Second Night of Summer by James H Schmitz

ON THE night after the day 
that brought summer officially to the land of Wend, 
on the planet of Noorhut, the shining lights were seen again in the 
big hollow at the east end of 
Grimp's father's farm. 

Grimp watched them for more 
than an hour from his upstairs 
room. The house was dark, but an 
occasional murmur of voices floated 
up to him through the windows below. Everyone in the farmhouse was 
looking at the lights. 



On the other farms around and 
in the village, which was over a hill 
and another two miles up the valley, every living soul who could get 
within view of the hollow was 
probably doing the same. For a 
time, the agitated yelling of the Village Guardian's big pank-hound 
had sounded clearly over the hill, 
but he had quieted down then very 
suddenly — or had been quieted 
down, more likely, Grimp suspected. The Guardian was dead-set 
against anyone making a fuss about 
the lights — and that included the 
pank-hound, too. 

There was some excuse for the 
pank-hound's excitement, though. 
From the window, Grimp could see 
there were a lot more lights tonight 
than had turned up in previous 
years — big, brilliant-blue bubbles, 
drifting and rising and falling silently all about the hollow. Sometimes one would lift straight up for 
several hundred feet, or move off 
over the edge of the hollow for 
about the same distance, and hang 
there suspended for a few minutes, 
before floating back to the others. 
That was as far as they ever went 
away from the hollow. 

There was, in fact, no need for 
the Halpa detector-globes to go any 
farther than that to get the information wanted by those who had 
sent them out, and who were listening now to the steady flow of brief 
reports, in some Halpa equivalent 
of human speech-thought, coming 
back to them through the globes: 

"No signs of hostile activity in 
the vicinity of the breakthrough 
point. No weapons or engines of 
power within range of detection. 
The area shows no significant alterations since the last investigation. 
Sharp curiosity among those who 
observe us consciously — traces of 
alarm and suspicion. But no overt 
hostility." 

The reports streamed on without" 
interruption, repeating the same 
bits of information automatically 
and incessantly, while the globes 



floated and dipped soundlessly 
above and about the hollow. 

Grimp continued to watch them, 
blinking sleepily now and then, until a spreading glow over the edge 
of the valley announced that Noorhut's Big Moon was coming up 
slowly, like a Planetary Guardian, 
to make its own inspection of the 
lights. The globes began to dim 
out then, just as they always had 
done at moonrise in the preceding 
summers; and even before the top 
rim of the Big Moon's yellow disk 
edged over the hills, the hollow 
was completely dark. 

Grimp heard his mother starting 
up the stairs. He got hurriedly into 
bed. The show was over for the 
night and he had a lot of pleasant 
things to think about before he 
went to sleep. 

Now that the lights had showed 
up, his good friend Grandma Erisa 
Wannattel and her patent-medicine 
trailer were sure to arrive, too. 
Sometime late tomorrow afternoon, 
the big draft-trailer would come 
rolling up the valley road from the 
city. For that was what Grandma 
Wannattel had done the past four 
summers — ever since the lights first 
started appearing above the hollow 
for the few nights they were to be 
seen there each year. And since four 
years were exactly half of Grimp's 
whole life, that made Grandma's 
return a mathematical certainty for 
him. 

Other people, of course, like the 
Village Guardian, might have a 



6 




 



poor opinion of Grandma, but just 
hanging around her and the trailer 
and the gigantic, exotic-looking 
rhinocerine pony that pulled it was, 
in Grimp's opinion, a lot better 
even than going to the circus. 

And vacations started the day 
after tomorrow ! The whole future 
just now, in fact, looked like one 
good thing after another, extending 
through a vista of summery infinities. 

Grimp-went to sleep happily. 

AT ABOUT the same hour, 
though at a distance greater 
than Grimp's imagination had 
stretched as yet, eight large ships 
came individually out of the darkness between the stars that was their 
sea, and began to move about Noorhut in a carefully timed pattern of 
orbits. They stayed much too far 
out to permit any instrument of 
space-detection to suspect tii a t 
Noorhut might be their common 
center of interest.. 

But that was what it was. 
Though the men who crewed -the 
eight ships bore the people of 
Noorhut no ill will, hardly anything could have looked less 
promising for Noorhut than the 
cargo they had on board. 

Seven of them were armed with 
a gas which was not often used 
any more. A highly volatile lethal 
catalyst, it sank to the solid surface 
of a world over which it was freed 
and spread out swiftly there to the 
point where its presence could no 



longer be detected by any chemical 
means. However, its effect of drawing the final breath almost imperceptibly out of all things that were 
oxygen-breathing was not noticeably reduced by diffusion. 

The eighth ship was equipped 
with a brace of torpedoes, which 
were normally released some hours 
after the gas-carriers dispersed their 
invisible death. They were quite 
small torpedoes, since the only task 
remaining for them would be to 
ignite the surface of the planet that 
had been treated with the catalyst. 

All those things might presently 
happen to Noorhut. But they would 
happen only if a specific message 
was flashed from it to the circling 
squadron — the message that Noorhut already was lost to a deadly foe 
who must, at any cost now, be prevented from spreading out from it 
to other inhabited worlds. 

NEXT afternoon, right after 
school, as Grimp came expectantly around the bend of the 
road at the edge of the farm, he 
found the village policeman sitting 
there on a rock, gazing tearfully 
down the road. 

"Hello, Runny," said Grimp, 
disturbed. Considered in the light 
of gossip he'd overhead in the village that morning, this didn't look 
so good for Grandma. It just didn't 
look good. 

The policeman blew his nose on 
a handkerchief he carried tucked 
into the front of his uniform, 



SECOND NIGHT OF SUMMER 



wiped his eyes, and gave Grimp an 
annoyed glance. 

"Don't you ' call me Runny, 
Grimp!" he said, replacing the 
handkerchief. Like Grimp himself 
and most of the people on Noorhut, the policeman was b'rownskinned and dark-eyed, normally 
a rather good-looking young fellow. But his eyes were swollen and 
red-rimmed now; and his nose, 
which was a bit larger than average, anyway, was also red and 
swollen and undeniably runny. He 
had hay-fever. 

Grimp apologized and sat down 
thoughtfully on the rock beside the 
policeman, who was one of his 
numerous cousins, most of the 
families of Noorhut being somehow related. He was about to mention that he had overheard Vellit 
using the expression when she and 
the policeman came through the 
big Leeth-flower orchard above the 
farm the other evening — at a much 
less leisurely rate than was their 
custom there. But he thought better of it. Vellit was the policeman's 
girl for most of the year, but she 
broke their engagement regularly 
during hay-fever season and called 
him cousin instead of dearest. 

"What are you doing here?" 
Grimp asked bluntly instead. 

"Waiting," said the policeman. 

"For what?" said Grimp, with a 
sinking heart. 

"Same individual you are, I 
guess," the policeman told him, 
hauling out the handkerchief again. 



He blew. "This year she's going to 
go right back where she came from 
or get pinched." 

"Who says so?" scowled Grimp. 

"The Guardian, that's who," said 
the policeman. "That good enough 
for you?" 

"He can't do it!" Grimp said 
hotly. "It's our farm, and she's got 
all her licenses." 

"He's had a whole year to think 
up a new list she's got to have," 
the policeman informed him. He 
fished in the breast-pocket of his 
uniform, pulled out a folded paper 
and opened it. "He put thirty-four 
items down here I got to check — 
she's bound to miss on one of 
them." 

"It's a dirty trick!" said Grimp, 
rapidly scanning *as much as he 
could see of the list. 

"Let's us have more respect for 
the Village Guardian, Grimp!" the 
policeman said warningly. 

"Uh-huh," muttered Grimp. 
"Sure . . ." If Runny would just 
move his big thumb out of the way. 
But what a list! Trailer; rhinocerine 
pony (beast, heavy draft, imported); patent medicines; household 
utensils; fortune-telling; pets; 
herbs; miracle-healing — 

The policeman looked down, saw 
what Grimp was doing and raised 
the paper out of his line of vision. 
"That's an official document," he 
said, warding Grimp off with one 
hand and tucking the paper away 
with the other. "Let's us not get 
our dirty hands on it." 



8 




 



Grimp was thinking fast. Grandma Wannattel did have framed licenses for some of the items he'd 
read hanging around inside the 
trailer, but certainly not thirty-four 
of them. 

"Remember that big skinless 
werret I caught last season?" he 
asked. 

The policeman gave him a quick 
glance, looked away again and 
wiped his eyes thoughtfully. The 
season on werrets would open the 
following week and he was as 
ardent a fisherman as anyone in the 
village — and last summer Grimp's 
monster werfet had broken a 
twelve-year record in the valley. 

"Some people," Grimp said idly, 
staring down the valley road to the 
point where it turned into the 
woods, "would sneak after a person 
for days who's caught a big werret, hoping he'd be dumb enough 
to go back to that pool." 

The policeman flushed and 
dabbed the handkerchief gingerly 
at his nose. 

"Some people would even sit in 
a haystack and use spyglasses, even 
when the hay made them sneeze 
like crazy," continued Grimp 
quietly. 

The policeman's flush deepened. 
He sneezed. 

"But a person isn't that dumb," 
said Grimp. "Not when he knows 
there's anyway two werrets there six 
inches bigger than the one he 
caught." 

"Six inches?" the policeman re


peated a bit incredulously — eagerly. 

"Easy," nodded Grimp. "I had a 
look at them again last week." 

It was the policeman's turn to 
think. Grimp idly hauled out his 
slingshot, fished a pebble out of 
his small-pebble pocket and 
knocked the head off a flower 
twenty feet away. He yawned 
negligently. 

"You're pretty good with that 
slingshot," the policeman remarked. 
"You must be just about as good as 
the culprit that used a slingshot to 
ring the fire-alarm signal on the 
defense unit bell from the top of 
the schoolhouse last week." 

"That'd take a pretty good shot," 
Grimp admitted. 

"And who then," continued the 
policeman, "dropped pepper in his 
trail, so the pank-hound near 
coughed off his head when we started to track him. The Guardian," 
he added significantly, "would like 
to have a clue about that culprit, 
all right." 

"Sure, sure," said Grimp, bored. 
The policeman, the Guardian, and 
probably even the pank-hound, 
knew exactly who the culprit was; 
but they wouldn't be able to prove 
it in twenty thousand years. Runny 
just had to realize first that threats 
weren't going to get him anywhere 
near a record werret. 

Apparently, he had; he was settling back for another bout of 
thinking. Grimp, interested in what 
he would produce next, decided 
just to leave him to it. . . . 



SECOND NIGHT OF SUMMER 



9 



Then Grimp jumped up suddenly from the rock. 

"There they are!" he yelled, 
waving the slingshot. 

A half-mile down the road, 
Grandma Wannattel's big, silvery 
trailer had come swaying out of the 
woods behind the rhinocerine pony 
and turned up toward the farm. 
The pony saw Grimp, lifted its 
head, which was as long as a tall 
man, and bawled a thunderous 
greeting. Grandma Wannattel stood 
up on the driver's seat and waved 
a green silk handkerchief. 

Grimp started sprinting down 
the road. 

The werrets should turn the trick 
— but he'd better get Grandma informed, just the same, about recent 
developments here, before she ran 
into Runny. 

GRANDMA WANNATTEL 
flicked the pony's horny rear 
with the reins just before they 
reached the policeman, who was 
waiting at the side of the road 
with the Guardian's check-list unfolded in his hand. 

The pony broke into a lumbering 
trot, and the trailer swept past 
Runny arid up around the bend of 
the road, where it stopped well 
within the boundaries of the farm. 
They climbed down and Grandma 
quickly unhitched the pony. It 
waddled, grunting, off the road and I 
down into the long, marshy meadow above the hollow. It stood 
still there, cooling its feet. 



Grimp felt a little better. Getting 
the trailer off community property 
gave Grandma a technical advantage. Grimp's people had a favorable opinion of her, and they were 
a sturdy lot who enjoyed telling 
off the Guardian any time he didn't 
actually have a law to back up his 
orders. But on the way to the farm, 
she had confessed to Grimp that, 
just as he'd feared, she didn't have 
anything like thirty-four licenses. 
And now the policeman was coming up around the bend of the road 
after them, blowing his nose and 
frowning. 

"Just let me handle him alone," 
Grandma told Grimp out of the 
corner of her mouth. 

He nodded and strolled off into 
the meadow to pass the time with 
the pony. She'd had a lot of experience in handling policemen. 

"Well, well, young man," he 
heard her greeting his cousin behind him. "That looks like a bad 
cold you've got." 

The policeman sneezed. 

"Wish it were a cold," he said 
resignedly. "It's hay-feVer. Can't do 
a thing with it. Now I've got a list 
here — " 

"Hay-fever?" said Grandma. 
"Step up into the trailer a moment. We'll fix that." 

"About this list — " began 
Runny, and stopped. "You think 
you got something that would fix 
it?" he asked skeptically. "I've been 
to I don't know how many doctors 
and they didn't help any." 



10 




 



"Doctors!" said Grandma. 
Grimp heard her heels click up the 
metal steps that led into the back 
of the trailer. "Come right in, 
won't take a moment." 

"Well — " said Runny doubtfully, but he followed her inside. 

Grimp winked at the pony. The 
.first round went to Grandma. 

"Hello, pony," he said. 

His worries couldn't reduce his 
appreciation of Grandma's fabulous 
draft-animal. Partly, of course, it 
was just that it was such an enormous beast. The long, round barrel 
of its body rested on short legs with 
wide, fiat feet which were settled 
deep in the meadow's mud by now. 
At one end was a spiky tail, and 
at the other a very big, wedgeshaped head, with a blunt, badly 
chipped horn set between nose and 
eyes. From nose to tail and all 
around, it was covered with thick, 
rectangular, horny plates, a mottled 
green-brown in color. It weighed 
as much as a long-extinct terrestrial 
elephant, but that was because it 
was only a pony. 

Grimp patted its rocky side affectionately. He loved the pony 
most for being the ugliest thing 
that had ever showed up on Noorhut. According to Grandma, she 
had bought it from a bankrupt circus which had imported it from a 
planet called Treebel; and Treebel 
was supposed to be a world full of. 
hot swamps, inexhaustibly explosive 
volcanoes and sulphurous stenches. 

One might have thought that 



after wandering around melting 
lava and under rainfalls of glowing 
ashes for most of its life, the pony 
would have considered Noorhut 
pretty tame. But though there 
wasn't much room for expression 
around the solid slab of bone supporting the horn, which was the 
front of its face, Grimp thought it 
looked thoroughly contented with 
its feet sunk out of sight in Noo»hut's cool mud. 

"You're a big fat pig!" he told 
it fondly. 

The pony slobbered out a long, 
purple tongue and carefully parted 
his hair. 

"Cut it out!" said Grimp. 
"Ugh!" 

The pony snorted, pleased, 
curled its tongue about a huge 
clump of weeds, pulled them up 
and flipped them into its mouth, 
roots, mud and all. It began to 
chew. 

Grimp glanced at the sun and 
turned anxiously to study the trailer. If she didn't get rid of Runny 
soon, they'd be calling him back to 
the house for supper before he and 
Grandma got around to having a 
good talk. And they weren't letting 
him out of doors these evenings, 
while the shining lights were here. 

He gave the pony a parting 
whack, returned quietly to the road 
and sat down out of sight near the 
back door of the trailer, where he 
could hear what was going on. 

". . . so about the only thing 
the Guardian could tack on you 



SECOND NIGHT OF SUMMER 



IT 



now," the policeman was saying, 
"would be a Public Menace charge. 
If there's any trouble about the 
lights this year, he's likely to try 
that. He's not a bad Guardian, you 
know, but he's got himself talked 
into thinking you're sort of to 
blame for the lights showing up 
here every year." 

Grandma chuckled. "Well, I try 
to get here in time to see them 
every summer," she admitted. "I 
can see how that might give him 
the idea." 

"And of course," said the policeman, "we're all trying to keep it 
quiet about them. If the news got 
out, we'd be having a lot of people 
coming here from the city, just to 
look. No one but the Guardian 
minds you being here, only you 
don't want a lot of city people 
tramping around your farms." 

"Of course not," agreed Grandma. "And I certainly haven't told 
anyone about them myself." 

"Last night," the policeman added, "everyone was saying there were 
twice as many lights this year as 
last summer. That's what got the 
Guardian so excited." 

Chafing more every minute, 
Grimp had to listen then to an extended polite argument about how 
much Runny wanted to pay Grandma for her hay-fever medicines, 
while she insisted he didn't owe 
her anything at all. In the end ? 
Grandma lost and the policeman 
paid up — much too much to take 
from any friend of Grimp's folks, 



Grandma protested to the last. And 
then, finally, that righteous minion 
of the law came climbing down the 
trailer steps again, with Grandma 
following him to the door. 

"How do I look, Grimp?" he 
beamed cheerfully as Grimp stood 
up. 

"Like you ought to wash your 
face sometime," Grimp said tactlessly, for he was fast losing patience with Runny. But then his 
eyes widened in surprise. 

Under a coating of yellowish 
grease, Runny's nose seemed to 
have returned almost to the shape it 
had out of hay-fever season, and his 
eyelids were hardly puffed at all! 
Instead of flaming red, those features, furthermore, now were only 
a delicate pink in shade. Runny, in 
short, was almost handsome again. 

"Pretty good, eh?" he said. "Just 
one shot did it. And I've only got 
to keep the salve on another hour. 
Isn't that right, Grandma?" 

"That's right," smiled Grandma 
from the door, clinking Runny's 
money gently out of one hand into 
the other. "You'll be as good as 
new then." 

"Permanent cure, too," said 
Runny. He patted Grimp benevolently on the head. "And next week 
we go werret-fishing, eh, Grimp?" 
he added greedily. 

"I guess so," Grimp said, with a 
trace of coldness. It was his opinion 
that Runny could have been satisfied with the hay-fever cure and 
forgotten about the werrets. 



12 




 



"It's a date!" nodded" Runny 
happily and took his greasy face 
whistling down the road. Grimp 
scowled after him, half-minded to 
reach for the slingshot then and 
there and let go with a medium 
stone at the lower rear of the uniform. But probably he'd better not. 

"Well, that's that," Grandma 
said softly. 

At that moment, up at the farmhouse, a cow horn went "Whoopwhoop!" across the valley. 

"Darn," said Grimp. "I knew it 
was getting late, with him doing 
all that talking! Now they're calling me to supper." There were tears 
of disappointment in his eyes. 

"Don't let" it fuss you, Grimp," 
Grandma said consolingly. "Just 
jump up in here a moment and 
close your eyes." 

Grimp jumped up into the trailer and closed his eyes expectantly. 

"Put out your hands," Grandma's voice told him. 

He put out his hands, and she 
pushed them together to form a 
cup. Then something small and 
light and furry dropped into them, 
caught hold of one of Grimp's 
thumbs, with tiny, cool fingers, and 
chittered. 

Grimp's eyes popped open. 

"It's a lortel!" he whispered, 
overwhelmed. 

"It's for you!" Grandma beamed. 

Grimp couldn't speak. The lortel 
looked at him from a tiny, black, 
human face with large blue eyes 
set in it, wrapped a long, furry tail 



twice around his wrist, clung to his 
thumb with its fingers, and grinned 
and squeaked. 

"It's wonderful!" gasped Grimp. 
"Can you really teach them to 
'talk?" 

"Hello," said the lortel. 

"That's all it can say so far," 
Grandma said. "But if you're patient with it, it'll learn more." 

"I'll be patient," Grimp promised, dazed. "I saw one at the circus this winter, down the valley at 
Laggand. They said it could talk, 
but it never said anything while I 
was there." 

"Hello!" said the lortel. 

"Hello!" gulped Grimp. 

The cow horn whoop-whooped 
again. 

"I guess you'd better run along 
to supper, or they might get mad," 
said Grandma. 

"I know," said Grimp. "What 
does it eat?" 

"Bugs and flowers and honey 
and fruit and eggs, when it's wild. 
But you just feed it whatever you 
eat yourself." 

"Well, good-by," said Grimp. 
"And golly — thanks, Grandma." 

He jumped out of the trailer. 
The lortel climbed out of his hand, 
ran up his arm and sat on his shoulder, wrapping its tail around his 
neck. 

"It knows you already," Grandma said. "It won't run away." 

Grimp reached up carefully with 
his other hand and patted the lortel. 

"I'll be back early tomorrow," 



SECOND NIGHT OF SUMMER 



13 



he said. "No school. . . . They 
won't let me out after supper as 
long as those lights keep coming 
around." 

The cow horn whooped for the 
third time, very loudly. This time 
it meant business. 

"Well, good-by," Grimp repeated hastily. He ran off, the lortel 
hanging on to his shirt collar and 
squeaking. 

Grandma looked after him and 
then at the sun, which had just 
touched the tops of the hills with 
its lower rim. 

"Might as well have some supper myself," she remarked, apparently to no one in particular. "But 
after that I'll have to run out the 
go-buggy and create a diversion." 

Lying on its armor-plated belly 
down in the meadow, the pony 
swung its big head around toward 
her. Its small yellow eyes blinked 
questioningly. 

"What makes you think a diversion will be required?" its voice 
asked into her ear. The ability to 
produce such ventriloquial effects 
was one of the talents that madethe pony well worth its consider^ ' 
able keep to Grandma. 

"Weren't you listening?" she 
scolded. "That policeman told me 



the Guardian's planning to march 
the village's defense unit up to the 
hollow after supper, and start them 
shooting at the Halpa detectorglobes as soon as they show up." 

The pony swore an oath meaningless to anyone who hadn't been 
raised on the planet Treebel. It 
stood up, braced itself, and began 
pulling its feet out of the mud in 
a succession of loud, sucking noises. 

"I haven't had an hour's straight 
rest since you talked me into tramping around with you eight years 
ago!" it complained. 

"But you've certainly been seeing life, like I promised," Grandma smiled. 

The pony slopped in a last, enormous tongueful of wet weeds. 
"That I have!" it said, with emphasis. 

It came chewing up to the road. 
* "I'll keep a watch on things 
while you're having your supper," 
it told her. 

AS THE uniformed twelve-man 
defense unit marched in good 
order out of the village, on its way 
to assume a strategic position 
around the hollow on Grimp's 
father's farm, there was a sudden, 
small explosion not very far offT 




14 




 



The Guardian, who was marching in the lead with a gun over his 
shoulder and the slavering pankhound on a leash, stopped short. 
The unit broke ranks and crowded 
up behind him. 

"What was that?" the Guardian 
inquired. 

Everybody glanced questioningly 
around the rolling green slopes of 
the valley, already darkened with 
evening shadows. The pank-hound 
sat down before the Guardian, 
pointed its nose at the even darker 



shadows in the woods ahead of 
them and growled. 

"Look!" a man said, pointing in 
the same direction. 

A spark of bright green light 
had appeared on their path, just 
'where it entered the woods. The 
spark grew rapidly in size, became 
as big as a human head — then bigger! Smoky green streamers seemed 
to be pouring out of it. . . . 

"I'm going home right now," 
someone announced at that point, 
sensibly enough. 




SECOND NIGHT OF SUMMER 



T5 



"Stand your ground!" the 
Guardian ordered, conscious of the 
beginnings of a general withdrawal 
movement behind him. He was an 
old soldier. He unslung his gun, 
cocked it and pointed it. The pankhound got up on his six feet and 
bristled. 

"Stop!" the Guardian shouted at 
the green light. 

It expanded promptly to the size 
of a barrel, new streamers shooting out from it and fanning about 
like hungry tentacles. 

He fired. 

"Run!" everybody yelled then. 
The pank-hound slammed backward against the Guardian's legs, 
upsetting him, and streaked off 
after the retreating unit. The green 
light had spread outward jerkily 
into the shape of something like a 
many-armed, writhing starfish, almost the size of the trees about it. 
Deep, hooting sounds came out of 
it as it started drifting down the 
path toward the Guardian. 

He got up on one knee and, in a 
single drumroll of sound, emptied 
all thirteen charges remaining in his 
gun into the middle of the starfish. 
It hooted more loudly, waved its 
arms more wildly, and continued 
to advance. 

He stood up quickly then, slung 
the gun over his shoulder and 
joined the retreat. By the time the 
unit reached the first houses of the 
village, he was well up in the front 
ranks again. And a few minutes 
later, he was breathlessly organizing 



the local defenses, employing the 
tactics that had shown their worth 
in the raids of the Laggand Bandits 
nine years before. 

The starfish, however, was making no attempt to follow up the valley people's rout. It was still on 
the path at the point where the 
Guardian had seen it last, waving 
its arms about and hooting menacingly at the silent trees. 

"fTlHAT should do it, I guess," 
■ JL Grandma Wannattel said. 
"Before the first projection fizzles 
out, the next one in the chain will 
start up where they can see it from 
the village. It ought to be past midnight before anyone starts bothering about the globes again. Particularly since there aren't going to 
be any globes around tonight — that 
is, if the Halpa attack-schedule has 
been correctly estimated." 

"I wish we were safely past midnight right now," the rhinocerine 
pony worriedly informed her. Its 
dark shape stood a little up the 
road from the trailer, outlined motionlessly like a ponderous statue 
against the red evening sky. Its 
head was up; it looked as if it were 
listening. Which it was, in its own 
way — listening for any signs of activity from the hollow. 

"No sense getting anxious about 
it," Grandma remarked. She was 
perched on a rock at the side of the 
road, a short distance from the 
pony, with a small black bag slung 
over her shoulder. "We'll wait here 



16 




 



another hour till it's good and dark 
and then go down to the hollow. 
The breakthrough might begin a 
couple of hours after that." 

"It would have to be us again!" 
grumbled the pony. In spite of its 
size, its temperament was on the 
nervous side; and any companion of 
Grandma's was bound to run regularly into situations that were far 
from soothing. She belonged to a 
powerful human organization 
whose activities extended throughout most of those sections of the 
Galaxy where Terra's original colonies, and their branch-colonies, and 
branches of the branches, had 
grown down the centuries into new 
and independent civilizations. The 
role of the organization was that 
of watchdog for the safety of all, 
without regard for the often conflicting rulings and aims of individual governments; and sometimes 
that wider view made it necessary 
to take some very grim risks locally. Unfortunately, this was one of 
the times. 

"I'd feel a lot better myself if 
Headquarters hadn't picked us for 
this particular operation," Grandma admitted. "Us and Noorhut. . . ." 

Because, by what was a rather 
singular coincidence, considering 
how things stood there tonight, the 
valley was also Grandma's home. 
She had been born, quite some 
while before, a hundred and eighty 
miles farther inland, at the foot of 
the dam of the great river Wend, 



which had given its name to the 
land, and nowadays supplied it with 
almost all its required power. 

Erisa Wannattel had done a great 
deal of traveling since she first became aware of the fact that her 
varied abilities and adventuresome 
nature needed a different sort of 
task to absorb them than could be 
found on Noorhut, which was progressing placidly up into the final 
stages of a rounded and balanced 
planetary civilization. But she still 
liked to consider the Valley of the 
Wend as her home and headquarters, to which she returned as often 
as her work would permit. Her 
exact understanding of the way 
people there thought about things 
and did things also made them easy 
for her to manipulate; and on occasion that could be very useful. 

In most other places, the means 
she had employed to turn the 
Guardian and his troop back from 
the hollow probably would have 
started a panic or brought armed 
ships and radiation guns zooming 
up for the kill within minutes. 
But the valley people had considered it just another local emergency. The bronze alarm bell in the 
village had pronounced a state of 
siege, and cow horns passed the 
word up to the outlying farms. 
Within minutes, the farmers were 
ts.elting down the roads to the village with their families and guns; 
Sai, very soon afterward, everything quieted down again. Guard 
lines had been set up by then, with 



SECOND NIGHT OF SUMMER 



17 



the women and children quartered 
in the central buildings, while the 
armed men had settled down to 
watching Grandma's illusion projections — directional video narrow 
beams — from the discreet distance 
marked by the village boundaries. 

If nothing else happened, the 
people would just stay there till 
morning and then start a cautious 
investigation. After seeing mysterious blue lights dancing harmlessly over Grimp's farm for four 
summers, this section of Wend was 
pretty well conditioned to fiery apparitions. But even if they got too 
adventurous, they couldn't hurt 
themselves on the projections, 
which were designed to be nothing 
but very effective visual displays. 

What it all came to was that 
Grandma had everybody in the 
neighborhood rounded up and immobilized where she wanted them. 

IN EVERY other respect, the valley presented an exceptionally 
peaceful twilight scene to the eye. 
There was nothing to show that it 
was the only present point of contact between forces engaged in what 
was probably a war of intergalactic 
proportions — a war made wraithlike but doubly deadly by the circumstance that, in over a thousand 
years, neither side had found out 
much more about the other than the 
merciless and devastating finality of 
its forms of attack. There never had 
been any actual battles between 
Mankind and the Halpa, only alter


nate and very thorough massacres 
— all of them, from Mankind's 
point of view, on the wrong side of 
the fence. 

The Halpa alone had the knowledge that enabled them to reach 
their human adversary. That was 
the trouble. But, apparently, they 
could launch their attacks only by 
a supreme effort, under conditions 
that existed for periods of less than 
a score of years, and about three 
hundred years apart as Mankind 
measured time. 

- It was hard to find any good in 
them, other than the virtue of persistence. Every three hundred years, 
they punctually utilized that brief 
period to execute one more thrust, 
carefully prepared and placed, and 
carried out with a dreadfully complete abruptness, against some new 
point of human civilization — and 
this time the attack was going to 
come through on Noorhut. 

"Something's starting to move 
around in that hollow!" the pony 
announced suddenly. "It's not one 
of their globe-detectors." 

"I know," murmured Grandma. 
"That's the first of the Halpa themselves. They're going to be right on 
schedule, it seems. But don't get 
nervous. They can't hurt anything 
until their transmitter comes 
through and revives them. We've 
got to be particularly careful now 
not to frighten them off. They seem 
to be even more sensitive to emotional tensions in their immediate 



18 




 



surroundings than the globes." 

The pony made no reply. It knew 
what was at stake and why eight 
big ships were circling Noorhut 
somewhere beyond space-detection 
tonight. It knew, too, that' the ships 
would act only if it was discovered 
that Grandma had failed. But — 

The pony shook its head uneasily. The people on Treebel had 
never become civilized to the point 
of considering the possibility of 
taking calculated risks on a planetary scale — not to mention the fact 
that the lives of the pony and of 
Grandma were included in the present calculation. In the eight years 
it had been accompanying her on 
her travels, it had developed a tremendous respect for Erisa Wannattel's judgment and prowess. But, 
just the same, frightening the 
Halpa off, if it still could be done, 
seemed like a very sound idea right 
now to the pony. 

As a matter of fact, as Grandma 
well knew, it probably could have 
been done at this stage by tossing 
a small firecracker into the hollow. 
Until they had established their 
planetary foothold, the Halpa took 
extreme precautions. They could 
spot things in the class of radiation weapons a hundred miles away, 
and either that or any suggestion 
of local aggressiveness or of longrange observation would check the 
invasion attempt on Noorhut then 
and there. 

But one of the principle reasons 
she was here tonight was to see 



that nothing did happen to stop it. 
For this assault would only be 
diverted against some other world 
then, and quite probably against 
one where the significance of the 
spying detector-globes wouldn't be 
understood before it was too late. 
The best information system in the 
Galaxy couldn't keep more than an 
insignificant fraction of its populations on the alert for dangers like 
that — 

She bounced suddenly to her feet 
and, at the same instant, the pony 
swung away from the hollow toward which it had been staring. 
They both stood for a moment 
then, turning their heads about, like 
baffled hounds trying to fix a scent 
on the wind. 

"It's Grimp!" Grandma exclaimed. 

The rhinocerine pony snorted 
faintly. "Those are his thought 
images, all right," it agreed. "He 
seems to feel you need protection. 
Can you locate him?" 

"Not yet," said Grandma anxiously. "Yes, I can. He's coming up 
through the woods on the other 
side of the hollow, off to the left. 
The little devil!" She was hustling 
back to the trailer. "Come on, I'll 
have to ride you there. I can't even 
dare use the go-buggy this late in 
the day." 

The pony crouched beside the 
trailer while she quickly snapped 
ton its saddle from the top of the 
back steps. Six metal rings had 
been welded into the horny plates 



SECOND NIGHT OF SUMMER 



19 



of its back for this purpose, so it 
was a simple job. Grandma clambered aloft, hanging onto the saddle's hand-rails. 

"Swing wide of the hollow," she 
warned. "Grimp came just as I 
suggested him mentally to. You 
needn't worry about making noise. 
The Halpa don't notice noise as 
such — it has to have emotional content for them to hear it — and the 
quicker Grimp spots us, the easier 
it will be to find him." 

The pony already was rushing 
down into the meadow at an amazing rate of speed — it took a lot of 
muscle to drive a body like that 
through the gluey swamps of Treebel, and there were none here to 
impede it. It swung wide of the 
hollow and of what it contained, 
crossed a shallow bog farther down 
the meadow with a sound like a 
charging torpedo-boat, and reached 
the woods. 

It had to slow down then to 
avoid brushing off Grandma. 

"Grimp's down that slope somewhere," Grandma said. "He's heard 
us. . . ." 

"They're making a lot of noise," 
Grimp's thought reached them suddenly and clearly. He seemed to 
be talking to someone. "But we're 
not scared of them, are we?" 

"Bang-bang!" another voicethought came excitedly. 

"That was the lortel," Grandma 
said. "They're very good for giving 
children courage. Much better than 
Teddy Bears." 



"That's the stuff," Grimp resumed approvingly. "We'll slingshot them all if they don't watch 
out. But we'd better find Grandma 
soon." 

"Grimp!" shouted Grandma. The 
pony backed her up with a roaring 
call. 

"Hello?" came the lortel's 
thought. 

"Wasn't that the pony?" Grimp 
asked it, getting only another 
"hello" in reply. "All right, we'll 
go that way," he added, as though 
they had reached a joint decision. 

"Here we come, Grimp!" Grandma shouted, and the pony descended the steep side of a ravine 
with the straightforward technique 
of a rock slide. 

"That's Grandma!" thought 
Grimp. "Grandma!" he yelled. 
"Look out, there's monsters all 
around!" 

"TTTHAT you missed!" yelled 
YY Grimp, dancing around the 
pony as Grandma Wannattel scrambled down from the saddle. "The 
monsters have the village surrounded, and the Guardian killed 
one and I slingshot another till he 
fizzled out, and I was coming to 
find you — " 

"Your mother will be worried," 
said Grandma as they rushed into 
each other's arms. 

i "No," grinned Grimp. "All the 
kids are supposed to be sleeping in 
the school house, and she won't 
look there till morning, and the 



20 




 



teacher said the monsters were all 
holynations — ho-lucy-nations. But 
he wouldn't go look when the 
Guardian said they'd show him 
one. He stayed right in bed! But 
the Guardian's all right — he killed 
one, and I slingshot another one 
and the lortel learned a new word. 
Say 'bang-bang,' lortel!" 

"Hello!" squeaked the lortel. 

"Aw, he's scared," said Grimp 
disappointedly. "He can say it, 
though. And I've come to take you 
to the village so the monsters don't 
chase after you. Hello, pony!" 

"Bang-bang," said the lortel distinctly. 

"See?" cried Grimp. "He wasn't 
scared, after all — he's a real brave 
lortel! If we see some monsters, 
don't you get scared, either, because 
I've got my slingshot," he said, 
waving it bloodthirstily, "and two 
back pockets all full of real big 
stones. I just hope my pants stay 
up. But that doesn't matter — the 
way to do it is to kill them all." 

"It sounds like a pretty good 
idea, Grimp," Grandma agreed. 
"But you're awfully tired now." 

"No, I'm not!" Grimp said, surprised. His right eye sagged shut 
and then his left. He opened them 
both with an effort and looked at 
Grandma. "I can stay awake all 
night, I bet," he argued drowsily. 
"I am — " 

"In fact," said Grandma, "you're 
asleep." 

"No, I'm n — " objected Grimp. 
Then he sagged toward the ground, 



and Grandma caught him firmly. 

"In a way, I hate to do it," she 
panted, wrestling him aboard the 
pony, which had hunkered down 
and flattened itself as much as it 
could to make the job easier. "He'd 
probably enjoy it. But we can't take 
a chance. He's a husky little devil, 
too," she groaned, giving a final 
boost, "and those ammunition 
pockets don't make him any 
lighter." She clambered up again 
behind him and noticed that the 
lortel had transferred itself to her 
coat collar. 

The pony stood up cautiously. 

"Now what ?" it asked. 

"Might as well go straight to the 
hollow," said Grandma, breathing 
hard. "We'll probably have to wait 
around there a few hours, but if 
we're careful it won't do any 
harm." 

"TAID you find a good deep 
\-J pond?" Grandma asked the 
pony a little later, as it came squishing up softly through the meadow 
behind her to rejoin her at the 
edge of the hollow. 

"Yes," said the pony. "About a 
hundred yards back. That should 
be close enough. How much more 
waiting do you think we'll have to 
do?" 

Grandma shrugged carefully. She 
was sitting in the grass with what, 
by daylight, would have been a 
good view of the hollow below. 
Grimp was asleep with his head on 
her knees. The lortel, after catching 



SECOND NIGHT OF SUMMER 



21 



a few bugs in the grass and eating 
them, had settled down on her 
shoulder and dozed off, too. 

"I don't know," she said. "It's 
still three hours till Big .Moonrise, 
and it's bound to be some time before then. Now that you've found 
a waterhole, we'll just stay here together and wait. The one thing to 
remember is not to let yourself start 
getting excited about them." 

The pony stood huge and chunky 
beside her, staring down, its forefeet on the edge of the hollow. 
Muddy water trickled from its 
knobby flanks. It had brought the 
warm mud-smells of a summer 
pond back with it to hang in a 
cloud about them. 

There was vague, dark, continuous motion at the bottom of the 
hollow. A barely noticeable stirring 
in the single big pool of darkness 
that filled it. 

"If I were alone," the pony 
said, "I'd get out of here! I know 
when I ought to be scared. But 
you've taken psychological control 
of my reactions, haven't you?" 

"Yes," said Grandma. "It'll be 
easier for me, though, if you help 
along as much as you can. There's 
really no danger until their transmitter has come through." 

"Unless," objected the pony, 
"they've worked out some brandnew tricks in the past few hundred 
years." 

"There's that chance," Grandma 
admitted. "But they've never tried 
changing their tricks on us yet. If 



it were us doing the attacking, we'd 
vary our methods each time, as 
much as we' could. But the Halpa 
don't seem to think the way 
we do about anything. They 
wouldn't still be so careful if they 
didn't realize they were very vulnerable at this point." 

"I hope they're right about 
that!" the pony said anxiously. 

Its head moved then, following 
the motion of something that sailed 
flutteringly out of the depths of 
the hollow, circled along its far 
rim, and descended again. The beings of Treebel had a much deeper 
range of night vision than Grandma Wannattel, but she was also 
aware of that shape. 

"They're not much to look at," 
the pony remarked. "Like a big, 
dark rag of leather, almost." 

"Their physical structure is believed to be quite simple," Grandma agreed slowly. 

The pony was tensing up again, 
and she realized that it was best to 
go on talking to it, about almost 
anything at all. That always helped, 
even though the pony knew her 
much too well by now to be really 
fooled by such tricks. 

"Many very efficient life-forms 
aren't physically complicated, you 
know," she went on, letting the 
sound of her voice ripple steadily 
fhto its mind. "Parasitical types, 
particularly. It's pretty certain, too, 
that the Halpa have the hive-mind 
class of intelligence, so what goes 
for the nerve systems of most of 



22 




 



the ones they send through to us 
might be nothing much more than 
secondary reflex-transmitters. . . ." 

Grimp stirred in his sleep at 
that point and grumbled. Grandma 
looked down at him. "You're 
sound asleep!" she told him severely, and he was again. 

"You've got plans for that boy, 
haven't you?" said the pony, without shifting its gaze from the 
hollow. 

"I've had my eye on him," 
Grandma admitted, "and I've already recommended him to the organization for observation. That's 
if we beat off the Halpa this time 
— and Grimp will be pretty important in deciding that. If we do, 
we'll let him develop with only a 
little help here and there. We'll see 
what he picks up naturally from the 
lortel, for instance, in the way of 
telepathic communication and sensory extensions. I think Grimp's 
the kind we can use." 

"He's all right," the pony agreed 
absently. "A bit murderous, though, 
like most of you. . . ." 

"He'll grow out of it!" Grandma 
said, a little annoyedly, for the 
subject of human aggressiveness 
was one she and the pony argued 
about frequently. "You can't hurry 
developments like that along too 
much. All of Noorhut should grow 
out of that stage, as a people, in 
another few hundred years. They're 
about at the turning-point right 
now — " 

Their heads came up together 



then, as something very much like 
a big, dark rag of leather came 
fluttering up from the hollow and 
hung in the dark air above them. 
The representatives of the opposing 
powers that were facing each other 
on Noorhut that night took quiet 
stock of one another for a few 
moments. 

THE Halpa was about six feet 
long and two feet wide, and 
considerably less than an inch 
thick. It held its position in the air 
with a steady, rippling motion, like 
a bat the size of a man, and then 
suddenly it extended itself with a 
snap, growing taut as a curved sail. 

The pony snorted involuntarily. 
The apparently featureless shape in 
the air turned toward it and drifted 
a few inches closer. When nothing 
more happened, it turned again 
and fluttered quietly back down 
into the hollow. 

"Could it tell I was scared?" thS 
pony asked uneasily. 

"You reacted just right," 
Grandma soothed. "Startled suspicion at first, and then just curiosity, and then another start when it 
made that jump. It's about what 
they'd expect from creatures that 
would be hanging around the hollow now. We're like cows to them. 
They can't tell what things are by 
their looks, as we do." 

But her tone was thoughtful, and 
she was more shaken than she 
would have cared to let the pony 
notice. There had been something 



SECOND NIGHT OF SUMMER 



23 



indescribably menacing and selfassured in the Halpa's attitude. Almost certainly, it had only been 
trying to draw a reaction of hostile 
intelligence from them, probing, 
perhaps, for the presence of 'weapons that might be dangerous to its 
kind. 

But there was a chance — a tiny 
but appalling chance — that the 
things had developed some drastically new form of attack since 
their last breakthrough, and that 
they already were in control of the 
situation. 

In which case, neither Grimp 
nor anyone else on Noorhut would 
be doing any more growing up 
after tomorrow. 

Each of the eleven hundred and 
seventeen planets that had been lost 
:o the Halpa so far still traced a 
fiery, forbidding orbit through 
space — torn back from the invaders only at the cost of depriving it, 
by humanity's own weapons, of 
the natural conditions that any 
known form of life could tolerate. 

The possibility that that might 
also be Noorhut's future had 
loomed as an ugly enormity before her for the past four years. 
But of the nearly half a hundred 
worlds which the Halpa were 
found to be investigating, through 
:heir detector-globes, as possible 
: nvasion points for this assault period, Noorhut finally had been 
selected by Headquarters as the 
one where local conditions were 



most suited to meet them successfully. That meant in a manner that 
must include the destruction of 
their only real invasion weapon, 
the fabulous and mysterious Halpa 
Transmitter. Capable as they undoubtedly were, they had shown in 
the past that they were able or 
willing to employ only one of those 
instruments for each period of attack. Destroying the transmitter 
meant, therefore, that humanity 
would gain a few more centuries 
to figure out a way to get back at 
the Halpa before a new invasion 
attempt was made. 

SO ON all planets but Noorhut, 
the detector-globes shrewdly 
had been encouraged to send back 
reports of a dangerously alert and 
well-armed population. On Noorhut, however, they had been 
soothed along . . . and just as her 
home planet had been chosen as 
the most favorable point of encounter, so was Erisa Wannattel 
herself selected as the agent most 
suited to represent humanity's 
forces under the conditions that 
existed there. 

Grandma sighed gently and reminded herself again that Headquarters was as unlikely to miscalculate the overall probability of 
success as it was to select the 
wrong person to achieve it. There 
wajs only the tiniest, the most theoretical, of chances that something 
might go wrong, and that she 
would end 'her long career with 



24 




 



the blundering murder of her own 
home world — 

But there was that chance. It 
meant the lives of people whose 
ancestors she had known, an entire 
world she loved and hoped to retire to some day. Worse yet, it 
meant relying on a small, helpless, 
untrained child — who might, after 
all, not be the instrument she 
should have chosen. 
, "There seem to be more down 
there every minute!" the pony was 
saying. 

Grandma drew a deep breath. 

"Must be several thousand by 
now," she acknowledged. "It's getting near breakthrough time, all 
right — but that's only the advance 
forces." She added, "Do you notice anything like a glow of light 
down there, toward the center?" 

The pony stared a moment. 
"Yes," it said. "But I would have 
thought that was way under the 
red for you. Can you see it?" 

"No," said Grandma. "I get a 
kind of feeling, like heat. That's 
the transmitter beginning to come 
through. I think we've got them!" 

The pony shifted its bulk slowly from side to side. 

"Yes," it said resignedly, "or 
they've got us." 

"Don't think about that," 
Grandma ordered sharply and 
clamped one more mental lock shut 
on the foggy, dark terrors that were 
curling and writhing under her 
conscious thoughts, trying to 
emerge and paralyze her actions. 



She had opened her black bag 
and was unhurriedly fitting together something composed of a 
few pieces of wood and wire, and 
a rather heavy, stiff spring. . . . 

"Just be ready," she added. 

"I've been ready for an hour," 
said the pony, shuffling its feet. 

"I mean Grimp," she explained, 
looking down at the sleeping boy 
intently. "A child is more perceptive than an adult, and his time 
sense is sharper because he lives 
at a much faster rate." 

"Then his time sense should be 
faster, too," the pony said. 

"It's like slow-motion film," 
Grandma told him. "The faster the 
camera goes, the more pictures it 
takes and the slower the action. A 
child is like that. Our time sense 
speeds up as we grow older and 
our life processes slow down. You 
might say we take fewer pictures 
than a child does." 

"Makes sense," the pony agreed. 
"But what does it lead to?" 

"Grimp," said Grandma, her 
face very close to the boy's, "is 
going to feel the critical moment 
of the breakthrough and let us 
know. He'll tell by the static tension in the air, the way a child becomes cranky when an electrical 
storm is getting ready to happen. 
We can't respond like that . . . 
even trained perceptives like -us 
. . . and not, certainly, in awareness of fractions of a second." 

The pony stared at Grimp with 
new respect. "He can?" 



SECOND NIGHT OF SUMMER 



25 



GRANDMA took in a breath 
that sounded like the fluttering of agitated strips of paper. "I 
hope so," she said. "It can't be 
just any child, though all of them 
are more sensitive than any adult. 
It has to be a hyper-sensitive 
child." 

"Then you're not sure he is." 

"No," Grandma confessed reluctantly. "I can't be sure until 
it's too late." 

They did no more talking after 
that. All the valley had become 
quiet about them. But slowly the 
hollow below was filling up with 
a black, stirring, slithering tide. 
Bits of it fluttered up now and 
then like strips of black smoke, 
hovered a few yards above the 
mass, and settled again. 

Suddenly, down in the center of 
the hollow, there was something 
else. 

The rhinocerine pony had seen 
it first, Grandma Wannattel realized. It had been staring in that 
direction for almost a minute before she grew able to distinguish 
something that might have been a 
group of graceful miniature spires. 
Semi-transparent in the darkness, 
four small domes showed at the 
corners, with a larger one in the 
center. The central one was about 
twenty feet high and very slender. 

The whole structure began to 
solidify- swiftly. . . . 

The Haipa Transmitter's appearance of crystalline slightness was 
perhaps the most mind-chilling 



thing about it. For it brought instantly a jarring sense of what 
must be black distance beyond all 
distances, reaching back unimaginably to its place of origin. In 
that unknown somewhere, a prodigiously talented and determined 
race of beings had labored for human centuries to prepare and point 
some stupendous gun . . . and 
were able then to bridge the vast 
interval with nothing more substantial than this dark sliver of 
glass that had come to rest suddenly in the valley of the Wend] 

But, of course, the Transmitter 
was all that was needed; its deadly 
poison lay in a sluggish, almost 
inert mass about it. Within minutes 
from now, it would waken to life, 
as similar transmitters had wakened on other nights on those lost 
and burning worlds. And in much 
less than minutes after that, the 
Halpa invaders would be hurled by 
their slender machine to every 
surface section of Noorhut — no 
longer inert, but quickened into a 
ravening, almost indestructible 
form of vampiric life, dividing and 
sub-dividing in its incredibly swift 
cycle of reproduction, fastening to 
feed anew, growing again — 

Spreading, at that stage, much 
more swiftly than it could be exterminated by anything but the 
ultimate weapons! 

The pony stirred suddenly, and 
she felt the wave of panic rolling 
up in it. 

"It's the Transmitter, all right," 



26 




 



Grandma's thought reached it 
quickly. "We've had two descriptions of it before. But we can't be 
sure it's here until it begins to 
charge itself. Then it lights up — 
first at the edges, and then at the 
center. Once the central spire lights 
up, it will be energized too much . 
to let them pull it back again. At 
least, they couldn't pull it back 
after that last time they were 
observed." She touched the sleeping boy anxiously. "Grimp will 
have to tell us when that exact instant is." 

The pony had been told all that 
before. But as it listened, it was 
quieting down again. 

"And you're to go on sleeping!" 
Grandma Wannattel's thought instructed Grimp next. "Your perception and time sense are to be 
alert, but you'll sleep on and remember nothing until I wake you." 

LIGHT surged suddenly up in 
the Transmitter — first into the 
four outer spires, and a moment 
later into the big central one, in 
a sullen red glow. It lit the hollow with a smoky glare. The pony 
took two startled steps backward. 

"Don't fail us, Grimp!" whispered Grandma's thought. 

She reached again into her black 
bag and took out a small plastic 
ball. It reflected the light from the 
hollow in dull crimson gleamiiigs. 
She let it slip down carefully inside the shaftlike frame of the 
gadget she had put together of 



wood and wire. It clicked into 
place there against one end of the 
compressed spring. 

But she didn't take her eyes off 
the boy. He was stirring restlessly, 
his breathing growing quicker and 
more difficult. His little hands 
twitched from time to time, 
though he remained asleep. 

"Watch the Halpa," she tensely 
told the pony. "I don't know if 
Grimp will sense the moment exactly. I'm not sure we can handle 
it then, but. . . ." 

Down below, they lay now in a 
blanket fifteen feet thick over the 
wet ground, like big, black, water-sogged leaves swept up in circular piles about the edges of the 
hollow. The tops and sides of the 
piles were fluttering and shivering 
and beginning to slide down toward the Transmitter. She felt tension growing, but she couldn't 
trust her own age-dulled perception. If the child failed, all Noorhut would fall to the Halpa. 

Grimp twisted in Grandma's 
arms abruptly, like a caught and 
fighting werret, and a strangled 
cry that was almost a sob came 
from him. 

It was what Grandma had been 
waiting for. She raised the wooden 
catapult to her shoulder. The pony 
shook its blunt-horned head violently from side to side, made a 
loud bawling noise, surged forward and plunged down the steep 
slope of the hollow in a thundering rush. 



SECOND NIGHT OF SUMMER 



27 



Grandma aimed carefully and let 

goThere was no explosion. The 
blanket of dead-leaf creatures was 
lifting into the air ahead of the 
pony's ground-shaking approach in 
a weightless, silent swirl of darkness, which instantly blotted both 
the glowing Transmitter and the 
pony's shape from sight. The pony 
roared once as the blackness closed 
over it. A second later, there was 
a crash like the shattering of a 
hundred-foot mirror. At approximately the same moment, Grandma's plastic ball exploded somewhere in the center of the swirling 
storm of lethal life. 

Cascading fountains of white 
fire filled the whole of the hollow. 
Within the fire, a dense mass of 
shapes fluttered and writhed frenziedly like burning rags. From 
down where the fire boiled fiercest 
rose continued sounds of brittle 
substances suffering enormous violence. The pony was trampling the 
Transmitter, making sure of its destruction. 

"Better get out of it!" Grandma 
shouted anxiously. "What's left of 
that will all melt now, anyway!" 

She didn't know whether it 
heard her or not, but a few seconds 
later, it came pounding up the side 
of the hollow again. Blazing from 
nose to rump, it tramped past 
Grandma, plunged through the 
meadow behind her, shedding 
white sheets of fire that exploded 
the marsh grass in its tracks, and 



hurled itself headlong into the 
pond it had selected previously. 
There was a great splash, accompanied by sharp hissing noises. 
Pond and pony vanished together 
under billowing clouds of steam. 

"That was pretty hot!" its 
thought came to Grandma. 

"Hot as anything that ever came 
out of a volcano!" she affirmed. "If 
you'd played around in it much 
longer, you'd have provided the 
village with roasts for a year." 

"I'll just stay here for a while, 
till I've cooled off a bit," said the 
pony. "And I'd like to forget that 
last remark of yours, too. Civilized 
cannibals, that's what people are!" 

GRANDMA found something 
strangling her then, and discovered it was the lortel's tail. She 
unwound it carefully. But the lortel promptly reanchored itself with 
all four hands in her hair. She decided to leave it there. It seemed 
badly upset. 

Grimp, however, relaxed suddenly and slept on. It was going 
to take a little maneuvering to get 
him back into the village undetected before morriing, but she would 
figure that out by and by. A steady 
flow of cool night air was being 
drawn past them into the hollow 
now, and rising out of it again in 
boiling, vertical columns of invisible heat. At the bottom of the 
de-luxe blaze she'd lit down there, 
things still seemed to be moving 
about — but very slowly. The Halpa 



28 




 



were tough organisms, all right, 
though not nearly so tough, when 
you heated them up with a really 
good incendiary, as the natives of 
Treebel. 

She would have to make a final 
check of the hollow around dawn, 
of course, when the ground should 
have cooled off enough to permit 
it — but her century's phase of the 
Halpa War did seem to be over. 
The defensive part of it, at any 
rate. 

Wet munching sounds from the 
pond indicated the pony felt comfortable enough by now to take 
an interest in the parboiled vegetation it found floating about it. 

"You picked the right child, 
after all," the pony's thought remarked to her. 

"Yes, Grimp worked out fine," 
Grandma said a little proudly. 

"I was pretty worried for a 
while." 

"I won't say I was exactly easy 
myself. I thought Grimp was reacting slowly and I was getting 
ready to hurl the incendiary." 

"But you didn't," the pon> 
pointed out, chewing loudly. 

"No. I suspected my perception 
might be too fast. It turned out to 
be almost two minutes off." 

The rhinocerine pony stopped 
munching and she felt the shiver 
of fear that went through its mind. 
"As much as that? You'd have 
caught the Transmitter before >it j 
was matter. Nothing would have 
happened . . . except the Halpa 



would have swarmed through when 
the Transmitter materialized. We 
couldn't have stopped them." 

"Grimp had the crisis down to 
the micro-second," she said happily. "Why fret about what might 
have happened?" 

"You're right, of course," the 
pony agreed, but its enormous 
appetite seemed suddenly to have 
disappeared. 

Grandma settled down carefully 
to sleep in the long marsh grass 
without disturbing Grimp's position too much. She appeared calm, 
but her sleep was more of a faint 
than untroubled slumber. 

BY SUNRISE, Grandma Wannatters patent-medicine trailer 
was nine miles from the village 
and rolling steadily southward up 
the valley road through the woods. 
As usual, she was departing under 
an official cloud. 

Grimp and the policeman had 
showed up early to warn her. The 
Guardian was making use of the 
night's various unprecedented disturbances to press through a vote 
on a Public Menace charge against 
Grandma in the village. Since 
everybody still felt rather excited 
and upset, he had a good chance 
just now of getting a majority. 

Grimp had accompanied her far 
enough to explain that this state 
of affairs wasn't going to be permanent. He had it all worked out: 
Runny's new immunity to hayfever had brought him and the 



SECOND NIGHT OF SUMMER 



29 




30 




 




pretty Vellit to a fresh understanding overnight; they were going to 
get married five weeks from now. 
As a married man, Runny would 
then be eligible for the post of 
Village Guardian at the harvest 
elections. Between Grimp's cousins 
and Vellit' s cousins, Runny' s backers would just about control the 
vote. So when Grandma got around 
to visiting the valley again next 
summer, she needn't worry any 
more about police interference or 
official disapproval. . . . 

Grandma had nodded approvingly. That was about the kind of 
neighborhood politics she'd begun 
to play herself at Grimp's age. She 
was pretty sure by now that Grimp 
was the one who eventually would 
become her successor as guardian 
of Noorhut, as well as of the starsystem to which Noorhut belonged, 
and perhaps of a good many other 
star-systems besides. With careful 
schooling, he ought to be just about 
ready for the job by the time she 
was willing, finally, to retire. 

An hour after he had started 
back to the farm, looking suddenly a little forlorn, the trailer swung 
off the valley road into a narrow! 
forest path. Here the pony length-? 
ened its stride, and less than five 
minutes later they entered a curv


ing ravine, at the far end of which 
lay something that Grimp would 
have recognized instantly as a small 
spaceship from his one visit to the 
nearest port city. 

A large round door opened 
soundlessly in its side as they 
approached. The pony came to a 
stop. Grandma got down from the 
driver's seat and unhitched it. The 
pony walked into the airlock, and 
the trailer picked its wheels off the 
ground and floated in behind it. 
Grandma Wannattel walked in last, 
and the lock closed quietly. 

The ship lay still a moment 
longer. Then it was suddenly 
gone. Dead leaves went dancing 
for a while about the ravine, disturbed by the breeze of its departure. 

In a place very far away — so far 
that neither Grimp nor his parents 
nor anyone in the village except 
the schoolteacher had ever heard 
of it — a set of instruments began 
signaling for attention. Somebody 
answered them. 

Grandma's voice announced distinctly: 

"This is Agent Wannattel's report on the successful conclusion 
of the Halpa operation on Noorhut — " 

High above Noorhut's skies, 
eight great ships swung instantly 
, Out of their watchful orbits about 
I' $Me planet and flashed off again 
r into the blackness of space that was 
their sea and their home. 