Twenty-Foot Miss By WILLY LEY 

IT HAPPENED about six years 
ago in a research laboratory on 
the Atlantic Coast. Somebody 
of importance, a VIP in military 
parlance, had announced his visit. 



He arrived in time for lunch, and 
the engineers, talking in relays, 
used the opportunity to fill the 
VIP with technical lore. Among 
other things, he w.as told that they 

would show him "Felix the Heatseeker." When the time came he 
was ushered into an empty room. 
In the center of that room there 
was a turntable and on the turntable rested a bomb, staring at the 
visitor through a lens in its nose. 
Feeling slightly uneasy, the VIP 
took a few steps to the right. The 
bomb swung around on the turntable, pointing at him again, staring. He moved to the left. The 
bomb turned after him, staring 
with the lens in its nose — 



This was, after all, a perfectly 
natural thing, because Felix the 
Heat-seeker was reacting to the 
VIP's body temperature, which 
may have gone up a degree or two 
because of this performance. The 
somewhat nerve-racking demonstration was, in part, a device for 
being remembered in the budget. 
In addition to that it was a kind 
of summary of recent developments in military technology, a lecture with the theme that it is no 
longer true that "a miss of an inch 



TWENTY-FOOT MISS 



87 



is as good as a mile." The saying 
should now be that a twenty-foot 
miss is a clean hit. 

That came about in three ways. 

The first, simplest and also oldest is the exploding charge. If a 
solid cannonball missed a soldier 
by six inches, he could shrug and 
continue charging. If, later on, a 
105mm. howitzer shell exploded 
at a distance of six feet from the 
soldier, it was a hit. The biggest 
application of this principle is, of 
course, the fission bomb, which, 
for this very reason, can't even be 
a front line weapon any more. 

The second way of transforming a miss into a hit is essentially 
an addition to the exploding 
charge. It is what may be called 
the "sensing" fuze,* which will 
perceive the nearness of a target 
and respond at the precise fractional instant of closest approach. 

The third, finally, is to correct 
the trajectory of whatever you are 
throwing at your enemy, prior to 
missing the target, so that the 
throw is turned into a hit. As far 
as strict chronological sequence 
goes, the third method was thought 
of and even tested before the second, but the second, the sensing 
fuze, was used first. 

IT APPEARED in action during 
the early days of the Second. 
World War, just when the war 

"The spelling FUZE Is the one authorized' 
by the Dept. of Defense. This is to distinguish it from a FUSE, which is an electric 
safety device. 



looked quite leisurely. The manifestation of the new principle in 
military technology was called a 
"magnetic mine," which is hardly 
a good name, for the device happened to be as non-magnetic as 
possible. Up to that moment all 
military engineers had known that 
a fuze (unless it happened to be 
a time fuze) had to make "contact" to be set off. That was still 
true, but it had always been taken 
for granted that any contact would 
be a physical one. That there could 
also be a contact of force fields 
was new. 

The fuze of the so-called magnetic mine relied on the simple 
fact that the earth has a magnetic 
field. The best known manifestation of that field is that it makes 
n magnetic needle assume an approximate North-South position, 
as in a compass. But if there is a 
large mass of iron nearby — for example, a ship — the earth's magnetic field is disturbed fox some 
distance and the compass needle 
misbehaves. Any schoolbook says 
so, but the Germans applied the 
information lethally. 

They built a naval mine of nonmagnetic materials, mostly aluminum, gave it the shape of an airplane bomb so that bombers could 
plant it, and put a fuze inside 
which would go off when a magnetic needle was disturbed. Such a 
disturbance meant that there was 
a large mass of iron nearby — 
again, for example, a ship. They 



88 




 



also had a safety catch on that 
fuze, consisting of a so-called 
hydrostatic switch, a device which 
prevented the fuze from working 
unless it was under water which 
opened the switch by its pressure. 

It was the undoing of the 
scheme that one of these parachuted mines did not fall into 
water but landed on a mudbank. 
Commander J. G. D. Ouvry, R. N., 
approached the monster with a kit 
of non-magnetic tools, mainly 
bronze. He opened up the mine, 
giving a running account of his 
actions through a microphone so 
that, in case of accident, the next 
mine opener would know what had 
been done wrong. He was both 
skilful and lucky, since he happened to be protected by the faithful functioning of the hydrostatic 
switch. The Allies then knew how 
sudi a mine worked: it just sat in 
the bottom mud of shallow water, 
waiting for a ship to come close. 

Once the principle of operation 
was known, counter-measures were 
not too difficult. Simultaneously the 
torpedo experts at Newport, R. I., 
began to think about disturbedforce fields. Torpedoes, if they 
scored a hit, were very effective 
weapons. They were also very expensive weapons, which point was 
usually remembered when a torpedo made a near miss. The result 
of the thinking about near misses 
and disturbed force fields was that 
the torpedo was cross-bred with an 
advanced magnetic mine. 



THE offspring was the Torpedo 
Mark XIV with magnetic 
fuze. It would explode when passing under a ship of shallow draft, 
and it would explode even when 
crossing the bow or stern. Performance was marred at first by a 
mistake in calibration of the early 
production models, and sailors 
made remarks featuring the word 
"long-hairs" — which they quickly 
took back when the device was 
made to work. 

The most famous example of 
sensing fuzes operated above the 
water line. I mean what the military call the VT fuze. It means 
"variable time," though engineers 
are more likely to call it "proximity fuze." That fuze is something which is a bit hard to believe, not so much because of its 
action, which makes it go off in 
the proximity of a target, but because it is really a radio set. 

You don't expect a radio set to 
be still in one piece, or even in 
working order, after it has been 
shot from a gun. But the VT fuze, 
after some 800 million dollars 
were spent on its development, remains in working order. In fact, 
it is not in working order before 
firing; it needs the shock of firing 
and the spinning of the shell to 
activate its battery. 

The working principle may 
again be called that of a disturbed 
force field, but it is utilized somewhat differently. When the battery 
has been activated, the fuze sends 



TWENTY-FOOT MISS 



89 



out a steady radio signal that 
forms a kind of aura. As long as 
nothing enters the aura, nothing 
will happen. But when the shell 
comes close to an airplane, radio 
waves are reflected back to the 
fuze. A special tube in the fuze 
senses the reflection and builds up 
resentment in the form of a charge. 
When the charge has grown 
strong enough — all this taking 
place in fractions of a second — 
this tube sets off a detonator. The 
detonator explodes a booster 
charge and the shock of the exploding booster makes the TNT 
of the main charge go off. Which 
is the end of the VT fuze and its 
radio aura, but usually also the end 
of the obstacle in the aura. 

These VT fuzes accomplished 
quite incredible feats during the 
Second World War. At Anzio 
Beach they downed 691 Luftwaffe 
planes, aided by a gun-directing 
mechanism known to ordnance personnel as the M-9. But the important point is not the large figure. 
It is that out of these 691 hits, 
some 680 were in all probability 
near misses, old style! 

HOWEVER, there must have 
been an additional number of 
actual misses beyond the range of 
action of the VT fuze, for once a 
shell had left the gun muzzle, it. 
was on its own. To influence it 
even after it had been fired was 
the goal of the third method. 
The third method, that of guid


ing a lethal missile, cropped up 
for the first time in 1911. It was, 
of all places, in a circus in Berlin. 
They had a model of a Zeppelin 
airship there, about 15 feet long. 
When the time for the act came, a 
console was carried into the arena 
and the inventor closed one switch. 
The battery-powered electric motors of the airship model began 
to whir and the ship moved. A 
second switch was closed and the 
airship model flew in a curve. A 
third switch was closed; the airship dropped a small bomb, which 
exploded with red flames and 
much smoke in the sawdust. 

Some time later, the same inventor demonstrated a motorboat 
which he ran by wireless signals 
from the shore of the lake. He 
pointed out that this would be a 
fine method for sending explosiveladen ships into enemy harbors or 
fleet formations. Probably because 
the range was very short and the 
signals could easily have been 
"jammed," these unmanned supertorpedoes failed to materialize during the First World War. After 
that war, however, the Germans 
utilized the idea in their famous 
Zahringen, a small warship with 
full armor but minus guns. Equipped with radio steering gear and 
all empty spaces stuffed with cork, 
the Zahringen did long service as 
a mobile target ship. 

People who have read Goethe's 
Faust like to quote the lines: "All 
theory, my friend, is gray; but life 



90 




 



a flowering green tree." It may be 
true in some cases, but when it 
comes to the guiding of missiles it 
works the other way round. It all 
looks fine and" lush in theory, in 
real life performance, things begin to look dark. When Dr. Ralph 
E. Gibson of the Applied Physics 
Laboratory in Silver Springs, Md., 
was interviewed recently, one reporter asked how far one could 
fire a missile now. Doctor Gibson 
was willing to concede some 500 
miles or a little more. And for what 
distance, asked another reporter, 
would you guarantee a hit? Ten 
feet, snapped Dr. Gibson. This I 
consider somewhat understated; he 
could have guaranteed a hit for 
the length of the missile itself. 

FACT is, in the Second World 
War, the only guided missiles used operationally were those 
released from aircraft, where conditions are somewhat simpler. There 
were ground-to-ground missiles, 
like V-l and V-2, but they were 
not guided. In the V-l, a robot 
pilot maintained the flying bomb 
on a straight course and at a given 
altitude. In the V-2, an automatic 
device saw to it that the power was 
shut off when the rocket had 
reached the proper velocity, which 
is, actually, the equivalent of doling 
out the right powder charge for a 
big gun. 

Of true guiding there were only 
beginnings. As an example I might 
mention a large anti-aircraft rocket 



that was supposed to form part of 
the German Rhineland defense. 
Naturally, the rocket was named 
Rheintocbter or Rhine Maiden. The 
idea was that when an allied bomber would be caught in a radar beam, 
a Rhine Maiden would be fired immediately and be trailed by a second 
beam, through which it would receive directional orders. Then the 
two beams would be brought together. 

It did not work too well and 
most experts now believe that this 
was not due to wartime hurry, but 
that the system itself was at fault. 
Those who think so prefer the "onebeam system," in which the antiaircraft missile is fed into the same 
beam that has caught the attacker. 
The missile receives no orders from 
the ground, but is equipped with a 
mechanism that will always shunt 
it back into its beam. 

Doctor Gibson calls that "conscience guiding," the missile being 
unable to stray from the narrow 
path leading to the enemy. Using 
only one beam, this method is not 
merely simpler, it has another advantage. Since one can feed several 
missiles in succession into the beam, 
the enemy would not have won out 
by default just because a single 
missile's conscience slipped. All 
that would be needed for final success would be a radar man on the 
ground who did not lose his target. 

But why not just send the missile aloft in the general direction 
of the enemy and entrust a device 



TWENTY-FOOT MISS 



97 



like Felix the Heat-seeker with the 
actual hunting? Well, during that 
demonstration the engineers had 
been careful to leave Felix alone 
with just one source of heat radiation. In real action there would be 
so many heat sources that any device would be confused. It would 
have to be brought pretty close to 
the intended prey until it could 
take over. And even then it might 
be useful only against an attacking 
unmanned missile. If it tried to 
chase a manned bomber, sniffing 
either for the heat of its exhaust or 
the noise of its engines, the crew 
could do something about it. 

They could, for example, drop an 
instantaneously igniting incendiary 
bomb with a parachute that keeps 
it from falling too fast. The total 
weight of such a bomb would be 
around three pounds, small enough 
to allow any plane to carry a considerable number of them. Result: 
the heat-seeking interceptor would 
suddenly get a much hotter scent 
and strain all control surfaces in 
diving wildly after the floating 
magnesium bomb, blowing it successfully into smaller hot splinters. 
Any competent fireworks chemist 
can compound a mixture which does 
no harm but produces a considerable 
noise while burning. Incorporated 
into a parachute bomb, that would 
take care of noise-seeking missiles. 
One can confuse the radar man on 
the ground, too, but not that easily. 

Going on from here, one could 
ask: why specific measures? Why 



not develop a field which will set 
off all VT-fuzed projectiles and 
missiles at a distance, where their 
explosion can't cause any harm? 

PERSONALLY, I don't know if 
this can be done. I am mostly 
wondering whether a plane could 
carry the necessary equipment to 
do it. But even if it can be done 
and if the plane can carry the necessary equipment, there exists one 
kind of VT fuze that might spoil 
everything. It is the optical VT fuze 
which actually sees the plane. 

The trick is accomplished by 
having a solid lucite lens which is 
covered except for a slot running 
all around the nose. Light enters 
through the slot and is focused on 
a photo-cell. An airplane that gets 
in the way is just something that 
acts as a partial screen reducing the 
amount of light received by the 
photo-cell. The photo-cell answers 
with a change in voltage that does 
what the reflected radio waves do 
in the other type. 

If you now feel like the VIP 
who was left alone with Felix, you 
find yourself in large company. All 
these developments took place so 
fast that nobody has been able to 
think his way through. And if 
there should be a good partial answer, it is not likely to be published. But it looks as if attack and 
defense are better matched than 
they were in 1940. By hard work 
and ingenuity, things may be kept 
that way.