Syndrome Johnny BY CHARLES DYE 

THE blood was added to a 
pool of other blood, mixed, 
< entnf uged, separated to 
pl.isiru and corpuscles, irradiated 
slightly, pasteurized slightly, frozen, 
evaporated, and finally banked. 
Some of the plasma was used immediately for a woman who had bled 
too much in childbirth. 
She died. 

Others received plasma and did 
not die. But their symptoms 
changed, including a syndrome of 
multiple endocrine unbalance, eccentricities of appetite and digestion, and a general pattern of 
emotional disturbance. 

An alert hospital administrator 
investigated the mortality rise and 
narrowed it to a question of who 
had donated blood the week before. After city residents were 

31 



eliminated, there remained' only the 
signed receipts and thumbprints of 
nine men. Nine healthy unregistered travelers poor enough to sell 
their blood for money, and among 
them a man who carried death in 
his vein?. The nine thumbprints 
were broadcast to all police files 
and a search began. 

The effort was futile, for there 
were many victims who had sickened and grown partially well 
again without recognizing the 
strangeness of their illness. 

Three years later they reached 
the carrier stage and the epidemic 
spread to four cities. Three more 
years, and there was an epidemic 
which spread around the world, 
meeting another wave coming from 
the opposite direction. It killed 
two out of four, fifty out of a hundred, twenty-seven million out of 
fifty million. There was hysteria 
where it appeared. And where it 
had not appeared there were quarantines to fence it out. But it could 
not be fenced out. For two years it 
covered the world. And then it 
vanished again, leaving the survivors with a tendency toward glandular troubles. 

Time passed. The world grew 
richer, more orderly, more peaceful. 

A man paused in the midst of 
his work at the U.N. Food and 
Agriculture Commission, l ie looked 
up at the red and green production 
map of India. 

"Just too many people per acre," 



he said. "All our work at improving production . . . just one jump 
ahead of their rising population, 
one jump ahead of famine. Sometimes I wish to God there woujjf 
be another plague to give us a 
breathing spell and a fair chance 
to get things organized." 

He went back to work and added 
another figure. 

Two months later, he was one of 
the first victims of the seconjd 
plague. 

IN THE dining hall of a university, a biochemical student 
glanced up from his paper to his 
breakfast companion. "You remember Johnny, the mythical carrier 
that they told about during the first 
and second epidemics of Syndrome 
Plague?" 

"Sure. Syndrome Johnny. They 
use that myth in psychology class 
as a typical example of mass hysteria. When a city was nervous and 
expecting the plague to reach them, 
some superstitious fool would imagine he saw Syndrome Johnny and 
the population would panic. Symbol for Death or some such thing. 
People imagined they saw him in 
every corner of the world. Simultaneously, of course." 

It was a bright morning and they 
were at a window which looked out 
across green roll ing fields to a 
towering glass-brick building in the 
distance. 

The student who had gone back 
to his paper suddenly looked up 



32 




 



again. "Some Peruvians here claim 
they saw Syndrome Johnny — " 

"Idiotic superstition! You'd 
think it would have died down 
when the plague died." 

The other grinned. "Hie plague 
didn't die-" l fe folded his newspaper slowly, obviously advancing 
an opening for a debate. 

His companion went on eating. 
"Another of your wild theories, 
huh?" Then through a mouthful 
of food: "All right, if the plague 
didn't die, where did it go?" 

"Nowhere. We have it now. We 
all have it!" He shrugged- "A 
virus catalyst of high affinity for 
the cells and a high similarity to a 
normal cell protein — how can it be 
detected ?" 

"Then why don't people die? 
Why aren't we sick?" 

"Because we have sickened and 
recovered. We caught it on conception and recovered before birth. 
Proof? Why do you think that the 
countries which were known as the 
Hungry Lands are now well-fed, 
leisured, educated, advanced ? Because the birth rate has fallen ! Why 
has the birth rate fallen ?" He 
paused, then very carefully said, 
"Because two out of three of all 
people who would have lived have 
died before birth, slain by Syndrome Pl-iguc. We are all carriers 
now, hosts to a new guest. And'' — 
his voice dropped to a mock sinister whisper — "with suth a 
stranger within our cells, at the 
heart of the intricate machinery of 



our lives, who knows what subtle 
changes have crept upon us unnoticed !" 

His companion laughed. "Eat 
your breakfast. You belong on a 
horror program!" 

A POLICE psychologist for the 
Federated States of The 
Americas was running through reports from the Bureau of Social 
Statistics. Suddenly he grunted, 
then a moment later said, "Uhhuh!" 

"Uh-huh what?" asked his 
superior, who was reading a newspaper with his feet up on the desk. 

"Remember the myth of Syndrome Johnny?" 

"Ghost of Syndrome Plague. Si, 
what of it ?" 

"Titaquahapahel, Peru, populalion nine hundred, sent in a claim 
that he turned up there and they 
almost caught him. Crime Statistics 
rerouted the report to Mass Phenomena, of course. Mass Phenomena blew a tube and sent their 
folder on Syndrome Johnny over 
here. Every report they ever had on 
him for ninety years back! A memo 
came with it." He handed the 
memo over. 

The man behind the desk looked 
at it. It was a small graph and 
some mathematical symbols. "What 

is it>" 

"It means," said the psychologist, .smiling dryly f "that every crazy 
report about our ghost has points 
of similarity to every other crazy 



SYNDROME JOHNNY 



report. The whole business of Syndrome Johnny has been in their 
'funny coincidence' file for twenty 
years. This time the suspect hits 
the averaged description of Johnny 
too closely: A solid-looking man, 
unusual number of visible minor 
scars, and a disturbing habit of 
bending his ringers at the lirst-joint 
knuckles when he is thinking. The 
coincidence has gotten too damn 
funny. There's a chance we've been 
passing up a crime." 

"An extensive crime," said the 
man at the desk softly. He reached 
for the folder. "Yes, a considerable 
quantity of murder." He leafed 
through the folder and then 
thought a while, looking at the 
most recent reports. Thinking was 
what lie was paid for, and he earned 
his excellent salary, 

"This thumbprint on the hotel 
register — the name is false, but the 
thumbprint looks real. Could we 
persuade the Bureau of Records to 
give their data on that print?" 

"Without a warrant? Against 
constitutional immunity. No, not a 
chance. The public has been touchy 
about the right to secrecy ever since 
that police state was attempted in 
Varga." 

"How about persuading an obliging judge to give a warrant on 
grounds of reasonable suspicion?" 

"No. We'd have the humanist 
press down on our necks in a minute, and any judge knows it. We'd 
have to prove a crime was committed. No crime, no warrant." 



"It seems a pity we can't even 
find out who (he gentleman is," the 
Crimes Department head murmured, looking at the thumbprint 
wistfully. "No crime, no records. 
No records, no evidence. No evidence, no proof of crime. Therefore, we must manufacture a small 
crime. He was attacked and he must 
have defended himself. Someone 
may have been hurt in the process." 
He pushed a button. "Do you think 
if I send a man down there, he 
could persuade one of the mob to 
swear out a complaint?" 

"That's a rhetorical question," 
said the psychologist, trying to work 
out an uncertain correlation in his 
reports. "With that sort of mob 
hysteria, the town would probably 
give you an affidavit of witchcraft." 

"T)HONE for you, Doctor AlJ- cala." The nurse was crisp 
but quiet, smiling down at the little 
girl before vanishing again. 

Ricardo Alcala pushed the 
plunger in gently, then carefully 
withdrew the hypodermic needle 
from the little girl's arm. "There 
you are, Cosita," he said, smiling 
and rising from the chair beside 
the white bed. 

"Will that make me better, Doctor?" she piped feebly. 

He patted her hand. "Be a g»od 
girl and you will be well tomorrow." He walked out into the hospital corridor to where the desk 
nurse held out a phone. 

"Alcala speaking." 



34 




 



The voice was unfamiliar. "My 
deepest apologies for interrupting 
your work, Doctor. At this late 
hour I'm afraid I assumed you 
would be at home. The name is 
Camba, Federation Investigator on 
a health case. I would like to consult you." 

Alcala was tired, but there was 
nothing to do at home. Nita was 
at the health resort and Johnny had 
borrowed all his laboratory space 
for a special synthesis of some sort, 
and probably would be too busy 
even to talk. Interest stirred in him. 
This was a Federation investigator 
calling; the man's work was probably important. "Tonight, if that's 
convenient. I'll be off duty in five 
minutes." 

Thirty minutes later they were 
ordering in a small cantina down 
the street from the hospital. 

Julio Camba, Federation Investigator, was a slender, dark man with 
sharp, glinting eyes. He spoke with 
a happy theatrical flourish. 

"Order what you choose, Senor, 
We're on my expense account. The 
resources of the Federated States 
of all The Americas stand behind 
your menu." 

Alcala smiled. "I wouldn't want 
to add to the national debt." 

"Not at all, Senor. The Federated 
States are only too happy thus to 
express a fraction of their gratitude 
by adding a touch of luxury to the 
otherwise barter! and self-sacrificing 
life of a scientist." 

"You shame me," Alcala. said 



dryly. It was true that he needed 
every spare penny for the health 
of Nita and the child, and for the 
laboratory. A penny saved from 
being spent on nourishment was a 
penny earned. He picked up the 
menu again and ordered steak. 

The investigator lit a cigar, asking casually: "Do you know John 
Osborne Drake?" 

ALCALA searched his memory. 
"No. I'm sorry . . ." Then 
he felt for the first time how closely he was being watched, and knew 
how carefully his reaction and the 
tone of his voice had been analyzed. 
The interview was dangerous. For 
some reason, he was suspected of 
something. 

Camba finished lighting the cigar 
and dropped the match into an ashtray. "Perhaps you know John Delgados?".He leaned back into the 
shadowy corner of the booth. 

Johnny! Out of all the people 
in the world, how could the government be interested in him? Alcala tried to sound casual. "An associate of mine. A friend." 

"I would like to contact the 
gentleman." The request was completely unforceful, undemanding. 
"I called, but he was not at home. 
Could you tell me where he might 
be?" 

"Fin sorry, Senor Camba, but. I 
cannot say. He could be on a business trip." Alcal.T was feeling increasingly nervous. Actually, Johnny 
was working at his laboratory. 



SYNDROME JOHNNY 



35 



"What Jo you know of his activities?" Camba asked. 

"A biochemist" Alcala tried to 
sec past the meditative mask of the 
thin dark face. "He makes small 
job-lots of chemical compounds. 
Special bug spray for sale to experimental plantations, hormone spray 
for fruits, that sort of thing. Sometimes, when he collects some money 
ahead, he Joes research." 

Camba waited, and his silence became a question. Alcala spoke reluctantly, anger rising in him. "Oh, 
it's genuine research. He has some 
patents and publications to his 
credit. You can confirm that if you 
choose." He was unable to keep 
the hostility out of his voice. 

A waiter came and placed steam 



ing platters of fooJ on the table. 
Ca mbfl waited until he was gone. 
"You know him well, I presume. 
Is he sane?" 

The question was another shock. 
Alcala thought carefully, for any 
man might be insane in secret. 
"Yes, so far as I know." He turned 
his attention to -the steak, but first 
■took three very large capsules from 
a bottle in his pocket. 

"I would not expect that a doctor would need to take pills," 
Camba remarked with friendly 
mockery. 

"I don't need them," Alcala explained. "Mixed silicones. I'm 
guinea pigging." 

"Can't such things be left to the 
guinea pigs?" Camba asked, watch


&ALAXY SCIENCE FICTION 



ing with revulsion as Alcala unc apped the secon d bot tic an d 
sprinkled a layer of gray powder 
over his steak. 

"Guinea pigs have no assimilation of silicones; onlv man has 
that." 

"Yes, Oi course. I should have 
remembered from your famous 
papers, The Need Of Trace Silicon 
In Human Diet and Silicon Deficiency Diseases." 

OBVIOUSLY Camba had done 
considerable investigating of 
Alcala before approaching him. He 
had even given the titles of the 
research papers correctly. Alcala's 
wariness increase 

"What is the purpose of the experiment this time?" asked -the 
small dark Federation agent genially. t 

"To determine the safe limits of 
silicon consumption and if there 
arc any dangers in an overdose." 

"How do you determine that? 
By dropping dead?" 

He could be right. Perhaps the 
test should be stopped. Every day, 
with growing uneasiness, Alcala 
took his dose of silicon compound, 
and every day, the chemical seemed 
to be absorbed completely — not released or excreted — in a way that 
was unpleasantly reminiscent of the 
way arsenic accumulated without 
evident damage, then killed ahninfly without warning. 

Already, this evening, he had 
noticed that there was something 



faulty about his coordination and 
weight and surface sense. The restaurant door had swung back with 
a curious lightness, and the hollow 
metal handle had had a curious 
softness under his fingers. Something merely going wrong with the 
sensitivity of his fingers — -? 

He tapped his fingertips on the 
heavy indestructible silicone plastic 
table top. There was a feeling of 
heaviness in his hands, and a feeling of faint rubbery give in the 
table. 

Tapping his fingers gently, his 
heavy fingers . . . the answer was 
dreamily fantastic. I'm turning into 
silicon plastic myself, he thought. 
But how, why ? He had not bothered to be curious before, but the 
question had always been — what 
were supposedly insoluble silicons 
doing assimilating into the human 
body at all? 

Several moments passed. He 
smoothed back his hair with his 
oddly heavy hand before picking 
up his fork again. 

"I'm turning into plastic," he 
told Camba. 

"I beg your pardon?" 

"Nothing. A joke." 

Camba was turning into plastic, 
too. Everyone was. But the effect 
was accumulating slowly, by generations. 

CAMBA lay down his knife and 
started in again. "What connections have you had with John 

Delgados?" 



SYNDROME JOHNNY 



37 



Concentrate on the immediate 
sit Nation. Alcala and Johnny were 
obviously in danger of some sort 
of mistaken arrest and interrogation. 

As Alcala focused on the question, one errant whimsical thought 
suddenly flitted through the back of 
his mind. In red advertising letters: 
TRY OUR NEW MODEL RUSTPROOF, WATERPROOF, HEAT 
& SCALD RESISTANT, STRONG 
— EXTRA - LONG - WEARING 
HUMAN BEING! 

He laughed inwardly and finally 
answered: "Friendship. Mutual interest in high ion colloidial suspensions and complex synthesis." 
Impatience suddenly mastered him. 
"Exactly what is it you wish to 
know, Senor? Perhaps I could inform you if I knew the reasons for 
your interest." 

Camba chose a piece of salad 
with great care. "We have reason 
to believe that he is Syndrome 
Johnny." 

Alcala waited for the words to 
clarify. After a moment, it ceased 
to be childish babble and became 
increasingly shocking. He remembered the first time he had met John 
Delgados, the smile, the strong 
handclasp. "Call me Johnny," he 
had said. It had seemed no more 
than a nickname. 

The investigator was watching 
his expression with bright brown 
eyes. 

Johnny, yes . . . but not Syndrome Johnny. He tried to think of 

38 



some quick refutation. "The whole 
thing is preposterous, Senor 
Camba. The myth of Syndrome 
Plague Johnny started about a century ago." 

"Doctor Alcala" — the small man 
in the gray suit was tensely sober — 
"John Delgados is very old, and 
John Delgados is not his proper 
name. I have traced his life back 
and back, through older and older 
records in Argentina, Panama, 
South Africa, the United States, 
China, Canada. Everywhere he has 
paid his taxes properly, put his 
fingerprints on file as a good citizen 
should. And he changed his name 
every twenty years, applying to the 
courts for permission with good 
honest reasons for changing his 
name. Everywhere he has been a 
laboratory worker, held patents, 
sometimes made a good deal of 
money. He is one hundred and forty 
years old. His first income tax was 
pa,id in 1970, exactly one hundred 
and twenty years ago." 
, "Other men are that old," said 
Ak A x 

"Other men are old, yes. Those 
who survived the two successive 
plagues were unusually durable," 
Camba finished and pushed back 
his plate. "There is no crime in 
being long-lived, surely. But he has 
changed his name five times !" 

"That proves nothing. Whatever 
his reasons for changing his name, 
it doesn't prove that he is Syndrome 
Johnny any more than it proves he 
is the cow that jumped over the 


 



moon. Syndrome Johnny is a myth, 
a figment of mob delirium." 

AS HE said it, he knew it was 
not true. A Federation investigator would not be on a wild 
goose chase. 

The plates were taken away and 
cups of steaming black coffee put 
between them. He would have to 
warn Johnny. It was strange how 
well you could know a man as well 
as he knew Johnny, firmly enough 
to believe that, despite evidence, 
everything the man did was right. 

"Why must it be a myth?" 
Camba asked softly. 

"It's ridiculous!" Alcala protested. "Why would any man — " His 
voice cut off as unrelated facts fell 
into a pattern. He sat for a moment, thinking intensely, seeing the 
century of plague as something he 
had never dreamed . . . 
A price. 

Not too high a price in the long 
run, considering what was purchased. Of course, the great change 
over into silicon catalysis would be 
a shock and require adjustment and, 
of course, the change must be made 
in several easy stages — and those 
who could not adjust would die. 

"Go on, Doctor," Camba urged 
softly. '' 'Why would any man — ' " 

He tried -to find a way of explaining which would not seem to 
have any relationship to John Delgados. "It has been recently discovered" — but he did not say boiv 
recently — "that the disease of Syn


drome Plague was not a disease. It 
is an improvement." He had spoken 
clumsily. 

An i mp ro v emen t on life ?" 
Camba laughed and nodded, but 
there were bitterness and anger 
burning behind the small man's 
smile. "People can be improved to 
death by the millions. Yes, yes, go 
on, Senor. You fascinate me." 

"We are stronger," Alcala told 
him. "We are changed chemically. 
The race has been improved!" 

"Come, Doctor Alcala," Camba 
said with a sneering merriment, 
"the Syndrome Plagues have come 
and they have gone. Where is this 
change?" 

Alcala tried to express it clearly. 
"We are stronger. Potentially, we 
are tremendously stronger. But we 
of this generation are still weak and 
ill, as our parents were, from the 
shock of the change. And we need 
silicone feeding; we have not ad* 
justed yet. Our illness masks our 
strength." He thought of what that 
strength would be ! 

Camb a sm i led an d took out a 
smatl notebook. "The disease is 
connected with silicones, you say? 
The original* name of John Delgados was John Osborne Drake. 
His father was Osborne Drake, a 
chemist at Dow Corning, who was 
sentenced to the electric chair in 
1967 for unauthorized bacterial experiments which resulted in an accidental epidemic and eight deaths. 
Dow Corning was the first major 
manufactury of silicones in Amer


SYNDROME JOHNNY 



ica, though not connected in any 
way with Osborne Drake's criminal 
experiments. It links together, docs 
it not?" 

"It is not a disease, it is 
Strength!" Alcala insisted doggedly. 

THE small investigator looked up 
from his notebook and his 
smile was an unnatural thing, a 
baring of teeth. "Half the world 
died Of this strength, Senor. If you 
will not think of the men and 
women, think of the children. Millions of children died!" 

Th 6 w ait e r br ough t the bill, 
dropping it on the table between 
them. 

"Lives will be saved in the long 
run," Alcala said obstinately. "Individual deaths arc not important 
in the long run." 

"That is hardly the philosophy 
for a doctor, is it?" asked Camba 
with open irony, taking die bill and 
rising. 

They went out of the restaurant 
in silence. Camba *s 'copter stood 
at the curb. 

"Would you care for a lift home. 
Doctor Alcala?" The offer was 
made with the utmost suavity. 

Alcala hesitated fractionally. 
"Why, yes, thank you." It would 
not do to give, the investigator any 
reason for suspicion by refusing. 

As the 'copter lifted into the air, 
Camba spoke with a more friendly 
note in his voice, as if he humored 
a child. ' 'Come, Alcala, you're a 
doctor dedicated to saving lives. 



How can you find sympathy for a 
murderer?" 

Alcala sat in the dark, looking; 
through the windshield down at 
the bright street falling away below. "I'm not a practicing medico; 
only one night a week do I come 
to the hospital. I'm a research man. 
I don't try to save individual lives, 
I'm dedicated to improving the 
average life, the average health. Can 
you understand that? Individuals 
may be sick and individuals may 
die, but the average lives on. And 
if the average is better, then I'm 
satisfied." 

The 'copter flew on. There was 
no answer. 

"I'm not good with words," said 
Alcala. Then, taking out his penknife and unfolding it, he said, 
"Watch!" He put his index finger 
on the altimeter dial, where there 
was light, and pressed the blade 
against the flesh between his finger 
and his thumb. He increased the 
pressure until the flesh stood out 
white on cither side of the blade, 
bending, but not cut. 

"Three generations back, this 
pressure would have gone right 
through the hand." He took away 
the blade and there was only a very 
tiny cut. Putting the knife away, 
he brought out his lighter. The blue 
flame was steady and hot. Alcala 
held it close to the dashboard and 
put his finger directly over it, counting patiently, "One, two, three, 
four, five — " He pulled the lighter 
back, snapping it shut. 



40 




 



"Three generations ago, a man 
couldn't have held a finger over 
that flame for more than a tenth 
part of that count. Doesn't all this 
prove something to you?" 

The 'copter was hovering above 
Attala's house. Camba lowered it 
to the ground and opened the door 
before answering. "It proves only 
that a good and worthy man will 
cut and burn his hand for an unworthy friendship. Good night." 

Disconcerted, Alcala watched the 
'copter lift away into the night, 
then, turning, saw that the lights 
were still on in the laboratory, 
Camba might have deduced something from that, if he knew that 
Nita and the girl were not supposed to be home. 
Alcala hurried in. 
Johnny hadn't left yet. He was 
sitting at Alcala's desk with .his 
feet on -the wastcbasket, the way 



Alcala often liked to sit, reading 
a technical journal. He looked up, 
smiling. For a moment Alcala saw 
him with the new clarity of a 
stranger. The lean, weathered face; 
brown eyes with smile deltas at the 
corners; wide shoulders; steady, big 
hands holding the magazine — solid, 
able, and ruthless enough to see 
what had to be done, and do it. 
"I was waiting for you, Ric." 
"The Feds are after you." Ricardo Alcala had been running. He 
found he was panting and his heart 
was pounding. 

Delgados' smile did not change. 
"It's all right, Ric. Everything's 
done. I can leave any time now."He indicated a square metal box 
standing in a corner. "There's the 
stuff." 

What stuff? The product Johnny 
had been working on ? "You 
haven't time for that now, Johnny. 



SYNDROME JOHNNT 



41 



You can't sell it. They'd watch for 
anyone of your description selling 
chemicals. Let me loan you some 
money." 

"Thanks." Johnny was smiling 
oddly. "Everything's set. I won't 
need it. How close are they to 
finding me?" 

"They don't know where you're 
staying." Alcala leaned on the desk 
edge and put out his hand. "They 
fell me you're Syndrome Johnny." 

"I thought you'd figured that one 
out." Johnny shook his hand formally. "The name is John Osborne 
Drake. You aren't horrified?" 

"No." Alcala knew that he was 
shaking hands with a man who 
would be, (hanked down all the 1 successive generations of mankind. He 
noticed again the odd white webwork of scars on the back of 
Johnny's hand. He indicated them 
as" casually as he could. "Where did 
you pick those up?" 

JOHN DRAKE glanced at his 
hand. "I don't know, Ric. 
Truthfully. I've had my brains 
beaten in too often to remember 
much any more. Unimportant. 
There are instructions outlining 
plans and methods filed in safety 
deposit boxes in almost every big 
.city in the world. Always the same 
typing, always the same instructions. I can't remember who typed 
them, myself or my father, but I 
must have been expected to forget 
or they wouldn't be there. Up to 
eleven, my memory is all right, but 



after Dad started to remake me, 
everything gets fuzzy." 

"After he did what?" 

johnny smiled tiredly and rested 
his head on one hand. "He had to 
remake me chemically, you know. 
How could I spread change without being changed myself,? I 
couldn't have two generations to 
adapt to it naturally like you, Ric. 
It had to be done artificially. It 
took years. You understand? I'm a 
community, a construction. The 
cells that carry on the silicon metabolism in me are not human. Dad 
adapted them for the purpose. I 
helped, but I can't remember any 
longer how it was done. I think 
when I've been badly damaged, organization scatters to the separate 
cells in my body. They can survive 
better that way, and they have 
powers of regrouping and healing. 
But memory can't be pasted together again or regrown." 

John Drake rose and looked 
around the laboratory with something like triumph. "They're too 
late. I made it, Ric. There's the 
catalyst cooling over there. This is 
the last step. I don't think ,'. I'll 
survive this plague, but I'll last 
long enough to set it going for the 
finish. The police won't stop me 
until it's too late." 

ANOTHER plague! ' 
' The last one had been before Alcala was born. He had not 
thought that Johnny would start 
another. It was a shock. 



42 




 



Alula walked over to the cage 
where he kept his white mice and 
looked in, trying to sort out his 
feelings. The white mice looked 
back with beady bright eyes, caged, 
not knowing they were waiting to 
be experimented upon. 

A timer clicked and John Delgados-Drake became all rapid efficient activity, moving from valve 
to valve. It lasted a half minute or 
less, then Drake had finished stripping off the lab whites to his street 
clothes. He picked up the square 
metal box containing the stuff he 
had nTude, tucked it under his arm 
and held out a solid hand again 
to Alcala. 

"Good-by, Kic. Wish me luck. 
Close up the lab for me, will you?" 

Alcala took the hand numbly and 
mumbled something, turned back 
to the cages and stared blindly at 
the mice. Drake's brisk footsteps 
clattered down the stairs. 

ANOTHER step forward for the 
human race. 
God knew what wonders for the 
race were in that box. Perhaps 
something for nerve construction, 
something for the mind — the last 
and most important step. He should 
have asked. 

There came at last a pressure 
that was a thought emerging from 
the depth of intuition. Doctor Rj~ 
cardo Alcala will die in the next 
plague, he and his ill wife Sita and 
bis ill little girl . . . And the name 
of Alcala will die forever as a weak 



strain blotted from the bloodstream 
of the race . . . 

He'd find out what was in the 
box by dying of tl ! 

He tried to reason it out, but 
only could remember that Nita, already sickly, would have no chance. 
And Alcala's family genes, in attempting to adapt to the previous 
steps, had become almost sterile. It 
had been difficult having children. 
The next step would mean complete 
sterility. The name of Alcala would 
die. The future might be wonderful, but it would not be his future! 

"Johnny!" he called suddenly, 
something like an icy lump hardening in his chest How long had it 
been since Johnny had left? 

Running, Alcala went down the 
long halt-lit stairs, out the back 
door and along the dark path toward the place where Johnny's 'copter had been parked.. 

A light shone through the leaves. 
It was still there. 

" JohnnyJ" 

John Osborne Drake was putting 
his suitcase into the rear of the 
'copter. 

"What is it, Ric?" he asked in 
a friendly voice without turning. 

// would be impossible to ask him 
to change his mind. Alcala found a 
rock, raised it behind Syndrome 
Johnny's back. "I know I'm being 
anti- social," he said regretfully, and 
then threw the rock away. 

His fist was enough like stone to 
crush a skull. 
