J/ ]fou Want the West in Science Tiction 

look for books with this distinctive herald 

Ten unique novels that set new high standards of 
drama and excitement in the science fiction field . . . 

SONS OF THE OCEAN DEEPS— By Bryce Walton 

A chilling tale of tile terrors of life seven miles under the 
sea faced by men who fought to save the North American Continent from disaster. 

MISTS OF DAWN — Chad Oliver 

Collision with the controls of a space-time machine traps a twentieth-century 
youth in the terrifying days at the dawn of civilization, when half-human 
Neanderthals prowled the plains in deadly packs. 

ROCKET JOCKEY— By fbifip St. Jonn 

A breath-taking interplanetary rocket race provides the background for this 
tale of how a teen-age space cadet outwits Martian plotting. 

VAULT OF THE AGES— By Poul Andenon 

In the barbarism that survives 500 years after the flaming collapse of twentieth-century civilization, a sixteen-year-old hero battles superstitious priests 
to uncover "ancient" crafts that can save his people from destruction. 

ISLANDS IN THE SKY— By Arthur C. Clarke 

The president of the British Interplanetary Society writes a convincing description of a space station that circles the Earth, of the men who service 
it and a teen-ager who visits it. 

EARTHBOUND — By Milton Lesser 

A spunky teen-ager who washes out of space school rockets to the asteroids 
on a rescue mission authorities said "couldn't succeed." 

FIVE AGAINST VENUS— By Pnilip Latnom 

How a family of earthlings battles for its life when a Moon-bound rocket 
crashes in the misty wilds of Venus is a tale of powerful reality. 

MAROONED ON MARS— By Lester del Rey 

A teen-age stowaway on the first Moon-to-Mars expedition solves a sinister 

aspect of life on the desolate "red planet." 

FIND THE FEATHERED SERPENT — By Evan Hunter 

Through centuries-back to the glittering Mayan civilization of ancient 
Mexico-go a pair of explorers who discover Vikings in the South! 

SON OF THE STARS — By Raymond Jones 

When a young visitor from space befriends his earthly counterpart, worried 
authorities turn friendship into treachery and bring Earth to the brink of 
destruction. 

THE JOHN C. WINSTON COMPANY 

Philadelphia and Toronto 




Vault of the ^ges 

By POUL ANDERSON 

Jacket illustration by Paul Orhan 



Five liuNDHKD VF.AKS after the "Doom" 
that destroyed present day civilization and sent nations to their graves with 
its "glowing death," the world is pictured as a barbaric society composed of 
primitive tribes that shunned all things 
connected with the twentieth century. 

This is the story of sixteen-year-old 
Carl who set out to break down the ignorant taboos that were destroying a 
priceless heritage and crushing all hope 
for tile future of humanity. 

When the fierce l.ann army thundered 
down from the north to conquer the 

forbidden City to seek out the Wisdom 
and knowledge that would save his people and rebuild the ancient glories of 
man. Accused of consorting with 
witches, threatened with penalty of 
death for ignoring the taboo on oldworld works and magic, Carl defied his 
own tribal seer to raise the ban on the 
time vault which held salvation for a 
dying civilization. How- he fought the 
invading enemy for life itself in a series 
of violent clashes, the slow discovery of 
what twentieth-century civilization had 
accomplished makes this book an intriguing one. 

With action and suspense and the fascination of science fiction speculation, 
this tale of rebellion and battle fury is 
one that will keep readers breathless to 
the very last page. 

THE JOHN C. WINSTON COMPANY 

Philadelphia and Toronto 



Zhe Author 



Poll Anhkhson gives a unique twist 
to this science fiction novel by using 
chronicles of the past as the basis for 
suppositions about future civilizations. 
Interested mainly in the sciences, the 
author is now doing graduate work in 
physics and philosophy at the Universit\ of Minnesota, ill iddition to his full 
schedule of writing. Though comparatively new to the science fiction field. 
Foul Anderson is known to readers for 
his short stories— many of which have 
been selected for anthologies. Fond of 
traveling and camping, he has made extensive tours in the United States, Canada and Europe. 



Zhe Editors 



Ceoii.e Matsciiat, editor of the 
Winston Science Fiction Series, i,s recognized as one of this country's most skilful writers and editors. She has .sixteen 
books to her credit, including the highly 
praised Suwannee River in the "Rivers 
of America" Scries. Nationally known as 
a lecturer, an artist of great ability, 
Ceeilc Matschat is also an expert historian. With this varied background, she 
is perfectly suited to select top science 
fiction authors and books to make this 
a balanced and well-rounded series. 

Carl Carmek, consulting editor, holds 
an outstanding position in the literary 
world. Author of Slavs Fell on Alabama, 
he now edits the popular "Rivers of 
America" Series. Other of his books are 
Genesee Fever, For the Rights of Man, 
Listen for a Lo)wsome Drum, and Windfall Fiddle. 



Vault of the figes 



A Science Fiction Novel 



Vaultofthe 
Ages 

By POUL ANDERSON 

Jacket Design by Paul Orban 
Endpaper Design by Alex Schomburg 




Ceci'/e Matschat, Editor 
Carl Conner, Consulting Editor 



THE JOHN C. WINSTON COMPANY 
Philadelphia • Toronto 



Copyright, 1952 
By Poul Anderson 



Copyright in Great Britain 
and in the British Dominions 

and Possessions 
Copyright in the Republic of 
the Philippines 



FIRST EDITION 



Made in the United States of America 
L. C. Card #52-8871 



To Mor and John 



The Time Capsule 



"Irchaeologists, studying the past, are handicapped 
by the fact that relics are usually few and in poor 
condition. Often, one is not even sure where to 
look for them. Out of such finds— from tombs, 
ruined cities, swamps, deserts, and any other place 
where men of the past have left some trace of themselves—the archaeologist tries to build up a picture of 
these men's lives and civilizations. But there are great 
gaps in our knowledge and probably always will be. 
For instance, we cannot yet read the inscriptions left 
by the ancient Cretans, and so are in the dark about 
many features of their high civilization. We know 
almost nothing of their actual history, and we are not 
even sure who the people were that finally destroyed 
them. In like manner, there are many things we would 
like to know about the Etruscans, Khmers, Mayans, 
and other important nations and tribes of the past; but 

vii 



viii Vault of the Ages 

we have simply not found enough complete records 
and relics to have a good picture. 

Hundreds of years from now, our own modern civilization may be as remote and mysterious as these cultures. As in this story, where I have laid the scene five 
hundred years in the future, after our present-day 
civilization was destroyed by the misuse of the atom 
bomb, the wise men of that day would be able to learn 
what we were like from time capsules. 

As to what a time capsule is, many definitions could 
be given, but let us stick to the facts. "Time capsule" 
is a coined name for a container of some kind which 
is filled with pictures, models, and other records which 
give a view as complete as possible of the world of 
the time— how the people lived, what they ate and 
wore and knew and thought. The container is then 
buried in a safe place for scientists of the far future 
to dig up. 

The idea of leaving tokens for the future is not entirely new. Such inscriptions as the great one on the 
Rock of Behistun, in Asia Minor, were made so that 
all men to come would know of the king who had 
ordered it. When a Chinese emperor in the third century B.C. tried to destroy certain texts, scholars hid 
copies in the hope that later generations would find 
them. This hope was realized, and so such writings as 
the Confucian Willow Books were saved for posterity. 
However, no such systematic attempts as we are discussing were, to my knowledge, made before the 
twentieth century. This is probably because of the 
difficulty of reconstructing the past, and because only 
since Schliemann's time has there been any real science 
of archaeology. 

I believe there are only two time capsules in exist


The Time Capsule ix 

ence— one at Atlanta, Georgia, and one in New York 
City, which is the best known. 

This time capsule was made by the Westinghouse 
Company and was buried in 1938 on the site of the 
World's Fair of 1939. It was meant to be dug up again 
in five thousand years, in a.d. 6938. A Book of Record 
was prepared and 3,650 copies printed on permanent 
paper with special ink. This Book of Record describes 
the contents, the exact location, and the purpose of 
the time capsule. It also contains a request that it be 
translated into new languages as they appear. However, in case this is not done, the book contains a carefully worked-out phonetic and linguistic key to the 
English language, from which any trained linguist can 
reconstruct our tongue. One copy was placed in the 
time capsule itself; the rest, distributed to libraries, 
museums, monasteries, lamaseries, temples, and other 
safe places around the world. It is hoped that some 
few copies, at least, will last the full five thousand 
years. Even if none does, the capsule will probably 
be found someday, for the site of New York City will 
always be of great interest to future archaeologists. 

The capsule itself is a torpedo-shaped vessel, seven 
and one-half feet long and eight and three-eighths 
inches in diameter, made of cupraloy (a very resistant 
alloy of copper) one inch thick. Inside, it is lined with 
pyrex glass and, after being packed and the air pumped 
out, it was filled with humid nitrogen to preserve the 
contents from decay and corrosion. It was lowered 
fifty feet into the earth through a steel pipe to a base 
of waterproof concrete. Pitch was poured in around it, 
then a top layer of concrete, after which the pipe was 
cut off and pulled out and the hole was filled in. With 
these precautions it should be safe from vandals such 



X 



Vault of the Ages 



as the grave robbers who destroyed much valuable 
material in the Egyptian pyramids; and geologists have 
assured us that in five thousand years the land will not 
have sunk below the sea. The time capsule should 
easily last its appointed period. 

The shell contains messages to the future from 
prominent men, a copy of the Book of Record and one 
of the Bible, and various technical aids to translators. 
There are numerous articles of common usefulness, 
pleasure, clothing, and vanity, such as a watch, hats, 
games, money, seeds, pipe and tobacco pouch, and so 
on. There are also a magnifier and a viewer for the 
microfilmed texts and the newsreel. This newsreel is 
a sound film running about fifteen minutes and showing characteristic or significant events of the year 
1938— scenes from military maneuvers and the SinoJapanese War then taking place, a fashion show, a 
Presidential address, and so on. 

On microfilm, there are a great many texts which 
are meant to give as complete a picture as possible of 
the world of 1938. There are photographs of industrial 
processes and works of art; books and encyclopedic 
articles describing what we knew and did and thought; 
some outstanding novels and dramas of the twentieth 
century; and even comic strips. 

The entire capsule is, indeed, a treasure chest of information about our own lives and times, not only the 
great events and discoveries, but the small details of 
everyday living. 

The one at Atlanta is, as far as I know, quite similar, 
though it contains more models of machinery, houses, 
and so forth. Probably more time capsules will be laid 
down from time to time in the future. 

As the repository described in this book is not en


The Time Capsule xi 

tirely like these, I have called it a "time vault" instead. 
It was not meant purely for wise men or scientists, but 
for the common men of the future, whom the maker 
foresaw would have sunk back to a barbaric state of 
life. He wanted them to find and enter the vault easily, 
and use its contents as a guide to rebuilding civilization. To facilitate this, he put his relics in a large cellar 
or vault underground, lined with concrete so it would 
not collapse, and left a door above ground for anyone 
who wished to enter. He did not microfilm his books, 
since these people of the future would probably not 
understand what he had done. Instead, he left them 
in steel cabinets with close-fitting doors, safe from 
animals, insects, fire, and damp. He chose books which 
would be easy to read and understand, as well as more 
complicated ones when the simple texts had been 
mastered. And he left plans and models not only of 
the great machines we now have, such as automobiles 
and airplanes, but also of things which backward peoples could make for themselves right away— balloons, 
windmills, schooners, simple blast furnaces, and the 
like. It was his hope that the people of the future would 
go on from this to make the more powerful machines 
of his own time. And he left them also the great works 
of art, literature, religion, and philosophy, hoping that 
these would teach men to use the machines wisely. 

P. A. 



Contents 



CHAPTER PAGE 



The Time Capsule .... 


. . . vii 


1 . Warriors of Lann 


... 1 


2. The Lost City 


... 14 


3. Wisdom of the Ancients . . . 


... 24 


4. The Undying Light .... 


... 37 










7. The Dalesmen Go to War . . 


... 71 


8. Storm from the North . . . 


... 83 


9. The Broken Ban 


... 92 


1 0. Vengeance of the Gods . . , 


. . .102 


1 1 . The Gods Are Angry .... 


... 112 


12. "Ride to Dalestown!" . . . 


... 123 


13. Hero's Reward 


... 133 


14. Council in Dalestown . . . 


... 145 


15. The Friendless Ones . . . . 


. . . 155 


1 6. Defiance of the Gods . . . 


... 164 


1 7. Return of the Lann .... 


... 173 


1 8. Battle of the Vault .... 


... 185 


19. The Last Battle 


... 196 


20. Twilight of the Gods .... 


. . .203 



xiii 



Chapter 1 Warriors of Lann 



(he sun was low, slanting its long light through the 
forests to north and west, and shadows crept over 
the rolling green farm lands across which Carl had 
come riding. He saw the buildings ahead as an outlined darkness against the trees beyond, heard noises 
of cattle and sheep and a barking dog drift through 
the quiet, and felt his pony break into a trot as it 
smelled hay and shelter. A wandering sunset breeze 
ruffled Carl's long hair. He shaded his eyes against 
the light and leaned forward in the saddle, eager as 
his horse. It had been a long day's ride. 

The dog came running from the farmyard and 
danced yammering around him as he neared the house. 
Carl's hand tightened on the hilt of his sword— watchdogs often attacked on these lonely places and had to 



1 



2 



Vault o! the Ages 



be beaten off with the flat of a weapon. This one, 
however, simply kept barking till the evening rang 
with echoes. 

"You there, Bull! Quiet!" 

A man stepped out of the house and the dog ran to 
him and was still. The man remained in the door, waiting with a spear in his hand. He was big and burly, 
with gray hair that reached to his shoulders and a 
beard that flowed over his homespun shirt. Two boys 
stood behind him with axes in their hands. 

Carl, smiling, reined in his pony. "Greetings," he 
said. "I come alone and in peace, asking a roof for the 
night." 

The farmer lowered his spear and nodded. "Then be 
welcome and stay with us," he replied formally. "I am 
John, son of Tom, and a Dalesman." 

"And I am Carl, son of Ralph in Dalestown," answered the newcomer. "I thank you for your kindness." 

"Ralph— in Dalestown!" John's eyes widened. "Then 
you must be the son of the Chief." 

"Yes, I am," Carl said, swinging out of the saddle. 

They stood for a moment looking at him. Carl was 
sixteen years old, but large and strong for his age, with 
ruddy brown hair, and sun-tanned face and wide-set 
brown eyes. He wore the usual clothes of a traveler: 
leather breeches, dyed wool shirt, short homespun 
cloak, and moccasins. Sword and dagger were belted 
at his waist and a round shield hung from his saddle 
beside a bow and quiver. He had a canteen of water 
but no other supplies; in the wilderness there was 
plenty of game, and where men lived, a farmer would 
always give him food and lodging for the sake of 
company and news. 



Warn'ors of Lann 



3 



"Come," one of the boys said eagerly. "I'll show you 
to the barn and then we'll eat and talk." 

He was the elder of John's two sons, a lean, redhaired, freckle-faced lad of about Carl's age. His 
brother, who followed them, was perhaps a year 
younger, short and stout and blond. "I am Tom," said 
the older boy, "and this is Owl." 

"Owl?" asked Carl. 

"His real name is Jim," said Tom, "but nobody ever 
calls him anything but Owl. He looks like one, doesn't 
he?" 

"It is because I am so wise," smiled his brother. 

The farm buildings were long and low, made from 
rough-hewn timbers chinked with clay and moss. 
Within the bam there were several horses and cows, 
and a twilight thick with the rich smell of animals and 
hay. Tom led Carl's pony to a vacant stall while Owl 
brought water. 

"You have a big place here," said Carl. "I wouldn't 
have thought it. You live right on the edge of the great 
forest and the border of the Dales." 

"Why shouldn't we have a good farm?" asked Tom. 

"Well— a place like this would tempt raiders, I 
should think." 

"There are none," said Owl. "The woods-runners 
around here were driven away a hundred years ago. 
You should know that." 

"I do," answered Carl gravely. "But there are worse 
than woods-runners— and they're on their way." 

"You mean the Lann." Tom's voice grew flat. "We 
can speak of them later." 

Carl shrugged, but there was a sudden bleakness in 
him. It had been this way all the time, everywhere he 



4 



Vault of the Ages 



went. So few would believe the story, so few could 
rise above the narrowness of their lives and see that 
the Dales faced a threat beyond their worst dreams. 

He clamped his mouth shut and helped care for the 
pony. When the three boys came out, the sun had set 
and twilight stole from the east, rising like mist between the high trees. They walked across the muddy 
yard toward the cheerful fire-glow of the house. 

The long room inside was bounded by curtained 
beds at one end and a stone hearth at the other. John's 
wife, a tall woman in the long-skirted dress of the 
Dales, was cooking supper there. She smiled at Carl 
and greeted him in a friendly way, but he saw the 
worry in her face and knew that she was not altogether 
deaf to the stories of the Lann. Besides John, who sat 
at the plank-table smoking a corncob pipe, there were 
two young men who were introduced to Carl as Arn 
and Samwell, workers on the farm. 

It was a handsome and comfortable house, thought 
Carl, letting his eyes travel around it. The soft light of 
home-dipped tallow candles fell on skin rugs, on a 
loom with a rich, half-woven tapestry stretched across 
it, on pots and bowls of baked clay and hammered 
copper. It slanted over weapons racked against one 
wall and the weapons threw back the light in a fierce 
iron blink, deflecting it off a faded picture of a man, 
one of the marvelous works which must have been 
handed down since the Day of Doom. And all this 
could go up in flame when the Lann arrived! 

The Dalesmen did not think it polite to talk of 
serious matters before a guest had been fed, so they 
spoke of weather and animals and neighborhood gossip. Unreal, thought Carl, swallowing his impatience. 
They sat and gabbled about rain and crops when the 



Warriors oi Lann 



5 



storm of conquest even then roared down from the 
north. The food, when at last it was served, was tasteless in his mouth. 

After the dishes had been cleared off and the fire 
built up against the cool dampness of early summer 
night, John gave him a shrewd glance across the table. 
A wavering red light danced through the room, weaving a pattern of huge rippling shadows in the corners 
from which Am looked superstitiously away. The 
farmer's eyes gleamed out of a face that was half in 
darkness, and he puffed a blue cloud of smoke into 
the air. 

"And how are things in Dalestown, Carl?" he asked. 

This was the time to speak! "The men are gathering," 
answered Carl, choosing his words slowly, with care. 
"In the east and west and south the Dalesmen have 
heard the war-word of their Chief and are sending 
their fighting men to join him. Dalestown has grown 
noisy with men and weapons. Only from this part of 
our northern lands have no men yet come." He raised 
his eyebrows. "You will march soon, of course?" 

"We will not march at all," said John calmly. "The 
men of the northern Dales are staying at home." 

"But—" Carl checked his words. After all, this was 
no surprise; Ralph's messengers had brought back the 
answer of these landholders already. Finally he said 
slowly, "But you are in the very path of the invaders." 

"Perhaps," replied John. "And in that case, should 
we abandon our homes to their plundering, leave our 
women and children and animals unshielded while all 
our warriors are at Dalestown?" 

"My father," said Carl desperately, "is gathering all 
the men of the tribe together so he can have an army 
of proper size with which to meet these Lann and 



6 



Vault of the Ages 



drive them back where they came from. Do you few 
border dwellers expect to stop the enemy alone?" 

"We stood off the woods-runners long ago," said 
John. "I don't think the Lann will be any worse." 

"But they are!" cried the boy. "We know!" 

John raised his brows. "And what do you know of 
the Lann? I thought there was no traffic northward." 

"Very little," said Carl. "We get what we need for 
ourselves in the Dales, and our traders carry what extra 
we have south to get fruits and tobacco or east for fish 
and salt. Still, travelers have gone into the cold lands 
from time to time, and they have told us that the tribes 
living there are poor and backward, but very fierce. 
Someone brought word back a couple of years ago that 
these tribes had united under one Chief and were talking of coming south." 

"Why should they do that?" asked Tom. "It's a long 
way from their homes to ours." 

"We live better," said Carl. "Our land is rich, our 
forests are full of game and timber, our ancient cities 
yield so much metal that we can even trade it with 
other people— oh, I can see where these northerners, 
these Lann as they call themselves, would envy us. 
Their own scouts and explorers have visited us now 
and then, you know." 

He ran a hand through his hair. "Also," he went on, 
"this is a matter which I do not understand very well, 
but some say the world is getting colder. Old men all 
tell how the summers were warmer and the winters 
shorter in their youth, that their grandfathers had told 
them things were still better. Old Donn, the High Doctor at Dalestown, who keeps the ancient wisdom, says 
that the wise men before the Doom knew of such 
changes too. Anyway," he finished lamely, "if the 



Warriors or" Lann 



7 



weather really is getting colder and stormier, it would 
strike the north first and hardest. They have had several bitter years and thin harvests, my father's spies 
have told, and are themselves harried by desperate 
raiders from still farther north. So all in all, it is easy 
to see that the Chief of the united Lann may want to 
lead a host which can conquer the south and take its 
lands." 

"That would take a great army," said Owl. 

"It is a great army," said Carl grimly. 

"But why should they fall on us?" asked John. 
"There are weaker tribes, easier prey." 

"I don't know," said Carl, "but my father thinks it's 
just because we Dalesmen are the largest and strongest of the tribes that they want to overrun us first. Once 
we are beaten, our neighbors will have no chance." He 
scowled. "Even so, those other tribes won't join with 
us. They're afraid to stir up the anger of the Lann. We 
stand alone." 

"And where is this northern army?" asked John. 

"I don't know," said Carl. "Nobody does. They could 
be anywhere in the great hills and forests to the north, 
and will move almost as fast as any scout of ours could 
bring word of their coming. I suppose they're scattered 
through the woods, so they can live off the country 
better, and will join forces again when they come out 
into the farm lands. There've been fights elsewhere in 
the northern marches between some of their advance 
guards and men of ours, so they must be near." 

"But no one can tell how near, eh?" John knocked 
out his pipe. A tiny coal glowed in the ashes for a 
moment and then went out like a closing eye. "I 
thought so. You see, Carl, it isn't at all sure that the 
Lann will come out of the woods just hereabouts, or if 



8 



Vaull of the Ages 



they do that it will be a force too big for us to handle, 
or even if it's their whole army that it will waste time 
attacking the gathered warriors of this neighborhood. 
So all in all, we men of this district voted to stay at 
home and defend our own hearth-fires." 

"It was your right under the law," admitted Carl 
gloomily, "but a divided tribe is a weak tribe." 

He sat for a while in a stillness broken only by the 
crackling of the fire and the whisper of the loom where 
John's wife worked. Somewhere outside, a wild dog 
howled, and Bull stirred where he lay on a deerskin 
and snarled an answer. 

"It isn't so bad," said John kindly. "We'll win out. 
There may not even be a war." He smiled. "Besides, 
lad, I don't think you're here as Ralph's messenger to 
us border men." 

"No," said Carl, brightening in spite of himself. "I'm 
really heading north to the City." 

"The City!" whispered Owl, and a stir of awe ran 
about the room. John's eyes narrowed, Tom leaned 
forward with his thin, sharp face drawn tight, Arn and 
Samwell looked at each other, and the woman at the 
loom stopped her weaving for a startled instant. 

"It isn't far from here, is it?" asked Carl. 

"Only about a day's ride," said Tom slowly. "But 
none of us have ever been there. It's taboo." 

"Not completely," Carl told him. "The Chief of a 
tribe can send men to bargain with the witch-men 
smiths there. That's me." 

"You're after iron weapons, I suppose?" 

"Yes. Every Dalesman has his own war tools, of 
course, but we need things like catapults and horse 
armor to fight the Lann. I'm supposed to get them from 



Warriors of Lann 



9 



the smiths in return for the usual payment— meat, salt, 
cloth, furs, you know." 

A wild dog howled again, closer this time. The 
woods were full of such packs, descendants, it was 
said, of tame animals which had run loose when the 
Doom scattered men. They were among the most 
dangerous beasts these days. Arn grunted, took a 
brand from the fire for light, and went out with Samwell to check the sheepfold. 

Carl sat letting his mind run over what he knew of 
the City. He had never been there, and his being sent 
on this errand was a proud sign that the son of the 
Chief was becoming a man. 

Once there stood towns and villages even in this 
region of the Allegheny Mountains. They had been 
abandoned during the Doom or shortly thereafter and 
had moldered to ruin. After early smiths had plundered 
all the metal in them, they had been left for the wind 
and the forests to bury, and today their fragments, 
thought to be haunted, were left alone by the tribes. 
As the other ancient metal— from houses, rusted machines, and the mysterious old railroad tracks— was 
used up, men looked toward the vaster ruins of the old 
cities. 

But by that time, taboos had grown up. Early explorers venturing into some of the empty metropolises 
—those which had been wrecked and burned by the 
terrible fury from the air which was the Doom— had 
often died of lingering sickness, and many thought that 
the "glowing death" was the sign of godly anger. So 
today the ruins, like other ancient works, were forbidden to tribesmen. 

Still, metal was needed. A hundred years, or perhaps 



10 



Vault of the Ages 



two hundred, after the Doom, little groups of outcasts 
had drifted into the cities and lived there. Not belonging to any of the great tribes, they had not been kept 
from going; but today they were shunned and feared 
as witch-men, in spite of being usually a timid and 
unwarlike folk. It was they who salvaged steel and 
copper from the huge ruined buildings, sometimes 
forging it themselves into tools and weapons, sometimes selling the metal as it was. Tribesmen were 
allowed to come and buy from them, providing that 
afterward a Doctor said magic over the things to take 
the curse off. 

In all this region, only one such city remained— the 
City. No one remembered its name today. It lay some 
distance north of the Dalesmen's territory, screened 
by the hills and forests which reached farther than 
anyone had ever traveled. Carl had long been eager to 
visit it, but this was the first time Ralph had allowed 
him. 

He spoke again, his words seeming loud in the quietness: "I need a guide. Will anyone come with me?" 

John shook his head. "The City is a bad place." 

"I do not think so," said Carl. "It was a great and 
glorious world before the Doom smashed everything. 
The ancient people were wiser men than we. Why 
should their works be evil?" 

It was a new thought, and they sat turning it carefully over in their minds. "Taboo," said John at last. 

"I have leave to go there," answered Carl. 

Tom leaned forward, his eyes alight, shivering a 
little. "Yes— Father, I can guide him!" he said. 

"You?" 

"And I," said Owl. "It's a shame, our living a day's 
ride from the City and never having seen it." 



Warriors of Lann 1 1 

"We'll be back in two days," cried Tom. 

"The Lann—" muttered John. 

"You said they were nowhere near," grinned Owl. 

"But-" 

"It is the tribe which asks you," said Carl urgently. 
"All the Dalesmen need those weapons." 

John argued for a long time, but when Carl went to 
bed he knew he had won. 



They were up with sunrise, Owl groaning and complaining at the earliness of it. "He's like that," smiled 
Tom. "He won't be really awake till after breakfast." 

Carl rubbed his eyes, yawning. "I know how he 
feels." 

They went out in a cool gray mist and helped with 
the morning's work. When they came back to the 
house, leading saddled horses, breakfast was waiting, 
and Carl ate as hungrily as his new friends. 

John's wife, Mary, hovered over the boys. "Be careful," she whispered. "Be careful, Tom, Jim, and— oh, 
come back to us!" 

"Yes," rumbled John in his beard. "I shouldn't let 
you go, but— the gods go with you." His rough hand 
brushed their shoulders and he turned away, blinking. 

The three were too eager to be off to pay much attention. It seemed a long time to Carl before he was 
riding into the woods, but the mist was still not quite 
off the ground and dew was shining in the grass. 

"I know the way," said Tom, "even if I've never been 
there myself. We follow this trail till we get to a brook, 
then it's due north across country to one of the old 
roads, and that'll take us straight in." 

"If it's that easy," said Carl, "I don't need a guide." 



12 



Vault of Ihe Ages 



"Oh, yes, you do," said Owl. "At least, I need the 
trip." 

They rode single file down a narrow path. Before 
long, the forest had closed in on them, brush and fern 
and high, sun-dappled trees, a red squirrel streaking 
up a mossy trunk, chatter of birds and murmur of 
running water— but they were alone, there were no 
others anywhere, and the great stillness lay like a cloak 
over all the lesser noises. Carl relaxed in the saddle, 
listening with half an ear to the excited talk of Tom 
and Owl, aware of the plod of hoofs and the squeak of 
leather and the jingle of metal, his nostrils sensing a 
thousand smells of green growing life. It was a good 
land here, a broad, fair land of green fields and tall 
forests and strong people— and by all the gods, the 
Dalesmen meant to keep it! 

"I know why Father let us go with you," said Tom. 
"He is upset about our neighborhood not sending men 
to Dalestown. He thinks it's still the wisest thing we're 
doing, but he doesn't really like it." 

"Nobody likes war," said Carl shortly. 

"I think the Lann must," said Owl. "Otherwise, why 
are they making it against us? We never harmed them." 

Carl didn't answer. Indeed, he thought, he was not 
at all sure of why things were happening or of what 
really was going on. The world, big and secret, held 
more in it than the tribes with their unchanging life or 
the Doctors with their narrow wisdom thought. 

They rode on, and the sun climbed in the sky and 
the forest slid away behind them and still loomed 
ahead. The trail faded out near a cold running brook 
which they forded, and beyond that, the hills climbed 
steeply, with many open meadows between the trees. 
They rested at noon, eating the dried meat which 



Warriors of Lann 



13 



John's sons had taken along, and then mounted again 
and rode farther. 

The attack came near midafternoon. Carl was riding in the lead, pushing a way through a dense part of 
the forest, lost in his own thoughts. Their own passage 
was so noisy that the boys did not hear anything else, 
and the sudden yell came like a thunderbolt. 

Carl whipped out his sword and dug heels into his 
pony's ribs in one unthinking motion. The arrow 
hummed past his cheek and stuck into a tree. He saw 
the man who rose out of ambush before him and hewed 
wildly even as the stranger's ax chopped at his leg. 

Metal clanged on metal, flaming in a single long 
sunbeam. The man yelled again, and others came out 
of the brush and dropped from the limbs of trees. Carl 
reined in his horse, it reared back and its hoofs slashed 
at the first attacker. He stumbled backward to escape, 
and Carl bent low in the saddle and burst into a gallop. 

"This way!" he yelled. "This way, after me! We've 
got to get clear! It's the Lann!" 



Chapter 2 

The Lost City 



Branches whipped across his face, and Carl flung up 
an arm to shield his eyes. Forward— a wild scrambling as the Lann warriors broke before his charge 
—out and away! He burst from the woods into the 
long grass of a sunlit meadow. Two arrows whistled 
after him; one grazed his neck, humming like an angry 
bee. Turning in the saddle, he saw Tom and Owl 
riding close behind him and the enemy running into 
the open. 

A horseman topped the crest of the hill to his right, 
light flashing off his iron helmet. If they had cavalry to 
pursue— Carl set his teeth and clucked to his pony. 
Fast, fast— the way back was cut off, they had to go 
forward. 

Up a long slope, down into a gulch below, with the 
horses slipping and stumbling on loose earth, around 
a thicket and through a brier-patch that clawed at Iiv
14 



The Lost City 



15 



ing flesh. Carl risked another glance behind and saw 
half a dozen armed men on the small shaggy horses of 
the north, galloping in an easy chase. Their mounts 
were fresh, thought the boy; they need only run down 
their wearied prey and after that, the end— or capture, 
which could be worse than death. 

The long-legged steeds of John's sons drew up on 
either side of Carl. Tom was bent low, his face white 
and set; Owl was riding easily, his lips even now curled 
in a half -smile. Leaning over, the younger boy shouted 
to Carl, "Looks like we'll get there sooner than we 
thought!" 

"The City?" cried his brother. 

"Where else?" panted Carl. "Maybe the witches will 
help us." 

It was a forlorn hope. The smith-folk knew they 
existed only on sufferance and on the tribesmen's unwillingness to enter the Cities, so they would never 
risk the anger of anyone by mixing into the quarrels of 
others. But— what else was there for the hunted to do? 

Ride, ride, ride! The wind roared in Carl's ears, 
whipping his hair and cloak behind him, the land 
seemed to blur past, the fury of speed stung his eyes 
with tears. Already his horse was breathing heavily, 
sweating and foaming. How much longer could it 
go on? 

The Lann were out of sight behind the rolling hills, 
but they would follow. Even as he guided his mount 
over the rough ground and wondered how long he 
would still be alive, Carl was thinking back over what 
he had seen. Except for one or two prisoners taken in 
border skirmishes, he had never met a Lann warrior 
before, and the image of his pursuers was sharp in his 
mind. 



16 Vault of the Ages 

The northerners were of the same race as the Dalesmen and the other Allegheny tribes, though a life of 
hardships had made them a little shorter and stockier; 
and their language was almost the same, easily understood. Even their clothing was much like that of the 
Dales, with more fur and leather used. But the fighting 
men all seemed to have breastplates of toughened hide 
painted in harsh colors, their swords were often curved 
instead of straight, and they used a shorter, heavier 
bow. It was said that they fought in a tighter and better 
arranged formation than the Dalesmen, who were 
peaceful folk and had no real art of war. 

Faintly to Carl's ears, above the rush of wind and 
murmur of grass and thudding of hoofs, there came 
the sound of a blown horn, wailing and hooting between the empty hills. A signal. Were the Lann calling 
to others? Would there be a whole army chasing three 
hapless boys? A gulp of despair rose in Carl's throat. 
He choked it down and urged his pony to another 
effort. 

Up a slanting, crumbling bluff. From its heights, 
Carl saw the enemy, more of them now, perhaps 
twenty. They had been joined by others, and where in 
all the reaching world was there shelter from them? 

As he plunged down the hill beyond, Carl saw a dull, 
white gleam through a screen of trees. A river— no, it 
was no stream, no trail— nothing! Straight as a hurled 
spear it ran northward, and Tom let out a yell as he 
saw it. 

"The road!" he shouted. "The road to the City!" 

Of course, thought Carl. He had seen the broken 
remnants of ancient highways, split by the ages, most 
of the blocks taken away by men for building material. 



The Lost City 17 

This one had not been disturbed, and it ran toward 
their goal. 

They came out on the road and its hard surface rang 
hollowly under the hoofs. "Ride on it!" said Owl. "It's 
a fast and easy way—" 

"Also for the Lann," said Tom bleakly. "But come." 

The frost and creeping roots of centuries had been 
cruel to the highway, Carl saw. Its great stony sections 
lay riven and cracked, tilted at crazy angles and often 
overgrown with brush. But still it was there, and it 
was straight and almost level. Ride, ride, ride! 

As they sped on their way, he noticed low grassy 
mounds on either side of the road. Under those, he 
knew, were buried the decayed ruins of ancient houses. 
Bold men sometimes defied taboo and dug about in 
such hills, finding the broken pieces of things incomprehensible to them. Even now, racing for his life, Carl 
could not help a shudder, and from the corner of an 
eye he saw Tom fingering a lucky charm about his 
neck. 

The mounds grew larger and closer together as the 
boys galloped north. Here and there a shattered fragment of worked stone, a few bricks, or a gleaming 
splinter of glass thrust out of the green overgrowth. 
The drumbeats of the hoofs rolled and echoed between those solemnly looming graves as if the dead 
woke up and cried in protest. 

"The Lann— coming— " 

Turning at Owl's voice, Carl saw the tiny figures of 
the enemy horsemen far behind, galloping down the 
highway with the westering sun flashing off their 
spears and helmets. Then Tom's cry jerked his head 
forward again. 



18 



Vault of the Ages 



"The City!" 

They were riding between two high mounds which 
overshadowed the road and blocked off the view 
ahead. As they burst out from between these, thengoal lay open to them. 

The City-the ancient City! 

Even then, Carl felt the awe and the sadness which 
lay over that dead titan. It sprawled farther away on 
every side than he could see, and it was toppled to 
ruin and waste. The buildings on this edge were little 
more than heaps of brick covered with vines and bush 
and young trees, and here and there a wall still stood 
erect under the creepers. The forest had crept in, 
blanketing the great old works in green, slowly and 
patiently gnawing them down; and wind and rain and 
frost had over the centuries brought them toppling; 
and wild beasts laired in the wreck and prowled the 
hollow streets. 

But far, far down, the towers, which had been the 
City's pride, gleamed in the long, low sunrays. Even 
from this distance, Carl could see that they were 
gutted. Many of the walls had fallen, leaving a rusted 
steel skeleton; the windows were empty and the blowing air wandered between dusty rooms— yet they stood, 
tall and straight against the evening sky, straining 
heavenward like the great dead men who had wrought 
them, and Carl knew that he was entering the ruin of 
a dream. 

"The Lann-Tom, Carl, look behind! The Lann!" 

They had reined in their horses between the two 
sentinel mounds and were milling in confusion. Their 
shouts drifted faintly down the sunset breeze to the 
boys sitting on their horses under the somber walls of 
a roofless building. 



The tort City 19 

"Taboo!" shouted Owl gleefully. "The old Cities are 
forbidden to them too. They don't dare enter!" 

Carl drew a long, shuddering breath, and it was as if 
life and hope flowed back into him with it. He laughed 
aloud, there in the stillness of the lost city. 

"But—" Tom looked nervously around him. "We're 
breaking the taboo ourselves." 

Purpose returned to Carl. He straightened his weary 
shoulders and looked boldly ahead. "What have we to 
lose?" he asked. "Come on, let's find the witches." 

The tired, sweating horses walked slowly down a 
street which was overgrown with grass and creepers. 
The echoes rang loud in that great stillness. A family 
of swallows dipped and wheeled overhead, swift and 
lovely against the golden sunset sky. This could not be 
such a terrible place, thought Carl. 

It had long been his idea that the tribes and the 
Doctors were wrong in forbidding the ancient works. 
Perhaps they had, as was said, brought the Doom on 
mankind— but they had so much power for good in 
them that he felt they could start today's unchanging 
life back upward toward the heights the ancestors had 
reached. Now, as he rode through the shadows and the 
tall, sad remnants, the belief was strengthened in him. 

"Halt! Halt!" 

The voice was shrill in Carl's ears. He clapped one 
hand to his sword and reined in before the score of men 
who had come from around a wall and stood barring 
the road. The witch-folk! 

They did not seem like the uncanny beings of whispered midnight stories. They were men even as those 
in the Dales— rather small and skinny men too, who 
handled their weapons awkwardly and seemed as shy 
as Tom and Owl had suddenly become. Most of them 



20 



Vault of the Ages 



were very dark-skinned. They must have blood of the 
black tribes which lived in the southlands, as well as 
the white of the Alleghenys and the north. Unlike the 
other tribes, they wore tunics and kilts, and their hair 
was cut short. 

One of them stepped out of the line and raised a thin 
hand. He was taller than his fellows, and old, with a 
white beard flowing from his wrinkled face, and a long 
fur-trimmed cloak wrapped his gaunt body. There was 
something in his deep-set blue eyes which made Carl 
like him even at first glance. 

"You may not come in here," said the old man. "It is 
forbidden." 

"By our own tribes, not by your laws," said Carl. 
"And even our own laws let a man save his life. There 
are foemen from the north hunting us. If we go out 
now, they will kill us." 

"Go!" cried a witch-man. His voice trembled. "We 
dare not have anything to do with the wars of the 
tribes." 

Carl grinned. "If you send us out," he said, "you are 
taking the northern part against the Dalesmen." Turning to the old man: "Sir, we come as your guests." 

"Then you can stay," decided the witch-man at once. 
"For a while, at least. We of the City know what a host 
must do as well as you in the Dales." 

"But—" His followers began to murmur, and he 
turned angrily on them. 

"I say these lads stay!" he snapped, and one by one 
the threatening spears were lowered. 

"Thank you, sir," said Carl. Then he gave the names 
of himself and his companions, and told their errand. 

"The son of Ralph, eh?" The old witch-man looked 
keenly at the boy. "I remember Ralph when he came 



The Lost City 21 
here once. A strong man, and wiser than most. Welcome, Carl. I am Ronwy, Chief of the City folk." 

Carl dismounted, and they shook hands. "We will 
give you food and shelter," said Ronwy. "But as for 
making weapons for you— that I cannot promise. The 
Chief of a city, like the Chief of a tribe, cannot do 
whatever he wishes; he is bound by law and the vote 
of his people. I must take this up with the others in 
council." His blue glance was shrewd. "And even if we 
made your engines for you, how would you get them 
past the Lann? We know they're all around this neighborhood." 

Carl gulped back his sudden dismay and followed 
Ronwy, leading his weary horse down the streets. The 
witch-men grumbled among themselves and went 
their separate ways. 

After a mile or so of walking in silence, the boys and 
their guide came to the outskirts of the section where 
the towers were. Here the buildings were taller and 
stronger than near the edge, and had stood the years of 
weathering better. Brush had been cleared away, 
rooms repaired and filled with household goods, new 
doors put on empty frames and the broken windows 
covered with thin-scraped parchment— this was the 
place where the witch-folk lived. They moved about 
on their daily errands, men and women and children 
walking between the enormous walls, firelight and the 
smell of cooking food coming from the houses, a banjo 
twanging somewhere in the dusk, the faint clang of a 
hammer from the open door of a smithy. 

"They aren't so terrible," whispered Owl. "They're 
people just like us— not very many of them, either. I 
don't see any devils or ghosts." 

"Have the old stories lied?" wondered Tom. 



22 



Vault of the Ages 



"Maybe," said Carl. He was too unsure of his own 
thoughts to go on. 

Ronwy led them to his own dwelling, a long room 
with high ceilings on the first story of an ancient tower. 
There was a marble floor, Carl saw wonderingly, and 
some of the old dishes and glasses and metal ornaments 
stood on the crude wooden tables of this age. Had the 
world really sunk so far from greatness? 

Ronwy lit candles, chasing the gloom back into the 
comers, and motioned them to chairs. "Be seated," he 
said. "My servants will take care of your horses and 
bring food shortly. I'm glad of your company. My wife 
is long dead and my sons are grown men and it's lonesome here. You must tell me what is going on in the 
Dales." 

Tom shivered in the evening chill and Ronwy began 
to stoke the fireplace. It had been built in later days, 
with the chimney going up through a hole in the 
cracked ceiling. "In the ancient time," said the Chief, 
"there was always warmth in here, without fire; and if 
you wanted light, it came from little glass balls which 
only had to be touched." 

Carl looked at the table beside his chair. A book lay 
on it, and he picked it up and leafed through the 
yellowed pages with awe in him. 

"Do you know what that is?" asked Ronwy. 

"It's called a book," said Carl. "The High Doctor in 
Dalestown has a few." 

"Can you read?" 

"Yes, sir, and write too. I'm the Chief's son, so I had 
to learn. We sometimes send letters—" Carl puzzled 
over the words before him. "But this doesn't make 
sense!" 

"It's a physics text," answered Ronwy. "It explains 



The Lost CHy 23 

—well— how the ancients did some of their magic." He 
smiled sadly. "I'm afraid it doesn't mean much to me 
either." 

A serving-woman brought dishes of food and the 
boys attacked it hungrily. Afterward they sat and 
talked of many things until Ronwy showed them to 
bed. 

He liked the City, Carl decided as he lay waiting for 
sleep to come. It was hard to believe in this quiet place 
that war and death waited outside. But he remembered grimly that the Lann had hunted him to the very 
edge of the tabooed zone. The witch-folk wouldn't let 
him stay long here, in spite of Ronwy— and the Lann 
swords would be waiting, sharp and hungry, for him 
to come out again. 



Wisdom of the Ancients 



n the morning, at breakfast, Ronwy told the boys: 
"I will gather the men of the City in council today 
and try to get them to vote for making the things you 
need. These northern invaders are a savage people, 
and the Dalesmen have always been our friends." His 
smile was a little bitter. "Or as nearly our friends as 
we outcasts have." 

"Where is the meeting held?" asked Tom. 
"In a great hall down the street," said Ronwy. "But 
by our law, no outsiders may attend such councils, so 
you might as well explore the City today. If you aren't 
afraid of ghosts and devils— and I, in all my life here, 
have never met any— you should be interested." 

"The City!" Carl's heart thudded with sudden excitement. The City, the City, the wonderful magic 
City— he would be roaming through it! 

"Be careful, though," said Ronwy. "There are many 

24 



Wisdom of the Ancients 



25 



old pits and other dangerous places hidden by brush 
and rubble. Snakes are not unknown either. I will see 
you here again in the evening." 

Taking some bread and meat along for lunch, Carl 
and his friends wandered outside and down the streets. 
Whatever fear they had was soon lost in the marvel of 
it all; but a great awe, tinged with the sorrow of a 
world's loss, took its place. 

The witch-folk were about their daily business, 
sullenly ignoring the strangers. Women cooked and 
spun and tended babies. Children scrambled through 
empty houses and over great heaps of rubble, or sat 
listening to the words of an old teacher sitting under 
a tree. Men were doing their various tasks. Some 
worked in the little gardens planted in open spaces, 
some were in smithies and carpenter shops, some drove 
wagonloads of goods down wide avenues which must 
have carried more traffic in the old days than Carl 
could imagine. The boy was struck afresh by the pitiful 
smallness of this life, huddled in the vast wreck of its 
godlike ancestors, puzzling dimly over things it could 
never understand— much less rebuild. He sighed. 

A great gong boomed solemnly down the air, echoing from wall to wall. It was Ronwy's first summons, 
telling the witch-men that a council would meet in the 
afternoon. 

"Look, Carl. Look up there!" 

The Chiefs son craned his neck as Owl pointed. Up 
the sheer wall of an ancient tower, up, up, up, unbelievably far up. The stories said these buildings had 
been called skyscrapers, and indeed, thought Carl 
wildly, their heights seemed to storm the heavens. 

The scarred brick facing was gone after the first few 
stories, and only a skeleton of giant rust-red girders 



26 Vau/f of (he Ages 

was left above, a dark net of emptiness through which 
the wind piped its mournful song. Clambering around 
on those mighty ribs were the tiny forms of men. The 
sound of their hammers and chisels drifted faintly 
down to the boys, and now and then the flame of a 
crude blowtorch would wink like a star caught in the 
steel net. The heavy ropes of a block and tackle 
reached from the heights down to the weed-grown 
street. 

"What are they doing?" whispered Tom. 

"They're tearing it down," said Carl, very softly. 
"Piece by piece, they're ripping out the steel to sell to 
the tribes." A shivering wind rippled about his words 
and blew them down the hollow canyon of the avenue. 

There was a huge sadness in it— the little men of 
today, gnawing apart the mighty works they no longer 
understood. In a few hundred years, or a few thousand, what did it matter? Nothing would be left, 
nothing but rubble and waving grass and the wild 
dogs howling where men had once lived. 

Sorrow wrestled in Carl with a slowly gathering 
anger. It was wrong, it was wrong. The ancient wisdom was not accursed! Men should be trying to learn 
it and use it to rebuild— not let time and the witch-folk 
eat it away. Already a priceless heritage was gone; if 
this greed and ignorance were not halted, nothing 
would be left for the future. 

His gloom deepened as the three prowled further. So 
little remained. The buildings were gutted long ago. 
Nothing remained but empty shells and the clumsy 
things of today's dwellers. Beyond this central part 
where the people lived, everything had simply been 
stripped of metal and left to crumble. The forest had 
grown far into the town. 



Wisdom of the Ancients 27 

Owl would not be stopped from climbing several 
stories up one of the towers, and Tom and Carl followed him. From that windy height they could look 
miles over the dead City and the hills and woods beyond. To the north a broad river ran through the 
toppled ruin of a great bridge. Today, thought Carl 
bleakly, they had only a couple of wooden scows for 
getting over. He looked south too, after some sign of 
the Lann, but could see only waving, sunlit green of 
trees. They were waiting, though. They were waiting. 

It was nearly noon when the boys found the vault 
which was to mean so much to them. They were exploring the southern edge of the inhabited section, 
skirting a wall of bush and young trees that screened 
off the long low sides of caved-in buildings, when Tom 
pointed and cried, "What's that?" 

Carl approached the thing gingerly, afraid in spite of 
himself. A pole stuck in the ground bore the skull of a 
horse— a common sign to keep off evil spirits. Beyond 
this were the two sides of a house otherwise fallen to 
heaps of brick and glass. At the rear of those parallel 
walls was a curious gray object like nothing he had 
seen before. 

"It's magic," said Tom, holding fast to his lucky 
charm. "The witches put up that sign because they're 
afraid of whatever it is." 

"Ronwy said there weren't any ghosts here," replied 
Owl stanchly. "He ought to know." 

Carl stood for a moment thinking. In spite of having 
no great faith in the old stories of evil, he could not 
keep his heart from thumping. The thing brooding 
there in the hot, white sunlight was of the unknown. 
But— it was that fear which had kept men from learning what their ancestors had to teach. "Come on," he 



28 Vault of the Ages 

said swiftly, before he could have time to get really 
frightened. "Let's go see." 

"Maybe—" Tom licked his hps, then tossed his red 
head. "All right! I'm not scared either." 

"Not much, anyway," said Owl. 

They moved carefully through the grass-grown 
mounds of rubble, poking ahead with Tom's spear in 
case of snakes, until they were at the rear of the old 
house. Then they stood for a long time staring at the 
mystery. 

It was a concrete block, about ten feet square and 
seven feet high, with a door of age-eaten bronze in 
the front. There were letters engraved in the gray 
cement above the door, and Carl spelled them slowly 
out: 

TIME VAULT 

"What's a vault?" asked Tom. 

"It's a place where you keep things," said Carl. 

"But you can't keep time," said Owl. "Time's not a 
thing. It's a— well— it's time. Days and years." 

"That's a very strong magic," said Tom, his voice 
trembling a little. "Or else whoever made this was 
crazy. Let's go." 

"I wonder— that door—" Carl pushed against the 
heavy green metal. It creaked slowly open, and he saw 
concrete steps leading down into a great darkness. 

"You, boys! Get away!" 

The boys whirled, and saw a witch-man standing 
just outside the pole. He held a drawn bow in his 
hands, the arrow pointing at them, and his angry face 
made it plain that he meant business. 

"Come out!" he shouted. "It's forbidden!" 

Carl and his friends scrambled back, secretly a little 



Wisdom of the Ancients 



29 



glad to be ordered from the vault. "I'm sorry," said 
Carl. "We didn't know." 

"If you weren't guests, I'd kill you," said the witchman. "That place is taboo. It's full of black magic." 

"How do you know, if you can't go in?" asked Owl 
impudently. 

"People have been in there," spat the man. "It's full 
of machines and books and things. The same black 
magic that brought the Doom. We don't want it to get 
loose again." 

He watched them go down the street and muttered 
charms against the devils in the vault. 

"I'm sorry," said Ronwy, when the boys returned to 
his house in the evening. "My folk are afraid to deal 
with anyone till they see how this war with the Lann 
comes out. I couldn't convince them otherwise. And 
they said you could stay here only three more nights. 
If the enemy hasn't given up by then, you'll have to try 
sneaking past them." 

Carl nodded absently, too full of the day's discoveries to think of his own danger right away. He had to 
talk to someone, and Ronwy 's wise blue gaze invited 
faith. 

Carl spilled out the story of what he had seen and 
thought, and Ronwy tugged his white beard and 
smiled sadly. 

"I've spent my life reading the old histories and 
other books we've found, and thinking about them," 
he said. "I believe I know what the Doom really was." 

"There was a war," said Tom eagerly. 

"Yes. The tribes— they called them nations— were 
much bigger then. This whole land, farther than any 
man has traveled today, was owned by one nation 



30 



Vault of the Ages 



called America, and there were other lands too— some 
of them even across the sea. They had many wars and 
were very cruel, destroying whole cities from the air 
and laying the country waste. Finally, one great war 
ruined so many cities and machines, and killed so many 
people, that things couldn't go on. There was plague 
and famine. By that time, too, so much of the land had 
been used up that people couldn't go back to a simple 
life in the country, so many of them starved to death; 
and the others fought over what was left, bringing 
themselves still lower. Finally only a few remained and 
the land could feed them, so things got better after 
a while. But there were those who believed the old 
machines and powers had brought this evil to pass. 
If men hadn't had machines that ran over the ground, 
and sailed, and flew, and destroyed, they wouldn't 
have been able to hurt each other so much. These people convinced the others that the old wisdom— science, 
they called it— was bad and should be forbidden. Since 
very few were left who even understood science, it was 
easy to kill them or make them keep still. 

"That was about five hundred years ago. Since then, 
the forests and the soil have come back and more people can live off the land than could right after the 
Doom. We have rebuilt until we live as you see today. 
But because of the taboos and the fear, we have not 
gone on to rebuild all that our ancestors had." 

Carl nodded slowly. "I thought it was something like 
that," he said. 

"But maybe the taboos are right," said Tom. "If it 
weren't for the— the science, there couldn't have been 
the Doom and all the suffering." 

"Neither could there have been many good things," 
answered Ronwy. "The ancients were not afraid of 



Wisdom of the Ancients 



31 



smallpox and the coughing sickness and other diseases 
which plague us today, because they had conquered 
them through science. Men lived in a plenty we cannot 
imagine today, and they had so much to do and see 
and think about that they were like gods. They lived 
longer and happier lives than we. Drought in one place 
did not mean that the people starved, for they could 
bring food from somewhere else in the world. The cold 
weather which has driven the Lann south against the 
Dales would not have mattered to them. Oh, there was 
so much they did, andso much they were about to do. . . . 

"Yes, they were cruel and foolish and brought the 
Doom on themselves. But why can we not learn from 
their mistakes? Why can we not use their science to 
live as they did, and at the same time be kinder and 
wiser? The world today is a world of want, and therefore a world of war; but we could build a future in 
which there was no hunger, no fear, no battle against 
man and nature. Think it over, boys! Think it over!" 

Carl woke instantly at the touch on his shoulder and 
sat up in bed. Gloom of night filled the chamber, but 
he could dimly see the City Chief's tall form bending 
over him. 

"What is it?" he breathed, fumbling for the dagger 
he kept under his pillow. 

"Uh— ugh— whoof!" Tom and Owl stirred in the 
double bed they shared and sat up, blinking into the 
night. Carl saw them as deeper shadows in the slowly 
stirring murk. 

"Carl," whispered Ronwy. "Listen to me, Carl. 
There isn't much time." 

"Yes, yes, what is it?" The boy swung out of the 
blankets, feeling the floor cold under his bare feet. 



32 



Vault of the Ages 



"I have talked to you, and I think you believe as I," 
came the rapid murmur out of darkness. "About the old 
science, and the need— the very desperate need— of 
today's world for a rebirth of knowledge. No one else 
will listen. I've been alone with my dreams, all my life. 
But you are son of the Chief of the greatest tribe in 
these lands. Someday, if the Dalesmen are not conquered, you will be their Chief yourself and able to 
do much. 

"I want to show you the time vault. Now, while the 
City sleeps. Will you come with me?" 

Strangely unafraid, strangely calm and steady except for the high pulse within him, Carl slipped on 
trousers and sword belt. Tom and Owl readied themselves at his back; there was the faintest chatter of 
teeth, but they would follow him even into the lair of 
the Doom, and he felt warm at the knowledge. Noiseless on bare feet, the three boys slipped out after 
Ronwy. 

In the moonless dark, the City was a place of looming shadows, streets like tunnels of night, a ghostly 
breeze and the tiny patter of a hurrying rat. A pair of 
bats swooped blackly against the dim glow of the 
Milky Way, and a wild dog howled far off in the woods. 
Ghostly, flitting through the enormous night silence 
and the small fearful noises below a wheeling sky, the 
four humans made their way to the forbidden place. 

Tom and Owl and even Carl shivered when they 
stood under the dim white skull that marked it, but 
Ronwy drew a long breath. "No one lives near by," he 
said. "We can talk now." 

As they groped carefully toward the vault, he went 
on: "As Chief, I do have power to go here whenever I 
wish, and I have spent long times studying the marvels 



Wisdom of ihe Ancients 



33 



within. But my people won't let me remove anything 
from it. They're afraid. All the world is afraid. Man's 
greatest devil is fear." 

The door still gaped open on unknown blacknesses. 
Ronwy struck flint and steel to light a candle he bore. 
"Follow me," he said. The yellow glow picked his face 
out of night, old and calm and immensely comforting. 
"I have entered often. There is no magic, no Doomnothing to be afraid of— only wonder and mystery." 

They went down the steps. At the bottom, Ronwy 
lifted his candle high and Carl saw that the vault was 
a great underground chamber lined with concrete, 
reaching farther into shadowy distance than he could 
see. He stood unmoving, caught up in the marvel of it. 

Steel cabinets stretched along the sides. Long 
benches held models protected under glass covers: 
cunningly wrought models of engines whose purpose 
Carl could not imagine, their metal catching the light 
in a dull shimmer. Full-size things of steel and copper 
and glass, shapes such as he had never dreamed, 
quietly waited for a man who understood. And there 
were books— books, everywhere books, shelf after 
glassed-in shelf of books from floor to ceiling— 

"Come here," said Ronwy. 

Carl followed him over to a wall on which there was 
a bronze plaque. The boy's lips moved as he slowly 
puzzled out what was engraved thereon. 

TO YOU WHO COME AFTER: THE WORLD IS ON THE EDGE 
OF THE FINAL WAR, THE WAR WHICH I THINK WILL DESTROY ALL CIVILIZATION AND HURL MAN, IF MAN SURVIVES, BACK TO SAVAGERY AND IGNORANCE. IT WILL TAKE 
LONG TO REGAIN WHAT IS LOST. PERHAPS IT WILL NEVER 
BE DONE. BUT I MUST DO WHAT I CAN TO SAVE THE KNOWL


34 Vault of the Ages 

EDGE WHICH IS SO GREAT AND GOOD. IT IS MEN WHO ARE 
EVIL AND MISUSE THEIR POWERS; THEIR KNOWLEDGE CAN 
ONLY BE GOOD. LEST THE TORCH WHICH IS NOW BURNING 
LOW CO OUT FOREVER, I PLACE A SPARK FROM IT HERE 
TO REKINDLE IT IN FUTURE AGES. 

IN THIS VAULT, THERE ARE BOOKS WHICH EXPLAIN 
WHAT WE KNOW OF SCIENCE AND HISTORY, STARTING 
WITH SIMPLE THINGS WHICH ANYONE CAN UNDERSTAND 
AND GOING ON TO THE PROUDEST DISCOVERIES OF THE 
HUMAN RACE. OUR SMALLER TOOLS AND MACHINES ARE 
HERE, AND MODELS OF THE LARGER ONES, TO HELP YOU 
LEARN AND REBUILD. HERE, TOO, ARE WHAT I COULD 
GATHER OF THE GREAT PROPHETS AND PHILOSOPHERS AND 
ARTISTS FROM ALL OUR PAST AGES, TO EXPLAIN HOW A 
REGAINED POWER SHOULD BE USED WITH MORE WISDOM 
AND KINDNESS THAN OUR UNHAPPY WORLD HAS SHOWN, 
AND TO INSPDXE YOU NOT MERELY TO IMITATE US, BUT TO 
GO ON FOR YOURSELVES AND CREATE NEWER AND BETTER 
DREAMS OF YOUR OWN. 

GUARD THIS TREASURE. USE IT WELL. MAY GOD HELP 
YOU IN YOUR TASK AND IN YOUR TRIUMPHS. 

It was long before Car] had finished spelling it out, 
and he had not understood much of what was in the 
message. But he knew it was a cry across the ages, and 
tears stung his eyes. 

"Who did this?" he whispered. 

"I don't know," answered Ronwy as softly. "It must 
have been a scientist who foresaw the Doom, five hundred years ago, and tried to save this for us. But his 
name is nowhere here. I think," he added after a 
moment, "that he didn't want us to know his name, 
that he wanted us to think of the whole human race, 
which had created all this, as giving it to us." 



Wisdom of the Ancients 



35 



"And the vault is tabooed!" Carl's bitter cry sent the 
echoes booming hollowly from wall to wall. 

"It need not always be so," replied Ronwy. "Someday, when you are Chief of the Dalesmen, you may be 
able to get the taboo lifted. It will take the work of 
many men and many years to learn all that is in here 
and put it to use. In a lifetime of study, I have only 
mastered a tiny part of this great store. Come." He took 
Carl's hand. "Let me show you a little." 

It was a strange quest, hunting among these dusty 
cases and boxes, lifting books and plans and models in 
trembling hands, there in the vault where time— yes, 
time itself— had been caged. Carl's mind staggered 
from most of the writings and machines. But there 
were things which could be used right now, today! A 
new design of sailboat, a windmill, a ritual called vaccination for preventing the dreaded smallpox, the natural laws of heredity by which farmers could breed 
better grain and livestock— a whole new world lay under his hands! 

Tom picked up one thing, a short metal tube with 
glass in one end and a crank on the side. "What is this?" 
he asked. 

Ronwy smiled in the yellow candle glow. "Turn the 
crank," he said. 

Tom did, and yelled in astonishment as a clear, white 
beam of light sprang from the glass. He dropped the 
thing— Carl snatched it out of the air— and the light 
died away. 

"It's called a flashlight," said Ronwy. "It has to be 
hand-powered, the card by it said, because the batteries they once had wouldn't last many years." 

Carl turned the miracle over in his fingers. "May I 



36 



Vault of the Ages 



keep this?" he asked. "I'll need something to prove 
what I say when I bring this story back to Dalestown." 

It was Ronwy's turn to be surprised. "What do you 
mean?" he asked. 

Carl's eyes gleamed fierce. "I mean that tomorrow 
night we three will try to sneak past those Lann scouts 
and get home," he answered. "Then the Dalesmen will 
come here in force, take over the vault, learn how to 
make weapons like the ancients had— and drive the invaders away!" 

There was a silence, then— 

"If we get past the Lann," said Owl. 



Chapter 4 The Undying Light 



"Inotheb day went by, a day of restlessly prowling the 
ruins under the hostile eyes of the witch-folk, and 
slowly the sun crossed heaven and limned the high, 
stern towers black against a ruddy western sky. 
Carl, Tom, and Owl fetched their horses, which had 
been stabled in an old place of polished marble known 
as BANK, and began readying themselves for their 
journey. 

"The Lann may have gone away," said Owl hopefully. 

"I'm afraid not," answered Carl. "They're scared of 
the City, but at the same time they know it's well for 
them to stop any messages going between the witches 
and the Dalesmen. They'll have at least a few men 
waiting outside to catch us." He smiled, trying to 
ignore the coldness of his hands and the tightness in 
his throat. "But it's a big woods and a dark night, so 

37 



38 



Vault of the Ages 



with fair luck we can slip by them. And if not—" He 
slapped his saddlebag. "If not, we may still have a 
chance." 

"I am guilty," said Ronwy. "I am guilty of sending 
you out to your enemies, when you are my guests." 

"You couldn't help it, sir," replied Tom quietly. "We 
know you're our friend." 

"In the old days," said Ronwy, "you could have 
traveled from one end of America to another without 
fear. Now those few miles you have to go are one long 
deathtrap. If you get home, Carl— if you become Chief 
of the Dalesmen— remember that!" 

"I will remember," said Carl. 

He tied his pony's mouth shut so that it could not 
whinny and betray him; his comrades did the same. 
Clear and lovely overhead, the first stars winked 
through a gathering dusk. 

"Good-by, Ronwy," said Carl. "And thank you." 

"The gods go with you," said the old man. 

He stood looking after them until their forms were 
lost in bush and shadow. 

The boys walked, leading their horses. Night thickened until they were groping through a pit of darkness 
whose walls bulked ragged against the stars. Slowly, 
stumblingly, they made their way through tumbled 
wreckage and crackling brush until they stood at the 
edge of the City and looked out over a dim sweep of 
forest and meadow. Straining their ears, they could 
hear only the dry chirp of crickets and rustle of windonce an owl hooted, once a wildcat screamed— but no 
sign of the enemy, no trace. Their own breathing 
seemed loud in the stillness, and Carl thought that 
surely the Lann must hear the drumbeats of his heart. 



The Undying Light 39 

"We don't follow the highway out, do we?" whispered Tom. 

"No, you woodenhead— that'd be a giveway," answered Owl as quietly. "We strike out across country, 
eh, Carl?" 

"Yes," nodded the Chief's son. "I think we can ride 
now, slowly, following the open land but keeping in 
the shadow of trees." He hooked one foot in the stirrup 
and swung into his saddle. "Let's go." 

His tautened ears heard the night murmurous 
around him. The long grass whispered under hoofs, 
leaves brushed his cheek as he hugged the line of forest, 
a stone clinked and his muscles knotted with alarm. 
Slowly— softly— the City was lost behind him, trees 
closed in, he was back in the wilderness. 

The Lann weren't stupid, he thought. They'd have 
known their prey would try slipping past them. So 
unless they had ringed in the whole City— which was 
hardly possible— they would guard it with a few small 
bands of men scattered well apart and ranging the 
territory on a patrol which might or might not happen 
close enough for a hunter's keen ears to hear the faint 
noise of passage. It lay with the gods. 

The meadow ended in a wall of forest. Carl urged 
his pony forward through a line of hedge that snapped 
and rustled and brought the sweat out cold on his 
forehead. Beyond, there was gloom in which the high 
trunks were like pillars holding up a roof of night. The 
horses stumbled on rough ground, and Carl hoped he 
could find his directions. It would be a terrible joke if 
they spent all night circling back to the City. 

"Listen?' 

Tom's hissing word brought Carl erect in the saddle, 



40 



Vauli of ihe Ages 



reining in his mount and staring wildly through darkness. Yes— yes— the sound of hoofs, the rattle of iron 

He held back a groan. The Lann! 

"Wait a bit," Carl breathed. "They may pass by." 

The noise grew louder, nearer, and he realized that 
the patrol would likely pass close enough to hear the 
horses' stamping and heavy breathing. Now there was 
nothing for it but to run. 

Leaning over, the pony's mane rough against his 
bare arm, he eased off the gagging rope. The animal 
would need its mouth for gulping air, he thought 
grimly, and almost smiled when it whickered its relief. 
"This way," he said. "Back— out to the meadows—" 

"Hey-ah! Who goes there?" 

The deep-throated shout rang between the trees. 
Carl urged his pony to a trot, though branches were 
whipping his face, and heard the voices of the Lann 
rise in excitement behind him. Now the hunt began! 

Breaking out into the open again, he struck heels 
against his pony's ribs and felt the rhythm of gallop 
under him. Tom and Owl edged their bigger horses 
alongside his, and for a brief while only the thudding 
of hoofs broke the night. 

Behind, a blot of darkness came out of the woods 
and became half a dozen riders. Starlight gleamed 
on helmets and lances, and a horn blew its call as the 
Lann saw the boys ahead of them. Carl bent low in the 
saddle and went flying up a long slope of hillside. 

Up and over! The swale below was thick with night. 
Rocks clattered and rang under frantic hoofs, and trees 
leaped out of nowhere to claw at eyes. The Lann 
topped the ridge and loomed against the sky, yelling. 

Owl's horse stumbled on a root and went rolling. 
Catlike, the rider was out of the stirrups and falling 



The Undying Light 41 

clear. "Go on!" he yelled, rising to his knees. "Go on— 
get away!" 

"No!" Tom reined in, brought bis horse dancing 
back, and starlight was dim on his drawn sword. "No— 
we'll fight!" 

Carl reined his own steed to a plunging halt and 
turned around. Now it was too late. The Lann were 
racing down the slope, howling their glee, no chance to 
escape them. 

Unless— 

Bending over, Carl groped in his saddlebag. The 
metal of the thing he sought was cold in his hand as 
he lifted it free. 

The Lann slowed and approached at a walk. Carl 
saw the flash of eyes and teeth in bearded faces, spiked 
iron helmets and polished leather breastplates shimmered faintly, lances were brought to rest. The leader 
raised his voice: "Do you surrender?" 

"No!" yelled Carl. The echoes went ringing and 
bouncing between the stony heights, no, no, no. 

"We come from the City," Carl shouted as loudly 
and wrathfully as his lungs could endure. "We come 
with the black magic of the Doom that wastes the 
world, the glowing death, nine thousand devils 
chained and raging to be free. Depart, men of Lann, 
for we are witches!" 

The horsemen waited. Carl heard a breath sucked 
between teeth in the quiet of night, saw a shield lifted 
and a charm fingered. But they did not run. 

"I hold the glowing death!" screamed Carl. "Your 
flesh will rot from your bones, your eyes will fall from 
the sockets, you are dead men already! See, men of 
Lann, seel" 

He aimed the flashlight and whirled the crank. A 



Vault of the Ages 



white beam stabbed forth, picking a savage face out 
of a night which suddenly seemed blacker, swinging 
around to another and another. A horse neighed, and 
a man shouted. 

Carl let go the handle, and it whined eerily to silence 
as the light died. Then he cranked again, holding the 
beam like a pointed spear, and urged his horse forward. 
As he advanced, he threw back his head and howled 
like a wild dog. 

A single noise of terror broke from the warriors, 
splitting the patrol into a crazed scramble of hoofs and 
bodies scattered in all directions. In moments, the men 
were lost to sight and sound. 

Carl sat for a minute, not daring to believe, and then 
he began to laugh. 

By dawn, the boys had come most of the way. Carl's 
flashlight trick would hardly work in the daytime, so 
as the first dull gray of morning stole into the sky, they 
dismounted, rubbed down their weary horses, and 
rolled up in blankets to sleep for a while. But the sun 
was not far over the horizon before they were on the 
trail again. 

"We'll be back just about in time for the chores," 
grumbled Owl, but the eyes twinkled in his round face. 

Tom ran a hand through his fiery hair. "It seems as if 
we left an age ago," he said, with a puzzled note in his 
voice. "We've seen and done and learned so much— I 
hardly know what to believe any longer." He glanced 
at Carl. "Tell me, is everything false that they taught 
us? Are there really no devils or magic or Doom?" 

"I don't know," said Carl soberly. "I suppose the old 
stories are true enough as far as they go— only they 
don't go far enough, and it's up to us to find the whole 



The Undying Light 



43 



truth. The Doctors, who claim to have kept as much of 
the old wisdom as is good for men to know, don't want 
us to do that; but I think that between the need of the 
Dalesmen for help against the Lann and this proof in 
my saddlebag, we can convince the people otherwise." 
He yawned and stretched his stiffened muscles. "It'll 
be good to reach your father's place. I could use a hot 
breakfast!" 

They followed the woodland trail through the cool 
rustling green, and John's sons spied the landmarks 
with eager eyes. It was Tom who first sniffed the air 
and turned back a worried face. "Do you smell smoke?" 
he asked. 

In a short while Carl and Owl sensed it too, the thin 
bitter reek and a light bluish haze in the air. They 
clucked to their horses and broke into a weary trot, 
straining homeward. 

Out of the woods, over a rise of ground, and then the 
dear, broad fields of home— 

The farm was burnt. 

They sat for a long time, stunned, only slowly grasping the ruin which was here. The outbuildings were 
smoking heaps from which charred rafters stuck up 
like fingers pointing at an empty heaven. The house 
was still burning here and there. Little flames wavered 
over fallen beams and blowing ash. Smoke stained the 
cloudless sky, black and ugly, and there was a terrible 
silence everywhere. 

"Father." It was a whimper in Owl's throat. 
"Mother." 

"Come on!" Tom took the lead, whipping his horse 
ruthlessly to a gallop. The others followed, sobbing 
without shame. 

Carl, less grief -stricken than the brothers, rode about 



44 Vauli of the Ages 

the yard scanning it for signs. The ground was 
trampled by many hoofs, the pens were broken open 
and a trail went through the grain fields toward the 
east. "The Lann," he said thinly. "A party of Lann 
warriors came and burned the place and drove off the 
stock to feed their army." 

Tom and Owl, white-faced, were poking through 
the smoldering, flickering wreck of the house. They 
looked up as Carl approached. "No bodies," said Tom. 
"We haven't found any dead." 

"No—" Carl went over to the shed. It had not burned 
so thoroughly as the rest, and he could see tools lying 
in the blackened wood. But no sign of the wagon which 
every farm owned. . . . 

"Be glad," he said, forcing a smile. "See, the wagon's 
gone, and there are no dead here. That meant your 
people fled before the enemy came. They should be on 
their way to Dalestown now." 

Owl let out a whoop, and Tom managed to laugh. 
It could have been worse. They dared not think how 
much worse. 

"Unless the Lann took them captive," Tom worried. 

"No. Why should invaders bother with prisoners?" 
Carl looked anxiously about the horizon. An evil black 
smudge to the west showed that another place had 
also been sacked. "But the Lann did this only lately, 
last night I suppose. That means they're still hereabouts. We'd better get moving!" 

There was little cover in the cleared farm lands. The 
boys went slowly down a rutted, dusty road, scanning 
the land nervously for signs of the enemy. Now and 
again they passed another gutted place where bodies 
sprawled in the fields and masterless animals ran loose 



The Undying Light 45 

—but nowhere a living human, in all the wasted 
marches. 

They had eaten their last supplies, and hunger 
gnawed at them. Carl's bow brought down a strayed 
pig, but he would only let them cut a few pieces of 
meat from it to eat uncooked. A fire could draw enemy 
attention. They chewed on raw pork and plodded 
gloomily forward. 

Their direction was southwest, toward the great 
forest which bordered the Dalesmen's territory. That 
would be safer to travel through until the last dash 
across open country to Dalestown, and Carl reasoned 
that the fleeing border dwellers would have taken the 
same route. In midafternoon, the boys were glad of 
their decision. They saw a column of dust far down the 
road and hastened to a clump of trees. Hiding in the 
thicket, they saw a troop of Lann warriors riding past. 

The stocky men sat their shaggy mounts as if they 
were part of the animals. Helmets blinked in the sunlight. The polished leather of shields and breastplates 
gleamed over jagged, fierce-colored paint. Long 
roweled spurs hung at the heels of fur-trimmed boots. 
Lances rose and fell in the rhythm of motion. Cloaks 
and red banners flapped against the green and brown 
of earth. The harsh, tanned faces were dark with beard 
and braided hair, eyes roved restlessly, and teeth 
flashed white at some jest. Spread over the plain, 
businesslike, warrior harness was barbaric finery— not 
only the men's own earrings and bracelets— but plunder 
from Dale homes, necklaces draped around hairy 
throats, jeweled rings flashing on sinewy fingers, silken 
cloth blowing from shoulders and waists. 

They rode past, and the noise of them— clash and 



46 



Vault of the Ages 



jingle of iron, squeaking of leather, thud of hoofs, hard, 
barking laughter— faded into the hot summer stillness. 
Carl, Tom, and Owl looked at each other with dismay. 
They saw too plainly that the Lann had struck through 
this part of the border; that the gathered farmers, if 
they had even had time to assemble, had been routed 
by their attack; and that a host was readying itself to fall 
on Dalestown. Time was shorter than even Chief Ralph 
had thought— desperately, terribly short. The vision of 
defeat and slavery was ghastly before Carl's eyes. 



Return — and Retreat 



I he sun was lowering again when the boys came to 
the western edge of the farm lands and entered 
the woods. Their horses slogged along in headdrooping weariness and they themselves felt aching bones and sandy eyelids. But need drove them, a 
need of a hiding place from the ranging Lann and a 
need, still greater and more bitter, to know what had 
happened to their people. 

Carl threw one last glance behind him. The Dales 
rolled green and still and beautiful away to the east, 
and the quiet evening air was full of sunset and the 
sleepy twitter of birds. No other human was in sight. 
Oh, it was a broad and fair land, and he knew what 
sort of hunger was in the Lann for such a home. But by 
all the gods, he thought with an anger dulled by his 
tiredness, it was the Dalesmen's home first! 

The road had narrowed to a single track, and once 
a 



48 



Vauli of the Ages 



under the trees it became a grassy lane where the hoofs 
were muffled and rabbits fled startled before the riders. 
They passed a charcoal burner's lonely hut, abandoned 
now in the face of the Lann. "That's the last dwelling," 
said Tom, his voice flat and empty. "After this, there's 
only the wilderness." 

A little way beyond, the trail petered out altogether 
and there was nothing. But here another pathway ran 
into the first, and Carl bent low over it, straining his 
eyes in the twilight. 

"Look!" he cried. "Look here-spoor of travelers!" 

They saw it then: fresh wheel tracks and hoof prints, 
broken twigs, and a trampled way plunging into the 
forest. Owl let out a faint yip. "It may be our own 
folks!" he chattered. "They could' ve come by the road 
past Harry's instead of the one we took— it'd lead them 
here— Come on, fellows! Come on!" 

The dusk rose between the high trunks like mist, and, 
winding around the trees, it was hard to follow even 
the plain wagon trail over the hilly ground. Carl's pony 
gasped under him, and he patted the bowed neck. 
"Easy, old man, easy," he whispered. "It can't be far 
now. A loaded wagon can't travel fast through this 
stuff." 

"Look! Up ahead!" Tom pointed a shadowy arm 
through the deepening twilight. A ruddy spark danced 
waveringly beyond a tinkle of stream. "A campfire!" 

Too tired to think whether those might be Lann who 
had made it, the boys forded the brook and scrambled 
with their mounts up the farther bank. Yes, yes ... a 
small fire, picking out the shapes of two wagons and 
tethered animals ... a man leaning on his spear 

"Who's that?" The voice rolled forth, weary and 
shaken. "Halt or we shoot!" 



Return — and Retreat 



49 



"Fatherl" yelled Owl joyfully. He sprang from his 
horse and ran toward the sentry. Tom plunged after 
him, and Carl was not far behind. When the Chief's 
son arrived, John the farmer was embracing his boys 
and crying praises to all the gods, while their mother 
wept her joy. In the ruins of their world, they still had 
each other! 

The dim red flicker of light picked out other faces, 
an old man, his son with wife and baby, and a young 
woman. They must have joined forces as they escaped. 
There were four brawny oxen to pull the wagons, a 
string of horses, and a couple of dogs, all resting under 
the trees. The wagons were piled high with family 
goods, and Carl frowned even as his hand was being 
shaken. What was the use of dragging all that through 
heartbreaking miles of forest when it slowed travel and 
invited raiders? 

Well. ... He remembered what his father had once 
said: "People are people, you can't change them much 
and a Chief has to take them as they are. Never forget 
that it's their will which keeps him Chief." 

He wondered with a sick fear what had happened 
to his father in these last long days. Were the Lann 
already at Dalestown? 

Carl eased himself to the cool, damp earth, looked 
into the sputtering flames, and listened drowsily to 
John's account of what had come to pass. Even if 
the story was grim, it was good to sprawl again and 
rest. 

Scouts had brought word the very day the boys had 
left John's homestead, that the Lann vanguard was 
emerging from the woods near by and gathering itself 
in the fields. The war-word had gone on hurried feet 
from house to lonely house, but it had taken more than 



50 



Vault of the Ages 



a day to assemble the men, and they met the enemy 
weary from a night's hard traveling. 

"They scattered us," said John somberly. "Their 
horsemen outflanked our pikemen and struck us from 
the side and behind. We fought long and hard. Many 
died in their tracks, but the others broke us up into 
little knots of men and finally we ran. The Lann hunted 
us down. They hunted us like dogs harrying a rabbit. 
Only nightfall saved us, and we streamed home knowing we were beaten. The Lann ranged about, plundering wherever they came, but that may have been a 
good thing. It held them up long enough for us to flee." 

If the northern farmers had gone to Dalestown in 
the first place, joined themselves to a large army under 
a leader who knew something of warcraft . . . Carl 
clamped his mouth shut on the words that he knew 
were too late. 

"There are many families retreating like us through 
the woods," said the young man, Torol. "It's slow 
going, but I don't think the Lann will bother chasing 
us. They've richer booty at hand— our homes." He spat. 
His wife started to cry, softly and hopelessly, and he 
put an arm about her shoulder and murmured what 
empty comfort he could. 

Carl reflected that the business of sacking the northern marches would keep the invaders occupied for a 
while. Then they would also have to assemble their 
entire army— a part of which had fought here. And, 
while they seemed to have a cavalry such as none of 
the southern tribes had ever dreamed of, the bulk of 
their host must be footmen just as it was in the Dales. 
So all in all, he thought Ralph would have a few days' 
grace yet before the hammer blow fell. 

Nevertheless, he wanted to get home and join his 



Return — and Retreat 



51 



father as soon as possible. He groaned at the thought 
of creaking through brush and hills with these overloaded oxcarts, and thought for a moment of leaving 
the group and pushing on alone. But no— his eyes went 
to the tired, dusty faces of Tom and Owl— those two 
had followed him, stood by him like true comrades in 
the face of the unknown powers of the City. Now they 
were with their folk, and the little caravan would need 
every hunter it could get to keep itself fed on the way. 
"The Chief," Ralph had said, "is the first servant of the 
tribe." 

Carl shook his head, sighing, and spread a blanket 
roll for sleep. He would let John's sons tell about the 
expedition to the witch-folk. Just now, he wanted only 
to rest. 

The following day grew into a slow nightmare of 
travel. For all the straining and grunting of oxen, and 
even the horses hitched on in especially difficult places, 
the wagons made no speed. They were snared in brush 
and saplings, stuck in the muddy banks of streams, 
dangerously tipped in the wild swoop of hillsides and 
gullies. Men had to push from behind, chop a path in 
front, guide the stubborn beasts along rugged slopes, 
cursing and sweating and always listening for the war 
whoop of the Lann. Near evening, Carl shuddered 
with relief when John asked him to go hunting. 

The boy took bow and arrows, a light spear, and a 
rawhide lariat, and slipped quietly into the tangled 
woods. His aching shoulders straightened as he moved 
away from the creaking wagons, and he sniffed the rich 
green life about him with a new delight. Summer, 
leaves rustling and breaking the light into golden 
flecks, a glimpse of blue sky amid cool shadows, a king 



52 Vault of the Ages 

snake sunning itself on a moss-grown log, a pheasant 
rising on alarmed wings before he could shoot, like a 
rainbowed lightning flash— oh, it was good to be alive, 
alive and free in the young summer! Carl whistled to 
himself until he was out of earshot of the caravan, then 
he grew still and his flitting brown form mingled with 
the shade. He had some work to do. 

It didn't take long to spot a woodchuck's burrowbut was the animal at home? Carl fitted an arrow to his 
bowstring and lay down to wait. The sun crept westward, his nose itched, flies buzzed maddeningly 
around his sweat-streaked face, but he crouched like 
a cat until patience was rewarded. The woodchuck 
crept from its hole, Carl's bow twanged, and he slung 
his prey at his belt. Nice fat one. But it would take 
more than that to feed ten people. Carl went on his 
way. 

He shot at a squirrel and missed, not feeling too 
sorry about it, for he liked the impudent red dwarfs. 
Scrambling along a slope, he met a porcupine and 
added it to his bag. The hill went down to a thin, 
trickling brook which he followed, picking up a small 
turtle on the way. Mixed food tonight. But not very 
much yet, even if Tom and Owl were ranging elsewhere. . . . 

Hold— what was that, up ahead? 

Carl splashed along the brook until it ran off a stony 
bluff into a broad, quiet pool under the mournful 
guarding of a willow thicket. The ground about the 
water hole was muddy with trampling. This was where 
some worth-while game drank! Carl didn't care to wait 
alone for it after dark. He knew the large difference between courage and foolishness. Next evening he and 



Re/urn — and Retreat 



53 



someone else could return. The caravan wouldn't be 
many miles away then, he thought impatiently. 
No— wait! Something elseCarl chuckled to himself as he saw the broad, hardpacked trail running from the pool. A cowpath, but it 
was the rangy, dangerous herds of woods-running wild 
cattle which had beaten that road through the forest. 
He knew that such trails often ran nearly straight for 
a score of miles. If this one did, the wagons could follow it, the trek home would become easy and swift, 
and . . . 

Skirting the pool, he ran down the trail at a long lope 
to check. What if he didn't bring back any more game? 
This news was worth a hungry night. He'd follow the 
path a mile or two to make sure. The trees flowed past, 
and evening quiet dropped over the land, muffling all 
but the calling of birds and the soft thud of his own 
moccasined feet, running and running. 

When he stopped, wiping the sweat from his face 
and laughing aloud in glee— yes, the trail could easily 
be used— he grew aware that the shadows were very 
long. In his excitement he'd gone farther than was wise 
and now he couldn't make it back before nightfall. 

"Stupid," he muttered. But there had, after all, not 
been much choice, and in any case he had little to fear. 
He started back, walking this time. The sunset air was 
cool on his face and under his wet shirt. He shivered 
and hastened his steps. 

Night deepened as the sun went under the hills. 
Shadows ebbed and flowed around him, creeping from 
the brake, flooding softly between the trees. A single 
pure star blinked forth, white in the dusk-blue sky over 
the trail. An owl hooted and a wildcat squalled answer, 



54 



Vault of the Ages 



far off in the woods. Somewhere a deer ran off in terror. 
It could be near or far, the leaves played strange tricks 
wifh sound, and now the very light was becoming as 
queer and magical. Carl thought of the godling spirits 
which were said to haunt the lonely glens. A thin white 
streamer of mist curled before him, and in spite of his 
City-strengthened doubts, he muttered a guardian 
charm. 

Willows hung dark against a glooming heaven, the 
pool was up ahead and fog was smoking out of it to 
blur the last remnants of sight. Carl picked a slow way 
through the weeping branches, skirting the white, mysterious glimmer of mist and water. 

Something moved in the twilight. Carl stiffened and 
an icy flash stabbed along his spine. The thing ahead 
was a deeper blot of darkness, rippling and flowing as 
if it were a mist-wraith too, but it was big, it was huge, 
and the last wan light threw back a cold green look of 
eyes. 

Carl backed up, hefting his spear, until he stood in 
the cow trail again. The beast edged out of the thicket 
and crouched. Its tail lashed and a growl rumbled in its 
throat. 

A tiger! 

There were not many of the huge striped cats this 
far north, but they were cursed and dreaded as killers 
of sheep and cattle and sometimes men. To the tribes, 
there had always been tigers— they had no way of 
knowing that these were the descendants of animals 
escaped from zoos in the Doom. This one must have 
been lying in waft for the herds to come to drink, and 
was angered by Carl's disturbance, angry enough, perhaps, to look on him as a meal. 

Slowly, hardly daring to move, Carl leaned his spear 



Return — and Retreat 



55 



against the tree at his back. It wouldn't do much good 
if the beast charged. He drew out a fistful of arrows, 
slipped the bow off his shoulder, and strung it with one 
gasping motion. It was a better weapon. 

The tiger snarled, flattening its belly to the ground. 
The smell of blood from the bag of game at Carl's waist 
must have stirred its hunter's heart. The boy fitted an 
arrow to the string and drew the bow taut. His pulse 
roared in his ears. 

The tiger crept nearer. 

The bow sang, and the tiger screamed and launched 
itself. Carl sprang aside almost as he shot. The tiger 
hit the ground where he had been and threshed about, 
biting at the arrow in its shoulder. Carl picked another 
arrow off the ground where he had thrown them, drew 
the bow, and let loose. He couldn't see in the murk if 
he had hit or not. The tiger staggered to its feet, growling. Before the tawny thunderbolt could strike again, 
Carl's bow had hummed afresh. 

The tiger screamed again and turned away. Yelling, 
Carl groped for another arrow. He fired and missed, 
but the beast was loping in a three-legged retreat. As 
Carl sank shaking to the ground, he felt blood hot and 
wet beneath him. 

If the tiger lived, he thought without exultation— he 
was still too frightened himself for that— it would have 
a proper respect for mankind. 

The thought continued as he resumed his way. It 
wasn't the animals which man had to fear. Tiger, bear, 
snake, even the terrible dog packs could not face human fire and metal. Slowly, as men hewed down the 
wilderness, its snarling guardians were driven back. 
Their fight was hopeless. 

And in the City, it had began to dawn on him that 



56 Vault of the Ages 

not even the supernatural, demons and ghosts and the 
very gods, threatened men. The powers of night and 
storm, flood and fire and drought and winter, were still 
a looming terror, but they had been conquered once 
by the ancients and they could be harnessed again. 

No, man's remorseless and deadly foe was only— 
himself. 

But that enemy was old and strong and crafty. It 
had brought to agonized wreck the godlike civilization 
of the ancients. Today, in the form of taboo and invading barbarians, it was risen afresh, and seemed all 
too likely to win. 

Overwhelming despair replaced Carl's fear. Could 
the children of light ever win? he thought. Must the 
Dalesmen go down in flame and death before the 
trampling horses of Lann? Must the last gasp of ancient 
wisdom rust away in darkness? Could there ever be a 
victory? 



Chapter 6 



oixowing the wild cattle trail, John's party took only 
another day and a half to get through the western 

forest to the point where he had meant to strike east 
for Dalestown. The wagons lay in the cover of brush 
at the edge of cultivation, while Tom and Carl rode out 
to find if the settled lands were still free. 

The boys returned jubilantly by sundown. "There's 
been no fighting around here," said Carl. "As far as the 
people we talked to know, the Lann haven't gotten 
farther yet than the northern border." 

"That's far enough," said John bleakly. Strain and 
sorrow had made him gaunt in the last few days. His 
eyes were hollow and he seldom smiled. But he nodded 
his unkempt head now. They'd have a safe passage to 
Dalestown; that was something. 

At dawn the caravan stirred, and wagons creaked 
through long, dew-wet grass until they emerged in 

57 



58 Vault of the Ages 

open country and found one of the pitted dirt roads of 
the tribe. There Carl took his leave of them. "You don't 
need me any longer," he said. "There are no enemies 
here, and the farmers will give you food and shelter. 
But it will take you perhaps two days to reach the town, 
and I have news for my father which can scarcely 
wait." 

"Aye, go then— and thank you, Carl," said John. 

"Father, how about letting me go along?" asked 
Owl. "It's just driving from here on, no work— and it's 
awful slowl" 

A tired, lopsided smile crossed the man's bearded 
face. "All right, Jim," he agreed. "And I daresay Tom 
would like to follow. I'll meet you in town, boys." 

The red-haired lad flashed a grin. "Thanks," he said. 
"I just want to see people's faces when Carl shows them 
that magic light." 

The three friends saddled their horses and trotted 
swiftly down the road. Before long, the wagons were 
lost to sight and they rode alone. 

The country was fair with hills, and valleys green 
with ripening crops, tall, windy groves of trees, 
the metal blink of streams and lakes, and shadows 
sweeping over the sunlit breadth of land. The farms 
were many, and wooden fences held the sleek livestock 
grazing in pastures. Most of the homes were the usual 
log cabins, larger or smaller depending on the wealth 
of the man and the size of his family, but some of the 
richer estates had two-story houses of stone and 
square-cut timbers. Now and again the travelers passed 
through a hamlet of four or five buildings— a smithy, a 
trading post, a water-powered mill, a Doctor's housebut otherwise the Dales lay open. Smoke rose blue and 



Taboo! 



59 



wing-ragged from chimneys, and farmers hailed the 
boys as they went past. 

Carl noticed that workers in the yards and the fields 
were almost entirely women, children, and old men. 
Those of fighting age were marshaled at Dalestown. 
And even these peaceful stay-at-homes carried spears 
and axes wherever they went. The shadow of war lay 
dark over the people. 

On rested horses, the ride to town took only a day. 
In the late afternoon, Carl topped a high ridge and 
saw his goal in the valley below him. 

Not much more than a village as the ancients had 
reckoned such tilings, it was still the only real town 
that the tribe had. Here the folk came to barter and 
make merry; here the Chief and the High Doctor lived, 
and the tribesmen met to vote on laws and action; here 
the four great seasonal feasts were held each year; and 
here the warriors assembled in time of danger. That 
was the first thing Carl noticed as his eyes swept the 
scene: tents and wooden booths clustered about the 
town to house the men, wagons drawn up and horses 
grazing in the fields, smoke of cooking fires staining 
the sky. As he rode down the hill, he caught the harsh 
reflection of sunlight on naked iron. 

A twenty-foot stockade rising out of high banks inclosed Dalestown in four walls. At each corner stood 
a wooden watchtower, with catapults and stonethrowing engines mounted just under the roof. In each 
wall, gates of heavy timber, reinforced with metal, protected the entrances. The town had fought off enemy 
attacks before. Carl hoped it would not have to do so 
again. 

He and his friends picked a threading way between 



60 Vault of the Ages 

the camps of the warriors. It was a brawling, lusty 
sight, with beardless youths and scarred old veterans 
swarming over the trampled grass. Sitting before their 
tents, they sharpened weapons and polished armor. 
Some were gathered about a fire and sang to the strum 
of a banjo while the evening meal bubbled in a great 
kettle. Others wrestled, laughed and bragged of what 
they would do, but Carl saw many who sat quiet and 
moody, thinking of the defeat in the north and wondering how strong the wild horsemen of Lann were. 

The main gate, on the south side, stood open, and a 
restless traffic swirled back and forth between the 
armed guards. One of them hailed the Chief's son: "Hi, 
there, Carl! So you're back? I thought the devils in 
the City would have eaten you." 

"Not yet, Ezzef." Carl smiled at the young pikeman, 
gay in red cloak and polished iron cuirass. Ezzef was 
one of the Chief's regular guardsmen, who ordinarily 
existed to keep order in the town. Carl and he had 
long been friends. 

"No, you're too ornery to make a decent meal." More 
soberly, Ezzef came over to stand at Carl's stirrup and 
look up into his dusty, sun-darkened face. "Did you 
make the bargain, Carl? Will the witch-men forge for 
us?" 

"The Chief has to know first. It's a long story," said 
the boy, turning his eyes away. He didn't want to start 
panic among the men by rumors of the City people's 
refusal, or premature hopes by tales of magic powers. 

Ezzef nodded gravely and went back to his post, and 
Carl began to realize the loneliness of a leader. He 
couldn't share his journey with this old comrade— the 
tribe had to come before any one man— but it was hard. 



Taboof 



61 



He clicked his tongue, and the pony moved forward 
again, shoving slowly through the crowds. 

Within the stockade, Dalestown was a jumble of 
wooden houses through which muddy streets wound a 
narrow way. It had its own wells and cisterns, and 
Ralph had, several years before, caused others to be 
made so that fire fighters would always have water 
close at hand. One bit of ancient wisdom which the 
Doctors told the people was that filth meant plague, so 
there were public baths and the Chief paid men to haul 
away wastes. But with all those who had crowded in 
since the first threat of war, that system was in danger 
of breakdown. 

As Carl rode down High Street, between the tall, 
overhanging walls of buildings gaudily painted under 
splashes of mud, he saw the same confusion of people 
he had known and loved all his life. Here, a rich merchant passed by, dressed in furs and gold chains, borne 
in a litter by four half-naked servants. There, a group 
of children tumbled and rolled in the dust; a mongrel 
yapped at their play. Yonder came a housewife, her 
long skirts lifted above the Uttered street, a baby 
strapped into a carrying-cradle on her back. A wandering juggler, his lean body clad in fantastically colored 
rags, a banjo slung next to his ribs, brushed shoulders 
with a sober-faced young Doctor in the long blue robe 
of his order, carrying a bag of magical instruments. 
Circled by the perpetual bustle, a tall, black-skinned 
trader in clothes of foreign cut, come from the southern 
tribes to barter his cotton or fruit or tobacco for the 
furs and leather of the Dales, was talking to a whitebearded old farmer who stood unmoving in his wooden 
shoes, puffing a long-stemmed pipe. A bulky guard was 
warning two drunken warriors to behave themselves; 



62 



Vault of the Ages 



a wagonload of fine timber moved slowly toward some 
carpenter's shop; and a horse tamer edged his halfbroken mount carefully through the swarm. 

Open doors, and shingled booths, where the work of 
the town went on, lined the sides of the street. A smith, 
muscled and sooty, hammered out a plowshare in the 
ruddy glow of his fire. Across the way, a fat baker gave 
two round loaves of coarse black bread, new and warm 
and fragrant, to a boy. And a weaver had his cloths 
and rugs spread out for sale, next door to a tailor who 
sat cross-legged making complete garments. On the 
corner, a dark and smoky tavern rang with noisy life 
and beside the tavern, a trader's store was massed with 
foreign goods and delicate jewelry for sale. Even now, 
Dalestown tried to live as it had always done. 

But many newcomers filled the streets, leaning from 
the windows and jamming into the crowd. Refugees, 
thought Carl, men and women and children from outlying farms who had fled here for safety when news 
of the invaders came. Some could stay with friends and 
relatives, some could pay for a bed in one of the few 
inns— but most had to sleep outside, in tents or under 
their wagons, ready to flee inside the walls if danger 
threatened. Their eyes were filled with fear and a deep, 
hopeless longing, their voices shrill or else hushed to 
an unnatural quiet. It was not a good thing to see, and 
Carl touched the saddlebag where he had the magic 
light as if groping for comfort. 

The boys came out on the open market square in 
the center of town and forced a slow path across its 
packed width. The Hall loomed on the farther side, a 
great building of dark oak with painted gables and the 
heads of animals carved along the eaves and ridgepole. 
Here was the place of meeting for the tribe. On its 



Taboo/ 



63 



right was the smaller house of the Chief, squarely and 
solidly built of wood and stone, the banner of the Dales 
—a green fir tree on a background of gold— floating 
above it. Toward this Carl directed his horse. 

An old servant stood on the porch, looking unhappily over the restless throng. When he saw Carl, he 
shouted. "Master Carl! Oh, Master Carl, you're back! 
Thank the gods, you're back!" 

"You never doubted it, did you, Rob?" smiled Carl, 
touched at the welcome. He swung stiffly to the 
ground, and the old man patted his shoulder with a 
thin, blue-veined hand. 

"Oh, but it's been so long, Master Carl—" 

"Only a few days. Is my father inside?" 

"Yes, he's talking with the High Doctor. Go right in, 
Master Carl, go in and make him glad. I'll take your 
horse." 

"And my friends' horses too, please." Carl frowned. 
He wasn't overly happy at having to confront Donn 
before he had talked with his father. The High Doctor 
meant well, and was kindly enough when no one 
crossed him, but he was overbearing and tightly bound 
by the ancient laws. 

Well, it would have to be faced sometime. "Come on, 
boys," said Carl, mounting the steps. 

"Maybe we should wait," hedged Tom. 

"Nonsense. You're the guests of the house, as your 
folks'll be when they arrive. Follow me." 

Carl entered a hallway paneled in wood and carpeted with skins. Light from the windows was getting 
dim, and candles burned in their brackets on the wall. 
It was a large, well-furnished house, but there were 
grander places in town. The Chief's power did not lie 
in trade goods. 



64 Vault of the Ages 

A small thunderbolt came shouting down the stairs 
and threw itself into Carl's arms, squealing and shouting. "Hello, brat," said the boy gruffly. "Get down— the 
Lann don't do as much damage as you." 

It was his young sister Betty, five years old, who 
clung to him and stared with wide eyes. There were 
only these two left— Ralph's other children, and then 
his wife, had died, of some disease which the ancients 
could have cured but which was too strong for the 
drums and prayers and herbs of the Doctors, and the 
Chief had not married again. The three were a happy 
family, but there were dark memories among them. 

"What's at?" Betty pointed to the flashlight, 
wrapped in a piece from his tattered cloak, that Carl 
bore in one hand. 

"Magic, brat, magic. Now where's Daddy?" 

"In'a living room. Can I come?" 

"Well—" Carl hesitated. It might not be wise for a 
child to know of this and prattle the news all over town. 
If the Lann were as smart as he thought, they had a few 
spies mingled with the refugees. "Not just now. This 
is man-talk. Later, huh?" 

Betty made fewer objections than he had thoughtshe was growing up enough to learn that men ruled 
the tribes, under the law if not always in fact— and he 
sent her trotting back up the stairs. Then he led Tom 
and Owl down the hall to the living-room door. He 
opened it softly and looked in. 

The room was long and low, furnished with a dark 
richness of carved wood and thick skins and the trophies of war and hunt. Light from many candles and 
the broad stone fireplace filled the farther end with 
radiance and shadows, glimmering off shields and 
swords hung above the mantel, off wrought brass 



Taboo/ 



65 



candlesticks and silver plates. Windows between heavy 
draperies showed the last gleam of day. 

Ralph stood before the hearth. He was a tall and 
powerful man of thirty-seven, his eyes blue in a grave 
bronzed face, his hair and close-cropped beard the 
color of gold. His dress was, as usual, simple: plain 
shirt and breeches of linen, a green wool cloak swinging from broad shoulders, a dagger at his tooled leather 
belt. His big hands were calloused with labor, for he 
worked his own farm outside the walls, but his look 
was calm and strong, and Carl's heart quickened at the 
sight of him. 

Old Donn sat in a chair by the hearth, blue robe 
drawn tight around his gaunt frame. Like the other 
Doctors, he was clean-shaven, and only a thin, white 
halo of hair fringed his high skull. With his hooked 
nose and sunken cheeks and smoldering, steady eyes, 
he resembled an aged eagle. One bony hand rested on 
the serpent-wreathed wand of his authority where it 
was laid across his knees; he rested his chin in his other, 
as he looked across at the third man. 

This was a stranger, a lean young warrior of about 
twenty, weaponless and clad in garments obviously 
borrowed from Ralph. His hair was raven black, and 
a dark mustache crossed his sharp face. He was seated 
at ease, legs crossed, a hard and hostile smile on his 
mouth. 

"It makes no difference," he was saying. "Whether 
you hold me or not, Raymon will come. He has other 
sons—" 

"Carl!" Ralph saw the boy and took a long stride 
forward across the tiger-skin, his arms opening and 
sudden gladness lighting in his face. "Carl— you're 
backl" 



66 Vault of the Ages 

They shook hands, father and son, and Ralph 
checked himself, putting on the mask of coolness expected from a man. Perhaps only Carl saw the candlelight glisten off a tear. It must have been cruel to hear 
that the enemy had been in the very region where he 
had sent his only son, the only hope of his race. 

"Yes— Father." The boy cleared his throat, trying to 
get the thickness out of his voice. "Yes— I'm back, well 
and sound. And these are my friends, Tom and OwlJim, sons of John in the north—" 

"Be welcome, friends of Carl and friends of mine," 
said Ralph gravely. He lifted his voice in a yell for a 
servant. "Margo, Margo, you human turtle, bring food 
and drink! Carl is backl 

Dorin looked keenly at the boys. "And how did the 
trip to the City go?" he murmured. 

"Both well and ill, sir," answered Carl uneasily. "But, 
Father— who is this?" 

Ralph smiled with pride. "Carl, meet Lenard— eldest 
son of Raymon, Chief of the Lann!" 

"What?" Tom's hand dropped unthinking to his 
knife. 

"Aye, aye. There have been skirmishes in the north 
between our scouring parties and vanguard Lann 
troops." Ralph paced back to the hearth. "The other 
day our men brought back some prisoners taken in one 
of those fights, and among them was Lenard here. A 
valuable captive!" 

Lenard grinned. "I was just explaining that my hostage value is small," he said in the harsh accents of the 
north. "We believe that the souls of dead warriors are 
reunited in Sky-Home, so— as long as my father has 
other brave sons— he will not betray our people to get 



Taboo! 



67 



me back." He waved a sinewy hand. "But I must say 
my host Ralph has treated me well." 

"He gave oaths not to try to escape before battle is 
joined, and my guards wouldn't let him get out of the 
house in any event," said Ralph. "I still think we can 
use him, ... or at least learn from him." His eyes held 
a brief, desperate appeal. "And if we treat our captives 
well, the Lann should do likewise— if they have honor." 

"We have honor," said Lenard stiffly, "though it may 
not always be the same as yours." 

Carl folded his legs under him and sat down on the 
rug. He could not help a certain uneasiness at having 
Lenard so close. Lenard, the heir to the mastery over 
that savage horde which had chased him down the 
ways of night and laid the northern marches in ruin. 

"But what of your journey, Carl?" persisted Donn. 
"What did the witch-folk say?" 

Carl glanced at Lenard. The prisoner sat quietly 
leaning back, half in shadow, not even seeming to 
listen. And neither Ralph nor Donn seemed to care 
what he might learn. 

Slowly, Carl told the story of Iris trip. There was stillness as he talked, under the thin dry crackle of flames. 
Once Donn stiffened and leaned forward, once Ralph 
whispered an oath and clenched his fists with a sudden 
blaze in his eyes— but both leaned away again, clamping the mask back over their faces, hooding eyes in the 
weaving shadow. 

Night closed down outside, darkening the windows, 
stilling a little the babble of the aimless crowds. Wordlessly, tire servant Margo came in with a tray of refreshment, set it on a table, and stole out again. Beyond 
the little ring of light at this end, the long room grew 
thick with a creeping darkness. 



68 Vau/( of (he Ages 

Under the light, Carl unwrapped the bundle in his 
hands. The ancient metal was smooth and cool; it 
seemed to vibrate with unknown powers. "And this is 
the light," he said, his voice shaking ever so faintly. 
"Look!" 

He spun the crank, and the pure white beam sprang 
forth, searching out corners, flashing back from metal 
and darkly gleaming wood, a whisper of gears and a 
lance of cold, colorless fire. Ralph gasped, Lenard 
gripped the arms of his chair with sudden whiteknuckled force— only Donn sat unmoving, unblinking, 
like the graven image of some eagle god. 

It was to the Doctor that Carl first looked when he 
let the light die, for he knew that the real decision lay 
there. The class of the Doctors existed in all known 
tribes, men who handed down a fragment of the 
ancient wisdom and guarded the mysteries. A Doctor 
was many things: public scribe and record-keeper, 
teacher of the young, priest of the gods, medicine man 
in time of sickness, counselor and sorcerer and preserver of knowledge. Much of what they did was good 
—they knew some medicine and other things beneath 
all the magical rites, and their shrewd advice had 
helped many. But Carl thought that they were, in their 
hidebound beliefs and their fear of the Doom, the 
greatest reason why life had hardly changed in these 
hundreds of years. And the fountainhead of the Doctors was their grand master, Donn. 

The old man was still very quiet. He had lifted his 
serpent wand, as if to ward off powers of evil, but his 
face did not move at all, he did not even seem to 
breathe. 

"Carl— Carl— let me see that light!" Ralph stooped 



Taboo/ 



over his son, shaking with excitement, holding forth an 
eager hand. "Let me see it!" 
"Stop." 

Donn spoke softly. Little more than a whisper came 
from his thin lips, but it seemed to fill that room of tall 
shadows. He held out his own gaunt fingers. "Give it 
to me, Carl." 

Slowly, as if moved by a power outside himself, Carl 
laid the metal tube in the hand of Donn. 

"Taboo! Taboo!" The old pagan word rustled and 
murmured in dark corners, hooted mockingly up the 
chimney to hunt the wind. "It is forbidden." 

"But it is good!" cried Carl, with a wrench in his 
soul. "It is the power which can save us from the Lann 
and—" 

"It is one of the powers which brought the Doom." 
The High Doctor touched the flashlight with his wand 
and muttered some spell. "Would you unchain that 
wrath and fire again? Would you see the earth laid 
waste and the demons of Atmik raging over the sky 
and folk falling dead of fire and hunger and plague and 
the blue glow— cursing your name as they died? Taboo, 
taboo!" 

Carl sat numbly, hardly aware of the stern words 
snapping from that suddenly grim face: 

"You have broken the law. You entered the accursed 
City and consorted with witches. You opened a door 
on the powers of the Doom, and you brought one of 
those very devils home with you. Fools! You wanted 
to help the Dalesmen? Be glad you haven't destroyed 
them!" 

After a moment, Donn spoke a little more gently. 
"Still, it is plain that some god protected you, for no 



70 Vauff of (he Ages 

harm that I can see has been done. I shall offer this light 
as a sacrifice to appease any anger in heaven. I shall 
throw it into the sacred well. And tomorrow you must 
come to the temple and have the sin taken off you— 
but that need only be marking your foreheads in the 
blood of a calf which you must bring. You meant well, 
and for that you shall be forgiven." 

The sternness came back like the clash of iron 
chains: "But there shall be no more of this. Ralph, you 
know the law as well as I do, and we have both been 
lax about enforcing it. This is certainly not the first time 
a trader to the City went inside the taboo circle. But it 
shall be the last. From now on, the law of the Dales 
shall be carried out to the full. And that law says— for 
breaking the taboo on ancient works and magic, the 
penalty is death!" 



CkiiptCf 7 The Dalesmen Go to War 



I coking into the wrathful eyes of Dorm, Carl dared 
not argue further. He knew that this old man, who, 
in other times, had held him on his knee, given him 
toys and gifts, taught him the arts a Chief should 
know, would not hesitate to order him killed if he 
thought it was demanded by the gods. Tom and Owl 
shrank into the half-darkness beyond the firelight, 
afraid even to whisper. Ralph himself dropped his gaze 
and muttered surrender. 

Donn's power was great in a very practical sense: he 
was the absolute ruler of the order of Doctors, which 
owned great lands and wealth; and his hold on the people was such that he could stir them up against anyone 
who dared oppose his stiff will. But more than that, he 
was the one who spoke for the gods. He was the agent 
of those great shadowy powers of sky and earth, fire 
and water, growth and death and destiny, before which. 



71 



72 



Vault of the Ages 



men quailed. Even Carl felt a shiver in his flesh at 
thought of what might be stooping over the world and 
listening to this man's words. For the moment, bitter 
disappointment was lost in a tide of fear, the inbred 
fear of many generations, and Carl bowed his head in 
submission. 

It was Lenard who laughed, a hard, ringing bark 
which jerked their attention back to him. "Dalesmen!" 
he jeered. 

Ralph's thick, fair brows drew into a scowl. "What 
do you mean?" he rumbled. 

"I mean that living in this fat land has made women 
of you," said Lenard. "No sooner is one of your people 
bold enough to seize the only chance you might have— 
and it was a good thought you had there, boy— than 
you throw it away in panic fear of gods you've never 
seen. It'll be no wonder when the Lann kick you out of 
your homes." 

"You'll find how cowardly we are when it comes to 
battle!" flared Tom. 

"Nor are your own folk exactly brave where it comes 
to the City," murmured Owl. "We, at least, dared to 
enter the place." 

Lenard frowned. "That may be true. But it isn't the 
City that will decide this— nor are all my warriors afraid 
of taboos." 

Carl leaned forward, seeking that gaunt, brown face 
out of flickering shadow as if to read a meaning in its 
lines and scars. "Why are you attacking us?" he asked. 
"We never harmed you." 

"The Lann go where they please," said Lenard 
haughtily. 

"But why?" 



The Dalesmen Go to War 



73 



"It is simple." The prisoner shrugged. "As long as our 
Doctors remember, we of the north have wrung a 
scanty living from a harsh and barren land. We have 
been hunters, herdsmen, small farmers ever at the 
mercy of cold and rain and blight. We have battled 
each other to death over what little there was, brother 
falling on brother like wild dogs. Yet every year more 
are born, there are more to feed. Meanwhile, it has 
grown yet colder and stormier; the harvests have been 
more thin each year. It was too much for men to 
stand! So we have gathered ourselves and turned the 
warlike skill we gained from fighting each other 
against those who hold better lands. That is all. And 
it is enough!" 

"But there is room here," protested Carl. "There are 
forest tracts which need only be logged off and 
plowed—" 

"So we should come as beggars?" Lenard tossed his 
head like an angered stallion. "None of that for a 
warrior people. Nor do I think there is enough room 
for two such large tribes here, even when you count in 
the forests. No, there is space for only one tribe to live 
decently, and we mean to be that tribe." 

"And what is your intention, then?" 

"Why, we will scatter your armies before us and 
divide your lands among our men, who will then send 
for their families. Most of the Dalesmen will have to 
go, of course; where, I don't know or care. Perhaps 
you can, in your turn, overrun someone else. Some of 
your people may be allowed to stay as servants of the 
Lann. That depends on the will of our Chief, my 
father." There was scorn in Lenard's voice. "And 
among the Lann, the Chief is Chief— none of this cumbersome nonsense about voting." 



Vault of the Ages 



"You speak boldly for a prisoner," said Ralph with 
dangerous gentleness. 

"Why shouldn't I?" Lenard grinned. "I know you 
won't hurt me. Even if I thought you would, I'm not 
afraid to die. We're a fighting people, we Lann, and 
you'll soon find it out." 

The army of the Dalesmen was ready to march. 

In the two days since Carl's return, scouts had 
brought word that the Lann host was assembling in 
full strength well to the north, on the edge of the 
rugged Scarpian district. It seemed clear that they 
would move against Dalestown, hoping to seize it. 
Once they held that fortress, it would be easy for them 
to reduce whatever outposts were left and bring the 
whole country to heel. Ralph meant to forestall them, 
catch them on the border, and defeat them in open 
combat and drive them north again. 

"And what will we do if we win, Father?" asked Carl. 

The Chief's golden-bearded face was sober. "I don't 
know," he said. "They could just go home and wait 
for another chance. I imagine the best thing for us to 
do would be to follow up our victory— next summer, or 
even this winter, but in any case we'll have to wait till 
after harvest. We can't be really safe till we've brought 
them into subjection. Yet the thought of being a conqueror leaves a bad taste in my mouth, nor are we a 
soldier-folk who would be well fitted for such a task." 
He shrugged. "But let's win the first battle first." 

There had been no answer, or only an evasive one, 
from the small neighbor tribes to whom Ralph had 
appealed for help. They were afraid to anger the Lann 
if those should win; and they knew that if the Dalesmen won, they would not be punished for their refusal. 



The Dalesmen Go to War 



75 



Ralph's plea that the northerners would soon gobble 
them up if the Dales fell had not impressed anyone. It 
was all too true what Lenard had remarked one day: 
these loose assemblies of quiet farmers and craftsmen 
had no idea of war or politics. 

Now the Chief stood on the porch of his home in a 
gray misty dawn, looking at the troop of mounted 
guards who waited for him in the market square. These 
sat their horses like statues, lances raised, metal polished, plumes and banners agleam with dew. The 
Chief was dressed like his guardsmen: a wool tunic 
under his breastplate of hammered steel, leather cloak 
and breeches, spurred boots, sword and dagger and 
signal horn belted at his waist. Carl, Tom, and Owl 
were more lightly armored, in reinforced bull's-hide 
cuirasses and flat helmets; they had quivers and longbows hung from their shoulders, for they, with the 
other warriors not fully grown, would be archers. Beyond the silently waiting men, a dense and unspeaking 
throng of women and children and old folk milled 
about, looking and looking. 

Lenard, armored in leather, but without weapons, 
smiled in thin scorn. This would not have been the 
farewell given an army by his fierce people. The Lann 
had been cheered out, and the town had been gay with 
flags and trophies. 

Ralph was taking him along under guard, still hoping to use him as a hostage; but he had given no 
promise not to try escaping, and none had been asked 
of him. 

Old Rob carried Betty out in his arms. The child's 
face was still cloudy with dreams, and she smiled 
sleepily at her father as he lifted her. "Come back soon, 
Daddy?" she whispered. 



76 



Vault of the Ages 



"Yes— oh, yes!" He held her very close for a moment. 
Then he gave her back to Rob, who was weeping 
silently, and spun on his heel. The plumed helmet, in 
the crook of his arm, he lifted and set on his head. The 
nose guard gave his face a sudden, strange, inhuman 
look. He drew on his gloves and walked rapidly to his 
horse. Carl squeezed Betty's small, curled-up hand and 
ran after his father, a stinging in his eyes. 

They rode down High Street to the main gate. Folk 
streamed after them, clutching at the men who went 
past, waving and crying farewell. "Good-by, good-by, 
good-by— the gods be with you— come back!" 

The main army waited beyond the walls. Here there 
was no such order as the trained guardsmen showed. 
The men who had come on horses sat together, waiting, 
and each was equipped with whatever he had brought 
along, lance and sword and ax slung at rest, armor over 
plain work-clothes, battered helmets set on shaggy 
heads. The footmen, who were the bulk of the Dale 
army, sat or stood as it pleased them, leaning on their 
pikes and axes, talking among themselves even when 
the Chief rode up. There was also a train of muledrawn supply wagons, for Ralph could not plunder the 
country for food as the Lann did; and three young 
Doctors were attached to them to guard against sickness and enemy magic. That was all. But that number 
of men, perhaps five thousand, sprawled far over the 
valley, hiding the muddy ground and filling the gray 
air with a murmur of life. 

Ralph winded his horn, and certain middle-aged 
men on horses began to thread through the army, blowing their own signals. These were the shrewd, experienced ones Ralph had chosen to lead the several divisions of his host. Standard-bearers lifted their flags, 



The Dalesmen Go to War 



77 



and slowly, with a vast grumble of movement, the 
soldiers grouped themselves around their banners. 

Ralph and his guardsmen were already under way, 
trotting down the road to the north, and the great snake 
of his army uncoiled itself and wound after him. It 
spilled off the narrow track and into the fields, trampling grain and breaking fences— and no doubt, many 
a farmstead along the way would be missing a few 
chickens or a fat pig. But that couldn't be helped. The 
main thing was that they were moving! 

Carl, riding beside his father, looked back as the fog 
lifted and the day grew warm. The army was a black 
mass behind, men walking along at an easy pace, riders 
plodding at their side, wagons rumbling dustily in the 
rear. Pikes and lances and banners rose and fell with 
the slow steady movement, the tramp of many feet 
quivered faintly in the earth, voices and a snatch of 
song drifted up. It was not a very military sight, but 
Carl's heart lifted with pride. These were free men! 

He stopped his pony, letting it graze while the army 
went by him. As he looked at the mass of them, he saw 
that the myriad of faces were the faces of men he knew. 
John, the farmer, riding beside his sons, caught sight of 
Carl and hailed him. Willy Rattlehead, grinning at a 
private joke, juggled three balls in the air as he walked. 
Sam the Trader, richly clad and burned dark by strange 
suns, steadied his well-muscled bay mare, which was 
shying at Willy's juggling balls. Little Jimmy-the-Old, 
off in worn-out shoes to defend his tiny farm, jumped 
from the path of the skittish mare. Jack the smith, a 
hammer carried on one mighty shoulder as his weapon 
of war, offered to defend little Jimmy-the-Old if he 
should need it. 

Fat Bucko groaned and complained every step of 



78 Vault of the Ages 

the way, but he kept up with the best. Sly, red-haired 
Gorda, whom no one called anything but Fox, and his 
inseparable friend, the big hairy simpleton Joe, gave 
a loud cheer when they saw Carl. Martun the Hunter, 
lean and quiet and buckskin-clad, marched with long 
springlike steps, gaining a yard for every stride. Black 
Dan from the south, who had settled here years ago 
and brought six tall sons with him to the wars, walked 
beside Martun; neither of them talking and both of 
them in perfect understanding. 

Rich and reckless young Dick, on a half-tamed 
stallion, pretended to thrust with his sword at Carl. But 
Rogga the farmer, who wanted only to be left in peace 
and would fight for the privilege, called him back into 
line; and slow-spoken gentle old Ansy, the carpenter, 
who liked Carl and who was equally peaceful, nodded 
his approval to Rogga. 

Carl knew them all, them and many others. They 
were his blood and bone, a part of this wide, green 
land, and it was as if the Dales themselves, the very 
earth, were rising in anger to cast out the strangers. 
Yes, it was a good sight to see— a better sight than a 
troop of half -savage Lann, for all their skill and courage. Carl felt, suddenly, immensely heartened. 

What if the magic of the City had failed him? These 
men were enough. What if the dead hand of taboo had 
closed heavily down on that vision of wonder he had 
seen? There would be others days, other ways. Carl 
broke into song as he rode back toward his father. 

Lenard, mounted between four guards, grinned at 
him. "You seem pretty confident, my friend," he said. 

"I am!" Carl waved his hand at the ranks behind 
him. "Look there, you. Do you really think these folk, 
with their hearth-fires at their backs, will yield to you?" 



The Dalesmen Go fo War 



79 



"As a matter of fact, yes." Lenard shook his head. 
"You've got a lot to learn, Carl. Strength and courage 
aren't everything. The Lann have that too, and besides 
that they have the knowledge of war. You might be as 
strong as, say, a smith, but even so you couldn't do his 
work because you haven't his training." 

"The Dales have beaten off other foes," said Carl 
hotly. 

Lenard smiled and made no reply. 

The army held a short rest at noon while the cooks 
prepared food; then they pushed on. Weariness set in. 
No more talk and song were heard. The grim, dusty 
slogging over hills and across streams continued endlessly, and when Ralph, at evening, blew the signal to 
pitch camp, there was one great sigh of relief. 

Fires winked and glowed through an enwrapping 
night. Sentries paced, yawning, watching the slow 
wheel of the stars for their time of relief . Ralph studied 
a map by the dim red light of a dying blaze, and held 
low-voiced conference with his chiefs. Carl tried to 
stay awake and listen, but his eyes grew too blurred, 
and he stretched himself in a blanket and slept. 

All the next day the rain poured, and the army 
grumbled to itself as it splashed in wet misery through 
the mud of fields and roads. That night, the drums of 
the Doctors throbbed to drive off fever-devils. 

On the third day, Ralph's host entered Scarpia, the 
wild northern province of his tribe. Here few people 
dwelt. Only rarely did a lonely cottage rise against a 
sky of wind-driven clouds, and trees grew thick and 
gloomy on the rugged backs of steep-sided hills. Crows 
hovered darkly overhead. Now and again a solitary 
eagle rode majestic wings above the men, and deer and 
wild ponies fled as they spied the moving army. Men 



80 Vault of (fie Ages 

scrambled up high banks of raw, red earth, forded 
brawling rivers, crashed their way through tangled underbrush in a roadless land, and many shivered and 
mumbled spells as they saw the gaunt gray shapes of 
stones raised long ago by savage woods-runners. But 
they went on— 

Carl was riding with the Chief in midaf ternoon when 
a horseman galloped up, mud-splashed and panting, to 
gasp out his word, "The Lann are ahead!" 

"How far?" snapped Ralph. Carl's heart leaped 
wildly and then settled to a high, steady pounding. 

"Two, three miles," answered the scout. "They're 
camped near a big river— thousands of them. They 
darken the ground!" 

"Well—" Ralph looked grim, then turned to his 
guards with a smile. "Let's just keep going, then. Pass 
the word along." 

Carl could see and almost feel the sudden tension in 
the men as the report went down their ranks. Eyes 
looked into eyes, wondering how many more suns they 
would see, hands tightened on the shafts of weapons, 
horses sensed the uneasiness in their masters and 
snorted. 

Company commanders blew their horns, and the 
ragged lines drew together. Outriders spread on either 
side, ranging the woods which gloomed about the 
army. Feet broke the dull rhythm of travel and quickened, pressing forward. 

Carl glimpsed Lenard, sitting between his guards 
and watching the Dalesmen prepare. He appeared to 
be amused. 

"They'll know we're coining, Father," said the boy. 
"Can't be helped," said Ralph. "We'll just have to 
reach favorable ground before they attack." For an 



The Dalesmen Go fo War 



81 



instant, the hardness of the leader was gone, and he 
touched Carl's hand with a sudden tenderness. "Be 
careful, son. Be brave, but be careful." 

They thrust ahead, plowing through brush, panting 
up a long slope of forested hill. The woods ended on its 
crest and Ralph drew rein. A sunbeam speared through 
hurrying clouds to touch his armor with fire as he 
pointed. "The Lannl" 

Carl's eyes swept the ground. The ridge went down 
on a gentler grade here, a long grassy incline broken 
by clumps of young trees, ending in a broad, level field 
where the Larm were camped. Beyond that lay the 
river, a wide watery stretch gleaming like gray iron in 
the dull, shifting light, trees rising thick on its farther 
side. On either hand, a mile or less away, the forest 
marched down to the river on the near side, hemming 
in the open ground. 

The Dalesmen looked first on the Lann warriors. 
Their tents were pitched on this bank— only a few, for 
most of those hardy warriors disdained such cover. 
They swarmed down by the river. It was indeed dark 
with men and horses, a whirling storm of movement as 
their horns shrilled command. Banners flying, lance 
heads hungrily aloft, hideously painted shields and 
breastplates glistening, bearded faces contorted with 
battle fury; they were a splendid and terrible sight, and 
Carl's heart stumbled within him. 

Ralph was looking keenly down on them. "Not so 
many as we," he murmured. "Three or four thousand, 
I guess— but better trained and equipped, of course. 
And their Chief can't be so very smart. He let us get 
this close without trying to stop us, and now we have 
the advantage of higher ground." 



82 



Vault of the Ages 



"Why should Raymon fear you?" sneered Lenard. 
"The Lann can get ready as fast as you can." 

Ralph galloped his horse across the front of his army, 
shouting orders. He had rehearsed his men at Dalestown, and they fell into formation more quickly than 
Carl had thought they would. But his own eyes were on 
the man who rode down toward the northerners with 
a white flag in his hand. Ralph was going to try one 
last parley. . . . 

The rider threw up his arms and tumbled under his 
suddenly plunging horse. A moment later, Carl heard 
the faint clang of the bow and the cruel barking 
laughter of men. The Lann didn't parley— and now 
they themselves were ready and moving up against the 
Dalesmen! 



ChaptCt S ^orm from the North 



Ralph's army was drawn up in the formation his people had always used, a double line in the shape of 
a blunt wedge, with himself and most of his guards 
at the point. Those in the first rank had axes and 
swords; behind them, the men slanted long pikes out 
between the leaders, with their own infighting weapons 
handy if they should have to step into the place of a 
fallen comrade. The banners of company commanders 
were planted at intervals along the lines, whipping and 
straining in the stiff, damp breeze. Horsemen waited 
on the flanks, lances lowered and swords loose in the 
scabbards. On higher ground, spread along the wedge 
in their own line, were the boys and the oldest warriors, 
armed with bows and slings. The arrangement was 
good, tight enough to withstand an attack without 
crumpling and then move forward against the enemy. 
The Lann, Carl saw, were approaching in a compact 

83 



84 Vault of (he Ages 

square of foot soldiers, about half the number of the 
Dalesmen. Their cavalry, much larger than that of their 
opponents, waited in a line of restless, tightly held 
horses near the river. Briefly, Carl thought that his own 
side had an enormous advantage. A frontal assault of 
lancers would have shattered itself against pikes and 
hamstringing swords; in any case, he could not think 
that cavalry would be of much use on this crowded 
field. Since almost half the Lann were mounted, it 
seemed that Ralph had already put that many out of 
useful action. That was a cheering thought. 

And Carl needed cheering. The sight of that approaching line of fiercely scowling strangers brought a 
cold, shaking thrill along his nerves and muscles. His 
tongue was thick and dry, his eyes blurred, and something beat in his ears. In moments, now, battle would 
be joined, his first real battle, and that sun, lowering 
westward behind windy clouds, might never see him 
alive again. 

The Lann broke into a trot up the hill, keeping their 
lines as tight as before. A rapid metallic banging began 
within their square, a gong beating time for their 
steadily approaching feet, and pipes skirled to urge 
them on. The red flag of the north flapped on each 
corner of the formation, bloody against the restless 
gray heavens. Closer— closer— here they came! 

Carl fitted an arrow to the string from the full quiver 
before him. Tom and Owl stood on either side, their 
own bows strained, waiting for the signal. The Lann 
were close, terribly close. Carl could see a scar zigzagging across one square, bronzed face— gods, would 
the horn never blow? 

Hoo-oo-oo! 

At the signal, Carl let his arrow fly. The heavy long


Storm from the North 



85 



bow throbbed in his hand. Over the Dale ranks that 
storm of whistling, feathered death rose, suddenly 
darkening the sky— down on the Lann! Carl saw men 
topple in the square, clawing at the shafts in their 
bodies, and yanked another arrow forth. Fear was suddenly gone. He felt a vast, chill clearness. He saw tiny 
things with an unnatural sharp vision, and it was as if 
everything were slowed to a nightmare's dragging 
pace. He saw the wounded and slain Lann fall, saw 
their comrades behind them trample the bodies underfoot as they stepped into the front ranks— Zip, zip, zip, 
give it to them! 

"Yaaaah!" Tom was howling as he let fly, his fiery 
hair blown wild as the lifted banners. Owl fired 
machine-like, one arrow after the next. Carl had time 
for a brief wondering as to how he looked, and then 
the Lann struck. 

Swords and axes were aloft, banging against shields, 
a sudden clamor of outraged iron. Men yelled, roared, 
cursed as they struck, shields trembled under blows, 
pikes thrust out and daggers flashed. Carl saw the lines 
of Dalesmen reel back under the shock, planting feet 
in suddenly slippery ground, hammering at faces that 
rose out of whirling, racketing fury and were lost again 
in the press of armored bodies. He skipped backward, 
up the hill, seeking a vantage point from which to 
shoot. 

Ralph towered above the battle, smiting from Iris 
horse at helmeted heads, lifted arms, snarling faces. 
The animal reared, hoofs striking out, smashing and 
driving back. A spear thrust against the Chief. He 
caught it in his left hand, wrenched it loose, and 
clubbed out savagely while his sword danced on the 
other side. A Lann soldier rose yelling under the belly 



Vault of the Ages 



of his horse, and Ralph's spurred heel crashed into his 
face. Dropping the spear, the Dale chief lifted his horn 
and blew, long, defiant shrieks that raised answering 
shouts. 

Backed against a thicket, Carl looked over the confusion that boiled below him. The Dalesmen were 
holding— the Dalesmen stood firm— oh, thank all gods! 
A sob caught in his throat. He took aim at a mounted 
piper in the square, and his bow sang and the man 
staggered in the saddle with an arrow through his 
shoulder. Mostly Carl was firing blindly into the thick 
of a mass that swayed and trampled and roared all 
along the hill. 

A spear flew viciously close, plowing into the earth 
beside him. Arrows were dropping here and there, and 
stones were flying. The Lann had their own shooting 
men. Carl growled and planted his legs firm in the 
grass and shot. 

Thunder burst in his head, light flared against a 
sudden, reeling darkness. He toppled to hands and 
knees, shaking a head that rang and ached, fighting 
clear of the night. "Carl! Carl!" 

He looked up into Owl's anxious face and climbed 
unsteadily erect, leaning on the younger boy. "Not 
much," he mumbled. "Flung stone— my helmet took the 
blow—" His skull throbbed, but he stooped to pick up 
his weapons. 

Back and forth the struggle swayed, edged metal 
whistling against armor and flesh, deep-throated shouts 
and hoarse gasps and pain-crazed screams, the air 
grown thick with arrows and rocks. Ralph was not in 
sight— Carl's heart stumbled, then he glimpsed his 
father's tall form on foot, hewing about him. His horse 
must have been killed— 



Storm from the North 



87 



Horse! Where were the Lann horses? 

Carl grew chill as his eyes ranged past the fight, 
down the hill to the river. Only the empty tents and the 
empty trees to be seen. What were two thousand 
mounted devils doing? 

A scream of horns and voices gave him the answer. 
He looked right and left, and a groan ripped from him. 
They had come from the woods into which they had 
slipped. They were charging up the hill and from the 
side against the Dalesmen's cavalry. He felt the rising 
thunder of galloping hoofs, saw lances drop low and 
riders bend in the saddle, and he yelled as the enemy 
struck. 

The impact seemed to shiver in his own bones. 
Lances splintered against shields or went through living bodies. The inexperienced Dalesmen fell from the 
saddle, driven back against themselves in a sudden, 
wild whirlpool. . . . Swords out, flashing, whistling, 
hacking, rising red! 

The Dale foot soldiers had all they could do to stand 
off the unending Lann press. Meanwhile, their flanks 
were being driven in, crumpling, horses trampling their 
own people, warriors speared in the back by lances 
coming from the rear. Carl fumbled for an arrow, saw 
that he had used them all, and cursed as he drew his 
sword and slipped his left arm into the straps of his 
shield. 

The Lann gongs crashed and the Lann pipes 
screamed in triumph, urging their men on against a 
wedge that was suddenly breaking up in confusion. 
Carl saw one of the guards fall, saw Ralph leap into 
the vacant saddle, and dimly he heard his father's roar: 
"Stand fast! Stand fast!" 

It was too late, groaned the boy's mind. The Dales


88 Vault of the Ages 

men's host was broken at the wings, forced back 
against itself by Lann cavalry raging on the flanks and 
Lann footmen slipping through loosened lines. They 
were done, and now it was every man for himself. 

A couple of enemy horsemen saw the little knot of 
archers at the thicket, laid lances in rest, and charged. 
Carl saw them swelling huge, heard the ground quivering under hoofs, caught a horribly clear glimpse of a 
stallion's straining nostrils and the foam at its mouth 
and the rider's eyes and teeth white in a darkened, 
blood-streaked face. He acted without thought, hardly 
heard himself shouting. "Tom, Owl, get that horse— 
the legs—" 

His own sword dropped from his fingers. The lance 
head was aimed at his breast, he skipped aside, and it 
blazed past him. He sprang, clutching at the reins beyond as he had often done to stop runaways. The shock 
of his own weight slammed back against his muscles. 
He set his teeth and clung there, and the horse plunged 
to a halt. Tom's knife gleamed by Carl's feet, hamstringing. The horse screamed, and a dim corner of 
Carl's mind had time to pity this innocent victim of 
human madness. Then the Lann warrior was springing 
lithely from the stirrups, to meet Owl's spear thrust and 
fall in a rush of blood. The other horse was running 
riderless, its master sprawled in the grass with a Dale 
arrow in him. 

But the Dalesmen were encircled, trapped, fighting 
desperately in a tightening ring. Lann were among 
them, cutting, smiting, riding their foes down. Carl 
and his little band stood by the thicket looking at a 
scene of horror. 

Light was dimming— gods, was the sun down already? Or . . . had the struggle lasted this long? 



Storm from the North 



89 



"To me, Dalesmen! To me!" 

Ralph's deep shout lifted over the clatter and scream 
of battle. He and the remnants of his guards were 
gathered around the last Dale banner not fallen to the 
reddened ground, hewing, driving off the Lann who 
rushed against them. The Chief winded his horn even 
as he engaged an enemy horseman, and men lifted 
weary heads and began to fight a way over to him. 

"Come on!" snapped Carl. "All together! Stick close 
together! We've got to get there!" 

They moved away from the thicket in a tight-packed 
square, perhaps thirty young archers and slingers with 
swords out. A detachment of Lann foot soldiers came 
against them. Carl bent low, holding his shield before 
his body, peering over the top and thrusting. A man 
attacked, using his own shield to defend himself. Even 
in the deepening murk, Carl saw the golden ring in 
the man's nose. 

The northern sword clashed against his own steel. 
He thrust back, hammering at the shield and the helmet, stabbing for the face that grinned at him. He 
hardly felt the shock of blows on his own metal. Probe— 
side-swipe— catch his blade on your own, twist it away, 
straighten your arm and stab for the golden ringTrie man was gone as the fight shifted. Carl was 
battling someone else. That was war, a huge confusion 
where men fought strangers that came out of nowhere 
and were as mysteriously gone. Now there was a shout 
on his left; another small group of Dalesmen was joining theirs and the Lann melted away. 

Ralph's standard flew before them. They came up to 
him and entered the growing ring of warriors rallying 
about their Chief. The Lann yelped against that wall 
of flying steel, dogs attacking a herd of wild bulls. And 



90 



Vault of the Ages 



more Dalesmen made their way over to Ralph, and 
then more. 

The darkness had grown thick. Carl could hardly see 
the men he fought except as shadows and a gleam of 
wet metal. His breath was harsh and heavy in dry 
throat and laboring breast. 

Ralph's voice seemed to come from very far away: 
"All right— now we cut our way free!" 

He rode out of the ring, laying about him from the 
saddle, and his men stumbled after him. They were 
drawn close together by instinct and the press of the 
foe, but in the raging gloom there was little need of 
skill. You struck and took blows yourself and threw 
your own weight into the mass that jammed against 
buckling enemy lines. 

Ralph and a few guards rode up and down the 
tattered Dale ranks, smiting at the foe, shouting thenown men on, holding together and leading them into 
the woods. When the trees closed about that great 
weary retreat, men stumbled and groped a way forward in the utter darkness. For an instant, wild panic 
beat in Carl. He wanted to run away, run and run and 
run forever from this place of slaughter, but he heard 
his father's voice, and a tired steadiness came. He 
thought dully that without Ralph, there would 
simply have been a stampede, even if the Dalesmen 
had somehow managed to escape that trap; the Lann 
could have hunted them down as hounds hunt down a 
stag. But the Chief had saved them. He had held his 
beaten army together and— 

Now the fighting had ceased. They fumbled a slow 
way through brush and trees, down the hill into darkness, but still no Lann confronted them. 

Carl knew that the night had saved them. In this 



Storm from the North 91 

thick gloom, with trees and bushes everywhere to 
hinder movement, the Dalesmen could have stood off 
whatever came against them and somehow cut a way 
to safety. The Lann Chief must have realized this and 
drawn back. They were free. 

Free and alive! Carl drew a shuddering breath of the 
damp night air and a slow feeling of wonder grew in 
him. He could still move. Blood still ran in his veins. 
A pattern of shadows and vague light still covered his 
eyes. He lived, he lived, and it was a heady thing to 
know. 

Weariness and despair came back in a rush. The 
Dalesmen had escaped with the bulk of their army, yes. 
But it was a beaten force, streaming home before a 
victorious enemy, tired and hurt and hopeless. They 
could not make a stand again. And now the unconquerable Lann would be spilling all over the Dales, 
with nothing to stop them. 

Ralph's voice drifted above the rustle of brush and 
dragging of feet and hoarse gasping breath of men. A 
roll of names. He was calling the roll of his guardsmen. 

"Ezzef" — "Here." - "Toom" — "Here." — "Rodge" "Still alive, Chief." — "Jonathan" — Silence. "Jonathan!" 
— Silence. 

"Where are Torsen and Piggy?" 

"Both killed. I saw Piggy go down myself." 

Alarm shivered in Ralph's call. The forest muffled his 
voice. It sounded strangely dead. "But they were 
guarding Lenard!" 

"The Lann must've got him back then." 

"Lenard— free again!" 



Ckdptet 7 The Brofcen Ban 



Morning came, chill and gray and hopeless. Men 
looked wearily about with eyes from which the 
nightmare of stumbling through dark forest and 
hills was only slowly lifting. 
The army straggled across the rough Scarpian landscape, men walking in small disordered groups. 
Thickets and ravines hid many from Carl's eyes, but 
he was sure that the bulk of Ralph's warriors had 
escaped. 

Only a few were very badly wounded, for the retreating Dalesmen had found no chance to rescue comrades 
in such plight. But all of them were slashed and battered, stiff with dried blood, clothes hanging ragged 
and dew-wet on exhausted bodies. Not many horses 
had been saved, and the most hurt rode these. Even 
Ralph was afoot now, carrying his own torn flag. 

Carl's body was one vast, numb ache. His head felt 

92 



Tile Broken Ban 



93 



hollow with tiredness, and he staggered a little as he 
walked. Only now was he becoming really aware of his 
wounds, a gash across one thigh which Tom had 
crudely bandaged, a throbbing lump on his head, 
bruises turning blue and yellow along his arms and 
breast Swords and forest thorns had ripped his clothes, 
the blade at his waist was nicked and blunted with use, 
the bow was gone and the corselet was heavy on his 
shoulders. 

Owl grinned painfully at his side. One eye was black 
and swollen, and he seemed to be short a tooth. "So 
this," he said, "is the excitement and glory of war! I'll 
never believe a ballad singer again." 

"At least," said Tom slowly, "we're all alive— You 
and Father and Carl here. Give thanks for small blessings." 

Carl thought of those who were dead. He hadn't had 
time yet to search for all his friends, but he knew that 
many were gone. Dick, the wild and gay, fat, stanch 
Bucko, soft-voiced Ansy— he'd never see them again in 
this world. They were sprawled on the red riverbank 
where the enemy went hallooing past their sightless 
eyes, and the sun shone and the wind whispered in long 
grasses and their kinfolk waited weeping, but they 
didn't know it. 

Dead— dead and defeated. 

Ralph was striding toward the brow of a tall hill. He 
walked stiffly, limping and leaning on his flagstaff, his 
face a mask of dried blood under the battered helmet, 
but the wide shoulders were unbowed and morning 
light struck gold from his hair. When he reached the 
top, he planted the banner and blew his horn. 

Though the cry was feeble, lost in the ringing, echoing reach of hills, the Dalesmen hearkened, and 



94 



Vauli of the Ages 



slowly, slowly, they gathered beneath him until their 
stooped forms hid the dew-glimmering earth. When 
they were all there, they sat and waited. Ralph's chiefs, 
such as lived, joined him, and Carl slipped up to stand 
by his father. But weariness was too heavy on him, and 
he sat instead, drawing his knees up under his chin 
and looking forth over the tired, beaten faces of the 
tribesmen. 

Ralph spoke, filling his lungs so that most of the 
army could hear and pass the word along: "We haven't 
been pursued yet, and I think the Lann would have 
caught up to us by now if they cared to. So most likely 
they're letting us go, not thinking us worth the trouble 
of another fight." 

"We aren't," said a man, grinning without humor. 

"They'll learn otherwise!" Ralph folded his arms and 
looked defiantly around. "We've lost a battle, yes, but 
we haven't lost the war. Not if we stick together and 
fight on." 

"We're done for, Chief, and you know it." Another 
man stood up near the crest of the hill, a gray-haired 
farmer with a sullen anger in his eyes. "Best we scatter, 
go to our homes, and flee south while we can." 

A low mumble went through the close-packed warriors, heads nodded and hands dropped slackly to the 
grass. 

Ralph lifted his voice to a shout: "That's coward's 
advice, Bilken, and I'd not have looked for that from 
you." 

"I lost one son at that battle," answered the fanner. 
"Why should I lose the rest-for nothing?" 

"But it's not for nothing!" cried Ralph. "It's for our 
homes and wives and children, for freedom, for our 
very lives. Where can we go as the trickling remnants 



The Broken Ban 



95 



of a broken people? Who will receive us? What will we 
do when the Lann swallow the next tribe, and the next, 
and the one after that? Become their slaves? Cut their 
wood and draw their water and clean their barns? 
Kneel in the mud when a horseman goes by? Was it for 
this that our fathers cleared the woods and plowed the 
land and fought the savages? Has their blood turned 
to water in our veins?" 

"We can't fight," croaked Bilken. "We've nothing to 
fight with." 

"Yes, we have. We have other weapons. We have 
other horses. One night's rest will give us new strength. 
We have Dalestown, whose walls have never been 
stormed. We have our bare hands, if need be!" Ralph 
shook the banner, and its golden field uncurled in the 
dawn breeze. "Are we still the Dalesmen or are we field 
mice running before a scythe? By all the gods, I'll fight 
alone if I must!" 

"They'll coop us up inside the walls while they burn 
our homes," cried a voice. 

"Nonsense! They won't burn that which they themselves want to take over. And even if they do, what of 
it? Your homes are lost anyway if you flee. But if we 
win, there is always more wood and stone for building. 
There's always the land." 

Ralph waved an arm at the hills and trees that 
stretched to a far blue horizon. "There's always the 
land," he repeated. "Without it, we are nothing— 
woods-runners, beggars, homeless and hopeless tramps. 
These are the Dales, and while we hold them we are 
strong and rich and happy. While we fight for our 
earth, it will give us of its strength. Dalesmen, free men, 
will you give away your birthright?" 

It struck home. Carl saw a new light in dulled eyes, 



96 



Vault of the Ages 



saw fingers close on the hafts of weapons and men rise 
to their feet. A ragged cheer lifted slowly, pulsing out 
like the golden flag that waved overhead. The farmer 
Bilken nodded grudgingly and sat down. When it came 
to a vote, there were few who said "No." 

Truly Ralph was a leader of men! 

But Carl saw that this hope was hollow. What, indeed, could be done against a foe who had already 
smashed their finest power, a foe who must even now 
be spilling out across the wide land and bringing terror 
where he went? The Dalesmen could retreat inside 
their walls, perhaps, but then what could they do? 
Wait for starvation, or sally forth to die? 

He shook his head, feeling weariness overwhelm 
him. But even then a resolution was gathering in his 
mind. 

The army rested most of that day. Ralph commandeered horses from the nearest farm and sent men 
galloping out. One would bear word of ruin back to 
Dalestown, one or two would try to spy on the enemy 
movements, the rest would pass a message to the 
scattered homesteads of the tribe and let them carry it 
farther: retreat to town, we are beaten and must draw 
into our shell. 

But many a lonely farm, thought Carl, would already 
have received that word from the fire and sword of the 
Lann. 

He spoke to his father a little, as they sprawled in 
the grass waiting for a sleep which would not come: 
"What do you hope to do? Do you really believe we can 
fetch victory, even now?" 

"I don't know," said Ralph dully. "It may be that we 
can, somehow, by some miracle. Or it may be that we 



The Broken Ban 



97 



will give the Lann so much trouble that they'll be willing to bargain and take less than everything. That 
would at least give us a breathing space. Or it may well 
be that we will go down to utter defeat. But even 
then—" He looked sternly up. "Even then, Carl, we'll 
have fought like Dalesmen!" 

The boy made no answer. Privately, he wondered if 
there was not something blind in this courage. To go 
down fighting— well, it left a brave memory, but if it 
gained nothing except the slaughter of many men, it 
seemed useless. The best leader was one who gained 
victory with as little bloodshed as could be. Yes, as little 
on both sides as possible. 

In the afternoon, Ralph summoned his men, and they 
started the weary trek homeward. There would be little 
food under way, for the supply wagons were lost and 
the farms on the route could not help so many. The 
Chief had foragers ranging widely, who would bring 
in as much as they could, but even so it would be a 
cold and hungry march. He drove his followers unmercifully, forcing stiff bodies to a cruelly fast pace and 
taking curses without reply. They had to get inside the 
walls as fast as could be managed, for, if the Lann fell 
on a host weakened with emptiness, it could be 
butchery. 

Carl walked beside Tom and Owl as before. He had 
become very close to these brothers since they followed him to the City. The days had been so full that 
it seemed they had known each other for many years. 
Tom's quiet thoughtfulness, Owl's unfailing good humor—he needed them, and they in turn looked to him 
as a leader. It was good to have friends. 

He spoke to them now, as the slow miles dragged by: 
"You know we haven't much chance. We can't say so 



98 



Vauti of the Ages 



out loud, for everyone's too downhearted already, but 
it's true." 

"Well," shrugged Owl, "it might be fun being a 
landless gypsy." 

"That's not so!" flared Tom. "It's right what the Chief 
said. Without the land, we are nothing." 

"Um-m-m-yes-can't say I fancy sleeping in the 
open all my life, and working for someone else to earn 
bitter bread. But what can we do about this?" 

Carl said softly: "We can return to the City." 

"What?" They stared at him, open-mouthed. 

"Not so loud!" Carl glanced nervously about him. 
The nearest group of men was several yards off, and 
they trudged unnoticing ahead, faces blank with 
weariness. But the Doctors— you never knew when a 
Doctor might be somewhere, listening. 

He went on, rapidly: "You know the powers of the 
ancients are locked in the time vault. You know Ronwy 
is our friend and will help us, and that he has some 
understanding of the old— science. If we can sneak 
away from this army tonight and make our way to the 
City, we can carry back the lightning to drive off our 
enemies!" Carl's eyes burned with a feverish eagerness. 
"We can— learn." 

"Taboo!" whispered Tom. "The gods—" 

"If the gods really cared about that taboo, they'd 
have knocked us over the first time we broke it. They'd 
never have let the witch-men live in the ruins." 

"But the witch-men have magic powers—" stuttered 
Owl. 

"Bah!" Carl felt strength rising in him even as he 
spoke. "You saw those witches yourself. You know 
they're just frightened outcasts, trading on our fears. 
I—" He tumbled the words out before he should have 



The Broken Ban 



99 



time to be afraid. "I wonder if there are any gods at all 
—if they aren't just another story." 

Tom and Owl shrank from him. But no lightning 
struck. 

"Someone must have made the world," said Tom at 
last, his voice trembling. 

"Yes, yes. The great God that the time vault spoke of 
—that I could believe in. But the other gods— well, if 
they exist, they're not very big or very smart. Why, in 
all the stories, they do things no child would care to 
do." Carl dropped the subject. "That doesn't matter 
now, though. It's just that I'd rather listen to Ronwy, 
who's spent his life among the ancient works, than to 
Donn, who's never been inside the taboo circle. And 
Ronwy says there's nothing to fear and much to gain." 

"But it's Donn who'll have you put to death," said 
Owl. 

Carl grinned. "When I come back with Atmik's 
Power in my hand? I'd like to see him try!" 

Tom shook his red head. "It's a big thing you want 
to do. And we're young yet." 

"This won't wait till we grow up; meanwhile, there's 
no one else to do the job. I tell you, boys, that vault has 
got to be opened, opened to the Dales— no, by Atmik, 
to all the world!" Carl's voice dropped. "What have we 
to lose? Sure, it's a slim chance, but you know that 
there's no other chance at all. I'm going there. Do you 
want to come along?" 

"If I had any sense," said Owl, "I'd report this to 
your father, and he'd tie you up till this madness is 
past," 

Carl's heart grew leaden. 

"But since I'm not very sensible," smiled Owl, "why, 
I'll just have to tag along after you." 



100 



Vault of the Ages 



"Good lad!" Carl slapped his back, and Owl winced. 

Tom shook his head. "You're crazy, both of you," he 
said. Then, with sudden firmness: "But just so nobody 
can say I hung back from a dangerous mission, count 
me in." 

Yes— it was good to have friends! 

The army marched on past sunset, through the long 
summer twilight and on under starlight and a thin 
sickle of moon. It was long after dark when Ralph 
called a halt. 

Even then there was much to do. The men had to be 
disposed on the sides of a hill where they could make 
a stand in case of attack. Sentries had to be posted and 
scouts assigned to ride around the area. Foragers 
trickled in with whatever they had been able to beg or 
steal, and a cooking fire blazed low under a shielding 
rock. Here they had good fortune: on a near-by farm, 
deserted by its owners, two cows were found and led 
to the camp for butchering. Each man had only a taste, 
though many were so tired that they went directly to 
sleep without waiting for their ration. 

Carl himself dozed off where he lay under a tree. 
When he awoke, it was near midnight and the Dalesmen slept around him. Wherever he looked, dark 
forms sprawled on the ground and a low muttering of 
sleep lifted to the glittering stars. The fire's last coals 
were a dull-red eye against the massive darkness of 
the hill. 

He got up, stretching stiff sinews. He was cold and 
wet and hungry. His wounds ached and his skin was 
sticky with sweat and dirt. But the rising excitement 
thudded in veins and nerves, driving out such aware


The Broken Ban 



101 



ness even while it sharpened his senses. Gently, he 
shook Tom and Owl awake where they lay beside him. 

"We ll have to swipe horses," he breathed. "They're 
hobbled over there. Easy now, 'ware the sentries." 

Slowly, patiently, the three crawled on their bellies 
toward the shadowy forms of animals. They had to 
cross a guardsman's beat. Carl lay in tall wet grass, 
hearing the sigh of wind and the distant creaking song 
of crickets. Looking upward, he saw the man go past, 
a dim sheen of metal against the Milky Way. Snakelike, he writhed over the line. 

Metal chinked on stone. "Who goes there?" shouted 
the watcher. 

The boys lay stiff, hardly breathing, trying to still 
even the clamor of their hearts. 

After a moment, the warrior decided that it had been 
nothing and trudged on his way. Carl slid over to the 
nearest horse. He could hear it cropping grass, and it 
tried to move away as he approached. 

"Steady," he whispered. "So, so, boy, easy." He rose 
beside the animal and stroked its neck. If only it 
wouldn't whinny! 

Gently he bridled it, using a length of rope to make 
a hackamore. This would have to be bareback too. But 
it wasn't far to the City, perhaps a day and a half 
through woods. Once they got away, the boys would 
hardly be trailed; three missing horses at daybreak 
would be set down to thieves, and in the disordered 
mass of the army, it might well be evening before Carl 
himself and his followers were missed. 

The others joined him, leading their mounts from 
the sleeping camp. When they were well away, they 
sprang to the horses' backs and rode westward. 



Chapter 10 Vengeance of the Gods 



I he City brooded under a hot, cloudless heaven, without sign of life. But the notion shuddered in Carl that 
it was a waiting stillness, and he fought to drive the 
superstition from his mind. 

"There she is," said Owl. He sat his horse in the 
shade of a tree, whose leaves hung unstirring in the 
breathless quiet, and looked past the wrecked outer 
buildings to the desolated splendor of the towers. 
"And now what do we do?" 

Carl wiped the sweat from his face. "We go to the 
time vault," he replied as steadily as possible. 

"The witch-men won't be happy about that," warned 
Tom. 

"Then they'll have to be unhappy," snapped Carl. 
"We've got their Chief on our side, at least." 

Stones rattled as they rode down an empty street. 
Once a lithe form went bounding across their path, a 
102 



Vengeance of the Gods 



103 



weasel, and once there was a flock of crows which flew 
blackly overhead, otherwise nothing but the stillness 
of dead centuries. In spite of the summer heat, Carl 
felt a chill tingle. It was hard to keep calm reason when 
violating the home of the gods. He remembered a saying of Donn's : "When the gods are angered, their revenge is not always swift death. They often choose the 
more cruel punishment of unending bad luck." 

But that was wrong, Carl reminded himself. If the 
idols of the Dalesmen were no more than wood and 
stone, then only the great God of the ancients could 
really be alive— and he would be more just than the 
powers of earth and air and fire. 

"Down this street," he pointed. "We needn't enter 
the section where the witches live. The important thing 
is to hold the time vault." 

Tom nodded. "That's right. Three of us, between 
those two high walls leading to it, could stand off an 
army— for a while." 

It was easy to get lost here, winding between endless 
heaps of brick and overgrown foundations. Several 
times Carl had to find a long avenue at whose end he 
could see the great towers. His woodsman's eye had 
noted their relation to the vault when he was last there, 
and— 

"Up ahead!" 

Carl reined in at Owl's shout, and his sword rasped 
from its sheath. A dozen witch-men stood with bows 
and spears in front of the horse-skull sign. They were 
small and scrawny and unarmored, but there was a 
terrible grimness on their faces. 

A noise behind made Carl look around, and he saw 
another party of the City dwellers coming from around 
a corner. The boys were in the middle of a street be


104 



Vault of the Ages 



tween the roofless, clifflike walls of two giant buildings 
—trapped! Trapped and taken! 

"Let's get away," muttered Owl. "If we charge those 
fellows on horseback— their line'll break—" 

"Do not move!" The voice was shrill. Carl, who had 
heard that panicky note in other cries, knew that the 
speaker was made dangerous by fear. He would kill at 
the first sign of fight. And there were many drawn bows 
and poised spears— 

Slowly, with vast care, the boy clashed his sword 
back into the scabbard. "We come in peace," he said. 
"Where is Ronwy?" 

"The Chief is on his way." The man who spoke was 
sullen, his eyes smoldered on them behind the arrow 
he held leveled on Carl's heart. "You will wait." 

"Is this how you treat your guests?" asked Owl. 

"You are not guests. You are prisoners. Dismount!" 

The boys climbed to the ground and stood glaring 
at the witch-men. But there was nothing to do, nothing 
at all. 

Someone was pounding a drum, and the muffled 
thunder echoed from wall to staring wall. Presently an 
answer came, beating from far away. The dwellers 
were summoning others. Carl found a shady spot and 
sat down. Owl joined him, grinning maliciously. "It'll 
get mighty tiring to stand holding a drawn bow," he 
remarked. 

"Be quiet!" snapped the leader. 

Presently Ronwy came, with a troop of armed witchmen after him. The tall old Chief pushed through the 
lines of his people and hurried to take Carl's hands in 
his own. "What have you done?" he cried. "What have 
you done?" 

"Nothing, yet," said Carl. "We simply rode in, which 



Vengeance of the Gods 105 

is against Dale but not City law, and suddenly we were 
captured." 

There were tears running along Ronwy's furrowed 
cheeks. "The men were afraid you'd come prowling 
back," he said. "They planted guards near the vault to 
ambush anyone that came. I couldn't stop it." 

"If you were a proper Chief," said the patrol leader, 
"you wouldn't have wanted to stop it." 

"Be still!" shouted Ronwy. "I am Chief of the City 
even now. These boys go with me." 

"They do not," replied the leader coldly. "They're 
our prisoners, and I say kill them before they work 
further mischief." 

"And bring the wrath of the Dalesmen down on us?" 

The leader's laugh was a harsh bark. "What would 
the Dalesmen have to say? These young snoops have 
broken tribal taboo, as you well know. In any case, it 
isn't the Dalesmen who matter any longer, it's the 
Lann, and they'll be pleased to get the heads of these 
fellows." 

"Why are you doing this?" asked Carl. "What have 
we done to hurt you?" 

"You came to enter the vault of devils," snarled the 
leader. "Don't deny that. You headed straight for it. 
You'd bring down the wrath of the gods on us by your 
meddling— to say nothing of the Lann. Only your 
deaths will lift the curse." 

A mumble of agreement came from the ragged, sooty 
figures that hemmed in the captives. 

Ronwy stepped forth, tall and lean and angry. His 
old voice rolled out with a new power: "If you kill these 
lads, you'll have worse than that to face!" he shouted. 
I'm still the Chief of the City. I still have loyal followers. Furthermore, I'm the greatest witch in this 



106 Vault of the Ages 

tribe. The powers of the Doom are in me. I'll curse you 
with plague and ruin and the glowing death." 

That brought them shuddering back. But some shook 
their fists and cried that the gods would protect the 
pious and that Ronwy's sorceries were taboo. For a 
moment it looked as if that milling throng would begin 
to fight itself— knives were coming out, spears were 
lowered. Carl's hand stole to the haft of his sword. 
There might be a chance to cut a way out of such a 
riot and escape. 

Ronwy and his rival strode among the men, yelling 
orders and cuffing heads, and a slow calm grumbled 
back into the tribe. Argument went hotly on, while the 
boys listened in the dark knowledge that their own 
lives hung on the outcome. But even in that desperate 
moment, Carl had to admire Ronwy. The old Chief had 
little power under the law, and few who would back 
him up, but his tongue was swift and subtle. He fought 
with words like a skilled swordsman with flickering 
blade, and, in the end, he won a compromise. The 
prisoners would be held for a while, unharmed, until 
their fate could be decided; and in no case would they 
be executed until word had been received whether 
Ralph— or the Lann— cared to ransom them. 

"I'm sorry I couldn't do more for you," whispered 
Ronwy. "But I'll keep trying." 

Carl managed to squeeze the old man's trembling 
hand. "You did splendidly, sir," he answered softly. 

Disarmed, the boys were marched to the area of 
towers. A small ground-floor room in one had been 
turned into the City jail: a few straw ticks on the floor, 
a jug of water, a basin, and a door of heavy wooden 
bars. They were shoved inside. A lock snapped shut as 



Vengeance of thtt Gods 107 

the door thudded closed, and a spearman sat down 
under a tree to watch them. 

"Well," said Owl after a long silence, "we found a 
vault of sorts." 

Tom looked grimly out through the bars. "Helpless!" 
he said between his clenched teeth. "Like animals in 
a cage— helpless!" 

Day dragged into night. Once the door was opened, 
and a silent woman gave them some bowls of food. The 
life of the City went by in the street, folk on thenvarious errands; many spat in the direction of the jail. 
With darkness there came silence, and presently the 
captives slept. 

They woke with dawn and sat staring at each other. 
Finally Carl spoke, awkwardly, "I'm sorry I got you 
into this." 

"It's all right," said Tom. "We didn't have to come 
along." 

"What will we do?" asked Owl. 
"Nothing," said Tom. 

The morning waxed. They were given breakfast and 
then left alone. The guard was changed, another man 
sat yawning outside the prison. A terrible bitterness 
grew in Carl, and he vowed that never again, if he 
lived, would he keep an animal behind bars. 

Late in the morning the boys heard shouts far away. 
They crowded to the door and strained against it, staring out at blank walls across the street. The guard rose, 
hefting his spear and peering warily about him. 

"Rescue?" cried Owl hopefully. 

"I doubt it," said Tom. "I don't think the gods are 
done with punishing us." 



108 



Vault of the Ages 



A scream rang out somewhere, and the sound of 
trampling hoofs, and a man's laugh like wild dogs baying. Carl stiffened in a sudden terror. He knew that 
laughter. 

Hoo-oo-oo! 

A horn was blowing, and now the rattle of iron swept 
near. Three women ran down the street, clutching children to them, screaming. The guard outside the jail 
ran from sight toward the noise of battle. 

"Someone's fighting their way into the City!" yelled 
Tom. 

Carl gripped himself, biting back fear. His knuckles 
were white where he clutched the bars of the jail. He 
tried to shake them— useless, useless. He was locked in 
here and there was nothing he could do. 

"Hold fast! Drive them back!" 

It was the voice of the patrol leader who had wanted 
to kill him, and Carl had to admit the man was brave. 
Swords were banging, a horse neighed, a man 
screamed. 

Backing down the street came a thin line of witchmen. They bore weapons in shaking hands, and many 
were bleeding from wounds. Even as Carl watched, a 
bow thrummed and a City dweller toppled with an 
arrow in him, coughing and clawing. 

"All right, men— ride 'em down!" 

Lenard! 

The horsemen of Lann came like a whirlwind, lances 
at rest, swords flashing free, plumes and mantles 
streaming in their thunderous passage. They struck the 
witch-line with a roar, and it broke before them. 

Hewing, hewing, the Lann rode through that boiling 
tide of men. The City folk turned to run. A mounted 



Vengeance of the Gods 



109 



warrior galloped after them, laughing aloud. The battle 
swept on out of sight. 
"Lenard," groaned Carl. 

The noise of fighting grew more distant. There 
could be only one end to that struggle, even if the Lann 
were outnumbered. The unwarlike City men could not 
stand before the determined, ruthless onslaught of 
trained warriors. 

"But this is taboo for them," gasped Tom. 

"Not any longer, it seems." Owl skinned his teeth in 
a mirthless grin. "They'll simply chase the witches into 
the forest. And then what do we do, Carl?" 

"I don't know," said the Chief's son dully. "I just 
don't know." 

They paced the cell, waiting. Shadows crawled over 
the street. A crow settled on one of the sprawled bodies, but flapped heavily skyward when a wounded man 
groaned and stirred. 

It seemed ages before hoofs were again ringing in 
the stillness. The Lann troops rode into sight and drew 
rein. There were only a score or so, but it had been 
enough. 

Lenard edged his horse over to the prison. "So here 
you are," he said. "Hello, Carl." 

He was in full battle dress, corselet and boots and 
spiked helmet, and a red cloak swinging from his 
shoulders and a tunic of rich blue Dale weave covering 
his lean, muscular body. The dark face split in a wolfgrin. "Bulak, Janzy, get that door open," he ordered. 

Two men dismounted and attacked the lock with 
their battle-axes. It shivered apart and the door creaked 
wide. "Come on out," said Lenard. 

The boys stumbled forth, blinking in the sunlight. 



no 



Vault of the Ages 



Lance heads came down to point ominously at their 
breasts. Looking around, Carl saw that one elderly man 
in a red robe was with the troop, and that Ronwy stood 
by Lenard's bridle. 
"Ronwy!" choked Carl. 

"I couldn't leave," said the old Chief. "They drove 
my people into the woods, but I couldn't leave our 
City." 

"I wouldn't 've let you, anyway," interrupted Lenard. "According to Carl's story, you're the one who 
knows how to make those things in the time vault 
work." 

"The time vault!" Carl looked with horror at the 
Lann prince. 

The long, lean head nodded. "Certainly. If the powers 
of the Doom would work for you, I don't see why they 
shouldn't work for us." With a savage gleam of eyes: 
"We'll be lords of the world if that's right!" 

"This place is taboo," bluffed Ronwy desperately. 
"The gods will be angry with you." 

"As a matter of fact," said Lenard, "the Lann— at 
least, that tribe of the confederation to which I belong 
—have no taboos on ancient works. Many are frightened of them, but they aren't actually forbidden. I 
suppose," he added thoughtfully, "that it's because in 
our home territory we have nothing to forbid. There 
are none of the old Cities left, only great cratered ruins. 
So I gathered these bold men here, who'd follow me to 
storm Sky-Home itself, and with my father's agreement 
we came to ransack that vault. I took along a Doctor, 
Kuthay there—" he gestured at the man in the red 
robe— "to take off any evil spells we might find." His 
contemptuous smile showed that it had only been to 
quiet any fears his men might have, and that he him


Vengeance of the Gods 111 

self had no belief in ancient curses. The grin flashed on 
his new captives. "But I didn't expect to find you here 
too. Welcome, boys, welcome!" 

"I don't know anything really," quavered Ronwy. "I 
can't make any of those machines work." 

"You'd better learn in a hurry, then," said Lenard 
grimly. "Because if you don't show me some results, 
all four of you will be killed. Now— off to the time 
vault— march!" 



Ck(iptCt // The Gods Are Angry 



I he mounted men reined in before the horse's skull 
and sat staring between the walls at the high gray 
cube within. An uneasy mutter went from mouth to 
bearded mouth, eyes flickered in hard, sun-darkened 
faces, and hands touched lucky charms. The horses 
seemed to know the uncertain fear stirring in their 
masters and stamped restless feet. Plainly the Lann 
were afraid of the old magic, in spite of Lenard's proud 
words. 

"We're going in," said the northern prince. His voice 
was oddly flat in the brooding, flimmering silence. 

"These places are cursed," mumbled a warrior. 

"We've the power of our own gods with us," snapped 
Lenard. 

"Our gods are far away in the north," answered the 
man. 

"Say not so." The old Lann Doctor, Kuthay, took a 
112 



The Gods Are Angry 113 

small iron box from his robe, and the men bent their 
heads to it. "I have with me the House of Jenzik, and 
the god himself is in it." 

He lifted his hands and broke into a chant. Its highpitched singsong shivered dully back from the ancient 
ruins. Carl listened closely, but could make out only a 
few words; it must be in the old language itself, which 
had changed greatly since the Doom. When he was 
through, Kuthay put the box carefully back inside his 
red garments and said matter-of-factly, "Now we're 
guarded against whatever spells may be here. Come." 

"Wait outside," Lenard ordered his men. "Bulak and 
Toom— " he nodded to two scarred warriors who had 
shown no fear— "come with us, the rest mount guard. 
We won't be in there past sundown." 

He swung to the ground. "Lead us in, Ronwy," he 
said. 

Slowly, trembling a little, the old chief began picking his way through the thomy brush and between the 
heaps of brick and glass. Lenard followed with Kuthay, 
then the boys; Bulak and Toom, with weapons in hand, 
came last. 

There was a rustle and a rattle and a blur of movement. Lenard swore as the rattlesnake struck. Its fangs 
sank harmlessly into the thick sole of his boot, and he 
crushed it with the other foot. 

"Are you sure the curse is gone?" asked Carl with 
grim amusement. 

The two warriors were shaken, and old Kuthay had 
gone white. But Lenard's answer barked angrily forth: 
"A snake can be anywhere. And this one did no harm, 
did it? If that's the best the guardians of the vault can 
do, we're safe." 

As they came to the entrance, he pointed to the in


114 



Vault of the Ages 



scription above it. "What does that say?" he asked. Carl 
remembered what travelers had long told, that none of 
the northerners could read. 

"Time vault," said Ronwy. He turned solemn eyes 
on his captors. "It is time itself, and all the ghosts and 
powers of a past that is not dead, only sleeping, which 
are locked in here. Enter at your peril." 

"Bluff!" snorted Lenard. 

The door creaked open under Ronwy s touch. Darkness gaped below. "Go ahead," ordered the prince. "If 
there are deathtraps inside, they'll get you first." 

They fumbled a way down the stairs into the cool 
night of the cellar. Ronwy felt his way to the table 
where he had candles and gave one to Lenard. The 
Lann prince struck fire with flint and steel to light it, 
and a yellow glow spilled forth over the dusty cases and 
machines. Lenard's breath sucked in between his teeth 
and something of the holy fire of wisdom-hunger grew 
in his eyes as he stared about him. "So this is the vault," 
he whispered. 

He lit other candles until the shadows retreated to 
the corners and waited huge and threatening. Bulak 
and Toom posted themselves at the foot of the stairs, 
looking about with awe-struck vision. Kuthay's lips 
moved in a voiceless chant. Lenard prowled about 
among the racks, touching a model here and a book 
there with fingers that trembled ever so faintly. Carl 
went over to the bronze plaque and read its appeal 
again. Tears blurred his eyes. 

"What is this?" Lenard touched a thing of metal 
plates and levers. "An instrument of torture?" 

"It is a printing press," said Ronwy tonelessly. "They 
used it to make books, so that all could learn what was 
known." 



The Gods Are Angry 



115 



"Bah!" Light and shadow slid across Lenard's savage 
face, etching it against the shuddering gloom. "What 
can we use for war?" 

"There were no weapons here," said Ronwy. "It was 
war that destroyed the ancients, and the man who 
created the vault did not want to raise that devil again." 

"I think you're lying." Lenard slitted his eyes. "Carl! 
Where are the weapons?" 

"I don't know of any," said the boy. "Ronwy tells the 
truth." 

"If I put your hands into this— printing press— and 
crushed them, you might remember." 

"What good would that do you?" Ronwy straightened, strangely majestic. "You can't wring facts from us 
that we don't have." 

"There must be something here that can be used in 
battle," snapped Lenard. "Otherwise Carl wouldn't 
have had the idea." 

"There is— wisdom, knowledge, yes," said Ronwy. 
He stroked his white beard. "There are no tools of war 
here, but there are the means of making some." 

"What? What can you do?" 

The old man went over to a set of shelves where 
dusty bottles were racked, one beside the other. On his 
last visit, Carl had not been able to read the legends 
engraved on the glass. They had been letters and numbers forming no words, and he had thought they were 
magical signs. Ronwy had told him that they were 
merely symbols for various substances, and that certain old books— chemistry texts, he called them— had 
explained these and had told what the substances in 
combination would do. 

"I can make certain things," said the witch-chief, so 
quietly that his voice was almost lost in the heavy 



116 



Vault of the Ages 



gloom. "For example, from what is in these flasks I can 
brew a magic potion which men can eat. Thereafter 
they are invulnerable. No metal can pierce their skins, 
no stone or club can bruise them, no poison can hurt 
them. Will that be enough?" 

Carl's body jerked, and a wave of sickness swept 
through him. Had Ronwy turned traitor? Was he really 
going to aid these robbers? 

Lenard's eyes flamed. "Yes, that will do— for a beginning!" he said. His voice rang forth, triumphant: 
"An army which cannot be hurt— oh, yes, that will do!" 

Even Bulak and Toom started forth, with greed in 
their faces. 

"One moment," said Kuthay shrewdly. "If this is so, 
why have you not made the City-folk, or yourself at 
least, invulnerable?" 

Ronwy smiled wearily. "This place and its magic is 
taboo for us," he answered. "My people would have 
nothing to do with it, and if I used it on myself they 
would cast me out. Furthermore, the thing is dangerous. There will be devils raised which may break loose, 
and it angers the gods when men thus take divine 
powers." 

Bulak and Toom shrank back toward the stairs. 

"Go ahead," said Lenard coldly. "I'll risk the devils 
and the gods." 

"I need someone to help," said Ronwy. "Carl, will 
you?" 

"No," said the boy. "No, you turncoat." 

"Go ahead and help him," ordered Lenard. "You 
know a little more than any of the rest of us about this." 
He laid a hand on the hilt of his sword. "Or must I have 
you— no, not you, but your friends— put to torture?" 

Sullenly, Carl went over to the witch-chief. Lenard 



The Gods Are Angry 1 1 7 

and Kuthay joined their men at the door, beckoning 
Tom and Owl over to them. 

Ronwy's old hand shook a little as he took down one 
of the bottles. This one had words on it, besides the 
chemical symbols, but Carl could not understand them: 
GUNPOWDER (BLACK). Then he remembered that 
"guns" were the lightning throwers of legend, and despite himself he shivered. 

"This is all the vault has," sighed Ronwy. "But we'll 
have to use it all. Carl, find me a bowl." 

The boy searched through a stack of apparatus until 
he found a large one. As he brought it back, Ronwy's 
lips touched his ear and the chief whispered: "I'm trying to trick them." 

A surging gladness went through Carl. He held his 
face tight, not daring to look toward the Lann who 
stood watching. 

Ronwy opened the bottle and spilled the black 
grains into the bowl. Again he had a chance to murmur. 
"They may kill us. Shall I go on?" 

Carl nodded, ever so faintly. 

Ronwy searched for other flasks. Meanwhile, he began to chant, his high, thin voice echoing in a sawtoothed wail that brought gooseflesh even to Carl's 
skin. Kuthay, a black shadow against the dimly sunlit 
doorway, lifted the House of Jenzik against magic. 

"In the name of Atmik, and the Cloud, and the bluefaced horseman who sowed the Rowing death across 
wasted fields, ten thousand devils chained and raging 
to he free, by the Doom and the darkness, I conjure 
you, ancient Rebel, child of night, out of the lower 
depths—" 

"Some more bowls, Carl. Spread the black powder 
in half a dozen." 



118 Vault of the Ages 

Ronwy unstoppered another flask and shook some 
blue crystals into one bowl. Into another he put a white 
substance marked NaCl but seemingly common salt, 
and into a third some purplish-black stuff. "Nee-weeho-hah-nee-yai. Atmik, Atmild" 

A hurried whisper: "Carl, I hope to frighten them 
from the vault so that they won't dare use its real 
powers—" 

Mumble of witch-chant, rattle of earthernware. 
"Hoo-hoo-hoo! Rise, all Powers of night and death and 
horror, rise to me now!" 

Ronwy handed Carl a copper tube. "Tamp some of 
the black powder into this. When it is full, find a 
stopper and close one end tightly." 

He stood making gestures, tall and gaunt and unhumanly stiff, a shudder of yellow light and moving 
darkness across his lined face, eyes burning. When 
Carl handed him the tube, he had a chance for another whisper: "I don't know what they'll do even if we 
succeed. I can only hope to frighten them from the 
City." Loudly: "O almighty gods of earth and sky, fire 
and water, summer and white winter, be not angry with 
us. Loose not the devils which are your hounds against 
us." 

Lenard's voice came, not unshaken. "If it's that dangerous, maybe we'd better forget it." 

"I can't stop now," said Ronwy tightly. "The Powers 
are already raised, now we must chain them. I hope 
we can! Yah-wee-nay-hah-no-nee!" 

Bulak and Toom cowered behind Kuthay, who held 
the House of Jenzik aloft in trembling hands. 

Ronwy took a length of coarse twine, put it in the 
open end of the powder tube, and sealed that end with 



The Gods Are Angry 119 

tight-packed clay. He had his own materials and crude 
apparatus in the vault, which he had used for many 
years in trying to fathom the secrets here. "Gods of the 
great world, be not angry!" 

"When is it ready?" Lenard's voice was becoming 
the snarl of a frightened dog. 

"Soon, soon. Then or never." Ronwy placed the open 
bowls on the floor and laid the tube beside them. He 
took a candle in one hand. 

"Now," he said solemnly, his tones echoing as if a 
ghost spoke with him from the moving shadows, 
"comes the release of that which we have raised. There 
will be fire and a stench of devils— bear yourselves 
bravely, for the devils are like hounds and fly at the 
throat of anyone who is afraid." 

That, thought Carl, was a masterly touch. For how 
could the Lann help being frightened in their hearts? 
He himself was cold with sweat, and his heartbeat was 
loud in his ears. 

"Atmik, arise!" Ronwy plunged the candle into the 
first bowl. 

A flame sheeted up, hissing, throwing a terrible 
death-blue glare on walls and faces and the crouching 
secret machines. A warrior cried out. Ronwy shook his 
head so that the long white beard flew wildly. 

"Don't be afraid!" he shouted. "It is death to be 
afraid!" 

He lit the next bowl, and the flame was a hard brassy 
yellow. A choking, stinging smoke of fumes roiled 
through the vault. 

"I smell fear!" screamed Ronwy, and the echoes 
rolled back, "Fear, fear, fear. . . ." He lit the third bowl, 
and the fire was red. 



120 Vault of (he Ages 

"Blood, blood!" Ronwy's voice trembled. "The sign 
of death. Someone here is going to die." 

"I go!" Toom whirled and rushed up the stairs. Lenard roared at him. The flames rushed higher. Ronwy 
lit the last bowl, and it burned green. 

"The green of mold and death," he wailed. "The 
green of grass on the graves of men. Atmik, Atmik, go 
back! All gods help us!" 

He touched the candle to the twine fuse of the 
copper tube. 

"Let the torch of the gods be lit to aid us," he 
quavered. 

A dim red spark glowed, eating inward. 

"The torch will not light— the gods have turned thenfaces from us— now flee for your lives!" Ronwy stumbled toward the door. Bulak howled and followed 
Toom up the stairs. Kuthay came after, then Tom and 
Owl, as frightened as their captors. The flames sheeted 
in the vault— blue and yellow and red and green, hard 
terrible light of wrath— and pain stabbed in lungs as 
the fumes swirled through the chamber. 

Lenard spread his legs and raised his sword. "I'm 
staying!" he cried, and even then Carl had to admire 
his courage. 

"Stay, then— and die!" Ronwy brushed past him, 
Carl on his heels. A moment later Lenard came. He 
had dropped his sword, and the breath sobbed in his 
throat. 

A bang came thundering to earth, a spurting fire and 
the crash of echoes, as the tube blew up. A hot metal 
splinter whizzed savagely from the doorway. 

Lann horses plunged in terror. "We're getting out of 
here!" screamed a man. 



The Gods Are Angry 



121 



"No! Wait!" Lenard grasped at bridles, shouting, 
cursing. "See, the fires are dying down there. It is over!" 

"Death, death!" wailed Ronwy eerily. "The glowing 
death is on us." 

Bulak hefted his ax and glared at Lenard. "We're 
going," he snapped. "There are ghosts and devils loose 
here." 

"No!" bellowed the prince. 

"Yes!" Old Kuthay stood forth, shaking in his red 
robes, his face gray and sweating. "Even Jenzik could 
not halt the powers of the Doom. It will take our greatest magic and many sacrifices to lift the curse that is on 
us now, and the gods— our gods, too— won't stand for 
more meddling." He lifted the iron box. "In the name 
of Jenzik the High, I declare this place, vault and City 
and accursed witch-folk, taboo. Taboo forever! And 
may death be swift for him who breaks the law." 

Lenard stood like a bear at bay, snarling into the 
faces of his men. "Cowards!" he yelled. "Oh, crawling 
cowards and traitors!" 

"We're going," grunted Toom. "We'll follow you 
anywhere else, but if you want to lead us, you'll come 
along now." 

"Well— well— " Lenard fought for self-control. 
Slowly, an iron smile twisted his lips. "Well, all right. 
We can take the Dales without need of magic." 

He mounted his horse and gestured to the prisoners. 
"Come along," he snapped. "You can still be useful, 
dead if not alive." 

"Not the old one." Kuthay pointed to Ronwy. "He is 
full of the Doom. There is no luck in him." 

"Leave him, then. Take the boys along, at least, and 
let's get out of here." 



122 



Vault of the Ages 



Ronwy stood for a long time, staring after the Lann 
and their prisoners. Then he sighed and turned back 
to the vault. When he came in, he went anxiously about 
to see if the explosion had done any harm. Finally he 
stopped before the bronze plaque, and his thin fingers 
touched it. 

"You saved us," he whispered, and there were tears 
glimmering in his eyes. "You saved us. But at what 
cost?" 



Chapter 12 

"Ride to Dalestown!" 



Jhe three boys, lent extra horses which the troop had 
taken along, rode untied, but they were carefully 
watched by their captors. It was a swift, trotting 
journey until they were well away from the City; 
then the pace slowed and the men began to breathe 
more easily. 

Carl looked about him at the great sweep of hill and 
forest and high blue heaven. A sigh went out of him. 
They had won— well, a small victory. The time vault 
had been saved from the barbarians. But they were 
still prisoners and the Lann were still unbeaten. 

His head lifted. So were the Dalesmen, he thought 
defiantly. And by all the gods, so was he himself! 

The thundercloud of anger that was half fear died 
in Lenard's face. Presently he was smiling, and when 
Kuthay began to mutter about bad luck that would 

123 



124 Vault of f/ie Ages 

pursue them, he laughed aloud and slapped the old 
Doctor on the back. 

"Why, if the powers in the vault were so mighty and 
wrathful as you say, the fact that we all escaped unhurt proves that we are the luckiest men alive," he said, 
and fell to joking with his men until they too grinned 
and relaxed. 

"After all," said Lenard, "the magic would have been 
helpful, but it's not as if we really needed it. The good 
swords of Lann are enough." 

He rode forward again until he was at Carl's side. 
"You needn't fear for your lives right away if you behave yourselves," he told the boys. "We're going to rejoin our main army— it's sweeping around the western 
borders now, and will soon be at Dalestown if it isn't 
there already. My father and I will keep you for hostages, as you tried to keep me. I daresay that will 
weaken your father's will to fight, Carl, and so save 
many lives on both sides." 

"Not a very cheering thought for me," answered 
Carl sourly. 

Lenard grew sober. "I wish you wouldn't think of us 
as devils," he said. "We're a rough crew, yes, and after 
a long, hard journey through hills and forests to get 
here, we're entitled to some looting. But few of us are 
doing this for pleasure or even for power." 

"Why, then?" snapped Owl. "For your health, 
maybe?" 

"In a way," replied Lenard. "We're driven to it. Our 
homeland can't feed us any longer. We must have new 
lands, and soon." 

"I've heard that story before," sneered Tom. 

"But you haven't seen it!" cried Lenard. "You haven't 
watched your thin bitter harvest ruined by hail and 



"Ride to Dalesfown!" 



125 



rain. You haven't heard babies crying with hunger, and 
seen your people hollow-eyed from it, and felt it tearing in your own belly. You haven't huddled in a miserable, overcrowded shack while a blizzard howls around 
you and kills the last few animals you own. You haven't 
battled the raids of savages from still farther north, 
driven by their own famine, coming with fire and death 
and pillage to steal the little remaining to you." His 
fist raised. "And you haven't seen the sleek, fur-clad 
trader from the southern tribes pass you by because 
you've nothing to barter for his meat and grain!" 

"We have our own homes," said Carl. "You're just 
doing to us what has been done to you." 

"Of course," answered Lenard. "Because we're a 
strong folk, a breed of warriors, and aren't meekly 
going to let our families die if we can take them to a 
better place. It's nature, Carl. We are the wild dogs 
killing a stag— because they must if they are to live. 
But we aren't monsters." 

"What would you have the Dalesmen do?" challenged Carl. 

"That's up to them," said Lenard, "but if Ralph had 
any sense, he'd gather his army, which is still pretty 
good, and retreat with all his people to attack some 
other, weaker tribe and win new lands." 

"And so evil breeds evil, until every man is at his 
brother's throat. No!" 

"As you will." Lenard shrugged. "It was only a 
thought— because I wish the Dalesmen no harm, and 
even admire them in a way. I think you especially, 
Carl, have the makings of a great Chief, and that you 
and I together could someday do mighty things, and 
that it is a shame you are to die in a hopeless fight. But 
you must make the choice yourself. Think it over." 



126 



Vault of the Ages 



He rode off, and Carl sat in silence. The words of the 
Lann prince seemed to echo in his mind. He couldn't 
shake free of them. Looking around at the faces of his 
captors, he saw that they were hardened by war and 
suffering— but they could smile as a rough joke passed 
among them. They had wives and children who waited 
with tears for their home-coming, and if they were 
wilder than the Dalesmen, it was because their stern 
land had made them so. 

Evil breeds evil— yes, but the great root of today's 
misery was that man as a whole could not provide himself with a decent living. He had once had the means, 
in that dim and glorious past which now shone only as 
a legend and a dream in winter nights— but the means 
were lost. No, they still existed. The key to that vanished 
greatness lay in the time vault— but it was taboo. 

Suddenly Carl wondered if it had not been a mistake 
to frighten the Lann from the vault. If they had remained there, and eventually won the war— it would 
have been a cruel blow for the Dalesmen, but the vault 
would have been in the hands of a people who were 
not afraid to use it. In time they might have learned 
other things, the peaceful arts of the old civilization, 
and from them it would have spread to all mankind. 
Many centuries would have been needed, but it might 
have been the only way to save what was locked in that 
dark chamber. 

What was right? A man should live justly— but too 
often it was hard to say which was the road of justice. 
At any rate, this war was not a struggle of evil against 
good, black against white; it was a fight between many 
human beings, none of whom was wholly bad or 
wholly good. If the Dalesmen should somehow win, it 



"Ride to Dalestownl" 



127 



would mean slow hunger-death not only for the warriors of Lann but for their innocent women and children in the northlands. What could one do? 

He thrust the whirl of confusion out of his mind. It 
was not, just now, a question of what should be done, 
but of what could be done. And the first problem was 
escape! 

At evening the Lann pitched camp in a meadow on 
the top of a hill. Forest lay on every side, quiet in the 
gentle sunset light, and it was as if no man had been 
here since the beginning of the world. The mens 
preparations were simple, a small fire built to cook the 
deer which a ranging hunter had brought back, the 
horses tethered a little way off to graze, blanket rolls 
spread on the ground for sleeping. Lenard assigned 
guard duty to three men who would watch in succession, timing themselves as usual by the stars. After 
supper, the Lann prince came over to the boys with 
some lengths of rawhide. 

"Sorry," he said, "but I'll have to tie you up at night." 

"Oh, it's quite all right," said Owl sarcastically. "We 
just love being tied up." 

"It need only be loose, like hobbling a horse," said 
Lenard. "And you can have some saddle blankets for 
sleeping." 

Carl submitted quietly to the binding. His wrists 
were lashed together in front of him and a two-foot 
cord was tied between his ankles, in a sort of harness 
passing over his shoulders and knotted at the back so 
that he couldn't reach the knot with his bound hands. 
It was simple but effective. Tom and Owl were secured 
in like manner, and Lenard spread some blankets out 



128 Vault of the Ages 

for them. "Watch these fellows so they don't go releasing each other," he laughed to the guard. "They're 
lively young scamps." 

Darkness stole over the world, stars blinked out and 
the fire burned to embers. The guard stayed on his feet, 
pacing up and down, now and then yawning or leaning 
on his spear. His comrades rolled themselves up and 
slept with an animal weariness. The horses dozed, or 
cropped in a night which began to sing with its many 
noises of cricket and owl and wildcat and startled, 
running feet. 

Carl, Tom, and Owl lay with their heads together. 
From time to time the sentry glanced sharply over at 
them, but did not try to stop their whispering. The thin 
new moon rose slowly over the treetops. 

"Anything we can do?" breathed Tom. "Any chance 
to get away?" 

"Nah— let's sleep." Owl yawned enormously. "What 
a day!" 

"I wonder—" Carl lay still for so long that his friends 
thought he had drowsed off himself. But he was 
thinking. 

A stone dug into his right shoulder blade. Lenard 
should have paid more attention where he spread the 
blankets. Small matter. Was there any chance of 
getting away? If there was, did he dare to take it? An 
attempt which failed would certainly annoy the Lann, 
perhaps enough so that they'd kill their prisoners. 

But that was an unworthy thought, he told himself 
sharply. His own death was a little thing in this huge 
world, however much it meant to him. He was son of 
the Chief and had to live up to the fact. 

But how to escape? The Lann slept not far off, the 



"Ride to Dalestownl" 



129 



sentry stood armed and alert, and he was trussed up 
like a pig for slaughter. . . . Curse that stone! His 
shoulder would be black and blue in the morning. 

The idea came all at once. A thin and desperate plan, 
but— Go ahead! Do it now, at once, before its hopelessness chilled the limbs with fear. 

He turned his head. "Tom, are you awake?" 

"Yes. What is it?" 

"Be ready for things to happen. . . . Owl. Owl, wake 
up." 

"Ugh— uh— whoof! Whazzamatter?" 
"Not so loud. Hold yourself ready. I'm going to try 
something." 

Carl waited until the sentry's back was turned. Then 
he threw off his upper blanket, rose to his knees, and 
began digging in the ground. 

The Lann guard swung about and strode over to 
him. His spearhead gleamed near the boy's ribs. "What 
are you doing?" he hissed. 

"There's a rock under my back. I'm getting rid of it. 
See?" Carl pointed to the shadowy form of the stone, 
where he had pulled aside the lower blanket. 

"All right, all right. Don't wake the camp. I'll dig it 
out for you." The Lann probed in the earth with his 
spearhead. Carl got to his feet, looking at the stooped 
back and the helmeted head, thinking with a vague 
regret, under the thudding of his heart, that the warrior wasn't a bad sort. 

There was a chink and the stone rolled free. "There 
you are," said the man. 

"Thanks." Carl stooped over, picking the rock up in 
one hand. It jutted from his fist, hard and cold and 
damp with the clinging earth. 



130 



Vault of the Ages 



Lightning swift, the boy's arms straightened, and his 
hand crashed the stone against the warrior's temple. 
The blow shocked back into his muscles, and he heard 
the dull crack as if it were a thunderclap. 

The man toppled, blood spurting from his face. Tom 
was already erect, catching the unconscious body as 
it fell and easing it to the ground. Owl seized the spear 
before it could fall clattering. Carl glared wildly at the 
dim black shapes of the Lann. Someone stirred, 
mumbling in his sleep. 

Bending over, he jerked out the warrior's knife and 
slashed his bonds across. He handed Tom the weapon 
to release himself and Owl, while his own fingers 
groped over the fallen enemy. Blood was hot and sticky 
as he fumbled with the helmet's chin strap. He got it 
loose, pulled off the man's dark cloak, and handed both 
to Tom. 

"You're about his height," he hissed. "Wear these 
and take his spear. Pace up and down, in case someone 
sees . . ." 

They were barely in time. As Tom moved slowly 
from the boys, a drowsy voice called out: "Whuzzat?" 

"It's all well. Go back to sleep," said Tom hoarsely, 
praying that his tones were not too different from the 
guard's. He began his slow walk, up and down, up and 
down. The spear shook in his sweat-slippery hands, 
and he bit his teeth together to keep them from chattering. 

Catlike, snakelike, Carl and Owl were writhing a 
way through tall grass to the horses. They had the 
sentry's knife and sword to cut the tether. But if a horse 
whinnied, or if the unconscious man woke up— Up and 
down, up and down, pace, pace, pace. 



"Ride to Da/es/own!" 131 

A faint, starlit flash of metal flitted among the animals. Carl and Owl were cutting all the tethers. A horse 
neighed once, and Tom froze. Then he began pacing 
again, a guardian figure in cloak and helmet, spear tall 
against the stars. An enemy, waking briefly, might well 
suppose that the sentry was still there and that the 
animal's noise was of no meaning. He might! 

The low trilling of a thrush came from the forest's 
edge. But thrushes rarely sing at night. It was a signal. 
Tom stared at the camp for a moment. Nothing stirred. 
He heard a snore and someone talking in his sleep. 
Turning, he went with long, quiet steps over to the 
horses. 

His friends were holding three by swiftly looped 
hackamore bridles. The others stirred and snorted, uneasy at this strange doing. Tom laid down his spear and 
leaped onto the back of one. Carl and Owl followed 
suit. 

A sudden voice thundered from the camp: "Joey! 
Joey, where are you? What's going on?" 

"All right, boys!" Carl's voice lifted high and clear. 
"Let's go!" He plunged into the thick of the herd, 
screeching and howling. "Eeeeyahl Hi, hi, hi! Giddap!" 

"They're getting away—" 

The horses stampeded. Neighing, plunging, they 
scattered in terror and a wild drumming of hoofs. 

"Come on!" barked Carl. "Let's ride to Dalestown!" 

An arrow whizzed by his cheek, and another and another. The Lann were awake now, shouting, running 
about after their mounts, firing at the three who 
galloped into the forest. 

Carl leaned low over the neck of his steed. There 
hadn't been time to steal spare animals. The risk had 



132 



Vau/f of Ifie Ages 



been enormous as it was— and so these would flag in a 
long chase. And a long chase it would be, clear to 
Dalestown, with the Lann in hot and angry pursuit as 
soon as they had recovered their own horses. 

Owl's laughter pealed forth. "We seem to do nothing 
but steal livestock these days!" he cried. 

"Ride, you ninny!" shouted Carl. "Ride to Dalestown!" 



Hero's Reward 



Ihe horse stumbled. Its breath came short and gasping, and foam streaked its dusty flanks. Relentlessly, 
Carl spurred it with a sharp-pointed twig. The dust 
cloud behind was growing terribly near. 
Weariness blurred the boy's eyes. His head felt 
empty from lack of rest. There had been no chance to 
drink all this day, and his mouth was dry. The sun 
danced cruelly bright above him. 

A night and a day, another night and now this day, 
fleeing, fleeing . . . only the shortest snatches of sleep, 
more to save the horses than themselves ... no food, 
until hunger was a numb ache within them . . . dodging, weaving, splashing along streams, using every trick 
they knew to hide their trail from the hunters. Now 
they were on the last stretch, plunging along the wellremembered road to Dalestown, and the riders of Lann 
were just behind them. 



134 



Vault of the Ages 



Carl cast a glance to the rear. He could see the forms 
of men and horses, the up and down of lances and helmets, wavering in heat-shimmer and swirling dust. 
Since getting on the track of the boys and spotting 
them about dawn, Lenard and his men had steadily 
closed the gap between. Their recovered horses, being 
more in number than the masters and thus able to rest 
from bearing weight, were fresher. Carl wondered 
bleakly if his own mount might not fall dead under 
him. 

It might have been wiser to go on foot. A man could 
run down a horse on any really long stretch. But no, 
the horse had greater speed for the shorter jogs— such 
as this last wild lap to Dalestown. No time to think. 
Too late to think. Ride, ride, ride! 

Beside him, Tom and Owl held to the hoof -thudding 
road, sagging a little with their own exhaustion. Their 
clothes were ragged, torn by branches in the woods. 
Their skins were scratched. They were muddy with 
grime and sweat, weaponless save for one stolen knife, 
hunted, but they plunged ahead, over the hard-baked 
dirt of the road, over the hills that rolled to Dalestown. 

"Hi-yi!" The savage, wolfish baying of the Lann rang 
faintly in Carl's ears. An arrow dropped almost beside 
him, its force spent. But soon the enemy would be well 
within bowshot-range, and that would be the end. 

The land lay broad and green about him, houses 
growing thicker as he neared the town, grain waving in 
fields and flowers blooming in gardens. But nothing 
lived there, nothing stirred, emptiness lay on the world. 
The people had retreated behind the walls of Dalestown. 

The long, easy rhythm of gallop under Carl was 
breaking as the horse staggered. The Lann howled and 



Hero's Reward 



135 



spurred their own mounts, closer, closer, a drumbeat 
roll of hoofs under the brazen heavens. 

"Carl— Carl— " Tom's voice was a moan. "We can't 
make it— so near, but we can't—" 

"We can!" shouted the Chief's son, half deliriously. 
His head rang and buzzed and whirled. He dug fingers 
into the horse's mane and leaned over the neck. "We're 
almost there. Hang on, hang on!" 

They were speeding up a long slope. As they neared 
the heights, Carl saw that thunderheads were piling up 
above it. There would be rain before nightfall and the 
earth would rejoice. But he— would he be there to feel 
its coolness? 

"Yah, yah, yah!" The Lann yelped and plunged 
ahead as their prey disappeared over the hilltop. 

Dalestown lay below, a dark spot in the green, deep 
valley, huddled under clouds lifting mountainous overhead. A fresh east wind was springing up, stiffening, 
whistling eerily in the long grasses and the suddenly 
tossing trees. 

Down the other slope, down toward the walls, 
gallop, gallop, gallop! Carl risked another glance behind. He could see Lenard's face now in the van of 
the enemy. The barbarian was smiling. 

Blackness grew bright with lightning streaks in the 
heart of the thunderheads. Clouds were boiling over 
the sky, flying gray tatters of storm, and the wind's 
keening rose yet louder. The storm was coming with 
giant strides. 

"We can't make it, Carl." This time it was Owl who 
gasped out his despair. The wind flung the words 
raggedly from his mouth. "We just can't make it—" 

"We can try!" shouted Carl. 

Down and down and down. An arrow sang past, and 



136 



Vault of the Ages 



another and another. Tom's horse neighed shrilly and 
somehow lengthened its pace. A shaft had grazed its 
flank. 

"Hi, there!" Lenard cupped his hands to yell above 
the wind and the roaring of trees and the growing boom 
of thunder. The voice drifted faint to Carl's ears. "Surrender now or we'll shoot you down!" 

So near, so near. . . . The valley sides were leveling 
off now. The massive log walls of Dalestown, the 
square towers, the high roofs beyond . . . two miles 
away, perhaps, and every flying step brought them 
closer . . . but there was no hope. The Lann were yards 
behind and . . . 

Sunlight speared through the clouds, a weird, hard 
brass-yellow. Thunder banged from heaven to earth 
and back, shivering the ground. A terrified flock of 
crows fought the harrying wind as they nearer a sheltering thicket. 

Carl's muscles tensed for the shaft that would enter 
his back. He set his teeth against it. He would not cry 
out even when it tore his lungs . . . but ride, ride, ride! 

Laughter snarled almost in his ear. Turning his head, 
Carl saw the warrior who drew alongside him, thrusting his horse between Tom and the Chief's son. Teeth 
gleamed in the dark bearded face as a hand reached out 
for the bridle on Carl's horse. 

The boy growled, almost sobbing, and leaned over. 
With one hand he clung to his steed's mane; the other 
fingers closed on the braids that hung below the warrior's helmet. He heaved back, reining in his horse as 
he did. The Lann mount still plunged ahead, and the 
warrior went crashing from the saddle, one foot caught 
in a stirrup, howling as he was dragged. Tom snatched 



Hero's Reward 



137 



the falling lance from the air and whirled about to meet 
the enemy. 

Lightning glared overhead and the rain came, the 
heavens opening in a gray flood. Stinging silver spears 
slanted on a whooping wind, splashing back from the 
earth, hiding the farther hills in a sudden smoke. 

Owl had also reined in. A triumphant Lann rider 
came at him with lifted sword. But Owl still had the 
knife. He grabbed the raised arm with one hand and 
slashed it with the other. The warrior yelled, clutching 
at his blood-spurting wrist, and Owl jerked the sword 
away and tossed it to Carl 

The Lann closed in on every side, edged metal lifted 
against the unarmored, rain-streaming bodies. Lightning flamed white in the sky and thunder was a giant 
war wagon, booming and banging and crashing. Carl 
lifted his face to the rain, drinking life in a last joyous 
draught, suddenly unafraid now when hope was gone. 

"Take them alive if you can," barked Lenard. 

Horses thrusting in, a sudden press of bodies, 
clubbing lance butts and the flat of swords. . . . Carl 
swung at the nearest threatening arm, felt his steel bite 
deep, and then a swung shaft crashed against his head. 
Lightning and darkness. ... He toppled from his seat 
and the rain boiled about him. 

Looking dizzily up from where he lay, he saw a 
horseman seeming to tower above him, lance head 
pointed against his throat. With a snarl, the boy 
grabbed the shaft, pushing it aside. His free hand 
picked up the sword out of the mud, and he hacked 
out. 

He'd not be taken as a hostage and a slave, he 
thought wildly. He'd make them kill him! 



]38 Vault of (he Ages 

Thunder bawled over the rushing rain and the hooting wind. Carl felt the earth tremble under his feet. 
Two of the Lann had jumped to the ground and were 
closing in on him, trying to hem him between thenshields. He smote at a helmet and his blade clanged off. 

Baroom, baroom, baroom, baroom— Not the thunder 
shaking the ground, but nearer— sweeping nearer— 

The horseman burst out of the storm. His mount was 
a tall black stallion, and he himself was big and goldenhaired and wrathful. Save for shield and helmet, he 
had no armor, but a broadsword flashed in his hand. 
He rode full tilt against the group of men. 

The great sword yelled out, its rain-wet steel suddenly red, and a warrior died. Another had no time to 
lift blade before he too was cut down. The plunging 
horse was reined in, rearing back on its hind legs, and 
the pawing hoofs smashed against a third barbarian. 
Steel clamored against steel as the newcomer hewed 
at a fourth man. A fifth rode against his left side, sword 
aloft. Raging like a tiger, the golden-haired man 
straightened his left arm, and the spiked boss on his 
shield crashed into the face of the northerner. 
"Father!" yelled Carl. "Father!" 
Ralph's smile was savage in his beard. He knocked 
the sword spinning from his enemy's hand and the man 
had barely time to skitter aside before that screaming 
blade scythed him down. And now other forms were 
coming from Dalestown. Carl saw Ezzef and three 
more guards in the lead, saw lances lowered and heard 
the faint scream of a horn. 

The Lann, suddenly outnumbered, whirled thensteeds about and went galloping back whence they 
came. Roaring vengefully, the Dalesmen swept after 



Hero's Reward 



them, until Ralph winded his horn. Then, slowly and 
grudgingly, they straggled back to their Chief. 

Ralph had already sprung from the saddle to fold 
Carl in his arms. "I saw you from afar," he choked. "I 
saw them after you, and came as fast as I could. Are 
you well? You're hurt." 

"A scratch." Carl hugged his father. "Tom? Owl?" 

"Still alive," said the younger boy. The pounding rain 
had plastered his sandy hair flat, and the blood running 
from his cut scalp was dissolved before it had trickled 
to his breast. He grinned weakly. 

Ezzef came riding up, his horse splashing mud, his 
face darkened. "We could've had 'em, if you hadn't 
called us back," he complained. 

"It might have led you into a trap," said Ralph. "The 
Lann, the main army, are very close." He straightened. 
"Come on, let's get back into town." 

Mounted again, Carl rode slowly with his father. The 
Chief's face was grave. "You went to the City, didn't 
you?" he said. 

"Yes," answered Carl. 

Ralph shook his head. "That was not wise. Donn is 
determined to enforce the law. You'll hardly be able to 
lie out of his accusation, and— well— " 

"It was for the good of the tribe," said Carl heavily. 

"Of course. But the tribe may not see it that way." 
Ralph clapped his son's shoulder, "However, I'll do 
what I can. I didn't rescue my only son from his 
enemies to see him hanged by his friends." 

The gates yawned before them. As they entered, 
Carl saw that the streets were jammed with people. As 
far as he could see, the crowd surged in the rain, 
drenched and miserable and hungry-looking. Tents and 



140 Vault of the Ages 

lean-tos were thrown up everywhere, in courtyards and 
streets and market places, a swarming city within a 
city. By order of the Chief and the Council, every home 
and warehouse and shop, any building that could hold 
a person, was filled with the overflow of refugees. All 
food had gone into a common store, and the town gave 
a grudging ration out of the kitchens it had taken over. 
Already, even before the Lann were in sight, Dalestown was under siege. 

The people were packed together, townsfolk and 
country dwellers and the hunters and charcoal burners 
and lumbermen of remote forests. Women held babies 
in their arms, shielding them against the rain, and 
other children clung to their skirts. Men were armed, 
grim and angry of face. Old folk looked around, timid 
and bewildered, a lifetime had toppled to ruin about 
them. The crowd moved aimlessly, hopelessly, buzzing 
and mumbling under the steady roll of thunder. Eyes, 
eyes, a thousand eyes stared at the returning warriors. 

"Has all the tribe come here?" whispered Carl. 

"No," said Ralph bleakly. "Only those who could 
make it. But that's more than we can really hold. Keeping order in that mob is more than enough for our 
guards to do, besides manning the lookout posts— and 
the food isn't going to last very long. And, if they're 
crowded together like this for several weeks, there'll 
be sickness. Oh, it's bad, it's very bad." 

Lightning blazed luridly in the windy heavens. A 
group of solemn Doctors approached the Chief. Two 
of them bore holy symbols aloft. Two were beating 
drums. Two chanted spells against witchcraft. In thenlead, tall and old and grim, stalked Donn. 

His robes clung to him in the lashing rain, his face 
was streaming with the chill watery flow, but there 



Hero's Reward 



141 



was no weakness and no mercy in the eagle face that 
lifted up to Carl. His voice came harsh and clear 
through the storm: "You have been to the City." 

Carl forced himself to meet those terrible eyes. "I 
have," he said. It would be worse than useless to deny 
what was plain to everyone. 

"You knew it was forbidden. You knew death is the 
penalty." 

"And I knew it was our only chance to save ourselves!" Carl turned to the ranked people where they 
stood in the rain, staring and waiting. "I know there is 
wisdom in the City, not witchcraft, not devils or Doom, 
but wisdom, craft and knowledge to drive off the Lann 
and rebuild the ancient glories of man. My friends and 
I risked our lives to go there for the sake of the tribe. 
For your sakes, O people." 

"And you brought down the anger of the gods!" 
cried Donn. He pointed at the boys, but it was to the 
Dalesmen that he shouted. "They went to the City 
once and entered the taboo circle and brought back 
a piece of the cursed magic. Our army was beaten at 
the battle of the river. They went again and dealt with 
the witches and fiends. The Lann are at our gates and 
our homes lie waste. People of the Dales, the gods 
have turned their faces from you. The wrath of the 
gods lies heavy on us, and we have been given into 
the hands of our enemies!" 

"Aye— aye— aye— " The voices rumbled, sullen, hating, the voices of a folk frightened and desperate and 
looking for a scapegoat. There had been nothing but 
bad luck. Something must have angered the gods, and 
the High Doctor was the man who knew their dark 
will. Fists were shaken and swords began to gleam. 

"The blasphemers must die!" 



142 



Vault of the Ages 



"Yes, yes, yes— Hang them, hang them now—" It was 
like a chorus of wolves baying. The mob pressed closer, 
the fierce blink of lightning gleamed on eyes and 
bared teeth. 

"No!" Ralph's roar was like the thunder come to 
earth. His sword flamed suddenly free, and his loyal 
guards drew their own blades and formed a ring about 
the boys. 

"If they have done a crime," shouted Ralph, "let 
them be tried as is the right of all Dalesmen. Are you 
beasts that would kill on one man's word? I swore to 
uphold the law of the Dales, and I'll do it at sword's 
point if I must!" 

"Then let them be thrown in prison," shrilled Donn. 
"Let the Council judge them tomorrow." 

Ralph's sword lowered as the crowd fell away. "So 
be it," he said wearily. "Let them be jailed, as the law 
demands." He touched his son's cheek, briefly and 
tenderly. "I'm sorry, Carl." 

The boy tried to smile. "It's all right, Father." 

Ezzef led a squad of guards to take the three friends 
to jail. The young guardsman was outraged. "If that's 
the law," he cried, "then it's a duty to break it!" He 
lowered his voice. "If you fellows want to make a dash 
for freedom, I don't think any of us could, uh, grab 
you in time." 

"A dash to the Lann? No, thanks!" Carl grimaced. 
"Anyway, I want a chance to plead my case before 
the Council. I'm going to try and get that stupid taboo 
lifted." 

"I'll spread the word," said Ezzef. "There've been 
rumors about your last expedition to the City. A lot 
of us younger men think you're probably right. At 
least, that you ought to get a fair hearing. We'll all 



Hero's Reward 



143 



be at the meeting tomorrow." His face darkened. "And 
if everything goes against you, if you really are sentenced to swing, we'll see what can be done about 
rescuing you. Nor do I think your father is so inhumanly upright that he wouldn't give us a hand in that 
case!" 

"We'll see." Carl's voice was flat with weariness. 
"Eight now I just want to sleep." 

The jail was a small, solid building near the great 
market square. It was watched over by a middle-aged 
guard and his wife, who were themselves indignant at 
seeing three boys facing death after having fought for 
the tribe that threatened them now. They prepared 
baths and supper, and locked the prisoners into a small 
clean cell of their own. The other rooms were crowded 
with men serving short terms for the brawling that was 
unavoidable in the over-full town. 

When the door closed behind him, Owl yawned and 
stretched and broke into a chuckle. "First the witches 
jug us, then the Dalesmen," he said. "And in between, 
we were held by the Lann. I guess we just aren't 
popular." 

"Who cares?" Tom's voice was blurred with sleep, 
and he stumbled almost blindly for one of the straw 
ticks on the floor. 

Carl stood for a moment looking out of the small, 
iron-barred window. The rain was still falling heavily, 
the street was running with water and muck, the town 
lay dark beyond. Yes, he thought wearily, yes, his was 
a strange destiny. He seemed to be an outcast everywhere in the world because he bore a mystery in bis 
heart. 

Well— tomorrow— He slept. 



144 



Vault of the Ages 



That night the Lann army marched its last lap. 
Dalesmen saw burning houses red against the horizon 
and heard the tramping of thousands of feet and hoofs, 
the clinking of metal and the guttural voices of men. 
When the dawn mists lifted, they saw a ring of steel 
about their walls, campfires burning, horses staked out 
in grainfields, and the savage myriads of Lann prowling around the defense. 

The last stronghold was besieged. 



Council in Dalestown 



nder the law of the Dales, every tribesman was a 
member of the Council and could attend its meetings on summons of the Chief if he chose, to help 
J make new laws and reach important decisions. The 
Council was also the highest court, though ordinary 
trials were given over to a jury of elders. But this was 
to be no common proceeding, and the criers and drums 
of the meeting had been calling since dawn. 

Some warriors had to stand guard in the towers and 
watch the encircling Lann, and as always, there were 
men who would not trouble themselves to attend a 
Council even when they were able. But rumor had 
been flying throughout the night and the morning. By 
noon the Hall was full. 

Ralph mounted the stage at its northern end with 
a slow, grave step. He was clad in black, with a white 
mantle hanging from his shoulders and the goldenhilted sword of justice at his side. After him came 

145 



146 Vault of the Ages 

Dorm, leaning on the arm of a younger Doctor, and 
then the elders of the tribe. They took their seats and 
waited. 

Carl and his friends were led by an armored guard 
onto the stage and found chairs there. The buzz of 
voices grew almost to a roar. For a moment Carl was 
afraid. He saw the hundreds upon hundreds of eyes 
all staring at him, and it was worse than the spears 
of the Lann. Then a single deep voice shouted above 
the noise— "Give it to 'em, ladsl You've done well!" 
Courage returned and he sat down, folding his arms 
and looking stiffly ahead. 

He knew the Hall from many past times, but he 
studied it now as if he were a stranger. The great 
building was one huge room; its rafters high, high 
above the men who surged and chattered below. From 
those rafters hung the ancient banners of the Dalesmen—that ragged flag had been carried by Valthor 
the Victorious, that dusty standard had lifted over the 
stricken field of Seven Rivers. The glories of the past 
stirred and rustled in their dreams. The walls were 
paneled in carved wood, gods and heroes and animals 
caught in a rich glow of polished oak. The wooden 
pillars that marched down the length of the Hall on 
either side were graven with leaves and fruits from the 
Tree of Life. Tapestries of the finest weave draped 
the windows, through which sunlight and air came 
streaming to the shadowy cavern of the chamber. From 
the stage to the door, the Hall was filled with benches, 
and now they were packed and crowded with men, 
the overflow standing in the aisles and beyond the 
entrance. Each man was armed, since there might be 
an alarm at any moment, and the sheen of metal was 
fierce in that hot, restless half-light. 



Council in Dalestown 147 

Sweeping his eyes over the Hall, Carl saw that he 
was not without supporters. John the farmer sat strickenly in the front row. Near by was a solid bloc of 
young men who had apparently come in a body; Ezzef 
waved at Carl from that section. And there were 
others, old family friends, comrades of game and chase, 
whose looks were sympathetic. 

The boy tried to relax. He was bathed, fed and 
rested. His wounds were bandaged, and Ralph had 
sent clean garments for him and his companions. He 
could do nothing just now. But excitement thrummed 
high in him; he strained and quivered with it. This 
was more than his own life. Perhaps the future of the 
world would be settled today. 

A gong boomed, once, twice, thrice. Slowly the talk 
died away and was replaced by a breathless, waiting silence. 

Ralph and Donn went through the old ritual of 
opening a Council. They avoided each other's eyes. 
Then the Chief stepped forth. His tones rang deep 
and clear. 

"I am supposed to preside over this, as all meetings," 
he said. "But a judge may not take sides, and I think 
you all know that my own feelings are too deeply 
caught here. Therefore, I shall turn the Council over 
to Wellan, chief of the elders, and speak only as a 
tribesman." He unbuckled the sword of justice and 
handed it gravely to the white-headed old man seated 
at his right. 

Owl hissed furiously, "He's betraying us! As Chief, 
he could at least swing things to save our lives. He's 
too law-abiding!" 

"No, you fool," muttered Tom. "This way is better. 
As Chief he could not even try to change whatever is 



148 Vault of the Ages 

going to happen, or people would know and howl him 
down. Under the law, he has no power to do more 
than preside. But as a tribesman, he can speak freely 
—and people will still know he's the real Chief and 
listen more closely to him than to others." He smiled. 
"Carl, your father may be upright, but he's not stupid 
either!" 

"We are met to try three for breaking taboo," came 
old Wellan's reedy voice. "I am told that this is also 
a meeting to decide if the taboo is not to be lifted. 
Let the accuser speak." 

Donn rose to his feet and walked to the front of 
the stage. His eyes smoldered over the Council, and 
when he spoke it was slowly and sorrowfully. 

"This is a heavy thing for me," he began. "I must 
turn on a family whose members have been my lifelong friends and helpers. I must call for the death of 
three promising youths who sought only to aid thentribe in this terrible war. The hand of the gods lies 
grimly on me. 

"But a Doctor's path is stern. He is sworn to forget 
not only himself, but all others, in serving the gods 
and the tribe. I have myself, in my younger days, 
closed my ears to the screaming of poor children from 
whom I pulled an infected tooth or cut a devouring 
growth. Yet afterward they lived because of what I 
had done, and thanked me for it. Now I must again 
hurt that I may heal. But this time the sickness is 
deeper. It is a sickness of the spirit, and the wrath of 
heaven lies on us because of it." 

He went on to describe the first visit of the boys 
and the trophy they had brought back— and how he 
had destroyed the thing with many purifying rites and 
hoped that the curse had been taken off. But apparently 



Council in Dalestown 149 

it had not, for the brave and wisely led army of the 
Dales had been routed by a smaller force of enemies 
—enemies who now held the entire land in their grip 
and had penned the tribe in its walls like cattle in a 
corral. Yet some devil must still have lurked in these 
boys, for they had stolen away again to the forbidden 
City, and had dealt with the witch-folk, and returned 
to preach openly the breaking of taboo. And what 
ruin might not come of that second insolence toward 
heaven? The gods might visit all the folk with plague; 
or they might let them die in here of slow hunger; or 
they might aid the Lann to break through and butcher 
the people and set the town ablaze. 

No, the tribe had to disown these mad boys who 
had thus broken the laws of the wise ancients. It had 
to appease heaven with the greatest sacrifice of all: 
human life taken according to law. "And thereafter," 
finished Donn, "the gods may take pity on us and 
grant us the victory. But I will weep alone in darkness." 

He turned slowly back to his chair and sat down 
again. His hands trembled. The Hall buzzed and mumbled until Wellan had the gong sounded again. Then 
the old man called, "Let the accused speak." 

Carl got up. "We have decided that I will speak 
for all three of us," he said, striving for quietness and 
dignity. He put his hands on his hips and stood looking over the assembly for a moment. 

"I am not one to argue logic and religion with the 
wise Donn," he went on. "However, I should like to 
make one or two points now, in answer to the questions just raised. 

"First, it is said that we suffered our defeat at the 
hands of the Lann because of this visit to the City 
where I obtained the cold light. May I point out that 



ISO Vault of the Ages 

we three were not the first to enter the taboo circle. 
It had often been done before, even if no one stayed 
very long. Furthermore, we did so under press of mortal danger, and the law of the Dales permits a man 
to save his life in any way necessary. Moreover, the 
first disaster to us, the Lann invasion of the northern 
marches, the defeat of the gathered men there, and 
the sack of all that territory, happened before we took 
this light away. So how could it be due to the anger 
of the gods? Surely they are not so unjust as to punish 
a deed before it is done— or, for that matter, to visit 
the sins of three heedless boys on a whole tribe." 

He looked at his father. "Sir, you led the army. Do 
you think our defeat was due to divine anger?" 

Ralph stood up. "I do not," he said flatly. "We were 
beaten because the Lann had a better army. More 
cavalry, not more virtue. Also, we cut our way out of 
their trap and escaped with fewer losses than even I 
had hoped for. Offhand, I should think the gods took 
pity on us, rather than vengeance." He sat down again. 

"As for the second trip to the City," went on Carl, 
"again, you and your families fleeing here, and the 
Lann sweeping through the Dales, happened before 
the crime which is supposed to have caused them. In 
short, O Council, I think common sense shows that 
whether or not anyone goes to the City has nothing 
to do with whether or not we win our battles. Except 
in this way: that by the power of the ancients which 
is hidden away there, we can find our victory! Let 
me now tell you the full story of these two visits and 
you shall judge for yourselves whether we did right 
or not." 

He gave them the tale, speaking in the plain words 
that he knew these earthy farmers and workmen liked. 



Council in Datestown 151 

He dwelt on the great good spirit which had created 
the time vault in the hope that men would find it and 
use it well, and he told them a few things the ancients 
had undoubtedly been able to do. He finished simply: 
"Thus I ask the Council, which makes all laws, to 
raise the taboo on the old works. It was bom of fear 
and ignorance; let us be bold and wise. Let us send 
our army forth from these walls, to drive through the 
Lann ring and capture that vault. Let us learn from 
it— first, some simple way to defeat our present foesthen, how to rebuild that glorious lost world. That 
is all." 

He sat down, and the assembly chamber muttered 
and seethed with voices. Men stirred restlessly, talking to their neighbors, turning this new thought over 
in slow minds. Someone stood up and screamed for 
the instant death of the blasphemers, but was shut up 
by an armed guard. The tone that grew slowly out of 
the noise was confused: many were frightened and 
hostile and wanted a hanging, many were simply bewildered, a few cried for the release of the prisoners 
and the changing of the law. 

Donn stood up again. "This is heresy!" he shouted. 
"Men only make the laws of men. They cannot change 
the laws of the gods." 

Carl could not suppress a grin, even then with the 
shadow of the noose on him. Hardly a Dalesman had 
any idea of what "heresy" could be; the gods were 
mysterious powers to which one sacrificed and made 
magic, that was all. Donn had spent so many years in 
his few old books that he had lost the feeling of life. 

But others were more dangerous. Taboo was a very 
real and terrible thing, whose breaking was sure to 
cause ruin. They yelled for the boys' deaths. But magic 



152 



Vauli of the Ages 



could be set against magic; a man armed with the 
sorceries of the ancients could laugh at the powers of 
the gods. So there were others who shook their weapons and cried they would burn the gallows first. 

Ezzef's voice lifted over the gathering roar: "Who 
stands with us? Who'll fight to save these lads and 
conquer the City?" 

"I, I, I!" Swords leaped out. The group of young 
men stood up and waved their blades whistling in the 
air. Others, scattered through the Hall, pushed toward 
them. 

"Kill the luckless ones!" A giant farmer rose, brandishing his ax. "Kill them and appease the gods!" 

"No!" John was on his feet now. "No, I'll fight for 
them—" 

"Order!" wailed the elder feebly. "Order! Remember 
the law!" 

The gong thundered. Its brazen voice was almost 
lost in the rising clamor. Swords were aloft and men 
scrambled for a place to fight. 

Ralph sprang to the front of the stage. His great 
voice bellowed forth like angry thunder: "Stop! Stop 
this! Sit down! I'll kill the first peacebreaker myself!" 

That turned their heads. They saw him towering 
there, stern and wrathful, a spear poised in one hand. 
They knew he could fling it to the farther end of the 
Hall and slay. They knew he was the Chief. 

Slowly, grumbling and growling, the men lowered 
their weapons and sat down. Slowly the storm died. 
When it was past and the silence lay heavy, Ralph's 
scom was whiplike: 

"Are you the Dalesmen, or are you wild dogs? What 
madness is this? With the enemy at our very walls, 
haven't you got enough fighting to do? Or do you 



Council in Dahstown 



153 



want to play into their hands and make them a present 
of all we've striven for? Hah, I don't know why I 
should bother leading you. I'd sooner lead a pack of 
woods-runners. Now be quiet and listen!" 

All had forgotten that he was not presiding, that he 
spoke only as a common tribesman. "We have to work 
together," he said, his tones now earnest and persuasive. "We have to forget grudges and differences until 
this common danger is past. Let us therefore reach a 
decision quickly, and let it be by the old method of 
law. Will all who favor keeping the taboo and hanging the boys raise their hands?" 

There were many hands that went up, thought Carl 
sickly. Some rose at once, some came slowly and hesitatingly, but the majority voted for death. 

Ralph did not stir a muscle, and his speech was 
unwavering. "Now let those who wish to change the 
law and release the boys raise their hands." Perhaps a 
hundred were lifted, mostly by younger men. 

"Very well." Ralph smiled. Only those on the stage 
were close enough to see the sweat that beaded his 
forehead. "As is the custom of the Dales, I suggest 
we compromise. Since most of us want to keep the 
law as it is, let it be so. But to satisfy the other party, 
let us set these lads free on their promise not to violate 
the taboo again. And if the gods grant us victory, we 
shall give them a double sacrifice at the next festival." 

That drew nods and muttered agreement from the 
bulk of the people. A few men, as usual, had to make 
speeches proposing this or that, or simply for or 
against Ralph's suggestion, but it didn't take long. In 
the end, the Council voted to adopt the motion, and 
Wellan closed the meeting. 

The great assembly filed out slowly, talking and 



154 



Vault of the Ages 



arguing. John sprang up on the stage and folded his 
sons in his arms, weeping without shame. Ralph wiped 
his face and grinned at Carl. 

"Whew!" he said. "That was close!" 

"Too close," said Carl. He felt no relief. There was 
a bitter taste in his mouth. 

Donn shook his head. "I do not know if this was 
wise," he said. "But—" Suddenly he smiled. "But believe me, Carl, I'm glad. If misfortune is to come, 
then let it!" His eyes grew piercing. "Now come with 
me to the temple and take the oath." 

Carl stiffened his back. "No," he said. 

"What?" screeched Donn. 

"I will not promise. Instead, I swear I will go back 
to the City whenever I can— again and again— until 
that vault is open!" 

"You're mad!" cried Ralph. "Carl, you're raving!" 

"You must die," said Donn in a dead voice. 

"No!" Ralph stepped forth. "Can't you see? He's 
sick. Maybe he's possessed by a devil. I don't know. 
But he isn't himself." 

"That may be." Donn stroked his chin. "Yes, that 
may well be. The curse of the City can work in strange 
ways." He came to a decision. "I'll do what I can to 
drive the devil from him," he said. "Tomorrow I'll 
come with all that's needful. But meanwhile he must 
go back to jail." 

Ralph bit his lip. After a long while, he nodded. 

Carl was led away. No one had noticed that Tom 
and Owl had left with their father, making no promises either. Or else they had not been thought important enough to matter. Ralph walked from the Hall out 
into the market square. His face was drawn, and he 
smote his hands together in pain. 



Chapter 15 The Friendless Ones 



t's shameful!" said Ezzef. "It's a cursed, crying 
shame!" He sat on a bench outside one of Dalestown's public stables, leaning forward with fists 
clenched on knees. Tom and Owl had slipped from 
their joyful parents to meet him and stood before the 
young guard. Half a dozen others also gathered 
around, reckless youths who had shouted for blood in 
the Council and still chafed at its decision. All bore 
arms and all were angry. 

Tom had just reported what had happened to Carl 
—he'd heard rumors that his friend was back in prison, 
and had stopped to talk with him through the barred 
window. "And tomorrow," he finished, "the Doctors 
will come with their drums and rattles and vile potions, to drive out the fiend they think has possessed 
him." 

"I doubt if there's any such thing," said Owl. "But 

155 



156 Vault of the Ages 

that kind of treatment will break anybody's will in 
time." 

"I don't know if they'd get an oath from Carl," 
scowled Ezzef. "He's always been a stubborn sort 
when he thought he was in the right." 

"In that case," said Nicky, a son of Black Dan, 
"they'll end up hanging him after all." 

"By that time," answered Tom gloomily, "the Lann 
will be here and may do the job for them." 

"Yes, so." Ezzef waved a sinewy hand at the nearest watchtower, where it bulked over the thatch and 
wood roofs. "They're waiting outside— just waiting, 
curse them! That's all they need to do. Hunger and 
sickness will fight for them within our walls." 

"I suppose Ralph will sally forth against the 
enemy," said Sam the Strong, who was a blacksmith's 
apprentice. 

"Heh!" Willy Rattlehead's bucktoothed mouth split 
in a grin. "And be mowed like ripe wheat. Oh, it'll 
make a fine hero-song, when we're all dead." 

"Now wait," said Ezzef. "Let's not get sidetracked. 
I called you fellows together because I wanted to 
talk with someone I trusted. Tom, Owl, tell me— how 
much power is there in that vault? Honestly." 

"I don't know much about it," shrugged Tom. "But 
you heard Carl tell in the meeting about that devil 
powder which scared the Lann from the City. Some 
of that, all by itself, could stampede their horses— 
which'd make a big difference in battle. And then 
the first time we were there, and old Ronwy was 
showing us through the vault, he was saying something about a simple flying machine. He called it a 
balloon, and said it wasn't hard to make. Imagine 
throwing rocks and boiling water from above!" 



The Friendless Ones 



157 



"There must be more," added Owl. "Lots more. 
We're just trying to remember what was there that 
we could put to quick use. Something called rockets 
—fire arrows, sort of, but charged with the devil 
powder—" 

"That's enough," Ezzef cut in. "I don't understand 
it. Don't think you boys do either. Carl does, a little, 
and this witch-chief seems to know a lot. Nor can 
the witches stand against even a few good warriors, 
so a strong band wouldn't have to worry about them. 
D'you see what I'm getting at?" 

Tom's eyes glowed. "Yes!" 

"We're not the only ones who'd go on such an expedition," said Ezzef. "I know at least a dozen others 
that'd jump at the chance. Didn't have time to get 
word to them of this little meeting, but they're biting 
the bit right now, I swear." 

"So—" Nicky's dark face grew taut. "So we get Carl 
out of the jug, and sneak from this town and through 
the enemy lines, and make our way to the City. There 
we'll have to drive off the witch-patrols. We're taking 
the wild chance that Carl and this Ronwy can cook 
up something useful. If that doesn't work, why, we've 
betrayed our tribe and are outlaws even if they do 
somehow win." 

"You needn't go if you're afraid," snapped Tom. 

"Oh, I'm not afraid," said Nicky evenly. "I'll be 
glad to go. I just wanted to make sure everybody 
understood the risks we'd have to run." 

"Not much risk," grunted Ezzef. "Because we've 
really nothing to lose. All right, boys, are you game?" 

Night crept westward. Carl's cell darkened before 
the sky had faded, and he stood at the window look


158 Vault of the Ages 

ing out to the blue strip of heaven until it had turned 
black and starry. Then he sighed and lay down on 
his crude mattress. 

It was quiet in here. Ralph had forbidden lights 
after dark while the siege lasted, lest they start a fire 
in the overcrowded town, and folk went to bed with 
the sun. Now there would only be the guards at gate 
and tower, and the night watch tramping down the 
streets. The town slept, and about its slumber glowed 
the ominous red of the Lann campfires, and the sounds 
of the enemy laughing and singing and sharpening 
swords drifted in its dreams. 

Carl couldn't doze off. He lay bolt awake, turning 
restlessly, staring open-eyed into the gloom. What was 
he to do? 

He'd hurt his father, who had fought so valiantly 
in battle and Council to save his life. He'd gotten himself locked away, when he might be of use patrolling 
the beleaguered town. In the morning he would face 
a crazed drumming and dancing, and be scourged and 
given nauseating drinks, to expel the devil they 
thought was in him. And for what? For a lost cause, 
for a will-o'-the wisp, for a stubbornness which would 
not surrender even in defeat. 

In the end, he knew, he would give up and take the 
oath. While he lived there was always hope— someone 
else might be persuaded to break taboo. But then why 
did he refuse now? Why did he suffer a useless confinement and visit an unnecessary pain on those who 
loved him? Was he becoming another Donn, so sternly 
devoted to the Tribe that he had no time or mercy 
for the mere tribespeople? 

Was he right, even? Who was he to challenge laws 



The Friendless Ones 



159 



made centuries before his birth? Was he so much 
wiser than his elders that he could tell them what was 
truth? 

Or even if he was right, even if the old powers 
could again be given to the world— was that for the 
best? How did he know that the ancients had been 
happy? How did he know that a rebuilding would not 
start anew the terrible old cycle of wars and cruelty 
and woe, until the world crashed in a second Doom? 

Carl tried to shake the doubts out of his tormented 
mind, but they returned to plague him, little formless 
devils mocking and gibbering in the depths of his 
brain. He muttered wearily and wondered how late in 
the night it was. 

There came a sudden, scuffling noise outside the 
door. A voice growled something, metal clinked 
faintly, feet slid over the packed dirt— Carl leaped 
from rest, every nerve drawn wire-taut, and strained 
against the solid bulk of the door. 

"Carl!" The whisper drifted through, dim and unrecognizable. "Carl, wake up!" 

"I'm here," he gasped. "Who is this?" 

"It's Owl. Stand by. We're going to break in." 

Carl drew a shuddering breath. "What is this—" 

"Not so loud! You'll wake the other prisoners. All 
right, Sam!" 

A hammer rang on iron, muffled by a fold of cloth 
laid between. Once, twice, thrice, and then the clumsy 
padlock jingled to ruin and the door creaked open. 

The figures of Carl's rescuers were vague shadows 
in the hall. There were four, armed and armored, peering nervously out the jail entrance into the silent 
street. Owl stepped forth. He bore equipment in his 



160 



Vault of the Ages 



hands— helmet, breastplate, shield, knife and sword— 
which he gave into Carl's amazed grasp. "Get this on 
quick," he muttered. 
"But-but— " 

"It's a rescue. Don't you see? Twenty of us are here 
to get you out and follow you to the City. Now fast!" 

For a moment longer Carl stood unmoving, and all 
his doubts rose to overwhelm him. Then decision came 
and suddenly he was swift and cool, throwing on his 
clothes, buckling the armor over them, no thought 
save the tremendous will to freedom. 

Yes, one— the gentle old couple who guarded the 
jail and had looked after him— "What about the guard 
here and his wife?" 

"They're all right. We went into their bedroom, 
bound and gagged them, that's all. They'll be found 
in the morning. But we can't rouse the others held in 
here or they'll make a racket that'll bring the night 
watch down on us like a star falling. All set? Let's go, 
then." 

They slipped out of the corridor and the entrance, 
into the street. Houses loomed tall on either hand, 
shadowing, turning the narrow way into a river of 
darkness. A cat squalled from a roof, a dog barked 
answer, a man shouted something angry out of an 
upper window, the leather of the fugitives squeaked 
and the metal rang faintly— the night seemed alive 
with noise, and Carl started at every sound. 

He had time for a brief regret. If they were caught 
trying to escape, it would go harder with his rescuers 
than with him; if they were caught by the Lann, it 
would most likely mean death for all; if they reached 
the City and failed to produce the promised magic, 
they would forever be marked traitors and outlaws. In 



The Friendless Ones 



161 



any case, it would be still another cruel blow to the 
many that Ralph and John had endured. 

His will grew tight again. This was no age for 
weaklings. You had to do whatever seemed best, without letting gods or men or the lower devils deter you. 

The measured tramping of feet came nearer. They 
crouched into a narrow alley and watched the town 
guard go by, armored guards with axes on their 
shoulders. For a moment, it seemed as if the relentless 
march would go through their very hiding place, but 
the guards turned sharply and went on down the street. 

Farther along, winding between the tents of refugees, the little band saw two men approaching. At 
Carl's hurried command, they fell into formation and 
moved steadily forward. The strangers fled. They must 
have been out to do a little thieving, and had taken 
the escaping ones for the watch. 

Now softly, softly, glide between walls up to the 
great stockade, hug its shadow and slip along, slip 
along . . . 

Two ladders seemed to spring out of darkness. Tom 
and Ezzef stood by them with drawn swords. "There 
you are," whispered the young guard. "All right, Carl. 
The rest have gone ahead. We go by twos, up the 
ladders, jump to the ground outside, and then the 
gods get us through the enemy camp. Meet at dawn 
by the swimming hole in old Rogga's woods. After 
that, you're the leader." 

Carl nodded and went softly up the rungs, holding 
his body close to the ladder. At the top he hesitated, 
glancing at the watchtowers looming against the sky. 
It was a cloudy, dark night, but even so the guards 
would be alert— Nothing to do but jump! 

He sprang, relaxing his body and falling twenty 



162 Vault of the Ages 

feet with trained ease. He landed in one of the hedges 
clustered below the walls, feeling branches rake him, 
more concerned with the noise of his armor. But that 
wasn't much. The crackling twigs were louder, and 
he lay stiff for a moment, waiting for a challenge. 

No answer, no sound. The fortress stood black and 
massive above him, crouched into itself, waiting for 
an unknown doom. Owl joined him and the two pairs 
of eyes turned to the scattered red flicker of enemy 
fires, half a mile away. 

"Let's go," said Carl at last. 

He drew his mantle up to cover the sheen of helmet 
and breastplate, and loped cautiously toward the besieging camp, weaving from tree to bush to thicket, 
waiting tense at every sound that drifted from the foe. 
Discovery meant flashing swords and red death. They 
had forfeited the help of Dalestown. Truly, thought 
Carl, his was a friendless gang and every man's hand 
was against it. Briefly, he wondered if the great pioneers who had built the lost civilization had been as 
lonely in their day. 

Closer, closer. Carl lay prone behind a bush and 
looked slit-eyed at the ring he had to cross. Some 
twenty yards off on either side, a dying campfire cast 
its dull light on sleeping men, stacked weapons, an 
occasional tent; between was a lane of darkness. Two 
fires down, several Lann were still sitting up, drinking 
wine robbed from some Dale house; their bawling 
songs came vaguely upwind. A cow taken for butchering lowed in the night. Somewhere a horse whinnied. 

"Let's go," hissed the boy again. 

He wormed a slow way from behind the shrub, 
through the trampled grass, between the fires. Often 
he halted, heart a-thunder, so that anyone who had 



The Friendless Ones 



163 



chanced to see a movement would suppose it was wind 
rippling the grass. He was almost through the barrier 
when he heard the squeak of boots. 

One of the Lann who had been drinking was going 
back to his own campfire to sleep. He staggered a little. 
Glancing up, Carl saw a dim red sheen of light on the 
grinning face. But he lurched away, and Carl's breath 
whistled out between his clenched teeth. 

So far, so good. Now came the hard part. 



Chapter 16 Defiance of the Gods 



our days later, in the middle of morning, Carl looked 
again on the City. It had been a hard trek on foot 
which he and his little band had made. They went 
across country, avoiding the roads which were still 
used by occasional marauding northerners, but even 
so they had often had to conceal themselves as a troop 
of Lann rode by. The countryside had been green and 
quiet for the most part; houses still stood and the 
burned, gutted shells Carl had expected were actually 
few. After all, the barbarians would not ruin too many 
of the homes they expected to occupy themselves. But 
Chief Raymon had his men out scouring the Dales to 
find livestock and stored grain to feed the besieging 
army. 

Now and then Carl's force encountered people of 
their own tribe. Some had even stayed in their houses, 

m 



Defiance of the Gods 



165 



hoping for a miracle before the terrible plunderers 
should come to them. Most wandered gypsy-like, 
gleaning what food they could, hiding by day and 
traveling by night. Many, Carl learned, had retreated 
into the great forests, taking up a hunter s existence. 
They were not panicky, but there was a look of misery 
about them, the look of the defeated and uprooted, 
which wrenched the boy's heart. 

His men had of necessity turned thieves themselves, 
stealing whatever grain or animals they had been able 
to find. But otherwise it would have gone to the Lann, 
and Carl promised himself to repay such of the owners 
as he could identify later. If he lived! 

Now he stood with his men crowding behind him, 
looking past the wilderness of the outer City to the 
distantly gleaming towers. 

Ezzef's awed whisper came to his ears: "It's— big, 
isn't it?" 

"And so still." Sam the Strong had never quailed before danger he could see and fight, but now he 
clutched a rabbit's foot tightly. "But it seems to be 
watching. Are you sure it's safe, Carl?" 

"It hasn't killed me yet," snapped the boy. 

"What do we do now?" asked Nicky. It was a 
strange feeling, having these warriors, most of them 
some years older than the Chief's son, turning to him 
for guidance— a strange and lonely feeling. Carl was 
glad that to Tom and Owl he was still only a friend. 

"We'll go straight to the witch-folk," he decided. 
"Might as well have it out with them now. Come on— 
and be careful." 

They went down the streets in a tight square. The 
early sun blinked off their drawn weapons. Walls 
closed in on either hand, high and silent. Some of the 



166 Vault of the Ages 

Dalesmen looked nervously about, feeling that a trap 
was closing on them. 

"It's nothing to fear," said Carl. His voice came 
oddly flat in that immense quiet. "Just brick and stone 
and metal and broken glass. Even the machines in the 
vault are dead until a man uses them." 

On and on. The most ruinous sections fell behind. 
The buildings grew taller, lifting magnificently toward 
a smiling heaven. Now and then a faint noise would 
make men start, but it was only a rat or a gopher or a 
wheeling bird. Until— 

The arrow whizzed from above and thunked 
quivering into Tom's bullhide shield. Carl yelled an 
order, and the Dalesmen sprang into a tight-bunched 
knot of warriors, holding their shields in front of them, 
peering over the tops. Four witch-men leaned out of a 
gaping third-story window and shot. Somewhere else 
a horn screamed, and a drum began to thutter. 

"Get away— on the double!" shouted Carl. 

Arrows sleeted after them as the invaders trotted 
down the street. The rearward men ran backward, 
shields aloft to protect the band. Shafts thudded home, 
caught in the toughened leather, rattling off helmets, 
now and then grazing a leg or an arm. But these were 
not from the hundred-pound longbows of the Dales, 
whose missiles could drive through an iron corselet— 
the witches pulled a feeble bow, and before long Carl's 
party was out of range. 

Then they faced forward and swung down the resounding way, hot with anger. The old skyscrapers 
loomed near, and the frantic drums rolled loud. A 
woman ran screeching from the warriors' path. A dog 
yelped on their heels. 



Defiance of the Gods 



167 



They burst into the main section and were confronted by the men of the City. The witches had 
grabbed weapons and gathered in a harried force. 
Even now, others were racing from shops and homes 
and gardens to join their fellows. The Dalesmen reformed their square and looked boldly at the spears 
slanting toward them. They were outnumbered five 
or six to one, but they had armor and they were trained 
and the purpose within them was insuperable. 

"Where is Ronwy?" said Carl, speaking to an old 
man in a splendid cloak who seemed to be the leader. 
"I want to speak to your Chief." 

"Ronwy is not our Chief," answered the witch sullenly. His followers stirred behind him, lips tightened 
by fear and hate. 

It was like a knife stabbing Carl's heart. "Ronwy is 
—dead?" he gasped. 

"He has angered the gods. His witchcraft brought 
fire and thunder and the devils of Atmik to earth. He 
cannot be our Chief. We came back after the Lann 
were gone and imprisoned him." 

"Ronwy lives!" Relief left Carl feeling weak. 

"I know you," said the witch-leader. "You are the 
ill-omened one who first came here and brought all 
this woe on us. I forbid you the City. Go, before we 
kill all of you." 

Carl shook his head. "No," he said. "We have come 
to free Ronwy and open the time vault. Stop us if 
you dare." 

"We are more than you," blustered the witch-man. 
"Many, many more. You can kill some of us, perhaps, 
but in the end we'll cut you down." 

"Go ahead, then!" Carl stepped slowly forward, 



168 



Vau/f of fhe Ages 



sword raised, glaring from behind his shield. "Who'll 
be the first to die?" 

His followers pressed behind him, locking their 
shields together, a walking wall which bristled with 
sharp-edged metal. The disorderly ranks of the witchmen stirred, muttering and backing up before that 
grim advance. 

"This is our home!" The old witch-chief's voice was 
almost a sob. "You've no right—" 

"We don't mean to violate your homes," said Carl. 
"We won't enter anyone's shop or dwelling. But the 
time vault is not yours. It belongs to all the world, and 
we claim it for the world." 

"Kill them!" screamed the leader. 

Weapons clashed and rattled, but no one stepped 
from the milling crowd. Carl grinned savagely and 
went on walking toward his opponents. 

"We'll go to the Lann!" babbled the witch-chief. 
"We'll get them to help us drive you out!" 

"All right, boys," said Carl. "Scatter them." 

The Dalesmen let out a spine-shivering yell and 
broke into a crashing, jingling trot. Swords and axes 
were aloft, pikes slanted forward, arrows fitted to 
tensed bowstrings. They were only twenty, but at sight 
of that band, the witches broke. They stumbled away, 
some running, some slinking and snarling, but none 
dared to stand and fight. 

Carl's hard-held breath whistled out in a great sigh 
of relief. He had not been too afraid of the City men— 
perhaps they could have slain all his band, perhaps 
not— but the thought of killing men who fought for 
their own homes had been painful. Praise all gods, the 
witches had been bluffed! 



Defiance of the Gods 



169 



He led the way to the well-remembered prison. The 
dwellers streamed away on either side, yelling and 
chattering. By the time Carl reached the jail, there was 
no sign of them. 

Ronwy was straining against the bars. He reached 
through to take Carl's hands, and tears ran down his 
faded cheeks. "Praise all powers," he choked. "You've 
come, my son, you've come. Oh, praises be!" 

"You haven't been hurt, sir?" asked Carl anxiously. 

"No, no. They treated me well enough— afraid of my 
magic, I suppose. What brings you here again, Carl? 
What has happened? Fugitives passing by said the 
Lann were at Dalestown, and my heart grew sick 
within me." 

Carl told the story as Sam and Ezzef broke open the 
door. When Ronwy emerged, he was trembling and 
leaned heavily on Tom's arm. "Outlawed?" he 
moaned. "Outcast from all tribes? Oh, this is bad. this 
is cruel!" 

"It doesn't matter," lied Carl wearily. He was 
shocked to see how Ronwy had aged in these few 
days. But then, the old man had seen all he had striven 
for in his long life apparently brought to ruin. New 
hope should mean new life for him. "Now, my teacher, 
we are free to do as we have dreamed." 

"I wonder. I wonder." Ronwy stroked his beard 
with thin, shaking fingers. "This is a great and terrible 
thing you have taken on yourself, and I am not one of 
the old scientists. I am only one who has read, and 
imagined too much— become half a ghost myself in 
this ghostly place. We can try, yes, try our best— but 
time is short if we are to save the Dales, and I know 
so little . . ." 



170 Vault of the Age> 

"We'll do it!" Carl's defiance rang out with a hopefulness he did not feel. "But come, let us rest you first, 
sir." 

They went to Ronwy 's home, closed and dusty since 
his imprisonment. The old man found wine and food, 
and Owl, who claimed to be a master cook, prepared a 
meal. That was cheering and strengthening to all, and 
they re-entered the street with higher hearts. 

A strange procession met them, loaded wagons 
rumbling down the streets, armed men walking, 
women and children wailing their fright and sorrow. 
"What is this?" cried Ronwy. "What are you doing?" 

His rival chief stopped and looked at him with 
hatred. "Your madness will bring the wrath of the 
gods down on the City," he answered. "We are leaving 
while there is still time." 

"Leaving— but where will you go?" 

"We will go to the Lann at Dalestown. If the gods 
do not smite you first, the Lann will avenge us." 

"There will be no harm done," protested Ronwy. 

"You were warned the last time. Thunder and 
lightning spoke, devils howled in the vault, and still 
your pride has not bent." The other old witch-man 
shook his head. "Perhaps the gods will not strike you 
even now. Perhaps they are so angered they do not care 
what ruin you bring on the world. But the Lann will 
care. They will help us." 

"Hah!" muttered Owl. "The Lann are more scared 
of this place than you are." 

"I don't know," said Tom worriedly. "Lenard, at 
least, fears nothing, and he may be able to break taboo 
with some of his men." 

"Well, we can't stop the witches from going," answered Carl. "They are desperate enough to fight us 



Defiance of the Gods 



171 



and overwhelm us, or at least cut a way through to 
safety, if we try. We'll just have to hope they don't 
succeed with the Lann." 

He and his men stood by Ronwy's door and watched 
the dwellers go past. Many cursed the invaders as they 
went by, and Ronwy bowed his head in grief. 

"What have I done?" he whispered. "These are my 
people. What have I done to them?" 

"Nothing, sir," said Carl as reassuringly as he could. 
"It's only their own ignorance driving them to this. 
And they'll come to no harm. Even the Lann have no 
reason to injure them, especially when they come as 
allies." 

"But they curse me! They— hate me!" 

"I've made myself an outcast from my own land," 
answered Carl with pain. "The way of the pioneer is 
lonely. But they'll all bless us if we succeed. And if 
we don't— why, then nothing matters, I suppose." 

"Yes— yes. You're right." Ronwy stared after the 
caravan until it was lost to sight. 

"Come on," said Ezzef impatiently. "Let's see that 
vault." 

The little band made its way down hollow streets, 
past emptily gazing walls and ruined splendors. Tom 
shook his head. "It'll take hundreds of years to build 
all this again," he said. 

"Yes," answered Carl, "but we can make a beginning." 

They came to the time vault and stood for a long 
while looking at it. "And that's the home of magic," 
breathed Nicky. "It's all in there— in that little place?" 

"It will grow if we let it out," said Carl. "Grow till 
it covers the world." 

Ezzef peered about with a soldier's eye. "We'll have 



172 Vault of the Ages 

to live right next to this, boys," he told the men. "I 
daresay we can clean out one of those rooms across the 
street for shelter, and bring in supplies of food and 
water in case we're attacked." 

"Do you expect the Lann to come, then?" asked 
Owl. 

"I don't know," said Ezzef practically, "but I'm not 
going to take chances. While you would-be magicians 
are snooping about inside the vault, the rest of us have 
work to do. We'll pile up rubble between the walls 
for a barricade." He looked keenly at Ronwy. "Just 
what do you expect to be looking for, anyway? What 
kind of weapon?" 

"I don't know," admitted the old man. "I don't 
know at all." 



Chapter 17 Refurn of ffie lann 



Hight had fallen, and fires blazed in the northern 
camp. A week of rest, lying at ease before Dalestown, jeering at the gaunt watchers on its towers, 
with nothing to do but sleep and play games and 
live well off the rich surrounding country, had given 
the Lann warriors restless new strength. They frolicked more wildly each day in the valley, wrestling, 
racing horses, shooting at targets, ranging afar to come 
back with a load of plunder from some undefended 
farmhouse, and each night, silence and slumber came 
later. On this evening, their foragers had brought in 
an especially fat herd of cattle and three wagonloads 
of southern wine, and the camp made merry. 

Lenard stalked through the bivouac toward his 
father's tent. A frown darkened his face, and he 
nodded curtly to those who hailed him. He was in 
battle dress: his own spiked helmet and well-tried 

173 



174 



Vault of the Ages 



sword, a steel cuirass taken from a Dalesman's body, 
a great spear in one hand. But his looted clothes were 
the finest: a flowing purple cloak with golden brooch, 
a red tunic of fur-trimmed linen, fringed buckskin 
breeches, silver-studded boots with ringing spurs, and 
a heavy gold necklace about his corded throat. 

On either side, the fires burned high, and the smell 
of roast meat still hung richly in the air. Ruddy light 
glowed off the rising smoke and splashed the faces of 
men sprawled near by. Although the Lann had 
weapons at hand, they were relaxed, flushed with the 
great bumpers of wine that went around the circle, 
and their hard, hairy bodies dripped gold and furs and 
embroidered cloth. The hubbub of voices, talking, 
laughing, shouting, roaring out songs to the thump of 
drums and the twang of banjos, beat like a stormy surf 
against Lenard's ears. It must be a terrible jeering 
music for the people in Dalestown, he thought briefly. 

Behind him trotted a strange little man. His hair 
was not worn long as in the Dales or braided as among 
the Lann, but cropped close, and instead of trousers 
he had a ragged kilt flapping about his skinny legs. 
His tunic was of good material, but sadly tattered and 
muddy, half hidden by the bushy gray beard that 
swept down his chest. He had been disarmed and 
shrank timidly from the stares and raucous laughter 
of the barbarians who saw him. 

The tent of Raymon loomed ahead, a square blackness against the night. Two guardsmen leaned on their 
pikes in front of it, looking wistfully at the revel. The 
Lann ruler himself sat cross-legged in the entrance 
before a tiny fire, smoking his pipe and tracing idle 
patterns in the ground with a knife blade. He was not 
a tall man, but broad of shoulder and long of arm, 



Return of Ihe Lann 



175 



with keen, scarred features and hooded black eyes; 
his dark hair and beard showed only the faintest 
streaks of gray. He wore a furry robe against the 
evening chill, but under it one could see a painted 
leather corselet. 

"Greeting, Father," said Lenard. 

The older man looked up and nodded. He had never 
shown much warmth toward anyone, even his family. 
"What do you want?" he asked. "I'm thinking." 

Raymon's thinking usually meant bad luck for his 
enemies. Lenard grinned for an instant, then sobered 
and lowered himself to the ground. His follower remained shyly standing. 

"What do you plan?" asked Lenard. 

"f m wondering how long the town can hold out," 
said Raymon. "They're a stiff-necked bunch in there. 
They may eat rats and leather before they give in. I'd 
like to have this war finished within a month, so that 
we can move our people down here and get them well 
settled before winter. But is it worth-while storming 
the fortress— or can we starve it out in time? I haven't 
decided yet." 

Lenard leaned forward, staring intently at the face 
dim-lit by the red coals. "I have news which may help 
you decide," he said. 

"Well, so? Speak up, then. And who is this with 
you?" 

"If it please you, honored sir, I am called Gervish, 
and I speak for the City—" began the stranger. 

"Be quiet," said Lenard. To his father: "Yesterday 
one of our foraging parties to the north found a whole 
caravan of these folk, headed toward Dalestown. They 
said they came in peace to see us. This Gervish rode 
ahead with one of our men to carry the word. He was 



176 Vault of the Ages 

brought to me just now, and I saw this was something 
you should know about." 

"Ah, so." Raymon's slitted gaze pierced the nervously hovering little man. "You're from a city? What 
city? Where? And why do you come to us, whom all 
others run away from?" 

"Almighty lord, it is the City, the City of the ancients—" 

"Be quiet, or we'll never get the story told." In brief, 
hard words Lenard related to his father the events 
which had caused the witch-folk to flee their homes. 
When he was through, he sat waiting for a response, 
but Raymon merely blew a cloud of smoke, and it was 
long before he answered. 

"Hm-m-m," he said at last. "So those crazy boys are 
trying it again, eh? What's that to us?" 

"It can be plenty," snapped Lenard. "You know the 
story of what went on before— how Carl scared off our 
men the first time with that magic light, and how there 
was thunder in the vault the second time. We may not 
get a third chance— not if Carl returns with the powers 
of the Doom." 

"The City's been tabooed," said Raymon. 

Lenard snorted in scorn and anger. "Yes, because 
that chicken-hearted Kuthay was frightened out of 
what wits he had. Oh, I admit I was scared too for a 
while. But I'm alive. Carl is no more a witch than I, 
but he's still alive too— and what's more, he's not afraid 
to go back there, even against his own tribe's will. I 
tell you, there are things in that vault which can be 
used against us— or by us— in a way nobody can yet 
imagine. If we don't get them, the Dalesmen will. And 
then woe for the Lann!" 

Raymon turned to one of his guardsmen. "Fetch 



Return of the Lann 



177 



Kuthay," he ordered. "Also Junti, our highest-ranking 
Doctor. Quick!" 

"Yes, sir." The warrior loped off and was lost in 
shadows. 

"I'll go alone if I must," cried Lenard. "But—" 
"Be quiet," said Raymon. "I have to think about 
this." 

He sat impassively smoking while Lenard fumed 
and Gervish cowered. It seemed an age before the red 
robes of Kuthay and stout, bald Junti came out of the 
night. 

"Sit down," said Raymon. He did not apologize for 
disturbing their revel or sleep, whichever it had been. 
Among the Lann, the Chief held supreme power over 
even the Doctors. "We've something to talk over." 

Kuthay started at sight of Gervish's gnomish features. "It's a witch!" he cried shrilly. 

"That shivering dwarf?" Raymon sneered. "Sit 
down, I say, and listen to me." He gave them a crisp 
account of the story. 

"We've nothing to fear, sir," said Kuthay a little 
shakily, when the tale was done. "The devils will take 
care of those Dalesmen." 

"I wish they'd take care of you!" snorted Lenard. 
"You and your mumbo-jumbo magic and old wives' 
superstitions. This business may cost us the war unless 
we strike fast." 

"What would you have us do?" asked Junti softly. 

"Lift that blasted taboo, man! You have the power. 
Lift the taboo and then I'll take some men to the City 
and clean out the enemy there for good. After that it's 
ours!" 

"The City—" wavered Gervish. "Sir, the City is our 
home—" 



178 



Vault of ihe Ages 



"The Larrn will do what they please with your 
precious City. And with you too." 

"I dare not," said Kuthay. His teeth were chattering. 
"I dare not let you go to that lair of devils. And bring 
them back here? All the gods forbid!" 

"You'll let him if I say so," snapped Raymon. His 
voice grew shrewd. "But while we can change the law 
easily enough, can we change our men? Your followers 
from the last time have spread enough horrible stories 
about the City. Have we any warriors that would go 
there now?" 

"I think many would," said Lenard thoughtfully. 
"First we should hold a great magical ceremony to arm 
us against all spells. Then we can take a large troop; 
there's confidence in numbers. And if we dangle all 
the wealth of the City before their noses, they'll follow 
me gladly enough. It must be stuffed with riches." 

"No," wailed Gervish. He threw himself prostrate. 
"No, great sirs! We never meant thatl The City is our 
home, and we are poor people with no other place to 
go." 

"Be still or I'll have you run through!" snarled Raymon. Gervish's howls died to a tearful whimper. 

"Hm-m-m." Junti stroked his chin. "I'm not too 
frightened of having people go there. As you said, 
Lenard, it doesn't seem to have hurt these Dale boys. 
But bringing things back— that's another matter. 
There's nothing understood about all this. You might 
be taking back the old plagues, or the glowing death, 
or— anything! No, no, I can't agree to your using the 
powers of the vault yourself." 

"But it's a threat otherwise," protested Lenard. 
"There'll always be a chance of someone like Carl 



Return of the Lann 



179 



going there and prowling about and turning the magic 
against us." 

"Not if you destroy the vault." 

"What? How?" 

"Simple. Burn the books. Smash the machines. Fill 
the place with earth and stones." Junti nodded. "It'd 
be a worthy deed too. You'd be scotching the last seed 
of the Doom." 

"Well—" Lenard hesitated. "I hadn't wanted to. I'd 
thought—" 

"Enough," said Raymon. "It's a good plan. We're 
well enough off without risking new and unknown 
ways. Let it be thus, then. Tomorrow you Doctors 
hold a great devil-laying and spell-turning rite, and 
we'll call for about a thousand bold volunteers to ride 
with you to the City, Lenard. That should be enough 
to handle a score of Dalesmen! After you've taken 
care of them and wrecked that vault thoroughly, your 
boys can sack the place to their heart's content. Drag 
back whatever you find that can be used for siegeengines and the like— I understand the witches used to 
manufacture such for the tribes. If it's enough, we'll 
storm the town and bum it around the Dalesmen's ears 
and finish this war." 

Kuthay shuddered but was silent. Gervish, weeping, 
opened his mouth to protest again, saw the spearhead 
against his ribs, and closed trembling lips. Lenard 
scowled briefly, then his face cleared and he laughed, 
a hard, short bark of triumph. 

In the morning, folk in the beleaguered town were 
wakened by the roll of drums and crash of gongs. Men 
snatched weapons, cursing, deathly afraid that the 
long-awaited Lann assault was on them, and sped to 



180 Vault of the Ages 

their assigned posts. But Ralph, mounting one of the 
towers to peer over the valley, saw that it was not a 
summons to battle. 

"What's going on, sir?" asked the guard beside him. 
"What are they doing out there?" 

"I don't know." The Dale Chief had grown curt and 
grim since his son's flight. His eyes were haggard with 
sleeplessness as he stared at his foes. 

The whole great army was massed about Raymon's 
tent, chanting and striking swords against shields in a 
clangor that drowned voices. A giant bonfire had been 
kindled and the red-robed Lann Doctors danced and 
drummed around it. As Ralph watched, he saw horses 
and cattle led up to the fire and saw a figure— he 
thought it was Raymon, but couldn't be sure— slash 
the throat of each sacrifice. Blood gushed into a bowl, 
from which the leader sprinkled it hot and red on the 
pressing warriors. Meat was hacked from the carcasses 
and thrown on the blaze, whose smoke mounted black 
and greasy toward heaven. 

"It's some kind of rite," decided the Dale Chief. 
"They're preparing to do something. Storm us? No, I 
think not. The Lann never needed special ceremonies 
for a battle. I wonder—" 

Afterward, Lenard harangued them from horseback. 
Slowly, a shout rose, swords waved in the air, spears 
were shaken fiercely and men roared. Some, Ralph 
saw, were edging away, silent, not liking whatever 
was being urged. But most howled approval. 

It was near noon before the ceremony was finished. 
Ralph pondered the wisdom of a quick sally against 
that disordered throng. But no— with a half-mile of 
open ground to cover, the Lann would have plenty of 
time to meet him. Best to see what was brewing. 



Return of the Land 



181 



Lenard forced his steed through the mob, pointing 
to man after man, and each that he singled out, hurried away to get horses and war gear. Before long, a 
host of cavalry was assembled— nearly a thousand 
men, Ralph guessed dizzily. And their swift, sure 
readiness meant that they were of the best Lann 
troops, the trained warriors who had turned the tide 
against him at the last clash. 

The division shook lances in air and hailed Lenard 
with a shout as he rode to the front. The rumble of 
hoofs drifted back to Ralph as they wheeled about 
together and trotted northward. 

North! 

"Where are they going?" wondered the guardsman. 
"What's their plan?" 

Ralph turned away. His shoulders were suddenly 
bent, and horror was in his eyes. 

"Carl," he groaned. "Carl." 

The vault was dim, even with a dozen candles 
flickering about the littered workbench. The dank air, 
full of a harsh smell, made Carl's head ache. He looked 
past the great mixing kettle to Ronwy, who was scooping up the last grains of powder and stuffing them into 
a crudely fashioned metal canister. 

"That's the last," said the old man. "There is no 
more sulfur." 

Carl nodded wearily. "Perhaps a dozen bombs," he 
said. "No— fifteen, to be exact. I should know! Is that 
all we can do?" 

"It's all the gunpowder we can make," shrugged 
Ronwy. He put a fuse in the canister, forcing it through 
a hole in the lid he had placed on the top, and tamped 
down clay to hold it. Carl took a pair of tongs and 



182 Vault of the Ages 

squeezed the container until it bent slightly, holding 
the lid in place. 

It was fortunate, he thought, that the witch-folk had 
known sulfur. They bought it from traders and used 
it to smoke rats and mice from their storerooms. The 
bluff which had frightened away the Lann had used 
all the real gunpowder left in the vault, but an old 
book had described a way of making it. Saltpeter was 
another ingredient that had been in a small barrel 
here in the vault, and charcoal, which the Dalesmen 
themselves had prepared, was the third. The powders 
were weighed out on a scale, mixed wet, dried, and 
put into containers hammered from sheet metal dug 
out of the ruins. 

Fifteen bombs— crude and weak, not even tested— 
all that the past six days of work had yielded. But 
there had been so desperately much to do: the formula 
had to be located in a stack of books Ronwy had once 
read but not remembered very well, a painful groping 
through many pages where half the words meant 
nothing; the powder had to be made, the metal found 
and beaten into shape. Carl's high-flying dreams had 
faded as he realized how heartbreakingly slow and 
difficult it would be to recreate the vanished past. 

"Maybe that will be for the best," Ronwy had remarked. "We can't gain everything back overnight. 
We aren't ready for it. We should go slowly, take 
many generations on the task, so that we can learn 
the proper use of each new power before getting the 
next." 

But— fifteen bombs! 

"And now what can we do?" asked Carl. "It would 
take rare luck for this little bit of weaponry to decide 
a battle." 



Return of the Lann 



183 



"I don't know." Ronwy sighed. "Make a balloon, 
perhaps. We would need a great deal of oiled cloth or 
fine leather, carefully sewed into a bag, and a large 
basket to hang from it, and some means of filling the 
sack with hot air—" 

"We can t take a year for this!" cried Carl. Tears 
stung his eyes. "The Lann aren't going to wait that 
long." 

"No. No. But-" 

"Carl— Carl— " Tom came rushing down the stairs, 
wild and white. "Carl, the patrol horn just blew! 
Someone's approaching!" 

Carl rushed up into the noonday light and blinked 
at the hot brilliance outside. His ears caught the warning blast now, from a man perched as lookout high 
in one of the skyscrapers. Plunging across the street, 
he burst into the room which his followers used for 
living quarters. The men were already pulling on their 
armor, and Carl dove for his. 

"What is it?" barked Ezzef. "Who's coming?" 

"I don't know," said the boy grimly, "but I'll bet it's 
an enemy." 

As he came out again, he looked to the defenses of 
the vault. His men had wrought well. The open space 
between the two walls was cleared of rubbish, which 
had been piled high to the rear to form an almost 
unbreakable third wall; a jumbled wilderness of ruin 
beyond, where the Dalesmen had thoughtfully strewn 
broken glass and sharp-edged metal, made it impossible to approach from that side. On the front, where 
the old walls faced onto the street, a six-foot barricade 
had been erected, stone and brick and timbers laid 
solidly together, with only a narrow passageway between in to the vault. 



184 Vault of the Ages 

Nicky, who had been the lookout, came running as 
the last of his comrades entered the little courtyard 
between vault and barricade. "It's the Lann!" he 
panted. "A whole army of horsemen— hundreds of 
them— riding into the City!" 

Carl grabbed his shoulders and shook him. "You're 
wrong!" he shouted. "It can't be!" 

"I tell you, I saw them," gasped Nicky. "And— 
hear?" 

They heard it then, the rising and nearing thunder 
of trotting hoofs, the banging of metal and the harsh 
clamor of voices. Man looked at man, and friend shook 
hands with friend. For they were twenty and the 
Lann were a thousand, and they did not expect to see 
another sunrise. 



Chapter 18 Battle of the Vault 



n line of horsemen rode into view, their painted 
I corselets agleam, their faces fierce under lie helI mets, lances aloft and hoofs ringing. Behind them 
I were others, and yet others, stretching out of sight, 
and the noise of them was a rolling thunder. 

Lenard rode in the van, haughtily erect on a great 
roan stallion, heavy saber in his right hand. It flashed 
up as he drew rein, and his cry went back over the 
pressing ranks: "Company haltl" 

As one, the Lann stopped, horses stamping and 
snorting. Lenard sheathed his saber and lifted one 
hand. "Will you parley in there?" he called. 

"If you wish." Carl stepped forth, standing between 
the thick walls of the barricade. "What do you want?" 

"The vault and the City, of course." The Lanrj 
prince's hard face grew earnest. "Give up now, without a fight, and all your lives will be spared." 

185 



186 



Vault of the Ages 



"Beware!" said Carl. His throat was dry, but he 
tried to be solemn and confident of manner. "The 
devils of the Doom are here." 

Lenard threw back his head and laughed. "You 
won't frighten us that way, my friend," he cried. 
"Those who believe in such things have been given 
charms against all magic— and as for me, I've no more 
faith in those devils than you. Now, quickly, come out 
with your hands up, all of you. If you make any 
trouble, there'll be no mercy." 

"You can't use this vault," said Carl wildly. "You'll 
never understand—" 

"I don't intend to use it. We're here to destroy the 
thing." 

"Destroy! No!" A thin shriek of agony ripped from 
Ronwy's heart. 

"Yes! Now don't hold us up any longer. Come out 
from those stupid walls and let's be done with this 
foolishness." 

Carl shook his head, slowly and stubbornly. "I'm 
staying," he said. 

"And I— and I— we'll all stay with you—" The rumble 
of voices went from man to man of his followers. 

"You're mad!" exclaimed Lenard. "It's death, I tell 
you— and all for nothing." 

"While we live, we'll fight you." 

"Very well, then!" His face contorted with rage, 
Lenard wheeled back to his men. 

Carl drew a long, shuddering breath. A tree growing in his little courtyard threw a dappled pattern of 
moving shadow on the sunlit walls. Tall clouds walked 
through a high, bright heaven. Oh, it was a fair world, 
a good life! But he couldn't give up. Not while the 
faintest gasp of hope remained could he surrender. 



£atf/e of fhe Vault 



187 



Three men could barely stand abreast in the entrance to the barricade. Carl, Tom, and Owl placed 
themselves there, shield locked with shield and swords 
out. Behind them were Ezzef, Nicky, and Sam, with 
pikes thrusting between the boys in the front rank. 
The other twelve disposed themselves about the courtyard, ready with weapons to repel any attempt at 
climbing the walls elsewhere; four, with bows, sprang 
to the flat roof of the time vault to shoot at the foe. 
Old Ronwy stood for an instant, bowed as if with 
overwhelming grief, then hurried into the vault and 
came back with an armload of bombs. 

The Lann were handicapped by their very numbers, 
thought Carl, his last indecision and sorrow drowned 
in the high, taut thrum of battle. They couldn't mass 
horsemen in the street for one of their thundering 
attacks, nor could even one man gather full speed as 
he plunged across the width of the avenue against the 
defenders. But even so— even so— 

Lenard and another rider trotted into sight, both 
carrying lances. They went to the opposite wall, 
turned about, laid their shafts low, and spurred their 
animals with a sudden, shivering yell. Hoofs rattled as 
the charge came. Carl braced himself, waiting for the 
shock. 

As the nearest lance head gleamed toward the Dale 
shields, the three pikemen lowered their twenty-foot 
weapons and planted the butts firm. The horses could 
have spitted themselves on that bristling wall. Lenard 
cursed, reining in, his hose rearing. He poised his lance 
and threw it the short distance. It struck the wooden 
frame of Carl's shield with a dull blow, hung clumsily, 
and dropped out. Lenard drew his saber and hacked 
at the slanting pikeshafts. As he chopped at one and 



188 



Vault of the Ages 



his companion at another, the third rammed suddenly 
forth. The other Lann warrior howled, his thigh pierced 
—his horse skittered away and a second rider leaped 
to take his place. 

Lenard thrust suddenly between the pikeshafts. His 
horse loomed immensely over the defenders, and he 
struck downward with his saber. Carl met the blow 
with his own lifted blade, a wild roar of iron, sparks 
showering and the metal rebounding with shock. 
Grimly, Carl hewed, not at the man but at the horse. 
The animal screamed and stumbled. Lenard howled 
and smote again, his blow clanging off Tom's helmet. 
Ezzef drew his pike back a little and then brought the 
head murderously against the other foeman, pressing 
behind his Chief's plunging horse. It sank into the 
hairy throat and the man toppled from his seat. "First 
blood!" cried Ezzef. 

Lenard's horse fell moaning to its knees. The Lann 
prince sprang from the saddle and hewed at Carl. 
Sword banged on sword. A fresh horseman was trying 
awkwardly to push his way in and fight. Lenard broke 
off the engagement, withdrew into the street, and bellowed at his man to come back with him. An arrow 
hummed past him, another one felled the retreating 
cavalryman, and Lenard turned and ran from sight. 

"We drove them off!" panted Owl. His eyes blazed. 
"We beat them!" 

"They'll be back," grunted Nicky. "They should' ve 
known better than to try horses against a defense like 
this, though." 

Carl stooped over Lenard's wounded mount and 
looked into the tortured eyes. "I'm sorry," he whispered. "I'm sorry, old fellow." His knife gleamed, and 



Battle of the Vault 



189 



the threshing animal lay still. Its body would form an 
extra obstacle. 

"It'll be a foot assault next time," said Ezzef . He laid 
his unwieldy pike down and selected a spear instead. 
Nicky did likewise, but Sam chose a long-shafted 
halberd. 

The noise of the Lann drifted to them, angry voices 
and clashing metal, but Carl could not hear what 
orders Lenard was giving. They'd be easy to deduce, 
though, he thought bleakly— attack, attack, attack, until sheer numbers overwhelmed a weary defense. 

But there might be a chance. "Ronwy, are you 
there?" 

"Yes." The old man was kindling a stick of punk. 
"I'm ready." 

The Lann came into view. They were on foot now, 
with shields and cutting steel in their hands, and it 
was such a swarming, boiling mass of men that Carl 
could only see it as a confused storm. The clamor of 
voices rose to a terrible, high barking, yelping, the 
shrill war whoops of the Lann. 

Arrows began to fly from the time vault, a gray sleet 
that struck through steel and leather and flesh to send 
men reeling and dying. With a howl, the Lann 
charged. 

Here they come! 

Three of them abreast rushed in against the defenders in the passageway. Ezzef s spear thrust out, 
catching one in the throat. Nicky's stab was turned 
by the shield of another man, but Sam's halberd 
reached out to bell on his helmet and hammer down 
his defense. The third struck against Carl, shield to 
shield, sword aloft and screaming down. 



190 Vault of the Ages 

Carl took the blow on his armored left shoulder. 
He cut low, seeking the enemy's legs under the shield. 
The Lann roared. Tom thrust from the side and 
brought him down. Another came leaping over his 
body, and another and another. 

A big man wielding an ax plunged against Carl. 
The boy's weapon sang, catching the wooden handle 
in mid-air, bitting deep into it. The warrior snarled, 
wrenched his weapon free and whirled it aloft again. 
It crashed against Carl's shield. The frame on that side 
buckled, but the ax haft broke across. Carl's blade 
struck snakelike against the man's arm. He fell, 
screaming, and Carl stooped to grab his better shield. 
A barbarian roared, trampling over his dying comrade 
with a huge two-handed sword raised. Carl thrust upward with the point of his own weapon, catching the 
man in the armpit. The warrior staggered back, hindering those behind, and Carl got the Lann shield free 
and onto his own left arm. Turning, he struck from 
the side at the man engaging Owl and laid him low. 

Another and another, a tide of faces and hammering blades. Carl hewed wildly as the enemy 
rose before him, not feeling the blows that rang and 
crashed off his own defenses, not feeling the cuts in 
his arms and legs. A northerner reached with a spear 
over the shoulder of one whom Carl fought, probing 
for the boy's head. The Chief's son struck at that shaft, 
beating it down, while he rammed his shield forward 
to hold back the swordsman. He hammered the spearhead down to earth, thrust out his foot, and snapped 
the shaft across. Sam's halberd clanged, dropping the 
barbarian swordsman. Carl chopped at the spearman 
before he could draw blade, sending him lurching 
back. A dying northerner stabbed upward with a 



BalMe of ffie Vault 



191 



knife. Carl saw the movement from the corner of an 
eye and stamped the man's hand down. 

Looking backward, Carl saw that the enemy was 
trying to enter elsewhere. The cruelly jagged barricade 
could not be scaled, but the Lann were boosting 
each other over the ancient brick walls. The defenders 
in the courtyard fought desperately, hewing and 
thrusting and shooting as each new body loomed into 
sight and dropped to earth. Knots of battle raged back 
and forth, and the vault was splashed red. 

"Ronwy!" gasped Carl. "Ronwy!" 

A bright metal shape arched over his head, to fall 
among the enemy milling in the passage. A moment 
later came the shattering crash of explosion. Two more 
hurled bombs blew up. A ragged howl lifted from the 
Lann. They drew away, panting and glaring. Ronwy 
tossed another canister. It fell before the first men in 
that disordered crowd, and these suddenly turned and 
tried to break through those behind and escape. A 
flash, a boom, a swirl of smoke and brimstone— the 
Lann eddied in confusion, wild-eyed. 

"Give me one of those!" exclaimed Ezzef. He took a 
bomb from Ronwy and threw it high above the wall, 
out of sight. A moment later came the scream of 
frightened horses as it went off among them. Men 
shouted, fighting their suddenly plunging mounts. 

Carl drew a shivering breath. By all high gods, it 
had worked! 

The dead and wounded lay thick before him. The 
battle in the courtyard died away as the last attackers 
were cut down. But four of the Dalesmen had fallen, 
and two others were out of action with wounds. 

Tom stumbled suddenly, clutching at Owl for support. His face was white, and blood streamed from a 



192 Vault of the Ages 

slash in his leg. "Get him inside!" choked Carl. 
"Ronwyl Bandage that cut—" 

"I will— I will." The old man eased Tom to the 
ground and ripped a piece off his cloak for a 
tourniquet. 

"I can fight," whispered Tom. "I can still fight." 

"Later," said Owl, inspecting the injury. "It'll heal 
up all right. But you're out of this fracas, my friend." 
He went back to his place, and Nicky took Tom's 
position. 

Lenard raged among his men, yelling at them, 
ordering them forward again. The bombs had done 
little if any actual harm, Carl realized. It was the noise 
which frightened warriors and horses. And the Lann 
weren't so easily scared. 

"I'll go myself!" Lenard ran toward the barricade. 
Two others followed, and then the rest shouted up 
their own courage and streamed in their wake. 

Carl spread his legs widely, braced for the next 
shock. It came in a blurring roar of steel, whistling and 
crashing against his own hard-held defense, a weaving, nickering net of snakelike metal, and Lenard's 
taut grin bobbing behind a lifted shield. Carl struck 
back, hewing and stabbing and parrying. The Lann 
yelled and pressed forward. Sam groaned and sank 
slowly to earth, a spear wound in his side. 

Crash! Crash! Crash! 

The men attacking stopped in their onward surge. 
Someone wailed aloud. Lenard, raging, sprang against 
Carl anew, slipped in a pool of blood, and fell at the 
boy's feet. Lithe as a cat, he rolled free, leaped up, 
and was trapped in the backward rush of his men. 

Crash! Crash! 

A horse ran wild, pawing at the close-packed war


Battle of the Vault 



193 



riors and trampling them to the ground before it was 
killed. Carl wiped the sweat from his face and gulped 
air into raw lungs. 

"One of them didn't go off," said Ronwy. His voice 
trembled. "We have four left." 

Through the muttering army, Lenard strode, beating men with angry fists, urging them back again. 
Carl saw with wonder that they were close to blind 
panic. A fire leaped in him. It might work! Twenty 
men might drive off a thousand todayl 

"Forward, forward!" Lenard ran in the front. 
Slowly, a number of his warriors followed. 

Ronwy hurled a bomb at them. As it clattered to 
earth, Lenard picked it up and tossed it back. It fell 
on the heaped bodies of the fallen and burst, metal 
fragments wailing and ricocheting. The Dalesmen 
stood firm, but the Lann flinched. 

"Once more!" raged Lenard. "It didn't hurt you, 
did it? Once more and we'll have them!" 

He plunged forward, saber gleaming. The Lann 
came after, a walking forest of swords and axes and 
spears. Carl staggered a little with weariness, thinking that this might indeed be the last assault. 

The Lann prince charged him afresh. After Lenard 
came his men, swinging their weapons, but fear had 
blunted the attack and few tried to scale the walls 
to left and right. Carl's sword hummed, bouncing off 
Lenard's helmet. He felt the return blow bite deeply 
into his shield. Savagely, he cut low, and Lenard intercepted the sweep with his own blade just in time to 
save his legs. Swords locked together. They strained, 
grunting, glaring, and Lenard's greater strength slowly 
forced Carl's arm back. 

Crash! Crash! 



194 



Vault of the Ages 



The barbarians howled, a single shuddering wail of 
stark terror, and fell away. Nicky and Owl laughed, 
closing in on the suddenly deserted Lenard. The 
northern prince cursed and retreated. 

Crash! 

The last bomb exploded amidst the enemy, scattering its terrible jagged fragments, and the host became 
a mob, screaming, fighting itself, clawing and trampling as it fled. 

Carl gasped for breath. His head reeled and rang, 
and he began to tremble uncontrollably. He sat down 
where he was and stared into the courtyard. 

His men had suffered cruelly. Not one but bled 
from a dozen wounds, and five lay dead and six could 
not stand. The arrows were exhausted, the swords 
nicked and blunted, the armor bashed and the shields 
splintered. But the fallen Lann were thick, and the 
Dalesmen managed a weary cheer. 

"If they come at us again," said Ezzef grimly, "we're 
done for. This time they can't help carrying the day." 

"We'll just have to hope they don't," answered Carl 
dully. 

He sat listening to the howl of the mob. It seemed 
very far away. He must have dozed off, for he woke 
with a start as Owl touched his arm. 

"Lenard's coming," said the farmer's son. 

Carl got to his feet. The Lann prince was a gory 
and terrible sight where he stood in the avenue. His 
face was turned to his men, who were out of sight 
behind the looming walls but who had quieted down, 
and his voice lifted angrily. 

"All right, I'll prove it! He's no more a witch than 
we are. I'll show you his magic won't help him. Then 



Battle of Ifie Vault 



195 



maybe you'll have heart enough to kill the rest of 
those pig-headed southlanders." 

He turned to Carl and flashed a wolf's grin. "Truce!" 
he called. "I want a truce of battle while you and 
I fight it out alone!" 

The boy stood stock-still. It was the custom among 
many tribes, he knew— single combat among the 
leaders before the real battle was resumed. He could 
not refuse this fight. Quite apart from custom, it would 
prove that he had no real magical powers to give him 
confidence; the Lann would take heart again and overrun the little defending force. But if he, Carl, failed 
in the duel, that too would inspire the Lann to a 
fresh and final attack. 

"I'll go for you," whispered Ezzef. 

"No, you can't," answered Carl. "I'm the one who's 
been challenged. Also, I'm the one they think is the 
witch— Ronwy and L and Ronwy surely can't go. If 
I failed to meet this, it'd be the end for all of us." 

"Come out, Carl, come out!" jeered Lenard. "Or 
are you afraid?" 

"I'm coming," said the boy. He cast his battered 
shield to earth and took a better one from Ezzef. His 
sword was dulled with use, but so was everyone else's; 
it might still be sharp enough. 

He felt no dread, he was past that now. But the 
weight of destiny was heavy on him as he walked out 
into the street. 



Chapter /£ 77,e Last Battle 



I he sun was sliding down the last quarter of its journey toward darkness, and the mellowed, ivy-covered walls glowed with a golden light. Trees rustled 
here and there in the faint breeze. Through the hot 
reek of blood and sweat, Carl smelled a cool, damp 
breath of green earth and summer blowing from the 
great forest. He flexed his aching muscles, taking glory 
in their very throb and weariness. His heart beat 
steadily and strongly, air filled his breast and tingled 
in his veins. Every ridge on the sword haft under his 
fingers sent a message to him, telling of a real world, 
one to be grasped in the hands and known by the living body— a world of life and mystery, a world of 
splendor and striving and wistful beauty. Yes, it was 
good to live, and even if he was now to join the sun in 
an endless night, he was glad of what he had been 
given. 

196 



The Last Battle 



197 



Lenard smiled at him and lifted his blade in salute. 
There was a strange warmth in his greeting: "I could 
almost wish you luck, Carl. You've been a gallant foe, 
and I would we had been friends." 

The Lann stood waiting on either side of the cleared 
space, row on row of tensed and breathless men, still 
shaken by the thunder of the bombs. The defenders 
went outside their own barricade to watch. 

"Go get him, Carl!" shouted Owl. 

Carl crossed blades with Lenard. "Are you ready?" 
he asked. 

"Yes," said the northerner. "Let's go!" 

His saber slithered free and lifted for a downward 
sweep. Carl struck first, holding his shield up as he 
battered against Lenard's. The prince's blade rasped 
across that shield and slewed about toward Carl's 
thigh. The boy smote downward, beating the enemy 
weapon aside, and skipped back. Lenard rushed at 
him, blade howling. It crashed mightily against Carl's 
shield. The boy planted himself firm, and his lighter, 
straight weapon clashed against the saber. 

Then they were at it, ducking and dodging, weaving 
around, and steel banging on steel. Carl's flickering 
blade sprang past Lenard's guard to slash the man's 
cheek. Lenard's saber answered, ringing on the Dalesman's helmet, bouncing from his shield. It struck the 
rim of that bullhide defense with a fury that dragged 
Carl's arm down. The Lann warrior grunted, thrusting 
forward, but his curved edge slid off the armored 
shoulder beyond. Carl hacked at the calf of his enemy's leg and felt his weapon bite through leather 
and flesh. The Dalesmen whooped. 

Lenard growled and bored in, a sudden whirring, 
clamoring blur of attack. The blows hailed and thun


198 Vault of the Ages 

dered, shivering in Carl's muscles and bones. He tried 
to parry, and his sword was hammered aside. Lenard 
drove forward relentlessly. Carl stepped back, panting. 

Whooo—bang! Carl's head reeled with the shock. 
Stars danced before his eyes. Lenard hewed at his 
ankles, drawing blood. Carl slashed at the barbarian's 
arm. The cut was deep, but the blunted edge would 
not bite well. Lenard grinned in fury and his snake'stongue saber blazed against the boy's defense. A 
ragged hole opened in the Dale shield, carved away 
by shrieking steel. Carl met the saber in mid-sweep, 
sparks and rattling. He ran backward as Lenard parried. The saber howled by his ear and raked down his 
sword arm. 

He was fighting desperately now, against an older, 
heavier, more experienced warrior. The shock and 
thunder of blows was loud in his ears. He crossed 
blades and his own was hurled aside— almost wrenched 
from his hand. The frame of his shield gave away, a 
splinter stabbing his left arm. He threw the thing off, 
hurling it under Lenard's feet. The northerner tripped 
over it and crashed to the ground. Carl hacked at him, 
but the enemy shield turned his blow and Lenard 
scrambled up again. 

"Well done!" he cried. 

His saber whistled against Carl's now unshielded 
left. The boy retreated, weaving a barrier of flying 
metal to guard himself. The Lann army tightened and 
cheered, seeing him outclassed. 

He couldn't go any farther. The wall of a building 
opposite the vault was suddenly against his back. Carl 
planted his legs firm and struck two-handed at Lenard, 
letting the northerner's blade smash at his own 
armored side. The straight sword whined against 



The Last Battle 



19? 



Lenard's incautiously exposed head. Blood ran free 
and Lenard's helmet rolled off. Carl had cut its chin 
strap but done little other harm. Lenard shook his 
head, bull-like, briefly dazed, and gave Carl a chance 
to slip back into the open. 

Yelling, Lenard rushed him. Carl twisted his body 
sideways, holding his left arm out of danger. He thrust 
against the attacking barbarian, reaching for the eyes. 
Lenard nearly spitted himself, but he danced aside 
in time. Carl drilled in, pulling his dagger out with 
his left hand. Sword caught on sword, and Carl 
stabbed with the knife. 

His thrust, awkwardly made, did little harm. Lenard 
broke free and crashed his shield-rim down on Carl's 
wrist. Numbed, the boy dropped the dagger. Lenard 
thrust close, sword spitting from behind his shield. 
Carl clinched again. Lenard thrust a sudden foot behind Carl's ankles and shoved. The boy went over on 
his back. Lenard sprang at him. Carl kicked with both 
feet. The kick thudded against Lenard's shield, driving him back. Carl rolled free and regained his stance, 
panting. 

Lenard's blade sang against Carl's helmet. The 
Dalesman staggered, and the watching Lann cheered 
afresh. Carl lurched back, Lenard hammering his 
defense. 

"Carl, Carl," groaned Owl. 

Wildly, the boy held firm and battled. His breath 
was sobbing now. A wave of dizziness went through 
him and his knees shook. He was not afraid. There 
wasn't time for fear. But his body wouldn't obey; it 
was too tired. 

He sent a mighty blow against Lenard's bare head. 
The shield came up to catch it, and the saber chopped 



200 Vault of (lie Ages 

for his neck. Carl ducked, letting the sweep ring on his 
helmet. He yanked his sword free and stabbed twohanded against Lenard's shield. The bullhide gave— 
but only a little, and Carl had to leap away before 
he was cut down. 

His back was once more to the wall. He leaned 
against the old bricks and met the furious assault as 
it came. Steel whistled and belled, a flying blur. 

Carl's sword met the thick edge of Lenard's saber, 
slid along it, and caught in a notch there. Lenard 
roared triumphantly and twisted with a skilled 
strength. The sword spun from Carl's sweat-slippery 
hand and went clanging to the street. 

"Now you're done!" shouted Lenard. His saber lifted 
for the death stroke. The Lann howled their glee. 

Carl sprang! He leaped against his enemy, one hand 
closing on the sword arm, one reaching for the throat. 
Lenard writhed, stepping back. Carl's right hand doubled into a fist and jolted a blow to Lenard's jaw. The 
northerner snarled and tried to jerk his weapon free. 
Carl tripped him, and they crashed to earth. 

The boy clawed for the saber. Lenard's shield was 
pinned under the barbarian, holding his left arm useless. Carl's hands tugged at the saber haft. Lenard 
slipped his shield arm free and closed it about Carl's 
neck. The boy grunted, hammering a fist down on the 
fingers closed about the weapon. It suddenly clattered free as the two fighters rolled to one side. 

Carl's fist smashed into the dark face that was now 
above him. Blood came. Lenard gouged for his eyes. 
Carl flung up an arm to protect himself, and Lenard 
twisted away, clutching after the saber. Carl got a 
scissor-lock about his waist and dragged him back. 

The air was alive with the howling of the Lann. The 



The Last Battle 



Dalesmen strained forward, white and drawn of face. 
The combatants rolled in the street, fists and arms 
locked, battering, raging. 

The flat of Lenard's hand struck Carl in the throat. 
Gasping with pain, the boy released his gripping arms. 
Lenard writhed half-free of the scissors-hold, reaching 
for the saber. 

Carl surged up, clawing his way onto Lenard's back. 
He closed fingers in the barbarian's hair and smashed 
his enemy's forehead against the old pavement. 

Lenard roared. Carl beat his head down again, and 
again, and again. Suddenly the warrior lay still. 

"Carl, Carl, Carl!" whooped the Dalesmen. 

The boy shook his head, now ringing and swimming 
with darkness. Thunder beat in his ears and blood 
dripped from his face to the street. Shuddering, he 
crawled free on hands and knees, looking up at the 
enemy host through ragged veils of darkness. 

They surged uneasily, muttering, rolling wild eyes. 
Had the boy's victory proved that he was a powerful 
witch, or did it mean nothing? But Lenard lay beaten, 
Lenard the bold who had egged them on in the teeth 
of angry gods. Their courage waned. There were so 
few Dalesmen to stand them off— but who knew what 
powers those few had ready to loosen? 

Carl sat up, holding his aching head in both hands. 
The darkness was fading now, swirling from his eyes, 
but the thuttering and booming still went on. There 
were faint shouts and— 

And they weren't within himself! 
' Carl staggered erect, not daring to believe. Above 
the Lann host, suddenly shrieking in alarm, there was 
the blowing of horns, the drumming of hoofs, the 
deep-voiced shouts of men. Far down the street, Carl 



202 



Vault of the Ages 



saw a green and yellow banner advancing, floating 
against heaven. The noise of battle lifted as the newcomers fell on the Lann from the rear. 
Dalesmen! 

Carl reeled away from the sudden, trampling horde 
of spectators. Almost without thinking, he grasped 
Lenard by the hair and pulled the unconscious prince 
away from those frantic feet. Owl and Ezzef sprang 
out to help him back. 

"Our people!" gibbered Owl. "Our people! I can't 
believe it!" 

"Let me see—" New strength flowed back into Carl. 
Aided by his friends, he climbed up on the top of a 
wall from which he could see what was happening. 

He recognized his father, mounted in the van of a 
Dale force that must have numbered some four hundred men. They were dusty, weary, their armor and 
bodies scarred with recent combat, their horses staggering in exhaustion, but they were hurling themselves 
against the enemy with a fierceness that rang between 
the ancient buildings. 

The Lann at that end of the avenue had kept to 
their horses and were meeting the attack with the 
vigor of freshness. Behind them, their fellows rallied, 
pressing forward against this new menace and raising 
their own war shouts. Carl's new-found gladness 
turned to dismay. 

The Dalesmen had come, yes— but they were tired, 
outnumbered two to one, moving against the most 
terrible foe of their history. Could they win? Would 
this prove only a trap? 



Ckapter20 Twilight of the Gods 



[rom his post on the wall, Carl saw Ralph plainly 
now. The Dale Chief was still mounted, a tall and 
terrible figure in travel-stained armor, hair flashing 
gold in the late sun. His standard-bearer rode beside him, but the rest of his army were leaping from 
their animals and thrusting ahead on foot. 

A Lann cavalryman swung mightily at Ralph, sword 
whistling to clang against the Dalesman's blade. That 
steel seemed to come alive, howling and roaring, 
smashing down the northerner's guard and sending 
him to earth. A lancer thrust at Ralph. The Chief 
chopped out, hewing the shaft in two, and pressed 
against the man. 

The Lann horseman edged back from the grimly 
advancing wall of pikes. In this narrow space, they 
had no chance against such an assault. Their comrades 

203 



204 Vault of the Ages 

on foot yelled at them to get out of the way, and they 
too dismounted. 

Now arrows began to fly over the heads of the frontrank Dalesmen, sleeting down among the Lann. A 
rattle of swords and axes lifted as the two lines met. 
The rearward Lann whooped, pushing forward, adding their own weight to the thrust against the Dalesmen. Their advance halted, the warriors of Ralph 
opened their ranks to let a line of their own swordsmen and axmen through the pikes. 

Metal banged on metal and sheared in flesh. Ralph's 
horse neighed, rearing and trampling, while its rider's 
blade swung like a reaping scythe. The Lann attacked 
with steadily rising bravery, leaping over the bodies 
of the fallen, smashing against the Dale weapons, and 
slowly, step by step, they drove the newcomers back. 

Ezzef groaned. "They're too many for us," he said. 
"Too many— it's all been for nothing, Carl." 

"No— wait— what's this?" The boy peered down the 
street, shading his eyes against the western sun. "What 
are they doing?" 

The double front rank of the Dalesmen stood firm, 
trading blow for blow, but their comrades behind 
them were withdrawing, racing down the street. Ralph 
himself pushed through his human wall to join those 
pulling back. 

"Are they beaten already?" whispered Owl. "No, 
they can't bel" 

Many yards of empty distance from the battle, the 
Dalesmen halted and wheeled about. Pikes reached 
through their massed lines, swords and axes swung 
free and bowmen and slingers loped in the rear. Ralph 
lifted his sword and plunged forward. His men poured 
after him, yelling. 



Twilight of (he Gods 205 

The Dalesmen who had been standing off the foe 
suddenly sprang aside, crowding against the walls on 
either hand. Carl saw what his father's idea was, and 
he shouted with the men as that massed charge struck 
the Lann. 

The four hundred men running together struck a 
terrible blow whose hammer-noise trembled in the 
earth and lifted up to heaven. Pikes were driven like 
battering-rams, smashing through all defenses to shatter the first barbarian lines. Those behind reeled from 
the shock, forcing their own rearward men farther 
back. A gray storm of arrows rained on the suddenly 
confused Lann army, and the hewers of the Dales 
thundered against them and hurled them into each 
other. 

For long moments, the struggle went on; the Lann 
in retreat before the smashing, sundering Dalesmen, 
their ranks crumpled, panic running blindly among 
them. They had been shaken by powers of magic; they 
had been made leaderless; they had been assailed by 
an enemy they thought safely bottled up. It was too 
much! 

With a single mob howl of utter dismay, the Lann 
turned and fled. 

The Dalesmen pursued them, smiting without 
mercy, taking revenge for all the bitterness they had 
suffered. Battle snarled past the time vault, turning to 
butchery, and went on down the street and lost itself 
in the forest as the Lann scattered. 

Carl sprang from the wall into Ralph's path. 
"Father!" he cried. "Father, you came!" 

"Oh, Carl, my son, my son—" The Chief dismounted 
and embraced him in trembling arms. 

a xt xt » » 



206 Vault of the Ages 

Night came, with stars and moon and a singing 
darkness. Men pitched camp in the ruins and slept for 
utter exhaustion. To the wounded, Lann and Dale 
alike, the gentle night gave rest and forgetfulness; over 
the dead it drew a shroud. The moon swam high in 
a winking sea of stars, touching leaves and old walls 
with a ghostly silver. 

PeaceSome were still awake, sitting about the hearth 
in Ronwy's home. A fire crackled before them, the 
light of candles touched their faces and shone in their 
eyes. Ralph was there, sprawled in a seat of honor with 
his sword across his knees. Carl sat by him, holding 
one of Ronwy's books in his lap and stroking its faded 
cover with shy fingers. Tom and Owl, the former insisting that his wounds were mere scratches, lay on 
the rug. Lenard, his head swathed in bandages, sat 
gloomily in a corner. The little witch-man, Gervish, 
who had followed Ralph to the City, hovered about 
trying to be of service to someone. 

Ralph was telling the story of his arrival. "Even 
if you haven't won anything else, boys, you saved us 
by drawing off a thousand of the best Lann," he told 
them. "When I saw them go away, I was sure they were 
bound for the City. I waited till they were safely distant, then led all our men out against those who remained. And this time we won! We broke them in the 
field. When their Chief fell, they scattered before us. 
Now they're streaming homeward, beaten, harried by 
our forces just so they won't get ideas about turning 
back. We've won!" 

"My father," said Lenard dully. "He's dead?" 

"Yes," said Ralph. 

"I— I'm sorry," whispered Carl. 



Twilight of the Gods 207 

"Oh-I"ll see him again-in Sky-Home after I die." 
Lenard tried to smile. "That makes me Chief of the 
Lann, doesn't it? A prisoner Chief—" He bowed his 
head, then looked up with a sigh. "But I may be better 
off this way. This defeat may well break up the 
confederation. . . ." 

Ralph went on: "Well, our folk were naturally full 
of glee and ready to lick the world. I took advantage 
of that— made them a speech pointing out that a thousand warriors were still loose up in the City, perhaps 
brewing magic against us and in any case nothing we 
wanted running free in the Dales. I got enough lads 
to follow me so I thought we'd have a chance. We 
hurried, I can tell you! We killed horses and nearly 
killed ourselves, but it was worth it." 

"The taboo?" breathed Carl. 

"Donn came with us. I thought you knew that." 
Ralph looked keenly at his son. "Never thought the 
old fellow could match the pace we were setting, but 
he did. I left him talking to your friend Ronwy, and—" 
He looked at the door. "And here they are!" 

The two old men entered, side by side. Donn paused 
in the doorway, looking beyond the chamber to a 
dream. An almost holy light shone in his eyes. 

"I have been in the vault," he whispered. "I have 
seen the treasure there, looked at the high-piled wisdom of the books. I have read the words of that unknown who gave it to us, and I have talked with 
this wise one here—" He shook his head, and a smile 
hovered about his thin lips. "There is no evil in the 
vault. There is only evil in the hearts of men. Knowledge, all knowledge, is good." 

"Then you'll lift the taboo?" cried Carl joyously. 

"I shall urge the Council to do so, and I know they 



208 



Vault of (fie Ages 



will. Afterward, Carl, you shall have whatever help the 
Doctors can give out of their little wisdom, to rebuild 
the old world as you have longed." Donn's smile became almost a grin. "Even if I myself wouldn't admit 
my error, which I freely do, four hundred lusty Dalesmen who've been to this place of wonder and come to 
no harm would have something to say about it!" 

It was as if a great brooding presence were suddenly 
gone, as if the wandering night breeze sobbed in a new 
loneliness. The gods were doomed— the cruel, old 
pagan gods of human fear and human ignorance felt 
their twilight upon them. And the darkness which 
dwells in every mortal heart cried out to the dying 
gods. 

Gervish was kneeling at Ronwy's feet. "Forgive us," 
he murmured brokenly. "We were wrong, all of us 
were wrong. The Lann from whom we sought aid 
would have ruined us. The Dalesmen, your friends, 
saved us; and the magic is not evil. Be our Chief 
again!" 

Ronwy lifted him. "Let there be no talk of forgiveness," he smiled. "We've too much to do even to 
remember the past, let alone judge it. But bear this 
in mind, Gervish, and tell it to the people: We of the 
City will be among the first to benefit from the released powers. Above all, the lifting of the taboo 
makes us a tribe like any other, who can walk like 
men instead of shunned and hated outcasts." 

Lenard spoke with sadness. "It seems that everyone but my poor Lann will gain from this." A dark 
flash of menace: "They'll come back someday!" 

Ralph shook his head. "I don't know what to do 
about you people," he said. "It's true, I suppose, that 
you were driven by great need to attack us. But the 



Twiiig/if of the Gods 209 

same force will drive you against the south once more, 
and once again after that. If we are not to be plagued 
by endless wars— what can we do?" 

"The vault is the answer!" cried Carl eagerly. "Look, 
Lenard, there are plans and models in it designed for 
the use of people like ourselves, people who can't hope 
to master the greatest of the ancient powers for many 
years yet. There are things we can do and build right 
now!" 

"Such as what?" challenged Lenard. Despite himself, there was a quickening in his own voice. 

"Oh, many things. For example, there's something 
called a schooner, which can sail against the windyes, I know it sounds fantastic, but I'm willing to try! 
They'll at least sail rings around the clumsy luggers 
the coastal tribes use today. Make them big enough, 
and you Lann can open trade, fisheries— why, even 
new lands to colonize! Then there are ways to use 
wind power for grinding grain, when you don't happen to have water power handy; and the rules by 
which you can breed better plants and animals; and 
means to prevent some of the diseases that now 
scourge us all. Oh, it's a long list, and I'll bet we find 
a lot more in that vault when we get it really well 
explored. 

"Give us a chance, Lenard." Carl's tones beat urgently against the barbarian, who sat with lowered 
head. "You're Chief up there, now that your father's 
gone; they'll listen to you. Swear a truce with us. 
Swear it now and then go back and make your people 
keep it!" 

"We may be able to hold out for three years—" said 
Lenard doubtfully. 

"That's fine," said Carl. "Oh, that'll do! We'll have 



210 Vault o! the Ages 

something to show you by that time, something to 
share with you, that you can use to better your own lot 
without taking from anyone else." 

"I'll arrange for food to be sent to you during the 
truce," said Ralph. "You can pay us back later, when 
these old things make you better able to afford it. 
Peace," he added, "is kept by the good will and strength 
of the peaceful." 

"I'll do it!" exclaimed Lenard. He thrust his hand 
out. "By Jenzik, you've been brave enemies and I think 
you'll be good friends!" 

Carl and Ralph clasped hands with him. Gladness 
filled the boy's heart. 

It would be a mighty task, this rebuilding. Lifetimes 
must pass before it was completed. But what better 
work could anyone ask for? 

Carl went softly to the door and opened it and 
looked out into the summer night. It was dark now, 
but dawn was not far off. 



