LOSE ALL By JACK VANCE 

CHIEF Officer Avery came 
up the tube into the bridge 
sucking a bulb of coffee. 
Second Mate Dart rose stiffly 
from the seat where he had spent 
his watch. "She's all yours." 

Avery was thin, hawk-nosed. 
His complexion was sallow leather color, his hair lank and 
sparse. He had black eyes between narrow lids and the angle 
at which they crossed his cheeks 



gave his face a look of clownish 
melancholy. Dart was stocky, 
stub-featured. His hair was Airedale-red; he was abrupt and positive in his movements. Stretching 
with a quick wide sweep of short 
arms, he joined Avery by the 
forward cupola. 

Avery leaned forward, looked 
up, down, right, left, tracing the 
veins of rose and electric blue 
across the black of macroid space. 



Illustrations by THORNE 



WINNER IOSE ALL 



93 



He said over his shoulder, "She's 
dim. Turn her up. Can't see 
twenty feet at this level." 

Dart, blinking, half-asleep, adjusted a rheostat, increasing the 
flood of polarized light from the 
bow projectors, and the gristlelike lines of force out in macroid 
space shone with greater brilliance and detail. 

Avery grunted, "That's a lot 
different. And there's a focus 
coming up, where those two 
stringers dent in toward each 
other." 

Dart came to watch as the lines 
trembled, bulged toward each 
other. Films of color began to 
flow from the area: wan yellow, 
pink, green. Suddenly a hot spark 
of red appeared. 

"There's the focus," said Avery 
sourly. "Three feet from your 
nose, the center of a sun." 

Dart ruefully rubbed his chin, 
thankful that Avery rather than 
Captain Badt had caught him 
dozing. 

"Yeah, I guess so." 

"Small to medium, from the 
kink to that inner blue line," said 
Avery. "Well, let's check for 
planets; that's what we're out 
here for." 

Inch by inch they searched the 
cupola, up, down, right, left. Dart 
said, "By golly, here it is. Just 
like the illustration in the text. 
Maybe we'll slice that bonus yet." 

The hot red spark faded to yel


low; the twist of colored veins 
which signified a planet started 
to uncoil. Avery sprang back, 
snapped the drift switch, and the 
lines became static. 

For a moment he studied the 
pattern in the hemispherical cupola. "The sun's right about 
here." He indicated a point between himself and Dart. "The 
planet's just inside the cupola." 

"We're big men," said Dart. 

Avery twisted his mouth in a 
saturnine grimace. "Either big, or 
a long way off in a freak direction." 

"With all these guys running 
loose claiming to be geniuses," 
said Dart, "it's funny one of them 
hasn't figured it out." 

Avery had been searching the 
cupola for further kinks. "Figure 
what out?" 

"What happens when we go 
into macroid space." 

"You're a dreamer," said Avery. "The universe shrinks, or we 
and the ship get cosmically big. 
The main thing is, we get there. 
Talk to Bascomb, he'll give you 
ten answers, all different. That's 
genius for you." Bascomb was the 
ship's biologist, who had gained 
himself the reputation of a tireless polemist and theoretician. 

Avery took one more look at 
the kink. "Call the captain, ring 
general quarters. We're going into 
normal space." 

* * * 



94 




 



'X'HE unigen was an intelligent 
organism, though its characteristics included neither form 
nor structure. Its components 
were mobile nodes of a luminous 
substance which was neither matter nor yet energy. There were 
millions" of nodes and each was 
connected with every other node 
by tendrils similar to the lines of 
force in macroid space. 

The unigen might be compared 
to a great brain, -the nodes corresponding to the gray cells, the 
lines of force to the nerve tissue. 
It might appear as a bright 
sphere, or it might disperse its 
nodes at light speed to all corners of the universe. 

Like every other aspect of reality, the unigen was a victim of 
entropy; to survive, it processed 
energy down the scale of availability, acquiring the energy from 
radioactive matter. The unigen's 
business of living included a constant search for energy. 

There were periods of plenitude when the unigen would wax 
heavy with energy and might expand the number of its nodes by 
a kind of parthenogenetic fission. 
Other times the nodes would 
wane, glowing only feebly, and 
the unigen would seek energy 
stuff like a wolf, stalking the 
planets, satellites, meteors and 
dark stars for crumbs of even 
low-grade energy material. During a lean time, one of the nodes, 

WINNER LOSE ALL 



approaching the planet of a small 
sun, became aware of quanta 
suggesting the presence of radioactivity: a spangle of distinctive 
color against a mottled background. 

Hope, an emotion compounded 
of desire and imagination, was 
not alien to the unigen. It speeded the node forward and the radiation came hard and sharp. The 
node flitted down through a high 
scud of cloud. The glow of colored light stretched, elongated, 
and near its middle shone a 
markedly bright spot, like a diamond on a band of silver, evidently where the radioactive material broke surface. Toward this 
spot the unigen directed the node. 

As it dropped, the unigen 
sought evidences of danger: the 
spoor of energy-eaters, sources of 
static electricity, such as clouds, 
which might disrupt the tight 
coils of a node with a spark. 

The air was clear and the 
planet seemed free of dangerous 
life-forms. The node fell like a 
bright snowflake toward the central concentration of radioactivity. 

* * * 

npHE ship circled the planet in 
a reconnaissance orbit. Captain Badt, taciturn and something 
of a martinet, stood by the bridge 
telescreen, receiving reports from 
the technicians and keeping his 
opinions to himself. 

95 



Dart muttered to Avery in a 
disgruntled voice, "I'd hardly call 
the place a tourist planet." 

"Looks pretty grim in spots, 
but it looks like a bonus." 

Dart sighed, shook his round 
red head. "There never yet was 
a world so tough that colonists 
wouldn't flock out to it. If it's not 
cold enough to freeze air and not 
hot enough to boil water, and if 
you can breathe without popping 
your eyes, then it's land, and men 
seem to want it." 

"I was born on a planet a hell 
of a lot worse than this," said 
Avery shortly. 

Dart was silent a moment; 
then, with the air of a man who 
refuses to admit discouragement, 
went on. "Well, it's livable. 
Breathable atmosphere, temperature and gravity inside the critical area, and — so far — no signs of 
life." He went to the cupola, 
which now overlooked the world 
below. "At home the ocean's blue. 
It's yellow on Alexander, red on 
Coralasan. Here it's green. Grass 
by -Jesus green." 

"Different proposition altogether," said Avery. "The red and 
yellow come from plankton. This 
green is algae or moss or seaweed. 
No telling how thick it is. Might 
be a man could walk out on it 
and pasture his cows." 

"Lots of good grazing," admitted Dart. "About four million 
square miles in sight from here. 



Probably the source of the planet's oxygen. According to Bascomb, there's no surface vegetation. Maybe lichens, a few shrubs 
and such. . . . That sea-bed must 
be thick with humus. . . ." 

The speaker from the laboratory click-clicked. On the other 
wing of the bridge Captain Badt 
snapped, "Report!" 

The code-sono opened the circuit; the voice of Jason the geologist said, "Here's a full report on 
the atmosphere. Thirty-one per 
cent oxygen, eleven per cent helium, forty per cent nitrogen, ten 
per cent argon, four per cent C0 2 , 
the other four per cent inert. Substantially an Earth-type atmosphere." 

"Thank you," said Captain 
Badt formally. "Off." 

He paced up and down the 
bridge frowning, his hands clasped behind his back. 

"The old man's in a hurry,"* 
Avery said quietly to Dart. "I 
can read his mind. He doesn't like 
survey duty, and he's figuring 
that if he finds a good Class A 
planet, he can use it as an excuse 
to take off for Earth." 

Captain Badt marched stiffly 
back and forth, paused, went to 
the speaker. "Jason." 

"Yes, sir?" 

"What's the story on the geol-ogy so far?" 

"I can't tell much from this 
high, but the relief seems gener


96 




 



ally a product of igneous action 
rather than erosion. Naturally, 
that's a guess." 

"A good ore planet, possibly?" 

"At a guess, yes. There's plenty 
of folding, lots of faults, not too 
much sediment. Where those 
mountains break up through the 
coastal strip, I'd expect schists, 
gneiss, broken rocks cemented 
with quartz and calcite." 

"Thank you." Captain Badt 
went to the magniscreen, watched 
the landscape drift past. He turned to Avery. "I think we'll dispense with further investigation 
and set down." 

The speaker click-clicked. "Report!" said Captain Badt. 

It was Jason again. "I've located an extensive outcrop of radioactive ore, probably pitchblende or possibly carnotite. It 
shines like a searchlight when I 
drop the X-screen across the 
scope. It runs along the shore just 
south of the long inlet." 

"Thank you." To Avery: 
"We'll set down there." 

THE reconnaissance party, consisting of Avery and Jason, 
walked along the black gravel 
pebbles of the shore. To their left, 
the ocean spread out to the horizon, a green velvety flat like a 
tremendous billiard table. To the 
right, black-shadowed gulleys 
led back into the mountains — • 
crag-crested barrens of rock. The 



sun was smaller and yellower 
than Sol; the light was wan, like 
Earth sunlight through a pall of 
smoke. Although the air had been 
certified breathable, the men 
wore head-domes, precautions 
against possibly dangerous bacteria or spores. 

Through a pick-up TV eye 
mounted above Avery's dome, 
Captain Badt watched from the 
ship. "Any insects, animal life of 
any sort?" he asked. 

"Haven't noticed any so far . . . 
That upholstered ocean should 
make a good home for bugs. Jason threw a stone out and it's still 
sitting high and dry. I believe a 
man could walk out there with a 
pair of snowshoes." 

"What is that vegetation to 
your right?" 

Avery paused, inspected the 
shrub. "Nothing very different 
from those around the ship. Just 
one of those paint-brush plants a 
little larger than the others. 
Country seems rather arid, in 
spite of this ocean. Takes rain to 
make good soil. Right, Jason?" 

"Right." 

Captain Badt said, "After a 
while, we'll check into the ocean. 
Right now I'm interested in that 
uranium reef. You should be almost on top of it." 

"I think it's about a hundred 
yards ahead, a ledge of black 
rock. Yep, Jason's detector is 
buzzing like mad . . . Jason says 



WINNER LOSE ALL 



97 



it's pitchblende — uranium oxide.** 
He stopped short in his tracks. 

"What's the trouble?" 

"There's a swarm of lights over 
it. Flickering up and down like 
mosquitoes." 

Captain Badt focused the image on the screen. "Yes, I see 
them." 

"Might be some sort of fireflies," hazarded Jason. 

Avery took a few cautious steps 
forward, halted. One of the luminous spots darted up, sped toward him, swung around his 
head, circled Jason, returned to 
the uranium ledge. 

Avery said uncertainly, "I 
guess they're not dangerous. Some 
kind of bug, apparently." 

Captain Badt said, "Peculiar 
how they're concentrated along 
that ledge. As if they're feeding 
on the uranium, or like the feel 
of the radiation." 

"There's nothing else nearby. 
No vegetation of any sort, so it 
must be the uranium." 

"I'll send Bascomb out," said 
Captain Badt. "He can investigate more closely." 

* * * 

THE node which originally discovered the planet settled on 
an outcrop of the uranium oxide 
and was presently joined by other 
nodes, fleeting in from less rewarding areas. The absorption of 
energy began; pressing against 
the massive blue-black rock, a 



node would generate sufficient 
heat to vaporize a quantity of the 
ore. Enveloping the gas, the node 
worked a complicated alchemy 
which released the latent energy. 
The node absorbed this energy, 
compacting and augmenting its 
structure, - kinking its whorls of 
force into harder knots. At the 
same time it discharged a flood of 
energy into the lines to the rest 
of the unigen, and everywhere in 
the universe nodes shone with a 
new golden -green luster. 

Insofar as surprise may be 
equated to witnessing events 
which have previously been dismissed as improbable, the unigen 
felt surprise when it sensed the 
approach of two creatures along 
the shore. 

The unigen had observed living creatures on other worlds. 
Some of these were dangerous, 
like the mirror-metal energy-eaters swimming in the thick atmosphere of another uranium-rich 
planet. Others were unimportant 
as competition for food. These 
particular slow- moving creatures 
appeared harmless. 

To investigate at close hand, 
" the unigen sent out a node, and 
received a report of infra-red 
radiation, fluctuating electromagnetic fields. 

"Harmless autochthones," was 
the unigen's summation. "Creatures living by chemical reaction 
at a low energy level, like the 



*4 




 



land -worms of Planet 11432. Useless as energy sources, incapable 
of damage to the hard energy of 
a node." 

Dismissing further consideration of the two creatures, the unigen absorbed itself with the 
uranium bank . . . Odd. On the 
surface of the ore had appeared 
what seemed to be a vegetable 
growth, a peppering of tiny spines 
rising from little flat collars. They 
had not been evident previously. 

And here came another of the 
slow-moving creatures. This one, 
like the others, emitted infra-red 
radiation, several different weaker 
waves. 

The creature halted, then 
slowly approached the ledge. 

The unigen watched with mild 
curiosity. Precise visual definition was beyond its powers, so 
the land-worm's movements came 
as blurs of shifting radiation. 

It seemed 'to manipulate a 
metal object which glinted and 
reflected sunlight — evidently a 
bit of pitchblende which had attracted its attention. 

The land-worm moved closer. 
It made a few blurred motions, 
and suddenly appeared to have 
extended one of its members. It 
moved once more, and a mesh of 
carbonaceous material fell around 
one of the npdes. 

Interesting, thought the unigen. The land-worm evidently 
had been attracted by the glitter 



and motion. The action implied 
curiosity; was the creature more 
highly evolved than its structure 
indicated? Or possibly it sustained life by trapping small 
bright animals, such as phosphorescent jellyfish from the sea. 

The land -worm drew the net 
close. To resolve the problem, 
the unigen permitted the node to 
be carried along. 

A brittle shell of another carbon compound was cupped over 
the node and an enclosure effected. 

Was this perhaps the landworm's organ of digestion? There 
appeared to be no digestive juice, 
no grinding or crushing action. 

The land-worm moved slightly 
away from the ledge and performed a series of mysterious gyrations. The unigen was puzzled. 

Two metal needles entered the 
brittle cage. In sudden consternation the unigen sought to snap 

the node free. 

* * * 

AVERY and Jason continued 
along the pitchblende ledge. 
Presently it dipped from sight, 
and the shore of black-gray pebbles slanted up from the green 
velvet ocean to the heavy shoulder of the mountain. 

"Nothing out here, Captain," 
said Avery. "Just looks like more 
shore and more mountains for 
ten or twenty miles." 

"Very well, you can return." 



WINNER LOSE AIL 



9» 



He added in a grumbling voice, 
"Bascomb's on his way out to 
check on those flickering lights. 
He thinks they're emanations, 
like will o' the wisps." 

Avery winked at Jason, and 
cutting off the band to the ship 
said, "Bascomb won't be satisfied 
till he has one of 'em pinned to a 
board like a butterfly." 

Jason held up a hand, signed 
Avery to listen. Avery switched 
back on the communication band, 
heard Bascomb's precise voice. 

* — from a distance of thirty 
feet, the spectroscope shows a 
uniform band, radiating at apparently equal intensity in all 
frequencies. This is curious. Normal phosphors emit in discrete 
bands. Perhaps some such occurrence like St. Elmo's Fire is involved, though I confess I don't 
quite understand — " 

Captain Badt growled impatiently, "Are they alive or aren't 
they?" 

Bascomb's voice was petulant. 
"I've no idea, I'm sure. After all, 
this is a strange planet. The word 
'life' has a thousand interpretations. Incidentally, I note a very 
odd type of vegetation growing 
on the pitchblende itself." 

"Avery mentioned no vegetation," said Captain Badt. "I 
questioned him specifically." 

Bascomb sniffed. "He could 
hardly have missed it. It's a line 
of shoots about six inches tall. 



They're like spikes, apparently 
stiff and crisp, rising from suckers 
clamped to the surface. Very 
similar to something I saw once 
on Martius Juvenal where a 
pitchblende vein breaks surface 
. . . It's very peculiar. The roots 
seem to have drilled into the solid 
rock." 

"You're the biologist," said 
Captain Badt. "You ought to 
know." 

Bascomb's voice took on a note 
of cheery assurance. "Well, we'll 
see. I've read of emanations being 
observed near pitchblende disposes, but I have never observed 
them. Possibly the concentrated 
radioactivity might be acting on 
minute condensations of moisture . . ." 

Captain Badt cleared his 
throat. "Very well, handle it your 
own way. Be careful and don't 
stir them up; they might be dangerous in some way." 

Bascomb said, "I've brought 
along a net and specimen bottle. 
I planned to capture one of the 
motes and examine it under the 
miscroscope." 

"I suppose you know what 
you're doing," said Captain Badt 
in a tired voice. 

"I've devoted my life to the 
study of extraterrestrial life," replied Bascomb stiffly. "I rather 
imagine that these motes are analogous to the sparkle-ticks of 
Procyon B . . . Now, if I just ad


100 

t: ' 




 



just my net. There! I've got one. 
Into the specimen jar. My, how 
it shines! Can you see it, Captain?" 

"Yes, I can see it. What's it like 
under the microscope?" 

"Hm . . ." Bascomb brought 
his pocket magnifier to bear. 
"There's no resolution. I see a 
central concentration of fire; undoubtedly that's where the insect 
is. I think I'll pass an electric 
spark through the creature and 
kill it, and perhaps I can examine 
it under higher power." 

"Don't stir 'em up — " began 
Captain Badt. The screen flared 
white in his face, went dark. 
"Bascomb! Bascomb!" 

Captain Badt received no reply
* * * 

DESTRUCTION of a node 
sent a restless shiver through 
the unigen. A node represented 
an integral fraction of the unigen's brain; it had been conditioned to modify a definite class 
of thoughts. When the node was 
destroyed, the thinking in the 
class was curtailed until another 
node could be produced and endowed with the same precise 
channels. 

The implications of the event 
were further cause for anxiety. 
The metal energy-eaters on another planet used the same technique — a stream of electrons 
smashing across the center of the 

WINNER IOSE ALL 



node, to upset the equilibrium. 
The result was a flash of released 
energy, which the metal ovoids 
were able to absorb. Apparently 
the land-worm had been surprised by the explosion and destroyed — possibly mistaking the 
node for some less energetic type 
of creature. 

It might be wise, thought the 
unigen, to destroy the land-worms 
as soon as they appeared, and 
thus prevent further accidents. 

Still another vexation: the 
spike -vegetation was spreading 
its collars across the surface of 
the ledge, sinking deep roots into 
the energy-stuff. Apparently it 
built the displaced material into 
the spike. When the unigen sent 
a node to absorb the leached 
uranium, it found a hard shell of 
inert substance, proof against the 
node's kernel of heat. 

Nodes flickered and quivered 
all over the universe as the unigen marshaled its computative 
abilities. Rigorous steps would 
have to be taken. 

* * * 

FAR down the beach, Avery 
and Jason saw the white flash 
of the explosion, saw the black 
gullies light up in a ghastly swift 
glare. Then came a rolling sound 
and a jar of concussion. 

Avery cut anxiously into the 
communication band. "Captain 
Badt, Avery calling. What's happened?" 

Itl 



Captain Badt said harshly, 
"That fool Bascomb's just blown 
himself up." 

"We're up the beach about a 
mile, I think, from where the explosion came," said Avery hurriedly. "Should we — " 

Captain Badt interrupted. 
"Don't do anything. Don't touch 
anything. This is a strange planet, 
and it's dangerous. Bascomb's 
just proved that." 

"What did he do?" 

"He apparently ran an electric 
current through one of those 
bright spots of light, and it went 
off in his face." 

Avery stopped short, looked 
warily up the shore. "We went 
past pretty closely and they 
didn't bother us. It must be the 
electricity." 

"You be careful on your way 
back. I can't afford to lose any 
more men. Keep out of the way 
of those lights." 

"Yes, sir," said Avery. He motioned to Jason. "Let's go. We'd 
better skirt the water as close as 
possible." 

Crowding the soggy verge of 
the ocean, they rounded the bend 
in the shoreline, approached the 
scene of the explosion. 

"Doesn't seem to be much left 
of Bascomb," said Jason in a 
hushed voice. 

"Not much crater either," said 
Avery. "It's a funny deal." 

"Look, now there's thousands 



of those light-bugs. Like bees 
around a hive. And look at that 
stuff growing out of the ledge! 
That wasn't there when we went 
past! Talk about mushrooms . . ." 

Avery turned his binoculars 
along the ledge. "Probably it's 
got something to do with the 
light-flecks. The lights could be 
spores or pollen or something of 
the sort." 

"Anything's possible," said Jason! "I've seen vines thirty miles 
long, as thick around as a house, 
and if you jab them with a stick 
they quiver their whole length. 
They're on Antaeus. The kids in 
the Earth colony tap out Morse 
code back and forth to each 
other. The vine doesn't like it, 
but there's nothing it can do." 

Avery had been watching the 
dancing lights over his shoulder. 
"They're like eyes watching us 
. . . Before a colony's sent out 
here, these damn things will have 
to be destroyed. They'd be dangerous flying loose around electricity." 

Jason said, "Duck! Here comes 
a couple of them after us!" 

Avery said in a nervous voice, 
"Don't get excited, kid. They're 
just drifting on the breeze." 

"Drifting, hell," said Jason, and 

started to run for the ship. 
* * * 

'B^HE unigen observed the land- B - worms returning along the 
shore, evidently seeking the sea


GAIAXY SCIENCE FICTION 



matter on which they fed. To 
guard against the accidental destruction of any more nodes, it 
would be wise to destroy the creatures as they appeared, and clean 
them from this particular section 
of the planet. 

It dispatched two nodes toward 
the land-worms. They seemed to 
sense danger and broke into lumbering motion. The unigen accelerated the nodes; they darted 
forward at half-light speed, punctured the land-worms, reversed, 
shuttled back and forth a score 
of times, each time leaving a 
small steaming hole. The landworms collapsed to the black pebbles, lay limp. 

The unigen brought the nodes 
back to the uranium bank. Now 
to a more serious matter: the 
vegetation which was choking off 
the face of the uranium with its 
collars and roots. 

The unigen concentrated the 
heat of twenty nodes on one of 
the spikes. A hole appeared, 
weakening the entire shoot. It 
sagged and shriveled, collapsed. 

Pleasure was a quality which 
the structure of the unigen was 
incapable of expressing, the nearest approach being a calm coasting sense, an awareness of control and mastery of movement. 
In this state the unigen began a 
systematic attack on the spikes. 

A second member fell over, became pale brown and a third . . . 



Overhead appeared a flying object, similar to a land-worm except that it radiated more strongly in the infra-red. 

Were the creatures everywhere? 
* * * 

CECOND Officer Dart had 
^ made the original suggestion, 
diffidently at first, half-expecting 
Captain Badt to freeze him with t 
a stare the color of zinc. But Captain Badt stood like a statue 
looking into the blank magniscreen, still tuned to Avery's 
band. 

Dart said with somewhat more 
boldness, "So far we have no conclusive report to make. Is the 
planet habitable or not? If we 
leave now we haven't proved anything." 

Captain Badt answered in . a 
voice without resonance, "I can't 
risk any more men." 

Dart rubbed at his bristling 
red hair. It occurred to him that 
Captain Badt was getting old. 

"Those little lights are vicious," 
Dart said emphatically. "We 
know that. They've killed three 
of our men. But we can handle 
them. An electric current blows 
'em apart. Another thing, they're 
like bees around a hive; they 
mind their own business unless 
they're bothered. Bascomb, 
Avery, Jason — they got it because 
they approached that pitchblende 
ledge too closely. Here's my idea, 
and I'll take the risk of carrying 



WINNER LOSE ALL 



103 



it through. We knock together a 
light frame, string it with wire, 
and charge the strands alternately 
positive and negative. Then I'll 
go up in the service 'copter and 
drift it across the ledge. They're 
so thick now that we can't help 
but knock out two-three hundred 
at a swipe." 

Captain Badt clenched and unclenched his hands. "Very well. 
Go ahead." He turned his back, 
stared into the blank magniscreen. This would be his last 
voyage. 

With the help of Henry, the 
ship's electrician, Dart built the 
frame, strung it with wire, 
equipped it with a high-potential 
battery. Strapping himself into 
the 'copter harness, he rose 
straight up, dangling a mile of 
light cable. He became a speck on 
the gray-blue sky. 

"That's it," said Henry into 
the communication mike. "Now 
I'll make fast this fly trap affair, 
and then — I've got another idea. 
We want the thing to move flatside forward, so I'll tie on a 
bridle with a bit of drag at the 
end." 

He arranged the drag, snapped 
the switch on the battery. "She's 
ready to go." 

A mile above, Dart moved 
across the sky toward the ledge 
of pitchblende. 

Captain Badt maintained an 
iron grip on the hand rail in the 



bridge, watching Dart's progress 
on the magniscreen. 

"Up, Dart," he said. "Up four 
feet . . . There . . . Steady. That's 
about right. Take it slow . . ." 
* * * 

'■^HE unigen's range of perception included the lowest radio 
waves as well as the hottest ultracosmics, a spectrum of a million 
colors. Stereoscopic vision was 
implicit in the fact that each node 
served as an organ of sight. Resolution of images was achieved by 
accepting only radiation normal 
to the surface of the node. In this 
manner a coarse spherical picture 
was received by each node, although detail as fine as the frame 
strung with wire was nearly invisible. 

The unigen's first warning was 
a pressure from the approaching 
electrostatic fields ; then the frame 
swept across the ledge, full 
through the heaviest concentration of nodes. 

The blast seared the ground, 
melted it into a flaming molten 
basin for a radius of fifty feet. 
The nodes which escaped the 
screen were flung pell-mell by the 
explosion out across the ocean. 

Directly under the explosion, 
the spike-vegetation was scorched; 
elsewhere, little affected. 

The structure of the unigen was 
no more capable of anger than 
pleasure; however, its will to survive was intense. Overhead flew 



104 




 



t 




the land -worm. One like it had 
destroyed a node through electricity; perhaps this one was 
somehow associated with the last 
catastrophic explosion. Four 
nodes slanted up at light speed, 
snapped back and forth through 
the land-worm like sewing-machine needles hemming a sheet. 
The creature fell to the ground. 

The unigen assembled its nodes 
a hundred feet over the bank of 
uranium. Ninety-six nodes destroyed. 

The unigen weighed the situation. The planet was rich with 
uranium, but it was also the home 
of lethal land-worms. 

The unigen decided. There was 
uranium elsewhere in the universe, on thousands of worlds that 
were silent and dark and free of 
any kind of life. A lesson had 
been learned: avoid worlds inhabited by life-forms, no matter 
how primitive. 

The nodes flashed off into the 
sky, dispersed into space. 

* * * 

CAPTAIN Badt relaxed his grip 
on the table. "That's it," he 
said in a flat voice. "Any world 
where we lose four good men in 
four hours — any world inhabited 
by swarms of crazy atomic bees — ■ 
that's no world for human beings. Four good men . . ." 

He stood silent a moment, limp 
and dejected. 

The cadet wandered into the 



WINNER LOSE ALL 



105 



bridge, stared wide-eyed. Lifelong habit reasserted itself. Captain Badt filled out, became erect, 
figid. His tunic and trousers hung 
crisp, his eyes once more shone 
with authority. 

"Ensign, you will act as chief 
officer until further notice. We're 
Jeaving the planet, returning to 
Earth. Please attend to all exterior ports." 

"Yes, sir," said the new Chief 
Mate. 

* * * 

rr*HE planet was quiet. The 
ocean spread bright and 
green, the mountains rolled back 
into the badlands: crags, ravines, 
plateaus — black rock, gray rock, 
pockets of drifted ash. 

On the pitchblende ledge the 
vegetation waxed tall, five, ten, 
twenty feet, gray spines mottled 
with white, ivory, silver. In each 
a central vein opened; the spike 
became a tube straight and stiff 
as a cannon barrel. 

At the bottom of the tube, the 
fruit of the plant began to develop. There was a spore-case, 
enclosed by a jacket into which 
water percolated. Below the 
spore-case opened another compartment, globe-shaped, communicating with the base of the 
spike by four splayed channels. 

A nub of uranium 235 accumulated in this chamber — one 
ounce, two ounces, three ounces, 
more end more diffused through 



the membranes of the plant by 
some evolutionary freak of a 
metabolism. 

The fruit was ripe. One by 
one, the spikes reached a culmination. A tension within the 
water-jacket increased past the 
breaking strain. The jacket split, 
flooded the compartment below 
the spore-case, surrounded the 
knob of uranium. 

Explosion. Steam bursting 
through the stern -pointing channels, back into the tube. Thrust, 
straight up. Sharp whipping 
blasts as the cases left the spikes. 
Up, up, up, at furious acceleration, into space . . . 

The water dissipated, the last 
puff of steam left the tubes. The 
spore-cases floated free on momentum. The gravitational field 
of the planet faded to a wisp, a 
film. The spore-cases drifted on. 
Now they cooled, cracked wide. 
From each a thousand capsules 
spilled into space, and the tiny 
jerk of the splitting case s^nt 
them in courses slightly divergent, enough to scatter them off 
toward different stars. 

Endless seeping of life across 
space. 

Smite into planet, the sift of 
spores, the search for the hot element, the growth, the culmination, the blast, the impulse. 

Then space, years of drift. Out 
beyond, and past beyond . . . 
