
^1 



tOc 



stones 




v 






k 



I 



.m 










V 



irfH ^ Hi *%*•'■ Hlra-DseaJ «a* ft* 

E JEWEL 
NCIENTS 

RABER 



3C 



i 



:<i 




« 




l»K> CO 







T. T. SCOTT, Pre.. MALCOLM REISS, Gen. Mgr. PAUL L. PAYNE, Ed. 

A Gripping Novel of Eartfttings Lost in Alien Savagery 

THE ROCKETEERS HAVE SHAGGY EARS by Keith Bennett 2 

■Some day there will be a legend like this. Some day, from steamy Venus or arid 
Mars, the shaking, awe-struck words will come whispering back to us, building 
the picture of a glory so great that our throats will choke with pride — pride in 
the Men of Terra! 

A Thrilling Space-Adventure Novel 

FLAME-JEWEL OF THE ANCIENTS . • by Edwin L. Graber 60 

The tiny golden sphere, blazing with terrible energy, spelled Galactic Empire 
at last to the out-space horde, once they had tapped its limitless power. They 
were grimly amused therefore when Captain Glayne of the Stellar Guardians 
dropped innocently out of the sub-space to view their mighty prize. 

Five Exciting Stories 

FOREVER AND THE EARTH by Ray Bradbury 26 

They brought that great blazing writer three hundred years into the future. They 
gave him the stars and planets and all space for his hungry pen. Then they tried 
lo put Thomas Wolfe back in his grave. 

THE FIRST MAN ON THE MOON ... by Alfred Coppel 36 

John Thurmon swore he'd be the first man on the moon. But he wasn't. He was 
only the first murderer. 

MADMEN OF MARS by Erik Fennel 40 

Why do the Martians drink red wine, swagger about, spout vile poetry and fight 
endless duels with each other? How did Terence Michael Burke change their 
minds about invading the Earth? 

WHO GOES THERE? by Charles H. Davis 53 

Hurtling down from cold and hostile space, battle-worn Ekrado and Ronaro gazed 
with joy at the lovely watery world below. Here, surely, they would find friends 
—and the precious help they needed! 

ULTIMATUM • by Roger Dee 98 

In a dingy little Indiana hotel room the fate of three worlds suddenly hung 
in precarious balance! 

And Planet's Regular Feature 

THE VIZIGRAPH by The Readers 101 



Spring Issue, 1950 




Vol. IV, No. 6 
20c per copy 



PLANET STORIES: Published quarterly by Love kowancw Pub. Co., Inc., 670 Fifth Are., New York 19, N Y. 
The entire contents of this magazine are copyrighted, 1949, by Love Romances Publishing Co., Inc. Entered as 
second-class matter, October 2, 1944, at the Post Office, at New York 1, N Y., under the Act of March 3, 1879. AH 
rights reserved. While due care is always exercised, the publishers will not be responsible for the return of unsolicited 
manuscripts. Yearly subscription rate 80* in advance. For advertising rates address: Advertising Director, friction 
House, Inc., 670 Fifth Ave., New York 19. N. Y. Printed in U. S. A, 




THE ROCKETEERS 
HAVE SHAGGY EARS 

By KEITH BENNETT 

Some day there will be a legend like this. Some day, from 
steamy Venus or arid Mars, the shaking, awe-struck words 
will come whispering back to us, building the picture of a 
glory so great that our throats will choke with pride— pride 

in the Men of Terra! 



I 




WUh a gobbling yell, gray, man-like figure* came leaping among thenu 



TH E COMMANDER'S VOICE 
went droning on, but Hague's fatigued brain registered it as mere 
sound with no words or meaning. He'd 
been dazed since the crash. Like a cracked 
phonograph, his brain kept playing back 
the ripping roar of jet chambers blowing 
out with a sickening lurch that had thrown 



every man in the control room to the floor. 
The lights had, flickered out, and a sickening elevator gHde began as Patrol Rocket 
One smashed down through the Venusian 
rainforest roof, and crashed in a clearing 
blasted by its own hurtling passage. 

Hague blinked hard and tried to focus 
his brain on what hard-faced Commander 

3 



PLANET STORIES 



Devlin was saying, something about the 
Base and Odysseus, the mother ship. 

"We've five hundred miles before we'll 
be in their vicinity, and every yard of 
it we walk. Hunting parties will shoot 
food animals. All water is to be boiled 
and treated with ultra-violet by my section. 
The photographers will march with the 
science section, which will continue classifying and writing reports. No actual 
specimens will be taken. We can't afford 
the weight." 

To Hague, the other five men seated 
around the little charting table appeared 
cool, confidently ready to march through 
five hundred, or a thousand miles of dark, 
unexplored, steaming Hell that is Venusian rainforest. Their faces tightset, icily 
calm, they nodded in turn as the Commander looked at each one of them; but 
Hague wondered if his own face wasn't 
betraying the fear lurking within him. 
Suddenly Commander Devlin grinned, and 
pulled a brandy bottle from his pocket, 
uncorking it as he spoke: "Well, Rocketeers, a short life and a merry one. I 
never did give a damn for riding in these 
tin cans." The tension broke, they were 
all smiling, and saying they'd walk into 
the base camp with some kind of a Venusian female under each arm for the edification of Officers' Mess. 

Leaden doubt of his own untried abilities and nerve lay icy in Hague's innards, 
and he left after one drink. The others 
streamed from the brightly lighted hatch 
a moment later. The Commander made 
a short speech to the entire party. Then 
Navigator Clark, a smiling, wiry little 
man, marched out of the clearing with his 
advance guard. Their voices muffled suddenly as they vanished down a forest corridor that lay gloomy between giant tree 
holes. 

Commander Devlin slapped Hague 
cheerfully on the shoulder as he moved 
past; and the second section, spruce and 
trim in blue-black uniforms, with silver 
piping, followed him. Crewmen Didrickson and Davis followed witH rifles and sagging bandoliers of explosive bullets crossing their chests ; and then Arndt, the lean 
craggy geologist, his arm in a sling, and 
marching beside him was rotupd, be


goggled Gault, the botanist. The little 
whippet tank clattered by next with Technician Whittaker grinning down at Hague 
from the turret. 

"It pains me somethin' awful to see you 
walkin' when I'm ridin'," Whittaker piped 
over the whippet's clanking growl. 

Hague grinned back, then pinched his 
nose between two fingers in the ageless 
dumb show of disgust, pointed at the tank, 
and shook his head sadly. The two carts 
the whippet towed swayed by, and the 
rest of the column followed; Bachmann, 
the doctor and Sewell, his beefy crotchety 
assistant; The two photographers staggered past under high-piled equipment 
packs, and Hague wondered how long they 
would keep all of it Lenkranz, Johnston, 
Harker, Szachek, Hirooka, Ellis — each 
carried a pack full of equipment. The 
rest filed by until finally Swenson, the 
big Swede technician, passed and the clearing was empty. 

Hague turned to look over his own 
party. In his mind's eye bobbed the neatly 
typed "Equipment, march order, light 
field artillery" lists he'd memorized along 
with what seemed a thousand other neatly 
typed lists at Gunnery School. 

The list faded, and Hague watched his 
five-man gun-section lounge against their 
rifles, leaning slightly forward to ease the 
heavy webbing that supported their marching packs and the sectioned pneumatic gun. 

"All right," Hague said brusquely. He 
dredged his brain desperately then for an 
encouraging speech, something that would 
show the crew he liked them, something 
the Commander might say, but he couldn't 
think of anything that sounded witty or 
rang with stirring words. He finally muttered a disgusted curse at his own blankheadedness, and said harshly, "All right, 
let's go." 

The six men filed silently out of the 
clearing battered in the forest by Patrol 
Rocket One, and into damp gloom between 
gargantuan trunks that rose smoothly out 
of sight into darkness. Behind them a 
little rat-like animal scurried into the deserted slot of blasted trees, its beady black 
eyes studying curiously the silver ship that 
lay smashed and half -buried in the forest 
floor. 



THE ROCKETEERS HAVE SHAGGY EARS 



BASE Commander Chapman shuffled 
hopelessly through the thick sheaf of 
onion-skin papers, and sank back sighing. 
Ammunition reports, supply reports, medical reports, strength reports, reconnaissance reports, radio logs, radar logs, sonar 
logs, bulging dossiers of reports, files full 
of them, were there ; and elsewhere in the 
ship efficient clerks were rapping out 
fresh, crisp battalions of new reports, 
neatly typed in triplicate on onion-skin 
paper. 

He stared across his crowded desk at 
the quiet executive officer. 

"Yes, Blake, it's a good picture of local 
conditions, but it isn't exploration. Until 
the Patrol Rocket gets in, we can send 
only this local stuff, and it just isn't 
enough." 

Blake shrugged. 

"It's all we've got. We can send parties 
out on foot from the base here, even if 
we do lose men, but the dope they'd get 
would still be on a localized area." 

The Commander left his desk, and 
stared through a viewport at the plateau, 
and beyond that at the jungled belt fringing an endless expanse of rainforest lying 
sullenly quiet under the roof of racing 
grey clouds. 

"The point is we've got to have more 
extensive material than this when we fire 
our robot-courier back to earth. This 
wonderful mountain of papers — what do 
they do, what do they tell? They describe 
beautifully the physical condition of this 
Base and its complement. They describe 
very well a ten mile area around the Base 
—but beyond that area they tell nothing. 
It's wonderful as far as it goes, but it 
only goes ten miles, and that isn't enough." 
Blake eyed the snowy pile of papers 
abstractedly. Then he jumped up nervously as another bundle shot into a receiving 
tray from the pneumatic message tube. 
He began pacing the floor. 

"Well, what can we do? Suppose we 
send the stuff we have here, get it microfilmed and get it off— what then?" 

The Commander swore bitterly, and 
turned to face his executive. 

"What then?" he demanded savagely. 
"Are we going into that again? Why, 
the minute every other branch of the 



services realize that we haven't got any 
kind of thorough preliminary report on 
this section of Venus, they'll start pounding the war drums. The battleship admirals and the bayonet generals will get 
to work and stir up enough public opinion 
to have the, United States Rocket Service 
absorbed by other branches — the old, old 
game of military politics." 

Blake nodded jerkily. "Yes, I know. 
We'd get the leftovers after the battleships 
had been built, or new infantry regiments 
activated, or something else. Anyway we 
wouldn't get enough money to carry on 
rocket research for space explorations." 

"Exactly," the Commander cut in harshly. "These rockets would be grounded on 
earth. The generals or admirals would 
swear that the international situation demanded that they be kept there as weapons 
of defense; and that would be the end 
of our work." 

"We've got to send back a good, thorough report, something to prove that the 
Rocket Service can do the job, and that it 
is worth the doing. And, until the patrol 
rocket gets back, we can't do it." 

"Okay, Commander," Blake called as he 
went through the steel passage opening 
onto the mother ship's upper corridor, 
"I'll be holding the Courier Rocket until 
we get word." 

SEVEN hours later it lightened a little, 
and day had come. Hague and the 
Sergeant had pulled the early morning 
guard shift, and began rolling the other 
four from their tiny individual tents. 

Bormann staggered erect, yawned lustily, and swore that this was worse than 
spring maneuvers in Carolina. 

"Shake it," Brian snarled savagely. 
"That whistle will blow in a minute." 

When it did sound, they buckled each 
other into pack harness and swung off 
smartly, but groaning and muttering as the 
mud dragged at their heavy boots. 

At midday, four hours later, there was 
no halt, and the^y marched steadily forward 
through steaming veils of oppressive heat, 
eatmg compressed ration as they walked. 
They splashed through a tiny creek that 
was solidly slimed, and hurried ahead 
when crawling things wriggled in the 



PLANET STORIES 



green mass. Perspiration ran in streams 
from each face filing past on the trail, 
soaked through pack harness and packs; 
and wiry Hurd began to complain that 
his pack straps had cut through his shoulders as far as his navel. They stopped 
for a five minute break at 1400, when 
Hurd stopped fussing with his back straps 
and signalled for silence, though the other 
five had been too wrapped in their own discomfort to be talking. 

"Listen! Do you hear it, Lieutenant? 
Like a horn? ,, Hurd's wizened rat face 
knotted in concentration. "Way off, like." 

Hague listened blankly a moment, attempted an expression he fondly hoped 
was at once intelligent and reassuring, 
then said, "I don't hear anything. You 
may have taken too much fever dope, 
and it's causing a ringing in your ears." 

"Naw," with heavy disgust. "Listen! 
There it goes again !" 

"I heard it." That was Sergeant Brian's 
voice, hard and incisive, and Hague wished 
he sounded like that, or that he would 
have heard the sound before his second 
in command. All of the six were hunched 
forward, listening raptly, when the Lieutenant stood up. 

"Yes, Hurd. Now I hear it." 

The whistle blew then, and they moved 
forward. Hague noticed the Sergeant had 
taken a post at the rear of the little file, 
and watched their back trail warily as they 
marched. 

"What do you think it was, sir?" Bucci 
inquired in the piping voice that sounded 
strange coming from his deep chest. 

"The Lord knows," Hague answered, 
and wondered how many times he'd be 
using that phrase in the days to come. 
"Might have been some animal. They 
hadn't found any traces of intelligent life 
when we left the Base Camp." 

BUT in the days that followed there was 
a new air of expectancy in the 
marchers, as if their suspicions had solidified into a waiting for attack. They'd been 
moving forward for several days. 

Hague saw the pack before any of his 
men did, and thanked his guiding star that 
for once he had been a little more alert 
than his gun-section members. 



The canvas carrier had been set neatly 
against one of the buttressing roots of a 
giant tree bole and, from the collecting 
bottles strapped in efficient rows outside, 
Hague deduced that it belonged to Bernstein, the entomologist. The gunnery 
officer halted and peered back into the 
gloom off the trail, called Bernstein's 
name ; and when there was no reply moved 
cautiously into the hushed shadows with 
his carbine ready. He sensed that Sergeant Brian was catfooting behind him. 

Then he saw the ghostly white bundle 
suspended six feet above the forest floor, 
and moved closer, calling Bernstein's name 
softly. The dim bundle vibrated gently, 
and Hague saw that it hung from a giant 
white lattice radiating wheel-like from the 
green gloom above. He raised his hand 
to touch the cocoon thing, noted it was 
shaped like a man well-wrapped in some 
woolly material; and on a sudden hunch 
pulled his belt knife and cut the fibers 
from what would be the head. 

It was Bernstein suspended there, his 
snug, silken shroud bobbing gently in the 
dimness. His dark face was pallid in the 
gloom, sunken and flaccid of feature, as 
though the juices had been sucked from 
his corpse, leaving it a limp mummy. 

The lattice's stick white strands vibrated 
— something moved across it overhead, and 
Hague flashed his lightpak up into the 
darkness. Crouched twenty feet above 
him, two giant legs delicately testing the 
strands of its lattice like web, Hague saw 
the spider, its bulbous furred body fully 
four feet across, the monster's myriad 
eyes glittering fire-like in the glow of 
Hague's lightpak, as it gathered the great 
legs slightly in the manner of a tarantula 
ready to leap. 

Brian's sharp yell broke Hague from 
his frozen trance. He threw himself down 
as Brian's rifle crashed, and the giant 
arachnid was bathed in a blue-white flash 
of explosive light, its body tumbling down 
across the web onto Hague where he lay 
in the mud. The officer's hoarse yells rang 
insanely while he pulled himself clear of 
the dead spider-beast, but he forced himself to quiet at the sound of the Sergeant's 
cool voice. 

"All clear, Lieutenant. It's dead." 



THE ROCKETEERS HAVE SHAGGY EARS 



"Okay, Brian. I'll be all right now." 
Hague's voice shook, and he cursed the 
weakness of his fear, forcing himself to 
walk calmly without a glance over his 
shoulder until they were back on the trail. 
He led the other four gunners back to the 
spider and Bernstein's body, as a grim 
object lesson, warned them to leave the 
trail only in pairs. They returned their 
weary footslogging pace down the muddy 
creek marked by Clark's crew. When 
miles had sweated by at the same steady 
pace, Hague could still feel in the men's 
stiff silence their horror of the thing Brian 
had killed. 

HOURS, and then days, rolled past, 
drudging nightmares through which 
they plowed in mud and steamy heat, with 
punctually once every sixteen hours a 
breathtaking, pounding torrent of rain. 
Giant drops turned the air into an aqueous 
mixture that was almost unbreathable, and 
smashed against their faces until the skin 
was numb. When the rain stopped 
abruptly the heat came back and water 
vapor rose steaming from the mud they 
walked through; but always they walked, 
shoving one aching foot ahead of the other 
through sucking black glue. Sometimes 
Bormann's harmonica would wheedle 
reedy airs, and they would sing and talk 
for a time, but mostly they swung forward 
in silence, faces drawn with fatigue and 
pale in the forest half light. Hague looked 
down at his hands, swollen, bloody with 
insect bites, and painfully stiff; and wondered if he'd be able to bend them round 
his ration pan at the evening halt. 

Hague was somnambulating at the rear 
of his little column, listening to an ardent 
account from Bormann of what his girl 
might expect when he safa her again. 
Bucci, slowing occasionally to ease the 
pneumatic gun's barrel assembly across his 
shoulder, chimed in with an ecstatic description of his little Wilma. The two 
had been married just before the Expedition blasted Venusward out of an Arizona 
desert. Crosse was at the front end, and 
his voice came back nasally. 

"Hey, Lieutenant, there's somebody sitting beside the trail." 

"Okay, Halt." The Lieutenant swore 



tiredly and trotted up to Crosse's side. 
"Where?" 

"There. Against the big root." 

Hague moved forward, carbine at ready, 
and knew without looking that Sergeant 
Brian was at his shoulder, cool and selfsufficient as [always. 

"Who^s there?" the officer croaked. 

"It's me, Bachmann." 

Hague motioned his party forward, and 
they gathered in a small circle about the 
Doctor, seated calmly beside the trail, 
with his back against a root flange. 

"What's the matter, Doc? Did you 
want to see us?" 

"No. Sewell seems to think you're all 
healthy. Too bad the main party isn't as 
well off. Quite a bit of trouble with fever. 
And, Bernstein gone of course." 

Hague nodded, and remembered he'd 
reported Bernstein's death to the Commander three nights before. 

"How's the Commander?" he inquired. 

The Doctor's cherubic face darkened. 
"Not good. He's not a young man, and 
this heat and walking are wrecking his 
heart. And he won't ride the tank." 

"Well, let's go, Doc." It was Brian's 
voice, cutting like a knife into Hague's 
consciousness. The Doctor looked tired, 
and drawn. 

"Go ahead, lads. I'm just going to sit 
here for a while." He looked up and 
smiled weakly at the astonished faces, but 
his eyes were bleakly determined. 

"This is as far as I go. Snake bite. 
We've no anti-venom that seems to work. 
A If they can do is to amputate, and we 
can't afford another sick man." He pulled 
a nylon wrapper from one leg that 
sprawled at an awkward angle beneath 
him. The bared flesh was black, swollen, 
and had a gangrenous smell. Young Crosse 
turned away, and Hague heard his retching. 

"What did the Commander say?" 

"He agreed this was best. I am going 
to die anyway." 

"Will— will you be all right here? Don't 
you want us to wait with you?" 

The Doctor's smile was weaker, and he 
mopped at the rivulets of perspiration 
streaking his mud-spattered face. 

"No. I have an X-kthal dosage and a 



8 



PLANET STORIES 



hypodermic. Ill be fine here. Sewell knows 
what to do." His round face contorted, 
"Now, for God's sake, get on, and let me 
take that tablet. The pain is driving me 
crazy/' 

Hague gave a curt order, and they got 
under way. A little further on the trail, 
he turned to wave at Doctor Bachmann, 
but the little man was already invisible 
in forest shadows. 

THE tenth day after the crash of 
Patrol Rocket One, unofficially 
known as the Ration Can, glimpses of 
skylight opened over the trail Clark's crew 
were marking; and Hague and his men 
found themselves suddenly in an opening 
where low, thick vines, and luxuriant, 
thick-leaved shrubs struggled viciously for 
life. Balistierri, the zoologist, slight wisp 
of a dark man always and almost a 
shadow now, stood wearily beside the 
trail waiting as they drew up. Their shadeblinded eyes picked out details in the open 
ground dimly. Hague groaned inwardly 
when he saw that this was a mere slit 
in the forest, and the great trees loomed 
again a hundred yards ahead. Balistierri 
seized Hague by the shoulder and pointed 
into the thick mat of green, smiling. 

"Watch, all of you." 

He blew a shrill blast on his whistle and 
waited, while Hague's gunners wondered 
and watched. There was a wild, silvery 
call, a threshing of wings, and two huge 
birds rose into the gold tinted air. They 
flapped up, locked their wings, and glided, 
soared, and wheeled over the earth-stained 
knot of men — two great white birds, with 
crests of fire-gold, plumage snowy save 
where it was dusted with rosy overtones. 
Their call was bell-like as they floated 
across the clearing in a golden haze of sunlight filtered through clouds. 

"They're — they're like angels." It was 
Bormann, the tough young sentimentalist. 

"You've named them, soldier," Balistierri grinned. "I've been trying for a, 
name ; and that's the best I've heard. Bormann's angels they'll be. In Latin, of 
course." 

Unfolding vistas of eternal zoological 
glory left Bormann speechless and redfaced. Sergeant Brian broke in. 



"I guess they would have made those 
horn sounds. Right, Lieutenant?" H19 
voice, dry and a little patronizing, suggested that this was a poor waste of 
valuable marching time. 

"I wouldn't know, Sergeant," Hague 
answered, trying to keep dislike out of his 
voice, but the momentary thrill was broken 
and, with Balistierri beside him, Gunnery 
Officer Hague struck out on the trail that 
had been blasted and hacked through the 
clearing's wanton extravagance of greedy 
plant life. 

As they crossed the clearing, Bucci 
tripped and sprawled full length in the 
mud. When he tried to get up, the vine 
over which he'd stumbled clutched with a 
woody tendril that wound snakelike tightly 
about his ankle; and, white faced, the 
rest of the men chopped him free of the 
serpentine thing with belt knives, bandaged 
the thorn wounds in his leg, and went on. 
The clearing had one more secret to 
divulge, however. A movement in the 
forest edge caught Brian's eye and he 
motioned to Hague, who followed him 
questioningly as the Sergeant led him off 
trail. Brian pointed silently and Hague 
saw Didrickson, Sergeant in charge ot 
Supplies, seated in the lemon-colored sunlight at the forest edge, an open food pack 
between his knees, from which he snatched 
things and swallowed them voraciously, 
feeding like a wild dog. 

"Didrickson! Sergeant Didrickson!" the 
Lieutenant yelled. "What are you doing?" 
The supply man stared back, and Hague 
knew from the man's face what had happened. He crouched warily, eyes wild 
with panic and jaw hanging foolishly 
slack. This was Didrickson, the steady, 
efficient man who'd sat at the chart table 
the night they began this march. He had 
been the only man Devlin thought competent and nerveless enough to handle the 
food. This was the same Didrickson, and 
madder now than a March hare, Hague 
concluded grimly. The enlisted man 
snatched up the food pack, staring at them 
in wild fear, and began to run back down 
the trail, back the way they'd come. 

"Come back, Didrickson. We've got 
to have that food, you fool!" 

The madman laughed crazily at the 



THE ROCKETEERS RAVE SHAGGY EARS 



sound of the officer's voice, glanced back 
for a moment, then spun and ran. 

Sergeant Brian, as always, was ready. 
His rifle cracked, and the explosive missile 
blew the running man nearly in half. Sergeant Brian silently retrieved the food 
pack and brought it back to Hague. 

"Do you want it here, Lieutenant, or 
shall I take it up to the main party?" 

"We'll keep it here, Sergeant. Sewell 
can take it back tonight after our medical 
check." Hague's voice shook, and he 
wished savagely that he could have had 
the nerve to pass that swift death sentence. 
Didrickson's crime was dangerous to every 
member of the party, and the Sergeant 
had been right to shoot. But when the 
time came — when perhaps the Sergeant 
wasn't with him — would he, Hague, react 
swiftly and coolly as an officer should, he 
wondered despairingly? 

"All right, lads, let's pull," he said, and 
the tight lipped gun crew filed again into 
the hushed, somber forest corridors. 



II 



COMMUNICATIONS TECHntcian Harker took a deep pull at his 
mug of steaming coffee, blinked his eyes 
hard at the swimming dials before him, 
and lit a cigarette. Odysseus warning center was never „quiet, even now in the graveyard watch when all other lights were 
turned low through the great ship's hull. 
Here in the neat grey room, murmuring, 
softly-clicking signal equipment was 
banked against every wall in a gleaming 
array of dials and meters, heavy power 
leads, black panels, and intricate sheafs 
of colored wire. The sonar kept up a sleepy 
drone, and radar scopes glowed fitfully 
with interference patterns, and the warning buzzer beeped softly as the radar 
echoed back to its receivers the rumor of 
strange planetary forces that radar hadn't 
been built to filter through. What made 
the interference, base technicians couldn't 
tell, but it practically paralyzed radio communication on all bands, and blanketed out 
even radar warnings. 

The cigarette burned his finger tips, and 
Harker jerked awake and tried to concentrate on the letter he was writing home. 



It would be microfilmed, and go or the 
next courier rocket. A movement at the 
Warnings Room door, brought Harker's 
head up, and he saw Commander Chapman, lean and grey, standing there. 

"Good evening, sir. Come on in. I've 
got coffee on." The Communications. 
Technician took a pot from the glow 
heater at his elbow, and set out another 
cup. 

The Commander smiled tiredly, pulled 
out a stubby metal stool, and sat across 
the low table from Harker, sipping the 
scalding coffee cautiously. He looked up 
after a moment. 

"What's the good word, Harker? Picked 
up anything ?" 

Harker ran his fingers through his mop 
of black hair, and grimaced. 

"Not a squeak, sir. No radio, no radar. 
Of course, the interference may be 
blanketing those. Creates a lot of false 
signals, too, on the radar screens. But we 
can't even pick* 'em up with long-range 
sonar. That should get through. We're 
pretty sure they crashed, all right." 

"How about our signals, Harker? Do 
you think we're getting through to them ?" 
Harker leaned back expansively, happy 
to expound his specialty. 

"Well, we've been sending radio signals 
every hour on the hour, and radio voice 
messages every hour on the half hour. 
We're sending a continuous sonar beam 
for their direction-finder. That's about all 
we can do. As for their picking it up, 
assuming the rocket has crashed and been 
totally knocked out, they still have a 
radio in the whippet tank. It's a transreceiver. And they have a portable sonar 
set, one of those little twenty-pound armored detection units. They'll use it as a 
direction finder." 

Chapman swirled the coffee around in 
the bottom of his cup and stared thoughtfully into it. 

"If they can get sonar, why can't we 
send them messages down the sonar beam ? 
You know, flick it on and off in Morse 
code?" 

"It won't work with a small detector 
like they have, sir. With our big set here, 
we could send them a message, but that 
outfit they have might burn out. It has a 






10 



PLACET STORIES 



limited sealed motor supply that must 
break down an initial current resistance 
on the grids before the rectifiers can convert it to audible sound. With the set operating continuously, power drainage is 
small, but begin changing your signal beam 
and the power has to break down the grid 
resistance several hundred times for every 
short signal sent. It would burn out their 
set in a matter of hours. 

"It works like a slide trombone, sort 
of. Run your slide way out, and you 
get a slowly vibrating column of air, and 
that is heard as a low note, only on sonar 
it would be a short note. Run your slide 
way up, and the vibrations are progessively 
faster and higher in pitch. The sonar set, 
at peak, is vibrating so rapidly that it's 
almost static, and the power flow is actually continuous. But, starting and stopping 
the set continuously, the vibrators never 
have a chance to reach a normal peak, 
and the power flow is broken at each 
vibration in the receiver— and a few hours 
later your sonar receptor is a hunk of 
junk." 

"All right, Harker. Your discussion is 
vague, but I get the general idea that my 
suggestion wasn't too hot. Well, have 
whoever is on duty call me if any signals 
come through." The Commander set down 
his cup, said goodnight, and moved off 
down the hushed corridor. Harker returned to his letter and a chewed stub of 
pencil, while he scowled in a fevered agony 
of composition. It was a letter to his girl, 
and it had to be good. 

NIGHT had begun to fall over the 
forest roof, and stole thickening 
down the muddy cathedral aisles of great 
trees, and Hague listened hopefully for 
the halt signal from the whippet tank, 
which should come soon. He was worried 
about Bucci who was laughing and talking 
volubly, and the officer decided he must 
have a touch of fever. The dark, muscular gunner kept talking about his young 
wife in what was almost a babble. Once he 
staggered and nearly fell, until Hurd took 
the pneumatic gun barrel assembly and 
carried it on his own shoulders. They 
were all listening expectantly for the tank's 
klaxon, when a brassy scream ripped the 



evening to echoing shreds and a flurry of 
shots broke out ahead. 

The scream came again, metallic and 
shrill as a locomotive gone amok; yells, 
explosive-bullet reports, and the sound of 
hammering blows drifted back. 

"Take over, Brian," Hague snapped. 
"Crosse, Hurd— let's go!" 

The three men ran at a stagger through 
the dragging mud around a turn in the 
trail, and dropped the pneumatic gun swiftly into place, Hurd at firing position, 
Crosse on the charger, and Hague prone 
in the slime snapping an ammunition belt 
into the loader. 

Two emergency flares some one had 
thrown lit the trail ahead in a garish photographic fantasy of bright, white light and 
ink-black shadow, a scene out of Inferno. 
A cart lay on its side, men were running 
clear, the whippet tank lay squirming on 
its side, and above it towered the screaming thing. A lizard, or dinosaur, rearing 
up thirty feet, scaly grey, a man clutched 
in its two hand-like claws, while its 
armored tail smashed and smashed at the 
tank with pile-driver blows. Explosive 
bullets cracked around the thing's chest 
in blue white flares of light, but it continued to rip at the man twisting pygmylike in its claws — white teeth glinting 
like sabers as its blindly malevolent 
screams went on. 

"On target," Hurd's voice came strained 
and low. 

"Charge on," from Crosse. 

"Let her go!" Hague yelled, and fed 
APX cartridges as the gun coughed a 
burst of armor-piercing, explosive shells 
into the rearing beast. Hague saw the 
tank turret swing up as Whittaker tried 
to get his gun in action, but a slashing 
slap of the monster's tail spun it back 
brokenly. The cluster of pneumatic shells 
hit then and burst within that body, and 
the great grey-skinned trunk was hurled 
off the trail, the head slapping against a 
tree trunk on the other side as the reptile 
was halved. 

"Good shooting, Crosse," Hague 
grunted. "Get back with Brian. Keep the 
gun ready. That thing might have a mate." 
He ran toward the main party, and into 
the glare of the two flares. 



THE ROCKETEERS HAVE SHAGGY EARS 



11 



"Where's Devlin?" 

Clark, the navigation officer, was standing with a small huddle of men near the 
smashed supply cart. 

"Here, Hague/' he called. His eyes 
were sunken, his face older in the days 
since Hague had last seen him. "Devlin's 
dead, smashed between the cart and a tree 
trunk. We've lost two men, Commander 
Devlin and Ellis, the soils man. He's the 
one it was eating." He grimaced. 

"That leaves twenty-three of us?" 
Hague inquired, and tried to sound casual. 
"That's right. You'll continue to cover 
the rear. Those horn sounds you reported 
had Devlin worried about an attack from 
your direction. I'll be with the tank." 

Sergeant Brian was stoically heating 
ration stew over the cook unit when Hague 
returned, while the crew sat in a close 
circle, alternately eying nervously the 
forest at their backs, and the savory steam 
that rose from Brian's mixture. There 
wasn't much for each of them, but it was 
hot and highly nutritious, and after a cigarette and coffee they would feel comfort 
for a while. 

Crosse, seated on the grey metal charger 
tube he'd carried all day, fingered the helmet in his lap, and looked inquiringly at 
the Lieutenant. 

"Well, sir, anybody hurt? Was the tank 
smashed ?" 

Hague squatted in the circle, sniffed the 
stew with loud enthusiasm, and looked 
about the circle. 

"Commander Devlin's dead, and Ellis. 
One supply cart smashed, but the tank'll 
be all right. The lizard charged the tank. 
Balistierri thinks it was the lizard's mating 
season, and he figured the tank was another male and he tried to fight it. Then 
he stayed — to — lunch and we got him. 
Lieutenant Clark is in command now." 

The orange glow of Brian's cook unit 
painted queer shadows on the strained 
faces around him, and Hague tried to 
brighten them up. 

"Will you favor us with one of your 
inimitable harmonica arrangements, Maestro Bormann?" 

"I can't right now. I'm bandaging 
Helen's wing." He held out something in 
the palm of his hand, and the heater's 



glow glittered on liquid black eyes. "She's 
like a little bird, but without her feathers. 
See?" He placed the warm lump in 
Hague's hand. "For wings, she's just got 
skin, like a bat, except she's built like a 
bird." 

"You ought to show this to Balistierri, 
and maybe he'll name this for you too." 

Bormann's homely face creased into a 
grin. "I did, sir. At the noon halt when 
I found it. It's named after my girl. 
'Bormann's Helen', only in Latin. Helen's 
got a broken wing." 

AS THEY ATE, they heard the horn 
note again. Bucci's black eyes were 
feverishly bright, his skin hot and dry, 
and the vine scratches on his leg badly 
inflamed ; and when the rest began to sing 
he was quiet. The reedy song of Bormann's 
harmonica piped down the quiet forest 
passages, and echoed back from the great 
trees ; and somewhere, as Hague dozed off 
in his little tent, he heard the horn note 
again, sandwiched into mouth organ melody. 

Two days of slogging through the slimy 
green mud, and at a noon halt Sewell 
brought back word to be careful, that a 
man had failed to report at roll call that 
morning. The gun crew divided Bucci's 
equipment between them, and he limped in 
the middle of the file on crutches fashioned 
from ration cart wreckage. Crosse, who'd 
been glancing off continually, like a 
wizened, curious rat, flung up his arm in 
a silent signal to halt, and Hague moved 
in to investigate, the ever present Brian 
moving carefully and with jungle beast's 
silent poise just behind him. Crumpled 
like a sack of damp laundry, in the murk 
of two root buttresses, lay Romano, one 
of the two photographers. His Hasselbladt 
camera lay beneath his body crushing a 
small plant he must have been photographing. 

From the back of Romano's neck protruded a gleaming nine-inch arrow shaft, 
a lovely thing of gleaming bronze-like 
metal, delicately thin of shaft and with 
fragile hammered bronze vanes. Brian 
moved up behind Hague, bent over the 
body and cut the arrow free. 

They examined the thing, and when 



12 



PLANET STORIES 






Brian spoke Hague was surprised that this 
time even the rock-steady Sergeant spoke 
in a hushed voice, the kind boys use when 
they walk by a graveyard at night and 
don't wish to attract unwelcome attention. 

"Looks like it came from a blowgun, 
Lieutenant. See the plug at the back. It 
must be poisoned; it's not big enough to 
kill him otherwise." 

Hague grunted assent, and the two 
moved back trailward. 

"Brian, take over. Crosse, come on. 
We'll report this to Clark. Remember, 
from now on wear your body armor and 
go in pairs when you leave the trail. Get 
Bucci's plates on to him." 

Bormann and Hurd set down their 
loads, and were buckling the weakly protesting Bucci into his chest and back 
plates, as Hague left them. 

COMMANDER Chapman stared at the 
circle of faces. His section commanders lounged about his tiny square 
office. "Well, then, what are their 
chances ?" 

Bjornson, executive for the technical 
section, stared at Chapman levelly. 

"I can vouch for Devlin. He's not precisely a rule-book officer, but that's why I 
recommended him for this expedition. 
He's at his best in an unusual situation, 
one where he has to depend on his own 
wits. He'll bring them through." 

Artilleryman Branch spoke in turn. "I 
don't know about Hague. He's young, 
untried. Seemed a little unsure. He might 
grow panicky and be useless. I sent him 
because there was no one else, unless I 
went myself." 

The Commander cleared his throat 
brusquely. "I know you wanted to go, 
Branch, but we can't send out our executive officers. Not yet, anyway. What 
about Clark? Could he take over Devlin's 
job?" 

"Clark can handle it," Captain Rindell 
of the Science Section, was saying. "He 
likes to follow the rule book, but he's 
sturdy stuff. He'll bring them through if 
something happens to Devlin." 

"Hmmmm — that leaves Hague as the 
one questionable link in their chain of 
command. Young man, untried. Of course, 



he's only the junior officer. There's no 
use stewing over this; but I'll tell you 
frankly, that if those men can't get their 
records through to us before we send the 
next courier rocket to earth, I think the 
U.S. Rocket Service is finished. This 
attempt will be chalked up as a failure. 
The project will be abandoned entirely, 
and we'll be ordered back to earth to 
serve as a fighter arm there." 

Bjornson peered from the space-port 
window and looked out over the cinderpacked parade a hundred fet below. "What 
makes you so sure the Rocket Service is 
in immediate danger of being scrapped?" 
"The last courier rocket contained a 
confidential memo from Secretary Dougherty. There is considerable war talk, and 
the other Service Arms are plunging for 
larger armaments. They want their appropriations of money and stock pile materials 
expanded at our expense. We've got to 
show that we are doing a good job, show 
the Government a concrete return in the 
form of adequate reports on the surface 
of Venus, and its soils and raw materials." 
"What about the 'copters !" Rindell inquired. "They brought in some good stuff 
for the reports." 

"Yes, but with a crew of only four men, 
they can't do enough." 

Branch cut in dryly. "About all I can 
see is to look hopeful. The Rocket would 
have exhausted its fuel long ago. It's 
been over ten weeks since they left Base." 
"Assuming they're marching overland, 
God forbid, they'll have only sonar and 
radio, right?" Bjornson was- saying. "Why 
not keep our klaxon going? It's a pretty 
faint hope, but we'll have to try everything. My section is keeping the listeners 
manned continually, we've got a sonar 
beam out, radio messages every thirty 
minutes, and with the klaxon we're doing 
all we can. I doubt if anything living 
could approach within a twenty five mile 
range without hearing that klaxon, or 
without us hearing them with the listeners." 

"All right." Commander Chapman 
stared hopelessly at a fresh batch of reports burdening his desk. "Send out 
ground parties within the ten mile limit, 
but remember we can't afford to lose men. 



THE ROCKETEERS HAVE SHAGGY EARS 



13 




If gathered the great legs slightly . . • ready to leap* 

III 



When the 'copters' are back in, send them 
both West." West meant merely in a 
direction west from Meridian 0, as the 
mother rocket's landing place had been 
designated. "They can't do much searching over that rainforest, but it's a try. 
They might pick up a radio message." 

Chapman returned grumpily to his reports, and the others filed out. 



AT NIGHT, ON GUARD, HAGUE 
saw a thousand horrors peopling the 
Stygian forest murk ; but when he flashed 
his lightpak into darkness there was nothing. He wondered how long he could 
stand the waiting, when he would crack 
as Supply Sergeant Didrickson had, and 



14 



PLANET STORIES 



his comrades would blast him down with 
explosive bullets. He should be like Brian, 
hard and sure, and always doing the right 
thing, lie decided. He'd come out of OCS 
Gunnery School, trained briefly in the 
newly-formed U.S. Rocket Service. Then 
the expedition to Venus — it was a fiftyfifty chance they said, and out of all the 
volunteers he'd been picked. And when 
the first expedition was ready to blast off 
from the Base Camp on Venus, he'd been 
picked again. Why, he cursed despairingly? Sure, he wanted to come, but how 
could his commanders have had faith in 
him, when he didn't know himself if he 
could continue to hold out. 

Sounds on the trail sent his carbine 
automatically to ready, and he called a 
strained, "Halt." 

"Okay, Hague. It's Clark and Arndt." 

The wiry little navigation officer, and 
lean, scraggy Geologist Arndt, the latter's 
arm still in a sling, came into the glow of 
Hague's lightpak. 

"Any more horns or arrows?" Clark's 
voice sounded tight, and repressed ; Hague 
reflected that perhaps the strain was getting him too. 

"No, but Bucci is getting worse. Can't 
you carry him on the cart?" 

"Hague, I've told you twenty times. 
That cart is full and breaking down now. 
Get it through your head that it's no longer 
individual men we can think of now, but 
the entire party. If they can't march, they 
must be left, or all of us may die!" His 
voice was savage, and when he tried to 
light a cigarette his hand shook. "All right. 
It's murder, and I don't like it any better 
than you do." 

"How are we doing ? What's the over-all 
picture !" Both of the officers tried to 
smile a little at the memory of that pompous little phrase, favorite of a windbag 
they'd served under. 

"Not good. Twenty-two of us now." 

"Hirooka thinks we may be within radio 
range of Base soon/' he continued more 
hopefully. "With this interference, we 
can't tell, though." 

They talked a little longer, Arndt gave 
the gunnery officer a food-and-medical 
supply packet, and Hague's visitors became two bobbing glows of light that 



vanished down the trail. 

A soul crushing weight of days passed 
while they strained forward through mud 
and green gloom, like men walking on a 
forest sea bottom. Then it was a cool 
dawn, and a tugging at his boot awoke 
the Lieutenant. Hurd, his face a strained 
mask, was peering into the officer's small 
shelter tent and jerking at his leg. 

"Get awake, Lieutenant. I think they're 
here." 

Hague struggled hard to blink off the 
exhausted sleep he'd been in. 

"Listen, Lieutenant, one of them horns 
has been blowing. It's right here. Between 
us and the main party." 

"Okay." Hague rolled swiftly from 
the tent as Hurd awoke the men. Hague 
moved swiftly to each. 

"Brian, you handle the gun. Bucci, 
loader. Crosse, charger. Bormann, cover 
our right; Hurd the left. I'll watch the 
trail ahead." 

Brian and Crosse worked swiftly and 
quietly with the lethal efficiency that had 
made them crack gunners at Fort Fisher, 
North Carolina. Bucci lay motionless at 
the ammunition box, but his eyes were 
bright, and he didn't seem to mind his 
feverish, swollen leg. The Sergeant and 
Crosse slewed the pneumatic gun to cover 
their back trail, and fell into position 
beside the gleaming grey tube. Hague, 
Bormann and Hurd moved quickly at 
striking tents and rolling packs, their 
rifles ready at hand. 

Hague had forgotten his fears and the 
self-doubt, the feeling that he had no business ordering men like Sergeant Brian, 
and Hurd and Bormann. They were swallowed in intense expectancy as he lay 
watching the dawn fog that obscured like 
thick smoke the trail that led to Clark's 
party and the whippet tank. 

He peered back over his shoulder for 
a moment. Brian, Bucci, and Crosse, mudstained backs toward him, were checking 
the gun and murmuring soft comments. 
Bormann looked at the officer, grinned 
tightly, and pointed at Helen perched on 
his shoulder. His lips carefully framed the 
words, "Be a pushover, Helen brings 
luck." 

The little bird peered up into Bormann's 



THE ROCKETEERS HAVE SHAGGY EARS 



15 



old-young face, and Hague, trying to grin 
back, hoped he looked confident. Hurd lay 
on the other side of the trail, his back 
to Bormann, peering over his rifle barrel, 
bearded jaws rhythmically working a cud 
of tobacco he'd salvaged somewhere, and 
Hague suddenly thought he must have 
been saving it for the finish. 

Hague looked back into the green light 
beginning to penetrate the trail fog, changing it into a glowing mass — then thought 
he saw a movement. Up the trail, the 
whippet tank's motor caught with a roar, 
and he heard Whittaker traversing the 
battered tank's turret. The turret gun 
boomed flatly, and a shell burst somewhere 
in the forest darkness to Hague's right. 

Then there was a gobbling yell and gray 
man-like figures poured out onto the trail. 
Hague set his sights on them, the black 
sight-blade silhouetting sharply in the 
glowing fog. He set them on a running 
figure, and squeezed his trigger, then 
again, and again, as new targets came. 
Sharp reports ran crackling among the 
great trees. Sharp screams came, and a 
whistling sound overhead that he knew 
were blowgun arrows. The pneumatic gun 
sputtered behind him, and Bormann's and 
Hurd's rifles thudded in the growing roar. 

Blue flashes and explosive bullets made 
fantastic flares back in the forest shadows ; 
and suddenly a knot of man-shapes were 
running toward him through the fog. 
Hague picked out one in the glowing mist, 
fired, another, fired. Gobbling yells were 
around him, and he shot toward them 
through the fog, at point-blank range. A 
thing rose up beside him, and Hague yelled 
with murderous fury, and drove his beltknife up into grey leather skin. Something 
burned his shoulder as he rolled aside and 
fired at the dark form standing over him 
with a poised, barbed spear. The bluewhite flash was blinding, and he cursed 
and leaped up. 

There was nothing more. Scattered 
shots, and the forest lay quiet again. After 
that shot at point-blank range, Hague's 
vision had blacked out. 

"Any one else need first aid ?" he called, 
and tried to keep his voice firm. When 
there was silence, he said, "Hurd, lead me 
to the tank." 



He heard the rat-faced man choke, "My 
God, he's blind." 

"Just flash blindness, Hurd. Only temporary." Hague kept his face stiff, and 
hoped frantically that he was right, that it 
was just temporary blindness, temporary 
optic shock. 

Sergeant Brian's icy voice cut in. 
"Gun's all right, Lieutenant. Nobody hurt. 
We fired twenty eight rounds of H.E. 
No A.P.X. Get going with him, Hurd." 

He felt Hurd's tug at his elbow, and 
they made their way up the trail. 

"What do they look like, Hurd?" 

"These men-things? They're grey, about 
my size, skin looks like leather, and their 
heads are flattish. Eyes on the side of 
their heads, like a lizard. Not a stitch of 
clothes. Just a belt with a knife and arrow 
holder. And they got webbed claws for 
feet. They're ugly-looking things, sir. 
Here's the tank." 

Clark's voice came, hard and clear. 
"That you, Hague?" Silence for a moment. "What's wrong? You're not 
blinded?" 

Sewell had dropped his irascibility, and 
his voice was steady and kindly. 

"Just flash blindness, isn't it, sir? This 
salve will fix you up. You've got a cut 
on your shoulder. I'll take care of that 
too." 

"How are your men, Hague?" Clark 
sounded as though he were standing beside Hague. 

"Not a scratch. We're ready to march." 

"Five hurt here, three with the advance 
party, and two at the tank. We got 'em 
good, though. They hit the trail between 
our units and got fire from both sides. 
Must be twenty of them dead." 

Hague grimaced at the sting of something Sewell had squeezed into his eyes. 
"Who was hurt?" 

"Arndt, the geologist ; his buddy, Galut, 
the botanist ; lab technician Harker, Crewman Harker, and Szachek, the meteorologist man. How's your pneumatic ammunition?" 

"We fired twenty-eight rounds of H.E." 

Cartographer Hirooka's voice burst in 
excitedly. 

"That gun crew of yours! Your gun 
crew got twenty-one of these — these lizard 



16 



PLANET STORIES 






men. A bunch came up our back trail, and 
the pneumatic cut them to pieces. " 

"Good going, Hague. We'll leave you 
extended back there. I'm pulling in the 
advance party, and there'll be just two 
groups. We'll be at point, and you continue at afterguard." Clark was silent 
for a moment, then his voice came bitterly, 
"We're down to seventeen men, you 
know." 

He cursed, and Hague heard the wiry 
little navigator slosh away through the 
mud and begin shouting orders. He and 
Hurd started back with Whittaker and 
Sergeant Sample yelling wild instructions 
from the tank as to what the rear guard 
might do with the next batch of lizardmen who came sneaking up. 

Hague's vision was clearing, and he 
saw Balistierri and the photographer Whitcomb through a milky haze, measuring, 
photographing, and even dissecting several 
of the lizard-men. The back trail, swept 
by pneumatic gunfire was a wreck of wood 
splinters and smashed trees, smashed 
bodies, and cratered earth. 

They broke down the gun, harnessed the 
equipment, and swung off at the sound of 
Clark's whistle. Bucci had to be supported 
between two of the others, and they took 
turnabout at the job, sloshing through 
the water and mud, with Bucci's one 
swollen leg dragging uselessly between 
them. It was punishing work as the heat 
veils shimmered and thickened, but no one 
seemed to consider leaving him behind, 
Hague noticed; and he determined to say 
nothing about Clark's orders that the sick 
must be abandoned. 

Days and nights flashed by in a dreary 
monotony of mud, heat, insects and thinning rations. Then one morning the giant 
trees began to thin, and they passed from 
rainforest into jungle. 

The change was too late for Bucci. They 
carved a neat marker beside the trail, and 
set the dead youth's helmet atop it. Lieutenant Hague carried ahead a smudged 
letter in his shirt, with instructions to forward it to Wilma, the gunner's young 
wife. 

Hague and his four gunners followed 
the rattling whippet tank's trail higher, 
the jungle fell behind, and their protesting 



legs carried them over the rim of a high, 
cloudswept plateau, that swept on to the 
limit of vision on both sides and ahead. 

THE CITY'S black walls squatted 
secretively; foursquare, black, glassy 
walls with a blocky tower set sturdily at 
each of the four corners, enclosing what 
appeared to be a square mile of low buildings. Grey fog whipped coldly across the 
flat bleakness and rustled through dark 
grass. 

Balistierri, plodding beside Hague at the 
rear, stared at it warily, muttering, "And 
Childe Roland to the dark tower came." 

Sampler's tank ground along the base 
of the twelve-foot wall, turned at a sharp 
right angle, and the party filed through a 
square cut opening that once had been a 
gate. The black city looked tenantless. 
There was dark-hued grass growing in the 
misted streets and squares, and across the 
lintels of cube-shaped, neatly aligned 
dwellings, fashioned of thick, black blocks. 
Hague could hear nothing but whipping 
wind, the tank's clatter, and the quiet clink 
of equipment as men shuffled ahead 
through the knee-high grass, peering 
watchfully into dark doorways. 

Clark's whistle shrilled, the tank motor 
died, and they waited. 

"Hague, come ahead." 

The gunnery officer nodded at Sergeant 
Brian, and walked swiftly to Clark, who 
was leaning against the tank's mudcaked 
side. 

"Sampler says we've got to make repairs 
on the tank. We'll shelter here. Set your 
gun on a roof top commanding the street — 
or, better yet, set it on the wall. I'll want 
two of your gunners to go hunting food 
animals." 

"What do you think this place is, Bob?" 

"Beats me," and the navigator's windburned face twisted in a perplexed expression. "Lenkranz knows more about 
metals, but he thinks this stone is volcanic, 
like obsidian. Those lizard-men couldn't 
have built it." 

"We passed some kind of bas-relief or 
murals inside the gate." 

"Whitcomb is going to photograph 
them. Blake, Lenkranz, Johnston, and 
Hirooka are going to explore the place. 



THE ROCKETEERS HAVE SHAGGY EARS 



17 



Your two gunners, and Crewman Swenson 
and Balistierri will form the two hunting 
parties." 

For five days, Hague and Crosse walked 
over the sullen plateau beneath scudding, 
leaden clouds, hunting little lizards that 
resembled dinosaurs and ran in coveys like 
grey chickens. The meat was good, and 
Sewell dropped his role of medical technician to achieve glowing accolades as an 
expert cook. Balistierri was in a zoologist's paradise, and he hunted over the 
windy plain with Swenson, the big whitehaired Swede, for ten and twelve hours 
at a stretch. Balistierri would sit in the 
cook's unit glow at night, his thin face 
ecstatic as he described the weird life 
forms he and Swenson had tracked down 
during the day ; or alternately he'd bemoan 
the necessity of eating what were to him 
priceless zoological specimens. 

Whittaker and Sampler hammered in 
the recalcitrant tank's bowels and shouted 
ribald remarks to any one nearby, until 
they emerged the third day, grease-stained 
and perspiring, to announce that "She's 
ready to roll her g — d — cleats off." 

Whittaker had been nursing the tank's 
radio transreceiver beside the forward 
hatch this grey afternoon, when his wild 
yell brought Hague erect. The officer carefully handed Bcrmann's skin bird back 
to the gunner, swung down from the city 
wall's edge, and ran to Whittaker's side. 
Clark was already there when Hague 
reached the tank. 

"Listen! I've got 'em!" Whittaker 
yelped and extended the crackling earphones to Clark. 

A tinny voice penetrated the interference. 

"Base . . . Peter One ... Do you hear 
... to George Easy Peter One .... hear 
me . . . out." 

Whittaker snapped on his throat microphone. 

"George Easy Peter One To Base. 
George Easy Peter One To Base. We 
hear you. We hear you. Rocket crashed. 
Rocket crashed. Returning overland. Returning overland. Present strength sixteen men. Can you drop us supplies ? Can 
you drop us supplies?" 

The earphones sputtered, but no more 



voices came through. Clark's excited face 
fell into tired lines. 

"We've lost them. Keep trying, Whittaker. Hague, we'll march-order tomorrow 
at dawn. You'll take the rear again." 

GREY, windy dawnlight brought them 
out to the sound of Clark's call. 
Strapping on equipment and plates, they 
assembled around the tank. They were 
rested, and full fed. 

"Walk, you poor devils," Whittaker 
was yelling from his tank turret. "And, 
if you get tired, run awhile," he snorted, 
grinning heartlessly, as he leaned back in 
pretended luxury against the gunner's seat, 
a thinly padded metal strip. 

Balistierri and the blond Swenson 
shouldered their rifles and shuffled out. 
They would move well in advance as 
scouts. 

"I wouldn't ride in that armored alarmclock if it had a built-in harem," Hurd 
was screaming at Whittaker, and hurled 
a well-placed mudball at the tankman's 
head as the tank motor caught, and the 
metal vehicle lumbered ahead toward the 
gate, with Whittaker sneering, but with 
most of his head safely below the turret 
rim. Beside it marched Clark, his ragged 
uniform carefully scraped clean of mud, 
and with him Lenkranz, the metals man. 
Both carried rifles and wore half empty 
bandoliers of blast cartridges. 

The supply cart jerked behind the tank, 
and behind it filed Whitcomb with his 
cameras; Sewell, the big, laconic medical 
technician; Johnston; cartographer Hirooka perusing absorbedly the clip board 
that held his strip map; Blake, the lean 
and spectacled bacteriologist, brought up 
the rear. Hague waited until they had 
disappeared through the gate cut sharply 
in the city's black wall, then he turned to 
his gun crew. 

Sergeant Brian, saturnine as always, 
swung past carrying the pneumatic barrel 
assembly, Crosse with the charger a pace 
behind. Next, Bormann, whispering to 
Helen who rode his shoulder piping 
throaty calls. Last came Hurd, swaggering past with jaws grinding steadily at 
that mysterious cud. Hague cast a glance 
over his shoulder at the deserted street of 



18 



PLACET STORIES 



black cubes, wondered at the dank loneness 
of the place, and followed Hurd. 

The hours wore on as they swung across 
dark grass, through damp tendrils of 
cloud, and faced into whipping, cold wind, 
eyes narrowed against its sting. Helen, 
squawking unhappily, crawled inside Bormann's shirt and rode with just her brown 
bird-head protruding. 

"Look at the big hole, Lieutenant/' 
Hurd called above the wind. 

Hurd had dropped behind, and Hague 
called a halt to investigate Hurd's find, 
but as he hiked rapidly back, the wiry 
little man yelled and pitched out of sight. 
Brian came running, and he and Hague 
peered over the edge of a funnel shaped 
pit, from which Hurd was trying to crawl. 
Each time he'd get a third of the way up 
the eighteen- foot slope, gravelly soil would 
slide and he'd again be carried to the bottom. 

"Throw me a line." 

Brian pulled a hank of nylon line from 
his belt, shook out the snarls, and tossed 
an end into Hurd's clawing hands. Hague 
and the Sergeant anchored themselves to 
the upper end and were preparing to haul, 
when Hague saw something move in the 
gravel beneath Hurd's feet, at the funnel 
bottom, and saw a giant pincers emerging 
from loose, black gravel. 

"Hurd look out!" he screamed. 

The little man, white-faced, threw himself aside as a giant beetle head erupted 
through the funnel bottom. The great 
pincers jaws fastened around Hurd's waist 
as he struggled frantically up the pit's side. 
He began screaming when the beetle monster dragged him relentlesssly down, his 
distorted face flung up at them appealingly. Hague snatched at his rifle and 
brought it up. When the gun cracked, the 
pincer's tightened on Hurd's middle, and 
the little man was snipped in half. The 
blue-white flash and report of the explosive bullet blended with Hurd's choked 
yells, the beetle rolled over on its back and 
the two bodies lay entangled at the pit 
bottom. Brian and Hague looked at each 
other in silent, blanched horror, then 
turned from the pit's edge and loped back 
to the others. 

Bormann and Crosse peered fearfully 



across the windwhipped grass, and inquired in shouts what Hurd was doing. 

"He's dead, gone," Hague yelled savagely over the wind's whine. "Keep moving. We can't do anything. Keep going." 

IV 

AT 1630 HOURS COMMANDER 
Technician Harker slipped on the 
earset, threw over a transmitting switch, 
and monotoned the routine verbal message. 

"Base to George Easy Peter One . . . 
Base to George Easy Peter One ... Do 
you hear me George Easy Peter One . . . 
Do you hear me George Easy Peter 
One . . . reply please . . . reply please." 
Nothing came from his earphones, but 
bursts of crackling interference, until he 
tried the copters next, and "George Easy 
Peter Two" and "George Easy Peter 
Three" reported in. They were operating 
near the base. 

He tried "One" again, just in case. 

"Base to George Easy Peter One . . . 
Base to George Easy Peter One ... Do 
you hear me ... Do you hear me . . . 
out". 

A scratching whisper resolved over the 
interference. Harker's face wore a stunned 
look, but he quickly flung over a second 
switch and the scratching voice blared 
over the mother ship's entire address 
system. Men dropped their work throughout the great hull, and clustered around 
the speakers. 

"George One . . . Base . . . hear you 
. . . rocket crashed . . . overland . . . 
present strength . . . supplies . . . drop 
supplies." 

Interference surged back and drowned 
the whispering voice, while through 
Odysseus' hull a ragged cheer grew and 
gathered volume. Harker shut off the 
address system and strained over his 
crackling earphones, but nothing more 
came in response to his radio calls. 

He glanced up and found the Warning 
Room jammed with technicians, science 
section members, officers, men in laboratory smocks, or greasy overalls, or spotless Rocket Service uniforms, watching 
intently his own strained face a9 he tried 
to get through. Commander Chapman 



THE ROCKETEERS HAVE SHAGGY EARS 



looked haggard, and Harker remembered 
that some one had once said that Chapman's young sister was the wife of the 
medical technician who'd gone out with 
Patrol Rocket One. 

Harker finally pulled off the earphones 
reluctantly and set them on the table before him. "That's all. You heard everything they said over the P.A. system. 
Nothing more is coming through." 

NIGHT came, another day, night again, 
and they came finally to the plateau's 
end, and stood staring from a windy escarpment across an endless roof of rainforest far below, grey green under the 
continuous roof of lead-colored clouds. 
Hague, standing back a little, watched 
them. A thin line of ragged men along 
the rim peering mournfully out across 
that endless expanse for a gleam that 
might be the distant hull of Odysseus, 
the mother ship. A damp wind fluttered 
their rags and plastered them against gaunt 
bodies. 

Clark and Sampler were conferring in 
shouts. 

"Will the tank make it down this 
grade?" Clark wanted to know. 

For once, Sergeant Sampler's mobile, 
merry face was grim. 

"I don't know, but we'll sure try. Be 
ready to cut that cart loose if the tank 
starts to slip." 

Drag ropes were fastened to the cart, 
a man stationed at the tank hitch, and 
Sampler sent his tank lurching forward 
over the edge, and it slanted down at a 
sharp angle. Hague, holding a drag rope, 
set his heels and allowed the tank's weight 
to pull him forward over the rim ; and the 
tank, cart, and muddy figures hanging to 
drag ropes began descending the steep 
gradient. Bormann, just ahead of the 
Lieutenant, strained back at the rope and 
turned a tight face over his shoulder. 

"She's slipping faster !" 

The tank was picking up speed, and 
Hague heard the clash of gears as Sampler 
tried to fight the downward pull of gravity. 
Gears ground, and Sampler forced the 
whippet straight again, but the downward 
slide was increasing. Hague was flattened 
under Bormann, heels digging, and behind 



19 

him he could hear Sergeant Brian cursing, 
struggling to keep flat against the downward pull. 

The tank careened sideways again, 
slipped, and Whittaker's white face 
popped from her turret. 

"She's going," he screamed. 

A drag rope parted. Clark sprang like 
a madman between tank and cart, and 
cut the hitch. The tank, with no longer 
sufficient restraining weight, tipped with 
slow majesty outward, then rolled out and 
down, bouncing, smashing as if in a slow 
motion film, shedding parts at each crushing contact. It looked like a toy below 
them, still rolling and gathering speed, 
when Hague saw Whittaker's body fly 
free, a tiny ragdoll at that distance, and 
the tank was lost to view when it bounced 
off a ledge and went floating down through 
space. 

Clark signalled them forward, and they 
inched the supply cart downward on the 
drag ropes, legs trembling with strain, and 
their nerves twitching at the memory of 
Whittaker's chalky face peering from the 
falling turret. It was eight hours before 
they reached the bottom, reeling with exhaustion, set a guard, and tumbled into 
their shelter tents. Outside, Hague could 
hear Clark pacing restlessly, trying to assure himself that he'd been right to cut 
the tank free, that there'd been no chance 
to save Whittaker and Sampler when the 
tank began to slide. 

Hague lay in his little tent listening to 
the footsteps splash past in muddy Venusian soil, and was thankful that he hadn't 
had to make the decision. He'd been 
saving three cigarettes in an oilskin packet, 
and he drew one carefully from the wrapping now, lit it, and inhaled deeply. Could 
he have done what Clark did — break that 
hitch? He still didn't know when he took 
a last lung-filling pull at the tiny stub of 
cigarette and crushed it out carefully. 

As dawn filtered through the cloud 
layer, they were rolling shelter tents and 
buckling on equipment. Clark's face was 
a worn mask when he talked with Hague, 
and his fingers shook over his pack 
buckles. 

'There are thirteen of us. Six men 
will pull the supply cart, and six guard, 



20 



PLANET STORIES 



in four hour shifts. You and I will alternate command at guard." 

He was silent for a moment, then 
watched Hague's face intently as he spoke 
again. 

"It'll be a first grade miracle if any of 
us get through. Hague, you — you know I 
had to cut that tank free." His voioe rose 
nervously. "You know that! You're an 
officer." 

"Yeah, I guess you did." Hague 
couldn't say it any better, and he turned 
away and fussed busily with the bars holding the portable Sonar detection unit to 
the supply cart. 

They moved off with Hague leaning 
into harness pulling the supply cart bumpily ahead. Qark stumbled jerkily at the 
head, with Blake, a lean, silent ghost beside him, rifle in hand. The cart came 
next with Hague, Bormann, Sergeant 
Brian, Crosse, Lenkranz and Sewell leaning in single file against its weight. At 
the rear marched photographer Whitcomb, 
Hirooka with his maps, and Balistierri, 
each carrying a rifle. The big Swede 
Swenson was last in line, peering warily 
back into the rainforest shadows. The 
thirteen men wound Indian file from sight 
of the flatheaded reptilian thing, clutching 
a sheaf of bronze arrows, that watched 
them. 

HAGUE had lost count of days again 
when he looked up into the shadowy 
forest roof, his feet finding their way unconsciously through the thin mud, his ears 
registering automatically the murmurs of 
talk behind him, the supply cart's tortured 
creaking, and the continuous Sonar drone. 
The air felt different, warmer than its 
usual steam bath heat, close and charged 
with expectancy, and the forest seemed to 
crouch in waiting with the repressed silence of a hunting cat, 

Crosse yelled thinly from the rear of 
the file, and they all halted to listen, the 
hauling crew dropping their harness thankfully. Hague turned back and &aw Crosse's 
thin arm waving a rifle overhead, then 
pointing down the trail. The Lieutenant 
listened carefully until he caught the 
sound, a thin call, the sound of a horn 
mellowed by distance. 



The men unthinkingly moved in close 
and threw wary looks into the forest ways 
around them. 

"Move further ahead, Hague. Must be 
more lizard men." Clark swore, with tired 
despair. "All right, let's get moving and 
make it fast." 

The cart creaked ahead again, moving 
faster this time, and the snicking of rifle 
bolts came to Hague. He moved swiftly 
ahead on the trail and glanced up again, 
saw breaks in the forest roof, and realized 
that the huge trees were pitching wildly 
far above. 

"Look up," he yelled, "wind coming!" 

The wind came suddenly, striking with 
stone wall solidity. Hague sprinted to 
the cart, and the struggling body of men 
worked it off the trail, and into a buttress 
angle of two great tree roots, lashing it 
there with nylon ropes. The wind velocity 
increased, smashing torn branches overhead, and ripping at the men who lay 
with their heads well down in the mud. 
Tiny animals were blown hurtling past, 
and once a great spider came flailing in 
cartwheel fashion, then smashed brokenly 
against a tree. 

The wind drone rose in volume, the air 
darkened, and Hague lost sight of the 
other men from behind his huddled shelter 
against a wall like root. The great trees 
twisted with groaning protest, and thunderous crashes came downward through 
the forest, with sometimes the faint squeak 
of a dying or frightened animal. The wind 
halted for a breathless, hushed moment of 
utter stillness, broken only by the dropping 
of limbs and the scurry of small life 
forms — then came the screaming fury 
from the opposite direction. 

For a moment, the gunnery officer 
thought he'd be torn from the root to 
which his clawing fingers clung: Its brutal 
force smashed breath from Hague's lungs 
and held him pinned in his corner until 
he struggled choking for air as a drowning 
man does. It seemed that he couldn't draw 
breath, that the air was a solid mass 
from which he could no longer get life. 
Then the wind stopped as suddenly as it had 
come, leaving dazed quiet. As he stumbled 
back to the cart, Hague saw crushed beneath a thigh-sized limb a feebly moving 



THE ROCKETEERS HAVE SHAGGY EARS 



21 



reptilian head; and the dying eyes of the 
lizard-man were still able to stare at him 
in cold malevolence. 

The supply cart was still intact, roped 
between buttressing roots to belt knives 
driven into the tough wood. Hague and 
Clark freed it, called a hasty roll, and the 
march was resumed at a fast pace through 
cooled, cleaner air. They could no longer 
hear horn sounds ; but the grim knowledge 
that lizard-men were near them lent 
strength, and Hague led as rapidly as he 
dared, listening carefully to the Sonar's 
drone behind him, altering his course when 
the sound faded, and straightening out 
when it grew in volume. 

A day slipped by and another, and the 
cart rolled ahead through thin greasy mud 
on the forest floor, with the Sonar's drone 
mingled with murmuring men's voices talking of food. It was the universal topic, 
and they carefully worked out prolonged 
menus each would engorge when they 
reached home. They forgot heat, insect 
bites, the sapping humidity, and talked of 
food — steaming roasts, flanked by crystal 
goblets of iced wine, oily roasted nuts, and 
lush, crisp green salads. 



HAGUE, AGAIN MARCHING 
ahead with Balistierri, broke into the 
comparatively bright clearing, and was 
blinded for a moment by the sudden, 
cloud-strained light after days of forest 
darkness. As their eyes accommodated to 
the lemon-colored glare, he and Balistierri 
sighted the animals squatting beneath low 
bushes that grew thickly in the clearing. 
They were monkey-like primates with 
golden tawny coats, a cockatoo crest of 
white flaring above dog faces. The 
monkeys stared a moment, the great white 
crests rising doubtfully, ivory canine teeth 
fully three inches long bared. 

They'd been feeding on fruit that dotted 
the shrub- filled clearing; but now one 
screamed a warning, and they sprang into 
vines that made a matted wall on every 
side. The two rifles cracked together again, 
and three fantastically colored bodies lay 
quiet, while the rest of the troop fled 
screaming into tree tops and disappeared. 



At the blast of sound, a fluttering kaleidoscope of color swept up about the startled 
rocketeers, and they stood blinded, while 
mad whorls of color whirled around them 
in a miniature storm. 

"Giant butterflies/' Balistierri was 
screaming in ecstasy. "Look at them ! Big 
as a dove!" 

Hague watched the bright insects coalesce into one agitated mass of vermillion, 
azure, metallic green, and sulphur yellow 
twenty feet overhead. The pulsating mass 
of hues resolved itself into single insects, 
with wings large as dinnerplates, and they 
streamed out of sight over the forest roof. 

"What were they?" he grinned at Balistierri. "Going to name them after Bormann ?" 

The slight zoologist still watched the 
spot where they'd vanished. 

"Does it matter much what I call, them ? 
Do you really believe any one will ever be 
able to read this logbook I'm making?" 
He eyed the gunnery officer bleakly, then, 
"Well, come on. We'd better skin these 
monks. They're food anyway." 

Hague followed Balistierri, and they 
stood looking down at the golden furred 
primates. The zoologist knelt, fingered 
a bedraggled white crest, and remarked, 
"These blast cartridges don't leave much 
meat, do they? Hardly enough for the 
whole party." He pulled a tiny metal 
block, with a hook and dial, from his 
pocket, loped the hook through a tendon 
in the monkey's leg and lifted the dead 
animal. 

"Hmmm. Forty-seven pounds. Not 
bad." He weighed each in turn, made measurements, and entered these in his pocket 
notebook. 

The circle around Sewell, who presided 
over the cook unit, was merry that night. 
The men's eyes were bright in the heater 
glow as they stuffed their shrunken stomachs with monkey meat and the fruits the 
monkeys had been eating when Hague and 
Balistierri surprised them. Swenson and 
Crosse and Whitcomb, the photographer, 
overate and were violently sick; but the 
others sat picking their teeth contentedly 
in a close circle. Bormann pulled his harmonica from his shirt pocket, and the hard, 
silvery torrent of music set them to sing


22 



PLAJVET STORIES 



ing softly. Hague and Blake, the bacteriologist, stood guard among the trees. 

At dawn, they were marching again, 
stepping more briskly over tiny creeks, 
through green-tinted mud, and the wet 
heat. At noon, they heard the horn again, 
and Clark ordered silence and a faster 
pace. They swung swiftly, eating iron 
rations as they marched. Hague leaned 
into his cart harness and watched perspiration staining through Bormann's 
shirted back just ahead of him. Behind, 
Sergeant Brian tugged manfully, and 
growled under his breath at buzzing insects, slapping occasionally with a low 
howl of muted anguish. Helen, the skin 
bird, rode on Bormann's shoulder, staring 
back into Hague's face with questioning 
chirps; and Hague was whistling softly 
between his teeth at her, when Bormann 
stopped suddenly and Hague slammed into 
him. Helen took flight with a startled 
squawk, and Clark came loping back to 
demand quiet. Bormann stared at the two 
officers, his young-old face blank with surprise. 

"Fm, Fm shot," he stuttered, and stared 
wonderingly at the thing thrusting from 
the side opening in his chest armor. It 
was one of the fragile bronze arrows, 
gleaming metallically in the forest gloom. 

Hague cursed, and jerked free of the 
cart harness. 

"Here, I'll get it free." He tugged at 
the shaft, and Bormann's face twisted. 
Hague stepped back. "Where's Sewell? 
This thing must be barbed." 

"Back off the trail ! Form a wide circle 
around the cart, but stay under cover! 
Fight 'em on their own ground!" Clark 
was yelling, and the men clustered about 
the cart faded into forest corridors. 

Hague and Sewell, left alone, dragged 
Bormann's limp length beneath the metal 
cart. Hague leaped erect again, manhandled the pneumatic gun off the cart 
and onto the trail, spun* the charger crank, 
and lay down in firing position. Behind 
him, Sewell grunted, "He's gone. Arrow 
poison must have paralyzed his diaphragm 
and chest muscles." 

"Okay. Get up here and handle the 
ammunition." Hague's face was savage 
as the medical technician crawled into pos


ition beside him and opened an ammunition 
carrier. 

"Watch the trail behind me," Hague 
continued, slamming up the top cover plate 
and jerking a belt through the pneumatic 
breech. "When I yell charge, spin the 
charger crank; and when I yell off a 
number, set the meter arrow at that number." He snapped the cover plate shut 
and locked it. 

"The other way! They're coming the 
other way !" Sewell lumbered to his knees, 
and the two heaved the gun around. A 
blowgun arrow rattled off the cart body 
above them, and gobbling yells filtered 
among the trees with an answering crack 
of explosive cartridges. A screaming knot 
of grey figures came sprinting down on 
the cart. Hague squeezed the pneumatic'9 
trigger, the gun coughed, and blue-firelimned lizard men crumpled in the trail 
mud. 

"Okay, give 'em a few the other way." 

The two men horsed the gun around 
and sent a buzzing flock of explosive loads 
down the forest corridor opening ahead of 
the cart. They began firing carefully down 
other corridors opening off the trail, aiming delicately less their missiles explode 
too close and the concussion kill their own 
men; but they worked a blasting circle of 
destruction that smashed the great trees 
back in the forest and made openings in 
the forest roof. Blue fire flashed in the 
shadows and froze weird tableaus of 
screaming lizard-men and hurtling mud, 
branches, and great splinters of wood. 

An exulting yell burst behind them. 
Hague saw Sewell stare over his shoulder, 
face contorted, then the big medical technician sprang to his feet. Hague rolled 
hard, pulling his belt knife, and saw Sewell 
and a grey man-shape locked in combat 
above him, saw leathery grey claws drive 
a bronze knife into the medic's unarmored 
throat; and then the gunnery officer was 
on his feet, knife slashing, and the lizardman fell across the prone Sewell. An 
almost audible silence fell over the forest, 
and Hague saw Rocketeers filtering back 
onto the cart trail, rifles cautiously extended at ready. 

"Where's Clark?" he asked Lenkranz. 
The grey-haired metals man gazed back 



THE ROCKETEERS HAVE SHAGGY EARS 



23 



dullv. 

"I haven't seen him since we left the 
trail. I was with Swenson." 

The others moved in, and Hague listed 
the casualties. Sewell, Bormann, and 
Lieutenant Clark. Gunnery Officer Clarence Hague was now in command. That 
the Junior Lieutenant now commanded 
Ground Expeditionary Patrol Number 
One trickled into his still numb brain; 
and he wondered for a moment what the 
Base Commander would think of their 
chances if he knew. Then he took stock 
of his little command. 

There was young Crosse, his face 
twitching nervously. There was Blake, 
the tall, quiet bacteriologist; Lenkranz, 
the metals man; Hirooka, the Nisei; Balistierri ; Whitcomb, the photographer, with 
a battered Hasselbladt still dangling by its 
neck cord against his armored chest. Swenson was still there, the big Swede crewman; and imperturbable Sergeant Brian, 
who was now calmly cleaning the pneumatic gun's loading mechanism. And, 
Helen, Bormann's skin bird, fluttering over 
the ration cart, beneath which Bormann 
and Sewell lay in the mud. 

"Crosse, Lenkranz, burial detail. Get 
going." It was Hague's first order as 
Commander. He thought the two looked 
most woebegone of the party, and figured 
digging might loosen their nerves. 

Crosse stared at him, and then sat suddenly against a tree bole. 

"I'm not going to dig. I'm not going to 
march. This is crazy. We're going to get 
killed. I'll wait for it right here. Why 
do we keep walking and walking when 
we're going to die anyway?" His rising 
voice cracked, and he burst into hysterical 
laughter. Sergeant Brian rose quietly from 
his gun cleaning, jerked Crosse to his 
feet, and slapped him into quiet. Then 
he turned to Hague. 

"Shall I take charge of the burial detail, 
sir?" 

Hague nodded; and suddenly his long 
dislike of the iron-hard Sergeant melted 
into warm liking and admiration. Brian 
was the man who'd get them all through. 

The Sergeant knotted his dark brows 
truculently at Hague. "And I don't believe Crosse meant what he said. He's a 



very brave man. We all get a little jumpy. 
But he's a good man, a good Rocketeer." 

THREE markers beside the trail, and 
a pile of dumped equipment marked 
the battle ground when the cart swung 
forward again. Hague had dropped all 
the recording instruments, saving only 
Whitcomb's exposed films, the rations, rifle 
ammunition, and logbooks that had been 
kept by different members of the science 
section. At his command, Sergeant Brian 
reluctantly smashed the pneumatic gun's 
firing mechanism, and left the gun squatting on its tripod beside charger and shell 
belts. With the lightened load, Hague 
figured three men could handle the cart, 
and he took his place with Brian and 
Crosse in the harness. The others no 
longer walked in the trail, but filtered between great root-flanges and tree boles on 
either side, guiding themselves by the 
Sonar's hum. 

They left no more trail markers, and 
Hague cautioned them against making any 
unnecessary noise. 

"No trail markers behind us. This mud 
is watery enough to hide footprints in a 
few minutes. We're making no noise, and 
well drop no more refuse. All they can 
hear will be the Sonar, and that won't 
carry far." 

On the seventy-first day of the march, 
Hague squatted, fell almost to the ground, 
and grunted, "Take ten." 

He stared at the stained, ragged scarecrows hunkered about him in forest mud. 

"Why do we do it?" he asked no one 
in particular. "Why do we keep going, 
and going, and going? Why don't we 
just lie down and die ? That would be the 
easiest thing I could think of right now." 
He knew that Rocket Service officers 
didn't talk that way, but he didn't feel 
like an officer, just a tired, feverish, boneweary man. 

"Have we got a great glowing tradition 
to inspire us?" he snarled. "No, we're 
just the lousy rocketeers that every other 
service arm plans to absorb. We haven't a 
Grant or a John Paul Jones to provide an 
example in a tough spot. The U.S. Rocket 
Service has nothing but the memory of 
some ships that went out and never came 



24 



PLANET STORIES 



back; and you can't make a legend out of 
men who just plain vanish." 

There was silence, and it looked as if the 
muddy figures were too exhausted to 
reply. Then Sergeant Brian spoke. 

"The Rocketeers have a legend, sir." 

"What legend, Brian?" Hague snorted. 

"Here is the legend, sir. 'George Easy 
Peter One'." 

Hague laughed hollowly, but the Sergeant continued as if he hadn't heard. 

"Ground Expeditionary Patrol One — 
the outfit a planet couldn't lick. Venus 
threw her grab bag at us, animals, swamps, 
poison plants, starvation, fever, and we 
kept right on coming. She just made us 
smarter, and tougher, and harder to -beat* 
And we'll blast through these lizard-men 
and the jungle, and march into Base like 
the whole U.S. Armed Forces on review." 

"Let's go," Hague called, and they staggered up again, nine gaunt bundles of 
sodden, muddy rags, capped in trim black 
steel helmets with cheek guards down. The 
others slipped off the trail, and Hague, 
Brian, and Crosse pulled on the cart harness and lurched forward. The cart wheel 
hub jammed against a tree bole, and as 
they strained blindly ahead to free it, a 
horn note drifted from afar. 

"Here they come again," Crosse 
groaned. 

"They — won't be — up — with us — for 
days," Hague grunted, while he threw his 
weight in jerks against the tow line. The 
cart lurched free with a lunge, and all three 
shot forward and sprawled raging in the 
muddy trail. 

They sat wiping mud from their faces, 
when Brian stopped suddenly, ripped off 
his helmet and threw it aside, then sat 
tensely forward in an attitude of strained 
listening. Hague had time to wonder dully 
if the man's brain had snapped, before 
he crawled to his feet. 

"Shut up, and listen," Brian was snarling. "Hear it! Hear it! It's a klaxon! 
Way off, about every two seconds !" 

Hague tugged off his heavy helmet, and 
strained every nerve to listen. Over the 
forest silence it came with pulse like regularity, a tiny whisper of sound. 

He and Brian stared bright-eyed at each 
other, not quite daring to say which they 



were thinking. Crosse got up and leaned 
like an empty sack against the cartwheel 
with an inane questioning look. 

"What is it ?" When they stared at him 
without speaking, still listening intently, 
"It's the Base. That's it, it's the Base!" 

Something choked Hague's throat, then 
he was yelling and firing his rifle. The rest 
came scuttling out of the forest shadow, 
faces breaking into wild grins, and they 
joined Hague, the forest rocking with gunfire. They moved forward, and Hirooka 
took up a thin chant: 

"Oooooooh, the Rocketeers 
have shaggy ears. 
They're dirty ." 

The rest of their lyrics wouldn't look 
well in print; but where the Rocketeers 
have gone, on every frontier of space, the 
ribald song is sung. The little file moved 
down the trail toward the klaxon sound. 
Behind them, something moved in the 
gloom, resolved itself into a reptile-headed, 
man-like thing, that reared a small wooden 
trumpet to fit its mouth, a soft horn note 
floated clear; and other shapes became 
visible, sprinting forward, flitting through 
the gloom . . . 

WHEN a red light flashed over Chapman's desk, he flung down a sheaf 
of papers and hurried down steel-walled 
corridors to the number one shaft. A tiny 
elevator swept him to Odysseus' upper 
side, where a shallow pit had been set in 
the ship's scarred skin, and a pneumatic 
gun installed. Chapman hurried past the 
gun and crew to stand beside a listening 
device. The four huge cones loomed 
dark against the clouds, the operator in 
their center was a blob of shadow in the 
dawnlight, where he huddled listening to a 
chanting murmur that came from his headset. Blake came running onto the gundeck ; Bjornson, and the staff officers were 
all there. 

"Cut it into the Address system," Chapman told the Listener operator excitedly; 
and the faint sounds were amplified 
through the whole ship. From humming 
Address amplifiers, the ribald words broke 
in a hoarse melody. 



THE ROCKETEERS HAVE SHAGGY EARS 



25 



"The rocketeers have shaggy ears, 
They're dirty " 

The rest described in vivid detail the 
prowess of rocketeers in general. 

"How far are they?" Chapman demanded. 

The operator pointed at a dial, fingered 
a knob that altered his receiving cones 
split-seconds of angle. "They're about 
twenty-five miles, sir." 

Chapman turned to the officers gathered 
in an exultant circle behind him. 

"Branch, here's your chance for action. 
Take thirty men, our whippet tank, and go 
out to them- Bjornson, get the 'copters 
aloft for air cover." 

Twenty minutes later, Chapman watched 
a column assemble beneath the Odysseus' 
gleaming side, and march into the jungle, 
with the 'copters buzzing west a moment 
later, like vindictive dragon flies. 

Breakfast was brought to the men clustered at Warnings equipment, and to 
Chapman at his post on the gundeck. The 
day ticked away, the parade ground vanished in thickening clots of night; and a 
second dawn found the watchers still at 
their posts, listening to queer sounds that 
trickled from the speakers. The singing 
had stopped; but once they heard a note 
that a horn might make, and several times 
gobbling yells that didn't sound human. 
George One was fighting, they knew now. 
The listeners picked up crackling of rifle 
fire, and when that died there was silence. 

The watchers heard a short cheer that 
died suddenly, as the relief column and 
George One met; and they waited and 
watched. Branch, who headed the relief 
column communicated with the mother 
ship by the simple expedient, of yelling, 
the sound being picked up by the listeners. 

"They're coming in, Chapman. I'm 
coming behind to guard their rear. They've 
been attacked by some kind of lizard-men. 
I'm not saying a thing — see for yourself 
when they arrive." 

Hours rolled past, while they speculated 
in low tones, the hush that held the ship 
growing taut and strained. 

"Surely Branch would have told us if 



anything was wrong, or if the records 
were lost," Chapman barked angrily. 
"Why did he have to be so damned melodramatic ?" 

"Look, there — through the trees. A helmet glinted!" The laconic Bjornson had 
thrown dignity to the winds, and capered 
like a drunken goat, as Rindell described it 
later. 

Chapman stared down at the jungle edging the parade ground and caught a movement. 

A man with a rifle came through the 
fringe and stood eying the ship in silence, 
and then came walking forward across the 
long, cindered expanse. From this height, 
he looked to Chapman like a child's lead 
soldier, a ragged, muddy, midget scarecrow. Another stir in the trees, and one 
more man, skulking like an infantryflanker with rifle at ready. He, too, 
straightened and came walking quietly forward. A file of three men came next, leaning into the harness of a little metal cart 
that bumped drunkenly as they dragged 
it forward. An instant of waiting, and two 
more men stole from the jungle, more like 
attacking infantry than returning heroes* 
Chapman waited, and no more came. This 
was all. 

"My God, no wonder Branch wouldn't 
tell us. There were thirty-two of them/' 
Rindell's voice was choked. 

"Yes, only seven." Chapman remembered his field glasses and focused them 
on the seven approaching men. "Lieutenant 
Hague is the only officer. And they're 
handing us the future of the U. S. Rocket 
Service on that little metal cart." 

The quiet shattered and a yelling horde 
of men poured from Odysseus' hull and 
engulfed the tattered seven, sweeping 
around them, yelling, cheering, and carrying them toward the mother ship. 

Chapman looked a little awed as he 
turned to the officers behind him. "Well 
they did it. We forward these records, 
and we've proven that we can do the job." 
He broke into a grin. "What am I talking 
about? Of course we did the job. We'll 
always do the job. We're the Rocketeers, 
aren't we?" 



Forever And The Earth 

By RAY BRADBURY 

They brought that great blazing writer three hundred years 
into the future. They gave him the stars and planets and all 
space for his hungry pen. Then they tried to put Thomas Wolfe 

back in his grave. 



AFTER SEVENTY YEARS OF 
writing short stories that never 
sold, Mr. Henry William Field 
arose one night at 1 1 :30 and burned ten 
million words. He carried the manuscripts 
downstairs through his dark old mansion 
and threw them into the furnace. 

'That's that," he said, and thinking 
about his lost art and his misspent life, 
he put himself to bed, among his rich 
antiques. "My mistake was in ever trying 
to picture this wild world of 2257 A.D. 
The rockets, the atom wonders, the travels 
to planets and double suns. Nobody can 
do it. Everyone's tried. All of our modern 
authors have failed. ,, 

Space was too big for them, and rockets 
too swift, and atomic science too instantaneous, he thought. But at least the other 
writers, while failing, had been published, 
while he, in his idle wealth, had used the 
years of his life for nothing. 

After an hour of feeling this way, he 
fumbled through the night rooms to his 
library and switched on a green hurricane 
lamp. At random, from a collection untouched in fifty years, he selected a book. 
It was a book three centuries yellow and 
three centuries brittle, but he settled into 
it and read hungrily until dawn .... 

At nine o'clock, Henry William Field, 
rushed from his library, called his servants, televised lawyers, friends, scientists, 
literateurs. 

"Come at once!" he cried. 

Within the hour, a dozen people hurried 
into the study where Henry William Field 
sat, very disreputable and hysterical with 
an odd, feeding joy, unshaven and feverish. He clutched a thick book in his brittle 
arms and laughed if any one even said 
good morning. 

"Here you see a book," he said at last, 
holding it out, "written by a giant, a man 
born in Asheville, North Carolina, in the 
26 



year 1900. Long gone to dust, he published four huge novels. He was a whirlwind. He lifted up mountains and collected winds. He left a trunk of pencilled 
manuscripts behind when he lay in bed at 
Johns Hopkins Hospital in Baltimore in 
the year 1938, on September 15th, and 
died of pneumonia, an ancient and awful 
disease." 

They looked at the book. 

LOOK HOMEWARD, ANGEL. 

He drew forth three more. OF TIME 
AND THE RIVER. THE WEB AND 
THE ROCK. YOU CAN'T GO HOME 
AGAIN. 

"By Thomas Wolfe," said the old man. 
"Three centuries cold in the North Carolina earth." 

"You mean you've called us simply to 
see four books by a dead man?" his 
friends protested. 

"More than that! I've called you because I feel Tom Wolfe's the man, the 
necessary man, to write of space, of time, 
huge things like nebulae and galactic war, 
meteors and planets, all the dark things 
he loved and put on paper were like this. 
He was born out of his time. He needed 
really big things to play with and never 
found them on Earth. He should have 
been born this afternoon instead of one 
hundred thousand mornings ago." 

"I'm afraid you're a bit late," said Professor Bolton. 

"I don't intend to be late !" snapped the 
old man. "I will not be frustrated by 
reality. You, professor, have experilented with time-travel. I expect you to 
finish your time machine this month. 
Here's a check, a blank check, fill it in. 
If you need more money, ask for it. 
You've done some traveling already, 
haven't you?" 

"A few years, yes, but nothing like 
centuries " 




«*^*8 



27 



28 



PLANET STORIES 



"Well make it centuries ! You others — " 
he swept them with a fierce and shining 
glance, " — will work with Bolton. I must 
have Thomas Wolfe." 

"What!" They fell back before him. 

"Yes/' he said. "That's the plan. Wolfe 
is to be brought to me. We will collaborate in the task of describing the flight 
from Earth to Mars, as only he could 
describe it!" 

They left him in his library with his 
books, turning the dry pages, nodding to 
himself. "Yes. Oh, dear Lord yes, Tom's 
the boy, Tom is the very boy for this." 

THE MONTH passed slowly. Days 
showed a maddening reluctance to 
leave the calendar, and weeks lingered on 
until Mr. Henry William Field began to 
scream silently. 

At the end of the month, Mr. Field 
awoke one midnight. The phone was 
ringing. He put his hand out in the darkness. 

"Yes?" 

"This is Professor Bolton calling. ,, 

"Yes, Bolton?" 

"Fll be leaving in an hour," said the 
voice. 

"Leaving? Leaving where? Are you 
quitting? You can't do that!" 

"Please, Mr. Field, leaving means 
leazring" 

"You mean, you're actually going?" 

"Within the hour." 

"To 1938? To September 15th?" 

"Yes!" 

"You're sure you've the date written 
down? You'll arrive before he dies? Be 
sure of it! Good Lord, you'd better get 
there a good hour before his death, don't 
you think?" 

"A good hour." 

"I'm so excited I can't hold the phone. 
Good luck, Bolton. Bring him through 
safely!" 

"Thank you, sir. Goodbye." 

The phone clicked. 

MR. Henry William Field lay through 
the ticking night. He thought of 
Tom Wolfe as a lost brother to be lifted 
intact from under a cold, chiseled stone, 
to be restored to blood and fire and speak


ing. He trembled each time he thought 
of Bolton whirling on the time wind back 
to other calendars and other faces. 

Tom, he thought, faintly, in the halfawake warmth of an old man calling after 
his favorite and long-gone child, Tom, 
where are you tonight, Tom ? Come along 
now, we'll help you through, you've got 
to come, there's need of you. I couldn't 
do it, Tom, none of us here can. So the 
next best thing to doing it myself, Tom, 
is helping you to do it. You can play 
with rockets like jackstraws, Tom, and 
you can have the stars, like a handful of 
crystals. Anything your heart asks, it's 
here. You'd like the fire and the travel, 
Tom, it was made for you. Oh, we've a 
pale lot of writers today, I've read them 
all, Tom, and they're not like you. I've 
waded in libraries of their stuff and they've 
never touched space, Tom; we need you 
for that ! Give an old man his wish then, 
for God knows I've waited all my life 
for myself or some other to write the 
really great book about the stars, and I've 
waited in vain. So, wherever you are tonight, Tom Wolfe, make yourself tall. 
It's that book you were going to write. 
It's that good book the critics said was 
in you when you stopped breathing. Here's 
your chance, will you do it, Tom? Will 
you listen and come through to us, will 
you do that tonight, and be here in the 
morning when I wake? Will you, Tom? 

His eyelids closed down over the fever 
and the demand. His tongue stopped quivering in his sleeping mouth. 

The clock struck four. 

AWAKENING to the white coolness 
of morning, he felt the excitement 
rising and welling in himself. He did not 
wish to blink, for fear that the thing 
which awaited him somewhere in the house 
might run off and slam a door, gone forever. His hands reached up to clutch his 
thin chest. 

Far away . . . footsteps . . . 

A series of doors opened and shut. Two 
men entered the bedroom. 

Field could hear them breathe. Their 
footsteps took on identities. The first steps 
were those of a spider, small and precise: 
Bolton. The second steps were those of 



FOREVER AND THE EARTH 



29 



a big man, a large man, a heavy man. 
"Tom ?" cried the old man. He did not 

open his eyes. 

"Yes," said a voice, at last. 

Tom Wolfe burst the seams of Field's 

imagination, as a huge child bursts the 

lining of a too-small coat. 

"Tom Wolfe, let me look at you!" If 

Field said it once he said it a dozen times 

as he fumbled from bed, shaking violently. 

"Put up the blinds, for God's sake, I 

want to see this! Tom Wolfe, is that 

your 

Tom Wolfe looked down from his tall 

thick body, with big hands out to balance 

himself in a world that was strange. He 

looked at the old man and the room and 

his mouth was trembling. 

"You're just as they said you were, 

Tom I" 

Thomas Wolfe began to laugh and the 

laughing was huge, for he must have 

thought himself insane or in a nightmare, 
and he came to the old man and touched 
him and he looked at Professor Bolton 
and felt of himself, his arms and legs, he 
coughed experimentally and touched his 
own brow. "My fever's gone," he said. 
Tin not sick any more." 
"Of course not, Tom." 
"What a night," said Tom Wolfe. "It 
hasn't been easy. I thought I was sicker 
than any man ever was. I felt myself 
floating and I thought, this is fever. I 
felt myself traveling, and thought, I'm 
dying fast. A man came to me. I thought, 
this is the Lord's messenger. He took 
my hands. I smelled electricity. I flew 
up and over, and I saw a brass city. I 
thought, I've arrived. This is the city of 
heaven, there is the Gate ! I'm numb from 
head to toe, like someone left in the snow 
to freeze. I've got to laugh and do things 
or I might think myself insane. You're 
not God, are you? You don't look like 
him." 

The old man laughed. "No, no, Tom, 
not God, but playing at it. I'm Field." He 
laughed again. "Lord, listen to me. I said 
it as if you should know who Field is. 
Field, the financier, Tom, bow low, kiss 
my ring-finger. I'm Henry Field, I like 
your work. I brought you here. Come 
here." 



The old man drew him fo an immense 
crystal window. 

"Do you see those lights in the sky, 
Tom?" 
"Yes, sir." 
"Those fireworks?" 
"Yes." 

"They're not what you think, son, It's 
not July Fourth, Tom. Not in the usual 
way. Every day's Independence Day now. 
Man has declared his Freedom from 
Earth. Gravitation without representation 
has been overthrown. The Revolt has 
long since been successful. That green 
Roman Candle's going to Mars. That red 
fire, that's the Venus rocket. And the 
others, you see the yellow and the blue? 
Rockets, all of them!" 

Thomas Wolfe gazed up like an immense child caught amid the colorized 
glories of a July evening when the setpieces are awhirl with phosphorous and 
glitter and barking explosion. 
"What year is this?" 
"The year of the rocket. Look here." 
And the old man touched some flowers 
that bloomed at his touch. The blossoms 
were like blue and white fire. They burned 
and sparkled their cold, long petals. The 
blooms were two feet wide, and they were 
the colour of an autumn moon. "Moonflowers," said the old man. "From the 
other side of the moon." He brushed them 
and they dripped away into a silver rain, 
a shower of white sparks, on the air. "The 
year of the rocket. That's a title for you, 
Tom. That's why we brought you here, 
we've need of you. You're the only man 
could handle the sun without being burnt 
to a ridiculous cinder. We want you to 
juggle the sun, Tom, and the stars, and 
what ever else you see on your trip to 
Mars." 

"Mars?" Thomas Wolfe turned to seize 
the old man's arm, bending down to him, 
searching his face in unbelief. 

"Tonight. You leave at six o'clock." 
The old man held a fluttering pink ticket 
on the air, waiting for Tom to think to 
take it. 

IT WAS five in the afternoon. "Of 
course, of course I appreciate what 
you've done," cried Thomas Wolfe. 



PLAKET STORIES 



"Sit down, Tom. Stop walking around/' 
"Let me finish, Mr. Field, let me get 
through with this, I've got to say it." 

"We've been arguing for hours," 
pleaded Mr. Field, exhaustedly. 

They had talked from breakfast until 
lunch until tea, they had wandered through 
a dozen rooms and ten dozen arguments, 
they had perspired and grown cold and 
perspired again. 

"It all comes down to this," said 

Thomas Wolfe, at last. "I can't stay here, 

Mr. Field. I 've got to go back. This isn't 

my time. You've no right to interfere — " 

"But, I—" 

"I was amidst my work, my best was 
yet to come, and now you hurry me off 
three centuries. Mr. Field, I want you to 
call Mr. Bolton back. I want you to have 
him put me in his machine, whatever it 
is, and return me to 1938, my rightful 
place and year. That's all I ask of you." 
"But, don't you want to see Mars?" 
"With all my heart. But I know it isn't 
for me. It would throw my writing off. 
I'd have a huge handful of experience that 
I couldn't fit into my other writing when 
I went home." 

"You don't understand, Tom, you don't 
understand at all." 

"I understand that you're selfish." 
"Selfish? Yes," said the old man. "For 
myself, and for others, very selfish." 
"I want to go home." 
"Listen to me, Tom." 
"Call Mr. Bolton." 

"Tom, I don't want to have to tell you 
this. I thought I wouldn't have to, that 
it wouldn't be necessary. Now, you leave 
me only this alternative." The old man's 
right hand fetched hold of a curtained 
wall, swept back the drapes revealing a 
large white screen, and dialed a number, 
a series of numbers, the screen flickered 
into vivid color, the lights of the room 
darkened, darkened, and a graveyard took 
line before their eyes. 

"What are you doing?" demanded 
Wolfe, striding forward, staring at the 
screen. 

"I don't like this at all," said the old 
man. "Look there." 

The graveyard lay in mid-afternoon 
light, the light of summer. From the 



screen drifted the smell of summer earth, 
granite, and the odor of a nearby creek. 
From the trees, a bird called. Red and 
yellow flowers nodded among the stones, 
and the screen moved, the sky rotated, the 
old man twisted a dial for emphasis, and 
in the center of the screen, growing large, 
coming closer, yet larger, and now filling 
their senses was a dark granite mass and 
Thomas Wolfe, looking up in the dim 
room, ran his eyes over the chiseled words, 
once, twice, three times, gasped, and read 
again, for there was his name: 

THOMAS WOLFE. 

And the date of his birth and the date 
of his death, and the flowers and green 
ferns smelling sweetly on the air of the 
cold room. 

"Turn it off," he said. 

"I'm sorry, Tom." 

"Turn it off, turn it off ! I don't believe 
it." 

"It's there." 

The screen went black and now the entire room was a midnight vault, a tomb, 
with the last faint odor of flowers. 

"I didn't wake up again," said Thomas 
Wolfe. 

"No. You died that September of 1938." 

"I never finished my book." 

"It was edited for you, by others who 
went over it, carefully." 

"I didn't finish my work, I didn't finish 
my work." 

"Don't take it so badly, Tom." 

"How else can I take it?" 

THE old man didn't turn on the lights. 
He didn't want to see Tom there. 
"Sit down, boy." No reply. "Tom?" No 
answer. "Sit down, son; will you have 
something to drink?" For answer there 
was only a sigh and a kind of brutal 
morning. "Good Lord," said Tom, "it's 
not fair. I had so much left to do, it's 
not fair." He began to weep quietly. 

"Don't do that," said the old man. "Listen. Listen to me. You're still alive, aren't 
you? Here? Now? You still feel, don't 
your 

Thomas Wolfe waited for a miriute and 
then he said, "Yes." 

"All right, then." The old man pressed 
forward on the dark air. "I've brought 



FOREVER AND THE EARTH 



31 



you here, I've given you another chance, 
Tom. An extra month or so. Do you 
think J haven't grieved for you? When 
I read your books and saw your gravestone there, three centuries worn by rains 
and wind, boy, don't you imagine how it 
killed me to think of your talent gone 
away? Well, it did! It killed me, Tom. 
And I spent my money to find a way to 
you. You've got a respite, not long, not 
long at all. Professor Bolton says that, 
with luck, he can hold the channels open 
through time for eight weeks. He can keep 
you here that long, and only that long. In 
that interval, Tom, you must write the book 

youVe wanted to write no, not the 

book you were working on for them, son, 
no, for they're dead and gone and it can't 
be changed. No, this time it's a book for 
us, Tom, for us the living, that's the book 
we want. A book you can leave with us, 
for you, a book bigger and better in every 
way than anything you ever wrote; say 
you'll do it, Tom, say you'll forget about 
that stone and that hospital for eight 
weeks and start to work for us, will you, 
Tom, will you?" 

The lights came slowly on. Tom Wolfe 
stood tall at the window, looking out, his 
face huge and tired and pale. He watched 
the rockets on the sky of early evening. 
"I imagine I don't realize what you've 
done for me," he said. "You've given me 
a little more time, and time is the thing I 
love most and need, the thing I always 
hated and fought against, and the only 
way I can show my appreciation is by 
doing as you say." He hesitated. "And 
when I'm finished, then what?" 

"Back to your hospital in 1938, Tom." 
"Must I?" 

"We can't change time. We borrowed 
you for five minutes. We'll return you 
to your hospital cot five minutes after you 
left it. That way, we upset nothing. It's 
all been written. You can't hurt us in the 
future by living here now with us, but, 
if you refused to go back, you could hurt 
the past, and resultantly, the future, make 
it into some sort of chaos." 

"Eight weeks," said Thomas Wolfe. 
"Eight weeks." 

"And the Mars rocket leaves in an 
hour?" 



"Yes." 

"I'll need pencils and paper." 
"Here they are." 

"I'd better go get ready. Goodbye, Mr. 
Field." 

"Good luck, Tom." 

Six o'clock. The sun setting. The sky 
turning to wine. The big house quiet. The 
old man shivering in the heat until Professor Bolton entered. "Bolton, how is he 
getting on, how was he at the port; tell 
me?" 

Bolton smiled. "What a monster he is, 
so big, they had to make a special uniform 
for him ! You should've seen him, walking 
around, lifting up everything, sniffing like 
a great hound, talking, his eyes looking 
at everyone, excited as a ten-year-old!" 

"God bless him, oh, God bless him ! 
Bolton, can you keep him here as long 
as you say?" 

Bolton frowned. "He doesn't belong 
here, you know. If our power should falter, he'd be snapped back to his own time, 
like a puppet on a rubber band. We'll try 
and keep him, I assure you." 

"You've got to, you understand, you 
can't let him go back until he's finished 
with his book. You've — " 

"Look," said Bolton. He pointed to the 
sky. On it was a silver rocket. 
"Is that him?" asked the old man. 
"That's Tom Wolfe," replied Bolton. 
"Going to Mars." 

"Give 'em hell, Tom, give 'em hell!" 
shouted the old man, lifting both fists. 
They watched the rocket fire into space. 

BY MIDNIGHT, the story was coming 
through. 
Henry William Field sat in his library. 
On his desk was a machine that hummed. 
It repeated words that were being written 
out beyond the Moon. It scrawled them in 
black pencil, in facsimile of Tom Wolfe's 
fevered hand a million miles away. The 
old man waited for a pile of them to collect and then he seized them and read 
them aloud to the room where Bolton and 
the servants stood listening. He read the 
words about space and time and travel, 
about a large man and a large journey 
and how it was in the long midnight and 
coldness of space, and how a man could 



32 



PLANET STORIES 



be hungry enough to take all of it and 
ask for more. He read the words that 
were full of fire and thunder and mystery. 
Space was like October, wrote Thomas 
Wolfe. He said things about its darkness 
and its loneliness and man so small in it. 
The eternal and timeless October, was 
one of the things he said. And then he 
told of the rocket itself, the smell and the 
feel of the metal of the rocket, and the 
sense of destiny and wild exultancy to 
at last leave Earth behind, all problems 
and all sadnesses, and go seeking a bigger 
problem and a bigger sadness. Oh, it was 
fine writing, and it said what had to be 
said about space and man and his small 
rockets out there alone. 

The old man read until he was hoarse, 
and then Bolton read, and then the others, 
far into the night, when the machine 
stopped transcribing words and they knew 
that Tom Wolfe was in bed, then, on the 
rocket, flying to Mars, probably not 
asleep, no, he wouldn't sleep for hours yet, 
no, lying awake, like a boy the night before a circus, not believing the big jewelled 
black tent is up and the circus is on, with 
ten billion blazing performers on the high 
wires and the invisible trapezes of space. 
"There," breathed the old man, gentling 
aside the last pages of the first chapter. 
"What do you think of that, Bolton?" 
"It's good." 

"Good, hell !" shouted Field. "It's wonderful! Read it again, sit down, read it 
again, damn you!" 

It kept coming through, one day following another, for ten hours at a time. The 
stack of yellow papers on the floor, 
scribbled on, grew immense in a week, unbelievable in two weeks, absolutely impossible in a month. 

"Listen to this !" cried the old man, and 
read. 

"And this !" he said. 
"And this chapter here, and this little 
novel here, it just came through, Bolton, 
titled THE SPACE WAR, a complete 
novel on how it feels to fight a space war. 
Tom's been talking to people, soldiers, 
officers, men, veterans- of space. He's got 
it all here. And here's a chapter called 
THE LONG MIDNIGHT, and here's 
one on the Negro colonization of Mars, 



and here's a character sketch of a Martian, 
absolutely priceless!" 

Bolton cleared his throat "Mr. Field ?" 
"Yes, yes, don't bother me." 
"I've some bad news, sir." 
Field jerked his grey head up. "What? 
The time element?" 

"You'd better tell Wolfe to hurry his 
work. The connection may break some 
time this week," said Bolton, softly. 

"I'll give you another million dollars 
if you keep it going!" 

"It's not money, Mr. Field. It's just 
plain physics right now. I'll do everything 
I can. But you'd better warn him, is all 
I say." 

The old man shriveled away into his 
chair and was small. "But you can't take 
him away from me now, not when he's 
doing so well. You should see the outline 
he sent through, an hour ago, the stories, 
the sketches. Here, here's one on spatial 
tides, another on meteors. Here's a short 
novel begun called THISTLEDOWN 
AND FIRE—" 
"I'm sorry." 

"If we lose him now, can we get him 
again ?" 

"I'd be afraid to tamper too much." 
The old man was frozen. "Only one 
thing to do then. Arrange to have Wolfe 
type his work, if possible, or dictate it, to 
save time, rather than have him use pencil and paper, he's got to use a machine of 
some sort. See to it!" 

The machine ticked away by the hour 
into the night and into the dawn and 
through the day. The old man slept only 
in faint dozes, blinking awake when the 
machine stuttered to life, and all of space 
and travel and existence came to him 
through the mind of another: 

". . . the great starred meadows of 
space . . ." 

The machine jumped. 
"Keep at it, Tom, show them!" The 
old man waited. 
The phone rang. 
It was Bolton. 

"We can't keep it up, Mr. Field. The 
time contact will fade some time in the 
next minute." 
"Do something!" 
"I can't." 









FOREVER AND 

The teletype chattered. In a cold fascination, in a horror, the old man watched the 
black lines form. 

". . . the Martian cities, immense and 
unbelievable, as numerous as stones thrown 
from some great mountain in a rushing 
and incredible avalanche, resting at last in 
shining mounds . . ." 

"Tom !" cried the old man. 

"Now," said Bolton, on the phone. 

The teletype hesitated, typed a word, 
and fell silent. 

"Tom!" screamed the old man. 

He shook the teletype. 

"It's no use," said the telephone voice. 
"He's gone. I'm shutting off the Time 
Machine." 

"No! Leave it on!" 

"But—" 

"You heard me — leave it! We're not 
sure he's gone." 

"He is. It's no use, we're wasting 
energy." 

"Waste it, then!" 

He slammed the phone down. 

He turned to the teletype, to the unfinished sentence. 

"Come on, Tom, they can't get rid of 
you that way, you won't let them, will 
you, boy, come on. Tom, show them, 
you're big, you're bigger than time or 
space or their damned machines, you're 
strong and you've a will like iron, Tom, 
show them, don't let them send you back !" 

The teletype snapped one key. 

The old man bleated. "Tom! You 
are there, aren't you ? Can you still write ? 
Write, Tom, keep it coming, as long as 
you keep it rolling, Tom, they can't send 
you back!" 

"The," typed the machine. 

"More, Tom, more!" 

"Odors of," clacked the machine. 

"Yes?" 

"Mars," typed the machine, and paused. 
A minute's silence. The machine spaced, 
skipped a paragraph, and began: 

The odors of Mars, the cinnamons and 
cold spice winds, the winds of cloudy dust 
and winds of powerful bone and ancient 
pollen — 

"Tom, you're still alive !" 

For answer the machine, in the next ten 

3 — Planet— Spring 



THE EARTH 33 

hours, slammed out six chapters of 
FLIGHT BEFORE FURY in a series 
of fevered explosions. 

TODAY makes six weeks, Bolton, six 
whole weeks, Tom gone, on Mars, 
through the Asteroids. Look here, the 
manuscripts. Ten thousand words a day, 
he's driving himself, I don't know when 
he sleeps, or if he eats, I don't care, he 
doesn't either, he only wants to get it done, 
because he knows the time is short." 

"I can't understand it," said Bolton. 
"The power failed because our relays wore 
out. It took us three days to manufacture 
and replace the particular channel relays 
necessary to keep the Time Element steady 
and yet Wolfe hung on. There's a personal factor here, Lord knows what, we 
didn't take into account. Wolfe lives here, 
in this time, when he is here, and can't be 
snapped back, after all. Time isn't as 
flexible as we imagined. We used the 
wrong simile. It's not like a rubberband. 
More like osmosis; the penetration of 
membranes by liquids, from Past to Present, but we've got to send him back, 
can't keep him here, there'd be a void 
there, a derangement. The one thing that 
really keeps him here now is himself, his 
drive, his desire, his work. After it's over 
he'll go back as naturally as pouring water 
from a glass." 

"I don't care about reasons, all I know 
is Tom is finishing it. He has the old fire 
and description, and something else, some 
thing more, a searching of values that 
supersede time and space. He's done a 
study of a woman left behind on Earth 
while the brave rocket heroes leap into 
space that's beautiful, objective and subtle; 
he calls it DAY OF THE ROCKET, 
and it is nothing more than an afternoon 
of a typical suburban housewife who lives 
as her ancestral mothers lived, in a house, 
raising her children, her life not much 
different from a cavewoman's, in the midst 
of the splendor of science and the trumpetings of space projectiles; a true and 
steady and subtle study of her wishes and 
frustrations. Here's another manuscript 
called THE INDIANS, in which he refers 
to the Martians as Cherokees and Iroquois 
and Blackfoots, the Indian nations of 






34 PLANET STORIES 

space, destroyed and driven back. Have a 



drink, Bolton, have a drink !" 

TOM WOLFE returned to Earth at 
the end of eight weeks. 
He arrived in fire as he had left in 
fire, and his huge steps were burned across 
space, and in the library of Henry William 
Field's house were towers of yellow paper, 
with lines of black scribble and type on 
them, and these were to be separated out 
into the six sections of a masterwork that, 
through endurance, and a knowing that 
the sands were dwindling from the glass, 
had mushroomed day on day. 

Torn Wolfe came back to Earth and 
stood in the library of Henry William 
Field's* house and looked at the massive 
outpourings of his heart and his hand 
and when the old man said, "Do you want 
to read it, Tom?" he shook his great 
head and replied, putting back his thick 
mane of dark hair with his big pale hand, 
"No. I don't dare start on it. If I did, 
I'd want to take it home with me. And 
I can't do that, can I?" 
"No, Tom, you can't." 
"No matter hozv much I wanted to ?" 
"No, that's the way it is. You never 
wrote another novel in that year, Tom. 
What was written here must stay here, 
what was written there must stay there. 
There's no touching it." 

"I see." Tom sank down into a chair 
with a great sigh. "I'm tired. I'm mightily 
tired. It's been hard, but it's been good. 
What day is it?" 

"This is the sixtieth day." 
"The last day?" 

The old man nodded and they were both 
silent awhile. 

"Back to 1938 in the stone cemetery," 
said Tom Wolfe, eyes shut. "I don't like 
that. I wish I didn't know about that, 
it's a horrible thing to know." His voice 
faded and he put his big hands over his 
face and held them tightly there. 

The door opened. Bolton let himself 
in and stood behind Tom Wolfe's chair, 
a small phial in his hand. 

"What's that?" asked the old man. 
"An extinct virus. Pneumonia. Very 
ancient and very evil," said Bolton. "When 
Mr. Wolfe came through, I had to cure 



him of his illness, of course, which was 
immensely easy with the techniques we 
know today, in order to put him in working 
condition for his job, Mr. Field. I kept 
this pneumonia culture. Now that he's 
going back, he'll have to be reinoculated 
with the disease." 
"Otherwise?" 
Tom Wolfe looked up. 
"Otherwise, he'd get well, in 1938." 
Tom Wolfe arose from his chair. "You 
mean, get well, walk around, back there, 
be well, and cheat the mortician?" 
"That's what I mean." 
Tom Wolfe stared at the phial and one 
of his hands twitched. "What if I destroyed the virus and refused to let you 
inoculate me?" 

"You can't do that!" 
"But — supposing?" 
"You'd ruin things." 
"What things?" 

"The pattern, life, the way things are 
and were, the things that can't be changed. 
You can't disrupt it. There's only one 
sure thing, you're to die, and I'm to see 
to it." 

Wolfe looked at the door. "I could run 
off, go back by myself." 

"We control the machine. You wouldn't 
get out of the house. I'd have you back 
here, by force, and inoculated. I anticipated some such trouble when the time 
came; there are five men waiting down 
below. One shout from me— you see, it's 
useless. There, that's better. Here now." 
Wolfe had moved back and now had 
turned to look at the old man and the window and this huge house. "I'm afraid I 
must apologize. I don't want to die. So 
very much I don't want to die." 

The old man came to him and shook his 
hand. "Think of it this way; you've had 
two more months than anyone could expect from life, and you've turned out 
another book, a last book, a fine book, 
think of that, and you'll feel better." 

"I want to thank you for this," said 
Thomas Wolfe, gravely. "I want to thank 
both of you. I'm ready." He rolled up 
his sleeve. 'The inoculation." 

And while Bolton bent to his task, with 
his free hand Thomas Wolfe pencilled two 
black lines across the top of the first manu


FOREVER AND THE EARTH 



35 



script and went on talking : 

"There's a passage from one of my 
old books," he said, scowling to remember 
it. ". . • of wandering forever and the 
earth . . . Who owns the Earth? Did we 
Want the Earth? that we should wander 
on it? Did we need the Earth that we 
were never still upon it? Whoever needs 
the Earth shall have the Earth; he shall 
be upon it, he shall rest within a little 
place, he shall dwell in one small room 
forever . . ." 

Wolfe was finished with the remembering. 

"Here's my last book," he said, and 
on the empty yellow paper facing it he 
blocked out vigorous huge black letters 
with pressures of the pencil: 

FOREVER AND THE EARTH, by 
Thomas Wolfe. 

He picked up a ream of it and held it 
tightly in his hands, against his chest, for 
a moment. "I wish I could take it back 
with me. It's like parting with my son." 
He gave it a slap and put it aside and immediately thereafter gave his quick hand 
into that of his employer, and strode 
across the room, Bolton after him, until 
he reached the door where he stood framed 
in the late afternoon light, huge and magnificent. "Goodbye, goodbye !" he cried. 

The door stemmed. Tom Wolfe was 
gone. 

THEY found him wandering in the 
hospital corridor. 
''Mr. Wolfe!" 
"What?" 

"Mr. Wolfe, you gave us a scare, we 
thought you were gone !" 

Permission to quote from "Of Time and the River" 



"Gone?" 

"Where did you go?" 

"Where? Where?" He let himself be 
led through the midnight corridors. 
"Where? Oh, if I told you where, you'd 
never believe." 

"Here's your bed, you shouldn't have 
left it." 

Deep into the white death bed, which 
smelled of pale, clean mortality awaiting 
him, a mortality which had the hospital 
odor in it; the bed which, as he touched 
it, folded him into fumes and white 
starched coldness. 

"Mars, Mars," whispered the huge man, 
late at night. "My best, my very best, my 
really fine book, yet to be written, yet to 
be printed, in another year, three centuries 
away ..." 

"You're tired." 

"Do you really think so?" murmured 
Thomas Wolfe. "Was it a dream? Perhaps. A good dream." 

His breathing faltered. Thomas Wolfe 
was dead. 

IN THE passing years, flowers are found 
on Tom Wolfe's grave. And this is 
not unusual, for many people travel to 
linger there. But these flowers appear 
each night. They seem to drop from the 
sky. They are the color of an autumn 
moon, their blossoms are immense and 
they burn and sparkle their cold, long 
petals in a blue and white fire. And when 
the dawn wind blows they drip away into 
a silver rain, a shower of white sparks 
on the air. Tom Wolfe has been dead 
many, many years, but these flowers never 
cease. . . 

gratefully acknowledged to Charles Scribner's Sons 





"Why don*t you answer me? 1 killed you once!" 

The First Man On The Moon 

By ALFRED COPPEL, 

John TJiiirmoii swore he'd be the first man on the moon. 
But he wasn't. Be was only the first murderer. 



THE SHIP LAY AT A CRAZY 
angle on the stark whiteness of the 
pumice plain. The rocket nozzles 
were a fused lump of slag; the fire-darkened hull crumpled and warped by the impact of landing. And there was silence . • . 
complete and utter silence. 

There could be no return. Thurmon 
realized this. At first the thought had 
brought panic, but, as the scope of his 
36 



achievement dawned on him, the fear retreated. Bruised, giddy, half-crazed . . . 
the certainty of death held no terrors. Not 
yet. And it was worth it ! Fame . , . immortality! Glory . . . in return for the 
last few years of a blighted, embittered, 
over-shadowed life. Yes, it was well 
worth it. And, except for the crash-landing and the certainty of no return, it had 
all come to pass just as he had planned it 



THE FIRST MAN ON THE MOOD! 



37 



for so long. 

On his knees he caressed the gritty soil. 
He lifted his arms toward the Day Star 
flaming in the day-night of space and 
knew completion. Tears streaked his 
stubbled face, and strange noises came 
from his slack mouth. The ecstasy of 
success was almost unbearable. For this, 
he had labored a lifetime. For this, he 
had murdered a friend . . . 

Across the abyss, the whole world 
waited for word. The transmitter in the 
rocket had survived the crash. The word 
would come, thought Thurmon . . . when 
he was ready to send it. And sending it, 
he would place the official seal of immortality on his brow. The book would 
close. But wonderfully, satisfyingly. There 
would be no other to steal his rightful 
glory. Only Wayne could have done 
that . . . and Wayne was dead. He laughed 
weirdly within his helmet. So simply 
done ! 

The Sea of Serenity stretched out before him in weird magnificence. In the 
far distance a mountain range rose precipitously from the wilderness of pumice 
to hump its spiny backbone at the brilliant 
stars. A limbo of black shadows and stark 
white talus slopes. Moonscape! Thurmon 
stumbled to his feet and fought the wave 
of nausea that surged over him as his 
equilibrium teetered from the low gravity. 
Then in an instant his discomfort was 
forgotten. Standing on the brink of the 
cosmos, his ego drank of grandeur. All 
the splendor of Creation lay before him 
like a jeweled carpet. All his! All for 
John Thurmon, genius . . . explorer . . . 
murderer! For John Thurmon . . . first 
man on the Moon ! 

With an effort he dragged his eyes from 
the sky. Slowly, his reason was returning. 
There was work to do. Wayne must be 
hidden. The next to come must never 
know. And it should be done quickly. 
Time would fly and in the last hours the 
fear would return. He knew that. Right 
now his triumph sustained him. 

There was the broadcast to look forward 
to. A billion people waited for his words. 
It was a sop to his ego, but it could not 
make him forget that this was costing 
him his life. On occasion, Thurmon could 



be realistic, and he knew that, when there 
was nothing left to do but sit and wait for 
the end, he would be afraid. Terribly, 
hideously afraid and alone. It was the 
only flaw in his plan for immortality. Yet, 
his life had been a barren thing, devoid 
of love or any real success. It was little 
enough to trade. And this was his only 
chance for lasting fame. He could not let 
it go. 

The plan was working . . . almost of its 
own inertia. He was alone. He was on 
the Moon, where no man had ever been 
before him. Not even Wayne. Wayne, 
who designed the rocket and guided it. 
Wayne, who had stolen every chance 
Thurmon had ever had for recognition! 
Well, Wayne was dead now. He had 
never put a living foot on the soil of the 
Moon. Only Thurmon had done that. And 
it was his passport to eternal glory! No 
one, no one could take that away from 
him ! Weighed in the loaded balance of his 
mind, it more than compensated for dying 
alone and on an alien world. In fact, even 
the dying would add to the legends, and 
Thurmon would live forever. The first 
man on the Moon ! 

He ran his tongue over dry lips and 
stooped to pick up the thing at his feet. 
Wayne's corpse was still bloated from 
internal pressures, and the naked flesh 
was drying fast to a parchment-like consistency. Moisture was still seeping in 
awful little globules from the shattered 
skull where Thurmon's unseen blow had 
landed. 

Thurmon found himself shuddering. 
The murder had been the hardest part . . . 
but now it was done . . . and all that remained was to give his dead companion 
a secret resting-place somewhere in the 
vast expanse of pumice that lay out there 
under the blistering sun. . 

Thurmon's unsteady mind swerved from 
high elation to sadness. Poor Wayne ! He 
felt he could afford to be generous now. 
So many years of work so soon to be forgotten. Just one quick blow, and poor, 
poor Wayne slipped into the limbo of the 
Earth's forgotten . . . 

Under the light gravity, he carried the 
naked, grisly bundle easily. And, as he 
walked out into the Mare Tranquilitatis, 



38 



PLANET STORIES 



his spirits rose again. How wonderful it 
was to be certain that no one could steal 
his triumph! Not even Wayne. Particularly not Wayne. He looked down at the 
thing in his arms and chuckled. The sound 
was uncanny within the pyrex bubble of 
his helmet. 

After what seemed a long time, Thurmon stopped and set down his burden. 
With his pack-spade he set to work digging a trench in the pumice. As he dug, 
he found himself crooning happily to the 
corpse. His voice was high-pitched and 
hysterical, but of course he did not notice 
it. 

"There, there . . . Wayne, old friend . . . 
see? I am making a grave for you. The 
very first grave, Wayne . . . and you shall 
have it, old friend! Yours the grave and 
mine the glory!" He laughed hilariously 
at the thought. "I'll say you didn't make 
it alive. You didn't, did you ? But / made 
it, Wayne. Me! Alone ... all alone! With 
no help from you, do you hear?" 

Thurmon chattered on, the sound of his 
crazed voice dying within the confines of 
his helmet, while all around him the eternal 
silence of the Sea of Serenity continued 
unbroken. The stars shown steadily in the 
airless sky, and the sun flamed in impotent 
splendor, furiously silent. 

At last the pit was done, and Thurmon 
lowered the nude corpse into the shadows. 
"Goodbye, Wayne. You see, you shouldn't 
have come here with me. You shouldn't 



have tried to steal my success. That was 
a wrong thing. But you're sorry now, 
aren't you, old friend? Don't feel too 
badly, Wayne. I'll join you soon. Goodbye, Wayne. Goodbye . . ." Laboriously, 
he shoveled pumice into the pit and tamped 
it down with his leaded boots. Then he 
smoothed the surface of the dig until it 
was as smooth as the rest of the surrounding plain. Satisfied, he turned his back on 
the grave and started for the rocket. 

He sang on the way back, so happy 
was he to have done with his ghastly companion. Recklessly prodigal of his oxygen 
supply, he ran toward the open valve of 
the ship. Breath coming hard, he stumbled 
into the rocket and across the buckled 
deck-plates to the radarphone. The tiny 
atomic batteries hummed as he removed 
the cadmium dampers. Power flickered 
the needles of the main set. Thurmon adjusted the selector to "relay" and tuned in 
his suit radio. Then he returned to sit in 
the open valve and call the monitoring 
station. 

He smiled with satisfaction as the response cut through the blanket of hissing 
solar static. 

"Hello! Hello, ES-1 ! This is White 
Sands! My Lord, we'd given you up for 
lost! Where are you?" 

Thurmon took a steadier grip on his 
dancing mind and replied: 

"Listen carefully. Carefully, you understand? This is John Thurmon. I am on 



DON'T THROW ROCKS 
AT YOUR NEWS DEALER! 

It's not his fault if youVe had trouble getting your copy of PLANET STORIES lately. 
Increased demand has caught us unawares. If your dealer can't supply you we will 
send you PLANET STORIES regularly at no extra cost. 

Order your copy of PLANET STORIES lor the year 

Just tear off this coupon, fill it in, attach 80* in stamps, check or postal or money order, 
and mail to Love Romances Publishing Co., Inc., 670 Fifth Avenue, New York 19, N. y! 

And Guarantee Your Reading Pleasure tor One Whole Yenrt 



NAME 

ADDRESS.. 



CITY.. 



...ZONE STATE.. 



THE FIRST JHM OJV THE MOON 



39 



the westernmost edge of the Sea of Serenity on the Moon. Wayne is dead ... he 
didn't make it. Died during acceleration 
and I had to dispose of his body in space. 
Did you get that? I am alone here. The 
ship crashed on landing. I can't get back 
... but it's worth it ! I haven't much time 
left ... but I want everyone to know that I 
made it. It will be easier now for others 
. . . after I've pointed the way. I'm the 
first and it's worth it! Did you get that?" 
There was a long silence. Finally, the 
radarman spoke respectfully. "Yes, Thurmon, we got that. Your transmission is 
being shunted onto the commercial bands. 
Can you tell us what you see up there? 
And . . . and Thurmon, we all want 
you to know that our prayers are with 
you." Tears were flowing on Earth now, 
Thurmon knew. Tears for a martyr to 
science doomed to death alone on an alien 
world. He smiled thinly. Even this tiny 
taste of deference and respect was heady 
wine to his frustrated psyche. 

Thurmon stepped through the valve and 
lowered himself to the plain. His heart 
was pounding triumphantly. Carefully, 
painstakingly, he began to describe his 
surroundings, interspersing his words with 
scientific data. He played the hero well. 
There was no hysteria recognizable in his 
voice . . . and, if it trembled slightly, there 
was reason enough for that. 

He rounded the bulge of the rocket's 
nose and looked for the first time at the 
western edge of the Mare. In the near 
distance an irregularly-shaped outcropping 
of rock caught his eye. Transmitting as 
he went, he made his way toward it . . . 
He drew nearer. And as he did, fear be


gan to stir within him. His steps faltered, 
but some awful power drew him on. His 
voice became a shrill rasp in his ears, and 
on- Earth a billion people gasped with 
horror . . . 
"Wayne!" 

Thurmon shouted the name in fear and 
threw his arm over his face. But the 
thing remained. It was real! 

"Wayne . . . no! IT CAN'T BE! 
NO . . ." 

But the figure did not move. The vast 
colossus loomed stark white and naked 
in the brilliant sunlight. Legs apart, arms 
folded on its breast, it stared with brooding 
eyes at the vast emptiness of the lunar 
plain. 

Thurman howled with terror and fury. 

"Damn you! Damn you! Why don't 

you answer me? I killed you once . . . 

I'll kill you again ! I'm the first one here ! 

Do you hear me? I'll kill you again!" 

He lowered his head and charged. The 
last thing he remembered was the soundless tinkle of his shattering helmet, and 
the terrible pain as his skull cracked under 
the suddenly shifting pressures . . . 
". . . And strangely enough, the story of 
the race's first conquest of space is the 
story of one man, Sargon, the Lemurian 
Immortal, who led his people to the Moon 
in the misty past of Earth's youth. The 
Lemurians are gone now, but on the westernmost edge of the Sea of Serenity there 
stands a statue of Sargon. It stands in 
magnificent isolation, a monument to the 
first man on the Moon" 

Essays on Tellurian History, 
Quintus Bland, Geneva Keep 
Press, 12.50 Cr, 



Immediate Relief with RUPTURE-EASER -10 DAY TRIAL OFFER 




Right or Left 

Side $295 

.4.95 

e Tin Most Efficthn Rcnrii Support 

• RtiptHre-Eastf Is Sanitary 

• Hi Fitting Required 

Just Measure Around the Lowest 
Port of the Abdomen ond Specify Right or Left Side or Double 



A strong.form-fitting washable support designed to 
give you relief and comfort. Adjustable back-lacing and adjustable leg 
strap. Snaps up in front. 
Soft flat groin pad — no 
steel or leather bands. Unexcelled for comfort, invisible under light clothing. 
Washable. Also used as after operation support. For 
Men, Women and Children. 



Piper Brace Company, Dept. FNS 

308 E. l2tK St., Kansas City 6. Mo. 
Please send my RUPTURE-EASER by return moil. 
Right Side Q $3.95 Measure oroond lowest port 
Left Side Q $3.95 of my obdomeft 
Double D $4.95 Is INCHES. 

Wo Prepay Pottage Except on C.O.D.'t 
Enclosed ist Q Money Order □ Check for % 

D Send C. O. D. 



■ Nome.. 



I 
I 
I 
I Address 

I 
I 



City and Stole.. 




I was at the mercy of a lunatic— and the Monies waiting outside! 

MADMEN OF MARS 

By ERIK FENNEL 

Why do the Martians drink red wine, swagger about, spout vile 
poetry and fight endless duels with each other? How did Terence 
Michael Burke change their minds about invading the Earth? 



ALL THIS TIME WE'VE KEPT] 
quiet as a whole cageful of mice. 
And with good reason. During the 
Big Scare, while everyone was afraid that 
the Exclusion Ultimatum meant the Martians wanted an interplanetary war, the 
Earth Governments would have been only 
too ready to hang, shoot, stab, gas, electrocute, freeze, burn, poison, impale and/or 
defenestrate the dastardly culprits responsible. If they could have discovered who 
40 



savvy 



did what to whom. They didn't 
Marties then — and still don't. 

But we are lucky. The Marties never 
explained why they called home their Cultural Emissaries, abandoned space travel, 
cut off Luminophone contact and excluded 
Earthmen and Earth ships from Mars. 
They couldn't, because they themselves 
weren't sure what had happened. And 
amid the confusion on Earth the last Mars 
transit of the spaceship Banshee escaped 



MADMEN OF MARS 



41 



official attention, which was largely due 
to Polly's good sense in making Mike see 
he'd better keep his big mouth shut. Our 
story would only have caused us trouble, 
even after the Scare died down. 

All that was five years ago, but we still 
thought it best to keep still when this 
rather surprising diplomatic angling for 
resumption of Martio-Terran relations began just recently. The five of us were 
closer to what caused the Malignant Inertia Complex than all the big-name psychologists who have written books of 
wrong guesses since it disappeared, and 
we could see no danger of it starting up 
again. Mike was sure the Martian Thing 
had lost its grip. So we were willing to 
let the new treaty come up for a popular 
vote, as all interplanetary treaties must 
under the Earth Governments charter, 
without sticking our oars in or our necks 
out. 

But last night Wild Bill Harrigan and 
I bumped into Miu Tlenow, a North 
Venus cat-man and veteran space-hopper 
who had just brought the Venusian diplomatic intermediaries from Mars to Earth 
for more treaty talks. 

Naturally Bill and I were curious about 
what cooked on Mars. Tlenow talked, 
openly puzzled, while Bill and I looked at 
each other and remembered. 

Fm not mad at anyone. Not even at 
the Thing. Mike swears the Thing meant 
no harm and the Cultural Emissaries 
couldn't help themselves, and I believe 
him. In fact I feel rathef sorry for the 
poor Marties themselves. It must be tough 
on them to have to live with themselves 
and each other. 

The psychos would probably name the 
Marties* current condition Acute Virulent 
Mass Burke-itis and laugh it off. But the 
psychos don't know Mike as Bill and I do. 
So Bill insists it's our duty as Earth 
citizens to divulge everything, and I'm inclined to agree. The thought of a whole 
planetful of Marties obsessed with Mike's 
sense of humor is appalling. 

Telling this really should be Mike's job 
— he's the only human who ever made 
contact with the Martian Thing — but he 
and Polly live at Venus Central now and 
the Professor is out there now visiting his 



grandchildren, Mike, Jr. and Bridget Dorrene. So I'm stuck. But I still think Bill 
ran in his own dice when we rolled to 
see which of us had to write this. 

THE Malignant Inertia Complex 
started while we were in space and 
was already pretty widespread when Bill 
and Mike and I brought the Banshee in 
from a Venus haul, and during the three 
weeks we spent getting ready for the Mars 
transit and installing the Professor's latest 
special equipment I had the creeping 
geevils constantly. There was a sour, stagnant undercurrent to life in Spaceport 
City. For once the rowdy place was actually quiet, dead in fact, and although there 
were a dozen ships in, the Ursa Major 
Tavern was almost deserted. 

Day and night the telaudio jabbered 
about the Complex, mostly learned doctors 
issuing statements that it was a purely 
psychological phenomenon, a sort of hysteria induced by this, that and the other 
factor in a civilization altering too rapidly 
for human minds to adjust. 

Most of them followed the line that the 
disease would cure itself soon, but behind 
their seven-jet words they seemed a bit 
uneasy themselves. And I'll never forget 
the particularly learned gent who suffered 
an attack right in the middle of his broadcast speech. He was talking reassuringly 
when all of a sudden his voice petered out. 
His eyes got all glazed and his face took 
on an empty look, and he sat there staring 
at the mike until the control room cut him 
off. It gave me the shivers. 

It was like that all over Earth. Each 
day more and more people got longer 
spells where they'd do absolutely nothing. 
It was raising the very devil with organized civilization and nobody could do anything about it. And the worst of it was 
that the victims didn't seem to mind. 
Everything was slowing down, and it made 
it plenty tough to do business with the 
outfits that furnished our supplies. People 
kept acting more and more like zombies — 
or Martians. But nobody thought of con•necting the Complex with the Cultural 
Emissaries. 

The whole thing hit me right in my pet 
phobia. 



42 



PLANET STORIES 



THEN it was blast-off morning, with 
me trying to keep my mind off my 
phobia and those nagging fears that had 
nothing to do with space-hopping. I cornered the Professor in the Banshee's control room. 

"The power drain of this widget of 
yours has me worried/* I complained. "The 
secondaries are already running overloaded." 

As pilot-engineer, power was my responsibility. 

Professor Tim Harrigan looked around, 
but not in his usual quick, birdlike way, 
and his eyes were dull. 

"I'm sorry, Olsen." His voice sounded 
as though something were missing. "I 
haven't been able to reduce input requirements yet. The circuit changes keep eluding me." 

Worms started squirming inside me. If 
the Professor, with his brilliant brain, 
were getting the Complex 

"Polly will tell Mike to be careful of 
power," he tried to reassure me. 

Naturally Polly was scheduled to handle 
the ground end. She usually did whenever 
we were testing one of the Professor's 
inventions. In some ways she was more 
like a partner than a daughter to him. The 
set in the Professor's laboratory was 
rigged for her, while the Hustic aboard 
ship was adjusted to Mike's brain- wave 
pattern. 

That's right. The thing we were going 
to test en route to Mars was the Harrigan 
Unimodulate Subetheric Telepathic Interspatial Communicator. Yes, I know that 
officially the Hustic wasn't invented until 
nearly a year later. Keeping it under wraps 
after what it did was one of our security 
measures. We were afraid someone might 
add two and two and get us hanged, shot, 
stabbed, defenestrated, etc. 

That first set was a bulky, power-hogging, spit-and-solder job very different 
from the perfected, foolproof, universaltype transceivers that have now replaced 
the clumsy old Luminophones on all interplantery routes. 

Terence Michael Burke, our red-headed 
astrogator, was standing as close to Polly 
as he could get, and from the gleam in 
his eye he was quoting some more of his 



abominable romantic poetry at her. But 
she wasn't responding as usual. Not even 
blushing. She just stood there looking pale 
and wan, frozen up inside. Typical symptoms of the Complex, and it made me 
wince. 

Mike looked around, missed something, 
and turned to me. 

"Where'd you put my books?" he demanded. 

"Cargo hold," I growled at him. "Had 
to use that space for the Hustic modulator." 

"Barbarian squarehead !" he yelped. 

"If you'd gas off to sleep like a human 
being — !" I squawked right back at him. 
The Wilsons weren't warming yet, but 
already my nerves were tightening up in 
anticipation. 

"Come on, Polly," he said. But she 
didn't follow him until he took her hand. 

Mike was born in San Francisco, but 
he's a professional Irishman. Red Irish. 
And a prolifically lousy poet. Had a picture 
of himself as the spiritual descendent of 
Fin McCool and Francois Villon and Robin 
Hood and Sir Henry Morgan and all the 
other poet-adventurers and troublemakers 
of history. He was one of those romantics 
— and still is. 

When he and Polly came back a few 
minutes later he had his bag of books 
under one arm, a smear of lipstick across 
his mouth, and a worried expression on 
his face. That was unusual. Ordinarily 
Mike was too slugnutty to worry about 
anything. On Polly's much prettier countenance there was no expression at all. 
And that was all wrong. 

Wild Bill, Professor Harrigan's younger 
but larger brother and skipper of the 
Banshee, came up from checking the drive 
room. 

"Final tests," he said. 

So we built up the secondaries until the 
whole ship howled and shrieked with their 
noise. Then when the needles came over 
without indicating radiation leakage we 
cut them to idling again. 

Polly had snapped out of her daze and 
was clinging to Mike. 

"I'm scared," she shouted in his ear, 
not realizing the noise had died. "Think 
nice thoughts to me on the Hustic, Michael 



itf /iDMElV OF MARS 



43 



dearest/' 

Mike's arms tightened around her. "Of 
course, my one and only love, pearl of 
my universe and lodestar of my life. Every 
day." 

I didn't like that "every day" stuff. I 
never approved of running secondary 
power packs to the limit. But before I 
could say anything Bill glanced at the 
chronometer. 

"Clear out and dog down," he ordered. 

Mike grabbed Polly and kissed her thoroughly, but she had gone back into her 
trance and he might as well have been 
kissing a rag doll. That was all wrong, 
too. She usually wasn't that way at all, 
not with Mike. Finally the Professor 
shook his head as though clearing away 
a mental fog, grabbed his daughter and 
led her out through the airlock. 

Outside, at the edge of the spaceport, 
one of the Martian Cultural Emissaries 
was watching. Just watching. He wasn't 
excited or even particularly interested by 
the Banshee about to blast off for his home 
planet, as far as Bill and I could see as 
we tugged on the heavy circular door. 
Just standing there as though about to 
take root. That's all the three hundred 
Cultural Emissaries who had come in from 
Mars a few months before ever did. Stood 
around. 

That's all the Marties did on Mars, too. 
The first Earthmen to ground on the Red 
Planet thought the Marties were incredibly dull and stupid because of their slow 
reactions. They began to change their 
minds after a few months contact, when 
the Marties copied our spaceships, adapting them to their own peculiar physical 
requirements, and displayed a disconcerning savvy in trading. But still their 
thoughts were alien, and we didn't understand them. 

When the red hand touched fifteen Bill 
Harrigan was already in his cushions with 
a sleep mask over his craggy face. I 
envied him, but it was my turn to ride the 
chair out. Mike was in the other set 
of pneumatic cushions, but he hadn't 
gassed out. He grinned at me. 

Then the red hand came straight up. 
I gritted my teeth and tripped the master 
throttle of the multiplex. The seven big 



Wilsons hit with a soundless shock and 
the Banshee went out. 

THE first few shifts were routine. 
Nasty, of course. The only pleasant 
part of spaceflight before the HalsteadJenkins Mass Diminutors replaced Wilson 
drivers two years ago were the off -shifts 
when you could crawl into the cushions 
and turn on the sleep gas. Every sane 
and normal spacehand gassed out as much 
of the time as possible. It was safest. 

For the Wilsons radiated supersonics 
with a frequency somewhere in the neighborhood of a fingernail scratching down 
a blackboard. Only amplified a million, 
billion, jillion stinking times. 

That's why space wasn't crowded in 
those days, and why some of the earlier 
ships didn't come back. Wilsons did something to a man's nerves and emotions. A 
crew might be good friends on the ground, 
but that constant barrage of driver supersonics made them hate each other as long 
as they were in transit. Occasionally some 
poor guy would crack wide open, go spacebatty, and when that happened the victim 
almost always wanted to kill his crewmates 
and wreck the controls. Earplugs were 
useless, for you don't hear supersonics. 
They sneak in through your pores and get 
under your toenails and even come down 
through the hairs of your head. They get 
in everywhere. 

Whenever the auto-timer cut the gas 
on me and I had to go on watch I always 
felt as though all the fiends of hell were 
digging at my nerves with red-hot power 
tools. I itched inside and couldn't get at 
the itches to scratch. But I was used to 
that. 

THEN, on one of my watches, the 
meters showed a heavy drain on the 
secondaries. I wrote a note asking Mike 
to limit his test calls with the Hustic, 
and then rewrote it six different times to 
keep it from sounding too nasty. That's 
how you get with Wilsons running. 

On my next time up I found a sketch 
of myself wet-nursing the power packs 
fastened to the bulkhead, and an alleged 
poem that was mostly putrid puns. Mike's 
idea of humor. 






PLANET 

Out of curiosity I put on the electrodestudded Hustic helmet and turned the set 
to receive. 

Wham ! Stars wheeled and comets fizzed 
and vague dark shapes glided and circled 
and balls of fire grew and exploded in 
showers of multicolored sparks. 

I yanked the helmet off. But quick. 

There's really no excuse for what I did 
then, except that I wasn't thinking clearly 
and ten days of supersonics will bring out 
all the petty meanness in anyone. And I 
thought that for once the Professor had 
missed the boat and the Hustic was a 
floperoo. It didn't bring in thoughts. Just 
stuff, and I wasn't going to have such a 
no-good gadget draining the power packs 
all the way to Mars and back. I forgot 
that first Hustic wasn't like a radio or 
these new universal models the space liners 
all carry. That experimental set had to 
be adjusted to the individual brain wave 
pattern of the operator. But I didn't remember that. 

So I disconnected one of the power 
leads and removed three parts. A curved 
metal bar, a small condenser, and the 
shield of one of the intricate little tubes. 
I went back to sleep thinking Mike 
would wake me to get the parts and we 
could writes notes back and forth to 
settle the matter, forgetting entirely how 
stubborn he could be. 

It was a dirty trick, but I'm glad now 
I did it. It helped save Earth. 

BEFORE I was fully awake I knew 
something was really wrong. Mike 
was shaking me roughly and there was 
a wild gleam in his eyes. A glance showed 
me he'd pulled off Bill's sleep mask too. 

" !" Mike yelled, but of course 

I couldn't hear him. In those Wilsondrive spaceships it was utterly impossible 
to talk between blast-off and landing. 

Then he shoved a pad under my nose. 

"MARTIANS TAKING OVER ! ! ! 
EARTH IN DEADLY PERIL!!!" he 
had written. 

Little slimy bugs with ice-cold, prickly 
feet marched up and down my spine. 
Every man has his private, personal 
phobia, something that throws him into 
an irrational panic, and mine has always 



STORIES 

been lunatics. Ever since I can remember 
I've had a morbid fear of mental disorders, 
which is why the Malignant Inertia Complex had had me so thoroughly frightened. 
And now I knew the supersonics had 
driven Mike space-batty. 

I didn't for a moment believe what he 
had written. I'd been to Mars before, 
seen Marties in their home environment, 
slow-moving and lethargic, entirely without initiative, completely unwarlike. 

"DISCOVERED PLOT VIA HUSTIC," Mike scribbled. 

The bugs on my spine quit parading 
and started running. I grabbed the pad. 
"IMPOSSIBLE," I wrote. "HUSTIC 
NOT WORKING. NO GOOD. DISCONNECTED." 

Mike dived across the cabin in the light 
gravity, hauled himself up neatly on a 
handgrip and raised the cover of the 
selector unit. Then he thumbed his nose 
at me. 

Bill and I took a good look. That stubborn, crazy Irishman had made a new 
bar to replace the one I'd hidden and cut 
down an empty food can as a tube shield. 
"GOT TO TURN BACK, WARN 
EARTH," Mike wrote. "THE CULTURAL—" 

Bill and I looked at each other. Swinging a ship in mid-transit can be done, but 
it's hardly safe or good practice. Mike 
was no puny infant, and we knew we had 
to get him before he became really violent. 
Mike read our faces and started to draw 
back, but he was too late. Bill pinioned 
his arms in a bear hug and I slipped a 
sleep mask over his face. He struggled 
and tried to hold his breath, but the gas 
got him at last and he went limp. 

Sadly we loaded him into the pneumatic 
cushions and placed the air-release valve 
out of his reach. Few victims of spacebattiness ever recovered, and both of us 
were feeling pretty sick. Mike had been 
space-hopping with us for three years, and 
despite his screwballisms we liked the big 
lug. And we knew Polly was going to 
take it awfully hard. 

THE rest of that transit was twelve 
on and twelve off for Bill and me, 
and every minute I was awake I was afraid 



MADMEN OF MARS 



45 



I might follow Mike down Lunacy Lane. 
Or that he might get loose. A couple of 
times we brought him awake, but each time 
we were glad we'd turned extra air pressure into his cushions. He struggled, and 
by watching his lips we knew he was still 
raving. 

The calculations for landing spiral made 
us sweat. We'd left the astrdgation to 
Mike so completely we'd gotten rusty. We 
missed him even more making contact. I 
had to handle both throttles and calculator 
while Bill took the cumbersome Luminophone mechanism. It took hours to line 
up the color-modulated beam, and then in 
typical Martian fashion more hours for 
them to answer with a landing clearance. 
But at last the Banshee scrunched into the 
red desert just outside T'lith, and as the 
Wilsons died Bill and I wiggled our 
fingers in our ears to get them back to 
normal. 

Within a few minutes a dozen Martians 
were striding toward us from the beehivedomes of their city. They came straight 
as though walking ruled lines, not hurrying 
and not lagging, semi-human in outline and 
size. 

A couple of hundred feet from the ship 
they deployed and began to watch. Then 
we could see their bulging, faceted eyes, 
their puckered, three-lipped mouths and 
the two rodlike antennae that waved slowly 
back and forth on their greenish foreheads. We didn't know then why they 
watched, or who — or what — told them to 
watch. But always there were a dozen on 
hand whenever a spaceship landed, watching in a passive, detached way with neither 
approval nor disapproval in their manner. 
They watched, just as the Cultural Emissaries on Earth kept an eye on everything 
that happened without asking a single 
question or interfering in any way that 
we could see. 

Bill opened the port and gobbled at the 
watchers in their own language, telling 
them we wanted to pick up a cargo of 
rhudite ore and had Earth gadgets to 
exchange. They didn't give any sign they 
heard us, but we didn't expect them to. 
The answer, if it came at all, would come 
minutes or even hours later. We didn't 
know why. Not then. We'd never heard 



of the Thing. 

Bill pulled his head in again, and while 
we waited we turned off Mike's sleep gas 
once more. This time we really had a 
faint hope that with the Wilsons off he'd 
be himself. 

But his first words were, ''Will you 
damned fools turn me loose? I'm not 
crazy! We've got to do something, and 
quick. Hell, I don't want to be like a 
damned Martie! They don't get any fun 
out of life." 

He started to kick and squirm, so we 
gassed him out again. It seemed the only 
merciful thing to do. 

"Olsen," Bill said thoughtfully. "We 
can't leave him alone and one of us has 
to rustle up a cargo." 

"You're elected. You know the lingo 
better than I do." 

"You don't mind?" 

I snorted. I wasn't any first -tripper who 
had to go sight-seeing. The bleak domes 
of T'lith were no different from those of 
M'nu or V'rad or any of the other cities. 
And the Marties themselves weren't my 
idea of jolly companions. 

So Bill packed the saddlebags of the 
little sandcycle and went sputtering off to 
question Marties about other Marties who 
might know of still other Marties who 
might know what rhudite was and perhaps 
with enough patient prodding might divulge some method for making a trade 
and getting the stuff to our ship. And 
each question would take ten minutes, minimum, for an answer. The three hundred 
Cultural Emissaries had been admitted to 
Earth on the theory that they might pick 
up Earth ideas that would facilitate trading. At least that's the story the peculiarly 
nebulous Martian government had given 
the Earth authorities. 

After Bill left I checked Mike's pulse. 
It was weakening slighty from over-anaesthesia so, much as I dreaded having a 
lunatic awake in the ship with me, I had 
to let him recover consciousness. 

He glared at me and fought against 
the pneumatic cushions that held him 
gently but tightly. 

"You fool!" he raved. "You abysmal 
idiot! Don't you realize you're dooming 
Earth to an eternity of Martianization ?" 



46 



PLANET STORIES 



It gave me a squirmy feeling to hear 
him talk that way. 

"There is no war/' I said soothingly, 
trying to reason with him. "It's all in 
your head. If the Martians were attacking 
Earth it's only logical they'd jump on us 
here and now. But you'll snap out of it 
when we get you back home." 

"It isn't that kind of a war," he insisted 
irritably. 

T^INALLY he calmed down. But his 
■*- eyes, crazy and wild, kept following 
me around the room. That made me so 
nervous I went down and tinkered with 
the engines. 

"Hey, Swede!" Mike's voice reached 
me after a while. "I'm thirsty." 

So I brought him a drink and fed him 
a sandwich bite by bite. 

"Fm okay now," he said when he had 
finished. "I know I blew my top, but I'm 
all over that. How's about turning me 
loose?" 

I shook my head unhappily. He didn't 
even argue. 

"Then how's about reading to me?" 
"What would you like?" It was the 
least I could do for the poor fellow. 

So I read some of Donn Byrne's things, 
stuff that looks like prose but is really 
poetry. Then he wanted Shakespeare's 
sonnets, but when I started reading he 
recited them from memory, his voice half 
a word ahead of mine. 

He slept a while and later I fed him 
again. He seemed resigned now to staying 
in the cushions. 

"How's about letting me try the Hustic 
again ?" he asked. "The Professor wanted 
a planet-to-planet test, and the helmet cable 
will reach over here." 

I hesitated and he glowered at me. 
"I know that Martian stuff was all a 
delusion," he insisted. "I'm sane now, 
but if you don't let me prove it to myself 
once and for all I might go off the deep 
end again." 

That got me. I wanted to be sure he 
had every chance. 

"Put back the parts you took out," he 
directed. 

I did. Then I stuck the helmet on his 
head and warmed the tubes. 



"Send," he said. I flipped the switch 
up and he lay there concentrating. 

"Receive," he said, his face taking on 
a listening expression. 

"Tighten the chin strap, please/' he 
asked. I did it. 

"Send." More concentration. 
"Receive." 

A fatuous grin lifted across his face. 
"It's Polly," he whispered. 
That made me uneasy. I thought it was 
just another delusion. I'd tried the Hustic 
once and it hadn't worked at all. 

"See," I said. "There aren't any Martians in there. They aren't making war 
on Earth." 

"Stop interrupting," he snapped. 
How much of what happened next was 
his own idea and how much he got from 
Polly I still don't know. For minutes at 
a time he'd think into the machine. Then 
I'd switch over and he'd lie there and 
grin. Finally he lay there listening so 
long and so quietly I thought he'd gone to 
sleep. I began to relax. 

Then Mike screamed and I came out of 
my chair like a shot. 

"Take it off! Take it off!" he shouted. 
"The Martians are after me !" He shook 
his head but the helmet stayed on, held by 
the chin ' strap. 

I cut the main switch and the tubes went 
dark. 

"It's all right, Mike!" I yelled across 
his screaming. "It's off now!" 

"No ! No ! No !" he gibbered. "They're 
coming through the helmet ! Take it away ! 
Take it away!" 

I knew I had to get that helmet off, 
much as I didn't like getting near him. I 
reached for the buckle, but he kept whipping his head about so I had trouble catching it and had to bend over him. 

Suddenly a long arm snaked around my 
neck and jerked me off balance. Then a 
ham-sized fist clipped my chin before I 
could even get my guard up. 

WHEN I came to I was in the cushions with the air turned on full. 
The release valve wasn't in my hand where 
it should have been. 
"Mike!" I yelled. 
He put his tongue between his lips and 



MADMEN OF MARS 



47 



made a rude noise. He was patching the 
rubberized fabric of the other set of cushions, the ones in which he had been confined, and on his face was that wild look 
I had seen before when a good brawl was 
in prospect. 

"Mike!" I pleaded. "You can't do this 
to me !" 

"No? If Polly hadn't reminded me of 
this I'd be in there yet." 

He held up the shamrock good luck pin 
Polly had given him, a little thing he 
kept pinned to his coveralls at all times. 
He had managed to unfasten it and puncture the pneumatic cushions. 

But I had no good luck pin. I lay there 
helpless with all the stories I'd ever heard 
about the supernormal cleverness of lunatics running through my brain. I knew 
it would be three days, maybe four, before 
Bill returned. No chance of help from 
him. 

Mike opened the Hustic case, whistling 
off key as he moved around, and replaced 
the original bar and tube shield and condenser with his homemade parts. Then he 
got to work on the bar with my delicate 
and expensive set of instrument files ruining them completely on the soft copper 
alloy. 

"Be quiet, lunatic 1" he barked every 
time I protested. 

He spent hours filing on that bar, putting 
on the helmet and testing, then filing some 
more. And there was absolutely nothing 
I could do. He had so much air pressure 
in my cushions I couldn't even squirm. 
At last he tested once more, and this 
time snapped the set off almost at once 
with a smile of satisfaction. 

Next he started tracing the secondary 
power circuits, but he didn't get very far. 
Every time the Professor had come up 
with a new idea we had rewired the 
Banshee, running new leads through the 
bulkheads but leaving the old circuits in 
place. The original wiring diagrams were 
nothing but propaganda by now, with the 
up-to-date dope all in my head and Bill's. 
I must have been getting hysterical from 
being pinned there so helplessly with a 
lunatic at large, for when he got into 
the metal rat's nest behind the meter panel 
I laughed. Then I wished I hadn't. 




"Swede," he said earnestly. "I want to 
double the voltage and step up the amperage by eight on the direct current. I 
want the frequency of the AC boosted to 
at least 850 cycles, and I need at least 
two thousand ehrenhafts on the magnetic 
flux leads." 

I blinked at those figures. 
"Now Mike," I said, trying to be calm. 
"Let me out of here and we'll talk this 
over." I had my eye on a heavy wrench 
I hoped I could grab in time. 

"Oh no, Swede. You're insane. I 
couldn't possibly let you loose." 

He chuckled at his own stupid joke. 
"Tell me how to rig it," he demanded. 

"No soap. That much overload would 
probably blow the packs and the whole 
ship with it." 

"That's a chance we'll have to take. For 
all Earth's sake," he said, really serious 
this time. "There's no other way. Now 
tell me." 

I shook my head. 

Instead of arguing he got out a soldering iron and started it heating. 

"You scared of me?" he asked ominously. 

"No, Mike. Of course not. We're shipmates." But it was a lie, a damned big lie. 
He knew it and I knew it, and I knew 
that he knew it. 

He touched a wet forefinger to the iron. 
It sizzled. 

"My !" he said, sounding like the smooth 
menace from some telaudio spooky-show. 
"What a nice red nose you're going to 
have — if you don't start talking!" 

"Mike!" I begged. "You can't do that 



48 



PLANET STORIES 



to me! We're old friends! Remember ?" 
But he did it. The tip of the iron on 
the tip of my nose, and it hurt. I yowled, 
mostly in utter panic rather than pain. 
My phobia was working overtime. 

"Enough?" he asked. 'Til keep it up 
if I have to." 

I thought it over. Crazy as he was, he 
might throw a dead short across the secondaries. Fission packs won't stand that 
without exploding. So I talked. Once I 
tried to give him a bum steer that would 
cut down the current, but he sensed it 
and waved the soldering iron at me again. 
When he had all the dope he needed 
he took time out to smear ointment on 
my nose. It made me look cross-eyed and 
I still wanted to touch the burn, but he 
refused to reduce the pressure even enough 
for me to work one arm loose. 

"Sorry, Swede," he chuckled. "It's for 
you're own good. You're insane, so I 
can't take chances." 

"Me?" I bellowed, for a moment forgetting even my blistered nose. I called 
him several names. 

Mike laughed — like crazy. 
"Now to gtt Bill back here. We'll even 
leave the port open for him." 

I thought that was good, until he removed a tank of sleep gas from its brackets 
and dragged it to the entry. 

"You can't reach Bill on the Hustic," I 
reminded him. "Use the radio." 

"And let him know who's making like 
a caterpillar in a cocoon?" Once more I 
thought of the supernormal cleverness of 
lunacy. 

He made some painstaking adjustments 
on the Hustic and flicked the changeover 
switch to send. 

Through the open port I could see three 
of the Marties watching the Banshee. If 
they'd been humans I'd have yelled for 
help, but with Marties I'd have been wasting my breath. 

^ Mike kept stepping up the power. His 
lips were tight and his eyes squinted in 
concentration. And then I saw one of the 
Marties move. Actually make an aimless 
movement. He shifted from one foot to 
the other. The second turned his hand 
from side to side as though uneasy. The 
third took a few steps back and forth. And 



Martians just didn't act like that. 

"Secondary effects," Mike grunted. "I'm 
not tuned on them, but the wave spills 
over." 

"Huh?" . 

Mike didn't answer. He just sat there 
thinking into the Hustic. 

A N HOUR passed that way. Then 
•**> I heard a sound !ike a whole forest 
full of infuriated parrots. It came from 
the direction of T'lith, and it grew loudei 
by the minute. 

Mike looked up. "Bill should be here 
soon." 

He was right. I heard the sandcycle, and 
then the squeal of its brakes below the 
entry port. 

"Olsen!" Bill was yelling as he 
scrambled in. "Hell is loose out there! 
The Marties — " 

"Look out !" I yelled, but too late. Bill 
was panting and didn't have a chance to 
hold his breath as Mike slapped the sleep 
mask over his face. Mike caught him as 
he fell and loaded him into the other cushions. 

There must have been at least a hundred 
green-skinned Marties milling about outside. They'd followed Bill from T'lith 
and they were really milling in a most 
un-Martian fashion. 

"What have you done, Mike?" I cried 
then I understood what the word "aghast" 
really means. That's what I was. Aghast. 
Mike slammed and dogged the port, but 
even through the insulated hull I could 
hear the uproar outside. 

Bill opened his eyes, gave me one look 
of utter disgust, and started struggling. 
"Mike!" he roared. "Get us the hell 
out of here! Turn me loose! All the 
Martians have gone crazy! They chased 
me, damn it!" 

Mike just grinned, but tensely. 

"You let me out of here at once!" Bill 

bellowed. "Damn it all, this is mutiny!" 

"Oh no," Mike protested. "I'm not 

responsible. I'm crazy. You put it in the 

log that way yourself." 

Wild Bill's face went purple. "Then 
blast us out of here yourself, before they 
kill us all," he yammered. "You were 
right! They're on the warpath!" 



MADMEN OF MARS 



49 



"No!" Mike refused flatly. "I'm not 
finished yet." 

Bill's language grew luridly unprintable, 
and when he refused to quit shouting 
Mike finally gassed him out again. 

Then he went back to the Hustic. Mostly 
he kept it on send, but every few minutes 
he'd flip over to receive for just a second 
or two. Then he'd make another infinitesimal adjustment. 

Once he froze in his chair. One of his 
arms was half raised and it stayed that 
way, unnaturally motionless. He looked 
like a statue — or a Martie — or someone 
who had the Malignant Inertia Complex. 

"Mike!" I yelled, more frightened than 
ever. 

He shook his head dizzily and flipped the 
witch out of the receive position. 

"Thanks, Swede," he said. "That Thing 
almost had me that time, but now I've got 

it." 

He twisted the power knob full oven 
The transformers howled under the overload. He jammed the helmet down more 
firmly on his head and stood up, staring 
blankly at the bulkhead as though looking 
through the solid steel. 

"Listen, Thing!" he growled. 
I shivered. Sheer lunacy. 
"Get every thought and word of this! 
You will cease interfering with Earth 
immediately— or I'll blow Mars^ and you 
both clear out of the universe!" 

Paranoia, I thought, delusions of grandeur. Somehow this was worse than anything that had gone before, though that 
had been bad enough. 

"J cm blast Mars out of the Universe 
at will— and if there is any further interference with Earth minds I shall do 
so. You are afraid of me! 

"Now get this, Thing. All of it. Individuality, the freedom of independent, 
individual action, is the right of every 
living creature! That includes Martians as 
well as Earthmen. 

"You are going to stop being What you 
have become. You will make ^ no more 
decisions for anyone. You will become 
once more what you were intended to be, 
a source of information only. You will 
make no more decisions, dominate no more 
4— Planet— Spring 




activities, and will give out information 
only when it is requested. 

"You will forget entirely the ideas with 
ktfhich you have become imbued, particularly the idea that the elimination of all 
activity not absolutely essential for survival is the goal of existence. 

"Here is the data which you will release 
to all Martians upon their mental request. 
But you will release it as information only 
aitd will not make their decisions as to 
conduct." 

Then, while the Martians jabbered and 
howled outside the Banshee, while Bill 
snored away in one set of shock cushions 
and I lay pinned helplessly in the other 
set, Terence Michael Burke stood with 
the Hustic helmet on his head and recited 
from memory all the poetry he had ever 
written — and there was a lot of it. Too 
much, and all of it highly emotional. Most 
of it was about either romantic love or 
epic battles, or both. 

When that was finished he began to 
read every scrap of printed matter we 
had aboard, even the astrogation tables and 
a set of seven place logarithms. I hadn't 
realized until then what a complete but 
heterogeneous library Mike had managed 
to stash away in various nooks and crannies around the ship. There were volumes 
of history and treaties on economic theory, 
some drama, a textbook on psychology, a 
cockeyed work on ethical thought. Then 
he dragged out my standard engineering 
references, including the manuals on Wilson drivers and fission power-pack operation. 






PLANET STORIES 



After that he got into the novels, and I 
think that's what did most of the damage. 
Most of them were either wild adventure 
stuff or incurably romantic, and almost all 
of them had been written by Irishmen 
who saw the world in a keyed-up and 
highly emotional way, just as Mike himself did. Naturally there was a complete 
set of Donn Byrne's works, for Mike 
swore that Byrne was the greatest writer 
who had ever lived. 

And there was a reprint of something 
called WARLORD OF MARS, written 
by a fellow named Burroughs way back 
in the days before spaceflight. When the 
novels were exhausted there came a 
bunch of science-fiction magazines, mostly 
the copies of PLANET STORIES he had 
missed while we were out on that long 
Venus haul. 

Finally there was a newspaper we'd 
brought aboard at the spaceport just before blast-off. He read it page by page 
and column by column, including the advice to the lovelorn section, the comics, 
the editorials, and all the ads. His voice 
droned on for hours, while the Hustic 
transformers whined and the air in the 
ship misted with the acrid fumes of overheated insulation and I soaked myself in 
cold sweat. The whole scene had the 
irrationality of a nightmare. But I was 
awake and knew it, and just wished I were 
dreaming the whole thing. 

THEN, inevitably with that overload, 
the Hustic spouted black smoke. The 
line surge that flashed back up the cables 
bent the meter needles around their stop 
pegs, and down in the belly of the ship 
the power packs sizzled and crackled. But 
somehow they didn't explode. 

Mike staggered and covered his face 
with his hands. He dropped to his knees 
and for an instant I thought the current 
had followed the helmet cable and electrocuted him. 

But he grasped a stanphion and pulled 
himself upright. His face was haggard 
and gaunt, but there was a wildly triumphant gleam in his bloodshot eyes and a 
twisted grin on his lips. 

Then I got my worst scare of all as he 
lurched toward me, fumbling in his pocket 



for the spring-opening knife he always 
carried. I closed my eyes and waited for 
the end. 

But he didn't stab me. Instead the air 
swooshed out of my cushions as he ripped 
the fabric. Then he turned and yanked 
the sleep mask from Bill's face. 

I scrambled out. My legs felt rubbery 
from being pinned in the cushions so long 
but I managed to stagger over and twist 
Bill's air release valve just as Mike 
crumpled to the deck. 

Bill opened his eyes. "What the — ?" 
Then he remembered what had happened, and heard the Marties still howling 
outside in a most unpleasant way. 

"Let's get the hell out of here!" he 
bellowed. 

We went out with Bill on the throttles 
and me down in the drive room with the 
portable emergency power pack and a 
handful of wires to get the Wilsons firing. 
Mike was out cold on the control room 
floor. We went out with a swish and a 
swoop on an uncontrolled skew curve, and 
only the low .38 gravity and 3.1 mile per 
second escape velocity of Mars kept us 
alive. 

As soon as we straightened out of the 
escape spiral Bill and I hustled Mike into 
the cushions. It wasn't necessary to gas 
him, for although he had recovered consciousness he did not resist at all. Instead 
he fell into a long normal sleep, twice 
around the clock as though completely exhausted. 

That trip still haunts my nightmares. 
Everything powered off the secondaries — 
which meant nearly everything but the 
main drivers — was dead. Mike had really 
fixed that. 

Then one of the Wilsons burned a liner, 
and with grave misgivings we had to turn 
Mike loose. We didn't like the notion of 
spacing a trajectory on power settings 
plotted by a crazy man, but the calculations 
for unbalanced drive needed his astrogating skill. With the mechanical astroplotter 
out of action it was too much for Bill and 
me. 

He didn't get violent, so after that we 
gave him the run of the ship, though of 
course we never left him on watch alone. 
He seemed harmless enough, and spent 



MADMEN OF MARS 



51 



most of his time at a typewriter he had 
rebuilt to operate in variable gravity. He 
wrote a few poems to and about Polly, 
The usual mush. 

Then he wrote a story. Maybe I've 
mentioned before that he collected rejection slips. Bill and I laughed when we 
read it, because it was much too farfetched for publication. All about a mysterious artificial brain — he didn't specify 
whether animal, vegetable or mineral — 
invented to serve as a combination integrating calculator and reference library, 
working on a form of telepathy. But the 
creatures for whom it was built kept using 
it more and more to solve their problems 
instead of working them out for themselves. After a few generations the creatures became nothing but eyes and hands 
for the brain, letting it do all their thinking and make all their decisions. 

And because the Thing was aware of 
every sensation of a whole planetful of 
creatures it grew very tired of processing 
irrelevant information and began to propagate the idea that any thought or action 
not absolutely essential for survival was 
wrong and should be suppressed, and that 
emotions — which interfered with transmission of factual data — were unthinkably 
degenerate, to be shunned at all costs. 
After a few more generations the creatures 
did not even realize they were being controlled by the Thing, had even forgotten 
its existence and believed its thoughts and 
decisions were their own. 
That was the story. 

Then he got to fooling with the 
burned-out ruins of the Hustic and made 
a 6heaf of graphs, all in five and six 
colors. They were too complex for Bill 
or me. 

A few days out from Earth, a worried 
Bill got me up in the middle of my offshift and motioned to the forward viewplate. There, coming toward us from the 
inviting blue-green ball of Earth, were 
thirty closely grouped orange specks. 
Spaceship driver flares. 

Mike took a look too, then held both 
hands to his forehead with index fingers 
protruding and wiggled them at us. When 
I got the idea I wasn't happy about it. 
The wiggling fingers meant antennae. 




Martians. 

Bill and I gnawed our fingernails. The 
poor Banshee could neither run nor fight. 
But the Martian ships went right on by 
without even trying to contact us on the 
Luminophone. Mike just grinned through 
it all. 

WE landed rough, on account of the 
burned-out driver, but when things 
stopped bouncing we were all in condition 
to limp away. 

Mike saw the car pull up outside and 
had the hatch open before we could stop 
him. 

Polly met him with open arms and a kiss 
that would have been censored on any 
telaudio show. She wasn't the pale, subdued, inertia-ridden girl of a few months 
before. Not at all. 

The Professor 3 was dancing up and 
down with excitement behind her, trying 
to shake one of Mike's hands. 

"You did it, darling!" Polly released 
her lips long enough to say. "They're 
gone, every one of them! And so is the 



52 



PLANET STORIES 



Complex." 

"Huh?" Bill and I stared. 

Then Bill grabbed his brother. 

"You mean Mike isn't — ?" he began. 

"Of course not," the Professor snapped. 
"He never was/' Then he turned to Mike. 

"What capacitance were you using when 
you picked up the Thing's radiations?" he 
demanded. "What power factor? What 
wave form? Sine wave or flat top or 
sawtooth ? Did you have the transportation 
grid shielded or were you getting a reinduction feedback?" 

"Father!" Polly said sternly. "Later!" 

Mike reached in his pocket and handed 
his fancy graphs to the Professor, who 
seemed to understand them at a glance. 

"Oh," he said. "There's just enough 
similarity of wave form here so the telepathic inertia influences directed at the 
Cultural Emissaries would heterodyne in 
their receiving organs and be re-emitted 
exactly on a generalized human brain wave 
pattern. 

"And that makeshift capacitance bar you 
rigged just happened to sensitize the set 
to the Thing's own wave form." 

We listened, but right then Mike was 
more interested in Polly. About that he 
displayed good sense. 

BILL'S Banshee III and my Thor are 
between-trips at the same time, so it 
was only natural that we got together last 
night. And when we met Miu Tlenow, 
the Venusian cat-man, it was also natural 
that we head immediately for the Ursa 
Major Tavern. 

"Mewargh!" Tlenow purred, extending 
and retracting his clawlike fingernails with 
pleasure as the second drink took hold. 
"Really it is good to get away from that 
madhouse." 

"What madhouse?" Bill asked. 

"Mars." 

We sat up straighten Somehow in the 
five years that had passed without authentic news from the Red Placet we had taken 
it for granted that things there had settled 
down once more to a slow, lethargic normality. We hadn't realized the full impact 



of Mike, as amplified by the Hustic. 

"Those Martians !" Tlenow mewled, his 
whiskers twitching in agitated disgust. 
"They are crazy. All crazy. They mate, 
but they use no sense in how they mate. 
Like Earthmen. Such complications ! They 
have many different governments with a 
hundred different political parties, and they 
talk and talk, vote and vote. They argue. 

"Things like Earthmen's gloves they 
make. Of course they will not fit Martian 
hands and they carry them only to hit in 
each other's faces. Then they fight duels. 

"They make liquor and drink it, and 
how crazy-drunk they get. Then, Great 
Space, they even try to sing! 

"They make jokes and play pranks, too, 
something they never did before." 

Tlenow was slit-eyed with amazement ati 
such illogical Martian behavior. 

"They do this one day, do that the next. 
Always they grow more like Venusians or 
Earthmen, only with not so much sense. 
What they will do on any tomorrow one 
can never tell." 

He finished his drink and leaned forward. 

"They make writing — too much writing 
— everything in writing — and all of it 
funny kind. What you Earthmen call— 
I think — poetry. Yes, that is it. Poetry. 
And each day gets worser. They never 
make like that before. By the Seven Black 
Comets, how they get that way?" 

That was when Bill and I knew we had 
to break our silence. 

SO THE Marties have not yet learned 
to think for themselves. Five years, 
after all, is a very short time. Perhaps 
some day. In the meantime they're nothing but reflections of the more uninhibited 
and generally screwy aspects of Terence 
Michael Burke's personality. And I'm 
afraid they'll share his disturbing ideas 
of humor. 

Do we want anything to do with them? 
Frankly, I don't know. That's up to you, 
Citizens of Earth, when you vote on the 
new treaty. 

But don't say I didn't warn you. 




They were next* Could they evade the atomic torpedoes? 

WHO GOES THERE? 

By CHARLES II. DAVIS 

Hurtling down from cold and hostile space, battle-worn Ekrado 
and Ronaro gazed with joy at the lovely watery world below. 
Here, surely, they would find friends— and the precious help 

they needed! 



THROUGH THE OUTER LIMITS 
of our solar system, two great ships 
flashed through the void. Light 
from distant Sol gleamed feebly on their 
dark hulls, paled to insignificance by the 
flare of pure energy that blasted each ship 
through space at inconceivable velocity. 
Sol's illumination was jnst enough to pick 



out the jagged gash near the base of the 
leading vessel where a force beam had 
struck a deadly Wow. 

As the interval between the spaceships 
lessened, a pale beam lanced out from the 
pursuing ship and caught the wounded 
Alarian cruiser on the flank. Mighty steel 
plates buckled inward and life-giving wat
53 



54 



PLANET STORIES 



er spouted out through the torn side to 
freeze instantly in the terrible cold of the 
void. As the pressure dropped, razoredged bulkhead doors shot automatically 
into place to seal off the stricken compartment. 

Although badly damaged, the Alarian 
ship was not yet out of the fight. Number 
Five turret lashed back with a heat ray 
that glowed cherry-red, then white, on the 
upper forward turret of the pursuing 
ship of Ru'ukon. A cluster of atomic torpedoes darted from the far side of the 
Alarian ship and headed for the Ru'ukonian cruiser in an intricate series of zigzag maneuvers, only to be caught half way 
by a force beam and exploded in a blinding 
flash. Another single torpedo, swinging 
wide through space in an arc hundreds 
of thousands of miles long, came up from 
behind the pursuing ship. For a moment 
it seemed that it might strike a vital blow, 
but the Ru'ukonian detection apparatus 
went into action at the last possible moment and the single torpedo was caught 
by a force beam when it was but a scant 
hundred miles from its target. 

Again the pale beam struck, and the 
Alarian ship staggered as the Number 
Two port engines exploded. 

In the control room, a squid-like shape 
churned through the clear water to the 
vision screen where Ekrado, the ship's 
commander, floated. 

"Yes, Ronaro," his thought was sharp 
and urgent, "what is it?" 

"Number Two port engine out," telepathed his deputy. "Number One turret 
out" 

"That is bad. Prepare our personal 
lifeboat for immediate use. It may become necessary to abandon ship." 

"Right away," acknowledged Ronaro. 
But even as he turned to carry out the 
order, Ekrado caught the indication of a 
half-formed question in his mind. 

"You have doubts, Ronaro," he challenged. "Out with them." 

"If we abandon ship now, how can we 
carry our message ?" 

"We have no choice ; this ship will never carry us to distant Alar, Our communication apparatus is wrecked beyond repair. We must contact a civilized race 



on one of the planets of this sun and win 
their cooperation — or Alar will never get 
our message." 

"Never get our message!" echoed Ronaro, shocked. 

"Don't float there thinking of failure. 
We must and will succeed. Now, off to 
the lifeboat. I'm going to try to dodge behind a planetary body of this system." 

The Captain gave the orders for a 
change of course, and the speeding ship 
turned on a long arc as it swung its bow 
in towards the center of the planetary system. The maneuver gained them a brief 
respite, as the Ru'ukonian swept on past 
before the pilot could react to the change 
of course. The superior speed of the other cruiser soon told, however, and the 
Alarian ship rocked again as another beam 
struck it. 

An excited subordinate swam up, waving his five tentacles frantically. "Captain," 
he telepathed, "the water-purifying plant 
has been hit. A beam went right through 
where Number Five turret used to be. 
The auxiliary plant was knocked out when 
Number Two engine exploded. 

"We'll abandon ship," decided the Captain. "Some of the lifeboats should reach 
planets. Set the controls to plunge the 
ship into the sun of this system." 

THE junior officer made the necessary 
adjustments to the controls. With a 
flick of one tentacle he set the automatic 
alarm broadcaster into action and swam 
hastily after his Captain. The metallic 
command, "Abandon Ship ! Abandon 
Ship!" rang through his mind as the device started functioning. 

The Captain was already at the controls 
of the lifeboat Ronaro dove after him. A 
moment later the lifeboat had slipped 
through the lock into space, darting away 
from the wounded giant at full speed. 

"Several small planets held by this star, 
Captain," reported Ronaro. 

"I see them," telepathed Ekrado. "You 
keep a watch on the enemy and look to 
see if any other lifeboats escape. I'll steer 
for the most likely planet." 

As Ronaro watched through the rearview vision screen, first one and then another darted away from the Alarian hulk 



WHO GOES THERE? 



55 



until he could count a total of five. 

"Rendezvous instructions ?" asked Ronaro mentally. 

"Third planet from the sun," ordered 
Ekrado. "We're in luck, Ronaro, the planet is mostly water — plenty of room to swim 
around in. I'll pick one of the ocean areas 
to land in and inform the other boats by 
beacon* signals of our exact location/' 

Even as Ronaro adjusted the communication amplifier to direct his mental command to the scattered lifeboats behind 
them, a more ominous picture appeared on 
the screen. The bright red halo that 
warned of approaching atomic torpedoes 
blossomed forth on the image of the enemy 
cruiser. The single halo gradually broke 
into smaller red circles as the cluster spread 
apart in space. 

"Space torpedoes coming," he reported 
tersely. 

"Six, of course," replied the Captain. 

"Right." It was the standard size cluster. 

"How* many lifeboats besides ourselves ?" 

"Five." 

"Then we're the sixth." 

"Right." 

"Any of them driving toward the cruiser 
itself?" 

"No, their guiding mechanisms must be 
set for small-sized craft. They'll track 
every one of us down." 

"A torpedo is heading directly for us 
now," reported Ronaro. 

"At least one boat must get through to 
carry our message," stated Ekrado flatly. 

"What do you propose — a sacrifice?" 

"Set the heat ray projector for a narrow fan beam and slice the nearest lifeboat into two parts," ordered the Captain. 

Ronaro's tentacles fairly boiled the water 
as he made the necessary adjustments. A 
thousand miles behind them, the closest 
lifeboat from their stricken vessel glowed 
briefly around its equator and fell apart 
into two halves that gradually spread apart. 

"Two hundred years ago, in the Second 
Gruon War, I saw my best friend die in 
just such a sacrifice," grated Ekrado. "I 
did not like it then and I do not like it now. 
It was not an easy order to give." 

Without replying, Ronaro watched the 



vision screen anxiously. His eyes were 
on the bright red halo that warned of a 
torpedo speeding toward their own lifeboat. There was an additional, separate 
metal object in space now, toward which 
the sixth torpedo might automatically be 
guided by the mechanism in its nose. 
Blinding flashes lit up the vision screen as 
one lifeboat after another was destroyed. 
Now only two torpedoes were left, one 
heading toward them, and then other toward the lifeboat that had been split in 
half. At last, the torpedo bearing on them 
deviated from its course as its guiding 
mechanism sensed the nearer metal bulk 
of the nearer half of the lifeboat. The two 
flashes appeared as one as the two torpedos blasted both halves of the sacrifice 
into nothingness. 

"All six exploded," reported Ronaro. 
"The enemy cruiser is veering off to return to base. We are safe!" 

The little boat sped on until finally it 
was screaming through the thin upper air 
of Earth. Ekrado sharply decreased their 
speed to prevent over-heating the hull, 
having no desire to be cooked alive in 
the water of his own lifeboat. 

BELOW them, covering the horizon, 
was the vast expanse of the Atlantic. 
The two Alarians were joyous at the 
sight of such a planet. Here was no driedup world, such as some they had seen 
where old age or the heat of a nearby sun 
had dried up the life-giving waters. Ekrado 
sent the little craft straight down toward 
the blue expanse below. 

Water shot high into the air like a 
geyser as the alien lifeboat plunged into 
the ocean. Deep under the water's surface, 
the craft leveled off and slowed until it 
drifted idly. 

"Take an instrument reading," ordered 
Ekrado. "Let us see what kind of a hydrosphere this planet has. It looks good 
enough." 

"It is not as good as it looks," reported 
Ronaro grimly. "The temperature and 
pressure are satisfactory, but the chemical 
content of the water is poisonous. It would 
kill us in a few minutes." 

"That means we must depend on our 
water purifying plant as long as we are 



56 



PLANET STORIES 






on this planet — or as long as it holds out. 
They aren't built to last forever." 

"We must get word to Alar that the 
entire Ru'ukonian fleet is attacking without warning, while our fleet is at the 
other end of the galaxy holding maneuvers. Maneuvers ! A yachting trip for the 
Lord Admiral Krukon, while Alar lies almost defenseless !" 

"You stated before that our only hope 
was to contact a civilized race on one of 
these planets, in hopes that they might 
have interstellar communication apparatus?" 

"Yes," responded Ekrado, "or any type 
of equipment for broadcasting radiation. 
We can rebuild it for our purpose. Have 
you forgotten that we served one hundred 
and sixty years together in the Communications Corps? We could rebuild anything, just so they have the power." 

"I believe we could," replied Ronaro, 
caught by his Captain's enthusiasm. 

"Right! Our first step must be to find 
intelligent life on one of the planets of 
this sun. We must start by searching the 
waters of this world." 

Ekrado threw the throttle-lever forward 
slightly and the ship moved ever more 
rapidly through the water. Straight ahead 
he drove it while the two Alarians concentrated every attention on the vision 
screens in the hope of sighting intelligent 
life. 

Life they saw aplenty in the next few 
hours, much of it strange but the greater 
part of it similar to that of their own 
world. 

"Ronaro, look/' telepathed Ekrado excitedly, "a being like an Alarian." 

Across the vision plate floated a pointed 
body sprouting a tanble of flexible arms 
at one end. Hope surged high in them 
both. 

"Wonderful," exulted Ronaro, "probably we've found intelligent life already. 
Probe his mind, Elkrado." 

"No response yet," replied the Captain, 
"possibly they use some other method of 
communication." 

"Such as signals or audible sounds," 
suggested Ronaro. 

"Yes. In that case, it would be difficult 
to establish contact." 



"Very difficult to transmit our thoughts, 
but not so difficult to read his." 

"Well, it has been done before, with 
non-telepathic races." 

"Like the giant rays of Ikraa." 

"Let me concentrate, Ronaro." 

The two Alarians drifted in telepathic 
silence, Ekrado closing his eyes and concentrating his mental efforts at reaching 
the alien mind. Ronaro studied the creature as it swam unconcernedly past searching for food. 

"Hunts his food in primitive fashion," 
he reflected silently, careful not to destroy Ekrado's concentration. "Apparently 
his people do not have shellfish farms. Or 
possibly he is simply hunting for the fun 
of it or in order to be alone. He has twice 
as many tentacles as an Alarian, but mere 
physical difference proves nothing. He is 
wearing no harness or ornamentation of 
any kind, nor is he carrying a weapon. Obviously a low level of culture, if any." 

"You try," ordered the Captain, relaxing. "I've concentrated until my braincase almost burst and achieved nothing." 

"I'm afraid I'll have no better luck," 
said Ronaro. Swiftly, he reported his observations to his Captain. 

Nonetheless, Ronaro also tried to contact the stranger. He had, perhaps, better 
luck than his Captain, but his mind found 
only primal impulses, not thoughts. There 
was hunger there, more like greed to the 
refined sensitiveness of the Alarian, and 
a great fear that at the moment lay dormant and formless. There wasn't even the 
faintest stirrings of curiosity toward their 
boat. In fact, his probing mind could not 
even find a specific identification of the 
lifeboat in the thing's mind. 

"Ugh," he shuddered, "completely undeveloped. A beast." 

Ekrado frowned mentally. "You must 
have done better than I, at least. I found 
only nothingness." 

"You must have been looking solely for 
intelligence," Ronaro hastened to reassure 
his Captain. "There was none to find. 
Only primitive emotions." 

Silently, Ekrado started the lifeboat on 
its long sweep through the waters. At 
the end of a hundred miles, he turned in 
a slow curve and headed back along a 



WHO GOES THERE? 



57 



straight line parallel to the way they had 
come. Back and forth they combed 
through the blue-green water, systematically hunting some sign of intelligent life. 

DURING this period, they several 
times encountered creatures similar 
to that which they had first thought might 
like themselves. Each time hope rose 
again; and each time it came to nothing. 
Each such creature inspired in them a 
strange medley of emotions, a sense of 
kinship and yet of repugnance, a feeling 
at once of benevolence toward a more 
backward cousin mixed with exasperation. 

After the futile search had gone on for 
several hours, Ronaro was struck with a 
sudden idea. 

"Perhaps the intelligent races of this 
planet are deep-sea creatures," he suggested. 

"It's posible," mused Ekrado. "So far 
IVe been cruising pretty much at our own 
favorite depth." 

"This lifeboat can stand tremendous 
pressure." 

"We'll try it," decided Ekrado. The 
slender shape of the lifeboat wheeled over 
until it was pointing straight down toward 
the ocean bottom. 

Soon there was a gradual change in the 
color of the water, fading from green to 
greenish blue and then to dark blue. Ronaro snapped on the searchlights at the 
Alarian equivalent of 700 feet and the 
yellow beams spread out into the dark 
blue waters on all sides. The pressure 
gauge showed them an ever increasing 
force pressing on all sides of their vessel, 
until, at 1700 feet, it had reached 770 
pounds per square inch. At this level the 
water was as black as space itself. The 
beams from their searchlights had changed 
in color from yellow to a luminous gray 
bordered along each side with dark blue. 
Sprinkled through the blackness were the 
lights carried by many deep-sea fish. The 
two Alarians studied the vision screens 
with tense concentration. Fish swam 
through their light beams and were gone 
again in an instant in the surrounding 
blackness. Groups of lights moving 
through the darkness told them of large 
fish or schools of smaller fish, but they 



were unable to trace the outlines from 
the pattern of lights. 

"We should be near bottom, by now, if 
this were Alar/' commented Ronaro at 
3000 feet. 

"The waters of this planet may well be 
deeper than those of our home world," 
pointed out Ekrado. 

Both of them looked at the pressure 
gauge. At the Alarian equivalent of 1358 
pounds per square inch, it was not far 
from the red line that indicated the maximum pressure the lifeboat could stand. 
But still they kept going down through 
the ice-cold blackness, 

"Look Ekrado P clamored Ronaro. "The 
God Ka!" 

It was not, indeed, the God Ka, but it 
might well have been. Its body alone was 
five times the size of their life-boat and 
its tentacles stretched for an unknown distance, far beyond the rays of their feeble 
lights. It brooded motionless in the inconceivable pressure, as though watching 
them, although it had no trace of eyes. 

Both Alarians concentrated their minds 
on the problem of communication with the 
tremendous mind they knew was contained 
within that mighty bulk. They both floated 
motionless, eyes closed, concentrating. But 
while the Alarians were motionless, the 
thing before them was not. A great tentacle wrapped itself around the hull. As the 
tentacle tightened in its body-crushing embrace, it encountered unexpected resistance 
in the hard metal of the hull. Even as 
the two Alarians were beginning to face 
their disappointment at what they had 
found, or what they had not found, that 
unexpected resistance registered within the 
brain of the giant squid. The dull surprise 
and heavy anger that flared within the 
primitive mind warned the two Alarians 
of their danger. 

As they became aware once more of 
their immediate surroundings, one vision 
screen was completely covered by the width 
of one huge tentacle wrapped around their 
ship, while the other showed several more 
tentacles drawing near to enfold their lifeboat. The upper part of the hull, the roof 
of their cabin, bulged inwards, while the 
hull groaned and creaked as though every 
plate and bar was about to collapse. 



58 



PLANET STORIES 



"Quick, Ronaro, the heat cannon," 
snapped the Captain as he dove for the 
controls. 

The motors hummed vainly as Ekrado 
sought to free the craft from the monster's 
grip. At the same time, Ronaro brought 
his sights to bear on the approaching tentacles. The tight beam sliced through them 
as fast as he could bring it to bear; one, 
two, three, four . . . But not fast enough, 
for one more tentacle closed around the 
lifeboat. By chance, the monster had 
blotted out their vision screen with the 
second tentacle. Now Ronaro was fighting 
blind. He set the angle of fire in such a 
way that the cannon would fire close to 
the life-boat's hull. He fired again and 
again, as fast as the weapon built up 
potential for another discharge, systematically combing the waters around them. The 
pressure on the hull relaxed almost visibly 
as the tentacles that held the ship were 
sliced in two at last by the heat ray. But 
since Ronaro could not set the weapon to 
actually graze the hull, the end of the 
severed tentacle remained wrapped around 
them to obscure the vision ports. 

The monster was not defeated yet. Even 
with six tentacles gone, it had four left, 
and Ronaro was still fighting blind. His 
rays bombarded the water blindly in the 
hope of striking the body of the giant. At 
the same time, the lifeboat got slowly under 
way, rising sternwards toward the surface. 
As it gathered momentum, Ekrado spun 
it over, to travel bowfirst. The turn dislodged the severed tentacles and once again 
the two Alarians could see into the dark 
water as far as their light beams could 
illuminate it. There was no sign of the 
monster. Whether they had outrun it or 
outfought it, they did not know, but in 
any case they were safe. 

"That idea did not turn out any too 
well, did it?" commented Ekrado wryly. 

Ronaro did not reply, for the statement 
hardly called for an answer. The two 
Alarians floated in silence while the lifeboat climbed back toward the lighter surface waters once more. 

HIGH above them a United States 
destroyer was cutting through the 
ocean swells, part of a great convoy that 



spread over many miles of water. In the 
center of the convoy were the troop ships, 
surrounded by a screen of other destroyers. 

On the bridge the captain and his executive officer were chatting desultorily. Their 
eyes scanned the waters constantly while 
they talked, a sea-borne custom that long 
antedated the ship's bristling radar screens. 
"If we put in anywhere along the Solomons," the captain said, 'Til bet we'll see 
the natives still wearing and using the 
old equipment — from forty-five." 

"Yeah," grinned the exec. "They all say 
it was the Navy that ruined the Pacific." 

"Huh," snorted the other. "We went 
ashore — but the Army stayed ashore. 
Whatever you find will be Government 
Issue." 

The exec yawned. "Cripes, what a boring tour. I'd give my last bottle for just 
one sight of a good old Nip periscope." 

"Or a Kamikaze," growled the captain 
sarcastically. 

A radioman stepped out on the bridge, 
saluted, and handed the captain a flimsy. 
He read it, and frowned at the exec. 

"Lead ship says we're about to pass over 
a submerged object — a derelict of some 
sort. The chief says to blast it. Menace to 
navigation and so forth." 

The exec stepped to the squawk-box, and 
flicked the switch. "Attention. Attention. 
Y-gun crew report to stations — on the 
double. Y-gun — on deck." 

As he stood there, waiting for the CPO 
commanding that detail to acknowledge 
and request orders, he let out a yawn, a 
prodigious mid-afternoon yawn that threatened to split his head. 

THE two Alarians floated motionless 
in the water of their lifeboat, each 
immersed in his own thoughts. Shaking 
off his lethargy, Ekrado began to make 
a routine check of the condition of the 
heat ray cannon. Mechanically, he went 
over the apparatus, his mind still on their 
problem. The cannon was, of course, in 
perfect condition. 

"Clackety-clack-clack-clack," chattered 
the Konald detector. 

"Metal !" exclaimed Ekrado in surprise. 

"Large masses of it," echoed Ronaro. 

"Here in the surface waters. That can 



WHO GOES THERE? 



59 



only mean . . . ." 

"Intelligent life/' the two minds chorused. 

High at the top of the vision screen appeared the bottom of a long narrow metal 
hull. It was unmistakably a metal ship, 
the work of intelligent minds, an indication of culture and civilization. 

"Only one of us will try to communicate 
this time," directed Ekrado. "You do it, 
Ronaro." 

This contact was entirely different. Ronaro's questing mind at once encountered 
intelligence. There was purpose there, not 
the mindless urges of hunger and fear that 
they had met before, but rational purpose 
backed by planning. But there was something else Ronaro sensed beneath the surface, something alien. 

"Ekrado!" he exclaimed, shocked. 
"These creatures are air breathers!" 

"Air breathers!" snorted the Captain. 
"Have you drifted into fantasy Ronaro? 
Establish contact with them." 

"I can't," Ronaro replied after a fewmoments of intense concentration. "Their 
minds cannot receive our thought impulses." 



"We've got to attract their attention. 
After they have seen us we'U be able to 
work out some method of communication." 

"It will be hard when we live in two 
different mediums — we in water and they 
in air." 

"No matter; we will manage somehow 
after we have made contact with them. I'll 
start the engine and head for the surface," 

Ronaro saw it first, a short cylinder-like 
object tumbling through the waters, directly toward their craft. Sensing danger instinctively, he cried out: 

"Ekrado! Full speed ahead!" 

He had barely gotten the thought out 
when it happened. A great explosion 
rocked the waters as the depth bomb went 
off. The lifeboat was smashed open, its 
alien water blending imperceptibly with 
the waters of the Atlantic. 

The body of a squid appeared on the 
surface, its tentacles trailing aimlessly. The 
keen eyes of the men on the destroyer 
flickered past it, looking for the tell-tale 
oil slick of a broken submarine, in vain. 

"Now just what the hell zvas that?" 
wondered the captain, scratching at his 
balding head. 



STATEMENT OF THE OWNERSHIP. MANAGEMENT, CIRCULATION, etc., required by the Act ot 
Congress of August 24, 1912, as amended by the Acts 
of March 3, 1933, and July 2 1946 of Planet Stories, 
published quarterly at New York N Y for Oct. 1, 1949. 

State of New York, County of New York, ss.: 

Before me, a Notary Public in and for the State and 
county aforesaid, personally appeared Paul L. Payne, 
who, having been duly sworn according to law, deposes 
and says that he is the Editor of the Planet Stories 
and that the following is, to the best of his knowledge 
and belief, a true statement of the ownership, management (and if a daily, weekly, semiweekly or triweekly 
newspaper, the circulation), etc., of the aforesaid publication for the date shown in the above caption, required 
by the act of August 24, 1912, as amended by the acts 
of March 3,_ 1933, and July 2, 1946 (section 537, Postal 
Laws and Regulations), printed on the reverse of this 
form, to wit: 

1 That the names and addresses of the publisher, 
editor, managing editor, and business managers are: 
Publisher, Love Romances Publishing Company, Inc., 
670 Fifth Ave., New York 19. N. Y.; Editor Paul L. 
Payne, 670 Fifth Ave., New York 19, N. Y.; Managing 
editor, none; Business manager, T. T. Scott, 670 Fifth 
Ave., New York 19, N. Y. 

2. That the owner is: (If owned by a corporation, its 
name and address must be stated and also immediately 
thereunder the names and addresses of stockholders owning or holding one percent or more of total amount of 
stock. If not owned by a corporation, the names and 
addresses of the individual owners must be given. It 
owned by a firm, company, or other unincorporated concern, its name and address, as well as those of eacu 
individual member, must be given.) Love Romances 
Publishing Co., Inc., 670 Fifth Ave., New York 19, 
N. Y.; J. G. Scott, 670 Fifth Ave.. New York 19, N. Y. 



3. That the known bondholders, mortgagees, and other 
security holders owning or holding 1 per cent or more of 
total amount of bonds, mortgages, or other securities are: 
(If there are none, so state.) None. 

4. That the two paragraphs next above, giving the 
names of the owners, stockholders, and security holders, 
if any, contain not only the list of stockholders and 
security holders as they appear upon the books of the 
company but also, in cases where the stockholder or 
security holder appears upon the books of the company 
as trustee or in any other fiduciary relation, the name 
of the person or corporation for whom such trustee is 
acting, is given; also that the said two paragraphs contain statements embracing affiant's full knowledge and 
belief as to the circumstances and conditions under which 
stockholders and security holders who do not appear upon 
the books of the company as trustees, hold stock and 
securities in a capacity other than that of a bona fide 
owner; and this affiant has no reason to believe that any 
other person, association, or corporation has any interest 
direct or indirect in the said stock, bonds, or other 
securities than as so stated by him. 

5. That the average number of copies of each issue 
of this publication sold or distributed, through the mails 
or otherwise, to paid subscribers during the twelve 
months preceding the date shown above is ... . . . 

(This information is required from daily, weekly, semiweekly, and triweekly newspapers only.) 

(Signed) Paul L. Payne, 

Editor. 

Sworn to and subscribed before me this 15th day of 
September, 1949. „ m 

George G. Schwenke, 

Notary Public. 

(My commission expires March 30, 1950.) 




The battle raged on aero** the start! 



Flame- Jewel of the 
Ancients 

By E0WIN L. GRARER 



TMiE TWO TERR AN SUPER 
Galactics glided side by side in the 
immensity of the interstellar void. 
Secure in the knowledge that they were the 
mightiest battleships ever built in the known 
galaxy, they didn't bother to raise their 
anti-energy shields. They knew, absolutely, 
that no other warcraft in the universe could 
equal their strength. . . . 
60 



Jukes, the third pilot, lounged carelessly 
in his gimbal-slung shock seat, idly watching the screen before him. Aside from his 
sister ship, there was nothing to be seen 
but the harsh points of starlight. Cautiously he looked over his shoulder to see 
if the executive officer were nearby, then, 
apparently satisfied, lit a cigarette and blew 
an expansive plume of smoke at the serried 




The tiny golden sphere, blazing with terrible energy, spelled 
Galactic Empire at last to the ont-space horde, once they had 
tapped its limitless power. They were grimly amused therefore 
when Captain Glayne of the Stellar Guardians dropped innocently out of sub-space to view their mighty prize. 



banks of instruments that were terraced 
about him. 

Suddenly the intermittent glowing of a 
red blinker aroused him. Throwing the 
butt to the deck, he bent forward, squinting into the screen. Far down in one 
corner he detected an irregularly sparkling 
mote moving slowly across the blazing 
points of the distant stars. With a single 
motion of his arm he swept the Call to 
Quarters alarm studs and began to speak 
rapidly into his throat transmitter. As the 



muffled vibrating thunder of his ship's drivers rose, he could make out his sister ship 
gradually swinging into an approach orbit. 
A double tap on his shoulder informed 
him that the first pilot was there to take 
over. Smoothly he slipped from the shock 
seat and took up his station with the other 
two pilots near the auxiliary control boards. 
Everywhere about him was excited, orderly 
confusion as the huge warship stripped for 
possible action. The orbit calculators at his 
left took up the excited jabbering chorus 

61 



62 



PLANET STORIES 



and somewhere above the third pilot was 
aware of the massive charge accumulators 
for the Kellander miatron blasters whining 
up the scale. 

"It's a Delban," he muttered to his fellow pilots. "Just a pipsqueak, too, blast 
his miserable, trespassing soul. A light 
cruiser, from what I saw of him." 

The younger one looked at him eagerly. 
"Do you think he'll fight?" 

The third pilot snorted. "One Stellar 
class cruiser against two Terran Galactics? 
He'd be out of his mind." 

Just then the battle screen lit up and 
a babbling group of gunnery officers 
crowded about, feeding firing data to waiting miatron crews. Over their shoulders 
the third pilot could make out the Delban 
cruiser as it lay there, slim and deadly 
against the vast, star-studded vault of 
space. 

"What I'd like to know is why the devil 
he doesn't run for it," the older pilot said 
to no one in particular. "Something's up, 
I'm sure. Delbans just don't act like this." 
The third pilot grunted absently, his eyes 
fixed on the battle screen. The two Galactics now lay on either side of the Delban. 
His sister ship began to communicate with 
the new arrival, her yellow beam glowing 
with baleful intensity. But the pilot wasn't 
watching. He had noticed something odd 
about that cruiser. It seemed to bulge in 
the wrong places. It was completely enclosed by a peculiar mesh antenna which 
glinted ominously in the faint light. 
Then the Delban fired. 
For a moment there was stunned amazement in the huge plotting room. It was the 
very absurdity of the situation rather than 
mere surprise. To make the blasphemy 
worse, the Delban had licked out with the 
beam of a secondary Kellander projector 
rather than with her main miatron batteries. The damage was slight, the communicator bulb of the other Galactic having 
been reduced to twisted slag. But this was 
the grossest of all insults in space warfare 
and demanded immediate retaliation. The 
third pilot held his breath in anticipation. 
Then it came. The plotting room exploded into frantic activity. Generators 
screamed into ear-splitting crescendoes as 
the main driver engines were coupled into 



them to raise the anti-energy shield. The 
Kellander miatron blasters hurled ravening bolts of energy at the audacious Delban, 
reducing accumulator loads to zero in instants. The remainder of the driver 
atomics were coupled into the Kellander 
accumulators sending up loads that were 
fed through the continuously thundering 
miatrons at the Delban criser. Literally 
trillions of megawatts lapped at the Delban 
shield, making it glow up the spectral scale 
in a brilliant spider web of absorbing power 
foci. But it held. 

THE Delban shield held! The third 
pilot was unbelievably shocked as he 
stared at the battle screen. It was simply 
not conceivable that the two mightiest 
warships in space could not penetrate the 
shield of a pipsqueak Stellar cruiser. 

Where were they getting the power? 
The question blazed up in the third pilot's 
consciousness as he stared at the slim, 
deadly Delban. Abruptly he recalled where 
he had seen the Delban's peculiar external 
mesh antenna. 

"Broadcast power!" he blurted to his 
comrades. "Those devils are receiving 
broadcast power !" 

The other two pilots looked at him incredulously. "Hell!" snorted the older 
one. "You can't transmit the stuff across 
interstellar distances." 

The third pilot didn't reply. As he 
watched the screen he suddenly knew they 
were in trouble. By rights this should 
have been the greatest shock of all but his 
mind was so dulled with amazement that 
he could only shake his head. 

The Delban's firing had gradually increased in strength until now both the 
Terran battleship's mighty shields were 
themselves glowing up the spectral scale in 
its spidery force web. Despite the older 
pilot's doubts, he realized that only broadcast power in unlimited quantities could 
account for those overloaded shields. But 
where were they getting it to broadcast? 
Only an infinite source of supply could do 
the job. 

Paralyzed, he watched the battle screen. 
He was aware of the miatron blasters falling silent, one after another, as the straining driver atomics were diverted to hold 



FLAME-JEWEL OF THE ANCIENTS 



63 



the shield. Their sister Galactic's blasters 
had all fallen silent as all the power of 
her own huge drivers was shunted into 
the shield generators. Their own shield 
was trembling and shuddering under the 
inconceivable impact of the energies that 
surged at it from the Delban. 

Suddenly the pilot saw their sister ship's 
shield coruscate in a multi-hued spider 
web of shorting power foci. Then it 
buckled. The third pilot instinctively 
averted his face from the indescribably 
brilliant, eye-searing nova that followed. 

His own ship screamed. The drivers, 
the generators, the converters and accumulators — all of them screamed in ultra-sonic 
crescendoes in an effort to maintain the 
crumbling shield. The force webs shorted 
one after another in brilliant red fire. The 
third pilot saw it rupture but he never 
felt it. . . . 

For days the twin novae burned in the 
endless night, then slowly faded to blackened cinders. 



II 



THE TRI-DI FILM CAME TO AN 
end and the Council Chamber's soft 
fluorescents picked up in strength. For a 
moment the members of Lorle Sector's 
High Council were stunned and bewildered 
at what they had seen. 

Captain Glayne waited patiently for the 
explosion which he knew would come. For 
about the tenth time that morning he fervently cursed all civilians. Not even the 
valiant efforts of Chairman Dell Thorder 
could keep them in check. A vast wave of 
irritation filled him as he listened to the 
piercing squeak of a fat Councilor named 
Trask. 

"It will mean war, I say — and we haven't 
had a war involving Terra for seventy 
years. Lorle Sector must remain neutral 
— especially if Delb Sector has weapons 
which can crush super Galactic battleships. 
Now I say," he squeaked, oblivious of the 
fact that no one was paying any attention, "that we must request Captain Glayne 
to leave immediately because his presence 
might be deemed an overt act by our 
friends, the Delbans. True, the Stellar 
Guardians — " 



He was suddenly cut off by the staccato 
thunder of Dell Thorder's gavel. The 
chairman's thin, ascetic face wore a worried expression as his eyes swept the now 
silent Council. Of them all, he was the 
only man Glayne admired. For thirty 
years he had maneuvered the nine-planet 
Lorle Sector through the treacherous shoals 
of Combine politics and never once had the 
cry of "boss" or "dictator" seriously been 
raised against him. 

"I must confess," he began quietly, "that 
I do not myself understand fully the implications of this situation. I do know that 
the fact that Imperial Terra has lost two 
large battleships is inconsequential. The 
real point is that the Terran Combine is 
facing imminent destruction at the hands 
of Gort Bro-Doral and his Delban Empire. 
Because we are Delb Sector's nearest 
neighbor, we may expect the first blow to 
fall on us. Since it is a known fact that 
the Intelligence Service of the Stellar 
Guardians is the finest in the galaxy, I 
have sent for Captain Glayne to explain 
certain of the technical aspects of the new 
Delban weapon in order that we may determine what action to take." 

Thorder silently gestured to Glayne who 
arose and faced the hostile stares of the 
councilors. Their unexpressed antipathy 
was amusing rather than irritating. The 
meager little navy that Lorle Sector did 
possess drained away funds that could 
otherwise be used in their pork barrel. 
However, they all had something to worry 
about which Thorder hadn't mentioned. 
The Revolution which had smashed the 
Delb-Lorle Axis thirty years before had 
made Gort Bro-Doral a ruthless enemy who 
would not rest until his ships had utterly 
destroyed the Lorle cities in retaliation. So 
far they had depended upon Imperial Terra 
to support them against the Bro's passionate 
desire for power. But now the Terran 
navy was helpless and Lorle was in a 
desperate plight. 

"What Dell Thorder told you is true," he 
began in a firm, clear voice. "Unfortunately 
it is an understatement because it implies 
that there is a possibility of discovering 
a counter-weapon to offset that of the 
Delbans. Such is not the case. 

"For a long time we have been prone 



64 



PLANET 






to think in terms of optimum sizes for 
warships. We were accustomed to believe 
that we had reached the pinnacle of development in destructive weapons. The fatal 
radiations of atomic generators and converters-make it necessary to divert a part 
of the power into shields. These shields 
are limited in size by the ship size, and 
the ship size in turn is limited by the 
size of its power plant. But there is a 
point of diminishing returns — that is, we 
cannot build ships larger than the Galactic 
class battleships without losing efficiency. 
So for a long time we have believed that 
there was a limit to the amount of power 
available in any given class of warship. 

"Unfortunately this no longer applies for 
the Delbans. As you have just seen on 
the tri-di film obtained by Stellar Guardian 
Intelligence, a single Stellar cruiser engaged 
and destroyed two Terran Galactics. This 
means, as Chairman Thorder has suggested, 
that the entire fleet strength of the nine 
hundred Sectors of the Terran Combine 
is now quite helpless against the Delban 
Grand Fleet/' 

Glayne paused for a moment. In spite 
of the room's air conditioning, many of the 
Councilors were mopping their faces 
anxiously. The one called Trask was 
chewing his lower lip nervously, not liking 
a bit what the tall Guardian officer had 
to say. Glayne felt a twinge of sympathy 
for his three hundred and fifty million constituents. 

"The crux of the whole problem is the 
source of this new Delban power. Experts 
in our organization are absolutely certain 
that they are using broadcast power, but 
this information is based on the tri-di film 
you have seen which our agents have stolen 
from the Terran Admiralty Office at Lunaport. It may be a fake, but that is hardly 
likely. The implications of broadcast power 
are so tremendous as to defy reason. Even 
under the best laboratory conditions the 
power lost in transmission makes it impractical. Consequently any source which 
produces energies capable of smashing two 
Terran Galactic battleships at perhaps stellar distances is vast beyond conjecture. As 
incredible as this sounds, we believe that 
the Delbans have it. As to its precise 
nature, we are still in the dark. How


STORfES 

ever, the Stellar Guardians, at least, are 
in a position to investigate/ ' 

Dell Thorder cleared his throat at this 
point and Glayne stopped. 

"You see our position/' said the weary 
Chairman. "Almost any countermeasure 
we attempt can be interpreted as an overt 
act by Bro-Doral. Hence any action on 
our part will make our ruin sooner instead of later. However, there is one thin 
possibility and that is Captain Glayne. It 
is true that he is a mercenary belonging to 
the Stellar Guardians. But Kairn's Intelligence vouches for him absolutely and I 
am informed that he is as competent as 
any man in the Lorle Fleet. 

"Because of the peculiar nature of the 
Stellar Guardian organization, he can carry 
out investigations where any such move on 
our part would be suicidal. In my opinion, 
our only possible chance is to employ him 
in this capacity to locate the Delban power 
transmitter— if one exists. It is possible 
that an all-out attack with all the units 
we can muster will succeed in destroying 

As Thorder finished, Glayne took a deep 
breath. He stood motionless by the immense circular table. He knew that the 
Councilors, like all small planet men, were 
impressed with his great shoulders and 
their suggestion of tremendous physical 
strength. But if they knew what torment 
he had to endure under high driver thrust 
as a result of his great size, they wouldn't 
be so impressed. 

Dell Thorder coughed. "Captain Glayne, 
would you mind stepping into the outer 
room while we take a vote? We will 
inform you directly/' 

GLAYNE nodded silently and left the 
Chamber. Disregarding the anteroom's soft chairs, he stood against the 
wall, waiting. His space-tanned face 
hardened as he looked thoughtfully from 
the glassene window at the jewel-like city 
of Lorle Capita^ a dazzling white under 
the noon sun. Mentally he pictured the 
sleek Delban cruisers flashing overhead in 
fast orbits, pouring phenomenal torrents of 
energy into the pathetic shield the city 
would attempt to set up. The Lorle High 
Council would trust him. In the end, even 



FLAME-JEWEL OF THE AIVCIEJVTS 



Trask would. They were all rabbits looking around desperately for someone to 
defend them. They would hire him ; they 
would pat him on the back and shake his 
hand ; they would make him solemnly swear 
the Guardian Oath to struggle against all 
their enemies. And Glayne would promise 
to do all of these things. 
But he would lie. 

He would do none of these things. Instead he would do all in his power to bring 
war to Lorle. He would commit an overt 
act against the Delbans and they would 
cry for Lorle blood. Their fast, sleek ships 
would deal out death and destruction to the 
very cities which he would swear ever so 
solemnly to defend to his last breath. With 
a coldly objective part of his mind he 
marveled at the consummate treachery he 
would perform. 

But another part of his mind was aghast. 
He was unable to suppress the bitter waves 
of remorse that filled him. Again he remembered the serious, heavy- jowled face 
of Garstow, Grand Admiral of the Stellar 
Guardians. In the Dorleb Headquarters, 
only forty hours before, Garstow had said : 
"Glayne, we need time. Some Sector 
must be thrown to the wolves. While the 
Delbans are occupied with that unfortunate 
Sector, we will have time to unravel their 
broadcast scramblers, build antennae of 
our own, and perhaps even locate their 
power transmitter. The Policy Organ has 
decided upon Lorle Sector. And it has 
decided that you, Glayne, are the man 
for the job." 

Glayne had listened in stunned silence 
to Garstow. A protest rose automatically 
to his lips but he had crushed it back 
with a click of his booted heels. And nowhere he was in Lorle Capital with his 
Stellar class cruiser Algol ready for action. 
When the fat men with rabbit eyes emerged 
from the Council Chamber and empowered 
him to work for them, he would be ready 
to move. A sudden raid on Delban space 
commerce, an energy bomb hurtling into 
a Delban city from a stolen Lorle warship 

any one of a dozen expedients would have 

the ruthless Gort Bro-Doral screaming 
down on the helpless cities of Lorle. 
As he stared at the afternoon brilliance 

5— Planet— Spring 



65 

of Lorle Capital he realized that his treachery was an ironic manifestation of a greater 
loyalty. People forgot that the Stellar 
Guardians were dedicated to the ideal of 
human progress. The great mercenary 
organization recognized the inevitability of 
war and determined that wars should be 
fought according to rules. But the Delbans 
were now in a position to* flout all rules 
and destroy all human progress. Hence 
all rules were forgotten and ruthless 
treachery was the order of the day as every 
resource was exploited to crush Gort BroDoral and his Delban Empire. 

Then the door of the Council Chamber opened and Dell Thorder stepped into 
the anteroom. He facer Glayne silently for 
a moment, lines of weariness etched in his 
tired, old face. 

Then he thrust out his hand and said 
simply: "We wish you the best of luck, 
Glayne." 

The Guardian Captain took the outstretched hand and almost winced at the 
trust he saw in Thorder's eyes. The weight 
of the crushing responsibility bowed down 
the Chairman's frail shoulders, but he 
seemed to burn with an indomitable determination to defend his people. He was not 
a rabbit but a warrior. And Glayne was 
going to betray him. 

'Til do my best," he said in quick, husky 
tones. 

He felt like a swine as he closed the door 
behind him, 

III 

IT WAS A SECOND-CLASS NIGHT 
spot called The Yarga. Glayne would 
meet the Stellar Guardian espionage chief 
for the Lorle Sector here. As he stood at 
the entrance bar absorbing the customary 
drink prior to entering the first stage, he 
swept the place with cold grey eyes. Evidently the city commission of Lorle Capital 
was going through a phase of puritanism 
because the deadly Kesla lights were absent 
and the swirling strains of the reportedly 
jawth-ied orchestra were considerably 
toned down. Nevertheless, the general impression was quite sufficiently exotic to suit 
Glayne as he entered the dimly-lit first 
stage. 



66 

Vaguely he was aware of the less restrained laughter of patrons who had already reached the second stage, having 
passed through the vibrator screen that 
simulated a soothing color movement. The 
function of the vibrator was to give jaded 
sensibilities the physical fillip necessary to 
convince reluctant laggards that they really 
were ready for the second stage. Glayne 
was also aware of his table's slight movement toward the vibrator screen and he 
felt a wave of irritation at the prospect 
of chasing through nine stages in this outlandish place looking for his contact. 

Suddenly the annunciator light in the 
center of his table began to glow an intermittent red-orange. Glayne looked at it, 
eyes narrowed. Experimentally he stabbed 
its speaker stud and a voice seemed to 
emerge from the empty air before his face. 
"Captain, you look so lonely and disconsolate sitting by yourself. Won't you join 
me?" It was a woman's voice, low and 
casual. Glayne was briefly startled — he had 
expected that his contact would be a man. 
Then it occurred to him that she was not 
his contact, but that doubt vanished when 
he remembered that he had discarded his 
uniform for the light grey business jumper 
of a young business executive. How could 
she know him for a Captain in the Stellar 
Guardians unless she was his contact? 

On the other hand, she had not made 
herself known with the code which had 
been selected beforehand. Puzzled and suspicious, he flicked the transmitter stud and 
said cautiously: "Where are you?" 

"You can't miss me, darling/' she replied. "Just stand up." 

Glayne hesitated, hefting the heavy, comforting weight of the Cardy blaster under 
his arm pit. With a shrug he tossed off the 
remnants of the blue-green borse which 
stirred lambently in the exquisite goblet. 
Then he stood up. 

She was perfectly correct. He couldn't 
miss her from ten light years, much less 
thirty feet. She was tall and graceful in 
a tailored green jumper which half suggested, half concealed the long, smooth 
curves of her young body. She had coppery red hair and wide-set green eyes that 
smiled boldly at him. She rested a hand 
on her hip in mock impatience. 



PLANET STORIES 

"Well, don't just stand there, fat-head!" 
she cried across the tables. "What do you 
usually do when you haven't seen someone 
for years and years ?" 

With an effort Glayne collected himself, 
assayed a weak smile, and maneuvered 
around the tables to her side. 

"Oh, you look perfectly gorgeous," she 
said, oblivious to the amused people around 
her. "Dance with me — you always were a 
divine dancer. You know, I was telling 
Jani just today how I wished you'd come 
for a visit — we haven't seen you for such 
a long time. . . * 

She prattled gaily on. Somewhat dazed, 
Glayne led her to the resilient dance floor, 
an absurdity which had suddenly become 
the very latest rage overnight. The girl 
slipped smoothly into his arms, her fragrant, perfumed hair under his chin. 

He wasn't at all prepared for the hard 
tones of her voice when she said: "1 
regret to inform you, Captain Glayne, that 
the agent you were supposed to meet here 
is dead. He had an unfortunate accident 
with a Cardy gun." 

Glayne stiffened perceptibly. "Who did 
it?" 

"Probably Delban espionage. They know 
that something is in the fire and they're 
not wearing kid gloves to find out what 
it is." 

"Did they discover the identity of the 
person he was supposed to meet ?" 

"No," she replied. "But they're looking. 
Fortunately the organization was not in the 
dark as to whom he would meet. Otherwise I could never have found you." 

Glayne's eyes narrowed. Too many 
people knew what was going on. That 
made it very dangerous. But what made 
it even more dangerous was the fact that 
he himself did not know what was going 
on. Agents of three organizations were 
involved in the search for information and 
the tangled maze of plots would be deadly 
for anyone caught in the middle. He was 
silent for a moment, battle-trained senses 
sifting ^ his surroundings instinctively. 
Something . . . somewhere . . . was odd. 

"If you will notice their eyes," the girl 
remarked dryly, "you will find that a good 
proportion of the Yarga's clientele are high 
on Soames drug." 



FLAME-JEWEL OF THE ANCIENTS 



67 



GLAYNE started and looked more 
closely at the couples entering the 
stage. Then he saw what she meant. Here 
and there he saw eyes — burning eyes— eyes 
that glittered with a brilliant fire that 
emanated from huge, dilated pupils. They 
were using the marvelous Soames energizing drug ; it fairly blazed from their slitted 
lids. Its purpose was to accelerate physical reaction speeds — but why use it on a 
small planet like Lorle IV? With the 
question came the answer. Their quarry 
had the .95 reaction index of a big planet 
man. That was Glayne' s index. And that 
meant that they were right on top of him. 
"I think," he intoned softly to the girl, 
"it would be wise for us to move on to the 
next stage." 

In reply she slipped smoothly from his 
arms, seized him by the sleeve of his loosefitting jumper, and propelled him to the 
tingle screen. When he balked she grinned 
at him and stood in the field of the screen 
herself and laughed at him. It was a bubbly, 
elated laugh. Glayne liked it. And he 
liked the way the soothing color movements 
of the tingle screen caressed the long curves 
of her figure. But he didn't like the nervous manner in which the glittering, dilated 
pupils flickered at them and held them 
curiously, then flickered casually away. 

The girl was clever, he realized. The 
keyed-up Delban agents would be far less 
likely to suspect an intoxicated couple of 
dark designs. Suddenly the red-headed 
girl stumbled, accidentally pushed from the 
other side of the screen. Instinctively 
Glayne reached out to steady her— reached 
out with a long, liquid motion of his powerful arm. In one instant every Soamesdilated eye in the room was upon him. 
In another, Cardy guns were magically appearing in a dozen hands. 

But, fast as they were, Glayne was 
faster. He drew his own weapon with 
blurred speed, fired, and flung himself and 
the girl through the screen into the second 
stage. The Delban agents hesitated to fire 
blindly through the screen and rushed after 
them. The big Guardian hurtled through 
the exotic darkness of the second stage 
with girl in his left arm. He scattered and 
smashed tables right and left, littering the 
floor with bewildered and drunken patrons. 



The exit toward which he was heading 
was suddenly no longer an exit. It was 
filled with a crowd of huge, glittering eyes 
and wicked looking Cardy guns. In a 
single movement, Glayne dropped to the 
floor and fired. 

The second stage was in an uproar. Now 
agents were pouring through the tingle 
screen in pursuit Desperately Glayne 
sought for a means of escape. Then he 
saw the portal that evidently led to the 
kitchen or the bar. He grabbed the dazed 
red-head and rushed through the portal, 
swept down a short corridor, turned, and 
straight-armed two tray-bearing waiters 
as he dashed through a second portal. 
And suddenly he was behind the entrance 
bar where he had taken his first drink. 
He tensed for a fraction of a second, then 
vaulted the low bar. 

A bartender and two customers stared 
at them with blank amazement but there 
was not a Delban agent in sight. Swiftly 
Glayne set the girl upon her feet and together they fled from the building. He 
noted approvingly the capable - looking 
Cardy she held in her small fist. 

"My flier is outside," she said. "They've 
probably surrounded the place, but in the 
confusion the ones outside won't know us. 
We'll try to bluff through." 

She nodded and put her gun away. As 
they approached the flier parking area she 
clutched his arm with intoxicated possessiveness. Glayne was right; here and 
there a Delban agent glanced at them suspiciously — then looked contemptuously 
away. The object of their search was alone. 
Controlling his heavy breathing with difficulty, Glayne approached an attendant, 
digging out his micro-wave key jewel. 
"Here! Get my air-jet," he panted. 
But instead of the expected response, the 
man stiffened for a measureless instant, 
then whirled with blurred speed. A Cardy 
blaster magically materialized in his hand 
and his eyes burned with Soames-induced 
ferocity. But Glayne was a shade faster. 
His left streaked with dazzling speed into 
the agent's stomach and the Delban folded 
up, his motor nerves paralyzed from the 
blow in the solar plexus. 

Crouching, they ran toward Glayne's airjet. A Cardy bolt splashed into the side 



■pp^^F^P^^P* 



68 



PLACET STORIES 



of a flier just above Glayne's head, battering the tough beralloy and sending a shower 
of white hot droplets in all directions. As 
they reached his air-jet, Glayne whirled and 
fired rapidly and with murderous accuracy 
at the pursuing Delban agents. As they 
scuttled for cover, Glayne turned and waved 
the talisman through the micro-wave field 
and the door swung open. 

Instantly he shoved the girl into the 
cabin, then climbed in behind her. He let 
the tiny atomic engine thunder beyond 
audibility, then fed power to the jets in 
huge gulps. With a tremendous surge the 
little craft leaped into the air and roared 
over the roof of the Yarga. A couple of 
Delban energy bolts slapped viciously into 
the air- jet, but soon Glayne out-distanced 
them, flying low over the dark countryside. 
The girl sighed beside him. "This has 
been a very warm evening. Do you think 
they'll catch us?" 

"I don't think they're organized that 
well," Glayne grunted, busy with the coursecomputer. "Their whole assault was hasty 
and ill-timed. I doubt if they even had 
time to set up an air net." 

"But, now that they are out in the open, 
they will move quickly. Do you have a 
specific plan in mind, Captain Glayne?" 

The Guardian frowned and cast a quick 
glance at her. He was puzzled by her insistence. "My Flagship, the Algol, is 
maneuvered into a fast orbit behind inert 
detector screens. About ninety miles out. 
I've just set course to intercept her before 
we hit dayside." 

In reply the girl bent past his shoulder 
toward the luminous figures which floated 
in the dial of the computer, announcing 
the course. The delicate lines of her face 
were hard in the faint light. Again Glayne 
felt a twinge of uneasiness and it was not 
dispelled by the soft touch of her body 
against his. 

"What is your name?" he asked belatedly, trying to make out the features 
of her face in the dim light from the instrument panel. 

She chuckled in the darkness and he 
fancied he heard a note of triumph. "Lieutenant Niala Chodred," she said. "Espionage Bureau of Imperial Terra. At your 
service, Captain." 



OF Imperial Terra! The words fairly 
blazed in Glayne's consciousness. His 
hand shot like lightning for the Cardy in 
his arm-pit holster, then stopped in midmotion as he became aware of a hard, 
cylindrical object thrust into his ribs. It 
was her tiny Cardy blaster. 

Through the waves of chagrin and impotent fury that surged up within him, 
Glayne heard her say mockingly: 
"Guardian warriors are supposed to func 
tion like machines when on missions, aren't 
they, Captain? Since when are machines 
rattled by pretty girls?" 

The lines on Glayne's face deepened but 
he said nothing. Her taunting rebuke was 
well-deserved. He had certainly lacked the 
emotionless precision which was the 
Guardian ideal. But the mere fact that 
he had been caught napping was inconsequential beside the implications of her 
presence as a Terran agent. How much 
did Terra know? The question hammered urgently in Glayne's mind. 

Even as it flashed through his head, he 
heard her amused voice say: "In time of 
crisis, Captain Glayne, the Stellar 
Guardians invariably throw allies and 
friends to the dogs in order to gain time. 
This is common knowledge. So all we had 
to do was determine the direction of the 
Guardian move. We immediately thought 
of Lorle. And we even thought that you 
might be the man the Guardians would 
send, Glayne, because we have a complete 
file on your activities for the past ten years. 
We know that you have been on good terms 
with Delban brass since that successful exploring job you performed at Jorger Sun, 
five years ago." 

With growing horror, Glayne listened to 
her unfold the deepest Guardian secrets — 
derived by Terran Espionage through simple induction. What a fool he had been 
for trusting her even for a minute! Unless he could stop her, she could utterly 
destroy all Guardian hopes to overcome the 
Delbans. His great body tensed as he 
stared at her from the corner of his eye, 
watching for the slightest sign of inattention. 

"Glayne," she continued, in a hard, objective voice with no trace of amusement, 
"Imperial Terra is not itself adverse to a 



FLAME-JEWEL OF THE ANCIENTS 69 

they were all bent upon throwing one another to the dogs. Surely they were not so 
tactically poverty-stricken that they could 
not conceive of a better plot which would 
not demand such a tremendous sacrifice of 
human life. 



policy of throwing someone to the dogs in 
order to gain time. But we want to give 
the dogs someone who can put up a fight. 
Poor Lorle would not be much of a match 
ior Gort Bro-Doral and she wouldn't gain 
us much time. But the Stellar Guardians 
would. In fact, the Stellar Guardians themselves will commit the overt act — with a 
little help." 

The Guardian Captain was stunned at 
the very audacity of her plan. He had 
to admit that its logic was undeniable. 
But how could she possibly seek to accomplish such an incredible feat as forcing the 
Guardians into a suicidal attack upon the 
Delbans? Unless. . . . 

Then his worst suspicions were realized 
as she said : "The Ganser mind-conditioning treatments will not harm your essential■ego, Captain Glayne. But, if you struggle 
against them, your mind will be shattered 
and you will be left an idiot when the effects 
wear off." 

A cold thrill of fear caressed Glayne's 
spine as he heard her words. The brutal, 
tearing fingers of the horrible mind-conditioner devised by the Delban Espionage 
Chief, Hoteh Ganser, would change his 
goals and values in the space of only a 
few hours. What seemed to him irrational 
now would be the height of reason after 
his conditioning. As the ramifications of 
Imperial Terra's plot came clear to him, 
Glayne realized with increasing urgency 
that he simply had to overcome the girl. 
"You may be sure that your attack on 
Sterle II will not be in vain," came the 
girl's brittle tones. "Admiral Bardled will 
station units of the Imperial Terran Fleet 
in hyper-space with the purpose of cracking the wave length of the broadcast power 
and locating its source. 

"Our plan is much cleaner and nobler 
than yours, is it not, Captain Glayne? You 
Stellar Guardians are all hard, ruthless 
fighters. You can take care of yourselves. 
But poor little Lorle wouldn't have a 
chance. Don't you agree, Captain? Don't 
you find it heroic to sacrifice yourself to 
the Delban dog pack to gain time for the 
rest of the galaxy?" 

Glayne ignored the mockery in her voice. 
A sudden wave of bitter anger swept over 
him at the presumptuous manner in which 



SUDDENLY, almost without warning, 
the tiny spark of rebellion within him 
blazed up in hot determination. To hell 
with Garstow and the Stellar Guardian 
Policy Organ. To hell with Admiral 
Bardled and the Terran fleet. To hell 
with everyone. The vague suggestion of 
a plan was forming in the recesses of his 
mind, breath-taking in its audacity and possibly, just possibly workable. 

But what of the girl? To think about 
overpowering her was one thing; actually doing it was another. She had already killed one Guardian earlier this evening, he presumed. She would not hesitate 
to kill another. That meant that he would 
have to meet cunning with cunning. 

"You don't mirid if I smoke one last 
cigar while I am still in control of my essential-ego, do you?" he asked, trying to 
match her mocking, satirical mood. "I 
don't believe the Ganser-personality enjoys tobacco as much as the average Guardian Captain." 

She alerted instantly, but the Cardy didn't 
waver the least fraction of an inch. "You 
are not the average Guardian Captain," 
she said in a strange, low voice. "But go 
ahead and smoke." 

Fleetingly Glayne wondered what she had 
meant, then he let the thought flicker away 
as he concentrated on his cigar. He reached 
for the radio-active on the instrument panel, 
flicking it so that its coal gleamed into 
gradual dull red life. She was watching 
him like a hawk, he knew, and smiled inwardly. The closer the better. Idly he 
began to hum a snatch of melody, a curious 
thing arranged in minors. It was peculiarly suited to his unsteady bass. He waved 
the radio-active in his hand in slow, sweeping circles in time to his humming. 

Smoothly he ignited his cigar, puffing 
the semi-narcotic smoke in thick clouds. 
He hummed louder, his voice pushing the 
deep, wailing dirge into the cabin. It acted 
like a drug, throwing everything into slow 



70 



PLANET STORIES 



time. It numbed the sensibilities and dulled 
acute perceptions. 

Ever so gently and smoothly Giayne 
turned his head and glanced at the girl. 
His scheme had worked. Her eyes automatically followed the circles he described 
with the radio-active in his hand. She 
was lulled into a near-hypnotic condition. 
In a single jump, Giayne seized the hand 
in which she held the Cardy gun. She 
reacted instantly, but not quite fast enough 
to wrest the weapon from his hand. Like 
a spring under great pressure she exploded 
into writhing, clawing, kicking, biting action. Her savage ferocity so startled 
Giayne that he nearly lost the weapon to 
her. As he sought to fend her off with 
one hand and throw the weapon away with 
the other, he felt her nails sink agonizingly 
into die side of his face. Gasping, he finally 
got rid of the weapon, then drew back 
his fist and slugged her with a short, jabbing punch. 

Panting, he recovered from the struggle. Suddenly he became aware of the 
peculiar angle of flight of the air-jet. It 
was shrieking down on its stubby fins toward the planet's surface. Somehow the 
Terran girl had kicked off the robot control. As he righted the craft and reoriented the course, he became aware of the 
girl's brooding eyes on him. 

"You are very clever, Captain Giayne/' 
she said. "Perhaps one might even say 
courageous. A heavy planet man like yourself should not risk himself with such reckless bravery in a physical struggle with 
a small planet individual." 

Giayne was stung by her rebuke, but he 
was even more startled at her bitterness. 
She was an espionage agent and she knew 
the risks and hazards involved. Certainly 
she was not whining at her defeat. 

"How do you propose to fake the overt 
act, Captain ?" she continued in a light, 
conversational tone. 

Giayne was grimly aware of the accusation in her words but he said nothing. 
She had a right to be bitter, he realized. 
Ironically, she was going to get her way 
after all, though she didn't know it yet. 
He grinned mirthlessly at her, the cigar 
clenched between his teeth. 

She was beautiful, but especiallv so in 



the resentment that was mirrored in her 
features. Giayne was suddenly very sorry 
that she had killed the Guardian agent he 
was supposed to meet. Otherwise he would 
^ave liked very much to have known her. 



IV 



THE NINE - HUNDRED - FOOT 
bulk of the Stellar class cruiser Algol 
loomed hugely over the little air- jet as 
Giayne maneuvered it into the gaping reception maw in the cruiser's belly. The 
craft's slight lurch as it came to rest just 
inside the lock awoke the Terran girl who 
had fallen asleep. 

Giayne sighed, glancing at her. She 
stared back at him coolly. He shook his 
head and said, "That green outfit of yours 
will just have to go, Lieutenant Chodred. 
Crew's morale, you know." 

Her eyes widened in sudden dismay. 
"But ... but surely you don't want me 
to—" 

He grinned. "You will have to wear 
a crew jumper." Glancing again at her 
graceful figure, he made a mental note: 
it would have to be an over-size jumper—* 
several sizes over. 

Stiffly they climbed from the little airjet and propelled themselves weightlessly 
to the elevator. Seconds later its door slid 
open and they were on the navigation 
bridge. Giayne took the girl's arm and escorted her around the bulking computers 
and auxiliary boards to the Captain's Station. 

Graysen, the grizzled old Executive Officer, snapped to attention and delivered 
a brisk salute. Giayne acknowledged it 
absently, his attention absorbed primarily 
in a hasty inspection of the bridge. Then 
he became aware of the intent stares of 
Graysen and the other officers. Those 
who were not gawking at Niala Chodred 
were staring hard at his cheek, obviously 
striving not to laugh. 

Puzzled, Giayne felt his cheek, then 
glanced at his hand. There was blood on 
it. He suddenly recalled the two long red 
welts inflicted by the Terran agent's fingernails and realized that his officers were 
drawing the obvious inferences. Abruptly 
he was stung with chagrin and pictured the 



FLAME-JEWEL OF THE ANCIENTS 



71 



juicy tidbit of gossip which he had just 
supplied gunroom scuttlebutt throughout 
the Guardian Fleet. Exasperated at his 
-own lack of foresight, he stared back at 
his officers, browbeating them into submission with his stony gaze. 

"Morning, Captain/' drawled Gray sen, 
breaking the embarrassed silence. 

"Good morning, Commander," returned 
Glayne. "Stoke her up. Set an orbit for 
Sterle II. Incidentally, this is Lieutenant 
Niala Chodred of Imperial Terran Espionage. I met her instead of our own 
agent. He had an unfortunate accident 
with a Cardy gun — I'm told." 

Glayne glanced significantly at the girl. 
Graysen nodded understanding^ and raised 
a quizzical eyebrow in Niala's direction. 
She looked from one to the other, mystified. 

Then sudden understanding registered 
on her features. "Glayne!" she cried in 
a horrified tone, "I didn't kill him! Terran Espionage had nothing to do with his 
death. He was murdered by the Delbans 
and we found out by bribing one of Kairn's 
men that he was supposed to make contact 
with an unknown Guardian big gun at the 
Yarga. We knew he was to meet you but 
the Delbans didn't. That's the only reason 
you escaped them, Captain Glayne. The 
Delbans murdered your contact agent but 
I had nothing to do with it You must 
believe me!" 

Glayne smiled synically at her and said, 
"Of course, Lieutenant Chodred, we believe you." He brusquely turned his back 
on her and said to Graysen, "You will have 
to move in with one of the other officers, 
Commander. Just temporarily, of course." 

"Aye, sir," replied Graysen. 

PRESENTLY the navigation bridge was 
filled with hurrying men. The orbit 
computers began to clatter noisily and somewhere within the depths of the ship a keening whine indicated that the huge driver 
atomics were being warmed. 

"What acceleration, Captain?" Graysen 
asked, appearing with a sheaf of orbit calculations. 

Glayne was on the point of saying three 
G's out of deference to Niala Chodred and 
her light planet birth. But he thrust her 
from his mind as he realized that speed 



was of the utmost importance. High acceleration meant speed and speed meant 
time saved. Time to carry out his bold 
scheme, time to locate and sabotage the 
mysterious Delban power broadcast, time 
to build the mesh antennae and energize 
the Stellar Guardian fleet . . . 

His face hardened grimly. "Five G's." 
he said shortly. 

Doubt flickered for an instant across 
Graysen's face as he glanced at the girl. 
Then he shrugged and turned away to 
comply with the order. 

Silently Glayne took Niala Chodred's arm 
and descended to the next deck. As the 
first traces of a floor appeared under their 
feet, he opened the door to Graysen's quarters. It was furnished with the Spartan 
simplicity of a typical warrior. Trophies 
and a few rather gruesome battle prints 
decorated the bulkheads. Niala examined 
the room curiously but preserved a hurt 
silence. 

He showed her the accleration hammocks 
and how to use the anti-thrust drugs in 
their small surettes. 

"If you need me," he said, "I will be in 
the cabin at the end of the corridor." 

She looked at him. with mock surprise. 
"What? No connecting door? Really, 
Captain, you've shattered all my girlish 
illusions about the Stellar Guardians." 

Glayne paused, his hand on the door 
stud. He turned around and said, "I want 
to wake up tomorrow without suffering an 
accident with a Cardy gun." He closed 
the door behind him. 

By the time he reached the navigation 
bridge again, the Algol had built up to 
five G's. To Glayne, accustomed to the 
heavy Dorleb planets, this was a little more 
than twice normal. 

Young Brodis, the ship's Intelligence 
Officer, approached him and saluted. "I 
beg your pardon, sir. Communications just 
handed these over to me — I thought you 
might be interested." He extended a sheaf 
of flimsies to Glayne. 

The big Guardian examined them, eyes 
narrowed. They were transcripts of an 
official Lorle news bulletin. Rapidly he 
read: 

Intelligence Chief Kairn announced tonight the death of Carting Clawdor, al





72 



PLANET STORIES 






legedly an espionage agent of the Stellar 
Guardians. It is believed that he was to 
contact another agent or agents at the 
Yarga night club this evening. Prior to 
his death by Cardy burns, Clawdor accused Delban agents. 

Intelligence Chief Kairn also revealed 
that a raid carried out on the Yarga night 
club failed to apprehend the Guardian 
agents. Just before their arrival a spectacular gun battle took place. Investigation 
is still proceeding, Kairn announced, indicating that . . . 

Silently Glayne handed the flimsies back 
to Brodis, chewing his lower lip. It was 
incredible that Kairn should reveal such 
confidential information. Obviously the 
Lorle Intelligence Chief was taking no 
chances on provoking an incident which 
the Delbans could twist into a pretext for 
war. But an even more important fact 
came clear to Glayne: Niala Chodred had 
not murdered Clawdor. He was very glad 
that she was innocent of the Guardian 
agent's death. Unconsciously he framed 
the apology he would make to her as he 
climbed with an effort into the Captain's 
Dome and lowered himself into its gimbal-slung shock seat. 

Far off to his left the globe of Lorle 
IV shrunk visibly. Again the mental picture of the Delban warships streaking over 
those short horizons in fast orbits flashed 
across his mind and he imagined them 
pouring their inconceivable torrents of energy into the unprotected cities. At least, 
he thought, he wouldn't be guilty of that 
crime. But what was the real chance of 
the wild scheme and its attendant insubordination which he had conceived in the 
air- jet? 

For a long time he pondered it. No 
matter how much he rationalized, it was 
still insubordination and it lay heavily on 
his mind. Suddenly he was shaky and 
he realized that he held the fate of the 
civilized galaxy in his hands. If he blundered, would that not be a greater crime 
than the mere sacrifice of Lorle? Glayne 
could not resolve the question and he was 
vaguely glad that decision was no longer 
in his hands and he could not turn back 
if he wanted to. 



THE Algol emerged from sub-space 
four hundred million kilometers below the plane of the ecliptic in the Sterle 
System. With her identity signals broadcasting at full power, she changed course, 
veering "upward" toward the second planet 
of Sterle's small brood of five. 

The faint beams of the distant red dwarf 
sun shed a sickly glow on the navigation 
bridge through the huge glassene ports. 
Shortly after her arrival the Algol was 
picked up by two fast and deadly Delban 
destroyers of the Planet class. Almost delicate in their unobtrusiveness, they slipped 
in on either side of the Algol and escorted 
her swiftly to the capital planet of the 
Delban Empire, Sterle II. 

"There's one consolation, anyway/* 
Graysen remarked to his chief as they 
stood before the glassene ports. "They 
don't seem to have fitted out their whole 
fleet with receiving antennae yet." 

Glayne nodded, flipping on the small 
auxiliary battle screen at his side. Expertly he manipulated the viewer until one 
of the rakish Delban warships ballooned 
up mightily on its plate. The tell-tale coppery mesh antenna was absent. 

"That is fortunate," Glayne grunted 
dourly. "But there is the possibility that 
these ships may be too small for the installation." 

The Delbans began to decelerate and the 
Algol's pilot hastily imitated them. Faintly 
Glayne made out the tiny red ball that 
was Sterle II. Uneasily Glayne realized 
that he had better go over the plan once 
more with Niala Chodred. Next to himself, the Terran girl's part was the most 
important. He grunted at Graysen to take 
over and descended to her quarters. He 
knocked twice perfunctorily and entered 
the room. 

Niala smiled up at him, pleased at his 
visit. "How much longer now, Captain ?* 

Glayne looked down at her, marveling 
at the failure of her absurdly huge jumper 
in concealing the long, smooth curves of 
her body. Her hair was a varied mass of 
copper and gold .vhich gleamed with a 
subtle display of half tones. In the cabin's 
fluorescents Glayne noted for the first time 
that she had once been the owner of a saddle of freckles across her nose. Now only 



FLAME-JEWEL OF THE ANCIENTS 



73 



one or two were left which contrasted deliciously with the smoothness of her face. 
Glayne felt a sudden desire to jet down on 
Sterle Capital like the legendary buccaneers 
and ransack the best dress shops to outfit 
her properly. 

"Well?" she said. 

"Huh?" said Glayne foolishly. Then he 
collected his wandering thoughts and replied, "Oh, yes. We're being escorted in 
now. We 11 be down in a couple of hours. 
I wanted to make a last minute check of the 
plan." 

"Ahh," she replied, stretching with devastating effect in the heavy jumper. "WeVe 
done this so many times, Captain. But 
really they're very entertaining." 

"Fm glad you like them," said Glayne 
dryly. "You should because the plan is 
substantially the one you would have had 
me carry out under a Ganser-personality." 

She colored, then regained control of her 
vascular motors and recited the plan in a 
sing-song monotone: "We jet down at 
Sterle Capital. You and I attend the informal reception. Commander Graysen remains with the Algol along with Lieutenant 
Harbin. But precisely at twenty-one hundred Standard, Harbin and twenty men 
leave the ship, ostensibly on liberty. At 
twenty-one fifteen, you and I attempt to 
maneuver Gort Bro-Doral and General 
Ganser together in conversation. At that 
moment Lieutenant Harbin will land on 
the roof of the palace, attacking the guards 
there. Then we will hustle the two Delbans into the elevator, take them to the 
roof, and escape with Harbin in the flier. 
In the meantime Graysen will have blasted 
off in the Algol; we will intercept him 
twenty miles over Topo Gulf." 

"Exactly," Glayne said. "Everything is 
going well so far. We've just received 
permission to land a liberty party so we 
don't have to worry about that anymore." 

He took some hand-drawn maps from the 
case in his hand. "Brodis and I made 
these from memory and a little inside information — one of the palace, one of the 
roof, and one of the grounds. The whole 
things depends upon whether they are using an old style one-way shield. If so, we 
can get out all right. Otherwise we're 
finished," 



She nodded and bent over the maps. 
Glayne bit the end off of a cigar, then lit 
it meticulously. He smiled quizzically at 
the girl. "How's your courage ?" he asked. 

Her wide green eyes looked up thoughtfully into his. "I've seen some shoe-string 
deals pulled before, but Captain, I'll have 
to award you the prize — never one as thin 
and short as this." 

Glayne felt a sudden fear and a sudden 
hunger as he looked at her. He could not 
bear the thought of failure — and the consequent fate of Niala Chodred. His cheek 
twitched nervously and he reached for her, 
gathering her into his powerful arms and 
drawing her face to his. Her breath was 
hot against his cheek and he could feel her 
heart pounding heavily against his chest. 
Willingly she responded to his kisses. 

"Here's to luck," he breathed. 

"And plenty of it," she replied. 



TRY AS HE MIGHT, GLAYNE 
could never accustom himself to these 
Sectors which lay far out on the edge of 
galaxy. Neighboring stars were hundreds 
of light years apart while the great belt of 
stars that was in the Main Galaxy revealed 
itself only as a faint haze twenty thousand 
light years distant. He could not shake off 
the loneliness that settled over him like a 
shroud, separating him from everything he 
knew. He was accustomed to the vast star 
clouds of Sagittarius; it was there he had 
spent the first ten years of his Guardianship. 

A dry and thirsty wind seemed to suck 
the moisture from his body as he waited 
by the after lock with Niala. It swept 
across the hard surface of the space-port 
and sang dolefully around the mass of the 
grounded Algol; it even seemed to characterize the Delbans themselves. A lonely 
people out on this forsaken edge of the 
galaxy, they hungered and thirsted after 
wealth and power. The Guardian sympathized with them to some extent, yet at 
the same time realized the awful threat to 
civilization they represented with the mysterious, titanic broadcast power at their 
disposal. 
Again Glayne felt inner qualms as he 



74 



PLANET STORIES 



considered the odds against them. Grimly 
he crushed them out and touched with almost superstitious reverence the tiny blaster at his hip — for ornamental purposes 
only. More confidently he hefted the weight 
of the heavy Cardy at his arm-pit. 

The small surf ace- jet which had set out 
for the Algol immediately after the mushrooming blasts of its landing jets subsided 
now drew up at the tiny waiting dock 
formed by the Algol's after lock. The lack 
of formality, Glayne knew, was as blatant 
an insult as the Delbans could manage. 
He smiled mirthlessly to himself. They 
couldn't please him more if they tried. The 
less pomp and ceremony attached to him, 
the more smoothly his plan would work. 

A single Delban emerged from the surface-jet, evidently a civilian judging from 
his dress. He was incredibly tall and thin 
and made Glayne very uncomfortable because he had to tilt his head back to get 
a good look at him. 

"Captain Glayne," began the emissary in 
a high, sighing nasal, "on behalf of His 
Imperial Excellency, Ruler of Ten Thousand Suns, Master of the Cosmos, and 
Supreme Overlord of the Delban Empire, 
Gort Bro-Doral, I humbly welcome you to 
Sterle II." He bowed very low. 

Glayne, nervously anticipating almost 
anything, could hardly restrain his laughter at this comic pomposity. It was quite 
out of place in the desolate, curiously-deserted space-port. He and Niala entered 
the rear compartment of the surface car 
and sunk back in the luxurious cushions. 
Their Delban guide tooled it with expert 
ease from the space-port and down a traffic 
artery toward the bright blob on the horizon that was Sterle Capital. 

In minutes, it seemed, they were pausing for the first guard check along the private road that led to the Bro's fabulous 
palace. Glayne had been there once before, five years ago. They passed two 
more guard checks. For a minute Glayne 
thought they were safely on the palace 
grounds, only to be disillusioned by another, and this time very close, guard check. 

The weapons' detector emitted a raucous 
buzz when they came into its field. Suspiciously the guards stared at them, their 
weapons leveled. Seeing the tiny toy at 



Glayne's hip, they smiled and passed them 
on with contemptuous nods. 

What a hell of a mess, he thought to 
himself. It was too late to back out. In 
another hour Harbin would be on his way 
to the palace — and right into a hive of 
trigger-happy guards. One faint consolation was their contempt which would render them more vulnerable to the surprise 
attack he planned. But on the whole it 
looked pretty grim. He suppressed his 
unhappy thoughts as the surf ace- jet drew 
up at last beneath a gigantic, arched entrance. 

Niala squeezed his hand bravely, casting 
a quick smile at him. 

Heartened by her display of courage, he 
climbed from the little jet car and followed 
the escorting Delban down a long series of 
luxuriously furnished corridors. Eventually they turned off into an enormous reception room brilliantly illuminated by 
chandeliers of priceless Tharna crystals. 
Tremendous tapestries hung along the wall, 
depicting ancient, pre-spaceship battle 
scenes. A score or so of guests stood about 
the huge room, all of them quite obviously 
in very advanced stages of drunkenness. 
Quite cheerfully they spilled drinks on the 
priceless jrik carpets or on the equally priceless marl Shanzi-wood furnishings. 

GLAYNE was puzzled by all the intoxication. As he speculated, it suddenly occurred to him that they were celebrating. Quite obviously they believed that 
they had won a victory of some sort in the 
diplomatic call by the Stellar Guardian 
Algol. Glayne had to agree that it was a 
logical conclusion and resolved to exploit 
their mistaken belief as far as possible. 

The first person to be presented to Glayne 
and Niala was General Hoteh Ganser. He 
was hopelessly drunk. Glayne knew the 
pop-eyed Delban Espionage Chief only by 
reputation; he was rather disappointed at 
the dried and withered figure he cut Nevertheless he was pleased to see the Delban 
in an intoxicated condition; he could be 
more easily handled. 

'The Bro will arrive presently," their 
guide informed them. Affairs of state 
prevented his presence at the moment. 
Meanwhile they were introduced to a num


FLAME-JEWEL OF THE ANCIENTS 



75 



ber of curious and intoxicated guests — highranking, Glayne gathered, from the monotonous repetition of titles. 

Then General Ganser was before them 
again, accompanied by another Delban in 
a brilliant uniform surmounted by a gaudy, 
flowing cape. He was aristocratic and condescending in his demeanor and a smile 
played about his eyes and dry lips. 

"May I present His Excellency, Gort 
Bro-Doral . . . Captain Glayne of the 
Stellar Guardians," introduced Ganser. His 
eyes were owlish with forced dignity. Gort 
Bro-Doral waved him away with a careless sweep of his arm and bowed politely 
to Glayne. 

"I think we met several years ago, Captain. Am I right ? But of course. Won't 
you and your . . .. er . . . lady have a 
drink?" 

Glayne colored angrily. Yes, they would 
have a drink. He glanced casually at his 
wrist-chromo. Twenty minutes . . .just 
twenty minutes before Harbin would be 
down on the roof. 

He sipped slowly at the huge cup of 
horse which the Bro had personally ladled 
out for him, letting its blue-green smoothness ease his parched throat and his nervousness. Niala, at his sign, slipped away 
and was immediately surrounded by a crowd 
of the outlanders, General Ganser at the 
head. They knew a good thing when they 
saw it, Glayne reflected wryly. 

Gort Bro-Doral eyed him with amusement across the mammoth horse bowl. 
"Now really, Captain, why did you come 
here? Surely not to inform us of the decision of your sacred Policy Organ?" The 
Ruler of Ten Thousand Suns emitted an 
odd, explosive noise that corresponded to 
laughter. 

To the Delban leader's question Glayne 
replied cautiously, "The Guardians have 
landed on their feet in every major crisis 
for the last thousand years. Perhaps we 
want to land feet-first this time." 

"That is quite understandable, Captain," 
replied Gort Bro-Doral, cautious in his turn. 

"When one side in a battle has unlimited strength," Glayne continued, "the wise 
man has no difficulty in deciding whom he 
will support. That is similar to our own 
position, Your Excellency." 



Again Bro-Doral produced his strange, 
whinnying laugh. "Really, Captain, you 
amaze me. The future Delban Empire cannot tolerate such things as mercenary armies and space fleets — nor do we need such 
organizations to win our battles now. But, 
if you could bring yourself to the point 
of forgetting your traditions and other related paraphernalia of which you are so 
fond, then there is a possibility that you 
might be absorbed into the Delban Space 
Navy. Of course, you would have to submit to our commands — but that's understandable . . ." 

Glayne exulted inwardly. The Bro simply saw them begging for a crumb of the 
spoils — he enjoyed his power to humiliate 
the Stellar Guardians. But what he didn't 
see, contrary to the old adage, was going 
to trim his scrawny neck. Where were 
Niala and Ganser ? A minute to go ! 

"Your conditions are rather harsh, Your 
Excellency," he said, looking around for 
Niala. "But perhaps tomorrow. . . ?" 

"Yes. Tomorrow by all means, Captain. And it will be a formal occasion this 
time." Again Bro-Doral produced his explosive laugh, glancing obliquely at Glayne 
from beneath lowered eyelids. Amusement 
at the Guardian's plight bubbled in the 
depths of his otherwise fathomless black 
eyes. 

A SUDDEN series of shocks made the 
floor shudder and Glayne's heart 
jumped to his throat. Harbin had struck ! 
Out of the corner of his eye he perceived 
Niala thrusting a big, black Cardy into 
Ganser's back, concealing it beneath his 
cape. Glayne drew his own and thrust it 
into Bro-Doral's ribs. 

"Keep laughing, damn you !" Glayne instructed. "Walk to the roof elevator — casually." Glayne's eyes flickered rapidly 
about the room. Niala was right behind 
him with the staggering and nonplussed 
General Ganser. He thrust his weapon into 
the fold of his jumper before it could be 
seen. Repeated tremors shook the floor — 
Harbin must be digging them out with a 
secondary Kellander, he thought fleetingly. 

"You must be insane !" choked the Master of the Cosmos. "The roof guards — 
the palace guards and my own personal men 



76 



PLANET STORIES 



will blast you down before you can set a 
foot outside this room !" 

"Just — keep — laughing !" Glayne said, 
emphasizing every word. One or two of 
the guests looked at them curiously as they 
approached the massive doors, then turned 
away indifferently. The trembling had 
ceased. That meant that Harbin had cleared 
away the immediate defenses — but Glayne 
knew it would be a race with the reinforcements. 

The doors were opened before them by 
attendants — slowly and with agonizing dignity. Two hawk-eyed Delban guards 
glanced at them sharply as they entered 
the corridor that led to the Bro's private 
apartment and the crucial fifth level roof 
elevator. Ever so slowly they moved down 
the corridor. It was a snail's pace to 
Glayne. Gort Bro-Doral laughed — or 
gasped in his sickly, explosive manner. He 
gestured. He spoke to Glayne, waving his 
arms in a deprecating manner. And all the 
while the Guardian looked innocently into 
the Delban's tormented features, his hand 
clinging wetly to the Cardy in the folds of 
his jumper. 

They met no more guards in the corridor; evidently the rest of them had hastened to the roof. But the first two were 
still eyeing them. Glayne could feel their 
stares burning into his back. Twenty feet 
separated them from the waiting elevator 
... fifteen . . . ten. Niala had drawn abreast 
with General Ganser; the sick, the pale, 
the fuzzy-minded Intelligence Chief whose 
cunning was known throughout the Galaxy. 

There was a sudden commotion behind 
them. Glayne cast a glance over his shoulder and saw the corridor rapidly filling with 
uniformed and heavily-armed Delbans. 
They commanded him to stop ; he smiled 
back. They brandished their weapons; he 
waved back gaily, herding the prisoners 
into the open elevator. They rushed after 
him ; he drew his Cardy gun, crouched, and 
fired with murderous effect. Then he 
lunged into the elevator and jabbed the 
roof stud. 

Swiftly it rose. Glayne turned to the 
two Delbans. The Ruler of Ten Thousand 
Suns was in a blue funk but General Ganser had pulled himself together a bit. His 
heavily-veined, crimson eyes blazed furi


ously at the kidnapers. 

"Be careful with the General," Glayne 
warned. "He is dangerous when sober." 

She managed a weak smile and thereby 
jumped another ten points in Glayne's 
esteem. The elevator sighed to a stop and 
the heavy door slid open, letting the dry 
wind pluck at them. Glayne turned his blaster on the controls, fusing them into tangled 
slag. Then he crept to the open door, 
crouched, and surveyed the palace roof in 
the pale, rosy illumination shed by one of 
Sterle's just-risen moons. 

On his left, not a hundred yards away, 
lay the flier from the Algol. Three gunners 
from the crew were operating a portable 
Kellander, firing along the edge of the 
anti-energy shield which had been generated from the flier to prevent other Delban 
roof emplacements from destroying the little assault force. The rest of the attacking 
group manned Delban energy projectors 
that were still in operating condition, sending a heavy fire into possible concentration 
points for an enemy counter-attack. Bodies 
— mostly Delban — sprawled everywhere. 

"We'll have to run for it," Glayne said. 
"They've erected an anti-shield between 
us and the flier. Once we gain that, we're 
safe." 

Niala nodded and prodded the two prisoners out of the elevator. Bending low, they 
ran diagonally across the roof toward the 
shimmering ovoid that was the anti-shield. 
They had not gone more than forty steps 
before a counter-attacking wave of Delban 
palace guards suddenly appeared on their 
right. Cursing, Glayne doubled about and 
increased his pace in order not to be cut off. 
"Glayne ! Slow down . . . I can't keep up," 
the girl panted. 

The Guardian glanced anxiously back 
at her just in time to be struck full force 
by General Ganser's flying body. They 
went down together in a wild tangle of 
thrashing arms and legs. The Delban, in 
spite of his dissipation, was tough and 
wiry; his long fingers sought Glayne's 
throat and clung to it with a vise-like grip. 
In vain the Guardian battered his body 
with sledge-hammer blows of his fists. 
Somewhere he had lost his gun. A black 
film threatened to engulf his consciousness 
as he struggled against the strangling grip 



FLAME-JEWEL OF THE ANCIENTS 



77 



of General Ganser. Vaguely he felt the 
roof on which he lay tremble from the impact of the energy beams that smashed 
into it. 

From far away he heard Niala scream. 
It was a bitter spur to his flagging strength. 
Summoning every last reserve, he tore 
Ganser's clutching hands from his throat 
and flung him down to the roof. Not done 
yet, the Delban snatched up Glayne's weapon which had fallen in the first seconds 
of the combat and lifted it to fire. Furiously Glayne launched his booted foot at 
Ganser in a savage kick. Bones crunched 
as it caught him full in the face and the 
impact sent him spinning. 

Glayne scooped up the Cardy gun and 
searched desperately for Niala. The Delban palace guard continued to storm the 
little Guardian stronghold, but the fire of 
the defenders took horrible effect on their 
ranks. In the darkness he saw Niala's 
crumpled form on the roof. And almost 
immediately afterwards he saw Gort BroDoral fleeing to the safety of his attacking 
soldiers. Holding his breath, Glayne tried 
a long range shot. But it was to no avail. 
The Supreme Overlord had made good his 
escape. 

ANXIOUSLY Glayne bent over the 
girl who was just beginning to stir. 
There was a nasty welt on her forehead. 

"I'm all right/' she gasped, rising to her 
feet. "Where's Bro-Doral? Did he get 
away ?" 

Glayne nodded grimly. "Yes, but never 
mind. We've got this one. Hurry !" 

Grunting, he swung Ganser's supine 
form to his shoulder and ran panting to the 
edge of the anti-shield. He halted a pace 
before the shimmering field and pulled a 
dark-colored disc from his pocket. Set beforehand to the shield frequency that Harbin would use, its purpose was to nullify 
a small section long enough for them to 
slip through. 

Hastily his fingers flipped the trigger 
and it began to vibrate furiously in his 
hand. Instantly an irregular opening flickered in the lethal shimmer of the shield. 
Glayne shoved the girl through, then darted 
after her with Ganser over his shoulder. 

Harbin waved joyously at them from the 



flier turret, his youthful face wreathed in 
smiles. "We can't hold them much longer," 
he shouted. "They're nullifying the shield 
with field scramblers. Hurry!" 

Right behind Glayne as he steered Niala 
through the lock and leaped in behind her 
came the portable Kellander crew, still firing as they backed the gun into the flier. 
With a clang the locks slammed shut and 
the flier's driver engines thundered. With 
a single motion of his arm, Harbin released 
the anti-shield and fed the pent-up driver 
power to the jets. With a tremendous heave 
that crushed Glayne back rigidly in his seat 
the flier blasted up from the palace roof. 

Harbin flung the flier around in a screaming turn and thundered low over the vast 
forest preserves that surrounded the palace. The tall, scraggly trees seemed to brush 
against the ship's stubby fins as Harbin 
sought to evade enemy pursuit. Grunting 
with effort, Glayne clambered up to the 
nose of the craft and sank back into a 
shock seat beside the pilot. 

Grimly the Guardian Captain peered 
ahead at the huge, featureless ovoid of 
grey which was fast rushing down upon 
them. It was the palace defense shield. If 
it was the new type, then they were licked 
because nothing could get in or out. But 
the two-way shields were dangerous and 
unnecessary as protection for a natural 
siege position like Gort Bro-Doral's palace. Hence Glayne had concluded that the 
Delbans would keep their old style shield. 

Or had he made a mistake in his reasoning? Glayne tensed unconsciously as the 
tiny flier flashed toward the grey ovoid. It 
was all or nothing. And suddenly the flier 
slashed through it like so much paper. 

Glayne suppressed a sigh of relief at the 
vindication of his logic. Now the flier was 
hurtling over Sterle Capital. Harbin, in 
an effort to avoid enemy detectors, was almost flying down the very streets. Their 
wild gamble almost looked as if it would 
pay off. Glayne hoped fervently that Graysen had managed to evade the two Delban 
escort destroyers that had accompanied 
them to the ^pace-port. The Algol would 
be a sitting duck over Topo Gulf until the 
flier arrived. 

But after that, Glayne thought grimly, 
they were clear. No matter how much 



78 



PLANET STORIES 



power the Delbans could receive from their 
astounding transmitter, they could not 
withstand a sustained ten G thrust like his 
crew of heavy planet men. Then he thought 
of Niala, accustomed to Terran Standard. 
He bit his lip. She would just have to take 
it; there was no other way. 

The flier had left Sterle Capital far behind and was climbing rapidly into the 
stratosphere. Evidently the surprise attack had disorganized the Delban patrols 
and drawn them like flies to the city. At 
any rate, not one was in sight as their flier 
streaked over Topo Gulf. 

Feverishly Harbin doubled the flier back 
and forth, searching the conic broadcast 
beam of the Algol, undetectable behind her 
inert screen. Finally a welcome series of 
dots and dashes crackled from the receiver 
and Harbin brought the flier around in a 
screaming turn to follow the directional 
beam. Cautiously he slowed the craft as the 
intensity of the signals increased. Suddenly 
the reception maw gaped at them out of 
grey nothingness — and the flier shuddered 
to a stop at the Algol's landing dock. 

Hastily Glayne jumped out of the flier 
and hurried to the navigation bridge, dropping Niala in her quarters along the way. 
Harbin would take General Ganser — the 
precious, indispensable Ganser — to Surgery 
for facial repairs. 

Graysen nodded at him, as taciturn as 
ever. "Your orbit, Captain ?" 
- "Anywhere," Glayne replied. "Anywhere, just so long as we get far enough 
out of this system to drop into sub-space." 
He rubbed his bristly chin for a moment, 
thinking. "Make it eight G's," he added. 

Graysen acknowledged and turned away. 
Almost immediately the inert screens were 
dropped and a floor began to build under 
Glayne's feet. By the time he had mounted 
to the Captain's Station, he was panting 
with effort. Automatically he jabbed an 
anti-thrust surette into his arm and felt 
his muscles relax instantaneously under 
the influence of the magic drug. 

The inter-ship communicator phones gurgled over his head for a couple of seconds, 
then Brodis' voice issued from the speaker: 
"The General is floating up to his ears in 
verchromynal, Captain. They're putting his 
face back together right now. Give the 



word and I'll go to work on him, thrust or 
no thrust." 

"No," Glayne replied. "We'll make subspace in a few hours. Then we'll have all 
the time we need to pump him. And, Lieutenant . . ." 

"Sir?" 

"Prepare the General's very own treatments for him." 

Brodis paused for an appreciable instant, 
then said, "Right, Captain," and cut off. 

Glayne watched the globe of Sterle II 
diminish in his battle screen with deep satisfaction. The first step in his plan had 
been carried off with miraculous good fortune. Now the most pressing necessity was 
speed. Once the Algol was sufficiently far 
from mass to drop into sub-space, the mysterious power source of the Delbans would 
be only a couple of hours distant at the 
most. With Ganser under control and acting as a safe conduct, Glayne saw success 
dangling just within his fingers. 

Yet deep within his nether-mind he felt 
a twinge of foreboding — as if he had forgotten some vital factor in his calculations. 
The dim awareness was almost on the 
threshold of prescience, but it was too indistinct for him to make out clearly. Uneasily he sought to ignore it but could not. 

VI 

TN SUB-SPACE TIME CREPT 
«* along in low gear. Glayne was aware of 
the fact that five hours in sub-space corresponded to about forty minutes in flat, 
normal space due to the difference in time 
rates. But time was time, whether fast or 
slow. General Hoteh Ganser also realized 
that time was passing; in fact, he exerted 
every effort to increase the length of time 
the Algol would have to remain in subspace. 

Sullenly he stared at Brodis and Glayne 
as they stood over him. There was a hint 
of amusement in the depths of his peculiar, 
crimson eyes. 

"You deserve congratulations in the success of your attack, Captain Glayne," he 
said mockingly. "A touch of bravado here, 
a bit too audacious there . . . but, all in 
all, quite well executed. His Excellency 
will remember it for a long time. In fact, 



FLAME-JEWEL OF THE ANCIENTS 



79 



your success now will add to his delight 
at witnessing your Vibra-Death later." 

Glayne suppressed an involuntary shudder. What a fertile imagination the Delban 
had! 

"Shut up!" snapped Brodi* with disgust in his voice. "You might as well make 
it easier for yourself, Ganser. Relax your 
mind barriers or we will smash them down 
and drag the information from you. Either 
way, we'll get it in the end I" 

Ganser sneered at the young Guardian. 
"I can loosen him up with some physical persuasion, Captain/' suggested Brodis 
hopefully. 

Ganser made an obscene remark which 
brought Brodis to his feet, enraged. The 
young officer was on the verge of clobbering him with a meaty fist, but Glayne 
stopped him. 

"Such an old veteran as the General is 
certain to have taken the precaution of 
having automatic anesthesia cultures introduced into his blood stream," he said. 
"He would like nothing better than to 
have you strike him because the sustained 
trauma of physical pain would trigger the 
anesthesia and make him unconscious for 
as long as forty-eight hours." 

Ganser made a mocking bow to Glayne. 
The Guardian Captain rubbed his cheek 
wearily. Nothing else but the Ganser conditioner probe now, he realized. He caught 
Brodis' eye and moved his head slightly in 
the direction of the gleaming mass of coils 
and the huge helmet which was the Ganser 
conditioner. 

Brodis nodded. With the aid of a couple 
of the technicians he set the helmet down 
carefully over the General's bald pate. 

"Have yon ever tried these wonderful 
treatments of yours, General?" Brodis inquired with clinical detachment. "They 
eliminate all your worries in instants, I understand. They can even make a new man 
of you, I'm told." 

Ganser remained obstinately silent as the 
massive helmet was adjusted about his head 
and clamped to the chair in which he was 
secured. In spite of himself Glayne admired the Delban's strength of will. He, if 
anyone, should know the mental anguish 
of the conditioner. But now it was dog eat 
dog, kill or be killed, and the devil take the 



hindmost. He nodded imperceptibly to 
Brodis who was waiting for the signal to 
begin. 

Hours passed and Glayne cursed each inexorable minute. He and Brodis and the 
four grey-faced technicians were wet with 
perspiration. Ganser drooped ,in the chair, 
but his crimson eyes still blazed with fanatical hatred. 

"Lord, what barriers!" whispered Brodis. He stared with fascination at the indomitable Delban. 

"What is the power source?" Glayne 
asked repeatedly, holding his face impassive through sheer force of will. "You 
want to help us, Guardian. Tell us about 
the broadcast power." 

The conditioned self was slowly beginning to take shape in Ganser's mind. It offered a new set of values, new goals and 
desires, uppermost of which was to give 
all possible aid to the Stellar Guardians. 
Thus the Ganser-personality they were so 
painstakingly superimposing upon the Delban was almost that of a Stellar Guardian. 
Gradually they saw it appear in the Delban's crimson eyes. 

"The Tane Jewel," he whispered. 
"Found it in space ... no bigger than a 
Terran grapefruit. Engineers . . . found 
way to drain its power potential . . . almost 
infinite." 

The Tane! The Flame-Jewel of the Elder Tane ! 

GLAYNE was stunned. He remembered the legends he had heard of 
the incredible Tane — weird creatures who 
had ruled the Galaxy long before the existence of protein life forms. He even recalled the tales of their fabulous Second 
Universe in which they had sought refuge 
in order to maintain an artificial stasis and 
escape extermination. Ever since the discovery of the Tane legends, scientists had 
speculated about the Second Universe and 
the titanic source of power it represented. 
And now it had been found by the Delban 
Empire and was at the disposal of Gort 
Bro-Doral. 

What had Ganser called it? A Jewel — 
and no larger than a grapefruit! Incredulously Glayne snapped a glance at one of 
the technicians who was watching the jerk





80 



PLANET STORIES 



ing movements of the He detector stylus on 
its graphed scroll. The man looked up and 
nodded, his mouth a tight line across his 
face. 

Glayne turned back to the Delban prisoner. "Where is the power broadcast from, 
Guardian ?" he asked urgently. 

"Tjadlinn," muttered Ganser, under the 
control of a pseudo-Guardian personality. 
"Jorger Sun . . . deep helio orbit. The 
planetless Jorger Sun — remember, we were 
commissioned to clear it of meteor drift. 
Later they built the Tjadlinn discoid 
around the Jewel . . ." 

Glayne smiled mirthlessly. So the Delbans had planted the Jewel right under 
their noses. Yet what more logical place! 
He reca led the job he had supervised there 
five years before. The Delbans were going 
to build a power research station in an 
orbit about the planetless sun — a practice 
common in many Sectors. 

Glayne tensed as he leaned toward Ganser to ask a third question. It was the crucial one and the others knew it. There was 
a hushed silence as Glayne asked : 

"What is the frequency of the Jewel 
power broadcast? What do you know 
about the design of the mesh receiving antennae? Tell us, Guardian. We need your 
help." 

Silence followed Glayne's question. It 
lengthened and became unbearable. 

At last : "The mesh antennae are manufactured at the secret Karkara Fleet Station on Scone III. It is defended by Jewelpowered Kellander batteries in addition to 
secondary auxiliary projectors. The approach code is not available to me. Neither 
is there information available on broadcast 
frequencies or antenna design." 

Glayne smashed his fist against his leg 
in violent disappointment. The facts were 
simply not available in Ganser's mind, so 
the pseudo-Guardian personality naturally 
failed to produce them. Again Glayne felt 
a twinge of respect for the Delban. If anyone knew the technical secrets of the Jewel 
broadcast, it should have been Ganser. But 
the Delban's wily cunning had thwarted 
them. He had carefully avoided all technical knowledge of the Jewel, anticipating an 
attempt to drain his mind. 
There was only one course open to him 



now. Attack Tjadlinn! He looked at his 
wrist-chrono. Twelve hours they had spent 
in this nether-space! It was inconceivable. 
Glayne swore to himself and thought furiously. 

According to Ganser, the mass of the 
Tjadlinn discoid was too slight to maintain 
an interstellar telephone; only message 
craft connected it with the rest of BroDoral's empire. That was a break, thought 
Glayne. In spite of the time they had spent 
in sub-space, they might still reach Jorger 
Sun before a warning came from Sterle II. 
With Ganser under their control and posing as a guide, they could bluff through 
the outer defenses of the Jewel station. 
Once inside, they would have to take the 
breaks as they came. 

His shoulders suddenly sagged at the 
appalling decision he would have to make. 
Once within the discoid, he would be cut 
off from outside communication and could 
not warn the fleet if anything went wrong. 
On the other hand, the fleet had to be 
standing by or there was no possible chance 
of success. Desperately he sought for alternatives to his scheme but none presented themselves. The Terran Combine's 
last chance rested within his own hands, 
he realized grimly. An immediate decision 
had to be made. But if he failed. . . . 

With sudden resolve he crushed out his 
burning doubts and turned to Brodis. 
"Take the fastest flier we have, dope 
yourself up with verchromynal, and go to 
the Stellar Guardian Communication Station at Zandrome. They generate enough 
power there to push a message over the 
interstellar telephone to Dorleb in thirtyfive minutes. Contact Admiral Garstow. 
Give him all the information we have and 
tell him that Scone III will be without 
Jewel power in forty-eight hours. Have 
him advise Admiral Bardled of the Terran Fleet that his aid is essential. Inform 
Garstow that every available fleet unit 
must be at Scone III in forty-eight hours. 
Hurry!" 

Brodis reached the door in one jump 
and was halfway down the corridor in 
another. Glayne watched him go, bleakly 
phrasing the rest of the message under 
his breath. Garstow, he thought, you will 
be slaughtered if there's one tiny slip on 






FLAME-JEWEL OF THE ANCIENTS 

my part. Ifs good you don't know about it. 
Then Glayne shrugged and went up to 
the navigation bridge. 



81 



JORGER SUN was barely visible 
through the glassene observation ports. 
But it blew up hugely in Glayne's auxiliary 
battle screen — a white dwarf of brilliant 
intensity and a temperature equal to that 
of the greatest white super-giants in the 
main galaxy. It was incredibly alone out 
on the furthest reaches of the vast, trailing 
arms of the galaxy. 

The Algol was decelerating as it flashed 
toward Jorger Sun. Somewhere behind 
it was the Tjadlinn discoid built around 
the fabulous Tane Jewel. It would look 
strange, Glayne knew, if they were detected in a maximum ten G deceleration 
thrust while on an official inspection tour 
—especially with their low-gravity guide, 
General Ganser, aboard. 

Commander Graysen approached, shifting his weight from one gnarled leg to 
the other in the space-man's shuffling gait. 
His leathery face widened in a rare grin 
as he reached Glayne. "I should have 
retired after that last cruise," he wheezed. 
"Here is Harbin for last minute instructions, Captain." 

Glayne nodded to the younger officer. 
"Harbin, you will take over when Commander Graysen and I leave with the 
landing party. If you are fired upon while 
we are inside the discoid, clear out fast. 
Take the Algol to Scone III as quickly 
as possible. Warn Admiral Garstow that 
my plan has failed and that it would be 
best to disperse all fleet units. Under no 
conditions are you to attempt battle. Do 
you understand?" 

"Aye, sir !" snapped the youngster. His 
face worked for an instant, but he suppressed his protest and brought himself 
under control. 

"Destination in sight, Captain Glayne," 
called the pilot over the communicator. 

"Cut deceleration to four G's." To Graysen: "How is Ganser?" 

"In excellent shape — even his face. 
According to Psych he is completely under 
control." 

Glayne turned back to his screen and 

6 — Planet — Spring 



stared at the expanding Tjadlinn discoid. 
Instinctively he looked for the slim and 
deadly Jewel-powered cruisers that would 
be waiting for them if a warning had 
reached Tjadlinn. But of course he saw 
nothing. If they were there, they would 
be masked by inert detector screens, waiting for him to approach so closely that 
no amount of frantic acceleration could 
tear him from their grasp. 

The discoid was a huge thing of beralloy, 
all of ten kilometers in diameter. About 
half-way from the center he could make 
out the landing dock as Ganser had indicated. He could also make out the evil 
snouts of Kellander projectors sprouting 
in clusters on Tjadlinn's metallic surface. 
Even as he watched, they wheeled about 
ominously, coming to bear on the decelerating Algol. Were they simply taking precautions, Glayne wondered, or were they 
cagily waiting for him to climb right down 
the barrels of their projectors? 

As he stood alone before the battle screen 
he suddenly felt a small hand touch his. 
He looked around. It was Niala Chodred, 
subdued and somewhat apprehensive. She 
looked up at him intently, forcing him 
to meet her eyes. 

"I believe you are planning to leave 
me behind in the ship when you land at 
Tjadlinn, aren't you?" 

Glayne winced at the slight accusation 
in her eyes. A sudden wave of nervous 
irritation welled up in him and he was 
on the verge of hurling a curse at her 
and driving her back to her quarters. But 
the tenderness in her eyes made him feel 
guilty because of his hasty mood and he 
relented. 

"Yes," he said. "I'm very sorry. The 
ship is unsafe enough as it is, but down 
there — " he gestured at the image of 
Tjadlinn in the screen, " — down there 
will be fighting and certainly many 
casualties." 

"But if I am present," she pointed out 

logically, "they will be much less likely 

to suspect you of hostile intentions." 

"How do you think I would feel if 

4 you were killed down there ?" Glayne asked, 

avoiding her eyes. 

"How do you think I would feel if you 
were?" she countered. 



82 



PLANET STORIES 



Glayne turned to her, about to point 
out another difficulty, then said nothing. 
Suddenly she was in his arms and he 
felt his senses swim at her touch. For a 
timeless instant he forgot everything but 
the warm, laughing, green-eyed Niala 
whom he held in his arms. 

VII 

TJADLINN WAS GIGANTIC. IT 
rotated on its central axis once every 
forty hours and completed a revolution 
about Jorger Sun once every eighty-five 
years. The orbit was like that of a comet ; 
at perihelion its velocity approached seventy miles per second. Now it had begun 
its journey away from the sun, swinging 
out into the infinite blackness of the lonely 
void. 

Grimly the Guardian Captain looked 
at his crewmen, sturdy big-planet men like 
himself. There were six of them.. Glayne 
wondered how many would be left when 
they returned — if they ever did return. 
He looked at the girl and wondered if 
she would return. She smiled at him as 
the artificial planetoid loomed hugely over 
their tiny landing launch. He felt no regret that she was along — his mind ignored 
all such feelings of that nature now. Instead it was concentrated to the highest 
degree of receptivity, sorting and classifying the sense impressions that came to it. 
The massive beralloy portals of the outer 
air-lock gaped open at them and the launch 
jetted inside. Then they closed with a 
thunderous clang and the inner doors slid 
open in an oddly obsequious fashion. They 
were much less ponderous than the outer 
doors, Glayne noted. A moment later the 
launch came to rest and General Hoteh 
Ganser, Chief of Delban Intelligence, 
stalked out of the cabin followed by representatives of the Stellar Guardians, now 
allied with the Delban Empire. 

There was a group of high-ranking 
Delban Army and Fleet officers awaiting 
them as they stepped from the launch. 
They bowed ceremoniously to Ganesr, then 
to Glayne and his party as they were 
introduced. The Guardian smiled, he bowed, 
he clicked his heels solemnly — but all the 
time his hand was casually resting inside 



of the fold of his jumper on the Cardy 
gun there. 

The only name Gayne remembered was 
that of the commander of Tjadlinn discoid: 
Admiral Selzi-Narfid, Right Royal Protector of the Emperor's Hunting Preserves. 
But he was not notable because of his 
absurd title; rather, it was the hint of 
amusement that Glayne fancied he saw 
flickering in the depths of his jet black 
eyes. 

It was Selzi-Narfid who turned to Ganser and said: "I'm sure you must be weary 
after your arduous journey, Your Excellency. Won't you and Captain Glayne and 
his party partake of some refreshment ?" 

Glayne frowned. That was not so good. 
They could not afford to waste time eating 
and drinking because the message craft 
might bring the warning from Sterle II 
at any minute. Yet how could they refuse? 

Evidently this same train of thought 
flashed through the conditioned intellect of 
General Ganser. For just an instant he 
paused before saying yes, they would be 
delighted. 

Again Selzi-Narfid bowed and this time 
Glayne was positive he saw mockery in 
the Tjadlinn commander's eye«. Following 
him, they entered a large mono-car poised 
on its single, gleaming span by gyros. It 
started with a jolt, picked up speed, and was 
presently bulleting down the tunnel, the 
walls a blur on either side. To Glayne it 
almost seemed as if they were moving 
down hill. 

"You will notice the gravity attraction increasing as we progress," began Selzi-Narfid. "That is because we are approaching 
the Jewel. It is considerably more comfortable in my quarters close to the center. 
On the periphery of the discoid one has 
almost no weight because of the distance 
from the Jewel. 

"No one knows the exact mass of the 
Tane Jewel. Probably around two hundred 
million tons, it is thought. Naturally it 
is not safe to approach too closely — the 
inverse square law, you know. Within a 
few meters the attraction is so tremendous 
that we have great difficulty in anchoring 
the power drain machinery. But you will 
see for yourself in the Jewel Chamber." 

The mono-car sighed to a halt and Selzi


FLAME-JEWEL OF 

Narfid ushered them graciously into a 
tapestried corridor. Glayne noticed that 
the gravity was just about Terran Standard. 
He also noticed that Selzi-Narfid, in spite 
of his flow of suave conversation, was worried. Suddenly a peculiar sensation of 
wrongncss flared up in Glayne's mind and 
he knew that his battle-trained, preternatural intuition was at work. His hand tightened on the Cardy and his eyes flickered 
everywhere but could discover nothing. 

At the wide entrance stage the Admiral 
held back, gesturing for Ganser, Glayne, 
and the others to precede him. The small 
hairs on the back of Glayne's neck arose as 
they entered the luxurious suite of the 
Tjadlinn commander. Something was definitely very wrong. 

THEN sick dismay scalded up in the 
pit of his stomach. He saw what was 
wrong. It was Gort Bro-Doral who faced 
them, a Cardy gun in his hand. 

Calmly the Delban Overlord fired at 
Ganser. The energy beam lashed into 
the pseudo-Guardian, making a big, ragged 
hole where his belly had been. 

Glayne could do nothing more than stare 
helplessly. He did not even think to resist 
when the room filled with armed Delbans 
who went about the job of disarming them 
in a very silent and efficient fashion. 

"Such a pity/' remarked Gort Bro-Doral, 
glancing down at Ganser's charred and 
crumpled body. "Hoteh was my right 
hand, but the poor wretch was just too 
thorough. His own mind conditioning device caught him in the end." He produced 
his sickly, explosive laugh and inclined his 
head to one of the armed Delbans. "Take 
it away," he murmured. 

"How did you get here so quickly ?" 
Glayne said, asking the question uppermost 
in his mind. He was bewildered to think 
of the incredible acceleration the low-gravity 
Delban must have undergone to have 
beaten the Guardian ship. 

"Another of the wonders of the glorious 
Tane Jewel," replied Bro-Doral with 
amused condescension. "Theoretically it 
was always possible to project material 
bodies into sub-space directly from planetary 
mass in the same way that the immaterial 
waves of an interstellar telephone message 



THE ANCIENTS 



83 



are cast directly into sub-space. Heretofore, however, there has never been sufficient power to form a shield around the 
material object strong enough to prevent 
its being completely crushed by the brutal 
space warp in the presence of mass. That 
difficulty vanishes when one has the unlimited power of the Tane Jewel at his 
disposal." 

Glayne understood. Ganser, who had 
meticulously avoided all technical knowledge, did not know this. Consequently 
they had walked straight into a trap. 
Glayne's shoulders sagged as he looked 
around, savouring the taste of defeat. 
Tough old Graysen stood at his side, impotently balling his fists. His carefully 
picked crewmen were behind him, arms 
above their heads. They looked grim and 
ready for anything. But Niala . . . 

Glayne fought down the painful lump 
in his throat. It made no difference. They 
had the Algol, too. So it mattered not at 
all whether she came along or stayed behind, 
he told himself. They had only one thing 
to look forward to — and that would be 
unpleasant. Surreptitiously he touched the 
massive ring on his hand. It contained a 
single blaster charge. Shakily he resolved 
to use it on Niala when it came to that. 

Bro-Doral whinnied. "I have your day 
planned for you, Captain," he said. "I 
have often been accused of lacking a sense 
of justice, but you will see for yourself 
that such a charge wrongs me. Your men 
will be executed as humanly as possible. 
You and the esteemed Graysen will be 
given a chance to witness the destruction of 
your ship. And then — " the Delban snickered, " — the Vibra-Death ! The girl . . . I'm 
not sure. Yes, it will take some thought. 
But you may be sure that it will be interesting." 

Bro-Doral's sadism was too much for 
Glayne. With a snarl of animal hatred he 
leaped at the Delban Overlord, brushing 
aside his Cardy gun and reaching for his 
throat. The force of his lunge carried them 
back a few steps and the Bro tripped. 
Glayne, blazing with blind rage, lifted his 
foot to crush the Bro like a worm. At 
that instant a cold beam lanced into his 
back. Its icy fingers played along his spine 
and paralyzed him with numbness. Help


84 



PLANET STORIES 



lessly his arms fell to his sides and two of 
the armed Delbans came up behind him, 
supporting him to prevent his falling. 

Gort Bro-Doral clambered up from the 
floor. His heavily-veined eyes were red 
with insane ferocity. He thrust his contorted face close to Glayne's own and said : 
" Guardian, you will now be extended 
another privilege. You will be permitted 
to see the girl writhing in the agonies of 
the Vibra-Death!" 

Bro-Doral turned to one of his men. 
"Take those crewmen away — execute 
them," he said. "Keep the girl here under 
guard while I show the two officers around." 
Glayne was horrified at the fruits of 
his unthinking attack on the Bro. It was 
almost as if he himself had pulled the 
switch which would subject Niala to the 
most infamous nerve torture ever devised. 
Dully he realized that he could not even 
lift his hand to administer a merciful death 
with the clean, fast energy beam of his 
ring. 

"The paralysis will wear off in a minute 
or two, Captain," observed Bro-Doral. He 
had completely regained his self-control. 
"Since you have exerted so much useless 
effort to destroy our Tane Jewel, I think 
you ought at least be permitted to see it. 
But after that — " he sighed expressively, 
" — after that, we will procrastinate no 
longer." 

Even before the effects of the cold beam 
had worn off completely, Bro-Doral nodded 
to his men and they took him by the arms 
and escorted him from the room. In despair, Glayne tried to jerk his head around 
to see the girl. For the briefest of instants he saw her smiling bravely at him. 
Then his view was cut off by the door 
as the guards maneuvered his still halfparalyzed frame around it. 

In a couple of moments Glayne was 
able to move under his own power. He 
turned to find Graysen staring anxiously 
at him, alert for the slightest command. 
Glayne nodded imperceptibly and examined 
the guards. There were six of them. He 
noticed wryly that they held cold-beam 
weapons in their long-fingered fists while 
the ones that really produced the fatal 
damage— the Cardys— hung in holsters at 
their sides. Trust them not to risk killing 



their prisoners when so many more delightful methods presented themselves, he 
thought bitterly. 

A S HE and Graysen were led side•**• by-side down a maze of corridors, 
their weight gradually increased. Along 
with it was the sensation of going down 
hill. Glayne's mind operated rapidly and 
with cold precision but the Delbans showed 
not the slightest weakness. Not even the 
increase in gravity seemed to annoy them. 
Nevertheless, Glayne resolved, he would 
risk everything on a sudden attack when 
they got as close to the Jewel as possible. 
There the conditions would be ideal for 
him, With eyes narrowed, he tried desperately to remember the turns they had 
taken through the winding corridors of 
the beralloy discoid. 

As they progressed Glayne saw the 
tough, all-metal walls were more heavily 
buttressed with the massive beralloy supports. Selzi-Narfid saw the direction of 
his glance and said, "Those were necessary when we maneuvered the Jewel into 
the center of the discoid. You have no 
idea of what such a tremendous mass in 
a body the size of the Jewel can do when 
it is not balanced." 

Glayne listened to the Admiral with 
just a part of his mind. His main attention was devoted to photographing 
mentally the warren of passages. Here 
and there he saw groups of Delban technicians, none of them armed. 
Good, thought Glayne. 
They reached the entrance stage of the 
Jewel Chamber. The beralloy walls here 
were nearly a meter thick. In single file 
the party crawled through the narrow 
opening that dilated ponderously in the 
entrance stage. Two very weary-looking 
guards snapped to attention as they passed, 
but almost immediately slumped back into 
their somnolent positions, exhausted by 
their abnormally increased weight. 
Better yet, thought Glayne. 
"This is the Jewel Chamber, Captain. 
It is the very heart of Tjadlinn," puffed 
Selzi-Narfid after he had crawled through 
the dilated entrance stage. 

Glayne stared about the vaulted room 
curiously. It was shaped like the inside 



TLAME-JEWEL OF THE ANCIENTS 



85 



of an oval, thick at the center but tapering 
off to nothing at the sides. They were 
standing on a balcony which was heavily 
buttressed and ran all the way around 
the Chamber past several other massive 
portals. In the exact center of the Chamber a kind of a nest was formed by the 
tremendously thick beralloy girders. Something burned there with a cold, golden 
brilliance that filtered through the interstices of the girders and etched them 
sharply in banded shadows about the heavy 
walls. 

An uncanny sensation possessed Glayne 
as he gazed at the Jewel. A vague dread 
passed over him and he found himself 
wondering if the Elder Tane Gods would 
emerge from their crypt and wreak hideous 
vengeance on mere mortals for disturbing 
their sleep. Uneasily he crushed the fantasy that was rioting up in his mind and 
determined to look for something more 
practical. 

He concentrated on the power drain 
machinery which hung in clusters from 
the massive girders. Obviously those 
mechanisms were far more delicate than 
their supports and could be sabotaged with 
comparatively little work. As he calculated he gradually became aware of BroDoral who was speaking: 

" — were remarkable creatures. As you 
know, Tane legends exist in every part 
of the known galaxy. They even possessed immortality — but they lost it for 
all practical purposes when they failed 
to adjust their bodies to the expanding 
universe. 

"While the universe expands, quanta 
emission frequencies remain constant. You 
are familiar, of course, with the shift in 
the wave length of the cadmium spectrum, 
taken over the centuries. Ages ago, emission frequencies were so long, relatively 
speaking, that energy liberation from protein organisms was impossible. That definitely rules out protein construction for 
the Tane — but just what they were composed of is unknown. At any rate, their 
bodies couldn't stand the shortened emission frequencies which overloaded their 
muscles. They exploded. Like a plague. 
Billions and billions of them must have 
died before they discovered the answer to 



the strange death that was striking among 
them. And billions more must have died 
before their marvelous science was able 
to build the Second Universe, as the legends call it." 

Gort Bro-Doral gestured at the Jewel 
which shed its cold, brilliant light about 
the Chamber. 

"They enclosed themselves in that tiny 
ovoid crypt you see there," he went on. 
That was countless ages ago. Somehow 
they had managed to construct shields 
capable of withstanding the spatial expansion of the universe. Who knows — 
they may still live in their static crypt? 
"As millions and millions of years passed, 
the Tane Jewel — the Second Universe, as 
the legends call it — slowly dwindled in size 
when considered in relation to our own 
universe. As it dwindled, its energy potential grew. Now its accumulated charge 
is so titanic that it defies conception. 

"Some day those beautiful engines of 
the Tane Gods would have run down and 
the shield would have collapsed. Then 
our own universe would have been destroyed. The sudden release of such a 
vast energy potential would have caused 
a concussion which would literally warp 
our flat space into the fourth-dimensional 
sub- space. 

"Now that can't happen. We are draining off that infinite potential and broadcasting it — flooding it — through sub-space 
to be received everywhere there is a Delban receiving antenna. The power is 
limitless. We Delbans will be the rulers 
of the universe just as the Tane Gods 
were of old. There is no limit to our 
power !" 

Bro-Doral's eyes blazed with a pure lust 
for power as he stared exultantly at the 
green brilliance of the Tane Jewel. His 
mouth was slack and he breathed heavily 
from the effort of his speech. SelziNarfied, too, was tired. Wearily he rested 
against the support rail of the balcony. 
The guards blinked their large pop-eyes 
from fatigue, shuffling from one foot to 
another to promote circulation. Most of 
them had placed their weapons in holsters 
as Bro-Doral talked. That is, all except 
one. He still held his weapon loosely in 
his fingers at his side. Slowly and gently 



86 PLANET 

Glayne poised, gathering his strength. 

"Isn't it beautiful, Glayne ?" mused the 
Delban Overlord, staring into the tiny 
radiant sun. "An artifact of the mightiest 
culture that ever existed. Now we will 
carry on in their footsteps. We will be 
the mightiest — " 

VIII 

THEN GLAYNE LEAPED. WITH 
one flailing fist he caught the Delban 
guard on his bony jaw and with the other 
he snatched the cold beam gun from his 
limp fingers. Whirling, he played it among 
the stupefied guards. Then old Grayson 
exploded into action, seizing Selzi-Narfld 
and hurling him bodily at Bro-Doral who 
was in the act of bringing up his Cardy 
gun. Three of the guards had collapsed 
and another was crumpling on his knees 
under Glayne's cold beam. The other two 
had crouched back in the shadows of 
the entrance portal, trying to bring their 
weapons to bear upon Glayne. 

Graysen whirled and lunged at them, 
smashing one down with a single blow. 
The last guard on his feet, surprised and 
dismayed by this attack from the rear, 
fled to the portal and tried to dilate it. 
But he was too late and sagged in a heap 
under Glayne's hand weapon. 

Scooping up two of the Cardy guns 
which had fallen to the balcony floor, 
Glayne shouted : "Pick up an energy gun, 
Graysen. Cut down the power drain machinery." 

Graysen reached for an energy gun in 
the holster of one of the paralyzed guards. 
He never even saw Gort Bro-Doral 
scramble to his feet and fire point blank. 
His head disappeared as the Delban's beam 
struck full force. Glayne fired back wildly 
but he was off balance and missed. Before 
he could collect himself to fire again, 
Bro-Doral had fled to another stage and 
darted through the dilation. 

Glayne whirled toward the Delbans. 
Selzi-Narfid had a broken neck and was 
obviously dead. The guards were all unconscious and would remain s© for a long 
time. 

Glayne turned back to the Jewel which 
cast its chill, gold light steadily through 



STORMES 

the interstices of the surrounding girders. 
Calmly he leveled the Cardy gun and 
fired at it. As if it were so much water, 
the deadly little energy beam washed off 
the Tane Jewel and fused with the beralloy 
supports. It was as he had expected. Given 
several hours, the little hand weapon might 
have made an impression on the incredibly 
tough beralloy but Glayne had no time 
to lose. 

As he had seen before, the power drain 
machinery which hung in clusters from 
the big beams and transmitted the energy 
through the heavy busbars looked to be 
the most fragile. Glayne wondered what 
would happen if he fired into them. There 
was only one way to find out. The muscles 
of his jaw hardened as he depressed the 
firing stud on the Cardy. 

Nothing happened. He let the beam 
of his energy gun play up and down the 
clusters of power drains, fusing them into 
slag. Now the thin, invisible rays of power 
which the drains extracted from the Jewel 
no longer existed since they had no place 
to go. But nothing happened. 

Then it occurred to him that nothing 
would happen in the Jewel Chamber itself. 
It needed no power for lights— the Jewel 
provided all the light needed. Heartened, 
Glayne blasted at every drain in reach, 
following the balcony around the Chamber. 
But even this method, he realized, would 
take too long. Gort Bro-Doral would soon 
have squads of men hurrying into the 
Chamber after him. Grimly he wished he 
had an energy bomb. With one of those 
he could finish the job in a few seconds. 
Suddenly he remembered an old Guardian trick. Hurriedly he began to tinker 
with one of the Cardy guns. By jamming 
a couple of the safety gadgets, it was 
possible to make the weapon fire out of 
phase. When the trigger stud was depressed, its tiny miatron coils would build 
up an unstable load in a couple of seconds 
then explode. Quickly he fixed the weapon 
to his satisfaction, then hurried on around 
the balcony to find a suitable opening in 
the girders through which to hurl the 
ersatz bomb. 

Halfway around, he met two panicstricken Delban technicians. The instant 
they saw him they turned tail and ran 



FLAME-JEWEL OF THE ANCIENTS 



87 



back through the portal. Obviously something must be happening, Glayne thought 
with grim satisfaction. Then he found a 
good spot, pressed the firing stud of the 
doctored Cardy gun, then flung it with 
all his strength into the remaining power 
drains. In an instant he had pivoted and 
lunged for the port of the entrance stage 
behind him, feeling in the shadow for its 
dilator stud. 

It refused to open! 
Obviously Glayne himself had sabotaged 
its power circuit. Now he was trapped in 
the Chamber and the ersatz bomb was 
about to explode. Tensely he crouched 
as far back in the recess of the port as 
he could and waited. With a terrific roar 
the bomb exploded in the confined Chamber, rupturing the membranes of his nose 
and crushing him violently against the port. 
Parts of the devastated power drains were 
hurled against the massive walls, then fell 
back to the Jewel. One of the heavy 
busbars had collapsed, ripping festoons of 
cables from the top of the Chamber which 
shorted violently against one another. 

Dazed, Glayne pulled himself to his feet. 
Fortunately he had broken no bones. But 
one of his ear drums was ruptured and his 
nose bled unremittingly. He had lost his 
other Cardy. Hurriedly he felt about, 
found it, and thrust it into the fold of 
his tattered jumper. 

He turned back to the port and found 
that the concussion had dilated it for him. 
Breathing heavily, he crawled through it 
into the inky blackness of the passages. 
On all sides he heard the sound of running footsteps. By touch he staggered 
into the blackness, realizing that he must 
keep going uphill, away from the Jewel's 
attraction. 

The exertion cleared his head a bit. 
He knew he was lost, but he hoped to 
be able to find his way back to SelziNarfid's quarters. There he would find 
Niala and be oriented with the rest of 
the discoid. 

Figures bumped into him in the blackness, hurrying to the scene of destruction. 
The Delbans were badly disorganized. 
Obviously they had not been prepared to 
cope with such devastation wreaked on 
their sacred Jewel. Not even to the extent 



of auxiliary power for lights, he thought 
as he panted up the black passages. 

EVEN as he thought about it, the lights 
began to flicker weakly in their fluorescent tubes, growing stronger with each 
passing second. Startled, Glayne crouched 
back in the shadow of a recess in the 
wall. That was Luck in all her perversity, 
he thought grimly. His hand sought the 
butt of the blaster in his jumper. Fortunately the lights did not wax as brightly 
as they had when the Jewel was still 
functioning, but that did not offer much 
consolation. He would be recognized instantly by the outline of his thick-chested 
body if he was seen in the corridor. 

He noticed that fewer Delbans were 
passing. He decided to chance it. Tightly 
grasping the gun in his jumper, he crept 
from his hiding place and ran on the 
balls of his feet, dodging and ducking into 
shadows every time one of the enemy 
passed. Once he was seen and pursued 
by a squad of Delban guards. Breathlessly he ran at full tilt through a crosscorridor, up a flight of high steps, and 
twisted into another of the endless passages of the discoid. 

The pull of the Jewel had become very 
slight. In fact it was much slighter than 
it had been in Selzi-Narfid's suite. Glayne 
pushed on, realizing that he was hopelessly lost. His only chance now was to 
find the mono-rail on which they had 
ridden from the landing dock to the Tj adlinn commander's suite. It occurred to 
him that even if he did find Niala, they 
might never escape Tjadlinn. And it was 
absolutely imperative that he make contact with Garstow at Scone III. The 
slightest delay on the part of the Stellar 
Guardian Admiral in attacking the Karkara Station might give the Delbans the 
precious time they needed to repair the 
damage he had effected. 

There were two entrance stages, one on 
either side, in the corridor through which 
he was hurrying. He tried one and found 
it was locked. He was more fortunate 
with the other. It creaked open slowly 
when he flipped the dilator stud. Tensely, 
hand on the Cardy gun in his jumper, 
he crept through the port 



88 



PLANET 



It was the landing dock! 

Glayne's heart jumped with delight as 
he crouched back in a shadow and examined the place. Not a hundred meters 
away was the launch which had brought 
his party from the Algol. His eyes drank 
it in avidly and a plan for escape formed 
rapidly in his mind. A message craft of 
some sort was preparing to leave, he saw. 
As soon as the inner lock door closed 
behind it, he would sma3h the launch 
through it and the air pressure would 
fling him out of the discoid. How very 
simple ! 

Then the impact of the realization that 
he would have to leave Niala Chodred 
behind struck him. He was stunned by 
its very violence. 

Leave Niala ? Abandon her to Gort BroDoral and his sadistic vengeance for the 
sabotage Glayne himself had performed? 
No! That was out of the question. But 
what of the Terran Combine? What did 
the life of Citizen Niala Chodred mean 
against the lives of the trillions who made 
up that Combine to which she had sworn 
allegiance ? Viewed in that light, it was 
obvious that the life of one person was 
a cheap price to pay for security of the 
Combine against the Tane Jewel. 

Glayne crouched in the shadow and 
buried his face in his hands. In an agony 
of indecision he prodded his weary mind 
to discover an alternative to the horrible 
dilemma. But he could find none. He 
would have to decide between Niala, the 
laughing, green-eyed Niala, and the ideal 
of human progress which he had sworn 
the Guardian Oath to protect. 

Dully he realized that the power of the 
abstract was too strong. He would forsake Niala. The pain redoubled itself as 
he made his decision but he set his face 
in a granite-mask against it. Unfortunately it was not so easy to quell the 
agony that burned within him. 

Grimly he stood up. He saw that the 
time had come for action. The message 
craft was slowly jetting down the cinder 
blastway toward the lock door. Glayne 
tensed for an instant, then raced for the 
launch, covering ten meters at a stride 
in the light gravity. Three Delban mechanics caught sight of him as he rounded 



STORIES 

the stubby fins and leaped for the lock. 
In mid-stride he whipped out his Cardy 
gun and brought them down in charred 
heaps. 

A guard squad saw him and fired. Their 
beams sang dangerously close, smashing 
into the beralloy side of the launch. They 
crunched down the blastway in pursuit 
as Glayne jumped through the open lock, 
slammed it shut, and darted to the controls. The atomic driver engine coughed 
and surged into life. He let it scream up 
beyond audibility, then fed power to the 
jets. The blast washed over the guards 
who were closest to the launch and the 
others fell back hastily before its searing 
heat. 

The inner lock of the entrance port 
had slid shut behind the message craft 
It was now or never, Glayne realized. He 
opened the atomic driver wide and the 
stubby launch shuddered for an instant, 
then lunged for the lock. The sudden 
thrust created constricting hands about 
Glayne's chest and he fought precariously 
on the edge of blacking out. For a brief 
instant Glayne was aware of the huge outer 
doors swinging shut before him— and then 
the air pressure struck them and flung 
the launch bodily through the narrow space 
left between them. 

The launch tumbled crazily end-overend until Glayne straightened it out and 
oriented himself with Tjadlinn and Jorger 
Sun. He had just sighted the tiny gleaming speck of the Algol a dozen kilometers 
distant when something struck the launch 
a terrific blow. Almost instantly the telltales indicated air was escaping. Dismayed, 
Glayne shot a glance over his shoulder 
at the receding discoid. He discovered 
that they were firing at him with the 
secondary Kellander batteries, using auxiliaries to power the miatrons. Feverishly 
he changed course, zig-zagging wildly 
away from the discoid. 

Due to over confidence, the Delbans 
had not destroyed the Algol immediately. 
They preferred to play cat and mouse. 
And now, with the titanic energies of the 
Jewel no longer available to them, they 
could not destroy the Algol 

The Kellander energy beams slashed 
dangerously close to the fleeing launch. 






FLAME-JEWEL OF THE ANCIENTS 



Not in salvoes but by ones and twos. 
That meant that their fire control was 
badly disorganized— and it was that fact 
which saved Glayne. Harbin had raised 
the Algol's anti-shield when the Delbans 
had commenced firing but he had not 
turned tail as Glayne had ordered, realizing 
that the launch was fleeing in his direction. 
Glayne flipped the stud of the shieldnullifier that was matched to the frequency 
of the Algol's anti-shield and darted the 
launch through it, braking with eye-searing 
blasts of the forward jets as the huge 
Reception Deck locks yawned open. With 
a heavy lurch, his battered craft came to 
rest inside the lip of the gaping outer doors. 



IX 



THE ALGOL'S OFFICERS 
formed a silent group beneath the 
huge glassene dome of the navigation 
bridge. They looked expectantly at Glayne 
as the elevator port dilated and he approached them, weary and unshaven, his 
face covered with blood. 

Ignoring their unspoken questions, 
Glayne said brusquely, glancing at the 
navigation chrono, "Lieutenant Harbin: 
Compute an orbit for Scone III. Get the 
ship under way immediately . . . drop 
into sub-space at three ten to the seventh 
kilos from Jorger Sun. Thrust — eight G's." 

He was about to turn on his heel when 
Harbin's hesitant voice stopped him. 

"Sir . . . what . . . what about Commander Graysen and the others?" 

Glayne stared at the youngster bleakly. 
"Graysen is dead," he said with a flat 
voice. "So is Ganser. And I presume 
that our escort has been executed." 

Harbin's youthful jaw tightened. "And 
Lieutenant Chodred?" 

The lines about Glayne's mouth deepened. He let his gaze travel over Harbin's 
troubled face and the impassive faces of 
the rest of the ship's officers. He saw 
accusation in their eyes along with resentment and veiled hostility. He knew what 
they were thinking. Why should he be 
the only one to return. Why had he 
abandoned the others? And now they 
« wanted to know what had happened to 
the girl. So he told them. 



89 

"She is still alive." Bitterly he wondered 
why Fate had designated her to be the 
only one left to face Gort Bro-DoraTs 
vengeance. He looked up again at the 
silent cluster of officers. "If your curiosity 
is satisfied, gentlemen, suppose we get on 
with the war?" 

"If Tjadlinn is without Jewel power," 
persisted Harbin stubbornly, "why can't 
we attack? We might be able to rescue 
Lieutenant Chodred. It's the least we could 
do—" 

"Follow my orders!" Glayne cut in 
savagely. He turned on his heel and 
mounted to his shock seat in the Captain's 
Station. Yes, he thought bitterly, they 
could attack TjacJJinn, incur heavy damage 
on the discoid — perhaps even accomplish 
a miraculous rescue of Niala. But weighed 
against that was the possibility that the 
Algol might be heavily damaged or destroyed by the highly potent secondary 
Kellanders of the discoid. Unless he got 
through to Garstow, the conservative 
Grand Admiral of the Stellar Guardians 
was likely to delay his attack on Karkara 
— and such a delay would be suicidal. 

Gradually a floor began to build under 
his feet and the Algol got under way. 
As the thrust increased, the discoid began 
to shrink in the distance. Glayne stared 
at its image grimly in the battle screen. 
He didn't say farewell because he knew 
he would be hack. He rubbed his bristly 
cheek. He saw success now. He felt it 
on the tips of his clutching fingers. But 
something else was beyond his grasp now 
— something that made success dry and 
unpalatable. He covered his eyes with 
his hand as the thought stabbed him : The 
laughing, green-eyed Niala. . . . 

THE Stellar Guardian fleet lay motionless across forty thousand kilometers of space when the Algol reached 
the rendezvous at Scone III. Admiral 
Garstow's anxious face formed rapidly in 
the featureless grey surface of Glayne's 
ship-to-ship communicator screen. 

"Give me a fast, verbal report on the 
Jewel, Glayne," ordered the Admiral. 

The Guardian Captain complied, rapidly 
sketching the main details of his sabotage 
and providing a rough outline of the Delban 



90 



PLANET STORIES 



defense of the discoid. 

When he finished, Garstow nodded 
thoughtfully. "Do you think it advisable 
to risk an immediate attack on the discoid 
on the chance that we can knock it out 
before they repair the power drains ?" 

Glayne frowned, then said, "No. It's too 
long a chance. They will mass their fleet 
at Tjadlinn immediately. Under normal 
circumstances we could lick them, but if 
they repair that Jewel faster than I expect, 
then we'll be sitting ducks." 

Garstow nodded again. "Lieutenant 
Brodis informed me of the plan you had 
in mind of attacking the Karkara Fleet 
Station on Scone III and thereby acquiring 
the Jewel power-receiving antennae. On 
the whole, I think that is the shrewder 
move. Since you've managed this show 
up to now, Captain, I think you might as 
well organize the attack." 

'Thank you, sir," Glayne replied. "I'll 
take my own cruiser division in first to 
clear away what little resistance they'll put 
up. That will be the simplest part about 
it. The real difficulty will come when we 
install the antennae. As Brodis probably 
told you, we were unable to get any technical information from General Ganser." 

Garstow rubbed his fleshy nose thoughtfully, then said, "It's in your hands, Captain," Then he cut out. 

Rapidly Glayne organized the attack, 
placing his own cruiser division at the 
point of the spearhead. Smoothly the 
Stellar Guardian striking force flashed 
down on Scone III. As Glayne had anticipated, their sudden assault was little more 
than an armed landing. The Delbans were 
caught completely off guard. They put 
up a fanatical resistance with the auxiliarypowered Kellander secondary batteries, but 
the superior weight of Glayne's miatron 
blasters soon crushed every last shred of 
opposition. 

As soon as the Algol had jetted down on 
the immense space-port of the Karkara 
Fleet Station, a group of technicians in 
addition to the landing party raced off 
to confiscate an antennae unit for the big 
ship. Glayne set up an operations unit in 
the glassene dome of the Algol to assign 
landing patterns to the other Guardian fleet 
units. The heaviest Cluster and Galactic 



class warships he assigned to fast orbits 
about Scone to defend the ships which had 
already landed. 

After he saw that landing operations were 
proceeding smoothly he descended to the 
engine room of the Algol to see how the 
installation of the antenna was progressing. 
Massive cables snaked across the deck in 
confusions, waiting to be hooked into the 
heavy buses which the technicians were 
jockeying into place. Outside on the hull, 
gangs of men were welding in the mesh 
antenna. Fuming, he looked at his wristchrono repeatedly. 

"How much longer?" he asked Harbin 
impatiently. 

"Thirty minutes at the most, sir," replied 
Harbin stiffly, refusing to meet Glayne's 
eyes. 

Glayne rubbed his bristly cheek thoughtfully as he turned away. The young officer was determined to give him the silent 
treatment along with the rest of the officers 
in his crew. Word would spread ; soon the 
whole fleet would hear of his cowardly negligence. He smiled thinly as he made his 
way back up to the navigation bridge. He 
had seen it happen before. There were 
just two ways to escape it. One was retirement. The other involved a Cardy gun 

placed at the temple 

The red light of his personal communicator was blinking intermittently when he 
regained the bridge. It was Garstow. 

"Glayne !" he barked abruptly, "Bardled 
is on his way in with the fleet of Imperial 
Terra. And a dozen other Sectors have 
massed their fleets and are on the way, too." 
"Excellent," said Glayne. "We're working faster now. We've put the Delban technicians to work and repaired the damage 
to their assembly lines. We ought to be 
able to handle a thousand ships an hour. 
How long before Bardled will arrive?" 
"Four hours . . . maybe six." 
"I'm lifting in a few minutes," Glayne 
said. "When Bardled arrives, install the 
units in his heavy ships first. Those tubs 
will smash the Tjadlinn anti-shield if anything will." 

Rapidly Glayne went on to sketch his 
plan of attack. When he finished, Garstow 
nodded ponderously. "Then we will subspace as soon as we pick up the power 



FLAME-JEWEE OF THE ANCIENTS 



91 



broadcast. A sound strategy, Captain. 
Good luck!" His face faded from the 
screen. 

THE FIRST of the big Cluster class 
battleships were easing down on vast 
fingers of flame when Harbin reported that 
the work of installation was complete. In 
quick succession the other cruisers of his 
division reported readiness and he gave 
the command to blast off. 

The Algol was almost two hundred million kilos below Scone System's plane of 
ecliptic when the hastily installed antenna 
unit began to pick up the first surges of 
power from the Tane Jewel. Cautiously the 
Algol's pilot experimented with it, accustoming himself to unlimited power at his 
finger tips. One by one, the ship's atomic 
drivers fell silent as the pilot gained confidence. 

"Raise the anti-shield, Lieutenant Harbin," Glayne said crisply over his inter-ship 
phone. "We'll sub-space right now." 

Harbin's image stared at him incredulously from the communicator screen for an 
instant but he fought down the words that 
trembled on his lips. 

"Aye, sir," he snapped. 

Glayne was grimly amused at his anxiety but said nothing to relieve it. They 
were dangerously close to mass, he knew, 
but if Gort Bro-Doral could blast into 
sub-space directly from Sterle II with a 
shield supported by Jewel power, then he 
ought to be able to get away with it at 
two hundred million kilos from mass. 

Briefly Glayne communicated his intent 
to the commanders of the thirty other 
cruisers in his division and their anti-shields 
began to build. At his curt command they 
dropped smoothly into sub-space, their 
shield generators heating up slightly as the 
sudden strain hit them. 

They plunged on through sub-space, 
building up to incredible velocities in that 
nether dimension where such commonplace 
things as mass and light did not exist. 
Glayne's mind worked rapidly, analyzing 
his plan of battle for any defects. Obviously the enemy would mass his fleet at the 
all-important Tjadlinn. If his calculations 
were correct, his cruiser division would 
pop into normal space right among them. 



If they struck fast enough, they could disorganize the Delbans sufficiently for Garstow and Bardled to get in among them with 
the heavy units of their fleets. And that, 
he knew, would be the end of the Delban 
Grand Fleet. 

The discoid was another matter. Paradoxically, it contained within it the very 
source of the power which they would use 
to destroy it. The only possible way the 
Delbans could deprive them of the Jewel 
power would be to turn off the non-directional broadcast entirely. That, however, 
would leave them open to an attack by the 
regular miatron batteries of the heavy 
Guardian and Terran battleships. They 
could not possibly hope to beat off such an 
attack with their Kellander secondaries. 
Hence, Glayne reasoned, they would keep 
up the power broadcast at all costs. 

Satisfied with his plan, Glayne let his 
mind relax and drift where it wanted. 
Abruptly it turned to thoughts of Niala 
Chodred and he winced at the pain which 
filled him. Grimly, he realized that if the 
silent treatment by his fellow officers failed 
to ruin him, the bitter acid of remorse which 
burned his soul would certainly accomplish 
the job. 



X 



ONE INSTANT THE FLEET OF 
the Delban Empire was assembling 
about the vital Tjadlinn discoid in an orderly fashion. An instant later all hell 
broke loose amid its massed ranks. 

Glayne's cruiser division popped out of 
sub-space at two hundred kilometers per 
second and flailed through the Delbans like 
a giant scythe. His eyes glued to the 
small battle screen in front of him, Glayne 
clipped off rapid commands over the shipto-ship communicator that kept him in 
touch with the rest of his group. 

Three Delban warships — one a battleship — had been caught with their shields 
down and were now exploding enthusiastically in nova-fashion. A dozen others 
had been heavily damaged by the slashing 
miatron beams as they vainly sought to 
lift their shields. 

The Algol screamed in protest as the pilot 
flung her around to bore in again. Her 



92 



PLANET STORIES 



armored hide seemed to crawl in squealing 
agony at the twenty G turn. Glayne panted, 
on the verge of blacking out. Dimly he 
glimpsed the strained features of the pilot 
wracked with spasms of coughing that 
flung lobs of blood and lung tissue against 
the terraced banks of instruments at his 
side. . . . 

Then they were among the Delbans 
again, slashing right and left with Kellander 
miatron beams. This time the Delbans were 
ready for them and replied with a vengeance. Torrents of energy smashed at the 
Algol's shield which shuddered like a live 
thing under the impact. Behind Glayne a 
knot of sweating gunnery officers rattled 
off firing data to waiting Kellander crews 
before the mammoth battle screen. Somewhere in the bowels of the ship the accumulators were screaming as they fed the Jewel 
energies from the antenna to the smoking 
banks of shield generators and the ravenous 
Kellander condensers. But dominating the 
ear-splitting crescendo of the Algol in full 
fighting stride was the continuous, ravening thunder of Kellander projectors as they 
flung their blasts at the Delban warships. 

Glayne saw that his division had scattered widely — but, at the same time, the 
disorganization of the Delbans was even 
more evident. Unaware that the sudden 
attack was a feint to draw them away 
from Tjadlinn, a dozen Delban fleet divisions abandoned the Jewel to join the fray. 

As the Guardian Captain scanned the 
screen, he saw that the tide was fast running in favor of the Delbans. The Anza 
was finished for the day. A flotilla of 
swift Delban destroyers had darted in with 
mines and torpedoes, one of which had 
gotten through her shield and exploded with 
a devastating energy concussion against her 
stern, sheering of! plates and jet tubes by 
it force. The Altor and Astrid were cornered by a dozen Delban Galactics and 
Clusters and their shields coruscated in 
brilliant hues as they trembled on the 
point of collapse. A third Guardian ship, 
the Aesir, blasted in to offer aid and even 
as Glayne watched, hurled her energies in 
a concerted salvo at a point just below the 
jets of one of the Delban Clusters. Its 
shield corruscated brilliantly, tottered, and 
suddenly it was strewing its guts, nova


fashion. Almost immediately the Aesir followed her example as a salvo of Galactic 
beams struck her amidships, rupturing her 
shield. A torpedo ripped into the bridge 
of the Astrid and she exploded in an eyesearing nova. The Altor managed to limp 
away in the confusion, her beralloy hide 
mangled and torn from a near miss. 

The Algol herself was in trouble. Two 
Delban Stellars were hurling torrents of 
energy at her shield, making it coruscate 
in a blaze of overloaded power foci. A 
pack of destroyers was circling hungrily, 
looking for a chance to dart in and plant 
their seeds of destruction. The pilot maneuvered desperately, but the overloaded 
power lines could not shunt sufficient power 
through the drivers to pull them out of 
their difficulty. 

Glayne swore, wondering where the rest 
of the fleet was. It couldn't go on much 
longer. The Akkad had novaed ; the Ashlar 
and Asgard had disappeared without leaving 
a trace. Only six of his original thirty were 
in fighting shape — and even as he watched 
he had to revise it to five. The Atlas, surrounded by a dozen enemies, exploded in 
nova-fashion as her shield collapsed. 

And then the void was suddenly full of 
great warships bearing the Guardian and 
Terran insignia, appearing magically in 
the midst of the Delbans. What had appeared to be triumph suddenly turned into 
a rout for the Delbans. Badly disorganized, 
they attempted to flee back to the safety 
of the mighty Kellander projectors of Tjadlinn. 

BUT Glayne's annihilated cruiser division had done its work well ; the Delbans, drawn too far from the discoid, were 
cut oflf by the fleets that opposed them. 
They fought desperately and fanatically, 
but there was only one possible outcome. 
One after another they exploded novafashion as the massed salvos of the tremendous Terran and Guardian battle ships 
swept aside their shields and touched detractive fingers to their beralloy sides. 

Glayne's ship-to-ship suddenly crackled 
into life and Garstow's heavy face appeared 
on the screen. "My boy," he boomed, 
"I'm proud of you. Excellent work ! We've 
bagged them all at almost no cost. Bardled 



FLAME-JEWEL OF THE ANCIENTS 



93 



tells me he didn't lose a ship." 

Glayne gazed stupidly at him for a 
moment before he could adjust himself to 
the idea of victory. Then he said quietly: 
"I have five ships left out of a command 
of thirty." 

"Oh ! . . . that's too bad," mumbled Garstow, his broad face becoming serious. 
"What I mean to say is — " 

"The chaplain will say what needs to be 
said," Glayne cut in with unnecessary bitterness. "If you still want me to run this 
show, then I submit that we attack Tj adlinn without delay." 

Admiral Garstow nodded, his face like 
a deflated balloon. 

Quickly Glayne outlined his plan for the 
assault on the discoid itself. The battle 
would be fought between the Kellander accumulator and condenser capacity of the 
massed fleets and the total generator capacity of the mighty anti-shield which the 
Delbans would raise from the discoid. If 
the Delban shield capacity was less than the 
massed strength of the fleet, then the discoid would be destroyed. But if the Delbans held them off, they would try 
something else. 

It took several hours to assemble the 
scattered and highly numerous Terran and 
Guardian warships into a closely-integrated 
formation. Matters were not helped by 
the appearance of dozens of warships from 
the fleets of other Sectors. They roamed 
about searching for enemy stragglers, but 
succeeded only in getting in the way. 
Finally, however, Glayne got them organized and the enormous fleet moved ponderously on Tjadlinn. 

The Delbans waited behind their featureless grey shield, not firing a single Kellander blast at the advancing fleet. When 
it reached to within fifty kilometers of the 
discoid, Glayne gave the order to commence fire. 

In the center of the huge discoid the 
Jewel, the Second Universe of the Elder 
Tane, blazed with a chill, golden luminescence. It did not waver a fraction as 
the tremendous energy demands struck it. 
The power drains fed voraciously of its 
infinite energies and flooded them into 
sub-space. The cumbersome mesh antennae on the hulls of the numberless ships 



in the massed fleet gulped it up and transmitted it to screaming accumulators which 
in turn fed it to the ravenous Kellander 
condensers. They, in turn, cast it through 
the miatron projectors at the shield of Tjadlinn from whence it had emerged. 

For minutes on end those titanic torrents 
of energy blasted at that phenomenal shield. 
But it held. The inconceivable energies 
could not crack it. Not even when every 
single accumulator and condenser in the 
massed fleets of the Terran Combine labored 
at peak capacity did the shield so much as 
tremble. Not even to the extent of a tiny 
spider web of coruscation along the power 
foci. 

Glayne barked a command to cease fire. 
He saw that the hail of torpedoes and 
mines which they had strewn had penetrated the shield. But they had been detonated by roving beams from the Tjadlinn 
secondaries before they could strike the 
surface of the discoid. If they could get 
through that mighty barrier, Glayne reasoned, then so could the Algol. He peered 
into the battle screen, attempting to locate 
the mammoth landing dock of the discoid 
through its shimmering grey shield. 

He made his decision. Garstow's face 
came to life on his communicator screen. 
Briefly he communicated his intention to 
the Guardian leader. When he had finished, Garstow nodded soberly and mumbled farewell. 

When he learned that the Algol's Kellander batteries had been rigged to fire by 
remote control from the pilot's seat, Glayne 
contacted Harbin. 

"Abandon ship!" he ordered laconically 
when the youngster's face filled the screen. 

"Wha — what?" blurted Harbin incredulously. 

"I said," Glayne repeated curtly, "abandon ship. Make haste!" 

"Aye, sir," said Harbin. His face still 
mirrored astonishment at it faded from 
the screen. 

XI 

GLAYNE SAT ALONE IN THE 
pilot's massive shock seat of the 
Algol. The instruments rose about him 
on all sides in terraced banks with the 



94 



PLANET STORIES 



battle screen directly in front of his eyes. 
Tentatively he reached for the firing studs, 
accustoming his fingers to their shape. 
When he saw that the last of the Algol's 
lifeboats had been picked up he realized 
that the time had come. 

He transferred his gaze to the discoid 
that was vague and indistinct beneath its 
anti-energy shield. Fastening his eyes to 
the armored outer lock doors of the landing dock, he gently fed power to the drivers. 
The Algol shuddered and gradually picked 
up speed. Glayne dropped the anti-shield, 
realizing that he would never get through 
the barrier with the energized shield functioning. But once he was through, it 
would have to go up quickly or his ship 
would be shattered by the roving secondaries. Hand hovering tensely over the 
shield control, he guided the ship toward 
the landing dock. 

His speed increased ; at twenty kilometers 
he was streaking toward the discoid in a 
free fall, all energy sources quiet. Fifteen 
— ten — five — and the Algol was boring 
through the energy barrier, stormed and 
buffeted as it sought to impede the passage 
of the individual circuits. Suddenly she 
emerged inside the shield and Tjadlinn was 
rushing upwards. 

Like lightning Glayne's fingers stabbed 
at the shield control and fed power to the 
drivers. He braked the ship crazily to 
avoid the lashing secondary beams that 
reached hungrily for him. Once . . . 
twice — and yet a third time the Kellander 
beams found the cruiser and slashed 
through her half -formed shield, dealing 
terrific blows to the plummeting ship. 

Then the massive beralloy doors of the 
landing stage were expanding hugely in 
his screen and he braked with all the power 
he could shunt into the straining drivers. 
Somehow his clutching fingers found the 
Kellander firing studs and he lashed out 
repeatedly against the outer lock. It 
whitened, ran into slag, crusted, and flared 
again and again as the ravening bolts struck 
it. Desperately Glayne fought to prevent 
blackness encroaching on the corners of his 
vision. 

Suddenly a rending, thundering roar 
filled the Algol and she was crashing headlong through the weakened beralloy doors 



of the landing dock. But even above that 
deafening roar, Glayne could hear the 
scream of twisted and tortured metal. 
Then the big ship stopped moving and all 
was quiet except for the shriek of air escaping through the crevices around her 
mangled hull. 

Groggily, Glayne shook his head in an 
effort to shake off the black-out which had 
engulfed his vision. In spite of his circulation exercises he couldn't see anything. 
Then a glimmering of the answer occurred 
to him and with wild surmise he experimentally flicked the firing stud of the ship's 
Kellanders. 

Nothing happened. 

Then Glayne understood. Every bit 
of the ship's power was cut off, including 
the lights and the battle screen. Obviously 
the Jewel power was cut off. Evidently 
the impact of the Algol's crash had jarred 
the delicate power drains so that Tjadlinn 
was once again without power. But he'd 
have to make sure. 

Heartened, he rose and took a space suit 
from the locker, checking to see if its 
light torch was operating. As he turned 
away, a vague, ridiculous hope struck him. 
He took a second suit from the locker. 

TWISTED and buckled beralloy plates 
had sheered long, jagged gashes in the 
equally tough armor of the cruiser, Glayne 
saw, as he clambered from the emergency 
lock. A little air still sighed through the 
huge rent which the cruiser had smashed 
in the skin of the discoid. The gigantic 
landing dock was dwarfed by the three 
hundred meter bulk of the cruiser. Small 
Delban craft had been flung violently on 
either side and now littered the walls with 
their batttered bodies. One or two of the 
Delban technicians had been caught by 
the crash and were either smeared thinly 
along the blastway or turned inside out 
as their bodies exploded from lack of air 
pressure. 

Hurriedly Glayne flashed his torch about, 
trying to find the mono-car which his 
party had used to get to Selzi-Narfid's 
quarters. The car itself was gone but he 
found the gleaming mono-rail and followed 
it at a rapid trot. Fortunately the passage 
was well-equipped with automatic air-locks, 



FLAME-JEWEL OF THE ANCIENTS 



95 



one of which had whipped in place when 
the air pressure dropped suddenly. When 
he came to the first of these, he found that 
the dilator was without power. He fumed 
at the wasted time as he burned around the 
lock with his torch and triggered the 
mechanism with his finger. 

After he closed it behind him, Glayne 
picked up his jogging pace down the mono* 
rail passage. He felt a kind of grim, 
ruthless hatred when he thought of BroDoral. He hoped wistfully that he would 
find the sneering sadist before Garstow's 
energy beams ripped the discoid to pieces. 

He wondered what had happened to 
Niala Chodred. During the battle he had 
conciously held his thoughts away from 
her and the dull ache of her memory. A 
chill loathing spread through him as he 
thought of the Vibra-Death. He knew of 
the agonies of that nerve torture; it produced not one slow death but thousands. 
More passionately than ever he longed to 
find the Bro. 

Suddenly Glayne felt the floor of the 
discoid tremble under his feet. At first he ignored it, but it grew persistently stronger 
and he realized that the fleet was again hurling its energy beams at the discoid — but this 
time they were penetrating because there 
was no shield to stop them. He quickened 
his pace, rounded a long curve, and found 
that he had reached his goal. 

He vaulted the high curbing and pounded 
down the tapestried corridor to the wide 
entrance stage. The dilator stud refused 
to operate, so Glayne burned into the lock 
to operate the stud. He discovered that 
the port itself was locked and a sudden unreasoning hope blazed up in him. With 
rapid movements he burned the lock out 
altogether and threw his weight against 
the door. With a wheeze it dilated and 
he staggered into the luxurious apartment, 
stumbling from the force of his own momentum. 

He was scrambling to his feet when 
something hit him. Jt was soft with rounded 
contours*which he perceived even through 
the unsympathetic thickness of his spacesuit. 
And it had red hair and green eyes. 

It was Niala. 

"Glayne ... oh, Glayne," she murmured 
clinging tightly to him. 



"But ... but you're not hurt," he stammered, his mind striving to adjust to the 
realization of a hope which it had long 
rejected. 

"I thought they had killed you," she 
sobbed happily. "But you got away." 

"Yes, he did," remarked a third voice, 
familiar and hated. "It was unfortunate." 

Glayne whirled. Gort Bro-Doral stood 
inside the entrance stage, a black Cardy 
gun in his hand. 

"Without you in the audience, Captain, 
I didn't see much point in amusing myself 
with the girl. But now that you have returned, Glayne — " 

The big Guardian crouched to spring 
at the Delban, gathering his legs under 
him. 

"I shouldn't do that, Captain," Bro-Doral 
observed sharply, waving the Cardy menacingly. "Life is too sweet to throw it 
away so rashly, isn't it? Besides, such refined methods require time and I fear your 
leader, Admiral Garstow, doesn't propose 
to give us that commodity." 

It was true, Glayne realized. The energy 
beams of the assaulting fleets were smashing tremendous blow at the discoid so that 
it shuddered violently. The shocks increased in strength even as he turned his 
attention to them. Somewhere deep in 
Tjadlina air was escaping with a screaming whistle where the skin wa9 ruptured. 

"You seem to have no idea how hideous 
Death is, Glayne," said the Delban, approaching them slowly. "Out here on the 
periphery of the galaxy we like to make 
some sort of a ceremony of his coming — ■ 
you see, he is always hovering around us." 
The Delban produced his explosive, nasal 
snicker. "Death is a fascinating subject; 
I have often wondered why you people 
in the Main Galaxy ignore him. Ever 
present, you know. And always waiting 
for you to step into his dark embrace." 

Glayne watched Bro-Doral narrowly. He 
was but a couple of meters away. As the 
blows of the Kellander beams smashing 
into the discoid increased, he became more 
preoccupied ' with his subject and his grip 
on the Cardy grew lax. Glayne's hand 
tightened imperceptibly on the spare spacesuit. 
" — out here on the Edge," Bro-Doral 



96 



PLACET STORIES 



was saying, "Life is considered only a prelude to Death. Personally — " 

GLAYNE lunged, flinging the extra 
spacesuit to one side. Bro-Doral 
alerted instantaneously, but his Cardy 
wavered for a fraction of an instant toward 
the empty space suit. Before he could 
recover his mistake Glayne's flying body 
had struck him. The two went down together in a thrashing tangle. Glayne's 
movements were hampered by the bulky 
spacesuit and he felt his desperate grip on 
the Delban slipping. Out of the corner 
of his eye he saw Bro-Doral extending his 
long fingers for the Cardy which he had 
dropped. Frantically he sought to restrain 
the Delban's long arm, missed, and saw 
the Delban slither from his grasp and reach 
for the gun. 

Glayne scrambled to his feet just in time 
to see Niala snatch up the weapon a split 
second ahead of Bro-Doral. For a brief 
instant the Ruler of Ten Thousand i>uns 
stared into the muzzle of Death. Then it 
wrapped him in its dark embrace forever 
as Niala fired. 

Glayne retrieved the spacesuit and hurriedly helped her don it. The screaming 
whistle of escaping air formed a mad symphony w r ith the rumbling crashes of corridors and whole levels caving in upon themselves. They raced from the apartment, 
through the tapestried corridor to the 
mono-rail which twisted like a live thing 
under the impact of the blasting energy 
beams. Jolt after jolt shook the discoid 
as torpedoes and mines exploded with 
devastating energy concussions deep within 
its entrails. 

It was uphill all the way as the tremendous mass of the Tane Jewel dragged 
at their flagging steps. Niala fell a half 
a dozen times from the smashing shocks 
that shook the discoid. Glayne helped her 
to her feet, only to be thrown down himself the next instant by the concussion of 
an energy torpedo. Huge seams opened in 
the tough beralloy sides of the mono-rail 
passage as the mammoth support beams 
fractured. 

Panting, they finally reached the point 
where the air-lock had fallen in place 
automatically. Glayne pushed at the port, 



expecting it to dilate. It didn't move a 
fraction of a centimeter. A rapid examination showed that it was sprung. Feverishly he felt for his torch to cut it down. 

But it was gone! 

He suddenly felt sick, realizing that he 
had lost it in the struggle with Bro-Doral. 
Now he would never be able to find it 
again. They were trapped. Waves of 
defeat swept over him as he crouched in 
the darkness. 

Suddenly he heard a new sound in the 
mad cacaphony of destruction that raged 
about them. It was the tortured scream 
of rending, snapping beralloy. And along 
with it came the sensation of increased 
weight. 

The Tane Jewel ! 

The huge beams which had anchored 
it in place had evidently collapsed under 
the impact of the assault and now the 
Jewel was falling freely through space, 
crashing through everything that stood in 
its path. And it was falling toward them I 

Glayne's weight grew unbearable as it 
approached. Vaguely he could make out 
its steady gold brilliance behind him in 
the passage. Grimly he clung to a projection in the wall with one arm and hung 
onto Niala with the other. 

Then the miraculous happened. 

The air-lock door which had been sprung 
now dilated under its own tremendous 
weight and the air pressure which remained 
in the passage flung Glayne and Niala 
through the lock. 

Summoning the last reserves of his 
diminishing strength, Glayne put his arm 
around her body and half -supported her, 
half-dragged her up the few remaining 
steps of the mono-rail passage to the landing dock. Forty meters separated him 
from the emergency lock of the Algol. 
Thirty meters. His straining muscles 
groaned in anguish. Twenty meters. Niala 
was unconscious and her slight form was 
an unbearable weight to him as he dragged 
her with painfully slow steps. Ten 
Five ... he reached the lock. 

He heaved her bodily into the lock and 
clambered in himself. Then through the 
inner door. Across to the elevator. His 
muscles were a symphony of agony 
Slowly, slowly the elevator climbed. The 






FLAME-JEWEL OF THE ANCIENTS 



97 



discoid was splitting and breaking up 
around the Algol — or was it wedging the 
cruiser more firmly than ever in the vice 
grip of the beralloy outer portals? The 
elevator door quivered for a moment, then 
dilated in a series of little shudders. Ever 
so slowly Glayne crawled across the bridge 
deck, dragging the girl. A shock seat . • . 
a surette of verchromynal into the blue 
vein inside her elbow. 

The crescendo of destruction reached 
new heights. The Tane Jewel was following him, splashing its insidious yellow 
radiance through the glassene window of 
the navigation bridge. It dogged his footsteps . . . closer . . . closer. The pilot's 
seat. The surette. Blackness encroached 
upon his vision. Dimly he was aware of 
his arm; it moved instinctively . . . slowly 
. . . slowly. The regular driver atomics 
began to shriek. His arm made another 
movement, flicking jet studs. Power suddenly sang in the forward jet chambers 
and ejected itself in a great, mushrooming 
flame. The Algol lurched backwards . . . 
another lurch . . . straining ... a third. 
And the Algol was suddenly free. 

The yawning pit of blackness closed its 
gaping maw on Glayne and he slid down, 
down, down . . . 

IT OCCURRED to Glayne, when he 
woke up, that his quarters in the Algol 
had a changed appearance. He climbed 
from his acceleration hammock and 
bounded to the shower. 

"Terran Standard!" he snorted to himself. "What the hell is Harbin doing 
puttering along like that?" 

As he dried himself from the tingling 
shower he tried to put his finger on the 
change that had come over his quarters. 
For one thing, he couldn't find what he 
wanted. But an even worse defect was 
the absence of his dust. 

Flag officers in the Stellar Guardians 
were generally conceded some slight idiosyncrasy through which they could assert 
their individuality in a service where indi


viduality was otherwise rigorously suppressed. Glayne's own idiosyncrasy was 
dust. After five long years as a Dorleb 
training-cadet without a speck of dust to 
his name, Glayne felt he had earned his 
right to wallow in a bit of dust. But now 
it was all gone. His quarters were spotless. 

He had finished dressing when a cautious 
knock sounded on his entrance portal ; 
then it dilated before he could answer. 
Harbin's face appeared in the opening. 

"Oh! I'm sorry, sir. Didn't think you 
were awake yet," Harbin said apologetically. 

"Forget it," grunted Glayne. "Come in." 
Harbin entered the room and fidgeted 
nervously for a moment. "Sir!" he 
finally burst out, "I . . . we're sorry about 
that unpleasantness. I want to apologize 
on behalf of—" 

Glayne snorted and cut him off with a 
wave of his arm. "What I want to know," 
he said with deceptive calmness, "is, where 
the hell is my dust?" 

Harbin grinned. "Lieutenant Chodred. 
I advised her against it — told her it was 
one of your peculiarities. But she wouldn't 
listen." 

"What 'she' is this?" inquired a new 
voice, pleasantly husky. 

Glayne turned and saw Niala leaning 
in the entrance stage. "You know damned 
well whom we are talking about," he said 
ominously. "Why did you take away my 
dust?" 

"Oh, is that all?" she laughed. It was 
a deliciously cool and tinkling laugh. Harbin foresaw an imminent explosion. Being 
a discreet warrior who longs to fight another day, he fled from the room. 

But it never quite jelled. Glayne extended his arms to the laughing, greeneyed Niala. But she stood her ground. 
"No," she teased. "Not when you have 
a beard like that." 

Glayne swore and reached for his depilatory. He was going to set a new 
galactic speed record for shaving. 



7 — Planet — Spring 




From the black box swelled a pulsing bubble of iridescent light. 

ULTIMATUM 

By ROGER DEE 

In a dingy little Indiana hotel room the fate of 
three worlds suddenly hung in precarious balance! 



WINANT FOLLOWED THE 
lanky sheriff down the jail corridor past rows of empty, plankwalled cells and drew a sharp breath of 
relief when they found the last cubicle 
still tenanted. 

"That's Uncle Ivor, all right/' Winant 
said. "Sorry he caused you so much trouble, sheriff, but 111 be glad to pay his fine. 
What's the charge against him?" 

The sheriff rubbed a pal^i across his 
drooping mustaches and looked doubtfully 
at the old man who sat on the edge of the 
cell bunk, the bald dome of his head 
cradled dejectedly in his hands. 

"You couldn't rightly say there is a charge, 
mister," he admitted. "Your uncle popped 
98 



into Ben Stuart's Drop Inn restaurant 
night before last with a little black box 
under his arm, naked as a jaybird and 
talking like a crazy man. 

1 I'm a visitor from Mars/ he says. 
Take me to your president, and quick!' 
Ben thought he was crazy, or drunk, and 
ran him out with a meat cleaver, and the 
old duck went down to the Warner Hotel 
and pulled the same goofy act. Pop 
Warner called me, and I went down and 
threw the old coot into the cooler. I knew 
right off that he was cracked, because I 
even had to show him how to put on the 
clothes I brought him. And the wingding 
he pitched when I took that black box 
away from him — wow!" 



ULTIMATUM 

Winant shook his head. "Poor Uncle 
Ivor," he said commiseratingly. 'The last 
time he got away from us he thought he was 
Mahatma Ghandi, and tried to buy a bus 
ticket from Cincinnati to New Delhi, India. 
I found him, finally, in Evansville, IndianaIt's amazing how he got this far south, 
but then a mentally-unbalanced person can 
do surprising things, sometimes/' 

The sheriff snorted. "Unbalanced, hell," 
he said. "The old coot's crazy as a bedbug. Just got in from Mars, he says, and 
he wants the president of the United 
States — on the double!" 

He unlocked the door and Winant went 
inside. 

"It's all right now, Uncle Ivor," he said 
gently. The old man raised a wrinkled, 
leathery face and stared at him uncomprehendingly. "Let's go over to my hotel and 
get a good meal and a hot bath," Winant 
urged. "Then we'll go home again. Ready, 
now?" 

A few minutes later in the jail office 
the sheriff pocketed the bill Winant gave 
him and handed over a small lacquered 
metal box that was surprisingly heavy for 
its size. 

"Here's your uncle's radio," he said. 
"New-fangled model, I reckon. I couldn't 
make head nor tail of it, so I just left it 
alone." 

Winant lifted the hinged cover and 
looked inside the box at the neat array 
of tiny meters and knobs that covered 
the control panel. 

"A wise decision, sheriff," he said dryly. 
"Wiser, perhaps, than you'll ever know." 



99 



THE old man stood in the center of 
Winant's hotel room, the sheriff's 
ill-fitting denims hanging on his slight 
frame like the castoff clothing of a scarecrow. 

"The box," he said. His voice, after 
talking for so long, was a hoarse, rasping 
croak. "Give me the box." 

Winant sat in a decrepit wicker chair, 
holding the box in his lap, his eyes missing no detail of the old man's shrunken 
figure with its bald dome-like head and 
wrinkled parchment face. 

"I'll give you the box when you tell me 
something that makes sense," he said. 



A SPLIT SECOND 
IN ETERNITY 




The Ancients Called It 
COSMIC CONSCIOUSNESS 

Must man die to release his inner consciousness? Can we experience momentary 
flights of the soul — that is, become one 
with the universe and receive an influx of 
great understanding? 

The shackles of the body — its earthly 
limitations — can be thrown off and man*s 
mind can he attuned to the Infinite Wisdom 
for a flash of a second. During this brief 
interval intuitive knowledge, great inspiration, and a new vision of our life's mission 
are had. Some call this great experience a 
psychic phenomenon. But the ancients knew 
it and taught it as Cosmic Consciousness-— 
the merging of man's mind with the Universal Intelligence. 

Let This Free Book Explain 
This is not a religious doctrine, but the 
application of simple, natural laws, which 
give man an insight into the great Cosmic 
plan. They make possible a source of great 
joy, strength, and a regeneration of man's 
personal powers. Write to the Rosicrucians, an age-old brotherhood of understanding, for a free copy of the book "The 
Mastery of Life." It will tell you how, in 
the privacy of your own home, you may 
indulge in these mysteries of life known 
to the ancients. Address: Scribe M. F. R. 

UBe %osicrucians 

(AMORC) 
SAN JOSE, CALIFORNIA, U.S.A. 



100 



PLANET STORIES 



"What you've just told me is nothing but 
a rehash of the story you told the sheriff 
— that your name is Yardana and that you 
are an envoy from Mars, sent to Earth 
to help scientific authorities develop safe 
atomic power. Look — I'm a news writer, 
down here to investigate th# rumors of a 
blue meteorite landing in the hills just 
north of here and to check up on the 
comic accounts I read of your appearance. 
I went to a lot of trouble and some risk 
to get you out of jail, and I want a 
reasonable story for my trouble. What 
about it, now ?" 

The old man wrung his hands. "Give 
me the box. Give me the box !" 

"Later," Winant promised. "When you 
give me the real story behind this thing 
I'll not only give you back your box, Til 
give you a lift out of this burg as well." 

He looked at the old man sharply. "How 
could a Martian speak the kind of English 
you've been using? Why should a Martian 
look so much like an ordinary human 
being? It doesn't add up." 

"We are of the same root stock," Yardana said. "Intelligent life follows the 
same evolutionary pattern, no matter where 
it develops, so long as conditions are the 
same. As for the language, my people have 
followed your experiments with electromagnetics since their beginning. We know 
every language of Earth intimately, 
through long study of your radio 
programs." 

Winant laughed. "Maybe the sheriff 
was right, at that," he said. "It's a goofy 
story, too fantastic for belief." 

He shrugged and handed the old man 
the black box. 

"Here'e your toy," he said resignedly. 
"I guess that's all I'm going to get for 
my trouble; just enough misinformation 
for another tongue-in-cheek article for 
Sunday supplements." 

He picked up his brief-case from the 
floor and laid it on the corner of the writing table at his elbow. "The lift I promised you still goes, if you want it, but 
it'll have to wait until tomorrow." 

The old man took the black box eagerly 
and threw back the cover. His fingers 
flickered over the controls with practised 
familiarity. 



"I shall not need your assistance — now," 
he said. His pale eyes met Winant's triumphantly. "Now that I have the Bubble 
again I have a means of return to my ship 
better than any Earthly conveyance could 
offer. Watch!" 

FROM the black box swelled a pulsing 
radiance, a misty rose-tinted sphere 
that grew swiftly until it enveloped Yardana in a six-foot bubble of iridescent 
light. Through its wavering envelope the 
old man's face showed taut and purposeful, 
its pleading replaced by grim determination. 

"Print your story," he said. "Tell your 
people about Yardana and his mission. Tell 
them too that their days are numbered 
from this minute, for in their savage perversion of natural principles to warlike 
uses they have forged a menace that threatens the peace of the Solar System and, 
eventually, of the universe itself." 

He moved toward the window, the rosy 
Bubble glowing about him. Winant turned 
his chair slightly, watching, but he did 
not rise. 

"My people knew the secrets of the 
atom," Yardana said, "before your own 
learned the use of fire. We built great 
cities and telescopes when your ancestors 
were troglodytes, living in caves and eating 
uncooked meat. We expected no dangerous intelligence to arise on your planet for 
thousands of years as yet, and we paid 
little attention to your progress until recently, when we learned through your 
radio broadcasts that you had cracked the 
atom. We knew then that something was 
dangerously wrong, and that we must investigate quickly before your sudden wisdom put you upon equal footing with us, 

"Today, when you should be only learning to compound gunpowder, we find you 
applying electromagnetic principles which 
you cannot possibly understand, and harnessing the atom for the sole purpose of 
killing greater numbers of your fellow beings. I came here, not to aid your scientists 
in developing the rudiments of the atomic 
power they have discovered, but to find the 
reason behind the sudden freakish intelligence they are displaying. I have discovered 
that reason — the scientific and political pow


VLTMATUM 

ers of Earth are under the domination and 
guidance of alien intelligences, entities bent 
upon developing a race of Earthmen so 
warlike and so technically proficient in 
the waging of war that it must endanger 
our own Martian culture/' 

Winant sat unmoving, his eyes not leaving the Martian's wrinkled face. The 
Bubble hissed audibly, its tiny sussuration 
suddenly loud in the room. 

'Therefore I shall recommend in my report that the -human race be completely 
destroyed/' Yardana said. "Alone it could 
not offer a serious threat against us for 
ages, but led and instructed by these 
outside intelligences it must soon surpass 
our own scientific development. And we 
must destroy you before you learn the 
secret of space travel, or we shall be too 
late to save ourselves. 

"We fought with the peoples of Venus 
once in ages past for the same reason, 
and reduced them to inconsequence if not 
to extinction, for no sign of intelligent 
life has been detected upon their world 
since we blasted it three thousand years 
ago. When I have made my report the 
council of Elders will recommend the 
blasting of Earth, and the solar system 
will be safe again for our superior Martian 
civilization — this time forever/' 

"When you have made your report," 
Winant said. His smile was edged with 
a sudden secret amusement. "But suppose 
these 'alien entities' prevent your return?" 
He opened the brief-case on the table 
and put a hand inside it. The Martian 
laughed harshly. 

"No missile can penetrate a Bubble, you 
fool," he said contemptuously. "It is impervious to any Earthly weapon." 

Winant laughed in turn, his lips pressed 
back flat against his teeth. The repressed 
hatred of three thousand years spoke in 
his voice, added pressure to the thrust 
of his thumb on the stud of the little 
silver tube in his hand. 

"Of course it is," he said, as the sullen 
crimson ray from the tube disintegrated 
Martian, box and Bubble alike in a breath. 
"That's why I came prepared — with a 
Venusian weapon!" 



101 



STOPTOBACCO 1 



thousands hare with Tobacco 
Bedoan wr . Writ* for froo booklet 
telling of Injurious effect of tobacco 
and Of a treatment which has reliev


TMC ME WELL COMPANY 

m Clayton Sta.. SLUuU5.Ho. 



LONESOME? 

JOIN RELIABLE CLUB, establish*! KM 

Members everywhere— beautiful girla.miraea. teachers, widows, businessmen, farmer* seeking congenial 
mates. Many claim wealth. Dignified, dependable and 
rare, we tret results. WRITE FOR INFORMATION 
AND DESCRIPTIONS FREE. SEALED. 

THE EXCHANGE, 3827-72 tofa, Kansas City, Mo. 





S0N6 POEMS WAITED 

TO BE SET TO HUSiC 

Sand your Poem* today for Free Examination fo 

j. chas. McNeil 

AS. MASTER OF MUUC 
S10-FH So. Alexandria Los Angeles | t Calif. 




AMERICA'S 
€/l.Urc 



largest and finest personal ired 
introduction 
elub invites you 
to meet their 
thousands of eligible members 
throughout the U.S.A. and Canada. Write today (enclose 10c coin) 
for 40 actual pictures and ■oalod. confidential detail*. Men t io n age 

HOLLYWOOD "400" CLUB 
P. O. Box 2349-CC Hollywood 28, California 



ARE YOU LONELY? 

Thousands o! lonely folk EVERYWHERE have 
found true happiness through introductions by mail. 
We will show you PROOF of results. Send NOW, 
for FREE particulars in plain sealed envelope. 

RAINBOW SERVICE, 110 W. Oak Avenue 
Santa Rosa, Cal., Dept. FH 



Be Lonely No More! 
Open Destiny's Door! 

50c brings Cupid's Destiny, World's Greatest Social Publication, Including coast-to-coast namas and addressas; either 
sax. Captivating descriptions; sparkling pictures— widows, 
widowers, bachelors, beautiful girls desiring early marriage. 
(Year, bi-monthly, $2.00.) Mention your ago. 

DESTINY LEA6UE • Aberdeen 16 • Washington 




[Let os help you nod real happiness. Join our old reliable 
dob. 42 years of dependable, confidential service. Corre*. 
Spondents most everywhere. Many with means, seeking coo-; 
genial mates. Proven results. Photos, descriptions free. 

STANDARD CLUB, BOX 207, GRAYS. MIKE. IU. 




THE VIZIGRAPH 



IT seems to us that there is no room for an editor's opinions in a department of this kind. It 
is a readers' section — and the editor can drop dead. 

But a definition of science fiction seems rather 
harmless, after all; it isn't as if one were taking 
sides in a race controversy (but oh, how we 
wanted to!) or debating the amount of sex we 
should allow to creep in — or out. 

Furthermore, we did say last time that we had 
a definition, and so we are now on a spot, with 
all the theories coming from you fans; besides, 
it's a bit unfair to appear to sneer at your efforts, 
when we keep our own to ourselves, safe and untouchable. 

So, if you'll pardon this pre-emption of your 
time and space, we'll drag into the light of day 
our own puny, crawling idea of what constitutes 
STF. 

Because science fiction has up to now been 
printed almost exclusively on pulp paper and 
distributed largely to pulp paper readers, it has 
been classified ("dismissed" might be a better 
term) as "escape literature", meaning as we all 
know literature intended and designed to transport the reader away from his environment and /or 
problems. 

But wasn't there already available, when STF 
began, an abundance of romantic and escapist 
literature— the western, the international spy, the 
general adventure, the light romance? Was there 
any real need for a new field, offering the glory 
of science and a peek at the world of tomorrow? 

We will oversimplify to save space. We will 
declare fantasy fiction to be no concern of the true 
science fiction fan. We will not go into certain 
factors which are the concern of anthropologists 
and psychologists. We will herewith, and humbly, 
serve up our definition of science fiction. 

It is easily enough defined technically. STF is 
any story whose plot depends, in whole or in 
part, on an imaginary scientific discovery, which 
in turn is based on a known scientific discovery. 

But we all knew that. When we ask for a 
definition of science fiction, aren't we really look
102 



ing for the reason it came into being, what makes 
the STFan tick? 

We call it the utopia-wish. We say there is a 
large proportion of readers who are as beset by 
problems and resentful of current economic conditions as the escapists. But this particular 
group simply finds it more, much more enchanting 
to dream about tomorrow. A tomorrow in which 
science has made the world a better place to 
live in. 

And there you have it— our real definition of 
science fiction: 

It is an Opportunity— to Dream about Tomorrow. 

Lewis Sherlock, thou hast been annointed ; name 
thy choice. Roger Dard, they love you for second; 
pick two (but get only one, Rog!). Wilkie Conner, pick three. 

Your Editor. 

FROM ONE WHO OUGHT TO KNOW 

1313 Abandon Lane 
__ _ Eternal, Hell 

Dear Mr. Payne: 

Perhaps I should have begun with "Dear Lewis 
Sherlock", for the purpose of this letter, actually, 
is to give the poor fellow some encouragement. 
He is, you will recall, the gentleman who wrote 
the fine epistle in your Winter Issue scolding 
that idiot, Al Einstein, for claiming a belief in a 
"Supreme Being". Such nonsense! 

Being a bright lad, and boasting of his interest 
in "heavy science and math", Lewis had, no doubt, 
read the works of Abbe Lemaitre, who proposed 
that the universe originated with the explosion 
of an immense primordial atom. 

Where did this atom come from? Why, it 
condensed from energy, of course. 

But where did the energy come from? What 
caused it to change form and become matter? 
What caused this atom of matter to explode? 
Why, uh . . . you see, uh . . . Well, no matter 
about such small details. After all, old Abb6 was 



THE VIZIGRAPH 



103 



a scientist. He should know what he was talking 
about 

As I was saying, all this matter went flying 
about the place, forming stars. Now don't ask 
silly questions, like "Why?" One of these stars, 
old Sol herself, decided that it was about time she 
threw off some planets, so she did. Planets "just 
so happen" to have the property of cooling, so 
they cooled. Now the third planet was a strange 
one indeed. A group of atoms, who long since had 
formed partnerships called molecules, arranged 
themselves, quite by accident, into a minute living 
organism. This organism, gaining an inferiority 
complex because of its small stature, neatly 
changed into a fish. A few fish, not able to learn 
to swim, crawled out of the water. Now crawling, 
they found, was awfully hard on their tummies, 
so they grew legs and became monkeys. Through 
the result of a bad experiment, a few unfortunate 
monkeys became men, to the great disgust of the 
remaining monkeys, and great misfortune to the 
world. 

In the meantime, naturally, other molecules had 
arranged themselves into trees and caves, much 
to the convenience of man. 

Now man, the intolerably stupid creature, had 
the audacity to look about him at the stars in the 
sky, the birds in the trees, the flowers in the 
meadows, and then to maintain that here was 
something created by a supreme individual, about 
some fixed pattern, for some unknown purpose. 
Gad, how silly. Why Lewis, smart people like 
you and me know that all this happened by sheer 
chance alone. Old cronies like Galileo, Newton, 
Planck, Eddington, and Einstein are simply talking through their hats when they claim there is a 
certain order to the universe that couldn't have 
come about through random chance. 

I also agree whole-heartedly with you, when 
you ask for greater public interest in science rather 
than in religion. All religion does is set up a moral 
standard for society to follow, so that there are 
less of such necessary and enjoyable practices as 
lying, cheating, stealing, and murdering. How 
useless! Science, on the other hand, creates such 
useful contrivances as atomic bombs, and guided 
missiles, so indispensable in thinning our overpopulated little world. 

Yes Lewis, let you and I and all of our friends, 
if there be such, strive toward that glorious day 
when the "Unified Field Hypothesis" will be outselling the Bible, and all hell breaks loose on this 
planet. Let our motto be heard throughout the 
world: "I'm an atheist, thank God". 
Egad, but it's HOT DOWN HERE! 
I'll be seeing you, 

Lucifer Sathanas, 
Director of admissions, 
Kingdom of Hell 

WELL. GEE. THANKS! 

201 Veterans Village 
Canton, New York 
Dear Editor: 

The 1949 Winter Issue of Planet is a good 
solid satisfying one— just re-reading the titles 
brings back a lot of enjoyment. But — 

The Dead-Star Rover is so exceptionally fine 
that I want to do a bit of exulting over it. The 
gimmick of this story—having men separated into 
"races" by reason of the mechanical means of 




11 



mm 



Tan SKINS, make up FURS 

Be a Taxidennirt. Double your hunting fun. We 

i at Hont. Mount Birdt, Animals, Flfh, 

. ..oumb apMioMna. Fun and profits. D«e©r»t« 

JrtJoS" Bi»*°pronu in .par* tim^TWlllTC^OOAY. 



lOO mmmm pictures >" FRPF BOOK 
Hanteri.fttrrar copy. It'. "ICE DUUR 
Now Froo. Sond po«t card. 8t*U» year A«C 
ttOftTHWESTERN SCHOOL OF TAXIDERMY 
Dopt. 460I 



Watch Repairing Pays 
Big Money 




Learn at horn* 



free Literature TeDt How 
Watchmakers in big demand. You train 
step-by-etep under experts. You learn to 
take a watch apart — repair and put in 
perfect working order. 10 easy lessons. 
We furnish all tools, and a 15 jeweled 
watch. Practicemovement with first lesson. 
Turn spare time into cashperhaps a business of your 
own. A licensed school. Students 18 to 65 have profited 
by our training. Low cost. 

VMf Today for AU th. Foctt-No ObligaHom 



WATCH REPAIRING ri, ' ,rl 4^:Tw-< 



GET INTO ONE OF THESE GREATER 
OPPORTUNITY FIELDS 



RADIO


TRAIN IN THE 
GREAT SHOPS OF 1 

OLDEST, BEST EQUIPPED 
SCHOOL OF ITS KIND IN U.S. 

gome to the Great Shops of COYNE in Chicago now. 
et practical training in ELECTRICITY or RADIOTELEVISION. Fascinating, big-pay fields. Finance 
rtan for non- veteran*. G.I. Approved. Mall Coupon 
Today for complete details. 

NOT -HOME-STUDY" COURSES I 
You learn on real, full-sired, modern equipment, not 
by mail. Finest staff of trained instructors to help 
you get ready for a better job, a fine future. 

FREE BOOK ggfSPS&IS&fifiSiWlS 

RADIO-TELEVISION or both. Sent FREE. No 
obligation; no salesman will call. Act NOW I 



B. W. Cooke, Pres., Dept. 99-31 H 

COYNE Electrical «c Radio School 

600 S. Paulina Street, Chicago 12, Illinois 

Send FREE BOOK and full details on 
□ ELECTRICITY D RADIO-TELEVISION i 

NAME 



ADDRESS 

! CITY STATE. 



104 



PLANET STORIES 



their transportation and livelihood — is absolutely 
new to me. Robert Abernathy's ability to make 
the reader feel with the 'terrapin' that the machine 
is merely an extension of his own personality 
shows' a writing ability quite out of the ordinary. 
It even shows me what a different person I should 
probably be if I were robbed of my pressure 
cookers and my washing machine. It points up 
the growing lack of concern of the automobile 
driver for that member of the inferior race of 
pedestrians. Even the solution of the story for the 
two poor "machineless humans", which seems at 
first to have been handed them on a platter, could 
not have come about if they had not truly been 
human and made an adjustment to humanity before 
the solution was offered them. And those two 
humans are such real people. Congratulations on 
a triple-A-1 story. 

Betsy Curtis 

SLOSH AWAY, VIZIPANS! 

Box 13 

Ralston, Washington 
Dear Editor: 

Had it not been that the Winter Issue arrived 
through the mail today, I should have dogmatically maintained that it was still summer. My 
attendant has evidently weather - stripped my 
jacket (the one with the sleeves that tie around 
my back) for I have not suffered the least from 
cold. But, taking only a moment to forgive my 
Esquire girl her error, I turn my mind to more 
cosmic matters. 

First of all, it has been evident for a number 
of years that all the contributors to the Vizigraph 
are grossly uninformed on an unbelievable number 
of subjects. Previous to this time, I have been content to allow those unfortunates to slosh about in 
their individual cesspools of ignorance, but now 
I feel called upon to halt an uncommonly hideous 
bit of distorted fiction that is being spread by the 
horde. 

The Vizigrapher who is especially responsible 
for the spread of this ugly contamination is W. 
Paul Ganley, and his criminal misdeed concerns 
the revolting rumor which he is attempting to defile fandom with. If that vile creature has infected 
your pure, impressionable mind with the slightest 
doubt, then renew your righteous faith with what 
I have to say. Mr. Editor, there are not any 
"other" science-fiction publications ! And until that 
glorious house of fiction, Fiction House, begins 
another, there will never be any "other" sciencefiction publications ! There are magazines that try 
to imitate, to be sure, but their very names prevent 
them from being called "science-fiction publications." Ask Vizigrapher Ganley to name a present 
day, professional publication that boasts of a solid, 
green-blooded, truly science-fictionish name as 
does Planet Stories. He will be unable to meet 
such a request, I am sure. 

From the above facts, one instantly realizes that 
your personal request for a definition of sciencefiction is needless. Any person of superior intelligence, such as I, can tell you that science-fiction 
is anything that is printed in Planet Stories. Yes, 
when they are printed in Planet Stories, even 
the advertisements are science-fiction I 

Now that all opposition has been thoroughly 
crushed, the focus of my attention shall turn to 
another important matter — picking the three best 
(least bad, that is) letters printed in the Vizigraph. 



This is hardly an easy task because your Vizi 
graphers seem to adhere to a set standard of 
stupidity— it must be an effort, at times, for them 
to keep themselves down to that standard — but I 
have decided on my choices, and I suggest that 
you grant originals to the three I list, despite the 
votes of the mentally unfortunate individuals who 
blunderingly attempt these delicate decisions for 
themselves. Grant first choice to Mr. Ganley for 
being the main reason that you are blessed with 
this letter; allow second choice to Margaret 
Gardiner because of her intelligent awareness of 
the types of mentalities that purchase Planet 
Stories ; give third choice to Wilkie Conner as a 
bribe to rid Planet Stories of his ghastly attempts at verse. 

I make no effort to comment on the stories since 
I am able to write so very much better than any 
of your authors, and it would no doubt cause 
many suicides among their ranks. were I to expend 
a volume or two in pointing out a few of their 
more obvious errors. 

Modestly yours, 

Wally Weber 

DEAD-STAR NELSON 

433 E. Chapin St 
_ Cadillac, Mich. 

Dear Paul, 

No more pix for Nehon, hey? 

It is dawn, grey-yellow dawn. 

They come. Now little peaks on the horizon, 
now strange beetles crawling in the distance, now 
behemoths of towering steel — great masses of 
welded grey that shake the ground with their 
coming. 

Vast beyond imagination, obscuring all the 
eastern sky with their bulk, they come. On broad 
metal treads they rumble toward us, closer, closer. 

Now their shadows fall on us and it is black 
dark and we scream with terror. They rise like 
walls above us as high as the clouds. 

The very earth creaks with their weight. The 
grinding of their gears deafens us. The wide, flat 
plates of their treads descend down on us, quickly, 
heedlessly. 

Crunch. 

Yerz, 

Radell Faraday Nelson, BeM 
AWARDS US WITH PIC 






Dear PLP: 



119 Ward Road 

North Tonawanda, N. Y. 



I bought PS. I laid down a grimy quarter, receiving a nickle in change. (Hey, there'd be 
TROUBLE 'round here if I didn't get that 
change!) Then, shielding it carefully (I'm used 
to it by now, but other people . . . ) ; as I was 
saying, I strolled home casually. 

Puffing from the unaccustomed running, I 
donned my special, inch-thick, smoked glasses, 
and commenced to search for LA VIZI. I found 
it. I read it through. 

Removing the shattered spectacles from a cut 
countenance, I put on another. Then I repeated 
the performance a third time. 

What all this has been leading up to . . . The 
best letter was mine. MINE1 Why, you ask? 



THE VIZIGRAPH 



105 



Why, indeed, I replied. So I put on my fourth 
pair of lenses, and carefully scrutinized those 
hallowed pages. 

And I found the answer! 

My letter was odious, but your comments were 
supernal. In just the right places. It was therefore 
the funniest epistle of the bunch. And therefore— 
PLP pick one, Connor pick two, — uh, lessee — 
Curtis pick three. Whassat? L. R. might not give 
you a pic? Well, if they don't — then Connor pick 
one, Curtis pick two,-— uh, h-mm-mmm, this gets 
complicated, not many letters this ish t none from 
Oliver, et al, well— Cox, pick three. 

Whew ! Poetry in LA VIZI I Well, it's fairly 
good, anyway. But keep it down. Look at what 
happened to — er — (ahem). 

THE NIGHT HAS A THOUSAND EYES 
. . . This story has a thousand merits. Bradbury 
didn't write it, but he might havel This was so 
good that I can't find words enough to describe 
it. (Yeah, yeah, I know, "purchase a Webster's 
Unabridged," but too many comments is too 
much!) 

THE GREEN DREAM. Excellent. Wonderful. 

LET THE ANTS TRY. Well, the ants can 
try or fry, but the story tried, and made the grade. 

THE DEAD-STAR ROVER. An excellent 
lead novelette, but no lead novel. 

SWORD OF FIRE. Oke. 

The other two were below average. (Something had to be, didn't it?) 

A few gripes, a few groans . . . "Jupiter Jones" 
happens to be a rather well-known and well-liked 
detective-fiction character, who has starred in such 
novels as "Harvard Has a Homicide", "This is 
Murder, Mr. Jones", "Three-Thirds of a Ghost", 
and a couple of others. Tsk-tsk. 

MacCreigh's novel — pardon me, short-story — 
was fantasy, not STF, because it is inconceivable, 
impossible, and a few other li'l adjectives. (Who 
needs a Webster's Unabridged?) Has anyone ever 
stopped to consider what numerous otherwiseunrelated mutations would have to take place to 
form such a species as MacCreigh proposes? 
Such as — feeding tract, lungs, throat, breathing 
apparatus, new system of blood vessels, new type 
of blood, and a couple other obscure items like 
that. 

Yes, to return to LA VIZI, that was fantasy. 
Had the author explained HOW such a thing 
could have taken place twice (once for the queen, 
once for the drone— or are those bees? — or whatever they call the male. And just how many potential queens are given birth to by an antqueen?). 

STF, then, is "Explained Fantasy". I believe 
this is about as short an explanation as one can 
put forth— but why put one forth at all ? This entire thing was given a thorough going-over in, 
lemme see, in — I think. (How long have you been 
apoplectic, now, PLP?) 

One thing— will someone explain "fantasy"? 

So Bradbury, the fair-haired boy of STF, returns. Ha. Bradbury rides again! Has he been 
gone? Gad, authors have been known to leave a 
mag for two or three issues, y'know. 

One thing about your comment appended to the 
end of my epistle, ed— we fen with pica typewriters are at a distinct disadvantage — we write 
three and four-page letters, and those with elite 
machines write two-pagers and say as much ! Bah. 
(Poohf—Ed.) 

About La Brackett— do we refer to her as 




WHY BE LONELY! 

[ Let America'! greatest Introduction ferric© 
[ find your ideal friend, sweetheart, or mate. 
Our amazingly different system has brought 
| ideal love, friendship, and enduring hapI plness to thousands. Why not yon ? This 
method offers individual analysts and in[ traduction to persons of your type. BensaI tional results — eren when all other methods 
fail. Largest, most select membership. Sealed details FREBL 
OR. MILES, Box 9265, Sta. S, Let Angeles 5, Col. 



LONESOME? 

Why be LONELY and blue? Do you want 
to make friends with refined, interesting 
and worthwhile persons? Confidential, personal service for lonely people. FREE particulars mailed in sealed envelope. Mention 
your age. Write for information. SOCIAL, 
Box 1 5 7- A, New York II. 

SONG-WRITERS ATTENTION 

The amazing demand for phonograph records, accelerated by countless Juke-Boxes, warrants your 
immediate investigation. We are offering New 
Writers the rare opportunity of having a celebrated "Hit" composer furnish music on reduced 
percentage basis for any likely poems received this 
month. The "Petriilo Ban" does not affect us. 

RECOLA RECORDING CO.. Box 987FH, Hollywood 28, Calif. 



''ON SH J P 



Meet your future husband, wife or 
companion through our personalized, 
selective introduction service. Nationwide 
membership, all ages. Write today (enclose lOo coin) and 
receive by return, sealed mall, 40 actual pictures and complete details. Please mention ace and sex. 
HOLLYWOOD "400" CLUB 
P. O. Bex 234?-KX Hollywood W, California 



FREE 



One year's membership to MEXICO'S famous Romance Club 
Confidential introductions to Old Mexico's romantic, captivating 
bewitching. 

EXOTIC MEXICAN SENORITAS 

desirous to wed foreigners; offering lore, thrills, happiness. Excitingly different from anything else, ever. Not the run of the 
mill circulars. For membership card, original photo, and all in* 
formation send mailing costs (85 cent* in postage stamps) NO 
COINS, please. 

ZAMORA Apartodo 87S1 Mexico City, Mexico 



nwrra 



20 alt different new pocket 
size illustrated cartoon 
booklets for Men. Packed 
with red hot belly-laughs. 
They're a riot! It's amazing how much fun you can 
get for a BUCK. Sent 
prepaid and sealed NOW 
for only SI. No C^O.O. 
CRAYKO, Dept 1723 




Box 520. S. P.O.. H.Y.C I 



CORRESPONDENCE PRODUCERS 

Thrills! Romance! Adventure! 

Our annual expansion program offers the super movie star Information chart (a super special) FREE, and also a saving of $2.00 
to every new member for a limited time. This is in addition to 
the regular material which includes many movie stars and pen 
pals the world over. Our membership fee is $5.00. however, this 
ad entitles you to a 40% discount. Make checks and money orders 
payable to: 

CORRESPONDENCE PRODUCERS 
P.O. Bex 563 Water Volley, Mississippi 






106 



PLANET STORIES 



"Miss Bracket", "Mrs. Brackett", "Miss Hamilton", or "Mrs. Hamilton"? Rather confoosin'. I 
pity her pore old husband, Mr. Brackett. (Either 
Leigh Brackett or Mrs. Edmond Hamilton. — Ed.) 

You can do better than PLANET'S LINTHEADED PTERODACTYL. And anyway, you 
used "Pterodactyl" before. Why not say, PLANET'S LEVIATHANIC POPINJAY? 

One thing more, ere I depart to limbo for 
another three months. (Well, school; it's the same 
thing.) This business about * * *. It's amusing, 
and all that, but is Love Romances so backward 
that their publications aren't allowed to mention 
the names of other publications? (Yes. — Ed.) 

Fiendishly, 

W. Paul Ganley 

P. S. : I wanna ask something — I mean, just in 
case — Is that pic of Bradbury on 110 available 
as an original . . . ? (No. — Ed.) 

NO STF IN PS? TST! 

418 High St. 
Closter, N. J. 
Dear PLP : 

The answer is absurdly simple; science-fiction 
is what Planet Stories prints everything else but. 

It was a warm day in August when the Winter 
Issue of PS arrived in the fair city of Closter, but 
I didn't question the seasonal oddity, for I realized 
that the publisher likes to send your mag to the 
stands via time-machine. The radioactive rays of 
the lectro-time spatial warp mess up the cover a 
bit, but we must bear with these things. 

The stories were all good this trip. While both 
novels were very good and neither plot outstanding, oldtimer McDowell's touch was far more entertaining than that of the relatively new author. 

Seems to me I've heard that title of the de 
Courcy yarn somewhere before. Hmm. Maybe I 
heard someone sing it; or was it a movie? I 
dunno. (From a poem titled ''Flight", by Frances 
W. Bourdillon, 1852-1921.— Ed.) 

"Flight From Time", by Coppel was very good, 
except for one thing. I don't believe it. 

Evidently you wanted to start another fight in 
La Vizi. In the letter of Lewis Sherlock you 
found the grenade to start it off. I admit you 
could debate for years on such a proposition as a 
definition of STF, but, when you choose that as 
your grenade, you ignored the atom bomb planted 
in the last three or four paragraphs — namely, 
his views on religion. 

In a brief sentence he stated that it would be a 
better, more progressive world, if we had less religion. Also he wonders how the top notch brain 
boys of science can profess religion. 

If that doesn't start a bigger fight than "what 
is STF?", I'm an uncle's monkey. 

Before I reveal to you the awesome, enlightening 
truth of the matter (my opinion) let me order you 
to give Mister Sherlock undisputed first place. 

Please? 

2nd to Mitchell Badler (for that very wonderful 
first paragraph). Third to A. A. Gilliland 

And now ... (the sound of bugles) . . . MY 
opinion ! ! ! 

It has been shown in the past that religion can 
hinder progress. Witness Greece, Rome, and the 
early days of Christianity. I feel, though, that 
it was due to the fact that religion was too closely 
linked with government. Any peoples that firmly 



believe that their religious priests can tell them 
and the government how to live, think, and 
breathe, will not progress. 

I do believe that modern religion is the solution 
Under a democratic religion, this ol' world has 
made unbelievable progress both in science and 
sociology, all in a comparatively short period of 
time. 

If, however, less religion does tend toward 
progress, then Russia undoubtedly will become the 
greatest country in the world. And I do not believe 
that 

How a scientist can also be religious has me 
stumped. Maybe someone else has some views on 
that matter. 

Becoming serious again, I must say that that 
thrilling picture of Ray Bradbury shining like a 
beacon on page 110, thrilled me no end. Look at 
him, his beautiful face like some dashing movie 
star, sneering disdainfully down at all the masses 
of his admirers (or maybe he has a stomach ache), 
bigh. Oh, girls, isn't he wonderful I 

Ya shouldn't of done it, Payne. Ya started 
something. I can just see the letters Ray is going 
to start receiving from awestruck female fans. 
You have now put dear Ray in a dangerous position . . . (bending over?). 

"Dear Ray: I love you passionately. If you do 
not marry me, I shall leap to my death from the 
roof of Matt's Meat Market ..." "Dear 

Ray: If you do not send me $457.87 by Feb. 23 
I shall name you as the father of my baby." 

See? Besides, that last girl can't claim that 
Kay Bradbury is the father of MY baby! 
I remain, 

Very truly mine, 

David M. Campbell 

THREE STEPS TO THE STARS 

2711 LaSalle Street 
~ -. Racine, Wisconsin 

Dear Editor: 

CONGRATULATIONS! HI say it againCONGRATULATIONS! (Heard 'you thf firTt 
time.— Ed.) 

"What fer?" says our ed (innocently keeping 
a modest smile on his purdy puss, but meanwhilst 
knowing all the time what fer). 

Why, congratulations for making the Winter 
Issue of Planet Stories one of the best issues 
I have ever read—and I've got all but four of 
em. The one blemish on your otherwise pure 
mag was that you did not print my letter. The 

mo ?Sc ordinator sha11 hear of this! Winter 
t r i, came as a very askable surprise after 
the fall magazine which I consider about the 
lousiest you've done thus far in your illustrious 
career, altho the lousiness was for the most part 
due to Bracket's Enchantress of Venus, which 
nauseated me no end. To paraphrase a' certain 
book that Lewis Sherlock (I'll get to him later) 
would not want mentioned here: "Yea, verily I 
say unto you, it stinketh !" 

The outstanding story of an outstanding issue 
was The Night Has a Thousand Eyes by John 
and Dorothy de Courcy. I rank this story well 
up among such classics as Bradbury's Million 
u? ar J tc 2 l %™ d ™y fevorite, the old epic, When 
Worlds Collide. Hereafter when anyone tries to 
tell me that stories about space pirates are hack, 
1 11 just push in their face with the Winter of 
Planet containing TNHATE and tell 'em to go 



. 



THE VIZIGR/IPH 



107 



to blazes! Where I shall now change the subject 
ere my missive becomes too lengthy. 

My, my, so Lewis Sherlock (I won't pun! I 
won't! I won't!) doesn't like Gushy Cowboy 
Stories being stuck on Mars and called STF. 
Well now, Whoa! Sherlock. Let's stop a moment 
and use a wee bit of perspective — as your namesake might have done. As my bearded English 
Prof (bless his icy heart) once painfully pointed 
out to me, there are only three (count 'em — 3) 
basic plots, to wit and viz: (oh how I love that 
phrase, to wit and viz: to wit and viz. — Uggle!) 
1. boy-meets-girl, 2. success and reverse-success 
story, and 3. the-man-who-learned better. Most 
stories, of course, are combinations of these basic 
plots, and you'll notice that none of them have 
anything to do with environment Obviously then, 
an author can have his plot enacted in ancient 
Greece or the Great Galaxy in Andromeda. In 
fact, you could probably lift the plot from any 
story and, with only minor changes, place it in 
completely different surroundings and still have a 
very passable story. 

To justify my point a little more, I'll just take 
Sherlock's suggestion and define STFiction. Science-Fiction is the author's particular mixture of 
the three basic plots placed in an environment of 
what he considers to be a logical extension of the 
future. This extension naturally must conform to 
accepted natural laws or, if it does not, it must 
replace the discarded law with a new one which 
does not contradict facts covered by the old one. 

In the future of space travel there will logically 
be three phases : 

1. The first phase will be an exploratory period. 
The cost of transportation being so high, the 
first explorers and colonists will be highly-trained 
and integrated scientists sent by national governments and large companies. 

2. Then some scientists will stumble across a 
cheap propulsive that will lift interplanetary travel 
up to about the same status as railroads held 100 
years ago. This will be the age of high romance; 
of fast-shooting rocketmen and lusty women; of 
space pirates and interplanetary warfare. Since 
this phase is as inevitable (unless something 
drastic occurs) as the pioneering days of our 
country were, don't you think the so-called "thud 
and blunder" stories have as much right in STF 
as any other type ? If you say, "Throw out stories 
of space piracy !" then I say, "Throw out sciencefiction!" for these tales are the blood of STF. 
Science-fiction was born in it and without it, will 
evenutally degenerate into a dry, lifeless travesty. 
I say, "Hurrah for Planet!" for upholding a 
losing but worthwhile cause when it prints socalled "cowboy-science-fiction". Of course, many 
such stories (not in Planet) are tripe, but the 
de Courcys have shown what a good yarn can be 
made from a logical extension. Naturally there 
will be important differences between the settling 
of the solar system and that of the West, but in 
general the effect will be similar. 

3. The last phase will be full colonization. 
Humanity will be still for a while. Then some 
damnfool will come out with an interstellar drive, 
and we're off again — with variations, but the 
same general outline. 

Well, Paul, that's my contribution to Planet's 
hysteria for this issue. Pics to Lizzy Curtis, 
Clarence Jacobs, and one to Paul Ganley for his 
well-worded post-script. 

Bruce Hapke 



0TODKI. Dept 211 



BHTSfr YBOY8tBere»* 
RfllL J| the real thing! 
r Mr-T^m Wl Just what you're 
iJcfllr ] looking for . . . 

mMw92^d Youn have tb * 

ZZ^^Btm m time of your life! 
10 small different booklets with chock full funniest 
cartoons (and other HOT offers). 
You'll be missing plenty — If you 
don't buy 'em NOW. Don't delay! 
Send a BUCK and we'll Bhln this funpacked package prepaid. No CO. IX 

Box 126-BO., New York.l. N, Y„ 



WANT A SWEETHEART? 

LONELY for Friendship, Romaics, ©r Marriage? "THE SOCIETY 
POST Correspondent Folio" can Help you FINd Friends or per* 
haps your IDEAL. Names, addresses, aad descriptions of opposite 
sex. Most ages, and types of orisinat. independent coast -to -coast 
Membership. To Ladies, 35* Gentlemen, half dollar. If sincere, 
please write, enclose stamp for sealed details. 

THE SOCIETY POST 
40 First Street Dept. A Maiden 48, Mast. 



ARE YOU LONELY? 

BRINGS BIG UP-TO-DATE LIST - ROMANTIC CLUB MEMBERS DESIRING 
EARLY MARRIAGE. ALL AGES; EITHER 
SEX. YEAR'S MEMBERSHIP, $1.00. SEND 
DESCRIPTION. 

DWIGHT IIILDEBRANT 

Box 805 Dept. KB, Omaha 1, Nebraska 

LONESOME? 

Find your Lifemate through my Club. Old 
and reliable; Established 1924. Personal service for refined men and women. Nationwide 
membership; Many state they are wealthy. 
(CONTINUOUS, DEPENDABLE, INDIVIDUAL 
Service.) Confidential Introductions by letter. Free Particulars, Photos* Descriptions, Seeled. 

LOIS L. REEDER, Box 549, Palestine, Texas 





LONESOME? 

A LONELY HEARTS CLUB THAT'S DIFFERENT! 

Introductions by letter. Confidential, Dignified, Honest service. Write for FREE sealed particulars. 

LESTER GOLLIDAY 
P.O. Box 2014-G Columbus 16. Ohio 




SgfferVarUos^ 



LEC (ORES? 



Tells all about this 40-year-old method, praised and i__ 
dorsed by thousands. Llepe Methods, Dept. J-76 
3284 N. Green Bay Ave., MQwsnkte. Wisconsin . 



WHY BE LONELY? 

If It's Friends. Romance or Companionship you 
want, let one of America's foremost Clubs arrange 
a correspondence for you, A confidential service. 
Nationwide membership. Sealed particulars free. 
Send stamp and age. 

PEARL J. SMITH 
P. O. Box 2732-H Kansas City, Mo. 






108 PLANET STORIES 

BACK INTO THE WOODWORK 



1431 2nd Avenue SE 
Cedar Rapids, Iowa 

Dear Planet's Lint-Headed Pterodactyl: 

My letters are getting fewer and fewer as time 
goes on, so you'd better print this lest I never 
write another. Just think, it might make the 
Spring Ish of dear ol' Planet a shrine to me. 

Glad to see the Vizi is still plugging. I recommend that somebody start a society for the prevention of guys like Hall. I was so mad when I 
read that letter of his that I wrote a long bubbling, beautifully hateful thing to you suggesting 
a thousand different ways to do away with guys 
like him, but after I cooled down a little I decided not to send it, thinking lots of other guys 
felt the same way and would send theirs. Then I 
wrote you a card telling you to keep La Viz and 
not to pay any attention to those dopes, and I 
forgot to mail it, I think. 

The best letter (for 1st choice) was Ed Cox's. 
His opinions were nearly the same as mine, and 
what a character. Why can't I be funny like that? 
I'm just stupid. I'll never get a illo . . . Bawww. 

Conner came next Give him two cracks. In 
only one point do I disagree with him and that one 
is his remark about Hamilton. Brackett in her 
way, and that way being style, is better than 
Hamilton, but there will never be another to come 
up to Hamilton's shoulders in plotting ability. 

Let Lew Sherlock have third for his sound 
discussion. I wish I could write a letter like that 
once in a while too. I'm just stupid. I'll never 
get an illo— Oh, pardon me, I said that once. 

Now to the yarns . . . 

I opened the book to the title page, and there, 
looming up at me, outshining everything else, 
was that one fiery sentence. "McDowell Returns 
with another Flaming Out-World Novell" Well, 
every word of the sentence was truth, but wasn't 
it a trifle melodramatic? Oh well, who cares? 
Sword of Fire was, I believe, the year's second 
most outstanding novel, Bracken's Enchantress 
of Venus of the issue before this one being the 
first most outstanding. McDowell can write. Man, 
how he can write ! Swords of Fire was by far the 
first this issue. I hope you pay him for his work 
as he deserves to be paid. For cold-action style, 
he is tops. 

The Dead-Star Rover seemed to be a nicelyhandled novel, too, and it was different, way different from your usual stuff. It was second and 
would have been first except for McDowell's 
neat style. Abernathy is good. His names are very 
exclusive. Torcred, Vascled, etc. 

I recognized one name, speaking of names in 
your stories, that Brackett used in a swell long 
novel in another mag (a novel, by the way, which 
I felt should have been in Planet). The name, 
Rhiannon. He was a god in Brackett's yarn. 
Tubemonkey was good, too. Nice, cold-action 
styling there too, I thought. It was third. 

The story behind Night Has a Thotisand Eyes 
was good, but the title, and a copied title at that, 
was corny in this situation. It lined up for fourth 
place. 

Bryce Walton is always good. The Green Dream 
did not disappoint me. 

Jimmie MacCreigh was up to par too. The 
best thing I ever read by MacCreigh was Donovan 
Had a Dream. Morbid and beautiful, that was. 

Flight From Time, I'm sorry to say, did 



not agree with my nervous system. I did not enjoy 
it as well as the others, but it was readable. The 
whole darned book was readable, but lacking of 
red-eyed Ray Bradbury, sadly enough. 

Oh yes, that reminds me, I saw that picture of 
him you ran in La Vizi. It came off pretty good. 
I'll send you mine and you can put it in, that'll 
send 'em. (Where? Well, that remains to be seen, 
but I'll send 'em.) Why don't you print more 
pics of your writers? I'd like to know what 
McDowell and Walton look like, and a few more 
(We'll print 'em if they'll send 'em—Ed.) 

The cover was, it was, . . . why, I, it was . . . 
yes, wasn't it though. Who'd you use for a heromodel, Johnny Weismuller? And what'sa idea of 
that beat-up old meat-axe he's swinging? 

Put away the gun, Anderson, it was okay. But 
I wish that they'd leave out that stupid block sign 
of lettering. It would be much nicer without it. 

The McWilliams drawings were all fine, but I 
have a question. What does he use to draw them 
with? Chalk? They're all so cut-and-dried perfect You only featured one artist in the last three 
or four years whom I have liked better than 
Mac, and that was Rubimor. He did the best 
inside illos of any artist I have come in contact 
with, I even like his work, as far as facial expression and proportion go, better than Finlay. 
(Why don't you use Finley?) 

Well, I said my piece, now I shall crawl back 
into the woodwork until once more PS graces the 
newsstand and I will come out and ungrace it with 
21 cents. 

Stupidly, 

Marvin Williams 
(Finlay, we feel, lends himself far better to 
fantasy than science fiction. We have always admired his work. — Ed.) 

A MODEL READER 

2615 West Cary Street 
_ w Richmond 20, Virginia 

Dear Editor: 

I've never made a habit of writing STF mags 
before and I hope it won't continue. I barely have 
enough time to read all of 'em that are on the 
market now. And in fact that is the only complaint I have or will have if any new ones crop 
up. That is, if the number of mags on the market 
increases I just won't have time enough to read 
them, and I know it'll just kill me. Just think, not 
being able to read all of them. 

I love all of your stories, your authors, the editors and publishers and the printers even. I have 
no complaints, no criticisms, no suggestions. Your 
magazine is perfect as far as set-up, etc. is concerned. If you want to cut out the letters that is 
okay, and if you want to increase the number of 
letters that is okay with me too. If all your 
authors want to put sex in their stories that's 
okay, and if they want to leave it out, well, I'm 
not going to kick. The only time I'm going to 
kick is the time I go to my dealer and he tells me 
he's just sold the last copy of your mag. Interesting thought. Eh! 

Good thing I thought of that, so I think I'll 
enclose my personal check for eighty cents, and 
have you send it to me. That way I just can't miss 
your mag. can I ? 

Very truy yours, 

Garland M. Roberts 



THE VfZf GRAPH 



109 



ANOTHER VICTIM OP THE 
TIME WARP 

Hotel Flanders 

135 West 47th Street 

New York 19, N. Y. 

Dear Paik: 

As things do stand (and they do stand vertically), I have been an admirer (?) and reader 
of Planet ever since I bought my first copy two 
years ago at the age of 10. But at that time, being 
a shy and timorous young fool, I didn't have 
courage enough to address a letter to the revered 
—ugh— and august La Vizi. But times have 
changed and I am now a little older perhaps, but 
also a little wiser at 14. (We make you out to be 
twelve years old, but maybe we can't add. — Ed.) 

After having stealthily crept up and having 
filched a copy of Planet from the blind man's 
newsstand, the first thing I turn to peruse wrth 
bloodshot orbs is (natch!) La mon amis Vizi! To 
have discontinued the latter item from Planet's 
mystical pages, as was so brazenly proposed in 
the Summer ish of P. S., would have been akin 
to the action of gouging a man's eyes out; and 
since La Vizi is the eyes of our sagacious and 
entertaining zine, let me offer my three arms in an 
amorous embrace now that you have thought of 
continuing LV. 

The stories in the Winter Ish were above par ; 
even thoughtfulness was shown in their storytelling capacity. Of course, there were too many 
of the usual blurbs in two or three tales but with 
the Dead Star Rover and Sword of Fire, which 
are incidentally tied for first place, what else 
can one ask ! ! — Let the Ants Try is undoubtedly 
one of the best stories Planet has had in a long 
while, and that includes novel-length as well as 
short stories. MORE end-of-the-world and maddoctor stories PLEASE, with a sprinkling of the 
time-machine element now and then. Tubemonkey 
and The Night Has a Thousand Eyes (aye-yieye!) tie together as the poorest tales. All that 
was missing from the latter tale was Edward G. 
Robinson. Mebbe it would've been better if Robinson was included in Planet's version of "1000 
Eyes." 

The Green Dream takes place with the above 
two tales and lives up to its title, no doubt being 
written by a green author; also very reminiscent 
of a detective story I read the other week about a 
murderer in the Louisiana bayous who plans the 
murder of his brother, except that this took place 
on Venus. Shucks ! I could write better than that 
with three of my eyes shut; as a matter of fact 
I might write a "good" story just for reprisal. 

Flight From Time would have been one of the 
"A-l" stories in this ish if it were not for the 
dubious and unsatisfactory ending. If Malenson's 
escape from justice was supposed to last for 15 
years, even though in reality it was only a 22 
month stellar cruise, and though his metabolism 
increased to unusual proportions, how can it be 
explained that he ate up his 15 years' stock of 
food in only 22 months ? Supposing that his 
speeded up metabolism may have been the primary 
factor for his over-indulgence, I cannot credulously conceive how one person could devour in 22 
months only a supply of food meant to stretch over 
a period of 15 years, without dying from acute 
gastritis, heart failure or other internal symptoms 
before he reached the Earth ! ! I — Someone 
puUese explain ere I turn to gluttony from being 



LONESOME? 

Marry Rich! 

Do yon want letters from our well-to-do 
members? Yes. from your own state. Send 
name and age for our free matching chart. 
Try us — we're different, and very fast, 

BLAIR CLUB 

i 153 i-FH Broadway CUicago 4©. IUL 



BAKING 



• *, 



Baking la one of America's high industries in wages. Not seasonable, but year 'round 
good field for trained and experienced men. 
Thorough basic sparo time home study course 
lays solid foundation. If you have the aptitude 
for this type of work, send for FREE Booklet, 
!'Opportunities in Commercial Baking." 

NATIONAL BAKING SCHOOL 
1315 S. Michigan Ave., Dept 2191. Chicago, IU. 



^DICE-CARDS 

Perfect Dice, Magic Dice, Magic 
Cards— READ THE BACKS— 
Inks, Daubs, Poker Chips, Gaming 
Layouts, Dice Boxes, Counter Games. 
Punch-boards, Articles never before heard of Send 
for famous 72 page fully illustrated BLUE BOOK 
CATALOGUE today while supply lasts! Enclose 10c 
coin to help pay cost of shipping and handling. 
K. C. CARD CO.. 815 S. Wabash Avenue, Chicago 5. BL 





— Many are finding 
welcome relief through the gentlo 
vibration, adjustable soothing heat,and) 
dilation provided by theDUA-THERlt. 
A modern, sclttrtlf Icslly designed instrument for easy, economical home use; 
liberal terms. Write today for full do* 
tails and 30-day trial off er.lnter- rnrr 
•sting booklet on Prostatitis rKtt 

THE DILA-THEWM CO., INC. 
•12 E. Colfax Av«., South Bend 24. lad* 



THERM 



Learn 

How to 



HYPNOTIZE/ 



Develop your personal POWER I 

NOW . . . revealed for you . ■ . are the secrets 
■ of practical hypnotism . . . that strange, 
' compelling force by which an expert operator 
can bring others nnder his power. He can 
■way people at will— issue commands and be 
obeyed— virtually cast a spall over his sub* 
, jects. This sensational knowledge may make 
YOU a more dominant, masterful personality. 
Illustrated SELF-INSTRUCTION 
COURSE in Useful Hypnotism 
Amazing lessons in simple, easy - to - understand language. How to select a subject — 
, bow to hypnotize by telephone— how to make 
' money from hypnotism— mental telepathystage hypnotism — self- hypnosis — how to use 
modern hypnotism to conquer inferiority complex, timidity, eta. Clear helpful pictures show operAkil %# £« Of" sain* positions, movement*. Startlingjow price. Sat\J PlL 1 91 • * ~ is faction guaranteed or money bask. 
SEND NO MONETY! Simply pay postman $1.95 plus C. O. D. postage — or send $1.95 and we pay postage; same money-back guarantee. 
Order "Hypnotism Course" todayl 
Nelson- Hall Co.. 1139 8. Wabash Ave., Deft. B-15, Cbleaoo 5, III. 







110 



PLANET STORIES 



frustrated. (We forgot to say that when Coppel 
came out of his closet he was turrible hunqrv. — 
Ed.) 

AHA & EUREKA I!! I see that the Ray of 
Bradbury will appear once again within the neglected sanctum sanctorum of Planet. Strange 
how you neglect the better authors and writers 
of such parsimonious stories and letters as me. 
Now take me for example; I have with me a 
novel of super-duper science and space-ships of 
100,000 words and if you'll only look at it 

Hasta La Vizi for the nonce, 

Calvin Thomas Beck 

DREADS CLOSETS 

4 Spring Street 
Lubec, Maine 
Dear Paul: 

I get back from the Convention and what do I 
find waiting for me? Well, uh, among other 
things, Planet Stories I So I read it. 

Abernathy seems to be getting good now. His 
first coupla three P Stories weren't so hot, but 
his "come-back" stories are much better. The 
mechanized "fauna" of the future is a new one 
to me. Pretty good, too. But even better was 
Sword of Fire. Nice to see this guy back again. 
Both "novels" were titled oddly (not fitting to the 
story; or else, please explain how they link up?). 
Tops in the shorts were Let the Ants Try and 
The Night Has a Thousand Eyes. Very good. 
Anthology material, if you ask me (and so what 
if ya didn't?). The others were worth their space 
(he callously writes, not caring how the authors 
wince as they read the careless words . . . ). 

But speaking of pen-names (a pet subject of 
mine, heheh) ... If you included this issue in 
your ". . . . past year . . ." (We didn't— Ed.) , 
there was at least one in this issue you don't 
know about But, with it being possible that it is 
supposed to be secret or sumpin', I won't mention 
it. 

Liked the pics, as usual, this time. Especially 
McWilliams'. Saw some originals by him during 
the auctions at the convention, but being too poor 
to bid on them, I don't snag them, durn it ! 

Hmm, guess No. 1 ought to go to W. Paul Ganley, he tries so hard and long. Dard gets 2nd and 
Sherlock (of Sherlock's Super Spaceships, Inc.) 
gets third I notice a gal from Maine has written 
in! At last, a fellow (oops, femme) Maine- iac. 
But why hasn't she written me? Mebbe she's read 
my letters . . . 

Not being an unkind beast at heart, PLP, I'll 
spare you and NOT write that four-page letter 
covering PS for 1949. But I will say that 1949 
was a good year, all in all. Brackett came back, 
for one thing. The letter-section stood the acid 
test And you printed a letter of mine in all four 
issues! Gad, thanks! 

The Bradbury story for next issue sounds good. 
About Thomas Wolfe and titled Forever and The 
Stars . . .? What connection? 

Suggestions: Where is Henry Hasse? Also 
Basil Wells. Then let's see . . . you have Fennel 
and McDowell . . . where is Gardiner F. Fox 
and Rocklynne ? Um, guess Rocklynne has stopped 
writing, for STFiction zines, at least. But De 
Pina is writing again. Get him! Of course, for 
new material, there are lots of guys. One Ed Cox 
for instance . . . heheh, one of these days . . . 
BEWARE! 



I haven t tried locking myself in a closet yet ; 
when that haopens, I'll be overdue in a looney-bin, 
but for a definition of science-fiction . . . well, if 
I try, I will end up in one! 

You know darned well guys have been trying 

It .c-Si 1 . 1115 for y< ? rs * But • • • tew say now 
that bit is a story based on scientific knowledge 
of today forecasting and experimenting with possible advances these sciences will make and their 
effect on humanity. I'd go along with that quite a 
l?&£ u t also sorta cal1 i* a literature (YES, YES 
YES LITERATURE!) of what the future may 
possibly be. What may be beyond the stars (even 
now), what Man may find in his own small system 
of planets. Science fiction explores and tests new 
ideas and inventions and what they may do to our 
culture. It has made many predictions (and still 
does) of what may (and has) happen(ed) when 
the atomic bomb and nower is used. That I consider as proof. Looks like this is getting beyond a 
mere definition but you are getting my idea. 

STFanatically, 

Ed Cox, the Maine-iac 

AGAIN. NO STF IN PS! 



806 Oak Street 
Runnemede, N. J. 
Dear Lint-Headed Pterodactyl (Don't blame 

me for the salutation. It is your own fault) : 
j-j V f ., th ? Wmtcr Planet Stories; so much 
did I like it that I am writing this, my first 
PLANET-bound epistle. The Dead Star Rover by 
Abernathy was much better than that author's 
recent Hostage of Tomorrow. I am not any authority on science-fiction (or anything else for 
that matter) but The Dead-Star Rover impresses 
me as a very original story, perhaps deserving of 
the label of "classic"? (But of course t— Ed.) 

I like the cover very much. At least nobody can 
insult Anderson by saying that the cover illustrates a scene from the featured story like someone did in the last issue. The cover was quite an 
abstraction on the story: It's confoozin* but 
amoozin'. 

Biggest gripe of the issue for me was Let the 
Ants Try by MacCreigh. It deals with timeparadoxes, but yet it is written in a dull, uninteresting way. Surely time paradoxes are not so 
commonplace that Gordy can suggest casually 
that they give the ants a chance. The author tried 
to pack a lot of events into a short story; as a 
result the story reads like the outline of a novel. 
MacCreigh should study short story technique. 
Bradbury, whom I compare, not in style but in 
effect, with the best of Poe, would merely have 
taken, if he had written the story, the atomic 
destruction of Detroit and would have written a 
GEM of a short story. 

The Night Has a Thousand Eyes was the best 
of the short stories. The de Courcys turn out 
some good stuff; this is better than the sad tale 
of Goma's follicles. 

The short stories were all fair filler material, 
nothing sensational. The illustrations were better 
than they have been for a few issues. 

Emmett McDowell returns to the crumbling 
halls of PS and all the sad relics and worn ancient 
tapestries seem to glow with their original beauty 
that they once knew in the Golden Age. Sword 
of Fire was splendid except for the ending. Please* 



THE VIZIGRAPH 



111 






Emmett, haven't you heard the old chestnut: 
"Two is company and three is a auisance. Why 
couldn't you let Lete get Jupiter; I dont care for 
Tabak 

I am nearly beyond my limit and I have not 
even mentioned la Vizi. Give original pics to — 
(short pause for mental gymnastics) — Wilkie 
Conner, Lewis Sherlock, and Phillip Waggoner. 
I see the Vizigraph still remains, daringly hanging 
on though spattered with Venusian mud from the 
vicious pollsters (or should I say poll-cats?) and 
weighted down by the numerous orchids presented 
by Chad Oliver so that his flow of PS originals 
would not be interfered with. ^ 

I am now going to define science-fiction tor you 
and I am SURE that it will not agree with your 
definition. This letter, once I get started, is liable 
to stretch into extra pages, but I am sure (C) 
you won't mind ; after all, you're only the editor. 
(But my shears are sharp.— Ed.) __-.___ r4 I shall now proceed to shock you. NONE Ur= 
THE STORIES PRINTED IN THE PRESENT ISSUE OF PLANET STORIES CAN 
II CLASSIFIED AS SCIENCE-FICTION. 
Take it easy, editor, we are now over the worst 
part. You have already ripped out half your hair ; 
don't pull out the other onel Calm down, old fellow. I should have realized the shock would be 
too much for your heart. Oh, well, it looks like 
PS is going to have a new editor. (Sigh) Most 
of the stories Planet publishes are, according to 
MY definitions, merely scientific mdcrirama— 
NOT science-fiction. Also, according to me, bcience-Fiction is not Melodrama ; and vice-versa . . . 
I see Bradbury is returning next ish. Hooray, 
now I know the Spring Planet Stories will be 
good. 

Definitely STFanatically I sign myself, 

Dave Hammond 



YOU TWO SHOULD MEET 

Box 49 

Runnemede, New Jersey 

Dear Editor: 

I have just devoured (nearly) the entire contents of the latest Planet Stories and 1 liked 
every story with the exception of Let the Ants 

Try 

The Dead-Star Rover was an epic novel and 
it was well liked by this fellow. I only wish that 
mankind had not been saved at the end of the 
story. If Abernathy had not — ded the tale as he 
did he could write sequels. (Like Brackett does.) 
He could still write sequels, of course, but they 
wouldn't be as good. I would like to read a story 
from, say, a buzzard's view point, or a snail s, or 
a dragon's. It was still extra special. # 

I had a good deal of trouble getting this issue. 
(Yes, Editor, the next time I have to fly to the 
Moon newsstand I am going to charge the ticket 
to Planet's Lousy Parasite! Don't forget!) 

Emmett McDowell was swell. I will never forget this author's wonderful The Wandering Egos. 
Talk about good reading ! ! ! Sword of Fire, while 
not up to the terrific standard set by the aforementioned story, did credit to the name of McDowell. Hey! Editor, you said McDowell is a 
pen name. What is the real name? Algernon 
Gurngy, perhaps?? Or maybe Fitzwater McSnort? Well, if you won't tell, it doesn't matter. 
(He was christened Robert Emmett McDowell.— 



LOVE! MONEY! POWER! 

All the«e can be yours! Handwriting reveals the hidden 
talents which will make you a success in your personal 
life. Get your individual analysis today 1 Send ten 
lines in your writing and 25 cents U> — 

SEYMOUR SCHNEID 

1669 Norman St., Ridgewood 27, Queens, New YorK 



ARE YOU LONESOME?— 

Large 16-page magazine, complete with details, pictures and descriptions, both ladies 
) and gentlemen. Copy lOtf; with ladies' or 
gentlemen's addresses 50^. 

WEED AGENCY 
772 Cleveland Ave., Bridgeport 4, Conn* 

_0 m__* *% * *t ****************** *~ ** 



WANT TO BE A MERCHANT SEAMAN? 
ffllr AV ' STARTING PAY 



! 195 



OR MORE 
PLUS FOOD 
OVERTIME 
LODGING 



TRAVEL-ADVENTURE 

CAREER AT SEA ON 

AMERICAN SHIPS 



NO EXPERIENCE REO^UIRED jo START 

ry.«FRVlCEM£N WITH SUFFICIENT SERVICE 

MAY QUALIFY FOR SHIP'S OFFICERS 

MERCANTILE INFORMATION BUREAU OF ^ALV«TON 
Box ©954-0, Walbrook Station Baltimore 1*. Md. 




f of FUN or- PPOUT ' 



MAGIC IS FUN! 
MAKE MAGIC YOUR HOBBY1 

Send for our new largo Illustrated eatajgf of 
500 amazing tricks and Jokes, suitable tor 
parlor, elub or stage. All aro easy to do! 
Romit only 10*. coin* or stamps. Your catalog will be mailed at onco. 

D. ROB8INS & CO.. Otyt. H-f 
152 W. 42 Stroot. Now York 18. N. Y. 



+ SONG POEMS TO BE SET TO MUSIC 
Submit one or more of your best poems for free 
M examination. Any subject. Send poem. 
^ Phonograph Records Made 

FIVE STAR MUSIC MASTERS 

M 420 Beacon Building o Boston 8, Mast. 



Be AUni jo* tUe 



BULL'S® EYE: 



MAGAZINES 

Lariat Fight 

Northwest Baseball 

Action Football 

Jangle Two Western 

Planet Frontier 

»»#««#»*» #>#«##«'»»»»«««««* * ***** 



: 









112 



PLANET STORIES 



Ed.) To paraphrase a quotation: "A story, by 
Ray^Bradbury, by any other name would read as 
well", or so everyone thought until they heard of 
the REFERENT. 

Throw those originals to Ganley, Waggoner, 
and Conner. The originals that you don't send to 
the winners, put where you usually put them. 
Then mail me your wastebasket ! I'll give you a 
break and not try to define science-fiction. 

Yours truly, 

David Van Jenrette 



THEY ALL SAY GHAA! 

129 Edgemere Street 
Fayetteville, N. Y. 
Dear Payne-in-the-neck : 

A few comments on the winter (brr!) issue. 

Ghaa ! What a lousy cover. 

Where's Brackett? We want Brackett, Brackets BRACKETT 1 ! ! 

The stories were all fine except the ones beginning on pages 2, 70, 29, 36, 42, and 85. La Vizi 
was swell. I don't think much of the new heading, 
though. 

Who cut out the "Raise Hamsters" ad *$&;:( 
()(^''\- :;**)*(*-!*!*! This is usually thebest 
story in the whole book! 

Why don't you start a fanzine department? 
Then you could review my Super- Slobzine entitled "Slightly Different" (excuse me while I 
get in a little plug.) It costs only one thin dime, 
and uh — and uh — Oh well, it's cheap, anyway. 

There's a cute little BEM waiting out in the 
car for me, so good-bye, you limp-eared pterodactyl. 

Alan M. Grant 

WE ASKED FOR THIS! 

Box 1296 

_ „ Levelland, Texas 

Dear Editor: 

SCIENCE FICTION may be defined as the 
feigned systematization of such departments of the 
mind as are given over to the investigation of 
admittedly illogical phenomena occuring at unexpected places in the several departments of matter 
(IV ow! — Ed.) 

In the coupling together of any two nouns 
ordinarily opposed to the accepted definition of 
each other we invariably obtain an intermediate 
meaning that bears but slight resemblance to either 
primary. The nouns so coupled lose their immediate identities and become territorial markers rather 
than subjective boundaries, and the use of such 
hyphenated nouns is ordinarily restricted to some 
definite application. 

Science is not a fiction because it is neither 
feigned nor invented, and by no stretch of the 
imagination can it be termed a legal assumption 
for the purpose of convenience in the furtherance 
of justice. Science is the systematized knowledge 
of some one or more departments of mind or matter, and Fiction is the accounting in prose form 
for the imagined results of an imaginary sequence 



in physical events. The two words are as radical 
in meaning as is North and South, for they shade 
the meaning of each other in much the same 
manner. 

Since Science is not a fiction and Fiction is not 
a science, Science Fiction is neither a science nor a 
faction. It is neither fact nor phantasv but rather 
something phantastically factual which can be 
neither proved nor disproved. Proved, it becomes 
scientific. Disproved, it becomes fictional. Only 
when absolute proof or disproof is lacking may 

FfctioT tCntS a St ° ry bC HRhtly Called Scicn< * 
Thus the writer of a story whose locale is that 
of another planet gains all the advantages of 
evolving an imaginary world in which his own 
mental and physical laws become the governing 
principles, but takes on the obligation of consistency in the application of those laws. He must 
not, at any time, discard a stated law for the convenience of furthering the plot to his story by a 
shift to laws he has previously pronounced inapplicable on that particular planet. In so doing 
he brands himself incapable of staying within his 
own laws, proving that his imagined world is 
based on Fiction to the exclusion of Science 

I might add that, to my notion, Science Fiction 
reaches its full height only when the author keeps 
his characters and events within those limits he 
himself unfolds ->s the plot develops, and refuses 
to break any one of such stated precepts for no 
better reason than the one that his leading character must somehow emerge triumphant. 

By abolishing all property rights just long 
enough to loot some Federal Treasury we could 
all become rich— but could we keep it? (What 
day ts today?— Ed.) 

Sincerely, 

R. A. Bradley 

IS MAD FOR THE ADS 

235 Westchester Avenue 
^ „ Port Chester, N. Y. 

Dear Editor: 

I have just wandered through the Winter Ish. 
Rirty good. The ads in the back show a decided 
improvement. Why not leave out the Viz and 
print more ads? Come to think of it, why not 
leave out the stories and . . . but I suppose that's 
asking too much. 

On to the cover. How in &$**!) (' is the blonde 
attached to the Bern? Scotch tape, mayhap? Also, 
my befuddled, tired, little mind wonders why she 
doesn't use the business end of her little dandy 
atom shooter. Our hero has a pained look, no 
doubt from the effects of being plugged by the 
purple man's spaghetti sprayer. 

The stories, I'll grudgingly have to admit, are 
just about beyond reproach. Anything by McDowell is OK with yours truly, and MacCreigh's 
effort made good reading on the seventh attempt. 
I spentthe first six wondering who screamed anyway. Now I know. It was a scream of Payne. 

Goombye 

Theodore Mead 

(The Great One) 



/Hf/u Send You 

^^ I 64 PACE BOOt ^T^ 

See how I give you practical ing. Read letters from men I < 

experience building Radio cir- trained, telling what they are 

cuits at home with Bid KITS doing, earning. See the kind of 

()l< PARTS I SEND. IHus- fascinating jobs Radio, Tele


fK 



trated book shows how you vision, Electronics offer. FREE 

make extrainomy fixing Ra 

in spare time while still learn


clios with coupon below! 



/ ACTUAL MAD/O USSON 

vut*v co ?V° n ^.VAK 8 • you t0 " s "Perhet" circuits work, three 

n,Tnl«4«wi iv-V* Getting Ac- reasons why tubes fail, locating 

SS, 1 ^ t^i 1 K^eiver Ser- defects, repairing loudspeaker. 

J, 1 . " 1 ',. J short-cuts Ra- Over 80 pictures, diagrams. 

dio Repairmen use. Tells how FREE! Send coupon now. 




See for yourse/f how /train you at fame to 

Be A Radio-Television Technician 



Want a good-pay job in the fast-growing RADIOTELEVISION Industry? Want a money-making 
Radio-Television shop of your own ? Here's your 
opportunity. I've trained hundreds of men to be 
Radio Technicians — MEN WITH NO PREVIOUS 
EXPERIENCE. My tested and proved train-athome method makes learning easy. You learn 
Radio-Television principles from illustrated 
lessons. You get practical experience 
building, testing, experimenting with 
MANY KITS OF PARTS I send. All 
equipment yours to keep. 

Make EXTRA MONEY In Spare Time 

The day you enroll, I start sending SPECIAL BOOKLETS that show you 
how to make $5. $10 a week EXTRA 
MONEY fixing neighbors' Radios in 
spare time. From here it's a short step 
to your own shop, or a good-pay RadioTelevision servicing job. Or get into 
Police, Aviation, Marine Radio. Broadcasting. Radio Manufacturing or Public Address work. And think of the 
present and future opportunities in the 
booming Television Industry. 

See What N.R.I. Can Do For You 

Act now! Send for my DOUBLE FREE OFFER. Coupon 

fviii? T^T^r^tual lesson, "GETTING ACQUAINTED 
WITH RECEIVER SERVICING." absolutely free. Over 80 
pictures and diagrams! You also get my 64-page book, "HOW 
Sr\,£i\. \ IN RADIO AM) TELEVISION
ELECTRONICS." Tells how quickly, easilv vou can get 
started Send coupon in envelope or paste on penny postal. 
J. E. SMITH. President. Dept. 9NO, National Radio Institute, Pioneer Home Study Radio School, Washington 9, I). (\ 

I TRAINED THESE MEN 

Has Own 
Radio Business 
"Now hare two Radio shops, servicing about 200 sets 
a month. Highly 
successful our first 

mmm , full year." A ft. 

LEY STUDY VI N, DeSoto, 

Missouri. 



You Build This MODERN RADIO with Parts I Send 

Complete, powerful Superheterodyne 
Radio Receiver brings in local and distant stations. N. R. I. gives you 
everything . . . speaker, tube, chassis, 
transformer, 
sockets, loop 
antenna, and 
all other Radio 
parts you need 
to build set-j 






Extra Cash In 
Sparc Time 

"Earned enough 
spare time i 
pay for my < 
by time I graduated, n. a. i. 

training is tops!" 
-ALEXANDER KISH, Carteret, New Jersey. 



SMITH, Pres., Dept. 9NG 



J National Radio Institute, Washington 9, D. C. 

1 Mail me FREE Sample Lesson and 64-page book abo 



Sample .. 
win success in Radio and Tell I 
will call. Please write plainly.) 



I iook about h m to 
Kleetr.c 



MY COURSE 
INCLUDES 



TELEVISION 



I 
I 
I 

I 
I 

| CITY .ZONE STATK 

■ D Check If Veteran Approved For Training Under G. i. Bill 



NAME s 

ADDRESS 



I 



fljEfl up S minute Edition of Famous Manual 

MAKES/^AUTO REPAIR JOB 



it 



NEW! 






95 MORE Pages! 

795 BIG Pages in All! 

*nore Chapters! More Facts! 



, REVISED! 

WJ 418 NEW Pictures/ 2100 in All! 141 NEW 
.Pictures on Hydramatic Drive! 



Now You Can Repair 
949 MODELS-As Well 
>y Car Built Since 1935! 



TRY BOOK FOR A WHOLE WEEK- FREE 

Return and Pay Nothing it Not Satisfied! 



HERE it is!— the brand-new, revised, enlarged edition of MoToR's 
Auto Repair Manual! Now you can "lick" any auto repair job on 
any car built since 1935— including all 1949 models! Just look up make, 
model, and job in quick index— and go to it. 

EVERYTHING YOU NEED TO KNOW TO REPAIR ANY CAR! 




795 BIG pages; 2100 "how-to-doit" pictures; 200 "quick-check" 
specifications, charts, and tables; 
over 200,000 facts make every 
operation a "snap"! Beginners will 
find in this giant book the most 
helpf ulguidance on every 
kind of service and repair job imaginable. Experts will be amazed by 
the shortcuts they'll discover. 

Wirt Prestige! Earn 
More Money! 

Factory engineers from 
every auto plant in America worked out these timesaving procedures. Now 
you get all this wealth 
of "know-how" from over 
150 Official Shop Manuals, "boiled down" into 
clear terms in one handy 
book! Now you can tackle 
jobs you wouldn't think of 
trying before. And you'll 



MOTOR'S 

AUTO 

REPAIR 
MANUM 



Auburn Cord 
Austin Croslcy 

Buick De Soto 

Cadillac Dodge 
Chevrolet Ford 
Chrysler Frazer 

Graham 

Hudson 

Kaiser 

Lafayette 

La Salle 

Lincoln 

Mercury 

Nash 

Oldsmobile 

Packard 

Pierce Arrow 

Plymouth 

Pontiac 

Reo 

Studebaker 

Terraplanc 

Willys 



win more prestige, more money! i 

Right at your fingertips you have every • 
"How-to-do-it" fact you want. Over ] 
35,000 essential dimensions on 697 car 
models! Whether you want to make a simirburetor adjustment or completely 
rebuild a transmission, step-by-step instructions show exactly WHAT 
do, HOW to do it. Used by 
U. S. Army, technical schools, 
thousands of auto service men. 



SEND NO MONEY 

Send no money. Knjoy this 
brand-new book at our risk 
for a full week, FREE! Test it 
right in your own garage or 
shop. If book doesn't more than 
pay for itself in 7 days, simply 
return it and pay nothing. Mail 
coupon NOW to MoToR Book 
Desk 10D, 250 West 
55th St., New York 19, N. Y. 



0m 

"-•*;r «;«■"& 



<2HB> 

Published 
by MoToR, 
The Leadinq 
Automotive 
Business 
Magazine 



Some FREE Offer on 

MoToR's TRUCK MANUAL 

Covers EVERY Job on EVERY truck made from 
1936 thru 1946! 1400 pictures, 952 pages, 300,000 
facts. All types Gasoline Engines, Truck Dii 
Hesselmans, Fuel Systems, Governors. Lubi 
tion, Ignition, Starters. Clutches, Axles. Bn 
etc., etc. 

ALSO covers many buses, tractors, contractor 
and road building equipment, stationary power 
machinery. Check box in coupon. 




MAIL COUPON NOW FOR 7- DAY FREE TRIAL 



MoToR BOOK DEPT. 

Desk 10D, 250 West 55th St., New York 19, N. Y. 

Rush '■ "t): 

□ MoToR's AUTO REPAIR MANUAL. If O.K., T will remit 
-! monthly for 2 
months and a final payment of 95c one month after ii, 

1] return the hook postpaid i:. ■■))! price, 

□ MoToR's TRUCK REPAIR MANUAL. (Described at left.) 
If O.K., I will remit $2 in 7 .lays, and $2 monthly for 8 
rsres with final payment, other
!1 return hook postpaid in . /» ptic, , 

Print Name Ac 

Prl nt Address 



□ Chock box and save 35c delivery charW 1 'ill 

refund privilege applies. 



