J 1 




APRIL, 1956 

m 



LEGION OF 
LAZARUS 

by Edmond Hamilton 

IT ISN'T the dying itself. 
I It's what comes before. 
The waiting, alone in a 
room without windows, 
trying not to think. The 
opening of the door, the 
voices of the men who are 
going with you but not all 
the way. The walk down 
the corridor to the airlock 
room, the faces of the men, 
closed and impersonal. 
They do not enjoy this. 
Neither do they shrink 
from it. It's their job. 

This is the room. It is 
small and it has a window. Outside there is no 
friendly sky, no clouds. 
There is space, and there 
is the huge red circle of 
Mars filling the sky, looking down like an enormous 
eye upon this tiny moon. 
But you do not look up. 
You look out. 

There are men out there. 
They are quite naked. 

The one garment you 
have worn is taken from 
you and the lock door 
opens, and the fear that 
cannot possibly become 
greater does become great 
er, and then suddenly 

(Turn to page 6) 



AUTHOR 




1 BEGAN writing science-fiction 
when I was twenty years old, 
back in the first months of 
1926. In fact, there weren't any 
science-fiction magazines yet published when I wrote my first s-f 
stories, and I sold them to the 
old WEIRD TALES. 

I've lost count, but have published something like 300 stories, most 
of them s-f but also a number in 
other fields. Thirty-two of them 
were novel-lengths. 

Born in Ohio, I lived a good 
many years in Western Pennsylvania. Knocked around the country a good bit — including some 
colorful trips years ago with my 
old friend Jack Williamson, the 
most interesting and arduous of 
which was a trek down 6he Mississippi River from St. Paul to Louis


★ 



iana in a small skiff. 

In 1946 I married Leigh Brackett — we lived a while in Los 
Angeles and then, on a visit back 
east, decided to realize the perennial writer's dreami of a small house 
way out in the country where we 
could work undisturbed. We purchased a 130-year old farmhouse 
in the old Western Reserve of 
Ohio, and set to work to renovate 
the venerable wreck. As might be 
expected, for the next few years we 
did more renovating than writing. 
We've finally called it done — 
and live therein with a few thousand books, a few hundred t, p. 
records, a few friendly squirrels 
who like our attic, and with many 
near neighbors in the form of 
woodchucks who like our clover, 
(Concluded on page 121) 



IMAGINATION 

STORIES OF SCIENCE AND FANTASY 



TABLE OF CONTENTS 

APRIL VOLUME 7 

195G KUMBER 2 

■ JUNE ISSUE ON SALE 

t&rleS MARCH 29th 



THE LEGION OF LAZARU5 

(Complete Novel) by Erfmond Hamilton 6 

Who were these men, roaming space, finding— and resurrecting— executed criminals! 

THE GRAVEYARD OF SPACE 

(Short Story) by Milton Lesser 58 

Men faced many perils in the void— but nothing to equal that of the Sargasso! . . . 
MR. CHIPFELLOW'S JACKPOT 

(Short Story) by Dick Pureed 72 

His will was unique — after he died any person on Earth could claim his fortune! 

THE BEASTS IN THE VOID 

(Novelette) by Paul W. Fairman 80 

Holloway enjoyed big game hunting — but how does a man fight a monster in space? 

ZERO HOUR 

(Short Story) by Alexander Blade 98 

Bobby had no business being near the rocket— even less smuggling himself aboard! 

PRISON OF A BILLION YEARS 

{Short Story) by C. H. Thames 104 

Slade knew they needed no walls to hold him; outside lay nothing but eternity - . . 



INTRODUCING THE AUTHOR 2 FAN DORA'S BOX 114 

THE EDITORIAL 4 SCIENCE FICTION LIBRARY 122 

FLY BY THE BOTTOMS 71 LETTERS FROM THE READERS 124 

SATELLITE 97 TOMORROW'S SCIENCE 132 



Editor Managing Editor Art Editor 

Front cover painting by Malcolm Smith, Illustrating, "The Legion of Lazarus." 
Back cover astronomical photo courtesy, Mt. Wilson & Palomar Observatories. 

Published bi-monthly by Greenleaf Publishlnn Company. 1426 Fowler Avenue. Evanston. Illinois- Entered*! 
second-class matter at th« Post Office at Evanston. Illinois, Additional entry at Sandusky. Ohio. Address 
all com mu nidations to IMAGINATION, P. 0. Box 230. Evanston. Illinois. We do not accent ™"on S .b,l,t V 
lor unsolicited manuscripts or art work; submissions must be accompanied by stamped Ml*-»Jdr«s- ed return envelopes. Accepted material is subject to whatever revision is necessary to meet requirements, ana 
will he paid for at our current rates. The names of all characters usod in stones are ii«itious, any 
semblanco to any person living or dead is coincidental. Copyright 1956 Greenleaf Publishing Company. Subscription rate 53.00 12 Issue*. Advertising rates sent upon request. Printed in U.S.A. fa* 
Stephens Printing Corp.. Sandusky. -Ohio. 




• • • •□ 



WE'VE tried something a bit 
different on the cover this 
month as you've already 
noted. We had a particular reason 
for starting the story right along 
with the cover painting; we felt the 
opening was so good it deserved 
front page advertising — so it would 
catch your eye right away. Aside 
from the commercial motive which 
prompted this innovation, we've since 
been wondering if it wouldn't be a 
good idea to continue doing this in 
the future. Not every issue, of 
course, but once in awhile. So you'll 
be doing us a favor if you'll drop 
us a card and let us know how you 
like the idea. 

>T*HIS issue we've got a sad announcement to make; yet happily, as a result of the development, 
there's a bit of good news too. First 
the sad: this issue marks the last 
column Mari Wolf will write for 
our fan department, FANDORA'S 
BOX. Mari wrote us regretfully 
that her time is being taken up not 
only by her outside work, being a 
housewife, and racing sports cars, 
but in addition she wants to devote 
what little free time she has left to 
serious writing. (Seems as if the 
novel bug has got hold of our gal!) 
We can only say that Madge will 
miss Mari; she's been part of the 
magazine since the fourth issue — 



back in April, 1951. We feel she did 
a fine job on the column, and know 
that you do too. We wish her the 
best of luck in her serious writing! 

NATURALLY Mari's leaving 
puts us in something of a 
spot. We had the next issue coming 
up and no reviewer! It was then 
that the lovely gal we're married to 
came up with the brilliant suggestion that perhaps we could interest fandom's favorite pro into 
taking over the column. Who? Why 
Robert Bloch, of course! 

SHORTLY thereafter we spent a 
pleasant afternoon at Bob's 
place in Weyauwega, Wisconsin, 
and broached the subject. Bob evinced interest, but when we finally put 
the matter to him bluntly he hedged. "It all depends," he said sagely. We inquired as to the nature 
of the conditions. He sighed. "The 
word rate, Bill. How much?" 

HAVING cleaned up this sordid 
aspect of the business to everyone's satisfaction, Bob allowed 
he would be most happy to take 
over the department. He felt compelled to warn us however that he 
could not guarantee how the column 
would turn out. Since Bob's pen 
has all the earmarks of a three ring 
circus we can only surmise that no 



4 



matter what is transcribed from 
his fertile brain, it will most 
certainly prove entertaining. So, 
starting next issue look for the new 
rin,gmaster holding forth in the 
BOX. (We must admit at this point 
that Bob actually never mentioned 
the word money in our conversation 
as above described. While Bob 
makes his living as a professional 
writer, he has far too much delicacy to hurt an editor's feelings by 
putting his work on a cash basis. 
A check will do just as well!) 

AFTER leaving the Blochs (we 
must not forget Marion's 
(gracious hospitality) we journeyed farther into the cold of northern 



Wisconsin to visit Ray Palmer. 
(It was warm for that part of 
the country, a sultry 15 below zero.) 
Ray — editor of Other Worlds — was 
busily engaged in moving into his 
new home constructed on a hill 
overlooking his private lake. All we 
saw was a snow-covered ice pack, 
but Ray assured us the water would 
appear come spring. He told us of 
his plan to bring a new Edgar 
Rice Burroughs into stf. Read his 
magazine for complete details. And 
don't forget our next issue of Madge 
— and Imaginative Tales, our companion book. How did our trip end 
so abruptly? It was cold, man ! 
We're glad we're home again. It's 
only zero here in Evanston! . . Avlh 




Being expelled from an air lock into deep 
space was the legal method of execution. But it 
was also the only way a man could qualify for— 



The Legion Of Lazarus 



IT ISN'T the dying itself. It's 
what comes before. The waiting, alone in a room without 
windows, trying to think. The opening of the door, the voices of the 
men who are going with you but 



not all the way } the walk down the 
corridor to the airlock room, the 
faces of the men, closed and impersonal. They do not enjoy this. 
Neither do they shrink from it. It's 
their job. 




7 



s 



IMAGINATION 



This is the room. It is small and 
it has a window. Outside there is 
no friendly sky, no clouds. There 
is space, and there is the huge red 
circle of Mars filling the sky, looking down like an enormous eye upon this tiny moon. But you do not 
look up. You lock out. 

There are men out there. They 
are quite naked. They sleep upon 
the barren plain, drowsing in a 
timeless ocean. Their bodies are 
white as ivory and their hair is 
loose across their faces. Some of 
them seem to smile. They He, and 
sleep, and the great red eye looks 
at them forever as they are borne 
around it. 

"It isn't so bad," says one of the 
men who are with you inside this 
ultimate room. "Fifty years from 
now, the rest of us will all be old f 
or dead." 

It is small comfort. 

The one garment you have worn 
is taken from you and the lock door 
opens, and the fear that cannot possibly become greater does become 
greater, and then suddenly that 
terrible crescendo is past. There is 
no longer any hope, and you learn 
that without hope there is little tobe afraid of. You want now only 
to get it over with. 

You step forward into the lock. 

The door behind you shuts. You 
sense that the one before you is 
opening, but there is not much time. 
The burst of aw carries you for


ward. Perhaps you scream, but 
you are now beyond sound, beyond sight, beyond everything. 
You do not even feel that it is .cold. 

CHAPTER I 

npHERE is a time for sleep, and 
a time for waking. But Hyrst 
had slept heavily, and the waking 
was hard. He had slept long, and 
the waking was slow. Fifty years, 
said t'he dim voice of remembrance. 
But another part of his mind said, 
No, it is only tomorrow morning. 

Another part of his mind. That 
was strange. There seemed to be 
more parts to his mind than he remembered having had before, but 
they were all confused and hidden 
behind a veil of mist. Perhaps they 
were not really there at all. Perhaps — 

Fifty years. I have been dead, 
he thought, and now I live again. 
Half a century. Strange. 

Hyrst lay on a narow bed, in a 
place of subdued light and antiseptic-smelling air. There was no 
one else in the room. There was 
no sound. 

Fifty years, he thought. What 
is it like now, the house where I 
lived once, the country, the planet? 
Where are my children, where are 
my friends, my enemies, the people I loved, the people I hated? 

Where is Elena? Where is my 
wife? 



THE LEGION OF LAZARUS 



9 



A whisper out of nowhere, sad, 
remote. Your wife is dead and 
your children are old. Forget them. 
Forget the friends and the enemies. 

But I can't forget/ cried Hyrst 
silently in the spaces of his own 
mind. It was only yesterday — 

Fifty years, said the whisper. 
And you must forget. 

MacDonald, said Hyrst suddenly. / didn't kill him. I was innocent. I can't forget that. 

Careful, said the whisper. Watch 
out. 

I didn't kill MacDonald. Some~ 
body did. Smncbody let me pay for 
it. Who? Was it Landers? Was it 
Saul? We four were together out 
there on Titan, when he died. 

Careful, Hyrst. They're coming. 
Listen to me. You think this is 
your own mind speaking, questionand-answer. But it isn't. 

Hyrst sprang upright on the narrow bed, his heart pounding, the 
sweat running cold on his skin. 
Who are you? Where are you? 
How — 

They're here, said the whisper 
calmly. Be quiet. 

Two men came into the ward. 
"I am Dr. Merridew," said the one 
in the white coverall, smiling at 
Hyrst with a brisk professional 
smile. "This is Warden Meister. We 
didn't mean to startle you. There 
are a few questions, before we release you — " 

Merridew, said the whisper in 



Hyrst's mind, is a psychiatrist. 
Let me handle this. 

Hyrst sat still, his hands lax between his knees, his eyes wide and 
fixed in astonishment. He heard the 
psychiatrist's questions, and he 
heard the answers he gave to them, 
but he was merely an instrument, 
with no conscious volition, it was 
the whisperer in his mind who was 
answering. Then the warden shuffled some papers he held in his 
hand and asked questions of his 
own. 

"You underwent the Humane 
Penalty without admitting your 
guilt. For the record, now that the 
penalty has been paid, do you wish 
to change your final statements?" 

The voice in Hyrst's mind, the 
secret voice, said swiftly to him. 
Don't argue with them, don't get 
angry, or they'll keep you on and 
on here. 

"But — " thought Hyrst. 

/ know you're innocent, but 
they'll never believe it. They'll 
keep you on for further psychiatric 
tests. They might get near the 
truth, Hyrst — the truth about us. 

Suddenly Hyrst began to understand, not all and not clearly, 
something of what had happened 
to him. The obscuring mists began 
to lift from the borders of his 
mind. 

"What is the truth," he asked in 
that inner quiet, "about us?" 
You've spent fifty years in the 



[0 



IMAGINATION 



Valley of the Shadow. You're 
changed, Ilyrst. You're not quite 
human any more. No one is, who 
goes through the freeze. Bui they 
don't know that. 

"Then you too — " 

Yes. And I too changed. And 
that is why our minds can speak, 
even though I am on Mars and you 
are on its moon. But they must 
not know that. So don't argue, 
don't show emotion! 

The warden was waiting. Hyrst 
said aloud to him, slowly. "I have 
no statement to make." 

The warden did not seem surprised. He went on, "According to 
your papers here you also denied 
knowing the location of the Titanite for which MacDonald was presumably murdered. Do you still 
deny that?" 

Hyrst was honestly surprised. 
"But surely, by now — " 

The warden shrugged. "According to this data, it never came to 
light." 

"I never knew," said Hyrst, 
"where it was." 

"Well," said the warden, "I've 
asked the question and that's as 
far as my responsibility goes. But 
there's a visitor who has permission to see you." 

IT E AND the doctor went out. 
A Hyrst watched them go. He 
thought, So I'm not quite human. 
Not quite human any more. Does 



that make me more, or less, than a 
man? 

Both, said the secret voice. Their 
minds are still closed to you. Only 
our minds — we who have changed 
toa — are open. 

"Who are you?" asked Hyrst. 

My name is Shearing. Now listen. When you are released, they'll 
bring you down here to Mars. I'll 
be waiting for you. I'll help you. 

"Why? What do you care about 
me, or a murder fifty years old?" 

/'// tell you why later, said the 
whisper of Shearing. But you must 
follow my guidance. There's danger for you, Hyrst, from the moment you're, released! There are. those 
who have been waiting for you. 

"Danger? But — " 

The door opened, and Hyrst's 
visitor came in. He was a man 
something over sixty hut the deep 
lines in 'his face made him look 
older. His face was gray and drawn 
and twitching, but it became perfectly rigid and white when he 
came to the foot of the bed and 
looked at Hyrst. There was rage in 
his eyes, a rage so old and weary 
that it brought tears to them. 

"You should have stayed dead," 
he said to Hyrst. "Why couldn't 
they let you stay dead?" 

Hyrst was shocked and startled. 
"Who are you? And why — " 

The other man was not even listening. His eyelids had closed, and 
when they opened again they look


THE LEGION OF LAZARUS 



EI 



ed on naked agony. "It isn't right," 
he said. "A murderer should die, 
and stay dead. Not come back." 

"I didn't murder MacDonald," 
Hyrst said, with the beginnings of 
anger. "And I don't know why 
you — " 

He stopped. The white, aging 
face, the tear-filled, furious eyes, 
he did not quite know what there 
was about them but it was there, 
like an old remembered face peeping up through a blur of water 
for a moment, and then withdrawing again. 

After a moment, Hyrst said 
hoarsely, "What's your name?" 

"You wouldn't know it," said the 
other. "I changed it, long ago." 

Hyrst felt a cold, and it seemed 
that he could not breathe. He 
said, "But you were only eleven — " 

He could not go on. There was 
a terrible silence between them. 
He must break it, he could not let 
it go on. he must speak. But all he 
could say was to whisper, "I'm 
not a murderer. You must believe 
it. I'm going to prove it — " 

"You murdered MacDonald. 
And you murdered my mother. I 
watched her age and die, spending 
every penny, spending every drop 
of her blood and ours, to get you 
back again. I pretended for fifty 
years that I too believed you were 
innocent, when all the time I 
knew." 

Hyrst said, "I'm innocent." He 



tried to say a name, too, but he 
could not speak the word. 

"No. You're lying, as you lied 
then. We found out. Mother hired 
detectives, experts. Over and over, 
for decades — and always they 
found the same thing. Landers and 
Saul could not possibly have killed 
MacDonald, and you were the only 
other human being there. Proof? 
I can show you barrels of it. And 
all of it proof that rny father was 
a murderer." 

He leaned a little toward Hyrst, 
and the tears ran down his lined, 
careworn face. He said, "All right, 
you've come back. Alive, still 
young. But I'm warning you. If 
you try again to get that Titanite, 
if you shame us all again after all 
this time, if you even come near 
us, I'll kill you." 

He went out. Hyrst sat, looking 
after him, and he thought that no 
man before him had ever felt what 
tore him now. 

Inside his mind came Shearing's 
whisper, with a totally unexpected 
note of compassion. But some of us 
have, Hyrst. Welcome to the brotherhood. Welcome to the Legion 
of Lazarus. 

CHAPTER II 

TVTARS ROARED and glittered 
^ * tonight. And how was a man 
to stand the faces and lights and 
sounds, when he had come back 



12 



IMAGINATION 



from the silence of eternity? 

Hyrst walked through the flaring streets of Syrtis City with slow 
and dragging steps. It was like 
being back on Earth. For this city 
was not really part of the old dead 
planet, of the dark barrens that 
rolled away beneath the night. This 
was the place of the rocket-men, 
the miners, the schemers, the workers, who had come from another, 
younger world. Their -bars and entertainment houses flung a sun-like 
brilliance. Their ships, lifting majestically skyward from the distant 
spaceport, wrote their flaming sign 
on the sky. Only here and there 
moved one of the hooded, robed 
humanoids who had once owned 
this world. 

The next corner, said the whisper 
in Hyrst's mind. Turn there. No, 
not toward the spaceport. The other 
way. 

Hyrst thought suddenly /'Shearing." 
Yes? 

"I am being followed." 

His physical ears heard nothing 
but the voices and music. His physical eyes saw only the street crowd. 
Yet he knew. He knew it by a picture that kept coming into his 
mind, of a blurred shape moving 
always behind him. 

Of course you're being followed, 
came Shearing's thought. / told you 
they've been waiting for you. 
This is the corner. Turn. 



Hyrst turned. It was a darker 
street, running away from the lights 
through black warehouses and on 
the labyrinthine monolithic houses 
of the humanoids. 

Now look back, Shearing commanded. No, not with your eyes! 
With your mind. Learn to use your 
talents. 

Hyrst tried. The blurred image 
in his mind came clearer, and clearer still, and it was a young man 
with a vicious mouth and flat uncaring eyes. Hyrst shivered. "Who 
is he?" 

He works for the men who hai\: 
been waiting for you, Hyrst. Bring 
him this way. 

"This — way?" 

Look ahead. With your mind. 
Can't you learn? 

Stung to sudden anger, Hyrst 
flung out a mental probe with a 
power he hadn't known he possessed. In a place of total darkness 
between two warehouses ahead, he 
saw a tall man lounging at his ease. 
Shearing laughed. 

Yes, it's me. Just walk past me. 
Don't hurry. 

Hyrst glanced backward, mentally at the man following him 
through the shadows. He was 
closer noWj and quite silent. His 
face was tight and secret. Hyrst 
thought, How do I know this 
Shearing isn't in it with him. taking me into a place where they 
can both get at me — 



THE LEGION OF LAZARUS 



»3 



He went past the two warehouses and he did not turn his 
head but his mind saw Shearing 
waiting in the darkness. Then there 
was a soft, shapeless sound, and 
he turned and saw Shearing bending over a huddled form. 

"That was unkind of you," said 
Shearing, speaking aloud but not 
loudly. 

Hyrst, still shaking, said, "But 
not exactly strange. I've never seen 
you before. And I still don't know 
what this is all about." 

Shearing smiled, as he knelt beside the prone, unmoving body. 
Even here in the shadows, Hyrst 
could see him with these new eyes 
of the mind. Shearing was a big 
man. His hair was grizzled along 
the sides of his head, and his eyes 
were dark and very keen. He 
reached out one hand and turned 
the head of the prone young man, 
and they looked at the lax, loose 
face. 

"He's not dead?" sad Hyrst. 

"Of course not. But it will be a 
while before he wakes." 

"But who is he?" 

Shearing stood up. "I never saw 
him before. But I know who he's 
working for." 

TTYRST FLUNG a sudden ques*■ tion at Shearing, and almost 
without thinking he followed it to 
surprise the answer in Shearing's 
mind. The question was, Who are 



you "working for? And the answer 
was a woman, a tall and handsome 
woman with angry eyes, standing 
against a drift of stars. There was 
a ship, all lonely on a dark plain, 
and she was pointing to it, and 
somehow Hyrst knew that it was 
vitally important to her, and to 
Shearing, and perhaps even to himself. But before he could do more 
than register this fleeting vision 
on his own consciousness, Shearing's mind slammed shut with exactly the same violent effect as a 
door slammed in his face. He reeled back, throwing up his arms in a 
futile but instinctive gesture, and 
Shearing said angrily, 

"You're getting too good. I'll 
give you a social hint — it's customary to knock before you enter." 

Hyrst said, still holding the 
pieces of his head together, "All 
right — sorry. So who is she?" 

"She's one of us. She wants what 
we want." 

"I want only to find out who 
murdered MacDonald! " 

"You want more than that, Hyrst, though you don't know it yet. 
But MacDonald's murderer is part 
of what we're after." 

He took Hyrst 's arm. "We 
don't have long. Thanks -to my 
guidance, you slipped them all except this one. But they'll be hounding after our trail very quickly." 

They went on along the shadowed street. The glare of the lights 



IMAGINATION 



died back behind them, and they 
moved in darkness with only the 
keen stars to watch them, and the 
cold, gritty wind blowing in from 
the barrens, and the dark doorways of the mastaba-like monolithic houses of the humanoids staring at them like sightless eyes. 
Hyrst looked up at the bright, 
tiny moon that crept amid the 
stars, and a deep shaking took him 
as he thought of men lying up 
there in the deathly sleep, of himself lying there year after year . . . 

"In here," said Shearing. It was 
one of the frigid, musty tombs 
that the humanoids called home. It 
was dark and there was nothing in 
it at all. "We can't risk a light. 
We don't need it, anyway." 

They sat down. Hyrst said desperately, "Listen, I want to know 
some things. Exactly what are we 
doing here?" 

Shearing answered deliberately, "We are hiding from those who 
want you, and we are waiting for 
a chance to go to our friends." 

"Our friends? Your friends, 
maybe. That woman — I don't know 
her, and — " 

Now you listen, Hyrst. I'll tell 
you this much about us now. 
We're Lazarites, like you, with the 
same powers as you. But all Lazarites are not on our side." 

Hyrst thought aibout that. "Then 
those others who are hunting us 



"There are Lazarites among 
them, too. Not many, but a few. 
You don't know us, you don't 
know them. Do you want to leave 
me and go back out and let them 
have you?" 

Hyrst remembered the adder-like 
face of the young man who had 
come after him through the shadows. After a long moment he said, 
"Well. But what are you after?" 

"The thing that MacDonald was 
killed for, fifty years ago." 

Hyrst said, "The Titanite? They 
said it hadn't ever -been found. But 
how it could have remained hidden 
so long — " 

"I want you," Shearing said, "to 
tell me all about how MacDonald 
died. Everything you can remember." 

Hyrst asked eagerly, "You think 
we can find out who killed him? 
After all this time? God, if we 
could — my son — " 

"Quiet, Hyrst. Go ahead and 
tell me. Not in words. Just remember what happened, and I'll get it." 

Yet, by sheer lifetime habit, 
Hyrst could not remember without first putting it into words in 
his own mind, as they two sat in 
the cold, whispering darkness. 

"There were four of us out there 
on Titan, you must already know 
that. And only four — " 

T?OUR MEN. And one was 
* named MacDonald, an en


THE LEGION OF LAZARUS 



'5 



gineer, a secretive, selfish and enormously greedy man. MacDonald 
was the man who found a fortune, 
and kept it secret, and died. 

Landers was one. A lean, brown, 
lively man, an excellent physicist 
with a friendly manner and no obvious ambitions. 

Saul was one, and he was big 
and blond and quiet, a good drinking companion, a good geologist, a 
lover of good music. If he had any 
darker passions, he kept them 
hidden. 

Hyrst was the fourth man, and 
the only one of the four still living 

He remembered now. He saw 
the black and bitter crags of Titan 
stark against the glory of the 
Rings, and he saw two figures 
moving across a plain of methane 
snow, their helmets gleaming in the 
Saturn-light. Behind them in the 
plain were the flat, half-buried 
concrete structures of the little refinery, and all around them were 
the spidery roads where the big 
half-tracs dragged their loads of 
uranium ore from the enchaining 
mountains. 

The two men were quarrelling. 

"You're angry," MacDonald was 
saying, "because it was I who 
found it." 

"Listen," Hyrst said. "We're 
sick, all three of us, of hearing 
you brag about it." 

"Ill bet you are," said Mac


Donald smugly. "The first find of 
a Titanite pocket for years. The 
rarest, costliest stuff in the System. If you know the way they've 
been bidding to buy it from me — " 

"I do know," Hyrst said. "You've done nothing for weeks but give 
forth mysterious hints—" 

"And you don't like that," MacDonald said. "Of course you 
don't! It's no part of our refinery 
deal, it's mine, I've got it and it's 
hidden where nobody can find it 
till I sell it. Naturally, you don't 
like that." 

"All right" said Hyrst. "So the 
Titanite find is all yours. You're 
still a partner in, the refinery, remember. And you've still got an 
obligation to the rest of us, so you 
can damn well get in and do your 
job." 

"Don't worry. I've always done 
my job." 

"More or less," said Hyrst. "For 
your information, I've seen better 
engineers in grade-school. There's 
Number Three hoist. It's been 
busted for a week. Now let's get 
in there and fix it." 

The two figures in Hyrst's memory toiled on, out of the area of 
roads to the edge of the landing 
field, where J;he ships come to take 
away the refined uranium. Number Three hoist rose in a stiff, 
ugly column from the ground. It 
was supposed to fetch the urnanium up from the underground 



IMAGINATION 



storage bins and load it into a 
specially- built hot-tank ship in position at the dock. But Number 
Three had balked and refused to 
perform its task. In this completely 
automated plant, men were only 
important when something went 
wrong. Now something was wrong, 
and it was up to MacDonald, the 
mechanical engineer, and Hyrst, 
the electronics man, to set it right. 

Hyrst opened the hatch, and 
they climbed the metal stairs to the 
upper chamber. Number Three's 
brain was here, its scanners, its 
tabulating and recording apparatus, 
its signal system. A red light pulsated on a panel, alone in a string 
of white ones. 

"Trouble's in the hoist-mechanism," said Hyrst. "That's your 
department." He smiled and sat 
down on a metal bench in the center of the room, with his back to 
the stair. "D Level." 

MacDonald grumbled, and 
went to a skeletal cage built over 
a round segment of the floor. Various tools were clipped to the ribs 
of the cage. MacDonald pulled an 
extra rayproof protectall over his 
vac-suit and stepped inside the 
cage, pressing a button. The cage 
dropped, into a circular shaft that 
paralleled the hoist right down 
to the feeder mechanism. 

Hyrst waited. Inside his helmet 
he could hear MacDonald breathing and grumbling as he worked 



away, repairing a break in the 
belt. He did not hear anything else. 
Then something happened, so 
swiftly that he had never had any 
memory of it, and some time later 
he came to and looked for MacDonald. The cage was way down 
at the bottom of the shaft and 
MacDonald was in it, with a very 
massive pedestal-block on top of 
him. The block had been unbolted 
from the floor and dragged to the 
edge of the shaft, and it could not 
possibly have been an accident 
that it tumbled in, between the 
wide-apart ribs of the cage. 

And that's how MacDonald 
died, Hyrst thought — and so / 
died. They said I forced the secret 
of his Titanite find out of him, 
and then killed him. 

Shearing asked swiftly, "MacDonald never gave you any hint 
of where he'd hidden Che Titanite?" 

"No," said Hyrst. He paused, 
and then said, "It's the Titanite 
you're after?" 

Shearing answered carefully. "In 
a way, yes. But we didn't kill 
MacDonald for it. Those who did 
kill him are the men who are after 
you now. They're afraid you might 
lead us to the stuff." 

Hyrst swore, shaking with sudden anger. "Damn it, I won't be 
treated like a child. Not by you, 
by anyone. I want — " 

"You want the men who killed 
MacDonald," said Shearing. "I 



THE LEGION OF LAZARUS 



17 



know. I remember what was in 
your mind when you met your 
son." 

A weakness took Hyrst and he 
leaned his forehead against the 
cold stone wall. 

"I'm sorry," said Shearing. "But 
we want what you want — and 
more. So much more that you can't 
dream it. You must trust us." 

"Us? That woman?" 

/"vNCE AGAIN in Shearing's 
mind Hyrst saw the woman 
with her head against the stars, 
and the ship looming darkly. He 
saw the woman much more clearly, 
and she was like a fire, burning 
with anger, burning with a singleminded, dedicated purpose. She 
was beautiful, and frightening. 

"She, and others," said Shearing. "Listen. We must go soon. 
We're to be picked up, secretly. 
Will you trust us — or would you 
rather trust yourself to those who 
are hunting you?" 

Hyrst was silent. Shearing said, 
"Well?" 

"I'll go with you," said Hyrst. 

They went out into the cold 
darkness, and Hyrst heard Shearing say in his mind, "I wouldn't 
try to run — " 

But it wasn't Shearing speaking 
in his mind now, it was a third 
man. 

"I wouldn't try to run — " 
Frantically startled, Hyrst threw 



out his mental vision and saw the 
men who stood around them in the 
the darkness-, four men, three of 
them holding the wicked little weapons called bee-guns in their hands. 
The fourth man came closer, a dark 
slender man with a face like a 
fox, high-boned, narrow-eyed, smiling. It came to Hyrst that the three 
with weapons were only ordinary 
men, and that it was this fourth 
man whose mind had spoken. 

. He was speaking aloud now. "I 
want you alive, believe me — but 
there are endless gradations between alive and dead. My men are 
very accurate." 

Shearing's face was suddenly 
drawn and exhausted. "Don't try 
anything," he warned Hyrst wearily. "He means it." 

The dark man shook his head at 
Shearing. "This wasn't nice of you. 
You knew we had a particular interest in Mr. Hyrst." He turned 
to Hyrst and smiled. His teeth 
were small and very neat and white. 
"Did you know that Shearing has 
been keeping a shield over your 
mind as well as his? A little too 
large a task for him. When you 
jarred his mind open for an instant, 
it was all we needed to lead us 
here." 

He went on. "Mr. Hyrst, my 
name is Vernon. We'd like you to 
come with us." 

Vernon nodded to the three accurate men . and the whole little 



IS 



IMAGINATION 



group began to wal'k in the direction of the spaceport. Shearing 
seemed almost asleep on his feet 
now. It was as though he had expended all his energy on a task, and 
failed at it, and was now quiescent, like an empty well waiting 
to fill again. 

"Where are we going?" Hyrs,t 
asked, and Vernon answered: 

"To see a gentleman you've 
never heard of, in a place you've 
never been." He added, with easy 
friendliness, "Don't worry, Mr. 
Hyrst, we have nothing against 
you. You're new to this — ah — 
state of life. You shouldn't be 
asked to make decisions or agreements until you know both sides 
of the question. Mr. Shearing was 
taking an unfair advantage." 

Remembering the dark hard 
purpose Shearing had let him see 
in his mind, Hyrst could not 
readily dispute that. But he put 
out an exploring probe in the direction of Vernon's mind. 

It was shut tight. 

They walked on, toward the 
spaceport gates. 

CHAPTER III m 

A LL SPACE was before him, 
hung with the many-colored 
lights of the stars, intensely brilliant in the black nothing. It was 
incredibly splendid, but it was too 
much like what he had looked at 



with his cold unseeing eyes for fifty 
years. He looked down — down 
being relative to where he was 
standing in the blister^window — 
and saw the whole Belt swarming 
by under him like a drift of fireflies. He quivered inwardly with a 
chill vertigo, and turned away. 

Vernon was talking aloud. He 
had been talking for some time. 
He was stretched out on a soft, 
deep lounge, smoking, pretending 
to sip from a tall glass. 

"So you see, Mr. Hyrst, we can 
help you a lot. It's not easy for a 
Lazarite — ■ for one of us — to get 
a job. I know. People have a — 
well, a feeling. Now Mr. Bellaver— " 

"Where is Shearing? " asked 
Hyrst. He came and stood in the 
center of the room, with the soft 
lights in his eyes and the soft carpets under his feet. His mind reached out, uneasy and restless, but 
it seemed to be surrounded by a 
zone of fog that tangled and confused and deflected it. He could not 
find Shearing. 

"We've been here for hours," he 
said. "Where is he?" 

"Probably talking a deal with 
Mr. Bellaver. I wouldn't worry. 
As I was saying, Bellaver Incorporated is interested in men like 
you. We're the largest builders of 
spacecraft in the System, and we 
can afford — " 

"I know all about it," said 
Hyrst impatiently. "Old Quentin 



THE LEGION OF LAZARUS 



Bellaver was busy swallowing up 
his rivals when I went through the 
door." 

"Then," said Vernon imperturbably, "you should realize how much 
we can do for you. Electronics is 
a vital branch—" 

Hyrst moved erratically around 
the room, looking at things and 
not really seeing them, hearing Vernon's voice but not understanding 
what it said. He was growing more 
and more uneasy. It was as though 
someone was calling to him, urgently, but just out of earshot. He kept 
straining, with his ears and his 
mind, and Vernon's voice babbled 
on, and the barrier was like a wall 
around his thoughts. 

They had been aboard this ship 
for a long time now, and he had 
not seen Shearing since they came 
through the hatch. It was not really a ship, of course. It had no 
power of its own, depending on 
powerful tugs to tow it. It was 
Walter Bellaver's floating pleasurepalace, and the damnedest thing 
Hyrst had ever seen. Vernon said 
it could and often did accomodate 
three or four hundred guests in the 
utmost luxury. There was nobody 
aboard it now but Bellaver, Vernon, Hyrst and Shearing, the three 
very accurate men, and perhaps a 
dozen others including stewards 
and the crews of the tugs and Bellaver's yacht. It was earned the 
Happy Dream, and it was presently 



drifting in an excessively lonely 
orbit high above the ecliptic, between nothing and nowhere. 

Vernon had been with him almost constantly. He was getting 
tired of Vernon. Vernon talked too 
much. 

"Listen," he said. "You can 
stop selling Bellaver. I'm not looking for a job. Where's Shearing?" 

"Oh, forget Shearing," said Vernon, impatient in his turn. "You 
never heard of him until a few 
days ago." 

"He helped me." 

"For reasons of his own." 

"What's your reason? And Bellaver's?" 

"Mr. Bellaver is interested in all 
social problems. And I'm a Lazarite myself, so naturally I have a 
sympathy for others like me." Vernon sat up, putting his glass aside 
on a low table. He had drunk hardly any of the contents. 

"Shearing," he said, "is a member of a gang who some time ago 
stole a particular property of Bellaver Incorporated. You're not involved in the quarrel, Mr. Hyrst. I'd 
advise you, as a friend, to stay not 
involved." 

Hyrst's mind and his ears were 
stretched and quivering, straining 
to hear a cry for help just a little 
too far away. 

"What kind of a property?" asked Hyrst. 

Vernon shrugged. The Bellavers 



20' 



IMAGINATION 



have never said what kind, for 
fairly obvious reasons." 

"Something to do with ships?" 

"I suppose so. It isn't important 
to me. Nor to you, Mr. Hyrst." 

"Will you pour me a drink?" 
said Hyrst, pointing to the cellaret 
close beside Vernon. "Yes, that's 
fine. How long ago?" 

"What?" asked Vernon, measuring whisky into a glass. 

"The theft," said Hyrst, and 
threw his mind suddenly against the 
barrier. For one fleeting second he 
forced a crack in it. "Something 
over fifty — ", said Vernon, and let 
the glass fall. He spun around 
from the cellaret and was halfway 
to his feet when Hyrst hit him. He 
hit him three or four times before 
he would stay down, and three or 
four more before he would lie 
quiet. Hyrst straightened up, 
breathing hard. His lip was bleeding and he wiped it with the back 
of his hand. "That was a little too 
big a job for you, Mr. Vernon," he 
said viciously. "Trying to keep my 
mind blanked and under control 
for hours." He stuffed a handkerchief into Vernon's mouth, and tied 
him up with his own cummerbund, 
and shoved him out of sight behind an enormous bed . Then he 
opened the door carefully, and 
went out. 

npHERE WAS nobody in the 
corridor. This was wide and 



ornate, with doors opening off it, 
and nothing to show what was behind them or which way to go. 
Hyrst stood still a minute, getting 
control of himself. The barrier no 
longer obscured his mind. He let it 
rove, finding that every time he 
did that it was easier, and the 
images clearer. He heard Shearing again, as he had heard him in 
that one second when Vernon's 
guard had faltered. His face became set and ugly. He began to 
move toward the stern of the 
Happy Dream. 

Heavy metal-cloth curtains closed 
this end of the corrider. Beyond 
them was a ballroom in which only 
one dim tight now burned, a vastness of black polished floors and 
crystal windows looking upon 
space. Hyrst's footsteps were hushed and swallowed up in whispering 
echoes. He made his way across to 
another set of curtains, edged between them with infinite caution, 
and found himself in the upper aisle 
of an amphitheater. 

It was pitch dark Where he was, 
and he stood perfectly still, exploring with his mind. He could not see 
any guards. The rows of empty 
seats were arranged in circles 
around a central pit, large enough 
for any entertainment Mr. Bellaver 
might decide to give. The pit was 
brilliantly lighted, and from somewhere lower down came the intermittent sound of voices. 



THE LEGION 

Also from the pit came Shearing's cries. Hyrst began to tremible 
with outrage and anger, and his 
still-uncertain mental control faltered dangerously. Then from out 
of nowhere, a voice spoke in his 
mind, and he saw the face of the 
woman he had seen twice before, 
the woman Shearing served. 

"Careful," she said. "There is a 
Lazarite with Bellaver. His attention is all on Shearing, but you 
must keep your mind shielded. 
I'll help you." 

Hyrst whispered. "Thanks." He 
felt calm now, alert and capable. 
He crept along the dark aisle, toward the pit. 

Mr. Bellaver's theater lacked 
nothing. The large circular stage 
area was fitted with upper and 
lower electro-magnets for the use 
of acrobats and dancers with nullgrav specialties. They could perform without disturbing the regular grav-field of the Happy Dream, 
thus keeping the guests comfortable, and by skillful manipulation 
of the magnetic fields more spectacular stunts were possible than in 
ordinary no-gravity. 

Shearing was in the pit, between 
the upper and lower magnets. He 
wore an acrobat's metal attracliun-harness, strapped on over his 
clothes. When Hyrst looked over 
the rail he was hanging at the 
central point of weightlessness, 
where everything in a man floats 



OF LAZARUS 21 

free and his senses are lost in a 
dreadful vertigo unless he has been 
conditioned over a long period of 
time to get used to it. Shearing 
had not been conditioned. 

"Careful," said the woman's 
warning voice in his mind. "His 
life depends on you. No, don't try 
to make contact with him! The 
Lazarite would sense you — " 

Shearing began a slow ascension toward the upper magnet as 
the current was increased, from 
some unseen control board. He 
moved convulsively turning horizontally around the axis of his own 
middle like a toy spun on a string. 
His back was uppermost, and 
Hyrst could not see his face. 

"Bellaver and the Lazarite," 
said the woman quietly, "are trying to learn from Shearing where 
our ship is. He has been able so 
far to keep his mind shielded. He 
is — a very -brave man. But you'll 
have to hurry. He's near the breaking point." 

Shearing was now almost level 
with Hyrst, suspended over that 
open pit. looking down, a long way. 

"You'll have to be quick, Hyrst. 
Flease. Please get hirn out of 
there before we have to kill him." 

The current in the magnet was 
cut and Shearing fell, with a long 
neighing scream. 

TTYRST looked down. The re* * pelling force of the lower mag


2 2 



IMAGINATION 



net cushioned the fall, and the upper magnet took hold, hard. Shearing stopped about three feet above 
the stage floor and started slowly 
to rise again. He seemed to be 
crying. Hyrst turned and ran back 
to the top of the aisle. Halfway around the circle he foiind steps 
and went tearing down them. On 
the next level — there were three 
— 'he saw two men leaning over the 
broad rail, watching Shearing. 

"Yes, there they are. You must 
find a weapon — " 

Hyrst looked around , blinking 
like a mole in the dark. Seats, 
nothing but seats. Ornamentation, 
but all solid. Small metal cylinder, 
set in a wall niche. Chemical extinguisher. Yes. Compact and 
heavy. He took it. 

"Hurry. He's almost through—" 

The two men were tense and 
hungry, eager as wolves. One was 
the Lazarite, a grey man, old and 
seamed with living and none of 
it good. The other was Belluver, 
and he was young. He was tall 
and fresh-faced, Impeccably shaven, 
impeccably dressed, the keen, 
clean, public-spirited executive. 

"I can give you more if you 
want it, Shearing," Bellaver said, 
his fingers ready on a control -plate 
set into the broad rail. "How about 
it?" 

"Shut up, Bella ver," whispered 
the Lazarite aloud. "I've almost 
got it. Almost — " His face wns 



agonized with concentration. 

"Now!" 

The woman's voiceless cry in 
his mind sent Hyrst forward. His 
hand swung up and then down in 
a crashing arc, elongated by the 
heavy cylinder. The Lazarite fell 
without a sound. He fell across 
Bellaver, pushing him back from 
the control-plate, and lay over his 
feet, bleeding gently into the thick 
pile of the carpet. Bellaver's mouth 
and eyes opened wide. He looked 
at the Lazarite and then at Hyrst. 
He leaped backward, away from 
the encumbrance at his ankles, 
making the first hoarse effort at a 
shout for help. Hyrst did not give 
him time to finish it. The first row 
of seats caught Bellaver and threw 
him. and Hyrst swung the cylinder 
again. Bellaver collapsed. 

"Was I in time?" Hyrst asiked 
of the woman, in his mind. He 
thought she was crying when she 
answered, "Yes." He smiled. He 
stepped over the Lazarite and 
went to the control-plate and began 
to work with it until he had Shearing safely on the floor of the stage. 
Then he cut the power and ran 
down another flight of steps to 
the bottom level. His mind was 
able to range free now. He could 
not sense anyone close at hand. 
Bellaver seemed to have sent underlings elsewhere in the Happy 
Dream while he worked on Shearing. It was nothing for which a 



THE LEGION OF LAZARUS 



23 



man would seek witnesses. Hyrst 
vaulted the rail onto ihe stage and 
dragged Shearing away from the 
magnet. He felt uncomfortable in 
all that glare of light. He hauled 
and grunted until he got Shearing 
over the rail into the dark. Then 
he wrestled the harness off him. 
Shearing sobbed feeblv, and retched. 

"Can you stand up?" said Hyrst. ' "Hey. Shearing." He shook 
him, hard. "Stand up." 

He got Shearing up, a one-hundred-and-ninety pound rag doll 
draped over his shoulders. He began to walk him out of the 
theater. "Are you still there?" he 
asked of the woman. 

The answer came into his mind 
swiftly. "Yes. I'll help you watch. 
Do you see where the skiff is?" 

It was in a pod under the belly 
of the Happy Dream. "I see it," 
said Hyrst. 

"Take that. Bellaver's yacht is 
faster, but you'd need the crew. 
The skiff you can handle yourself." 

TIE WALKED Shearing into a 
* fore-and-aft corridor. Shearing's feet were beginning to move 
of their own accord, and he had 
stopped retching. But his eyes were 
still blank and he staggered aimlessly. Hyrst's nerves were prickling with a mixture of fierce satisfaction and fear. Far above in the 
lush suite he felt Vernon stir and 



come to. There were men somewhere closer, quite close. He forced 
his mind to see. Two of the very 
accurate men who had been with 
Vernon were playing cards with 
two others who were apparently 
stewards. The third one lolled in a 
chair, smoking. All five were in a 
lounge just around the corner of a 
transverse corridor. The door was 
open. 

Without realizing that he had 
done so, Hyrst took control of 
Shearing's mind. "Steady, now. 
We're going past that corner without a sound. You hear me, Shearing? Not a sound." 

Shearing's eyes flickered vaguely. 
He frowned, and his step became 
steadier. The floor of the corridor 
was covered in a tough resilient 
plastic that deadened footsteps. 
They passed the corner. The men 
continued to play cards. Hyrst sent 
up a derisive insult to Vernon and 
told Shearing to hurry a little. The 
stair leading down into the pod 
was just ahead, ten yards, five — 

A man appeared in the corridor 
ahead, coming from some storeroom with a rack of plastic bottles 
in his hand. 

"You'll have to run now," 
came the woman's thought, coolly. 
"Don't panic. You can still make 
it." 

The man with the bottles yelled. 
He began to run toward Hyrst and 
Shearing, dropping the rack to 



2 4 



IMAGINATION 



leave 'his hands free. In the loungeroom behind them the card-party 
broke up. Hyrst took Shearing by 
the arm and clamped down even 
tighter on his mind, giving him a 
single command. They ran together, fast. 

The men from the lounge poured out into the main corridor. Their 
voices were confused and very 
loud. Ahead, the man who had 
been bringing the bottles was now 
between Hyrst and the stair. He 
was a brown, hard man who looked like a pilot. He said, "You better stop," and then he grappled 
with Hyrst and Shearing. The 
three of them spun around in a 
clumsy dance. Shearing moving 
like an automaton, Hyrst and the 
pilot flailing away with their fists, 
and tihen the pilot fell back hard 
on the seat of his pants, with the 
blood bursting out of his nose and 
his eyes glazing. Hyrst raced for 
the stair, propelling Shearing. They 
tumbled down it with a shot from 
a bee-gun buzzing over their heads. 
It was a short stair with a doublehatch door at the bottom. They 
fell through it, and Hyrst slammed it shut almost on the toes of 
a man coming down the stair behind them. The automatic lock took 
hold. Hyrst told Shearing, "You 
can stop now." 

A few minutes later, from the 
great swag belly of the Happy 
Dream, a small space-skiff shot 



away and was quiokly lost in the 
star-shot immensity above the Belt. 

CHAPTER IV 

TT BID NOT stay lost for long. 

Shearing was at the controls. 
The chronometer showed fourteen 
hours and twenty-seven minutes 
since they left the Happy Dream. 
Shearing had spent eight of those 
hours in a species of comatose 
slumber, from which he had roused out practically normal. Now 
Hyrst was heavily asleep in the 
pneumo-chair beside him. 

Shearing punched him. "Wake 
up." 

After several more punches 
Hyrst groaned and opened his 
eyes. He mumbled a question, and 
Shearing pointed out the wide 
curved port that gave full vision 
forward and on both sides. 

"It was a good try," he said, "but 
I don't think we're going to make 
it. Look there. No, farther back. 
See it? Now the other side. And 
there's one astern." 

Still sleepy, but alarmed, Hyrst. 
swung his mental vision around. It 
was easier than looking. Two fast, 
powerful tugs from the Happy 
Dream, and Bellaver's yacht. He 
frowned in heavy concentration. 
"Bellaver's aboard. He's got a 
mighty goose-egg on his head. Vernon too, with his shields up tight. 
The three accurate men and the 



THE LEGION 

pilot — his nose is a thing of beauty — plus crew. Nine in all. Two 
men each to the tugs. The other 
Lazarite, the one I laid out — he's 
not along." 

Shearing nodded approvingly. 
"You're getting good. Now take a 
glance at our fuel-tanks and tell 
me what you see." 

Hyrst sat up straight, fully 
awake. "Practically," he said, 
"nothing." 

"This skiff was meant for short 
hops only. We've got enough for 
perhaps another forty-five minutes, less if we get too involved. 
They're faster than we are, so 
they'll catch up to us— oh, say in 
about half an hour. We have 
friends coming — " 

"Friends?" 

"Certainly. You don't think we 
let each other down, do you? Not 
the brotherhood. But they had to 
come from a long way off. We can't 
possibly rendezvous under an hour 
and a half, maybe more if — " 

"I know," said Hyrst. "If we all 
get involved." He looked out the 
port. In the beginning, following 
directions from the young woman — 
whose name he had never thought 
to ask — he had set a course that 
plunged him deep into one of the 
wildest sectors of the Belt. He was 
not a pilot. He could, like most 
men of his time, handle a simple 
craft under simple conditions, but 



OF LAZARUS 25 

these conditions were not simple. 
The skiff's radar was short-range 
and it had no automatic deflection 
reflexes. Hyrst had had to fly on 
ESP, spotting meteor swarms, asteroids, debris of all sorts in this 
poetically named hell-hole, the 
Path of Minor Worlds, and then 
figuring out how to get by, through, 
or over then without a crash. 
Shearing had relieved him just in 
time. 

He glowered at the whirling, 
glittering mess outside, the dust, 
the shards and fragments of a 
shattered world. It merged into 
mist and his mind was roving again. 
Shearing jockeyed the controls. He 
was flying esper too. The tugs and 
Bella ver's fast yacht were closing 
up the gap. The level in the tanks 
went down, used up not in free fall 
but in the constant maneuvering. 
Hyrst swung mentally inboard to 
check vac-suits and equipment in 
the locker, and then out again. His 
vision was strong and free. He 
could look at the Sun, "and see the 
splendid fires of the corona. He 
could look at Mars, old and cold 
and dried-up, and at Jupiter, massive and sullen and totally useless 
except as an anchor for its family 
of crazy moons. He could look farther than that. He could look at 
the stars. In a little while, he 
thought, he could look at whole 
galaxies. His heart pounded and the 



26 



IMAGINATION 



breath came hot and hard into his 
lungs. It was a good feeling. It 
made all that had gone before almost worthwhile. The primal immensities drew him, the black gulfs 
lit with gold and crimson and peacock-colored flames. He wanted to 
go farther and farther, into — 

"You're learning too fast," said 
Shearing dryly. "Stick to something small and close and sordid, 
namely an asteroid where we can 
land." 

''I found one," said Hyrst. 
"There." 

SHEARING followed his mental nudge. "Hell," he said, 
"couldn't you have spotted something better? These Valhallas give 
me the creeps." 

''The others within reach are too 
small, or there's no cover. We'll 
have quite a little time to wait. I 
take it you would like to be alive 
when your friends come." 

Vernon's thought broke in on 
them abruptly. "You have just one 
chance of that, and that's to give 
yourselves up, right now." 

"Does the socially-conscious Mr. 
Bellaver still want to give me that 
job?" asiked Hyrst. 

"I'm warning you," said Vernon. 

"Your mind is full of hate," said 
Hyrst. "Cleanse it." He shut Vernon out as easily as hanging up a 



phone. Under stress, his new powers were developing rapidly. He 
felt a little drunk with them. Shearing said, "Don't get above yourself, 
boy. You're still a cub, you know." 
Them he grinned briefly and added, 
"By the way, thanks." 

Hyrst said, "I owed it to you. 
And you can thank your lady friend, 
too. She had a big hand in it." 

"Christina," said Shearing softly. "Yes." 

He dropped the skiff sharply in 
a descending curve, toward the 
asteroid. 

"Do you think," said Hyrst, 
"you could now tell me what the 
devil this is all about?" 

Shearing said, "We've got a starship." 

Hyrst stared. For a long time he 
didn't say anything. Then, "You've 
got a starship? But nobody has! 
People talk of someday reaching 
other stars, but nobody tried yet, 
nobody could try — " He broke off, 
suddenly remembering a dark, lonely .ship, and a woman with angry 
eyes watching it. Even in his astonishment, things began to come 
clea re r to him. "So t hat 's i t — a 
starship. And Bellaver wants it?" 

Shearing nodded. 

"Well," said Hyrst. "Go on." 

"You've already developed some 
amazing mental capabilities since 
you came back from beyond the 
door. You'll find that's only the be


THE LEGION OF LAZARUS 



27 



ginning. The radiation, the exposure — something. The simple act of 
pseudo-death, perhaps. Anyway, the 
brain is altered, stepped up, a great 
deal of its normally unused potential released. You've always been 
a lair- to-middling technician. You'll 
find your rating boosted, eventually, to the genius level." • 

The ski f f veered wildly as 
Shearing dodged a whizzing chunk 
of rock the size of a skyscraper. 

"That's one reason," he said, 
"why we wanted to get you before 
Bellaver did. The number of technicians undergoing the Humane 
Penalty is quite small. We — the 
brotherhood — need all of them we 
can get." 

"But that wasn't the main reason you wanted me?" pressed 
Hyrst. 

Shearing looked at him. "No. 
We wanted you mainly because you 
were present when MacDonald 
died. Handled right—" 

He paused. The asteroid was 
rushing at them, and Bellaver 's 
ships were close behind. Hyrst was 
already in a vac-suit, all but the 
helmet. 

"Take the controls." said Shearing. "As she goes. Don't worry, 
I'll make the landing." He pulled 
the vac-suit on. "Handled right," 
he said, "you might be the key to 
that murder, and to the mystery behind it that the brotherhood must 



solve." 

He took the controls again. They 
helped each other on with their 
helmets. The asteroid filled the 
port, a wild, weird jumble of varicolored rock. 

"I don't see how," said Hyrst, 
into his helmet mike. 

"Latent impressions," answered 
Shearing briefly, and sent the skiff 
skittering in between two great 
black monoliths, to settle with a 
jar on a pan of rock as smooth and 
naked as a ballroom floor. 

"Make it fast," said Shearing. 
"They're right on top of us." 

r TVHE SKIFF, designed as Sheering had said for short hops, 
could not accomodate the extra 
weight and bulk of an air-lock. 
You were supposed to land in atmosphere. If you didn't, you just 
pushed a release-button and hung 
on. The air was exhausted in one 
whistling swoosh that took with it 
everything loose. The moisture 
in it crystallized instantly, and 
before this frozen drift had even 
begun to settle, Hyrst and Shearing 
were on their way. 

They crossed the rock pan in 
great swaggering bounds. The gravity was light, the horizon only 
twenty or so miles away. Literally 
in his mind's eye Hyrst could see 
the three ships arrowing at them. 
He opened contact with Vernon, 



28 



IMAGINATION 



knowing Shearing had done so too. 
Vernon had been looking for them. 

"Mr. Bellaver still prefers to have 
you alive," he said. "If you'll wait 
quietly beside the skiff, we'll take 
you aboard." 

Shearing gave him a hard answer. 

"Very well," said Vernon. "Mr. 
Bellaver wants me to make it clear 
to you that he doesn't intend for 
you to get away. So you can interpret that as you please. Be seeing 
you." 

He broke contact, knowing that 
Hyrst and Shearing would close 
him out. From now on, Hyrst realized, he would keep track of them 
the way he and Shearing had kept 
track of obstructions in the path 
of flight, by mental "sight". The 
yacht was extremely close. Suddenly Hyrst had a confused glimpse 
of a hand on a control-lever overlapped by a view of the blackmouthed tubes of the yacht's bellyjets. He dived, literally, into a crack 
between one of the monoliths and 
a slab that leaned against its base, 
dragging Shearing with him. 

The yacht swept over. Nothing 
happened. It dropped out of sight, 
braking for a landing. 

"Imagination," said Shearing. 
"You realize a possibility, and you 
think it's so. Tricky. But I don't 
blame you. The safe side is the 
best one." 



Hyrst looked out the crack. One 
of the tugs was coming in to land 
beside the skiff, while the other one 
circled. 

"Now what?" he said. "I suppose 
we can dodge them for a while, but 
we can't hide from Vernon." 

Shearing chuckled. He had got 
his look of tough competence back. 
He seemed almost to be enjoying 
himself. "I told you you were only 
a cub. How do you suppose we've 
kept the starship hidden all these 
years? Watch." 

In the flick of a second Hyrst 
went blind and deaf. Then he realized that it was only his mental 
eyes and ears that were blanked 
out as though a curtain had been 
drawn across them. His physical 
eyes were still clear and sharp, 
and when Shearing's voice came 
over the helmet audio he heard 
it without trouble. 

"This is called the cloak. I 
suppose you could call it an extension of the shield, though it's 
more like a force field. It's no bar 
to physieal vision, and it has the 
one great disadvantage of being 
opaque both ways to mental energy. But it does act as a deflector. 
If Vernon follows us now, he'll 
have to do it the hard way. Stick 
close by me, so I don't have too 
wide a spread. And it'll be up to 
you to lead. I can't do both. Let's 
go." 



THE LEGION OF LAZARUS 



29 



Hyrst had, unconsciously, become so used to his new perceptions 
that it made him feel dull and 
helpless to be without them. He 
led off down one of the smooth 
rock avenues, going away from the 
skiff and the tug which had just 
landed. 

On either side of the avenue 
were monoliths, irregularly spaced 
and of different sizes and heights 
but following an apparently orderly plan. The light of the distant sun lay raw and blinding on 
them, casting shadows as black and 
sharp-edged as though drawn upon 
the rock with india ink. 

You could see faces in the monoliths. You could see mighty outlines, singly and in groups, of gods 
and beasts and men, in combat, in 
suppliance, in death and burial. 
That was why these asteroids were 
called Valhallas. Twenty-six of 
them had been found so far, and 
studied, and still no one could say 
certainly whether or not the hands 
of any living beings had fashioned them. They might be actual 
monuments, defaced by cosmic dust, 
by collision with the myriad fragments of the Belt, by time. They 
might be one of Nature's casual 
jokes, created by the same agencies. 
No actual tombs had been found, 
nor tools, nor definitely identifiable artifacts. But still the feeling 
persisted, in the airless silence of 



the avenues, that some passing race 
had paused and wrought for itself 
a memorial more enduring than its 
fame, and then gone on into the 
great galactic sea, never Jo return. 

TTYRST had never been on a 
Valhalla before. He understood 
why Shearing had not wanted to 
land and he wished now that they 
hadn't. There was something overwhelmingly sad and awesome about 
these leaning, towering figures of 
stone, moving forever in their lonely orbit, going nowhere, returning 
to nowhere. 

Then he saw the second tug 
overhead. He forgot his daydreams. 
"They're going to act as a spotter," 
he said. Shearing grunted but did 
not speak. His whole mind was 
concentrated on maintaining the 
cloak. Hyrst stopped him still in 
the pitchy shadow under what 
might have been a kneeling woman sixty feet high. He watched the 
tug. It lazed away, circling slowly, 
and he did not think it had seen 
them. He could not any longer see 
the place where they had landed, 
but he assumed that by now the 
yacht had looped back and come in 
— if not there somewhere close 
by. They could figure on nine to 
eleven men hunting them, depending 
on whether they left the ships 
guarded or not. Either way, it was 
too many, 



30 



IMAGINATION 



"Listen," he said aloud to Shearing, "Listen, I want to ask you. 
What you said about latent impressions — you thinik I might have seen 
and hear,d the killer even though 
I was unconscious?" 

"Especially heard. Possible. With 
your increased power, and ours, 
impressions received through sensechannels but not recognized at the 
time or remembered later might 
be recovered." He shook his head. 
"Don't bother me." 

"I just wanted to know," said 
Hyrst. He thought of his son, and 
the two daughters he hoped he 
would never see. He thought of 
Elena. It was too late to do anything for her, but the others were 
still living. So was he, and he intended to stay that way, at least 
until he had done what he set out 
to do. 

"Old Bellaver was behind that 
killing, wasn't he? Old Quentin, 
this one's grandfather." 

"Yes. Don't bother me." 

"One thing more. Do we Lazarites live longer than men?" 

Shearing gave him a curious, 
brief look. "Yes." 

The tug was out of sight behind 
a massive rearing shape that seemed to clutch a broken ship between 
its paws. Symbolic, perhaps, of 
space? Who knew? Hyrst led 
Shearing in wild impala-like leaps 
across an open space, and into a 



narrow way that twisted, filled 
with darkness, among the bases 
of a group that resembled an outlandish procession following a king. 

"How much longer?" 

"Humane Penalty first came in 
a hundred and fourteen years ago, 
right? After Seitz' method was perfected for saving spacemen. I was 
one of the first they used it on." 

"My God," said Hyrst. Yet, 
somehow, he was not as surprised as 
he might have been. 

"I've aged," said Shearing apologetically. "I was only twentyseven then." 

They crouched, beside a humped 
shape like a gigantic lizard with 
a long tail. The tug swung overhead and slowly on. 

Hyrst said, "Then it's possible 
the one who killed MacDonald is 
still alive?" 

"Possible. Probable." 

Hyrst bared his teeth, in what 
was not at all like a smile. "Good," 
he said. 'That makes me happy.' 

They did not do any talking after that. They had had their helmet radios operating on practically no power at all, so that they 
couldn't be picked up outside a radius of a few yards, but even that 
might be too close, now that Bellaver's men had had time to get 
suited and fan out. They shut 
them off entirely, communicating 
hy yanks and midges. 



THE LEGION OF LAZARUS 



31 



T^OR WHAT seemed to Hyrst 
^ like a very long time, but which 
was probably less than half an hour 
in measured minutes, they dodged 
from one patch of shadow to another, following an erratic course 
that Hyrst thought would lead them 
away from the ships. Once more 
the tug went over, slow, and then 
Hyrst didn't see it again. The 
idea that they might have given up 
occurred to him but he dismissed 
it as absurd. With the helmet mike 
shut off, the silence was beginning 
to get on his nerves. Once he looked up and saw a piece of cosmic 
debris smash into a monolith. Dust 
and splinters flew, and a great 
fragment broke off and fell slowly downward, bumping and rebounding, and all of it as soundless as a dream. You couldn't hear 
yourself walk, you couldn't hear 
anything but the roar of your own 
breathing and the pounding of your 
own blood. The grotesque rocky 
avenues could hide an army, stealthy, creeping — 

There was a hill, or at least a 
higher eminence, crowned with 
what might have been the cyclopean image of a man stretched out 
on a noble catafalque, with hooded giants standing by in attitudes of 
mourning. It seemed like the best 
place to stop that Hyrst had seen, 
with plenty of cover and a view of 
the surrounding area. With luck, 



you might stay hidden there a long 
time. He jogged Shearing's elbow 
and pointed, and Shearing nodded. 
There was a wide, almost circular 
sweep of open rock around the 
base of the hill. Hyrst looked carefully for the tug. There was no 
sign of it. He tore out across 
the open, with Shearing at his 
heels. 

The tug swooped over, going 
fast this time. It could not possibly have missed them. Shearing 
dropped the cloak with a grunt. 
"No use for that any more," he 
said. They bounded up the hillside and in among the mourning 
figures. The tug whipped around 
in a tight spiral and hung over the 
hill. Hyrst shook the sweat out of 
his eyes. His mind was clear again. 
The tug's skipper was babbling into his communicator, and in another place on the asteroid Hyrst 
could mentally see a thin skirmish line spread out, and in still 
another four men in a bunch. They 
all picked up and began to move, 
toward the hill. 

Shearing said, nodding spaceward, "Our friends are on the way. 
If we can hold out — " 

"Fat chance," said Hyrst. 
"They're armed, and all we've got 
is flare-pistols." But he looked around. His eyes detected nothing 
but rock, hard sunlight, and deep 
shadow, but his mind saw that 



32 



IMAGINATION 



one of the black blots at the base 
of the main block, the catafalque, 
was more than a shadow. He slid 
into a crack that resembled a passage, being rounded rather than 
ragged. Shearing was right behind 
him. "I don't like this," he said, 
"but I suppose there's no help for 
it." 

The crack led down into a cave, 
or chamber, too irregularly shaped 
to be artificial, too smoothly surfaced and floored to be natural. 
There was nothing in it but a 
block of stone, nine feet or so long 
and about four feet wide by five 
feet high. It seemed to be a natural part of the floor, but Hyrst avoided it. On the opposite, the sunward side, there was a small windowlike aperture that admitted a 
ray of blinding radiance, sharply 
defined and doing nothing to illumine the dark on either side of 
it. 

Vernon's thought came to them, 
hard, triumphant, peremptory. 
"Mr. Bellaver says you have ten 
minutes to come out. After that, 
no mercy." 

CHAPTER V 

npHE MINUTES slid past, sections of eternity arbitrarily 
measured by the standards of another planet and having no relevance at all on this tiny whirling 
rock. The beam of light from the 



small aperture moved visibly across 
the opposite wall. Hyrst watched 
it, blinking. Outside, Bellaver's men 
were drawn up in a wide crescent 
across the hill in front of the catafalque. They waited. 

"No mercy," said Hyrst softly. 
"No mercy, is it?" He bent over 
and began to loosen the clamps that 
held the lead weights to the soles 
of his boots. 

"It isn't mercy we need/' said 
Shearing. "It's time." 

"How much?" 

"Look for yourself." 

Hyrst shifted his attention to 
space. There was a ship in it, heading toward the asteroid, and coming 
fast. Hyrst frowned, doing in his 
head without thinking about it a 
calculation that would have required a computer in his former 
life. 

"Twenty-three minutes and seventeen seconds," he said, "inclusive 
of the four remaining." 

He finished getting the weights 
off his boots. He handed one to 
Shearing. Then he half -climbed, 
half-floated up the wall and settled himself above the entrance, 
where there was a slight concavity 
in the rock to give him hold. 

"Shearing," he said. 

"What?" He was settling himself 
beside the mouth of the crack, 
where a man would have to come 
clear inside to get a shot at him. 

"A starship implies the intention 



THE LEGION OF LAZARUS 



33 



to go to the stars. Why haven't 
you?" 

"For the simplest reason in the 
world," said Shearing bitterly. 
"The damn thing can't fly." 

"But — " said Hyrst, in astonishment. 

"It isn't finished. It's been building for over seventy years now, and 
a long and painful process that's 
been, too, Hyrst — doing it bit 
by bit in secret, and every bit having to be dreamed up out of whole 
cloth, and often discarded and 
dreamed up again, because the 
principle of a workable star-drive 
has never been formulated before. 
And it still isn't finished. It can't 
be finished, unless — " 

He stopped, and both men turned their attention to the outside. 

"Bellaver's looking at his 
chrono," said Hyrst. "Go ahead, 
we've got a minute." 

Shearing continued, "unless we 
can get hold of enough Titanite to 
build the hyper-shift relays. Nothing else has a fast enough reaction 
time, and the necessary load-capacity, We must have burned out a 
thousand different test-boards, 
trying." 

"Can't you buy it?" asked 
Hyrst. The question sounded reasonable, but he knew as he said it 
that it was a foolish one. "I mean, 
I know the stuff is scarcer than 
virtue and worth astronomical 
sums — that's what MacDonald 



was so happy about — fbut — " 

"The Bellaver Corporation had 
a corner on the stuff before our 
ship was even thought of. That's 
what brought this whole damned 
mess about. Some of our people — 
not saying why they wanted it, of 
course — tried to buy some from 
Bellaver in the usual way, and one 
of them must have been incautious about his shield. Because a 
Lazarite working for Bellaver 
caught a mental hint of the starship, and the reason for the Titanite, and that was it. Three generations of Bellavers have been after 
us for the star-drive, and it's developed into a secret war as bitter as 
any ever fought on the battlefield. 
They hold all the Titanite, we 
hold the ship, and perhaps now 
you're beginning to see why MacDonald was killed, and why you're 
so important to both sides." 

"Beginning to," said Hyrst. "But 
only beginning." 

"MacDonald found a Titanite 
pocket. And as you know, a Titanite pocket isn't very big. One man 
can break the crude stuff, fill a 
sack with it, and tote it on his 
own back if he doesn't have a 
power-sled." 

"MacDonald had a sled." 

"And he used it. He cleaned out 
his pocket, afraid somebody else 
would track him to it, and he hid 
the wretched ore somewhere. Then 
he began to dicker. He approach


IMAGINATION 



ed the Bellaver Corporation, and 
we heard of it and approached 
him. He tried playing us off 
against Bellaver to boost the price, 
and suddenly he was dead and you 
were accused of his murder. We 
thought you really had rJone it, because no Titanite turned up, and 
we knew Bellaver hadn't gotten it 
from him. We'd watched too closely. It wasn't until some years later 
that one of our people learned that 
MacDonald had threatened a little 
too loudly to sell to us unlelss Bellaver practically tripled his offer 
— and of course Bellaver didn't 
dare do that. A price so much out 
of line even for Titanite would 
have stirred all the rival shipbuilders to unwelcome curiosity. So, we 
figured, Bellaver had had him 
killed." 

"But what happened to the Titanite?" 

"That," said Shearing, "is what 
nobody knows. Bellaver must have 
figured that if his tame Lazarites 
couldn't find where MacDonald had 
put it, we couldn't either. He was 
right. With all our combined mental probes and conventional detectors we haven't been able to track 
it down. And we haven't been able 
to find any more pockets, either. 
Bellaver Corporation got exclusive 
mineral rights to the whole damned 
moon. They even own the refinery 
now." 

Hyrst shook his head. "Latent 



impressions or not, I don't sec how 
I can help on that. If MacDonald 
had given the killer any clue — " 

A BEAM of bright blue light no 
thicker than a pencil struck 
in through the mouth of the passage. It touched the side of the 
large stone block. The stone turned 
molten and ran, and then the beam 
flicked off, leaving a place that 
glowed briefly red. Shearing said, 
"I guess our ten minutes are up." 

They were. For a second or two 
nothing more happened and then 
Hyrst saw something come sailing 
in through the crack. His mind told 
him what it was just barely in time 
to shut his eyes. There was a flash 
that dazzled him even through his 
closed lids, and the flash became a 
glare that did not lessen. Bellaver's 
men had tossed in a long-term flare, 
and almost at once someone followed it, in the hope of catching Hyrst 
and Shearing blinded and off guard. 
The eyes of Hyrst's mind, unaffected by light, clearly showed him 
the suited figure just below him, 
with its bubble helmet covered by a 
glare-shield. They directed him 
with perfect accuracy in the downward sweep of the lead weight he 
had taken from his boot, and 
which he still held in his hand. The 
bubble helmet was very strong, and 
the gravity very light, but the concussion was enough to drop the 
man unconscious. Just aibout 



THE LEGION OF LAZARUS 



35 



thought Hyrst, what happened to 
me there in the hoist tower, when 
MacDonald died. Shearing, who 
had by now adjusted his own glareshield stooped quickly and took the 
man's gun. 

He said aloud, over the helmet 
communicator, "The next one that 
steps through here gets it. Do you 
hear that, Bellaver?" 

Bellaver's voice answered. "Listen, Shearing, I was wrong. I admit 
it. Let's calm down and start over 
again. I — " 

"Ten minutes ago it was no 
mercy," 

"It's hard for me to behave reasonably about this business. You 
know what it means to me, what it 
meant to my father and his father. 
But I'm willing to do anything, 
Shearing, if you'll make a deal." 

"I'll make a deal. Readily. Eagerly. Give back what your grandfather stole from us, and we'll call it 
square." 

"Oh no we won't," said Hyrst 
grimly, breaking in. "Not until I 
find who killed MacDonald." 

"All right," said Bellaver. "Wilson, break out the grenades." 

The entire surface of Hyrst's 
body burst into a flaring sweat. 
For one panic-stricken second he 
wanted to rush out the crack pleading for mercy. Then he got his feet 
against the wall and pushed hard, 
and went plunging across the chamber in a sort of floating dive. 



Shearing got there at the same 
time and helped to pull him down. 
They huddled together on the floor, 
with the coffin-shaped block between them and the crack. Hyrst 
sent out a frantic mental call to 
hurry, directed at the spaceship of 
the brotherhood. 

"They're all going to hurry," 
said Shearing. "Vernon has found 
the ship now. He's telling Bellaver. 
Here comes the grenade — " 

Small round glittering thing of 
death, curving light and graceful 
through Ihe airless gloom. It comes 
so slowly, and the flesh shrinks 
quivering upon itself until it is 
nothing more than a handful of 
simple fear. Outside the men are 
running away, and the one who has 
thrown the grenade from the cramped, constructing vantage of the 
crack is running after them, and 
Shearing is crying with his mind 
Will it to fall short, will it to jail 
sh— 

There is a great brilliance, and 
the rock leaps, but there is not the 
slightest sound. 

CHAPTER VI 

"The Ram, the Bull, the Heavenly Twins, 
And next the Crab the Lion 

Shine. 

The Virgin and the Scales — " 
The old zodiacal rhyme was 
running through Hyrst's mind, and 



36 



IMAGINATION 



that was the only thing that was in 
his mind. 

The Virgin and the Scales. 

Yes. And she's very beautiful, 
too, thought Hyrst. But she 
shouldn't be holding the Scales. 
That's all wrong. The Scales come 
next, and then the Scorpion — 
Scorpio — and the Archer — Sagittarius — 

And anyway they aren't scales, 
they're a pair of big golden stars, 
and she's putting them down, and 
they're meUing together. There's 
only one of them, and it's not a 
star at all, really. It's a polished 
metal jug, reflecting the light, and 

The Virgin smiled. "The doctor 
said you were comi ng arou nd. I 
brought you something to drink." 

Reality returned to Hyrst with a 
rush. "You're Christina," he said, 
and tried to sit up. He was dizzy, 
and she helped him, and he said, 
"I guess it did fall short." 

"What?" 

"The grenade. The last thing I 
remember is Shearing — Wait. 
Where is Shearing?" 

"Sitting up in the lounge, nursing 
his bruises. Yes, it fell short, but I 
don't think telekinetics had much 
to do with that. We've never been 
able to control matter convincingly. There. All right?" 

"Fine. How did you get us out?" 

"Of course the grenade had 
made the entrance impassible — we 



had to cut our way in through the 
outer wall. We had a clear field. 
Bellaver's men had all gone back to 
their ships.' They thought you were 
dead, and to tell you the truth we 
thought you must be, too. But you 
didn't quite 'feel' dead, so we dug 
you out." 

"Thanks," said Hyrst. "I suppose they know different now." 

He was in a ship's sick-bay. 
From the erratic crash and shudder of the lateral jets, they were 
bea t i ng thei r wa y t hrough tht 
Belt, and at a high rate of speed. 
Hyrst sent a glance back into 
space. The tugs and Bellaver's 
yacht were following, but this time 
only the yacht had a chance. The 
tugs were dropping hopelessly behind. 

"Yes, they soon found out once 
we got you out, but with any luck 
we'll lose them," said Christina. 
She sat down beside the bunk, 
where she could see his face. 
"Shearing told you about the ship." 

"The starship. Yes." He looked 
at her. Suddenly he laughed. "You're not a goddess at all." 

"Who said I was?" 

"Shearing. Or anyway, his mind. 
Ten feet tall, and crowned with 
stars — I was afraid of you." lie 
leaned closer. "Your eyes, though. 
They are angry." 

"So will yours be," she said, 
"when you've fought the Bellavers 
as LoDg as we have." 



THE LEGION OF LAZARUS 



"There are still things I don't 
understand. Why you built the 
ship, why you've kept it secret from 
everyone, not just Bellaver, what 
you plan to do with it — how you 
came to be one of the Brotherhood." 

She smiled. "The Seitz method 
was originated to save wreck-victims frozen in deep space. Remember? Quite a few of us never went 
through the door at all, innocent or 
guilty. But that makes no difference, once you've come back from 
uut there." She put her hand on 
his. "You've learned fast, but you're only on the threshold. There's 
no need for words with us. Open 
your mind — " 

TIE DID SO. At first it was no 
different from the contact he 
had had with Shearing's mind, or 
with Christina's before on the 
Happy Dream. Thoughts came to 
him clearly phrased — You want 
to know why we built the ship, 
what we plan to do with it — and 
it was only after some time that 
he realized the words had stopped 
and he was receiving Christina's 
emotions, her memories and opinions, her disappointments and her 
dreams, as simpiy and directly as 
though they were bis own. 

You haven't had time yet, they 
told him without words, to realize 
how alone you are. You .haven't 
tried, as most of us do at first, to 



be human again, to fit yourself into life as though the gap of time 
was not there, as though nothing 
had changed. You haven't watched 
people getting old around you while 
you have hardly added a gray hair. 
You haven't had to move from one 
place to another, one job, one group 
of friends to another, because 
sooner or later they sense something wrong about you. You haven't had to hide your new [lowers 
as you would hide a disease because people would fear and hate 
you, perhaps even kill you. if they 
knew. That's why there is a brotherhood. And that's why we built 
the ship. 

Symbol of flight. Symbol of freedom. A universe wide beyond imagining, thronging wth many colored guns, with new worlds where 
men in a human society could build 
a society of their own. No boundaries beyond which the mind cannot 
dare to go. All space, all time, all 
knowledge — free! 

Once more he saw those wide 
dark seas between the suns. His 
mind raced with hers through the 
cold-flaming nebulae, wheeled 
blinded and stunned past the hiving stars of Hercules, looked in 
eager fascination at the splendid 
spiral of Andromeda — no longer, 
perhaps, beyond reach, for what are 
time and space to the intangible 
forces of the mind? 

Then that wild flight ceased, and 



38 



IMAGINATION 



instead there was a smaller vision, 
misty and only half realized, of 
houses and streets, a place where 
they could live and be what they 
were, openly and without fear. 

Can you understand now, she 
asked him, what they would think 
if they knew about the ship? Can 
you understand that they would he 
ajratd to have us colonizing out 
there, afraid of what we might do? 

He understood. At the very 
least, if the truth were known, the 
Lazarites would never be free 
again. They would be taken and 
tested and examined and lectured 
about, legislated over, restricted, 
governed, and used. They might 
be fairly paid for their ship and 
whatever other advancements they 
might develop, but they would 
never be permitted to use them. 

With sudden savage eagerness 
Hyrst said, "But first of all I 
must know who killed MacDonald. 
Shearing explained about the latent 
impressions. I'm ready." 

She stood up. regarding him 
with grave eyes. "There's no guarantee it will work. Sometimes it 
does. Sometimes not." 

Hyrst thought about the tired, 
gray-haired man who had stood at 
the foot of his bed. "It'll work. It's 
got to." 

He added, "If it doesn't, 111 
tear the truth out of Bellaver with 
my hands." 

"It may come to that," she said 



grimly. "But we'll hope. Lie quiet. 
I'll make the arrangements." 

An hour later Hyrst lay on the 
padded table in the middle of the 
sick-bay. The ship spun and whirled and leaped in a sort of insane 
dance, and Hyrst was strapped w 
t'he table to prevent his being 
thrown off. He had known that 
the ship was maneuvering in the 
thickest swarm area of the Belt 
with four pilots mind-linked and 
flying esper, trying to out-dare 
Bellaver. Two others were keeping 
Vernon blanked, and they hoped 
that eitiher Bellaver himself or his 
radar-deflector system would give 
up, Hyrst had known this, but now 
he was no longer interested. He was 
barely conscious of the lurching of 
the ship. They had given him some 
sort of a drug, and he lay relaxed 
and pliant in a pleasant suspension 
of all worries, looking vaguely up 
at the faces that were bent over 
him. Finally he closed his eyes, 
and even they were gone. 

TTE was crossing the plain of 
^ methane snow with MacDonald, under the glowing Rings. 
At first it was all a little blurred, 
but gradually the memory cleared 
until he was aware of eaah tiny detail far more clearly than he had 
been at the time — the texture of 
the material from which MacDonald's suit was made, the infinitesimal shadow underscoring every 



THE LEGION OF LAZARUS 



39 



roughness of the snow, the exact sensation of walking in his 
leaded boots, the whisper and whistle of his oxygen system. He quarrelled again with MacDonald, not 
missing a word. He climbed with 
him into the tower of Number 
Three hoist and examined the signal lights, and sat down on the 
bench, smiling, to wait. 

He sweated inside his suit. He 
would take a shower when he got 
back to quarters. He wished for a 
smoke. MacDonald's steady grumbling and cursing filled his helmet. 
He listened, enjoying it. Hope you 
bang yourself with your own 
clumsy hammer. And I wisih you 
joy of your fortune. If you have 
as many friends rich as you had 
poor you won't have any. There 
was an itch under his left arm. He 
pressed the suit in with his right 
and wriggled his body against it. 
It didn't do any good. Damn suits. 
Damn Titan. Lucky Elena, back 
on Earth with the kids. Making 
good money, though. Won't be long 
before I can go back and live like 
a human being. Now his nose 
itched, and MacDonald was still 
grumbling. There was the faintest 
ghost of a sound and then crack, 
then nothing, dark, cold, sinking, 
very weak, gone. Nothing, nothing. 
I come to in the cold silence and 
look down the shaft at MacDonald and he is dead. 

Go back a bit. Slow. That's 



right. Easy. Back to Elena and the 
kids. 

Lucky Elena, in the sun and the 
warm sweet air. Lucky kids. But 
I'm lucky too. I can go back to 
them soon. My nose itches. Why 
does your nose always itoh when 
you've got a helmet on, or your 
hands all over grease? Listen to 
MacDonald, damning the belt, 
damning the tools, damning everything in sight. Is that a footstep? 
The air is thin and poisonous, but 
it carries sound. Somebody coming 
behind me? Split second, no time 
to look or think. Crack. Cold. DarkNothing. 

Let's go back again. Don't hurry. 
We've all the time in the world. 
Go back to the footsteps you heard 
behind you. 

Almost heard. And then I black 
and cold. Heavy. Flat. Face heavy 
against helmet, cold. Lying down. 
Must get up, must get up, danger. 
Far away. Can't. MacDonald is 
screaming. Let the lift alone, what 
are you doing, Hyrst? Hyrst! Shut 
up, you greedy little man, and listen. You're not Hyrst — who are 
you? That doesn't matter. I know, 
you're from Bellaver. Bellaver sent 
you to steal the Titanite. Well, 
you won't get it. It's where nobody 
will ever get it unless I show them 
how. Good. That's good, MacDonald. That's what I wanted to 
know. You see, we don't need the 
Titanite. 



40 



IMAGINATION 



MacDonald screams again and 
the lift goes down with a roar and 
a rattle of severed chain. 

Heavy footsteps, shaking the 
floor by my head. Someone turns 
me over, speaks to me, bending 
close. Light is gray and strange. I 
try to rouse. I can't. The man is 
satisfied. He drops me and goes 
away, but I have seen his face inside his helmet. I hear him working on some metal thing with a tool. 
He is whistling a little under his 
breath. MacDonald is not screaming now. From time to time he 
whimpers. But I have seen the 
killer's face. 

I have seen his face. 

I have seen — 

Take it easy, Hyrst. Take your 
time. 

Elena is dead, and this is Christina bending over me. 

I have seen the killer's face. 
It is the face of Vernon. 

CHAPTER VII 

*T*HERE WAS Christina, and 
there was Shearing, and there 
were two more he did not know, 
leaning over hirn. The drug was 
wearing off a little, and Hyrst 
could see them more clearly, see the 
bitter disappointment in their eyes. 

"Is that all?" Christina said. 
"Are you sure? Go back again — " 

The\- took him back again, and 
it was the same. 


"That's all MacDonald said? 
Then we're no closer to the Titanite 
than we were before." 

Hyrst was not interested in the 
Titanite. "Vernon," lie said. Something red and wild rose up in him, 
and he tried to tear away the straps 
that held him. "Vernon. I'll get 
him — " 

"Later, Hyrst," said Shearing, 
and sighed. "Lie still a bit. lie's on 
Bellaver's yacht, remember? Quite 
out of reach. Now think. MacDonald said, You won't get it, it's 
where nobody will ever get it — " 4 

"What's the use?" said Christina, turning away. "It was a faint 
hope anyway. Dying men don't 
draw obliging maps for you." She 
sat down on the edge of a bunk 
and put her head in her hands. 
"We might as well give up. You 
know that." 

One of the two Lazarites who 
had done the latent probe on Hyrst 
said with hollow hopefulness, "Perhaps if we let him rest a while and 
then go over it again — " 

"Let me up out of here," said 
Hyrst, still groggy with the drug. 
"I want Vernon." 

"I'll help you get him," said 
Shearing, "if you'll tell me what 
MacDonald meant when he said 
nobody will ever get it unless I 
show them how." 

"How the devil do I know?" 
Hyrst tugged at the straps, raging. 
"Let me up." 



THE LEGIOX OF LAZARUS 



4 



"But you knew MacDonald well. 
You worked with him and beside 
him for years." 

"Does that tell me where he 
hid the Titanite? Don't be an ass, 
Shearing. Let me up." 

"But," said Shearing equably, 
"he didn't say where. He said 
how." 

"Isn't that the same thing?" 

"Is it? Listen. Nobody will ever 
get it unless I show them where. 
Nubody will ever get it unless I 
show them how." 

Hyrst stopped fighting the 
straps. He began to frown. Christina lifted her head again. She did 
not say anything. The two Lazarites who had done the probe stood 
still and held their breath. 

Shearing's mind touched Hyrst's 
Stroking it as with soothing fingers. 
"Let's think about that for a minute. Let your thoughts move freely. 
MacDonald was an engineer. The 
engineer. Of the four, he alone 
knew every inch of the physical setup of the refinery. So?" 

"Yes. That's right. But that 
doesn't say where — Wait a minute, though. If he'd just shoved it 
in a crack somewhere in the mountains, he'd know a detector might 
find it, more easily than before it 
was dug. He'd have put it some 
where deep, deeper than he could 
possibly dig. Maybe in an abandoned mine?" 

"No place," said Shearing, "is 



too deep for us to pro-be. We've examined every abandoned mine on 
that side of Titan. And it doesn't 
fit, anyway. No. Try again." 

"He wouldn't have brought it 
back to the refinery. One of us 
would be sure to find it. Unless, of 
course — " 

Hyrst stopped, and the tension 
in the sick-bay tightened another 
notch. The ship lurched sharply, 
swerved, and shot upward with a 
deafening thunder of rocket-blasts. 
Hyrst shut his eyes, thinking hard. 

"Unless he put it in some place 
so dangerous that nobody ever went 
there. A place where even he didn't 
go, but which he would know about 
being the engineer." 

"Can you think of any place that 
would answer that description?" 

"Yes," said Hyrst slowly. "The 
underground storage bins. They're 
always hot, even when they're 
empty. Anything hidden near them 
would be blanketed by radiation. 
No detector would see anything 
but uranium. Probably even you 
wouldn't." 

"No," said Shearing, looking 
amazed. "Probably we wouldn't. 
The radioactive disturbance would 
be too strong to get through, even 
if we were looking for something 
beyond it, which we weren't." 

CHRISTINA had sprung up. 
Now she bent over Hvrsl and 
said, "But is there a way it could 



42 



IMAGINATION 



have been done? Obviously, the 
Titanite couldn't have been put 
directly into the bin with the uranium — if nothing else, it would 
have been shipped out in the next 
tanker." 

"Oh, yes," said Hyrst. "There 
would be several ways. I can think 
of a couple myself, and I've never 
even see the layout. The repairlift shaft, I know, goes clear down 
to the feeder mechanism, and 
there's some kind of a system of 
dispersal tunnels and an emergency 
gadget that trips automatically to 
release a liquid -graphite damping 
material into them in case the radiation level gels too high. I don't 
remember that it ever did, but it's 
a safeguard. There'd be plenty of 
places to hide a lead box full of 
Titanite." 

"Unless I show them how," repeated Shearing slowly, and began 
to undo the straps that held Hyrst 
to the table. "It has an ominous 
sound. I'll bet you that localing the 
Titanite will be child's play compared to getting it out. Well, we'll 
do what we can." 

"The first thing," said Christina 
grimly, "is to get rid of Bellavcr. 
If he has the slightest suspicion 
where we're headed he'll radio ahead and have all Titan alerted." 

Hyrst, sitting up now on the 
edge of the table, hanging on 
against the lurching of the ship, 
said, "That's right — he owns the 



refinery now, doesn't he? Is it still 
working? " 

"No. The mines around there 
played out, oh, ten, fifteen years 
ago. The activity's shifted to the 
north, and east on the other side 
of the range. That is what may 
possibly give us a chance." Shearing staggered with Hyrst across 
the bucking deck and sat tailorfashion in the bunk, his eyes intent. "Hyrst, I want you to remember everything you can about the 
rei'mery. The ground plan, exactly 
where the buildings are. the hoists, 
the landing field. Everything." 

Hyrst said, showing the edges of 
his teeth, "When do I get Vernon?" 

"You'll get him. I promise you." 

"What about Bellaver? He's still 
behind us." 

Shearing smiled. "That's Christina's job; Let her worry." 

Hyrst nodded. He began to remember the refinery. Christina and 
th$ other two went out. 

A short while later a number of 
things happened, violently, and in 
quick succession, The ship of the 
Lazarites, pursuing its wild and 
headlong course through the swarming debris of the Belt, was far ahead of Bellaver's yacht but still 
within instrument range. Apparently in desperation it plunged 
suddenly on a tangential course into a cluster of great jagged rocks 
all travelling together at a furious 
rate of speed. The cluster was per


THE LEGION 01- LAZARUS 



43 



haps two hundred miles across. The 
Lazarite ship twisted and turned, 
and then there was a swift bright 
flowering of flame, and then nothing. 

"She's blown her tubes," said 
Bellaver exultantly, on the bridge 
of his yacht. The instruments had 
lost contact, chiefly because the 
cluster was so thick that it was impossible to separate one body from 
another. 

Vernon said, "They're not 
blanking my mind any more. It 
stopped, like that." 

But he was still doubtful. 

lL ( an you locate the ship?" asked 
Bellaver. 

"I'm trying." 

Bellaver caught his arm. "Look 
there! " 

There was a second, larger and 
more brilliant, flash of flame. 

"They've hit an asteroid." he 
said. "They're done for." 

.''I can't locate them," Vernon 
said. "No ship, no wreckage. It 
could be a trick. They could be 
holding a cloak." 

"A I rick?" said Bellaver. "I 
doubt it. Anyway, we're running 
low on fuel, and I'm not going to 
go into that cluster and risk my 
own neck to find out. H by any 
chance they do come out again 
IuUt on, we'll deal with them." 

But they both watched the cluster until it had whirled on out of 
sighl And neither eye nor instru


ment nor Vernon's probing mind 
could distinguish any sign of life. 

CHAPTER VIII 

qpITAN LAY below them in the 
Saturn-glow, under the fantastic glory of the Rings. A bitter, 
repellent world of jagged peaks 
and glimmering plains of poison 
snow. The tiny life-raft dropped 
toward it, skittering nervously as 
it hit the thin atmosphere. Hyrst 
clung hard to the handholds, living 
not to retch. He was not habituated 
to space anyway, and the skiff had 
been bad enough. Now, wit In ml 
any hull around him and nothing 
but a curved shield in front of him, 
he felt like an ant on a flying leaf. 

"I don't like it either. Shearing 
said. "But it gives us a fifty-fifty 
chance of getting through unnntLced. Radar usually isn't looking for 
anything so small." 

"I understand all the reasons,'' 
Hyrst said. "It's my stomach that's 
obtuse." 

He could make out the pattern 
of the refinery now, a million miles 
of vertigo below him. The Lazarite 
ship was somewhere up and out behind them, hiding in the Rings. The 
trick had worked with Bellaver out 
there in the Belt, and they hoped 
now that it would work with Bellaver's observers on Titan. There was 
no need for any fake explosions 
this time, to give the impression of 



44 



IMAGINATION 



destruction. Secrecy was the watchword, all lights out and jet-blasts 
muffled to a spark. Later, when 
Hyrst and Shearing had accomplished their mission, the ship 
would drop down fast and take 
them off, with the Titanite, before 
any patrol craft would have time 
to arrive. 
They hoped. 

The buildings of the refineiy 
were dark and cold, drifted mit of 
shape by an accumulation of the 
thin, evil snow. The spiderweb of 
roads had faded f rom the plain , 
and the landing field was smooth 
and unmarked. Around its perimeter the six stiff towers of the 
hoists stood up like lonely sentinels, hooded and cloaked. 

Hyrst felt a sudden tightening 
of his throat, and this was a thing 
he had not expected. A refinery on 
Titan was hardly a thing to be sentimental about. But it was bound 
up so intimately with other things, 
with hopes for a future that was 
now far behind him, with plans 
for Elena and the kids that were 
now a cruel mockery, with friendly 
memories of Saul :md Landers, 
now long dead, that he could not 
look at it unmoved. 

"Let's try again," said Shearing 
quietly. "If we could locate the Titanite definitely it might make all 
the difference. We'll hardly have 
time to search all six of the bins." 

Glad of the distraction, Hyrst 



tried. He linked his mind to Shearing's and they probed with this 
double probe, one after the other, 
the six hoists and the bins beneath 
them, while the raft fell whistling 
down the air. 

II was the same as all the tries 
before. The bins had been empty 
for more than a decade, but t Lie residual radiation was still hot 
enough to present a luminous naze 
to the eyes of the mind, fogging 
everything around it. 

"Wait a minute," Hyrst said. 
"Let's use our wits. Look at the 
way those hoists are placed, in a 
wide crescent. Now if I was 
MacDonald, coming in from the 
mountains with a load of Titanite, 
and I wanted not to be seen, which 
one would I pick?" 

"Either One or Six," said Sheaiing, without hesitation. "They're 
the farthest away from the buildings." 

"But Number Six is at the west 
end of the crescent, and to reach 
it you would have to go clear across the landing field." He pointed mentally to Number One. I'll 
bet on that one. Shall we give it 
another try?" 

They did. This time, for a fleeting second, Hyrst thought he had 
something. 

"So did I," said Shearing. "Sort 
of down under and behind." 

"Yes," said Hyrst. "Look out!" 
His involuntary cry was caused by 



THE LEGION 

the sudrlen collision of the life-raft 
with a cloud. The vapor was very 
thick, and after the cruel clarity 
of space it made Hyrst feel that he 
was smothering. Shearing jockeyed 
the raft's meagre controls, and in a 
minute or two they were below the 
cloud and spiralling down toward 
the landing field. It was snowing. 

"Good," said Shearing. "We'll 
hope it keeps up." 

npHEY LANDED close to Nura* ber One Hoist and floundered rapidly through the shallow 
drifts, carrying some things. The 
hatch had been sealed with a plastic spray to prevent corrosion, and 
it took them several minutes to get 
it open. Inside the tower it was 
pitch black, but they did not need 
lights. Their other senses showed 
them the worn metal treads of the 
steps quite clearly. In the upper 
chamber the indicator panels were 
dark and dead. Hyrst shivered inside his suit. He had been here 
so many times before, so rung ago. 
"Let's get busy," Shearing said. 
They pulled on the rayproofs 
they had brought with them from 
the raft. Without power the lift was 
useless, but the skeleton cage, 
stripped of all its tools, was not too 
heavy for two strong men to swing 
clear of the shaft top. They made 
sure it would stay clear, and then 
sent down a light collapsible ladder. Hyrst slid down first into the 



OF LAZARUS 45 

smooth, round, totally unlighted 
hole, that had one segment of it 
open paralleling the machinery of 
the hoist. 

"Take it caref ully," Shearing 
said, and slid after him. 

Clumsy in vac-suit and rayproof, Hyrst descended the ladder 
with agonizing slowness. Every 
impulse cried out for haste, but he 
knew if he hurried he would wind 
up at the bottom of the shaft as 
dead as MacDonald. The banging 
and knocking of their passage 
against the metal wall made a .somber, hollow booming in that enclosed space, and it seemed to Hyrst 
that the silent belts and cables of 
the hoist bummed a little in sympathy. It was probably only the 
blood humming in his own ears. 

"See anything yet?" 

"No." 

The vast strange glowing of the 
bin grew brighter as they approached it. The hoist was still "hot," 
and it glowed too, but nothing like 
the concentration in the hin. 

"Even with rayproofs, we can't 
stay close to that too long." 

"I don't think we'll have to. 
MacDonald was only human, and 
the bin was full then. He couldn't 
have stayed long either." 

"See anything yet?" 

"Nothing but fog. When you hit 
bottom, better use your light." 

At long last Hyrst felt the 
bottom of the shaft under his 



IMAGINATION 



boots. He stood aside from the ladder and switched on his belt lamp. 
In this case the physical eyes were 
better than the mental, being insensitive to radiation. Instantly the 
gears and cams of the feeder assembly sprang into sharp relief on 
the open side of the shaft. Shearing stumbled down off the ladder 
and switched on his own light. 

"Where was it we thought we 
saw something?" 

"Down under and behind." 
Hyrst turned slowly around, questing. The shaft was unbroken except by the repair opening. He 
climbed through it, with some difficulty, because nobody was supposed to climb through it and the 
machinery was placed for easy access with extension tools from the 
lift. The bin itself was now directly opposite them, a big hopper cut 
deep in the solid rock and serving 
the feeder by simple gravity. The 
feeder pretty well filled its own 
rocky chamber. A place might 
have been found beside it for 
something not too big, but the 
first man who came down on the 
lift would have seen it whether he 
was looking for it or not. 

Shearing pointed. A dark opening pierced the rock at one side. 
Hyrst tried to see into it with his 
mental eyes, but the "fog" was so 
dense and bright — 

Hp saw it, an unsubstantial 
ghostly shadow, but there. A square 



box some twenty feet down the 
tunnel. 

Shea r i ng d re w a qu ick sha r p 
breath "Let's go." 

They went into the tunnel, 
crouching, scraping against the narrow sides. 

"Look out for booby traps." 

"I don't see any — yet." 

The box sat in the middle of the 
tunnel. There was no way to get 
around it, no way to see over it 
without lying on its top and wriggling between it and the low roof. 
Hyrst and Shearing shut their 
eyes. 

"I'm not sure, but I think I see 
a wire. Damn the fog. Can't tell 
where it goes — " 

TTYRST took cutters from his 
*• belt and slithered cautiously 
over the box. His heart was hammering very hard and his hand 
shook so that he had great difficulty getting the cutters and the 
wire together. The wire was attached to the back of the box, 
very crudely and hastily attached 
with a blob of plastic solder. It was 
not until he had pinched the wire 
with the sharp metal cutter-teeth 
that he realized the plastic was 
non-metallic and the wire bare. 
And then, of course, it was too 
late. 

There must have been a simple 
energizer somewhere up ahead, still 
charging itself from the ample ra


THE LEGION OF LAZARUS 



47 



diation source. The cutters flew 
out of Hyrst's hand in a shower of 
sparks, and in the darkness of the 
tunnel ahead there was a sudden 
wild flare of light, and an explosion of dust. A shock wave, not too 
great, hammered past Hyrst's 
helmet. Shearing yelled once, a protest broken short in mid-cry. Then 
they waited. 

The dust settled. The brief tremor of the rock was stilled. 

In the roof of the tunnel, where 
the blast had been, a broken dumptrap hung open, but nothing poured out of it but a handful of black 
dust. 

Hyrst began to laugh. He lay on 
his belly on top of the box of Titanite and laughed. The tears ran 
out of his eyes and down his nose 
and dropped onto the inside of his 
helmet. Shearing hit him from behind. He hit him until he stopped 
laughing, and then Hyrst shook his 
head and said. 

"Poor MacDonald." 

"Yeah. Go ahead, you can cut 
the wire now." 

"Such a lovely booby trap. But 
he wasn't figuring on time. They 
went away from here, Shearing, 
you see? And when they went they 
drained off the liquid graphite and 
took it with them. So there isn't 
anything left to flood the tunnel. 
Pathetic, isn't it?" 

Shearing hit him again. "Cut the 
wire." 



He cut it. They scuffled backward down the tunnel, dragging 
the box. When they got back into 
the shaft where there was room to 
do it they opened up the box. 

"Doesn't look like much, does 
it, for all the trouble it's made?" 

"No, it doesn't. But then gold 
doesn't look like much, or uranium, 
or a handful of little dry seeds." 
Shearing picked up a chunk of the 
rough, grayish ore. "You know 
what that is, Hyrst? That's the 
stars. " 

It was Hyrst's turn to prod 
Shearing into quiet. The starship 
and the dream that went with it 
were still only an intellectual interest to him. They shared out the 
Titanite into two webbing sacks. It 
made a light load for each, hardly 
noticeable when clipped to a beltring at the back. 

Hyrst felt suddenly very nervous. Perhaps it was reaction, perhaps it was the memory of having 
been trapped in a similar hole on 
the Valhalla asteroid. Perhaps it 
was a mental premonition, obscured by the radioactive "fog". At 
any rate, he started to climb the 
ladder with almost suicidal haste, 
urging Shearing on after him. The 
shaft seemed to be a mile high. It 
seemed to lengthen ahead of him 
as he climbed, so that he was never 
any nearer the top. He knew it was 
only imagination, because he passed the level markers, but it was 



4 s 



IMAGINATION 



the closest thing to a nightmare "he 
had ever experienced when he was 
broad awake. Just after they had 
passed the E Level mark, Shearing 
spoke. 

"A ship has landed." 

Hyrst looked mentally. The 
fog-effect was not so great now , 
and he could see quite clearly. It 
was a small ship, and two men were 
getting out of it. It had stopped 
snowing. 

"Radar must have picked up 
the raft after all," said Shearing. 
"Or else somebody spotted the jetflares." He began to climb faster. 
"We better get out of this before 
they come in-." 

D Level. Hyrst's hands were 
cold and stiff inside his gauntlets, 
clumsy hooks to catch the slender 
rungs. The two men were standing 
outside in the snow, peering around. 

C Level. One of the two men 
saw the raft parked by the hoist 
tower. He pointed, and they moved 
toward it. 

B Level. Hyrst's boots slipped 
and scrambled, banging the shaft 
wall. "Christ," said Shearing. "You 
sound like a temple gong. What 
are you trying to do, alarm the 
whole moon?" 

'TT'HE MEN outside bent over 
the raft. They looked at it. 
Then they looked at the hoist 
tower. They left the raft and began 
to run, pulling guns out of their 



belts. 

A Level. Hyrst's breath roared 
in his helmet like a great wind, lie 
thought of the long dark way dnwn 
that was below them, and how 
MacDonald had looked at the 
bottom of the shaft, and how he 
would take Shearing with him if 
he fell, and nobody would get to 
the stars, and Vernon would go 
free. He set his teeth, and sobbed, 
and climbed. Outside, the two men 
cautiously removed the hatch and 
stepped into the tower. 

End of the ladder, A level floor 
to sprawl on. Hyrst squirmed away 
from the shaft. He thought for a 
minute he was going to pass out, 
and he fumbled with the oxygen 
valve, making the mixture richer. 
His head began to clear. Shearing 
was now beside him. This time 
they had guns, too. Shearing gave 
him a quick mental caution, Not 
unless you have to. One of the two 
men was placing a tentative foot on 
the stair that led up to where they 
were. The other man was close behind him. Shearing took careful 
aim and fired, at half power. 

The harsh blue bolt did not 
strike either man. But they went 
reeling back in a cloud of burning 
flakes, and when Shearing shimlcd 
to them to drop their weapons and 
get out they did so, half stunned 
from the shock. Hyrst and Shearing leaped down the stairs, stopping only long enough to pick up 



THE LEGION OF LAZARUS 



4Q 



the guns. Then they scrambled 
outside. The two men were running as hard as they could for 
their ship, but they had not gone 
far and Shearing stopped them 
with another shot that sent a geyser of methane steam puffing up 
practically under their feet. 

"Not yet," he said. "Later." 

The two men stood, sullenly 
obedient. They were both young, 
and not bad looking. Just doing a 
job, Hyrst thought. No real harm 
in them, just doing a job, like so 
many people who never stop to 
worry about what the job means. 
They both wore Bellaver's insigne 
on their vac-suits. 

One of them said, as though he 
were reciting a lesson in which he 
had no real personal interest, 
"You're trespassing on private 
property. You'll be prosecuted to 
the fullest extent of the law." 

"Sure," said Shearing. He motioned to the hoist tower. "Back 
inside." 

The young men hesitated. "What 
you going to do?" 

"Nothing fatal. It shouldn't take 
you more than half an hour to 
break out again." 

He marched them to the hatch 
and saw them inside it. Hyrst was 
watching the sky, the black starglittering sky with the glorious 
arch of the Rings across it and one 
milky-bright curve of Saturn visible and growing above the eastern 



horizon. 

"They're coming," he said mentally to Shearing. 

"Good." He started to close the 
hatch, and one of the young men 
pointed suddenly to the sack clipped to Shearing's belt. 

"You've been stealing something." 

"Tell that to Bellaver." 

"You bet I will. The fullest extent of the law, mister! The fullest 
extent — " 

The hatch closed. Shearing jammed the fastening mechanism so 
it could not be turned from the inside. Then he went and stood beside Hyrst in the glimmering plain, 
watching the ship drop down out 
of the Rings. 

Hyrst said, "They'll tell Bellaver." 

"Naturally." 

"What will Bellaver do?" 

"I'm not sure. Something drastic. He wants our starship so hard 
he'd murder his own children to 
get it. You can see why. In itself 
it's priceless, a hundred years ahead of its time, but that's not 
all. It's what it stands for. To us 
it means freedom and safety. To 
Bellaver it means — " 

He gestured toward the sky, 
and Hyrst nodded, seeing in 
Shearing's mind the image of a gigantic Bellaver, ten times bigger 
than God, gathering the whole 
galaxy into his arms. 



5o 



IMAGINATION 



"I wish you luck," said Hyrst. 
He unhooked the sack of Titanite 
from his belt and gave it to Shearing. "It'll take a little while to refine the stuff and build the relays, 
even so. That may be time enough. 
Come back for me if you can." 

"Vernon?" 

"Yes." 

Shearing nodded. "I said I'd help 
you get him. I will." 

"No. This is my job. I'll do it 
alone. You belong there, with them. 
With Christina." 

"Hyrst. Listen — " 

'"Don't tell me where the starship is. 1 might not hold out as 
well as you." 

"All right, but Hyrst — in case 
we can't get back — look for us 
away from the Sun. Not toward 
it." 

"I'll remember." 

The ship landed. Shearing entered it, carrying the Titanite. And 
Hyrst walked away, toward the 
closed and buried buildings of the 
refinery. 

It had begun to snow again. 

CHAPTER IX 

IT WAS cold and dark and infinitely sad. Hyrst wandered 
through the rooms, feeling like a 
ghost, thinking like one. Everything had been removed from the 
buildings. The living quarters were 
now mere cubicular tombs for a 



lot of memories, absolutely bare of 
any human or familiar touch. Tt 
felt very strange to Hyrst. He kept 
telling himself that fifty years had 
passed, but he could not believe it. 
It seemed only a few months since 
MacDonald's death, months occupied by investigation and trial and 
the raging, futile anguish of the unjustly accused. The long interval 
of the pseudo-death was no more 
than a night's sleep, to a mind 
unconscious of passing time. Now 
it seemed that Saul and Landers 
should still be here, and there 
should be lights and warmth and 
movement. 

There was nothing. He could not 
bring himself to stay in the living 
quarters. He went into one of the 
storerooms and sat on a concrete 
buttress and waited. It was a long 
and dreadful wait. During it all 
the emotional storms occasioned by 
the murder and its aftermath passed through his mind. Scenes with 
Saul and Landers. Scenes with the 
investigators, with MacDonald's 
family, with lawyers and reporters. 
Scenes with Elena. The whole terrible nightmare, leading inevitably 
to that culminating moment when 
the door of the airlock opened and 
he joined the sleepers on the 
plain. When it was all over Hyrst 
felt shaken and exhausted, but 
calm. The face of Vernon burned 
brightly in his mind's eye. 

Without bothering to open the 



THE LEGION OF LAZARUS 



5* 



steel -shuttered windows, he watched l he two young men force their 
way out of the hoist tower. He 
watched them run to their ship and 
chatter excitedly over their radio. 
By the time, much later, that Bellaver's yacht came screaming down 
to the landing field on a flaming 
hurst of jets, he could watch it 
with almost the cool detachment 
of a spectator. He was careful to 
keep his shields up tight against 
Vernon, and he did not think the 
other Lazarite would be likely to 
look for him. Vernon seemed to be 
fully occupied with Bellaver. 

"What else would they be stealing, you fool? You should have 
killed Hyrst before, when you had 
the chance." 

"Somebody had to take the 
blame for MacDonald. A nyway, 
you had him aboard the Happy 
Dream Why didn't you hang ontohim?" 

"Don't get insolent with me, 
Vernon. I can turn you over tothe police anytime, for any one of 
a hundred things" 

"Not without tipping your hand, 
Bellaver," 

"It would be worth it." A string 
'nf foul names, delivered in a furious 
.scream. "You couldn't locate the 
Titanite, but they did, just as soon 
as they got hold of Hyrst." 

"All right, Mr. God Almighty 
Bellaver, turn me in. But if it 
was the Titanite they took, yon 



haven't a chance of finding that 
starship without me." 

"You haven't done very well at 
it so far." 

"In the excitement, they may 
get careless. But it's up to you" 

More foul language, but Bellaver did not repeat his threat. He 
and Vernon, with a couple of other 
men, got into vac -suits and lumbered across the snow to the hoist 
tower. From inside the cold dark 
buried building, Hyrst watched 
them, and thought hard and fast, 
and smiled. Presently he left the 
building and circled cautiously 
through the snowy gloom until he 
was in range of their helmet-communicators. He could hear them 
aurally now, but he kept" watching 
them, esper-fashion. 

npHEY inspected the empty lead 
box, and the young men told 
what had happened, and Bellaver 
turned his raging fury against 
them. There was no longer any 
doubt that the Titanite had been 
found and taken away, and Bellaver saw the stars and worlds and 
moons, the bright glowing plunder 
of a galaxy, slipping away from 
him. He threatened the two young 
men with every punishment he 
could think of for not having stopped the thieves, and one of the 
young men turned white and anxious, and the other one flushed 
brick red and shook his fist close 



IMAGINATION 



to Bellaver's helmet. 

"You go to hell," he said. "I 
don't care who you are. You go to 
hell." 

He walked out of the hoist tower, 
with his companion stumbling at 
his heels, and Bellaver screamed 
after them, and behind him the 
crewmen looked shocked and contemptuous, and Vernon laughed 
openly, showing the edges of his 
teeth. 

The two young men got into 
their ship and went away. Bellaver turned and stood looking at the 
empty box. He seemed exhausted 
now, hopeless, like a child about 
to break down and cry. Vernon 
went over and kicked the box. 

"Hyrst had the advantage," he 
said. "He knew MacDonald and 
he knew the refinery. Even so, jt 
must have been pure guesswork. 
Nobody could probe through that 
fog." 

"What are we going to do?" 
asked Bellaver. "Vernon, what are 
we going to do?" 

Hyrst spoke for the first time, 
his voice ringing loud and startling 
in their ears. 

"Don't ask Vernon," he said. 
"Ask me." 

There was a moment of complete silence. Hyrst felt Vernon's 
mind brush his, and he permitted 
himself one cruel flash of triumph. 
Then everybody spoke at once, 
Vernon explaining why he hadn't 



spotted Hyrst — who could have 
figured he'd stay behind al a time 
like this? — the crew- members nervously fingering their guns, and 
Bellaver crying, 

"Hyrst! Is that you, Hyrst? 
Where are you?" 

"Where I can get the first shot 
at anybody coming out of the 
tower, and where nobody from the 
yacht will ever reach me. Tell them 
all to stay put. Go ahead, Bellaver, 
you want to hear me out, don't 
you?" 

"What do you want to say?" 

"I can find you that starshjp. 
Tell them, Bellaver." 

He told them. And Vernon said 
to Bellaver, "If he's willing to betray his friends, why would he get 
them the Titanite?" He laughed. 
"It isn't even a good trick." 

"Oh, yes, it is," said Hyrst softly. "It's a very good one. The best. 
You see, I don't care about the 
starship or the Titanite. All I care 
about is the man who killed MacDonald. They were sort of bound 
up together. Ever hear of latent 
impressions, Vernon? I was unconscious, but my ears heard and my 
eyes saw, and my brain remembered, when it was shown how." 

"That was fifty years ago," said 
Vernon. "People don't understand 
about us. Nobody would believe 
you if you told them." 

"They would if Bellaver told 
them. They would if Bellaver ex


THE LEGION OF LAZARUS 



plained out loud about the Lazarites, about what happens to men 
when they go through the door. 
They'd listen to him. And there 
must be others who know, or at 
least suspect." Hyrst paused, long 
enough to smile. "The beauty of 
that is, Bellaver, that you're in 
the clear. You're not responsible 
for a murder your grandfather had 
done. You could swear you didn't 
even know about it until now." 

Vernon said to Bellaver, "If you 
do this to me, I'll blast you wide 
open." 

"What can he do, Bellaver?" 
Hyrst shouted. "He can talk, but 
you have the money, the position, 
the legal powers. You can talk 
louder. And when they know the 
truth, will anybody take the word 
of a Lazarite against a human 
man?" 

His voice rose higher and louder, drowning out Vernon's cry. 

"Are you afraid of him, Bellaver? Are you so afraid of him you'll 
let the starship go?" 

"Hold him," Bellaver said, and 
the crew-men held Vernon fast. 
"Wait a minute, Hyrst," he said. 
"What's your angle? Is it just 
revenge? Are you selling out your 
friends for something over and 
done half a century ago? I don't 
believe it, Hyrst." 

Hyrst said slowly, "I can answer that, so even you will understand. I have children. They're 



getting old now. They've lived all 
their lives thinking their father 
killed a man. not for love or for 
justice or in self-defense, but for 
sheer cold-blooded greed. I want 
them to know it wasn't so." 

"Hold him!" Bellaver said. The 
crewmen struggled with Vernon, 
and Vernon said viciously to Bellaver, 

"He'll never lead you to the 
starship. I can read his mind. When 
you've turned me in and blackened your grandfather's name to 
clear him, he'll laugh in your face. 
What are you. Bellaver, a fool?" 

"Am I. Hyrst?" 

"That's for you to find out. I'm 
offering you the starship for Vernon, and that's fair enough, because I want him as bad as you 
want it. And I can tell you, Bellaver, if you decide to play it 
smart and call in your guards to 
hunt me down, it will do you no 
good. I won't be alive when they 
take me." 

Silence. In his mind's eye Hyrst 
could see the beads of sweat running down Bellaver's face behind 
his helmet. He could see Vernon's 
face, too. It gave him pleasure. 

"It should be an easy decision, 
Bellaver," he said. "After all, suppose I am lying. What have you 
got to lose but Vernon? And with 
his record, that isn't much." 

"Hold him." said Bellaver. "All 
right, Hyrst. I'll do it. But P.! tell 



54 



IMAGINATION 



you now. If you lie to me, there 
won't be any reawakening in another fifty years. This will be for 
good." 

"Fair enough," said Hyrst. "I'm 
putting my gun away. I'm coming 
in." 

He walked quickly through the 
snow toward the tower. 

CHAPTER X 

/~vN THE BRIDGE of his yacht, 
Bellaver turned to Hyrst and 

said, 

"I've done what you wanted. 
Now find me that starship." 

Hyrst nodded. "Take off." 

The rockets roared and thundered, and the swift yacht leaped 
quivering into the sky. 

Hyrst sat quietly in his recoil 
chair. He felt a different man, 
changed entirely in the last few 
days. Much had happened in those 
days. 

Bellaver had got busy on the 
radio even before his yacht left Titan, and the story of the Lazarites 
had burst like a nova upon the 
Solar System. Already there were 
instances of suspected Lazarites 
being mobbed by their neighbors, 
and Government was frantically 
concerning itself with all the new, 
far-reachng implications of the 
Humane Penalty. 

Close on the heels of this bombshell had come Vernon's angry ac


cusations against Bellaver, delivered as soon as he was given to the 
authorities on Mars, During the 
twenty Martian hours necessary 
for formal charge and the taking 
of depositions, and while Bellaver 's 
yacht was being refueled, Vernon's 
story of the starship went out on 
all the interworld circuits. And it 
had been as Christina had said. 
The whole Solar System was frantic to have the Lazarites caught and 
stopped, and every man in space 
became a self-appointed searcher 
for the hidden starship. Bellaver, 
letting his lawyers worry about 
Vernon's accusations, had already 
laid formal claim to that ship, 
based on the value of the stolen 
Titanite. 

"Where?" demanded Bellaver 
now, in a fury of impatience. 
"Where?" 

"Wait," said Hyrst. "There are 
too many watching, ready to follow you. They know what you're 
after. Wait till we're clear of 
Mars." 

He sat in his ohair, looking into 
space. His drive was all gone, and 
the anger that had fed it. Somewhere his son and his two daughters were drawing their first free 
breaths relieved of a burden they 
should never have had to carry. 
They knew now that he was innocent, and they could think of 
him now without bitterness, speak 
his name wthout hate. He had done 



THE LEGION 

what he had set out to do, and 
he was finished. He knew what was 
ahead of him, but he was too tired 
lo care. 

The yacht went fast, away from 
the old red weary planet. Hyrst . 
thought of Shearing and Christina 
and the others, laboring over their 
ship on the dark plain. He felt 
safe in doing this, because Vernon 
was gone and the gray evil man 
who had helped to torture Shearing aboard the Happy Dream was 
still in an Earth hospital recovering from the blow Hyrst had given 
him. They were out of reach, and 
Hyrst was the only Lazarite Bellaver had. 

He did not try to get through to 
Shearing because he knew that was 
impossible, and there was no reason for it anyway. He let his mind 
stretch out and rove through the 
[lighted spaces beyond Saturn, beyond Uranus and Neptune, beyond 
the black and frigid bulk of Pluto. 
He did not see the ship nor touch 
a Lazarite mind, and so he knew 
that they were still holding the 
cloak, still hiding from possible betrayal. He withdrew his mind, and 
wished them luck. 

"We're clear of Mars," said Bellaver. "Which way?" 

"That way," said Hyrst, and 
pointed. "Toward the Sun." 

The yacht swerved and steadied on a new course, toward the 
distant glare of Sol. And Bellaver 



OF LAZARUS 5S 

said, 

"What's the exact location?" 

"Can you trust every man in 
this crew?" asked Hyrst. "Can you 
be sure not one of them would give 
it away, when we stop to refuel? 
You're not the only one that 
knows about the starship now, remember." 

"You could tell me." 

"You're too impatient, Bellaver. 
You'd want to head straight there, 
and it won't be that easy. They 
have defenses. We have to be careful, or they'll destroy the ship 
before we reach it." 

"Or finish their relays and go." 
Bellaver gave Hyrst a long look. 
"I'll trust you because T have lo. 
But I wasn't making an empty 
threat. And I'll do it so there won't 
be any thought of murder. You'd 
better find me that ship, Hyrst." 

From then on, Bellaver hardly 
slept. He paced the corridors and 
haunted the control room and 
Watched Hyrst with a gnawing, agonizing doubt. Hyrst began to feel 
for him a distant sort of pity, as 
he might have felt for a man afflicted by some" disease brought on 
by his own excesses. 

npHE YACHT passed the orbit 
* of Earth, refueled at an obscure space station, and sped on. 
Hyrst continued to stall Bellaver, 
ordering a change of course from 
time to tme to keep him happy. At 



IMAGINATION 



intervals he let his mind rove 
through those dark spaces they 
were leaving farther behind with 
every passing second. Each time it 
was a greater effort, but still there 
was no sign of the starship or its 
base, and so he knew that the 
labor still went on. 

By the time the yacht reached 
the orbit of Venus a fan-shaped 
cordon of other ships had collected 
around and behind her drawn by 
the word that Bellaver was on his 
way to find the star-ship. Government patrols were in constant 
touch. 

"They can't interfere," said Bellaver. "I've got a Hen on that 
ship, a formal claim." 

"Sure," said Hyrst. "But you'd 
better be the first to find it. Possession, you know. Bear off a bit. 
Mislead them. They're sure now 
they know where you're going." 

"Don't they?" said Bellaver, 
looking ahead at the glittering 
spark that was Mercury. "There 
isn't anyplace else to go." 

"Isn't there?" 

Bellaver stared at him, narroweyed. "The legend of the Vulcan 
was exploded by the first explorers. 
There is no intra-Mercurial world." 

Hyrst shot a swift stabbng mental glance toward Pluto. Still nothing. He sighed and said easily, 

"There wasn't then. There is 
now." 

He brazened out the look of 



incredulity on Bellaver's face. 

"These are Lazarites, remember, 
not men. They built a place for 
themselves where nobody would 
ever think to look. Not a planet, 
of course, just a floating workshop. 
A satellite. And now you know. So 
you can let them beat you to 
Mercury." 

"All right," said Bellaver softly. 
"All right." 

They passed Mercury, lost in 
the blaze of the Sun, -ind only a 
few ships followed them, far behind. The rest stopped to search 
the craggy valleys of the Twilight 
Belt, and the bleak icefields of the 
Dark Side. 

And now Hyrst had run his 
string out, and he knew it. When 
no intra-Mercurial satellite showed 
up, physically or on detectorscreens, there was no further lie 
to tell. He drove his mind out and 
away, to the cold planets wheeling 
on the fringes of Sol's light, and he 
sweated, and prayed, and hoped 
that nothing had gone wrong. And 
suddenly the cloak was dropped, 
and he saw a lonesome chip of 
rock beyond Pluto, all hollowed 
out for shops and living quarters, 
and the great ship standing in the 
mile-long plain, with the stars all 
drifted overhead. And the ship lifted from the plain, circled upward, 
and suddenly was not. 

Hyrst was bitterly sorry that he 
was not aboard. But he told Bell


THE LEGION OF LAZARUS 



57 



aver, "You can stop looking now. 
They've got away." 

He watched Bellaver die, standing erect on his feet, still breathing but dying inside with the last 
outgoing of hope. 

"I thought you were lying," he 
said, "but it was the only chance 
I had." He nodded, looking toward 
the shuttered port with the insufferable blaze outside. He said, in a 
flat, dead voice, "If you were put 
out here, bound, in a lifeboat, 
headed toward the Sun — Yes. I 
could make up a story to fit that." 

In the same toneless voice, he 
called his men. And suddenly the 
yacht lurched over shuddering in 
the backwash of some tremendous 
energy. Hyrst and the others were 
flung scattering against the hulkheads, and the lights went out, and 
the instruments went dead. 

Beyond the port, on the unshuttered side away from the Sun, a 
vast dark shape had materialized 
out of nothing, to hang close in 
space beside the yacht. 

Hyrst heard in his mind, strong 
and clear, the voice of Shearing 
say i ng , "Didn't I tell you the 
brotherhood stands by its own? 
Besides, we couldn't make a liar 
out of you, now could we?" 



Hyrst began to laugh, just a 
little bit hysterically. He told Bellaver, "There's your starship. And 
Shearing says if I'm not alive when 
he comes aboard to get me, that 
they won't be as careful about 
warping space when they go away 
as they were when they came," 

Bellaver did not say anything. 
He sat on the deck where the 
shock had thrown him, not speaking. He was still sitting there when 
Hyrst passed through the airlock 
into the starship's boat, and he 
did not move even when the great 
ship vanished silently into whatever mysterious ultra-space the 
minds of the Lazarites had unlocked, outbound for the limitless freedom of the universe, where the 
wheeling galaxies thunder on forever across infinity and the stars 
burn bright, and there is nothing 
to stop the march of the Legion of 
Lazarus. And who knew, who could 
tell, where that march would end? 

Aboard the starship. already a 
million miles away, Hyrst said to 
Christina, "When they brought me 
back from beyond the door, that 
was re-awakening. But this — this 
is being born again." 

She did not answer that. But she 
took his hand and smiled. 



FEATURED NEXT ISSUE: — 



BATTLE FOR THE STARS 

BY ALEXANDER BLADE 
SMASHING NOVEL OF INTER-GALACTIC ADVENTURE. 




58 



Nobody knew very much about the Sargasso 
area of the void; only one thing was certain: 
if a ship was caught there it was doomed in— 

The Graveyard Of Space 



HE LIT a cigarette, the last 
one they had, and asked his 
wife "Want to share it?" 
"No. That's all right." Diane 
sat at the viewport of. the battered 



old Gormann '87, a small figure 
of a woman hunched over and 
watching the parade of asteroids 
like tiny slow-moving incandescent 
flashes. 



50 



6o 



IMAGINATION 



Ralph looked at her and said 
nothing. He remembered what it 
was like when she had worked by 
his side at the mine. It had not 
been much of a mine. It had been a 
bust, a first class sure as hell bust, 
like everything else in their life together. And it had aged her. Had it 
only been three years? he thought. 
Three years on asteroid 4712, a 
speck of cosmic dust drifting on its 
orbit in the asteroid belt between 
Jupiter and Mars. Uranium potential, high — the government had 
said. So they had leased the asteriod and prospected it and although 
they had not finished the job, they 
were finished. They were going 
home and now there were lines on 
Diane's face although she was hardly past twenty-four. And there was 
a bitterness, a bleakness, in her 
eyes. 

The asteroid had ruined them, 
had taken something from them 
and given nothing in return. They 
were going home and. Ralph Meeker thought, they had left more 
than their second-hand mining 
equipment on asteroid 4712. They 
had left the happy early days of 
their marriage as a ghost for 
whomever tried his luck next on 
4712. They had never mentioned 
the word divorce; Diane had merely said she would spend some time 
witlh her sister in Marsport instead 
of going on to Earth . . . 

"We'd be swinging around to 



sunward on 4712," Ralph mused. 

"Please. That's over. I don't 
want to talk about the mine." 

"Won't it ever bother you that 
we never finished?" 

"We finished," Diane said. 

He smoked the cigarette halfway and offered it to her. She 
shook her head and he put the butt 
out delicately, to save it. 

Then a radar bell clanged. 

"What is it?" Ralph asked, immediately alert, studying the viewport. You had to be alert on an 
old tub like the Gurmann '87. 
A hundred tonner, it had put in 
thirty years and a billion and some 
miles for several owners. Its warning devices and its reflexes — it 
was funny. Ralph thought, how 
you ascribed something human like 
reflexes to a hundred tons of battered metal — were unpredictable. 

"I don't see anything," Diane 
said. 

He didn't either. But you never 
knew in the asteroid belt. It was 
next to impossible to thread a passage without a radar screen — and 
completely impossible with a radar 
screen on the blink and giving you 
false information. You could shut 
it off and pray — but the odds 
would still be a hundred to one 
against you. 

"There!" Diane cried. "On the 
left! The left, Ralph — " 

He saw it too. At first it looked 
like a jumble of rocks, of dust as 



THE GRAVEYARD OF SPACE 



6 1 



the asteroid old-timers called the 
gravity-held rock swarms which 
pursued their erratic, dangerous orbits through the asteroid belt. 

But it was not dust. 

"Will you look at that," Diane 
said. 

The jumble of rocks — which 
they were ready to classify as dust 
— swam up toward them. Ralph 
waited, expecting the automatic 
pilot to answer the radar warning 
and swing them safely around the 
obstacle. So Ralph watched and 
saw the dark jumble of rocks — 
silvery on one side where the distant sunlight hit it — apparently 
spread out as they approached it. 
Spread out and assume tiny shapes, 
shapes in miniature. 

"Spaceships," Diane said. 
"Spaceships, Ralph. Hundreds of 
them." 

They gleamed like silver motes 
in the sun or were black as the 
space around them. They tumbled 
slowly, in incredible slow motion, 
end over end and around and around each other, as if they had 
been suspended in a slowly boiling 
liquid instead of the dark emptiness of space. 

"That's the sargasso," Ralph 
said. 

"But — " 

"But we're off course. I know 
it. The radar was probably able to 
miss things in our way, but failed 
to compensate afterwards and bring 



us back to course. Now — " 

Suddenly Ralph dived for the 
controls. The throbbing rockets of 
the Gormann '87 had not responded to the radar warning. They were 
rocketing on toward the sargasso, 
rapidly, dangerously. 

"Hold on to something!" Ralph 
hollered, and punched full power 
in the left rockets and breaking 
power in the right forward rockets 
simultaneously, attempting to stand 
the Gormann '87 on its head and 
fight off the deadly gravitational 
attraction of the sargasso. 

The Gormann '87 shuddered like 
something alive and Ralph felt 
himself thrust to the left and forward violently. His head struck the 
radar screen and, as if mocking 
him the radar bell clanged its 
warning. He thought he heard 
Diane scream. Then he was trying 
to stand, but the gravity of sudden 
acceleration gripped him with a 
giant hand and he slumped back 
slowly, aware of a wetness seeping 
from his nose, his ears — 

All of space opened and swallowed him and he went down, trying to reach for Diane's hand. But 
she withdrew it and then the 
blackness, like some obscene mouth 
as large as the distance from here 
to Alpha Centauri, swallowed him. 

(« \ RE YOU all right, Diane?" 
he asked. 
He was on his knees. His head 



62 



IMAGINATION 



ached and one of his legs, felt 
painfully stiff, but he had crawled over to where Diane was down, 
flat on her back, behind the pilot 
chair. He found the water tank unsprung and brought her some and 
in a few moments she blinked her 
eyes and looked at him. 

"Cold," she said. 

He had not noticed it, but he 
was still numb and only half conscious, half of his faculties working. It was cold. He felt that now. 
And he was giddy and growing rapidly more so — as if they did not 
have sufficent oxygen to breathe. 

Then he heard it. A slow steady 
hissing probably the sound feared most by spacemen. Air escaping. 

Diane looked at him. "For God's 
sake, Ralph/' she cried. "Find 
it." 

He found it and patched it — 
and was numb with the cold and 
barely conscious when he had finished. Diane came to him and 
squeezed his hand and that was 
the first time they had touched 
since they had left the asteroid. 
Then they rested for a few moments and drank some of the achingly cold water from the tank 
and got up and went to the viewport. They had known it, but confirmation was necessary. They 
looked outside. 

They were within the sargasso. 

The battered derelict ships rol


led and tumbled and spun out 
there, slowly, un-hurried, in a 
mutual gravitational field which 
their own Gormann '87 had disturbed. It was a sargasso like the 
legendary Sargasso Seas of Earth's 
early sailing days, becalmed seas, 
seas without wind, with choking 
Sargasso weed, seas that snared 
and entrapped .... 

"Can we get out?" Diane asked. 

He shrugged. "That depends. 
How strong the pull of gravity is. 
Whether the Gormann's rocket 
drive is still working. If we can repair the radar. We'd never get out 
without the radar." 

"I'll get something to eat," she 
said practically. "You see about 
the radar." 

Diane went aft while he remained there in the tiny control cabin. 
By the time she brought the heated cans back with her, he knew it 
was hopeless. Diane was not the 
sort of woman you had to humor 
aibout a thing like that. She offered him a can of pork and beans 
and looked at his face, and when 
he nodded she said: 

"It's no use?" 

"We couldn't fix it. The scopes 
just wore out, Diane. Hell, if they 
haven't been replaced since this 
tub rolled off the assembly line, 
they're thirty years old. She's an 

"Is there anything we can do?" 



THE GRAVEYARD OF SPACE 



63 



He shrugged, "We're going to 
try. We'll check the air and water 
and see what we have. Then we 
start looking." 

"Start looking? I don't understand." 

"For a series eighty Gormann 
cruiser." 

Diane's eyes widened. "You 
mean — out there?" 

"I mean out there. If we find 
a series eighty cruiser — and we 
might — and if I'm able to transfer the radarscopes after we find 
out they're in good shape, then we 
have a chance." 

Diane nodded slowly "If there 
are any other minor repairs to 
make, I could be making them 
while you look for a series eighty 
Gormann." 

But Ralph shook his head. 
"We'll probably have only a few 
hours of air to spare, Diane. If we 
both look, we'll cover more ground. 
I hate to ask you, because it won't 
be pretty out there. But it might 
be our only chance," 

"I'll go, of course. Ralph?" 

"Yes?" 

"What is this sargasso, anyway?" 

TIE SHRUGGED as he read 
*- the meters on the compressed air tanks. Four tanks full, 
with ten hours of air, for two, in 
each. One tank half full. Five 
hours. Five plus forty. Forty-five 
hours of air. 



They would need a minimum of 
thirty-five hours to reach Mars. 

"No one knows for sure about 
the sargasso," he said, wanting to 
talk, wanting to dispel his own 
fear so he would not communicate it to her as he took the spacesuits down from their rack and began to climb into one. "They don't 
think it's anything but the ships, 
though. It started with a few 
ships. Then more. And more. 
Trapped by mutual gravity. It got 
bigger and bigger and 1 think there 
are almost a thousand derelicts 
here now. There's talk of blasting 
them clear, of salvaging them for 
metals and so on. But so far the 
planetary governments haven't 
co-operated." 

"But how did the first ships get 
here?" 

"It doesn't make a hell of a lot 
of difference. One theory is ships 
only, and maybe a couple of hunks 
of meteoric debris in the beginning. 
Another theory says there may be 
a particularly heavy small asteroid in this maze of wrecks somewhere — you know, superheavy 
stuff with the atoms stripped of 
their electrons and the nuclei 
squeezed together, weighing in the 
neighborhood of a couple of tons 
per square inch. That could account 
for the beginning, but once the 
thing got started, the wrecked ships 
account for more wrecked ships 
and pretty soon you have — a sar


6 4 



IMAGINATION 



gasso." 

Diane nodded and said, "You 
can put my helmet on now." 

"All right. Don't forget to check 
the radio with me before we go 
out. If the radio doesn't work, 
then you stay here. Because I want 
us in constant radio contact if 
we're both out there. Is that understood?" 

"Yes, sir, captain," she said, and 
grinned. It was her old grin. He 
had not seen her grin like that for 
a long time. He had almost forgotten what that grin was like. 
It made her face seem younger and 
prettier, as he had remembered it 
from what seemed so long ago but 
was only three years. It was a 
wonderful grin and he watched it 
in the split-second which remained before he swung the heavy helmet up and in place over her shoulders. 

Then he put on his own helmet 
awkwardly and fingered the outside radio controls. "Hear me?" he 
said. 

"I can hear you." Her voice was 
metallic but very clear through the 
suit radios. 

"Then listen. There shouldn't 
be any danger of getting lost. I'll 
leave a light on inside the ship and 
we'll see it through the ports. It 
will be the only light, so whatever 
you do, don't go out of range. As 
long as you can always see it, 
you'll be 0. K. Understand?" 



"Right," she said as they both 
climbed into the Gormann '87'$ airlock and waited for the presssure 
to leave it and the outer door to 
swing out into space. "Ralph? I'm 
a little scared, Ralph." 

"That's all right," he said. "So 
am I." 

"What did you mean, it won't be 
pretty out there?" 

"Because we'll have to look not 
just for series eighty Gormanns but 
for any ships that look as old as 
ours. There ought to be plenty of 
them and any one of them could 
have had a Gormann radarscope, 
although it's unlikely. Have to 
look, though." 

"But what — won't be pretty?" 

"We'll have to enter those ships. 
You won't like what's inside." 

"Say, how will we get in? We 
don't have blasters or weapons of 
any kind." 

"Your suit rockets," Ralph said. 
"You swing around and blast with 
your suit rockets. A porthole should 
be better than an airlock if its big 
enough to climb through. You 
won't have any trouble." 

"But you still haven't told me 
what — " 

"Inside the ships. People. They'll 
all be dead. If they didn't lose 
their air so far, they'll lose it 
when we go in. Either way, of 
course, they'll be dead. They've all 
been dead for years, with no food. 
But without air — " 



THE GRAVEYARD OF SPACE 



"What are you stopping for?" 
Diane said. "Please go on." 

"A body, without air. Fifteen 
pounds of pressure per square inch 
on the inside, and zero on the 
outside. It isn't pretty. It bloats." 

"My God, Ralph." 

"I'm sorry, kid. Maybe you 
want to stay back here and I'll 
look." 

"You said we only have ten 
hours. I want to help you." 

All at once, the airlock swung 
out. Space yawned at them, black 
enormous, the silent ships, the dead 
sargasso ships, floating slowly by, 
eternally, unhurried 

"Better make it eight hours," 
Ralph said over the suit radio. 
"We'd better keep a couple of hours 
leeway in case I figured wrong. 
Eight hours and remember, don't 
get out of sight of the ship's lights 
and don't break radio contact under any circumstances. These suit 
radios work like miniature radar 
sets, too. If anything goes wrong, 
we'll be able to track each other. 
It's directional beam radio." 

"But what can go wrong?" 

"I don't know," Ralph admitted. 
"Nothing probably." He turned on 
his suit rockets and felt the sudden 
surge of power drive him clear of 
the ship. He watched Diane rocketing away from him to the right. 
He waved his hand in the bulky 
spacesuit. "Good luck, rt he called. 
"I love you, Diane." 



"Ralph," she said. Her voice 
caught. He heard it catch over the 
suit radio. "Ralph, we agreed 
never to — oh, forget it. Good luck, 
Ralph. Good luck, oh good luck. 
And I — " 

"You what." 

"Nothing, Ralph, Good luck." 
"Good luck," he said, and headed 
for the first jumble of space wrecks. 

TT WOULD probably have taken 
them a month to explore all the 
derelicts which were old enough to 
have Gormann series eighty radarscopes. Theoretically, Ralph realized, even a newer ship could have 
one. But it wasn't likely, because 
if someone could afford a newer 
ship then he could afford a better 
radarscope. But that, he told himself, was only half the story. The 
other half was this: with a better 
radarscope a ship might not have 
floundered into the sargasso at all 

So it was hardly possible to pass 
up any ship if their life depended 
on it — and the going was slow. 
- Too slow. 

He had entered some dozen ships 
in the first four hours turning, using his shoulder rockets to blast a 
port hole out and climb in 
through there. He had not liked 
what he saw. but there was no preventing it. Without a light it wasn't 
so bad, but you needed a light to 
examine the radar scope .... 



66 



IMAGINATION 



They were dead. They had been 
dead for years but of course there 
would be no decomposition in the 
airless void of space and very little 
even if air had remained until he 
blasted his way in, for the air was 
sterile canned spaceship air. They 
were dead, and they were bloated. 
All impossibly fat men, with white 
faces like melons and gross bodies, 
like Tweedle Dee's and limbs like 
fat sausages. 

By the fifth ship >he was sick to 
his stomach, but by the tenth he 
had achieved the necessary detachment to continue his task. Once — 
it was the eighth ship — he found 
a Gormann series eighty radarscope, and his heart pounded when 
he saw it. But the scope was hopelessly damaged, as bad as their 
own. Aside from that one. he did 
not encounter any, damaged or in 
good shape, which they might convert to their own use. 

Four hours, he thought. Four 
hours and twelve ships. Diane reported every few moments by intercom. In her first four hours she 
had visited eight ships. Her voice 
sounded funny. She was fighting 
it every step of the way, he 
thought. It must have been hell to 
her, breaking into those wrecks 
with their dead men with faces 
like white, bloated melons — 

In the thirteenth ship he found 
a skeleton. 

He did not report it k Diane 



over the intercom. The skeleton 
made no sense at all. The flesh 
could not possibly have decomposed. Curious, he clomped closer on 
his magnetic boots. Even if the 
flesh had decomposed, the clothing 
would have remained. But it was 
a skeleton picked completely clean, 
with no clothing, not even boots — 
As if the man had stripped of his 
clothing first. 

He found out why a moment 
later, and it left him feeling more 
than a little sick. There were other 
corpses aboard the ship, a battered 
Thompson '81 in worse shape than 
their own Gormann. Bodies, not 
skeletons. But when they had entered the sargasso they had apparently struck another ship. One 
whole side of the Thompson was 
smashed in and Ralph could see 
the repair patches on the wall. 
Near them and thoroughly destroyed, were the Thompson's spacesuits. 

The galley lockers were empty 
when Ralph found them. All the 
food gone — how many years 
ago? And one of the crew, dying 
before the others. 

Cannibalism. 

Shuddering, Ralph rocketed outside into the clear darkness of 
space. That was a paradox, he 
thought. It was clear, all right, 
but it was dark. You could see a 
g eal way. You could see a million 
million miles but it was darker 



THE GRAVEYARD OF SPACE 



than anything on Earth. It was 
almost an extra-dimensional effect. 
It made the third dimension on 
earth, the dimension of depth, 
seem hopelessly flat. 
"Ralph!" 

"Go ahead, kid," he said. It was 
their first radio contact in almost 
half an hour. 

"Oh, Ralph. It's a Gormann. An 
eighty-five, I think. Right in front 
of me. Ralph, if its scopes are good 
— oh, Ralph." 

"I'm coming," he said. "Go 
ahead inside. I'll pick up your 
beam and be along." He could feel 
his heart thumping wildly. Five 
hours now. They did not have 
much time. This ship — this Gormann eighty-five which Diane had 
found — might be their last chance. 
Because it would certainly take 
him all of three hours to transfer 
the radarscope, using the rockets 
from one of their spacesuits, to 
their own ship. 

He rocketed along now, following her directional beam, and listened as she said: "I'm cutting 
through the porthole now, Ralph. 

Her voice, stopped suddenly. It 
did not drift off gradually. It 
merely ceased, without warning, 
without reason. "Diane!" he called. 
"Diane, can you hear me?" 



H 



E TRACKED the beam in desperate silence. Wrecks flashed 



»7 

by, tumbling slowly in their web 
of mutual gravitation. Some were 
molten silver if the wan sunlight caught theim. Some were black, 
but every rivet, every seam was 
distinct. The impossible clarity of 
blackest space .... 

"Ralph?" Her voice came suddenly. 

"Yes, Diane. Yes. What is it?" 

"What a curious thing. I stopped blasting at the port hole. I'm 
not going in that way. The airlock, 
Ralph." 

"What about the airlock?" 

"It opened up on me. It swung 
out into space, all of a sodden. I'm 
going in, Ralph." 

Fear, unexpected, inexplicable, 
gripped him. "Don't," he said. 
"Wait for me." 

"That's silly, Ralph. We barely have time. I'm going in now, 
Ralph. There. I'm closing the outer 
door. I wonder if the pressure will 
build up for me. If it doesn't, I'll 
blast the outer door with my rockets and get out of here . . . Ralph! 
The light's blinking. The pressure's building. The inner door is 
beginnnng to open, Ralph. I'm 
going inside now." 

He was still tracking the beam. 
He thought he was close now, a 
hundred miles perhaps. A hundred 
miles by suit rocket was merely 
a few seconds but somehow the 
fear was still with him. It was that 
skeleton, he thought. That skele


68 



IMAGINATION 



ton had unnerved him. 

"Ralph. It's here, Ralph. A radarscope just like ours. Oh, Ralph, 
it's in perfect shape." 

"I'm coming," he said. A big 
old Bartson Cruiser tumbled by 
end over end, a thousand tonner, 
the largest ship he had seen in here 
so far. At some of the portholes as 
he flashed by he could see faces, 
dead faces staring into space forever. 

Then Diane's voice suddenly: 
"Is that you, Ralph?" 

"I'm still about fifty miles out," 
he said automatically, and then 
cold fear, real fear, gripped him. 
Is that you, Ralph? 

"Ralph, is that — oh, Ralph. 
Ralph — " she screamed, and was 
silent. 

"Diane! Diane, answer me." 

Silence. She had seen someone 
— something. Alive? It hardly 
seemed possible. He tried to notch 
his rocket controls further toward 
full power, but they were straining already — 

The dead ships flashed by, 
scores of them, hundreds, with 
dead men and dead dreams inside, waiting through eternity, in 
no hurry to give up their corpses 
and corpses of dreams. 

He heard Diane again then, a 
single agonized scream. Then there 
was silence, absolute silence. 

Time seemed frozen, frozen like 
the faces of the dead men inside 



the ships, suspended, unmoving, not dropping into the well of 
the past. The ships crawled by 
now, crawled. And from a long 
way off he saw the Gormann 
eighty-five. He knew- it was the 
right ship because the outer airlock door had swung open again. 
It hung there in space, the lock 
gaping — 

But it was a long way off. 

He hardly seemed to be approaching it at all. Every few seconds he called Diane's name, but 
there was no answer. No answer. 
Time crawled" with the fear icy 
now, as cold as death, in the pit of 
his stomach, with the fear making 
his heart pound rapidly, with the 
fear making it impossible for him 
to think. Fear — for Diane. I love 
you, Di, he thought. I love you. I 
never stopped loving you. We 
were wrong. We were crazy wrong. 
It was like a sargasso, inside of 
us, an emptiness which needed filling — but we were wrong. Diane — 

TTE REACHED the Gormann 
^ and plunged inside the airlock, swinging the outer door shut 
behind him. He waited. Would the 
pressure build up again, as it had 
built up for Diane? He did not 
know. He could only wait — 

A red light blinked over his 
head, on and off, on and off as 
pressure was built. Then it stopped. 
Fifteen pounds of pressure in 



THE GRAVEYARD OF SPACE 



fig 



the airlock, which meant that the 
i nner door shou Id open . He ran 
forward, rammed his shoulder 
against it, tumbled through. He 
entered a narrow companionway 
and clomped awkwardly toward 
the front of the ship, where the 
radarscope would be located. 

He passed a skeleton in the companion way, like the one he had 
seen in another ship. For the same 
reason, he thought. He had time to 
think that. And then he saw them. 

Diane. On the floor, her spacesuit off her now, a great bruise, 
blue-ugly bruise across her temple. 
Unconscious. 

And the thing which hovered 
over her. 

At first he did not know what 
it was, but he leaped at it. It 
turned, snarling. There was air in 
the ship and he wondered about 
that. He did not have time to 
wonder. The thing was like some 
monstrous, misshapen creature, a 
man — yes, but a man to give you 
nightmares. Bent and misshapen, 
gnarled, twisted like the roots of 
an ancient tree, with a wild growth 
of beard, white beard, heavy across 
the chest, with bent limbs powerfully muscled and a gaunt face, 
like a death's head. And the eyes 
— the eyes were wild, staring vacantly, almost glazed as in death. 
The eyes stared at him and 
through him and then he closed 
with this thing which had felled 



Diane. 

It had incredible strength. The 
strength of the insane. It drove 
Ralph back across the cabin and 
Ralph, encumbered by his spacesuit, could only fight awkwardly. It 
drove him back and it found something on the floor, the metal leg 
of what once had been a "-r, and 
slammed it down across the faceplate of Ralph's spacesuit. 

Ralph staggered, fell to his 
knees. He had absorbed the blow 
on the crown of his skull through 
the helmet of the suit, and it 
dazed him. The thing struck again, 
and Ralph felt himself falling .... 

Somehow, he climbed to his feet 
again. The thing was back over 
Diane's still form again, looking at 
her, its eyes staring and vacant. 
Spittle drooled from the lips — 

Then Ralph was wrestling with 
it again. The thing was almost protean. It all but seemed to change 
its shape and writhe from Ralph's 
grasp as they struggled across the 
cabin, but this time there was no 
weapon for it *o grab and use with 
stunning force. 

Half-crazed himself now, Ralph 
got his fingers gauntleted in rubberized metal, about the sinewy 
throat under the tattered beard. 
His fingers closed there and the 
wild eyes went big and he held it 
that way a long time, then finally 
thrust it. away from him. 

The thing fell but sprang to its 



70 



IMAGINATION 



feet. It looked at Ralph and the 
mouth opened and closed, but he 
heard no sound. The teeth were 
yellow and black, broken, like 
fangs. 

Then the thing turned and ran. 

Ralph followed it as far as the 
airlock. The inner door was slammed between them, A light blinked 
over the door. 

Ralph ran to a port hole and 
watched, 

The thing which once had been 
a man floated out into space, turning, spinning slowly. The gnarled 
twisted body expanded outward, 
became fat and swollen, balloonlike. It came quite close to the 
porthole, thudding against the 
ship's hull, the face — dead now 
— like a melon. 

Then, after he was sick for a 
moment there beside the airlock, 
he went back for Diane. 

nnHEY WERE back aboard the 
*■ Gormann '87 now, their own 
ship. Ralph had revived Diane and 
brought her back — along with the 
other Gormann's radarscope — to 
their battered tub. The bruise on 
her temple was badly discolored 
and she was still weak, but she 
would be all right. 

"But what was it?" Diane asked. 
She had hardly seen her attacker. 

"A man," Ralph said. "God 
knows how long that ship was in 
here. Years, maybe. Years, alone 



in space, here in the sargasso, with 
dead men and dead ships for company. He used up all the food. His 
shipmates died. Maybe he killed 
them. He needed more Food — " 

"Oh, no. You don't mean — " 

Ralph nodded. "He became a 
cannibal. Maybe he had a spacesuit and raided some of the other 
ships too. It doesn't matter. He's 
dead now." 

"He must have been insane like 
that for years, waiting here, never 
seeing another living thing . . . 

"Don't talk about it," Ralph 
said, then smiled. "Ship's ready to 
go, Diane." 

"Yes," she said. 

He looked at her. "Mars?" 

She didn't say anything. 

"I learned something in there," 
Ralph said. "We were like that 
poor insane creature in a way. We 
were too wrapped up in the asteroid and the mine. We forgot to live 
from day to day, to scrape up a 
few bucks every now and (hen 
maybe and take in a show on Ceres 
or have a weekend on Vesta. What 
the hell, Di, everybody needs it." 

"Yes," she said. 

"Di?" 

"Yes, Ralph?" 

"1 — I want to give it another 
try, if you do." 
"The mine?" 

"The mine eventually. The mine 
isn't important. Us, I mean." He 
paused, his hands still over the 



THE GRAVEYARD OF SPACE 



controls. "Will it be Mars?" 

"No," she said, and sat up and 
kissed him. "A weekend on Vesta 
sounds very nice. Very, very nice, 
darling." 



Ralph smiled and punched the 
controls. Minutes later they had 
left the sargasso — both sargassos 
— behind them. 

THE END 



THE question of weightlessness, 
of "free fall'', of gravitationlessness, in a hypothetical rocket of 
the future, has often been treated 
most casually in science-fiction stories. "Free fall" is generally regarded as an amusing condition, in 
which the rocketeers can cavort in 
their strange domain, as easy as 
fish in a bowl. 

Alas, from what medical men can 
tell so far, this is far from the 
case, and while weightlessness will 
not prevent men from going into 
rocket "free-fall" in their eventual 
journey to the stars, the state of 
zero gravity is going to require 
a long and slow process of re-orientation, probably strongly assisted 
by a blend of medical and physical 
techniques. 

To cope with free fall, the human 
body employs a "panic" reaction. 
When the human body — ordinarily 
always under gravitational influence^ — goes into a fall the central 
nervous system reacts violently. 
You have only to recaH a falling experience. Perhaps you also have experienced that atavistic carry-over 
from Man's days in the trees — remember the violent wrench of falling- only to awaken in bed? 



It is not inconceivable that free 
fall might be a perpetual state like 
that! 

In an experiment to determine 
how important gravitation is to 
the sense of human orientation, Dr. 
Huberttis Strughold of the School 
of Space Medicine, performed an 
interesting experiment during the 
Second World War while he was 
a medical technician with the Luftwaffe. 

Observing that pilots assert often 
that they fly ' l by the seat o[ their 
pants"— literally true, since buttock muscles serve as sensors of the 
gravitational field when one is sitting — he anaesthetized his posterior with novocaine and then took 
a flight with another pilot. To his 
expec ted alarm and astonish ment, 
he was utterly unable to locate or 
orient himself! 

It is strongly suggested by even 
the most enthusiastic advocates of 
space flight that provision for gravity be made if any long time in 
weightlessness is contemplated. If 
centrifugal force is necessary, we 
can expect the rotating spaceship. 
Adaptable as the human body is, 
there are limitations. You've got 
to fly by the seat of your pants! 



Being one of the richest men in the world 
it was only natural that many people anticipated 
the day he would die. For someone should claim — 

Mr. Chipfellow's Jackpot 

h 



J J T 'm getting old," Sam ChipI fellow said, "and old men 
die." 

His words were an indirect answer to a question from Carter Hagen, his attorney. The two men 
were standing in an open glade, 
some distance from Sam Chipfellow's mansion at Chipfellow's Folly, 
this being the name Sam himself 
had attached to his huge estate. 

Sam lived there quite alone except for visits from relatives and 
those who claimed to be relatives. 
He needed no servants nor help of 
any kind because the mansion was 
completely automatic. Sam did not 
live alone from choice, but he was 
highly perceptive and it made him 
uncomfortable to have relatives around with but one thought in their 
minds: When are you going to die 
and leave me some money? 

Of course, the relatives could 



hardly he blamed for entertaining 
this thought. It came as naturally as 
breathing because Sam Chipfellow 
was one of those rare individuals — a 
scientist who had made money; all 
kinds of money; more money than 
almost anybody. And after all, his 
relatives were no different than 
those of any other rich man. They 
felt they had rights. 

Sam was known as The Genius 
of the Space Age, an apt title because there might not have been any 
space without him. He had been 
extremely versatile during his long 
career, having been responsible for 
the so-called eternal metals — metal 
against which no temperature, corrosive, or combinations of corrosives 
would prevail. He was also the 
pioneer of telepower, the science of 
control over things mechanical 
through the electronic emanations 
of thought waves. Because of his 



investigations into this power, men 
were able to direct great ships by 
merely "thinking" them on their 
proper courses. , 

These were only two of his contributions to progress, there being 
many i'thers. And now, Sam was 
facing the mystery neither he nor 
any other scientist had ever been 
able to solve. 



Mortality. 

There was a great deal of activity 
near the point at which the men 
stood. Drills and rock cutters had 
formed three sides of an enclosure 
in a ridge of solid rock, and now a 
giant crane was lowering thick slabs 
of metal to form the walls. Nearby, 
waiting to be placed, lay the slab 
which would obviously become the 



73 



74 



IMAGINATION 



door to whatever Sam was building. It's surface was entirely smooth, 
but it bore great hinges and some 
sort of a locking device was built 
in along one edge. 

Carter Hagen watched the activity and considered Sam's reply to 
his question. "Then this is to be a 
mausoleum?" 

Sam chuckled. "Only in a sense. 
Not a place to house my dead bones 
if that's what you mean." 

Carter Hagen, understanding this 
lonely old man as he did, knew further questions would be useless. Sam 
was like that. If he wanted you to 
know something, he told you. 

So Carter held his peace and they 
returned to the mansion where Sam 
gave him a drink after they concluded the business he had come on. 

Sam also gave Carter something 
else — an envelope. "Put that in your 
safe. Carter. You're comparatively 
young. I'm takng it for granted 
you will survive me." 

"And this is—?" 

"My will. All old men should 
leave wills and I'm no exception to 
the rule. When I'm dead, open it 
and read what's inside." * 

/BARTER Hagen regarded the en^— ' velope with speculation. Sam 
smiled. "If you're wondering how 
much I left you. Carter, 1 11 say this. 
You might get it all." 
Hagen strove to appear nonchal


ant but his eyes widened regardless. 
Sam enjoyed this. He said. "Yes, 
you'll have as much chance as anyone else." 

"You mean as much chance as 
any of your relatives?" 

"I mean what I said — as much 
as anyone. I've given them no mure 
consideration than anyone else." 

Carter Hagen stared, puzzled. 
"I'm afraid I don't understand 
you." 

"1 didn't expect you to, but that 
will come later. I'll tell you this 
much, though. No one will be barred. The winner will take all, and 
the winner may be anyone on this 
planet. My one regret is that I won't 
be around to see who gets the 
jackpot." 

Carter Hagen dutifully pocketed 
the will and left. He relumed oh 
other business a week later. Sam 
Chipfellow's first question was, 
"well, what did you think of it?" 

"Think of what?" 

"My will." 

Carter Hagen straightened to an 
indignant five-foot-six. "Mr. Chipfellow. I don't like having my integrity questioned. Your will was 
in a sealed envelope. You instructed me to read it after your death. 
If you think I'm the sort of man 
who would violate a trust — " 

Sam put a drink into his attorney's hand. "Here, take this. Calm 
down." 



MR- CHI PF ELL 

Carter Hagen gulped the drink 
and allowed his feathers to smooth 
down. As he set down his glass, Sam 
leaned back and said, "Now that 
that's over, let's get on with it. 
Tell me — what did you think of 
my will?" 

The attorney flushed. It was no 
use trying to fool Chipfellow. He 
was a master at that damned 
thought business. "I — I did look at 
it. I couldn't resist the temptation. 
The envelope was so easily opened." 

Sam was regarding him keenly 
but without anger. "I know you're 
a crook Hagen but no more so 
than most people. So don't sit there 
cringing." 

"This will is — well, amazing, and 
getting an advance look didn't held 
me a bit unless — -" Hagen looked up 
hopefully. " — unless you're willing 
to give me a slight clue—" 

"I'll give you nothing. You take 
your chances along with the rest." 

Hagen sighed. "As to the will 
itself, all I can say is that it's 
bound to cause a sensation." 

"I think so too," Sam said, his 
eyes turning a trifle sad. "It's too 
bad a man has to die just at the 
most interesting point of his life." 

"You'll live for years, Mr. Chipfellow. You're in fine condition." 

"Cut it out. You're itching for 
me to shuffle off so you can get a 
crack at what I'm leaving behind." 

"Why, Mr. — " 



►W'S JACKPOT 75 

"Shut up and have another 
drink." 

^ARTER Hagen did not have 
^ long to wait as life-times go. 
Eighteen months later, Sam Chipfellow dropped dead while walking 
in his garden. The news was broadcast immediately but the stir it 
caused was nothing to the worldwide reaction that came a few days 
later. 

This was after all the relatives, 
all those who thought they had a 
faint chance of proving themselves 
relatives, and representatives of the 
press, radio, and video, gathered in 
the late Sam Chipfellow's mansion 
to hear the reading of the will. Carter Hagen, seeking to control his excitement, stood before a microphone installed for the benefit of 
those who couldn't get in. 

He said "This is the last will and 
testament of Samuel Chipfellow, deceased. As his lawyer, It becomes 
my duty to — " 

An angry murmur went up from 
those assembled. Exclamations of 
impatience. "Come on! Get on with 
it. Quit making a speech and read 
the will, we can't wait all day!" 

"Quiet please, and give me your 
closest attention. I will read slowly 
so all may hear. This is Mr. Chipfellows last testament: 

"I Samuel B. Chipfellow, have 
made a great deal 0} money during 



7 6 



IMAGINATION 



my active years. The time now 
comes when I must decide what will 
become of it after my death. I have 
made my decision, but I remain in 
the peculiar position of still not 
knowing what will become of it. 
Frankly, I'm of the opinion that no 
one will ever benefit from if— that 
it will remain in the place I have 
secreted it until the end of time." 

A murmur went up from the 
crowd. 

"A treasure hunt!" someone cried. 
"I wonder if they'll distribute 
maps ! " 

Carter Hagen raised his hand. 
"Please! Let's have a little more 
order or the reading will not continue." 

The room quieted and Hagen's 
droning voice was again raised: 
"This place consists of a vault I 
have had erected upon my grounds. 
This vault, I assure you, is burglarproof, weather-proof, cycloncproof, 
tornadoproof, bombproof. Time 
will have no effect upon its walls. It 
could conceivaby be thrown jree 
in some great volcanic upheaval 
but even then the contents would 
remain inaccessible. 

"There is only one way the vault 
can be opened. Its lock is sensitized 
to respond to a thought. That's what 
I said — a thought. I have selected 
a single, definite, clear-cut thought 
to which the combination will respond. 



"There is a stone bench in front 
of the vault door and I decree that 
any person who wishes, may sit 
down on this bench and direct 
his or her thought at the door. If it 
is the correct one, the door will open 
and the person causing this to happen shall then be the possessor of all 
my worldly wealth which lies inside. 

"Because of the number of persons who will no doubt wish to try 
their luck, I decree further that each 
shall be given thirty seconds in 
which to project their thought. A 
force vf six men shall be hired to 
supervise the operation and handle 
the crowds in the neighborhood of 
the vault. A trust fund has been already set up to pay this group. The 
balance of my wealth lies awaiting 
the lucky thinker in the vault — all 
save this estate itself, an item of 
trifling value in comparison to the 
rest, which I bequeath to the State 
with the stipulation that the other 
terms of the will are rigidly carried 
out. 

And so, good luck to everyone in 
the world. May one of you succeed,, 
in opening my vault— although I 
doubt it. Samuel B. Chip fellow. P. 
S. The thought-throwing shall begin one week after the reading of 
the will. I add this as a precaution to keep everyone from rushing to the vault after this will is 
read. You might kill each other in 
the stampede. S. B. C." 



MR. CHIPFELLOW'S JACKPOT 



77 



There was a rush regardless. Reporters knocked each other down 
getting to the battery of phones 
set up to carry the news around 
the world. And Sam Chipfellow's 
will pushed all else off the video 
screens and the front pages. 

TOURING the following weeks, 
millions were made through 
the sale of Chipfellow's thought to 
the gullible. Great commercial activity began in the area surrounding the estate as arrangements were 
made to accomodate the hundreds 
of thousands who were heading in 
that direction. 

A line began forming immediatly at the gate to Chipfellow's Folly 
and a brisk market got under way 
in positions therein. The going figure of the first hundred positions 
was in the neighborhood of ten 
thousand dollars. A man three 
thousand thoughts away was offered a thousand dollars two 
days before the week was up, and 
on the last day, the woman at the 
head of the line sold her position for eighteen thousand dollars. 

There were many learned roundtables and discussions as to the nature of Chipfellow's thoughts. The 
majority leaned to the belief that 
it would be scientific in nature because Chipfellow was the world's 
greatest scientist. 

This appeared to give scientific


ally trained brains the edge and 
those fortunate in this respect spent 
long hours learning what they 
could of Chipfellow's life, trying 
to divine his performance in the 
realm of thought. 

So intense was the interest created that scarcely anyone paid attention to the activities of Chipfellow's closer relatives. They sued 
to break the will but met with defeat. The verdict was rendered 
speedily, after which the judge who 
made the ruling declared a recess 
and bought the eleven thousandth 
position in line for five hundred 
dollars. 

On the morning of the appointed 
day, the gates were opened and the 
line moved toward the vault. The 
first man took his seat on the 
bench. A stopwatch clicked. A 
great silence settled over the watchers. This lasted for thirty seconds 
after which the watch clicked 
again. The man got up from the 
bench eighteen thousand dollars 
poorer. 

The vault had not opened. 

Nor did it open the next day, 
the next, nor the next. A week 
passed, a month, six months. And 
at the end of that time it was estimated that more than twenty-five 
thousand people had tried their 
luck and failed. 

Each failure was greeted with a 
public sigh of relief— relief from 



78 



IMAGINATION 



both those who were waiting for a 
turn and those who were getting 
rich from the commercial enterprises abutting upon the Chipfellow estate. 

There was a motel, a hotel, a 
few night clubs, a lot of restaurants, a hastily constructed bus terminal, an airport and several 
turned into parking lots at a dollar a head. 

The line was a permanent thing 
and it was soon necessary to build 
a cement walk because the everpresent hopeful were standing in 
a ditch a foot deep. 

There also continued to be an 
active business in positions, a 
group of professional standers having sprung up, each with an assistant to bring food and coffee 
and keep track of the ever fluctuating market in positions. 

And still no one opened Chipfellow's vault. 

It was conceded that the big 
endowment funds had the inside 
track because they had the money 
to hire the best brains in the 
world; men who were almost as 
able scientifically as had been 
Chipfellow himself but unfortunately hadn't made as much money. 
The monied interests also had access to the robot calculators that 
turned out far more plausible 
thoughts than there were positions 
in the line. 



A year passed. The vault remained locked. 

TJY that time the number of those 
who had tried and failed and 
were naturally disgruntled, was 
large enough to be heard, so a rumor got about that the whole thing 
was a vast hoax— a mean joke perpetrated upon the helpless public 
by a lousy old crook who hadn't 
any money in the first place. 

Vituperative editorials were written — by editors who had stood in 
line and thrown futile thoughts at 
the great door. These editorials 
were vigorously rebutted by editors and columnists who as yet had 
not had a chance to try for the 
jackpot. 

One senator, who had tried and 
missed, introduced a law making 
it illegal to sit on a stone bench 
and hurl a thought at a door. 

There were enough congressional 
failures to pass the law. It went to 
the Supreme Court but was tossed 
out because they said von couldn't 
pass a law prohibiting a man from 
thinking. 

And still the vault remained 
closed. 

Until Mr. and Mrs. Wilson, farm 
people impoverished by reverses, 
spent their last ten dollars for two 
thoughts and waited out the hours 
and the days in line. Their daughter Susan, aged nine, waited with 



MR. CHIPFFXLOW'S JACKPOT 



them, passing the time by telling 
her doll fairy tales and wondering 
what the world looked like to a bird 
flying high up over a tree top. Susan was glad when her mother and 
father reached the bench because 
then they all could go home and see 
how her pet rabbit was doing. 

Mr. Wilson hurled his thought 
and moved on with drooping shoulders. Mrs. Wilson threw hers and 
was told to leave the bench. The 
guard looked at Susan. "Your 
turn," he said. 

"But I haven't got any thought," 
Susan said. "I just want to go 
home." 

This made no sense to the guard. 
The line was being held up. People were grumbling. The guard said, 
"All right, but that was silly. You 
could have sold your position for 
good money. Run along with your 
mother and father." 

Susan started away. Then she 
looked at the vault which certain


79 

ly resembled a mausoleum and 
said, "Wait — I have too got a little thought," and she popped onto 
the bench. 

The guard frowned and snapped 
his stop watch. 

Susan screwed her eyes tight 
shut. She tried to see an angel with 
big white wings like she sometimes 
saw in her dreams and she also 
tried to visualize a white-haired, jolly-faced little man as she 
considered M r. Chipfellow to be. 
Her lips moved soundlessly as she 
said, 

Dear God and all the angels — 
please have pity on poor Mr. Chipfellow for dying and please make 
him happy in heaven. 

Then Susan got off the bench 
quickly to run after her mother 
and father who had not waited. 

There was the sound of metal 
grinding upon metal and the great 
door was swinging open. 

THE END 




"It's science fiction . . . about a man who in* 
vents a vessel capable of crossing a river." 



Hollo way was used to big game hunters and 
their expeditions to other worlds. But this trip 
was sheer madness — a space ship stalking among — 

The Beasts In The Void 

h 

PaJ W. lJ air man 

THE EXAMINER looked that I read your log before I take 
doubtful and said, "But Mr. verbal testimony." 
Holloway, regulations requite Holloway's face was drawn and 



So 



Illnetrated hy W. B. Terry 



ravaged. His bloodshot eyes sat in 
black pits. They were trained on 
the Examiner but looked through 
him rather than at him. 

Holloway said, "But; I must 
talk! I've got to tell you about it. 
I have to keep talking." 

"But—" 

Holloway's words tumbled out. 
" It started In the control cabin 
there in deep space. When Mrs. 
Kelvey came in. She was the blonde 
one. I turned around and she said, 
'Captain, there's a great big tiger 
in the cornipanionway.'" 



The desperate Holloway, fearful 
of being stopped or running out of 
words, went into minute detail. 
"She made the statement as a 
pouting complaint, almost casually. 
Then, before I could speak, she 
realized what she'd said and her 
face changed. A kind of horrified 
double-take. 'A tiger? In the cornpa nionway of a space ship?' This 
last was an incredulous question 
she asked herself. Then she fainted. 
I looked outside. I thought I saw 
something blurred and indistinct 
but it vanished quickly if it was 



82 



IMAGINATION 



really there at all. The companionway was empty. No tiger. No animal of any kind — " 

The Examiner, holding up a 
hand of protest, looked like a man 
directing traffic. "Please, Mr. Holloway — please. We must remember 
regulations." 

Holloway's eyes closed for a 
moment but he resolutely forced 
them open as though afraid of 
something. 

The scene was Holloway's tworoom suite in the Space Port Hotel. 
There were three men present — 
Holloway, skipper of the Space 
King. John Mason, Port Resident, 
and Merle Kennedy, Section Examiner for the Space Authority people. Kennedy regarded Holloway 
with frank concern. Good heavens 
— the man was a complete roess. 
Looked ready to collapse. Kennedy 
turned to Mason. " This can be 
postponed, you know." 

Mason was regarding Holloway 
also. Strange, he thought; Holloway 
had left in a fanfare of publicity. 
Now it appeared his return would 
be even more dramatic. Maybe 
Holloway was that kind of a chap; 
the kind things just happened to. 

He was quite young though he 
certainly didn't look it now. He'd 
been known as a playboy ever since 
his father struck it big in Venusian 
oil. But good-looking, personable, 
he had worn the label well. He'd 
been good copy because the public 



regarded him with patronizing affection. To them, he'd been a nice 
kid having fun; not a young wastrel wasting his father's money. 

Naturally he would pick a glamour girl to play the romantic feminine role and Melody Hayden 
had filled the bill perfectly. Together, they had enchanted the public. Princess and Prince Charming 
stuff. Then tragedy. Disaster in a 
rocketing sports car; Melody's 
coffin sealed before the funeral; 
young Holloway coming off without a scratch. Melody's death was 
a bombshell and everyone asked. 
What will he do now? expepting of 
course, something sensational. 

He didn't let them down. Dramatically, he announed a completely new life. He bought a space ship 
and foreswore his old ways. He 
had quite a reputation as a big 
game hunter. He'd stalked the vicious Plutonian ice bears and lain 
in Venusian swamps waiting for 
the ten-ton lizards to rise out of 
the slime. He had knocked over the 
wiliest of animals, a telepathic 
Uranian mountain wolf and had 
dropped in flight a Martian radarbat, a feat duplicated by only three 
other marksmen of record. 

So what more natural occupation than guiding hunting parties 
in deep space? Holloway had been 
obviously torn by Melody's tragic 
death. Perhaps out among the stars 
he could forget. 



THE BEASTS IN THE VOID 



83 



'-pHERE HAD BEEN some trouble, Mason recalled, in. clearing Holloway's first cruise. A 
party of five. Not to any established hunting ground but a D. U. 
thing. Destination Unknown, and 
they were always trouble. Clearance had been made, though, and 
now — here was Holloway back 
again — dramatically of course — 
with one of his party dead and the 
other four in trance-like stupors. 
Strange. 

And stranger still, Holloway's 
reason for wanting to talk immediately; with no rest — no medical attention: 

"It will help keep me awake. I 
mustn't go to sleep. Can't I make 
you understand? I've got to stay 
awake." 

Mason pitied the man. He turned 
to Kennedy. "I have the log here, 
sir. Perhaps you could go over it 
now — " 

Holloway leaned forward. "I'll 
tell you what's in the log. Every 
word of it. If I just sit here waiting — " 

Mason laid a hand on his knee. 
"It's all right, old chap. I won't 
let you go to sleep. You and I 
will talk while Mr. Kennedy goes 
through the log. It won't take 
long." 

Mason handed the book to Kennedy. He was almost apologetic. 
"It's a strange log, sir, It- 2 -" 

" Strange ? " Kennedy frowned . 



Logs had no right to be strange. 
There were regulations — rules 
stating exactly how a log should be 
kept. 

"Well sir, the lad is young. His 
first trip. I just meant there's perhaps a little more in the log than 
should appear there." 

"We'll see," Kennedy said. 
There was a slight frost on his 
words. If disciplinary measures 
were in the offing it would pay not 
to get too cozy with Holloway and 
the Resident. 

Kennedy opened the log. The 
first entry was dated June 3rd, 
4:10 p. m. Earth time. Kennedy 
frowned. Permissible of course, but 
sloppy, very sloppy. The better 
skippers computed from Orion immediately after blast-off. Kennedy 
set back and began to read: 
* * # 

June 3rd, 4: 10 p. m. 

We blasted at 2:18 p. m. A 
good getaway. Course 58.3 2 9 by 
the polar angle. No blast sickness 
among the passengers . They are 
old hands. I put the automatic 
board into control at 3:50 p. m. I 
checked the tubes. Pressures balanced and equal. 

I don't like this cruise. I don't 
like Murdo. He's a domineering 
slob. The other four, well — Keebler is an alcoholic, Kelvey an 
empty-headed opportunist. I don't 
particularly dislike them. They're 
just a worthless pair who would 



84 



IMAGINATION 



rather fawn on Murdo and take his 
insults than work for a living. The 
two wives are both young. Martha 
Keebler has a child's mind in a woman's body. Jane Kelvey is an 
oversexed witch with an indecent 
exposure complex. I may have 
trouble with her. Already she's 
parading around in skimpy shorts 
and a bra. Evidently Murdo doesn't care for women. He pays no attention to her. Money and power 
are his dish. And a terrible restlessness. 

Melody baby — I wish you were 
here— 

June 4th, 3:00 p. m. 

I had a talk with Murdo about 
this silly cruise. Tried to swing 
him onto something that makes a 
little more sense. Pluto, Venus, 
Ganymede - — some hunting ground 
I'm familiar with. No good. Even 
a suggestion and he thinks you're 
crossing him and snorts like a bull. 
Still demands to go to this place 
where big game prowls in space. 
Where elephants and leopards and 
snakes and anything you can name 
fly around your ship and look in 
your ports. Where you do your 
hunting in space suits right out in 
the void. 

■ Why in hell did I fall for this 

idiocy? Guess' I just didn't care. 
Maybe I thought it was a good 
idea because it sounded like a 
cruise you could get killed on with


out much trouble. No — I shouldn't 
say that. Melody wouldn't like me 
to say it. She was so wonderful — ■ 
so level-headed. How wrong they 
all were about us. About ber. Because she was so beautiful, I guess. 
I tried to tell them I'd married an 
angel and they took bets among 
themselves on how long it would 
last. The answer to that would 
have been forever. It still is. I've 
lost so much and learned so much 
in such a very short time. The hell 
with Murdo and his four puppets. 
I'll take them out and bring them 
back. Then I'll go somewhere alone 
and I won't come back at all. 
Melody. 

.Course 28.493 by polar 
angle. Went through small asteroid 
field . . . 

T^ENNEDY looked up sharply. 

He frowned. This log is unacceptable." 

Holloway was pacing the floor, 
his eyes blank and terrible "Unacceptable?" 

"Course and position should be 
noted within each twenty-four hour 
period. You missed June 5th 
entirely- You — " Kennedy leafed 
through the pages. "Why at times 
you missed three and four days 
in sequence! " 

"Sometimes I didn't have time 
to write." 

Mason tried to hide his disgust. 
How did men like Kennedy get 



THE BEASTS IN THE VOID 



85 



into positions they weren't fitted 
for? The ass! Couldn't he see this 
man was suffering? Mason said, 
"Why not reserve comment until 
you've finished. Mr. Kennedy?" 

Kennedy's eyes widened at the 
sharp tone of Mason's voice. Really. When residents start dictating to 
Examiners — Kennedy saw the 
stiffness in Mason's face. And 
something more. He went quickly 
back to his reading: 
* * * 
June 6, ijoo p. m. 

I talked some more with Murdo 
about this fool cruise. He got wind 
of our destination — wherever it is 
— from some rich idiot in i'aris. 
And I don't use idiot figuratively. 
His informant was in some kind of 
a private nut house — an exclusive 
insane asylum of idiots with lots 
of money— and he had lucid intervals. At one of these times he 
told Murdo where he'd been and 
what had happened. T don't think 
Murdo believes all of it but he 
wants to see for himself. Well, if he 
wants to spend his money chasing 
meteorites it's his business. 

Keebler got drunk as a goat. 
Strapped him in his bunk and left 
him there. Murdo spent a few 
hours explaining guns to Mr. Keebler. I think he enjoys the look of 
wonder on her face. Makes him 
feel very superior knowledgewise. 
Her face is just built that- way and 
so far as she's concerned he could 



be talking Greek. He thinks she's 
very beautiful. I wonder if he ever 
saw Melody's picture? 

Cou rse 36.829 by the Orion 
angle. All clear. 

* * * 

June gth, 1 :oo a. m. 

Course 36.841 by the Orion 
angle. Small asteroids. 

Jane Kelvey is bored and has 
started taking it out on me. When 
I passed her door it was open. She 
was taking a sponge bath, stark 
naked in the middle of the cabin. 
She turned around to face me and 
did a very bad job of acting flustered, trying to cover herself up with 
a small sponge! How crude can a 
female get? She was hoping I'd 
come in. If I had it would have 
been to slap her face. I got away 
as fast as I could. 

* * * 

June 10th f 7 p. m. 

Course 41 .864 by the Orion 
angle. Brushed a small asteroid. 

I've been noting the time 
wrong. It should be figured on a 
twenty-four-hour cycle. Midnight 
to midnight, the hell with it. 

Had a fight with Murdo. He 
wanted to take over the ship. His 
words were, "Let's get some speed 
out of this slop bucket." I reminded him I was Captain. He reminded 
me he was footing the bills. I asked 
him how he would like to be locked in his cabin for the remainder 
of the cruise? He didn't say, but 



86 



IMAGINATION 



I guess he wouldn't have liked it 
because he quieted down. Keebler 
has been quietly drunk for the last 
two days. Lucky Keebler. 
* * * 

June 13th, 18 hours. 

Course 26.932 by the Virgo 
angle. Went four degrees off course 
to avoid small planetoid. 

Jane Kelvey came to my cabin 
an hour ago. The rest were asleep. 
She wore a blue dressing gown with 
nothing under it. I want to set 
down what happened in case 
there's ever a kickback although I 
don't think there ever will be. 

I was sitting in a chair and she 
came up behind me and it was very 
unfortunate because I saw the blue 
dressing gown first. By sheer 
chance it was almost exactly like 
the one Melody wore that first 
night. I was thinking of Melody. 
Melody was all around me and inside me. In my mind, in my heart, 
in all my aching regrets. 

So when that dressing gown 
brushed me, something electric 
happened inside and I got up and 
took Jane Kelvey in my arms. It 
wasn't more than three or four 
seconds but in that time the gown 
had been brushed aside. Then I 
came to my senses and pushed her 
away. 

The dressing gown stayed 
parted. She stepped back, confused. 
She said, "What's the matter? Are 
you scared?" 



" I*m disgusted . B u 1 1 on you r 
gown. Get out of here!" 

"What are you? Not one of those 
noble creatures I hope — who 
wouldn't touch a man's wife." 

"I said get out! I wouldn't touch 
you regardless." 

"But you just did." 

"It was a mistake. I — " 

"Look — I'm a woman. You're 
a man — I think. We're alone in 
space and life is short. Let's have 
fun and then forget about it." 

I slapped her across the mouth. 
A skipper can be jailed for life for 
striking a passenger. Even with 
cause. But I slapped her and I'm 
setting it down in the log . . . 

T^-ENNEDY looked up from his 
^* reading. "Jane Kelvey — she 
is the dead one? " 
Mason nodded. 

Kennedy looked at Holloway 
with marked severity. "Are you 
sure you only slapped her?" 

Mason exploded. "Good God, 
man. Did you see the body? You're 
not implying be did that to her are 
you?" 

"I'm not implying anything," 
Kennedy said within a restrained 
grimness that infuriated Mason. 

"Why don't you finish the log 
before you start passing judgment?" 

Kennedy leafed through the 
pages. "I — wait a minute! This 
log doesn't cover the whole cruise! 



THE BEASTS IN THE VOID 



8? 



ft breaks off in the middle of a 
sentence!" 

"Read what's there, man! Read 
what's there." 

"Very serious — very serious," 
Kennedy muttered. "Not completing a log. No license should have 
been issued this man. Lax! Very 
lax." He sat back to make himself 
more comfortable and prepared to 
go on with his reading. 

* # * 
June T,oth — - 3 hours 

Course 29.341 by the Virgo 
angle. I think that's the course. 
The instruments are acting funny. 
In fact a lot of things seem to be 
wrong. Some of the constellations 
aren't in the right places anymore. 

I began noticing these things a 
couple of days ago and spoke to 
Murdo. I suggested we turn back. 
I told him it was my duty as a 
skipper to look out for the welfare 
of my passengers. And that included not continuing if vital instruments showed signs of failure. 

He sneered at me and said, "I 
thought you were a big game 
hunter, Holloway?" 

I told him I'd hunted big game 
— yes. 

"It doesn't sound like it. You 
sound like a timid old woman. So 
you've made some miscalculations. 
The course is still right. It's on the 
flight pattern in the automatic control board and I know it's correct 
because I gave it to you." 



"But if instruments fail nothing 
stays right." 

"Okay — you're the skipper. If 
you've turned yellow and want to 
show your tail T guess there's nothing I can do about it." 

He almost got his jaw broken, 
but I was able to hold myself. Then, suddenly, I didn't care. 
I didn't care whether Murdo stayed alive or got killed. As to the 
others —they'd come on the cruise 
with their eyes open. They deserved whatever they got. And I 
certainly didn't give a damn about 
myself. Guess I wasn't cut out to 
skipper a ship A skipper should 
care. That's all he should do. Just 
care. I'd rather dream about Melody. 

* * * 

I don't know what the dale is. 
The chronometer stopped so I 
don't even know what time it is. 
But what does it matter about the 
time if you don't even know what 
day it is? We just go on and on. 

Murdo — I can't figure out. 
Windbag or not — braggart or no 
he — has an iron will. I think 
he's scared but he won't admit it. 
And some stubborn streak inside 
him won't let him turn tail and 
run. He hides his fear behind long 
accounts of his hunting trips. He 
describes the vicious animals he's 
killed. He bores us with accounts 
of his skill as a great hunter. 

The rest listen because they 



88 



IMAGINATION 



have to, I go to my cabin and remember Melody. 

The rest are scared too, but 
they're too scared of Murdo to let 
him know it. That's an odd one. 
Scared for your life but afraid to 
tell the big man because he might 
till you. Would Murdo kill in a fit 
of rage? I don't know. 

Keebler stays drunk so none of 
it bothers him. Keebler's wife, I 
think, is in love with Murdo but 
it's a kind of little-girl love. She 
never quite grew up. Kelvey glues 
himself to Murdo and sticks like a 
plaster. He seems to consider 
Murdo a haven, as though Murdo's bulk will make everythng all 
right. 

Jane Kelvey hasn't quit making 
passes at me but they're halfhearted. She bothers me. I'm uneasy when she's around. I get the 
feeling that any minute she might 
drop to her knees and beg. What do 
you do with a women on her knees 
before you, begging? Maybe before 
long her husband will look good 
to her. Maybe she'll be able 
to get him away from Murdo's 
side for a while. 

I look at both these women and 
realize what I lost. Melody. 
* * * 

JANE KELVEY came to my cabin. It's hit her that things 
aren't right. She's scared. She asked, "Why did you tell Murdo you 
wanted to turn back?" 



"Because I thought we'd come 
too far." 

"Do you still think so?" 

"Everything will be all right." 

"The instruments — are they 
working again?" 

I lied to her. "They're working." 

"Do you think it's really as 
Murdo says — that there are animals out in space?" 

"I don't know." 

She looked wan and forlorn and 
I was sorry for her. She said, "I've 
only been on one hunting trip in 
my life." 

"Is that so?" 

"In India. A boy carried my gun 
for me. When the tiger came the 
boy handed me the gun and told 
me where to point. I fired but 
I didn't hit the tiger. Somebody 
else shot it." 

"That was too bad." 

"No, it was all right. He was 
such a big beautiful animal. So 
sleek and powerful." 

I saw her body tremble as she 
closed her eyes. I said, "You better get some rest." 

She passed a hand over her 
eyes and then gave me an odd wistful smile. "Animals are smarter, I 
think. We do make awful messes 
out of our lives, don't we?" 

"I'm afraid we do." 

"But is it our fault? God makes 
us this way. We can't help that." 

"No, I guess we can't." 

"Why did God make us like 



THE BEASTS IN THE VOID 



8<> 



we are?" 

"I don't know, Jane. Let's hope 
He does." 

"Isn't that sacrilege or something? Doubting Him?" 

"I guess it is." 

She reached out suddenly and 
touched my face. "You're a nice 
guy. I don't blame you for slapping me." 

"I'm sorry. You're pretty nice 
yourself." 

The smile faded. "I'm not," she 
said miserably, and left the cabin. 

Poor kid. I forgot her and 
thought of Melody. 

* * # 

Something's gone wrong with 
everything. Not a very scientific 
statement for a skipper to make 
but that's how it is. The stars 
have disappeared. The instruments 
jumped around as though they 
had minds of their own. The dial 
needles spin around like crazy. 

And something else — something even worse. Space has 
changed. I mean there's something 
out there in space. First I just 
felt it. A raw uneasiness. Then I 
trained a light through the port and 
I could see it. Stuff that looks like 
dust but isn't. It's hazy and yet 
it sparkles and you have a sense 
of being on a ship that's pushing 
its way through a fog so thick the 
friction holds you back. And 
there's something more about this 
sparkling fog. You look out at it 



and it seems to be looking back at 
you. Or maybe I'm losing my 
mind. Anyhow, that's the way it 
seems. As though it's waiting for 
you to speak to it — say hello or 
something. 

I guess I'm going crazy. 

The sparkling fog is affecting the 
others, too. They've all quieted 
down and they slip along the bulkheads as though they were being 
followed. Only Murdo blusters 
back. He says, what the hell? We 
expected something different 
didn't we? Well, this is sure different enough, isn't it? 

I'd turn back but I don't know 
how. I have nothing to go by. The 
instruments make no sense. 

I am going crazy. I looked out 
the port just now and saw a water 
buffalo. It was standing right* out 
there in space with its head down 
looking at the ship! I had a light 
turned on it and suddenly it 
charged and hit the port headon. 
It bounced off and went staggering 
away and disappeared. 

But it left a big white scratch 
on the quartz outside. At least I 
think it did. Wait. I'll look again. 
Yes. A big white scratch. It's still 
there. So how can I be mad? Maybe it's a new kind of madness . . . 
* * * 

SOME OF THE sparkling fog 
has penetrated the ship. Turn 
out the light and you can see it in 



IMAGINATION 



the cabin. Not as thick as out in 
the void but thick enough to see; 
thick enough to stand there and 
ask you to talk to it. 

Murdo is ready to turn back. 
He came to the control room and 
said, "I saw it out there." 

"You saw what?" 

His face was pale and his hands 
twitched. A boa-constrictor. Exactly like the one I killed four years 
ago on the Amazon. It came to the 
port and looked in at me." 

"It must be your imagination." 

"No. It was there. Let's tuirn 
back. Get out of this." 

"I wish we could." 

"You mean — ?" 

"I don't know where back is. 
We might just as well go as we 
are. Changing course doesn't help 
if you don't know your directions. 
Our only hope is to drive on out of 
this cloud. If I turned I might 
go right back into it." 

"Then one direction is as good 
as another?" 

"That's right." 

His mind wandered as he turned 
away. "I didn't know it would be 
like this," he muttered. "I thought 
it would be fun — sport. I thought 
we'd put on space suits and go out 
and make a kill. I thought — " 

"The space suits are ready. Do 
you want to try it?" 

He shuddered, his hanging jowls 
almost flapping. "You couldn't 



drag me out there." 

* * * 

The stuff is getting thicker in 
the ship. 

Jane came into my cabin. She 
had an odd look on her face. She 
said, "There's a big tiger in the 
companion way." 

I got up from my bunk and 
suddenly she seemed to realize what 
she'd said. She repeated it. Then 
she fell down in a faint. I put her 
in my bunk and looked out into 
the companionway. The sparkling 
fog glittered but there was no 
tiger. 

When she came to, she didn't 
seem to know where she was. Then 
she smiled. "I must have been 
drinking too much," she said. Then 
slie realized where she was. "But 
look where it got me? Into your 
bunk." 

"Do you feel all right now?" 

"I guess so. I can get up now. I 
do have to get up, don't I?" 

"I think you'd better." 

After she left I did some thinking. The sparkling haze had been 
outside the ship and I'd seen a 
water buffalo through the port. 
Murdo had seen a boa-constrictor. 
Then the haze penetrated the hull 
and got inside the ship. And Jane 
had seen a tiger in the companionway. 

Were they phantoms? Was 



THE BEASTS IN THE VOID 



91 



Jane's tiger a tiger of the mind? 
Murdo swore his snake had been 
real and my buffalo left a mark on 
the port. I sat there trying to 
think. With the sparkling fog drifting around me. It seemed to be 
trying to tell me something. ' 

Things grow worse. Today, at 
mess, Murdo was holding forth 
about a Plutonian ice bear he'd 
killed. I think he was trying to 
cover the gloom that has settled 
over us. Anyhow, he'd just got to 
the point where the bear was charging down on him when we heard 
the roar of thunder from outside. 
Maybe I'd better repeat that for 
the record. We heard a roaring 
through the walls of the space ship. 
In the void. Nothing goes through 
the walls of a space ship in the 
void but we all heard it and jumped to the port. And we all saw it. 

An ice bear as big as ten of the 
largest that ever lived in the 
Pultonian ice flows. A huge ravening beast that rushed through the 
void at the ship and tried to tear 
the port out of its metal seat with 
teeth as big as the height of a man. 

The women fell back, screaming. 
Keebler, in his usual stupor stared 
blankly as though not realizing 
what was going on. Kelvey looked 
to Murdo for guidance. When 
none came he crouched behind a 
chair. 



Murdo fell back slowly, step by 
step as though his eyes were fastened to the quartz and it was hard 
to pull away. I don't remember 
what I did. Murdo was saying 
"My God — my God — my God," 
as though chanting a ritual. He 
tore his eyes from the sight and 
looked at me. 

"You wanted big game, buster," 
I croaked. "There it is." 

"But it can't be real. It can't!" 

"Maybe not, but if that port 
gives I'll bet it won't be from vaccuum pressure." 

"Vaccuum draws. It doesn't 
press," Kelvey babbled inanely, but 
nobody paid any attention to him. 

The beast made two more 
charges on the ship, then drew back 
screaming in rage from a snapped 
tooth. And all around us, there in 
the ship, the sparkling fog glittered and tried to talk. 

* *■ * 

Two hours. The beast still 
rages in the void outside our ship. 

* * * 

JANE IS DEAD. She was horribly mangled. I put her in her 
bunk and laid a blanket over her 
and now the blanket is soaked in 
her blood. 

No one could have helped her. It 
happened in the lounge. She was 
in there alone. I was in the control 
room. I don't know where the rest 
were. 



IMAGINATION 



I was workng uselessly with the 
controls when I heard a terrible 
scream mixed with a hideous 
snarling. I ran into the companion way and stared toward the 
lounge. Murdo appeared Jrom 
somewhere and we were shouldering each other on the companion 
ladder. Murdo fell heavily. Then 
we were both looking into the 
lounge. 

It was too late to help Jane. We 
saw her there, still and bloody. A 
shiny black, leopard was crouching 
gory-mouthed over her body with 
its paws on her breast. It's eyes 
were black magnets, holding mine. 

I said, "Get a gun," trying to 
speak without moving my lips. 

"But—" 

"Damn you — get a gunl " 
Murdo staggered away. It seemed a year before he came back 
with a Hinzie Special .442. The 
leopard was tight, ready to spring. I 
didn't dare move a muscle. I said. 
"Over my shoulder. Get him. Don't 
miss." 

That last was a little silly. How 
could a man miss with a Hinzie at 
ten feet? Murdo fired and tore the 
leopard's head off. It was down 
already so it didn't move. It sat 
there headless, its tail twitching 
slightly. Then it was still. 

I didn't hesitate this time. I said, 
"Come on. We've got to get this 
out of here before the others show." 



We put the dead leopard into 
the forward storage bunker. Then 
I picked up poor Jane and carried 
her to her room. Murdo hepled me 
up the ladder. The others were 
in the companionway and they 
pressed back in horror to let me 
pass. For the first time since we'd 
started, Keebler was sober. Ashen, 
shaking, stone sober. He broke ; 
screamed and ran for his bottle, 
the world of reality too terrible for 
him to bear. 

There was no huddle, no conference, no meeting of the minds. 
Everyone else went to the galley 
and sat staring into space; stared 
at the dancing little sparkles in the 
air. 

I went to my cabin. 

* * * 

When confronted by a reality 
no matter how crazy and improbable, a man must not turn from 
it. He can not carry the mangled 
body of a woman in his arms and 
then say to himself: This isn't real 
because it doesn't make sense. It 
does make sense — some kind of 
sense or it would not exist. A man 
must say rather: / don't understand this and maybe I never will 
but God gave me a brain and I 
must try. 1 can't sit back and deny 
reality. I must try to understand it. 
I cleared my mind and tried to rationalize the things around us. 

Out in the darkness there was a 



THE BEASTS IN THE VOID 



93 



terrible roaring and yammering. 
The thuds and bellows of violence. 
I went to the port. 

There, in the light from the 
ship, the ice bear and the water 
buffalo were fighting. It was a 
terrible and magnificent thing but 
to me it was anticlimax; a sideshow of almost casual interest.^ 

The ice bear outsized the water 
buff by too much to be in any 
danger, but the buff fought savagely and the ice bear had no easy 
time. The buff opened a long deep 
gash in the bear's throat when the 
bear missed a lunge and the Plutonian mammal fell back with a 
roar of pain and fury. They came 
together again and this time the 
bear got the buff in a hug and it 
was all over. The buff's spine 
broke and the bear bent the body 
double, then tore it to pieces. I 
wondered if the others were watching. 

I went back to pacing; back to 
my thinking. 

I have been thinking, thinking, 
thinking; wracking my brain- And 
of one thing I am sure. Some invisible intelligence is trying to help 
me; trying to give me knowledge. 
The sparkling fog? 

* * * 

\ GREAT and wonderful thing 
has happened. 
And I know. Do you realize 
what that means? To know in a 



situation like this? And to be wonderfully and wildly happy? The 
knowledge was not all given me. 
There was a thought process of 
my own developing. The thing 
given me was the basic knowledge 
upon which to build. And proof of 
this knowledge. Absolute and indisputable proof. 

The sparkling fog is mind stuff. 

I will not defend that statement. 
I will not rationalize it. But I will 
seek explanations; consider possibilities. 

Known : This sparkling fog 
through which we drift is intelligent matter; the stuff of thoughts; 
the basic material from which consciousness springs. It is consciousness itself. 

Supposed : It is probably electronuclear in composition, and appears to be completely innocent. 
By that I mean it has no intention 
to harm, perhaps because it does 
not understand the difference between good and evil, harm and help, 
pain and pleasure. 

It has only one urge; the basic 
urge of all creation. To evolve, to 
develop. As the tree has but one 
basic urge — to grow and greaten; 
the flower but one desire — to 
bloom,, to improve; to assert itself 
through evolution and become better. 

Perhaps and who can successfully deny it? — this great space 



94 



IMAGINATION 



cloud could be a storage place of 
the Creator Himself; a storage 
place for mind stuff. When an infant or an animal or a plant is 
touched with the magic thing 
called life — where does that 
magic come from? Is it created at 
the very moment or does it come 
somehow from a source-pile? Is 
this cloud a source-pile of life itself? No one can say. But I think 
I've hit on a limitation of this 
mind stuff. I'm going to try an experiment and pray to God it works. 

I'm going to find Murdo and 
knock him unconscious. 

* * * 

I have solved the mind-stuff. 
What just happened is the last 
bit of proof I need. I went to the 
galley. Murdo had wandered away. 
I found him in the lounge. I stepped casually in front of him, set 
myself, and drove a straight right 
to his jaw. He went down like a log. 

I closed my eyes and counted 
to twenty praying to God to make 
me right in my belief — in the 
crazy theory I evolved. I opened 
my eyes and turned to the storage 
locker. I looked inside. 

The dead leopard was gone. 

I went to the port and looked 
out. The huge ice bear had been 
ravening insanely among the 
shreds of the water buffalo's body. 
As I watched both bear and buff 
began fading. 



Before my eyes, they disappeared, evolved back into the stuff of 
the sparkling fog. I had proved my 
theory. 

Now all the parts dropped into 
place. The mind stuff has only the 
ability and the urge to evolve — 
nothing else — no imagination. It 
can evolve only if given something 
to reproduce. 

This it can get only from a human mind. It is able to see an 
image pictured in the human memory and reproduce it in a state of 
absolute reality. 

Witness: Jane saw a tiger in the 
companionway. Clear in her memory was the image of the tiger she 
had shot at in India. The mindstuff saw it and reproduced it in 
reality. The water buffalo came 
from my own mind. I killed one exactly like it a year ago. The ice 
bear was out of Murdo's memory 
as was the black leopard and the 
snake. 

Witness: The three animals 
created inside the ship did not appear until the mind stuff from outside penetrated the hull and entered the ship. They were of normal 
size. But the animals created outside the ship were far out of proportion, the ice bear especially. 
Why? Because, I believe, the mind 
stuff is denser in the void. There 
it has more strength. 

My defense against the mind 



THE BEASTS 

stuff was formulated almost accidentally. I remembered the sequence of Jane's tiger. She saw it, 
entered my cabin, realized its significance, and fainted. I looked 
into the companionway and saw the 
tiger fading. 

So I knocked out Murdo for final 
pre m if and got it. As soon as he 
lapsed into unconsciousness the recreations from his mind turned 
back into sparkling fog. Obviously, 
and a heaven-sent phenomenon it 
is — the mind stuff immediately 
loses its subject-image when the 
mind from which it came goes unconscious. The mind-stuff has no 
memory of its own and cannot hold 
its recreated image in the evolved 
form under conditions of unconsciousness. The answer now becomes simple. 

* * * 

I drugged Murdo before he regained consciousness. 1 drugged 
the other three by means of whisky 
and food. They have been unconscious for twelve hours. Nothing 
has happened. I shall keep them 
that way. 

* * * 

The mind-stuff is trying to complain to me. Almost petulantly; as 
a child. I sense it sharply. It does 
not understand the wrong it has 
done and feels it has been deprived 
of its right. 

* * * 



IN THE VOID 95 

I have no time for the mindstuff. I guard myself against it and 
ignore it. There are other things 
on my mind. Shall I go back if we 
ever escape from the sparkling 
fog? I don't know. I don't want to 
go back. I want to go on and on 
forever just Ike this. But the 
others cannot go on like this. It 
would be murder. I don't know. — 
I don't know. 

* * if 

I must keep awake. I use drugs. 
I must not sleep — not sleep. 
* * * 

We have cleared the fog. The instruments are working again. Again 
the stars glow. What shall I dc. 
Melody , . , 

l^ENNEDY looked up from his 
reading. "As I said," — and 
he spoke severely — "you break off 
at an abrupt point. You did not 
complete the log." 

Holloway's red eyes were glazed. 
"I had other things to do. I was 
tired of keeping a log." 

Mason sought to draw Kennedy 
off his quarry. "There's an odd 
point," he said, looking at Holloway. "Only animals were recreated. Do you think the mind stuff 
was capable only of recreating animals?" 

Holloway spoke in an exhausted 
monotone. "It took the clearest 
image from the strongest minds. 



96 



IMAGINATION 



Murdo thought mainly of hunting. 
He pondered on his more spectacular kills. Thus the mind-stuff used 
his images." 
"I see." 

Holloway seemed to sag — to 
shrink. He said, "The mind-stuff 
could recreate anything. It brought 
Melody back to me." 

Kennedy sprang to his feet. 
"There is no reference in this log 
to—" 

Mason turned on him. "Shut up, 
you fool!" He laid a gentle hand 
on Holloway's shoulder. "Tell us 
about it, old chap." 

Holloway turned his burning eyes 
on the closed door to the next 
room. "She's in there. I wanted to 
get rid of you. I was afraid you 
would take her away from me. But 
it's no use. I can't hold my consciousness much longer. Then she will 
vanish." 

Holloway tried weakly to rise 
from his chair. He called, "Melody 
— Melody baby!" 

The door opened. A beautiful 
girl in a blue dressing gown came 
gracefully into the room. She walked straight to Holloway and took 
his tortured head into her soft 
hands. Her eyes pleaded with the 
men. "He suffers so. He wilt not 
sleep. I can't make him sleep. I — 
I don't understand." 

Holloway's head dropped suddenly onto his chest. He slumped 



down in his chair. And as he did 
so, a change took place. The two 
men stood rooted, staring. 

As Melody began to fade. Slowly, 
slowly, into a transparent image, 
into a mist, into a handful of 
sparkling fog. 

Then she was gone. 

Mason knelt by the bone-thin 
body in the chair. He made a quick 
examination and got wearily to 
his feet. 

"Holloway is dead," he murmured. "Drugs of that nature would 
kill an elephant. I can't understand how he lived so long." 

Kennedy blinked and seemed to 
come out of a trance. He frowned. 
"And the investigation hardly 
started." 

Mason shook his head and looked pityingly at Kennedy. It was just 
no use with a man like him. Mason said, "There's one point entirely apparent without an investigation." 

"What's that?" 

Mason's voice was sharp and 
cold. "That our little playboy, for 
all his reputation of frivolity, was 
a better man than you and I put 
together. Does that register, Mr. 
Kennedy?" 

Kennedy flared. "Nov/ see here. 
I'm only doing my job!" 

"Oh shut up," Mason said. 

And strode out of the room. 
THE END 



THE much-discussed and long 
promised satellite which the 
Government soon will throw into the 
skies, will be one of the remarkable accomplishments of our times, 
concerning how short a time it was 
since the only use the hard-headed 
"realists" could see for rocket power was the bombardment of cities! 

The fact that the satellite will be 
only a foot or so in diameter, will 
remain in the sky for a few days 
only, and will be at a relatively 
modest height, doesn't detract at all 
from the power of the conception. 
For this is really a first prolonged 



step into space. 

The Russians' announcement that 
they too will try for the sky has 
no one worried. On the contrary, 
the U.S. has proposed — and hopes — 
that the Russians will make it a 
joint effort. Other European countries are clamoring to aid and assist. With world action like this, 
how can we fail to reach the Moon 
within the century? 

It's a difficult job, but the space 
satellite is the first and necessary 
step. With its success — and it will 
be successful — the Moon-trip will 
follow . . . 




ZERO HOUR 

h 

^JHexantler $iade 

By accident Bobby discovered the rocket was 
about to be shot to the Moon. Naturally he wanted 
to go along. But could he smuggle himself aboard? 

Illustrated by IJwyd Rognan 



DAD HAD already gone when 
Bobby got up. This disappointed Bobby a little but 
then he remembered — this was the 
big day. Naturally Dad would get 
over lo the project early. And at 
four o'clock — Bobby shivered deliriously at the thought of it. 

He ate his breakfast in silence 
with Mom across the table drinking 
a cup of coffee and looking at a 
fashion catalogue. He was glad she 
was occupied because he didn't want 
to talk; not today he didn't. Might 
spill something secret. Might even 
let out flhe big secret. That would 
be terrible. 

Of course, all things were secret 
at Buffalo Flats. So secret top 
scientists like Dad didn't even discuss them with wives like Mom. 
And wives like Mom never asked. 
So it was really something to sit 



there eating breakfast knowing that 
today, Dad was going to rocket to 
the Moon. And with Mom not even 
knowing the Lunar project was in 
the works, so naturally not dreaming that he was going with Dad! 
The thrill was overpowering. 

Maybe they would have radio 
communication after they got 
there and he would call back and 
s;iv. TTeUo, Mon/' Guess where I 
am? On the moon with Dad! And 
Mom would say, Why Bobby! 
Scaring me to death like this! I 
was looking all over for you. Sounding very angry but not being really angry after all. Because maybe 
Dad would cut in and say, Yeah, 
he's right here with vie, dear. What 
do you think of this boy of ours? 

Bobby gulped the last of his 
cereal so he could go outside and 
wriggle for joy. As he got up from 



QS 




99 



roo 



IMAGINATION 



his chair, Mom said, "And what's 
your plan for today, young man? 
Davy Crockett or Buck Rogers?" 

Bobby had a quick thought — a 
sudden temptation. Why not give 
Mom a hint? Why he could even 
tell her and she still wouldn't know. 
Then later, after he was gone, she 
would remember back and say, 
That boy! When he tells you something he really means it. 

Bobby smiled and said, "I think 
I'll go to the moon today." 

Mom smiled too and went back 
to her fashions. "Well, see to it 
your fuel mixture is correct." 

"I'll check it. And Mom — I 
might not be home for lunch." 

"Where will you be?" 

"Oh, I don't know." 

"Well, mind your manners and 
say thank you when you leave." 

Mrs. Kendall, still smiling, 
watched Bobby dash out into the 
yard. Living on a restricted government area had one compensation at 
least. You didn't have to worry 
about your children. Four dozen 
families, alt with offspring, trapped 
behind ten-foot patrolled fence. 
Here, nobody worried about their 
children. They came and went and 
at noon a mother fed whatever 
number happened to be in the house 
at the time. Mrs. Kendall usually 
drew six or seven. It would be a 
relief to dodge the chore for one 
Saturday . . . 



/^\UT IN THE backyard, Bobby 
fussed around his space rocket a lilttle; tightening a screw here 
—hammering in a nail there. Just 
until he could slip away without 
Mom noticing his direction. 

It wasn't a bad Rocket at that, 
he thought. Six feet long^ with two 
seats and a keen instrument panel. 
But kid stuff of course. After he 
found the way in through the sewer 
he hadn't paid any more attention 
to his own ship. 

He could see Mom through the 
window, back in her book, so he 
went casually out through the back 
gate and turned left, kicking at 
pebbles as he sauntered along and 
trying to look as though he had no 
place to go. Had to be c:ueful. 
Didn't want to bump into any of 
the other kids today, either. 

The way in through the sewer 
was at a place behind Laboratory 
B. There was a kind of an alley 
there that nobody ever walked 
through and then this round lid 
you could lift up and look under. 
And a ladder you could climb 
down. 

Bobby hadn't dared go down at 
first. But after thinking about it 
over night his curiosity won out 
and he went back and ducked down 
into the lower level. He called it 
a sewer because of sewers being 
underground but this place was 
clean and had bunches of wires 



ZERO 

strung in every direction and faint 
little lights you could see by. 

Bobby went further and further 
every trip he took, never telling 
anybody because you weren't supposed to talk about things at Buffalo Flats — not even to the other 
kids. 

Then he found the big drome 
where they were building the rocket. It was so sleek and beautiful 
and shiny that he just stared at it 
— up through the grating in the 
floor that was for air circulation 
or something. 

He didn't know it was the moon 
rocket at first. Not until he'd gone 
back several times to peek up at 
it and then one day two scientists 
came walking along right in front 
of his nose. 

One of them was Dad. 

Bobby almost called out but he 
caught himself and just listened to 
them talking. This was the first 
time his conscience bothered him 
about going underneath the drome. 
He thought about it a lot — whether 
it was the right thing to do. And 
while he was never able to still his 
conscience completely, he quieted 
down by saying he really wasn't 
doing any harm because he'd never 
told anybody what he saw. 

He learned the rocket was going 
to the moon by listening to Dad 
and the other scientists talk when 
they thought they were alone. And 



HOUR i oi 

it was funny. Because even there, 
they spoke in low voices and didn't 
give too much away. 

He had known now for three 
days that at four o'clock the roof 
would open and the drome would 
be turned into a blast-pit and the 
rocket would shoot out through 
space to the moon. 

That was all he did know for 
sure. None of the men had said who 
was going on the first trip to the 
moon. Nothing had been said on 
that subject at all, but Hobby 
knew Dad would go. He would have 
to. After all, Dad was the second 
biggest scientist at Buffalo Mais. 
Second only to Schleimmer himself and Professor Schleimmer was 
very old and certainly wouldn't 
make the trip. That left Dad. Dad 
would just have to go in order to 
run the rocket. There probably 
wasn't anybody else smart enough 
in the whole place. 

The idea of going himself had 
been born the previous day— when 
he found a larger grating in the 
floor near the rocket and realized 
if he was very careful he could 
climb out of the sewer and duck 
into the rocket when nobody was 
looking. Once inside he was pretty sure he'd find a place to hide until blast-off. 

All the men would probably be 
strapped in bunks but if he found 
a place he could wedge himself in 



102 



IMAGINATION 



he didn'-t think he'd get hurt. Then, 
halfway to the moon he would come 
out and find Dad and would he 
be surprised! 

At first, thinking about it, he'd 
been scared but after he realized 
how proud Dad and Mom would 
be, he made up his mind. 

Now, crouched beside the 
grating near the ship, he waited 
while two men — technicians in 
■white overalls — walked by. 

One of them said, "Well, whatever happens, she'll make a big 
splash." 

"You said it. Hope the brains 
know what they're doing." 

That made Bobby mad. Who 
said Dad didn't know what he was 
doing? Dad was just about the 
smartest scientist in the world. 

After the two men left he waited a long time. He heard voices but 
no one came in sight. Taking a 
deep breath, he opened the grating and got out. It was only four 
steps to the open port of the rocket. There was a little ramp they'd 
used to roll things in and Bobby's 
feet touched it but lightly as he 
jumped into the ship. He found 
himself in some kind of a store 
room. It would be a good place to 
hide all right. It was full of aluminum barrels all the same size. He 
found a space between two rows and 
sat down and got his breath back. 
It was very quiet around him. 



Scary quiet. But he set his lips 
firmly. 

He was going to the moon with 
Dad. 

JOHN KENDALL was a little 
late that night. He kissed his 
wife and said, "Well, did you see 
the big sky rocket?" 

"How could I miss it, darling? 
Your supper is in the oven." 
"I could use a Martini first." 
"Coming right up." 
While Myra fixed the drink 
John lay back in his easy cliair 
and closed his eyes. "We'd hoped to 
stage a little ceremony at the 
launching but Washington said 
no." 

"The Russians?" 

"The Eastern Coalition. It was a 
race. That was why it had to be 
so secret. Washington said, light 
the fuse and fire the thing." 

"Is it still hash-hush?" 

"No. Not between us at least. 
We fired an explosion rocket at the 
moon. It will hit in about an hour 
and telescopes will show a big purple spot when our explosives go 
off and throw dye all over the 
place." 

Myra handed him a dry Martini. 
"I see. Lots of fun no doubt but 
what's the purpose? Fourth of 
July on the moon?" 

"Oh, no. If the experiment is a 
success the next rocket will carry 
men instead of a bomb." 



ZERO HOUR 



E03 



Myra went to the kitchen to see 
about supper. John called, "Where's 
Bobby? In bed T suppose." 

Myra didn't hear and John set 
his drink down and moved toward 
the bedroom. Maybe he was still 
awake. 

Bobby rolled over. His eyes 
popped open. "Dad! I thought you 
went to—" 

John Kendall sat down on the 
edge of the bed and touseled his 
son's hair. "No son. It's the old 
terra jirma for me. Did you see 
the rocket blast?" 

"Uh-huh. It was really something. It went to the moon, didn't 
it?" 

"That's right," Kendall smiled 
and thought. Try to keep a secret 
from the kids. It just can't be 
done. "How's your moon rocket 
coming along, son?" 



"Pretty good. Gee, Dad! As long 
as you didn't go, I'm glad I didn't 
go either." 

"You were planning to make 
the trip also?" 

"Uh-huh. I got into the rocket 
and was all set but T got to thinking about Mom— how one of us 
should stay and take care of her 
in case anything happened." 

"Smart thinking, son. Now you 
get to sleep. I'll have a little time 
tomorrow. We'll play some ball." 

"That will be keen!" 

John Kendall smiled as he left 
the bed room. Kids were wonderful! 
Give them a few old boards and 
a steering wheel and they could 
build a ship to fly to the moon. 
What a wonderful dream world 
they lived in! 

Too bad they had to grow out 
of it. 




"I knew If s rather unusual, but most ef my roomers are 
fraternity students. Said he belonged to Alpha Centauri." 



Adam Slade was a man who had nothing to 
lose by making a break for it. The trouble was, 
he knew that no one had ever escaped from the— 

Prison Of A Billion Years 

anted 

Illustrated by H. W. McCauley 



ADAM SLADE crushed the 
guard's skull with a two foot 
length of iron pipe. No one 
ever knew where Slade got the iron 
pipe, but it did not seem so important. 

The guard was dead. That was 
important. 

And Slade was on the loose. With 
a hostage. 

That was even more important. 

The hostage's name was Marcia 
Lawrence. She was twenty-two 
years old and pretty and scared 
half out of her wits. She was, before she became a hostage, a reporter for interplanetary Video. 
She had been granted the final 
pre-execution interview with Adam 
Slade and she had looked forward 
to it a long time but it had not 
worked out as planned. 

It had not worked out as planned because Slade, only hours from 



the execution chamber with absolutely nothing to lose, had splattered the guard's brains around the 
inside of his cell and marched outside with a frightened Marcia 
Lawrence. 

Outside. Outside the cell block 
while other condemned prisoners 
roared and shouted and banged 
tin cups on bars and metal walls 
and judas-hole-grills. Outside the 
prison compound and across the 
dome-enclosed city which served 
the prison. 

Then outside the dome. 

Outside the dome there was rock. 
Rock only, twisted and convoluted 
and thrusting and gigantic like 
monoliths of a race of giants. Rock 
alone under the awesome gray sky. 
Steaming rock, for some of the 
terrestrial waters were still trapped at great depths. And the sea 
far off, booming against rocky 



104 



IMAGINATION 



106 

headlands, hissing tidally and slowly, in an age-long process, pulverizing the rock. The sea far off, a 
clean .sea, not sea-smelling sea, a 
sea whose waters must evaporate 
countless times and be borne up 
over the naked rooks in vapor and 
clouds and come down in pelting, 
endless rain and rush across the 
rock, frothing and steaming — a 
sea which must do this countless 
times in the eons to come, and 
would do it, to bring salinity to its 
own waters. 

"It kind of scares the hell out 
of you. doesn't it?" Adam Slade 
said. He was a big man with a 
thick neck and heavy, sleepy-looking eyes and a blue beard-shadow 
on his stubborn jaw. He said those 
words as he climbed out of the 
prison tank with Marcia Lawrence. 
The tank's metal was still warm 
from over-heated travel. 

"I didn't think anything would 
scare you," Marcia Lawrence said. 
She had conquered her initial terror in the five hours of clanking 
tank flight from the prison. They 
had come a great many miles from 
the prison dome, paralleling the 
edge of the saltless sea and then 
finally, when their fuel was almost gone, clanking and rattling 
down toward the sea. She was a 
newspaperwoman, that above all 
now. She must not be afraid. She 
had a story here. A story. 



"Get moving," Adam Slade said. "I 
got nothing against you, lady," he 
told her for the tenth time. ''But 
you try anything, you're dead. You 
get that? I got nothing to lose. One 
time is all they can kill me. But 
first they got to find me, but they 
won't be able to take me as long as 
you're here. Just stay meek and 
you'll stay alive." 

"How long do you think you 
can hold out?" Marcia Lawrence 
asked practically. They had begun to walk away from the now 
useless tank. Adam Slade was carrying the dead guard's M-gun in 
the crock of his bent left arm and 
walking with long, easy, groundconsuming strides. Marcia almost 
had to run to keep up with him as 
they went down a stretch of 
slightly sloping black rock toward 
the steaming, hissing, pounding, 
roaring, exploding surf. 

Slade smiled. "Plenty of water," 
he said. 

"But no food, Mr. Slade. There 
is absolutely no food on earth now 
and no possible way of getting food 
unless you want to stick around for 
a few million years." 

"You think I came out here 
without a plan?" Slade asked with 
some hostility. 

"I don't know. You were desperate." , 

"As long as you're with me I 
figure they might follow, but they 



PRISON OF A BILLION YEARS 



won't rush me. They might even 
send over a 'copter, but it won't 
try anything. Not with you here. 
Desperate? I'm not desperate, and 
don't you forget it. Desperate you 
don't think straight. Once is all 
they can execute me. I stayed behind, they'd of done it. If they 
catch me, they'll do it. What's the 
difference?" 

"You said you had a plan." 

npHEY REACHED the edge of 
a thrusting headland, an 
enormous beak-shaped cliff of 
beetling black rock which leaned 
out over the young, still saltless 
ocean. Slade paced back and forth 
quickly, with a powerful leonine 
grace, until he found a fault in the 
rock. The fault tumbled jaggedly, 
steeply down almost to the edge 
of the sea. 

"Down there," Slade said. "We'll 
follow the sea coast back to the 
prison." 

"Back?" Marcia said in disbelief. 

"Hell yes, back. You said it 
yourself. There's no food out here. 
Since there ain't no life, of course 
there's no food. Oh, it's a great 
place for a prison, all right. Whoever thought of it ought to win a 
prize. A prison — a billion, years 
in the past. What's the word?" 

"Archaeozoic," she supplied. 

"Yeah, ardhaeozoic. An arch


aeozoic prison. You can escape to 
your heart's content, but what the 
hell's the difference. There's no life 
back here, not yet. The Earth's 
just a baby. So you escape — and 
you starve to death. It makes every 
maximum security jail before this 
one look like a kid's piggy bank." 

"There hasn't ever been an escape." Marcia said hopefully as 
they made their way down to the 
sea, she in front and Slade behind 
her with the M-gun. 

"There ain*t never been a hostage before." 
"No-o." 

"There's a hostage now." 

Marcia Lawrence took a deep 
breath and asked suddenly, "Are 
you going to kill me?" 

"Hell, I don't know. I got no 
reason to— 'unless you make me. 
We're going back there. We're double-tracking along the beach, get 
me? Back to the prison dome." 

"But—" 

"Adam Slade won't starve to 
death out here. We'll double back 
to the dome — and the time machine." 

"Oh," she said. They began to 
walk along the edge of the sea, its 
waters sullen gray, mirroring the 
sky. Here on this dawn earth the 
sky has as yet never been blue, for 
the primordial waters were still falling, falling. It rained almost all the 
time and the air was thick with 



to8 



IMAGINATION 



moisture and every night when the 
sun — as yet unseen by the dawn 
earth except as an invisible source 
of light — went down and darkness 
came, the mists rolled in from the 
sea. In the morning whether rains 
had fallen or not the ground was 
soaked and tiny freshets rushed 
down to the sea, returning to it. 

"Look out!" lie cried suddenly, 
and shoved her against the base of 
the cliff which overlooked the water. The cliff top thrust out over 
them, umbrella- wise. The base of 
the cliff was thus a concavity and 
they pressed themselves against it 
now, in shadow. The waters of the 
infant sea were a hundred yards 
away, surging and booming against 
the rock. 

She heard it soon after he did. 
A helicopter. She wanted to scream. 
She wondered if they would hear 
her scream. But she looked at Adam 
Slade's face and did nothing. Soon 
the helicopter came, buzzing low 
over them, searching. It circled a 
great many times because the 
abandoned tank was there. It circled and came down on the beach 
and two uniformed figures got out. 
Now she really wanted to scream. 
One sound. One sound and they 
would hear her. One quick filling 
of the lungs and — 

Adam Slade hit her suddenly and 
savagely and the black loomed up 
at her but she did not remember 



striking it. 

When she awoke, the helicopter 
was gone. 

"Sorry I had to poke you one-" 
Slade said. He did not seem sorry 
at all. He said it automatically 
and then added: "You ready to 
walk?" 

She nodded. She got up and staggered a few steps before her legs 
steadied under her. Then with 
Slade she walked down along the 
rocky beach. This, she thought , 
was a story. It was the only big 
story she had ever had and probably she would not live to write it. 
As a woman, she was almost hysterical with fear, but as a videocaster she was angry. The story 
was hers — if she lived to tell it. 

Then she had to live. 

Time prison. Sure, she thought. 
Utterly escape proof — unless someone like Slade could take a hostage, double back to the prison 
dome, the hermetically sealed 
dome and somehow trick or overpower the guards who watched the 
time traveling machine outside the 
prison dome. 

Outside. Naturally, it would be 
outside. That way the prisoners 
couldn't get at it. 

Unless, like Slade, they too were 
outside. 

Outside, where life had not yet 
been born. Outside, the infant 
earth. Let a man escape. What did 



PRISON OF A BILLION YEARS 



his escape matter? He would live 
exactly as long as it took a man, 
reasonably healthy, to starve to 
death. 

Unless he had a hostage and a 
plan . . . 

SHE BECAME aware of rain 
when they left the cliff overhang. There was almost no wind 
and the rain came down slowly at 
first, huge slow drops which splattered on the black rock. 

"If it gets any harder," Slade 
said, "we'll have to duck under the 
cliff for protection. You don't know 
What a rain can be like back here. 
I seen them through the dome." 

But they couldn't go under the 
cliff for protection , not if they 
wanted to keep going. For the cliff 
dropped suddenly in a wild jumble 
of rocks and then there was nothing but the sloping black beach, 
sloping down to the sea. 

Then, all at once, someone opened the sluicegates and the rain 
bombarded them. It slapped and 
bounced off the rock like pistol 
shots. It struck them like hammers. They staggered under its 
weight. 

"We'll have to go back to the 
cliffs!" Marcia cried. She yelled it 
again at the top of her voice because she realized Slade would not 
hear her otherwise as the rain cracked and exploded and splattered 



and crashed. There were no 
droplets of water. For each one 
had size and shape and weight, 
swift-falling, hammering weight as 
it came down. Each one, Marcia 
thought wildly, struggling to keep 
her feet, was the size of your clenched fist there in the gray dawn of 
Earth. 

"The cliffs!" she cried again. 

But Adam Slade shook his head, 
grabbed her arm above the wrist 
and pulled her after him. He pointed ahead, in the direction they had 
been going. He said nothing. There 
was no need to talk. They were 
going forward and if it killed them 
probably Adam Slade did not care 
much. 

He wanted that prison time machine for his escape and he was 
either going to get it or die in the 
attempt. 

They went on slowly. First one 
would fall and then the other and 
when it was Slade who had fallen, 
she would wait patiently, hopefully. If he ever released his hold on 
the M-gun — 

But if it were Marcia who fell, 
Slade would yank her to her feet 
savagely, yelling words which she 
had heard at first but Which after 
a while, after an eternity of the 
storm, seemed to merge with the 
sound of the rain and the far 
booming of thunder out over the 
water and then, as if by magic, she 



I IO 



IMAGINATION 



was walking again and stumbling along with Slade, drenched and beaten and half-drowned. 

She hardly remembered when 
night came, but presently she was 
aware of the darkness and the 
mist over the sea and over the rock 
and now engulfing them with its 
white ectoplasmic tendrils. In the 
mist she knew she could escape 
Slade, and yet she did not. Without 
Slade now, now in the middle of 
nowhere there by the sea on the 
shores of the young Earth, she 
would die in the storm. With Slade 
— at least for now — was life. And 
she went on. 

The thunder followed them — and 
came closer. 

By the middle of the night it 
sounded like artillery at a distance 
of half a mile, like a barrage of big 
atomic shells just out of sight behind a black ridgeline which 
wasn't there. And through the deeper rain-wet darkness of early 
morning, through the mist, tearing the mist to tatters, shredding it, 
came the spears and forks and lances of lightning. It was, Marcia 
thought, a nightmare of a storm. 
And she must remember it, for it 
would make a story, a real story, 
if ever she lived to tell it. 

By morning, the air smelled of 
ozone. It reeked of ozone and 
around them as the gray light seeiped 
out of the wet sky and the rain 



suddenly slackened as if the weak 
daylight dispelled it, the black 

rocks were blasted and broken 
where lightning had struck. 

In the dawn's first light another 
helicopter came. 

''Get down!" Slade shouted, and 
they drop[)ed among the blasted 
black rocks, hiding there, not moving. The helicopter came on through 
the slackening rain, buzzing a few 
hundred feet over them but not 
circling. It was heading for the 
abandoned tank, Marcia thought. 
It wasn't looking for them here — 

But suddenly the rain came 
down in all its savage force a^ain, 
blinding bounding off the rocks, 
pounding relentlessly. 

Overhead , the helicopter seemed to pause like a bird .stricken in 
flight. The rotors whirled a silver shield against the rain, the 
great drops splattering off the 
shield. 

And the helicopter came down 
under the weight of the rain. 

TT LANDED a hundred and fifty yards from them down the 
beach and Marcia watched breathlessly while three men got out and 
looked at each other and at the 
rain. The dawn light was still only 
a dim gray and Marcia could not 
see the men clearly, but abruptly 
a jagged spear of lightning blasted 
rock midway between where they 



PRISON OF A BILLION YEARS 



in 



were hiding and the helicopter and 
in the after-glare through the wet 
and almost crackling air, the men 
were very clear. And clearer still 
when other lightning came down 
around them, ringing them in, it 
seemed, like a tent. There was now 
so much lightning it looked more 
like an aurora than an electric storm. 

The dawn earth, before life, 
spending itself in fury . . . 

All at once Marcia was running 
down toward the edge of the water, 
where the helicopter was. She ran 
screaming and shouting but the 
thunder swallowed her puny voice. 
At every moment she expected 
Adam Slade to kill her, to merely 
stand up with the M-gun and shoot 
her, but he did not and perhaps 
her unconscious mind in the instant 
she had fled had instinctively 
known he would not. For if Adam 
Slade killed her, he had no hostage. If he killed her and they 
found him, he would have absolutely no chance. 

She turned and looked behind 
her. There was Slade, silhouetted 
against the lightning, running, covering the ground in huge strides, 
gaining on her. She did not look 
back again. The whole world was 
lightning and thunder and her legs 
striking earth under her, up and 
down, up and down, pounding, running, fleeing, and the rain, Slade's 
ally, beating her, buffetting her, ex


ploding against her. 

She stumbled and fell but she 
was up and running again in a 
moment. Now Slade was very close. 
But the helicopter was close too. She 
did not think the men there had 
seen them yet. She waved her arms 
and screamed although she knew 
the screams would not be heard — 
and then Slade was on her. 

They went down together and 
she knew she was frail and helpless before his great strength. He 
grabbed her, his hands, angry hands 
on her throat — 

And lightning struck. 

It bounded and bounced off rock 
a dozen feet from them. It shook 
the earth and blasted the rock and 
pieces like shrapnel cluttered all 
around them and struck them too 
and Marcia felt hot blood on her 
arm and it was her own blood. 

But Slade had been momentarily stunned and she was running 
again. Away from him. 

But away from the helicopter 
too. At first she did not realize 
that but when she did realize it, 
it was too late. If she doubled back 
now, she would rush into Slade's 
arms. 

She ran — into the sea. 

It was suddenly, unexpectedly 
calm. It merely eddied around her 
ankles, as if waiting for something. 
The storm seemed to be waiting 
too, lightning holding back, the 



I i 2 



IMAGINATION 



thunder stilled, even the ra'in hanging there in the black heavy sky, 
waiting . . . 

Slade came after her, stalking 
through the surf. 

A single bolt of lightning lanced 
dawn at them and a great engulfing 
roar lifted Marcia, carried her, 
stunned her, and then the rain 
pelted down again and the sea was 
an anrgy sea and the air was supercharged with ozone and another 
smell. Like seared flesh. 

Like seared flesh. 

She saw Adam Slade then. Slade 
was down in a foot of water, face 
down. He was not moving and the 
water lapped around him, over 
bim. She went to him, walking 
slowly. 

The men from the helicopter 
were there too. They had seen in 
that final flash of lightning. 

"Are you all right, miss?" one 
of them shouted. 

"Yes. Slade?" 

They turned him over. They looked at him. "Dead," one of them 
said. 

"Dead," she echoed. She would 
have collapsed, but they caught 
her. 

npHEN" THE RAIN really came 
down, not as it had come before, which was hard enough. It 
came in huge globes of water and 
each globe was as big as your head 



and if it hit it could stun you. 

"Slade?" someone cried as the 
globes exploded violently in the 
surf around them. 

"He's dead. Hell keep." 

And they went back to the helicopter with Marcia, to await the 
end of the storm there. 

When it was over, when the sky 
was not black but merely the 
color of lead, they returned down 
the beach for Slade's body. 

But Slade wasn't there. 

"But he was dead!" Marcia said 
incredulously. 

One of the men smiled. "He didn't 
go anyplace under his own power. 
He was dead, all right. The storm 
took his body out to sea, is all." 

They stood there for a moment, 
gazing out across the black troubled water of the infant ocean on the 
infant earth. A billion years ago . . . 

Slade was out there. Slade, dead. 
Out there with the tides and the 
waters and the frequent electric 
storms — 

"Out there with a million bacteriological parasites on his dead 
body and m his dead body, wihich 
he brought with him," Marcia said, 
dreamily. 

"What are you talking about, 
miss?" 

Out there in the electric dawn 
of earth, with the bacteria which 
lived in his body as they lived in 
all other bodies. Out there with 



PRISON OF A BILLION YEARS 



them, dead. 
Food for them. 

Food and water and air heavy 
with ozone and the electric storms. 

Marcia laughed hysterically. It 
was a story she wanted to write. 

But she wouldn't write it. 

Slade was a killer, condemned 
to die. But Slade, dead out there 
with his bacteria, Slade evil to 
man and human society but not necessarily evil in the implaccable ways 
of nature or perhaps grimly, terribly evil — Slade out there, dead 
on the bosom of the primordial waters, Slade back in time a billion 
years before life had been born 



on Earth . . . 

She laughed hysterically as they 
led her away from the water. They 
slapped her face, gently at first, 
then harder. "I'll be all right," she 
managed to say. 

She would be all right. She could 
live to forget it. 

But Slade out there. 

Slade. 

Slade fathering all life on earth 
there in the sea with his dead body. 
Slade who had sinned and was taken back here to die for his sins so 
that life could be born. 

Slade, whose first name was 
Adam. 




"Getting the hong of it, PritchorJ?" 




Conducted Lu Wari Wolf 



SCIENCE FICTION conventions, like the science fiction 
field itself, seem to have 
passed their peak of quantitativity. 
I'm not saying that conventions 
aren't as good as or better than 
ever, any more than I'm saying that 
science fiction isn't as good as or 
better than ever. From all reports 
I've heard about it, the fans who 
attended the Cleveland convention 
consider it one of the best. But the 
fact remains that not so many people went to Cleveland last year as 
have gone to conventions in years 
past - and this despite the fact that 
the gathering was held in the middle west, accessible to the largest 
possible number of fans. 

The first conventions were very 
small, with most of the attendees 
being local fans or fans from nearby cities and only a few coming 
from distant parts of the country. 
In these years, science fiction fan


dom was comparatively small also; 
the fans of the depression years 
were close knit, though often quarreling, groups who held themselves 
almost a breed apart and prided 
themselves on seeing a future that 
was comic to most people — a future of space travel, robots, terrible weapons, and new frontiers 
among the stars. 

In. the post war years, in the 
shadow of the A bomb and V-2 
rocket, more and more people turned to science fiction. The field grew; 
more copies of the existing magazines and books sold, new magazines and books started up, and the 
ranks of fandom swelled. Convention attendance swelled also. A 
west coast convention, such as the 
Portland one, might be smaller than 
the middle western or eastern one 
preceding it, but each convention 
in a given area tended to grow larger than any held in that area be


114 



fore. Now not only active s-f fans 
came to the conventions; people 
who perhaps had never read a 
science fiction magazine showed up. 
Tin-Be people had heard science fiction programs on the radio or seen 
s-f movies or read s-f stories in 
the big slick magazines; they were 
interested in the V-2 and its still 
largely classified successors; some 
of them were interested primarily 
in flying saucers. 

The Chicago convention had over 
a thousand members. It apparently 
reached the numerical peak. Three 
years later, in 1955, when the convention returned to the midwest at 
Cleveland, the membership had dropped about fifty per cent. 

During- these three years, the 
great boom of science fiction had 
ended. The number of magazines 
had dropped, so had the amount 
of coverage in other mediums. The 
field as a whole was in a recession. 
Yet, paradoxically, these same 
three years had brought more people than ever before to an acceptance 
of concepts that once were purely 
science fictional. 

People who never read science 
fiction at all are familar with the 
Colliers series on space travel. 
They're aware of the Mouse project; 
maybe they don't know what a 
rocket pushes against in empty space 
or how you could get something circling around the earth forever and 
not have it fall down, but they 
know the US is planning on sending up an artificial satellite. Pew 
laugh any more at the very idea 
of going to the Moon; they might 
say, it won't happen in our lifetime, 
but they're willing to consider the 
concept. 



They don't look forward to the 
manlike robot; but they'll discuss 
automation; in fact, it seems to 
have became a catchword. The factory workers or the office worker 
might have a sublime disinterest in 
sociological science fiction, but he's 
interested in what the new growth 
of computer theory and the automatic industrial processes will do 
to kis job. 

Everyone is interested in concepts 
that were the domain of the science 
fiction fan just a few years ago. 
But just because a man is interested 
in rockets or satellite stations or 
automation doesn't automatically 
make him interested in science fiction. He might be working on high 
temperature alloys to withstand 
solar radiation outside the atmosphere, but why should he care to 
read about aliens on Centaurus II? 
Let's face it, much of what was 
science fiction yesterday is just 
today's blueprint and tomorrow's 
technology. 

But whether or not public acceptance of the orbital rocket and 
nuclear power and the automatic 
factory has anything whatsoever 
' to do with convention attendance, 
I certainly can't say. Despite all 
the polls taken by fans among other fans, does anyone know whether 
fandom as a whole is growing, 
standing still, or shrinking? There 
seem to be as many fanzines as ever. 
Are there? I don't know. If any 
fan has conducted a thorough census of past and present zines, I'd 
like to see it. What about local 
science fiction clubs? Are there 
more, about the same number, or 
fewer of them than there were ten 
years ago? Again, it would be in


1 1 6 



IMAGINATION 



teresting to see a census. 

Perhaps the conventions are 
growing smaller for reasons totally unrelated to the boom or wane 
of the general science fiction market. Fans have always been a small 
percentage of the overall readership 
of s-f media. Right about the time 
of the Chicago convention, fans began to say that the cons were getting too big. That you could wander 
around a hotel lobby for hours and 
never have a chance to really get 
acquainted. That the pros kept to 
themselves too much. That there 
weren't enough facilities available 
for fans with common interests to 
get together and discuss them. 

Prom everything I've heard, 
there were more facilities available at Cleveland than ever before, even a discussion room open 
all night to fans. It seemed like a 
fine get-together, one with almost 
no complaints. 

Is the trend to small conventions 
and more of them, more regional 
conferences where smaller numbers 
of people can meet and discuss their 
common interests? I've been to both 
big and small fan gatherings; I'll 
have to admit that some of the Westercons, with two or three hundred 
attendees, have been the most fun 
to me personally. But as to what 
others think about this, I don't 
know at all. 

. Perhaps fanHom is splitting into 
groups that go to conventions and 
groups that don't, and the ones 
that go are the ones that get the 
most out of them and so think 
them better and better each year. 
Perhaps a lot of active fans have 
stayed away because of the nonactive people who just showed up 



to see what science fiction was all 
about. Or perhaps there's no correlation at all, merely chance factors, and next year's get-together, 
at New York, will be bigger than 
any previous. 

I don't know. It's a question for 
some present day fan historian and I'd be interested to see the results of someone's poll or fannish 
opinion. 

Now to the fanzines: 

OOP SLA : 15c ; Gregg Calkins, 
2817 11th St., Santa Monica, Calif. 

This issue of OOPS has a very 
funny reprint from SLANT : the 
Bob Shaw lectures on Fansnianship. 
They're not only funny - I've seen 
them used ! 

The rest is concerned with zine 
reviews, a bit by John Berry, another installment of Walt Willis' 
"Harp Stateside" and some things 
by Calkins. All in all, OOPS is as 
good as usual. 

Rating: 1. 

* * * ■ 1 

SCIENCE FICTION REVIEW: 
15c; Dick Geis, 1525 N- E., Ainsworth, Portland 11, Oregon. This 
review should really have a black 
border around it as a sign of respect to the late PSYCHOTIC. Of 
course, by the time this is read, its 
demise will be even older history 
than it is now. The successor, 
SCIENCE FICTION REVIEW, is 
mimeoed (this one in green ink!) 
and has a different format from 
PSYCHOTIC'S but the same personality. Among others, Harlan 
Ellison, Damon Knight and Jim 
Harmon have things in this issue; 
Ellison with a "Letter from New 
York" that looks like a permanent 



FANDORA'S BOX 



117 



thing. 

Funny thing; occurred to me concerning Geis the other day. Is he 
real? Seriously, I don't know anyone 
who has seen him. He almost came 
to the Friscon and then didn't because he didn't want to drive down 
alone or some such. He was all set 
to go to another con (I've forgotten which) and sprained his wrist 
or his back or somebody did. I've 
forgotten the exact details on his 
lack of appearance but, outside of 
the Portland group, who has met 
him? Maybe after this brilliant bit 
of deduction, I'll find out that 
everyone in fandom but me knows 
him personally but, gee what a jolt 
if R. E. G. turns out to be two 
eight year old kids! 

Oh well, come the next Westercon I'll find out. But what if he 
moves before then ! 

Eating: 1. 

* * • 

GASP: Gerald Stewart, 166 McRoberts Ave., Toronto 10, Ontario, 
Canada. There is no set price for 
GASP ; material, comment, trade 
or even money {any amount) is all 
that's needed. 

Most of this zine is taken up with 
rambling sorts of things by the 
editor and some of the others in the 
group. The existence — nonexistence 
of Boyd Raeburn still hangs over 
the picture like smog over Los Angeles. In the letter section, Bob 
Bloch remarked that he is beginning 
to distrust anything that comes out 
of Canada, including Canadian 
Club! This is serious! If you go for 
subtle humor, the Toronto bunch is 
it. 

Rating: 2 

• • # 



CANFAN: William D. Grant, 11 
Burton Rd., Toronto 10, Ontario, 
Canada. No price listed. This issue isn't quite up to the Canadian 
group's usual standards; of their 
four articles, two are reprints and 
not very interesting reprints. The 
third article is, alas, rather empty 
too. One interesting thing is the 
write-up of the *55 Midwestereon. 
Judging from this report, things 
were fine: no drunks, fights or 
other assorted plagues. The balance 
of the zine is concerned with a 
ilong letter column and a zine review section that lists what they 
consider the top zine of the quarter and the five next best. In this 
quarter, top place was split between SCIENCE FICTION REVIEW and SATELLITE. 

CANFAN is one zine that consistently has superior reproduction and good, clean layout. And, 
contrary to some people, I like the 
mimeod photos - at least when done 
as well as they do. The most humorous thing was a letter from Ron 
Ellik, printed in its entirety. Ellik, 
without realizing it, managed to put 
both feet in his mouth. Repeatedly! 
I quote "... altho I hope your 
sentence structure improves. Mayhap you dori*t speak English normally? Lot of French up in that area, 
aren't there?" I'm sure Ron means 
well, but I wonder if he's sure just 
where Toronto is. 

Rating: 4 

• * * 

HYPHEN: l/-or 15c; Walt Willis, 170 Upper Newtownards Rd., 
Belfast, North Ireland. With this 
issue HYPHEN'S price goes up to 
15c American; as the editors say, it's 
a question of how much money you 



zx8 



IMAGINATION 



can afford to lose. The issues have 
got bigger and bigger, and so has 
the cost. 

Most of this issue is given over 
to the Kettering Convention - apparently quite an affair. As Willis 
says, regarding the universal appearance of beanies atop all fannish heads at conventions over 
there, British fans do what American fans only dream of doing. But 
somehow British fans seem to be 
able to act exuberant (childish?) 
without overdoing it - or so I gather from the reports. 

There are also columns by Bob 
Shaw, John Berry, and HYPHEN'S 
co-editor Chuck Harris. And Willis' 
account of "Bob Shaw and the Budgerigar" in which is set forth 
Shaw's contention that budgies 
can't talk. But they can. I've heard 
them. I admit I've never been able 
to understand a word they say, 
but this, the owners assert, is because I don't listen carefully. Or, 
there's the final clincher, "Of 
course he won't talk for you. He 
doesn't like you," 

Rating: 2 

* * * 

ALICE: 20c; Kent Corey, Box 64, 
Enid, Oklahoma. This is a peachy 
keen put-together thing. Very well 
done in some sort of litho, this issue has, according to Corey, 55 
illos. His boast is that ALICE is 
the sexiest zine, if nothing else. I'd 
be inclined to agree. I counted 12 
illos of females : nude, semi-nude, 
and even a couple with clothes on! 
All of the art work is excellent, as 
is the layout. But oh, those typos. 
Kent pleads that he doesn't have 
time to correct them but they do 
more to mess up the mag than any


thing else. 

A rambling, Geis type editorial 
goes on for five pages, then a seven page zine review column followed by a write up on Don Ford. 
With some letters from readers, 
and more editorial, that's it! This 
issue is blurbed on the cover as the 
Clevecon issue, but not a mention 
of the Clevecon did I find. Maybe 
it's meant as a means of identification. All Alice's readers were to 
pin them on their coats as they entered the hotel or some"thing. Oh, 
well, it's one of the best zines from 
a production standpoint. 

Rating : 5 ■ 

* * * ■'" 
MAGNITUDE: 10c; Ralph Stapenhorst, 409 W. Lexington Drive, 
Glendale 3, Calif. This is a good 
looking, half letter size, photo offset zine. The art done by Ron 
Cobb„ is better than a lot of professional work. Cobb has come a 
long way with his art in the last 
few years and, in the next few, 
should make a good professional 
artist. 

Their regular features include an 
editorial, a column by Forrest Ackerman, and news of the Chesley 
Donovan Club, the group that publishes MAGNIT UD E . There are 
two better than average stories, 
"Mission" by Lewis Kovner and 
"What You Don't Know" by Paul 
Arram and an article by Stapenhorst on the filming of "Conquest 
of Space". The article itself is very 
interesting but I don't agree with 
his opinion of the film. Ralph 
thinks that it may be the science fiction picture of 1955, and warns, 
"Don't miss it!" I feel that if you 
were lucky enough to miss it, stay 



FAN DORA'S BOX 



119 



that way! 

MAGNITUDE is a slim sort of 
thing but the art, reproduction and 
all around quality make it worth the 
dime. 

Rating: 4 

* • • 

ALPHA: 60c/year: bi-monthly Jan 
Jansen, 229 Berchemlei, Borgerhout, Antwerpen, Belgium. U. S. 
representative: Dick Ellington, 113 
W. 84th St., No. 51, N. Y. 24, N. Y. 

This, to my knowledge, is the only zine put out regularly in Europe. 
At least the only one put out for 
English speaking fans. ALPHA is 
mimeo, with a lot of attention 
given to the process so the end 
result is very legible. The interior 
art and the cover are well drawn 
and the format, although slightly 
cramped, is good. 

This issue leads off with an editorial that supposedly continues on 
page 26; after a confusing search, 
I found it on 18. Of course, if you 
continue on to page 26, you end up 
with an interesting sentence. Following that, Eric Bentcliffe has an 
interesting article titled "Obscene 
Writing about SEX", concerned 
mostly with quotes from some recent 
s-f stories. It seems that they are 
trying to stir up discussion on what 
is fit to print and what isn't. And 
if it is fit, if they'll let you! 

Marie-Louise Share has a short 
■article, the only interesting part 
being the background of the song, 
"This Ole House," while Vernon 
McCain does a very good bit on 
"Why Review Fanzines?" 

Rating: 3 

• * • 

PEON: 20c; Charles Lee Riddle, 
PNCA, USN, P. 0. Box 511, New 



London, Conn. The issue I have 
here is PEON's 7th anniversary 
issue — a long time for a fanzine to 
keep coming out, especially when 
you consider that editor Riddle is 
in the Navy and has been transferred quite a few times during 
these 7 years. 

As usual, Peon is good sized, 
chock full of well known writers 
and presented in a very readable, 
neat format. Robert Bloch in hia 
"Credo for Fantasy Writers" lists 
a few of the things a would be s-f 
writer should promise not to touch: 
from a mad scientist with a beautiful daughter to a dinosaur egg 
that hatches. Then there's Harlan 
Ellison's story "Night Vigil", which 
is about a man condemned to a long 
and solitary life on. some galactie 
outpost so that he can warn Earth 
and the galaxy when the aliens invade. He has a "scanner" to tell 
him when the aliens start attacking. 
When the "scanner" notifies him, he 
is to push some keys to warn Earth. 
The story's premise is that a man 
has to be the lookout instead of a 
computer since it would take such 
a huge computing device to respond 
to all the eventualities. What 
eventualities? This man has two 
functions: to watch the scanner and 
to push the keys. He has no other 
way, according to the story, to receive or transmit data . . . But it 
would have taken such a huge device to make the "scanner" trigger 
the keys when activated? 

Dave Mason's "The Death of 
Conan" is a story of quite a different type. It really has the old Conan flavor, though a few old time 
Conan fans might not approve of 
their hero's ending. 



I 20 



IMAGINATION 



Rating: 4 

* * * 

INSIDE & SCIENCE FICTION 
ADVERTISER: 25c; Ron Smith, 
611 West 114th Street, Apartment 
3d-310, New York 25, N. Y. Most 
of this issue is taken up in the 
discussion "Fire When Ready, Critic!" Sam Moskowitz leads off with 
"The Strange Business Attitude of 
the Science Fiction Industry", in 
which he compares a-f publishing 
with large business corporations to 
science fiction's detriment. One of 
his main assertions is that editors 
can't take criticism of their product but take all eriticism as a 
personal attack. He definitely prefers some of the science fiction of 
past eras to the current product, 
and apparently feels that editor's 
should also. 

Robert Lowndes in "For Robots 
Only," Larry Shaw in "For People Only," and H. L. Gold in "The 
Chromium Ring" leap into rebuttal of various points that Sam has 
made (and Sam's points are always put across forcefully). 
Lowndes points out how comparison between science fiction publishing and big industry breaks 
down ; Larry Shaw brings up some 
of the human problems that editors have to face (Larry doesn't 
get heated, either) ; and H. L. Gold 
strikes back at Moskowitz's assertion that editors tend to blacklist 
their critics. 

Very interesting reading, no 
matter who you're inclined to agree 
with. 

Lin Carter writes a well thought 
out article on the Bronte family 
and the fantasy world that they 
created as children, in "The Angrian 



Saga". He gives a very good account 
of their imaginary land and its inhabitants — and the traces it leaves 
in their later, adult work. 
Rating: 3 

• * * 

FEMIZINE: 4 issues for 2/6 or 35c; 

American representative, Eva Firestone, Box 515, Upton, Wyoming. 
In England send your money to 
Frances Evans, School House, 
Teignmonth St., Collyhurst, Manchester 9, England. 

This issue is loaded with addresses; apparently everyone connected 
with the zine is a few hundred 
miles away from all the others. 
The editor, whose address you use 
if you're trading zines is Joan Carr, 
Cyprus Detachment, or Sgt. J. W. 
Carr, Clearing Wing, R. P. 0. Middle East, British Air Forces Post 
Office 53. There are still a couple 
of other people (at other places) 
you write to if you feel like submitting material .... 

This zine is by and for the femme 
fan. Frances Evans reports on the 
Minicon, which was sort of a private convention Madeline Willis 
styles herself "The Hostess With 
the Mostest (To Put Up With)" in 
her account of meeting Walt and 
Irish fandom and life as part of a 
Ghoodminton crew. There are also 
extensive fanzine reviews and letters to the editors. 

Plus Francezca's Column - very 
well written and concerning man's 
(or woman's) duty to participate 
in society and not just read about, 
talk about, or feel superior to it. 
A bit intense, but well done, Francezca has been paid what I guess 
is the supreme compliment - one of 
her readers for some time was con


FANDORA'S BOX 



12 1 



vinced she must be a man. 
Rating: 6 

* * • 

EISFA: 5e; Juanita Coulson, 407% 
East 6th St., North Manchester, 
Indiana. The only thing of much 
interest in this issue is "Medic and 
Manure," written by Bob Briney. 
This is mostly concerned with the 
gag pulled on Evelyn Gold by Doc 
Barrett and other assorted con 



men. Evelyn had bumped her ankle so the group proceeded to administer first aid. With full camera coverage. The rest of the zine 
is rather skimpy, a couple of very 
short bits of humor, a poem, and 
a short fiction piece. The zine is 
well produced, thought, and only 5c. 
Rating; 6 

That's all the fanzines for this 
time. Mari Wolf 



INTRODUCING the AUTHOR 

^ CtlnumJ J4amilton "fa 

(Concluded From Page 2) 



raccoon who like our sweet-corn, 
and deer who also like sweet-corn. 

I think that covers the vital statistics. And by the way, the accompanying likeness of myself is 
the work of that mightiest of all 
Lensmen, Dr. E. E. "Skylark" 
Smith. He vowed he could make 
me look good where others had 
failed — 'the credit or blame is 
all his. 

My interest in s-f dates back to 
a time when I was so young \ 
could barely read, but was fascinated by the illustrations of an H. G. 
Wells article, "The Things that 
Live on Mars," in the old Metropolitan Magazine. I soon graduated 
to the Argosy and Allstory magazines, with the mighty Martian 
stories of Burroughs and all the 
other great fantastic stories they 



published for so many years. 

Recently, Dr. C. L. Barrett of 
Belief ontaine, Ohio, was kind 
enough to let me dig through his 
magnificent collection of the old 
magazines — and it was like vividly re-living years of my younger 
days, to look over those well-remembered stories again — Burroughs, and Merritt, and the "Polaris" stories of Stillson, the cosmic adventure stories of Homer 
Eon Flint, to my mind still underrated as a pioneer; the eery yarns 
of Tod Robbins; the Giesy novels 
of the Dog-Star Pack; the "Flying Legion" of George Allan England, and a host of others. I 
loved them all, and in time wanted 
to write such stories myself. So I 
tried, and I've been trying ever 
since. — Edmond Hamilton 



- REVIEWING CURRENT SCIENCE FICTION BOOKS 
Conducted bu ~j4enru $ott 



■fenru 

Hard cover science fiction is booming and many fine novels 
end anthologies ore available af all bookstores or by writing 
direct to the publishers. Each month IMAGINATION will review 
one or more — candidly — as a guide to your book purchases. 

ARK OF VENUS 



by Clyde Q. Clason, $2.00, 181 pages, Alfred A. Knopf, publishers, 
New York, New York. 

The problems of building a 
"thrust-ship" to colonize Venus in 
the post-Atomic war years, and the 
problems of settling the planet itself, are the subjects of this juvenile. The characterizations are good, 
much of the technological description fascinating, and the suggested 
political mileu most interesting. I 
would say that you might enjoy this 
book as well or better than much 
.of the material that masquerades 
under the guise of science-fiction 
in the new books. 

It is difficult for me to assess 
juveniles in science-fiction in some 
respects. A touchstone of the highest excellence already exists in this 
field. You ask, how does the book 



compare with what Heinlein has 
done? The series of juveniles he's 
done and which have had such wide 
popularity, are so good, so durable, 
that comparison with them is inevitable for any similar book. 

"Ark of Venus" is not as good 
as one of these, but it is a number of cuts above the numerous, 
juveniles which have appeared in 
the last few years. In no sense for 
example does it condescend to the 
reader, a fault not uncommon 
among this type. 

Were I to introduce a young 
reader to science-fiction, assuming 
the comic books hadn't ruined his 
appetite, I'd insist on everything 
that Heinlein wrote. With that 
background, he'd quickly form his 
own tastes and judgments, I'm 
sure. 



122 



SCIENCE FICTION LIBRARY 



1 23 



THE END OF ETERNITY 



l>y Isaac Asimov, $2.95, 192 pages, 
Doubleday & Company, Garden City, 
S'ew York. 

Prolific Asimov has churned out 
another novel, and in this case I 
find it rather entertaining. Andrew 
Harlan, (a very staid name for 
the time) an Eternal Technician, 
has the job of traversing time, easing and smoothing the rough spots 
in temporal history — a temporal 
watchman, so to speak. Tensed by 
a love story in which the lovers 
raise hob with Time, this unusual 
conceit really is interesting. The 
book is burdened with technical 
nonsense, but all in all it is worth 



reading. I find myself smiling as 
I write thin because certainly I 
could not say the same about the 
"Robot" or the "Foundation" stories. Asimov is a literate, intelligent 
man; when he sets his mind to it, 
as he has here, he turns out an excellent piece of work. 

But to return to the book; I cannot in conscience say that this story 
iB great, but it is entertaining. If 
you're a fan, you'll need no encouragement to get this; if you are not 
and would like to know Asimov's 
work, I suggest this as an introduction. I hope this is a harbinger 
of his inevitable forthcoming novels. 



TIME BOMB 



by Wilson Tucker, $2.75, 246 pages, 
Rinehart & Company , Inc., New 
York 16, A'. 1". 

This is a detective story, & captivating detective., story in many 
ways with a leaven of science-ficttion — but still a detective story. If 
that sounds derogatory, it is not 
intended to be, for Wilson Tucker 
has written an entertaining thriller. 

Mysterious bombs exploded in 
rainy weather, always destroying 
the fanatic "Sons of America" in 
the process. With this thread to link 
the explosions, Danforth of the Illinois Secret Police sets out to determine the cause. And for once, 
time-travel is interesting! 

Because it is a mystery story — 
wot in the hard-boiled style — it is 
impossible to say much about the 
plot without revealing too much. 
Suffice it to say that the characterization is excellent, there is 



enough action to satisfy a Davy 
Crockett aficionado, and in general 
it's worth a reading. 

In fact it is a welcome change 
from the fiercely futuristic brand 
of science fiction. Because it is a 
directive story the method is familiar and we're treated to the 
sight of a gifted detective exercising the deductive faculty with skill 
and insight. 

A sense of humor which Wilson 
has, makes itself felt in the story 
and in spite of a certain grimness 
in the detective's relentlessness, 
here are quite a few laughs. 

Television comes in for a merciless satiric roasting, one of the best 
things in the book. 

After reading TIME BOMB I'm 
convinced that science-fiction needs 
more of the writing devoted to 
present times with just the "teeniest extrapolation" . . . 




• ••UJLULOa 



ORCHIDS TO DANNY 

Dear Mr. Hamling: 

Question. Which science fiction 
magazine is the best on the market 
— tops in stories, quality, and articles? 

Answer: IMAGINATION, of 
course ! 

May I send my thanks and congratulations to Daniel F. Galpuye 
for another terrific story? I'm talking about "The Day The Sun 
Died" in the December issue. I 
couldn't lay the issue down once 
until I finished the story. This was 
truly a great sequel to Dan's "Tonight The Sky Will Fall" which appeared in the May 1952 issue. Orchids to Danny for a wonderful 
job. And Orchids to Madge for being- a wonderful magazine! 

I must admit I haven't been keeping up to date with Madge — or 
stf — but I intend to from now on. 
The first science fiction book I 
picked up was Madge — the January 
1952 number. While I've got a two 
year collection I intend to fill in 



all the back issues I missed. 

Back to the December issue: 
"Not In The Script" merits an 
A-rating, very good; "Selling 
Point" a B-rating. Haven't quite had 
time to complete the rest of the issue but it looks like it's a top number. 

Keep the cartoons coming — and 
all present departments. 

Barbara Joseph 
547 E. 12th St. 
Oakland, Cal. 
We're pleased you like Dan Galouye's novel. We agree with 
you that it was a f ine sequel to his 
earlier novel. To complete your 
MADGE collection turn to page 
129 and look over the back issue order blank wlh 

NO MORE LOAFING . . . 

Dear Bill: 

Congratulations ! After almost 
two years of loafing you're getting 
Madge back on its editorial feet. 

The Rognan cover on the December issue was the best you've 



124 



LETTERS FROM THE READERS 



had in a long time. — Too long! 
The two-color interiors, while nice, 
tend to take the detail out of the 
illustrations. 

The stories in the December issue were quite good. THE DAY 
THE SUN DIED was an excellent 
sequel, though I wouldn't sav it was 
better than TONIGHT THE SKY 
WILL FALL. 

I've noticed in recent issues you've 
been trending toward the better 
class of stories that were so evident in Madge's earlier issues. Wellthoughtout and suspenscful storie3. 
This is all to the good. Keep it up. 

James Burroughs 
1075 Calder Ave. 
Beaumont, Texas 
More Rognun cove rs coin in g u p, 
Jim. The boy's really making his 
mark in the field! As to the stories 
— they'll be tops too! . . wlh 

ROGNAN PARADOX . . . 

Dear Mr. Hamling: 

I must be losing my touch. Either 
that or else your new stf artist, 
Lloyd Rognan, is one of the most 
erratic artists I've ever come 
across. Let me clarify this. I saw 
Rognan's work for the first time illustrating THE METAL EMPEROR on the cover of the November 
'55 issue of your companion magazine, IMAGINATIVE TALES. I 
thought it was positively the worst 
piece of work imaginable. But lo 
and behold I pick up the December 
issue of Madge and find a veritable 
masterpiece by the self-same Rognan. How can an artist be so bad 
and so good in successive months? 

Yes, the December Madge cover 



is the best in many issues. It even 
surpasses the McCauley and Terry 
covers. Please, have this lad do 
more work! 

The December Madge makes an 
overpowering statement when you 
try to evaluate the stories — and 
that is that both Madge and Tales 
are featuring better and better 
novelettes while showing up with 
just the opposite in the shorter 
length stories. THE DAY THE 
SUN DIED and UNDERGROUND 
are botti tops in December, but the 
other yarns miss the boat completely. I'd like to see you come up with 
better shorts in the future. 

As always, your departments are 
great, but what happened to Forry 
Ackerman? There's nobody like 
him when it comes to writing a 
good meaty film news column — 
and I certainly enjoy his department SCIENTIFILM MARQUEE. 
Bring back Ackerman! 

FANDORA'S BOX is always 
.good, but let Hank Bott review 
more titles in the SCIENCE FICTION LIBRARY. A measly "single" book reviewed is not enough! 

Kenn Curtis 
4722 Peabody Ave. 
Cincinnati 27, Ohio 
Lloyd Rognan's cover on the November issue of IMAGINATIVE 
TALES was the first stf cover he 
painted; we don't mean that we 
think it was bad — to the contrary 
we liked it! But since that time 
Lloyd has been getting the "feel" 
of science fiction and naturally 
his future covers will have more 
nparkle and zing. What's happened 
to Forry? He's around, Kenn! His 
SCIENTIFILM MARQUEE column 



IMAGINATION 



126 

is now a regular department in our 
companion magazine, IMAGINATIVE TALES. You mean to say 
you haven't noticed? Bott will be 
revieioing m,ore books. It isn't that 
we held him down — we review every 
book in the field that crosses our 
desk. So book publishers please take 
note wlh 

THE [FIRST — BUT NOT LAST! 

Dear Mr. Hamling: 

I just finished reading the December issue of IMAGINATION — 
the first copy of your magazine 
I've ever read. It certainly won't 
be the last! With so many stf magazines deservedly falling by the 
wayside it's good to see one at long 
last that is worthwhile reading. 

I can find fault only with the 
short, NOT IN THE SCRIPT, which 
seemed a bit ridiculous and puintless. Also, the ending of SELLING 
POINT was, I thought, stiff— almost sermonish. Otherwise it was 
a fine story. — In a fine magazine. 

Sol Klein 
1631 Amsterdam Ave, 
New York, N. Y. 
Welcome into the fold, Sol. The 
only question we'd like to ask is — 
what took you so long! . . . wlh 

HAMILTON NOW ABOARD 1 

Dear Bill: 

Just got the December issue of 
Madge. I'm happy to see you're 
heading back to readable science 
fiction! THE UNDERGROUND, 
by Gordon Dickson is, I think, the 
best he's ever written. Keep pub


lishing yarns like that and nothing 
can dislodge Madge from the top! 

THE DAY THE SUN DIED was 
well written and probably wellreceived, especially bv those who 
didn't read TONIGHT THE SKY 
WILL FALL in the May '52 issue. 
The other stories in the issue were 
somewhat ancient as far as ideas 
go. 

Incidentally, how about, running 
another Woo-Woo story by Sherwood Springer? 

And also, when i3 Geoff St. Reynard coming back? 

Even further— would it he. possible to get a story by Edmond 
Hamilton? It might cost more— but 
it would be worth it! 

Jeremy Millett 
1446 Garden St. 
Park Ridge, 111. 
Don't know what's happened to 
Sjyringer . . . Geoff St. Reynard is 
working hard on a new novel which 
we're sure is good news. Ed Hamilton? Hah J Read the cover story 
this issue? How's that for fast 
service! — Ed will be back frequently! wlh 

SENSE OF LOSS AND SORROW 

Dear Bill: 

I read the letter of Rory Faulkner and your agreement with him, 
in the December letter column — 
with a sense of loss and sorrow. 

Granted that for some folks a 
story meant to provoke thought is 
too deep for reading pleasure. It is 
also good, that for these people, 
Madge should print stories more 
acceptable to them. But it makes a 
person feel lonely when he knows 



LETTERS FROM THE READERS 



127 



that people who should agree with, 
and understand him, do not do so. 

I was under the impression that 
the very idea and soul of science 
fiction is to open our eyes to the 
worlds of tomorrow — in our time. 
It hardly seems possible that because a story may have "sociological" significance it may be obnoxious to an stf fan! I thought that 
being an stf fan was the reason 
these stories were interesting to 
me! 

But even if sociology bores most 
readers, let me point out a fact. 
Mr. Faulkner prays for a return 
to the "space opera" type of story 
— "that used to be so utterly fascinating." 

A few space operas toere beautifully done. But the majority were 
rehashes of the same old theme, ignoring characterization, and even 
scientific accuracy; they created 
unreal, and very unlikely situations 
which were in turn overcome by 
some conveniently invented unscientific idea. The fact is — and 
Faulkner said it — they "used" to 
be fascinating! 

I believe people nowdays are educated beyond the scope of the mere 
space opera. They want more in 
a story. The "starry-eyed wonder" 
of the newer reader has surely worn 
off— and the old magic of the earlier stories read by us old-timers 
has long gone. 

As I recall, the "Tarzan" stories 
used to be fascinating to me. But 
re-reading them today is a big disappointment . . . The old thrill has 
passed. 

So don 't go backward with 
Madge. Space stories are better for


gotten, unless one comes along that 
is truly different. Leave the old 
blood-and-th under back where it 
belongs, in the past. 

Gwen Cunningham 
13801 E. 14th St. 

San Leandro, Gal. 
The very argument you use against 
the so-called space opera can be 
brought to bear against the sociological type of story; they USED 
to be fascinating! They certainly 
are no longer. Main distinction — 
is that a space opera uses adventure as its -motivation, whereas the 
"adult" story tries to educate first, 
and entertain as a by-product; if 
indeed it has any entertainment 
value at all! 

Let's face it, most of us read — 
and enjoy — science fict ion because 
it entertains us. And this does not 
mean we are closing our eyes to 
the worlds of tomorrow — to the contrary, by taking off on an adventure to other planets or the stars 
we are living to morro w — today ! 

That "old magic" you mentioned 
included, among other things, atomic power, radar, television, rockets, 
etc. Yet you contend that space 
opera incorporated ideas lacking 
scientific accuracy? 

The "old magic" is still there to 
enjoy — with such "unlikely" ideas 
being expounded as telepathy, teleportation, telekinesis, time travel, 
inter-galactic space drives, etc. Sure, 
the basis of space opera is adventure — but afterall, adventure is 
what makes a story! Coupling adventure with "unscientific" ideas 
such as above is what gives us the 
"starry-eyed wonder" science fiction 
is meant to impart. 



IMAGINATION 



tag 

MADGE isn't going backward — 
we're going forward to breath-taking thrills throughout the universe. 
Thrills which will beco-me a reality 
someday. To our way of thinking 
that's enjoying science fiction to 
the fullest wlh 

THAT "WHAT IF—'* FEELING 

Dear Mr. Hamling: 

I am an stf fan — or at least was 
one; seems to me something is 
wrong with current science ficttion! 

Stories that I've read in the past 
year seem something akin to science 
fiction, but lack the oomph that put 
the reader into a daze for an hour 
— made him think, "What if — " 

It isn't me. I haven't changed. 
I believe the authors ought to look 
around and realize they've been 
slipping up! They're not entertaining us as they used to! 

Jim Mays 
607 Lambert St. 
Belpre, Ohio 
Your letter carries out the discussion in the previous letter, Jim. 
You're right—science fiction did 
change. But as far as Madge and 
Imaginative Tales are concerned, 
we'll be giving you the type of stf 
you want. We've got some top-notch 
writers and the boys know how to 
get that "What If — " feeling into 
their yams wlh. 

STF CONFERENCE 

Dear Bill: 

If there is still time to have material included in your issue on 
sale around March 1st, we would 



greatly appreciate your mentioning the following: 

The 2nd Annual Southeastern 
Science Fiction Conference will be 
held at the Hotel Charlotte, Charlotte, N. C, March 3rd and 4th. 

Attending will be fans and professionals from all sections of the 
nation. 

One dollar registration fee should 
be mailed to Robert A. Madle, 1620 
Anderson St., Charlotte, N. C. 

We hope that many Madge readers wiil be able to attend the conference. We guarantee everyone 
will have a good time! 

Ian T. McCauley 
Publicity Chairman 
57 East Park Lane 
Atlanta 5, Ga. 
We're glad to make mention of the 
conference. And if at all possible 
we'll try and make it ourselves! 
Hope everybody will! . . wlh 

HAUNT THE STANDS 1 

Dear Bill: 

Thought I'd drop you a line while 
in the letter writing mood ! Just 
finished going over the December 
issue of Madge — including cartoons 
and letter section. I must say that 
Rory Faulkner's letter was one of 
the best I ever read. Although I 
am not going to dig back in my 
collection to read some really good 
stories. 

Instead, I'll haunt the newsstands 
for new issues of IMAGINATION 
and IMAGINATIVE TALES. Both 
these magazines are showing great 
improvement. For example, I recently got hold of the first issue of 
Madge, the October 1950 number. 



LETTERS FROM THE READERS 



129 



Taking the cover, for instance, and 
comparing it with what you're using today — well, there's no comparison. 

A question: why did you change 
the subtitle on the cover from 
"Stories of Science and Fantasy" 
to "Science Fiction"? 

John Elledge 
3007 West Ave. 
Austin, Texas 
We changed the subtitle because 
IMAGINATION is, afterall, a 
science fiction magazine. We run 
a fantasy story only occasionally. 
Reason for this is quite simple : 
fantasy has no great popular appeal. Or, to put it another way, 
perhaps more accurately, science 
fiction has much greater appeal 
than fantasy. wffe 



CONCLUSION ERRONEOUS 

Dear Bill: 

I rest my case as follows: 

SUBJECT: December 1955 issue of Madge. 

COMPLAINT: The revision and 
reprint of a story by Dan Galouye, 
TONIGHT THE SKY WILL FALL 
under a new title, THE DAY THE 
SUN DIED. 

EVIDENCE. Copy of May '52 
issue. 

CONCLUSION: IMAGINATION 
should not feature reprints. 

Don Berhent 
1246 Lander Rd. 
Cleveland 24, Ohio 
The novel in the December issue 
was a sequel, Don. We never have 
used a reprint — and never wilL wlh 



Back Issues of Imagination Available 

—SEE NEXT PAGE TO SUBSCRIBE FOB COMING ISSUES— 



May 1952, No. 10 
July 1953, No. 11 
September 1952, No. IS 
October 1952. No. 13 
December 1952, No. 14 
January 1953. No. 15 
Februarv 1953, No. 16 
April 1953, No. 11 
May 1953, No. 18 
Jane 1953, No. 19 
JdIv 1953, No. 20 
AutTi-tt 1953. No. 21 
September 1953, No. 22 
October 1953, No. 2? 
November 1953, No. £4 
December 1953, No. 25 
January 1954. No. 26 
February 1954, No, 27 



,1 ii ii 



l <tr. ; 



39 
No. SI 



84 



July 1954, 
August 1954, N 
September 1954 
October 1954. ho. aa 
November 1954. No. 36 
December 1954, No. 37 
Januarv 1955, No. 38 
February 1955, No. 39 
March 1955, No. 40 
April 1955, No. 41 
May 1955, No. 48 
June 1955, No. 43 
July 1955, No. 44 
October 1955, No. 4S 
December 1955, No, 46 
February 1956, No. 47 



Copies ore 35c each, or ihree lor $1.00. Enclose cash, check, or money 
order. Address: IMAGINATION, P.O. Box 230, Evanslon, Illinois. Orders 
iilled promptly, and all copies mailed in heavy protecting envelopes. 



NAME 

ADDBESS 



Zone. 



YOU CAN HAVE THESE SCIENCE FICTION BOOKS 




A $9.00 VALUE AT ALL BOOK STORES C 
—REGULAR CLOTHBOUND PUBLISHERS' EDITIONS
We've jut mailo a fantastic deal with a major Wok publisher WKJTfeL^ 
limited quantity ol these classic science fiction hooks to he rima to you Kltr.il 
alone with your subscription to IMAGINATION. The oilers below are nnprocedented — we can hardly believe them ourselves! But it's true — the boohs arc 
yours - ABSOLUTELY FREE - as part ol y..ur It, 24. or 38 issue subscription. 
(You can extend your present subscription with any ol thj«jmM«ali<» "S'V 
Subscribe TODAY! Send cash, check, or money order to: IMAGINAHUfl, r. U. 
Box 230, Evanston, 111. _ _ _ _ _ 

OFFER No. 1 □ 36 Full Issues of IMAGINATION 

$9.00 ($21.60 VALUE) WIIH ALL THREE BOOKS SHOWN ABOVE! 

OFFER No. 2 □ 24 Full Issues of IMAGINATION 

$6.00 ($14.50 VALUE) WITH FREE BOOKS A — B — C (CIRCLE TWO) 

OFFER No. 3 □ 12 Full Issues of IMAGINATION 

$3.00 ($7.50 VALUE) WITH FREE BOOK A— B — C (CIRCLE ONE) 

□ Extend My Current Subscription 



ADDRESS 

CUT 



Oountrlea other than U.S.A. A Canada. 13.50 Oiler No. 1; S7.00 Oiler No. t; 
$10.50 Oiler No. S. 



Printed In U.S.A. 



13° 



IT'S OUT OF THIS WORLD! 



THE FIRS! EDITION OF 

THE SECRET 

OF THE 

SAUCERS 

THE COMPLFTFJ-Y TRUE. COMPLETELY HONEST STORY OF 

ORFEO ANGELUCCI * 




Already nearrng ■ sellout as it comes otl the 
took has astounded us. Apparently no one 
— and the desire to know what thev are 



press! The advance sale of this marvelous, 
dnubts the existence of the saucers today 
and where- ihcv come from it intense. 



THE ANSWER IS IN THIS BOOK! 



no fairy talc. Psychic experience, 
y«l But backed by facl. Authenticated 
by eyewitness conlirmaiion. Dozens of 
people saw the physical reality, while 
Orfeo experienced the psychic 1 adventure. 
Simultaneous evidence that will astound 
you. There actually is an unknown 
world around us, usually invisible, but at 
last the veil is bring torn away. Vou 

ORDER YOUR 



owe it to yourself to read this incredible, yet to:allv credible, book! But 
you'll have to act fast to get a copy of 
the first edition. Half the print order is 
already sold, being shipped directly 
from the binding room! Imagine itl 
Yes, a second edition is on order, but if 
you want a copy of this already rare 
first edition, 

COPY TODAY! 



lead the amaiifiR history of the saucers, of the message to our troubled earth, live Orfeo's 
people who fly in [hem, of iheir mission on tremendous adventure with him, as he tells it 
•arth. Read the prophecy of the future, the in his own words, simply and honestly. 
SEND 41,00 TODAY FOR THIS HANDSOMELY CLOTH-BOUND BOOK. 

| GREENLEAF PUBLISHING CO., P. O. BOX 230, EVANSTON, ILL. | 

| Enclosed is $3.00 lor my copy of THE SECRET OF THE SAUCERS by 

| Orfea Angelucei. Rush my copy to me by return mail. 

| NAME I 

j ADDRESS I 

I I 
I CITY ZONE STATE | 



