
'^i^ 



, , , in lltt H iWlt^P^ U^ "^ fc fart 
ttitafrwiiwL ^ « todt hu^ mil tnt 

ff» REBEL 
I of VALKYR 



b7 i R A D I U It T 






IT. 






STORIES- -M.;! 



VOL 4. NO. 8 • 



A FICTION HOUSE MAGAZINE 



FALL, 1950 



THE REBEL OF VALKYR Alfred Coppel 4 

. . . From the Dork Ages of Space emerged the Second Empire . . . ruled by a 
child, a usurper and a fool! The Greot Throne of Imperial Earth commanded a 
thousand vossal worlds — bleak, starved worlds that sullenly whispered of galactic 
revolt ... At lost, like eagles at a distant eyrie, the Star-Kings gathered ... not 
to whisper, but to strike I 

THE SKY IS FALLING C. H. Liddell 42 

The Blow-Up was coming. It was near, near . . . Johnny Dyson knew he would see 
It soon. One minute, Etirth. The next . . . little Nova, weeping radioactive dust into 
the Void. Then Johnny and the Robot would build an Eden on Mars . . . 

STAR SHIP Poul Anderson 66 

The strangest spoce-castowoys of oil! The Terron Explorers left their great interstellar ship unmanned In a tight orbit around Khozok-— descended, all of them. In 
a lifeboat to investigate that alien, weirdly medieval world — and the lifeboat 
cracked up I 

DEATH-WISH • . . ./?ay Bradbury 29 

They wandered the dead and fragile cities, looking for the legendary Blue Bottle — 
not knowing what it was, nor coring, not reolly wonting to f»nd it ; . . ever . . . 

THE CROWDED COLONY Jay B. Drexel 36 

The Conquerors laughed loudly at the dusty shrines, those crude and homely temples in the desert. More softly laughed the Martians, who dreamed of laughing 
lost . . , 

MEEM Margaret Sf. Clair 58 

The fog-shrouded marshlands of Vaudrio seethed with manhunt . . , and Duncan, 
with his stolen secret, sought refuge in the E'orth-Ship GORGO. Safe behind steel 
. . . until . . . 

STRANGE EXODUS Robert Abernafhy 85 

Gigantic, mindless, the Monsters hod come out of space to devour Earth. Where, 
on this gutted, cosmic carcass, could humanity flee? 

PATCH WilHam Shedenhelm 93 

Old pilots like Pop Gillette weren't needed any longer to handle the big ships . . . 
until everything went haywire on the Venus run I 

^ PloHet'i. ReKfulan, ^eatid/i^ 

THE VIZIGRAPH , , hylhe Readers 98 

1, T. SCOTT. Pr9ild0nf JEROME BIXBY. Bdlfor MALCOLM RCISS. Gen eral Manager 

FLANET STORIEJS: Published quarterly by Love Romance Pub. Co., Inc., 130 W. 42 et.. Now York 18. N. Y. The entire cwitent« 
M this magazine are copyrighted, 1950, by Lova Romances Publish ing C<x, Ino. Entered as second-class matter. Ootober 2, 1944. at 
«« PMt Office, at New York 1. N. Y.. under the Act of March 3. 1879. All rights reserved. While duo care is always exercised. th« 
publishers will not be responsible for the return of unsolicited manuscripts. Price 20# per copy. Yearly subscription rate 80^ la advance. For advertising rutOfl |kJ*MS ; AaTmiling Diwtor, Fiction House, Inc., 130 W, 42 St., New Yorls 18, N, Y. Printed In U. S. A. 



NAME VoiHf FOR YOu/ 

Do you know the vibrations of your name affect, your personal conditions, yow success, 
your happiness even your health? 

Do Yov Know How to Adjust Your Nome? 

To bring about the things you desire, these and many hundreds of questions are answered 
in the NEW SENSATIONAL '^HEQUAZ ODD NAME BOOK.'* 

The Most Unusuol Book of its Khid 

Do you know that both divorces and happy marriages are the outer results of the vibra* 
tions of names? If you are not the success you think you should be. You may find the fault 
lies within your name. 

Parents when you name your children do you know what vibrations you are putting into 
action in their lives? 

JUST THE BOOK FOR PARENTS WHO WISH TO NAME THEIR CHILDREN 

THIS MARVELOUS BOOK SHOULD BE IN HANDS OF WRITERS! ACTORS! PARENTS! 

IN NEED OP NAMES THAT ARE UNUSUAL, BEAUTIFUL AND ATTRACTIVE 

BUY TODAY! THE BOOK OF A THOUSAND ODD AND BEAUTIFUL NAMES 

When you read this sensational book it will open a new field of interest to you. 

Odd Name Collecting 

Be among the thousands that are taking up this new and interesting hobby. It is loads of 
fun wherever you are, when you hear an odd name to jot it down for your collection. 

Membership In the Hequoz Odd Nome Collecting Club 

This will entitle you to a beautiful membership certificate to hang upon your wall. Some* 
thing you will be proud to show your friends. 

A free list of 50 names to begin your collection and every three months the addresses of 
members all over the country will be sent you. So you can either exchange or sell your 
names to other members. This membership also makes you eligible to enter the ODD 
NAME COLLECTING CONTEST that starts March J, 19S0 and ends Septtmher i, 19SQ. 

ALL CASH PRIZES 

Iff PRIZE $250.00 

2ii4 PRIZE $150.00 

3rd PRIZE $100.00 

4fh PRIZE $ 50.00 

5fli PRIZE $ 25.00 

Reolly Something New! Something DifPerent to Do 

Right now get started win one of these cash prizes. 

Easy! Simple! Loads of Fun for Every One! 

Besides a hobhy that will grow more interesting and profitable as the years go by. 




'TfCaU ^»»fioH TUtif


I 



HEQUAZ CORRESPONDENCE SCHOOL OF NUMEROLOGY 

268 North Sfate Stre«f, Morion, Ohio 

I •nclose $3.50 for "HE(?UAZ ODD NAME BOOK." 

If you desire MEMBERSHIP CERTIFICATE IN THE •'HEQUAZ ODD NAME COLLECTING CLUB" which •ntltles 

you to enter the contest. Enclose one dollar extra. 

NAME 

ADDRESS 

CITY ZONE STATE 

AW winners will b» notified by return moll 
Sponsored by "HEQUAZ CORRESPONDENCE SCHOOL OF NUMEROLOGY" 



;4 ^dft^alH' 

KORTHWEST 
ROMMCfiS 

A Magazine Of 

STIRRING ADVENTURE 

IN THE NORTHLANDS 

INoRTHWEST features vivid, 
colorful tales laid in the wild, 
peril-laden expanse of the 
Ireacherous snow-ice country .. . the rugged Arctic 
where proud male and reckless female pit muscle and 
wile against nature's frigid 
fury. You'll find a brace 
of action-packed, thrill-laden 
novels, novelets, short stories and true-to-life articles of the sourdough country by such outstanding authors of adventure as Dan Cushman, C. Hall Thompson, John Jo Carpenter and B. McConnelL 

DOT^'T MISS IT . . . SEE YOVR NEWSDEALER NOW 

NORTHWEST ROMANCES 

ONLY TWENTY CENTS! 







the Rebel of 



i 



Valkyr 



By ALFRED COPPB. 



OUT OF THE DARK AGES OF 

th^ Interregnum e^nerged the Second Em-pire. Once again in the space of a millennium, 
the banner of Imperial Earth waved above 
the decimated lands of the inhabited worlds. 
Four generations of conquerors, heirs to 
the greatness of the Thousafid Emperors, 
had recreated the Galactic Empire, by force 
of arms. But technology, the Great De^ 
stroyer, was feared and forbidden. Only 
zvitches, warlocks and sorcerers remembered tJte old knowledge, and the mobs, 
tortured by the racial memories of the 
awful destruction of the Civil Wars, stoned 
these seekers and burned them in the 
squares of towns built amid the rubble of 
the old wars. The ancient, mighty spaceships — indestructible, eternal — carried men 
ayid horses, fire and sword across the 
Galaxy at the bidding of the warlords. The 
Secoftd Empire — four generations out of 
isolated savagery — feudal, grim; a culture 
held together by bonds forged of blood and 
iron and the loyalty of the tvarrior starkings . , . 

— Quintus Bland, 
Essays on Galactic History. 



K 



lERON, WARLORD OF VALkyr, paced the polished floor angrily. 
The flickering lights of the vast 



mirrored chamber glinted from the jewels 
in his ceremonial harness and sliimmered 
down the length of his silver cape. For 
a moment, the star-king paused before the 
tall double doors of beaten bronze, his 
strong hands toying with the liilt of his 
sword. The towering Janizaries of the 
Palace Guard stood immobile on either 
side of the arching doorway, their great 
axes resting on the flagstones. It was as 
though the dark thoughts that coursed 
through Kieron's mind were — ^to them — 
unthinkable. The huge warriors from the 
heavy planets of the Pleiades were stolid, 
loyal, unimaginative. And even a star-king 
did not dream of assaulting the closed portals of the Emperor's diambers. 

Kieron's fingers opened and closed spasmodically over the gem-crusted pommel of 
his weapon; his dark eyes glittered with 
unspent fury. Muttering an oath, he 
turned away from the silent door and 
resumed his pacing. His companion, a 
brawny man in the plain battle harness of 
Valkyr, watched him quietly from under 
bushy yellow brows. He stood with his 
great arms folded over the plaits of grizzled yellow hair that hung to his waist, his 
deeply-lined face framed by the loosened 
lacings of a winged helmet. A huge sword 
hugged his naked thigh; a msissive blade 
with worn and sweat-stained .hilt. 

The lord of Valkyr paused in his angry 



. . . From the Dark Ages of Space emerged the Second Empire . . . 
ruled hy a child, a usurper and a fool! The Great Throne of Imperial 
Earth commanded a thousand vassal worlds — bleak, starved worlds 
that sullenly whispered of galactic revolt . . . At last, like eagles at a 
distant eyrie, the Star-kfngs gathered ... no/ to whisper, but to strike! 




)l-a;M^N 



J^* 



Like great nher fish leaping up into the bowl of night, the ships of the Valkyr 

fleet rose from Kaigan • • • 



I 



pacing to glare at his aide. "By the Great 
Destroyer, Nevitta! How long are we to 
stand this?" 

*Tatience, Kieron, patience/' The old 
warrior spoke with the assurance of lifelong familiarity. "They try us sorely, but 
we have waited three weeks. A little 
longer can do no harm.^*
*'Three weeks!" Kieron ♦scowled at Nevitta. "Will they drive us into rebellion? 
Is that their intention? I swear I would 
not have taken this from Gilmer himself !" 

"The great Emperor would never have 
dealt with us so. The fighting men of 
Valkyr were ever closest to his heart, 
Kieron. This is a way of doing that 
smacks of a woman's hand." He spat on 
the polished floor. "May the Seven Helb 
claim her!" 

Kieron grunted shortly and turned again 
toward the silent door. Ivane! Ivane the 
Fair . . . Ivane the schemer. What devil's 
brew wzs she mixing now? Intrigue had 
always been her weapon — and now that 
Gilmer was gone and she stood by the 
Great Throne . . . 

Kieron cursed her roundly under his 
breath. Nevitta spoke the truth. There was 
Ivane's hand in this, as surely as the stars 
made Galaxies! 

Three weeks wasted. Long weeks. 
Twenty-one full days since their ships had 
touched the Imperial City. Days of fighting through the swarms of dilettantes and 
favor-seekers that thronged the Imperial 
Palace. There had beenf times when Kieron 
had wanted to cut a path through the 
fawning dandies with his sword! 

Gilmer of Kaidor lay dead a full year 
and still the new Court was a madhouse 
of simpering sycophants. Petitions were 
being granted by the score as the favorites 
collected their long-delayed largess from 
the boy-Emperor Toran. And Kieron 
knew well enough that whatever favors 
were granted came through the ambitious 
hands of the Consort Ivane. She might not 
be allowed to wear the crown of an Empress without the blood of the Thousand 
Emperors in her veins, but by now no one 
at Court denied that she was the fountainhead of Imperial favor. Yet that wasn't 
really enough for her, Kieron knew. Ivane 
dreamed of better things. And because of 
all this hidden by-play, the old favorites 
of the warrior Gilmer were snubbed and 



PLANET STORIES 

refused audience. A new inner circle was 
building, and Kieron of Valkyr was not — 
it was plain to see — to be Induded. He was 
prevented even from presenting his just 
complaints to the Emperor Toran. 



OTHER MATTERS, he was told 
again and again, occupied His Im 
perial Majesty's attention. Other matters I 
Kieron could feel the anger hot and throbbing in his veins. What other matters 
could there be of more importance to a 
sovereign than the loyalty of his finest 
"fighting men? Or if Toran was a fool 
as the courtiers privately claimed, then 
surely Ivane had more fntelligence than 
to keep a Warlord of the Outer Marches 
cooling his heels in antechambers for three 
weeks! The Lady Ivane, herself so proud, 
should know how near to rebellion were 
the warrior peoples of the Periphery. 

Under such deliberate provocations it 
was difficult to loyally ignore the invitation 
of Freka of Kalgan to meet with the other 
star-kings in grievance council. Rebellion 
was not alluring to one like Kieron who 
had spent his boyhood fighting beside Gilmer, but there was a limit to human endurance, and he was fast reaching it. 

"Nevitta," Kieron spoke abruptly. 
"Were you able to find out anything concerning the Lady Alys?" 

The grizzled warrior shook his head. 
"Nothing but the common talk. It is said 
that she has secluded herself, still mouming for Gilmer. You know, Kieron, how 
the little princess loved her father." 

The lord of Valkyr frowned thoughtfully. Yes, it was true enough that Alys 
had loved Gilmer. He could remember 
her at the great Emperor's side after the 
battle of Kaidor. Even the conquered interregnal lords of that world had claimed 
that Gilmer would have surrendered the 
planet if they had been able to capture his 
daughter. The bond between father and 
daughter had been a close one. Possibly 
Alys had secluded herself to carry on with 
her mourning — ^but Kieron doubted it. 
That \yould not have been Gilmer's way, 
nor his daughter's. 

*Things would be diflferent here," said 
Nevitta with feeling, "if the little princess ruled instead of Toran." 

Very different, thought Kieron. The 
foolish Toran bid fair to lose what four 



THE REBEL OF VALKYR 

generations of loyal fighters had built up 



out of the rubble of the dark ages. Alys, 
the warrior princess, would add to the 
glory of the Imperium, not detract from it. 
But perhaps he was prejudiced in her favor, reflected Kieron. It was hard not to 
be. 

He recalled her laughing eyes and her 
courage. A slim child, direct in manner 
and bearing. Embarrassing him before his 
roaring Valkyrs with her forthright protestations of love. The armies had worshipped her. A lovely child — with pride of 
race written into her patrician face. But 
compassionate, too. Gravely comforting the 
dying and the wounded with a touch or a 
word. 

Eight years had passed since bloody 
Kaidor. The child of twelve would be a 
woman now. And, thought Kieron anxiously, a threat to the ascendant power 
of the Consort Ivane . . . 

THE TALL BRONZE DOORS 
swung open suddenly, and Kieron 
turned. But it was not the Emperor who 
stood there framed in the archway, nor 
even the Consort. It was the gem-bedecked 
figure of Landor, the First Lord of Space. 

Kieron snorted derisively. First Lord! 
The shades of the mighty fighters who had 
carried that title through a thousand of 
Imperial Earth's battles must have been 
sickened by young Toran's . • , or Ivane's 
. . . choice of the mincing courtier who 
now stood before him. 

The more cynical courtiers said that 
Landor had won his honors in Ivane's 
bed, and Kieron could well believe it. Out 
in the vast emptinesses of the Edge men 
lived by different standards. Out there 
a woman was a woman — a thing to be 
loved or beaten, cherished or enjoyed and 
cast off — but not a touchstone to wealth 
and power. Kieron had loathed Landor 
on sight, and there was reason enough to 
believe that the First Lord reciprocated 
most completely. It was not wise for anyone, even a Warlord, to openly scorn the 
Consort's favorites — ^but restraint was not 
one of the lord of Valkyr's virtues, though 
even Nevitta warned him to take care. 
Assassination was a fine art in the Imperial City, and one amply subsidized by 
the First Lord of Space. 

"Well, Landor?" Kieron demanded, dis


daining to use Landor's title. 

Landor's smoothly handsome features 
showed no expression. The pale eyes veiled 
like a serpent's. 

"I regret," the First Lord of Space said 
easily, ''that His Imperial Majesty has retired for the night, Valkyr. Under the 
circumstances . . f' He spread his slender 
hands in a gesture of helplessness. 

The lie was obvious. Through the open 
doorway of the royal chambers came the 
murmuring sound of laughter and the 
reedy melody of a minstrel's pipes in the 
age-old ballad of Lady Greensleeves, Kieron could hear Toran's uncertain voice singing: 

Greensleeves was all my joy, 
Greensleeves was all my joy, 
And who but Lady Greensleeves T' 

Kieron could imagine the boy — lolling 
foolishly before the glittering Ivane, trying to win with verses what any man could 
have for a pledge of loyalty to the Consort. 

The Valkyr glared at Landor. "I'm not 
to be received, is that it? By the Seven 
Hells, why don't you say what you mean ?" 

Landor^s smile was scornful. "You outworlders! You should learn how to behave, really. Perhaps later ..." 

"Later be damned!" snapped Kieron. 
"My people are starving no^v! Your grubbing tax-gatherers are wringing us dry! 
How long do you think they'll stand for 
it? How long do you imagine / will stand 
for it?" 

"Threats, Valkyr?" asked the First 
Lord, his eyes suddenly venomous. 
"Threats against your Emperor? Men 
have been whipped to death for much 
less." 

"Not men of Valkyr," retorted Kieron. 

"The men of Valkyr no longer hold the 
favored position they once did, Kieron. I 
counsel you to remember that." 

"True enough," Kieron replied scornfully, "Under Gilmer, fighting men were 
the power of the Empire. Now Toran 
rules with the hands of women . . . and 
dancing masters." 

THE FIRST LORD'S FACE darkened at the insult. He laid a hand 
on the hilt of his ornate sword, but the 
Valkyr's eyes remained insolent. The huge 
Nevitta stirred, measuring the Pleiadene 



8 PLANET 

Janizaries at the door, ready for trouble. 

But Landor had no stomach for swordplay — particularly with as young and supple a fighter as the Warlord of Valkyr. 
His o^Ti ready tongue was a better weapon 
than steel. With an effort, he forced himself to smile. It was a cold smile, pregnant 
with subtle danger. 

"Harsh words, Valkyr. And unwise. I 
shall not forget them. I doubt that you 
uill be able to see His Majesty, since I do 
not believe the tribulations of a planet 
of savages would concern him. You waste 
your time here. If you have other business, 
you had better be about it.*' 

It was Kieron's turn to feel the hot goad 
of anger. "Are those Toran's words or 
I vane's dancing master?" 

"The Consort Ivane, of course, agrees. 
If your people cannot pay their taxes, let 
them sell a few of their brats into service," Landor said smoothly. 

The die was cast, then, thought Kieron 
furiously. All hope for an adjustment 
from Toran was gone and only one course 
lay open to him now. 

"Nevitta! See that our men and horses 
are loaded tonight and the ships made 
ready for space!" 

Nevitta saluted and turned to go, THe 
paused, looked insolently at the First 
Lord, and deliberately spat on the floor. 
Then he was gone, his spurs ringing metallically as he disappeared through the high 
curving' archway. 

"Savage," muttered Landor. 

"Savage enough to be loyal and worthy 
of any trust," said Kieron; "but you 
would know nothing of that." 

Landor ignored the thrust. "Where do 
you go now, Valkyr?" 

"OfF-world." 

"Of course," Landor smiled thinly, his 
eyebrows arching over pale, shrewd eyes. 
"Off-world." 

Kieron felt a stab of suspicion. How 
much did Landor know? Had his spies 
pierced Freka the Unknown's counterespionage cordon and brought word of the 
star-kings gathering on Kalgan? 

"It cannot concern you where I go now, 
Landor," said Kieron grimly. "You've 
won here. But ..." Kieron stepped a pace 
nearer the resplendent favorite. *Warn 
your tax-gatherers to go armed when they 
land on Valkyr. Well armed, Landor." 



STORIES 

Kieron turned on his heel and strode 
out of the antechamber, his booted heels 
staccato on the flagstones, silver cape 
flaunting like a proud banner. 

II 

FlST THE TALL ARCH OF THE 
Emperor's antechamber lay the Hail 
of the Thousand Emperors. Kieron strode 
through it, the flickering flames oi the 
wall-sconces casting long shadows out 
behind him — shadows^ that danced and 
whirled on the tapestried walls and touched 
the composed faces of the great men of 
Earth. 

These were brooding men; men who 
stared down at him out of their thousand 
pasts. Men who had stood w4th a planet 
for a throne and watched their Empire 
passing in ordered glory from horizon to 
horizon across the night sky of Earth — 
men worshipped as gods on out-world 
planets, who watched and guided the tide 
of Empire until it crashed thundering on 
the shores of ten thousand worlds beyond 
Vega and Altair. Men who sat cloaked 
in sable robes with diamond stars encrusted and saw their civilization built out 
from the Great Throne, tier on shining 
tier until at last it reached tlie Edge and 
strained across the awful gulf for the 
terrible seetee suns of mighty Andromeda 
Itself .... 

The last few of the men like gods had 
watched the First Empire crumble. They 
had seen the wave of annihilation sweeping 
in from the Outer Marches of the Periphery; had seen their gem-bright civilization shattered with destructive forces so 
hideous that the spectre of the Great Detroyer hung like a mantle of death over 
the Galaxy, a thing to be shunned and 
feared forever. And thus had come the 
Interregnum. 

Kieron had no eyes for these brooding 
giants; his world was not the world they 
had known. It was in the next chamber 
that the out-world warrior paused. It was 
a vast and empty place. Here there were 
but five figures and space for a thousand 
more. This was the Empire that Kieron 
knew. This Empire he had fought for and 
helped secure; a savage, darkling thing 
spawned in the dark ag-es of the Interregnum, a Galaxy-spanning fief of star


THE REBEL 

kings and serfs— of warlocks and space*ips— of light and shadow. This Empire 
had been bom in the agony of a Galaxy 
and tempered in the bitter internecine wars 
of reconquest. 

Before the image of Gilmer of Kaidor, 
Kieron stopped. He stood in silence, looking into the face of his dead liege. The 
hour was late and the Hall deserted, Kieron kneh, suddenly filled with sadness. He 
was on his way to rebellion against the 
Empire that he had helped this stern-faced 
man to expand and hold — rebellion against 
tile power of Imperial Earth, personified 
by the weak- faced boy standing draped 
in the sable mantle of sovereignty in the 
next niche. Kieron looked from father to 
son. By its composure and its nearness to 
the magnetic features of the great Gilmer, 
the face of young Toran seemed to draw 
character and strength. It was an illusion, 
Kieron knew. 

The young Valkyr felt driven hard. His 
people hungered. Military service was no 
longer enough for the Imperial Government as it had been for decades. Money 
was demanded, and there was no money 
on Valkyr. So the people hungered — and 
Kieron was their lord. He could not stand 
by and see the agony on the faces of his 
warrior maids as their children weakened, 
nor could he see his proud warriors sellir^ 
themselves into slavery for a handful of 
coins. The Emperor would not listen. 
Kieron had recourse only to the one thing 
he knew . . . the sword. 

He bowed his head and asked the shade 
of Gilmer for forgiveness. 

A SLIGHT MOVEMENT caught his 
battle-sharpened eye as someone 
stirred behind a fluted column. Kieron's 
sword whispered as it slid from the scabbard, the gemmed hilt casting shards of 
light into the dimness of the colonnade. 

Treading softly, Kieron eased his tall 
frame into the shadows, weapon alert. The 
thought of assassination flashed across his 
mind and he smiled grimly. Could it be 
that Landor had his hirelings after him already? 

Kieron saw the shadowy shape .slip from 
the colonnade out onto the great curving 
terrace that bordered the entire west wing 
of the Palace. Eyes narrowed under his 
black brows, the lord of Valkyr followed. 



OP VALKYR 9 

The stars gleamed in the moonless 
night, and far below, Kieron could see the 
flickering torchlights of the Imperial City 
fanning out to the horizon like the spokes 
of some fantastic, glittering wheel. The 
dark figure ahead had vanished. 

Kieron sheathed his sword and drew 
his poniard. It was far too dark for swordplay, and he did not wish to risk letting 
the assassin escape. Melting into the shadows of the colonade again, he made his 
way parallel to the terrace, alert for any 
sign of movement. Presently, the figure 
appeared again beside the balustrade, and 
the Valkyr moved swiftly and quietly up 
behind. With a cat-like movement, he 
slipped his free arm about the slight shape, 
pulling it tight against himself. Tlie poniard flashed in his upraised hand, the 
slender blade reflecting the starlight. 

The weapon did not descend . . , . 

Against liis forearm, Kieron felt a yielding softness, and the hair that brushed his 
cheek was warm and perfumed. 

He stood transfixed. Tlie girl twisted 
in his grasp and broke free with a gasping cry. Instantly, a blade gleamed in her 
hand and she had launched herself at the 
Valkyr furiously. Her voice was tight with 
rage. 

**Murdering butcher! You dare . . ./" 

Kieron caught her upraised arm and 
wrenched the dagger from her grasp. She 
clawed at him, kicking, biting, but never 
once calling aloud for aid. At last Kieron 
was able to pin her to a column witti his 
weight, and he held her there, arms pinioned to her sides. 

"You hellcat!'* he muttered against her 
hair, "Who are you ?" 

"You know well enoug'h, you murdering 
lackey! Why don't you kill me and go 
collect your pay, damn you!*' gritted the 
girl furiously. "Must you manhandle me 
too?'^ 

Kiernon gasped. "/ kilT you !** He caught 
the girl's hair and pulled her head back 
30 that her features would catch the faint 
glow of lig<ht from the city below. "Who 
are you, hellcat?" 

The light outlined his own features and 
the Arms of Valkyr on the clasp of his 
cloak at his throat. The girl's eyes widened. Slowly the tenseness went out of her 
and she relaxed against him. 

"Kieron! Kieron of Valkyr!" 



10 



PLANET STORIES 



KIERON WAS STILL ALERT for 
some tridc. Landor could have hired 
a female assassin just as well as a man. 

"You know me?' he asked cautiously. 

''Know you!'' She laughed suddenly, 
and it was a silvery sound in the night. 
**1 loved you . . . beast !" 

"By the Seven Hells, your speak in 
riddles! Who are you?" the Valkyr demanded irritably. 

"And I thought you had come to kill 
me," mused the girl in self-reproach. **My 
own KieronT* 

"I'm not your Kieron or anyone else's, 
Lady," said Kieron rather stiffly, "and 
you'd better explain why you were watching me in the Hall of Emperors before 
ril let you go." 

"My father warned me that you would 
forget me. I did not think you would be 
so cruel," she taunted. 

*'I knew your father?" 

"Well enough, I think." 

"I've had a hundred wenches — and 
knoA\Ti some of their fathers, too. You 
can't expect me to . . ." 

''Not this wench, Valkyr!" the girl exploded furiously. 

The tone carried such command that 
Kieron involuntarily stepped back, but 
still keeping the girl's hands pinned to her 
sides. 

'*If you had spdcen so on Kaidor, I'd 
have had the skin stripped from your back, 
outworld savage!" she cried. 

Kaidor! Kieron feh the blood drain 
away from his face. This, then, was . . . 
Alys. 

"Ha! So you remember now! Kaidor 
you can recall, but you have forgotten me ! 
Kieron, you always were a beast!" 

Kieron felt a smile spreading across his 
face. It was good to smile again. And it 
was good to know that Alys was . . . safe. 

"Highness . . ." 

"Don't 'Highness' me!" 

"Alys, then. Forgive me. I could not 
have known you. After all it has been 
eight years . . ." 

"And there have been a hundred 
wenches . . ." mimicked the girl angrily. 

Kieron grinned. "There really haven't 
been that many. I boasted." 

"Any would be too many !" 

"You haven't changed, Alys, except that 
you . . ." 



"Have grown so? Spare me that!" She 
glared at him, eyes flaming in the shadows. 
Then suddenly she was laughing again, a 
silvery laugh that hung like a bright thread 
in the soft tapestry of night sounds. "Oh, 
Kieron, it is good to see you again !" 

"I thought to hear from you, Alys, 
when we reached Earth — ^but there was 
nothing. No word of any kind. I was told 
you were in seclusion still mourning Gilmer." 

ALYS BOWED HER HEAD. "I will 
never stop mourning him." She 
looked up, her eyes suddenly bright with 
unshed tears. "Nor will you. I saw you 
kneeling inside. I thought then that it 
might be you. No one kneels to Gilmer 
now but the old comrades." She walked 
to the balustrade and stood looking out 
over the lights of the Imperial City. Kieron watched the play of emotions over her 
face, caught suddenly by her beauty. 

"I tried to reach you, Kieron — ^tried 
hard. But my servants have been taken 
from me since I was caught spying on 
Ivane. And I'm kept under cover now, 
permitted out only after dark — and then 
only on the Palace grounds. Ivane has 
convinced Toran that I'm dangerous. The 
people like me because I was father^s 
favorite. My poor stupid little brother! 
How that woman rules him . . . !" 

Kieron was aghast. "You spied on 
Ivane? In heaven's name, why?" 

"That woman is a bom plotter, Kieron. 
She isn't satisfied with a Consort's coronet. She's brewing something. Emmissaries have come to her from certain of 
the star-kings and others . . /' 

"Others?" 

Alys' voice was hushed. "A warlock, 
Kieron! He has been seeing Ivane privately for more than a year. An awful 
man !" 

Superstition stirred like a quickening 
devil inside the Valkyr. The shuddering 
horror of the dark and bloody tales he had 
heard all his life acbout the warlocks who 
clung to the knowledge of the Great Destroyer rose like a wave of blackness within him. 

Alys felt the same dark tide rising in 
her. She moved closer to Kieron, her 
slim body trembling slightly against his. 
"The people would tear Ivane to pieces if 



TBE REBEL OF VALKYR 



11 






they knew," she whispered. 

"You saii/ this warlock?" asked Kieron, 
sick with dread. 

Alys nodded soundlessly. 

Kieron fought down his fears and wondered uneasily what Ivane's connection 
a>uld be with such a pariah. The warlocks 
and witches were despised and feared 
above all other creatures in the Galaxy. 

"His name?" Kieron asked. 

"Geller. Geller of the Marshes. It is 
i.^ laid that he is a conjurer of devils . . . 

and that he can create homunculi! Out of 
the very filth of the marshes I Oh, Kieron!" Alys shuddered. 

An awful plan was forming in Kieron's 
mind. He was thinking that Ivane must 
be stripped of the sigils and powers of 
this devil-man. With such powers at her 
command there might be nothing impossible of attainment. Even the crown of 
the Imperium itself .... 

"Where/* Kieron asked slowly, "can 
this warlock be found?" 

"On tiie street of the Black Flame, in 
the city of Neg ... on Kalgan." 

''Kalganr Kieron's heart contracted. 
Was there a connection? Kalgan! What 
had Ivane to do with that lonely planet 
beyond the dark veil of the Coalsack ? Was 
it coincidence? Out of all the thousands of 
worlds in space . . • Kalgan. 

"Is there something wrong, Kieron? 
""^^ You know tfiis man?** 

Kieron shook his head. It had suddenly 
become more than imperative that he go 
to Kalgan. The mystery of the Imperial 
Consort's connection with a warlock of 
Kalgan must be unraveled. And the starkings were gathering .... 

The Valkyr was suddenly taken with a 
new and different fear. If Alys had spied 
on Ivane, then she must be in danger here. 
Ivane would never tolerate interference 
with her plans from Gihner's daughter. 

"Alys, are you a prisoner here?" 

"More, Fm afraid," the girl said sadly. 
"Fm a reminder to Toran of Hit days of 
our father. One that he would like to 
eliminate, I think.** 

KIERON STUDIED HER in the starlight. His eyes sought the thick 
golden hair that brushed her shoulders, 
the glittering metallic skirt that hung low 
on her hips, outlining the slim thighs. He 



watched the graceful Ihie of her unadorned 
throat, the bare shoulders and breasts, the 
small waist, the flat, firm stomach— all 
revealed by the studied nakedness of the 
fashions of the Inner Marches. This was 
no child. The thought of her in danger 
shook him badly. 

"Toran would not dare harm you, 
Alys," said Kieron uncertainly. There had 
been a time when he could have said such 
a thing with perfect assurance, but since 
the death of Gilmer, the Imperial City was 
like an over-civilized jungle — full of beasts 
of prey. 

"No, Toran wouldn't . . . alone,'* said 
Alys; "but there are Ivane and Landor.'* 
She laugdied, suddenly gay ; her eyes, seeking Kieron*s, were shining. "But not now ! 
You are here, Kieron!" 

The Valkyr felt his heart contract. 
"Alys," he said softly, "I leave Earth tonight. For Kalgan." 

"For Kalgan, Kieron?" Alys* e>^es widened. "To seek that warlock?" 

"For another reason, Alys." Kieron 
paused uneasily. It \vzs hard to speak to 
Gilmer of Kaidor's daughter about rebellion. Yet he could not lie to her. He 
temporized. 

"I have business with the lord of ICalgan," he said. 

Aly's face was shadowed and her voice 
when she spoke was sad. "Do the starkings gather, Kieron? Have they had all 
they can stand of Toran's foolish rule?" 

Kieron nodded wordlessly. 

The girl flared up with a sudden imperious anger. "That fool! He is letting the 
favorites drive the Empire to ruin!" She 
looked up at Kieron pleadingly. "Promise 
me one thing, Kieron." 

"If I can." 

"That you will not commit yourself to 
any rebellion until we have spoken again." 

"Alys, I . . ." 

"Oh, Kieron! Promise me! If there is 
no other way, then fight the Imperial 
House. But give me one chance to save 
what my father and his father died 
for . . .!" 

"And mine," added Kieron sombrely. 

"You know that if there is no other 
way, I won't try to dissuade you. But 
while you are on Kalgan, I'll speak to 
Toran. Please, Kieron, promise me that 
Valkyr will not rebel until we have tried 



12 



PLANET STOtUES 



everything." Her eyes shone with passion. 
*Then if it comes to war, Til ride by your 
side!" 

**Done, Alys," said Kieron slowly. "But 
take care when you speak to Toran. Remember there is danger here for you." He 
wondered briefly what Freka the Unknown 
would think of his sudden reluctance to 
commit the hundred spaceships and five 
thousand warriors of Valkyr to the coming 
rebellion. A thought struck him and quickly he discarded it. For just an instant he 
had wondered if Geller of the Marshes and 
the mysterious Freka the Unknown might 
be the same . . . Stranger things had 
happened. But Alys had described Geller 
as old, and Freka was known to be a sixand-one-half foot warrior, the perfect 
'type' of the star-king caste. 

"One thing more, Alys," Kieron said; 
"I will leave one of my vessels here for 
your use, Nevitta and a company will remain, too. Keep them by you. They will 
guard you with their lives." He slipped 
his arm about her, holding her to him. 

"Nevitta?" Alys said with a slow smile. 
"Nevitta of the yellow braids and the great 
sword? I remember him." 

"The braids are greying, but the sword 
is as long as ever. He can guard you for 
me, and keep you safe." 

The girl's smile deepened at the words 
'for me' but Kieron did not notice. He was 
deep in planning. "Be very careful, Alys. 
And watch out for Landor.'* 

"Yes, Kieron," the girl breathed meekly. 
She looked up at the tall outworld warrior's face, lips parted. 

But Kieron was looking up at the stars 
of the Empire, and there was uneasiness 
in his heart. He tightened his arm about 
Alys, holding her closer to him as though 
to protect her from the hot gaze of those 
fiery stars. 

HI 

THE SPACESHIP WAS ANCIENT, 
yet the mysterious force of the Great 
Destroyer chained within the sealed coils 
between the hulls drove it with unthinkable speed across the star-shot darkness. 
The interior was close and smoky, for the 
only light came from oil lamps turned low 
to slow the fouling of the air. Once, there 
had been light without fire in the thousand


foot hulls, but the tiny orbs set into the 
ceilings had failed for they were not of a 
kind with the force in the sealed, eternal 
coils. 

On the lower decks, the horses of the 
small party of Valkyr warriors aboard 
stomped the steel deck-plates, impatient in 
their close confinement ; while in the tiny 
bubble of glass at the very prow of the 
ancient vessel, two shamen of the hereditary caste of Navigators drove the pulsing 
starship toward the spot beyond the veil 
of the Coalsack where their astrolabes 
and armillary spheres told them that the 
misty globe of Kalgan lay. 

Many men — risking indictment as warlocks or sorcerers — had tried to probe the 
secrets of the Great Destroyer and compute the speed of these mighty spacecraft of antiquity. Some had even claimed 
a speed of 100,000 miles per hour for 
them. But since the starships made the 
voyage from Earth to the agricultural 
worlds of Proxima Centauri in slightly 
less than twenty-eight hours, such calculations would place the nearest starsystem an astounding two minion eight 
hundred thousand miles from Earth — a 
figure that was as absurd to all Navigators 
as it was inconceivable to laymen. 

The great spaceship bearing the Warlord of Valkyr's blazon solidified into 
reality near Kalgan as its great velocity 
diminished. It circled the planet to kill 
speed and nosed down into the damp air 
of the grey world. The high cloud cover 
passed, it slanted down into slightly clearer air. Kalgan did not rotate: in its slow 
orbit around the red giant parent star, the 
planet turned first one face, and then 
another to the slight heat of its sun. Great 
oceans covered the poles, and. the central 
land mass was like a craggy girdle of rock 
and soil around the bulging equator. Only 
in the twilight zone was life endurable, and 
the city of Neg, stronghold of Freka the 
Unknown, was the only urban grouping on 
the planet. 

Neg lay shllen in the eternal twilight 
when at last Kieron's spaceship landed 
outside the gates and the debarkation of 
his retinue had begun ; the spaceport, however, was ablaze with flares and torches, 
and the lord of Kalgan had sent a corps of 
drummers — signal honors — to greet the 
visiting star-king. The hot, misty night air 



THE REBEL OF VALKYR 



13 






throbbed with the beat of the huge kettledrums, aiid weapons and jewelled harness 
flashed in the yellow light of the flames. 

At last the debarkation was complete, 
and Kieron and his warriors were led 
by a torch-bearing procession of soldiery 
into the fortified city of Neg— along ancient cobbled streets— through small 
crowded squares — and finally to the Citadel of Neg itself. The residence of Freka 
the Unknown, Lord of Kalgan. 

The people they passed were a silent, 
sullen lot. Dull, brutish faces. The faces 
of slaves and serfs held in bondage by fear 
and force. These people, Kieron reflected, 
would go mad in a carnival of destruction 
if the heavy hand of their lord should 
falter. 

He turned his attention from the people 
of Neg to the massive Citadel. It was a 
powerful keep with high walls and turreted outworks. It spoke of Kalgan's 
bloody history in every squat, functional 
line. A history of endless rebellion and uprising, of coups and upheavals. Warrior 
after warrior had set himself up as ruler 
of this sullen world only to fall before 
the assaults of his own vassals. It had 
ever been the policy of the Imperial Government never to interfere with these 
purely local affairs. It was felt that out of 
the crucibles of domestic strife would arise 
the best fighting men, and they, in turn, 
could serve the Imperium. As long as 
Kalgan produced its levy of fighting men 
and spaceships, no one on Earth cared 
about the local government. So Kalgan 
wallowed in blood. 

Out of the last nightmare had ccmie 
Freka. He had risen rapidly to power on 
Kalgan— and stayed in power. Hated by 
his people, he nevertheless ruled harshly, 
for that was his way. Kieron had been told 
that this warrior who had sprung out of 
nowhere was different from other men. 
The Imperial courtiers claimed that he 
cared nothing for wine or women, and that 
he loved only battle. It would take such a 
man, thought Kieron studying the Citadel, 
to take and hold a world like Kalgan. It 
would take such a man to want it! 

If Freka of Kalgan loved bloodshed, he 
would be happy when this coming council 
of star-kings ended, the Valkyr reflected 
moodily. He knew himself how near to 
rebellion he was, and the other lords of the 



Outer Marches, the lords of Auriga, 
Doom, Quintain, Helia — all were r^idy to 
strike the Imperial crown from Toran's 
foolish head. 

KIERON WAS ESCORTED with his 
warriors to a luxurious suite within 
the Citadel. Freka, he was informed, regretted his inability to greet htm personally, but intended to meet all the gathered 
star-kings in the Great Hall within twelve 
hours. Meanwhile, there would be entertainment for the visiting warriors, and the 
hospitality of Kalgan. Which hospitality, 
claimed the hawk-faced steward pridef ully, 
was without peer in the known Universe! 
An imp of perversity stirred in Kieron. 
He found that he did not completely trust 
Freka of Kalgan. There was a premeditated cold-bloodedness about this whole 
business of the star-kings' grievance council that alerted him to danger. There 
should have been less smoothness and efficiency in the way the visitors were handled, 
Kieron thought illogically, remembering the 
troubles he, himself, had gone to whenever 
outworld rulers had visited Valkyr. He 
was suddenly glad that he had warned 
Nevitta to use extreme caution should it 
be necessary to bring Alys to Kalgan. It 
was possible he was being over-suspicious^ 
but he could not forget that Alys herself 
had seen a warlock from Kalgan in familiar conversation with the woman really 
to blame for the danger that smouldered 
red among the worlds of the Empire. 

The drums told the Valkyr that the 
other star-kings were arriving. Torches 
flared in the courtyards of the Citadel, and 
the hissing roar of spaceships landing told 
of the eagles gathering. 

TEfOUgh the long, featureless twilight, 
the sounds continued. Freka made no appearances, but the promised entertainment 
was forthcoming and lavish. Food and 
wine in profusion were brought to the 
apartments of the Valkyrs. Musicians and 
minstrels came too, to sing and play the 
love songs and warchants of ancient Valkyr while the warriors roared approval. 

Kieron sat on the high seat reserved for 
him and watched the dancing yellow light 
of the flambeaux light up the stone rooms 
and play across the ruddy faces of his 
warriors as they drank and gamed and 
quarreled. 



I 



14 



PLANET STORIES 



Dancing girls were sent them, and the 
Valkyrs howled with savage pleasure as the 
naked bodies, glistening with scented oils, 
gyrated in the barbaric rhythms of the 
sword dances steel whirring in bright arcs 
above the tawny heads. The long, gloomy 
twilight passed unregretted in the warm, 
flame-splashed closeness of the Citadel. 
Kieron watched thoughtfully as more women and fiery vintages were brought into 
the merrymaking. The finest wines and the 
best women were passed hand to hand over 
the heads of laughing warriors to Kieron's 
place, and he drank deeply of both. The 
wines were heady, the full lips of the 
sybaritic houris bittersweet, but Kieron 
smiled inwardly — if Freka the Unknown 
sought to bring him into the gathering of 
the star-kings drunk and satiated and 
amenable to suggestion, the lord of Klalgan 
knew little of the capacity of the men of 
the Edge. 

The hours passed and revelry filled the 
Citadel of N^. Life on the outer worlds 
was harsh, and the gathering warriors 
took full measure of the pleasures placed 
at their disposal by the lord of Kalgan. 
The misty, eternal dusk rang with the 
drinking songs and battle-cries, the quarreling and lovemaking of warriors from a 
dozen outworld planets. Each star-king, 
Kieron knew, was being entertained separately, plied with wine and woman-flesh 
until the hour for the meeting came. 

The sands had run their course in the 
glass five times before the trumpets blared 
through the Citadel, calling the lords to the 
meeting. Kieron left his men to enjoy 
themselves, and with an attendant in the 
harness of Kalgan made his way toward 
the Great Hall. 

Through dark passageways that reeked 
of ancient violence, by walls hung with 
tapestries and antique weapons, they went ; 
over flagstones worn smooth by generations. This keep had been old when the 
reconquering heirs to the Thousand Emperors rode their chargers into the Great 
Hall and dictated their peace terms to the 
interregna! lords of Kalgan. 

THE HALL was a vast, vaulted stone 
room filled with the smoky heat of 
torches and many bodies. It teemed with 
be-jewelled warriors, star-kings, warlords, 
aides and attendants. For just a moment 



the lord of Valkyr regretted having come 
into the impressive gathering alone. Yet 
it was unimportant. These men were — 
for the most part — his peers and friends ; 
the warrior kings of the Edge. 

Odo of Helia was there, filling the 
room with his great laughter; and Theron, 
the Lord of Auriga; KJeph of Quintain; 
and others. Many others. Kieron saw the 
white mane of his father^s friend Eric, 
the Warlord of Doom, the great Red 
Sun beyond the Horsehead Nebula. Here 
was an aggregation of might to give even 
a Galactic Emperor pause. The warlike 
worlds of the Edge, gathered on Kalgan 
to decide the issue of war against the 
uneasy crown of Imperial Earth. 

Questions coursed through Kieron's 
mind as he stood among the star-kings. 
Alys — ^pleading with Toran — ^what success 
could she have against the insidious power 
of the Consort? Was Alys in danger? And 
there was Geller, the mysterious warlock 
of the Marshes. Kieron felt he must seek 
out the man. There were questions that 
only Geller could answer. Yet at the 
thought of a wariock— a familiar of the 
Great Destroyer— Kieron's blood ran 
cold. 

The Valkyr looked about him. That 
there was power enough here to crush the 
forces of Earth, there was no doubt. But 
what then? When Toran was stripped of 
his power, who would wear the crown? 
The Empire was a necessity — ^without it 
the dark ages of the Interregnum would 
fall again. For four generations the mantle 
of shadows had hovered over the youngling Second Empire. Not even the most 
savage wanted a return of the lost years 
of isolation. The Empire must live. But 
the Empire would need a titular head. If 
not Toran, the foolish weak boy, then 
who? Kieron's suspicions stirred. . . . 

A nimble of tympani announced the 
entrance of the host. The murmuring 
voices grew still. Freka the Unknown had 
entered the Great Hall. 

Kieron stared. The man was— magnificent ! The tall figure was muscled like 
a statue from the Dawn Age; sinews 
rippling under the golden hide like oiled 
machinery, grace and power in every 
movement. A mane of hair the color of 
fire framed a face of classic purity — ascetic, almost inhuman in its perfection. 



THE REBEL OF VALKYR 



15 



The pale eyes that swept tlie assemblage 
were like drops of molten silver. Hot, but 
with a cold heat that seared with an icy 
touch. Kieron shivered. This man was already half a god. . . • 

Yet there was something in Freka that 
stirred resentment in the Valkyr. Some 
iadefinable lack that was sensed rather 
than seen. Kieron knew he looked upon a 
magnificent star-king, but there was no 
warmth in the man. 

Kieron fought down the unreasonable 
dislike. It was not his way to judge men 
so emotionally. Perhaps, thought the Valkyr, / unagine the coldness. But it was 
there! 

Yet when Freka spoke, the feeling vanished, and Ki^-on felt himself transported 
by the timbre and resonant power of the 
voice. 

'*Star-kings of the Empire !'* Freka 
cried, and the soimd of his words rolled 
out over the gathering like a wave, gaining power even as he continued: "For 
more than a hundred years you and your 
fathers have fought for the glory and gain 
of the Great Throne! Under Gilmer of 
Kaidor you carried the gonfalon of Imperial Earth to the Edge and planted it 
there under the light of Andromeda itself ! 
Your blood was shed and your treasure 
spent for the new Emperors ! And what is 
your reward? The heavy liand of a fool I 
Your people writhe under the burden of 
excessive taxation — ^your women starve 
and your children are sold into slavery! 
You are in bondage to a fooUsh boy who 
squats like a toad on the Great 
Throne . . .'* 

KIERON LISTENED BREATHlessly as Freka of Kalgan wove a 
web of half-truths around the assembled 
warriors. The compelling power of the 
man was astoimding. 

'The worlds writhe in the grip of an 
idiot ! Helia, Doom, Auriga, Valkyr, Quintain . . y He called the roll of the warrior 
worlds. "Yes, and Kalgan, too! There is 
not enough wealth in the Universe to 
satiate Toran and the Great Throne ! And 
the Court laughs at our complaints! At 
us ! The star-kings who are the fists of the 
Empire! How long will we endure it? 
How long will we maintain Toran (Xi a 
throne that he is too weak to hold V* 



Toran, thought Kieron grimly, always 
Toran. Never a word of Ivauie or Landor 
or the favorites who twisted Toran around 
their fingers. 

Freka's voice dropped low and he leaned 
out over the first row of upturned faces. 
"I call upon you — as you love your people 
and your freedom — to join with Kalgan 
and rid the Empire of this weakling and 
his money-grubbing and neglect 1" 

In the crowd, someone stirred. All but 
this one seemed hypnotized. It was old 
Eric of Doom who stepped forward. 

"You speak treason! You brought us 
here to discuss grievances, and you preach 
rebellion and treason, I say!^ he shouted 
angrily. 

Freka turned told eyes on the old warrior. 

"If this is treason," he said ominously, 
"it is the Emperor's treason — not ours.** 

Eric of Doom seemed to wilt under the 
icy gaze of those inhuman eyes. Kieron 
watched him step back into the circle of 
his followers, fear in his aging face. There 
was a power in Freka to quell almost any 
insurrection here, thought the Valkyr uneasily. He, himself, was bound by the 
promise he had made to Alys, but it was 
only that that kept him from casting in 
his lot with the compelling lord of Kalgan. 
Such a feeling was unreason itself, he 
knew, and he fought against it, drawing 
on his reserves of information to strengthen his resolve to obstruct Freka if he 
could. Yet it was easy to understand how 
this strange man had ^mng out of obscurity and made himself master of Kalgan. Freka was a creature made for leadership. 

Kieron stood away from the crowd and 
forced himself to speak. All his earlier 
suspicions were growing like a suffocating 
cloud within him. Someone was being 
fooled and used, and it was not the lord of 
Kalgan! 

"You, Freka!" he cried, and the lords 
turned to listen. "You shout of getting rid 
of Toran — ^but what do you offer in his 
place?" 

Frekas eyes were like steel now, glinting 
dully in the light of the wall-torches. 

**Not myself. Is that what you feared?'' 
The fine mouth curled scornfully. "I ask 
no man to lay down his life so that / 
may take for myself the Great Throne and 



16 



PLANET STORMES 



the sable mantle of Emperor! I renounce 
here and now any claim to the Imperial 
Crown! When the time is right, I will 
make my wishes known.'* 

The crowd of star-kings murmured approvingly. Freka had won them. 

"A vote!*' someone cried. "Those who 
are with Freka and against Toran ! A 
vote!" 

Swords leaped from scabbards and glittered in the torchlight while the chamber 
rang to a savage cheer. Here was war and 
loot to satisfy the savage heart! The sack 
of Imperial Earth herself ! Even old Eric 
of Doom's sword was reluctantly raised. 
Kieron alone remained silent, sword 
sheathed. 

Freka looked down at him coldly. 
"Well, Valkyr? Do you ride with us?*' 
"I need more time to consider/' said 
Kieron carefully. 

Freka's laughter was like a lash. "Time ! 
Time to worry about risking his skin! 
Valkyr needs time!" 

Kieron felt his quick anger surging. The 
blood pounded in his temples, throbbing, 
pulsing, goading him to fight. His hand 
closed on the hilt of his sword and it 
slipped half out of the sheath. But Kieron 
caught himself. There was something sinister in this deliberate attempt to ruin him — 
to brand him a coward before his peers. A 
man faced 'two choices here, apparently ; 
follow Freka into rebellion, or be branded 
craven. Kieron glared into the cold eyes 
of the Kalgan lord. The temptation to 
challenge him was strong — as strong as 
Kieron's whole background and training 
in the harsh warrior-code of the Edge. 
But he could not. Not yet. There were too 
many irons in the fire to be watched. There 
was Alys and her plea to Toran. There 
was the plight of his people. He could 
not risk the danger to himself of driving 
a blade through Freka's throat, no matter 
how his blood boiled with rage. 

He turned on his heel and strode from 
the Great Hall, the laughter of Freka and 
the star-kings ringing mockingly in his 
ears. 

IV 

KIERON AWOKE IN DARKNESS. 
Of the fire on the hearth, only embers 
remained and the stone rooms were silent 



but for the sound of sleeping men. The 
single Valkyr sentry was at his elbow, 
whispering him into wakefulness. Kieron 
threw back the fur coverlets and swung his 
feet over the edge of the low couch. 
"What is it?" he asked. 
"Nevitta, sir." 

"Nevitta! Here?" Kieron sprang to his 
feet, fully awake now. "Is there a woman 
with him?" 

"A slave-girl, sir. They wait in the outer 
chamber." 

Kieron reached for his harness and weapons, threading his way through his sleeping men. In the dimly lit antechamber, Nevitta stood near the muffled figure of Alys. 
Kieron went immediately to the girl, and 
she threw back her hood, baring her 
golden head to the torchlight. Her eyes 
were bright with the pleasure of seeing 
Kieron again, but there was anger*in them, 
too. The lord of Valkyr knew at once that 
she had not succeeded with Toran. 
"What happened, Nevitta?" 
"An attempt was made on the little, prin* 
cess' life, sir." 

'Whatr Kieron felt the blood drain 
from his face. 

"As I say, Kieron.*' The old Valkyr's 
face was grim. "We had to fight our way 
out of the Palace." 

"I never had a chance to speak to Toran," the girl said sombrely. "It was all 
that could be done to reach the spaceship. 
Even the Janizaries tried to stop us. Two 
of your men died for me, Kieron." 

"Who did this thing?" asked Kieron 
ominously. 

"The men who attacked the princess' 
quarters," said Nevitta deliberately, "wore 
the harness of Kalgan." 

That hit Kieron like a physical blow . . . 
hard. ''Kalgan! And you brought her heref 
You fool, Nevitta!" 

The old Valkyr nodded agreement. "Yes^ 
Kieron. Fool is the proper word . . ." 

"No!" Alys spoke up imperiously. "It 
was my command that brought us here. I 
insisted." 

"By the Seven Hells! Why?" demanded 
Kieron. "Why here? You could have been 
safe on Valkyr ! I know it was my order 
to bring you here, but after what hat^ 
pened ..." ^ 

"The princess would not hear of seeking 
safety, Kieron," said Nevitta. "When Kal


THE REBEL OF VALKYR 



17 



gan proved its treachery by trying to 
assassinate her, she could think only of 
your danger here . . . unwarned. She 
would risk her life to bring you this news, 
Kieron/' 

Kieron turned to face the girl. She 
looked up at him, eyes bright, lips parted. 
"What could make a princess risk her 
life . . ." Kieron began numbly. 

"Kieron . . ." The girl breathed his 
name softly. "I was so afraid for you." 

The Valkyr reached slowly for the clasp 
of her cloak and unfastened it. The heavy 
mantle dropped unnoticed to the flagstones. 
Alys stood, swaying slightly, parted lips 
inviting. Kieron watched the throbbing 
pulse in her white throat and felt his own 
pounding. He took a step toward her, his 
arms closing about her yielding suppleness. His mouth sought her lips. 

Unnoticed, Nevitta slipped from the 
antechamber and silently closed the door 
after him , . . 

KIERON STOOD before the arched 
window, staring out into the eternal, 
misty dusk of Kalgan, his heart heavy. 
Behind him, Alys lay on the low 
couch. Her bright hair lay in tumbled 
profusion about her face as she watched 
her lover at the window. Kieron turned to 
look at her, feeling the impact of her warm 
beauty. He began to pace the floor, wracking his brains for a lead to his next move 
in the subtle war of treachery and intrigue 
that had taken shape around him. 

He had ordered his men ready for attack, but for the moment there was little 
need for that kind of vigilance. What was 
needed was more information. Carefully, 
he marshalled what few facts he had at his 
disposal. 

The connection between Freka and the 
plotters in the Imperial City that he had 
suspected was proved at last by the attempt 
on Alys' life by men of Kalgan. The starkings were being used to fight a battle not 
their own. But whose? Freka's ... or 
Ivane's? No matter which, they were being 
tricked into striking the Imperial Crown 
from Toran's head, and the gain to them 
and their people would be — more oppression. 

The treatment he, himself, had received 
in the Imperial Court made sense now. 

a-Planet Stories— Fall 



Landor sought to drive him into the arms 
of Freka's revolt. Only Alys had spared 
him. 

Now, the star-kings must be warned. 
But by the code of the Edge, Kieron 
must prove to them that he was not the 
craven coward that Freka's laughter had 
branded him. And he needed proof. Proof 
of the monstrous structure of treachery 
and intrigue that had sprung up out of a 
woman's cupidity and an unknown starking's cold inhumanity. 

Kieron stared moodily down into the 
damp courtyard beneath the open window. 
In the early dawn it was deserted. Then, 
quite suddenly, there was activity in the 
walled-in square. An officer of the Citadel 
guard escorted a heavily cloaked figure 
into the yard, and with every evidence of 
great resi>ect, withdrew. The solitary figure paced the wet cobbles nervously. 

Who, wondered Kieron, would be 
treated with such obvious obsequiousness 
and yet left in a back courtyard to await 
the summons of Freka of Kalgan? A sudden thought struck him. It could be only 
someone who should not be seen by the 
star-kings and their attendants that filled 
the Citadel of Neg to overflowing. 

Kieron studied the cloaked nobleman 
with renewed interest. It seemed to him 
that he had seen that mincing walk before . . . 
^Lander! 

Kieron flung open the door to the outer 
chamber. His startled men gathered about 
him. Alys was on her feet behind him. 
He signalled for Nevitta and four men to 
enter. 

**Nevitta! Tear down that wall tapestry 
and cut it into shreds . . • Alys, tie the 
strips together and make a rope of it! 
Make certain the knots are secure enough 
to bear a man's weight . . . That^s Landor 
down there!'' 

Kicking off his spurred boots, Kieron 
eased himself over the ledge of the window. The courtyard was thirty feet below, 
but the ancient walls of the Citadel were 
rough and full of the ornate projections of 
Interregnal architecture. Kieron let himself 
down, feeling the mist wet on his face. 
Twice he almost lost his footing and 
pitched to the courtyard floor. Alys stared 
down at him from the window, whitefaced. 



IS 



PLANET STORiES 



He was ten feet from the bottom when 
Landor looked up. Recognition was instant. There was a moment of stunned 
silence, and Kieron dropped the remaining 
distance to land cat-like on his feet, bla,de 
in hand. 

"Kieron!" Landor's face was grey. 

THE VALKYR ADVANCED purposefully. *'Yes, Landor! Kieron! I 
wasn't supposed to see you here, was I? 
And you don't dare raise an outcry or 
the others will see you, too! That would 
raise quite su smell in the Consort's pretty 
brew, wouldn't it?" 

Landor shrank back, away from the 
gleaming blade in Kieron's hand. 

"Draw, Landor," said Kieron softly. 
"Draw now, or I'll kill you where you 
stand." 

In a panic, the First Lord of Space 
drew his sword. He knew himself to be 
no match for the Valkyr star-king, and at 
the first touch of blades, he turned and fled 
for the gate. He banged hard against the 
heavy panels. The gate was locked. Kieron 
followed him deliberately. 

"Cry for help, Landor," Kieron suggested with a short, hard laugh. "The place 
is full of fighting-men." 

Landor was wild-eyed. "Why do you 
want to kill me, Kieron," he cried hoarsely ; "what have I done to you . . . ?" 

"You've taxed my people and insulted 
me, and if that were not enough there 
would still be your treachery with Freka — 
tricking me and the others into rebeUion so 
that Ivane can seize the crown! That's 
more than enough reason to kill you. Besides . . ." Kieron smiled grimly, "I just 
don't like you, Landor. I'd enjoy spilling 
some of your milky blood." 

"Kieron I I swear, Kieron . . ** 
"Save it, dancing master!" Kieron 
touched Landor's loosely held weapon with 
his own. "Guard yourself !" 

Landor uttered an animal cr}^ of desperation and Itmged clumsily at the Valkyr. 
Kieron's sword made a gUttering encirclement and the First Lord's weapon clattered 
on the cobblegtones twenty feet away. 

Kieron's eyes were cold as he advanced 

on the now thoroughly terrorized courtier. 

"Kneel down, Landor. A lackey should 

always die on his knees." 

The First Lord threw himself to the 



cobbles, his arms around the outworlder's 
knees. He was grey with fright and babbhng for mercy, his eyes tightly shut. 
Kieron reversed his. sword and brought 
the heav>^ hilt down sliarply on Landor's 
head. The courtier sighed and pitched forward. Kieron sheathed his weapon and 
picked the unconscious man up like a sack 
of meal. Time was short. The guards 
would be returning to escort Landor to 
Freka. Kieron picked up the courtier's 
fallen sword. There must be no sign of 
struggle in the courtyard. 

The Valkyr carried Landor over to 
where Alys and Nevitta had lowered theh* 
improvised rope. He trussed Landor up 
like a butchered boar and called to them. 
"Haul him up !" 

Landor disappeared into the window and 
the rope came down again. Kieron climbed 
hand over hand after the vanished courtier. 
Within seconds he stood among his warriors again, and the courtyard was empty, 

tiT ANDOR!" Kieron splashed wine in 
-L' the unconscious man's face. "Landor, wake up !" 

The courtier stirred and opened his 
eyes. Immediately they filmed with fear. A 
hostile circle of faces looked down at him. 
Kieron, his dark eyes flaming. Alys ... the 
great red face of Nevitta, framed by tht 
winged helmet . . . other* savage looking 
Valkyrs. It was to Landor a scene from 
the legendary Seventh Hdl of the Great 
Destroyer. 

"If you want to live, talk," said Kieron. 
"What are you doing here on Kalgan? 
It must be a message of importance you 
carry. Ivane would have sent someone else 
if it weren't." 

"I ... I carry no message, Kieron." 

Kieron nodded to Nevitta who drew his 
dagger and placed it against Landor's 
throat. 

"We have no time for lies, Landor," 
said Kieron. 

To empliasize the point, Nevitta pressed 
the blade tighter against the pulse in the 
First Lord's neck. Landor screamed. 

"Don't . . . !'^ 

"Talk — or I'll cut the gftzard out of 
you!" Nevitta growled. 

'*A11 right! All right! But take tl^ai 
knife away ... !" 

"Ivane sent you here." 



•I 



1 
1 



THE REBEL OF VALKYR 



19 



Landor nodded soundlessly. 
''Why?' 

"I ... I ... was to tell Freka that . . . 
that his men failed to . . . to . . ." 

'To kill me!" finished Alys angrily. 
*'What else?'' 

"I . . . was also to tell him that the rest 
of the plan was . . . was . . . carried out 
. . . successfully." 

"Danm you, don't talk in riddles !'* Kieron said. "What 'plan'?" 

"The ... the Emperor is dead," Landor blurted, eyes wild with terror. "But 
not by my hand ! I swear it ! Not by my 
hand!" 

Alys choked back a cry of pain. 

"Toran! Poor . . . Toran . . ." 

Kieron took the terrified courtier by 
the throat and shook him. 

"You filthy swine! Who did it? Who 
killed the Emperor f' 

''Ivanef' gasped Landor. "The people do 
not know he is dead and she awaits the 
star-king's invasion to proclaim herself 
Empress ! ... In the gods' name, Kieron, 
don't kill me! I speak the truth!" 

"Freka helped plan this?" demanded 
Kieron. 

"He is Ivane's man," stammered Landor, "but I know nothing of him ! Nothing, 
Kieron ! The warlock Geller brought him to 
Ivane five years ago . . . that is all I 
know!" 

Geller of the Marshes . . . again. Kieron 
felt the awful dread seeping through his 
anger. Somehow the connection between 
Geller and Freka must be discovered. 
Somehow . . . ! 

Kieron turned away from the terrified 
Landor. The picture was shaping now. 
Freka and Ivane. The star-kings' rebellion. Toran . . . murdered. 

"Keep this hound under guard!" ordered Kieron. 

Landor was led away, shaken and weak. 

"Nevitta!" 

"Sir?" 

"You and the princess will go back to 
the ship as you came. She must be taken 
to safety at once. As soon as that pig is 
missed, we'll have visitors . . ." 

"No, Kieron! I won't go!" cried Alys. 

"You must. If you are captured on 
Kalgan now it will mean a carte bUmche 
for Ivane." 

"But then you must come!'* 



"I can't. If I tried to leave here now, 
Freka would detain me by force. I know 
his plans." He turned again to Nevitta. 
"She goes with you, Nevitta. By force if 
necessary. 

"Return to Valkyr and gather the tribes. 
We can do nothing without men at our 
backs. One of the ships will remain here 
with me and the men. We will try to get 
clear after we are certain that — " He 
looked over at the slim girl, his eyes sombre— "that Her Majesty is safe." 

The Valkyr warriors in the room 
straightened, a subtle change in their expression as they watched Alys. A gulf had 
suddenly opened between this girl and 
their chieftain. They felt it too. One by 
one they dropped to their knees before her. 
Alys made a protesting gesture, her eyes 
bright with tears. She saw the chasm opening, and fought it f utilely. But when Kieron, too, went to his knees, she knew it 
was so. In one fleeting moment, they had 
changed from lover and beloved to sovereign and vassal. 

She forced back the tears and raised her 
head proudly; as Galactic Empress, Heiress to the Thousand Emperors, she accepted the homage of her fighting men. 

"My lord of Valkyr," she said in a low, 
unsteady voice. "My love and affection for 
you — and these warriors will never be forgotten. If we live . . ." 

Kieron rose to his full height, naked 
sword extended in his hands. 

"Your Imperial Majesty," he spoke the 
words formally and slowly, regretting what 
w^as gone. "The men of Valkyr are yours. 
To the death." 



K' 



"lERON WATCHED NEVITTA and 
Alys vanish down the long, gloomy 
hall outside the Valkyr chambers — to all 
appearances a wariior chieftain and his 
slave-girl ordered away by their master. 
Even then, thought Kieron bleakly, there 
was danger. He saw them pass one sentry, 
two . . . three . . . They turned the corner and were gone, Kieron's hopes and 
fears riding with them. 

Already, there were sounds of confusion 
in the Citadel of Neg. Men were searching 
for the vanished Landor, Searching quietly, reflected Kieron with grim satisfaction, 
for the visiting star-kings must not know 
that Freka the Unknown held familiar 



^ 






20 



PLANET STORIES 



I 



audience with the Imperial First Eord of 
Space. Spur of the moment hunting parties 
and entertainments were keeping the visitors occupied while the Kalgan soldiery 
searched. 

Kieron weighed his chances of escape 
and found them small indeed. They dared 
not stir from their quarters in the Qtadel 
until the roar of Nevitta's spaceship told 
that the Empress was safely away. And 
meanwhile, the search for Landor drew 
nearer. 

An hour passed, the sand in the glass 
running with agonizing slowness. Once 
Kieron thought he heard the beat of hooves 
on the drawbridge of the Citadel, but he 
could not be certain. 

Two hours. Kieron paced the floor of 
the Valkyr chambers, his twelve reinaining 
warriors armed, alert, watching him. Nervously he fingered the hilt of his sword. 

Another hour in the grey, eternal twilight. Still no sound of a spaceship rising. 
Kieron's anxiety grew to gargantuan proportions. The search for Landor came 
closer steadily. Kieron could hear the 
soldiers tramping the stone c^rrid<irs and 
causeways of the Citadel. 

Suddenly there was a knock at tlie 
barred door to the Valkyrs' quarters. 

"Open! In the name of the lord of 
Kalgan!" 

A Valkyr near the door replied languidly. "Our master sleeps. Go away." 

Tlie knocldng continu#d. "It is regretted 
that we must disturb him, but a slave of 
the household has escaped. We must search 
for him." 

"Would you distufh the Warlord of 
Valkyr's repose for a slave, barbarians?'* 
demanded the warrior at the door in a hurt 
tone of voice. "Go away." 

The officer in the hallway was begin* 
ning to lose patience. 

"Open, I say! Or we'll bretk in!" 

"Do," offered the Valkyr pleasantly. "I 
have a sword that has been too long dry.'* 

How Landor must be sweating in that 
back room, Kieron thought wryly, tWnking 
that the Valkyrs would rather kill him than 
let his message reach Freka. But Landor's 
death would serve no useful purpose now. 
Time! Time was needed. Time enough to 
let Nevitta get Alys out of danger! 

Kieron stepped to the door, hoping that 
some warriors of the Outer Marches might 



possibly be within earshot and catch the 
implication of his words. "Kieron of Valkyr speaks!" he cried. "We have Laador 
of Earth here! Landor, the First Lord — 
is that the slave you seek?" 

But the only response was the suddeti 
crash of a ram against the panels of the 
wooden door. Kieron prepared to fight 
Still, no sound of a spaceship rising . . , 

The door collapeed, and a flood of Kalgan warriors poured into the room, weapons 
flashing. 

Savagely, the Valkyrs closed with them, 
and the air rang with the 'metaUic clash 
of steel. No mercy was asked and none 
was given. Kieron cut a circle of death with 
his long, outworld weapon, the fighting 
blood of a hundred generations of warriors 
singing in his ears. The savage chant of 
the Edge rose above the confuwd sounds 
of battle. A man screamed in agony as his 
arm was severed by a blow from a Valkyr 
blade, and he waved the »tump desperately, 
spattering the milling men with dark Wood. 
A Valkyr warrior went down, locked in 
a death-embrace with a Kalgan warrior, 
driving his dagger into his enemy again 
and again even as he died. Kieron crossed 
swords with a guardsman, forcing him 
backward until th© Kalgan slipped on the 
flagstones made slippery with blood and 
went down with a sword-cut from throat 
to groin. 

The Valkyrs were cuttkig down their 
opponents, but numbers were beginning to 
tell. Two Valkyrs went down before fresh 
onslaughts. Another, and another, and still 
another. Kieron felt the burning touch of 
a dagger wound. He looked down and 9aw< 
that a thrust from someone in the meiea 
had slashed him to the bone. His side was 
slick with blood and the white ribs showed 
along the ten inch gash. 

Now, Kieron stood back to back with 
his two remaining companions. The other 
Valkyrs were down, lying still on the 
bloody floor. Kieron caught a glimpse of 
Freka's tall figure behind his guardsman 
and he lunged for him, suddenly blind with 
fury. Two Kalgan guards engaged him 
and he lost sight of Freka. A Valkyr went 
down with a thrust in the belly. Kieron 
took another wound in the arm. He could 
not tell how badly hurt he was, btit faintness from the loss of blood was telling 
on him. It was getting hard to see clearly. 



THE REBEL OF VALKYR 



21 



Darkness seemed to be flickering like a 
bkck flame just beyond his range of vision. He saw Freka again and tried to 
reach him. Again he failed, blocked by a 
Kalgan soldier. A thrown sword whistled 
past him and imbedded itself in the last 
Valkyr's chest. The man sank to the 
floor in silence, and Kieron fought alone. 

He saw the blade of an officer descending, but he could not ward it off. And as 
it fell, a great hissing roar sounded beyond 
the open window. Kieron ahnost smiled. 
Alys was safe ... 

He lifted his sword to parry the descending stroke. Weakened, the best he 
could do was deflect it slightly. The blade 
caught him a glancing blow on the side of 
the head and he staggered to his knees. He 
tried to raise his weapon again . . . tried 
to fight on . . . but he could not. Slowly, 
reluctantly, he sank to the floor as darkness welled up out of the bloody flagstones to engulf him . . . 

V 

KIERON STIRRED, THE PULSING 
ache in his side piercing the reddish 
veil of unconsciousness. Under him, he 
could feel wet stones that stank of death 
and filth. He moved painfully, and the 
throbbing agony grew worse, making him 
teeter precariously between consciousness 
and the dark. 

He was stiff and cold. Hurt badly, too, 
he thought vaguely. His wounds had not 
been tended. Very carefully, he opened 
his eyes. They told him what he had already known. He was in a dark cell, filthy 
and damp. A sick chill shook him. Teeth 
chattering, huddled on the stone floor, 
Kieron sank again into imconsciousness. 
When he awoke again, he was burning 
with fever and a cold bowl of solidified, 
greasy gruel lay beside him. His tongue 
felt thick and swollen, but the sharp agony 
of his wounded side had subsided to a dull 
" hurt. With a great effort, he dragged himself into a comer of the dungeon and 
propped himself up facing the iron-bound 
door. 

His searching hands found that he had 
been stripped of his harness and weapons. 
He was naked, smeared with filth and dried 
blood. As he moved he felt a renewed flow 
of v^rarmth flooding down from his torn 



flank. The wound had reopened. Sweat 
was streaking the caked blood on kh cheek. 
His mind wandered in a feverish delirium 
— a nightmare dream in which the tall, 
coldly arrogant figure of Freka seemed 
to fill all space and all time. Kieron's 
over-bright eyes glittered with animal 
hate .... 

Somehow, he felt that the hated Kalgan was nearby. He tried to keep his eyes 
open, but the lids seemed weighted. His 
head sagged and the fever took him again 
into the ebony darkness of some fantastic 
intergalactic night where weird shapes 
danced and whirled in hideous joyous


ness . . . 

The rattling of the door-lock woke him. 
It might have been minutes later or days. 
Kieron had no way of knowing. He felt 
light-headed and giddy. He watched the 
door open with fever-bright eyes. A jailer 
carrying a flambeau entered and the light 
blinded Kieron. He shielded his face 
with his hand. There was a voice speaking to him. A voice he knew . . . and 
liated. With a shuddering effort, he took 
a grip on his staggering mind, his hate 
sustaining him now. Moving his hands 
away from his face, he looked up — into 
the icy eyes of Freka the Unknown. 

**So you're awake at last,'' the Kalgan 
said. 

Kieron made no reply. He could feel the 
fury burning deep inside him. 

Freka held a jewelled dagger in his 
hands, toying with it idly. Kieron watched 
the shards of light leaping from the faceted 
gems in the liquid torchlight. The slender 
blade shimmered, blue and silvery in the 
Kalgan's hands. 

''I have been told that the Lady Alys 
was with you — here on Kalgan. Is this 
true?" 

Alys . . . Kieron thought vaguely of her 
for a moment, but somehow the picture 
brought sadness. He put her out of his 
mind and squinted up at Freka's .gemmed 
dagger, unable to take his eyes from the 
glittering weapon. 

**Can you speak?" demanded Freka. 
**Was Toran's sister with you?" 

Kieron watched the weapon, a feral 
brilliance growing like a flame in his dark 
eyes. 

Freka shrugged. *'Very well, Kieron. 
It makes no difference. Does it interest 



22 



PLANET STORiES 



P 



you to know that the armies are gathering? 
Earth witt be ours within four weeks." His 
voice was cold, unemotional. *'You realize, 
of course, that you cannot be allowed to 
live." 

Kieron said nothing. Very carefully he 
gathered his strength. The dagger ... the 
dagger . . .! 

"I will not risk war with Valkyr by 
killing you now. But you will be tried by a 
council of star-kings on Earth when we 
have done what we must do . . ." 

Kieron stared hard at the slender weapon, his hate pounding in his fevered mind. 
He drew a deep, shuddering breath. Freka 
spun the blade idly, setting the jewels 
afire. 

"We should have taken you the moment 
Landor was missed," mused the Kalgan. 
*'But ... it really doesn't matter now . . ." 
Kieron's taut muscles uncoiled in a 
snakelike, lashing movement. He hit Freka 
below the knees with all his fevered 
strength and the Kalgan went down without a sound, the slim dagger clattering on 
the slimy floor of the cell. The guard 
leaped forward. Kieron's searching hand 
closed about the hilt of the dagger. With 
a sound of pure animal rage in his tliroat 
he drove it into Freka's unprotected chest. 
Twice again his hand rose and fell, and 
then the guard caught him full in the 
face with a booted foot and the light of 
the torch faded again into inl^ blackness . . . 



IN THE DARKNESS, time lost its 
meaning. Kieron woke a dozen times, 
feeling the dull throbbing ache of his 
wounds and then fading again into unconsciousness. He ate — or was fed — enough 
to keep him alive, but he had no memory 
of it. He floated in a red-tinged sea of 
black, unreal, frightening. He screamed or 
sobl3ed as the phantasms of his sick dreams 
dictated, but through it all ran a single 
thread of elation. Freka, the hated one, 
was dead. No horror of nightmare or delirium could strip him of that one grip on 
life. Freka was dead. He remembered 
vaguely the feel of the dagger plunging 
again and again into his tormentor's breast. 
Sometimes he even forgot why he had 
hated Freka, but he clung to the knowledge 
that he had killed him the way a drown


ing man clings to the last suffocating 
breath. 

Sounds filtered into Kieron's dungeon. 
Sounds that were familiar. The hissing 
roar of spaceships. Then later the awful 
susurration of mob sounds. Kieron lay 
sprawled on the stones of his cell-floor, 
not hearing, lost in the fantasmagoric 
stupor of delirium. His wounds still untended, only the magnificent body of a 
warrior helped him cling to the thread of 
life. 

Other sounds came. The crash of rams 
and the clatter of falling masonry. The 
shrieks of men and women dying. The 
ringing cacophony of weapons and the 
curses of fighting men. Hours passed and 
the din grew louder, closer, in the heart 
of the Citadel of Neg itself. The torches 
on the outer cellblocks guttered out and 
were left untended. The sounds of fighting rose to a wild pitch, interlaced with 
the inhuman, animal sounds of a mob gone 
mad. 

At last Kieron stirred, some of the familiar sounds of battle striking buried 
chords in his fevered mind. He listened to 
the advancing clash of weapons until it 
rang just beyond his dungeon door. 

He dragged himself into his comer 
again and crouched there, the feral light 
in his eyes brilliant now. His hands itched 
for killing. He flexed the fingers painfully 
and waited. 

The silence was sudden and as complete 
as the hu»h of the tomb. 
Kieron waited. 

The door was flung wide, and men bearing torches rushed into the cell. Kieron 
lunged sa\^gely for the first one, hands 
seeking a throat. 

''Kieron r Nevitta threw himself backward violently. Kieron clung to him, his 
face a fevered mask of hate. "Kieron ! It 
is I . . . Nevitta!'* 

Kieron's hands fell away from tfie old 
warrior and he stood swaying, squinting 
against the light of the torches. '*Nevitta . . . Nevitta?" 

A wild laugh came from the prisoner's 
cracked lips. He looked about him, into 
the strained faces of his own figiiting men. 
He took one step and pitched forward 
into the arms of Nevitta, ^\iio carried him 
like a child up into the light, tears streaking his grizzled cheeks , , , 



% 



THE REBEL OF VALKYR 



23 



FOR THREE WEEKS Alys and Nevitta nursed Kieron, sucking the poison of his untended wounds with their 
mouths and bathing him to break the fiery 
grip of the fever. At last they won. Kieron 
opened his eyes— and they were sane and 
clear. 

''How long?" Kieron asked faintly. 
"We were gone from Kalgan twenty 
days ... you have lain here twenty-one,'^ 
Alys said thankfully. 

"Why did you come back here?" Kieron 
demanded bitterly. "You have lo^t an Empire!" 

"We came for you, Kieron," Nevitta 
said. "For our king." 

"But . . . Alys . . ." Kieron protested. 
"I would not have the Great Throne, 
Kieron," said Alys, "if it meant leaving 
you to rot in a cell !" 

Kieron turned his face to the wall. Because of him, the star-kings fought Ivane's 
battle. And by now they would have won. 
The only thing that had been done was the 
killing of the treacherous Freka. He held 
Kalgan now, for the Valkyrs had returned 
seeking their Warlord after Freka's plan 
had stripped the planet of fighting men— 
and the mobs had done the Valkyr's work 
for them. But two worlds were not an Empire of stars. Alys had been cheated. Because of him. 

No ! thought Kieron, by the Seven Hells, 
no ! They could not be defeated so easily. 
There were five thousand warriors with 
him now. If need be, he would fight the 
Imperium's massed forces to win Alys' 
rightful place on the throne of Gilmer of 
Kaidor ! 

"Let me up," Kieron demanded. "If We 
hit them on Earth before they have a 
chance to consolidate, there's still a 
chance !" 

"There is no hurry, Kieron," said Nevitta holding him in the bed with a great 
hand. "Freka and the star-kings have already , . ." 

''Freka!" Kieron sat bolt upright. 
"Why, yes . . ." murmured Nevitta in 
perplexity. "Freka." 
"That's impossible!" 
"We have had information from the 
Imperial City, Kieron. Freka is there," 
said Alys. 

Kieron sank back on the pillows. Had he 
dreamed killing the Kalgan? No ! It wasn't 



possible! He had driven the blade into his 
chest three times . . . driven it deep. 

With an effort he rose from the bed. 
"Order my charger, Nevitta!" 

"But sir!" 

"Quickly, Nevitta! There is no time!" 

Nevitta saluted reluctantly and withdrew. 

"Help me with my harness, Alys," ordered Kieron forgetful of majesty. 

"Kieron, you can't ride!" 

"I have to ride, Alys. Listen to me. I 
drove a dagger into Freka three times . . . 
and he has not died! One man can tell 
us why, and we must know. That man is 
Geller of the Marshes!" 

NEG WAS A SHAMBLES. The advent of the Valkyrs had been a signal 
for the brutish population to go mad. Mobs 
had thronged the streets, smashing, killing 
and looting. The few Kalgan warriors left 
behind to guard the city had had to aid the 
Valkyrs in restoring order. It seemed to 
Kieron, as he rode along the now sullenly 
silent streets, that Kalgan and Neg had 
been deliberately abandoned as having 
served a purpose. If Freka still lived, as 
they said, then he was something unique 
among men, and not meant for so unimportant a world as Kalgan, 

Shops and houses had been gutted by 
fire. Goods of all kinds were strewn about 
the streets, and here and there a body — 
twisted and dismembered — awaited the 
harrassed burial detachments that roamed 
the shattered megalopolis, 

Kieron and Alys rode slowly toward the 
marshy slums of the lower city, Nevitta 
following them at a short distance. The 
three war horses, creatures bred to war 
and destruction, paced along easily, flaring 
nostrils taking in the familiar smells of a 
ruined city. 

Along the street of the Black Flames 
there was nothing left standing whole. 
Every hovel, every tenement had been 
gutted and looted by the mobs. Presently, 
Kieron drew rein before a shuttered 
shanty between ' two structures of fireblackened stone. 

Nevitta rode up with a protest. "Why 
do you seek this beloved of demons, Kieron?" he asked fearfully. "No good can 
come of this!" 

Kieron stared at the shanty. It stared 



i 



24 

back at him with veiled ghoulish eyes. The 
writhing mists shrouded the grey street 
in the eternal twilight of Kalgan. Kieron 
felt his hands trembling on the reins. This 
was the lair of the warlock. 

The stench of the marshes was thick and 
now the mists turned to soft rain. Kieron 
dismounted. 

"Wait for me here/' he ordered Nevitta 
and Alys. 

With pounding heart, he drew his sword 
and started for the door that gaped Jike 
the black mouth of a plague victim. Alys 
touched his elbow, disregarding his instructions. Her eyes were bright with fear, but 
she followed him closely. Secretly glad of 
her companionship, Kieron breathed a 
prayer to his Valkyr gods and stepped inside .... 

The place was a wreck. Old books lay 
everywhere, ripped and tattered. In a corner, someone had tried to make a bonfire of a pile of manuscripts and broken 
furniture and had half succeeded. 

"The mob has been here," Alys said 
succinctly. 

Kieron led the way through the rubble 
toward the door of a beck room. Carefully, he pushed it ajar with the point 
of his blade. It creaked menacingly, revealing another chamber—one filled with 
strange machines and twisted tubes of 
glass. Great black boxes stood along one 
wall, coils of bright wire running into the 
jumbled mass of shattered machines that 
dominated the center of the room. The air 
of the cold, silent room had a strange and 
unpleasant tang. The smell, thought the 
Valkyr, of the Great Destroyer! 

The tip of his sword touched one ®f the 
bright copper coils springing from the row 
of black boxes along the wall, and a tiny 
blue spark leaped up the blade. Kieron 
yanlced his weapon away, his heart racing 
vvildly. A thin curl of smoke hung in liie 
air, and the steel of the blade was pitted. 
Kieron fought down the urge to run m 
terror. 

"Fm afraid, Kieron T' whispered Alys, 
clinging to him. 

Kieron took her hand and moved cautiously around the pile of broken machinery. He found Geller then, and tried 
to stop Alys from seeing. 

"The Great Destroyer he served failed 
him," Kieron said slowly. 



PLANET STORIES 

The warlock was dead. The mob, terrified — ^and hating what they could not understand—had killed him cruelly. The staring eyes mocked Kieron, the blackened 
tongue lolled stupidly out of the dry lips. 
Geller's mystery, thought Kieron, was still 
safe with him. . , . 

On the way out, Kieron stopped and 
picked up the remnants of a book of sigils. 
It was incredibly old, for the characters 
on the cover were those of the legendary 
First Empire. With some difficulty he 
made out the title. 

"Terpetnally Regenerating Warps and 
their Application in Interstellar Engines'. . . ." 

The words meant nothing to him. He 
dropped the magic book and picked up 
two others. This time his eyes widened. 

"What is it, Kieron?" Alys asked fearfully. 

^^ "Long ago," Kieron said thoughtfully, 
•'on Valkyr, it was said that the ancients 
of the First Empire were familiar with 
the secrets of the Great Destroyer . . ." 

"That's true. That is why the Interregnum came, and the dark ages," said 
Alys. 

"I wonder," mused Kieron looking at 
the books. "What was this Geller known 
best for?" 

Alys shuddered. "For his h<^nmculi." 

"The ancients, it is said, knew many 
things. Even how to make . . . artificial 
servants. Robots, they were called." He 
handed her the book. "Can you read this 
ancient script?" 

Alys read aloud, her voice unsteady. 

'''First Principles of Robotics/'' 

"And this one?" 

"'Incubation and Gestation of Androids', . . . ^ ^ ^ 

Kieron of Valkyr stood in the silent, 
wrecked laboratory of ^ dead wariock 
Geller, his medieval mind trying to break 
free of the bondage of a mtlleniiium of 
superstition and ignorance. He understood 
now . . . many things. 

yi 

T IKE GREAT SILVER FISH 
^-^ leaping up into the bowl of nighl;, 
the ships of the Valkyr fket rose from 
Kalgan. Within the pulsing hulls five 
thousand warriors rode, ready for feattle. 



TflE REBEL OF VALK¥R 



25 



Against the mighty forces of the assembled star-kings, the army of Valkyr 
counted ior almost nothing; but the sav^e fighting men of the Edge carried with 
them their talisman — ^Alys Imperatrix, uncrowned sovereign of the Galaxy, Heiress 
to the Thousand Emperors — ^the daughter 
of their beloved warrior-prince, Gilmer, 
conqueror of Kaidor. 

In the lead vessel, Nevitta dogged the 
harried Navigators, urging greater speed. 
Below decks, the war chargers snorted and 
stomped the steel decks, sensing the tension of the coming clash in the close, 
smoky air of the spaceships. 

Kieron stood beside the forward port 
with Alys, looking out into the strangely 
distorted night of space. As speed increased, the stars vanished and the night 
that pressed against the flanks of the 
hurtling ship grew grey and unsteady. 
Still v^kxnty dimhed, and then beyond the 
great curving glass screen there was 
nr»thing. Not blackness, car emptiness. A 
smil-chilling nothingness that twisted the 
mind and refused to be accepted by human eyes. Hyperspace. 

Kieron drew the draperies closed and 
the observation lounge of the huge ancient 
liner grew dim and warm. 

"What's ahead, Kieron?" the girl asked 
with a sigh. "More fighting and killing?" 
The Valkyr shook his head. "Your Imperium, Your Maje^," he said formally, 
"a crown of stars that a thousand generations have gathered for you. That lies 
ahead." 

"Oh, Kieron! Can't ytm forget the Empire for the space of an hour?*' Alys demanded angrily. 

The Warlord of VaUcyr looked at his 
Empress in perplexity. There were times 
when women were hard to fathom. 

"Forget it, I say!" the gtrl cried, her 
eyes suddenly flaming. 

"If Your Majesty wishes, I'll not speak 
of it again," said Kieron stiffly. 

Alys took a step toward him. "There 
was a time when you looked at me as st 
woman. When you thought of me as a 
woman! Am I so different now?" 

Kieron studied her sfim body and sensuously patrician face. "There was a time 
when I thouglit of yow as a child, too. 
Those times pass. You are now my Empress. I am your vassal. Command me. 



I'll fight for you. Die for you, if need be. 
Anything. But by the Seven Hells, Alys, 
don't torture me with favors I can't 
claim!" 

"So I must command, then?" She 
stamped her foot angrily. "Very well, I 
command you, Valkyr I" 

"Lady, I'll never be a Consort!" 

The girl's face flushed. "Did I ask it? 
I know I can't make a lapdog out of you, 
Kieron." 

"Stop it, Alys," Kieron muttered heavily. • 

"Kieron," she said softly, "I've loved 
you since I was a child. I love you now. 
Does that mean nothing to. you?" 

"Everything, Alys." 

"Then for the space of this voyage, 
Kieron, forget the Empire. Forget everything except that I love you. Take what 
I offer you. There is no Empress here . . ." 

THE SILVER FLEET speared down 
into the atmosphere of the mother 
planet. Earth lay beneath them like a globe 
of azure. The spaceships fanned out into 
a wedge as they split the thin cold air 
high above the sprawling megalopolis of 
the Imperial City. 

The capital lay ringed about with the 
somnolent shapes of the star-kings' great 
armada. Somewhere down there, Kieron 
knew, Freka waited. Freka the Unknown. 
The unkillable? Kieron wondered. For 
weapons he had his sword and a little 
knowledge. He prayed it would be enough. 
It had to be. Five thousand warriors could 
not defeat the assembled might of the starkings. 

Shunning the spaceport, Kieron led his 
fleet to a landing on the grassy esplanade 
that surrounded the city. As the hurried 
debarkation of men and horses began, Kieron could see a cavalry force massing before the gates to oppose them. He cursed 
and urged Hs men to greater speed. 
Horses reared and neighed ; weapons glinted in the late afternoon sunli^t. 

Within the hour the debarkation was 
complete, and Kieron sat armed and 
mounted before the serried ranks of his 
warriors. The afternoon was filled with 
the flash of steel and the blazing glory 
of gonfalons as he ordered his ranks for 
battle ... a battle that he hoped with 
all his heart te avoid. 

Across the plain, the Valkyr could malce 



26 



PLANET STORIES 



^ 



out the pennon of Doom in the first rank 
of the advancing defenders. Kieron ordered Nevitta to stay by the Empress in 
the rear ranks and to escort her forward 
with all ceremony if he called for her. 

Alys rode a white charger and had clad 
herself in the panoply of 'a. Valkyr warrior 
maid. Her hips were girded in a. harness 
of linked steel plates, her long legs free 
to ride astride. Over her chest and breasts 
was laced a hauberk of chain mail that 
shimmered in the slanting sunlight. On 
her head a Valkyr's winged helmet — ^and 
from under it her golden hair fell in cascades of light to her shoulders. A silver 
cloak stood out behind her as she galloped 
past the ranks of Valkyrs, and they cheered 
her as she went. Kieron, watching her, 
thought she resembled the ancient wargoddess of his own world — ^imperious, 
regal. 

With a cry, Kieron ordered his riders 
forward and the glittering ranks swept 
forward across the esplanade like a turbulent wave, spear-heads agleam, gonafalons fluttering. He rode far ahead, seeking a meeting with old Eric of Doom, his 
father's friend. 

He signalled, and the two surging 
masses of warriors slowed as the two 
star-kings rode to a meeting between the 
armies. Kieron raised an open right hand 
in the sign of truce and old Eric did likewise. Their caparisoned chargers tossed 
their heads angrily at being restrained and 
eyed each other with white-rimmed eyes. 

Kieron drew rein, facing the old starking. 

"I greet you," he said formally. 

"Do you come in friendship, or in war?'* 
asked Eric. 

**That will depend on the Empress," 
Kieron replied. 

The lord of Doom smiled, and there 
was scom on his face. He was remembering Kalgan and Kieron's reluctance. "You 
will be pleased to know, then, that the 
Imperial Ivane bids you enter her city in 
peace — so that you may do her homage 
and throw yourself on her mercy for your 
crimes against Kalgan." 

Kieron gave a short, steely laugh. So 
Ivane had already learned of the Valkyr 
sack of Kalgan. "I do not know any *Imperial Ivane,' Eric," he said coldly. 
"When I spcke of the Empress, I meant 



the true Empress, Alys, the daughter of 
your lord and mine, Gilmer of Kaidor." 
He signalled Alys and Nevitta forward. 

The gonfalons of the Valkyr line dipped 
in salute as Alys trotted through the ranks. 
She drew rein, facing the amazed Eric. 

"Noble lady!" he gasped. "We were 
told you were dead!" 

"And so I might have been, had Ivane 
had her way!" 

' The old star-king stammered in confusion. There was more here than he could 
understand. Only a week before, he and 
the other star-kings had done homage to 
Ivane and hailed her as their savior from 
the oppressions of the Emperor Toran, 
and the nearest living kin to the late Gilmer. And now . . . ! 

Eric frowned. "If we have been made 
fools, Freka must answer for this!" 

"And now," asked Kieron grimly, "do 
we enter the city in peace or do we cut 
our way in?" 

Eric signalled his men to swing in beside the ranked Valkyrs and the whole 
mass of armed men moved through the 
fading afternoon toward the gates of the 
Imperial City. 

IT WAS DUSK by the time the cavalcade reached the walls of the Imperial 
Palace. Kieron called a halt and ordered 
his men to rest on their arms. Taking only 
Nevitta and Alys with him, he joined Eric 
of Doom in challenging the Janizaries of 
the Palace Guard. 

They were passed by the stolid Pleiadenes without comment, for the lord of 
Doom was known as a vassal of the Imperial Ivane. Faces set, the small party 
strode up the wide curving stairway that 
led into the Hall of the Great Throne. The 
courtiers had been warned by the shouts 
of the people in the streets that something 
was happening, and they had already begun 
to gather in the Throne Room. 

He had come a long way, thought Kieron, from the day when he had stood before the Throne begging an audience with 
Toran. Now, everything hung on his one 
chance to prove his case — and Alys' — ^to 
the assembled nobles. 

Kieron noted with some concern that 
the Palace Guards were gathering too. 
They covered each exit to the chamber, 
cutting off retreat. 



THE REBEL 

By now, the Hall of the Great Throne 
was jammed with courtiers and star-kin^s, 
all tensely silent — waiting. Nor did they 
wait long. 

With a blast of trumpets and a rolling 
of tympani, Ivane entered the Throne 
Room. Some of the courtiers knelt, but 
others stood in confusion, looking from 
Alys to Ivane and back again. 

Kieron studied Ivane coldly. She was, 
he had to admit, a regal figure. A tall 
woman with hair the color of jet. A face 
that seemed chiseled out of marble. Dark, 
predatory eyes and a figure like a Dawn 
Age goddess. She stood before the Great 
Throne of the Empire, mantled in the 
sable robe of the Imperium — a robe as 
black as space and spangled with diamonds 
to resemble the stars of the Imperial Galaxy. On her head rested the irridium 
tiara of Imperatrix. 

Ivane swept the Hall with a haughty 
stare that stung like a lash. When her 
eyes found Alys standing beside Kieron, 
they brightened, became feral. 

"Guards !" she commanded. "Seize that 
woman! She is the killer of the Emperor 
Toran!'' 

A murmuring filled the chamber. The 
Janizaries pressed forward. Kieron drew 
his sword and leaped to the dais beside 
Ivane. She did not shrink back from him. 
"Touch her, and Ivane dies!" shouted 
Kieron, his point at Ivane's naked breast. 
The murmuring subsided and the Janizaries pulled up short. 

"Now, you are all going to listen to 
fne !" shouted Kieron from the dais. "This 
woman under my blade is a murderess and 
plotter, and I can prove it !" 

Ivane's face was strained and white. 
(Not from fear of his sword, Kieron knew. 
"In the Palace dungeons you will likely 
find Landor . . ." Kieron continued. "He 
will be there because he knew of Ivane's 
plottings and talked too much when he 
had a dagger at his throat. He will conIfirm what I say! 

"This woman plotted to usurp the Imjperium as long as fwe years ag9! It may 
have been longer . . ." He turned to Ivane. 
**How long does it take to incubate an 
android, Ivane? A year? Two? And then 
to train him, school him so that every 
move he makes is intended to further your 
aims? How long does all that take?^' 



OF VALKYR 27 

Ivane uttered a scream of terror now, 
"Freka! Call Freka!" 

Kieron dropped his sword point and 
stepped away from Ivane as though she 
were contaminated. There was little danger from her now — ^but there was still 
another. 

Freka appeared at the edge of the dais, 
his tall form towering above the courtiers. 
"You called for me, Imperial Ivane?'' 

Ivane stared at Kieron with hate-filled 
eyes. "You have failed me! Kill him now!*' 



K 



lERON WHIRLED and caught Fre


drew back, giving them room to fight. No 
one made a move to interfere. It was 
known that Valkyrs had sacked the city of 
Neg, and according to the warrior code 
the two warlords must be allowed to fight 
to the death if they wished. 

Kieron made no attack. Instead he retreated before the expressionless Freka. 

"Did you know, Freka,*' asked Kieron 
softly, "that Geller of the Marshes is 
dead ? He was your father in a way, wasn't 
he?" 

Freka made no reply, and for a moment the only sound in the hushed chamber was the ring of blades. 

Suddenly Kieron lunged. His sword 
pierced Freka from breast to back. The 
Valkyr stepped back and pulled his blade 
clear. The crowd gasped, for Freka the 
Unknown did not fall . . . 

"Are you really unkillable?" breathed 
Kieron. "I wonder!" 

Again he lunged under the mechanical 
guard of the Kalgan. Again his blade sank 
deep. Freka backed away for a moment, 
still alert and unwoimded. 

Kieron shouted derisively at the starkings: "Great warriors! Do you see? You 
have followed the leadership of an android ! A homunculus spawned by the warlock Geller!" 

A gasping roar went up in the chamber. 
A sound of superstitious horror and growing anger. 

Kieron parried a thrust and brought his 
blade down on Freka's sword arm. Hard. 
A sword clattered to the flagstones — still 
gripped by a slowly relaxing hand. There 
was no blood. The android stiU unoved in, 
eyes expressionless, his one hand reaching 
for his enemy, Kieron struck again. A 



28 



PLANET STORIES 



clean cut opened from shoulder to belly, 
slicing the artificial tendons and leaving 
the android helpless but still erect. Kieron 
raised and lowered his blade in glittering 
arcs, Freka ... or the thing that had been 
Freka . . . collapsed in a grotesque heap. 
Still it moved. Kieron passed his point 
again and again through the quivering mass 
until at long last it was still. Somewhere 
a woman fainted 

A thick silence fell over the assemblage. 
All eyes turned to I vane. She stood staring 
at the remnants of the thing that had been 
. . . almost ... a man. Her hand fluttered 
at her throat. 

Alys* voice cut through the heavy stillness. "Arrest that woman for the murder of my brother Toran !" 

But the crowd of courtiers was thinking 
of other things. Jaded and cynical, they 
had seen with their own eyes that Ivane 
was a familiar of the dreaded Great Destroyer. Someone cried : "Witch ! Bum 
herr 

The mass of courtiers and warriors 
swept forward, screaming for the kill. Kieron leaped for the dais, his sword still 
bared. 

"ril kill the first one who sets foot on 
the Great Throne !" he cried. 

But Ivane had heard the crowd sounds. 
The black mantle slipped from her shoulders, and she stood stripped to the waist, 
like a marble goddess— her eyes recapturing some of their icy hauteur. Then, 
before she could be stopped, she had taken 
a jewelled dagger and driven it deep into 
her breast. 

Kieron caught her as she fell, feeling 
the warm blood staining his hands. He 
eased her down on the foot of the Great 



Throne and laid his ear to her breast. 
There was no pulse. Ivane was dead. 

BEFORE the assembled Court, the 
Warlord of Valkyr knelt before his 
Empress. The star-kings had gone, and the 
Valkyrs were the last outworld warriors 
remaining in the Imperial City. Now, they 
too, would take their leave. 

The Empress sat on the Great Throne, 
mantled in sable. Somehow, the huge 
throne and the vast vaulted chamber seemed to make her look small and frail. 

"Your Imperial Majesty,*^ said Kieron, 
"have we your leave to go?** 

Alys' eyes were bright with tears. She 
leaned forward so that none but Kieron 
might hear. "Stay a while yet, Kieron. 
At least let us say our goodbyes alone and 
not . . ." She looked about the crowded 
Throne Room, *'. . , not here.'* 

Kieron shook his head mutely. Aloud, 
he said again, "Have I Your Majesty's 
permission to return to Valkyr?'* 

"Kieron . . .!'* whispered Alvs. 
"Please . . .'* 

He looked up at her once, pain in his 
eyts, but he did not speak. 

Alys knew then that the gulf had opened 
between them again ; that this time, it was 
for the rest of their lives. The tears came 
and streaked her cheek as she lifted her 
head and spoke for all the Court to hear, 

"Permission is granted. My Lord of 
Valkyr. You . . . you may return to Valkyr." And then she whispered, "And my 
love goes with you, Kieron !" 

Kieron raised her jewelled hands to his 
lips and kissed them. . . . Then he arose 
and turned on his heel to stride swiftly 
from the Great Hall. 





A Short Story by 

RAY 
BRADBURY 




They had opened ii to find 
Ufhai they most desired • • • 



death-wish 



Tkey wandered the dead and fragile eities, leaking fer the 

legendary Blue BeMIe— 4iet knowing what it was, ner earing, 

net really wanting te find it • • • ever • • • 



THE SUNDIALS WERE TUMbled into wliite pefbbles- The birds 
of the air now flew in ancient skies 
of rock and sand, buried, their songs 
stopped. The rivers were currented with 
duat which flooded across the land when 
the wind bade it reenact an old tale of 
engulfment. The cities were deep laid with 



granaries of silence, time stored and kept, 
golden kernels of forgetfulno3«, pools and 
fountains of quietude and memory. 

Mars was dead. 

And then out of the large stillneiis, 
from a great distance, on the stones of an 
old highway, there was a tiny sound. 
First, like an insect, and growing larger, 

29 



30 PLAXET 

between the cinnamon hills, and finally 
broadening, flattening out, the sound buzzing and humming, while .something moved, 
growing big. 

The highway trembled. The rocks 
ground one upon another briefly. The 
soiuid grew into a thimder which shook 
down avalanches of dust in the old cities. 

The sound ceased. 

Mr. Albert Steinbeck and Mr. Leonard 
Craig sat in their rusted automobile, 
in the warm silence of midday, sighing. 
They looked at a city which did not move 
but stood with one stone upon another 
waiting for them to enter. 

"Hello!" cried Mr. Steinbeck. 

A tower dropped into soft dusting ruin. 

"Hello!" 

A second and a third tower crumbled 
into whispers of dust. 

"Hello!" 

Steinbeck waited. 

No more towers fell. 

"It's safe to go in now," he said. 

•To find the Blue Bottle?" said Mr. 
Leonard Craig, not moving. 

"Yes." 

"Why does everyone want it? What's 
in the Bottle?" 

"I don't know." Steinbeck checked his 
equipment. 

"Wfiio does know?* 

"Nobody knows. Those that found it 
never told." 

"Then why bother?" said Craig, lying in 
his comer of the car, a cigarette unlit on 
his lower lip. His mouth barely moved. 
His eyes were half shut and faintly amused. 

"Use a little sense," said Steinbeck. 
"It's because it might contain anything 
that everyone is looking for the Blue 
Bottle." 

^Everyone?'^ 

Steinbeck nodded. "It's old. Old as that 
desert there, or the canals." 

"A Blue Bottle," ^aid Craig, sitting up 
and looking around, as if trying to explain it to himself and the highway. 
"Blown by some ancient Martians, and it's 
in one of these damned cities. Mind you, 
I'm not criticising. IVe got nothmg to 
do. If I wasn't traveling with you, I'd 
be sitting under a tree somewhere or swimming in a canal. I'm just along for the 
ride. Continue." 



STORIES 

STEINBECK LOOKED at the rusted 
car. They had found it in an old ruin 
somewhere, part of the flotsam of the first 
Industrial Invasion of Mars that had died 
when resources had petered out forty 
years ago. He and Craig had worked on 
the motor for six weeks and it ran, intermittently, from dead city to city, through 
the lands of the idlers and roustabouts, 
the dreamers andthelazers, like himself and 
Craig, men who had never wanted to do 
anything and had found Mars a good place 
to do it. 

"Look at it this way, Craig," said Steinbeck; '*all of my life, I've done nothing. Nothing big. Everyone else I went to 
school with, they did something big, on 
Earth, on Venus, somewhere in the System. Now if s my turn." 

"You're a tramp," said Craig truthfully. 

"Not when I get that Blue Bottle.*' 

"Let me figure." Craig counted his fingers. "Nine, no, ten years you've hunted 
that damn thing. Long before I met you. 
And now the last two years since I landed 
on this place, I've been tagging along, 
watching you twitch nights. I see you by 
the fire, asleep. You whine and shake. 
You get nightmares. You sure must want 
it bad, and since you don't even know 
what's in that damn Bottle, that means you 
don't even know what you want from 
life." 

"Look, Craig, we argue about this every day.** 

"And every day I keep telling you to 
relax. You don't need an excuse to be a 
bum. You got this Blue Bottle as an exaise maybe, a rationalization, for you never doing anything. All / ask is a drink, 
some hot soup, a sandwich, plenty of sleep. 
No work, if I can help it. And / don't 
need a blasted Bottle to excuse my lazy 
carcass. All right, I'll shut up. Come on, 
we*ll get into the city." 

They walked on the stones of the avenue, past fountains of littered bone. 

'This building?" asked Craig. 

"Just a moment," said Steinbeck. He 
cupped his mouth and shouted, "You 
there!" 

They ran back. 

From the towers, in a shattering flight, 
stone griffens fell down. They banged the 
street. They flew to pieces. His voice sum


BEATB'WISH 



31 



moned them like live animals, and the 
towers answered, groaned, cradced, the gargoyle's tilted over, twisting, pluinmenting. 
They fell one upon another, their faces 
splintered, their teeth stinging in small 
flints on Steinbeck's chest. That was the 
way of these cities. Sometimes towers as 
beautiful as a symphony would fall at a 
cough. It was like watching a Bach cantata 
disintegrate before your eyes. A moment 
later there was only a sweltering heap and 
silence. 

'If the Blue Bottle was in there," said 
Craig, "we'll never know/* 

"Shut up." 

They tested another building atid enr 
tered. 

"You take that room. I'll take this," 
said Steinbeck. 

"In that bottle," said Craig, "is it a 
woman in there, a little accordian woman, 
all compressed up, like one of those tin 
cups you fold in on itself? or like one of 
those Japanese flowers y«u put in cold 
water and it opens out ?" 

"I don't give a damn for women." 

"That's what you think. Maybe that's it. 
You never had a wx>man, so maybe, subliminally, that's what you hope is in it?" 
Craig pursed his mouth. "Or maybe, in 
that bottle, something about your childhood. That's a thought. All put up in a bundle, a lake, a telephone pole or a tree yt>u 
climbed, a root-beer you drank, a sliver 
you got in your hand, green grass, a creek, 
some crayfish, how's that sound?" 

Steinbeck's eyes focusscd on a distant 
point. "Yes. Sometimes, that's almost it. 
I don't know." 

"What's in the bottle would depend, 
maybe, on who's looking. Old men would 
want a Youth Elixir in it. A scientist 
might want a perpetual motion machine 
in it. Biologists would expect to find the 
perfect edible all-purpose food to sustain 
life in any climate. What about you?" 

"Some nights," (said Steinbeck, "I almost know. I dream about it. AU I know 
is I've got to find it." 

"Now, if there was a shot <rf bourbon 
in it—" 

"Get on, and look!" 

THERE WERE seven rooms <mi the 
ground floor. They were filled with 
glitter and shine. From floor to tiiered ceil


ing there were casks, scuttles, cribs, erodes; 
magnums, pails, stoup«, tubs, urns, vases 
and cruets. These were fashioned of red, 
pink, yellow, violet and Wack glass. 

Steinbeck broke them, one by one, to 
eliminate them, to get them out of the 
way, so he would never have to go through 
them again, searching for the hidden treasure. The empty house sounded with con^ 
tinually breaking glass. 

Steinbeck finished his room. He stood 
ready to invade the next. He was afraid to 
go on. Afraid that this time ke would find 
it, the search would be over and meaning 
would go out of his Hfe. It had been with 
him a long time, this fear that some day 
he iiH)uld find the Bottle. And what would 
be left of his life then? Only after he had 
heard of the Bottle of Blue Glass from 
fire-travelers all tlie way from Venus to 
Jupiter, ten years ago, had life begun to 
take; on a purpose. The fever had lit him 
and he had burned steadily ever since. If 
he worked it properly, the prospect of 
finding the Bottle might fill his entire life 
to the brim. Another thirty years, if he 
was careful, and not too diligent, of searching, never admitting aloud that it wasn't 
the Bottle that counted at all, but the 
search, the running and the hunting, the 
dust and the cities and tlie going-on. Then 
he could die, his life full of activity, as 
senseless as a clock set to sound out its 
twelve strokes at some future date, and 
then lie still. 

What if he knew the Bottle to lie in 
the next room at this instant ? 

He would turn and walk out and not 
come back for many years. He knew that 
as certamly as he knew the forests of grey 
web and thidcets of spiders waiting in the 
long hall. 

He heard a sound. He turned and 
walked to a window looking out into the 
courtyard. A small grey, streamlined motorcycle had purred up almost noiselessly, 
at the end of the street. A fat man with 
blond hair eased himself off the spring 
seat and stood looking at the towers. Another searclier. A rich one, this time. Steinbeck sighed. Thousands of them, searching and searching. But there were thousands of brittle dties and towns aaid villages and it would take a millcnium to 
search them all. 

"How you doing?" Ci^g appeared in a 



32 



PLANET 



doon^ay. 

*'Get back to your own room and 
search/' 

'*I searched. Nothing." 

Steinbeck sniffed. "Do you smell anything?" 

"What?" Craig looked about. 

"Smells like — ^bourbon," said Steinbeck. 

^'Ho!" Craig laughed. "That's meV 

"You?" 

"I just took a drink. Found some in the 
other room." 

Steinbeck moved aside some red bottles 
and peered into a corner. 

"Sure," said Craig. "I shoved some 
stuff around and I found a mess of bottles, 
like always, and one of them had some 
bourbon in it, so I drank it." 

Steinbeck turned and stared. 

"Say that again." 

"So I drank it," said Craig. 

"What would bourbon be doing in a 
Martian bottle?" asked Steinbeck. His 
hands were cold. He didn't move, but he 
knew that he was trembling. He took a 
slow step. "What color was the bottle?" 

"I didn't notice, it was just a bottle — ^" 
Craig swallowed and turned pale. "Oh 
God!" he said. He put his hand to his 
throat and then to his mouth. "It wasi 
blue." And Craig was running. 

STEINBECK WANTED to yell, "No, 
don't ! Fm leaving." He tried to walk 
out, to get away. But Craig was back now, 
and there was a bottle, as blue as the sky, 
the size of a ismall fruit, light and airy in 
his hands as he set it down upon a table. 

"Here it is, it doesn't look very interesting to me," said Craig. "It can't be the 
right one. After all, it's just a bottle, a 
bottle with some bourbon in it, and very 
refreshing." He smiled. 

Steinbeck stood looking at it. 

"I don't see anything inside," he said. 

"You're insane," said Craig. "Go on, 
shake it." 

Steinbeck picked it up, gingerly. He 
shook it. 

"Hear the liquor gurgle inside?" said 
Craig. 

"No." 

"/ can hear it. Just as plain." 

"There's nothing in it, I tell you." 

"You don't see anything?* 

'^No." 



STORIES 

They set it on the table again and said 
nothing. Sunlight falling through a side 
window struck blue flashes off the tall, 
slender container. It was the blue of a 
star held in the hand. It was the blue of 
a shallow ocean bay at noon. It was the 
blue of a diamond at morning. 

"This is it/* said Steinbeck. "I know it 
is. We don't have to look any more. We've 
found it." 

"I guess you're right," said Craig, 
slowly. "If I see bourbon and you see 
nothing, it must be the Bottle. Are you 
sure you don't see anything?" 

Steinbeck bent close and peered deeply 
into the blue universe of glass. "There's 
something faint there. I can almost see it, 
but not quite. Maybe if I open it up and 
let it out, what ever it is, I'll know." 

"I put the stopper in tight. Here." Craig 
reached out. 

"If you will excuse me," said a voice 
in the door behind them. Steinbeck and 
Craig did not move. 

The plump gentleman with blond hair 
walked around into their line of vision 
with a gun. He did not look at their 
faces, he looked only at the blue glass bottle they held in their hands. He began to 
smile. "I hate very much to handle guns," 
he said, "but it is a matter of necessity 
now. I simply must have that work of 
art, and this need of mine overcomes any 
squeamishness I might have toward firearms. Now, the longer you refrain from 
giving me the Bottle, the more nervous I 
am inclined to become. My finger might 
easily cause an accident. To avoid any 
such unfortunate thing, I suggest that you 
let me take it and go." 

Steinbeck was almost pleased. It had a 
certain beauty of timing, this incident, it 
was the sort of thing he might have wished 
for, to have the treasure stolen before 
it was opened. It was only Craig's presence that had forced him to go ahead with 
opening the Bottle anyway, and now — 
there was the good prospect of a chase, 
a fight, a series of gains and losses, and, 
before they were done, perhaps another 
four or five years spent upon a new 
search. 

"Come along now," said the stranger. 
"Give it^ up. There's nothing in it for 
you, a lot for me." He shook the gun 
warningly. 



DEATH-WISH 



33 



Steinbeck handed it over. 

**Thank you and goodbye," said the 
plump man, then hesitated. "But first, 
your guns. Tm afraid 111 have to take them 
along with me, in case you should think 
of following," The guns were relinquished. 
"This is really amazing," said the plump 
man. "I can't believe it was as simple as 
this, to walk in, to hear two men talking, 
and to have the Bottle simply handed to 
me. 

He wandered off down the hall, out into 
the daylight, talking to himself. 

IT WAS MIDNIGHT. The cities of 
Mars were bone and idle dust. Along 
the scattered highway the rusted car 
bumped and rattled, past cities w^here the 
tapestries, the meters, the g>TOstats, the 
furniture, the paintings lay pow^dered over 
with mortar and insect wings. Past cities 
tliat were cities no longer, but only things 
rubbed to a fine silt that flowed senselessly back and forth on the winds between one land and another, like the sand 
in a gigantic hour-glass, endless pyramiding and re-pyramiding. Silence opened up 
to let the car pass, and closed swiftly in 
behind. 

Craig said, "We'll never find him. These 
damned roads. So old. Pot-holes, lumps, 
ever^^thing wrong. He's got the advantage 
on a motorcycle, you can dodge and weave. 
Damn it!" 

They swerved to avoid a crevasse. 

"You watch the sides of the road," said 
Steinbeck. "He could hide until we passed 
and then go the opposite direction." 

"Maybe he had a rocket parked somewhere and went up in it." 

"Wait a minute!" Steinbeck throttled 
the car down. He slowed and turned about. 
"I saw something back there." 

"Where?" 

They drove back a hundred yard,s. 
"There, you see?" 

In the ditch, by the side of the road, 
they saw a large mass. 

The plump man lay folded over his motorc}xle. 'He did not move. His eyes were 
wide and when Steinbeck flashed his torch 
down, the eyes burned dully. 

Steinbeck jumped down into the ditch 
and retrieved a gun from under the plump 
man's heaviness. 

a—Planet Stories— Fall 



"Where's the Bottle?" 

"I don't know." Steinbeck cursed. 

"What killed him?" 

"I don't know that either." 

"The motorcycle looks okay. Not an 
accident Looks as if he just let himself 
down here on his motordycle and died." 

Steinbeck rolled the body over. "No 
wounds. He stopped of his own accord." 

"Heart attack. He had to stop. He got 
down off the highway to hide in case we 
came by. Tliought he'd be all right. But 
the heart attack didn't go away. Killed 
him." He touched the body. "Cold. He's 
been dead at least five hours." 

"That doesn't account for the Blue Bottle." 

"Someone happened along. Lord, you 
know how many prospectors there are, on 
horseback, on foot, any old way." 

They both scanned the desert around 
them. Far off in the starred blackness, on 
the cinnamon hills, they saw a dim movement. 

"There!" Craig pointed. 

"Looks like three men, on horseback." 

"You going after them?" 

"I haven't decided." 

Craig opened his mouth to say something, but it was never said. 

BELOW THEM, in the ditch, as they 
watched, the figure of the plump 
man glowed and began to melt. The eyes 
took on the aspect of moonstones under a 
sudden rush of water. The face began to 
dissolve away into fire. The hair resembled small firecracker strings, lit and sputtering. At any moment, he might explode, 
shatter apart, so many fragments of crystal and glass and molten lava. The body 
fumed. The fingers jerked with flame. 
Then, as if a gigantic hammer had struck 
a glass statue, the body cracked upward 
and was gone into a million shards, becoming mist as the breeze carried it across 
the highway. 

"Good Lord," said Craig. "They must 
have done something to him, those three 
men, with a new kind of gun." 
"It wasn't a gun," said Steinbeck. 
"What was it, then ?" 
"I don't know. But I'll find out." 
"Are you going to follow them?" 
"Yes, I've decided. This decided me." 
He pointed to where the body had been. 



34 



PLANET STORIES 



M 



"It's happened before, this way. Men I 
knew who had the Blue Bottie. They 
vanished. And the Bottle passed on to 
others, who vanished. This is the first 
time I w^s present when it happened. It 
looked like a million fireflies, when he 
broke apart, did you notice?'* 

"I noticed." 

"We'd better start." 

"In the car?" 

"Yes." 

"But three against two, and we have 
only one gun — " 

"Stay here then." Steinbeck went back 
to the car. He judged the desert mounds, 
the hills of bone-silt and cinnamon. "It'll 
be a hard job, but I think I can poke the 
car through after them. I haz^e to, now. I 
think I know what's in the Blue Bottle, and 
for the first time in my life I want to 
have it. Always before, it was the running 
after it that counted. I never really wanted 
to find it, because I knew that what ever 
was in it couldn't possibly be as big as my 
dreams of what it should be. And now, 
suddenly, I realize that what I want most 
of all is in the Bottle. Now. Waiting for 
me." 

"Maybe you'll think Fm a coward," 
said Craig, coming up to the car where 
Steinbeck sat in the dark, his hands on his 
knees. "But I'm not 'going with you . . • 
because the Bottle means nothing to me in 
any way. I won't die for it. You're asking 
to be ishot by those goons out there who're 
running off wuth it That's your business. 
I'll follow you up, on foot. Then, if they 
should capture you, maybe I can ^figure a 
way of helping you. I just want to live, 
Steinie. Maybe I'm different than you. 
You seem to want something awful bad, 
something even you don't know what. Me ? 
I don't want anything but to kick around 
and drink and smell the air and sit down 
and think once in awhile. So you go on 
ahead and I'll walk. I just don't want to 
die right now. I like to walk at night, anyway, just looking around. Good luck." 

"Thanks," said Steinbeck, and drove 
away into the dunes. 

THE NIGHT was as clear as the water 
in a long river. It was as cool as 
water coming over the glass hood of the 
car. He drove the car over dead river 
washes and stones and spills of pebble, 



his hands fastened to the w4ieel as if all of 
destiny were in it. 

'He bent forward and gave the car full 
throttle. In the rushing roar, for a moment, 
there was time to cast his mind back, to all 
the nights in the last ten years, nights 
when he had built red fires on the sea 
bottoms, and cooked slow, thoughtful meals 
to spoon into his hungry mouth. And lying down and dreaming of his wants and 
desires. Always those dreams of wanting 
something. Not knowing what. Ever since 
he was a young man, the hard life on 
Earth, the great Panic of 2130, the slowstarvation, and then the budking through 
the planets, the womanless, loveless years, 
the alone years. You came out of the dark 
into the light, out of the womb into the 
world, and what did you find that you 
really wanted? Nothing. Nothing could 
touch you or change you. Out of the 
dark and comfortable womb into chaos, 
riot, want, torture. And wasn't it the same 
for all men? Were the rich men any better? What about that plump man back 
there on the highway, dead? Wasn't he 
always looking for something extra? Something that he didn't have? Peace? Or 
what? 

So what was there for men like himself ? Or for anyone? \Vjas there anything 
at all to look forward to? 

The Blue Bottle. 

He braked the car to a halt. He leaped 
out, the gun ready. He ran in the dunes. 
Ahead of him, three horses reared up in 
terror. He fired a shot. He aimed but 
there was nothing to aim at. Empty-saddled, the horses screamed and pelted off, 
throwing up great showers of sand. Their 
hooves pounded past a dead city and the 
bony towers fell, stone upon stone, at the 
echoes. 

Steinbeck ran hunched over. He cocked 
his gun. Then he returned it to his holster. 

The three men lay on the cold sand, 
neatly. They were Earthmen, with tan 
faces and rough clothes and gnarled hands. 
Starlight shone on the Blue Bottle which 
lay among them. 

Far away, the horses screamed faintly 
and plunged on. 

Steinbeck watched the bodies. 

And as he watched, the bodies began 
to melt. They vanished away into rises of 
steam, into dewdrops and crystals. In a 



DEATH'WiSB 



35 



moment they were gone. 

Steinbeck felt the coldness in his body as 
the flakes rained across his eyes, flicking 
his lips and his cheeks. 

He did not move. 

The plump man. Dead and vanishing. 
Craig's voice, '*Some new gim ..." 

No. Not a new gun at all. 

The Blue Bottle. 

They had opened it to find what they 
most desired. All of the desiring men 
down the long and lonely years had 
opened it to find what they most wanted 
in all of the planets of the universe. And 
all had found it, even as had these three. 
Now it could be understood, why the 
Bottle passed on so swiftly, from one to 
another, and the men vanishing behind it. 
Harvest chafif fluttering on the sand, 
among the dry river beds. Turning to 
flame and fireflies. To mist. 

STEINBECK PICKED UP the bottle 
and held it away from himself for a 
long moment. His eyes shone clearly. His 
hands trembled. 

So this is what I've been looking for? he 
thought. He turned the Bottle so it flashed 
blue starlight. 

So this is what all men really want ? the 
secret desire, deep inside, hid all away 
where we never guess? The subliminal 
urge. So this is what each man seeks, 
through some private guilt, to find? 

Death. 

An end to doubt, to torture, to monotony, to want, to loneliness, to fear, an 
end to everything. 

All men? 

No. Not Craig. Craig was, perhaps, far 
luckier. A few men were like animals in 
the universe, not questioning, drinking at 
pools and breeding and raising their young 
and not doubting for a moment that life 
was anything but good. That was Craig. 
There were a handful like him. Happy animals on a great reservation, in the hand 
of God, Craig and the men like him. With 
a religion and a faith that grew like a set 
of special nerves in them. The un-neurotic 
men in the midst of the billionfold neurotics. They would only want death, later, in 
a natural manner. Not now. Later. 

Steinbeck raised the Bottle to his face. 
'How simple, he thought, and how right. 
This is what I've always wanted. Nothing 



else. It was always in my mind but I 
never took it out into the light. I couldn't 
admit it. 

The Bottle was empty and blue in the 
starlight. He took an iminense draught of 
the air coming from the Bottle, deep into 
his lungs. 

'*I have it at last,'' he thought. 

He relaxed. He felt his body become 
wonderfully cool and then wonderfully 
warm. He knew that he was dropping 
down a long slide of stars into a darloiess 
as delightful as wine. He was swimming 
in blue wine and lavendar wine and red 
wine. There were candles in his chest, and 
firewheels spinning. He felt his hands leave 
him. He felt his legs fly away, amusingly. 
He laughed. He shut his eyes and laughed. 

He was very happy for the first time in 
his life. 

Tlie Blue Bottle, dropped onto the white 
sand. 

AT DAWN, Craig walked along, whistling. He saw the Blue Bottle lying 
in the first pink light of the sun on the 
empty white sands. As he picked it up, 
there was a fiery whisper of air. A number 
of orange and red and purple fireflies 
blinked on the air, and passed on away. 
This place was very still. 

"Here's the Bottle," said Cxaig. "Fll 
be damned." He glanced toward the dead 
windows of the city. *^Hey, Steinbeck !" A 
tower collapsed into powder. "Steinbeck, 
here's your damn bottle! I don't want it. 
Come and get it !" 

''Come and get it," said an echo, and 
the last tower fell. 

Craig waited. 

"That's rich," he said. "The Bottle right 
here and Steinbeck not even around to 
take advantage of it." He opened the Bottle and peered inside. "Yes, sir, just tlie 
way it was before. Full of bourbon, by 
hell! That's more like it." He drank and 
wiped his wet mouth. "Ah I Have another ? 
Don't mind if I do." 

He held the Bottle carelessly. 

"All that trouble for a little bourbon. I'll 
just wait right here for Steinbeck and give 
him his old bottle. Meanwhile ..." 

The only sound in the dead land was the 
sound of liquid running into a parched 
throat. The Blue Bottle flashed in the sun. 
Craig smiled happily and drank again. 






THE CROWDED COLONY 



Oh, how decadent these Martians were! Borke, Barnes and the 
rest of the Conqnerors laughed loudly at the dusty shrines, 
those crude and homely temples in the desert. More softly 
laughed the Martians, who dreamed of laughing last • • • 



WHEN THE MARTIANS HAD 
built the village of Kinkaaka there 
had been water in the canal, a 
cool, level sweep of green water from the 
northern icecap. Now there was none, and 
Kinkaaka clung to the upper swell of the 
bank and curved its staggered residential 
terraces like tragic brows over the long 
slope of sand and clay, the dead wall 
baked criss-cross by the sun, that bore at 
its deep juncture with the opposite bank 
tlie pitiful, straggling trench cut by Mars' 
last moving waters an untold time ago. 

Kinkaaka's other side, away from the 
canal, was coated rust-red by the desert 
winds that came with sunset. Here were 
the crumbHng market arenas of the ancient 
traders, the great mounds of underground 
warehouses long empty; and here now, 
with Mars' conquest, was the "native" 
section into whose sandstone huts the village's few inhabitants were shoved firmly, 
but not brutally, to rest when they weren't 
needed to work. 

Like most of the Conquerors, Jack 
Burke and his companions preferred the 
canal side of Kinkaaka. There they could 
sit in the stone-cool shade of the Expedition Restaurant and look through the 
broad glassless windows down the sunscalded canal bank, across to the opposite 
slope with its dotting of nomad caves, the 
desert beyond and the red-tainted blue of 
the sky. 

"Happy day we came to Mars," said 
Jack Burke. He picked up his stone mug 
and drank with a shudder. 

He was big and brown, typical of the 
Conquerors, and spoke, as they all did 
36 



when within earshot of natives, the Martian dialect which the Linguistics Squad 
had translated and reasoned to completion 
from the pages of script found in the 
metal cairn, half-buried in desert sands 
and upon which they had conveniently almost landed their space-cube upon arrival 
two days ago. 

That was one of the dicta of tiie Psychologists : Always speak the native tongue, 
and learn It preferably from graphics or a 
specimen before contacting the native collective. 

There were other policies as strange, 
or more so; but the Psychologists, oflfworld in the home-shJp and poring over 
the translations beamed to them, must 
know what they were doing. 

Barnes looked up in quick response to 
Burke's sarcasm. Of the three Conquerors 
at this table, he was the smallest. He 
fiddled nervously with his one-pronged 
fork, turning a piece of badly cooked 
huj over and over, not looking at it. 

"That," he said, and he included the 
hiij, "is a mouthful. There doesn^t seem to 
be a Martian in this village who can cook 
worth a damn, and you — " this to the 
pasty faced Martian who stood attentively 
by — "are no exception. You're getting off 
easy with this job, Martian. Or would you 
rather go back to digging up history with 
the rest of your tribe?" 

"I am sorry." The Martian adv^anced 
and bobbed his head. "The preparation of 
your foodstuffs is difficult for me to comprehend. Would you care to try something 
else, perhaps?" 

Barnes skidded the fork onto the pla;te 




''There goes a pretty decent pernon^ said Burke. "I'w glad we don^t have to 

kill him.'* 



37 



38 



PLA2VET STORIES 



and put his hands flat on the stone table. 
"No. Just take this away." 

The Conquerors watched the creature as 
it moved silently off with the plate of huj. 
All except Randolph, the youngest of the 
trio. 

HE SAT nearest the stone-silled window, his gaze reaching out distantly 
over the sandscape. On the* far bank of 
the canal he could see a few natives with 
their guards,, emerging from a wood and 
stone structure that thrust finger-shaped 
into the pink sky. 

**No race should have its soul dissected/' 
he said slowly. "Not, at least, until theyVe 
extinct and can't feel it." He avoided 
Barnes* sudden, sharp look. "Our Archaeologists over there — " pointing at the 
moving dots — "are poking around in burial 
crypts or sacred temples or whatever — it's 
like cutting someone up alive. We don't 
know w^hat those things mean to these 
Martians." 

Barnes laughed, more of a snort. "You 
speak as if 'these Martians' were people," 
He leaned forward and blinked his emphasis. "What in hell ever happened to 
you that youVe got such ideas? Primitive, 
misshapen morons — ^you can't think of 
them as persons ! Don't let an Intelligence 
Officer hear you talking that way or you'll 
find yourself getting shipped hoine!" 

Randolph's eyes flicked Barnes' heavy 
face, then turned to the mural on the 
restaurant wall. 

"This is very beautiful," he said. He 
bent closer, examining the delicate work. 
"This isn't moronic. You're wrong, 
Barnes." 

Burke spoke harshly : "You'd better shut 
up, Randolph. You're sitting there emoting over decadent art and there's an Intelligence Officer at the bar.** 

Young Randolph stiffened and forced 
a smile. "Of course, the Martians are a 
degenerated race. Our Archaeologists have 
revealed that Mars was spiritually effeminized thousands of years ago. Our colonization will have a reforming effect upon 
them. It is a healthy thing. That is our 
mission in time and space." 

The Martian had returned and was 
again standing at service. Randolph caught 
his eye and flushed, returned his gaze to 
the mural. 



Burke cleared his. throat. The Intelligence Officer at the bar was still looking 
icily at Randolph's back, twiddling his 
drink with a wooden mixer. 

"You cannot doubt," Barnes took up the 
fraying thread, "that our conquest of these 
Martians is a very good thing. For them. 
I ... for us, too . . . That is our mission 
in time and space. The first desert shrine 
— the metal one from which we learned this 
tongue we speak — is ugly enough proof. 
Sheaves of manuscript, recording the most 
disgusting standards and attitudes. And 
the contents of subsequently found structures — ^like that one across the canal — show 
an even greater decline into sensualism and 
the subjugation of creative energies." 

The Martian stood quietly, his smallfeatured face blank and smooth. He was 
meant to hear all this. 

"I heard one of our Archaeologists say 
something about the language of that first 
shrine — ^the metal one — l>eing different 
from all the others." Randolph shifted his 
great bulk to lean back against the wall. 
"The others are mostly alike, but this one 
we learned is totally different.'^ 

The Martian's eyes flickered. 

"So what?" Barnes grunted, "Dialects. 
Same thing at home.'* 

"But, I mean they—" 

"But what? These Martians here speak 
the language we learned, don't. they?" 

"But—" 

"Hell ! Do you speak Ahrianr 

"You know I don't." 

"So w^hen we get through investigating 
here and move on to other villages, we'll 
find Martians who speak the other dialects." 

The Martian said: "Will there be anything else, sirs ?" 

"Not," said Barnes, "unless you would 
like to try some noecUm.'* 

"No thank you, sir." 

Randolph and Burke raised their eyehoods humorously. Then they looked a 
little less amused as Barnes* voice hardened. 

"You might like it, Martian. Try it." 
He pulled a tough green wad of noedan 
from his pouch and tore off a strip. "I 
think the sooner you Martians get used to 
doing as we do and liking the things we 
like, the better off you'll be. Now take this 
noedan and use it." 



I 



THE CROWDED COLONY 



39 



••Oh, for heirs sake, Barnes—" Randolph put out a hand. "Let him alone. He 
doesn't want it. It makes him sick.*' 

The Intelligence Officer got up from the 
bar and started for the table, his eyes hard, 
his aural fronds quivering with emotion. 

Burke spotted him and seemed to shrug. 
"You asked for it, kid,*' he told Randolph. 
"Give my love to the home worlds. You're 
through on Mars.'* 

"Maybe that's what I wanted," said 
Randolph. 



THE INTELLIGENCE OFFICER 
halted beside the table and Randolph 
got up without a word and left with him. 

Burke and Barnes watched them down 
the winding clay street, saw them enter a 
portable teleport booth, one of the several 
scattered about Kinkaaka to facilitate trips 
to and from the space-cube. The door 
closed, the light blinked on and off, then 
the booth was open again, empty. 

"On his way back to the home-ship and 
Parna," grunted Burke, "and I don't know 
but that I envy him." 

"You too?" 

"Yeah. Now that there's no damned 
Intelligence Officer around, me too." 

"Disgrace and all?" 

"That's what stops me — " and noticing 
the angry color to Barnes' uiye — "and the 
glory of our mission. Hell, anyone can get 
homesick, can't they?" 

During the few moments of Randolph's 
arrest and departure the Martian had disappeared. Barnes grunted and shoved the 
noedan back into his pouch and finished 
his drink. 

"You'll never get anywhere acting like 
that," said Burke after a short silence. 
"You can't shove our ways down their 
throats and get cooperation." 

Barnes got up a little angrily. "Who 
wants to get anywhere? What do we want 
out of these creatures? They smell! How 
are we supposed to act? We own their 
smelly little world — " 

"Randolph might say we don't own it." 

"Shut up, Burke. I'm sick of that!" 

Barnes started for the door and Burke 
got up to follow. They stepped out onto 
the hot clay of the street, moving their 
top-skins against the tight-fitting impact 
of the sun's rays. 



"/ don't want anything from them, 
Burke, rm the one who should be sent 
home. / want to go home. Why should we 
go around labeled with Martian names? 
Barnes, Randolph, Burke, Smith — good 
God I And talking this /.rw-twisting sut::: of 
a language Martian of all the time speaking!" 

Burke chuckled, deep in his sac. "The 
Psychologists dreamed it up — ^to make us 
seem less alien. We speak their sounds. 
And we take their names. After all, no 
trouble at all is better than the little they 
might be able to give us if they got excited." 

They went down the street toward the 
teleport booth, two big octopoids, the sun 
warming their glistening brown backs. 

THE "MARTIAN" was in the cool 
back room of the restaurant, seated 
before a group of his kind. This was afternoon rest period, and some freedom to 
congregate eixisted then. 

A man turned from the wall slit through 
which he had watched the exit of Burke 
and Barnes. 

"Tliose things make me sick, Burke," he 
said to the "Martian". "How can you get 
so close to them and keep your stomach? 
They smell." 

Burke shrugged. "You get used to it, 
Barnes." 

He bent down and lifted the lid of a 
box that was stamped: FIRST MARS 
EXPEDITION— 2006. He took out a 
heavy proton-buster, broke the grip and 
examined its load of white pellets. 

"It's been two days now," he went on, 
"and I'm convinced at last that this one 
party is all. Scouts, perhaps, from a parent 
ship off in deep space. And I've listened 
to them talk. If they don't return, nobody's 
going to come looking for them. They come 
from that kind of society. The others will 
mark Sol off as a bad bet and move on." 

He clicked the gun together. "They still 
think we're the race pictured in the Martian crypts and temples — and in your 
translations, Randolph. Coincidence eh? 
that the old Martians were humanoid and 
their appearance not discrepant with ours." 

"We colonize Mars," mused Randolph, 
"and Beta Centauri colonizes us as Martians. Ring around the rosy." 

BuAe stood there, the proton-buster in 



40 



PLANET 



his hand. "And it was cosmic coincidence 
that the Centurians landed their ship at 
practically the same spot we'd set down 
only three days before. And it's almost incredible that they came to this village 
where we had taken up headquarters and 
addressed us in English!*' He turned to 
Barnes. "You're the Psych-man . . . let's 
have it again. Slowly." 

Barnes half turned from the wall slit 
where he had been keeping an eye out for 
Centaurians. "They found our ship and 
took it to be a primitive shrine of some 
sort, never dreaming it was a vehicle, a 
space-craft." He waved another man to 
the slit and stretched his legs as he sat 
down on a crate. He struck a match and 
cupped it into his pipe. "I'm almost certain that they didn't even recognize the 
mechanisms as such. Their ship, as you've 
all seen, is a cube of pure energy, configurated — ^they're that alien. Also, I believe they're military men, soldiers and 
minor technicians. The top specialists are 
probably on the other ship, away from 
possible danger and biding their talents 
until called." 

The watcher's hand went up and fluttered for silence, and Barnes paused while 
heavy, meaty footsteps scuffled the clay 
outside. When they had passed, he spoke 
again, softly: 

"Fortunately, there wasn't room in our 
ship for a library, or they might have 
encountered the Terrestrial mind and 
caught on. But they learned our language 
— English, and a damned neat trick — from 
Randolph's written translations of the 
Martian inscripHones sensnales he was 
working on. And when they came here and 
addressed us in that language and we responded, nolens-volens they took us for 
Martians and judged us by the context of 
those translations — foolish, vain and harmless, but perhaps with some value as workers. They even took our names from the 
nameplates on our bunks, something tliat 
would have found favor with the perverse 
Fourth-Era Martians they presumed us to 
be." He sucked at his pipe which had gone 
out. "Their Psychologists are clever — 
maybe a little too clever. They think we 
have no violence potential." 

Randolph seemed almost entranced. 
"But how could they have worked out the 
phonetics ?" 



STORIES 

Barnes grinned, lifted a shoulder In admiration and envy. "I don't know . • . 
Ask them,*' 

"They couldn't know they were our 
names," said Randolph. 

"No, but they thought they were native 
names. Thank God, we got the pitch right 
off and were able to carry the farce." 

"Why didn't they just kill us?" 

BARNES FROWNED and struck another match. "That would've been 
the really smart thing to do, Dolph, but 
they're not brutes and they're not making 
war. Their imtention is to colonize, and 
we might as well be insects for all we 
could mean to them or do to stand up to 
them." 

"But if we have to be dealt with at all, 
we're in the way — " 

Barnes had the pipe going. He shook his 
head. "We're not in their way; we Ye 
underfoot, and only a sick mind makes a 
point of stepping on ants. Would you kill 
a talking louse?" 

Randolph grinned. "Yes." 

"No, you wouldn't — not until you'd 
given it a going over." 

"They're not sick in a killing way," 
Burke grunted, "but they seem to feel 
that their colonizations act as cathartic to 
wayward worlds. Just look at them, and 
you know that's sick." 

"The people," said Barnes, "at the bottom of any movement — a pun, gentlemen — 
are always fed on dream-stuff. Soldiers 
always are. Trutli is, maybe the big boys 
at home think they can find enough use 
for us to warrant keeping us alive. As 
laborers, as subjects for experimentation, 
as pets." 

Burke looked out the window at the reddening sky. Then he gathered their attention by standing up. 

"If we hadn't been here," he said, "they 
would have gone on to Earth and taken 
over. As is, they tliink Mars is nothing 
to write home about, but they're sticking 
around to study awhile — ^not us, the supposed latter Martians, the d^enerates, but 
to search out and study the bones of Mars' 
civilization back when it was dynamic. 
Maybe there's something worth learning. 
That's what they think." 

He hefted the proton-buster. Barnes 
and Smith and Kirk and Randolph ani 



I 



THE CROWDED COLONY 



41 




Jason and all the others got guns irom the 
box. 

There was a hiss and they turned to 
the window. Rising above /the visible cluster of roof -domes from some point in the 
other side of the village was a smaller 
edition of the Centaurians' space-cube. It 
glirtted once, high up, and was gone^ 

'There goes a pretty decent person," 
said Burke. **Vm glad we don't have to 
kill him. He appreciated Randolph's watercolor painting of the canal." His voice 



was regretful. "How alien can you get? 
His name was Randolph, and he*s going 
home in disgrace." 

Night was coming. Burke's face hardened. The Centaurians would be coming 
too, ready to herd the Martians into their 
sleeping huts. 

*'One alien ship, terribly armed," Burke 
went on, "and sixty Centaurians walking 
around unarmed because they think weVe 
pansies." He cocked the gun. "They'll 
never leave Kinkaaka to bring back more." 



To give you a glimpse of future A JuilLi iJCl Jl 1^ 
• IN THE NEXT ISSUE 

THE LAST TWO ALIVE! 

A Navel of Chaos and Rebirth hy ALFRED COPPEL 

MITKEY RIDES AGAIN 

Sequel to THE STARMOUSE fey FREDERIC BROWN 



CARRY ME HOME 
fry €. H. UDDELI4 

Also Stories by Jokn D. McDonald 



CARGO TO CALLISTO 
By JAY B. BREXEL 



Allen K. Lang 



Fox B. Holden 



• Coming mp moon -4 • • RAYHiaiVB Z. GAIXIJN, WILLIAM THNN, RAY BRABBURY, NOEL LOOMIS, BRYCE WALTON and manw otherwl 



THE SKY IS FALLING 

The Blotr-IJp was coming. It was near, near • • • 
JTohnny Dyson knew lie would see it soon. One minBte, Earth. The next • • • little IVova, weeping radioactive dnst into the void. Then Johnny and the 
" R<ribot would build an Eden on Mars • .9 

By C. H. LIDDELL 



'^'^ 






^■^^^^■•v^ 



JOHNNY WONDERED WHEN the spaceship would get 
there. He didn't know where ''there" was — nobody knew. 
But he was anxious for landing-day to come. It would give 
day a real meaning, after the endless artificial days and nights of 
the ship. 

Not that the ship wasn't comfortable, and not that there wasn't 
purpose in that comfort. Johnny would have to be in perfect shape 



42 




"Benfjrt What's $h0 matter toith rouf Earth's gone , , , we're safe!" 



43 



44 PLANET 

when the hour of landing finally came and 
his job would begin. Because he wanted to 
be in condition to do the job, he had trained 
his mind to complete relaxation. 

So he lay back in his deep chair, and 
watched the viziports with their troubling 
tri-dimensional visions of what no longer 
existed. Blue sky, white clouds, birds, 
the tops of buildings — ^he closed his eyes. 
Perhaps it had been a mistake, after all, 
this hiding the blackness of space by camouflage. He didn't want to remember 
Earth. There was no Earth. There was a 
shaking white blaze among the stars, somewhere a long way back now, and that was 
all. No Earth. 

All that remained of it was himself, this 
ship, the robot that took care of them both, 
and the images that filled the viziports 
with nostalgic pictures. 

The rest was over, finished. He didn't 
often let himself think about the unpleasant past, or how, for himself, the beginning of the end had happened. . . . 

LEANING BACK against the bulkhead, Johnny Dyson smiled, 

"Go on," he said to the hooked fish 
named Benjy White. 

White tipped his head back cautiously 
because of the cumbersome helmet he 
wore, sprouting wires like Medusa-hair. 
He looked at his own fcweshortened image 
reflected dimly in the steel ceiling and 
nodded sagely at himself. 

"Yeah," he said, "I learned about women from her. I sure did. Toughest tomato I ever met, then or since. Only one 
thing ever scared Poochie — I called her 
Poochie— " 

Beyond the steel walls lay the endless 
red hills of Mars. Beyond the steel ceiling 
hung Orion in a blue-black sky lighted 
by tumbling moonis. Somewhere between 
here and Orion rolled a time-bomb called 
Earth with its fuse set and lighted and the 
hours ticking along toward Blow-Up. 

"I called her Poochie," White said. "If 
I told you her real name you'd be surprised. After she swiped my dough and 
divorced me she went right on to the 
top. What a woman. Now she owns half 
of—" 

Johnny Dyson thought of the take-off, 
scheduled for noon tomorrow. Back to 
Earth. Back to the eve of Armageddon. 



STORIES 

"Back to the world I never made,'' he 
thought fiercely. " — 7, a stranger and 
afraid—' '' 

Well, he had a right to be afraid. He 
knew what was coming. He thought : 

Problem : To keep the ship on Mars, 

Method: To steal the atomic fuel. 

It was perfectly simple. All good plans 
were simple. Unfortunately it depended on 
the simple mind of White whether or not 
the plan worked out. And White was a 
well-hooked fish, all right, but he wasn't 
landed yet. He wore the transmitter that 
controlled the ship's robot. And the robot 
was the key to the fuel supply which could 
bridge the long jump between Mars, where 
life could be an Eden, and Earth, where 
life was doomed. Sooner or later, sooner 
or later . . . 

*'Oh, well," White was saying. "Funny 
thing is, there's a warrant out for my arrest back on Earth, and the company that 
issued it belongs to Poochie lock, stock and 
barrel. She don't know about it, of 
course." He chuckled sardonically. 

"Think I could get her to quash that 
warrant? No, sir. Only one thing ever 
scared that woman. Thunder. If I went 
to Poochie right now — only it'd be a long 
walk — ^if I went to her and said, 'Poochie, 
remember how you used to try to crawl 
in my pocket whenever it thimdered ? Well, 
now, for old time's sake — ' " 

He grinned, shaking his head until 
the Medusa-wires whined against each 
other. 

"That woman,'* he said admiringly. 
"That woman. She'd put the cuffs on me 
herself. Tough as pig-iron. Never was very 
pretty, but she looks like a hippo these 
days. My opinion, if she ever got the 
idea of ccmquering the world, she'd do it. 
Oh well. She went up. I didn't." 

"What's the warrant fw:?" Dyson asked, 
not caring. 

"Larceny. I guess I sort of miscalculated 
there." White grinned again. "Not so 
good, is it? I look older than I am, the 
life I led, but Tm under fifty. And I 
always felt I had my best years ahead. 
Still feel that way. I'd hate to waste 'em 
in jail. I'll tell you, Johnny, I kind of 
like your idea of staying on here. Not 
going back. Nobody to say, 'Move along, 
bud.' And then there's lots of things I 
always wanted to do, never been let. Lots 



THE SKY IS FALLING 



45 



of things. On Earth, I'd never get a 
chance." 

Now they were getting to it. Dyson 
kept the eagerness out of his voice with 
rigid control. All he said was, "We're in 
Eden, Benjy. We've got all the power we 
need in the batteries — safe power. Safe 
atomic power. We've got the robot. People 
were right when they said heaven was in 
the sky, Benjy. Mars is heaven." 

"Mm-m. Sometimes Mars is underneath, 
too. Still, the closer I get to that larceny 
rap, the more I like your idea. Just like 
Paradise. Milk and honey for free. All 
we'd need is some houris," White said, 
mispronouncing it. 

"You can't have everything,'* 

"Guess not. Still, it almost seems like 
in this set-up you got planned, I could 
wish for anything and just get it. If I 
wished for a woman — " He snorted* "I 
might get Poochie, come to think of it» 
Oh, Lord. Maybe later we could put the 
robot to work on quasi-biology. I recollect 
something about surrogate plasms. If I 
could rig the genes in advance I could 
maybe work out a nice, comfortable little 
lady and speed up her growing time. Wonder how long it'd take her to hit biological 
twenty? It's an idea, Johnny, it's an idea.'" 

"Sure, why not? Wish on a star. All 
you need's to be on the right star. This is 
it. We can do anything we want, and 
there's nobody to stop us." 

"Martkie," White said. 

"Two against one. Benjy?'* 

"Yeah?" 

"We can do it. Right now.'* 

White's brows lifted. 

"What's happened? Not—** His face 
changed. He tilted his head to stare at the 
dull reflection in the ceiling. Beyond it he 
was seeing the night sky and the bluegreen star of Earth. 

"Oh no, no," Dyson said quickly. "Not 
the Blow-Up. Not yet, anyhow." 

White shrugged. "May never come," he 
said, and stretched his arm out for a 
cigarette on the table beside him. "May 
never come at all." 

"It'll come," Dyson said quietly. "It 
doesn't matter a hoot whether or not our 
cargo gtts back to Earth. Ever since the 
Forties physicists have been looking for 
an atomic safety, and if they couldn't even 
find it through artificial radio-elements, 



what good can Martian ores do? We've 
wasted six months mining junk." 

"Can't tell that," White said, blowing 
smoke. "We got no equipment for refining 
and testing. All we do is hunt, dig and 
load. The rest is up to the physics boys." 

Dyson shook his head. 

"It'll come," he insisted. "Ever since 
Alamogordo it's been coming. So I say, 
what's the use of going back? All you'll 
get out of it's jail. All I'll get is — oh, I 
don't know. More hard work, more worries, the same old routine. And for what? 
The Blow-Up. That's all. Why work?" 

WHITE, sitting on the edge of the 
bunk, humped himself forward, el)x)ws on knees, cigarette dangling from his 
lips. The wires of the helmet cast complex 
shadows over his face. He didn't answer. 

Dyson said eagerly, "We can pull our 
plan right now, Benjy. Martine's microphotographing the log. He'll be busy for a 
couple of hours more anyway. We'll have 
all the time we need to hide the fuel." 

White tried absently to scratch his head 
and tangled his fingers in a maze of insulated wiring. 

"Not so fast," he said. "Wliat's the big 
rush? We got to think this over. I'm not 
going to haul that fuel around. Even if I 
had lead skin, I'd still say no thanks." 

"Who's asking you to haul fuel? All 
you've got to do is hand over that transmitter." 

White looked at him sidewise. His eyes 
grew slightly glassy. "Hold on there. The 
robot's got to stay energized. It takes 
somebody's mind to do that. If I took it 
off—" 

"I'd put it on." 

"Yes, but — ^look here, there might be 
trouble if I—" 

"Martine's busy, I tell you." 

"I mean robot trouble. Suppose we need 
the critter in an emergency? After all, the 
robot's the lad who's got to pilot us home." 

"Not if we don't go. Lodk, Benjy. We 
won't be leaving Mars. Got that?" 

White screwed up his face dubiously. 
"Yeah," he said. 

"Okay. That means the ship will be immobilized. Got that too?" 

White blew smoke and studied it, squinting. 

"Sure." 



n 



46 



PLANET STORiES 



"So we don't have to worry about the 
robot. All it's going to do is take the fuel 
out and hide it where Martine can't find 
it. Got that?" 

White snorted and inhaled smoke. 

"Sure I got it I ain't dumb. Even if 
they did pick three Jbeat-up techs like us 
for this crazy trip, that don't mean my 
head's soft yet, I get it, all right. Only, 
I got my orders about this robot. Martine 
would blow his top if he caught you witli 
the helmet on." 

"I know how to handle the thing. I've 
done it before." 

"Not since the Chief caught you passing 
the buck to the robot," White said with 
the air of one capturing a minor pawn. 

That had happened a month before when 
Dyson, wearing the transmitter, had sent 
the robot down a deep crevasse to test 
rock strata. Martine had objected violently. 
While the robot was far stronger and 
more agile than a man, it was also much 
heavier and more fragile, even in the decreased gravity of Mars. Obviously too, 
Martine considered the robot much less 
expendable than Johnny Dyson. Insofar as 
this argument applied to the social unit it 
was true, since the piloting of the ship 
depended on the precision, memory and 
integration of the robot. Dyson, however, 
remained unconvinced. 

Now he grinned. "You learn by experience," he said. "This time he won't catch 
me. Just hand the transmitter over. I 
know what I'm doing." 

"Well," White said, "well— of course 
if we do it at all, the robot's the boy to 
send. If a shield or a damper should slip 
I'd rather the robot was carrying the stuff 
than me. I'd hate to get my bones sunburned. Only, what about afterwards?" 

"Martine? Oh, he'll come around. He'll 
have to. He can't get away without fuel. 
He'll find out Mars is a nice place to live — 
not to visit." 

"I wonder about that," White murmured, and Dyson's eyes narrowed. He 
drew a deep breath. So much depended on 
this fool, this fool — 

"I thought you were convinced," he said, 
after a safe interval. 

"Take it easy. I didn't say no, did I? I 
got that larceny rap to think of. But — ^" 
he made a wrinkled grimace of indecision 
and touched the control button at his fore


head with a hesitating hand. 

"Go on," Dyson urged. "Take it off. 
From now on you can relax. You're free. 
You can do anything you want. Only give 
me the helmet." 

WHITE PUT BOTH HANDS to the 
steel crown of the thing, lifted it a 
little, rolled frightened eyes at Dyson and 
then suddenly, with a gesture of abnegation, raised it from his head and held it 
out. The white line its pressure had left 
on his forehead turned pink. He wrinkled 
his brow anxiously. 

"Careful, now, careful," he said unnecessarily. "Look out for that cord. And 
cut down to minimum before you put it on. 
Easy, now. Turn it up easy, Johnny." 

I>yson paid no attention to him. This 
was his moment of triumph, and Benjy 
White had ceased to exist A slow warmth 
seeped through his skull from the contact 
of the helmet, and the remote vibrations 
he felt were like the vibrations of music 
heard from far away. The music of the 
spheres, he thought. With this on his head 
he could control a planet — if Martine gave 
him another five minutes of freedom. 

"We'll have to take the robot outside," 
he said. "Got a control unit on a portable?" 

"Sure have." White did things to a wall 
panel and a square box slid out and 
cradled itself on a carriage with flexible 
telescoping legs. 

"Two miles of wire will do," Dyson 
said. "I've got the place for the cache 
spotted." 

"Two miles . . . mm-m. Two ... got 
it. Johnny, you really figure there won't 
be rescue ships sent out for us?" 

"Not a chance. Millions for defense, but 
try to get a few bucks spent on; an expedition like ours, once our work's done. 
Resale ships, ha. Rescue ships take expensive equipment. They take man-hours. 
You can't waste stuff like that, Benjy. 
Ask the Energy Allocation Board. It 
took a miracle to get this ship out and 
another to keep it from going for military 
defense." 

Dyson was talking with the topmost 
level of his mind, waiting for enough 
power to accumulate, listening to the music 
grow stronger and stronger in his skull. 

"Maybe so," White said doubtfully. 



1 



THE SKY IS FALLING 



47 



"What if the Chief sends out a signal, 
though? He might do it somehow. He 
might mark a big SOS out on the desert." 

Dyson considered the possibihty, weaving it in and out of 6iat beautiful, distant 
vibration of music. Martine was a problem, of course. But any problem could be 
solved, if you approached it the right way. 

"He'll come around," he said. *lt's two 
against one, remember. Once he knows he 
can't ever get back to Earth, he'll come 
around. Once he knows our plans • . . 
Who'd turn down Eden?" 

"Oh, it sounds like a lazy man's paradise, 
all right," White said. "That's for me. 
Little streams of whiskey come trickling 
down the rodcs. Just the same, I'd kind 
of like to see our cargo get bock home." 

"Wliat for? It's no good." 

"Can't tell. It might be. All I'm saying 
IS, I wish I could kick tlie ship on the 
rump and send her back to Earth." 

"How can the ship get back without tlie 
robot to guide it?" Dyson asked in a toopatient voice, his eyes unfocused as he 
concentrated on the gathering power in the 
helmet. 

HE TOUCHED IT with a tentarive 
finger and then bent to the mirror 
set in the wall to read the reversed image 
of the dial set in the helmet's front. "Won't 
be long now," he murmured. "We're going 
to need the robot, Benjy. Just remember 
that. Unless you want to work like a dc^." 

"I been working like a dog all my life," 
White said. "And all the bones had the 
meat chawed off before I got 'em. Oh, 
I'm convinced, Johnny, but I can't help 
thinking about Poochie." 

"You'd have plenty of time to think 
about her in jail." 

"Guess so. Tell you what. Maybe later 
we can figure a way to get the cargo home. 
If we built another robot — it nxight take 
quite a while, but if we managed it — ^we 
could spare the one we got now." 

"Why not?" Dyson agreed quickly. 
"Plenty of time to work that out later on." 

"Plenty. We'll want something to keep 
us busy, after Eden's all built I just — " 
He grinned a little sheepishly* "I don't 
know, I guess I just hate to give up without a struggle." 

"We aren't 1" Dyson was stung. "There's 
no use struggling when you haven't got a 



chance. If there was a chance I'd be the 
last man to give up, Benjy. I'd fight to the 
last ditch. But Earth's as good as gone, 
and . . . (rfi, shut up. Don't think about 
it." 

But he could fed it and see it — ^the 
solid planet shuddering underfoot, buckling 
above hollow emptiness, and the mushroom 
cloud rolling majestically toward the sky. 
Was it Man's fault? He'd picked up tliat 
fatally sliarp knife of liis own volition, 
but who gave Man the knife in the first 
place? God? It was the fruit of the tree 
of knowledge, all right, and to taste it 
was to die. God's fault, then, not Adam's. 
"Let's go," he said abruptly. "We 
haven't got all the time in the world. 
^Vhere's the robot?" 

"Storage. Johnny, you thought how a 
court of law might feel about this?" 

"The same way they'd feel about larceny, majrbe," Dyson said, and walked the 
control carriage out the door. As he tiptoed it along the passage he could hear 
White padding after him, worrying softly 
under his breath. 

Luckily they didn't have to pass Martine's door. Dyson urged the carriage 
faster, watched the trundling box rock 
liastily along before him like a dog on a 
leash. A plump Scotty, periiaps, with 
greyhound legs. He squeezed the bulb at 
the leash's end and the Scotty sprinted. 

Its radioactive sodium battery had a 
half-life of three years. After that, the 
battery could be recharged, but not without 
a pile to produce the right isotope. And 
there were no atomic piles on Mars. And 
there never would be. Plenty of storage 
batteries in the ship, but all of those, even 
hooked up in series, couldn't throw enough 
power into the ship to overcome Martian 
gravity. No, Mars hugged the ship to 
her bosom now with an unbreakable grip. 
Mars the mother, restraining it with strong 
apron strings, however foolishly it might 
try to plunge back across space to the 
world where doom awaited it. Mars would 
receive and hide the fuel and hold the 
ship to her bosom forever. 

Tlie batteries would be useful, though. 
They'd help provide all the comforts of 
home. This world, Dyson assured himself, 
was going to be a perfect Eden, an Eden 
with modem plumbing. 

He reined the control carriage to a halt 



48 PLANET STORIES 

and opened the door at his shoulder. There 
was the rdbot, waiting in storage. It hung 
cradled in a resilient mould that rocked 
occasionally as balances automatically 
shifted and compensated inside the grey, 
gleaming body. 



w^ 



GIGANTIC AND INHUMAN. Segmented like an ant, thorax and abdomen linked by a universal joint. Many 
specialized limbs. That was the robot. It 
had bulb-shaped eyes set in its abdomen, 
for underwater visfon. A turret-tower of 
mosaic eyes, some for day and some for 
night, rose from the top of the thorax. 

Lion-yellow, these eyes looked at Dyson. 

Urging the carriage before him, he 
stepped quickly into the room and moved 
to one side uneasily, trying to elude that 
steady stare. But he could not, of course. 
There were always facets whose optic 
axes faced the observer accurately enough 
to reveal the dark pigments around the 
visual sense-cells. Any spider can do the 
same trick. But the false pupils' stare unnerved Dyson. 

He reached for a dial on the control 
unit. White hissed a nervous warning 
from the door, and Dyson closed his mouth 
on an equally nervous retort. After all, it 
had been over a month since he had worn 
the transmitter, and if the robot fell down 
the noise would wake the dead. 

He tunied the dial very gently. The 
music deepened in his skull. And the robot 
stirred majestically, lifting its thorax. You 
could hear oiled steel moving sweetly on 
oiled steel. Solemnly the great gleaming 
creature clim»bed from its cradle and 
crossed the room, walking with no remotest likeness to the motion of life. 

Dyson met it in the center of the floor, 
at the chart-table, shooing the controlcarriage before him on its nimble legs. 
Together man and robot bent above the 
table, the robot's thoradc section hanging 
enormous above Dyson's shoulder, reared 
upright and curving over him while a 
compound crown of eyes focused on the 
maps. 

Dyson spun the selector until the right 
chart came up and spread itself out on the 
table in moulded relief that took the shadows 
of the room in miniature perfection, casting long fingers of shade across the tiny 



plastic valleys that duplicated what lay just 
outside the ship. It was perfect duplication, 
every hill slope and plateau showing clear. 
There was even — ^and Dyson blinked to 
see it — a blunt oval replica of the ship 
they stood in. 

He felt a little dizzy, half believing that 
inside that vinylite bulge on the map was 
a doll-sized room where a doll-sized Johnny 
Dyson stood watching a doll-sized chart . , . 

Above him the robot creaked conscientiously as it lowered its compound focus 
toward the map. Dyson shook off the illusion of infinitely repeated Johnny Dysons 
receding into the microcosm and touched 
the map with a careful finger, thinking 
into the transmitter as his fingers traced 
a course from the ship across the plain and 
up the hillside. The robot watched. Faint, 
remote clickings could be heard from inside it as it memorized the path. 

Dyson was just attempting to shake off 
the further illusion that a multiplicity of 
other and larger Johnny Dysons extended 
the opposite way, into the macrocosm, 
when a harsh, crisp voice spoke like God's, 
out of the air. 

"Dyson!** the voice said. "Dyson!" 



WHITE INHALED with a soft, 
appalled gasp. Dyson looked up 
sharply, feeling his stomach turn over. For 
he hadn't heard the inter-com click on. 
There had been no warning. And that 
could mean it had been on all the time. His 
voice and White's could have been babbling 
their mutinous plans straight into Martine's office, straight into his listening ears. 

"Dyson, report to my room. At once !" 

Dyson gulped. Then he shook his head 
at White and lifted a warning finger. If 
the inter-com had been open both ways, 
caution didn't matter now. Still, if Martine knew what they were doing, why 
waste time with the inter-com. The Chief '^s 
quarters were less than half a ship's length 
away. And Martine had long legs and a 
loaded revolver. 

"Reporting, sir, " Dyson said hoarsely. 

"That's all." 

There was no concluding click to prove 
the inter-com had been shut off. Dyson 
kept his finger raised. 

White was having difficulty in swallowing. 



THE SKY IS FALLING 



49 



There was still a chance, a good chance 
if Dyson hurried. He bent over the chart 
again, moving his finger along the course 
he meant the robot to travel He worked 
fast, but accurately. His orders clicked out 
with almost mechanical precision into the 
precise, mechanical brain of the robot. It 
took about thirty seconds to finish. 

Then the robot stepped back. Its huge 
thorax lowered on the gently purring joint, 
and it walked quickly out of the room. 
Walked— rolled— glided. There is no ww^d 
for the gait of an organism like that. It 
went smoothly and quite fast, making no 
sound except for the faint, small noises 
within it as mechanisms adjusted to the 
task at hand. Clicking with metallic 
thoughts, it moved away. 

Now it would go directly to the fuel 
supply chamber. Dyson's mind ran ahead 
of the great shining ant-shaped thing and 
traced its course out of the ship and across 
the face of Mars, as he had just traced 
it across the map. Over the plain, up the 
slope, into the cavern he had found weeks 
ago and marked for just this purpose. Load 
by load the fuel would accumulate there 
until not an ounce remained in the ship. 
And nobody but Johnny Dyson would ever 
know where it was. Nobody, that is, if the 
robot's memory track were erased in time. 
As the huge, majestic metal thing vanished down the corridor White caught Dyson's eye and drew his finger across his 
throat. 

Dyson grinned. He reached for a stylo 
pad with one hand and turned down the 
control-power with the other. 

*'A11 set," he wrote. ''Robot has orders. 
Keep transmitter on. Robot will signal 
when finished. Then erase memory track.'* 
He underlined the last sentence twice for 
emphasis and held it under White's nose. 

God's voice spoke again, peremptorily 
out of the empty air. 
"Dyson ! Fm waiting !" 
"Yes, sir — coming." 

Now he would have to move fast. He 
waited impatiently — ^and yet reluctantly, 
too — while the music of the spheres died 
slowly out of his skull. While its faint 
vibrations still rang he lifted the helmet off 
and fitted it on White's head. Neither 
of them dared to speak. 
Dyson turned and ran. 
4-Plaiiet Stories— Fall 



HE SLOWED DOWN by the time he 
reached Martine's closed door, and 
his strong will buckled slightly in the 
middle. What was going to happen now? 
Suppose Martine's first words were an 
accusation ? 

. , . Never mind, the take-off was due tomorrow. All three men would be needed. 
At worst, Martine would say unpleasant 
things. They might be very unpleasant — 
if the inter-com had been on long enough. 

Actually, the more urgent thing was 
what White would do. His conviction was 
shaky, at best. And he had full control 
of the robot now. He wzs entirely capable 
of recalling it, replacing the fuel and 
letting events take their own disastrous 
course, back to Earth, if Dyson left him 
alone long enough for his nerve to fail. 
So much depended on Dyson now — so terribly much. 

He had a moment's deep longing to lay 
his burden down. If he just stood here 
silent long enough, something might happen . . . 

Which was, he realized, exactly the sort 
of philosophy that kept Earth rolling along 
the old familiar groove toward atomic holocaust. 

He made himself knock on the door. 



Martine's collar wus open at the throat. 
He had his shoes off and his feet in neatly 
darned wool socks were crossed comfortably on the desk. Johnny Dyson stared at 
him in shocked amazement. He had never 
seen the Chief before except in full uniform, rigidly correct. Now Martine's face 
reminded him somehow of the robot deactivated. When he saw the bottle on the 
desk he knew why. 

For the first time he saw that Martine 
had a fat, soft face. 

The hi{f slob, Dyson thought exultantly. 
So he's solved that problem, all by himself. He's got a turn-off switch, after all. 
I won't have to kill him, later on. There 
won't be any trouble I can't handle. He 
can have all the whiskey he wants. We can 
make the stuff. Just pull out the nail in 
his foot, let the fire drain out, and refill 
with ninety-proof Martian vin du pays, 
home brewed. No, distilled. Doesn't matter. You can make the stuff out of any


so 



PLANET STORIES 



thing. All you need is a ferment. And 
there's plen^ of ferment in this ship right 
now. 

He restrained his immediate mad impulse to spit in Martinets eye and declare 
his intentions, which was probably just 
as wdl, for the Chief kept a revolver in 
his desk. Dyson waited, at attention, until 
Martine, who had been looking vacantly 
at the ceiling, glanced down and saw him. 

"Oh. At ease. Sit down, Dyson." 

"Yessir,** Dyson said with a respect fid 
no longer felt. It was hard to keep the 
triumph out of his voice. He should have 
realized that Martine had to be a secondrater too. They couldn't have spared him 
for this trip if he'd been first rate, 
"Thanks, sir," he said. 

Martine waved at the desk, where ;ai 
second, and empty, glass stood beside a full 
one and the bottle. 

"Pour yourself a drink, DysonJ^ 

THIS WAS too good to be true. Dyson 
moved forward willingly, because 
from the desk he could see the inter-com 
switch. While whiskey gurgled into the 
glass he leaned forward enough to observe 
that the switch was closed, after all. So 
Martine hadn't heard a thing. So the plan 
should work out perfectly, if White olayed 
along. 

"Happy landings, sir," he said, lifting 
his small glass. 

"Happy landings," Martine nodded, 
sniffing at his. 

But they meant very different things. 
Dyson was thinking, "We've already made 
ours. And it's going to be happy ever after, 
world without end, amen." Not like Earth. 
This is the way the world ends— how did 
that line go? That quoted-to-death line 
with the irritating ending. He couldn't 
quite remember. This is the way the world 
ends, not mth a bang but— but-- Never 
mind. 

"You're off duty," Martine said. "Relax." ^ 

"Fll try, sir." 

"We've done a hard job," Martine said 
with satisfaction. "Six months in the field. 
Shoddy equipment. Only three of us to do 
everything. It's been quite a responsibility. 
If anything had gone wrong—" He took 
another drink. "Well, the ore's loaded, the 
records went off to Earth half an hour 



ago and everything's done. Every microscopic, piddling, vital detail. Tomorrow 
we go on duty again. But our mission's accomplished." 

"For all the good it will do in the long 
run," Dyson said, and told himself to 
shut up. He looked down warily at the 
glass in his hand, surprised to find it empty. Careful, Johnny, careful, he thought. 
"What do you mean ?" 
"Oh, I don't know. After all, the 
nuclear physics boys have been working 
on the problem a long time without getting 
anywhere, haven't they? I don't see—" 
"Are you a qualified nuclear physicist.?" 
"I came within an ace of being one," 
Dyson said. 

Martine stared at him. "What hs^ 
pened ?" 

"Oh, I don't know." Dyson shrugged. 
"I guess I just realized finally how hopeless 
It all was. A good thing, too, from my 
viewpoint. If I were qualified now I'd be 
back home working on military projects 
like all the other competent boys. Whether 
they want to or not. It's practically martial law back there now." 

"Got to be," Martine said, looking at 
him curiously. "You can't just give up, 
you know." 

It was the same thing White had said, 
and it infuriated Dyson. They wouldn't 
see! He caught his breath for a sharp 
rebuttal, but what good would that do? 
None so blind, he thought, and remarked 
instead : "People don't cliange, sir. That's 
the trouble. People in general are — well, a 
bad lot, I'm afraid. They're bringing on the 
Blow-Up and no one can stop it No matter what anybody does." 

"Very likely," Martine said, bored. 
"Have another drink." 

"Thanks, sir." Dyson leaned over and 
poured himself a second glass, wondering 
as he did so why he kept on calling the 
Chief sir . . . For the first time, he realized, it didn't matter whether or not he 
irritated Martine. The important point was 
to allow time to get the fuel hidden. After 
that, Martine would stop being an officer 
automatically. (Of course, there was the 
revolver in the desk. He mustn't go too 
far.) 

"Where's White?" Martine asked. It 
was perfectly clear that he was bored. Maybe White would offer better eatertaimnent. 



1 



THE SKY IS FALLING 



51 



"He's — resting," Dyson said wildly. 

"Oh yes, energizing the robot for the 
take-off. I forgot. Well, now you've had 
your drink why don't you spell him? Maybe he'd like a drink, too." 

DYSON KNEW he had to say something that would catch the Chief's 
interest — it didn't matter what — anything, 
anything. White must be left to do what 
he was doing until the job was accomplished. All doubt in his mind vanished as 
to whether White was actually operating 
the robot as he had promised. Dyson was 
suddenly confident about that. The only 
thing that mattered was to let him finish, 
to give him time, to keep Martine quiet. 

''Sir," he said, "sir, I'd like your opinion. You've had experience. If I'm wrong 
I wish you'd tell me. Is it wrong to feel my 
generation's been cheated of its rights?" 

Martine yawned. Then he leaned back 
to flip a switch, and a tape began to play 
Lili Marlene with infinitely saccharine emphasis. 

*'You think the world owes you a living, 
eh?" he asked unpleasantly. 

"No, sir! Well — ^yes. Yes, a living, that's 
all. I want to stay alive. It isn't much to 
ask, is it? And the Blow-Up— " 

"Dyson, you've got atomophobia. Just 
try to remember that when we get back to 
Earth you'll have a better perspective. I 
know the last six months haven't been a 
picnic, but we had a job to do. Now — ^" 

"I've had perspective," Dyson said. 
"Ever since I was a kid. Sir, my father 
was Dr. Gerald Dyson." 

Martine opened his eyes. 

"Oh. So that's how you qualified for 
this trip. I wondered. You had the right 
technical training, of course, but — I wondered." 

"Oh yes, I had training. My father insisted on that. He worked on one of the 
first bombs, you know. He was one of the 
men who said, 'Oops, sorry.' Afterward he 
got a mission in life — to find an atomic 
control. Of course, there isn't any. He'd 
just lighted a stick of dynamite and 
handed it over to me. Until I was old 
enough to stand up for my rights and say 
the devil with it. Parents always try to 
compensate for their failures through their 
children. But I've finally got clear away 
from Earth. For the first time in my life 



I'm out from under the shadow of — " 
He paused, looked down at his glass, shuddered a little. 

"The shadow of the cloud, sir. A big 
black cloud, spreading out. I was brought 
up with it. My father ran the films over 
and over, studying them. I dreamed about 
that cloud. It got bigger and bigger. My 
father could have handed me an Eden on 
Earth, with controlled atomic power. It 
could have been like a magic wand. It 
could make all work unnecessary. By 
rights a fellow like me, bom in the Atomic 
Age, should never have any problems at 
all. Unlimited power's the answer to everything. But the only answer we're getting 
is the Blow-Up/' 

"I wish you'd quit saying that," Martine 
declared with sudden irritation. "You talk 
as if Earth had already gone up. It hasn't. 
Maybe it won't. There's a good chance we 
can still find a control. At least, we can 
go on trying." 

"But don't you see, that kind of thinking is just a pep talk to the galley slaves?" 

"If your precious Blow-Up ever does 
come," Martine said severely, "it'll come 
because people like you — " He paused and 
then shrugged. "Skip it," he said. "You've 
been under a strain, too. How about spelling White now at the robot and ... no, 
wait a minute. I forgot." He regarded 
Dyson with distrustful memory showing on 
his face. 

DYSON THOUGHT of the robot 
climbing down the crevasse and Martine blowing his top. He almost grinned. 
The Chief's paramount nightmare must 
be that something would happen to the 
robot. It had taken seven years in building 
and it was as integral a part of the ship 
as the fuel load. The fuel made up the 
muscles, but the robot was the brain that 
kept the complicated organism of the ship 
functioning in space. Dyson had thought 
first of disabling the robot, but he'd discarded the idea very soon. For one thing, 
he didn't know how. The robot had compensatory protective devices, the equivalent 
of an ego balancing its id. And anyhow, 
later on it would be useful. 

When Eden was built on Mars the robot 
would furnish the perfect means of reducing details to a minimum. It could do 
almost anything. To Martine its primary 



wm^^mmmm^ 



52 



PLANET STORIES 



^ 



function was running tKe ship, and it was 
less expendable than the men, but Martine's feeling toward the robot had a touch 
of narcissism, Dyson thought. Probably 
every time Martine looked in a mirror he 
saw a synthesis of Martine and robot. 

Later on, when the robot was made a 
hewer of wood and drawer of water — Dyson 
found himself suppressing a grin. Martine 
wouldn't like that at all. But he'd come 
around eventually. He could be bought, one 
way or another, just as Benjy White had 
been bought, with an intangible coinage. 

Martine sat up, lifted his feet to the 
floor and groped with his toes for the discarded shoes. 

*'Guess rii take White a Uttle drink/' 
he said. 

The whiske/s spreading warmth had 
been relaxing all the tension in Dyson's 
body. Now suddenly every nerve twanged 
taut again and he heard without a sound 
the same vibrating chords like distant music which he had sensed in his skull when 
he wore the control helmet. Only this 
time the music was all discords. He had 
to stop Martine. He had to. 

But Martine was on his feet now, stamping fnto his shoes, leaning to snap their 
catches. He tucked the bottle under his arm 
and picked up two dean glasses. 

"Welir 

"I — I'll take over, sir. I know how to 
handle the transmitter. Let me go. I'll send 
White in—" 

Martine was at the door now. He simply 
shook his head briskly and went out, letting the door slam behind him. 

Dyson looked at the dock, horrified to 
see how little time had passed, horrified to 
realize that in spite of all he had done this 
could still be happening. Surely, he had 
thought, at the last moment something 
would occur to him, some dever way to 
outwit Martine, some way to carry through 
the scheme that had so far worked so 
smoothly . . • 

Martinets footsteps receded down the 
passage into silence. Lili Marlene crooned 
itself away in over-sweet harmonies toward 
a close while Dyson swung like a metronome toward the door and away from it, 
waiting in vain for some idea about what 
to do next. Finally Lili Marlene was left 
for good and all under the lamplight, and 



Dyson discovered that he was opening 
Martine's desk with shaking hands. 

But the revolver wasn't there any more. 

So Martine would catch White while the 
robot was still at work hiding the fuel, and 
the ship would go back to E^rth, and all 
Johnny Dyson's brave plans for a new 
world began to waver around the edges. 
Of course, he could run away, he could 
hide. They could go back without him, if 
they would — but in the long run he 
couldn't win. Sootier or later ships would 
come screaming down through the thin air 
above the scarlet plains, loaded with truant 
officers hunting Johmiy Dyson . , . 



He stopped on the threshold of the storage room. Benjy White was solving nothing by twisting his hands together in an 
agonized way above the spin(He-l^;ged control carriage. The robot-cradle, of course, 
was empty. Martine wore the transmitter 
helmet, and by the look on his face Dyson 
knew the robot's activation directions were 
coming in clear and strong. Martine knew 
everything. 

His eyes met Dyson's. 

Dyson turned and ran. 

A DOLL-SIZED JOHNNY DYSON 
ran across the contours of a doll-sized 
chart away from a doll-sized vinylite 
spaceship. He didn't dare look up because 
in the sky the face of a gigantic Johnny 
Dyson might be looking down at him. Time 
had slipped back fifteen minutes and he 
had fallen into the microcosm, and somewhere up there, enonnous in an inconceivably vast spaceship, the whole scene was 
playing itself over again, from the moment 
Martine's voice had snapped an order-toreport into the inter-com. 

The vast, invisible finger of giant Jolmny 
Dyson, fifteen-minutes-ago- Johnny-Dyson, 
had traced his trail in advance. He knew 
where to run. He knew the route the robot 
would have followed. But the time-factor 
was unknown. 

The fuel might already be stored in 
the cache and camouflaged. Even if it had, 
still he had failed. For White hadn't erased 
the robot's memory track and Martine 
could follow every step of the way through 
the path of the metal mind. 



THE SKY IS FALLING 



53 



Martine was running behind him now. 
So was White, he thought. But he didn't 
look back. He was running from more than 
Martine, more than men. He ran from the 
power and tyranny of a suicidal and homicidal Earth. Under his feet the ground 
rang hollow, as though his subterranean 
palace were already built, and waited, a 
hollow Eden, for its inheritor. 

Then on the hillside ahead he saw a 
flicker of moonlight on metal and in the 
grey pallor of the night the robot came 
ponderously into his range of vision, toiling mindlessly under its fuel load toward 
the cave. 

A shout sounded behind him, ringing 
thinly in the cold air. Glancing back, Dyson 
saw the dwarfed figures still running behind him. The ship looked doll-sized beyond. 
Illusion persisted. Everything had gone 
small. Ahead of the minimized White came 
marionette Martine, the transmitter gleaming on his head, while he guided a puppet's 
puppet, the control box, at a grotesque 
rocking run across the plain. All of them, 
pursuers and pursued, moved with the 
nightmare slowness and lightness that 
Martian gravity induces. 

Dyson's head start — for he had plunged 
headlong out of the ship, and the others 
had lost time searching for him in the 
corridors — ^was a totally useless thing. He 
knew it. But he could not yet give up the 
faint hope that somehow, somehow, a way 
would be revealed to him at the last crucial 
moment. 

There was a white flash in the dark, and 
the thin report of a revolver behind him. 
Probably it was a warning only, for he 
heard no whine of a bullet going by. He 
looked up, meeting the crooked gaze of 
the two moons like twQ uneven eyes — eyes 
in the face of giant Johnny Dyson. The 
sky around him was filled with conflict. 
Orion's club was lifted, Taurus' horns 
were lowered, Andromeda struggled in her 
chains, Sirius was a bared and gleaming 
fang. And bright among them hung a bluegreen planet— blue for purity, green for 
peace . . . 

Dyson's vision telescoped through a 
dizzy spiral, down diminishing vortices of 
time and space. At the end was the bluegreen world and ten-years-ago Johnny 
Dyson, fifteen-years-ago Johnny Dyson, 
quite ignorant and quite safe. The world 



was his parents' responsibility in those 
golden days. Not his. Oh youth, youth, 
lovely and lost and safe. 

Martine fired again. 

Here-and-now Johnny Dyson ran on toward the robot, which was in the act of vanishing into the dark mouth of the cave. The 
cave was only an ant-burrow and the robot 
was a shining pale ant with a grain of 
sand clutched in its mandibles. Spatial dimensions had lost all importance along 
with the rest of the natural laws. Only 
in dreams did you seem to float like this 
when you leaped, running as if through 
glue from pursuing dangers. 

Directly ahead was a pile of shielded 
canisters, damper-hooks in place. Dyson 
slowed to study them, trying confusedly 
to estimate how many foot-pounds or tons 
of lifting pressure they represented. Not 
enough to lift the ship. There were only 
eight. If the robot had hidden all the rest, 
then Mars' apron-strings would still be 
strong enough to tie the ship down forever. If— if ... of course! If the rest 
were in the cave, and if he could get there 
first, then the answer was childishly easy. 
How could he have missed it? Exultation 
boiled up in him, filling his throat with 
triumph. 

He heard his name shouted, and he 
sprinted, bending low at each jump so the 
thrust of his toe would carry him forward 
and not up against the easy gravity of 
Mars. 

HE REACHED THE CAVE 
MOUTH just as the robot's emerging thorax caught light from the rolling 
moons. It did not pause, but its false pupils 
examined him, the radioatomic brain analyzed him as a mobile obstacle, and the great 
worker-ant walked straight ahead. Dyson 
got out of the way. The worker-ant moved 
majestically downhill toward the remaining 
fuel -canisters. 

Dyson paused at the cave mouth, peering in. It was so dark in there. He hesitated for a moment, knowing the solution 
to his problem was waiting for him in the 
dark, but feeling a curious reluctance to 
enter that black enclosure. 

He glanced back. Martine and White 
were much closer, running silently, and the 
robot was moving down the slope toward 
them ahead of its twin shadows. Tliere 



S4 



were more shadows thatt men moving toward him up the hill, twice as many shadows, in twinned pairs, one black and one 
gray on the purple mosses. Deimos and 
Phobos spun through the emptiness overhead, pale silver shaping the gliosts of all 
moving things behind them on the ground. 
But it was Phobos that guided them. 
Phobos, who is Fear. 

Dyson turned his back on them. They were 
still far enough away to look tiny. He could 
reach across the vinylite map and take the 
control box away from Martine between his 
thumb and finger • • • 

Instead he took out a pocket fluorescent 
and shook it alight. With an uncomfortable 
feeling that he was somehow violating a 
sanctuary, he stepped into the cave. There 
were the canisters, row upon row against 
the rocky wall. 

This was the mouth of Eden. He had 
chosen this site for his underground palace, hidden safely away in case after all 
rescue ships did come from Earth. But he 
hadn't really expected rescue ships. The 
spreading cloud of his childhood had gradually swelled until Earth was scarcely visible to him any more. It was a shadow cast 
before the flash of the Blow-Up. 

Working quickly, with both hands, he 
stripped the damper-hooks fnxn the canisters . . . 

A few minutes afterward he ran out of 
the cave and down the slope toward the 
approaching men with their escort of nervous shadows. His shout broke on a highpitched note of triumph. 

"Walk right in!" he cried across the 
plain. "It's all there, Martine! It's all in 
the cave! Go and get it!" 

Then the thimders began. 

THERE WASN'T any real danger. 
Not as long as they stayed out of 
the cave. The fuel was blowing off canister 
by canister, not all at once, because each 
was a unit and constructed with every 
safety precaution mankind knew how to 
apply. Bach one had a half-life of sixtyfive seconds. They weren't blowing all at 
once because Dyson hadn't activated them 
all at once. He had only two hands. 

One canister blew. Eight seconds later 
another one blew. The power that should 
have lifted a spaceship was going into light 
and sound and radiation too subtle to look 



PLANET STORIES 

dangerous. A mistn could walk into the 



cave and right up to the canisters, if he 
wanted. And he could walk out again. 

What would happen to his cells, his 
marrow, his blood and bones^ later, was 
another matter. Radium can be leached 
from the human body. But the invisible 
poisons in the cave couldn't be, ever. Gamma radiation leprosy, quite incurable, was 
pouring out of the canisters into the alternate white glare and blind darkness 
of the cave. 

Before that threat human conflicts altered. 

But not quite instantly. There was a 
brief, stunned interval in which Martine 
struggled with the readjustment of his own 
mind, changing rage over into terror, triumph into the awareness of defeat. 

He pointed his revolver. 

"Go back in," he said. "Turn it off." 

"No," Dyson said. 

**ril count three." 

"I'd rather be dead." 

Martine hesitated a moment. Then, 
"White," he said. 

White was staring at the bright mouth 
of the cave. It blinked and went dark. He 
licked his lips. 

"No, sir," he said. 

"Go in yourself," I>yson said to Martine, grinning, seeing the older man's face 
lighted again by the renewed glare from 
the cave. He waited until the thunder 
ceased briefly to vibrate, and said, "It's 
easy, you know. Just push the dampers in 
again. Either way, you lose. Stay where 
you are and you're washed up as a commander. Or go in the cave. You'll get back 
to Earth with the carg6 and maybe youll 
wear more stars on your shoulders — only 
you won't have any shoulders." 

"Shut up," Martine said crisply. 

The thunders rolled. 

Martine drew a noisy breath and yanked 
the control-carriage toward him. It came 
on its spindling legs, like a dog. He turned 
a dial. There was a clank of metal on 
rock and the robot moved slowly into sight 
toward them. He had cancelled its commands, then, and Dyson's orders were 
erased from its mind. But too late. Much 
too late. 

Now it began to move mindlessly toward 
the cave. 

"Fine," Dyson jeered. "That's the way 



1 




THE SKY IS FALLING 



55 



to save the fuel, all right It'll ruin the 
robot, of course, so it can't pilot the ship. 
But what of it? Mars is a nice place to 
liver 

Martine began to curse him. 

*'Oh shut up,'' Dyson said. "You're 
through. So's Earth. When the Blow-Up 
comes, we'll be out of it right here in our 
Ark, watching the Deluge from a nice 
safe distance." 

The thunders rolled. 

Martine made his mistake. He fell back 
on argument. His voice ^vas still firm, but 
what he said was, "Earth needs our 
cargo — " 

D}'son took a long chance and swung 
his arm,. The revolver sailed out of Martine's grip and thudded softly on the moss 
at Benjy White's feet. That meant Alartine's finger hadn't been inside the guard, 
on the trigger. And that meant many 
things . . . 

''Our cargo?" Dyson echoed, poised on 
his toes and watching Martine intently, 
ready to forestall the slightest move toward the revolver. He wanted to pick it up 
himself, but that would instantly change 
the plane of conflict from moral to physical, and on the moral plane he knew he 
was already the winner. 

Why didn't White pick it up? Why 
had White come along, anyhow? Whose 
side was he on ? Probably he didn't know 
himself. Dyson grimaced angrily at him. 
But he kept on talking: 

*'We haven't got the cure for the BlowUp in our cargo, Martine. There isn't any 
cure. And for one reason — ^just one. That's 
people. Men and women. They're no good, 
Martine. So they're going to die. All of 
them." He nodded toward the roaring 
cave. **Tliis is the way the world ends," he 
said. 

MARTINE LOOKED UP the slope, 
listened to the thunder. He didn't 
move. He liad nothing to say. Watching 
him, Dyson realized tliat he didn't care 
whether White picked up the gun or not. 
He had won without guns. 

''All right, Martine," he said, almost 
casually. "Let's have the helmet. You won't 
be needing the transmitter any more." 

There was a pause. The thunders rolled. 
Dyson glanced at White, who was staring 
at the pale eye of the cave. Dyson stooped 



swiftly and picked up the gun. 

"Johnny." 

It was White, still looking as if hypnotized into the cave-eye. 

"Well?" 

"Listen." 

The thunders rolled. 

"I hear it," Dyson said. Martine neither 
moved nor spoke. 

"Pint-sized Blow-Up," White said. "The 
real one would be a lot worse. Noisier. 
Somehow I never thought of that before. 
The noise." 

"We won't hear it." 

"We'd see it, though. I'd see it. I'd 
know." He wrenched his gaze away from the 
glare of the cavern and looked up into the 
dark, toward the blue-green star of Earth. 
"Poochie," he said slowly, "was always 
afraid of thunder." 

Dyson felt the bottom of his stomach 
drop out. He didn't know w^hy yet, not 
with his mind. But there was some danger 
approaching that had taken the lead away 
from him, out of his control. It was coming 
closer and closer, with every word White 
spoke and every slow thought that took 
shape in his brain. 

"I told you about Poochie," White said. 
"She used to be my wife, once. And the 
only thing that ever scared her was thunder. Used to hang on to me when — " 

The thunders rolled. 

"Benjy," Dyson said, his mouth dry. 
"Benjy—" 

"So I'm crazy," White said. "Can't help 
what you think, kid. I never thought the 
Blow-Up would sound like this. I think I 
ought to be around where Poochie could 
find me, if she wanted, in case the BlowUp comes." 

He started up the slope toward the cave. 

"Benjy!" Dyson said. His voice trembled. "You'd be dead in six months. And 
what good would it do? Our cargo can't 
stop the Blow-Up." 

"How do you know?" White asked over 
his shoulder. "It's not for us to say. Our 
job wasn't to stop the Blow-Up. It was 
to get some Martian ores back home. A 
man ought to do his job if he takes the 
pay for it." 

"Benjy! Don't move! I tell you, you 
can't stop the Blow-Up!" 

"I sure as hell can stop this one," White 
said, and went on up the slope. 



56 PLANET 

"Benjy, if you take another step FU 
shoot!'' 

White glanced over his shoulder. 

"No you won't, Johnny," he said. "No, 
you won't." 

Dyson tried to squeeze the trigger. 

He couldn't. 

He concentrated on White's silhouetted 
back and sighted along the revolver, and 
he forced a command down his arm, into 
his index finger. But the message never 
got through. Martine moved faster. 

MARTINE took the long, quick forward step and slammed the edge of 
his palm down on Dyson's wrist. The gun 
exploded in mid-air as it spun away. 

The thunders rolled. 

"Benjy !" Dyson shouted. It came out a 
thin whisper. He had to stop Benjy. He 
liad to. Benjy mustn't go into that cave. 
It was very, very wrong, somehow, for 
anyone but Johnny Dyson to go into that 
cave. He took a step forward, but Martine, revolver ready, blocked his path. Martine, the truant officer, ready to collar him 
and drag him back to Earth. Back to work, 
discipline, responsibility. 

Work. Discipline. Responsibility — 

"Oh, no, no !" Johnny Dyson whispered. 
In his mind's eye he saw his fragile Martian Eden glisten under the moons, all its 
palaces and shining towers beginning to 
dissolve around him, 

A Geiger began to tick in his brain. 

It ticked faster and louder. 

It roared. 

Then he felt the flash. He felt the top 
of his head open and the bursting nova 
explode and the ballooning black cloud 
spurt upward through the sutures of his 
skull. The cloud rolled out enormously, 
its edges curling over and under in the 
familiar, the terrible shape of doom. He 
looked up to see it . . . 

He saw the Earth-star, blue-green against 
the dark. He saw it change. He saw it 
change . . . 

The explosion in his head must have 
been only a faint and remote echo, he 
thought, of that other and larger and 
farther nova-burst. For an instant half the 
sky was Wotted out in the white glare of 
exploding Earth. He saw it happen. 

Then the glare receded and condensed. 
The Earth-star took shape again, no longer 



STORIES 

blue for purity and green for peace, but 
a dreadful, shaking, unstable glow. 

This is the way the world ends . . . 

Not with a bang, but a whimper. 

He heard himself laughing. 

He stumbled up the slope after White. 

"Benjy!" he yelled. "Benjy, wait! It's 
happened! Didn't you hear? Look up — 
it's happened r 

White slogged on, not turning. Dyson 
labored after him, seized his shoulder. 
White paused and looked uncertainly into 
his face. Dyson couldn't stay still. He 
couldn't stop laughing. He danced — ^the 
old, old dance of triumph. When Martine 
reached the spot he danced around Martine too. 

"What's happened?" Martine shouted at 
him. 

"The end of the world!" Dyson shrilled. 
"This is the way, all right. You must have 
heard it! Earth's gone. We're safe. Safe 
in Eden. Look up, you dopes, look up!" 

Two of the men looked up, while the 
third danced. Danced and laughed. Johnny 
couldn't stop laughing, even when Martine 
and White lowered their gaze and stared 
at him. 

"Dyson," Martine said in a curious, low 
voice. "Dyson. Listen. Nothing's happened. 
You must have — imagined it. Look up, see 
for yourself." 

Johnny looked. It was still there, all 
right. A trembling white glare in the sky. 
He laughed more shrilly than ever. 

"But Dyson — " Martine said. Wliite 
shook his head at him, reached out and 
took Johnny by the arm, stopping his 
dance. 

"It's all right, Johnny," he said. "You're 
safe now. Everything's fine. Now you just 
take it easy and wait for me. I'll be back 
in a little while." He whispered something 
to Martine. Then he started up the slope 
again, toward the cave. 

Johnny stared after him. 

"Benjy!" 

There was no answer. 

"Benjy, what's the matter with you? 
You don't need to save the fuel now. 
Earth's gone. We're safe. We don't have 
to go back. Don't you understand — " 

"Easy," Martine said. "It's all right." 

White went on slowly up the hill, his 
shoulders hunched as if against a wind that 
was not blowing. He was getting smaller 



THE SKY IS FALLING 



57 



and smaller, vanishing into the microcosm. 
Johnny Dyson blinked into the white eye 
of the cave. Then the rolling thunders 
swallowed Benjy. 



AFTER A WHILE THEY were in 
the ship again, ready for the take-oflf. 
And, after that, Martine and White talked 
as if they had actually left Mars, headed 
back toward — ^well, not Earth, because obviously there was no Earth. Where, then? 

Johnny tried to figure it out. When he 
asked questions the answers he got were 
so irrational that he had to translate them 
into his own terms ; but presently he found 
a solution that satisfied him. When they 
said "Earth" they meant it only as a 
symbol. They were, logically enough, going 
to try to locate another habitable planet 
somewhere, a planet even 1>etter than 
Mars, where they could rebuild Eden. 

And that was all right too. Because, 
after thinking it over, Johnny realized that 
it would have taken a lot of hard work to 
build his Martian Eden, even with the 
robot to help- It would have been quite a 
responsibility. 

It was better to let the older men have 
the responsibility. 

Of course the Blow-Up must have been 
quite a shock to Martine and White. It 
was difficult for them to readjust. But it 
did no harm to let them pretend. The 
name didn't matter. They thought of the 
new, undiscovered planet as Earth. Wlien 
they found it they might even call it Earth 
—New Earth, in memory of the bad Old 
Earth that was gone. Gone forever, with 
all its worthless, evil infestations of humanity. For that Johnny couldn't really 
feel regret. 

He made allowances for his companions, 
even when they acted a little crazy. It was 
odd, being the only completely sane mai 
in the ship. 

He waited. There was a period of vivid, 
confuting dreams in which he almost imagined himself back on Earth, but presently 
the dreams passed and were gone. Then 
he was able to sleep soundly again. 



. . . Johnny's spaceship kept on going. 

Sometimes he wondered when it would 
reach its destination. He was tired of the 
artificial days and nights of the ship, and 
those viziports with their disturbingly vivid 
images of what no longer existed. It had 
been pointless, after all, trying to disguise the blackness of space with those 
visions of Old Earth outside the windows. 
And it had been rather foolish to disguise 
the robot so that it looked like a man in 
white when it came in to bring him food and 
get its orders from him. 

Someday when he felt more like it, he 
would change the orders and remake the 
robot, casting it back into its metal reality. 
But he was tired. He had to rest. He 
musn't take on any unnecessary responsibilities now, because the day was coming 
when the ship. would land on a liabitable 
planet and his work would begin. 

And he'd do his job. He'd do it well. He 
hadn't given up. Oh no, not Johnny Dyson. 

His own father had lain down on the job, 
of course, first trying to pass the buck to 
Johnny, and then, when that failed, simply 
by going insane. A complete refusal to 
accept responsibility. Yes, that was the 
only sin — giving up. For if his father had 
stayed on the job, he might have found 
an answer. After all, Dr. Gerald Dyson 
had been a brilliant man. 

But Dr. Gerald Dyson had given up. He 
had ended his career in an insane asylum, 
very likely so happy in his ultimate retreat 
that he'd never even known it when the 
Blow-Up came. 

// rd had my father* s dmnces, Fd have 
kept on fighting to the last ditch, Jolmny 
thought. But Vve got my own job. It isn't 
too late. And if the ship ever reaches a 
habitable world, Fll start right in working 
at it. 

He glanced at the viziport images of a 
world that had given up and therefore had 
died, quickly and painlessly. 

Johnny smiled. 

He was so happy in his spaceship room 
that he never knew it when the real BlowUp came. 



MEEM 



AshoHsiorybY MARGARET ST. CLAIR 



Tlie f og-shroiided marshlands of Vandria seethed with man* 

hant • • « and Dnncan9 with his stolen seeret^ sought refuge in 

the Earth-Ship GORGO. Safe beliind steel • . . until, faraway, 

a strange Lorelei shaped its song • • • 



THIS TIME LAST YEAR DUNcan had been junior commissioner 
for protocol at the Terrestrial Embassy. Discreet, hard working, popular with 
his male and female colleagues alike, the 
future had seemed to hold nothing for him 
but a series of comfortably merited advancements to full consular rank. Now he 
crouched under the bridge in the chilly 
dankness of the Vaudrian night, holding 
on to the upright and shivering uncontrollably, while he prayed, prayed to everything in his nebulous pantheon, that the 
Vaudrian patrol wouldn't find him. It 
wouldn't be so bad if they merely shot 
him, but he doubted they would let it go at 
that. 

The meem, snuggled warmly under his 
jacket, stirred lethargically. He could feel 
the tiny ticking of its thoughts going past 
his. "Safe," they ran, "safe? So tired. 
Safe on Earth.'' 

Duncan grinned lopsidedly. Safe? Not 
by a damnsight ! He wouldn't be safe until 
he was on board the 5. S. \Gorgo, if then. 
From the respected member of a respected 
profession he had turned, degree by degree, 
into a hunted man. He was a human explosive, the potential disseminator of a 
biological scandal of major size. If he ever 
got back to earth, what he had to tell 
would rip the heavy fabric of terrestrialVaudrian relations from bottom to top. 
And yet it had happened so imperceptibly ! 
58 



The conversation with Nickerson that 
afternoon last year had been the starting 
point. The Embassy staff had been clustered on the roof of the Embassy building, 
watching excitedly, through binoculars, 
opera glasses, and a variety of optical 
aids, the Vaudrian throngs streaming 
into the already-packed great circle 
that marked the city's heart. The influx 
had ceased only when it was physically 
impossible for another Vaudrian to push 
his way into it. There had been a second 
of tense silence, when the huge crowd was 
utterly still. And then, thrillingly audible 
through the cahn air, a single high note 
had poured out of nearly a million Vaudrian throats. 

The people on the roof of the Embassy 
building had leaned forward intently. 
Nickerson, standing beside Duncan, liad 
jogged his shoulder to be sure he was 
watching. Slowly the doors of the circular 
temple on the edge of the great circle had 
parted. The temple statue, visible on this 
day only, was revealed. 

Duncan had seen it clearly ; it was quite 
as impressive as people said. The group 
represented two persons, a seated man 
and a girl-child. The man's left hand was 
resting lightly and tenderly on the shoulder of the girl who stood between his 
knees. His other hand pointed past the 
girl's head into the distance, and the girl's 
rapt, dreaming gaze followed it. The inner 




The weird light$ drew nearer in the fog,,, the Vaudrian patrol u>a$ ringing him in! 



59. 



60 



PLAiVET STORiES 



meaning of fatherhood — loving, uplifting, 
fostering — had never been more beautifully expressed. 

A SHUDDERING long-drawn 0/fhad 
gone up from the Vaudrians. Then 
the doors of the temple had begun to close 
again. Duncan had time to observe that the 
group was made of some frosty silver 
metal and that the object at the feet of the 
father was probably a meem, the universal 
Vaudrian pet. Then the temple doors had 
gone to, not to open for another year, and 
the silent crowd began to disperse. Tomorrow was Father's Day, but it would 
be observed without ceremonial, within 
the quiet confines of millions of Vaudrian 
homes. 

Duncan had begun to put his field glasses 
away. "By the Father and the Daughter,'' 
he quoted from the Vaudrian ritual to 
Nickerson; "Fm glad I saw it. It was 
impressive and beautiful, worth waiting a 
year for." 

"Yes . . ." Nickerson fiad fidgeted with 
the straps of his binoculars. The rest of 
the Embassy staff was going down the 
escalator, chattering in subdued tones, but 
Nickerson seemed to want to linger on the 
roof and talk. Since he was Duncan's 
superior, Duncan waited respectfully for 
him to speak. Nickerson had cleared his 
throat and leaned toward him. "Did you 
know . . . that they're not mammals, my 
boy?'' 

Duncan had been taken aback. The point 
had never occurred to him. Like most 
Terrestrials, he had found the Vaudrians 
unsympathetic except where their fatherdaughter cult was concerned, but he had 
never questioned their basic likeness to 
himself. 

"But . . . they're warm-blooded and they 
suckle their young," he said after a moment. "They look like us, except for their 
greater height and their bluish pigmentation." 

"There's more to being a mammal than 
warm blood and suckling," Nickerson had 
said. "Besides, did you ever notice that 
they don't suckle their children when 
they're very young?" 

(How much had Nickerson surmised or 
guessed? Duncan wondered. He shifted his 
numb fingers on the clammy wood of the 
bridge and tried not to cough. Everything? 



No, the remark about the suckling must 
have been no more than a coincidence. ) 

Nickerson had pulled at his sandy mous^ 
tache for a moment. "Of course you understand this is in strict confidence, my boy," 
he had said. Duncan had smelled the heavy 
sweetness of phlomis on his breath. "One 
of the chaps at the Embassy here whose 
hobby was biology told me a few things 
he'd found out about them." He had hesitated; and if he had stopped there (Duncan thought, listening to the cold lapping 
of the water under the bridge), everything 
would have been all right. Duncan would 
have been sitting in front of one of the 
Embassy fires now, sipping a nightcap of 
champagne and thinking that it was about 
time for bed. But Nickerson had gone on, 
he had gone on and ruined everything. 

"They reproduce by parthenogenesis/* 
he had said. Duncan could feel now, as 
vividly as if it had been yesterday, the 
shock the slow words had given him. 
"Inokeye assured me it was by parthenogenesis." 

"But — but — " Duncan had stammered. 
He had stared blankly at Nickerson, expecting a hint that the older man was 
making a joke. "That's impossible! What 
about their cult of fatherhood?" 

Nickerson had shrugged for answer. 

"But — " Dimcan- had repeated. "But I 
always understood that in parthenogenesis 
no males were born." 

■^ICKERSON had looked all around. 
•^ ^ him before answering and then, 
though there was no one on the roof except themselves, had lowered his voice. 

"You really must keep this to yourself, 
Duncan," he had said wamingly. "Terrestrial industry — I don't think it's altogether a good thing — has become so dependent upon large-scale imports of benite 
from Vaudria that we can't risk offending 
them. Vaudrian touchiness in these matters 
is really remarkable. Did you know that 
no Terrestrial has ever seen, been allowed 
to see, I mean, a Vaudrian text on biology? 
— But Inokeye thought the answer to your 
point about males being bom might lie in 
the fact that they aren't functional males." 
"You mean there's no mating?" 
"There not only isn't, there couldn't 
possibly be." And Nickerson had gone into 
anatomical details. He liad finished with a 



JUEEiV 



61 



furdier warning to Duncan to keep what 
he had learned strictly to himself. 

Nobody could possibly have heard the 
conversation. Duncan and Nickerson had 
been alone on the roof, in the open air. But 
next week Nickerson had been unexpectedly transferred to Mars— kicked upstairs, as 
Embassy scuttlebutt had it — and Duncan 
had begun to notice a certain thickening 
in the atmosphere that surrounded him 
personally. He had laughed at himself for 
his suspicions, but he had set traps. As 
a result of the trap-setting, he had foiuid 
that his papers were being searched regularly twice each week. 

His colleagues in the Embassy were not 
quite so friendly as they had been. Toby, 
Nickerson's successor, called Duncan in 
for a long, pointless interview, in the 
course of which he expressed admiration 
for the Vaudrian Father-Daughter cult and 
pleasure that it was being extended to 
Earth. Duncan had perceived that he was 
being tested, that his loyalty was being 
checked. NBut loyalty to what? To whom? 

Even then it might have died down 
gradually, except for the lettergram from 
Nickerson and Duncan's friendship with 
Jrar. Jrar was a young Vaudrian chemist 
who had come to the Embassy to try to 
arrange for the importation of some special terrestrial chemical apparatus he 
wanted. Duncan had helped him with the 
papers and discovered a tepid liking for 
him. They had lunched together once or 
twice. 

Jrar had been somewhat less reticent 
than most Vaudrians. Duncan had learned 
that he was twenty-two, that he wasn't 
married yet (highly unusual for a Vaudrian), that though he had good prospects 
he wasn't altogether satisfied with them. 

It was toward the end of the second 
lunch date that the significant thing (Duncan realized it now) had been said. Jrar 
had been holding the restaurant's meem 
on his knees, stroking its thick blackish 
fur absently, and Duncan liad said something or other about wondering why meems 
were so universally popular. They were, he 
thought, too sluggish and unresponsive to 
make good pets. Jrar had looked at him 
for a moment and then, in a voice unlike 
his usual one, had said, "Did you ever 
notice, Duncan, how the meems disappear 
after Father's Day?" 



That had been all. Jrar had dianged the 
subject quickly after that. 

DUNCAN SHIFTED his position, 
trying to ease his cramped limbs. His 
hands were so cold that he was afraid 
he might lose his grip and fall. He leaned 
forward abruptly, apprehension waking in 
him. Had he seen, about half a mile off 
through the light mist, a spot of light that 
seemed to waver and slowly expand? That 
would be the patrol, and if it was, he'd 
have to get out. Where could he go? His 
rendezvous with the Gorgo's third mate 
wasn't due for another two hours. He'd 
wait a little, wait and hope and keep his 
fingers crossed. 

The friendslup with Jrar would have 
stopped anyway. The two men had not 
enough in common to keep their interest up. 
But the next day Toby liad called Duncan into his office and told him sternly 
that, as Duncan must already know, friendships between Vaudrians and Terrestrials 
were not encouraged. There had been 
complaints about his seeing Jrar from a 
Vaudrian high-up. Duncan must drop the 
acquaintanceship. 

Duncan had listened and agreed, fuming 
inwardly. He had been too angry to defend himself. He'd gone back to his room 
and read the lettergram from Nickerson 
again, more and more puzzled by it. It 
seemed on the surface to be merely a 
friendly letter, full of personal news and 
trivialities. But it didn't sound quite like 
Nickerson, and after a good many hours 
Duncan had succeeded in decoding it. 
Nickerson advised him urgently to make 
contact with the S, S. Cargo's third mate. 
The Gorgo wasn't due in port for a month 
yet. Next week J;he Vaudrian newscaster 
had announced, among other items, that 
the body of a young Vaudrian chemist, a 
man named 803 Jrar, had been found in 
an abandoned house. 

Duncan was tall enough to pass for 
Vaudrian, and the blue pigment could be 
simulated. He decided to try to pick up 
Jrar's trail. 

He had been very, very careful. He had, 
on the whole, had considerable success. He 
had found, as he thought, that Jrar had 
been murdered. And he had found — 

It was the patrol. He would have to 
leave the bridge immediately. The spot of 



o^ PLANET 

light had iDeen much nearer this time. That 
meant that they were "ringing'' the area 
where he was, piece by piece. 

EHincan began to work his way toward 
land, jumping from trestle to tresftle of 
the bridge. Once he missed his footing on 
the slippery rounds and nearly went into 
the deep, icy stream. His alarm must have 
registered in the meem's little mind, for 
he could feel the instant patter of its 
thoughts. "Be careful, Duncan. Not safe. 
Get to Earth. Be safe." 

HE STOOD hesitating when he had 
reached the shore. Where could he 
go? In his dirty, exhausted condition, the 
disguising pigment gone, the first Vaudrian who saw him would call the patrol. 
He'd try the Gorgo, on the chance that the 
third mate might be around somewhere. 

His physical activity seemed to have 
aroused the meem from its lethargy. Its 
thoughts were coming in a thick stream 
now. Occasionally Duncan answered them. 
Discovering that meems were telepathic and 
how to contact them had been one of his 
most valuable achievements in the period 
during which he had been following Jrar. 
The discovery had enabled him to pick out 
a meem which was discontented and afraid 
and hence would cooperate. 

The Gorgo was a long way off, and 
though Duncan tried to hurry, the days of 
exposure and strain had told on him. 
Once he looked back and saw the expanding ring of light near where he had been 
on the bridge. An involuntary quiver 
passed over him. What would have happened to him if the patrol had caught him ? 
What happened to the meems, probably. 
It was characteristic of Vaudrian psychology to make the punishment fit the criine. 

Finding out about the meems had been 
pure accident. Duncan had been sitting in 
a third-rate bar, drinking the licoriceflavored pap that passed for intoxicating 
liquor on Vaudria. The bar hostess had 
stepped out to get change for the bill he 
had given her. And then her baby, in 
the room behind the ill-lit bar, had begun 
to cry. 

Duncan had hesitated. But the baby had 
kept on crying, louder and louder, until 
finally Duncan, in his role of Vaudrian 
male, had stepped into the back to try 
to comfort it. He'd jounced the crib up 



STORIES 

and down several times^— it was suspended 
on springs from the ceiling — and when the 
infant kept on screaming had put out his 
hand uncertainly toward its cheek. 

The baby was very yoimg, less than a 
month. But it had turned its head toward 
Duncan's fingers with uncanny rapidity. 
And while he had still been wondering at 
the movement, it had licked fiercely at his 
hand. 

Duncan had let out an amazed cry. The 
child's tongue had been as hard and rough 
as a file. His wrist was smarting and 
stinging where it had rasped the flesh from 
It. 

Then the outer door had banged and 
the bar hostess had come running in, all 
apologies for the accident. (Fortimately 
she hadn't seen the color of the blood 
oozing from Duncan's wrist.) She had 
picked up the child and soothed it ecxpertly, 
and when it hushed had said, as if in 
explanation, **His meem died too soon. He 
misses it." 

Duncan had had another drink and left. 
That night he had stolen the meem. 



HE COULD SEE the Gorgo now 
through the thin mist, a mile-high 
bulk. The ship was loading cargo. He could 
hear the whine of the winches and see the 
aureoles of its sodium lights through the 
haze. Ingots of benite were moving steadily 
into the ship's dozen holds. In the confused 
activity of loading, he might be able to 
get close and look for Picket, the third 
mate. 

An instant later Duncan felt despair 
invade him. Twenty or so Vaudrian soldiers were standing about the open holds, 
as if they were on guard. Their officer 
(an elderly woman, as always) was talking 
to the Gorgo^s second mate. 

Had the message from Nickerson been 
detected? If so, the soldiers were on the 
lookout for him, Duncan, and Picket must 
be already under arrest. Duncan came 
closer, thankful for the cover given by the 
mist, and listened intently. 

What he heard reassured him. The 
Vaudrian officer's high voice carried well ; 
she and the mate were discussing smuggling and he was assuring her that the 
Vaudrian government would have the full 
cooperation of the Gorgo's personnel in 



9iEEn 



seeing that nothing went in or out of the 
ship illicitly. 

The message, then, hadti't been discovered, and Picket was still at large. But 
what was Duncan to do? He looked behind him and saw, with painful apprehension, that the expanding lights of the "ringing*' process were getting close again. 

The meem stirred beneath his jacket. 
*'Rope," its thoughts came; "Duncan, climb 
little rope." 

Duncan looked about, wondering what the 
creature meant. (It was apparently somewhat clairvoyant, as well as telepathic, 
since it couldn't see from its hiding 
place.) After a moment, he located the 
rope. It was a slender electrical cable to 
one side in the shadow. It went up to 
a ring that was near an open hatch. The 
cable was used, EHmcan knew, for groundmg the huge charge of static electricity 
the Gorgo had picked up in space. He 
tested the cable, and it was solidly tied. 
He only hoped the insulation was sound 
on it. 

He waited an instant, taking deep 
breaths. Then he caught hold of the cable 
and began to haul himself up on it, hand 
over hand. 

He was wickedly tirei. His weight 
wrenched at his shoulder sockets, and his 
muscles felt soft and hot. The cable was 
slack, and that increased the difficulty of 
his climb. The fog thickened as he went 
up. 

He was two thirds of the way to the 
ring, fifty or sixty feet from the ground, 
when there came a burst of shouts at him 
[from below. A light shone up dimly 
through the fog; somebody had seen him. 
A second later there came the long roll of 
a stun gun. 

The meem was frightened; its thoughts 
went screaming past Duncan in almost 
vocal hysteria. The stun gun trilled again. 
Duncan bit his lip until he tasted Wood. 
Then he let himself slide down the cable 
about ten feet, and, with a precise coordination of which he never would have believed himself capable, used the momentum 
thus imparted to swing in at an open porthole below him and to the right. 

He almost missed it. He caught /the edge 
of the frame with his fingernails, and 
clawed his way over it; tlien he was in a 
softly^carpeted corridor and running down 



63 



it desperately. 

He made two turns before he found a 
stateroom whose door had been left ajar. 
He darted in, barriered the door, and collapsed against it. His whole body was 
shaking with his heart's desperate tliuds. 

He wasn't safe. They k-new he was on 
the ship, and they'd search the ship for 
him. He might be able to hide for a 
while, but sooner or later he'd be found. 
He'd exchanged tlie frying pan for a pot 
of similar temperature. 

He couldn't go any further. He'd have 
to rest. He sank down on the padded 
bunk, so tired that he hardly cared if he 
was caught. 

The meem poked its flat head out. Its 
dull eyes looked at him. "The man, the 
man you want. Near here," came the patter 
of its thoughts. 

"How do you know?" Duncan asked 
aloud. 

"He is thinking of you." 

p\UNCAN LOOKED at th^ meem for 
f^ a moment. It had lain down again, as 
if exhausted by its recent activity. 

"Where is he?" Duncan asked. 

"To your right." 

Duncan scrubbed his face hastily with 
the end of a damp towel — ^he might meet 
someone in the corridor— and smoothed his 
his hair. His image in the mirror was still 
desperate and holbw-eyed. He stepped 
into the corridor. 

He found Picket leaning up against one 
of the bulkheads, his hands in his pockets, 
w^histling idly. The stripes on his blue 
sleeves identified him clearly enough. Duncan softly gave him the countersign. 

"You're not mixed up in anything — 
unh— serious, are you?" Picket asked 
when the two men had gone back to the 
cabin. His sleepy, good-natured face wore 
a disconcerted look. It was clear that Duncan's unexpected arrival and hunted, harried appearance had discomposed him. 

Duncan hesitated. He was too tired to 
think. He decided on the exact truth. "I 
stole this," he said, indicating the limp 
form of the meem. "Taking them from 
Vaudria is forbidden by interplanetary 
agreement. But they would have killed it 
if I'd left it here." 

Picket's face cleared a little but re


a PLANET 

mained dubious. He jingled the keys in 
his pockets uncertainly and frowned a/t the 
meem. ''I guess it'll be all right," he said 
at last. *'01d Nickerson did me a good 
turn once, and I'd like to pay it back. He 
said you were in soine sort of mess with 
the Vaudrians." 

*'Are they searching the ship?'* Duncan 
asked. 

Picket looked surprised. "Why, no," he 
said. He halted and grinned boyishly. 
*'You and old Nick seem to have Vaudria 
on the brain. The last time I saw him, all 
he could talk about was how Vaudrian 
trade was getting too important to earth. I 
haven't cared much for the Vaudrians 
Tve met, but they're not sinister. Nickerson's wrong about that. They're just like 
anybody else." 

Duncan bit his lip and made no reply. 
Was this the attitude he'd have to buck 
when he got back to earth? Business as 
usual and no slanders, please, on the 
Vaudrians ? But he had the meem, and examination by a biologist would show that 
what he had to say was true. He could 
convince them, he knew he could, 

'Tfou look worn out, old timer," Picket 
said s}Tnpathetically. "Lie down and rest, 
and ni go see the purser and have him 
put you on the passenger list. I'll fix it 
up with him about your passport, too." He 
cleared his throat. "I don't know why you 
stole that thing, and I'm not going to 
ask. But the Vaudrians won't get you now. 
We're jetting for Terra tomorrow at 16. 
You're safe here." 

Where else was there to go, what else 
could he do? 

"I hope so," Duncan saiA 

IN THE OFFICE of the Vaudrian 
overseer of police, a kilometer or so 
from the space port, 429 Bood was remonstrating respectfully with his immediate 
superior. 

'*Would it not be well to take diem now, 
my lady? They must not escape. We 
know they are on the ship. We could 
apply to the captain for license to search 
the ship." 

88 Etath smiled at him indulgently. "And 
if he refuses it?" she said. "That would 
be unpleasant It is better this way, Bood." 
She put her lean bluish fingers tc^ether. 
**Are you forgetting what day tomorrow 



STORIES 

IS?" 

"Oh," said 429 Bood. 

'There will be no trouble, no unpleasantness. It will happen quietly. He is bound 
to be affected. I have seen it before with 
men from Earth." 

"Oh," said Bood once more. 

"Bring your wife with you when you 
report for duty tomorrow," said 88 Etath, 
dismissing him. "And see that the men 
under you bring theirs." 

♦ * * 

Duncan was roused from apprehensive 
reveries next morning by Picket's discreet 
rap on the cabin door. Picket had brought 
breakfast and, in a musette bag, a change 
of clothing. There was a worried expression on his pleasant face. 

"When you've finished, I think you'd 
better get out of here," he said to Duncan 
as he ate. "I brought one of my old suits 
for you." 

Duncan pressed one hand to the back of 
his neck. "Is — are the Vaudrians searching 
the ship?" 

"No, it's just Vaudrian sightseers. 
Mainly women, and only one or two of 
the men are armed. The old man gave them 
permission to go over the ship. 

"But we're not taking on passengers 
until twelve, and they might wonder about 
you if they saw you. I think you'd better 
change into my old clothes and go up 
to the chart room with me. If they see 
you there, they'll think you're an officer. 
What about that thing, though?" Picket 
indicated the meem, which, as inert as a 
feather stole, was lying on the edge of 
the bunk. "What can we do with it?" 

Duncan pressed his hand once more to 
the base of his skull. The meem's eyes 
were open, so he knew it was not asleep, 
but he could no longer make contact with 
its thoughts. "It can hide under my tunic. 
I've carried it that way all along." 

Picket's face relaxed a little. "Can it 
be trusted to keep still, though? You said 
stealing it was forbidden by interplanetary 
agreement. You might get into a mess if 
it gave you away." 

"It'll be quiet," Duncan said abstractedly. "It wants to get to Earth just as 
much as I do. It would be killed if it 
stayed here." He stood up, staggering a 
little. He had to catch at the bracket above 
his head to get his balance back. 



iWEEiW 



65 



Picket looked at him in quick alarm. 
'* What's the matter?*' he said. *'Are you 
sick?" 

"I've got a splitting headache, that's all. 
I might be a little feverish," 

"Oh. You'll feel better when we're in 
space, I guess." 



DUNCAN began to change into Picket's uniform. There was, as he had 
foreseen, room enough for the meem inside the tunic. He picked the animal up 
and arranged it against his diest. As if 
the movement had disturbed it, the sluggish 
current of its thoughts began flowing again 
("Safe? Safe? So fw to earth."), and it 
cooperated with him lethargically. 

"Now, where do we go?'^ Duncan asked 
when he had finished. For a moment he 
pressed both hands tightly to liis head. 
"Lord, how my head hurts. I took two 
tablets from the aid chest when I woke 
up, but they didn't help. I don't feel 
quite myself." 

Picket looked at him but made no comment. He led Duncan out into the corridor 
and turned to the left. A hundred steps 
further, and they turned to the left again. 

"The chart room's on the next level," 
Picket 5aid softly. "The shafts aren't 
turned on, so we'll have to walk up the 
emergency stair." They moved on a few 
steps. 

"Hey, where are you going?" Picket 
cried in sudden amazement. "The sightseers are down that way ! Come back here ! 
Come back!" 

Duncan made no answer. With rigid 
energy he shook off Pickett's grip on his 
arm. He began walking down the corridor 
toward the distant group of sightseers with 
long, stiff steps, shaking his head from 
side to side. 

Picket stared at him unbelievingly for a 
second and then came after him. He 
caught him by both shoulders and held on. 
"Stop it I" he hissed. "Are you out of 
your mind?'^ 

With no perceptible exertion Duncan 
broke away from him. His face was darkly 
flushed and his lower jaw hung loose. He 

5~Planet Stories— Fall 



made a faint, miserable noise. Then, as if 
obeying some irresistible call, he started 
toward the Vaudrians again with the same 
stiff, bouncing walk. 

Picket hesitated. It was already too 
late. Heads were turning toward them, 
voices were being raised. His face a mask 
of bewilderment, Picket leaned back 
against the bulkhead and incredulously 
watched. 

As Duncan drew nearer the group of 
sightseers, it shaped itself smoothly into 
an open square. There was something 
faintly menacing about the formation, but 
Duncan did not even slow down. When 
he was about five feet from the Vaudrians 
he stopped and, with fingers whose stiffness was apparent to Picket even at that 
distance, began to unbutton his tunic. The 
meem hopped out. 

Four silenced stun guns hissed softly together. Duncan fell as if he had been 
poleaxed, stiffly and in one piece. 88 Etath 
gave a low order to her men. They closed 
evenly around Duncan and picked him up. 

The meem paid no attention to what was 
going on behind its back. It was wholly 
occupied with frisking and curveting 
around the alluring females of itsi race. 
Their attraction — ^the wonderful attraction 
which had reached into the cabin seeking 
the meem and enmeshed Duncan at the 
same time — held the animal irresistibly. 

It knew what would happen to it, but it 
no longer cared. Since Duncan had stepped 
into the corridor with it in his tunk it had 
ceased to struggle and resist. After the 
mating there would come the egg laying, 
after the tgg laying the long period when 
the young Vaudrians would feed painfully 
on its still living flesh. 

What did it matter? The desire whose 
contagion, received telepathically by Duncan, had driven Duncan straight toward 
the Vaudrian stun guns, burned brightly 
and compellingly in the meem. Duncan 
would probably share its final fate as food 
for the Vaudrian young. What did it matter? The meem was the Vaudrian functional male, the semi-parasitic father of the 
next generation. Its females were before 
it. Today was Father's Day, The meem 
wanted to mate. 



^ 



STAR SHIP 



By 

POUL 

ANDERSON 



WITH SUNSET, THERE WAS 
rain. When Dougald Anson 
brought his boat in to Krakenau 
harbor, there was only a vast wet darkness around him. 

He swore in a sulfurous mixture of 
Krakenaui, Volgazani, and half a dozen 
other languages, including some spaceman's Terrestrial, and let down the sail. 
The canvas was heavy and awkward in the 
drenching rain; it was all he could do to 
lash it around the boom. Then he picked up 
the long wooden sweep and began sculling 
his boat in toward the dock. 

Lightning flared bluely through the rain, 
and he :saw the great bay in one livid flash, 
filled with galleys at anchor and the little 
schooners of the fishing fleet. Beyond the 
wharfs, tlie land climbed steeply toward 
the sky, and he saw the dark mass of the 
town reaching up to the citadel on the 
hilltop. Dark — dark! Hardly a light 
showed in the gloom. 

What in the name of Shantuzik was up? 
The waterfront, at least, should have been 
alive with torches and music and bawdy 
merriment. And the newly installed iStreet 
lights should have been twinkling along 
the main avenues leading up to the castle. 
Instead Krakenau lay crpuched in night, 
and — I 

He scowled, and drove the light vessel 
shoreward with rhythmic sweeps of the 
long oar. Uneasiness prickled along his 
spine. It wasn't right. He'd only been gone 
a few days. What had happened in the 

66 



The sfrangesf space-castaways of all! 
The Terrans leff fheir great interstellar ship unmanned in a tight orbit 
around Khazak — descended, all of 
thenn, in a lifeboat to investigate that 
weird, Iron-Age world — and the lifehoof cracked up! 



meantime ? 

When he reached the pier, he made fast 
with a quietness unusual to him. Maybe 
he was being overcautious. Maybe it was 
only that the king liad died or some other 
reason for restrained conduct had arisen. 
But a man didn't spend years warring 
among the pirates of the outer islands and 
the neighboring kingdoitis around Krakenau without learning to be careful. 

He ducked under the awning in the 
bows which was the boat's only shelter, 
and got a towel from the sea chest and 
rubbed his rain-wet body dry. He'd only 
been wearing a tattered pair of breeches, 
and the water ran along his ribs and down 
his flanks. Then he shrugged on a tunic, 
and a coat of ring-mail over that. A flatbladed sword at his side and a helmet over 
his long yellow hair completed his outfit. 
He felt secure now, and jumped up to the 
pier. 

For a moment he stood in thought. The 
steady rain washed down over his leather 
cape, blurring vision a few meters away, 
and only the intermittent flicker of lightning broke the darkness. Wliere to go? 
His father's house was the logical place, 
perhaps. But the Masefield dwelling was 
a little closer to here, and Ellen 

He grinned and set out at a long stride. 
Masefield's be it. 




His blaster raved, and Alonzo had no time to scream before the flame licked 

about hint • • • 



67 




68 PLANET 

The street onto which he turned opened 
before him like a tunnel of night. The high 
steep-roofed houses lay dark on either side, 
walling it in, and the fluoroglobes were 
unlit. When the lightning blinked, the wet 
cobblestones gleamed ; otherwise there was 
only darkness and rain. 

He passed one of the twisting alleys, and 
glanced at it with automatic caution. The 
next instant he had thrown himself to the 
ground, and the javelin whipped through 
the place where his belly had been. 

He rolled over and bounded to his feet, 
crouched low, the sword whining out of 
its scabbard into his hand. Four Khazaki 
sprang from the alley and darted at him. 

Dougald Anson grunted, backed up 
against a wall. The natives were armed and 
mailed, they were warriors, and they had 
all the unhuman swiftness of their species. 
Four of them ! 

The leading attacker met his sword in a 
clang of steel. Dougald let him come lunging in, took the cut on his mailed ribs, and 
swept his own weapon murderously out. 
Faster than a man could think, the Khazaki had his own blade up to parry the 
sweeping blow. But he wasn't quite fast 
enough; he met it at an awkward angle 
and the Terrestrial's sheer power sent the 
sword spinning from his hand. The hand 
went too, a fractional second later, and he 
screamed and fell back and away. 

The others were upon Anson. For mo
ents it was parry and slash, three against 
ne, with no time to feel afraid or notice 
the cuts in his arms and legs. A remote 
part of his brain told him bleakly: This 
is all. You're finished. No lone Earthting 
ever stood up long to more than two Khazaki. But he hardly noticed. 

Suddenly there were only two in front 
of him. He darted forth from the wall, his 
sword crashing down with all the power of 
his huge body behind it. The warrior tried 
to skip aside — ^too late. The tremendous 
blow smashed his own parry down and 
sang in his skullbones. 

And the last of the attackers died. He 
tumbled over beside the second, and each 
of them had a feathered shaft between his 
ribs. 

The bowman came loping through the 
rain. He paused, in typical Khazak fashion, to slit the throat of the wounded 
being, and then came up to where Dougald 



STORIES 

Anson stood panting. 

The human strained through ^ rainy 
dark. Lightning glimmered in the sky, and 
he recognized the newcomer. '']^xi2a.ikV* 

"And Anson," nodded the Khazaki. His 
sharp white teeth gleamed in his shadowed 
face. "You seem to have met a warm webcome." 

"Too warm. But — ^thanks!" Anson bent 
over the nearest of the corpses, and only 
now did the realization penetrate his brain* 
They all wore black mail of a certain pattern, spiked helmets, red cloaks — Gods of 
Gorzak! They were all royal guardsmen! 

HE LOOKED UP to the dark form ofi 
Janazik, and his lean face was suddenly tight. "What is this?" he asked 
slowly. "I thought maybe bandits or soma 
enemy state had managed to enter the 
city " 

"That would be hard to do, now that we 
have the gims," said Janazik. "No, these 
are within our own walls. If you'll look 
closely, you'll see they wear a gold-colored 
brassard." 

"Prince Volakech— but he " 

"There's more to this than Volakech, 
and more than a question of the throne," 
said Janazik. Then suddenly, urgently: 
"But we can't stay here to talk. They're 
patrolling the streets, it's dangerous to be 
abroad. Let's get to shelter." 

"What's happened ?" Anson got up, towering over the native by a good quarter 
meter, his voice suddenly rough. "What 
happened? How is everyone?'* 

"Not well. Come on, now.^ 

"Ellen? Masefield Ellen?" 

"I don't know. Nobody knows. Now 
come on!" 

They slipped into the alley. Anson was 
blind in the gloom, and Janazik's slim sixfingered hand took his to guide him. The 
Khazaki were smaller than Terrestrials and 
lacked the sheer strength and endurance 
which Earth's higher gravity gave; but 
they could move like the wind, they had 
an utter grace and balance beside which 
humans were clumsy cattle, and they saw 
in the dark. 

Dougald Anson's mind whirred in desperate speculation. If Volakech had gotten 
enough guardsmen and soldiers on his side 
to swing a palace revolution, it was bad. 
But matters looked worse than that, Why 



STAR SHIP 



69 



should Volakech's men have assaulted a 
human ? Why should Janazik have to sneak 
him into a hiding place? How had the revolutionists gotten control in the first place, 
against King Aligan*s new weapons ? What 
powers did they have now ? 

What had become of the human community in Krakenau? What of his father, 
his brother and sisters, his friends? What 
of Masefield Ellen? What of Ellen? 

He grew aware that Janazik had halted. 
They were im an evil-smelling, refuse-littered courtyard, surrounded by tumbledown structures, dark and silent as the rest 
of the city, Anson realized that all Krakenau was blacked out. In such times of 
danger, the old Khazaki clandom reasserted itself. Families barricaded themselves 
in their dwellings, prepared to fight all 
comers till the danger was past. The city 
was awake, yes — it was crouched in breathless tension all around him — but not a 
light showed, not a hand stirred, not a 
voice spoke. They were all waiting. 

Janazik crouched at the base of one of 
the old buildings and lifted a trapdoor. 
Light gleamed dimly up from a cellar. He 
dropped lightly down and Anson followed, 
closing the door behind him. 

There was only one smoky lamp in the 
dank gloom. Shadows were thick and huge 
around the guttering wick. The red flame 
picked out faces, shimmered off cold steel, 
and lost itself in darkness. 

Anson's eyes scanned the faces. Half a 
dozen humans: Chiang Chung-Chen, DuFrere Marie, Gonzales Alonzo and his 
wife Nora who was Anson's sister, Dougald Joan, Masefield Philip — No sign of 
Ellen. 

"Anse ! Anse !" The voices almost sobbed 
out of the dim-lit hollowness. Joan and 
Nora sprang forward as if to touch their 
brother, make sure he was alive and no 
vision of the night, but Janazik waved 
them back with his sword. 

*'No noise," hissed the Khazaki's fierce 
wiiisper. **No noise, by all the thirteen 
hells! Volakech's btirats are all over the 
city. If a patrol finds us '* 

**Ellen!" Anson's blue eyes searched 
for Masefield Philip, crouched near the 
lamp. "Where's your sister, "Phil?" 

"I don't know," whispered the boy. 
^'We're all who seem to've escaped. They 
may have caught her — I don't know " 



*Tather." Joan's voice caught with a 
dry sob. "Anse, Father and Jamie are 
dead. The rebels killed them." 

For a moment, Anson couldn't grasp 
the* reality of that. It just wasn't possible 
that his big laughing father and young 
Jamie-the-brat should be killed — no! 

But 

He looked up, and then looked away. 
When he turned back to face them, his 
visage had gone hard and expressionless, 
and only the white-knuckled grip on his 
sword showed he was not a stranger. 

"All right," he said slowly, very slowly 
and steadily. "All right. Give me the story. 
What is it? What's happened in Krakenau ?" 



II 



JANAZIK PADDED AROUND TO 
stand before him. He was not the only 
Khazaki in the cellar; there were a good 
dozen others. Mostly they were young 
males, and Anse recognized them. Bolazan, 
Pragakech, Slavatozik — ^he'd played with 
them as a child, he'd fared out with them 
as a youth and a man to the wars, to storm 
the high citadel of Zarganau and smite the 
warriors of Volgazan and pirate the commerce of the outer islands. They were good 
comrades, yes. But Father and Jamie were 
dead. Ellen, Ellen was vanished. Only 
a fragment of the human community remained; his world had suddenly come 
down in ruin about him. 

Well — ^his old bleak resolution came 
back to him, and he met the yellow slitpupilled gaze of Janazik with a challenging 
stare. 

They were a strange contrast, these two, 
for all that they had fought shoulder to 
shoulder halfway round the planet, had 
sung and played and roistered from Krakenau to Gorgazan. Comrades in arms, 
blood brothers maybe, but neither was human from the viewpoint of the other. 

Dougald Anson was big even for a Terrestrial; his tawny head rode at full two 
meters and his wide shoulders strained the 
chain mail he wore. He was young, but his 
face had had the youth burned out of it by 
strange suns and wild winds around the 
world, was lean and brown and marked 
with an old scar across the forehead. His 
eyes were almost intolerably bright and 



70 



PLAXET STORIES 



direct in their blue stare, the eyes of a bird 
of prey. 

The Khazaki was humanoid, to be sure 
— shorter than the Terrestrial average, but 
slim and lithe. Soft golden fur covered 
his sinewy body, and a slender tail 
switched restlessly against his legs. His 
head was the least human part of him, 
with its sloping forehead, narrow chin, and 
blunt-muzzled face. The long whiskers 
around his mouth and above the amber 
cat-eyes twitched continuously, sensitive 
to minute shifts in air currents and temperature. Along the top of .his skull, the 
fur grew up in a cockatoo plume that 
swept back down his neck, a secondary 
sexual characteristic that females lacked. 
Janazik was something of a dandy, and 
even now he wore the baggy silk-like 
trousers, long red sash, and elaborately embroidered blouse and vest of a Krakenaui 
noble. It was woefully muddy, but he managed to retain an air of fastidious elegance. The bow and quiver across his 
badk, the sword and dirk at his side, 
somehow looked purely ornamental when 
he wore them. 

He was almost dwarfed by Anse's hugethewed height. But old Chiang ChungChen noticed, not for the first time, that 
the human wore clothing and carried weapons of Khazaki pattern, and that the 
harsh syllables of Krakenaui came more 
easily to his lips than the Terrestrial 
of his fathers. And the old man nodded, 
gravely and a little wearily. 

Janazik spoke rapidly: "Volakech must 
have been plotting his return from exile 
a long time. He managed to raise a small 
army of pirates, mercenaries, and outlawed Krakenaui, and he made bargains 
with groups within the city. Two days ago, 
certain of the guards seized the new guns 
and let Volakech and his men in. Others 
revolted within the town. I think King 
Aligan was killed; at least I've seen or 
heard nothing of him since. There's been 
some fighting between rebels and loyalists 
but the rebels got all the Earth-weapons 
when they captured the royal arsenal and 
since then they've just about crushed resistance. Loyalists who could, fled tlie city. 
The rest are in hiding. Volakech is king." 
"But — why us? The Terrestrials — ^what 
have we to do with — " 
Janazik's yellow eyes blazed at him. 



''You aren't stupid, blood-brother. Think !'* 

After a moment Anse nodded bleakly, 
'The Star Ship '' 

"Of course! Volakech has seized the 
rocket boat. No Terrestrial in his right mind 
would show him how to use it, so he had 
to capture someone who understood its 
operation and force them to take him out 
to the Star Ship. Old Masefield Henry was 
killed resisting arrest — ^you know how 
bloody guardsmen are, in spite of orders to 
take someone alive. Volakech ordered the 
arrest of all Terrestrials then. A few surrendered to him, a few were killed resisting, most were captured by force. As far 
as we know, this group is all which escaped." 

"Then Ellen ?" 

"That's the weird thing. I don't believe 
^he has been caught. Volakech's men are 
still scouring the city for *an Earthling 
woman' as the orders read. And who could 
it be but Ellen? No other woman represents any danger or any desirable capture 
to Volakech." 

"Ellen understands astrogation," said 
Anse slowly. "She learned it from her 
grandfather." 

"Yes. And now that he is dead, she is 
the only human — the only beiag on this 
planet — who can get that rocket up to the 
Star Ship. And Masefield Carson knows 
it." 

"Carson? Ellen's older brother? What—" 

Janazik's voice was c<»ld as Winter: 
"Masefield Carson was with Volakech. He 
led the rebels inside the city. Now he's the 
new king's lieutenant." 

"Carson! No!" 

"Carson — ^yes!" Janazik's smile was 
without mirth or pity. His eyes sought out 
Philip, huddled miserably beside the lamp. 
"Isn't that the truth?" 

THE BOY NODDED, too choked 
with his own unhappiness to cry. 
"Carse always was a friend of Volakedi, 
before King Aligan outlawed him," he 
mumbled. "And he always said how it was 
a shame, and how Volakech would know 
better what to do with the Star Ship than 
anyone now. Then — that night — " His 
voice trailed oflF, he sat dumbly .staring into 
the flame. 

"Carson led the rebel guardsmen in their 
seizure of the city guns," said Janazik. 



STAR SHIP 



71 



"He also rode to the Masefield house at the 
head of a troop of them and called on his 
people to surrender on promise of good 
treatment, Joe and the mother did, and I 
suppose they're held somewhere in the citadel now. Phil and Ellen happened to be out 
at the time. When Phil heard of the uprising, he was afraid to give himself up, 
in spite of the heralds that went about 
promising safety to those who did. He 
heard how the rebels had been killing his 
friends. He went to Slavatozik here, whom 
he could trust, and later they got in touch 
with me. Td used this hiding place before, 
nd gathered all the fugitives I could find 
here." Janazik shrugged, a sinuous unhuman gesture. "Since then I've seen 
Carse, at a distance, riding around like 
a prince of the blood, with a troop of his 
own personal guardsmen. I suspect he 
really runs things now. Volakech wants 
power, but only Carse can show him how 
to get it.'* 

"And Ellen ?" 

"No sign of her. But as I said, I think 
she's in hiding somewhere, or the guards 
wouldn't be out looking for a w^oman. She 
wouldn't give herself up." 

"Not Ellen." A grim pride lifted Anse's 
head. 

"Remains the problem of finding her before they do," said Gonzales Alonzo. "If 
they catch her and make her plot an orbit 
for the rocket, they'll have the Star Ship — 
which means power over the whole planet." 

"Not that I care who's king," growled 
Pragakech. "But you know that Masefield Carson never did want to use the ship 
to get out to the stars. And I want 
to see those other worlds before I die." 

"To the thirteenth hell with the other 
worlds," snarled Bolazan. "Aligan was my 
king, and it's for me to avenge him and 
put his rightful heir on the throne." 

"We all have our motives for wanting 
the blood of Volakech and Carson," said 
Janazik. "Never mind that now; the important thing is how to get at their livers. 
We're few, Anse. Here are all the free humans we know of, except Masefield Ellen. 
There can't be more than two or three at 
large, and perhaps ten dead. That means 
the enemy holds almost a hundred humans 
captive. Discounting children and others 
who are ignorant of Terrestrial science, it 
still means they'll be able to operate the 



guns, the steel mill, the atomic-power plant 
— all the new machines except the rocket 
boat, and they only need Ellen for that." 

Anse nodded, slowly. "What is our 
strength?" he asked. 

"I don't know. Not much. I know where 
about a hundred Khazaki warriors are hiding, ready to follow us whenever we call 
on them, and there will be many more sitting at home now who'll rise if someone 
else takes the lead. But the enemy has all 
the guns. It would be suicide." 

"What about the Khazaki who fled?" 
Usually, in one of the planet's violent 
changes of governments, the refugees were 
powerful nobles who would be slain as a 
safety measure if they stayed at home but 
who could, in exile, raise strong forces for 
a comeback. Such a one had Volakedi himself been, barely escaping with his life 
after his disastrous attempt to seize the 
throne a few years back. 

"Don't be more stupid than you can 
help," snorted Janazik. "By the time they 
can have rallied enough to do any good, 
Volakech and Carson will have the Star 
Ship, one way or another, and then the 
whole world is at their mercy." 

"That means we have to strike back 
somehow — quickly !" Anse stood for a moment in thought. 

The habits of his warring, wandering 
years were coming back to him. He had 
faced death and despair before, and with 
.strength and cunning and bluff and sheer 
luck had come through alive. This was 
another problem, more desperate and more 
urgent, but still another problem. 

No — there was more to it than that. 

HIS FACE GREW BLEAK, and it 
was as if a coldness touched his 
heart. Carson was Ellen's older brother, 
and even if they had quarreled from time 
to time he knew she had always felt deeply 
bound to him. Carse is everything I never 
was. He stayed in Krakenau and studied 
and became an educated man and a skilled 
engineer while I went hallooing over the 
world. He's brave and a good fighter — so 
am I — but he's so much more than that. I 
imagine it zms his example that made Ellen 
learn the astrogation 07ily her grandfather 
knew. 

And now I'm back from roa/ming and 
roving with Janazik, and I'm trying hard 



72 PLANET 

to settle down and learn something so that 
I won't be just a barbarian, a wild Khasaki 
in hunuin skin, when zve go out to the 
civilizaticn of the stars. So that I won't 
be too utterly ashamed to ask Ellen to 
7narry me. And it was all going pretty 
well until new. 

But now — I'm fighting her brother — 

Well — he pushed the thought out of his 
lirain. After all, apparently she was in 
opposition to Carse's plans too. 

**I wonder why they tried to kill me?*' 
he asked aloud, more to fill in the time 
while he thought than out of curiosity. 

"You'd be of no use to Carson, having 
no technical education/' said Janazik, 
"while your knowledge of figliting and 
your connections with warlike groups make 
you dangerous to him. Also, I don't think 
he ever liked your paying attention to Ellen." 

"No — ^he always said I w^as a waster. 
Called me a — an absorbed Khazaki. FdVe 
split his skull if he hadn't been Ellen's 
brother — No matter now. We've more intportant things to talk over." 

Have we, nowf he thought sickly. Cor* 
son must know Ellen well, better than I 
do. If he thinks he can have me killed 
Zidthout making her hate him, then — maybe 
I never had any clmtKe with her then — 

"How'd you happen by?" he asked tonelessly. 

"I've been out from time to time, looking 
for Ellen and killing guardsmen whenever 
I could catch them alone." Janazik's white 
fangs gleamed in a carnivore's smile. "And, 
of course, I expected you back from your 
fishing trip about this time, and w^atched 
for you lest you blunder into their hands." 

Anse began to pace the floor, back and 
forth, his head bent to avoid the basement 
rafters. If Carson was in control, and out 
to kill him . . . There was more to it than 
that, of course. The whole future of the 
planet Khazak, perhaps of the fabulous 
Galactic civilization itself, was balanced 
on the edge of a sword. If Volakech or a 
descendant of his took the warlike race out 
among the stars, with a high level of industry to back a scheme of conquest 

But it didn't matter. All the universe 
didn't matter. There was only Ellen, and 
his own dead kin, and himself. 

A man's heart can only hold so much. 

Janazik stood quietly back, watching liis 



STORIES 

friend's restless prowling. He had seon 
that pacing before, and he knew that some 
scheme would come out of it, crazy and 
reckless and desperate, with his own cool 
unhuman intelligence to temper it and 
make it workable. He and Anse made a 
good team. They made the best damned 
fighting team Khazak had ever seen. 

Presently the human lifted his head* 
There was silence in the hiding place, thick 
and taut, so that they could hear their 
own breathing and the steady drum of 
rain on the trapdoor. 

"I have an idea," said Anse* 

III 

THE LONG NIGHT WORE ON. 
Janazik had sent most of his Kha-* 
25aki out to alert the other loyalists in their 
hiding places, but only they had a chance 
of slipping unobserved past the enemy 
patrols. Humans, obviously alien, slowfooted and clumsy beside the flitting shadows of Khazak, would never get fan 
They had to wait. 

Anse was glad of the opportunity for 
conference with Janazik, planning the assault on the citadel. Neither of them was 
very familiar with the layout, but Alonzo, 
as an engineer on the rocket building project, and old Chiang had been there often 
enough to know it intimately. 

It was impossible that a few hundred 
warriors armed with the primitive weapons 
of Khazak could take the stronghold. Its 
walls were manned by more fighters than 
that, and there were the terrible Earthtype guns as well. Alonzo had a blaster 
with a couple of charges, but otherwise 
there was nothing modern in the loyalist 
force. 

But still that futile assault was necessary— 

"It's taking a desperate chance," said 
Dougald Joan. She was young yet, hardly 
out of girlhood, but her voice had an indomitable ring. The true warriors among 
the five Earthling families were all Dougalds thought Janazik. "Suppose Ellen 
doesn't come out of hiding? Suppose she's 
dead or — or captured already, in spite of 
what we think." 

"We'll just have to try and destroy the 
rocket then," said Alonzo. "Certainly we 
can't let Volakech get to the Star Ship.'' 



STAR 

He sighed, heavily. *'And the labor of another generation will be gone/' 

"It wouldn't take us long to build another boat/' said his wife. ''We know how, 
now, and we have the industry to do it/' 

*'There are only a few who really know 
how to handle and build the Terrestrial 
machines, and most of them are in the 
enemy's hands/' reminded old Chiang. 
**I'm sure I couldn't tell you much about 
atomic engines, even though I was on the 
Star Ship herself once. If those few are 
killed, we may never be able to duplicate 
our efforts. What Terrestrials survive will 
sink back into barbarism, become simply 
another part of Khazaki culture/' 

"I don't know " said Nora, 

"I know, because I've seen it happen/' 
insisted Chiang. "In the fifty years since 
we were marooned here, two generations 
have been born on Khazak. They've grown 
up among Khazaki, played witli native 
children, worked and fought with Khazaki 
natives, adopted the dress and speech and 
whole outlook of Krakenau. Only a few in 
tliis third generation have consciously tried 
to remain — Terrestrial. I must admit that 
Masefield Carson is one such. Ellen is another. But few others.'* 

"Would you have us wall ourselves ciut 
from the world ?" asked Anse with a Bridling anger. 

"No. I don't see how the situation could 
be helped. We are a minority in an alien 
culture with which we've had to cooperate. 
It's only natural that we'd be more assimilated than assimilating. Even at that, we've 
wrought immense changes." 

JANAZIK NODDED. The stranded 
Terrestrials had found themselves in 
an early Iron Age civilization of citystates, among a race naturally violent and 
predatory. For their own survival, they 
had had to league forces with the state 
in which they found themselves — Krakenau, as it happened. Before they could 
build the industry they needed, they had 
to liave some security — which meant that 
they must teach the Krakenaui military 
principles and means of making new weapons which would make them superior to 
their neighbors. After that — well, it took 
an immense technology to build even a 
small spaceship. The superalloys which 
could stand the combustion of rocket fuel 



SHIP 73 

required unheard-of elements such as manganese and chromium, which required 
means of mining and refining them, which 
required a considerable chemical plant, 
which required — How far down do you 
have to start ? And there were a hundred 
or a tliousand other requirements of equal 
importance and difficulty. 

Besides, the Terrestrials had had to 
learn much from scratch themselves. None 
of them had ever built a rocketship, had 
ever seen one in action even. It was centuries obsolete in Galactic civilization. But 
gravity drives were out of the question. 
So — they'd had to design the ship from the 
ground up. Which meant years of painstaking research . . . and only a few interested humans and Khazaki to do it. The 
rest were too busy with their own affairs 
in the brawling barbaric culture. 

Ten years ago, the first spaceboat had 
blasted off toward the Star Ship— nand exploded in mid-acceleration. More designing, more testing, more slow building — 
and now the second one lay ready. Perhaps 
it could reach the Star Ship. 

The Star Ship — faster than light, 
weightless when it chose to be for all its 
enormous mass, armed with atomic guns 
that could blast a city to superheated vapor. Whoever controlled that ship could 
get to Galactic stars in a matter of weeks. 
Or could rule all Khazaki if he chose. 

No wonder Carson and Volakech had 
struck now, before tiie rocket boat was 
launched. When they had the shipBut only Ellen knew the figures of its 
orbit and the complicated calculations by 
which the boat would plot a course to get 
there. A bold warrior might make a try at 
reaching the ship by seat-of-the-pants piloting, but he wouldn't have much chance 
of making it. So EUen, and the rocket boat, 
were the fulcrum of the future. 

"Strange," mused Chiang. "Strange that 
we should have had that accident . . /' 

They had heard the story a hundred 
times before, but they gathered around to 
listen ; there was nothing else to do while 
the slow hours dragged on. 

"We were ten, all told, five men and 
their wives. Exploratory expeditions are 
often out for years at a time, so the Service makes it a policy to man the ships 
with married couples. It's hard for a 
Khazaki to appreciate the absolute equality 



74 



PLANET STORIES 



between the sexes which human civilization has achieved. It's due to the advanced 
technology, of course, and weVe losing it 
as we go back to barbarism — " 

Anse felt a small hand laid on his arm. 
JTe looked down into the dark eyes of DuFrere Marie. She was a pretty girl, a little 
younger than he, and until he*d really noticed Ellen he'd been paying her some attention. 

*'I don't care about equality," she whispered. *'A woman shouldn't try to be a 
man. I'd want only to cook and keep house 
for my man, and bear his children." 

It was, Anse realized, a typical Khazaki 
attitude. But — ^he remembered with a sudden pity that Carson had been courting 
Marie. "This is pretty tough on you/' he 
muttered. "FU try to see that Carse is 
saved , . . If we win," he added wryly. 

''Him ? I don't care about that Masef ield. 
Let them hang him. But Anse — ^be careful—" 

TTE looked away, his face hot in 
AJL the gloom, realizing suddenly why 
Masefield Carson hated him. Briefly, he 
wished he hadn't had such consistent luck 
with women. But the accident that there 
was a preponderance of females in the second and third generations of Khazaki humans had made it more or less inevitable, 
and he — well, he was only human. There'd 
been Earthling girls; and not a few Khazaki women had been intrigued by the big 
Terrestrial. Yes, I was lucky, he thought 
bitterly. Lucky in all except the one that 
mattered. 

'' — we'd been a few weeks out of Avandar — it was an obscure outpost then, 
though I imagine it's grown since — when 
we detected this Sol-type sun. Seeing that 
there was an Earth-like planet, we decided 
to investigate. And since we were all tired 
of being cooped in the ship, and telescopes 
showed that any natives which might exist 
would be too primitive to endanger us, 
we all went down in the lifeboat. 

"And the one-in-a-billion chance happened . . . the atomic converters went out 
of control and we barely escaped from the 
boat before it was utterly consumed. We 
were stranded on an alien planet, with 
nothing but our clothes and a few hand 
weapons — and with our ship that would go 
faster than light circling in its orbit not ten 



thousand kilometers above us! 

'*No chance of rescue. There are just 
too many suns for the Galactic Coordinators to hope to find a ship that doesn't 
come back. Expansion into this region of 
space wasn't scheduled for another two 
centuries. So there we were, and until we 
could build a boat which would take us 
back to our ship — ^there we stayed ! 

"And it's taken us fifty years so far . . ." 

Pragakech came in wath the rain glistening on his fur and running in small 
puddles about his padding feet. "We're 
ready," he said. "Every warrior whose hiding place we knew has been contacted." 

"Then we might as well go." Janazik 
got up and stretched luxuriously. His eyes 
were like molten gold in the murky light. 

"So soon?" Marie held Anse back with 
anxious hands. "This same night?" 

"The sooner the better," Anse said 
grimly. "Every day that goes by, more 
of our friends will be found out and killed, 
more places will be searched for Ellen, 
Volakech's grip on the city will grow 
stronger." He put the spiked helmet back 
on his head, and buckled the sword about 
his mailed waist "Come on, Janazik. The 
rest stay here and wait for word. If we're 
utterly defeated, such of us as survive will 
manage to get back and lead you out of 
Krakenau — somehow." 

Marie started to say something, then 
shook her head as if the words hurt her 
throat ,and drew Anse's face down to hers. 
"Goodbye, then," she whispered. "Goodbye, 
and the gods be with you." 

He kissed her more awkwardly than was 
his wont, feeling himself a thorough scoundrel. Then he followed Pragakech and 
Janazik out the trapdoor. 

IV 

THE COURTYARD was filled with 
Khazaki warriors, standing silently 
in the slow heavy rain. It was the darkness of early morning, and only an occasional wan lightning flash, gleaming on 
spears and axes, broke the chill gloom. 
Anse was aware of softly-moving supple 
bodies pressing around him, of night-seeing 
eyes watching him with an impassive stare. 
It w^s he and Janazik who had the plan, 
and who had the most experience in warfare, and the rest looked to them for lead


STAR 

ership. It was not easy to stand under that 
cool, judging scrutiny, and Anse strode 
forth into the street with a feeling of relief at the prospect of action. 

As they moved toward the castle, along 
the narrow cobbled lanes winding up the 
hills, their army grew. Warriors came loping from alleys, came slipping out of the 
dark barricaded houses, seemed to rise out 
of the rainy night around them. All Krakenau was abroad, it seemed, but quietly, 
quietly. 

And throughout the town other such 
forces were on the move, gathering under 
the lead of anyone who could be trusted, 
converging on the citadel and the rocketship it guarded. 

Tonight — victory, or destruction of five 
boat and a drawn battle . , , ^or repulsion 
and ultimate shattering dejeai. The gods 
are abroad tonight. 

Somewhere, faint and far through the 
dull washing of rain, a trumpet blew a 
harsh challenge, once and again. After it 
came a distance-muted shouting of voices: 
and a clattering of swords. 

''One of our bands has come across a 
patrol," said Janazik unnecessarily. "Now 
all hell will be loose in Krakenau. Come 
on!'' 

They broke into a trot up the hilL 
Rounding a sharp turn in the street, they 
saw a close-ranked mass of warriors with 
spears aloft. 

Guardsmen ! 

The two forces let out a simultaneous 
yell and charged at each other in the disorderly Khazaki fashion. It was beginning 
to lighten just a little; Anse could make 
out enough for purposes of battle. Hai-ah 
— ^here we go! 

He smashed into a leading guard, w^ho 
stabbed at him with his long pike. The edge 
grazed off Anse's heavy chain mail as the 
Earthling chopped out with his sword. He 
knocked the shaft aside and thrust in, 
hewing at the Khazaki's neck. The guard 
intercepted the blow with his shield, and 
isuddenly rammed it forward. The murderous spike on its boss thudded against the 
Terrestrial's broad chest and the linked 
rings gave under that blow — just a little, 
just enough to draw blood. Anse roared 
and chopped down across the other's right 
arm. The Khazaki howled his pain and 
Stumbled back. 



SHIP 75 

Another was on the Earthling like a 
spitting cat. Swords hummed and clashed 
together. Leaping and dodging, the Khazaki lashed out with a blade like a flickering 
flame, and none of Anse's blows could land 
on him. 

The Kliazaki leaped in suddenly, his 
edge reaching for the human's unprotected 
throat. Anse parried with his sword, while 
his left fist shot out like an iron cannonball. It hit the native full in the face, with 
a crunch of splintering bones. The guard's 
head snapped back and he fell to the bloodrunning street. 

Janazik was fighting two at once, his 
sword never resting. He leaped and danced 
like the shadow of a flame in the wind, and 
he was laughing — ^laughing! Anse hewed 
out, and one of the foemen's heads sprang 
from its neck. Janazik darted in, there was 
a blur of ^teel, and the other guardsman 
toppled. 

Axe and sword! Spear and dagger and 
flying arrows! The fight rolled back and 
forth between the darkling walls of houses. 
It grew with time ; Volakech's patrols were 
drawn by the noise, loyalists crouched in 
hiding heard of the attack and sped to join 
it. Anse and Janazik fought side by side, 
human brawn and Khazaki swiftness, and 
the corpses were heaped where they went. 

A pike raked Anse's hand. He dropped 
his sword and the enemy leaped in with 
drawn knife. Anse did not reach for his 
own dirk — no human had a chance in a 
knife fight with a Khazaki — but his arms 
snaked out, his hands closed on the native's 
waist, and he lifted the enemy up and 
hurled him against another. They both 
went down in a crash of denting armor and 
snapping bones. Anse roared his war-cry 
and picked up his sword again. 

JANAZIK LEAPED and darted and 
fenced, grinning as he fought, demonlights in his yellow eyes. A spear was 
hurled at him. He picked it out of the 
air, one-handed, and threw it back, even 
as he fought another guardsman. The rebel 
took advantage of it to get in under Janazik's guard. Swifter than thought, the 
warrior's dagger was in his left hand— and 
into the rebel's throat. 

Back and forth the battle swayed, roaring, trampling, and the rain mingled with 
blood between the cobblestones. Thunder of 



1 



\ 

1 



76 



PLACET STORIES 



weapons, shrieking of wounded, shouting 
of challenges — ^lightning dancing overhead ! 

Suddenly it was over. 

Anse looked up from his last victim and 
saw that the confusion no longer snarled 
around him. The street was heaped with 
dead and wounded, and a few individual 
battles were still going on. But the surviving guardsmen were in full flight, and the 
victorious warriors were shouting their 
triumph. 

''That was a fight!" panted Janazik. He 
quivered with feral eagerness. "Now on to 
the castle!" 

*a think," said Slavatozik thoughtfully, 
"that this was the decisive struggle as far 
as the city is concerned. Look at how 
many were involved. Almost all the patrols 
must have come here — and now they're 
beaten. We hold the city !" 

"Not much good to us while Volakech is 
in the castle," said Anse. "He need only 
sally forth with the Earth-weapons — " He 
leaned on his sword, gasping great lungfuls of the cool wet air into him. "But 
Where's Ellen?" 

"We've had heralds out shouting for 
her, as you suggested," said Slavatozik. 
"Now that the city is in our control, she 
should come out. If not ^* 

" — then I know how to blow up the 
boat," said Gonzales Alonzo bleakly. "If 
we can get inside the citadel to it." 

The loyalists were reassembling their 
forces. Warriors moved over the scene of 
battle, plundering dead guardsmen, cutting 
the throats of wounded enemies and badly 
mutilated friends. It was a small army that 
was crowding around Anse's tall form. 

His worried eyes probed into the dull 
gray light of the rainy dawn. Of a sudden, 
he stiffened and peered more closely. 
Someone was coming down the street, 
thrusting through the assembled warriors. 
Someone — someone — ^he knew that bright 
bronze hair . • • 

Ellen. 

He stood waiting, letting her come up 
to him, and his eyes were hungry. She 
was tall and full-bodied and supple, graceful almost as a Khazaki, and her wideset eyes were calm and gray under a broad 
clear forehead and there was a dusting 
of freckles over her straight nose and her 
mouth was wide and strong and generous 
and — 



"Ellen," he said wonderingly. "Ellen." 

"What are you doing?" she asked. 
"What have you planned?" 

No question of how he was, no look 
at the blood trickling along his sides and 
splashed over his face and arms — ^well — 
"Where were ^ou ?" he asked, and cursed 
himself for not being able to think of a 
better greeting. ^ 

"I hid with the family of Azakhagar," 
she said. "I lay in their loft when the 
patrolmen came searching for me. Then 
I heard your heralds going through the 
streets, calling on me to come out in your 
name. So I came." 

"How did you know it wasn't a trick of 
Volakech's?" asked someone. 

"I told the heralds to use my name 
and add after it — well — something that 
only she and I knew/^ said Anse uncomfortably. 



JANAZIK remained impassive, but he 
recalled that the phrase had been 
"Dougald Anson, who once told you some^ 
thing on a sunny day down by Zamanaui 
River." He could guess what the something had been. Well, it seemed to happen 
to all Earthmen sooner or later, and it 
meant the end of the old unregenerate 
days. He sighed, a little wistfully. 

"But what did you want me for?" 
asked Ellen. She stood before Anse jn 
her short, close-fitting tunic, the raindrops 
glittering in her heavy coppery hair, and he 
thought wr>^ly that the question was in 
one sense superfluous. But in another 
sense, and with time so desperately short — 

"You're the only one of us who can plot 
a course for the rocket," he said. "Alonzo 
here, or almost anyone, should be able to 
pilot it, but you're the only one who can 
take it to the Star Ship. So that, of 
course, is why Carson and Volakech were 
after you, and why we had to have you 
too. If we can get into the citadel, capture 
the rocket and get up to the Star Ship, it'll 
be easy to overthrow Volakech. But if he 
gets there first, all Khazak couldn't win 
against him." 

She nodded, slowly and wearily. Her 
gray eyes were haunted. "I wonder if it 
matters who gets there,'^ she said. "I wonder why we're fighting and killing each 
other. Over who shall sit on the throne of 



I 



STAR 

an obscure city-state on an insi^ficant 
planet? Over the eixact disposition to be 
made of one little spaceship? It isn't worth 
it." She looked around at the sprawled 
corpses, lying on the bloody cobblestones 
with rain falling- in their gaping mouths, 
and shuddered. "It isn't worth that." 

"There's more to it than that," said 
Janazik bleakly. "Masefield Carson and 
his friend — ^his puppet, I think — Volakech 
would use the ship to bring all the world 
tmder their rule. Then they would mold it 
into a pattern suited for conquering a 
small empire among the neighboring stars." 

"Volakech always talked that way, before his first revolution," said Ellen. "And 
Carse used to say — but that can't be 
right! He can't have meant it And even 
if he did — ^what of it? Is it worth enough 
for brothers to slay each other over?" 

"Yes." Janazik's voice was pitiless. 
"Shall the freemen of Khazak become the 
regimented hordes of a tyrant ? Let all this 
world be blown asunder first!" 

"Shall the innocent folk of the other 
stars become his victims?" urged Alonzo. 
**Shall Khazak become a menace to the 
Galaxy, one which must be destroyed — 
or must itself destroy? Shall there be war 
with— Earth herself ?" 

"To Shantuzik with that," growled 
Anjse. "These are our enemies, to be 
fought and beaten. Out there is the great 
civilization of the Galaxy, and they would 
keep us from it for generations yet, and 
make it in the end our foe. And Volakech 
is a murderer with no right to the throne 
of Krakenau. I say let's get at his liver !" 

"Well—" Ellen looked away. When 
she turned back, there was torment in her 
eyes, but her voice was low and steady: 
"I'm with you in whatever you plan. But 
on one condition. Carse is not to be 
harmed." 

"Not harmed!" exploded Janazik. "Why, 
tliat dirty traitor deserves " 

"He is still my brother," said Ellen. 
"When Volakech is beaten, he will not 
be able to do any more harm, and he will 
see that he was wrong." Her eyes flashed 
coldly. "Whoever hurts Carse will have 
me for blood-enemy !" 

"As you will," shrugged Anse, trying to 
hide the pain in his heart. "But now . . . 
Our plan is to storm the citadel. We can't 
hope to take it, but we'll keep the gar


SHIP 77 

rison busy. Meanwhile a few of us break 
in, get the rocket, and take it back out 
here, where you will have an orbit 
plotted—" 

"I can't make one that quickly. And 
who can pilot it well enough to land it here 
Without cracking it up?" 

THEY LOOKED at each other, and 
then ^yt;^ turned to Gonzales Alonzo. 
He smiled mirthlessly. "I can tr>'," he said. 
"But I'm only an engineer; I never imagined I'd have to fly the thing. Chiang 
Ching-Wei was supposed to be the pilot, 
but he's a prisoner now.'* 

"If we smash the rocket — ^well, then we 
smash it," said Anse heavily. "It'll mean a 
long and hard v^rar against Volakech from 
outside, and he'll have all the advantages 
of the new weapons. We may never overthrow him before he gets another boat 
built. Still — we'll just have to try." 

Ellen said quietly: "I can pilot it.** 

"You!" 

"Of course. IVe been working on the 
second boat from the beginning. I know it 
as well as anyone, every seam and rivet 
and wiring diagram. I was aboard when 
Chiang took her on a practice run only a 
few days ago. I'll fly it for you!" 

"You can't — ^we have to fight our way 
into the castle itself, the very heart of 
Volakech's power — ^you'd be killed!'^ 

"It's the best chance. If you think we 
can get in at all, I stand as good a chanoe 
of living through it as anyone else." 

"She's right," said Janazik. "And while 
we waste time here arguing, the citadel is 
getting ready. Come on !" 

Automatically, Anse broke into movement, trotting along beside Janazik, and 
the army formed its ranks and followed 
them. 

He had time for a few hurried words 
with Ellen, whispered as they went up the 
hill : ''Stay close by me. There'll be a small 
group of us getting in, picked fighters, and 
we'll make a ring about you." 

"Of course," she nodded. Her gray eyes 
shone, and she was breathing quickly. "I 
begin to see why you were a rover all 
those years, Anse. It's mad and desperate 
and terrible — but before Cosmos, we're 
alive!" 

"Most recruits are frightened green before their first battle," he said. "You have 



I 



78 PLACET 

a warrior's heart, Ellen — " He broke off, 
hearing the banality of his own words. 

'^Listen, my dearest/' he said then, 
quickly. **We may not come alive through 
all this. But remember what I did say, 
down by the river that day. I love you." 

She was silent. He went on, fumbling 
for words: "You wouldn't answer me 
then " 

"I thought it was just your usual talk 
to women." 

'It may have been — ^then,'' he admitted. 
**But it hasn't been since, and it isn't now." 
His sword-calloused hand found hers. 
''Don't forget, Ellen. I love you. I will 
always love you." 

"Anse " She turned toward him, 

and he saw her eyes alight. **Anse " 

A bugle shrilled through the rain, high 
and harsh ahead of them. Dimly, they 
made out the monstrous bulk of the castle, 
looming through the misty gray light, its 
towers lost in the vague sky. Janazik's 
sword flashed from its sheath. 

"The battle begins," said a voice out of 
the blurring rain. 

Anse drew Ellen over against a wall and 
kissed her. Her lips were cool and firm 
under his, wet with rain; he would never 
forget that kiss while life was in him. 

They looked at each other for a moment 
of wonder, and then broke apart and followed Janazik. 



V 



THE LOYALISTS CHARGED IN 
a living wave that roared as it surfed 
against the castle walls and spattered a 
foam of blood and steel. From three sides 
they came, weaving in and out of the 
hailing arrows, lifting shields above them, 
leaving their dead behind them. 

The blaster cannon mounted on the walls 
spouted flame and thunder. Warriors were 
mowed down before that whirling white 
fury, armor melted when the lightninglike discharges played over it, but still the 
assault went on with all the grim bitter 
courage of the Khazaki race. 

Old siege engines were appearing, 
dragged out of storehouses and hiding 
places where they had been kept against 
such a da;,- of need. Now the great catapults and ballistae were mounted; stones 
and fireballs and iron-headed bolts were 



STORIES 

raking the walls. A testudo moved awkwardly forth up the steep hill toward the 
gates. It was blasted to flaming molten 
ruin, but another got underneath the walls 
and the crash of a battering ram came 
from under its roof. 

Shadowlike in the blinding rain, the warriors flitted up toward the walls. No spot 
of cover was too small for one of those 
ghostly shapes ; they seemed to carry their 
own invisibility with them. Under the 
walls — scaling ladders appearing as if out 
of nowhere — ^up the walls and into the 
castle ! 

The ladders were hurled down. The warriors who gained the walls were blasted by 
cannon, cut down by superior numbers, 
lost in a swirl of battle and death. Boiling water rained down over the walls on 
those below, spears and arrows and the 
roaring blaster bolts. But still they came. 
Still the howling, screeching demons of 
Krakenau came, and died, and came again. 

Anse cursed, softly, luridly, pain croaking in his voice : ''We can't be with them. 
They're being slaughtered and we can't 
be with them." 

"We're needed worse here," said Janazik 
curtly. "If only Pragakech can maintain 
the assault for an hour " 

He and Anse loped in the forefront. 
Behind them came Gonzales, Ellen, and a 
dozen picked young Khazaki. They wove 
through a maze of alleys and streets and 
deserted market squares, working around 
behind the castle. The roar of battle came 
to them out of the gray mist of rain; 
otherwise there was only the padding and 
splashing of their own feet, the breath 
rasping harsh in their lungs, the faint 
clank and jingle of their harness. All 
Krakenau not at the storming of the citadel had withdrawn into the mysterious 
shells of the houses, lay watching and 
waiting and whetting knives in the dark. 

The paths dipped steeply downward, until, when they came around behind the 
citadel and stood peering out of a tunnellike alley, there was a sheer cliff-face before them. On this side the castle was 
impregnable. The only approach was a 
knife-edged trail winding up the cliff, barely wide enough for one man at a time. At 
its top, flush with the precipice edge, the 
wall was built. Against this wall, commanding the trail, there had in the old days 



STAR SHIP 



79 



been an archer post, But lately a cannon 
had been mounted there. 

Yet that very security, thought Anse, 
might be a weakness. Except for that gtin, 
the approach wouldn't be watched, especially with the fight going on elsewhere. 
So — 

"Give m© your weapon, Alonzo," said 
Janazik. 

"Here." Gonzales handed him the blaster 
pistol. *'But it only has two diarges left in 
it.'' 

"That may be enough." Janazik slipped it 
under his cloak. Then he wound a gold 
brassard about his arm and started up the 
trail. A couple of his Khazaki came behind them, then Anse, Ellen, and Alonzo, 
and finally the rest of the warriors. 

THE TRAIL WAS STEEP and slippery, water swirling down it, loose 
rocks moving uneasily beneath the feet — 
and it was a dizzying drop off the sheer 
edge to the ground below. They wound 
upward slowly, panting, cursing, wondering how much of a chance their desperate 
scheme really had. 

Ellen slipped a little. Anse reached back 
and caught her hand. He smiled lop-sidedly. "Now I don't want to let go," he said. 

"I wonder — " Ellen looked away, then 
back to him, and her eyes were wide and 
puzzled. *T wonder if I want you to, 
Anse." 

His heart seemed to jump up into his 
throat, but he let her go and said wryly: 
"I'm afraid I have to right now. But wait 
till later." 

Up and up — Later! Will tJtere ever be a 
later? 

And if there is, what then? Tm still more 
than half a Khasuki. Can we live together 
in the great civilisation I Itardly compre^ 
hend? 

It was simpler when Janazik and I were 
waj-ring over the planet . . . Janazik I I 
wonder if two beings of the same race 
could ever know as close a friendship as 
that betzveen lis two aliens.^ W^ve fought 
and laughed and sung together, we've saved 
each other's lives, sweated and suffered and 
been afraid, together. We know each other 
as we will nez'er know any other being. 

Well, it passes. We'll always remain 
close friends, I suppose. But ttie old com-radeship — I'll have to give that up. 



But Ellen— 

Up and up — 

Janazik whistled, long and loud, and 
called: "Hail Volakech! Friends!" 

He could dimly s«e the looming bulk of 
the blaster cannon, crouched behind its 
iron shield. Above it the walls of the 
castle were high and dark and — empty. 

The voice came from ahead of him, 
taut with nervousness : "Who goes there ?" 

"A friend. I hav« a message for His 
Highness." Janazik moved forward almost 
casually. His eyes gleamed with mirth. It 
tickled his heart, this dicing with death. 
Someday he'd overreach himself and that 
would be the end, but until then he was 
having fun. 

"Advance . , . No, no one else. Just 
you alone." 

Janazik sauntered forward until he stood 
only a meter from the Wunt ugly muzzle. 
He had his left arm out of his cloak, so 
that the golden brasserd shone in plain 
view. Underneath, his right hand thumbed 
the catch of Alonzo's pistol. 

"Who are you?" challenged the voice 
from bdiind the shield. 

"A messenger ior His Highness from 
his allies in Volgazan," said Janazik. "Seeing that there was still fighting going on, I 
and my men decided to come in the back 
way." 

''Well — I suppose I can let you in, under 
guard. But your men will have to stay 
out here." 

"Very well." Janazik strolled over behind the shield. 

There were three warriors crouched 
there, in front of a small door in the wall. 
One of them was about to blow his 
trumpet for a guard detail. The other 
two poised their spears near Janazik' s 
throat. None of them thought that anyone outside the citadd might possess an 
Earth-weapon. 

JANAZIK SHOT right through his 
cloak. In tliat narrow space, the ravenous discharge blinded and blistered him, 
stung his face with flying particles of molten iron. The hammer-blow of concussion 
sent him reeling back against the wall. His 
cloak caught afire; he ripped it off and 
flung it down on the three blackened 
corpses before him. 

Vision returned to his dazzled eyes. 



I 



80 



PLANET STORIES 



These Earth-weapons were hideous things, 
he thought ; they made nothing of courage 
or strengtli or even ainning. He wondered 
what changes Galactic civilization would 
bring to old Khazak, and didn't think he'd 
like most of them. Maybe Volakech was 
right. 

But Anse was his comrade and Aligan 
had been his king. He whistled, and the 
others came running up. 

"Quick," rasped Janazik. "The noise 
may draw somebody — quick, inside!'* 

"Can't we swing this lightning thrower 
around and blast them?" wondered a 
Khazaki. 

"No, it's fixed in place," Anse threw 
his brawny shoulders against the solid 
mass of the door. It swung ponderously 
back and they dashed through the tunnel 
in the thick wall — out into the open courtyard of the castle! 

The noises of the fight rose high from 
here, but there were only a few warriors 
in sight, scurrying back and forth on their 
errands without noticing the newcomers — 
a fact which did not surprise Anse or 
Janazik, who knew what vast confusion 
a battle was. The human remembered the 
layout now — ^the rocket would be over by 
the machine shops, near the donjon keep 
—"This way!" 

They trotted across the court, around 
the gray stone bulk of the citadel's buildings and towers, toward the long wooden 
shed which housed the new machine shop. 
The rain was beginning to slacken now, 
and the sun was up behind its gray veil, so 
that there was light shining through slanting silver. Against the dark walls, the lean 
torpedo shape of the rocket boat gleamed 
like a polished spearhead. 

"Now — ahead!" Janazik broke into a 
run toward the boat, and they followed 
him in a close ring about Ellen. 

A band of fighters came around the corner of the machine shop, in front of the 
rocket. The wet light shone off their 
brassards. Janazik swore bitterly, and his 
hand dropped to his sword. 

One of the enemy warriors let out a yell. 
"Earthlings — ^two — three of them! Not 



ours 



The blaster crashed in Janazik's hand, 
and five dropped their charred bodies on 
the ground. With a spine-shivering yell, 
Janazik bounded forward, and after him 



came Anse, Alonzo, and a round dozen 
of the fiercest fighters in Krakenau. The 
blaster was exhausted now — but they had 
their swords! 

The leader of the enemy band was a 
huge Khazaki, dark-furred and green-eyed. 
His men were scattering in panic, but he 
roared a bull-voiced command and they 
rallied about him and stood befort the 
rocket. 

Volakech. By all the thirteen hells, Vola" 
kech! 

He must have been leading reinforce^ 
ments to a threatened point on the wall, 
thought Anse in a fleeting moment, and 
his sharp mind had instantly deduced that 
the invaders were after the rocket — and 
that they could have no more blaster 
charges, or they would be using them. And 
Volakech's band was still larger than 
theirs, and he had all the forces of the 
citadel behind him if he could summon 
them! 

THE TWO BANDS CRASHED together and steel began to fly. Anse 
stood before Ellen and lashed out at a 
spitting Khazaki who reached for his 
belly with a sword. The enemy dodged past 
his guard, drilled in close. Ellen shouted 
and kicked at the native's ankles. He 
stumbled, dropping his defense, and Anse 
clove his skull. 

Volakech roared. He swung a huge 
battle axe, and its shock and thunder rose 
high over the swaying tide of battle. Two 
of Janazik's men leaped at him. He swept 
the axe in a terrible arc and the spike 
cracked one pate and the edge split the 
other's face open. Alonzo sprang at him 
with furious courage, wielding a sword. 
Volakech knocked it spinning -from his 
hand, but, before he could kill the engineer, Anse was on him. 

They traded blows in a clamor of steel. 
Axe and sword clashed together, sheared 
along chain mail and rang on helmets. It 
was a blur of rake and slash and parry, 
with Volakech grinning at him behind a 
network of whirling steel. 

Anse gathered his strength and pressed 
forward with reckless fury. His sword 
hummed and whistled and roared against 
Volakech's hard-held guard. He laid open 
arms, legs, cheek; he probed and lunged 
for the rebel king's trunk. Volakech 



90 PLACET 

his hand-ax, and ran panting to the place 
where he had dug for food. His excavations tended to close and heal overnight; 
now he went to work with vicious strokes 
enlarging the latest one, hacking and tearing it deeper and deeper. 

He was almost hidden in the cavity 
when a shadow fell across him from behind. He whirled, for there could be no 
shadows on the monster's back. 

A man stood watching him calmly— an 
elderly man in rusty black clothing, leaning on a stick. The staff, the snowy beard, 
and something that smoldered behind the 
benign eyes, gave him the look of an ancient prophet. 

'^Who are you?" asked Westover, 

breathlessly but almost whhout surprise. 

"I am the Preacher,*' the old man said. 

*The Lord hath sent me to save you. 

Arise, my son, and follow me." 

Westover hesitated. 'Tm not just imagining you?" he appealed. "Scnnebody else 
has really found the answer?" 

The Preacher's brows knitted faintly, 
but then his look turned to benevolent understanding. **You have 'been alone too 
long here. Come with me— I will take you 
to the Doctor." 

Westover was still not sure that the 
other was more than one of the powerful 
specters of childhood— the Preacher, the 
Doctor, no doubt the Teacher next— risen 
to rob him of his last shreds of sanity. 
But he nodded in childlike obedience, and 

followed. 

When, a few hundred yards nearer the 
monster's head, the other halted at a black 
rent in the rugose hide, the mouth of a 
burrow descending into utter blackness— 
Westover knew that both the Preacher 
and his own wild hope were real. 

"Down here. Into the belly of Leviathan," said the old man solemnly, and Westover nodded this time with alacrity. 

THE CRAWLING DESCENT 
through the twisting, Stygian burrow had much that ought to belong to a 
journey into Hell. . . More than that, no 
demonologist's imagination could have conceived without experiencing the sheer horror of the yielding beslimed walls that 
seemed every moment squeezing in to trap 
them unspeakably. The air was warm and 
rank with the familiar heavy sweetish 



STORIES 

odor of the monster's colorless blood. . . . 
Then, as he knew it must, a light glimmered ahead, the sinus widened, and Westover climbed to his feet and stood, weakkneed still, staring at a chamber carved in 
the veritable belly of Leviathan. The floor 
underfoot was firm, as was the wall his 
shaking fingers tested. Dazzled, he saw 
tools leaning against the walls, spades, 
crowbars, axes, and a half-dozen people, 
men and women in rough grimy clothing, 
who stood watching him with lively interest. 

The Preacher stood beside him, breathing hard and mopping his forehead. But 
he brushed aside the deferential offers of 
the others: "No — I will take him to the 
Doctor myself. All of you must hurry 
now to dose the shaft." 

There was another tunnel to be crawled 
through, but that one was firm-walled as 
the room they left behind. They emerged 
into a larger cavern, that like the first 
was lit — only now did the miracle of it 
obtrude itself in his dazed mind — by fluorescent tubes, and filled with equipment 
that gleamed glass and metal. Over an apparatus with many fluid-dripping trays, 
like an air-conditioning device, bent a lone 
man. 



"Is it working?" inquired the Preacher. 

"It's working," the other answered without looking up from the adjustment he 
was making. Bubbles were rising in the 
fluid that filled the trays, rising and bursting, rising and bursting with a curiously 
fascinating monotony. The subtly tense 
attitudes of the two initiates told Westover 
better than words that there was something 
hugely important in the success of whatever magic was producing those bubbles. 

The thaumaturge straightened, wiping 
his hands on his trousers as he turned 
with a satisfied grin on his round, spectacled face — then both he and Westover 
froze in dumbfounded recognition. 

SUTTON was first to recover. He said 
quietly, "Welcome aboard the ark. Bill. 
You*re just in time — I think we're about 
to hoist anchor." His quick eyes studied 
Westover's face, and he gestured toward 
a packing box against the wall opposite his 
apparatus. "Sit down. You've been through 
the mill." 

"That's right," Westover sat down diz


^ 



STRANGE EXODVS 



what it was. . . . 

There came a moming, though, when he 
remembered. 

HE WOKE with the sun's warmth 
on his body and the realization of 
something amiss trickling through his head. 
It was a little while before he recognized 
the wrongness, and when he did he sat 
bolt upright. 

The sun was already up, and the monster should have begun once more its 
steady, ravenous march to the east. But 
there was no motion; the great living expanse lay still around him. He wondered 
wildly if it was dead. 

Presently, though, he felt a faint shuddering and lift beneath his feet, and 
heard far stifled mutterings and sighs. 
^ Westover's mind was beginning to function again; it was as though the cessation 
of the rock and sway had exorcised the 
lethargy that had lain upon him. He knew 
now that he had been almost insane for 
the time he had passed here, touched by 
the madness that takes hermits and men 
lost in deserts or oceans. And his was a 
stranger solitude than any of those. 

Now he listened strainingly to the portentous sounds of change in the monster's vitals, and in a flash of insight knew 
them for what they were. The scientists 
had found, in the burst bodies of the Titans that had been killed by atomic bombs^ 
the answer to the riddle of these creatures' 
crossing of space: great vacuoles, pockets of gas that in the living animal could 
be under exceedingly high pressures, and 
that could 'fee expelled to drive the monster in flight like a reaction engine. Rocket 
propulsion, of course, was nothing new to 
zoology ; it was developed ages before man, 
by the squids and by those odd degenerate 
relatives of the vertebrates that are called 
tunicates because of their gaudy celluloseplastic armor. . . . 

The monster on which Westover had 
been living as a parasite was generating 
gases within itself, preparing to leave the 
ravished Earth. That was the meaning of 
its gargantuan belly rumblings. And they 
meant further that he must finally leave 
it— now or never — or be borne aloft to 
die gasping in the stratosphere. 

^ Hurriedly the man scrambled to the 
highest eminence of the back and stood 



89 



looking about; and what he saw brought 
him to the brink of despair. For all around 
lay blue water, waves dancing and glinting in the fresh breeze ; and sniffing the 
air he recognized the salt tang of the sea. 
While he slept the monster had crept beyond the coast line, and lay now in what to 
it was shallow water— fifty or a hundred 
fathoms. Back the way it had come, a 
headland was visible, mockingly, hopelessly 
distant. 

^ Of course— the great beast would crawl 
mto the sea, which would float its bloated 
bulk and enable it to accelerate and take 
flight. It would never have been able to 
lift itself into the air from the dry land. 

^ He should have foreseen that and made 
his escape in time. Now that he had solved 
the problem of human- survival. . . But the 
bright ocean laughed at him, sparkling 
away wave beyond rolling wave, and beyond that blue headland could be only a 
land made desert, where men become 
beasts fought crazily over the last morsels 
Of food. He had lost track of tlie days he 
had been on the monster's back, but the 
rape of Earth must be finished now. He 
had no doubt that the things would depart as they had come into the Solar System—in that close, seemingly one-willed 
swarm that Earth's astronomers had at 
first taken for a comet. K this one was 
leaving, the rest no doubt were too. 

Westover sat for a space with head in 
hands, hearing the faint continuing murmurs from below. And he remembered the 
voices. 



HE HAD BEEN HEARING them 
again as he awoke— the distant muffled voices whose words he could not make 
out, not the small close ones that sometimes in the hot middays had spoken 
cleariy in his ear and even called his name 
The latter had to be, as he had vaguely 
accepted them even then, illusions— but 
the others— with his new clarity he was 
suddenly sure that they had been real. 

And a wild, white light of hope blazed 
in him, and he flung liimself flat on the 
rough surface, beat on it with bare fists 
and shouted: *'Help! Here I am! Help!" 

He paused to listen with fierce intentness, and heard nothing but the faint eructations deep inside the monster. 

Then he sprang to his feet, gripping 



PLANET STORIES 



that the surface beneath him had shifted. 
Unmistakably even in the misty dawnUght, the hills and valleys of the rugose 
back were changing shape, as the vast 
prc^plasmic mass below crawled, flowed 
beneath its integument. In slow peristahic 
motion the waves marched eastward, toward tlie monster's head. 

He could stay where he was unharmed, 
of course. On the monster's back, of all 
places, he had nothing to fear from it or 
from others of its kind. But he knew 
with desperate clarity that by nightfall, 
when the beast became still once more, exhaustion and growing hunger would have 
made him unable to descend. As he lay 
where he had fallen, he felt that weakness 
creeping over him, no longer held in check 
by the will that had kept him doggedlyplodding forward. 

A^itt he lay half conscious, in a lethargy that unchecked must grow steadily 
deeper until death. Isolated thoughts floated 
through his head. It occurred to him that 
he was now ideally located to conduct the 
experiments necessary to prove his theory 
of how to destroy the monsters — ^if only 
someone had had the foresight to build a 
biological laboratory on the monster's back. 
Of course the rolling motion would create 
special problems of technique. . . Idiocy. . . 
Once more he seemed to glimpse Sutton's 
face, as the biologist calmly made that 
gridy report to the President's Committee 
on Extermination . . . Sutton's prediction 
had been a hundred percent correct. The 
monsters' hunger knew no halt until they 
had absorbed into themselves all the organic material on the world which was 
their prey. . . And men must starve, as he 
was starving now. . . . 

WITH A STRUGGLE Westover 
roused himself, first sitting up, 
then swaying to his feet, frowning with 
the effort to look sanely at the terrible 
inspiration that had come to him. The cloud 
blanket was breaking up, the sun already 
high, beating down on the naked moving 
plateau on which the man stood. The idea 
l)orn in him seemed to stand that light, 
even to expand into hope. 

Fingers shaking, he unhitched the light 
ax from his belt and began to hack with 
feverish industry at the monster's crusted 
hide. 



The scaly, weathered epidermis seemed 
immeasurably thick. But at last he had 
chopped through it, reached tlie softer 
protoplasm beneath. Clawing and hewing 
in the hole he had made, he tore out heavyslabs of the monster's flesh. 

A ripple that did not belong to the 
crawling motion ran over the thing's surface round about, Westover laughed wildly with a sudden sense of power. He, the 
insignificant human mite, liad made the 
miles-long beast twitch like a flea-bitten 
dog. 

The analogy was pat ; like a flea, he had 
lodged on a larger animal and was about 
£b nourish himself from it. The slabs of 
flesh he had cut off were gray and unappetizing, but he knew from the studies he 
had helped Sutton make that the monsters, extraterrestrial though they were, 
were in the basic chemistry of proteins, 
fats and carbohydrates one with man or 
the amoeba, and therefore migiit be — food. 
His matches were dry in their waterproof case; he made a smoldering fire 
from the loose fibrous scale of the monster's l)ack, and half an hour later was 
replete. Either the long fast, or involuntary revulsion, or perhaps merely the motion of the creature brought on nausea, but 
he fought it sternly back and succeeded 
in keeping his strange meal down. Then 
he was tormented by thirst. It was some 
time, though, before he could bring himself to drink the colorless fluid tliat had 
collected in the wound he had inflicted on 
the monster. 

Thus began for him a weird existence — 
the life of a parasite, of a flea on a dog. 
The monster crawled by day and rested 
by night; strengthened, the man could 
have left it then, but somehow night after 
night he did not. It wasn't, he argued with 
himself sometimes in the days when he 
lay torpidly drowsing, lulled by the long 
sway, arms over his head to protect him 
from the sun's baking, merely tkat he was 
chained to the only source of food he knew 
in all the world — not just tliat he was 
developing a flea's psyrfiology. He was a 
man and a scientist, and he was conducting 
an experiment. . . His life on the monster's back was proving sometliitig, something of vast importance for man, the 
extinct animal — but for increasingly loager periods of time he could not remember 



STRANGE EXODVS 



chaos of a desolated planet. It was an ordinary face, roundish, spectacled, but 
etched now by tragedy; the voice that 
went with it was flat, unemotional, pedantic. 

"There are so many of them, and weVe 
destroyed so few — and to kill those few 
took our mightiest weapons. Examination 
of the ones that have been killed discloses 
the reason why ordinary projectiles and 
bombs and poisons are ineffective against 
them — apart, that is, from the chief reason t)f sheer size. The creatures are so 
loosely organized that a local injury hardly 
affects the whole. In a sense, each one of 
them is a single cell — like the slime molds, 
the Earthly life fonns that most resemble 
them. 

"That striking resemblance, together 
with the fact that they chose Earth to 
attack out of all the planets of the Solar 
System, shows they must have originated 
on a world much like this. But while on 
Earth the slime molds are the highest 
reticular organisms, and the dominant life 
-is all multicellular, on the monsters* home 
world conditions must have favored unicellular growth. Probably as a result of 
this unspecialized structure, the monsters 
have attained their great size and perhaps 
for the same reason they have achieved 
what even intelligent cellular life so far 
hasn't — liberation from existence bound to 
one world's surface, the conquest of space. 
They accomplished it not by invention but 
by adaptation, as brainless life once 
crawled out of the sea to conquer the dry 
land. 

"The monsters who have descended on 
Earth must represent the end result of a 
long evolution completed in space itself. 
They are evidently deep-space beings, able 
to propel themselves from planet to planet 
and from star to star in search of food, 
guided by instinct to suns and worlds like 
ours. Descending on such a planet, they 
move across its surface systematically ingesting all edible material — all life^ not 
mobile enough to avoid their march. They 
are like caterpillars that overrun a planet 
and strip it of its leaves, before moving 
on to the next. 

"Man IS a highly mobile species, so our 
direct casualties of this invasion have been 
very light and will continue to be. But 
when the monsters have finished with 



87 



Earth, there will be no v^etation left for 
man's food, no houses, no cities, none of 
the fixed installations of civilization, and 
the end will be far more terrible than if 
we were all devoured by the monsters." 

WESTOVER AWOKE, feeling himself bathed by the cold sweat of 
nightmare — then he realized that a misty 
rain had wetted his face and sc^ged his 
ck)thes. That, and the sleep he had had, 
refreshed him and made his mind cfearer 
than it had been for days, and he remembered that he could not sleep but had to 
go on, searching with a hope that would 
not die for some miraculously spared refuge where civilization and science might 
yet exist, where there would be the means 
to realize his idea for stopping the monsters. 

He sat up, eyes searching the sky for a 
sign to tell him how long he had slept. 
Low on the western horizon he found the 
faint glow that told of the moon's setting; and in the east a stronger light was 
already struggling through the clouds and 
mist, becoming every moment less tenuous 
and illusory, more the bitter reality of the 
breaking day. 

Even as Westover began frantically 
climbing, out of that lightening sky the 
hopelessness of his eflFort pressed down 
on him. With dawn the monster would 
begin to move, to crawl eastward impelled 
by the same dim phototropic urge which 
must guide these things out of the intersteller depths to Sun-type stars. All of 
them had crept endlessly eastward around 
the Earth, gutting the continents and 
churning the sea bottoms, and by now 
whatever was left of human civilization 
must be starving beyond the Arctic circle, 
or aboard ships at sea. The hordes that still 
lived and wandered over the once populous 
fertile lands, like this — would not live long. 

For a man like Westover, who had been 
a scientist, it was not the prospect of 
death that was most crushing, but the 
death blow to his human pride, the starstorming pride of mind and will— defeated 
by sheer bulk and mindless hunger. 

Near the crest of the monster's back, 
he stumbled and fell hands and knees on 
the shagreen-roughness of the skin; at 
first he thought only that an attack of dizziness had made him fall, then h^ realized 



86 PLAIVET STORIES 

left of him was the sullen noise of the 
river in flood, and behind him, too, the 
rising water he had barely escaped. The 
nig-ht was overcast, the moon a faint disk 
of glow that left river and hills and even 
the mud underfoot invisible. 

He had not sought in his mind for the 
flood's cause, but had merely taken it 
numbly as part of the fury and confusion 
of a world in ruin. Anyway, he was dead 
tired, out on his feet. 

He sensed more than saw the looming 
v;all before him, but he thought it the bare 
ledge-rock of a stripped hillside until he 
stepped into a small pot-hole and lurched 
forward, and his outflung hands sank into 
the slime that covered a surface faintly, 
horrifyingly resilient. 

He recoiled as if seared, and retreated, 
slithering in the muck. For moments his 
mind was full of dark f oniiless panic \ then 
he took a firm hold on himself and tried to 
comprehend the situation. 

Nothing was distinguishable beyond a 
few yards, but his mind's eye could see 
the rest— the immense slug-like shape that 
extended in ponderous repose across the 
river valley, its head and tail spilling over 
the hills on either side, five miles apart. 
The beast was quiescent until morning — 
sleeping, if such things slept. 

And that explained the flood ; the monster's body had formed an unbreakable 
dam behind which the river had been 
steadily piling up in those first hours of 
night; if it did not move until dawn, the 
level would be far higher then. 

Westover stood motionless in the blackness ; how long, he did not know. He was 
hai'dly aware of the water that covered his 
feet, crept over his ankles, and swirled halfway to his knees. Only the emergence of 
the moon through a rift of the cloud 
blanket brought him awake; its dim light 
gleamed all around on a great sheeit of 
water, unbroken save for scattered black 
hummocks — crests of knolls like that on 
which he stood, all soon to be hidden by 
the rising flood. 

For a moment he knew despair. The 
way back was impassable, and the way 
ahead was blocked by the titanic enemy. 
Then the impersonal will that had driven him implacably two days and nights 
without stopping came to his rescue. Westover plodded forward, pressed his shrink


ing body against the slimy, faintly warm 
surface of the monster's foot, and sought 
above him with upstretched hands — found 
holds, and began to climb with a strength 
he had not known was left in him. 

The moonlight's fading again was merciful as he. climbed the sheer, slippery face 
of the foot ; but he could hear the wash and 
chuckle of the flood below. His tired brain 
told him treacherously: "I'm already asleep 
— ^this is a nightmare." Once, listening 
to that insidious voice, he slipped and 
for instants hung dizzily by his hands, 
and for some minutes after he had found 
a new foothold merely clung panting with 
pounding heart 

Some time after he had found courage 
to resume the climb, he dragged himself, 
gasping and quivering, to comparative 
safeity on the broad shelf that marked the 
rim of the foot. Above him lay the great 
black steep that rose to the summit of the 
monster's humped back, a mountain to be 
climbed. Westover felt poignantly that 
his exhausted body could not make that 
ascent and face the long and dangerous 
descent beyond, which he had to make before dawn . . . but tiot now ... not 
now. . . . 

HE LAY IN A STATE l^tween 
waking and dreaming, high on the 
monster's side; and it seemed that the 
colossal body moved, swelling and sighing 

but he knew they did not breathe as 

backboned animals do. Westover had been 
one of the men who, in the days when 
humanity was still fighting, had accumulated quite a store of knowledge about the 
eneiny — the enemy that was brainless and 
tooUess, but that was simply too vast for 
human intelligence and weapons to defeat . . . 

Westover no longer saw the murky 
moonlight, the far faint glitter of the flood 
or the slope of the living mountain. He 
saw, as he had seen from a circling jet 
plane, an immense tree of smoke that rose 
and expanded under the noonday sun, 
creamy white above and black and oily below, and beneath the black cloud something that writhed and flowed sluggishly 
iti a cyclopean death agony. 

That picture dissolved, and was replaced 
by the face of a man — one who might 
now be alive or dead, elsewhere in the 



STRANGE EXODUS 



By ROBERT ABERNATHY 



GitfMitle, mllldlABB^ Ui^ Moiisters had c#m«Vfli 6f InteMtellar 
space to devour Earth. They gnawed at her soil, drank deep 
of her seas« Where, on Ods gntted eosmle eareass, eonld 

hamanlty flee? 

Illustrated by McWILLIAMS 




Thus began for him a weird existence — ihe life of a parasite, of a flea on a dog. 



WESTOVER GOT A SHCm:K 
when he stumbled onto the monster, for all that he knew one had 
been through here. 



He had been following the high ground 
toward the hills, alternately splashing 
through waisit-deep water and climbing onto comparatively dry knolls. To right and 

85 



84 



PLAIVET STGRiES 

TIGl^-LIKE, ANSE SPRANG. 
Carse glimpsed him, turned, the 
blaster half swung about . . . and the murderous fighting machine which was *Dougald Anson had reached him. Carse saw 
the sword shrieking against his face; it 
was the last thing he ever^pw . . . 

Anse lurched back against the control 
panel *Turn it off!" yelled Janazik. 
"Throw that big switch there !" 

Mechanically, the huinan obeyed, and 
there was silence again, a deep ringing silence in which they floated free. It felt like 
an endless falling. 

Falling, falling— Anse looked numbly 
down at his bloody sword. Falling, falling, 
falling— but that couldn't be right, he 
thought dully. He had already fallen. He 
had killed Ellen's brother. 

**And I love her," he whispered. 
Janazik drifted over, slowly in the silent room. His eyes were a deep gold, 
searching now. // Ellen won't have him, 
he <md I mil go out together,, out to the 
stars and the great new frontier. But if 
she will, ril have to go alone, I'll (dways 
be alone — 

Utiless she would come too. She's a good 
kid . , , Vd like to have her along. Maybe 
take a mate of my ozvn too . , » But that 
can never be, now. She won't come near her 
brother's slayer, 

"You might not have had to kill him/' 
said Janazik ''Maybe you could have disarmed him/' 

"Not before he got one of us— probably 
you/' said Anse tonelessly. "Anyway, he 
needed killing. He shot Alonzo." 

He added, after a moment: "A man has 
to stand by his comrades/' 

Janazik nodded, very slowly. ''Give me 
your sword," he said. 

"Eh?" Anse looked at him. The blue 
eyes were unseeing, blind with pain, but 
he handed over the red weapon. Janazik 
slipped his own glaive into the human's 
fingers. 

Then he laid a hand on Anse's shoulder 

and smiled at him, and then looked away. 

We Kha^aki don't knozv love. There is 

comradeship, deeper than any Earfhling 

knows. When it happens between male and 



female, they are mates. When it is between 
male ajid male, they are blood-brothers. 
And a man must stand by his comrades, 

Ellen came in, pulling her way along 
the walls by the handholds, and Anse 
looked at her without saying a word, just 
looking. 

"What happened?" she said. "What is 

the— 0/r.'" 

Carse's body floated in midair, turning 
over and over in air currents like a 
drowned man in the sea. 
"Carse— Carse— " 

Ellen pushed from the wall, over to the 
dead man. She looked at his still face, 
and stroked his blood-matted hair, and 
smiled through a mist of tears. 

"You were always good to me, Carse," 
she whispered. "You were . . . goodnight, 
brother. Goodnight." 

Then turning to Anse and Janazik, with 
something cold and terrible in her voice: 
"Wlio killed him?" 

Anse looked at her, dumbly. 
"I did," said Janazik. 
He held forth the dripping sword. "He 
stowed away— was going to take over the 
ship. Alonzo threw him off balance by 
turning the rockets l>ack on. He killed 
Alonzo. Then I killed him. He needed it. 
He was a traitor and a murderer, Ellen." 
"He was my brother," she whispered. 
And suddenly she was sobbing in Anse's 
arms, great racking sobs that seemed to 
tear her slender body apart. 
But she'd get o\'er it. 
Anse looked at Janazik over her shoulder, and while he ruffled her shining hair 
his eyes locked with the Khazaki's. This 
is the end. Once we land, we can never see 
each other, not ever again. And zve were 
comrades in the old days . . . 
Farezi^ll, my brother. 

WHEN THE STAR SHIP landed 
outside Krakenau's surrendered citadel, it was still raining a little. Janazik 
looked out at the wet gray world and 
shivered. Then, wordlessly, he stepped 
from the airlock and walked slowly down 
the hill toward the sea. He did not look 
back, and Anse did not look after him. 



^lAR SHIP 



was this space? Open space? No wonder 
the old people had longed to get away I 



S3 



♦ * * 

How to get help, how to warn Anse — 
Janazik's mind spun like an unloaded engine, spewing forth plan after unusable 
plan. Quickly, now, by Shantuzik^s hells! 

No way out — and the minutes were fleeing, the rocket was reaching for the sky, 
he knew they were nearing the Star Ship 
and still he lay in his harness like a sheep 
and obeyed Carse's gun-point orders ! 

The disgrace of it! He snarled his 
anger, and at Alonzo's gasped command 
swung the wheel with unnecessary savagery. The ship lurched as a rocket tube 
overfired. Carse nearly lost his hold, and 
for an instant Janazik's hands were at the 
acceleration webbing, ready to fling it off 
and leap at him. 

The man recovered, and his blaster came 
to the ready again. He had to shout to 
be heard above the thundering jets : "Don't 
try that — either of you! I can shoot you 
down and handle it myself if I must!" 

He laughed then, a tall and splendid figure standing strained against the brutal, 
clawing acceleration. Ellen's brother— aye! 
And one could see why she wanted him 
spared. Janazik's lip curled back from his 
teeth in a snarl of hate. 

THE ROCKET must be very near escape velocity now. Presently Ellen 
would signal for the jets to be turned off 
and they would rush weightless through 
space while she took her readings and 
plotted the orbit that would get them to 
the Star Ship. And if then Carse emerged 
with his blaster — 

Anse had only a sword. 

But— Anse is Anse, thought Janazik. If 
there is any faintest glimmer of a chance 
Anse will find it. And if not, we're really 
no worse off than now. Fll Imve to warn 
Afise and leave the rest up to him. 

The Khazaki nodded bleakly to himself. 
It would probably mean his own death 
before Carse's blaster flame— and damn it, 
damn it, he liked living. Even if the old 
Khazak he knew were doomed, there had 
been many new worlds of the Galactic 
frontier. He and Anse had often dreamed 
of roving over them — 



However — 

A red light blinked on the panet Ellen's 
signal to cut the rockets. They were at escape •velocity. 

Wearily, his hand shaking, Alonzo threw 
the master switch. The sudden silence was 
like a thunderclap. 

And Janazik' screeched the old Krakenaui danger call from his fullest lungs. 
Carse turned around with a curse, awkward in the sickening zero-gravity of free 
fall. ''It won't do you any good," he yelled 
thickly. "I'll kill him too—" 

Alonzo threw the master switch up! 
With^ a. coughing roar, the rockets burst 
back into life. No longer holding the stanchion, Carse was hurled to the floor. 

Janazik clawed at his webbing to get 
free. Carse leveled his blaster on Alonzo. 
The engineer threw another switch at random, and the direction of acceleration 
shifted with sudden violence, slamming 
Carse against the farther wall. 

His blaster raved, and Alonzo had no 
time to scream before the flame licked 
about him. 

And in the control room, Anse heard 
Janazik's high ululating yell. The reflexes 
of the wanderiiig years came back to 
galvanize him. His sword seemed to leap 
into his hand, he flung himself out of 
his chair webbing with a shout . . . 

"Anse !" Ellen's voice came dimly to hi*s 
ears, hardly noticed. "Anse— -what is it—" 
He drifted weightless in midair, cursing, 
trying to swim. And then the rockets 
woke up again and threw him against the 
floor. He twisted with Khazaki agility, 
landed crouched, and bounded for the 
stern. 

Ellen, looked after him, gasping, for an 
instant yet unaware of the catastrophe, 
thinking how little she knew that yellowmaned savage after all, and how she would 
like to learn, and — 

The rocket veered, crazily. Anse caught 
himself as he fell, adjusted to the new 
direction of gravity, and continued his 
plunging run. The crash of a blaster came 
from ahead of him. 

He burst into the control room and saw 
it in one blinding instant. Alonzo's charred 
body sagging in its harness, Janazik half out 
of his, Carse staggering to his feet— the 
blaster turned on Janazik, Janazik, the 
finger tightening— 



g2 PLANET STORIES 

"Or we can use the ship to blast the 
citadel/' 

^*No— oh, Cosmos, no!" Her eyes were 
filled with sudden horror. 

*Why not?" he argued angrily. "Only 
way we can rescue our people if he won't 
give them up of his own^will." 

"We might kill Carse," she whispered. 
It was on his tongue to snap good riddance, but he choked down the impulse. 
"Why do you care for him that much?'' 
"He's my brother," she said simply, and 
he realized that in spite of her civilized 
protestations Ellen was sufficiently Khazaki 
to feel the primitive unreasoning clan loyalty of the planet. She added slowly: ''And 
when Father died, years ago, Carse took 
his place, he's been both father and big 
brother to me. He may have some wrong 

ideas, but he's always been so— good " 

A child's worship of the talented, handsome, genial elder brother, and she had 
never really outgrown it. Well — ^it didn't 
matter. Once they had the Star Ship, Carse 
didn't matter. "He'll be as safe as anyone 
can be in these days," said Anse. *1— 
ril protect him myself if need be." 

Her hand slid into his, and she kissed 
him, there in the little boat while it rocked 
and roared under the furious assaults from 
without. "Anyone who hurts Carse is my 
blood foe," she breathed. "But anyone 
who helps him helps me, and — ^and — " 

Anse smiled, dreamily. The engines 
began to stutter, wanning up, and Volakech's men scattered in dismay. They had 
seen the fire that spurted from the rocket 
tubes. 

And in the engine room, Masefield Carson held his blaster leveled on Alonzo and 
Janazik. "Go ahead," he smiled. "Go 
ahead— take the ship up." 

VI 



THE KHAZAKI SWORE LIVIDLY. 
His sword seemed almost to leap 
lialfway out of the scabbard. Carse swung 
the blaster warningly, and he clashed the 
weapon back. Useless, useless, when white 
flame could destroy him before he got moving. 

"How did you get here?' he snarled. 

The tall, bronze-haired man smiled 
ag^ti. "I wasn't in the fight," he said. 
"Volakech wanted to save my knowledge 



and told me to stay out of the battle. I 
wasn't really needed. But it occurred to 
me that your assault was obviously a 
futile gesture unless you hoped in some 
way to capture the boat. So I hid in here 
to guard it — just in cose. And now — 
we'll take her up. We may just as well 
do so. Once I have the Star Ship — " He 
gestured at Alonzo. "Start the engines. 
And no tricks. I understand them as well 
as you do." 

Gonzales strapped himself in place and 
stood swaying with weakness while he 
manipulated the controls. "I can't — reach 
that wheel — " he gasped. 

"Turn it, Janazik," said Carse. "About 
a quarter turn — ^that's enough." 

The impassive faces of meters wavered 
and blurred before Alonzo's swimming 
eyes. He had been pretty badly hurt. But 
the engines were warming up. 

"Strap yourself in, Janazik," said Carse. 
The Khazaki obeyed, sickly. He didn't 
really need the anti-acceleration webbing— 
Carse himself was content to hang on to 
a stanchion with one hand — but it would 
hamper his movements, he would have no 
way of making a sudden leap. Between 
them, he and Alonzo could handle the 
engines readily enough, Carse giving them 
their orders. Then once they were at tlie 
Star Ship he could blast them down, go 
out to capture Anse and Ellen — and the 
old books said one man could handle the 
ship if necessary — 

How to warn the two in the pilot room? 
How to get help? The warrior's brain 
began to turn over, cool and steady now, 
swift as chilled lightning. 

The boat spouted flame, stood on its tail 
and climbed for the sky. Acceleration 
dragged at Carse, but it wasn't too great 
for a strong man to resist. Carse tightened 
his grip on the stanchion. His blaster was 
steady on them. 

Ellen's signal lights blinked and blinked 
on the control panels. More on the No. 3 
jet, ease to port, full ahead, cut No. 2 . . . 
Alonzo handled most of It, occasionally 
gasping a command to Janazik. The bellow 
of the rockets filled the engine room. 

And in the bows, Dougald Anson saw 
the world reel and fall behind, saw the 
rainy sky open up in a sudden magnificence of sun, saw it slowly darken and 
the stars come awesomely out. Gods, gods, 



STAR 

snarled, but step by step he was driven 
back. 

Warriors fell, but it was on the bodies 
of f oemen and even dying they stabbed upward at the enemy. Bitter, bloody, utterly 
ruthless, the struggle swayed about the 
rocketship. It was old Khazak that fought, 
the planet of warriors, and, even as he 
hewed and danced and slew, Janazik 
thought bleakly that he was trying to end 
the gory magnificence of that age; he was 
bringing civilization and with it the doom 
of his own kind. Khazak of the future 
would not be the same world. 
If they won — if they won! 
'To me!" he yelled. 'To me, men of 
AHgan! Hai, Aligan! Krakenau! Dougald!'' 

They heard and rallied round him, the 
last gasping survivors of his band. But 
there were few of Volakech's men left, 
few. 

"Volakech! Aid the king! To me, men 
of Volakech !'' The rebel shouted at the 
top of his lungs. And Anse lunged in at 
him, beating against the swift armor of the 
axe. 

"Ansel" Janazik's urgent shout cut 
through the clangor of battle. "Anse, here! 
We're blasting free V 

^ The human hardly heard him. He forced 
his way closer in against Volakech, his 
sword whistling about the usurper's helmeted head. 

"Anse!" shouted Janazik. "Anse— Ellen 
needs you — " 

With a tiger snarl, Anse broke free 
from his opponent and whirled about. A 
rebel stood before him. There was an instant of violence too swift to be followed, 
and Anse leaped over the ripped body and 
up to Janazik. 

The Khazaki stood by the airlock. There 
was a ring of corpses before him; his 
sword ran blood. 

"Ellen?" gasped Anse. "Ellen?" 
"Inside," rasped Janazik. "She^s inside. 
We have to get out of here--only way to 
get your attention — Cofne on!" 

Anse saw the armed band swarming at 
them from one of the outer towers, defenders who had finally noticed the battle 
at the rocket and were coming to aid their 
king. Not a chance against them— exceiit 
the boat! 

6-Planet Stories— FaJl 



snip 



81 



Man and Khazaki stepped back into the 
airlock. A storm of arrows and javelins 
broke loose. Anse saw two of his men 
fall— then Janazik had slammed the heavy 
outer valve and dogged it shut. 

"Ellen!" he gasped. "Ellen— take the 
boat up before they dynamite it!" 

The giri nodded. She was strapping herself into the pilot's seat before the gleaming 
control panel. Only Alonzo was there with 
her, bleeding but still on his feet. Four 
of them survived-only four— but they had 
the boat ! ^ 

Through the viewport, Anse saw the attackers surging around the hull. They'd 
y\st ballistae to crush it, dynamite to blow 
It up, blaster cannon to fry them alive inside the metal shell— unless they got it into 
the sky first. 

"Take the engines, Alonzo," said Ellen. 

Gonzales Alonzo nodded. "You help me 
Janazik," he said. 'Tm not sure I-^ai^ 
stay conscious — " 



THE PILOT ROOM was in the bows. 
Behind it, bulkheaded off, lay the air 
pJant and the other mechanisms for maintaining h'fe aboard— not very extensive, for 
the boat wouldn't be in space long. Amidships were the control gyros, and behind 
still another bulkhead the engine controls 
Rather than install an elaborate automatic 
feed system, the builders had relied on 
manual controls acting on light signals 
flashed by the pilot. It was less efficient 
but It had shortened the labor of constructing the vessel and was good enough 
for the mere hop it had to make. 

"I don't know anything about it," said 
Janazik doubtfully. 

"I'll tell you what to do-^Help me " 

Leaning on the Khazaki's arm, Alonzo 
stumbled toward the stern. 

Anse strapped his big body into the cliair 
beside Ellen's. "I can't help much, I'm 
afraid," he said. 

"No-except by being here," she smiled. 

Looking out, he saw that the assault on 

the castle was almost over— beaten off It 

had provided the diversion they needed— 

but at what cost, at what cost? 

"We might as well take off for the 
Star Ship right away," he said. 

"Of course. And that will end the war 
Volakech can either surrender or sit in 
the castle till he rots." 



STRANGE EXOUVS 



91 



zily. **rve tieen aboard your ark for some 
time now, though. Only as an ectoparasite/' 

"It's high time you joined the endoparasites. Lucky you scratched around 
enough up there to create repercussions 
we could feel down here. You got the 
ssmc idea, then?'* 

'T stumbled onto it/* Westover admitted. 
"I was wandering across country — my 
plane crashed on the way back from that 
South American bug hunt dreamed up by 
somebody who'd been reading Wells' War 
of the Worlds, I think my pilot went nuts ; 
you could see too much of the destruction 
from up there , . . But I got out in one 
piece and started walking — looking for 
some place with people and facilities that 
could try out my method of killing the 
monsters. I thought — I still think — I had a 
sure-fire way to do that — ^but I didn't realize then that it was too late to think of 
killing them off.** 

Sutton nodded thoughtfully. "It was too 
late — or too early, perhaps. We'll have to 
talk that over.'* 

Westover finished the brief account of 
his coming to dwell on the monster's 
back. The other grinned happily. 

"You began with the practice, where I 
worked out the theofy first.** 

"I haven't got so far with the theory,** 
said Westover, "but I think I've got the 
main outlines. Until the monsters came, 
man was a parasite on the face of the 
Earth. Fundamentally, parasitism — on the 
green plants and their by-products — ^was 
our way of life, as of all animals from 
the beginning. But the monsters absorbed 
into themselves all the plant food and even 
the organic material in the soil. So we 
have only one way out — ^to transfer our 
parasitism to the only remaining food 
source — the monsters themselves. 

"The mcmsters almost defeated us, because of their two special adaptations of 
extreme size and ability to cross space. 
But man has always won the battle of 
adaptations before, because he could improvise new ones as the need arose. The 
greatest crisis humanity ever faced called 
for the most radical innovation in our 
way of life." 

"Very well put,'* apprcwed Sutt<m. "Except that you make it sound easy. By the 
time I'd worked it out like that, things 



were already in such a turmoil that puting it into effect was the devil's own job. 
Ab^ut the only ones I could find to help 
me were the Preacher and his people. They 
have the faith that moves mountains, that 
has made this self-moving mountain inhabitable.** 

"It is inliabitable?'* Westover's question 
reflected no doubt. 

SUTTON GESTURED at the bubbling 
device behind him. "That thing is 
making air now, which we're going to 
need when the monster's in space. It was 
when we were still trying to find a poison 
for the beasts that I hit on the catalyst that 
makes their blood give up its oxygen — 
that's its blood flowing through the filters. 
We've got an electric generator running 
by tapping the monster's internal gas 
pressure. There are problems left before 
we'll be fully self-sufficient here — but the 
monster is so much like us in fundamental 
makeup that its body contains all the elements human life needs too.'* 

"Then/' Westover glanced appreciatively around, "it looks like the main hazard is 
claustrophobia." 

"Don't worry about a cave-in. We're 
surrounded by solid cystoid tissue. But/' 
Sutton's voice took on a graver note, 
"there may be other psychological dangers. 
I don*t think all our people — ^there are 
fifty-one, fifty-two of us now — realize yet 
that this colony isn't just a temporary 
expedient. Human history hasn't liad such 
a turning-point since men first started 
chipping stone. Spengler's Mensch als 
Raubtier — if he ever existed — ^has to be 
replaced by the Mensch als Schmarotzer, 
and the adjustment may come hard. We've 
got to plan for the rest of our lives — and 
our children's and our cliildren's children's 
— ^as parasites inside this monster and 
whatever others we can manage to — infect 
— when they're clustered again in space." 

"For the future/' put in the Preacher, 
who had watched benignly the biologists' 
reunion, "the Lord will provide, even as 
He did unto Jonah when he cried to Him 
out of the belly of the fish." 

"Amen," agreed Sutton. But the gaze 
he fixed on Weslpver was oddly troubled. 
"Speaking of the future iM^ings up the 
question of the idea you mentioned — ^your 
monster-killing scheme.** 



92 



PLANET STORIES 



^ 



WESTOVER FLEXED his hands involuntarily, like one who has been 
too long enforcedly idle. In terse eager 
sentences he outlined for Sutton the plan 
that had burned in him during his bitter 
wandering over the face of the ruined 
land. It would be very easy to accomplish 
from an endoparasite's point of vantage, 
merely by isolating from the creature's 
blood over a long period enough of some 
potent secretion — ^honnone, enzyme or the 
like — ^to kill when suddenly reintroduced 
into the system. '"Originally I thought we 
could accomplish the same thing by synthesis — but this way will be simpler." 

"Beautifully simple." Sutton smiled 
wryly. **So much so that I wish you'd never thought of it.'' 

Westover stared. "Why?" 

"Describing your plan, you sounded almost ready to put it into efSFect on the 
spot." 

"No! Of course I realize — ^Well, I see 
what you mean — ^I think." Westover was 
crestfallen. 

Sutton smiled faintly. 

"I think you do, Bill. To survive, we've 
got to be good parasites. That means before all, for the coming generations, that 
we keep our numbers down. A good parasite doesn't destroy or even overtax its 
host. We don't want to follow the sorry 
example of such unsuccessful species as 
the bugs of bubonic plague or typhoid; 
we'll do better to model ourselves on the 
humble tapeworm. 

"Your idea is dangerous for the same 
reason. The monsters probably spend thousands of years in interstellar space; during that time they'll be living exclusively on 
their fat — ^the fuel they stored on Earth, 
and so will we. We've got a wtiole 



new history of man ahead of us, 
under such changed conditions that we 
can't b^in to predict what turns it may 
take. There's a very great danger th^ 
men will proliferate imtil they kill their 
hosts. But imagine a struggle for LebenS" 
raum when all the living space there is is 
a few thousand monsters capable of supporting a very limited number of people 
each — ^with your method giving an easy 
way to de-stroy these little worlds oiu: descendants will inhabit. It's too much dynamite to have around the house." 

Westover bowed his head, but he had 
caught a curiously expectant glint in Sutton's eyes as he spoke. He thought, and 
his face lightened. "Suppose we work 
out a way to record my idea, one that 
can't be deciphered by anyone unintelligent enough to be likely to misuse it A 
riddle for our descendants — who should 
have use for it some day." 

At last Sutton smiled. "That's better. 
You've thought it through to the end, I 
see . . . This phase of our history won't 
last forever. Eventually, the monsters will 
come to another planet not too unlike 
Earth, because it's on such worlds they 
prey. A tapeworm can cross the Sahara 
desert in the intestine of a camel — ^" 

His voice was drowned in a vast hissing 
roar. An irresistible pressure distorted the 
walls of the chamber and scythed its occupants from their feet. Sutton staggered 
drunkenly almost erect, fought his way 
across the tilting floor to make sure of 
his precious apparatus. He turned back toward the others, bracing himself and 
shouting something; then, knowing his 
words lost in the thunder, gestured toward the Earth they were leaving, a halfregretful, half'triwmphant farewell 



»^^###^#s»^^r^^^^#J^r^^^^^^#^^^^^«#'#^#«#^s».»#'#s»^#s»^«##.#^^»#l#><^#^#l###^^^ 



Bey There! 

dont forget that from NOW on . • • 

► ^s PLANET 



EVmY OTHER MONTH! 
first BI-MONTHLY issue on sale SEPTEMBER 1 I 



Old pilete like Pop GUlette weren^t needed any more to rim 

the big skips. Nowadays ytm were boosted and r€»osted by the 

grace of Gimmiek. Sooner or later. Pop predicted, someithing 

was gonna loose up • • • 



^v-*-**^'*" 

l^^ 

i^^ 




The heavx <^<P shuddered to a stop five feet abovm $he ramp • • • 

PATCH 

THE WALL SPEAKER IN THE for landing. Over/' 

control tower was crackling softly Even across ten thousaaci miles of space 

with space static when the voice the sharp New England, twang clearly 

first cut in. "Lorelei calling Venusport showed the origin of its owner. Joe flicked 



By WILLIAM SHEDENHELM 



93 



94 



PLANET SIOHiUS 



the transmitting stud and winked at the 
radar man. 

"Venusport to Lorelei, Gome on in, you 
old space pirate. Use Ramp Four. Out." 

He glanced at the green spot on the 
radar sweep screen that was the Lorelei, 
entered a set of figures in the tower log, 
then leaned back in the chair in front of 
the control panels and lit a cigarette. 

''That Pop/' he said, nodding vaguely 
at the radar screen and the Ic^ book, *'must 
be damn near two hundred years old, and 
he's still the best pilot in the System. Used 
to have the All-Planetary run back when 
it was really something. When they put 
in automatics for cruising it made him 
so mad he quit and never would go back. 
Said he wasn't going to let a bunch of 
machines run his ship, even out in space." 

He blew a beam of smoke at the spot 
that moved slowly toward the center of the 
radar sweep screen. 

'*He bought the tub he calls the Lorelei 
at a surplus sale, and spends all his time 
batting around the odd comers of space 
that the Survey Patrol hasn't gotten to 
yet." Joe puffed his cigarette reminiscentiy for a minute. *'I remember the first time 
I saw him land the Lorelei. Lord, what a 
sight No one else has ever had the nerve 
to try it the way he does it, or at least 
lived to tell about it. I wonder if he's 
gotten too old to do it anymore." 

The radar man stared at the faint speck 
that showed above the horizon, .then 
brought it into magnified focus on the 
tele-screen. 

*'He's coming in awfully funny," he said. 

Joe got up and stood staring out through 
the sides of the big plastic bubble that 
formed the walls and roof of the control 
tower. 

'*I think he's going to try it. Watch 
this!" 



THE STUBBY OVALOID was angling in towards the Port from a little 
above horizontal, as though to make a 
belly landing. Just short of the field, the 
steering jets gave a tremendous side blast 
that whipped the ship into a tight upward arc. All the ship's jets winked out, 
and the ship whistled straight up for over 
a mile, began to slow, and dropped back 
in free fall. The ship dropped faster and 



faster toward the concrete apron, tail first, 
its jets dead. 

Two hundred feet above the ramp Pop 
Gillette hit the bank of firing buttons and 
hit it hard. The heavy ship .shuddered to 
a stop five feet above the ramp, cracking the 
concrete with the fury of its rear jets, 
spinning like an enormous pin-wheel, its 
rotator jets gushing fire in hundred-yard 
sweeps. 

Joe wiped the sweat from his forehead 
and dropped into his chair. 

"Brother! Someday his tubes are going 
to misfire when he tries that, and the 
Lorelei is going to be spread from here 
to Marsport!" 

The radar man did not answer immediately. He was still standing at the dome, 
his mouth slightly agape, staring at the 
stubby ship that now lay silent in Ramp 
Four. He pulled himself together, closed 
his mouth with a click, and moved back 
to the sweep screen. 

"Who the hell is that guy?" 

'Tou've heard of Pop Gillette. Everybody in space has. Anytime you want to 
tell a whopper about space, all you have 
to say is, 'I remember one time when 
Pop Gillette and me was out around!* soand-so . . / And whatever nutty place 
you name, he's probably really been there, 
and whatever nutty thing you can think of 
to happen, it probably really did happen 
to him." 

The radar man nodded in recognition, 
and Joe went on. 

"Like the time he got mad at the people 
at WTiite Sands Port. One night he goosed 
an asteroid down right in the middle of 
their main landing strips. The damn thing 
was a quarter of a mile long, and almost 
as high. How he got it down through the 
atmosphere, nobody knows, but he did . . . 
and he landed it so gently that nobody 
knew anything about it until they looked 
out their windows the next morning. 
They finally got the Patrol on him, and 
told him the asteroid was legally his, so 
he had to think of a way to get rid of 
it. He did. Turned out to be laced with 
uranium, so he rented, the whole darned 
field for a month, cut the thing up and 
carted it away. Sold it for a fortune." 

The outer door of the ovaloid ship 
was now open, and as one of the^ Port's 
zeeps rolled alongside, a man, miniature 



PATCH 

in the distance, slid down the ship's sideladder and climbed aboard. Joe swung the 
directional p.a. at the zeep. 
'*Hey Pop . . . come cm up!" 



95 



THE LITTLE FIGURE waved, and 
the zeep headed for the control tower. 
As it drew nearer they could begin to see 



Pop chol^d on a lungful of cigarote 
smoke, and, turning crimson through his 
space tan, glared at Joe. 

'"You better clear out of this tower, 
son. When that bunch of gears comes in, 
it's apt to take this whole side off the 
planet!" 

Joe kept his face serious. 

'T hear this is one of the new models," 



Pop Gillette more clearly. He was a thin he said. 'They only U8e the pilot for land


little man, deeply space tanned. He could 
have been anyplace from fifty to three 
hundred and fifty. He rode sitting on the 
rear edge of the speeding zeep, balanced 
precariously, calmly puffing a Venusian 
cigarote. 

He came through the outer control 
rooms like a Martian whirlwind, spraying 
greetings and minor presents in all directions. 

*'Hi there, Tom. Saw your unde out 
near Ganymede. Living with a Phobion 
Bat Woman . . • 

"Hi there. Here's that g^oo bird's 
tail feather you asked for five or ax years 
ago!" (It had been near twenty years 
ago, when the recipient was four years 
old.) 

"Hello, Honey. You know that Neptunian Rock Egg you wanted? Got a 
couple in my ship as big as your head. 
Come up to the hotel for supper tonight 
and ril give them to you!" He winked 
roguishly at Honey and whirled inte the 
control room. 

'*Hi Joe, you landlocked lard-bottom. 
What have you been doing?" And before 
Joe could start to answer, he went on. 
"Had an unusual thing happen to me out 



ings. Take-offs and cruising are all automatic." 

Pop Gillette tossed his cigarote into the 
disposall in disgust. 

'1 wouldn't put it past that bunch of 
pants-brains to just point the things and 
light a fuse. Those young punks they 
have for pilots couldn't belly on the moon." 

"But Pop," Joe said. "YouVe too old 
to work a liner even if they did go back 
to manuals." 

Pop Gillette flashed red and purple, and 
glared at Joe. 

"Too old ! Do you know what I hit when 
I brought the Lorelei in just now? Fourteen damn G's ! If she wasn't an old meteor 
patrol ship she'd crack open like an egg 
the way I handle her. Too old my spacewarped rear!" 

'*But ships are bigger these days, Pop. 
When you were shoving them they coddn't 
have weighed over half a million tons. 
The one that's due this afternoon tops two 
million. That's a lot of ship." 

Pop Gillette shook his head derisively 
at such Ignorance, which was, after all, to 
be expected from a ground crew man. 

"They're all the same. Once you have 
the feel of it," he rippled his fingers as 



on Huto, I was out prospectmg for liquid though working a bank of firing keys "it 

hydrogen wells when I sprung a leak works anyplace. I run the Lorelei just'like 

in my oxygen tank. I got it fixed, but most I used to run my liners. I can dut it a bit 

of my oxy had leaked out. Had enough finer than I could a big ship, but elsewise 



fm* fifteen, maybe twenty minutes, and 
the ship was two hours away. Thought 
I'd never make it. Finally started back 
with a load of icicles under my arm. Every 
few minutes I'd stop, break off a piece, 
and drop it into my tank. Turned out to 
be pure oxygen, frozen stiff!" 

When Joe had regained his composure, 
he tossed a wink at the radar man, who 
was again standing with his mouth ajar, 

"Say, Pop," Joe said with careful casualness. "All-Planetary's Mercury- Venus 
liner is coming in about oh-four-four." 



it doesn't make any diflFerence how big 
they come. I could stand that liner on her 
butt and write my name clean across that 
field." He jerked his head at the four-milewide Venusport, and glared at Joe and the 
radar man. "And cross the 't's' and dot the 



IT WAS AN HOUR LATER, while 
they were sitting around drinking Venusian wine, that the call came through. You 
always expect a distress call to be weak 



96 PLANET 

and diflfficult to understand, j>ut this one 
wasn't. It was as clear as though the transmitter were in the next room. 

"Mayday! Mayday! Mayday! All-Planetary Liner Twelve calling Venusport! 
Over!" 

At the first sound of the universal distress call, Joe and the radar man went into 
action. Joe hit a red stud that alerted 
all the units at the Port, and cut in the 
speakers in the other control sections, while 
the radar man got a rough bearing on the 
liner, and switched up the amplification 
until he had the ship located within a 
foot, and its speed and course plotted to 
five decimal places. 

All this in the time it took the first 
call to come through. Joe flipped the transmitting stud. 

"Venusport to All-Planetary Twelve. 
All other units clear the air immediately. 
Come in." 

The voice cut in sharply through the 
space static again, sounding a little frightened and tense. 

"All-Planetary Twelve calling Venusport. Something went wrong with the 
radar deflectors. We took a meteor through 
the control room. Luckily it just dipped 
us, but it put a ten foot hole in the 
side. The man on duty got out okay, but 
we lost all the air in that section. We 
can't bring her in with that hole in her. 
We have to have air in the control room, 
or all the switches arc out. Over." 

Outside, the control tower ships were 
being moved out of the way, back into the 
hangars and into the pits. Blinker lights 
and radio landing beams were flickering 
out "Stay Clear!" warnings to all ships 
in that segment of space. Joe flipped the 
stud again. 

"Is the hole too big for a plastic patch? 
Over." 

"It's a good ten feet across. We haven't 
got any patches that big, and even if we 
did have, they wouldn't do any good. Once 
we pumped the air back in, the pressure 
wwild boot the patch out into space. The 
only thing that will work is a welding job. 
Over." . 

Joe shook his head glumly and flipped 

the stud. 

"We've got enough monalloy here to 
fix it, but we haven't got a portable welding outfit that could handle the job. Down 



STORIES 

here we could have it fixed in half an hour. 
Over." 

There was a pause before the voice came 
back. 

"That's a lot of help. Over." 



POP GILLETTE tugged at Joe's sleeve. 
Joe started to shake him loose, but 
stopped when he felt the old man's grip 
tighten on his arm like a space gr^ple. 
"Let me have that thing," he said. He 
took the mike from Joe and flipped the 
stud. 

"Hey there! What's your cargo?" 

The speaker was silent for a moment, 
other than for the faint crackle of tiie 
space static. Then the voice cut in again, 
a little more resigned than before, as it 
rattled off the list of cargo. 

"Let's see. We've got twenty tons of 
unrefined uranium from Titan, fifty thousand gallons of mercury from Gany, and 
twenty tons of canned wooklah meat from 
Jupe. At least we can live on wooklah meat 
on our way to Alpha Centauri." He 
laughed nervously. "Boy, is All-Planetary 
going to be mad, at a hundred bucks a can. 
Over." 

Pop Gillette scratched his chin reflectively. Finally he shook his head in disgust. 

"I could have told that bunch of fatheaded clod'lubbers they couldn't trust a 
bunch of machinery. If they'd of had a 
pilot watching the screens instead of some 
half-baked cre^vman, this wouldn't have 
happened. Easiest thing in the world to 
blast around a meteor, but try to tdl that 
to that bunch." He spat in disgust. "I 
swore Td never lift a hand for AllPlanetary again as long as I lived, but 
now I guess I'll have to go up and fix 
that damned liner. First vacation I've had 
in five years and I have to play nursemaid to a bunch of half-wits!" 

He glared at Joe. "Well, are you coming 
or aren't you?" 

Joe looked at him blankly. 

Pop Gillette shook his head sadly at 
the mental level of Venusport's personnel. 

"Somebody's got to bring the Lorelei 
back down, don't they? Lord, the people 
they put in responsible positions these 

days Come on I Get the cadmium out !" 

And he was halfway down the stairs before Joe was on his feet. 



PATCH 



97 



"And bring a roll of scotch tape!'* he 
shouted back. 

What happened after that is pretty well 
a matter of the records. Every telecast 
carried the report for days. Pop Gillette 
got aboard the liner by bringing the Lorelei 
alongside. Then, with Joe holding her 
steady as she went, Pop jumped across 
the twenty feet of open space, scotch tape 
in his space suit pocket, to the liner's open 
port. 

Then he brought the liner down for a 
tail landing, as pretty as you please. 

IT WAS TEN MINUTES later that 
Pop Gillette and Joe sat drinking their 
Venusian wine again, watching the ground 
crews welding a new plate on the liner, 
a mile away across the Port. 

"But how did you do it?" Joe asked. 
"And why the scotch tape?'* 

Pop Gillette deftly poured a tumbler of 
wine down his throat and reached for the 
bottle. 

"Simplest thing in the world. I used the 



tape to stick a couple of bed sheets over 
the hole, inside and out." 

Joe stared at him in puzzlement. 

"Bedsheets? What for?" 

Pop Gillette cast his eyes heavenwards 
as for deliverance. "I'm sure glad I don't 
run a liner anymore. I might get somebody like you for a co-pilot. I had to 
have a mold, didn't I ? You heard the pilot 
say the patch had to be metal to stand 
the pressure. Fifteen pounds to the inch 
over a ten foot patch is a lot of pressure. 
Well, after I had the sheets over the hole, 
I turned it towards the sun, .filled the mold, 
and turned it around away from the sun. 
The temperature drop in space did the 
rest." 

Joe put his hand to his brow and glanced 
at his wine glass suspiciously. "I vaguely 
get what you're talking about, but just 
what did you make the patch out of?" 

Pop Gillette chuckled wryly. 

"The mercury, of course. Froze hard 
as steel when I turned her away from the 
sun. Perfect fit, too." 



m THE NEXT ISSIE 




FKEDEIIC BROWN'S FAMOIS 

STARMOUSE 



RETIRKS II TIE ROVEMBER PLANET STORIES 






7— Planet Stories— Fall 




THE VIZIGRAPH 



There's so much to tell you this issue that we'll 
just start the ball rolling and duck out : 

1) Starting with the next issue PLANET will appear bi-monthly, satisfying a long-standing 
yowl from you faithful fen . . . We figure if 
Velikovsky can slow down a planet, we can 
speed one up ! And, kidding aside, we're darned 
grateful here at PS for the solid reader-support that encouraged us to make this move. 
Thanks to you, and you too . . . from now on, 
it's PLANET every other month! 

2) Attention, Vizigripers: PLANETs new address is 130 W. 42nd St., New York 18, N. Y. 
Try to get your letters off within a week or so 
after PS goes on the stands, huh? A lot of 
good stuff is squeezed out of La Viz, simply 
because it hits our desk about the same time as 
do the advance copies, soggy from the press, 
of the PS in which it might have appeared. 
The bi-monthly issuance will cut this even 
finer, so get the lead out . . . and incidentally, 
the more mail we get, the better job we can do. 
Yah, come on, all you associate editors ! 

3) There's a story in this issue which we think 
deserves a loud fanfaronade: THE SKY IS 
FALLIKG by C. H. Liddell. Once in a very 
long while the lucky editor receives a manuscript cold, with no "big name" appended, 
that lifts him up off his blase back-side with a 
whoop. THE SKY IS FALLING is such a 
story. Mr. Liddell writes with uncommon 
pow^ and clarity; more, his work is most 
wonderfully un jaded. You PS readers whoVe 
had psychological training . . . opinions, please. 

4) There's been a lot of holler about covers. Well, 
the babe-bra wn-Bem cover is here to stay, see ? 
We like it, see? Cest tout! 

5) The announcement on p. 97 speaks for itself. 
Better practise a few screams of glee before 
looking. 

98 



6) And how do you like PLANET's new look? 

7) By way of a post script to Ray Ramsay, who 
suggested a story on the scientific aspects of 
reproduction ... try MEEM, in this issue, Ray. 
We strive to please. 

So, to the pic awards. Remember, winners choose 
illustrations from the issue in which their letters 
appeared, not the issue they roasted or the issue 
which announces their winnership. First place winner chooses only one, and gets it. Winner number 
two chooses two, in order of preference, because 
No. 1 is likely to choose 2's 1st choice, leaving 2 
his 2nd choice. No. 3 picks 3 pics, so that after 1 
who won 1 has made off with it and 2 has chosen 
2 but gotten only 1 too, there'll be something left 
for someone. Don't ask us who. 

First, place and show are: Robert Silverberg? 
Marion Zimmer Bradley; Al Weinstein. 

Jerome Bixby 



NO SACRIFICE TOO GREAT 

Stanford, California 
Dear Mr. Bixby : 

Now that PLANET is no longer in the hands 
of PLP, Fm taking the liberty o£ writing with a 
few suggestions. Of course, Payne paid no attention to my pleas — and Fve no real hope that you 
will, either. However, read on — 

First, the covers. Anderson should really be put 
out to pasture. And don't get Bergey— he's even 
worse. Hire Timmins, Rogers or Canedo. Or 
Finlay. Toujours Finlay! (Threej ours Anderson! 
— Ed,) In general, the interior artwork is good. 
A few turkeys, but by and large okay. One thing, 
though. Tell the artists to quit trying to sex up the 
stories and stick to the script. I love flesh as well 
as the next one, but let's have a little accuracy. 




Photo Schoenfeld 



From Three Lions 



AN INTERESTING bit of sclentifictioniana, gang ... an imaginative artist— name 
unknown — neatly prophecies suspended mono-railroads; the year . . . 1906! A municipal system of this type was inaugurated in Wupperthal, Germany, just before 
World War I. but the idea didn't spread. Too bad. 



99 



100 



PLANET STORIES 



The brush-pushers might even read the stories 
before illustrating them. I realize tliis is a radical 
suggestion that will probably get me investigated 
by Congress, but in the interests of a good planet 
— ^no sacrifice is too great ! 

Now tlie writers. Point one — Bradbury. It has 
gotten to the point now that anything Ray chooses 
to palm off on the readers automatically stimulates raves. This is a sad state of affairs. We have 
suffered through his Martian Period, and now are 
about to be subjected to a stream of tales about 
kaput authors among the stars. Bradbury is at his 
scintillating best in his tales of those hair-raising 
children he used to write about. He has never approached the skill and feeling that went into his 
HOMECOMING— a story that had everything. 
Pathos, grace, irony and a real style. ZEIRO 
HOUR was excellent. But these last few things of 
his have been hackneyed and badly done. Let Ray 
return to the things he does well and have the good 
taste to leave Tom Wolfe, Poe, and company alorie 
and in peace. If this be treason, make the best of it. 

I am glad to see new writers appearing always 
in Planet. It is a real pleasure to watch from 
afar, as it were, the growth of a newcomer in the 
field. Coppel, for example, is getting better with 
each issue. His first piece — that horror about a 
jinx ship — was about as hack as they come. The 
second in the series ( ?), THE STARBUSTERS. 
was better, but still far from good. Then came 
RUNAWAY and CAPTAIN MIDAS and 
FLIGHT FROM TIME— all bell ringers. He 
slipped a bit on FIRST MAN IN THE MOON, 
and has come back with a bang in WARRIOR 
MAID OF MARS. This last is noteworthy for 
having — to my laiowledge, at least — the first 
"alien" hero to appear on your pages in recent 
times. Keep an eye on this boy, he's going places. 

Writers like Mullen, McDowell, and (shortstuff) Dee are always acceptable. Margaret St. 
Clair is good and competent. This is the regular 
stuff that makes PLANET what it is. These 
steady ones can compensate for the uneveimess of 
the newer writers. Keep them around. 

Suggestion: Get some Azimov, Van Vogt, 
Shiras and deCamp. It may cost you something, 
but it will do the circulation worlds of good. 

Conclusions: PLANET is a fine space-adventure mag, but it could stand a shade of polish. I 
don't mean for it to go long-hair. Just ease off 
on the garish format and use a little better grade 
of paper. Go on, what the hell ! Charge an extra 
nickel and give the readers their money's worth. 
It will pay off in the long run. 

It is too much to hope for that you could go 
monthly? No? Then what about bi-monthdj'? 
Surely bi-monthly. Every sixty days, a PLANET 
STORIES ! That would be something to look forward to, indeed it would. (Start looking — Ed*) 

Let me end with one last plea. During your stint 
as editor of PS, do everything you can to take 
science-fiction out of the area of the juvenile and 
the comic-book. Buy stories with something like 
thought in them and present them in an adult way. 
The fans will thank you for it. 
Sincerely, 

Douglas Creighton 

THIS, ON A BLUE MONDAY! 

2%2 Santa Ana St. 

South Gate, Cakf . 
Dear Editor : 

Well, as I review planet stories down at 
LASFS, I thought I'd drope you a line to tell you 



what's been hapening. To you, Mr. Bixby, the 
name Sneary may mean nothing . . . But there was 
a day when it could strike tarror into the harts of 
many a Editor and proof-reader. (JVel, ding our 
cats and call us Pavlov, we sea what you me en! 
— Ed.) And planet was the first to use a letter of 
mine, so I feel a deep fonness for the dear ©Id 
raged pages . . . And so, as more active work in the 
iner-circle of f andom took the time I use to spend 
writting you, I was forced to stop. But nodiing 
has kept me from Reading dear old P.S., and now, 
I even subscribe to the thing, to asure my getting 
my copy ahead of the hord 

The curent issue is up to planets usual standard 
...Nothing as good as THE ROCKETTERS 
HAVE SHAGGY EARS, but good . . . Bradbury 
of course rates the best written story . . . His people always seen;i to be so ahve. Infact you can all 
most feal sorry for them as he thinks up new ways 
inwhich to torture and kill them off. There was 
one slight flaw in this one though , . . Why didn't 
they climb under their life-raft, and escape the 
rain, or even a metal plate from the wreck? But 
even this doesn't detract from it. 

Maxwell's duphcation idea ought to get a prise 
for a fine idea, not developed. Fd of liked to seen 
more of the mix up of ego's. It is a perfict set up 
for setuation comady. You might steal even more 
from the book Four Sided Triangle and call it 
The two sided Square, The duplication of people 
has been a subject touched on but lightly, and then 
usually to from some sort of paradox. 

I read through the lead novel with the usual 
feeling of "I've been here before." I guess these 
Bourroughs type tales are a part of PS we will 
neaver loose, no mater what we try ... I guess if 
they don't get any worse than this time, I'll keep 
on enjoying them. 

Specking of enjoyment, we would down right 
injoy having you, or any fans out this way, dropping in on the 3rd Annual WESTERCON, which 
the OUTLANDER SOCIETY fs giving in L.A., 
June 18th, in the Knights of Pytliias Hall, (3rd 
floor) 617 Venice Blvd., Los Angeles, Calif. There 
is no charge, and things start right at 10 AM. We 
will have authors, and fans, auctions and speachs 
on science-fictional subjects. It is a annual all day 
Fan Conference, were the fans in this part of the 
State get to gether, and rub elbows and conversation with the pro's. We had 90 there last year, and 
as this is the First time the Outlanders have 
sponcered it, we hope to have twice that this year. 
All fans are welcome, come earlly, and stay late 
. . . For added information write Freddie Hershey. 
6335 King Ave., Bell, Calif. (Luck, sirsI-^Ed.} 

As for letters. (Love'em) First to Silverberg 
for his views on the Viz... Second to Mrs. 
Bradley, for her views on TRHSE, in the last 
issue. (What's this, both Bradley's writting a letter. Seems almost unfair, but the Boff Perry wrote 
two letters one issue, so I guess this is O.K.) Oh, 
give the Third to Weinstcin, for a well written 
letter, though I'm not inclined to agree with him 
on all points. 

We wish to add, that in our esdmation, Rodney 
Palmer, like another gentalman named Palmer of 
that city, has, to use a curent expession no doubt 
familiar to botli, rocks in his head. I'd Tike him 
to just try and prove eveyone believes in spirts, 
ife after death, etc— Ha! Yon will have a lot 
liarder time proving to me there are such things, 
than I would proving to you that Rockets are 
going to lift man off Earth in the next five years. 
Ihat is, unless you believe in deros 



Yours, 



Rick Sneary 



THE VIZWRAPH 
FINE. WACKY PS 

617 Miner Avenue 
T^ ^ Seattle 4, Wn. 

Dear Editor : 

Welcome to the Chair, and I hope you got all 
your shots first-BEM-fever serum, controversy 
vaccine, anti-fanzine booster, etc. A good solid 
selection, this first issue under the Bixby aeeis 



101 



BradbujT's DEATH BY RAIN is quite refreshing. Too bad the basic theme of the story ^ 
obsolete now Dust clouds, not rain, is the latest 
^■^ 1^°''^ ^'^^b theory. But nevertheless, I hope 
1 nas a half-dozen more stories in his files that 
should be completed sooner or later and ... I hooe 
. . . sold. *^ 

3,rc\^!">.T„?^ffi^'l"^?^ sold again. Good. 



(you just got that aegis back from the cleanefs! Shpw7how"rfan^or*ex-fanrfr senlf'heSs 
fht\^^ ^*' '° "'"^ ^^ spotless-just wait. t«."t ?ii?iT.^;" =.*'*• The idea was nice. S 



though). 

Wasn't Bradbury on the wrong planet this time? 
Ur are we to expect a new series? He and Miss 
bt Clair are the standouts of Summer '50 (Hey 
Standouts of Summer '50"~a PS title if ever I 
saw one! Now all I need is a story). The lady 
id^a^ ^ "^^^ on— shall we say—well-proven 

• u^'u'^ 71^^^"" ^^ ^^ *^" t^e Ed how to do his 
joD but 1 have only a few minor items. No beefs 
on the stones, artwork, or untrimmed edges— the 
mag has survived over ten years as is, so why 
rS^^^i? winning combination? (Love that man! 
wIy ?"f\\n^ blurbs-those beautiful, breathless blurbs 1 Wliat say we try having them written 
by someone who has read the stories? Might 
even, if that works, try the same treatment for 
the titles. 

Paley to the contrary, let's don't have a "fan 
corner. There must be others like myself, who 
wearily trudge through the "fan departments," 
hopelessly looking for some sign of activity within 
a reasonable distance. Apparently the necessary 
combination of talent, spare time, money and 
equipment hasn't jelled around here This is 
strictly a private beef, but seriously, 'there are 
enough fanclub-fanzine departments going now 
to meet the demand, and we need all your inelastic pages for stories. Yes, stories ! I may be eccentric but I buy stf mags for the reading material 
If your volume-and-issue numbering has been 
consistent, this magazine must have started 
around the fall of 1939, right? (The first PS was 
dated Winter, '39^Ed.) In that case I guess Fve 
been with you from the start, except for part of 
the war (glutton for punishment). Keep up the 
fine wacky standard of PS and the Vizigraph 
and the next ten years should be as enjoyable as 
the last ten. 

Yours for more Bradbury and Brackett, 

F. M. Busby 

R. DEE SIMPLY TRIFFIC! 

4 Spring Street, 

T^ I, -r. Lubec, Maine 

Dear Mk. Bixby : 

Or can we possibly call you "Bix"' Or "JB"? 
Anyhow, I got the flat package in the mail recently 
and eagerly opened it. Let me again thank every^dy concerned for this original. The plates in 
i.^ cant do justice to the originals, can they? 
Especially if the pics are by Alden McWiUiams ' 

Now to the current issue of PS. Alfred Coppel 
made a pretty good attempt at the classical PS 
adventure-epic but despite his entertaining effort. 
It cou dn t match past epics by Fox, McDowell, 
i-ennel and other authors. But it was good though. 
Wope he tries more like it too. But who was responsible for the mis-title and blurb? Oh, well 
ya gotta attract buyers. As long as the storv 
pleases ... ' 

St Clair's FLOWERING EVIL was only 
inildly mteresting, mostly because the idea itself 
isn t new. But orchids to her for the ending 



mick better. Gad, -what an ending. 
Orr?t''"*"^"°v narrative in COLLISION 
Z^ll ""^^ K^fi^'T^'y "«^-'^*' fo*- some reason 
or other. Probably because I'm more used to finding them in detective novels and mags. Altho I 
have stopped reading them to any extent a firstperson yarn somehow rings the bell with me, when 

wa^'f^ R ?T "^^'^ ^"°"«''- Tl>is one almost 
W^ V am encouraged. How? you ask? 

Well, somehow, the yams / write are usually in 
first-person too. But I'll spare you for a while 

it^llu^^-t^^^^^^- ^°"'"'s familiar. Whether 
Ran ^ '!,,^^'"u'^'' °'' "°*' tl^e story was good. 
N?r/^^^r.*''/°,^°'* °^*''^ others this time. 
Maxwell t'o!> '^"P''*^^"""- Like to see more by 

MOON OF TREASON was undoubtedly the 
best m the issue. I like McDowell's writing Goes 
down smoothly (oops, thinking of a drink) h| 
vlm^i^TV T'^ .^d useful gimmick in Ws 
^sTv 'wVw'5"J? '*? ^^^ ^y'^ nictitating lids. 
^ ;?? ^S*l*^'"^^ve times, fast.) (So if s difficult f-Ed. ) Definitely MORE BY McDOwiLi*. 

In Stan Mullen's SUICIDE COMMAND a 
more or less rare, these days, atmosphere was attained, briefly, when they discovered the hol^ !n 
Ae little asteroid and the horror^eyond the dlr 

tY.'"w ^* */ji!!«' "•"^^'>'' ^''^"'y f'o^rible and fanuJ: 
tic were the mainstay of the early internlanetaA, 

Jl^r^'tr^"^^**^ them anyway, and all t^ few 
times these days do we find them. Mullen ho^ 
ever, seems to have a knack for this touch aLd I 
find ,t quite often in his yams ^ ^ 

Wlioever Roger Dee might be. be is a irood 

you™sT;!r'"rI^^\*'"? ^/^ especially'liLny 
Jwffi- l^-^- ^°i ^asic idea, well handled and 

alHC-'In/PV- 'J^ar E<jitor. Welcome and 

fr!i|lft-g!;-- f::i;iii^L'^r^^i 

Also mi'^^J^r'' ''^ P'^ase^stay witlT^t 'l^hHe 

sfeR?SftoVL/StTTRirsTi^l:'^^^ 
few hopeful suggestiot cSmi?g^the a7t wo;k^ 

--^tl^l W^ for Mullen's 

lo the Vizigraph we happily prance 

hair down once in a while. Not Ih^IM «t .ifT 
people writing in to the Vizieranh ,1 -i -^^ t^'* 
all of the time. But in tlSon"^ S'Se^ 



102 



PLANET 




m 



people on a drunk, etc., you'll «"£ » 1° ' '"^^J.^' 
railed childishness, drivel, etc. Aan the atleg^ 
Sme in this column. Especally when there t3M> 
little of it Most letters are more or less constructive criticism with the writers dressing it up a 
bit Anyone can have f un. Esp«^ally when it is not 
harmful And if Fredrlc Filo happens to deign to 
atCd the NORWESCON in Portland Oregon 
fhrSeptember, he can talk it over with people 
who S thes^ letters. I also happen to plan on 
Tttending. He might find that these peop^ who 
write this "childish ... asimne ... hogwash in 
Uieir siLre moments can probably give him quite 
a lamb^ting in applied physics, atomic *«,? 
plot-building, etc.. any number of things. Even 

'"SoJe^renTlhiUnintentionaUy long 1^^^^^^^ 
let me say I'm glad to know th^t PLANET 
STORIES is going to be bi-monthly soon! 

Ed Cox 



HOUSE DIVIDED 

Box 298 . 
Tahoka, Tex. 

Dear Ed : , u » 

An ancient scribe once put forth the theory that 
a house divided against itself c^not stand. Hearken then, to my tale of woe, and tell me, if tell me 
you can, what magic ointment will cement together tliat which has been so rudely torn apart C 
Everything was going oh so smootlily untilyour 
recent PLANET hit the stands. It looked interesting Its titles sounded intriguing. The cover was 
beaudful. Can you blame me for tossing my last 
two dimes at the salesgirl and hurrying home with 
the Martian Warrior-Maid clutched tight to my 
breast? {Lord, no!— Ed.) ... r f ..„j 
The first wrong note sounded when 1 touna 
another Spy of the same PLANET curled.up on 
the divan with the pride of my house, the joy of 
mv Jipart the oreoarer of my infrequent meals! 
hS ust fin^^ed off the WARRIOR-MAID 
OF MARS she was centering her attenUon upon 
Beckys COLLISION ORBIT. I was for the 
time being! an UNWELCOME TENANT. 

Advancing the guarded opinion that 1 considered ALPHA SAY, BETA DO the best story m 
the mag, my next conscious thought was that SUICIDE COMMAND might have been a more appropriate selection. Never in all my life had 1 
dreamed that a man could exist at such low mtellectual levels as I found myself occupying! 

I admitted that the plot was older than my 
grandfather's great grandfather. That the comparative analysis of scientist versus floor-polisher 
was another oldie. That split personalities was 
nothing new in this age of psychology and psychiatrists. That men have been falling m love 
with women, and women with men, since time immemorial. Tliat one of the parties to such lovemating has always taken the initiative. That if the 
man didn't save the woman, the woman must save 
the man. I tried only to make the very minor point 
that the story was well- written ! 
That, I fear, was a major mistake. 
I am now thoroughly convinced that my own 
opinion is of no value even to myself. In fact, i 
now fully realize it to be a detriment ! 

And so, from the depths of my desj^ir, I entreat you to salve my hurts by Publishing only 
such stories as may safely be called KAJKJU \ 
Woefully yours, 

Robert A. Bradley 



LITERARY LiN 

Buckroe Beach, Va. 
To : Editor Chrome Bixby 
Dear Red : 

Have read nothing more tlian the Visigraph and 
not even all of that— Don't know when I ye wjoyed anything as much as I have your editorial 
comment. Suggest you keep up the present method 
of commentary (You know, like this) -It will 
allow you to make all the acrid, acrimonious, 
pleasant or just plain fumiy statements you wish 
and the brevity will keep you from boring either 
yourself or us... so far as I am concerned, you 
could even say a bit more— I enjoy you 

In answer to a question; yes, I would like to 
know PLP's penmane ... (I don't know whether 
he's a lion in literary circles yet or not, but my 
lousay typing is making him one here.) 
Comments on letters : ^ . «• 

I don't like people who don't have Intelligence 
enough to appreciate me and my kind— Tell me 
Frederic, does Filo stand f or . . . ( Wf ^WiJ, a^/ju/> . . . 
veddy witty. Stu, hut CENSORBD—Ed.)? 

Ah yes, Zimmer...So you've never read any 
science in a science fiction magazme. Well, there 
was some once. It was entitled "The Frame Concept Theory." It was primarily concerned with 
the concept and use of macrocosmic and microcosmic mathematical number frames. I read the thmg 
out of curiosity more tlxan anything else, but to 
my surprise, found immediate use for it m an 
advanced calculus course ... 

WHO GOES THERE— originally a story 
about the first world war, I forget who by— Seems 
to be a popular title. 

As for the stories themselves, rate em yourself. You've read *em. I haven't 
Bye for now— 

Stuart A. Line 



THE SAGE SPEAKS AGAIN 

Dear Mr. Bixby : 

It has indeed been many a weary aeon since I 
last had a letter in the Vizi. I have been leading a 
life of Chastity, Celibacy, and Boredom ... a barren, sterile, stefless existence. Few and sparse 
have been the letters I have dashed off to the proz. 
But now,. I can contain myself no longer and must 
dash a letter off to deah ole PS. 

And we have a new editor among our ranks. 
eh? Welcome, thrice welcome in the Name of 
Aliah ! You have a nice uncluttered, unpretentious 
little mag here, let's hope you do well by it. Could 
stand some improvement. Frinstance the Vizigraf. For the last several munts it has been tlie 
stomping ground of scientific discussions, racial 
prejudice, vicious back-biting feuds, and others of 
their ilk. Gone are the vastly amusing, entertaining letters of yesteryear . . . gone are the Giffords, 
the Asimovs, the Lessers, the Shaws, the Olivers, 
the Kennedys, the Snearys, the— yes I the Carters, 
and in their place : Sigler. Cox. What a depraved 
set of substitutes ! Mr. Bixby, let's make the Vizi 
as interesting and entertaining as it used to be, 
back in the days when PLANET had the best dam 
letter-column in the proz. We can do it, boys ! 

I neglected to write last issue, but I should 
have said something about Bradbury's wonderful 
FOREVER AND THE EARTH, which was the 
best thing he's done for old Fiction House since 
the memorable PILLAR OF FIRE. FATE was 
really superb: an example of the sort of prose 

Brad is quite capable of writing, but too seldom 



THE VIZIGRAPH 



103 



does. That yarn was so compelling that I had to 
go and re-read Wolfe's OF TIME AND THE 
RIVER, which contains the passage from which 
Brad got his title. PLANET bumbles along month 
after month, printing second rate space-opera in 
the main, but boy ! when you do get a good yarn 
it is TQsiily good! 

Best story in the Summer issue was possibly 
the Coppel novel, and probably best only because 
of its length. I have an idiosyncracy of preferring 
long stories to short. 'S'funny. The story was entertaining and had lots of nice wham-socko-boomyer-dead action. Colorful. But it couldn't begin to 
come up to the Brackettale. Hint ! Not bad, tho, 
in fact pretty good in its own way. 

Ray Bradbury's effort was a distinct let-down 
after his fine story the ish before. When Brad 
writes good he writes very good, but when he 
louses one up it really reeks. DEATH-BY-RAIN, 
I fear, fell into the latter classification. Stanley 
Mullen had a fairly intriguing short, and UNWELCOME TENANT had a quite clever idea, 
albeit one I have seen before, and in PLANET 
too. Qood, tho. 

All in all the ish was something below average. 
With a new editor at the helm, perhaps things 
will start looking up. I'd like to see some more by 
Leigh Brackett and Henry Kuttner, of course 
more Bradbury, and if you could lure Edmond 
Hamilton into^ the fold I wouldn't complain. A 
new cover artist might be a help. Your interior 
artists are competent, hardly outstanding, but 
competent. One could dream of Bok, Cartier, 
Bonestell and Rogers, but leave us not be so unworldly. Sich things are impossible. 

It might be worth-while to reinstate the P.S. 
Feature Flash, always one of PLANET's more 
interesting features. Only this time alternate, a 
thumbnail sketch of an author, then a fan, than an 
artist, then author, et cetera. You might lengthen 
the Editor's squib at the head of the Vizi into a 
regular honest-to-gosh editor's page, if you like. 
Then we could hear about stories forecoming 
and new departments and the like. I think every 
pro should have something of that sort. 

Anyway, welcome Mr. Bixby, and best luck with 
future issues ! 

Lin Carter 

"The Sage of St. Pete" 

METAPHYSICAL ALLIANCE 

501 East Lincoln, 
Wellington, Kans. 
My Dear Mr. Bixby : 

I call you Mister Bixby for the sheer originality 
of it, as you have probably been by this time addressed in every anagrammatic form to which 
your initials adapt themselves. 

The Summer 1950 issue of PLANET stacks 
up like this. Ray Bradbury, as usual coming thni 
with one of his seemingly plotless stories, which 
never the less has a distinctive appeal of its own. 
MOON OF TREASON, and SUICIDE COMMAND both deserve a word in their favor, 
though both had loose ends that were not tied 
into the story thread. UNWELCOME TENANT, Bradbury again ? 

The rest of the stories were unimpressive, with 
the exception of FLOWERING EVIL and 
WARRIOR MAID OF MARS. These two are 
feeble, and I feel inclined to debate whether 
either is STF. I might also add that WARRIOR 
MAID is precisely the type of stuff which will 
drive fan and fen away from the newsstand in 



flocks. (Disagree . . . PS, almost the last berth of 
occasional Ye Olde Cliff-hanger Stfe, is doing 
right well — Ed.) 

Enough of the incidentals, now to the most 
important part of the magazine^ VIZIGRAPH. 

Best letter, Al Weinstein, laymg out Lucifer. 
Just one cornment, Al. Don't you think that "having a God" is simply the process of worshipping 
some particular quality in oneself ? 

What happened to the address on Shirley Henderson's letter? {Not enclosed— Ed.) Whatever 
it was, it caused me to spend hours going thru the 
Hendersons in the Wichita Phone Directory, 
bothering Hell out of innocent and completely unsuspecting people. Result? Nil ! 

Please inform Miss Henderson that if she 
would like to get in with a group interested in 
writing STF and modern literature she can contact me at the above address. 

Her, Miss Henderson's, definition of STF, has 
that particular twist to it that could mean she is 
a girl who is concerned with more than whether 
her lipstick is on straight. 

I agree, STF is a state of mind. But, not the 
same state of mind in everyone who reads it. It is 
however, an outgrowth from the desire to be, or 
the conviction that one is, unique, different. Which 
is true in the sense of individual difference. But, 
in the overall aspect, looking at the human race 
with the eyes of the philosophers— "the officer's 
lady, and Rosy O'Grady, are sisters under the 
skin." 

In other words, you and I differ in the respect 
that we do not have the same experiences, or the 
same (consequent) desires, per se. Nor do you 
and I have the same amount of energy to expend 
toward the attainment of those desires. 

We are similar in that we must eat, and sleep, 
work and play, love and be loved ; in the fact that 
we fear what we do not understand, logicize and 
justify our actions to ourselves. And, if we are 
mature, we attempt by realizing and comparing 
these similarities in each other to understand a 
little more of the people about us. 

So we see that the STF fan is actually reaching, thusly into himself, forming a metaphysical 
alliance with the world. He is attempting, not to 
operate thru similarity to others, but thru his own 
individual difference. 

Perhaps STF is somewhat of a bible to the 
Fan. He could do worse. But, nevertheless I maintam, that any literary form, STF included, must 
be analyzed thru its readers and writers, and what 
particular fulfillment they find within it. 

E. A. McKlNLEY 

WANTED: A SUITABLE ANSWER 

107 Hayes Street 
^ , Seattle 9, Washington 

Dear Jerome : 

I have enjoyed the Vizigraph of late with the 
discussions of this and that and especially the 
creation of the universe. I thought I would write 
and put in my thoughts on the subject. A subject 
like that can be argued for years without getting 
anywhere. You just keep going in circles and 
never find a suitable answer. 

How old is the Earth? How old is the sun? 
The galaxy? The Universe? Nobody knows. The 
age of the Earth is estimated at so many million 
years by eminent scientists who base their estimates upon the disintegration of uranium. Uranium has a half life of 4.6 billion years, or a whole 
life of 9.2 billion years. (Mephitic physics, Buryl 



K 



104 



PLANET STORIES 



— Ed.) Since there is still uranium present on the 
Earth and in the sun and in other suns, they can*t 
have existed for more than 9.2 billion years ! Yet 
everyone agrees that the Universe has lasted for 
bilUons of years. How come there's uranium left? 
Has the Universe been in existence for less than 
9.2 billion years? What was before that time? 
Was that a time? {Boy, WAS itl-^Ed.) Etc. 

I'm an agnostic. Perhaps some of your readers 
can tell me. 

The best story m the mag was DEATH-BYRAIN. The rest were good, but I liked that the 
best. Let's have more Brackett, Bradbury, and 
artists that read the stories before drawing illos 
of them. 

Sincerely, 

BuRYL Payne 

'OL- DUSTY ATOMIC BOMB 

546 Ellis 

Wichita 9, Kansas 
Dear Editor : 

I am glad to see that PLANET has acquired 
a new editor. It may be that the magazine will 
improve in quality now, as for a long time it's 
been the same old tripe. 

I thought that the cover novel in the present 
issue was excellent for it dealt with a problem as 
old as humanity itself. That is, when an old and 
decaying culture meets up with a newer and more 
progressive culture, what should they do about it ? 
Shall they act like little children and die rather 
than accept the newer concepts or shall they act 
like men and begin to build anew upon what the 
newer culture has to offer. The hero was torn 
between these two extremes. He realized that his 
world was dying because of its inability to meet 
its problems yet he was afraid to accept that 
which was better. The conflict he faced before he 
could reconcile the two made a good story. 

The cover illustration was better than most of 
them have been but whoever did the interior picture should have read the story first. It seems as 
if he just can't leave any duds on his dames. 

I just couldn't get interested in Bradbury's.short 
story. He may be able to write but it seems that 
all his stories blithely ignore some matter that no 
intelligent author should overlook. According to 
Bradbury it never quit raining on the planet, 
Venus, which would be a violation of natural law 
as anybody should know. Rain can only fall when 
sufficient water has evaporated to saturate the air. 
If it were always raining there could be no evaporation and hence no rain. How silly can some 
authors get ? 

The story, THE ENORMOUS WORD, was 
rather interesting but why do they always have to 
do everything the hard way? They had to labor 
like the dickens to make an atomic bomb to blast 
the invaders when old man TNT could have done 
the job in a fraction of the time. It would be perfectly easy to use aircraft with steam or Diesel 
power and mechanical controls or even some form 
of jet or rocket in whicli the ignition was accomplished by an ordinary flame to drop heavy bombs 
on the base or even to fire hght cannon at the 
ships. 

If it were desirable to use some other method 
it would be possible to use long range bombardment with heavy guns placed under cover of darkness or even do it with such weapons as the 105 
m.m. howitzers drawn by steam or Diesel engines. As a last resort a raid by a few regiments 
of troops armed with automatic rifles, demolition 



grenades, bazookas, and a few fifty calibre machine guns firing armor piercing shells could do a 
pretty good job. After all, it has been done before. 
But that wouldn't sound as good so the atomic 
bomb has to be hauled out and dusted off. 

The other stories were just so-so. How about 
some more interesting letters in the Visigraph and 
I don't mean the, *Heh, heh, ain't I the dope?* 
type, either. 

Respectfully, 

Edwin Sigler 

1) Oh er field's aliem ships were "able to detect 
the slightest unauthorized action on the ground 
below" — which kills your bombardment/ armed^raid theory — and 2) the aliens could by pressing a 
button in their Sahara stronghold "bring quick 
death to every single Earthman" — thus the neces^ 
sity for a weapon swift and deadly (and unob" 
irusively made ready) as the A-bomb. 

Tsk. 

ROMULUS, THE BLUE BEM 

1455 Townsend Ave. 
New York 52, N. Y. 
Dear Bix : 

I've been walking around in sort of a stupor (as 
usual), thinking about what to write in this Viziletter. I could tell you about Romulus, the Blue 
BEM who dictates my letters and eats hot iron 
pyrites, but Rommy is a sensitive soul and doesn't 
like publicity. Then again I might comment on 
how corny are the efforts of various Vizifans to 
convince us of their erudition, but I guess there 
would be a scarcity of orig votes 'round my way 
for a while. Of course, there's the old standby of 
writing a story, let us say, about the Ghu-Slobberers in the Venusian slime marshes, but maybe 
I can sell that idea to MESSY HORROR or 
something. Therefore, I have but one recourse 
left. I must comment on the latest issue of PS ! 

I realize this will come as a shock After wading through masses of missives, you have come to 
one which talks not about Brackett, not about 
Null-A, not even about religion, but about 
PLANET STORIES ! 

But before I go further, let me offer my condolences to the vacant space that was Paul Payne. 
And, in case you should feel your dimensional 
hold slipping, kindly inform Malcolm Reiss that 
I AM AVAILABLE, 

Coppel's WARRIOR-MAID OF MARS was 
pretty good, but what, pray tell, is a "barbarian 
worlds novel" ? 

DEATH-BY-RAIN was fine. Not in the class 
of FOREVER AND THE EARTH, but fine, 
still. 

The rest of the issue, save for the swell St. 
Clair story, was about average. I thought the 
cover was pretty miserable. Anderson has nerve, 
at least. He signed it this time ! This cover bore 
quite a resemblance to some forty-odd other 
PScovers, though. 

This science-vs.-religion feud has gone far 
enough. What's it doing in La Vizi, anyhow? 
And what has become of the famed two-page 
rule? Both Ganley and Weinstein transgressed 
this ish. Give Ganley a pic, anyway, for a good 
letter. Also Bob Silverberg. Give Weinstein a 
kick in the astral body (or as some no doubt witty 
stf author recently stated in a fanmag ((only 
Fiction House puts out promags)), the asteroid) 
(Yuk—Ed,) for filUng La Vizi with drivel. Can't 
thmk of anyone 'cept me to vote the third pic to, 
so won't vote further. 



Roger Dee is a house pseudonym ! Roger Dee is 
a house pseudonym! Roger Dee is a house pseudonym I (Get lost . . it's 's private and 

personal nom-de-blume, not a house name. Intrtgmng, what?— Ed.) 

coSfnu^"^''^ ^"''^ ^°" '*'"''* P""* *"y lett^""' I 
r^T'^T?^"*' wringing another story out of 
I may decide to become a poor man's Van Vogt, 
Ed) ^^ ^""^^ ^°" warning. {Noted-^ 

fh-i?^i7^?f^"'* ^? ™n more by the big name authors FoUowmg IS a hst of my favorites, who 
Id hke to see m PLANET. I've scrambl^ the 
names a b't so that the big shots at Fiction House 
who think JUNGLE STORIES is the onlyoThw 
mag runnmg fantasy, won't be disillusioned. Anv)S n^V"!.- ^•,?"i'^'"<^ Van Sturgeon. Theiwfol I ?'^*^°??l^J^"''''*y Vogtimov, Damon 

HSpait^n"; SlitglT"' ""'• "^""^ ^""-^ 
Yours 'til PS runs parapsychological articles, 
Morton D. Paley 

PROF IS A FAN 

2711 La Salle Street 
Dear jEixv Bean: ^"'^' Wisconsin 

I really should be writing a theme for English 
Comp mstead of hacking out this article (see 
what I go through for dear old PS), but since 
my prof is also a stfan (wonder of wonders) if 
he sees this in the next issue of PLANET he 

Se-^i hop;?'* '° *°'^'^' *" ^^"^''^ °f «y 

Oh, Al Weinstein. tch, tch, tch. Before you accuse anyone of being a fanatic always check to 
see that you aren't going of! the far end yourself 
I won t say much about Al's letter except to replv 
that m certain places he appears to get as fanatical 
at one extreme as he accuses "Sathanas" of getting 
^ he other. WhatAl apparently doesn't ?ealizf 
IS that there w a cold, scientific, logical expianation of God which does reconcile science and religon. I don t want to go into that explanation here 

Jtl . Ji? u''""^i"S '^°^" ^^ wrath of various 
assorted bishops. Popes, ministers and other members of religious groups, but if Al or anyone else 

ihi's"leTter! ""^ ""^^'^"^ '" ''"'"^ *' the X of 
tri V "aL^"°"^'' ^'^ *^ profound, leave us turn to the 
OH-H(D! We're getting MODEST are we 
The usually valiantly-battling (always valiantly-' 
batt mg) femme on the cover now has a filmv 
negjgee to hide her near-nudenes^prlthr sSn 

\t'^ll'':u •"^L^'^h*' ?".* '■" "^^'^ cloth (^" 

the other haiid, Anderson's BEM seemTto be ao" 
proaching the opposite extreme: if he doesn'^t 
Iegg:o the aforementioned modestly-attired lad v's 
shield and grab his sagging britches, said brhches 
will soon be hugging said BEM's ankles which 
^|hould think, would greatly hinder the ^oSttle 

thu'dtTbLd^rteTs'^t oWd-r* ^ 

MOON OF TREASON ^fs t.'&'Zry''^ 
Ae issue For my money McDowell is one of the 
best writers you have: what plots, what actSn 
.. . what women ! ! ! ( Why don't you write a C 
Emmett; everyone else seems to be doing^ ) 
For some reason Bradbury didn't click th^rsfueperhaps because his last story was so outs a^ 



THE VIZIGRAPH 



105 



fORMENOm? 

-jHi GIRd iOI/E ir TOO // '^ 



pUOTOS 

U BOOKS I 




\ 



MOfft 'NAN 



IBUC/Ci 



LARCH BOOK CO. 

IIS Eaft 28 8t. New York 18, Dept 158-11 



WORK SHIRTS 



EmlN'oidered 

NAME 
FREE 

WifhEa€h 

Order 
Over $1.00 




3forl.79 



AMAZING VALUES! 



SAVE mooeyl Thwe tr» surplus sto«k from a big supply Arm 
Sturdy. servfsMbto work shirts. tlH>u«h used havi be*n 
WMhetf, sbrllliH and r^condition'ed. Eviy sSfrt of l?S.w^. 

stltchino 9A points of strain. Money back guarantoi! 

WORK PANTS TO MATCH 99c 

Blud or Tan. Send waist measure and le^ lengtb. 

SHIRT & PANTS TOGETHER $1.68 

Blue or Tan. Send shirt nock slxe, walsC and lee length. 
COVERALLS sJnd^hwt measurement. $1.49 

Send No Money! 

Ofw iMine. address, city or toiwi, size and eolor choice (also 
state 2nd color choice). Pay oostaiwt ptue postage. Or send 
owj and we thjp prepaid. Keep I0 days. If not satisfied, 
return for refund! 

Uall Tour Order Today! 

YOUNG DISTRIBUTING CO. 

D»p#. R-A 2606 Elmlmrst Detroit 6. Mfeh. 



106 



PLANET STORIES 



c« 1,^ tiit<; a hieh third, with Margaret St. 
CllPs I^OWERING EVIL a lagging second. 
That ending of hers got me, I almost choked 
loon't^y it!) Why doesn't someone ^ke a«ay 
Rneer Dee's typewriter ribbon? His style isni 
bad but hTs plots are lousy. I guessed the whole 

r;sTeJrUroid"fo7^|;atrrsfoT; 

PLANET'S covers are symboic! The hero is gnttine his teeth because he is afraid h.s false choppers will fall out, and that stuff. on his playsm^ 
isn't salad at all, it's the remains of a green 
Martian turkey that the hero ate raw in a sancro ant ceremony the night before The p.gst.cker 
[n hTs belt wasn't very sharp and the turkey splatered Now the girl holding the glowing sphere 
stands for...um..er. ..why don't you ask Salt dor Dali what she stands for? (There^ an idea 
Ed- get Dali to paint your covers. Then youd 

""irUo'ZnvLy thinks PI-^NETs sho^^^^^^^^^^^ 
wonderful he ought to see MY shorts-they re 
green with purple flowers and little yellow butterflies What's this? Do I see a hint of PLANbl 
becoming bi-monthly? Oh ^apt^re! Oh joy ! (0^ 
yoo hoo,you with the shorts!-Ed.) Switch on 
the overdrive men, PLANET rides again! 

And now at the risk of being prosecuted for 
plagarism, I shall dedicate the following poem to 
PLANET'S budding poet-launet Wi kie Conner 
(who I see voted for me— thanks, Wiik) : 

He's a poet, 
And doesn't know it, 

But his feet show it— ,^11 \, 

—They're Longf ellows ! . . . Kyuck, kyuck, 
kyuck 

{He got 'em wet, 
They'd be wet yet, 
But John he met— 
^John DrydemI . . .yerp,,yerp, yerp.—hd.) 

Originals to Ganley Miss Shirly Henderson 
(Miss? Did she say Missf . . , Well, well, well !), 
and Mad Marion. Bruce Hapke 

P S You did a swell job on your first issue. 
Keep the old interPLANETary tradition roaring. 

<;eriously, Bruce— and Paley, too-^/re always 
looking fornew writers. So try. If they re good 
stories, we'll buy 'em, if they're good stones, 

WE STILL LOVE OUR COVERS! 

308 W. Clinton St. 

Elmira, N. Y. 
Dear Jerry: 

Congratulations on your new seat of thon^ 
brickbats and flowers. May you have a long rei^ 
and a profitable one for PS, including a bimonUily issuance. Incidentally, Please bear with 
my handwriting. I know it's pretty bad, but typewriters are out of range at present 

Having seen, rather ^"^^P^^r ^f must la^ 
welcome sight of my letter in Viz, I must take 
S Tn hand^and cry ;'battle/' Respite your love of 
Wir covers, couldn't you do something to force 
your artists into reading the stones they are tryfne to illustrate? Even the blurb for the story was 
wfong I ike PS, otherwise I wouldn't be a sub


scriber, but gibberish, either verbal or pictorial, 
naus^tes me^ Where, oh where in the magazine 
does a woman wield a sword? Where, oh where 
does a fight show up containing a woman ana a 
man defending themselves against savages armed 
with guns and Death's Head guardsmen using 
swords? In comparison, the cover with which 1 
took exception in my last letter was a yeritable 
hunk of truth. By all means let us be artistic, but, 
at the same time, let us show some consideration 

for logic. , .^^ , ^ 

Which last leads me to a letter written by one 
Rodney Palmer, who has all his wires short-circuited almost beyond repair. Where did he ever 
dream up the idea that fantasy is possible and 
science-fiction impossible? His definition or explanation of why stf is impossible is as fantastic 
as some of Lovecraft's wildest flights of fancy. 1 
can only conceive that this fan is of very recent 
vintage, that he has never heard of Robert Henlein, Anson McDonald (Latter's the former-^ 
Ed.), Don A. Stuart, Hugo Gernsback, Isaac Azimov, and dozens more who have been writing S-F 
in the past two decades that I have been a fan. 
Is it necessary to write a story of the future and 
include space-travel? Let him read FINAL 
BLACKOUT and SIXTH COLUMN for answer. Is it necessary to deal entirely with he-men 
adventurers roaming the universe? Let him read 
BEYOND THIS HORIZON and THE HUMANOIDS for answer. (Ironsmtth was plenty 
he-man . . . with brains, of course—Ed.) Anyone 
who claims that everyone believes in spirits and 
life after death is contradicting a long history of 
atheism and agnosticism. In conclusion, order this 
man one large raspberry in spades! 

On to the attack! Mr. Ramsay is also, or should 
I say must be also, one of these Johnny-come 
lately's to S-F. Just one author has refuted his 
entire presentation on how future civilizations 
are portrayed. Maybe he never heard of Robert 
Heinlein and his history of the future and the 
stories which evolved from that history. SIXTH 
COLUMN was sociology, through religion, m 
action. BEYOND THIS HORIZON was genetics completely. If these readers would only do a 
little back- tracking on what has been published 
they wouldn't stick their necks out so far all the 
time. His plaint about musicology is valid, I 
think, except for one story which contained a 
figment of it in passing. It appeared in one of the 
competition and has since been included in an 
anthology. . 

Have been brought up short at this point by 
realizing that I'm writing a book. However, 
gotta write more yet, just have to! 

The stories this issue were not easy to grade. 
Being the addict that I am, I can never really tell 
how I want to grade a story because I usually 
enjoy them all very much. These wonderful fans 
who can sit down and separate the worth of one 
story from that of another incite huge gahs of 
envy in me. It could be that I have read too many 
of them too fast to be able to pin one down and 
say I liked it just a little better than the rest. 
However, I can say that MOON OF TREASON 
was a little different from most mutant stories 
and I would like to see sequels to it. Ray Bradbury can, when he wants to, write stories with 
atmosphere like no one in S-F today. This little 
short was good. 

I think I have wearied you by now so I will 
shut this ink fountain off by saying. 



Best of luck, 



Larry Rothstein 






ANOTHER ONE? 

320 Stenzel Street 

T. T,^ „ N- Tbnawanda. N. Y. 

Dear Mr, Bixby : 

I writ a letter to Payne L. Paul one day long 
ago, and he didn't print it. Was I disappointed? 
No ! I've always been this color. Now I seen 
-jforementioned editor has faded into nothingness 
iid one Jerome Bisquik has taked over post (JVe 
rose to the occasion^Ed.) "This is good" I spoke 
to myself. "I will write this fellow letter.*' I have 
now done so. 

Cover was most pretty on current issue. Four 
characters compose the frightening scene. (1) 
chmese giriie with gauzy chain-mail. Blue belt 
pretty too! (2) villain in foreground with red 
torso and orange legs. His hat is a Daniel Boone 
ongmal, no doubt. (3) villain in background This 
is the most modest fellow of the group, also, he 
must use ox-blood complexion plan, (4) hero. 
Cheater ! He uses two swords. He is lost my vote! 

I readed the Vizigraph also, but I couldn't get 
the plot In any case, the Buck Rogers illo went 
with the story. There were also some other stories 
m the mag the last time I cast fevered eyes upon 
It, but I will not mention them, with the exception 
of DEMISE BY PRECIPITATION by a certain 
Brad Raybury. This is poor for Mr. Raybury. 
If he continues to write like that, he'll probably 
be voted into the editor's chair, and then you, Mr, 
Jerome, will be the one who is out in the Vaia 
Also, you is traitor to PLANET STORIES I 
{Lave see certain story, by name AND ALL FOR 
ONE, which is saying under it, where is usually 
put name of author, Jerome Bixby. Donnerwetter! (This is foreign word which means **What 
IS Bixby doing here?") 

I am seen you send pics to best letters in issue. 
1 hereby make vote. Send all three to girl who 
has wnted letter on back cover which speaks "I 
went from size 16 dress to a size 12." That is the 
sort of thing it is making me a great happiness 
to hear. 

Goodbye to you now, Mr. Bisquik. Don't make 
P.b. a bi-monthly, whatever you da Once every 
ttiree months is enough. I can alwavs go back to 
Shaver, you know. Hee hee heeheehee. 

Love and kisses, 

Al Leverentz 

Oh, welL, . there* s one in every deck Say Al 
Vfos your mother ever frightened by a Snearyf ^ 

FOR SHAME! 

418 High Street 
Closter, N. J. 
Dear Jet Bomb : 

I <l^«'t know why you fellows persist in putting 
out the Summer issues of planet stories just as 
the last snows are melting off the ground, but 
agam said magazine arrived on time, dated three 
months in the future. It's very perplexing. 

Very. 

So was this month's cover. The heroine's negligee or whatever it is she's wearing, looks as 
though It hasn't been washed in years. Why 
Why you can hardly see through it ! For Shame ! 

PS is slipping. This issue you printed three 
readable stories, two of which said nothing and 
not very well. McDowell always writes a good 
adventure yarn, but what has hoppened to those 
wonderful novels he used to write with the titles 
with colors in them? MOON OF TREASON 
was average. Just. 



THE VIZIGRAPH 



107 




A lr««h, new line pf comk bo<4cl«ts 

for odwJfs. Rich in lusty humor, with 

good, dear iliustrotions. 12 of thet« 

little bootclets, all different, sent to 

^ yoo prepaid for $1. No COD please. 

' ) NOVa ARTS, ■ 

</ P.O. BOX 4(0. DANVILLE. ILf.. 



WANT TO BE A MERCHANT SEAMAN?, 
SKV- STARTIHG PAY 

PLU5*?oOD TRAYEL.ADVENTURE 
OVEmyS^ CAREER AT SEA ON 
^^ LODGING AMERICAN SHIPS 

NO EXPERIENCE REQUIRED TO START 
RPRVinpMru «/i^" iuFFICIENT 8ERV' 
SHIP'S OFFICERS 



'195 



^ 



^^"^E^^'C^^'EW W>TH SUFFICIENT SERVICE 

MAY Qi/aLIFY FOR SHIP'S OFFICERS 

for further IntormaHon WHnE today to: 



V^^.tti^l!-^ INFORMATION BUREAU OF GALVESTON 
Box 6954.D. Wolbroolc Sfoflon Balflinorri 6. iZf! 




SPEEDY STITCHER 

Sews LockSWcb Like a HacMne 

Save time and money in ropalrlne 
shoes. bootB, loatiier jackets, gloTM 
auto topi. saddle* and many other 
things. Speedily gwn grain bags, 
burlap, canvas, leather and heavy 
textiles and wire cut* oa livestock. Ready to us© the minute you need it. Comes with 
reel of wareti thread and 3 
needles In different sizes. 
Spare needles are carried 
in handle. Get this handy 
tool now so that you'll 
have it when you need it. at 
home, on hunting, fishing or 
camping trips. Priceless when 
you need It. but costs <«Iy 
$1.50 postpaid if you send 
cash, check or money order. O.O.D. $1.50 plus 
fee and postage. 

SPORTSMEN'S 
POST 



Do YOU want 

MONEY, LOVE, and POWER? 

po you fee! that opportunity is pass'""^ ^^«^/'' ^^^^ »f someone showed*^ 
you HOW, you^ could earn big moneyA 
be popular and make people admire' 
yai? Wouldn't you like to win iti' 
whatever you do? Boss those who now 
boss you ? Deane Hammond, a collegf 
tramed New York Public Relation. 

^tHo\f -^^r^^'^^"^^^^^^^ iThe^5d^^E^^h^i?e 

man dehvers. the booklet FORMUI/A FOR Vl CC^S 
with instrucriona, pay only $2 olus Doatao^iT k«iw^. 

whL^fl Hil/^rn^'^ T^ COMPI.ETE:i,Y SATISFIED 
Ji led tn f^'' *" *^"-^ ^^."^ ^ "^^t ^^''^' You are SiWEALTH JL raIptmJ^S ^"^^^^ ^^^ HEALTH. 
Write NOW to ^^^^^^^ y^ ^a^c always wanted. 

TRULOVE 58 WAUER STREET 

■ «% w A. w Y C D«p#, 145.AM. Hovi York JS 




PLANET STORIES 







■i> ^ i>t>i»i ? i 



Photo Schoenfeld 



From Three Lioaia 



SUBMARINE WARFARE, as foreseen In 1883 by an again-unknown artist. This sketch 
predates by five years the launching of the first naval submarine, which, to our way 
Ef thinking! makes it valid enough scientifictioniana Note the frogmen on brf^^ 
saddle-subs. more of an innovation. Our favorite is the stiff-backed Don Qu.xote.sh 
character in lower left . . . one feels somehow that he should be *''t'"pg ^';': «, ^^t^ ' 
wheel. Incidentally, all credit for procuring these pics belongs to Planets Leptor
rhinian Pipistrelle. 



Margaret St. Clair got by using a plot tha has 
been an old faithful for years and yf". Usually 
the plant gets to eat the human though Something 
like that should happen to Miss St. Clair. 

Raving about Ray Bradbury's story would be 
a useless procedure. Every one else will probably 
go no raptures over it, but I shall control myself 

fnd merely say it was gf^*. ^t"r1.tfiH I . ^ ' 
excellent, unforgettable, slobber, terr fie ! ! ! 
Why does ttat wonderful man always write 



such good stories for you good folks. Either Ray 
writes a classic (hate that word), or a near-classic, or else he writes a dud. In the past year he s 
been writing quite a few duds, but has never 
palmed one off on you. I guess you're not one of 
those editors, who, enchanted by The Master's 
name, buy everything submitted without even 
reading the dam things. Anyway, DEATH-BYRAIN was excellent. 
It was kinda cute to read, right after Ray s ex


cellent short suc^ oi his writing. 

THE ENORMOUS WORD deserves a large 
belch, such as the one in the story. 

La Vizi was pretty good this month, but the 
subject of debate is pretty much out of place. 
1 m sorry I had a hand in it. No letter section 
should be devoted to the tearing down of another's 
religious beliefs. It is not healthy for either side. 
1 am an agnostic, but I see no point in trying to 
shatter the spiritual foundations of a person who 
has found his or her answer. If they want to 
worship God, Science, Nothing, or themselves, let 
them be. They are hurting no one. But by constant 
criticism we are hurting each other and ourselves 
l^t s all try to define Science-fiction or something. 
{No, no.,. let's drop that TOO l-^Ed. ) 

Somebody wanted to know what progress is. I 
tiiink they were asking me. I think progress, in 
the ^se of a civilization, is beneficial change If 
you don t agree with my contention that religion— 
m the past mind you— has hindered progress. 
"^Vx^ru^^- ^^^ ^^^^«^^aP^ is not the place 

Whatever happened to Gardner F. Fox and his 
super-human heroes. Hmmm? When do we get 
som€ more of Brackett? (January ish—Ed) 
Howabout a novel by E. Hamilton? 

Useless questions ! ! 

Well, anyway, 

I remain very truly mine, 

David M. Campbell 

PRYOR ASKS FOR IT... 

363y2 Amar Street 
r. ,, T, San Pedro, Calif. 

Dear Mr. Bixby : 

Nobody got it, huh? I'm referring to the title 
THE ROCKETEERS HAVE SHAGGY EARS 
l-here were numerous mentions of it, derogatory 
and otherwise, but nobody made the obvious connection. 

Have none of your erudite readers branched out 
far enough to read the hilarious works of Robert 
J, Casey? One of his books was titled "The Can
doesn't'it^^^^ ^^'"^ ^'"'' ^'' ^ ^^'^^''' ^^'^^^ 

Its euphony. Maybe Bennett thought it would be 
an equally good title, slightly paraphrased, for a 
space opera— and It wasn't bad. 
As long as Fm using your time, how about a 

wrath of fandom on my hapless head. What's so 
good about this Ray Bradbury? (CRASH /^Ed) 
I ve patiently perused his stuff, yawned at the 
cndmg^and gone on with the magazine for years 
now. Yet, each following issue brings slavering 
screec^^ for more from the alle^d reade^s^ 

He takes a tired old earth-bound plot, juices it 
Z^'o^^t' ^^ ^i^^^^e^nd word-pictuVls (a la 
in i^i^^'"if^^y '^^^^^ "t^« '•ain spattered 
on the sidewalk like machine gun bullets") then 

DErS /'' Whyl^"' '''' ^'''"' ^^^ '^'' "^^^It may be sacrilege to suggest it, but if the 
Bradbury lovers would look over some of the ex! 
patriate writers' work of the '20s they could find 
"^r^ulZ' '^\TV^-'':' ^^^^"^ ^^ peddhngi^but 



THE VIZIGRAPH 



109 



GET RID df your Collonses 
CORNS GO «»^^K-*ASY 

r«r?c"^;5P'^^.i ''•'"«>^« ♦»»•. raosf Stubborn, painful old 
«fi 5v! "* i1."?^^*l *^*'y ♦'"^•- No pa!n-no fuss. You'll 
say It s worth $S0 but vf« will ruth a |ar to you prepaid 
and insured for only one dollar. Just addre«: 

END-O-CORN Rutiond 19. Vermont 



liS.rT^ STOP TOBACCO 



^^Jf^M^^ 



My three cents worth. 



Wayne Pryor 



Banish Ihe craviog for tobacco as thouMnds 
have wtth Tobacco R«<Jeemw. Wnte fw free booJt 
let telfing of injufious effect o< Wbacco arxl 
of ft treatment which has relieved many men. 

In Business Smce 1909 

^m Satisfied CDShwwrs 

THE HEWELL COMPANY 

293 Clayton $ta.» St. Louis 5, Mo^ 



FREE 
BOOK 




YOOR OWN BUSINESS FOR $S0.00 1 ! 

Ing machine business. No experience n««ftssaryuwork full or part time. Send for free catalog^ 

" fiI!;r'u,r*r«!S ^^^^ *•"'• money-making business witb nut, candy or flum vending machines 



PIONEER VEHDIHG SERVICE 



461 SACKMAN ST. • BROOKLYN 12, N. 



BLUSHFUL! DARING! 



Famous Dwiglit Fiske and 
Nan Blackstone Party Records 

tio^ PYallable by Prepaid, Imurod Mall 

ruM. ^. RECORD SERVICE 

FHI, W.O.W. Bidg., Omaha 2. Nebr. 



'*^£ fOR FREE C 



RUPTURE-EASER 

FOR MEN. WOMEN ANO CHILOREfT 

A strong, form fitting, washable sup- ••-«««»• 

pore. Back lacing adJustaWe. 8aaM 

^^r.^J^^^' Adjiulable leg strap. 

^k ^^ l^ln pad. No steel or 

leather bands. UcexcelliKl for coni' 

rort. Also used as aftcr-operatlott 

flUPiK>rt. Olr© measure around the 

lowest part of the abdomeo. Specify 

right or left dde or double. We pay •-•^x^ 

^_stage exc^ <» CODjuyp^R BBACe Cff 




308 East 12th 



Dept FHQ 



$39S 

Double 4.9S 
Kansaa City 0, M*. 



DRUNK? 



^; DOCTOICS MAR}niOU% NiW DtSCOV^kY 
{tfillEVES MUNICENNESfi IN S DAYS 

Does Drunkenness ThreaJen Your HappiMji w Your loved 
Oanl Our Rmvkabl^ Mew Discovery QuMAty and £a$»jy 
Helps Bring Relief Fron All Oetire For Uqveri With Th.$ 
Craving for Liquor Gone, No Will Ptmti U tticessary Is 
Stop Orinklftei Til* Is Sirtetly A Home Method! Easy to 
Take! Notkiac like It Before! You Can Co to Business And 
^* Carry On Your Social life As Usual, While Uiing Qui Meth\od! May t>e used ucrstly for whiskey, wmo or beerf 
Improvement Is Noticed In A Remarkably Short lime' The 
u.»^M c , . T"" ^ Amarfngly Low! 0«ly $10.00 For The Entire 
Method, Formula and Instructions! This It The Only Method Tkit 
SaarsfltNs Satisfaction or Yosr Money Refumfed! You Will Blest The 
Osf Ysa Saw Tkis As Tbcusaads Havt Already Ooai! 
Pay Postmaa On Dalhrsry! MaH Us Vsw Haas asd Address Oely! 




SCIENTIfIC AIDS CO., INC. Oept t gB Box 11 8. Jersey City 3. W J. 



S£NO 

NO 
MONSV 




FOOTBALL ACTION 



ALL-AMERICAN FOOTBALL 

MACAZINE 

FOOTBALL STORIES 

A trio ot Hard'Bitting 
Sports Magazinem • . . 

that offer a gridiron-full of fastmoving, power-laden football 
novels and short stories pins a 
brace of pigskin fact articles and 
special features. 

You can get these touchdown 

bargains at your favorite news 

stand • • • 

<HiSale 
Now 



PLAJVET STORIES 

WE HAVE A UTTLE DESK! 

P.O. Box 877, 

Grand Central Station, 

New York 17, N. Y. 

Dear Jerry : 

You too should be awarded a pic . . -the one on 
the bottom of page 95 of the Sunimer PLANET 
that's the one I mean; and you can have half ot 
t after I've used the other half for stuffing the 
crack in m'y window-payne, (Gad! that name 
again?) which suffered dire affects due to my 
tossing the Summer P.S. at same as the af erma hs^of an uncontrollable rage which seized this 
erudite person when he noted that his fine, long 
and edifying epistle was lacking m f andumb s 
hack corner, La Phizzi. , 

But to business, and don't ask me what type of, 
or I might give it to you after what you did or 
didn't do to my litter. But hearken! Why ^Wd 
I complain? Though my epistle was not there, 
ample revenge was taken upon your pointed pate 
with the appearance of the very outstanding story, 
COLLISION ORBIT, written by CLYDE 
BECK, one of my many foremost and f telligent 
relatives ... and all Becks are mtel ligent for that 
matter. And though I may seem rather biased, the 
above really was the best story m the issue. 
But in order of merit, the other tales fell m the 

'^tATAlli OF MARS, by Coppel. falls 
in second place as being a fine but very stereotyped 
composition of a very old theme ; could ve been 
hackier though if not for the crafty pen of author 
Coppel, who seems the sort of author who can 
make the worst tale appear as one of the best 
FLOWERING EVIL-a typical Maggie St. Clair 
yarn, written in the spirit of her Oona & Jick 
tales of yore ... and I've often wondered why all 
her stories, although well written keep on having 
the similar style as her past ones do! ! Third Place 

DE\TH-BY-RAIN. was a fine Bradbury yarn, 
and though not his best, was good readin stuff; 
but how's about having our fair-haired boy ot the 
pulps do a lead novel for a change ! That d be a 
welcome treat, 4th for this one. And for the sake 
of conserving space the others go like this * 
MOON OF TREASON, by McDowell, 5th. 
UNWELCOME TENANT, by Dee 6th. 
THE ENORMOUS WORD, by Oberfield, 7th. 
ALPHA SAY, BETA DO by Maxwell 8th. 
SUICIDE COMMAND, by Stan Mullen, 9th. 

And as we come to the letter section of the 
latest P.S., I cannot help but note the prattlings of 
Fred Filo, who feels that all such letter ^yrlters as 
we could never contribute to the enlightenment 
of the world's masses, or so I gather from his 
baleful demeanor. On some points of his dissertation though, I can't help but fully agree with 
him, since, if it were not for the fear that one s 
letter wouldn't get printed if one did not contorm 
to certain standards of idiocy or form in lauding 
the contents of each issue properly, all letters 
would in general, have more of an air of authenticity and interest in their format ; but there seems 
to exist the stigma of doubt in all of our minds 
when e'er anyone of us takes pen in hand and 
attempts to be original and speak straight from 
the shoulder, since, "We gotta sound pleasant 
when writin' letters to the little man behind the 
big desk." Suh! I'll have you-all know that all 
this has the earmarks of a subversive form of 
dictatorship about it . . . the policy I mean. {Policy, 
helll We've never called for goo, and never 
intend to!— Ed.) But I'll disagree with Filo that 



La Vizi's epistles are "stupid trash" since it is 
qu.te evident that he hasn't taken Ig^d^Ssoml 
of the other alleged litter-columns of other zTnTs 
else he'd know tlut one doesn't have to praise "all 
of the stones of PS. all of the time" in order to 
have a letter printed, though I could be wrong on 
that poml, and I'm NOT referring to the one 

rj^tnyl—Ed) One thmg I'd welcome, and probably would be most relieved over, and that woCld 
be m havmg confidence that if a letter HAS 
somethmg to say, and would be considered of 

f^A""'"'''-'" ?'K"' ^hy not prinr'em instead of scrappmg 'em? And what of it if there 
IS a cuss word or more included! You could II^iT H^'i-'^*''- substitute it one way or ti.e 
come changes ever to be made in aiiy STF publ 

DOFq Uf ^"^ '\°'^ ^'J^ "t''" «nags that ther« 
UOES exist an unbiased and warm fan-letter! 
column wherein you DON'T necessarily have to 

about how-wonderful-the-editor-is-looking. 
Before we leave the cold shores of Manhattan. 

mLwS^f Johnson and Rodney Palmer... and 
many thanks for remembering me. Rod ! 

And with the strumming of our ukeleles we hid 
SS%^"l;l*«fjlj>rk again next Spring ^\^'J 
me I'ail i'.b.— Egad ! Wot a seasonal time warp! I 

Calvin Thos. Beck 
Pres. of the American 
Science-Fantasy Society 
To repeat, there's no "letter policy" here at PS 
Any mterestmg well-written letter has an odds'. 

Z,ts OnV^ '"'•"■"^ '*'^''"' «"i^'*^'' 'V raves or 
rants Only requirements are: double-space it on 
one side of the sheet, and keep itdoZtotwo 
pages or thereabouts . . . which. chuZ L hZ 
come we chopped two pages out 'of yZ ^presZ 



THE VIZIGRAPH 




"Sine* 188$'* 



^^.^k relief with Denf». Use Dent's Tooth Gum 
or Dent's Tooth Drops for cavity foothoches. 
Use Oont'j Dental Poultice for pain of lore^ 
ness m gvm% or teeth. At all drug stores. 



TOOTH GUM 
TOOTH DROPS 
DENTAL POULTtCE 



DENT'S 



WEAKEST LINK 

201 Veterans Village 
DearMr.Bixby: Canton, New York 

Welcome to the Siege Perilous for the h'ttle 
time that will be allotted to you before your de! 
coocooning into an author or sometliinl.^ 

The summer issue of PLANET is a irreat 

FI^^^'h"!" 7/ '*°'y. *^ ^°'-t'' far more thaH the 
two and a half cents it cost me-in fact there are 

FLOWER?NT-°FV?f"?"i,^^^^^^' St. Clafr's 
I'l.UWtKING EVIL is her usual gem of resourcefulness m humans in the future and Brad 
fr'inO DEATH-BY-RAIN is the most immed^fe 
transference of sensation tliat I can remember 
Roger Dee's UNWELCOME TENaStTs a^ 
effective variation on the possession theme most 

WORn"lf= .Z\^^^'¥<^'' ENORMOUS 
WORD s notable for the language of tlie aliens 
McDowe I's MOON OF TREASON, with "ts 
well-motivated fast-moving action comain a b 
of description m its fifth paragraph (the warming 
of he space ship) which keeps a story realS 
tors may come and go. but PLANET certahSV 
keeps spinning beautifully. ' 

I must get in my pennyworth on the 'what is 

define a ^pe of fiction by its effects and funcHftnT 
Sc.ence-fict.on is certainly set apart from Xr 
fichon only by its content, which seems to te the 
domgs of md.v,duals as they are affected by s^i«! 
tific discoveries and the scientific method TWs 



Do You Want to 

make Men OBEY YOU? 

watit to make him say, "DarliW. 
I ^\^ZXrL^^' I worship you. Fl 
do ANYtelNG for if^QtZI" Do 
you ^vant to make him OBEY 

CIIE;Z-E:i,I,JR (\Vhat a Perfmnc) 
to help you CONTROI, Men. One 
woinau told me that CHEZp.IvE is the STRONGEST perfume she ever used. Another 
wotnan told us that she blrssel 
5?r« ^ay «be first used CHEZcomes homo at night to hdi *hS°''' "'''' ^^'^ ^"'^^"^ 

a Trll^BltTeVfTHETELLE^fe "'^^J T^^ "«'^ 
you When the I^man^eKc^z^^ELLE In^ ^^ 

packa^re, deposit only $2 plus post^e a W «a -f^Pl**" 
«i thxs guarantee: Use CHE^ELT w P Vn^^^'"" 

TRIflOVf. S8 Walker Streef, Oept. J45.AC. New York 13 




Illustrated Comic Booklets 

assorJ^^hJlTV"*' ^^^P*^^ °P^" '•^^^iP of $1 00 or 7S 

« Hm A "='*SAC SALES CO. 

« Hff» Av»nu« D,pt. lf.7J N.w York 3. N. Y. 



BOOKIiETS 

address and mail to- ^- ^- ^' ^^"^ n»°>® "^^ 

28 Cooper Sf Uon, N«nr York 3, N. Y. 



ULUSTMTEO COMIC 
^ BOOKLETS 

THE KtND MEM UKet 

(VEST POCKET SIZE) 
1 toe»f are loaded with rare carV ^S^^^SlF'''^ and Humor. 
)20MFF£tf£NT booklets 

^ »««»» prepaid for $1 in plain 

nRAviTrh i^^ — T »^^e<l wrapper. NoC.O.D.'a. 




112 



makes any happenings in the f"*"!^ =^''i"'^^f 3'^em 
the proper content of science-fiction as we seem 
certain that the future will be at lea^t. Partly determined by scientific discoveries, but it would also 
Xw the writing of DeKruif (if it had plot and 
more direct characterization) in such works as 
Microbe Hunters (and if the events were ficiwnal, 
not historical) to be accepted into the genre. 

It is true that a steady diet of science-fiction 
may have certain definite effects on a reader. 1 am 
Schned to think that one of these effects is a sort 
of pre-conditioning of society (that part of society 
which reads the stuff) to accept and deal with the 
mprobable in an effective and mature way; but 
hat's beside the point. Any fan who has tried to 
'sell' science fiction to someone who can t get the 
point should know better than to judge sciencefiction by its 'inevitable' results. . 

I'd like to see first choice of pics go to Al Wemstein for his paragraph on the blessings of science 
anTdefense of scientists, although I d'^agree with 
him here and there. Second place to Bob Silverberg who is an inspiration to carefu reading and 
loves The Vizi in spite of us. A third to Ray 
Ramsay because 1 agree with practically everything he says and I don't want.to give him a first 
because it might sound too prejudiced '".favor of 
my own ideas. (That doesn't sound qmte right, 

^"0ne'las?iemark which I trust will arouse >x>ur 
sympathy, in spite of the fact that it will certam ly 
aSe the affections of the more superstitious 

'^NO" CHAIN "letters WILL BE FORWARDED FROM 201 VETERANS VILLAGE! Betsy Curtis 

So THAT'S liihy we didn't get our $1,000,0001 
Fie... fie.- ■ ■' 

CALLING ALL FEN 

Dear Editor: 

Ml fans in Southwest Washington are asked to 
geiin touch with Tom Daniel at Brown-Elmores, 
Sr Bill Weeks at 608 W. 1st St., Aberdeen, Wn., 
for the purpose of forming a new, and active, fan 
group No definite meetings have as yet been set^ 
but plenty of other ideas have come forth, such 
as a dub fanzine, and instructional and mechanical activities that will excite anybody. No age or 
other limits. Hurry, hurry ! t_ r_ Daniel 



PLAJVET STORIES 

Peninsula. So far, my efforts have pr?<|"ced negligible results. As a last resort, which perhaps 
should have been first, I have deeded to try advertising in the prozines. So, I would apprecmte 
U very much if you would print th-s letter m THE 

^ifSe ar""any STFen in the Newport New.s 
Hampton. Phoebus area who are interested in 
forming such a club, would you please contact 

C. Ray Bryan 

305 N. 2nd St. 

Buckroe Beach, Va. 

Phone — Hampton 7734 

Thank you very much, 

C. Ray Bryaw 



AF 34117036 
T/Sgt. Andre Von Bell, 
35th Supply Squadron, Box 45 
APO 994, c/o Postmaster 
San Francisco, Calif. 
Dear Editor : 

. . . Would like to receive letters from other 
fans especially those in my home state. North 
&^^ Will try to answer all letters, and if any 
o? vou guys or gals have any dog-eared or coverksscoplefvou would care to send to a lonesome 
;1rman tere in Japan, I would certainly appreciate 
'em very much . . . 

From just another Fan, 

T/Sgt. Andre V.Bell 

Dear Editor: 

For the Dast three months I have been attempting ?o organize a STFan dub here on the V.rgmia 



•S ALL IM FUN. NO? 

New York, N. Y. 
Dear Mr. Bixby : 

It is with a leer that I take up pen to write you 
a pome-card ... to wit ; 

ODE TO AN ODEROUS ISSUE 

Oh, PLANET'S new chief 
Is headed for grief, 

For Larchmont is here with a pome. 
With ink full of acid 
And temper not placid,, ^ , , . 

He's come to drive Bixby back home 

Your first issue's lousy, 

The artwork is frowsy, , ,. , 

The yarns except Bradbury s, stmk. 
You'll have to do better 
('s the gist of this letter) , , ^ . . 

Or PLANET will topple the brmk. 
Don't mind me, though-it was a pretty good 
issue, all told. Pm just ^^'^'^^i^^'jJ^%^ 
exam coming up tomorrow. WHAT AM 1 1X>; 
mr^ RFADING PS WHEN I SHOULD BE 
CRAMMmO ON O^ ? 

Scientifanatically yours, 

Don Larchmont 

It is with the sad smile of a crushed rabbit that 
we take up pen to answer . . . your wttf 
TAKING ISSUE WITH AN ODEROUS ODE 

Oh, comments so churly 
Do make us sore surly, 

When Larchmont with meter moroip^c. 
Does devastate PLANET, 
Does heartlessly pan it, , . /? , 

When everyone KNOWS it's tahnfic! 

His gumption is null, 
He's dull in the skull, 

He Ims all the zest of a zobo, 
The ethics of cobra, 
Aesthetics of goat, 

And knows not his brass fram hts oboe. 

Bezvare . . next time, Don, include your address 
or your missizH^ will be mislaid on P^^PP'';'' 
and bye the bye, are you aJuilhard ^^^t'^'ifft^^i 
student? If so, shake, pardner . ., many s the hour 
we've fingered the eighiyeight in those hallowed 
tractise-rooms. Luck with your exam. ^ 
"^ Well... thanks, all and one, for a ntce,wellr 

rounded Vi^igraph. T^^^' , ^^I'J^'^Z/utsL 
STORIES will be on sale September lst...se^ 

you then . . . 




RESEARCH EXPERT SAYS: 

AMAZING NEW SCIENTIFIC FORMULA «><»>••»•") 
destroys these hair-killing germs: 



Staphylococcus 
Albus 




NOTHING CAN DO MORE TO 

SAVE 
YOUR 
HAIR 

Look for these symptoms. ITCHY SCALP, DANDRUFF, UNPLEASANT HEAD ODORS, HEAD 
SCALES, HAIR LOSS! It may be nature's warning of 
approaching baldness. Be guided by NATURE'S 
WARNING! Do as thousands do: start using the NEW 
AND IMPROVED, AMAZING, SCIENTIFIC HAIR 
RESEARCH FORMULA (it contains no alcohol). 

NEW FORMULA GIVES 
BETTER RESULTS 

It kills quickly and efficiently millions of troublebreeding bacteria. This new and improved HAIR RESEARCH FORMULA now KILLS saiely and quickly 
ALL FOUR types of these destructive hair germs. 
Many medical authorities know that these hair-destroying germs are a significant cause of baldness. Do what 
science knows nothing better for you to do: KILL 
THESE GERMS, they may DESTROY your HAIR 
GROWTH. Act now, mail coupon below and test it 
at home for 10 days FREE at our expense. NO OTHER 
FORMULA known to science can do more to SAVE 
YOUR HAIR! 

GET FIVE IMMEDIATE BENEFITS 

( 1 ) KILL the four types of germs that may be retarding your normal hair growth. 

(2) HELP stop scalp itch and burn. 

(3) FOLLOW the instructions of the treatment and 
start enjoying healthful massage action. 

(4) HELPS bring HAIR-NOURISHING blood to 
scalp. 

(5) HELPS remove ugly loose DANDRUFF. 

Don't wait till you get BALD! It's too late then. Remember, science knows no cure for baldness. The NEW 
AND IMPROVED HAIR RESEARCH FORMULA 
that contains no alcohol, helps keep your scalp (that 
may be sick) free of loose dandruff, seborrhea, and 
helps stop the hair loss they cause. With this formula 
your hair will appear thicker, more alive and attractive 
almost from the first time you use it. 

HAIR RESEARCH CO.. Dept. 69 
1025 Broad Street. Newark. New Jersey 



Morococcus 



Microbocillus 



Pityrosporum 
Ovale 






SATISFIED USERS SAY 

"Nothing I have ever used has done more 
for my hair" — A, P., Trenton, N. J. 

"My friends remark how much better my 
hair looks after using your formula for 
only two weeks" — A. L., Boston, Mass. 

"No Hair Expert I have ever gone to has 
done as much for me" — H. H., Chicago, 
III 






"I was skeptical at first but took a chance, 

now after ten days' trial I am convinced. Nothing has ever 

helped me more than your treatment" — /. S., Los Angeles, Calif. 



MONEY-BACK GUARANTEE 
WITH A 10-DAY FREE TRIAL 

If the NEW AND IMPROVED AMAZING SCIENTIFIC RESEARCH FORMULA doesn't live up to your expectations, if 
you don't feel it's the best thing you ever did for your hair, if 
your hair and scalp don't appear improved, if you are not 
100% delighted with it, if after using it 10 days you don't see 
an innprovement, return the unused portion and your money 
will be refunded in full. You have nothing to lose, you are 
the sole judge. SO DON'T DELAY. MAIL COUPON TODAY! 

SENT ON APPROVAL! 



HAIR RESEARCH CO., Dept. 69 

1025 Broad Street. Newark. New Jersey 

Rush one month's supply of your NEW AND IMPROVED AMAZING 
SCIENTIFIC HAIR RESEARCH FORMULA ot once. I enclose $2.00 
cosh, check or money order, ship prepaid. My money will be refunded if not satisfied. 



Name . 



Address . 



City. 



State. 



I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
p. 

i 
I 
I 



D I enclose $5. Send three mon^ths' supply. 

I understand if not delighted with the NEW AND IMPROVED HAIR ■ 

FORMULA, I can return it after 10 days' for full purchase price refund. | 







E A SUCCESS AS A 



TBTm^ 



HNICIAN 



Jk., 

Americas Fast Gtowing Industry 
Offers You All Three ^ 



TWO 
SHOI¥ HOW 

MAIL COUPON 



I TRAINED THESE 
MEN aT home 



I OWNS sueecmuL iusineu 
■T..<iMy I »m con*idered an expert 
Radio-Televidion T.-ohnician. ! have 
r.>ur employees working in my »hop. 
Repair business hait doubled."— PAUL 
• MILLKR. TaI ■ -• 



•4DI0 CNOINEER 4BC NETWORK 




"(MAN H. I 

I U TO til WEEK IN SPAtE TIME 

I "While learninif. made »5 to|10 a 

■k in spare time Now have i spare 

e shop in my home and earn as 

hiifh as »2ft a week."— LEANDEK 

I ARNOLD. I'ontiac, Michigan. 

tERVIClNO lUSINESS PROFITMU 

V r \\,- past two years, I have been 

K my own Ser\icing business. 

•• I 'fit, 16,850. N.RJ. training 

.!• t possible."- PHILIP O. 

l)ui.,vs, b^uisviiie, Kentucky. 

^W& OETt FIRST iOI THROUQH N.RJ. 

■ 1? "^*' ""^^ ^*''*' *''** KDLR, was ob
' "g? tinned fur me by your Craduate Serv
: Ke Dept. Am now Chief Knjrine«r, 

rolK-e Radio Station WQOX."— T. 

.S NORTON. Hamilton, Ohio. 

HOFIT IN RADIO HLEVISION 

1 .-rating my own Radio Sales 

.. •! . rvice business. With FM ami 

, in, we arc louking forward to : 
» -ry profitable future."— ALBKRT ; 
I'ATKKK. Tampa. Florida. 

i SPARE TIME SERVICE FAYS WELL 

•Work only in spare time at Radio 
and average about $40 a month. Knew 
n.ithing about Radio before enrclling 
withN.R.I."_SAMUELT. DEWALD. 
J St. Clair, Pennsylvania. 



1. EXTRA MONEY ^ 
IN SPARi TIME^ 

As part of my .<orvicinu: course, I send yi>u SPECIAL 
BOOKLETS starting the day you enroll that show 
how you can make .$.'>, .510 or more a week EXTRA 
tixin^j noijjhiwrs' Radios in spare time while learnine. 
Tester you build with parts I .^end helps. 

2. COOD PAY JOB 

Your next step is a gtX)d job installing and servicing 
Radio-Television sets, or Ixx^oming l)oss of your own 
Radio-Television Sales and Service Shop, or getting a 
good job in a Broadcasting Station. In 194'), there were 
9-13 Radio Stations. Today, about 2,700 are on the air! 
Result — thousands of .lualified men stepped into gt>od 
job.s. Then add developments in FM, Two-Way Radio, 
Police, Aviation, Marine, Micro-wave Relay Radio. 
Think what this means? New jobs, more jobs, good 
pay for qualified men. 

S. BRICHT FUTUREI 

And think of the opportunities in Television. Only 19 
Stations were on the air in 1947. Today, more than 
fifty. And the experts say there will be over 1,000 
within three years. Manufacturers are producing ovfi 
100,000 Television sets a month. Be a successful RadioTelevision OiK'rator or Technician ... get in line for 
success and a bright future in America's fastest-growing industi-y! 



a^ 






I Will Train You at Home 

You Practice Servicing or Communicotions 
with MANY KITS 



^' 



2: 
o 

< 









o 

o 



31 



I've trained hundreds of men with no piwious experience to be successful TECHNICIANS. I will 
train you, too. Or now you can enroll for my NEW 
practical course in Radio-Television Communicalions. Train for your FCC operator's or technician's license. Vou learn Radio-Television theory 
from clear, illustrated lessons in my tested home 
study courses. 

As part of both my Servicing and Communications course, 1 send you MANY KITS of modern 
• quipment that "bring to life" theory you learn 



Duilding circuits, conducting experimpnts with 
th»'m, introducing and repairing defects, gi\ps you 
valuabUf, practical fxi>«'ri».'nre. (.Some of thp equipm^'nt you K»*t is shown below ) Ev<?rvthing I sond 
is yours to k«»ep 

Mail Coupon for Book* FREE 

Coupon entitles you to ACTUAL I-K.S.SON on 
Radio Servicing with many pictures and diagrams 
pln.s my 64-page book, 'HOW TO BE A SUCCESS 
IN RADIO-TELEVISION" both FREE .S,.e 

what mv graduates are doing and earning S.-nd 
coujMjn t.xiay J E. SMITH. Pr.-sid.-nt. D«pt GEO. 
National Radio ln.stitut<;, PionruT Home Study 
Radio .s. I10..I. \Va.shington 9. D C 



VETERANS 

GET THIS TRAINING 
WITHOUT COST 
UN^<:R G. I. BILL. 
MAlrC COUPON NOW.j 






% 




Yol BHiM This MODERN RADIO 

As part of my Servicing course. I .send you 
speaker, tubes, cha.ssis, loop antenna, 
transformer. EVERYTHING you 
need to build this modern Radio Use 
it to conduct many valuable tests and 
practice servicing. It's 
yours to keep. 



GoodArBoWi-rRES,^ 



Yon Build This TRANSMITTER 

As part of my Ne *• Communications course 
1 send parts to build this low-power broadcastin;? Transmitter that shows how to put a 
station "on the air." Perform procedures 
demanded of Broadcast Station operators, 
conduct many ttets, experiments. It's yours 
to keep. 



.S^ 




MR. J. C. SMITH. Prosidont, Dept. OFG 
National Radio Institute, Washington 9, D. C. 

Mail m«' .'Sample I.^'.s.son and G4-pajre Book al>out How to 
Success in Radio-Television — l>oth FREE. (No sales 
will caU. Please write plainly.i 



Name_. 



. -Ajre.. .. 






'^y^^ D Check if Veteran -< Api 



Zone SUte _ 

Approved Under G. I. Bill 



