There IS a Time 
when Your Luck 
Will Change! 

"Arid there shall be signs in the sun, and in the 
moon, and in the nations, with perplexity; the 
sea and the waves roaring: Men's hearts failing 
them for fear, and for looking after those things 
which are coming on the earth . . ." 

-St. Luke 21:25, 26. 

When the Bible was written prophecy was an outstanding feature of this 
greatest of all books. Today many scoff at predictions, yet—the Biblical 
prophecy written 2,000 years ago that the Jews would reestablish a new 
nation of Israel, has just come true! Today we know that there are 
"cycles" when wars and world problems reach fanatical heights— then 
changes come. 

Marguerite Carter has given her life to study, keeping records that may 
be used to help mankind. Of one thing you may be sure, she is honest 
and to be trusted! 

This amazing woman predicted, long before, the coming order of 
nations in World War II. In 1943 when Russia was struggling for survival, she said: "'We shall find it necessary to sit down equally at the 
peace table with Russia and concede to her wishes. Only very shrewd 
maneuvering will prevent her being the completely dominant power in 
Europe." This has come true! Now— she says— "This is the time of 
many small wars, quarrels in families and sudden home changes. 
Through it all, the United States will advance to unbelievable power 
and sound financial strength. For many, many people there will be 
completely new fields of work!" 

Test Miss Carter's accuracy for the greatest help you personally have 
ever known. Get "your * forecast for the next twelve months. Send your 
complete birthday— month, date, and year, the hour of your birth (if 
known), and the place— with a remittance of $2.00 for your forecast 
which will include Miss Carter's special notations showing "Outstanding 
Indications." Allow three weeks for proper, careful attention. Address: 
Marguerite Carter, 791 Jackson Bldg., Indianapolis 25, Indiana. 




IAMTION 

STORIES OF SCIENCE AND FANTASY 



TABLE OF CONTENTS 

JANUARY VOLUME 6 

1955 NUMBER 1 



FEBRUARY ISSUE ON SALE 
DECEMBER 30th 



WORLD OF THE DRONE 

(Complete Novel) by Robert Abernathy 6 

Today machines serve man — but in Dworn's future they were a lethal necessity: 

COMFORT ME, MY ROBOT 

(Short story) Jby Robert Bfocb 62 

In a few centuries a man may solve his marital problems simply — via homicide! 

THE DICTATOR 

(Short story) by Milton Lesser 74 

Ellaby had been trained as an assassin; the trouble was, so had his victim! . . . 

THE HAND 

(Short story) by Jerry Sob/ 88 

Dobie was a good hunting dog— so when he met an alien he did the natural thing! 

BROWN JOHN'S BODY 

(Short story) .....by Winston Marks 100 

Erd Neff had his share of money and enemies. Plus a talented — and vicious— pet! 



ifff^ y »■ « ii ■ M if 



• • • ■HHIIIIIIIIIII|llll 

THE EDITORIAL „ 4 

DEATH RAIN 61 

TERRAN TELEVISION 87 

PHYSICS IS A MADHOUSE! 98 



FANDORA'S BOX 112 

SCIENCE FICTION LIBRARY 121 

LETTERS FROM THE READERS 122 

XMAS SUBSCRIPTION OFFER 130 



Editor 



3, 



*J4antiin 



ranceS ^tamling. 
Managing: Editor 



Art Editor 



Front cover painting, "Traffic Mishap, 1990" by Harold McCauley 
Interior illustrations by Richard Loehle and W. E. Terry 
Cartoons by Tupper, Scheffy, and Danch 

Published monthly by Greenleaf Publishing Company, 1426 Fowler Avenue, Evanston, Illinois. Entered as 
second-class matter at the Post Office at Evanston, Illinois. Additional entry at Sandusky, Ohio. Address 
all communications to IMAGINATION, P. 0. Box 230. Evanston, Illinois. We do not accept responsibility 
for unsolicited manuscripts or art work; submissions must be accompanied by stamped, self-addressed return envelopes. Accepted material is subject to whatever revision is necessary to meet requirements, and 
Will be paid for at our current rates. The names of all characters used in stories are fictitious; any resemblance to any person living or dead is coincidental. Copyright 1954, Greenleaf Publishing Company. Subscription rate $3.00 per year. Advertising) rates sent upon request. Printed in U.S.A. by 
Stephens Printing Corp., Sandusky, Ohio. 



3 



RECENTLY one of our eminent figures in the critical 
world of literature — Clifton 
Fadiman — voiced a profound observation on what constitutes science 
fiction. Moderating a new radio 
program called Conversation, on 
which he had as a guest Aldous 
Huxley, Mr. Fadiman summed up 
science fiction by referring to it 
as wild daydreams of imaginative 
men. Surprisingly Mr. Huxley 
took no issue with this definition — 
which certainly included him! 

MR. Fadiman probed his subject endeavoring to discover 
why science fiction was popular, 
and in particular why people in 
technological fields seemed to favor 
it. He ran the gamut of escapism to 
reasons of a quasi-religious nature. 
For a man of his erudite stature it 
is surprising to us that the obvious 
reason escaped him. But then, 
even Aldous Huxley seemed befuddled on the subject. 

GENTLEMEN, what prompted 
Columbus to pit hs puny fleet 
against the mighty Atlantic? 
Fame, fortune, surely, but paramount the adventurer's instinct, 
the quest for knowledge, achievement, the braving of a vast unknown. Similarly our early settlers who foraged across this continent, breaking a trail, charting 
a course for other men to follow. 



What, we ask, is so wild in the desire to venture into space — the last 
and greatest frontier man faces — 
the greatest challenge to the human race. 

IT'S as simple as that. Nothing 
to probe to profound depths 
for. Space flight — the backbone 
of science fiction — is the world of 
tomorrow. Writers and readers of 
science fiction recognize this and 
enjoy speculating on man's forthcoming great adventure. Messers 
Fadiman and Huxley, we're 
ashamed of you. Even fans of 
Captain Video could have told you 
the facts! wlh 




Dworn knew that if his machine failed him 
in battle he would die. For men fought each other 
viciously, with no bond of brotherhood, in this— 



World Of The Drone 

h 

ernalltij 



THE beetle woke from a 
dreamless sleep, yawned, 
stretched cramped limbs 
and smiled to himself. In the west 
the sunset's last glow faded. Stars 
sprang out in the clear desert sky, 



dimmed only by the white moon 
that rose full and brilliant above 
the eastern (horizon. 

Methodically, suppressing impatience, he went through every 
evening's ritual of waking. He 



8 



IMAGINATION 



checked his instruments, scanned 
the mirrors which gave him a 
broad view of moonlit desert to his 
left. To the right he could see 
nothing, for his little armored. machine lay half-buried, burrowed 
deep into the sheltering flank of a 
great dune; all day long it had 
escaped the notice of prowling 
diurnal -machines of prey. He listened, too, for any sound of danger 
which his amplifiers might pick up 
from near or far. 

The motor, idling as it had all 
day while its master slept, responded to testing with a smooth, almost noiseless surge of power. The 
instruments were in order; there 
was plenty of water in the condenser, and though his food supply 
was low that shouldn't matter — 
before tonight was done he would 
be once more among his people. 

Only the fuel gauge brought an 
impatient frown to his face. It was 
menacingly near the empty mark — 
which meant he would have to 
spend time foraging before he could 
continue his journey. Well ... no 
help for it. He opened the throttle. 

The beetle's name was Dworn, 
and he was twenty-one years old. 
The flesh and blood of him, that is. 
The rest, the steel-armored shell, 
the wheels and engine and hydraulic power-system, the electric 
sensory equipment — all of which 
was to his mind as much part of 



his identity as his own skin, muscles, eyes and ears — was only five 
years old. 

Dworn's face, under his sleeptousled thatch of blond hair, was 
boyish. But there were hard lines 
of decision there, which the last 
months had left . . . Tonight by the 
reckoning of his people, he was 
still a youth; but when tomorrow 
dawned, the testing of his wanderyear would be behind him, and he 
would be adult, a warrior of the 
beetle horde. 

Sand spilled from the beetle's 
dull-black carapace as it surged 
from its hiding-place. It drifted, 
its motor only a murmur, along the 
shoulder of the dune. Dworn eyed 
his offending fuel gauge darkly; he 
would very much have liked to be 
on his way at top speed, toward the 
year's-end rendezvous of the horde 
under the shadow of the Barrier . . 

He began cruising slowly, at random, across the rolling moonlit 
waste of wind-built dunes, watching for spoor. 

He spied, and swerved automatically to avoid, the cunningly concealed pit of a sand devil, strategically placed in a hollow of the 
ground. Cautiously Dworn circled 
back for a second look. The conical 
pit was partly fallen in, unrepaired; 
the devil was obviously gone. 

The burrowing machine would, 
Dworn knew, have had fuel and 



WORLD OF THE DRONE 



9 



other supplies somewhere in its 
deep lair, buried beneath the drifted 
sand where it spent its life breathing through a tube to the surface 
and waiting for unwary passers-by 
to skid into its trap. But Dworn regretfully concluded that it would 
not be worth while digging on the 
chance that whatever had done 
away with the devil had not rifled 
its stores ... He swung the beetle's 
nose about and accelerated again. 

On the next rise, he paused to inspect the track of a pill-bug; but to 
his practiced eye it was quickly 
evident that the trail was too old, 
blowing sand had already blurred 
the mark of heels, and the bug 
probably was many miles away by 
now. 

A mile farther on, luck smiled on 
him ait last. He crossed the fresh 
and well-marked trail of a caterpillar — deeply indented tread-marks, 
meandering across the dunes. 

TTE began following the spoor, 
^ still slowly, so as not to lose it 
or to run upon its maker unawares. 
A caterpillar was a lumbering mon^ 
ster of which he had no fear, but it 
was much bigger than a beetle, and 
could be dangerous when cornered. 
Dworn had no wish to corner it; 
the caterpillar itself was not the object of his stalking, but one of its 
supply caches which according to 
caterpillar custom it would have 



hidden at various places within its 
range. 

The trail led him uphill, into a 
region cut by washes — dry now, 
since the rainy season was past — . 
and by ridges that rose like naked 
vertebrae from the sea of sand 
that engulfed the valley floor. 

Several times Dworn saw places 
where the caterpillar had halted, 
backed and filled, shoved piles of 
earth and rocks together or scraped 
patches of ground clear with its 
great shovel. But the beetle knew 
his prey's habits of old, and he passed by these spots without a second 
glance, aware that this conspicuous 
activity was no more than a ruse 
to deceive predators like himself. If 
Dworn hadn't known that trick, 
and many others used by the various non-predatory machine species which manufactured food 
and fuel -by photosynthesis, he 
would have been unfit to be a 
beetle — and he would never have 
lived through the wanderyear 
which weeded out the unfit according to the beetle people's 
stern immemorial custom. 

At last he came to a stop on a 
rocky hillside, where the tracks 
were faint and indistinct. Carefully scanning the ground downslope, he saw that his instinct 
had not misled him— 'the caterpillar had turned aside at this 
place and had afterward returned 



10 



IMAGINATION 



to its original trail, backing and 
dragging its digging-blade to obliterate the traces of its side excursion. 

Dworn grinned, feeling the 
stirring of the hunter's excitement 
that never failed to move him, 
even on such a prosaic foraging 
expedition as this. He sent the 
beetle bumping down the slope. 

The blurred trail led into the 
sandy bed of a wash at the foot 
of the hill, and along that easilytraveled way for a quarter mile. 
Then the stream made a sharp 
bend, undercutting a promontory 
on the left and creating a high 
bank of earth and soft white rock. 
Dworn saw that a section of the 
bank had collapsed and slid into 
the gully. That was no accident; 
the mark where a great blade 
had sheared into the overhang was 
plain to read, even if it had not 
been for the scuffed over vestiges 
of caterpillar tracks round about. 

Dworn halted and listened intently, his amplifier turned all 
the way up. No sound broke the 
stillness, and the black moonshadows within range of his vision 
did not stir. 

He nosed the beetle carefully 
up to the heap. He had no equipment for moving those tons of 
soil and rock, but that was no matter. He twisted a knob on the 
control panel, a shutter in the 



beetle's forward cowling snapped 
open and a telescoping drill thrust 
from its housing, chattered briefly 
and took hold, while the engine's 
pulse strengthened to take up the 
load. 

Twice Dworn abandoned fruitless borings and tried a different 
spot. On the third try, at almost 
full extension the drill-point 
screeched suddenly on metal and 
then as suddenly met no more resistance. Dworn switched on the 
pump, and quickly turned it off 
again; he swung the overhead 
hatch open, and — pausing to 
listen warily once more — clambered out onfo the cowling, in the 
cold night air, to open the sample 
tap at the base of the drill and 
sniff the colorless fluid that trickled from it. 

It gave off the potent odor of 
good fuel, and Dworn nodded to 
himself, not regretting his caution though in this case it had not 
been needed. But — clever caterpillars had been known to bury 
canisters of water in their caches, 
poison for the unsuspecting. 

THE pump throbbed again; 
there was the satisfying gurgle of fuel flowing into almostempty tanks. Dworn leaned back, 
seizing the opportunity to relax 
for a moment in preparation for 
the strenuous journey still before 



WORLD OF THE DRONE 



ii 



him. 

But he didn't fail to snap alert 
when just as the gauge trembled 
near the full mark, he heard pebbles rattling on the hillside above. 
Immediately thereupon he became 
aware of the grind of steel on 
stone and the rumbling of an imperfectly muffled engine. 

In one smooth rapid motion 
Dworn switched off the pump, 
and spun the drill control. As the 
mechanism telescoped bade into 
place, he gunned his engine, and 
the beetle shot backward and 
spun round to face the oncoming 
noise. 

A squarish black silhouette 
loomed high on the slope above 
the overhanging bank, which rose 
so steeply that a stone loosened 
by turning treads bounded with a 
clang off the beetle's armor in the 
wash below. The caterpillar baited momentarily, engine grumbling 
to take in the scene. 

Dworn didn't linger to learn 
its reaction at spying a looter. A 
snap shot from his turret gun exploded directly in front of the 
other machine, throwing up a 
cloud of dust and — he hoped — 
confusing its crew. And the 
beetle was fleeing around the 
bend in the stream bed, keeping" 
close to the high bank. 

A score of yards past the turning, intuition of danger made 



Dworn swerve sharply. An instant 
later, the ground blew up almost 
in his face— the bend had brought 
him into view, under the guns of 
the enemy above. 

He wrenched the beetle around 
'in a skidding turn and raced 
back for the bend where the 
overhang afforded shelter. Another 
shell and another crashed into 
places he had just left, and then 
he was safe— for the moment. 

But it was an uncomfortable 
spot. The caterpillar rumbling 
wrathfully on the slope above 
him, couldn't see him as long as 
he hugged the hank, undercut by 
the water that flowed here in the 
rainy season; but, by the same 
token, he couldn't make a dash 
for safety without running the 
gauntlet of a murderous fire in 
the all-too-narrow way the stream 
bed offered. In open country, he 
would not have hesitated to count 
on his ability to outmaneuver 
and outshoot the caterpillar. . . 
but here he was neatly trapped. 

And it was nerve-racking to be 
unable to see what the enemy was 
about. It seemed to have halted, 
judging the situation just as he had 
been doing. Now, though, he heard 
its engine speed up again, and the 
grinding of its treads came unmistakably closer. His ears strained to gauge its advance as it came 
lurching down the slope, till it 



12 



IMAGINATION 



sounded only a few feet away 
and Dworn braced himself to 
shoot fast and straight if it started 
coming down over the bank. Then 
it paused again, and sat idling, 
hoping no doubt that he would 
panic and show himself. 

He didn't. The caterpillar's engine raced up once more and began to labor under a heavy load. 
There was an increasing clatter of 
falling stones. Then Dworn remembered the great digging-blade 
it carried, and realized what it 
was going to try. 

Ten feet to his right the bank 
began giving way. Tons of rubble 
thundered into the gully. Dworn 
winced and moved away as far as 
he dared. He heard the caterpillar 
back and turn, then it snarled 
with effort once more and another 
section of the overhang caved in 
with a grinding roar. 

Inside minutes at this rate, 
it would either have driven him 
from his refuge or buried him 
alive. Now it came rumbling forward for the third time; rocks 
showered from the rim directly 
above his head, and he saw the 
bank begin to tremble. 

DWORN braced himself. Even 
as the wall of earth and rock 
began leaning outward above him, 
he gave his engine full throttle. 
The wheels spun for one sicken


ing instant, then the little machine 
lunged' forward from beneath the 
fresh landslide and was climbing, 
bucking and slewing, up the slope 
of loose soil created by the ones 
before. 

The caterpillar loomed black 
and enormous on his left hand, 
so close that it could not have 
brought its guns to bear even if 
its crew had expected the beetle 
to take this daring way out. 
With its shovel lowered and halfburied, it could not swing round 
quickly — Dworn had counted on 
that. 

As the beetle's flank cleared 
the corner of the digging blade with 
inches to spare, Dworn's gun turret passed in line with the space 
between the blade and the caterpillar's treads, and he jabbed the 
firing button. The explosion 
wreathed the monster's forward 
half in smoke and dust, and into 
that cloud it tilted forward, teetered ponderously and then slid 
headlong to the bottom of the 
wash as the loosened bank gave 
way conclusively under its great 
weight. 

Dworn looked back from the 
hill crest to see it still floundering, 
treads furiously churning sand, 
struggling to fight clear of the 
avalanche it had carried with it. 
The beetle laughed full-throatedly, without rancor. This hadn't 



WORLD OF THE DRONE 



13 



been the first nor the tightest 
corner hfc'd been in during the 
dangerous course of his wanderyear; and in that hard school of 
life you learned not to worry about 
danger already past. 

At another time, he might have 
returned to the battle in hope of 
capturing the additional supplies 
the caterpillar carried and — still 
more valuable booty — the chart 
it would have, showing the location of its other caches. But now 
he was in a hurry — this refueling 
foray had cost him a couple of 
hours, and the moon was already 
high. 

So he slipped quietly away over 
the ridge and set his course to the 
east. 

Beyond the hilly land, the terrain ironed out into level alkali 
flats where a vanished lake had 
been in the long-gone days when 
the earth was fertile. There he 
opened the throttle wide. The plain, 
white in the moonlight, rolled under the racing wheels at ninety 
and a hundred miles an hour; air 
whistled over the carapace . . . 

Impatience surged up in 
Dworn once more. Eagerly he 
pictured his forthcoming reunion 
with his native horde — and with 
Yold, his father, chief of the 
horde. 

Countless times in the long 
wanderyear — in moments when 



death loomed nearer than it had 
in the brush just past, and he 
despaired of surviving his testing, 
or in other moments, yet harder 
to bear, when the immensity of 
of the desert earth seemed about 
to swallow him up in his loneliness — he had grasped at that vision now soon to be real: he, 
Dworn, stood before the assembled 
horde, the year of his proving triumphantly completed, and he received before them all the proud, 
laconic commendation of the chief, 
his father. 

Hungrily he scanned the horizon ahead, saw with leaping heart 
that it was no longer flat. Along 
it a black line rose, and grew 
ragged as it came nearer, and became an endless line of cliffs, 
marching straight north, and south 
as far as the eye could see . . . 
The Barrier! 

Dworn recognized familiar 
landmarks, and altered his direction a little so as to be heading 
directly for the year's-end rendezvous. He knew, from childhood 
memories even, the outline of that 
vast stone rampart as it appeared by moonlight. Every year the 
Barrier formed the eastern limit 
of the beetles' annual migration, 
as naturally as the shore of the 
sea was its westward terminus. 
So it had been for a thousand 
years or more, as far back as the 



14 



IMAGINATION 



oldest traditions reached: generation after generation, hunting, 
foraging, and fighting — from the 
Barrier to the ocean, from the 
ocean to the Barrier. 

TO right and left the serried 
cliffs stretched out of sight — 
the edge of the world, so far as 
beetles knew. If you examined 
the contour of its rim, you could 
see how it corresponded point by 
point to the irregularities of the 
hilly land on its hither side. Some 
time, millennia ago, a great fault 
in the earth's crust had given way, 
and the unknown lands of the 
continental interior had been 
lifted as if on a platform, five hundred feet above the coastal regions. Or perhaps the coast had 
sunk. Legend attributed the event 
to the ancients' wars, when, it 
Was said, some unimaginable weapon had cleft the continent asunder. . . 

Dworn perforce slowed his 
breakneck pace as the ground 
grew uneven again. He guided 
his machine with instinctive skill 
over the ascending slopes and 
ridges, eyes combing the moonshadows for the first sign of his 
people. 

Then, a couple of miles ahead, 
he glimpsed lights. His heart 
bounded up — then sank with a 
prescient dismay; there was some


thing wrong — 

The fires that winked up there 
— four, no, five of them, under the 
very rim just before the cliffs 
rose sheer — didn't look like campfires. They were unequally spaced, 
and they flared up and waned 
oddly by turns, glowing evilly 
red. 

Dworn braked the beetle to a 
stop on a patch of high ground, 
and sat straining to discern the 
meaning of those ominous beacons. To his ' imagination, rasped 
raw by expectation and the tension of long travel, they became 
red eyes of menace, warnings . . . 
He tried the infrared viewer, but 
it showed no more than he could 
see with the naked eye. Only 
ghosts paraded across the screen, 
ghosts of the folded slopes that 
rose to the abrupt wall of the 
Barrier. Nothing seemed moving 
there; the whole sweep of broken 
and tumbled landscape appeared 
dead and lifeless as the moon. 

But yonder burned the fires. 

Sternly Dworn reminded himself that this night he was mature, a warrior of the proud 
beetle race. He thrust his fears 
resolutely aside; there was nothing to do but find out. 

The beetle drifted forward, but 
cautiously now, at a stalking 
pace. Dworn took advantage of 
the lie of the land, continually 



WORLD OF THE DRONE 



15 



seeking cover as he advanced, to 
shield him from whatever eyes 
might be watching from the silent 
slopes above. 

Boulders lay ever more thickly 
strewn as he neared the Barrier 
cliffs, and he skirted patches of 
gravel and loose stones that would 
have crunched loudly under his 
wheels. Only occasionally, emerging into the open, he glimpsed 
his objective, but his sense of direction kept him bearing steadily 
toward the fires. 

Fifteen minutes later, the 
beetle's blunt nose thrusting from 
under a shelf of rock that would 
disguise its outline if anything was 
watching, its motor noiselessly 
idling, Dworn knew that his premonitions had not been in vain. He 
looked out upon a scene that 
chilled his blood. 

The burning machines, scattered 
for two hundred yards along 
the talus slope where destruction 
had come upon them or where 
they had plunged out of control, 
were beetles. Or they had been. 
Now they were wrecks, smashed, 
overturned, fitfully aflame. 

There was no sign of an enemy. 
But here was the havoc which 
some powerful enemy had wrought, 
it could not have been long ago. 

He strove to Jind identifying 
marks on the blackened hulks, but 
in the uncertain light could make 



out at first no more than the female ornaments which had graced 
two or three of them. Names and 
faces flashed through Dworn's 
mind; he could not know yet who 
had perished here, which faces 
he would not see again. . . 

It hardly occurred to him to 
speculate that anyone might be 
left alive on the scene of the debacle. For one thing, the destruction's thoroughness was too evident, and besides, in Dworn's 
mind, by all his background and 
his teaching, human and machine 
were inextricably one; when one 
perished, so did the other . . . 

THERE was a dull explosion, 
a shower of sparks and a 
spreading glare as a fuel tank 
blew up. The flare revealed the 
pillar of smoke, blood-colored by 
reflection, that towered into the 
night above the scene. 

And it revealed more. For 
Dworn saw by that unholy light 
that one of the nearer beetlescapsized and burned out, its 
carapace burst raggedly open— it 
bore the golden scarab emblem 
which was the chief's alone. 

The sight smote Dworn like a 
physical blow, so that he almost 
cried out aloud. Somehow it had 
not even crossed his mind that his 
father Yold could 'have been 
among tihe slain in whatever dis


i6 



IMAGINATION 



aster had fallen upon the beetles 
here. . . Others might die; but 
his father was a pillar of strength 
that could not fall — the grave 
iron-willed chief, demanding and 
rewarding, for his son impartially 
as for all the people. . . 

Dworn's breath choked in his 
throat and his eyes stung. Fiercely he told himself that a beetle, 
a chief's son, did not weep. 

Not to mourn — to revenge, that 
was his duty. By the law of his 
people, the bereaved son must 
seek out and slay not less than 
three members of whatever race 
had done his father to death. Until then, his father's insatiate 
spirit would roam the deserts 
without rest. . . 

But Dworn did not even know 
as yet who had done this night's 
work. 

Suddenly, toy the new tolaze 
that still continued, he saw 
movement, a dull sheen of metal 
moving, and he froze the gesture 
that had been about to send him 
forward into the arena of death. 

The infrared was useless; by it 
the flickering firelight was blinding. Dworn bit his lip in anger 
at his own lack of precaution, and 
hastily twisted his sound-receptor 
control to maximum. The crackling of the flames swelled to a 
hissing roar, but through it he 
heard the unmistakable creaking 



sound of treads. Beyond the smoke 
moved an indistinct and monstrous shape. 

Dworn's jaw muscles set rockhard and his hand flashed to another control. His turret gun revolved soundlessly, and the 
crosshairs of the sight danced across the mirrored image of the 
approaching thing. His finger 
poised over the firing button, he 
braced himself to fling his machine into swift evasive action before the enemy's perhaps, overwhelming firepower could reply — 

The monster lumbered slowly 
into the light, canted far over 
and traveling with an odd sidling 
motion along the steep rubbly 
slope. Great treads set far out on 
each side of the squat, ungainly 
body preserved it against overturning. Its flattened forward 
turret swiveled nervously from 
side to side, peering blackly from 
vision ports steel-shuttered down 
to squinting slits. 

And Dworn relaxed. The red hatred that had blazed up in him 
subsided into mere disgust; he 
watched the great machine's 
wary progress with a familiar, instinctive contempt. It was a scavenger, huge but not very formidable, drawn from afar by the fires 
which promised loot, salvageable 
scrap, perhaps even usable parts, 
fuel or ammunition ... It could not 



WORLD OF THE DRONE 



17 



possibly have been responsible for 
the carnage; such cowardly creatures gave a wide berth . to the 
beetle horde. 

The monster ground to a halt 
amid the wreckage. Then its engine bellowed with sudden power 
and it spun half round, one tread 
spraying gravel, and backed hastily away up the slope. And Dworn 
was aware that the noise of creaking treads had redoubled. He cast 
about, and saw, laboring upward 
from below, another big machine, 
closely similar to the first. 

Both scavengers came to a stop, 
facing one another across the fading of the fires, their unmuffled 
engines grumbling sullenly. Dworn 
watched them narrowly, expecting 
the shooting to begin any 
moment. But the scavengers' way 
of life was not one that encouraged 
reckless valor. After a long minute, a hatch-cover was lifted in the 
first arrival's armored back; a cautious head thrust forth, and 
shouted hoarsely, words clear to 
Dworn's amplified hearing: 

"Better go back where you came 
from, brother. We got here first!" 

The other scavenger's turrethatch also swung slightly open. A 
different voice answered: "Don't 
talk foolishness, brother. We've got 
as much right here as you, and 
anyway we saw it first!" 

The first voice thickened with 



belligerence. "We've got the advantage of the ground on you, 
brother. Better back up!" 

"Oh, go smelt pebbles!" snarled 
the other. No doubt that was a 
scathing rejoinder among the 
scavengers. 

DWORN grimaced scornfully 
and brought his turrent-gun 
to bear on an outcropping midway 
between the disputants. Either of 
them outweighed the little beetle 
twenty times over — but at this 
juncture a single unexpected shot 
would probably send both of them 
scuttling for cover — • 

But he halted again on the verge 
of firing. For he had not stopped 
listening, and now his trained ears 
picked out another, an unfamiliar 
sound from the background of 
noises. 

It was a queer rattle and scurry, 
mingled with a high-pitched buzz 
that could only come from a number of small but high-speed motors. 
It was not a sound the exact like 
of which Dworn remembered having heard before. He went rigid, 
staring, as the sound's source came 
into view. 

A column of little machines — 
lighter even than a beetle, and 
more elongated' — advancing in single file, multiple wheels swerving 
in the leader's tracks as the column 
wound nearer along the mountain


IMAGINATION 



side. As the firelight fell on them 
they gleamed with the mild sheen 
of aluminum. Round vision-ports 
stared glassily, and turbines buzzed 
feverishly shrill. 

With astonishing bravado, the 
flimsy little vehicles, one behind 
another, came parading onto the 
wreck-strewn slope. 

And what was more startling still 
— no two of them were alike. The 
leader mounted a winch in plain 
view; behind came another machine 
fitted with oddly-shaped grappling 
claws, and next one bearing a mysterious device terminating in front 
in a sort of flexible trunk. . . Strangely, too, they didn't seem to 
carry any armament — no snouting 
guns, no flame or gas projectors. 

Despite that fact or perhaps because of it, something sounded an 
alarm deep in Dworn's mind. 

Their diversity itself was uncanny, that was certain. In all 
Dworn's experience, machines were 
the work of races whose traditions 
of construction, handed down from 
forgotten antiquity, were as fixed 
and unvarying as the biological 
heredity that made one race lighthaired, another dark. . . 

A hatch-cover clanged shut, and 
another. The squabbling scavengers had finally noticed the appearance of outside competition. 
The one upslope raced its engine 
uncertainly, swung round to face 



the buzzing invaders, hesitated. 

The newcomers, for their part, 
seemed oblivious to the scavengers' presence. Their column began dispersing. A grapple-armed 
machine laid hold on one of the 
wrecked beetles and, whining with 
effort, sought to drag it to leveler 
ground. A second, following, spat 
a burst of sparks and extended a 
gleaming arm tipped by the singing blue radiance of a cutting torch. 

The first-come scavenger growled 
throatily and lumbered toward the 
interlopers, plainly taking heart 
from their air of harmless stupidity. Behind it, the other scavenger 
came clattering up the slope to its 
fellow's aid. 

Flame bloomed thunderously 
from the muzzle of the first one's 
forward gun. The machine with 
the torch was flung bodily into the 
air and went rolling and bouncing 
down the hill, wheels futilely spinning. The gun roared again, and 
the exploding shell tore open a 
flimsy aluminum body from nose 
to tail. Motors whirred frantically 
as the pygmies scattered before the 
charging behemoth. One of them 
darted witlessly right under the 
huge treads, and disappeared with 
a brief screech of crumpling metal. 

'~pHE fight was over as quickly 
-*- as it had begun. The scavenger wheeled, snorting, and fired 



WORLD OF THE DRONE 



19 



one more shot into the dark 
after its routed opponents . . . 

Dworn muttered an imprecation 
under his breath. No chance of 
frightening the scavengers off now 
that their blood was up and their 
differences forgotten; and a lone 
beetle could scarcely stand up to 
two of them in a knock down 
fight. To rush in now would be 
suicidal. 

He gave up the idea of investigating the scene of disaster more 
closely, and backed stealthily away, 
keeping to the cover of the rocks. 
At a safe distance he began circling round, downslope. 

What he could and must do now 
was to locate what was left of his 
native horde. It had numbered 
about fifty when he had departed 
for his wanderyear; a dozen, perhaps more, had died on the mountain tonight. He must seek out the 
survivors, and help plan retaliation against whatever enemy had 
dealt them this terrible blow. 

Yet something else nagged at 
his mind, until he halted to gaze 
achingly once more toward the 
glowing embers up there, where 
the scavengers now clanked to and 
fro about their business. 

Dworn recognized that what 
bothered him was the puzzle of the 
unidentified little machines that 
had turned up on the battlefield 
only to be sent packing. During his 



yearlong solitary struggle to survive, he had developed an extra 
sense or two — and in the queerly 
confident behavior of those buzzing strangers he had scented danger, a trap . . . 

So it happened that he was still 
looking on at the moment when 
the trap was sprung. 

A star, it seemed, fell almost 
vertically from the zenith, falling 
and expanding with the uncanny 
silence of flight faster than sound. 
The scavengers had no time to act. 
Dworn caught one faint glimpse of 
a winged shape against the sky, 
limned by the flashes that stabbed 
from it as it leveled out of its terrific dive. 

One scavenger shuddered with 
the force of a heavy explosion 
somewhere within it, and subsided, 
smoking. The other too staggered 
under crippling impacts, but 
ground somehow into motion, 
spinning and sliding crazily down 
the gravel slope. Then, as the 
first attacker's shock-wave made 
the very earth tremble, a second 
and a third plunged from the black 
heights, and as the last one rose 
screeching from its swoop the 
whole lower face of the hillside 
boomed into a holocaust of flame 
and oily smoke. The fleeing scavenger was gone, enveloped somewhere in an acre of fiery hell. 

Dworn, two hundred yards away, 



20 



IMAGINATION 



felt a searing breath of heat, and 
with a great effort controlled the 
impulse to whirl round and race 
for opener ground. He sat still, 
hands cramped sweating on the 
beetle's controls, while the sky 
whistled vindictively with the 
flight of things that circled in 
search of further targets. 

When, after a seeming eon, their 
screaming died away, he released 
held breath in a long sigh. He 
found himself trembling with reaction. Still he didn't stir. He was 
ransacking his memory for something he should be able to recall 
but which eluded him — a myth, 
perhaps, heard as a child beside 
the camp fires of the horde— 

The old men would know; Yold 
would have known. At thought of 
his father, the grief and fury rose 
up again in Dworn, and this time 
he knew the object of his vengeful 
anger. There was small doubt now 
in his. mind that those flying machines which struck so swiftly and 
so murderously had been the beetles' attackers. 

But he didn't know what they 
were. He knew, of course, about 
the machines called hornets, which 
could fly and strike at fearful 
speeds like that, outracing sound. 
But the hornets flew only in daylight, and made no trouble for the 
nocturnal race of beetles. These— 
were something else. 



And more — between the deadly 
night-fliers and the harmlesslooking aluminum crawlers he had 
seen, Dworn sensed some connection, some unnatured symbiosis. He 
had heard vague rumors about 
such arrangements, but had halfdiscounted them; any of the peoples whom he knew at first hand 
would have scorned to enter into 
alliance with an alien species. 

Lastly, he realized bitterly, he 
didn't even know where the enemy's lair, their base on the ground, 
might be. . . . 

'T , HE moon stood high now. But 
the Barrier, close at hand 
now, rose like an immense black 
wall, folded in shadows, revealing 
no secrets — walling off the world 
the beetles knew from the unknown 
beyond. Involuntarily Dworn shivered. He couldn't be sure — but 
it seemed to him that the destroyers had come from over the 
Barrier and had flown back there. 

He set his machine in cautious 
motion again and stole along, making northward and keeping close 
to the Barrier. It occurred to him 
that the beetle horde, routed and 
fleeing, might well have hugged 
the cliffs for protection against 
flying foes. 

The going here was not easy. 
The terrain seemed increasingly 
unfamiliar though he should have 



WORLD OF THE DRONE 



known every foot of it. But — he 
remembered no such tumbled 
crags, no such great heaps of stony 
detritus as blocked his way and 
forced him into long detours. . . . 

Finally he halted to take his 
bearings, and, looking up, discovered what had happened. The black 
rampart of the Barrier was notched and broken. Sometime in the 
past year, since Dworn had left 
this place to begin his wandering, 
a quarter-mile-wide section of the 
upper crags, hollowed and loosened by the slow working of millenial erosion, had fallen and spilled 
millions of tons of rock crashing 
and shattering onto the slopes below. Here now water would run 
when the rains fell, and in ten or 
twenty thousand years, perhaps, a 
river-course would have completed 
the breach. 

Dworn wondered fleetingly whether any living thing had been here 
when the cliffs fell. If so, it was 
buried now, crumbling bone and 
corroding metal, under the mountain for all time to come. 

He set about skirting the rockfall, still searching the ground for 
traces of beetle wheels. But there 
were very few wheel or tread 
marks of any description to be 
seen — and that was strange in itself. 

Impulsively he halted again 
and listened, his amplifier turned 



up. He should have heard faroff 
engine-mutterings, occasional explosions from the desert to the 
west, where normally the predatory 
machines and their victims prowled and fought all night long over 
the sandy tracts and the desolate 
ridges. . . . But there was nothing. 
A silence, vast and unnatural, lay 
upon the wastes in the shadow of 
the high plateau. 

He looked up again at the fallen 
rampart of the Barrier. The great 
landship had opened, as it were, a 
gateway to the unknown lands in 
the east — a gateway for what? 

There was a strangeness here 
since last year, and the strangeness crept chillingly into Dworn's 
blood, made the mountain air seem 
thin and cold. 

As he started again, he noticed 
yet another curious thing. He was 
crossing a sandy natural terrace, 
and the soft soil here was traversed by a row of indented marks 
that marched in a straight line across the open space. They were 
scuffed depressions, such as a 
ricocheting projectile might have 
made — but oddly regular in shape 
and spacing, almost, he thought 
fancifully, like giant footprints, ten 
feet apart. . . 

Dworn was growing numbed to 
riddles. He shrugged impatiently 
and pressed the accelerator again. 

He would push, on northward 



IMAGINATION 



for a few more miles, he determined, and if he still found no sign of 
his people, he would circle back to 
the south. . . 

The moonlight shadow of the 
huge tilted boulder ahead was 
inky. But Dorn was keeping to 
the shadows by preference, remembering the death from above; so he 
cut close around the overhanging 
rock. 

Too late to swerve, then, he saw 
the gleam of something stretched 
across his path. A metallic glint 
of deceptively slender strands 
which, as the beetle rolled headlong into them, snapped taut without breaking, sprang back and 
flipped the beetle clean over to 
fetch up against the rock with an 
ear-shattering bang. 

Half-stunned 'by the suddenness 
of it and the violence with which 
he had been flung about, Dworn 
blurrily saw other cables settling 
from overhead, coiling almost like 
living things around his overturned 
machine. Then he glimpsed something else; stalking monstrously 
down from the unscalable crag 
above, its armor glimmering in the 
moonlight, a machine such as he 
had never imagined — a machine 
without wheels or treads, a nightmare moving on jointed steel legs 
that flexed and found holds for 
clawed steel feet with the smooth 
precision of well-oiled pistons. A 



machine that walked. 

Capsized, its vulnerable underside exposed, the beetle was all but 
helpless. One hope remained.- With 
wooden fingers Dworn groped for 
the emergency button, found it — 

The propellant-charge went off 
beneath him with a deafening 
roar. The beetle was hurled upward and sidewise, in an arc that 
should have brought it down on 
its wheels again — tout the ensnaring cables tightened and held, and 
Dworn's head slammed against 
something inside the cabin. The 
world burst apart into a shower 
of lights and darkness. . . . 

1TAWORN came awake to a 
pounding head and blurred 
light in his eyes. He moved, and 
sensed that he was bound. 

His vision cleared. He saw that 
he was in a closed, half-darkened 
chamber — and that discovery alone 
made him shudder, he who as a free 
beetle had spent his whole life under desert skies. His feet rested on 
a floor of hard-packed sand, and 
his back, behind which his wrists 
were lashed together was propped 
uncomfortably against a wall ribbed 
with metal girders. The room was 
circular and its walls converged upward, into tangled shadows overhead; the chamber was roughly 
bottle-shaped. 

To one side a door stood ajar, 



WORLD OF 

and it was thence that the light 
streamed, but from where he was 
Dworn couldn't see into the space 
beyond. 

He tried hard to collect his 
thoughts. When had everything 
stopped making sense? When he 
had first glimpsed the fires that 
were burning beetles on the mountainside, or . . . 

The converging lines of the wallgirders led his eyes upward. The 
shadows overhead resolved themselves as he studied them, and 
Dworn's heart pounded as he commenced to understand what manner of place he was in. The roof of 
the bottle-shaped chamber — he 
was sure it must be underground — 
was no roof, but was the underside 
of a great machine complex with 
gear-housings and levers connected 
with the six powerful metal legs 
radiating from it, their cleated feet 
resting on a shelf that encircled 
the bottle-neck. It squatted there, 
motionless above him, sealing the 
entrance to its burrow. . . 

Trapped. For some reason he 
couldn't guess at, he had been 
taken alive — his human body, at 
least; he didn't know what had 
become of the rest of him, the machine that was part and parcel of 
him too. 

The light suddenly brightened. 
The door at one side was swinging 
open. 



THE DRONE 23 

Dworn blinked at the glare from 
the lighted room beyond. Against it 
a figure stood in silhouette, and he 
saw that it was a woman. 

She was slender, not very tall, 
and her hair was jet-black, a striking frame for a startlingly pale 
face. , Here beneath the earth she 
must not get much sun. . . In that 
white face her lips were shockingly 
red, the color of fresh blood. And 
the nails of her slim white fingers 
were crimson claws. After a moment, he realized that both must be 
painted — a strange thing to him, for 
there was no such practice among 
beetle women. 

She was clad in a coverall suit 
of much the same design as the 
green garment Dworn wore according to beetle custom. But her garb 
was shiny black, and in front, between the swelling mounds of her 
breasts, was an emblem he did not 
understand; the shape of an hourglass, in vermilion red. 

She stood gazing at him, smiling 
a little with a curve of scarlet lips 
that revealed white, sharp-looking 
teeth. Dworn groped for his voice; 
but she spoke first. 

"Patience, beetle," she said. 
"I'll attend to you in a moment." 

The words had the accent of a 
strange speech, but they were intelligible. Dworn stared uncomprehendingly at her, mumbled, "Who 
— what are you?" 



24 



IMAGINATION 



She moved nearer and stood 
smiling down at him. "Why, beetle, 
don't you know? ... I'm the 
spider who caught you." 

"Spi-der?" Dworn fumbled with 
the unfamiliar word. "I don't—" 

Her eyes too were black, very 
black and intense. She said slowly, 
"You don't know about spiders, 
beetle? Strange. It must be that 
till now there were none of our 
kind on this side of the Rim." 

T~\WORN'S aching head was not 
serving him well, but a part 
of his intelligence functioned to 
grapple with the implication of her 
words. "The Rim"— that must 
mean the Barrier, as seen from 
its eastern side. Then she, and 
others like her, must have come 
from beyond the Barrier. A walking machine could descend by the 
broken path of the landslide. 

But "spider" — the word rang 
some bell deep in his mind, some 
recollection of childhood's fairytale bogeys perhaps, but he still 
hadn't succeeded in grasping the 
memory. 

He growled, "I don't know — but 
if you'd untie my hands, I'd show 
you what a beetle is." 

She eyed him thoughtfully. 
Then she smiled, showing the 
sharp little white teeth again. 
"Presently I'll free you. When it's 
quite safe. As soon as — " Her hand 



dipped to a small black case secured to her belt, and came up with a 
diminutive gleaming object— a 
slender needle thrusting from a liquid-filled plastic cylinder fitted 
with a plunger. "Do you know 
what this is, beetle?" 

Dworn glowered silently. 

"When I've injected this fluid 
into your veins, you will have no 
will of your own left. You'll do 
what I say, and only what I say — 
for the rest of your life, beetle!" 

Dworn's eyes clung in unwilling fascination to the glittering 
needle. He said through stiff lips, 
"Now I remember. Your kind is a 
legend among my people. The evil 

women who have no men 

who kill their male children at 
birth, and trap their mates from 
among the other races, and kill 
them, too, when they no longer 
want them. . . . Spider!" 

His gaze collided squarely with 
hers, and she needed no skill to 
read the loathing in it, rendered 
more violent by her beauty that 
he could not help but see. 

Her eyes dropped first. She clutched the needle and muttered 
fiercely to herself, "But when 
you've had the injection, it won't 
matter. I'll say, 'Love me!' and 
you'll love me, and 'Die!' and 
you'll die ..." 

Dworn stared burningly at the 
slim figure in black with the scar


WORLD OF THE DRONE 



let hourglass on her bosom. He was 
alert again, and his' mind was racing. To all appearances he was 
lost — but something in the spider 
girl's manner gave him an unreasonable hope. 

He said abruptly, "So. Why 
didn't you use your poison while 
I was stunned? That would have 
been easy." 

She looked away. "You ask 
foolish questions, beetle. Naturally, 
I had to prepare myself according 
to our customs. I had to paint my 
face and make myself beautiful 

He said inspiredly, "You are 
beautiful." 

Her reaction was surprising. She 
stood gazing raptly at him, lips 
slightly parted the hypodermic forgotten in her hand. Dworn sensed 
that had he been unbound, he 
would have had no trouble overpowering her. 

She whispered, "It's true, then!" 

And he realized forcibly how 
young she was— -the painted lips 
made her look much older, and the 
shadows — which he now saw were 
also painted on — beneath her 
eyes. Only a girl, and if she had 
been one of his own people he 
would have looked at her twice and 
more than twice. . . 

But above their heads the great 
spider-machine's underparts gleamed dully, straddling the sunken 



den. And the spell lasted only a 
moment. 

The girl straightened her shoulders and took a deep breath. 
"Why am I talking to a beetle? 
It's time—" 

THERE was a clang of metal 
from somewhere in the room 
beyond. The girl's face reflected 
sudden fright, beneath its painted 
mask. She spun round and took 
two steps toward the inner door, 
but even as she did so, the door 
swung wide, and dark figures 
crowded through it. 

The girl cried, with terror and 
anger in her voice, "What do you 
mean, coming into my Nest like 
this? You have no right — " 

The interlopers were three in 
number, and all of them were women, wearing black garments like 
the girl's, with the red spider symbol on the breast. The one in the 
lead was elderly, her hair wisped 
with gray, and her face was lined 
by years and passions; her eyes 
were flinty, her mouth thin and 
cruel. The other two were younger; 
one was a strapping blonde wench 
taller than Dworn, who moved 
with a powerful and formidable 
grace; the other was short, softlooking, with a child's pouting 
mouth and a queer, mad glint in 
her dark eyes. 
The older woman said, "No 



IMAGINATION 



right? You've had your own Nest 
for all of three months now, dear 
Qanya, and already you tell your 
Mother that she has no right to 
enter?" 

The girl quailed. She retreated 
step hy step until her back was 
against the wall beside Dworn, 
and met the old woman's eyes with 
a look half fright, half defiance. 

"But, of course, you have your 
reasons," the Spider Mother went 
on bitingly. Her hard eyes stabbed 
at the bound and helpless Dworn. 
"Somewhere you managed to catch 
this, and bring him in without 
letting anyone know, and paint 
your face and prepare the needle 
. . . You chose to forget that in 
times like these there are others 
of the Family whose claim to a 
mate has priority over yours!" 

"That's true, Mother!" said the 
tall blonde energetically. The 
plump girl licked her full lips and 
said nothing. 

"Quiet, Purri!" snapped the Spider Mother. Her eyes raked the 
girl Qanya again. "Well, and what 
do you have to say for yourself?" 

Qanya's black eyes flashed. "I 
caught him myself," she blazed. 
"You've no right — " 

"No right, no right," mocked the 
old woman. "Why, I believe that, 
if you'd dared, you'd have blocked 
up the connecting tunnel so we 
couldn't walk in on you. Who has 



rights is for me to decide — and for 
me to decide whether you're whipped and sent back to the young 
girls' dormitory. Until I've made 
up my mind — " She turned and 
frowned thoughtfully at her two 
companions, jabbed a finger at the 
tall one. "You, Purri, stay here 
and see that nothing happens to 
the catch, and make sure our little 
Qanya doesn't misbehave. I'm 
going to my Nest and check over 
the Family ledger, to settle the 
question of who's first in line for 
a mate. We've got to be strict, now 
that the cursed night-fliers are 
everywhere and it's been so long 
since we trapped a presentable 
male." She eyed Dworn once 
more, and smiled thinly. "He's a 
fine youth. Who knows? I might 
even take him for myself." 

Dworn had no stomach for the 
compliment. Secretly, he was 
twisting his bound hands behind 
him, trying to loosen the knots. 
Those knots had been none too 
skillfully tied, and given time. . But 
he had to desist as the tall Purri 
strode near and stood over him. 
She cast a glance after the retreating backs of the Spider Mother 
and her other proteges, then devoted all her attention to Dworn, 
surveying him in critical silence 
and with a business-like eye for 
detail. 

Qanya huddled against the 



WORLD OF THE DRONE 



27 



wall; her dark eyes were enormous, 
and tears had streaked the makeup on her cheeks. 

Purri nodded satisfiedly. "He'll 
do," she said matter-of-factly to 
Qanya. "The Mother should give 
him to me. It's a choice between 
me and Marza, really—" She jerked her head toward the door 
through which the dark, pouting 
girl had gone— "But Marza doesn't really appreciate a mate. All 
she cares about is seeing how long 
she can take to make them die." 

Qanya stared hotly at her. 
She said in a stifled voice, "You're 
a beast, and Marza is a beast, and 
» 

"Careful!" said Purri lazily. "If 
you say anything against the 
Mother, I'll have to report you." 
Arms akimbo, she looked scornfully down at the younger girl's 
tearful face. 

DWORN had been right about 
the knots Qanya -had tied. 
They were slipping. He wrestled in 
silence, hoping for a little more 
time. . . Then he was sickeningly 
aware that Qanya was looking toward him, had seen what he was 
doing. For an instant he froze. 

Qanya said hurriedly, "Any•way, you're a beast, Purri. A greedy 
one. You've had two mates already 
— why didn't you make them last? 
And I've not even had one." 



"When you're older," said 
Purri loftily, her back still turned 
to the struggling beetle, "you'll 
understand more. But you ought to 
know from your schooling that 
there are some races that mate for 
life — and among them, the males 
dominate the female. We spiders 
are above such degrading practices." 

Qanya's eyes flicked momentarily to Dworn, who was wrenching 
at the final knot. "Yes, yes, I 
know," she said. "But I still say it 
isn't fair — " 

Dworn came catlike to his feet, 
ignoring the pain of cramped limbs. 
The cord with which he had been 
bound was looped in his hands. 
With a single stride he was upon 
the unwarned Purri; one hand 
clamped over her mouth, cutting 
off outcry, and the other hand 
whipped the cord tight around 
her. She fought with the strength 
of a man, but futilely. Dworn ripped a length of fabric from her 
clothing and improvised a gag; 
when he was done, the spider woman could do no more than kick 
and gurgle a little. 

During' the brief struggle, Qanya 
had watched without making a 
sound, hands pressed against the 
girdered wall at her back. As 
Dworn faced her now, breathing 
hard, he saw fear written large in 
her face. 



IMAGINATION 



She whispered, "Beetle, you 
won't hurt me?" 

Dworn hesitated briefly. There 
was no doubt she had helped him — 
if only out of jealousy of the 
others. But at the same time she 
was a spider, a natural enemy. And 
time was desperately vital. In a 
flash of inspiration, he saw that 
there was one way to make sure of 
his escape. 

"If you're quiet," he promised, 
"I won't hurt you. Not much, anyway." Then his arm was about her, 
pinioning her, while his free hand 
snaked to her waist and plucked the hypodermic from its case. 
For a moment she struggled and 
even tried to bite him, as she saw 
what he was about to do. Then, 
clumsily but effectively, he had 
stabbed the needle into her upper 
arm and pressed the plunger home. 

He felt her stiffen and then relax, shivering, as the drug coursed 
through her blood. He released her 
and stepped back, watching her 
warily. 

"How do you like your own 
medicine, spider?" he demanded 
harshly. 

The girl stood motionless. Her 
black eyes, fixed on 'him, seemed 
to dull as if with sleep. 

"Do you hear me?" 

"Yes," she said tonelessly. 

"Do you obey me if I give you 
orders?" 



"Yes." 

Dworn grinned exultantly. It 
had worked — But there was no 
time to lose. The Spider Mother 
might return any moment. 

"Where is my machine?" 

She answered without expression, 
"I left it where it was. I didn't 
want it, I was only seeking a 
mate." 

Dworn sighed with heartfelt relief. He looked upward, toward 
the spidernmachine overhead: 
"All right. I command you to take 
me back to the place where you 
left my beetle." 

Qanya turned silently toward a 
slender steel ladder that rose to 
the belly of the crouching metal 
monster. Dworn followed her, his 
nerves still strung close to the 
snapping point, but with hope 
leaping in him. . . On the floor, the 
trussed-up Purri stared up with 
round eyes and made smothered 
noises. 

^TVHEY clambered into the spider 
through a port in its underside, past the engines and the great 
drums of steel cable which served 
to snare the spider's prey. The 
space within was cramped, barely 
big enough to hold two, and its instruments and controls were bewilderingly strange to Dworn. The 
tangle of switches and levers that 
must govern the mechanical legs 



WORLD OF THE DRONE 



made no sense at all to him, and 
he felt a moment of near-panic: if 
the hypnotic injection's magic 
should fail, he would be quite helpless here. 

Braving it out, he snapped, 
"Make it go!" 

Obediently Qanya touched this 
and that control. The spider's engine throbbed with power, and its 
legs straightened, lifting it so 
quickly as to cause a sinking sensation in the stomach. From overhead came a creaking, and a band 
of light appeared and widened, 
grew dazzling as a circular trapdoor opened on daylight. 

Dworn caught his breath. He 
hadn't reckoned with its being 
daytime; evidently he had been 
unconscious longer than he had 
supposed. But he couldn't worry 
about that. 

"Go on!" he rasped. "Outside!" 

The machine clambered stiffly 
out of its burrow; sand crunched 
under its steel feet. Blinking at 
the sun, Dwprn saw that the trap 
opened on a stretch of boulderstrewn wasteland; it must not be 
far from the foot of the great slide. 
The trapdoor was coated with sand 
to make it appear only a half-buried rock, and in the near distance 
were other, closely similar outcroppings that were very likely 
the entrances to other spiders' burrows. 



"Get us away from here! 
Quick!" ordered Dworn shakily. 

Still wordlessly, her face smooth 
and mask-like, the girl set the 
walking machine in motion. It 
moved with a queer rolling gait 
which made Dworn dizzy, though 
it stilted over the irregularities of 
the ground with scarcely a jar. 
Dworn felt nakedly exposed, riding 
high above the ground in broad 
daylight, but he gritted his teeth 
and tried not to think of the probability of attack by some dayfaring marauder. He supposed the 
spider girl, accustomed likewise to 
a nocturnal life, would have felt 
the same fear of the light, if she 
hadn't been hypnotized. 

Under the drug's influence she 
apparently couldn't speak unless 
spoken to. However, there were 
questions he wanted to ask her. 

First — "What do you know 
about the attack on the beetles last 
night?" 

"I know there was a battle," said 
Qanya flatly, without looking up 
from the controls. "I didn't see it, 
but the Mother and some others 
were prowling at the time, and 
saw. It was the flying things, 
which have given us too so much 
trouble." 

That, if true — and he judged 
that it must be true— confirmed his 
prior suspicion, and killed another 
suspicion he had entertained for a 



30 



IMAGINATION 



little while— that the spiders themselves might have been the ambushers. He demanded, "What do 
you know about those nightfliers?" 

"Very little. We do not know 
just what they are or where they 
came from. They began appearing 
hereabouts only four months ago, 
which was three months after the 
Rim collapsed and the Mother decided that we should descend and 
try the hunting on this side. Since 
then they've grown more and more 
numerous. They fly by day as well 
as by night, and attack everything 
that moves. They've taken several 
of our Family, and I think they've 
made heavy depredations on the 
peoples that inhabit this region. We 
spiders would have abandoned the 
location before now, but we feared to be caught migrating in the 
open. . . ." 

TTAWORN gazed apprehensively 
out at the glaring desert that 
was rolling past the spider windows. The news that the aerial killers also operated by day was most 
unwelcome. But as yet there was 
no sign of an enemy. 

He said, "The little ground 
machines — unarmored, made of 
aluminum. They're allied in some 
way to the flying ones, aren't 
they?" 

"We think so. Wherever the fly


ing machines have made a kill, the 
crawlers appear before long to 
carry away the spoils. And if 
they're attacked— the fliers come 
swooping down within minutes to 
defend or avenge them. So most 
of the other inhabitants have 
learned to leave the crawlers alone; 
it's extremely dangerous to meddle 
with them." 

Dworn could confirm that fact 
from his own observation. 

Evidently the spider folk, even 
though they came from beyond the 
Barrier as the mysterious others 
apparently had too, knew little 
more than he himself had already 
discovered. But — there was one 
more question. 

"Do you know," he asked tensely, "where, these strangers' home 
base is? .Where do they fly from?" 

The girl looked doubtful. 
"We're sure only that it's somewhere beyond the Rim, Where we 
used to live." 

That much, too, he had guessed. 
Dworn subsided into glum silence, 
as Qanya impassively guided the 
machine on its way, covering distance at a surprising speed. 

Then, even by the unaccustomed 
daylight, Dworn recognized first 
one landmark and then another, 
and knew they were approaching 
the spot where he had been trapped 
last night. A weird return, riding 
as master in the monstrous ma


WORLD OF THE DRONE 



3i 



chine that had snared him! 

As the great tilted rock hove in 
view, Dworn strained for the first 
glimpse of his' abandoned vehicle. 
When he saw it, lying still overturned in the shadow of the boulder, he sighed in relief. Its door 
was ajar, where Qanya must have 
dragged him stunned from the machine last night .... but it appeared unscathed. The fear at the 
back of his mind, that scavengers 
might have happened on it — in 
which case they would have had it 
dismantled and carried away by 
now — was happily unrealized. For 
that he perhaps had partly to 
thank the_ enemy against whom he 
had sworn vengeance, the flying 
fiends who had decimated and terrorized the peoples native to this 
land. . . . 

"All right," he ordered. "Stop 
here!" 

The walking machine crunched 
to a halt, standing almost over the 
beetle. Dworn looked at the spider 
girl, then, in irresolution. 

In the pitiless daylight she was 
still piquantly beautiful, though 
her pale face was still smudged 
with the remnants of her ceremonial make-up and her eyes were veiled, withdrawn. Yes, she was even 
desirable. . . Dworn put that 
thought determinedly out of his 
head. After all, she was an alien 
and an enemy; she had sought to 



make a doomed slave of him. 

But now that her usefulness to 
him was over, he didn't know just 
what to do about her. The sensible 
thing would be, of course, simply 
to kill her. Somehow he felt that 
he couldn't do that. It was one 
thing to kill in the hnpersonal 
fury of machine combat, a different matter when the victim was 
helpless within your reach . . . And 
he remembered that she had helped 
him escape. 

He could command her to return 
to her people, to the tender mercies 
of the Spider Mother — who -would 
know by now of Qanya 's part in 
Dworn's disappearance. Damn it, 
that would probably be worse than 
killing her in cold blood! He was 
wasting time. Angry at himself for 
his unbeetlelike softness, Dworn 
postponed deciding what to do 
with her till he should have inspected his machine and made sure 
it was in shape to travel. 

"Come along," he told the girl 
gruffly. "Outside." 

Once more she obeyed unprotesting. The two clambered out of 
the belly of the standing spider — 
Qanya staring before her with 
sleepwalking fixity, Dworn nervously scanning sky and horizon 
for hostile machines. The sunlit 
waste was terrifyingly immense 
bright, and empty. With a physical ache of yearning he longed for 



32 



IMAGINATION 



the cramped security of his own 
machine's cabin. 

He brushed past the girl and ran 
toward the upside-down beetle— he 
could easily right it with a spare 
emergency cartridge, and then he 
would be on his way in a normal 
world again— 

He stopped short with one hand 
on the beetle's dull-black steel 
flank. The world seemed to rock 
around him. 

'T^HE girl watched him without 
* expression as his face went 
slack with horror, as he completed 
his arrested movement and dived 
into the cabin to confirm the dreadful discovery that first touch 
had disclosed to him. 

When Dworn climbed out he 
was white and shaking. He took 
a few steps away from the beetle 
and sank weakly down on the 
sunarmed sand. 

"What's the matter?" asked 
Qanya. 

He turned and looked dully at 
her. He had completely forgotten 
that she was there. 

He said listlessly, "I'm dead." 

"Of course you're dead." Her 
brows puckered faintly as she 
gazed at him. "Naturally, I drained 
your fuel tanks last night — " 

Dworn surged to his feet and 
took one step toward her, fists 
knotted, blown by a gust of fury. 



She stared levelly back at him, unflinching — and he halted, shoulders 
drooping. "Ah, what's the use?" 

He should have foreseen this — 
not that it would have done any 
good if he had. The beetle's fuel 
supply had been drunk up by the 
spider now towering over them; 
and the beetle's engine, even idling 
at minimum consumption, had 
used up what little remained in 
the system, and had stopped. And 
it was as if Dworn's own lifeblood 
had been drained and his own 
heart had stopped beating. 

Qanya was still watching him 
blankly. She said, "Can't you 
■Start it again?" 

Dworn was jolted by the realization that she genuinely didn't 
understand that he was dead — • 
that there was no way of restarting an engine once stopped. Until 
now he had supposed that all races 
were the same in that respect; but 
evidently spiders were different. 
In fact, now he remembered that, 
when they had entered the spidervehicle, the girl had pushed a but-, 
ton that apparently started the 
engine. Spiders, then, died and 
came to life again every day — a 
startling notion. 

But the beetles — Among the 
thoughts that tumbled disjointedly 
through Dworn's head in this 
awful moment was a clear vision of 
the night, five years ago, when his 



WORLD OF THE DRONE 



33 



machine-existence had begun: 
when, in the horde's encampment 
by the sea a thousand miles from 
here, the beetle's last seam had 
been welded, and its engine set 
going with the appropriate ritual 
of birth The sixteen-yearold boy's heart had beaten high 
and proudly, in tune with the heart 
of steel and fire that had begun 
to throb at that moment. And the 
life expectancy of the two was 
measured with the same measure, 
the life of flesh and that of metal 
indissolubly entwined. . . . 

He mumbled dazedly, "I'm dead, 
do you hear? Dead!" 

There was a sudden howling in 
the sky. Flashing overhead, as the 
two stood momentarily petrified, 
went a shrieking flight of half a 
dozen winged shapes — stubby 
vanes slanting back from vicious 
noses, they hurtled low over the 
desert and vanished swiftly into 
the distance, dust-devils dancing across the ground in the whirling 
wind of their passage. 

Dworn stared after them, and 
his eyes narrowed. A new and desperate resolve had begun shaping 
itself in his mind. 

Of the things he had meant to 
do in life, it was no use thinking 
any more of rejoining his people. 
He was dead to them, for sure— 
not even a beetle any more, but 
only what was left of one, a ghost 



.... But a holy duty, stronger 
than death, remained to him; his 
father was still unrevenged. 

What he could do against a foe 
so powerful as those who had just 
passed over, he had no idea — -but 
perhaps a ghost could accomplish 
what a living man might well deem 
impossible. 

He motioned Qanya peremptorily toward the waiting spider-machine. "Come on. We're taking 
your machine, and we're going to 
find them!" 

For a moment she seemed to 
hesitate. . . . then she obeyed. If 
her face was paler than usual, 
Dworn failed to notice it. 

>TpHE spider-vehicle lurched and 
swayed, even its marvelous 
system of shock-absorbers protesting as it climbed steeply, straddling upward from rock to rock. 

Dworn clutched at handholds inside the pitching cabin and tried to 
combat the sympathetic lurching of 
his stomach. Qanya huddled tensely over the controls, slim hands 
flashing nimbly to and fro as with 
incredible deftness she guided the 
laboring machine. 

Dworn risked a glimpse from the 
-turret-windows, then shut his eyes 
with a rush of giddiness. They were 
climbing now up the steepest part 
of the great slide, where the mountainside had collapsed in a chaos 



34 



IMAGINATION 



of splintered rock and tumbled 
crags that would have been utterly 
impassible for any wheeled vehicle. 
Below them, the sloping valley 
floor they had left appeared from 
this height entirely flat and sickeningly far away. And still the 
cliff-heads frowning above them 
seemed terribly remote. 

''How. . . far?" gasped Dworn. 

"It can't be very far now to the 
top," said Qanya, without glancing 
up from her absorbed concentration. Both their lives- were in her 
hands; a slip, a misstep, and they 
might fall hundreds of feet among 
the jagged rocks to their death. 

For seconds at a time, the walking machine poised motionless, one 
or more of its clawed limbs groping for footholds. As it clambered 
painfully upward, it was hopelessly exposed to attack if it should 
be sighted from the air. 

Dworn, the beetle told himself 
savagely, you are not only a ghost, 
you are an insane ghost. Only a 
madman would have undertaken 
such a journey. 

The cabin heeled wildly as the 
machine grappled a ledge and, its 
engine panting at full throttle, levered itself upward a few more 
feet. 

He had commanded the spider 
girl to find the route by which 
her people had descended. But 
twice already they had missed the 



way and had arrived at dead ends 
beyond which it was impossible to 
climb higher; twice they had been 
forced to descend and search for an 
easier path. It had been scarcely 
noon when they started; now the 
sun was already sinking low. 

Dworn could not even be sure 
that he would find his sworn enemies beyond the Barrier. But the 
duty of venegeance was all he had 
left to live for, since what was to 
have been his triumphal return had 
ended in bereavement and catastrophe. 

And a dead man, thought Dworn 
bleakly, needs something to live 
for, even more than other people 
do. 

The world came level again, for 
the moment. The machine sidled 
precariously along a narrow ledge 
girdling an unscalable wall of 
rock, as Qanya sought a spot to 
resume the ascent. Dworn winced 
at the thought that the way might 
be blocked again. But, no — fifty 
yards further on, the wall was 
breached, and toppled boulders 
formed a perilous but not impossible stairway. 

Just as Qanya grasped the levers 
which would set the spider scrambling upward once more, there was 
a sound — one grown hatefully 
familiar to Dworn since the night 
before, the feverish buzzing of a 
number of light high-speed engines. 



WORLD OF THE DRONE 



He opened his mouth to hiss a 
warning, but Qanya too had heard. 
Instantly she guided the spidermachine as close as possible to the 
cliff, where the hollowed rock afforded some shelter, and twirled 
a knob that made it sink down, 
legs folding compactly. 

They waited scarcely breathing. 
A couple of times before they had 
huddled like this, while flights of 
the winged enemies whistled 
over. . . but the wingless ones? It 
seemed impossible that they should 
he up here, where surely nothing 
that ran on wheels could travel. . . 

THE head of a column of the 
aluminum crawlers came into 
view, whirring along the ledge with 
a confident air of knowing where 
they were going. One by one, the 
little machines rolled past within a 
few feet of the crouching spider, 
hastening on with an uncanny preoccupation. 

Dworn saw that, like those he 
had seen earlier, they were of diverse kinds; and several of them, 
fitted with claws and racks for 
transporting booty, were heavily 
laden now with metal plates and 
girders carved from some larger 
machine, a roll of caterpillar tread, 
a slightly bent axle . . . The last 
pygmy in line, whose afterbody 
was a bloated tank, gurgled as it 
jolted hy, and trailed an aroma of 



35 

looted fuel. 

A few yards beyond the staring 
watchers, each of the little plunderers pivoted sharply in its turn 
and without even slackening speed 
vanished straight into the cliffface. Dworn and Qanya looked incredulously at one another. 

"A tunnel!" Dworn grunted in 
realization. 

That explained one mystery, at 
least — how, if the winged and 
wingless strangers' home base . was 
somewhere above the cliffs, the 
wheeled machines contrived to forage at the foot of the Barrier. They 
must have one or more inclined 
tunnels, bored through solid rock 
for a distance that staggered 
Dworn's imagination. Emerging 
at this level, they had found or 
constructed a passable road the 
rest of the way to the valley 
floor. . . . Now he noticed that the 
ledge to which the spider had so 
laboriously climbed showed signs 
of being an often-used trail, and 
the cliffs it skirted exhibited in 
places the raw marks of recent 
blasting. 

"Remember this spot", he told 
Qanya. "If we should return this 
same way — there's evidently an 
easier path down." 

She said nothing. Dworn wondered wrily if, in her drug beclouded mind, she was aware of how unlikely it was that either of them 



36 



IMAGINATION 



would be returning from beyond 
the Barrier. 

A mad enterprise indeed — a 
ghost and a zombie, going to seek 
out a foe whose numbers and whose 
might grew ever more apparent. 
The tunnel opening here was clear 
evidence of engineering resources 
and skill far beyond that of any 
of the machine races Dworn 
knew. 

Its discovery was no help to 
them, since it was far too small 
to admit the spider. 

"Go en!" Dworn ordered doggedly. "At least we know now that 
their dwelling can't be far!" 

Qanya glanced briefly sidelong 
at him, then moved the levers, and 
the spider rocked upright once 
more and began to climb. 

'TPHE sun was low, and the 
•*■ shadows of rocks and dunes in 
the valley behind them were pointing long blue fingers eastward, 
when the machine staggered up 
the last precipitous ascent and 
stood on level ground at the summit. 

Dworn took a deep breath and 
looked ahead, looked for the first 
time in his life upon the unknown 
land beyond the Barrier. 

At first glance, it differed little 
from any of the desert country 
where he had lived all his life. The 
ground shelved gradually away 



from the rocky rim on which they 
stood; far off, against the darkening eastern sky, blue mountains 
rose murkily, but between here 
and the ranges lay a vast shallow 
depression, an arid sink floored 
with wind-rippled sand. Perhaps it 
had been a lake-bed once, before 
natural or unnatural cataclysms, 
and the millennial drying-up of all 
this country, had emptied it of 
water. Or perhaps — as its circular 
form suggested — it was one of 
those other, mysterious depressions 
which were scattered irregularly across the face of the earth where 
no lakes had ever been; those, 
legend said, were soars left by the 
ancients' wars. 

The rich light of the declining 
sun fell at a shallow angle into the 
miles-wide bowl and brought out 
with startling clarity the maze of 
wheel-tracks, crossing and crisscrossing, which covered its sandy 
expanse and testified to a fever 
of recent machine activity there. 
The light gleamed, too, here and 
there, upon scurrying metallic 
shapes, that raced by ones and 
twos or in trickling columns to and 
from the center of the bowl, where 

Dworn strained his eyes and his 
capacity for belief in an effort to 
make sense of the structures there, 
miles away. He was not very successful, for the scene was. too un


WORLD OF THE DRONE 



37 



like anything be had ever looked 
on before. 

There were certain races which 
built stationary dwellings — Dworn 
knew of the scale-makers who 
lived, in colonies sometimes of considerable size, beneath individual 
armored, anchored domes sunk into the face of some impregnable 
rock; he knew of the sand devils 
with their pits, and now he had 
seen also how the spider people 
nested. But the huge buildings that 
loomed yonder, lowering and 
windowless, and the winged things 
clustering thick on the ground 
about them, were such as he had 
never seen in his nomadic life. 

Atop a slender tower that 
spired above the squat structures 
he could make out something which 
turned and turned, something like 
a broad net of lacy wires, revolving 
steadily from east to west, from 
north to south. Strange, too, the 
smooth-surfaced ways that radiated outward in four directions, like 
an immense cross, broad paved 
roads that came to abrupt dead 
ends a mile or more from the central buildings .... After a moment, 
though, he guessed that those were 
runways for the aircraft which 
flew from this place. 

The unknown builders were obviously a mighty people, a people 
who had perfected their peculiar 
form of organization on a gigantic 



scale. And a people who acted and 
thought strangely; for their behavior, as Dworn had observed it, 
suggested a chilly-blooded and fanatic discipline, a regimentation 
which he found monstrous and repellent. 

Dworn turned questioning eyes 
on Qanya. 

"I Don't know what they are," 
she answered his unspoken query 
in a voice that faltered. "I remember this valley. But a few months 
ago it was uninhabited. All this 
has been built since then." 

DWORN hesitated. He was seeing very clearly now just how 
hopeless this mad expedition was. 
Nevertheless, he had sworn vengeance, and he could at least perish 
with honor. 

But — Seeing the fear in Qanya's 
face, it came to him sharply that, 
after all, she had no part in his 
blood feud. She had served him 
well by bringing him this far. The 
vague plans he had had, of using 
the spider-machine for an attack on 
the enemy, stood revealed as rankest folly. Big and powerful as the 
spider was by ordinary standards, 
against such as those it could accomplish little more than a man 
with his bare hands. 

Which was what Dworn would 
be — He stifled further reflection, 
said crisply: "You can go now. 



38 



IMAGINATION 



I'll remain here; I have a duty 
to perform. But you can return — 
go make your peace with your 
people, or whatever you like." 

Qanya's black eyes met his 
squarely. "I won't," she said. 

"Now see here — " Dworn began, 
and broke off, thunderstruck. 

"B-but," he gulped, "you can't 
disobey me. The drug, the spider 
poison — " 

"Doesn't work on a born spider. 
I must have neglected to mention 
that, naturally, we're all immunized against it." She smiled with a 
flash of those sharp white teeth. 

"Then — then — " Dworn stumbled, feeling his preconceptions 
tossed helter-skelter. "Then you 
must have come with me — of your 
own free will!" 

"At first," murmured Qanya, 
"I knew you'd never trust me unless I pretended .... and I was 
curious, too, to see how it was to 
be the one that obeyed. And then 
. . . well, you'd have known, if 
you'd ever seen how the drug really works. You should have realized, anyway, when I laughed at 
you. . . But you do so love to be 
masterful don't you?" 

For a moment, Dworn's chief 
emotion was one of quick rage 
at the revelation of how thoroughly 
she'd deceived him. Then the 
anger subsided and left him feeling merely foolish, as he saw that 



she'd merely left him deceive himself. And, finally — as it came home 
to him that this girl had followed 
him of her own choice into exile 
and great danger — a new and quite 
unaccustomed feeling flooded in on 
him, a queer sense of humility. 

"I'm sorry," he said confusedly. 
"I didn't — I don't — understand." 

She breathed in a barely audible 
voice, "You said I was beautiful . . 
And you hadn't the drug." 

From far away, from around 
the vast, mysterious buildings, 
came mournful hooting sounds, a 
sighing and a sobbing as of some 
mythical monster in torment. 

Dworn was rudely recalled to 
realization of where they were — 
and of the fact that, as the spidermachine stood poised here on the 
cliff-edge, it would be starkly 
visible from over there, seen 
against the setting sun. 

He gave up trying to unsnarl 
the tangle of his own feelings. He 
said hurriedly, "But you should go 
back. There's no time — I have 
to go on. But there's no reason you 
should die." 

Qanya's face was drawn and determined. "No," she said flatly. 

"I don't know what you're talking about. But I won't leave you 
now . . . ." 

The distant sighing rose to a 
whining roar. 

"Quick!" cried Dworn in des


WORLD OF THE DRONE 



39 



peration. . "Find cover. I think 
we've been seen! " 

THE girl reached for the controls and the spider's engine 
raced up. But it was already late. 
Off yonder, along that one of the 
radiating runways that stretched 
toward them, something was moving, racing swiftly and more swiftly 
outward with its long shadow following it. 

All at once the moving thing 
left its shadow behind, and' Dworn 
recognized it for an aircraft taking 
off. 

Then he had to snatch for a 
handhold as the spider-machine 
lunged into a dead run. At full 
speed on the level ground, it could 
make good time; the ground butside skimmed past at fifty or sixty 
miles an hour. 

Qanya had spied some rocky 
outcroppings, which might furnish 
a modicum of shelter, about a mile 
away and some distance from the 
brink of the cliffs, and she was 
heading for them. But the terrain 
nearer at hand was implacably 
flat— and the enemy was airborne, 
a vicious winged shape growing 
• at terrifying speed. Its whistling 
roar swelled and grew deafening. 

Qanya shouted something inaudible and pointed. Dworn understood, and, holding on for dear life 
in the pitching cabin, clawed his 



way within reach of the fire-controls. Wrestling with the unfamiliar 
mechanism, he fought to train the 
spider's guns on the hurtling attacker. 

Puffs of smoke bloomed high in 
air — but any hit on such a fastmoving target, from so unstable a 
platform, would have been a miracle. The enemy screeched overhead, and an instant later flame 
and thunder erupted all around the 
running spider. The machine stumbled and for a moment seemed 
going down, but it righted itself 
and staggered on. 

Dworn shook his ringing head 
and saw the flier banking steeply 
half a mile away, while a second 
and a third were climbing* against 
the sky, gaining altitude to dive. 

They couldn't last another 
thirty seconds, couldn't even hope 
to reach the doubtful cover of the 
rocks . . . Up ahead, two hundred yards, was a low mound, only 
a few feet high, the only nearby 
elevation of any sort. And it was 
plainly artificial, though windpiled sand had softened its outlines ; others like it' were scattered 
around the periphery of the great 
sink, and Dworn guessed their nature as he saw a column of the aluminum crawlers beginning to emerge from the side of the one just 
ahead. It must be the other end 
of a tunnel such as they had dis


40 



IMAGINATION 



covered among the cliffs . . . 

He nudged Qanya urgently, 
shouted, "Head for that!" 

She gave him a fleeting, wideeyed look. The mound's low swell 
could furnish no shelter for the 
towering spider, and the tunnel 
mouth was of course much too 
small to enter. But she veered without slackening speed in the direction indicated. 

Dworn abandoned the useless 
guns. The mound, with a gleaming line of crawlers still parading 
out of it, swept closer; and at the 
same time the desert echoed 
back the screaming onrush of the 
two new attackers. 

Dwprn wrenched open the cabin 
door with one hand. His other arm 
circled Qanya's waist, dragged her 
away from the controls. She cried 
in uncomprehending shock as he 
swung her before him into the open 
doorway. They swayed there, high 
above the speeding ground, wind 
whipping at them as the spider 
pounded blindly on. 

The mound loomed immediately 
at hand. Dworn prayed that he 
had judged the moment right, and 
with a mighty leap launched both 
of them out into space. 

A pistoning steel leg barely missed them. Even as they fell, the air 
was torn by explosions as the 
swooping fliers opened fire. 



DWORN hit the ground with almost stunning force. His hold 
on the girl was broken and he was 
rolled helplessly over and over by 
his own momentum. But he fetched 
up on hands and knees, bruised 
and breathless but unhurt. 

From the corner of his eye he 
saw Qanya sitting up dizzily, halfburied in the drifted sand that had 
broken their fall. Apparently she 
too was uninjured, but she was 
staring in horrified fascination 
after her runaway machine. 

The spider careened onward, no 
hand at its controls. It hit the line 
of crawling little machines coming 
from underground; it knocked one 
spinning end over end, and stepped squarely on another, stamping it flat. It recovered its balance 
amazingly, and loped on, even 
though one leg was buckling beneath it — 

Then it was hit dead-on by what 
must have been at least a hundredpound high explosive rocket. 

The winged killers shot low overhead wth an exultant whoop of 
jets, peeling off to right and left 
of the column of smoke that rose 
and towered where the spider had 
been struck. Out of the cloud, 
metal fragments soared glinting 
upward and arced back to earth, 
and on the ground, amid smoke 
and dust, a metal limb was briefly 
visible, flexing convulsively and 



WORLD OF THE DRONE 



4i 



growing still. 

Dworn heard a smothered sound 
beside him. A tear rolled down 
Qanya's smudged cheek, and 
Dworn thought fuzzily, Even spiders can cry. Only, he corrected, 
she's not a spider any more she's 
now just a ghost like me. 

If he hadn't been a ghost already, if he hadn't lost his own 
machine — the idea of jumping clear 
and saving both their human lives 
while letting the spider be destroyed would never have occurred to 
him. 

He came to himself, hissed, 
"Down! Keep low and maybe 
they'll overlook us!" 

They huddled together on the 
slope of the sandhill, while the 
victorious flying enemy circled 
round in a miles-wide sweep and 
began descending toward their 
base again, wing-flaps braking 
them for landing. 

And on the ground meanwhile, 
the crawlers which had come from 
the tunnel were proceeding on their 
way, leaving two of their number 
behind with strange indifference to 
their own casualties. 

"What'll we do?" quavered 
Qanya. 

Dworn had time to take stock 
of the situation. The tunnel-mound 
was, as he had seen before, the only 
cover — and that a poor one — for 
a considerable distance. It w'as all 



of a quarter mile to the ed'ge beyond which the cliffs fell away. 

He tried to sound hopeful — 
whether for Qanya's sake or to 
keep up his own courage, he could 
hardly have .said. "I think we'll 
have to stay here, and hope we're 
not noticed, until it gets dark. 
Then, maybe — " 

Qanya caught her breath sharply 
and gripped his arm. "Look — 
there!" 

Still far away across the sloping 
floor of the great bowl, but rapidly approaching from its center, 
moved a dust cloud. Beneath it, 
the expiring sunlight glinted on the 
aluminum shells of at least a score 
of the ground machines. 

Dworn sard grimly, "Might have 
expected it; they'll be coming to 
look over the scene of action and 
pick up the pieces. We've one 
chance; keep out of sight behind 
this little hill, and maybe they 
•won't investigate too closely." 

Qanya nodded, biting her lip. 
She could reckon as well as he 
how much that chance was worth. 

'T^HE buzzing motors came near*■ er. The two cowering in the 
lee of the mound, almost without 
daring to breathe, heard them halt, 
slow to idling speed one by one a 
little way off, where the wrecked 
spider lay. From that spot obscure 
sounds began rising, thurJs and 



42 



IMAGINATION 



gratings and a shrill hissing noise. 

But then— the whine of a single 
high-speed engine rose again, clear 
to their hearing. One of the enemy 
was approaching around the flank 
of the sandhill. 

They crounched motionless, frozen. No hope in either flight or 
fight; on the open ground, they 
would be run down in no time, and 
they had no weapons — even the 
notion of a weapon, as something 
apart from the fighting machine 
that carried it, was alien to »their 
thinking. 

The enemy -vehicle rolled into 
full view and nosed slowly along 
the base of -the mound; its -motor 
Whining questingly, only a few 
yards of gentle slope between it 
and the huddled pair. Its visionports glinted redly in the sunset 
glow, and Dworn could almost feel 
the raking of murderous eyes from 
behind them . . . Like the other 
machines of this kind he had seen it 
was small and without armor — it 
couldn't weigh more than a couple 
of thousand pounds, and it carried 
no guns. From the vantage of his 
armed and armored beetle, he had 
regarded its like as flimsy and 
harmless-looking ... But now 
he realized for the first time how 
helpless a mere human was against 
such a thing, and, with an irrepressible shudder, how easily the 
grappling and cutting-tools this 



one was equipped with might be 
employed for — dismantling — flesh 
and blood. 

The machine paused momentarily. Then its engine revved up 
again. It rolled on past, giving no 
sign of excitement, and vanished 
beyond the hillside. 

"Dworn, Dworn, it didn't see 
us!" Qanya was sobbing with relief. 

Dworn was staring after the 
enemy, brows puzzledly drawn 
downward. The sounds from the 
other side of the mound went on 
uninterrupted— a clangor of metal, 
the prolonged shrilling of a cutting-torch, where evidently they 
were at work breaking up the 
smashed spider-vehicle. 

He said huskily, "Something's 
very queer about them .... Wait. 
I've got to take a look." 

Qanya glanced at him in quick 
alarm as he started wriggling to 
the crest of the sandhill. Then she 
followed silently, and peered over 
the top beside him. 

Twilight was descending, but 
they could still see easily enough 
what went on out there. Not a 
hundred yards away, the little machines swarmed about the spider, 
bringing their various wrecking 
equipment into play to dismantle 
it rapidly under the watchers' 
eyes. Torches flared, winches tugged at fragments of the shattered 



WORLD OF THE DRONE 



43 



monster. An aluminum cylinder 
with a serrated alligator snout 
rolled triumphantly away, bearing 
aloft the shank of a great steel 
leg. . . 

But Dworn's attention was riveted by what was happening 
closer at hand. Here, near the tunnel-entrance that opened just below their observation point, lay 
the two crawlers which the runaway spider had disabled. One of 
these, the one which had merely 
been overturned and severely 
dented, was already being dragged 
away, wheels still helplessly in the 
air, by a towing-machine. The 
other had been smashed beyond repair. Around it several of the new 
arrivals were busy, callously and 
efficiently beginning to take it apart. 

Dworn watched them at it, and 
the dreadful suspicion that had 
budded in his mind ripened into a 
monstrous certainty. 

Aluminum skin was swiftly 
stripped away; frame members of 
the same metal were clipped neatly 
asunder by a machine armed with 
great shearing jaws. The engine 
came loose and was hoisted aloft 
carried dangling away by another 
specialized machine. In an incredibly short time, little but a bare 
chassis remained, and that too was 
being attacked by the salvagers. 

And Dworn knew at last beyond 



all doubt, what manner of things 
these were. 

Beside him he heard a sharp 
gasp, and turned to put a warning finger on Qanya's lips. He drew 
her gently back with him, out of 
view of the activities on the farther side of the mound. 

"You understand what that 
means?" 

The girl nodded soberly. "We 
have the tradition. I think that 
must be one tradition that all the 
peoples have in common." 

"Then you know what we have 
to do." 

She nodded again. 

Between them the word hung 
unspoken- — a word not to be uttered lightly, so awful was it in 
it's connotations, freighted with 
memories of a terror rooted in the 
youth of the world. 

Drones. 

IN the beginning — said the stories 
— there were the ancients, who 
were great and powerful beyond 
the imagining of the latter-day peoples. But the ancients were divided 
among themselves, for some of 
them were good and some of them 
were evil. 

So they fought one another, with 
the terrific weapons of devastation 
which they owned. And the good 
triumphed in the end, as it must — 
though at terrible cost, for in those 



44 



IMAGINATION 



wars the earth was stripped almost 
lifeless; searing flame, plague, 
climatic convulsions wiped out the 
varied life which once populated 
the world, and finally there remained only the peoples of the 
machine, all of whom — diverse 
though their ways of existence 
had become, and for all that they 
lived in ceaseless conflict with each ' 
other — were descended from the 
victors in that primal struggle of 
men like gods. 

But the evil old ones, though 
they were' vanquished and their 
seed utterly annihilated, had nevertheless found a way to perpetuate 
their evil upon the earth. For before the last of them died, as a 
final act of vindictive atrocity, they 
created the drones. . . . 

Qanya was shivering uncontrollably. She whispered, "No one remembers when they last came. 
Some thought there were none left 
in the world." 

"It's the same among my people," Dworn said hushedly. 
"There's no record of the drones' 
having appeared in the time of anyone now living . . . But here they 
are." 

From out of sight came the rattle and clank and whine of machines at work. And from farther 
away, from the direction of the 
great windowless buildings-, there 
were hootings and throbbing 



sounds, and from time to time a 
deep rumbling that shook the earth. 

Those noises were somehow unspeakably horrible now — now that 
they knew there was no one there. 
No one — nothing 'but the machines, 
without feeling or thought, without life, with only the blind meaningless activity of unliving mechanism set in motion and made 
self -subsisting a thousand or two 
thousand years ago . . . 

With infinite caution the two 
humans peeked once again over the 
summit of the mound. Out there 
on the flat, the little wingless 
drones buzzed to and fro with 
their false seeming of animation, 
finishing their work. 

From around the great buildings, whose interior no living eyes 
had ever looked upon, lights 
winked oddly blue through the 
thickening dusk. They caught 
glimpses of immense moving machinery, and heard mysterious 
sounds. Once and again, it seemed 
that in the open space before the 
structures a great door opened 
in the earth, and against a blue 
light that streamed upward they 
saw a vast winged shape rise majestically from underground and 
roll slowly forward into the shadows to join others already ranked 
there. 

"What are they doing?" 

"I don't know . . ." Dworn re


WORLD OF THE DRONE 



45 



fleeted, grasping at memories of 
the legends, the traditions he had 
heard. What he recalled was ominous. "I think I can guess, though. 
I think they're getting ready to 
swarm." 

Her stifled exclamation was sign 
enough that she understood. 

If the guess was right, the -danger was on the verge of being multiplied many times over. Soon now, 
a swarm of queen ships would take 
to the air and fly in all directions, 
sowing the seed of the robot plague broadcast far and wide; one 
such colonizing vessel, no doubt, 
had founded this great hive only a 
few months ago. The things worked 
fast. . . . 

And Dworn's duty, and Qanya's, 
became all the more clear and urgent. Duty to spread the warning, 
at whatever risk to themselves. In 
the face of that, Dworn's mission 
of personal blood vengeance became unimportant— even if it had 
been possible to take such vengeance upon a foe with no life to 
forfeit. 

He whispered to Qanya, "The 
ground machines are about to 
leave. When they're gone, we'll 
have to make a break for it." For 
some reason, as he pondered the 
distance they must cross to reach 
the Barrier cliffs, he recalled the 
strange revolving thing atop the 
central tower off yonder, turning 



constantly with its air of restless 
searching . . . He swallowed 
painfully, repeated, "Have to." 

The girl nodded silently. Impulsively Dworn put his arm 
around her; she pressed close 
against him. They huddled together like that, finding in one another's living warmth some measure of encouragement against the 
terror of the falling night in which 
nothing moved but the lifeless machines. 

>""pHEY watched while the lights 
glimmered far off across the 
flats; while a flight of fighter 
drones took off from there and 
howled away into the dark on some 
roving patrol; while, at last, the 
salvaging machines finished their 
work and rolled loot-laden away 
one by one. 

More than once while they 
waited, other columns of the wingless drones entered or emerged 
from the tunnel mouth at the base 
of the mound. The tempo of activity in the hive was, if anything, 
increased as night came on. In the 
deepening darkness a faint blue 
glow streamed from the tunnel 
mouth. 

As the whirring of the last salvager receded, Dworn got cautiously to his feet. He said between his 
teeth, "We'd 'better move fast, 
now — " 



46 



IMAGINATION 



"Wait," said Qanya tensely. 
"They'll sight us in the open, and 
then what chance will we have?" 

Dworn tried to make out her 
expression, but in the darkness 
her face was only a white blur. 
"We've got to try. There's no 
other way." 

"Perhaps there is. What about 
the tunnel?" 

Dworn was brought up short; 
that idea hadn't occurred to him 
at all. He said slowly, "I see what 
you mean, It's only big enough 
for one-way traffic — and the drones 
evidently have some system of remote control, so that outbound 
expeditions aren't using it at the 
same time as returning ones. . ." 

"So, if we wait till some of the 
wingless ones enter from this end, 
and hurry through the tunnel close 
behind them — " Qanya left the 
sentence uncompleted. Dworn 
knew she could imagine as well as 
he what would happen if they failed to time it right, and met a 
drone column coming from the opposite direction. Still, the sound 
sense of the girl's ideas was obvious. 

"All right," he said. "We'll try 
it that way." 

It was another nerve-fraying 
wait until a file of ground machines came winding near and vanished one after another into the 
tunnel. 



The two watchers gave them a 
little time — not too much — to get 
clear of the entrance. Then Dworn 
clasped Qanya's hand tightly in 
his own, and together they plunged down the sliding slope of the 
sandhill. The tunnel mouth yawned in its side,, the bore on which 
it opened slanting steeply down 
into the earth, inwardly lit with 
eery blue light. 

Hearts pounding, they raced 
into the tunnel. 

It was an unreal, nightmare 
flight. The blue shaft curved and 
descended endlessly. Endlessly afaead of them echoed the snarling 
of drone engines. 

They ran with lungs near to 
bursting, through air heavy and 
foul with exhaust gases — trying 
frantically to keep close behind 
that engine noise, while it receded 
inexorably before them. And once 
and again, amid the tricky tunnel 
echoes, Dworn was almost sure 
that other drones had entered and 
were descending the narrow way 
behind them, and before his eyes 
flashed hideous visions of the two 
of them overtaken and run down, 
here where there was scarcely room 
to turn, let alone fight or hide. 

The featureless walls were 
pressing inward to crush them, 
swimming before eyes filmed with 
exhaustion, in the blue shimmer 
which no doubt sufficed for the 



WORLD OF THE DRONE 



47 



perceptions of the drones but 
which hardly served human vision. . . . 

The tunnel was in fact perhaps 
a thousand yards long. 

But it seemed as if they had 
been staggering for a lifetime 
through the nightmare, through 
the blue glow, and it scarcely 
seemed real when a patch of night 
sky showed through the exit before them, and when they stumbled panting out into the clean 
cold air of the mountainside, and 
saw the white radiance of moonrise over the Barrier cliffs above 
them. 

They sank down to catch their 
breath on a rock not far from the 
tunnel. They'd made it none -too 
soon— only a minute or two had 
passed when the night once more 
buzzed with motor noise, and a 
column of foraging drones rolled 
up the trail and plunged at full 
speed into the mouth of the shaft. 

Qanya buried her face against 
Dworn's shoulder. 

"Easy, now," Dworn whispered, 
patting her with clumsy gentleness. 
"The worst's over. We made it . . . 
Qanya, darling, we made it!" 

She looked up at him and by 
the moonlight he saw her smile 
tremulously. She said breathlessly, "Would . . .would you mind 
saying that again, please?" 



THE moon was already high as 
they trudged across the rolling desert beyond the foot of the 
great landslip. 

After the tunnel, the rest of the 
descent had been relatively easy; 
they had followed the trail used 
by the wingless drones, being forced off it only once by the passage 
of a cavalcade of the little marauders. And they had discovered, to 
their surprise, that the human 
physique — inferior though it might 
be to machines in ruggedness, 
speed, and other respects — was 
better equipped for traversing 
rough terrain than the most ingenious vehicle ever constructed. 

But both of them, unaccustomed 
as they were to walking on their 
own feet, were dead weary. They 
tramped on doggedly, searching 
the shadows, hoping to come upon 
some living machine-creature — of 
what race, didn't matter now. 

So far they had seen only abundant evidence that the drones were 
abroad in force tonight, preparing 
perhaps for their swarming time. 
Drones in the air and on the 
ground, and once the burnt-out 
shell of an unidentifiable machine 
with a crew of the wingless salvagers worrying it, and once the 
light of fires afar off where the 
winged ones had made a kill . . . 

Qanya stumbled, and Dworn 
caught her round the waist as she 



4 3 



IMAGINATION 



swayed. 

"Tired," she gasped in a little 
girl's voice, then stiffened her back 
with a resolute effort. 

"We'd better rest—" 

"No," she said shakily; and 
then abruptly: "Listen!" 

Not very far away, lost somewhere among the tricky moonshadows, there was a stealthy 
crunching. It was coming nearer. 

With instinctive caution the 
two hugged the pool of shadow 
beside a boulder. 

"Spiders!" Qanya recognized 
them first. 

They came prowling out of the 
shadows, crunching rhythmically 
across an open moonlit space towards a hollow beyond. One, two, 
four of them, moving with furtive 
caution through the perilous night. 

They had to be intercepted, the 
warning given. But it was a critically dangerous moment — suspicious and on edge, they might fire, 
at the first movement they saw. 

"Stay here," said Dworn shortly. 
He thrust Qanya back into the 
shadows, and walked steadfastly 
out into the clear moonlight, in the 
path of the walking spider machines. 

He raised one hand on high, 
palm outward in an immemorial 
gesture that he could only hope 
would be seen. He shouted at the 
top of his voice, "Stop! Don't 



shoot! I come in peace!" 

His heart leaped. The leading 
spider ground to a halt, and the 
others behind it. He saw a dim 
figure move atop the foremost 
towering machine; and before he 
could speak again, heard the .rasping voice of the Spider Mother 
herself. 

"You! The one who got away — 
and who seduced one of us from 
the ways of her ancestors — ? What 
peace can there be between you 
and us?" 

"I bring," cried Dworn clearly, 
"warning of the Drone." 

There was stunned silence. 

Dworn sensed the other spiders 
watching from the height of their 
machines; and he guessed something of what must be going on in 
the mind of the fierce old woman 
staring down at him. She would be 
wondering if an alien, a mere 
beetle, would be so far without 
honor, so anxious to save his own 
skin, as to lie in such a matter. 

Then he felt Qanya's hand in his, 
and heard her cry out, her voice 
vibrant and assured: "It is true, 
Mother! I have seen them too. 
The night-fliers, the raiders — they 
are the evil things our legends tell 
of!" 

The great machine took two 
steps forward and knelt low to the 
ground. "Come here!" rasped the 
Spider Mother, and when the two 



WORLD OF THE DRONE 



49 



advanced till she could look into 
their young faces — "You swear to 
this?'" 

''We swear!" they said at the 
same moment. 

The Spider Mother's face was 
like iron. She looked from one to 
the other slowly. 

"Then," she said stiffly and 
formally, leaning over to extend a 
wrinkled hand to Dworn, "let there 
be peace between us. . . . between 
me and mine and you and yours, 
and among all living peace . . . 
till the evil is no more!" 

Dworn took the hand, and answered, hurriedly recalling ancient 
custom: "Till the evil is no more!" 
And heard Qanya echo the words. 

ALL night the desert was stirring, with a feverish hastening of messengers. These were at 
first spiders — then, members of 
a half dozen, a dozen other races, 
as the word was passed from one 
people to another — as tribe after 
tribe of hardbitten, suspicious 
warriors, fingers, fidgeting on triggers at the open approach of their 
hereditary mortal foes, heard and 
were electrified by the news — 
The Coming of the Drone! 

And hand gripped hand, all 
feuds were forgotten, the peoples 
mingled in a common effort of hurried mobilization. The desert land 
below the cliffs crawled with them, 



a mixed multitude of constantly increasing numbers, girding them — 
selves for war. 

Ferocious predatory machines — 
spiders, wheel-bugs, scorpions — 
formidable in their armor and 
bristling with guns, lay alongside 
the more pacific slugs and caterpillars and snails which in ordinary times were their natural prey, 
and were freely fuelled and provisioned out of the stores which normally their possessors would have 
fought to the death to safeguard 
against the despoilers .... 

In the presence of the drones, 
there were no more natural enmities. For the drones were the Enemy. Their coming meant that all 
life was kindred; deep in the heritage of every people was the almost 
instinctive knowledge that, if the 
drones were not checked as tradition decreed, their blind automatic propagation would end by 
sweeping every living thing from 
the face of the Earth. 

Toward morning, the chiefs of a 
score of tribes held council of war 
in the very shadow of the Barrier. 
Their consultation was brief; there 
was no arguable question of what 
must be done, only of how. And 
if the drones were about to swarm, 
they must act promptly. No time 
to wait for the gathering of more 
distant peoples; no time to send 
word to the wasps or the hornets 



IMAGINATION 



and gain aerial support. They 
must strike with what they had. 

r\WORN started awake as a 
hand touched his shoulder. He 
sat up, angrily flinging a coverlet 
from him. 

"I didn't intend to sleep!" he 
muttered, rubbing his eyes and 
realizing where he was— below 
ground in the spiders' colony, whither he and Qanya had been taken 
and where he had been persuaded 
to lie down and rest a little while 
the warning was carried by others. 

The tall blonde spider, Purri, 
was grinning maliciously down at 
him. "Hear the beetle talk! I suppose, after a day spent in what, for 
you was comparative idleness, you 
felt like doing something really 
strenuous .... say going out and 
demolishing the drones' hive barehanded. . . .?" 

Dworn climbed to his feet. With 
a violent effort he kept from wincing at the protest of stiffened muscles and yesterday's collection of 
•bruises. 

"What's going on out there now? 
Where's Qanya?" 

"There's really nothing more 
you can do, you know. I merely 
woke you because I thought you'd 
want to hear that your beetle-folk 
have been contacted — they'd holed 
up to lick their wounds about 
twenty miles south of here — and 



have joined the fighting force 
that's getting ready to attack the 
drones at dawn. As for dear little 
Qanya, she's sleeping angelically in 
the next chamber. . ." 

"No, she isn't," said Qanya 
from the doorway. 

"You, too?" said Purri with irritation. "And what do you want, 
scapegrace?'" ' 

Qanya's black eyes narrowed 
dangerously. She moved forward 
to Dworn 's side and took a grip on 
his arm. "I might ask what you're 
doing here disturbing — " 

"Both of you, you're wasting 
time," growled Dworn. 

He'd heard with a queer pang 
that his people — those who remained alive — had been located. Not 
that it made any real difference, of 
course. His father was dead, and 
he, Dworn, was dead too as far as 
his own kind was concerned. Nor, 
in this world, was there anywhere 
else he could turn. 

For the present, under the 
threat of the Drone, that didn't 
matter. All laws of all peoples 
were in abeyance for the duration 
of the great emergency. But once 
the threat was dissolved, and the 
old laws resumed their force, the 
plight of Dworn and of Qanya also 
would be what it had been — that 
of outcasts in a world where an 
outcast had no chance of survival. 

Well, it was no use thinking of 



WORLD OF THE DRONE 



5i 



the future. Dworn said determinedly: "I want to see the end of this 
business, at least" 

"And I!" declared Qanya. 
"We've earned that right." 

Purri eyed them sourly, shrugged. "As you like. I'm in command 
here while the Mother's busy at 
the front. I'll see you get transportation up there." Turning toward the door, she glanced sidelong at Dworn .... "You'll have 
to go separately, since a spider will 
only carry two. I'm leaving right 
away myself; you may come with 
me in my machine — " 

"No, he won't," declared Qanya 
with finality, tightening her hold 
on Dworn's arm. "He can ride with 
old Zimka." 

Purri stalked through the doorway before them, grumbling to herself, "Why is it the best ones always get away?" 

EARLIER in the night, climbing 
spiders — the only machines 
which could manage the ascent of 
the toppled Barrier — had scouted 
the periphery of the drones' fortress, and discovered the sole possible approach to it. At a single spot 
above the slide, a low ridge made 
it feasible to surmount the rim and 
steal out onto the table-land beyond without coming in direct 
view of the enemy's installations. 
Once that was known, the coun


cil of chiefs decided on a daring 
strategy. Up the thousand-foot 
slope of tumbled rocks below that 
one vulnerable point, a fantastic 
supply line was established. One 
by one, machines from among 
those massing on the desert below 
toiled upward until wheels or 
treads could carry them no further; then they were hoisted bodily over the precipices by the invaluable spiders, who anchored themselves firmly in place with the 
powerful steel cables they ordinarily used for snaring prey, and used 
other such cables as pulleys. 

Through the remaining hours of 
darkness the joined forces labored 
with Herculean devotion to accomplish the seemingly impossible 
task. There were brushes with the 
enemy, for the wingless drones 
still came and went about the 
mountainside and from time to 
time their winged kindred flew 
overhead. But strict orders had 
gone out to all the allied peoplesavoid opening fire, avoid precipitaing a general engagement, and 
freeze motionless whenever the 
fliers passed over. This last instruction rested on the observation 
that the robot predators, with 
whatever sensory devices they 
used, apparently had difficulty 
in spotting anything but a moving 
target. 

In this wise, when dawn began 



52 



IMAGINATION 



to break, close to three hundred 
first-line fighting machines of a 
dozen different species had been 
raised to the summit of the Barrier. 
Thence they filtered cautiously 
out across the plateau, in a great 
arc moving to enclose the hollow 
of the drones. 

npHE sky was lightening when 
■*- Dworn and Qanya settled 
themselves to watch from the crest 
of the rocky ridge which had 
shielded the attacking forces' deployment not far from the brink 
of the cliffs. 

Behind them, the spiders which 
had brought them here melted 
stealthily away toward the east, 
going to take their places in the 
battle line. 

The two were alone once more, 
looking out over the vast circular 
depression infested by the enemy, 
just as they had yesterday at sunset. But today, as the sun rose, 
the situation was very different. 
For miles around the circumference of the great hive, there were 
furtive stirrings, last-minute movements of preparation for the imminent assault. From behind every 
outcropping and fold of the ground, 
grim gun-muzzles pointed inward, 
ready to begin spitting fire when 
the zero second came. 

From here the central buildings 
of the hive were plainly visible, 



standing out against the sunrise. 
Around them moved many of the 
tireless worker machines; and the 
parked aircraft seemed more numerous than they had been the night 
before. Among them a score or 
more of winged shapes loomed 
conspicuous for their great size; 
when you made proper allowance 
for the distance, you realized that 
they were immense. 

Those would be the queens — 
loaded and ready to take flight on 
their oneway journey to found new 
colonies wherever their evil destiny 
might lead them. The time of 
swarming was near. 

Dworn scowled darkly, squinting against the light in an effort to 
judge the enemy's numbers. He 
grunted, "I hope . . ." and bit 
his lip. 

"What's wrong?" said Qanya 
tensely. 

"Nothing . . . Only it would 
have been well if we'd had time to 
bring up more reinforcements. But 
don't worry — we'll smash them." 
He was a little surprised to note 
that he said "we" — and meant 
any and all of the machine-peoples, 
united now in a common cause. 

Dworn was bitterly wishing at 
this moment that he had had his 
beetle-machine again, and had 
been able to take an active part. 
As it was, he didn't even know 
surely just where in the battle line 



WORLD OF THE DRONE 



53 



the beetles had taken up their position. 

A distant explosion, a single 
gunshot, rolled echoless across the 
flats. It was a signal. Even as the 
shell hit the ground close to the 
ranked drone aircraft, motors had 
begun to pulse and snarl all along 
the farflung line. The desert began 
to spew forth attackers. A motley 
horde of metal things, they darted, 
stalked, and lumbered from their 
lurking-places, and as they advanced to the assault the firing 
commenced in earnest, became a 
staccato thunder that blanketed but 
failed to drown out the beginning 
alarm-wail of a huge mechanical 
voice from the fortress of the 
drones. 

The enemy was not slow to react. Almost as the first rain of projectiles smashed down among 
them, jet engines began howling 
into life, and some of the fighter 
craft rocked into motion, wheeling 
out onto the runways. 

The encircling attackers well 
knew the peril of letting any of 
those pilotless killers get into the 
air. Shellfire was being concentrated on the airstrips, striving to 
block them, plow them up with 
craters. 

\ fighter drone came roaring 
out one of the runaways 
gathering speed and beginning to 



lift. Dworn followed it with his 
eyes, feeling sweat spring out on 
his forehead, repeating under his 
breath without conscious awareness of what he was saying: "Stop 
him, stop him — " 

Then the enemy craft spun 
round in the air, belching smoke, 
came apart and spilled along the 
runway for a hundred yards. A 
second, coming close behind it, 
plowed into the wreckage of its 
comrade, rolled over and over and 
became a furiously burning pyre. 
That strip was blocked. 

All round the central hive smoke 
and flame were rising in innumerable places, from the paved ways 
and from the open desert. On another launching strip, just visible 
through the mounting inferno, one 
of the big queen-craft had sought 
to take to the air, and had been 
knocked out by heavy shellfire. 
Now its upended and blazing hulk 
tilted slowly over and collapsed 
burying beneath it several of the 
little wingless workers. In all the 
confusion these still scurried hither 
any yon, oblivious to the bombardment, laboring frantically but futilely to clear away the debris. Their 
efforts were useless, while the rain 
of explosives from the tightening 
ring of assault forces continued 
adding to the ruin and disorder 
within the hive. . . . 

Dworn sprang to his feet for a 



54 



IMAGINATION 



better view. He hugged Qanya to 
him till she gasped for breath, 
shouted in her ear over the thunder 
of the barrage, "We've got them!" 

Close to the ridge where they 
stood a line of many-wheeled 
monsters rolled past — scorpions, 
moving along the battle front and, 
whenever the thickening smoke 
up ahead revealed a target, halting to wheel round and discharge 
their heavy-caliber tail guns. 

Dworn had never liked scorpions, but he watched these with 
heartfelt approval. 

Then he stared, bewilderedly 
aware that something had gone 
wrong. The big machines had turned and begun heading toward the 
ridge, clattering along at their top 
speed and no longer pausing to 
fire. 

Within moments, Dworn perceived that all the other attackers 
were doing likewise; everywhere 
on the blazing battlefield, they had 
ceased their advance and were scattering to seek cover. 

Only then, as the firing slackened, did he realize that the sky had 
begun to echo with a spiteful 
screaming of flying things. Against 
the brightening daylight hurtled 
some two dozen dark winged 
shapes. . . . fighter drones. 

Dworn realized they must have 
been out on patrol, and summoned 
back by the drones' mysterious 



means of communication to defend 
the threatened hive. Now the flight 
was splitting into groups of two 
or three, diving to attack at one 
point and another and flitting away 
again so swiftly that human reflexes could scarcely act to train a 
gun. 

Dworn glimpsed Qanya's horrified face beside him, and the girl 
threw her weight against him and 
dragged him down among the 
sheltering rocks. Overhead, from 
out of the sun, shot three of the 
winged drones. They passed over 
before the shrieking of their flight 
could reach the ears, and Dworn 
caught a glimpse of bombs tumbling earthward. Thunder crashed 
as the scorpions hugging the ridge 
threw up a vicious defensive barrage, and was drowned out as the 
bombs landed all around. The 
rocks heaved, and dust and splinters showered down from above. 

Only a dozen yards away, a 
scorpion, came rumbling up across 
the crest, its many wheels jolting 
over the rocks, and halted there, 
its tail gun weaving angrily as it 
sought vainly for targets in the 
sky. Along one of its gray-painted sides was a long bright gash 
where something had barely glanced from its armor. And Dworn 
saw, too, the black outline of a 
mythological arachnid on its observation turrret, which signified that 



WORLD OF THE DRONE 



55 



the machine belonged to a scorpion 
chief. 

SCARCELY knowing what he intended, he shook off Qanya's 
panic grip and plunged recklessly 
toward the big machine. As he 
scrambled over the rugged hilltop, 
he saw fleetingly what went on in 
the arena of battle — the allied 
peoples were being driven back, 
forced to concentrate their fire 
power on beating off aerial onslaughts. Meantime, the wingless 
drones about their beleaguered 
citadel worked feverishly to clear 
the way for their fighters that still 
remained undamaged on the ground 
. . . Within minutes, unless something happened to turn the tide, 
there would be enough flying 
drones aloft to break the attack 
and inflict terrible losses. 

Dworn found himself alongside 
the scorpion, just as its tail gun 
fired once more. The muzzle blast 
almost knocked him down, but he 
clawed his way up the side of the 
machine and began hammering on 
the observation turret hatch-cover. 

"You in there!" he shouted. 
"Listen to me — " 

The hatch cracked open and a 
grizzled head peered out, blinking 
at him with bewilderment and an 
automatic fierce suspicion. But at 
a time like this anything human 
was an ally. 



"What's the idea?" demanded 
the scorpion. 

The racket of gunfire and of jets 
made speech almost impossible. 
But Dworn pointed out across the 
sink, shouted: "Fire on the buildings — the central tower! They're 
controlled from somewhere — " 

Luckily the scorpion leader — if 
that was who he was — was a man 
of quick understanding. He nodded 
vigorously and dropped out of 
sight again into the interior of his 
vehicle, bawling something to its 
driver. Dworn dropped off the 
machine's side as it lurched abruptly into motion. He watched, 
hardly breathing, as it slid to a 
halt at the bottom of the hill beside another of its tribe, and with 
shouts and gestures the word was 
passed on. 

Inside a minute, all the nearby 
scorpions had begun banging away 
at the structures some three miles 
distant. The heavy scorpion guns 
were quite capable of carrying that 
far, and their shells had enough 
punch to do much damage to the 
buildings or to the central tower 
which still loomed occasionally visible through the drifting smoke . . 

But it was only a hope, perhaps 
even a forlorn hope. .Dworn was 
fairly confident of his guess that 
the drones possessed some sort of 
central communication and control 
system — but it would take a lucky 



IMAGINATION 



hit to disable that nerve center in 
time. 

Qanya stumbled to his side. 
She cried something he couldn't 
hear over the continuous firing, 
tugged at him and pointed skyward with terror in her eyes. 

The flying drones aloft had 
suddenly abandoned their scattered 
strafing attacks. With deadly machine-precision they wheeled into 
a single formation once more, and 
the whole flight came diving straight at the scorpion battery's position. 

Dworn stood rigid, fists clenched 
at his sides, watching them scream 
nearer. 

He ignored Qanya's pleading 
with him to take cover. No point 
to that— the drones' full force 
would blast the whole ridge to rubble and blanket it with their liquid 
flame. 

At least, the enemy's reaction 
proved his inspiration correct. He 
noticed with fierce satisfaction that 
the scorpions were still doggedly 
firing. . . . 

The foremost drone came on, 
slanting down the sky until the 
gaping rocket-ports were plainly 
visible along its swept-back wings. 
But those sports still spat no flame. 
And it came on. It cleared the 
hilltop by no more than fifty feet, 
still diving faster than the speed 
of sound. It hit the desert slope 



beyond and ricocheted like a great 
projectile, bursting apart into fiery 
fragments that strewed themselves 
for a thousand yards across the 
rolling plateau. 

DWORN picked himself up 
from among the rocks where 
he had been flung by the shockwave of its near passage, and was 
knocked sprawling again by the 
earthquake impact of a second 
drone that thundered headlong into the earth a few hundred feet 
away, burying itself under a crater like that of a huge bomb. 

He glimpsed a third craft going 
down to the west of them, just missing the rim of the Barrier cliffs 
and plunging out of sight without 
a sign of coming out of its dive. 

Those which remained in the air 
were flying aimlessly. Two of them 
passed over side by side, gradually 
converging until, a couple of miles 
away, they locked wings and went 
spinning down toward the horizon 
in a deadly embrace. 

On the ground, a like confusion 
had befallen the wingless workers. 
Their scurrying suddenly lost all its 
busy, planned efficiency. Some 
buzzed round and round in drunken circles; others ran head-on into one another, or tumbled into 
shell-holes to lie futilely spinning 
their wheels. 

A hush descended on the field 



WORLD OF THE DRONE 



57 



of battle. After the fury of bombardment and counterattack, the relative silence was deafening. 

Dworn got to his feet for the 
second time and helped Qanya up; 
he grinned exultantly at her, oblivious of a trickle of blood running down his face where a rocksplinter had hit. 

The scorpion lying nearest the 
foot of the slope opened its hatchcover. A man climbed out, clasped hands together over his head 
and stamped on the gray monster's 
back in an awkward impromptu 
victory-dance. Cheers rang faintly 
from far off down the silenced firing-line. 

Then— the spell of premature 
triumph was rudely shattered. 

From the direction of the. breached and smoking buildings, there 
rose yet again the soughing roar 
of jet engines gathering speed. Onto 
the runway to the west — the only 
one which the workers had managed to clear before their central 
control was knocked out — came 
waddling an enormous winged 
thing. 

Its multiple engines screamed up 
to a frenzied pitch, and it rolled 
out along the strip at increasing 
velocity. Its huge wheels narrowly 
missed a dead fighter slewed across 
the way. Its tail went up. 

Naturally, the queen ships 
wouldn't be dependent on the 



nerve-center of the hive that had 
spawned them; for each of them 
carried within itself the full-grown 
robot brain, the nucleus of a new 
hive. . . . 

Shooting began again raggedly, 
the gunners caught unawares. Perhaps the great machine was hit — 
but to stop it would take more 
than one or two hits. 

It reached and passed the end of 
the runway, its wheels barely 
clearing the ground as the paved 
strip ended. Black smoke belched 
from its engines as it spent fuel 
lavishly, fighting heavy-laden for 
altitude. It rocked with the concussion of shells bursting all around it, and then it was soaring 
out over the Barrier, dipping and 
rolling perilously in the downdrafts 
beyond the cliffs. But it steadied 
and flew on, out of range of the 
guns, rising and dwindling until it 
was a speck, a mote vanishing into 
the western sky . . . 

But no more queens escaped 
that day. The cannonade resumed 
with redoubled fury, and the guns 
did not fall silent until nothing 
was left to stir amid the gutted 
and blazing wreckage that had been 
the citadel of the drones. 

MORNING wind blew over the 
plateau, clearing away the 
reek of battle, bringing air that was 
cool and clear as it must have been 



58 



IMAGINATION 



in the morning of the world. 

In that breeze like the breath of 
a new creation, it somehow seemed 
not at all strange to Dworn that he 
should be walking in the open under a daylight sky, among a multitude of excited strangers, men and 
women of all races, who mixed and 
exchanged greetings, laughed, 
shouted, slapped one another on 
the back . . . then, perhaps, drew 
away for a moment with eyes of 
wonder at their own boldness . . . 

Nor did it seem strange that 
Dworn strolled round the smoldering drone fortress hand in hand 
with a girl of the spider (who was 
by that token his hereditary foe,) 
and that he turned and kissed this 
enemy on the mouth, and she returned the kiss. 

They stood with arms around 
one another, on the edge of the 
jubilant crowd, and looked out 
across the vast litter of smoking 
wreckage where scarcely a shellholed wall stood upright now, from 
which the Enemy would no longer 
come to threaten the life of the 
Earth. 

"One got away," said Qanya 
soberly. 

"Yes. Somewhere it will all be 
to do over again." Dworn glanced 
toward the empty west, whither 
the queen flier had disappeared — 
where, perhaps, by now it would 
have crash-landed two or three 



hundred miles away, to spew forth 
its cargo of pygmy workers and (if 
the inhabitants or the area where 
it descended didn't discover and 
scotch it in time) to construct more 
workers, fighters, a hive no less 
formidable than the one that 
had perished today. 

Dworn said, brow thoughtfully 
furrowed: "But maybe there's a 
good reason, even for the drones. 
Maybe they serve a purpose . . ." 
He faltered, unable to phrase the 
idea that had come to him — a 
thought that was not only unaccustomed but downright heretical. 
According to tradition the drones 
were the spawn of ancient evil and 
themselves wholly evil— but, 
Dworn was thinking, perhaps their 
existence produced good if, once in 
a generation or in ten generations, 
they came to remind the warring 
peoples that fundamentally all life 
was one in its eonlong conflict with 
no-life. 

But he sensed, too, that that idea 
would take a long, long time to be 
worked out, to be communicated, 
to bear fruit . . . 

Qanya's hand pressed his, and 
she said softly, "I think I know 
what you mean." 

On one impulse they turned their 
backs to the ruins and gazed out 
across the throng of people, milling 
happily about, rejoicing, among the 
grim war-machines that stood 



WORLD OF THE DRONE 



open and abandoned on every 
hand. Near by, a crew of pill-bugs 
had tapped containers of the spe- . 
cial beverage they brewed for their 
own use, and were inviting all passersby to pause and drink. 

"Your people are here somewhere," said Qanya. Her eyes on 
Dworn were troubled. "Over there 
to the south, I think I saw some 
beetles parked. Do you want to 
visit them?" 

Dworn sighed. "Your people are 
here too." 

"I know." 

NEITHER of them moved. 
They stood silent, their thoughts the same; in a little while 
now, the Peace of the Drone would 
be over, and all this celebrating 
crowd would grow warily quiet, 
would climb back into their various fighting machines, close the 
hatches and man the guns and 
creep away in their separate directions. The world would go its way 
again, a world in which there was 
no place left for the two of them . . 

Dworn blotted the image from 
his mind's eye and bent to kiss 
Qanya once more, while the Peace 
lasted. 

A voice called, "Dworn!" A 
familiar voice — one that couldn't 
be real, that must be a trick of his 
ears. 

He turned. A little way off 



stood a small group of people 
watching them, and in the forefront was a stalwart man of fifty, 
in the green garment of a beetle 
with a golden scarab blazoned on 
his chest — 

"father!" Dworn gasped unbelieving. 

They grasped one another's 
hands and looked into one another's eyes. Dworn was only dimly aware of the others looking on — 
among them the hard-faced Spider 
Mother, and the grizzled chief 
scorpion whose cohorts had struck 
the decisive blow in the battle. 

Yold smiled with a quizzically 
raised eyebrow. "You thought I 
was dead, no doubt? You came on 
the spot where we were attacked 
and you saw—" 

Dworn nodded and gulped. "I 
couldn't have been mistaken. I saw 
your machine there, wrecked . . . 
And now I've lost mine." His 
voice trailed off miserably. 

•His father gave him a penetrating look. "I see. You're supposing 
that means everything is over." 

"Doesn't it?" 

The chief smiled again. "When 
you departed for your wanderyear, you were still a boy, though 
you'd learned your lessons and 
your beetle traditions well . . . 
But now you're a man. We don't 
tell boys everything." 

Dworn stared at his 



6o 



IMAGINATION 



while understanding dawned like a 
glory upon him. To live again, the 
life he'd thought lost — 

"So far as I could learn, your 
beetle was disabled through no 
fault of your own. In fact, by what 
these strangers ■ tell me — " Yold 
nodded towards the Spider Mother 
and the scorpion chief — "you've 
proved yourself worthy indeed, 
over and above the customary testing. Of course, there will be the 
formality of a rebirth ceremony — 
which I have to undergo, too, so 
we can both do so together." 

Dworn couldn't speak. Once 
again he had to remind himself that 
a beetle warrior didn't weep — not 
even tears of joy. 

Then the Spider Mother spoke 
up, her voice brittle and metallic. 
"The girl will naturally be returned to us. After this business, I am 
going to have to take -pains to restore discipline in the Family." 

Dworn saw Qanya's desolate 
face, took one step to the girl's 
side and put a shielding arm 
around her. He felt Qanya trembling, and glared at the Spider 
Mother's implacable face. 

"I won't go back!" Qanya cried 
vehemently. "I'll die first! I never 
wanted to be a spider, anyway!" 

"And I," growled Dworn, "won't 
let you take her. I won't let her 
go — " his face was pale, but he 
went on resolutely — "even if it 



means I can't return to my own 
people." 

The beetle chief surveyed the 
two young people gravely, then 
turned to confront the old woman. 
He said, "I don't see that you 
have any further claim on the girl. 
According to our customs, she too 
can be 'reborn'— this time into the 
beetle horde, as one of my people — 
and my son's." 

The head scorpion, looking on, 
nodded approval and grinned encouragingly at Dworn. 

The Spider Mother and the 
chief exchanged a long, stony 
look — on either side, the look of a 
ruler used to command. 

"It would be too bad," said 
Yold softly, "to mar the Peace. 
But my warriors are within call, 
and . . . ." , 

The Spider Mother turned away 
and spat. "Have it your way. Who 
wants weaklings in the Family!" 

The- chief glanced sidelong at 
Dworn and Qanya, and saw that 
they were .wholly absorbed in one 
another. With an open-handed gesture he invited the Spider Mother 
to follow him. 

"Shall we go, then," he suggested 
politely, "and — while the Peace 
still reigns — find out whether the 
pill-bugs' beverage is all they 
claim it is?" 

THE END 



A LITTLE known concomitant 
of the fearsome hydrogen 
bomb is the death rain. This dramatic name is given the prosaic 
fall of dust which accompanies the 
hydrogen bomb explosion. In itself it would not be startling except 
for the fact that the dust is extremely radioactive! For an area 
of hundreds of square miles around 
an exploded hydrogen bomb is rife 
with a rain of lethal dust particles. 

The Japanese fishermen who 
were exposed to it are testimony 
to its effectiveness and they, the


ain 



oretically, were well without its 
range. What must it be like within 
the range? 

So far as is known the only possible way to resist this deadly dust 
is by cover and shelter. It can be 
removed from the skin by repeated 
washing, but if it filters into the 
lungs nothing can be done. It 
would seem that respirators or gas 
masks will be as familiar in any 
future as they have been in 
the past ones. Horrors pile upon 
horrors when the hydrogen bomb 
explodes — is there no limit? 




Comfort Me, My Robot 



Robert (J2locli 

Henson knew his wife was holding a guilty 
secret from him. This was intolerable and only 
one thing could quiet his anxiety — killing her! 



WHEN Henson came in, the 
Adjustor was sitting inside his desk, telescreening 
a case. At the sound of the doortone he flicked a switch. The posturchair rose from the center of the 
desk until the Adjuster's face peered at the visitor from an equal 
level. 

"Oh, it's you," said the Adjustor. 

"Aren't you a bit early for dinner? Our engagement isn't until 
five." 

"This isn't an engagement," 
Henson told him. "Its an appointment." 

"Appointment?" 

"Didn't the girl tell you? I'm 
here to see you professionally." 

If the Adjustor was surprised, 
he didn't show it. He cocked a 
thumb at a posturchair. "Sit down 
and tell me all about it, Henson," 
he said. 

"Nothing to tell." Henson stared 



out of the window at the plains of 
Upper Mongolia. "It's just a routine matter. I'm here to make a request and you're the Adjustor." 

"And your request is — ?" 

"Simple," said Henson. I want 
to kill my wife." 

The Adjustor nodded. "That 
can be arranged," he murmured. 
"Of course, it will take a few 
days." 

"I can wait." 

"Would Friday be convenient?" 

"Good enough. That way it 
won't cut into my week-end. Lita 
and I were planning a fishing trip, 
up NewZealand way. Care to join 
us?" 

"Sorry, but I'm tied up until 
Monday." The Adjustor stifled a 
yawn. "Why do you want to kill 
Lita?" he asked. 

"She's hiding something from 
me." 

"What do you suspect?" 



62 



"That's just it — I don't know 
what to suspect. And it keeps 
bothering me." 

"Why don't you question her?" 

"Violation of privacy. Surely 
you, as a certified public Adjuster, 
wouldn't advocate that?" 

"Not professionally." The Adjuster grinned. "But since we're 
personal friends, I don't mind telling you that there are times when 



I think privacy should be violated. 
This notion of individual rights 
can become a fetish." 
"Fetish?" 

"Just an archaicism." The Adjuster waved a casual dismissal to 
the word. He leaned forward. 
"Then, as I understand it, your 
wife's attitude troubles you. Rather 
than embarrass her with questions, 
you propose to solve the problem 



63 



6 4 



IMAGINATION 



delicately, by killing her." 
"Right." 

"A very chivalrous attitude. I 
admire it." 

"I'm not sure whether I do or 
not," Henson mused. "You see, 
it really wasn't my idea. But the 
worry was beginning to affect my 
work, and my Administrator — 
Loring, you know him, I believe — 
took me aside for a talk. He suggested I see you and arrange for 
a murder." 

"Then it's to be murder." The 
Adjustor frowned. "You- know, 
actually, we are supposed to be the 
arbiters when it comes to method. In some cases a suicide works 
just as well. Or an accident." 

"I want a murder," Henson said. 
"Premeditated, and in the first 
degree." Now it was his turn to 
grin. "You see, I know a few 
archaicisms myself." 

The Adjustor made a note. "As 
long as we're dealing in archaic 
terminology, might I characterize 
your attitude towards your wife 
as one of — jealousy?" 

Henson controlled his blush at 
the sound of the word. He nodded 
slowly. "I guess you're right," he 
admitted. "I can't bear the idea 
of her having any secrets. I know 
it's immature and absurd, and 
that's why I'm seeking an immature solution." 

"Let me correct you," said the 



Adjustor. "Your solution is far 
from immature. A good murder is 
probably the most adult approach 
to your problem. After all, man, 
this is the twenty-second century, 
not the twentieth. Although even 
way back then they were beginning 
to learn some of the answers." 

"Don't tell me they had Adjusters, " Henson murmured. 

"No, of course not. In those days 
this field was only a small, neglected part of physical medicine. 
Practitioners were called psychiatrists, psychologists, auditors, analysts — and a lot of other things. 
That was their chief stock in trade, 
by the way; name-calling and 
labelling." 

>"pHE Adjustor gestured toward 
the slide-files. "I must 
have five hundred spools transcribed there," he calculated. "All 
of it from books — nineteenth, twentieth, even early twenty-first century material. And it's largely terminology, not technique. Psycotherapy was just like alchemy in 
those days. Everything was named 
and defined. Inability to cope 
with environment was minutely 
broken down into hundreds of 
categories, thousands of terms. 
There were 'schools' of therapy, 
with widely divergent theories and 
applications. And the crude attempts at technique they used — 



COMFORT ME, MY ROBOT 



65 



you wouldn't believe it unless you 
studied what I have here! Everything from trying to 'cure' a disorder in one session by means of 
brain-surgery or electric shock to 
the other extreme of letting the 
'patient' talk about his problems 
for thousands of hours over a period of years." 

He smiled. "I'm afraid I'm letting my personal enthusiasm run 
away with me. After all, Henson, 
you aren't interested in the historical aspects. But I did have a 
point I wanted to make. About the 
maturity of murder as a solutionconcept." 

Henson adjusted the posturchair as he listened. 

"As I said, even back in the 
twentieth century, they were beginning to get a hint of the answer. 
It was painfully apparent that 
some of the techniques I mention 
weren't working at all. 'Sublimation' and 'catharsis' helped but did 
not cure in a majority of cases. 
Physical therapy altered and 
warped the personality. And all the 
while, the answer lay right before 
their eyes. 

"Let's take your twentieth-century counterpart for an example. 
Man named Henson, who was jealous of his wife. He might go to an 
analyst for years without relief. 
Whereas if he did the sensible 
thing, he'd take an axe to her and 



kill her. 

"Of course, in the twentieth century such a procedure was antisocial and illegal. Henson would be 
sent to prison for the rest of his 
life. 

"But the chances are, he'd function perfectly thereafter. Having 
relieved his psychic tension by the 
common-sense method of direct action, he'd have no further difficulty in adjustment. 

"Gradually the psychiatrists observed this phenomenon. They 
learned to distinguish between the 
psycopath and the perfectly normal human being who sought to relieve an intolerable situation. It 
was hard, because once a normal 
man was put in prison, he was subject to new tensions and stresses 
which caused fresh aberrations. 
But these aberrations stemmed 
from his confinement — not from 
the impuses which led him to kill." 
Again the Adjustor paused. "I hope 
I'm not making this too abstruse 
for you," he said. "Terms like 
'psycopath' and 'normal' can't have 
much meaning to a layman." 

"I understand what you're driving at," Henson told him. "Go. 
ahead. I've always wondered how 
Adjustment evolved, anyway." 

"I'll make it brief from now 
on," the Adjustor promised. "The 
next crude step was something 
called the 'psychodrama.' It was a 



66 



IMAGINATION 



simple technique in which an aberrated individual was encouraged to 
get up on a platform, before an 
audience, and act out his fantasies 
—including those involving aggression and violently antisocial impulses. This afforded great relief. Well, I won't trouble you with 
the historical details about the establishment of Master Control, 
right after North America went under in the Blast. We got it, and 
the world started afresh, and one 
of the groups set up was Adjustment. All of physical medicine, all 
of what was then called sociology 
and psychiatry, came under the 
scope of this group. And from that 
point on we started to make real 
progress. 

"Adjusters quickly learned that 
oldfashioned therapies must be discarded. Naming or classifying a 
mental disturbance didn't necessarily overcome it. Talking about 
it, distracting ""attention from it, 
teaching the patient a theory about 
it, were not solutions. Nor was 
chopping out or shocking out part 
of his brain-structure. 

"More and more we came to rely 
on direct action as a cure, just as 
we do in physical medicine. 

"Then, of course, robotics came 
along and gave us the final 
answer. And it is the answer, Henson— that's the thought I've been 
trying to convey. Because we're 



friends, I know you well enough 
to eliminate all the preliminaries. 
I don't have to give you a battery of tests, check reactions, and 
go through the other formalities. 
But if I did, I'm sure I'd end up 
with the same answer — in your 
case, the mature solution is to murder your wife as quickly as possible. That will cure you." 

"Thanks," said Henson. "I 
knew I could count on you." 

"No trouble at all." The Adjuster stood up. He was a tall, handsome man with curly red hair, and 
he somewhat towered over Henson 
who was only six feet and a bit too 
thin. 

"You'll have papers to sign, of 
course," the Adjuster reminded 
him. "I'll get everything ready by 
Friday morning. If you'll step in 
then, you can do it in ten minutes." 

"Fine." Henson smiled. "Then 
I think I'll plan the murder for 
Friday evening, at home. I'll get 
Lita to visit her mother in Saigon 
overnight. Best if she doesn't 
know about this until afterwards." 

"Thoughtful of you," the Adjuster agreed. "I'll have her robot requisitioned for you from Inventory. Any special requirements?" 

"I don't believe so. It was made 
less than two years ago, and it's 
almost a perfect match. Paid al


COMFORT ME, MY ROBOT 



67 



most seven thousand for the job." 

"That's a lot of capital to destroy." The Adjuster sighed. "Still, 
it's necessary. Will you want anything else— weapons, perhaps?" 

"No." Henson stood in th,e doorway. 'T think I'll just strangle 
her." 

"Very well, then. I'll have the 
robot here and operating for you 
on Friday morning. And you'll 
take your robot too." 

"Mine? Why, might I ask?" 

"Standard procedure. You see, 
we've learned something more 
about the mind — about what used 
to be called a 'guilt complex'. 
Sometimes a man isn't freed by direct action alone. There may be 
a peculiar desire for punishment 
involved. In the old days many 
men who committed actual murders had this need to be caught 
and punished. Those who avoided 
capture frequently p u n i s h ed 
themselves. They developed odd 
psychosomatic reactions — some 
even committed suicide. 

"In case you have any such impulses, your robot will be available 
to you. Punish it any way you 
like — destroy it, if necessary. 
That's the sensible thing to do." 

"Right. See you Friday morning, 
then. And many thanks." Henson 
started through the doorway. He 
looked back and grinned. "You 
know, just thinking about it makes 



me feel better already!" 

TTENSON whizzed back to the 
Adjuster's office on Friday 
morning. He was in rare good humor all the way. Anticipation was 
a wonderful thing. Everything was 
wonderful, for that matter. 

Take robots, for example. The 
simple, uncomplicated mechanisms 
did all the work, all the drudgery. 
Their original development for military purposes during the twentyfirst century was forgotten now, 
along with the concept of war 
which had inspired their creation. 
Now the automatons functioned as 
workers. 

And for the well-to-do there were 
these personalized surrogates. 
What a convenience! 

Hensen remembered how he'd 
argued to convince Lita they 
should invest in a pair when they 
married. He'd used all of the 
sensible modern arguments. "You 
know as well as I do what having 
them will save us in terms of time 
and efficiency. We can send them 
to all the boring banquets and social functions. They can represent us at weddings and funerals, 
that sort of thing. After all, it's 
being done everywhere nowadays. 
Nobody attends such affairs in person any more if they can afford 
not to. Why, you see them on the 
street everywhere. Remember 



68 



IMAGINATION 



Kirk, at our reception? Stayed four 
hours, life of the party and everybody was fooled — you didn't know 
it was his robot until he told you." 

And so forth on and on. "Aren't 
you sentimental at all darling? If 
I died wouldn't you like to have 
my surrogate around to comfort 
you? I certainly would want yours 
to share the rest of my life." 

Yes he'd used all the practical 
arguments except the psychotherapeutic one — at that time it had 
never occurred to him. But perhaps 
it should have, when he heard her 
objections. 

"I just don't like the idea" Lita 
had persisted. "Oh it isn't that I'm 
oldfashioned. But lying there in 
the forms having every detail of 
my body duplicated synthetically 
— ugh! And then they do that 
awful hypnotherapy or whatever 
it's called for days to make them 
think. Oh I know they have no 
brains it's only a lot of chemicals 
and electricity but they do duplicate your thought-patterns and 
they react the same and they 
sound so real. I don't want anyone 
or anything to know all my secrets — " 

Yes that objection should have 
started him thinking. Lita had secrets even then. 

But he'd been too busy to notice; he'd spent his efforts in 
battering down her objections. And 



finally she'd consented. 

He remembered the days at the 
Institute — the tests they'd taken, 
the time spent in working with the 
anatomists, the cosmetic department, the sonic and visio adaptors, 
and then days of hypnotic transference. 

Lita was right in a way; it 
hadn't been pleasant. Even a modern man was bound to feel a certain atavistic fear when confronted 
for the first time with his completed surrogate. But the finished 
product was worth it. And after 
Henson had mastered instructions, 
learned how to manipulate the robot by virtue of the control-command, he had been almost paternally proud of the creation. 

He'd wanted to take his surrogate home with him, but Lita 
positively drew the line at that. 

"We'll leave them both here in 
Inventory," she said. "If we need 
them we can always send for them. 
But I hope we never do." 

Henson was finally forced to 
agree. He and Lita had both given 
their immobilization commands to 
the surrogates, and they were placed in their metal cabinets ready to 
be filed away — "Just like corpses!" Lita had shuddered. "We're 
looking at ourselves after we're 
dead." 

And that had ended the episode. 
For a while, Henson made sugges


COMFORT ME, MY ROBOT 



69 



tions about using the surrogates — 
there were occasions he'd have 
liked to take advantage of a substitute for token public appearances — but Lita continued to object. And so, for two years now, 
the robots had been ori file. Henson paid his taxes and fees on them 
annually and that was all. 

That was all, until lately. Until Lita's unexplained silences and 
still more inexplicable absences 
had started Henson thinking. 
Thinking and worrying. Worrying 
and watching. Watching and waiting. Waiting to catch her, waiting 
to kill her — 

SO he'd remembered psychotherapy, and gone to his Adjustor. 
Lucky the man was a friend of his; 
a friend of both of them, rather. 
Actually, Lita had known him 
longer than her husband. But 
they'd been very close, the three of 
them, and he knew the Adjustor 
would understand. 

He could trust the Adjustor not 
to tell Lita. He could trust the Adjustor to have everything ready 
and waiting for him now. 

Henson went up to the office. 
The papers were ready for him to 
sign. The two metal boxes containing the surrogates were already 
placed on the loaders ready for 
transport to wherever he designated. But the Adjustor wasn't on 



hand to greet him. 

"Special assignment in Manila," 
the Second explained to him. "But 
he left instructions about your 
case, Mr. Henson. All you have to 
do is sign the responsibility slips. 
And of course, you'll be in Monday 
for the official report." 

Henson nodded. Now that the 
moment was so near at hand he 
was impatient of details. He could 
scarcely wait until the micro-dupes 
were completed and the Register 
Board signalled clearance. Two 
common robots were requisitioned 
to carry the metal cases down to 
the gyro and load them in. Henson 
whizzed back home with them and 
they brought the cases up to his 
living-level. Then he dismissed 
them, and he was alone. 

He was alone. He could open 
the cases now. First, his own. He 
slid back the cover, gazed down at 
the perfect duplicate of his own 
body, sleeping peacefully for two 
serene years since its creation. 
Henson stared curiously at his 
pseudo-countenance. He'd aged a 
bit in two years, but the surrogate 
was ageless. It could survive the 
ravages of centuries, and it was always at peace. Always at peace. 
He almost envied it. The surrogate didn't love, couldn't hate, 
wouldn't know the gnawing torture 
of suspicion that led to this shaking, quaking, aching lust to kill — 


70 



IMAGINATION 



Henson shoved the lid back and 
lifted the metal case upright, then 
dragged it along the wall to a 
storage cabinet. A domestic-model 
could have done it for. him, but 
Lita didn't like domestic-models. 
She wouldn't permit even a common robot in her home. 

Lita and her likes and dislikes! 
Damn her to Los Alamos and 
gone! 

Henson ripped the lid down on 
the second file. 

There she was. 

There she was; the beautiful, 
harlot-eyed, blonde, lying, adorable, dirty, gorgeous, loathsome, 
heavenly, filthy little goddess of a 
slut! 

He remembered the command 
word to awake her. It almost 
choked him now, but he said it. 

"Beloved!" 

Nothing happened. Then he 
realized why. He'd been almost 
snarling. He had to change the 
pitch of his voice. He tried again, 
softly. "Beloved!" 

She moved. Her breasts rose 
and fell, rose and fell. She opened 
her eyes. She held out her arms 
and smiled. She stood up and came 
close to him, without a word. 

Henson stared at her. She was 
newly-born and innocent, she had 
no secrets, she wouldn't betray 
him. How could he harm her? How 



could he harm her when she lifted 
her face in expectation of a kiss? 

But she was Lita. He had to remember that. She was Lita, and 
Lita was hiding something from 
him and she must be punished, 
would be punished. 

Suddenly, Henson became conscious of his hands. There was a 
tingling in his wrists and it ran 
down through the strong muscles 
and sinews to the fingers, and the 
fingers flexed and unflexed with 
exultant vigour, and then they rose 
and curled around the surrogate's 
throat, around Lita's throat, and 
they were squeezing and squeezing 
and the surrogate — Lita tried to 
move away and the scream was almost real and the popping eyes were 
almost real and the purpling face 
was almost real, only nothing was 
real any more except the hands 
and the choking and the surging 
sensation of strength. 

And then it was over. He dragged the limp, dangling mechanism 
(it was only a mechanism now, 
just as the hate was only a memory) to the waste-jet and fed the 
surrogate to the flame. He turned 
the aperture wide and thrust the 
metal case in, too. 

Then Henson slept, and he did 
not dream. For the first time in 
months he did not dream, because 
it was over and he was himself 
again. The therapy was complete. 



»3 s 



COMFORT ME, MY ROBOT 
that's how it was." Hen


7i 



son sat in the Adjuster's 
office, and the Monday morning 
sun was strong on his face. 

"Good." The Adjuster smiled 
and ran a hand across the top of 
his curly head. "And how did you 
and Lita enjoy your weekend? 
Fish biting?" 

"We didn't fish," said Henson. 
"We talked." 
"Oh?" 

"I figured I'd have to tell her 
what happened, sooner or later. So 
I did." 

"How did she take it?" 

"Very well, at first." 

"And then — ?" 

"I asked her some questions." 
"Yes." 

"She answered them." 

"You mean she told you what 
she'd been hiding?" 

"Not willingly. But she told me. 
After I told her about my own little check-up." 

"What was that?" 

"I did some calling Friday night. 
She wasn't in Saigon with her 
mother." 

"No?" 

"And you weren't in Manila on 
a special case, either." Henson 
leaned forward. "The two of you 
were together, in New Singapore! 
I checked it and she admitted it." 

The Adjuster sighed. "So now 
you know," he said. 



"Yes. Now I know. Now I know 
what she's been concealing from 
me. What you've both been concealing." 

"Surely you're not jealous about 
that?" the Adjuster asked "Not in 
this modern day and age when — " 
"She says she wants to have a 
child by you," Henson said. "She 
refused to bear one for me. But 
she wants yours. She told me so." 

"What do you want to do about 
it?" the Adjuster asked. 

"You tell me," Henson murmured. "That's why I've come to you. 
You're my Adjuster." 

"What would you like to do?" 
"I'd like to kill you," Henson 
said. "I'd like .to blow off the top 
of your head with a pocket-blast." 

"Not a bad idea." The Adjustor 
nodded. "I'll have my robot ready 
whenever you say." 

"At my place," said Henson. 
"Tonight." 

"Good enough. I'll send it there 
to you." 

"One thing more." Henson gulped for a moment. "In order for it to 
do any good, Lita must watch." 

It was the Adjuster's turn to 
gulp, now. "You mean you're 
going to force her to see you go 
through with this — ?" 

"I told her and she agreed," 
Henson said. 

"But, think of the effect on her, 
man!" 



IMAGINATION 



"Think of the effect on me. Do 
you want me to go mad?" 

"No," said the Adjuster "You're 
right. It's therapy. I'll send the robot around at eight. Do you need 
a pocket-blast requisition?" 

"I have one," said Henson. 

"What instructions shall I give 
my surrogate?" the Adjustor 
asked. 

Henson told him. He was brutally explicit, and midway in his 
statement the Adjustor looked 
away, coloring. "So the two of you 
will be together, just as if you 
were real, and then I'll come in 
and — " 

The Adjustor shuddered a little 
then managed a smile. "Sound 
therapy," he said. "If that's the 
way you want it, that's the way it 
will be." 

THAT'S the way Henson wanted it, and that's the way he 
had it — up to a point. 

He burst into the room around 
quarter after eight and found the 
two of them waiting for him. There 
was Lita, and there was the Adjuster's surrogate. The surrogate 
had been well-instructed; it looked 
surprised and startled. Lita needed 
no instruction; hers was an agony 
of shame. 

Henson had the pocket-blast in 
his hand, cocked at the ready. He 
aimed. 



Unfortunately, he was just a little late. The surrogate sat up 
gracefully and slid one hand under 
the pillow. The hand came up with 
another pocket-iblast aimed and 
fired all in one motion. 

Henson teetered, tottered, and 
fell. The whole left side of his face 
sheared away as he went down. 

Lita screamed. 

Then the surrogate put his arms 
around her and whispered, "It's all 
over, darling. All over. We did it! 
He really thought I was a robot, 
that I'd go through with his aberrated notion of dramatizing his revenge." 

The Adjustor smiled and lifted 
her face to his. "From now on you 
and I will always be together. 
We'll have our child, lots of children if you wish. There's nothing to 
come between us now." 

"But you killed him," Lita 
whispered. "What will they do to 
you?" 

"Nothing. It was self-defense. 
Don't forget, I'm an Adjustor. 
From the moment he came into my 
office, everything he did or said 
was recorded during our interviews. 
The evidence will show that I tried 
to humor him, that I indicated his 
mental unbalance and allowed him 
to work out his own therapy. 

"This last interview, today, will 
not be a part of the record. I've already destroyed it. So as far as the 



COMFORT ME, MY ROBOT 



73 



law is concerned, he had no 
grounds for jealousy or suspicion. 
I happened to stop in here to visit 
this evening and found him trying 
to kill you — the actual you. And 
when he turned on me, I blasted 
him in self-defense." 

"Will you get away with it?" 

"Of course I'll get away with it. 
The man was aberrated, and the 
record will show it." 

The Adjuster stood up, "I'm 
going to call Authority now," he 
said. 

Lita rose and put her hand on 
his shoulder. "Kiss me first," she 
whispered. "A real kiss. I like real 
things." 

"Real things," said the Adjuster. 
She snuggled against him, but he 
made no move to take her in his 
arms. He was staring down at 
Henson. 

Lita followed his gaze. 

Both of them saw it at the same 
time, then — both of them saw the 
torn hole in the left side of Henson's head, and the thin strands of 
wire protruding from the opening. 

"He didn't come," the Adjuster 
murmured. "He must have suspected, and he sent his robot instead." 

Lita began to shake. "You were 



to send your robot, but you didn't. 
He was to come himself, but he 
sent his robot. Each of you doublecrossed the other, and now — " 

And now the door opened very 
quickly. 

Henson came into the room. 

He looked at his surrogate lying 
on the floor. He looked at Lita. He 
looked at the Adjustor. Then he 
grinned. There was no madness in 
his grin, only deliberation. 

There was deliberation in the 
way he raised the pocket-blast. He 
aimed well and carefully, fired only 
once, but both the Adjustor and 
Lita crumpled in the burst. 

Henson bent over the bodies, inspecting them carefully to make 
sure that they were real. He was 
beginning to appreciate Lita's philosophy now. He liked real things. 

For that matter, the Adjustor 
had some good ideas, too. This 
business of dramatizing aggressions 
really seemed to work. He didn't 
feel at all angry or upset any more, 
just perfectly calm and at peace 
with the world. 

Henson rose, smiled, and walked 
towards the door. For the first time 
in years he felt completely adjusted. 



SPECIAL YULETIDE OFFER — SEE PAGE 130 

For Xmas-and All Year-Give a 'Madge' Subscription 



Ellaby's society was a perfect democracy, 
where all men were equal. But some still wanted 
more personal attention, and they got it, like— 



THE DICTATOR 

With* 



JUST looking at Ellaby, you 
could tell he was going places. 
He was five feet nine inches 
tall and weighed a hundred and 
fifty pounds. He had an I. Q. of 
ninety-eight point five-seven, less 
than four hundredths off the mode. 
His hair was mousey and worn 
slightly long for a man, slightly 
short for a woman. Back in High 
Falls, where he was torn, he was 
physically weaker than sixty percent of the men but stronger than 
sixty percent of the women. 

He had been in training since his 
twentieth birthday to assassinate 
the Dictator. Ellaby was now 
thirty years old. 

Dorcas Sinclair met Ellaby at 
the pneumo-station. She was too 
big and strapping for a woman, 
but otherwise not unattractive 
with her lusterless hair, slightly 
thick-featured face, small sagging 
bosom and heavy-calved legs. 



"I'll take your bags," she told 
Ellaby, and led him from the station. She walked quickly, but not 
too quickly. You always had to 
find the happy medium, thought 
Ellaby. For Ellaby, finding the 
happy medium had always come 
easy. Ten years ago, when Ellaby 
had been graduated from the High 
Falls secondary school, the four 
words MOST LIKELY TO SUCCEED had been printed under his 
picture in the yearbook. It was expected by everyone: young Ellaby 
had learned his three R's — rules, 
rights, responsibilities — satisfactorily. Ellaby had neither excelled 
nor failed: he was by nature a first 
class citizen. 

Running to keep up with the 
too big, too long-legged Dorcas 
Sinclair who was carrying one of 
his suitcases in each hand, Ellaby 
was led from the pneumo-station. 
The splendid, unimaginative geo


74 



metric precision of the Capitol 
stretched out before him in the 
dazzling summer sunlight, the view 
serving as a leaven for Ellaby's 
usually phlegmatic disposition. He 
could feel his spirits rise, his heart 
thump more rapidly, speeding the 
sudden flow of adrenalin through 
his body. 

This was the city. It was here 
where the fruits of whatever had 
gone wrong in Ellaby's upbringing 
or whatever had gone wrong in the 
linear arrangement of his genes 
would ripen. It was here where 
Ellaby, modal Ellaby would pass 



his tests for top-secret work; unsuspected, average Ellaby, would 
write his name in flaming letters across the pages of history. It was 
here where Ellaby would kill the 
Dictator. 

And after that — what? Chaos? 
A new order based not on modality 
but something else? Ellaby wasn't 
sure. No one in the organization 
knew for sure. The concept was 
staggering to Ellaby. It was the system — or nothing. Well, let the 
others worry about it. They did the 
planning. Ellaby was only the executioner. 



75 



IMAGINATION 



HpHE house was like all the 
others on the block, all the 
others in the Capitol, a grimly solid 
structure of lets-pretend brick 
fronting on a street which faded 
into distant haze, straight as a 
ruled line, to north and south, 
crossing the east-west avenues at 
precise right angles every five hundred feet. The grid pattern city, 
Ellaby remembered from his rights 
course in school, (every man has 
the right to a room and bath in 
any city as long as he is employed) 
made the best use of available 
space for houses. The strip city is 
unnecessary in time of peace — 
was there ever, had there ever 
been any other time?; the radial 
city is preferred for rapid transportation, being the accepted • pattern in the great economic hubs 
and ports like Greater New York 
and Hampton Roads. 

"You will have to live here with 
me" Dorcas Sinclair told Ellaby, 
"until you pass your tests for employment. I don't have to tell you 
how much depends on the outcome 
of those tests, Ellaby." 

"But I can't fail them. I thought 
you knew my record." 

With an unnerving unmodal 
violence, Dorcas Sinclair's strong 
fingers dug into the flabby muscle 
of Ellaby's upper arm. "Well, you 
had better not," she said, her large 
teeth hardly parting to let the 



sounds out. 

Ellaby was suddenly alarmed. 
He had had very little truck with 
people of this sort. They were as 
unpredictable as the weather in 
High Falls which having a population under twenty-five thousand, 
had never qualified for weather 
control. Unlike modal man, they 
had never been exhaustively studied. Their likes and dislikes were 
not catered to, but their passions 
couldn't foe predicted, either. 

"Ease up, Dorcas," a deep voice 
said from the doorway leading to 
the kitchen. 

Ellaby stared in that direction 
gratefully. It was indecent for a 
woman, for anyone, to expose her 
emotions that way. Ellaby was almost inclined to thank the stranger. 

"Stranger, nothing!" Ellaby 
blurted aloud. Ellaby's face reddened and he apologized. "I 
didn't mean to raise my voice," he 
explained. "You surprised me." 

"I guess you didn't expect to 
find me here, at that. You haven't 
changed much, Ellaby." 

Automatically, Ellaby mumbled 
his thanks for the compliment. Sam 
Mulden, though, had changed. 
He'd always been a radical. He 
wore his hair cropped too short. He 
was tall and thin, his elbows and 
knees exposed by the tunic he 
wore like knots on gnarled, living 
wood. Mulden looked older. He 



THE DICTATOR 



77 



hadn't bothered to dye his graying 
hair, or to smooth the premature 
wrinkles on his long-nosed, thinlipped face. He was smiling sardonically at Ellaby now, as if he 
could read Ellaby's mind. "I might 
have known it would be you," he 
said. "As soon as they said the 
assassin was coming from High 
Falls, I should have guessed." 

"Why?" asked Ellaby. It was a 
question which had nudged for ten 
years at his docile patience. When 
people go out of their way to train 
you, though, to spend ten years 
teaching you every inch of Capitol 
territory without once taking you 
there, to make you proficient with 
various deadly weapons although 
your reflexes are splendidly modal, 
to teach you meaningless phrases 
like democratic inequality (?) and 
individuality (?) and the right to 
live a self-directed (?) life, to 
make your own decisions ( ? ) , when 
people act, in short, like a very 
thorough government school, even 
if their motives seem strangely misdirected, you don't question them. 

"For two reasons," Mulden said. 
"You can understand the first, 
Ellaby. If the second one bothers 
you, forget it. In the first place, 
you're so perfectly modal, the 
government would never suspect 
you. In the second place, you're so 
well adjusted you're bound to follow our instructions." 



"Or any instructions," Dorcas 
Sinclair said. "That's what I'm afraid of, Mulden." 

TpLLABY still couldn't get over 
' it. He never expected to find 
poor, unfortunate Sam Mulden in 
such a high position in the organization or anywhere. He remembered Mulden clearly from their school 
days together. Mulden was a 
character, a real character. Physically, he was barely acceptable: 
more than eighty percent of the 
men and some sixty-five percent 
of the women were able to knock 
Mulden down in the Jligh Falls 
gymnasium classes. But mentally 
Mulden was a misfit. His I. Q. was 
in the neighborhood of a hundred 
and fifty. His gangling, ineffectual 
physique wasn't too far below the 
mode, but mentally he soared intolerably above it. 

Now Mulden told Dorcas Sinclair, "Don't worry about that. 
We've had ten years to work on 
him. They can't undo it in a few 
days. Ellaby, you are quite sure 
you know what you must do?" 

"Oh, yes. Tomorrow morning I 
will take my security tests. According to the record of my previous 
physical and mental testing, I 
should make top secret classification. I will work here in the capitol. 
I will find the Dictator and kill 
him. The only thing that bothers 



IMAGINATION 



me is I don't know who to look 
for. What does the Dictator look 
like?" 

"Didn't they explain all of that 
to you in High Falls?" the woman 
asked irritably, without even making an effort to poker her face. 

"Ease off," Mulden told her for 
the second time. "He's confused. 
Listen to me, Ellaby. Don't you 
remember? The Dictator never 
makes public appearances." 

"Yes. Yes, now I remember. No 
one knows what the Dictator looks 
like. He keeps to himself. He issues orders which are instantly 
obeyed, helping to maintain universal modality in the country. It almost seems a shame I'll have to 
kill him." 

"So we've pavloved him for ten 
years, have we?" Dorcas Sinclair 
rased. Ellaby turned away in embarrassment. "Damn you, Mulden, 
he still questions it!" 

"He's supposed to," Mulden explained quietly. "If he accepted 
what we told him, he'd go around 
talking about it naively. This way, 
he understands the necessity for 
secrecy." 

"He doesn't understand — " 

"Well, then he realizes it. Let 
him get some sleep, will you? Tomorrow's going to be a good day 
for us, a big day for him. Good 
night, Ellaby. If you want anything, Sinclair will get it for you." 



Ellaby assured them he would 
want nothing except a simple meal 
of whatever most people in the 
Capitol ate on Wednesdays. It 
turned out to be pork chops, which 
Ellaby neither particularly liked 
nor disliked. He chewed his food 
with the proper lack of enthusiasm 
and retired early. 

THE next morning, Ellaby took 
his I. Q. test at the Capitol 
personnel bureau. He was slightly 
above average in space perception 
but slightly below average in comparisons. He hoped his anxiety 
didn't show on his face. If anyone 
asked him why he had come to the 
Capitol he was ready to blurt out 
the reason and have done with it. 
He wondered what Sam Mulden 
would have thought if he knew. 
The Sinclair woman would have 
been furious. 

No one asked Ellaby. You came 
to the Capitol because you wanted 
to work there. According to the 
mode, a man desired to change his 
location every 3.7 years. Elllaby 
had been 6.3 years tardy, but High 
Falls was an ideally modal community in which people tended to 
linger. 

"I. Q., point seven under the 
mode," the personnel clerk told 
Ellaby. The slight variation — due 
to his anxiety — was not enough to 
matter, Ellaby realized with a 



THE D 

faint sense of triumph. "Proceed to 
physical testing," the girl told Ellaby. 

Obediently, Ellaby followed the 
green arrow to the gymnasium. He 
was given a locker, a towel, a pair 
of athletic shorts and a first-aid 
kit. He stripped off his clothing, 
placing the tunic, underwear and 
sandals in the locker, then climbed 
into his athletic shorts and fell into line with the other men and 
women carrying their towels and 
first-aid kits into the gymnasium. 

The ten-over-mode male wrestling tester pinned Ellaby in less 
than two minutes, a fact which 
was duly noted on his employment 
blank: He was given fifteen minutes of rest, then squared off on the 
mat with a skinny, five-undermode male. Ellaby bested him in 
four minutes flat, took another 
fifteen minute break, mopping the 
sweat from his body with an already sodden towel, then defeated 
the ten-under-mode female wrestler in two minutes and some seconds. It developed into a knock 
down, drag out fight with the twoover-mode female, who finally 
forced Ellaby's shoulders to the 
mat for the necessary five seconds 
after half an hour. 

Ellaby showered, ate a hot 
Thursday lunch and took his employment blank to the emotion lab. 
His electroencephalogram revealed 



:tator 79 

nine alpha cycles to the second, 
but too much theta. 

"Are you nervous?" the technician asked Ellaby. "You're thetaing all over the place." 

"I guess so. Yes, I'm nervous." 

"Then let's try it again." 

They did, the technician rubbing 
the greasy electrode salve on Ellaby's forehead before the electrodes 
were fastened there for the second 
time. The result was the same. 
"More than modal theta," said the 
technician, writing something in 
code on his employment blank. 
"See the personnel advisor, please." 

For Ellaby, it came as a distinct 
shock. His heart pounded against 
his temples, in , his ears. He was 
emotionally unstable. Had the ten 
years been for nothing? 

tcQlT down, Ellaby," the perk3 sonnel advisor said. He was 
a man of middle age, irritatingly 
careless about his appearance. He 
had dyed his graying hair, of 
course, but if you looked close you 
could see gray at the roots. He 
wore a green Thursday tunic which 
was poorly starched. Having had a 
full week to get it ready, that was 
naturally inexcusable. 

"You have a splendid record, 
Ellaby," the sloppy personnel 
clerk said. "Mentally, within tenths 
of the mode. Physically, even 
closer. Unfortunately your emo


8o 



IMAGINATION 



tional — " 

'•That never happened to me before, not in High Falls, it didn't," 
Ellaby interrupted. 

"This is not High Falls. Every 
community, you must realize, 
has its own security testing center. 
And the capitol requires the tightest security of all." 

"I know but I was nervous. 
You're going to tell me my theta 
was too high, aren't you?" 

"That's correct. You needn't feel 
so bad about it. You're going to be 
cleared for secret work. You're 
damn close to modal, Ellaby. 
You're a good security risk. Incidentally, just why were you nervous?" 

"Because I wanted top secret 
clearance. Because I wanted to 
work close to the Dictator. You 
see — " Abruptly, Ellaby stopped 
talking, clasping a hand over his 
mouth in sudden confusion. He 
wasn't supposed to talk about this. 
Lying, of course, was as far from 
Ellaby 's nature as it was from anyone else's, assuming he were reasonably close to the mode. But 
Ellaby hadn't been asked for all 
that information directly. "What 
kind of job will I get?" he asked, 
trying desperately to change the 
subject. 

It was too late. The personnel 
clerk asked, "Just why did you 
want to work close to the Dicta


tor?" 

Ellaby felt a single drop of sweat 
fall from his armpit under the loose 
tunic and roll, itching, down the 
side of his body. He wanted with 
all his soul to be back in High 
Falls. Anyplace but here. 

"Why, Ellaby?" 

"I can't answer that question. A 
man isn't forced to answer a question unless he wants ^to." 

"Certainly not," said the personnel advisor, staring blandly at 
Ellaby. "This is a democratic 
country." 

"Then — " 

"But you've never known a man 
to refuse answering a question asked of him officially, have you?" 

"I'm not sure I understand, sir." 

"You don't have to be so obsequious, Ellaby. I'm less modal 
than you are, hut I make the best 
of my divergencies. What I meant 
was this: did you ever hear of a 
criminal not confessing to his 
crime?" 

"Well, no." 

"I'll ask you the question again, 
Ellaby. Why did you want to work 
near the Dictator?" 

The man leaned close, peered at 
Ellaby. The room was small, almost a cubicle, the bare walls seeming to close in on all four sides. 
Ellaby stifled a wild impulse to 
scream and run out of there, run 
any place as long as he could leave 



THE DICTATOR 



81 



the room and the personnel advisor behind him. "I'm sorry, but 
I can't answer that question," he 
said finally. 

"Tell me, Ellaby, did you ever 
hear your own voice?" 

What a strange question. "Why, 
certainly. All the time, when I 
speak." 

"No, I mean your voice reproduced artificially. Your radio 
voice?" 

"No, I never heard it." 

"Well, you're about to." 

While the personnel advisor 
busied himself setting up the radio 
equipment, Ellaby had a few seconds in which to think. He could 
still make a clean breast of the 
whole thing. They had chosen him 
— Mulden, the Sinclair woman 
and the others in High Falls — for 
his modality. Very well, he could 
use that modality to get out from 
under. He didn't understand. He 
didn't know what they were leading him to, slowly, over a period of 
ten years. He didn't want to assassinate the Dictator. What in the 
world would he want to do that 
for? He would gladly name all the 
names he knew if the personnel advisor would only let him forget the 
whole mad experience and return 
to High Falls. He could attend 
Adjustment Academy if they 
thought he needed it. Anything. 
Anything .... 



"Please slip these earphones 
over your head, over your ears. 
There. Is the microphone close enough to your lips? I think so." 

\ metal band running over the 
top of Ellaby's cranium held 
the earphones in place. Another 
metal band curved around the side 
of his cheek and chin, leading to a 
small microphone before his lips. 

"Place your hands on the arms 
of your chair, please." 

Ellaby did as he was told. Click! 
Click! A pair of manacles sprang 
up from the chair arms trapping 
Ellaby's wrists. Ellaby looked at 
the personnel tester in unpokered 
alarm. "What did you do that 
for?" he asked timidly. 

"So you won't remove the earphones. Now, are we ready?" The 
personnel advisor pressed a button 
on his desk. Ellaby thought he 
heard a faint hum of power in the 
microphone. "I will ask you once 
more, Ellaby. Why did you want 
to work near the Dictator?" 

Ellaby shrugged. He was going 
to say, "I'm sorry, but I don't 
have to answer that question." 
He said, and heard through the 
earphones: "I'm sorry (I'm) but I 
(sorry" don't have (but) to ans(I) wer that (don't) question 
(have to answer that question)." 

"Again, please. I didn't hear 
you," the personnel tester said. 



IMAGINATION 



It was his own voice Ellaby had 
heard through the earphones. 
Playback, with a fraction of a second lapse. Oddly, it un-nerved him. 
The reproduced voice had no right 
lagging. He shouted, "I'm sorry 
(I'm) hut I (sorry) don't have 
(but) to ans (I) wer that (don't 
question! (have to) Shut up! (answer) SHUT UP! (that) PLEASE 
. . . . (question). PLEASE! 
(please)." 

' Once more, if you don't mind." 

Ellaby's head was whirling. He 
blinked sweat from his eyes. "I — 
please! (I — please!)" 

"The law requires that you make 
some answer, even if answer is a refusal." 

Criminals confessed, Ellaby 
thought wildly. Is this why criminals confessed? Did the sound of 
their own voices drive them mad? 
It seemed such a simple device, 
and yet . . . .and yet . . . .but he 
could fool it. He couldn't rush the 
words out in a quick torrent and: 
"I don't have to (I don't answer 
that ques (have to) tion (answer 
that question.)" Ellaby — and Ellaby's echo. "Well, I (well) don't 
(I don't)!" Ellaby blinked more 
sweat from his eyes. "Mumble 
(mumble). Sob. (Sob)." 

"Relax, Ellaby. You seem upset. 
Will you read this, please?" the 
personnel advisor held a card in 
front of Ellaby's face. 



The words swam, blurred together, fused, were readable and 
then were not. Ellaby read aloud: 
"A code (a) of eth (code) ics for 
(eth) mankind (ethics for mankind)." It was, he realized, the 
preamble to the constitution. "In 
the (in) nineteenth (the) centur 
(nine) y the (nine) common 
(teenth)" — faster, faster! — 
"(century the common )c-common 
man was defended (common man) 
by enlightened liberalism (man 
was). In the t-twentieth century 
(in the t-twen) common man was 
championed by (tieth century) enlightened liberalism (the common 
man was). In the twenty-first century (championed by enlightened) 
the common man assumed his proper place (liberalism) at the top of 
society but (in the twenty-first 
cen) will protect the rights of the 
(tury the common man) enlightened liberals or any other minority, 
(assumed his proper) encouraging 
them to become (place at the top 
of) as common as possible (society 
but will protect the rights of the 
enlightened liberals or any other 
minority, encouraging them to become as common as possible). 

"Oh God (Oh)," shouted Ellaby. 
"Shut (God) it (shut) off (it) 
make (off) it (make) stop (it) 
God (stop — God)!" 

"Will you agree to answer my 
question?" 



THE DICTATOR 



83 



"Anything (anything)! ANYTHING (anything)." Now the 
playback was a faint whisper. Ellaby found himself hysterically 
fascinated by it, trying to guess 
the time-lapse, which varied, trying 
to guess the volume, which varied. 
Ellaby's head slumped forward on 
his chest. The unfamiliar wetness 
at the corners of his mouth was 
drool. Ellaby didn't quite know it, 
of course,, but he had given himself 
a very mild and very temporary 
nervous breakdown. 

Two hours later he was asked 
one question. He answered: "I 
want to be near the Dictator so I 
can kill him." 

LATER, Dorcas Sinclair asked: 
'"What else happened at testing, Ellaby?" 

"Take your time," Mulden cautioned. "He looks nervous." 

"I know it. I want to find out 
why." 

"After my EEG," said Ellaby 
softly, "they told me I had too 
much theta." 

"Damn you!" Dorcas Sinclair 
swore. "Then you weren't cleared 
for top sceret?" 

"No, I wasn't. Not at first. Then 
a strange thing happened. They 
said I was cleared only for secret 
and asked me why I wanted to he 
cleared for top secret." 

"You fool!" the woman cried. 



"I told them it was because I 
wanted to work near the Dictator. 
I didn't mean to tell them, but — " 

The woman shook her head in 
despair. "Don't bother finishing," 
she said. "You can clear out of 
here, Ellaby. You're through. Ten 
years. Ten years wasted." 

"If you wish," Ellaby said mildly. "But you're missing the most 
interesting part. They asked me 
why I wanted to be near the Dictator." 

Dorcas Sinclair sucked in her 
breath sharply. Even Mulden 
seemed anxious. "You didn't tell 
them?" the woman asked in a 
frantic whisper. 

"I'm afraid I did." 

"We'll have to flee the city," 
the woman told Mulden, ignoring 
Ellaby now. "If he told them that, 
he probably named names. I have 
friends in Hampton Roads — " 

"Let him finish," Mulden said. 
Mulden was looking strangely at 
Ellaby. 

"They didn't ask me to name 
anyone in the conspiracy," Ellaby 
said. "Unless they could poker 
very well, they seemed perfectly 
calm. They said they would make 
an exception in my case. They 
would clear me for top secret work. 
I start tomorrow." 

"What's your job?" Mulden asked eagerly. 

"Well, this is the strangest part. 



84 



IMAGINATION 



I'm to be the Dictator's confidential assistant.'" 

"Of course!" Mulden cried. "It 
makes sense. Don't you see, Sinclair? We're not the only ones. 
There are others, inside the government, who think it's time' for a 
coup. With their help, Ellaby won't 
fail us." 

Dorcas Sinclair wasn't convinced. "Doesn't it seem peculiar to 
you that, purely by co-incidence, 
Ellaby happened to meet these 
people?" 

But Mulden shrugged. "You 
know the old saw about the gift 
horse," he said. "Ellaby will go ahead with the plan. Tomorrow, if 
all goes well, we'll have a fullscale revolution on our hands. 
Don't you understand, Sinclair? 
The Dictator — a figurehead. 
There are plenty of people around 
like us, who don't want to do 
things just because everyone else 
does them, who don't want to be 
stamped by the mold of conformity, who don't want .... but I 
don't have to go on. The Dictator 
is a figurehead, a symbol of power. 
Destroy him and the whole conforming system comes tumbling 
down in chaos. You'll see tomorrow." 

It was all beyond Ellaby, who 
was still weary from the playback 
ordeals. He took the small, palmsized blaster from Mulden and slip


ped it into his tunic. Tomorrow he 
would assassinate the Dictator and 
suffer the consequences. He almost 
had in mind to rebel. The people 
at testing had been very nice — 
except for those earphones. But the 
Sinclair woman and Mulden might 
be able to do as bad — or worse. 
He'd go through with it. 

Under the circumstances, he 
slept surprisingly well. 

A yTULDEN'S passionate parting 
^J-words still ringing in his ears, 
Ellaby entered the capitol building. 
"Someday you and your kind will 
understand, Ellaby," Mulden had 
said. "Someday you'll know what 
banal really means, and vulgar. 
Someday — I promise you, someday — the true social perspective 
will be re-established, it should not 
be the role in life of the common 
man, the mass, the mob, to make 
the uncommon man as common as 
possible, but quite the other way 
around. The other way, Ellaby! 
Common folk should be given the 
opportunity to become as uncommon as possible. Otherwise, Ellaby, 
we've reached a dead end. 

"Kill him and I promised you 
this: the whole warped system will 
come tumbling. A man shouldn't be 
forced to conform, Ellaby. Mankind's greatness stems from lack of 
conformity. For his own purposes, 
the Dictator bows to the will of the 



THE DI 

mob. But he's surrounded himself, 
with mediocrity. Without him, what 
can they do? Without him they'll 
go down in weeks, Ellaby. In 
days!" 

The guard, a tall blonde woman 
who looked like a twenty-overmode to Ellaby, led him down a 
long, well-lit corridor. No one had 
searched him. It would have taken 
the guard a moment to reach 
within his tunic, find the blaster 
and drag him off to the Academy. 
Other people, nameless people on 
nameless errands, walked by in the 
corridor without paying Ellaby 
any attention. 

Was Mulden right? Were there 
people here, within the building, 
waiting to help Ellaby? 

Ellaby licked his dry lips and 
kept walking, finding it difficult to 
keep his legs from trembling. It was 
as if a nimbus of terror dogged his 
footsteps, ready to envelope him 
momentarily. The guard seemed 
completely unconcerned. She was 
humming the melody of the latest 
song-hit, a wonderfully liltingly 
banal tune which had been on 
everyone's lips back in High Falls. 

The blonde guard paused before 
a door in the long corridor. "Here 
we are," she said. 

Ellaby opened his mouth to 
speak, but gulped in air instead. 
He felt a weak fluttering in his 
chest. He had never been so afraid 



TATOR 8s 

in all his life. 

The guard, who was a head taller than Ellaby, glanced down at 
him. "You don't have to be so nervous," she said in a perfectly normal voice. "Everything's going to 
be all right." 

"You see, it's a new job and all 

;i 

"Oh, here! Let's see that blaster." 

Ellaby's heart plunged. He wanted to bolt, to run. She knew. She 
knew .... 

He stood there, too weak to 
move, while the guard reached inside his tunic, found the blaster 
taped to his chest, wrenched it 
loose. She took it out, held it up, 
flipping open the chamber and examined the inside. "All right," she 
said. "I only wanted to make sure 
it was loaded." 

And she took out a key and 
opened the door. "He's inside," she 
said, and strolled on down the hall. 

ELLABY clutched the doorframe 
for support. He was breathing 
raggedly now, as if he'd run all the 
great length of the corridor, sprinting with monsters behind him. He 
rubbed the shoulder of his tunic 
against his damp brow and entered 
the room. 

A man Ellaby's own size was sitting there, viewing a 3D. When he 
heard Ellaby at the door he got up. 
He looked very unhappy as Ellaby 



86 



IMAGINATION 



pointed the blaster at him. He 
said, "So soon?" 

"They said you would try wiles, 
trickery, deceit," Ellaby recited. 
"You won't fool me." 

"You think I'm the Dictator? 
You're going to kill me? That's 
very funny. I know, you see. I 
know." 

"Stand back!" Ellaby screamed. 

"I assure you, I am not the Dictator any more than you will be — " 

The Dictator^ face dissolved in 
a red, jelly-like smear as Ellaby 
pulled this trigger of his blaster. 

He spent the next ten minutes 
being very ill. 

Afterwards, they were very efficient. They carted the body away 
and told Ellaby all he had to do 
was ring for food or drink or anything he wanted. Occasionally, he 
would sign some papers. Occassion


ally — masked — he might be 
asked to review a parade. 

And all at once, sitting alone in 
the room with its pleasant view, it 
came to Ellaby. He passed no 
judgment, but he understood — 
and he was afraid. 

The masses ruled, thought Ellaby, hardly knowing what the 
phrase meant. The system was 
self-perpetuating, and revolution 
couldn't change it. The common 
man — men like Ellaby — had 
come into his own, for once and for 
all time. 

The man Ellaby had slain was 
no Dictator. He had tried to tell 
Ellaby that before he perished. 
Now Ellaby had taken his place. 
Ellaby was no Dictator, either. 

But he would do until the next 
one came along. 

THE END 




"I thought you said they wouldn't understand English!" 



^Jerrcin ^Jeleviston 



A TELEVISION network encompassing the entire Earth is 
in the making. In the United 
States we've had a continental 
hook-up for years; Europe is well 
on its way to providing a similar 
chain of microwave-linked stations. All that remains is to connect these two systems. 

Technicians have decided that 
the micro-wave transmission of TV 
images is the most economical and 
efficient. The question is: how do 
you plant micro-wave stations one 
hundred and fifty miles apart 



across the breadth of the Atlantic 
Ocean? 

The answer is of course that 
you don't! Instead you go up the 
Canadian coast from U. S. stations, 
into the Arctic regions, across the 
top of Greenland, into the Scandinavian Peninsula and thence down 
to Europe. There is hardly one 
spot not on land over this entire 
distance. 

Unquestionably within a half a 
decade, all-Terran television will 
be a reality and the Earth will 
have shrunk a great deal more! 




Alice knew that Dobie was a good dog, even 
if lie did have an alarming habit of hunting down 
rabbits and gophers. But one day he brought her— 



THE HAND 

h 



ALICE McNearby was 
washing breakfast dishes 
and looking out the kitchen 
window at the November sky 
when she first spied Dobie. The 
way he was sneaking up to the 
house she knew he had killed something. 

She dried her hands on her apron 
and tried to put down the suspicion 
that gnawed at the edge of her 
mind as she went to the door. During the past month Dobie had 
killed a cat, a pheasant, two rabbits and a field mouse and it seemed it would be only a question of 
time until he got one of the chickens or even one of the suckling 
pigs. That would be all Mac would 
need to throw one of his wild 
spells and he'd probably take a 
gun to Dobie as he had threatened 
to do. To make it worse, Dobie 
seemed to know how Mac felt and 
often growled at him. Mac didn't 



growl back but the look in her 
husband's eyes was enough to convince her Dobie's continued existence was in doubt. 

It was a wonder to Alice that 
Mac hadn't done away with him 
already, judging from the comfort 
she derived from the dog. Dobie 
never fretted, never whined and 
seemed so appreciative of everything she did for him. She had scolded him for his killing but found 
herself unable to put her heart in it 
because he seemed to love it so. 
Instead, she always managed to 
clear any bones away before Mac 
returned from town or came up 
from the barn and she was thankful he seemed as yet unaware of the 
brown dog's hunting nature. 

Now it appeared she'd have to 
cover up for the dog once again 
and she opened the door. Dobie 
was under a bush half way across 
the barn yard, his kill still in his 



88 



mouth. He was circling around, 
and she knew he'd soon be on his 
stomach enjoying his feast. 

"Dobie!" she called in a low 
voice, hoping it would not carry to 
the barn. 

Dobie's ears came up. He looked 
her way. 

"Dobie! . . . Come here, Dobie!" 

The dog was undecided, looking 
at her, unmoving for a moment. 
Then his tail started flicking, he 
lowered his head and came up to 
her. 

Then she saw what he had in his 



mouth and her blood stopped and 
only a great effort on the part of 
her heart started it going again. 

It was a human hand, blood 
still oozing from the severed wrist. 

"Dobie!" 

The way she said it, the way 
she looked — something made the 
dog drop the hand. It fell to the 
ground, limp, palm down. 

Dobie, head hung, tail down, 
ventured forward, nuzzled her 
hand. But Alice could not tear her 
eyes from the thing on the cold 
ground. She had cared for Dobie 



89 



IMAGINATION 



90 

like a baby ever since someone 
dropped him off out in the country 
and she had adopted the name 
Dobie because a passing child had 
called him that and it seemed like 
a good name . . . and she loved him. 

But this, this hand. That was too 
much. 

She looked around, saw a milk 
pail, put it open end down over 
the hand and carried two large 
rocks from the garden border to 
put on top to secure it. She didn't 
want it to be gone when she 
brought Mac back to see it. 

She heard her ring on the telephone — rather early for Mrs. 
Swearingen or Mrs. Abbey wasn't 
it? — but ignored it. There was 
something else she had to do and 
do quickly. For the first time in 
months she felt thankful for 
Mac's presence. Surely he would 
know what to do. Though it was 
cold, she was unmindful of the fact 
that she did not wear a coat as she 
hurried to the barn; she was thinking instead that perhaps she should 
have answered the phone in case 
it might have been someone other 
than her women friends, possibly 
something in connection with the 
severed hand. She shuddered as she 
remembered how it had looked. 

Alice found Mac in the loft. He 
had a forkful of hay over the 
opening when he saw her below. He 
stopped, narrowed his eyes before 



he slowly brought the hay back to 
the loft floor and leaned on the 
pitchfork. 

"Dobie's found something," she 
said and wished her voice hadn't 
quavered so. 

Mac spat a blob of tobacco on 
the floor above her. "He's a nogood dog," he said. "Scares the 
pigs. Always sneakin' around. 
Ought to be rid of him. Should 
have got 'round to it before this 
What did he find?" 

"A hand." She swallowed . ... 
and shivered. 

"A what?" 

"A hand. A human hand." She 
suddenly took pride in the fact that 
she was telling him something he 
didn't know and that he was interested. "I don't know where he got 
it." 

Mac put down the fork and 
lowered his burly frame over the 
edge of the opening and came down 
the ladder without a word. He followed her up to the house and she 
was thankful Dobie was nowhere 
around. When he kicked over the 
pail she was gratified to hear his 
sharp intake of breath. 

"By God!" he said, staring down 
at it. Then he flicked it over with 
his boot. "By God!" he said again. 
Alice had never seen him so agitated. 

He turned to her, his eyes narrower than she had ever seen them. 



THE HAND 



9 r 



"You take a good look at it?" 

She nodded, looked down at the 
way the fingers were bent upward 
as if the hand were holding an invisible ball. She heard Mac spit, 
looked at him running his fingers 
along his stubbled jaw. 

"It ain't human," he said. "Anybody with any sense could see that. 
It's got six fingers." 

JUST then the phone rang again. 
It seemed to come from a long 
way off and Alice hadn't consciously noticed it until her husband said. 
"Ain't you goin' to answer the 
phone?" And then she went to the 
door, dazed and wondering. She 
turned before she went in. 

"What are you going to do with 
it?" she asked. 

"You just go in and gab with 
those women folks," he said. "I'll 
take care of it." 

"Shouldn't we call the sheriff?" 
His eyes came up level with 
hers. "We ain't goin' to call nobody. I don't want no trouble. And 
don't you go talkin' about it with 
them either." 

The phone was Mrs. Swearingen 
who told her that she had been trying to get her for the last half hour 
ever since she heard about that 
ship that crashed and wasn't it 
awful and that a person wasn't safe 
in his bed asleep any more with 
these planes flying around and 



crashing — and so far from an airport, too. Mrs. Swearingen was surprised that Alice had noticed no 
smoke and didn't she know the 
wreck was closer to the McXearby 
place than it was to the Swearingen s? 

"It's right south of your lower 
forty on the old Carnahan land, 
Alice. I'd figure it at about a mile 
from your place. Lots of people 
down there." 

And then there was the call from 
Mrs. Abbey who told her she'd 
come from the crash site and 
wasn't it a peculiar plane with 
those funny windows and that 
once-broken-one somebody had 
patched up from the inside. 

"The sheriff won't let anybody 
go near it," Mrs. Abbey said. "He 
says it's a space ship and the army 
ought to have a look at it first. But 
I saw him trying to find where to 
get in. Except for that broken 
window and that crumpled nose it 
don't look too bad off. Big clouds 
of smoke were shooting out the tail 
when I first got there but it's not 
smoking any more. Really, you 
ought to go down and see it, 
Alice." 

Alice told her husband about it. 
He had gone back to the barn and 
she didn't see the severed hand 
anywhere on the way there. 

"So that's where it come from," 
he said. "Good thing it didn't land 



02 



IMAGINATION 



on my place." He spat and wiped 
his mouth with the sleeve of his 
overalls. It always bothered Alice 
when he did this because the stain 
was so difficult to get out but she 
had long ceased trying to change 
him "If it'd landed here I'd of 
blown it up like a stump." 

"Shouldn't we go down and see 
it?" Alice asked, knowing too late 
she had phrased the question the 
wrong way. 

"Curiosity killed the cat," (he 
said, and there was the faintest 
glimmer of a smile on his face but 
it was only fleeting. "Let everybody 
else go down and I'll get my work 
clone while they're standin' around 
with their mouths hangin' open. 
I'm runnin' a farm and I aim to 
run it right." 

"I think I'll go down." She tried 
to make it have resolve but didn't 
quite succeed. 

He glared at her and spat again. 
"Then git," he said. He threw 
down a large forkful of hay and 
she had to jump out of the way. 
She went right after dinner. 

She saw a silver cylinder that 
looked ever so much like pictures 
of guided missiles she had seen in 
the newspapers except that this one 
was bigger than any of them. Its 
nose was dug she could not tell 
how far into the earth and some 
of the metal on the sides was battered and bent and the tail was she 



guessed about a hundred and 
fifty feet in the air. It was about 
twenty-five feet across. 

There were clusters of people 
about and she recognized many of 
them she hadn't seen for a long 
time and she was glad she had 
come because it gave her a rare 
chance to visit; Mac seldom cared 
for just visiting. She talked to the 
Blaines, the Purveses, to the Gordon children whose parents had let 
them remain at the wreck site even 
after they had gone home for 
chores, to the Barfords and Hocholters and many others. They asked about Mac and she offered her 
usual excuses for him. 

While she was there she saw an 
army car driven up. She watched 
while some men got out and went 
through the roped-off area and 
pounded and scraped on the cylinder and then stood off looking at 
the tail of it, scratching their 
heads. 

XT7HEN she went home she was 
» * surprised to see how far the 
sun had moved across the sky 
and hoped Mac wouldn't be upset 
by her prolonged absence. She was 
gratified to see that he wasn't in 
the house. She petted Dobie for a 
while before she went in to stir up 
the stove and prepare supper. 

During the meal Alice tried to 
tell her husband something of what 



THE HAND 



93 



she had seen at the wreck site but 
if he paid any attention to her he 
didn't reveal it. He had propped up 
a farm equipment catalogue against 
the sugar bowl and studied the 
pages without saying a word. She 
resigned herself to eating in silence 
with this great hulk of a man before her and reflected that this 
night was no different from most 
of the others. She wondered what 
it was that made him the way he 
was, so intent on his farm to the 
exclusion of everything else, including humanity. It was a fetish, 
an obsession that didn't pay off because she couldn't see that they 
were better off than the Swearingens or the Abbeys or any of the 
others in the neighborhood. 

When he was through he simply got up, put on his overcoat 
and went outside. In a few minutes 
she could hear the car start and 
knew it would be another lonely 
evening. Mac would be home when 
he felt like it, reeking of liquor but 
handling it well. She did not begrudge him these absences because 
the man obviously needed something to take his mind off his work. 
But she wished she had some comparable escape. 

She had got out her writing 
board, had settled herself comfortably with pen in hand in Mac's big 
chair and had even put the date on 
the letter to her mother who lived 



in Canada when she heard Dobie's 
excited bark. 

She picked up a shawl on the 
way to the kitchen, turned on the 
big light on the windmill and looked out the window. Dobie was in 
the middle of the yard barking at 
something she couldn't see. She 
went out. 

"Dobie," she called. "What is 
it?" 

The dog whined and moved 
about nervously, looking first at 
her and then at the darkness between the big barn and the machine shed. As she sought to pierce 
the blackness there, a shape moved 
out from between the buildings and 
the sudden move caused her to 
step back. Dobie at once set up 
loud and ferocious barking. 

"Quiet, Dobie," she managed to 
say, laying a hand aside the dog's 
head and viewing the figure before 
her. It was a man — at least a man 
shape — with hands (she thanked 
God the creature had both its 
hands), a head, neck, shoulders 
and legs. But the head was a lot 
larger than a man's, there was no 
hair on it and the eyes were smaller, the nose longer and the mouth 
a narrow slash across the face. 
The neck was short, the shoulders 
thin and the legs and arms were 
spindling. She saw that each hand 
had six fingers. Across the narrow 
shoulders had been flung what 



94 



IMAGINATION 



looked like a carpet and from beneath this fell a skirt that went to 
the knees, held to the body with a 
metal rope belt just under his ribs. 
The shoes were enormous things 
for such pipestem legs — until she 
saw they were soft and furry and 
that this gave them their size. For 
a moment she almost laughed because he presented such a grotesque figure, but she did not dare. 
The creature spoke. 

"Good evening, Mrs. McNearby," it said in a not unpleasant, 
whistling voice and Alice wondered 
how it could talk so well to her. 

"I come from the crashed ship. 
You know of it, of course. You 
were there this afternoon." 

Alice was on the point of asking 
how he knew she had been at the 
wreck site when he started in 
again. 

"We have traced the severed 
hand of one of our crew to your 
place here. We came down at considerable velocity' when our ship 
went out of control. We were lucky 
to escape with our lives. But one of 
us was thrown from the ship with 
such force that his hand was cut 
off by an obstruction on the ship. 
Your dog happened on the scene 
before we could find the hand." 

The chill of the November night 
air was beginning to penetrate her 
shawl and Alice could feel a stirring of air on her legs. Dobie 



moved restlessly at her side but she 
did not let go of his neck hair for 
fear of what he might do. 

"We need that hand, Mrs. McNearby. Without it the man who 
lost it will be at a tragic disadvantage among us. That is why we 
were looking so hard for it this 
morning after the crash. If we can 
return the hand to him in time it 
can, through proper treatment, be 
made as good as new. Would you 
be so good as to return it to me, 
now, please?" 

The eyes, though tiny, seemed 
not unkind, and the alien stood 
silent. She was moved by his 
pleas. 

"Mac — that's my husband — has 
it," Alice said. "I saw Dpbie here 
with it and put it under a milk pail 
and when Mac saw it he said he'd 
take care of it." She hoped she was 
making sense. 

"Do you know where it is?" 

"I don't know where Mac put 
it." 

"Would you find it for me, 
please? I'll wait." 



ALICE agreed 
what Mac 



and, wondering 
would say if he 
came home and found the hand 
gone, started looking for it. But 
surely Mac would understand 
about the hand, she thought. I'll 
explain to him the urgency of it, 
that one of the aliens needs it to 



THE HAND 



95 



live and be useful. 

She looked in the obvious places, 
in the storeroom just off the kitchen, in the cellar, then in the 
house itself, in Mac's room and 
through his things, and even in the 
attic, though she knew it couldn't 
be there. She became frantic then, 
paced by the alien's necessity for 
his hand, and did not bother to 
straighten things up after she looked. It simply couldn't be in the 
house. But where else? She went 
out and told the alien she could not 
find it but that she would look in 
the barn. 

In the end she could find it nowhere and when she told the alien 
he seemed as disappointed as she. 

"I have seen you searching," he 
said. "I want to thank you for your 
trouble." 

"I'm awfully sorry," she said. "I 
don't know where Mac could have 
hid it. When he comes home I'll 
ask him." 

"I'll wait for him," the alien 
said. "It's imperative we have the 
hand. It is the only thing standing 
in the way of our leaving your 
planet. Your husband will know 
where it is and return it to us." 

"I'm sure he will," she said, hoping she was right but knowing how 
stubborn Mac could be. Then she 
got to worrying about what would 
happen if he would refuse and as 
she went back to the house with 



Dobie at her side she was overcome 
with the shakes. 

She did not get her composure 
back until she had drunk a cup of 
steaming hot coffee. Then she 
looked at the clock, saw it was 
eleven and that she had spent nearly two hours looking for the hand. 
She saw, too, that the figure was 
still in the yard, standing there motionless, like something carved out 
of stone. 

Her husband drove in at midnight and it seemed an eternity between the time the engine stopped 
and he entered the house. 

From the way he looked at her 
he was surprised to find her still 
in the kitchen. 

"You still up?" His face was 
flushed, his tongue thick. 

"Mac," she said, not knowing 
how to begin. "Where is that 
hand?" 

"You still worried about that?" 
He took off his coat and threw it 
on the table. 

"But Mac! They've come after 
it." 

He looked at her dully. "Who's 
come after it?" 

"The aliens — from the ship. 
There's one of them in the yard. 
Look out the window." 

He turned around and saw the 
stationary figure in the yard. He 
took a deep breath. "So that's one 
of 'em, eh?" He laughed in a way 



9 6 IMAGE 

that chilled her, then went to the 
cupboard and reached for his shotgun on the wall next to it. 

Alice put her hand on his shoulders and he stopped before he 
touched the gun. 

"Listen, Mac. They need that 
hand. It belongs to one of their 
men and they need it because 
they're going to put it back 
on and it will be as good as new. 
Then they're going to leave." 

He looked down at her with 
bloodshot, narrow eyes and she 
could see where tobacco had run 
out of the corner of his mouth and 
the only thing she could think of 
was what it would look like on the 
overalls when she'd wash them. 

"That thing out there," Mac 
said, "ain't got no business 
'round here scarin' the pigs and 
chickens. And I aim to get it." 

"I wish you had told me where 
the hand is," Alice said, her eyes 
scalded with tears. "I tried to find 
it. I looked everywhere. If I had 
found it I would have given it to 
him and now they'd be gone." 

He shoved her from him rudely. "Jest like a woman to do a 
thing like that. And without even 
askin' me." He was breathing hard 
and he moved to the window to 
look at the alien again. "You, out 
there. You want that hand, eh?" 
He laughed again, then turned to 
her. "You looked for it. That's 



what you said. Well, you jest looked in the wrong place. I hid it 
good." He went over to his coat 
and withdrew a newspaper-wrapped package from one of the pockets. He unfolded it on the table. It 
was the hand. 

"Please take it out to him, 
Mac," Alice said. "He's waiting 
for it." 

His face was sour and his lips a 
sneer. "Give it to him, hell," he 
said. "Dobie brought it here, didn't 
he? I've a mind to let Dobie have 
it." 

"No, No!" 

Mac put his hands on the table, 
stared down at the hand and shook 
his head. "But Dobie don't deserve 
it." 

He picked up the hand and a 
queasiness prevented Alice from 
looking directly at it. 

"It's a matter of time," she 
pleaded. "Please take it to them. 
They've got to have it right away 
or they can't use it. She heard the 
clink of one of the stove lids and 
watched in horror as Mac dropped 
the hand through the hole into the 
fire beneath. She was suddenly 
sick. During it all she could hear 
was Mac's laughter. 

"Git on upstairs," he said a few 
minutes later. "Git on up to bed." 

ALICE looked at him, knowing 
her face was pale and her eyes 



THE HAND 



97 



wet and hating him for what he 
had done to her and what he had 
done to the aliens. But she felt 
fear, too, because she had never 
seen him quite like this. 

"What are you going to do?" 

He went over, took down a box 
of shells from the cupboard. "What 
d'you suppose? I'm goin' to run 
that thing off my place." 

"You can't do that!" 

"You wait and see." 

"But he's done nothing to you!" 

"He's on my property, ain't he? 
Now you get on upstairs like I told 
you. Git!" 

Alice went up the stairs engulfed by a feeling of sorrow for the 
aliens, particularly for the one 
that would never get his hand 
back, and filled with fury for her 
husband. 

From her bedroom window she 
could see the alien still standing in 
the yard and she wondered what 
he would think of them for burning 
the hand and for what Mac was 
about to do. 

She stood there a long time before the alien moved. She heard 
the downstairs door open and close 
and she knew Mac was outside and 
that the two were approaching each 
other. The alien finally moved from 
her field of vision. 

Listening, she heard the alien's 
calm, whistling voice but she 
could- not make out what he said. 



She could only hear the raving of 
her husband and this she did not 
want to hear. 

When the shotgun blast came 
she jumped as if she herself had 
been hit and once again she was 
flooded with compassion for the 
creature from another world somewhere who had come in friendship 
and who had been given something 
hateful in return. 

She went to the window but she 
could see nothing. She did not dare 
go downstairs again with Mac in 
the mood he was in. She sat in an 
armchair at the window looking 
out into the barn lot illuminated 
by the lone electric light high in 
the windmill. And eventually, she 
did not know when, she fell asleep. 

When she woke up the day was 
just dawning and with a rush she 
remembered everything that had 
happened the night before and she 
found she had slept through the 
night in the chair without removing her clothes. When she stood 
up, her muscles screamed protestingly. She looked out into 
the yard and saw that the light 
in the windmill was still burning. 

She went to Mac's bedroom, expecting to find him sprawled out 
across his bed. But his bed had not 
been slept in. Downstairs she expected to find him, head in hands, 
asleep at the kitchen table. But 
he was not there and the shot


9 8 



IMAGINATION 



gun was not in its place on the 

wall. 

She found the gun on the doorstep. But Mac wasn't in sight. 
Dobie came up to her and nuzzled her hands. 

"Where is he Dobie?" she 
asked. -'Where's Mac?" 

Dobie turned and trotted be


fore her, looking back at her as 
if to say, "This is the way." 

She found Mac behind the barn. 

He was alive, but in a state 
of shock, moaning in pain and 
fear. 

His right hand was missing. 
Severed neatly at the wrist. 
THE END. 



oude I 



! 



ONCE upon a time in the dear, 
dead days of fifteen years ago, 
the science of nuclear physics (it 
was called atomic physics then ! ) was 
simple and understandable. Even 
physicists felt they had discovered 
their building blocks and that all 
that remained was to put them together. The scientists had electrons, 
protons, photons and neutrons to 
worry about. It was all so simple. 

But the picture has changed a 
lot since then and while tremendous 
practical advances have been made, 
the confusion is much worse than 
before. Now physics worries about 
20 fundamental particles where it 
once had four! There are neutrinos, 
electrons, positrons, positive mu 
mesons, negative mu mesons, kappa 
mesons, protons, antiprotons, neutrons, antineutrons, gravitons, mesons — the list seems endless! 

The nice clear Bohr picture of the 
atom (which today's illustrators are 
very fond of) with its little electrons spinning in elliptical orbits 
around a simple nucleus is gone. So 
much is happening within the atom, 
that any simple picture is impossi


ble to present. At present only the 
weird abstruse complexities of mathematical wave mechanics can describe such a thing, and unfortunately most of us can't understand 
it. For that matter even the physicists have no vivid picture themselves. It's as if they plug in numbers — and numbers come out. 

Actually the situation of course 
is not that bad. But what the science of nuclear physics needs right 
now is not bigger and better atom 
smashers or more atomic piles — instead it needs some genius who can 
sense a coordinated connection between a hundred different aspects of 
the atomic structure of matter. 
This hypothetical genius would do 
more for science than all the mechanisms on Earth. 

The proper end of scientific theory is economy — that is, you try to 
explain a phenomenon in the simplest, most logical way. Simplicityis a good yardstick for measuring 
theories. Unfortunately, nuclear 
physics fails to meet this measurement and the result is that the laboratories are grinding out mas


PHYSICS IS A MADHOUSE! 



99 



sive amounts of new data without 
knowing what the old has shown 
them. 

The old saw about "the more 
you know, the less you know" has 
more than a kernel of truth. Nuclear physics is getting so complicated that hardly one man can he 
more than an expert in one tiny 
segment of it. Some scientists have 
gone so far to suggest that the 
only way this impasse will ever be 
cleared is when huge mechanical 
brains are devised which will be 



able to collate and synthesize sense 
from a bewildering complexity of 
fact. They suggest that if for no 
other reason, mechanical brains 
must be devised! 

On the other hand — science is 
sometimes a funny thing. It is perfectly possible that some thinker 
may see a complete connection and 
the whole fantastic complexity of 
nuclear physics may be reduced to 
a simple sensible picture capable of 
being understood at a glance! — we 
hope! 




"I've lost them! They must be in outer space!" 



Brown John's Body 

'Winiton 'ffllarks 

Erd Neff wanted as little to do with his 
fellow men as possible. So he lived alone in 
his big cash-vault. Alone, except for John . . . 



ERD Neff dropped a thin 
bundle of currency into the 
$100 bill drawer of the 
flat-top desk and kicked the drawer 
shut with a dusty boot. 

He flicked the drip from his 
hooked nose, which was chronically irritated by the wheat dust of 
the warehouse, then he wiped his 
fingers down the leg of his soiled 
denims. Across the 12 X 12, windowless room John stirred awake 
from the noise and began nosing 
in the debris of his filthy cage. 

"Time for supper, John?" Neff 
tugged at the twine at his belt and 
examined his $3 watch. He pinched 
a dozen grains of wheat from a 
two-pound coffee can and let them 
sift through the wires of the cage. 
John pounced on the grain hungrily. 

"Wait a minute! What do you 
say, dammit?" Neff's hand reached 
for the marshmallow-toasting fork 
that hung from a hook on the 



wall. He touched the points, filed 
needle sharp. "What do you say?" 
he repeated, twanging the tines 
like a tuning fork. 

John skittered to the far corner, 
tearing new holes in the old newspaper with frantic claws. Cowering 
against the wires he spat halfchewed flecks of wheat trying to 
say the magic words that would 
spare him from the fork. "Tinkoo! 
Tinkoo!" he squeaked, straining to 
make the two syllables distinct. 

Neff hung up the fork, and John 
turned to lick at the old scabs 
clotted from earlier jabs, taking 
sullen inventory to be sure there 
were no new crimson leaks in his 
louse-infested hide. Until two 
months ago, he had been just one 
more gregarious specimen of Mammalia Rodentia Simplicidentata 
Myomorphia Muridae decumanus. 
Now he had another name. Like each 
of his predecessors in the cage, he 
was a large, ibrown rat called 



100 



John — after Erd Neff's despised 
and deceased father. Neff named 
all his rats John. 

"Well, don't get fat." 

John finished the grain, pawed 
the air and squeaked, "Mur!" 

"More, hey? You talk fine when 
you're hungry." 

"Peef, mur, mur!" John begged. 
He did well with his vowels, but 
"I" and "s" sounds were beyond 
him. He said "f" for "s". "L's" he 
ignored entirely. 

Neff gave him one more wheat 
head. "Okay, get fat!" 



He turned to the door, lifted the 
inside, mechanical latch, shoved 
with his foot and snatched his revolver from his hip-holster. The 
vault door opened ponderously revealing an empty warehouse. Neff 
peeked through the crack between 
the hinges to clear the area concealed by the door itself. 

One hoodlum hopeful had hidden there. Spotting him through 
the crack, Neff had simply beefed 
into the foot-thick slab of fireproof steel. Inertial plus surprise 
had disposed of that one. Neff 

1 01 



102 



IMAGINATION 



hadn't even had to shoot. 

'■"pONIGHT there was no one. 

Funny. The wheat country 
was getting tame, or else the tinhorns had learned their lesson. It 
was no secret that Erd Neff never 
visited the local bank, yet it had 
been more than six months since 
anyone tried to hold him up. 

The local bank hated him 
plenty. He was costing them. His 
five loan offices in the rich wheat 
county skimmed the cream of the 
mortgage loan business. Of course, 
nowadays most people paid off 
their loans, and the low interest 
rates he charged to lure the business barely paid expenses. Yet, he 
still picked up an occasional foreclosure. Farmers still got drunk divorced, gambled, broke legs or 
committed suicide once in awhile, 
and Neff's loan documents were 
ruthless about extensions of time. 

These foreclosed acreages he 
traded for grain elevators and 
warehouses when crops were small 
and operators were desperate. Then 
came the bumper years during and 
after World War II. Wheat on the 
ground and no place to store it but 
in Erd Neff's sheds. It wasn't 
cheap to store with Neff, and he 
had a virtual monopoly in Ulma 

Neff swung the great door back 
into place with its whoosh — thunk 
County. 



that sealed in air, sound and nearly a hundred thousand dollars in 
currency. He levered the bolts into place and spun the expensive 
combination lock. 

The vault, tucked away in the 
front, left-hand corner of the old 
frame warehouse expressed Neff's 
distrust and contempt for mankind. Concrete and steel. Bed 
shower, toilet and desk. In this 
walk-in cash box he was fire-proof, 
bomb-proof, theft-proof and, most 
important of all, people-proof. There 
he consorted unmolested with the 
one mammal on earth he found interesting — John, the brown rat. 

He slid the broad warehouse door 
closed behind him with a cacophony of dry screeches and padlocked it. The dusty street was deserted except for a black sedan 
which two-wheeled the corner a 
block away and sped toward him. 
Neff dropped his pistol back in its 
holster. "Now, what the hell — ?" 

He waited on the splintery platform, a huge man, ugly of face, 
shortlegged and long-bodied with 
a- belly swollen from regular overeating. His shaved head swivelled 
slowly as the police car leaned into a skid-stop. 

Officer Collin Burns got out 
and stared up at the motionless 
statue in sweat-dust stained denims. Burns was half Neff's 56 
years, tall and thin. He wore gray, 



BROWN JOHN'S BODY 



103 



a silver star and a big black hat. 
He said, "I'll take your gun, Erd." 

"Now what? I got a permit." 

"Not any more. It's revoked." 

"For why?" 

"There were witnesses this 
afternoon." 

"Witnesses? What in hell are 
you — oh, no! Not that damned 
dog?" 

"The puppy belonged to a 
little girl. You can't claim self-defense this time." 

"He was coming down here 
chasing the cats away every day." 

"So you shot him, like you did 
Greeley's collie." 

"Cats count for more. You 
know well as I do, you can't control the rats around a warehouse 
without cats." 

"You've shot five men, too, 
Erd. Three of them are dead." 

"I was cleared, you know 
damned well! Self-defense." 

"You're too handy with that 
pistol. Anyway, I didn't file this 
complaint. It was the child's 
mother, and she made it stick with 
the chief. Give me the gun, Erd." 

"You got a warrant for my arrest?" 

"No, but I will have in an hour 
if you insist." 

"I got a perfect right to protect 
my property." 

"Not with a gun. Not any 



more." 

"I just get these punks convinced, and now you want to turn 
loose on me again. Who put you up 
to this Collin?" 

"You did. When you shot that 
pup. I'm not here to debate it. 
You're breaking the law from this 
minute on if you don't hand over 
the gun." 

"Dammit, Collin, you know 
how much money I got in there? 
You know how much I pack 
around on me sometimes?" 

"That's your business. You can 
use the bank and bonded messengers — they get along with dogs." 

"Telling me how to run my 
business?" 

"I'm telling you to give me that 
gun. You'll get the same police 
protection as any other citizen." 

Neff sneered openly. "I'd a been 
dead thirty years ago depending 
on cops." 

"I don't doubt that a minute. 
You're easy to hate, Erd. Are you 
going to give me that gun?" 

"No." 

"You like things the hard way, 
don't you?" Burns got back in the 
squad car and drove off. Neff 
spat a crater in the wheat-littered 
dust and got into his own car. 

TWO minutes later he turned up 
Main Street and stopped before city hall. Inside the tiny po


104 



IMAGINATION 



lice station he dropped his pistol 
on the counter. Bud Ackenbush 
looked up from his desk. "You 
could have saved Collin some trouble." 

Neff stalked out without a word 
and crossed the street to the Palace Cafe. He ordered a doublethick steak, fried potatoes and 
pie. He liked the way the waitresses scrambled for the chance to 
wait on him. Women didn't like 
him. He was ugly and smelled of 
sweat, and on the street women 
looked the other way when they 
met him. All but the waitresses at 
the Palace. When he came in they 
showed their teeth and tongues 
and wiggled their hips. He was a 
50-cent tipper. 

The important thing was it got 
him his steak, really double thick 
and double quick. People could be 
real efficient. Like brown John. 
Prod 'em where they live and 
they'll do anything. Even talk to 
you. 

"You look kinda naked tonight, 
Erd," Gloria kidded. 

Neff wiped steak juice from his 
chin and stared at her breasts. It 
used to excite him, but now it was 
just habit. It was better than looking at red-smeared lips that smiled 
and eyes that didn't, eyes that 
said, "Don't forget the tip, you 
filthy bastard!" 

Funny. Hang a gun on any 



other citizen in town and people 
would stare. Take the gun off of 
Erd Neff and people make cracks. 

He did feel naked. 

"I didn't order this damned succotash!" 

"It's free with the steak dinner, 
Erd." 

Go ahead, pinch my leg like the 
harvesting crews do. I'm free with 
the dinner, too. Like the ketchup. 
Like the mustard and the salt and 
pepper and the steak sauce and the 
sugar and the extra butter if you 
ask for it, just don't forget the tip. 

Clarence Hogan, the fry-cook, 
came around the counter and leaned on the booth table beside Gloria. 
"You don't like succotash? How 
about some nice peas, Erd?" 

Clarence was Gloria's husband. 

Pimp ! 

"Put some ice-cream on my pie," 
Neff said. He looked up at Clarence. "No, I don't want any goddamned peas! " 

They brought his pie and left 
him alone. He finished it and felt 
in his pocket for the tip. He 
changed his mind. To hell with 
Gloria and her fat leg! The steak 
was tough. 

He paid the check and went out. 
The sky was pink yet. Later in the 
week the sunsets would be bloodred, as the great combines increased in number and cruised the rippling ocean of wheat, leaving brist


BROWN JOHN'S BODY 



ly wakes and a sky-clogging spray 
of dust. 

Neff's busiest season. Damn that 
dog! Damn Collin Burns! 

His hand brushed his leg where 
the leather holster should be. 
Damned laws that men made. Laws 
that acquitted him of homicide and 
then snatched away his only weapon of self-defense because he shot 
a yapping dog. 

As he got in his car Collin 
Burns came out of the station. He 
tossed Neff's gun through the 
open window onto the seat. "Here's 
your property. The Marshal came 
in, and he changed everybody's 
mind. It's going to cost you a hundred dollars and a new pup for the 
little girl, probably. Here's the 
subpoena. Tuesday at ten." 

"I don't get it." 

"The Marshal said to let you 
fight your own battles." 

NEFF started the car and let 
the clutch out. The Marshal 
knew his way around. The transient harvesting crews were a wild 
bunch. If word got out that Neff 
was unarmed, packing thousands of 
dollars the length of the county, 
the enforcement people would have 
a lot of extra work on their hands. 

He parked behind the warehouse, next to the railroad tracks. 

He came around front, unlocked 
the big door, pulled it shut behind 



him and bolted it. The warehouse 
was jet black now, but he knew 
every inch of the place. He could 
fire his pistol almost as accurately 
at a sound as at a visible target. 
He practiced on rats. 

Holding a pocket flash, he worked the combination. As the final 
tumbler fell silently, a faint, raspy 
screech came to his ears, like a 
board tearing its rusty nails loose 
under the persuasion of a wrecking 
bar. He listened a minute, then he 
levered the bolts back, stepped into the vault-room, closed the door 
and shot the mechanical bolts. 

Sure. Someone was out there, 
but they'd get damned tired before 
morning. He flicked on the light 
and touched the other wall switch 
beside it. The powerful blower and 
sucker fans cleared out the musty 
air and rat-stink. 

John rustled in the cage, blinking at the sudden light. "Hi, Neff! 
Meat! Meat! Meat!" 

Smart little devil! Neff sometimes brought him a scrap from 
his dinner, but he hadn't thought 
to tonight. He sucked at his teeth 
and pulled out a tiny string of 
steak. "Here. Bite my finger and 
I'll poke both your eyes out." 

John picked the thread of gristle 
from Neff's finger with his forepaws and devoured it, trembling 
with pleasure. Neff lifted the cage. 
"Okay, now let's have a few 



IMAGINATION 



tricks." 

At once John made for the 
can of wheat. "Get outta there!" 
Neff scooped him up and dropped 
him on the desk, snapping his tail 
with a forefinger. John whirled, laid his ears back and opened 
his mouth. At bay, the brown rat, 
Neff knew, is the most ferocious 
rodent of the 2000 species, but 
Neff held his hand out daring 
John to bite. 

Neff knew all about rats. More 
than anybody in the world knew 
about rats. When you live among 
them for three decades you find 
out about their cunning wariness, 
fecundity, secretiveness, boldness, 
omnivorous and voracious appetites. Fools reviled them as predators and scavengers. Neff appreciated them for what they really 
are: The most adaptable mammal 
on earth. 

John was smart but no smarter 
than the rest. Neff had proved this 
by teaching every rat he captured 
alive to talk. 

Impossible they had told 
him. Even parrots and parakeets 
only imitate sounds in their squawking — yes, and pet crows. 
Animals don't have thinking 
brains, they said. They react, trial 
and error, stimulus and response, 
but they don't think. 

Neff didn't know about the 
others, but he knew about rats. 



Keep them hungry and lonely for 
a mate. Hurt them. Torture them. 
To hell with this reward business. 
Rats are like men. Mentally lazy. 
They'll go for bait, sure, but 
they'll go faster to escape pain — 
a thousand times faster. 

And rats have lived with man 
from the first. They have a feeling for language like the human 
brat. Between partitions, inches 
from a man's head when he lies in 
bed talking to his wife, under a 
man's feet while he's eating, over 
his head in the warehouse rafters 
while he's working. Always, just 
inches or feet away from man, running through sewers, hiding in 
woodpiles, freight-cars, ships, 
barns, slaughter-house,- skulking 
down black alleys, listening, hiding, 
stealing, always listening. 

Yes, rats know about man, but 
rats had never known a man like 
Erd Neff, a man who hated all 
mankind. A man who chose a 
rat for a companion in preference 
to one of his own kind. Rats named 
John learned about Neff. They 
learned that his tones and inflections had specific meaning. They 
learned very fast under the stabbing prod of the marshmallow 
fork. With just enough food to 
keep them alive, their blind ferocity changed into painful attention. They learned to squeak and 
squawk and form the sounds into 



BROWN JOHN'S BODY 



a pattern with their motile 
tongues. In weeks and 'months, 
they learned what the human brat 
learned in years. 

"Stand up like a goddamned 
man!" 

JOHN stood up, his tail the third 
point of the support. 
"Say the alphabet." 
"Eh — bih — fih — dih — ih 
— eff — jih — etch — " 

Neff lit a cigar and watched the 
smoke float away from the ceiling 
blower and vanish into the overhead vent in the far corner. He 
bobbed one foot in time to the 
squeaky rhythm of the recitation. 
He took no exception to John's 
failure with "I," "s", and "z". 
The other Johns had been 
unable to handle them, too. 
"Hungrih, Neff. Hungrih!" 
The big man picked out three 
grains of wheat. He noticed the 
can was almost empty. One by one 
he handed the kernels to his pet, 
waiting for John's "Tinkoo!" in 
between. 

"Mur! Mur!" 

"Lazy tongue! It's more, not 
mur! " 

John dropped to all fours and 
retreated. Usually Neff slapped 
him in the belly when he used that 
tone. But Neff was bemused tonight. He kept listening for 
sounds, sounds that he knew could 



never penetrate the thick walls. 

They were out there, he was 
sure. Another damned fool or two, 
flashing a light around, trying to 
figure out something. Neff remembered one pair who had even tried 
nitroglycerin. He saw the burns 
on the outside of the door the next 
morning. 

Amateurs! Nobody knew for 
sure just how much money Neff 
kept in the old deslc, and big-time 
pros wouldn't tackle a job like this 
without a pretty fair notion of the 
loot. For all they knew, maybe he 
mailed it to an out-of-town bank. 

"Okay, fetch the pencil." 

John jumped from the desk and 
moved toward the open door of 
the shower-stall where Neff had 
thrown the pencil stub. He paused 
by the wheat can, then scurried 
on to get the pencil. He climbed 
Neff's leg, and dropped the pencil 
into the open palm. 

"Smart punks up at State College. So you can't teach a rat anything but mazes and how to go 
nuts from electric shocks, eh? 
Wouldn't they be surprised to 
meet you, John?" 

"Hungrih!" 

"You're always hungry!" 
"Meat! Meat!" 

"Yeah. You can sound your "e's" 
real good when you say, 'meat.' 
Somebody I'll cut off your tail and 
feed it to you." He laughed, grab


io8 



IMAGINATION 



bed John by the coarse hair of his 
back and slipped him back under 
the cage. 

Then he undressed down to his 
underwear, turned out the light and 
lay on the narrow iron bed. John 
rustled in his cage for a minute, 
then there was only the faint hum 
of the blower and sucker motors in 
the ventilating system. The incoming and outgoing air was baffled 
and trapped to kill sounds, and 
spring-loaded sliding doors poised 
to jam shut and seal off the room 
if anyone tampered with the exterior grilles in the roof. 

The fans hummed softly and 
Erd Neff slept. 

Sleck-thud, sleck-thud! 

HE was awake pawing the wall 
for the light switch, but 
even as his hand found it, and his 
eyes discovered the closed ventilator doors, a reddish vapor sank 
over his body. A single gasp and 
Neff was clawing his throat. Sharp, 
brown-tasting, acid-burning, eyesearing, nose-stinging! 

He fell to his knees and clawed 
to the far corner, fighting for air, 
but the acrid stink stained his 
throat and nose. His eyes kept 
burning. The whole room must be 
full! 

The door-lever! No, that's what 
they wanted. Blind! Gun's no 
good now. God, for a breath of 



air! Damned tears! Can't open my 
eyes! Air! Got to have it! 

His throat refused to open. The 
stink, a little like iodine, a lot like 
a hospital smell but a million times 
stronger — raked at the tender tissues of his throat. Icepicks 
stabbed from his soft palate, up into his brain, his temples. He 
swayed against the door, caught 
the lever and heaved convulsively. 
The door fell away slowly. He 
stumbled forward, gashing his knee 
against the sharp jamb. 

A light struck redly through his 
clenched, tear-soaked eye-lids. 

"That did it. Get the gun!" The 
voice was high, almost girlish. A 
young boy? 

A slightly heavier voice said, 
"Got it. Keep an eye on him while 
I find out why the fan stopped 
working." 

"He's going no place. You were 
right. That bromine stuff really 
did the business. Lookit his face. 
Sure it won't kill him?" 

"Don't care if it does now. We 
got the door open." 

"What is this bromine, anyhow? Boy it sure stinks!" 

"It's a chemical element like 
chlorine, only it's a liquid. It fumes 
if you don't keep it covered with 
water, and the fumes really get 
you. They used it in- gas bombs 
in the war." 

"That was chlorine." 



BROWN JOHN'S BODY 



109 



"They used bromine, too. I read 
it." 

"Air!" Neff rasped. 

"Help yourself if you call this 
stinkin' stuff in your warehouse 
air." 

From the vault the deadened 
voice came. "This must be the 
switch. The other switch is for 
the lights." 

"Look out! When you turn it 
on don't get dosed yourself." 

"I only dumped a few drops in. 
There. It'll blow out in a few 
—phew, let me outta here. That 
stuff does — God, it's worse than 
the dose I got in the chem lab!" 
The voice grew, coughing and 
cursing. "Better wait a minute 
or two. How's our big brave dogkiller doing?" 

On his hands and knees, Neff 
was on the verge of passing out, 
but doggedly he tried to place the 
voices. Highschool kids? Bromine. 
Sounded like a chemical they might 
filch from the highschool laboratory. 

A kick in the ribs reminded him 
he was still helpless. "All right, 
get back in there." They aimed 
him through the vault door and 
kept kicking him until he went. 
They hauled him up into his chair. 
He tried to strike out blindly, but 
his chest was full of licking flames 
that spread pain out to his shoulders. 



Now rope whipped around his 
feet, hands, chest and neck, jerking his body hard against the castered desk-chair and cramping his 
head back. "Tie him good. No way 
to lock him in with this door." 

Neff opened his eyes. The boys 
were wet blurs rummaging through 
his desk. "Look! Just look at 
that! We can't carry all that." 

"Get one of those burlap sacks 
out there. By the door." 

Footsteps went and returned. 
"Now, just the small bills. Up to 
twenty. No, Jerry, leave the big 
stuff alone. Who'd take one from 
a kid?" 

"Okay, let's make tracks." 

"Wait! Neff said desperately. 
"My legs and hands. You've cut off 
the circulation!" 

SOMETHING hard like 'he barrel of a gun rapped down on 
the top of his head. "I ought to 
blow your dirty brains out. Killing my little sister's dog, damn 
you. Damn you, I think I will 
kill you. Damn you, damn you!" 
the voice crested. 

"Wait a minute Jerry," the other 
voice cut in. "I got a better idea. 
Here. Look at this." 

Short silence. "Yeah! Yeah, 
that's just dandy. Look how thin 
he is. That's just what the doctor ordered. Okay, the top's loose. 
Stand by the door and don't let 



no 



IMAGINATION 



him get by you. Wait. Got your 
flash? Good! In the dark. That's 
real good. Which switch is it?" 

"Throw them both." 

"Okay. Flash it over here. Look 
out, here I come! " 

"Hurry up! Look at that hungry, black-eyed little devil. That 
ought to fix up the son-of-a— " 
..Thunk! The compression 
rammed heavily into Neff's ears. 
The bolts shot solidly into place 
from the outside, and the combination knob rang faintly as it was 
spun. Silence. 

They'd go out the same way 
they came in and tack the board 
back in place. How long before 
anybody would miss him? Twenty-four hours? Hell, no. Nobody 
would bust a gut worrying that 
soon. Two days? Some weeks he 
was g6ne several days making the 
rounds of his loan offices. 

A week? Maybe. Girls at the 
Palace would get suspicious. Tell 
Collin Burns. 

But a week! They'd cut off the 
blower when they threw both 
switches. No ventilation. No air. 

Neff strained at the ropes. His 
legs were pulled under the seat 
so tightly that his feet were turning numb. Hands were tingling, 
too. Dirty little sadists. Turning 
John loose thinkingsHe had to get loose. Less than 
one day's air, then — 



"John!" Thank God John wasn't 
an ordinary rat. 

"John, come over to me. These 
ropes. Chew them, John. Come on, 
John. Come on, boy." 

No sound at first, then a faint 
motion in the old newspapers. 
"John, say the alphabet!" 

"Eh— bih " 

"That's right. Go on!" 

"Fih jih " The 

squeaking stopped. 

"Come over to me, John. Come 
to me, boy." 

He held his breath. The beating 
of his heart was so loud he couldn't 
be sure that John was moving. 
The silence was long. Even the rat 
was blind in this blackness. He 
must be patient. 

Sweat began oozing and trickling down his face, his armpits, 
his back — even his left leg. No, 
wait! That wasn't sweat! 

fT^HE throbbing in his legs was 
greatest at his left knee. 
The trickle was blood from the 
gash. It ran freely, now, the ropes 
backing up arterial pressure. Never 
mind that! 
"John!" 

The coffee can tipped over, and 
the racket made Neff start against 
his bonds. The rope sawed his 
Adam's apple. 

Crunch! 

"Leave that damned wheat 



BROWN JOHN'S BODY 



in 



alone, John. Come over to me, 
boy. I'll give you a whole bag full 
when you chew off these ropes. 
Hear that, John? And a chicken 
foot. I'll bring you a whole 
chicken. A live one. I'll tie her 
down so she won't peck you. 
That's what I'll do, John." 

He was breathing heavily now. 
"Do you get me, John? Would you 
like a live chicken?" 

"Yeff." 

The crunching resumed for a 
minute then stopped. Neff remembered, there had been only a dozen 
or so grains of wheat left. John 
would still be hungry. The thought 
of a chicken should do it. If not, 
he could threaten him. 

Neff waited. Relax! There was 
all night to work this out. 

Finally, he felt something at his 
ankles. "That's the boy, John. Up 
here and down my arms. They're 
behind me. Get the rope off my 
hands first. Come on boy." 

It was John, all right. Neff 
could feel the little claws coming 
up his left leg. 

"Come on, hurry up, John. Tell 
you what. I'll bring you a nice, 



fat female, just like yourself. A 
live one. You can live in the cage 
togeth — — John, don't stop 
there!" 

The claws had paused near his 
knee and were clinging to the 
blood-soaked cloth. 

"No, no, John! Don't! I'll stick 
you with the fork. I'll stick you — 
I'll kill you! John, we got to get 
out of here or we'll both die. Die, 
do you hear! We'll suffocate! 
Don't do that. Stop. Stop or 
I'll—" 

Neff's threats beat hard into the 
rat's brain, and now as the slanting 
incisors tore at the cloth and 
chewed the luscious, blood-smothered, hot meat, Neff's screams sent 
tremors through the skinny, voracious body, and the tail tucked 
down. The words made John nervous, but it was dark. And there 
was food, such wonderful food, so 
much food! 

They were harsh words, terrible, 
screaming words: but words are 
words and food is food, and after 
allJohn was only a rat. 

THE END 



FEATURED NEXT MONTH:— 

COSMIC SABOTEUR 

by 

FRANK M. ROBINSON 

If you were kidnapped from Earth as a youth — do you think you could be 
indoctrinated to hate your race? Don't miss this significant novel! 




(Conducted by 'Ylflari Wotf 



THE World Science Fiction 
Convention held in San 
Francisco is now history. To 
you, reading this, it's rather ancient history; to me, writing it, 
it's something barely over. I'm still 
sleepy from it. While I write this, 
fans are still leaving San Francisco, 
catching their planes or buses or 
trains or heading their automobiles out onto the open road. The 
physical evidences of the convention are still scattered about the 
Sir Francis Drake Hotel — programs and campaign literature for 
next year's site. (Next year it's 
Cleveland.) 

Almost all Convention reports, 
if they're straight accounts of 
what happened, read very much 
the same. To a certain extent, all 
conventions are very much the 
same. There are the program 
highlights — the speeches and the 
panel discussions and the auction, 



the banquet and the masquerade. 
There are all the after hours parties that go on and on through 
most of the night. But if you've 
been to several Conventions you 
can see the changes that accumulate year by year. Fans who remember the really early Conventions, when fandom was a relatively small group and almost everyone you met at a Convention 
was an old friend, can see this 
change still more clearly. 

Les and Es Cole and all the rest 
of the San Francisco Convention 
Committee did a fine job with the 
program. Willy Ley's speech, especially, was one nobody should have 
missed. It was odd, somehow, 
learning at a science fiction convention that two new natural 
moons have been discovered around 
Earth. (At the time I'm writing 
this the news, though out a couple 
of weeks, hasn't had time to hit the 



112 



FANDORA'S BOX 



Sunday supplement pages or the 
science for the Layman journals.) 
For me the high points of the regular program were Willy Ley's account of the moons, both the natural ones and the proposed artificial satellites, and the panel discussion on the question "Is Science 
Unduly Restricted?" To me, anyway, discussions on science and 
the layman's attitude toward science are among the most interesting that can be discussed at a science fiction convention. After 
all, science and technology and the 
world's reaction to them are the 
background of stf; the field could 
hardly exist without them. 

Too, discussions on science fiction itself often degenerates into a "science fiction-versus-something-or-other" argument that to 
me seems rather silly. For instance, the panel discussion on science fiction versus the detective 
story — why should there be any 
conflict between the forms, or an 
Aristotelian this - is - better - thanthat approach? — it's the same thing 
with the "maturity-versus-action" 
arguments you've seen in past conventions (not this one). I can't 
see accepting one form as being 
better than all the others. If you 
are in a well rounded field you have 
them all. 

I remember sitting at the banquet, looking around at hundreds 
of strange faces and unfamiliar 
name badges, and wondering, where 
now, conventions. The San Francisco affair was smaller than the 
Chicago one (I didn't get to Philadelphia, so I can't judge first 
hand there). But it was still big. 
Almost too big, in some respects. 



After the program was over people 
scattered into a dozen groups, and 
sometimes, if you got separated 
from the group with which you 
were intending to spend the evening, it was almost impossible to 
find it again. 

Today's science fiction convention is big. It's not only big in 
the number of fans attending, it's 
big business. The days when, 
if you read science fiction, you 
hid it from teachers, parents, or 
the fellow at the next desk are 
way in the past. Being a science 
fiction enthusiast no longer sets 
you apart — everyone's getting in 
on the fun of discovering stf. And 
sometimes, at a convention, it seems 
as if everyone's attending. 

A lot of fans think the Conventions are too big. I'm inclined to 
agree. They have a tendency to 
become decentralized. If, at a science fiction convention, it were 
possible to get a whole floor or 
block of rooms, turn it over to the 
attendees for their use during the 
night as well as the day, a lot of 
the troubles arising from the size 
of the things would be allayed. As 
it is, when the program is over 
and the main hall closes up and 
fans by the hundreds start roaming 
through the halls of the convention hotel, there are bound to be 
people feeling left out. There are 
also bound to be a few people making more noise than the hotel management thinks they should. 

A lot of the younger fans especially come to see people, both 
pros and fans, and if everyone immediately vanishes to every corner of the hotel the young fan is 
likely to feel left out indeed. Of 



U4 



IMAGINATION 



course, people will always split off 
into their own groups; it would be 
impossible trying to keep everyone 
together and no one would have 
much fun that way. But if there 
were large meeting rooms for parties at night, meeting rooms where 
just about everyone would drop in 
and out during the course of the 
convention, everyone would probably be happier — the fans, the hotel management, and the other 
guests. 

THE Conventions change from 
year to year in a lot of little 
ways. Four or five years ago 
autograph collecting, for example, 
worked quite differently than it 
does now. Then trading signatures 
on the program booklet was an accepted part of the convention. If 
there were two hundred people 
present you'd get home with close 
to two hundred signatures. If you'd 
been a fan for very long you'd usually know a good deal about most 
of the people whose names you'd 
collected; not many people wandered in off the streets to a science 
fiction get-together in those days. 
Now that there are so many people 
autograph collecting has become 
more like it has always been in 
other fields, and the reciprocal 
name-trading of the past hasn't 
left many remnants. 

(Some fans have a good system 
for obtaining collectors' items. 
They bring along an anthology or 
two and try to get all the authors 
included to sign their own stories.) 

Prom year to year the Conventions have a habit of growing. It's 
not a linear growth; when the 
Convention is held a long way from 



the center of the country, as it 
was this year, you'll find fewer 
people than during the last centrally located one. I don't know 
what the registration at San Francisco was; I imagine it was six or 
seven hundred, maybe more. 

It was big enough so that even 
if you knew some one was present 
and wanted to meet him you might 
never see him. It was also big 
enough so that you met all sorts 
of people from your own home 
area whom you'd never run into 
before. For me it was old home 
Los Angeles week. I ran into 
writers whom I hadn't seen since 
■ the Westercon last year, and I kept 
meeting for the first time other 
writers who're comparatively near 
neighbors. 

On the train going up, for ex 
ample, we were sitting in the 
snack car across from a man who 
caught our attention because he 
was reading a large, thick book. 
He seemed to be the only other literate person present. There may 
have been others — we don't know — 
but we got to talking and found 
out that he was the writer Charlie Beaumont, whom I've always 
just missed runing into at Forrie 
Ackerman's. 

At San Francisco just about 
everyone from Los Angeles and 
San Diego as well as the Bay area 
were there. (And lots and lots 
of people from all over the rest of 
the country.) It was a fine opportunity for fans to meet their 
favorite writers in person. Big as 
the Convention was, it was still 
possible to track down the pros 
you wanted to meet. It was easier 
to find Big Name fans, especially 



FANDORA'S BOX 



"5 



in the daytime. Most of them spent 
a good deal of their time in the 
registration room, where the stands 
displaying fanzines and club activities were set up. (However, this 
room was locked at night, as well 
as during parts of the day. Why?) 

The auction has changed too, 
over the years. Once, when fandom was smaller and most fans 
were collectors or the close friends 
of collectors, the auction was one 
of the highpoints of the program. 
Nothing interfered with it. It had 
a place of honor on the Convention program and almost everyone 
attended. (I don't like auctions; 
I used to find it hard to collect 
other auction haters to avoid the 
things with me.) 

This time it was more of a running auction. Material was auctioned off at several sessions during the Convention. Lots and lots 
of people attended; prices were 
good and the material sold well; 
but the accent had shifted away 
from it. To a lot of newcomers to 
fandom there was probably no significance at all in the original illustrations and manuscripts and 
covers being bought by the collectors. A thing that was once of 
primary importance to. fandom as 
a whole is now of interest to only 
a certain part. 

The program has changed too. 
Not basically — as I said earlier 
the speeches and the panel discussions that are the backbones of the 
planned program of any convention are very much the same. But 
more and more of a professional 
note is creeping into the program. 
It started in Chicago two years 
ago with the ballet (which I wish 



everyone could have seen). The 
trend continued still stronger in 
San Francisco with the opera, made 
from Ray Bradbury's "A Scent of 
Sarsparilla." The opera was produced by a professional cast; the 
chorus especially was very, very 
good; and Tony Boucher's narration — well, there should have been 
more of it. Just about everyone 
was very pleased with the overall 
result. 

But it is different. More and 
more programs are being put on 
for fans, but no longer so much 
by fans. Fan participation in the 
program seems to grow less each 
year. To a certain extent the very 
size of the Conventions makes this 
inevitable, as does the increasing 
number of casual stf readers who 
come to hear editors and writers 
talk and may know nothing about 
the amateurs in the field. But it 
seems to me that there could be a 
better balance. There could be 
part of the program given by fans 
for fans. There could easily be, if 
a large room were available day 
and night, time for fan entertainment and discussion of the problems and rewards of amateur publishing. 

Science fiction isn't a field where 
the professional members, after 
years of study and schooling, sit 
off oh a pinnacle above the fans. 
Most of the pros were fans, and 
often not too long ago. I don't 
think Conventions should be one 
way affairs, with the fans the passive audience. And I don't think 
the groups should split, with the 
pros having their own conventions 
and the amateurs theirs. 

Cleveland next year will un


n6 



IMAGINATION 



doubtedly host a still bigger Convention. The problems could be intensified — or they could be to a 
large extent solved. I think that 
plenty of room, meeting rooms for 
fans and pros and the casual passersby from the street, will do 
more toward solidifying the fun of 
the Convention than a bigger and 
better program, more extensive 
press coverage, or anything else. 

* c * 

Now to this month's fanzines: 
PSYCHOTIC: 10c; Dick Geis, 
2631 N. Mississippi, Portland 12, 
Oregon. Apt. 106. Very happy to 
see this issue. Last month I was 
able to frown over Psycho's cover 
and this month I am happy to say 
I have caught Geis in an unpardonable sin: plagiarism! He stole a 
line from someone else! I will admit it was a very short line — only 
four words — and he did enclose it 
in quotes. But I think that the 
truth should be known; let the 
chips fall where they may. The 
line on page one that reads" — is 
an honorable man" wasn't written 
by Geis. I know, 'cause with my 
very own ears I heard Marlon 
Brando say it in a movie. 

What is fandom coming to when 
the most you can criticize in a 
zine is a four word quote? Psychotic 
is, as usual, good from cover to 
cover. I won't bother to list all of 
the contributors; if you read it, 
you know them; if you don't read 
it, you're so far out in fandom 
that you'd better buy Psychotic 
for the snob value. 

Eating: 1 

* ■ & 

HYPHEN: 2/25c; Wat Willis, 170 
Upper Newtownards Rd., Belfast, 



North Ireland. This issue is largely given over to Convention reports — reports of the British Science Fiction Convention held in 
Manchester, that is. Of course if 
you don't know any of the people 
involved you're bound to lose out 
on a lot of the fun between the 
lines; so much depends on the 
personalities involved. But Hyphen 
has some of the best Convention 
coverers in the business, topped off 
by Willis himself, so that after 
you've read for a while you get the 
feeling you know everyone after 
all. (Shades of the Dashcon report . . . ) 

Walt Willis, Vine Clarke and 
Chuck Harris give three different 
accounts of the Con, in which you 
learn, among other things, that a 
British fan wields a mighty mean 
water pistol. 

There's also a one page coverage, Peter Yaler's "With Bottle 
and Pencil Thru the Convention." 
Good. 

One question: maybe I missed a 
line somewhere in the account of 
Bert Campbell's getting left behind. 
But did he ever get there? 

Rating : 2 

ISFA: 15c; bimonthly; Edward 
McNulty, .5645 N. Winthrop St., 
Indianapolis, Indiana. This zine, 
sponsored by the Indiana Science 
Fiction Association, has some fan 
fiction that's considerably better 
than the average ( though it could 
stand improving). Both Edward 
Nelson's "There are Exceptions" 
and Lee Ann Tremper's "Keller" 
deal with the theme of possession, 
but in very different ways. Nelson's story is the often written one 



FANDORA'S BOX 



about alien parasites taking over 
a spaceship's crew. Tremper's is 
about the aptitude of babies ■ born 
without eyes, ears or muscular control, and their relationship with 
their parents. It's very well done. 

Then there's How to Do It article 
—"How to Write a Non-Pact Article or Critical Review," by W. 
Asparagus Leycamp. 

And in the poetry section a selection by someone you'd hardly 
consider an stf writer — Lord Byron's "Darkness." Variety here. 

Rating: 5 

SPACESHIP: 10c; quarterly; 
Bob Silverberg. 760 Montgomery 
St., Brooklyn 13, N. Y. Spaceship, 
now in its sixth year of publication, is now back in PAPA (Fantasy Amateur Press Association). 
Copies are still available, fortunately, to non Fapans, however. 

Almost all of the issue I have 
here is devoted to E. E. Smith 
and his works. Redd Boggs in 
"Flight of the Skylarks" takes 
you through the Skylark series, 
with a good long look at the author 
and his characterizations. Whether you're a Smith fan or not you'd 
find this well worth reading — it's 
comprehensive and very readable. 

This is a fanzine that's been 
around a long time and shows signs 
of being around a lot longer. It 
could be studied to good advantage by a lot of the brand new fan 
editors. 

Rating: 2 

* * * 

CHIGGER PATCH OF FANDOM: 

25e; Bob Farnham, 204 Mountain 
View Drive, Dalton, Georgia. This 
one is an annual; it doesn't take 



long term subscriptions but will be 
happy to send you the current 
issue. 

The cover and general format 
is good; so is the mimeoing. Contents are varied, with more nonfiction than fiction. Joe Gibson 
writes on the politics of selecting 
the site for the following year's 
Convention in his article about 
smoke filled rooms. His suggestions on rotating the Convention 
site seem good; there has always, 
however, been a rough approximation of the rotating Con. (But it's 
sometimes been quite rough.) 

There's Ed Cox's last man on 
Earth story, "The Watcher," 
poems by Orma McCormick and 
Stan Woolston and Harlan Ellison's article on the professional stf 
field. 

Publisher Nan Gerding states, in 
telling what is wanted for publication in the Chigger Patch, that 
unless there's a big clamor for it 
the Bubbette type of story will be 
dropped . and only satirical fiction 
used. No Bubbette this issue, 
more's the pity. I personally hope 
someone clamors. 

Also included was a copy of Bob 
Tucker's new fan questionnaire — 
but that rates a review of its own. 

Rating: 5 

* * * 

EISFA: 5c; monthly; Juanita R. 
Wellons, 529 Millon Ave., Anderson, Indiana. The Eastern Indiana Science Fiction Association, 
whose initials this zine bears, seems 
to be an active organization. The 
account of the club meeting given 
in this issue though can hardly be 
typical . . . 

Robert Coulson's "Assignment in 



IMAGINATION 



Space" is a pretty stock story about 
the guy who's an iron disciplinarian and the guy who can't take discipline at all. The latter saves the 
spaceship, of .course; he thinks the 
aliens are the DT's and isn't afraid 
of them. 

Thomas Stratton and Robert Del 
Ray each have a copiously footnoted humor story, the footnotes 
supposedly carrying most of the 
humor. It's not a form I care 
about much, though. 

Reproduction is okay, and some 
of Hal Hosteller's cartoons are really amusing. 

A good buy for a nickel. 

Rating : 4 

* * * 

VARIOSO: 10c; John L. Magnus 
Jr., 9312 Second Ave., Silver 
Spring, Maryland. Hal Clement 
has an article in this issue on 
"Characterizing an Alien." Clement, who perhaps is the one stf 
author most technically proficient 
at depicting completely alien 
physical environments now sets 
down some of the methods he uses 
in depicting his alien "people." 
You start with the external environment (type of sun, rotation 
period, gravity, atmospheric pressure and composition, temperature 
and a host of other factors) ; you 
add the biology that has arisen on 
this alien world (speed of nerve impulses, type of sense receptors, 
method of reproduction) and you 
extrapolate the alien psychology 
from these. Of course, you may 
have to be somewhat arbitrary in 
assigning emotions; some readers 
will accuse you of making your 
characters too unreal and others 
of making them too human . . . 



An excellent article by the one 
person who could have written it. 

Tucked away near the back is 
a gem of a story by Ray Schaffer 
Jr. It's called "A Lackaj is a 
Jackel," and it's quite impossible 
to describe without doing it an injustice. It's true satire (which 
98 percent of fan satire isn't) and 
it really should have come out in 
a college humor mag or one of the 
more literary journals. If not 
sold. Slightly Thurberish, ' but 
without copying anyone's style. 

An excellent issue. 

Rating : 1 

* * * 

ZIP : 5c; Ted E. White, 1014 N. 
Tuckahoe St., Falls Church, Virginia. Far and away the choicest 
item in this issue is a reprint from 
the Fantasy Fictioneer, 1939. It's 
Hoy Ping Pong's "An Open Letter to 
a Congressman," a letter in which 
Pong, the secretary of the League 
for Aiding Starving Martians," 
makes a plea for American aid, in 
the form of oxygen, to Mars . . . 
By a strange coincidence Pong lived 
in Bloomington, Illinois, the home 
of another writer whose name you 
may have heard mentioned — Bob 
Tucker . . . 

There's a story by John G. 
Fletcher, "Supply Ship," about a 
small boy who Foils the Villains 
who've Stolen the Spaceship; however, the climax isn't written. It's 
skipped. You have the events 
leading up to the denoument, and 
the epilogue, and that's that. Don 
Wegars, in the nonfiction section, 
writes about the travails of a fanzine editor; and there's a rather 
extensive letter section too. 

A mimeoed legible fanzine, much 



FANDORA'S BOX 



119 



better now that it's full sized. A 
good value for a nickel. 
Rating : 5 

* * * 

PHANTASMAGORIA : Derek 
Pickles, 197, Cutler Heights Lane, 
Bradford 4, Yorkshire, England. 
Pickles and Stan Thomas put out 
this British zine, which they're distributing free! (But if you're on 
the west side of the Atlantic I 
suggest you send enough to cover 
postage.) 

Phantasmagoria is more of a 
news letter — at least in its earlier 
issues. It covers the Manchester 
convention and other fan doings of 
note, and its full of comments 
about British fandom. Probably, 
though, it would be of much more 
interest to British fans and their 
intimate friends than to most 
Americans. / 

Rating: 6 

* * * 

SPIRAL: 10c; bimonthly; Denis 
Moreen, 214 Ninth St., Wilmette, 
111. Dick Geis has a column in 
Spy called "The Violent Ward" 
that, in itself, can be well worth 
your dime. In the issue I have 
here Geis goes to the movies, reviewing "The Creature from the 
Black Lagoon." I've seen the picture and read the review, and all 
I can say is I regret not having 
read the review first . . . 

Ed Cox in his "Oh, So You 
Read SF, Do You," presents a rebuttal to an earlier article of Geis' 
in Spiral. Geis made the point that 
many fans identify themselves with 
the "homo superior" of the stories; 
Cox made the also valid point that 
many readers of mystery or westerns or adventure literature nfake 



the same sort of hero identification. Still, though, your western 
or mystery fan usually doesn't consider himself one of a breed apart 
because of his reading interest — 
and many an stf fan does just that. 

Dennis Murphy has another story in this issue, "The Last Air 
Raid." It's not as good as some 
of his others in this magazine, but 
it's still pretty good fan fiction. 

Reproduction is very good too. 

Rating: 4 

* * * 

KAYMAR TRADER: 10c or 
4-25c; monthly; K. Martin Carlson, 1028 Third Ave. So., Moorhead, Minn. Here's one fanzine 
that no collector of science fiction 
or fantasy material should be without. If you want to complete your 
collection of back copies of some 
magazine, whether last year's 
MADGE or something from the 
20's, you're likely to find just what 
you want listed here. If you don't, 
you can always run a want ad. 
(Advertising rates in the Trader 
are very t low; it's a zine for fans, 
not people with oodles of money.) 

If you're looking for a fanzine 
with a lot of reading material, this 
one isn't for you. But if you're 
buying, selling, or just windowshopping, you'll want it. 

Rating: 3 

* * * 

FANTASY-TIMES: 10c; published twice a month; James V. TaurasL 137-03 32nd Ave., Flushing 
54, N. Y. One of the issues I have 
here of this science fiction newspaper is really a beauty. It's an 
anniversary issue — the 200th one 
that Fantasy-Times has put out. 
This certainly must hold the rec


120 



IMAGINATION 



ord for number of published issues 
among fanzines; I wonder if any 
other amateur publication can top 
it . . . 

As well as the regular news of 
the professional and amateur stf 
field, the magazine and book publishers, the movie, radio and TV 
science fiction, and foreign reports, 
this particular issue carries some 
excellent articles on the field as a 
whole. MADGE'S own Bill Hamling in "Alas, What Boom" gives 
a good picture of what has happened in the field during the past 
couple of years. It's a very good 



article on a subject a lot of fans 
have been talking about, well worth 
scrounging up a back issue of F-T 
to read. 
Rating: 2 

* * * 

Well, that's all for this time. 
Next issue I'll get a chance to review all the zines given to me at 
San Francisco — these fanzine reviews are pre-convention. If you 
have a zine you want reviewed 
send it to me, Mari Wolf, Fandora's Box, IMAGINATION, P. O. 
Box 230, Evanston, Illinois. 

— Mari Wolf 



STATEMENT REQUIRED BY THE ACT OF AUGUST 24, 1912, AS AMENDED BY 
- THE ACTS OF MARCH 3, 1933, AND JULY 2, 1946 (Title 39, United States 
Code, Section 233) SHOWING THE OWNERSHIP, MANAGEMENT, AND CIRCULATION OF IMAGINATION, Stories of Science and Fantasy, published 
monthly at Evanston, Illinois for January, 1955. 

1. The names and addresses of the publisher, editor, managing editor, and 
business managers are: 

Publisher, GREENLEAF PUBLISHING COMPANY, 1426 Fowler Ave., Evanston, 
Illinois. 

Editor, William L. Hamling, 1426 Fowler Ave., Evanston, Illinois. 
Managing Editor, Frances Hamling, 1426 Fowler Ave., Evanston, Illinois. 
Business Manager, None. 

2. The owner is: (If owned by a corporation, its name and address must 
be stated and also immediately thereunder the names and addresses of stockholders 
owning or holding 1 percent or more of total amount of stock. If not owned by 
a corporation the names anij addresses of the individual owners must be given. 
If owned by a partnership or other unincorporated firm, its name and address, 
as well as that of each individual member, must be given). 

GREENLEAF PUBLISHING COMPANY, 1426 Fowler Ave., Evanston, Illinois. 
William L. Hamling, 1426 Fowler Ave., Evanston, Illinois. 
Frances Hamling, 1426 Fowler Ave., Evanston, Illinois. 

3. The known bondholders, mortgagees, and other security holders owning 
or holding 1 percent or more of total amount of bonds, mortgages, or other securities are: None. 

4. Paragraphs 2 and 3 include, in cases where the stockholder or security 
holder appears upon the books of the company as trustee or in any other fiduciary 
relation, the name of the person or corporation for whom such trustee is acting: 
also the statements in the two paragraphs show the affiant's full knowledge and 
belief as to the circumstances and conditions under which stockholders and security 
holders who do not appear upon the books of the company as trustees, hold stock 
and securities In a capacity other than that of a bona fide owner. 

5. The average number of copies of each issue of this publication sold or 
distributed, through the mails, or otherwise, to paid subscribers during the 12 
months preceding the date shown above was: (This Information is required from 
daily, weekly, semiweekly, and triweekly newspapers only). 

WILLIAM L. HAMLING, Editor. 
Sworn to and subscribed before me this 28th day of September, 1954 

(SEAL) WENZEL A. PELZ. 

(My commission expires May 27, 1956) 



- REVIEWING CURRENT SCIENCE FICTION BOOKS 


Conducted bu Jdenru Hott 

Hard cover science fiction is booming and many fine noveis 
and anthologies are available at all bookstores or by writing 
direct to the publishers. Each month IMAGINATION will review 
several titles — candidly — as a guide to your book purchases. 

ASSIGNMENT IN TOMORROW 



Edited and with an introduction by 
Frederick Pokl, 317 pages, $2.95. 
Hanover House, Garden City, New 
York 

While it seems that there is no 
end to anthologies — and this one 
— there is a wide variation in quality. This anthology is first rate. 
It includes a short novel, three novelettes and twelve short stories all 
by "big name" writers such as 
Sturgeon, Kornbluth, Bixby, Bester, 
Vonnegut, Gold, Williamson, Farmer and many others. 

Bester's unusual story "5,217,009" almost is worth the price of 
the book alone. For that matter 
many other stories are equally 
good, though the memorable • Mr. 
Solon Aquila will not soon leave 
your mind. 

If all anthologies were as selec


tive as this one, the mining of magazines, fantastic as it has been 
with so many anthologies pouring 
forth, would be perfectly justified. 
Unfortunately that isn't the usual case. 

This book, however, you may buy 
with perfect assurance that you're 
getting your money's worth. 

Farmer's "Mother" is a superb 
example of what science fiction 
can be in spite of its hideous theme. 
The ability to evoke a response 
from readers is the mark of writing skill. Farmer has that skill. 

It is possible almost to pick stories at random in this meaty volume and be assured of getting 
something well worth reading. It's 
not possible to say that about most 
anthologies. By all means, read 
this! 



121 







•••• 









• • • 





"WEAPON" SATELLITE? 

Dear Bill: 

Seems we've got the makings of 
a good, solid discussion with the 
Space Station controversy. There 
are a lot of angles to the space 
station scheme which I'd like to 
cover, so I'll go into a few of them 
now. 

You say you "don't agree, period" 
that a space station is no longer 
practical for military purposes, so 
so let us consider some of the reasons it isn't practical. 

First, a space station circling 
the Earth in a close orbit — say, 
once every two hours — couldn't be 
hidden from view. It could be dull 
black and it would still appear on 
astronomers' photographs; and 
from that, anybody with a backyard telescope could spot it. Furthermore, anybody could study it. 

This brings up a technical fact 
most people don't realize; radar 
is only better than the naked eye. 
Radar can spot a large-sized object several hundred miles away, 
which would be too far for the un


aided eye to see it. But radar can't 
spot anything you couldn't see 
yourself at distances of several 
thousand miles or more — it could 
spot a moonlet a few miles in diameter at such distances, but you 
could see that yourself. So for distances encountered in space, radar is useless. However, the plain, 
old-fashioned telescope works perfectly well. With it you can spot 
a clean, white tennis ball 1,000 
miles up. Meteor detectors on 
spacecraft will probably be telescopes coupled with television 
screens which will trigger an 
alarm whenever any "foreign object" appears on them. Astrogation instruments will work through 
telescopes. And they'll do a perfectly good job that radar couldn't 
do. 

Now consider the construction of 
a space station. A fully equipped 
station would be fairly large; add 
atomic-warhead missiles, and small 
missiles to defend itself, and it's 
even larger. It becomes too big to 
assemble on Earth and fire out into space in one package. All right, 



122 



LETTERS FROM THE READERS 



123 



you can carry its part into space 
in rockets (which you'll need to 
keep it supplied, anyway) and assemble it out there. 

Suppose Russia did this! We'd 
be able to spot them the moment 
they started assembling their station out there. Would that station 
be completed and ready for business, d'you think, before we fired 
a space rocket out there to blast it 
to pieces? 

But let's assume a space station 
is established, and that it's Russian. You and I, if we're still 
alive, are probably up in the hills 
with 'scope-mounted Winchester 
deer rifles. But the situation still 
isn't hopeless. There's one thing a 
space station can't defend itself 
against: that's gravel-sized meteors. Most meteors in space are no 
bigger than grains of sand, and a 
station's outer hull could stop them. 
Meteors the size of pebbles would 
"hole" a station, but they're so 
rare that when one did pierce the 
station, its crewmen could patch 
it and make repairs even though 
they might suffer a few casualties. 
One such meteor wouldn't knock out 
the station. 

However, it would take a space 
rocket, only five minutes or less to 
reach a station's orbit. The station could be on the other side of 
the Earth when it does. It could 
eject thousands of tiny steel bearings, strewing them along the 
station's orbit, then return to 
Earth. Such tiny objects would be 
too small to detect before the station plowed into them. 

Or you could tell from a station's 
size and shape how it was equipped, how many crewmen it has, and 



how many large and small missiles 
it's armed with. Say it has 300 
city-blasters and 200 small defensive missiles. Suppose you build 
501 space rockets under a mountain range, somewhere, and fire 
them all at the station in one 
salvo? 

Of course, you can assume that 
stations might have something that 
will protect them from pebble-sized 
meteors; and scientists might find 
a way to build stations on the 
ground and send them into space, 
complete and ready for business. 
They might put several stations up 
at the same time, so every square 
inch of the Earth's surface is being scrutinized simultaneously. 
With that you might argue that 
nobody could build space rockets 
to destroy the stations — the stations would spot any such project 
and blast it. But don't bet on it. 
There are plenty of underground 
installations already in existence, 
tho they aren't being used for the 
production of space rockets. And 
right now any such project would 
be a large undertaking, incredibly 
hard to hide, — but that's because it 
would take an incredible amount 
of research and production, 
right now to develope a space 
rocket. Once they've been developed, scientists are going to find 
easier ways to build them. The 
easier it gets, the smaller the 
project. 

So you've simply got to hide a 
space station, if you're going to 
use it for military purposes. There 
is only one way to do that. Essentially, it would still be a space station, but you've got to build it underground — on the Moon! 



IMAGINATION 



We could build space rockets and 
try to construct a space station 
circling close to the Earth, right 
now. We aren't doing it. The Russians have a new "103" rocket motor and are developing a twostage, long-range intercontinental 
missile, right now. We know about 
it. We're working on new ceramicmetal alloys (ceramets) with incredible heat resistance and superhot, highly conductive gases which 
respond to strong magnetic fields; 
with these things, and an atomicelectric power plant, we'll have a 
ship that can land on the moon, 
unload cargo, and return to Earth. 
The Russians know it, and are undoubtedly working on the same 
thing. 

A hundred years from now, either the world will be in a dark 
age of slavery, or a war-gutted 
wilderness, or several fair-sized 
republics will be on the map where 
the USSR is now. 

I also agree that the USA would 
be a more benevolent protector 
than a dictatorial master of the 
world, if we had that base. But 
I wouldn't want us to keep that 
power, say, for 200 years. With a 
Moon Base maintaining world 
peace, people are going to become 
complacent. You only need to fool 
all of the people some of the time — 
and one man becomes a dictator. 
And with such power as the prize, 
some men would inevitably try to 
get control of it. No, we'll have 
to turn that Moon Base over to a 
World Government which none of 
us will ever fully trust. Then we 
will stay on our toes, and not become ignorant or complacent about 
its dangers. 



There's a perfectly valid answer 
to the question raised by John 
Courtois in the October letter section, concerning whether the crewmen in a space station — or a Moon 
Base — would remain loyal to the 
government that put them there. 
Where do you think they'd be getting their supplies of tanked air, 
food and water — and what happens to revolutionists when their 
air gives out? If they demanded 
more supplies sent up a "supply 
rocket" with an atomic warhead 
could be sent. And who do you 
think would be sending out their 
replacements, so they could come 
down for a few weeks' whooping it 
up on the town? If one crewman 
showed revolutionary tendencies, 
the others would immediately clobber him. It wouldn't be too difficult at all to "watch the watchers" 
in this set-up! 

Joe Gibson 
24 Kensington Ave. 
Jersey City 4, N. J. 
Somewhere along the line our original thoughts concerning the space 
station have been confused or lost 
in a semantic labyrinth. Actually 
we do not look upon the space station so much as a military project, 
as we do a stepping stone for man 
to breach space — and the other 
planets in our solar system. The 
military aspect is a side issue. 
Such military importance crops up 
only in the event Russia beats us 
to the punch. We' know we can't 
trust th-e Reds, and they might put 
one up primarily to take over this 
planet — before going on to others! 
That's the nub of the deal. We 
feel the USA would use it for 
man's progress — to enable us to 



LETTERS FROM THE READERS 



I2| 



reach the Moon. And as we've said 
before, we feel the only salvation 
for mankind is to branch out, 
away from the petty squabbles of 
Earth; all of them would seem 
somewhat insignificant after the 
door to the Universe opened! But, 
until that time comes, we do have 
the problem under discussion. Incidentally, Joe, the space station 
would serve its purpose if we did 
reach the Moon, so you don't propose an alternate suggestion of a 
Moon Base when the station is in 
theory the means of accomplishing 
that end! Also, the 200 year business you mention is quite an exaggeration of a need for our governorship. Once space is actually conquered the new horizon will be 
visible to all on this planet. Then 
there'll be a dash — an exodus if 
you please — outivard. Man may 
come into his own once he can see 
himself as a pin-point dot in the 
vast reaches of the cosmos. But 
let's not deter the discussion. How 
about it, gang? Agree with what 
Joe has to say? wlh 

NO "SWORD-PEACE" 

Gentlemen : 

In the letter section of the October Madge, John Courtois' and 
Joe Gibson's comments regarding 
a space station, orbiting around 
the Earth, as a possible weapon 
for peace were interesting. But 
I am inclined to be pessimistic. My 
own views regarding a lasting 
peace may be regarded as archaic, 
medieval, or at best merely reactionary, but I believe I have perceived certain lessons from history. 
A secular "sword-peace" has never 
lasted. The famed Roman Peace 



lasted only as long as the Roman 
legions were able to hold their 
phalanxes firm; once the Roman 
crest began to ebb, province after 
province was either lost or broke 
away until the pitiful Romulus 
Augustulus, the last Roman Emperor of the West, knelt weeping 
before the assembled Germanic 
chiefs to beg for his life. Does 
anyone think that any nation, or 
group of nations, can maintain a 
purely secular "sword-peace" without the phalanxes being broken at 
last? 

No matter who controls it, an 
orbital space station as a weapon 
is still primarily the tool of a 
"sword-peace". 

The only lasting peace the world 
has ever known has been through 
the historical faiths of mankind. 
Islam had it, although still in the 
process of a renaissance only four 
decades old, may again achieve it. 
The Europe-wide faith of Christendom almost achieved it, until, almost at the hour of realization, 
Europe evolved the poisonous miasma of self-seeking nationalism. 

The sword-peace orbital space 
station, A-bomb, H-bomb, C-bomo 
strengthened, would be no stronger than the Romans, or the Mongol, British or Chinese. When 
the first soldier breaks and runs 
the phalanx is broken. 

If you really want your' ultimate 
weapon, read the Gospels over 
again, or the Qu'ran of Islam, 
or the writings of the Bahai 
faith. The secret is in each and 
all of them: mankind is one. A 
realization of this in the souls of 
enough people will make war im< 
possible. 



126 



IMAGINATION 



If this letter is published, there 
will probably be a storm of' controversy. Religion, I've been told, 
is old hat, and medieval. However, 
comment is welcomed. 

Edward F. Lacy III 
1011 Pabst St. 
Houston 17, Texas 
Again, the crux of the space station discussion is that we contend 
there will be more chance for peace 
if the USA controls it rather than 
one put up by Russia or UN sponsored which in essence would be 
handing it to Russia. As for history and religion, look it over a 
bit more carefully, Ed. You'll find 
that more wars were fought over 
religion than any other cause! Ostensibly to achieve that ever-lasting state of peace you mention. 
Rather a drastic means for so sublime a goal, huh? At any rate, we 
still believe man has little chance 
to reach an idyllic state; but he 
can reduce his squabbles by expanding his horizon. And that of 
course, fixes our eyes on space. 
Visibility unlimited! .... wlh 

US POOR SLAVES! 

Dear Bill: 

You are about to be bored with 
yet another opinion in relation to 
the hassle over ownership of the 
first space station. 

In your answers to the October 
issue letters you treat the subject 
like a silent movie plot. You show 
the USA as a young and gallant 
hero whose great strength is always turned toward helping the innocent protect themselves from hideous monsters. Russia, of course, 
is the major monster. The rest of 
the world is portrayed as a fair 



but feeble-minded damsel. 

I agree that politically Russia 
is a monster. The USA, however, 
is not fully the grand and glorious hero you make it seem. We 
have enough trouble keeping ourselves running properly without 
trying to control the world. 

To explain, you say: "... we 
feel the role of the US would be 
more of a benevolent protector, 
than a police state." You know, 
I have a pet parakeet. I am kind 
to him. I protect him from his 
natural enemies. I am his benevoolent protector. Yet, he has no 
freedom beyond the limits I set. 
He cannot choose what he eats or 
where he sleeps. He can do nothing 
I do not sanction; in fact, he has 
no say whatsoever whether he lives 
or dies. I may be his benevolent 
protector — but he is my slave! 

About Madge in general: Covers, 
the best: issue No. 3; the worst, 
issues 18, 30, and 34. The October 
cover is very nice — perhaps because I like pretty girls! Stories: 
lately they've been too plot-worn; 
get some more original yarns — that 
is, the ideas behind them. 

Jim Sanford 
1477 S. Garfield 
Denver 10, Colo. 
Your parakeet wouldn't know freedom from slavery to begin with, 
Jim, so the .analogy falls short; 
however, we'll carry it a step further. Substitute a man for the 
bird in that gilded cage. You take 
care of him, seeing his wants are 
satisfied, that he lives contentedly. That's the USA. Put that 
same "bird" in the hands of the 
Reds. Wonder if he'd be as happy in a political concentration camp 



LETTERS FROM THE READERS 



— up against a firing squad wall — 
or perhaps lolling in the frigid 
comfort of a "cage" known as Siberia? The question is not one of 
the USA being virginal pure, but 
rather, who offers more today in 
a quest for freedom? With a 
thing so vital as a space station, 
the answer— as far as we're concerned — is pretty obvious! . . . 
You xvant better story ideas? 
Watch upcoming issues. For example, there's a four-part serial 
by George O. Smith which we predict will rank as one of the top 
stf novels in many a year! Oh 
yes, we've got some pretty neat 
covers for you too! . ... wlh 

WANTS BEAUTIFUL MEN! 

Dear Bill: 

I've read Madge so long I feel 
as if I know you. Just keep improving her as you have been doing and I won't be able to complain! Madge, by the way, was 
responsible for my husband becoming a science fiction fan. He 
read a copy a year ago while on 
our honeymoon (waiting for me to 
get dressed!) and has read every 
copy I've purchased since. Now we 
.have an infant son, who, we feel, 
will see the planets, if not the 
stars ! 

I'd like to know if there is some 
way I can contact a fan club „in 
Chicago. We moved here from 
Kansas City, and so far I haven't 
been able to contact any stf readers. 

One word about the covers. 
While I have nothing against beautiful girls«in interesting situations, 
how about a beautiful man or two 
once in a while. Just to keep us 



STEPHEN'S 
Book Service 

125 FOURTH AVE. 

NEW YORK 3, N. Y. 

Phone GRamercy 3-5990 
• 

We Stock All 
current American Science Fiction 
in Book Form and carry current 
Magazines and Pocket Books. 
• 

A large selection of Science 
Fiction is available of British 
Books, Magazines and 
Pocket Editions. 
• 

We carry a large stock of Back 
Issues of Science Fiction 
Magazines. 
• 

CATALOGUES ISSUED 

girls happy! 

Mary Jimi Mesch 
1712 W. Montrose 
Chicago 40, 111. 
Beautiful men, Mary? We didn't 
know there was such an animal! 
— Midwest fans, get in touch with 
Mary wlh 

THE LOVE OF HIS LIFE! 

Dear Bill: 

For the last ten years I've been 
an avid reader of science fiction. 
About three years ago my interest 
waned and I almost ignored it completely. 

But then I met a very charming 
young lady at a friend's house. 
After a couple of dates I found 



liVlAL.JJNATiUJN 



her so downright loveable that I've 
been keeping steady company with 
her ever since that day. — I've been 
unhappy with Madge at times, but 
only because I love her so much! 

THE LAUGHTER OF TOPFEE in the October issue was nothing less than sheer delight. THE 
CAUTIOUS INVADERS could 
have been very good. But the attempt at a surprise ending was 
too clumsy and thus the story ended rather flatly. I wonder where 
Sellers figured I'd assume the invaders were if not in an amusement arcade! The other shorts 
were generally on the poor side. 
Can't you get some better ones? 

Madge's novels are always worth 
the price of the magazine, so you've 
got a steady customer. But if you 
continue to buy these rejects from 
"Goofy Wonder Stories" one of 
these days you'll find yourself editing a manuscript of mine. If 
you have money to throw away, 



throw some my way! 

Allen R. Miller 
142 Clay Ave. 
South San Francisco, Cal. 
Can't have any bum shorts interfering with this grand romance, 
Allen, so we'll look into the matter wlh 

STF— AN ADULT SCHOOL 

Dear Bill: 

Unfortunately I was unable to 
obtain the July, August, or September issues of Madge. I have, 
however, just purchased the October issue. I only want to make 
one comment about THE LAUGHTER OF TOFFEE. Frankly, I 
can't see what it has to do with 
science fiction. It was one of the 
funniest things I've read recently, 
though. Let's see more of Mr. Myers' work on different plots. 

Being a teenager, I've naturally 
given a great deal of thought on 
what parents think of science fic


LITTLE LUNCEFORD 




"When you can prove what possible interest all this can be 
to a space cadet, than I'll start taking some interest." 



LETTERS FROM THE READERS 



129 



tion. My conclusions are the following: The problem actually reverts back to what parents think of 
the ability of teenagers to think 
and judge for themselves. Luckily 
most parents don't appear too worried over teenagers being corrupted 
by what they read. Too many 
people it would seem are inclined 
to treat young people as if they 
were complete fools. The logical 
question is, how can you get a person to "grow up" and assume adult 
responsibilities if you don't pay 
some attention to his ideas? 

I can't help but agree with Ethel 
Burke. Her's seems to be the universal complaint among stf fans. 
The ordinary stf addict seems 
to think stf consists only of rockets 
to the moon, flying saucers, or invasion of the Earth by BEMs! 



In a more serious vein, now, I 
noticed several letters on the subject of who should control a space 
station. My own opinion is that it 
should not be put in the hands of 
the UN. Reason is simple: the UN 
is not united. Management should 
be in the hands of a united people 
—the USA. 

Jack Zeitz 
1300 Medary Ave. 
Philadelphia 41, Pa. 
There's been much talk about various types of reading and delinquency. Our own opinion is thata delinquent is generally not made 
— he's born. We do not subscribe 
to the let's - place - the - blame - onreading school. If we did we'd have 
to boycott the works of Shakespeare too! . . . See you next month. 

wlh 



Back Issues of Imagination Available 

—SEE NEXT PAGE TO SUBSCRIBE FOB COMING ISSUES — 



May 1952, No. 10 ( 

July 1952, No. 11 < 

September 1952, No. 12 < 

October 1952, No. 13 ( 

December 1952, No. 14 < 

January 1953, No. 15 ( 

February 1953, No. 16 < 

April 1953, No. 17 < 

May 1953, No. 18 < 

June 1953, No. 19 < 

August 1953, No. 21 < 

July 1953, No. 20 < 

September 1953, No. 22 ( 



October 1953, No. 23 
November 1953, No. 24 
December 1953, No. 25 
January 1954, No. 26 
February 1954, No. 27 
March, 1954, No. 28 
May 1954, No. 30 
June 1954, No. 31 
July 1954, No. 32 
August 1954, No. 33 
September 1954, No. 34 
October 1954, No. 35 
November 1954, No. 36 
December 1954, No. 37 



Copies are 35c each, or three lor $1.00. Enclose cash, check, or money 
order. Address: IMAGINATION, P.O. Box 230, Evanston, Illinois. Orders 
filled promptly, and all copies mailed in heavy protecting envelopes. 



NAME 



ADDRESS 
CITY 



Zone State — 



YOUR XMAS SUBSCRIPTION 



TO 



STORIES OF SCIENCE AND FANTASY 



25 m O nthly ISSUES FOR 

YOU SAVE A FULL $3.75 OVER THE NEWSSTAND PRICE 

THE ABOVE OFFER FOR THIS MONTH ONLY! 

If you prefer, you can subscribe for 13 issues at the reduced rate of $3.00 
— meaning a saving to you of $1.55 over the single copy value. But as 
stated above, FOR THIS MONTH ONLY you can get a fine Xmas present 
— 25 great issues of IMAGINATION for just $5.00— and while you're at it, 
wouldn't this make a nice gift to your friends? The same money saving 
offer goes for your gift subscriptions ... Make certain you don't miss 
this bonus opportunity — today! 

MAIL YOUR REMITTANCE TO 

IMAGINATION, P. O. Box 230, Evanston, Illinois 

ADDRESS 

CITY 

ZONE STATE „ 



□ 25 ISSUES □ '3 issues 

$5.00 $3.oo 

Enclosed is □ cash □ check □ money order for 

Begin my subscription with the issue. 

All countries other than U.S.A. and Canada, $3.50 13 issues, $6.00 25 issues 

PRINTED IN U.S.A. 



130 



7he TtopuSetited 9acU qfMfc


THERE are some things that cannot 
be generally told — things you ought to 
know. Great truths are dangerous to 
some — but factors f:>r personal power 
and accomplishment in the hands of 
those who understand them. Behind 
the tales of the miracles and mysteries 
of the ancients, lie centuries of their 
secret probing into nature's laws — 
their amazing discoveries of the bidden processes of man's mind, and the 
mastery of life's problems. Once shrouded in mystery to avoid their destruction by mass fear and ignorance, these 
facts remain a useful heritage for the 
thousands of men and women who privately use them in their homes today. 

THIS FREE BOOK 

The Rosicrucians (not a religious 



organization) an age-old brotherhood 
of learning, have preserved this secret 
wisdom in their archives for centuries. They now invite you to share the 
practical helpfulness of their teachings. 
Write today for a free copy of the 
book, "The Mastery of Life." Within 
its pages may lie a new life of opportunity for you. Address: Scribe K.G.L. 



I SEND THIS COUPON 

i Scribe K.G.L. 

I The ROSICRUCIANS (AMOKC) 
1 San Jose, California 

t Please send me the free book. The Mastery 
I of Life, which explains now 1 may learn to 
I use my faculties and powers of mind. 

[ Name 

I Address 

I City 



c JJ5e Rosicrucians 



(AMORC) 



SAN JOSE, CALIFORNIA, U S. A. 




T"P y° u re th*t man, here's something that will 
**■ interest you. 

Not a magic formula — not a get-rich-quick 
scheme— but something more substantial, more 
practical. 

Of course, you need something more than just 
the desire co be an accountant. You've got to pay 
the price — be willing to study earnestly, thoroughly. 

Still, wouldn't it be worth your while to sacrifice some of your leisure in favor of interesting 
home study — over a comparatively brief period? 
Always provided that the rewards were good — a 
salary of S4,000 to 510,000? 

An accountant's duties are interesting, varied 
and of real worth to his employers. He has Handing! 

Do you feel that such things aren't for you? 
Well, don't be too sure. Very possibly they can be! 

Why not, like so many before you, investigate 
LaSalle's modern Problem Method of training for 
an accountancy, position? 

Just suppose you were permitted to work in a 
Jarge accounting house under trie personal supervision of an expert accountant. Suppose, with his 
aid, you studied accounting principles and solved 
problems day by day — easy ones at first— then 
more difficult ones. If you could do this— and 
could turn to him for advice as the problems became complex — soon you'd master them all. 

That's the training you follow in principle under the LaSalle Problem Method. 

You cover accountancy from the basic Principles right up through Accountancy Systems and 
Income Tax Procedure. Then you add C. P. A. 
Training and prepare for the C. P. A. examinations. 

As you go along, you absorb the principles of 
Auditing, Cost Accounting, Business Law, Sta


tistical Control, Organization, Management and 

Finance. 

Your progress is as speedy as you care to make 
it — depending on your own eagerness to learn 
and the time you spend in study. 

Will recognition come? The only answer, as 
you know, is that success does come to the man 
who is really trained, It's possible your employers 
will notice your improvement in a very few weeks 
or months. Indeed, many LaSalle graduates have 
paid for their training — with increased earnings 
— before they have completed it! For accountants, 
who are trained in organization and management, 
are the executives of the future. 

Send For Free Sample Lesson 

For your own good, get all the tacts. Write for our 
free 48-page book, "Accountancy, The Profession 
That Pays" — also the free sample lesson so you can 
prove to yourself that you can master accountancy 
quickly, thoroly in spare time at home. 

Over 4,000 Certified Public Accountants 
among LaSalle alumni 



LASALLE EXTENSION UNIVERSITY 
A Correspondence Institution 

Dept. 187-H, 417 S. Dearborn St., Chicago 5, III. 

Send me without obligation, Free Sample Lesson 
and "Accountancy, The Profession That Pays." 

Name Age 

Address .*• 

City, Zone & State , 



