Darwinian Pool Room by ISAAC ASIMOV

OF COURSE the ordinary 
conception of Genesis I is 
all wrong," I said. "Take 
a pool room, for instance." 

The other three mentally took a 
pool room. We were sitting jn 
broken down swivel-Chairs in Dr. 
Trotter's laboratory, but it was no 
trick at all for them to convert the 
lab benches into pool tables, the tall 
ring-stands into cues, the reagent 
bottles into billiard balls and then 
wait for me to do something with 
the imaginary layout. 

Thetier even raised one finger, 



closed his eyes and muttered softly. 
"Pool room!" Trotter, as usual, said 
nothing at all, but nursed his second 
cup of coffee. The coffee, also as 
usual, was horrible, but then I was 
the newcomer to the group and had 
not jet calloused my gastric lining. 

"Now consider the end of a game 
of pocket pool," I said. "You've got 
each ball, except the cue-ball, of 
course, in a given pocket — " 

"Wait a while," said Thetier, always fhe purist. "It doesn't matter 
which pocket." 

"Beside the point. When the 



152 




 



game is over, the balls are in various 
pockets. Right? Now suppose you 
walk into the pool room when the 
game is all . over, and observe only 
that final position and try to reconstruct the course of previous events. 
You have several alternatives. 

"Not if you know the rules of 
the game," said Madend. 

"Assume complete ignorance," I 
said. "You can decide that the balls 
were pocketed by being struck with 
the cue-ball, which in turn was 
struck by the cue. This would be 
the truth, but not an explanation 
that is very likely to occur to you 
spontaneously. It is much more likely that you would decide' that the 
balls were individually placed in 
their corresponding pockets by 
hand, or always existed in the pockets as you found them." > 

"All right," said Thetier, "if 
you're going to skip back to Genesis, 
you will claim that by analogy we 
can account for the universe as either 
having always existed, having been 
created arbitrarily as it is now, or 
having developed through evolution. So what?" 

"That's not the alternative I'm 
proposing at all," I said. "Let us 
accept the idea of creation for a 
purpose, and consider only the 
methods by which such a creation 
could have been accomplished. It's 
easy to suppose that God said, 'Let 
there be light,' and there was light, 
but it's not esthetic." 

"It's simple," said Madend, "and 
'Occam's Razor' demands that of 



alternate possibilities, the simpler be 
chosen." 

"Then why don't you play pool 
by putting the balls in the pockets 
by hand? That's simpler, too, but 
it isn't the game. Now if you started with the primordial atom — " 

"What is that?" asked Trotter 
craftily. 

"Well, call it all the mass-energy 
of the universe compressed into a 
single sphere, in a state of minimum 
entropy — completely at rest, motionless. Now explode that in such a 
way that all the constituent particles 
of matter and quanta of energy act, 
react and interact in a pre-calculated 
way, so that just our present universe' is created. Wouldn't that be 
much more satisfactory than simply 
waving your hand and saying, 'Let 
there be light'?" 

""W"OU mean," said Madend, 

JL "like stroking the cue-ball 
against one of the billiard-balls and 
sending all fifteen into their predestined pockets?" 

"In an esthetic pattern," I said. 

"There's more poetry in the 
thought of a huge act of direct 
will," said Madend. 

"That depends on whether you 
look at the matter as a mathematician or a theologian," I said. "As a 
matter of fact, Genesis I could be 
made to fit the billiard-ball scheme. 
The Creator could have spent His 
time calculating all the necessary 
variables and relationships into six 
gigantic equations. Count one 'day' for each equation. After having applied the initial explosive impetus, 
He would then 'rest' on the seventh 
'day', said seventh 'day' being the 
entire interval of time from that beginning to 4,004 B.C. That interval, 
in which the infinitely complex pattern of billiard balls is sorting itself 
out, is obviously of no interest to 
the writers of the Bible. AH two 
billion years of it could be considered merely the developing single 
act of creation." 

"You're postulating a teleological 
universe," said Trotter, "one in 
which purpose is implied." 

"Sure," I said. "Why not? A conscious act of creation without a purpose is ridiculous. Besides which, if 
you try to consider the course of 
evolution as the blind outcome of 
non-purposive forces, you end up 
with some very puzzling problems." 

"AS FOR instance?" asked MadJ\ end. 

"As for instance," I said, "the 
passing away of the dinosaurs." 

"What's so" hard to understand 
about that?" 

"There's no logical reason for it. 
Try to name same." 

"Law of diminishing returns," 
Said Madend. "The brontosaurus 
got so massive, it took legs like treetrunks to support him, and at that 
he had to stand jn water and let 
buoyancy do most of the work. And 
he had to eat all the time to keep 
himself supplied with calories. I 
mean all the time. As for the carni



 



vores, they afflicted such armor upon 
themselves in their race against one 
another, offensive and defensive, 
that they were just crawling tanks, 
puffing under tons of bone and scale. 
It got to the point where it just 
didn't pay off." 

"Okay," I said, "so the big babies 
die off. But most of the dinosaurs 
were little running creatures whose 
mass and armor had not become excessive. What happened to them?" 

"As far as the small ones are concerned," put in Thetier, "there's the 
question of competition. If some of 
the reptiles developed hair and warm 
blood, they could adapt themselves 
to variations in climate more efficiently. They wouldn't have to stay 
out of direct sunlight. They would 
not get sluggish as soon as the temperature dropped below eighty Fahrenheit. They would develop intelligence of a sort. Therefore, they 
would win the race for food," 

"That doesn't satisfy me," I said. 
"In the first place, I don't think the 
various saurians were quite such 
pushovers. They held out for some 
three hundred million years, you 
know, which is 299 million more 
than genus Homo. Secondly, coldblooded animals still survive, notably 
insects and amphibia — -" 

"High rate of reproduction," said 
Thetier. 

"And plenty of reptiles. The 
snakes, lizards, and turtles are still 
very much in business. For that matter, what about the ocean? The saurians adapted to that in the shape of ichthyosaurs and plesiosaurs. They 
vanished, too, and there were no 
newly developed forms of life based 
on radical evolutionary advances to 
compete with them. As near as I can 
make out, the highest form of ocean 
life are the fish — mammals asides — 
and they came before the ichthyosaurs. How do you account for that? 
The fish are just as cold-blooded and 
even more primitive. And in the 
ocean, there's no question of mass 
and diminishing returns since the 
water does all the work of support. 
The sulfur-bottom whale is larger 
than any dinosaur that ever lived. 
Another thing. What's the use of 
talking about the inefficiency of cold 
blood and saying that, at temperatures below 80, cold-blooded animals 
become sluggish? Fish are very 
happy at continuous temperatures of 
about 35, and there is nothing sluggish about a shark." 

"rpHEN why did the dinosaurs 
-L quietly steal off the Earth, 
leaving their bones behind?" asked 
Madend. 

"They were part of the plan. Once 
they had served their purpose, they 
were gotten rid of." 

"How? In a properly arranged 
Velikovskian catastrophe? A striking comet? The finger of God?" 

"No, of course not. They died out 
naturally and of necessity according 
to the original pre-calculation." 

"Then we ought to be able to 
find out what that natural, necessary 
cause of extinction was." 


 



"Not necessarily. It might have 
been some obscure failure of the 
saurian biochemistry, deliberately 
provided for, some developing vitamin deficiency — " 

"It's too complicated," said Thetier. 

"It just seems complicated," I 
maintained. "Supposing it were necessary to pocket a given billiard-ball 
by making a four-cushion shot. 
Would you quibble at the complicated course of the cue-ball? A direct hit would be less complicated, 
but would accomplish nothing. And 
despite the apparent complication, 
the stroke would be no more difficult to the master. It would still be 
a single motion of the cue, merely 
in a different direction. The ordinary 
properties of elastic materials and 
the laws of conservation .of momentum would then take over." 
_ "I take it then," said Trotter, 
"that you suggest that the course of 
evolution represents the Simplest 
way in which one could have progressed from qriginal chaos to man." 

"That's right. Not a sparrow falls 
without a purpose, and not a pterodactyl, either." 

"And where do we go from 
here?" 

"Nowhere. Evolution is finished 
with the development of man. The 
old rules don't apply any more." 

"Oh, don't they?" said Madend. 
"You rule out the continuing occurrence of environmental variation and 
of mutations?" 

"In a sense, I do," I insisted. 



" "More and more, man is controlling 
his environment, and more and 
more he is understanding the mechanism of mutations. Before man 
appeared on the scene, creatures 
could neither foresee and guard 
themselves against shifts in climatic 
conditions, nor could they understand the increasing danger from 
newly developing species before the 
danger had become overwhelming. 
But now ask yourself this question: 
What species of organism can possibly replace us and how 'is it going 
to accomplish the task?" 

"We can start off," said Madend, 
"by considering the insects. I think 
they're doing the job already." 

"mUEY haven't prevented us 
J- from increasing in population 
about ten-fold in the last two hundred and fifty years. If man were 
ever to concentrate on the struggle 
with the insects, instead of spending most of his spare effort on other 
types of fighting, said insects would, 
not last long. We could clean them 
off the planet." 

"What about bacteria, or, better 
still, viruses?" asked Madend. "The 
influenza virus of 1918 did a respectable job of getting rid of a sizable percentage of us." 

"Sure," I said, "just about one 
per cent. Even the Black Death of 
the 14th Century only managed to 
kill one-third of the population of 
Europe, and that at a time when 
medical science was non-existent. It 
was allowed to run its course at 



DARWINIAN POOL ROOM 



157 



will, under the most appalling conditions of medieval poverty, filth- and 
squalor, and still two-thirds of our 
very tough species managed to survive. Disease can't do it." 

"What about man himself developing into a sort of superman and 
displacing the old-timers?" suggested Thetier. 

"Not likely," I said. "The only 
part of the human being which is 
worth anything, as far as being boss 
of the world is concerned, is his 
nervous system; the cerebral hemispheres of the brain, in particular. 
They are the most specialized part 
of his organism and therefore a 
dead end. If there is anything the 
course of evolution demonstrates, it 
is that, once a certain degree of 



specialization sets in, flexibility Is 
lost. Further development can proceed only in greater specialization." 

"Isn't that exactly what's wanted?" said Thetier. 

"Maybe it is, but as Madend 
pointed out, specializations ' have a 
way of reaching a point of diminishing returns. It's the size of the 
human head at birth that makes the 
process difficult and painful. It's the 
complexity of the human mentality 
that makes mental and emotional 
maturity lag so far behind sexual 
maturity in man, with its consequent harvest of troubles. It's the 
delicacy of mental equipment that 
makes most or all of the race neurotic. How much further can we go 
without complete disaster?"' 

"THE development," said Mad
-L end, "might be in greater stability, or quicker maturity, rather 
than higher brain-power." 

"Maybe, but there are no signs 
of it. Cro-Magnon man existed ten 
thousand years ago, and there are 
indications that modern man is -his 
inferior, if anything, in brain-power. 
And in physique, too." 

"Ten thousand years," said Trotter, "isn't much, evolutionarily 
speaking. Besides, there is always the 
possibility of other species of animals developing intelligence, or 
something better — and don't say 
there couldn't be anything better." 

"We'd never let them. That's the 
point. It would take hundreds of 
thousands of years for, let us say, 
apes or insects to become intelligent, 



and we'd wipe them out — or else use 
them as slaves." 

"All right," said Thetier. "What 
about obscure biochemical deficiencies, such as you insisted on in the 
case of the dinosaurs? Take Vitamin 
C, for instance. The only organisms 
that can't make their own are 
guinea-pigs and primates, including 
man. Suppose this trend continues 
and we become impossibly dependent on too many essential food' factors. Or what if the apparent 
increase in the susceptibility of man 
to cancer continues?" Then what will 
happen?" 

"That's no problem," I said. "It's 
the essence of the new situation, that 
we are producing all known foodfactors artificially, and may eventually hare a completely synthetic diet. 
And there's no reason to think we 
won't learn how to prevent or cure 
cancer some day." 

Trotter got up. He had finished 
his coffee, but was still nursing his 
cup.- "All right, then, you say we've 
bit a dead end. But what if all this 
has been taken into the original account? The Creator was prepared to 
spend three hundred million years 
letting the dinosaurs develop something or other that would eventually 
result in mankind — or so you say. 
Why can't He have figured out a 
way in which man could use his 
intelligence and his control of the 
environment to prepare the next 
stage of the game? That might be 
a very tricky part of the pool game.'" 

That stopped me. "How do you 
mean ?" 

Trotter smiled at me. "Oh, I was 
just thinking that it might not be 
entirely coincidence, and that a new 
race may be coming and an old one 
going, entirely through the efforts 
of this cerebral mechanism." He 
tapped his temple. 

"In what way?" 

"Stop me if I'm wrong, but 
aren't the sciences of nucleonics and 
cybernetics reaching simultaneous 
peaks? Aren't we inventing hydrogen bombs and thinking machines 
at the same time? Is that coincidence 
: — or part of the divine purpose?" 

That was about all for that lunch 
hour. It, had begun as logic-chopping just to kill time, but since then 
— 'I've been wondering. 