

MULL TARVISH looked backward 
for the last time at the little 
mountainside cottage that had been his 
home. Then he faced about, purposefully, and strode away — out of Ozarky. 

He passed the place where the great 
steel road of the Ancients had been, 
now only two rusty streaks and a row 
of decayed logs. Beside it was the mossy 
heap of stones that had been an ancient 
structure in the days before the Dark 
Centuries, three hundred years ago, 
when Ozarky had been a part of the 
old state of M'souri. 

They had been mighty sorcerers, 
those ancients; their steel roads went 
everywhere, and everywhere were the 
ruins of their towns, built it was said, 
by a magic that lifted weights. Down 
in the valley, he knew, men were still 
seeking that magic. 

Tarvish whistled to himself, shifted 
the rag bag on his shoulder, set his bow 
more comfortably on his mighty back, 
and trudged on. He was going to see 



what the world was like. He had been 
always a restless sort, not at all like 
the other six Tarvish sons. They were 
true mountainies. Not Hull, however; 
he was restless, curious, dreamy. So he 
whistled his way into the world, and 
was happy. 

At evening he stopped at the Hobel 
cottage on the edge of the mountains. 
Away before him stretched the plain, 
and in the darkening distance was visible the church spire of Norse. That was 
a village; Hull had never seen a village. 
But he had heard all about Norse, because the mountainies occasionally went 
down there to buy powder and ball for 
their rides, those of them who had 
rifles. 

Hull had only a bow. Powder and 
ball cost money ; but an arrow did the 
same work for nothing, and that without scaring all the game a mile away. 

Morning he bade good-by to the Hobels, and set off. His powerful, brown 
bare legs flashed under his ragged trou


C-piirighl, Ill-ill, by Belter Publications, Inc., and originally published 
in Thrilling Wonder Stories for June, 1939 
10 



Here Begins the Saga 

sers, his bare feet made a pleasant 
soosh in the dust of the road, the June 
sun beat warm on his right cheek. He 
was happy; he was bound for adventure. 

He swung placidly on toward Norse 
with a glistening spring-steel bow on 
his shoulder, and twenty-two bright 
tubular steel arrows in his quiver. 

He stopped on a little rise and the 
town lay before him. He stared. A 
hundred houses at least. More than 
he'd ever seen in his life all together. 
He stared at the houses, and at the 
people, most of them shod in leather. 

Hull didn't care for Norse, he decided. 
As the sun set, the houses loomed too 
close, as if they'd stifle him, so he set 
out into the countryside. There he 
found a good place and slept. 

TJE AWOKE dewy wet. The sun shot 
" golden lances through the trees, 
and he was ravenously hungry. He ate 
the last of his mother's brown bread 
from his bag, then strode out to the 
road. There was a wagon creaking there 
plodding northward. The bearded, kindly man in it was glad enough to have 
him ride for company. 

"Mountainy?" he asked. 

"Yes." 

"Bound where?" 

"The world," said Hull. 

"Well," observed the other, "it's a 
big place, and all I've seen of it is much 
like this. All except Selui.* That's a 
city. Twenty thousand people in it! 
Maybe more. And they got ruins there 
the biggest you ever saw. Bridges. 
Buildings." 

"Who lived in them?" asked Hull. 

"Don't know. Who'd want to live so 
high up it'd taken a full morning to 
climb there? Unless it was magic. I 
don't hold much with magic but they 
do say the Old People knew how to fly." 



of Black Mar got, the 

"I don't believe it," Hull said. 

"Nor L But did you hear what they're 
saying in Norse?" 

"I didn't hear anything." 

"They say," said the farmer, "that 
Joaquin Smith is going to march again." 

"Joaquin Smith!" 

"Yes. Even the mountainies know 
about him, eh?" 

"Who doesn't?" returned Hull. "Then 
there'll be fighting in the south, 1 guess. 
I have a notion to go south." 

"Why?" 

"I like fighting," said Hull simply. 

"Fair answer," said the farmer, "but 
from what folks say, there's not much 
fighting when the Master marches. He 
has a spell; there's great sorcery in 
N'Orleans, from the merest warlock up 
to Martin Sair." 

"I'd like to see his sorcery against arrow and ball," said Hull grimly. There's 
none of us can't spot either eye at a 
thousand paces!" "sing a rifle. Or two 
hundred with arrow." 

"No doubt, but what if powder 
flames, and your guns fire themselves 
before he's even across the horizon ? 
They say he has a spell for that, he or 
Black Margot."* 

"Black Margot?" 

"The Princess, his half-sister. The 
dark witch who rides beside him, the 
Princess Margaret." 

"I don't know," said the other. "It. 
makes small difference to me whether 
I pay my taxes to N'Orleans or to gruff 
Marcus Ormiston, who's eldarch of 
Ormistotv!' village there." 

•It is a usual error of historians of the Conquest to speak of the Princess Margaret as 
either Margaret of Urbs or Lhe Black Fiame. 
Both terms are anachronisms. She was not 
known as the Black Flame until the time of 
the poet Sovern, as yet unborn, while of course 
TJvbs, the vast, glittering, brilliant, wicked 
world metropolis and .-apital, was at this time 
only a dream in the mind of Joaquin Smith. 



'Selui: The anrient St. Louis 



f Ormiston: The present village of Ormon. 

12 



Living Flame that Consumed a Future World 



"The mountain) es pay taxes to no 
one." Hull was silent a moment. Then 
he burst out. "The Master, is he really 
immortal ?" 

The other shrugged. "How can I 
say? There are great sorcerers in the 
southlands, the greatest of whom is 
Martin Sair. But I do know this, that 




I have seen sixty-two years, and as far 
back as memory goes there was always 
Joaquin Smith in the south, and always 
an Empire gobbling cities as a hare 
gobbles carrots. When I was young it 
was far away, now it reaches close at 
hand ; that is all the difference. Men 
talked of the Satanic beauty of Black 
Margot then as they do now, and of the 
wizardry of Martin Sair." 

Hull made no answer, for Ormiston 
was at hand. The village was.much like 
Norse save that it huddled among low 



hills, on the crest of some of which 
loomed ancient ruins. At the near side 
his companion halted, and Hull thanked 
him as he leaped to the ground. 

He spun suddenly about as a voice 
called him from across the road: "Hi! 
Mpuntainy!" It was a girl. A pretty 
girl, slim-waisted, copper-haired, blue
The voice of the farmer sounded behind him. "It's Vail Ormiston, the 
eldarch's daughter." 

But Vail Ormiston was above much 
converse with a wandering mountainman. She surveyed his mighty form approvingly and then disappeared into the 
house. 

But that afternoon, trudging toward 
Selui, he was richer than when he had 
set out by the memory of the copper ' 
hair and blue eyes of Vail Ormiston. 

II 

TT HREE weeks in Selui had served to 
give Hull Tarvish an acquaintance with 
the place. He no longer gaped at the •sky-piercing ruins of the ancient city, 
or the vast fallen bridges, and he was 
quite at home in the town that lay beside it. He had found work easily 
enough in a baker's establishment, 
where his great muscles served well. 
The hours were long, but his pay was 
munificent — five silver quarters a week. 

Ordinarily Hull was quick to make 
friends, but his long hours hindered 
him. He had but one,- an enormously old 
man who sat at evening on the step 
beyond his lodging, Old Einar. 

"I wonder," he said to Old Einar, . 
staring at the crumbling towers of the 
Ancients glowing in the sunset, "what 
the Ancients were like. Were they men 
like us? Then how could they fly?" 

"They were men like us, Hull. As for 
flying — well, it's my belief that flying 
is a legend. There was a man supposed 



Living Flame that Consumed a Future World 



"The mountainies pay taxes to no 
one." Hull was silent a moment. Then 
he burst nut. "The Master, is lie really 
immortal ?" 

The other shrugged. "How can I 
say? There are great sorcerers in the 
southlands, the greatest of whom is 
Martin Sair. But I do know this, that 




I have seen sixty-two years, and as far 
back as memory goes there was always 
Joaquin Smith in the south, and always 
an Empire gobbling cities as a hare 
gobbles carrots. When I was young it 
was far away, now it reaches close at 
hand; that is all the difference. Men 
talked of the Satanic beauty of Black 
Margot then as (hey do now, and of the 
wizardry of Martin Sair." 

Hull made no answer, for Ormiston 
was at hand. The village was. much like 
Norse save that it huddled among low 



hills, on the crest of some of which 
loomed ancient ruins. At the near side 
his companion halted, and Hull thanked 
him as he leaped to the ground. 

He spun suddenly about as a voice 
called him from across the road: "Hi! 
Mountainy !" It was a girl. A pretty 
girl, slim-waisted, copper-haired, blueeyed. 

The voice of the farmer sounded behind him. "It's Vail Ormiston, the 
eldarch's daughter." 

But Vail Ormiston was above much 
converse with a wandering mountainman. She surveyed his mighty form approvingly and then disappeared into the 
house. 

But that afternoon, trudging toward 
Selui, lie was richer than when he had 
set out by the memory of the copper 
hair and blue eyes of Vail Ormiston. 

II 

TP HRER week-; in Selui had served to 
give Hull Tarvish an acquaintance with 
the place. He no longer gaped at the 
sky-piercing ruins of the ancient city, 
or the vast fallen bridges, and he was 
quite at home in the town that lay beside it. He had found work easily 
enough in a baker's establishment, 
where his great muscles served well. 
The hours were long, but his pay was 
munificent — five silver quarters a week. 

Ordinarily Hull was quick to make 
friends, but his long hours hindered 
him. He had but one, an enormously old 
man who sat at evening on the step 
beyond his lodging, Old Einar. 

"I wonder," he said to Old Einar, 
staring at the crumbling towers of the 
Ancients glowing in the sunset, "what 
the Ancients were like. Were they men 
like us? Then how could they fly?" 

"They were men like us, Hull. As for 
flying — well, it's my belief that flying 
is a legend. There was a man supposed 



14 FANTASTIC SI 

to have flown over the cold lands to the 
north and those to the south, and also 
across the great sea. 

"Rut this flying man is called in some 
accounts Bird and in others I.indbird, 
and surely one can see the origin of 
such a legend. The migrations of birds, 
who cross land and seas each year, that 
is all." 

"Or perhaps magic," suggested Hull. 

"There is no magic. The Ancients 
themselves denied it, and I have struggled through many a moldy book in 
their curious, archaic tongue!" 

"You can read!" Hull exclaimed. 
"That in itself is a sort of magic." 

Old Einar settled himself on the step 
and puffed blue smoke from his pipe. 
"Shall I tell you the true story of the 
world. Hull — the story called History?" 

"Yes. In the Ozarky we spoke little 
of such things." 

"Well," said the old man comfortably. 
"I will begin, then, at what to us is the 
beginning, but to the Ancients was the 
end. Great steel wagons once roared 
over the iron roads of the Ancients. Men 
crossed the oceans to east and west. 
The cities were full of whirring wheels, 
and instead of the many little citystates of our time, there were giant 
nations with thousands of cities and a 
hundred million — a hundred and fifty 
million people." 

Hull stared. "I do not believe there 
are so many people in the world," he 
said. 

Old Einar shrugged. "Who knows?" 
he returned. "The ancient books — all 
too few— tell us that the world is round, 
and that beyond the seas lie one, or 
several other continents, but what races 
are there today not even Joaquin Smith 
can say." 

He puffed smoke again. "Well, such 
was the ancient world. These were warlike nations, so fond of battle that they 
had to write many books about the horrors of war to keep themselves at peace, 
but they always failed. During the time 
they called their twentieth century 
there was a whole series of wars, not 



RY MAGAZINE 

such little quarrels as we have so often 
between our city-states, nor even such 
as that between the Memphis League 
and the Empire, five years ago. Their 
wars spread like storm clouds around 
the world, and were fought between 
millions of men with unimaginable 
weapons that Hung destruction a hundred miles and with ships on the seas, 
and with poisonous gases." 

"J love fighting." said Hull. 

"Yes. but would you love it if it meant 
simply destroying of thousands of men 
beyond the horizon ? Men you were 
never to see?" 

"No. War should be man to man, or 
at least no farther than the carry of a 
rifle ball." 

"True. Well some time near the end 
of their twentieth century, the ancient 
world exploded into war like a powder 
horn in a fire. It was not only nation 
against nation, but race against race. 
And then came the Gray Death." 

TTULL shuddered. "I have heard of 
the Gray Death," he said. 

"At any rate," Einar went on, "the 
Gray Death leaped suddenly across the 
world, striking alike at all people ; six 
out of every ten died. 

"By the first century after the 
Plague, there was little left of the Ancients save their ruined cities where 
lurked robber bands that scoured the 
country by night. They had little interest in anything save food or the 
coined money of the old nations, and 
they did incalculable damage. None or 
few could read, and on cold nights it was 
usual to raid the ancient libraries for 
books to burn, and to make things 
worse, fire gutted the ruins of all cities, 
and there was no organized resistance 
to it. The flames simply burned themselves out, and priceless books, vanished." 

"Yet in N'Orleans they study, don't 
they?" asked Hull. 

"Yes, I'm coming to that. About two 
centuries after the Plague — a hundred 
years ago, that is — the world had 



DAWN OF 

stabilizer! itself, And then, into the 
town of N'Orleans. built beside the ancient citv. came young John Holland. 

"Holland was a rare .specimen, anxious for learning. Tie found the remains 
of an ancient Hbrarv and began slowly 
to decipher the archaic words in the 
few IjooVs that had survived. Little by 
little others mined him. and the Academy was born. 

"It was a group of studious men livings sort of communistic, monastic life. 
One day a youth named Teran had a 
dream — no less a dream than to recondition the centuries-old power machines 
of N'Orleans. to give the city the power 
that travels on wires !" 

"What's that?" asked Hull. "What's 
that, old Einar?" 

"You wouldn't understand. Hull. It 
didn't stop Teran to realize that there 
was no coal or oil to run his machines. 
He believed that when power was 
needed, it .would be there so he and his 
followers scrubbed and filed and welded 
away, and Teran was risrht. When he 
needed power, it was there. 

"This was the gift of a man named 
Olin. who had unearthed the last, the 
crowning secret of 'the Ancients, the 
power called atomic energy. He .gave it 
to Teran, and N'Orleans became a miracle city where lights glowed and wheels 
turned. Men came from every part of 
the continent to see. and among these 
were two called Martin Sair and Joaquin 
Smith, come out of Mexico with the 
half-sister of Joaquin, the Satanically 
beautiful being sometimes called Black 
Mar got. 

"Martin Sair was a genius, tie found 
his field in the study of medicine, and it 
was less than ten years before he had 
uncovered the secret of the hard rays. 
He was studying sterility, but he found 
— immortality !" 

"Then the Immortals are immortal!" 
murmured Hull. 

"It may be, Hull. At least they do 
not seem to age, but . . . Well, Joaquin 
Smith was also a genius, but of a different sort. I think he dreams of an 



FLAME 15 

American Empire, or- — " old Einar's 
voice dropped — "A world Empire. At 
least, he took Martin Sair's immortality 
and traded it for power. 

"The Second Enlightenment was 
dawning and there was genius in N'Orleans. He traded immortality to Kohlmar for a weapon, he offered it to Olin 
for atomic power, but Olin was already 
past youth, and refused. So the Master 
seized the secret of the atom despite 
Olin. and the Conquest began. 

"Smith raised his army and marched 
north, and everywhere cities fell or 
yielded willingly. Joaquin Smith is 
magnificent, and men flock to him, cities 
cheer him. Only here and there men 
hate him bitterly, and speak such words 
as tyrant, and talk of freedom." 

"What are they like, the Immortals?" 

"Well, Martin Sair is as cold as 
mountain rock, and the Princess Margaret is like black fire. Even my old 
bones feel younger only to look at her, 
and it is wise for young men not to look 
at her at all, because she is quite heartless, ruthless, and pitiless. As for Joaquin Smith, the Master— I do not know 
the words to describe" so complex a 
character, and I know him well. He is 
miid. perhaps, but enormously strong, 
kind or cruel as suits his purpose, glitteringly intelligent, and dangerously 
charming." 

"You knoto him I" echoed Hull, and 
added curiously. "What is your other 
name, Old Einar, you who know the 
Immortals ?" 

The old man smiled. 

"When I was born," he said, "my 
parents called me Einar Olin." 



III 



OAQU1N Smith was marching. Hull 
Tarvish leaned against the door of File 
Ormson's iron worker's shop in Ormiston, and stared at the blue mountains 
of Ozarky in the south. Report had it 
Ozarky was already under the Master's 
sway. As for Selui, the Master, encamped above Norse, had requested the 



IS 



FANTASTIC STORY MAGAZINE 



city's surrender. 

Selui wasn't going- to yield. Already 
the towns of the three months' old 
Selui Confederation were sending in 
their men, from Blooming-ton, from 
Cairo, even from distant Chicago on the 
shores of the saltless sea Mitchin. 

Hull knew there was fighting ahead, 
and he had come to take part in it. 

Ormiston was his home for the present, since he'd found work here with 
File Ormson, the- squat iron-worker, 
broad-shouldered as Hull -himself and a 
head shorter, 

A voice sounded at his side. "Hull 
Tarvish ! Are you too proud to notice 
humble folk?" 

It was Vail Ormiston. ITe remembered pleasantly an evening- two days 
ago when he had sat and talked with 
her on a bench by a tree. 

And he remembered the walk 
through the fields when she had shown 
him the mouth of the great ancient 
storm sewer that had run under the 
dead city, and still stretched crumbling 
for miles underground toward the hills. 

And then he recalled her star* .' r 
how, when a child, she had lost herse f 
in it, so that her father had planted the 
tangle of blackberry bushes that still 
concealed the opening-. 

He grinned, "Is it the eldarch's 
daughter speaking of humble folk? 
Your father will be taxing- me double 
if he hears of this!" 

Her eyes twinkled. 

"I'd like to talk to you again this evening. Vail," he said boldly. 

"Would you ?" she murmured demurely. 

"Yes, if Enoch Ormiston hasn't spoken first for vnur time." 

"Rut he has, Hull." 

He knew she was teasing him deliberately. "I'm sorry," he said shortly. 

"But— I told him I was busy," she 
finished. 

"Then what a misfortune it is that 
I have work to do," Hull said. 

"What does File make?" asked Vail. 
Instantly Hull's smile faded. "He 



forges — a sword !" 

Vail, too, was no longer the joyous 
one of a moment ago. Over both of 
them had crime tiie shadow of the Empire. Out in the bine hills of Ozarky 
Joaquin Smith was marching. 

T ATER that evening Hull watched the 
*^ glint of a yellow moon on Vail's 
copper hair, and leaned back on the 
bench near her bouse at the edge of 
town. Behind them the stone house 
loomed dark, for her father was scurrying- about in town on Confederation 
business, and the help had availed themselves of the evening- of freedom to join 
the crowd in the village square. But 
the yellow daylight of the oil-lamp 
showed across the road in the house of 
Hue Helm, the former who had brought 
Hull from Norse to Ormiston. 

It was at this light that Hull stared 
thoughtfully. 

"I like, fighting," he repeated, "but 
somehow the joy has gone out of this. 
It's as iT one wailed the onslaught of a 
thunder cloud." , 

"How," asked Vail in a timid, small 
voice, "can one fight magic?" 

"There is no magic," said the youth, 
echoing Old Einar's words. 

"Then why is it that Joaquin Smith 
has never lost a battle?" 

"Knowledge." said Hull. "The knowledge of the Ancients." 

"The knowledge of the Ancients was 
magic." said the girl. "If Holland, Olin, 
and Martin Sair are not sorcerers, then 
what are they? If Black Margot is no 
witch, then my eyes never looked on 
one." 

"Have you seen them?" queried Hull. 

"Of course, all but Holland, who is 
dead. Three years ago during the Peace 
of Memphis my father and I traveled 
into the Empire. 1 saw all of them about 
the city of N'Orleans." 

"And is she — what they say she is?" 

"The Princess?" Vail's eyes dropped. 
"Men say she is beautiful." 

"But you think not ?" 

"What if she is?" snapped the girl 



DAWN OF 

almost defiantly. "Tier beauty is like 
her youth, like her very life — -artificial, 
preserved after its allotted time, frozen. 
That's it — frozen by .sorcery." 

"At least." Hull returned, "there's no 
magic will stop a bullet save flesh and 
bone. Yes, and the wizard who stops 
one with his skull lies just as dead as an 
honest man." 

"I hope you're right," she breathed 
timidly. "Hull, he mast be stopped, lie 
must! If Joaquin Smith takes Ormiston, my father is the one to suffer. His 
lands will he parceled out. lie's old, 
Hull— old. What will become of him 
then? I know many people feel there is 
magic in the very name of Joaquin 
Smith, for he marches through armies 
that outnumber him ten to one." She 
paused. "But not Ormiston !" she cried 
fiercely. "Not if the women have to 
hear arms!" 

"Not Ormiston." lie agreed gentlv. 

"You'll fight. Hull, won't you? Even 
though you're not Ormiston born?" 

"Of course. I" have bow and sword, 
and a good pistol. I'll fight." 

"But no rifle? Wait. Hull." 

In a moment she was back again. 
"Hele. Here is a rifle and horn and 
ball. Send me a bullet through the 
Master's skull. And one besides between the eyes of Black Margot — for 
me!" 

"I do not fight women," he said. 

"Not woman but witch!" 

"None the less, Vail, it must he two 
bullets for the Master and only the 
captive's chains for Princess Margaret." 

"Yes!" she blazed. "Oh, yes, Hull, 
that's better. If I could ever hope to 
see that — " She rose suddenly and he 
followed her to the gate. "You must 
go," she nun-mured, "hut before you 
leave me, you can — if you wish it, Hull 
— kiss me." 

Of a sudden he was all shy mountainy 
again. He faced her flushing a furious 
red, but only half from embarrassment, 
for the rest was happiness. He circled 
her with his great arms and, very hastily, he touched his lips to soft ones. 



FLAME 17 

1 "Now," he said exultantly, "now I 
will fight if I have to charge the men of 
the Empire by myself." 

IV 

MHK MEN of the Confederation 
were pouring into Ormiston all night 
long. There was a rumble of wagons, 
bringing powder and ball from Selui, 
and food as well, for Ormiston couldn't 
even attempt to feed so many ravenous 
mouths. A magnificent army, ten thousand strong, and all of them seasoned 
fighting men. 

The stand was to be at Ormiston, and 
Norse, the only settlement now between 
Joaquin Smith and the Confederation, 
was left to its fate. Experienced leaders 
had examined the territorv, and had 
agreed on a plan. Three miles south of 
the town, the road followed an ancient 
railroad cut. with fifty-foot embankments on either side, heavily wooded 
for a mile north and south of the bridge 
across Eaglefoot Flow. 

Along this course they were to distribute men, a single line where the 
bluffs were high and steep, massed 
forces where the terrain permitted. 
Joaquin Smith must follow that road; 
there was no other. An ideal situation 
for ambush, and a magnificently simple 
plan. 

Tt was mid-morning when the woods 
runners who had been sent into Ozarky 
returned with breath-taking news. 
Joaquin Smith had received the Selui 
defiance of his representations, and was 
marching, was close. His forces? The 
runners estimated them at four thousand men, all mounted with perhaps another thousand auxiliaries. The Master's 
army was outnumbered two to one! 

The time was at hand. In the little 
room beside File Ormson's workshop, 
Hull was going over his weapons while 
Vail Ormiston, pale and nervous and 
very lovely, watched him. 

"Before you go," Vail whispered, "will 
you — kiss me, Hull?" 

He strode toward her, then recoiled 



18 



FANTASTIC STORY MAGAZINE 



in sudden alarm. For he heard a series 
of the faintest possible clicks, and Hull 
fancied that he saw for an instant a 
glistening of tiny blue sparks on candlesticks and metal objects about the room, 
and that he felt for a brief moment a 
curious tingling. 

Then he forgot all of these strange 
trifles as the powder horn on the table 
roared into terrific flame, and flaming 
wads of powder shot meteor-like around 
him. 

For an instant he froze rigid. Vail 
was screaming — her dress was burning! He moved into sudden action, 
sweeping her from her feet, crashing 
her sideward to the floor, where his 
great hands beat out the fire. Then he 
siapped table and floor ; and finally there 
were no flames. 

He turned, eoughing and choking in 
the black smoke, and bent over Vail, 
who gasped half overcome. Her skirt 
was burned to her knees. 

"Are you hurt?" he cried. "Vail, are 
you burned?" 

"No — no!" she panted. 

"Then outside!" he snapped, reaching 
down to lift her. 

Outside there was chaos. He set Vail 
gently on the step and surveyed a scene 
of turmoil. Men ran shouting, and from 
windows along the street black smoke 
poured. A dozen yards away a powder 
wagon had blasted itself into a vast 
mushroom of smoke, incinerating 
horses and driver alike. 

"What — happened?" gasped Vail. 
"Hull, what~?" 

He comprehended suddenly. "The 
sparkers*!" he roared. "Joaquin Smith's 
sparkers ! Old Einar told me about 
them." He groaned. "There goes our 
ammunition." 

He rushed toward the milling group 
that surrounded bearded old Marcus 
Ormiston and the Confederation leaders. 



*The Errien resonators. A device, now obsolete, that projected an inductive field sufficient to induce tiny electrical discharges in 
metal objects up to a distance of many miles. 
Thus it ignited inflammables such as gunpowder. 



He plowed his way fiercely through, and 
seized the panic-stricken graybeard. 

He glared at the five leaders. "You'll 
carry through. Do you see? For powder 
and ball there's bow and sword. Gather 
your men and march!" 

And such, within the hour, was the 
decision. Hull marched with the men 
of Ormiston. The Ormiston men were 
first on the line of Master's approach, 
and they filtered to their forest-hidden 
places as silently as foxes. Hull let his 
eyes wander back along the cut and 
what he saw pleased him, for no eye 
could have detected that along the deserted road lay ten thousand fighting 
men. They were good woodsmen, too, 
these fellows from the upper river and 
the saltless seas. 

r\OWN the way from Norse a single 
U horseman came galloping. Old Marcus Ormiston recognized him, stood 
erect, and hailed him. They talked ; 
Hull could hear the words. The Master 
had passed through Norse, pausing only 
long enough to notify the eldarch that 
henceforth his taxes must be transmitted to N'Or leans. 

The informant rode on toward Ormiston, and the men fell to their quiet waiting. A half hour passed, and then, faint 
drifting on the silent air, came the 
sound of music. Singing; men's voices 
in song. Hull listened intently, and his 
skin crept and his hair prickled as he 
made out the words of the Battle Song 
of N'Orleans. 

Hull gripped his bow and set feather 
to cord. He knew well enough that the 
plan was to permit the enemy to pass 
unmolested until their whole line was 
within the span of the ambush. And 
now, far down the way beyond the cut, 
he saw dust rising. Joaquin Smith was 
at hand. 

Then — the unexpected! Suddenly 
through the trees to his right, brownclothed, lithe little men were slipping 
like charging shadows, horns sounding, 
whistles shrilling. The woods runners 
of the Master ! Joaquin Smith had anti


DAWN OF FLAME 



cipated just such an ambush! 

Instantly Hull saw the weakness of 
his forces. They were ten thousand, 
true enough, but here they were strung 
thinly over a distance of two miles, and 
now the woods runners were at a vast 
advantage in numbers, with the main 
body approach ing*. One chance! Fight 
it out. drive off the scouts, and retire to 
the woods. While the army existed, 
even though Ormiston fell, there was 
hope. 

He shouted, strung his arrow, and 
sent it [lashing through the leaves. A 
bad place for arrows : their arching 
flight was always deflected by the 
tangled branches. He slung bow on 
shoulder and gripped his sword; close 
Quarters was the solution! 

Then — the second surprise! The 
woods runners bad flashed their own 
weapons, little blunt revolvers.* But 
they sent no bullets; only pale beams 
darted through the leaves and branches, 
faint blue streaks of light. Sorcery? 

Hull learned its meaning instantly. 
His sword grew suddenly scorching hot 
in his hands, and a moment later the 
queerest pain he had ever encountered 
racked his body. A violent, stinging, inward tingle that twitched his muscles 
and paralyzed his movements. A brief 
second and the shock ceased, but his 
sword lay smoking in the leaves, and 
his steel bow had seared his shoulders. 
Around him men were yelling in pain, 
writhing on the ground, running back 
into the forest 1 depths. 

Yet apparently no man had been 
killed. Hands were seared and blistered 
by weapons that grew hot under the 
blue beams, bodies were racked by the 
torture that Hull could not know was 
electric shock, but none was slain. Hope 
flared again, and he ran to head off a 
retreating group. 

"To the road !" he roared. "Out where 

*Kohimar's ionic beams. Two parallel beams 
of highly actinic light ionize a path of ait', 
and along these conductive lanes of gas an 
electric current can be passed, powerful 
enough to kill or merely intense enough to 
punish. 



19 



our arrows can fly free! Charge the 
column !" 

For a moment the group halted. Hull 
seized a yet unhealed sword from someone, and turned back. 

Below in the cut was the head of the 
column, advancing placidly. He glimpsed 
a silver-helmeted, black-haired man on 
a great white mare at its head, and beside him a slighter figure on a black 
stallion. Joaquin Smith! Hull roared 
down the embankment toward him. 
Four men spurred instantly between 
him and the figure with the silver helmet. A beam flicked; his sword scorched 
his skin and he flung it away. 

"Come on!" he bellowed. "Here's a 
fight!" 

Strangely, in curious clarity, he saw 
the eyes of the Empire men, a smile in 
them, mysteriously amused. No anger, 
no fear — just amusement. Hull glanced 
quickly behind him, and knew finally 
the cause of that amusement. No one 
had followed him; he had charged the 
Master's army alone! 

Deserted ! Abandoned by those for 
whom he fought. He roared his rage 
to the echoing bluffs, and sprang at the 
horseman nearest him. 

The horse reared, pawing the air. Hull 
thrust his mighty arms below its belly 
and heaved with a convulsion of his 
great muscles. Backward toppled steed 
and rider, and all about the Master was 
a milling turmoil where a man scrambled desperately to escape the clashing 
hoofs. But Hull glimpsed Joaquin Smith 
sitting statuelike and smiling on his 
great white mare. 

He tore another rider from his saddle, 
and then, from the corner of his eye, 
he saw the slim youth at the Master's 
side raise a weapon, coolly, methodically. For the barest instant Hull faced 
icy green eyes where cold, passionless 
death threatened. He flung himself 
aside as a beam spat smoking against 
the dust of the road. 

"Don't!" snapped Joaquin Smith, his 
low voice clear through the turmoil. 
"The youth is splendid!" 



FANTASTIC STORY MAGAZINE 



But Hull had no mind to die uselessly. 
He bent, flung himself halfway up the 
bluff in a mighty leap, caught a dragging branch, and swung into the forest. 
A startled woods runner faced him; he 
flung the fellow behind him down the 
slope and slipped into the shelter of 
leaves. 

"The wise warrior fights pride," he 
muttered to himself. "It's no disgrace 
for one man to run from an army." 



Hull found File Ormson in the 
group that started across town to where 
the road from Norse elbowed east to 
enter. Hull had outsped- the leisurely 
march of the Master, for there at the 
bend was the glittering army, now 
halted. Not even the woods runners had 
come into Ormiston town, for there they 
were too, lined in a brown-clad rank 
along the edge of the wood-lots beyond 
the nearer fields. 

They had made no effort, apparently, 
to take prisoners, but had simply herded 
the terrified defenders into the village. 
Joaquin Smith had done it again ; he 
had taken a town without a single death 
or at least with no casualties than whatever injuries had come from bursting 
rifles and blazing powder. 

Suddenly Hull noticed something. 
"Where are the Confederation men?" 
he asked sharply. 

File Ormson turned gloomy eyes on 
him. "They've fled." He scowled, then 
smiled. "You're a brave fool, Hull. 
Think not hard of us. Those fiendish 
ticklers tickled away our courage. But 
they can kill as well as tickle; when 
there "was need of it before Memphis 
they killed quickly enough." 

Down the way there was some sort 
of stir. Hull described the silver helmet 
of the Master. He dismounted and faced 
someone; it was— yes T old Marcus Ormiston. He left File Ormson and shouldered his way to the edge of the crowd 
that circled the two. 

Joaquin Smith was speaking. 



"And," he said, "all taxes are to be 
forwarded to N'Orleans, including those 
on your own lands. Half of them I shall 
use to maintain my government,, but 
half will revert to your own district. 
You are no longer eldarch, but for the 
present you may collect the taxes at the 
rate I prescribe." 

Old Marcus was bitterly afraid. 

"My — my lands?" he whined. 

Joaquin Smith turned away indifferently, placed foot to stirrup, and swung 
upon his great white mare. 

Tall as Hull himself, more slender, 
but with powerful shoulders, he seemed 
no older than the late twenties, or no 
more than thirty at most, though that 
was only the magic of Martin Sair, for 
more than eighty years had passed since 
his birth in the mountains of Mexico. 
His bronzed body was like the ancient 
statues Hull had seen in Selui, and he 
looked hardly the fiend that most people 
thought him. 

lie rose forward, and a dozen officers 
followed. 

A voice, a tense, shrieking voice 
sounded behind Hull. 

"You! It is Hull! It's you!" It was 
Vail, teary-eyed and pale. "They said 
you were — " She broke off sobbing, 
clinging to him, while Enoch Ormiston 
watched sourly. 

He held her. "It isn't as bad as it 
might be," he consoled. "He wasn't as 
severe as I feared." 

"Revere!" she echoed. "Do you believe 
those mild words of his, Hull ? First our 
taxes, then our lands, and next it will 
be our lives — or at least my father's 
life. Doa't you understand? That was 
no eldarch from some enemy town, Hull. 
That was Joaquin Smith. Joaquin 
Smith! Pie and Black Margot and their 
craft! Look there! 

He spun around. For a moment he 
saw nothing save the green-eyed youth 
who had turned death-laden eyes on him 
at Eaglefoot Flow mounted on the 
mighty black stallion. Youth? He saw 
suddenly that it was a woman — a girl, 
rather. Eighteen — twenty-five ? He 



DAWN OF 

couldn't tell. The sunset fell on a flaming black mop of hair, so black that it 
glinted blue— an intense, unbelievable 
black. 

Like Joaquin Smith she wore only 
a shirt and very abbreviated shorts. 
There was a curious grace in even the 
way she sat the idling steed, one hand 
on its haunches, the other on withers, 
the bridle dangling loose. 

"Black Margot!" Hull whispered. 
"Brazen' Half naked! What's so beautiful about hi'r?" 

AS IF she heard his whisper, she 
turned suddenly, her emerald eyes 
sweeping the crowd about him, and he 
felt his question answered. Her beauty 
was starkly incredible — audacious, outrageous. 

Those eyes met Hull's, and it was almost as if he heard an audible click. 
He saw recognition in her face, and she 
passed her glance casually over his 
mighty figure. If she acknowledged his 
gaze at all, it was by the faintest of all 
possible smiles of mockery as she rode 
coolly away from Joaquin Smith. 

"She — she smiled at you, Hull !" 
gasped Vail, "I'm frightened." 

His fascination was yielding now to 
a surge of hatred for Joaquin Smith, 
for the Princess, for the whole Empire. 
It was Vail he loved, and she was being 
crushed by these. An idea formed slowly as he stared down the street where 
Joaquin Smith had dismounted and was 
now striding into the little church. He 
heard an approving murmur sweep the 
crowd. That was simply policy, the 
Master's worshipping in Ormistnn 
church, a gesture to the crowd. 

He lifted the steel bow from his back 
and bent it. The spring was still in it. 
"Wait here!" he snapped .to Vail, and 
strode up the street toward the church. 

Outside stood a dozen Empire men, 
and the Princess idled on her great black 
horse. He slipped across the churchyard, around behind where a tangle of 
vines stretched toward the roof. He 
pulled himself hand over hand to the 



FLAME 21 

eaves, and thence to the peak. 

He crept forward to the base of the 
steeple. Now he must leave the peak 
and creep precariously along the steep 
slope around it. He reached the street 
edge and peered cautiously over. 

The Master was still within. Against 
his wit! he glanced at Black Margot, and 
even put cord to feather and sighted at 
her ivory throat. lie could not loose the 
shaft. 

Below him there was a stir. Joaquin 
Smith came out and swung to his white 
horse. Now was the moment. Hull rose 
to his knees, hoping that he could remain steady on the sharp pitch of the 
roof. Carefully, carefully, he drew the 
steel arrow back. 

There was a shout. He had been seen, 
and a blue beam sent racking pain 
through his body. For an instant he 
bore it, then lossed his arrow and went 
sliding down the roof edge and over. 

Me fell on soft loam. A dozen hands 
seized him, dragged him upright, thrust 
him out into the street. He saw Joaquin 
Smith still on his horse, but the glistening arrow stood upright like a plume in 
his silver helmet, and a trickle of blood 
was red on his cheek. 

But he wasn't killed. He raised the 
helmet from his head, waved aside the 
cluster of officers, and with his own 
hands bound a white cloth about his 
forehead. Then he turned coo] gray 
eyes on Hull. 

"You drive a strong shaft," he said, 
and then recognition, flickered in his 
eyes. "I spared your life some hours 
ago, did I not ?" 
Hull said nothing. 

Tlie contpieror turned away. "I,ook 
him up," he ordered coolly. "Let him 
make whatever preparations his religion requires, and then — execute him." 

Above the murmur of the crowd Hull 
heard Vail Ormiston's cry of anguieh. 
He turned to smile at her. 

"I'm sorry," he called gently. "I loved 
you, Vail." Then he was being thrust 
away down the street. 

He was pushed into Hue Helm's stone


22 LANTASTIC ST 

walled tool shed. Hull drew himself up 
and stood passively by the door, before 
which stood two grim Empire men. 

One of them spoke. "Keep peaceful, 
Weed,"* he said in his N'Orleans drawl. 
"Go ahead with your praying." 

"I do nothing." said Hull. "The mountainies believe that a right life is better 
than a right ending, and right or wrong 
a ghost's but a ghost anyway." 

The guard laughed. "And a ghbst 
you'll be." 

"If a ghost I'll be," retorted Hull, 
turning slowly toward him, "I'd sooner 
turn one— fighting!" 

He sprang suddenly, crashed a mighty 
fist against the arm that bore the weapon, thrust one guard upon the other, 
and overleaped the tangle into the dusk. 
As he spun to circle the house, something very hard smashed viciously 
against the back of his skull. 

VI 

For a brief moment Hull sprawled 
half stunned, then his muscles lost their 
paralysis and he thrust himself to his 
feet, whirling to face whatever assault 
threatened. In the doorway the guards 
still scrambled, but directly before him 
towered a rider on a black mount, and 
two men on foot flanked him. The rider, 
of course, was the Princess, her green 
eyes luminous in the dusk as she slapped 
a short sword into its scabbard. It was 
a blow from the flat of its blade that 
had felled him. 

She held now the blunt weapon of the 
blue beam. "Stand quiet, Hull Tarvish," 
she said. "One flash will burst that 
stubborn heart of yours forever." 

Perforce he stood quiet, his back to 
the wall of the shed. 

She spoke again, letting her glance 
flicker disdainfully over the two appalled guards. "The Master will be 
pleased," she said contemptuously, "to 

•Weed: The term applied by Dominists (the 
Master's partisans) to their opposers. It originated in Joaquin Smith's remark before 
the Battle of Memphis: "Even the weeds of 
the fields have taken arms against us." 



RY MAGAZINE 

learn that one unarmed Weed outmatches two men of his own cohort." 

"But your Highness," the nearer man 
faltered, "he rushed us unexpect — " 

"No matter," she cut in, and turned 
back to Hull. For the first time now he 
really felt the presence of death as she 
said roolly, "I am minded to kill you." 

"Then do it!" he snanped. 

"But 1 think also." she resumed, "that 
your living might amuse me more than 
your death, and — " for the first time 
there was a breath of feeling in her 
voice — "God knows 1 need amusement!" 
Her tones chilled again. "I give vou your 
life." 

"Your Highness," muttered the cowed 
guard, "the Master has ordered — " 

"I countermand the orders " she said 
shortly, and then to, Hull. "YBu are a 
fighter. Are you also a man of honor?" 

"If I'm not," he retorted, "the lie that 
says I am would mean nothing to me." 

She smiled coldly. 

"Well, I think you are, Hull Tarvish. 
You go free on your word to carry no 
weapons, and your promise to visit me 
this evening, in my quarters at the 
eldarch's home." She paused. "Well?" 

"I give my word." 

"And I take it. Away, all of you!" 
she ordered. She rode off toward the 
street. 

Hull let himself relax against the wall 
with a low "whew " Sweat started on 
his cold forehead, and his mighty 
muscles felt weak. 

He wanted to find Vail, to use her 
cool loveliness as an antidote for the 
dark poison of the beauty he had been 
facing. And then, at the gate, he drew 
back suddenly. A group of men in Empire garb came striding by, and among 
them, helmetless and with his head 
bound, moved the Master. 

His eyes fell on Hull. 

"You again !" he said. "How is it that 
you still live, Hull Tarvish?" 

"The Princess ordered it." 

The frown faded. "So," said Joaquin 
Smith slowly, "Margaret takes it upon 
herself to interfere somewhat too fre


DAWN C 

quently. I suppose she also freed you ?" 

"Yes, on my promise not to bear 
arms." 

There was a curious expression in the 
face of the conqueror. 

"Well," he said almost gently, "it was 
not my intention to torture you, but 
merely to have you killed for your 
treason. It may be that you will soon 
wish that my orders had been left unaltered." He strode on Into the eldarch's 
dooryard. 

XJULL hurried toward his room beside File Ormson's shop, and there, 
tragic-eyed and mist-pale, he found 
Vail Ormiston. She was huddled on the 
doorstep with Enoch holding her against 
him. 

Vail looked up with uncomprehending 
eyes, stared for a moment without expression, and, then, with a little moan, 
crumpled and fainted. 

She was unconscious only a few moments, scarcely long enough for Hull 
to bear her into his room. There she 
lay now on his couch, -clinging to his 
great hand, convinced at least of his 
living presence. 

"I think," she murmured, "that you're 
as deathless as Joaquin Smith, Hull. 
Tell me — tell me how it happened." 

He told her. "Black Margot's to thank 
for it," he finished. 

Enoch cut in. "Here's one for the 
Harriers, then" he said sourly. "The 
pack needs him." 

"The Harriers?" Hull looked up 
puzzled. 

"Oh, Hull, yes!" said Vail. "File Ormson's been busy. The Harriers are what's 
left of the army — the better citizens of 
Ormiston. The Master's magic didn't 
reach beyond the ridge, and over the 
hills there's still powder and rifles. And 
the spell is no longer in the valley, 
either. One of the men carried a cup of 
powder across the ridge, and it didn't 
burn." 

The better citizens, Hull thought smiling. She meant of course those who 
owned land and feared a loss of it such 



FLAME 23 

as Marcus Ormiston had suffered. But 
aloud he said only, "How many men 
have you ?" 

"Oh, there'll be several hundred with 
the farmers across the hills." She looked 
into his eyes. "I know it's a forlorn 
hope, Hull, but— we've got to try. You'll 
help, won't you ?" 

"Of course. But all your Harriers can 
attempt is raids. They can't fight the 
Master's army." 

"I know. I know it, Hull. It's a desperate hope." 

"Desperate ?" said Enoch suddenly. 
"Hull, didn't you say you were ordered 
to Black Margot's quarters this evening?" 

"Yes." 

"Then — see here! You'll carry a knife 
in your arm-pit. Sooner or later she'll 
want you alone with her, and when that 
happens, you'll slide the knife quietly 
into her ruthless heart ! If you've courage!" 

"Courage!" he growled. "To murder 
a woman!" 

"Black Margot's a devil!" 

Hull scowled. "I swore not to bear 
weapons." 

"Swore to her!" snapped Enoch. 
"That needn't bind you." 

"My word's given," said Hull firmly. 
"I do not lie." 

Vail smiled. "You're right," she 
whispered, and as Enoch's face darkened, "I love you for it, Hull." 

"Then," grunted Enoch, "if it's not 
lack of courage, do this. Lure her somehow across the west windows. We can 
slip two or three Harriers to the edge 
of the woodlot, and if she passes a window with the light behind her — well, 
they won't miss." 

Vail's blue eyes pleaded. "That won't 
be breaking your word, Hull. Please. 
She's a sorceress. Please, Hull." 

Bitterly he yielded. "I'll try, then." 
He frowned gloomily. "She saved my 
life, and — Well, which room is hers?" 

"My father's. Mine is the western 
chamber, which she took for her — her 
maid. We," she said, "are left to sleep 



24 



in the kitchen." 

An hour later, having eaten, he 
walked somberly home with Vail. The 
guards let Vail in, but halted Hull. One 
of them ran exploratory hands about his 
body. 

"Orders of Tier Highness," he explained gruffly. 

Hull smiled. The Princess had not 
trusted his word too implicitly. In a 
moment the fellow had finished his 
search and swung the door open. 

Hull entered. He had never seen the 
interior of the house, and for a moment 
its splendor dazzled him. Carved ancient furniture, woven carpets, intricately worked standards for the oil 
lamps, and even a full-length mirror of 
ancient workmanship wherein his own 
ima°;e faced him. 

Upstairs was a dimly lit hall where a 
guard stood silently. "The Princess 
Margaret?" he asked, but in place of 
answer came the liquid tones of Margaret herself. "Let him come in, Corlin." 

A screen within the door blocked 
sight of the room. Hull circled it, steeling himself against the memory of that 
soul-burning loveliness he remembered. 
But his defense was shattered by the 
shock that awaited him. 

The screen, indeed, shielded the 
Princess from the sight of the fuard in 
the hall, but not from Hull's eyes. He 
stared appalled at the sight of her lying 
in indifference in a great tub of water, 
being bathed by one of her women. He 
could not avoid a single glimpse of her 
exquisite form. 

"Oh, sit down!" she said contemptuously.' "This will be over in a moment." 

He kept his eyes averted while water 
splashed and a towel whisked sibilantly. 
When he heard her footsteps beside him 
he glanced up tentatively, still fearful 
of what he might see, but she was covered now in a full robe of filmy black 
and gold that made her seem taller. 

Hull felt again the fascination against 
which he had steeled himself. 

"So," she said. "You may sit down 



FANTASTIC STORY MAGAZINE 



again. I do not demand court etiquette 
in the field." She sat opposite, and produced a black cigarette, lighting it at 
the chimney of the lamp on the table. 

"Now," she said with a faintly ironie 
smile, "tell me what they say of me 
here." 

"They call you witch." 

"And do they hate me?" 

"Hate you?" he echoed thoughtfully. 
"At least they will fight you and the 
Master to the last feather on the last 
arrow." 

"Of course. The young men will fight 
— except those that Joaquin has bought 
with the eldarch's lands — because they 
know that once within the Empire, 
fighting is no more to be had. No more 
joyous, thrilling little wars between 
the cities, no more boasting, and parading before the pretty provincial girls." 
She paused. "And you, Hull Tarvish- — 
what do you think of me?" 

"I call you witch for other reasons." 

The Princess looked narrowly at him. 
"Tell me," she said, "was that the eldarch's prettv daughter who cried so 
piteous! v after you there before the 
church?" 

"Yes." 

"And do you love her?" 

"Yes." This was the opening he had 
sought. He took the opportunity grimly. "I should like to ask one favor." 

"Ask it." 

"I should like to see the chamber that 
was to have been our bridal room. The 
west chamber." 

The Princess laughed disdainfully. 
"Go see it then." 

For a moment he feared, or hoped, 
perhaps, that she was going to let him 
go alone. Then she rose and followed 
him to the hall, and to the door of the 
west chamber. 

VII 

HlJLL paused at the door of the wesL 
chamber to permit the Princess to enter. Her glorious green eyes flashed 
speculatively to his face, then she 



DAWN OF FLAME 



stepped back. 

"You first. Weed," she commanded. 

He did not hesitate. He turned and 
strode into the room, hoping that the 
Harrier riflemen, if indeed they lurked 
in the copse, might recognize his mighty 
figure in time to stay their eager triggers. His scalp prickled as he moved 
steadily across the window, but nothing 
happened. 

Behind him the Princess laughed softly. "I have lived too long in the aura 
of plot and counterplot in N'Orleans," 
she said. "I mistrust you without cause, 
honest Hull Tarvish." 

Her words tortured him. He turned 
to see her black robe mold itself to her 
body as she moved, and, as sometimes 
happens in moments of stress, he caught 
an instantaneous picture of her with his 
sense so quickened that it seemed as if 
she, himself, and the world were frozen 
into immobility. 

He remembered her forever as she 
was then, with her limbs in the act of 
striding, her green eyes soft in the 
lamplight. Witch and devil she might 
be, but she looked like a dark-haired 
angel, and in that moment his spirit 
revolted. 

"No!" he bellowed, and sprang toward her, striking her slim shoulders 
with both hands in a thrust that sent 
her staggering back into the hallway, 
there to sit hard and suddenly on the 
floor beside the amazed guard. 

She sprang up instantly, and there 
was nothing angelic now in her face. 
"You — hurt — me !" she hissed. "Me ! 
Now I'll- — " She snatched the guard's 
weapon from his belt, thrust it full at 
Hull's chest, and sent the blue beam 
humming upon him. 

It was pain far worse than that at 
Eaglefoot Flow. He bore it stolidly, 
grinding into silence the groan that 
" rose in his throat. 

"Treachery again !" she said. "I won't 
kill you, Hull Tarvish. I know a better 
way." She whirled toward the stairwell. "Lebeau!" she called. "Lebeau! 
There's—" She glanced sharply at Hull, 



25 



and continued, "II ya des tirailleurs dans 
le bois. Je vais les tirer en avant!*" 

It was the French of N'Orleans, as 
incomprehensible to Hull as Aramaic. 

"I've a mind," she blazed, "to strip 
the Weed clothes from the Eldarch's 
daughter and send her marching across 
the window!" 

He was utterly appalled. "She — she 
—was in town!" he gasped, then fell 
silent at the sound of feet below. 

"Well, there's no time," she retorted. 
"So, if I must — " She strode steadily 
into the west chamber, paused a moment, and then stepped deliberately in 
front of the window! 

IIJULL was aghast. He watched her 
AA stand so that the lamplight must 
have cast her perfect silhouette full on 
the pane, stand tense and motionless for 
the fraction of a breath, and then leap 
back so sharply her robe billowed away 
from her body. 

She had timed it to perfection. Two 
shots crashed almost together, and the 
glass shattered. And then, out in the 
night, a dozen beams criss-crossed, and, 
thin and clear in the silence after the 
shots, a yell of mortal anguish drifted 
up. and another, and a third. 

The Princess Margaret smiled in malice, and sucked a crimson drop from a 
finger gashed by flying glass. "Your 
treachery reacts. Instead of my betrayal, you have befrayed your own 
men." 

Hull Tarvish bit his lip. 

"Wei!," she said musingly, "you're 
rather more entertaining than I had expected." 

He chose to ignore the mockery in 
her voice. "Perhaps," he said grimly. 

"Why, then, did you weaken, Hull 
Tarvish ? You might have had my life." 

"I do not fight women," he said despondently. "I looked at you— and 
turned weak." A question formed in his 
mind. "Hut why did you risk your life 
before the window? You could have 
* ^'There are snipers in the copse. I'll draw 



FANTASTIC STORY MAGAZINE 



had fifty wood runners scour the copse." 

She smiled, but there was a shrewd 
narrowness in her eyes. "Because so 
many of these villages are built above 
the underground ways of the Ancients 
— the subways, the sewers. How did I 
know that your assassin might slip into 
some burrow and escape? It was necessary to lure them into the disclosure." 

Hull shadowed the gleam that shot 
into his own eyes. lie remembered suddenly the ancient sewer in which the 
child Vail had wandered, whose mouth 
was hidden by blackberry bushes. So 
the Empire men were not aware of it! 

"Your Highness"," he said grimly, "unless you kill me now, I will be a bitter 
enemy to your Empire army." 

"Perhaps less bitter than you think," 
she said softly. "See, Hull, the only 
three that know of your weakness are 
dead. No one can name you traitor or 
weakling." 

"But / can," he returned somberly. 
"And you." 

"Not I, Hull," she murmured. "I never 
blame a man who weakens because of 
me — and there have been many. Men 
as strong as you, Hull, and some that 
the world still calls great. Come in here," 
she said in altered tones. "Tell me, 
would you like to see the Great City, 
Hull?" 

"You know I would." 

She shrugged. "Oh, you can visit 
N'Orleans, of course, but suppose I offered you the chance to go as the — the 
guest, we'll say, of the Princess Margaret, what would you give for that privilege?" 

"What would you ask for it?" he rejoined. 

"Oh, your allegiance, perhaps. Or 
perhaps the betrayal of your little band 
of Harriers, who will be the devil's own 
nuisance to stamp out of these hills." 

He looked up, startled that she knew 
the name. "The Harriers? How — " 

She smiled. "We have friends among 
the Ormiston men. Friends bought with 
land," she added contemptuously. "But 
what of my offer, Hull?" 



He scowled. "You say as your guest. 
What am I to understand by that?" 

CHE LEANED across the table, her 
^ exquisite green eyes on his, her hair 
flaming blue-black, her perfect lips in 
a faint smile. "What you please, Hull. 
Whatever you please." 

"Do you mean," he said huskily, "that 
you'd do that for so small a thing as the 
destruction of a little enemy band? You, 
with the whole Empire at your back?" 

She nodded. "It saves trouble, doesn't 
it?" 

"And honesty, virtue, honor, mean as 
little to you as that? Is this one of 
your usual means of conquest? Do you 
ordinarily sell your — your favors for — " 

"Not ordinarily," she interrupted 
coolly. "First I must like my co-partner 
in the trade. You, Hull — I like those 
vast muscles of yours, and your stubborn courage, and your slow, clear mind. 
You are not a great man, Hull, for your 
mind has not the cold fire of genius, but 
you are a strong one, and 1 like vou 
for it." 

"Like me!" he roared, starting up in 
his chair. "Yet you think I'll trade what 
honor's left me for — that! You think 
I'll betray my cause! You're wrong!" 

She shook her head, smiling. "No. I 
wasn't wrong, for I thought you 
wouldn't." 

"Oh, you did!" he snarled. "Then 
what if I'd accepted? What would you 
have done then ?" 

"What I promised." She laughed at 
his angry, incredulous face. "Don't look 
so shocked, Hull. I'm not little Vail 
Ormiston. I'm the Princess Margaret of 
N'Orleans. called Margaret the Divine 
by those who love me. and by those who 
hate me called — well, you must know 
what my enemies call me." 

"I do!" he blazed. "Black Margot! A 
good name for you!" 

"Doubtless. But you fail to understand, Hull. I'm an Immortal. Would 
you have me follow the standards of 
death-bound Vail Ormiston ?" 

"Yes! By what right are you su


DAWN OF 

perior to her standards?" 

Her [ins had ceased to smile, and her 
eyes turned wistful. "By the right that 
I can act in no other way, Hull," she said 
softly. A tinge of emotion quavered 
in her voice. "Immortality!" she whispered. "Year after year after year of 
sameness. I have no sense of destiny 
like Joaquin, who sees before him Empire." 

His anger had drained away. He was 
staring at her aghast, appalled. 

"When killing palls and love grows 
stale, what's left? Did I say love? How 
can there he love for me when I know 
that if I love a man, it will be only to 
w;'tch him age and turn wrinkled, weak, 
and flabby? And when I beg Joaquin 
for immortality for the man I love he 
flaunts before me that promise of his 
to Martin Kair, to grant it only to those 
already proved worthy. By the time a 
man's worthy he's old." 

She went on tensely. "I tell you, Hull, 
that I'm so friendless and alone that I 
envy you death-bound ones! Yes, and 
one of these days I'll join you!" 

He gulped. "My Cod!" he muttered. 
"Better for you if you'd stayed in your 
native mountains with friends, home, 
husband and children." 

"Children !" she echoed, her eyes 
misting with tears. "Immortals can't 
have children. Sometimes I curse Martin Sair and his hard rays. I don't want 
immortality; I want life!" 

Hull found his mind in a whirl. He 
scarcely knew his own allegiance. 
"God!" he whispered. "I'm sorry!" 

"And you, Hull- — will vou help me — a 
little?" 

Suddenly some quirk of her dainty lips 
caught his attention. He stared incredulously into the green depths of her 
eyes. It was true. There was laughter 
there. She had been mocking him! And 
as she perceived his realization, her 
soft laughter rippled like rain or water. 

"You — devil!" he choked. "You black 
witch! I wish I'd let you be killed!" 

"Oh, no," she said demurely. "Look 
at me, Hull." 



FLAME 27 

The command was needless. He 
watched her exquisite face. 

"Do you love me, Hull?" 

"T love Vail Ormiston," he rasped. 

"But. do you love me?" 

He rose. "Whatever harm 1 can do 
your cause," he said, "that harm I will 
do. I will not be twice a traitor." 

VIII 

ULL looked down at noon over Ormiston valley, where Joaquin Smith was 
marching. At Ins side Vail Ormiston 
paused, and together they gazed silently over the Selui road, now black with 
riding men and rumbling wagons on 
their way to attack the remnant of the 
Confederation army in Selui. Three 
hundred soldiers and two hundred horsemen remained in Ormiston to deal with 
the Harriers, under Black Margot herself. 

"Our moment comes tonight," Hull 
said soberly. "Our numbers all but equal 
theirs, and surprise is on our side." 

Vail nodded. "The ancient tunnel was 
a bold thought, Hull. The Harriers are 
shoring up the crumbled places. Father 
is with them." 

"He shouldn't be." 

"But this is his hope, Hull. He lives 
for this." 

"Small enough hope! Suppose we're 
successful, Vail. What will it mean save 
the return of Joaquin Smith and his 
army ?" 

"Oh, no!" cried Vail. "If our success 
means the end of Black Margot. isn't 
that enough? Besides, you know that 
half the Master's powers are the work 
of the witch. Enoch — poor Enoch— said 
so." 

Hull winced. Enoch had been one of 
the three marksmen slain outside the 
west window. 

"Enoch," she repeated softly. "He 
loved me in his sour way, Hull, but once 
I had known you, I had no thoughts for 
him." 

Hull slipped his arm about her, cursing himself that he could not steal his 



FANTASTIC STORY MAGAZINE 



thought away from Margaret, of N'Orleans, because it was Vail he loved, and 
Vail he wanted to love. But he could 
not blot Margaret's Satanic loveliness 
from liis inward gaze. 

"Well," lie sighed, "let it be tonight, 
then. Was it four hours past sunset? 
Good. The Umpire men should be sleeping: or gaming in Tigh's Taven by that 
time. It's for us to pray for our gunpowder." 

"Gunpowder? Oh. but didn't you 
hear what I told File Ormson and the 
Harriers, back there on the ridge? The 
casters of the spell are gone ; Joaquin 
Smith has taken them to Selui. I 
watched and listened from the kitchen 
this morning." 

"The sparkers? Thev're gone?" 

"Yes. They called them reson — resators — " 

"Resonators," said Hull, recalling Old 
Einar's words. 

"Something like that. There were two 
of them, great iron barrels on swivels, 
and they swept the valley north and 
south, and east and west, and over toward Norse there was the sound of shots 
and the smoke of a bunting building. 
They loaded them on wag'ins and 
dragged them away toward Selui." 

"They didn't cross the ridge with 
their spell."* said Hull. "The Harriers 
still have powder." 

"Yes," murmured Vail, drawing his" 
arm closer about her. "Tell me," she 
said suddenly, "what did she want of 
yon last night?" 

Hull hesitated for a moment. "Treason." he said finallv. "She wanted me 
to betray the Harriers." 

"What did she offer you for betrayal?" 

Again he hesitated. "A great reward." he answered at last. "A reward 
out of all proportion to the task." 

"Hut in what way? Men say so much 
of her beauty, of her deadly charm. 

* The field of the Erdeti resonator passes readily through structures and walls, but is 
blocked by any considerable natural obstructions, hills, and for some reason, fogbanlts or low clouds. 



Hull— did you feel it?" 
• "I love you, Vail." 

She sighed, and drew yet closer. "I 
think you're the strongest man in the 
World, Hull. The very strongest." 

"I'll need to be," he muttered, staring 
gloomily over the valley. 

Vail left him in Ormiston village and 
took her way hesitantly homeward. Hull 
did what he could about the idle shop, 
and when the sun slanted low, bought 
himself a square loaf of brown bread, 
a great slice of cheese, and a bottle of 
wine. It was just as he finished his meal 
in his room that a pounding on the door 
of the shop summoned him. 

It was an Empire man. "From Her 
Highness," he said, and handed him an 
intricately folded slip of black paper. 

The mountain youth stared at it. 

"This scratching means nothing to 
me," Hull said. 

The Fmpire man sniffed contemptuously. "I'll read it." he said, taking the 
missive. "It says, 'Follow the messenger 
to our quarters,' and it's signed Margarita Imperii Regina, which means Margaret, Princess of the Empire." 

"Suppose I won't go," growled Hull. 

"This isn't an invitation, Weed. It's 
a command." 

Hull grunted assent and followed the 
messenger. 

ri^HIS time, however, lie found the 
■1 Princess clothed, wearing the diminutive shorts and shirt that were her riding costume. She sat in a deep chair 
beside the table, a flagon of wine at 
hand and a black cigarette in her fingers. Her jet hair was like a helmet of 
ebony against the ivory of her forehead 
and throat, and her green eyes like twin 
emeralds. 

"Sit down," she said, as he stood before her. Fire danced in her eyes. "Hull, 
I am as strong as most, men, but 1 believe those vast muscles of yours could 
overpower me as if I were some shrinking provincial girl. And yet — " 

"And yet what ?" 

"And yet you are much like my black 



DAWN OF FLAME 



stallion TCblis. Your muscles are nearly 
as strong:, but tike him, I can goad you, 
drive you, lash you, and set you gallopins in whatever direction I choose." 

"Can you?" he snapped. "Don't try 
it." But the spell of her unearthly 
beauty was hard to face. 

"But 1 think I shall try it," she said 
gently. "Hull, do you ever lie?" 

"I do not." 

".Shall I make you lie, then, Hull? 
Shall I make you swear such falsehoods 
that you will redden forever afterward 
at the thought of them?" 

"You can't !" 

"Do you love me ?" Her face was 
sj! intlike, earnest, pure, even the green 
eyes were soft now as the green of 
spring. 

"No!" ha, ground out savagely, then 
(lushed crimson at the smile on her lips. 
"That isn't a lie!" he blazed. "/ don't 
love your beauty; it's unnatural, hellish, and the girt of Martin Sair. It's a 
false beauty, like your whole life!" 

"Suppose," she proceeded gently, "I 
were to promise to abandon Joaquin, to 
be no longer Black Margot and Princess 
of the Empire, but to be only — Hull 
Tarvish's wife. Between Vail and me, 
which of us would you choose?" 

He said nothing for a moment. 
"You're unfair," he said bitterly at last. 
"Is it fair to compare Vail and yourself? She's sweet and loyal and innocent, but you — you're Black Margot!" 

"Nevertheless," she said calmly, "I 
think T shall compare us. Sora !" A 
woman appeared. "Sora, this wine is 
gone. Send the eldarch's daughter here 
with another bottle and a second 
goblet." 

Hull stared appalled. "What are you 
going to do ?" 

"No harm to your Utile Weed. I 
promise no harm." 

"But — " He paused. Vail's footsteps 
sounded on the stair, and she entered 
timidly bearing a tray with a bottle and 
a metal goblet. lie saw her start as she 
perceived him, but she only advanced 
quietly, set the tray on the table, and 



backed toward the door. 

"Wait a moment," said the Princess. 
She rose and moved to Vail's side as if 
to force the comparison on Hull. Barefooted, the Princess Margaret was exactly the height of Vail in her lowheeled sandals, and she was the merest 
shade slimmer. 

But her startling black hair and her 
glorious green eyes seemed almost to 
fade the unhappy Ormiston girl's to a 
colorless dun. It wasn't fair. Hull realized that it was like comparing candlelight to sunbeam. 

"Hull," said Hie Princess, "which of 
us do you love?" 

He saw Vail's lips twitch fearfully, 
and he remained stubbornly silent. 

"I take it," said the Princess, smiling, 
"that your silence means you love me 
the more. Am I right?" 

He was in utter torment. T T is white 
lips twisted in anguish as he muttered 
finally, "Oh, Cod! Then yes!" 

She smiled softly. "You may go," 
she said to the pallid and frightened 
Vail. 

But Tor a moment the girl hesitated. 
"Hull," she whispered, "Hull, I know you 
said that to save me. 1 don't believe it. 
Hull, and I love you. I blame — her!" 

"Why do you delight in torture ?" 
cried Hull after Vail Tiad left. "You're 
cruel as a cat." 

"That wasn't, cruelty," said the Princess gently. "It was but a means of 
proving what I said, that your mighty 
muscles are well-broken to my saddle." 

"If that needed proof," he muttered. 

"It needed none. There's proof 
enough, Hull, in what's happening even 
now, if I .judge the time rightly. I mean 
your Harriers slipping through their 
ancient sewer right into my trap behind the barn." 

He was thunderstruck. "You — are 
you — you must, be a w r itch!" he gasped. 

"Perhaps. But it wasn't witchcraft 
that led me to put the thought of that 
sewer into your head, Hull. Do you remember now that it was my suggestion, 
given last evening there in the hallway? 



311 



FANTASTIC STORY MAGAZINE 



I knew quite well that you'd put the 
bait before the Harriers." 

His brain was reeling. "But why — 
why—" 

"Oh," she said indifferently, "it 
amused me to see you play the traitor 
twice, Hull Tarvish." 

IX 

TlIE PRINCESS stepped close to him. 
her magnificent- eyes gentle as an 
angel's. "Poor, strong, weak Hull Tarvish!" she breathed. "Now you shall have 
a lesson in the cost of weakness!" 

He scarcely heard her. His gyrating 
mind struggled with an idea. The Harriers were creeping singly into the trap, 
but they could not all be through the 
tunnel. If he could warn them— His eyes 
shifted to the belipull in the hall beside 
the guard, the rope that tolled the 
bronze bell in the belfry to summon 
public gatherings, or to call aid to fight 
fires. 

His great arm flashed suddenly, 
sweeping the Princess from her feet 
and crashing her dainty figure violently against the wall. Then he was upon 
the startled guard, thrusting him up 
and over the rail of (he stair-well to 
drop with a sullen bump below. And 
then he threw his weight on the bellrope, and the great voice of bronze 
boomed out, again and again. 

But Black -Margot was on her feet, 
with the green hell-sparks flickering in 
her eyes and her face a lovefy mask of 
fury. Men came rushing up the stairs 
with drawn weapons. Hull gave a last 
tug on the rope and turned to face death. 
Half a dozen weapons were on him. 

"Hold him— for me!" gasped the 
Princess. "Take him- — to the barn!" 

Behind the barn a close-packed mass 
of dark figures huddled near the mouth 
of the ancient tunnel where the bushes 
were trampled away, and a brownclad 
file of Empire woods runners surrounded them. A few figures lay sprawled on 
the turf, and Hull smiled a little as he 
saw that some were Empire men. Then 



his eyes strayed to the Princess where 
she faced a dark-haired officer. 

"How many, Lebeau ?" 

"A hundred and forty or fifty, Your 
Highness. " 

"Not half! Why are you not pursuing 
the rest through the tunnel ?" 

"Because, Your Highness, one of them 
pulled the shoring and the roof down 
upon himself, and blocked us off. We're 
digging him out now." 

"By then they'll have left their burrow." She strode over to Hull. "Where 
does this tunnel end?" 

File Ormson's great voice rumbled 
out of the mass of prisoners. "Hull ! 
Hull! Was this trap your doing?" 

Hull made no answer, but Black Margot herself replied. "No," she snapped, 
"but the warning bell was^' 

"Then why do you spare him?" 

Her eyes glitered icy green. "To kill 
in my own way, Weed," she said. 

Her eyes blazed chill emerald fire into 
Hull's. He met her glance squarely, and 
said in a low voice, "Do you grant any 
favors to a man about to die?" 

"! am not disposed to grant favors to 
you, Hull Tarvish, who have twice laid 
hands of violence on me." 

His voice dropped almost to a whisper. 
"It is the lives of my companions I 
ask." 

She raised her eyebows in surprise, 
then shook her ebony flame of hair. 
"How can I? 1 remained here purposely 
to wipe them out." 

"I ask their lives," he repeated. 

A curious, whimsical fire danced 
green in her eyes. "I will try," she promised. "Lebeau!" she snapped. "Hold back 
a while." 

She strode into the gap between the 
prisoners and her own men. Hand on 
hip she surveyed the Harriers, while 
the moonlight lent her beauty an aura 
that was incredible, unearthly. A loveliness that was cold, deadly. 

"Now," she said, passing her glance 
over the group, "on my promise of 
amnesty, how many of you would join 



DAWN OF FLAME 



'"PWO figures moved forward, and the 
Harriers stirred angrily. Hull recognized the men; they were stragglers 
of the Confederation army, Chicago 
men, good fighters but mereiy mercenaries, changing sides as mood or 
advantage moved them. 

"You two," said the Princess, "are 
you Ormiston men?" 

"No," said one. "Both of us come from 
the shores of Mitchin." 

"Very well, 1 *' she said calmly. With a 
movement 'swift as arrow flight she 
snatched her weapon from her belt; the 
blue beam spat twice, and the men 
crumbled, one with face burned carbonblack, and both sending forth an odorous wisp of flesh-seared smoke. 

She faced the aghast group. "Now," 
she said, "who is your leader?" 

File Ormson stepped forth, scowling 
and grim. "What do you want of me?" 

"Will you treat with me? Will your 
men follow your agreements?" 

File nodded. "They have small 
choice." 

"Good. Now that I have sifted the 
traitors from your ranks T shall make 
my offer." She smiled at the squat ironsmith. "Would you, with your great 
muscles and warrior's heart follow a 
woman ?" 

The scowl vanished in surprise. "Follow you? You?" 

"Yes." Hull watched her in fascination as she used her voice, her eyes, her 
unearthly beauty intensified by the 
moonlight, all on hulking File Ormson. 
"Yes, I mean to follow me," she repeated 
softly. "You are brave men, all of you." 

"But — " File gulped, "our others — " 

"I promise you need not fight against 
your companions. I will release any of 
you who will not follow me. And your 
lands — it is your lands you fight for, is 
it not? I will not touch one acre save the 
eldarch's." She paused. "Well?" 

Suddenly File's booming laugh roared 
out. "By God!" he swore. "If you mean 
what you say, there's nothing to fight 
about! For my part, I'm with you!" He 
turned on his men. "Who follows me?" 



31 



The group stirred. A few stepped forward, then a few more, and then, with 
a shout, the whole mass. "Good!" roared 
File. He raised his great hard hand to 
his heart, in the Empire salute. "To 
Black — To the Princess Margaret!" he 
bellowed. "To a warrior!" 

She smiled and dropped her eyes as if 
in modesty. When the cheer had passed, 
she addressed Hie Ormson again. "You 
will .send men to your others?" she 
asked. "Let them come in on the same 
terms." 

"They'll come!" growled File. 

The Princess nodded. "Lebeau," she 
called, "order off your men. These are 
our allies." 

The Princess stepped close to Hull, 
smiling maliciously up into his perplexed 
face. 

"Will you die happy now?" she asked 
softly. 

"No man dies happy," he growled. 

"I granted your wish, Hull." 

"If your promises can be trusted," he 
retorted bitterly. 

She shrugged. "I do not break my 
given word. The Harriers are safe." 

Beyond her, men came suddenly from 
the tunnel mouth, dragging something 
dark behind them. 

"The Weed who pulled down the roof, 
Your Highness," said Lebeau. 

She glanced back of her, and pursed 
her dainty lips in surprise. "The eldarch! The dotard died bravely enough." 

17" AIL slipped by with a low moan of 
» anguish, and Hull watched her kneel 
by her father's body, A spasm of pity 
shook him as he realized that now she 
was utterly, completely alone. Enoch 
had died in the ambush of the previous 
night, old Marcus lay dead here before 
her, and he, Hull, was condemned to 
death. He bent a slow, helpless, pitying 
smile on her, but there was nothing he 
could do or say. 

And Black Margot, after the merest 
glance, turned back to Hull. "Now," she 
said, the ice in her voice again, "I deal 



32 FANTASTIC ST( 

with you at last!" 

He faced her dumbly. "Will you have 
the mercy to deal quickly, then?" he 
muttered. 

"Mercy ? I do not know the word 
where you're concerned, Hull." She 
moved closer, "I cannot bear the touch 
of violence, Hull, and you have laid 
violent hands on me twice. Twice!" 

"One was to save your life," he said, 
"and the other to rectify my own unwitting: treason." 

She smiled coldly. "Well argued, Hull, 
but you die none the less in the way I 
wish." She turned. "Rack to the house!" 
she commanded, and he strode away, 
between the six guards who still flanked 
him. 

She led them into the lower room that 
had been the Master's. There she sat 
idly in a deep chair of ancient craftsmanship, lit a black cigarette at the 
lamn. and thrust her s'im letrs carelessly 
before her. ga?ing at Hull. But he. staring through the window behind her, 
could see Vail Ormiston weeping beside 
the '■'ody of her father. 

"Now." said the Princess, "how would 
you like to die. Hull?" 

"Of old ajre!" he snanped. "And if you 
will not permit that, then as quickly as 
possible." 

"I might grant the second," she observpd. "I might" 

The thought of Vaii was still torturing him. At last he said, "Your Highness, is your courage equal to the ordeal 
of facing me alone? I want to ask something that 1 will not ask in others' ears." 

She laughed contemptuously. "Get 
out!" she snapped at the silent guards. 
And, as they left; "Hull, do you think I 
fear you? I tell you your great muscles 
and stubborn heart are no more than 
those of Eblis, the black stallion. Must 
I prove it again to you ?" 

"No," he muttered. "God help me, but 
I know it's true. I'm not the match for 
Black Margot." 

•"Nor is any other man," she countered. Then, more softly, "But if ever 



IY MAGAZINE 

I do meet the man who can conquer me, 
if ever he exists, he will have something 
of you in him, Hull. Your great, slow 
strength, and your stubborn honesty, 
and your courage. I promise that." She 
paused, her faee now pure as a marble 
saint's. "So say what you have to say, 
Hull. What do you ask?" 

"My life," he said bluntly. 

Her green eyes widened in surprise. 

"You, Hull? You beg your life? You?" 

"Not for myself," he muttered. 
"There's Vail Ormiston weeping over 
her father. Enoch, who would have married her and loved her, is dead in last 
night's ambush, and if 1 die, she's left 
alone. I ask my life for her. She'll die 
without someone to help her through 
this time of torment." 

"Let her die, Hull," said the Princess 
coolly, "as I think you'll die in the next 
moment or so!" Her hand rested on the 
stock of the weapon at her belt. "I grant 
you your second choice— the quick 
death." 

X 

BSlACK MARGOT ground out her 
cigarette with her left hand against the 
polished wood of the table top; her right 
rested inexorably on her weapon. 

A voice spoke behind Hull, a familiar, 
pleasant voice. 

"Do I intrude, Margaret?" 

He whirled. It was Old Einar. thrusting his good-humored, wrinkled visage 
through the opening he had made in the 
doorway. He grinned at Hull, flung the 
door wider, and slipped into the chamber. 

"Einar!" cried the Princess, springing from her chair. "Einar Olin! Are 
you still in the world?" Her tones took 
on suddenly the note of deep pity. "But 
so old — so old !" 

The old man took her free hand. "It 
is forty years since last I saw you, Margaret — and I was fifty then." 

"But so old!" she repeated. "Einar, 
have / changed?" 

He peered at her. "Not physically, 



DAWN OF 

my dear. But from the stories that go 
up and down the continent, you are 
hardly the gay madcap that N'Orleans 
worshipped as the Princess Peggy, nor 
even the valiant little warrior they used 
to call the Maid of Orleans. 

"Seeing you now, Margaret, I wonder 
instead if T were not very wise to refuse 
immortality. Youth is too great a restlessness to bear for so long a time, and 
you have borne it less than a century. 
What will you be in another fifty years? 
In another hundred, if Martin Sair's art 
keeps its power? What will you be?" 

She shook her head; her green eyes 
grew deep and sorrowful. 



FLAME 33 

He pointed a gnarled finger at Hull. 
"What do vou want of my voung friend 
here?" 

Her eyes (lashed emerald, and she 
drew her hand from that of Old Einar. 
"I plan to kill him." 
"Indeed? And why?" 
"Why?" her voice chilled. "Because 
he struck me with his hands. Twice." 

The old man smiled. "But I think I 
shall ask you to forgive young Hull 
Tarvish." 

"Why should I?" asked the Princess. 
"Why do you think a word from you 
can save him ?" 

"I am still Olin," said the aged one, 




THE CLASSIC YOU'VE WAITED FORI 

S LAN 

A Full-Length Novel of the Future 

By A. E. van VOCT 



"I don't know, Einar. I don't know. I 
might have been different, Einar, had 
you joined us. I could have loved you, 
Einar." 

"Yes," he agreed wryly. "I was afraid 
of that, and it was one of the reasons 
for my refusal. You see, 1 did love you, 
Margaret. All of us did at one time or 
another. 'Flame-struck', we used to call 
it." He smiled reflectively. "Are any left 
save me of all those who loved you?" 

"Just Jorgensen," she answered sadly. 
"If he has not yet killed himself in Ins 
quest for the secret of the Ancient's 
wings."* 

"Well," .said Olin dryly, "my years will 
yet make a mock of their immortality." 

"He did, just one \vt:ch at'iev this date, the date 
of the Battle of Sehii. He crashed at N'Orleans 
after a flight of thirty minutes in an atomic, 
rocket of the Ring type. 



meeting her green eyes steadily with his 
watery blue ones. "I still carry Joaquin's 
seal." 

"As if that could stop me!" But the 
cold fire died slowly in her gaze, and 
again her eyes were sad. "But you are 
still Olin, the Father of Power," she 
murmured. 

With a sudden gesture she thrust her 
weapon back into her belt. "I spare him 
again," she said ; and then, in tones gone 
strangely dull: "It is a weakness of 
mine that. I cannot kill those who love 
me in a certain way — a weakness that 
will cost me dear some day." 

r\LIN twisted his old lips in that skull^ like smile, turning to the silent 
youth. . 

"Hull," he said kindly, "if you're curious enough to tempt your luck further. 



34 FANTASTIC SI 

listen to this old man's advice. Go twist 
the tail of a lion before you again try 
the wrath of Black Margot. And now 
get out of here." 

"Not yet, Hull," snapped the Princess. 
"I have still my score to settle with 
you." She turned back to Olin. "Where 
do you wander now, Einar?" 

"To N'Orleans. I am homesick besides 
for the Great City." He paused. "I have 
seen Joaquin. Selui has fallen." 

"I know — I ride to meet him tonight." 

"He has left Jacob Sair as governor." 

"I know, Einar." 

"He has sent representatives to Chicago." Old Einar shook his thin white 
hair. "What will be the end of this, 
Margaret?" he asked gently. "After 
Chicago is taken — what then ?" 

"Then the land north of the saltless 
seas, and east of them. N'York and all 
the cities on the ocean shore. Later 
South America, Europe, Asia and 
Africa." 

"And after all of them?" 

"Afterward," she replied wearily, "we 
can rest. The fierce destiny that drives 
Joaquin surely cannot drive him beyond the boundaries of the world." 

"And so," said Olin, "you fight your 
way around the world so that you can 
rest at the end of the journey. Then why 
not rest now, Margaret? Must you pillow your . head on the globe of the 
planet?" 

Fury flamed green in her eyes. She 
raised her hand and struck the old man 
across his lips, but it must have been 
lightly, for he still smiled. 

"Fool!" she cried. "Then 1 will see to 
it that there is always war! Between 
me and Joaquin, if need be- — or between 
me and anyone— anyone— so that I can 
fight!" She paused panting. "Leave me, 
Einar," she said tensely. "I do not like 
the things you bring to mind." 

Still smiling, the old man backed 
away. At the door he paused. "I will see 
you before I die, Margaret," he promised, and was gone. 

Slowly, almost wearily, the Princess 
turned to face Hull. 



»RY MAGAZINE 

"Hull," she said gently, "what do you 
think of me now ?" 

"I think you are a black flame blowing 
cold across the world. I think a demon 
drives you." 

"And do you hate me so bitterly?" 

"I pray every second to hate you." 

"Then see, Hull." With her little fingers she took his great hands and placed 
them about the perfect curve of her 
throat. "Here I give you my life for the 
taking. You have only to twist once 
with these mighty hands of yours and 
Black Margot will be out of the world 
forever." She paused. "Must I beg you ?" 

TTULL felt as if molten metal flowed 
upward through his arms from the 
touch of her white skin. His fingers were 
rigid as metal bars, and all the great 
strength of them could not put one 
feather's weight of pressure on the*soft 
throat they circled. And deep in the 
lambent emerald flames that burned in 
her eyes he saw again the fire of mockery — jeering, taunting. 

"You will not?" she said, lifting away 
his hands, but holding them in hers. 
"Then you do not hate me?" 

"You know I don't!" he groaned. 

"And you do love me?" 

"Please," he muttered. "Is it necessary to torture me? I need no proof of 
your mastery," 

"Then say you love me." 

"Heaven forgive me for it," he whispered, "but I do." 

She dropped his hands and smiled. 
"Then listen to me, Hull. You love little 
Vail with a truer love, and month by 
month memory fades before reality. 
After awhile there will be nothing left 
in you of Black Margot, but there will 
be always Vail. I go now hoping never 
to see you again, but — " and her eyes 
chilled to green ice — "before I go I 
settle my score with you." 

She donned her silver gauntlets, 
raised her hand. 

"This for your treachery!" she said, 
and raked him savagely across his right 



DAWN OF 

clieek. Blood spouted, but he stood 
stolid. "This for your violence!" she 
said, and the silver gauntlet tore his left 
cheek. Then her eyes softened. "And 
this," she murmured, "for your love!" 

Her arms circled him. her body was 
warm against him, and her exquisite 
lips burned against his. lie felt as if lie 
embraced a flame for a moment, and 
then she was gone, and a part of his soul 
went with her. When he heard the hoofs 
of the stallion, LCblis, pounding beyond 
the window, he turned and walked slowly out of the house, to where Vail still 
crouched beside her father's body. She 
clung to him, wiped the blood from his 
cheeks, and strangely, her words were 
not of her father, or of the sparing of 
Hull's life, but of Black Margot 

"I knew you lied to save me," she 
murmured. "I know you never loved 
her." 

And Hull, in whom there was no falsehood, drew her close to him and said 
nothing. 



FLAME 35 

But Black Margot rode north from 
Selui through the night. In the sky before her were thin shadows leading 
phantom armies: Alexander I he CIreat, 
Attila, denghis Khan, Tamerlane, Napoleon, and clearer than all, llie battle 
(|iieen Remiramis. All the mighty conciuerers of the past, and where were 
they, where were their empires, and' 
where, even, were their bones? Far in 
the south were the graves of men who 
loved her, all except Old Einar. who 
tottered like a feeble gray ghost across 
the world to find his. 

At her side, Joaquin Smith turned as 
if to speak, stared, and remained silent, 
lie was not accustomed to the sight of 
tears in the eyes and on the cheeks of 
Black Margot.* 



ascribed to the Princess 
Margaret in this story is taken verbatim Onm 
an anonymous volume published in Urhs in the 
year 186', called "Loves of the Black Flame." It 
is credited to Jacques Lebe-au, officer in command of the Black Flame's personal guard. 
[Turn page, far "The Black Flame"] 




THE BLACK FLAME 




A Novel by STANLEY G. WEINBAIM 



She was halt sweet, provocative goddess, half cruel 
devil who would steal his, knowledge— and his heart 1 . 



I 



THOMAS MARSHALL CONNOR 
was about to die. The droning voice 
o1" the prison chaplain gradually dulled 
his perception instead of stimulating 
his mind. Everything was hazy and indistinct to the condemned man. lie was 
going to the electric chair in just ten 
minutes to pay the supreme penalty 
because he had accidentally killed a man 
with his bare fists. 

Connor, vibrantly alive, vigorous and 
healthy, only twenty-six. a brilliant 
young engineer, was going to die. And. 
knowing, he did not care. But there was 
nothing at all nebulous about the gray 
stone and cold iron bars of the death 
cell. There was nothing uncertain about 
the split down his trouser leg and the 
shaven spot on his head. 

The condemned man ■was acutely 
aware of the solidarity of material 



things about him. The world he was 
leaving was concrete and substantial. 
The approaching footsteps of the death 
guard sounded heavily in the distance. 

Then the cell door opened, and the 
chaplain ceased his murmuring. Passively Thomas Marshall Connor accepted 
his blessings, and calmly took his position between his guards for his last 
voluntary walk. 

He remained in his state of detachment as they seated him in the chair, 
strapped his body and fastened the electrodes. He heard the faint rustling of 
the witnesses and the nervous, rapid 
scratching of reporters' pencils. He 
could imagine their adjectives: "Calloused murderer" . . . "Brazenly indifferent to his fate." 

But it was as if the matter concerned 
a third party. 



Copyright, tS3S, by Better Pubtkations, Inc., and originally 
published in January, Ifl.l'.i, Startling Stories 




THE BLACK FLAME 



THE BLACK FLAME 




A Novel by STANLEY G. WEINBAUM 



She was half sweet, provocative goddess, half cruel 
devil who would steal his.knowledge — and his heart! 



THOMAS MA RSHALL CONNOR 
was about to die. The droning voice 
of the prison chaplain gradually dulled 
his perception instead of stimulating 
his mind. Everything was hazy and indistinct to the condemned man. He was 
going to the electric chair in just ten 
minutes to pay the supreme penalty 
because he had accidentally killed a man 
with his bare fists. 

Connor, vibrantly alive, vigorous and 
healthy, only twenty-six. a brilliant 
young engineer, was going to die. And, 
knowing, he did not care. But there was 
nothing at all nebulous about the gray 
stone and cold iron bars of the death 
cell. There was nothing uncertain about 
the split down his trouser leg and the 
shaven spot on his head. 

The condemned man was acutely 
aware of the solidarity of material 



things about him. The world he was 
leaving was concrete and substantial. 
The approaching footsteps of the death 
guard sounded heavily in the distance. 

Then the cell door opened, and the 
chaplain ceased his murmuring. Passively Thomas Marshall Connor accepted 
his blessings, and calmly took his position between his guards for his last 
voluntary walk. 

He remained in his state of detachment as they seated him in the chair, 
strapped his body and fastened the electrodes. He heard the faint rustling of 
the witnesses and the nervous, rapid 
scratching of reporters' pencils. He 
could imagine their adjectives: "Calloused murderer" . « . "Brazenly indifferent to his fate." 

But it was as if the matter concerned 
a third party. 



Copyright, 10.18, by licitn- I'lih/irtilious, Inc., and originally 
published in January, 1939, Startling Sturics 



37 



A Novel by STANLEY G. WEINBAIM 



She was half sweet, provocative goddess, half cruel 
devil who would steal his.knowledge^and his heart! 



THOMAS MARSHALL CONNOR 
was about to die. The droning; voice 
of the prison chaplain gradually dulled 
his perception instead of stimulating 
his mind. Everything was hazy and indistinct to the condemned man. lie was 
going to the electric chair in just ten 
minutes to pay the supreme penalty 
because he had accidentally killed a man 
with his bare fists. 

Connor, vibrantly alive, vigorous and 
healthy, only twenty-six. a brilliant 
young engineer, was going to die. And, 
knowing, he did not care. But there was 
nothing at all nebulous about the gray 
stone and cold iron bars of the death 
cell. There was nothing uncertain about 
the split down his trouser leg and the 
shaven spot on his head. 

The condemned man was acutely 
aware of the solidarity of material 



things about him. The world he was 
leaving was concrete and substantial. 
The approaching footsteps of the death 
guard sounded heavily in the distance. 

Then the cell door opened, and the 
chaplain ceased his murmuring. Passively Thomas Marshall Connor accepted 
his blessings, and calmly took his position between his guards for his last 
voluntary walk. 

He remained in his state of detachment as they seated him in the chair, 
strapped his body and fastened the electrodes. He heard the faint rustling of 
the witnesses and the nervous, rapid 
scratching of reporters' pencils. He 
could imagine their adjectives: "Calloused murderer" . . , "Brazenly indifferent to his fate." 

But it was as if the matter concerned 
a third party. 



Copyright, 79:18, by Better Publications, Inc., and originally 
published in January, 19S9, Startling Storied 




28 FANTASTIC SI 

He simply relaxed and- waited. To die 
so quickly and painlessly was more a 
relief than anything. He was not even 
aware when the warden gave his signal. 
There was a sudden silent flash of blue 
light. And then — nothing at all. 

CO THIS was death. The slow and 
^ majestic drifting through the Stygian void, borne on the ageless tides of 
eternity. 

Peace, at last — j>eace, and quiet, and 
rest. 

But what was this sensation like the 
glimpse of a faint, faraway light which 
winked on and off like a star? After an 
interminable period the light became 
fixed and steady, a thing of annoyance. 
Thomas Marshall Connor slowly became 
aware of the fact of his existence as an 
entity, in some unknown state. Th e 
sense and memories that were his personality struggled weakly to reassemble 
themselves into a thinking unity of 
being — and he became conscious of pain 
and physical torture. 

There was a sound of shrill voices, 
and a stir of fresh air. He became aware 
of his body again. He lay quietly, inert 
and exhausted. But not as lifeless as he 
had lain for — how long? 

When the shrill voices sounded again, 
Connor opened unseeing eyes and stared 
at the blackness just above him. After a 
space he beran to see. but not to comprehend. The blackness beeame a 
jagged, pebbled roof no more than 
twelve inches from his eyes, rough and 
unfinished like the underside of a concrete walk. 

The light became a glimmer of daylight from a point near his right shoulder. 

Another sensation crept into his 
awareness. lie was horribly, bitterly 
cold. Not with the chill of winter air, 
but with the terrible frigidity of interga'actic space. Yet he was on- -no, inearth of some sort. Lt was as if icy watar 
(lowed in his veins instead of blood. Yet 
he felt completely dehydrated. His bodywas as inert as though detached from 



)BY MAGAZINE 

his brain, but he was cruelly imprisoned 
within it. He became conscious of a 
growing resentment of this fact. 

Then, stimulated by the shrilling, 
piping voices and the patter of tiny feet 
out there somewhere to the right, he 
made a tremendous effort to move. 
There was a dry, withered crackling 
sound like the crumpling of old parchment, but indubitably his right arm had 
lifted! 

The exertion left him weak and nauseated. For a time he lay as if in a 
stupor. Then a second effort proved 
easier. After another timeless interval 
of struggling torment his legs yielded 
reluctant obedience to his brain. Again 
he lay quietly, exhausted, but gathering 
stength for the supreme effort of bursting from his crypt. 

For he knew now where he was. He 
lay in what remained of his grave. How 
or why, he did not know. That was to be 
determined. 

WTITH ALL his weak strength he 
" thrust against the left side of his 
queer tomb, moving his body against 
the crevice at his right. Only a thin veil 
of loose gravel and rubble blocked the 
way to the open. As his shoulder struck 
the pile, it gave and slid away, outward 
and downward, in a miniature avalanche. 

Blinding daylight smote Connor like 
an agony. The shrill vo ; ces screamed. 

" 'S moom !" a child's voice cried tremulously. " 'S moom again !" 

Connor panted from exertion, and 
struggled to emerge from his hole, each 
movement producing another noise like 
rattling paper. Suddenly he was free. 
The last of the gravel tinkled away and 
he rolled abruptly down a small declivity 
to rest limply at the bottom of the hill. 

He saw now that erosion had cut 
through this burial ground — wherever 
it was— and had opened a way for him 
through the side of the grave. His sight 
was strangely dim, but he became aware 
of half a dozen little figures in a frightened semi-circle beyond him. 



40 FANTASTIC ST 

Children! Children in strange modernistic garb of bright colors, but nevertheless human children who stared at 
him with wide-open mouths and popping 
eyes. Their curiously cherubic faces 
were set in masks of horrified terror. 

Suddenly recalling the terrors he had 
sometimes known in his own childhood, 
Connor was surprised they did not flee. 
He stretched forth an imploring hand 
and made a desperate effort to speak. 
This was his first attempt to use his 
voice, and 1 he' found that he could not. 

The spell of dread that held the children frozen was instantly broken. One 
of them gave a dismayed cry. * 

"A-a-a-h ! 'S a specker!" 

In a panic, shrieking that cry, the entire group turned and fled. They disappeared around the shoulder of the 
eroded hill, and Connor was left horribly alone. He groaned from the depths 
of his despajr and was conscious of a 
faint rasping noise through his cracked 
and parched lips. 

He realized suddenly that he was 
quite naked— his shroud had long since 
moldered to dust. At the same moment 
that full comprehension of what this 
meant came to hfm, he was gazing in 
"horror at his body. Bones! Nothing but 
bones, covered with a dirty, parchmentlike skin. 

So tightly did his skin cover his 
skeletal framework that the very structure of the bones showed through. He 
could see the articulation at knuckles, 
knees, and toes. And the parchment skin 
was cracked like an ancient Chinese 
va-e. checked like aged varnish. He was 
a horror from the tomb, and he nearly 
fainted at the realization. 

After a swooning space, he endeavored to arise. Finding that he could 
not. he began crawling painfully and 
laboriously toward a puddle of water 
from the last rain. Reaching it, he 
leaned over to place his lips against its 
surface, reckless of its potability, and 
sucked in the liquid until a vast roaring 
filled his ears. 

' The moment of dizziness passed. He 



►RV MAGAZINE 

felt somewhat better, and his breathing 
rasped a bit less painfully in his moistened throat. His eyesight was slowly 
clearing and, as he leaned above the 
little pool, he glimpsed the specter reflected there. It looked like a skull— a 
face with lips shrunken away from the 
teeth, so fleshless that it might have 
been a death's-head. 

"Oh, God!" be called out aloud, and 
his voice croaked like that of a sick 
raven. "What and where am I!" 

In the back of his mind all through 
this weird, experience, there had been a 
sense of something strange aside from 
his emergence from a tomb in the form 
of a living scarecrow. He stared up at 
the sky. 

The vault of heaven was blue and 
fleecy with the whitest of clouds. The 
sun was shining as he had never thought 
to see it shine again. The grass was 
green. The ground was normally earthy. 
Everything was as it should be — but 
there was a strangeness about it that 
frightened him. Instinctively he knew 
that something was direfully amiss. 

It was not the fact that he failed to 
recognize his surroundings. He had not 
had the strength to explore; neither 
did he know where he had been buried. 
It was that indefinable homing instinct 
possessed in varying degree by all animate things. That instinct was out of 
gear. Hisjime sense had stopped with 
the throwing of that electric switch — 
how long ago? Somehow, lying there 
under the warming rays of the sun, he 
felt like an alien presence in a strange 
country. 

"Lost!" he whimpered tike a child. . . . 

After a long space in which he remained in a sort of stupor, he became 
aware of the sound of footsteps. Dully 
he looked up. A group of men, led by 
one of the children,, was advancing 
slowly toward him. They wore brightly 
colored shirts — red, blue, violet — and 
queer baggy trousers gathered at the 
ankles in an exotic style. 

With a desperate burst of energy, 
Connor gained his knees. He extended a 



THE BLACK FLAME 



41 



pleading, skeleton-like claw. 

"Help me!" he croaked in a hoarse 
whisper. 

The beardless, queerly effeminatelooking men halted and stared at him in 
horror. 

'"Assim!" shrilled the child's voice. 
" 'S a speaker. 'S dead." 
. One of the men stepped forward, 
looking from Connor to the gaping hole 
in the hillside. 

"Wassup?" he questioned. 

Connor could only repeat his croaking plea for aid. 

" 'Esick," spoke another man gravely. 
"Sleeper, eh ?" 

There was a murmur of consultation 
among the men with the bright clothes 
and oddly soft, woman-like voices. 

"T' Evanie!" decided one. "T* Evanie, 
the Sorc'ess." 

They closed quickly around the half 
reclining Connor and lifted him gently. 
He was conscious of being borne along 
the curving cut to a yellow country 
road, and then black oblivion descended 
once more to claim him. 

When he regained consciousness the 
next time, he found that he was within 
walls, reclining on a soft bed of some 
kind, lie had a vague dreamy impression of a girlish face with bronze hair 
and features like Raphael's angels bending over him. Something warm and 
sweetish, like glycerin, trickled down 
his throat. 

Then, to the whispered accompaniment of that queerly slurred English 
speech, he sank into the blissful repose 
of deep sleep. 

T^HERE were successive intervals of 
dream and oblivion, of racking pain 
and terrible nauseating weakness, of 
voices murmuring queer, unintelligible 
words that yet were elusively familiar. 

Then one day he awoke to the consciousness of a summer morning. Birds 
twittered : in the distance children 
shouted. Clear of mind at last, he lay on 
a cushioned couch puzzling over his 
whereabouts, even his identity, for noth


ing within his vision indicated where or 
who he was. 

The first thing that caught his attention was his own right hand. Paper-thin, 
incredibly bony, it lay like the hand of 
death oh the rosy coverlet, so transparent that the very color shone 
through. lie could not raise it; only a 
twitching of the horrible fingers attested its union with his body. 

The room itself was utterly unfamiliar in its almost magnificently simple 
furnishings. There were neither pictures nor ornaments. Only several chairs 
of aluminum-like metal, a gleaming 
silvery table holding a few ragged old 
volumes, a massive cabinet against the 
opposite wall, and a chandelier pendant 
by a chain from the ceiling. 

He tried to call out. A faint croak 
issued. 

The response was startlingly immediate. A soft voice said, "Hahya?" in his 
ear and he turned his head painfully to 
face the girl of the bronze hair, seated 
at his side. She smiled gently. 

She was dressed in curious green baggy trousers gathered at the ankle, and 
a brilliant green shirt. She had rolled 
the full sleeves to her shoulders. Hers 
was like the costume of the men who 
had.brought him here. 

"Whahya?" she said softly. 

He understood. 

"Oh, I'm— uh — Thomas Connor, of 
course. " 

"Thomas Connor o'Course ?" she 
echoed. 

He smiled feebly. 

"No. Just Thomas Connor." 

"F'm 'ere?" 

"From St. Ijouis."* 

"Selui? 'S far off." 

Far off? Then where was he? Suddenly a framient of memory returned. 
The trial — Ruth — that catastrophic episode of the grim chair. Ruth ! The yellow-haired girl he had once adored, who 
was to have been his wife — the girl 
who had coldly sworn his life away because he had killed the man she loved. 

Dimly memory came back of how he 



42 FANTASTIC ST 

had found her in that other man's arms 
on the very eve of their wedding; of 
his bitter realization that the man he 
had called friend had stolen Ruth from 
him. His outraged passions had flamed, 
the fire had blinded him; and when the 
ensuing battle had ended, the man had 
been crumpled with a broken neck on 
the green sward of the terrace. 

He had been electrocuted for that. He 
had been strapped in that chair! 

Then — then the niche on the hill. But 
how? Had he by some miracle survived 
the burning current? He must have — 
and he still had the penalty to pay! 

He tried desperately to rise. 

"Must leave here!" he mattered. "Get 
away — must get away." A new thought. 
"No! I'm legally dead. They can't touch 
me now; no double jeopardy in this 
country. I'm safe!" 

VOICES sounded in the next room, 
discussing him. 
"F'm Selui, he say," said a man's 
voice. "Longo. too." 

"Eah," said another. " 'S lucky to 
live — lucky! 'L be rich." 

That meant nothing to him. He raised 
his hand with a great effort; it glistened 
in the light with an oil of some sort. It 
was no longer cracked, and the gltost 
of a layer of tissue softened the bones. 
His flesh was growing back. 

His throat felt dry. He drew a breath 
that ended in a tickling cough. 

"Could 1 have some water?" he asked 
the girl. 

"N-n-n '." She shook her head. "N* 
water. S'm licket?" 

"Licket?" Must be liquid, he reflected, 
lie nodded, and dank the mug of thick 
fluid she held to his lips. He grinned his 
thanks, and she sat beside him. He 
wondered what sort of colony was this 
into which he had fallen — with their 
exotic dress and queer, clipped English. 

His eyes wandered appreciatively 
over his companion. Even if she were 
: ome sort of foreigner, she was gloriously beautiful, with her bronze hair gleaming above the emerald costume. 



RY MAGAZINE 

"C'n talk," she said finally as if in 
permission. 

He accepted. "What's your name?" 

"M Evanie Sair. Evanie the Sorc'ess." 

"Evanie the Sorceress!" he echoed. 
"Pretty name — Evanie. Why the Sorceress, though? Do you tell fortunes?" 

The question puzzled her. 

"N'onstan," she murmured. 

"I mean — what do you do?" 

"Sorc'y." At his'mystified look, she 
amplified it. "To give, strength — to make 
well." She touched his fleshless arm. 

"But that's medicine — a science. Not 
sorcery." 

"Eah. Science, sorc'y. 'S all one. My 
father. Evan Sair the Wizard, taught 
me." Her face shadowed. " 'S dead now." 
Then, abruptly: "Whe's your money?" 
she asked. 

He stared. "Why, in St. Louis. In a 
bank." 

"Oh!" she exclaimed. "N-n-n! Selui! 
N'safe!" 

"Why not?" He started. "Has .there 
been another flood of bank-bus tings?" 

The girl looked puzzled. 

"N'safe," she reiterated. "Urbs is better. For very long, Urbs is better." She 
paused. "Wlien'd you sleep?" 

"Why, last night." 

"N-n-n. The long sleep." 

The long sleep! It struck him with 
stunning force that his last memories 
before that terrible awakening had been 
of a September world— and this was 
mid-summer! A horror gripped him. 
How long — how long had he tain in his 
grave? Weeks? No- -months, at least . 

lie shuddered as the girl repeated 
gently, "When?" 

"In September," he muttered. 

"What year?" 

Surprise strengthened him. "Year? 
Nineteen thirty-eight, of course!" 

She rose suddenly. '"S no Nineteen 
thirty-eight. 'S only Eight forty-six 
now!" 

T^HEN she was gone, nor on her return would she permit him to talk. 
The day vanished. He slept, and an


THE BLACK FLAME 



other day dawned and passed. Still Evanie Sair refused to allow him to talk 
again, and the succeedings days found 
him fuming and puzzled. Little by little, 
however, her strange clipped English 
became familiar. 

So he lay thinking of his situation, his 
remarkable escape, the miracle that had 
somehow softened the discharge of Missouri's generators. And he strengthened. A day came when Evanie again 
permitted speech, while he watched her 
preparing his food. 

"Y'onger, Tom?" she asked gently. "L 
bea soon." He understood ; she was saying, "Are you hungry, Tom ? I'll be there 
soon." 

He answered with her own affirmative "Eah," and watched her place the 
meal in a miraculous cook stove that 
could be trusted to prepare it without 
burning. 

"Evanie," he began, "how long have 
I been here?" 

"Three months," said Evanie. "You 
were very sick." 

"But how long was I asleep?" 

"You ought to know," retorted Evanie. "I told you this was Eight fortysix." 

He frowned. 

"The year Eight forty-six of what?" 

"Just Eight fortv-six," Evanie said 
matter-of-factly. "Of the Enlightenment, of course. What year did you 
sleep?" 

"I told you Nineteen thirty -eight," insisted Connor, perplexed. "Nineteen 
thirty-eight. A.D." ' 

"Oh," said Evanie, as if humoring a 
child. Then, "A.D. ?" she repeated. "Anno Domini, that means. Year of the 
Master. But the Master is nowhere near 
nineteen hundred years old." 

Connor was nonplussed. He and Evanie seemed to be talking at cross-purposes. He calmly started again. 

"Listen to me," he said grimly. "Suppose you tell me exactly what you think 
I am — all about it, just as if I were a— 
oh, a Martian. In simple words." 

"I know what you are," said Evanie. 



"You're a Sleeper. Often they wake with 
muddled minds." 

. "And what," he pursued doggedly, "is 
a Sleeper?" 

Surprisingly Evanie answered that, in 
a clear, understandable, but most astonishing way. Almost as astonished herself that Connor should not know the 
answer to his question. 

"A Sleeper," she said simply, and 
Connor was now able to understand her 
peculiar clipped speech — the speech of 
all these people — with comparative ease, 
"is one of those who undertake electrolepsis. That is, have put themselves to 
sleep for a long term of years to make 
money." 

"How? Ey exhibiting themselves?" 

"No," she said. "I mean that those 
who want wealth badly enough, but 
won't spend years working for it, undertake the Sleep. You must remember 
that, even if you have forgotten so much 
else. They put their money in the banks 
organized for the Sleepers. You will remember. They guarantee six per cent. 
You see, don't you? At that rate a 
Sleeper's money increases three hundred 
times a century — three hundred units 
for each one deposited. Six per cent 
doubles their money every twelve years. 
A thousand becomes a fortune of three 
-hundred thousand, if the Sleeper outlasts a century — and if he lives." 

"Fairy tales," Connor said contemptuously, but now he understood her 
question about the whereabouts of his 
money, when he had first awakened. 
"What institution can guarantee six per 
cent with safety? What could they invest in?" 

"They invest in one per cent Urban 
bonds." 

- "And run at a loss, I suppose!" 

"No. Their profits are enormous — 
from the funds of the nine out of every 
ten Sleepers who fail to awaken !" 

"So I'm a Sleeper!" Connor said slowly. "I wish you would tell me the truth." 

Evanie gazed anxious down at him. 
"Electrolepsis often muddles -one," she 
murmured. 



44 



FANTASTIC STOBY MAGAZINE 



"I'm not muddled!*' he protested. "I 
want truth, that's all. I want "to know 
the date." 

"It's the middle of July, Eight hundred and forty-six," Evanie said patiently. 

"The devil it is! Perhaps I slept backward then! I want to know what happened to me." 

"Then suppose you tell," Evanie said 
gently. 

"I will !" he cried frantically. "I'm the 
Thomas Marshall Connor of the newspapers — or don't you read 'em. I'm the 
man who was tried.for murder, and electrocuted. Tom Connor of St. Louis— 
St. Louii! Do you understand?" 

Evanie's gentle features went suddenly pale. 

"St. Louis!" she whispered. "St. Louis — the ancient name of Selui ! Before 
the Dark Centuries. Impossible!" 

"Not impossible. It's true," Connor 
said grimly. "Too painfully true." 

"Electrocution!" Evanie whispered in 
awe. "The Ancients' punishment!" 

She stared as if fascinated, then cried 
excitedly: "Could electrolepsis happen 
by accident? Could it? But no! A milliampere too much and brairds destroyed ; 
a millivolt too little and asepsis fails. Either way's death— but it has happened, 
if what you are telling is the truth, Tom 
Connor! You must have experienced the 
impossible!" 

"And what is electrolepsis?" Connor 
asked, desperately calm. 

"It's — it's the Sleep!" whispered the 
tense girl. "Electrical paralysis of the 
part of the brain before Rolando's Fissure. It's what trfe sleepers use, but only 
for a century, or a very I i tie more. This 
— this is fantastic ! You have slept since 
before the Dark Centuries! Not loss 
than a thousand years!" 

II 

A 

-f™. WEEK, the third since Connor's 
awakening to sane thought, had passed. 
He sat on, a carved stone bench before 
Evanie's cottage and reveled in the 



burning canopy of stars and the copper 
moon. He was living, if what he had 
been told was true— and he was forced 
to believe it now — after untold billions 
had passed into eternity. 

Evanie must have been right. He was 
convinced by her gentle insistence, by 
the queer English on every tongue, by a 
subtle difference in the very world about 
him. It wasn't the same world— quite. 

He sighed contentedly, breathing the 
cool night air. He had learned milch of 
the new age from Evanie, though much 
was still mysteriously veiled. Evanie 
had spoken of the city of Urbs and the 
Master, but only vaguely. One day he 
asked her why. 

"Because — ■" she hesitated — "well, 
because it's best for you to form your 
own judgments. We are not fond of 
Urbs and the Immortals, and I would not 
like to influence you, Tom ; for in all 
truth, it's the partisans of the Master 
who have the best of it, not his enemies. 
Urbs is in power; it will probably remain in power long after our lifetimes, 
since it has ruled for seven centuries." 

Connor looked at the gentle Evanie. 

"I'm sure," he said, "that your side of 
the question is mine." 

Abruptly she withdrew something 
from her pocket and passed it to him. 
He bent over it— a golden disc, a coin. 
He'made out the lettering, "10 Units," 
and the figure of a snake circling a globe, 
its tail in its mouth, 

"The Midgard Serpent," said Evanie. 
"I don't know why, but that's what it's 
called." 

Connor reversed the coin. There was 
revealed the embossed portrait of a 
man's head, whose features, even in 
•miniature, looked cold, austere, powerful. Connor read : 

"Orbis Terrarum Imperator Dominusque UrbiS." 

"Emperor of the World and Master 
of the City," he translated. 

"Yes. That is the Master." Evanie's 
voice was serious as she took the coin. 
"This is the money of Urbs. To understand Urbs and the Master you must of 



THE BLACK FLAME 



45 



course know something of history since 
your — sleep." 

"History?" he repeated. 

She nodded. "Since the Dark Centuries. Some day one of our patriarchs will 
tell you more than T know. For 1 know 
little of your mighty ancient world. It 
seems to us an incredible age, with its 
vast cities, its fierce nations, its inconceivable teeming populations, its terrific 
energies and its flaming genius. Great 
wars, great industries, great art — and 
then great wars again." 

"But you can tell me — " Connor began, a little impatiently. Evanie shook 
her head. 

"Not now," she said quickly. "For 
now I must hasten, to friends who will 
discuss with me a matter of great moment. Perhaps some day you may learn 
of that, too." 

And she was gone before Tom Connor 
could say a word to detain her. He was 
left alone with his thoughts — clashing, 
devastating thoughts sometimes, for 
there was so much to be learned in this' 
strange world into which he had been 
plunged. 

In so many ways it was a strange, 
new world, Connor thought, as he 
watched the girl disappear down the 
road that slanted from her hilltop home 
to the village. From where he sat on 
that bench of hewn stone he could 
glimpse the village at the foot of the hill 
— a group of buildings, low, made of 
some white stone. Al! the structures 
were classical, with pure Doric columns. 
Ormon was the name of the village, Evanie had said. 

It was all strange to him. Not only 
were the people -so vastly at variance 
with those he had known, but the physical world was bcwilderingly different. 

Gazing beyond the village, and bringing his attention back to the hills and 
the forests about him, Tom Connor wondered if they, too, would be different. 

He had to know. 

The springtime landscape beckoned. 
Connor's strength had returned to such 
an extent that he arose from his bench 



in the sun and headed toward the green 
of the forest stretching away behind 
Evanie's home. It was an enchanting 
prospect. The trees had the glistening 
new green of young foliage, and emerald green grass waved in the fields that 
stretched away down the hillsides and 
carpeted the plains. 

Birds were twittering in the trees as 
he entered the forest — birds of all varieties, in profusion, with gaily-colored 
plumage. Their numbers and fearlessness would have surprised Connor had 
he not remembered something Evanie 
had told him. Urbs, she had said, had 
wiped out all objectionable stinging insects — flies, corn-worms and the like — 
centuries ago, and the birds had helped. 
So had certain parasites that had been 
bred for the purpose. 

"They only had to let the birds increase," Evanie had said, "by destroying 
their chief enemy, the Egyptian cat — the 
house-cat. It was acclimatized here and 
running wild in the woods, so they bred 
a parasite, the Feliphage, which destroyed it. Since then there have been 
many birds, and fewer insects." 

It was pleasant to stroll through that 
green forest, to that bird orchestral accompaniment. The spring breeze 
touched Tom Connor's face lightly, and 
for the first time in his life he knew 
what it was to stroll in freedom, untouched by the pestiferous annoyance 
of mosquitoes, swarming gnats and 
midges, or other stinging insects that 
once had made the greenwood sometimes akin to purgatory. 

What a boon to humanity! Honey 
bees buzzed in the dandelions in the carpeting grass, and drank the sweetness 
from spring flowers, but no mites or 
flies buzzed about Connor's uncovered, 
upflung head as he swung along briskly. 

pONNOR did not know how far he 
^ had penetrated into the depths of 
the newly green woods when he found 
himself following the course of a small 
stream. Its silvery waters sparkled in 



46 



FANTASTIC STORY MAGAZINE 



the sunlight filtering through the trees 
as it moved along, lazily somnolent. 

Now and then he passed mossy and 
viny heaps of stones, interesting to him, 
since he knew, from what he had been 
told, that they were the sole reminders 
of ancient structures erected before the 
Dark Centuries. Those hc.ps of stones 
had once formed buildings in another, 
long-gone age — his own age. 

Idly following the little stream, he 
came at last to a wide bend where the 
stream came down from higher ground 
to spill in a litle splashing falls. 

He had just rounded the bend, his eyes 
on a clear, still pool beyond, when he 
stopped stock-still, his eyes widening incredulously. 

It was as if he were seeing spread before him a picture, well known in his 
memory, and now brought to animate 
life. Connor had thought himself alone 
in that wood, but he was not. Sharing it 
with him, within short yards of where 
he stood, was the most beautiful creature on whom he had ever looked. 

It was hard to believe she was a living, 
breathing creature and not an imaginary 
being. No sound had warned her of his 
approach and, sublimely unaware that 
she was not alone, she held the pose in 
which Connor had first seen her, like 
some lovely wood sprite — which she 
might be, in this increasingly astonishing new world. 

She was on her knees beside the darkly mirrored pool, supported by the slender arms and hands that looked alabaster white against the mossy bank on 
which she leaned. She was smiling down 
at her own reflection in the water — the 
famous Psyche painting which Connor 
so well remembered, come to life! 

He was afraid to breathe, much less 
to speak, for fear of startling her. But 
when she turned her head and saw him, 
she showed no signs of being startled. 
Slowly she smilvd and got gracefully to 
her feet, the clinging white Grecian draperies that swathed her gently swaying 
in the breeze to outline a figure too perfect to be flesh and blood. It was accen


tuated by the silver cord that crossed beneath her breasts, as sparkling: as her 
ink-black hair. 

But as she smiled at Connor, instantly in the depths of her sea-green eyes he 
saw no fear of him; only mockery. 

"I did not know," she said, in a voice 
that held the resonance of a silvery bell, 
"that any Weeds ever cared so much 
about the beauties of Nature to penetrate so far into the forest." 

"I am not a Weed," Connor promptly 
disclaimed, as unconsciously he took a 
step or two nearer her. He hoped that 
she would not vanish at the sound of his 
voice, or at his approach. I am — " 

She stared at him a moment, then 
laughed. And the laughter, too, was 
mocking. 

"No need to tell me," she said airily. 
"I know. You are the Sleeper who was ■ 
recently revived, with the great tale of 
having slept a thousand years. As if 
you were an Immortal!" 

In her laughter, her voice, was the 
lofty intimation that she, at least, believed nothing of the sort. Connor made 
no attempt to convince her — -not then. 
He was too enthralled merely gazing at 
her. 

"Are you one of the Immortals?" he 
asked, his own voice awed. "I have 
heard much of them." 

"There are many things more immortal," she said, half cryptically, half 
mockingly, "than the human to whom 
has been given immortality. Such Immortals know nothing of all that was 
known, or guessed, by the Greeks of 
long, long ages past." 

Again Connor stared at her. She 
spoke so confidently. And she looked^Could it be possible that the gods and 
goddesses, the sprites, of that long-dead 
Greek age were not legends, after all, 
but living entities? Could it be possible 
that he was gazing on one now — and 
that she might vanish at a touch, at a 
word ? 

She seemed real enough, though, and 
there was a certain imperiousness in 
her manner that was not his idea of 



THE BLA< 

what should be the reaction of any 
lovely sprite straight out of the pages 
of mythology. None of it seemed real 
except her extravagant, pulse-warming 
beauty. 

T^HE girl's words snapped him out of 
*• his reverie, with the confused 
knowledge that he was staring at her 
inanely as she stood there, swaying 
slightly, like a slender reed, while the 
gentle breeze whipped her white, gauzy 
draperies. 

"Come," she said peremptorily. 
"Come sit beside me here. I have come 
to the forest to find adventure that I 
cannot find elsewhere in a boring world. 
I have not found ft Come, you shall 
amuse me. Sit here and tell me this 
story I have been hearing about your — 
sleep. 

Half -hypnotically, Connor, obeyed. 
Nor did he question why. It was all in a 
line with the rest, that he should find 
himself here above the sparkling dark 
pool, beside this woman — or girl, rather, 
since she could be no more than eighteen — whose beauty was starkly incredible. 

The sun, filtering through the leaves, 
touched her mop of hair, so black that it 
glinted blue as it fell in waving cascades 
below her slender waist. Her skin, magnolia-tinted, was all the clearer because 
of the startling ebony of her "hair. Her 
beauty was more than a lack of flaws; 
it was, in true fact, goddess- 1 ike, but sultry, flaming. Her perfect lips seemed 
constantly smiling, but like the smile in 
her emerald eyes, it seemed sardonic. 

For one moment the beauty of this 
wood sprite, come upon so unexpectedly, 
swept all other thoughts from Connor's 
mind — even memory of Evanie. But the 
next moment Evanie was back, lilling his 
thoughts as she had from the first with 
her cool, understandable loveliness. But 
even in that moment he knew that the 
radiant creature beside him, so different 
from Evanie and other Weed girls he 
had seen, would forever haunt him, whoever, whatever she might be — human 



K FLAME 47 

being or wood goddess. 

The girl grew impatient at his silence. 

"Tell me!" she said imperiously. "I 
have said to you that I would be amused. 
Tell me — Sleeper." 

"I am no Sleeper of the type of which 1 
you have customarily heard," Connor 
said, obedient to her command. "Whatever has come to me has been none of 
my own doing, nor by my wishes. It was 
like this. . . ." 

Briefly he recited his experience, all 
that he knew of it, making no dramatic 
effort. He must ha,ve been impressive, 
for as he talked, he could see the incredulity and mockery pass from her 
sea-green eyes, to be replaced by reluctant belief, then astonishment. 

"It is almost unbelievable," she said 
softly, when he had finished. "But I do 
believe you." Her marvelous eyes held"a 
faraway expression. "If in your memory you have retained knowledge of your 
own ancient times, great things await 
you in this age to which you have come." 

"But I know nothing about this age," 
Connor quickly complained. "I glean 
snatches of this and that, of some mysterious Immortals who seem to reign supreme, of many things alien to me and 
my understanding. But so far, I have 
not been able to learn much about this 
age. No! Nor do I even know anything 
of the history of the ages that have 
passed while I was — sleeping." 

Connor's wood sprite looked hard at 
him for a moment, admiration for him 
plain in her glance. The mockery flickered a moment in her eyes, then died. 

"Shall I tell you?" she asked. "We of 
the woods and valleys know many 
things. We learn as the cycles of years 
go by. But not always do we pass our 
knowledge along." 

"Please!" begged Connor. "Please tell 
me everything. I am lost!" 

SHE SEEMED a little uncertain where 
to begin, then suddenly started to 
ta'k as if giving an all-inclusive lesson 
in history from the beginning of time. 
"You of the ancient world had great 



FANTASTIC STORY MAGAZINE 



cities," she said. "Today there are 
mighfey cities, too. N'York had eight 
millions of people; Urbs. the great metropolis of this age, has thirty millions. 
But where there is now one metropolis, 
your world had a hundred. A marvelous 
age, that time of yours — but it ended. 
Some time in your Twentieth Century, it 
went out in a blaze of war." 

"The Twentieth Century!" exclaimed 
Connor. "In my own time!" 

"Yes. Your fierce, warlike nations 
sated their lust for battle at last in one 
gigantic war that "spread like a cloud 
around the planet. They fought by sea, 
by land, by air, and beneath sea and 
land. They fought with weapons whose 
secrets are still lost, with strange chemistries, with diseases. Every nation was 
caught in the struggle; all their vast 
knowledge went into it, and city after 
giant city was destroyed by atomic 
bombs or annihilated by infected water 
supplies. Famine stalked the world, and 
after it swept swift pestilence. 

"But, by the fiftieth year after the 
war, the world had reached a sort of stability. Then came barbarism. The old 
nations had fallen, and in their place 
came numberless little city-states, little 
farming communities each sufficient to 
itself, weaving its own cloth, raising its 
own food. And then the language began 
to. change." 

"Why?" asked Connor. "Children 
speak like their parents." 

"Not exactly," said the wood sprite, 
with a slow smile. "Language evolves 
by laws. Here's one : consonants tend to 
move forward in the mouth as languages 
age. Take the word 'mother.' In the ancient' Tokhar, it was makar. Then the 
Latin, mater. Then madre, then mother 
and now our modern word muvver. Do 
you see? K-T-D-Th-V— each sound a 
little advanced in the throat. The ultimate of course, is mama — pure labial 
sounds, which prove only that it's the 
oldest word in the world." 

"I see," said Connor. 

"Well, once it was released from the 
bonds of printing, language changed. It 



became difficult to read the old books, 
and then the books began to vanish. 
Fire gutted the abandoned cities; the 
robber bands that lurked there burned 
books by winter for warmth. Worms 
and decay ruined them. Precious knowledge vanished, some of it forever." 

She paused a moment, watching Connor keenly. "Do you see now," she asked, 
"why I said greatness awaits you if you 
retain any of your ancient knowledge?" 

"Possibly," said Connor. "But go on, 
please." 

"Other factors, too, were at work," 
she said, nodding. "In the first place, a 
group of small city-states seems to be 
the best environment for genius. That 
was the situation in Greece during the 
Golden Age, in Italy during the Renaissance, and all over the world before the 
Second Enlightenment. 

"Then too, a period of barbarism 
seems to act as a time of rest for humanity before a charge to now heights. 
The Stone Age flared suddenly into the 
light of Egypt, Persia decayed and 
Greece' flowered, and the Middle Ages 
awoke to the glory of the Renaissance. 
So the Dark Centuries began to flame 
into the brilliant age of the Second Enlightenment, the fourth great dawn in 
human history. 

"It began tfuietly enough, about two 
centuries after the war. A young man 
named John Holland drifted into the 
village of N'Orleans that sprawled beside the ancient city's ruins. He found 
the remnants of a library, and he was 
one of those rare ones who could read. 
He studied alone at first, but soon others 
joined him, and the Academy was born. 

"The townspeople thought the students were wizards and sorcerers, but as 
knowledge grew the words wizard and 
sorcerer became synonyms for what 
your age called scientists." 

"I see!" muttered Connor, and he was 
thinking of Evanie the Sorceress. "I 
see ! " 

"N'Orleans," said his own charming 
enlightener, "became the center of the 
Enlightenment, and played Athens to 



THE BLACK FLAME 



the world. Holland died, but the Academy lived, and one day a young student 
named Teran had a vision. Some of the 
ancient knowledge had by now yielded 
its secrets, and Teran's vision was to recondition the centuries-old N'Orleans 
power plants and water systems — to 
give the city its utilities! 

"That there was no power, no coal, 
no oil, didn't stop him. He and his group 
scraped and filed and welded away at 
the ancient machines, firmly believing 
that when power was needed, it would 
be there. , 

"He was right. It was the gift of an 
old man named Einar Olin, who had 
wandered over the continent seeking — 
and finding — the tast and greatest 
achievement of the Ancients — atomic 
energy. N'Orleans became a miracle 
city where wheels turned and lights 
glowed. Across plains and mountains 
came hundreds just to sec the Great 
City, and among these were three on 
whom history turned. 

"These were sandy-haired Martin 
Sair, and black-haired Joaquin Smith, 
and his sister. Some have called her 
satanicalty beautiful. The Black Flame, 
they call her now — have you heard?" 

CONNOR shook his head, his eyes 
drinking in the beauty of this woman of the woods, who fascinated him as 
he had never believed possible. 

For a moment the mocking glint came 
back in the girl's eyes, then instantly it 
was gone as she shrugged her white 
shoulders and went on. 

"Those three changed the whole 
course of history. Martin Sair turned 
to biology and medicine when he joined 
the half-monastic Academy, and his 
genius added the first new discovery to 
add to the knowledge of the Ancients. 
Studying evolution, experimenting with 
hard radiations, he found sterility, then 
immortality! 

"Joaquin Smith found his field in the 
neglected social sciences, government, 
economics, psychology. He too had a 
dream — of rebuilding the old world. He 



was — or is — a colossal genius. He took 
Martin Sair's immortality and traded it 
for power. He graded immortality to 
Jorgensen for a rocket that flew on the 
atomic blast, to Kohlmar for a weapon, 
to Erden for the Erden resonator that 
explodes gunpowder miles away. And 
then he gathered his army and 
marched." 

"War again!" Connor said tightly. "I 
should have thought they'd have had 
enough." 

.But the girl did not heed him. In her 
emerald eyes was a light as if she were 
seeing visions herself — visions of glorious conquest. 

"N'Orleans," she said, "directly in 
the light of Joaquin Smith's magnetic 
personality, yielded gladly. Other cities 
yielded almost as if fascinated, while 
those who fought Were. overcome. What 
chance had rifle and arrow against the 
flying Triangles of Jorgensen, or Kohlmar's ionic beams? And Joaquin Smith 
himself was magnificent. Even the 
wives of the slain cheered him when he 
comforted them in that noble manner of 
his. 

"America was conquered within sixty 
years. . Immortality gave Smith, the 
Master, power, and no one save Martin 
Sair and those he taught has ever been 
able to learn its secret. Thousands have 
tried, many have claimed success, but 
the results of their failures still haunt 
the world. 

"And— well, Joaquin Smith has his 
world Empire now; not America alone. 
He has bred out criminals and the feeble-minded, he has impressed his native 
English on every tongue, he has built 
Urbs, the vast, glittering, brilliant, 
wicked world capital, and there he rules 
with his sister, Margaret of Urbs, beside 
him. Yet—" 

"1 should think this world he conquered would worship him!" exclaimed 
Connor. 

"Worship him!" cried the girl. "Too 
many hate him, in spite of all he has 
done, not only for this age, but for ages 
gone, since the Enlightenment. He — " 



50 



FANTASTIC STORY MAGAZINE. 



But Tom Connor was no longer listening. All his thoughts, his attention, his 
eyes that drank in her beauty, were on 
the girl. So lovely — and to have so much 
wisdom stored up in the brain beneath 
the sheen of that black satiny cap that 
was her hair. There could only be one 
answer to that. She must be a goddess, 
come to life. 

He ached to touch her, to touch only 
the hem of her gauzy garment, but that 
must not be. His heart pounded at the 
very nearness of her, but it was with a 
worship that could have thrown him 
prostrate at her feet. 

"It's all like a dream, what you've 
told me," he said, his voice far-away, 
musing. "You're a dream." 

The dancing light of mockery came 
back into her sea-green eyes. 

"Shall we leave it a dream — this meeting of ours?" she asked softly. She laid 
one white hand lightly on his arm and 
he thrilled at the touch as though an 
electric current had shot through him — 
but not a painful, annihilating one now. 
"Man of the Ancients," she said, "will 
you give me a promise?" 

"Anything— anything!" Connor said 
eagerly. 

"Then promise me you will say nothing, not even to the Weed girl who is 
called Evanie the Sorceress, about having seen me this morning. No slightest 
hint." 

For a moment Connor hesitated. 
Would it be disloyalty to Evanie, in any 
way, to make that promise? He did not 
know. What he did know was that it fell 
in with his own ideas to keep this meeting a secret, like something sacred ; 
something to hold as a memory deep 
within his own heart only. 

"Promise?" she repeated. 

Connor nodded. "I promise," he said 
soberly. "But tell me, will I see you 
again ?" 

Suddenly the girl leaped lightly to her 
feet, startled, listening, like the faun she 
probably was. Her astonishing emerald 
eyes were wide, as she poised for flight. 
Dimly, the entranced Connor became 



aware of voices back in the woods. Men 
were probably coming to seek him, 
knowing how sick he had been. 

"I must flee!" the girl whispered 
quickly. "But Man of the Ancients, we 
shall meet again ! That is my promise. 
Keep yours!" 

And then, before he could speak, she 
had whirled like a butterfly in flight, and 
was speeding through the woods on 
noiseless feet. Connor caught one last 
glimpse of her fluttering white draperies 
against the brown and green of tree 
trunks and" leaves, and then she was 
gone. 

He passed a hand slowly before his 
bewildered eyes. It must be a dream! 
But she had promised they would meet 
again. 



III 



AYS slipped imperceptibly by. 
Connor had almost regained his full 
strength. Time and again, whenever he 
could do so unobserved, he slipped away 
to the woods alone, but never again did 
he catch sight of the wood nymph who 
had so deeply fascinated him. Gradually 
he came in to persuade himself that the 
whole incident had been a dream. Many 
things as strange had happened to him 
since his strange awakening. Only one 
thing gave it the semblance of reality 
— the knowledge he had gleaned from 
the inky-haired girl of mystery, a knowledge later confirmed when he began to 
enter the peaceful life of the village. 

Aside from Evanie, however, he had 
but one other close friend. He had taken 
at once to Jan Orm, engineer and operator of the village of Ormon's single 
factory on the hill. 

The factory was a perpetual surprise 
to Connor. The incredibly versatile machines made nearly everything except 
the heavier mechanisms used in the 
lields, and these, he learned, could have 
been made. That was not necessary since 
the completed machines could as easily 
be transported as the steel necessary to 
construct them. 



THE BLACK FLAME 



51 



The atomic power amazed Tom Connor. The motors burned only water, or 
rather the hydrogen in it, and the energy 
was the product of synthesis rather than 
disintegration. Four hydrogen atoms, 
with their weight of 1.008, combined 
into one helium atom with a weight of 4 ; 
somewhere had disappeared the difference of .032, and this was the source of 
that abundant energy — matter being destroyed, weight transformed to energy. 

There was a whole series of atomic 
furnaces too. The release of energy was 
a process of one degree, like radium; 
once started, neither temperature nor 
pressure could speed or slow it in the 
least. But the hydrogen burned steadily 
into helium at the uniform rate of half 
its mass in three hundred days. 

Jan Orm was proud of the plant. 

"Neat, isn't it?" he asked Connor. 
"One of the type called Omnifac ; make 
anything. There's thousands of 'em 
about the country ; practically make each 
town independent and self-sustaining. 
We don't need your ancient cumbersome 
railroad system to transport coal and 
ore." 

"How about the metal you use?" 

"Nor metal either," Jan said. "Just as 
there was a stone age, a bronze age, and 
an iron age, just as history calls your 
time the age of steel, we're in the aluminum age. And aluminum's everywhere; 
it's the base of all clays, almost eight 
per cent of the earth's crust." 

"I know it's there," grunted Connor. 
"It used to cost too much to get it out 
of .clay." 

"Well, power costs nothing now. 
"Water's free." His face darkened moodily. "If we could only control the rate, 
but power comes out at always the same 
rate — a half period of three hundred 
days. If we could build rockets like the 
Triangles of Urbs. The natural rate is 
just too slow to lift its own weight; the 
power from a pound of water comes out 
too gradually to raise a one-pound mass. 
The Urbans know how to increase the 
rate, to make the water deliver half its 
energy in a hundred days — ten days." 



"And if you could build rockets?" 

"Then," said Jan, growing even moodier, "then we'd — " He paused abruptly. 
"We can detonate it," he said in a 
changed voice. "We can get all the energy in one terrific blast, but that's useless for a rocket." 

"Why can't you use a firing chamber 
and explode say a gram of water at a 
time?" Connor asked. "A rapid series of 
little explosions should be just as effective as a continuous blast." 

"My father tried that," Jan Orm said 
grimly. "He's buried at the bend of the 
river." 

Later, Connor asked Evanie why Jan 
was so anxious to develop atom-powered 
rockets. The girl turned suddenly serious 
eyes on him, but made no direct reply. 

"The Immortals guard the secret of 
the Triangle," was all she said. "It's a 
military secret" 

"But what could he do with a rocket?" 

She shook her glistening hair. 

"Nothing, perhaps." 

"Evanie," he said soberly, "I don't 
like to feel that you won't trust me. I 
know from what you've said that you're 
somehow opposed to the government. 
Well, I'll help you, if I can — but I can't 
if you keep me in ignorance." 

The girl was silent. 

"And another thing," he proceeded. 
"This immortality process. I've heard 
somebody say that the results of its failures when some tried it still haunt the 
world. Why, Evanie?" 

Swiftly a crimson flush spread over 
the girl's cheeks and throat. 

"Now what the devil have I said?" he 
cried. "Evanie, I swear I wouldn't hurt 
you for- the world!" 

"Don't," she onJy murmured, turning 
silently away. 

TTE, TOO, was hurt, because she was. 

He knew he owed his life to her for 
her treatments and hospitality. It disturbed him to think he knew of no way 
in which to repay her. But he was dubious of his ability to earn much as an 
engineer in this strange new world. 



FANTASTIC STOKY MAGAZINE 



"I'd have to start right at the bottom," he observed ruefully to Evanie 
when he spoke of that later. 

"In Urbs," Evanie said, "you'd be 
worth your weight in radium as a source 
of ancient knowledge. So much has been 
lost; so much is gone, perhaps forever. 
Often we have only the record of a great 
man's name, and no trace of his work. 
Of these is a man named Einstein and 
another named de Sitter — men acknowledged to be supreme geniuses of science 
even by the supreme scientists of your 
age. Their work is lost." 

"I'm afraid it will remain lost, then," 
he said whimsically. "Both Einstein and 
de Sitter were contemporaries of mine, 
but I wasn't up to understanding their 
theories. All I know is that they dealt 
with space and time, and a supposed 
curvature of space — relatively, the theory was called." 

"But that's exactly the clue they'd 
want in Urbs!" exclaimed Evanie, her 
eyes shining. "That's all they'd need. 
And think of what you could tell them 
of ancient literature! We haven't the 
artists and writers you had — not yet. 
The plays of a man named Shakespeare 
are still the most popular of all of the 
vision broadcasts. I always watch 
them." She looked up wistfully. "Was 
he also a contemporary of yours? And 
did you know a philosopher named Aris-' 
totle?" 

Connor laughed. "I missed one by 
three centuries and the other by twentyfive" he chuckled. 

"I'm sorry," said the girl, flushing 
red. "I don't know much of history." 

He smiled warmly. "If I thought I 
could actually earn something — -if I 
could pay you for all the trouble I've 
been, I'd go to this city of Urbs for a 
while — and then come back here. I'd 
like to pay you." 

"Pay me?" she asked in surprise. 
"We don't use money here, except for 
taxes." 

"The taxes?" 

"Yes. The Urban taxes. They come 
each year to collect, and it must be paid 



in money." She frowned angrily, "I hate 
Urbs and all it stands for! I hate it!" 

"Are the taxes so oppressively high?" 

"Oppressive?" she retorted. "Any tax 
is oppressive. It's a difference in degree, 
that's all. As long as a government has 
the right to tax, the potential injustice 
is there. And what of other rights the 
Master arrogates to himself?" She 
paused as if to let the full enormity of 
that strike in. 

"Well?" he said carelessly. "That's 
been a privilege granted to the heads of 
many governments, hasn't it?" 

Her eyes blazed. "I can't understand 
a man who's willing to surrender his 
natural rights!" she flared. "Our men 
would die for a principle." 

"But they're not doing it," observed 
Connor caustically. 

"Because they'd be throwing their 
lives away uselessly. They can't fight 
the Master now with any chance of success. But just wait until the time 
comes. " 

"And then, I suppose, the whole world 
will be just one great beautiful state of 
anarchy." 

"And isn't that an ideal worth fighting 
for?" asked the girl hotly. "To permit 
every single individual to attain his 
rightful liberty? To destroy every 
chance of injustice?" 

"But—" 

Connor paused, considering. Why 
should he be arguing like this with Evanie? He felt no allegiance to the government of Urbs; the Master meant 
nothing to him. The only government he 
could have fought for, died for, was lost 
a thousand years in the past. Whatever 
loyalty he owed in this topsy-turvy age 
belonged to Evanie. He grinned. "Crazy 
or not," Evanie," he promised, "your 
cause is mine !" 

She softened suddenly. "Thank you, 
Tom," she said. Then, in lower tones, 
"Now you know why Jan Orm is so 
anxious for the secret of the rocket blast. 
Do you Bee?" Her voice dropped to a 
whisper. "Revolution!" 

He nodded. "I guessed that. But since 



THE BLACK FLAME 



you've answered one question, perhaps 
you'll answer my other one. What are 
the failures that still haunt the world, 
the products of the immortality treatment?" 

Again that flush of unhappiness. "He 
meant the metamorphs," she murmured 
softly. » 

Quickly she rose and passed into the 
cottage. 

CONNOR'S strength swiftly approached normal, and shortly little 
remained of that unbelievable sojourn 
in the grave. His month's grizzle of 
beard began to be irritating, and one day 
he asked Jan for a razor. 

Jan seemed puzzled; at Connor's explanation he laughed, and produced a 
jar of salve that quickly dissolved the 
stubble, assuring Connor that the preparation would soon destroy the growth 
enti rely. 

But Evanie's reaction surprised him. 
She stared for a moment without recognition. 

"Tom!" she cried. "You look — you 
look like an ancient statue!" 

He did look different from the mildfeatured villagers. With the beard removed, his lean face had an aura of 
strength and ruggedness that was quite 
unlike the appearance of his neighbors. 

Time slipped pleasantly away. Evenings he spent talking to new friends, 
relating stories of his dead age, explaining the state of politics, society, and science in that forgotten time. Often 
Evanie joined in the conversation, 
though at other times she amused herself at the "vision," a device of remarkable perfection, on whose two-foot 
screen actors in distant cities spoke and 
moved with the naturalness of miniature 
life. 

Connor himself saw "Winter's Tale" 
and "Henry the Eighth" given in accurate portrayal, and was once surprised 
to discover a familiar-seeming musical 
comedy, complete to scantily-clad chorus. In many ways Evanie puzzled Tom 
Connor. There was some mystery about 



her that he could not understand. Life 
in Ormon, it seemed to him, was essentially what it had been in his oid days in 
.St. Louis. Young men still followed immemorial routine; each evening saw 
them walking, sitting, talking, with 
girls, idling through the park-like arcades of trees, strolling along the quiet 
river. 

But not Evanie. No youth ever 
climbed the hill to her cottage or sat with 
her at evening, except when Jan Orm 
occasionally came. And this seemed 
strange, ' considering the girl's loveliness. Connor couldn't remember a more 
attractive girl than this spirited, gentle, 
demure Evanie — except his girl of the 
woods. Not even Ruth, of the buried 
days of the past. 

He mused over the matter until a more 
sensational mystery effaced it. 
- One morning he and Jan Orm and 
Evanie went hunting game up-river. 
Deer were fairly plentiful, and game 
birds, wild turkeys, and pheasants had 
increased until they were nearly as common as crows once had been. 

„The trio carried glistening bows of 
spring steel that flung slender steel arrows with deadly accuracy, if used properly. Connor was awkward, but Evanie 
and Jan Orm handled them with skill. 
Connor bemoaned the lack of rifles; he 
had been a fair marksman in the old 
days. 

"I'd show you," he^declared. "If I only 
had my Marl in repeater!" 

"Guns aren't made any more," said 
Jan. "The Erden Resonator did for 
them; they're useless for military 
weapons." 

"But for hunting?" 

"They're banned by law. For a while 
after the founding of the Urban Empire 
people kept 'em hidden around, but no 
one knew when a resonator might sweep 
the section, and folks got tired of having 
the things go off at night, smashing 
windows and plowing walls. They 
weren't safe house-pets." 

"Well," grumbled Connor, "I'd like 
one now, even an air rifle. Say!" he 



V 



54 



FANTASTIC STORY MAGAZINE 



exclaimed. "Why not a water-gun?" 
"A water-gun?" 

"One run by atomic energy. Didn't 
you say you could detonate it, get all the 
power out at once?" 

"Yes, but — " Jan Giro paused. "By 
the gods!" he roared. "That's the answer! That's the weapon! Why didn't 
anybody think of that before? There's 
what we need to — " He broke his sentence in mid-air. 

Evanie smiled. "It's all right," she 
said. "Tom knows." 

"Yes," said Connor, "and I'm with you 
in your revolutionary ambitions." 

"I'm glad," Jan Orm said simply. His 
eyes lighted. "That gun is a stroke of 
genius. The resonators can't damage an 
atom-powered rifle. Evanie, the time 
draws near." 

The three proceeded thoughtfully up 
the river bank. The midsummer sun 
beat down- upon them with withering 
intensity. Connor mopped his streaming 
brow. 

"How I'd like a swim!" he ejaculated. 
"Evanie, do you people ever swim here? 
That place where the river's backed up 
by that fallen bridge should be a great 
place for a dip." 

"Oh, no!" the girl said quickly. "Why 
should we swim? You can bathe every 
day in the pool at home." 

That was true. The six-foot basin 
where water, warmed to a pleasant tepidity by atomic heat, bubbled steadily, 
was always available. But it was a poor 
substitute for swimming in open water. 

"That little lake looked tempting," 
Connor sighed. 

"The lake!" cried Evanie, in horror. 
"Oh, no! You can't swim there!" 

"Why not?" 

"You just can't!" 

And that was as much information as 
he could obtain. Shortly afterward, 
swinging the half-dozen birds that had 
fallen to their arrows, they started back 
for the village. 



B 



UT CONNOR was determined to ferret out at least that one mystery — 



why he should not swim in the lake. The 
next time he accompanied Jan Orm on a 
tramp up-river, he piled Jan with questions. But it was futile. He could extract no more from Jan Orm than he had 
from Evanie. 

As the pair approached the place of 
the ruined bridge that dammed the 
stream, they turned a little way inland. 
Jan's keen eyes spotted a movement in a 
thick copse. 

"Deer in there," h» whispered. "Let's 
separate and start him." 

He bore off to the left, and Connor, 
creeping cautiously to the right, approached the grass-grown marge of the 
flowage. Suddenly he stopped short. 
Ahead of him the sun had glinted on 
something large and brown and wet, and 
he heard a rustle of movement. He 
moved stealthily forward ; with utmost 
care he separated a screen of brush, and 
gazed through it to a little open glade, 
and on the creature that sprawled there 
beside the water. 

At first he saw only a live-foot strip 
of wet, hairless, oily skin that heaved to 
the thing's slow breathing. He held his 
bow ready lest it prove dangerous, and 
stared, wondering what sort of creature 
it could be. It was certainly nothing 
native to the North America of his day. 
And then, at some sound or movement 
of his, the beast rolled over and faced 
him. 

Connor felt sick. He glimpsed short, 
incredibly thick limbs, great splay feet 
with webbed toes, broad hands with 
webbed fingers. But what sickened him 
was the smooth bulbous face with its 
tiny eyes and little round, red-lipped 
mouth. 

The thing was — or had been — human! 

Connor let out a choking yell. The 
creature, with a mumble that might have 
been speech, flopped awkwardly to the 
bank and into the water, 'where it 
cleaved the element like an otter and 
disappeared with a long, silent wake. 

He heard the crashing of Jan Orm's 
approach, and his cry of inquiry. But 
a webbed print in the mud of the bank 



THE BLACK FLAME 



lold Jan Orm the story. 

"Wh — what was it?" Connor choked. 

"A metamorph," said Jan soberly. 

Empty-handed as they were, he 
turned homeward. Connor, too aghast to 
press questions, followed him. And then 
came the second mystery. 

Connor saw it first — a face, a child's 
face, peering at them from a leafy covert. But this was no human child. 
Speechless, Connor saw the small pointed twitching ears, the pointed teeth,. the 
little black slanting eyes squinting at 
him beadily. The face was that of a 
young satyr, a child of Pan. It was the 
spirit of the wilderness incarnate, not 
evil exactly, not even savage, but just 
wild — wild ! 

The imp vanished instantly. As Connor gasped, "What's that?" it was already far beyond arrow-shot, headed for 
the forest. Jan viewed it without surprise. 

"It's a young metamorph," he said. 
"A different sort than the one at the 
lake." He paused and stared steadily 



into Connor's eyes. "Promise me something," he muttered. 
"What?" 

"That you'll not tell Evanie you saw 
these things." 

"If you wish," said Connor slowly. It 
was all beyond him. 

IV 

Tom CONNOR was determined now 
to fathom these mysteries. Jan should no 
longer put him off. He stopped and 
placed a hand firmly on Jan's arm, 
forced the man to look into his eyes when 
Jan would have evaded his gaze. 

"Just what," he said bluntly, "is a 
metamorph ? You must tell me, Jan !" 

There was a moment's uncomfortable 
silence. 

"That question has been evaded long 
enough," Connor said firmly, "and I intend to know why. This is my world 
now. I've got to live in it, and I want 
to know what others know of it — its 

[Turn pnge] 



ADVERTISEMENT 



Can Man Refuse to Die? 



Thirty-nine years ago in forbidden Tibet, 
behind the highest mountains in the world, a 
young journalist named Edwin J. Dingle 
found the answer to this question. A great 
mystic opened his eyes. A great change came 
over him. He realized the strange power that 
knowledge gives. 

That Power, he says, can transform the 
life of anyone. Questions, whatever they are, 
can be answered. The problems of health, 
death, poverty and wrong, can be solved. 

In his own ease, he was brought back to 
splendid health. He' acquired wealth too, as 
well as world-wide professional recognition. 
Thirty-nine years ago, he was sick as a man 
could be and live. Once his coffin was bought. 
Years of almost continuous tropical fevers, 
broken bones, near blindness, privation and 
danger had made a human wreck of him, 
physically and mentally. 

He was about to be sent back home to 
die, when a strange message came — "They 
are waiting for you in Tibet." He wants to 
tell the whole world what he learned thei M, 



under the guidance of the greatest mystic he 
ever encountered during his 21 years of travel 
throughout the world. He wants everyone to 
experience the greater health and the Power 
which there came to him. 

Within ten years, he was able to retire to 
this country with a fortune. He had been 
honored by fellowships in the world's leading 
geographical societies, for his work as a geographer. And today, 39 years later, he is still 
so athletic, capable of so much work, so young 
in appearance, it is hard to believe he has 
lived so long. 

As a fir it step in their progress toward the 
Power that Knowledge gives, Mr. Dingle 
wants to send to readers of this paper a 
9, 000-word treatise. He says the time is here 
for it to be released to the Western World, 
and offers to send it, free of cost or obligation, to sincere readers of this notice. For 
your free copy, atl-ress The Institute of 
Mcntalphysics, 213 South Hnbart Blvd., Dept. 
C-1G, Los Anjeles 4, Calif. Write promptly as 
only a limited number of the free books have 
been r._\::tcd. 



56 



FANTASTIC STORY MAGAZINE 



faults as well as its virtues. Why have 
you shunned the question?" 

"Because — because — " 

"Because of Evanie!" supplied Connor. 

"Yes," Jan agreed, reluctantly. "Because of Evanie." 

"What has that monster at the lake 
to do with her?" 

"Nothing directly." Jan Orm paused. 
"Before I tell you more, Tom, I'm going 
to ask you something. Do you love 
Evanie?" 

"I'm very fond of her." 

"But do you love her?" Jan insisted. 

"Yes," said Connor suddenly. "I do." 

A swift thought had come to him before he had reached that decision. The 
vision of a smiling wood nymph was before his eyes. But only a human being 
could be loved by a man — a coolly lovely 
girl like Evanie; not a goddess. 

"Why do the youths of Ormon ignore 
Evanie so, Jan?" Connor asked abruptly. "She's far the loveliest girl in town." 

"So she is, Tom. It's her own doing 
that they ignore her. They have tried to 
be friends with her — have tried hard. 
But she— well, she has always discouraged them." 

"Why?" 

"Because, I think, she feels that in 
justice to eveiybody she can't marry." 

"And again why?" 

For a long moment Jan Orm hesitated. 
"I'll tell you," he decided finally. "Tom, 
she's one-eighth metamorph !" 

"What?" 

"Yes. Her mother was the daughter 
of Montmerci the Anadominist. A great 
man, but half metamorph." 

"Do you mean," asked Conner, aghast, 
"that she has the blood of that lake monster in her?" 

"No ! Oh, no ! "There are two kinds of 
metamorphs. One sort, the Panate metamorph, is human ; the others, the amphimorphs, are just — horrors. Evanie's 
blood is Panate. But she has conquered 
her metamorphic heredity." 

"A metamorph!" Connor groaned. 

The picture of that flopping horror 



rose in his mind, and then the vision 
of the mild, impish face of the woods 
child. There was something reminiscent 
of Evanie in that, the color' of her bronze 
hair, an occasional glint in her deep eyes. 

"Tell me," he said huskily, "about that 
heredity of hers. Might her child, for 
instance, turn wild? Or turn into such a 
horror as an — amphimorph?" 

Jan Orm smiled. 

"By no chance! The Panate metamorphs, I tell you, are human. They're 
people. They're much like us — good and 
bad, brilliant and stupid, and many of 
them surpassingly beautiful in their 
wild way." 

"But just what are they? Where'd 
they come from?" 

"Do you remember hearing Martin 
Sair mentioned? He was companion of 
the Master. Evanie's great-uncle thirty 
generations removed." 

"The discoverer of immortality? I remember." 

But Connor made no mention of when 
he had first heard of both Martin Sair 
and the Master — from an uncannily 
beautiful wood sprite who had seemed 
to possess all the wisdom of the ages. 

"Yes," Jan told him. "And you must 
have heard, too, that there were other 
attempts at making men immortal, in 
the first century of the Enlightenment. 
And failures. Some that still haunt the 
world. Well, the metamorphs are those 
failures." 

"I see," said Connor slowly. 

"They're a mutation, an artificial mutation," Jan explained. "When Martin 
Sair's discovery became known, thousands sought to imitate him. It was understood that he was working with hard 
radiations, but just what was a mystery 
— whether as hard as the cosmic, rays or 
as soft as the harder X-rays. Nevertheless, many charlatans claimed to be able 
to give immortality, and there were 
thousands of eager victims. It was a 
mania, a wave of lunacy. The laboratories of th,e tricksters were packed. 

"There were four directions of error 
to be made; those who had not Sair's 



THE BLACK FLAME 



secret, erred in all four. People who 
were treated with too hard radiations 
died ; those treated with too soft rays 
simply became sterile. Those treated 
with the right rays, but for too long a 
time, remained themselves unchanged, 
but bore amphimorphs as children ; 
those treated for too short a time bore 
Panate metamorphs. 

"Can you imagine the turmoil? In a 
world just emerging from barbarism, 
still disorganized, of course some of the 
freaks survived. Near the sea coasts 
amphimorphs began to appear, and in 
lakes and rivers; while in the hills and 
forests the Children of Nature, the 
Panate type, went trouping through the 
wilderness." 

BUT WHY weren't they extermin" ated ?" asked Connors tersely. 
"You've bred out criminals. Why let 
these creatures exist?" 

"Criminals could he reached and 
sterilized. It's impossible to sterilize beings who slip into the sea at one's approach, or who fade like shadows into 
the depths of a forest." 

"Then why not kill them off?'-' 
"Would you favor such a measure?" 
"No," Connor said, adding in impassioned tone, "it would be nothing less 
than murder, even to kill the swimmers! 
Are they — intelligent?" 

"In a dim fashion. The amphimorphs 
are creatures cast back to the amphibious stage of the human embryo — just 
above the gilled period. The others, the 
Panates, are strange. Except for an odd 
claustrophobia — the fear of enclosed 
things, of houses or clothing- -they're 
quite as intelligent as most of us. And 
they're comparatively harmless." 

Connor heaved a sigh of relief. "Then 
they aren't a problem?" 

"Oh, there were consequences," Jan 
said wryly. "Their women are often very 
beautiful, like the marble figures of 
nymphs dug up in Europe. There have 
been many cases like Evanie's. Many of 
us may have a drop or so of metamorphic blood. But it falls hardest on 



57 



the first offspring, the hybrids, miserable creatures unable to endure civilized 
life, and often most unhappy in. the 
wilds. Yet even these occasionally produce a genius. Evanie's grandfather is 
one." 

"What did he do?" 

"He was known as Montmerci the 
Anadominist, half human, half metamorph. Yet his was a powerful personality. He was strong enough to lead an 
abortive revolution against the Master. 
Both humans and metamorphs followed 
him. H» even managed to direct a group 
of amphimorphs, who got into the city's 
water supply and erupted into the sewers by hundreds." 

"But what happened to the revolution ?" 

"It was quickly suppressed," Jan said 
bitterly. "What could a horde armed 
with bows and knives do against the 
Rings and ionic beams of Urbs?" 

"And Montmerci?" 

"He was executed — a rare punishment. But the Master realized the danger from this wild metamorph. A second 
attempt might have been successful. 
That's why Evanie hates Urbs so intensely." 

"Evanie!" Connor said musingly. 
"Tell me, what was it that led to her 
father's marrying a — a—" 

"A cross? Well, Evan Sair was like 
Evanie, a doctor. He came upon Meria, 
the daughter of Mofitmerci, down in 
the mountain region caited Ozarky. He 
found her there sick, just after the collapse of the uprising. Evan Sair cared 
for her and fell in love with her. He 
brought her here to his home, and married her, but she soon began to weaken 
again from lack of the open woods and 
sunlight. 

"She died when Evanie was born, but 
she would have died anyway." 

Jan Orm paused and drew a long 
breath. "Now do you see why Evanie 
fears her own blood? Why she has driven away the youths who tried to arouse 
even friendship? She's afraid of the 
sleeping metamorphic nature in her, and 



FANTASTIC STORY MAGAZINE 



needlessly afraid, since she's safely 
human. She has even tried to drive roe 
away, but I refuse to be so driven. I 
understand." 

"So do I," said Connor soberly. "And 
I'm going to marry her." 

Jan Orm smiled dryly. "And if she 
thinks otherwise?" 

"Then I must convince her." 

Jan shook his head jn mild wonderment. "Perhaps you can," he said, with 
the barest hint of reluctance. "There's 
something dynamic about you. In some 
ways you're like the Immortals of Urbs." 

When they reached the village, Connor left Jan Orm and trudged in a deep 
reverie up Evanie's hill, musing on the 
curious revelations he had heai'd, analyzing his own feelings. Did he really 
love the bronze-haired Evanie? The 
query had never presented itself until 
Jan had put it to him, so bluntly, yet now 
he was certain he did. Admitting that, 
then — had he the right to ask her to marry a survival of the past, a revivified 
mummy, a sort of living fossil? 

What damage might that millenium of 
sleep have done him? Might he not 
awake some morning to find the weight 
of his years suddenly upon him? Might 
he not disintegrate like a veritable mummy when its wrappings were removed? 
Still he had never felt stronger or healthier in his life. And was he such a freak, 
after all, in this world of Immortals, 
satyrs, and half-human swimmers? 

He paused a* the door of the cottage, 
peering within. The miraculous cookstove hissed quietly, and Evanie was 
humming to herself as she stood before a 
mirror, brushing the shining metal of 
her hair. She glimpsed him instantly 
and whirled. He strode forward and 
caught' her hands. 

"Evanie — •" he began, and paused as 
she jerked violently to release herself. 

"Please go out!" she said. 

He held her wrists (irmly. "Evanie, 
you've got to listen to me. I love you !" 

"I know those aren't the right words," 
he stumbled on. "It's just — the best I 
can do." 



"I don't — 'permit this," she murmured, 
"I know you don't ; but Evanie, I mean 
it!" 

He tried to draw her closer but she 
stood stiffly while he slipped his arms 
about her. By sheer strength he tilted 
her head back and kissed her. 

For a moment he felt her relax against 
him, then she thrust him away. 

"Please!" she gasped. "You can't! 
You don't understand!" 

"I do," he said gently. 

"Then you see how impossible it is for 
me try — marry?" 

"Any wildness in any children of 
ours," he said with a smile, "might as 
easily come of the Connor blood." 

For a long moment Evanie lay passive 
in his arms, and then, when she struggled away, he was startled to see tears. 

"Tom," she whispered, "if I say I love 
you will you promise me something?" 

"You know I will!" 

"Then promise you'll not mention love 
again, nor try to kiss me, nor even touch 
me — for a month. After that, I'll do as 
you wish. Do you promise?" 

"Of course; but why, Evanie? Why?" 

"Because within a month," she murmured tensely, "there'll be war!" 

pONNOR held strictly to his word 
with Evanie- But the change in their 
relationship was apparent to both of 
them. Evanie no longer met his gaze 
with frank steadiness. Her eyes would 
drop when they met his, and she would 
lose the thread of her sentences in confusion. 

Yet when he turned unexpectedly, he 
always found her watching him with a 
mixture of abstractedness and speculation. And once or twice he awakened in 
the morning to find her gazing at him 
from the doorway with a tender, wistful 
smile. 

One afternoon Jan Orm hailed him 
from the foot of Evanie's hill. 

"I've something to show you," he 
called, and Connor rose from his comfortable sprawl in the shade and joined 
him, walking toward the factory across 



THE BLACK FLAME 



the village. 

"I've been thinking, Jan," Connor remarked. "Frankly, I can't yet understand why you consider the Master such 
a despicable tyrant. I've yet to hear ofj 
any really tyrannous act of his." 

"He isn't a tyrant," Jan said gloomily. 
"I wish he were. Then our revolution 
woujd be simple. Almost everybody 
would be on our side. It's evidence of his 
ability that he avoids any misgovernment, and keeps the greater part of the 
people satisfied. He's just, kind and benevolent — on the surface!" 

"What makes you think he's different 
underneath?" 

"He retains the one secret we'd all 
like to possess — the secret of immortality. Isn't that evidence enough that he's 
supremely selfish? He and his two or 
three million Immortals — so!# rulers of 
the Earth!" " 

"Two or three million!" 

"Yes. What's the difference how 
many? They're still ruling half a billion 
people— a small percentage ruling the 
many. If he's so benevolent, why doesn't 
he grant others the privilege of immortality?" 

"That's a fair question," said Connor 
slowly, pondering. "Anyway, I'm on 
your side, Jan. You're my people now; 
I owe you ' all my allegiance." They 
entered the factory. "And now — what 
was it you brought me here to see?" 

Jan's face brightened. 

"Ah!" he exclaimed. "Have a look at 
this." 

He brought forth an object from a 
desk drawer In his office, passing it 
proudly to Connor. It was a blunt, thickhandled, blue steel revolver. 

"Atom-powered," Jan glowed. "Here's 
the magazine." 

He shook a dozen little leaden balls, 
each the size of his little fingernail, into 
his palm. 

"No need of a cartridge, of course," 
commented Connor. "Water in the handle? I thought so. But here's one mistake. You don't want your projectiles 
round; you lose range and accuracy. 



Make 'era cylindrical and blunt^pointed." He squinted through the weapon's 
barrel. "And — there's no rifling." 

He explained the purpose of rifling 
the barrel to give the bullet a rotary-motion, 

"I might have known enough to consult you first," Jan Orm said wryly. 
"Want to try it out anyway? I haven't 
been ab'e to hit much with it so far." 

They moved through the whirring factory. At the rear the door opened upon 
a slope away from the village. The 
ground slanted gently toward the river. 
Glancing about for a suitable target, 
Connor seized an empty can from a 
bench within the door and flung it as far 
as he could down the slope. He raised 
the revolver, and suddenly perceived another imperfection that had escaped his 
notice. 

"There are no sights on it!" he ejaculated. 

"Sights?" Jan was puzzled. 

"To aim by." He explained the principle. "Well, let's try it a's is." 

He squinted down the smooth barrel, 
squeezed the trigger. There was a sharp 
report, his arm snapped back to a terrific recoil, and the can leaped spinning 
high into the air, to fall yards farther 
toward the river. 

"Wow [" he exclaimed. "What a kick !" 

But Jan was leaping with enthusiasm. 

"You hit it! You hit it!" 

"Yeah, but it hit back," Connor said 
ruefully. "While you're making the other 
changes lighten the charge a little or 
you'll have broken wrists in your army. 
And I'd get somebody to work on ordnance and rifles. They're a lot more 
useful than revolvers." At Jan's nod, he 
asked, "You don't expect to equip the 
whole revolution with the products of 
this one factory, do you?" 

"Of course not! There are thousands 
like it, in villages like Ormon. I've already sent descriptions of the weapons 
we'll need. I'll have to correct them." 

"How many men can you count on? 
Altogether, I mean." 

"About twenty-five thousand." 



SO FANTASTIC ST 

"Twenty-five thousand for a world 
revolution? An even twenty-five thousand to attack a city of thirty millon?" 

"Don't forget that the city is all that 
counts. Who holds Urbs, holds the 
world." 

"But still — a city that size! Or even 
just the three million Immortals. We'll 
be overwhelmed!" 

"I don't think so," Jan said grimly. 
"Don't forget that in Urbs arc several 
million Anadominists. I count on them 
to join us. In fact, I'm planning to smuggle arms to them, provided our weapons 
are successful. They won't be as effective 
as the ionic beam, but we can only try. 
We'll have at least fhe advantage of surprise, since we don't plan to muster and 
march on Urbs. We'll infiltrate slowly, 
and on the given day, at the given hour, 
we'll strike!" 

"There'll be street fighting, then," 
Connor said. "There's nothing like machine guns for that." 

"What are they?" 

Jan's eyes glowed as Connor explained. 

"We can manage those," he decided. 
"That should put us on a par with the 
Urban troops, so long as we remain in 
the city where the air forces can't help 
them. If only we had aircraft!" 

"There's air planes, such as my generation used." 

"Too flimsy. Useless against the fliers 
of Urbs. No, what we need is the secret 
of the rocket blast, and since that's unobtainable, we'll have to do without. 
We'll manage to keep our fighting in the 
City itself. And how we'll need you!" 

CONNOR soon came to realize the 
truth of Jan's words. What little he 
knew of trajectories, velocities, and the 
science of ballistics was taxed to the uttermost, lie was astounded to discover 
that calculus was a lost knowledge, and 
that Jan was even unacquainted with 
the use of logarithms and the slide rule. 

Rather than plod through hours. and 
hours of mathematical computation, it 
seemed to Connor the shorter method 



IRY MAGAZINE 

was to work out a table of logarithms to 
four places, and to construct a slide rule. 
In both of these operations Jan joined 
with growing enthusiasm as understanding increased. 

As the preparations progressed, Connor began to notice other things — the 
vanishing of familiar faces, the lack of 
youthful activities. He knew what that 
meant. The revolutionaries were gradually filtering into Urbs, and the day of 
the uprising was at hand. 

How close it was, however, he never 
dreamed until he emerged one morning 
to find Evanie talking to Jan Orm, with 
her eyes alight. She turned eagerly to 
Tom, led him back into the cottage. 

"Kiss me!" she whispered. "The day 
is here! We leave for Urbs tonight!" 

All day there was a hush over the village. It was bereft of youth, girls as well 
as men. Only the oldsters plodded about 
in street and field. 

Jan Orm confessed to Connor that he 
was not entirely pleased with all details. 
His estimate of the number of revolutionaries who would join him had been 
loo high. But the infiltration into the 
city had been successful, and twenty-two 
thousand villagers lay armed and hidden 
among their Urban sympathizers. This, 
Jan argued, promised a great accession 
to their ranks once the hour .had struck. 

"What are your arrangements?" Connor asked. 

"Each village has chosen its leader. 
These loaders have again centralized 
their command into ten, of whom our 
Ormon leader happens to be one. But 
each variety of Weed has its own corps." 
He smiled. "They call us Weeds, because 
we're supposed to run wild." 

And again there came to Connor a 
quick mental picture of his beautiful 
girl of the forest. She, too, had spoken 
of "Weeds," a little contemptuously, he 
remembered now. He had not understood her allusion then, had not asked 
her to explain. But it was plain enough 
now. Her lofty attitude toward "Weeds," 
or the common people, must have been 
because she was an aristocrat herself. 



THE BLA 

Who could she have been ? He had seen 
no one hereabouts bearing any faintest 
resemblance to her. 

He brought his mind swiftly back to 
Jan. 

"If you win," he observed, "you'll 
have a general battle over the spoils. 
You may find yourself worse off after 
the revolution than before." 

"We know that," Jan said grimlv. 
"Yet we'll fight side by side until t''e 
Master's done for. Afterward — " He 
spread his hands expressively. 

"You mentioned 'our Ormon leader*." 
remarked Connor. "That's you, of 
course." 

"Oh, no!" Jan chuckled. "That's Evanie. " 

"The devil !" Connor stared amazed at 
the gentle, shy, quiet girl. 

"Jan exaggerates," she said, smiling. 
"I depend on all the rest of you. Especially Jan — and you, Tom." 

He shook his head, puzzled about this 
revolution — shadowy, vague, ill-planned. 
To assault a world ruler in a colossal 
city with untrained rabble using weapons unfamiliar to them ! Surely the Master must know there was sedition and 
plotting among his people. 

He was about to voice his doubts when 
a flash of iridescence down the sunny 
slope caught his eye. It seemed more 
like a disturbance in the air or a focus of 
light than a material body. It swept in 
wide circles as if hunting or seeking, and 
Connor heard its high, humming buzz. 
The creature, if it were a creature, was 
no more than eighteen inches long, and 
featureless save for a misty beak at the 
forward end. 

It circled closer, and suddenly he perceived an amazing phenomenon. It was 
circling the three of them and, he had 
thought, the cottage too. Then he saw 
that instead of circling the building it 
was passing through the walls! 

"Look !" he cried. "What's that?" 

V 

T HE EFFECT on Jan and Evanie 



:k flame si 

was startling. As they perceived the almost invisible thing, the girl shrieked in 
terror. 

"Don't look at it!" Jan choked out. 
"Don't even think of it!" 

Both of them covered their faces with 
their hands. 

They made no attempt to flee; indeed, 
Cinnnr thought confusedly, how could 
'>ue hide from a thing that could pass 
like a phantom through rock walls? He 
tried to follow their example, but could 
not res ; ^t anot h "r neop at the mvstery. 
it was still visible, but further off down 
the sln-ie toward the river, and as he 
g-zed. it abandoned its circling, passed 
like a streak of mist over the water, and 
vanished. 

"It's gone," he said mildly. "Suppose 
ye" 'ell me what it was." 

"It — it was a Messenger of the Master," murmured Evanie fearfully. "Jan, 
do you think it was for one of us? If so, 
that means he suspects!" 

"God knows!" Jan muttered. "It 
looked dim to me, like a stray." 

"And what," Connor demanded to 
know, "is a Messenger of the Master?" 

"It's to carry the Master's commands," said Evanie. 

"You don't say!" he snapped ironically. "I could guess that from its name. 
But what is it?" 

"It's a mechanism of force, or so we 
think," said Jan. "It's — Did you ever 
see ball-lightning?" B 

Connor nodded. 

"Well, there's nothing vnterial, strictly speaking, in ball-Iightn':tg, It's a balance of electrical forces. And so are the 
Messengers — a structure of forces." 

"But was it olivet" 

"We believe not. Not exactly alive." 

Connor groaned. "Not material, strictly speaking, and not exactly a'ive! In 
other words, a ghost." 
.Jan smiled nervously. 

"It does sound queer. What I mean is 
that the Messengers are composed of 
forces, like ball-lightning. They're stable as long as Urbs supplies enough energy to offset the losses. They don't dis


62 FANTASTIC ST( 

charge all at once like ball-lightning. 
When their energy is cut off, they just 
dissipate, fade out, vanish. That one 
missed its mark, it was for us." 

"How do they bear the Master's commands?" 

"I hope you never find out." Evanie 
said soft'y. "J was sent for once before, 
but that Messenger missed like this. Jan 
and I can close our minds to them. It 
takes practice to learn how." 

"Well," said Connor, "if the Master 
suspects, you'd better change your plans. 
Surprise was your one advantage." 

"We can't," Jan said grimly. "Our cooperating groups would split into factions in half an hour, given any excuse." 

"But that might have been sent as a 
warning!" 

"No matter. We've got to go ahead. 
What's more, we'd better leave now." 

Jan rose abruptly and departed. A 
moment later Connor saw him back in a 
motor vehicle from the hill below the 
factory. And then, with no more preparation than that, they were jolting 
over the rutted red clay road, Jan driving, Evanie between the two men. 

When they swung suddenly to a wide 
paved highway, the battered vehicle, 
leaped swiftly to unexpected speed. A 
full hundred miles an hour, though that 
was not so greatly in excess of the speed 
of cars of Connor's own dayHour after hour they rushed down the 
endless way. They passed tree-grown 
ruins and little villages like Ormon. and 
as night fell, here and there the lights 
of some peaceful farm dwelling. Evanie 
relieved Jan, and then Connor, pleading 
his acquaintance with ancient automobiles, drove for a while, to the expressed 
admiration of the other two. 

"You ancients must have been amazing!" said Jan. 

"What paving is this?" asked Connor 
as they darted along. ■ 

"Same stuff as our tires. Rubrum. 
Synthetic rubber." 

"Paved by whom?" 

"By Urbs," said Jan sourly. "Out of 
our taxes." 



>RY MAGAZINE 

"Well, isn't that one answer to your 
objections? No taxes, no roads." 

"The road through Ormon is maintained without taxes, simply by the cooperation of the people." 

Connor smiled, remembering that rutted clay road. 

"Is it possible to alienate any of the 
Master's troops?" he asked. "Trained 
men would help our chances." 

"No," Jan said positively. "The man 
has a genius for loyalty. Such an attempt would be suicide." 

"Humph ! Do you know— the more I 
hear of the Master, the more I like him? 
I can't see why you hate him so. Apparently he's a good ruler." 

"He is a good ruler, damn his clever 
soul ! If he weren't, I told you everybody'd be on our side." Jan turned to 
Evanie. "See how dangerous the Master is? His charm strikes even through 
the words of his enemies!" 

WHEN they finally stopped for re. freshmen ts, Evanie described for 
Connor other wonders of the Master's 
world empire. She told him of the hothouse cities of Antarctica under their 
crystal domes, and especially Austropolis, of the great mining city in the 
shadow of the Southern Pole, and of 
Nyx, lying precariously on the slopes of 
the volcano Erebus. 

She had a wealth of detail gleaned 
from the vision screen, but Jan Orm had 
traveled there, and added terse comment. All traffic and freight came in by 
rocket, the Triangles of Urbs, a means 
too expensive for general use, but the 
mines produced the highly-prized metal, 
platinum. 

Evanie spoke, too, of the "Urban 
pond," the new sea formed in the Sahara 
Desert by the blasting of a passage 
through the Atlas Mountains to the 
Mediterranean. That had made of Algeria and Tripoli fertile countries, and 
by the increased surface for evaporation, it had changed even the climate of 
the distant Arabian Desert. 

And there was Eartheye on the sum


THE BLAl 

mit of sky-piercing Everest, the great 
observatory whose objective mirror was 
a spinning pool of mercury a hundred 
feet across, and whose images of stellar 
bodies were broadcast to students 
around the world. In this gigantic mirror, Betelgeuse showed a measurable 
disc, the moon was a pitted plain thirty 
yards away, and even Mars glowed 
cryptically at a distance of only two and 
a half miles. 

Connor learned that the red planet 
still held its mystery. The canals had 
turned out to be illusion, but the seasonal changes still argued life, and a million tiny markings hinted at some sort 
ol' civilization. 

"But they've been to the moon," Evanie said, continuing the discussion as 
they got under way again. "There's a 
remnant of life there, little crystalline 
flowers that the great ladies of Urbs 
sometimes* wear. Moon orchids — each 
one worth a fortune." 

"I'd like to give you one some day," 
murmured Connor. 

"Look, Tom!" Evanie cried sharply. 
"A Triangle!" 

He saw it in the radiance of early 
dawn. It was in fact a triangle with 
three girders rising from its points to an 
apex, whence the biast struck down 
through the open center. At once he realized the logic of the construction, for it 
could neither tip nor fall while the blast 
was fed. 

How large? He couldn't tell, since it 
liung at an unknown height. It seemed 
enormous, at least a hundred feet on a 
side. And then a lateral blast flared, 
and it moved rapidly ahead of them into 
the south. 

"Were they watching us, do you suppose?" Evanie asked tensely. "But — of 
course not! 1 guess I'm just nervous. 
Look, Tom, there's Kaatskill, a suburb of 
the City." 

The town was one of magn i ficent 
dwellings and vast lawns. 

"Kaatskill !" mused Connor. "The 
home of Rip Van Winkle!" 

Evanie did not guess his meaning. 



K FLAME 63 

"If he lives in Kaatskill I never heard 
of him," she said. "It is a place where 
many wealthy Sleepers have settled to 
enjoy their wealth." 

The road widened suddenly, and then 
they topped the crest of a hill. Connor's 
eyes widened in astonishment as the 
scene unfolded. 

A valley lay before them, and cupped 
in the hills as in the palm of a colossal 
hand, lay such a hive of mammoth buildings that for a moment reason refused 
to accept it. Urbs! Connor knew instantly that only the world capital could 
stretch in such reaches across to the dis^ 
tant blue hills beyond. 

He stared at sky-piercing structures, 
at tiered streets, at the curious steel web 
where a monorail car sped like a spider 
along its silken strand. 

"There! Urbs Minor!" whispered Evanie. "Lesser Urbs!" 

"Lesser Urbs!" 

"Yes. Urbs Major is beyond. See? 
Toward the hills." 

He saw. He saw the incredible structures that loomed Gargantuan. He saw 
a fleecy cloud drift across one, while behind it twin towers struck yet higher 
toward the heavens. 

"The spires of the Palace," murmured 
Evanie. 

They sped along the topmost of three 
tiers, and the vast structures were blotted out by nearer ones. For an hour and 
a half they passed along that seemingly 
endless street. The morning life of Urbs 
was appearing, traffic flowed, pedestrians moved in and out of doorways. 

The dress of the city had something 
military about it, with men and women 
alike garbed in metallic-scaled shirts and 
either kirtles or brief shorts, with sandaled feet. They were slight in build, as 
were the Ormon folk, but they had none 
of the easy-going complacency of the 
villagers. They were hectic and hurried, 
and the sight struck a familiar noie 
across the centuries. 

Urbs was City incarnate. Connor felt 
the brilliance, the glamour, the wickedness, that is a part of all great cities 



FANTASTIC STORY MAGAZINE 



from Babylon to Chicago. Here were all 
of them in one, all the great cities that 
ever were, all in this gigantic metropolis. Babylon reborn — Imperial Rome 
made young again! 

They crossed, suddenly, a three-tiered 
viaduct over brown water. 

"The canal that makes Urbs a seaport," Evanie explained. 

Beyond, rising cliff-like from the 
bank, soared those structural clossi Connor had seen in the blue distance, towering unbelievably into the bright sky. He 
felt like a pygmy, crushed and stifled, so 
enormous was the mass. He did not need 
Evanie's whisper: 

"Across the water is Greater Urbs." 

Those mountainous piles could be 
nothing less. 

On the crowded sidewalks brilliantcostumed people flowed by, many smoking black cigarettes. That roused a longing in Tom Connor for his ancient pipe, 
now disintegrated a thousand years. He 
stared at the bold Urban women with 
their short hair and metallic garb. Now 
and again one stared back, either contemptuously, noting his Weed clothing, 
or in admiration of his strong figure. 

Jan Orm guided the car down a long 
ramp, past the second tier and down into 
the dusk of the ground level. They cut 
into a solid line of thunderous trucks, 
and finally pulled up at the base of one 
of the giant buildings. Jan drew a deep 
sigh. 

"We're here," he said. "Urbs!" 

Connor made no reply. In his mind 
was only the stunning thought that this 
colossus called Urbs was the city they 
were to attempt to eonquer with their* 
Weed army — a handful of less than 
twenty-five thousand ! 

WITH the cessation of the car's movement a blanket of humid heat closed 
down on them. The ground level was 
sultry, hot with the stagnant breath of 
thirty million pairs of lungs. 

Then, as Connor alighted, there was a 
whir, and he glanced up to see a fan. 
blower dissolve into whirling invisibil


ity, drawing up the fetid accumulation 
of air. A faint coolness wafted along the 
tunnel-like street. For perhaps half a 
minute the fan hummed, then was stilled. 
The colossal city breathed — in thirtysecond gasps. 

They moved into the building, to a 
temperature almost chilly after the furnace heat outside. Connor heard the hiss 
of a cooling system, recognized the sibilance since he had heard it from a similar 
system in Evanie's cottage. They followed Jan to an elevator, one of a bank 
of about forty, and identical to one of 
the automatic lifts ir. an ancient apartment building. 

Jan pressed a button, and the cage 
shot into swift and silent motion. It 
seemed a long time before it clicked to a 
halt at the seventy- fourth floor. The 
doors swung noiselessly aside : and they 
emerged into a carpeted hall, following 
Jan to a door halfway down the corridor. A faint murmur of voices within 
ceased as Jan pressed a bell-push. 

In the moment of silence a faint, bluish light outlined the faces of Jan and 
Evanie; Connor, standing a bit to the 
side, was beyond it. 

"Looking us over on a vision screen," 
whispered Jan, and instantly the door 
opened. Connor heard voices. 

"Evanie Sair and Jan Orm ! At last !" 

Connor followed them into a small 
chamber, and was a little taken aback 
by the hush that greeted his appearance. 
He faced the group of leaders in the 
room, half a dozen men and an equal 
number of women, all garbed in Urban 
dress, and all frozen in immobile surprise. 

"This is Tom Connor," Jan Orm said 
quickly. "He suggested the rifles." 

"Well!" drawled a golden-haired girl, 
relaxing. "He looks like a cool Immortal Lord! I thought we were in for it!" 

"You'd manage, Ena," said a striking 
dark-haired beauty, laughing disdainfully. 

"Don't mind Maris." The blonde 
smiled at Connor. "She's been told she 
looks like the Princess; hence the air of 



THE BLA 

hauteur." She paused. "And what do 
you think of Urbs?" 

"Crowded," Connor said, and grinned. 

"Crowded ! You should see it on a 
business day." 

"It's their weekly-holiday," explained 
Evanie. "Sunday. We chose it purposely." There'll be fewer guards in the Palace seeing-room." 

For the first time Connor realized that 
Sundays passed unobserved in the peaceful life of Ormon. 

Jan was surveying the Urban "costumes in grim disapproval. 

"Let's get to business," he said shortly
There was a chorus of "Hush !** 

The girl Maris added, "You know 
there's a scanner in every room in Urbs, 
Jan. We can be seen from the Palace, 
and heard too!" 

She nodded toward one of the lightbrackets on the wall. After a moment of 
close inspection Connor distinguished 
the tiny crystal "eye." 

"Why not cover it?" he asked in a low 
voice, 

"That would bring a Palace officer in 
five minutes," responded the blonde, 
Ena. "A blank on the screen sticks out 
like the Alpha Building." 

She summoned the group close about 
her, slipping a casual arm through Connor's. In an almost inaudible whisper 
she began to detail the progress of the 
plans, replying to Jan's queries about the 
distribution of weapons and where thinnow were to Evanie's question about the 
appointed time, to inquiries from each 
of the others. 

Evanie's report of the Messenger 
caused some apprehension. 

"Do you think he knc*vs?" asked Ena. 
"He must, unless it was some stray that 
passed near you." 

"Suppose he does," countered Evanie. 
"He can't know when. We're ready, 
aren't we? Why not strike today — now 
— at once?" 

There was a chorus of whispered protest. 

"We ough'n't to risk everything on a 



K FLAME 65 

sudden decision — it's too reckless!" 

Ena pressed Connor's arm and whispered, "What do you think?" 

He caught an angry glance from Evanie. She resented the blonde girl's obvious attention. . 

"Evanie's right," he murmured. "The 
only chance this half-baked revolution 
has is surprise. Lose that and you've lost 
every th i ng." 

And such, after more whispered discussion, was the decision. The blow was 
to be struck at one o'clock, just two 
hours away. The leaders departed to 
pass' the instructions to their subordinate leaders, until only Connor and Evanie remained. Even Jan Orm had gone 
to warn the men of Ormon. 

T^VANIE seemed about to speak to 
*- J Connor, but suddenly turned her 
back on him. 

"What's the matter, Evanie?" he said 
softly. 

He was unprepared for the violence 
with which she swung around, her 
brown eyes blazing. 

"Matter!" she snapped. "You dare 
ask ! With the feel of that canary-headed 
Ena's fingers still warm on your arm!" 

"But Evanie " he protested. "I did 
nothing." 

"You let her!" 

"But—" 

"You let her!" 

Further protest was prevented by the 
return of the patrician Maris. Evanie 
dropped into a sulkysilence, until shortly Jan Orm appeared. 

It was a solemn group that emerged 
on the ground level and turned their 
steps in the direction of the twin-towered Palace. Evanie had apparently forgotten her grievance in the importance 
of the .impending moment, but all were 
silent and thoughtful. 

Not even Connor had eyes for Palace 
Avenue, and the tumult and turmoil of 
that great street boiled about him unnoticed. Through the girders above, the 
traffic of the second and third tiers sent 
rumbling thunder, but he never glanced 



«6 FANTASTIC SI 

up, trudging abstractedly beside Evanie. 

A hundred feet from the street's end 
they paused. Through the tunnel-like 
opening where Palace Avenue divided to 
circle the broad grounds of the Palace, 
Connor gazed at a vista of green lawn 
surmounted by 'the flight of white steps 
that led to the Arch where the enormous 
diorite statue of Holland, the Father of 
Knowledge, sat peering with narrowed 
eyes into an ancient volume. 

"Two minutes," aaid Jan with a nervouse glance around. "We'd better move 
forward." 

They reached the open. The grounds, 
surrounded by the incredible wall of 
mountainous buildings, glowed green as 
a lake in the sun, and the full vastness 
of the Palace burst upon Connor's eyes, 
towering into the heavens like a twinpeaked mountain. For a moment he 
gazed, awe-struck; then he glanced back 
into the cave of the ground level, waiting 
for the hour to strike. 

It came, booming out of the Palace 
tower. One o'clock ! Instantly the ground 
level was a teeming mass of humanity, 
swarming out of the buildings in a torrent. Sunlight glanced, flashing from 
rifle barrels; shouts sounded in a wild 
chorus. Swiftly the Ormon men gathered around Evanie, whose brilliant costume of green and crimson formed a rallying point like a flag. 

The mob became an army, each group 
falling into formation about its leader. 
Men ran shouting into the streets on the 
broad avenue that circled the grounds, 
on the second and third tiers. Instantly 
a traffic jam began to spread to epic proportions. And then, between the vehicles, the mass of humanity flowed across 
the street toward the Palace. 

From other streets to right and left, 
other crowds were pouring. The blackhaired Maris was striding, bare-limbed 
and lithe, before her forces. White, 
frightened faces stared from a thousand stalled cars. 

Then the heterogeneous mob was 
sweeping up the slope of grass, a surging mass converging from every side. 



>RY MAGAZINE 

The Palace was surrounded, at the mercy of the mob. And then — the whole 
frenzied panorama froze suddenly into 
immobility. 

From a dozen doors, and down the 
wide white steps came men — Urban 
men,' with glittering metallic cuirasses 
and bare brown limbs. They moved deliberately, in the manner of trained 
troops. Quickly they formed an inner 
circle about the Palace, an opposing line 
to the menacing thousands without. 

They were few compared to the revolutionary forces, yet for a tense moment 
the charge was halted, and the two lines 
glared at each other across a few hundred feet of grassy slope. 

rpHAT moment was etched forever in 
*■ Connor's mind. He seemed to see 
everything, with the strange clarity that 
excitement can lend. The glint of sunlight on steel, the vast irtextricable jam 
of traffic, the motionless thousands on 
the hill, the untold thousands peering 
from every window in every one of the 
gigantic buildings, the frowning towers 
of the Palace. And even, on a balcony of 
stone far up on the left tower, two tiny 
shining figures surveying the scene. The 
three Triangles hanging motionless as 
clouds high in the heavens. The vast 
brooding' figure of Holland staring unperturbed into his black stone book. . 

"He's warned — he's ready!" Jan muttered. 

"We'll have to fire," Evanie cried. 

But before her command, the sharp 
rattle of rifles came from far to the 
right. Machine-guns sputtered, and all 
down the widespread line puffs of steam 
billowed like ,huge white chrysanthemums, and dissipated at once. 

From a thousand windows in the bank 
of buildings burst other • momentary 
clouds, and the medley of shouts punctuated by staccato explosions was like a 
chorus of wild music. 

Connor stared thunderstruck. In the 
opposing line not a single man had fallen ! Each stood motionless as the giant 
statue, left arm crooked across breast, 



THE BLACK FLAME 



right arm holding a glistening revolverlike weapon. Was marksmanship responsible for that — incredibly poor 
marksmanship? 

Impossible, with that hail of bullets! 
Puffs of dust spurted up before the tine, 
splintered stone flew from the walls behind. Windows crashed. But not one 
Urban soldier moved. 

"What's wrong?" Connor yelled. 

"He knew." Jan Orm panted. "He's 
equipped his men with Paige deflectors. 
He's the devil himself!" 

The girl Maris leaped forward. 

"Come on!" she snouted, and led the 
charge. 

Instantly the line of Urbans raised 
their weapons, laying them across their 
bent left arms. A faint misty radiance 
stabbed out, a hundred brief flashes of 
light. The beams swept the revolutionaries. Anguished cries broke out as men 
spun and writhed. 

Connor leaped back as a flash caught 
him. Sudden pain racked him as his muscles tore against each other in violent 
spasmodic contractions. A moment only ; 
then he was trembling and aching as the 
beam flicked out. An electric shock ! 
None should know better than he! 

Everywhere the revolutionaries were 
writhing in agony. The front ranks were 
down, and of all those near him, only he 
and Evanie were standing. Her face was 
strained and white and agonized. 

Jan Orm was struggling to his feet, 
his face a mask of pain. Beyond him 
others were crawling away. Connor w;is 
astounded. The shock had been painful, 
but not that painful. 

Halfway up the slope before the immobile line of Urbans lay the blackhaired Maris. Her nerves had been unequal to the task set them, and she had 
fainted from sheer pain. The whole mass 
of the Weed army was wavering. The 
revolution was failing! 

VI 

ONNOR had an inspiration. The 
deflecting force must emanate from the 



glittering buttons on the Urban's left 
arms. Moreover, the field must be projected only before the Urban soldiers, 
else they'd not be able to move their own 
weapons. Springing to a fallen machinegun, he righted it, spun it far to the left 
so as to enfilade the Urbans, to strike 
them from the side. 

He pulled the trigger — let out a yell of 
fierce joy as a dozen foemen toppled. He 
tried to shout his discovery to the others, 
but none heeded, and anyhow the Urbans could counter it by a slight shift of 
formation. So grimly he cut as wide a 
gap as he could. 

The beams flashed. Steeling himself 
to the agony of the shock, he bore it unflinching. When it had passed, the Weed 
army was in flight. He muttered a vicious curse and jerked a groaning man 
on the ground beside him to his feet. 

"You're still alive, you sheep!" he 
snarled. "Get up and carry that girl!" 
He gestured at the prostrate Maris. 

The slope was clearing. Only half a 
hundred Weeds lay twisting on the 
grass, or were staggering painfully, 
erect. Connor glared at the slowly advancing Urbans, faced them for a moment disdainfully, then turned to follow 
the flying Weeds. Halfway .across the 
grounds he paused, seized an abandoned 
rifle, and dropped to his knee. 

In a gesture of utter defiance, he took 
'careful aim at the two figures on the 
tower balcony five hundred feet above. 
He pressed the trigger. Ten shots spat 
out in quick succession. Windows splintered above the figures, below, to right 
and left. Tom Connor swore again as he 
realized that these, too, were protected. 
Then he gritted his teeth as the ionic 
beam swept him once more. 

When it ceased, he fled, to mingle with 
the last of the retreating Weed forces. 
They were tric'-ling through, over, and 
around that traffic jam that would take 
heroic efforts to untangle. 

The Revolution was over. No man 
could reorganize that flying mob. Connor thrust his way through the mass of 
panic-stricken humanity until he 



68 



FANTASTIC STORY MAGAZINE 



reached the car in which Jan and Evanie 
were already waiting:. 

Without a word Jan swung the car 
hastily about, for the traffic snarl was 
reaching even as far away as he had 
parked. Evanie dropped her head on 
Connor's shoulder, weeping quietly. 

"That's a hell of a revolution!" he 
grunted. "Twenty minutes and it's 
over !" 

The car swept through the semi-dusk 
of the ground level of Palace Avenue to 
the point where the ramp curved about 
the base of the Atlas Building. There 
Jan guided it into the sunlight of the 
upper tier. In the afternoon glare his 
face was worn and haggard. Evanie, her 
spell of weeping over, was pallid and expressionless, like a statue in ivory. 

"Won't we be stopped?" Connor 
asked, as Jan put on speed. 

"They'll try," said Jan. "They'll block 
all of the Hundred Bridges. I hope we 
get across first. We can only hope, because they can see every move we make, 
of course. There are scanners on every 
street. We may be watched from the 
Palace now." 

The bridge over which they had-com L > 
into the city loomed before them, "n a 
moment they were over the canal and 
into Urbs Minor, where ten million people still moved about their occupations 
in utter ignorance of the revolution and 
its outcome. 

The colossal bu ild i ngs of Greater 
Urbs receded and took on the blue hue of 
distance, and Lesser Urbs s'inpod rapidly by them. It was not until they had 
surmounted the ridge and dropped into 
Kaatskill that Jan gave any evidence of 
relaxing. There hi? drew a deep breath. 

"Respite!" he murmured gloomily.' 
"There are no scanners here, at least." 

"What's to be done now?" asked Connor. 

"Heaven knows! We'll be hunted, of 
course — everybody who was in it. But in 
Montmerci's rebe'lion the Master punished only one- Montmerci himself, the 
leader." 

"Evanie's grandfather," 



"Yes, That may weigh against her." 

"This damned revolution was doomed 
from the start!" declared Connor irritably. "We hadn't enough organization, 
nor good enough weapons, nor an effective plan — nothing! And having lost 
the advantage of surprise, we had no 
chance at all." 

"Don't!" Evanie murmured wearily. 
"We know that now." 

"I knew it the whole time," he retorted. "By the way, Jan — those Paige deflectors of theirs. Do you know how they 
work?" 

"Of course." Jan's voice was as weary 
as Evanie's. "It's just an inductive field. 
And metal passing.through it has eddy 
currents induced in it." 

Simple enough, mused Connor. He'd 
seen the old experiment of the aluminum 
ring tossed by eddy currents from the 
pole of an alternating current magnet. 
But he asked in surprise : 

"Against such velocities?" 

"Yes. The greater the velocity, the 
stronger the eddy currents. The bullet's 
speed helps to deflect it." 

"Did you know of these deflectors before?" snapped Connor. 

"Of course. But projectile weapons 
haven't been used for so long — how 
could I dream he'd know of our rifles and 
resurrect the deflectors?" 

"You should have ^nticiprvfed the possibility. Why, we could have used — " He 
broke off. Recriminations were use'ess 
now. "Never mind. Tell me about the 
ionic beam, Jan?" 

"It's just two parallel beams of highly actinic light, like gamma rays. They 
ionize the air they pass through. The 
ionized air is a conductor. There's an 
atomic generator in the handles of the 
beam-pistols, and it shoots an electric 
charge along the beams. And when your 
body closes the circuit between them — 
Lord! They didn't use a killing potential, or we'd have been burned to a crisp. 
I still ache from that agony!" 

"Evanie stood up to it," Connor remarked. 

"Just once," murmured the girl. "A 



THE BLACK FLAME 



second time — Oh, I'd have died !" 

TT STRUCK Connor that this delicate, 
small-boned, nervous race must be 

more sensitive, less inured to pain, than 

himself. He had stood the shock with 

little difficulty. 

"You're lucky you wern't touched," 

said Jan. 

Connor snorted. "I was touched three 
times— the third time by ten beams! If 
you'd listened to me we could have won 
the dog-fight anyway. I blew a dozen Urbans down by firing from the side." 

"You what?" 

"I saw that," said Evanie. "Just before the second beam. But I — I couldn't 
stand any more." 

"It makes our position worse, I suppose," muttered Jan. "The Master will 
be angry at injury to his men." 

Connor gave it up. Jan's regret that 
the enemy had suffered damage simply 
capped a long overdue climax. He was 
loath to blame Jan, or the whole Weed 
army, for flying from the searing touch 
of the ionic beams. He felt himself an 
unfair judge, since he couldn't feel with 
their nerves. More than likely what was 
merely painful to his more rugged body 
was unbearable agony to them. 

What did trouble him was the realization that he failed to understand these 
people, failed to comprehend their viewpoint. This whole mess of a revolution 
seemed ill-planned, futile, unnecessary, 
even stupid. 

This set him to wondering about Evanie. Was it fair to try to bring love 
into her life, to rouse her from the reserve she had cast about herself? Might 
that not threaten unhappiness to both of 
them, — these two strangers from different ages? 

Humanity had changed during his 
long sleep; the only personality in this 
world with whom he felt the slightest 
sympathy was — the Master! 

A man he had never even seen, unless 
one of the two shining figures on the 
tower had been he. Like himself, the 
Master was a survival of an earlier time. 



Therein, perhaps, lay the bond. 

His musings were interrupted by a 
flash of iridescence in the air ahead. 
There was a long, desolate silence as the 
car sped onward. 

"Well," Jan Orm at last said gloomily, 
"it's come." 

But Connor already knew, instinctively, that what he had seen was the rainbow glint of one of the Master's messengers. 

"For which of us, do you suppose?" 
he asked soberly. 

"For Evanie, I guess. But don't watch 
it — don't think of it. It might be for 
you." 

Evanie was lying back in the seat, 
eyes shut, features blank. She had closed 
her mind to the unholy thing. But Connor was unable to keep either mind or 
eyes from the circling mystery as it 
swept silently about the speeding car. 

"It's closing in," he whispered to Jan. 

Jan reached a sudden decision. A rutted road branched ahead of them, and he 
swung the car into it, boring toward the 
hills. 

"Weed village in here," he muttered. 
"Perhaps we can lose it there." 

"How? It can pass through brick 
walls." 

"I know, but the pneumatic freight 
tube goes through here. The tube's fast 
as a scared meteor. We can try it, 
and — " He paused grimly. 

The sun was low in the west when 
they came to the village, a tiny place nestled among green hills. The ominous circling thing was glowing faintly in the 
dusk, now no more than twenty yards 
away. Evanie had kept to her resolute 
silence, never glancing at the threatening mystery. 

In the village, Jan talked to an ancient, bearded individual, and returned 
to the car with a frown. 

"He has only two cylinders," he announced. "You and Evanie are going." 

Connor clambered out of the car. 

"See here!" he whispered. "You're in 
more danger than I. Leave me with the 
car. I can find my way to Ormon." 



70 



FANTASTIC STORY MAGAZINE 



Jan shook his head. "Listen a moment," he said firmly. "Understand what 
I'm saying. I love Evanie. I've always 
loved her, but it's you that's been given 
to waken her. You must go with her. 
And for God's sake— quickly !" 

Reluctantly Connor and Evanie followed Jan into a stone building where 
the nervous old man stood above two 
seven-foot cylinders lying on a little 
,track. Without a word the girl clambered into the first, lying flat on her face 
with her tiny sandals pressed against 
the rear. 

The ancient snapped down the cover 
like a coffin lid. Connor's heart sank as 
the man shoved the metal cylinder into a 
round opening, closed down a door behind it, and twirled a hissing handle. 
Jan motioned Tom Connor to the other 
tube, and at that moment the flashing 
iridescence of the Messenger swept 
through the room and away. He climbed 
hastily in, lying as Evanie had done. 

"To Ormon?" he asked. 

"No. To the next Weed village, back 
in the mountains. Hurry!" 

THE OLD MAN slammed the cover. 
Connor 'ay in utter darkness, but as 
he felt the cylinder slide along the track, 
he thought he glimpsed for a bare instant the luminous Messenger in a flash 
through the metal sides. He heard the 
faint clang of the door, and there was a 
brief moment of quiet. 

Then, with a force that bent his knees, 
ho felt the thrust of terrific acceleration. 
Only a fp.inf rumb'e came to his ears, but 
he rraliz?d that his speed must be enormous. Then the pressure shifted. He felt 
his hands driven against the front, and 
in a few more seconds, no pressure at 
all. 

The cover was raised. He thrust himself out, to face Evanie, just clambering 
fr<'m Her own cylinder, and a frightened 
• nondescript man who muttered frantically. 

"Don't tell on hie ! Don't tell I" 
He turned to listen to a low-voiced inquiry from Evanie, and answered in an 



inaudible whisper and a gesture to the 
north. 

Connor followed Evanie as she hurried out of the building into darkness. 
He caught a faint glimpse of the stone 
cottages of a village smaller than Ormon, and then they were trudging over 
a dim trail toward the hills black 
against the stars. 

"To the metamorphs of the hills," Evanie said mechanically. "They'll hide us 
until it's safe." She added wearily, "I'm 
so tired!" 

That was not surprising, after such a 
day. She started to speak. "You've 
been — Oh!" 

He saw it too. The luminous, needlebeaked shape that was the Messenger, 
circling them still twenty yards away. 

"Lord !" he whispered. "How fast can 
that thing travel?" 

"Disembodied electric force?" she 
asked wearily. "As fast as light, I suppose. Well— it doesn't matter. I can 
fin;ht it off, if I must. But hurry !" 

"God!" Connor groaned. "That persistent demon!" 

His voice rose in a yell of surprise and 
fear. The misty thing had stopped in 
mid air, poised a moment, then launched 
itself at his head! 

Tnere was no pain, just a brief buzzing. Connor realized that the needlebeak 
had thrust itself into his skull, and the 
horror rested above his shoulder. He 
beat at it. His hands passed through it 
like mist. And then, in a squeaky little 
voice that clicked maddeningly within 
his very brain, came the words of the 
Messenger. 

"Go back to Urbs!" it clicked. "Go 
back to Urbs!" Over and over. "Go back 
to Urbs!" Just that. 

He turned frantic eyes on Evanie's 
startled face. 

"Get it off!' he cried. "Get it off!" 

"It was for you !" she whispered, 
stricken. "Oh, if it had only been for me! 
I can fight it. 'Close your mind to it, 
Tom. Try! Please try!" 

He did try, over and over. But> that 
maddening, clicking voice burned 



THE BLACK FLAME 



71 



through his efforts : "Go back to Urbs ! 
Go back to Urbs !" 

"I can't stand it!" Connor cried frantically. "It tickles — inside my brain!" 
He paced back and forth in anguish. "I 
want to run! To walk until I'm exhausted. I can't — stand — it!" 

"Yes!" Evanie said. "Walk until 
you're exhausted. It will give us time 
that way. But walk north — away from 
Urbs. Con*." 

She turned wearily to join him. 

"Stay here," he said. "I'll walk alone. 
Not far. I'll soon return." 

He rushed off into the darkness. His 
thoughts were turmoil as he dashed 
down the dim trail. I'll fight it off — Go 
back to Urbs! — I won't listen — Go back 
to Urbs! — If Evanie can, so can I. I'm 
a man, stronger than she — Go back to 
Urbs! Go back to^Urbs! 

CLICKING — tickling — maddening! 
He rushed blindly on, tripping over 
branches, crashing into trees. He scrambled up the slope of a steep hill, driving 
himself, trying to exhaust himself until 
he could attain the forgetfulness of 
sleep. 

Panting, scratched, weary, he paused 
from sheer necessity on the crest of the 
hill. The horror on his shoulder, clicking its message in his brain, gave him 
no surcease. He was going mad ! Better 
death at the Master's hands than this. 
Better anything than this. He turned 
about and plunged toward the hill from 
which he had come. With his first step 
south, the maddening voice ceased. 

He walked on in a relieved daze. Not 
even the dim mist of the Messenger on 
his shoulder detracted from the sheer ecstasy of stillness. He murmured meaningless words of gratitude, felt an impulse to shout a song. 

Evanie, resting on a fallen log, 
glanced up at him as he approached. 

"I'm going back to Urbs!" he cried 
wildly. "I can't stand this!" 

"You can't! I won't let you ! Please — 
I can rid you of it, given time. Give me 
a little time, Tom. Fight it!" 



"I won't fight it! I'm going back!" 

He turned frantically to rush on south, 
in any direction that would silence that 
clicking, tickling voice of torment. 

"Go back to Urbs!" it ticked. "Go 
back to Urbs!" 

Evanie seized his arm. 

"Please — please, Tom !" 

He tugged away and spun around. 
What he immediately saw in the darkness halted him. In a luminous arc, not 
three yards distant, spun a second Messenger — and in a mad moment of perversity, he was almost glad! 

"Here's one for you!" he said grimly. 
"Now fight it!" 

The girl's face turned pale and terror 
stricken. "Oh, no! No!" she murmured. 
"I'm so tired — so tired!" She turned 
frightened brown eyes on him. "Then 
stay, Tom. Don't distract me now. I need 
- — all nfy strength." 

It was too late. The second horror had 
poised itself and struck, glowing mistily 
against Evanie's soft bronze hair. 

She stood frozen, only a low moan of 
anguish twisting her lips. 

Connor felt a surge of sympathy that 
not even the insanity-breeding Messenger could overcome. 

"Evanie!" he cried huskily. "Oh, my 
God! What is it saying?" 

Her eyes were wide and terrified. 

"It says 'Sleep — Sleep!' It says 'The 
world grows dark — your eyes are closing.' " She clenched her fists in frenzy. 
"It isn't fair ! I could light it off — I could 
fight both of them off, given time! The 
Master — the Master wants me — unable 
— to help you." 

Her eyes grew misty. 

Suddenly she collapsed at his feet. 

For a long minute Connor stared 
down at her. Then he bent over, gathered her in his arms, and moved out into 
the darkness toward Urbs. 

Evanie was a light burden, but that 
first mile down the mountain was a torment that was burned into Connor's 
memory forever. The Messenger was 
still as he began the return, and he managed well enough by the starlight to fol= 



72 FANTASTIC SI 

low the trail. But a thousand feet of 
mountain unevenness and inequalities of 
footing just about exhausted him. 

TJIS BREATH shortened to painful 
" gasps, and his whole body, worn 
out after two nights of sleeplessness, 
protested with aches and twinges. At 
last, still cradling Evanie in his arms, he 
-sank exhausted on the moss-covered bole 
of a fallen tree that glowed with misty 
fox-fire. 

Instantly the Messenger took up its 
distractingly irritating admonition. 

"Go back to Urbs,,!" it clicked deep in 
his brain. "Go back to Urbs! Go back 
to Urbs!" 

He bore the torment for five minutes 
before he rose in wild obedience and 
staggered south with his burden. 

But another quarter mile found him 
reeling and dizzy with exhaustion, lurching into trees and bushes, scratched, 
torn, and ragged. Once Evanie's hair 
caught in the thorns of some shadowy 
shrub and - when he paused to disentangle it, the Messenger took up its maddening refrain. He tore the girl loose 
with a desperately convulsive gesture 
and blundered on along the trail. 

He was on the verge of collapse after 
a single mile, and Urbs lay — God only 
knew how far south. He shifted Evanie 
from his arms to his shoulder, but the 
thought- of abandoning her never entered his mind. 

But the time came when his wearied 
body could go no further. Letting Evanie's limp body slide to the ground he 
closed his eyes in agony as the torturing 
voice of the Messenger resumed as he 
dropped beside her. 

"I can't!" he croaked as though the 
Messenger or its distant controller could 
hear him. "Do you want to kill me?" 

The sublimity of relief! The voice was 
still, and he relaxed in an ecstasy of rest. 
He realized to the full the sweetness of 
simple silence, the absolute perfection 
of merely being quiet. 
- He sighed, drawing in great breaths 
to fill his straining lungs. 



)RY MAGAZINE 

He slumped full length to the ground, 
then, and in a moment was sleeping as 
profoundly as Evanie herself. 

When Tom Connor awoke to broad 
day a heap of fruit and a shallow wooden bowl of water were beside him. Connor guessed that they had been placed 
there by the metamorphs that roamed 
the hills. 

They were still loyal to Evanie, watching out for her. 

He ate hungrily, then lifted Evanie's 
bronze head, tilting the water against 
her lips. She choked, swallowed a 
mouthful or two, but moved no more 
than that. 

The damage to his clothing from his 
plunge through the darkness was slight. 

His shirt was torn at sleeves and 
shoulder, and his trousers were ripped 
in several places. Evanie's soft hair 
was tangled with twigs and burrs, and 
a thorn had scratched her cheek. The 
elastic that bound her trouser leg to 
her left ankle was broken, and the garment flapped loosely. The bared ankle 
was crossed by a reddened gash. 

He poured what remained of the 
water over the wound to wash away any 
dirt or foreign substance that might be 
in it. That was all his surgery encompassed. 

VII 

B Y DAYLIGHT the Messenger was 
only a blur, visible out of the corner of 
his eye like a tear in the eye itself. The 
demon on Evanie's shoulder was a shifting iridescence no more solid than the 
heat-waves above a summer road. He 
stared compassionately down on the 
still, white face of the girl, and it was 
at that moment that the Messenger took 
up its inexorable, clicking chant: "Go 
back to Urbs! Go back to Urbs!" 

He sighed, lifted the girl in arms 
still aching, and took up his laborious 
journey. Yard by yard he trudged along 
the uneven trail. When the blood began 
to pound in his ears he rested again, and 
the silent Messenger on his shoulder re


THE OLA 

mained silent. Only when his strength 
had returned did its voice take up the 
admonition. 

Connor hated the Master now, hated 
him for these past hours of torture, and 
for the pallor of Evanie's cheeks, and 
her body limp in his arms. 

The sun rose higher, struck down 
burning rays on his body. The perspiration that dampened his clothes was 
warm and sticky while he toiled along, 
and clammily cold while he rested. Shiny 
beads of it were on the brow of the 
unconscious girl, while his own face was 
covered with trickling rivulets that 
stung his eyes and bore salty drops to 
his lips. And the air was hot — hot! 

Staggering south, resting, plowing 
on again, it was near sunset when he 
approached the Weed village where they 
had emerged from the pneumatic tube. 
A man digging before a cottage stared 
at him and fled through the door. On the 
steps of the building that housed the 
tube, half a dozen idlers moved hastily 
within, and he glimpsed the panicstricken nondescript who had released 
him from the freight cylinder. 

Connor strode wearily to the steps 
and deposited Evanie. lie glared at the 
pale faces beyond the door. 

"I want food," he snapped. "And wine. 
Do you hear? Wine!" 

Someone slipped timidly past him. In 
a moment he was back with coarse 
brown bread and cold meat, and a bottle 
of the tart wild grape wine of the region. Connor ate silently, realizing that 
eyes peered at him from every window. 
When he had finished, he poured wine 
between Evanie's lips. It was the only 
'nourishment he could give her. 

"You in there!" he called. "Can any 
of you release us from these things?" 

Evidently, that was a mistake. There 
was a terrified rustling within and a 
hurried exodus from some other door. 
The Messenger took up its refrain with 
maddening promptness. Abandoning 
hope of aid, once again he picked up 
Evanie and tramped into the darkness. 

The demon on his shoulder finally let 



K FLAME 73 

him sleep. It was just dawn when he 
awoke, and scarcely had he opened his 
eyes on this second morning of his tortuous trek when the clicking voice resumed its chant. He made no attempt to 
resist it, but rose and struggled on with 
his burden. Now he followed a clay 
road on which he could avoid tearing 
thorns and branches. 

No more than a mile from the village 
he topped a rise to view a wide black 
highway, perhaps the same over which 
he and Jan Or-m and Evanie had sped 
to Urbs just two days ago. He found the 
rubbery surface somewhat less tiring 
and managed a little more distance between rests. But the journey was painfully slow. Yet the Messenger never 
hurried him. He was permitted ample 
rest. 

Now and again vehicles hummed past, 
mostly giant trucks. Occasionally a 
speeding machine slowed as if to stop, 
but one glimpse of the mistiness on his 
shoulder sent the driver whizzing on. 
No one, apparently, dared association 
with the bearer of that dread badge of 
the Master's enmity. It was with amazement, therefore, that Connor saw a 
truck actually stopping, and heard a 
cheerful invitation to "Come on in!" 

TTE CLAMBERED laboriously into the 
cab, placing Evanie on the seat beside him, holding her against him. He 
thanked the driver, a pleasant-featured 
youth, and relaxed, silent. 

"Weed trouble, eh*?" the driver asked. 
He stared at Connor's shoulder. "Say, 
you must be a pretty important Weed to 
rate a Messenger." He glanced sideward 
at Connor and suddenly grinned. "I 
know you now! You're the fellow that 
carried the beam when hell popped Sunday. Lord ! Stood right up to the beam !" 
In his tone was deep admiration. 

Connor said nothing. 

"Well, you're in for it, all right," the 
youth resumed cheerfully. "You blew 
down some of the Master's men, and 
that's bad!" 

"What did he do with the others?" 



74 FANTASTIC SI 

Connor asked gloomily. "They couldn't 
all get away." 

"He only picked up the leaders. Nine 
of 'em. Vision didn't say what he did. 
Papers say he released some of 'em. Girl 
who thinks she looks like the Princess." 

Maris, thought Connor. And Evanie 
was the tenth of the decemvir ate. He 
himself was tossed in for good measure. 
Well, perhaps he might bargain for Evanie's release. After all, he had something to trade. 

It was mid -afternoon before they 
looked down on Kaatskill, and Connor 
realized in astonishment the distance 
over which they must have flashed in the 
freight tube. Then he forgot all else 
as Urbs Minor appeared with its thousands of towel's and, far across the valley, the misty peaks that were the colossus, Greater Urbs. 

The truck kept to the ground level. 
The mighty buildings, shielded by the 
upper streets from sight, were less spectacular here, but their vast bases seemed 
to press upon the ground like a range 
of mountains, until Connor wondered 
why the solid earth did not sink beneath 
their weight. Millions upon millions of 
tons of metal and masonry — and all of 
it as if it rested on his own brain, so 
despondent did he feel. 

Presently they were on Palace Avenue. Even the ground level of that 
mighty street was crowded. Connor already knew its almost legendary reputation. What the Via Appia was to 
Kome, or Broadway to America of yore. 
Palace Avenue now was to the world. 
Main street of the planet; highway of 
the six — no, the seven — -continents. For 
Antarctica was an inhabited continent 
now. 

When the unbelievably magnificent 
Twin Towers came into clean view the 
truck came to a halt. Connor climbed 
out and turned to pick up Evanie. 

"Thanks," he said. "You made the 
r^.d to hell a lot easier." 

Tl>e youth grinned. 

" 'S nothing. Good chances, Weed. 
You'll need 'em!" 



>RY MAGAZINE 

f^ONNOR turned for the long ascent to 
^ the Palace. He trudged up the interminable flight of steps, passing crowds 
of Urbans who stared and gave him wide 
passageway. He moved close under the 
great, brooding, diorite statue of Holland, into the north doorway of the Palace, where a guard stepped hastily aside 
to admit him. 

Through a door to his right came the 
clatter and rustle of voices and machines, engaged in the business of administering a world government. To his 
left was a closed door, and ahead the 
hall debouched into a room so colossal 
that at first it seemed an illusion. 

He strode in. Along the far wall, a 
thousand feet away, was a row of seats 
— thrones, rather — each on a dais or 
platform perhaps ten feet above the 
floor, and each apparently occupied. Perhaps fifty of them. Before the central 
one stood a group of people, and a few 
guards flanked it. Then, as he approached, he realized that all but the 
central throne were occupied only by 
images, by cleverly worked statues of 
bronze. No — two central thrones held 
living forms. 

He pushed his way roughly through 
the knot of people, carefully deposited 
Evanie on the steps ascending to the 
seat, and glared defiantly at the Master. 

For a moment, so intent was his gaze 
at the man he had come bitterly to hate, 
through all the torture of his forced trip, 
that he did not shift his eyes to the figure 
who sat beside the Master. The Princess 
of whom he had heard, he supposed — 
the beautiful, cruel Margaret of Urbs 
who, with her brother, ruled with an 
iron hand. 

But he was not interested in her now. 
Her immortal brotlier claimed all his attention, all his defiance. Just for a 
breath, though, Connor's eyes did flicker 
in her direction— and instantly he stoodstockstill, frozen, wondering if at last 
he had lest his mind. For here, before 
his staring eyes, was the most incredible 
thing he had come upon in all this incredible new world! And what held him 



THE BLACK FLAME 



75 



spellbound was not so much the utter, 
unbelievable, fantastic beauty of the 
woman — or girl— who sat upon the 
throne of Urbs, as was the fact that he 
knew her ! Gazing at her, frozen in utter 
surprise and fascination, Tom Connor 
knew in that moment that the cruel Margaret of Urbs and the inky-haired, 
white-robed girl with whom he had spent 
those unforgettable moments in the wild 
wood outside the village of Ormon were 
one and the same! 

There could be no possible doubt of 
that, though in her emerald green eyes 
now was no friendly light as she looked 
down at him haughtily, in the same 
manner she might show her distaste for 
some crawling thing that had annoyed 
her. But not even her changed expression, not even the rich garb that had 
replaced her white robe of sylvan simplicity, could alter the fact that here before Tom Connor was his woman of the 
woods, his girl of mystery, the girl who 
had unfolded to him the history of this 
more and more astonishing age into 
which Fate had drawn him. 

Not by the slightest flicker of a long, 
black, curling eyelash did she show that 
she had even seen Connor before. But 
even in his own quick resentment that 
swiftly followed his frozen moment of 
surprise, the man from another age uncomfortably realized that her fascination for him, the sway of her bewildering beauty, was as great as it had been 
the first moment he had gazed upon her. 

His own predicament — Evanie, everything — was forgotten, as if he were hypnotized. 

Instead of a gauzy white robe that 
was in itself revealing, but with a touch 
of poetry and mysticism, she now wore 
the typical revealing costume of Urbs 
—rose bodice, and short kirtle of golden 
scales. And that hair of hers— never 
would Connor forget it — so black that it 
glinted blue in the light. Nor would he 
even forget her skin, so transparently 
clear, with its tint like the patina over 
ancient silver-bronze. 

Looking at her now, Connor could see 



how Maris might claim a resemblance, 
but it was no more than the resemblance 
of a candle to the sun. Evanie was beautiful, too, but her loveliness was that of 
a human being, while the beauty of this 
girl who sat upon a throne was unearthly, unbelievable, immortal. 

She sat with her slim legs thrust carelessly before her, her elbow on the arm 
of her chair, her chin in her cupped 
hand, and gazed indifferently from 
strange sea-green eyes into the vastness 
of the giant chamber. Never once did 
she glance at Connor after her first 
swift distasteful survey. 

Her exquisite features were expressionless, or expressive only of complete 
boredom. Though there did seem to 
Connor that there was the faintest trace 
of that unforgettable mockery in the 
set of her perfect lips. Before he could 
tear his gaze away from her she moved 
slightly. With the movement something 
flamed on her breast — a great flower of 
seven petals that flashed and glistened 
in a dozen colors, as if made of jewels. 

It took all of Connor's will power to 
keep his eyes from her, even though in 
that moment of long silence that had 
fallen in the throne room with his entry, 
he was resenting her, loathing her for 
what she was instead of what he had 
thought her to be. 

Deliberately he faced the Master, head 
up, defiant. Let the Master — let his 
Princess sister — do* what they pleased. 

rpHE MAN at whom Connor stared, the 
man whose features he had seen before on Evanie's coin, seemed no older 
than the middle twenties. He was darkeyed, and his black hair fell in a smooth 
helmet below his ears. 

The eyes were strange, piercing, 
shrewd, as if they alone had aged, as 
if they were the receptacles of these 
centuries of experience. The mouth was 
set in a thin, cold line and yet, strangely 
enough, there was a humorous quirk to 
it. Or not so strangely, either, decided 
Connor. A man must have a sense of 
humor to survive seven centuries. 



FANTASTIC STORY MAGAZINE 



And then a deep, resonant voice 
sounded as the Master spoke. 

"I see, Thomas Connor," he said ironically, "that you received my Messenger 
hospitably. And this is little Evanie!" 
His voice changed. "Good blood," he 
mused. "The mingling of the blood of 
Martin Sair with that of Montmerci." 

Connor glared belligerently. "Release 
ua from these vicious Messengers of 
yours, will you?" he demanded angrily. 
"We're here." 

The Master nodded mildly, and spoke 
briefly into a mouthpiece on a black 
table beside him. There was a moment's 
pause, then a tingling shock as the unbound energies of the Messeng'er 
grounded through Connor's body. Evanie quivered and moaned as the thing 
on her shoulder vanished, but she lay as 
quiet as ever. 

Connor shook himself. He was free! 
He flashed an angry frown at the impassive Master, but his eyes kept straying back to the Princess, who still had 
not even glanced at him after that one 
first instant. 

"Well," said the Master quietly, "your 
revolution was a trifle abortive, wasn't 
it?" 

"Up to now!" snapped Connor. 

His hatred suddenly overwhelmed 
him. The impulse for revenge shook him 
bodily. Swiftly stooping, he snatched 
Evanie's revolver from her belt, and 
held the trigger while twelve shots spat 
full at the Master's face in a continuous 
steaming roar. 

The steam moved lazily away. The 
Master sat without change of expression, uninjured, while from far above a 
few splinters of glass from a shattered 
skylight tinkled about him. Of course, 
Connor reflected bitterly, the man would 
be protected by an inductive field. Glass 
had been able to pass through that inductive field, where Connor's bullets 
could not, but their glass was a dielectric. 

He cast the empty gun aside and 
stared sullenly at the man on the throne. 
Then, despite his efforts, his gaze was 



again drawn to the Princess. 

She was no longer looking abstractedly into vacancy. At the crash of the 
shots she had shifted slightly, without 
raising her chin from her hand, and was 
watching him. Their glances crossed. 
It was like the tingle of the Messenger's 
discharge to him as he met the cool 
green eyes, inscrutable and expressionless and utterly disinterested. And in 
them was no slightest hint of recognition! For reasons of her own she did 
not mean to recognize him. Well, two 
could play at that game. 

"Your impulses take violent form," 
said the Master coldly. "Why do you, 
who claim to be a newcomer to this age, 
hate me so?" 

"Hate you?" Connor echoed fiercely. 
"Why shouldn't I? Didn't you put me 
through two days and nights of hell 
with your damned Messenger?" 

"But there would have been no torment had you obeyed immediately." 

"But Evanie!" Connor snapped. "See 
what you've done to her!" 

"She was interfering. I didn't want 
her here, particularly, but she might 
have released you from the Messenger. 
If you'd left her to herself, I would have 
freed n"er within a few hours." 

"Kind, aren't you?" sneered Connor. 
"You're so confident in your own powers 
that you don't even punish revolt. Well, 
you're a tyrant, nevertheless, and some 
day you'll get more than you bargain 
for. / could have done it myself!" 

He glanced again at the Princess. 
Was there the faintest flicker of interest 
in her imperious eyes? 

"And what would you have done," 
queried the Master amiably, "if you had 
been running the revolution?" 

"Plenty!" retorted Connor. "In the 
first place, I'd never have shipped 
weapons into Urbs through the public 
tubes. You were bound to discover that, 
and surprise was our greatest ally. I'd 
have had 'em made right here, or near 
here. There must be Weed factories 
around, and if not, I'd have bought one." 

"Go on," said the Master interestedly. 



THIS BLACK FLAME 



77 



"What else?" 

"I'd have had a real organization — 
not this cumbersome leader upon leader 
pyramid. I'd have laid real plans, planted spies in the Palace. And finally, your 
deflectors. I didn't know of them, or we 
could have won even as things were. My 
— associates — forgot, rather carelessly, 
to mention them." 

The Master smiled. "That was an error. If you had known of them, what 
would you have done?" 

"I'd have used wooden bullets instead 
of metal ones," said Connor boldly. 
"Your induction field won't stop wood. 
And your ionic beams — why the devil 
couldn't we have used metal screen armor? We could have closed the circuit 
with that instead of with our bodies!" 

TIE WAS aware, though he steadfastly 
refused to look at her, that the 
Princess was watching him now with 
undisguised mockery, her lovely lips 
parted in the ghost of a smile. 

"True," said the Master with a curious expression. "You could have." He 
frowned. "1 did not believe the stories 
1 first heard of you — that you were a 
Sleeper who had awakened after a slepp 
of a thousand years. They were too 
fantastic for belief. T thought you were 
meaning to capitalize on the Sleep insome way known only to yourself, since 
I understand you had. no bank deposit 
to draw interest for you and make yon 
a wealthy man. Now 1 am inclined to 
believe you have come from another age 
— an age of wisdom — and you're a dangerous man. Thomas Connor. You're a 
brave man to bait me as you do, and a 
strong one, but dangerous ; too dangerous. Yet I'm rather sorry your courage 
and strength lias been bred out of the 
race." 

"What are you going to do?" 

"I'm going to kill you," said the Master softly. "I'm sorry. Were it not for 
Evanie, 1 might be tempted to ask for 
your" oath of allegiance and release you, 
but I can't trust a man who loves a 
Weed woman. It's a chance I dare not 



take, though I bitterly regret losing your 
blood and your ancient knowledge. If it 
consoles you, know that I intend to free 
Evanie. She's harmless to me. Any 
trouble she might cause can be easily 
handled. But you — you're different." 

"Thanks," retorted Connor. 

Like a compass needle his eyes did 
return to the face of the Princess, then. 
Even now, condemned to die for the 
second time in his strange life, he gazed 
fascinated at her, smiling at her with an 
echo of her own mockery. 

"I don't suppose," said the Master 
hopefully, "that you'd consent to — marry Evanie, and perpetuate your blood 
before you die. I need that ancient 
strain of yours. Our race has grown 
weak." 

"I would not!" Connor said. 

"Tell me!" said the other in sudden 
eagerness. "Is it true, as an Ormon 
prisoner told us, and which I scorned to 
believe, having then no faith in this 
thousand-year Sleep, that you understand the ancient mathematics? Calculus, logarithms, and such lost branches?" 

"It's quite true^' snapped Connor. 
"Who told you?" 

- "Your Ormon chemist. Would you 
consent to impart that knowledge? The 
world needs it." 

"For my life, perhaps." 

Tlie Master hesitated, frowning. 

"I'm sorry," he said at last. "Invaluable as the knowledge is, the danger you, 
personally, present, outweighs it. I could 
trick you out of yobr secrets. I could 
promise you life, get your information, 
then quietly kill you. I do not stoop to 
that. If you desire, your knowledge goes 
to the grave with you." 

"Thanks again," retorted Connor. 
"You might remember that I could have 
concealed my dangerous character, too. 
I needn't have pointed out the weakness 
in your defenses." 

"I already knew them. I also know 
the weaknesses of Weed mentality." He 
paused. "I'm truly sorry, but — thisseems to be the end of our interview." 
He turned as if to gesture to the guards 



78 



FANTASTIC STORY MAGAZINE 



along the wall. 

Margaret of Urbs flashed a strange, 
inscrutable glance at Connor, and leaned 
toward the Master. She spoke in low, 
inaudible tones, but emphatically, insistently. The Master looked up at 
Connor. 

"I reconsider," he said coolly. "I grant 
you your life for the present on one condition — that you make no move against 
me while you are in the Palace. I do 
not ask your word not to escape. I only 
warn you that a Messenger will follow. 
Do you agree?" 

Connor thought only a moment. 

"I do." 

"Then you will remain within the 
Palace." The Master snapped an order 
to a guard. "I will send doctors to attend 
little Evanie. That's all." 

The guard, as tall a man as Connor 
himself, stepped forward and gathered ■ 
Evanie in his arms. Connor followed 
him, but could not resist a backward 
glance at the Princess, who once more 
sat staring idly into space. But in his 
mind was the thought now, exultant in 
spite of his resentment, that at least she 
had not forgotten him, or those hours 
together in the woods. 

They moved into the hall, and into an 
elevator that flashed upward with sudden and sickening acceleration. He had 
glimpses of floor after floor through the 
glass doors as they mounted high into 
the North Tower. 

The motion ceased. Connor followed 
the guard into a room lit by the red 
glow of sunset, and watched as he deposited Evanie on a white-covered bed, 
then turned, and threw open a door. 
"That is yours," the guard said briefly, 
and departed. 

Luxury breathed through the perfumed air of the-rooms, but Connor had 
no time for such observations . He bent 
anxiously over the pallid Evanie, wondering miserably why the rel'ease of the 
Messenger had not awakened her. He 
was still gazing when a knock sounded, 
and two doctors entered. 

One, the younger, set instantly to 



work examining the scratch on the girl's 
ankle, while the other pried open her 
eyes, parted her still lips, bent close to 
listen to her breathing. 

"Brain-burnt," he announced. "Brain 
burnt by a vitergon — the Messenger. Severe electrolepsis." 

"Lord!" Connor muttered anxiously. 
"Is it — is it very serious?" 

"Serious? Bah!" The older man spun 
on him. "It's exactly what happens to 
Sleeper^ — paralysis of the pre-Rolandic 
areas, the will, the consciousness. Like — 
if I'm properly informed — what happened to you ! Jt might be serious if we 
let her sleep for half a century, not 
otherwise." He stepped to an ebony table beside the bed, decanting a ruby 
liquid into a tumbler. "Here," he said. 
"We'll try a good stiff stimulant." 

He poured the ruddy fluid between 
.Evanie's lips, and when the last drop had 
vanished, stood over her watching. She 
moved convulsively and moaned in 
agony. 

"Hah!" said the doctor. "That'll burn 
some life into her!" The girl shuddered 
and opened dazed and pain-racked eyes. 
"So! You can handle her now," he called 
ta the younger man, and moved out of 
the door. 

"Evanie!" murmured Connor tensely. 
"Are you all right?" 
The dazed eyes rested on him. 
"I burn! Water — oh, please — water!" 

VIII 

ToM CONNOR glanced a silent question at the doctor. At his nod, Connor 
seized the empty tumbler and looked 
frantically for water. He found it beyond a door, where a silent stream 
gushed from the mouth of a grotesque 
face into a broad basin. 

Evanie drank eagerly, thirstily, when 
he brought it to her. She stared in bewilderment about the luxurious room, 
and turned questioning eyes on Connor. 

"Where — " she began. 

"In Urbs. In the Palace." 

Comprehension dawned. 



THE BLA 

"The Messengers! Oh, my God!" She 
shivered in fright. "How long have I — " 

"Just two days, Evanie. 1 carried you 
here." 

"What is to be done with us?" 

"I don't know, dear. But you're safe." 

She frowned a moment in the effort 
to compose her still dazed and bewildered mind, 

"Well," she murmured finally, "nothing can be done about it. I'm ashamed to 
have been so weak. Was he very angry?" 

"He didn't seem so." The memory of 
the Master's impassive face rose in his 
mind, and with it the vision of the exquisite features of the Princess. 

"I suppose the girl who sits on his 
right is the Princess, isn't she?" he 
asked. "Who is she?" 

Evanie nodded. "Everyone knows 
that. On his left sits Martin Sair, the 
Giver of Life, and on his right — Why 
do you ask that?" She glanced up troubled, suspicious. 

"Because she saved my life. She intervened for me." 

"Tom!" Evanie's voice was horrorfilled. "Tom, that was Margaret of Urbs, 
the Black Flame!" Her eyes were terrified. "Tom, she's dangerous. You mustn't 
even look at her. She's driven men — 1 
don't know how many — to suicide. She's 
killed men, she's tortured them. Don't 
ever go near her, Tom ! If she saved you, 
it wasn't out of mercy, because she's 
merciless — EJithless — utterly pitiless!" 

Scarcely conscious as yet, the girl was 
on the verge of hysteria. Her voice grew 
shrill, and Connor glanced apprehensively at the young doctor's face. 

Evanie turned ashen pale. "I— feel — 
dizzy," she choked. "I'm going to — " 

The doctor sprang forward. "You 
mustn't!" he snapped. "We can't let her 
sleep again. We must walk her ! 
Quickly!" 

Between them they dragged the collapsing girl from the bed, walking her 
up and down the chamber. A measure 
of strength returned, and she walked 
weakly between them, back and forth. 



K FLAME 79 

Then, abruptly, they paused at the 
sound of a sharp rap on the chamber 
door. 

The doctor called out a summons. Two 
Urban guards in glittering metal strode 
through the entrance, and stood like 
images on either side of it. One of them 
intoned slowly, deep as an anthem:
"Margarita, Urbis Regina, Sororque 
Domini!" 

The Princess! Connor and the doctor 
stood frozen, and even Evanie' raised 
weary eyes as the Princess entered, 
striding imperiously into the room with 
the scaly gold of her kirtle glittering 
crimson in the last rays of the sun. She 
swept her cold eyes over the startled 
group, and suddenly her exquisite features flashed into a flame of anger. The 
glorious lips parted. 

"You fool!" she spat. "You utter 
fool V 

Connor flushed in sudden anger, then 
realized that the Princess addressed, 
not him, but the doctor at Evanie's left, 
who was fear-stricken and pallid. 

"You fool !" repeated Margaret of 
Urbs. "Walking an electroleptic ! Put 
her to bed instantly. Let her sleep. Do 
you want to risk brain fever?" 

'T'HE frightened physician moved to 
obey, but Connor interposed. 
"Wait a moment." He shot an accusing glance at the Princess. "Do you 
know anything about this? Are you a 
doctor?" 

. He received a cobl glance from her 
narrowed green eyes. "Do you think," 
she drawled, "that I've learned nothing 
in seven hundred years?" And he alone 
caught the full implication of her words. 
She was subtly reminding him of how 
once before she had given him evidence 
of how vast was her knowledge. She 
turned imperiously. "Obey!" she 
snapped. 

Connor stood aside as the doctor complied in panic. 

"Where's Kringar?" the Princess demanded.
"Your Highness," babbled the medico, 



80 FANTASTIC ST 

"he gave the girl a stimulant and left. 
He said — " 

"All right. Get out." She nodded at 
the impassive guards. "You, too." 

The door closed behind them. Margaret of Urbs bent over Evanie, now 
fully conscious, but pale aa death. She 
placed a dainty hand on the girl's forehead. 

"Sleep," she said softly. 

"Leave me here alone, please," Evanie 
begged, trembling. "I'm afraid of you. 
I don't trust you, and I won't sleep. I'm 
afraid to sleep again." 

Connor stood miserably irresolute. 
While he hesitated, the Princess fixed 
her eyes on Evanie'B; they glowed emerald in the evening dusk as she repeated, 
"Sleep!" 

He saw the fear vanish from Evanie's 
face, leaving her features as blank as 
those of an image- Then she was sleeping. 

The Princess faced Tom Connor 
across the bed. She took a black cigarette from a box on the ebony table. It 
glowed magically as she removed it, and 
she blew a plume of perfumed smoke at 
him. 

"Worried, aren't you?" she asked 
mockingly. 

"You know I am." 

"Well, rest your mind. I mean no 
harm to Evanie." 

"But do you know what you're doing?" 

She laughed, low laughter soft as rain 
in a poo!. 

"See here," she said, still with a taunt 
in her eyes, "I conceived the vitergons. 
Martin Sair created them, but / conceived them. I know what harm they 
can do, and I know the cure for that 
harm. Do you trust me?" 

"Not entirely." 

"Well, you have small choice." She 
exhaled another cloud of scented smoke. 
"Your little Weed is safe." She moved 
toward the adjoining room. "There's a 
bath in here," she said. "Use it, and 
then put on some Urban clothes. I'm inclined to dine with you this evening." 



>RY MAGAZINE 

He was startled. He stared back at 
the mocking perfection of her face, but 
the green eyes carried no readable expression, as she came closer. 

"Why?" he asked. 

"Perhaps to recall a more pleasant 
meeting," she said gently. "Oh, I have 
not forgotten you, if that is what you 
are thinking. I recall every word of that 
day in the woods, but it may be better 
if you forget it, publicly. Margaret of 
Urbs does not care to have her private 
business broadcast to the city. Nor is it 
the affair of anyone here, or any business of yours, that I choose to get away 
from them all occasionally, with only 
the birds and the trees to bear me company. You will do well to bear that in 
mind, Thomas Connor!" 

Suddenly her voice took on a taunting 
note, and the mockery in the emerald 
eyes was plain. "Perhaps," she said, "I 
have another reason for commanding 
you to dine with me. I may want to steal 
your knowledge, and then kill you. I 
might have more than one reason for 
wanting to do that, but you fired a dozen 
shots at me on Sunday, Thomas Connor, 
as I stood on the balcony of the Tower. 
I do not fail to repay such debts. 

"It will take more than you to steal 
what I will not give," he growled, and 
turned into his room, closing the door. 

TTE STEPPED instantly to the hall 
door, opened it and gazed squarely 
into the impassive eyes of an Urban 
guard standing quietly opposite. So he 
was being watched! 

He turned back into the chamber, 
stripped, and entered the water of the 
pool, reveling in the refreshing coolness. 
As he bathed he could look out a window, 
and saw that the colossal Palace was 
built as a hollow square. Opposite him 
rose the mountainous spire of the South 
Tower, and far below was the wide pool 
and green-bordered walks of the Inner 
Gardens. 

Drying his glowing body, he glanced 
distastefully at the sweat-stained pile 
of Weed clothing on the floor. In a closet 



THE BLACK FLAMJs 



he found Urban dress. It gave him a 
queer, masquerade-like feeling to don 
the barbaric metal coreselet and kirtle, 
but the garments were cool, and befitted 
his great frame. 

Ready at last, he flung open the door 
to Evanie's room. 

Margaret of Urbs sat cross-legged on 
the bed, beside Evanie, smoking her 
black cigarette. Her green eyes passed 
appraisingly over Connor, and the glint 
of mockery was again in their depths. 

"I always thought the ancient sculptors exaggerated their contemporaries' 
physiques," she said, smiling. "J was 
wrong. . . . But you're to kneel when you 
enter my presence, Thomas Connor, 
You didn't before." 

"And I don't now. As an enemy, I owe 
you no such respect." 

"As a gentleman you do, however. But 
never mind. I'm hungry. Come." 

"Why can't we eat here? I don't want 
to leave Evanie." 

"Evanie will be dull company for a 
dozen hours more. I'll send a maid to 
undress and bathe her." 

"You're very considerate, aren't 
you ?" 

She laughed maliciously. 

"I have no quarrel with her. But I 
have with you. Come!" 

The glorious green eyes swept him. 
Both eyes and voice — a voice that now 
seemed to glory in malice — were so different from those of the girl of the 
woods that it was hard for Tom Connor 
to believe they were the same. But he 
knew they were. And now that he and 
she were alone every gesture seemed to 
admit that. 

She rose without a glance at Evanie's 
still, white face and Connor followed her 
reluctantly past the guard, whose challenge she silenced with a peremptory 
word, and over to the bank of elevators. 

"Where to?" he asked as the cage 
dropped swiftly. 

"To a room of mine in the South Tower, I think. We'll have to go all the way 
down and walk across." 

The cage came to sickening halt. He 



followed her through the vast emptiness 
of the room of thrones, noting curiously 
that both her own throne and that of the 
Master were now occupied by cleverly 
executed bronze figures. He paused to 
examine the effigy of the Princess, wondering how long ago it had been cast. 

"Third century," she said as if in 
answer to his thought. "Five hundred 
years ago. I was a child of two hundred 
and twenty then — and happier." Sardonic amusement was in her face and 
manner. "There was no Black Flame 
in those days. I was the madcap Princess 
-Peggy then, reckless and daring, but 
sweet and noble. Or so they thought." 

"I'm sure you deserved the reputation," Connor observed acidly. He meant 
to follow her lead in whatever she said 
or did, She would have no complaint 
that he was the first to mention their 
previous meeting. If she said no more 
about it, it would not be mentioned at 
all. 

She flashed her green eyes on him, 
eyes as icy as the green oap over Antarctica. 

"I'm sure I deserve it no longer," she 
said in tones so cold that they startled 
him. "Come on." 

There was something fascinating, almost hypnotic, about this weirdly beautiful being. " 

"I'd rather dine with your image 
there," he remarked dryly. 

11/f ARGARET of Urbs laughed and led 
Connor through a door behind the 
line of thrones. 

"Martin Sair's laboratory," she explained, gesturing at the chaotic confusion of glassware and microscopes. 
"And this — " passing into a chamber beyond — "is mine." 

The place seemed more like a luxurious, sumptuously furnished library than 
a laboratory. There were shelves upon 
shelves of books, hundreds of them obviously ancient, a great vision screen, 
a delicately inlaid desk, and here and 
there bits of statuary. 

"Laboratory!" he echoed. "What do 



FANTASTIC STORY MAGAZINE 



you do here?" 

"I think. When I want to work I use 
Martin's." She picked up a white carving from the desk. "See here— some of 
your ancient work." She added a trifle 
sadly, "We have no artists able to create 
such beauty today. It's a tragedy that 
the arms were broken. During the Dark 
Centuries, I suppose." 

Connor looked at the exquisite little 
ivory replica of the Venus de Milo and 
laughed. 

"Arms broken !" he scoffed. "That's a 
copy of an ancient Greek statue of 
Praxiteles. The arms were broken two 
thousand years before my time!" 

"A copy! Where's the original? I 
want it!" 

"It was in the Louvre, in Paris." 

"Paris is in ruins. Do you know where 
the Louvre stood?" 

"Yes." 

"Then tell me! I'll have it searched 
for. Tell me!" 

He gazed into eyes sincerely eager; 
the eyes now of the white-clad girl of 
the woods who had lolled with him on 
a mossy, woodland bank and told him 
stories of the ages. That girl had loved 
beauty, too; had been seeking it, matching her own reflection in the black pool. 
It amazed him that now in her role as 
the frigid princess she could still be so 
avid for beauty. 

"That's a bit of information I withhold," he said slowly, "until I can trade 
it for something else I may want. Evanie's safety, or my own." 

The mocking light returned to her 
eyes. "You amuse me, Weed!" she said 
curtly. "But very well." She led the way 
to the South Tower elevators. 

She was silent during the long ride to 
the very pinnacle of the tower. They 
emerged into a small chamber walled 
on every side in glass, and Connor stood 
in awe as the city spread out before 
them. The palace overtopped even the 
colossal structures around the Park. He 
gazed speechlessly at the mighty stretch 
of peaks outlined in light. 

The Princess turned to a black


screened box. 

"Send dinner to the tower," she ordered. "I want— oh, anything. And send 
Sora to the room of Evanie Sair." 

She flung herself carelessly onto a 
purple couch along a glass wall, and 
Connor seated himself. 

"Now," she said, "what will you take 
for your knowledge?" 

"I won't bargain with you. I don't 
trust you." 

She laughed. 

"You see me through Evanie's eyes, 
Tom Connor, and once — well, once I 
thought you were attracted to me. But 
no matter. We will not again speak of 
that time, though it does seem odd that 
Fate should have had me set my Triangle 
down where you were. When I was just 
wandering restlessly, aimlessly, seeking 
peace in loveliness. . . . It's too bad you 
fancy yourself in love with Evanie. For 
I assure you she doesn't love you." 

"That's not true!" he flared. 

CHE laughed, and instantly her touch 
^ of wistfulness was gone, to be replaced by wickedness. 

"Be careful," she mocked, "or I'll 
exact payment for that insult as well. 
But it was no lie." 

He controlled his anger. "Why do you 
say that?" 

"Because when I forced her to sleep, 
frightened as she was, she didn't turn 
to you. She fought me herself. If she 
had loved you, she'd have instinctively 
called you for help." 

"I don't believe you." 

"Then you're a foot," she observed indifferently, and turned from him disinterestedly at the entry of two servants 
bearing food. 

They slipped a table between the two 
and served a sumptuous repast, with 
dishes Connor failed to recognize. He 
ate hungrily, but the Princess, despite 
her professed hunger, picked and chose 
and ate scarcely anything. It was a silent meal, but afterward, smoking one 
of the black cigarettes, he prepared to 
ask certain questions. 



THE BLACK FLAME 



She forestalled him. With green eyes 
glowing sardonically, she looked straight 
at him. 

"Why do you love Evanie instead of 
me?" she asked. 

"You? Because you are not what I 
thought you were. Instead of being pure 
and sweet, you revel in evil. That is not 
hearsay; it is the historical record of 
your seven hundred years. For that I 
hate you, thoroughly and completely." 

She narrowed her eyes. "Then you 
hate without reason," she said. "Am I 
not more powerful than Evanie, more 
intelligent, stronger, and even, I think, 
more beautiful?" 

"You're outrageously, incredibly, fantastically beautiful!" he cried, as if the 
acknowledgment were wrenched from 
him against his will. "You're perhaps 
the most beautiful woman since Helen of 
Troy, and the most dangerous. And I 
hate you." 

"Why?" 

"Because of your lack of a little factor 
called character. I concede your beauty 
and your brilliance, but Evanie is sweet, 
kind, honest, and lovable. One loves 
character, not characteristics." 

"Character!" she echoed. "You know 
nothing of my character. I have a hundred characters! No one can be so gentle as I— nor so cruel." 

The faintest ripple of a mocking smile 
crossed her exquisite features, and then 
they were suddenly pure as an angel's. 
Without rising she kicked the switch of 
a vision screen with a dainty, sandaled 
toe. 

"Control," she said as it glowed. A 
face appeared. 

> "A vitergon set tell to this room," 
she said cryptically, and then to Connor 
as the face vanished: "There is no scanner here. This chamber and Joaquin's 
in the North Tower are the only two in 
Urbs lacking them." 
"What of it?" 

"It means, Thomas Connor, that we 
are in utter privacy." 

He frowned, puzzled. Abruptly he 
started back in his chair as a flash of 



iridescence flickered., A Messenger ! And 
almost with his start the thing was upon 
him. 

"Tell!" it creaked in his brain. "Tell! 
Tell! Tell! Tell!" 

He sprang erect. 

"Take it off!" he roared. 

"When I have your knowledge of 
Venus," his tormentor said carelessly. 

"Take it off, or—" 

"Or what?" Her smile was guileless, 
sweet, innocent. . 

"This!" he blazed, and covered the 
space between them in a bound, his right 
hand clutching the delicate curve of her 
throat, his left pressing her shoulders 
fiercely down against the cushions. 

"Take it off!" he bellowed. 

CUDDENLY there was a sound behind 
^ him, the grating of doors, and he 
was torn away, held by four grim-faced 
guards. Of course ! The operator of the 
Messenger could hear his words. He 
should have remembered that. 

The Black Flame pushed herself to a 
sitting position, and her face was no 
angel's, but the face of a lovely demon. 
Green hell glittered in her eyes, but she 
only reached shakily for the vision 
switch. 

"Tell Control to release," she choked 
huskily, and faced Tom Connor. 

The Messenger tingled and vanished. 
The Princess rose unsteadily, but her 
glorious eyes burned cold as she 
snatched a weapon from the nearest 
guard. 

"Get out, all of you!" she snapped. 
The men backed away. Connor faced 
her. 

*I should have killed you!" he muttered. "For humanity's sake." 

"Yes, you should have, Thomas Connor." Her tones were bitter cold. "For 
then you would have died quickly and 
mercifully for murder, but now — now 
you die in the way I choose, and it will 
be neither quick nor merciful. I cannot — " her voice shook — -"bear the touch 
of violence!" Her free hand rubbed her 
throat. "For this you will suffer!" 



84 



FANTASTIC STORY MAGAZINE 



He shrugged. "It was worth it- I 
know your character now ! I no longer 
have to guess." 

Mockery gleamed in her eyes. 

"Do you?" Her face changed suddenly, and again it was soft and pure and 
wistful. "Do you ?" she repeated, in tones 
that were sad, but held that bell-like 
quality he so well remembered. "You 
don't. Do you think the Black Flame is 
the true Margaret of Urbs ? Do you realize what immortality means?" Her exquisite face was unutterably mournful 
as she thrust the weapon into her belt. 
"You think it's a' blessing, don't you? 
You wonder, don't you, why Joaquin 
has withheld it from everybody?" 

"Yes, I do. I think it's tyranny. It's 
selfish." 

"Sel fish ! Oh, God !" Her voice shook. 
"Why, he withheld it from his own 
mother. Blessing? It's a curse! I bear 
it out of my duty to Joaquin, else I'd 
have killed myself centuries ago. I still 
may, do you hear? I still may!" Her 
voice rose. 

Appalled, he stared at her. "Why?" 
he cried. 

"You ask why! Seven hundred years. 
Seven hundred years ! Denied love ! How 
do I dare love a man who ages day by 
day, until his teeth yellow and his hair 
falls out, and he's decrepit, senile, old? 
Denied children! Immortals cari't have 
children. Don't you think I'd trade immortality for motherhood ? Don't you?" 

Connor was speechless. Her voice 
rose to a tense pitch. 

"Do you know what seven hundred 
years mean? I do! It means seven centuries of friendlessness. Do you wonder 
that I run away to the woods sometimes, 
seeking the companionship, the friendship, the love, that everywhere else is . 
tlenied me? How can I make friends 
among people who vanish like ghosts? 
Who among the dry scientists of the 
Immortals is alone — and I'm boredbored — bored !" Her green eyes were ■ 
bright with tears.but when he opened 
his lips to speak, she stopped him with 
an imperious gesture. "I'm sick to death 



of immortality! I want someone who 
loves me. Someone I'd love to grow old 
with, and children to grow up beside 
me. I want — a friend!" 

She was sobbing. Impulsively he 
moved toward her, taking her hand. 

"My God!" he choked. "I'm sorry. I 
didn't understand." 

"And you — will help me?" Her exquisite features were pleading, tearstreaked. 

"The best I can," he promised. 

Her perfect lips were two rosy temptations as she drew him toward her. He 
bent to kiss her gently — and sprang 
back as if his own lips had in truth 
touched a flame. 

Laughter ! He looked into mocking 
eyes whose only tears were that of sardonic mirth ! 

"So!" she said, her red lips taunting. 
"There is the first taste, Thomas Connor, but there will be more before I kill 
you. You may go." 

IX 

"You DEVIL!" Connor gasped, and 
then whirled at a soft click behind 
him. A white envelope lay in a wire 
basket by the elevator. 

"Hand it to me," said the Flame coolly. 

He snatched it and thrust it at her, in 
a turmoil of emotion as he watched her 
read it. 

"Indeed !" she murmured. "My esteemed brother orders me to keep well 
away from you— which I shall not do — 
and commands you to his quarters at 
once." She yawned. "Take the elevator 
to any floor below the Tower and ask a 
guard. That's all." 

Yet, as the cage dropped, Connor 
could not forget that there had been 
something wistful about the Princess, at 
his last glimpse of her. Somehow, try as 
he would, he couldn't hate her quite 
whole-heartedly, and he frowned as he 
found his way to the West Chambers. A 
guard admitted him to an inner room 
and then retired quietly, leaving him 



THE BLA( 

facing the Master, who sat behind a paper-littered desk. 

"Well, what do you think of me?" the 
Master greeted him abruptly. 

Connor was taken aback, unprepared 
for the question. 

"Why," he stammered, "what would I 
naturally think of you? You dragged 
me back here by torture. You nearly 
killed Evanie. Do you think I can easily 
forget or forgive such things?" 

"After all, Thomas Connor, you participated in a revolt against me," the 
Master said suavely. "You wounded 
eleven of my men. Did the governments 
of your day deal so leniently with treason ?" 

"I've wondered why you are so easy 
on the rebels," Connor admitted. 
"Frankly, in my time, there'd have been 
a good many of us lined up against a 
wall and shot." 

The Master shook his head. "Why 
should I do that? The Weeds are the 
finest of my people. / made the only mistake — that of giving leisure to a race 
not ready for it. Leisure is what's bred 
all these minor revolutions. But does a 
father kill his favorite children?" 

"Does a son kill hjs mother?" retorted 
Connor. 

"I see my sister has been talking to 
you. Yes, I refused immortality to my 
mother. She was an old woman, ill and 
infirm. Should I have condemned her to 
added centuries of misery? Immortality 
does not^ restore youth." 

The point was incontrovertible. 

"Yet you withhold it from those who 
have youth," Connor protested. "You 
keep it selfishly as a reward, to bind to 
yourself all men of ability. You've emasculated the rest of humanity." 

"You feel that immortality is a highly 
desirable reward, don't you?" 

"I do! In spite of what your sister 
says." 

"You don't understand," said the Master patiently. "We'll pass the question 
of its desirability; it doesn't matter. But 
suppose I were to open it to the race, to 
instruct all the doctors in its secrets. 



< FLAME 85 

Wouldn't it immediately halt all development? How can evolution function if no 
one dies and no children are born?" 

That was a puzzler. 

"You could permit it after the birth of 
children," Connor said. 

"I could. But at the present birth 
rate, the land areas would provide bare 
standing room in just a century and a 
half. I could then kill off nine-tenths of 
the population, presumably, but what of 
the famines and food shortages intervening?" 

CONNOR was silent for a long moment. 

"The fault's with immortality itself," 
he burst out vehemently. "Men should 
never have learned that secret." 

"But they have learned it. Would you 
have me destroy the knowledge because 
fools envy it — and envy it mistakenly?" 

"Did you summon me here merely to 
justify your acts?" Tom Connor snapped 
in reply. 

"Exactly. You possess knowledge invaluable to me. I'd like to convince you 
of my sincerity." 

"You never will." 

"See here," said the Master, still in 
tones of calm gravity.. "Don't ever doubt 
that I could steal your knowledge. I 
know ways to encompass it, and if I 
failed, others would not fail." 

"The Princess tried that," said Connor grimly. "She will not try it again." 
He lingered a small bronze bust on the 
desk before him. ''And incidentally, 
what's to prevent me from flinging this 
bronze through your skull right now — 
killing you, instead of waiting for you 
to kill me?" 

"Your word to make no move against 
me in the Palace," reminded the Master 
gently. 

Connor's lips tightened. In that moment he realized suddenly what it was 
that had perturbed him so violently. He 
was beginning to believe the Master, 
and he didn't want to! The memory of 
the Messenger's torture was too recent; 
the picture of Evanie's helplessness was 



FANTASTIC STORY MAGAZINE 



too burning. He was being won over 
against his Will, but — 

"You win," he growled, releasing the 
bust. "Go ahead. Tell me what all this 
is leading up to. You must have some 
objective other than the indefinite perpetuation of your own power." 

The Master smiled. "I have. I plan 
the ultimate destiny of Mankind." He 
held up a hand to still Connor's quick, 
unbelieving protest. "Listen to me. I 
have bred out criminals by sterilizing, 
for many centuries, those with criminal 
tendencies. I have raised the general 
level of intelligence by sterilizing the 
feeble-minded, the incompetent. I f we 
have fewer supreme geniuses than your 
people, we have at least no stupid nor insane — and genius will come. 

"I try, to the best of my knowledge, 
to improve the race. I think I'm succeeding. At least we're far advanced over 
the barbarians of the Dark Centuries, 
and even, I believe, over the average of 
your mighty ancient people. I think 
we're happier." He paused. "Do you?" 

"In a way," Connor conceded. "But 
even happiness isn't always a fair exchange for liberty." 

"Liberty? Suppose I granted liberty? 
Suppose I abdicated? How long do you 
think it would be before every sort of 
Weed village was at war with every 
other sort? Do you want the world to 
break up into another welter of quarreling little nations? That's what I found; 
out of it I've created an empire." 

He drummed a finger on the desk, 
thoughtfully gazing at Connor. 

"Moreover, I've preserved what differences I could. The yellow race was a 
remnant; I've bred it strong again. The 
red race was gone, but the black is growing. And the tag-ends of nations — I've 
nourished them." 

"Why?" Connor demanded. "Differences are only grounds for future trouble, aren't they ?" 

"Civilization grows out of differences. 
No race can produce a high culture by 
itself. There must be an exchange of 
ideas, and that means that there must 



be differences." 

"You're very sure, aren't you?" Connor taunted. 

"I've spent centuries thinking of it. 
I'm confident I've found the truth. And 
I do the best I can." 

"I wish — " Connor paused. "T wish 
I could believe you !" 

"You can. I never lie." 

"I almost feel I can. You're not the 
mocking devil your sister is. I rather like 
you." 

A queer smile flickered on the Master's lips. 

"I have instructed her to cease tormenting you. I assume she has been, 
but she'll keep away from you hereafter. 
. . . Won't you, my dear?" 

Connor spun around. Lounging carelessly in the far doorway, a half-smoked 
cigarette in her hand, was the exquisite 
form of Margaret of Urbs. 

"Perhaps," she drawled slowly and 
advanced leisurely into the room, seating herself casually on the desk regardless of its litter of papers. 

"Joaquin," she remarked, "this man 
neglects to kneel in my presence. In 
yours as well, 1 perceive. Shall I command him?" 

"Try commanding'the statue of Olin," 
snapped Connor. 

"We could persuade him." insinuated 
the Princess. "After all, Evanie Sair is 
our hostage?" 

"Be still!" the Master said sharply. 
"You know I never impose a custom on 
those who reject it." 

The Princess turned taunting eyes on 
Tom Connor and was silent. "With your 
permission I should like to retire," he 
said. "We seem to have covered the 
ground." 

"Not entirely," said the Master. 

"What more do you want of me?" 

"Two things. First, your knowledge. 
Your understanding of the ancient 
mathematics, and whatever else we 
need." 

"Granted — on condition." At the Master's inquiring look he said boldly, "On 
condition that any knowledge I impart 



THE BLACK FLAME 



be made public. You have enough secrets, though some of them are apt hot 
to remain go!" 

"I'll agree," the Master said promptly. 
"That was always my intention. But 
what secret of mine is in danger of exposure ?" 

Connor laughed. "What else was it 
you wanted of me?" 

"Your blood. Your strain in the race, 
like an infusion of bulldog blood to give 
greyhounds courage. I want you to marry, and have children." 

"And that," said Connor bluntly, "is 
my personal business. I refuse to promise that." 

"Well," the Master genially remarked, 
"we'll let Nature take its course. I'll 
trade you that indulgence for the revelation of what "secret you suspect." 

"Done! It's the Triangle rocketblasts." 

"The rocket-blasts!" 

"Yes. I've heard your craft in flight. 
I've listened to the blasts." He turned 
sardonic eyes from the Master to the 
Princess. "The blast isn't steady. It 
throbs. Do you understand ? It throbs!" 

The Master's face was stern. "Well?" 

"I know you can't control the rate of 
power. You've had the whole world 
looking for a means of controlling the 
rate. That's impossible. Hydrogen has 
its natural period like radium. You can 
release the energy at that single rate or 
all at once, as in our rifles — but you 
can't control it otherwise!" 

rpHERE was silence. 

"I know what you do in the blast. 
You detonate your water — a little at a 
time in an enormously strong firing 
chamber, and release the blast gradually. 
It's no more continuous than the power 
of a gasoline engine!" 

■ "You're endangering your life !" whispered the Master. "You can't live now!" 

"With her Satanic Majesty, the Goddess of Mockery, to intercede for me?" 
Connor jeered, staring steadily into the 
gray-green eyes of the Princess. In her 
features now was no slightest trace of a 



87 



taunt, but something more like admiration. "If I'm to die, it had better be here 
and now, else I'll find a way to tell what 
I know!" 

"Here and now!" said Margaret of 
Urbs. 

"Not yet," said the Master, "Thomas 
Connor, long ago, in my youth, I knew 
men like you. They're dead, and it's a 
great loss to the world. But you're living. I don't want to kill you. I'd rather 
trust the fate of my empire to your 
word. Having heard my side, then, will 
you swear allegiance to me?" 

"No. I'm not sure of your sincerity." 

"If you were, would you?" 

"Gladly. I see more with you than 
with the Weeds." 

"Then will you swear not to oppose 
me until such time as you are sure? And 
will you swear to keep that knowledge 
you have to yourself?" 

"Fair enough!" Connor said, and 
grinned. He took the bronzed hand the 
Master extended. "I swear it." He 
glanced coolly at the Princess. "And by 
the three kinds of metamorphs, I'm glad 
to swear it!" 

"Two kinds," corrected the Master 
mildly. "Panate and amphimorph." 

But Margaret of Urbs caught his 
meaning. A faint trace of anger glinted 
in her eyes. 

"The Immortals," she said coldly, "do 
not consider themselves metamorphs." 

"Then I don't consider myself Irish," 
said Thomas Connor. "Any freak that 
comes out of Martin Sair's ray is a metamorph to me." 

"Enough," said the Master. "That's 
all, Connor." 

But at the door the Princess halted 
Connor, and he gazed down into her upturned face. 

"Do you believe," she said coldly, 
"that Joaquin's promise will protect you 
—or Evanie Sair — from me? I have my 
own debt to collect from you." 

He glanced back at the impassive figure at the desk. 

"I traded my knowledge for your 
Word," he called. "Is it good?" 



FANTASTIC STORY MAGAZINE 



"I am the Master," said that individual calmly. 

Connor gazed again at the perfect features of the Flame. Slowly he raised his 
hand, holding her eyes with his. And 
then, with a sharp gesture, he snapped 
his finger stingingly against her dainty 
nose, grinned, and strode away. 

At the outer door he turned. The 
Black Flame, her lovely face a pale mask 
of fury, held a beam-pistol in her hand, 
but she made no move as he grinned back 
at her. Behind her the Master smiled 
cryptically down at the point of his pen. 

But back in his room, an amazing realization came to Connor. Under the guise 
of his mildnass, the Master had won 
every single point. He had extracted 
from Connor the promise of secrecy con-, 
ceming the Triangle blasts, his alienation from the Weed cause, and more than 
half an oath of allegiance to himself! 

And all for what? The right of Thomas Connor to bear his own children, and 
the same promise of safety given at 
their earlier meeting! 

He swore softly and lay thinking of 
the mocking loveliness of the Black 
Flame. 

CONNOR awoke fully rested, with the 
ache from muscles strained by Evanie's weight almost vanished. He 
arose, bathed, donned his glittering Urban costume, and looked into Evanie's 
ronra. 

The girl was awake at last, and apparently well on toward recovery. He 
breathed a deep sigh of relief. At least 
in one matter, then, the unpredictable 
Princess had been sincere. 

"Evanie," he murmured. "Are you 
really all right? Are you better?" 

She smiled and nodded. "I feel almost 
like myself." 

"Well, we misjudged the" Princess in 
one respect, then. I'll have to thank her 
for pulling you through." 

Evanie's eyes widened in horror. 

"Thank her! What do you mean? 
Tom did you see her while I — " 

He was surprised. 



"Why, I had dinner with her." 

"After I warned you!" she wailed. "1 
tell you she's like a madness that gets 
into your blood. A man can't even look 
at her without suffering, and she's cruel 
and utterly inhuman." She compressed 
her lips firmly and whispered : "There's 
a scanner here — right under the light. I 
mustn't talk like this." 

"Who cares? She won't get into my 
blood, Evanie. I've met only two Immortals. I like the Master. The Princess I hate !" 

"See!" she whispered. "You like the 
Master. Tom, he's as bad as the Princess. He's subtle, scheming, insidious! 
His charm is poisonous. Don't let him 
talk you over, please!" 

He was startled at her vehemence. 
But the Master had his word now. Could 
he break it? He was more than half convinced of the great ruler's sincerity. 
After all, Evanie was only a sweet, impulsive country girl whose grandfather 
had been killed. Something of his 
thoughts must have shown in his expression, for her face grew suddenly 
hard. 

"If I believed you were turning away 
from us to them," she said tensely, "I'd 
despise you, Tom. But I believe in you! 
Believe you're strong enough to resist 
the trickery of the Immortals. Don't 
fail me." 

He could not answer her then, for the 
maid, Sora, came in with a tray of food. 
She placed it on a cleverly constructed 
swinging arm that held it above the bed. 
It was a silent meal. Sora's presence put 
a restraint on them, and Evanie was 
cold, regarding Connor suspiciously. 

He was relieved when they finished 
and the woman departed with the tray. 
He found a box of the magically selflighting cigarettes, and puffed moodily, 
while Evanie watched him in silence. 

A rap sounded. A Palace guard entered, bowed, and handed Connor a tiny 
package and an envelope sealed with the 
ifnprint of the Midgard Serpent, and departed. 

Connor broke the seal and slipped a 



THE BLACK FLAME 



card from within, read it, and whistled. 
There was a queer expression on his face 
when he handed it to Evanie. Written 
on it in script as fine and precise as engraving were the two sentences: 

We desire your presence at once in our 
laboratory in the East Chambers. Show our 
medallion to the guard at your door. 

Margarita, Urbis Retina, Sororque Domini. 

The royal "we." It was no invitation, 
but a command. Connor stared at 
Evanie, who stared back with narrowed 
eyes. 

"Well?" he said at last. 
"Well ?" 

"What can I do? Ignore it and expose 
both of us to her anger if she's such a 
devil as you say?" 

"Oh, go!" snapped Evanie. "You and 
your ancient strength and courage. 
You're like any other man before the 
Black Flame of Urbs — just a fool. Go!" 

"And leave you?" 

"I'll have Sora for company," she retorted. "Go ahead. Burn yourself at 
the Flame, and see if I care." 

"I don't see what else I can do than 
go," he muttered unhappily. 

He turned moodily to the door, stripping the wrapper from the tiny package. 
A beautifully cast golden disc lay in his 
hand, with the pure features of the Princess in high relief. 

rpHE GUARD outside challenged him 
at once. It gave him a grim pleasure 
to flash the medallion in the fellow's 
face, to see him salute in amazement and 
step aside. Connor took the elevator to 
the ground floor, and passed moodily 
into the vast cavity of the Throne Room. 

He passed through Martin Sair's disorderly chamber and finally to his destination. Margaret of Urbs sat with a 
glass of purple wine in one hand and the 
inevitable cigarette in the other, her 
dainty sandaled feet on a soft .footstool. 
She wore Urban dress of glistening silver, above which her black hair gleamed 
like metal. She gave him a sardonic 
smile. 



"You may' kiss my sandal," she said. 

"Or the hem of your skirt," he retorted. ".Why did you send me that note?" 

She gestured at the vision screen beside her. 

"Mostly to watch you and Evanie 
quarrel over it." 

"Then you know my ooinion of you." 

"Yes. I was rather amused." 

"Well, if you've ceased to be amused, 
may I go back?" 

"Not immediately," said the Princess. 
"Don't you think I owe you a little 
amusement in return?" 

"I'll forgive the obligation." 

"But I'm very circumspect about my 
debts," she insisted, with that m'addening twinkle of mockery in the eyes that 
dared him. "Isn't there anything about 
the Palace — or in the world— that interests you? I'll take you sightseeing." 

It was an opportunity, at that. There 
certainly was much he would like to see 
in this world that had grown up a thousand years after he was born. He hesitated. The inky-haired girl gestured at 
a chair and he sat down. Without permission he poured himself a goblet of 
the wine beside her. It was quite different from the still wines of Ormon ; 
sweet, sparkling, rich — -and potent. 

"I'd like to see Eartheye," he said, 
musingly. 

"Oh, Asia's too far!" she quickly protested. "I'm only giving you an hour or 
so." 

"Let's have something on the vision 
screen from Eartheye,' then," he suggested. "How about Mars?" 

"Well, it's night over Asia." She 
snapped the screen on with a negligent 
hand and said, "Eartheye." In a moment a bearded face appeared with a respectful salute. "Put on Mars," she 
drawled. "The central region of Solis 
Lacus." 

In a moment a rosy glow suffused the 
screen, resolving into focus as a ruddy 
plain with a greenish center. Connor 
gazed spellbound. The planet of mystery 
at a distance of two miles! 

Enigmatical dark spots of strangely 



FANTASTIC STORY MAGAZINE 



suggestive regularity were distinguishable, a laey tracery of cabalistic lines, 
the flash of something bright that might 
be water. A pygmy civilization ? he wondered dizzily. 

"I'd like to see that at first hand," he 
murmured. 

"So would I," said Margaret of Urbs. 
"I've tried to talk my esteemed brother 
into permission to make the attempt, 
without success so far." 

"You?" He remembered his conversation with Evanie and Jan Orm. "But 
it's two and a half years there and 
back!" 

"What's two and a half years to me?" 
She snapped off the screen. "Come on," 
she said rising. 

"Where now?" 

"For a little flight. I'll show you a 
Triangle" — she glanced at him with a 
mocking smile — "since you know their 
secret, and yet live!" 

"No thanks to you," Connor flashed at 
her. 

"No. Were you frightened?" 

"Did I seem so?" 

She shook her head. 

"Are you ever afraid?" 

"Often. I try not to show it." 

"I never am," she said, pulling a 
beam-pistol from a table drawer and 
snapping it to her waist. "Since we're 
leaving the Palace," she explained. "I 
intend to bring you back." 

He laughed and followed her through 
the Throne Room and up to a portion of 
the vast Palace roof below the South 
Tower. A Triangle stood there on a 
metal flooring. He noticed the pitting 
and excoriations where the blast had 
struck. The vehicle gleamed silver, far 
smaller than the giant ones he had seen 
in flight. Connor glanced curiously at 
the firing chamber at the apex, then at 
the name "Sky-rat" engraved on the 
wall. 

"My Sky-rat," said Margaret of Urbs. 
"The swiftest thing yet made by manYour bullets are laggards beside it." She 
hesitated, and for a moment he could 
have sworn that there was a touch of 



shyness in her eyes. "I took one trip in 
this — not so long ago," she said softly, 
"that I will never forget. The woods of 
Ormon are lovely, don't you think?" 

He made no answer to that, and followed her in. The tubular chamber was 
luxuriously fitted, with deeply cushioned 
seats and room enough for comfortable 
sleeping quarters. When they were seated she depressed a lever and the throbbing roar of the blast began. 

Through the floor-port he watched the 
Palace drop away. Urbs Major unrolled 
beneath. There was a sensation of 
weight as the vehicle shot upward like 
an errant meteor. 

"Frightened?" laughed the Princess. 

Connor shrugged. "I've flown before," 
he said laconically. 

"Oh — airplanes ! Wait !" 



INUTE by minute the Earth receded. It seemed not so much to drop as 
to diminish, as if the surface were condensing like a deflating balloon. Urbs 
Minor slipped smoothly into the square 
of vision and the whole panorama of the 
mighty city was below — Greater and 
Lesser Urbs with the gash of the canal 
between them, tiny as a toy village in 
the Swiss Alps. 

Kaatskill slid into the square, and a 
dozen other previously unseen suburbs 
of the vast metropolis. The aspiring 
towers of the Palace were small as pins 
in a carpet, and already a little east of 
them, as their radial flight permitted 
the Earth's rotation to gain on the craft. 

The Earth began to seem hazy, and 
off to the north a snow-white plain of 
clouds glistened. The vast bowl of the 
planet began slowly to hump in the center. It was inverting, beginning to seem 
spherical. 

Tom Connor jumped violently as a 
spark crackled off his thumb. A second 
stung the tip of his nose. The black silken hair of the Princess rose queerly in 
a cloud about the perfection of her face, 
and sparks raced along the ship's hull. 



THE BLAt 

"The Heaviside ionization layer," she 
murmured. "Scared?" 
"No." 

Margaret of Urbs glanced at a dial. 

"Thirty thousand now." 
I "Feet?" 

She laughed. "Meters." 

About twenty miles. And they were 
still accelerating. The surface below 
flowed continually inward. The sky 
darkened ; a star appeared, and then another; fifty stars; a thousand — all glistening in a black sky where the sun 
blazed blue-white. The Earth was decidedly globular now. The vast, inconceivable slope of the planet could be seen 
in all directions. 

Unconsciously Connor jumped as suddenly there came a sharp patter like 
hail. 

"Meteoric particles," said the girl 
turning a knob. "Paige deflector," she 
explained. 

"For meteors as well as bullets, eh?" 
he suggested. 

"For the iron ones. A stone might get 
through." 

Uncomfortable thought. Minutes 
passed — -half an hour. Suddenly the 
Princess moved something. Connor was 
nearly lifted from his seat by the sudden-lightness. 

"Deceleration," she said, glancing 
down at the colossal convexity below. 
"Three hundred miles. Are you frightened?" 

"Do you think so?" 

She smiled a taunt. "I'll turn off the 
deflectors," she murmured. 

There was a pattering roar. Something crashed glancingly above him and 
the floor tipped and spun like a juggler's 
platter. Margaret of Urbs laughed. 

"Might I ask the object?" he queried. 

"Yes," she said gently. "I'm going to 
commit suicide !" 

As he caught his breath sharply, unbelievingly, she moved the lever before 
her, and the throbbing roar of the blast 
died suddenly. The sensation of dizziness that followed was a thousand times 
worse than that Connor had experienced 



K FLAME 91 

in the swift Palace elevators. 

He was utterly weightless. They were 
■in a free fall ! 

The Princess was laughing at him. 
Deep in those lustrous, inhumanly lovely sea-green eyes of hers was the glint 
of mockery. 

"Scared?" she whispered, as she had 
done repeatedly, and gave a low rippling 
chuckle at his silence. "Three hundred 
miles!" she jeered. A moment passed. 
"Two hundred !" 

TTE COULDN'T shift his gaze from 
J-l the satanic beauty of her face, but 
he grimly fought his quivering lips to 
firmness. There was a low whine outside 
that rose abruptly to a screaming shriek 
that went gibbering across the world, 
The air! They had struck the atmosphere. 

The floor grew warm, almost so hot it 
burned. At last Connor tore his eyes 
from the face of the Princess and gazed 
down at the up-rushing planet. 

They were over ocean. What matter? 
At that speed it might as well be concrete. How high were they? Two miles 
— & mile? Less each succeeding second. 
The scream was a great roaring. 

"We're going to crash," he said evenly, knowing she couldn't hear him. 

Margaret of Urbs kicked a lever with 
a daintily casual foot. The blast roared 
out — too late! Or was it? Irresistible 
weight oppressed Connor as the sea 
rushed upward. So clQse it was now that 
he saw the very waters hollowed by the 
blast. That near! 

But far enough. They were receding 
until the girl cut the blast again and set 
the rocket gently on the heaving swells 
of the Pacific. 

Connor gulped. "Nice flying," he said 
steadily. "How often can you do it?" 

"I don't know," she laughed. "I've 
never tried before. Scared?" The reiteration of that word was getting on 
his nerves as greatly as had the speed 
of the rocket. 

"Did I show it?" he asked. 

"I'm afraid not." Her voice changed 



92 



FANTASTIC STORY MAGAZINE 



suddenly. She rose, whipped the beampistol from her aide. "If I can't frighten you," she said, her eyes glittering, "1 
can at least kill you!" The beam flashed 
over him. 

He took the shock unflinching. She 
slid her finger along the barrel until it 
stabbed harder, racking him. He bit his 
lips and gazed back into eyes, now deeply emerald. And at last she laughed and 
returned the weapon to its place. 

"Were all ancients like you, Tom?" 
she murmured. 

Somehow he managed a calm reply. 

"Some stronger, ' some weaker," he 
said carelessly. 

"I think I could love you," she whispered. 

She thrust a hand suddenly toward 
him and involuntarily he started. 

"Afraid of one thing, at least, aren't 
you?" she jeered. "Afraid of — me!" 

Without warning he caught her arm, 
swept her suddenly to him. He pressed 
a fierce kiss on the perfection of her lips. 
She yielded instantly, returning the caress. For a moment her lips burned 
against his like strong wine, and lights 
coruscated in his spinning brain. With 
the Black Flame of Urbs in his arms, 
the world seemed to fall away as it had 
from the rising Triangle. 

He felt her lips move against his, 
heard her murmur, "Tom! Tom! I do 
love you. Say you love me!" 

"Love you? Love yon ?" he said. But 
just in time he caught that familiar 
gleam of mockery in her eyes. "Yes," 
he paid. "Just as I love a drink of strong 
liquor!" 

He pushed her roughly away, grinning sardonically. Margaret of Urbs 
laughed, but he fancied there was a 
quaver in her laughter. It was the first 
time he had seen the diamond hardness 
of her poise so much as ruffled. That is, 
since he had seen her in her robe of cruel 
Princess, the role she had played for 
seven hundred years. When he had seen 
her as a child of the woods she had been 
different. 

But she quickly regained her hard 



control over herself. She slapped a trifle 
viciously at the controls, and the Sky-rat 
soared away from a boiling circle of 
ocean toward Urbs. 

* RRIVED there, the Princess said not 
a word, but left Tom Connor at 
once. He wandered irresolutely to his 
room and opened Evanie's door. She sat 
propped against some cushions while a 
man in the garb of a Palace servant 
leaned above her. Both turned startled 
faces toward him. In amazement he 
recognized the man as Jan Orm of Ormon ! 

Tom Connor opened his mouth to cry 
an involuntary greeting to Jan Orm, but 
checked it at the sight of Jan's warning 
look and a gesture from Evanie. Of 
course! Jan was here in disguise, and 
there was the scanner with unwinking 
eye and attentive ear. Connor advanced 
to the side of Evanie's bed and bent over 
her. 

"Don't look at Jan when you talk," she 
said softly. 

"I won't. Lord, I'm glad to see you, 
Jan! I didn't know what might have 
happened to you." 

"I'm working in the kitchen," whispered Jan, nodding at a tray on the wallarm. He added eagerly, "Tom, you can 
help us! We need you." 

"Help you to what?" 

"To finish — " Jan began, but Evanie 
interrupted. "Help me to escape," she 
whispered, then shot a glance at Jan 
Orm. "Be careful of him, Jan," she 
warned. "He's been around the Black 
Flame." 

Connor reddened. "Look here !" he 
muttered. "Here's exactly how 1 stand. 
For safety's sake, I've sworn to the Master to make no move against him for the 
present, and to tell him what 1 know of 
mathematics. That can't hurt you, can 
it? Evanie's safety is worth more to me 
than that." 

He caught a sidelong flash of Jan's 
face gone suddenly blank. Jan's lips 
tightened grimly. 

"What's the value of an oath to the 



THE BLACK FLAME 



Master?" he growled. "That needn't 
bind you!" 

"I keep my word," Connor said, as 
grimly. 

"But your oath doesn't keep you from 
helping me to escape, does it?" whispered Evanie. 

"I guess not— but what's the use of 
it? To suffer another Messenger?" 

"This time," declared Evanie, "I'll 
fight off any Messenger. I was worn out 
before, exhausted, almost helpless." 

"What can I do?" asked Connor, a little reluctantly. 

"Are you free to move as you will 
about the Palace?" 

"Not entirely." 

"Well, I want to see the Master. I 
must see him." 

"Why don't you call him and ask for 
an interview?" Connor asked. 

"I have. All I can get is a statement 
from the vision room that he's busy in 
his quarters and can't come. I'm not 
supposed to leave my bed, you know." 
She paused. "It's probably true. Jan 
has heard that there's a Conclave of the 
Immortals of the South day after tomorrow." She glanced at Connor imploringly. "Can't you get me to him, 
Tom? Please — I must see him." 

Connor smiled, amused, as a swift 
thought crossed his mind. Margaret of 
Urbs must indeed have been perturbed 
this morning. She had forgotten to reclaim her medallion. If he were to use it 
before she remembered — 

"Perhaps I can help you reach him, 
Evanie," he whispered. "If you'll come 
at once." 

THE GUARDS passed them without 
question, with only a glance at the 
medallion. 

When they reached the anteroom beyond the arch they at once saw the Master at his littered desk. Evanie dropped 
gracefully to one knee as they neared 
the ruler. But Connor stood erect and 
stared at Margaret of Urbs, who sat in a 
chair by the window, a book on her lap, 
a black cigarette in her fingers spiraling 



smoke as she stared back at him. 

The Master's eyes flickered over them. 

"May I ask how you two managed to 
arrive here?" he inquired mi'clly. 

Connor tossed the medallion on the 
desk, and his lips twisted in wry amusement when he saw the quivering start 
that twitched the dainty lips of the Princess. She arose quickly and moved to the 
Master's side. She and Evanie gazed at 
each other across the desk. The eyes of 
Margaret of Urbs were faintly disdainful, but Evanie's were hostile. 

It was Tom Connor's first opportunity 
to make a first-hand comparison of the 
two. He hated himself for making it, 
but here it was thrust upon him. 

The Princess was a trifle taller, a bit 
more slender than Evanie, and infinitely 
mnre beautiful, lovely as Evanie was. It 
wasn't fair, Connor told himself bitterly. It was terribly unfair, in fact, to 
compare Evanie's beauty with the unearthly beauty of the Black Flame of 
Urbs. It was like contrasting the simple loveliness of a wild rose to the splendor of an orchid, or a brown milkweed 
butterfly to a star-dying Luna moth. 

The Mnstpr spoke. 

"I presume you have a reason for coming." 

"Yes," said Evanie., "I can't stand being imprisoned in a single room. I had 
to see you." Her lips quivered. She was 
a consummate actress, Connor suddenly 
realized. "You know I — -I have metamorphie blood in me. You know what 
that means. I have to move about in the 
open to breathe air that comes from the 
sky. not from Palace ventilators. So I've 
come to ask you for a little freedom. Just 
permission to walk now and then in the 
Inner Gardens." 

Connor wondered how walking in the 
square of the Inner Gardens could* encompass her escape, since the Palace surrounded it. 

"It is my intention to release you, but 
not yet," the Master said. "Not until I 
have had what I wish from Thomas 
Connor." 

"But I can't stand it!" the girl begged. 



94 FANTASTIC ST 

The Master turned to Connor. 

"Remembering your oath," he said, 
"do you second this request? This is no 
move against me?" 

"I do not break my word," Connor 
said. 

"Well, I see no harm in it." The Master called a few syllables into the box 
beside him, then spoke to Eyanie. "You 
have the liberty of the halls and the Inner Gardens — no more. As for you" — 
his eyes flickered over Connor — "apparently you manage without my permission. That's all." 

Evanie dropped again to her knee, 
rose and moved toward the archway. 
As Connor followed, the Master called: 

"Not you, Thomas Connor." 

Connor turned again toward the faintly amused face of the ruler. 

"I perceive," the Master said, "that 
my sister has disobeyed me." 

The Princess laughed in that mocking 
way of hers. 

"Do I ever obey you, Joaquin?" 

"Nominally, at times." He paused, 
studying his sister coolly for a moment, 
then again turned his attention to the 
man before him. "As you may know," 
he remarked, "I have summoned a Conclave for day after tomorrow. I am completely occupied. But I do not forget 
your promise, Thomas Connor, nor have 
I lost interest in the stores of ancient 
knowledge. Therefore, you will accompany the Princess to the chambers behind the Throne Room and fulfill your 
promise by explaining to her as much as 
time permits of mathematics, particularly of the meaning of logarithms and of 
the device 1 have heard termed the sliderule. She will understand you. That's 
all." 

He met the eyes of the Princess. "I 
may obey you this time, Joaquin," she 
said, and moved out of the door. 

CONNOR followed her. The halls betrayed the activity of the coming 
Conclave, and were more crowded than 
he had observed before. Twice gravefaced, long-haired Immortals passed 



>RY MAGAZINE 

them, raising respectful hands in salute 
to' Margaret of Urbs. 

She turned into the South Corridor. 

"This isn't the way," he objected. 

"We're going to the Tower." She 
glanced sideward at him. "You'll see 
soon why the Palace needs all its size. 
There'll be twenty thousand Immortals 
here, and we have room for all of them 
— half the Immortals in the world." 

"Half! Evanie said there were three 
million." 

She gave him an inscrutable smile. 

"It does no harm to let the Weeds 
over-estimate our strength." 

"Then why tell me?" 

Her smile was the unfathomable one 
of the Mona Lisa. 

"I never do anything without reason," was her reply. 

He laughed. When once again they 
reached the aspiring pinnacle of the 
Tower, without a glance at the mighty 
city below the Princess pulled pen and 
paper from a table, seated herself, and 
faced Connor. 

"Well?" she queried. "Begin." 

He did. It was a new Margaret of 
Urbs he saw now, unknown before save 
possibly in that brief moment when he 
had mentioned the Venus of Milo, or 
when earlier in the woods she had shown 
him how vast was her knowledge of and 
interest in history and world events. ■ 

She was eager, curious, questioning, 
avid for knowledge, and uncannily quick 
to comprehend. There were queer gaps 
in her learning. Often he had to stop to 
explain terms utterly elementary, while 
at other times she followed him through 
the most complex maze of reasoning 
without a question. 

The afternoon waned, dusk crept over 
the great vista, and at length she threw 
down her pen. 

"Enough," she said. "We must have 
ten-place logarithm tables worked out. 
They'll be priceless at Eartheye." Not 
until then did a trace of mockery creep 
into her voice. "I suppose you realize," 
she taunted, "that once we have your 
knowledge all reason to keep you alive is 



THE BLACK FLAME 



gone, but the reasons to kill you remain." 
He laughed. 

"You'd like to frighten me, wouldn't 
you? Haven't you tried that often 
enough? The Master trusts my word. I 
trust his — but not yours." His lips 
twisted. "Had I not trusted him, I could 
have escaped this morning. What was to 
prevent me from taking your weapon 
away, dropping you on a deserted shore 
—or even kidnapping you— and escaping in the Sky-rat? I never promised 
not to escape. What kept me here was 
my trust in his word, and a desire to see 
this game played out!" 

"There is no safety anywhere in the 
world for you, Thomas Connor," said 
the Flame softly, "except in my favor. 
And why you still live is a mystery, so 
much so that I wonder at it. I have never before been so indulgent to one I 
hate." She flashed her glorious emerald 
eyes to his face. "Do I hate you?" 

"You should know hatred better than 

I." 

"Yes, and yet I wonder." She smiled 
slowly. "If ever I love the way I hate, 
not death itself could thwart me. But 
there is no man strong enough to conquer me." 

"Or perhaps," he retorted, "that one 
isn't interested." 

She smiled again with almost a trace 
of wistfulness. 

"You're very strong," she admitted. 
"I should have loved to have lived in 
your ancient days. To have lived among 
your great lighters and great makers of 
beauty. At least those were men — your 
ancients. I cpuld have loved one of 
those." , 

"And haven't you ever loved a man?" 
he asked ironically. 

TTE COULD detect no mocking note in 
*■* her voice. 

"Loved? I have thought myself in 
love a hundred times. At least a dozen 
times I have gone to Joaquin to beg immortality for some man I have loved. 
But Joaquin swore to Martin Sair long 
ago to grant it only to those worthy of 



it, and he has kept that oath ; " 

She smiled wryly. "It takes all a 
man's youth to prove himself worthy, 
and so the Immortals are all dry scientists — not to my taste. Joaquin refused 
me each time I asked for the favor, 
wanting to know if I were sure I'd never 
tire of htm for whom I begged — to 
swear I was sure. And of course I 
couldn't swear." She paused thoughtfully. "He was always right, too. I did tire 
even before old age blighted them." 

"And what did you do to prove yourself worthy?" Connor mocked. 

"I'm serious today," the Princess 
said. "I'm not teasing now. I think I 
could love you, Thomas Connor." 

"Thank you." He grinned, suspecting 
the glitter in the green eyes, though he 
did not see it. "In my time it was the 
custom for the man to make such declarations." 

"Your time!" flared Margaret of 
Urbs. "What do I care for your antediluvian customs and prehistoric prejudices? Would you have the Black Flame 
as shrinking and modest as little Evanie 
pretends to be?" 

"I'd dislike you less if you were." 

"You don't dislike me. You're merely 
afraid of me because I represent everything you hate in a woman — and yet you 
can't hafe me. Indeed, I rather think 
you love me." 

He laughed, mocking now, himself. 

"I'm Margaret of Urbs!" she flashed. 
"What do I want of you? Nothing! I 
don't really want you at all, Tom Connor. You'd be like a'l the others; you'd 
age. Those mighty limbs of yours will 
turn skinny, or else fat and bloated. 
Those clear eyes will be pale and watery. 
Your teeth will yellow and your hair fall 
out, and then you'll he gone !" * 

She pulled a cigarette from the box 
and blew a plume of smoke in his impassive face. 

"Go brag of this when we release you 
— if we do ! Go tell it up and down the 
world that you alone of all men were 
strong enough to reject the love of Margaret of Urbs. Go say that the Black 



FANTASTIC STORY MAGAZINE 



Flame failed to scorch you, failed even 
to warm you." Her voice quivered. "And 
go say too that no other man save you 
ever learned how unhappy she is!" 

The deep eyes were tear-bright. He 
stared into them perplexed. Was this 
merely more acting? Was there nothing 
left of Margaret of Urbs save a lovely 
masque and a thousand poses — no real 
being within? He forced a sardonic grin 
to his lips, for the impossible beauty of 
the girl tore at him despite his will. 

At his smile her face darkened. "And 
then say," she said, from between tight 
lips, "that the Black Flame doesn't care 
what talk you make of her, because she 
burns on, while you — and those you talk 
to- — in so very few years will be dust!" 

Again he laughed at her and the 
Flame turned suddenly away. 

"I suppose you may go now," she said 
dully. 

But Connor hardly heard her. He was 
caught in speculations concerning the 
strange black and golden soul of the 
Princess, baffling, hateful, fascinating'to 
the point of deadliness, and yet — somehow wistful, almost pitiful. It was almost, he thought, as if in the glimpse 
he had caught of her in the freedom fcf 
the woods he had seen the true soul of 
the woman, and all the rest was masquerading. 

Ho stared across at the glory of her 
face, now subdued to sadness as she 
gazed out at a million lighted windows. 
Then a flicker of motion caught his eye, 
far, Car beneath him in the well of shadows in the Inner Gardens. 

"Someone's in the Gardens," he observed absently. 

"Oh," said the Princess listlessly, "it 
must be an Antarctic Immortal, enjoying a garden under the sky." She clicked 
the vision screen. "Garden," she ordered dully. "North bank of the pool." 

A burst of choked laughter startled 
him. He swung about. There, shown on 
the screen before his eyes, was Evanie, 
seated on a garden bench, her head on 
the shoulder of Jan Orm, his arm about 
her waist ! 



"A waiter!" the Black Flame said 
scornfully. "A Palace waiter !" 

But despite her laughter and his own 
confusion, Connor did not fail to notice 
that there were still tears in her eyes. 

XI 

€^ONNER awoke late next morning, 
and to an instant memory of the shock 
he had experienced at the sight of 
Evanie and Jan Orm. Most of the night 
he had spent in improvising possible excuses for the girl. Perhaps it was an innocent scene he had witnessed. 

After all, she and Jan were lifelong 
friends, born and raised in Ormon, and 
it might be that Evanie had turned to 
him in loneliness, or in pique at Tom 
Connor's own involuntary attendance on 
Margaret of Urbs. But the mocking suggestions of the Princess and the memory 
of Evanie's contented face in the vision 
screen troubled him. And he remembered, too, Jan's confession that he loved 
Evanie. 

Dressing, he glimpsed her far below 
in the Inner Gardens, with her bronze 
hair glinting. She was lying at full 
length on the grass. He forgot breakfast and h urried i nto the corridor, 
where the guard, remembering the medallion of the Princess, merely saluted 
respectfully, unaware that Connor no 
longer possessed the disc of gold. 

He descended at once to the ground 
level, followed an interminable passage 
toward the Palace's center, and flung 
open a door at its end. Instead of daylight, a dim chamber with glowing walls 
lay beyond, wherein, after .a moment of . 
blinking, he described a row of perhaps 
twenty men. Some stared at him, surprised, but most kept their eyes fixed 
steadily on the shining wall. 

"I'm sorry," he said to the nearest 
man. "I was looking for the Gardens." 

Unexpectedly, a voice spoke beside 
him. 

"The Gardens are two stories above 
us, Thomas. And I see you still wander." 
It was the Master. Beside him was 



THE BLACK FLAME 



another Immortal, grave-eyed and 
sandy-haired. 

"This is Thomas Connor," said the 
Master, "our storehouse of ancient 
knowledge. Thomas, this is Martin Sair, 
here from Austropolis." He added, 
"Thomas is one of those who affect not 
to kneel in our presence. I indulge him." 

"Indulgence is a habit of yours, Urbanus," rumbled the sandy-haired man. 
"Does the Princess also indulge?" 

"Not willingly. Margaret is having 
one of her restless years, I'm afraid." 
He frowned. "But they pass, they pass. 
Look there, Thomas." He gestured 
toward the wall. "This is our seeing 
room. Here is focused every scanner in 
Urbs — in any of my cities, if I wish. If 
the Palace is the world's brain, this 
room is the visual center." 

Connor took his eyes from a fascinated scrutiny of the legendary Martin Sair. the Giver of Life, and glanced 
,"f the v nils. Millions of tiny pictures 
covered them, each small as a thumbnail, glowing some in colors, and some 
wiien the distant origin was in darkness, in the dull blue-gray of the short 
waves. He saw flickers of movement as 
the pictured men and women went about 
their daily business. 

"We can enlarge any scene there." 
said the Master, pointing at a row of 
wider screens, some even now illumined. 
"In this room I can follow a man's life 
from birth to death, so long as he remains in one of my cities." He paused 
musingly, then shrugged. "The Gardens 
are two floors above us, Thomas." 

It was dismissal. Connor cast a last 
glance at Martin Sair, feeling as if he 
were gazing on a demigod. Martin Sair, 
the Giver of Life, greatest except the 
Master among all the heroic figures in 
the dazzling age of the Enlightenment. 
Then he backed away from the great 
Immortal and betook himse'f to the Gardens. 

T^VANIE was there, lovely as a bit of 
the ancient statuar> that dotted the 
square, as she lay in the barbaric cos


tume of Urbs watching a twenty-inch 
column of water slip smoothly from the 
mouth of a giant stone lion. She gave 
Connor a cool glance as he approached. 

"Evanie!" he said unhappily. "I've 
looked everywhere for you." 

"Why?" she asked indifferently. 

"To be with you, of course. You know 
that." 

"I don't know it. Or has the Flame 
burned you at last?" 

Her coolness baffled him. 

"Evanie," he pleaded, "why are you 
so offended?" 

Her mouth hardened. "You've deserted the Weeds, Tom. Do you think I 
could ever forgive that?" 

"See here, Evanie," he said hastily. 
"There's one thing you seem to have forgotten. I was thrust in among the 
Weeds of Ormon without choice. Does 
that mean 1 have to accept your social 
theories blindly ? Perhaps I'm too primitive for anarchy, but I think you are 
too!" He went on defiantly. "I don't 
think your theories will work, and I do 
think the Master's government is what 
this world needs. It isn't perfect, but 
it's belter than the Weeds offer. And 
even for you, Evanie, I won't give up 
freedom of thought." 

"You mean you won't think!" she 
blazed. "You're not fooling me, Tom! 
I know the way the Black Flame poisons 
men, and you've been with her too 
often!" Her anger mounted. "Oh, go 
away !" 

"Evanie," he began earnestly, and 
paused. Was he untouched by the devastating charm of the Princess? The dizzying warmth of her lips, his reeling 
brain in the hour on the Pacific— "She's 
the daughter of Hell!" he muttered. 

"Go away!" flared Evanie. "You've 
deserted us!" 

Hot words rose to his lips. But he suppressed his anger, even as the picture 
he had seen of Jan and Evanie flashed 
on his mental screen, and turned away 
into the Palace. 

For an hour he stamped through the 
endless halls now crowded with arriving 



»8 FANTASTIC SI 

Immortals from Africa, Antarctica, 
Australia, and South America. Now and 
again one turned cool eyes on his forbidding countenance or smiled gravely 
after him. None stopped or addressed 
him. 

He must have completed the somewhat less than a mile of circuit several 
times when a guard approached him. He 
turned a furious scowl on the fellow, but 
he had only a tiny black envelope inscribed in white in the precise script of 
the Princess. Connor ripped the missive 
open. A short note was inside. It read : 

Come to my chambers at half after the 
seventh hour to escort me to dinner. Wear the 
black costume in your quarters, and the black 
cape. Margaret of Urbs 

A LTHOUGH hours remained before 
the appointed dinner hour, he went 
back to his quarters, glancing indifferently at the Urban formal dress laid 
carefully on hisjbed. It was exactly like 
his present garb save that it shimmered 
black with metallic scales, and was 
edged with silver. Crossing to the window he sat staring down at Evanie in 
the Gardens, bathing her rounded limbs 
in sunlight, until Jan Orm, in Urban 
dress, joined her. He turned angrily 
away. 

With no breakfast or lunch, he was 
both short-tempered and ravenous. So 
when the hours had dragged by, and he 
finally located the Chambers on the hundred and seventh level of the South' Tower, he was in no pleasant mood. Two 
armed guards stepped aside, and the 
serving woman, Sora, admitted him with 
a clumsy curtsy. 

He passed into the anteroom, furnished, as was the Black Flame's laboratory behind the Throne Room and her 
place at the summit of the Tower, lavishly and ornately. But surprise leaped to 
his eyes as he saw the gigantic black 
Persian cat that gazed steadily at him, 
with green eyes that seemed almost a 
replica of those of the Princess. 

"A cat!" he exclaimed. "I thought 
they were extinct." 

"Satan is immortal," said the soft 



JR¥ MAGAZINE 

voice of Margaret of Urbs. 

He whirled and faced her as she 
emerged from the inner chamber, and 
hunger and anger alike drained out of 
him as he stared. 

She was magnificent! Garbed in a jetblack cape that dropped to her greencrystaled sandals, she seemed taller as 
she advanced into the room. A circlet of 
emeralds bound her ebony hair, and beneath it her eyes were smoldering, seagreen fire. 

But he felt the thrill of surprised 
shock as she threw open the cape. Her 
brief kirtle and coreselet glittered in a 
solid surface of green gems, and at her 
waist sparkled that mystic crystalline 
flower of many colors, glistening from 
red to violet, blue, and purest emerald. 
Then she moved toward the lamp, and in 
its yellow radiance her whole costume 
was green no longer, but the deep lavender of wine. 

"Alexandrites," she laughed, answering his unspoken question. "Green by 
day, lavender by artificial light. Synthetic, of course. There aren't this many 
natural stones in the world." She turned. 
"Like it?" 

"Exquisite!" he whispered. "You 
daughter of Lucifer!" 

He followed her in rebellious fascination as they progressed unattended to 
the ground floor and into a long Palace 
car with stifE-backed driver and footman. 

"Merimee's," she said, and the car 
spun silently away, mounting to the upper tier of Palace Avenue. 

It was dusk, but now and then when 
traffic slowed their motion, cheers 
sounded, and many a glance was cast at 
them. Margaret of Urbs ignored the 
glances, but smiled at the cheers. 

"Who's Merimee?" Connor asked. 

"A rich Sleeper in Kaatskill. Society 
here is largely Sleepers." 

"No nobility?" 

"The Immortals seldom entertain. 
We're a serious lot." 

Kaatskill appeared, and they glided 
into the grounds of an imposing Grecian 



THE BLACK FLAME 



mansion Lights were glowing, gay 
voices sounded as they entered. 

There was a sudden silence as the 
whole assemblage knelt. Margaret of 
Urbs gestured and the guests arose. 
Merirnee himself, paunchy, bald, came 
babbing his appreciation, his gratitude 
for the honor to his house. 

"But the entertainment, Your Highness! On such short notice, you see — 
best the bureau could furnish — I know 
you'll forgive me." 

T^HE DINNER was lavish. Connnr sat 
at the left of the Princess. Lines of 
servitors passed in a steady stream, 
bfrmng soups, then "fish — Bombay 
ducks, pompano, a dozen unknown 
viands— and fowl — ortolan, ptarmigan, 
pheasant, and nameless others. 

Connor was ravenous. He sampled 
everything, and it was the middle of the 
meal before he noticed the aghast looks 
of the crowd, and that he was almost 
the only one who was eating. 

"Have I violated the proprieties?" he 
asked the Princess. 

"You're supposed to eat only of the 
dishes I taste," she informed him 
coolly. 

"But I'm hungry. And you've eaten 
practically nothing." It was true. Margaret of Urbs had taken only a little 
salad, though she had sipped gla!ss after 
glass of wine. 

"I like to tantalize these hogs," she 
replied in low but audible tones. "This 
bores me." 

"Then why come?" 

"A whim." 

He chuckled, turning his attention to 
the entertainment. This, he thought, was 
excellent. An incredibly skillful juggler 
succeeded a talented magician ; a lowvoieed woman sang sweet, ancient 
tunes; a trio played tinkling melodies. 
A graceful pair of adagio dancers performed breathtakingly in the square 
surrounded by the tables, and a contortionist managed unbelievable bodily 
tangles. The performers came and went 
in silence. Not one burst of applause 



rewarded them. 

"Unappreciative audience!" Connor 
growled. 

"Is it?" the Princess drawled. 
"Watch." 

The following number, he thought, 
was the worst of the lot — a frightened, 
dingy man with a half-trained dancing 
monkey that chattered and grimaced, 
but made a sad failure of the dancing. 
Yet at the conclusion Margaret of Urbs 
raised her dainty hands and applauded. 

Instantly bedlam broke loose. Applause crashed through the hall; encores 
were shouted, and the astonished player 
stumbled once more through the ludicrous performance. 

"Well, his fortune's made," observed 
t+ie Princess. "N'York will want him, 
and Chicago and Singapore as well." 

The. master of ceremonies was presenting "Homero, the Poet of Personalities," a thin-faced Urban crowned with 
laurel leaves and bearing a classical 
harp. 

He bowed* and smiled. 

"And who, Ladies and Lords, shall it 
be? Of whom do I sing?" 

"Her Highness!" roared the crowd. 
"The Princess of Urbs !" 

Homero strummed his harp, and began chanting, minstrel-like: 

"The Princess? Adjective and verb 
Turn feeble! Glorious? Superb? 
Exquisite? None of these can name 
The splendor of the Urban Flame. 

Our Princess! Stars are loath to rise 
Lest they be faded by her eyes 
Yet once they've risen, they witt not set, 
But gaze entranced on Margaret. 

The continents and oceans seven 
Revolve beneath the laws of Heaven; 
What limit, law, or cannon curbs 
The tongue that speaks the Flame of Urbs?" 

Applause, violent and enthusiastic, 
greeted the doggerel. Margaret of Urbs 
lowered her eyes and smiled. 

"Who now?" Homero called. "Of 
whom do I sing?" 

Unexpectedly, Merimee spoke. "Tom 
Connor!" he cried. "Tom Connor, the 
Ancient!" 



100 FANTASTIC SI 

Homero strummed his harp and sang : 

"Ladies and Lords, you do me honor, 
Giving the name of Thomas Connor, 
That Ancient, phoenix-like arisen 
Out of his cold, sepulchral prison, 
Thrust into life — a comet hurled 
Prom the dead past into the world. 

What poet great enough to sing 

The wonderful awakening? 

Let golden Science try explain 

That miracle — and try in vain; 

For only Art, by Heaved inflamed, 

Can dream how Death itself was tamed!" 

"He'll turn this into some insipid 
compliment to me," whispered Margaret 
of Urbs. The Poet of Personalities sang 
on. 

Year after year the strong flesh 

mouldered, 
Dim was the spark of life that 

smouldered — Until the Princess glanced that way\ 
And lo! The cold and lifeless clay, 
To Death and Time no longer slave, 
Burst out triumphant from the gravel 

TN THE roar of applause Connor sat 
*■ amazed at the reference to his own 
experience. How did Homero know? He 
turned to question the Princess. 

"I'm tired of this," she said, and rose 
to depart. 

The whole body of guests rose with 
her. She drew her cape around her and 
strode to the car. 

"Slowly," she ordered the driver, then 
leaned back gazing at Connor. "Well?" 
she murmured. 

"Interesting. Homero is clever." 

"Bah ! Stock verses composed beforehand." 

"But — -about me?" 

"Don't you know you've been a newspaper and vision sensation?" 

"The devil!" Connor was shocked. 

"This Homero," she went on musingly. "Once, long ago, I knew Sovern, the 
only great poet of the Enlightenment, 
he who half seriously, half contemptuously, named me the Black Flame, and 
the only man save you, Tom Connor, 
who ever flaunted me to my face. One 
evening he angered me, and I exiled him 
frnm TTrhc TTrhs that hp loved — and too 



HtY MAGAZINE 

late I found that his bitterness grew out 
of love for me. 

"So I called him back in time to die, 
when not even Martin Sair could save 
him. And dying .he told me he would 
take his revenge in remembering that I 
am human, and to be human is to love 
and suffer." She paused. "I have not 
forgotten that." 

"And was it true?" asked Connor, 
struck suddenly by th is revelation of the 
fiery, imperious, untamable character 
beside him. 

"I think, lately, that it is true," she 
murmured, and drew a long breath. "I 
have slain, I have tortured, for less violence than you have committed against 
me." 

She flung open her cape, baring the 
marks of his fingers still on the exquisite curve of her throat. 

"I cannot suffer violence, and yet-you 
have struck me twice and still live. 
There is a magic about you, Thomas 
Connor, some laughing ancient strength 
that has died out of the world. I have 
never feared anything in my life, I have 
never begged anyone— but I fear you 
and I plead with you." She swayed 
against him. "Kiss me!" she whispered. 

He stared down at the unearthly 
beauty of her face, but there was a 
green light in her eyes that puzzled 
him. Coolly he fought the fascination 
that was cast about him. This was but 
another taste of the torment she had 
promised. Ho was sure of it. 

"I will not," he said. "Each time I 
have kissed you, yon have laughed at 
me." 

"But I will not laugh now." 

"You'll not trap me again by the same 
trick," he said. "Find another way for 
the torment you threatened. And when 
you're ready to kill me for the violence 
I did you, I'll die laughing at you." 

"I have forgiven that," she said soft
ly
"Then," he said mockingly. "Here's 
more to forgive." 

HE LIFTED her slender wrist in his 
miehtv hand, circled it with his 



THE BLACK FLAME 



101 



powerful fingers, and crushed it in a 
grasp like contracting steel. It gave him 
a grim pleasure to thus vent his turbulent emotions on her. and to see her face 
whiten under pain that must have been 
excruciating. But save for her pallor 
she gave no sign of agony. 

He dropped her hand, ashamed of his 
cruelty, though it was not as if he had 
used his strength against a mortal 
woman. Margaret of Urbs seemed to 
him more of a female demon. 

But she only said softly. "I thank you 
for this. It has taught mp what I wanted 
to know, for any other than you would 
now be dead for it. I love you, Tom." 

"Flame!" he retorted, while her eyes 
widened the merest trifle at the familiarity. "I don't believe you." 

"But you must! After all these years 
upon years I am sure. 1 swear it, Tom! 
Say you love me." 

"I love — Evanie." But despite his 
words the doubts that had been constantly creeping in on him assailed him. 
Evanie was still alien. 

"You love me.'" she murmured. "I am 
the Black Flame, yet I plead now. Say 
it, Tom!" 

"I love Evanie!" 

"Then will you kiss me?" 

He stared down at her. "Why not?" 
he said savagely. "Do you think I'm 
afraid of you?" 

He spun her against him and her lips 
burned against his. 

"Say you love me!" she repeated in a 
tense whisper. "Say it!" 

"I love — " he began, and the car slid 
to a stop before the Palace arch. The 
footman stood holding the car door open. 

Margaret of Urbs gazed as if distraught from Connor's face to the silent 
attendant and back again. Abruptly she 
thrust herself away, her mouth quivering. 

"I wish," she said tensely, "I wish I 
had never seen you!" 

She struck him a sharp blow across 
his mouth, clambered unassisted to the 
ground, and disappeared into the Palace, trailing her black cape behind her. 



Back in his room again, Connor was 
in a turmoil, ashamed, perplexed, bitter. 

"Caught!" he swore fiercely. "Burned! 
God! What a fool— what a weakling!" 

For call it what he would — it was 
true. Fascination, infatuation, anything 
— the fact faced him that the Black 
Flame had burned Evanie from his 
heart. He swore viciously and battered 
at Evanie's door. 

The blows echoed into silence. There 
was no response. 

With a long-drawn sigh, Connor 
turned away from Evanie's door. 
Whether absent or simply ignoring him, 
she had failed him, and he needed her 
desperately now. He wanted to quench 
the fires of the Black Flame in her cool 
simplicity, to reassure himself that what 
he now felt was an obsession, anything 
but love. 

He wanted to convince himself it was 
Evanie he loved by telling her so. Better never to have emerged from under 
the prison than to live again, loving a 
mask of beauty hiding a daughter of 
Satan. 

He strode to the casement overlooking the Gardens. Dim light from the 
Palace windows streaked in bars across 
it, but he saw no sign of Evanie. But 
could that be Evanie — there where the 
bushes shadowed a pool? 

xn 

Tom CONNOR made his way hurriedly to the Gardens. He saw Evanie 
crouched in the shadow of shrubbery 
just above the brink of the water. He 
dashed forward as* she glanced up at 
him. 

"Evanie !" he began. "Oh, my dear — " 
"Hush!" Her voice was tense. 
"But—" 

"Be still. Speak softly. Do you think 
I want a scanner on me?" She paused. 
"I'd rather you'd go away," she whispered. 

He seated himself stubbornly beside 
her, though it seemed certain she was 
waiting for someone. Jan Orm, probably. 



102 



FANTASTIC STORY MAGAZINE 



"I won't go," he said in subdued voice. 
"You've got to listen to me, Evanie." 

"Please!" she murmured. "Be quiet, 
Tom. I've been waiting here six hours." 

"For what?" 

She made no reply. He subsided into 
gloomy silence, watching the great 
column of water that gushed from the 
jaws of the huge stone lion at the far 
end of the pool. The water, smooth as 
a steel pillar, fell with surprisingly 
little sound. 

But while he gazed, it changed. The 
smoothness was broken. Bubbles flashed, 
and then the flow ceased altogether 
while a huge bubble glistened, billowed 
and broke. Something white and shining and large as a man shot with a 
small splash into the poo!. The column 
of water crashed instantly back. 

A webbed hand holding a silk-wrapped 
package rose suddenly from the black 
water. An amphimorph ! 

Evanie seized the bundle, crammed it 
beneath an Urban cape at her side. 

"Quick!" she said tensely. "Stand 
here beside me, Tom, so we'll block the 
scanner." 

He obeyed wonderingly. A queer low 
coo came from Evanie's lips. The black 
waters parted again and he glimpsed 
the tiny round mouth and horrible face 
of the creature in the pool. It flopped to 
the bank, scuttled desperately along into 
the bushes. He saw it raise the lid of a 
manhole or a storm-sewer, and it was 
gone. 

Pale and trembling, Evanie sank down 
on the bank, her bronzed legs dangling 
toward the water. 

"If only we weren't seen!" she whispered. 

"How the devil did that thing get 
here?" Connor demanded. 

"It rode a bubble down the water tunnel from the mountains, fifty miles 
away. An amphimorph doesn't need 
much air. A big bubble will last." 

"But^" 

"Don't ask me how it found the maze 
of mains in Urbs. I don't know. I only 
know they have queer instinctive ways 



of getting where they want to go. Now 
it's gone into the storm sewer. It will 
find its way to the Canal and go up 
rivers to its mountains." 

"But what was that it brought, and 
from whom?" 

"From King Orm." 

"From whom?" he persisted. 

"Tom," she said quietly, "I'm not going to tell you." 

"What was in that package, Evanie?" 

"I won't tell you that, either." She 
threw the cape over her arm, concealing 
the package. "I can't trust you, Tom. 
You and I are enemies." She backed 
away at his anger. "Tom. please! You 
promised to help me escape, didn't you?" 

"All right," he yielded dully. "Evanie, 
I sought you out here because I wanted 
to end this misunderstanding. Please 
give me a chance to convince you I love 
you !" 

He held out his arms to her. She 
backed another step. 

"I won't come near you, Tom. I won't 
trust myself in your arms. I'm afraid of 
you, and I'm afraid of myself. You're 
too strong — too strong for me physically, and perhaps too strong otherwise. 
You wakened my love once. I dare not 
chance it again." 

"Oh, Evanie! Now of all times, when 
I need you!" 

"Need me?" A queer expression flickered over her face. "So the Black Flame 
burns at last!" Her voice dropped to a 
murmur. "I'm sorry for you, Tom. I'm 
sorry for anyone who loves her, because 
she's utterly heartless. But 1 can't come 
near you. I don't dare!" 

She turned and darted suddenly into 
the Palace, leaving him to stare hopelessly after, and then to follow slowly. 

TTE SLEPT little that night. Restless, 
-d tortured hours were filled with 
dreams of Margaret of Urbs and the 
sound of her laughter. He arose early 
and wandered dully from his room. 

The halls were crowded with arriving 
Immortals, among whom he stalked as 
silent and grave as themselves. At last, 



THE BLACK FLAME 



103 



tired of aimless, wandering, he went into 
the shaded Gardens, and sat glumly 
down beside the pool. 

Far overhead Triangle drifted with 
muffled, throbbing roars, and a bird sang 
in the bushes. Deep in his own perturbed thoughts, he was startled when 
he heard his name spoken softly, almost 
timidly. 

"Tom." 

He looked up. Margaret of Urbs stood 
beside him, garbed in tlie most magnificent gown he had ever seen, golden 
and black, and concealin.fr her tiny feet. 
Instead of the circlet of the previous 
evening, she wore now a coronet of 
scintillant brilliance, and the strange 
flower flamed at her waist. 

"Official robes," she said and smiled. 
"I preside this morning." 

She looked a little worn, he thought. 
There was a pallor on her cheeks, and. 
a subdued air about her. Her smile, 
almost wistful, tore at him. 

"You didn't give me a chance toNihank 
you for last night," he said. 

"Did you want to thank me? For 
everything?" 

"No," he said stonily. "Not for everything." 

She. dropped listlessly to the bench 
beside him. 

"I'm tired," she said wearily. "I 
didn't sleep well, and my head aches. 
That Grecian wine. I must see Martin 
Sair." 

"My head aches for other reasons," he 
said grimly. 

"I'm sorry, Tom." 

"Were you laughing at me last night?" 
he blazed. 

"No," she said gently. "No." 

"l don't believe you!" 

"No matter. Tom, I came here to tell 
you something." She paused and gazed 
steadily at him. "The Master will grant 
you immortality." 

"What?" 

She nodded. "He considers you 
worthy." 

"Worthy! What of the children of 
mine he was so anxious about?" 



"You're to have them first." 

He laughed bitterly. "Then I'll be 
old and feeble by the time I'm ready for 
immortality. Evanie has refused mo — 
and I refuse him' I'll live my life out 
in nr- own way." 

"Think well of it first," she said slowly, and something in her voice caught 
him. 

"Now I know I won't accept," he 
flashed. "You begged him for it! Do you 
think I'd take favors of you?" 

"I didn't — ". She was silent. After a 
moment she said, "Would you believe 
one statement of mine, Tom?" 

"Not one." 

At last his bitterness touched her. She 
flushed faintly. The old gleam of mockery shone for an instant. 

"You're right, of course," she snapped. 
"There's nothing real remaining of Margaret of Urbs. She's the Black Flame 
that burns on illusion's altar. You must 
never believe a single word of hers." 

"Nor do I." 

"But will you believe one sentence if 
I swear it by something sacred to me? 
One thing, Tom?" 

"What's sacred to you? God? Honor? 
Not even yourself!" 

"By the one thing I love," she said 
steadily. "I swear I'm speaking the 
truth now." 

TT WAS on his very tongue to say no. 

He was thoroughly surprised to hear 
himself mutter "Yes" — and mean it. 

"Then do you remember that day in 
the Triangle when I said I was going to 
commit suicide? I swear that is the 
only lie I've ever told you. Do you 
understand? The only lie!" 

She arose as he stared at her uncomprehendingly. 

"I want to be alone," she whispered. 
"I'm going to — " a brief, wistful smile — 
"my thinking room." 

Connor's brain was whirling. He did 
believe her. What of it? Evanie didn't 
love him. He knew that now. And he 
didn't love Evanie. Margaret of Urbs 
said she loved him ! Could it be possible? 



104 FANTASTIC ST 

The Black flame might be his! The 
unearthly beauty of her, the wild, untamed character, his to tame — if he 
could. The Satanic spirit, the fiery soul, 
all his for life. For life? For immortality, if he chose! 

An exultant shout burst from him and 
went echoing between the walls as he 
went to the Palace door and hurried 
through. 

Memory of Evanie had vanished like 
mist. Where was the Princess? In her 
thinking room? Then he remembered. 
The laboratory behind the Throne Room. 

A speaker blared down the hall as he 
■ran : "Conclave in thirty minutes." 

The corridors were thronged; he 
jostled his way past crowds of guards, 
servants, officials, and auster Immortals. Curious eyes followed him, but no 
one moved to halt him. 

Not, at least, until he reached the 
great arch of the Throne Room itself. 
The crystal doors were shut and a line 
of four impassive guards blocked the 
way. He moved to Step between them, 
and a sharp challenge sounded. 

He paused. "I want to see the Princess," he said firmly. 

"None to pass," snapped the guard. 
"Master's orders." 

"But is the Princess in there?" 

"Her Highness," responded the guard, 
"entered here five minutes ago. She said 
nothing of any one to follow." 

RELUCTANTLY, Tom Connor fell 
back. This was the only way to her 
laboratory; of that he was certain. He 
leaned against the wall and clenclied his 
fists in a frenzy of impatience. 

The glass doors opened and the Master 
emerged, accompanied by Martin Sair, 
and two other tall Immortals. 

"Sir," Connor begged eagerly, "tell 
this fellow to pass me. I want to see the 
Princess." 

A curious, quizzical expression flickered in the eyes of the great ruler. He 
shook his head. 

"I'm sorry, Thomas," he said mildly. 
"In fifteen minutes the Princess will be 



RY MAGAZINE 

needed. You can wait." 

"But I think she wants to see me!" 

"Then she can wait as well." His eyes 
flickered again. "She has waited, not too 
patiently, for more than seven centuries." He moved away down the corridor, 
leaving Connor nonplussed. 

He curbed his impatience. After all, 
the Master was right. Time stretched 
before him and Margaret of Urbs, years 
upon years of it. But it was hard, to 
lose these precious moments. 

He thought of the vision screens. Just 
behind him was the vast office opposite 
the Throne Room. He turned in there, 
bursting in upon a scene of feverish activity as the records of half the world 
were made- ready for the Immortals of 
the Southern Hemisphere. Glancing 
about, he descried a screen on a table at 
the far end of the room, and twisted his 
way down the line of desks, ignoring a 
thousand staring clerks. 

"The Princess," he said eagerly, snapping tine switch. "In her laboratory behind the Throne Room." 

On the screen flashed a girl's face, 
but not that of Margaret of Urbs. 

"I'm sorry," she said. "No calls to 
any at the Conclave. Master's orders." 
The screen clicked blank again. 

In the hallway he saw Evanie, staring 
with strange intentness at the closed 
glass doors. He pushed his way to her 
side. 

"Hello," he said, and was puzzled by 
her sudden lack of fear. But she recovered herself and glanced coolly at 
him. 

"Oh, it's you," she said briefly. 

He thought wonderingly how different was this Evanie from the timid, 
modest little Ormon girl of so few days 
ago. But he hardly cared. The Flame 
had burned him free of Evanie. 

"Waiting for the parade of the Immortals?" he asked with a quiet smile. 

"Perhaps." 

"I thought you hated them so that 
you'd prefer not even looking at them." 

Her voice changed to bitterness. "I 
do." 



THE BLAC 

"Well, what's the answer, then?" 

She glanced at a watch on her wrist. 

"You'll know in a moment or two." . 
She gave him a curiously sardonic smile. 
"I'm not afraid to tell you now. I'll even 
tell- you what was in the package I took 
from the amphimorph. Would you like 
to know?" 

"Of course." 

Her voice quivered excitedlv. "In that 
package was an atomic bomb!" 

"An atomic bomb?" 

"Yes. And do you know where it is 
now?" The voice rose, exultant, fanatically elated. "At the wall behind the 
Throne of Urbs ! Behind the throne 
where the Master's sitting this moment!" She laughed at his horrified 
face. "My thanks for sponsoring my request for freedom, Tom. It helped." 

"The Master isn't in there," he said 
tightly. "1 saw him leave." He saw her 
face whiten — and then an appalling 
thought struck him. "Oh, God! But the 
Princess is! The Princess is!" 

He dashed toward the guarded door, 
disregarding Evanie's cry of warning: 
"Tom, it's due! It's due!" 

HE RUSHED at the impassive 
guards, but before their challenge 
was uttered a thunderous roar reverberated in the vast hall like the rumbling 
thunder of a collapsing mountain. 

A continuous screaming bellow like 
the clamor in hell rose in an ear-blasting crescendo, and beyond the glass 
doors rolled billowing clouds of steam, 
shot through with jagged fires. 

Maddened to desperation, Tom Connor plunged against the doors. They 
swung inward and closed behind him, 
and he was in the room of the blast. Far 
down, behind the Master's throne, an 
erupting geyser of destruction appalled 
him — a mighty, roaring, billowing 
cloud of smoke-streaked steam that 
shrieked louder than the tortured souls 
of the seventh circle of hell. 

Crashing discharges of stray energy 
etched flames through the cloud, like 
lightning behind a thunderhead, and the 



K FLAME 105 

reverberations echqed above the roar of 
the disrupting hydrogen. The Master's 
throne was hidden by the bellowing fires 
that grounded to it. 

But even that holocaust had not yet 
filled the vast concave of the Throne 
Room. The end where Connor stood, 
momentarily bewildered, was as yet 
clouded only by shreds and streamers. 
He lowered his head, and charged into 
the inferno. Margaret was caught 
somewhere behind that hellish blast! 

Scalding steam lickpd at him. swirling about his body. His bare legs and 
shoulders stung at the touch, his face 
burned, but he gained the line of thrones 
and paused a single moment on., the 
shielded side. What an engine of destruction! A homb that, instead of venting its force in a single blast, kept on 
exploding as successive billions of atoms 
shattered. 

No need to look for the door. The detonation, the first blast, had blown the 
wall open. Instantly, he made a dash 
over the scorching debris, where the 
mighty girders were fantastically twisted and bent away from the roaring center, pointed up in the misty light. He 
launched himself at the edge of the opening, passing close to the very threshold 
of that trapdoor of Tophet. 

Gamma radiations excoriated his 
body. The shriek of'dying atoms thundered against his tortured eardrums, 
and he was burning, blistering. But an 
implacable thrust urged him on. He was 
responsible for this chaos, this holocaust, and Margaret of Urbs— He had 
violated his oath to the Master! Evanie 
had betrayed him into that, had tricked 
him into sponsoring her plea for freedom, and because he had aided her this 
had happened. Jan Orm could have done 
no damage alone. Only Evanie, because 
of the inhuman blood in her, could have 
dealt with an amphimorph. Evanie, 
with whom he had thought himself in 
love! 

And the Princess, whom he did love, 
was somewhere beyond. He raged on, 
his mind turbulent as the blast itself, 



108 FANTASTIC SI 

into Martin Sair's laboratory, a flaming 
outer region of hell clouded to invisib i 1 i fry. Suffocating, scorching, he 
crashed against its farther wall, slid 
along it, at last found the door. 

rpHE ROOM of the Princess was in 
chaotic disorder, but only lazy wisps 
of steam drifted there, and the bellow 
of the blast was muffled. But even now 
the wall was cracking. 

"Margaret!" he cried. "Margaret of 
Urbs !" 

Her voice answered him. She was in 
a corner, crouching. Injured? No, she 
was saarching earnestly through a pile 
of debris that had been swept across the 
room by the first concussion. He rushed 
toward her. 

"Come on!" he shouted. "We'll break 
a window and get out." 

She glanced coolly up. 

"A window? Try it. A bullet might, 
but nothing less." 

He snatched up a chair, spun it 
fiercely against the pane. The chair 
shattered ; two tiny dents showed in the 
crystal, and that was all. And in the 
Palace, ventilated by washed air from 
the topmost pinnacles of the Twin Towers, no windows opened. He whirled on 
her. 

"Then it will have to be back through 
the blast!" he roared. "Come on!" 

She stood up, facing him. She had 
slipped off her black robe in the steaming heat, wore now the typical revealing garb of Urbs save that the material 
was of black velvet instead of metallic 
scales. 

"You can't go through in clothes like 
that!" he shouted. 

"My Venus," she said. "It was blown 
somewhere here. I want it." 

"You'll come now!" 

"I want my ivory Venus." 

The pale flash of ivory caught his eye. 

"Here it is, then," he snapped, thrusting the statuette into his belt. "Now 
come." 

Faint mockery flashed in her eyes. 
"What if I don't?" 



»KY MAGAZINE 

He shook a rugged fist. "You will or 
I'll take you." 

She was motionless. 

"Why," she asked, "do you risk your 
life to reach me?" 

"Because," he snarled in exasperation, "I was unwittingly responsible for 
this. I was tricked into breaking my 
word. Do you think I can let the Master 
— or you — suffer for my stupidity?" 

"Oh," she said, her eyes dropping. 
"Well, I won't go." 

"You will!" He sprang to seize her, 
but she evaded him. 

But only for a moment, as again he 
saw the gleam of mockery in her eyes. 

"Very well," she said, suddenly submissive. 

He snatched the flowing robe from 
the floor as she turned and walked 
steadily toward the wall that now 
heaved and'cracked and groaned. Before he could reach her she had flung 
open the door and hell roared in upon 
them. 

Martin Sair's laboratory was a mass 
of smoke and steam like the crater of 
Erebus that flames in the eternal ice of 
Antarctica. Flinging the robe over the 
Princess like an enshrouding blanket, 
Connor propelled her, muffled and 
stumbling, toward the evil effulgence of 
the screaming blast. 

At the break in the wall he put his 
weight into a mighty thrust that sent 
her sliding, staggering, sprawling into 
the room where the fiery cloud closed, 
billowing, about her. Then he leaped 
through, his flesh writhing in the torment of the stinging rays, and blistering at the touch of scalding steam. 

TI/TARGARET of Urbs was clambering 
to her feet, stumbling in the entangling robe, in the all but unbearable 
shelter of the thrones. She choked as 
the searing air reached her lungs. 

"You hurt!" she cried. 

"Come on!" 

Again the taunting gleam, even with 
blistering death staring them in the face. 
But she followed unresisting as he seized 



THE BLAl 

her arm and plunged through the blinding fog of steam and smoke that now 
filled the mighty room to the distant 
ceiling. Blind chance was their guide 
as they rushed ahead, staggering, coughing, teary-eyed. It seemed a long way. 
Were they circling in the gloom of the 
monstrous chamber? 

The Princess dragged against Connor's arm. 

"No." she gasped. "This way." 

He let her lead. They struggled 
through billowing masses that began to 
take fantastic shapes of charging monsters, heaving mountains. She staggered, 
stumbled, but shook off the arm he 
raised to support her. 

"I've never needed help." she muttered proudly. "I never will." 

It seemed to him that the blast roared 
closer. 

"Are we — right?" he choked. 

Then, through a momentary rift he 
saw something that sickened him — the 
row of thrones, smoking and blackened 
in the blaze. They had circled! 

Through some vagary of draught or 
ventilation there was a little area of almost clear air beside the throne of the 
Princess. Coughing and choking, they 
faced each other in it. He was astounded to see a flickering, taunting smile play 
for a single instant on her lips. Her 
hair singed and plastered flat by the 
steamy condensation, her face sootstreaked and reddened, she was yet so 
incredibly lovely that he forgot even 
their peril as her smile turned suddenly 
earnest, wistful. 

"Dearest," she whispered, inaudibly, 
but he read her lips. "I'll confess now. 
We are safe in my room. We must have 
been watched in the vision screens, and 
men would have come to cut through 
the window." 

He was appalled. 

"Then why — " 

"Listen to me, Tom. Even here I misled you, for I knew which way the door 
lies by the pattern on the floor. But if 
you will not love me and I must kill you 
as I promised, ■ then let both of us die! 



K FLAME 107 

For I cannot watch you age year by 
year — and then perish. I cannot!" 

"Flame!" he roared, his voice" impassioned. "But T love you ! Did you think — 
I love you, Flame!" 

Her streaming eyes widened. 

"Oh, God r she choked. "Now it's too 
late !" She covered her face, then 
abruptly glanced up again, with a dawning hope in her eyes. "Perhaps not!" 
she cried. "Can they see us here? No— 
the steam. But men will come in moonsuits to carry away the blast — if we can 
live until then." She coughed. "But we 
can't." She was swaying. "You go — that 
way. Kiss me, Tom, and leave me. I 
want to die on the throne — of Urbs. 
Only a thing like this, some accident — can kill an — Immortal!" 

"Leave you?" he cried. "Not even in 
death !" He choked as he drew her close. 

A wave of steam and fire engulfed 
them. "Help me to my — throne," she 
whispered, gasping. 

Her eyes, bright and green in the 
fierce lightnings, went blank. They 
closed, and she slipped half through his 
arms. Her knees gave way as she collapsed. 

XIII 

He HELD her against him. Put her 
on the throne? Why not? Why not hold 
her there until the end, die with her in 
his arms? Or perhaps shield her with 
his body until men came, or until the 
blast burned out. Somehow she must be 
saved ! 

Never — not even when a thousand 
years ago an electric current was shot 
through him to kill him, had his urge 
for life been so great as it was now. 
Now, when life promised so much — -the 
love of himself and the Black Flame of 
Urbs, two beings who should have been 
dead centuries ago and in different ages 
— he must die ! 

Had Destiny kept them alive to meet 
and love for this brief moment before 
death? Better to die struggling for life. 
Raising the girl in his arms, he stag


10t> FANTASTIC SI 

gered away toward the wall that still 
shielded the room where he had found 
the Princess. 

Her weight was slight, but he had not 
taken ten steps when he went crashing 
to his knees. He struggled up dizzily. 
The line of diagonal black square 
showed dim on the floor, yet he could 
not be sure that he had not changed his 
direction. He was suffocating; the roaring blast seemed to bellow in a gigantic 
throbbing, now in his very ears, now 
dim and faint and far away. 

He battled on. Suddenly he realized 
that he was moving burdenless. Without even being aware of it he had 
dropped the Princess. He turned grimly 
back until be stumbled over her lying 
huddled with her cheek against the 
steaming floor. Swinging her across his 
shoulders, gripping her knees so tightly 
that his fingers bit into the soft skin, 
he staggered back over the lost ground. 

Each step was a gamble with death. 
If he fell now he would never rise again. 
He tottered on while his lungs labored 
in the vitiated air and the searing steam. 
Then behind him the blast roared fainter. Or was it simply that his senses were 
dulling? 

It was the sharp blow of his head 
against the wall that brought him back 
from a dreamy somnolence into which 
he was falling, surprised to feel the 
weight of the unconscious girl still on 
his shoulder. 

Which wail? In what direction was 
the door that meant life? He groaned 
and turned at random to the right, 
simply because his right arm clutched 
the limbs of Margaret of Urbs and his 
left hand was free to support him 
against the carved masonry. But an 
ejaculation of triumph escaped his 
burned, cracked lips as his hand slid 
over steam-clouded glass, and he saw 
white faces through the track it left. 

He could go no further; make not one 
more move. The limp body of the Princess slid from his arms, and vaguely 
then he knew that both of them were 
being dragged into the safety of the 



»KY MAGAZINE 

corridor. He gasped in great breaths of 
clear air that whistled in his burning 
throat, and then his heart chilled as his 
bloodshot eyes turned on the form of 
the Flame. ' 

Her face frightened him. Waxen pale, 
still as the image on her throne, she 
seemed scarcely to breathe. 

A grnve Immortal who bent above her 
straightened up and said tensely, "Get 
Martin Sair — quickly!" His eyes flashed 
to Cnnnor. "Ynn'rc not hurt," he said. 
"Just rest here for a time." 

There was a stir in the hallway. Two 
men in brown, all-encnmpassing suits 
and crystal he'mef-s were pulling something metal. It looked like a steamshovel scoop with two fifty-foot handles. 
It was a grapple for the blast, to box it 
before it undermined the vast Palace. 

Then Martin Sair was at hand, and 
the Master, his sorrowful eyes on the 
Princess. 

"Clear the corridor," said the sandyhaired Immortal, and guards swept 
back the crowd. 

Through the North Arch, Connor 
glimpsed thousands upon thousands of 
Urbans on the Palace lawn, and then 
tbey were hidden as the gates closed. 

"He must go, too," said Martin Sair, 
nodding at Connor. "The fewer lungs 
here the better. The girl is asphyxiated." 

"No!" Connor crodked, flinging an 
arm across the Flame. 

"All right. Move aside, then." 

But a roaring like all the tortured 
souls since creation burst from the opening doors. Out rushed the gnome-like 
men pulling their grapple, and Connor 
thrust his body between them and the 
Princess, taking the fierce rays on his 
own flesh. 

rpHE CONTAINER glowed brilliant as 
the sun, and out beyond the North 
Arch a chain dropped from the sky — a 
Triangle to bear away the deadly thing, 
to drop it into the sea. And the Palace 
was silent now as the silence of death. 
Death ? Tom Connor glanced fear


THE BLAC 

fully at the marble features of Margaret 
of Urbs. They were like death, too, and 
he gazed so fascinated that he was utterly surprised to look up and see Evanie 
and Jan Orm herded down the corridor 
by half a dozen grim guards. 

"Trying to escape out of the South 
Gate," said one. 

The Master turned burning eyes on 
them, and then again looked sorrowfully 
down on the still perfection of the features of the Black Flame. 

An Immortal placed a box at Martin 
Sair's side. 

"Adrenalin!" snapped the Giver of 
Life, and took the tube the other handed 
him. "Amino-hyoscine! Doturamine!" 

He pressed the pale flesh of the girl's 
arm, parted the closed lids to gaze into 
unseeing eyes. Finally, in the familiar 
manner of an ancient physician, he 
placed thumb and forefinger on her 
wrist, frowning as he felt for the faint 
throb of her pulse. 

"Suffocated," he repeated. "Asphyxia." 

In an agony of apprehension, his eyes 
blurred, Connor watched the slow rise 
and fall of her breast. Twice he fancied 
that the movement had ceased and each 
time, with an almost inaudible gasp, the 
labored breathing recommenced. Then 
it did cease; he was positive, and a great 
wave of despair engulfed him. 

"Her heart's stopping," Martin Sair 
said briefly. 

Tom- Connor gazed wildly about the 
corridor. Uncomprehending, he saw 
the grim light of triumph in the face of 
Evanie Sair as she looked coldly down 
on the fading glory of the Black Flame. 

That such beauty should perish — be 
thrust into the earth— turn into a heap 
of crumbling bones! 

"Dying!" Connor gasped again. 

The Giver of Life glanced coldly at 
him. 

"Dying?" He echoed impassively. 
"No. Dead. What of it?" 

The Master turned grimly away and 
passed silently into the Throne Room 
with a word of brief command to the 



K FLAME 109 

guards. They thrust Evanie Sair and 
Jan Orm before them, but Tom Connor 
did not miss the backward glance of 
triumph which the girl flung defiantly at 
him. 

Connor gazed desolately on the lovely 
clay that had been the Black Flame of 
Urbs, wondering dully why Martin Sair 
still bent so attentively above her, still 
kept the pale wrist in his hand. 

He started when the austere Immortal 
moved, placed his lips close to the cold 
ones of the girl, and rapped out: 

"Now! The Mask!" 

The Giver of Life jammed a cone over 
the still face- There was a moment's 
silence; nothing happened. The scientist bent closer. Abruptly he placed his 
hands about the waist of the Princess, 
shook her violently, until her head rolled 
from side to side. He slapped her breast, 
her cheeks. And then, like the faint 
sighing of evening wind, she breathed. 

A thin, muffled gasp — no more. But 
life-bearing oxygen flowed into her 
lungs, and the suspended metabolism of 
her body resumed its interrupted chemistries. Her breathing strengthened to 
a labored, w r histling panting. 

"Chain-Stokes breathing," muttered 
Martin Sair, whose genius had recalled 
a spirit already treading the pathways 
of eternity. The Black Flame, rekindled, 
burned dimly and flickeringly — but 
burned ! 

TT WAS past Connor to comprehend. 
*- The transition from the deeps of desolation to the peak of hope was too vast 
to span in a moment. He merely gazed 
blankly on the mask-covered face of the 
Princess. When realization began to 
dawn, the cry of amazement and ecstasy 
strangled in his throat and became only 
an inchoate gurgle. He managed a 
choked question. 

"Will she — live?" He moved as if to 
clasp her in his arms. 
. "Don't!" snapped Martin Sair. "On 
your life, don't touch her yet. Give hei 
red corpuscles time to oxygenate. The 
girl's asphyxiated, suffocated, strangled. 



110 FANTASTIC SI 

Do you want it all to do over again?" 
His eyes perceived the anguish in Connor's face, and he softened. "Of course 
she'll live. Did you think Death could so 
easily defeat Martin Sair? He has beaten me many a time, but never in so mild 
a contest as this !" 

The great Immortal again bent over 
the girl. Her breathing had eased. For 
a terrible instant Connor thought it was 
ceasing once more. Martin JSair lifted 
the mask from the pallid, perfect features, still quiet as marble save for the 
sighing of her breathing. 

"Now the elixir yitae," he said. "That 
will put lire into this chilly blood." 

He toek a phial of ruby liquid from 
the hand of his silent assistant, the same 
potent stimulant, it appeared, that had 
aroused Evanie from the death-like 
sleep of the Messenger. 

The Princess was far too deep in unconsciousness to swallow. Martin Sair 
poured a tiny, trickling stream between 
her lips, no more than a few crimson 
drops. It was enough. As it made its 
fiery way down her throat she moaned 
and her exquisite face twisted as if in 
agony. The limp hands clenched convulsively into white fists. 

Martin Sair rose. 

"You see," he said to his grave assistant, "there was nothing organically 
wrong. Oxygen-starved, that was all. 
The organism was undamaged. The 
blood had not even begun to coagulate. 
It. was simply necessary to start the 
body machine working, since it was in 
perfect running order." 

"Cardiacine is a gamble," his assistant said slowly. "I've had it rupture the 
hearts in some cases." 

Martin Sair snorted. "Not with proper precautions. Daturamine and aminohyoscine first. Cardiacine is powerful, 
of course." He mused. "I've seen it produce pulsations in the heart of a man 
ten days dead." 

Connor ceased to listen. Cases! As if 
this were a medical case — this miracle! 
They droned on without even a glance 
at the pain-racked, exquisite face. Tom 



JKY MAGAZINE 

Connor touched her cold cheeks, kissed 
the soot-streaked forehead. 

"Careful!" warned Martin Sair. 

"But she breathes!" Connor whispered exultantly. "You're certain she'll 
live?" 

"She'll be conscious in ten minutes. 
A little sick, but conscious." The scientist's tone softened again. "In two days 
she'll be as bright as ever. After all, her 
body is the body of a twenty-year-old 
girl. She has youth, resilience. You can 
stop worrying." 

Someone touched Connor's shoulder; 
a guard , who began dron ing, "Orbis 
T erratum Imperator — " 

"I won't go!" Tom Connor blazed. 
"I'm staying here!" 

"She's out of danger, I tell you," insisted Martin Sair. "If she were ever 
in danger, with me at hand!" 

Hesitantly then, Connor followed the 
guard, glancing apprehensively back at 
Margaret of Urbs, prone on the stone 
floor of the corridor. Then reluctantly 
he went on into the Throne Room. 

TN THE Throne Iioom the ventilators 
* had drawn out the steam and smokepoisoned air, but moisture dripped from 
the walls and gathered in pools on the 
floor. The terrific destruction of the 
blast was evident everywhere. No single 
hanging remained on walls or windows. 
Everything inflammable was in cinders, 
and the floor was still almost blistering 
hot. 

The far end was a mass of indescribable ruin, debris '"rom the shattered wall, 
even fragments of the diorite bases of 
the thrones. The air, despite the humming ventilators, was stifling in the radiations from floor and walls. 

The Master sat upon the half-melted 
wreckage of his throne, his stern eyes 
on Evanie and Jan Orm, who stood between guards before him. 

The frightened look on Evanie's face 
moved Connor despite the injuries she 
had done him. After all, she had nursed 
him out of the very grave and given 
him, penniless and strange, a home and 



THE BLACK FLAME 



111 



a place in this bizarre world. She was 
clinging frantically to the arm of Jan, 
who stood morose and impassive before 
the Master. 

"Thomas," the ruler said, "I can pet 
nothing from this sullen pair. Tell me 
what you know of this." 

Connor met Evanie's terrified gaze, 
and it wrung pity from him. He owed 
much to this girl. Was it any more than 
right that he help her now? At least he 
could confuse the issue, prolong it until 
he could obtain the aid of Margaret of 
Urbs. 

"I did it myself!" he said promptly. 
There was no change in the Master's 
face. 

"You?" he repeated mildly. "How?" 

"I made the bomb in Martin Sair's 
laboratory," Connor said, with a quick 
warning glance at Evanie. "I made it at 
night, and smuggled it in here during 
the darkness. That's all." 

"Indeed? After your oath, Thomas? 
And I had flattered myself that you were 
my friend — my esteemed friend." 

There was something inscrutable in 
the Master's face. The grave eyes surveyed Connor sorrowfully as he fingered 
a beam-pistol. 

"I think," said the Master, slipping 
out the weapon, "that 1 will destroy you 
once and for all, Connor." He leveled 
the gun. 

"Wait!" shrieked Jan Orm. "He didn't 
do it — I did!" He paused as the Master's 
cool eyes shifted to him. "I had it made 
in Ormon and smuggled here to me. 1 
hid it in the Throne Room early this 
morning, before any one was about!" " 

"Well," said the Master slowly. "I 
might believe that both of you had a 
hand in it." 

His eyes flickered over Evanie. 

She drew herself erect. 

"What's the use?" she said dully. "I 
won't have you two shielding me. I did 
it. 1 had the bomb smuggled to me by 
an amphimorph, who rode a bubble 
down the mains to the pool in the Gardens. That's the truth." 

"Suppose, then," said the Master, "I 



destroy all three of you. and thus assure 
myself that the guilty one is punished." 

"I don't care!" Evanie flung out defiantly. "I'm sorry I failed, but at least 
I've extinguished the Bbck Flame of 
Urbs-«-aiid I'm glad!" 

rr<HE RULER'S eyes held a curious 
light as he gazed over their heads. A 
step sounded behind them. Connor 
whirled to see Margaret of Urbs approaching, supported by the arm of 
Martin Sair. Soot-stained, the whole 
slim length of her right leg red and blistered by the blast, her right cheek inflamed by thp contact with the steaming 
floor, she was still so incredibly lovely 
that she was breath-taking. Tom Connor 
sprang to her side, slipped a steadying 
arm about her as she swayed willingly 
against him. Evanie, so pale she seemed 
about to f ai n t, was leaning weakly 
against Jan Orm. 

"What's all this, Joaquin?" asked the 
Princess. 

"Merely an attempt to fix responsibility for the bombing, my dear." 

"And have you fixed it?" 

"All three claim the honor." 

"I see." She paused. "Well, I can 
throw some light on the mystery. / am 
responsible for the bomb explosion. It 
was an accident. I was watching some 
detonol crystallize, in Martin Sair's 
room, and forgot to take it off the burner. I was stunned by the concussion, 
and Thomas Connor "rushed in and guided me out. Somewhere in the Throne 
Room I suppose I must have been overcome." She paused again, staring back 
at the Master. "Don't you see? Each of 
these three suspects the others and each 
is trying to shield his friends. But I 
did it. It was an accident." 

She slipped from Connor's arm and 
sank wearily to the steps that led to her 
ruined Throne. 

"I burn!" she muttered, and sipped 
the goblet of water that a guard held to 
her lips. 

Quizzically, the Master gazed down 
at her. 



112 



FANTASTIC STORY MAGAZINE 



"You know," he said, suddenly stern, 
"that to me the one unforgivable sin is 
the thwarting; of my plans. Not even 
you, my sister, may stand in the way of 
them. While I live. T am the Master. I 
shall yield only when a power arises 
strong enough to overthrow me, f>r that 
will tell me "that my work is done. When 
that occurs. I shall have guided humanity as far as I am able along; the 
path of Destiny, but until then T am the 
Master." 

His face, austere as an impgp in 
basalt. loomed over them. For the first 
time Connor glimpsed dimly the colossus behind the mild mask, the diamond 
hardness below the silk that sheathed 
it. 

Then the ruler smiled. 

"I suppose I cannot doubt my sister's 
word. I release all of you." 

He arose and descended from the 
throne. 

Connor followed a step or two. "I'm 
interested to learn." he whispered, 
"which of us you believe." 

The Master smiled again. "Haven't 
I just said ?" He turned away. "Of 
course, If I were curious, I could ask 
you and Jan Orm how you knew what 
time to set the blast. I hadn't decided 
on a time for the Conclave until I had 
it announced in the corridors, and the 
bomb must have been placed between 
that moment and the arrival of the 
guards." 

"Or the Princess is telling the truth," 
suggested Tom Connor. 

"Some day Margaret shall explain 
why detonal causes a cloud of steam," 
observed the Master. He continued absently, "Evanie has good blood in her. 
So has Jan Orm." 

Then he was gone, followed by Martin 
Sair and the guards. 

Connor returned to Margaret of Urbs. 
Evanie's incredulous eyes were fixed on 
the Princess as she whispered: 

"Why did you do that?" 

"Because I thought it would please 
Tom Connor," Margaret of Urbs said 
frankly. 



Evanie stared at her with yawning 
comnrehension. 

"The Black Flame herself burned!" 
she murmured wonderingly. "T see now 
why we can still learn from the ancients. 
They're miracle workers." But the next 
instant her brown eyes glittered vindictively. "I'm glad at least that the conquest of the Flame was during my life 
time." She bowed half in wonderment, 
half in mockery, before Connor. "I salute the Prince consort of Urbs." 

The Princess flushed faintly, and Connor laughed and glanced away. Something that sparkled in a pile of ashes 
caught his eye. 

lie stooped to retrieve the marvelous 
crystalline flower, glowing brilliant and 
indestructible, untouched — even brightened — by the blast. 

"What is this?" he asked. 

"My mnon-orchid," said Margaret of 
Urbs. "The only perfect one ever 
found." 

He grinned and turned to Evanie. 

"I promised you one. Here — our wedding present to you and Jan." 

"Engagement present, rather," said, 
the Princess. "I owe you two somewhat 
more than you realize." She ignored 
both Evanie's silence and Jan Orm's 
protestations of mingled embarrassment, thanks, and refusal as he held 
the priceless thing. "Tom," she murmured, "would you mind if we were— 
alone ?" 

TT WAS dismissal. Jan and Evanie 
^ backed away with half awe-struck 
glances at Connor. He dropped beside 
the weary Princess of Urbs, slipping his 
arm tenderly about her shoulders. Even 
in the sultriness of that blasted chamber 
she shivered, her teeth chattered, so 
recently had the icy face of death withdrawn. 

He drew her close, then halted as he 
heard a distant, thin clamor beyond the 
windows. 

"What's that?" he asked sharply. 
"Another revolution?" 
"Just the newspapers, I guess. You've" 



THE BLACK FLAME 



been in them frequently of late." She 
smiled wanly. "As often as I, this past 
week. The Weed who sustained the 
ionic beams — revealed as a living ancient — proclaimed for immortality — the 
rescuer of Margaret of Urbs — and 
now — " She quoted ironically, " 'Margaret to Wed? Romance Rumored with 
Rescuer!'" She nestled closer to him. 
"Oh, the downfall of the Black Flame 
will be well publicized, never fear. Let 
them add this to their pictures and vision broadcasts. I don't care!" 

"Pictures? What pictures?" He 
glanced about the vast deserted chamber. ' 

"From the seeing room, of course! 
Don't you suppose we were watched all 
during the blast, even in here, as much 
as the steam permitted ? Don't you know 
we're being watched now, photographed 
for papers, and broadcasts? You're 
world news, Tom." She frowned. "They 
must have thought me mad to rush into 
that inferno with you, out of safety. 
Well, I was mad!" 

"You can't even die in privacy here!" 
Connor said bluntly. "Do you suppose — -"his voice dropped to a whisper 
— "they heard what we said?" 

"Above the roar of the blast? No. I 
thought of that when I said it." 

TTE SMILED at that. It was so typical 
** of the utterly strange and fascinating character of the girl. He drew her 
against him, and felt the pressure of 
something hard in his belt — the ivory 
Venus, still safe, still immaculate in its 
perfection, since it had been on the left 
side, shielded by his own flesh when he 
passed the blast. 

"I know what I shali give you as a 
wedding present," he said slowly. "The 
original Venus de Milo. The most beautiful statue of the ancient world." 

She smiled and a trace of the old 
mockery showed. 

"And I know what I shall give you," 
she said. "Life'!" 

"Immortality?" 



113 



"Tom, is it very hard to give up the idea 
of children? Men want children, don't 
they?" 

"Most of us do, but it's a happiness 
well lost for you." He glanced down at 
her. "Listen, can't immortality be undone? Wouldn't it be possible for Martin Sair to render you mortal for a few 
years?" 

"Of course. Further exposure to the 
hard rays will do it." 

"And then," eagerly, "could we — " 

The smile she Hashed at him had in it 
a touch of heaven. "Yes," she said exultantly, but instantly a cloud chased 
away the smile. "But don't you remember what sort of children women 
bear who've been too long in the ray?" 
she whispered. "Amphimorphs, Tom! 
Would you like to be father to a little 
amphimorph?" 

He shuddered. "Thank you. We'll do 
as we are, then." 

SHE burst suddenly into laughter almost as mocking as her old self. 
Then she was as suddenly serious, 
tender. 

"Tom," she murmured, "I won't tease 
you. That will be my gift to you. Martin 
Sair can do what you wish. There is 
some leeway to the process — enough, 
perhaps, for a time. I'll give you five 
years of mortality. My permanent age 
is twenty, now; it will be twenty-five 
then. But who in all the world could 
have anticipated that the Black Flame 
would assume motherhood — and like it? 
Tom, that's my gift to you. Life! Kiss 
me!" 

For a moment of ecstasy he felt her 
lips quiver against his. 

"Two boys and a girl !" she murmured 
softly. 

"Can Martin Sair," he asked ironically, "fix that for us, too?" 

"Of course. Two boys like you, Tom." 
She was suddenly dreamy-eyed. 

"But not a girl like you." 

"Why not?" 

"Because," Tom Connor laughed, "I 



"Not immortality. Life." She turned * don",; tnink society could stand a second 
her emerald eyes on him and asked: Black Flame!" • • • 



THIN END 



by J. W. 
GROVES 




watch Mary plummet into the swift-rt 



Deep in space, a man suddenly discovers his own wife 
fo be one ol ihe dreaded, nearly-extinct paranorms! 



HE should never have left the turret 
inspection-door to the main engine room open, of Course. And certainly 
he should have wiped up the oil immediately after he dropped it, not left it to 
spread out in a slippery patch over the 
metal plates of the catwalk. But the 
owners of small pleasure-craft are notoriously space's most careless navigators. 

He Was halfway across the connect


ing corridor when he heard his wife's 
shrill scream. He swung round and 
flung himself back through the door, 
fear lending him extra speed. 

Her slim body, white-clothed, was 
just disappearing. She had fallen and 
slid to the edge. The single guard-rail 
was too far above her head to save her. 
He made futile grabbing motions 
though he was still a dozen feet away. 
Then he dived to the rail to watch her 



THIN 

plummet, screaming still, towards turning axles and giant swift-meshing gears. 

His throat was dry, his eyes rigidly 
wide as he waited for the horror of 
crunching bones — of spurting blood. 
And then a greater horror intervened. 
She floated to one side, clear of danger, 
and landed gently on her feet. 

His numbed mind would not accept 
that at first. It tried to pretend that his 
eyes had lied, that the wide footway 
round the engine was directly below the 
spot from which she had fallen. 

And all the time he knew it was not 
so. She had been falling to certain death 
until the laws of gravity had gone crazy. 
And the laws of gravity— even the 
pseudo-gravity of mattract plates — do 
not invert themselves crazily for normal 
people. 

He stayed where he was, sick with 
shock, trying to realize all that it meant, 
until he heard her feet pattering lightly 
up metal stairs. Then he turned and 
stumbled towards their cabin. There was 
a gun there — A little electron-stream 
sporting model that they had brought 
along for shooting the Arico bats of 
Mars. 

THE small cylinder felt cool in his 
palm until it grew sticky with his 
sweat. He met her in the corridor outside, fixed his gaze on the trim white 
waist of leatherine snug-suit. That was 
the thing to do. Never meet their eyes 
when you looked at them. That way they 
couldn't control you. At least so people 
said. Nobody really knew. 

He spoke to her, his voice furry. "You 
—you levitated." 

She was quiet for a long time while 
he glared at her waist. Then she answered in a tired voice. "Yes, Jim, 1 
levitated." 

The words set "him trembling, increased in fury the turmoil of clashing 
emotions inside him. He would have 
called her a liar if she had denied it. But 
all the time there had lingered in one 
corner of his mind a wild hope that she 
would deny it — that she would indig


END 115 

nantly refute his implied accusation and 
somehow beat down his skepticism so 
that he could believe her. 

Now, though, he had to face the 
truth— and with it the duty that truth 
laid upon him. A duty that he owed to 
himself and the men he had fought with 
and the whole human race — a simple 
duty — just to pull a trigger. 

But Jhis was Mary — M& Mary, the 
Mary of that soft sweet spring and long 
glowing sun-drenched summer that had 
preceded the war. The Mary who, in 
the fall, had promised in a bravely controlled voice to wait for him until the 
fighting was over. And who had faithfully kept that promise. 

"Three years," he said in a low, flat 
tone. "Three years I spent with the 
Human Navy, fighting the paranorms 
until we thought we had exterminated 
them completely. And all the time my 
own wife — " 

"We can't help being what we are 
born, Jim," she said sadly. * 

Unthinkingly he lifted his eyes to hers 
and knew instantly that it had been a 
mistake. The gun leaped from his hands, 
seemingly of its own volition, though he 
knew that actually an involuntary 
movement of his own muscles had made 
him throw it away. 

She bent to pick up the weapon. Freed 
from the compulsion of her eyes he 
turned and ran up the corridor. As he 
raced along, his feet .tap-tapping softly 
on the rubberoid floor covering, he 
formed inchoate half-plans for getting 
to the corn-room, radioing* frantically to 
Earth. 

But of course she had thought of that 
first. As he turned the last corner he 
saw her in front of the com-room door, 
waiting for him. 

There's only one way she could have 
got there in that time, he thought grimly 
— teleportation. Well, thank God there 
were limits to that power. The best of 
them couldn't cross a million miles of 
space without a ship. And she was no 
pilot. She was locked out as surely as 
he was unless she got the chance to 



116 



FANTASTIC STORY MAGAZINE 



take over his mind. 

Weaponless, too dizzy to think properly, he ran back to the cabin, slammed 
the heavy door behind him and locked it. 
Many of them could teleport through 
solid matter providing its elements were 
low in the atomic scale. But the more 
complicated structures of proton and 
electron baulked most of them. None 
but the ablest could teleport through 



At least that was what they had 
taught him in the Space Navy. Though 
they had been careful to warn him that 
nobody knew for certain. Nobody knew 
for certain what the limits of their powers were. 

Evidently, though, the parasteel walls 
of the cabin were enough to stop Mary. 
For he heard her knock softly on the 
door. 

"Let me in, Jim, please," she pleaded 
quietly. 

IHs only answer to that was a harsh 
short laugh. She began to talk again. 
"Jim. You're making a terrible mistake." 

"I'm not making it. I made it. Four 
years ago when I married you." 

He heard her sob and the sound 
wrenched at the heart of him. He gritted 
his teeth, deliberately hardening himself. "Go away. Go away and let me 
alone." 

She went away for a little while. But 
after an hour or so he heard her knock 
again. "Jim, what are you going to do?" 

"I don't knojv. I've got to think. Just 
let me alone." 

"But Jim. All the food concentrates 
are in there. And the water converter." 

IN HIS confusion of mind he had not 
realized it up to then. Now he 
laughed sharply. "Fine. That makes 
everything just perfect." 

It didn't though. He knew that he'd 
never be able to stick it if she came to 
him starving, thirsty, pleading for food 
and water. He had to kill her — but he 
had to find some more humane way of 
doing it. Shooting or strangling — 



Shooting? Strangling? Dear God, this 
was Mary! Mary, with whom he had 
camped on the flower -jeweled slopes of 
Venusmount. Mary, with whom he had 
raided the glittering shop-palaces of 
New York. . . . 

He pulled himself out of it with an 
effort, forced his mind to concentrate on 
the war, on the purple bloated bodies he 
had seen. On the friends he had known 
who had gone into action and never 
come back, on the thick, heartening 
hatred that all of them had felt for 
those damned paranorms. 

All the same it was foolish to think of 
shooting or strangling. He had no gun 
and he'd never be able to get near 
enough to her to strangle her without 
giving her a chance to master him. He'd 
have to devise something more subtle. 

He wondered if she was following his 
thoughts all the time. The Naval instructors said it couldn't be done. That 
reading someone else's mind without 
their cooperation needed a strong mental effort on the part of the paranorms, 
one that couldn't be maintained for long 
without exhaustion. That is, as far as 
anybody knew. 

He got some proof that it was true 
when he thought of the airshaft before 
she did and was left in peace to drag 
the heavy metal wardrobe in front of it 
and jam that into place with several 
other pieces of furniture. 

A half-hour later, when Mary teleported through a thin screen in some 
other part of the ship, along the open 
airshaft, and up to the cabin, he was sitting down waiting for her. 

He heard her grunt with pain as her 
teleported body slapped back into solidity against the wardrobe. 

"Sorry," he said quietly. "No entry 
that way." 

"Jim," she pleaded from behind the 
furniture. "Jim. Please— I've got to talk 
to you." 

"Not interested." 

"But Jim, you've got to be interested. 
It's so important to both of us." 

He remained silent, crouching stiffly 



THIN 

in his chair. After awhile she went on. 
"Jim. Why should you hate me or fear 
me? Have I ever done any harm to — to 
your kind of people?" 

"You're a paranorm," he said gratingly. "One of the monsters we had to 
fight — exterminate — to save ourselves." 

"But have / ever done anything?" 

"Not as far as I know." he admitted 
grudgingly. 

"Well?" 

When he replied he was arguing as 
much with himself as with her. "It's 
what your people did that counts. 
Worming into positions of power all 
over the world so they could start a war 
and then, when everybody was weakened by it, trying to take over, be dictators — " 

"That isn't true," she said passionately. "We hate war and don't want to 
dictate to anybody. But your peace was 
nothing but a precarious balance of power that the least little incident would 
have sent toppling. Some of us pushed 
ourselves into ruling positions so that 
we could establish a real peace." 

If she had limited her pleading to her 
own personal defense she might have 
stood a chance with him. He was jn love 
with her, and would have wanted desperately to believe what she was saying. 
But that she should try to excuse the 
whole of her race was too much. 

ALL the old hate, so assiduously cultivated in him by newspaper and 
video during those three grim years, 
flared up. 

"A real peace !" he said scornfully. 
"Yes — the peace that slaves or cattle 
get. It's no use, Mary. If we leave even 
a few of you alive you'll be- — be like a 
wedge, trying all the time to split our 
civilization wide open again so that you 
can get power." 

She was crying again, out of sight 
behind the barrier of tumbled steel. He 
sat in his chair, crushing all the instinctive reactions that the sound called 
.up, clinging grimly to his rage. He 
heard the soft swish as she teleported 



END 1]7 

back along the airshaft. 

The jangling emotions inside him 
killed his desire for eating. That was 
why it was some time before he discovered that she was apporting the food 
concentrates out of the store. And when 
he did find out there was nothing he 
could do about it. 

Parasteel could stop them from teleporting. But apporting — the plucking to 
themselves of material things out of 
locked boxes, out of anywhere — required 
less energy. And anyway the concentrates were small and light, easy to handle. Water would be even easier though 
of course she couldn't take the converter. 

By evening, or what would have been 
evening if they had been on Earth, all 
his food was gone and she was stocked 
up for months. 

The fact that she had made an overt 
move against him, even so slight a one, 
made it easier for him to keep a grip 
on the thought of duty, to crush down 
the sentiments that might have weakened him. And it brought an idea as tb 
how the thing that had to be done might 
be accomplished. 

For all their powers paranorms had 
this much in common with ordinary humanity — there were three things that 
they had to have, to stay alive. And one 
of those three he might be able to take 
away from Mary. 

When the idea came to him he called 
himself a fool for not having thought of 
it at first, for not having run to the 
control-chamber instead of the cabin. 
But there was no use regretting that. 
The only thing to do was to w'ait patiently for his chance. 

Fortunately the little medical store 
was in the cabin. He went to it, took 
out three antisleep tablets and swallowed them with a draft of water. Briefly he wondered if it were possible for a 
paranorm to outlast him, even though 
he was assisted by drugs. Did the creatures need sleep? 

Of course they did. Hadn't he seen 
Mary with her dark curls tumbled over 
the white pillow, her face gently flushed, 



118 FANTASTIC SI 

her soft inviting lips half parted as she 
breathed? To hell with it. The "point 
was — how was he going to know when 
she was asleep now? 

It was easier than he expected. Above 
the door of the cabin a small rack hung 
on the wall, fastened with grub screws 
that sank right through the depth of 
the metal. The peephole left when he removed one of the screws gave him only 
a limited view of the corridor outside. 
But it was enough. 

Mary, either with the idea of keeping a watch on him or because she still 
felt a desire for his company, had 
dragged a lounge chair from the transparent-walled view-chamber at the rear 
of the ship. Now, a half-a-dozen yards 
away from the cabin door — but luckily 
on the side farthest away from the control chamber — she was lying back in the 
chair, her eyes closed. 

"I'll watch her carefully," he thought. 
"Meanwhile I'd better try not to think 
about what I'm going to do in case she 
takes a fancy to probe my thoughts." 

IT was three o'clock in the morning, 
Earth-time, when he decided that he 
needn't have bothered with the antisleep tablets, that he was reasonably 
safe. Mary had been still for some hours 
except for an occasional restless stirring. And by putting his ear to the 
screw-hole he had been able to hear the 
sound of her deep breathing. 

He reached the control-chamber, 
creeping on shoeless feet, without disturbing her. Swiftly he locked the door 
behind him and began to turn valves. 

Intended only for use in an emergency 
the things were stiff from disuse. For a 
moment he thought they were not going 
to work and cursed himself for neglecting the Trequent oiling so strongly recommended in the maker's handbook. 
Then he got them to move, hermetically 
sealing, the control-chamber, opening 
locks through the rest of the ship and 
letting the air go swishing out. 

He had a brief sickening vision of 
Mary like one of those bodies he had 



>RY MAGAZINE 

seen in the- war, bloated, purple, flecked 
with blood about the nostrils and ears. 
And then, transmitted by the metal 
floor, there came the sound of a soft 
scuffle outside the door. 

He leaped across the chamber. The 
door had a transparent inset about five 
feet from the floor. Through it he could 
see Mary. Over her head, half veiling 
her features, was a soft transparentwhite covering. 

Ectoplasm, he thought grimly. Well, 
he had enough knowledge of that stuff 
to know that it wasn't very permanent. 
Her impromptu space-helmet wouldn't 
last long. 

All the same he wished she hadn't 
been able to do it. It would only make 
her end a lingering one and he hated 
the thought of that. 

Her words came to him, not as sound 
this time, but directly into his mind. 
"Jim. Let me in, please." 

"Nor 

• "Very well." 

She stepped forward. The door might 
as well not have been there. He stared 
at her, standing in front of him inside 
the control-chamber. "You — you could 
have got at me any time !" he croaked. 

"Yes, Jim. I could have got at you any 
time." 

Her eyes caught his, exerted compulsion, drove him back to sink into the 
pilot's chair. Invisible impalpable bonds 
locked him there. 

"Now, Jtm, I'm going to teach you a 
lesson. Watch the speed gauges." 

He did as she told him, at first in 
sullen obedience, then in stark amazement. The gauges were calibrated to 
show speeds far above those safe for a 
ship of this size. And their needles had 
gone up and up, to jam hard against the 
stop by the highest figure. 

"But we're not rocketing," he objected. 

'"That's right. We're not rocketing. 
Now look through the space-viewing 
ports." 

The sight that greeted his eyes was 
this time too starkly unimaginable for 



THIN 

credence. The very stars were crawling 
out of place, speeding until they became 
white streaks. 

"I don't believe it," he said hoarsely. 
"It's some sort of trick." 

She smiled gently. "Teleporting a 
mass the size of this ship isn't difficult. 
And there's no limit to the speed attainable by teleporting." 

His stunned mind struggled with the 
implications of it. "We must be going at 
more than light speed. But if you paranorms can do that, why did you lose the 
war?" 

"Ask yourself that." 

His thoughts went back, to queer inconsistencies that had troubled his niind 
slightly even when he had been a loyal 
fighter in the Space Navy. Inconsistencies might be easily explicable now. 

"I often wondered why there were no 
major land battles," he said slowly. 
"They told us'it was because there were 
so few paranorms, that they had alt 
fled to space at the first alarm. But — " 

"We had to break out through the 
Navy's blockade so that we could get 
our endangered members home," she 
said softly. "We killed as few of you 
as possible." 

"Home ? You're not natives of 
Earth?" 

"No." 

The sheer irrationality of that irritated him. "But that's nonsense. Living 
conditions are so different on other 
planets that evolution could never produce similar life forms on any two of 
them." 

"That's true, Jim. But wait till we get 
to where we are going and you'll understand." 

THE stars outside were figure dancers now, whirling and pirouetting, 
breaking up their formations, clustering 
into others as the angle of the constellations varied. His brain grew dizzy 
trying to make even a rough guess at 
their speed. 

"Mightn't we hit something?" he 
asked. 



END H9 

"We have — quite a number of things." 

He nodded his understanding of that. 
They had hit in the same way that she 
had hit the 'control chamber door. 

"Where are we going?" 

"I'm not allowed to tell you that. In 
fact"— she hesitated — "in fact; Jim, I'm 
breaking the laws of my people even 
by what I'm doing now. But I do so want 
you to understand." 

They approached the planet so rapidly that it did not appear to grow before them but rather to flick into existence. She halted the ship, left it 
hovering in a high-riding mass of clouds 
that would hide it from any casual 
observer. Then she turned on the teleports so that he could scan the surface 
below. 

It was a world much like Earth 
except that so far as he could judge 
the climate was more equable. But it 
was not that which caught his attention. 
There were cities down there — cities 
such as the architects of Earth dreamed 
of occasionally in their moments of 
highest inspiration. 

Places of light, of clean-cut flowing 
lines, of gracious beauty in every smallest detail that blended perfectly into 
gracious beauty in the whole. And outside the cities the countryside was 
tamed by engineering projects breathtaking in their darfng ingenuity, aweinspiring in the vastness of their scope. 

The people in city and countryside 
looked human — except that they teleported everywhere and smiled and 
laughed at each other but never once 
opened their mouths to speak. 

Both place and people seemed to 
breathe a spirit of kindliness, of sweetly 
sane and civilized living in which the 
ideas of killing and conquest would be 
held horrible. And in the man's mind 
logic reinforced that impression. 

If people such as these had ever 
come teleporting across the starways 
to conquer Earth, then Earth would 
have been conquered and the whole 
proud Space Navy no more effective 
than a buzzing gnat to stop it. 



120 



FANTASTIC STORY MAGAZINE 



Jim shook his head. "I don't understand. This is the world of the paranorms but — " 

She interrupted him with a smile. 
"This is a world — one of many — helonging to the norms." 

"The norms?" 

She nodded. "There are no paranorms, 
Jim. Only norms and" — she said it 
apologetically — "and subnorms." 

He sat looking at her, waiting for 
her to go on. 

"You stated yourself that nature 
could not produce two human races 
separately on two planets," she said. 
"That means that either our kind traveled across the light years to populate 
your world or your kind came here. 
Which is the more likely?" 

He answered the question indirectly. 
"Why did you colonize Earth?" 

She laughed gently. "We didn't do 
it voluntarily. Surely that should be 
obvious. But a million years ago our' 
mastery of teleportion was not as great 
as it is today. A small exploring party 
went out once and lost their way. 
Somehow they crashed on Earth, iniuring themselves so that they couldn't 
get away." 

"But if they had children surely 
they — " 

She shook her head. "For some reason 
we are not quite sure about — perhaps 
an inimical radiation that your Sun 
gave off in those days — their descendants began to degenerate. By the time 
we found them their powers had grown 
feeble and they had forgotten their old 
civilization except for some dim legends 
about a heavenly land that lay beyond 
the sky." 

TTE STRUGGLED with the idea, pride 
driving him to reject it, the inexorable facts forcing him to accept. While he 
thought, she lifted the ship, set it in 
the path for home. 

"We mustn't stay too long," she 
explained. "I should be punished if 
we were discovered." 

"Why?" he questioned. "Why have 



you people kept all this secret? Why 
haven't you told the whole world?" 

"Your world isn't yet fit for the 
knowledge. There are still too many who 
see glory in conquest. We could defeat 
them, of course, but we'd rather not 
have to. And anyway we are not sure 
what undesirable psychological effects 
might be caused by a sudden revelation 
to your people of their own inferiority." 

"But surely you could have told me?" 

"Could I. Jim?" 

He gave a twisted grin, deriding himself. "No, 1 suppose not. 1 was too much 
of a pig-headed fool. But — why did you 
marry me at all?" 

"Because I loved you." She chuckled. 
"Trite, isn't it? But true. We believe in 
affinities. And when a woman has found 
her affinity we don't think it any shame 
for her to mate with him, even if it 
should mean that she has to take a less 
active part in the work." 

"The work?" he seized on that for 
a further question. "What work? What 
were your people doing on Earth?" 

"We came to teach you — to lead you 
unobtrusively — and to mate with you, 
so that the old blood would be bred back 
into you and your descendants become 
fit to join the race again." 

He thought it over for a long, long 
while. And then he said huskily, "Is 
there any way I can help?" 

She smiled in quick delight, and 
crossed to him. "Oh, Jim, my sweet, 
I'm so glad you said that— so very glad! 
There are plenty of ways in which you 
can help." 

She pulled his face close to hers. 
Outside their ports, the stars gyrated 
swiftly. Twenty miles away from their 
stationary ship, in the only habitable 
cabin of a battered wreck, the few gaunt 
survivors of the nearly exterminated 
paranorms crouched. They were sweating mightily over the longest and most 
complicated visual hallucination they 
had ever produced. 

To them she telepathed one brief message. "Congrats, boys. The sap's fallen 
for it. We're in again." 



Third Alternative 

By SAM WCRWIN, II . 

There are odd, fatal differences— even in parallel worlds 



rjpHE arrogant amiability of Gerald 
M. Wister was amputated as by a surgeon's knife when he saw the man who 
could not be Bradford Lanning round a 
corner of the Hotel Castleford Lobby 
and vanish. The easy walk, the set of 
his shoulders, that profile briefly 
glimpsed — all were Lanning's. 



But Bradford Lanning had been dead 
for three years — and it was Gerald 
Wister who had arranged the matter. 
His stomach curled like an oyster in alcohol. 

Acting on reflexes Wister brought out 
cigarette-case and lighter, discovered his 
fingers were shaking. He squared his 



122 FANTASTIC SI 

shoulders, inhaled deeply, lit his smoke. 
It was, of course, ridiculous. The man 
who had rounded the corner ahead of 
him merely looked like Brad, merely 
walked like Brad, merely. . . . 

Carefully he wrapped himself in a 
simulation of his previous mood of wellbeing. Then he walked deliberately 
through the lobby to the cocktail lounge, 
where Corinne Weir awaited him at a 
table. But his eyes were questing, wary, 
as he moved. 

Clear-eyed Corinne looked up at him 
with obvious concern. "What's the matter, Gerry?" she asked softly. "Seen a 
ghost?" 

Wister felt the allusion unfortunate. 
In a way, he supposed, he had seen a 
ghost, even though it had been a creation 
of his own deep-buried guilt. He laughed 
a trifle shakily, murmured something 
about having hurried too fast to reach 
the Castleford on time. 

"Surely a novelty — but flattering," 
said Corinne, smiling. 

"Oh come, I always try to be prompt," 
Wister told her, "especially with you." 
He wished, not for the first time, that 
Corinne were not so completely devoted 
to the memory of the fiance whose death 
he had arranged. 

"But you're such a busy man of affairs," she said. Wister thought he detected mockery in her voice. He 
shrugged it off, ordered a double-Gibson, 
very dry. He needed one. 

"You ought to take a rest, Gerry," 
said Regan Konetowsky, who occupied 
the third chair at the table. "No man 
can drive himself forever as you do." 
He spoke with a trace of foreign accent. 

"It's no drive, Regan," replied Wister. 
"It's somewhere between a five-iron and 
a putt." He winced at his own corny 
gag. 

"Missed putts have lost many championships," said Konetowsky owlishly. 
He was shading forty and to Wister it 
was incredible that he should have accomplished so much in so many fields of 
science. Already he was mentioned with 
— well, if not with Einstein, then with 



►RY MAGAZINE 

Fermi, Oppenheimer and the rest There 
were whispers of a Nobel award, withheld only because of his youth. 

"You should talk," growled Wister 
and the scientist laughed, absurdly 
young despite his pepper-and-salt hair. 
Wister glanced obliquely at Corinne, 
wondered whether the relationship bet w e e n them still rested within the 
bounds of friendship and professional 
give-and-take. 

TTE HAD seen to it that Corinne need 
never work. This obligation he'd 
have undertaken even had he not been 
responsible for her fiance's death. But 
Corinne had elected to-immerse herself 
in science, had ultimately become Regan 
Konetowsky's assistant. She would, he 
thought, fulfill her purpose far better as 
a rich man's wife — say his own. 

He downed his drink and said, "Incidentally, what's the occasion ? You were 
mighty mysterious over the phone, 
Corinne." 

"Oh — Regan's just finished his most 
important experiment," she replied, regarding Regan proudly. "We felt a celebration in order and decided to count 
you in." 

"Indirectly you had much to do with 
our success," the scientist stated. Then, 
when Wister's eyebrows rose, "Corinne 
has been invaluable. If you hadn't managed her affairs so wisely she would not 
have been able to take the courses that 
enabled her to show me so many short 
cuts." 

-"Rush wah, Brain," said the girl, 
wrinkling her nose charmingly. "Why, 
if it hadn't been for . . ." 

She talked on, but Wister heard 
nothing. His attention was caught by a 
wall mirror that offered a narrow view 
of the men's bar beyond a row of potted 
palms. In it he saw Bradford Lanning 
lift a glass to his lips. As he stared, incredulous, the man he had had slain 
three years before smiled, gestured a 
silent toast. 

"Something wrong, Gerry ?" Konetowsky's sharp question brought him 



THIRD ALTERNATIVE 



back to immediate awareness. He looked 
down, saw his cocktail glass lying on its 
side on the tablecloth in a widening 
stain. 

"I guess I'm not quite up to par," he 
said. He rose, tried to smile. "Please 
excuse me — I'll run along home." He 
gripped his chairback tightly lest he 
sway in a faint. 

He raced through the lobby, ignoring 
the stares of the curious, cut around to 
the men's bar, wormed his way rudely 
through the crowd' of imbibers to the far 
end, where the ghost of Bradford Lanning — if it had been a ghost — stood and 
mocked him silently. 

But no one was there— no one who 
looked even faintly like Lanning. The 
bartender could not help him— too many 
people, too many orders. Frustrated, 
Wister checked the mirror, saw Corinne 
and the scientist still at the table, heads 
close together. Slowly he turned away, 
walked out of the hotel. 

The following day, while strolling 
back from his luncheon club to the offices 
on whose door his name stood alone, 
Wister saw Bradford Lanning againThis time the ghost was buying a paper 
from the newsdealer across the street. 
When Wister stopped, his former partner seemed to sense his presence. At 
any rate he turned, smiled, lifted his 
paper in cheery salute. 

Wister fled back to his office, mopped 
icy sweat from his brow, ordered his receptionist to admit no one to see him. 
He passed the entire afternoon — between trips to his portable bar — staring 
out the big picture window at the shipping in the upper bay, taking stock of 
himself. He was far from satisfied with 
his findings. 

It had not been an emotional murder. 
Any emotion involved had belonged to 
the corpse — if Lanning were still a 
corpse. Theyliad been partners, the two 
of them, in an investment business largely financed by Lanning's fat inheritance 
from a rich uncle. Earlier they had been 
roommates in school and college. 

During World War Two Lanning had 



123 



served with the Marines in the Pacific. 
Wister, thanks to a game leg acquired 
in a salad-day automobile crackup, had 
stayed home and minded the business, 
had quadrupled its capital, quintupled 
its markets and clients. Foreseeing V-J 
Day he had put it on a sound peacetime 
footing ahead of most of their competitors. Lanning should have been grateful. 

But the Corps had invalidated Brad 
as a businessman. It had firmed his 
youthful idealism, deep-frozen his moral 
flexibility beyond reason. Certainly Wister had indulged in behind-the-scenes 
fixing when priorities made legitimate 
deals, impossible. It had been a matter of 
do business or go under — -and he had had 
not the slightest intention of going under. 

He had been scrupulously honest in 
dividing the profits — but Brad had been 
utterly unreasonable on his return. He 
had dug out the grey-and -black-market 
deals, the specification shortcomings, 
the "gifts" to officials. When Wister had 
pointed out that exposure could mean 
prison for them both, Brad had insisted 
he preferred prison to profits piled up 
at the cost of blood shed by his Marine 
Corps comrades. 

Reluctantly Wister had done what had 
to be done— he had even wept when the 
police asked him, along with Corinne, to 
visit the morgue and identify the remains. A shotgun, fired at close range, 
had destroyed most of the head — and 
when the killers, as ordered, set fire to 
car and corpse alike they had destroyed 
the fingerprints. But Brad's dentist had 
been able to make identification. 

lVTOW Wister felt crowded with doubts 
-L" The dentist could have been wrong 
honestly or otherwise. Unlikely, but al 
the same . . . And Wister could hardly 
check on the gunmen without risking 
all sorts of future shakedowns. No, he 
was going to have to go along on the 
assumption that the man he had had 
killed was his former partner. 

Which left another alternative — that 



FANTASTIC STORY MAGAZINE 



he was going mad. Wister, who prided 
himself on his ability to face reality, 
took this possibility in stride. He could 
hardly consult a psychiatrist — a psychiatrist was of small use to anyone who 
withheld facts and Wister was hardly in 
position to tell the truth. Furthermore 
a clever one might mine the truth 
through adroit questioning. 

Perforce he had to let things ride. He 
went about his business as usual the 
next day and, when Lanning failed to 
reappear, regained a near-normal stride, 
even swung a highly profitable deal. 

It was late in the third day, as he left 
the office en. route to a discreetly orgiastic celebration of this success, that the 
phantom Lanning' reentered his life. 
Wister was working his way through the 
rush-hour crowd toward the spot where 
his chauffeur waited. 

"Nice going, Gerry." The voice, from 
behind him, was Lanning's — beyond all 
doubt. Lanning was back, he was here, 
he 

In the grip of panic Wister's resolution hardened. There was a third alternative open to him. He could pursue this 
phantom, if phantom it were, run it to 
earth, bury it — if need be see that it was 
laid to rest with a silver bullet in its 
heart. 

This resolution must have been growing within him since his first encounter 
with the spectre in the hotel lobby — for 
he acted swiftly, without fear. He did 
wonder how the phantom had known of 
his successful deal — from that, "Nice 
going, Gerry," it must have. But Wister, 
pushed to the wall, was striking back. 
He had no time for such speculation. 

He pivoted in time to see his former 
partner— a faint well-remembered smile 
on his lips — melt into the crowd. Lanning wore the uniform of the business 
district — chesterfield, grey homborg, 
pigskin gloves. But Wister knew his 
walk, the set of his shoulders. He followed his victim unerringly, forgetting 
the lush and immoral young creature 
awaiting him uptown in a certain hotel 
suite. 



Shadowine Lanning proved unexpectedly easy. He kept roughly a hundred 
feet behind his quarrv, let the shoals of 
emerging office workers provide him 
with cover. So intent was he that he 
failed to note or reply to the greetings 
of men who knew him. 

They left the financial district, moved 
east a'ong shabbier, emptier streets. 
Where had a generation before been the 
mansions of the wealthy were now. 
ragged tenements. Unemptied refuse 
cans lined the sidewalks, runny-nosed 
urchins played beneath rusty fireescapes. 

On the lip of a dust-mantled park the 
ghost turned south, headed into a warehouse area. It turned left around a 
corner and, when its pursuer followed, 
had vanished. But the door of a battered 
edifice swung gently in the rimy chill 
of the grey winter twilight. 

Wister paused there, uneasily considered a trap. Why, he wondered, should 
ghost or man. permit itself to be run to 
earth in such a place? But he did not 
hesitate long. The urgencies that had 
brought him thus far refused to be denied. Squaring heavy shoulders, he 
pushed on through into the building. 

It was a dim cavernous place. His 
footsteps echoed emptily from the concrete. He paused again, heard unhurried steps ahead in the gloom, checked 
their direction, followed rapidly, as 
silently as he could. 

Light flared suddenly before him, revealing the door to a room filled with 
thick smoke. Wister ran toward it as 
he saw the shadow of his quarry vanish 
into it. Recklessly he plunged after him, 
from deep twilight into what might have 
been sun-drenched fog. 

HE STUMBLED over a shallow step, 
found himself in a street behind the 
warehouse — in a very different part of 
town. For a moment he stood blinking, 
wondering. He thought of the Williamsburg restoration. Here was the city as 
it must have looked half a century before his birth. 



THIRD ALTERNATIVE 



125 



By the streetlights, which had come 
on while he was in the warehouse, it was 
neat, obviously a district of folk with 
means and taste. The sidewalks were 
evenly laid, the brick fronts of the old 
houses trim, their shutters neatly painted. At irregular intervals a polished 
brass door-knocker or doorplate or footscraper caught a highlight from the 
nearest streetlamp. 

Wister, who had not heard of any 
such restoration project, wondered who 
had put up the money. Glancing backward, he found reassurance in the skyscrapers that raised twinkling tiers high 
in the darkening heavens. Then, returning to the matter at hand, he saw 
Lanning turn into a house in the next 
block. He gave chase, calling his expartner's name. 

"Yes — you want me?" Lanning's voice 
was polite, surprised. 

"Brad!" cried Wister, panting up to 
his quarry. By the light from the house 
he saw that it was indeed Lanning — if 
slightly older than his memory of the 
man. After all, it had been three years. 

"I thought you were dead," he babbled. 
"What's the idea of ducking me?" He 
thought no more of ghosts — this was 
Brad in the flesh. The half-smile on his 
face was proof enough for Wister. 

"Perhaps 1 preferred it that way," said 
the man officially dead. "But since you've 
finally found me, come on in, Gerry. 
You might as well see the rest of it." 

Wister saw a fine old city mansion 
with fine white paneling and wainscoats, 
fine old furniture," prints and mirrors, 
fipe old carpets underfoot. He thought 
of his own expensively "decorated" 
apartment uptown and envied Lanning 
his home. 

"As I recall it you like bourbon 
straight," said Lanning as he lifted a 
crystal decanter from a sideboard Wister recognized as genuine Sheraton. "I 
think you'll like this, Gerry. Martha's 
great-grandfather had it laid down almost a century ago." 

"Martha?" Wister blinked. Who, he 
wondered, was Martha.? And what mo


tives lay behind Lanning's withdrawal 
into this odd old-world corner in the 
downtown heart of the city? 

He got his first answer quickly. A 
handsome woman, willowy and chic although she must have been in her late 
thirties, entered, cave Lanning a fond 
buss and said, "I've got Gillie in bed 
with his Teddy Bear and a croup kettle. 
The twins are having a pillow-fight. I 
wish you'd go upstairs and calm them 
down, darling." 

"Right," said Lanning. "Excuse me, 
Geriy. This is my wife, Martha — 
Gerry Wister. You've heard me speak 
-of him." 

A flash of something — fear? — crossed 
Martha Lanning's well-bred features. 
Then she was smiling, pouring a drink, 
telling him he must stay for dinner, that 
it was a shame the way Brad had let 
old friendships lapse since their marriage. 

"I'd love to — thanks," said Wister. 
So Brad had been hiding s wife all the 
time he was engaged to Corinne! No 
wonder he had seized the chance to 
vanish. He must have arranged the substitution with his assassins, rigged a 
deal with the dentist. 

T^HE bourbon flowed smoothly down 
1 Wister's throat to expand in pleasant 
warmth. Brad, he decided, had it very 
good indeed. Martha, for instance— no 
show-stopper, perhaps, but with style, 
charm, a quiet beauty that was bound to 
grow rather than pall with time. There 
was something oddly familiar about her 
- — Wister tried to run it down, failed, 
suppressed a faint tremor of worry. 

". . . and I'd love to have you see the 
children, but Gillie has a cold and it's so 
contagious this time of year." Martha 
Lanning talked amiably and aimlessly, 
after the fashion of wives the world over 
With unexpected guests for dinner. 

"A pity," said Wister. He let her 
ramble on, tried to work it out — the unexpected house in the unexpected part of 
town, the unexpected wife and children 
—above all the strange familiarity of 



126 



FANTASTIC STORY MAGAZINE 



the woman, the Hash of emotion that had 
crossed her face when they were introduced. She was being a shade too trivia!, 
too casual. 

And the haunting of the past few 
days — that would take some explaining, 
explaining no mere hospitality could 
wipe from the agenda. He rose when 
Brad came downstairs, and Martha excused herself to warn the cook of a guest 
for dinner. 

Wister bided his time through a wellserved meal whose quality hinted that 
Brad was indeed doing himself well. 
Talk remained pleasant if desultory. 
Brad kept the ball rolling, chatting of 
his new life, ignoring the old. Martha 
grew increasingly nervous. She pecked 
at her food, excused herself with the coffee, with the plea that the children needed her. 

There was heavy "silence — silence Wister finally broke with, "Well, Brad, 
haven't we a few things we ought to discuss ?" 

"Right," said Brad, rising. "Let's get 
at it. I have a query or two myself." He 
led the way to a comfortable den at the 
rear of the house, containing leather 
easy chairs and sofa, a large desk. Bookcases lined two of the walls, a gun cabinet a third. A large window with 
drawn blind took up the remaining wall 
space. 

"Still collecting firearms, Brad?" Wis


ter inquired as he accepted a large inhaler of brandy from his host. 

"I pick up a gun occasionally," said 
Lanning. "I still like to hunt. The guns 
in the lower shelf are oiled up." 

Wister eyed the gleaming Belgian 
shotgun at the far end of the rack, debated doing the job himself when opportunity offered. This time there would 
be no question of survival for Lanning. 
But there were Martha, the servants — 
too many witnesses to his presence here. 
An alibi would be costly and difficult if 
not impossible. 

CO IT would have to wait. He sipped 
^ his brandy, which was of incredible excellence, said, "All right, Brad — 
why have you been haunting me this 
past week '!" 

"Isn't 'haunting' rather an odd word, 
Gerry?" 

"Hardly — under the circumstances. 
After all, Brad; you arc officially dead." 

"Thanks to you," said Lanning bluntly. "Gerry, that was a damfool thing to 
do." 

"Maybe," said Wister, "but look at it 
from my angle— what else could I do?" 

"Using hired gunmen!" Lanning said 
savagely. 

"You should know," retorted Wister. 
"Brad, I Had to have you killed. What I 
want to know is how you got out of it — 
how you kept it a secret — why you've 



THE ADVENTURES OF 


IT SMELLS GRAND 


IT PACKS RIGHT 






HAS IT GOT AROMA? 
MAN, AND HOW! 


AND fT PACKS SO NEAT f 
IT RATES A SOW- / 



THIRD ALTERNATIVE 



127 



been haunting me the last few days?" 

"Thanks, Gerry," said Lanning. He 
pressed a button beneath the desk, added, "Your confession's all on tape." His 
smile was no longer amiable. "Now I'll 
answer your questions— gladly." 

"Hold it!" Wister was on his feet, his 
whole body an alarm system. "Your 
murder has been a closed book for almost three years. You can't hope to reopen it now." 

"/ don't intend to," said Lanning 
quietly. "I've done this for Corinne 
Weir — since she and Dr. Konetowsky 
managed to get through." 

"Get through?" asked Lanning, his 
throat dry. 

"Yes — through!" replied Lanning. 
"When you followed me into the warehouse you entered a gateway between 
parallel worlds. Dr. Konetowsky stumbled onto it while working on hyperspace 
beams for high-speed communication in 
your world. They built the gateway, 
came through, found me. We — worked 
out a little campaign." 

"You're crazy, Brad." Gerry Wister's 
voice was a croak. 

"Am I? Take a look." Contemptuously Lanning tossed a newspaper from the 
desk. Wister caught it, studied it. At 
first glance it looked normal. Then he 
saw difference in masthead and headlines. 



He dived for the financial page, 
scanned the listing. Many familiar initials were there — -along with some absentees and strangers. 

"You could have faked this." said Wister. Even to himself it rang false. There 
were too many discrepancies— Brad's 
resurrection, the strange part of the 
city, the children. Martha . . . Again he 
wondered about Martha, about her odd 
familiarity. 

"I didn't," said Lanning. "I'm delivering your taped confession to Miss 
Weir tomorrow. I bad to get you here to 
draw it out of you. You see, Miss Weir 
wants you punished for killing her fiancee," 

"Then you aren't Bradford Lanning," 
cried Wister hoarsely. 

"I'm Lanning, all right," his host stated quietly. "1 just don't happen to be the 
Lanning you killed. This is another 
world, one parallel to yours — the other 
side of the Mobius if you will. But when 
you go back you'll go to prison, never 
fear. You may even die — though this is 
unlikely in view of the attorneys you 
will hire." 

"That crime is a closed book," said 
Wister. He took two cautious steps toward the gun cabinet. If he could eliminate this other Brad Lanning — and any 
other course was now unthinkable — -he 
could g£t back, destroy. the gateway, pre
\TuTn page] 



UXCLE WALTER 



IT SMOKES SWEET 




IT CANT BITE! 

A BLEND OF CHOICE KENTUCKY BURLEVS, 
EXTRA-AGED TO GUARD AGAINST TONGUE 
BITE. SIR. WALTER. RALEIGH STAYS LIT 
TO THE LAST PUFF —NEVER LEAVES A 
SOGGV HEEL . 




128 



FANTASTIC STORY MAGAZINE 



vent Konetowsky from building another. 
Gateway between worlds — parallel timetracks — he could not yet quite believe it. 
But the A-bomb had taught him to respect scientific theory and its possible 
translation into fact. 

"You've had it soft for years now," 
said Lanning, turning to pour another 
brandy. "Why not take your medicine?" 

Lanning saw the shells in a box at the 
bottom of the guncase. He moved swiftly, silently — plucked out the shotgun, 
loaded it, aimed it almost in single motion. Lanning was .just turning back 
toward him when, Wister let him have 
both barrels. 

T~iHE gun emitting a duet of thin 
coughing sounds — Lanning stood 
staring at him, unharmed. Then, before Wister could recover from his 
shock, his host drew a heavy automatic 
pistol from the desk and calmly shot him 
through the foot. 

"That," he said, "will hold you until 
I can get the police here." 

He picked up the telephone, made the 
call. Then he sat on the desk, pistol in 
hand, and studied Lanning, who sat on 
the rug, crying and watching the blood 
spurt from his smashed bench-made 
boot. He added, "Martha will have to 
have the carpet cleaned." 

Stung by his host's detachment and 
by his own anguish, Wister cried, "What 
good will your tape recording do you 
now?" 

"Me? None, naturally," was the reply. "I didn't undertake this for profit. 
But it will explain your disappearance 
from your own world as a probable suicide. It will enable Corinne to have you 
declared legally dead, will let her claim 
a part of your fortune, which will legally be hers thanks to my late namesake's 
will." 



"And how are you going to explain 
me in this world?" Wister asked, his face 
twisted with pain. He whimpered a little. 

"You? Try not to make such a fuss, 
will you? You'll wake the children," said 
Lanning in reproof. "Why do I have to 
explain you? By the time the police get 
through questioning you you'll be meat 
for the nut-hatch, friend." 

He paused, added, "You know nothing about this world, and your answers 
to some of their questions will put you 
in a padded cell, I'm afraid — especially 
when I tell them you crashed in here 
with a story of being an old friend of a 
former business-associate and then tried 
to shoot me with my own shotgun. Naturally, knowing you as I do, I doctored 
the charges in those, shells." 

"Tell me one thing," pleaded Wister 
as heavy footsteps sounded in the hall 
behind the closed door. "How did you 
know so much about me? How did you 
learn about my deal this afternoon?" 

"Brace yourself," replied Lanning. 
"It may be a bit of a shock." He moved 
toward the door as a hard knock sounded, adding, "I knew you well enough to 
see that you felt especially good this evening. It was in your expression, your 
walk, a lot of little things." 

"But how did you know?" repeated 
the wounded man. 

"There are differences, friend, even in 
parallel worlds," his host told him. "In 
yours Lanning was your partner, you 
had him killed. In mine things worked 
out differently — and a whole lot better. 
The partnership isn't the same here. I 
married you. For in this world you were 
born a girl." 

He opened the door, admitted the police. "Do what you can for this poor 
crazy devil," he told them. "He seems 
to have fainted." 



Read THE WELL OF THE WORLDS, a brilliant new complete novel by 
Henry Kuttner in March STARTLING STORIES — on gale 
at all stands, 25c per copy! Now published monthly! . 




PAST Ki-uts' shoulder he could see 
four men plodding slowly nearer 
across the distant plain, where the 
rocket ship lay stranded like a silver 
whale. lie wished they would hurry. 

"But what do you want to learn for?" 
Kruts was saying. "You can't shoot. 
You're just another radioman, that's all. 



You're holding that rifle as if it was going to bite you. Oh hell, try again if 
you want to." 

He tried again, loading, aiming, firing 
and gasping in the thin Martian air, until Kruts said, "Look, Willie, why don't 
you give up, for God's sake? Go twirl 
those blasted radio dials of yours — 



By LAURENCE MA\XI\C 

129 



130 FANTASTIC ST 

that's something you can do." 

"I'm sorry to be so slow, Knits." 

"Skip it. Save your breath for climbing." 

He pointed to the steep slope that 
dropped to the canyon floor, a thousand 
feet below. On the left the canyon 
opened into a wide circular valley; on 
the right it ran for miles, straight and 
narrow through the flat Martian uplands. They had spent that morning 
walking along its rim to the far end — 
out on the other side and back on this. 
Now they were going to descend, cross 
and climb the opposite slope to their 
starting point, with an armed party 
from the ship waiting to meet them. 

Fifty feet away, perched on a boulder, 
Lieutenant Jolift'e was brooding over his 
notebook. Kruts was studying the scene 
below. Willie fidgeted, stared at the distant figures, sighed impatiently, said, 
"Gee, I wish they'd hurry up — I can 
hardly wait." 

The first men on Mars! It felt great 
to Willie. But DeVoe and Dr. Wilson 
were the lucky ones. The station was 
going to be over in the valley. They'd 
have five years to explore it all ! They'd 
have a little farm — even chickens. The 
eggs had started to hatch already and 
Stockton in the ship's supply office 
wanted to know if the skipper thought 
he had signed on as a farmer. There'd 
be a regular little settlement. 

Kruts grunted, his eyes still intent on 
the canyon. "It'll be nice company for 
Smith's ghost," he said at last. 

"Oh— I didn't hear what happened." 

"He climbed down there yesterday 
afternoon like a damn fool. He never 
came back." 

"Didn't they send a search party?" 

"Yeh. We're it. There's nothing 
hasty about the skipper.". 

Willie stared down at the canyon. The 
only creatures visible were about the size 
of goats in scattered groups, peacefully 
nibbling at the vegetation, green now in 
the Martian spring. 

"But what could happen to him ? 
What's down there to be afraid of?" 



'BY MAGAZINE 

"If 1 knew I Wouldn't be afraid of it." 

Kruts stiffened, stared and shouted, 
"See it, Lieutenant? Near the far side, 
small and fast — gone now, sir." 

Lieutenant Joliffe came -out of his 
meditations with a start and grabbed his 
binoculars. Willie whispered, "He wasn't 
on the ball that time, was he?" 

"Don't worry about him. He can 
shoot," answered Kruts from the side of 
his mouth. Then called out abruptly: 
"At the mouth of the canyon — another 
One — going away from us, Lieutenant!" 

WILLIE caught only a glimpse of distant movement that vanished into 
the masking greenery below. He set 
himself to watch but it was many minutes before anything happened. Then 
the nearest group Qf animals, browsing 
right below them, burst into sudden 
flight. 

Something small and black flashed 
among the shrubbery in pursuit. In a 
few seconds it overtook one and seemed 
to flatten out in a curious manner, almost to wrap itself around its prey. Both 
fell out of sight behind the vegetation. 

The Lieutenant climbed off his rock 
and walked over to them. "Well, Kruts," 
he said, "you won't have time for a second shot at that — whatever it is. I can't 
make it out at all. The herbivorae are 
about what you might expect, long thin 
legs and a big chest — Look out, man! 
Climbing up your boot!" 

Kruts said, "Those damn tiger-bugs!" 
He slapped, then brushed the sticky 
mess away. 

The Lieutenant nodded and said, 
"They can bite! One look a chunk out 
of me yesterday an eighth of an inch 
across." He held up a bandaged thumb. 
"I can't seem to classify them either. 
Two antennae, but definitely not inseets 
— only one body segment and twelve 
legs. I don't even know what they live 
on. There are no animals up here and 
they don't seem to eat vegetation . . ." 
His voice trailed off and he stood stroking his chin thoughtfully. 

Willie saw that the men had reached 



MEN ON 

the opposite crest at last. He coughed 
suggestively and the Lieutenant looked 
up, nodded and gave the word to start. 

It was a tough climb down. At the 
bottom they paused to get their breath. 
The shrubs turned out to be just too 
high to see over. Though spaced well 
apart, the vistas Vet ween were irregular 
and confusing. 

In a low voice the Lieutenant gave his 
orders, "Thorgess, you will lead. Kruts 
and I will cover you. Go slow and keep 
your eyes open." 

Willie started, trying to keep a 
straight course as he wound in and out 
between the clumps. Each bush he 
passed with a little shiver — no telling 
what was hiding behind its grass-like 
leaves. It was utterly quiet. Feet made 
no sound in the thick dust that covered 
the ground but he could tell the others 
were behind him by the sound of their 
breathing. He heard Kruts whisper, 
"This walking blind is not good." 

There was something white lying on 
the ground — a skeleton. lie stepped 
over it, eyes probing the leafy corridors 
ahead. He paused a moment and heard 
the Lieutenant mutter, "No vertebrae, 
just one big bonc-plate! Why, it's a 
whole ne^v class! Good!" 

Kruts said, "Not so good, sir. What 
kind of a thing kills and eats its prey 
without tearing off so much as a leg?" 

Willie led on, his rifle hugged to his 
armpit as Kruts had told him. He nearly took a shot at a pile of gray boulders 
between the shrubs ahead. He gasped 
at the thought of such a blunder and 
hoped Kruts would think -the sudden 
movement of his gun had been only 
alertness. 

The Lieutenant whispered, "Climb up, 
Thorgess. Maybe we can see something 
from up there." He and Kruts waited, 
rifles ready, while Willie got up, then 
joined him. Together they peered cautiously over the top. 

Not fifty feet off two animals stood 
eating. If you could call it eating, 
thought Willie. Each tore off a mouthful of leaves, munehed it, spit it out 



MARS 131 

again on the ground, nuzzled it, to suck 
up the wet cud with an audible schloop 
and gulp it down at last. Each had a 
horn about six inches long in the middle 
of its forehead. They scuttled out of 
sight just as Kruts was cautiously getting his rifle into position for a shot. 

Something fast and quiet was running 
among the shrubs close by. Then it 
flashed into view, small and black, and 
was gone again. Uut in that instant 
Kruts' rifle had fired. It was hit but 
its pace had not even faltered. Willie 
shut unbelieving eyes to recapture the 
brief image. 

Four legs rising to a big lump of 
muscle — that was all. No head, not 
even a real body. Just a lump where the 
legs joined together like the arched back 
of a black cat that had no head or tail. 
Or like a man cut off at the waist whose 
legs ran around by themselves — like 
nothing Willie had ever seen in real life. 

"That bullet would stop an elephant 
but not that little beggar. Now what 
do we do?" said Kruts. 

Willie had been staring across the canyon and interrupted, "The ship's party 
has started over toward us. They'll run 
slap into that thing." 

There were a fusillade of shots and 
sounds of distant shouting. Then three 
figures were climbing hastily up the far 
slope, making extraordinary motions as 
though dancing and slapping themselves. 
Partway up they stopped and began 
shooting at something hidden below 
them. 

"There's only three of them," said 
Willie. "Why did they leave the other 
man?" 

"Probably because he's dead," barked 
Kruts. 

The Lieutenant got quickly to his feet. 
"We have to cross the canyon some time. 
If we do it now we may be able to help 
—come on, men!" 

IT came at them from behind the tenth 
clump of shrubbery, swift and sudden. 
All three fired. Two holes gaped but it 
kept on coming and was almost at their 



132 



FANTASTIC STORY MAGAZINE 



feet when it fell. Five separate pieces, 
not one body, tumbled to the ground. 
Each piece as it struck broke into hundreds of tiny individuals that wriggled 
in separate life. The ground was covered with a writhing mound of tigerbugs! 

At once, while they stared stupefied, 
the parts began to reassemble. The 
small creatures clung to each other to 
make lumps and strands of tissue. Legs 
formed and began to join and raise themselves off the ground again. The weird 
resurrection, was nearly complete when 
Kruts put three bullets, one after another, into the mass. A few tiger-bugs 
were knocked out but the structure did 
not fall entirely apart this time. "Back 
to the rocks!" shouted the Lieutenant. 

The unkillable thing was in swift pursuit before they got there. Kruts 
whirled to pump bullets into it. It fell, 
splashing tiger-bugs on his boots. Then 
he followed the others up the rocks, 
slapping himself and cursing. 

Willie said, "Hold still a minute, 
Kruts," and squashed one in the middle 
of his back. 

Their pursuer was running again by 
now but not toward them . It went 
around and around the rock pile, veering 
away when it came too near. The Lieutenant said "Oh-oh! Here comes another." They waited, rifles ready. But 
the second one also raced in a circle, also 
avoided coming close to the rocks. After 
a minute Willie gave a gasp of relief. 

"Looks like maybe we're safe up here. 
Whew! That was close." 

"Yes, Thorgess," said the Lieutenant, 
"it does look that way. Now why should 
it? Why do they keep away from the 
rocks?" 

Then he added, "Give Kruts a hand 
with that bandage on his shoulder." He 
watched a minute. "Those bites must 
hurt like the devil, Kruts. I'll have to 
report you unfit for duty. The Captain 
will have to know about all this anyway. 
Get the ship on the radio, Thorgess." 

When the report had been made, 
Willie could hear the faint tinny voice 



of the skipper in the earphone and 
caught the last words ". . . sweat it out 
where you are while I think it over 
awhile, Lieutenant." 

For an hour nothing happened, hardly anything was said. Kruts was swearing to himself as he tried to find a comfortable position to rest in. The Lieutenant was alternately looking through 
his glasses and writing in his notebook. 
Willie watched the circling horrors. 

There were at least five of them at 
various locations in the canyon. The 
horned browsers had more speed than he 
had first thought. Though put to flight 
eight times in the hour only one was 
caught. It fell in an open spot where 
he could watch the kill in detail. A black 
tide flower over it and its struggles 
ceased almost at once. 

Then the tiger-bugs, gorged, began to 
leave, each carrying a - piece of -flesh in 
its jaws. They formed a procession, like 
a line of ants returning from a raid, 
marching toward the canyon wall on the 
left. Willie was shocked to see how 
quickly the carcass was stripped to its 
bare bones. 

The Lieutenant had been watching 
too and muttered, "Marvelous! What 
organization ! Bees or ants ar& nothing 
compared to them! Why, they swarm 
like slime-mold in a microseope!" 

He put down his glasses and turned 
excitedly to Willie. "Don't you see the 
parallel?" he asked. "The slime-molds 
gather into a slug that crawls about like 
a true animal. After it culminates the 
cells go back to separate lives again. 
Why, this is- almost the same thing on a 
larger scale !" 

"Huh ?" said Willie. He gulped. "I'm 
afraid I don't get you, sir." 

Lieutenant Joliffe looked surprised, 
then grinned. "Sorry, Thorgess. I for"got where 1 was for a minute. I'm just 
beginning to understand the tiger-bugs 
a little — to classify them, that is. But 
how do they see to run so fast and 
straight? Where do they march to 
after they make a kill?" 

(Turn to page ISi) 



Keel iH'hifjSpi'riiilisI Says: Where |\PR| 

LOSE WEIGHT KtUUUt 




"Why, I dunno, sir," answered Willie. 
"I just sort of thought they had a nest 
over there somewhere with maybe a 
queen in it." 

The Lieutenant looked doubtful and 
said, "Could be." He turned to look at 
Kruts. "How is it with you now?" he 
asked. 

The big man pressed his lips tight together and frowned. "The bites have 
stopped stinging but how long must we 
stay here? It will be damned cold when 
the sun sets." 

"Let's hope the Captain gets us out of 
here before dark." 

"He could make flame-throwers out of 
welding torches," grunted Kruts. "It 
would be easy to rig them up. Then 
burn every tiger-bug in the valley!" 

The Lieutenant shook his head. "He'd 
never authorize that much oxygen. 
There is barely enough for the crew to 
breathe on the way home. There are 
some hand grenades though and a rocket 
mortar." 

"The target is too swift," said Kruts. 
"They'd be useless, sir." 

"But what," asked Willie, "what can 
the Captain do, then? If flame-throwers are the only things that will work. 
He'll just have to use some oxygen." 

The Lieutenant looked at him thoughtfully. "Getting the ship back to earth is 
a bit more important than getting us 
back to the ship, Thorgess. This is your 
first voyage. You've never seen a space 
crew on oxygen rations, half of them unconscious, all with splitting headaches. 
It's quite an experience." 

"It went to eighty below zero last 
night," said Kruts. "We have no shelter, 
no blankets. We can't stay here and live, 
sir." 

A LL three men were silent. Willie 
felt an icy lump forming in his 
stomach though the afternoon sun was 
still warm. 

"Get the ship on the radio," snapped 
the Lieutenant. 

DeVoe's voice answered. Willie felt 
almost homesick as he pictured the radio 



room with its gleaming metal walls and 
the warm hum of the dynamo behind 
the cagework. He asked for the Captain 
and handed over the radio. 

"Lieutenant Joliffe reporting, sir." 
Willie strained his ears to catch a few 
words of the Captain's answer. 

"You are valuable members of this 
crew but your value is not infinite ... I 
may fail to colonize— I shall not fail to 
return my ship safely . . . Good luck, 
Joliffe. " 

The lump of ice in Willie's stomach 
grew heavier and colder. 

The Lieutenant cleared his throat. 
"We are on our own, men. Return to 
the ship as best we can — those are the 
orders. We will make a dash for it, each 
man for himself. No rescues, mind ! 
Everyone will have an equal chance to 
get across." 

"But we have no chance at all," Willie 
blurted out. "Surely they can do something, sir! Why wouldn't space-suits 
keep the bugs out?" 

The Lieutenant studied him sternly 
but when he spoke his voice was gentle. 
"You have not been bitten, Thorgess. 
The rubber is too thin. They would bite 
right through it, probably get inside . . ." 
He frowned and stopped talking abruptly. 

"Besides," put in Kruts, "you can't 
run in a space-suit." He turned to the 
Lieutenant. "Now?" he asked. 

"Hm'm! The bugs are probably too 
torpid to move when it gets cold. At a 
guess we might be perfectly safe after 
dark." 

Kruts said, "Who has a flashlight?" 
Nobody answered. He continued, "So 
we have no light. We won't find our 
way among the thickets. We'll slip and 
stumble — fall into holes or maybe walk 
right into one of those cattle "things. 
Their horns could be very bad in the 
dark. Even if we reach the other side — 
how'll we climb up? There will be an 
inch of frost over everything." 

"Yes," said the Lieutenant. "Well, 
those creatures must have some reaction 
to cold-. They must associate it with 



darkness. Just possibly they get under 
cover at the first hint of sunset- — there's 
no dusk here, of course. Our best chance 
may be — say 17 :30 Mars time. An hour 
and a half from now." He turned calmly to his binoculars and notebook. 

Willie looked at him in a daze, then 
at Kruts, who was calming: sleeping 
again. Didn't they realize that they 
would all be killed before the day ended? 
What real chance had even one man to 
get through those tireless circlers? The 
Lieutenant was taking notes for his 
book, eh? Well, some other biologist 
would write it! Some other men would 
go down in history as the first to settle 
Mars. 

History! Why, there wouldn't have 
been any if a deadly thing like this had 
lived back on earth. It was bullet-proof 
— you couldn't even beat one to death 
with a club ! He pictured himself trying 
to and shuddered. He looked at the distant valley, like a green mirage in the 
sunlight. Even if it could be settled 
there was no thrill left there now. 

Men would work only behind safe 
walls with no exciting explorations 
around the countryside. But they would 
be other men, this, expedition would return to earth — a failure — three men 
short. Then to his horror Willie felt a 
tear begin to run down his nose. 

The others must not see that, he 
thought desperately. He bent over his 
radio set, hurriedly wiping as he 
stooped. For something to do he dialed 
in the ultra-high frequency band where 
he and DeVoe had noticed queer static 
ever since the ship landed on Mars. Not 
everyone could hold it for the band was 
narrow and kept shifting frequency in a 
rising-and-falling pattern. 

His sensitive fingers caught and held 
it now. To his surprise it was much 
louder down here in the canyon. His 
mind became a blessed blank as it always 
did when he was receiving. He listened 
to the thin, high whisper in his ear — 
bub-bub-squee-bubble-quee-bub. His eyes 
wandered unseeingly. 



HAD NEVER WRITTEN A LINE . . . SELLS 
ARTICLE BEFORE COMPLETING COURSE 




How do I get My Start 

as a writer?" 



. . . HERE'S THE ANSWER . . . 




and aid writers. 

Where to begin then? There is no eurer way than to 
Bet busy Bnd write. 

Gain experience, the "know how. - ' Understand how to 
use words. Then you can construct the word-buildings 

O. Henry™Mark Twain, Kipling, King Lardner, just to 
mention a few. all lirst learned to use words at a newspaper copy desk. And the Newspaper Institute Copy Desk 

develop their writing talent . . . helping them gain their 
first little checks of JfiO and SI 00. 

learn To Write by Writing 

The Newspaper Institute of America is a training school for 

you a o" C experienoel'we don* toHyou'tn rrad^nts^uttor^nd 
that author or to study his style. We don't give you roles 
and theories to absorb. The N. I. A. aims to leach you lo 
express yourself in your own natural style. You work in 
your own home, on your own^time. _ 

as though you worked on a large metropolitan daily. Your 
stories are then returned to us and we put them under a 
microscope, so to speak. Faults are pointed out. Suggestions 
are made. Soon vou discover you are letting the "feel" of 
it. that professional t.-n-.-h. You acquire a natural, easy 
iiHiroflch. Vou can see where you're guing. 

When a maralne returns a story, one Seldom knows the 
rr-al reason for the rejection. They have no time to waste 
giving constructive eriUtisw.^he^S. I. A^tells^you^here 

A Chance To Test Yourself — FREE 



Our unique Writing Aptitude Test tells whether ynn posaeas the fundamental qualities necessary lo success! ul writing — acute obs-rvalion. drama l iv i-.,,-. ;. imaf instil.. 

etc You'll ciijov tnkirifi ilii.n ift,:. lis VyiKE. Jo-! rnaii the 




Copyright 19E1. Newspaper Institute of America 



In a vague way they noticed the black 
runner circling the rocks — round and 
round. The wavering sound had to be 
followed up and down the dial in a repeating rhythm. Up and down — 'round 
and 'round- — it was several minutes before his tired brain put eye and ear together. 

Then he sat up and said, "Jeepers!" 

The how and why did not bother 
Willie — he knew. He had worked too 
long with g-uided missile controls to be 
mistaken. If the rhythm were the same 
for signal and beast it meant a direction 
control— it must mean that. Each 
change of frequency ordered a change 
in direction — of course! And what was 
more . . . 

The Lieutenant was looking at him 
strangely. Willie burst out with, 
"What's more, we can walk away from 
here whenever we like ! You remember 
that HF squeal we've been getting on 
Mars — DeVoe reported it yesterday? 
Well, I know what it is now. It's the 
tiger-bugs' direction control — tells 'em 
which way to run. Here, try it yourself, 
sir." 

Joliffe looked puzzled but his fingers 
tried to follow the rise and fall of the 
signal- — lost it, found it again, lost it. 
"Just what am I supposed to listen for?" 
he asked. 

"The signal goes up and down the frequencies. Well, that tiger-bug thing 
circles in exact time to it — don't you 
get it?" 

He looked sharply at Willie and tried 
again. Then he grunted and a faint excitement showed on his face. His fingers were twisting away, his eyes intent, 
when suddenly the signal rose in volume 
until Willie could hear it buzzing angrily 
out of the earpiece. The small black 
beast was racing after one of the horned 
browsers. The buzzing held a fixed frequency, grew even louder, then ceased 
altogether. So, Willie noticed, did the 
chase. 

Lieutenant Joliffe rubbed his ear. "It 
simply can't be coincidence," he said. 
"I'll be damned! But why do you say 



we can walk away when we like?" 

"Oh that. I think that will work. We 
can send out interference on the same 
frequencies. The set sends and receives 
at the same time with the same controls." 

"By God, I suppose we could, Thorgess! Jam its sending station, so to 
speak. But what is its sending station ?" 

"Dunno, sir. Don't care much if it 
works all right." 

"Well, let's try. See that one over 
there? Find his frequency and see what 
happens. Wait 'til I get these glasses 
focused. Now, go ahead!" 

But after a minute or two Willie shook 
his head. "The rhythm's not the same 
at all," he said. 

"Hunt for another signal," snapped 
the Lieutenant. "The frequency is probably different for each one — must be or 
they'd get mixed up." 

WILLIE searched up and down the 
scale, found another and after a 
minute of listening lie nodded. "Ready," 
he said and flicked the sending switch. 
The distant runner fell apart in full, 
stride, melted to a black puddle on the 
gray dust. 

"Stop sending. Let's see what they 
do then, Thorgess." 

Willie flicked the switch. Their aimless wandering ceased and the tigerbugs began to group themselves, again 
into legs, the legs began to join together. 
The Lieutenant nodded, Willie flicked the 
switch once more and the legs fell apart 
again. 

"Very good indeed, Thorgess," said 
the Lieutenant. "You'll get a promotion out of this even if it" is your first 
voyage. 1 wish I knew how it worked 
though, or why. Something directs their 
running. Whatever it is, it must be 
where it can see over the shrubbery. 
Partway up the canyon wall, perhaps." 

"Could be a boss bug with maybe extra-big antennae for sending," suggested Willie. "There'd be a different 
one for each of these bug-beasts.* If we 



could find them all and smash 'em this 
valley would be a swell place to live in." 

They both had their glasses focused 
on the far slope and spent ten minutes 
searching- it foot by foot. Twice they 
saw things that looked like insect antennae; once there was something that 
Willie said was a long stalk with two 
eyes on it. The Lieutenant pointed out 
that they might all be just oddly-shaped 
leaves. 

"If you'll let me bring a party out tomorrow with two or three radios, I can 
get a lix on each sending station by cross 
angles," said Willie at last. 

The Lieutenant said, "Yes, there is going to be a tomorrow after all, isn't 
there? A whole blessed string of them, 
thank God!" He grinned happily at 
Willie, who grinned back. Then they 
woke up Knits and told him the news. 

-What!" he yelled. "That damn little 
box knocks 'em down when my rifle 
can't! Show me— just show me!" 

Willie made the nearest runner fall 
apart. Kruts sat staring at the radio. 
Then he asked if he could try it himself, so Willie showed him how, but 
Kruts could not keep the frequency 
tuned in. 

Willie was patient but after a few 
minutes of it he said, "Look, Kruts, let's 
practise after we get back, eh? You 
don't seem to get the feel of the radio, 
somehow. Anyway I don't see why you 
want to learn. You can come along tomorrow if you want to, but bring your 
rifle — you sure handle that like an expert." 

The Lieutenant said, "All right, let's 
go." 

But down on the ground Willie found 
a complication. He couldn't see over the 
shrubbery. "It's no use if I can't see 
them," he groaned. "I'd have to be 
eight feet high to do it." 

"Get up on my shoulders and you will 
be," said Kruts. "Only for cripe's sake 
sit easy on those bites." 

Willie mounted, gripped hard with his 
knees to leave both hands free and they 


started. He was nervous, keyed to a 
high pitch. It was all up to. him and 
this was it! 

There were five of the deadly things 
to watch for. He knew the general direction of each and exactly where to find 
its frequency on the radio controls. 
There was one now. 

His fingers flew. He flicked the 
switch. Down it went. 

There was another — and that fixed 
him! 

He suddenly felt invincible. He had 
a dozen, hands, eyes all around his head'; 
The instant any small black shape 
showed, he knocked it down — it was as 
easy as that. Why, they were almost 
across! The Lieutenant was grinning 
and waving at the men waiting there, 
men who shouted and stared as if they 
could hardly believe their eyesr 

Kruts began chanting as he marched 
along, "Hup. two, three, four. Hup, two, 
three four!" 

Willie wanted to shout and chant too 
but bis throat was all tightened up. Ills 
head seemed to soar through the sky as 
he rode along. It felt wonderful ! 


