
conan, 
man 
of 

destiny 

by . , . Robert E. Howard 
and L. Sprague de Camp 



It has been said in Turan that 
a woman's wiles may cause even 
the Sun to tremble and grow pale. 
But Conan wore a brighter shield. 



The ship that had suffered 
ignominious defeat in the sea.fight wallowed in the crimson 
wash. Just out of bow-shot the 
winner limped away towards the 
rugged hills that overhung the blue 
water. It was a scene common 
enough on the Sea of Vilayet in 
the reign of King Yildiz of Turan. 

The ship heeling drunken ly in 
the blue waste was a high-beaked 
Turanian war-galley, a sister to the 
other. On the loser death had 
reaped a plentiful harvest. Dead 
men sprawled on the high poop; 
they hung loosely over the scarred 
rail; they slumped along the runway that bridged the waist, where 
the slain oarsmen lay among their 
broken benches. 

Clustered on the poop stood the 
survivors, thirty men, many grievously wounded. They were men of 
many nations: Kothians, Zamorians, Brythunians, Corinthians, 
Shemites, Zaporoskans. Their features were those of wild men, and 
many bbr^the scars of lash or 
branding-iron. Many were halfnaked, but the motley clothes they 
wore were often of good quality, 



A uamor m fantasy's bright domain 
swords with Conan the Cimmerian u ou 
collaborative wayfaring with Conan i i 
in his own chosen field calls for even 
music and stronger wine. But L. Spragi 
this second saga of a lousing new Cone 
up ii' high in imaginati vv i pi end or tinde 



who would dare to match wits or cross 
Id be reckless indeed. But to join t/tiilh in 
•reator, the late, great Robert E. Howard 
greater hardt hood—and perhaps louder 
ft de Camp has dared to do just that, in 
n itrim which u e like to think has set a 
i the hlazing suns of Sharpur and Turan. 



CONAN, MAN OF DESTINY 



5 



though now stained with tar and 
blood. 

Some were bareheaded 'while 
others wore steel caps, fur caps, 
or strips of cloth wound turbanwise about their heads. Some wore 
shirts of chain-mail; others were 
naked to their sash-girt waists, 
their muscular arms and shoulders 
burnt almost black. Jewels glittered in earrings and the hilts of 
daggers. Naked swords were in 
their hands. Their dark eyes were 
restless. 

They stood about a man bigger 
than any of them, almost a giant, 
with thickly-corded muscles. A 
square-cut mane of black hair surmounted his broad low fort-head, 
and the eyes that blazed in his dark, 
scarred face were a volcanic blue. 

These eyes now stared at the 
shore. No town or harbor was visible along this stretch of lonely coast 
between Khawarism, the southernmost outpost of the Turanian kingdom, and its capital of Aghrapur. 
From the waterline rose tree-covered hills, climbing swiftly to the 
snowy peaks of the Anshans in the 
distance, on which the sinking sun 
shone red. 

The big man glared at the slowly 
receding galley. Its crew had been 
glad to break away from the deathgrapple, and it crawled toward .1 
creek that wound out of the hills 
between high cliffs. On the poop 
the pirate captain could still make 
out a tall figure on whose helmet 
the low sun sparkled. He remembered the features under that hel


met, glimpsed in the frenzy of 
battle — hawk-nosed, black-bearded, 
with slanting dark eyes. That was 
Artaban of Shahpur, until recently 
the scourge of the Sea of Vilayet. 

A lean Corinthian spoke: "We 
almost had the devil. What shall 
we do now, Conan?" 

The gigantic Cimmerian went to 
one of the steering-sweeps. "Ivanos," he said to the one who had 
spoken, "you and Hermio take the 
other sweep. Medius, pick three 
besides yourself and start bailing. 
The rest of you dog-souls tie up 
your cuts and then go down into 
the waist and bend your backs on 
the oars. Throw as many stiffs 
overboard as you need to make 
room." 

"Are you going to follow the 
other galley to the mouth of the 
creek?" asked Ivanos. 

The Cimmerian shook his head. 
"We're too waterlogged from the 
holing their ram gave us to risk 
another grapple," he said. "But if 
we pull hard, we can beach her on 
that headland." 

Laboriously they worked the 
galley inshore. The sun had set, 
and a haze like soft blue smoke 
hovered over the dusky water. 
Their late antagonist vanished into 
the creek. The starboard rail was 
almost awash when the bottom of 
the pirates' galley grounded on the 
sand and gravel of the headland^ 
Shouts of relief and exaltation resounded from the decks of the 
slanting vessel, and echoed through 
the bleak canyons beyond. 



6 



FANTASTIC UNIVERSE 



II 

The Akrim River, which 
wound through patches of meadow 
and farmland, was tinged red, and 
the mountains that rose on either 
side of the valley looked down on 
a scene only less ancient than they. 
Horror had come upon the peaceful valley-dwellers, in the shape of 
wolfish riders from the outlands. 
They did not turn their gaze' toward the castle that hung on the 
sheer slope of the mountains, for 
there too, oppressors lurked. 

The clan of Kurush Khan, a 
sub-chief of one of the more barbarous Hyrkanian tribes from east 
of the Sea of Vilayet, had been 
driven westward out of its native 
steppes by a tribal feud. Now it 
was taking toll of the Yuetshi villages in the valley of Akrim. 
Though this was mainly a simple 
raid for cattle, slaves, and plunder, 
Kurush Khan had wider ambitions. 
Kingdoms had been carved out of 
these hills before. 

However, just now, like his warriors, Kurush Khan was drunk 
with slaughter. The huts of the 
Yuetshi lay in smoking ruins. The 
barns had been spared because they 
contained f odder, as well as the 
. ricks. 

Up and down the valley the lean 
riders raced, stabbing and loosing 
their barbed arrows. Men howled 
as the steel drove home and women 
screamed as they were jerked 
naked across the raiders' saddlebows, 



Horsemen in sheepskins and 
high fur caps swarmed in the 
streets of the largest village — a 
squalid cluster of huts, half mud, 
half stone. Routed out of their pitiful hiding places the villagers 
knelt, vainly imploring mercy, or 
as vainly fled, to be savagely ridden 
down as they ran. The yataghans 
whistled, ending their barbaric 
hilarity in the zhukk of cloven 
flesh and bone. 

A fugitive turned with a wild 
cry as Kurush Khan swooped 
down on him with his cloak spreading out in the wind like the wings 
of a hawk. In that instant the eyes 
of the Yuetshi saw, as in a dream, 
the bearded face with its thin 
down-curving nose, the wide sleeve 
falling away from the lead arm 
that rose grasping a curving glitter 
of steel. 

The Yuetshi carried one of the 
few effective weapons in the valley: 
a heavy hunting-bow with a single 
arrow. With a screech of desperation he nocked the arrow, drew, 
and loosed it, just as the Hyrkanian 
struck at him in passing. The arrow diudded home and Kurush 
Khan tumbled out of the saddle, 
instantly dead from a cloven heart. 

As the riderless horse raced 
away, one of the two figures drew 
itself up on one elbaw. It was the 
Yuetshi, whose life was welling 
fast- from a ghastly cut across neck 
and shoulder. Gasping, he looked 
at the other form. 

Kurush Khan's beard jutted upwards as if in comic surprise. The 



CON AN, MAN 

Yuetshi's arm gave way and his 
face fell into the dirt, the calamity 
filling his mouth with dust. He 
tried to rise, gave a ghastly laugh 
from frothy lips, and fell back. 
When the Hyrkanians reached the 
spot he, too, was dead. 

The Hyrkanians squatted like 
vultures about a slain sheep and 
conversed over the body of their 
khan. When they rose, death had 
been decreed for every Yuetsln in 
the valley of Akrim. 

Granaries, ricks, and stables, 
spared by Kurush Khan, went up 
in dames. All prisoners were slain, 
some tossed living into the flames, 
and others pierced by swords and 
flung into the ensanguined streets. 
Beside the khan's corpse grew a 
mound of gruesome trophies. 

Riders galloped up, swinging 
the slain across their saddles, to 
toss them on the grim pyramid. 
Every place that might hide a shuddering villager was ripped apart or 
put to the torch. 

One tribesman, prodding into a 
stack of hay, discerned a movement 
in the straw. With a triumphant 
yell he pounced upon die stack and 
dragged his victim to light. It was 
a girl, and no dumpy, sloc-cycd 
Yuetshi woman either. Half-tearing 
off her cloak, the Hyrkanian feasted his eyes on her great beauty. 

The girl struggled desperately, 
but he dragged her remorselessly 
toward his horse. Then, quick and 
deadly as a cobra, she snatched a 
dagger from his girdle and stabbed 
him twice. With a groan he crum


OF DESTINY J 

pled, and she sprang like a sheleopard to his horse. 

The steed neighed and reared, 
and she wrenched it abou t and 
raced up the valley. Behind her the 
pack gave tongue and streamed 
out in pursuit. Arrows whistleJ 
about her head. 

She guided the l*orse straight at 
the mountain-wall on the south of 
the valley, where a narrow canyon 
opened out. Here the going Wtt 
perilous, and the Hyrkanians reined 
to a less headlong pace among the 
stones and boulders. 

But the girl rode like a windblown leaf, and was leading them 
by several hundred paces when shecame to a low wall or barrier across 
the mouth of the canyon, as if at 
some time somebody had rolled 
boulders together to make a crude 
defense. Tamarisks grew out of the 
ridge, and a small stream cut 
through a narrow notch in the center. Men_ were there. 

She saw them among the rrxlcs, 
and they shouted to her to halt. 
At first she thought them more 
Hyrkanians, and then saw otherwise. They were tall and strongly 
built, with chain-mail glinting under their cloaks, and spired steel 
caps on their heads. She made up 
her mind instantly. Throwing herself from her horse she ran up to 
the rocks and dropped to her 
knees. 

"Aid, in the name of Ishtar [he 
merciful!" she pleaded. 

A man emerged, at the sight of 
whom she cried out: "General Ar


FANTASTIC UNIVERSE 



8 

tabaat" She clasped his knees. 
"Save me from the wolves that 
foUow!" 

"Why should I risk my life for 
you?" he asked indifferently. 

"I knew you at the court of the 
king at Aghrapur! I danced before 
you. I am Roxana, the Zamoran." 

"Many women have danced before me." 

"Then I will give you a password," she said in desperation. 
"Listen !" 

As she whispered a name in his 
ear, he started as if stung. He 
stared piercingly at her. Then, 
clambering upon a great boulder, 
lie faced the oncoming riders with 
Ufted hand. 

"Go your way in peace, in the 
name of King Yildiz of Turan !" 

His answer was a whistle of arrows about his ears. He sprang 
down and waved. Bows twanged 
alt along the barrier and arrows 
sheeted out among the Hyrkanians. 
Men rolled from their saddles; 
horses screamed and bucked. The 
other riders fell back, yelling in 
dismay. They wheeled and raced 
back down the valley. 

Artaban turned to Roxana : a 
tall [nan in a cloak of crimson silk 
and a chain-mail corselet threaded 
with gold. Water and blood had 
stained his apparel, yet its richness 
was still notable. His men gathered 
about him, forty stalwart Turanian 
mariners bristling with weapons. A 
mist' rab!c- looking Yuetshi stood by 
with his hands bound. 

"My daughter," said Artaban, 



"I have made enemies in this rc 
mote land on your behalf because 
of a name whispered in my car. 
I believed you — " 

"If I lied, may a strong man's 
tortures be mine." 

"You will get your wish," he 
promised gently. "I will see to it 
personally. You named Prince 
Teyaspa. What do you know of 
him?" | 

"For three years I have shared 
his exile." 

"Where is he?" 

She pointed down the valley to 
where the turrets of the castle were 
just visible among the crags. "He 
is there — in the stronghold of 
Gleg the 7-aporoskan." 

"That fortress would be hard to 
take," mused Artaban. 

"Send for the rest of your seahawks ! I know a way to bring you 
to the heart of the keep!" 

He shook his head. "These you 
see are all my band." Seeing her 
incredulity he added: "I am not 
surprised that you wonder. I will 
tell you . . ." 

in 

With the frankness that his 
fellow-Turanians found so disconcerting, Artaban sketched his fall. 
He did not tell her of his triumphs, 
which were too well-known to need 
repetition. He was famous as a 
general for his swift raids into far 
countries — Brythunia, Zamora, 
Koth, and Shc-m— when five years 
before, the pirates- of die Sea of 



CONAN, MAN OF DESTINY 



Vilayet, working in league with the 
outlaw kozaki of the adjoining 
steppes, had become a formidable 
menace to that westernmost Hyrkanian kingdom, and King Yildiz 
had called upon Artaban to redress 
the situation. By vigorous action 
Artaban had put down the pirates, 
or at least driven them away from 
the western shores of the sea. 

But Artaban, a passionate gambler, had become embroiled in his 
own recklessness to the detriment 
of his purse. To discharge his debts 
he had, while on a lone patrol with 
his- flagship, seized a legitimate 
merchantman out of Khorusun, put 
all her people to the sword, and 
taken her cargo back to his base to 
sell secretly. But, though his crew 
had been sworn to secrecy, somebody blabbed. 

Artaban had kept his head only 
at the price of a command from. 
King Yildiz that almost amounted 
to suicide: to sail across the Sea of 
Vilayet to theymouth . of the 2aporoska River and destroy the encampments of the pirates. Only 
two ships happened to be available 
for this enterprise. 

Artaban had found die fortified 
camp of the Vilayet pirates and 
had taken it by storm, because only 
a few of the pirates had been in it 
at the time. The rest had gone up 
the river to fight a band of wandering Hyrkanians, similar to Kurush Khan's band, that had attacked 
the native Zaporoskans along the 
river, with whom the pirates were 
on friendly terms. Artaban had de


stroyed several pirate ships in their 
docks and captured a number of 
old or sick pirates. 

To cow the absent pirates, Artaban had ordered that those taken 
alive should be burned by slow 
fires in the middle of the encampment. This sentence was in the 
midst of being executed when the 
main body of the pirates had returned. 

Artaban had fled, leaving one 
of his ships in their hands. Knowing the penalty for failure, he had 
struck out for the wild stretch along 
the southwestern shore of Vilayet 
Sea where the Anshan Mountains 
came down to the water. 

He was soon pursued by the pirates In the captured ship, and 
overtaken when the western shore 
was already in sight. The resulting 
battle had raged over the decks of 
both ships until the dead and 
wounded lay everywhere. The greater numbers and superior equipment 
of the Turanians, together with 
Artaban's adroit use of his ram, 
had barely given them a defensive, 
indecisive victory. 

"So we ran the galley ashore in 
the creek. We might have repaired 
it, but the king's fleet rules all of 
Vilayet Sea, and he will have a 
bowstring ready for me when he 
knows I've failed. We struck into 
the mountains, seeking we know 
not what — -a way out of Turanian 
dominions oc a new kingdom to 
rule." 

Roxana listened and then without comment began her tale. As 



10 



FANTASTIC UNIVERSE 



Artaban well knew, it was the custom of the kings of Turan, upon 
coming to the throne, to kill their 
brothers and their brothers' children In order to eliminate the 
chance of a civil war. Moreover it 
was the custom, when the king 
died, for the nobles and generals 
to acclaim as king the first of his 
sons to reach the capital after the 
event. 

Even with this advantage the 
weak Yildiz could not have conquered his aggressive brother Teyaspa had it not been for his mother, 
a Kothian woman named Khushia. 
This formidable old dame, the real 
ruler of Tuxan, preferred Yildiz 
because he was more docile, and 
Teyaspa was driven into exile in 
disgrace. 

He sought refuge in Iranistan, 
but discovered that the king of that 
land was corresponding with Yildiz in regard to poisoning him. In 
an attempt to reach Vendhya he 
was captured by a nomadic Hyrkanian tribe who recognized him 
and sold him to the Turanians. 
Teyaspa thought his fate was sealed, but his mother intervened and 
stopped Yildiz from having 'his 
brother strangled. 

Instead, Teyaspa was confined 
in the castle of Gleg the Zaporoskan, a fierce semi-bandit chief who 
had come into the valley of the 
Akrim many years before and set 
himself up as a feudal lord over 
the primitive Yuctshi, preying on 
them but not protecting them. Teyaspa was furnished with all lux


uries . and forms of dissipation 
calculated to soften his fiber. 

Roxana explained that she was 
one of the dancing-girls sent to 
entertain him. She had fallen violently in love with the handsome 
prince and,- instead of seeking to 
ruin him, had striven to lift him 
back to manhood. 

"But," she concluded, "Prince 
Teyaspa has sunk into apathy. One 
would not know him for the young 
eagle who led his horsemen against 
the Brythunian knights and the 
Shcmitic cisshi/r/. Imprisonment 
and wine have blunted the keenness of his mind. He sits entranced 
on his cushions, coming to life only 
when I sing or dance for him, But 
he has the blood of conquerors in 
him. He is like a lion who sleeps. 

"When the Hyrkanians rode into 
the valley, I slipped out of the 
castle and went looking for Kurush 
Khan, hoping to find a man bold 
enough to aid Teyaspa. But I saw 
Kurush Khan slain, and then the 
Hyrkanians became like mad dogs. 
I hid from them, but they dragged 
me out. 

"My lord, help us! What if you 
have only a handful of soldiers. 
Kingdoms have been won by less ! 
When it is known that the prince 
is free, men will flock to us! Yildiz is a fumbling mediocrity, and 
the people fear his son Yezdigerd, 
a fierce, cruel, and gloomy youth. 

"The nearest Turanian garrison 
is three days' ride from here. Akrim is isolated. Only wandering 
nomads and the wretched Yuetshi 



CON AN , MAN 

know its strength. Here an empire 
can be plotted without interference. 
You, like myself, are an outlaw. 
If wc band together we can free 
Tcyaspa and place him on his 
throne! If he were king, unbelievable wealth and honor would be 
yours, while Yildiz offers you nothing but a bowstring!" 

She was on her knees, gripping 
his cloak, her dark eyes ablaze with 
passion. Artaban stared down at 
her silently. Then, suddenly, he 
laughed a gusty laugh. 

"We shall need the Hyrkanians," 
he said, and the girl clapped her 
hands with a cry of Joy. 

IV 

"Hold up !" Conan the Cimmerian halted and glanced about, 
craning his massive neck. Behind 
film his comrades shifted with .1 
clank of weapons. They were in a 
narrow canyon, flanked on either 
hand by steep slopes, grown with 
stunted firs. Before them a small 
spring welled up among straggling 
trees and trickled away down a 
moss-green channel. 

"Water here at least," grunted 
Conan. "Drink." 

The previous evening, a quick 
much had brought them to Artaban's ship in its hiding-place in the 
creek before dark. Conan had left 
four of his most seriously wounded 
men here, to work at patching up 
the vessel, while he pushed on 
witii the rest. Believing that the 
Turanians were only a short dis


OF DESTINY IT 

tance ahead, he had pressed recklessly ahead in hope of coming up 
with them and avenging the massacre on the Zaporoska. 

But then, with the setting of the 
young moon, they had lost the trail 
in a maze of gullies and wandered 
blindly. Now at dawn they had 
found water, but were lost and 
worn out. The only sign of human 
life they had seen since leaving the 
coast was a huddle of huts among 
the crags, housing nondescript 
skin-clad creatures who fled howlin l; at: their approach. Somewhere 
in the hills a lion roared. 

Of the twenty-six men, only Conan's iron muscles retained their 
resilience. "Get some sleep," he 
growled. "Ivanos, pick two men 
to take the first watch with you. 
When the sun's over that lir, wake 
three others. I'm going to scout up 
this gorge." 

He strode up the canyon and 
was soon lust among the straggling 
growth. The slopes changed to 
towering cliffs that rose sheer from 
the sloping, rock-littered floor. 
Then with heart-stopping suddenness a wild shaggy figure sprang 
up from a tangle of bushes and, 
confronted the pirate. Conan's face 
darkened belligerently as his sword 
flashed. Then he checked the stroke, 
seeing that the apparition was 
weaponless. 

It was a Yuetshi — a wizened, 
gnomclike man in sheepskins, with 
long arms, short legs, and a flat 
yellow slant-eyed face seamed with 
many small wrinkles. 



12 



FANTASTIC UNIVERSE 



"Khosatral!" exclaimed the vagabond. "What brings a member of 
the free brotherhood to this Hyrkanian-hauntcd land?" The man 
spoke the Turanian dialect of Hyrkanian, but with a strong accent. 

"Who arc you?" grunted Conan. 

"I was a chief of the Yuctshi," 
answered the other with a. wild 
laugh. "I was called Vinashko. But 
you haven't answered me." 

"What lies beyond this canyon?" Conan countered. 

"Over the ridge directly in front 
of you lies a tangle of gullies and 
crags. If you thread your way carefully among. them, you will come 
out overlooking the broad valley 
of the Akrim. Until yesterday it 
was the home of my tribe, but today it holds only their charred 
bones." 

"Is there food there?" Conan 
asked. 

"Yes — and death. A horde of 
Hyrkanian nomads holds the valley." 

As Conan ruminated this, a step 
brought him about, to see Ivanos 
approaching. 

"Hah!" Conan scowled. "I told 
you to watch while the men slept!" 

"They are too hungry to sleep," 
retorted the Corinthian, suspiciously eyeing the Yuetshi. 

"Crom I" growled the Cimmerian. "I cannot produce food out of 
thin air. They must continue to 
gnaw their thumbs until we find a 
village to loot — " 

"I can lead you to enough food 



lo feed an army," interrupted Vinashko. 

Conan said, his voice heavy with 
menace: "Don't mock me, my 
friend! You just said the Hyrk.mians — ■'* 

"There's a place near here, unknown to them, where wc stored 
food. I was on my way there when 
I saw you." 

Conan hefted his sword, a broad, 
straight, double-edged blade over 
four feet long, in a land where 
curved blades were more the rule. 
"Then let's go, Yuetshi. I accept 
your offer — and gratefully. But at 
the first false move, off goes your 
head ! I do not speak in jest." 

Again the Yuetshi laughed that 
wild, scornful laugh, and motioned 
them to follow. He made for the 
nearer cliff, groped among the 
brittle bushes, and disclosed a ( Wu k 
in the wall. Beckoning, he beat 
and crawled inside. 

"Into that wolf's den ?" said 
Ivanos. 

"What are you afraid of?" said 
Conan. "Mice?" 

He bent and squeezed through 
the opening, and the other followed 
bin, Conan found himself, not in 
a cave, but in a narrow cleft of the 
cliff. Overhead a narrow, crooked 
ribbon of blue morning sky appea red between the steep walls, 
which got higher with every step. 

They advanced through the 
gloom for a hundred paces and 
came out into a wide circular space 
surrounded by the towering walls 
of what looked at first glance like 



CONAN, MAN OF DF.STINV 



a monstrous honeycomb. A low 
roaring came from the center of 
the space, where a snull circular 
curbing surrounded a hole in the 
floor from which issued a pallid 
flame as tall as a man, casting a 
w,m illumination about the cavity. 

Conan looked curiously about 
him. It was like being at the bottom of a gigantic well. The floor 
was of solid rock, worn smooth as 
it by the feet of ten thousand generations. The walls, too regut.iriy 
circular to be altogether natural, 
were pierced by hundreds of black 
square depressions, a hand's 
breath deep and arranged in regular rows and tiers. 

The wall rose stupendously, ending in a small circle of blue sky, 
where a vulture hung like a dot. 
A spiral stairway cut in the black 
rock started up from ground-level, 
made half a complete circle as it 
rose, and ended with a platform 
in front of a larger black hole in 
the wall, the entrance to a tunnel. 

Vinashko explained : "Those 
holes are the tombs of an ancient 
people who lived here even before 
my ancestors came to the Sea of 
Vilayet. There are a few dim legends about these people. It is said 
that ihey were not human, but 
preyed upon my ancestors until a 
priest of the Yuctshi by a great 
sprll confined them to their holes 
in the wall and lit that fire to hold 
them there. No doubt their bones 
have long ago crumbled to dust. 

"A few of my people have tried 
to chip away the slabs of stone that 



13 

block these tombs, but the rock defied their efforts." He pointed to 
heaps of stuff at one side of the 
amphitheater. "My people stored 
food here against times of famine. 
Take your fill. There are no more 
Yuctshi to eat it." 

Conan repressed a shudder of 
superstitious fear. "Your people 
should have dwelt in these caves. 
One man could hold that outer 
cleft against a horde." 

The Yuetshi shrugged. "Here 
there is no water. Besides, when 
the Hyrkanians swooped down 
there was no time. My people were 
not warlike. They only wished to 
till the soil." 

Conan shook his head, unable to 
understand such natures. Vinashko 
was pulling out leather bags of 
grain, rice, moldy cheese, and dried 
meat, and skins of sour wine. 

"Go bring some of the men to 
help carry the stuff, Ivanos," said 
Conan, staring upward. "I'll stay 
here." 

As Ivanos swaggered off, Vinashko tugged at Conan's arm. "Now 
do you believe I'm honest?" 

"Aye, by Crom," answered Conan, gnawing a handful of dried 
figs. "Any man that leads me to 
food must be a friend. But how 
did you and your tribe get here 
from the Valley of the Akrim? It 
must be a long steep road." 

Vinashko's eyes gleamed like 
those of a hungry wolf. "That is 
our secret. I will show you, if you 
trust me." 

"When my belly's full," said 



FANTASTIC UNIVERSE 



Conan "with his month almost bursting with figs. "We're following 
that black devil Artaban of Shahpur, who is somewhere in these 
mountains." 

"He is your enemy?" 
"Enemy! If I catch him I'll make 
a pair of boots of his hide." 

"Artaban of Shahpur is only 
three hours' ride from here." 

"Ha!" Conan started up, feeling 
for his sword, his blue eyes ablaze. 
"Lead me to him!'" 

"Take care!" cried Vinashko. 
"He has forty armored Turanians, 
and has been joined by Dayuki and 
a hundred and fifty Hyrkanians. 
How many warriors have you, 
lord?" 

Conan munched silently, scowling. With such a disparity of numbers he could not afford to give 
Artaban any advantages. In the 
months since he had become a pirate captain he had beaten and 
bullied his crew into an effective 
force, but it was still an instrument 
that had to be used with care. By 
themselves they were reckless and 
improvident. Well led, they could 
do much. But without wise leadership they would throw away their 
lives on a whim. 

Vinashko said: "If you will come 
with me, kozak, I will show you 
what no man except a Yuetshi has 
seen for a thousand years!" 

"What's that?" Conan queried, 
instantly alert. 

"A road of death for our enemies !" 

Conan Look a step, then halted. 



"Wait. Here come the red brothers. Hear the dogs swear J" 

"Send them back with the food," 
whispered Vinashko as half a dozen 
pirates swaggered out of the cleft 
to gape at the cavern. Conan faced 
them with a gesture. 

"Lug this stuff back to the 
spring," he said. "I told you I 
should find foud." 

"And what of you?" demanded 
Ivanos. 

"Don't worry about me. I have 
words with Vinashko. Go back to 
camp and gorge yourselves — -and 
may you live to regret it." 

As the pirates' footsteps faded 
away down the cleft, Conan gave 
Vinashko a clap on the back that 
staggered him. "Let's go," he said. 

The Yuetshi led the way up the 
circular stairway carved in the rock 
Wall. Above the last tier of tombs 
it ended at the tunnel's mouth. 
Conan found that he could stand 
upright in the tunnel. 

"If you follow this tunnel," said 
Vinashko, "you will come out behind the castle of the Zaporoskan, 
Gleg, that overlooks Akrim." 

"What good will that do?" 
grunted Conan, feeling his way 
behind the Yuetshi. 

"Yesterday when the slaying began, I stood my ground for a while 
against the Hyrkanian dogs. But 
when my comrades had all been cut 
down I fled the valley, running up 
to the Gorge of Diva. I had no 
sooner entered the gorge when I 
found myself among strange warriors, who knocked me down and 



CONAKT, MAN 

bound me, wishing to ask me what 
went on in the valley. They were 
sailors of the king's Vilayet squadron, and called their leader Artahan. 

"While they questioned rne, a 
girl came riding like mad with the 
Hyrkanians after her. When she 
sprang from her horse and begged 
aid ol Artaban I recognized her as 
the Zarnoran dancing-girl who lives 
in Gleg's castle. A volley of arrows 
scattered the Hyrkanians, and then 
Artaban talked with the girl, completely forgetting about me. 

"For three years Gleg has held 
a captive. I know, because I have 
taken grain and sheep to the castle, 
to be paid in the Zaporaskan fashion, with curses and blows. Kozdk, 
the prisoner is Teyaspa, brother of 
King Yildiz!" 

Con an grunted in surprise. 

"The girl, Roxana, disclosed this 
to Artaban, and he swore tu aid 
her in freeing the prince. As they 
talked, the Hyrkanians returned 
and halted at a distance, vengeful 
but cautious. Artaban hailed them 
and had speech with Dayuki, the 
new chief since Kurush Khan was 
slain. At last the Hyrkanian came 
over the wall of rocks and shared 
bread and salt with Artaban. And 
the three plotted to rescue Prince 
Teyaspa and put him on the throne. 

"Roxana had discovered the secret way to the castle. Today, just 
before sunset, the Hyrkanians are 
to attack the fortress from the 
front. While they thus attract the 
attention of the Zaporoskans, Arta


OF DESTINY 15 

ban and his men ace to gain entrance by the secret passageway. 
Roxana will open the door for 
them, and they will take the prince 
and flee into die hills to recruit 
warriors. As they talked, night fell, 
and I gnawed through my cords 
and slipped away. 

"You wish vengeance. I'll show 
you how to trap Artaban. Slay the 
lot — all but Teyaspa. You can 
either extort a mighty price from 
Khushia for her son, or from Yildiz for killing him, or if you prefer you can try to be king-maker 
yourself." 

"Show me," said Conan, eyes 
agleam with eagerness. 

V 

The smooth floor of the tunnel, 
in which three horses might have 
been ridden abreast, slanted downward . From time to time short 
flights of steps gave on to lower 
levels. For a while Conan could 
not see anything in the darkness. 
Then a faint glow ahead relieved it. 
The glow became a silvery sheen, 
and the sound of falling water 
filled the tunnel. 

They stood in the mouth of the 
tunnel, which was masked by a 
sheet of water rushing over the 
cli'f ibove. From the pool that 
foamed at the foot of the falls, a 
narrow stream raced away down 
the gorge. 

Vinashko pointed out a ledge 
that ran from the cavern-mouth, 
skirting the pool. Conan followed 



FANTASTIC UNIVERSE 



16 

him. Plunging through the thin 
^dge of the falls, he found himself in a gorge that was like a 
knife cut through the hills. Nowhere was it more than fifty paces 
wide, willi sheer cliffs on both 
sides. No vegetation grew anywhere 
except for a fringe along the 
stream. The stream meandered 
down the canyon floor to plunge 
through a narrow crack in the opposite cliff. 

Conan followed Vinashko up the 
twisting gorge. Within three hundred paces they lost sight of the 
waterfall. The floor slanted upward. 
Shortly the Yuetshi drew back, 
clutching his companion's arm. A 
stunted tree grew at an angle in 
che rock wall, and behind this Vinashko crouched, pointing. 

Beyond the angle, the gorge ran 
on for eighly paces and ended in 
an impasse. On their left the cliff 
seemed curiously altered, and Conan sl.ired for an instant before 
he realized that he was looking at 
a man-made wall. They were almost behind a castle built in a 
notch in the cliffs. 

Its wall rose sheer from the edge 
of a deep crevice. No bridge 
spanned this chasm, and the only 
apparent entrance in the wall was 
a heavy iron-braced door lialfway 
up its precipitous expanse. Opposite to it a narrow ledge ran along 
the opposite side of the gorge, and 
this had been improved so that it 
could be reached on foot from 
where they stood. 

"By this path the girl Rox.uu 



escaped," said Vinashko. "This 
gorge runs almost parallel to the 
Akrim. It narrows to the west and 
finally comes into the valley 
through a narrow notch, where 
the stream flows through. The Z&poroskans have blocked the entrance with stones so that the path 
cannot be seen from the outer val 
ley unless one knows of it. They 
seldom use this road and know 
nothing of the tunnel behind the 
waterfall." 

Conan rubbed his shaven chin. 
He yearned to loot the castle himself but saw no way to come to it. 
"By Crom, Vinashko, I should like 
to look on this noted valley." 

The Yuetshi glanced at Conan's 
bulk and shook his head. "There is 
a way we call the Eagle's Road, but 
it is not for such as you." 

"Ymir! Is a skin-clad savage a 
better climber than a Cimmerian 
hillman? Get going; my friend.*' 

Vinashko shrugged and led the 
way back down the gorge until, 
within sight of the waterfall, he 
stopped at what looked like a shallow groove corroded in the higher 
cliff-wall. Looking closely Conan 
saw a series of shallow hand-holds 
notched into the solid rock. 

"I'd have deepened these pockmarks," grumbled Conan, but started up nevertheless after Vinashko, 
clinging to the shallow pits by toes 
and fingers. At last they reached 
the top of the ridge forming the 
southern side of the gorge and sat 
down with their feet hanging over 
the edge. 



COHAN) MAN 

The gorge twisted like.a snake's 
track beneath them. Conan looked 
out over the opposite and lower 
wall into the valley of the Akriin. 

On his right the morning sun 
xiood high over the glittering Sea 
of Vilayet and on his left rose the 
white-hooded peaks of the Anshans. Behind him he could see 
down into the tangle of gorges 
among which he knew his crew 
to be encamped. 

Smoke still floated lazily up 
from the blackened' patches that 
had been villages, Down the valley, on the left bank of the river, 
were pitched a number of tents of 
hide. 

Conan saw men swarming like 
ants around these tents. These 
were the Hyrkanians, Vinashko informed him, and pointed up the 
valley to the mouth of a narrow 
canyon where the Turanians were 
encamped. But the castle drew Conan's interest. 

It was solidly set in a notch in 
the cliffs between the gorge beneath them and the valley beyond. 
The castle faced the valley, entirely surrounded by a massive twentyfoot wall. A ponderous gate flanked by towers pierced with slits for 
arrows commanded the outer slope. 
This slope was not too steep to be 
l limbed or even ridden up, but 
afforded no cover. 

"It would take a devil to storm 
that castle," growled Conan. "How 
are we to come at the king's 
brother in that pile of rock? You'd 
better lead us to Artaban, so I can 



of DESTINY i 7 

rake his head back to the Zapo
roska." 

"Be less foolhardy if you wish 
tO wear your own," answered Vinashko. "What do you see in the 

gorge?" 

"A 1 ot of bare ston e with a 
f ringe of green along the stream." 

The Yuetshi grinned wolf-like. 
"And do you notice that the 
fringe is denser on the right bank, 
where it is also higher? Listen! 
From behind the waterfall we can 
watch until the Turanians come up 
the gorge. Then, while they arcbusy at Gleg's castle, we'll hide 
among the bushes along the 
stream and waylay them as they 
return. We'll kill all but Teyaspa, 
whom we will take captive. Then 
we'll go back through the tunnel. 
Have you a ship to escape in?" 

"Aye," said Conan, rising and 
stretching. "Vinashko, is there any 
way down from this knife-edge 
you have us balanced on except 
that shaft we came up by?" 

"There is a trail that leads east 
along the ridge and then down 
into those gullies where your men 
camp. Let me show you. Do you 
sec that rock that looks like an old 
woman ? Well, you turn right 
there ..." 

Conan listened attentively to the 
directions, but the substance of 
them was that this perilous path, 
more suitable for ibex or chamois 
than for men, did not provide access to the gorge beneath ihem. 

In the midst of his explanation. 



7« 



FANTASTIC UNIVERSE 



Vinashko turned and stiffened. 
"What's diis?" he said. 

Men were galloping out of the 
distant Hyrkanian camp and lashing their horses across the shallow 
river. The sun struck glints from 
their lance-points, and the castle 
walls helmets began to sparkle. 

"The attack !' ' cried Vinashko. 
"Khosatral Khel! They've changed 
their plans. They were not going 
to attack until evening! This is 
serious! We must get dov/n there 
before the Turanians arrive!" 

They levered their bodies into 
the shallow groove and crept down, 
step by step. 

At last they stood in the gorge 
and hastened toward the waterfall. 
They reached the pool, crossed the 
ledge, and plunged through the 
fall. As they came into the dimness beyond, Vinashko gripped 
Oman's mailed arm. 

Above the rush of water the 
Cimmerian heard the clink of steel 
on rock, He looked out through 
the silver-shimmering screen that 
made everything ghostly and unreal, but which hid them from the 
eyes of anyone outside. They had 
not gained their refuge any too 
soon. 

A band of men was coming along 
the gorge — tall men in mail hauberks and turban-bound helmets. 
At their head strode one taller than 
the rest, with black-bearded hawklike features. Conan sighed and 
gripped his sword hilt, moving 
forward a trifle, but Vinashko 
caught him. 



"In the gods' names, fcnzak," he 
whispered frantically, "don't throw 
away our lives! We have thorn 
trapped, but if you rush out 
now — -** 

"Don't worry, little man," said 
Conan with a somber grin. "I am 
not so simple as to spoil a good 
vengeance by a thoughtless impulse." 

The Turanians were crossing the 
narrow stream. On the farther bank 
they halted in an attitude of listening. Presently, above the rush of 
the waters, the men in the cavernouth heard the distant shouting 
of many men. 

"The attack!" whispered Vinashko. 

As if it were a signal, the Turanians started swiftly up the gorge. 
Vinashko touched the Cimmerian's 
arm. 

"Stay here and watch. I'll hurry 
back and bring your pirates." 

"Hurry, then/' said Conan. "It 
will be touch and go if you can get 
them here in time." 

And Vinashko slipped away like 
a shadow. 

VI 

In a broad chamber shielded 
from the too-inquisitive by goldworked tapestries, and silken 
screens, the prince Teyaspa reclined 
at full length on a narrow divan. 
He seemed the picture of voluptuous idleness as he lounged in silks 
and satins, a crystal jar of wine at 
his elbow. His dark eyes were those 



CONAN, MAN 

of a dreamer whose dreams are 
tinted with wine and ^drugs. His 
gaze rested on Roxana, who tensely 
gripped the bars of a casement, 
peering out. But his expression was 
placid and far-away and he seemed 
unaware of the yells and clamor 
that raged without. 

Roxana moved restlessly, glancing at the prince over her slim 
shoulder. She had fought like a 
tigress to keep Teyaspa from falling into the gulf of degeneracy and 
resignation that his captors had rirepai'ed for him. Koxana, no fatalist, 
had kept him stung into life and 
ambition. 

"It is time," she breathed, turning swiftly. "The sun is almost at 
the zenith. The Hyrkanians arc riding up the slope, lashing their 
steeds and shooting arrows against 
the walls. The Zaporoskans are 
pouring poison darts and stones 
down upon them. Their bodies litter the slope, but they keep coming 
on again like madmen. I must leave 
you now. You will sit on the golden 
throne, "my lover, if you have the 
courage to stand firm." 

She prostrated herself and kissed 
his slippers in an ecstasy of adoration. Then she rose and hurried 
out of the room, and through another where ten great black mutes 
kept guard night and day. She 
traversed a corridor to the outer 
court that lay between the castle 
and the postern wall. Though Teyaspa was not allowed unguarded 
out of his chamber, she was free 
to come and go as she liked. 



OF DESTINY 19 
Crossing the court, she approached the door that led into the 
gorge. One warrior leaned there, 
disgruntled because he could not 
take part in the fighting. Though 
the rear of the castle seemed invulnerable, the cautious Gleg had 
posted a sentry there anyway. The 
man on guard was a Sogdian, his 
felt cap perched on the side of his 
head. 

He leaned on a pike, scowling, 
as Roxana approached him. "What 
do you here, woman ?" he demanded. 

"I am afraid," Roxana replied 
instantly. "The* cries and shouts 
frighten me, lord. The prince is 
dazed with wine, and there is no 
one to soothe my fears." 

She would have fired the heart 
of a corpse as she stood before the 
Sogdian in an attitude of fear and 
supplication. He plucked his thick 
beard. 

"Do not fear, little gazelle," he 
said. "I'll soothe you." He laid a 
black-nailed hand on her shoulder 
and drew her close. "Those ruffians 
won't touch a lock of your hair. 
I — ahhh !" 

Snuggling in his arms, Roxana 
had slipped a dagger from her sash 
and thrust it through his thick 
throat. One of the Sogdian's hands 
clutched at his beard while the 
other fumbled for the hilts in his 
girdle. He reeled and fell heavily. 

Roxana snatched a bunch of keys 
from his girdle and ran to the door. 
She swung it open and gave a low 
ay of joy at the sight of Artaban 



FANTASTIC UNIVERSE 



and his Turanians on the ledge 
across the chasm. 

A heavy plank, used as a bridge, 
lay inside the gate, but it was far 
too heavy for her to handle. Chance 
had enabled her to use it for her 
previous escape, when rare carelessness had left it in place across 
the chasm and unguarded for a few 
minutes. 

Artaban tossed her the end of a 
rope, which she made fast to the 
hinges of the door. The other end 
was. gripped by half a dozen strong 
men, and three Turanians crossed 
the crevice, swinging hand over 
hand. They spanned the chasm with 
the plank for the rest to cross. 

"Twenty men guard the bridge," 
snapped Artaban. "The rest follow 
me." 

The sea-wolves drew their steel 
and followed their chief. Artaban 
led them swiftly after the lightfooted girl. As they entered the 
castle, a servitor sprang up and 
gaped at them. Before he could 
cry out, Dayuki's razor-edged 
yataghan sliced through his throat, 
and the band rushed into the chamber where the ten mutes sprang up, 
gripping scimitars! 

There was a flurry of fierce, silent fighting, noiseless except for 
the hiss and rasp of steel and the 
gasps of the w.ounded. Three Turanians died, and the rest strode 
into the inner chamber over the 
slumped bodies of the blades. 

Teyaspa rose, his quiet eyes 
gleaming with old fire, as Artabao 



dramatically knelt before him ami 
lifted the hilt of his scimitar. 

"These arc the warriors who will 
fight until death takes them to set 
you on your throne!" cried Roxana. 

"We must go quickly, before the 
Zaporoskan dogs are aware of us," 
said Artaban. 

He drew up his men in a clump 
around Teyaspa. Swiftly they 
traversed the chambers, crossed the 
court, and approached the gate. But 
the clang of steel had been heard. 
Even as the raiders were crossing 
the bridge, savage yells rose from 
behind them. Across the courtyard 
rushed a stocky, powerful figure in 
silk and steel, followed by fifty 
hel meted archers and swordsmen. 

"Gleg !" screamed Rox.ina. 

"Cast down the plank!" roared 
Artaban, springing to the bridgehead. 

On each side of the chasm bows 
twanged until the air over the plank 
was clouded with shafts whistling 
in both directions. Several Zaporoshans fell, but so did the two 
Turanians who stooped to lift the 
plank. Across the bridge rushed 
Gleg, his cold gray eyes blazing 
under his spired helmet. 

Artaban met him breast to breast. 
In a glittering whirl of steel tine 
Turanian's scimitar grated around 
Gleg's blade, and the keen edge Lut 
through the camail and the thick 
muscles of the Zaporoskan's neck. 
Gleg staggered and, with a wild 
cry, pitched off into the chasm. 

In an instant the Turanians had 



COKAN, MAN OF DESTINY 



cast Lhc bridge after him. On the 
far side the Zaporoskans halted 
with furious yells and began shooting their thick horn bows as fast 
as thef could draw and nock. Before the Turanians, running down 
the ledge, could get out of range, 
three more had been brought down 
and a couple of others had received 
minor wounds from the vicious 
arrow-storm. 

Artaban cursed at his losses. "All 
but six of you go forward to make 
sure that the way is clear," he Ordered. "I will follow with the 
prince. My lord, I could not bring 
a horse up this defile, but I will 
have the dogs make you a litter of 
spears." 

"The gods would turn from me 
if I rode on my deliverers' shoulders!" said Teyaspa. "Again I am 
a man! I will never forget this 
day!" 

"The gods be praised !'" whispered Roxana. "You have chosen 
the path of honor." 

They came within sight of the 
waterfall. All but the small group 
in the rear had crossed the stream 
and were straggling down the left 
bank when there came a multiple 
snap of bowstrings, as though a 
hand had swept across the Strings 
of a muted harp. 

A sheet of arrows hissed actOsS 
the stream into their ranks, and 
then another and another. The 
foremost Turanians went down like 
wheat under the scythe and the 
rest gave ground, shouting alarm. 

"Dog!" shouted Artaban, turn


ing on Dayuki, "This is your 
work!" 

"Do I order my men to shoot at 
me?" squalled the Hyrkanian, his 
dark face pale. "This is some new 
enemy !" 

Artaban ran down the gorge toward his demoralized men, cursing. He knew that the Zaporoskans 
would rig up some sort of bridge 
across the chasm and pursue him, 
Catching him between two forces. 
Who his assailants were he had no 
idea. From the castle he heard the 
shouts of hat lie-, anil t lien a great 
rumble of hooves and shouting and 
a clang of steel seemed to come 
from the outer valley. But, pent as 
he was in that narrow gorge which 
muffled sound, he could not be 
sure. 

The Turanians continued to fall 
before the storm of arrows from 
their invisible . opponents. Some 
staggered blindly into the bushes. 
Artaban knocked their bows aside, 
shouting: "Fools! Why waste arrows on shadows? Draw your steel 
and follow me !" 

With the fury of men ignominiously forced into retreat, the 
remaining Turanians charged the 
ambush, their dark eyes blazing. 
Arrows brought down some, but 
the rest leaped into the water and 
splashed across. From the bushes 
on the farther bank rose wild figures, mail-clad or half-naked, 
swords in hands. 

"Up and at them!" bellowed the 
great voice of Conan. "Cut and 
Uirust !"' 



FANTASTIC UNIVERSE 



22
VII 

A yell or amazement rose from 
the Turanians at the sight of the 
Vilayet pirates. Then they closed 
with a roar. The rasp and clangor 
of steel echoed from die cliffs. The 
first Turanians to spring up the 
higher bank i ull back into the 
stream with heads split. Then the 
pirates leaped down the bank to 
meet Lheir foes hand-to-hand, 
thigh-deep in water that soon grew 
dark with their spilled blood. Pirate and Turanian slashed and slew 
in a blind frenzy, neither giving 
nor expecting quarter. 

Dayuki ran into the melee, glaring. His double-curved blade split 
a pirate's head. Then Vinashko 
leaped upon him barehanded and 
cursing. 

The Hyrkanian recoiled from 
the mad ferocity in the Yuetshi's 
features, but Vinashko caught Dayuki around the neck and sank his 
teeth in the man's throat. He hung 
on, biting deeper and deeper, heedless of the dagger that Dayuki 
drove into his side. He continued 
to struggle until both, men lost 
their footing and fell irito the 
stream. Still locked in furious combat they were washed down with 
the current, now one face showing 
above water, now another, until 
both vanished forever. 

The Turaniajis were driven back 
up the left bank, where they made 
a brief last-ditch stand. Then they 
broke and fled toward the place 
where Prince Teyaspa stared en


tranced in the shadow of the cliff, 
with the small knot of warriors 
whom Artaban had detailed to 
g uar d him. Tw ice he moved a s 
though to draw his sword and cast 
himself into the fray, but Roxana, 
dinging to his knees, stopped him. 

Artaban, breaking away from 
the battle, hastened to Teyaspa. The 
admiral's sword was still uusheadied, his mail was hacked, and blood 
dripped from beneath his helmet. 
After him through the melee came 
Conan, brandishing his great sword 
in his sledge-like fist. He beat down 
his foes with strokes that shattered 
bucklers, caved in helmets, and 
clove through mail, flesh, and bone. 

"Ho, you rascals!" he roared in 
his barbarous Hyrkanian. "I want 
your head, Artaban, and the fellow 
beside you there— Teyaspa. Have 
no fear, my pretty prince. I'll not 
hurt you." 

Artaban, looking about for an 
avenue of escape, saw the groove 
leading up the cliff and guessed 
its purpose. 

"Quick, my lord!" he whispered. 
"Up the cliff! I'll hold off the barbarian while you diinb!" 

"Yes, hurry!" urged Roxana. 
"I'll follow!" 

But the fatalistic mask had descended again on Prince Teyaspa. 
He shrugged. "It is plain that the 
gods do not will that I should press 
the throne. What man can escape 
his destiny?" 

Roxana clutched her hair with 
a look of horror. Artaban sheathed 
his sword, sprang for the groove. 



CONAN, MAN 

and started up with the agility of 
a sailor. But Conan, corning up behind him at a run, reached up, 
caught his ankle, and plucked him 
out of his cranny like a fowler 
catching a bird by the leg. 

Artaban struck the ground with 
a clang. As he tried to roll over 
to wrench loose, the Cimmerian 
drove his sword into the Turanian's body, crunching through 
mail-links, and into the ground beneath. 

Pirates approached with drawn 
blades. Teyaspa spread his hands, 
saying: "Take me if you will. I 
am Teyaspa/' 

Roxana swayed, her hands over 
her eyes. Then like a flash she 
thrust her dagger through Teyaspa's heart, and he died on his feet. 
As he fell, she drove the point into 
her own breast and sank down beside her lover. Moaning, she 
cradled his head in her arms, while 
the pirates stood about, awed and 
uncomprehending. 

A sound up the gorge made them 
lift their heads. They had dwindled 
to a handful, weary and dazed with 
battle, their garments half torn 
from their bodies. 

Conan said: "Men are coming 
down the gorge. Get back into the 
tunnel." 

They obeyed, but slowly, as if 
they only half understood him. Before the last of them had. ducked 
under the waterfall, a stream of 
men poured down the path from 
the castle. 

Conan, cursing and beating bis 



OF DESTINY 23 

rearmost men to make them hurry, 
looked around to see the gorge 
thronged with armed figures. He 
recognized the fur caps of the Zaporoskans and with them the white 
turbans^ of the Imperial Guards 
from Agbrapur. One of these wore 
a spray of bird-of -paradise feathers 
in his turban, and Conan was startled to recognize,, from these and 
other indications, the general of the 
Imperial Guards, the third man of 
the Turanian Empire. 

The general saw Conan and the 
tail of his procession too and shouted an order. As Conan, the last in 
line, plunged through the waterfall, a body of Turanians detached 
themselves from the rest and ran 
to the pool. 

Conan yelled to his men to run, 
then turned and faced the sheet of 
water from the inner side, holding 
up a buckler from a dead Turanian 
and his great sword. 

Presently a guardsman came 
through the sheet of water. He 
started to yell, but the sound was 
cut oft by a meaty chunk as Conan's 
sword sheared through his neck. 
His head and body tumbled separately off the ledge into the pool. 
The second gua rd had time to 
strike at the dim figure that towered over him, but his sword reboimded from the Cimmerian's 
buckler. The next instant he in turn 
fell back into the pool with a cloven 
Skull. 

There were shouts, partly 
muffled by the sound of the water. 
Conan flattened himself against the 



24 



FANTASTIC UNIVERSE 



side of the tunnel, and a storm of 
arrows whipped through the sheet 
of water, bringing little splashes of 
droplets with them and rebounding 
with a clatter from the walls and 
floor of the tunnel. 

A glance back showed Conan 
that his men had vanished into the 
gloom beyond. He ran after them, 
so that when a few moments later 
the guardsmen again burst through 
the waterfall they found nobody in 
front of them. 

Meanwhile in the gorge, voices 
filled with horror rose as the newcomers halted among the corpses. 
The general knelt beside the dead 
prince, and the dying girl. 

"It is Prince Teyaspa!" he cried. 

"He is beyond help now," murmured Roxana. "I would have made 
him king, but you robbed him of 
his manhood — so I killed him." 

"But I bring him the crown of 
Turan!" cried the general. "Yildiz 
is dead, and the people will rise 
against his son Yezdigerd if they 
have anyone else to follow — " 

"Too late!" whispered Roxana, 
and her dark head sank on her 
arm. 

VIII 

Conan ran up the tunnel with 
the feet of the pursuing Turanians 
echoing after him. Where the tunnel opened into the great natural 
chimney lined with the tombs of 
the forgotten race, he saw his men 
grouped uncertainly on the floor 
of the pit below him, some looking 



at the hissing flame and some up 
at the stair down which they had 
come. 

"Go on to the ship !" he bellowed through cupped hands. The 
words rattled back from the black 
cylindrical walls. 

The men ran out into the cleft 
that led to the outer world. Conan 
turned again and leaned against 
the side of the chimney just alongside the tunnel entrance. He waited as the footsteps grew louder. 

An Imperial Guard popped out 
of the tunnel. Again Conan's sword 
swished and struck, biting into the 
man's back through mail- and skin 
and spine. In complete silence the 
guard pitched head-first off the 
platform. His momentum carried 
him out from the spiral stair toward the middle of the floor below. His body plunged into the 
hole in the rocky floor from which 
issued the flame and wedged there 
like a cork in a bottle. The flame 
went out with a pop, plunging the 
chamber into gloom only faintly 
relieved by the opening to the sky 
far above. 

Conan did not see the body 
strike the floor, for he was watching the tunnel- opening for his next 
foe. The next guard looked out, but 
leaped back as Conan struck at him 
with a ferocious backhand. There 
came a jabber of voices, and an 
arrow whizzed out of the tunnel 
past Conan's face, to strike the far 
side of the chamber and shatter 
against the black rock. 

Conan turned and started down 



CON AN, MAN 

the stone steps, taking three at a 
time. As he reached the bottom he 
saw Ivanos herding the last of the 
pirates into the cleft across the 
floor, perhaps ten strides away. To 
the left of the cleft, five times 
Conan's height from the floor, the 
Turanian guards emerged from the 
tunnel and clattered down the 
stairs.^ A couple loosed arrows at 
the Cimmerian as they ran, but between the speed of his motion and 
the dimness of the light their shots 
missed. 

But, as Conan reached the bottom steps, another group of beings 
appeared. With a grinding sound 
the slabs of stone blocking the ends 
of the tomb-cavities swung inward, 
first a few, then by scores. Like a 
swarm of larvae issuing from their 
cells, the inhabitants of the tombs 
came forth. Conan had not taken 
three strides toward the cleft when 
he found the way blocked by a 
dozen of the things. 

They were of vaguely human 
form, but white and hairless, lean 
and stringy as if from a long fast. 
Their toes and fingers ended in 
great hooked claws. They had large 
staring eyes set in faces that looked 
mare like those of bats than of 
human beings, with great flaring 
ears, little snub-noses, and wide 
mouths that opened to show 
needle-pointed fangs. 

The first to reach the floor were 
those who crawled out of the bottom tiers of cells. But the upper 
tiers were opening too and the 
creatures were spilling out of them 



Or DESTINY 25 

by hundreds, climbing swiftly 
down the pitted walls of the chamber by their hooked claws. Those 
that reached the floor first glimpsed 
the last pirates as they entered the 
cleft. With a pointing of clawed 
fingers and a shrill twittering, the 
creatures nearest the cleft rushed 
toward and into it. 

Conan, the hairs of his neck 
prickling with a barbarian's horror 
of supernatural menaces, recognized 
the newcomers as the dreaded brylukas of Zaporoskan legend — 
creatures neither man nor beast nor 
demon, but a little of all three. 
Their near-human intelligence 
Served their bestial destructiveness, 
while their supernatural powers enabled them to survive even though 
entombed for centuries. Creatures 
of darkness, they had been held 
at bay by the light of the flame. 
When this was put out they 
emerged, as ferocious as ever and 
even more eager for prey. 

Those that struck the floor near 
Conan rushed upon him, claws outstretched. With an inarticulate roar 
he whirled, making wide sweeps 
with his gpcat sword to keep them 
from piling on his back. The blade 
sheared off a head here, an arm 
there, and cut one bryluka in half. 

Still they clustered, twittering, 
while from the spiral staircase rose 
the shrieks of the leading Turanians as bryJukas leaped upon them 
from above and climbed up from 
be low to fasten the i r claws and 
farigs in their bodies. 

The stair was clustered with 



a6 



FANTASTIC UNIVERSE 



writhing, battling figures as the 
Turanians hacked madly at the 
things crowding upon them. A cluster consisting of one guard with 
several brylukas clinging to htm 
rolled off the stair to strike the 
floor. The entrance to the cleft was 
solidly jammed with twittering brylukas trying to force their way in 
to chase Conan's pirates. 

In the seconds before they overwhelmed him too, Conan saw that 
neither way out would serve him. 
With a resounding oath he ran 
across the floor, but not in the direction the brylukas expected. 
Weaving and zigzagging, his 
sword a whirling glimmer in the 
gloom, he reached the wall directly 
below the platform that formed 
the top of the stair and the entrance to the tunnel, leaving a trail 
of writhing figures behind him. 
Hooked claws snatched at him as 
he ran, glancing off his mail, tearing his clothes to ribbons, and 
drawing blood from deep scratches 
on his arms and legs. 

As he reached the wall, Conafi 
dropped his buckler, took his sword 
in his teeth, sprang high into the 
air, and caught the lower sill of 
one of the cells in the third tier 
above the floor, a cell that had already discharged its occupant. With 
incredible agility the Cimmerian 
mountaineer went up the wall, 
using the cell-openings as handholds and foot-holds. 

Once, as his face came opposite 
a cell-opening, a hideous batlike 
visage Jookcd into his as the bry


htfca started to emerge. Conan's fist 
shot out and struck the grinning 
face with a crunch of bones. Then 
without waiting to see what execution he had done he swarmed on 
up. 

Below him, other brylukas 
climbed the wall in pursuit. Then 
with a heave and a grunt he was 
on the platform. The few guards 
who had been tardy in starting 
down the stairs, had turned on seeing what was happening in the 
chamber and had ' raced back 
through the tunnel. A few brylukas 
crowded into the tunnel on their 
heels just as Conan readied the 
platform. 

Even as they turned toward him 
he was among them like ■ whirlwind. Bodies, whole or dismembered, spilled off the platform as 
his sword sheared through white 
unnatural flesh. _For an instant a 
cleared area stretched before him. 
Conan plunged into the tunnel and 
ran with all his might. 

Ahead of him ran % few of the 
vampire creatures, and ahead of 
them the guards who had been coming along the tunnel. Conan, 
coming up to the brylukas from 
behind, struck down one, then another, then another, until they were 
all writhing in agony behind him. 
lie kept on until he came to the 
end of the tunnel, where the last 
of the guards had just ducked 
through the waterfall. 

A glance back showed Conan 
another swarm of brylukas rushing 
upon him with outstretched claws. 



CONAN, MAN 

Conan bolted through the sheet of 
water in his turn and found himself looking down upon the scene 
of the recent battle witii the Tu- ranians. 

The general and the rest of his 
escort were standing about, shouting and gesticulating as their fellows emerged from the water and 
ran down the ledge to the ground. 
When Conan appeared right after 
the last of these, the yammer continued without a break until a 
louder shout from the general cut 
through it: 

"It is one of the pirates! 
Shoot!" 

Conan, running down the ledge, 
was already halfway to the laddershaft. Those in front of him, who 
had just reached the floor of the 
gorge, turned to stare as he raced 
past them with such tremendous 
strides that the archers, misjudging 
his speed, sent a flight of arrows 
clattering against the rocks behind 
him. Before Lhey had nocked their 
second arrows he had reached the 
vertical groove in the cliff-face. 

The Cimmerian slipped into this 
shaft, whose concavity protected 
him momentarily from the arrows 
of the Turanians standing near the 
general. He caught at the indentations with hands and toes and went 
up like a monkey. By the time the 
Turanians had recovered enough 
presence of mind to run up the 
gorge to where they could sec him 
to shoot at, Conan was fifteen paces 
up and rising fast. 

Another storm of arrows whis


OF DESTINY 27 

tied about him, clattering as they 
glanced from the rock. A couple 
struck his body but were .prevented 
from piercing his flesh by his mailshirt. Three more struck his clothing and caught in the cloth. One 
hit his right arm, the point passing shallowly under the skin and 
then out again. 

With a fearful oath Conan tore 
the arrow out of the wound pointfust, threw it from him, and continued his climb. Blood from the 
flcsli wound drenched his arm and 
trickled down his body. By the 
next volley he was so high that the 
arrows had little force left when 
they reached him. One struck his 
boot but failed to penetrate. 

Up and up he went, the Turanians becoming small beneath him. 
When their arrows no longer 
reached him they ceased shooting. 
Snatches of argument floated up. 
The general wanted his men to 
climb the shaft after Conan, and 
the men protested that this would 
be futile, as he would simply wait 
at the top of the cliff and cut their 
heads off, one by one as they 
emerged. Conan smiled grimly. 

Then he reached the top. He sat 
gasping on the edge with his feet 
hanging down into the shaft while 
he bandaged his wounds with 
strip:; torn from his clothing, meantime looking about him. Glancing 
ahead over the rock wall into the 
valley of the Akrim he saw sheepskin-clad Hyrkanians riding hard 
for the hills, pursued by horsemen 



FANTASTIC UNIVERSE 



in glittering mail — Turanian soldiers. 

Below him the Turanians and 
Zaporoskans millet! around like 
ants and finally set off up the gorge 
to the castle, leaving a few of their 
number on watch in case Conan 
should come back down the 
groove. 

Some time later Conan rose, 
stretched his great muscles, and 
turned to look eastward towards 
the sea of Vilayet. He started as 
his keen vision picked up a ship, 
and shading his eyes with his hand 
he made out a galley of the Turanian navy crawling away from the 



mouth of the creek -where Artaban 
had left his ship. 

"Crom!" he muttered. "So the 
cowards piled aboard and pulled 
out without waiting!" 

He struck his palm with his fist, 
growling deep in his throat like 
an angry bear. Then he relaxed 
and laughed shortly. It was no 
more than he should have expected. Anyway, he was getting tired 
of the Hyrkanian lands, and there 
were still many countries in the 
west that he had never visited. 

He started to hunt for the precarious route down from the ridge 
that Vinashko had shown him. 




Among the Contributors to Next Month's Startling Issue 
will be 

WILLIAM TENN, with "Wednesday's Child" 
LESTER DEL REY, with "The Keepers of the House" 
PHlf.IP K. DICK, with "The Minority Report" 
ROBERT BLOCH, with "You Got to Have Brains" 
WILLIAM MORRISON and 

FREDERIK POHL, with "The Head Hunters" 

and many oihett 



the 
entity 

. Arthur Purges 



There are more things in the 
outermost regions of space than 
are dreamed of in man's mundane 
philosophy. Just for example — 



The emissary from a distant 
planet was addressing the World 
Council in closed session. 

It was a super-secret conference. 
Only the assembled senior statesmen knew of the visitor's presence 
on earth; and at the moment it was 
all they did know, except that he 
bore a message of immense significance for humanity. It was a 
strange experience for the members, since the emissary's essential 
nature was incomprehensible to 
their minds. 

One instant the Council saw a 
glinting, cloudy mass the size of a 
man, and the next — a tiny pillar 
of bluish haze. There were times 
when they heard strains of atonal 
music and felt pulsating colors. 
And always they had an odd, not 
unpleasant visceral awareness. 

But they felt little strain, for the 
visitor's motives, still to be explained, were obviously benevolent. 
From the moment he had taken 
over their public address system, 
speaking in a baritone voice of 
bright, unearthly beauty, the 
terrestrials knew him intuitively for 
a friend. 

When die brief excitement at


Arthur Porges may or may not have hunted birds of swift passage in Amazonian 
wilds or winged in its flight the fabled firebird of the Aztecs, with its pinions 
of a thousand hues resplendent. But we think you'll agree that he is a cosmic 
hunter extraordinary. It is just possible that the horror in minuscule he 
has bagged here is not the most terrifying entity in all of Time and Space 
but we're convinced that di long as human life endures it will be so regarded. 



X9 



30 



FANTASTIC UNIVERSE 



tendant upon this first contact with 
another planet had subsided, the 
emissary began his message. After 
a few preliminary remarks to create 
the necessary empathy, he said, with 
humorous apology in his tones: 
"Now I will tell you a little story. 
It leads to a decision you must 
make soon. And I offer my service* 
to implement that decision, if necessary. 

' ' 1 hope to make the account 
simple, clarifying as much as possible the problem you face. If you 
can imagine yourselves trying to 
explain to a completely alien intelligence — that of a mantis, for example — the physiological effects 
upon its species of DDT, you will 
understand something of my task 
and excuse any obscurities. The 
basic situation, I believe, will be 
quite clear." 

He didn't stress the enormous 
mental gap between mantids and 
man, with its obvious parallel to his 
own role. But that was only courtesy, they knew, and they accepted 
the fact without resentment. 

"Several million years ago," the 
emissary continued, "when I was 
still in the learning stage — '* Here 
he sensed their shock and his voice 
seemed to smile a little sadly. "It's 
an incredible age to you, of course, 
a point not irrelevant to the problem ahead. But more on that later. 

"I was at the time curator of a 
sort of zoo which we maintained 
on a nearby planet. We had combed 
the galaxy for specimens, and possessed a great variety of life-forms 



whose countless divergences were 
of constant interest to science. 
There were living crystals, gases 
that waxed philosophical, electromagnetic intellects, and a host of 
other beings even more foreign to 
your experience. 

"Wc were, I confess, rather 
smug in holding that no really 
different creatures could possibly 
exist. After all, we had collected 
for ages, the last truly novel organism having been captured long 
before. 

"Then we were disillusioned. A 
scoutship sent in an emergency report that a life-form was passing 
through our solar system; and 
purely as a routine gesture, I went 
out to inspect it. Naturally I expected the thing to be a duplicate, 
basically, of some specimen already 
in our custody. To my astonishment, it was altogether new, and 
of a complexity that surprised me. 

"Nor do I mean— and this is not 
vanity — that the entity was in any 
way superior to my own class of 
beings. It is true that we pursued 
it in vain for many months, unable 
to cope with the thing; but neither 
was it capable of harming us. Wc 
are equally complex, but fundamentally different. 

"None of the ordinary methods 
enabled us to seize it. Traction 
rays, force patterns, space warps — ■ 
nothing seemed able to constrain 
this creature. It passed easily 
through all kinds of matter, was 
immune to our excellent arsenal of 
traps, and co-existed in a mulli


THE ENTITY 



tude of dimensions more numerous 
even than our awn. 

"In short, it would have escaped 
almost effortlessly, when luck came 
to our aid. One of our best scientists, at work in a laboratory outpost some light years away, saw the 
entity pass, with my fleet of ships 
in futile attendance. He had just 
finished some experiments on a device which I shall call the T-ray, a 
sub-atomic manifold outside of 
. your experience or imagination. 
Four of his Utile ships had grouped 
themselves to generate a tetrahedral pattern with the new ray, and 
we were amazed to see the specimen hurl itself against that structure without the slightest penetration. 

"Naturally, I took prompt 
advantage of so fortunate a circumstance. The four laboratory 
ships, under my orders, stopped 
their generators, and by a superior 
bit of maneuvering reformed the 
tetrahedron about the life-form. It 
was a neatly sprung trap, and a 
most successful coup. In spite of 
its utmost efforts, the thing was 
helpless, and we bore it home in 
triumph. 

"I see you are confused, unable 
f . to relate this rather verbose account 

to earthly affairs. Please be patient. 
It is vitally necessary to prepare 
your minds for an important revelation. 

"Now, as curator, I called upon 
our most capable scientists to make 
a thorough study of the alien being, which they did, taking well 



over a thousand years of your time. 
There was much we found out, and 
more that remained baffling. We 
were unable, for example, to determine its method of absorbing or 
utilizing energy; and some phases 
of its physical structure seemed mutually contradictory. Nor were we 
able to communicate with it by any 
means whatsoever. 

"Although we searched thousands of stars and planets for other 
specimens, we found none of its 
fellows; and yet we had reason to 
believe ours was only an immature 
individual of the species. The implication was inescapable that the 
entity came from some part of 
space too distant even for our ships 
to explore. We now believe that it 
originated at the farthest edge of 
the universe. 

"Millions of years passed, but 
there remained a large residuum of 
knowledge we were unable to master. Certain aspects of our captive 
were as puzzling then as in the 
first weeks of its capture. I might 
point out that we never retain 
specimens which genuinely wish to 
be free; but in those days we erred 
occasionally in assuming that an organism's mere inability to communicate in our terms meant satisfaction with life in the zoo. The offer 
I mean to make shortly is a violation of that humane code, but 
justifiably so. 

"To return, however, our study 
of the strange creature came to an 
abrupt end. Because of a careless 
technician, the force pattern was 



32 



FANTASTIC UNIVERSE 



momentarily disrupted, and moving 
with tremendous velocity, the prisoner escaped. Of course, we pursued it; but our T-ray ships were 
no longer conveniently grouped, 
and before we could get organized, 
the entity was many light years 
away, hopelessly beyond tracing. Its 
speed, now that it had apparently 
matured, even in captivity, far exceeded that of our best scouts. 

"But we did not abandon the 
chase. While not of the first priority, the recapture of that specimen 
was one object of every exploratory 
expedition. As we ranged farther 
into space in our systematic mapping of the galaxy, we found "many 
remarkable beings, but nothing so 
different as our former prisoner. 

"And dien, not many centuries 
ago, our scouts readied this solar 
system of yours. Long before seeing 
the planet's disc, they know from 
instruments that the entity was here. 
This was its chosen home. Immediately word was flashed back, and 
we sent scientists to survey the situation. 

"There was, to begin with, the 
question of whether or not to leave 
the thing in its picked environmen t 
for most effective study. It is often 
more fruitful to examine a lifeform in its own setting. And that, 
generally speaking, is still the problem : to leave it here or take it back 
with us. As you will see, the matter 
is of profound concern to human
"But do not be alarmed. Tire 
decision will be yours entirely. I 



am only trying to supply the needed background for your debate on 
the question. 

"It was possible for us to reconstruct much of the tiling's history 
after its escape from our zoo. There 
were long periods, we believe, 
when it paused motionless in the 
void. And there were times when it 
traveled at enormous velocity, pervasive yet unified, tenuous but 
concentrated. It might have ended 
its journeying at any one of countless planets, but chance or the 
working of subtle instinct brought 
it finally to a medium-sized star 
with nine new-born worlds. 

"One of ' these — your earth — ■ 
seemed suitable, and in its fashion 
the entity settled on and through 
the steaming globe, racked with 
earthquakes, scoured by abraisive 
tides, and seared by chemical- vapors. It lapped itself about the tortured planet to wait with the 
patience of a billion years' perspective. 

"And the inevitable happened. 
A cloudy speck of heavy, unstable 
molecules,' a near virus, stirred to 
life under the fierce actinic rays of 
the youthful sun, ending the entity's long vigil. It must have eaten 
soon after, appreciatively, but with 
circumspection. With food its hunger grew, and as the ages passed, 
each living thing knew this alien 
and paid it toll, early or late." 

Here the emissary paused, and 
they were aware of his pity. 

"Remember that the entity was 
and is utterly imperceptible to the 



THE ENTITY 



33 



crude senses of its victims, although 
a gifted few among the higher animals vaguely felt at times its sinister imminence. 

"So it was natural that when man 
arose to become earth's only naming creature, he called this being 
after the sole evidence of its presence, never dreaming it was native 
neither, to the world nor man, but 
sprung uniquely from some galaxy 
on the rim of the universe. 

"It is here now— today — -inside 
and outside the earth, permeating 
every molecule with hyperdimensional tendrils. I can see in this 
room that one of you — no, I didn't 
mean that." He stopped, and there 
was a tense silence. 

c 'Of all living things," he resumed hastily, "only the most 
primitive, recalling racially what 
had awaited those fi rst colloidal 
blobs in the warm sea, learned to 
resist, even in part, the entity's 
pressing demands. Over these — the 
protozoa — it has but limited power. 

"We — my people— could still 
tear the entity's fibres from the 
earth; but in millions of years its 



presence here has had a profound 
effect upon life. Evolution — what 
a tortured mechanism that has become on this planet! The terrible 
swell of 'natural' increase — a 
wholly abnormal development, 
really — is just one example. Nowhere else are things like that. 
Your problem is Indeed one of 
bewildering magnitude. 

"T know that most of you are 
beginning to understand the nature of this dilemma and its implications for mankind. If I remove 
the entity, now that your world is 
conditioned to geometric increase, 
the result could be catastrophic indeed: a gigantic compost of organisms in one writhing mass. The 
living devouring the living, so that 
the fragments, still alive, become 
somehow part of the devourer. 

"The decision must be yours and 
yours alone. 

"Say, then, men of the Council, 
will you live forever, knowing the 
consequences of such a choice? 

"Shall we free you from this 
alien elemental — this entity you call 
Death?" 



THE HEAD HUNTERS 

By William Morrison & Frederik Pohl 

When science fiction strives for a documentary-type realism in the field of 
space mechanics and Atomic-age theory it may, if successful, profoundly stir 
the imagination, and reach heights of maturity seldom encountered in any 
other branch of imaginative literature. The short-stories of F. B, Rryning 
are of this nature, and so is the remarkable the head hunters by William 
Mcrrison and Fredcrik Pohl in our very next issue. You won't want to miss 
this breathlessly exciting yarn of isotope-plant, asteroid-zone engineering and 
space hazards incalculable by two writers with a real thrilling story to tell. 



the 

conquerors 

by ... Ed M. Clinton, fr 



Bowing the knee to alien victors 
was a bitter pill for Earthmen 
to swallow. But a knee can bend 
and still be fashioned of steel! 



H adt.ey clutched the jutting 
metal arm of the free fall ladder, 
and said to the enemy officer, "I'm 
afraid I'm ill." 

A faint flutter of amusement 
crossed lyaka's parchment-on-bone 
face. "Well — space comes hard to 
some," he said. His manner was 
not so unkind as it was consciously 
superior, which aggravated Hadley's embarrassment all the more. 
He lapped the Earthman on the 
shoulder. "Come with mc. Coordinator." 

Hadley followed him, swinging 
from one handhold to the next 
along the ladder, to the washroom 
in the rear of the gig. It took him 
an agonized moment to figure out 
the place? though. In spite of 
physiological simi laritics, cultural 
variation had made for exasperating differences in the way lyaka's 
people designed their facilities. 

heeling better, he swung forward 
again and peered out of the gig's 
ports. They were approaching the 
big Segavas star ship, and it arced 
into view as he looked. For a moment, also, he saw the shadowed 
disc of Earth as they swung about. 
The thought came to him that 



// you were thrilled by the < ■ miracle* of tomorrow in Ed M, Clinton's 
recent unusual lead novelette, EPIDEMIC ON VENUS — and your letters leave little 
doubt on that score — -. new and slightly different kind of thrill awaits you 
bert. Por you'll see tomorrow urn oil before you in as startling a tale of alien 
mtntaltty effrontery as yntll ha liktly to encounter this side of Betelgeuse. 



34 



THE CONQUERORS 



3^ 



nowadays thai lovely sight was an 
all too uncommon experience. He 
regretted lhat the view was so fleeting. The opportunity might be a 
long time coming again. 

There were two others in the gig, 
Iyaka's staff officers, Hadley assumed. One of them was at the 
controls, and the other was presently polishing his brassard with a 
colored kerchief. Like Iyaka, they 
radiated confidence, power, authority. Hail the conquering heroes, 
Hadley thought. He would be glad 
when this damned business was 
over! 

Their uniforms were of a shocking red, cut to an alien pattern, 
and they wore them with a candor 
no Earthman could have mustered. 
He was sure that the Segavan eye 
was less sensitive, though probably 
more discriminating, in the red 
area of the spectrum, for to a human eye, with its ready response to 
red, the effect was painfully dazzling. 

With a clang the gig shuddered 
into contact with the star ship. 
Iyaka, who alone among his people 
spoke Terran, smoothed his uniform and said stiffly: "Wc will be 
going aboard in a moment. I must 
warn you in advance that the personage to whom you are being taken 
is more than merely the captain of 
this vessel. He is the incarnation of 
our great people, and he speaks 
with absolute authority on all matters." 

"Under the circumstances," 
growled Hadley, a trifle annoyed, 



"why need T worry about this ? 
Since I represent a conquered race, 
all I can do is listen and obey." 

He could almost see the huge 
chest expand and was convinced 
that had Iyaka's uniform possessed 
buttons they surely would have 
popped. "Naturally," the enemy 
officer said. "But I wanted you to 
understand the extent of the captain's authority." 

There was another clang and an 
ear-piercing scraping. Hadley 
glanced up in time to see the view 
of space wiped from the ports by 
the steel walls of the landing 
cradle as the gig was hauled 
aboard. He felt weight returning, 
and with it a comforting sense of 
orientation. He wondered i f the 
ship's gravity matched that of the 
Segavan's home planet, for he felt 
considerably lighter than when 
Earthsidc. Probably he would never 
know. He didn't consider there 
would be much opportunity for 
questioning the Segavas while he 
was with them — which seemed a 
shame. 

The gig had ceased moving. After a brief interval of waiting the 
airlock groaned open, and Iyaka led 
him through the double seal, his 
aides following closely behind. 

The star ship was obviously 
parent to the gig. It was engineered 
identically but on a vaster scale and 
Hadley saw immediately the same 
significant dependence on raw materials only slightly transformed. 
Such materia is, for instance, as 
steels and aluminum alloys. There 



36 FANTASTIC 

was the same frequent use of bolts 
and hinges, and reliance upon 
beams for structural stability. There 
was also an extreme use of bright 
reds and oranges and to his eyes 
this resulted in a pronounced indistinctness and loss of detail. What 
would a Segavan eye look like on 
the dissecting table? he wondered. 

There was an armed troop in the 
receiving area, which he estimated 
must consist of nearly sixty men. 
He considered this a somewhat 
larger contingent than would normally be required to handle one 
unarmed Earthman. However, the 
pomp and ritual obviously must be 
observed. It seemed to be a special 
group, too, because its members all 
glittered with superfluous regalia. 
Their wide belts were embellished 
with medals and chevrons— apparently awards of some "sort, since 
they varied from individual to individual. 

Iyaka snapped a command to the 
officer in charge of the troop, in 
the singsong, glottally-explosive 
language of his people, and the 
troop split into a two-columned 
escort. "This way," Iyaka growled. 

Hadley sighed and followed him. 
"What pompous nonsense," he 
muttered. 

Tyaka twisted his skinny head. 
"What did you say?" 

"It was nothing, nothing," replied Hadley, shaking his head and 
smiling. 

Iyaka eyed him suspiciously for 
a moment, then turned away and 



UNIVERSE 

stared stiffly forward. Hadley looked back as they marched away. The 
gig was being left alone, the lock 
still open. That at least was comforting. While the whole affair 
bored him to distraction, he felt a 
little nervous — although he would 
never have confessed it to LaGrange. 

After all, he was alone, a single 
Earthman, on the starship of 
Earth's self-styled conquerors. Presumably this was how Daniel 
Boone felt at an Indian pow-wow! 
Only here the pipe of peace was 
missing. 

The corridor broadened at its 
end, feeding into a group of cableoperated elevators and a wide stairway. Tt was inevitable that the 
whole shebang should insist on 
marching up the stairway with him. 
He considered asking Iyaka if the 
elevators were out of commission, 
but thought better of it. 

He had no idea how far amidships the endless stairway ascended, but it was a considerable distance, and when they finally reached 
the ultimate landing he was utterly 
winded. He made no effort to conceal the fact, and one of lyaka's 
aides grinned and muttered to 
Iyaka. 

The Segavan looked at him, and 
smiled patronizingly. "Perhaps I 
should not say this, but you see 
what a soft culture such as yours 
does to a man?" He clapped Hadley on the back and dug his seven 
bony fingers into the Earthman's 
flesh. "Times will be better. Uadcr 



the cor 

the Segavas, Terra and its people 
will grow and strengthen." 

Hadley said, "You give me hope, 
then, that the Segavas will be gracious masters. In our planet's native history, so many primitive 
conquerors have destroyed simpler 
civilizations, sacking their treasure, 
devouring their mineral wealth, 
crushing their culture — " 

It was more than mockery. Hadley was really curious. What had 
these foolish, confident Segavas in 
mind for an Earth they had seen 
surrender after their first ultimatum? There was no time for Iyaka 
to reply, if he intended to, for they 
were nearing a door at the far end 
of the corridor which swung open 
as they approached. Its ornate decoration reminded Hadley of middle twentieth-century Earth. 

It opened on an unbelievably red 
conference room, huge and spacious — a veritable chamber of fire 
which left him gasping. Within 
was a long yellow table, at which 
a large number of the Segavas were 
seated and at its head, radiating 
absolute authority like a fluorescent 
lamp, sat the Segavas who was obviously the captain of the ship. 

This lad, thought Hadley, is the 
boss. 

The troop halted at the door, 
and Iyaka and his Staff officers escorted Hadley into that -fantastically dazzling room. Hadley squinted 1 
and shook his head, the better to 
focus his nearly blinded eyes. The 
Segavas at the 'table stared at him 
with intense curiosity, their eyes 



2UERORS 37 

following him in unison as he 
came closer. 

Iyaka saluted, his left fist doubled tightly and pressed to his forehead, and talked for a moment to 
his captain. The captain nodded, 
answered curtly, and then aimed 
his glittering black eyes at Hadley. 
Iyaka said, "Captain Tillikut greets 
you, Coordinator Hadley, and asks 
if you are prepared to receive his 
instructions." 

Hadley licked his lips. He had 
to call himself back to the business 
at hand, for he was still a little 
dazed by the bizarre decor of the 
room: "Um — tell the captain," he 
said finally, "that I speak for all 
..of Terra when I welcome his people to our world." 

Iyaka translated. A thin, satiric 
smile — it was all the Segavas 
seemed able to muster, but it neatly characterized their transparent 
consciousness of divine destiny — 
stained Captain Tillikut's tightskinned face. He chattered to Iyaka 
for a moment. 

Then Iyaka said to Hadley, 
"Captain Tillikut says that he is 
glad that your people are ready to 
accept the benevolent administration of the Segavas, and asks again 
if you are prepared for your instructions." 

Hadley extracted a sheaf of 
papers from his tunic pocket. 
"These are my official letters of 
authority," he said to Iyaka, and 
handed, them over. They wouldn't 
stand' up in a local civil court, he 
thought bitterly. Ritual! 



38 



FANTASTIC UNIVERSE 



Iyaka made a great pretense of 
examining the documents, though 
Hadley seriously doubted that he 
could read Terran. He then gave 
them to Captain Tillikut, who at 
least had the dignity not to feign 
comprehension. 

Iyaka and the captain talked. 

"The captain says," translated 
Iyaka, turning to Hadley, "that tomorrow morning, by your local 
reckoning, you will accompany a 
group of our representatives back 
to Terra and commence a preliminary survey of your planet." 

Hadley nodded. "May I ask the 
purpose of this survey?" 

Iyaka and the captain consulted 
together and then Iyaka said. 

"Sime you and your people are 
from this moment forward, by authority of the papers you have just 
given us, under the administration 
of the Segavas, there can be no 
harm in your knowing the general 
plan of our project. This survey 
will enable us first of all to establish the nature of your scientific 
establishment, and, on the basis of 
such knowledge, to provide a 
schedule for our occupation procedure and our gradual assumption 
of management of those and all 
other resources." 

Hadley pursed his lips and put 
his arms behind his back. "I see. 
You realize, of course, that such a 
small group could only make a 
most cursory examination." 

"Naturally," Iyaka said "Your 
instructions arc to provide us with 
data on the major technical installa


tions, and to conduct our survey 
group on a tour of these mediations. That of course will only be 
the first step. Its purpose, frankly, 
is to give us the true flavor of your 
civilization." 

"I see. Are there any other instructions at this time?" 

There was a brief exchange between Iyaka and Tillikut. "None," 
said Iyaka. "We will take you now 
to your quarters." 

The captain, smiling again that 
wan smile of folded parchmcflt, 
waved a hand and spoke rapidly. 
"Iyaka, too, smiled. "Captain Tillikut asks me to remind you that, if 
you do your job well, there will be 
a high place for you in the reorganized Terran society." 

Hadley bowed, a gesture ihat 
Iyaka seemed to understand. "The 
captain is most gracious, and the 
Coordinator wishes to assure him 
that he is not blind to the advantages of cooperation." He straightened. "Now can I talk to my government?" 

Iyaka nodded. "Certainly. It will 
be necessary for me to monitor the 
conversation, however. This way, 
please." He saluted his captain 
again with the same clenched fist 
gesture, spun on his heels, and led 
Hadley from the room, the everpresent aides at his side. Outside 
the door they picked up the guard 
troop and tramped methodically 
down the corridor. 

Ten minutes later Hadley was 
putting through his call. 'Hello, 
LaGrange, this is Hadley." 



THE COl^ 

"Greetings! How are we doing?" 

"About as expected." 

"Any idea what their demands 
will be?" 

"Nothing specific. We'll be 
coming down for a survey tomorrow." Iladlcy gave the official at 
the other end of the wire the details, and lyaka supplied him with 
the number of Scgavans that would 
be in the party. 

"Well, we'll prepare a welcoming committee." LaGrange cleared 
his throat. "Loaded with the proper respect, of course." 

"Certainly. And — LaGrange . , ." 

"Yes, Hadley?" 

"I'll be glad when this is over, 
Do you realize I'm missing my son's 
graduation ?" 

LaGrange's reply was reproachful. "But think of the importance 
of what you're doing!" 

Hadley stifled a retort. "See you 
tomorrow," he growled. 

lyaka said as he led the Earthman to his quarters: "I 'must say 
I admire your courage. And permit 
me, as a Segavas, to add that I 
personally think your culture will 
easily integrate with ours, and that 
we may both profit." 

It came so obviously from the 
heart that Hadley had no desire to 
laugh. "Thank you," he said, and 
followed him . . . 

Greater Omaha Landing Field, 
doing duty for the first time in 
generations as a spaceport, was 
alive with curious people. Hadley 



iuerors 39 

stood watching them from the platform — the eternal three close to 
him and the tight clutch of scientists and military representatives 
just inside the lock at his back. He 
imagined that a primitive county 
fair must have exuded much the 
same atmosphere. Indeed, he was 
just a little afraid that the fine 
edge of curiosity, the side-show 
aura, might show through to the 
Segavas. 

Hadley could hardly hear 
Iyaka's voice above the noise of the 
crowd and the playing of the bands, 
even though it was close against 
his ear. "We are most pleased at 
the reception your admirable people are giving us," lyaka was 
saying. 

"One must learn to accept the 
inevitable," replied Hadley, and 
then he added, "Roth as individuals and as entire societies." 

"It is the way of destiny," nodded lyaka in solemn agreement. 

A pathway began to open up 
from the edge of the -field to the 
foot of the Segavas ship, and several large cars swung into it and 
moved slowly toward them. lyaka 
observed them through narrowed 
eyes. He said nothing, but continued to stare intently as the first 
one halted at the foot of the platform. 

"I believe, said Hadley, turning 
to lyaka, "that these are our transportation." 

"Yes." Iyaka's face wore an uneasy frown. "The style is very 
primitive," he decided. "Tell me, 



40 FANTA STIC 

what is the precise power source?" 

Hadley smiled. "I'm not too 
versed in such matters," he lied, 
"but I believe it derives from some 
central transmission station in the 
middle of the city." 

"Oh," responded Iyaka. "I saw 
no wires." 

"If it pleases the committee, we 
can go anytime." 

Iyaka nodded and turned to the 
survey committee. They talked for 
a moment, and then Iyaka said to 
Hadley, "Proceed." They went 
down the winding ladder, Hadley 
with the two aides directly behind 
him, Iyaka following after. 

The trailing committee members 
looked around with frankly curious 
eyes, reminding Hadley for all the 
world of a conducted tour composed of inordinately curious individuals disembarking on a foreign 
planet, which in a way it was. 

The group consisted, according 
to Iyaka, of a physicist, a chemist, 
a cultural anthropologist, two military attaches, several government 
bureau representatives, assorted 
engineers, and of course the 
eternal guard, an elite troop of 
fifty-four. Hadley had finally 
through sheer desperate curiosity 
made an exact count. All the committeemen wore uniforms, too, 
looking like small boys dressed up 
for a party. 

Tourists, Hadley thought again. 
I'm a damned tourist guide. 

The cheers and shouting quieted 
when they reached the ground, and 
only the music continued. Hadley 



UNIVERSE 

opened the door of the first car for 
Iyaka and his aides, and they 
climbed in, the Earthman following. He knew that there would be 
a Terran in each of the other cars. 
He saw doors swinging open and 
committeemen, with guards from 
the elite troop, stepping in, all 
down the long line. 

The cushions adjusted to their 
weights and closed gently around 
them. Iyaka leaned back, obviously 
enjoying himself. His staff men, a 
trifle hesitantly, followed suit. 

Iyaka started forward. "Where 
is our driver?" he asked, apprehensively. 

"These are robot controlled," 
explained Hadley. "As I said, the 
power source is located in some 
central power station. I'm sorry 
that my lack of technical knowledge 
prevents me f rom being more specific." 

Iyaka seemed to acquire a sudden distaste for contact with the 
cushions. "Very good," he said uncertainly. "Truly a fine scientific 
achievement. Is it recent?" 

"Well — before my birth," 
shrugged Hadley. 

The car was moving now, and 
behind it the others followed, a 
many-segmented snake winding out 
of the landing field and into one 
of the main arteries of the city. At 
first the absence of a driver disquieted Iyaka, but after a while be 
relaxed. 

"We would like first to visit the 
capitol building, and set up suitable occupation headquarters." 



THE CONQUERORS 



41 



-"Of course," Hadlcy said, "that's 
where we're being taken now." 

There was a tiny buzz, and 
Iyaka's hand swooped into his inside pocket and retrieved a small 
communicator, trailing wires out of 
the pocket. He spoke into it, harshly, and a voice answered in the 
Segavan tongue. 

Iyaka looked at Hadley. "Dr. 
Citenik wants the cars stopped for 
a moment." 

Citenik was the physicist. "As 
you wish." Hadlcy said, leaning 
forward and pressing a button just 
above the armrest. 

The car rolled to a stop. Hadley 
twisted around, and looked with 
gratification out the back window. 
Citenik, from the second car, was 
on his hands and knees, peering 
under the short snout of his car. 
Hadlcy, Iyaka, and the guards got 
out and joined him. Citenik arose, 
dusted his uniform,, and talked for 
a moment to Iyaka. 

The latter turned to Hadley. 
"Dr. Citenik wants to know what 
makes it work, and why it doesn't 
make any noise." 

Hadley shrugged. "I couldn't 
say. It is pretty quiet, though, isn't 
it? If you wish, I'll get you detailed plans." 

Iyaka nodded and conveyed the 
information to Citcn ik, who was 
still staring at the hood. The 
physicist shot a few words at 
Iyaka, glaring at Hadlcy as he did 
so. 

"He wants it opened," Iyaka 
said to Hadley. 



Again Hadlcy heaved his shoulder':. "That can't be done. There's 
nothing to open. I'm extremely 
sorry. Commander." 

Iyaka conveyed the incredible information to Citenik, who looked 
at Hadlcy in disbelief, and then 
slowly walked around the car, 
shaking his head. Every once in a 
while he reached out and jiggled 
some protuberance, twisting and 
tugging, apparently determined to 
make Hadley out a liar. 

Later, as they approached the 
capitol building, Iyaka said, "And 
after we've set up headquarters, 
we'll want to see a typical military 
installation." 

Hadley tried to look as embarrassed as he could. "I'm afraid 
that's impossible," he murmured. 

Iyaka drew himself up slightly, 
an automatic movement, indignation coloring his bony cheeks. 
"Hadley, we've been doing nicely 
so far, but apparently you forget 
that this is an occupied planet. We 
intend to see that military establishment.'' 

"But you see," Hadley explained, "we haven't any." 

Iyaka stared. Then he began to 
laugh . , . 

Hadley stretched out languorously and let the bed fit itself to his 
body. It felt mighty good. He'd 
had another long day, the third 
in a series of long and rather boring days. Though, on consideration, 
it had possessed its amusing moments. He stared up into the 



42 FANTASTIC 

darkness, letting his thoughts 
coalesce before calling LaGrange 

At length he slipped the thick 
gold ring from Ills finger and spoke 
to it. "LaGrange, Central, please,"' 

He yawned while he waited. 
Iyaka had begun to look a little 
dark around the eyes, he thought. 
There was a bit less of the strutting conqueror about him. "I must 
remind you, Hadiey," the Segavan 
had said early that morning, "(hat 
overhead hangs our vessel, and that 
we are perfectly capable of dealing 
with any situation which may arise. 
I hope," he had concluded with a 
slight twitching of his paper-thin 
eyebrows, "that all of your people 
are adopting the same realistic attitude as yourself." 

The conversation had occurred 
near the beginning of the day's 
tour, before Iyaka and his group 
had inspected General Communications, the complex brain center 
of communication between Earth 
and all of the associated worlds. 
Of course, Iyaka didn't know about 
the latter yet — 

"LaGrange speaking," came the 
familiar voice from the ring. 

"Hadiey." 

"Good! I'm dying of curiosity." 

"I'm dying of boredom. Blast it, 
LaGrange, I'll get back at you for 
this." 

LaGrange chuckled. "Temper, 
temper. How did it go today? How 
are our conquerors taking it? Do 
they approve of our organization?" 

Hadiey stifled another yawn. 
"Well, we went through com


UNIVETi.SE 

mumVations first thing today. I let 
Iyaka talk to his ship through the 
all-wave locator. That gave him a 
thrill! Then Citenik insisted that 
we inspect Central Power." Hadiey 
laughed. "I still don't think he believes it. He keeps looking for 
wires, and I had to explain to 
Iyaka five times — and each time he 
translated it a little differently — ■ 
that C P supplies most of the 
world's power. Citenik convinced 
Iyaka that it was impossible for all 
this to emanate from one small 
building. Then Iyaka warned me." 

LaGrange's voice darkened. 
"Warned you?" 

"Yes, he warned me. He said 
that it would do us no good to 
hide oar secrets, that when their 
troops landed they would find out 
everything anyway. Then he offered 
me a job." 

LaGrange's laughter rattled from 
the ring. "Oh, no! Cooperate, eh?" 

"Exactly," Hadiey said. "Anyway, " their anthropologist Rekilo 
wanted to poke around in a few 
museums, which we did, and I gave 
him a few books and tabes, and a 
machine to play the tapes on. Iyaka 
suggested I learn their language, 
and I said, 'sure.' " 
"Have you?" 

*T had most of it by this morning. But I'm damned if I'll give 
them the satisfaction of knowing I 
spent the time at it. Besides, it's 
more useful as secret knowledge." 

LaGrange clucked a bit. "That 
threat, though. They could hurt 
somebody." 



THE CON 1 

"A boatload of Indians invading 
New York harhor could shoot 
somebody in the backside with an 
arrow," Had ley said. "But I'll 
watch it." 

"What's tomorrow?" 

"Windup, if I can manage it. 
I'll take them through atomics, then 
the transmutation plant, robot center, and the piece de resistance as 
a finisher." 

"The star ship?" 

"Yes. You said thcre'd be one 
Jlarthside." 

"Oh, yes, we made sure of that. 
The Hercules." 

HaJley went to sleep immediately after patting the ring back on. 

The next day dawned bright and 
clear. 

Hadley pretended to doze as the 
car which he shared with lyaka, 
Citenik, and their two aides moved 
across the desert. Pretended only — 
for he was listening intently to 
lyaka's conversation with Citenik, a 
conversation which they thought he 
could not understand. 

Citenik was saying, "I was very 
much impressed by the atomic 
plant. It is an achievement at least 
on a level with ours.'' 

"Come, come!" snapped lyaka, 
somewhat irritably, and Hadley 
flickered his eyes open long enough 
to catch the color rising in the 
Segavan's pale cheeks. "Don't take 
mt for a fool, Citenik. I've seen 
enough atomic installations on Segavas to be aware that there are 
differences here. I want your 
honest opinion as a physicist." 



(U.ERORS 43 

Citenik chewed his colorless 
lips, and the skin drew tighter than 
ever over the bones of his face. 
HaJley watched through slitted 
eyes. "Very well. I feel that this 
station was a considerably more 
advanced a'tomic energy plant than 
any on_jSegavas." 

Again little raspberries blossomed in lyaka's cheeks. "Thank 
you. I was sure of that myself." 

They rode in silence for a while. 
At length lyaka turned and 
nudged Hadley, and said in Terran, "I am most interested in this 
robot plant of yours. Is that where 
they manufacture the operation devices for — " He nodded at the 
front of the car. "For this?" 

Hadley inclined his head. 
"Among other things, yes." 

The rosy hue literally spurted 
up lyaka's cheeks, clear to his forehead. "You are entirely too evasive. Remember to whom you are 
speaking, and answer my questions 
directly." 

Hadley quenched a surge of annoyance. He was suddenly very 
tired of the whole thing, very glad 
it would shortly be over. "Sorry," 
he managed to say, **I thought I 
had. The answer, of course, is yes." 

"You said, 'among other things.' 
What other things?" 

Hadley rubbed his face. "Mmm 
— servomechanisms for home 
maintenance, for traffic control, for 
communications substations. Medical assistance devices, computers, 
linguistic and musical transcribing 
and transposing devices — " He 




44 . FANTASTIC 

leaned forward and peered ahead. 
"Ah! We're here!" He fell tack, 
smiling at lyaka. "I've shown you 
everything you wished. Now the 
humble pride of a conquered people will be satisfied if you will 
honor us by inspecting our greatest achievement." 

"It was as you wished," said 
lyaka, but he did not sound particularly enthusiastic The car 
swung off the highway onto a long 
paved strip, which presently 
dropped down into an underground 
tube! lyaka and Citenik pressed 
forward, and so did the two aides, 
parrot-lbke, their expressions utterly imitative. 

"Underground?" murmured 
lyaka. "This achievement you 
speak of is — located underground?" 

"It's not necessary to pass 
through the atmosphere," commented Hadley, 

lyaka frowned. 

"Do you know," asked Citenik 
in his own language, "what he is 
talking about?" 

lyaka shrugged, his shoulders betraying his annoyance more than 
his face. "No, but it's something 
he's been yammering about all day. 
I thought it best to satisfy him. A 
sop to their ego, you know." 

"I hope you're right," said Citenik, sounding as if he believed 
otherwise. 

The car burst into a vast underground chamber that was bathed 
in a flood of radiance whose source 
was so far overhead as to be indis


UNIVER5S 

ringuishable, and came to a gentle 
halt. One of the aides opened the 
door and lyaka got out, followed 
by the others. 

They stood by the car, blinking 
painfully for a moment, their eyes 
dazzled by the light. There was the 
faint distant hum of activity, 
voices swallowed by distance, the 
clank and clatter of moving objects, the rumble of machinery. 

"Commander, this place is 
huge !" gasped Citenik. "Why, I 
can't even see the — " 

"Be quiet," snapped lyaka. "Not 
another word." 

Hadley pointed. "There it is ! 
The Hercules!" 

It took a moment for lyaka to 
realize that he was gazing, not at 
the far wall of the enclosure, but 
at the side of a monster space ship. 
He swayed forward. Hadlcy could 
almost read Ins thoughts. He saw 
Citenik' s hand come up to shade 
his eyes, then the upsurging color 
again, and the hand reaching out 
to grab Iyaka's shoulder as if to 
steady himself. 

"Commander," he blurted, 
"Commander, it's impossible." 

"Be quiet. It's a deception of 
some sort intended to frighten us." 
Iyaka's voice shook, and he almost 
choked on his glottals. He turned 
to Hadley. "What is this tiling?" 

"It is one of our star ships," the 
Earthman replied mattcr-of-factly. 
"It is due to leave in a moment or 
two. We arranged to delay the departure so that you might see it." 
"But you never told me — " 



THE CONQUERORS 



4S 



"You never asked me, Commander," Hadley said softly. 

lyaka was shaken. "Still — we are 
underground," he murmured. 

"As I said, it is not necessary to 
pass through the atmosphere," 
Hadley reminded him. "But watch! 
Any second now — " 

lyaka opened his mouth to 
speak, and at, that instant die 
Hercules disappeared. Where an instant before the giant vessel had 
towered up into the brilliant 
lights until its prow was lost in 
their glare, there now yawned 
utter emptiness, and the true immensity of the underground dispatch terminal became apparent. 
The far wall was now clearly visible, perhaps a mile away, and 
occupying the intervening space 
were five transmission rings — 
shimmering polished circlets each 
a hundred yards in diameter. It was 
the nearest of these which had just 
catapulted the Hercules on its journey across the galaxy. 

"That is how we maintain contact and commerce with the other 
worlds of our confederation," said 
Hadley. "It is very quick." Washing Iyaka's and Citenik's expressions, he found that he was 
enjoying himself 1 at last . . . 

"LaGrange talking. Well?" 
"They're gone. lyaka wanted out 



of the dispatch terminal in a tremendous big hurry. They took the 
whole committee and the troops 
back to their ship." 

LaGrange laughed. "Precisely 
what did he say?" 

"He said Captain Tillikut had 
summoned him to a conference. He 
neglected to mention when -he'd 
return." 

There was a pause. "Just a second, Hadley. Here's MacKinnon 
with a message." Hadley heard the 
rustle of papers. "The Segavas ship 
just started to leave the Solar System. They have their atomics on 
full blast, apparently." 

"In what direction are they 
traveling?" 

"Rack to where they came from, 
naturally." The scorn of LaGrange's laughter rang free. "We 
got rid of them without a suggestion of violence, Hadley. Silly people." 

Hadley frowned. "Don't laugh, 
LaGrange." 

"But it's damned amusing. Can't 
you see that?" 

"It is right now. But they're not 
going to stand still, you know. 
We've no patent on progress. And 
I guess someday they'll be back, 
with a clear memory of a certain 
humiliation. Our grandchildren 
had better be ready." 

LaGrange stopped laughing. 



the 

quetenestel 
towers 

by . . . Robert F. Young 



A vision of beauty becomes a part 
o( the mind that rejoices in its 
splendor. No wonder the Martian 
cowers menaced Tborton's sanity. 



The mass of men lead lives 
of quiet desperation. 

Henry David Thoreau 

Somehow Thorton had not felt 
like going with the others. Something in him had rebelled against 
squandering the last precious hours 
of his vacation in the flamboyant 
carnival town across the canal, and 
he had stayed behind. 

It was comfortable there in the 
late afternoon sunlight, his body 
propped lazily against the soft 
grass of the canal bank. It was 
calm and peaceful, and a million 
miles from tomorrow. That was 
where tomorrow belonged, Thorton 
thought. A million miles — or sixty 
million, which was the same thing 
— away. He never wanted it to 
come any closer. 

Beyond the vivid blue of tho 
canal he could see the Quetenestel 
Towers rising into the violet sky. 
The mild sunlight had caught their 
crystalline patterns and transformed 
them into a dazzling tapestry o£ 
light shards. The towers were ai 
integral a part of the Martian landscape as the canal was, Thorton 
thought. 



In the fullest, most audacious tense Robert F. Young is a completely unspoiled 
writer. He may never ba an inordinately prosperous writer — he may even occa~ 
sionally go hungry. We don't know and we refuse to venture a prediction. But 
when a writer is true to himself, and wholly dedicated to an inner vision of soaring beauty and abiding worth Time bos often a curious it ay of making htm famous overnight. You'll see what we mean when you read this memorable story. 



4 6 



THE QUETENESTEL TOWERS 



V) 



They were as endemic as the yellow sea of Martian maize rolling 
away beyond them to the distant 
crimson mountains. They looked as 
though they had been standing 
there for a million million years, 
the scintillating culmination of all 
the art of old Mars. They were the 
sort of monument you'd have expected a great civilization to leave 
behind it— the sort of symbol you 
wanted a great civilization to leave 
behind it. 

Quetenestel, according to the 
little guide book issued by Interplanetary, Inc., had lived during 
the hedonistic centuries preceding 
the Martian siroccos. While his 
contemporaries were frantically burrowing underground, excavating 
the intricate system of grottoes that 
were so shortly and tragically to 
become catacombs, he had made his 
last defiant gesture against mortality and built his fabulous towers. 

Thorrcn's mind evoked a vivid 
image of an old and wizened man, 
his elfin face crinkled by two Martian centuries, his scrawny arms 
gesticulating, his bird-like voice 
shrill as he strode back and forth 
along the canal bank directing the 
exacting creation of his ultimate 
masterpiece. Like some fantastic 
Cheops. Like some alien Ozyrmndias. 

Thorton saw the towers rising, 
section by shining section, the scintillating columns stabbing ever 
higher into the swiftly darkening 
sky; he saw the first drab murk of 
the dust storms curtaining the 



horizon. And then he saw the dustmisted years swirl leadenly by, the 
sun a bloodshot eye in a lowering 
sky 'that had forgotten day and remembered only night. 

And all the while Ihe timeless 
towers remained standing, while 
the blue canals became pitiful striations wrinkling the faces of newborn deserts and the cities became 
memories choked with dust. Standing, still, when the first survivor 
poked his blanched face out of his 
mountain burrow and crept into 
the slowly brightening sunlight. 
Standing, sedate and calm, to greet 
the space- jaundiced eye of the first 
Ear! h man to step from the bowels 
of the first Earth-Mars spaceship. 

"You admire the towers, senir?" 

Very startled, Thorton twisted 
around. He saw the little Martian 
peasant standing on the canal path 
just above him. The peasant bowed 
in the humble courtesy of his race. 

"I am sorry to have disturbed 
you," he said. "I was but passing 
to my batttfueno when 1 saw you 
sitting there con Icmplating an ancient art form of my race. Without 
propriety the question rushed to 
my lips." 

"I do admire the towers," Thorton admitted. 

"My heart is warmed that you 
find pleasure in the art of my people. To us the towers are priceless 
because behind their immortality 
lies a lesson we shall never forget." 

"A lesson?" Thorton's face must 
have betrayed his interest because 



FANTASTIC UNIVERSE 



the Martian, after hesitating a moment, descended the slope and 
stood before him. "You would like 
to hear?" he asked. 

"Sit down," Thorton said. 

"No, senir. It is not fitting. I am 
but a poor tiller of the land while 
you — you are an Earthman, a dweller in one of the great cities of 
your planet. But I shall be glad to 
impart the meager information I 
possess if you are interested.'* 

His small leathery face was inscrutable, yet Thorton had the 
uncomfortable feeling that he was 
being ridiculed. His curiosity, however, was rapidly becoming unbearable. 

"I am very interested," he said. 

"Thank you, senir. I shall tell 
you about the towers. But first, in 
order that you may understand, I 
shall tell you about my people. 

"Once wc were a big race, a 
brave, bold race. Much like your 
own race today, senir, though of 
course not quite so bold, nor nearly 
so brave. Our culture of that period, judged in the light of the 
set of values that shaped it, was 
the glorious consummation of a way 
of life. 

"To use a simple expression, we 
were obj ect- worshippers . We 
adored things. Not things with 
meaning behind them; not symbols. But things that we made, 
things that we built. Vehicles, machines, buildings. Most of all 
buildings, senir. Buildings, and, of 
course, those agglomerations of 
buildings — cities. 



We loved our tall white edifices 
with their gleaming facades, their 
magnificent spires and pinnacles. 
We lived in them completely. We 
carried on our lives' work in them, 
hurrying, when it was necessary, 
from one to the other, but never 
for long remaining in the sunlight. 

"It was during that period that 
the Quetenestel Towers were 
built — " 

"No!" Thorton objected. 

The Martian looked at him puzzledly. "Why do you shout 'No", 
senir?" 

"Because an age like that simply 
can't produce art." 

"But that age produced the Quetenestel Towers." 

"You must be mistaken!" 

"Possibly, senir, but I do not 
think so." 

Thorton waited for him to go 
on. But the Martian stood there 
quietly, a strange reticence in his 
opaque brown eyes. Thorton became impatient. "You mentioned 
a significance behind the towers," 
he prompted. "A lesson." 

"I did, senir. Primarily, the tow 
ers signify that which they unequivocally state. Are you familiar 
with our simple language?" Thorton shook his head. "It does not 
matter. You will observe the first 
tower. In a bizarre fashion it resembles the 'K' in your alphabet. 
Actually it is a gigantic symbol for 
our language sound "Q/ The second tower, comparable to the inverted 'N' in your alphabet, is our 
way of indicating the sound 'Ten.' 



THE QUETENESTHI. TOWERS 



49 



Then there is the symbol, very 
much like your *S,' except that its 
curve is less pronounced, which — " 

"Are you trying to say — " Thorton began. Then he stopped, 
wordless. He was staring across the 
canal, not quite believing, yet desperately wanting to believe, wanting to be the first Earthman to make 
the amazing discovery. 

"I am trying to say, setiir, that 
the Quetenestcl Towers are the 
word 'Quetenestet' spelt out, on a 
prodigal scale, in the symbols of 
our simple alphabet." 

"I'll be damned!" Thorton was 
frozen in an attitude of in terse 
concentration, bis whole being focused through his eyes at the suddenly revealed letters which, a 
moment ago in inane illiteracy, he 
had believed to be towers. And 
yet, paradoxically, they were still 
towers, and still beautiful despite 
his disillusionment. 

"To think," he said, "that all 
this while people have come here 
sightseeing, that some, like myself, 
have come here for the express purpose of seeing those towers, and 
all the while no one knew, no one 
dreamed — But why? Why didn't 
you, or others of your race, tell 
us?" 

"No one asked us, sen/r." 

Thorton sat there quietly for a 
long time. Finally he said, "You 
implied a deeper significance, a 
lesson — " 

"Yes, setiir. Object worship 
flourished during the centuries immediately preceding the dust 



storms. As I have explained, wtwere d cvol cd to miterial objei ts 
Nothing to us had value unless it 
had been manufactured by ourselves, unless it was immediately 
pleasing to the eye, and had, supposedly, a necessary function to 
perform. 

"Also, as I have explained, we 
loved our buildings and our cities 
most of all. We spent our long 
cool evenings drinking our clear 
incomparable wine, looking up 
from our sidewalk cafes at tall stately facades, at pinnacles lost in the 
stars. While it lasted, senir, it was 
a pleasant way of life. But, oi 
course, it could not last. 

"When the dust storms came wc 
burrowed underground. We could 
not take our buildings or our objects with us. We had to leave oui 
lovely houses and our beloved cities 
to the mercy of the wind and the 
dust. And the wind and the dust 
were not merciful. 

"No race can continue to maintain an ideal that is not durable, 
that will not forbear turning intc 
a msty hulk or a pile of misshapen 
ruins the day after tomorrow 
When the remnants of my people 
crept out into the sun they saw 
nothing of their adored cities, nothing of their cherished objects 
They saw nothing but — " 

Suddenly the Martian knelt and 
plunged one hand into the ground 
He scooped up a handful of dark 
red silt and let it trickle through 
his fingers. 

"All of my people today, senh. 



50 FANTASTIC 

are tillers of the soil. We live as 
closely to the soil as we can get. 
When we crept forth from our 
burrows we found our heritage and 
humbly accepted it. The land." 

"But the towers — " Thorton 
said. 

"Yes, yes, senir. The towers. 
They too remained. The towers 
and the dust. There is always an 
exception to prove every rule, but 
seldom has a rule been proven as 
ironically as the towers proved this 
rule . . . When we looked across 
the desolation of our land and saw 
the towers, we knew in our hearts 
that we would never build another 
building, or another city." 

"But why?" 

The Martian pointed across the 
canal. Dusk had begun to creep 
down from the crimson mountains, 
across the yellow fields of maize. 
The towers stood, pale and cold 
and lonely. At their feet the neon 
veins of the carnival town had begun to glow. "Look at them, senir. 
Read them. Can you not see why?" 

"I see four tremendous letters 
of your alphabet immortalizing the 
name of the artist who constructed 
them," Thorton said. 

"Artist?" 

"Certainly. The fact that he used 
his own name in the configuration 
of his masterpiece doesn't in the 
least detract from his genius. Egotism is typical of all great artists, 
and Quetenestel undeniably was a 
very great artist. The fact that his 
towers were the only buildings to 



UNIVERSE 

survive the siroccos merely accentuates his greatness." 

The Martian was staring at him 
oddly. "I keep forgetting, senir, 
that you are unfamiliar with -our 
history, that you do not understand 
our language . . . Why did you 
come to Mars, senir?" he asked 
abruptly. 

Thorton was taken aback. The 
sudden change of subject caught 
him off guard and he answered 
Without thinking, without rationalizing. 

"Why," he said, "to find something to take back with me." 

"Thank you for telling me, 
senir." 

"But you don't understand," 
Thorton said. "It's not what you're 
thinking. It's nothing simple. It's 
nothing I can pick up and put into 
my pocket, or take home and place 
on my mantel. It's nothing like 
that—" 

"I do understand, senir. You 
want something to take home. 
Something that will make going 
home easier. You want a memory 
that will not rust, that will remain 
clean and shining throughout the 
quiet years of your life. Something 
lasting that you can hang on to 
when doubts assail you. A touchstone that your own civilization is 
unable to provide." He lowered 
his eyes, staring at the dark red soil 
in his thin hand. "All of us are like 
that, senir" 

The Martian raised his eyes 
again. "I am proud that my humble 
race is able to lend you such a 



THE QUKTENESTEL TOWERS 



5> 



touchstone," he said. He stood up 
slowly. Then he raised one arm in 
a wide gesture. "The Quetencstcl 
Towers, senir. Take them. Quetcncstcl was, as your guidebook states, 
a famous Martian artist. If, when 
my people gaze upon his masterpiece, they know that they shall 
never build again, it is because they 
are ashamed of their clumsy hands. 
It is because they are afraid that 
their noblest efforts can never 
touch the consummate art work of 
(In.' master." 

He bowed. "I am sorry to have 
disturbed you," he said. "I was but 
passing to my batiqueno when I 
saw you sitting here. I am grateful 
for the time of day you have so 
graciously granted me. And now, 
quit san joruiia, Far-ewell." 

He turned and started tiredly up 
the slope to the canal path. 

"Wait," Thorton said, rising. He 
felt vaguely dissatisfied, vaguely 
afraid that something essential had 
escaped him. But the Martian did 
not pause. He climbed up the slope 
to the path and walked down the 
path, blending finally into the deepening evening shadows. 

Thorton would have followed, 
but he heard the high-pitched drone 
of the returning launch and knew 
that the others were on their way 
back from the carnival town. 

He waited there on the canal 
bank, and when the launch came 
in he helped his wife and bis son 
up the slope, losing, in the sudden 
cessation of the afternoon's loneliness, some of the doubts that had 



infiltrated his mind. lie took his 
wife's arm and his son's small hand 
and walked with them and the rest 
of the tourists back to the neat row 
of prefabricated cottages facing the 

canal. 

Behind him the kaleidoscopic 
veins of the carnival town flowed 
brightly through the intensifying 
night And then- — Thorton paused 
on his small front lawn to watch 
— liquid light leaped vividly 
through the huge vowels and consonants of the Quetenestel Towers, 
etching their creator's name in purest scarlet against the star-haunted 
Martian night. 

And suddenly Thor ton's heart 
was full. Suddenly he was able to 
face tomorrow. His vacation had 
not been in vain. He had his touchstone. 

The matter probably would have 
ended there, and Thorton doubtless 
would have endured the abyss of 
time separating him from his next 
vacation with more patience and 
equanimity than he could usually 
summon to meet the rigors of civilized living. If he had not been 
curious; if, deep, deep in the innermost reaches of his mind there 
had not lurked one tiny nagging 
doubt. 

He had been home less than two 
months when the Tri-Planetary Historical Society announced the opening of the first Martian micro-film 
library in Lesser New York. Thorton spent a whole week doing battle 
with himself. He presented himself 
with a hundred excellent reasons 



52 FANTASTIC 

why it would be a waste of time 
for him to sit In a long narrow 
room mining his eyes over 3-D 
films, listening to prosaic descriptions of a planet he had seen at 
first hand. 

"What can they tell me about 
Mars?" he asked himself again and 
again. "I've been there!" 

The libro-specialist in the long 
narrow room— the Q — S room — 
said: "What topic, sir?" 

Thorton was embarrassed. "The 
Quetenestel— " he began. Somehow he could not say the rest. 

"Oh, the towers," the girl said. 
"Won't you sit -down, sir?" 

He was sweating. The seat was 
supposed to be form-adjusting, yet 
it failed utterly to align itself to 
his shifting posture. The long room 
darkened and abruptly there was 
the blue canal flowing slowly 
across the 3-D screen before him, 
and just beyond it the crystalline 
towers rising, with patches of violet 
sky showing exquisitely between 
their delicate fretworks. 

A wave of such poignant nostalgia swept over him that he felt 
that the room could no longer contain him, the room, or Earth for 
that matter; that he must get up 
and flee; run down the grassy bank 
' of the canal and plunge into the 
blue blue water, striking out with 
long strong strokes toward the 
magic pinnacles waiting forever on 
the farther shore. 

"The Quetenestel Towers," the 
narrator's flat voice said': "a remarkable example of Martian mass 



UNIVERSE 

art dating from the last century of 
the old modernism. Formerly and 
romantically believed to represent 
the attempt of a poet-architect 
named Quetenestel to immortalize 
himself by spelling his name in 
grandiose letters "along the Suriul 
canal . 

"Actually an example of the advertising ingenuity — and the extravagance—of a huge Martian 
winery. The Quetenestel Vintners. 
The towers bear a startling resemblance, when properly understood, 
to the much smaller neon lettering 
used to promulgate similar products on Earth during the twentieth 
century." 

"Is something wrong, sir?** 
Thorton realized that he was 
standing. "No, no. Nothing," he 
said. 

Somehow he found his way out 
of the room into the corridor. He 
walked down the corridor to the 
elevators and descended to street 

Jevel. 

They crawled out of their burrows Into the sim, he kept thinking. 
Into the sun, and they saw the dust 
covering their broken cities. And 
in all their land nothing stood except the towers, the towers immortalizing the vintage they had drunk 
for centuries to rationalize their 
brick and vtortar civilization . . . 

Thorton stepped through the 
street entrance into the bleak November sunshine. He saw the 
naked street and the tall white 
buildings lining it. And the people 
hurrying. He shuddered. 



when 
blindness 
strikes 

by . . . Winston Marks 



When blindness strikes even the 
brightest of human dreams may 
give birth to a nameless tyranny. 



It was done, over, finished. The 
horrible purpose had been achieved. 
The carefully nurtured cultures of 
mistrust and hatred finally had succeeded beyond the most perverted 
dreams of the commintern. 

Tens of millions of Negroes, 
Jews, Catholics, Orientals and others lay maimed or dead — dead in 
the land of the free, the home of 
the brave. 

In some remote backwashes, victims still swung from limbs of 
trees, ropes inexpertly knotted 
around their unbroken necks, their 
faces black and contorted from the 
slower strangulation. 

Other thousands lay yet unburicd. The smell of human rot 
was everywhere, for no street or 
alley was unstained with fly-covered 
puddles of human blood, no city 
or village had yet entirely removed 
all its grisly debris. There were 
even greater problems now, no 
time for the dead, scant comfort 
for the living. 

Yes, now the great dividend of 
the massacre rolled unexpectedly 
into the communist coffers. Pandemic blindness swept the North 
American continent. The shadow 



Like Lord Dunsany, Winston Marks can irate his lineage straight hack to the 
brighl-sceptcred Kings of Elfland, and he has few peers as a master of fantasy 
trippingly light and enchanting. But Mr. Marks can be somber too, extracting 
from the acrid rind of reality so profoundly terrifying a vision of thatu hich-mtist-never-be you'll never once doubt its starkly prophetic validity. 



53 



54 FANTASTIC 

of darkness sifted Into the eyes of 
the living like a cosmic soot, striking seemingly at random, man and 
woman, laborer and scholar, the 
aged and the young. 

Even as the loathsome stupidity 
of mob rule dissipated, the cold 
panic of national fear took its 
place; the fear of the mysterious 
retribution that paralyzed the optic 
nerve and sent individuals, families, whole communities reeling into 
Stygian blackness, where there was 
no tiniest spark of sun, no stars, 
no moon, no faintest gray of 
dawn. 

Dr. Thomas Johnson, President Emeritus of a large medical 
school, dean and patron saint of 
modern psychiatrists, clutched the 
edges of the lectern, panic rising 
within him. He felt dizzy and faint 
as he awaited the quieting of the 
United- States Senators and Representatives. 

However, to them who still retained their vision, the beloved old 
man appeared a rock of quiet dignity, a pillar of strength and sanity 
in the ocean of sorrow and shame 
that spread at his feet. 

It was a lengthy wait before the 
noise from the floor subsided, for 
at the last moment, dozens of blinded legislators had insisted in being 
guided to the chambers to hear Dr. 
Johnson address the joint meeting 
of the House and Senate. 

At last a voice at his shoulder 
said, "You may begin, Dr. Johnson, if you wish." 



TJ NT VERSE 

Someone pressed a glass of 
water into his hand and he drank 
gratefully. 

"Gentlemen," he began simply, 
with emotion in his strong voice, 
"I have been pressed to give the 
official opinion of the medical world 
on the epidemic blindness which 
afflicts more than half of our population, and which appears to continue to spread. 

"This opinion has long since been 
fully published in the press and 
over the air, so my words are largely a confirmation of what you 
already know. 

"The condition is entirely functional. It is a simple, psycho-somatic symptom, deriving from 
hysteria and mental trauma. In 
shorter words, the brain has come 
to reject the continual visual 
shocks that besiege it on every 
hand." 

He paused to allow them to absorb his words. Then he went on 
deliberately, "Such is my report. 
But I appreciate that your purpose 
in calling me here today was more 
than this. 

"You are hoping to hear words 
of encouragement, words of hope, 
perhaps even words that will lead 
to a miracle cure of some kind. 
You want mc to speculate* on the 
duration of this terrible seizure, to 
give you assurances and some fragments of confidence that our chaos 
will come to an early end. I shall 
do my best. 

"First, I must accept a responsibility. Gentlemen, the publication 



WHEN BLINDNESS STRIKES 



5 3 



of my views previously may very 
well have been heavily responsible 
for the quick spread of the epidemic!" 

He paused, his lips tightening. 

A surprised stir rustled from the 
assembly. 

"As you "know, I hold firmly to 
the view tint an emotion of gutlt 

is the principal basis of the psychosis which has us in its grip- Individuals who took an active part in 
the slaughter of our minority 
groups number the largest part of 
our afflicted. A few of these went 
blind before the pogrom ended, and 
it was my published explanation of 
the guilt-complex that broadcast the 
epidemic. My comment was that the 
typical attack of blindness was 
reasonable evidence of direct guilt. 

"This was the most unfortunate 
assertion of my career! When my 
charge stared -out of the headlines 
at the whole nation, the eyes of the 
mob, which could tolerate any 
bloody horror, became once again 
the eyes of the individual who 
stood accused. 

"Yes, the mob, which has no 
conscience, dispersed into men 
who do have consciences. And 
these men read from my words 
their sentences for their crimes: 
Blindness. My suggestion fell upon 
brains already hypnotized by the 
shock and remorse and self-loathing." 

Now individual voices were 
causing islands of commotion. 
Even as he spoke, men were still 
going blind in his very audience. 



When the confusion reached a minimum he continued. 

"In our psychiatric wards, the 
pitifully few we have been able to 
treat have yielded a number of releases or cures. Some cases have 
proved easily broken, but a distressing fact has emerged. The 
only cures we have effected are 
among p'atients who had merely 
condoned the violence, and who 
had not participated directly." He 
hammered out the words with 
emphasis. 

"Surely, even such cures are important, and we must treat them 
as quickly as possible. These people are sorely needed to help the 
less fortunate ones." 

Once again he paused and 
thought: Perhaps I can bring about 
a jew such recoveries at this time, 
in these chambers. X must try. 

The great vaulted chamber was 
still. 

"First, know this: The fact that 
you suffer the blindness is proof 
that you have a deep-seated sense 
of right and wrong. You are essentially a moral person. No matter 
what temporary insanity led you to 
condone the murder of innocents, 
there was always something solidly 
decent in your subconscious mind 
that abhorred the persecutions. 

"If this were not so, you could 
have remained aloof. You would 
have suffered no conflict between 
your momentary brutal convictions 
and your life-long sense of morality. Without this conflict, blindness 
could not have struck at you. 



56 FANTASTIC 

"Therefore, hear this: From the 
bottom of my heart, I pronounce 
every blind person in this assembly 
to be basically good of heart. Your 
past blindness has been ample proof 
of the remorse and contrition of 
your earlier thoughts and acts. So, 
when I clap my hands twice, open 
your eyes and see!" 

He brought his hands together 
before him, and the microphone 
picked up the two sharp reports 
and exploded them through the 
auditorium with ear-splitting intensity. 

The echo had scarcely stopped 
reverberating when a voice from 
the floor split the dramatic silence. 
"I can see! My God, I can see 
again !" 

Then another voice from a different section screamed with relief. 
Then another and another. 

There was the bedlam of a revival meeting at first. Dozens of 
throats screamed and sobbed as 
person after person felt the balm 
of absolution and caught the powerful impact of the suggestion els it 
was emphasized by the testimony of 
- other shouts. 

Dr. Johnson stood calmly 
throughout the tumult waiting for 
the inevitable. Gradually an undertone of muttering swelled in an 
ominous counterpoint to the jubilant shouts of joy as the uncured 
realized that they were not among 
the chosen ones. Before the muttering grew too loud, Dr. Johnson 
held up his hands for silence, then, 
realizing that the gesture was mean


UNIVERSE 

ingless to many, he spoke loudly 
into the P. A. system to gain attention. 

They gave it reluctantly, and the 
roar diminished to a low enough 
level to enable him to continue. 

"Some of you have already 
gained back your sight. Others of 
you who have actually raised your 
hands in violence still lack the 
courage to face the visual evidence 
of your deeds. 

"What hope can I offer to these 
poor souls?" 

He bowed his head, and his slender shoulders sagged as if undei 
the burden of their collective suffering. His gentle face showed a 
compassion that wet the eyes of all 
who could see it. "I will not mislead you," he said slowly. "Wc 
have not yet freed a single patient 
from the blindness when the patient admits that he committed a 
racial murder himself. 

"We have tried everything. We 
have sought to mitigate the acute 
guilt-pain by careful reiteration of 
the principles of mob psychology. 
Wc have shown these people the 
evidence that the whole massacre 
was the result of direct communist 
machinations. 

"We have pointed out that all 
the original murders were coldly 
planned and executed by a foreign 
power; that the riots were entirely 
the product of subversive agents 
and provocateurs; that the atroci^ 
ties by members of so-called inferior groups were staged to invoke 



WHEN RLINI 

our deepest and most savage instincts of survival and revenge. 

"We have submitted these cases 
to the courts and received legal 
absolution from the charges of 
first-degree murder for each patient. 

"But to no avail." 

Dr. Johnson's knuckles grew 
white where he gripped the lectern. 

"The man who struck his fellow 
American with a weapon, who 
cheered while the knives and axes 
hacked living flesh before his eyes, 
and who submitted his body and 
mind to the carnage, however brief 
ly, however insanely— this man 
who . now finds himself blind is 
suffering a shock of such unprecedented severity that the medical 
world has.no standard by which to 
predict its intensity or permanency. 

"It is, I suppose, only in a land 
which has known the meaning of 
mercy that such a thing could occur — where a citizen will pay with 
his eyesight for the despicable deed 
that has ravaged Asia and Europe 



•JESS STRIKES 57 

with no such phenomenon of na 
tional conscience. 

"It may be — we hope it shall Ix 
— that time will reduce the horror. 
Perhaps these unfortunates will become available to treatment as the 
nation returns to normal. I can give 
no assurances at this time, however. I — I sincerely wish I could. 
With all my heart I wish it." 

Soft sounds deep in the throats 
of hundreds of men swelled into a 
murmur of despair that drew deeper lines on Dr. Johnson's sensitive 
face. He stood facing the moaning 
tide of sound, and the pain gnawed 
at his entrails, 

"We have done a terrible 
thing," he xoncluded in a voice 
that broke finally. With grave humility he said, "Whether absolution is ours to ask for, I cannot 
decide. I can only plead — may God 
have mercy on our souls!" 

He turned, tears streaming from 
his old eyes, and groped for the 
arm of his attendant, groped with 
the typical widespread, helpless fingers of the recently blinded. 



the 
mental 
coin 

by , . . Richard R. Smith 



Under the Sarks* expert guidance 
everyone on Earth had a task lo 
perform. But the Sarks' own task 
was a chill, dreadful secret. 



Sweat was an acrid, salty taste 
in his mouth. His heart beat wildly, his flesh burned faintly. He 
opened his eyes and stared at the 
brilliant light in the low ceiling. 
Frantically, he searched his mind 
and found . . . nothing. 

He rose on trembling legs and 
examined the room. 

The ceiling was smooth and 
blank except for the one light and 
a small ventilating grille. The floor 
was devoid of any furniture, Three 
walls were chalky - white, smooth 
and bare. The fourth was an energy 
screen. He ran his fingers over the 
smooth, hard flow of energy. It was 
opaque, and it reached from floor 
to ceiling, and from wall to walk 
It was completely impenetrable. 

He was hopelessly and terrifyingly trapped. 

He pressed quivering fingertips 
to his temples. What had happened 
to his memory? Who was he? 
Where was he? When he searched 
his pockets he found nothing. With 
a sensation of futility, he removed 
his clothing and painstakingly ex


Through the medium of science fantasy we are privileged to see human life on 
/his planet through a hind of miraculous prism mirroring worlds of experience 
that would be either glorious or intolerable in reality. Art Utopia, ideally 
conceived, can he truly dazzling. But brilliant young Richard R, Smith is more 
fascinated by the darker aspects of tomorrow. With a narrative persuasiveness 
that has at times am almost Wellsian vigor he has here pictured a world 
ens/aped by an alien tyranny as terrifying as it is heartbreakingly pitiable. 



58 



THE MENTAL COIN 



S9 



amincd it. It was a gray tunic, 
nothing more, nothing less. There 
were no names or initials stitched 
into the cloth. 

He sat on the floor and tried to 
think. He could rememher cities, 
social customs, models of cars and 
books. But he couldn't remember 
anything assochtted with bis identity. 

Pain ripped through his flesh 
like the jagged edges of a broken 
bottle. It explored his eyes and 
squeezed with steel ringers. It 
Struck his back with the force of a 
whip and his arms and legs throbbed with torment as if the bones 
were broken. 

He kept his self-control as long 
as he could. Then ... he screamed. 

He listened as the screams 
echoed in the empty room. It was 
an oddly satisfying sound, an outlet for the agony in his body. He 
sank to the cool floor, pressed his 
body against the hard substance 
and waited for the pain to end. 

After what seemed an eternity, 
the throbbing agony of his flesh 
ceased and he rose weakly to a 
sitting position, his entire body 
tingling from the effects of the torture rays. 

A faint swishing sound broke 
the silence. 

He turned abruptly to look at 
the energy screen. A plate of food 
slid through the opaque current, 
and a man's hand appeared. With 
a despairing cry, he threw himself 
at it. Instantly, soundlessly, it vanished. 



Dumbly, he explored with his 
fingers the spot where the hand 
had disappeared. Obviously it was 
a one-way energy screen. Objects 
could be thrust into the room but 
he couldn't pass through the screen 
from his side. But how was the 
man able to withdraw his hand 
when once a part of it was on the 
other side? Could a small section 
of the screen be deactivated and 
remain opaque while momentarily 
losing its force? 

He examined the food. The plastic plate was filled almost to overflowing with pork chops, apple 
sauce, green peas, bread and butter. A box of milk rested on the 
plate's edge. But there were no 
knives, forks or spoons. 

That at least was a clue. They 
thought he wight kill himself. He 
had reason to kill himself, then? 
Or was he mistaken about its being 
a clue? Perhaps he was the type 
of person who would commit suicide to avoid torture. Would he be 
tortured again if he did not destroy 
himself? The memory of the agony 
made him shudder. 

He ate slowly, and with as much 
dignity as he could summon, although he felt starved. Dignity ! 
That was something he must remember. He must act normally, 
with complete outward composure. 
He must do so because they were 
beyond the screen and could see 
him. 

He finished the meal and drank 
the small container of milk. Before he placed the box on the floor, 



6o 



FANTASTIC UNIVERSE 



he noticed the bright red letters: 
Servo. Servo Milk Company. He 
was still on Earth, however cruelly 
and deviously he had been 
trapped. 

He said carefully, "Why are you 
torturing me?" 

There was no answer. 

He waited a few minutes and 
then asked mqre loudly, "Who 
am I V 

Again — silence. 

He shouted, "Why did you torture me}" 

Hts body trembled violently in 
the _ silence which ensued. 

"You inhuman devils! You — " 
He screamed insults and exhausted 
his vocabulary of colorful adjectives which was not a small one. 

Once more the torture rays 
bathed his body with their almost 
unbearable torment, seemingly 
twice as powerful as before. He 
screamed in agony as the invisible 
lashes of fire swept across him, He 
wouldn't last long, lie knew. They 
couldn't ""know what it felt like. 
The pain would drive him insane. 
No one could endure it for long. 

Abruptly, the torture rays 
ceased, and the light in the ceiling 
dimmed slowly. In a few seconds, 
he was in complete darkness. 

In the long silence that followed, 
he made several deductions. The 
most important one was that his 
captors would kill him at the end 
of a week. It was a matter of logi< : 
One hundred and twenty years ago, 
the Sarks had landed on Earth. For 
tile privilege of living on Earth, 



they had reluctantly given their 
hosts dozens of their inventions. 

The Memo was one of the most 
useful: a gigantic machine now 
owned by the FBI that made murder without detection almost impossible. Every man and woman 
in the United States had a personal 
file in the Memo machine. The file 
was a thin wire, the thickness of a 
hair and a foot long. Electrical 
emanations from an individual's 
brain were recorded on his personal 
file. 

When that individual died, the 
FBI ran the wire through a translator that converted the electrical 
imprints into visual, auditory and 
thought-record documents. These 
records enabled the authorities to 
see exactly what the deceased had 
seen, hear what he had heard and 
even read what he had thought 
during his last week of life. In die 
majority of cases, the records 
showed precisely • whom the slain 
individual's murderer was or gave 
definite clues as to his identity. 

A person's file was only a week 
long — and it was a continuous record. As micro-electrical impulses 
were recorded at one end of 1 the 
thin wire, they were erased at the 
other end. Therefore, a murderer 
could succeed with his crime if he 
kept the victim from seeing Bam 
and thinking about him for an entire week. 

So far, he hadn't seen his captor. Hie erasure of his memory 
would prevent him from thinking 
about his murderer's identity. After 



THE MENTAL COIN" 



6i 



a week, the record of his antagonist's identity would no longer be 
on the Memo hie and his captor 
could kill him without danger to 
himself. 

The Memo does not vanquish 
murder, he thought. // only makes 
it tt more involved process! 

As quietly as possible, he removed his shirt and wrapped it 
around his fist. 

The ceiling was low, a few 
inches above his head, He smashed 
his fist against the light in the ceiling, so violently that fragments of 
thin glass cut through the cloth, 
and bit into his knuckles. The remaining fragments fell to the floor 
with soft tinkling sounds. 

Very deliberately he arranged 
the cloth around his fingers and 
probed at the wiring in the uncovered recess. Testily, he crossed 
some wires, and almost instantly 
sparks spurted from the recess with 
a crackling sound and burned his 
face and forehead. 

He prayed he had blown every 
fuse in I be building and whirled 
toward the energy screen. It was 
gone. As he had suspected, by blowing the fuses, he had robbed the 
screen of its power-source. 

The room beyond his prison was 
large, and dimly lit by moonlight 
that streamed through two oval 
windows. It was completely empty. 
He ran across the room and tried 
the door at the other side, his lips 
tightening when he discovered that 
the portal was securely locked. 
Someone was moving stealthily 



about in the hall beyond the darkened room, his footsteps nearing 
the shadowy door. 

How many minutes did he have ? 
He tried a window. It, too, was 
locked and foe could see no way 
to open or break it. 

The running footsteps stopped 
outside the room's door — stopped 
abruptly. 

His mind whirled and his eyes 
scanned the dim room, searching 
for some due to his captor's identity. Was escape impossible after 
coming this far? The furniture was 
small, and he noticed a strange, 
sweet odor. 

A key fumbled in the door's 
lock, and the next instant, beside 
a small desk, a wastepaper basket 
gleamed in the moonlight. It was 
an abnormally large basket — an incongruity beside the desk. 

His laughter whispered across 
the room. Surely, if he ever did 
escape, that basket would give them 
something to think about! 

He leaped across the room, 
paused briefly before the wastepaper receptacle and then deliberately 
stepped into it. 

II 

His feet touched the mattertransmitter at the base of the basket and passed completely through 
it. His pulses beginning to pound, 
he raised his arms above his head 
and fell. 

The sides of the basket scraped 
flesh from his body. Shouting with 



62 



FANTASTIC UNIVERSE 



the pain, he struck a conveyer belt 
and rolled on his back. 

A moment later he was staring 
up at thousands of matter-transmitters that constantly poured the 
discarded items of an entire city 
on an endless belt. As the conveyer 
carried him swiftly to an unknown 
destination, a flood of paper, halfeaten food, torn clothing, and various unsavory articles of refuse fell 
upon him. By the time he lost 
consciousness, he was completely 
covered by refuse. 

"That was smart!" a voice commented. 

He stared up in bewildered 
alarm at green eyes in a fleshy, 
round face. 

"Where am I?" he whispered, 
hoarsely. 

"Don't you remember?" the 
fleshy individual said. "You got the 
brilliant idea of jumping into a 
wastepaper basket. You're the first 
captive this week to think of it. At 
this moment you're in the Central 
Disposal Plant." 

He rubbed trembling fingers 
across his forehead as memory 
flooded his mind. He had escaped! 
It wasn't an original idea. Years 
ago, a highly intelligent friend of 
his youth had fallen into a wastepaper basket when intoxicated and 
bad described the experience to him 
at considerable length. 

Matter-transmitter wastcpaper. 
baskets were another gift 'of the 
generous Sarks. Millions of baskets 
throughout the country were efficiently linked to certain Disposal 



Plants. All discarded items placed 
in the baskets were in due course 
transmitted to a Plant where they 
were sorted by intricate Robot ic 
equipment. Metals were carried by 
conveyer belts to furnaces where 
they were melted and re-used, while 
paper and cloth were carefully arranged in stacks and carried to book 
manufacturers and magazine publishers. Lesser items of value were 
transported to Salvage Shops where 
they were sold to Morons. Vegetable and animal matter was carried to fertilizer factories. 

The Sarks had provided the 
country with an economical disposal 
system which not only paid for itself but completely eliminated 
waste and eased the strain on 
Earth's dwindling natural resources. 

He noticed that his wounds had 
been dressed. Wearily, he rose and 
sat on the edge of the cot. 

"Why did you do it, Mister?" 
the round-faced man asked when 
he noticed the gray trousers. "What 
happened to your shirt?" lie shook 
his head sadly. "Why an Intelligence would want to jump in the 
city's junkyard is beyond me!" 

Intelligence. 

The word reminded him that he 
didn't know what he was! Was he 
Moron, Norm or Intelligence ? He 
wore the gray of an Intelligence 
but clothing could be, and often 
was, stolen. For the first time, he 
noticed the stranger's yellow clothing. The man was — a Norm. 

There was nothing surprising 



THE MENTAL COIN 



63 



about that, of course. An attendant 
in a Disposal Plant would have to 
be a Norm. Such a job required 
more thought than a Moron was 
capable of, and yet it was far too 
lowly for an Intelligence. 

"We have a rule here, Mister," 
the Norm said. "Anyone who uses 
a basket to get to a Plant has to 
have a memory erasure. The Sarks 
don't want the possibility known 
publicly because it's too dangerous. 
You could have killed yourself. 
You're damn lucky the Sarks put 
in gadgets to take care of guys that 
get here. Otherwise, you might 
have been carried to the furnaces 
and — ™ 

He shuddered inwardly at the 
prospect of losing more memory. 
Already, he couldn't remember anything at all about his identity. And 
now, this stranger wanted to take 
away even his recollection of his 
escape ! 

The attendant pushed a button 
on a small table, and with clocklike precision and only the faintest 
of whirring sounds, a gleaming 
machine entered the room. 

"Don't try to fight it, Mister," 
the Norm warned. "It's got a 
paralysis gadget in it. You try to 
run and it'll freeze you." 

He watched with a cold knot in 
his stomach as the machine extended its metal tentacles toward his 
skull. He was too weak to resist, 
or even to cry out in protest. 

"While the machine's working 
on you," the Norm said, "I'll see 



if I can't find a shirt for you. You 
can't leave here like that!" 

The attendant sauntered from 
the room as if animated by an 
automatic compulsion, and with no 
particular destination in mind. 
Typical Norm, he thought bitterly. 

He closed his eyes as the machine's cold metal tentacles pressed 
against his skull. Intangible tendrils drifted through his maze of 
thoughts and memories. They 
searched, found what they wanted 
and slashed with faint, delicate 
beams of electricity. In numb despair he watched the machine as it 
rolled from the room. 

Where was he? How had he 
arrived in such a dismal predicament? He frowned and tried to 
recall. He remembered the torture 
and his desperate attempt to escape 
from it. He could even remember 
his elation when the attempt had 
succeeded, but he couldn't recall 
how he had accomplished it. 

The attendant returned to the 
room and extended a torn brown 
shirt. "This is the only garment I 
could find," he explained. "I'm 
sorry it had to be a Moron's shirt. 
But I guess it's better than nothing." 

He accepted the shirt and slipped 
into tt. Bells chimed somewhere in 
the distance, and the attendant 
frowned. 

"Company. I'll be back in a minute. You rest awhile. That operation always leaves people a little 
dizzy from shock." 

Once more, he was alone. In 



6-J- FANTASTIC 

desperation he stared at the halfOpen door, dirty yellow walls and 
rumpled cot. His mind struggled 
to find something that no longer 
existed. 

Distant voices drifted to his ears'. 

"Yeah, he's here." 

"Where?" 

There was a muffled reply, and 
footsteps clattered in the hall. He 
realized with dawning horror that 
only one person would know where 
to find him — his antagonist! 

He sensed the weakness in his 
body and knew he was Loo fatigued 
to fight or even to struggle against 
a recapture. In frantic alarm he 
crossed the room as fast as his 
rubbery legs would carry him, and 
jerked open the door f 

The street outside was dark, 
chillingly empty. Quietly he closed 
the door behind him, and ran down 
the street, his shoes making hollow, echoing sounds on the concrete. Voices shouted orders for 
him to stop, but he only ran the 
faster. 

Two yards to his left the street 
suddenly erupted in a blaze of red 
flame and a cascade of stones struck 
his back as he turned into an alley. 
He stumbled on through the dark 
shadows, his heart beating like a 
trip-hammer, his lungs gasping for 
air. 

The alley emptied into a main 
street. The instant he emerged on 
its wide expanse he mingled with 
the throng of people and assumed 
a normal gait. The sidewalks were 
filled with a mixture of Norms and 



Morons. He observed with a shudder the blank, stupid expressions 
of the Morons. Their brown tunics 
were wrinkled, torn and dirty, and 
they walked with slow shuffles, staring vacantly at the men and women 
about them. 

He wasn't a Moron. Of that he 
was sure. His reactions were quite 
different from theirs. He felt alert 
and poised like a steel spring ready 
to leap at the slightest provocation. 

The superiority of the Norms to 
the Morons was plainly visible. The 
Norms walked faster, and their 
eyes gleamed with a hazy alertness. 
Quite as important, their clothes 
were never dirty, torn or patched 
even though they did not wear expensive clothing. 

He decided he was either Norm 
or Intelligence — more probably an 
Intelligence. 

There were no Intelligences 
visible, but that occasioned him no 
surprise. Intelligences . did not 
mingle with Morons and Norms 
under normal circumstances. They 
lived on the outskirts of cities and 
usually worked in huge office 
buildings in the country. 

A neon sign glared with light 
and caught his attention. Mental 
Coins, One Credit. Another gift of 
the Sarks, he reflected, remembering that the Sarks sold intelligence 
to humans in the form of pills the 
size of a dime. 

He paused before the store window and glanced at the room beyond. As always, there were no 
attendants visible — only a me


THE MENTAL COIN 



&5 



cfaanieal dispensor. A long line of 
customers stood before the machine, and as he watched an elderly 
Norm slipped a five-credit bill into 
a slot and received change and a 
Mental Coin. The Norm swallowed 
the pill immediately. 

How do they do it? he wondered. 

A Norm or an Intelligence could 
buy a Mental Coin from any one 
of thousands of Sark shops. After 
he swallowed the pill, the purchaser remained decidedly more 
alert and intelligent for an entire 
day. 

It was a vicious circle. Intelligences earned more money than 
Norms and Morons. Therefore, 
they were able to buy a larger 
amount of Coins, and because of 
the Coins, their intelligence was 
continually higher than a Norm's. 
It followed as a correlary that because their intelligence was greater, 
they earned more money . . . 

Morons were the worst victims ■ 
of the cycle. Because they were 
stupid, they lived in barracks, went 
without most luxuries and earned 
very little money. Because they 
earned little money, they couldn't 
afford many or any Mental Coins. 
Because they couldn't afford the 
Coins, they remained dumb. Because they were dumb, they earned 
very little. Statistics showed that 
only one Moron in a thousand rose 
to the status of Norm. 

The Norms were the normal, 
average people. They lived in 
apartment houses, had a few lux


uries and jobs that required some 
thought. Because they earned a fair 
salary, they bought a steady 
amount of Coins to maintain their 
average intelligence. Because they 
had an average intelligence, they 
continued to earn their average 
salaries . . . 

The Norm class was the easiest 
to leave. If a' Norm was lazy, he 
could very easily slip into the 
Moron class from" which there was 
almost no return. Or, by hard work 
and initiative, a Norm could rise 
to the level of Intelligence. 

The facts were hard and cold: 
Intelligences remained Intelligences. Norms could become Intelligences, Morons or remain Norm. 
Morons remained Morons. 

What was he? 

A hand gently touched his arm, 
and he turned to stare. 

She was pretty. Dark brown 
hair she had — and her eyes were 
deep and blue and unwavering. 
There were little dancing lights in 
' them, and her face was smooth and 
young. Her face Js too smooth, he 
thought irrelevantly. 

She whispered, barely moving 
her moist crimson lips, "Pretend 
you know me." 

"Well, hello!" he exclaimed. 

He took her hand and squeezed 
it. Her fingers were soft and cold. 
She tugged faintly on his hand, 
indicating the direction she wanted him to go. 

He listened with pretended interest,; as she talked about people 
neither of them knew. A good del, 



66 



FANTASTIC UNIVERSE 



he thought with admiration. But 
who is she afraid of? 

She stopped before a crumbling 
apartment house. "Would you care 
to come tn for awhile?" she asked 
politely. 

"Certainly," he replied, without 
hesitation. 

In silence, they climbed the 
creaking staircase to the third floor. 
The building was dirty, its wallpaper peeling in large sections. He 
heard babies crying, men and women arguing in loud voices, TV seti 
blaring. 

He noticed that some of the people who passed them wore the 
brown clothing of Morons; others 
the more conspicuous yellow of 
Norms. The girl, whatever her station and reason for helping him, 
had been wise in choosing a Borderline House. When they left they 
could disguise themselves as either 
Morons or Norms, making it doubly difficult for their adversaries to 
recognize them. He felt completely 
confident on that score. 

On the third floor, she led him 
into a small apartment and locked 
the door behind them. 

"Sit down," she said. "You need 
not fear discovery here." 

He relaxed his muscles and fell 
on a faded green sofa. 

A layer of dust covered the contents of the room. The furniture 
was cheap, the ashtrays filled to 
overflowing and the air had an unhealthy, stale tang. A room reserved 
for special occasions such as ibis, 
he thought. 



"Have you any cigarettes?" be 
asked. 

She reached into her purse. 
"No," she replied. "But I have 

this." 

She tossed a small gun on the 
seat beside him. 

"Now," she suggested, "you can 
kill yourself with dignity." 

HI 

"Kill myself with dignity!" he 
repeated incredulously. 

He studied her face. H e was 
quite sure that she meant it. Her 
expression was, calm, her body relaxed. She didn't have the appearance of an insane person. She stood 
in the center of the room on shapely legs, her cool eyes surveying him 
emotionlcssly. 

Her young bosom rose and fell 
evenly beneath the glittering 
blouse. She wasn't excited, and her 
calmness, in conjunction with the 
fact that her face and figure were 
average, added to his bewilderment. 
She was attractive but without the 
kind of beauty that would attract 
attention. Physically, she looked 
like an entirely normal woman. But 
what normal woman would ask a 
man to commit suicide without the 
slightest sign of excitement? 

"You could have killed yourself 
in the street, but it wouldn't have 
been very dignified," she said. 
"After you die, you'll be Earth's 
greatest hero so you should die in 
a way that will — " 

He waved a restraining hand. 



THE MENTAt COIN 



07 



"Will you explain a few things 
first?" 

"We haven't much time," she 
warned. "They might come any 
minute!" 

"Just who are they?" 

"I can't tell you," she replied, 
quickly. "We don't want them to 
know that we know." 

"What group do you belong 
to?" 

She shook her head. "I can't tell 
you that either. We don't want it 
recorded on the Memo machine in 
Washington." 

"Who am I?" he persisted, hoping that she would relent and Lell 
him that much at least. 

"You are an agent in a group 
fighting for Earth," she said. "Your 
name is unimportant; You and I 
belong to the same group. I'm your 
ally." 

He laughed bitterly. "You're my 
ally and you want me to kill myself." 

"Don't you understand ?" she 
asked angrily. "You've learned 
something that will lead our cause 
to victory when you die. You 
learned it the day before yesterday. 
It's recorded on the Memo in 
Washington. When you die, the 
FBI will read your file. The things 
you knew will become public 
knowledge and we'll win!" 

He shook his head violently. It 
was like playing a game and not 
knowing the rules while everyone 
else had the rules memorized. 

"How did you know where to 
find me?" he asked anxiously. 



"We knew you were a prisoner 
but we couldn't rescue you. We 
tried but we couldn't, However, we 
did learn how you escaped and we 
knew you'd be in or near the Disposal Plant. We sent a few of pur 
members to the . Plant itself and a 
few of us waited in the streets outside the Plant. I happened to locate 
you before the others." 

At last, some of the pieces were 
falling in place. He was the goal 
of two conflicting groups. His 
group wanted him to die immediately. His enemies wanted him to 
live for at least a week. Both 
groups had sent members to the 
Disposal Plant and his enemies had 
gotten there first. Now he was with 
bis group. And they wanted him 
to commit suicide . . , 

"I don't think you know — " His 
eyes widened and his speech congealed.' 

The brown-haired girl had removed another gun from her purse 
and was aiming it at his chest. 

He rolled from the sofa, and 
grappled with her, so quickly that 
she had no chance to fire. But the 
weapon exploded nevertheless, the 
charge scorching his left ear as it 
passed close by his head. 

He struck the floor, rolled on 
his back and looked up at the girl 
a few yards away- The green sofa 
burned with darting, crackling 
flames. He fired without hesitation, 
ripping her arm off at the elbow. 

That didn't stop her. She seized 
a large metal vase with her left 
hand and raised it to crush his 



FANTASTIC UNIVERSE 



skull. He destroyed both her legs 
with his next two shots. She crumpled to the floor, and lay motionless, her left arm pinned beneath 
her body, her eyes wide and staring. 

He knelt beside her and studied 
the wide eyes. The floor was covered with wiring and tiny mechanisms that his shots had torn from 
her body. 

"Are you a self-contained automaton or is someone manipulating—" 

"We are actually miles away," 
the robot's feminine voice interrupted. "This android body that 
you have destroyed is merely a receiver." 

"Well, you, can at least tell 
me — ■" 

The robot exclaimed, "For the 
good of Earth, kill yourself at 

once!" 

Boards creaked in the hall outside the apartment. 

He asked rapidly, "Do you know 
what it, was I discovered a few 
days ago C\ 

"Naturally not," was the instant 
reply. "If we did, we would make 
it public knowledge and the conflict would end. Now even you 
don't know. Only the Memo knows. 
You must kill -yourself so that the 
FBI will—" 

"I won't kill myself and not 
know why I'm doing it!" he whispered angrily. "And if you send 
anybody else to kill me, robot or 
human, you'll live to regret it." 

He decided not to waste more 



time. He ran across the room, and 
threw open the door. 

The room beyond was a small, 
filthy kitchen. He climbed through 
a window, and onto a roof-top. 
Moving with agile assurance, he 
crossed several roofs, found a fire 
escape and descended to a narrow 
alley. The alley led to the street 
where he had met the girl. 
How long ago that seemed! 
Swiftly he mixed with the sluggish crowd, walking aimlessly, his 
thoughts in a turmoil. 

He was a member of a group 
fighting for Earth. But Earth was 
not in danger! True, some fanatics 
disliked the alien Sarks. But they 
had not harmed Earth. On the contrary, they had helped the planet 
immensely. They had given Earth 
the benefit of their superior science, including the Memo which 
had almost abolished crime, from 
petty theft to murder. 

The Sarks sold intelligence to 
humans. Their Mental Coins drove 
the cobwebs from a man's mind 
and allowed him to think with 
speed and clarity. They gave cities 

the economical Disposal Plants that 
prevented waste of vital industrial 
materials. 

They numbered only thousands, 
and they had beautiful Reservations 
for their homes. Earth and the 
Sarks befriended each other. The 
Sarks had nothing to do with politics or power. They lived quietly 
on their Reservations and bothered 
no one. 

If he was in a group fighting for 



THE MENTAL COIN 

or what was it fight


6 9 



Earth, who 
ing? 

A dark blue car screeched to a 
halt beside him. 

IV 

He ignored the vehicle and continued walking, crossing the wide 
thoroughfare diagonally. He had 
scarcely gone ten paces from the 
curb when a burly hand gripped 
his shoulder and turned him 
around. He looked at the hard face, 
but avoided the cold brown eyes 
of the husky man confronting him. 

The man escorted him to the car, 
opened the door, and ordered, 
"Get in." 

He slipped into the back seat, 
too bewildered by preceding events 
to be surprised at the Sark who 
sat with his back against the far 
side of the stationary vehicle. 

The chauffeur was slumped on 
the front seat. At the Sark's command the man leaned forward and 
punched a button. As the car 
lurched away from the curb, a wide 
rooftop vista swept into view 
through the car's transparent top. 
Row upon row of towering apartment houses filled with Norm 
families were etched in glowing 
splendor against the deep blue sky. 
He would be content to be a Norm, 
he told himself despairfully. A 
Norm with an average job, a wife 
and kids, a few private rooms and 
such luxuries as TV and a microfilm library. 

He turned to face the alien. 



The Sark was typical of his kind. 
His body was human in shape but 
so small that he resembled a child. 
His skin was an unhealthy pink, 
devoid of any hair, and when his 
soft lips moved a girlish voice said, 
"My name is Ranoffga. I've decided to explain a few things to you." 

He watched the alien with a 
growing interest. It was the first 
time that he had been this close 
to one of mankind's benefactors. 

"You've no doubt wondered 
about your treatment lately," 
Ranoffga said. "The unfortunate 
truth is — you are a member of an 
anti-Sark movement. Many Earthmen resent us because of our superior science and have tried to 
find flaws in us. Not being perfect, 
we do have flaws. You discovered 
some of them and — " 

"What are they?" he interrupted 
quickly. 

The alien shrugged his small, 
bony shoulders. "I cannot tell you. 
But you may rest assured that what 
you discovered is unimportant. It 
concerns only us and does not in 
any way concern Earthmen. But if 
Earthmen knew, they would look 
upon us with disgust." 

The Sark's eyelids quivered. 
"You. discovered these things but 
we captured yau before you could 
inform your organization. We destroyed your memory and planned 
to free you at the end of a week 
when the Memo would no longer 
record your knowledge. 

"But, unfortunately, you escaped. We know that one of your 



70 FANTASTIC 

group contacted you and tried to 
kill you. And now you are once 
more under our protection." 

Ranoffga sighed as if the explanation was tiring him greatly. 
"You are in a strange position," 
he went on. "You were trying to 
discredit us In the eyes of Earthmen. I can assure you that what 
you learned would not cause 
Earthmen to drive us from their 
planet. But, as I said before, they 
would look upon us with disgust, 
and we do not desire that. We wish 
you no harm, but the fanatical antiSark group you belong to will kill 
you if they are given the chance. 
They want you to die, so that your 
Memo file will become public 
knowledge." 

The alien lit a cigarette and blew 
thin jets of blue smoke through 
his nostrils. The Sarks, he remembered, continually condescended. 
They wore human clothing and 
deliberately adopted many of 
Earth's customs in an effort to decrease the difference between the 
two races. They were in all respects 
the greater race and yet they were 
the ones who yielded sociologically! 

"Does that explain everything?" 
Ranoffga queried. 

He considered. It explained the 
fantastic cat and mouse game in a 
vague manner, beyond a doubt. But 
it failed to enlighten him as to the 
fpecific knowledge that had placed 
him in his incredible position. 

"One more thing," he asked. 
"Why did you torture me? - ' 



l NlVBJtSE 

Ranoffga's eyes flickered for an 
instant toward the chauffeur's beefy 
neck, then stared vacantly through 
a window, "That was regrettable," 
he conceded. "Our race has to employ Earthmen to perform duties 
which are unpleasant to us. Usually, 
we have to employ men who are 
inherently sadistic. This particular 
person — a man named Roden — 
tortured you for his own pathological amusement. He had been 
instructed only to keep you a prisoner for a week and then to give 
you your liberty." 

The car had reached the outskirts of the city where the Intelligences lived. Their homes were 
spacious and rambling. The yards 
were scrupulously clean and they 
were surrounded by bright green 
he'dges and swimming pools which 
glittered in the moonlight. 

The individual dwellings were 
spaced well apart. Some were 
brightly lit with the Intelligences' 
frequent parties, and he saw beautiful, smiling women in shining 
dresses and confident men in evening clothes. Their cars were large 
and. gleamed dully. Everyone appeared gay and satisfied. Everyone 
wauled to be an Intelligence. 

But for every Intelligence, there 
were at least a thousand Norms 
and a hundred Morons! Statistics 
showed that every year the number 
of Intelligences decreased by five 
percent and the number of Morons 
increased by seven percent. Soon, 
he realized, Earth would be dominated by the feeble-minded. 



THE MENTAL COIN 



7' 



It was logical and obvious. Intelligences, in order to maintain 
their privileged standard of living* 
were having fewer and fewer children each year. Fewer children 
meant fewer expenses and more 
money for Mental Coins. On the 
other hand. Morons had nothing to 
lose — so they multiplied like rab
bits. ' 

"Where are you taking me 
now?" he asked the Sark. "Tell 
ine! I must know." 

The alien smiled wryly. "An ancient proverb of your race states 
that the best place to hide a leaf 
is in the depths of a forest. Obviously the best place to hide a 
man is in a large group of men. 
We're taking you to the Moron 
Barracks at the Sark Agricultural 
Project. Your group will not think 
of looking for you in such a place 
and at the end of a week, the 
Memo file will no longer record 
your knowledge and your life will 
no longer be in danger. Some of 
our men will be near you during 
every moment of your stay at the 
Barracks. They will protect you 
from your group, if any of its members should locate you. In the 
meantime, you will only have to 
wait and behave like a Moron." 

'"What's my name?" he asked 
suddenly. 

"At the Barracks, your name will 
be John Wilson." 

"My real name!" he insisted. 

The Sark shook his head. "We 
cannot afford to tell you anything 
about your actual identity. Surely 



the reason must be self-evident to 
you by now." 

"Here we are," the chauffeur interrupted. 

A neon sign flared in the dark 
night — Sark Agricultural Project. 

John studied the fields of Rater 
as they swayed gently in the faint 
moonlight. Acres and acres of 
Rater— an alien crop planted in 
Earth's soil. Morons cultivated and 
harvested the fruit for the few 
dozen Sarks on the nearby Reservation, dutifully carrying out a service rendered by their government 
in return for many gifts from the 
Sarks. 

The car stopped before a large, 
three-story Barracks. The building 
was dark, but a few Morons loitered on the large porch, staring 
vacantly at the luxurious vehicle. 

John Wilson descended in obedience to the Sark's nod, and shut 
the car door firmly behind him. 

He stood for several minutes in 
the swirling dust and watched the 
car until it was out of sight. Then 
he turned and walked toward the 
Barracks. 

V 

The hall was high-vaulted and 
somber of aspect. A few yards from 
the entrance he found a crowded 
cubicle inhabited by a sleepy-eyed, 
bored Norm. The clerk glanced up 
from his magazine with visible reluctance. 

"What's your trouble, dope?" he 
asked. 



FANTASTIC UNIVERSE 



Wilson reddened at the insult 
but decided not to argue. For his 
own protection, lie must behave like 
a Moron. 

"My name is John Wilson," he 
said. "What's my room number?" 

Tile Norm sneered, his lips forming a wide, silent snarl. "You must 
really be a low-grade Moron! 
Can't even remember your own 
room number!" He consulted a 
faded ledger. "Room thrcc-ohtwo," he affirmed. Bunk sixteen. 
Room thrcc-oh-two is on the third . 
floor." 

' The room was large. He counted 
two hundred Morons — men, women and children in the one crowded 
compartment. The cots were placed 
a few feet apart, and the only other 
articles of furniture were metal 
lockers which stood at the foot of 
each bed. 

He sat on the edge of cot number sixteen and removed his shoes. 
Instantly the man on the next cot 
stirred and rolled on his side to 
face him. 

"Hi, John," a voice whispered 
in the semi-darkness. 

"Hi," he replied, with friendly 
casualncss. 

"Where you been ?" the man 
demanded. 

"Seems like I've been everywhere," Wilson replied. He peered 
through the darkness until his eyes 
ached, but the man's features remained hidden by the gloom. 

The Sarks were efficient, he realized. He had been in the Barracks 
only a few minutes and already one 



of his guards had made himself 
known. He stud ied the shadowy 
forms on the other cots and wondered how many men had been 
assigned to guard him and if any 
of them were members of his own 
group awaiting a chance to kill 
him. 

Despite his unsavory status? he 
had no trouble sleeping. 

As soon as he awoke the next 
morning, he glanced at the adjacent 
cot. His new acquaintance was a 
thin, hawk-faced man with pale, 
unhealthy features. A tag on the 
man's cot read, Henry Parrel J'. 

The limp form stirred, stretched 
and yawned, his blood-shot, beady 
eyes focusing slowly. 

"Morning, John," he said, running his fingers through his sparse 
hair. 

"Good morning, Henry," Wilson answered. Farrell accompanied 
him to the mess hall. Breakfast 
consisted of eggs and bacon. The 
large room was filled to capacity 
and everyone talked at once. The 
clatter of silverware was deafening. 

After the meal, Wilson worked 
in the fields with the other men 
and women. "Farrell remained constantly at his side and occasionally 
started a conversation. 

"This seems like a lot of fruit 
for the few Sarks on the Reservation to eat," Wilson stated. 

The hawk-faced -man wiped 
beads of sweat from his forehead 
and explained briefly, "They tell 
me most of the fruit is useless — 



THE MENTAL COIN 



mere husks. They say the edible 
portion in each fruit is the size of 
a peanut." 

Acres and acres of the small 
Rater .trees stretched as far as the 
eye could see in every direction. 
The fruit was soft and brown, and 
no larger than a grapefruit. Ir was 
easy to pick, and carry a bag of 
Raters to a truck that waited for a 
complete load. It was so easy that 
even a Moron could do it. 

Another innovation of the Sarks. 
They had given Earth so many labor-saving devices and automatic 
equipment that hundreds of thousands of men and women had lost 
their jobs. 

The Sarks had created the deplorable situation, so, obviously 
they liad felt duty-bound to remedy 
it. They had remedied it by arranging jar a hundred men to do mental 
tasks that one machine could do 
just as effectively. 

The men who did this type of 
work were classed as Morons. They 
were fed with food raised by other 
Morons, dressed with clothes made 
by Morons, and housed in dwellings constructed by Morons. The 
Morons who were too stupid even 
for the smallest tasks were kept in 
Homey. They were fed, clothed and 
supported by income received by 
the Sarks from their sale of Mental 
Coins. 

But who had the right to complain? Morons on the Farm were 
typical of Morons everywhere. 
They worked only four hours a day 
and the work wasn't hard physi


73 

cally or mentally. No one held whips 
over their heads. No one shouted 
orders at them. Everyone worked 
as hard as he or she wanted to. 
The Morons on the Farm were 
well-fed. They had clothes and 
shelter, and the only things they 
lacked were common luxuries and 
privacy. 

The Sarks treated Earthmen better than, their own government 
could. Most people earned a relatively small income, and a small 
income meant a proportionately 
small Federal income tax. Governments couldn't afford to support the 
unemployed. So, the Sarks supported them. Who could complain? 
The Sarks were benefactors of mankind! 

During the first day, John successfully assumed the appearance 
of a Moron. It was easy to shuffle 
his fect, stare blankly and in general, behave like a zombie. 

On the morning of his second 
day at the Farm, he awoke feeling 
sluggish. He ate breakfast slowly, 
his muscles seemingly tired and his 
skull filled with an intangible 
heaviness that made thinking difficult. 

The sun beat unmercifully down 
on him as he. mechanically picked 
the Rater fruit. It burned his body 
with its brilliant glow and squeezed 
sweat from his flesh. He dragged 
a bag of fruit to a waiting truck 
and realized: he wasn't acting like 
a Moron anymore. He was becoming one! 

With sleepy, half -closed eyes, he 



74 FANTASTIC 

watched dully as a truck laden with 
fruit reached the highway and 
turned left. The fruit was grown 
for Sark consumption and the Sark 
Reservation was to the right. 

The highway reached a dead-end 
a few miles south and Wilson realized with a vague, confused uneasiness that the truck would run into 
an impasse which was . . . the City 
Reservoir. He tried to grasp the 
thought that eluded him but his 
mind was too dull. 

During the day, his thirst became unbearable. He dropped his 
fruit bag and shuffled toward a 
stream at the field's edge. 

Abruptly a stocky Norm supervisor blocked his way. "Contaminated water," the man explained 
briefly. "Can't you read signs? Unless you want your guts eaten out, 
wait until you get back lo the Barracks. You'll find plenty of water 
there." 

That night, John Wilson did not 
drink any water. 

Slowly, alertness crept into the 
neural patterns of his brain. He 
lay on his cot and listened lo the 
many discordant sounds that reached his cars through the odor of 
two hundred sweating bodies. Some 
of the Morons were conversing, 
their speech slow, hesitant and 
rambling from one unimportant 
Subject to another. Some couples 
whispered the eternal phrases of 
courtship. Some argued holly and 
at least three babies were crying 
at the same time. 

As the hours passed, the sounds 



UNIVERSE 

of the large room diminished until 
there was only the collective noise 
of two hundred people sleeping, 
snoring and turning restlessly on 
their cots. 

He rolled on his side and studied Farrell's motionless body. 
Would Farrell kdl him when the 
Memo was clear of his valuable in- formation? Was one of the many 
dark forms on the cots his ally? 
Could he be completely sure that 
his own group did not know where 
he was? 

He rose as quietly as possible, 
and put on his clothes. 

Outside the Barracks, he headed 
straight for the garages. He knew 
that the doors would be open, for 
cars and trucks no longer had ignition keys and locks but were operated by dial-studded buttons. And 
who would steal a car or truck when 
the police could use the Memo and 
present instant proof of his crime? 

He opened a garage door, and — 
heard a faint sound behind him. 
N He ducked, sidestepped and 
turned in one continuous flow of 
motion. But almost as quickly his 
attacker raised the knife for a second attempt. There was a faint 
swish, and a muttered curse. Then 
the moonlight sparkled on a metal 
blade poised for still another vicious slash. 

Wilson reached for the weapon 
in his tunic. But before he could 
draw it forth the man before him 
swayed and crumpled to the 
ground with a strangled sob. 

Something moved in the shadows 



THE MPNTAL COIN 



75 



beside the distant Barracks. The 
Sarks, then, had protected him ! 
"Thank you, Farrell," he whispered. 

He dragged the strange ally into 
the garage, knelt, and felt the 
man's heart. Clearly Farrell was a 
good shot, for the would-be assassin was dying. 

Carefully, he placed the limp 
form in a truck, slipped behind the 
wheel and pushed the accelerator to 
the floor-board. 

When he reached the highway 
and turned toward the Sark Reservation, the man on the seat beside hi in stirred and moaned 
faintly. 

Wilson glanced sharply at his 
attacker's pale face. He was not a 
young man. Apparently he was in 
his late forties, for strands of white 
mingled with the mass of black 
hair on his head and his face was 
heavily wrinkled. Beneath the wrinkles, however, his features were 
curiously soft and smooth. He was 
the kind of man who should have 
been smoking a pipe in front of a 
warm fireplace instead of sitting in 
a dirty truck with death at his 
elbow. 

"You're dying," Wilson told 
him. "You can't lose anything by 
telling me what I want to know." 

The form beside him mumbled 
incoherently. 

"If valuable information is recorded on my Memo file, why does- • 
n't someone contact the FBI and 
have them read the file?" 

"They can't . . . machines auto


matic. They only work when .someone d-dies. Even then . . . t-they 
sort information . . . only give relevant — " 

Abruptly, the man beside him 
sagged limply, his head falling forward, and the breath rattling in his 
throat. 

VI 

He had seen pictures of the 
Reservation but they had not prepared him for the alienness of the 
place. The grass was blue and scattered across the wide lawns were 
strange, angular bushes and trees 
with kaleidoscopic fruit. By comparison, the predominantly green 
plant growth of Karth seemed dull 
and monotonous. 

The buildings were clustered together as if seeking to draw 
strength from each other, 

He marveled at the alien construction. Tall spires jutted upward 
from delicate, fairy-like buildings 
and a labyrinth of lacy, slender 
bridges tied all the spires and 
fragile buildings together as if with 
a kind of magical, glowing twine. 
The structures were in all the hues 
of a rainbow and the glowing 
colors were in perfect harmony as 
if following some intricate, perfect 
master-plan. 

The lines of the buildings flotved 
in sheer abandonment of space 
economy. It was obvious that the 
buildings had been constructed not 
only for utility but also to give 
pleasure to the senses. By compar


76 FANTASTIC 

ison, the straight lines of Earth's 
skyscrapers and homes were like 
the creations of unimaginative, 
economy-crazed misers. 

Wilson reflected, No wonder 
some Eartbmen bate the Sarks. No 
race as conceited as ours wants to 
admit its own inferiority. 

He walked quickly through the 
main entrance of the Sarks' living 
quarters. He was not too surprised 
to find that Ranoffga and an Earthman were waiting patiently for him 
in a dimly-lit foyer. 

The Sark smiled faintly. 
"You've been expecting me?" 
Wilson asked. 

"There are cameras on the 
grounds," Ranoffga replied. "Every 
time an Earthman enters the Reservation, robotic equipment notifies me and presents me with a 
photograph of the visitor. Needless to say, I was surprised to see 
you. I thought you would prefer 
the obscurity of the Farm." Ranoffga's eyebrows rose slightly. 
"Why did you come here?" 

"I want to discuss some matters 
of vital importance with you." 

The Earthman seated beside the 
Sark grunted, and his thick lips 
twisted in a crooked grin. 

Wilson recognized him as the 
chauffeur he had studied with repugnance a few days before. "You 
never introduced us, Ranoffga," he 
chided. 

The Sark hesitated before replying in a strained voice, "This is 
Roden, my assistant." 

"The same Rodcn who enter


UNIVERSE 

tained mc while I was a prisoner ?" 
Wilson queried, needlessly. 

Rodin's eyes narrowed as he 
nodded his head affirmatively. 

"Follow me," Ranoffga said, his 
tone more persuasive than commanding. 

Wilson followed the Sark te a 
room on the second floor. The door 
opened automatically, although it 
was constructed with a manual lock. 
Ranoffga stepped into the darkness, manipulated a light switch, 
and gestured with a pale, trembling 
hand. 

Wilson's breath caught in his 
throat. It was the same room, lightflooded and blank-walled. As before the familiar energy screen 
shimmered silently, politely hiding 
the torture chamber beyond. 

"Please be seated," the Sark .said 
with quiet insistence. "We can talk 
freely here." 

Ranoffga sat stiffly" in the chair 
behind the small desk. Roden stood 
beside him, his muscular arms 
crossed on his chest, but poised and 
visibly impatient for action. 

"Will you explain now what you 
have been deliberately concealing 
from mc?" Wilson asked. 

The Sark smiled weakly. "Surely you must understand my position ! I cannot give you the information you seek until I am sure 
how much you know." 

Wilson laughed bitterly. "I 
know more than you may suspect. 
For instance, I know that your people do not cat Raters. The fruit is 
carried to reservoirs and mixed with 



THE MEN" 

the water. I know too that Sarks 
have drugged Earthmen and — towered everyone's intelligence!" 

The color drained visibly from 
Ranoffga's fa.ee. "Just how did you 
learn that ?" he demanded. 

"Deduction," Wilson replied. "I 
saw a truck of Raters headed toward the ^, City's reservoir. When I 
was on the Farm, I wanted to drink 
from a stream but was prevented 
from doing so with the excuse that 
the water was contaminated. More 
important, my mind was clear and 
active until I had spent some time 
on the Farm. I knew I'd been 
drugged simply because I couldn't 
think clearly. There were only two 
ways I could have been drugged — 
either through the food I ate or 
the water I drank. Everything pointed to the water — ■ " 

"We underestimated you," Ranoffga said, his tone unmistakably 
tinged with admiration. 

Wilson grinned. "That knowledge would be fatal to Sarks if it 
was known publicly, wouldn't it?" 

"Yes," Ranoffga conceded. 

"How much of what you told 
me before is ;he truth?" 

The Sark hesitated- — and then he 
shrugged. -"Everything except the 
status of what you discovered before. I told you it was unimportant, and that it didn't vitally 
concern Earthmen. That was the 
only lie. What you really discovered almost a week ago was what 
you recently deduced about the 
drugged water supply." 

Wilson nodded grimly. "Now, 



AL COIN" 77 

will you explain why your race has 
drugged an entire planet and makes 
no attempt to control it?" 

Ranoffga frowned. "I suppose 
you are entitled to an explanation. 
He paused an instant, then went on, 
choosing his words with care. "In 
the beginning, Mr. Wilson, our 
native world was a peaceful place. 
There was no violence there, no 
conflict, no. savage animals for pur 
ancestors to fear. Our world was 
peaceful and yet it "was barren and 
desolate. My race had to develop 
its intelligence in order to survive. 
Thousands of years ago, when our 
race was in its infancy, animal and 
vegetable life was scarce. At a very 
early age, my race had to learn how 
to breed animals and cultivate plant 
life. Our planet's climate was Weak 
and told. When we were still primitives, we had to build shelters. Do 
you understand?" 

Wilson nodded his head. He 
could imagine a bleak, barren 
world inhabited by frail creatures 
such as the Sarks. Such a race in 
such an environment would of necessity have to develop its intelligence and learn many tilings or 
die. 

"It's very simple," Ranoffga continued. "My race became intelligent 
because it had to. It was forced to 
develop much more aggressively 
than would have been normal if 
circumstances had been different. 
And yet, warfare and violence were 
unknown to us. My native world 
is very different than Earth. 

"Actually, we developed into a 



J 8 FANTASTIC 

race of — cowards, you might say. 
And yet we arc not exactly cowards. Remember, warfare and violence' were unknown to us! It was 
inevitable, therefore that when our 
planet was attacked by aliens we 
should have found ourselves defenseless. We did not even know 
the principles of war. War was as 
alien a concept to us as the concept 
of our sociology is to you. 

"We had no weapons or defenses against weapons. But our 
spaceships were faster than those 
of our attackers, and wc were able 
to flee. Those of us who escaped 
landed on Earth." 

The Sark's small body quivered, 
and tears dribbled down his smooth 
cheeks. "We have no desire to conquer Earth. We want only to be 
needed." 

Wilson almost dropped his cigarette. He stared hard at Ranoffga 
and repeated incredulously, "Needed?" 

"Yes. Our race psychology is 
such that we can never be conquerors or rulers. Our psychology may 
seem strange to you. But don't forget that human viciousness and 
aggressiveness seem strange to us. 
Since we cannot be aggressive we 
need a powerful ally to protect us 
from our enemies — " 

Wilson guessed the explanation, 
"And yon want Earth to light your 
wars and defend you because we're 
brutal?" 

"Exactly. Your race can fight. In 
a few years, our enemies will follow us across space. Our purpose 



UNIVERSE 

has been to develop the intelligence 
of a small selected portion of your 
race. Eventually fhey'will be capable of inventing the weapons necessary to fight our enemies. They 
will devise weapons that we are 
psychologically incapable of inventing. And the people of Earth will 
be our army. Your race is made 
for fighting." 

Wilson's head whirled. The 

Sarks didn't wish to harm or rule 
Earth. They wanted only to have 
Earth as their brave defender! 

"And so, you devised a way to 
make yourselves needed so we'd 
have to let you remain until we 
would be fully equipped to fight 
your battles?" he asked. 

"Exactly. We gave Earth our 
greatest inventions, the benefit of 
our superior science. That did not 
at first make Earth completely dependent on us, of course, but it 
did make Earth grateful and it 
paved the way. As you probably 
realize, Earth is now wholly dependent on us economically and 
sociologically. Earth needs our science and needs us to, support the 
unemployed that we ourselves 
caused. And your race needs our 
Mental Coins. Without them 
everyone on Earth would be a complete Moron! And, only we can 
make the Coins." 

Ranoffga continued with the 
painful expression of a man confessing a great sin. "A hundred 
and twenty years ago, wc gave every 
city fully automatic reservoir systems. We didn't build them our


THE MENTAL COIN 



selves. We gave men the benefits 
of our science and showed them 
how to construct the new plants. 
They cooperated because, once in 
operation, the automatic systems 
provided everyone with enough 
water and were infinitely more efficient than the old reservoirs." 

''And then you planted fields of 
Rater fruit to put in the water systems to make everyone less intelligent," Wilson said. 

"A depressant, yes," Ranoffga 
confirmed. "We developed the 
plant especially for that purpose. 
We waited ten years before we 
started using the drug. By that 
time, your FBI and your various 
police forces had grown tired of 
inspecting the automatic water systems. After they had been in use 
for ten years, no one was suspicious 
of them and everyone took them 
for granted." 

The Sark nodded thoughtfully. 
"For a hundred and ten years, your ( 
race has been drinking a powerful 
drug. At first, there was hardly any 
change in a man's intelligence after 
he drank the water. But gradually, 
year after year, we increased the 
dosage. Each year we made the 
drug a little stronger and each year 
your race became more stupid. The 
change in mass mentality was so 
gradual it attracted little attention." 

Wilson tossed his cigarette into 
a large waste basket at his elbow. 
"It's remarkable someone didn't 
discover the drug in the water," 
he said. 



"The drug is undetectable," 
Ranoffga explained. "Your scientists are not capable of noticing it. 
Also, we took many precautions 
against discovery. And naturally, as 
the drug became more powerful 
your race became less alert, and the 
risk of discovery continued to diminish." 

"Tell me about the Mental 
Coins," Roden suggested. 

"Oh, yes, our Coins were the 
final link. They are what made 
your race dependent on us. They 
counteract the drug. They don't actually raise a person's intelligence. 
They act solely as an antidote. But 
since we lowered your race's intelligence to such a low degree, 
they have the apparent effect of 
enormously increasing it. Man now 
needs the Coins to offset the depressant and raise his intelligence." 

"And," Wilson concluded for 
Ranoffga, "the Coins are the end 
of the cycle. Earthmen desperately 
need them. Only Sarks manufacture 
them and, therefore, your mission 
is accomplished : Earth needs your 
race and will have to let you stay. 
It will have to fight your wars!" 

Ranoffga smiled wanly. "True. 
Earth is, unknowingly, very cooperative. Your own race created the 
class distinction of Intelligences, 
Norms and Morons. The resultant, 
present class and economic systems 
make the Coins a necessity for all." 

"Parasftes," Wilson said, looking 
straight at Ranoffga. 

Roden stepped forward, his 
hands doubled into fists. "Shut up! 



So 



FANTASTIC UNIVERSE 



The Sarks have helped Earth, you 
ungrateful—" 

Ranoffga waved a restraining 
hand. 

"Sure they helped Earth," Wilson said. "The same way a tapeworm helps a fat man by sticking to 
his guts and — " 

"Don't feel that way, Mr. Wilson," the Sark pleaded. "We have 
helped your race! We've eliminated crime and war. We've increased 
the average life span and given 
Earth a better science. Earth is now 
much more powerf u 1 than i I was 
when we first canie and we've only 
started. In a few years, when we're 
better organized, we'll raise the 
standard of living and every Earthman will — " 

Wilson interrupted curtly, "Skip 
it. What happens to me now?" 

"We will once more remove 
your memory. A week later, when 
it is safe, we will set you at liberty. 
You will not be harmed in any 
way." 

Roden blurted, "I think we 
ought to kill him. He's too smart 
for his own good. He might figure 
out again how — " 

Wilson removed the weapon 
from his tunic and pressed the barrel against his head. "Suppose I 
kill myself now?" he asked. "That 
would ruin your plans, wouldn't 
it? My Memo file would be read 
and everyone would know ihe 
truth." 

"You won't kill yourself," Ranoffga stated calmly. "You are not 
the suicide type no matter how 



great the justification may appear 
to be. We're psychologically convinced of that — so convinced that 
we let you keep your little weapon. 
We knew you wouldn't kill yourself and we thought you could use 
it to defend yourself from your own 
group." 

Roden slowly crossed the room, 
his thick arms swinging loosely at 
his sides. "Are you going to come 
quietly?" he demanded. "You can't 
get away this time. We've posted 
guards all around this room." 

Escape was impossible, Wilson 
knew. Once before he had escaped, 
but he couldn't remember how. and 
he had no new ideas. 

He shuddered at the thought of 
losing his memory again — for a full 
week. A week from now the Sark 
conspiracy would still be a great 
invisible parasite clinging vampirishly to an Earth it sought only to 
use in a cruelly inhuman way. And 
no one would ever know, simply 
because he didn't have the nerve 
to kill himself. 

Unless . . . 

He pointed the gun at Roden. 

The huge man recoiled, and 
paled visibly. 

"Roden, you'll be famous," Wilson said. "You've heard everything 
that was said here and your Memo 
file will be talked about for years 
to come. You'll go down in the history books . . ." 

He pressed the trigger. There 
was an instant, crackling report, 
followed by a flickering on wall 
and ceiling. 



THE MENTAL COIN 



81 



Roden's scream ended sharply as 
his lifeless form struck the floor 
and rolled over twice. 

Ranoffga shrieked and covered 
his face with his hands. He cried 
for ten full minutes. It was final, 
conclusive proof that, as the alien 
had stated, his race was not familiar with violence. 

He recovered eventually, his eyes 
avoiding the still form on the 
floor. 

"What do you think Earth will 
do when it knows about us?" he 
said, in a thin, despairing whisper. 
"Will they—" 

Wilson shrugged his shoulders. 
"I don't know. They might make 
your race leave Earth. They might 
let you stay because, as you've stated, your race has become at least 
temporarily essential to the stability of our economic and sociological 
systems. But I'm quite sure no one 
will continue to drink drugged 
water, and your sale of Coins is 
going to dwindle to the vanishing 
point." 

He nodded. "Ranoffga, your 
race wants to be needed because it 
wants someone to fight its wars. 
But what you'll never understand 



is that Earthmen will probably defend your race even when they 
don't have to. Our race is young 
and adventurous. We're eager for 
action and we do like to wave flags 
and fight for a cause. Any cause 
will do, just so long as it seems a 
reasonably good one. We've always 
looked for excuses to fight. 

"Frankly, your race is a little 
crazy and Earthmen are just as 
crazy, but in a different way. We 
don't like to see anyone pushed 
around. Personally, if you gave us 
ships and weapons as good as the 
ones your enemies have, I'd be one 
of the first to fight for you!" 

Hope glimmered on the Sark's 
face. 

Wilson walked to a window. On 
the distant highway, a stream of 
police cars approached the Reservation, their headlights like bruised 
eaglets' eyes burning with indignation, the wail of their sirens like 
the protestations of an angry race. 

The Sarks would not struggle or 
resist. They didn't know how to 
fight. And, Earth would not be 
brutal toward the cowardly race. 
The next few months would be very 
interesting . . . 



Saturday's child has jar to go. But Wednesday' s 

child must follow the Unknown's relentless bidding 
arid its journey — may make the universe reel, 

WEDNESDAY'S CHILD 

by WILLIAM TENN 



In the next issue 



jukebox 

by . . . Arthur Sellings 



It's a tragic mistake to shun a 
romantic experience. Tt may he 
youth's last desperate dream on 
a long-forgotten sound track. 



He slid off his stool and, taking 
his drink with him, crossed over 
to the jukebox. For a moment he 
regarded the list of tune titles with 
a dull eye. Then he jabbed his 
choice, and returned to the bar. 
But this time he took up a stool 
next to the redhead he had been 
watching on and off for the past 
five minutes. The needle engaged 
and the music broke out just as he 
sat down. 

The redhead turned vaguely at 
the sound. He caught her eye. 

"My favorite tune," he lied smilingly. 

Her eyebrows lifted faintly. 

"That trumpet," he said, "that's 
music, isn't it?" 

She gave a disinterested movement of the shoulders and turned 
away. 

What a life! he thought, and 
found himself suddenly yearning 
towards domesticity, certainty, 
monogamy — things he'd always 
frantically fled from. Freedom, he 
reflected grayly, was all very well. 
But freedom for what? To go on 
playing the small-town Don Juan 
when you knew you were getting 



Not only is Arthur Sellings a subtle and brilliant -writer in the realm of 
whimsical fantasy. He cart take a ghost — any kind of ghost — and turn it, 
him or her into such an amazing byproduct of the scientific mind and method 
that the most hard-headed skeptic would be brought up short. This is in all 
respects a true science-fiction yarn. But there is something ghostly about it as 
well, and if it fails to haunt you unforgettably it can only mean that yuu have 
been deliberately led astray by the Watchers from beyond the farthest stars. 



JUKEBOX 



past the appropriate age for it? To 
make inane small talk, frame the 
hackneyed gestures of a quite synIhdic charm? To be rebuffed— and 
when you weren't, to find it ending 
up sordid, expensive, monotonous? 

He smiled bitterly. That was the 
word for it, wasn't it? Even marriage couldn't be as monotonous as 
this life, surely. With the years you 
COuld learn new things about a 
wife. Little, trifling things, perhaps, 
but they'd be intimate, human. 
With these chance affairs you onlygot the surface. And the surfaces 
were all the same. There must have 
been changes of style, he told himself, but it was - always from one 
pattern to another, a current model 
of face and hairdo and phrase, like 
so many automobiles. Anyway, on 
retrospect, they all seemed exactly 
the same — vapid, trite, and completely characterless. He quoted to 
himself: 

When 1 am formulated — 

— sprawling on a pin, 
Then how should I begin 
To spit out all the buftends 

of my days and ways? 
And how should I presume? 

Hell! he thought, how out of 
character can a man get? It is / 
who am stereotyped, by an act of 
will — or weakness. I cover the 
gentle soul of a man of sensibility 
with a stucco and foreign bravado. 

/ am an egotist, he told himself, 
meeting his image in a mirror. He 
turned away from its look of con


demnation. / am also slightly drunk. 

But his thoughts meandered on. 
If I am stereotyped, should I wonder that I meet only stereotyped 
women ? Or that I am rebuffed by 
those of character? He surveyed the 
back of the redhead with renewed 
interest. 

Her hair was cropped short, but 
tidily, showing a slender neck of 
a creaminess that he found quite 
fascinating. She had on a pink suit. 
Definitely a woman of character, 
he told himself. Not for this one 
the hackneyed green that so many 
redheads affected. And the way her 
head was poised was interesting, 
even if its direction — away from 
him — was discouraging. 

I must address myself to her, he 
thought, with becoming intelligence. I will make a Significant Remark. But the most significant 
remark he could think up on the 
spur of the moment was "What'll 
you have?" But she was still nursing the long drink she'd had when 
he'd come into the bar. Then — 
what? Ah — 

How about the- lights, the bronzecolored streaks of fire in the night 
sky that he had seen on 'his way 
here ? They had been visible for 
only a second or two, right overhead, and had then blinked out. 
A few other people in the street 
had noticed them. Someone had 
said, Flying Sdncers, and others had 
laughed. 

He dismissed the notion with a 
shrug. What could be more commonplace or boring? Instead, he 



84 FANTASTIC 

leaned closer to the redhead's back 
and said, "If you don't like the 
record I'll be glad to turn it off." 

She ■ half -turned, her shoulders 
eloquent of annoyance. 

"Please — " he said. "Don't mind 
my talking to you. It's just that I'm 
lonely, you see, and — " 

He cursed to find his lips framing old. and weary words. But she 
turned, fully now, a slight smile 
on her lipf. 

"In fact," he went on quickly, "I 
don't like that record at all. It was 
just something to say, you know 
how it is," 

"Do I?" she said, tilting her 
head. Then, smiling more certainly, 
"Perhaps I do. Anyway, I don't like 
the record, cither." 

He made to get up to turn it off. 
"It doesn't matter," she said. 
"It's just finishing." 

"What kind of music do you 
lrke?" he asked, turning back. 

"Oh," she said, "Vivaldi — " 
] "Vivaldi?" he said, in a kind of 
wonder. ' 

"Why, is that something remarkable?" she said. 

"No-o. Yes. It certainly is," he 
stuttered, quite confused by meeting 
a girl in a bar, just like that, who 
•actually liked Vivaldi. A girl, moreover, who was — well, really almost 
beaut i jut. 

Anything can happen now, he 
thought. 
It did. 

Total darkness fell upon the 
world. 

He slid off his stool and, taking 



UNIVERSE 

his drink with him, crossed over 
to the jukebox. He jabbed his 
choice, then returned to the bar, 
next to the redhead. The needle 
engaged, a trumpet blared out . . . 

That turn! Why had he chosen 
it again? He made to jump up to 
cut it off. But somehow he couldn't. 
He just couldn't. 

The redhead turned vaguely at 
the sound. He caught her eye. 

I'm sorry, he tried to say. / didn't want to put it on again. Yon 
must believe me — 

"My favorite tune," he said, 
smiling. 

Her eyebrows lifted faintly. 
Well, it did bring us together, 
he tried to apoIogi2e. Perhaps that's 
why I wanted to bear H again. But 
the words refused to come. Instead, 
he said, "That trumpet. That's 
music, isn't it?" 

He writhed to hear himself repeating the stupid, and by now 
quite unnecessary words. At least, 
he would have writhed if he had 
been able to. 

What has happened to me? he 
thought. Was it all just too good 
to be true, this miracle of a 'chance 
meeting? But it is true. It happened — 

Then why had it stopped? Why 
was he doing it all over again 
against his will? Saying things he 
hadn't the slightest wish to say 
again, yet at the same time thinking thoughts that he was unable 
to express? 

He felt a reptilian fear creep 
into his heart as frantic reasoning 



touched a chord from 
and old stories. What kind of creatures were they that, when they 
tried to speak, couldn't? 
Ghosts — 

Then he was a ghost? But, no, 
he was alive. He was, wasn't he? 
Anyway, when ghosts couldn't 
speak the messages they ached to 
deliver, they couldn't. He could 
speak. It was only that he couldn't 
say the right things, but only repeat words out of an inane and distasteful script. But wait — perhaps . . . 

Worth trying, anyway. 

He leaned closer to her and said, 
"If you don't like the record I'll 
be glad to turn it off." 

Having by heaven-kntw-what 
compulsion to speak the words, he 
couldn't pursue the desperate train 
of his thoughts. But now, as she 
turned, smiling slightly, he didn't 
want to any more. She was smiling, 
and he was talking to her, and she 
was listening. And he was in a 
state of wonder again, not at the 
curious lapse that had befallen him, 
but at the sheer miracle of this 
meeting. 

And to the back of his mind 
now, reassuring him, came the 
thought that the perfect surprise 
of it had put him in * whirl for a 
moment. Yes, of course ! It had 
somehow knocked him into a state 
of timelcssncss for a second, so 
that it was happening for the first 
time yet seeming as if it had already happened, because it was the 
kind of meeting he had always 



jukebox 85 

fiildhood dreamed of but had never dared 
hope to make. 

And now he had made it, It 

might be disturbing, this feeling of 
excitement and strangeness, but was 
it really anything to wonder at? 
Wouldn't it be more surprising if 
he had experienced no excitement 
at all? 

"Well, is that something remarkable?" she said. 

"No-o. Yes. It certainly is," he 
found himself saying. 

That's right, he 'remembered, 
that was when he had first felt 
confused. It was the strangeness 
and excitement which must have 
caused the whirl, the feeling of 
d'eja vif. But he didn't feci confused 
now. Now he was going on. Now 
they were going on. They would 
talk, this beautiful stranger and 
himself, of music, of Vivaldi, of— 
oh, how much more ! They would 
reveal new facets of themselves to 
each other with every hour together. And there would surely be 
many hours together. The two of 
them would — 

Darkness fell, sharp and absolute, a darkness of sight and mind 
together. 



He SLID from his stool . . . 
' Memory returned. He wanted to 
scream, but he couldn't. It was starting all over again. What was happening to him? He had to find 
out, so :hat he could stop it. Where 
had he been? Death? ghosthood — 
ah, yes. 

A punishment, was that what it 



86 



FANTASTIC UN1VERSK 



was? Had this meeting been conjured up in some back room of the 
Fates, solely to cheat him? To 
bring him to the brink of truth 
after all these years of falsity, only 
to snatch it away from him again 
and again? 

He laughed hollowly to himself. 
What nonsense was he thinking? 
Wasn't such primitive anthropomorphic myth-truckling as stupid 
as to think himself a ghost? Something fantastic had happened to 
him, certainly. But to think of being punished by personalized and 
vindictive Fates was something 
right out of the archetypal subconscious — the most elemental kind of 
guilt complex imaginable. Anyway, 
that, like ghost hood, presupposed 
his being dead, didn't it? Aud 
again, he wasn't — was he? He 
stopped laughing. He had dismissed the thought before, but now 
it returned to torment him. Was 
he? Dead? 

But surely not, he thought. He 
didn't suffer from a weak heart or 
anything similar that could bring 
sudden death. For one wild moment he wondered if this might 
not be some horrible kind of 
D.T.'s. But no, he thought, he didn't drink that heavily. 

Then — what had happened ? 

A war? But there wasn't a war 
on. A sudden undeclared attack, 
then? Could that be it? 

But the words he had to say 
interrupted his thoughts again — the 
words and the fascination of the 
girl s face turned to his once more. 



His hopes rose afresh — only to be 
dashed again in darkness. 

The next time round he told 
himself, "Yes, that's it. The lights 
in the iky. He had dismissed them 
as no more than some new kind 
of jet or something equally commonplace. But perhaps it had been 
a hostile plane and it had dropped 
a bomb and — 

But almost instantly the thought 
withered and died. That still couldn't explain this. 

Faced with the unknown, the 
unknoivn unknown, he went on 
desperately trying to relate it to the 
familiar, the chronicled unknown. 
He thought he had succeeded when 
he decided that it was witchcraft, 
that this girl, this unlikely girl in 
an unlikely place, was an agent of 
darkness. 

She must be the link in all this, 
he told himself— its cause or its 
agent. Two remarkable events like 
this, the one seemingly wonderful, 
the other undeniably horrible, 
couldn't but be connected. 

He ached to look into her eyes, 
to sec if he could read the answer 
there. Perhaps he would see in 
them a mockery that he had been 
too enchanted to see before. 

But he had to wait until the 
moment came round again for her 
to turn, wait what seemed an age 
while the noise of the trumpet 
blared insanely from the jukebox. 

When she at last turned, a halfsinile on her lips, and while he 
automatically said his lines, he 
scrutinized her face, her eyes. But 



JUKEBOX 



87 



she was smiling, and he was smiling, and there was no answer at 
all there . . . 

The sixth time round he wondered hysterically if the hateful 
trumpet playing frpm the juktbox 
was, in fact, the Last Trump. But 
the incongruity of the thought 
checked the hysteria. 

The next time round, though, 
he reflected that it wasn't so incongruous. Why shouldn't the Last 
Trump be blown that way? If it 
was going to sound over a mechanized world why shouldn't // be 
mechanized, too, a million-throated 
trump set in motion by a million 
unwitting fingers? 

But that, he realized dully, still 
didn't explain it. 

By the ninth time round— or was 
it the tenth? — he began to understand, or think he did. 

As he went through his act he 
trained his gaze about him. It was 
hellishly difficult, because his every 
bodily movement was controlled, 
even to the eyeballs. But seeing, he 
discovered, was more and less than 
optical focus. Noticing was also an 
ingredient. Within severe limits he 
found that he could observe things 
he had been too preoccupied to notice before. 

The first thing he managed to 
discern was that the bar seemed to 
end in a circle about him. About 
him and the girl, that was. And 
the jukebox. Then that it was more 
than a circle. It was a sphere, cutting them off in a tiny universe of 
their own. 



The next time round he tried 
again. Only this time he strained 
every nerve to look — outside. 

If before it had been difficult, 
now it was agonizing. For, superimposed upon the incontestability of 
the force that dictated his actions, 
was a different quality in what lay 
beyond — a quality as of enli rely 
different physical laws operating. 

But he managed at last to distinguish movement out there. 
Movement of vast and shadowy 
shapes, shadowy yet seeming at the 
same time to shed an aura of somber light. At intervals he saw them 
bending over the little universe that 
contained him and the girl. And 
the truth began to dawn on him. 

But frantically he thrust the 
thought away. He must have proof, 
he told himself — then tried to 
thrust that thought away too. As if 
proof mattered now, when there 
was nothing he or the girl or anyone else could do about it! But he 
had to be sure. 

Twice round again and he was 
quite sure. For by then he had bad 
a chance to check the successive dispositions of the dark giants outside. 
And they weren't the same each 
time. Once one seemed to bend very 
close, and something like a cloudy 
but gently glowing eye seemed to 
be peering in at them. 

And that was proof enough. 

Only in here, in this minute segment of his own world, was everything fixed and cyclic. Physically, 
anyway. His thoughts were independent, even if they couldn't alter 



88 



FANTASTIC UNIVERSE 



his movements by the flicker of an 
eyelash. 

So those flashes in the sky bad 
meant something. They must have 
been the visible sign of some visitor 
to Earth. And they had taken samples — human samples. With a little 
bit of human environment clinging 
to them, just as a human explorer 
might bring back from the tropics 
a strange insect in its nest. 

These great dark beings had 
reached down and scooped thern 
up, and by some superior science 
had frozen their little charade, so 
that it repeated itself over and 
over again. For their pleasure or 
their study, whichever, it made no 
difference. 

He laughed wryly to himself at 
the thought of what the dark 
giants would make of what they 
saw — a man, a woman, a segment 
of bar, a jukebox. What construction would they make — what reconstruction of a social order? Perhaps, though, they had taken other 
samples. Perhaps from all of them 
they might be able to piece together a jigsaw picture of Earth's 
civilization as they studied the samples at their leisure, on board their 
ship or back on their own world, 
wherever they were now. 

A sudden hopeful thought came 
to him. Perhaps they were only on 
probation. Perhaps they had to repeat their little act over and over 
again so that the giants could be 
sure that they — the humans — were 
not dangerous. Perhaps just once 
more round and they would be 



satisfied and let him and the girl 
out from their tantalizing prison. 
With hope came aching impatience. 
Then — 

"It doesn't matter," she was saying. "It's just finishing." 

And in her voice was there not 
something — ?" 

"What kind of music do you 
like?*' he said. 

And it was in bis, too. 

And then he knew for sure — all 
of it. And he was filled with a 
black and hopeless rage. This wasn't just some trick with time, then. 
If it were he would not only be 
performing the same acts over and 
over. His thoughts would surely 
be the same, too, because it would 
be fresh each time. But it was only 
the physical actions that had been 
frozen. 

"Oh," she said, "Vivaldi — " 
There it was again, more pronounced now and quite unmistakable. There was a small but definite 
scratchiness in her voice. Her outline, too, seemed to waver ever so 
slightly at the edges. This was final 
proof. 

Men bring back from remote 
parts of the world moving pictures 
of the natives, recordings of their 
speech. But a superior species 
would have superior techniques, 
more complete ones. Absolutely 
complete ones. Not just light and 
sound, but everything. 

And now he was filled with a 
bitter jealousy of his own self back 
on Earth. The thought of what he 
and the redhead might have done 



JUKEBOX 

together made him choke with frust ration, for now he would never 
know. Nor would lie be able to 
experience anything of it. He 
sought consolation in the reflection 
that whatever had happened between them on Earth was probably over and done with long since, 
the originals of both the redhead 
and himself skeletons by now — for 
there was no knowing what interval elapsed during the blacknesses 
in between the repetitions of their 



8 9 



But there was little consolation 
in the thought. He could have wept 
at the cruelty of it. Why, he didn't 
even know her name, would never 
know it, or anything more about 
her. They would go on and on, 
over and over again, looking at 
each other, talking to each other, 
as the inane script they had forged 
for themselves that fated and far


away night on Earth demanded. 
They would never be closer to each 
other than that. All they would 
have would be their thoughts, separate and incommunicable. 

He wondered again at that freedom of thought, and cursed it. 
Perhaps the dark giants didn't even 
know, when they recorded matter 
and event, speech and gesture, that 
a replica of the mind came over 
with it too, helplessly trapped in the 
interstices of the recording. 

Anyway, there was no way of 
telling them. He and the redhead 
were utterly doomed, nothing more 
now than a recording on some vast 
celestial jukebox. And there could 
only be one faint and distant chance 
of release. That one day, worn out, 
they might be thrown away onto 
some vast celestial scrapheap. 

He would pray for that day . . . 
and the long night beyond it. 




In a brilliant writer's chill "Utopia" idiots 

with enlarged heads and wasted bodies chart the 

destinies of men, and the future's dark unfurling. 

THE MINORITY REPORT 

By PHILIP K. DICK 



consultant 
diagnostician 

by . . . F. B. Brynitig 



Joan Buckley could see deep into 
the minds of desperate, tormented 
people. But her own problems were 
unique on the round green Earth. 



pi-AR , ,", Again and again, as 
his questions approached the subject of fire, there came the blue 
signal, Fear. 

Dr. James Ballantine contemplated the small ground-glass panel in 
the base of his ornate inkstand until the word, in blue letters, flicked 
out. 

"Do you mind ?" he asked his 
patient, a thin, middle-aged spinster, as he took a cigarette case 
from his pocket. 

"No — " she replied, a trifle hesitantly. "No — of course not." 

The word Fear flashed on and 
off the tiny screen. 

Dr. Ballantine was clumsy with 
his matches. Somehow, after he 
had lighted his cigarette, the single 
match ignited the heads of all the 
others in the box. There was a 
fierce, hissing flare . . . 

With a cry the patient jumped 
to her feet, upsetting her chair, to 
stand before him white and 
shaken. 

Unperturbed by either the burning box of matches or his patient's 
reaction, the psychiatrist glanced at 
the screen on which the word Fear 



IF'f like to think of F. B. Bryning as silling with his typewriter humming before 
him—surely an Australian lypcwriter must be as murmurous as the bet-laden 
glades of "Down Under" when animated by such story-gathering talents — and 
writing continuously for hours. The time element is of vital importance, for 
only then can we be sure that he will continue to delight us with sequels to 
his amazing atomic age story about the mutant child of Dr. Elizabeth Buckley 
as entertaining as this — and as super-charged with totally unexpected thnlh. 



90 



CONSULTANT DIAONOSTICIAN 



91 



wji flashing on and off rapidly to 
denote high intensity. As he 
watched the flashing slowed down 
and the word remained steady for 
a few seconds before it disappeared. 

"Calmly Dr. Ballantine pressed 
the burning matchbox into his ashtray and smothered the flames. 
Then he got up, smiling, and went 
around his desk to pick up his patient's chair. 

"Please sit down again, Miss 
Corbett," he said, reassuringly. 
"And please forgive my apparent, 
carelessness. I have to confess that 
that little bit of fireworks was purposely started and under control 
all the time. There was nothing 
in it to harm cither you or me. It 
was a trick of mine to help confirm ari opinion I have on your 
problem." 

Gingerly, Miss Corbett seated 
herself again, and he returned to 
his own chair. 

"When was it, Miss Corbett — 
probably in your childhood — that 
you had some terrifying experience 
with lire?" 

Back into the screen came the 
blue word Fear. 

"I think," he continued, as the 
patient still hesitated, "that some 
such experience is at the bottom 
of your neurosis. Will you please 
tell me about that time when you 
nearly lost your life — or you lost 
something or someone dear to you 
as a result of fire?" 

Her troubled gaze remained 
upon him, but she did not answer. 



"You needn't be afraid of it any 
longer," he went on persuasively, 
smiling into her eyes, "you realize 
now, I'm sure, that it has been 
creeping along behind you all 
these years, and you have not dared 
to look at it. If you turn and face 
it you will find it will lose its 
power over you. So please tell me." 

Hate, in yellow letters, came up 
on the screen. 

"It is true — what you say," said 
the patient, tensely. "But I never 
talk about it." 

"Of course not," agreed the psychiatrist. "It can be too painful. As 
we all do, you prefer to talk of 
plcasanter things. But that doesn't 
get rid of it. It gets worse, and 
begins to hurt of its own accord 
again. So it must be treated — al-, 
though the treatment itself may 
be painful for a time. But eventually the pain will recede, and 
with it the power of that experience to hurt you. So I must ask 
you to put up with the pain of 
bringing it out into the light, where 
I can face it with you." 

Again came the yellow word 
Hate as the patient strove within 
herself. 

"I — I'll tell you," she agreed, 
witli an effort. "It was when I was 
five years old. My mother . . ."■ 

Dr. Ballantine showed his 
patient out and returned through 
the empty waiting room. As he 
entered his own room again a 
heavy curtain opposite the door was 
pulled back, and out stepped a 



92 FANTASTIC 

girl of striking aspect, in a white 
medical smock. 

She was in her early twenties, 
slight and straight, and, it seemed, 
charged with vitality. Her hair, 
eyebrows, and lashes were the 
frosty white, and her skin the delicate pink of the albino which, except for her eyes, she was. Her 
irises were neither the pink nor the 
very pale blue typical of the albino, 
but very dark brown — almost 
black. 

"That was a great help, Joan," 
said Ballantine, holding for her the 
chair vacated by the patient. "Once 
again we got to the heart of a 
problem in a fraction of the time 
I would have needed by myself." 

She smiled gratefully and spoke 
a soundless, sibilant "Thank you," 
as he moved around the desk to 
his own chair. 

"I am more than ever convinced 
that the ideal employment for your 
extra-sensory perception is in psychiatry. "With that and your alreadyestablished practice as consulting 
diagnostician in pathology, you 
should have a splendid career 
ahead of you." 

The delicate pink of her neck 
and cheek bloomed a trifle deeper 
as she uttered again the whispered 
"Thank you." Yet so precisely 
were her lip movements made, and 
so expressive her features, that no 
one could have had any difficulty 
in understanding her. She continued in like manner, rather more 
slowly than normal conversation. 



UNIVERSE 

clearly rendering her vowel-less 
pharyngeal speech. 

"Glad to help, Uncle Jim." She 
smiled mischievously. "And your 
kind words 'offset my inferiority . 
complex at having no voice." 

Ballantine laughed with her, 
"You haven't much of that complex left, my dear, to talk of it like 
that." 

"I claim the deficiency as an extra qualification for a psychiatrist. 
It ought to give most patients a 
feeling of superiority over me — or 
enlist compassion — so I should get 
more quickly into sympathetic rapport with them!" 

"Good girl! You make me wish 
1 had a wart on my nose, of a 
squint, for the same purpose. I'm 
quite sincere." 

Head on one side, she gave him 
an impish, appraising look. "Seems 
hardly necessary!" she teased, and 
they grinned companionably at one 
another. "Now, about Miss Corbett— " 

"Before we start," interposed 
Ballantine. "I was puzzled at your 
registering Hate instead of Fear 
when I asked her about that terrifying experience with fire. Why did 
she hate me for mentioning that, 
and forget her fear? Or did you 
touch the wrong key?" 

Dr. Joan Buckley shook her 
snow-white head. 

"Hate it was — but not hate of 
you. Hate of that particular fire. 
No doubt she fears fire in general, 
but because that particular fire 
maimed and tortured her mother, 



CONSULTANT DIAGNOSTICIAN" 



her hate far exceeds her fear when 
she thinks of it?" 

Ballantme pondered for a moment. "You may be right. But how 
can you be sure it was hatred of 
fire and not of me, for broaching 
that very painful subject?" 

""Because" I, too, experienced hate 
during those moments. Her feeling 
was unbelievably intense. With 
such intensity I have to share the 
emotion unless I deliberately resist 
it." 

"Does that happen often?" 

"With any very strongly-felt 
emotion — any mass hysteria — yes. 
But I have learned— from mother 
mainly, I think — to resist when I 
want to. But I never have any 
doubt about the object of the emotion, or what causes it." 
-* When Joan Buckley reached her 
penthouse home on the roof of the 
six-story Arthur Buckley Plant Deve topmen t Insti tut-e, she immediately ran to her mother's arms, 
and clung there. 

Dr. Elizabeth Buckley"" knew just 
what to do. She embraced her 
daughter and held her close. As if 
by a kind of symbiosis, the daughter derived a calmness, a sedation 
of the nerves, and recuperation. To 
the mother came a sense of rest 
also, and a shared exaltation as 
she felt Joan becoming soothed and 
eager to assist Dr. Ballantine to an 
even more remarkable extent. 

After twenty-three years of 
widowhood Elizabeth Buckley was 
growing old gracefully. Her tall 
figure was still straight and erect, 



her hair still more auburn than 
gray. The few lines on her clear 
skin were those engraved by the 
pleasurable" effort of concentration 
upon her chosen work as a scientist, and the satisfaction of achievements beyond the ordinary in 
creative work. Heightening that 
satisfaction was the knowledge that 
she possessed the affection and approbation of her colleagues — and 
the joy which came to her through 
sharing the accomplishments of her 
daughter. 

Her grief at the one great catastrophe in her life — the death of 
her husband, at the height of his 
career, from exposure to the 
radioactive forces with which he 
had been working to develop new 
plant mutations — had been tempered by three abiding factors. 

The first was her deep pride in 
his achievements and his memory. 
The second was her own success 
and self-fulfilment in carrying on 
his work as Director of the Arthur 
Buckley Plant Development Institute. The third was her signal victory in her gamble with life in 
bearing her husband's mutant child 
— the sepia-eyed, albinoid, and 
voiceless daughter who yet possessed, in addition to an intelligence worthy of her parents, a 
singular telepathic sense. 

Elizabeth Buckley's devotion to 
the task of caring for and training 
her peculiarly handicapped yet 
uniquely gifted daughter had been 
all-absorbing. It had meant much 
physical isolation for them both, 



94 FANTASTIC 

to shield the too-receptive child 
from random contacts which might 
have led to mental and emotional 
derangement. 

It had meant painstaking study 
of the processes of speech and 
much patient labor to teach the 
baby girl to speak normally in all 
but vocalized vowel sounds. This 
the child had learned to do with 
conspicuous success, almost entirely offsetting her lack of vocal 
cords. 

It had meant for Elizabeth 
Buckley herself the development of 
an exceptionally high degree of 
self-control in all things, so that 
her moments of fear, worry, 
anxiety, anger, or high excitement 
would not be unbalancing to the 
infant telcpath. 

She had had to train herself to 
be ready for the frequent occasions 
when the child, jittery from her 
"reception" of some nerve-jangling 
contact, would run to her arms as 
a refuge. There she would cling, 
enveloped in an "aura," as it were, 
of comforting, warm affection, of 
calm confidence, and strength. 

[Elizabeth. .Buckley had found 
that this physical and emotional 
embrace, which had be^n initiated 
by the child herself in the first few 
hours of her life, with her head 
pressed into her mother's bosom, 
had the effect of discharging 
Joan's overwrought emotions, and 
of restoring her menial and emotional vigor. 

And she had found that even in 
a crowded room, when physical 



UNIVERSE 

isolation was impossible tJie child 
could be substantially "insulated" 
from the babel of emotional impulses surrounding, her in just this 
way. ^ 

When the white head was lifted 
from her breast and laid on her 
shoulder, Elizabeth Ruckley stroked 
Joan's silken hair. 

"A trying day, dear?" she 
asked. 

"A "good day, really, Mother." 
Joan sat up so that her lips could 
be read. "We made progress on 
all our cases." 

"You seem more tired than 
usual." 

"Perhaps. Of course I have to 
suffer with each patient to some 
extent. I know now how to sample' 
their sensations, and resist them 
before I get too much. But a full 
day of it is a bit wearing." 

"Would it help, do you think, 
if you limited more strictly the 
number of patients you monitor in 
a day — or how involved you become emotionally with each individual case?" 

Joan Buckley shrugged. "Perhaps 
I need just to hold on — and increase my capacity to resist," she 
said. "I haven't been overwhelmed 
by anyone else's emotions in a long 
time. I think it may be very much 
like the weariness of aching muscles growing stronger with exercise." -< 

"I hope so. No doubt you can 
judge best, darling. But be sure to 
take care." 

"I shall, Mother. Tonight I'm 



CONSULTANT DIAGNOSTICIAN 



OS 



going to bed early. In the morning 
Uncle Jim is taking me to see a 
patient at Broadacres Mental Hospital before city consultations." 

Elizabeth Buckley nodded. c "Will 
you invite bira to have dinner with 
us tomorrow evening?" she said. 
"I've a few questions I'd like to 
ask him." 

' 'Oh , Mother ! You shouldn' t 
fuss over me like that. I'm old 
enough now — " 

"Of course you are!" Dr. Elizabeth Buckley smiled fondly. "And 
a Doctor of Medicine to boot. But 
I want to talk' to him all the same." 

"This patient," explained Dr. 
Ballantine as they were driven towards Broadacres next morning, 
"has us baffled for the time being. 
His name is George Rogers and he 
is about thirty-five years old. He 
appears to be a more or less typical 
paranoid — with a pronounced persecution complex, delusions of 
grandeur, and a readiness to score 
off anyone in an 'inferior' situation 
to himself, such as the weaker and 
more timid patients. He parades a 
lofty contempt for the hospital attendants, whom he treats as menials, and so on." 

"Any — violence ?" Joan asked. 

"Rarely," replied Ballantine, 
frowning. "He will occasionally 
Lake advantage of a turned back 
to get in a furtive punch or a kick. 
And he keeps a sharp eye out for 
opportunities of escape. At times 
you would think him a case of reaction against a tyrannical father — 



transferring the father-hatred to 
every other man in authority over 
him for the time being — policemen, employer, doctor, and so on. 
He adopts this attitude in particular towards his doctors, who are 
Dr. Wilson, Superintendent of 
Broadacres, and, in consultation, 
myself." 

"So I, who am not a man, 
might — ?" Joan let the question 
trail off. 

"Perhaps," agreed Ballaniine. 
"But I really had in mind your 
working unseen behind a screen 
in Dr. Wilson's room, and noting 
his reactions in ' shorthand. We 
don ' (. w an t to bri n g him to my 
rooms yet, and our electrical signaling screen is a bit too cumbersome to uproot and rig up here. 
We must, by the way, get a portable outfit before long." 

"Yuu know best about that," 
said Joan. "But what is the precise 
difficulty? Where does the 'typical 
paranoid' diagnosis break down?" 

"It doesn't, really. It's just that 
we can't get past the main hurdle 
in order to begin therapy. We are 
more and more certain that fatherhatred is at the bottom of his troubles, because whenever his father 
is mentioned he becomes intensely 
ar^gry. He quivers with rage and 
shouts 'Don't mention my father! 
How dare you speak of my 
father!' And he becomes so agitated that we can't get any 
further." 

"And you'd like me to be present when he does that again?" 



FANTASTIC UNIVERSE 



"Yes. Everything seems to go 
up at that point in an uncontrollable fury that renders him 
blanched and shaking, with eyes 
flaming fiercely ... I have told 
Dr. Wilson what you can do and 
I am just hoping you can sense in 
that outburst of his something that 
will give us the clue we need." 

Right from the beginning, however, the" doctor's little scheme 
went astray. Joan had just been 
introduced to Dr. Wilson in his 
office when a not-too-experienced 
attendant brought the patient 
straight in, through a door in the 
wall behind the superintendent, instead of asking him to wait in the 
anteroom. 

In his exasperation as he swung 
about, Dr. Wilson knocked from 
his desk a round phial of tablets, 
which clattered to the floor and 
rolled beneath a cabinet. As he 
rose to his feet the apologetic attendant promptly went down on 
his hands and knees to grope for 
the small, and possibly shattered, 
container. 

Joan had already begun covertly 
to study (he patient. He was thin 
and tense, barely above medium 
height, with a good head of unruly hair and bushy black eyebrows. He had a lean, bony, toothy 
countenance, with a wide, mobilemouth which, as she watched, he 
pursed forward and then drew 
back over his strong teeth. 

She heard Dr. Wilson spoking 
to the attendant, but his words 
failed to register with her as she 



suddenly sensed the patient's scorn, 
which was quickly overwhelmed by 
something else — a wild delight, 
with an abandoned, reckless element in it. 

Letting herself go with it she 
found herself regarding the round 
metal ruler on Dr. Wilson's desk 
with a peculiar fascination. She felt 
a sudden desire to snatch it up and 
hit the attendant on the head with 
it. Simultaneously she saw the patient's right hand moving towards 
the - desk. 

She stood up and reached quickly for the ruler. 

She was too late. Rogers had 
picked it up, and was fingering it. 
Quickly she moved around the 
desk, between Rogers and the attendant. Pushing Dr. Ballantine 
aside rather ungently she wheeled 
and confronted the patient with 
her most dazzling smile. 

"Thank you!" she exclaimed in 
her loudest whisper and most expressive lip-talk, taking firm hold 
of the ruler. "That's the very 
thing 1" 

She felt the tug on the ruler 
as Rogers momentarily held to his 
original purpose, despite his surprise. Then he hesitated, intrigued 
by her dramatic mode of speech 
and her peculiar, attractive appearance. For a split second he g4anced 
at his intended victim, sensed that 
his moment had passed, and yielded 
the ruler to Joan's importunate 
hand. 

Swinging about, Joan at once 
passed the ruler to Dr. Wilson. 



Consultant diagnostician* 



97 



"Tins will help him reach it," 
she said, and at the same time, unseen by Rogers, motioned Dr. Ballantine to keep away. Then she 
turned back to Rogers with another flashing smile. "I hope you 
don't think I wis rude! You see — 
I have no voice and I often do 
things instead of talking. I forget 
that other people think and act at 
the same time, too!" 

Still a trifle bewildered at the 
speed with which events had 
moved, but fascinated by Joan's 
vivacity, the patient shook his 
head. 

"No — oh, no— you weren't 
rude," he faltered. "Not a bit. I 
was going to — to give it to him. 
But you were nearer. And you 
thought of it, too." 

"How nice of you to say that!" 
She beamed at him, and noticed 
with relief that Dr. Ballantine had 
restrained Dr. Wilson from interrupting. "I'm sure you acted first. 
But you are kind to give mc 
credit. You see, having no voice 
makes mc feel inferior — " 

".Oh, no," he protested. "You 
have no reason — " 

"X have to assert myself at times, 
they tell me, to overcome that feeling of inferiority." 

Joan felt shameless as she 
sensed a warm, protect ivc feeling 
towards herself build up in him, 
and she knew she could manage 
bum from that moment. She signaled behind her back to Dr. Ballantine to leave the room. 

"They're mad," said the patient, 



confidentially. She felt a sudden 
surge of anger in him. "Why did 
they bring you here?" 

"I am visiting Dr. Wilson — with 
Dr. Ballantine — for a consultation." ' 

She sensed his anger give way 
to scorn, and heard with approval 
Dr. Ballantine say: "Come into the 
ante-room, Wilson, and tell me 
about it. Miss Buckley and Mr. 
Rogers can wait here for us." 

"They're all quacks," Rogers said 
when they had gone. "Jailers! Look 
out they don't try to shut you up 
here with the rest of us." 

"I couldn't say what they have 
in mind," she confessed. 

"I know them! They're probably plotting out there right now, 
planning to trick you into admitting things that aren't true. Don't 
you get sick of their endless questions?" 

Joan grimaced and he interpreted it as a moue of disgust. 

"But I'm too smart for this fellow Wilson," he said, triumphantly. "I know his kind ! My stepfather was one just like him! He 
tried to take the rightful place of 
my father! He even made me 
change my name to his." A resentful gleam came into his eyes. 

'Tsn't Rogers your real name?" 
Joan asked, wide-eyed. 

"My real name," he confided in 
a lowered voice, "is Stephenson — 
George Stephenson. It's the samename as that of the man who invented the steam locomotive. A 
great man! That was my father's 



FANTASTIC UNIVERSE 



name, too. There was no one like 
my father. He died when I was 
seven." 

"I am sure you are like him," 
suggested Joan. 

"You think so?" he cried 
eagerly. "I am, of course! Yes — I 
am, really. And he was too smart 
for his enemies, too. They were 
all down on him. But he was too 
good for them. If he'd lived, he'd 
have beaten them all. He was afraid 
of nothing." 

Fifteen minutes later Dr. Joan 
Buckley sat again with Dr. Wilson 
and Dr. Ballantine in the former's 
office. 

"Do you think you might be a 
step forward if you knew that your 
patient's persecution complex originated with a stepfather — not his 
real father?" she asked them. 

Dr. Wilson's eyebrows shot up. 
"I think we might be," he agreed. 

"And what if he really worshipped his real father, who was 
a great companion, but died when 
he was seven? And if his real 
father was usurped by the stepfather who turned out to be a harsh 
disciplinarian ?" 

The two men exchanged 
glances, Wilson with eyebrows 
again high on his forehead, Ballantine rather smug. 

"And what if the stepfather, 
jealous, perhaps, of the real father, 
insisted on expunging his memory 
by having the boy change his name 
from George Stephenson — -his father's name and an honored name 
in history — to George Rogers?" 



Joan and Ballantine waited f or 
Dr. Wilson to speak. 

"I should think," said Wilson 
after a few moments, "that if all 
thai should be true it will give us 
the key — and I'd say in addition 
that we can turn that key. But how 
you came to know all this, young 
lady, is beyond me!" 

"I told yon, Wilson, thai: Dr. 
Buckley could get us the answers 
if anyone could — and that she 
works fast," claimed Ballantine. 
"But this time she seems to have 
done the job belore we even got 
started." He leaned over and patted 
Joan on the hand. "Thank you, 
my dear." 

IN HER rooftop garden, in the 
light that streamed out from the 
lounge, Elizabtih Buckley and Dr. 
Ballantine took their coffee. Joan 
had long since gone to bed at the 
farthest corner of the house. 

"Of course I am pleased — and 
proud — Jim, at such high praise of 
Joan," she said. "And I admit she 
is as uniquely fitted to work in 
psychiatry as she is in the diagnosis of the disorders of inarticulate infants. But what is to be the 
effect on her of such tuning-in,' 
and really sharing as experiences 
the emotional storms and mental 
aberrations of people who are — 
well — -mentally ill?" 

Ballantine jabbed at the disc of 
lemon in his cup. 

"Frankly, Elizabeth, I don't 
know. I have not forgotten our 
speculations on this matter when 



CONSULTANT DIAGNOSTICIAN 



90 



Joan decided to add psychiatry to 
her medical degree, and again 
when she entered my rooms as associate. I have limited her contacts 
to a selected number of" patients. 
She seems never to be jittery after 
monitoring any patient. A bit 
weary, perhaps, at the end of the 
day — sometimes a trifle pale." 

"It worries me that she cannot 
be so detached — as, for example, 
you can be," explained Elizabeth 
Buckley. "Surely you must- get 
'fed-up' sometimes at confronting 
psychological aberrations day after 
■day ? But Joan not merely confronts them. She actually shares 
their tensions and turmoils. It 
tuns! have some effect." 

"I agree." He nodded, slowly. 
"Certainly she should be restricted 
in the number of her contacts." 

"I referred to that last night, 
when I thought she came home 
rather tired. She had other ideas." 

"Oh?" Dr. Ballantine exclaimed, 
his expression thoughtful. 

"She suggested that probably 
she was merely suffering f rom 
'aching muscles' while developing 
strength," Elizabeth Buckley said. 
"If she just 'held on,' she thought, 
she would increase her ability to 
resist." 

"She did?" For a moment Ballantine pondered the statement. 
"She might well be right, although 
we won't take it for granted," he 
said, at last". "She should have 
enough strength of will. I doubt 
if either you or her father lacked 
anything in that direction! And we 



mustn't forget that from babyhood 
Joan has been contending with an 
emotional clamor emanating from 
everyone around her. 

"We shielded her from it when 
she was little — and we still try to. 
But nothing could have avoided 
the need for her to build her own 
armor against it. She has probably 
developed some such shield long 
since, and now it may be only a 
matter of toughening it." 

"In any case it might be important to protect her from too great 
a battering before she has that 
armor really strong?" 

"I'll keep an eye on that. But I 
suspect she has probably diagnosed 
her own case this time as shrewdly 
as she has her inevitable complexes 
arising from never having had a 
voice — or a father." 

"Has she — really?" 

"Long since," replied Ballantine', 
with tjuict assurance, "and prescribed the best possible remedies, obtainable or not." 

"What were they. Tell me!" 

Ballantine put his cup down and 
they walked over to the parapet. 
Resting his elbows on the top of 
the wall, he looked away from her 
across the Institute's farmlands and 
the river, to the distant lights of 
the city. 

"To get a voice — and to get a 
husband." 

The light went out of Elizabeth 
Buckley's eyes, and she seemed to 
droop a little against the wall. 

"Poor darling!" 

"She doesn't think so. When she 



100 



FANTASTIC UNIVERSE 



told me I felt very much as you do 
now, inside. But I said, as brightly 
as I could, 'You're a good psychiatrist, Joan — ' She cut me off. 
'Don't feel sorry for me, Uncle 
Jim. Your words can't hide from 
me what you're feeling, you know. 
I think I'll have them both before 
I die' " 

"But marriage — " 

"Of the two that would be the 
easier obtained. She's very attractive — and not without suitors 
now." 

"But she's a mutant!" 

"Does that matter — in these 
days?" 

"Of course she doesn't have to 
have children," acknowledged 
Elizabeth Buckley. "She doesn't 
have to pass on the afflictions of 
the parents unto the fourth generation and beyond." 

"But what of the gifts— the special qualities? What of her extrasensory perception — if that can be 
inherited?" Dr. Ballaiitine asked. 
"She may feel the same compulsion that you felt when you decided to bear her although you 
knew she must almost certainly be 
mutated in some way." 

"The same gamble," amended 
Elizabeth Buckley. "And at such 
long odds we couldn't expect to 
win a second time." 

"Do you really mean that 'we' 
Elizabeth? Shouldn't it be 'they' — 
Joan and her husband? It will be 



a first time for them, with odds no 
worse than yours." 

For quite half a minute Elizabeth Buckley said nothing. Then 
she turned and smiled. 

"You are quite right, of course, 
Jim. It's just that I have to get used 
to the idea. Joan will always need 
someone to turn to — as to a haven. 
Someone intimate, and I won't be 
here always. Still, the right kind 
of husband might be hard to find." 

"According to Joan she will find 

a man like her father," 

Elizabeth Buckley wheeled on 
him. "How can she? She never 
even saw her father. He d ied 
seven months, before she was 
born!" 

"She claims to know him well." 

"What do you mean ?" Dr. 
Buckley asked. 

"On the same occasion when she 
told me she would have a husband 
some day she also said: l I have always known my father, Uncle Jim 
— through my mother!' " 

Like a statue Elizabeth Buckley 
stood, holding tightly to the parapet. When she relaxed she placed 
a hand on Ballantine's arm. With 
relief, he saw that she was smiling. 

"Once again she is away ahead 
of me, Jim. I must learn to admit 
that my little daughter is grownup 
now." 

"And," added Ballantine, "that 
she is in some ways specially well 
equipped to take care of herself." 




W Still cM&ue> ^ime . . . 




—TO COMPLETE YOUR F. U. FILE 
— OF THE FINEST SCIENCE FICTION 
—AND FANTASY BY GREAT WRITERS 



Here's your chance to purchase all 22 issues published to date. A few copies are 
still available and they are yours by filling 
in the coupon below, fantastic universe 
is always siar-studdedJiy the best writers 
in the field. We are now offering these at 
bargain prices — single copies at 35*; three 
copies at $%; six copies at $1.75; and 
twelve copies at $-J.'£5. Here's who you get 
in the first 12 issues. 



No. 1 Arthur C. Clarke. Ray Bradbury, Eric Front. Russell, August Derleth, Frank 

B«llbiap Louk, Jaeciues Jean Ferrat. and others. 
No. 2 William Campbell Gault. Richard Matheson. Walt Sheldon, Evan Hunter, Poul 

Anderson, Clifford D. Simak, Bertram Chandler, and others. 
No. 3 William F. Temple, Jacques Jean Ferrat. Philip K. Dick, Dal Stivena, C. M. Korn
bluth, William Morrison. Evelyn E. Smith, and others. 
No. 4 Poul Anderson, Walt SheltlOB, John Wyndhani, Philip Joae Farmer, Robert Aber
nathy, Robert Moore Williams, and others. 
No. 5 Roper Dee, Frank Belknap I-ona. Eando Binder, Algis Budrys, Mann Rubin, John 

Foster West, Jim Brown, and others. 
No. 6 Philip Jose Farmer, Sam Merwin, Jr., Jack Williamson, Philip K. Dick, Carl 

Jacobi, Richard Matheson, Robert Bloeh, Evan Hunter, and others. 
No. 7 Margaret St. Clair, Lester del Rey, PfiUip Jo*e Farmer. F. L. Wallace, Idria Seabright, Algis Budrys, William Morrison, and others. 
No. 8 Letter del Rey. Ray CumminKS, Marion Zimener Bradley. Roger Dee, Frank Belknap 

Long, William Campbell Gault, and others. 

No. 9 Robert Sheckley, Philip Jose Farmer, Charles E. Fritch, Philip K. Dick, Carl 

Jacobi, Evan Hunter, Norman Arkawy, and others. 
No. 10 Algin Budrvs, Robert F. Young, Evelyn Goldstein, Theodore R. Cogswell, Robert 

ShecMey. Frank Belknap Long, Hal K. Wells, and others. 
No. 11 Milton Lesser, Walter M. Miller, Jr., Algis Budrys, Horatio Winslow, F. B. Bry
ning, Judith Merril, and others. 
No. 12 Irving E. Cox, Jr.. Richard Matheson, Evelyn E. Smith. Roger Dee, John Wyndham, 

Poul Anderuon, Theodore Pratt, and others. 



KING-SIZE PUBLICATIONS, INC. Three copies for $1.00 



471 Park Avenue, New York 22, N. Y. 



Two copies for 70<* 
One copy for 35^ 



I enclose $. 



Name. 



Write in by number 
issues desired 



Address. 



City, Zon*, State. 



FO 512 



picture 
that! 

by . , . Norman Arkaivy 



It was a wonderful town — friendly 
and joyous. But when Louis turned 
photographer's helper the future 
did an eerily startling take! 



\Yhen I first met Uncle Willie, I was an itinerant tramp who 
had just arrived in Hallow. I was 
just passing through, and I had no 
idea, at the time, that with the 
help of a wonderful camera, I was 
going to be instrumental in bringing happiness to him. I had no 
idea that I was going to find happiness myself. All I wanted was a 
handout. 

WILL FARR, said the signvon 
the plateglass store front, PHOTOGRAPHER. This is a likely 
prospect, I thought. I could think 
of nothing that I could do fot a 
photographer, and, satisfied -that it 
was safe to ask for work, I turned 
in off the sidewalk and entered the 
studio. 

It was a small room, almost bare 
of furnishings. I am an observant 
individual and I noticed that twenty-eight small photographs hung in 
three neat rows on the wall facing 
the door. They were a poor advertisement^ for the skill of the 
photographer who had taken them. 
Excessive grain and unsightly pock 
marks obscured the salient aspects 
of most of them. Several others 



Norman Arkawy is one of the younger group of science fantasy writer's who 
have made such determined forays into the field in recent years with the 
avowed intention of transforming it. Some have succeeded; some have failed. 
But Mr. Arkawy's success has been more than confirmed by the frequency of hisappearance in all of the leading SF magazines. In this rarely imaginative 
little story dewdrops of the future glisten tvith a most persuasive convincingness on a friendly -village photographer's audaciously exposed negatives. 



FiCTUftK THAT! 



103 



were streaked with yellow and blue 
fogs. Only the last two pictures 
at the end of the bottom row were 
fairly good] and those two were 
almost identical llii inspired prints 
of a dead tree. 

"Some photographer!" I thought. 
"If he's in this business to make 
a living he's probably so broke 
he'll try to put the bite on me!" 

I was turning to leave and seek 
out more promising prospects when 
a curtain in the back of the store 
parted and Uncle Willie came into 
the room. "Good morning," he 
said, smiling at me as if I were a 
paying customer. "Can I help 
you?" 

I siied him up quickly and decided to use the direct approach. 
"Yes, sir," I said, "I haven't had 
anything to eat today and I could 
sure use some help." 

"Well, sir," said Uncle Willie 
without batting an eye, "I was just 
fixing to close up for lunch. Be 
glad to have your company." 

I'm almost never wrong in sizing folks up. I had figured Uncle 
Willie for a real sweet guy, and 
he was. He closed the shop, and 
we went down the street to the 
restaurant. 

"I hope my appearance won't 
embarrass you," I said, conscious 
of my shabby clothes and unshaven 
chin. "Perhaps I'd better go around 
to . . ." 

He laughed. "Folks hereabouts 
don't put no stock in what a 
man wears," he said. "We figure 
if he wants to wear old clothes, 



that's his business. If he's got to 
wear 'em-,- we figure give him Lime 
and maybe his luck will change and 
he'll buy some new duds here in 
Hallow." He chuckled again, and 
added: "And give business a 
boost." 

I followed him into the restaurant, to a table near the window. 
"If we're going to cat together, wc 
ought to get to know one another,'" 
he said, extending his hand. "I'm 
Will Farr." 

I told him my name, die real 
one, which I hadn't used in over 
three years. For the first time since 
I hit the road, I seemed to have 
enough self-respect to call myself 
Louis Webster. "Footloose Looie" 
did not seem to fit me any more. 

"Pleased to know you, Mr. Webster," Uncle Willie said. "Mind if 
I call you Louis? I don't see no 
need for a man having two names 
when one will do." 

I smiled at him. "Fair enough. 
Will." 

"Might as well make it Uncle 
Willie," he said. "If you're aiming 
to stay in town a while, that's what 
you'll be calling me sooner or 
later. Everybody does." 

We ate lunch, then went back to 
Uncle Willie's studio. It was during the meal that I decided that I 
would like to settle down in Hal-" 
low. I had never dreamed of finding a place where people did not 
take a man at face value, but accepted him as an equal, regardless 
of his appearance. I had stopped 
hoping that I would ever be given 



104. ' FANTASTIC 

the opportunity to regain my selfrespect. Now, here it was: the place 
and the opportunity, and I was determined to take both if they were 
offered to me. 

1 "Are there any jobs to be had 
in this town?" I asked. 

"Sure," said Uncle Willie. "As 
a matter of fact, I could use an 
assistant myself. I'm pretty busy, 
you know." 

I laughed. "Busy? A photographer in a small town like this? 
Thanks for the offer, Will, but I 
don't want charity." It's remarkable what a little self-respect can 
do to a man! 

His eyebrows lifted in mild reproach. "I'm not offering you a 
handout," he said. "I really -am 
busy. There's not much regular 
photographic work to be done," 
he explained, "but my experiments 
keep me busy most of the time, 
and I could use someone to help 
me with them." 

Now my eyebrows lifted. "Experiments?" 

He waved a hand at the pictures 
lined up on the wall. "You must 
have noticed these." 

"Yes," I said. "They're — well, 
they're certainly different." 

He laughed in his friendly, 
honest way. "You mean they're no 
good." I started to protest that I 
had not meant that at all, but he 
brushed aside my objection. "You're 
right, of course. As photographs, 
they're terrible. But as the results 
of my experiments, I think they're 
pretty good." 



UNIVERSE 

I went over to the pictures and 
studied them. I could see nothing 
good about them. Grainy, pockmarked, streaked, they were all unintelligible except for the last two. 
which were the mediocre still takes 
of a dead tree. 

"Those pictures," Uncle Willie ' 
went on, "are step by step records 
of the improvements in my technique. The last one is pretty good, 
I think." 

"Quite good," I lied politely. 

Uncle Willie smiled smugly. 
"Yould really mean that if you 
knew what that picture represents." 

"What do you mean?" I asked. 
"It's a tree. I can see that." 

"I want to show you something," he said, beckoning me to 
follow him outside. He pointed to 
a sturdy young maple tree in front 
of his shop. "That's the tree in the 
picture," he announced quietly. 

"I don't understand," I confessed. 

"I think I've developed a camera 
that takes pictures of the future," 
he said with an undercurrent of 
excitement in his voice. "I don't 
know how it works," he admitted, 
"but when I used it to take a picture of that tree, it gave me the 
photograph you saw hanging on 
the wall in there." 

"You've got a camera that. . .?*' 
The idea seemed too fantastic to 
put into words. 

He nodded his head. "The funny 
thing is, I didn't even know what 
I was doing when I made it. I was 



PICTURE THAT! 



[05 



trying to make a camera thai would 
take th ree- D pi ct u res you cou 1 d 
look at without any stereo devices, 
and I stumbled onto this instead. 

"At first, the pictures were impossible to read. So I kept on tinkering with the lens arrangement 
in the camera, until they finally 
came out clear. They're not in threeD, but they're not ordinary photographs, either. They're time 
pictures! I was as sure of it then 
as I am now." 

I stared at him, unable to believe 
what I was hearing. Poor Uncle 
Willie, I thought — and he seems 
like such a nice guy! 

"Of course," he continued, "it 
needs a lot of work yet. I haven't 
tried it out on anything but that 
tree, and I'm not even sure that 
it looks into the future. There 
might have been a dead tree standing there in the past, you know. 
Maybe the camera looks back in 
time instead of ahead. But one 
thing I do know: it doesn't show 
things as they are now. That tree 
isn't dead!" 

"No, it isn't," I agreed halfheartedly. 

"Oh, I'll have to fool around 
with it a lot more before I'll have 
it perfected, I guess. The first thing 
I've got to do is take pictures of 
Other things to see which way it 
moves them in time. If old Mrs. 
Beardslcy comes out a kid, it looks 
into the past. If Timmy Crew looks 
like an old man, it looks into the 
future. If- — " 

"Well, why don't you?" I asked. 



"Why don't you just go out and 
take some pictures?" 

"It's not that easy," he said. "I 
have to make my own film, and 
that takes time and a lot of work. 
That's why I could use your help, 
if you want a job. I can't pay much, 
but , . 

"It's a deal!" I said. What the 
heck, I thought, even if the little 
guy is eccentric, he's a good joe. 
And I still liked the looks of Hallow as a place to settle down. So, 
I decided I'd help Uncle Willie 
with his crazy experiments and, at 
the s.tnie time, try Hallow on for 
size. 

So I went to work in Uncle Willie's laboratory, making film for 
his camera. He had three specially 
developed emulsions with which he 
coated three thin glass plates. He 
sandwiched the three plates and 
fused them along two edges to 
form one film plate. It was a slow 
and tedious process. Working together, we had only fifteen plates 
finished by the end of the week. 

During that week, I got the lowdown on a lot of things. For one, 
Uncle Willie was an even sweeter 
guy than I had thought. He loved 
children, and thought of grown-ups 
as children who were just a little 
older than they had been at one 
time. It was a pity, everyone said, 
that he had never married and had 
kids of his own. That was the 
tragedy of Hallow, to hear people 
talk— the simple fact that Will 
Farr had remained a bachelor. He 



K>6 



FANTASTIC UNIVERSE 



would have made a wonderful 
father, they said. 

B : tit his youth had passed, and 
now his bachelorhood was deepgrained and solidly established. The 
town busybodies had not given up 
on him, though. In their good-intentioned, bungling way, they were 
Stilt trying to pair him off with the 
eligible mature and unmarried 
women in Hallow. Conspicuous 
among the prospects were the unpleasingly plump widow who was 
■the leader of the, Women's Club, 
the withered old matd_ . librarian 
whom everybody pitied and nobody 
loved, and — Miss Barnes. 

Actually, Miss Barnes was the 
only prospect that anyone but a 
meddling busybody would have seriously considered. She was a female 
counterpart of Uncle Willie — * 
little younger perhaps, and a bit 
prettier — and folks would have 
oiled her Aunt Mary except that 
she was a schoolteacher and the 
kids just naturally referred to her 
as "Miss Barnes." 

They would have been happy together, everybody said. But Uncle 
Willie just never got around to 
asking Mary Barnes to marry him. 
He loved her, bat he was plagued 
by shyness and a feeling of inferiority, and he was sure that Mary 
felt only a condescending fondness 
for him. Everybody else in town 
had it figured out the other way 
around, for it was obvious that 
Mary's feelings exceeded fondness. 
But Willie seemed indifferent. 
J decided somebody should have 



a talk with Mary and, since I was 
the only one who knew Will's secret, I promised myself that" I 
would explain how matters stood 
just as soon as we became so well 
acquainted that she wouldn't think 
I was a fun-making wise guy. 

On Friday, Willie and I went 
out, loaded down with camera, tripod and a heavy case of him 
plates. We walked around town, 
taking shots of various people and 
things. We used up two-thirds of 
our supply of film before Willie's 
curiosity persuaded him that we 
had a sufficiently large and varied 
sampling to tell us what we wanted 
to know. Then with methodical assurance we packed up and hurried 
back to the studio to develop the 
plates. 

We took the negatives out of the 
fixer bath and held them up to the 
viewbox, examined them, one by 
one. I looked at Uncle Willie in 
amazement. He was not so eccentric after all. His camera really 
worked ! 

The results of the ten shots we'd 
taken were more confusing than 
clarifying, however. They seemed 
to picture different haphazard movements in time. 

Picture number one was a candid 
shot of Mrs. Beardsley, the leader 
of Hallow Society. A woman of 
stout middle-age, the photograph 
showed her as a young and strikingly beautiful girl. 

Picture number two showed 
Charlie Morrin's hardware store 
with a shiny new modem front. 



PICTURE THAT! 



107 



(Picture number three should have 
beta .1 walking likeness of little 
Timmy Crew. It came out an action take of a grown-up Tim Crew 
— a baseball player taking a hefty 
swing at bat. 

Picture number four was a blank. 
It had been a shot of Old Man 
Jensen, who, folks said, drank too 
much and who, I recalled, had been 
bemused by a hangover when we 
saw him. 

Picture number five was a take 
of me. It showed me as I am; a 
little sturdier in build, perhaps. 

Uncle Willie shook his head in 
bewilderment. "It doesn't make 
sense," he said. "It just doesn't 
make any sense at all!" 

I looked over the first five pictures again and began, vaguely, to 
see a possible meaning in the confusion. 

"Mrs. Beardsley gets young," 
Uncle Willie expounded. "That's a 
movement into the past. Charlie's 
store becomes modernized — a movement into the future. Timmy grows 
uf) — the future again. One shot 
doesn't come out at all. And you're 
just you, as you are today. I can't 
figure- ii out," he said, "unless it's 
just a hit or miss proposition . . . 
unless the camera's completely 
erratic!" 

"Let's see the rest of them," I 
said, anxious to follow up my 
hunch. He held the negatives up 
for examination. 

Picture number six was the 
statue of General Grant in front 
of the Town Hall. It was an ordi


nary picture of the statue of General Grant. Pictures number seven, 
eight and nine were distorted views 
of Town Hall, the schoolhouse, and 
the post office. 

Picture number ten was an embarrassing shot of Miss Barnes. She 
had no clothing on and was held 
in a passionate embrace by a man 
who was a dead ringer for Uncle 
Willie. 

"It figures," I said, convinced 
that my hunch had been right, and 
understanding the nature of Uncle 
Willie's marvelous camera. "Here, 
Will." I handed him the last negative. "What do you have to say 
for yourself?" 

He blushed crimson. 

"Did that happen in the past?" 
I asked, smiling. 

"Of course not!" he spluttered, 
growing even redder. 

"Then it must be going to happen in the future, right?" 

"1 ... I guess so." 

I laughed at his discomfort. 
"Well, I suppose I could let it go 
at that," I said. "Maybe if you 
thought it was inevitable-, you'd do 
something to make it happen soon. 
On the other hand, you might just 
sit back and wait for it to happen, 
in which case it never would. 
Y'see," I told him, "your camera 
<.locsn't fake pictures of (lie future 
or the past. It doesn't move in time 
at all. It moves in an entirely different dimension." 

"Different dimension?" Uncle 
Willie was obviously baffled. He 
looked at me in the same way I 



FANTASTIC UNIVERSE 



to8 

must have looked at him when he 
first told me of his camera, "What 
dimension ?" 

- "Hope," I said. "It shows what 
people wish for, what they'd like 
to be true. Mrs. Beardsley would 
like to be a young girl again, and 
prettier than she could possibly 
ever have been. Your camera shows 
her that way. Charlie would Like 
to fix his store up with a new 
front," I went on, checking off each 
picture. "Timmy wants to be a big 
leagae baseball player. • Old Man 
Jensen, with his hangover, was 
probably wishing he had never been 
born, so his picture came out a 
blank." 

"Wait a minute," Uncle Willie 
objected. "What about you, and 
the statue, and the tree, and . . ,?" 

"Easy," I explained. "I came out 
almost exactly the way I am now 
because I don't want anything different than what I've got. The 
statue of Grant is inanimate, so 
there's no wish involved there. The 
picture of the tree was probably 
the collective wish of all the ter


mites on it. The buildings appear 
distorted because there were many 
conflicting wishes coming, all at 
the same time, from the people inside them. Which brings us to Miss 
Barnes . . ." 

But Uncle Willie wasn't listening to me any more. I guess I had 
convinced him, because he was already out the door, heading down 
the street towards Miss Barnes' 
place. 

I smiled and congratulated myself on not having to have that delicate talk with Mary Barnes, after 
all. I looked down at Willie's 
camera. A wonderful invention, I 
thought. With it, a man can see his 
dreams come true. But I didn't 
need it. 

I closed the shop and strolled 
through the streets of Hallow, nodding happy hellos to the friendly, 
smiling faces of the people who 
called me Louis and who were not 
ashamed to call me friend. No, I 
did not need the camera. My dream 
had already come true. And not 
just, on paper. 



floyd 
and 

the 

eumenides 

by . . . Evelyn E. Smith 

A man pursued by the Furies may 
be irresistible to the ladies. But 
there's a dreadful catch to it — ■ 
as Floyd Smathers discovered. 



When Floyd Smathers came 
back from his four-week, allexpenses-paid cruise to Greece and 
the Mediterranean Islands pursued 
by the Furies, he was asked nearly 
everywhere. The expenses had all 
been paid by the Acropolis Dried 
Fig Company, for which he had 
completed the sentence "I like 
Acropolis Dried Figs because . . .*' 
in less than twenty-five words. 

Upen hearing of the young man's 
good fortune, Mr. Levjoy owner 
and director of the Levjoy Advertising Agency, for which Floyd 
worked as junior copywriter, had 
given him all the time in the world 
to make his trip. 

"For," he said, "if you can turn 
out prize-winning sentences for 
Acropolis and such unmitigated 
trash for us, then it is plain to see 
your heart is not with Levjoy." 
Meaning the agency and not himself, for he was not a sentimental 
man during business hours. 

He had been right, of course. 
Floyd, fundamentally an honest 
young man, was able to write glowingly about Acropolis Dried Figs 



Evelyn E. Smith has a rarely evocative gift for summoning the most illustrious of mythological characters from shades Elysium, and endowing them 
with twentieth-century foibles. But what writer he fare her in fantasy's 
dark-bright domain has ever dared to evoke the Furies, those serpent-tressed 
sisters of Greek mythology in all of their Gorgonesque fright fulness? Yet 
Miss Smith has appeared so often in these pages with a wand of gold plucked 
straight from Merlin's hand that her audacity ought not to have surprised us. 



joy 



I I (> 



FANTASTIC UNIVERSR 



because be truly loved them, finding 
them as tasty, nutritious, and healthful as he had stated in his less than 
twenty-five words, whereas he could 
find nothing admirable in any of the 
products sponsored by Mr. Levjoy's firm. 

Being out of a job did not depress Floyd, for he had been fired 
many times before in his twenty* 
seven years. Buoyed by the knowledge that six months worth of unemployment insurance awaited him 
upon his return, he embarked for 
the land of the Helleiies, blithe as 
a young man of a naturally melancholy disposition could be. 

The trip itself was not an unqualified success. Floyd was a shy 
and retiring youth, devoid of the 
charm, good looks, money, or any of 
the other attributes that win friends. 
Orphaned since youth, he was accustomed to loneliness and had 
never succeeded in making the 
requisite social adjustments. Upon a 
tourist-class ship, he might have 
managed to find others like himself. 

But unfortunately, Acropolis 
Dried Figs did not believe in doing 
things by halves, and he, therefore, 
found himself the occupant of 1 a 
spacious first-class cabin on a luxury 
liner. The other passengers all were, 
or believed themselves to be, members of the haut monde. They accepted Floyd's own opinion of himself — which was nil — at face value, 
and sneered at him or ignored him 
as the occasion arose. 

Floyd dreamed many dreams of 
defiance, all of which he lacked the 



courage to carry out. Particularly did 
he wish to defy the lovely Veronica 
Van Brunt, whose disdain he felt 
most keenly because it seemed unfair of her to begrudge him in person the smiles her two-dimensional 
counterpart had accorded him so 
freely, or, to be precise, for the sum 
of seventy cents on weekday nights, 
eighty-five on Saturdays. As soon as 
the sea began to swell, however, he 
found himself fully preoccupied 
with visceral disorders far overshadowing those of the heart or his 
self-esteem. 

His seasickness lasted until just 
before the S. S. N areas touched 
land. Greece he enjoyed despite its 
lack of sanitation, not only for its 
beauty but because to the simple 
Greek peasants all Americans were 
millionaires, and they smiled at him 
and cheated him with the same 
warmth that they smiled at and 
cheated his fellow passengers, some 
of whom actually ivere millionaires. 

And, since on the tours the others 
persisted In their haughty behavior 
toward him Floyd took to wandering off by himself, rejoining them 
only for meals, and, toward the end, 
not even then. 

The last day the ship was in port, 
Miss Van Brunt and Anthony, sixth 
Baron Threadgill, were sipping gin 
and lime on the boat-deck when 
they espied a small commotion at 
the pier entrance and Floyd Smathers burst into sight, pursued by 
three shrieking, snaky-haired hags 
in classical Greek costume. 

"The fellow musE've tried to 



FI.OYD AND THE EUMENIDES 



smuggle something past the customs," Threadgill remarked, leaning over the side of the ship and 
regarding the tableau with interest. 

"I really don't think so, Tony," 
Miss Van Brunt said. The customs 
men don't dress like that. These 
must be peasants— probably the 
wretched little man tried to cheat 
them or flirt with them or something; But let's not bother with liim, 
Tony. Let's talk about us , . ." And 
she turned her great blue eyes effectively upon the young man. 

Although Miss Van Brunt's long 
and distinguished roster of husbands included several titles— she 
was a social luminary as well as an 
actress — none had been English, 
and she was curious to know what 
it would be like to be married to a 
British nobleman. 

Floyd, however, could not dismiss his problem so lightly. His 
stateroom had seemed large on the 
way out, but now, filled by three 
vociferous Furies, it was tiny. 

"You'll have to leave, you know," 
be told them. "I can't afford to pay 
three more fares, even if I wanted 
to, which I don't." 

"We shall never leave you," declared Alecto. Being supernatural, 
the three sisters were, of course, 
conversant with all languages. "We 
shall hound you to the end of your 
days . . . There, doesn't that make 
you writhe in agony?" 

Straightway, with her invisible 
stings, she inflicted on him the selfsame torments that had caused 



Orestes to shriek through innumerable strophes and antistrophes. 

But Floyd merely gave his usual 
twisted smile. "I have always had 
poor teeth," he said. "In your day 
1 don't suppose you had such a 
thing as dentists. But, let me tell 
you, my Dr. Frankenstein could 
give you ladies cards and spades in 
the matter of torture." 

"What are dentists?" Megaera 
asked, jealously. 

"They are creatures besides which 
your primitive efforts at inBicting 
agony are as nothing," he told her, 
falling naturally into the heroic diction suitable for a man in his plight. 

At this the two Furies gnashed 
their teeth and went at him with redoubled vigor, while chanting an 
appropriate passage from /Eschylus: 
" '. . . swift as the wind, /We follow and find, /Till he stumbles 
apacc,/Who had hoped in the race,/ 
To escape from the grasp of the 
Furies,/And we trample him low/ 
Till he writhes in his woe,/Who 
had fled from the chase of Uie 
Furies.' " 

But Floyd continued to unpack. 
"1 don't pretend that you're not going to be an inconvenience,'' he told 
them over his shoulder as he placed 
his shirts neatly in a drawer, "because you are. But that's all." 

"Where's Tisiphone!" Alecto 
suddenly screamed. "No wonder we 
haven't been able to achieve the full 
effect! Tisiphone!" 

"I'm in here!" the third Fury's 
voice came f rom the bathroom. 
"Look, you just turn these little 



I 12 



FANTASTIC UNIVERSS 



handles and water comes out. Zeus 
never could do anything like this- — 
at least not "without a lot of fuss." 

"Come out of there and do your 
work!" Alecto yelled. 

"Oh, very well." 

The youngest Fury emerged from 
the bathroom just as a bell rang 
outside and a stentorian voice bellowed, "All ashore that's going 
ashore," 

"Beg pardon, sir — " a steward 
knocked on the half -open door 
" — but it's time for the ladies to 
go/' 

"You tell them," Floyd suggested, separating the socks with holes 
from the socks with integrity. "They 
refuse to leave." 

, The steward looked apologetically at the Furies. "I'm sorry, ladies, 
but all visitors must leave the ship." 

"We are not visitors," Alecto 
told him. "We are the Furies — 
supernatural beings," she explained 
irritably, seeing the look of noncoemprchension on his face, "assigned to follow and torment Floyd 
Smathers until the end of his days. 
Read your Bulfinch, man!" 

"We are avenging spirits," 
Megaera added with a horrid laugh. 
"Our duty is to drive Floyd to madness and self-destruction." 

Tisiphone sighed. "Only way we 
can drive men mad." She glanced in 
the mirror mournfully. "I don't see 
why just because I'm a Fury I have 
to look a fright." 

Her sisters glared at her. Then 
all diree gnashed their teeth, causing the snakes on their heads to hiss 



and writhe, and chanted explanatorily: " 'From primal ages/This lot, 
our pride and glory/ Appointed was 
to us;/To Hades gloomy portal, /To 
chase the guilty mortal/But from 
Olympians, reigning/In lucid seats, 
abstain ing,/Their nectared feasts wc 
taste not/Their snow-white robes 
invest not/The maids of Erebus.' " 

At that the steward knew this 
was a matter for the purser. And 
the purser, being quick of wit, saw 
iuuucdiately that it was a question 
for the captain to deal with. 

The captain handled the situation 
admirably. "Since Mr. Smather's return passage is paid, we cannot eject 
him from the ship," he said, "and, 
since these ladies are bound by — -ei 
— divine law to follow him, we 
would be unable to eject them 
either. If they share the cabin with 
Mr. Smathers, no violence will be 
done to propriety, for they are considerably older than he is — by at 

least three* thousand VOLTS, I should 
say. . \ 

"And we will not ask them for 
additional fares, for the Atlantcan 
Line never charges supernatural 
beings passage, regarding the price 
of their fares in the light of an investment . . . Mr. Jennings," he addressed the chief steward, who had 
joined the curious group of ship's 
personnel, "you will accord these 
ladies every consideration." 

"Why, thank you, sir," Tisiphone said. "It's so long since anyone afforded us any consideration," 
she added softly. 

"This man," Alecto declared, "is 



FLOYD AND THE Et'MENIDES 



trying to obstruct us in the performance of our duty. Carry on, girls." 

"Lift ye the hymn of the Furies 
amain!" they chanted in chorus. 
" 'The gleeless song and the lyreless 
strain, /That bindeth the heart with 
a viewless chain,/With notes of distraction and maddening sorrow,/ 
Blighting the brain, and burning 
the marrow !' " 

And the agonies that assailed 
Floyd were so piercing that, he felt, 
if only Alecto were to murmur, 
"Open a little wider please. Now, 
this isn't going to hurt you a bit," 
he might be back in good old Dr. 
Frankenstein's office. 

H 

"Oh, look!" exclaimed Miss Van 
Brunt, as Floyd entered the dining 
saloon that night followed by the 
Furies, "those three funny-looking 
Greeks are still with that Mr. 
Smathers." 

The captain, at whose table she 
was sitting, blanched. "Please don't 
refer to those ladies as funny-looking Greeks, Miss Van Brunt. They 
are the Furies." 

He seemed almost to tremble. 

And Lord Threadgill, who, like 
all Englishmen, had undergone a 
classical education, was able to put 
it to some use at last. He explained 
to Miss Van Brunt who the Furies 
were. Having been to Bryn Mawr, 
Miss Van Brunt knew well enough, 
but she had also learned that knowledge is like lingerie — essential, but 
to be concealed. She was charmed. 



"But surely they should sit at the 
captain's table then," she said. 

"Mr, Smathers would have to, 
also," the captain warned her. 
"They are inseparable." 

"Oh, by all means let's have him 
over too then, " Miss Van Brunt declared. "A man who'd be pursued 
by 'the Furies must have more to 
him than I had supposed." 

"Wonder what he did to deserve 
them," Lord Threadgill muttered 
jealously. 

"That," Veronica replied with an 
artful glitter in her eye, "is what I 
propose to find out. You may be 
sure I shall waste no time." 

So Floyd and the Furies were 
shifted from their little table for 
four in a quiet corner of the dining 
saloon to the glory of the captain's 
table. The Furies were ill-pleased at 
this, for they were unused to such a 
cordial atmosphere, being, like all 
monsters, shy at heart. But there 
was nothing any of the three could 
do — no hope of alleviation for their 
torment. Wherever Floyd went, they 
had to go as well . . . unless some 
cataclysm prevented them. 

"Well, Mr. Smathers," Veronica 
said, as Floyd came up on deck the 
next morning to smoke an afterbreakfast filtered cigarette, "1 never 
expected to see you up in weather 
like this." There was quite a high 
sea, and Lord Threadgill had just 
lett her, owing to a sudden indisposition. 

"Yes," Floyd agreed, blushing at 
the memory of his weakness on the 
way out, "but I seem finally to have 



114 FANTASTIC 

gotten my sea legs." And he took a 
deep breath of the bracing air. 

"Where are your — er — companions?" 

Floyd's face grew soft with sympathy. "Seasick — every last one of 
'em," he said. "The sea is unusually 
rough for this part of the world this 
time of the year," he added knowledgeably. "They say Poseidon has a 
grudge against them. In fact, they 
say everybody hates them. I wouldn't be surprised if their whole vacation originated in paranoia/' he 
went on, surprised to find himself 
talking so easily to Miss Van Brunt. 

"Feeling themselves persecuted, 
they turned to persecuting others. 
Everbody talks about the CEdipus 
complex," he warmed to his subject, 
"but has anybody considered the far 
more dangerous Erinys complex ?" 

"No," said Veronica. "Tell me 
about it, Mr. Smathers." 

Later on Floyd went below to his 
cabin. Alecto lay on the bed shrieking; Mcgaera screamed on the 
couch; Tisiphone ululated from the 
rug. 

"I've brought you some fruit and 
a carafe of lemonade," Floyd said 
kindly. "Very good for seasickness." 

"Go away," howled Alecto. 

"You really ought to get out on 
deck, you know," he urged. "Fresh 
air's much the best tiling for trial 
de mer." 

"Go away," moaned Mcgaera. 

"Would you like me to ask the 
stewardess to drop around and have 
a look at you?" 

"Go away," groaned Tisiphone. 



UNIVERSE 

"Oh, very well," Floyd said, and 
he joined Veronica and the captain 
for lunch. 

Since Poseidon continued to harbor his grudge, the Furies continued 
to keep to their — rather, Floyd's — 
cabin, and he slept in an adjoining 
one which happened to be vacant 
and which the steward gladly placed 
at his disposal, for a consideration. 

However, Floyd didn't have 
much chance to sleep, because he 
was too busy keeping Veronica company in the absence of Lord Threadgill who was suffering from the 
same disability as the Furies 
throughout the voyage. But, try as 
she might, she couldn't find out 
what he had done to set the Erinyes 
on his trail. 

By the time the Statue of Liberty 
hove into sight, Floyd and Veronica 
were affianced. Although Veronica 
had been married to various noblemen — and what, after all, made a 
British title so special? — she had 
never been married to a man pursued by the Furies and was curious 
to know what it was like. Floyd did 
not worry about taking on the responsibility of a wife despite the 
fact that he had no job, for he knew 
that Veronica had enough for two. 

After being photographed together, the lovers had to separate at 
the pier, because the Faries insisted 
on getting into the same car as 
Floyd, and Veronica wanted to 
break the news gently to her father, 
who had come in the Van Brunt 
Cadillac to pkk her up. The Furies 
also insisted on getting into all pic


FLOYD AND THE EUMENIDES 



"5 



Lures to the astonishment and dismay of the photographers. 

"Let them get in," Veronica said 
to her press agent out of the corner 
of her mouth. "I'll explain later. 
Big story." 

She pretended to herself that she 
withheld the information in deference to Floyd's diffidence. But it 
was actually because she did not 
wish him to take the limelight away 
from her just then. She was generous, but not to a fault. 

"Funny sort of fellow you picked 
for a husband, Ronnie," her father 
said, when they were alone, in the 
back of the car. "Not, mind you," 
he added scrupulously, "that he 
looks any funnier, than your seventh 
and fourth . . . But those were 
mighty queer-looking friends he 
bad with him." 

"Those weren't his friends; they 
were the Furies." Veronica explained. 

Her father listened restlessly. 
"But you can't marry a man pursued by the Furies. Think how it'll 
look when you come down the aisle 
at St. James'." 

"Oh, that's all right," she assured 
him. "Everybody will just think 
they're bridesmaids." 

"But why are the Furies pursuing him?" he persisted. "Stands to 
reason he must have done something to rate them." 

"Oh-, probably something completely trivial," Veronica replied, 
for she didn't want to admit that 
she'd used all her wiles on Floyd 
and yet had failed to find out. 



"Floyd is, if anything, too highprincipled. In fact, if he weren't 
pursued by the Furies, I'd say he 
was downright dull." 

"The- Furies don't pursue people 
for trivia," her father persisted. 
"Do you happen to know whether 
he killed his father and married his 
mother?" 

"No," Veronica replied assuredly, "because he told me he'd never 
been married. And Floyd is notoriously truthful. 

On the other side of town, Floyd 
managed to get the Furies out of 
the taxicab and into the lobby of his 
apartment house without incident. 
However, when the self-service elevator arrived, it already bore Mrs. 
Buchheister, of 4G, up from the 
basement with a load of wet laundry. 

"Back from your travels, I see," 
she said, beaming at him. "My, 
you're looking well. And these are 
your aunts you've brought back 
from the old country. I can see the 
resemblance." 

" 'I breathe on thee curses,' " 
Mcgaera muttered under her breath, 
" 'I cut through thy marrow/For the 
insult that pierces/My heart like an 
arrow.' " 

"These are not my aunts," Floyd 
said coldly. "They are the Eumenides." 

"Pleased to meet you, Miss Eumenide." Mrs. Buchheister beamed 
impartially at each Fury. "As soon 
as you get settled, you must come 
down to my place for a glass of tea 
and a piece of strudel." 



FANTASTIC UNIVERSE 



Alecto glared at her. "WJiy . . . 
why ... !" 

"Why, we'd be delighted," Tisiphone said. "There's no harm in 
being polite," she explained, after 
Mrs. Buchheister had left them with 
effusive farewells. ''Fair's fair — 
we're not pursuing her." 

"I'd almost sooner pursue anyone 
than this twerp !" Megaera snapped, 
as they got out on the fifth floor. 
"Criminals aren't what they used 
to be." 

"Now, Megaera," Alecto declared 
reprovingly, as Floyd unlocked the 
door to 5G, "if you underestimate 
Floyd, you will lower our own prestige. His crime was the most horrible one known to God or man, 
and I'll thank you not to forget it." 

"I won't," said Megaera, gazing 
drearily at the interior of Floyd's 
modest apartment. "I need something to raise my spirits. Who 
would have thought the Erinyes 
would ever come to this?" 

The Furies screamed and howled 
all night, but on -West Eighty-fifth 
Street pandemonium is commonplace, and Floyd was glad for this 
chance to get even with his neighbors. 

"Ah, family life, there's nothing 
like it," said Mrs. Buchheister to 
Mr. Buchheister, as they sipped tea 
and listened dreamily to the yeHs 
from upstairs. "So nice for Mr. ( 
Smathers to have his aunts with 
him. I always felt so sorry for the 
poor boy, living alone like that , . . 
Such nice ladies, too. I must 



have them over some afternoon." 

"Company, company, company!" 
Mr. Buchheister shouted. "Never a 
moment's peace! When the house 
isn't full of your half-witted 
friends, you're out gadding. Not a 
clean shirt to put on when I go to 
the office and still she gads!" 

"Half-witted!" Mrs. Buchheister 
shrieked. "Look who's talking. The 
s.ilary you get, your boss should be 
glad you don't come in naked, let 
alone with a clean shirt." 

She hurled her glass of tea at her 
husband. The wet tea bag hit him 
smack in the eye, making him forget 
he was a gentleman. He riposted 
with a jar half full of strawberry 
/am. The battle was on . . , 

Upstairs, one by one, the Furies 
ceased their activities to listen in 
reluctant admiration . . . 

Ill 

Floyd could not long retain his 
anonymity, for as soon as Veronica's 
press agent got the story from her 
he gave it to the newspapers, and 
Floyd and the Furies were interviewed innumerable times. They 
were also asked by. the landlord to 
leave the apartment house. 

"I'm sorry, Mr. Smathers, but the 
other tenants won't stand for no 
mythological Greeks. They say it 
gives the house a bad name. Everybody knows what them Greek gods 
was like." 

So Floyd moved to Park Avenue, 
where Furies were welcomed. He 
was able to afford Park Avenue be


FLOYD AND THE EUMENIDES 



cause he had a fine new job on 
Madison. When Mr. Levjoy had 
heard of Floyd's changed status he 
had, with tears in his eyes, begged 
the young man to take back his old 
position at twice the salary. 

But Floyd had refused. "It was 
the Acropolis Dried Fig Company 
to which I owe ray success," he had 
said, "and' it is the Hermetic Advertising Agency, which handles the 
Acropolis account, that shall have 
my services. My chief duty will be 
to write copy for Acropolis Dried 
Figs, because it will come — " and he 
bowed to several members of the 
press who happened to be standing 
nearby "—from the heart." 

"And so he went to Hermetic — at 
ten times his previous salary. Mr, 
Mr. Solon, director of Hermetic, 
was overjoyed. "A man pursued by 
the Furies is just what every advertising agency wants and needs." 

He turned to the Furies themselves. "And, if you ladies could be 
persuaded to extend your activities 
to the other members of the staff, I 
think I may assure you of a not 
insubstantial bonus when the glad 
Vuletide season rolls round." 

"Bonus!" Alecto repeated in a 
terrible voice. "Are you under the 
impression, sir, that we are on your 
payroll?" 

'"How much do we get?" Tisiphone asfeed eagerly. "I'm dying to 
get same new clothes. I've worn 
these old rags for thousands of 
years." 

"They are the classical garb of 
the Furies," Alecto retorted, "the 



117 

purple-tinctured robes on which 
Athena herself has commented favorably. It would be sacrilege to 
change ! . . But what's this about 
our being employed here?" 

"It was a package deal," Floyd 
explained. "Come, girls . . ." 

"Whole thing smacks of peonage 
to me," Megaera muttered. "Come 
to think of it, I could use a new 
chiton myself." 

"There's going to be a problem 
space- wise," Mr. Solon mused. 
'Where are we going to squeeze in 
four desks?" 

"Only one's necessary," Floyd assured him. "The Furies don't work 
at desks. They just stand behind me 
and shriek." 

"Excellent!" Mr. Solon beamed. 
"Just the right atmosphere. Now, 
remember, kids — " and he put his 
arms around Floyd and the nearest 
Fury " I'm expecting great things 
out of the four of you." 

And so Floyd, as the man engaged to Veronica Van Brunt and 
pursued by the Furies, became a 
popular social figure. He was invited to all the really important social events and acquired a surprising amount of savoir faire, amour 
propre, and je tie sais quoi f though 
not enough to make up for a lifetime spent without them. 

However, his love life was -not 
altogether smooth for, spurred on 
by her curiosity, augmented by her 
father's, Veronica kept trying to ferret out the nature of the crime for 
which Floyd was being pursued by 
the Furies. 



FANTASTIC UNIVERSE 



"But I tell you, my sweet," he insisted, "it was a mere nothing." 

"How dare you say that ! ' 
Megaera shrieked, "The Furies do 
not pursue men for a mere nothing!" 

"Just between us girls," Veronica 
cajoled, turning to her, "tell me— 
what did lie do?" 

"The Furies are instruments of 
divine wrath," Megaera replied, 
"not squealers. Let him tell you 
himself." 

"Tell me, darling, tell me," Veronica begged, embracing him. "I 
don't mind if you did kill your 
father and marry your mother, so 
long as you divorced, or otherwise 
disposed of her afterward. The 
studio frowns on bigamy." 

Floyd squirmed away, embarrassed. "Nothing like that at all. 
And 1 do wish you wouldn't be so 
demonstrative in public, Ronnie." 

At that the Furies laughed raucously, and Veronica opened her 
big blue eyes wide. Since she was an 
actress, she was used to being demonstrative in public. In fact, she 
was never at her best without an 
audience. 

"But they're going to be with us 
all the time, sweetie, so you might 
as well get used to it." 

"Golly," Floyd said, "I never 
thought of that. The three of them 
are going to watch us all the time. 
And you don't mind?" 

"There's only two of them 
now," Veronica said evasively. 

"So there you are!" he exclaimed, 
leaping to his feet. "Where's 



Alecto? Nothing's happened lo 
her?" 

"No, no, calm yourself — she's all 
right,'' Tisiphone soothed him. 
"We didn't say anything because 
we'd hoped you wouldn't notice." 

"She thought she was entitled to 
one night off in five thousand 
years," Megaera said belligerently. 
"And I must say I agree with her." 

"But'where is she?" 

Tisiphone blushed and patted the 
new stole, for which Alecto had accorded grudging permission and 
Floyd had paid. "Well, a man 
wheedled her into appearing on a 
television program called ' What's 
My Line,' I believe. He said she'd 
be a natural for it." 

"H seems to me," Floyd said 
sulkily, "that I might have been 
consulted. After all, when a man is 
entitled to three Furies someone 
might at least inform him wIk-ii lie 
is being fobbed off with two." 

"Look, chum," Megaera sai3", 
"get this through your thick head. 
We're your persecutors, not your 
employees." 

"It's not as if I were a tyrant or 
anything," Floyd persisted stubbornly. "All I'm asking for is a 
little consideration." 

That night it was so Cjuict he 
could hardly sleep, for Megaera and 
Tisiphone decided to knock off and 
play Scrabble until their sister came. 
Alecto didn't get in until late and 
then the other Furies were so busy 
listening to all she had to tell that 
they forgot to get in any shrieking 
and singing. 



FLOYD AND THE BUMENIDES 



119 



Floyd lay on his bed feeling alone 
and neglected, listening to the 
merry voices from the next room as 
Alecto relayed the bon r^iots she had 
picked up at the studio, ". . . And 
then the tailor said to the professor, 
'Euripides ?' to which the professor 
replied 'Eumenides'." There were 
shrieks, but of laughter. Floyd hated 
to admit it, even to himself, but his 
Furies were slipping away from 
him ... 

. The next morning at the agency 
Mr. Solon glared at Floyd and 
greeted Alecto w-tih humorous reproach. "You slyboots, you," he 
said, wagging an arch finger. 
"Never telling me you were going 
on the air. You have certain commitments to Hermetic, you know." 

"Floyd has, not us," Alecto reminded him. 

"True, but, frankly speaking, his 
job is dependent upon you ladies." 

"So fire him!" Megaera snapped. 
"See if we care." 

"There seems to be an impression 
around that we are Floyd's maiden 
aunts," Alecto told him. "A wholly 
eiToneoiis'impression, I might add, 
We are his persecutors, and wish 
him only harm." 

"Oh, you're just saying that!" 
Mr. Solon smiled. "You know you 
love Floyd like a son." 

"Know what we do with our sons 
in Greece?" Megaera asked. "We 
bake 'em in pies and eat 'em." 

Mr. Solon laughed. "What a 
sense of humor ! You ought to be on 
TV yourself . . . And, speaking of 
that, I've got a little business propo


sition for you, girls. How would all 
three of you like to go on the air as 
a team?" 

".Well, I don't know;" Alecto 
said dubiously. "It would mean 
leaving Floyd alone." 

"Only for a few hours. He's a 
b% boy now. He can take care of 
himself." 

"Ummm," Alecto pondered, "We 
do have a contract, you know, and 
with an Agency higher than Hermetic," 

"Just wants to hog the limelight 
for herself," Megaera said jealously. " 'Mark my word, I tell thee 
truly, /Pride, that lifts itself unduly, 
Had a godless heart for sire./ 
Healthy-minded moderation /Wins . 
the wealthy consummation,/ Every 
heart's desire.' " 

"Now, Meg," Alecto replied, 
wounded, "you know I'm not that 
kind at all. I'm just thinking of our 
duty." 

"Duty, shmooty," Tisiphone interposed, stars in her eyes. "I've always wanted to be an actress ever 
since I ,was turned down by the 
Bacchantes." 

"And listen, girls," the tempter 
pressed his point, "this is real hightype stuff, fit for the gods. Acropolis Dried Figs plans to put on a 
series of classical dramas — something like the BBC's Third Programme." 

"I have heard the Third Programme very well spoken of," 
Alecto conceded. 

"They plan to open the scries 
with ^Eschylus's Eumenides!" Mr. 



FANTASTIC UNIVERSE 



Solon cried, ecstatic at his own brilliance. "Imagine, Acropolis Dried 
Figs now present The Furies, by 
ALscbylus, featuring the original 
Eumenides." 

"Gee, the title part!" Megaera 
exclaimed. "Sounds good to me." 

"All three of us leaving at 
once . . ." Alecto murmured. "If at 
least one of us were to stay with 
him. Tizzy, you're youngest I" 

"Oh, no you don't!" Tisiphone 
exclaimed. "Look, Allie," she 
pleaded, "who'll know if all of us 
go out at once? We're so far away 
from Greece They couldn't get at us 
even if They did find out. Let's do 
it." 

"All right," Alecto conceded. 
"Just this once." 

Tisiphone clapped her hands. 

"We're making some slight 
changes in the play," Mr. Solon 
added, "to make it conform to 
prcscnt-day tastes. It's going to be a 
musical." 

"It always was a musical," Alecto 
informed him in a superior manner. 
"In the Greek drama, the choruses 
were all sung." 

"Remember that catchy number 
that they hummed all over Athens 
in. the fall of 458 B.C. T' Tisiphone 
mused "Do I!" Megaera repeated 
reminiscently. "Remember how we 
didn't have to shriek to drive men 
mad that year? All we had to do 
was sing it." 

And the three sisters burst into 
song: "'For the Furies work readily / Vengeance unsparing, / Surely 
and steadily/Ruin preparing. /Dark 



crimes strictly noted, /Sure-memoried they store them;/ And, judgment once voted, /Prayers vainly implore them./For they know no communion/With the bright-throned 
union/Of the gods of the day;/ 
Where the living appear not,/ 
Where the pale Shades near not,/ 
In regions delightless,/All sunless 
and sightless,/They dwell far 
away.' " 

Styles in music change over the 
centuries. Artist, copywriter, and account executive put down brush , 
pen, and whip respectively, and listened entranced. "With any luck — " 
Mr. Solon gleefully rubbed his 
hands " — we'll make a second Andrews Sisters out of you. Gee," he 
said -wistfully, "if we could only get 
Frank Sinatra for Orestes . . ." 

IV 

Floyd disapproved of the whole 
thing from start to finish. Mr. Solon 
had neglected to mention rehearsals 
when speaking of the few hours' 
leave that would be necessary, and 
the sisters, having made up their 
minds to appear, didn't quibble 
when they found out. Megaera even 
went so far as to call Floyd an old 
fuss-pot. 

He wouldn't even watch the performance from the studio audience, 
and, instead, prepared to view The 
Eumenides from the -Van Brunt 
game room, where he found himself alone with Veronica for the first 
time in months. But 'she was curiously restless and aloof. 



FLOYD AND THE EVME NIDES 



"What is it, dearest?" he asked, 
taking her hand. 

"Don't, Floyd," she protested, 
pulling away from him. "I don't 
know what it "is. Unless it's that I 
miss the girls." 

"You only love me for my 
Furies," he said sulkily. 

"Well," she said, "what other 
outstanding trait do you possess to 
make you worthy of me? Unless the 
horrible crime you committed gives 
you distinction. Now that we're 
alone, tell mc — " 

But just then the show came on. 
Floyd gasped when he saw what the 
clever make-up man had done to 
his quondam persecutors. The 
snakes on their heads had been 
bleached and curled into the latest 
coiffures, while the agelessness of 
immortality had been plucked and 
painted into the agelessness of the 
theatre. They were beautiful. Moreover, the brief tunics revealed hitherto unsuspected charms. 

" 'Ancient rights and hoary 
uses,' " they sang, "Now shall yield 
to young abuses./Right and wrong 
together chime,/If the vote/Fail to 
note/M other-murder for a crime/ 
Murder now, made nimble-handed/ 
Wide shall range without curtail;/ 
Sons against their parents banded/ 
Deeds abhorred/With the sword/ 
Now shall work, while ages rail.* " 

The audience went wild with enthusiasm and, paying no attention to 
the pleas of the announcer, who 
kept reminding them that time is of 
the essence in television, clamored 
for an encore. 



121 

"They'll never come back to you, 
Floyd," Veronica said mournfully. 
"Never. They're a hit. And Greece 
is far away . . ." 

"They've got to stay with me!" 
Floyd protested. "They can't leave 
me now. Why, they're my family. 
They're all I have." 

Veronica shook her golden head 
wisely. "Look at their faces. They're 
having the time of their lives. 
You've lost thcm'i Floyd." 

"Oh, well," he said, trying to put 
his arm around her, "at least I still 
have you, Ronnie." 

But she drew away. "Frankly, 
Floyd, don't you think we may be 
making a mistake?" 

He stared at her. 

"Without Furies," she went on, 
"you're not much of a catch for 
someone in my position, are you ? 
Unless . . . Tell me— I insist upon 
it — what was the crime you committed?" 

He swallowed. "All right — it was 
blasphemy." 

"What!" 

"All the other passengers were 
mean to me," he blurted, "and I 
was afraid to answer back, and I 
was seething with repressed emotions — which isn't good for the 
health, you know. So I climbed to 
the top of Mount Olympus and 
blasphemed the gods, because I 
needed an outlet and I thought I 
was pretty safe. Never imagined 
They would answer back. 'Pooh to 
Zeus,' I said. 'Two poohs to Hera, 
and a loud sneer to Hermes.' ... I 
don't suppose I would' ve done it," 



7 22 



FANTASTIC UNIVERSE 



he confessed, "if I'd thoixght they 
could hear me." 

"You call that a crime? Floyd, I 
am more than disappointed in you !" 

"Blasphemy is too a crime." 

"But not that kind of blasphemy. 
The Greek gods arc mythological, 
so they don't count." 

"But—" 

"Floyd, I feel I have been the 
victim of a gross deception, and I 
must ask you . . ," 

"Oh, take your old ring!" and he 
flung it at her. "Just you wait," he 
yelled over his shoulder. "The 
Furies will come back to me and 
you'll be sorry." 

But he waited all night and they 
didn't come. They didn't even 
phone. Finally he sobbed himself to 
sleep. 

In the morning the phone rang. 
He ran to .it eagerly. But it was only 
Mr. Solon. "Smathers, do you know 
what those blasted Furies of yours 
have done? They signed up for a 
whole series with the Danai Gift 
Company." 

"But I thought Danai were handled by Colossus," Floyd said innocently. 

"They are! Smathers, you're 
fired!" 

Well, Floyd thought sadly, putting down the telephone, there sti*ll 
was the unemployment insurance — 
only it wouldn't go nearly as far on 
Park Avenue. 

Some time later, the buz2er at the 
door sounded and he crept miserably to answer it. 

It was Tisiphone, wearing a smart 



charcoal- tweed suit with the new 
lowered waistline, a blue mink 
scarf, and a small grey hat perched 
upon her herpetic blonde curls, She 
looked ravishing, 

"I came to pick up a few tilings 
we left," she murmured. "Thought 
I'd better ring the doorbell since — 
well — -we're no longer attached to 
you. May I come in?" 

Floyd stood aside so she could 
enter. "You did know, didn't you?" 
she asked anxiously. 

He nodded. "Solon told me when 
he Bred me." 

"Oh, Floyd, I am sorry! But, 
after all, we couldn't let your career 
stand in the way of ours." 

"How did you manage to get free 
from your — " he cast an involuntary glance upward " — other commitments." 

She laughed. "Oh, it all turned 
out to have been a mistake in the 
first place. We had a lawyer look 
into it. Tt seems the entire Western 
Hemisphere was out of Zeus' jurisdiction all the time. And, anyhow, 
the whole thing was unconstitutional. We're going to stay in America and become citizens, so there's 
not much chance of Their getting 
at us." 

But Floyd was more interested in 
his own future. "I trusted you," he 
said brokenly, "and you failed me." 

"Please, Floyd, don't make it any 
harder." 

"You deserted me. Now I'm , . . 
all alone." 

"Oh, don't say that! You still 
have Veronica." 



FLOYD AND THE EUMENIDES 



123 



He shook his head. "She ditched 
me, too. Seems she didn't love me 
for myself alone." 

"Floyd, -how 'awful !" Tisinhone's 
lovely eyes brimmed with tears. 

"Oh," he said with heavy lightness, "I didn't really love her either, 
I guess. I was just dazzled by her 
beauty." He took a good look at 
Tisiphone. "And you're much more 
beautiful than she is, Tizzy. Much. 
I was blind not to notice it." 

Her eyes shone. "O, Floyd, do 
you really think so?" 

He nodded. "But I couldn't expect you to sec anything in a perfectly ordinary guy like me. Ronnie 
was beautiful, but she was dumb. 



You have brains. You'd go for 
somebody handsome and .intellectual." 

"Oh, no, Floyd! For months T 
have been repressing the tender 
emotion for you that burgeoned in 
my breast." 

"Repressions are unhealthf nl." 

"1 know — but who could love a 
Fury?" 

"1 could," Floyd said stoutly. 

"Oh, Floyd!" They embraced. 

Floyd did not worry about taking 
on the responsibility of a wife, despite the fact that he had no job. He 
knew that the salary the three singing Eumenides woidd make would 
be enough for four. 

