TIME QUARRY BY CLIFFORD D. SIMAK 


SUTTON lay with his eyes tight 
shut and listened, heard the 
muted mutter of the coasting 
rocket tubes, sensed the walls of a 
ship around him, an air-filled shell 
hurtling through space. 

"Johnny," Sutton's mind called silently. "Where are we?" 

There was a gentle movement 
within his brain, 'as reassuring as a 
cheek laid against his own, and a 
voiceless voice answered: 

"We're in a ship, Ash, somewhere 
beyond Mars." 



"How many are in the ship with 
us?" . . 

"The android and the girl. And 
they are friendly. I told you they 
were friendly. Why didn't you pay 
attention?" 

"I can't trust anyone." 

"Not even me?" 

"Not your judgment, Johnny. 
You're new here."
"Not new, Ash. I know Earth and 
Earthmen. Much better than you 
know them. You're not the first 
Earthman I've known." 

"I'm sorry. I keep forgetting." 

"And we should be as one. We 
were before. Why has it been different lately?" 

Sutton's brain squirmed guiltily. 
"I don't know. Things have happened. So many things." 

"One mind, Ash. One mind, one 
body. Not two, but one. Not you, 
nor I. Us, singular." 

Eva said: 'You're awake, Ash. No 
use playing possum." • 

Sutton kept his eyes firmly shut. 
"You understand any of this, 
Johnny? This Morgan business?" 

"No, Ash." 

"But jou see a pattern?" 
• "I'm beginning to." 

"Then you're doing better than I 
am. Let me in on it." 

"Not yet, Ash. You're not ready." 

Eva Armour shook him. "Wake 
up," she said, 

Sutton opened his eyes. He was 
lying on a bunk and the girl was 
shaking him and she was angry and 
not at all gentle. Herkimer stuck 



TIME QUARRY 



103 



his head out of the door of the pilot 
shell. "Coming around?" he asked. 

"Sure," said Sutton. "I'm all 
right." 

He swung his legs off the bunk 
and sat on its edge. His hand went 
up and felt the lump on his jaw. 

"I had to hit you hard," said 
Herkimer regretfully. "I tried to calculate it as closely as I could. Hard 
enough to knock you out, not hard 
enough to cause any real damage." 

"You should have pasted him," 
said Eva sharply, "with everything 
you had. I never saw a more exasperating person. He's been lying here 
awake for the last five minutes." 

Herkimer squinted at the jaw with 
professional pride. "I do believe I 
got you on the button. First try, too." 

The ship, Sutton saw, was small. 
But it was clean and comfortable and 
there would have been room enough 
for four or five on a short trip. 
Herkimer, talking his precise, copybook speech, had said it was small, 
but serviceable. 

"I suppose," said Sutton, "you 
wouldn't consider telling me where 
you are taking me." 

"We don't mind at all," said Eva.. 
"We're going to an asteroid." 

"The hunting asteroid," added 
Herkimer. "The one you won from 
Benton. It has a lodge and a good 
supply of food and it is comfortable." 

"It will be pleasant," Sutton said, 
"-to do a little hunting." 

"You won't be doing any hunting," Herkimer replied. 



Sutton raised his head, glanced 
sharply from one to the other. 

"You're going to write a book," 
said Eva. "Surely you know about 
the book. The Revisionists are. . . ." 

"Yes," Sutton told her. 

"I know about the book — " 

He stopped, remembering, and his 
hand went involuntarily to his breast 
pocket. The book was there, all right, 
and something that crinkled when he 
touched it. He remembered that, too. 
The incredibly old letter that John 
H. Sutton had forgotten to open six 
thousand years before. 

""VTO," said Eva, "we didn't rob 
JLl you. We didn't even search 
you." 

"About the book," said Sutton, 
and then stopped again. He had 
been about to say he needn't bother 
about writing the book, "for he already had a copy. But something 
stopped him; he wasn't certain that 
it was smart just then to let them 
know about the copy he had. 

"I brought along the case," said 
Herkimer. "The manuscript's all 
there. I checked through it." 

"And plenty of paper?" asked 
Sutton, mocking him. 

"Oh, yes. More than enough." 

Eva Armour leaned toward Sutton, so close that he could smell the fragrance of her copper hair. "Don't you 
see," she asked, "how important it . 
is that you write this book? Don't 
you understand ?" 

Sutton shook his head. Important, 
he thought. Important for what? 



104 




 



He remembered the mouth that 
death pried open, the teeth glittering in the moonlight, and the words 
of a dying man still ringing sharply 
in his ears. 

"No, I don't understand," he said. 
"Maybe you can tell me." 

She shook her head. "You write 
the book. That's your job." 

XVII 

THE asteroid was enveloped in the 
perpetual twilight of the farfrom-Sun and its frosty peaks speared 
up like sharp, silvery . needles stabbing at the stars. 

The air was sharp and cold and, 
■thinner than on Earth and the wonder was, Sutton told himself, that 
any air could be ke^c on the place at 
all. Although at the cost that it had 
taken to make this asteroid habitable, 
it would seem that anything should 
be possible. The price of the atomic 
plants alone would run to the national debt of a medium-size planet, 
and without atomics there would be 
no power to run the atmosphere generators and gravity machines that 
supplied the air and held it in place. 

Once, he thought, Man had been 
content — had been forced to be content — to find his solitude at a lakeshore cottage or a hunting lodge or 
aboard a pleasure yacht. But now, 
with the wealth of a galaxy to spend, 
Man fixed up an asteroid at a fabulous cost or bought out a solar system at a bargain price. 



"There's the lodge," said Herkimer, and Sutton looked in the direction of the pointing finger. High up 
on the jigsaw horizon, he saw the 
shining metal building with its one 
pinpoint of light. 

"What's the light?" asked Eva. "Is 
there someone here?" 

Herkimer shrugged indifferently. 
"Someone forgot to turn it off when 
they left." 

Evergreens and birches, ghostlike 
in the starlight, stood in ragged 
clumps, like marching soldiers storming the height where the lodge was 
set. 

"The path is over here," said 
Herkimer. 

He led the way and they climbed, 
with Eva in the center and Sutton 
bringing up the rear. The path was 
steep and uneven and the light was 
none too good, for the thin atmosphere failed to break up the starlight. The stars themselves remained 
tiny, steely points of light that did 
not blaze or twinkle, but stood primly in the sky like dots upon a map. 

The lodge, Sutton saw, apparently sat upon a small plateau, and he 
knew that the plateau would be the 
work of Man. Nowhere else in all 
this jumbled landscape was it likely 
that one would find a level spot 
much bigger than a pocket handkerchief. 

A movement ot air, so faint and 
tenuous that it could be scarcely 
called a breeze, rustled down the 
slope and set the evergreens to moaning. Something scuttled from the 



TIME QUARRY 



105 



path and skittered up the rocks. 
From somewhere far away came a 
screaming sound that set Sutton's 
teeth on edge. 

"That's an animal," Herkimer said 
quietly. He stopped and waved his 
hand at the tortured, twisted rock. 
"Great place to hunt," he added, "if 
you don't break a leg." 

SUTTON looked behind him and 
saw for the first time the true, 
savage wildness of the place. A 
frozen whirlpool of star-speckled terrain stretched below .them . . . 
great, yawning gulfs of blackness, 
above which stood brooding peaks 
and spirelike pinnacles. 

Sutton shivered at the sight. "Let's 
get on," he said. 

They climbed the last hundred 
yards and reached the Man-made 
plateau, then stood and stared across 
the nightmare landscape, and as he 
looked, Sutton felt the cold hand of 
loneliness reach down with icy fingers to take him in its grip. For 
here was sheer, mad loneliness such 
as he had never dreamed. Here was 
the very negation of life and motion. 
Here was the stark, bald beginning 
when there was no life, nor even 
thought of life. Here anything that 
moved was an alien thing. 

A footstep crunched behind them 
and they swung around. A man 
moved out of the starry darkness. 
His voice was pleasant and heavy as 
he spoke to them: "Good evening. 
We heard you land and I walked out 
to meet you." 


Eva's voice was cold and just a 
little angry. "We had not expected 
anyone to be here." 

The man's tone stiffened. "I hope 
we are not trespassing. We are 
friends of Mr. Benton and he told 
us to use the place at our convenience." 

"Mr. Benton is dead," said Eva 
frostily-. "This man is the new 
owner." 

The man's head turned toward 
Sutton. "I'm sorry, sir. We did not 
'know. Of course, we'll leave the 
first moment that we can." 

"I see no reason," Sutton told 
him, "why you should not stay." 

"Mr. Sutton," said Eva, "came 
.here for peace and quiet. He expects to write a book." 

"A book," the man repeated. "An 
author, eh?" 

Sutton had the uncomfortable feeling that the man was laughing, not 
at him alone, but at the three of 
them. 

"Sutton?" asked the man, apparently thinking hard. "I don't seem to 
recall the name. But, then, I'm not 
a great reader." 

"I've never written anything before," explained Sutton. 

"Oh, well," said the man, laughing as if he were relieved, "that explains it." 

"It's cold out here," Herkimer said 
abruptly. "Let us get. indoors." 

"Certainly," said the man. "Yes, 
it is cold, although I hadn't noticed 
it. By the way, my name is Pringle. 
My partner's name is -Case." 



106 




 



, No one answered him and after a 
few seconds he turned around and 
trotted ahead of them, leading the 
way. 

The lodge, Sutton saw as they approached it, was larger than it had 
seemed from the valley where they 
hid brought the ship in. It loomed 
huge against the starlit backdrop. If 
one had not known that it was there, 
it might have been mistaken for an 
odd rock formation. 

The door opened as their feet 
sounded on the massive stone steps 
which led up to it. Another man 
stood there, stiff and erect and tall, 
thin, but with whipcord strength 
about him, as the light from inside 
the room outlined his figure harshly. 

"The new owner, Case," said 
Pringle, and it seemed to Sutton that 
ha emphasized the words just a bit 
too much. As if he meant his tone 
to be a warning. 

"Benton died, you know," said 
Pringle, and Case answered: "Oh, 
did he? How peculiar." 

Which, Sutton thought, was a 
funny thing to say. 

Case stood to one side to let them 
enter, then pulled shut the door. 

The room was immense, with onlyone lamp burning, and shadows 
pressed in upon them out of the 
dark corners and the cavernous atch 
of the raftered ceiling. 

"I am afraid," said Pringle, "that 
you'll have to look out for yourselves. Case and I are roughing it and 
we brought along no robots, although I can fix up something if 



you happen to be hungry. A hot 
drink, perhaps, and some sandwiches?" 

"TTTE ATE just before we 

VV landed," Eva said, "and 
Herkimer will take care of what few 
things we have." 

"Then take a chair," urged 
Pringle. "That one over there is comfortable. We can talk a bit." 

"Not right now, thanks. The trip 
was 'just'a little rough." 

"You're an ungracious young 
lady," Pringle said; and his' words 
were halfway between jest and anger. 

"I'm a tired young lady." 
■ Pringle walked to a wall, flipped 
up toggles. Lights sprang into being. 
"The bedrooms are upstairs," he 
said. "Off the balcony. Case and I 
have the first and second to the left. 
Take your pick from any of the 
rest." 

He moved forward to lead them 
up the stairs. But Case spoke up and 
Pringle stopped and waited, one 
hand on the lower curve of the stair 

rail. • 

"Mr. Sutton," said Case, "it seems 
to me I have heard your name somewhere." 

"I don't think so," said Sutton. 
"I'm a very unimportant person." 

"But you killed Benton." 

"No one said I killed him." 

Case did not laugh, but his voice 
said that if he had not been Case, 
he would have. "Nevertheless, you 
must have killed him. I happen to 
know that is the only way anyone 



TIME QUARRY 



107 



could get this asteroid. Benton loved 
it and this side of life he'd never 
give it up." 

"Since you insist, then I did kill 
Benton." 

Case shook his head, awed. "Remarkable," he said. "Absolutely remarkable." 

"Good night, Mr. Case," said Eva, 
and then turned to Pringle. "No 
need to trouble you. We will find 
our way." 

"No trouble," Pringle rumbled 
back. "No trouble at all." And, once 
again, he was laughing at them. 

He jogged lightly up the stairs. 

XVIII 

THERE was something wrong 
about Pringle and' Case. The 
very fact that they were here, at the 
lodge, was sinister. 

There had been mockery in 
Pringle's voice. He had been laughing at them all the time, laughingwith a sneering amusement, enjoying 
some thinly varnished joke that they 
, did not know. 

Pringle was a talker, a buffoon . . . 
but Case was stiff and straight and 
correct, and when he spoke his words 
were clipped and sharp. There was 
something about Case . . . some point 
. . . some resemblance to something 
that escaped Sutton at the moment. 

Sitting on the edge of his bed, 
Sutton frowned. 

If I could just remember, he told 
himself. If I could put my finger on 



that mannerism, on the way he talks 
and walks and holds himself erect. 
If I could associate that with a certain thing I can't identify, it would 
explain a lot. It might tell me who 
Case is, or what he is, or even why 
he's here. 

Case knew that I killed Benton. 
Case knows who I am. And he should 
have kept his mouth shut, but he had 
to let me know he knew, because that 
way he bolstered up his ego and even 
if he doesn't look it, his ego may 
need boosting. 

Eva didn't trust them, either, for 
she tried to tell me something when 
we parted at her door. I couldn't 
quite make out what it was from the 
way she moved her lips, although it 
looked like she was trying to say: 
"Don't trust them." 

As if I would trust anyone . . . 
anyone at all. 

Sutton wiggled his toes and stared 
at them, fascinated. He tried to 
wiggle them in series and they 
wouldn't wiggle that way. He tried 
to match the wiggling of each toe 
on each foot and they wouldn't 
match. 

I can't even control my own body, 
he thought, and it was a funny thing 
to .think. 

Pringle and Case were waiting for 
us, Sutton told himself, and wondered even as he said it if he might 
not be giving himself over to sheer 
imagery. For how could they be waiting when they could not have known 
that Herkimer and Eva would head 
for the asteroid? 



108 




 



He shook his head, but the belief 
that the two had been waiting for 
them stayed . . . 

After all, it was not so strange. 
Adams had known that he was coming back to Earth, returning home 
after twenty years. Adams knew and 
set a trap for him . . . and there 
was no way, absolutely no way that 
Adams could have known. • 

Why had Adams set the trap? 

Why had Buster run away to home/ stead a planet? 

Why had someone conditioned 
Benton to kill Sutton? 

Why had three men been waiting 
for Sutton when he came back to 
the Orion Arms? 

Why had Eva and Herkimer 
brought him to the asteroid ? 

To write a book, they had said. 
- But the book was written. 

The book . . . 

He reached for his coat, which 
hung from the back of a chair. From 
it, he took out the gold-lettered copy 
of the book and as he pulled it out, 
the letter came with it and fell upon 
■the carpet. He picked the letter up 
and put it on the bed beside him and 
opened the book to the flyleaf. 

"THIS IS DESTINY," it said, 
"By Asher. Sutton." 

Underneath the title, at the very 
bottom of the page, was a line of 
fine print. Sutton had to hold the 
book a little closer so that he could 
read it: 

Original Version 
And that was all. No date of pub
TIME QUARRY 



lication. No marks of copyright. No 
publisher's imprint. Just the title and 
the author and the line of print that 
said Original Version. 

As if, he thought ... as if the 
book were so well known, so firm 
a fixture in the lives of everyone, 
that anything other than the title and 
the author would be superfluous. 

HE TURNED two pages and 
they were blank, and then another page, and trie text began: 

We are not alone. 

No one euer is alone. 

Nat since the first faint stirring of the first flicker of life, 
on the first planet in the galaxy 
that knew the quickening of 
sentiency, has there ever been a 
single entity that walked or 
crawled or slithered down the 
path of life alone. 

And that was it, he thought. That 
is the way i mean to write, it. 

That was the way I wrote it. 

For I must have written it. Sometime, somewhere, I must have written it, for I hold it in my hands. 

He closed the book and put it back 
carefully in the pocket and hung the 
coat back on the chair. 

I must not read it, he told himself. I must not read and know the 
way that it will go, for then I would 
write the way that I had read it, and 
I must not do that. I must write it 
the way I know it is, the way I plan 
to write it. I must be honest, for 

10? 



someday the race of Man . . . and 
the races of other things as well 
. . . may know the book and read it 
and every word must be exactly so, 
and I must write so well and so simply that all can understand. " , 

He threw back the covers of the 
bed and lay down, and as he did, he 
saw the letter and picked it up. 

With a steady finger, he inserted 
his nail beneath the flap and ran it 
along the edge and the mucilage dissolved in a brittle shower of powder. He took the letter out and unfolded it carefully, so that it would 
not break and saw that it was typewritten, with many mistakes that 
were X'd out, as, if the man who 
wrote it had found a typewriter an 
unhandy thing to use. 

Sutton rolled over on one side 
and held the paper under the lamp 
and read the living words pf a man 
6,000 years dead. 

XIX 

Bridgeport, Wis., 
July 11, 1987 

I WRITE this letter to myself, so 
that the postmark may prove beyond controversy the day and year 
that it was written. I shall not open 
it, but shall place it among my effects against the day when someone 
— a far-distant member of my own. 
family, God willing — may open it 
and read. And reading, know the 
thing that I believe and think, but 



dare not say while I am still alive, 
lest someone call me touched. 

For I have not long to live. I have 
lasted more than a man's average 
span- and while I still am hale and 
hearty, I know full well the hand of _ 
time may miss a man at one reaping, 
and get him at the next. Hence, I 
hasten to introduce myself and the 
mystery I have come to know. 

My name is John H. Sutton and 
I, am a member of a numerous family 
which had its loots in the east, but 
one branch of which situated in this 
locality about one hundred years ago. 
I must ask, if the reader of this be" 
unacquainted with the Suttons, that 
my word be taken at face value without substantiating proof. However, I 
would like to state that we Suttons 
are a sober lot and not given to 
jokes, and that our reputation for 
integrity and honesty is singularly 
unquestioned. > 

While I was educated for the law, 
I soon found it not entirely to my 
liking and for the last forty years 
or more have followed the occupation of farming, finding more contentment in it than 1 ever found in 
law. For farming is an honest and a 
soul-warming job that gives one contact with the first essentials of living. 

For the past number of years I 
have not been physically able to continue with the more strenuous labor 
of the farm," but pride myself that 
I still do most of the chores and still 
hold active management, which 
means that I am in the habit of mak


110 




 



ing regular tours of the acres to see 
how things are coming. 

Of late years, as. my L step has 
slowed and I have found exertion tiring, I have fallen into the habit of 
arbitrarily setting for myself certain 
places of rest during my inspection 
of the farm. One spot has always 
had, from the very first, a sense of 
the special for me. If I were still a 
child, I might best explain it by saying that it seems to be 'an enchanted 
place. 

It is a deep cleft in the bluff thatruns down to the river valley and it 
is located at the north end -of the 
high "pasture. There is a fair-sized 
boulder at the top of the .cleft,. and 
this boulder is shaped appropriately 
for sitting, which may be one of the 
reasons why I like it, for I am a man 
who takes to comfort. 

From the boulder one may see the 
sweep of the river valley with a 
stressed third-dimensional quality, 
due no doubt to the height of the 
vantage point plus the clearness of. 
the air, although at times the whole 
scene is enveloped with a blue mist 
of particularly tantalizing and lucid 
clarity. 

IT IS as if the place were tingling 
. . . waiting for some"thing to 
happen ... as if that one particular 
spot- held great possibilities for 
drama or for revelation. There, on 
that one area of Earth, something 
could or might happen which could 
happen nowhere else on the entire 
planet. I have, at times, tried to 



imagine what that happening might 
be, and I shrink from telling some 
of the possibilities that I have 
imagined, although, in truth, in other 
things I am perhaps not imaginative enough. 

To approach the boulder, I cut 
across the lower end of the bluff pasture, a place which is often in better grass than the rest of the grazing 
area, for the cattle, for some reason, 
do not often venture there. The pasture ends in a thin growth of trees, 
the forerunners of the mass of foliage which sweeps down the bluff 
side. Just a few rods inside the trees 
is the boulder, and because of the 
trees the boulder is always shaded, 
no matter what the time of the day, 
but the view is unobstructed because 
of the rapid shelving of the ground. 

One day about ten years ago — 'July 4, 1977, to be exact — I approached this place and found a man 
and a strange machine at the lower 
end of the pasture, just clear of the 
trees. 

I say machine, because that is what 
it appeared to be, although, to tell 
the truth, I could not make too much 
of it. It was like an egg, pointed 
slightly at each end, as an egg might 
look if someone stepped on it and 
did not break it, but spread it out, 
so that the ends became more pronounced. It had no working parts 
outside and so far as I could see not 
even a window, yet it was apparent 
that the operator of it sat inside. 

For the man had what appeared 
to be a door open and was standing 



TIME QUARRY 



in 



outside and working at what may 
have been the motor, although, when 
I ventured a look, it appeared like no 
motor I had ever seen before. The 
fact is that I never did get a good 
look at the motor or at anything else 
about the contraption. The man, as 
soon as he saw me, adroitly maneuvered me away from it and engaged 
me in such pleasant and intelligent 
conversation that 1 could not, without rudeness, change the subject long 
enough to pay attention to all the 
things that stirred my curiosity. I remember now, thinking back, that 
there were many things which I 
wanted to ask him, but which I never 
got around to, and it seems to me 
now that he must have anticipated 
these very questions and deliberately and skillfully steered me away 
from them. 

The plain truth is that he never 
did tell me who he was or where 
he came from or why he happened 
to be in my pasture. And while that 
may seem rude to the reader of this 
account, it did not seem rude at the 
time, for he was such a charming 
person. ' . 

He seemed well informed on farming, although he looked like no 
farmer. Come to think of it, I do 
not remember exactly what he did 
look like, only that he was dressed 
in a way which I had never seen before. Not garishly, nor ourlandishly, 
nor even in such a manner that one 
would think of him as foreign, but 
in clothing which had certain subtle 
differences difficult to pin down. 



He complimented me on the good 
growth of the pasture grass and 
asked me how .many head of cattle 
we ran there and how many we were 
milking and what was the most satisfactory manner we had found to finish off good beef, il answered him 
as best I could, being very interested 
in his line of talk, and he kept the 
conversation going with appropriate 
comment and questions, some of 
which I now realize were meant as 
subtle flattery, although at the time 
I did not think so. 

HE HAD a tool of some sort in 
his hand and now he waved 
it at ,a field of corn across the fence 
and said it looked like a good stand 
and asked me if I thought it would 
be knee high by the Fourth. I told 
him that today was the Fourth and 
that it was. a mite better than knee 
high and that I was very pleased with 
it, since it was a new brand of seed 
that I was trying for the first time. 
He looked a little taken aback and 
laughed and said, "So, it's the 
Fourth," and that he had been so 
busy lately he had got his dates 
mixed. And then, before I could 
even wonder how a man could get 
his dates so mixed that he could 
miss the ■Fourth of July, he was off 
again on another tack. 

He asked how long I had lived 
here and when I told him, he asked 
if the family hadn't been here a 
long time; somewhere, he said, he 
had heard the name before. So I told 
him that we had and before I knew 



112 




 



it, he had me telling all about the 
family, including some anecdotes 
which we usually do not tell outside 
the family circle, since they are not 
exactly the kind of stories that we 
would care to have known about ourselves. For while our family is conservative and honorable in the main 
and better in most things than many 
others, there is no family which does 
not have a skeleton or two to hide 
away from view. 

We talked until it was long past 
the dinner hour and when I noticed 
this, I asked him if he would not 
take the meal with us, but he thanked 
me and said that in just a short while 
he would have the trouble fixed and 
would be on his way. He said that 
he had virtually completed whatever 
repair was needed when I had appeared. - I apologized for delaying 
him, but he assured me that he did 
not mind at all, that it had been 
pleasant to spend the time with me. 

As I left him, I managed to get 
in one question. I had been intrigued 
by the tool which he had held in his 
hand during our conversation and I 
asked him what it was. He showed it 
to me and told me it was a wrench, 
and it did look something like a 
wrench, although not very much so. 

After J had eaten dinner and had 
a nap, I walked back to the pasture, 
determined to ask the stranger some 
of the questions which I realized, 
by this time, he had avoided. 

The machine was gone and the 
stranger, too, with only a print in 
the pasture grass to show where the 



machine had stood. But the wrench 
was there and when I bent to pick 
it up, I saw that one end was discolored and upon investigation I found 
that the discoloration was blood. I 
have, many times since, berated myself for not having had an analysis 
made to determine whether the blood 
was human or from some animal. 

Likewise, I have wondered many 
times just what happened there. Who 
the man was and how he came to 
leave the wrench and why the heavier 
end of the wrench was stained with 
blood. 

I still make the boulder one of 
my regular stops and the boulder still 
is always in the shade_ and the view 
still is unobstructed and the air over 
the river valley still lends to the 
scene its strangely deep three : dimensional effect. And the sense of tingling expectancy still hangs above the 
spot, so I know that the place had 
not been waiting for this one strange 
happening alone, but that other 
strange happenings still may occur. I 
do not hope nor expect that I shall 
see another, for the life of man is 
but a second in comparison with the 
time of planets. 

THE wrench which I picked up is 
still with us and it has proved 
a very useful tool. As a matter of 
fact, we have dispensed with most 
of our other tools and use it almost 
alone, since it will adjust itself to 
almost any nut or stud or will hold 
a shaft of almost any size from turning. There is no need of adjustment, 



TIME QUARRY 



113 



nor is there any adjustment device 
tljat can be found. One simply applies it' to whatever piece, of metal 
one wants to take a grip upon and 
the tool adjusts itself. No great 
amount of pressure or strength is 
needed to operate the wrench. It appears to have the. tendency to take 
whatever slight pressure one exerts 
upon it and multiply that pressure to 
the exact point needed. 

However, we are very careful to 
use the wrench only when there are 
no outside eyes to see it, for it smacks 
too much of magic or of witchcraft 
to be allowed on public view. The 
general knowledge that we possessed 
such a wrench almost certainly would 
lead to unwholesome speculation 
among our neighbors. And since we 
are an honest and respectable family, 
such a situation is the furthest from 
our wish. 

NONE of us ever talk about the 
man and the machine I found 
in the bluff pasture, even among 
ourselves. We seem tactfully to recognize that it is a subject which does 
not befit sober farmers. 

But while we do not talk about 
it,- I do know that I, myself, think 
about it much. I spend more time 
than usual at the boulder resting 
place, just why, I do not know, unless it is in the feeble hope that somehow I may find a clue which either 
will substantiate or disprove the 
theory I have formed to account for 
the happening. 

For I believe, without proof of 



any sort, that the man was a man 
A'ho came from time and that the 
machine was a time machine and the 
wrench is a tool which will not be 
discovered nor manufactured for 
more years to come than I might 
possibly guess. 

I believe that somewhere in the 
future, Man has discovered a method 
by which he moves through time and 
that undoubtedly he has evolved a 
very rigid code of ethics and practices, in order to prevent the paradoxes which would result from indiscriminate time traveling or meddling in the affairs of other times. 

I believe that the leaving of the 
wrench in my time provides. one of 
those paradoxes which in itself is 
simple, but which under certain circumstances might lead to many complications. For that reason, I have 
impressed upon the family the strict 
necessity of keeping it secret. 

Likewise, I have come to the conclusion — also unsupported — that the 
cleft, at the head of which the boulder is located, may be a road through 
time, or at least part of a road, a 
single point where our present time 
coincides very closely through the 
operation of some as-yet-unknown 
principle with another time far removed from us. It may be a place in 
space-time where less resistance is encountered in traveling through time 
than in other places, and, having 
been discovered, is usej^cjuite frequently. Or it may simply be that it 
is a time road more deeply rutted, 
more frequently used than many 



114 




 



other time roads, with the result that 
whatever medium , separates one time 
from another time had been worn 
thin, or had bulged a bit, or whatever would happen under such a circumstance. 

That reasoning might explain the 
strange eerie tingling of the place, 
the sense of expectancy. 

The reader must bear in mind, of 
course, that I am an old, old man, 
that I 'have outlived the ordinary 
span of human life and that I continue to exist through some quirk of 
human destiny. While it does not 
seem so to myself, it may be that 
my mind is not as sharp or keen not 
as analytical as it may once have 
been, and that as a result I am susceptible to ideas which would be rejected by a younger person. 

The one bit of proof, if one may 
call it proof, that I have to support 
my theories is that the man I met 
could well have been a future man, 
might well have sprung from some 
civilization further advanced than 
ours. For it must be apparent to 
whoever reads this letter that in my 
talk with him he used me for ' his 
own purpose, that he pulled the wool 
over my eyes as easily as a man of 
my day might pull it over the eyes 
of a Homeric Greek or some member of Attila's tribe. He was, I am 
sure, a man versed in semantics and 
in psychology. Certainly, he always 
was one long jump ahead of me. 

I write this now only so that my 
theories, which I shrink from telling 
in my lifetime, may not be wholly 



lost, but may be available at some 
future time when a more enlightened knowledge than we have today 
may be able to make something out 
of them. And I hope that, reading 
them, one will not laugh, since I 
am dead. For if one did laugh, I am 
afraid that, dead as I might be, 1 
would surely know it. 

THAT is the failing of us Suttons 
— we cannot bear to be. made 
the butt of laughter. 

And in case one may believe that 
my mind is twisted, I herewith enclose a physician's certificate, signed 
just three days ago, asserting that 
upon examination he found me 
sound of body and mind. 

But the story I have to tell is not 
yet entirely done. These additional 
events should have been included in 
earlier sequence, but I found no 
place in which they logically would 
fit. 

They concern the strange incident 
of the stolen clothing and the coming of William Jones. 

The clothing was stolen a few 
days after the incident in the high 
pasture. Martha had done the washing early in the day,~ before the heat 
of the summer sun, and hung it on 
the line. When she went to take in 
the clothes, she found that an old 
pair of overalls of mine, a shirt" belonging to Roland and a couple pair 
of socks, the ownership of which I 
fear I have forgotten, had disappeared. 

The theft made quite a stir among 



TIME QUARRY 



115 



us„ for thievery is a thing which 
does not often happen in our community. We talked about it off and 
on for several days, and finally agreed 
that the theft must have been the 
work of some passing tramp. . Even 
that explanation was scarcely satisfactory. We are off the beaten way and 
tramps do not often pass, and that 
year, as I remember it, was a year of 
great prosperity and there were few 
tramps. 

It was two weeks or so after the 
theft of the clothing that William 
Jones came to the house and asked 
if we might need a hand to help 
with the harvest. We were glad to 
take him on, for we were short of 
help and the wages that he asked 
were far below the going pay. We 
took him on for the harvest only, 
but he proved so capable that we 
have kept him all of ten years. Even 
as I write this, he is out in the barnyard readying the binder for the 
small grain cutting. 

There is a funny thing about William Jones. In this country a man 
soon acquires a nickname or at least 
a variation of his own. But William 
Jones always has been William Jones. 
He never has been Will or Bill or 
Willie. Nor has he been Spike or 
Bub or Kid.- Not even Jonesy. There 
is a quiet dignity about him that 
makes everyone respect him, and his 
love of work and his quiet, intelligent interest in farming raise him far 
above the usual status of a hired 
hand in the community. 

He never drinks, a thing for which 



I am thankful, although at one time 
I had my misgivings. For when he 
came to us, he had a bandage on his 
head and he explained to me, 
shamefacedly, that he had been hurt 
in a tavern brawl across the river 
somewhere in Crawford County. 

I don't know when it was that 
I began to wonder about William 
Jones. Certainly it -was not at first, 
for I accepted him for what he pretended to be, a man looking for 
work. If there was any resemblance 
to the man I had talked with down 
in the pasture, I did not' notice it 
then. And, now, having seen it at 
this late date, I wonder if my 
imagination, running riot with my 
theories of time travel, may not have 
conditioned me to a point where I 
see a mystery crouching back of every 
tree. 

But the conviction has grown 
lipon me through the years I have associated with him. For all that he 
tries to keep his place, attempts to 
adapt his idiom to match our idiom, 
there are times when his speech hints 
at an education and an understanding 
one' would not expect to find in a 
man who works on a farm for $75 
a month and board. 

rrtHERE, too, is his natural shyness, 
-L which is a thing one would expect to find if a man were deliberately attempting to adapt himself to 
a society that was not his own. 

And there is the matter of the 
,clothes. Thinking back, I can't be 
sure about the overalls, for all over


116 




 



alls look alike. But the shirt was 
exactly like the shirt that had been 
stolen from the line, although I tell 
myself that it would not be improbable for two men to own the same 
kind of shirt. And he was barefooted, which seemed a funny thing 
even at the time, but he explained it 
by saying that he had been down on 
his luck and I remember I advanced 
him enough money to buy some 
shoes and socks. But it turned out 
that he didn't -need the socks, for he 
had two pair in his pocket. 

A few years ago I decided several 
times that I would speak to him 
about the matter, but each time my 
resolution failed and now I know 
I never will. For I like William 
Jones and William Jones likes me 
and I would not for the world destroy that mutual liking by a question 
that might send him fleeing from 
the farm. 

There is yet one other thing which 
goes to make William Jones unlike 
most farm hands. With his first 
money from his work here, he bought 
a typewriter and during the first 
two or three years that he was with 
us, he spent long hours of his eveings in his room using the typewriter and tramping about the room, 
as a man who is thinking is apt to 
walk. 

And then one day, in the early 
morning, before the rest of us had 
gotten from our beds, he took a great 
sheaf of paper, apparently the result 
of. those long hours of work, and 
burned it. Watching from my bed


room window, I watched him do it 
and he stayed until he was sure that 
the last scrap of the paper had been 
burned. Then he turned around and 
walked back slowly to the house. 

I never mentioned to him the burning of the paper, for I felt, somehow, that it was something he did 
not wish another man to know. 

I might go on for many pages and 
write down many other inconsequential, trivial things which rattle in my 
skull, but they would not add one 
iota of actual information, and 
might, in fact, convince the reader 
that I am in my dotage. 

To whom this letter may reach, 
I wish to make one last assurance. 
While my theory may be wrong, 1 
would have him or her believe that 
the facts I have told are true. I would 
have him or her know that I did 
see a strange machine in the high 
pasture and that I did talk with a 
strange man, that I picked up a 
wrench with blood upon it, that 
clothes were stolen from the wash 
line and that even now a man named 
William Jones is pumping himself a 
drink of water at the well, for the 
day is very hot. 

Sincerely, 

John H. Sutton 

XX . ' < . 

ASHER SUTTON folded the letter and the crackling of the old 
paper rippled across the quietness of 



TIME QUARRY 



117 



the room unlike a spiteful snarl of 
thunder. 

Then he recalled something and 
unfolded the sheaf of leaves again 
and found the thing that had been 
mentioned. It was yellow and old 
... not as good a quality of paper 
as the letter had been ' written on. 
The writing was by hand, with ink, 
and the lines were faded so they 
hardly could be read. The date was 
unclear, except for the final 7. 

Sutton puzzled it out: 

John H. Sutton today has 
been examined by me and I find 
him sound -of mind and body. 

The signature was a scrawl that 
probably could not have been read 
even when the ink was scarcely dry, 
but there were two letters that stood 
out fairly clearly at the very end. 

The letters were M. D. 

Sutton stared across the room and 
saw in his mind the scene of that 
long gone day. 

"Doctor, I've a mind to make a 
will. Wonder if you could . . . 

For John H. Sutton never would 
have told the doctor the real reason 
for that slip of paper ... the real 
reason why he wanted it established 
that he was not insane. 

Sutton could imagine him. Ponderous in his walk, slow, deliberate, 
taking plenty of time to think things 
over, placing vast values on qualities 
and fictions which even in that day 
were shopworn and losing caste from 
centuries of over-glorification. 



An old tyrant to his family, more 
likely. A fuddy-duddy among his 
neighbors, who laughed behind his 
back. A -man lacking in humor and 
crinkling his brow over fine matters 
of etiquette and ethics. 

He had been trained for the law 
and he had a lawyer's mind; that 
much, at least, the letter told with 
clarity. A lawyer's mind for detail, 
and a landed man's quality of slowness, and an old man's garrulity. 

But there was no mistaking John 
Sutton's sincerity. He believed he had 
seen a strange machine and had 
talked with a strange man and had 
picked up a wrench stained with . . . 

A wrench! 

Sutton sat upright on the bed. 

THE wrench had been in the 
trunk. He had held it in his 
hand. He had picked it up and 
tossed it on the pile of junk. 

Sutton's hand trembled as he slid 
the letter back into its envelope. First 
it had been the stamp that had intrigued him, a stamp that was worth 
Lord knew how much . . . then it 
was the letter itself and the mystery 
of its being sealed . . . and now there 
was the wrench. And the wrench 
clinched everything. 

For the wrench meant that there 
actually had been a strange machine 
and a stranger man ... a man who 
knew enough semantics and psychology to talk a talkative, self-centered 
oldster off his mental feet. Fast 
enough on the uptake to keep this 
inspection-tripping farmer from ask


118 




 



ing him the very questions the man 
was bubbling to ask. 

Who are you and where did you 
come from and what's that machine 
and how does it run and I never saw 
the like of it before . . . 

Hard to answer, if they were ever 
asked. 

They were not asked. 

But Asher Sutton chuckled, thinking of John H. Sutton's having the 
last word and how it had come about. 
It would please the old boy if he 
could only know, but, of course, he 
couldn't. 

There had been some slips naturally. The letter had. been lost or mislaid . . . and .finally, somehow, it had 
come into the hands of another Sutton, 6,000 years removed. 

And Asher Sutton was the only 
Sutton for whom the letter would 
have done a bit of good. For the letter tied in someplace, had some significance in the mystery that involved 
him. 

Men who traveled in time. Men 
whose time machines went haywire 
and came to landfall or timefall, 
whichever you might call it, in a cow 
pasture. And other men who fought 
in time and screamed through folds 
of time in burning ships and crashed 
in a swamp. 

A battle back in '83, the dying 
youth had said. Not a battle at 
Waterloo or off the Martian orbit, 
but back in '83. And the man had 
cried his name just before he died 
and lifted himself to make a sign 
with strangely twisted fingers. 

TIME QUARRY . 



So I am known, thought Sutton, 
up in '83 and beyond '83, for the 
boy said back and that means that, 
in his time, a time three centuries 
yet to come is historically the past. 

Sutton reached for his coat again 
and slid the letter into the pocket 
with the book, then rolled out of 
bed. He reached for his clothes and 
began to dress. 

Pringle and Case had used a spaceship to get to the asteroid. Sutton 
had to find that ship. 

. XXI 

THE lodge was deserted, big and 
empty with an alienness in its 
emptiness that made Sutton, who 
should have been accustomed to 
alienness, shiver as he felt it touch 
him. 

He stood for a moment outside his 
door and listened to the whispering 
of the place, the faint, illogical 
breathing of the house, the creak of 
frost-expanded walls, the caress of 
wind against a windowpane, and the 
noises that could not be explained 
by either frost or wind, the living 
sound of something that is not alive. 

The carpeting in the hall deadened 
his footsteps as he went down it toward the stairs. Snores came from 
one of the two rooms which Pringle 
had said that he and Case occupied, 
and Sutton wondered for a moment 
which one of them it was that snored. 
• He went carefully down the stairs, 
trailing his hand along the bannister ' 

11? 



to guide him. When he reached the " 
massive living space, he waited, 
standing motionless so that his" eyes 
might become accustomed to the 
deeper dark that crouched there like 
lairing animals. 

Slowly the animals took the shapes 
of chairs and couches, tables, cabinets and cases. One of the chairs, 
he saw, had a man sitting in it. 

As if he had become aware that 
Sutton had seen him, the man stirred, 
turning his face toward him. And 
although it was too dark to see his 
features, Sutton knew that the man 
in the chair was Case. 

Then, he thought, the man who 
snores is Pringle, although he knew 
it made no difference which it was. 

<<CJO, Mr. Sutton," Case said 
.O slowly, "you decided to go out 
and try to find our ship." 

"Yes," Sutton said, "I did." 

"Now that is fine," said Case. 
"That is the way I like a man to 
speak up and say what's on his 
mind." He sighed. "You meet so 
many devious persons, so many people who try to lie to you, so many 
people who tell you half truths and 
feel, while they're doing it, that they 
are being clever." 

He rose out of the chair, tall and 
straight and prim. 

"Mr. Sutton," he said, "I like you 
very much." 

Sutton felt like grinning at the 
absurdity of the situation, but a coldness and a half anger in him told 
him this was no laughing matter. 
. 

120 



Footsteps padded softly down the 
stairs behind him and Pringle's voice 
whispered through the room: "So he 
decided to make a try for it." 

"As<you see," said Case. 

"I told you that he would," said 
Pringle, almost triumphantly. "I told 
you that he would get it figured out." 

Sutton choked down the gorge that 
rose into his throat. But the anger 
held, anger at the way they talked 
about him as if he weren't there. 

"I fear," said Case to Sutton, "that 
we have disturbed you. We are most 
untactful people and you are sensitive. But let's forget it all and get 
down to business now. You wanted, 
I believe, to ferret out our ship." 

Sutton shrugged his shoulders. 
"That's out now, isn't it?" 

"Oh, but you misunderstand," said 
Case. "We have no objection. Go 
ahead and ferret." 

"Meaning I can't find it?" 

"Meaning that you can," said 
Case. "We didn't try to hide it." 

"We'll even show you the way," 
said Pringle. "We'll go along with 
you. 'It will take you a lot less time." 

Sutton felt a fine ooze of perspiration break out along his hairline. 

A trap, he told himself. A trap 
laid out in plain sight and not even 
baited. And he'd walked into it without even looking. 

But it was too late now. There was 
no backing out. 

He tried to make his voice sound 
unconcerned. 

"All right," /he said. "I'll gamble 
with you." 


 



XXII 

r|THE ship was strange, but very 
-L real. And it was the only thing 
that was. All the rest of the situation 
had a vague, unrealistic, almost fairy 
character about it, as if. it might be 
a bad dream and Sutton would wake 
up and for an agonizing moment try 
to distinguish between dream and 
reality. 

"That map over there," said 
Pringle, "puzzles you, no doubt. 
There is every reason that it should. 
It is a time map." He chuckled and 
rubbed the back of his head with a 
beefy Band. "Tell the truth, I don't 
understand the thing myself. Case 
does. Case is a military man and 
I'm just a propagandist. A propagandist doesn't have to know what 
he is talking about, just so he talks 
convincingly. But a military man 
does. A military man has to know; 
some day his life may depend on 
knowing." 

So that was it, thought Sutton. 
That was the thing that had bothered 
him, the clue that he had told himself would explain Case, who he was 
and what he was and why he was 
here on this asteroid. 

A military man. 

I should have guessed, Sutton said 
to himself. But I was thinking in the 
present . . . not the past or future. 
And there are no military men, as 
such, in the world today. Although 
there were military men before my 
time and apparently there will be 
military men in ages yet to come. 



He said to Case: "War in four 
dimensions must be slightly complicated." 

And lie didn't say it because he 
was interested at the moment in war, 
either in three or four dimensions, 
but because he felt that it was his 
turn to talk, his turn to keep this 
Mad Hatter tea chatter going at its 
proper senseless pace. 

For that was what it was, he told 
himself ... an utterly illogical situation, a madcap, slightly psychotic 
interlude that might have its purpose, but hidden and tangled in confusion. 

The time has come, the Walrus 
said, to talk of many things, of sealing wax and sailing ships, of cabbages and . . . 

Case smiled when he spoke to 
him, a tight, hard, clipped military 
smile. 

"Primarily," Case said, "it is a 
matter of charts and graphs arid very 
special knowledge and some superguessing. You figure out where the 
enemy may be and what he may be 
thinking and you get there first." 

Sutton shrugged. "Basically that 
always was the principle," he said. 
"You got there fustest . . ." 

"Ah," said Pringle, "but there are 
now so many more places where the 
enemy may go." 

"You work with thought graphs 
and attitude charts and historic reports," said Case, almost as if he had 
not been interrupted. "You trace 
back certain happenings and then 
you return and try to change some 



TIME QUARRY 



121 



of those happenings . . . just a little, 
you understand, for you must not 
change them much. Only enough so 
the end result is slightly different, 
just a little less favorable to the enemy. One change here and another 
there and you have him on the run." 

"It drives you nuts," said Pringle 
confidentially. "Because you must be 
sure, you see. You pick out a nice 
juicy historic trend and you figure 
it out to the finest detail and you 
pick a key point where change is indicated, so you go back and change 
it . . 

" A ND then," said Case, "it kicks 

il you in the face." 

"Because, you understand," explained Pringle, "the historian was 
wrong. Some of his material was 
wrong or his method was clumsy or 
his reasoning was off . . ." 

"Somewhere along the line," said 
Case, "he missed a factor." 

"That's r i g h t," said Pringle, 
"somewhere he missed a factor and 
you find, after you have changed it, 
that it affects your side more than •it 
does your enemy's." 

"Now, Mr. Bones," said Sutton, 
his face straight, "I wonder if you 
could- tell me why a chicken runs 
across the road." 

"Yes, Mr. Interlocutor," said 
Pringle, also without a smile. "Because it wants to get on the other 
side." 

Cartoon stuff, thought Sutton. A 
scene jerked raw and bleeding from 
a crazy humorist's routine. 

122 *ac". 



But clever. Pringle was a propagandist and he was no fool. He knew 
semantics and he knew psychology. 
He knew all there was to know about 
the human race, so far as that knowledge could serve his sinister unknown 
purpose. 

A man had landed in the high pasture one morning, 6,000 years before, and John H. Sutton, Esq., had 
come ambling down the hill, swinging a stick, for he was the sort of 
man who would have carried a stick 
— a stout, strong hickory stick, no 
doubt, cut and trimmed with his own 
jackknife. And the man had talked 
with him and had used the same kind 
of mental tactics on John H. Sutton 
as Pringle now was trying to use on 
Sutton's far descendant. 

Go ahead, said Sutton to himself. 
Talk yourself hoarse in the throat 
and dry in the tongue. And pretty 
soon we'll get down to business. 

As if he had read Sutton's 
thoughts, Case said to Pringle: "Jake, 
it isn't working out." 

"No, I guess it ain't," said Pringle. 

"Let's sit down," said Case. 

Sutton felt a flood of relief. Now, 
he told himself, he would find out 
what the others wanted, might get 
some clue to what was going on. 

He sat down in a pressure chair; 
and from where he sat he could see 
the front end of the spaceship's 
cabin, a tiny living space that 
shrieked efficiency. The control board 
canted in front of the pilot's chair, 
but there were few controls. A row 
of buttons, lever or two, a panel of 


 



toggles that probably controlled lights 
and pbrts and such , . . and that 
was all. Efficient and simple, no foolishness, a minimum of manual controls. The ship, Sutton thought, must 
almost fly itself. 

Case slid down into a chair and 
crossed his long legs, stretching them 
out in front of him, sitting on his 
backbone. Pringle perched on a 
chair's edge, leaning forward, rubbing hairy hands. 

"Sutton, 1 ' asked Case, "what is it 
that you want?" 

"Not a thing," said Sutton. "Not 
a single thing." 

"But that's foolish," Pringle protested. "There must be something 
you want." 

"A little information, maybe." 

"Like what?" 

"Like what this is all about." 

"You're going to write a book," 
said Case. 

"Yes," said Sutton. "I intend to 
write a book." 

"And you want to sell that book." 

"I hope to see it published." 

» A BOOK," Case pointed out, 

-iX "is a commodity. It's a product of brain and muscle. It has a 
market value." 

"I suppose," said Sutton, "that you 
are in the market." 

"We are publishers," said Case, 
"looking for a book." 

"A best seller," Pringle added. 

Case uncrossed his legs, hitched 
himself higher in the chair. "It's all 
quite simple," he said. "Just a busi
TIME QUARRY 



ness deal. We wish you would set 
your price." 

"Make it high," urged Pringle. 
"We are prepared to pay." 

"I have no price in mind," said 
Sutton. 

"We had discussed it," Case told 
him, "in a rather speculative man-ner, wondering how much you might 
want and how muoh we might be 
willing to give. We figured a planet 
might be attractive to you." 

"We'd make it a- dozen planets," 
Pringle said, "but that doesn't make 
sense. What would a man do with a 
dozen planets?" 

"He might rent them out," said 
Sutton. 

"You mean," asked Case, "that 
you might be interested in a dozen 
planets?" 

"No, I wouldn't," Sutton answered. "Pringle wondered what a 
man would do with a dozen planets 
and t was being helpful. I said . . ." 

Pringle leaned so far forward in 
his chair that he was almost off it. 
"Look, we aren't talking about one 
of the backwoods planets out at the 
tail end of nowhere. We're offering 
you a landscaped planet, free of all 
veriomous and hostile life, with a 
salubrious climate and tractable natives and all the customary living accommodations and improvements." 

"And the money," said Case, "to 
keep it running for the rest of your 
life." 

"Right spang in the middle of the 
galaxy," said Pringle. "It's an address you wouldn't be ashanied of."' 

j 123 



"I'm not interested," said Sutton. 

Case's temper cracked. "Good 
Lord,. what is it that you want?" 

"I want information," Sutton said. 

Case sighed. "All right, then. 
We'll give you inforrrfation." 

"Why do you want my book?" 
■ "There are three parties interested 
in your book," said Case. "One of 
those parties would kill you to prevent your writing it. What is more 
to the point, they probably will if 
you don't throw in with us." 

"And the third party?" 

"The third party wants you to 
write the book, all right, but they 
won't pay you a thing for doing it. 
They'll do all they can to make it 
easy for you to write the book and 
they'll try to protect you from the 
ones that would like to kill you, but 
they're not offering any money." 

"If I took you up," said Sutton, "I 
suppose you'd help me write the 
book? Conferences and so forth?" 

"Naturally," said Case. "We'd 
have an interest in it. We'd want it 
done the best way possible." 

"After all," said Pringle, "our interest would be as great as yours." 

"That's what I thought," Sutton 
told them. "My book is not for sale." 

"We'd boost the ante some," said 
Pringle. 

"It still is not for sale." 

"That's your final word?" asked 
Case. "Your considered opinion?" 

Sutton nodded. 

Case sighed. "Then," he said, "I 
guess we have to kill you." 

He took a gun out of his pocket. 

r i 

1*4 



XXIII 

rpHE psych-tracer ticked on, end-' 
-L lessly, running fast, then slow, 
skipping a beat now and then^ like 
the erratic time measurement of a 
clock with hiccoughs. 
• It was the only sound in the room 
and to Adams it seemed as if he 
were listening to the beating of a 
heart, the breathing of a man, the 
throb of blood along the jugular 
vein. 

He grimaced at the pile of dossiers which a moment before he had 
swept from his desk onto the floor 
with an angry sweep of his hand. 
For there was nothing in them . . . 
absolutely nothing. Every one was 
perfect, every one checked. Birth certificates, scholastic records, recommendations, loyalty checks, psych examinations, all of them were as they 
should be. There was not a single 
flaw. 

That was the trouble ... in all the 
records of the Service's personnel, 
there was not a single flaw. Not a 
thing a man could point to. Not a 
thing on which one could anchor 
suspicion. 

Lily white and pure. 

Yet someone inside the Service 
had stolen Sutton's dossier. Someone 
had tipped off Sutton on the gun-trap 
laid for him at the Orion Arms. 
Someone had been ready and waiting, knowing of the trap, to whisk 
him out of reach. 

"Spies," said Adams to himself, 
and he made his hand into a fist and 


 



hit the desk so hard that his knuckles 
stung. , 

For no one but an insider could 
have made away with Sutton's dossier. No one but an insider could 
have known of the decision to destroy Sutton, nor of the three men 
who had been assigned to carry out 
the order. 

Adams smiled grimly. 

The tracer chuckled arhim. Kerup, it said, ker-up, clickity, click, 
ker-up. 

That was Sutton's heart and breath 
. . . Sutton's life ticking away somewhere. So long as Sutton lived, no 
matter where he was or what he 
might be doing, the tracer would go 
on chuckling and burping. 

Ker-rup, ker-rup, ker-rup . . . 

Somewhere in the asteroid belt, 
the tracer had said, and that was a 
very general location, but it could be 
narrowed. Already ships with other 
tracers aboard were narrowing it 
down. Sooner or later, hours or days 
or weeks, Sutton would be found. 

Ker-rup . . t 

War, the man in the mask had said. 

And hours later, a ship had come 
screaming down across the hills, like 
a blazing comet, to plunge into a 
swamp. 

A ship such as no man as yet had 
made, carrying melted weapons that 
were unlike any that Man had yet invented. A ship whose thunder in the 
night had roused the sleeping inhabitants for miles around, whose 
flaming metal had been a beacon 
glowing in the sky. 



A ship and a body, and a track 
that led from ship to body across 
three hundred yards of marsh. The 
trace of one man's footprints and the 
furrowing trail of other feet that 
dragged across the mud. And the 
man who had carried the dead man 
had been Asher Sutton, for Sutton's 
fingerprints were on the muddied 
clothing of the man lying at the 
swamp's edge. 

Sutton, thought Adams wearily. It 
is always Sutton. Sutton's name upon 
the flyleaf out of Aldebaran XII. 
Sutton's fingerprints upon a dead, 
man's clothing. The man in the mask 
had said there would have been no 
incident on Aldebaran if it had not 
been for Sutton. And' Sutton had 
killed Benton, Earth's greatest duelist — with a bullet in the arm. 

Ker-up, clickity, click, ker-up . . . 

Dr. Raven, called in by Adams, 
had sat in that chair across the desk 
and told of the afternoon Sutton had 
dropped in at the university. 

"He found destiny," Dr. Raven 
had said, and he said it as if it were 
commonplace, as if it were a thing 
that could have been expected "all 
along. 

"Not a religion," Dr. Raven had 
said, with the afternoon sunlight 
shining on his snow white hair. "Oh, 
dear, no, not a religion. Actual 
destiny." 

DESTINY, noun. Destiny— the 
predetermined course in events 
often conceived as a resistless power 
or agency ... 



TIME QUARRY 



125 



"The accepted definition," Dr. 
Raven had said, as if he might be addressing a lecture hall, "may have to 
be modified slightly when Asher 
writes his book." 

But how could Sutton find destiny? Destiny was an idea, an abstract. 

"You forget," Dr. Raven had told 
Adams, speaking gently as one would 
to a child, "that part about the resistless power or agency. That is what 
he found . . . the power or agency." 

"Sutton told me about the beings 
he found on Cygni," Adams had 
said. "He was at a loss to describe 
them. The nearest that he could 
come was symbiotic abstractions." 

Dr. Raven had nodded his head 
and pulled his shell-like ears and 
figured that maybe symbiotic abstractions would fit the bill, although it 
was hard for one to decide just what 
a symbiotic abstraction was, or what 
it would look like. 

Under questioning, he reiterated 
that it was not a new religion Sutton had found. "Oh, gracious, no, 
not a religion." 

And Jtaven, Adams thought, 
should be the one to know, for he 
was one of the galaxy's best and 
most widely known comparative religionists. 

"Although it would be a new 
idea," Dr. Raven had said. "Bless 
me, yes, an absolutely new idea." 

And ideas are dangerous, Adams 
told himself. 

For Man was spread thin across 
the galaxy. So thin that one word 



— literally one spoken word or unbidden thought — might be enough 
to set off the train of rebellion and 
of violence that would sweep Man 
back to the solar system, back to the 
puny ring of circling planets that had 
caged him in before. 

One could not take a chance. One 
could not gamble with an imponderable. 

Better that one man die needlessly 
than that the whole race lose its grip 
upon the galaxy. Better that one new 
idea, however great, be blotted out 
than that Mankind be swept from 
the billion stars. 

Item one: Sutton wasn't human. 

Item Two: He was not telling all 
he knew. 

Item Thriee: He had a manuscript . 
which was not decipherable. 

It»m Four: He meant to write a 
book. 

Item Five: He had a new idea. 
Conclusion: Sutton must be killed. 
Ker-up, clickity, click . . . 
War, the man had said. A war 
in time. 

TT WOULD spread thin, too, like 
X Man across the galaxy. 

It would be three-dimensional 
chess with a million billion squares 
and pieces, and with the rules changing at every move. 

It would reach back to win its 
battles. It would strike at points in 
time and space which would not even 
know that there was a war. It could, 
logically, go back to the silver mines 
of Athens, to the horse and chariot 



126 




 



of Thutmoses III, to the sailing of 
Columbus. It would involve all fields 
of human endeavor and human speculation, and it would twist the 
dreams of men who had never 
thought of time except as a moving 
shadow across a sun dial's face. 

It would involve spies and propagandists — 'spies to learn the factors 
of the past so that they could be 
plotted in the campaign strategy, 
propagandists to twist the fabric of 
the past so that strategy could be the 
more effective. 

It would load the personnel of the 
Justice Department of the year 7990 
with spies and fifth columnists and 
saboteurs. And it would do that so 
cleverly one could never find the 
spies. 

But, as in an ordinary, honest war, 
there would be strategic points. As in 
chess, there would be one key piece. 

Sutton was that piece. He was the 
pawn that stood in 'the way of the 
sweep of bishop and of rook. He 
was the pawn that both sides were 
lining up on, bring all their pressure 
on a single point . . . and when one 
side was ready, when it gained a 
fraction of advantage, the slaughter 
would begin. 

Adams folded his arms upon the 
desk and laid his head upon them. 
His shoulders twitched, but he had 
no tears. 

"Ash, boy," he said. "Ash, I counted on you so much." 

The silence brought him straight 
in the chair again. 

For a moment, he was unable to
TIME QUARRY 



locate it . . . determine what was 
wrong. And then he knew. 

The psych-tracer had stopped its 
burping. 

He leaned forward and bent above 
it and there was no sound of heart, 
of breath, of blood coursing in the 
body. 

The motivating force that had operated it — Asher Sutton — has ceased 
to be. 

Slowly, Adams rose from his chair, 
took down his hat and put it on. 

For the first time in his life, Christopher Adams was going home before the day was over. 

XXIV 

SUTTON stiffened in his chair and 
then relaxed. For this was a 
bluff, he told himself. These men 
wouldn't kill him. They wanted the 
book and dead men do not write. 

Case answered him, almost as if 
Sutton had spoken what he thought 
aloud. "You must not count on us 
as honorable men; neither of us ourselves would lay a claim to that. 
Pr'ingle, I think, will bear me out in 
that." 

"Oh, certainly," said Pringle. "I 
have no use for honor." 

"It would have meant a great deal 
to us if we could have taken you 
back to Trevor and . . ." 

"Wait a second," interrupted Sutton. "Who is this Trevor? He's a 
new one." 

"Oh, Trevor," said Pringle. "Just 

127" 




an oversight. Trevor is the head of 
the corporation." 

"The corporation," added Case, 
"that wants to get your book." 

"Trevor would have heaped us 
with honors," Pringle said, "and 
loaded us with wealth if we had 
pulled it off. But since you won't 
cooperate, we'll have to cast around 
for some other way to make ourselves a profit." 

"So we switch sides," explained 
Case, "and we shoot you. Morgan 
will pay high for you, but he wants 
you dead. Your carcass will be worth 
a good deal to Morgan. Oh, yes, 
quite a lot." 

"And you will sell it to him." 

"Of course," said Pringle. "We 
never miss a bet." 

Case purred at Sutton: "You do 
not object, ! hope." 

Sutton shrugged indifferently. 
"What you do with my cadaver is no 
concern of mine." 

"Well, then," said Case, and he 
raised the gun. 

"Just a second," Sutton said. 

Case lowered the gun. "Now 
what?" 

"He wants a cigaret," said Pringle. 
"Men who are about to be executed 
always want a cigaret or a glass of 
wine or a chicken dinner or something of the sort." 

"I want to ask a question," Sutton said. 

Case nodded. 

"I take it," Sutton said, "that in 
your time I've already written this 
book." 


 




"That's right," Case told him. 
"An honest and efficient job." 

"Under your imprint or someone 
else's?" 

Pringle cackled. "Under someone 
else's, of course. If you did it under ours, why do you think we'd be 
back here at all?" 

Sutton wrinkled his brow. "I've already written it," he said, "without 
your help and without your editing. 
Now if I did it a second time, and 
wrote it the way you wanted, there 
would be complications." 

"None," said Case, "we couldn't 
overcome. Nothing that could not be 
explained quite satisfactorily." 

"And now that you're going to 
kill me, there'll 'be no book at all. 
How will you handle that?" 



Case frowned. "It will be difficult and unfortunate . . . unfortunate 
for many people. But we'll work it 
out." He raised the gun. "Sure you 
. won't change your mind?" 

Sutton shook his head. 

They won't shoot, he told himself. 
It's a bluff. The deck is cold and . . . 

Case pulled the trigger. 

A mighty force, like a striking fist, 
slammed into Sutton's body and 
shoved him back so hard that the. 
chair tilted and then slued around, 
yawing like a ship caught in magnetic stresses. 

Fire flashed within his skull. He 
felt one swift shriek of agony that 
took him in its claws and lifted him 
and shook him, jangling every nerve, 
grating every bone. 




TIME QUARRY 



12? 



There was one thought, one fleeting thought that he tried to grasp 
and hold, but it wriggled from his 
brain like an eel slipping free from 
bloody fingers. ' 

Change, said the thought. Change. 

He felt the change . . . felt it start 
even as he died. 

And death was a soft thing, soft 
and black, cool and sweet and gracious. He slipped into it as a swim, mer slips into the surf and it closed 
over him and held him. He felt the 
pulse and beat of it and knew the 
vastness- and the sureness of it. 

Back on Earth, the psych-tracer faltered to a stop and Christopher 
Adams got up and put on his hat 
and went home for the first time in 
his life before the day was done. 

xxv ■ 

HERKIMER lay on his bed and 
tried to sleep, but sleep was 
long in coming. And he wondered 
that he should sleep . . . that he 
should sleep and eat and drink as 
Man. For he was not a man and 
would never be a man. 

His origin was chemical and Man's 
was biological. He was the imitation 
and Man was reality. It is the method, 
he told hjmself, the method and the 
terminology, that keep me from being 
. Man, for in all things else we are 
the same. 

The method and the name of android and the tattoo mark I wear upon 
my brow. 

130 



I am as good as Man and as smart 
as Man, for all I act the clown, and 
could be as treacherous as Man if 
I had the chance. Except I wear a 
tattoo mark and I am owned and I 
have no soul . . . although sometimes I wonder. 

Herkimer lay very quiet- and gazed 
at the ceiling and tried to remember 
certain things, but it was frighteningly complicated. 

First there was the tool and then 
the machine, which was no more 
than a complicated tool, and both 
machine and tool Were no more than 
the extension of a hand. 

Man's hand, of course. 

Then came the robot and a robot 
was a machine that walked like a 
man. That walked and looked and 
talked like a man and did the things 
Man wished, but it was a caricature. 
No matter how sleekly machined, no 
matter how cleverly* designed, there 
never was a danger vthat it be mistaken for a man. 

And after the robot? 

We are not robots, Herkimer told 
himself, and we are not men. We are 
not machines, because we are flesh 
and blood. We are chemicals made 
into the shapes of our creators and 
assigned a chemical life so close to 
the life of our makers that "some day 
one of them will find, to his astonishment, that there is no difference. 

Made in the shape of men . . . and 
the resemblance is so close that we 
wear a tattoo mark so that men may 
know us apart. 

So close to Man and yet not Man. 


 



Although there is hope . . , if we 
can keep the Cradle secret, if we can 
keep it hidden from the eyes of Man. 
Someday there will be no difference. 
Someday a man will talk to an android and think he is talking to a fellow man. And he will be. 

HERKIMER stretched his arms 
and folded them over his head. 
He tried to examine his mind, to 
arrive at motives and evaluations, but 
it was hard to do. No rancor, certainly. No jealousy. No bitterness. 
Just a nagging feeling of inadequacy, 
of having almost reached the goal 
and fallen short. 

But there was comfort, he thought. 
There was comfort if nothing else. 

And that comfort must be kept. 
Kept for those dike himself, the ones 
that were less than Man. 

He lay for a long time, thinking 
about comfort, watching the dark 
square of the window with the rime 
of frost .upon it and the stars shining thrcjugh the frost, listening to the 
thin whine of the feeble, vicious 
weasel-wind as it snarled across the 
roof. 

Sleep did not come and he got up 
at last and turned on the light. Shivering, he got into his clothes .and 
pulled a book out of his pocket. Huddling close to the lamp, he turned 
the pages to a passage worn thin with 
reading. _ . 

There is no thing, no matter, 
how created, how born or how 
conceived or made, which knows 



the pulse of life, that goes 
alone. That assurance I can give 
you. . ... 

He closed the book and held it 
clasped between the palms of his two 
hands. 

. . . how bora or how conceived 
or made. 
Made. 

All that mattered was the pulse of 
life, the stir of sentiency. 
Comfort. 

And it must be kept. 

I did my duty, he told himself. My 
willing, almost eager duty. I still am 
doing it. , 

I acted the part, he told himself, 
and I think I acted well. I acted a 
part when I carried the challenge to 
Asher Sutton's room. I acted a part 
when I came to him as a part of thg 
estate duello ... the saucy, subservient part of any common android. 

I did my duty for him . . . and 
yet not for him, but for comfort, for 
the privilege of knowing and believing that neither I nor any other living thing, no matter how lowly it 
may be, will ever be alone. 

I hit him. I hit him on the button 
and knocked him out, and I lifted 
him in my arms and carried him into 
the spaceship. 

He was angry at me, but that does 
not matter. His anger cannot wash 
away a single word of the assurance 
he gave me. 

Thunder shook the house. The 
window, for a moment, 'flared with 
sudden crimson. 



TIME QUARRY 



131 



Herkimer came to his feet and ran 
for the window and stood there, 
gripping the ledge, watching the red 
twinkle of dwindling rocket tubes. 

Fear hit him in the stomach and 
he raced put of the door and down 
the hall, to Sutton's room. 

He did not knock nor did he turn 
the knob. He hit the door and it 
shattered open, with a wrecked and 
twisted lock dangling by its screws. 

The bed was empty and there was 
no one in the room. 



XXVI 

SUTTON sensed resurrection and 
he fought against it, for death 
was so . comfottable. Like a soft, 
warm- bed. And resurrection was a 
strident, insistent, maddening alarm 
clock that shrilled across the predawn chill of a dreadful, frowsy 
room. Dreadful with its life and its 
raw reality and its sharp, sickening 
reminder that one must get up. 

But this is not the first time, said 
Sutton. This is not the first time that 
I died and came to life again. For I 
did it once before and that time 
I was dead for a long, long time. 

There was a hard, flat surface underneath him and he lay face. down, 
upon it. For what seemed an interminable stretch of time, his mind 
struggled to visualize the hardness 
and smoothness beneath him. Hard 
and flat and smooth, three words, but 
they did not help one see or understand the thing that they described. 

132 



He felt life creep back and quicken, seep along his legs and arms. But 
he wasn't breathing and his heart 
was still. 

Floor. 

That was it . . . that was the word 
for the thing on which he lay. The. 
flat, hard, smooth surface was a floor. 
The floor of what? 

Sounds came to him, but at first 
he didn't call them sounds, for he 
had no word for them at all, and 
then, a moment later, he remembered 
that that was the word. 

Now he could move one finger. 
Then a second finger. 

He opened his eyes and there was 
light. 

The sounds were voices and the 
voices were word's and the words 
were thoughts. 

It takes so long to figure things 
out, Sutton wearily told himself. 

"We should have tried a little 
harder," said a voice, "and a little 
longer. The trouble with us, Case, is 
that we have no patience." 

"Patience wouldn't have done a 
bit of good," said Case. "He was 
convinced that we were bluffing. No 
matter what we'd done or said, he'd 
still have thought we were bluffing 
and we would have gotten nowhere. 
There- was only one thing to do." 

<<~W"ES, I know," Pringle agreed. 

JL "Convince him that we weren't 
bluffing." He made a sound of blowing out his breath. "Pity, too. He 
was such a bright young man." 

They were silent for a time and 


 



now it was not life alone, but 
strength, that was flowing into Sutton. Strength to stand and walk, 
strength to lift his arms, strength to 
vent his anger. Strength to kill two 
men. 

"We won't do so badly," Pringle 
went on. "Morgan and his crowd 
wil'l pay us just as much." 

Case was squeamish. "I don't like 
it, Pringle. A dead man is a dead 
man if you kill him and leave him. 
But when you sell him, that makes 
you a butcher." 

"That's not the thing that's worrying me," Pringle answered. "What 
will it do to the future, Case? To 
our future. We had a future with 
many of its facets based on Sutton's 
book. If we had managed to change 
the book a little, it wouldn't have 
mattered much . . . wouldn't have 
mattered at all, in fact, the way we 
had it figured out. But now Sutton's 
dead. There will be no book by Sut- ' 
ton. The future will be ' completely 
different." 

Sutton rose to his feet. 

They spun around and faced him 
and Case's hand went for his gun. 

"Go ahead," invited Sutton. "Shoot 
me full of holes. You won't live a 
minute longer for it." 
He tried to hate them, as he had 
hated Benton during that one fleeting moment back on Earth. Hatred 
so strong and primal that it had 
blasted the man's mind into oblivion. 
. . . killed him with only a puzzling bullet in his arm and a hateshattered brain. 



But there was no hate. Just a ponderous, determined will to destroy 
a bothersome hindrance. 

He moved forward on inexorable 
legs and his hands reached out. 

Pringle ran, squealing, seeking to 
escape. Case's gun spat twice and 
when blood oozed out and ran down 
Sutton's chest and he still came on, 
Case threw away his weapon and 
backed against the wall. 

It didn't take long. 

They couldn't get away. 

There was no place to go. 



XXVII 

SUTTON maneuvered^ the ship 
down against the tiny asteroid, a 
whirling piece of debris not much 
bigger than the ship itself. He felt 
-it touch and his thumb reached out 
and snubbed over the gravity lever. 
The ship clamped down, to go tumbling through space with the twisting chunk of rock. 

Sutton let his hands fall to "his 
side and sat quietly in the pilot's 
chair. In front of him, space was 
black and friendless, streaked by 
the pinpoint stars that spun in lines 
of fire across the field of vision, writing cryptic messages of cold, white 
light across the cosmos as the asteroid , 
bumbled on its erratic course. 

Safe, he told himself. Safe for a 
while, at least. Perhaps safe forever, 
for there might be no one looking 
for him. • 

Safe with a hole blasted through 



TIME QUARRY 



133 



his chest, with blood running down 
his front and splashing on the floor. 

Handy thing to have, he thought 
grimly, this second body of mine. 
This body that was grafted on me by 
the Cygnians. It will keep me going 
until . . . until . . . 

Until what? 

Until I can get back to Earth and 
walk into a doctor's office and say: 
"I got shot up a little. How about 
a patching job?" 

Sutton chuckled. He could see the 
doctor having a fit. 

Or going back to Cygni? But 
they wouldn't let me in. 

Or just going back to Earth the 
way I am and forget about the doctor? I could get other clothes and 
the bleeding will stop when the 
blood's all gone. 

BUT I wouldn't breathe, and they 
would notice that. 
"Johnny," he said, but there was 
no answer, just a feeble stir of life 
within his brain, a sign of recognition, like a dog wagging its tail 
to let you know it heard, but was too 
busy with a bone to let anything distract it. 

"Johnny, is there any way?" 
There might be. It was a hope to 
cling to, a thing to think about. 

Not even yet, he suspected, had he 
begun to plumb the strange depth of 
abilities lodged within his body and 
his mind. 

He had not known that his hate 
alone could kill, that hate could 
spear out from his brain like a lance 



of steel and strike a man dead. And 
yet Benton had died with a bullet in 
the arm . . . only he had been dead 
before the bullet hit him. For Benton had fired first and missed, and 
Benton, alive, never would have 
missed. 

Sutton had not known that by 
mind alone he could control the energy needed to lift the dead weight 
of a ship from a boulder bed and fly 
it across eleven years of space. And 
yet that was what he'd done, winnowing the energy from the flaming 
stars so far away they dimmed to almost nothing, from the random 
specks of matter in the void. 

And while he knew that he could 
change at will from one life to another, he had not known for certain 
that when one way of life was killed, 
the other way would take over automatically. Yet that was what had 
happened. Case had killed him and 
he had died and he had come to life 
again. But he had died before the 
change had started. Of that much 
he was sure. For he remembered 
death and recognized it. He knew 
it from the time he had died before. 

He felt his body eating . . . sucking at the stars as a human sucks 
an orange, nibbling at the energy imprisoned in the bit of rook to which 
the ship was clamped, pouncing on 
the tiny leaks of power from the 
ship's atomic motors. 

Eating to grow strong, eating to 
repair . . . 

"Johnny, is there any way?" 

And there was no answer. 



134 




 



HE LET his head sag forward until it lay upon the inclined 
panel that housed the instruments. 
His body went on eating at the 

stars. 

He listened to the slow drip of 
blood falling from his body and 
splashing on the floor. 

His mind was clouding and he let 
it cloud, for there was nothing to do. 
There was no need to use it; he did 
not know how to use it. He did not 
know what he could do or what he 
couldn't do, nor .how to go about it. 

He had fallen, he remembered, 
screaming down the alien sky, knowing in a moment of wild elation that 
he had broken through, that the 
world of Cygni VII lay beneath his 
hand. That what all the navies of 
the Earth had failed to do, he'd done. 

The planet was rushing up and he 
saw the tangled geography of it that 
snaked in black and gray across his 
vision plate. 

That was twenty years ago, but he 
remembered it, in the dim fog of his 
mind, as if it were happening this 
very moment. 

He reached out a hand and hauled 
back on a lever and the lever would 
not move. The ship plunged down 
and for a moment he felt a rising 
fear that exploded into panic. 

One fact stood out, one stark, 
black fact in all the flashing fragments of thoughts and schemes and 
prayer that went screeching through 
his brain. One stark fact ... he was 
about to crash. 

He did not remember crashing, 



for he probably never knew exactly 
when he crashed. It was only fear 
and terror and then no fear nor terror. It was consciousness and awareness and then a nothingness that was 
a restfulness and a vast forgetting. 

Awareness came back ... in a 
moment or an eon, which, he could 
not tell. But an awareness that was 
different, a sentiency that was only 
partly human, just a small percentage 
human. And a knowledge that was 
new, but which, it seemed, he had 
held forever. 

He sensed or knew, for it was not 
seeing, his body stretched out on the 
ground smashed and broken, twisted 
out of human shape. And although 
he knew it was his body and knew 
its every superficial function and the 
plan of its assembly, he felt a twinge 
of wonder at the thing which lay 
there and knew that here was a problem which would tax his utmost ingenuity. 

For the body must be put together, 
must be straightened out and reintegrated and co-ordinated so that it 
would work and the life that had 
escaped be returned to it again. 

He thought of Humpty Dumpty 
and the thought was strange, as if 
the nursery rhyme were something 
new or something long forgotten. 

Humpty Dumpty, said another part 
of him, supplies no answer, and he 
knew that it was right, for Humpty, 
he recalled, could not be put together again. 

He became aware there were two 
of him; one part of him had an


TIME 9UARRY 



135 



swered the other part of him. The 
answerer and the listener, and although they were one, they were also 
separate. There was a cleavage he 
could not understand. 

"I am your destiny," said the answerer. "I was with you when you 
came to life and I will stay with you 
till you-die. I do not control you and 
I do not coerce you, but I try to guide 
you, although you "do not know it." 

Sutton, the small part of him that 
was Sutton, said: "I know it now." 

He knew it as if he'd always 
known it and that was, queer, for he 
had only just then learned it. Knowledge, he realized, was all tangled up, 
for there were two of him ... he 
and destiny. He could not immediately distinguish between the things 
he knew as Sutton alone and those 
he knew as Sutton plus Sutton's destiny. 

I cannot know, he thought. I could 
not know then and I cannot know 
now. For there still is deep within 
me the two facets of my being, the 
human that I am and the destiny that 
would guide me to a greater glory 
and a greater life, if I would only 
let it. 

F)R it will not coerce me and it 
will not stop me. It will only 
give me hunches; it will only whisper warnings and encouragement to 
me. It is the thing called conscience 
and the thing called judgment and 
the thing called intuition. 

And it sits within my brain as it 
sits within the brain of no other 



thing, for I am one with it. I know 
of it with a dreadful certainty and 
others do not know at all, or, if they 
do, they only guess at the great immensity of its truthfulness. 

And all must know. All must 
know each thing has destiny. 

But there is something going on 
to keep them from knowing, or to 
twist their knowledge so their knowing is all wrong. I must find out 
what it is and I must correct it. And 
somehow I must strike into the future; I must set it aright for the days 
I will not see. 

I am your destiny, the answerer 
had said. 

Destiny, not fatalism. 

Destiny, not predetermination. 

Destiny, the way of men and races 
and of worlds. 

Destiny, the way you made your 
life, the way you shaped your living 
. . . the way it was meant to be, the 
way that it would be if you listened 
to the still, small voice that talked 
to you at the many turning points 
and crossroads. 

But if you ' did not listen . . . 
why, then, you did not listen and 
you did not hear. And there was no 
power that could make you listen. 
There was no penalty if you did not 
listen except the penalty of having 
gone against your destiny. 

There were other thoughts or other 
voices. Sutton could not tell which 
they were, but they were outside the 
tangled thing that was he and destiny. 

That is my body, he thought. And 
I am somewhere else. Some place 




 



where there is no seeing as I used to 
see . . . nor hearing, although I see 
and hear, but with another's senses 
and in an alien way. 

The screen let him through, said 
one thought, although screen was not 
the word it used. 

And another said that the screen 
had served its purpose. 

And another said that there was 
a certain technique he had picked up 
on a planet, the name of which 
blurred and ran and made a splotch 
and had no meaning at all, so far as 
Sutton could make out. 

Still another pointed out the singular complexity and inefficiency of 
Sutton's mangled body and spoke enthusiastically of the simplicity and 
perfection of' direct energy intake. 

Sutton tried to cry out to them for 
the love of God to hurry, for his 
body was* a fragile thing, that if they 
waited too long it would be past all 
mending. But he could not say it, 
and, as if in a dream, he listened to 
the interplay of thought, the flash 
and flicker of individual opinion, all 
molding into" one cohesive thought 
that spelled eventual decision. 

He tried to wonder where he was, 
tried to orient himself and found 
that he could not even define himself. For himself no longer was a 
body, nor a place in space or time, 
nor even a personal pronoun. It was 
a hanging, dangling thing that had 
no substance, no fixture in the scheme 
of time and it could not recognize 
itself, no matter what it did. It was 
a vacuum that knew it existed and it 



was dominated by .something else 
that might ' as well have been a 
vacuum for all the recognition he 
could make of it. 

He was outside his body and he 
lived. But where or how, there was 
no way of knowing. 

"I am your destiny," the answerer 
that seemed a part of him had said. 

But destiny was a word and nothing more. An idea. An abstract. A 
tenuous definition for something that 
the mind of Man had conceived, but 
could not prove . . . that the mind 
of Man was willing to agree was an 
idea only and could "never be proved. 

""V^OU are wrong," said Sutton's 
-L destiny. "Destiny is real, although you cannot see it. It is real 
for you and for all other things . . . 
for every single thing that knows the 
surge of life. And it has always been 
and it will always be." 

"This is not death?" asked Sutton. 

"You are the first" to come to us," 
said destiny. "We cannot let you die. 
We will give you back your body, 
but until then you will live with me. 
You will be part of me. And that is 
only fair, for I have always lived 
with you; I have always been part of 
you." 

"You did not- want me here," said 
Sutton. "You built a screen to keep 
me out." 

"We' wanted one," said destiny. 
"One only. You are that one; there 
will be no more." 

"But'the screen?" 



TIME QUARRY 



137 



"It was keyed to a mind," said 
destiny. "To a certain mind. The one 
mind we wanted." 

"But you let me die." 

"You had to die," destiny told 
him. "Until you died and became 
one of us, you could not know. In 
your body we could not have reached 
you. You had to die- so that you 
would be freed and J was there to 
take you and make you part of me 
so you would understand." 

"I do not understand." 

"You will," said -destiny. "You 
will." 

And I did, thought Sutton. 

HIS body shook as he remembered and his mind stood 
awed with the vast, unexpected 
immensity of destiny ... of trillions 
upon trillions of destinies to match 
the teeming life of the galaxy. 

Destiny whispered and a thing 
climbed dripping from the water and 
in the eons to come its fins were legs 
and its gills were nostrils. 

Destiny stirred and a shaggy ape 
thing stooped and picked up a 
broken stick. It stirred again and he 
struck flint together. It stirred once 
more and there was a bow and arrow. 
Again and the wheel was born. 

Symbiotic abstractions. Parasites. 
Invisible partners. Call them what 
you would. 

They were destiny. 
And the time had come for the 
galaxy to know of destiny. 

If parasites, then beneficial parasites, ready to give more than they 



could take. For all they got was the 
sense of living, the sense of being 
. ." . and what they gave, or stood 
' ready to give, was far more than 
mere living. 

For many of the lives they lived 
must be dull, indeed. An angleworm, 
for instance. Or the bloated mass of 
instinct that xrept through nauseous 
jungle worlds. 

But because of them, someday an 
angleworm might be more than an 
angleworm ... or a greater angleworm. The bloated mass of instinct 
might be something that would reach 
to greater heights than Man. 

For every thing that moved, 
whether intelligent or mindless, 
across the face of any world, was not 
• one thing, but two. It and its own 
.individual destiny. 

And sometimes destiny took hold 
and won . . . and sometimes* it didn't. 
But where there was destiny, there 
was hope forever. For destiny was 
hope. And destiny was everywhere. 

No thing walks alone. 

Nor crawls nor vegetates nor 
swims nor flies nor shambles. 

One planet barred to every mind 
but one; and once that mind arrived, 
barred forevermore. 

One mind to tell the galaxy when 
the galaxy was ready. One mind to 
tell of destiny and hope. 

That mind, thought Sutton, is my 
own. 

Lord help me now. 

For if I had been the one to , 
choose, if I had been asked, if I had 
had a thing to say about it, it would 



138 




 



not have been me, but someone or 
something else. Some other mind in 
another million years. Some other 
thing in ten times another million 
years. 

It is too much to ask, he thought 
. . . too much to ask a being with 
a mind as frail as Man's, to bear the 
weight of revelation, to bear the load 
of knowing. 

BUT destiny put the finger on me. 
Happenstance or accident or 
pure blind luck ... it would be~ 
destiny. 

I lived with destiny, as destiny . . . 
I was a part of destiny instead of 
destiny merely a part of me and we 
came to know each other as if we 
were two humans .• . . better than if 
we were two humans. For destiny 
was I and I was destiny. Destiny had 
no name and I called it Johnny and 
the fact that I had to name him is a 
joke that destiny, my destiny, still 
can chuckle over. 

I lived with Johnny, the vital part 
of me, the spark of me that men call 
life and do not understand ... the 
part of me I still do not understand 
. . . until my body had been repaired 
again. And then I returned to it and 
it was a different body, a better body, 
for the many destinies had been astounded and horrified at the inefficiency and fiimsiness of the human 
structure. 

When they fixed it up, they made 
it better. They tinkered it so it had 
a lot of things it did not have before 
. . . many things, I suspect, that I 



still do not know about and will not 
know about until it is time to use 
them. Some things, perhaps, I'll never 
know at all. 

When I went back to my body, 
destiny came and lived with me 
again. But now I knew him and 
recognized him and I called him 
Johnny and we talked together. Now 
I never failed to hear him, as I must 
many times have failed to hear him 
in the past. 

"Johnny," Sutton called. He waited and there was no answer. 
"Johnny," he called again and there 
was terror in his voice. For Johnny 
must be there. Destiny must be there. 

Unless ... the thought struck 
slowly, kindly . . . unless Asher Sutton was really dead. Unless this was 
dreaming, unless this was a twilight 
zone where knowledge and a sense 
of being linger for a moment between the state of life and death. 

Johnny's voice was small, very 
small and very far away: "Ash." 

"Yes, Johnny!" He forgot his 
doubts, sat erect and tense. 

"The engines, Ash. The engines." 

He fought his body out of the 
pilot's chair, stood on weaving legs. 

He could scarcely see . . . just the 
faded, blurred, shifting outline of 
the shape of metal that enclosed him. 
His feet were solid weights that he 
could not move. They were no part 
of him at all. 

He stumbled, staggered forward, 
fell flat upon his face. 

Shock, he thought. The shock of 
violence, the shock of death, the 



TIME QUARRY 



13? 



shock of draining blood, of mangled, 
blasted flesh. 

There once had been strength that 
had brought him, clear-eyed, clearbrained, to his feet. A strength that 
had been great enough to take the 
lives of the two men who had killed 
him. The strength of vengeance. 

But that strength was gone and 
now he knew it had been the strength 
of will alone. 

He struggled to his hands and 
knees and crept. He stopped and 
rested and then crept a few feet more. 
His head hung limp between his 
shoulders, drooling blood that left 
a trail across the floor. 

He found the door of the engine 
room and by slow degrees pulled 
himself upward to the latch. 

His fingers found the latch and 
pulled, it down, but they had no 
strength. They slipped off the metal. 
He fell into a huddled pile of sheer 
defeat against the hard coldness of 
the door. 

He waited for a long time and 
then tried again. This time the latch 
clicked open even as his fingers 
slipped again. And as he fell, he fell 
across the threshold. 

Intelligence, senses, consciousness 
. . . they all vanished in the same 
micro-second. 

XXVIII 

ASHER SUTTON awoke to dark, -> cess.' 

To darkness and unknowing. 



To unknowing and a slow, expanding wonder. 

He was lying on a hard, smooth 
surface and a roof of metal came 
down close above his head. And beside him .was a thing that purred and 
rumbled. One arm was flung across 
the purring thing and somehow he 
knew " that he had slept with the 
thing clasped to him. 

There was- no sense of time or 
sense of place, and no means of any 
life before. As if he had sprung 
full-limbed by magic. into life and intelligence and knowing. 

He lay still and his eyes became 
accustomed to the dark, and he saw 
the open door and the dark stain, 
now dry, that led across the threshold into the room beyond. Something had dragged itself there, from 
the other room into this one, and 
left a trail behind it. He lay for a 
long time, wondering what the thing 
might be, with the queasiness of terror gnawing at his mind. For the 
thing might still be with him and it 
might be dangerous. 

But he felt he was alone, sensed 
a loneness in the throbbing of the engine at his side . . . and it was thus, 
for the first time that he knew the 
purring thing for what it was. Name 
and recognition had slipped back into 
his consciousness without his searching fox it, as if it were a thing he 
had known all the time and now he 
knew what it was, except that it 
seemed to him the name had come 
ahead of recognition, and that, he 
thought, was strange. 



140 




 



So the thing beside him was an 
engine and he. was lying on a floor 
and the metal close above his head 
was a roof of some sort. A narrow 
space, he thought. A narrow space 
that housed an engine and a door 
that opened into another room. 

A ship. That was it. He was in a 
ship. And the trail of dark, that ran 
across the threshold . . .? 

At first he thought that some 
imagined thing had crawled in slime 
of- its own making to mark the trail, 
but now he remembered. -It had been 
himself crawling to the -engines. 

Lying quietly, he remembered it 
all, and in wonder he tested his aliveness. He lifted a hand and felt his 
chest. The clothes were burned away 
and their scorched edges were crisp 
• between his fingers, but his chest was 
whole . . . whole and smooth and 
hard. Sound human flesh. No ragged, 
bleeding holes. 

So it was possible, he thought. I 
remember that I wondered if it was 
... if Johnny might not have some 
trick up his sleeve, if my body might 
not have some capability which I 
could not suspect. 

It sucked at the stars and nibbled 
at the asteroid and it yearned toward 
the engines. It wanted energy. And 
the engines had available energy . . . 
more than the distant stars, more 
than the cold, frozen chunk of rock 
that was the asteroid. 

So I crawled to reach the engines 
and I left a dark death-trail behind 
me and I slept with the engines in 
my arms. And my body — my direct


intake, energy-eating body — sucked 
the power that Was needed from the 
flaming core of the reaction chambers. 

And I am whole again. 

I am back on my , breath-andblood body once again and I can 
return to Earth. 

SUTTON crawled out of the engine room and stood on his two 

feet. 

Faint starlight came through the 
vision plates and scattered like jewel 
dust along the floor and walls. And 
there were two huddled shapes, one 
in the middle of the floor and another in a corner. 

His mind took them in and' turned 
them around as they were dead and 
as they might have been alive, and 
in a little while he remembered what 
they were. The humanity within him 
shivered at the black, sprawled 
shapes, but another part of him, a 
cold, hard inner core, stood undismayed in the face of death. 

He moved forward on slow feet 
and slowly knelt beside one of the 
bodies. It must be Case, he thought, 
for Case had been thin and tall. But 
he could not see the face and he did 
not wish to see it, for in some dark 
corner of his mind he still remembered what Case and Pringle had 
looked like when they died. 

His hands went down and 
searched through the clothing. He 
made a tiny pile of the things he 
found, and finally he found the thing 
he was looking for. 



TIME QUARRY 



141 



Squatting on his heels, he opened 
the book to the title page and it was 
the same 'as the one he carried in 
his pocket. The same except for a 
line of type at the very bottom: 

Revised Edition 

So that was it. That was the meaning of the word that had puzzled 
him ^Revisionists. 

There had been a book and it had 
been revised. Those who lived by the 
revised edition were the Revisionists. 
And the others? He wondered, running through the names . . . Fundamentalists, Primitives, Orthodox, 
Hard Shell. There were others, ha 
was suie, but it didn't really matter 
what the others would be called. 

There were two blank pages and 
the text began: 

We are not alone. 

No one ever is alone. 

Not since the first faint stirring of the first flicker of life, 
on the first planet in the galaxy 
that knew the quickening of 
sentiency, has there ever been a 
single entity that walked or 
crawled or slithered down the 
path of life alone. 

His eye went down the page to the 
first footnote. 

* This is 'the first of many 
statements which, wrongly interpreted, have caused some 
readers to believe that Sutton 



meant to say that life, regardless of its intelligence or moral 
precepts, is the beneficiary of 

- destiny. His first line-should refute this entire line of reasoning, for Sutton used the pronoun "we" and all students of 
semantics are agreed that it is a 
common idiom for any genus, 
when speaking of itself, to use 
such a personal pronoun. Had 
Sutton meant all life, he would 
have written "all life." But by 
using the personal pronoun, he 
undeniably was referring to his 
own genus, the human race, and 
the human race alone. He apparently erroneously believed, a 
not uncommon belief of his day, 
that the Earth had been the first 
planet to know life and this 
will explain his reference to the 
first planet of the galaxy to 
know the quickening of life. 

" There is no doubt that, in part, 
Sutton's revelations of his great 
discovery of destiny have been 
tampered with. Assiduous research and study, however, have 
resulted in determining beyond 
reasonable doubt which portions 
are genuine and which are not. 
Those parts which patently have 
been altered will be noted and 
the reasons for this belief will 
be carefully and frankly pointed 
out, 

SUTTON riffled through the pages 
quickly. More than half the text 
was taken up by the fine print foot


142 




 



notes. Some of the pages had two or 
three lines of actual text and the rest 
was filled with lengthy explanation 
and refutation. 

He slapped the book shut, held it 
angrily between his flattened palms. 

I tried so hard, he thought. I repeated and reiterated and underscored. 

Not human life alone, but all 
life. Everything that lives. 

And yet they twist my words. 

They fight a war so that my words 
shall not be the words I wrote, so 
that the things I meant to say shall 
be misinterpreted. They scheme and 
fight and murder so that the great 
cloak of destiny shall rest on one 
race alone ... so that the most 
grasping and ambitious race ever 
spawned shall steal . the thing that 
was meant not for them alone, but 
for every living thing. 

And somehow I must stop it 
Somehow it must be stopped. Somehow my words must stand, so that 
all may read and know, without the 
smokescreen of crooked theorizing 
and dishonest interpretation and 
weasel logic confusing them. 

FDR- it is so simple. Such a 
simple thing: 
All life has destiny, not human 
life alone. 

There is one destiny partner for 
every living thing. For every living 
thing and then to spare. They wait 
for life to happen, and each time it 
occurs, one of them is there and stays 
there until the particular life is end


ed. How, I do not know, nor why. 
I do not know if the actual Johnny 
is lodged within my mind and being, 
or if he merely keeps in contact 
with me from Cygni. But I know 
that he is with me. I know that he 
will stay. 

And yet the Revisionists will twist 
my words and discredit me. They 
will change my book and dig up old 
scandals about the Suttons so that 
the mistakes of my forebears, magnified many times, will tend to smear 
my name. 

They sent back a man who talked 
to John H. Sutton and he told them 
things that they could have used. 
For John Sutton "said that there are 
skeletons in every family closet, and 
in that he spoke the truth. And, 
being old and garrulous, he talked 
about those skeletons. 

But those tales were not carried 
forward into the future to be of any 
use, for the man who heard them 
came tramping up the road with a 
bandage on his head and no shoes 
on his feet. 

Something happened and he 
could not go back. 

Something happened. 

Something . . . 

Sutton rose slowly. 

Something happened, he said, talking to himself, and I know what it 
was. 

Six thousand years ago in a place 
that was called Wisconsin. 

He moved forward, heading for 
the pilot's chair and the Wisconsin 
of sixty centuries in the past. 



TIME 9UARRY 



143 



XXIX 

CHRISTOPHER ADAMS came 
into his office and hung up his 
hat and coat. »
He turned around and pulled out 
the chair before his desk and in the 
act of sitting down, he froze and listened. 

The psych-tracer burped at him. 

Ker-up, it chuckled. Ker-up, clickity, click, ker-up. 

Christopher Adams straightened 
from his half-sitting position and 
put on his hat and coat again. ' 
- Going out, he slammed the door 
behind him. 

In all his life, he had never 
slammed a door. 



XXX 

SUTTON breasted the river, swimming with slow, sure strokes. 
The water was warm against his body 
and it talked to him with a deep, 
important voice and Sutton thought: It is trying to tell me something, as 
it has tried to tell people something 
all down through the ages. A mighty 
tongue talking down the land, gossiping to itself when there is no one 
to hear, but trying, always trying 
to tell its people the news it has to 
tell. Some of them, perhaps, have 
grasped a certain truth and a certain 
philosophy from the river, but none 
of them have ever reached the meaning of the river's language, for it is 
an unknown language. 



Like the language, Sutton thought, 
I used to make my notes. For they 
had to be in a language which no 
one else could read, a language that 
had been forgotten in the galaxy 
eons before any tongue now living 
lisped its baby talk. Either a language that had been forgotten or one 
that never could be known. 

I do not know that language, Sutton told himself, the language of my 
notes. I do not know whence it came 
or when or how. I asked, but they 
would not tell me. Johnny tried to 
tell me once, but I could not grasp 
it, for it was a thing that the brain 
of Man could not accept. 

I know its symbols and the things 
they stand for, but I do not know 
the sounds that make it. My tongue 
might not be able to form the sounds 
that make the spoken language. For 
all I know, it might be the language 
that this river talks ... or the language of some race that went to disaster and to dust -a million or a billion years ago. 

The black of night came down to 
nestle against the black of flowing 
river and the Moon had not arisen, 
would not rise for many hours to 
come. The starlight made little diamond points on the rippling waves 
of the pulsing river. On the shore 
ahead, the lights of homes made 
jagged patterns up and down the 
land. 

Herkimer has the notes, Sutton 
told himself, and I hope he has sense 
enough to hide them. I will need 
them later, but not now. I would like 




 



to see Herkimer, but I can't take the 
chance; they'll be watching him. And 
there's no doubt they have a tracer 
on me, but if I move fast enough I 
can keep out of their way. 

His feet struck gravel bottom and 
he let himself down, waded up the 
shelving shore. The night wind 
struck him and he shivered; the river 
had been warm from a day of sun, 
and the wind had a touch of chill. 

Herkimer, of course, would be one 
of those who had come back from 
the future to see that he wrote the 
book as he would have written it if 
there had been no interference. Herkimer and Eva . . . and of the two, 
Sutton told himself, he could trust 
Herkimer. For an android would 
fight, would fight and die for the 
thing that the book would say. And 
so would every non-human form of 
life that could read and understand 
Asher Sutton's book. But no human 
could be trusted. 

HE FOUND a grassy bank and 
sat down and took off his 
clothes to wring them dry, then put 
them on again. He struck out across 
the meadow toward the highway that 
arrowed up the valley. 

No one would find the ship at the 
bottom of the river ... not for a 
while, at least. And a few hours 
were all he needed. A few hours to 
ask a thing that he must know, a 
few minutes then to get back to the 
ship again. 

But he couldn't waste any time. 
He had fo get the information the 



quickest way he could. For if Adams 
had a tracer on him — and Adams 
would have a tracer on him — they 
would already know that he had returned to Earth. 

Once again came the old nagging 
wonder about Adams. How had 
Adams known that he was coming 
back from 61 Cygni, and why had 
he set a mouse trap for him when 
he did arrive? What information had 
he gotten that would make him give 
the order that Sutton must be shot 
on sight ? 

Someone had reached him . . . 
someone who had evidence to show 
him. For Adams , would not go on 
anything less than evidence. And the 
only person who could have given 
him any information would, have, 
been someone from the future. One 
of those, perhaps, who contended 
that the book must not be written, t 
that it must not exist, that the knowl-. 
edge that it held be blotted out forever. And if the man who was to 
write it should die, what could -be 
more simple? s 

Except that the book had been 
written. The book already did exist. 
The knowledge apparently was 
spread across the galaxy. 

That would be catastrophe . . . for 
if the book were not written, then it 
never had existed. The whole segment of the future that had been 
touched by the book in 'any wise 
would be blotted out, along with the 
book that had not been. 

And that could not be, Sutton told 
himself. 



TIME QUARRY 



That meant that Asher Sutton 
could not, would not be allowed to 
die before the book was written. 

However it were written, the book 
must be written or the future was a 
lie. 

Sutton shrugged. The tangled 
thread of logic was too much for 
him. There was no precept, ho precedent upon which one might develop the pattern of cause and result. 

Alternate futures? Maybe, but it 
didn't seem likely. Alternate futures 
were a fantasy that employed semantics-twisting to prove a point, a clever 
use of words that covered up and 
masked the fallacies. 

He crossed the road and took a 
footpath that led to a house standing 
on a knoll. 

In the marsh down near the river, 
the frogs had struck up their piping 
and somewhere far away a wild duck 
called in the darkness. In the hills 
the whippoorwills began the evening forum. The scent of new-cut 
grass lay heavy in the air and the smell 
of fog was crawling up the hills. 

The path came out on a patio artd 
Sutton moved across it. 

A man's voice came to him. 

"Good evening," it said, and Sutton 
wheeled around. 

He saw- the man, then, for the first 
time. A man who sat in his chair and 
smoked his pipe beneath the evening 
stars. 

"I hate to bother you," said Sutton, 
"but I wonder if I might use your 

phone." 



"Certainly, Ash," said Adams. 
"Anything you wish." 

Sutton started and then felt himself freeze. 
. Adams! 

OF ALL the homes along the river, 
he would walk. in on Adams! 
Adams chuckled at him. "Destiny 
works, against you, Ash." i 

Sutton moved forward, found a 
chair in the darkness and sat down. 
"You have a pleasant place," he said. 

"A very pleasant place," said 
Adams. He tapped out his pipe and 
put it in his pocket. "So you died 
again." 

"I was killed," said Sutton. "I got 
unkilled almost immediately." 

"Some of my boys ?" asked Adams. 
"They are hunting for you." 

"A couple of strangers. Some of 
Morgan's gang." 

Adams shook his head. "I don't 
know the name." 

"He probably didn't tell you his 
name," said Shotton. "He told you 
I was coming back." 

"So that was it. The-man out of 
the future. You have him worried, 
Ash." 

"I need a phone," said Sutton. 

"You can use the phone." 

"And I need an hour." 

Adams shook his head. "I can't 
give you an hour." 

"A half-hour, then. I may have a 
chance to make it. A half-hour after 
I finish my call." 

"Nor a half-hour, either." 

"You never gamble, do you?" 



146 




 



"Never," said Adams. 

"I do," said Sutton. He rose. 
"Where is that phone? I'm going to 
gamble on you." 

"Sit down, Ash," said Adams, almost kindly. "Sit down and tell me 
something." 

Stubbornly, Sutton remained standing. 

"If you could give me your word," 
said Adams, "that this destiny business won't harm Man, if you could 
tell me it won't give aid and comfort to our enemies . . ." 

"Man hasn't any enemies," said 
Ash, "except the ones he's made." 

"The galaxy is waiting for us to 
crack. Waiting to close in at the first ' 
sign of weakness." 

"That's because we taught them it. 
They watched us use their own weaknesses to push them under." 

"What will this destiny do?" 
asked Adams'. 

"It will teach Man humility," said 
Sutton. "Humility and responsibility." 

"It's not a religion," said Adams. 
"That's what Raven told me. But it 
sounds like a religiqn . . . with all 
that preaching about humility." 

"Dr. Raven was right," Sutton 
told him. "It's not a religion. Destiny and religions could flourish side 
by side and exist in perfect peace. 
They- do not conflict. Rather, they 
would complement one another. Destiny stands for the same things most 
religions stand for, and it holds out 
no promise of an after-life. It leaves 
that to religion." 

TIME 9UARRY 



"Ash," asked Adams quietly, "you 
have read your history?" 
Sutton nodded. 

"Think back," said Adams. "Remember the Crusades. Remember the 
rise of Mohammedanism. Remember 
Cromwell in England. Remember 
Germany and America. And Russia 
and America. Religion and ideas, 
Ash. Man will fight for an idea 
when he wouldn't lift a hand for 
land or life or honor. But an idea 
to make other races fight Man . . . 
that's a different thing." 

"And you're afraid of an idea," 

"We can't afford any, Ash. Not 
right now, at least." 

"And still," Sutton told him, "it 
has been the ideas that have made 
men grow. We wouldn't have a culture if- it weren't for ideas." 

"Right now," said Adams bitterly, "men are fighting in the future 
over this destiny of yours." 

"That's why I have to use the 
phone," said Sutton. "That's why I 
need an hour." . 

ADAMS rose heavily to his feet. 
"I may be making a mistake," 
he said. "It's something I have never 
done in all my life. But I seem to be 
doing a lot of things I never did before. For once I'll gamble." 

He led the way across the patio 
and into a dimly lighted room, filled 
with old-fashioned furniture of the 
50th and 60th centuries. 
"Jonathon," he called. 
Feet pattered in the hall and the 
android came into the room. 

M7 



"A pair of dice," said Adams 
heavily. "Mr. Sutton and I are about 
to gamble." 

"Dice, sir?" 

"Yes, that pair you and the cook 
are using." 

"Yes, sir," said Jonathon. ' 

He turned and disappeared and 
Sutton listened to his feet going 
through the house, fainter -and 
fainter. 

Adams turned to face him. 

"One throw each," he said. "High 
man wins." 

Sutton nodded, tense. 

"If you win, you get the hour," 
said Adams. "If I win, you take my 
orders." 

"I'll throw with you," said Sutton. 
"On terms like that, I'm willing to 
gamble." 

And he was thinking: I lifted the 
battered ship on Cygni VII and 
maneuvered it through space. I was 
the engine and the pilot, the power 
tubes and navigator. Energy garnered 
by my body took the ship and lifted 
it and drove it through space . . . 
eleven years through space. I brought 
the ship down tonight through atmosphere with the engines dead so it 
could not be spotted and I landed in 
the river. I could pick a book out of 
•that case and carry it to the table 
without laying hands on it, and I 
could turn the pages without the use 
of fingertips. 

But dice. 

They roll so fast and topple so. 
"Win or lose," said Adams, "you 
can use the phone." 




 



"If I lose," said Sutton, "I won't 
need the phone." 

Jonathon came back and laid the 
dice upon a table top. When he saw 
that the two -humans were waiting 
for him to go, he left. His footsteps 
died away. 

Sutton nodded at the dice carelessly. "You first," he said. 

Adams picked them up, held them 
in his fist and shook them. Their 
clicking was- like the frightened 
porcelain chatter of teeth. 

Hk fist came down above the table 
and his fingers opened. The little 
white cubes spun and whirled on the 
polished top. They came to rest. 

Oxie was a five, the other a six. 

Adams raised his eyes to Sutton 
and there was nothing in them. No 
triumph. Absolutely nothing. 

"Your turn," he said. 

'Perfect, thought Sutton, nothing 
less than perfect. It has to be two 
sixes. 



HE STRETCHED out his hand 
and picked up the dice, shook 
them in his fist, felt the shape and 
size of them rolling in his palm. 

Now take them in your mind, he 
told himself . . . take them in your 
mind as well as in your fist. Hold 
them in your mind, make them a part 
of you, as you made the two ships 
you drove through space, as you 
could make a book or chair or a 
flower you wished to pick. 

He changed for a moment and his 
heart faltered to a stop. The blood 
. slowed to a trickle in his arteries and 
veins, and he was not breathing. He 
felt the energy system take over, the 
other body that drew raw energy 
from anything that could be tapped. 

His mind reached out and took 
'the dice and shook them inside the 
prison of his fist. He brought his 
hand down with a swooping gesture 
and let his fingers -uncurl. The dice 
came dancing out. 




TIME QUARRY 



14? 



They were dancing in his brain,' 
too, as well as on the table top and 
he saw them, or sensed them, or was 
aware of them, as if they were a 
part of him. Aware of the sides that 
had the six black dots and the sides 
with all the other numbers. 

But they were slippery to handle, 
hard to make go the way he wanted 
them to go. For a fearful, agonizing 
second, it seemed almost as if the 
spinning cubes had minds and personalities that were their very own. 

One of them was a six and the 
other still was rolling. The six was" 
coming up and it toppled for a moment, threatening to fall back. 

A push, thought Sutton. Just a little push. But with brain power instead of muscular. 

The six came up and the two dice 
lay there, both of them showing sixes. 

Sutton drew in a sobbing breath 
and his heart beat once again and the 
blood pumped through the veins. 

The two men stood in silence for 
a moment, staring at one another 
across the table top. 

Adams spoke and his voice was 
quiet; one could not have guessed 
from his tone what he felt. 

"The phone is over there," he 
said. 

Sutton bowed, ever so slightly, and 
felt foolis'h doing it, like a character 
out of some incredibly old and bad 
piece of romantic fiction. 

' "Destiny," he said, "still is working for me. When it comes to the 
pinch, destiny is there." 

"Your hour will start," said 



Adams, "as soon as you finish phoning." 

He turned smartly and walked 
back to the patio, very stiff and 
straight. 

Now that he had won, Sutton suddenly was weak, and he walked unsteadily to the phone. He sat down 
before it and took out the directory 
that he needed. 

INFormation. And the subheading: Geography, 'historic, North 
America. 

HE FOUND the number and 
■dialed it and the screen lit up. , 
The information robot said: "Can 
I be of service, sir?" 

"Yes," said Sutton. "I would like 
to know where Wisconsin was." 
"Where are you> now, sir?" 
"I am at the residence of Mr. 
Christopher Adams." . 

"The Mr. Adams who is with the 
Department of Galactic Investigation?" 

"The same." 

"Then," the robot said, "you are 
in Wisconsin." 

"Bridgeport?" asked Sutton. 

"It was on the Wisconsin River, 
on the north bank, a matter of seven 
miles above the junction with the 
Mississippi." 

"But those rivers — I've never 
heard of them." 

"You are near them now, sir. The 
Wisconsin flows into the Mississippi 
just below the point where you are 
now." 

Sutton hung up, rose shakily and 



150 




 



crossed the .room, went out on the 
patio. 

• Adams was lighting up his pipe. 
"You got what you wanted?" 
Sutton nodded. 

"Get going, then," said Adams. 
"Your hour's already started." 

Sutton hesitated. 

"What is it, Ash?" . 

"I wonder," said Sutton, "I won. der if you would shake my hand." ■ 

"Why, sure," said Adams. 

He rose ponderously to his feet 
and held out his hand. , 

"I don't know which," said 
Adams, "but you are .either the greatest man or the biggest damn fool • 
that I have ever known." 

XXXI 

BRIDGEPORT dreamed in, its 
rock-hemmed niche alongside 
the swiftly flowing river. The summer sun beat down into the pocket 
between the tree-mantled cliffs with 
a ' fierceness . that seemed to squeeze 
the last hope of life and energy out 
of everything . .„ . out of the weatherbeaten houses, out of the dust that 
lay along the street, out of leaf-wilted shrub and bush and beaten rows 
of flowers. 

The railroad tracks curved around 
a bluff and entered the town, then 
curved around another bluff and were 
gone again. For the short span of this 
arc out of somewhere into nowhere, 
they shone in the sun with the burnished sharpness of a whetted knife. 



Between the tracks and river, the railroad station drowsed, a foursquare 
building that had the look of having 
hunched its shoulders against summer sun and winter cold for so many 
years that it stood despondent and 
cringing, waiting for the next whiplash of weather. 

Sutton stood on the station platform and listened to the river, the 
suck and swish of tiny whirlpools 
that ran- along the shore,, the gurgle 
of water flowing acroS a hidden, upward-canted log, the soft sigh of 
watery fingers grasping at the tip of 
a downward-drooping branch. And 
above it all, cutting through it all, 
the real noise of the river. 

He lifted his head and squinted 
against the sun to follow the mighty 
metal span that leaped across the 
river from the bluff-top, slanting 
down toward the high-graded roadbed that walked across the gently rising valley on the other shore. 

Man leaped rivers on great spans 
of steel and he never heard the talk 
of rivers as they rolled down to the 
sea. Man leaped seas on wings powered by smooth, sleek engines, and 
the thunder of the sea was a sound 
lost in the empty vault of sky. Man 
crossed space in metallic cylinders 
that twisted time and space and 
hurled Man and his miraculous machines down alleys of conjectural 
mathematics that were not even 
dreamed of in this world of Bridgeport, 1977. 

Man was in a hurry and he went 
too far, too fast. So far and fast that 



TIME QUARRY 



151 



he missed many things . . . things 
that he should have taken time to 
learn as he went along -. . . things 
that someday in some future age he 
would take the time to study. Someday Man would come back along the 
trail again and learn the things he'd 
missed and wonder why he missed 
them and think upon the years that 
were lost for never knowing them. 

Sutton stepped down from the 
platform and found a faint footpath 
that went dowfi to the river. Carefully, he made his way along it, for it 
was soft and crumbly and there were 
stones that might turn underfoot. 

AT THE end of the footpath -he 
found the old man. ' 
The oldster sat perched on a small 
boulder planted in the mud and he 
held a cane pole slanted riverwise 
across his knees. An ancient pipe protruded from a two-weeks' growth of 
graying whiskers, and an earthenware 
jug with a corncob for a cork sat 
beside him, easy to his hand. 

Sutton sat down cautiously on the 
shelving shore beside the boulder and 
wondered at the coolness of the shade 
from the trees and undergrowth — a 
welcome coolness after the fierce 
splash of sun upon the village just 
a few rods up the bank. 

"Catching anything?" he asked. 
"Nope," said the old man. 
He puffed away at his pipe and 
Sutton watched in fascinated silence. 
One would have sworn, he told himself, that the mop of whiskers was 
on fire. 



"Didn't catch nothing yesterday, 
-either," the old man added. He took 
his pipe out of his mouth with" a 
deliberate, considered motion and 
spat neatly into the center of a river 
eddy. "Didn't catch nothing the day 
before yesterday." 

"You want to catch something, 
don't you?" Sutton asked. 

"Nope." The old man put down a 
hand and lifted the jug, worked out 
the corncob cork and wiped the jug's 
neck carefully' with a dirty hand. 
"Have a snort," he invited. 

Sutton, remembering the dirty 
hand, took it, gagging to himself. 
Cautiously, he lifted it and tipped it 
to his mouth. 

The stuff splashed and gurgled 
down his throat and it was liquid fire 
laced with gall and with a touch of 
brimstone to give it something extra. 

Sutton snatched the jug away and 
held it by the handle, keeping his 
mouth wide open to cool it and air 
out the taste. 

The old man took the jug back and 
Sutton swabbed at the tears running 
down his cheeks. 

"Ain't aged the way she should 
be," the old man apologized. "But I 
ain't got the time to fool around with 
that." 

He took himself a hooker, wiped , 
his mouth with the back of his hand 
and whooshed out his breath in gusty 
satisfaction. He put the jug down 
again and worked the cork in tight. 

"Stranger, ain't you?" he asked 
Sutton. "Don't recall seeing you 
around." < 



152 




 



SUTTON nodded. "Looking for 
some people by the name of Sutton. John H. Sutton." 

The old man chuckled. "Old John, 
eh? Him and me was kids together. 
Sneakiest little rascal that I ever 
knew. Ain't worth a tinker's damn, 
old John ain't. Went off to law school 
and got him an education. But he 
didn't make a go of it. Roosting out 
on a farm up on the ridge, over there 
across the river." He shot a look at 
Sutton. "You ain't no relative of his, 
are you?" 

"Well," said Sutton, "not exactly. 
Not very close, at least." 

"Tomorrow's the Fourth," said the 
old man, "and I recollect the time 
that John and me blew up a culvert 
in Campbell Hollow, come the 
Fourth. Found some dynamite a road 
gang had been using for blasting. 
John and me, we figured it would 
make a bigger bang if we confined 
it, sort of. So we put her in the culvert pipe and lit a long fuse. Mister, 
it blew that culvert all to hell. I recollect our dads like to took the hide 
off us for doing it." 

Dead ringer, thought Sutton. John 
H. Sutton is just across the river and 
tomorrow is the Fourth. July 4, 1977, 
that's what the letter said. 

And I didn't have to ask. The old 
codger unwittingly told me. 

The sun was a furnace blast from 
the river's surface, but here, underneath the trees, one just caught the 
edge of the flare of heat. A leaf 
floated by and there was a grasshopper riding on it. The grasshopper 
tried to jump ashore, but his jump 
fell short and the current grabbed and 
swallowed him out of sight. 

"Never had a chance," said the 
old man, "that hopper didn't. Wickedest river in these United States, the 
old Wisconsin is. Can't trust her. 
Tried to run steamboats on her in 
the early days, but they couldn't do 
it, for where there was a channel one 
day there' d be a sand bar on the next. 
Current shifts the sand something awful. Government fellow wrote a report on her once. Said the only way 
you could use the Wisconsin for navigation was to lathe and plaster it." 

From far overhead came the rumble of traffic crossing the bridge. A 
train came by, chuffing and grinding, 
a long freight that dragged itself up 
the valley. Long after it had passed, 
Sutton heard its whistle hooting. 

"Destiny," said the old man, "sure 
wasn't working worth a hoot for that 
hopper, was it?" 

SUTTON sat upright. "What was 
that you said?" 
"Don't mind me," the old man 
told him. "I go around mumbling to 
myself. Sometimes people hear me; 
mostly they don't." 

"But destiny — you said something 
about destiny." 

"Interested in it, lad? Wrote a 
story about it once. Didn't amount to 
much. Used to mess around some, 
writing, in my early days." 
Sutton relaxed and lay back. 
A dragonfly skimmed the water's 
surface. Far up the bank, a small fish 



jumped and left a widening circle in 
the water, 

"About this fishing," said Sutton. 
"You don't seem to care whether you 
catch anything or not." 

"Rather not," the old man told 
him. "Catch something and you got 
to take it off the hook. Then you got . 
to bait up again and throw the hook 
back in the river. Then you got to 
clean the fish. It's an awful sight of 
work." He took the pipe out of his 
mouth and "spat carefully into the 
river. "Ever read Thoreau, son?" 

Sutton shook his head, trying to remember. The name struck a chord of 
memory. There had been a fragment 
in a book of ancient literature in his 
college days. All that was left of what 
was believed to have been an extensive amount of writing. 

"You ought to," the old man told 
him. "He had the right idea." 

Sutton rose and dusted off his 
trousers. 

"Stick around," the old man said. 
"You ain't bothering rhe. Hardly 
none at all." ■ 

"Got to be getting along," said 
Sutton. 

"Hunt me up some other time," 
the old man said. "We could talk 
some more." 

"Someday," Sutton answered politely, "I'll do just that." 

"Care for another snort before you 
go?" 

"No, thank you," said Sutton, 
backing off. "No, thank you very 
much." 

"Oh, well," the old man said. He 




 



Hfted the jug and took a long and 
gurgling drink. 

Sutton climbed the bank to -the 
blaze of sun again. 

"Sure," said the station agent in 
the village, "the Suttons live just 
across the river, over in Grant 
County. Several ways to get there. 
Which one would you like?" 

"The longest one," Sutton told 
him. "I'm not in any hurry." 

The moon was coming up when 
Sutton climbed the hill to reach the 
bridge. 

He was in no hurry. He had all 
night. Tomorrow was the Fourth. 

XXXII 

THE land was wild . . . wilder than 
anything Sutton had ever seen on 
the seeded, trimmed and watered 
parks of his native Earth. The land 
tilted upward, as if it rested on a knife 
edge, and ■ it was littered by great 
clumps of stone which appeared to 
have been flung down in godlike 
anger by a giant hand out of forgotten time. Stark bluffs speared erect, 
soaring massively, masked by mighty 
trees that seemed to have tried, at one 
time, to have matched the height and 
dignity of the rocky cliffs. Through 
the trees, Asher Sutton glimpsed the 
break in the cliffs ahead and knew 
that he was at the place that old John 
Sutton had mentioned in his letter. 

The sun was only a couple of 
hours high and there still was time. 
There still would be time, for John 
Sutton had talked to the man only a 

TIME QUARRY 



couple of hours or so and then had 
gone to dinner. 

From there on, with the cleft of 
the cliff in sight, Sutton took his time. 
'He reached the top and found the 
boulder that his old ancestor had 
spoken of. It was almost designed for 
sitting. 

He sat upon it and stared across 
the valley, grateful for the shade. 

And there was peace, as John Sutton had said there was. Peace and the 
quieting majesty of the scene before 
him ... the strange third-dimensional 
quality of the space that hung, as if 
alive, above the river valley. Strangeness, too, the strangeness of expected 
. . . and unexpected . . . happenings. 

He looked at his watch. It was 
half-past nine, so he left the boulder 
and lay down behind a patch of 
brush and waited. Almost as he did, 
there was a soft, smooth swish of 
motor-noise and a ship came down, a 
tiny one-man ship, slanting across the 
trees, to land in the pasture just beyond the fence. 

A man got out and leaned against 
the ship, staring at the sky and trees, 
as if satisfying himself that he had 
reached his destination. 

Sutton chuckled quietly to himself. 

Stage setting, he said. Dropping in 
unexpectedly and with a crippled 
ship ... no need to explain your 
presence. Waiting for a man to come 
walking up and talk to you. Most 
natural thing in all the worlds. You 
didn't seek him out; he saw you and 
came to you, and of course he talked. 

You couldn't come walking up the 

155 



road and turn in at the gate and 
knotk at the door and say. "I came to 
pick up all the scandal I can about 
the Sutton family. I wonder if I 
might sit down and talk with you/'" 

But you could land in a pasture 
with a crippled ship and first you'd 
talk of corn and pasture, of weather 
and of grass, and finally you'd get 
around to talking about personal and 
family matters. 

The man had his wrench out and 
was tinkering at the ship. 

lit must almost be time. 

Sutton lifted himself on his arms 
and stared through the close-laced 
branches of the, hazel brush. 

John H. Sutton was coming down 
the hill, a big-bellied man with a trim 
white beard and an old black hat, and 
his walk was a waddle with some 
swagger still left in it. 

XXXIII 

SO THIS is failure, Eva Armour 
said. This is how failure feels. 
Dry in the throat and heavy in the 
heart and tired in the brain. 

I am bitter, she told herself, and ! 
have a right to be. Although I am so 
tired with trying and with failure 
that the knife edge of bitterness is 
dulled. 

"The psych tracer in Adams' office has stopped," Herkimer had said, 
and then the plate had gone dead as 
he cut the visor. 

There was no trace of Sutton. The 
tracer had stopped. 

That meant that Sutton was dead. 



He could not be dead, for historically he had written a book and he 
had not yet written it. 
■ But history was something that you 
couldn't trust. It was put together 
wrong, or copied wrong, or misinterpreted, or improved upon by a man 
with a misplaced- imagination. Truth 
was so hard to keep, myth and fable 
so easy to breathe into a life that was 
more acceptable than truth. 

Half the history of Sutton, Eva 
knew, must be sheer legend. And yet 
there were certain truths that must be 
truths indeed. 

Someone had written a book and 
it would have had to be Sutton. No 
one' else could break the language in 
which his notes were written, and the 
words themselves breathed the very 
sincerity of the man himself. 

Sutton had died, but not on Earth 
nor in Earth's solar system and not a 
youth of sixty. He had died on a 
planet circling some far star and he 
had not died for many, many years. 

These were truths that could not 
well be twisted. These were truths 
that had to stand until they were disproved. 

And yet the tracer had stopped. 

Eva got up from her chair and 
walked across the room to the window that looked out on the landscaped grounds of the Orion Arms. 
Fireflies were dotting the bushes with 
their brief, cold, flame and the late 
moon was coming up behind a cloud 
that looked like a gentle hill. 

So much work, she thought. So 
many years of planning. Androids 



156 




 



who had worn no mark upon their 
forehead and who had been formed 
to look exactly like the humans they 
replaced. And other androids who 
had marks upon their foreheads, but 
who had not been the androids made 
in the laboratories of the eightieth 
century. Elaborate networks of espionage, waiting for the day Sutton 
would come home. Years of puzzling 
over the records of the past, trying to 
separate the truth from the half -truth 
and the downright error. 

Years of watching and of waiting, 
parrying the counter-espionage of the 
Revisionist, laying the groundwork 
for the day of action. And being careful .. . always careful. For the 
eightieth century must not know, 
must not even guess. 

But there had been unseen factors. 

MORGAN had come back and 
warned Adams that Sutton must 
be killed. 

Two humans had been planted on 
Benton's forfeited asteroid. 

Although those two factors could 
not account entirely for what had 
happened. There was another factor 
somewhere. 

She stood at the window, looking 
out at the rising moon, and her brows 
knit into crinkling lines of thought. 
But she was too tired. No thought 
would come. 
Except defeat. 
Defeat would explain it all. 
Sutton might be dead and that 
would be defeat, utter and complete. 
Victory for an officialdom that was at once too timid and too vicious to take 
any active part in the struggle for the 
book. An officialdom that sought to 
keep the status quo, willing to wipe 
out centuries of thought to maintain 
its grip on the galaxy. 

Such a defeat, she knew, would be 
even worse than a defeat by the Revisionists. If the Revisionists won, 
there still would be a book; there still 
would be the teaching of Man's own 
destiny. And that, she told herself, 
was better than no inkling of destiny 
at all. 

Behind her, the visiphone purred, 
and she spun around, hurried across 
the room. 

A robot saidr "Mr. Sutton called. 
He asked about Wisconsin." 

"Wisconsin?" 

"It's an old place name," the robot 
explained. "He asked about a place 
called Bridgeport, Wisconsin." 

"As if he were going there?" 

"It would appear so." 

"Quick," said Eva. "Where is this 
Bridgeport?" 

"Five or six miles away," said the 
robot, "and at least four thousand 
years." 

She caught her breath. "In time," 
she said. 

"Yes, miss, in time." 

"Tell me exactly," Eva told him. 

The robot shook his head. "I don't 
know. I couldn't catch it. His mind 
was all roiled up. He'd just come 
through a trying experience." 

"Then you can't help." 

"I wouldn't bother if I were you," 
the robot told her. "He struck me as 



a man who knew what he was doing. 
He'll come'out all right." 

"You're sure of that?" 

"I would like to be," the robot 
admitted reluctantly. 

XXXIV 

A DRY stick cracked under Sutton's feet and the man with the 
wrench slowly turned around. A 
swift, smooth smile spread upon his 
face in widening crinkles to hide the 
amazement that glittered in his eyes. 
"Good afternoon," said, Sutton. 
John H. Sutton was a stout speck 
that had almost climbed the hill. The 
sun had passed its zenith' and was 
swinging toward the west. Down in 
the river valley, a half-dozen crows 
were cawing;- it was as if the sound 
came from underneath their feet. 

The man held out his hand. "Mr. 
Sutton, isn't it?" he asked. "The Mr. 
Sutton of the eightieth century?" 
"Drop the wrench," said Sutton. 
The man pretended not to hear 
him. "My name is Dean," he said. 
"Arnold Dean. I'm from the eightyfourth." 

"Drop the wrench," said Sutton. 

Dean dropped it. Sutton hook'ed it 
along the ground with a toe until it 
was out of reach. 

"That is better," he said. "Now, 
let's sit down and talk." 

Dean gestured with a thumb. "The 
old man will be coming back. He will 
get to wondering and he will come 
back. He had a lot of questions he 
f orgot to ask."' 



158 




 



"Not for a while," Sutton told 
him. "Not until he's eaten and had 
an after-dinner nap." 

Dean grunted and eased himself to 
a sitting position, his back against the 
ship. "Random factors," he said. 
"That's what balls up the detail. 
You're a random factor, Sutton. It 
wasn't planned this way." 

Sutton sat down easily and picked 
up the wrench. He weighed it in his 
hand. Blood, he thought, looking at 
the wrench. You'll have blood upon 
one end before the day is out. 

"Tell me,", said Dean. "Now that 
you are here, what do you plan to 
do?" 
"Easy," said Sutton. "You're going 
to talk to me. You're going to tell me 
something that I need to know." 
"Gladly," Dean agreed. 
"You said you came from the 
eighty-fourth. What year?" 

"Eighty-three eighty-six," said 
Dean. "But if I were you, I'd go a 
little past that. You'd find more to 
interest you." 

"But you figure I'll never get even 
as far as that," said Sutton. "You 
think that you will win." 
"Of course I do," said Dean. 
Sutton dug into the ground with 
the wrench. "A while ago, I found a 
man who died very shortly after. He 
recognized me and he made a sign 
with his fingers." — 
Dean spat upon the ground. "Android. They worship you, Sutton. 
They made a religion out of you. Because, you see, you gave them hope to 
cling to. You gave them something 



that made them, in one way, the 
equal of Man." 

"I take it," Sutton said, "you don't 
believe a thing I wrote." 

"Should I?" 

"I do," said Sutton. 

DEAN said nothing. 
"You have taken the thing I 
wrote," said Sutton evenly, "and you 
are trying to use it to fashion one 
more rung in the ladder of Man's 
vanity. You have missed the point entirely. You have no sense of destiny 
because you gave destiny no chance 
whatever." 

And he felt foolish even as he said 
it, for it sounded so much like preaching. So much like what the men of 
old had said of faith when faith was 
just a word, before it had .become a 
force to really reckon with. 

"I won't lecture you," he said, 
angry at the smooth way Dean had 
put him on the defensive. "I won't 
preach at you. You either accept destiny or you ignore it. So far as I'm 
concerned I'll not raise a hand to convince any single man. The book I 
wrote tells you what I know. You can 
take it or you can leave it . . . it's all 
the same to me." 

"Sutton," said Dean, "you're batting your head against a stone wall. 
You haven't got a chance. You're 
fighting humankind. The whole 
human race against you . . . and 
nothing's ever stood against the human race. All you have is a pack of 
measly androids and a few renegade 
humans ... the kind of humans that 



TIME QUARRY 



159 



used to swarm to the old cult-worships." 

"The empire is built on androids 
and robots," Sutton told him. "They 
can throw you out any time they 
want to. Without them you couldn't 
hold a single foot of ground outside 
the solar system." 

"They will stick with us in the empire," Dean retorted, very confident. 
"They may fight us on this business 
of destiny, but they'll stay with us because they can't get along without us. 
They can't reproduce, you know. And 
they can't make themselves. They 
have to have humans to keep their 
race going, to replace the ones who 
get knocked off." 

He chuckled. "Until one android 
can create ahother android, they will 
stick withuus and they will work with 
us. If they didn't, they would be 
committing racial suicide." 

"What I can't understand," said 
Sutton, "is how you know which ones 
are fighting you and which are sticking with you." 

"That," said Dean, "is the hell of 
it ... we don't. If we did, we'd make 
short work of this lousy war. The 
android who fought you yesterday 
may shine your shoes tomorrow, and 
how are you to know ? The answer is, 
you don't." 

HE PICKED up a tiny stone and 
flicked it out on the pasture 

grass. 

"Sutton," he said, "it's enough to 
drive you nuts. No battles, really. 
Just guerrilla skirmishes here and 

160 



there, when one small task force sent 
out to do a time-fixing job is ambushed by another task force sent out 
by the other side to intercept them." 

"Like I intercepted you," said Sutton. 

"Huh . . ." said Dean, and then he 
brightened. "Why, sure. Like you 
intercepted me." 

One moment Dean was sitting 
with his back against the machine, 
talking as if he meant to keep on talking . . . and in the next moment his 
body was a fluid streak of motion, 
jackknifing up and forward in a 
lunge toward the wrench that Sutton 
held. 

Sutton moved instinctively, toes 
tightening against the ground, leg 
muscles flexing to 4 drive his body 
aside, hand starting to jerk the 
wrench away. 

But Dean had the advantage, of a 
full second's start. 

Sutton felt the wrench ripped from 
his grip, saw the flash of it in. the 
sun as Dean swung it sharply for the 
blow. 

Dean's lips were moving. Even as 
he tried to throw up his arms to 
shield his head, Sutton read the 
words the other's lips were ironically 
forming: 

"So you thought the blood on the 
wrench would be mine!" 

Then pain exploded inside Sutton's head and he fell through darkness. 
