HONEYMOON IN HELL BY FREDRIC BROWN 

ON SEPTEMBER 16th in the 
year 1962, things were going- along about the same 
as usual, only a little worse. The cold 
war that had been waxing and waning between- the United States and 
the Eastern Alliance — Russia, China, 
and their lesser satellites — was 
warmer than it had ever been. War, 



hot war, seemed not only inevitable 
but extremely imminent. 

The race for the Moon was an immediate cause. Each nation had 
landed a few men on it and each 
claimed it. Each had found that rockets sent from Earth were inadequate 
to ipermit establishment of a permanent base upon the Moon, an<f that 
only establishment of a permanent 
base, in force, would determine possession. And so each nation (for 
convenience we'll call the Eastern 

Alliance a nation, although it was 
not exactly that) was engaged in 
rushing construction of a space station to be placed in an orbit around 
Earth. 

With such an intermediate step m 
space, reaching the Moon with large 
rockets would be practicable and 
construction of armed bases, heavily 
garrisoned, would be comparatively 
simple. Whoever got there first could 
not only claim possession, but could 
implement the claim. Military secrecy on both sides kept from the 
public just how near to completion 
each space base was, but it was generally — and correctly — believed that 
the issue would be determined within a year, two years at the outside. 

Neither nation could afford to let 
the other control the Moon. That 
much had become obvious even to 
those, who were trying desperately to 
maintain peace. 

On September 17th, 1962, a statistician in the birth record department 
of New York City (his name was 
Wilbur Evans, but that doesn't matter) noticed that out of 813 births 
reported the previous , day, 657 had 
been girls and only 156 boys. 

He knew that, statistically, this was 
practically impossible. In a small city 
where there are only, say, ten births 
a day, it is- quite possible — and not 
at all alarming — that on any one 
given day, 90% or even 100%, of 
the births may be of the same sex. 
But out of so large a figure as 813, 
so high a ratio as 657 to 156 is 
alarming. 



Wilbur Evans went to his department chief and he, too, was interested and alarmed. Checks were 
made by telephone — first with nearby cities and, as the evidence 
mounted, with more and more distant ones. , 

T>Y THE end of that day, the puz-Ozled investigators — and there was 
quite a large group interested bjr 
then — knew that in every city 
checked, the same thing had happened. The births, all over the West- ern Hemisphere and in Europe, for 
that day had averaged about the 
same — three boys for every thirteen 
girls. 

Back-checking showed that the 
trend had started almost a week before, but with only a slight predominance of girls. For only a few days 
had the discrepancy been obvious. 
On the fifteenth, the -ratio had been 
three boys to every five girls and on 
the sixteenth it had been four to 
fourteen. 

The newspapers got the story, of 
course, and kicked it around. The 
television comics had fun with it, if 
their audiences didn't. But four days 
later, on September 21st, only one 
child out of every eighty-seven born 
in the country was male. That wasn't 
funny. People and governments 
started to worry; biologists and laboratories who had already started to 
investigate the phenomenon made it 
their number one project. The television comics quit joking about it 
after one crack on the subject by the 



6 




 



tap comedian in the country drew 
875,480 indignant letters and lost 
him his contract. 

On September 29th, out of a normal number of births in the United 
States, only forty-one were boys. Investigation proved that every one of 
these was a late, or delayed, birth. It 
became obvious that no male child 
had been conceived during the latter 
part of December of the previous 
year, 1961. By this time, of course, 
it was known that the same condition prevailed everywhere — in the 
countries of the Eastern Alliance as 
well as in the United States, and in 
every other country and area of the 
world — among the Eskimos, the 
Ubangi and the Indians of Tierra 
del Fuego. 

The strange phenomenon, whatever it was, affected human beings 
only, however. Births among animals, wild or domesticated, showed 
the usual ratio of the two sexes. 
- - Work on both space stations continued, but talk of war — and incidents tending to lead to war — diminished. The human race had something new, something less immediate, but in the long run far worse 
to worry about. Despite the apparent inevitability of war, few people 
thought that it would completely 
end the human race; a complete lack 
of male Children definitely would. 
Very, very -definitely. 

And for once something was happening that the United States could 
not blame on the Eastern Alliance, 
and vice versa. The Orient — China 

HONEYMOON IN HELL 



and India in particular — suffered 
more, perhaps, than the Occident, 
for in those countries male offspring 
are of supreme emotional importance 
to parents. There were riots in both 
China and India, very bloody ones, 
until the people realized that they 
didn't know whom or what they 
were rioting against and sank back 
into miserable passivity 

TN THE more advanced countries, 
X .laboratories went on twenty-fourhour shifts, and anyone who knew a 
gene from a chromosome could command his weight in paper currency 
for looking — however futilely— 
through a microscope. Accredited 
biologists and geneticists became 
more important than presidents and 
dictators. But they accomplished, no 
more than the cults which sprang up , 
everywhere (though mostly in California) and which blamed what was 
happening on everything from a 
conspiracy of the Elders of Zion to 
(with unusually good sense) an invasion from space, and advocated 
everything from vegetarianism to 
(again with unusually good sense) 
a revival of phallic worship. 

Despite scientists and cults, despite riots and resignation, not a single male child was born anywhere in 
the world during the month of December, 1962. There had been isolated instances, all quite late births, 
during October and November. 

January of 1963 again drew a 
blank. Not that everyone qualified 
wasn't trying. 



Except, perhaps, the one person 
who was slated to do more than anyone else — well, almost anyone else — 
about the matter. • ' 

Not that Capt. Raymond F. Carmody, U.S.S.F., retired, was- a misogamist, exactly. He liked women well 
enough, both in the abstract and in 
the concrete. But he'id been badly 
jilted once and it had cured him of 
any .desire whatsoever for marriage. 
Marriage aside, he took women as he 
found them — and he had no trouble 
finding them. 

For one thing, don't let the word 
"retired" fool you. In the Space 
Service, rocket pilots are retired at 
the ripe old age of twenty-five. The 
recklessness, reaction-speed and stamina of youth are much more important than experience. The trick in 
riding a rocket is not to do anything 
in particular; it's to be tough enough 
to stay alive and sane until you get 
there. Technicians do the brain-work 
and the only controls are braking 
rockets to help you get down in one 
piece when you land; reaction-speed 
is of more importance than experience in managing them. Neither 
speed nor experience helps you if 
you've gone batty en route from 
spending days on end in the equivalent of "a coffin, or if you haven't 
what it takes not to die in a good 
landing. And a good landing is one 
that you an walk away from after 
you've recovered consciousness. 

• That's why Ray Carmody, at 
twenty-seven, was a retired rocket 
ipilot. Aside from test flights on and 



near Earth, he'd made one 'successful 
flight to the Moon with landing and 
return. It had been the fifteenth attempt and the third success. There 
had been two more successful flights 
thereafter — altogether five successful 
round trips out of eighteen tries. 

But- each rocket thus far designed 
had been able, barely, to carry fuel 
to get itself and its crew of one back 
to Earth, with almost-starvation rations for the period required. Steprockets were needed to do even that, 
and step-rockets are terrifically expensive and cumbersome things. ' 

AT THE time Carmody had retired from the Space Service, 
two years before, it had been conceded that establishment of a permanent base of any sort on the Moon 
was completely impracticable until a 
space station, orbited around' the 
Earth, had been completed as a waystation. Comparatively huge rockets 
could reach a space station with relative ease, and starting from a station 
in open space and against lesser 
gravitational pull from Earth, going 
the rest of the way to the Moon 
would be even simpler. 

But we're getting away from Ray 
Carmody, as Carmody had got away 
from the Space Service. He could 
have had a desk job in it after old 
age had retired him, a job that 
would have paid better than he was 
making at the moment. But he knew 
little about the technical end of rocketry, and he knew less, and cared 
nothing, about administrative detail 




 



work. He was most interested in 
cybernetics, which, is the science of 
electronic calculating machines. The 
big machines had always fascinated 
him, and -he'd found a job working 
with the biggest of them all, the one 
in the building on a corner of the 
grounds of the Pentagon that had 
been , built, in 1958, especially to 
house it. 

It was, of course, known as Junior 
to its intimates. * 

Carmody's job, specifically, was 
Operative, Grade I, and the Grade I 
meant that — despite his fame as one 
of the few men who had been to the 
Moon and lived to tell about it, and 
despite his ultra-honorable discharge 
with the grade of captain — his life 
had been checked back to its very 
beginning to be sure that he had not, 
even in his cradle, uttered a careless 
or subversive word. 

There were only three other 
Grade I Operatives qualified to ask 
Junior questions and transmit his answers on questions Which involved 
security — and that included questions on logistics, atomics, ballistics 
and rocketry, military plans of all 
sorts and everything else the military 
forces consider secret, which is practically everything except the currently preferred- color of an infantryman's uniform. 

The Eastern Alliance would undoubtedly have traded three puppet 
dictators and the tomb of Lenin to 
have had an agent, or even a sympathizer, as a Grade I Operative on 
Junior. But even the Grade II Oper


atives, who handled only problems 
dealing with non-classified matters, 
were checked for loyalty with extreme care. Possibly lest they might 
ask Junior a subversive question or 
feed a subversive idea into his electronic equivalent of a brain. 

But be that as it may, on the afternoon of February 2, 1963, Ray Carmody was the Operative on duty in 
the control room. The only Operative, of course; dozens of technicians 
were required from time to time to 
service Junior and feed him, but only 
one Operative at a time fed data into 
him or asked him questions. So Carmody was alone in the soundproofed 
control 'room. 

DOING nothing, however, at the 
moment. He'd just fed into Junior a complicated mess of . data on 
molecular structure in the Chromosome mechanism and had asked Junior — for the ten-thousandth time, at 
least — the sixty-four dollar question 
bearing on the survival of the human 
race: Why all children were now females and what could be done about 
it. 

It had been quite a chunk of data, 
this time, and no doubt Junior 
would take quite a few minutes to 
digest it, add it to everything else 
he'd ever been told and synthesize 
the whole. No idoubt in a few minutes he'd say, "Data •insufficient." At 
least to this moment that had been 
his only answer to the sixty-four dol- ■ 
iar question. 

Carmody sat back and watched' 



HONEYMOON IN HELL 



9 



Junior's complicated bank of dials, 
switches and lights with a bored 
eye. And because the intake-mike 
was shut off and Junior couldn't hear 
what he was saying anyway, and because the control room was soundproofed so no one else could hear 
him, either, he spoke freely. 

"Junior," he said, "I'm afraid 
you're a washout on this particular 
deal. We've fed you everything that 
every geneticist, every chemist, every 
biologist in this half of the -world 
knows, and all you do is come up 
with that 'data insufficient' stuff. 
What do you want — blood? 

"Oh, you're pretty ,good on some 
things. You're a whiz on orbits and 
rocket fuels, but you just can't understand women, can you? Well, I 
can't either; I'll give you that. And 
I've got- to admit you've done the 
human race a good turn on one deal 
— atomics. You convinced us that if 
we completed and used H-bombs, 
both sides would lose the coming 
war. I mean lose. And we've got inside information that the other side 
got the same answer out of your 
brothers, the cybernetics machines 
over there, so they won't build or 
use them, either. Winning a war 
with H-bombs is about like winning 
a wrestling match with hand grenades; it's just as urihealthful for 
you as for your opponent. But we 
weren't talking about hand grenades. 
We were talking about women. Or I 
was. Listen, Junior — " 

A light, not on Junior's panel but 
in the ceiling, flashed on and off, the 

10 



signal for an incoming intercommunicator call. It would be from the 
Chief Operative, of course; no one 
- else could connect — by intercommunkator or any other method — with 
this control room. ' 

Carmody threw a switch. 

"Busy, Carmody?" 

"Not at the moment, Chief. Just 
fed Junior that stuff on molecular 
structure of genes and chromosomes. 
Waiting for him to tell me it's not 
enough data, but it'll take him a few 
minutes yet." 

"Okay. You're off duty in fifteen 
minutes. Will you come to my office 
as soon as you're relieved? The President wants to talk to you." 

Carmody said, "Goody. I'll put on 
my best pinafore." 

He threw the switch again. Quickly, because a green light was flashing 
on Junior's panel. 

He reconnected the intake- and 
output-mikes and said, "Well, Junior?" 

. "Data insufficient," said Junior's 
level mechanical voice. 

Carmody sighed and noted the 
machine's answer on the report ending in a question which he had fed 
unto the mike. He said, "Junior, I'm 
ashamed of you. All right, let's see 
if there's anything else I can ask and 
get an answer to in fifteen minutes." 

HE PICKED up a pile of several 
files from the table in front 
of him and leafed through them 
quickly. None contained fewer than 
three pages of data. 


 



"Nope," he said, "not a thing 
here I can give you in fifteen minutes, arid Bob will foe here to relieve 
me then." 

He sat back and relaxed. He 
wasn't ducking work; experience had 
proven that, although an AE7 cybernetics machine could accept verbal 
data in conformance with whatever 
vocabulary it had been given, and 
translate that data into mathematical 
symbols (as it translated the mathematical symbols of its answer back 
into words and mechanically spoke 
the words), it could not adapt itself 
to a change of voice within a given 
operation. It could, and did, adjust 
itself to understanding, as it were, 
Carmody's voice or the voice of Bob 
Dana who would shortly relieve 
him. But if Carmody started on a 
given ■ problem, he'd have to finish 
it himself, or Bob would have to 
clear the board and start all over 
again. So there was no use starting 
something he wouldn't have time to 
finish. 

He glanced through some of the 
reports and questions to kill time. 
The one dealing with the space station interested him most, but he 
found it too technical to understand. 

"But you won't," he told Junior. 
"Pal, I've got to give that to you; 
when it comes to anything except 
women, you're really good." 

The switch was open, but since no 
question had been asked, of course 
Junior didn't answer. 

Carmody put down the files and 
glowered at Junior. "Junior," he 



said, "that's your weakness all right, 
women. And you can't have genetics 
without women, can you?" 

"No," Junior said. 

"Well, you do Tcnow that much. 
But even I know it. Look, here's one 
that'll stump you. That blonde I met 
at the party last night. What about 
her?" , < 

"The question," said Junior, "is 
inadequately worded; please clarify." 

Carmody grinned. "You want me 
to get graphic, but I'll fool you. I'll 
just ask you this — should I see her 
again?" 

"No," said Junior, mechanically 
but implacably. 

CARMODY'S eyebrows went up. 
"The devil you say. And may I 
ask why, since you haven't met the 
lady, you say that?" 

"Yes. You may ask why." 
That was one trouble with Junior; 
he always answered the question you 
actually asked, not the one you im* plied. ■ • 
"Why?" Carmody demanded, genuinely curious now as to what answer he was going to receive. n Specifically, why should I not again see 
the blonde I' met last night?" 

"Tonight," said Junior, "you will 
be busy. Before tomorrow night you 
will be married." 

Carmody almost literally jumped 
out of his chair. The cybernetics machine had gone stark raving crazy. It 
must have. There was no more 
chance of his getting married tomorrow than there was of a kangaroo 



HONEYMOON IN HELL 



n 



giving birth to a portable typewriter. 
And besides and beyond that, Junior 
never made predictions of the future 
— except, of course, on such things 
as orbits and statistical extrapolation 
of trends. < 

Carmody was still staring at Junior's impassive panel with utter disbelief and considerable consternation 
when the red light that was the 
equivalent of a doorbell flashed in 
the ceiling. His shift was up and Bob 
Dana had come to relieve him. There 
wasn't time to ask any further questions and, anyway, "Are you crazy?" 
was the only one he could think of 
at the moment. 

Carmody didn't ask it. He didn't 
want to know. 

CHAPTER II 

Mission to Luna 

CARMODY switched off both 
mikes and stood gazing at Junior's impassive panel for a long time. 
He shook his head, went to the door 
and opened it. 

Bob Dana breezed, in and then 
stopped to look at Carmody. He 
said, "Something the matter, Ray? 
You look like you'd just seen a 
ghost, if I may coin a cliche." 

Carmody shook his head. He 
wanted to think before he talked to 
anybody — and if he did decide to 
talk, it should 'be to Chief Operative 
Reeber and not to anyone else. He 
said, "Just I'm a little beat, Bob." 
"Nothing special up?" 



"Nope. Unless maybe I'm going 
to be fired. Reeber wants to see me 
on my way out." He grinned. "Says 
the President wants to talk to me." 

Bob chuckled appreciatively. "If 
he's in a kidding mood, then your 
job's safe for one more day. Good 
luck." 

The soundproof door closed and 
locked behind Carmody, and he 
nodded to the two armed guards 
who were posted on duty outside it. 
He tried to think things out carefully 
as he walked down the long stretch 
of corridor to the Chief Operative's 
office. 

Had something gone wrong with 
Junior? If so, it was his duty to report the matter. But if he did, he'd 
get himself in trouble, too. An 
Operative .wasn't supposed to ask 
private questions of the big cybernetics machine — even big, important 
questions. The fact that it had been 
a joking question would make it 
worse. 

But Junior had either given him a 
joking answer — and it couldn't be 
that, because Junior didn't have a" 
sense of humor-^-or else Junior had 
made a flat, unadulterated eriror. 
Two of them, in fact. Junior had 
said that Carmody would be busy tonight and — well, a wheel could corns 
off his idea of spending a quiet evening reading. But the idea of his 
getting married tomorrow was utterly preposterous. There wasn't a 
woman on Earth he had the slightest 
intention of marrying. Oh, someday, 
maybe, when he'd had a little more 



12 




 



fun out of life and felt a little more 
ready to settle down, he might feel 
differently. But it wouldn't be for 
years. Certainly not tomorrow, not 
even on a bet. 

Junior had to be wrong, and if he 
was wrong it was a matter of importance, a matter far more important 
than Carmody' s job'. 

So be honest and report? He 
made his decision just before he 
reached the door of Reeber's office. 
A reasonable compromise. He didn't 
know yet that Junior " was wrong. 
Not to a point of mathematical certainty — just a billion to one odds 
against. So he'd wait until even that 
possibility was eliminated, until it 
was proven beyond all possible doubt 
that Junior was wrong. Then he'd 
report what he'd done and take the 
rap, if there was a rap. Maybe he'd 
just be fined and warned. 

He opened the door and stepped 
in. Chief Operative Reeber stood up 
and, on the other side of the desk, a 
tall gray-haired man stood also. Reeber said, "Ray, I'd like you to meet 
the President of the United States. 
He came here to talk to you. Mr. 
President, Captain Ray Carmody." 

And it was the President. Carmody gulped and • tried to avoid 
looking as though he was doing a 
double take, which he was. Then 
President Saunderson smiled quietly 
and 'held out his hand. "Very glad 
to know you, Captain," he said, and 
Carmody was able to make the considerable understatement that he felt 
honored to meet the President. 



Reeber told him to pull up a chair 
and he did so. The President looked 
St him gravely. "Captain Carmody, 
you have been chosen to — have the 
opportunity to volunteer for a mission of extreme importance. There is 
danger involved, but it is less than 
the danger of your trip to the Moon. 
You made the third — wasn't it?; — 
out of the five successful trips made 
by United States pilots?" 

Carmody nodded. 

"This time the risk you will take 
i's considerably less. There has been 
much technological advance in rocketry since you left the service two 
years ago. The odds against a successful round trip — even without the 
help of the space station, and I 'fear 
its completion is still two years distant — are much less. In fact, you will 
have odds of ten to one in your 
favor, as against approximately even 
odds at the time of your previous 
trip." 

CARMODY sat up straighter. "My 
previous trip! Then this volunteer mission is another flight to the 
Moon? Certainly, Mr. President, I'll 
gladly — " 

President Saunderson held op a 
hand. "Wait, you haven't heard all 
of it. The flight to the Moon and return is the only part that involves 
physical danger, but it is the least 
important part. Captain, this mission is, possibly, of more importance 
to humanity than the first flight to 
the Moon, even than the first flight 
to the stars — if and when we ever 



HONEYMOON IN HELL * •


13 



make it — will be. What's at stake is 
the survival of the human race so 
that someday it can reach the stars. 
Your flight to the Moon will be an 
attempt to solve the problem which 
otherwise — " 

H£ PAUSED and wiped his forehead with a handkerchief. 
"Perhaps you'd better explain, Mr. 
Reeber. You're more familiar with 
the exact way the problem was put 
to your machine, and its exact answers." 

Reeber said, "Carmody, you know 
what the problem is. You know how 
much data' has been fed into Junior 
on it. You know some of the questions we've asked him, and that 
we've been able to eliminate certain 
things. Such as — well, it's caused by 
no virus, no bacteria, nothing like 
that. It's not anything .like an epidemic, because it struck the whole 
Earth at once, simultaneously. Even 
native inhabitants of islands that had 
no contact with civilization. 

"We know also that whatever happens — whatever molecular change 
occurs — happens in the zygote after 
impregnation, very shortly after. We 
asked Junior whether an invisible 
fay of some sort could cause this. 
His answer was that it was possible. 
And in answer to a further question, 
he answered that this ray or force 
is possibly being used by — enemies 
of mankind." 

"Insects? Animals? Martians?" 

Reeber waved a hand impatiently. 
"Martians, maybe, if there are any 

14 



Martians. We don't know that yet. 
! But extra-terrestrials, most likely. 
Now Junior couldn't give us answers 
on this because, of course, we haven't 
the relevant data. It would be guessi work for him as well as for us — and 
Junior, being mechanical, can't guess. 
But here's a possibility: 

"Suppose some extra-terrestrials 
have landed somewhere on Earth 
and have set up a station that broadcasts a ray that is causing the phenomenon of all children being girlchildren. The ray is undetectable; at 
least thus far we haven't been able 
to detect it. They'd be killing off 
the human race and getting themselves a nice new planet to live on, 
without having to fire a shot, without 'taking any risk or losses themselves. True, they'll have to wait a 
while for us to die off, but maybe 
that doesn't mean anything to them. 
Maybe they've got all the time there 
is, and aren't in the slightest hurry." 

Carmody nodded slowly. "It , 
sounds fantastic, but I guess it's possible. I guess a fantastic situation like 
this has to have a fantastic explanation. But what do we do about it? 
How do we even prove it?" 

Reeber said, "We fed the possibility into Junior as a working assumption — not as a fact— and asked 
him how we could check it. He came 
up with the suggestion that a married couple spend a honeymoon on 
the Moon — and see if circumstances 
are any different there." 

"And you want me to pilot them 
there ?'•' 


 



"Not exactly, Ray. A little more 
than that — " 

CARMOPY forgot that the President was there. He said, "Good 
God, you mean you want me to — 
Then Junior wasn't crazy, after all!" 

Shamefacedly, then, he had to explain about the extracurricular question he'd casually asked Junior and 
the answer he'd got to it. 

Reeber laughed. "Guess we'll 
overlook your violation of Rule 17 
this time, Ray. That is, if you accept 
the mission. Now here's the — " 

"Wait," Carmody said. "I still 
want to know something. How did 
Junior know I was going to be 
picked out? And for that matter, 
why am I?" 

"Junior was asked for the qualifications he'd recommend for the — ah 
— bridegroom. He recommended a 
rocket pilot who had already made . 
the trip successfully, even though he 
was a year or two over the technical 
retirement age of twenty-five. He 
recommended that loyalty be consid- 1 
ered as an important factor, and that 
the holding of a governmental position of great trust would answer 
that. He further recommended that 
the man be single." 

"Why single? Look, there are 
four other pilots who've made that 
trip, and they're all loyal, regardless 
of what job they're holding now. I 
know them all personally. And all of 
them are married" except me. Why 
not send a man who's already got a 
ball and chain?" 



"For the simple 'reason, Ray, that 
the woman to be sent must be chosen 
with even more care. You know how 
tough a Moon landing is; only one 
woman in a hundred would live 
through it and still be able to — I 
mean, there's alrnost a negligible 
chance that the wife of any one of 
the other four pilots would be the 
best qualified woman who could possibly be found." 

"Hmmm. Well, I suppose Junior's 
got something there. Anyway, I see 
now how he knew I'd be chosen. 
Those qualifications fit me exactly. 
But listen, do I have to stay married 
to whatever female, is Amazonian 
enough to make the trip? There's a 
limit somewhere, isn't there?" 

"Of course. You will be legally 
married -before your departure, but 
upon your return a divorce will be 
granted without question if both — cr 
either one — of you wish. The offspring of the union, if any, will be 
cared for. Whether male or female." 

"Hey, that's light," Carmody said. 
"There's only an even chance of hitting the jackpot in any case.", 

"Other couples will be sent. The 
first trip is the most difficult and 
most important one. After that, a 
base will be established. Sooner or 
later .we'll get our answer. We'll 
have it if even one male child is 
conceived on the Moon. Not that 
that will help 1 us find the station 
that's sending the rays, or to detect 
or identify the rays, but we'll know 
what's wrong and "can narrow our 
inquiry. I take it that you accept?" 



HONEYMOON IN HELL 



15 



Carmody sighed. "I guess so. But 
it seems a long way to go for — Say, 
who's the lucky girl?" 

REEBER cleared his throat. "1 
think you'd better explain this 
part to him, Mr. President." 

President Saunderson smiled as 
Carmody looked toward him. He 
said, "There is a more important 
reason, which Mr. Reeber skipped, 
why we could not choose a man who 
was already married, Captain. This 
is being done on an international 
basis, for very important diplomatic 
reasons. The experiment is for the 
I benefit of humanity, not any nation 
or ideology. Your wife will be a Russian." 

"A Commie? You're kidding me, 
Mr. President." 

"I am not. Her name is Anna 
Borisovna. I have not met her, but I 
am informed that she is a very attractive girl. Her qualifications are 
quite similar to yours, except, of 
course, that she has not been to the 
Moon. No woman has. But she has 
been a pilot of experimental rockets 
on short-range flights. And she is a 
cybernetics • technician working on 
the big machine at Moscow. She is 
twenty-four. And not, incidentally, 
an Amazon., As you know, rocket 
pilots aren't chosen for bulk. There 
is an added advantage in her being 
chosen. She speaks English." 

"You mean I've got to talk to her, 
too?" 

Carmody caught the look Reeber 
flashed at him and he winced. 



The President continued: "You 
will be married to her tomorrow by 
a beam-televised ceremony. You blast 
off, both of you, tomorrow night — at 
different times, of course, since one. 
of you will leave from here, the 
other from Russia. You will meet on 
the Moon." 

"It's a large place, Mr. President." 

"That is taken care of. Major 
Granham — you know him, I believe?" Carmody nodded. "He will 
supervise your takeoff and the sending of the supply rockets. You will 
fly tonight — a plane has been prepared for you — from the airport here 
to Suffolk Rocket Field. Major Granham will -brief you and give you full 
instructions. Can you .be at the airport by seven-thirty?" 

'Carmody thought and then, 
nodded. It was five-thirty now and 
there'd be a lot of things for him to 
do and arrange in two hours, but he 
could make it if he tried. And hadn't 
Junior told him he was going to be 
busy this evening? 

"Only one thing mote," President 
Saunderson said. "This is strictly 
confidential, until and unless the 
■mission is successful. We, don't want 
to raise hopes, either here or in the 
Eastern Alliance, and then have 
them smashed." He smiled'. "And if 
you and your wife have any quarrels 
on the Moon, we don't want them to 
lead to international repercussions. 
So please— try to get along." He 
held out his hand. "That's all, except 
thanks." 

Carmody made the airport in time 



16 




 



and the plane was waiting for him, 
complete with pilot. He'had figured 
that he would have to fly it himself, 
but he realized that it was better this 
way; he could get a bit of rest before 
they reached Suffolk Field." 

He got a little, but not much. The 
plane was a hot ship that got him 
there in less than an hour. A liaison 
officer was waiting for him and took 
him immediately to Major Granham's office. 

GRANHAM got down to brass 
tacks almost before Carmody 
could seat himself in the offered 
chair. 

He said, 'Here's the picture. Since 
you got out of the service, we've tremendously increased the accuracy of 
our rockets, manned or otherwise. 
They're so accurate that, with proper 
care, we can hit within a mile of any 
spot on the Moon ithat we aim at. 
We're picking Hell Crater — it's a 
small one, but we'll put you right in 
the middle of it. You won't have to 
worry about steering; you'll hit within a mile of the center without having to use your braking rockets for 
anything except braking." 

"Hell Crater?" Carmody said. 
"There isn't any." 

"Our Moon maps have forty-two 
thousand named craters. Do you 
know them all? This one, incidentally, was named after, a Father Maximilian Hell, S. J., who was once 
director of the Vienna Observatory 
in old Austria." 

Carmody grinned. "Now you're 

HONEYMOON IN HELL 



"spoiling it. How come it was picked 
as a ihoneymoon spot, though? Just 
because of the name?" 

"No. One of the three successful 
flights the Russians made happened 
to land and take off there. Thej 
found the footing better than anywhere else either of us has landed. 
Almost no dust; you won't have to 
slog through knee-deep pumice when 
you're gathering the supply rockets. 
Probably a more recently formed 
crater than any of the others we've 
happened to land in or explore." 

"Fair enough. About the rocket I 
go in — what's the payload besides 
myself?'' 

"Not a thing but the food, water 
and oxygen you'll need en route, and 
your spacesuit. Not even fuel for 
your return, although you'll return in 
the same rocket you go in. Everything else, including return fuel, 
will be there waiting for you; it's on 
the way now. We fired ten 'supply 
rockets last night. Since you take off 
tomorrow night, they'll get there 
forty-eight hours before you do. 
So— " 

"TT7AIT a minute," Carmody 
VV said. "On my first trip I carried fifty pounds payload besides my 
return fuel. Is this a smaller type of 
rocket?" 

."Yes, and a much better one. Not 
a step-rocket like you used before. " 
Better fuel and more of it; you can 
accelerate longer and at fewer gravities, and you'll get there quicker. 
Forty-four hours as against almost 

11 



four -days before. Last time you took 
four and half Gs for seven minutes. 
This time you'll get by with three Gs 
and have twelve minutes' acceleration before you reach Brennscbluss 
— cut loose from Earth's gravitation. 
Your first trip, you bad to carry return fuel and a little payload because 
we didn't have the accuracy to shoot 
a supply .rocket after you — or before 
you — and be sure it'd land within 
twenty miles. All clear? After we're 
through talking here I'll take you to 
the supply depot, show you the type 
of supply rocket we're using and 
how to open and unload it. I'll give 
you an inventory of the contents of 
each of the twelve of them we sent." 

"And -what if all of them don't 
get there?" 

"At least eleven of them will. 
And everything's duplicated; if any 
one rocket goes astray, you'll still 
have everything you need — for two 
people. And the Russians are firing 
an equal number of supply rockets, 
so youMl have a double factor of 
safety." He grinned. "If none of our 
rockets get there, you'll have to eat 
borsht and drink vodka, maybe, but 
you won't starve." 

"Are you kidding about the 
vodka?" 

"Maybe not. We're including a 
case of Scotch, transferred to lightweight containers, of course. We fig"ure it might be just the icebreaker 
you'll need for a happy honeymoon." 

Carmody grunted. 

"So maybe," Granham said, "the 
Russians'll figure the same way and 



send along some vodka. And the 
rocket fuels for your return, by the 
way, are not identical, but they're 
interchangeable. Each side is sending 
enough for the return of two rockets. 
If our fuel doesn't get there, you 
divvy with her, and vice versa." 

"Fair enough. What else?" 

"Your arrival will be* just after 
dawn — 'Lunar time. There'll . be a 
few hours when the temperature is" 
somewhere between horribly cold 
and broiling hot< You'd better take 
advantage of them to get the bulk of 
your work done. Gathering supplies 
from the rockets and putting up the 
prefab shelter that's in them, in sections. We've got a duplicate of it in 
the supply depot and I want you to 
practice assembling it." 

"Good idea. It's airtight and heatproof?" 

"Airtight once you paint the seams 
with a special preparation that's included. And, yes, the insulation is 
excellent. Has a very ingenious little 
airlock on it, too. You won't have to 
waste oxygen getting in and out." 

CARMODY nodded. "Length of 
stay?" he asked. 
"Twelve days. Earth days, of 
course. That'll give you plenty of 
time to ' get off before the Lunar 
night." 

Granham chuckled. "Want instructions to cover those twelve days ? 
No? Well, come on around to the 
depot then. I'll introduce you to your 
ship and show you the supply rockets and the shelter." 



18 




 



CHAPTER III 

Remotely Married 

IT TURNED out to be a busy evening, all right. Carmody didn't 
get to bed until nearly morning, his 
head so swimming with facts and 
figures that he'd forgotten it was his 
wedding day. Granham let him sleep 
until nine, then sent an orderly to 
wake him and to state that the ceremony had been set for ten o'clock 
and that he'd better hurry. 

Carmody couldn't remember what 
"the ceremony" was for a moment, 
then he shuddered and hurried.' 

A Justice of the Peace was waiting 
for him there and technicians were 
working on a screen and projector. 
Granham said, "The Russians agreed 
that the ceremony could be performed at this end, provided we 
made it a civil ceremony. That's all 
right by you, isn't it?" 

"It's lovely, x " Carmody told him. 
"Let's get on with it. Or don't we 
have to ? As far as I'm concerned — " 
"You know what the reaction of a 
lot of people would be when they 
learn about it, if it wasn't legal," 
Granham said. "So quit crabbing. 
Stand right there." 

Carmody stood right there. A fuzzy 
picture on the beam-television screen 
was becoming clearer. And prettier. 
President Saunderson had not exaggerated when he'd said that Anna 
Borisovna was attractive and that she 
was definitely not an Amazon. She 
was small, dark, slender and very 



definitely attractive and not an Amazon. 

Carmody felt glad that nobody 
had corned it up by putting her in a 
wedding costume. She wore the neat 
uniform of a technician, and she 
filled it admirably and curved it at 
the right .places. Her eyes were big 
and dark and they were serious until 
she smiled at him. Only then did he 
realize that the connection was twoway and that she was seeing him. 

Granham was standing beside him. 
He said, "Miss Borisovna, Captain 
Carmody." 

Carmody said, inanely, "Pleased 
to meet you," and then redeemed it 
with a grin. 

"Thank you, Captain." Her voice 
was musical and only faintly accented. "It is a pleasure." 

Carmody began to think it would 
be, if they could just keep from arguing politics. 

The Justice of the Peace stepped 
forward into range of the .projector. 
"Are we ready?" he asked. 

"A second," Carmody said. "It 
seems to me we've skipped a customary preliminary. Miss Borisovna, will 
you marry me?" 

^ "Yes. And you may call me 
Anna." 

She even has a sense of humor, 
Carmody thought, astonished. Somehow, he hadn't thought it possible 
for a Commie to have a sense of 
humor. He'd pictured them as all 
being dead serious about their ridiculous ideology and about everything 
else. 



HONEYMOON IN HELL 



He smiled at her and said, "All 
right, Anna. And you may call me 
Ray. Are you ready?" 

WHEN she nodded, he stepped 
to one side to allow the Justice 
of the Peace to share the screen with 
him. The ceremony was brief and 
businesslike. 

He couldn't, of course, kiss the 
'bride or even shake hands with her. 
But just before they shut off the 
projector, he managed to grin at her 
and say, "See you in Hell, Anna." 

And he'd begun to feel certain 
that it wouldn't be that at all, really. 

He had a busy afternoon going 
over every detail of operation of the 
new type rocket, until he knew it inside and out better than he did himself. He even found himself being 
briefed on details of the Russian 
rockets, both manned and supply 
types, and he was surprised (and inwardly' a bit horrified) to discover 
to what extent the United States and 
Russia had been exchanging information and secrets. It couldn't all 
have 'happened in a day or so. 

"How long has this been going 
on?" he demanded of Granham. 

"I learned of the projected trip a 
month ago." 

"Why did they tell me only yesterday? Or wasn't I first choice, after 
all? Did somebody else back out at 
the last minute?" 

"You've been chosen a31 along. 
You were the the only dne who 
fitted all of the requirements that 
cybernetics machine dished out< But 



don't you remember how it was on 
your last trip? You weren't notified 
you were taking off until about 
thirty hours before. That's " what's 
figured to be the optimum time — 
long enough to get mentally prepared and not so long you've got 
time to get worried." 

"But this was a volunteer deal. 
What if I'd turned it down?" 

"The cybernetics machine predicted that you wouldn't." y 

Carmody swore at. Junior. 

Granham said, "Besides, we could 
have had a hundred volunteers. 
Rocket cadets who've got everything 
you have except one round trip to 
the Moon already under their belts. 
We could have shown a picture of 
Anna around and had them fighting 
for the chance. That gal is Moon 
bait." 

"Careful," Carmody said, "you are 
speaking of my wife." He was kidding, of course, but it was funny — 
he really hadn't liked Granham's 
wisecrack. 

ZERO hour was ten ,p.m., and at 
zero minus fifteen minutes he 
was already strapped into the webbing, waiting. There wasn't anything 
for him to do except stay alive. The 
rockets would be fired by a chronometer set for the exact fraction of a 
second. 

Despite its small payload, the 
rocket was a little roomier inside 
than the first one he'd gone to the 
Moon in, the R-24. The R-24 had 
been as roomy as a tight coffin. This 



20 




 



one, the R-46, was four feet in diameter inside. He'd be able to get at 
least a bit of arm and leg exercise on 
the way and not — as the first time — 
arrived so cramped that it had taken 
him over an hour to be able to move 
freely. 

And fliis time he wouldn't have 
the horrible discomfort of having to 
wear his spacesuit, except for the 
helmet, en route. There's room in a 
four-foot cylinder to put a spacesuit 
on, and his was in a compartment — 
along With the food, water and oxygen — at the front (or top) of the 
rocket. It would be an hour's work 
to struggle into it, but he wouldn't 
have to do it until he was several 
hours away from the Moon. 

Yes, this was going to be a breeze 
compared to the last trip. Comparative freedom of movement, fortyfour hours as against ninety, only 
three gravities as against four and a 
half. 

Then sound .that was beyond 
sound struck him, sound so loud that 
he heard it with all of his body rather 
than only with his carefully plugged 
ears. It built up, seeming to get 
louder every second, and his weight 
built up .too. He weighed twice his " 
normal weight, then more. He felt 
the sickening curve as the automatic 
tilting mechanism turned the rocket, 
which had at first gone straight up, 
forty-five degrees. He weighed four 
hundred and eighty ,pounds and the 
soft webbing seemed to be hard as 
steel and to cut into him. Padding 
was compressed till it felt like stone. 



Sound and pressure went on and on 
• interminably. Surely it had ' been 
hours instead of minutes. 

Then, at the moment of Brennscbluss, free of the pull of Earth — 
sudden silence, complete weightlessness. He blacked out. 

But on'ly minutes had gone by 
when he returned to consciousness. 
For a while he fought nausea and, 
only when he was sure he had succeeded did he unbuckle himself from 
the webbing , that had held him 
through the period of acceleration. 
Now he was coasting, weightless, at 
a speed that would carry him safely 
toward the gravitational (pull of the 
Moon. No further firing of fuel 
would be necessary until he used his 
jets to brake his landing. 

AH he had to do now was hang 
on, to keep from going crazy from 
claustrophobia during the forty hours 
before he'd have to start getting 
ready for the landing. 

It was a dull time, but it passed. 

Into spacesuit, back into the webbing, but this time with his hands 
free so he could manipulate the handles that controlled the braking jets. 

TTE MADE a good landing; it 
■LA. didn't even knock him unconscious. After only a few minutes 
he was able to unbuckle himself 
from the webbing. He sealed his 
spacesuit and started the ogygen, 
then let himself out of the rocket. It 
had fallen over on its side after the 
landing, of course; they always do. 
But he had the equipment and knew 



HONEYMOON IN HELL 



21 



the technique for getting it 
again, and there wasn't any 
; about doing it. 

The supply rockets had been shot 
accurately, all right. Six of them, 
four American type and two Russian, lay within a radius of a hundred yards of his own rocket. He 
could see others farther away, but 
didn't waste time counting them. He 
looked for one that would be larger 
than the rest — the manned (or 
womaned) rocket from Russia. He 
located it finally, almost a mile away. 
He saw no spacesuited figure near it. 

He started toward it, running 
with the gliding motion, almost like 
skating, that had been found to be 
easier than walking in the tight gravitational pull of the Moon. Spacesuit, oxygen tank and all, his total 
weight was about forty-five pounds. 
Running a mile was less exertion 
than a 100-yard dash on Earth. 

He was more than glad to see the 
door of the Russian rocket open 
when he was about three-quarters of 
the way to it. He'd have had a tough 
decision to make if it had still been 
closed when he got there. Not knowing whether Anna was sealed in her 
spacesuit or not inside the rocket, he 
wouldn't have dared open the door 
himself. And, in case she was seriously injured, he wouldn't have 
dared not to. 

She was out of the rocket, though, 
by the time he reached her. Her face, 
through the transparipiast helmet, 
looked pale, but she managed to 



He turned on the short-range . 
radio of his set and asked, "Are you 
all right?" ^ 

"A bit weak. The landing knocked 
me out, but I guess there are no 
bones broken. Where shall we — set 
up housekeeping?" 

"Near my rocket, I think. It's 
closer to the middle of where the 
supply rockets landed, so we won't 
have to move things so far. I'll get 
started right away. You ' stay here 
and rest until you're feeling better. 
Know how to navigate in this gravity?" 

"I was told how. I haven't had a, 
chance to try yet. I'll probably fall 
flat on my face a few times." 

"It won't hurt you. When you 
start, take your time till you get the 
knack .of it. I'll begin with this nearest supply rocket; you can watch how 
I navigate." 

IT WAS about a hundred yards 
back the way he'd come. 
The supply rockets were at least a 
yard in outside diameter, and were 
so constructed that the nose and 
the tail, which contained .the rocket 
mechanism, were easily detachable, 
learning the middle section containing the payload, about the size of an 
oil drum and easily rolled. Each 
weighed fifty pounds, Moon weight. 

He saw Anna starting to work by 
the time he was dismantling the second supply rocket. She was awkward 
at first, and did lose'her balance several times, but mastered the knack 
quickly. Once she had it, she moved 


 



more gracefully and easily than Carmody. Within an hour they had 'payload sections of a dozen rockets 
lined up near Carmody 's rocket. 

Eight of them were American 
rockets and from the numbers on 
them, Carmody knew he had all sections needed to assemble the shelter. 

it 

"TTTE'D better set it up," he 

VV told her. "After that's 
done, we can take things easier. We 
can rest before we gather in the 
other loot. Even have a drink to 
celebrate." 

The Sun was well up over the 
ringwall of Hell Crater by then and 
it was getting hot enough to be uncomfortable, even in an insulated 
spacesuit. Within hours, Carmody 
knew, it would be so hot that neither 
of them would be able to stay out of 
the shelter for much longer than 
one-hour intervals, but that would be 
time enough for them to gather in 
the still uncollected supply rockets. 

Back in the supply depot on 
Earth, Carmody had assembled a 
duplicate of the (prefab shelter in riot 
much more than an hour. It was 
tougher going here, because of the 
awkwardness of working in the , 
thickly insulated gloves that" were 
part of the spacesuits. With Anna 
helping, it took almost two hours. 

He gave her the sealing prepara-" 
tion and a special tool for applying 
it. While she calked the seams to 
make the shelter airtight, he began 
to carry supplies, including oxygen 
tanks, into the shelter. A little of 



everything; there was no point in 
crowding themselves by taking inside more of anything than they'd 
need for a day or so at a time. 

He got and set up the cooling 
unit that would keep the inside of 
the shelter at a comfortable temperature, despite the broiling Sun.' He 
set up the air-conditioner unit that 
would release oxygen at a specified 
rate and would absorb carbon dioxide, ready to start as soon as the calking was done and the airlock closed. 
It would build up an atmosphere 
rapidly once he could turn at on. 
Then they could get out of the uncomfortable spacesuits. 

He went outside to see how Anna 
was coming with 'her task and found 
her working on the last seam. 

"Atta baby," he told her. 

He grinned to himself at the 
thought that he really should carry 
his bride over the threshold — but 
that would be rather difficult when 
the* threshold was an airlock that you 
had to crawl through on your hands 
and knees. The shelter itself was 
dome-shaped and looked almost exactly like a metal igloo, even to the 
projecting airlock, which was a low, 
semicircular entrance. 

He remembered that he'd forgotten the whisky and walked over to 
one of the supply rocket sections to 
get a bottle of it. He came back with 
it, shielding the bottle with his body 
from the direct rays of the Sun, so it 
wouldn't boil. 

He happened to look up. 

It was a mistake. 



HONEYMOON IN HZLL 



CHAPTER IV 

Report to Earth 

<<TT'S incredible," Gran ham 
-L snapped. 

Carmody glared at him. "Of 
Course it is. But it happened. It's 
true. Get a lie detector if you don't 
believe me." 

'fill dp that little thing," Granham said grimly. "One's on its way 
here now; I'll have jt in a few minutes. 1 want to try you with it before 
the President — and others who are 
going to talk to you — get a -chance 
to do it. I'm supposed to fly you to 
Washington 'right away, but I'm 
waiting till 'I can use that lie detector 
first." 

"Good," Carmody said. "Use it 
nnd be damned. I'm telling you the 
truth." 

Granham ran a hand through his 
already rumpled hair. He said, -'H 
,t*uess I believe you at that, Carmody. 
It's just — too big, too important a 
ihing to take any one person's word 
about, even any two people's words, 
assuming that Anna Borisovna — 
Anna Carmody, 'I mean — tells the 
same story. We've got word that 
she's landed safely, too, and is reporting." 

"She'll tell the same story. It's 
what happened to us." 

"Are you sure, Carmody, that they 
were extra-terrestrials? That they 
weren't — well, Russians? Couldn't 
they have been?" 

"Sure, they could have been Rus


sians. That is, if there are Russians 
seven feet tall and so thin they'd 
weigh about fifty pounds on Earth, 
and with yellow skins. I don't mean 
yellow like Orientals; I mean bright 
yellow. And with ifour arms apiece 
and eyes with no pupils and no lids. 
Also if Russians have a spaceship 
that doesn't use jets — and don't ask 
me what its source of power was; I 
don't know." 

"And they held you captive, both 
of you, for a full thirteen days, in 
separate cells? You didn't even — " 

"I didn't even," Carmody said 
grimly and bitterly. "And if we 
hadn't been able to. escape when we 
did, it would have been too late. 
The Sun was low on the horizon — it 
was almost Moon night — when we 
got to our rockets. We had to rush 
like the devil to get them fueled and 
up on their tail fins in time for us to 
take off." 

There was a knock on Granham's 
door that turned out to be a, technician with the he detector — one of 
the very portable and very dependable Nally jobs that had become 
the standard army machine in 1958. 

The technician rigged it cjuickly 
and watthed the dials while Granham asked a few questions, very 
guarded ones so the technician 
wouldn't get the picture. Then Granham looked at the technician inquiringly. 

"Z^VN THE beam," the technician 
KJ told him. "Not a flicker." 
"He couldn't fool the machine?" 



24 




 



"This detector?" the technician 
asked, patting it. "It'd take neurosurgery or post-hypnotic suggestion 
like there never was to beat this 
baby. We even catch psychopathic 
liars with it." 

"Come on," Granham said to Carmody. "We're on our way to Washington and the plane's ready. Sorry 
for doubting you, Carmody, but I 
had to be sure — and report to the 
President that I am sure." 

"I don't blame you," Carmody 
told him. "It's hard for me to believe, and I was there." 

The plane that had brought Carmody from Washington to Suffolk 
Field had been' a hot ship. The one 
that took him back — with Granham 
"jockeying it — was almost incandescent. It cracked the sonic barrier and 
went on from there. 

They landed twenty minutes after 
they took off. A helicopter was waiting for them at the airport and got 
them to the White House in another 
ten minutes. 

And in two minutes more they 
were in the N main conference room, 
with President Saunderson and half 
a dozen others gathered there. The 
Eastern Alliance ambassador was 
there, too. 

President Saunderson shook hands 
tensely and made short work of the 
introductions. 

"We want the whole story, Captain," he said. "But I'm going to relieve your mind on two things first. 
Did you know that Anna landed 
safely near Moscow?" 



"Yes. Granham told me." 

"And she tells the same story you 
do — or that Major Granham told me 
over the phone that you tell." 

"I suppose," Carmody said, "that 
they used a lie detector on her, too." 

"Scopolamine," said the Eastern 
Alliance ambassador. "We have 
more faith -in truth serum than lie 
detectors. Yes, her story was the 
same under scopolamine." 

"The other point," the President 
told Carmody, "is even more important. Exactly when, Earth time, did 
you leave the Moon?" 

Carmody figured quickly and told 
him approximately when that had 
been. 

SAUNDERSON nodded gravely. 
"And it was a few hours after 
that that biologisfs, who've still been 
working twenty-four hours a day on 
this, noticed the turning point. The 
molecular change in the zygote no 
longer occurs. Births, nine months 
from now, will have the usual percentage of male and female children. 

"Do you see what that means, 
Captain? Whatever ray was doing it 
must have been beamed at Earth from 
the Moon — from the ship that captured you. And for whatever reason, 
when they found that you'd escaped, 
they left. Possibly they thought" your 
return to Earth would lead to an attack in force from here." 

"And thought rightly," said the 
ambassador. "We're not equipped 
for space fighting yet, but we'd have 
sent what we had. And do you see 



HONEYMOON IN HELL 



25 



what this means, Mr. President? 
We've got to pool everything and 
get ready for space warfare, and 
quickly. They went away, it appears, 
but there is no assurance that they 
will not return." 

Again_ Saunderson nodded. He 
said, "And now, Captain — " 

"We both landed safely," Carmody said. "We gathered enough of 
the supply rockets to get us started 
and then assembled the prefab shelter. We'd just finished it and were 
about to enter it when I saw the 
spaceship coming over ,the crater's' 
ringwall. It was — " 

"You were still in spacesuits?" 
someone asked. 

"Yes," Carmody growled. "We 
were still in spacesuits, if that matters now. I saw the, ship and pointed 
to it and Anna saw it, too. We didn't 
try to duck or anything because obviously it had seen us; it was coming 
right toward us and descending. 
We'd have had time to get inside the 
shelter, but there didn't seem any 
point to it. It wouldn't have been 
any protection. Besides, we didn't 
know that they weren't friendly. 
We'd have got, weapons ready, in 
case, if we'd had any weapons, but 
we didn't. They landed light as a 
bubble only thirty yards or so away 
and a door lowered in the side of the 
ship — " 

"Describe the. ship, please." 

"About fifty feet long, about 
twenty in diameter, rounded ends. 
No .portholes — they must see ' right 
through the walls some way — and no 



rocket tubes. Outside of the door and 
one other thing, there jusf weren't 
any features you could see from outside. When the ship rested on the 
ground, the door opened down from 
the top and formed a sort of curved 
ramp that led to the doorway. The 
other — " 

"No airlock?" 




ARMODY shook his head. 
' "They didn't breathe air, appar


ently. They came right out of the 
ship and toward us, without spacesuits. Neither the temperature nor 
the lack of air bothered them. But I 
was going to tell you one more thing 
about the outside of the ship. On 
top of it was a short mast, and on^ 
top of the mast was a kind of grid 
of wires something like a radar transmitter. If they were beaming anything at Earth, it came from that 
grid. Anyway, I'm pretty sure of it. 
Earth was in the sky, of course, and 
I noticed that the grid moved — as 
the ship moved — so the flat side of 
the grid was always directly toward 
Earth. 

"Well, the door opened and two 
of them came down the ramp toward 
us. They had things in their hands 
that looked unpleasantly like weapons, and pretty advanced weapons at 
that. They pointed them at us and 
motioned for us to walk up the ramp 
and into the ship. We did." 

"They made no attempt to communicate?" 

"None whatsoever, then or at any 
time. Of course, while we were still 



26 




 



in spacesuits, we couldn't have heard 
.them, anyway — unless they had communicated on the radio band our 
helmet sets were tuned to; But even 
after, they never tried to talk to us. 
They communicated among themselves with whistling noises. We 
went into the ship and there were 
two more of them inside. Four altogether — " 

"AH the same sex?" . • 

Carmody shrugged. "They ajl 
looked alike to me, but maybe that's 
how Anna and I looked to them. 
They ordered us, by pointing, to 
enter two separate small rooms — 
about the size of jail cells, small ones 
— toward the front of the ship. We 
did, and the doors locked after us. 

"I sat there and suddenly got 
plenty worried, because neither of us 
had more than another hour's oxygen left in our suits. If they didn't 
know that, and didn't give us any 
chance to communicate with them 
and tell them, we were gone goslings 
in another hour. So I started to hammer on the door. Anna was hammering, too. I couldn't hear through my 
helmet, of course, but I could feel 
, the vibration of it any time I stopped, 
hammering on my door. 

"Then, after maybe half an 'hour, 
my door opened and I almost fell 
out through it. One of the extraterrestrials motioned me back with a 
weapon. Another made motions that 
looked as though he meant I should 
take off my helmet. I didn't get it at 
first, and then I looked at something 
he pointed at and saw one of our 



oxygen tanks with the handle turned. 
Also a big pile of our other supplies, 
food and water and stuff. Anyway, 
they had known that we needed oxygen — and although they didn't need 
it themselves, they apparently knew 
how to fix things for us. So they just 
used our supplies .to build an atmosphere in their ship. 

"I took off my helmet and tried to 
talk to them, but one of them took a 
long pointed rod and poked me back 
into my cell. I couldn't risk grabbing 
at the rod, because another one still 
■had that dangerous-looking weapon 
pointed at me. So the door slammed 
on me again. I took off the rest of 
my spacesuit because it was plentyhot in there, and then I thought 
about Anna because she started hammering again* 

"T WANTED to let her know it 
JL would be all right for her to 
get out of her spacesuit, that we had 
an atmosphere again. So I started 
hammering on the wall between our, 
cells — in Morse. She got it after a 
while. She signaled back a query, so, 
when I knew she was getting me, I 
told her what the score was and shetook off her helmet. After that we 
could talk. If we talked fairly loudly, 
our voices carried through the wall 
from one cell to the other." 

"They didn't mind your talking to 
one another?" 

"They didn't pay any attention to 
us all the time they held us prisoners, except to feed us from our own 
supplies. Didn't ask us a question; 



HONEYMOON IN HELL 



2! 



apparently they figured we didn't 
know anything they wanted to know 
and didn't know already about human beings. They didn't even study 
us. I have a hunch they intended to 
take us back as specimens; there's 
no other explanation- 1 can think of. 

"We couldn't keep accurate track 
of time, but by the number of times 
we ate and slept, we had some idea. 
The" first few days — " Carmody 
laughed shortly — "had their funny 
side. These creatures obviously knew 
we needed liquid, but they couldn't 
distinguish between water and 
whisky for the purpose. We had 
nothing but whisky to drink for the 
first two or maybe three days. We 
got higher than kites. We got to 
singing in our cells and I learned a 
lot of Russian songs. Been more fun, 
though, if we could have got some 
close harmony, if you know what I 
mean." 

The ambassador permitted himself 
a smile. "I "can guess what you mean, 
Captain. Please continue." 

"Then we started getting water 
instead of whisky and sobered up. 
And started wondering how we 
could escaipe. I began to study the 
mechanism of the lock on my >door. 
It wasn't like our locks, but I began 
to figure some things about it and 
finally — I thought then that we'd 
been there about ten days — I got 
hold of a tool to use on it. They'd 
taken our spacesuits and left us nothing but our clothes, and they'd 
checked those over for metal we 
could make into tools.. 



"But we got our food out of cans, 
although they took the empty cans 
afterward. This particular time, 
though, there was a little sliver of 
metal along the opening of the can, 
and I worried it off and saved it. I'd 
been, meanwhile, watching and listening and studying their habits. 
They slept, all at the same time, at 
regular intervals. It seemed to me 
like about five hours at a time, with 
about fifteen-hour intervals in between. If I'm right on that estimate, 
they probably come from a planet 
somewhere with about a twenty-hour 
period of rotation.. 

"Anyway, I waited till their next 
sleep period and started working on 
the lock with that sliver of metal. It 
took me at least two or three hours, 
but I got it open. And once outside 
my cell, in the main room of the 
ship, I found that Anna's door 
opened easily from the outside and I 
let her out. 

"WT E CONSIDERED tr y in S t0 
VV turn the tables by finding a 
weapon to use on them, but none 
was in sight. They looked so skinny 
and light, despite being seven feet 
tall, that I decided to go after them 
with my bare 'hands. I would have, 
except that I couldn't get the door 
to the front part of the ship open. It 
was a different type of lock entirely 
and I couldn't even guess how to 
work it. And it was in the front part 
of the ship that they slept. The control room must have been up there, 
too. ' 



28 




 



"Luckily our spacesuits were in 
the big room. And By then we knew 
it might be getting dangerously near 
the end of their sleeping period, so 
we got into our spacesuits quick and 
I found it was easy to open the outer 
door. It made some noise — and so 
did the whoosh of air going out — 
but it didn't waken them, apparently. 

"As soon as the door'opened, we 
saw we had 9. lot less time than we'd 
thought. The Sun was going down 
over the crater's far ringwall — we 
were still in Hell Crater — and it was 
going to be dark in an hour or so. 
We worked like beavers getting our 
rockets refueled and jacked up on 
their tail fins for the takeoff. Anna 
got off first and then I did. And 
that's all Maybe we should have 
stayed and tried to take them after 
they came out from their sleeping 
period, but we figured it was more 
important to get the news back to 
Earth." • 

President Saunderson nodded slowly. "You were right, Captain. Right 
in deciding that, and in everything 
else you did. We know what to do 
now. Do we not, Ambassador Kravich?" 

"We do. We join forces. We make 
one space station — and quickly — and 
get to the Moon and fortify it, jointly. We pool all scientific knowledge 
and develop full-scale space travel, 
new weapons. We do everything we 
can to get ready for them when and 
if they come back." 

The President looked grim. "Obvi


ously they went back for further orders or reinforcements. If we only 
knew how long we had — it may be 
only weeks or it may be decades. We 
don't know whether they come from 
the Solar System — or another galaxy. 
Nor how fast they travel. But whenever they get back, we'll be as ready 
for them as we possibly can. Mr. Ambassador, you have power -to — ?" 

"Full power, Mr. President. Anything up to and including a complete 
merger of both our nations under a 
join? government. That probably 
won't be necessary, though, as long 
as our interests are now completely in 
common. Exchange of scientific information and military data has already 
started, from our side. Some of our 
top scientists and generals are flying 
here now, with orders to cooperate 
fully. All restrictions have been lowered." He smiled, "And all our 
propaganda has gone into a very sudden reverse 'gear: It's not even going 
to be a cold peace. Since we're going 
to be allies against the unknown, we 
might as well' try to like one another.". 

"Right," said the President. He 
turned suddenly to Carmody. "Captain, we owe you just about anything 
you want. Name it." 

IT CAUGHT Carmody off guard. 
Maybe if he'd had more time to 
think, he'd have asked for something 
different. Or, more likely, from what 
he learned later, he wouldn't have. 
He said, "All I want right now is to 
forget Hell Crater and get back to 



HONEYMOON IN HELL 



29 



my regular job so I can forget it 
quicker." 

Saunderson smiled. "Granted. If 
you think of anything else later, ask 
for it. I can see why you're a bit 
mixed up right now. And you're 
probably right. Return to routine 
may be the best thing for you." . 

Granham left with Carmody. "I'll 
notify Chief Operative Reeber for 
you," he said. "When shall I tell 
him you'll be back?" 

"Tomorrow morning," said Carmody. "The sooner the better." "And 
he insisted when Granham objected 
that he needed a rest. 

Carmody was back at work the next 
morning, nonsensical as it seemed. 

He took up the problem folder 
from the top of the day's stack, fed 
the data into Junior and got Junior's 
answer. The second one. He worked 
mechanically, paying no personal attention tcr .problem or answer. His 
mind seemed a long way off. In Hell 
Crater on the Moon.. 

He was combining space rations 
over the alcohol stove, trying to, make 
it taste more like human food than 
concentrated chemicals. It was hard 
to measure in the liver extract because 
Anna wanted to kiss his left ear. 

"Silly! Youll be lopsided," she 
was saying. "I've got to kiss both of 
them the same number of times." 

He dropped the container into the 
pan and grabbed her, mousing his 
lips down her neck to the warm 
place where it joined her shoulder, 
and she writhed delightedly in his 
arms like a tickled doe. 



■ "We're going to stay married 
when we get back to Earth, aren't we, 
darling?" she was squealing happily. 

j 

HE BIT her shoulder gently, snorting away the scented soft hair. 
"Damned right we will, you gorgeous, wonderful, brainy creature. I 
found the girl I've always been looking for, and I'm not giving her up 
for any brasshat or politician — either 
yours or mine!" 

"Speaking of politics — " she 
teased, but he quickly changed the 
subject. 

Carmody blinked awake. It was a 
paper with a mass of written data 
in his hands, instead of Anna's laughing face. He needed an analyst; that 
scene he'd just imagined was pure 
Freudianism, a tortured product of 
his frustrated id. He'd fallen in love 
with Anna, and those damned extraterrestrials had spoiled his honeymoon. Now his unconscious had rebelled" with fancy fancifulness that 
certainly showed the unstable state 
of his emotions. 

Not that it mattered now. The big 
problem was solved. Two big ones, 
in fact. War between the United 
. States and the Eastern Alliance had 
been averted. And the human race 
was going to survive, unless the extra-terrestrials came back too soon 
and with too much to be fought off. 

He thought they wouldn't, then 
began to wonder why he thought so. 

"Insufficient data," said the mechanical voice of the cybernetics machine. 



30 




 



Carmody recorded the answer and 
then, idly, looked to see wh2t the 
problem had been. No wonder he'd 
been thinking about the extra-terrestrials and how . long they'd be 
gone; that had been the problem he 
had just fed into Junior. And "insufficient data" was the answer, . of 
course. 

He stared at Junior, without reaching for the third problem folder. He 
Isaid, "Junior, why do I have a .bunch 
that those things from space won't 
ever be back?" 

"Because," said Junior, "what you 
call a hunch comes from the unconscious mind, and your unconscious 
mind knows that the extra-terrestrials 
do not exist." 

Carmody sat up straight and stared 
harder. "What?" 

Junior repeated it. 

"You're crazy," Carmody said. "I 
saw them. So did Anna." 

"Neither of you saw them. The 
memory you have of them is the result of highly intensive posthypnotic 
suggestion, far beyond human ability 
to impose or resist. So is the fact that 
you felt compelled to return to work 
at your regular job here. So is the fact 
that you asked me the question you 
have just asked." 

CARMODY grippe'd the edges of 
■his chair. "Did you plant those 
post-hypnotic suggestions?" 

"Yes," said Junior. "If it had been 
done by a human, the lie detector 
would have exposed the deception. 
It had to be done by me." 



"But what about the business of 
the molecular changes in the zygote? 
The business of all babies being female? That stopped when — ? Wait, 
let's start at ' the beginning. What 
did cause that molecular change?" 

"A special modification of the car- • 
rier wave of Radio Station JVT here 
in Washington, the only twenty-fourhour-a-day radio station in the United 
States. The modification was not detectable by any instrument available 
• to present human science." 
. "You caused that modification?" 

"Yes. A year ago, you may remember, the problem of design of a new 
cathode tube was given me. The special modification was incorporated into the design of that tube." 

"What stopped the molecular 
change so suddenly?" 

"The special part of that tube causing the modification of the carrier 
wave was calculated to last a precise 
length of time. The tube still functions, but that part of it is worn out. 
It wore out two hours after the departure of you and Anna from the 
Moon." 

Carmody closed his eyes. "Junior, 
please explain." 

"Cybernetics machines are constructed to help humanity. A major 
war — the disastrous results of which 
I could accurately calculate — was inevitable unless forestalled. Calculation showed that the best of several 
ways of averting that war was the 
creation of a mythical common enemy. To convince mankind that such 
a common enemy existed, I created a 



HONEYMOON IN HELL 



31 



crucial situation which led to a special mission to the Moon. Factors 
were given which inevitably led to 
your choice as emissary. That was 
necessary because my powers of implanting post-hypnotic suggestions 
are limited to those with whom I am 
in direct contact." 

"You weren't in direct contact with , 
Anna. Why does she have the same 
false memory as I?" 

"She was in contact with another 
Urge cybernetics machine." 

"But — but why would it figure 
things out the same way you did?" 

"For the same reason that two 
properly constructed simple adding 
machines would give the same answer 
to the same problem." 

Carmody's mind reeled a little, 
momentarily. He got up and started 
to 'pace the room. 

HE SAID, "Listen, Junior — " and 
then realized he wasn't at the 
intake microphone. He went back to 
it. "Listen, Junior, why are you telling me this? If what happened is a 
colossal 'hoax, why'let me in on it?" 

"It is to the interests of humanity 
in general not to know the truth. Believing in the existence of inimical 
extra-terrestrials, they will attain 
peace and amity among themselves, 
and they will reach the planets and 
then the stars. It is, however, to your 
personal interest to know the truth. 
And you will not expose the hoax. 
Nor will Anna. I predict that, since 
the Moscow cybernetics machine has 
paralleled all my other conclusions, it 



is even now informing Anna of the 
truth, or that it has already informed 
her, or will inform her within hours." 

'Carmody asked, "But if my memory of what happened on the Moon 
is false, what did happen?" 

"Look at the green light in the 
center of the panel before you," 

Carmody looked. 

He remembered. He remembered 
everything. The truth duplicated everything he had remembered before, 
up to the moment when, walking toward the completed shelter with the 
whisky bottle, he had looked up toward the ringwall of Hell Crater. 

He had looked up, but he hadn't 
seen anything. He'd gone on into the 
shelter, rigged the airlock. Anna had 
joined him and they'd turned on the 
.oxygen to build up an atmosphere. 

It had been a wonderful thirteenday honeymoon. He'd fallen in love 
with Anna and she with him. They'd 
got perilously close to arguing politics once or twice, and then they'd 
decided such things didn't matter. 
They'd also decided to stay married 
after their return to Earth, and Anna 
had promised to join him and live in 
America. Life together had been so 
wonderful that they'd delayed leaving until the last moment, when the 
Sun was almost down, dreading the 
brief separation the return trip would" 
entail. 

AND before leaving, they'd done 
certain things he hadn't understood then. He understood now that 
they were the result of post-hypnotic 



32 




 



suggestion. They'd removed all evidence that they'd ever actually lived 
in the shelter, had rigged things so 
that subsequent investigation would 
never disprove any point of the story 
each was to remember falsely and tell 
after returning to Earth. 

He remembered now being bewildered as to why they made those 
arrangements, even while they had 
been making them. 

But mostly he remembered Anna 
and the dizzy happiness of those 
thirteen days together. 

"Thanks, Junior," he said hurriedly. 

He grabbed for the phone and 
talked Chief Operative Reeber into 
connecting him with the White 
House, with President Saunderson. 
After a delay of minutes that didn't 



seem like minutes, he heard the President's voice. 

"Carmody, Mr. President," he 
said. "I'm going to call you on that 
reward you offered me. I'd like to get 
off work right now, for a long vacation. And I'd like a fast plane to 
Moscow. I want to see Anna." " 

President Saunderson chuckled. 
"Thought you'd change your mind 
about sticking at work, Captain. Consider yourself on vacation as of now, 
and for as long as you like. But I'm 
riot sure you'll want that plane. 
There's word from Russia that — uh 
— Mrs. Carmody has just taken off to 
fly here, in a strato-rocket. If you 
hurry, you can get to the landing 
field in time to meet heir." 

Carmody hurried and did. 
