MISBEGOTTEN MISSIONARY BY ISAAC ASIMOV

HE HAD slipped aboard the 
ship ! There had been dozens 
waiting outside the energy 
barrier when it had seemed that waiting would do no good. Then the barrier had faltered for a matter of two 
minutes (which showed the superiority of unified organisms over life 
fragments) and he was across. 

None of the others had been able 
to move quickly enough to take advantage of the break, but that didn't 
matter. All alone, he was enough. No 
others. were necessary. 

And the thought faded out of satisfaction and into loneliness. It was 
a terribly unhappy and unnatural 
thing to be parted from all the rest 
of the unified organism, to be a life 
fragment oneself. How could these 
aliens stand being fragments? 

It increased his sympathy for the 
aliens. Now that he experienced fragmentation himself, he could feel, as 
though from a distance, the terrible 
isolation that made them so afraid. 
It was fear born of that isolation 
that dictated their actions. What but 



the insane fear of their condition 
could have caused them to blast an 
area, one mile in diameter, into dullred heat, before landing their ship? 
Even the organized life ten feet deep 
in the soil had been destroyed in the 
blast. 

He engaged reception, listening 
eagerly, letting the alien thought saturate him. He enjoyed the touch of 
life upon his consciousness. He 
would have to ration that enjoyment. 
He must not forget himself — 

But it could do no harm to listen 
to thoughts. Some of the fragments 
of life on, the ship thought quite 




clearly, considering that they were 

such primitive, incomplete creatures. 

Their thoughts were like tiny bells. 
*, *.*'. 

ROGER OLDENN said, "I feel 
contaminated. You know what 
I mean? I keep washing my hands 
and it doesn't help." 

Jerry Thorn hated dramatics and 
didn't look up. They -were still 
maneuvering in the stratosphere of 
Saybrook's Planet and he preferred 
to watch the panel dials. He said, 
"No reason to feel contaminated. 
Nothing happened." • 

"I hope not," said Oldenn. "At 
least they had all the field men discard their spacesuits in the airlock 
for complete disinfection. They had 
a radiation bath for all men entering 
from outside. I suppose nothing happened." 

"Why be nervous then?" 
"I don't know. I wish the Barrier 
hadn't broken down.". 

"Who doesn't? It was an accident." 

"I wonder." Oldenn was vehement. "I was here when it happened. 
My shift, you know. There was no 
reason to overload the power line. 
There was equipment plugged into it 
that had no damn business near it. 
None whatsoever." 

"All right. People are stupid." 

"Not that stupid. I hung around 
when the Old Man was checking into 
the matter. None of them had rea 
sonable excuses. The armor-baking 
circuits, which were draining off two 



thousand watts, had been put into 
the Barrier line. They'd been- using 
the second-subsidiaries for a week. 
Why not this time? They couldn't 
give any reason.". 
"Can you?" 

Oldenn flushed. "No. I was just 
wondering if the men had been" — 
he searched for a word — "hypnotized 
into it. By those things outside." 

Thorn's eyes lifted and met those 
of the others levelly. "I wouldn't repeat that to anyone else. The Barrier 
was down only two minutes. If anything had happened, if even a spear 
of grass had- drifted across, it would 
have shown up in our bacteria cultures within, half an hour, in the 
fruit-fly colonies in a matter of days. 
Before we got back it would show 
up in the hamsters, the rabbits, maybe the goats. Just get it through your 
head, Oldenn, that nothing happened. 
Nothing." 

Oldenn turned on his heel and 
left. In leaving, his foot came within two feet of the object , in the 
corner of the room. He did not see it. 
• * * . ' 

HE DISENGAGED his reception 
centers and let the thoughts 
flow past him unperceived. These 
life-fragments were not important, in 
any case, since they were not fitted 
for the continuation of life. Even 
as fragments, they were incomplete. 

The other types of fragments 
now — They were different. He had 
to be careful of them. The temptation would be great, and he must 



34 




 



give no indication, none at all, of his 
existence on board ship till they 
landed on their home planet. • 

He focused on the other parts of 
the ship, marveling at the diversity 
of' life. Each item, no matter how 
small, was sufficient to itself. He 
forced himself to contemplate this, 
until the unpleasantness of the 
thought grated on him and he longed 
for the normality of home. 

Most of the thoughts he received 
from the smaller fragments were 
vague and fleeting, as you would expect. There wasn't much to be had 
from them, but that meant their need 
for completeness was all the greater. 
It was that which touched him so 
keenly. 

There was the life fragment which 
squatted on its haunches and fingered the wire netting that enclosed 
it. Its thoughts, were clear, but limited. Chiefly, they concerned the yellow fruit a companion fragment was 
eating. It wanted the fruit very deeply. Only the wire netting that separated the fragments prevented its 
seizing the fruit by force. 

He disengaged reception in a moment of complete revulsion. These, 
fragments competed for food! 

He tried to reach far outward for 
the peace and harmony of home, but 
it was already an immense distance 
away. He could reach only into the 
nothingness that separated him from 
sanity. 

He longed at the moment even for 
the feel of the dead soil between the 
Barrier and the ship. He had crawled 



over it last night. There had been no 
life upon it, but it had been the soil 
of home, and on the other side of 
the Barrier there had still been the 
comforting feel of the rest of organized life. 

He could ] remember the moment 
he had located himself on the surface of the ship, maintaining a desperate suction grip until the airlock 
opened. He had entered, moving cautiously between the outgoing feet. 
There had been an inner lock and 
that had been passed later. Now he 
lay here, a life fragment himself, 
inert and unnoticed. 

Cautiously, he engaged reception 
again at the previous focus. The 
squatting fragment of life was tugging furiously at the wire netting. It 
still wanted the other's food, though 
it was the less hungry of the two. 
* * * . 

LARSEN said, "Don't feed the 
damn thing. She isn't hungry; 
she's just sore because Tillie had the 
nerve to eat before she herself was ' 
crammed full. The greedy ape! I 
wish we were back home and I never 
had to look another animal in the 
face again." 

He scowled at the older female 
chimpanzee frowningly and the 
chimp mouthed and chattered back 
to him in full reciprocation. 

Rizzo said, "Okay, okay. Why 
hang around here, then ? Feeding 
time is over. Let's get out." 

The)' went past the goat pens,' the 
rabbit hutches, the hamster cages. 



MISBEGOTTEN MISSIONARY 



37 



Larsen said bitterly, "You volunteer for an exploration voyage. 
You're a hero. They send you off 
with speeches — and make a zoo-keeper out of you." 

"They give you double pay." 

"All right, so what? I didn't sign 
up just for the money. They said at 
the- original briefing that it was even 
odds we wouldn't come back, that 
we'd end up like Saybrook. I signed 
up because I wanted to do something important." 

"Just a bloomin' bloody hero," 
said Rizzo. 

"I'm not an animal nurse." 

Rizzo paused to lift a hamster out 
of the cage and stroke it. "Hey," he 
said, "did you ever think that maybe one of these hamsters has some 
cute little baby hamsters inside, just 
getting started?" 

"Wise guy! They're tested every 
day." 

"Sure, sure." He muzzled the little 
creature, which vibrated its nose at 
him. "But just suppose you came 
down one morning and found them 
there. New little hamsters looking up 
at you with soft, green patches of 
fur where the eyes ought to be." 

"Shut up, for thi: love of Mike," 
yelled Larsen. 

"Little soft, green patches of shining fur," said Rizzo, and put the 
hamster down with a sudden loathing sensation. 

**; * * ' * ~ 

He engaged reception again and 
varied the focus. There wasn't a 



specialized life fragment at home 
that didn't have a rough counterpart, on shipboard. 

There were the moving runners in 
various shapes, the moving swimmers, and the moving fliers. Some- of 
the fliers were quite large, with perceptible thoughts; others were small, 
gauzy-winged creatures. These last 
transmitted only patterns of senseperception, imperfect patterns at that, 
and added nothing intelligent ' of 
their own. 

There were the non-movers, which, 
like the non-movers at home, were 
green and lived on the air, water and 
soil. These were a mental blank. 
Only the dim, dim consciousness of 
light, moisture and gravity. 

And each fragment, moving and 
non-moving, had its mockery of life. 

Not yet. Not yet — 

HE CLAMPED down hard upon 
his feelings. Once before, 
these life fragments had come, and 
the rest at home had tried to help 
them — too quickly. It had not 
worked. This time they must wait. 

If only these fragments did not 
discover him. 

They had not, so far. They had 
not noticed him lying in the corner 
of the pilot room. No one had bent 
down to pick up and discard liim. 
Earlier, it had meant he could -not 
move. Someone might have turned 
and stared at the stiff wormlike 
thing, not quite six^ inches long — 
First stare, then shout, and then it 
would be all over. 



38 




 



But now, perhaps, he had waited 
long enough. The takeoff was long 
past. The controls were locked; the 
pilot room was empty. 

It did not take him long to' find 
the chink in the armor leading to the 
recess where some of the wiring was. 
They were dead wires. 

The front end of his body was a 
rasp that cut in two a wire of just 
the right diameter. Then, six inches 
away, he cut it in two again. He 
pushed the snipped-off section of the 
wire- ahead of him, packing it away 
neatly and invisibly into a corner of 
recess. Its outer covering was a brown 
elastic material and its core was 
gleaming, ruddy metal. He himself 
could not reproduce the core, of 
course, but that was not necessary. 
It was enough that the pellicle that 
covered him had been carefully bred 
to resemble the wire's surface. 

He returned and grasped the cut 
sections of the wire before and behind. He tightened against them as 
his little suction discs came into play. 
Not even a seam showed. 

They could not find him now. 
They could look right at him and 
see only a continuous stretch of wire. 

Unless they looked very closely 
indeed and noted that, in a certain 
spot on this certain wire, there were 
two tiny patches of soft and shining 
green fur. 

. V ■ * .*■ . 

"TT IS remarkable," said Dr. 

J. Weiss, "that little green hairs 
can do so much." 

MISBEGOTTEN MISSIONARY 



Captain Loring poured the brandy 
carefully. In a sense, this was a celebration. They would be ready for the 
Jump through hyper-space in two 
hours, and, after that, two days 
would see them back on Earth. 

"You are convinced, then, the 
green fur is the sense organ?" he 
asked. 

"It is," said Weiss. Brandy made 
him come out in splotches, but he 
was aware of the need of celebration, 
quite aware. "The experiments were 
conducted under difficulties, but they 
were quite significant." 

The captain smiled stiffly. " 'Under difficulties' is one way of phrasing it. I would never have taken the 
chances you did to run them. 

"Nonsense. We're all heroes 
aboard this ship, all volunteers, all 
great men with trumpet, fife and fanfarade. You took the chance of coming here." 

"You were the first to go outside 
the Barrier." 

"No particular risk was involved," 
Weiss said. "I burned the ground before me as I went, to say nothing of 
the portable Barrier that surrounded 
me. Nonsense, Captain. Let's all take 
our medals when we come back; let's 
take them without attempt at 
gradation. Besides, I'm a male." 

"But you're filled with bacteria to 
here." The captain's hand made a 
quick, cutting gesture three inches 
above his head. "Which makes you 
as vulnerable as a female would be." 

They paused for drinking purposes. 

M 



"Refill?" asked the captain. 

"No, thanks. I've exceeded my 
quota already." 

"Then one last for the spaceroad." 
He lifted his glass in the general 
direction of Saybrpok's Planet, no 
longer visible, its sun' only a bright 
star in the visiplate. "To the little 
green hairs that gave Saybrook his 
first lead." 

Weiss nodded. "A lucky thing. 
We'll quarantine the planet, of 
course." 

The captain said, "That doesn't 
seem drastic enough. Someone might 
always land by accident someday and 
not have Saybrook's insight, or his 
guts. Suppose he did not blow up h'is 
ship, as Saybrook did. Suppose he 
got back to some inhabited place." 

"I'd rather not suppose it. But 
what else can we do? If we could 
develop a self-sustaining atomic reaction in iron, which I'm told is theoretically impossible, we might blow 
ap the whole planet." 

The captain was somber. "Do you 
suppose they might ever develop interstellar travel on their own?" 

"I doubt it. No proof, of course. 
It's just that they have such a completely different orientation. Their 
entire organization of life has made 
tools unnecessary. As far as we know, 
even a stone axe doesn't exist on. the 
planet." 

"I hope you're right. Oh, and, 
Weiss, would you spend some time 
with Drake?" 

"The Galactic Press fellow?" 

"Yes. Once we get back, the story 

40 



of Saybrook's Planet will be released 
for the public and I don't think it 
would be wise to over-sensationalize 
it. I've asked Drake to let you consult' with him on the 'story. You're 
a biologist and enough of an authority to carry weight with him. Would 
you oblige?" 
"A pleasure." 

The captain closed his eyes wearily 
and shook his head. 

"Headache, Captain?" 

"No. Just thinking of poor Saybrook." 

• * * 

HE WAS weary of the ship. A 
while back there had been a 
queer, momentary sensation as though 
he had been turned inside-out. It was 
alarming and he had searched the 
minds of the keen-thinkers for an 
explanation. Apparently, the ship 
had leaped across vast stretches of 
empty space by cutting across something they knew as "Hyper-space." 
The keen-thinkers were ingenious. 

But — he was weary of the ship. 
It was such a futile phenomenon. 
These life-fragments were skillful in 
their constructions, yet it was only a 
measure of their unhappiness, after 
all. They strove to find in the control of inanimate matter what they 
could not find in themselves. In their 
unconscious yearning for completeness, they built machines and scoured 
space, seeking, seeking — 

These creatures, he knew, could 
never, in the very nature of things, 
find that for which they were seek

 



ing. At least, not until such time as 
he gave it to them. He quivered a little at the thought. 
Completeness ! 

These fragments had no concept 
for it, even. "Completeness" was a 
poor word. 

In their ignorance they would even 
fight it. There had been the ship that 
had come before. The first ship had 
contained many of the keen-thinking 
fragments. There had been two varieties, life-producers and the sterile 
ones. (How different this second 
- ship was. The keen-thinkers were all 
sterile, while the other fragments, the 
fuzzy- thinkers and the no-fhinkers, 
were all producers of life. It was 
strange.) 

How gladly that first ship had 
been welcomed by all the planet! He 
could ' remember the first intense 
shock at the realization that the visitors were fragments and not complete. The shock had given way to 
pity, and the pity to action. It was 
not certain how they would fit into 
the community, but there had been 
no hesitation. All life was sacred and 
somehow room would have been 
made for them — for all of them, 
from the large keen-thinkers to the 
little multipliers in the darkness. 

But there had been a miscalculation! They had not correctly analyzed 
the course of the fragments' ways of 
thinking. The keen-thinkers became 
aware of what had been done and 
resented it. They were frightened, of 
course; they did not understand. 

They had developed the Barrier 



first, and then, later, had destroyed 
themselves, exploding their ship to 
atoms. 

Poor, foolish fragments. 

This time, at least, it would be different. They would be saved, despite 
themselves. 

* * * 

JOHN DRAKE would not have 
admitted it in so many words, 
but he was very proud of his skill 
on the photo- typer. He had a travelkit model, which was a six-by-eight, 
featureless, dark plastic slab, with 
cylindrical bulges on either end to 
hold the roll of thin paper. It fitted 
into a brown leather case, equipped 
with 'a beltlike contraption that held 
it closely about the waist and at one 
hip. The whole thing weighed less 
than a pound. 

Drake could operate it with either 
hand. His fingers would flicker 
quickly and easily, placing their 
light pressure at exact spots on the 
blank surface, and, .soundlessly, 
words would be written. 

He looked thoughtfully at the beginning of his story, then up at Dr. 
Weiss. "What do you think, doc?" 
"It starts well." 

Drake nodded. "I thought I might 
as well start with Saybrook himself. 
They haven't released his story back 
home yet. I wish I could have seen 
Saybrook's original report. How did 
he ever get it through, by the way?" 

"As near as I could tell, he spent 
one last night sending it through the 
sub-ether. When he was finished, he 



MISBEGOTTEN MISSIONARY 



41 



shorted the motors, and converted the 
entire ship into a thin cloud of vapor 
a millionth of a second later. The 
crew and himself along with it." 

"What a man! You were in this 
from the beginning, doc?" 

"Not from the beginning," corrected Weiss, gently. "Only since 
the receipt of Saybrook's report." 

He could not help thinking back. 
He had read that report, realizing 
even then how wonderful the planet 
must have seemed when Saybrook's 
colonizing expedition first reached 
it. It was practically a- duplicate of 
Earth, with an abounding plant life 
and a purely vegetarian animal life. 

There had been only the little 
patches of green fur (how often had 
he used that phrase in his speaking 
and thinking) to seem strange. No 
living individual on the Planet had 
eyes. Instead there was this fur. Even 
the plants had them, each blade or 
leaf or blossom possessing the two 
patches of richer green. 

Then Saybrook had noticed, 
startled and bewildered, that there 
was no conflict for food on the 
planet. All plants grew pulpy appendages which were eaten by the 
animals. These were regrown in a 
matter of hours. No other parts of 
the plants were touched. It was as 
though the plants fed the animals as 
part of the order of nature. And the 
plants themselves did not grow in 
overpowering profusion. They might 
almost have been cultivated, they 
were spread across the available soil 
so discriminately. 



How much time, Weiss wondered, 
had Saybrook had to observe the 
strange law and order on the planet? 
The fact that insects kept their numbers reasonable, though no birds ate 
them. That the rodentlike things did 
not swarm, though no carnivores 
existed to keep them in check. 




ND then there had come the 
. incident of the white tats. 



That prodded Weiss. He said, 
"Oh, one correction, Drake. Hamsters were not the first animals involved. It was the white rats." 

"White rats," said Drake, making 
the correction in his notes. 

"Every colonizing ship," said 
Weiss, "takes a group of white rats 
for the purpose of testing any alien 
foods. Rats, of course, are very similar to human beings from a nutritional viewpoint. Naturally, only female white rats are taken." 

Naturally. If only one sex was 
present, there was no danger of unchecked multiplication in case the 
planet proved favorable. Remember 
the rabbits in Australia. 

"Incidentally, why not use males?" 
asked Drake. 

"Females are hardier," said Weiss, 
"which is lucky, since that gave the 
situation away. It turned out suddenly that all the rats were bearing 
young." 

"Right. Now that's where I'm up 
to, so here's my chance to get some 
things straight. For my own information, doc, how did Saybrook find 
out they were in a family way?" 



42 




 



"Accidentally, of course. In the 
course of nutritional investigations, 
rats are dissected for evidence of internal damage. Their condition was 
bound to he discovered. A few more 
were dissected; same results. Eventually, all that lived gave birth to 
young — with no male rats aboard!" 

"And the point is that all the 
young were born with little green 
patches of fur instead of eyes." 

"That is correct. Saybrook said so 
and we corroborate him. After the 
rats, the pet cat of one of the children was obviously affected. When it 
finally kittened, the kittens were not 
born with closed eyes, but with little 
patches of green fur. There was no 
tomcat aboard. 

"Eventually Saybrook had the 
women tested. He didn't tell them 
what for. He didn't want to frighten 
them. Every single one of them was 
in the early stages of pregnancy, 
leaving out of consideration those 
few who had been pregnant at the 
time of embarkation. Saybrook never 
waited for any child to be born, of 
course. He knew they would have no 
eyes, only shining patches of green 
fur. 

"He. even prepared bacterial cultures (Saybrook was a thorough 
man) and found each little bacillus 
to. show miscroscopic green spots." 

Drake was eager. "That goes way 
beyond our briefing — or, at least, 
the briefing / got. But granted that 
life on Saybrook's Planet is organized into a unified whole, how is it 
done?" 

MISBEGOTTEN MISSIONARY 



"How? How are your cells organized into a unified whole? Take 
an individual cell out of your body, 
even a brain cell, and what is it by 
itself? Nothing. A little blob of protoplasm with no more capacity for 
anything human than an amoeba. 
Less capacity, in fact, since it couldn't 
live by itself. But put the cells together and you have something that 
could invent a spaceship, or write 
a symphony." 

"I get the - idea," said Drake. 

WEISS went on, "All life on Saybrook's Planet is a single, organism. In a sense, all life on Earth 
is, too, but it's a fighting dependence, a dog-eat-dog dependence. The 
bacteria fix nitrogen; the plants fix 
carbon; animals eat plants and each 
other; bacterial decay hits everything. 
It comes full circle. Each grabs as 
much as it can, and is, in turn, 
grabbed. 

"On Saybrook's Planet, each organism has its place, as each cell in your 
body does. Bacteria and plants produce food, on the excess of which 
animals feed, providing in turn carbon dioxide and nitrogenous wastes. 
Nothing is produced more or less 
than is needed. The scheme of life 
is intelligently altered to suit the local environment. No group of lifeforms multiplies more or less than 
is needed, just as the cells in your 
body stop multiplying when there are 
enough of them for a given purpose. . 
When they don't stop multiplying, 
we call it cancer. And that's what 



life on Earth really is, the kind of 
organic organization we have, compared to that on Saybrook's Planet. 
One big cancer. Every species, every 
individual doing its best to thrive at 
the expense of every other species 
and individual:" 

""VTOU sound as if you approve 

-L of Saybrook's Planet, doc." 

"I do, in a way. It makes sense 
out of the business of living. I can 
see their viewpoint toward us. Suppose one of the cells of your body 
could be conscious- of the efficiency 
of the human body as compared with 
that of the cell itself, and could 
realize that this was only the result 
of the union of many cells into a 
higher whole. And then suppose it 
became conscious of the existence of 
free-living cells, with bare life and 
nothing more. It might feel a very 
strong desire to drag the poor thing 
into an organization. It might feel 
sorry for it, feel perhaps a sort of 
missionary spirit. The things on Saybrook's Planet — or the thing; one 
should use the singular-n^-feels just 
that, perhaps." 

"And went ahead by bringing 
about virgin births, eh, doc? I've got 
to go easy on that angle of it. Postoffice regulations, you know." 

"There's nothing ribald about it, 
Drake. For centuries, we've been able 
to make the eggs of sea-urchins, bees, 
frogs, etcetera, develop without the 
intervention of male fertilization. 
The touch of a needle was sometimes 
enough, or just immersion in the 



proper salt solution. The thing on 
Saybrook's Planet can cause fertilization by the controlled used of radiant 
energy. That's why an appropriate 
Energy Barrier stops it; interference, ' 
you see, or static. 

"They can do more than stimulate 
the division and development of an 
unfertilized egg. They can impress 
their own characteristics upon its 
nucleo-proteins, so that the young are 
born with the little patches of green 
fur, which serve as the planet's sense 
organ and means of communication. 
The young, in other words, are -not 
individuals, but become part of the 
thing on Saybrook's Planet. The 
thing on the planet,, not at all incidentally, can impregnate any species 
— plant, animal, or microscopic." 

"Potent Stuff," muttered Drake. 

"Totipotent," Dr. Weiss said 
sharply. "Universally potent. Any 
fragment of it is totipotent. Given 
time, a single bacterium from Saybrook's Planet can convert all of 
Earth into a single organism! We've 
got the experimental proof of that." 

Drake unexpectedly said, "You 
know, I think I'm a millionaire, doc. 
Can you keep a secret?" 

Weiss nodded, puzzled. 

"I've got a souvenir from Saybrook's Planet," Drake told him, 
grinning. "It's only a pebble, but 
after the publicity the planet will get, 
combined with the fact that it's 
quarantined from here on in, the pebble will be all any human being will 
ever see of it. How much do you 
suppose I could sell the thing for?" 




 



Weiss stared. "A pebble?" He 
snatched at the object shown him, a 
hard, gray ovoid. "You shouldn't 
have done that, Drake. It was strictly against regulations." 

'3 know; That's why I asked if 
you could keep a secret. If you could 
give me a signed note of authentication — What's the matter, doc?" 

Instead of answering, Weiss could 
only chatter and point. Drake ran 
over and stared down at the pebble. 
It was the same as before — 
, Except that the light was catching 
it at an angle, and it showed up two 
little green spots. Look very closely; 
they were patches of green hairs. 

* ,* . * 

HE WAS disturbed. There was a 
definite air of danger within 
the ship. There was the suspicion of 
his presence aboard ship. How could 
that be? He had done nothing yet. 
Had another fragment of home come 
aboard and been less cautious? That 
would be impossible without his 
knowledge, and, though he probed 
the ship intensely, he found nothing. 

And then the suspicion diminished, but it was not quite dead. One 
of the keen-thinkers still wondered, 
and was treading close to the truth. 

How long before the landing? 
Would an entire world of life-fragments be deprived of completeness? 
He clung closer to the severed ends 
of the wire he had been specially 
bred, to imitate, afraid of detection, 
fearful for his altruistic mission. 

* . * * ' 




,R. WEISS had locked himself in 



ready within the Solar System, and in 
three hours they would be landing. 
He had to think. He had three hours 
in which to decide. 

Drake's devilish "pebble" had 
been part of the organized life on 
Saybrook's Planet, of course, but it 
was dead. It was dead when he had 
first seen it, and if it hadn't been, it 
was certainly dead after they fed it 
into the hyper-atomic motor and converted it into a blast of pure heat. 
And the bacterial cultures still 
showed normal when Weiss anxiously checked. 

That was not. what bothered Weiss 
now. . 
Drake had picked up the "pebble" 
during the last hours of the stay on 
Saybrook's Planet — after the Barrier 
breakdown. What if the breakdown 
had been the result of a slow, relentless mental pressure on the part 
of the thing on the planet? What if 
parts of its being waited to invade 
as the Barrier dropped? If the "pebble" had not been fast enough and 
had moved only after the Barrier was 
re-established, it would have been 
killed. It would have"lain there for 
Drake to see and pick up. 

It was a "pebble," not a natural 
life-form. But did that mean it was 
not some kind of life-form ? It might 
have been a deliberate production of 
the planet's" single organism — a creature deliberately designed to look 
like a pebble, harmless-seeming, unsuspicious. Camouflage, in other 



MISBEGOTTEN MISSIONARY 



45 



words, a shrewd and frighteningly 
successful camouflage. 

Had any other camouflage creature 
succeeded in crossing the Barrier before it was re-established — with a 
suitable shape filched from the minds 
of the humans aboard ship by 
the mind-reading organism of the 
planet? Would it have the casual 
appearance of a paper-weight? Of an 
ornamental brass-head nail in the 
captain's old-fashioned chair? And 
how would they locate it? Could they 
search every part of the ship for the 
telltale green patches — even down to 
, individual microbes? 

And why camouflage? Did it intend to remain undetected for a 
time? Why? So that it might wait 
for the landing on Earth? 

An infection after landing could 
not be cured by blowing up a ship. 
The bacteria of Earth, the molds, 
yeasts, and protozoa, would go first. 
Within a year, the non-human young 
would begin arriving by the uncountable billions.. 

Weiss closed his eyes and told 
himself it might not be such a bad 
thing. There would be no more disease, since no bacterium would multiply at the expense of its host, but 
instead would be satisfied with its 
fair share of what was available. 
There would be no more overpopulation; the hordes of East Asia would 
decline to adjust themselves to the 
food supply. There would be no 
more wars, no crime, no greed. 

But there would be no more individuality, either. 



Humanity would find security by 
becoming a cog in a biological machine. A man would be brother to a 
germ, or to a liver cell. 

He stood up. He would havea 
talk with Captain Loring. They 
would send their report and blow 
up the ship, just as Saybrook had 
done. 

He sat down again. Saybrook had 
had proof, while he had only the 
conjectures of a terrorized mind, rattled by the sight of two green spots 
on a pebble. Could he kill the two 
hundred men on board ship because 
of a feeble suspicion ? 

He had to think! 

* * * 

HE WAS straining. Why did he 
have to wait? If he could only 
welcome those who were aboard 
now. Now! 

Yet a cooler, more reasoning part 
of himself told "him that he could 
not. The little multipliers in the darkness would betray their new status 
in fifteen minutes, and the keenthinkers had them under continual 
observation. Even one mile from the 
surface of their planet would be too 
soon, since they might still destroy 
themselves and their ship out in 
space. 

Better to wait for the main airlocks to open, for the planetary air 
to swirl in with millions of the little multipliers. Better to greet each 
one of them into the brotherhoo.d of 
unified life and let them swirl out 
again to spread the message. 


 



Then it would be done! Another 
world organized, complete! 

He waited. There was the dull 
throbbing, of the engines working 
mightily to control the slow dropping of the ship; the shudder of 
contact with planetary 'Surface, 
then — 

He let the jubilation of. the keenthinkers sweep into reception, and 
his own jubilant thoughts answered 
them. Soon they would be able to 
receive as well as himself. Perhaps 
not these particular fragments, but 
the fragments that would grow out 
of those which were fitted for the 
continuation of life. 

The main airlocks were about to 
be opened — 

And all thought ceased. 

* * * 

JERRY THORN thought, "Damn 
it, something's wrong now." 
He said to Captain Loring, "Sorry. 
There seems to be a power breakdown. The locks won't open." 

"Are you sure, Thorn? The lights 
are on." 

"Yes, sir. We're investigating it 
now." 

He tore away and joined Roger 
Oldenn at the airlock wiring-box. 
" What's wrong?" 

"Give me a chance, will you?" 
Oldenn 's hands were busy. Then he 
said, "For the love of Pete, there's 
a six-inch break in the twenty-amp 
lead." 

"What? That can't bef* 

Oldenn held up the broken wires 



with their clean, sharp, sawn-through 
ends. 

Dr. Weiss joined them. He looked 
haggard and there was the smell of 
brandy on his breath. 

He said shakily, "What's the matter?" ■ 

They told him. At the bottom of 
the compartment, in one corner, was 
the missing section. 

Weiss bent. There was a black 
fragment on the floor of the compartment. He touched it with' his finger 
and it smeared, leaving a sooty 
smudge on his finger-tip. He rubbed 
it off absently. 

There might have been something 
taking the place of the missing section of wire. Something that had 
been alive and only looked like wire, 
yet something that would heat, die, 
and carbonize in a tiny fraction of a 
second once the electrical circuit 
which controlled the airlock had been 
closed. 

The thing on Saybrook's Planet, 
thought Weiss, was not built to understand inanimate objects. It did 
not realize that a dead wire need 
not always remain dead. 

He said, "How are the bacteria?" 

A crew member went to check, returned and said, "All normal, doc." 

The wires had meanwhile been 
spliced, the locks opened, and Dr. 
Weiss stepped out into the anarchic 
world of life that was Earth. 

"Anarchy," he said, laughing a little wildly. "And it will stay that 
way." 