To Serve Man BY DAMON KNIGHT 

Kanamit were not very I don't know what we expected 

I pretty, it's true. They looked interstellar visitors to look like — 

something like pigs and those who thought about it at all, 

something like people, and that is not that is. Angels, perhaps, or some
an attractive combination. Seeing thing too alien' to be really awful, 

them for the .first time shocked you; Maybe that's why we were all so 

that was their handicap. When a horrified and repelled "when they 

thing with the countenance of a landed in their great ships and we 

fiend comes from the stars and offers saw what they really were like, 

a gift, you are disinclined to accept. The Kanamit were short and very 



TO SERVE MAN 



91 



•hairy — thick, bristly brown-gray hair 
all over their abominably plump 
'■. bodies. Their noses were snoutlike 
and thek eyes small, and they had 
thick hands of three fingers each. 
They wore green leather harness and 
green shorts, but I think the shorts 
were a concession to our notions of 
public decency. The garments werequite modishly cut, with slash 
pockets and half-belts in the back. 
The Kanamit had a sense of humor, 
anyhow; their clothes proved it. 

There were three of them at this 
session of the U. N., and I can't tell 
you how queer it looked to see them 
there in the middle of a solemn 
Plenary Session — three fat piglike 
creatures in green harness and shorts, 
sitting at the long table below the 
podium, surrounded by the packed 
arcs of delegates from every nation. 
They sat correctly upright, politely 
' watching each speaker. Their flat ears 
drooped over the earphones. Later 
on, I believe, they learned every human language, but at this time they 
knew only French and English. 

They seemed perfectly at ease — 
and that, along with their humor, 
was a thing that tended to make me 
like them. I was in the minority; I 
didn't think they were trying to put 
anything over. They said quite simply that they wanted to help us and 
I believed it. As a U. N. translator, 
of course, my opinion didn't matter, 
but I thought they were the best 
thing that ever happened to Earth. 

The delegate from Argentina got 
up and said that his government was 



interested by the demonstration of a 
new cheap power source, which the 
Kanamit had made at the previous 
session, but that the Argentine government could not commit itself as 
to its future policy without a' much 
more thorough examination. 

IT WAS what all the delegates were 
saying, but I had to pay particular attention to Senor Valdes, because he tended to sputter and his 
diction was bad. I got through the 
translation all right, with only one 
or two momentary hesitations, and 
then switched to, the Polish-English 
line to hear how Gregori was doing 
with Janciewicz. Janciewicz was the 
cross Gregori had to bear, just as 
Valdes was mine. 

Janciewicz repeated the previous 
remarks with a few ideological variations, and then the Secretary-General 
recognized the delegate from France, 
who introduced Dr. Denis Leveque, 
the criminologist, and a great deal 
of complicated equipment" was 
wheeled in. 

Dr. Leveque remarked that the 
question in many people's minds had 
been aptly expressed by the delegate 
from the U. S. S. R. at the preceding 
sessio'n, when he demanded, "What 
is the motive of the Kanamit? What 
is their purpose in offering us these 
unprecedented gifts, while asking 
nothing in return?" 

The doctor then said, "At the request of several ' delegates and with 
the full consent of our guests, the 
Kanamit, my associates and I have 



92 




 



made a series of tests upon- the Kanamit with the equipment which you 
see before you. These tests will now 
be repeated." 

A murmur ran through the chamber. There was a fusillade of flashbulbs, and one of the TV cameras 
moved up to focus on the instrument 
board of the doctor's equipment. At 
the same time, the huge television 
screen behind the podium lighted up, 
and we saw the blank faces of two 
dials, each with its pointer resting 
at zeto, and a strip of paper tape 
with a stylus point resting against it. 

The doctor's assistants were fastening wires to the temples of one of 
the Kanamit, wrapping a canvas-covered rubber tube around his forearm, 
and taping something to the palm of 
his right hand. 

In the screen, we saw the paper 
tape begin to move while the stylus 
traced a slow zigzag pattern along it. 
One of the needles began to jump 
rhythmically; the other flipped over 
and stayed there, wavering slightly. 

"These are" the standard instruments for testing the truth of a 
statement," said Dr. Leveque. "Our 
first object, since the physiology of 
the Kanamit is unknown to us, was 
to determine whether or not they react to these tests as human beings 
do. We will now repeat one of the 
many experiments which was made 
in the endeavor to discover this." 

He pointed to the first dial. "This 
instrument registers the subject's 
heart-beat. This shows the electrical 
conductivity of the skin in the palm 

TO SERVE MAN 



of his hand, a measure of perspiration, which increases under stress. 
And this — " pointing to the tapeand-stylus device — ■ "shows the pattern and intensity of the electrical 
waves emanating from his brain. It 
has been shown, with human subjects, that all these readings vary 
markedly depending upon whether 
the subject is speaking the truth." 

HE PICKED up two large pieces 
of cardboard, one red and one 
black. The red one was a square 
about a meter on a side; the black 
was a rectangle a meter and a half 
long. He addressed himself to the 
Kanama: 

"Which of these is longer than 
the other?" 

"The red," said the Kanama. 
Both needles leaped wildly, and so 
did the line on the unrolling tape. 

"I shall repeat the question," said 
the doctor. "Which of these is longer 
than the other?" 

"The black," said the creature. 
This time the instruments continued in their normal rhythm. 

"How did you come to this 
planet?" asked the doctor. 

"Walked," replied the Kanama. 
Again the instruments responded, 
and there was a subdued ripple of 
laughter in the chamber. 

"Once more," said the doctor, 
"how did you come to this planet?" 

"In a spaceship," said the Kanama, 
and the instruments did not jump. 

The doctor again faced the delegates. "Many such experiments were 

93 



made," he said, "and my colleagues 
and myself are satisfied that the 
mechanisms are effective. Now," he 
turned to the Kanama, "I shall ask 
oar distinguished guest to reply to 
the question put at the last session 
by the delegate of the U. S. S. R., 
namely, what is the motive of the 
^Kanamit people in offering "these 
great gifts to the people of Earth?" 

The Kanama rose. Speaking this 
time in English, he said, "On my 
planet there is a saying, 'There are 
more riddles in a stone than in a 
philosopher's head.' The motives of 
intelligent beings, though they may 
at times appear obscure, are simple 
things compared to the complex 
workings of the natural universe. 
Therefore I hope that the people of 
Earth will understand, and believe, 
when I tell you that our mission 
upon your planet is simply this — 
to bring to you the peace and plenty 
which we ourselves enjoy, and which 
we have in the past brought to other 
races throughout the galaxy. When 
your world has no more hunger, no 
more war, no more needless suffering, that will be our reward." 

And the needles had not jumped 
once. 

The delegate from the Ukraine 
jumped to his feet, asking to be 
recognized, but the time was up and 
the Secretary-General closed the session. 

I MET Gregori as we were leaving 
the U: N. chamber. His face was 
red with excitement. "Who pro


moted that circus?" he demanded. 

"The tests looked genuine to me," 
I told him. 

"A circus!" he said vehemently. 
"A second-rate farce ! If . they were 
genuine, Peter, why was debate 
stifled?" 

"There'll be time for debate tomorrow surely." 

"Tomorrow the doctor and his instruments will be back in Paris. 
Plenty of things can happen before 
tomorrow. In the name of sanity, 
man, how can anybody trust a thing 
that looks as if it ate the baby?" 

I was a little annoyed. I said, "Are 
you sure you're not more worried 
about their politics than their appearance?" 

He said, "Bah," and went away. 

The next day reports began to 
come in from government laboratories all over the world where the 
Kanamit's power source was, being 
tested. They were wildly enthusiastic. 
I don't understand such things myself, but it seemed that those little 
metal boxes would give more electrical power than an atomic pile, for 
next to nothing and nearly forever. 
And it was said that they were so 
cheap' to manufacture that everybody 
in the world could have one of his 
own. In the early afternoon there 
were reports that seventeen countries 
had already begun to set up factories 
to turn them out. 

The next day the Kanamit turned 
up with plans and specimens of a 
gadget that would increase the fertility of any arable land by sixty to 



94 




 

\ 



one hundred per cent. It speeded the 
formation of nitrates in the soil, or 
something. There was nothing in the 
headlines but the Kanamit any more. 
The day after that, they dropped 
their bombshell. ' 

"You now have potentially unlimited powex and increased food 
supply," said one of them. He pointed with his three-fingered hand to an 
instrument that stood on the table 
before him. It was a box on a tripod, 
with a parabolic reflector on the front 
of it. "We offer you today a third 
gift which is at least as important 
as the first two." 

He beckoned to the TV men to 
roll their cameras into closeup position. Then he picked up a large sheet 
of cardboard covered with drawings 
and English lettering. We saw it on 
the large screen above the podium; it 
was all clearly legible. 

"We are informed that this broadcast is being relayed throughout your 
world," said the Kanama. "I wish 
that everyone who has .equipment for 
taking photographs from television 
screens would use it now." 

The Secretary-General leaned forward and asked a question sharply, 
but the Kanama ignored him, 

"This device," he said, "projects 
a field in which no explosive, of 
whatever nature, can detonate." 

There, was an uncomprehending 
silence. 

The Kanama said, "It cannot now 
be suppressed. If one nation has it, 
all must have it." When nobody 
seemed to understand, he explained 

TO SERVE MAN 



bluntly, "There will be no more 
war." 

THAT was the biggest news of the 
millennium, and it was perfectly 
true. It turned out that the explosions the Kanama was talking about 
included gasoline and Diesel explosions. They had simply made it impossible for anybody to mount or 
equip a modern army. 

We could have gone back to bows 
and arrows, of course, but that 
wouldn't have satisfied the military. 
Not after having atomic bombs and 
all the rest. Besides, there wouldn't 
be any reason to make war. Every 
nation would soon have everything. 

Nobody ever gave another thought 
to those lie-detector experiments, or 
asked the Kanamit what their politics 
were. Gregori was put out; he had 
nothing to prove his suspicions. 

I quit my job with the U. N. a 
few months later, because I foresaw 
that it was going to die under me 
anyhow. U. N. business was booming 
at the time, but after a year or so 
there was going to be nothing for it 
to do. Every nation on Earth was 
well on the way to being completely 
self-supporting; they weren't going 
to need much arbitration. 

I accepted a position as translator 
with the Kanamit Embassy, and it 
was there that I ran into Gregori 
again. I was glad to see him, but I 
couldn't imagine what he was doing 
there. 

"I thought you were on the opposition," T said. "Don't tell me 

95 



you're convinced the Kanamit are all 
right." 

He looked rather shamefaced. 
"They're not what they look, anyhow," he said. 

'It was as much of a concession' as 
he could decently make, and I invited him down to the embassy lounge 
for a drink. It was an intimate kind 
of place, and he grew confidential 
over the second daiquiri. 

"They fascinate me," he said. "I 
hate them instinctively on sight still 
— that hasn't changed, but I can evaluate it. You were right, obviously; 
they mean us nothing but good. But 
do you know — " he leaned across the 
table — "the question of the Soviet 
delegate was never answered." 

I am afraid I snorted. 

"No, really," he said. "They told 
us what they wanted to do — 'to bring 
to you the peace and plenty which 
we ourselves enjoy.' But thev' didn't 
say why." * 

"Why do missionaries — " 

"Hogwash!" he said angrily. 
"Missionaries have a religious motive. If these creatures do own a religion, they haven't once mentioned 
it. What's more, they didn't send a 
missionary group, they sent a diplomatic delegation — a group representing the will and policy of their 
whole people. Now just what have 
the Kanamit, as a people or a nation, 
got to gain from our welfare?" 
• I said, "Cultural — " 

"Cultural cabbage-soup! No, it's 
something less obvious than that, 
something obscure that belongs to 



their psychology and not to ours. But 
trust me, Peter, there is no such 
thing as a completely disinterested 
altruism. In one way or another, they 
have something to gain." 

"And that's why you're here," I 
said, "to try to find out what it is?" 

'"Correct. I wanted to get on one 
of the ten-year exchange groups to 
their home planet, but I couldn't; the 
quota was filled a week after they 
made the announcement. This is the 
next best thing. I'm studying their 
language, and you know that language reflects the basic assumptions 
of the people who use it. I've got a 
fair command of the spoken lingo 
already. It's not hard, really, and 
there are hints in it. I'm sure I'll get 
the answer eventually." 

"More power," I said, and we 
went back to work. 

I saw Gregori frequently from 
then on, and he kept me posted about 
his progress. He was highly excited 
about a month after that first meeting; said he'd got hold of a book 
of the Kanamit' s and was trying to 
puzzle it out. They wrote in ideographs, worse than Chinese, but he 
was determined to fathom it if it 
took him years. He wanted my help. 

WELL, I was interested in spite 
of myself, for I knew it 
would be a long job. We spent some 
evenings together, working with material from Kanamit bulletin-boards 
and so forth, and the extremely limited English-Kanamit dictionary they 
issued the staff. My conscience both


96 




 



ered me about the stolen book, but 
gradually I became absorbed by the 
problem. Languages are my field, 
after all. I couldn't help being fascinated. 

We got the title worked out in a 
few weeks. It was "How to Serve 
Man," evidently a handbook they 
were giving out to new Kanamit 
members of the embassy staff. They 
had new ones in, all .the time now, a 
shipload about once a month; they 
were opening all kinds of research 
laboratories, clinics and so on. If 
there was anybody on Earth besides 
Gregori who still distrusted those 
people, he must have been somewhere in the middle of Tibet. 

It was astonishing to see the 
changes that had been wrought in 
less than a year. There were no more 
standing armies, no more shortages, 
no unemployment. When you picked 
up a newspaper you didn't see 
"H-BOMB" or "V-2" leaping out at 
you; the news was always good. It 
was a hard thing to get used to. The 
Kanamit were working on human 
biochemistry, and it was ' known 
around the embassy that they were 
nearly ready to announce methods of 
making our race taller and stronger 
and' healthier — practically a race of 
supermen — and they had a potential 
cure for heart disease and cancer. 

*I didn't see Gregori for a fortnight 
after we finished .working out the 
title of the book; I was on a longoverdue vacation in Canada. When I 
got back, I was shocked by the change 
in his appearance. 



"What on Earth is wrong, Gregori?" I asked. "You look like the 
very devil." 

"Come down to the lounge." 

I WENT with him, and he gulped 
a stiff Scotch as if he needed it. 
"Come on, man, what's the matter?" I urged. 

"The Kanarnit have put me on the 
passenger list for the next exchange 
ship," he said. "You, too, otherwise 
I wouldn't be talking to you." 
"Well," I said, "but— " 
"They're not altruists." 
"What do you mean?" 
"What I told you," he said. 
"They're not altruists." 

I tried to reason with him. I pointed out they'd made Earth a paradise 
compared to what k was before. He 
only shook his head. 

Then I said,. "Well, what about 
those lie-detector tests?" 

"A farce," he replied, without 
heat. "I said so at the time, you fool. 
They told the truth, though, as far 
as it went." 

"And the book?" I demanded, annoyed. "What about that — 'How to 
Serve Man'? That wasn't put there 
for you to read. They mean it. How 
do you explain that?" 

"I've read the first paragraph of 
that book," he said. "Why do you 
suppose I haven't slept for a week?" 

I said, "Well?" and he smiled 
that curious, twisted smile, as if he 
really wanted to cry instead. 
"It's a cookbook," he said. 