STORIES OF SCIENCE AND FANTASY 





I WAS born in New York in 
1928, but my parents moved 
soon after to Maplewood, New 
Jersey. I started to write in tlfe 
fourth or fifth grade^ as near as I 
can remember, and determined at 
that time to become a freelance writer. My output was largely short plays and poetry, with an 
occasional short story ! ^ ' 

Through high school .| <,was an 
avid, though silent, 4€^1^^pe-fiction 
fan. My first science-fiction story, 
at the age of iourieen, we^i 10 the 
riow-defunct Astonishing Stories. It 
dealt with the idea that our planets are really gigantic eggs, our 
sun an incubator, and the mama 
bird on her way back. I was surprised to hear from the editor that 
ihr iflra hnd been used. ..S^iepne 
had gotten there before miB. 




After graduating from high school, 
I hitchhiked, to California, worked 
a few months, hitchhiked back and 
joined the army. I wrote nothing 
in service except a few letters 
home. My time was taken up 
walking guard on the thirty-eighth 
parallel, and later, playing ,^ui tar 
in a dance band in Seoul. " Discharged in 1948, I enrolled in 'New 
York Uniy^rsity and started to 
write -again, this time nothing -but 
short stories. _ %. , " 

Three yeais laiei I gtaduaicvS^, 
with a-wife^(whom I had met in a 
writing class givei* by Irwin Shaw), 
a trunkful of stories and moderately high- hopes. 

After a iew months of writing I 
still had the%ifie and the trunkful 
of stories. I took a job in an air{Concluded on Page 68) 



TABLE OF CONTENTS 



MAY 
1954 



VOLUME 5 
NUMBER 5 





JUNE ISSUE ON SALE 
APRIL 27tit 



" LULIAAJL 



THE GIANTS FROM OUTER SPACE 

(Novel — 25,000 wards) by Geoff Sf. Reynard... 6 

Terror filled the void around Pinkhaln and his crew — a terror that couldn't exist! 

OFF-LIMITS PLANET 

(Short — 3,000 words) by Robert Sheckley. 70 

Four lonely creatures roamed space looking for a world to colonize — with insanity! 

COSMIC SANTA CLAUS 

(Short — 4,600 words).... by Daniel F, Galouye 80 

He offered Earth Incredible gifts of science — ^no strings, no catch — or so it seemed! 

PRELUDE TO SPACE 

(Short — 1,100 words) .tr. by Robert W. Haseltine 94 

The man's questions were the usual survey data; the results-^out of this world! 

CANCER WORLD 

(Short — 4,500 words)..... ....by Harry Warner, Jr,.... 98 

Nobody could leave a quarantined planet— yet Greg tried desperately to iPeach one! 

SPIES DIE HARD! 

(Short — 1,100 words) by Arnold Marmor 110 

A good interplanetary agent was worth his weight in gold credits — or a negligee! 



• • •TOBpnonBumnnaan 

INTRODUCING THE AUTHOR. 2 

THfe EDITORIAL 4 

BUGLESS HELICOPTER 69 

PREVIEW OF COMING ISSUE 109 



ACCURATE RADAR .113 

SCIENCE FICTION LIBRARY..... 114 

PANDORA'S BOX ...116 

LETTERS FROM THE READERS..! 122 



uiiam 



Editor 



^J4ainiii 



Managing Editor 



IfVlatcoim Smiih 
Art Editor 



Front cover painting by H, W. McCauley, suggested by 
"The Giants From Outer Space" 
Interior illustrations by H. W. McCauley and W. E. Terry 
Cartoons by Hagglund, Scheffy, and Kohler 

Published monthly by Greenleaf Publishing Company, 1426 Fowler Avenue, Evanston, Illinois. Entered as 
second-elass matter at the Post Office at Evansto<n, Illinois. Additional entry at Sandusliy, Ohio. Address 
all communications to IMAGINATION, P. 0. Box 230. Evanston, Illinois. We do not accept responsibility 
for unsolicited manuscripts or art work; submissions must be acoompanied biy stamped, self -addressed return envelopes. The names of all characters used in stories are fictitious; any resemblance to any person, 
living or dead is coincidental. Copyright 1954. Greenleaf Publishing Company. Subscription rate $3.00. 
per year. Advertising rates sent upon request. Printed in U.S.A. 




# # # •] 



THINGS are going on up on 
Luna, we suspect. A few 
months ago we had a pleasant 
chat with Fox B. Holden, a top 
Madge writer and a nice guy to feoot. 
Fox mentioned a phenomenon he had 
observed a number of times with his 
home-mounted telescope. . It seems 
that during a several hour period 
of studying the jrnmi on various occa^sions, he not^id a. s^iaali «daii^ 
speck. This was not curious in itself, until lite moted that the speck 
seemed to move minutely in a 
straight line. Then abruptly^ it 
made a ninety degree turn and followed another straight line until it 
vanished. During the course of 
this movement Fox suspected a spot 
of dust etc., on his lens. He carefully checked the lens but found it 
free of any obstructing matter. 
After watching the phenomenon on 
various occasions he came to the 
«®nclusion that if it was not something on his lenjs, or something in 
the atmosphere over Earth {possible but unlikely) then the possibility existed tbat he was witnessing 
actual movement of some large oh^ 
ject on the Moon's surface. 

W'E HAVE mmm talked to othejr frimds wfeo M^e amat©ar 
astronomers ani Wmm i^md Mmiiar 
occurrences quite common. Most 
of these moon-watehers shrug awmy 
the phenomenon as som^ natural but 
uniden'tifiable obstruction betwee^i 





telescope and Luna. To anyone but 
a science fiction reader this is the 
easiest and most logical explanation. 

'E'RE just imaginative 
enough to refuse to shrug 
the matter away in such fashion. 
We offer the idea that many amateur astronomers are witnessing actual movement on Luna's surface. 
What's going on up there? We 
don't know, but reflecting on the 
"Flying Saucer'' sightings of recent years, we wonder if our Moon 
isn't a temporary landing base for 
the elusive craft! In this respect 
it would be interesting to know 
what sort of reports our govern-^ 
ramt Tet^ives frcm EarWs large 
observatories. Well? . . . wlh 




"Lopk, dear, a my—ri 



7lu XtMpuSeu&ed 9aai qfjQU


THERE are some things that cannot 
be generally told — things you ought to 
know. Great truths are dangerous to 
some --i- but factors for personal power 
and accomplishment in the hands of 
those who understand them. Behind 
the tales of the miracles and mysteries 
of the ancients, lie centuries of their 
secret probing into nature's laws — 
their amazing discpveries of the hid' 
den processes of mctn^s mind, and the 
mastery of life's prohtems. Once shrouded in mystery to avoid their destructian by mass fear and ignorance, these 
facts remain a useful heritage for the 
thousands of men and women who privately use them in their homes today. 

THIS FREE BOOK 

The Rosicrucians (not a religious 



organization) an age-old brotherhood 
of learning, have preserved this secret 
wisdom in their archives for Centuries. They now invite you to share the 
practical helpfulness of their teachings. 
Write today for a free copy of the 
book, **The Mastery of Life." Within 
its pages may lie a new life of opportunity for you. Address: Scribe D.TvC, 



r SEND THIS COUPON 

I Scribe D.T.C, ^ 
I The ROSICRUCIANS (AMOMO 
I San Jose, California 

I Please send me the free book, The Mastery 
I of Life, which eiEplains how I may learn to 
1 use my faculties and powers of mind. 



I Name. 

I Address 

I City 

InM ^ wfm -m ^ mm mm mm ^ ^ *m wm^ mm


UBe Rosicrucians 



(AMORO 



SAN JOSE, CALIFORNIA, U.S.A. 



5 



Grim terror lurked in the void many light 
yeors from Earth. But Pinkham and his men were 
unaware of it — until suddenly they discovered — 

i 

/ 

1 

The Giants From Outer Space 



4( 



O KAY, make another 
check on the reading." 
"I've made four checks already 



"Damn it, make another!^' 

"It's no use, Pink. The life-scanner's never, wrong." 

"No possibility of a monkey 
wrench dropped into its innards? It 
couldn't be seeing things that aren't there?" 

"Not in a million years.'' 

"Then there's no water, no air, 
no gravity worth mentioning, and 
still — ^ 

"That's right. There's life on that 
silly-looking little apple. There's 
somebody sitting on it!'' 

In the ninetieth star system to^ 
be explored by the insatiably curious men of Earth, there were seven planets. Between the fourth and 
fifth frorn the star there was a belt 
of asteroids: scmie three or four 



thousand tiny planetary bodies traveling in vast ellipses around the 
star. At one time they had probably constituted a single planet, 
but some unimaginable explosion 
far back in time had scattered the 
great ball broadcast, ' and the largest of the resulting planetoids was 
now no more than 440 miles across. 
In the gargantuan belt of them, 
many were; no bigger in diameter 
than the spaceship Elephant^s Child 
herself. 

When the instruments of the 
ship detected this belt of asteroids, 
Captain Pinkham turned aside as 
a matter of course, to cruise through 
it and let his cartographer map it, 
his organicus officer check it .for 
signs of life, and all his other crewmen turn their inquisitive eyes and 
machines upon it. It was the seventh asteroid belt to be discovered 
by man, if you included the one 
between the orbits of Jupiter and 



S IMAGE 

Mars, back home, incredible lightyears behind ... 

No life had ever been discovered 
on an asteroid, except for the vegetable-animal space-eating bacteria 
on Palla.s. No life — 

Until now. ^ 

CAPTAIN Pinkham headed for 
the tiny bit of planet, let his 
ship's screens pick it up and relay 
its presence to the automatic recoil 
engines, which slammed the Elefhanfs Child to a stop about twelve 
feet away from tl^ knobbly slategray surface. The energy testers, 
having come into play simultaneously with the screens, at once 
flashed the green "Not Radioactive'' sign; a fairly useless gesture, 
since a positive reaction would 
have turned the ship away at an 
angle before it entered the danger 
zone. 

The senior officej; said, "Jerry, 
let's take a look at that critter you 
^ think is perched on this thing." 

The orgajiicus officer grinned 
with one corner of his mouth. He 
pulled down a platinum lever, and 
a thirty-inch screen above his control board sprang to life. The black 
of space showed the bumpy planetoid Hke a ball of cold lava, and 
seated in the center of the screen, 
a man in a spacesuit. 

Captain Pinkham licked his lips. • 
*^Okay," he said, "I owe you a 



shot of rye. You were right." Then 
he blinked his gray eyes. "My 
God!" he roared. "What's a human being doing out here in System Ninety?" 

The outburst, he felt, was quite 
lustified; in fact, he might have 
gone stark raving crazy- with justification. There seemed no possibility that his space armada could 
have been preceded' to this star, 
system by another from Earth. The 
ancient Martians might have made 
it this far, but their spacesuits were 
no&ing like those of Terra. So he 
and Jerry were now staring at a 
hopeless absurdity. It couldn't be 
ttere. 

Pinkham leaned sideways and 
bellowed into the intercom. "Get 
in here! Everybody I On the double!'' 

' The crew came running, from the 
engine rooms, the astrogatium and 
astrolab, from the sleeping quarters and the mess hall. The ship 
was gigantic; it took twenty minutes, for the ship's complement to 
assemble in the .xaptain's control 
hall. There were fifty-seven men, 
eighteen officers. They stood in casual formation and gaped at the lifescanner's screen. 

The spacesuited figure had not 
moved. 

Captain Pinkham said, "One 
question. Which of you gadget-happy jokers gimmicked up the scan


US? Who did this?" 
Nobody said anything. Only one 
man smiled: Lieutenant Joe Silver, 
a very bri^t, very ambitious big 
cub who was on his second extragalactic expedition and obviously had visions of earning his captain's bronze comets within the 
year. Joe was a rather unpleasant 
young piece of beef, thought Pink; 
but he wouldn't pull practical jokes. 
He was too bloody serious. If be 
smiled, it was probably because he 
was enjoying the Captain's evident 
bewilderment. 

''Thm it isn't a joke/' said Pink* 
ham. "Three of you outside repairmen get into your suits and 
bring that in." He gestured at the 
silent figure on the motionless little 
world oif the scanner. "Jerry says 
it's alive. Handle with care." He 
waved them his dismissal. 

Some twenty minutes later he 
'Watched the screen as the three 
crewmen descended to the surface 
of the planetoid, pried loose the 
double anchor which the unknown 
Earthman had sunk into the ball's 
crust to hold him steady m the 
almost-gravityless world, lifted the 
bulky figure and leaped upward, 
like thick but weightless panthers 
carrying their prey, into the open 
airlock. 

The spacesuited stranger had not 
moved in the slightest* 
Yet the scanner, which was nev


er wrong, said that within the armor of the suit was life. 

Pinkham sat staring at the 
blanked-out screen, and a queer 
chill began to crawl tip his neck. 
An old slang phrase came to his 
mind, and wouldn't leave. 

How come? How come? Mou 
come? 

' - _ ■ 

CHAPTER II 

* 

T)INK and Jerry and Joe Silver 
walked around and around the 
spacesuit. Bill Calico, the astrogator, and Washington Daley, the 
senior lieutenant, sat in front of 
it on stools covered with Venusian 
jo0rg-hide, going through a routine of flippant gags that thinly 
disguised their bafflement. Finally 
Pinkham said, "When were these 
stiits invented?" 

*^2i44," said Joe Silver. 

Bright kid, thought Pink with 
irritfttion. "Thirty-odd years ago. 
That's my guesi, too." 

'''October ist, 2144, is the patent 
date," said Joe Silver smugly. 

"Click, elide, . click," said Daley. 
"Your mind is a damn file room, 
Silver. It gives me the jitters." 

Joe Silver looked at him expressionlessly. 

"I just read the date on the instruction plate," he said. 
1 Captain Pinkham bent down and 
read aloud fpm the iiaynist plate 



10 



IMAGINATION 



set into the back of the spacesuit. 

"'Bernard Patent Slugjet Suit, 
size 24-B patented' . . . here it is. 
^Instructions for reviving occupant. 
The man in this suit is alive if thie 
translucent face plate is tinted orange'."
/^It is/' said Bill Calico with eagerness. 

" ^Unscrew the seven small xscrews around face plate. Depress 
lever Z on fight side of chest plate. 
Loosen gorget, shoulder pieces, pallettes, brassarts, cuisses ... ' " 
They were following the instructions as he read. He thought, these 
suits were terrific, they were the 
best. But you had to have a billion 
dollars behind your expedition or 
you couldn't afford 'em. Each one 
cost half as much as a regular-size 
moon rocket! They shouldn't have 
stopped making them, though. They 
ought to have tried bringing down 
the cost. One of these could save a 
man's life when nothing else in 
God's universe couM; and a man's 
life is surely worth as much as half 
a moon rocket? 

The Bernard Slugjet Suit. Guaranteed to keep a guy alive for a 
minimum of 250 years in free 
space. Guaranteed to let him 
emerge healthy and — miraculously 
— sane, provided he was picked up 
within the time limit. 

You were jetting toward the 
edge of the galaxy, say^. Your ship 



ran into trouble. A big meteor tore 
out your belly, or your fuel gave 
out, or any of a million things happened to crack up the beautiful 
great spaceship that w^s your vehicle and your pride and almost 
you, an extension of yourself, an 
.expression of your yearning to conquer the stars. So you got into your 
slugjet suit and walked out an 
airlock, if you had enough warning, that is. And there you were 
in space. 

Your suit was actually a miniature spaceship itself; if there was 
land anywhere near, you aimed for 
it, loosed your powerful shoulder 
jets, and shot toward it. The suit 
had a range of about five hundred 
thousand miles, which was often 
enough. ' 
. But suppose it wasn't. Then you 
just stayed there in black space, 
and you started to touch buttons 
in the big gloves, to pull levers on 
the chest, and to activate other 
circuits by the sound of your voice. 
And the suit became a world for 
you, a world that kept you healthy 
and sane for a quarter of a millennium. 

Your life processes were slowed 
down to a pace of only a crawl 
and a mumble, next door to death. 
Your breathing couldn't be detected. Your heart beat six times to 
the hour. Drugs did it, and vapors, the depressants of a hundred 



planets gathered and refined by Bernard for his suits. s 

You didn't sleep; you didn^t need 
to. You were a slug, a worm in a 
cocoon, awake in a^n ultra-slowmotion way In 250 years, you 
aged about fifteen. The suits were 
supposed to have a maximum efficiency of a thousand years; you 
came out an old man at the end of 
that time, maybe j but it was an 
even bet that you did come out. 

And to keep your mind whole and 
unwarped, there in the immensity 
of brain-shattering space, you were 
entertained — well and constantly. 

Three-dimensional movies were 
shown on your translucent face 
plate, so slow/that to a person with 
unhampered reflexes they would 
look, like stills. Music played to 
you, a low drone and buzz that to 
you was jazz, classical, anything 
ygu selected. The Minute Waltz 
took several hours to play in your 
ear. 

Body wastes and carbon dioxide 
were eliminated, and breathable 
air released, by the same principles 
in use in spaceships. You were fed 
intravenously, vitamins, concentrates of everylhing you needed 
were stuck into you without your 
knowing it, for you lived too slowly to be capable of pain. The temperature of your suit was even.Audiotherapy was given you at 
suitable intervals. You were res


cued, and came out of your suit 
as well-adjusted, as balanced a& 
you'd gone in. Maybe more so. 

Rescued? It wasn't all left to 
luck. The radio in your high bulbous crest broadcast a constant 
S.O.S. Your suit glowed so that it 
could be spotted easily, a crimson 
star against the blackness. Your 
own life within it called to every 
life-scanner within 500,000 miles. 

Meanwhile, you were in a damn 
fine world of your own . . . 

Pinkham finished reading the instructions, and walked around to 
the front of the bulky suit. Bill 
Calico lifted off the crest, Daley 
removed tihie helmet, Jerry and Joe 
Silver caught the suit as it fell 
away in two sections. 

And Captain Pinkham caugh 
the girl. 

SHE was slim and full in the 
places where a woman ought 
to be so, and her hair, close-cropped, was black-brown and shining. 
Her face was good, damn good, 
bloody damn fine to a spaceman 
who'd been out on the ways for a 
couple of years; but Pink (had the 
happy thought — it was the first 
one he had, before the shock really 
hit him that that this was a girl — 
that she would have looked just as 
good to him on Earth. 

She wore the uniform of an organicus officer: just a bit datedj 



12 IMAi^l. 

the lapels too wide by an inch, the 
synthetic fabric of the jacket just 
a little more clinging and revealing 
than the current fashion, the pants 
narrow at the cuff where today's 
were bell-bottomed. She must have 
been out here a while; not more 
than thirty years, though. She did 
not look more than tweaty-five 
now, and the normal life span was 
was a hundred and ten . . . Pink 
snapped his queer thoughts sharply 
into line. What did her age matter 
to him? 

She was limp in his arms, as 
relaxed as a sleeping kitten. Her 
. eyes, deep brown, were open but 
heavy-lidded. He half-knelt, cradling her comfortably, as Jerry anticipated his question* and said, 
"She's okay. Shell be out of it in 
a few minutes. She's still living 
slower than we are." 
Joe Silver, unaccountably across 
e room by the life-scanner, said, 
^^Hey! There's another one!" 

Another what?" asked Ws 
senior lieutenant, Daley. 

"Another fellow — or girl — in 
a Slugjet. Down that direction a 
few thousand miles." 

As all of them but Pink raced to 
the screen, the girl began to sing, 
softly, musically, and very slowly. 

am sick of this bucMtmg 
Lunar run 
In this dirty old steel cocoon; 
Vwr sick of the Earth and I'm 



sick of the Sun 

And I'm sick to death af the 
Moon . . . 

That was — what was the 
name? — the Lament of the Vetetan EcM:keteer, a ballad that 
Pink had been singing in his grade 
school days. He hadn't heard it 
for mcwre than a dozen years. Probably popular when this gal blasted off Terra. 

She stopped singing. " ^Bout 
tiiiie you got here," she said drowsily. "I've been waiting for months. 
Didn't Fawcett's crest radio reach 
you?" 

*'Take it easy," said Pink, and 

told himself that was a stupid thing 
to say. "Who are you? What was 
your expedition?" 

She blinked. "You aren't Commander Dyevis, are you? Who are 
you?" 

"I'm Joe Silver," said that young 
upstart over Pinkham's shoulder. 

"Nobody asked you," said Daley. 
They had left the screen, all but 
Jerry, who was making course for 
the second speck of life in the 
asteroid belt. 

"This is the Elephant's Child, 
flagship of Armada Seven, 843 days 
out of Terra to explore star systems 
87 through 93," said Pink quietly. 
"We just plucked you off an asteroid in System Ninety. This is — -" 
take it easy, he said to himself 
this time, "this is October iSth, 



2176.'' 

"Holy Hotoendis," said the girl, 
turning a little pale. "Our ship 
split up her seams in November 
of 2158." 

Daley, the oldest of the lot at 
thirty-six, and the coolest spacehead of them all, said, "May I 
introduce Captain John Pinkham, 
our leader?'' Formalities eased a 
shock, he knew, and helped you 
over the rough spots. "I'm Lt. 
Washingtcm Djiey and you are 

"Organicus Officer Circe Smith, 
of Colonel Fawcett's exploratory 
armada," she said automatically. 

"Fawcett!" said everyone, loudly and with amazement. 

"So he got to System Ninety," 
said Pink. "Every spaceman on the 
ways has wondered about Fawcett 
for eighteen years. He vanished 
with two ships — " 

"She knows that^ Captain," said 
Daley. 

"Oh. Of course-" 

"Our other ship was still okay 
when we broke up,'' said O. 'O. 
Smith, brushing her short hair back 
from a forehead that was wide and 
intelligent. "My crest radio was 
on the fritz, but Fawcett's was all 
right and he was, supposed to call 
Commander Dyeyis, who was cruising down by Planet Four. At least 
half a dozen of us got off in Slugjet 
Suits before the ship died* I guess 



his message never got to Dyevis." 

"Lord knows," said Pinkham 
The Elephant's Child shivered 
slightly as her recoil engines 
stopped her. Jerry came over fro 
the controls. 

"There's another one sitting outside," he said casually. 

"Maybe it's Colonel Fawcett," 
the girl cried eagerly. 

Jerry shook his head. "I'm afraid 
not." He looked at her a moment 
then turned to Pinkham. "This m 
has four arms," he said. 

CHAPTER III 

'TpHEY sat at dinner, the eighteen 
officers of the Mephanfs 
Child y eating fresh v^etables an 
curried lamb from the hydropom 
farm and the frozen food lockers. 
Ob either side of Captain Pinkma^^^ 
sat O. O. Circe Smith, of th^m 
lamented Fawcett expedition, and 
First Officer Ynohp of the extinc 
Martian Space Navy. 

"If you Terrestrians came to Mar 
over one hundred years ago," 
Ynohp was saying, in a clear an 
metallic voice that came from th 
lingoalter on his chest — a tin 
box which could be set to change 
any of nine thousand spoken Ian 
guages into any one of the others 
"and at that time my people had 
lost the secrets of space trave' 
for approximaitely four thousan 



14 



IMAGINATION 



years, this means that I have been 
reclining on a planetoid here for at 
least 4,100 years. The probability is 
that it has been much longer. Unfortunately my time recorder has 
long since become inoperative." 

He extended one of his four 
rib appendages and picked up a 
piece of carrot. "Naturally I was ' 
in a cataleptic state," he went 
on. "As you may know, in my race 
that means that all body processes 
are suspei. . i in toto. There is ho 
growth and no decay. Moth and 
rust do not corrupt, you might put 
it." 

Pink frowned momentarily. 
There was a false note somewhere, 
but he couldn't put his finger on 
it. He tried to remember all he 
could about the dying race of 
Martians. What Ynohp was' saying was correct, as nearly as he 
could recall, but ... he shrugged. 
My God! he thought, this critter's over four thousand years old! 

Well, Circe's about forty-five. 

The hell she is. She's twentyseven, which was her age when 
her ship was wrecked, plus about 
one actual year of life which equals 
the eighteen she was lost in the 
Slug jet. Twenty-eight, then, really. 
I'm thirty-one. Not a bad combination. 

Hey, boy, you're a confirmed 
bachelor, remember? 

He chuckled. Who says so? He 



took a look at Circe. The prettiest 
spaceman who evef came my way, 
he said to himself happily. 

The dinner broke up. Space 
etiquette demanded that he escort 
the Martian to his stateroom first, 
for the four-armed little gray man 
was senior to a, mere organicus officer; when he returned to the 
mess hall, he found that Joe Silver 
had whisked Circe away to show 
her the new improvements in space 
drives and other technical details. 

"At least," said Bill Calico, "he 
said he was going to." 

Pink Went off to talk to Jerry, 
who was a lousy substitute for a 
beautiful girl. 

He found his O. O. tinkering with 
the life-scanner. 

"Something wrong," Jerry said 
through his teeth. He was a slim 
young man — Pink, who Stood 
six-three and hefted in at two hundred, would have made two of Jerry 
— and his normally joyous expression was now writhed into a frown. 
"The red light's not on, but the 
scanner's not working." 

"How d'you know?" 

"Had a hunch. Don't ask me 
why — unless it's that the Martian makes me suspicious. Anyway, 
I tested the scanner;^ turned it 
inside and aimed it all over the 
ship. Nothing doing. No Ufe in 
here, according to it. So something's 
the matter with it, and I^m damned 



THE GIANTS FROM OUTER SPACE 



IS 




if I can figure what." • 

Pink said, "That means what?" 

"Means that if Fawcett or any 
of his men are out there, we won't 
know it. We could flash right by 
them, or through 'em for t^at matter, and never know it." 

'^Nothing more serious, though?" 

"That's bad enough, isn't it?" 
Jerry asked him. 

"Sure, sure." Pink shook himself. "I feel — I gu^ss wary is the 
word." Jerry looked a question. 
-"Yeah," said Binkham uncoqifortably, "it's the Martian. A nice 
guy and all, but he makes me 
wonder." 

"Four thousand years plus," nodded Jerry. 

"No, not that. I think that's 
possible. It's something else, son." 

"What?" 

Pink said slowly, futilely, "I 
don't know." He patted the O.O.'s 
shoulder. "Keep at it, Jerry." He 
went out and walked down the 
long ramp to the astrolab. Daley 
was there. "How's it going?" Pink 
asked him. 

"We aren't moving," said the 
lieutenant. 

"I know. I told Kinkare to put 
her into the same orbit as the asteroid belt. We want to stay in the 
same relation to the planetoids till 
we decide where to look for Fawcett." 

"I know you issued those orders, 



Pink. I meant we aren't in the orbit. We're hanging in space, and 
the dang asteroids are shooting past 
us." Daley flipped on his great 
banks of scanners. "See?" Bands 
of light were tiny balls of inert 
matter, flashing by an obviously 
stationary Elephant's Child, 

Pink jumped for the intercom. 
"No use," said Daley. "It's dead. 
I sent Calico for Randy Kinkare," 
They looked at each other. "I 
think it's Ynohp," said Daley. 

Pinkham took out a pad and 
pencil. Without saying anything, 
without admitting to himself that 
he agreed with his officer, he put 
down a number of figures. Then 
be said, "I left Ynohp just fourteen 
minutes ago in his stateroom. IVe 
put down the distances he'd have 
to travel to reach all . the things 
that have gone wrong since then. 
He could have done it — if he was 
invisible, and could move at the 
rate of two hundred feet per second." 

"Maybe he can.'^ ' 

"You know Martians Iiave the 
same^ rate of speed, roughly speaking, as Terrestrians." 

"And if Ynol^ isn't a Martian 
at all?" 

"Washington, did ^ovt ever see 
a Martian?" 
"Yeah." 

"Could anything in the universe 
make itself look like a four-foot


i6 



IMAGINATION 



tall, four-armed, slate-gray man 
with pink eyes?" 

''I don't know," ' said Daley. 
"Maybe tiere's SOTiething in System Ninety that can. Hypnotism, 
matter transference,., fluidity or a 
lot of other facts could explain 
it." 

Kinkare and Bill Calico came in 
on the rum. 

Their news didn't surprise Pink 
greatly. 

The space drive was out of commission. 
They were adrift in the wid. 

CHAPTER IV 

npH® mtercom, the space drive, 
the life-scanner. So far apart 
that one man couldn't have put 
them out of whack. No one connected in any way with the others. 
Ynohp snoring gently in his stateroom. Pinkham, Dafey, Silver^ 
Kinkare, Jerry Jones, Calico, and 
the girl, all gathered in the Captain's quarters, tense,, baffkd, and 
all talking at once. 

And out of the hubbub, one clear 
sweet voice saying something that 
didn't make sense and yet electrified Pink as if he'd put his hand 
on a lighted cigar . . . 

"Maybe it's the space giants?^' 
"Shut upl" bawled Pinkham. 
he officers turnrf toward him, 
brows lifting, mouths stiH open. 



"Now," he- said quietly, "Circe 
— Miss Smith what did you 
say?" . . 

"Space giants," she repeated 
don't think they exist, but I certainly saw something." 

"Give it to us slow," said Diey. 

'Well, a couple of times while I 
was anchored to the asteroid, 
watching tri-di movies, I had the 
impression that something enormous was floating just beyond niy 
face plate, watching me. Of course 
I was slowed down. «o-. far that it 
must have taken me an bout to 
register the fact, and another lour 
or two to flick my eyes up a'^^Y 
from the movies. What was a second to me was at least that long. 
But just once I got a clear viet of 
something incredible. It vanished almost at once." 

"What was it?" 

"A very big man, naked, bald, 
with eyes like fires. That's the 
only way I can describe him. He 
looked humanoid, except he v^ras 
so big." 

"How big?" 

"I can't tell and hate to make 
a guess — but at least a thousand 
feet. Of course I hadn't anything 
to compare him with." 

"Wait a minute," said Randy 
Kinkare, the assistant pilot, yoice 
reeking with unb^ef. "How coi^ld 
you see through an opaque faxe 
plate?" 



Lnrj uri-ars io ris.uivi uuiUrK orAUii 



17 



"It^s not opaque/' said Joe. 
Silver officiously. ^'It's transliiceat 
from without md traihspareiit from 
within. I took a look at it this 
afternoon." 

"Space giants," groaned someoi^. ^^Oh, Lord!'' 

"We can't discount it," said 
Pink, realizing that he was doing 
just that, but refusing to disbelieve Circe. Illusion? Not a lie, 
surely? ^^She wasn't drugged, after 
all. She was in full control of 
senses that were merely slowed 
down." 

There was a discomfortable 



Intercom, space drive, life-scan-ner. Maybe other machinery by 
this time. Sabotage in such a clever 
way that no one of the highly skilled officers and technicians could 
discover how it was done, what was 
wrong. Space giants? Ah, come*^^, 
Fink! 

Ynohp. Something wrong with 
him, some flaw in his looks? No, 
he was Martian in every oversize 
pore. Some anajchronism? 

Hey! Anachronism. Pink's mind 
fished up tfee dictionary definition. 
An error in chronology by which 
events are misplaced in regard to 
each other .... 
He had it. 
He got to his feet, motioned 
Jerry and Wash Daley to go with 
him. They congregated outside the 



door, as further talk broke out inside his quarters. He said urgently. Remember what Ynohp said 
about his cataleptic state? 'Moth 
and rust do not corrupt.' He said 
it as if it were a quotation." 

^*It is," said Daley. "More or 
less word for word it's from the 
King James version of the Bible." 

"Dated, if I remember correctly, 
about 1 61 1 A.D.?" 

"Yes." 

"At which date the Martians 
had been without space flight for 
about 3,600 years. At which date, 
further, Ynohp claims to have been 
sitting on an asteroid for about 
4,000-plus years." 

"Coincidence?" asked Jerry. 

Pink asked, "Do you think so?" 

<^Hell," said Jerry, "no." 

"Let's go look at his space suit," 
said Daley urgently. They ran 
down the corridor, shoving for the 
lead. 

Ten minutes later they sat back 
on their heels and stared at the interior of the suit. 

Rust had corrupted here, or at 
any rate decay; the Martian steel, 
ancient and harder than any known 
metal, was worn to a papery shell, 
and in many places tiny holes had 
eroded clear through the suit. 

"No man or Martian or anything 
I know except the space-eating 
bacteria of Pallas could have lived 
in that suit, - cataleptic state or 



i8 



IMAGINATION 



not." Pink looked around at his 
friends. ^Wkat in the name of 
heaven have we brought into the 
ship?'' 

Then the threje were racing for 
the '^Martian's" stateroom. They 
burst in, and found that now. it was 
empty of life. 

They stood, indecisive, just outside. Pinkham's gaze went to the 
door, on which, as was the custom, a hastily-printed card had 
been placed with the officer's name 
upon it. He read it. Then he bUnked. 

"Look," he said, gesturing. 
"What about it?" 
The card blared its secret, its 
pun, at them. 
Y N O H P. 

"Read it backwards," said Pinkham . . • " 

■« 

CHAPTER V 

4 C "^ONE of you thought to look 

^ at the Martian spacesuit 
when we'd removed it?'' asked Pink. 

The others shook their heads. They 
were all in his quarters again. 

"Neither did you, Captain," 
said Joe Silver. "You were as busy 
looking at the Martian as we 



were. 

a 



True enough," admitted Pinkham. "Well, the thing to do first 
is radio the Diogenes and the Cottabus to stand by for trouble." He 



lit a cigarette, "If the radio hasn't 
been tampered with," he said."Silver, go tell Sparks to start 
sending to them. Diogenes is down 
by Planet Five, and Cottabus heading for Four. Tell them to look for 
us somewhere in the planetoid orbit. They'll have to come in on 
the radio beam. I don't suppose 
we can expect them for a day." Joe 
Silver gave Circe's arm an encouraging squeeze — they'd got 
on together pretty damn fast — 
and started out. "And instruct 
them not to pick up anybody, off 
asteroids or planets or out of the 
ether. I don't care if they see their 
grandmothers floating outside a 
spaceport." 

The thought of his armada joining him made Pink feel more at 
ease. No sense to that, of course, 
but three ships are better than 
one, if only for moral support. 
'^Daley," he said then, "lower the 
Mutiny Gates." 

"You think it's wise?" 

"If I didn't, I wouldn't do it," 
he snapped. It would be the first 
time that a mutiny gate had been 
used in more than forty years. All 
the large ships were equipped with 
them, great plastikoid barriers 
which operated from the captain's 
room, sealing off the officer's sector from the rest of the ship. They 
had been made standard equipment 
in the old days, before screenings 



THE GIANTS FROM OUTER SPACE 



19 



became really effective and the 
danger of psychopathic trouble in 
the crew grew negligible. Now they 
were of- theoretical use in case of 
boarding by alien life, or of damage to a large segment of the hull 
. . . but they had never actually 
been brought into, play in Pinkham's lifetime. "Drop 'em/' ,he repeated. ^ • 

Daley pulled open a drawer, tugged at an unused switch, which 
creaked protestingly ; then the 
brief alarm clang that heralded 
the fall of the forty gates sounded 
in the distance. ^'If he's beyond 
the gates/' the senior lieutenant 
said heavily, "the crew may be done 
for." 

"No more than if the gates were 
up," Pink told him impatiently. 

"You're projecting," said Daley. 
"How do we know the ^nature of 
the beast? He may mop 'em up in 
a fit of pique at being shut out 
there," ' 

"The chances are he's oil our 
side of the walls," said Bill Calico. 
"Nothing out there of much importance to him. The hydroponics 
farm, history room, library, and so 



on. 



"We don't know what's important to him," said, Daley. "We 
don't know what in blazes he wants 
aboard. We don't know a doggone 
thing!" 

Silver returned. "I heard the mu


tiny gates go," he said questioning
"Are you all armed?" asked 
Pink. They nodded. "Then let's 
sweep the place," he said, glancing' 
from one grim face to another. 
, "Pick up the other officers as we 
go, and make a chain of inspection that' he can't bust through. 
We'll corner him sooner or later. 
Then we'll see if atomic pistols 
will settle his hash." He looked at 
Circe. "You'd better stay here/' he 
said. 

"I agree," said Randy Kinkare 
suddenly. "And you'd best lock her 
in — from the outside." 

"Why?" blazed the girl. 
• "We picked you up on an asteroid too," said the assistant pilot. 

Pink, restraining himself from 
bashing Kinkare in the nose, said 
reluctantly, "You're right. We 
can't trust any stranger till we find 
out what's going on. Sorry, Circe." 

"I suppose you're right." She sat 
down, a little flushed, eyes snapping. "Have I the right to ask for 
protection? I'm just as unsafe as 
you are, whether you believe me 
or not. Please leave Lieutenant 
Silver to guard me." 

He couldn't refuse. He nodded 
curtly to Joe Silver, who looked toe 
damn smug for words. So they'd 
paired off already? So much for 
his quick dream of marrying a 
^acegirl . . • 



IMAGINATION 



20 

It had never happ^ed to him 
before, though, and it was a hard 
dr^am to give up, all the more so 
for its abrupt flowering in a heart 
that heretofore had held nothing 
it love for the sileiice of the 
spaceways. John Pinkham, rugged, 
handsome, all a woman could 
want, had been dedicated to his 
profession since he was five; and 
many a wench had found that out 
to her disappointment. Now . . * 
oh, weS. Maybe therie wasn't mma 
for space and a girl in his heart, 
after all. And maybe she wasn't 
hat she seemed. 

He led thmk into tiie corritor 
and locked the^ quarters behind 
him. 

Around the first bend and up 
€te first mmp they fwatid Second 
Watch Officer Wright. They knew 
Mm by his chubby build and his 
ttniform. They couldn't reco^hse 
Ms head, efven when they found it 
three minutes later. 
CHAPTER VI 

'T^HEY gathered in Sparks' radio 
^ room. That was due to the 
simple fact that, a^kie from themselves, only Sparks was alive on 
this side of the mutiny gates. The 
ther office mme seatte'-ad ~ in 
' e grisly sen-se of the word 
all over the place. 
*^Seven of us^ if Silver's ^fl 



alive," said Daley. "Eight with the 
girl. Why us? He could easily have 
attacked us in a body." Five of 
the dead officers had been found 
in a heap, just-used pistols in their 
rigid hands. Atomic force was obviously useless against the thing 
from the asteroid. 

Pink said, fighting nausea, "All 
the senior offters are alive. We 
can run the Elephants Child without the eleven who died. Maybe 
that's why. Maybe we have to be 
preserved to carry this monster 
wherever he wants to go." 

"Logical," said Jerry. "He'll 
have to be pfetty persuasive, 
'though. I hope he knows that." 

Sparks said, "The radio's working. I had an answer from the Cotta^sMhsii she's heading this way. 
Diogenes hasn't replied; she must 
be further off." 

"Evidently he doesn't caire if the 
radio works/' said Calico. 

"Or else he wants the whole 
armada assembled," added. Daley. 

"I ccmW use a drink," blurted 
Kinkare. "You got anything in 
this place, Sparks?" 

"Gin m the shelf," said_the 
radioman, pointing. 

Kinkare picked up the bottle. 
"You always- leave the cap off?" 

"No! Somebody's been at it." 

^^Where is he?" asked Pink in 
a whisper. 

"What, Captain?" Kinkare 



THE GIANTS FE 

stopped the bottle halfway to his 
lips. 

^'Where the devil is the brute? 
We combed the place. He can't 
have got 'through the mutiny gates. 
He can't have slipped past our 
chain. Where the hell is he?" 

"Maybe disguised as one of us/' 
said Daley slowly. ''He isn't a Martian, but he imitated one to the 
last pore. Why couldn't be imitate us?" 

"Well, Fm me," said Kinkare, 
and put the bottle to his mouth. 
Then he dropped it, screeching. 
Pinkham stared at him and saw 
his upper lip turned violent, hideous 
scarlet. Blood began to drip to 
the rug. The skin and flesh of his 
lip had dissolved as though sprayed with acid. 

Kinkare fell to his knees, covering his face with both arms. The 
others sprang to help him. Sparks 
reaching for the medicine chest; 
but Pink snatched up the gin bottle. What the hell? Acid? Or — 

From the square spout poured a 
gush of smoke, writhing sinuous 
in the bright indirect light of the 
small room; it coalesced, clotted 
into a body. Impossible, brain-boggling, an uiireaJ fantasy amid the 
most concrete achievements of man, 
£he thing swelled into solidity before the. Captain's staring eyes. 

He was eight feet tall, three 
broad; his eyes were brilliant ver


M OUTER SPACE 21 

milion^ his swollen head was eggbald, and the expression on his 
coarse, features was at once lecherous, evil, savage and cunning. He 
was stark naked, completely humanoid. And he had come out of 
the bottle. 

A voice boomed from him like 
a vocalizing cannon. "I object to 
anyone trying to drink me!" he 
roare(^ at them. 

In the reeling chaos of all his 
beliefs gone wild, Pinkham had 
one sane thought, and yelled it as 
fast and short as he could. "Don't 
shoot! For God's sake, don't 
shoot!" Then, as Calico and Jerry 
held their pistols partly raised, he 
said urgently, 'We'll only blast 
each other. Remember this thing's 
invulnerable." 

The pistols were bolstered with 
reluctance. The five pale men — 
Kinkare still thrashed in agony on 
the floor — gaped at the apparition, which said, "I am Ynohp the 
Martian." Gargantuan laughter 
rocked him. "I am your god, Earthmen. Bow down 4o mel" 

^^Damfido," said Jerry, which 
was evidently all he could manage 
to get out of "Damned if I do." 

"Drop -your wee^oais m fhe 
floor," said the being. 

Pink drew his gun; casually he 
sighted on the great head above 
hmi,and risked one shot, which had 
all the effect of a sunbeam; then 



22 



IMAGINATION 



he let the pistol fall. The others 
discarded theirs. The naked crejature reached out a foot and herded the weapons into a corner. '^You 
can't hurt me with them," he said, 
"but you might try suicide, and I 
need you. Take heart, mortals," 
he said, laughing, "you may get 
out alive!" 

Then he dwindled and his lines 
blurred into ephemera and he slid 
out through the door, which was 
open perhaps an inch. • 

CHAPTER VII 

4 4T>UT by all that's holy," said 
^ Daley (it was an hour later, 
and the eight were gathered in 
the control room, Kinkare now 
bandaged and relieved of pain, but 
unable to speak), "if he's a brainpicker, and got his lingo out of 
our minds, who did he get ^take 
heart niortals' from?" The lieutenant glanced at Pinkham. "It may 
seem little, but it's minutiae that 
will give us clues to his nature, 
and therefore how to fight him. 
Take heart, mortals, after all. Who 
talks like that?" 

"You're right," said Pink wearily. 
"It's little things we've got to look 
for. -Like, evidently, gin bottles." 

"Item," said Jerry, who was eating a sandwich. "He's composed of 
something alien to any life we know. 
Gas? I doubt it. Atomic shqpk 



would disseminate gas. Are his molecules loose and do they edge aside 
for obstacles, compress together 
when he wants to shrink, and so 
on? Possible. But anyhow, he's different — and so faf as we know, 
invulnerable." 

^^How did he gimmick the guns?" 
asked Calico, a note of desperation 
in his voice. "We picked them up 
as soon as he'd gone, and they 
wouldn't fire." 

"Same way he gimmicked the intercom, the life-scanner, the space 
drive. Known hereafter as Unknown Method One." 

"Another item," went on Jerry. 
^He talks English without using 
a lingoalter. Thus, probably, he's 
telepathic, 'f ake heart mortals' he 
might have grubbed out of somebody's subconscious." * 

"It adds up to this," said Pink. 
"We're helpless against him. Granting this, I say let's go get him." 

It made no sense, it was the gesture of fools in love with death or 
of madmen battling their own futility; but every officer there shout^ed, "Right!" Except for Joe Silver. 

"I say, sit tight and wait," he 
said. "Something will happen. 
There's no use committing suicide." 

"If he wants us alive, and we 
can't fight him, I think we're better 
off dead," said Jerry through his 
teeth. 

"Hell, Where there's life there's 



THE GIANTS FR 

hope." 

"I suppose ypti're right," said 
Pink slowly. His muscles ached, 
his hands grasped ceaselessly at the 
'air; he was a maii of action, his 
desire for combat throttled by incapability. ^'Twenty-some hours before the other ships get here. If 
our deductions are on the beam, 
he won^t do anything till then. He 
'"^wants the whole armada." 

Then, with a snarl of static, the 
intercom came to life. 

At first they heard a jumble of 
voices. ^What's wrong?" "Nothing 
works . . ." "Are all the officers 
dead?" It was the crew, beyond the 
barriers of the mutiny gates, evidently trying to get into communication. Over and over one voice 
s,aid, "Hello, Captain Pinkham. 
Come in. Captain Pinkham." 

Pink took two strides and flipped 
the switch of the visiograph. Tuning it first to one crew station and 
then another, he told them succinctly what had happened. "Don't 
panic, for God's sake. The mutiny 
gates are for your protection. If 
they work, you n^ay be able to do 
something later, regardless of what 
happens to us." 

npHEIR somber faces looked out 
of the screen at him. "Let us 
in, Captain," pleaded one big repairman. "We'll mob the critter." 
"No use, Jackson. Stand by." He 



>M OUTER SPACE 23 

turned the dial of the visiograph 
into the officers'" section, scanned 
one room after another. No alien 
being appeared. "I wonder if he's 
in here with us?" said Pink halfaloud. 

Jerry came to him. "I have an 
idea," he said quietly. Then he 
whispered at length into Pinkham's 
ear. 

"It won't work. He knows what 
he's doing." . 

"How do we know that? If he 
needs us, he's ignorant of spaceships. Look at the intercom — he 
turned it off, by some means, then 
turned it on when he iound out 
what it was. The space drive must 
have been easy to guess at; likewise the life-scanner. But the intercom's a lot of complex machinery 
that only adds up to a televisiontelephone communication system. 
However he snarls the stuff , it's instantaneous and simple for him to 
do. I think he just took a crack 
at everything that looked important. Now he's experimenting, 
learning the ship, finding out what 
he threw out of joint. Obviously he 
doesn't give a damOr if we talk to 
the crew!" 

"You could be right.'* 

"So if I do what I want to, it'll 
confuse hell out of him. It may give 
us an advantage. And we'll certainly learn something." 

"It's worth a try." Pink looked at 



24 IMAUl 

Jerry, his closest friend. "I'll send 
Silver to do it/' he said. 

Jerry shook his lean head. ^^This 
is my baby, Pink." Then he opened the door and went out, closing 
it behind him. 

Pinkham said levelly, ^^Daley, 
come here." He whispered the plan 
into his lieutenant's ear. Daky said 
^admiringly, ^^Good deal. And I 
think that's sense — he can't know 
much about the ship. I'll bet he 
was hiding inr-that bottle, casing 
Sparks's equipment and learning 
how to operate it. The quick look 
he got at the rest of us on our jobs 
before he started playing hob must 
have given him the barest, scantiest idea of things. So Jerry's notion could work." 

"Or it could blow up," said Pink 
dismally.' "Go tell the others. 
Whisper it, in case our guest is in 
here." He struggled briefly with 
his deepest fedings. "Don't tell 
Circe. We can't be sure of her yet." 

"Roger." I^aley left him alone 
at the intercom. Pinkham set the 
dial to show the large room toward 
which Jerry was making his way . . . 

Somewhere beyond their ken, the 
incredible beast from the void made 
another decision, or tried another 
experiment; and the life-scanner 
flickered into working order again. 
Joe Silver saw it first. Its screen 
blinked, then its alarm buttons 
glowed vividly. Without the ship,. 



at a vast distance but approaching 
rapidly, were an untold^ number 
of organic entities, life-sources that 
reacted upon the scanner like approaching aircraft on a radar set. 
They could be spaceships, slugjet suits, or anything that contained 
the intangible thing called life. And 
the sister ships of the Elephant's 
Child were still too far away to 
register. 0' 
"Great Jupiter! bellowed Joe 
Silver, pointing. "What now?" 

CHAPTER VIII ■ 

r 

O. Jerry Jones cxegi along 
the last ramp. Why the 
devil was he skuilking like this? 
Habit, he grinned ruefully to himself; the habit of primitive man 
who crouched and slunk in the 
presence of danger, no matter what 
kind. 

And the old preservation instinct 
was also giving him all sorts of reasons to knock this silly business 
off, and go back to the protection, 
however illusory, of the control 
room. For instance, said the sly instinct, if this alien is telepathic, 
as you so neatly proved to yourself, 
then doesn't he know all that you 
and your pals know about a spaceship? 

Shut up, Jerry told himself. I 
was wrong. He can't be telepathic, 
or he wouldn't bother to keep us 



alive after he's combed our brains. 
^Couldn't lie have some physical 
^ for you all?" said the instinct. 
Get thee behind me, Satan, he 
growled in his mind. 

He opened the door of the room 
be was seeking. 

Where to start? One wall was 
anked with books; never mind 
them. Another wall was covered 
with strange-looking projections, 
tubes and spouts and wheels and 
levers^ behind a long table of 
plastikoid. There? Good enough. 

He had a momentary pang as he 
picked up a spanner from the rack 
of tools by the door ... 

Then he was across the room 
and smashing wildly at levers, 
spouts, wall tanks, faucets; beating metal into scrap, crushing 
shining aluminum to scarred uselessness; he did not rest his arm 
until the whole wall was a ruin of 
beaten metal and broken glass. 
Then he turned ,his attention to 
the third wall. 

Here was a giant turntable, rack 
on rack of shellacked alloy discs, 
mysterious-appearing charts and 
cabalistic signs. These he wrecked as methodically and ruthlessly 
as he had the first, but now there 
were tears gKstening in his eyes. 
He ended the destruction with a 
moan of sorrow. 

He paused to snap on the intercom. Pink's worry-lined face ap


S 

peared. "How'm I doing?" Jerry 
asked his captain. 

"Great so far. Calico is crying 
like a child." 

"I have news for ymi," Jerry 
said. "So am I." Then he turned to 
the last wall. Before it spread a 
long arjay of niechanical devices: 
large boxes on ^ndly legs, with 
glassed tops and brilliant colors 
splashed across .their surfaces; taller, narrower cases with crooked levers and viewplates on which were 
small designs and words. There was 
a kind of double, cage with tiny 
cubes therein. There were great 
wheels with many numbers. Almost 
all were attached to the wall by 
electric cords, though some were entirely mechanical and others ran on 
self-generated power. Jerry began 
at one end and passed down the 
line, shattering glass and snapping wooden legs with his spanner. 

He had almost finished when the 
door burst open and the tall humanoid form of the stranger appeared. A blast of rage almost lifted 
Jerry off his feet. The being came 
at him, its motion a flowing tigerish pounce. .The spanner was 
twitched from his hand flung acrossi 
the room. He backed against the 
wall, bloating with fear in spite of 
himself. The creature swelled above 
him. 

"Whoreson knave!" it bawled 
angrily. "What are you doing?" 



26 



IMAGINATION 



"Making d-d-damn sure you 
don't take the ship anywhere," 
said Jerry, croaking a little. "Now 
t-try and run it! '^ 

He was suddenly lifted off his 
feet and dangled helplessly a yard 
off the floor. "Fix them," snarled 
the alien thing into his face. He 
had time to realize that its grip 
was extremely powerful, whatever 
its molecules and atoms might be 
made of. "Reconstruct them, or you 
die." 

"Don't be an idiot," Jerry told 
it, making up his mind- that he was 
as good as dead and might as well 
go out like a man. "There isn't a 
single spare part aboard for any of 
these-devices." He managed a sick 
grin. "If you're so smart, you know 
I'm telling the truth." 

Pinkham called from the screen 
of the intercom. "That's true, 
whatever-you-are. Those things are 
useless to you now." 

The alien took Jerry by the 
chest, wrapping one hand around 
his back to do it; slowly it exerted 
pressure, and Jerry realized that it 
muM have elongated the hand enormously to encompass him so. He 
also knew , that his rib cage would 
shortly collapse. He shrieked. 

Then Circe, the girl from the 
asteroid, was gazing from the 
screen, horrified. "No!" she screamed at the being. "You can't kill 
him for only wrecking the — " 



"Shut up!" squealed Jerry. 
"The recreation room!" she 
finished. 

Abruptly he was dropped to the 
floor, where he lay gasping, massaging his bruised sides. The thing 
above him said, "Recreation 
room?" 

"Sure. The soda fountain, the 
phonograph, and the pinball machines and games." 

Then Pinkham had encircled her 
throat with one arm, clamped his 
other hand on her mouth, and 
dragged her back. But the damage 
was done. : 

The alien gave another of those 
mirthless peals of bull's laughter. 
"Clever," he said, "Oh, clever little man." Then he plucked Jerry 
off the floor once more. 

Pm going to die now • . . 

The brute set him on his feet, 
twisted him toward the door, and 
gave him a brisk, forceful pat on 
the backside that sent him staggering. He gained his balance and 
ran into the. corridor. It was more 
humiliating than had he been 
slain. 

CHAPTER IX 

44Tt didn't work, but it taught us 
a few things." 
"You're right. It taught us that 
this bitch can't be trusted. Either she's in league with it, a sister 



THE GIANTS FRC 

or brother of it, or else she's so 
stupid that she's a menace to our 
survival." 

^*0h, you blithering jackass!" 
said Circle indignantly to her fellow organicus officer. "How could 
I guess what your plan was? Nobody told me. All I knew was that 
you were going to be murdered for 
doing a perfectly harmless — " 

"She's right," said Joe Silver, 
"We ought to have told her." 

"Shut up," said Pinkham savagely. "Any more of that and 111 
figure she's corrupted you or addled your brains, and I'll toss you 
into the brig. Silver." 

. "You try it you pigsqueak," 
shouted Silver, who measured half 
an inch over Pink's six-foot-three. 
"Captain or not, this is a grade 
A emergency and we're all needed. 
-I'll pull the Mars Convention on 
you if you try to shut me up.'' 

"He's right," said Daley to the captain. "Mars Convention says 
that in a grade A emergency any 
officer above Second Watch is 
equal to the captain or conmiander, Pink." Then he turned to 
Silver, grinned, and lashing out 
with a hand the size of a spaniel, 
caught his under-lieutenant on the 
ear. It knocked Silver sprawling. 
"That's for slanging at your superiors," he said quietly. "And the 
Mars Convention says I can do 
that:' 



M OUTER SPACE 27 

Silver got up and blinked. He 
seemed dazed and for the first time 
in his space life, uncertain of himself. He looked at the others and 
recognized himself as a minority 
here. "Okay," he said, "okay, I'm 
outvoted. But I say the girl is 
only suspect, by no means convicted of anything but ignorance of 
the plan." 

^ Kinkare, unable to speak through 
his bandaged mouth, nodded 
strongly. Circe glared defiance at 
Pinkham. "Next time, for God's 
sake tell me what you have in 
mirrd," she said. "Not that I'^d 
let you sacrifice poor Jerry, anyway." 

"Women," said Jerry. "Women 
on a ship. Jonahs. Sentimental imbeciles." 

"I'll knock your teeth down your 
scrawny throat," began. Joe Silver, 
and "Quiet!" roared Pinkham. 
"We're quarreling like kids. What's 
to be done now!" ^ 

"I was saying it taught us a 
few things," said Daley. "Let's figure them out. The thing's evidently not telepathic. It can't run a 
spaceship, or it wouldn't have been 
so worked up over the ruin of the 
soda fountain, which must have 
looked pretty vital to its inexperienced eyes. It's definitely tangible, 
for it picked Jerry up." 

"It also murdered eleven men," 
said Pink. "That's tangible en


28 IMAGI 

ough too." 

''It's damned intelligenl, for it 
must have spotted Jerry on the 
intercom, which means it was 
working it. It also speaks a veryfunny breed of English. 'Whoreson 
knave/ for example. Nobody hew 
ever called anyone that." 

"Whoreson knave is Shakespearean," said Jerry. 

"And, to finish what I've deduced, the monster is as strong as 
a couple of men, at least." He 
grinned at Jerry. "Not that you 
needed me to deduce that.^' 

Randy Kinkare was staring at 
the life-scanner screen. Now he beat 
a tattoo on the arm of his chair, 
pointed so that they all looked. The 
flecks of light that indicated organic life had thronged in toward 
the ship; not so numerous as the 
stars, they Were still too many to 
count. One object on the screen 
was large now, large enough to be 
identified. It approached the ship 
at a slow but steady rate, and they 
gasped as they saw it was another 
of the human-like figures. 

"His brothers," said Pinkham. 
"That must be their natural form, 
then." 

It grew and grew. It seemed it 
must now be touching the scanner's outside cell; but no, it grew 
even greater. At last it could not be 
seen in its entirety, tihen only its 
face showed. It was a hideous face. 



twisted with sardonic malice. The 
face grew. When it stopped, only 
one enormous eye filled the screen* 

Jerry cleared his throat. "Do you 
know what that means?" he asked. 
"It means that, at a conservative 
estimate, the critter is — " 

"Go on," said Daley impatiently, when Jerry's silence had lengthened intolerably* 

"It must be at least one thousand feet tall," said the O. O. 

There was a long, unbroken stillness, a hush of horror and disbelief in the control rocwn. 

Finally Circe said slowly, "I 
think I'm going to faint." 

And she did. 

CHAPTER X 

'T^HE long-unused armaments 
room was half the width of 
the ship away. They went toward 
at silently, seven men and a girl, 
praying that their visitor would not 
meet them or spot their furtive 
advance on the intercom. They 
slunk into the gunroom and Pinky 
coming last, ran the heavy emergency bolt across the door behind 
him. 

The armaments officer was dead, 
of course. Pink said quietly, "Who 
knows the principles of these weapc^s?" Daley and Joe Silver raised 
their hands. "Activate the viewers, 
then." 



THE GIANTS FROM OUTER SPACE 



9 I 



Two walls darkened and became 
the silver-flecked night of space; 
it was as if they had become snd-^ 
denly transparent. Half a dozen 
of the void-giants showed near the 
Elephant's Child, hovering or slowly drifting around the bow of the 
ship. 

*'Now/' said the captain, "if 
only our friend in the bottk has left 
us our guns — train 'em on those 
monstrosities and fire every forward battery simultaneously." 

The lieutenarits, seated in foamcfiairs behind the double banks of 
the gun controls, manipulated instruments that were very like the 
si^ts on common atom-pistols. 
Thin blue lines moved across the 
reflected picture of the space beyond the ship's nose, steadied and 
centered oil the nearest giants. 
Silver glanced at Daley, who said, 
"Count o' three, Joe." 

Every man leaned forward, scowling at the screens. The nearest 
space-soarer squinted full in their 
faces, as though he could actually 
see them as they were scanning 
him. Coincidence, but — ■ Pink 
shuddered. 

"One," said Daley. "Two." 

The Elephant's; Child rocked 
wildly up and back as thirty platinum *guns, the heaviest type in 
the knewn universe, fired their 
hell-projectiles — great shells whose 
inconceivable destructive power was 





released by the splitting of the 
curium atom. In flight, the sh 
would have absorbed the treme 
dous recoil automatically; stationary as she was, it bucked her over 
like a blown leaf* 

The shells, set to explode at th 
very closest range that safety permitted, flashed upon the twin M 
screens like bursting suns. Humai|(| 
eyes looking directly at such a 
bombardment would have crisped in 
their sockets; even on the screei 
their glare was too bright for cm 
fort. 

The men blinked, peered sharply 
for signs of the ef fect op the giants 

Pink felt disappointment, 
biting and gut-curdling that he 
nearly vomited. For at first the 
shells seemed^ to have had littl 
effect except to hurl the giants bacl 
a mile or so from the ship. Then, 
as they slowly surged forward toward it again, be saw that they ha; 
not escaped whole. 

One lacked an arm; another had 
half his head blown away; a third 
drifted in without the if wer halfjl 
of his torso. The expressions oMJ 
their bronze-yellow faces were not 
of pain, however^ but only of rag
"Hey!" bellowed Calico. " 
nicked 'em up, anyway!" 

"Look again," said Dmley 
rosely, standing from his 
chair. "Look at the head of the far 
left skunk." . 





IMAGINATION 



lit* who had lost half his cranium 
was slowly regenerating it, the brow 
and cheek pressing outward to form 
new firm outlines, a missing eye 
gradually emerging from the bloodless tatters of the old socket. Pink 
said, * Well.'' He took a deep 
breath. ^'Well, that's that. Let's 
all get out and plink at them 
with bean-shooters. It'll do as much 
harm," All the giants were reconstituting their lost parts. 

Now one monster, floating right 
up to the ship, wrapped his fivehundred-feet-long arms around it 
and gave it a shake. It. was as if 
a man had rattled a box full of 
beetles. The officers of the Elephant's Child, who had ridden 
through the bucking of the tremendous explosion, were unprepared 
for this movement, for they had 
risen from their deep seats. They 
sprawled across the room, smashing 
up against the wall with bone-jarring thumps. Pinkham found himself entangled with Circe Smith 
in a pretzel of ar^ms. and legs that 
would mnder other circumstances 
have been ridiculous but pleasurable. Fearing for her safety, he 
grasped her around the waist; she 
yielded to him a moment, then 
struggled back and stood up. Was 
lier face flushed with indignation, 
fright/ or ■ — ? He got to his own feet. 
The giant had released the ship. 
"We are chastened," murmured 



Jerry, feeling a, bruised shin. 

^^And now what?" asked Joe 
Silver. "Ordinary weapons are 
as much use to us as -spitballs." 
He sa-t down. "Let's figure out 
what else to try. Somewhere there's 
an answer." 

They all sat down, Pink said, 
"Remember Wolf 864?" 

"Sure," said Daley, who had 
been on that expedition with Pinkham when they were young cubs 
out of jetschool. "Friendly natives, kind of vegetable-animal life, 
and we murdered half of them unintentionally. We had to get out and 
never go back." ' 

"How?" asked Circe. "How did 
you kill them?" 

"Germs. The common ordinary 
non-toxic germs we carry in our systems all the time. It was a massacre — and of a queer, sweet kind 
of beast. They had no tolerance for 
our microbes." 

"I volunteer to find the alien 
and breathe in his face," said 
Jerry. "Somebody hand me an 
onion," he added. 

The conversation went on. It 
grew aimless to Pink, a bunch of 
boys whistling by a graveyard, 
eight prisoners speculating on their 
escape when they had no real 
knowledge of their jailer., ije fiddled with the intercom, saw that 
the crew had gathered by the mutiny gates and were waiting ten


sely, puny weapons in their hands. 
He spoke a few words of encouraigement to them. 57 men — whom 
he hated to see die. Somehow he 
had to save them. 

It was about half an hour afterwards that he first discovered he 
was breathing too shallowly. 

CHAPTER XI 

4CTX7HAT is it?" asked Circe. 

^ ^ Her lovely face was a 
trifle pallid. "I feel odd — and 
you* all look pale." 

Then it struck Pink. None of the 
others, even Daley, had recognized 
what was happening. He did not 
dare waste a second in telling them. 
He tore the door open and leaped 
into the corridor. 

Deliberately he tried to draw 
as much oxygen into his lungs as 
he could. It was growing rarer every 
instant; but never mind trying to 
conserve it — the life of everyone 
aboard depended on his reaching 
the atmosph^ria. For the air in the 
spaceship was" rapidly degenerating, becoming unbreathable as what 
remained of the good stuff was inhaled and thrown off as useless 
gases ... 

Either the atmospheric system 
had ^gone on the blink by itself, 
he thought, which was a hell of a 
long shot and too much of a coincidence, cr else the alien, experi


menting, had turned it off by accident. 

Maybe the brute didn't need oxygen. Of course he didn't! His 
brothers outside sure didn't have 
any." Then, if He were independent 
of it, but could stand living in it, 
the probabilities were that he didn't 
breathe at all; that his metabolism 
was geared to ignore the elements 
in which he lived. 
• Just possibly he was taking this 
way to kill them off in a particularly fiendish fashion. 

Silently Pink cursed the architect who had designed the Elephant's Child With, the armaments 
room in the bow and the atmospheria back near the crew's sector, a thousand feet of passageways off. Every dooT he flung open 
took another t)it of strength from 
his aching limbs. As he passed a 
mirror, he had a glimpse of his 
face. His face was flushed now, the 
grim-set lips were bluish, his eyes 
seemed to bulge from his head. 

He began breathing through his 
mouth. It may have been imagination, but he thouglxt the air had 
a foul taste, like a sea full of putrid fish. 

Pink fell to his knees. Abruptly 
his strength had waned to almost 
nothing. He was horrified to realize how swiftly the air was going 
bad. He had to get to the system! 
He struggled up, staggered for


3« 

ward like a drunk. His 

pounding wildly a moment before, 
now seemed to be slowing, weakening. 

He found himself singing . . . 

^'Blast off at two, jet down^at 
three 

On the dead dry dusty sphere 

What sort of , a life is this for 
me, 

A veteran rocketeer?'' 

Great God, was he crazy? Singing, shouting the words to that old 
song that Circe had brought back 
to his mind. Using up what 
amounted to his last drops of 
energy and air. God, God, help 
me, he thought wildly; make me 
shut up. But the maddened outer 
part of his brain kept him singing. 

'^I, who have seen the flame* 
dark seas, 

Canals like great raw scars, 

And the ^claret lakes and the 

crimson trees 

In the rich red soil of Mars!'^ 

Then he fell, and this time be 
could not get up. 

He would lie here and die, horribly, gasping for breath where 
there was nothing to breathe biit 
death. The mind that had made 
him sing, that had thought of Circe 
longingly and of what he must do 
to siave her and all his friends, 



IMAGINATION 



that blacked out, -fell into a pit oJ 
ebony walls and ink at the bottom, 
blackness and nathiog left anywhere 



SOMEWHERE deep in his skull, 
some unknown cranny blazed 
with the light of knowledge. He 
had only a few yards to go. He had 
to make it. This knowledge crept 
out and through his body, raised 
cold swollen hands and made them 
grasp at a wall, forced the feet of 
this dead man to scrabble for purchase on the floor of the passage. 
Pinkham knew that he was moving, 
but it was as if he were sitting on 
a distant planet and knowing it; 
there was no realization that this 
was he. Captain Pinkham, clawing 
upward and shoving himself on. He 
looked at himself curiously, rather 
proud and a little contemptuous* 
What a fool, what a damn fool, he* 
thought. 

Here was a door. The half -blind 
thing that was Pink groped for the 
handle, recognizing dimly that if 
this were not the atmospheria^ then 
it was aU over. 

He opened the door and fell at 
full length on the carpet. Instinct 
rolled him over and hauled him to 
his knees, and he said admiringly 
and far away on that planet of 
death, By God, this is a man! 
Through a red haze he saw that he 
was in the first of the two small 



THE GIANTS FROM OUTER SPACE 

CHAPTER XII 



33 



rooms that made up the atmospheria. He lunged forward, falling, 
jerked convulsively upwiird^ plunged down a mile and smashed his 
face into the carpet, felt pain that 
for a moment brought him out of 
jhis stupor. He was making the 
master switch that controlled tJie 
nitrogen-oxygen-ozone-et-cetra that 
poured continuously through the 
great ship wh^ all was well. From 
a great distance he could see that 
the switch was shoved up; only by 
breaking a steel band of superb 
tensility <xmld the alien creature 
have pushed that switch up, for 
Pink carried the key to the band on 
his master ring, hanging at his 
ibelt. It looked like viciousness, 
either of knowledge fh^t this was 
the humans' finish, or of ignorance 
flaring into anger. What a beast , , . 

He gathered himself like a mortally wounded lion. He launched 
his perishing frame at the switch, 
bands clawed to drag it down to the 
normal position. 

He could not feel whethier he 
even touched the wait, lor his 
senses were obliterated.- He lay 
on his face and knew that he would 
not get up again. 

Idly, he wondered whether he 
^ad managed to reach the switch. 

Then the final flame of intelligence winked out, and it was 
night and unrelieved blackness., and 
he fell asleep. 



JERRY blinked. He opened his 
eyes and blinked again. 
IJad Pink made it to the atmospheria? 

He must have, for the air was | 
sweet and normal once more. So 
either Pink or Joe Silver had saved 
(hem. The others had all dropped along the way; he had passed 
Daley's motionless form some 
yards back there — now he looked, 
mid sair the senior lieu tenant sitting up against the wall. 

Jerry rubbed his forehead gingerly. What a headache I 

By the time he maimged to 
stand, shakily, Joe Silver had appeared in front of him. Before 
Jerry could ask questions, the big 
man said hoarsely, "Must have 
been the captain. / passed out before I made the door." He shook 
his own head, which evidently 
ached too. "The blasted door is 
now locked. I can't get In." 

The three of them went toward 
the atmospheria. Calico and Sparks 
following slowly. Before they 
reached it, the door opened and 
the alien thing emerged, stooping 
to clear the lintel. In its treethick arms lay Pinkham, apparently lifeless, his head dangling, 

"Aside, mortals," the beast 
mouthed at them, and added, grotesquely, "goddammit!" They 



34 iiviAUi 

dropped back, it passed them and 
turned a corner and vanished* 
"Wait," said Daley urgently, 
don't follow it yet." He switched 
on the passage intercom screen. 
"We'll spy on it with this. If 
Pink's alive, we mustn't anger the 
brute." 

Tense, they watched the image 
of the stranger as it prowled 
through the ship, carrying their 
chief. It passed Randy Kinkare, 
and they saw him shrink away, a 
noise of terror gurgling in his gullet. The lipless Kinkare had reason to be afraid. 

The .giant took Pinkham into his 
own quarters and laid him on a 
foamcouch. Then it sat down in 
an angle of the wall, and its gruesomely human-like body swelled 
until it occupied much of the free 
space in the cabin. 

"To scare him if he wakes,'^ 
breathed Bill Calico. 

"Isn't it frightful enough?" asked 
Jerry. "I have an idea: if the 
Rabelaisian types outside are at 
their normal size, which seems logical, then this^ one may be uncomfortable, having to go around all 
compressed to eight feet." 

"Could be . . . let's advance," 
said Daley. "We'll wait just outside Pink's door. Then if it tries 
anything — " 

"Yeah?" 

"We'll make a protest," finish


ed Daley. "Somehow, we'll make 
a strong protest." 

They left the screen, a few seconds before' Captain Pinkham 
groaned and opened his eyes. 

The alien regarded him with its 
habitual expression of overpowering slyness. "Why did you nearly die?" it asked. "Was it something I did?" 

When Pink could trust himself 
to speak without gibbering-r-it was 
horrifying to see half his room filled 
by this bronze-yellow balloon of 
evidently solid flesh — ^he said, 
"Naturally it was something you 
did, ydu big' ape. You turned off 
our air." 

"Air?" . It compressed its lips. 
"Ah, I remember air. A substance 
needed on Earth for life. We never understood it." 

"Don't you breathe?" asked 
Pink. "Don't you take any element into your system and mix it 
with your blood and then — oh, you 
haven't any blood." He paused. 
"But don't you need any outside 
element to sustain life?" 

"No. Nor do we eat." 

"But you are organic life?" 

"Of course. A life which you 
cannot understand, I see. A life 
impervious to anything beyond it, 
indestructible and eternal." 

/ think you're lying, said Pink 
to himself. Nothing in the universe is indestructible ... or at 



THE GIANTS FROM OUTER SPACE 



35 



any rate, unalterable. Everything 
has its Achilles heel, even the atom. 

'T^HE monster spoke, half to it^ self. "That, the locked switch 
was the air, then. I thought it 
was the air-lock.'' It 'laughed. 
Pink thought it had a pretty primitive sense of humor. "Not the 

rr-lock, but the air." 
"You wanted to let your friends 
into the ship," accused Pink. The 
||^ beast' nodded. "Didn't you know 
that opening the air-locks without 
sealing off their compression 
rooms would kill all the hum'ans 

roard?" 
"No," it said. "I want you 
alive. Some of you. To teach us 
the working of this rocket." 

"Spaceship," corrected Pink 
without thinking. Then, "Why do 
^you want the ship?" 
Hjlli^ Its eyes glowed fire at him. "To 
preturn to Earth," it hissed. "To 
return to our own planet!" 
"Fo^^r planet!" 

^'As much as yours, mortal.'' It 
leaned forward, obscuring practically all the room for him. "Show 
me how to open the air-locks,", it 
said. * 

"In a swine's eye." 

t"With safety to yourself, naturally," it said impatiently.- "Come, 
show me." 
"Find the machinery yourself. 
Experiment. Knock us all off. 



You'll be stuck out here with a 
ship you can't operate." 

It plucked him off the foamcouch and hurled him against the 
wall, jarring him in every bone. 
"Show me how," it roared. "Thou 
zed, thou cream-faced loon — " 
Shakespeare? wondered Pink — 
"show me the controls!" 

Pink dived behind a stationary 
chair. He drew his useless pistol 
and threw it at the being's face; 
it rebounded to the floor. He 
snatched up a vase of ever-blooming Jovian lilies, sent them after 
the gun. The monster reached for 
him, snarling. He leaped over its 
hand, hurdling it as if he were a 
boy crossing a fence. On the far 
wall were many weapons. 

When he made Captain, and was 
given the Elephant's Child as his 
flagship, h^ had transferred all his 
belongings to it, so that nowhere 
in the galaxies would he ever feel 
at home save here. Among his 
keepsakes was the collection of antique weaponry handed down to 
him by his father, whose grandfather had bought them in the long 
ago from many museums. Gradually he had added to the collection, 
souvenirs of the planets he had explored. They were bracketed on 
the wall. Zulu war clubs and Kentucky muskets. Martian spearguns and antiquated jet-pistols; a 
Derringer, a Colt .44, a blowpipe 



tioni an unknown Pacific island. 

The alien giant was too swollen 
to turn swiftly. Pink reached the 
wall display. He tore down- an assegai, whirled and thrust it at the 
monstrous, contorted face, searching for the eyes. 

He was a mouse, bedeviling a 
cat with a broom straw. The thing 
batted his spear aside, brushed 
him with its fingers Mn a powerful swat, smashed him against 
his desk. A corner caught him, 
and he felt a rib snap. The pain 
enraged him. 

TN that desk he kept his other 
^ colection, ammunition for 

those weapons: it was his boast 
that he had at least six rounds for 
every projectile- thrower t h e r e. 
Some of it had been painstakingly fashioned in modern times from 
the old formulae, some miraculously preserved through the centuries. On strange planets he and 
Jerry used to have target practice 
with the ancient toys. 

Now the agony and the fear 
forced him into a gesture. He would 
die in this room, for certainly he'd 
never teU the giant where to find 
the air-lock switches; he had to go 
down .fighting, and if to fight this 
impervious lout was the most futile of gestures, at least he would 
make it a glorious one! 

Fumbling, he tore open a draw


er and clutched a box out of it. 
This, was the ammunition for the 
Colt revolver. Gripping it in his 
left hand, he jumped aside as the 
beast put out a hand for him. He 
, fled across the room, bis ears 
cringing -from the titanic yells of 
fury behind him. Now he had to 
get the Colt .44 from the wall. 

It took him tjiree horrible minutes of dodging and bounding to 
reach the weapons again. ' He 
snatched at the revolver, missed, 
made another desperate grab as he 
dropped to the rug; the second time 
he had it. He crawled under a 
chest which stood twenty inches 
off the floor. Luckily the alien 
was trying to catch him, not slay 
him, for it could long since have 
smeared him into jelly with a 
piece of furniture for a bludgeon. 

Feverishly he loaded the chambers of the Colt. For a moment 
his scattered wits could not recollect just how to operate this special weapon. Then he remembered. 

The fingers of the monster, sausage-sized and disgusting in their 
parody of humanity, came groping^ beneath the chest. Pinkham wormed back and came up 
behind it, staring into the red 
eyes. 

With a concentration of power 
that he had not known he could 
summon, he shot out from behind 
the chest and vaulted onto the top 



THE GIANTS FROM OUTER SPACE 



37 



of his enormous desk. 

The ahen, lips curling, straightened till its head brushed the ceiling. It reached out for him. 

In the last split second, Pink 
had a vision of himself, and instead 
of a glorious gesture, it seemed 
to hiin suddenly that he was mak


bronze-yellow space-dwelling giant. 

The being loomed over him, and 
a scream like the death-wail of a 
meteor lanced into his eardrums 
and made him gasp with anguish. 
He pumped the last slug into the 
enemy and launched himself sidelong, without much hope of land


ing an awful ass of himself. Like ^ ing anywhere but in a bushel


man before a firing squad thumbng his nose .... 

Nevertheless, he aimed the Colt 
full into the gargantuan face before him, and pulled the trigger. 

CHAPTER XIII 

"T^HE dawn-man, a thing like a 
wet rat, bared its teeth at the 
dinosaur . . . The Cro-Magnon 
aced a horde of hulking Neanderthals with a grin . . . The Crusa'er stood with a broken sword and 
brandished the hilt at the charging Saracens . . . The Apache drew 
is knife to fight a doui)le-troop 
irmed with carbines . . . The 
^American flung his empty M-i in 
the faces of forty Japanese . . . 
toujours le beau geste. Captain 
Pinkham, standing in his -cabin 
'board the spaceship Elephant's 
hild adrift in Star System Nineleaned forward and pulled the 
trigger to the two-cenury-old, outmoded, laughable popgun of a Colt 
firing once and twice and again 
again into the face of the 



sized palm. He was actually surprised when he found himself on 
the rug. He scrambled for cover, 
but before he reached it, it daWn>d on him that he might not need 
it. 

The alien had sunk to its knees, 
was making a convulsive effort to 
rise but obviously lacked the 
strength! Somehow, aud God alone 
knew how, Pinkham had wounded 
the beast! 

He drew back to the wall, watching. The agony of the big humanoid was doubling it over and 
throwing it upright as though a 
volcano , were erupting in its belly. 
It flung out an arm, struck a 
foamchair, which shattered explosively. Pink put more feet between them.* The convulsions 
were like those of a harpooned 
\yhale. Yet the creature did not 
seem able to move from its knees. 
Finally, perhaps a minute after the 
first throes, it collapsed all at once, 
a crumpled titan. Pink cautiously 
opened the door, just -as Daley 
was reafcjiing for the handle. 



38 



IMAGINATION 



"What in hell did you doV 
shouted the lieutenant. 

"Shot him ' with a revolvingchamber pistol of the mid- 1 9th 
Centujry/' said Pink. His rib was 
hurting and his flesh felt bruised 
all over. He grinned. "Figure that 
one, boy. Atomic disintegrator 
doesn't work, antique powder-using firearm does. I'm too beat to 
know why." * 

"It's crazy," said Joe Silver 
flatly. They all stood around the 
alien, which was sprawled on its 
back. The red eyes gleamed, but 
no muscle moved in the great body. 
They looked for signs of the. 
wounds, for holes or dissolving 
matter, for anything different; 
there was nothing. "What if — " 
began Silver. 

"This can wait." Pink took a 
deep breath, which hurt, and cleared his throat. "There's plenty to 
be done. Jerry, check your scanner and detectors for possible damage. Sparks, get on the radio to 
Cottabus and Diogenes; tell 'em 
everything, and warn them to come 
in cautiously. Kinkare, Daley, see 
what you can do with the space 
drive." 

He walked to the chest and 
picked up the box of Colt cartridges. He loaded the weapon again. 
"This works — and for now I'm not 
asking why. I'll stay with this 
scum 6f the void and try to get 



something out of him that'll clear 
things up. Bill, you determine our 
position and give it to Sparks; then 
start checking all the other equipment for bugs." He looked at Joe 
Silver. "You collect the bodies of 
the dead officers and prepare them 
for space burial." 

"Why me?" blurted Silver. 

Pink gave him a long look. "Because it's an officer's job. Because 
I tell you to. And Silver — " 

"Yeah?" r 

"I have decided that this is no 

longer a grade A emergency." 
Joe Silver said stiffly, "Yes, 



sir. 



■piNK activated the intercom 
screen, told the crew briefly 
what had happened. Then he 
raised the mutiny gates, giving a 
sigh of relief. "Get going," he 
told his officers. 

. "What about the girl?" asked 
Jerry suspiciously. "She could 
still be one of them." 

"Leave her with me. I have 
six bullets in this thing and fortyeight more after that." He looked at- Circe, who was pale and 
weary. "Sit down, O. O. Smith," 
he said gently. "I think you're 
all right. But you realize we can't 
chance anything till we have 
proof." 

"I understand," phe said listlessly, and dropped into a foamseat, 



THE GIANTS FROM OUTER SPACE 



39 



.staring at the fallen giant. The 

(others trooped out. 
With the door shut, Pink walkfed to* the head of the creature; it 
was a swollen and hideous head, 
but by rights it should have been even more hideous, should have had 
half a dozen wounds. The yellow 
hide was unmarked. Pink said, 
k "You're alive. Can you speak?" 
|HI "Certainly." The , Hps barely 
moved. "I am but immobilized 
for the moment." 
"What caused it?" 
The being sneered at him without answering. ^ Pink said, "I can 
keep you in this state for a long 
time, chum. And when we've 
shown our heels to your brothers, 
I'm going to dump you out an airlock and let you drift around beeen the stars." 

He knelt beside it. "What did 
II you do to the space drive?" 

P There was a long pause. Then 
it evidently made up its mind. 
H "The drive should be in working 
m order now. Your men will discover so when they try it. As with 
the other contrivances, I merely 
placed a temporary stasis on the 
protons of certain atoms, which 

(rendered them futile. There should 
be no damage by this time." 
Echoing his words^ Pink heard 
the first throbbing murmur of the 
activated piles. He looked without conscious volition at Circe, and 



they exchanged smiles of vast relief. 

"You'll be popping out that airlock sooner than Vd hoped/' said 
Pink to the giajit. Then he was 
startled by a great peal of harsh 
laughter. 

"Oh, you pigmy!" shouted the 
alien. "You flea-brained besotted 
fool! Your ship is out of control 
even now, and your hours are numbered on one hand. You've lost, 
and haven't the brains to see why! " 

And, thought Pink, listening to 
the mirthless ' laugh < while a chill 
sought out his belly, the monster's 
words did «iot sound remotely like 
a bluff. 

He knew something hidden from 
the captain, and even in his captivity he felt himself master of the. 
Elephants Child, 

Why? Why? Why? 

Then Pink turned and looked at 
Circe. 

CHAPTER XIV 



T)INK woke from a sweating 
nightmare. He rolled over 
and his bandaged ribs creaked with 
a twinge. He had slept nearly a 
round of the clock; the other ships 
must be nearing the asteroids. He 
got up and dressed quickly, wondering who was watching Circe 
now, holding the revolver on her, 
praying that if she should change 



40 



IMAGINATION 



form, the old-fashioned gun would 
paralyze her as it had the giant. 

The giant. He had to check on 
that devil immediately. He called 
his quarters on tffe intercom, and 
Lieutenant Daley':? image waved at 
him reassuringly. The' monstrous 
entity had not moved; its eyes still 
gleamed with malevolence. 

"Your hours are numbered on 
one hand/' said Pinkham to himself. "How many fingers on that 
mitt, I wonder?" 

And, even yet he did not believe 
the thing had been bluffing. 

He ate a brisk breakfast in the 
mess hall/ then stalked 'off to his 
own room, trying to analyze what 
he now knew of the giants' nature; 
but Circe's face intruded in his 
mind. He was in love with her. 
If she were an alien, then he was 
in love with the remarkable illusion she had created, of beauty and 
something niore: of a deep integrity of soul that shone in her eyes 
and . touched every word she uttered. And if that were an illusion, then he was a cynic and quite 
likely a positive misanthrope from 
this day -forward. 

"Get a slug of coffee," he told 
Daley. "Then hare back and we'll 
have some brandy. It looks like 
a busy day." Daley went out, 
giving him the Colt as he left. 

Sparks reported the Cottabus 
and Diogenes had joined their 



routes and would be alongside 
within half an hour. Pink sat 
down and looked at Circe, asleep 
on the couch. He switched his 
gaze after a while to the enemy, 
who watched him steadily. It said, 
"A favor. Captain." 

"No," he told it. 

"Only a sip, a drop of brandy 
to wet these cold lips ! " 

"Cold lips, cold heart: old proverb." For the first time in his life, 
Pinkham wanted to torture someone. "You "bastard," he said grimly? "you murdered eleven men, 
eleven good officers, and spoiled 
Kinkare's face for him. And you 
want a drink of brandy." 

"Rubbing alcohol, then. Only a 
touch on my mouth. Drop it in 
my eye if you wish," said the thing 
pitifully. 

"No — hey, wait a second. You 
told me your breed doesn't eat or 
drink. You don't need any outside element. Why the alcohol?" 

It heaved what was possibly a 
sigh. "I can absorb certain portions of the carbon atoms of alkuhl,^'' it said. "It is the greatest 
pleasure known to my race. And, 
save for the paltry drops of gin 
in that bottle yesterday, I have 
not— let us say 'tasted'— it for 
sonie hundreds of years!" 

'^Al-kuhl?" repeated Pinkham. 

"The Arabic slips easily from 
my tongue after all those years," 



THE GIANTS FROM OUTER SPACE 



41 




id the thing, half to itself., 
Arabic! "You weren't lying," 
said Pink, ^'when you told us you 
c.'ime from Earth, then." 

I Was not lying. Give me some 
hoi, Captain." 

t"No. How do I know it won't 
revive you?" 
I "My word on it" 
► Pink gave the hardest and briefest 
bark of laughter ever heard on the 
spaceways. It became silent. Fin
Pllly he leaned forward to stare at 
R. "Your eyes have faded," he 
said. "By God, I think you aren't 
IH^ paralyzed. I think you're dying!" 
Wtk After another silence it said, 
^^■Kes.^ I am dying." 

"I couldn't be happier," said 
Pinkham viciously. "I even hope 
s painful." 

"It is not. The only pain came 
the passage through my moles of the 1 — " it halted abruptly. 
"Ah," said Pink, hefting the 
Colt. "Of the lead. It had to be 
that, of course; but thanks for re^ assuring me. Your tribe's allergic 



I 



'T^HE flames leaped in its eyes. 

"I haven't told you anything 
so valuable," it said, with a kind 
of weak bravado. "There are too 
many of us, too few of you, and 
not enough lead in this whole system to conquer us. You have 
found the secret, but you'll never 



carry it back to Earth. My people shall go there instead, when 
they have sucked the methods from 
your broken body." 

"When will you die??' he asked it. 
In spite of his hatred, humanity 
was rising in him. It was beaten 
and he was too much of a man to 
crow for long. 

"I hear remorse in your tone," 
said the alien. "For the love of 
God; then, give me some alcohol." 

He remembered the headless 
corpse of Wright. He said, "No." 

Perhaps a quarter of an hour 
passed. It began to talk to itself 
in a monotone, a sort of feverish 
delirium. 

"I never thought of it, at least 
not often, for I steered my mind 
away from it; but once a decade or 
every thirty years I would remember, perhaps one of us would say, 
"Oh, to have a flagon of palm 
wine,' and then the agony of desire would wrack me until I must 
fight my body and tear it proton 
from proton so that I i.^rt badly 
and the remembrance would leave 
me. AUkuhl, al-kuM! Why in all 
the universe must there be this one 
combination of stupid elements 
which drags every fleck of yearning from me like water wrung from 
a cloth? My race needs nothing, 
nothing — we long for nothing— we 
are the only self-sufficient beings in 
creation — ^why do we remember the 



42 IMAUl 

aUkuhW 

"Like a ^e^/-smoker," said Pinkham quietly. "You don't long for 
anything else." After a little he 
added, "And you fear nothing save 
lead." 

^^True," said the being distractedly. "If it were not for lead and 
alcohol we would be perfect gods." 

^'Who are you?" Pink asked, 
conscious that his throat was constricted with excitement. "When 
did you leave Earth? Why don't I 
recognize you, out of history? What 
are you called?" 

He had tried too hard. The alien 
rolled its dimmed eyes at him. "I 
wish I could smile now/' it said 
through motionless lips. "Ah, if I 
could only smile knowingly! You 
will die today with that curiosity 
unslaked." 

He was balefully angry at that; 
he leaped to his feet, thrusting out 
the revolver. "If I throw another 
slug into you, it just might hurt 
some more," he roared. 

"I would rather die in pain than 
see your questions answered. I 
know well that curiosity is the 
worst terment to an Englishman." 

"I'm not English/' said Pink. 

"It's all the same. I might as 
well have said 'human.' " 

Pink recalled that he had the 
Colt, and so could take a few 
chances. "I'll trade you. One 
drop of brandy for each answer." 



It considered. Theif, withou 

budging, it gave the effect of a 
shrug. "Why not? You'll be dead 
soon." 

"You're so sure," said Pink. 

"Look at your scanner." 

There was something in the 
words that sent Pink racing. He 
was only just in time to see the finish of all his new-born hopes. 

The Cottabu^ and Diogenes were 
approaching at a slowing pace; the 
Elephanfs Child had deactivated 
her drive to wait for them. Whether 
the captains of the sister ships saw 
them or not. Pink could not tell; 
but a number of the space giants, 
so reduced in size as to be mere 
blots on the screen, hovered in the 
area. 

As the ships gradually lost speed, 
a», giant appeared atop each, growing rapidly from eight feet to a 
thousand, till they straddled the 
great ships like riders on Shetland ponies. 

The thing on the floor chuckled. 
"We are much more comfortable at 
that size, you see, Captain. We 
don't like to cramp our molecular 
structure into these puny dimensions. We can get into bottles — 
but we prefer to expand as you 
see." Then it laughed. "Yes, there 
is one of us on your own flagship 
at this instant, where he has been 
waiting, compressed, till the others 
caught their seats. Your ships are 



THE GIANTS FROM OUTER SPACE 



43 



captured as surely as in a net. You 
cannot dislodge them^ as you know. 
You must carry them to Earth 
so, or capitulate and let them inside." 

There was no scrap of fear that 
he would carry these devils to 
Earth, naturally.- But for the moment, Pink couuld see no sure way 
to escape the doom that now lay 
over him and all his ijien. They 
would have to remain in this as^ 
teroid belt . . . perhaps forever. 

N CHAPTER XV 

'T^^HE three spaceships lay to^ gether in the void. 

In the Elephant's Child, 57 men, 
seven officers, and Circe Smith 
were seated in the demolished recreation room, which was the only 
place besides the mess hall with 
enough chairs to accommodate 
them all. Radio communication 
with the other ships was handled 
over an extension set connected 
to th^ main radio room by a triple 
quancord laid down with furious 
energy by Sparks. 

"What we need, and need fast, 
is this," said Pinkham. "A method by which we can project lead, 
in pellets or spray or any damn 
for^i, with accuracy, using our platinum guns. There aren't any other weapons that will fire from within.'' 



"As you know, we've tried a few 
methods. One of the gunners of 
the Cottabus went into an air-lock 
and tossed a lead ball at the giant 
on the Diogenes, using a sling-gun. 
He found the range was too long; 
and when the captain attempted to 
bring the Cattabus rieafer, the thing 
on Diogenes simply reared his ship 
up by shifting his weight backward. So long as they can maiieuver our ships as easily as toy boats, 
we can't use that simple method. 

"Then Diogenes tried to smash 
our giant off his perch by simply 
ramming him headlong. Take a 
look at the screen and you'll see 
that Diogenes has a dented nose 
for her pains. ^ Five men died iii 
that try." 

"Captain," said a hydroponics 
engineer, "isn't it possible that, if 
we keep trying to oppose these 
aliens, they may simply tear their 
way into the ships and retaliate?" 

"Quite possible. Their strength 
is equal to picking the Elephant's 
Child apart, I'm sure." He glared 
at the men. "Listen: I don't have 
to pull punches with you. The 
chances of our getting rid of these 
giants and making it to Earth are 
damned remote. There may be a 
chance, though, so we have to keep 
trying for it. 

"The most important thing we 
have to do is keep this lifeform of 
the asteroids from going to Earth. 



.44 



IMAGINATION 



We of the armada are a terrible 
danger to mankind, through no 
fault of ours. We're so many Typhoid Marys, potential carriers of 
something worse than any disease. 
Even if we're all killed, the giants 
might manage to learn the control 
of the ships, and take them to Terra alone. 

''So if we can't wipe out the enemy, our only course is to destroy 
ourselves and our ships. Every 
officer in the armada has instmctions to blow up his ship if the 
giants should break into it. The 
thing is so important- that I've issued orders to do that even though 
the use of lead- thrower weapons 
might conquer the invaders. 

''If giants seize a ship aiid' it is 
not destroyed within five minutes, 
the other two will turn their platinum guns on it.. 

"Any questions?" 

Jackson, who ■ was spokesman 
for the crew, answered promptly, 
"No questions, sir." 

"Okay. Now let's have the 
technicians' report.'^ 

A lean, angular man rose. "I've 
checked all the books. Captain. 
There is no way to substitute a 
charge of lead for the war-head in 
the curium shells." 

There was a stillness. "You 
mean we can't shoot lead at the 
giants except with the few handguns in my possession," said Pink 



heavily. 
, "That's right. Captain." 

"The giants are too alert to be 
caught that way," said Bill Calico. 
"I have an idea-^not much of a 
one, but it's a try." 

"Let's have it." 

Jerry waved a hand. "Please 
remove O. O. Smith fir«t." 

Circe flared, "I think you're just 
afraid I'll get your job, you incompetent — " 

"Take her out^" said Pink to Joe 
Silver. 

Calico then outlined his pMn. 
Pinkham said at once, "I'll relay 
it to the other ships. We'll try it 
immediately." They all nodded 
agreement. Pink bent over the 
radio; he gave the co-captains instructions in an ancient language 
which they all knew, but which 
he felt sure would baffle any eavesdropping giants — an old, old tongue 
known as Pig Latin. 

The officers and men scattered 
to their stations. Pink and. Jerry 
took Circe to the captain's quarters, where Pink took his seat for 
the plan's- dirQction, Jerry holding 
the Colt on Circe and the dying 
giant. 

The space drives of the three 
ships wpre activated, and in sideby-side formation they moved 
slowly forward, as Pink watched 
keenly for a sign of objection from 
the gigantic "jockeys" atop them. 



THE GIANTS FR< 

None so far . . , probably they 
thought Pink was under the instructions of their brother inside. 
Five minutes went by. Eight. Fifteen. 

The largest asteroid in this part 
of the belt appeared ahead; it was 
roughly fourteen miles in diameter. 
The ships dipped their noses as if 
to pass well under it. They drew 
very close. Pink bent to his speakand bellowed, "Now!"' 

S one, the auxiliary jets of each, 
ship roared into life. Cottabus 
and Diogenes leaped out beside 
their flagship, and like three hotshot pilots buzzing an airdrome, 
the captains took the enormous 
spacecraft hurtling for the surface 
of the asteroid. Passing beneath 
it — or, thought Pink irrelevantly, 
while every , nerve and sinew concentrated on the dangerous task, 
perhaps they were flying over it 
upside down — they l^rought their 
years of training and experience 
to bear on the problem of missing 
that knobbed gray surface by the 
smallest margin possible. Diogenes 
actually scraped her superstructure, 
with a noise that made every hair 
on her captain's neck stand upright; the others missed the plane^ 
toid by no more than a foot or 
two. Then they were dear and 
again in the void. 

According to orders, they slowed 



iM OUTER SPACE 45 

at a distance of four hundred 
miles, and eagerly scanned one another in their viewscreens for signs 
of the giants. 

Pink gave a loud shout of relief, and took a second to realize 
that his co-captains . had each 
groaned . . . 

The riders on Cottabus and Diogenes had vanished, and were undoubtedly back there by the asteroid, reconstituting their bashed-up 
bodies angrily. But Pink now heard, 
with a sinking heart, that his giant 
was still with him. It had leaned 
backward from the knees, lying 
flat on the hull which it had gripped with legs and arms. Somehow 
it had grasped Pink's plan in time 
to prepare itself. The asteroid had 
flattened its face and chest like a 
plane smoothing wood, and it was 
now forming itself anew, with, so 
they told Pink, a truly malicious 
scowl on its reformed lips. 

Jerry was standing with a hand 
on Pink's shoulder; he had forgotten Circe in the tenseness of the 
bid for freedom. She came up on 
the other side and put her own 
hand on the captain's other shoulder. He was startled, and realizing that she could have killed or 
captured them both, had she 
wished, chalked up another doubt 
in his mind against the theory of 
her alienness. 

"Please come outside," she said 



46 



IMAGINATION 



urgently. "I want to suggest 
something to you." 

He rose at once aAd followed Jier 
to the door, while Jerry frowned 
and the dying giant watched him 
out of faded red eyes. In the hall, 
she said, "You're almost licked, 
Captain. It's time for desperation 
measures." Pink laughed, but before he could ask her what the hell 
they had been trying, she hurried 
on. "Find out where the home 
of these monsters is; it must be 
an asteroid. Then go there. Land 
and get out with your guns. They 
will think our friend in there 
brought us to them— and you'll ^ 
have the advantage of surprise. 
You have about a dozen firearms 
that will take lead bullets. That's 
enough for twelve of us. I think 
we'd stand a chance of success." 

"And if they murder us all? 
What about the ship?" 

She said, "Leave orders to blow 
it up if we fail." 

Pink scratched his jaw. The girl 
had something, or the nucleus of 
something, there. He saw other 
possibilities in it — it was tantamount to suicide, but there was 
nothing else left to try. He said, 
"If we liye through this, Circe, I'll 
see you make lieutenant!" 

"I'd rather make ... well, never min(i." She turned to go into 
the room. He wondered it she had 
had Joe Silver in mind. 



CHAPTER XVI 

T TE said to the alien, "Where's 
your home planetoid?" 

"Why?" it asked, mockery still 
in its weak voice. 

"I'm capitulating. I want to 
make a deal with your people." 

It said, "Ah, the human has 
sense after all. Our home is the 
largest of the asteroids, as you call 
them. The one you said at supper \ast night had a diameter of 
440 miles. We call it Oasis — ^and 
a poor one it is, when we remember 
Earth." • 

Jerry said, astounded, *What?" 
His narrow face worked with surprise. 

"Shut up, Jerry." Pink still 
had things to find out. "Can you 
tell your race, telepathically, 
what we're doing? I don't want 
them to lose patience and tear up 
the hull. We have .a very aiigry 
gent atop us." 

"It's the girl," snarled Jerry, 
before the alien could answer. 
"She's got you fooled like a — 
like a — good Lord, Pink, are you 
so crazy about her you can't see 
she's been waiting to put this idea 
in your head all this time?" 

"Jerry," he said through his 
teeth^ "shut your damn mouth. 
I'm captain of the Elephant's 
Child/' 

Jerry was aiming the Colt at 



THE GIANTS FROM OUTER SPACE 



47 



him; accidentally, Pink hoped. 
Then the O. O. said, "If I have to 
blow out your guts to save us, Pink, 
I .will." His tortured features 
writhed with pain. "Oh, hell, boy, 
wake up!" 

"Give me one more minute, before you fly off the handle and 
make an ass of yourself— and a 
mess of me." Pink had to have 
that minute. It was so vital he 
couldn't save himself from the angered Jerry with the one phrase 
that would explain everything. 
"Jerry, one lousy minute." 

"Just teU me you don't mean^it 
about giving in." 

He couldn't. My God, he couldn't. There was too much of a 
chance that this brute on the floor 
was telepathic with its own kind. 
"I have to do it, Jerry," he said. 

"Then I have to tie you up till 
oi're sane," said Jerry. "First, 
though, I've got to make sure about 
this girl." The muzzle of the gun 
traveled toward Circe, steadily, remorselessly. 

Pink had no alternative; the 
lives of all his men hung in that 
teetering balance. He jerked his 
right hand, and the tiny gambler's 
gun, the antique Derringer he had 
hidden up his sleeve for emergencies, slid down into his palm. Instinctively his forefinger caught 
the trigger and with sorrow and 
determination he shot Jerry high 



in the chest, below the clavicle 
and a safe distance from the lung. 
Jerry staggered back, a look of 
amazement spreading over his face; 
he fired the Colt wildly, putting 
a slug into the floor. Then he 
sat down, making hurt, uncomprehending noises. Circe took the 
gun from his hand. 

Pink heard a babble from the intercom. He grasped that some of 
his officers must have seen the occurrence. He still hadn't much 
more than a minute. 

,^" Circe," he snapped, "turn off 
that intercom and then lock the 
door." To the ^ giant he said, 
"Well, can you tell your friends?" 

"I would have doubted y«|ia, had 
you not eliminated your objecting 
officer," it told him. "Now I will 
say that I cannot communicate 
with .my race through thought 
transference; but if you head for 
Oasis, you will be safe." 

Pink breathed a little easier. He 
snatched down a bottle of whisky 
and twisted off the cap. There 
was another fact he must learn. He 
knelt and presented the bottle to 
the inert lips. "Have a slug," he 
said. 

"Yow are sensible," said the being ^with satisfaction. "Pour it 
into my mouth or my eye; I can 
absorb it through any orifice." 
Pink poured rapidly. The liquor 
ran down over the yellow hide. 



48 IMAGII 

"No, no," gurgled the irsonster. 
''Slowly! I absorb it far more 
slowly than you do—" 

"piNK stood up. He took a 
drink from the bottle and 
handed it to Circe. His face was 
radiant v^ith success. "Toast the 
last slim chance, honey/' he said, 
voice cracking with relief. "We 
just found out what we needed to 
know." He retrieved the bottle 
after she, had downed a gulp, gave 
it to the dazed Jerry. "Cheer up, 
boy," he said. "You didn't .get 
your pink skin plugged for nothing. 
Now listen." Rapidly he outlined 
Circe's plot, then the additions he 
had concocted. "See why I had 
to do it?" he asked finally. 

"Yeah. Yes, I see." Jerry blinked. "Would you spray a little 
sulfaheal on this hole, Pink? It 
hurts . . . Okay, I give in. I'm 
with you. It's a mad notion, but 
I sure can't better it. I'm with 
you." He looked at Circe, who 
was already busy with sulfaspray 
and bandages. "But can we trust 
this wench. Captain? She could 
be a wonderful decoy for 'em." 

"She's in the clear, Jerry; if we 
hadn't been so blasted rattled we'd 
have realized it long ago. There 
was , a test she could have passed in 
two seconds that would have eliminated all this fat-headed suspicion." 



"What?" 

"Holy Holmendis, boy — lead! 
If she were alien, the touch of lead 
would have crisped her up with 
pain and paralysis." Pink opened the door then, and the first tide 
of officers coming to Jerry's rescue 
were halted at sight of Circe tending his wound. Pink said to Jerry, 
and to them all, "While I was 
standing in the hall, I took a cartridge out of this Derringer, and 
rubbed the lead across the back^f 
her neck. She never winced. That 
vouches for her, doesn't it?" 

Jerry s$iid, "It does. Heaven 
forgive us for a pack of drooling 
imbeciles! It does indeed." 

Circe stood up. She came to Pink 
and stared him in the face. "So 
that was it," she said quietly. "You 
were testing me. And I thought it 
was a caress. Oh, you — " Then 
she hauled off and smacked Captain John Pinkham square in the 
left eye. 

It hurt like sin, but Pink could 
hardly blame her. So be apologized, without words. He took her 
in his arms and kissed her soundly. 

And Circe kissed him back. 

CHAPTER XVII 

'T^HE Elephant's Child rested on 
the surface of the asteroid 
Oasis, a waterless, airless, cold and 
gray ball as uninviting as any solid 



■1 



THE GIANTS FROM OUTER. SPACE 



49 



body in the universe. At the entrance to Air-lock One, the officers 
stood in a tight group listening to 
fekham; their spacesuits were fastened on, only the helmets rernaining to be donned ; their gloves were 
the modified digitmits which enabled the wearers to hold small objects and to operate machinery or 
firearms. 

There were seven officers, and 
now three crewmen in spacesuits 
joined them. Jerry, whose wound 
was nearly healed already, thanks 
to the sulfaspray , passed out guns 
from the captain's collection. Each 
man carried a handgun, or, in two 
cases a long rifle.* The ammunition for all amounted to one thousand two hundred and five rounds, 
in the main handgun csfrtridges. 
Pink had decided against using the 
Kentuckv rifle, which was difficult for a modern man to load. 

At each belt hung half a dozen curious objects, shaped like bottles but of a dull gray color and 
rough surface texture. These sloshed and gurgled when, the men 
moved. 

Pink concluded his instructions 
on the use of the weapons and the 
gray bottle- things. "Remember," 
he said, "keep in touch by your 
radio, and don't travel more than 
a mile from the ship if you can help 
it. Try the lure first, then when 
the containers are full, the guns. 



Be sure to keep at least one portion of lure for emergency; don't 
use' it all." He grinned. "And 
don't drink any of the lure." 

The men laughed, easing tension. Pink went on^ "You'll have 
some trouble adjusting to the gravity — our average weight will be six 
or seven pounds, or, in Jerry's 
case, three or four." They chuckled again. "Remember we don't 
know how they'll react, so keep 
your minds open and use your own 
judgment in everything. Now let's 
go." 

As he turned and activated the 
sliding panel that covered the first 
chamber of the air-lock, and they 
all settled their helmets down onto 
their shoulders and fastened them, 
an eleventh figure joined them,, its 
helmet already in place. Jerry, 
shaking his head reprovingly, handed this one the last weapon, a small 
automatic from the so-called 
"Gangster Age" of America. Then 
they went into the air-lock and the 
door shut tight behind them. 

In the control room, Jackson 
and a few others watched tensely 
on the viewscreen as one by one 
the landing party jumped to the 
planetoid. He looked at his watch. 
"Two hours," he said. "Oh my 
God, I hope they make it!" For 
in precisely two hpurs, if they had 
not returned to the ship, Jackson 
was to blow it to metallic dust, 



so iMA(jrJLJ> 

and all the remaining humans with 
it. 

Forty miles above the surface •of 
the small world, the Diogenes and 
the Cottabus cruised at a good rate 
of speed, to keep their hulls free 
of hitchhiking giants while watching the progress of the expedition. 

On the floor of Pinkham's quarters, the dying alien lay alone and 
cursed weakly at the sly and 
crafty doublecross he had so stupidly fallen for. He called upqu 
a number of strange gods to curse 
these mortals; among the names he 
uttered was that of a deity called 
Allah. 

In dressing room B, a technician 
discovered a crewman who was sitting against a wall rubbing his 
skull. "Somebody bopped me/' 
said the man glumly. "I'm supposed to go out there and blast 
giants, dammit. Who could have 
swiped me so hard?" 

■piNK. took an experimental hop. 
^ It should have carried him, at 
Terra gravity, about two feet. He 
soared over a hillock and came 
down gently on a plain of rock that 
looked like lava; his hop had carried him some scores of yards. He 
felt for an instant like a kid let 
loose on a wonderful playground. 
Then he snapped into it and began to scan the terrain for signs 
of Hfe. 



To the right was the mountain 
they had seen from the descending 
ship, with its irregular rows of 
gaping holes which suggested caves 
and therefore possible habitations. 
It wouldn't take more than five 
minutes to reach them at an easy 
amble, or a minute at a brisk walk; 
'about a mile away, they seemed. 

Then with a horrified start he 
remembered the giant who had been 
atop his ship. Washington Daley 
had. been delegated to deal with it 
— tand Pink had forgotton, had not 
even glanced back to see how his 
lieutenant was making out! . He 
whirled neglecting caution, and 
fell on his face.* Luckily he came 
down like a big bulky feather, and 
caught himself and bounced up 
again, a rubber ball of a man on 
this alien world Oasis. » 

He was just in time to see the 
giant, bending forward over the 
front of the ship, begin to blur and 
stream downward toward the tiny 
figure of the human who stood below him. In a moment he resembled 
a cloud of tobacco-smoke, drawn 
into the gray container in Daley's 
hand. He vanished entirely, Daley 
clapped on the sealing lid, and gave 
a triumphant wave to his captain. 
Pink blew out a breath of gratitude 
and remorse; he'd have to be on 
his toes from now on, really vibrant with wat( hfii]n<\ss. Laxity 
in one thing cwuld lose this weird 



THE GIANTS FR( 

battle. 

Strung out in a straggling liiie of 
erratically progressing units, the 
men of Earth headed for the caves. 
In a time so short as to be faintly 
ridiculous, they were moving up 
the mountainside. The gaping 
holes were caves, and obviously 
eep ones. Pink stood at the enrance of one for a moment, checking on the number of his men; 
then he waved a hand over his 
head, and entered the great den. 
Bdiind him came another figure, 
one whose slimness told him it was 
probably Jerry. 

Their chest lamps lit up the interior, which was as gray, knobby, 
and featureless as the outside 
world. Pink held his Colt .44 in 
his right hand, one of the bottles 
in his left. The technicians of the 
Elephant^s Child had worked like 
drudges over those bottles ... 

Every bottle of liquor aboard 
had been requisitioned. The liquid 
had been poured into plastic containers; only a few spoonfuls had 
been left in each bottle. 

Then lead, melted down and 
beaten into sheets, was wrapped 
around each bottle, forming a thin 
and chinkless layer over all the 
glass but the lip; and the lead was 
painted with tough plastikoid paint, 
which covered it with a film onetwentieth of an inch thick. Caps of 
lead were made for the bottles. At 



A OUTER SPACE - 51 

the end of a couple of hours, they 
had sixty-six bottles, glass inside, 
lead covered, and topped off with 
plastikoid^ which would conceal the 
presence of lead from any known 
test short of X-ray. 

Each of the eleven men carried 
six of these bottles, then, actually 
lead containers, but apparently 
plastikoid; the lead stoppers were 
concealed in joerg-hide bags. If 
the giant who had beep beaten in 
the spaceship was a criterion, the 
enemy would not recognize the 
presence of lead until it actually 
touched them — and then, thought 
Pink, with a quick prayer, it would 
be too late for them. 

Beaming the radio to a distance 
of ten feet, he said, "Hey, Jerry, 
want to lay a bet on who bags the 
first brute?" 

"Sure. Twenty bucks says I 
get him. And don't call me Jerry," 
said the sweet, quiet, and thoroughly startling voice of organicus officer Circe Smith. 

CH^TER XVIII 

T DIDNT have to do it. Pink 
thought. I oould have changed 
the orders when 1 saw that no 
giants \sv\\\ in sight. We could 
have blasted the one on top of 
th^ 'Elephant's C Mid and taken off 
and ^ol out of range of 'em and 
gonti back to Earth. We were free 




IMAGINATION 



52 

in that instant, when Daley caught, 
the alien and corked it up in the 
lead bottle with the liquor that 
drew it. We shouldn't have come 
out here to the caves. We should 
have left Oasis to itself. 

He knew that he had squelched 
this idea before it was born, because he had longed for a good 
fight ; he recognized this alien 4ifeform as unclean, and he'd wanted 
to stamp it out, or make a dent in 
its numbers anyway. So he'd gone 
ahead with the project, and now 
here was Circe, risking her life to 
be with him, and if anything happened to her he'd-kill himself . • . 
well, at least he'd mop up -the 
giants who'd drawn him here, he'd 
make a pogrom, a massacre to 
avenge her . . . 

She isn't dead, boy, he told himself. She's just in danger. Don't 
get distracted. 

"Stick close," he told her shortly. 
"I'll whale the pants off you when 
we get back for this trick, but for 
now, stay close and keep your eyes 
open." > 

Then he tuned his radio outward. "Report,"' he said. His men 
checked in. Nothing had been 
sighted thus far. 

So it was Captain Pinkham's 
luck to meet the first alien. 

Rounding a turn, he saw that 
the cavern enlarged, became a huge 
grotto; seated around its walls, 



staring at one another in the uncanny silence of this airless place, 
were many of the giant life-forms. 
Only one was near him, and this 
monster was first to see him; it 
leaped, at him with the abruptness 
of perfect muscular control, its 
feet a Httle off the floor of the 
cavern — Pink recalled that these 
things could levitate themselves in 
space. 

There was no time to use the 
lure of the bottle. He threw up his 
old revolver and fired point-blank, 
catching Circe by 'the arm and 
hurling her to one side as he did 
so. The giant recoiled, / as at a 
wall, doubled and thrashed in 
agony. Pink, rooted to the spot, 
waited to see the effects. Would 
one slug of lead be enough? And 
evidently it wa;s, for suddenly the 
thing fell and writhed futilely on 
.the ground, flinging its arms wide 
with diminishing strengths In a 
moment it was helpless, its only 
motion a slight heaving as its 
life retreated far within the gigantic bulk. Its red eyes glowed at 
him malevolently in Ihe glare of 
his chest-lamp. 

Strangely enough, none of the 
others had seen him yet, nor had 
any of them moved from the sitting posture. Swiftly he unhooked 
four of his six bottles and set them 
in a row on the rock floor. Circe 
returned, having bounced like a 



THE GIANTS FR( 

bit of india-rubber a dozen yards 
before checking herself. "You big 
bully," she said over the radio, 
and, her tuning being for distance, 
Daley in another cave said "What? 
Who?" in a startled tone. 

Pink dragged her, five pounds of 
resistance on the tiny planet, and 
plunked her down behind a rock. 
/'Sit tight," he said urgently. "Keep 
the gun handy. And check that you 
haven't spilled any alky — ^well 
need all the bottles we can get." 
Then he turned and shone his 
beam full on the traps he had set 
out. One of the aliens was bound 
to spot them soon. 

When one did, it came at them 
with a rush, snarling soundlessly as 
it sought the source of the illumination. ^Towering over the insignificant bottles, it halted, shuddered, stared down — Pink held his 
breath — and the incredible disintegration and flow of the body happened. The giant entered the 
bottle, leaving not a trace of its 
thousand-foot carcass outside. Restraining a desire to leap out and 
cork up that bottle. Pink waited. 
The movement of this alien had 
caught the red eyes of others; they 
advanced, some hurrying and sorne 
cautious, till two more had scented or sensed the alcohol and poured into bottles. Pink kept his eyes 
on the little containers. Beside him, 
Circe gazed with horrified fascina


IM OUTER SPACE 53 
tion *the coming gargantuas . . . 

A TRIO of them were misting 
now; this was the test. One 
empty bottle remained. What would 
happen, Pink wondered; was one 
giant per bottle the maximum content? The three streaked down, like 
smoke sucked into a vacuum cleaner. They jetted into the bottles, 
and again nothing was left outside. 
Pink said "Good," in a mutter, 
and forced himself to wait longer. 
The more the merrier. How long 
would it take them to soak up the 
alcohol? His captive had said the 
process was slow. How slow? How 
' long did he dare wait? 

He caught eight more, .then the 
next hesitated, looking around for 
the source of light. Either he was 
capable of more resistance to the 
seductive element, or the bottles 
were now full of churning, lapping 
aliens. There were more of .them 
approaching, but he didn't dare 
wait any longer. He jumped forward, potting at the foremost. 

It went down thrashing, and he 
shot over it into the yellow of them. 
Emptying the Colt, he reloaded hastily and plugged or nicked another 
half dozen. By then he was standing over the bottles. Nothing had 
emerged yet. He stooped to slam 
on the caps. 

With horrible speed .two giants 
pounced for him; he saw them out 



of the corner of his eye. Then they 
slammed full length to the rock, 
and he knew that Circe's automatic 
was in action. He corked the last 
bottle and slung it on his belt, put 
down the two rcanaining containers. 

Then he turned and made a mighty 
jump away from them, dragging 
Circe with him. The aliens came 
on. 

Some of them could withstand 
the piiil of the liquor, and some 

could not. There was a phalanx 
of them coming, for a good third 
of the growth's population had seen 
the disturbance by now. Any who 
appeared to be passing by the bottles, he and Circe shot; those who 
hesitated by them and were drawn 
in exchanged their liberty for their 
lives, because in two minutes Pinkham had feverishly capped them 
into the leaden prisons. He hooked them onto his belt and said into 
the mouthpiece before his lips^ "Go 
for the entrance, baby. I'll cover 
you.'' 

"No!" she snapped back. "You 
are not goiijg to sacrifice — " 

"Sacrifice, nuts! " he yelled. 

"This is part of the plan you'd 
have heard if you hadn't sneaked 
into the landing party at the last 
minute. Get going!" He was reloading as he spoke. 

She ran, almost flying down the 
cave-tunnel with great leaps that 



covered many yards each. He fired 
three .times at the giants who now 
loomed above him; then he was 
running too, stretching his legs 
and throwing every ounce of power 
and panic in his frame into the 
incredible jumps. And apparently 
he had the advantage over the 
brutes, for he began to outdistance 
them; .their mass being greater, he 
was helped by the lack of gravity. 

Then a rock crumbled under his 
toe, he was thrown off balance, his 
momentum shot him full tilt 
against the wall of the passage, 
and his head cracked sharply 
against the inside of his helmet. 
He knew that he was losing consciousness, and .that he had fallen 
ai;id was rolling straight into the 
path of the raging aliens. 

CHAPTER XIX . 

^pHOUGHT came to him before 
feeling. Pink lay in a hazy 
world of shifting ideas,, of coagulating and disintegrating forms of"" 
cerebration. He was not wholly 
unaware of what had happened, but 
his groping mind, was more con-. 
cerned with piecing together certain facts and fancies, reaching 
conclusions he felt were of the first 
importance. If his body were in 
danger, it must help itself, for 
Pink had other fish to fry. 

As he . sank into thick-witted 



tupar, then fought up to the light 
of reason, feeling his mind ebb and 
tflow with ideas and mad conjecilfes, it came to him that he 
knew the truth of the giants, and 
nSa not stated it to himself before 
in so many words. He had deliberately shied away from it, in fact, 
for it stank of fantasy, of crackbrained superstition and imbecilic 
fairy tales . . . > 

Admit it, he told himself, giggling in the far reaches of his brain. 

dmit it. You know ' about these 
critters, Pink. 

Yes* I linow about them. They 
are the djinn. 

The djinn that Solomon ruled, 
conquered, and put down. The 
enormous entities of Arabian Nights 
tales, whose habits and character 
and shrewd-canny-gullible ways of 
hinking were all set down in the 
books and marveled at by people 
even yet, hundreds and hundreds 
of years after they had been written. Marveled, sure, but marveled 
only at the imaginations that had 
produced them. And it wasn't imagination at all. It was the , real 
actual goddam solid thing. 

The djinn 'had been at once a 
triumph and a sad mistake of nature. They were the ultimate in 
physical perfection, needing nothing, living perfectly in^dependently, 
huge and strong and yet able to 



assume the tiniest proportions when 
needed. Wounds were nothing, 
for their makeup was such that 
their molecules compressed away 
from weapons, to ooze back into 
place when danger was past. They 
controlled the forces of the atom, 
at least to the extent of ability to 
freeze protons, and probably they 
could do many more stunts in that 
line. 

All their powers, being far in advance of man's, had been misunderstood and misinterpreted in the 
old days. So when a djinni let his 
atoms flow into the most convenient shape for getting into bottles 
for alcohol or for passing an obstruction he didn't care to demolish, it seemed to men that he turned into *a cloud of smoke. Hadn't 
Pink used that simile to himself? 
'* The fact ,that they could levitate, 
probably by control of the force of 
gravity, and fly through the thin 
upper air, by some process Pink 
only dimly understood, was certainly enough to stamp them as 
minpr gods in Arabia and all the 
other countries they had infested. 
' Sure, they were a .triumph of 
nature; but also a colossal failure. 
For they were, despite their scientific powers, too stupid for pity, 
too insensitive for compassion, and 
to egocentric for tolerance. Their 
nature was .that ot the most depraved human being. Consequently 



IMAGINATION 



they'd been beaten. In spite of 
their terrific strength, they'd been 
beaten by puny, unscientific, bumbling man. 
How? 

Well, Solomon had known about 
the lead. He'd sealed them in copper bottles with stoppers of lead, 
and Pink would bet a buck those 
bottles had been lead-lined, too. 
Solomon hadn't gone far enough, 
of course; he'd thrown the bottles 
into the sea, and sometimes they'd 
washed up and been opened. For 
bait, he must have used alcohol, 
too, since it was the Achilles heel 
^ of th-e djinn. 

Had he nailed the entire breed of 
djinn in his lifetime? It seemed 
likely, for the legends stopped soon 
afterwards, didn't they? Pink wasn't sure. An3rway, there" sure as 
hell weren't any djinn on Earth 
today. 

How had .they gotten out here, 
all the way to Star System Ninety? 
That was beyond conjecture. How 
come the first brute he had con-^, tacted, old Ynohp the phony Martian, spoke a kind of. messed-up 
Shakespearian lingo? God only 
knew. 

Now he'd discovered them, any^ 
way, and they wanted to go back 
to Earth. If they got hold of the 
Elephant's Child, they might do it* 
He couldn't let them succeed . . . 
but then the crew was going- to 



blow up the ship in two hours. 
Two hours! 

Pinkham's mind beat wildly at the 
prison of lethargy and dimmed consciousness. How long had he lain 
here? Where was he lying? Did 
the giants, the djinn, have him? 
And Circe? 

Circe. Making the most intense 
and painful effort of his life, Pink 
dragged his eyes open and tried 
to sit up. He had to find Circe. 

He saw nothing, and there was a 
weight on him that held him flat 
on his back. Either his lanip was 
broken, or he was blind. 

Sensibly^ though it cost him untold hell to be sensible, Pink lay 
quietly until he felt all his faculties under control. Then he made 
an abrupt and violent attempt to 
sit up. Whatever it was that was 
holding him down rolled off. He 
ninanaged to get to his knees, one 
hand on the rock beneath him, and 
then arms were thrown around him 
and a body pressed against his. 

The horror of absolute blacknessand the unknown predicament he. 
was in proved just a little too much 
for him. Captain Pinkham gave a 
loud, long scream of fear. 

CHAPTER XX 

44VXrHAT is it?" asked Circe, 
^ ^ her voice wild with fright. 
^Tink, darling, what is it? Are 



THE GIANTS FROM OUTER SPACE 



57 



.you hurt?" 

■jblt was Girce who was holding 
rinm. Sobbing with relief, he said 
jinto the radio, ^^No, no, baby, I'm 
I fine, I'm wonderful." 
■H Her answering cry was a tiny 
Hpund of joy and affection. "I wish 
I could kiss you," she said, ^'but 
there are .two spacesuits in the 



ither( 
P»H( 



He found her hand and squeezed 
it hard. "I wish I could see you, 
||Smitty," he said, "but either I'm 
■pnd or — " 

W "Oh, I should have told you at 
once. I turned , off our chestlamps." 

"But where are we?" 
"Not far from where you fell.'* 
Her hand was a comfort in his, as 
much so as a squad of Space Marines, marching down to greet them 
would have been. "You flew past 
me like a kicked football. Pink, 
and I veered off ,to see if you were 
okay. When you fell and didn't 
move, the first thing I did was 
snap off the lamps. About a second afterwards, the giants went 
past. They have a weird kind 
of glow in the dark, I think they 
could have seen us — certainly they 
don't exist blind in .this ink-pool — 
but there's a ridge of rock and we 
were pretty well hidden behind it. 
I dragged you about forty feet and 
found this hole and we've been lying here ever since." 



"The others," he said, remembering. 

"I've been in touch with Daley all 
the time. He and Calico ran into 
a lot of .trouble and Calico got a 
broken leg. Joe Silver took him 
back to the ship. Daley and Jerry 
found each other and fought off a 
horde of giants. Every man got 
all his bottles full of ^specimens' 
and then used up most of his lead. 
Sparks — " she hesitated a moment 
— "Sparks is dead. So is Randy 
Kinkare." 

Pink said quietly into the dark, 
"I don't think Randy would mind 
that. He didn't have much of a 
face left." 

"Whatever that first ojie did to 
burn him, that's the weapon they 
used on him and Sparks. Both of 
them were burnt to a ... " 

"Okay," he said. "Okay, okay." 

"So Daley said they'd try to find 
us; but everyone got mixed up in 
the caves, and there hasn't been a 
sign or sound of anyone for half 
an hour," 

"Half an hour?" The flesh 
chilled down his back. "How long 
have I been out?" 

"I don't know. A couple of 
hours." 

"My Lord! The Eleph'anfs Child 
is to be blown up two hours from 
the minute we left her!" 

"Daley said Silver was going to 
countermand that order." 



S8 IMAGII 

Pink groaned heavily. "He can't! 
Jackson had my absolute command on it, and Jackson would 
see himself and Silver and the 
whole lot of them dead before he^d 
fail to carry out a command of 
miiie. That was important; we 
calculated that two hours was more 
than enough to expend all the 
ammo, and that if we weren't back 
by then, the hull would be crawling with giants. Every bullet 
aboard came out with us. We could 
n't take the chance of the ship 
blasting off with giants on her, 
maybe in the form of gnats or 
smoke or — no," he finished, "Silver, if he tried .to change my order, 
is either dead or unconscious or in 
the brig right now." He lifted his 
left hand. "I've got to check the 
time," he said, and for an instant 
switched on the dial of his glove 
watch. 

It was a hundred and two minutes after landing time. 

He had eighteen minutes to get 
back to the Elephant's Child. 

CHAPTER XXI 

T TE beamed hi^ radio to its fuU^ est extent. "Daley," he said. 
"Daley, come in. Jerry. Cohan. 
Caleskie. Kole. Come in, anyone."* 
"Kole here, Captain. I'm on 
the plain. It was all fouled up in 
that cave." 



"What can you see?" 

"They've got the big trap out 
of the ship," said the distant, tinny 
voice of the crewman. "What a 
waste of good liquor! Beg your 
pardon, Captain." 

"Giants?" Pink asked. 

"About a million of 'em, all headed for the trap. We should have 
tried it first. Did you know Caleskie got his?" 

"No, I didn't know. We had to 
suck them out into the open before 
they cpuld spot the trap, Kole. Is 
Lieutenant Daley in sight?" 

"I saw him a while back, sir. He 
was headed out of a cave with the 
O. O. But it turned out they were 
going the wrong way, because I 

"Thanks, Kole. Report aboard 
ship. Don't get mixed up with the 
giaats." 

"They won't bother me, sir. It's 
like a bunch of big bees tearing after a vat of nectar out here. They 
don't even see me." 

"What did he mean?" asked 
Circe. "A trap?" 

"Plastikoided lead box, twelve by 
twelve feet. All the alcohol in the 
ship was poured into it an hour .after we left, and they sest it outside 
as far from the ship as they could 
safely go. I didn't know it would 
work, but it was a try. It still 
doesn't affect Jackson's orders. I 
didn't know, I still don't know, but 



THE GIANTS FRi 

that some of the djinn can resist 
the stuff." 

"The what?^^ she asked, starled. 

"Never mind. WeVe got about a 
quarter hour to get back. Where 
in blazes is Daley?" 

A small, weakened voice said in 
his ear, "I'm here, Pink. Jerry 
too. But he's out cold. I don't 
feel so hot myself.'' 

"Daley!" he roared. "Where are 
you?" ' 

"Big cave, about size of Texas. 
Came across it trying to find our 
way out. Lot of giants here. One 
of them saw us and picked us up 
and banged us together. I think 
he must be saving us for a hearty 
lynch. He's sitting ten^ feet off 
watching us." 

"Your guns, boy!" 

"No good. All the slugs are 
gone. Pink," said the weak, 
worried voice, "do you know what 
time it is? You better hightail it 
for the ship." 

"I'm coming after you," said 
Pink. 

"Don't be a heroic son of a 
space cook, Pink!" 

^'-Shut up and lie still." He 
switched his radio to close quar*ters. "Honey, you make for the 
Child, I'll pick up the boys and 
be right with you." 

"You're crazy," she said flatly. 
"I wouldn't leave you if — " 



VI OUTER SPACE 59 

He had switched on his chest lamp 
and drawn out a pen and paper 
from his pocket kit. "I'm going 
to write Jackson a note countermanding the order. Take it to 
him." > 

"You're wasting your time," she 
said grimly.. "If you're going into the cave, I'm going too." 

"You fathead, you can save the 
ship by taking this note." 

"You're dping it to save me. I 
won't. What happens to you happens to me." 

"My God the whole damn ship 

"Doesn't matter to me if you're 
gone, Pink." Her voice was strange, 
half-hysterical and oddly loving. 
"I don't know why I feel this way 
about you. Pink. I've never been 
in love before. If I hadn't been 
stranded, I'd be old enough to be 
your mother. You're a big cold 
dedicated spaceman, but I love 
you. Lead the way, if you're going to make a fool "of yourself." 

TN that moment Pink learned 
wisdom, for he gave up his attempt at a note and bounded to 
his feet. Some well-spring of instinct had told him that a man 
could never argue a woman out of 
anything. 

"Got your automatic?" 

"And a full clip left." 

"Come on, baby." 



6o IMAGI 

They ran down the cavernous 
corridor, grotesque , tiny fleas making unbelievable leaps. In seconds 
they had entered the grotto. 

Many, too many giants were still 
there. Some of them seemed not to 
have seen anything of the hectic occurrences, others were standing in 
small groups (if anything formed 
of thousand-foot beings could be 
called small, thought Pink as he 
rocketed along) motioning hugely 
to one another. 

"Stay close," he called to Circe. 
She was moving as fast as he, her 
light frame an asset. They ran 
down one side of the cavern, ignoring giants who did not at first 
noticig them. Pink beamed , out 
his radio and said, "Daley! Locate 
yourself. "I'm in the cavern." 

"You ape," said Daley, "why'd 
you come? We're in front of an 
entrance that's the middle one of 
three. Spot it?" 

"I see four sets of three," said 
Pink, heading for the nearest as 
his heart sank. 

"Sorry, I can't see any more than 
these. Be careful, old boy." There 
was a pause. "We have twelve 
minutes left," said the senior lieutenant calmly. 

The first of .the triple entrances 
—had they been buih, or were they 
natural? — ^was at hand. Three gigantic djinn sat near them. The 
ground, uneven as a lava flow solid


ified, might have concealed a score 
of humans. Pink gave a high leap, 
surveyed the terrain as he floated 
down. Nobody here. But a giant 
saw him. ' « 

Pink shot him in the ankle and 
dived like a skin-swimmer between 
his legs. He had lost Circe. He 
pivoted, wide-eyed, and saw her 
beneath the skyscraper torso of a 
bending giant. Their lamps were 
drawing attention now. -He saw 
her shoot the titan and fly off at a 
tangent, disappearing behind others of ,the enemy. 

Sixth sense warning prickled 
his neck. He whirled again to pot 
at a groping hand the size of a 
ten-story house; the hand contracted, bunched, groped . outward and 
was hidden as the body fell upon it. 
Pink saved himself by a frantic 
backward shove that jolted hini into 
the wall. Circe sped by and he 
followed, shouting into his radio. 
They joined hands and aimed for 
the next entrances, a mile down the 
hall. 

Four speeding djinn abruptly 
barred their path, express-flying 
down on them. 

CHAPTER XXII 

44T KNOW how a fly feels," 
^ gasped the girl. "I'll never wield another swatter." 

Pink had empied his Colt. He 



THE GIANTS FR( 

tried reloading on the run, or 
rather, he thought wryly, on the 
bounce, but it was a tricky job. 
And he had only about a dozen 
shells left. 

Circe shot another angry monster. If lead took just two seconds longer to work on those immense systems, Pink realized, he 
and Circe would have been squashed long since. They had fought 
down half the hall, past three of 
the triple entrances, and now there 
was only one to check on. If Daley 
and Jerry weren't there, they might 
as well give up; the ship would go 
scattering into the void ^in about 
five minutes. 

They had to watch, backwards as 
well as before them. The giants 
were nearly all in motion now, the 
milling of such throngs of them 
having caught the vacant ^stares of 
those who had been gaping at nothing. 

And suddenly there was Daley, 
standing before them and holding 
\he limp spacesuited form of Jerry Jones in his arms. "Hey, Pink/' 
he said, ''down here.'' 

Pinkham blasted two foemen in 
the hands as they grasped for him. 
'Xike fighting giant redwoods," 
said Circe , indistinctly, panting. 
They joined the two officers, jumping and digging in their heels to. 
halt sharply. 

"We have to make for that," 



M. OUTER SPACE 6i 

said Pink, waving across the grotto 
at the invisible hole which led to 
the plain. Straight through these 
dam Alps of aliens." He shot over 
Qrce's head. "How you feeling?" 

"Little rocky," said Daley. 

"Take the Colt, then." He 
shoved it into the lieutenant's hand 
hoisted Jerry like a rag out of Daley's arms. "Come on," he barked. "And don't get slapped. That's 
an order." He ran. 

Their combined chest-lamps 
beamed out a couple of miles as 
they headed for the home stretch. 
Across the light passed the giant 
djinn, moving to waylay them, 
standing mountain-steady to intercept. Circe rocketed into the lead 
and led them on a zigzag course 
that avoided the vast parodies of 
human feet which barred the way 
like river dams. 

They had had uncanny luck thus 
far. Why? Probably the giants 
were sluggish from long inactivity. 
Too, Pink knew, it's hard to hit a 
small darting object that's not more 
than one-one-hundred-and-s i x t ysixth of your size. And the lead 
slugs of their guns had turned 
many sure captures into escapes. 

But now the guns were empty. 

Feet, said Piiik, quoting an ancient joke, feet, do your stuff! 

Circe was amazing, dodging and 
pirouetting and even hurdling the 
gross feet when they couldn't be 



62 



IMAGINATION 



side-stepped. Knk gamely followed her lead, Jerry ^now slung over 
his shoulder. There was panting 
in his ears — ^Daley must be having tough going. Then he recognized the deep wheezing breaths: 
they were his own. 

"Daley?" he gasped. , 
"Right behind you, Pink.'* 

The mouth of their corridor was 
in sight. -Then there were djinn, 
a row of them standing side by 
side with feet firmly planted to 
make a barrier. My God, he 
thought, this is it! Circe vanished, he did not see where. The 
feet were there, and arms reaching 
down for him. He pitched side"ways, flipped by a questing finger; 
crashed on his shoulder, rolled, still 
miraculously hanging onto Jerry. 
The brashest course was the only 
one. He gathered himself and 
jumped onto a toe. It was as hard 
as the rock. And this thing, he 
said irrelevantly in his mind, this 
massive piece of solidity can vaporize into a gin bottle! He slid 
down the toe and scuttled ratlike 
under the lofty legs and was in the 
clear. The tunnel, itself an astoundingly high cave, appeared directly before him. 

There was no time now to look 
for Circe and Daley, vital though 
their safety was to him. He carried Jerry into the tuntiel and 
loped with multiyarded strides for 



the plain. ]p[e could not see any 
lamp-glare but his own. But he 
could not stop. Humanity in that 
instant overcame all his private desires. There were fifty-eight souls 
who would be blotted out if he didn't make the Elephanfs Child in 
two minutes. Sixty-one, if you 
counted Daley and Circe and Pink 
himself. In less than one of those 
minutes he had traversed the tunnel and come out above the plain. 

The ship was still .there. Some 
distance away from it stood the big 
trap, and even yet giants were 
speeding toward it from all points 
of the compass. Pink gasped a 
breath and launched himself out 
and down the steep hillside. He 
took it all in that one jump. As 
he was landing, a curiously weightless man on this tiny planetoid, 
Jerry came to life and writhed suddenly in his arms, upsetting his 
balance. Pink fell and his left 
ankle shrieked with pain as it 
turned under him and was smashed, 
into the gray rock by his dropping 
body and Jerry's. 

He sprawled full length and 
knew his ankle was broken or 
sprained. Jerry rolled free and 
collapsed, sighing into his radio. 

Pink tried to stand and the ankle 
buckled. Horrified, he looked at 
his glove watch. 

He had seventy seconds. 



THE GIANTS FROM OUTER SPACE 



63 



CHAPTER XXm 

PINK bellowed, "Jerry!" He 
yelled it so loudly that his 
ears protested at the helmet echoes. 
Jerry said groggily, "Wha?" 
"Stand up!" 

Jerry sat up and at once fell flat 
again. "Judas priest, I can't. 
That you Pink?" 

"We've got to make the ship," 
e bawled, twisting with pain. 
"Make it what?" 
"If you want to live, son — stand 
up!" 

Jerry got to his knees. "I'm sick, 
Pink." 

He had used up six seconds. He 
had to try it on his own. Jerry 
was too far gone to function properly. ^ 

Pink stood up. His teeth were 
grinding together like millstones, 
but he didn't stop. He knew pain 
and dread and rage that shook 
him. He faced the ship, and 
stood- on his good leg and bent his 
knee and gave a tremendous hop. 

As he fell on his face, an unknown number of yards nearer, a 
great alien passed him, the mighty 
sole slamming the rock a few feet 
from^ his prone body. Pink struggled upright and balanced on the 
right leg and made another hop. 
This time he didn't fall when he 
lit. Praying thankfully for the 



two seconds that saved, he sprang 
again. And fell, painfully. 

It was a useless piece of bravado* * 
It was impossible to reach the 
ship. He got up and leaped. He 
fell. He forced himself up and 
sprang and didn't fall and spraiig 
and fell. 

He couldn't waste a blink of 
time in looking at the watch or 
yelling with agony or even praying now. He went through his 
routine automatically, his mind a 
thing of terror. Eons seemed to 
pass him by as he hopped over the 
d jinn-infested gray .rock plain. 

^A superb spring took him 
abreast of the big lead vat. What 
wild scenes of delirium were going 
on there he could not even imagine. 
He hopped twice more ^nd was at 
the ship. 

At any instant, at this very second the ship would blossom into 
red-white carnage of metal and 
flesh and death. Impossibly Pink 
stood on his good leg and aimed for 
the scanner-port which he knew, or 
hoped, connected with the screen 
in the (^ontrol room where Jackson 
sat. 

Now the Elephant's Child was 
done, Jackson was shoving the 
switch" over, now it would all disintegrate in his face. He flew 
through space and struck the hull 
flat; all the perishing strength in 



64 



IMAGINATION 



him glued his body, his fingers in 
their thin gloves, to that curving 
surface. His great helmet, with 
the crest insignia of comets and 
spears that marked him as the captain, hung 'for a short time directly in front of the scanner-port. 

He shook his head violently, 
back and forth, back and forth. 
No, he screamed in his mind, wishing insanely that his radio were 
constructed so that it could be 
heard in the ship. No, he shook, 
no, no! 

Then his prc^carioiis grip on the 
smooth side slid off, and Captain 
Pinkham fell lightly but finally to 
the asteroid. 

He lay there unresisting. He bad 
done his best, absolutely his damned best. Let it blow. Let it blow. 

After a while he looked at his 
glove watch. It was two minutes 
past the time for explosion. 

He had saved the Elephanfs 
Child, 

He turned and looked across the 
plain and saw, beyond the great 
trap into which giant-smoke was 
settling, two figures come running 
toward him with unearthly strides. 
One of them halted and gathered 
Jerry into its arms. The other 
reached Pink and knelt beside him 
and hugged him tightly. Pink 
laughed, a passionate sound of relief. Circe said, "You made it, 



darling. You made it! " 

The air-lock began to open." 

CHAPTER XXIV 

^T~^HE djinni on the floor said, "I 
^ concede this battle to you, 
Captain. I have seen the ending 
on the screen. But there are others out there, on Oasis and in the 
void. We'll win to Earth some 
day in spite" of this victory." 

Pink, snugly ensconed in a foamchair with his sprained ankle propped up, his surviving officers seated 
around him, and Circe on the arm 
of the deep chair, took another 
drink of lemonade. He made a 
face, almost asked for brandy, and 
remembered. He said, "Maybe 
the same way you came to these 
asteroids?" 

"No, not that.^ That way went 
only in one direction, through the 
fourth dimension, I think. The 
people of the continent you call 
Atlantis built that way for our 
use, though much against our de-sire; and the machine they made 
was so fearful that its use sank 
their whole land into the sea. They 
were a great, scientific people, and 
we have not their skill." 

"Atlantis too," Jerry said. "Now 
we've heard everything, all but the 
Little People and Pan." 

The djinni did not seem to hear 



THE GIANTS FROM OUTER SPACE 



65 



him. Its eyes^ like dead coals 
now in the yellow Yace, rested on 
Pink. "It was clever of you to 
recognize us from history." 

"You go into bottleS;, speak 
Arabic^ fly and are humanoid in 
form. I should have guessed your 
race hours before." 

"We are not humanoid. You 
are djinnoid. We came before you 
in evolution." 

"How d« you know?" asked Daley. 

"Our legends ... I cannot tell, 
being no more than six or seven 
thousand years old myself. But 
we a;re told we predate man." 

"When were you relegated to 
this belt?" asked Jerry, who was 
still a little pale. "You were 
around in Solomon's time." 

"Yes. He caught and trapped 
most of my race — ^we are not so 
numerous as you cursed rabbits — 
by the same means you used. One 
great vat he collected, after s-ome 
yearss of the bottles, and sealed up 
a multitude of my folk and cast 
them off a ship; somehow the currents dragged the box to Atlantis. 
There my people were freed, and 
set about to conquer the land. 
But the Atlanteans captured them 
after several decades and, having 
constructed the terrible machine, 
sent them off to this forsaken hole 
in space. The cataclysm the ma


chine made— evidently they hadn^t been so clever as they thought, 
may Allah rot their souls! — set off 
volcanic acticm, which eventually 
sank their country. It was never 
very large, anyway ..." 

"How do you know this?" asked 
Pink. He was a bit breathless; at 
any moment the being might decide to shut up and die. He had 
to satisfy his curiosity about the 
space-dwellers. 

"I was one who escaped Solomon. I. made my way to England 
after a few centuries of wandering, 
of being a minor deity here and 
there, and in England in the late 
seventeenth century I met a brother. He had been on Atlantis, and 
hovering above it had seen the exiling of our race and the death of 
the land. Together we determined 
to find the machine, repair it if 
need be, and bring back our people. We thought they were somewhere in the bowels of the earth, 
or perhaps held invisible in the 
machine itself. 

"We felt we were the last djinn 
at liberty. We went under the 



sea


"How?" This was Bill Calico, 
nursing a broken leg on the couch. 

"We are oblivious to our surrounding elements, so long as they 
are not too dense for us to penetrate. After a year or two we 




66 IMAGI 

found the machine. It was partially destroyed, but so simple that 
we easily repaired it. We could 
not see how it could make our race 
vanish, but as we are indestructible except by lead, and the Atlanteans did not, know of that metal, 
we knew that they had vanished 
rather than died. When we had 
the machine fixed, I volunteered 
to try it out and see what happened. He was to reverse it and draw 
me back shortly." 

npHE monstrous thing sighed. 
^ "It was too complex for us. 
First I found myself floating a 
mile or so off Oasis, and then my 
friend joined me. His adjustments 
had failed. The cursed, machine 
had relegated us both." 

"God bless Atlantis," murmured 
Circe. 

"I presume you are taking the 
bottles and the great vat of ^lead 
back to Earth? it queried slyly. 

"Not on your life," said Daley. 
"As soon as we're out of System 
Ninety, we'll drop 'em into the 
void. Your damn tribe will be 
marooned properly this time." 

"But they are alive in those prisons!" it shouted, its eyes n^omentarily reddening again. "Such 
compression is most irksome to 
them, and they must constantly 
shift about to keep clear of the 



lead in the stoppers^ IVs inhuman!" 

"You're right," said Pink grimly. "It'sjijinnlike." 

"How did you learn English?" 
asked Jerry suddenly.' "Modern 
English, I mean." 

"You forget; when you brought 
me aboard, in the guise of a Martian, you handed me a lingoalter. 
It was simple to speak the English 
of the 17 th century into it and 
listen as modern speech came out." 

"That's another thing. That 

Martian suit — how'd you get it?" 

"They had come this far. We 
found the suit, with its otcupant 
long turned to dust. We kept it 
for such emergencies. When the 
space ^hips foundered nearby a few 
years ago, we refrained from molesting this woman, thinking that 
she might some day be^a fine decoy." 

"You watched me in the suit," 
said Circe. 

"We did. We had not seen a 
human in a long time." The djinni paused, then said, "The Martians had space travel when Earthmen were barbarians. They came 
to Terra, and we, sensing danger 
in them, drove them out. We saw 
to it that the Martians would tell 
tales of the horrors of Earth life, 
and never come back." 

"By God," said Pink, "that's 



THE GIANTS FRC 

hy they never colonized Earth, 
though they had spaceships! It's 
one of the biggest problems we've 
known." 

"Then IVe solved it for you. 
ill you do me a favor in return?" 
"What?" 

"Have you any lead left?" 
"A little." ^ 
"Then lay it on my .chest, and 
give me a quick death." 

"Get it," Pink said > to Daley, r 
he lieutenant started a protest. 
Pink said, "My Lord, can't we afford to be merciful now? After 
all that slaughter?" And Daley 
went to find the lead. ' 

Circe said, "Why do you want 
to go to Earth so badly? What's 
there that you want? You're such 
n independent form of life ..." 

"Atmosphere," ^aid the djinni; 

"But you don't breathe!" 

"We do, however, talk; and we 
cannot hear each other in a vacuum. We wanted to find Earth 
gain and- know the pleasure of 
communication. On Oasis we had 
to talk with our hands." It groaned, grotesquely human in its agony. "Can you imagine living for 
centuries without the joy of conversation?" it asked pitifully. 

Circe shook her head. "I don't 
much blame you," she said in a 
small voice. 

Daley came back. He handed a 



M OUTER SPACE ^ 67 

small rough bar of lead to Pink. 
The Captain^s mind seethed with 
questions he longed to ask; but 
the reaction of the battle was settling in with vengeance, and he 
could not see this great paralyzed 
brute live on because of his own 
more or less idle curiosity. He 
bent forward from the chair. "Sorry," he said, and dropped the bar 
onto its chest. 

"Wait!" said Jerry. "How did 
you know how to spell phonyV^ 

The djinni made a small hissing 
noise that had something in it of 
contentment. Its eyes turned jetty, and they knew it was dead. 

"It died happy," said Daley to 
the slim O. O. "It knew it was 
leaving us a problem that we'd 
never solve. What a — ^what a malicious character it was!" 

"Poor devil," said Circe. "No 
conversation for five hundred 
years!" 

CHAPTER XXV 

T70UR days later Pinkham and 
Circe stood quietly before a 
scanner screen, Pink leaning on a 
cane, and watched the great lead 
vat and then the multitude of bottles go tumbling into space. 
are giving them a chance of survival," mused Circe. "There's 
about one chance in a billion that 



some day they'll be found and released again." 

^^I wonder/' said Pink, if they 
did predate man in evolution? Or 
if thfey were originally native to 
another planet that expelled 'em? 
There were always legends of giants and ogres and djinn and* demons on earth, myths that started 
to die out about the time this late 
friend of ours left the globe for 
good. Maybe the djinni developed side by side with man, but 
was limited because of his flaws. 
There are a million life-forms in 
the universe so alien to man as to 
be unexplainable, and a lot of 
them are right home on Terra." 

Circe shook her dark head. "Is 

THE 



the whole thing real, Pink? Or 
is it a fantasy we've uncovered out 
here in the void?" 

"Every damn thing about them 
is scientifically possible. But I 
know how you feel — it seems like 
a fairy story. If so many good 
guys weren't dead back there, I'd 
disbelieve it myself." He scowkd 
a moment, then looked at her 
and ' brightened. "Honey," he 
said, "remind me that I have to 
send a radio message to Earth as 
soon as we're close enough." 

"Radio message? What?" 

"A sort of temperance warning, 
that's all." He grinned. "It goes 
like this: // you find any bottles^ 
don't open them!'^ 

END 



INTRODUCING the AUTHOR 

{Concluded from Page 2) 



craft plant as assistant metallurgist. I had almost decided that 
science-fiction wasn't for me, when 
the great day came. My very first 
sale— to IMAGINATION. Needless to say, I felt three hundred 
feet tall that day. 

Perversely enough, I wrote very 
little in the next few. months. But 
after another sale, I quit the aircraft business to devote full time 



to free-lancing.. 

That was almost two years ago. 
Since then, I've made about sixty 
sales to most of the science-fiction 
magazines, plus sales to Colliers, 
Esquire and Today's Woman. Also 
sold fifteen television scripts. By 
and large, free-lancing is as pleasant as I hoped it "would be, and I 
'expect to stay at it. 

— Robert Sheckley 



★ 



HE smartest idea in simplifying helicopters has recently 



shift in the location of the driving 
motor — but it makes all the difference in the world. 

As you know> if you've seen or 
listened to a helicopter, vibration 
. is its biggest drawback. The reason for this is that the power has 
to be transmitted to the overhead 
rotors from the engine, through a 



icopie^ 



pedient of putting i^he engine overhead, right beneath the rotors! The 
result is that the gear-shaft system is eliminated, with its consequent elimination of oscillation and 
vibration. 

Technicians strongly suspect that 
the final power answer in the helicopter will be some sort of jet-onthe-end-of-the-rotor method, so as 
to eliminate vibration entirely. The 
real way to iron out the bugs in 



complicated system of shafting and heliwpters would be to offer buildgearing. In the new helicopter, it-yourself kits to amateurs — a milthey get away from that vibration- lion new ideas would take hold! 
inducing method by the logical ex- * * * 




^ ^ "This used to be my wife's room until she hod to 

go away to that place 1 wos telling you about." 

69 



OFF




Four psychotic bipeds vanished somewhere 
in the galaxy. Naturally they had to be caught 
before they spread insanity on a normal world • • • 



HAT a mess!" Gik 
said, gazing mournfully 
over the once-beautiful 
Gahie Preserve. 

T|xe repair crew nodded, and began to sort their tools. 

Gik looked around nostalgically. 
The Game Preserve planet had 
been one of the show places of the 
Central Galaxy, a scenic wonderland drawing tourists even from the 
distant. Ktong Universe. Now the 
place was all but destroyed. 

Gik could tell at a glance that 
many species of animal life, gathered especially for the Preserve, 
had been obliterated. Whole clans 
of birds had disappeared. Whole 
orders of insects were missing, and 
rare plants had been choked out 
of existence. 

"What's done is done," said 
Gik. Now he had all the work of 



reconstruction in front of him. 
But where to begin? Reforestation? 

Utilizing his glyge sense, Gik 
saw that the damage ran all the 
way down to the bowels of the 
Game Preserve Planet. 

"And to think," Gik said aloud, 
"That this whole mess was the 
work of four madmen!" 

The repair crew looked up immediately. They were dull-witted 
construction workers recruited 
from Lis. That little planet lay 
at the extreme East end of the' 
Central galaxy, where news travels slowly. 

"Four madmen,* sir?" one asked, 
with typical Lissic impertinence. 

"Two madmen, and two madwomen," Gik said. "You can morigaze the rest while you work." 

But Lis was a backward planet, 



70 



and none of its inhabitants knew 
how to morigaze a complete story 
from two disconnected though casually related facts. 

"You'll hear about it when you 
get home, then," Gik said. 

The workers protested. The destruction of arGame Preserve was 
shocking, even to their dull sensibilities. They demanded to know 
bow it happened. 
"No," said Gik. 

"Sir," said a worker, "we will 
mk better if we know." 



"What makes you think so?" 
Gik asked. 

"Sir, it has been shown that inducement motives increase geometrically when the gross finite causes 
of any irreversible, action are — " 

"None of your damned Hyploxian 
psychology," Gik growled. It was 
maddening, to be lectured at by 
morons! Besides, their terminology was hopelessly jumbled. 

But the repair crew clustered 
around him, showin<i; no interest in 
the task ahead, their cloddish faces 



72 



IMAGINATION 



eager for information. "Well," Gik 
said, "1^11 tell you the beginning 
and you can vorsatize the rest. 
Agreed?" 

TT started quite some time back, 
when twp psychiatrists named 
Olg and Loom were piloting their 
ship back to the Asylum at North 
Edge. They had a cargo of four 
psychotics — two madmen and two 
madwomen — ^and were conducting 
them to four safely padded cells. 

It was a long hot trip, through 
the bla?:ing galactic center. The 
psychiatrists had to thread their 
way through clusters of blazing 
white supergiants, dull red dwarfs> 
and sizzling blue giants. 

The four psychotics were resting 
quietly,.since the psychiatrists had 
drugged them. 

Both psychiatrists were tired and 
thirsty. Therefore, they were sorely tempted when a convenient Ref reshery . hove in sight, moored to 
a dark star. 

"Asylum work comes first," Olg 
said. ■ * 

"True," Loom agreed, several of 
his tongues hanging out. "But 
one quick one — "
It didn't take much argument.' 
Their madmen w^re safely stupefied, and, because of their amazingly short life spans, the psychotics 
would probably die before they 
could reach the Asylum in distant 



North Edge. It seemed that a 
few minutes would make no appreciable difference. 

Accordingly they anchored and 
hurried into the Refreshery. Inside, they had two drinks of Vish 
apiece, and came back out.
Although they had been gone a 
very short time, as Olg and Loom 
counted time, ship and psychotics 
were gone. 

"Oh, no," Loom murmured. 

"Oh, yes," Olg sighed. He realized that he hadn't taken into account the psychotics' high metabolic rate, a concommittant of 
short life span. The few moments 
that Olg and Loom had been'^gone 
could have been months to their 
charges; enough time to recover 
from the drug, master the controls, and roar away. 

"We must find them at once," 
cried Loom. "Before they land on 
some civilized world!" 

"No need to worry," Olg said. 
"Any civilized world will return 
them or thi^ir corpses to the Asylum." 

"Of course they will," Loom 
said. "// tkey detect them! Remember, psychotics are capable of 
almost limitless cunning. They 
might land at night and conceal 
themselves, and do — ^why, they'd 
do anything! They'd blow up a 
planet, if they could!" 

"And they could," Olg said. 



OFF-LIMITS PLANET 



73 



^'But let's not. get excited." He 
hurried back into the Refreshery, 
had another drink of Vish, and 
commandeered the proprietor's 
ship. The two psychiatrists got in, 
then looked at each other hope^ 
lessly. 

All around them lay. the suns 
of the Central galaxy, millions of 
stars with tens of millions of planets. 

. ^Think," Olg said. "What 
would you do first,- if you were 
psychotic?" 

"I'd slalang," Loom said prompt
ly. 

"Let's try it, then." Quickly 

they slalanged the ship into mon
oradic space, which, in its entire 
extent, is only eighty yards long 
by twenty wide, well-lighted, and 
affording no place to hide. 

Annoying enough, the psychotics 
weren't there. 

"Too bad," Loom^ said. "It 
would have been so easy to find 
them here," 

"We'll have to search all the 
planets in* this vicinity of space," 
Olg said. 

"I know one way we'll be able 
to detect their presence," Loi>m 
said. 

"How's that?" Olg asked.. 
'"When they blow up a planet, 
we're bound to sed the flash." 

They set the ship's controls for 
top speed, in defiance of all galac


tic speed laws, and headed for Ptis, 
the nearest inhabited world. 

4 C^HAT'S enough," Gik said to^ 
his workers. "You can 
vorsatize the rest. Now to work." 
He glyged the surface^of the Oame 
Preserve. 

What he saw there was not 
heartening. The minerals had 
been blasted from the ground. The 
waters were polluted, the forests 
destroyed, the land masses chopped 
up. 

"You and you," Gik said. "Take 
that iron ore down four thousand 
feet and spread it around. " Build 
up to the surface with lighter 
ores. Let's get rolling now." 

Most of the workers had vorsatized the rest of the stor}^ Smiling sadly, they began to work. 

"Sir," anot)her» worker said, 
"Some of us can't vorsatize." 

"Why not?" Gik asked. , 

"We're very stupid," the worker 
said humbly. 

"That I can see," Gik said. "But 
et'er3/o/^(? can vorsatize !" , 

"We can't," the worker said miserably. " . 

"Well, I'll tell you some more. 
Then vou can induct the rest. You 
can induct, can't you?" 

The workers nodded. Gik looked around to make sure the minerals team was workini:, «*nil wrnl 
on. 



74 



IMAGINATION 



'T^HE Ptis world reported no sign 
of psychotics. Search parties on 
Klish and Yegl didn't find anything. Nor was there any report 
, from the Maverni planets, nor 
from the Calden sun, nor froni the 
Hyboxu Confederation. 

"So far, no good/' Loom said. 

"At least we've established t^at 
they're not hiding in the immediate 
neighborhood," Olg said. "Now 
we'll pin it down a step farther. 
Let me see the report on the psychotics." 

"It was in our ship/' Loom said. 

"Fine! Do you remember their 
classification?" 

Loom concentrated deeply. 
"They were bipeds," he said.. 

"Oh." " ^ 

"Yes. I'm sure of it. Bipeds 
with a 224 metabolism and a fecundity rate high in the 005 's." 

"That's very bad," Olg said. 

"Extremely short life span/^ 
Loom said. "Quite possibly they 
died in spacje. But we can't take 
any chances." 

"Of course not. Call Galactic 
Center and get me a list of all biped worlds." 

While Loom was getting the list 
Olg did some serious thinking. 

.Psychotic bipeds were a great 
danger. 

The biped worlds, because of 
their short life spans, were usually left alone, by Center. Quiet, 



ingenious beings, the bjpeds were 
known for their peace-loving, 
friendly ways. 

But add four psychotic bipeds to 
any normal biped world . . . 

The result could be catastrophic! 

Bipeds, for all their good qualities, were nature's most delicate 
creatures. If psychotics were allowed to breed into normal stock, 
a sizeable percentage of the race 
could be infected. It had happened before. 

Once infected, bipeds were the 
terror of the galaxy. Biped worlds 
had been known to go ^to war — 
against all and sundry. Hefeditary 
nomads, the bipeds ranged through 
space, bombing any world that 
stood in their i?^ay. Often they 
smashed planets out of sheer pique, 
or used them as refueling stations, 
or as large targets. 

The psychotic bipeds would naturally .head for a biped world. They 
would land, acting quite normal, 
and be accepted in all good faith 
• • • 

Olg prayed that the local authorities would be alert enough to apprehend .them -before any intermarriage had occurred. 

When Loom returned with the 
list, they were ready. Swiftly they 
flew to the nearest biped world, 
landed, and made contact with the 
planetary representative. 

"Have you any ..record of recent 



OFF-LIMITS PLANET 



75 



psychoses?'' they asked 4:he biped. 

"I'll have to check the records," 
the biped said. He hurried to do 
so, but died of old age before his 
task was completed. 

Olg and Loom cursed their 
bad luck. They had hit a 
world where the life span was 
unusually short, even for bipeds. 

His successor took over, while 
Olg and Loom waited and fumed. 

"What was the question?" the 
new planetary representative asked. 

"Psychotics?" Loom asked, very 
rapidly, in order for the biped to 
hav^ time to answer. 

As fast as Loom could speak, it 
took years, as the bipeds measured 
time. 

"I don't — " the biped began, and 
died. 

His successor, fortunately, was a 
youth. The lad had time to 
check the records and tell them 
no, before he died of advanced old 
age. 

"Af this rate," Loom said, back 
in their ship, "We'll never catch 
up with them." 

Olg look^ unhappy. This, of 
course, was why Central usually 
left the bipeds alone. It was next 
to impossible to talk to them, except over several generations. 

The psychiatrists knew that it 
was entirely possible that the psychotics had begun to infect a papu


lation already. Their descendants 
might be spreading the seeds of 
destruction further. 

If so, they had to discover and 
isolate the polluted segment of the 
race. 

"How many more biped worlds 
are there?" Olg asked, 

"One hundred and four," Loom 
said." 

With sinking hopes, the psychiatrists gpt under way again. 

44 AND the rest is, obvious," 
Gik said. "You can easily 
induct it from there." 

Smiles lighted the brutish faces 
of the Lis workers. Inducting happily, they returned to their work. 

Gik saw that the minerals crew 
was doing nicely. He directed the 
scattering of diamonds next, for 
esthetic effect. 

Another team was assigned the 
task of rebuilding a range of stubby mountains. After that, eight 
major rivers had to be deflected to 
their natural courses, and millions 
of square miles of grass had to be 
replanted. And even that was 
only the beginning. 

"A thorough mess," Gik said to 
himself. He sniffed the air, and 
decided that it would have to be 
shipped out and cleaned, before 
being really fit to breathe. 

"Sir," said a voice at Gik's 
shoulder. 



76 - IMAGIlN 

"Don't bother me," Gik said. After purifying the air, he would have 
to restore its natural fragrance. 
That would require several million 
tons of — 

"Sir," the voice said again. ' 

Gik turned, and saw a tiny, 
wizened worker. 

"What is it?" 

"Sir — I can't induct.'^ 
' "You can't induct! What did 
you learn in school?" 

"Nol very much, sir,'^ the little 
worker said miserably. "Sir — 
won't you tell me the rest?" 

"Stop bothering me," Gik said. 
"Even without inducting, you 
should be able tp work out the 
rest." 

"No sir," the little worker said. 

"Not accurately. I perceive, of 
course, the direct implied casual 
relationship between the wrecked. 
Game Preserve and the escape and 
assumed subsequent race reintegration of the psychotic bipeds. 
But I ask myself, is it a one-toone bearing, a progression in logical arithmeticism, or are there imperceptible but course-changing 
overtones, gap-bridging potentials 
emerging, and the like? I ask 
myself, according to the former 
major h)^o thesis, was a war th^en 
begun by a psychotic strain on a 
biped planet in which one of the 
attrition points was the Game Preserve? If so, what should I expect, 



morphologically? Was the Gam 
Preserve used as (a) a refueling station, (b) a target 
area, , (c) a general base of 
operations, to explore only the 
more obvious of the series? Or, to 
explore a second major hypothesis, could not the original escaped 
psychotics have gone to two biped 
worlds, separated though conjoined? I would judge a small operational probability for this, since, 
after all, it takes two to make a 
war. One defective biped race 
could, conceivably, have been held 
in check or the occurrence reported to Center. But with two — ^ ' 
and this is .only a supposition based 
on a shaky hypothesis — ^we have 
all the quasi-logical foundations 
for a war. However, going back to 
the first major hypothesis — " 

"Spare me your dull-witted chatter," Gik said. 

"I'm sorry, sir," the worker said. 

"You're wrong," Gik said. 

"I was afraid so," the worker 
said, sniffing' back tears. 

"And you're remarkably stupid." 

"I know it," the v^orker said. 

"Get back to work. There's a 
lot to be done." 

"Yes sir." The wizened little 
worker drew back his tail, preparatory to frustration-suicide. But Gik 
stopped him. 

"I'm short-handed as it is," he 
said. "If you promise to get right 



OFF-LIMI 

back to work, I'll tell you the 
rest." 

"Oh, I will sir!" the little worker said. 

"Very well," Gik said. "Now 
then—" 

A FTER checking fifty-four biped worlds, the psychiatrists 
still had not found the missing psychotics. Theif search pattern 
loomed in front of them, clear put 
to the galactic rim. \ 

They knew that the original 
madmen were long since dead. Now 
the problem was their descendants, 
if any. 

As they roared toward the fiftyfifth biped world, Loom detected a 
beat in his wave detector. 

They focused, and the wave grew 
into a typical psychotic pattern^ 
clearly amplified. 

They got a fix and hurried over, 
ignoring all galactic speed laws. 
Without delay, they landed. 

It was obvious at once that this 
was a strange world Usually, bi()eds were careful about breeding 
quotas, since, as a race, they were 
slightly claustrophobic. But on 
t his world they had spawned limitlessly. 

And the marks of infection were 
manifest, even at a casual glance. 
Wars were raging over the face of 
the planet; millions were starving. 



5 PLANET 77 

More miilions were diseased, or 
crippled. 

Illing with the 111 sense, the 
psychiatrists saw that the tremendous population was unable to feed, 
itself, and was equally unable to 
control its breeding. This was 
proof of insanity right there. 

And to make matters worse, cooperation, usually so prized among 
bipeds, operated only spasmodically here. 

On top of all this, these bipeds 
had artificially split themselves into races and subraces, and invented 
separate classifications witHin the 
classifications. 

« This was the final proof of psychosis, since bipeds were indivisibly 
the children of one race, and one 
race only. 

This was where the psychotics 
had landed. 

"The question now is," JLoom 
said, "how many — and what — other worlds have they infected? How 
many planets have they blasted, 
sacked, ripped apart, destroyed?" 

They illed and elged the information carefully, already certain of 
the answer. Bipeds were naturalborn spacers, and insane bipeds always spread to the stars. 

Olg saw the answer first. For 
an instant he was unable to believe 
it. Then Loom saw it. 

"These bipeds," Loom said, 



*^have never been in contact with 
any others. They Ve never been in 
space!" 
It was unbelievable — ^but true. 
These bipeds had never been able 
to develop space travel. Nor had 
their neighbors given it to them. 

Olg checked the list of biped 
worlds, and found the answer. 

This was no biped worjd. These 
bipeds had spawned on the Game 
Preserve! 

"That's it," Loom said. "The 
original four didn't go to a biped 
world. Instead they landed on a 
Game Preserve, where no one 
would look for them. Their descendants reverted to savagery, ani 
spawned — " 

"And spawned," Olg broke in. 
^'How they spawned!" 

"What a pity," Loom said. "Every one of these bipeds is a descendant of the original four." 

"They've certainly done a job on 
the Game Preserve," Olg. said. 
"Temporarily, we'll have to reclassify it. What do the natives 
call this place?" 

Loom illed the answer. "They 
call it Earth," he said. 



"Call the repair crew," Olg sai< 
"And hurry, before they blow t' 
planet to pieces." 

"At least," Loom said, "Th 
didn't infect any of the normal b' 
ped worlds." 

4 4 QO that's it," the little wor 
^ er said. 

^^That's it," Gik said. ^^And o 
course, we're left ^ith all the repair work on this butchered plan 
et." 

The worker picked up his tools. 

Then he turned back to Gik. 

"Where are the inhabitants* 
now?" he asked. 

"Well, naturally they couldn't 
be left here'' Gik said carelessly. 
"Psychotics belong in padded cells, 
in the Asylum." He paused. "Tl 
inhabitants were quite upset about 
it, naturally. I believe the psychiatrists had to send for three billion 
strait jackets. 

^^Now will you kindly get to 
work?" 

The little worker nodded. With 
exquisite delicacy he began to rebuild a shattered granite mountain. 
THE END 



WHArS IN YOUR FUTURE? 

IMAGINATION — every month! 

*' * 

Always your guarantee of the finest SCIENCE FICTION entertainment! 
DON'T MISS A SINGLE THRILLING ISSUE— SUBSCRIBE TODAY — SEE PAGE 130 



m 

r 




A man from the stars wouSd be looked upon 
with suspicion until his purpose was known. So 
If was with Aries, but he calmed Earth's fears 
with incredible gifts of science seemingly a — 




SANTA ClAU 



Contact skull be neither start' 
ling nor abrupt. It shall initially 
demonstzatey beyond any possibility of misinterpretation, that the 
uninttiated culture- has no cause 
jor consiernation; that no aggression is intended 



• • • 



coruscating metallic ovoid. 
I hovered over Washington for 
an entire day after making 
its initial appearance with the 
dawn of a Monday morning. 

Even* before it was sighted visually, it appeared on three radar 
screens in the form of a luminous 
patch deposited there by the circling sweep beam. 

By nine o'clock an interceptor 
had swung aloft, boxed in the 
area described in the initial report, 
and radioed back that he could 
sight nothing suspicious. 



^ But that was perhaps because 
he was looking up, not down — not 
between the green, round forms of 
the trees that dot Anacostia Park. 

By eleven, however, the object 
had been reported successively over 
■ Union Bepot, the Capitol, the National Gallery of Art, the National 
Museum, Washington Monument 
and the White House. 

The first interceptor squadron 
took off from Anacostia Naval 
Air Station shortly before noon. 
Contact was made immediately 
over the Potomac River in the vicinity of Arlington Memorial 
Bridge. ■ 

Eighteen Banshee jets emptied 
their fifty calibre machine gun 
magazines after receiving no visible response to an order to land 
and after unsuccessfully attempting to herd the object to their 



80 



82 



IMAGINATION 



base. They unleashed their total 
load of rockets, regrouped, then Returned to the field to report all efforts ineffective. 

Four more squadrons attacked 
during mid-afternoon. And, before 
night had come, at least a dozen 
anti-aircraft batteries had fired 
hundreds of rounds at the low 
maneuvering silvery form. 

At dusk, it landed at Washington National Airport immediately 
in front of the Administration 
Building. 

Before midnight, long after all 
air operations had been cancelled 
at the field, it had been ringed in 
by two artillery companies and 
an entire infantry division — all' under orders to hold their fire. 

At dawn, a previously indiscernible hatch in the side of the 
huge ship swung out. 

Mortar crews snapped into po-/ 
sition beside their weapons. 

Field pieces readjusted their 
aims to cover various portions of 
the craft. 

Grenade throwers hugged the 
ground beneath the muzzles of the 
big guns. 

Riflemen, pronle because of the 
point-blank range of the artillery, 
brought up their guns instinctive
ly. 

Lieutenant General Hollerman 
sped in his jeep to a point in the 



defense ring opposite the opening 
hatch. 

A metallic thud rang across the 
field as the swinging partition 
reached its full-throw position. 

A small, dumpy man stepped 
out, his tweed jacket flung across 
his left arm: He was almost bald, 
his smooth scalp shining against 
a curlicue of white fuzz that ringed his h^ad. There was a rhythm 
of form to his arching mustache 
and flowing alabaster beard. But 
the superabundance of hair on his 
face failed to dominate the ruddy, 
bulbous cheeks and the almost 
. spherical nose. 

Surveying the ring defense with 
eyes that danced in expression of 
amused delight, he swabbed his 
brow with a handkerchief and 
smiled. 

"Hello," he said. "Dodgers still 
.on top?" 

Extreme caution shall he exercised in .establishing, through observation, qualification of candi^ 
date culture ... 

CCILT^OU .might, by way of an 
* understatement," adniitted 
the Army Chief of Staff, staring 
out the window into the Pentagon 
parking area, "call it incredible." 

He turned to look at Secretary 
of Defense Arthurs. "But I'd say 



COSMIC SA 

it's nothing less than fantastic." 

Arthurs drummed his fingers on 
the desk impatiently. "Where is 
he now, General Barrow?" 
"TheyVe leaving the airpoKt." 
"Just leaving?" 

"Hollerman was told to conduct 
ini^al questioning there. They 
finished only minutes ago." 

- "And I suppose they^re being 
followed by ten thousand gawking 
civilians and a corps of newspapermen?" 

"Fortunately not." Barrow 
smiled feebly, going over to the 
desk. "An old man with a beard 
might attract some attent^pn — ^but 
not as much as if it had been US 
outlandish — uh, thing that had 
gotten out of that contraption. 
But there's plenty enough in the 
papers as it is. 

It was twelve. But there was no 
customary flurry of noontime activity outside. Instead, it seemed 
to Barrow, there was portentous 
calm; a lurking stillness |:hat almost 
shouted the unfjrecedented significance of the day. 

"Human!" Secretary Arthurs 
shook his head incredulously. 

"Of that," suggested the General, "we should be grateful." 
"But how ..." 
"He told Hollerman he is a representative — an intermediary." 
"Of the Algolians," Arthurs said 



[TA GLAUS 83 

knowingly. "But what are Algolians?" 

"The old man says they are 
creatures that come from something like five hundred million 
million miles across space." 

"Creatures?" 

Barrow nodded. "He-^told Hollerman that's why they sent him. 
Because they're not human." 

Arthurs frowned. 

"The old man," Barrow continued, "said - the Algolians realize 
that culture can't meet culture 
from a standing start; that they 
must have a common basis of contact . . . That's his role. They are 
supposed to have "borrowed him 
from earth as a baby a few decades 
ago and brought him up so he 
would be used to them, would understand them. At the same time 
they trained him in earth culture 

too sa he would know both." 

"Trained, him in earth culture?" 
the Secretary repeated awkwardly. 

"By what he called remote penetro-video and penetro-audio observation instruments — or something like th^-t." 

The Secretary uttered an "Oh" 
which conveyed nothing. 

Barrow turned to stare impatiently out the window^ again. 

Arthurs was silent a moment. 
Then, "And what does he say 
these— Algolians want? " 



84 



IMAGINATION 



The General shrugged. ^'Nothing. Only contact now.' Later perhaps, if we qualify technologically 
and in other respects, commerce — 
exchange of materials. But right 
now they only want to help us." 

The General and the Secretary 
silently studied each other with 
unspoken suspicion. 

"We've temporarily impounded 
the craft, of course?" Arthurs 
asked. 

"Naturally. But the old man 
didn't seem to mind; laughed 
about it; said the Algolians intended for us to accept it as a gift. 
He'd like to borrow it after we 
get through studying it, though, so 
he can report back to them.'^ 

The Secretary of Defense resumed drumming his fingers meditatively on the polished desk tc^. 

"What do you think of it, 
Frank?" he asked finally, g 
"Hell, Bob, I don't like it." 

/^NLY minutes later, the old 
man sat in the chair across 
the desk from the Secretary. He 
was flanked by Generals Hollerman and Barrow. 

"Aries," he said, responding to 
Arthurs' personal question. "That's 
the only name they gave me. It's 
descriptive of the time of the year 
that I became associated with the 
Algolians, as determined by the 



earth Zodiac." 

The answer failed to dissipat 
the cumbersome reticence of the 
three officials. 

The old man leaned back and* 
laughed jovially. It was a deep, 
belly laugh and the joggling motion of his prominent midsection 
was imparted even to the chair. 

"Gentlemen," he said, his eyes 
blinking friendily, "this ^ is no 
death vigil. For me, it's homecoming! For us— humanity — it's 
the start of a new age!" 

Barrow folded his arms, glanced 
at Secretary Arthurs, then studied 
the old man through narrowed 
eyes. "^^And what is required of us 
to— qualify for this new age, Mr. 
Aries?" 

"Not mister — just Aries," 
Laughter returned to his eyes. 
"We have already been accepted, 
so to speak. We now face, shall 
we say, a preparatory period 
wherein we will make ourselves 
worthy of association - with other 
cultures. In the centuries to come, 
the Algolians realize, we will be in 
contact with many other races who 
cannot let themselves become 
known to us now because of a cqde 
of behavior which they must follow. If we are not prepared, we 
may find ourselves in the position 
of accepting baubles instead o 
merchandise of like value." 



Arthurs folded his hands on the 
desk top. "These. Algolians. What 
are they like?" : v 

"I suppose/' Aries smiled warmly, fingering his beard, ."you would 
describe them ^ aa monstrous. 
That's why it was necessary to 
have an intermediary. But after 
you become acquainted with them 
through me you will acquire a different appreciation of them." 

"When do they put in their appearance?" Barrow asked. 

"Not for a year or so. You must 
first achieve space. Regulations 
require that." 

Barrow did not take his eyes 
from the man.\ There was something about him that was almost 
hypnotic. Intently, he groped for 
the association . . . If the tweed 
suit were replaced by a red costume with a broad black -belt— if 
the . almost bald head were covered by a red cap with a white cotton ball on top — ^if he wore shiny 
black boots instead ... 

"You are perhaps wondering," 
Aries continued complaisantly as 
he played with several paper clips 
in a tray on the desk, "why an intermediary should be an old man. 
There are two reasons. First, my 
appearance, symbolically demonstrates benevolent motivation. Then 
too, it required a good deal of 
time to become familiar with the 



technology that Fm to pass on to 



you. 

While he spoke he straightened 
five of the metal clips and reshaped 
them into various designs of coils 
and angles. 

"Took years to learn the principles behind this." He laid the 
wire sections iti a circular series 
with their ends touching,, except 
for a small breach in the circuit. 
"But of course I've prepared treatises that will enable you to grasp 
such things immediately." 

From his pocket he withdrew a 
small object that appeared to be a 
gray, porous rock; he laid it across 
the open ends of the circuit. 

The desk shuddered, raised a foot 
in the air and remained suspended 
there. * • 

.Hollerman and Barrow leaped 
up, turning their chairs over. Arthurs leaned far back, as though 
cringing from the desk, his eyes 
staring. 

Aries laughed deeply, holding 
his stomach in amusement. Then 
slowly he removed the stone from 
the wires. The desk sank to the 
floor. He replaced the rock in his. 
pocket. 

"I had hoped for an audience 
with the highest official," he said, 
looking at the Secretary. "But you 
have the authority to gather the 
men we'll need. Ill have to see 



86 



IMAGINATION 



your most competent physician, 
physicist and rocket engineer . . • 
all engaged in research, of course." 

The three men frowned. 

Aries answered with an amused 
laugh. "When you have gifts of 
the nature that I have, you must 
present them to the persons most 
qualified to understand and interpret them for others of lesser intellectual ability." 

"Gifts?" repeated Barrow and 
Arthurs simultaneously. 

"Technological achievements , " 
explained Aries, "that will make us 
eligible for contact with the Algolians and others." 

Patholagical advance shall take 
precedence in chiteria of qualifica-^ 
iion. Unless disease has been 
eliminated through ultimate pathological methods, said culture shall 
be considered disqualified. Under 
no conditions shall an impure culture be permitted to associate with 
a biologically cleansed species . . . 

you see, Dr. Paulington," 
^ "it was Aries' voice coming 
lustily through the doorway from 
the next room of the suite overlooking the Potomac, "pathology 
becomes quite simple when the factors are viewed in their true nature." 

Arthurs and Barrow looked won


deringly at each other, then 
glanced into the other room where 
Aries stood with a thick printed 
manuscript in his hand. 

* "I don't quite understand . . . " 
Paulington began hestitatingly. 

"The germ theory," Aries went 
on patiently, "represented a considerable advance, and in the right 
direction, over the idea of spontaneous generation of disease. But 
it's still two levels above the reality of the situation. Our key of 
correlation lies not with micro-organisms, not with viruses — but 
rathcK pn the stratum of the chemical protein molecule itself." 

Only Paulington's anxious 
breathing came from the room. 

Aries laughed at his confusion. 
"Within two hours," he encouraged, ."youll understand it. But 
first we must concede that the 
molecule itself, or rather inherent 
variations in the molecule, is responsible for the pathogenic potentialities of both the virus and the 
microbe; that the variations are ordered and are directly related with 
the diverse diseases, and that they 
are controlled by simple methods 
. . . Here," he drew the doctor beside him and turned several pages 
of the manuscript. "First well take 
the broad category of infectious 
diseases — " 

The dominant, bass voice low


— V * 



ered and Barrow and Arthurs turned to stare out the window. 

"Get a rough going over by the 
press?" Arthurs asked. 

"Rough as hell," Barrow swore, 
"They were like flies." 

"What did you tell them?" 
"Everything." General Barrow 
hrugged indifferently. "You said 
o secrecy lid." 
Secretary Arthurs shrugged. 
"Couldn't very well keep the covers on something like this, could 
you? The people wouldn't stand 
for it." 

He motioned down into the 
street below. 

Barrow stared at the restless 
thousands, held 'back by a line of 
troops standing at parade rest, bay^ bared. 

"Imagine what it would be 
like," Arthurs suggested, "if we 
hadn't taken over the whole buildmg." 

"I don't see why* we didn't refer 
Aries over to the State Department. Seems to me it would be 
their squawling* brat." 

"Tried to/' the Secretary said 
wistfully. "But Aries won't bounce. 
Jarvis said no soap at the cabinet 
meeting last night. Said that if we 
got all the — -gifts that Aries promised, he didn't see why^ it wouldn't 
lit in the category of nalional- defense knowledge. Jarvis indicated 



he may take over later — ^after we 
get through." 

Aries' voice welled through the 
open door. "And the basic instrument3 I brought can be used as 
models. I'll have them delivered as 
soon as you say." 

"This afternoon?" Paulington 
asked weakly. y 

"This afternoon,"^ Aries laughed 
spiritedly, "if you'll indicate which 
ones you want first." 

General Barrow stared down 
thoughtfully into his nioist palms. 
It was so much like Santa, he 
thought, with a pop-eyed youngster on his knee, asking him what 
he wanted for Christmas and tell-ing him ... 

"I asked this yesterday," Arthurs interrupted. "I'm going to 
ask it again: What do you think, 
Prank?" 

Barrow's eyes switched to study 
his other palm. "Againv Hell, I 
don't like it. Why would aikybody 
want to give us something for 
nothing?" 

Arthurs shrugged. "I can conceive of ourselves doing the same 
for, say, a savage tribe in Africa."
The General laughed embtion4essly. "If we thought we could 
make friends and trade off some 
dime-store necklaces for mraniuin 
ore." ' . 

"No," Arthurs protested. ^ "Look 



at the missionaries. They go down 
among the primitives — " 

"Even they have a pitch. They 
are after souls. Everybody's after 
something." ^ 

The Secretary conceded listlessly. "Perhaps so — with humanity. 
But, can we classify and judge the 
Algolians according to human 
standards? Anyway, there's an 
adage: Don't look a gift horse . . 

No culture ignorant of the APrime energy spectrum and Us applications shall be deemed entitled 
to the benefits of contact. To admit such a culture would be inviting a situation wherein the vigor 
and resources of one or several 
superior cultures would be squandered in a benevolent gesture on 
an immature people ... 

44/^OME in/' Aries urged, smil^ ing broadly, "I'm not the 
least bit sensitive about having an 
audience while I'm dressing." 

From the doorway. General Barrow watched him buckle his belt, 
refusing to gather in any of the superfluous flesh by tightening it even 
one notch beyond what was required to hold his trousers up. 

"I have a morning paper," the 
General offered dully, "It's all 
about the— knowledge you gave 
Paulington yesterday." 



Aries turned, running a brush 
languidly through his beard. "Has 
be tried any of the pathological 
methods?" 

"Enough to have already announced apparent total cures for 
cancer and three other diseases." 

The old man's eyes flashed his 
merriment. "Fine! It is encouraging to see results so soon . . . 
Have you arranged for the physicist?" 

"He's here now." The Army 
Chief of Staff tossed the paper on 
the bed. Then he turned searching, 
submissive eyes on the other. 
"Aries, it's Wednesday. Two days 
ago you arrived. Since then you've 
gained the trust of everybody who 
can read a newspaper. Now, I'm 
not an unduly suspicious man, 
but—" 

"And why shouldn't I have gained 
everybody's confidence?" Aries 
interrupted in a mildly mocking 
tone. "I am one of you. Of course 
it's only by accident, but I'm the 
one who was selected to bring a 
new era to earth — ^lo send progress 
leaping ahead perhaps two, perhaps 
three thousand years." 

He 'Opened the closet, slid out a 
suitcase and swung back its lid. It 
was filled with stapled stacks of 
printed papers. 

"I have only two more of these," 
he said, holding up one of the 



COSMIC SANTA CLAUS 



89 



manuscripts, "to present personally 
to recipients. There are over a 
I score of treatises that will be left 
pfcidth you to distribute to the proper individuals or institutions. They 
represent proportionate thousandyear advances in other fields." 

1^ "x^fter you present them — then 
what?" 

I Aries tapped Barrow's shoulder 
f affectionately. "Then I shall return to the Algolians and report — 
and wait for earth ships to come 
out into space and meet us there." 

Aries' grin was effusive. Barrow smiled weakly in an unenthusiastic response. If it was as the 

old man said — if he would merely 
leave his 'gifts' and return from 
where he had come — then maybe 
he would take the irrepressi-ble aura 
of suspicion with him. Or was 
there an aura of suspicion? Barrow 
wondered if it were only he who 
was reserved in his acceptance of 
Aries. 

I The old man put on his coat, indicating he was ready to enter the 
other room. 
"I've already ordered your 
breakfast," Barrow said as they 
went through the doorway. 
"Excellent! And the physicist 
^ is . . . ?" 

P "Dr. Wallertz. Baldon Wallertz.'^ . 

Secretary Arthurs and the man 



who sat beside him rose from the 
divan at the other end of the room. 

Aries went directly over to the 
latter. 

"Once," he began sonorously, 
without waiting for an introduction, "we were completely unaware 
of the existence of electricity. You 
are familiat- with its discovery ,and 
harnessing. Of course, electromagnetism is actually a form of energy 
transmissioti, but it's suitable here 
as a reference to show that forces 
may exist of which we are not 
aware until we perfect* the instruments to detect and utilize 
them." 

Wallertz shifted uneasily, apparently wondering whether he was 

« 

expected to say something. 

But Aries went on. "Just as utilization of electricity was a dormant potentiality, so is yet another 
energy source — what is universally 
referred to as A-Prime energy. 

"It has spectromatic characteristics.' It exists in inert form 
throughout what you have, until 
recently, referred to as the ether. 
It makes obsolete the need for 
coal, gasoline — everything you have 
used until now — ^as a means of producing power. You would have 
discovered A-Prlme energy, perhaps, after several hundred years of 
experimenting with nucleonics . . . 
But if you'll come with me, Dr. 



90 iMAUil 

Wallertz, we'll take a shortcut 
through those centuries." 

Aries led the physicist off into a 
second reception room, stopping 
at the door of the bedroom to get 
a portfolio. 

Arthurs turned to the General*^ 
"Still don^t like it?" 

"Still . . . How about you?" 

"I was a bit suspicious for a 
while. But, what the hell? What 
can happen? The old guy's giving 
us knowledge that can't do anything but good. Then he's going to 
go back where he came frop. Everything'll be the same — except 
that well be a couple of thousand 
years more advanced than --we are 
now." 

The General was meditatively silent. 

"What did you have in mind, 
Frank?" Arthurs went . on, half 
smiling. "Something Orson Wellish? Hell, these Algolians wouldn't make us smarter first." 

Barrow inspected his hands 
again, as though he might find now 
what he had missed yesterday. 

"Aries ..." he said absently, 
tracing on his palm a straight line 
that branched off at the top into 
two half circles. "The sign of the 
Ram." 

The Secretary looked quizically 
at him. . 

"Aries," he mused aloud. "The 



first constellation of the Zodiac. 
Pictured as a Ram." He stared 
thoughtfully at the other. 

After a moment he went on. 
"Ever been around a slaughtering 
house? -Cattle-swine — you can 
drive them from the pens to the 
slaughterer. But you can't drive 
sheep. The meatpackers get 
around that problem, though. For 
you can lead a sheep.- A trained 
ram does the job efficiently. In the 
industry they call it a Judas Ram." < 

Candidate culture must have 
conquered space. Perfection of interstellar devices, however, shall 
not be deemed a necessary acquisition. The minimum standard is 
interplanetary travel within the 
system in question ... 

'T^HE door bpened and closed 
^ softly. Still holding on to the 
knob, the thin, middle-aged man 
passed a folded handkerchief Qver 
his forehead and looked down 
thoughtfully at the bulky manuscript protruding from the baggy 
pocket of his jacket. 

'Arthurs stared e:5tpectantly at 
him. "Learn anything about rocketry?" he asked facetiously. 

Dr. James Starkton nodded coming across the room. "Enough to 
know the answers^ to everything 
that stumped us on his ship. But, 



COSMIC SANTA CLAUS 



91 



will we be able to apply the knowledge?" 

"I've just spoken with the White 
House. And I might say I detected nothing but amazement when I 
told the President that an entire 
space program would cost us less 
than the appropriation for the last 
flattop and that it could be completed within a year." 

"You explained, of course, that 
was because no research would be 
involved?" 

The Secretary nodded. "And he 
had no doubt but what he can get 
double or triple that appropriation* 
He said that instead of twenty ships 
he wants a fleet of at least fifty 
. . . Where's Aries?" 

A roar welled from the throng 
inside, as though in answer to the 
question, 

"He seemed rather amused with 
the idea of the official parade," 
said Starkton. "He went on down." 

Somewhere below a band struck 
up "Here Comes Santa Claus." But 
the music was drowned out by a 
surge in volume of the cheering 
voices. 

Arthurs went over to the window and looked down as Aries 
emerged from the building, flanked 
by six bodyguards. But he brushed them aside and went alone to 
the open Limousine waving to Ms 
admirers. 



He tossed kisses to either side 
of the street and bowed, but remained standirig in the back of the 
car. Whistles blew, motorcycles 
coughed to life and the parade 
moved off. 

When the Secretary turned 
around, Starkton had gone and 
General Barrow was .entering. 

"Monday, Tuesday, Wednesday, 
Thursday, Friday," Arthurs said, 
enumerating the days on his fingers, "and we still don't have any 
justification for your suspicion." 

"Suspicion?" The General went 
over and turned on the television 
set, smiling for the first time in 
the week. "That's something I can't 
very well have much of any more. 
He's leaving and there still aren't 
any strings tied to the gifts . . 
Anyway, it's like you said — why 
should they smarten us up first?" 

The screen flickered and he adjusted a dial. "Know something, 
Bob? I'm rather anxious to meet 
these Algolians." 

He drew a picture from his 
pocket. "They don^t look as monstrous as I thought they would at 
first. At least, they've got two 
arms, two legs and a head." 

Barrow turned back to the 
screen. The parade was swinging 
onto Pennsylvania Avenue. The 
camera, looking down on the Limousine, showed Aries standing with 



92 



IMAGINATION 



feet planted wide and his head 

thrown back, laughing. His hands, 
fingers spread apart, were held 
'tightly against his shaking stomach. And his beard rippled in the 
breeze of the ride. 

''I suppose," Arthurs said, **we 
will have to give the Algolians credit for a good deal of foresight 
and a thorough understanding of 
human nature. I wonder how receptive we would have been if they 
had sent anyone except a kindly 
old man?" 

Another camera took up transmission, panning the Pandemonium among the spectators., 

^Welcome, Space Santa!" banners were hoisted high over the 
heads of the throng. Streamers 
and- confetti rained down on the 
automobile and marching soldiers. 

"We wsLiit the Algolians!" was 
the repeated chorus of thousands 
along one entire block as the procession passed. 

Fifty-foot tall pictures of Algolians, produced from photographs 
released by Aries on the second to 
last day of his visit, draped every 
other building along a two-block 
stretch. 

Aries buttons ttie size of oranges 
clung to almost every other .lapel 
while women waved red and white 
corsages with jingle bells attached. . 

Barrow turned his attention from 



the screen. "When's ihe com 

back?" 

''Not until we go out to me 
him," the Secretary answered 
gretfully. 

"But where will we find him? 
Barrow asked puzzled. 

"Somewhere between here an 
Pluto. But we don't have to wo 
ry. The ships we're going to bui 
will take us anywhere in the s 

tem." , 

The Limousine drew to a s 
in front of the White House, 

camera at a vantage point the 
picking up the action. 

Another individual in form 

dress entered the car, shook Arie 
hand and sat down. The tumultuou 
roar increased, but it was evidei 
that none of the ovation was i^ 
tended for the President as the 
Limousine moved off again with 
him and the old man. 

Out Fourteenth Street it went, 
past the Executive Buildings and 
the Washington Monument, across 
the Potomac and along Mt. Vernon Memorial Highway to the National Airport, hardly leaving the 
field of one video camera before it 
was picked up by another. 

The car stopped next to the ship 
when it arrived at the airport. After throwing a score more kisses, 
te^th^r with his merry laughter, 
out ovpr tj^e crowd, Aries entered 



COSMIC SANTA CLAUS 



93 



e gleaming craft. 
The airport throng waved and 

M Kited deliriously as the hatch 
« 1< ised. Then the ship rose silently, 
Hwiftly. 

General Barrow turned the telr\ ision receiver off and crossed to 
iIk' door of the suite. 

"Where are you going?" asked 
Secretary Arthurs. 

The General's smile was one of 
weary relief. "Out to buy myself 
an Aries button." 

, , . Only if the above-prescribed standards are met shall contact 
ivith an uninitiated culture be permissible. It then becomes the direct responsibility of the initial 



would be nothing less than a planetary governorship. ' 

With a square of rough cloth, 
he rubbed his face brusquely. The 
crimson, bulbous nose and tjie 
cherubic cheeks came off first. 
Then the whiskers and shining pate 
and ears and fringe hair around 
his temples. 

^ . . Aggression against such cultures as not qualified according to 
the rules . outlined in this Handbook of Intragalactic Behavior 
shall be punishable by isolation of 
aggressor-species, deprivation vf all 
intersystem commerce .and travel, 
and death of responsible representatives, . 



bodied in the Galactic Convention 



observer to appraise said culture 

of the existence of and articles em- , XTES, Aries mused, readjusting 

^ course a fraction of a degree 
so that he would not miss the Algolian fleet out beyond the final orbit in the system, they had written 
the rules well to protect cultures 
unaible to defend themselves — ^un* 
qualified cultures. 

He disrobed and went to work 
on his paunch with the liquid and 
towel. 

But the rules didn't say anything about qualifying a race and 
, . . waiting. 

THE END 



/^UTSIDE the atmosphere, 
Aries set course and rose from 
the control chair. Within a year, 
he thought, they would have sent 
dozens of ships out from their 
planet. 

He went over to a locker and 
withdrew a flask, uncorked it and 
applied its liquid to his face. 
^ He ha.d done his job well indeed. 
And in all probability his reward 



FOR BACK ISSUES OF IMAGINATIOM - SEE PAGE 129 




You're certain to be included in 
o survey at one time or another. 
However, there's one you may not 
recognize as such. Chances are 
it will be more important tliali 
you imagine. It could be man's— 



Prelude To Space 



I WAS climbing the steep side 
of a central Wisconsin hill, 
holding my bow away from my 
(body for balance, when I first saw 
the stranger. He sat on a stump 
at the crest and watched me struggle up. As I drew nearer I panted out a greeting and received his 
cheerful "Hi" in return. When I 
finally reached the top I threw 
myself on the ground and began 
catching my breath. 



He didn't say anything at firstJ 
just looked at the bow and the 
quiver of arrows on my back. Finally he said, "May I look at it?" 
and reached for the bow. I handed it to him. He examined itj 
carefully and returned it. i 

"Beautiful workmanship. Is that^ 
all you use.?" he asked. 

"I never cared much for guns/' 
I answered. "IVe always thought'' 
a bow gave the animal more of 



94 



even chance for his life." 

We talked then on the various 
aspects of hunting aiid how the 
crisp fall air seemed to make the 
deer seem closer than during the 
heat of summer. While we talked 
I tried to place the reason he disturbed me, but I couldn't seem to 
do it. He was dressed in an old 
plaid shirt and dungarees and his 
blond hair wasn't many: shades removed- from my own straw thatch. 
But there was something odd about 
him that I couldn't quite find. 

"Perhaps it's the cloth." His 
words surprised me. "You see, 
it hasn't been discovered on 
this planet as yet. "My face 
must have shown astonishment because he went on in the same vein. 
'^I admit it's confusing, but it's 
also true. My clothes weren't 
made on Earth." He chuckled then, 
deep in his throat. "I dorj't blame 
you for being confused. I know 
how I would feel if I met an extraterrestrial being before space 
travel was a reality." 

I kept staring at him. Finally 
I blurted .out, ^What in Sam Hill 
are you talking about?" 

He leaned forward on the stump 
and his face grew earnest. ^'You 
might say I'm a poll taker. I have 
to decide certain things from various interviews with individuals I 
meet." 

"What are you trying to prove?" 



I asked. 

"I'm sorry, but I can't tell you 
that until I'm finished with the 
interview. If I told you your interest in the subject would tend' 
to prejudice your answers." 

"Fair enough. What do you 
want to ask me?" 

He pulled out a notebook and 
smiled. "These questions may 
seem..a little silly but I must have 
straight answers to them. Will 
you go along with me?" 

I nodded my head. 

"Let's see now. If you were the 
head of a government and wanted 
to ascertain whether another country was ready for admission into 
the United Nations; what would 
you do?" 

I shrugged. "I suppose I would 
^ read books and magazines from the 
country and possibly have an interview with the heads of the government. After I had collected my 
data I could then act upon it." 

"For the sake of argument suppose the books and other pt'iiodicals were written so as to be picjudicial in favw of the government, 
and the heads also were coloring 
what they said." 

I thought for a minute. '*ln Out 
case I suppose T WfHilil ^ei re lly 

place SOnK'oiif m <<\r ihll HMItlftV 

to interview Ua i a 

first hand view of llie •Mum ton. 
Then I woulii 14! mi <Uu " 



96 



IMAGINATION 



TTE nodded his head. "Yes, the 
^ people themselves and the 
conditions they live in will give 
you the needed data." He turned 
a page m the book. "Now suppose 
that vou wished to know if a certain planet was ready to enter into an organization such as the Galactic Federation, what would you 
do?" 

"I suppose I'd act as I did before. Place people inside the various areas of the planet to interview and observe. They would 
bring back the information needed 
to ascertain whether they would be 
an asset or a detriment to the organization." 

I thought to myself that the 
question was a trifle silly; after all, 
hadn't science proved that life 
couldn't exist on the other planets 
in our system? 

He relaxed after I answered and 
his smile was brighter than the 
previous ones. "Right," he said. 
"Naturally we had to learn the 
language first, but now a first hand 
check can be made. You see, 
there is a civilization out there," 
he raised his hand and swept the 
sky, "and -we have to check to see 
if this planet is ready to take its 
place as an adult civilization with 
the rest of us. 

"Earth within a very short time, 
will be reaching her fingers into 
space. Once she gets there she will 



be eligible to join the Galactic Fed-: 
eration." 

"That's all right," I said, "then 
we can exchange culture and 
knowledge with other civilizations." 

"Yes, if you are eligible to join." 

"But you said that once we reach 
space we will be eligible." 

"Look at it this way," he said. 
"The main purpose of the Galactic 
Foundation is to promote peace 
and understanding among the various planets. Earth would have to 
be prepared to take its place as 
just another member, and not an 
important member at that. Earth, 
you see, is one of the smaller planets and also would be the latest 
one to join. 

"In times past some planets have 
reached space without being fully 
prepared for what they would find. 
They still had internal troubles on 
their- own worlds. We had to place 
them in quarantine until they 
reached that degree of civilization 
where they were ready to live in 
peace. Now we check a planet 
before it reaches the space travel 
stage. We find out the reactions 
of the inhabitants to certain situations." . . 

"What sort of situations?" I 
asked. 
"Well, naturally we want to see 
their artifacts as an indication as 
to their advancement. We have to 
know what the average man thinks 



PRELUDE TO SPACE 97 

of space travel and trade with other reach space. We have the means 

planets. And their ideas on peace of keeping you from it if we de
and their feelings towards their cide you aren't yet ready." 

fellow men. All are very important. ^ He stood up and I followed suit. 

"Actually, when a planet once "I must be going now," he sighed, 

enters the Federation the people "This work keeps me on the run 

are the ones to decide on peace and and I have many more interviews 

war. So if the majority of the to make. Believe me, it was a 

people on a planet are peace-loving pleasure meeting you. I hope we 

that planet is ready to enter the meet again — later;" We shook 

Federation." hands and he strolled over the hill 

"But how do you find out all into the valley, 
these things?" I asked. "When a Perhaps I should have followed 
man finds out what you are trying him, but it wouldn't have done any 
to prove he may lie because he good, really. Because a few mowants to get into space." ments later I saw something shim
His eyes held a mischievous glint mering over the top of the hill. It 

as he answered. "Simple, the art was big and disc-shaped and shot 

of telepathy has been highly de- into the sky with a speed that was 

veloped among my race. I ha,ve unbelievable. ) 

your thoughts on everything I've I still don't know what to think 

mentioned. Later, when all the about him or what we talked about, 

data from thousands of similar in- I'm going to keep watching the pa
terviews is in it will be evaluated pers though, and hoping he got 

and the decision made as to whetb- the right answers. If we reach 

er your world will be allowed to the Moon I'll know he did ... 




• • due ctt the Spaceport in ten minutes — ^find that helmet yet?" 



Greg tried desperately to find an illegal 
metliod of joining his family on Mars; for the^ 
law said that no healthy man could land qn a« 



CANCER 




^^TXTE won the Patagonian 
W trust case," Greg Marson's jubilant tones filled the apartment — • the hall in 
which he stood, . the automatic 
kitchen in the rear, the living quarters, bedroom and nursery in between. 

But no one replied. Greg let 
his bulging, expensive briefcase 
slip to the floorj strode through 
the empty hall, poked his head into the kitchen, then entered the 
nursery. 

Dennis dashed to his father on 
two-year-old legs, and baby Phyllis gurgled twice in her pen. Gr^g 
wrinkled his nose in puzzlement, 
then punched the baby viewer. 

"You can cut service," he told 
the girl whose blonde head appeared on the screen. 

She nodded, counted on her fingers, and said: "That will be seven hours of viewing. No extras. 



The children behaved beautifully.| 

The screen darkened. Gr< 
stared foolishly at it, then turned 
to Dennis. 

"Where 'd your mother go?" 

Dennis smiled vaguely, and bega^ to tinker with his molecule^ 
builder. Phyllis gurgled again. 

Greg looked at the remains of 
the lunch that had hopped auto-, 
matically from its can at noon, 
and the lowered reservoir of inilk 
in the baby's feeder. Dora obvi-^ 
ously hadn't been there since' 
morning, Bnd she didn't like tO; 
trust the babyview service so long. 
It was Wednesday, and bridge 
club was Tuesday. They'd subscribed to the telebuying service, 
so Dora hadn't gone shopping f( 
months. The new baby wasn't due 
for five months, so a hurry-up trip 
to a doctor was unlikely . . . 

The front door screeched, its 
bad hinge audible in the nursery, 



98 



I 



and Greg relaxed. \"I'm back here, 
Dpjra," he called, andT headed for 
the hall, closing the nursery door 
behind him. 

Greg saw the policeman before 
he saw Dora. She was being lead 
toward the living room sofa, her* 
face white, her coat soiled. 

"What's wrong?" Greg rushed 
forward. 

"You're Marson? Relax. Your 
wife just got excited for a laiinute. Lots of them try what she 
did. We won't hold it against 
her." 

Dora pressed close to Greg, her 
head pushing against his chest, 
her body trembling. Reproachfully, the policeman was saying: 

"You. should have stayed home 
on her check day. If sl^ could 
have reached you when she heard 
the news—" He brushed invisible 
specks from his spotless uniform 
and walked out of the apartment. 

Greg led his wife to the sofa 
and sank down beside her. 
Check day. He stared at her with 
disbelief. 

"I'm sorry," she said in a whisper, not looking at him. "You 
never could remember anniversaries or dates, and I didn^t want to 
worry you." She started to quiver 
again. 

"How bad is it?" Greg fought 
for words, blinking to try to drive 
away the haze before his eyes. 

"It isn't serious at all/' she 



said, raising her head and looking 
at him for the first time. "They 
said that the operation ivill take 
oifly a few minutes. They said 
cancer wouldn't ever-, be dangerous if they always found it as 
quickly as this ' time. We — I'm 
really very lucky, they said." 

"But you should have told me 
that this was your check day. I 
was worried a^xjut the Patagonian 
case, and I just — " 

Then Greg stared straight at his 
wife, trying to pierce the strangeness that covered her eyes. He 
realized in a flood of terror the 
full implications of this day. 

"Dora — do they let you have 
the child if you're pregnant when 
they find cancer? I don't remember . . . 

SHE sat erect and pushed the 
hair away from her eyes, suddenly the stronger of the two. "Of 
course, I can have the child," she 
said. "And please don't worry 
about today. I was silly, and 
fainted when they brought in the 
report, and when I came to I tried 
to pretend that I'd suffered 
amnesia. It was foolish because 
they could have identified me 
from their records, but they told 
me that lots of women get the 
same idea,, so maybe I'm not so 
terrible after aJL" 

Dennis wailed from the nursery 
and Phyllis' thin cry joined his. 



"TheyVe lonely," Dora said. "I'll 
go aad see — " 

"Wait. You didn't make a decision?" 

" "Of course I did." She smiled 
palely. "I f€iserved passage." 

"But you can't go away! What 
would I do without you and the 
kids?" 

. "Don't shout so/ Yob'!! frighten 
them. And stop thinking about 
yourself. You know I'd be willing 
to undergo sterilization. But we 
can't inflict it on tte ki^is when 
they're still too young to decide 
for themselves." 

"I'll find some way out. There 
must be someone who'd be willing 
to be bought — " 

"Don't talk that way," she tried 
to laugh. "After all, you've .always said you'd like to have 
the children another planet." 

Greg sat down again and covered his face with his hands. "Don't 
say that, Dora. Sure, I'd like to 
take my family to Venus if they 
ever opened it up for colonizatidn. 
But that's a fine plaiitl. Mars is 
hell, and the law siiys I can't go. 
with you or the. kids." 

"That's exactly right. The law 
says that we're bree<ling a cancer-free race of humans on Earth 
by sending to Mars all the people 
who prove to be susceptible." 

Greg shook his head. "That plan 
wasn't set up just to breed out cancer prones. It was partly to keep 



Earth from starvation when 
population became an impossibl 
problem. It isn't really a monil 
issue. Look, you can probably 
cancel vour pasmge, and we can 
mmnge sterilization. The kids 
will approve when they grow up." 

Now it was Dora who held Greg 
close. "I don't want to leave you,'* 
she said desperately, "but there's 
nothing else to do. You know the 
Carstairs, and the Andresens. The 
same thing happened to both of 
^hme girls. They talked it over 
witli t&dr -afeusbands atid decided 
on sterilization, and the Andresens 
broke up the next year and Mrs. 
Carstairs is in a mental home . . ." 

Greg was silent fc^ at motmnt* 
Then he looked at her. 

"When do you leave?" 

The children wailed again. "I 
won't be here next Wednesday," she 
arose and walked unsteadily toward the nursery. 

GREG drove the next morning 
through narrow streets and 
backed his car into a parking 
space close to his destination. 
He sat for a mom^nty fjowning at the antiquated, dirty 
buildings, half-residential, halfJ 
business. Then he left the car 
and walked up the half-'Joaten u 
even stone steps to Modern La 
oratories. 

Behind the small front office, 
Modern Laboratories; contained an 



102 



IMAGINATION 



array of testtubeSj some sluggish 
guinea pigs, and dusty bottles. A 
man who Greg knew must be Dr. 
Haskeft stood in front of the bottles and looked dubiously at him. 

"My contact told me to say that 
I need altitude shots," Greg said. 
'^He also told me to say that I've, 
heard of your success in transplantations." 

"Sit down." ■ 

Greg found a stool, and looked 
unhappily at the grimy fingernails 
of Dr. Haskett which were now 
tapping the sink's edge. "Did your 
friend explain how much it will 
cost?" . " . 

"The check's written.' Greg 
handed it over. "It's dated ahead. 
I can stop pa3niient if you don't 
do what you promise. And secrecy 
is important. My wife doesn't 
know what I'm doing." 

"Marta," Dr. Haskett called. A 
girl from the front office came 
into the laboratory, and in bored 
fashion pulled a soiled white robe 
over her street dress. 

"Lie down here." Dr. Haskett 
shoved two tables together to provide a large, flat surface, and 
Marta shoved home the lock on 
the single door leading out of the 
room. "But ^sign thii? release, 'first. 
And undress. You prefer intravenous anaesthesia, I suppose?" 

"There's not much risk?" Greg 
asked, his perspiring fingers slipping, as he tried to unknot his 



tie. "Not much risk that you'll 
fail to make good ... a good 
transplantation?"' 

"I guarantee that part of it," Dr. 
Haskett said, opening a case and 
withdrawing instruments. "The 
only risk lies in the danger that 
it will grow too- fast in sixjnonths." 

"I won't give it a chance. My 
wife gets sent to Mars next week. 
I'm going to ask for a special 
check and get myself sent aboard 
the same ship with her. I know 
the right people." 

Marta laughed openly. Dr. 
Haskett shot a glare in her direction, then looked calculatingly at 
Greg. 

"You're talking like a child," he 
said. "If I implant cancerous tissue in your body, you can't submit 
to a check for at least six months. 
The examiners- would find the 
scars of the operation. There are 
laws against what you want me to 
do for you." ' 

Greg stared at the tie he had finally pulled loose. "But I can't 
wait six months," he said helplessly. "If Dora gets sent to Mars 
alQue, you know what will happen 
as well as I do. Deported people 
are automatically divorced from 
their husbands and wives on Earth. 
They have to marry again as soon 
as possible on Mars. The woijien 
need someone to support them and 
their kids, the men need the women to run the houses up there 



CANCER 

» 

• • • 

The woman straightened her face 
with an effort, took off the white 
robe, and tossed it on the floor. 
Then she unlocked the door and 
returned to her office. Dr. Haskett turned his back on Greg, saying, "I'm afraid there's nothing I 
can do for. you, sir." 

GREG drove from the rundown 
district faster than the law allowed. Did the ordinary man on 
the street submit calmly when this 
happened to his wife or did he 
have contacts that Greg had never 
known? i 

Still, it seemed unlikely that 
many persons could escape the 
law. Every nation on Earth cooperated to send cancerous persons to Mars,^ not only to breed 
the disease out of Earth, but to 
relieve the tremendous pressure 
of a growing population. The effort was succeeding, even though 
it was taking much of Earth's resources to send the people and 
supplies to Mars, even though the 
project had delayed the opening 
of colonization on a real paradise 
planet, Venus. 

Pulling into the apartment's 
parking cell, Greg rode the elevar 
tor to his floor. 

The apartment was dark and 
silent. A single lamp glowed faintly on the living room desk, and 
then he saw the note beside the 



WORLD 103 

viewphone. 

"I didn't exactly lie about the 
date of my passage," the note said, 
"but I misled you. The children 
and I went at noon today. It's 
the best way. We couldn't stand 
the torture of a week, so I asked 
for immediate passage. Try to 
snauggle through a^ message to the 
children and me later on, but don't 
try to do anything more dangerous. I pray that someday the laws 
will change and we'll see each other again." There were a few 
more lines of writing, but they 
had been carefully scratched out. 
Dora's signature, barely recognizable in its shakiness, was at the 
bottom of the paper . , . ^ 

npHE smoke in the tavern was 
too thick to permit easy 
breathing. But Greg had been 
choking somewhere deep inside before he had wandered into the 
place. He placed his glass carefully over the well in the counter, 
pressed the stud at the edge of 
the counter, and watched the mixed drink squirt up through the 
patent bottom of the glass. There 
was a slight click as the bottom 
tightened automatically, the price 
appeared on the inset beside the 
stud, and Greg drank. Then he 
put down the glass, aware that the 
man beside him was studying him 
intently. 

"There comes a time," the man


104 IMAUII 

said carefully, "when , the fingers 
refuse to clench the glass with sufficient resistance. At that point, 
you begin to pass out." The stranger raised his glass with only 
slight effort, and watched Greg apply time and thought to the same 
procedure. ^ 

"You remind ^me of the way 
some doctors talk," Greg said. 

^^I never forget a patient,'' the 
stranger said, peering intently at 
Greg, "and you aren't one 
mine, even though you're not quite 
sober enough to look natural. But 
people tell me that all doctors act 
somewhat alike, even when they 
aren't very good doctors." Be 
drained his glass with one gulp. 

^"My wife was sent to Mars," 
Greg blurted the- words out. He 
turned to the stranger. 

"There must be some way I can 
bring her back!" 

"Don't proposition me, fellow," 
the strange doctor said, blinking 
but keeping his eyes boring into 
Greg's face. "You're talking to 
the wrong person, if you want one 
of those little operations." 

Greg shook his head. "I thought 
of that. I went to one doctor. He 
told me the scar wouldn't heal for 
six months . . . She'll be married 
again by that time." 

The stranger pursed his lips 
thoughtfully for a moment. Then 
he looked away from Greg and 
began to speak lowly, as if he 



were talking to himself* 

"I've run across other people in 
your situation. Space freighters go 
close to Mars' surface and parachute equipment down. The passenger ships stay further away and 
send people down in little auxiliary 
ships. I've never heard of anyone 
smuggling himself to Mars, you 
understand, but if you tried to — " 

"What I want is a freighter that 
actually wiU land on Mars." 

"You won't find any," the doctor said. "It takes too much fuel 
to take off again. This way, the}^ 
can carry twice as much load, by 
just circling the planet close to 
the surface." He stopped, looked 
at Greg quizzically. "Funny thing 
about cancer — you study it since 
you learnad the bad news? No? 
Well, the cure is something like 
the disease these days. Cancer 
is caused by cells that are harmful 
to the -other cells in the body and 
grow too fast. So we're deporting 
people who might be harmful to 
other people by propagating the 
disease. Then there's metastasis." 

"What's that?" VMetastasis — the migration of 
cancer cells. They move from one 
part of the body to the other." 

"Like we're moving people to 
Mars?" Greg laughed tiredly and 
started to get up. 

"Take it easy, bud." A hand 
was on Greg's shoulder, and the 
doctor's voice was in his ear. 



CANCER 

"We've all got troubles. Look up 
this guy, if you reallly want to do 
something abaut the wife and 
kids." A hand slipped a card into 
Greg's pocket. 

iCTTTHAT can you do?" The 
recruiting officer eyed Greg 
suspiciously. 

"Anything." Greg spoke slowly, 
his eyes on the officer. "A fellow 
gave me this card, and told me I 
could get work . on a freighter at 
this address." 

The man glanced at the card 
and shrugged. "Sign this." He 
shoved a dogeared form toward 
Greg. The table shook slightly as 
a spaceship blas):ed off. , Greg 
signed,' glancing over the form. 

"This isn't a contract," he said, 
handing it back. "It's just a release for you in case something 
hap|:^ns to a crew member." 

"So we aren't running pleasure 
trips or slumming expeditions for 
rich guys. You were born yesterday if you don't know the frei^ters are a little dangerous. We don't 
know how much money we'll make 
out of a trip until we've made it. 
So we can't^ settle on any pay 
now." 

"Get me onto the surface of 
the planet and you get my services 
free the whole trip put," Greg said. 
"Isn't that f^ir eriSugJi?" 

"So you want to hop out before 
the return trip?" The agent's 



WORLD 10 s 

face darkened. "Just when you've 
started to learn something useful 
aboardship?" A man standing at 
the door started to move slowly toward them. 

"I've changed my mind." Greg 
got up, turned, and ' suddenly an 
arm encircled his throat. He twisted fiercely, uselessly, while the recruiting officer pulled a cloth-covered tube from the desk drawer. 
The word shanghai flashed into 
Greg's mind, an instant before the 
lead pipe smashed down against 
his skull. 

SOMEONE was shaking Greg, 
trying to dislodge his consciousness from the black, cramped 
niche into which it was wedged. 
The hand at his shoulder gripped 
hard, shook roughly, and a voice 
was bellowing into Greg's ears. 
Greg moved a handj experimentally. Instantly he was jerked upright. 

"Time to get to work," the voice 
rumbled loudly, "Let's get this 
^ow on the road. My iiame's 
Moore. What's yours?" 

Greg poked with stiff fingers at 
his eyes. Light blinded him,. He 
was in a small room that might 
iiave been an overgrown closet. He 
sat on the lower half of a two-tier 
bunk. There was. a webbing of 
ropes at the other side, and a 
couple of small lockers around the 
other sides. The hand that ha4 



io6 



IMAGINATION 




been shaking hinf belonged to a 
giant blond fellow who might have 
been in his forties. 

"Feel better?" The blond giant 
steadied Grfeg in a sitting position. 

^What's this all about?" Greg 
felt for the lump on his head. 

"Well, they haven't told me 
about you," the fellow grinned^ 
"but I can guess. When someone 
starts to ask about a berth on a 
freighter, they figure that he's 
either a potential crew member or 
a spy. Either way, they figure 
they'd better take him aboard. I 
got took just the same way, ten 
years ago. I'm not sorry now. It's 
a pretty good life." 

"Look, I've got some money." 
Greg struggled to his feet. "Who 
can I see to get out of here?" 

"Too late," Moore said. "We've 
blasted off. YbuVe been out cold 
for two days. Don't you feel the 
ship?" 

Greg sat down again, and sudidenly he felt better. After all 
wasn't he on his way to Mars, 
where he had wanted to go all 
along? He could worry about smuggling himself onto the planet later, 
when they started to toss out the 
cargo ... 

Moore introduced him to his 
duties in the horns that followed, 
and later joined him In their tiny 
cabin. 

"You'll have to take the upper 
bunk as soon as you feel better," 



Moore warned. got seniority, 
you know." 

"Maybe I won't be around long. 
How do you go about skipping 
ship at delivery point?" 

"It can be done if you've got 
the money," Moore said. "They 
run these boats to make money and 
they aren't particular about where 
the money comes from. They never are sure what sort of a price 
they can get for the refrigeration 
equipment 'and dehumidifiers an( 
stuff," 

"Refrigeration — dehumidifiers?" 
Greg stared at Moore. "Are they 
crazy? Mars is the last place in 
the world to dispose of stuff like 
that!" 

"Mars? Who said anything 
about Mars, bud?"° Moore looked 
at him curiously. "They need that 
stuff on Venus, because it gets hot 
and damp there in the summer 
time. We're going to Venus, my 
friend!" , 

The words stunned Greg's mind. 
"But my wife and kids were sent 
to Mars, and if I'm heading for 
Veiius it'll too late—" 

"But you ought to have known 
that these birds only go to Venus 
— ^" Moore began. Greg didn't 
give him a chance to finish, rising 
abruptly and running from the 
cabin. ' 

All the fear, worry and despair 
that he had felt since Dora's check 
day transmuted magically into an 



CANCER WORLD 



107 



alloy of anger and hatred against 
any authority. 

He searched for the officers' 
quarters, his feet stamping loudly 
against the metal flooring, the 
noise thrusting new aches into 
his head, the aches in his head 
increasing his fury. 

Hopelessly lost after a moment, 
he opened one door and caught 
a glimpse of inferno and the insulation-clad men who tended the 
propulsion units. Twice he blundered into the space between the 
outer and inner hulls on the wrong 
side of the ship. One panel in the 
wall that looked like a door proved 
to be the lid for a viewer that 
gave a fantastically beautiful image of th^stars and planets outside 
the ship. He had wandered into a 
storeroom when a voice came from 
behind him
"Getting thirsty again?" 

"Where's the captain?" Greg 
yelled back. The man who had 
called to him straightened from 
behind a row of boxes. 



recruiting office! 

"So you're the one who had me 
shanghaied to Venus ! " Greg sprang 
at the man, fists flying. 

The doctor ducked. Greg sprawled clumsily at the opposite ^all, 
thrown off balance by the slighter 
gravity maintained in the ship. He 
started to rise, then dropped to his 
inees as knife-like pain shot 
through his ankle. The doctor 
stood over him with* that strange 
half-smile. 

"You shouldn't be angry. You 
wanted transportation, didn't you?" 
He kneeled -to look at Greg's 
ankle and the pain conquered 
Greg's impulse to smash a fist into 
his face. ^ 

"Exactly what I wanted/' Greg, 
answered bitterly* "Of course I 
wanted to get shanghaied on a 
freight headed for Venus while my 
family's on Mars!" 

"I think it's just a sprain, not ^ 
break," the doctor said, running a 
finger over the swelling ankle. "But 
we'd better take a picture. Come 



"Last time I saw you, you were on." He hoisted Greg to a standmore interested in drinks than in ing position with unexpected 
the captain." . strength, and walked him out of 

the storeroom to his cabin. Medical equipment lined the rooni. 

"Did it ever occur to you that 
someday you're going to get the 
lawbooks thrown at you?" Greg 
ask^d, quietly^ but with hatred. 
"They stopped tolerating this sort 
of thing centuries ago." 



REG looked hard at musculd;r 
fingers, and the ghost image 
of a bar back on Earth materialized for an instant in the stockroom around the man. It was the 
doctor who had given him instructions on how to find the freighter 




le doctor laughed. ^^Fme talk 
from a man who tried to smuggle 
himself on Mars." 

^'You don't have any proof. I 
don't even know your name." 
.-^^It's Coleridge. You can put 
doctor in front of it, too. I really 
did study and get a diploma. 
Then I decided I could ha,ve more 
fun out in space than in some 
IS tuff y office back on Earth. Maybe you'd enjoy this sort of life, 
too, if you haven't congealed completely." He sat Greg before a 
small X-ray machine. 

"I've always wanted to spend 
the rest of my life fighting dinosaurs m Vmm whie my faanSy 
is on Mars and my career is on 
Earth." Greg said acidly. 

^^Ym know very well there aren't any dinosaurs on Venus," Coleridge replied mildly. "It's practically perfect as a planet, with a few 
gadgets to keep things dry and 
cool." He looked straight at Greg."You know it's the most desirable 
planet in the system but they've 
discouraged emigration because 
they need the spaceships to handle the cancer colonies on Mars. 
It's only tramp freighters like this 
that can get away with trips to 
Venus." He pulled the film from 
its fixing bath and squinted at it. 
"Not a sign of a fracture*" 

GREG . began to wonder what 
Coleridge was^ leading up to. 



Everything he said appeared to 
a case of diverting attention froi 
Greg's problem by talking aboi 
Venus' merits. He decided to pl^ 
along until he found out. 

"You think I could find some-J 
thing to keep myself occupied on^ 
Venus?" 

"Swe/ they need smart mei 
and you can tell the employment 
agencies that your wife and kidj 
are on the way." 

Greg stared at him, feeling the^ 
tormei^ r^etum. 

Coleridge grinned. "Haven't you 
ever put two and two together, 
about the population figures?" 

"You mean there's a chance for 
my family to get from Mars to 
Venus?" 

"Look. You remember that they 
started to send people from Earth •> 
to Mars a century ago, because 
the population had overgrown, 
Earth. Emigration has gone out 
all that time, millions of people 
have been sent to Mars, and once 
they get there they have children 
and raise families just as theyi 
would do on Earth. Now, if you 
weren't a lawyer, always splitting 
hairs and quibbling, you'd have 
guessed loj^g ago what other intelligent people sooner or later real-, 
ize. Mars is smaller than Earth, 
only part of it is warm enough 
for Earthmejn. — ^so Mars gpt overpopulated, too, a few years back. 

"Remember what I told you in 




GANGER WORLD 



109 



the bar about metastasis? I thought 
you'd catch on then, when I tried 
to draw an analogy about migrating cancer cells and migrating 
people. ^ 

"They've been afraid to tell 
people on Earth the real situation, 
because Venus has been held up 
for so long as the second Eden 
where we'll all live as soon as the 
cancer problem'* is licked. But actually, they've had to ship new 
arrivals on Mars off to Venus in 
recent years, because there's no 
more , room on Ma:rs. I suppose 
they'll break the news to Earth 
some of these days, formally. If 
you were closer to the grapevine, 
you probably would have heard 
the rumor long ago." 

Greg sat there gaping at Coleridge. ^ Finally he asked, in humbled to|fes: ♦"If Venus is such a 
paradise, how come you don't drop 
off there and stay there yourself?" 

"Well," the doctor said, beginning to put away his equipment, 
"I've been thinking of it, but I 



wanted to save up some money 
first, and this seemed to be about 
the best way to do it. It's a little 
more humane than the way some 
doctors do, implanting cancer conditions into people who have to 
undergo operations to get themselves deported. Of course, it'§ a 
little more uncertain. 

"For ^instance," he said, eyeing 
Greg sharply, "now that you have 
that bum ankle, I could probably 
tell the captain that you'll be no 
good as a crew member, and I 
could have you dumped overboard 
when we begin to circle Venus. 
That way you wouldn't have done 
a thing illegal and you'd have a 
clean slate to meet your family 
a few days later." 

Greg rubbed the lump on his 
head, gingerly flexed his sore ankle, remembered the emotions of 
the past three or four days, and 
then reached for his check book. 

"I think I'm beginning to understand," Greg smiled. "Got a 
pen?" 

THE END 



COMING NEXT MONTH:
SLAVES .TO IHE METAl HORDE 

by MILTON LESSER 

lohzmy Hope stumble^ through the wreckage ol what had once been 
great Earth cities — now the dumping ground of robot monsters, 
pom't miss liiis ifaniling noirel of Man fightfjikg lor suzriiralt 

JUNE ISSUE OF IMAGINATION ON SALE APRIL 27th 



Earth's espionage ring was a headache, so 
the Martian Security Chief offered ten thousand 
credits for a key agent. But fven for a price-* 

, SPIES DIE HARD! 



armof 



Ljpi 

MT 



^^fT^HIS man is a spy for 

I Earth," a voice droned, 
as the telecaster vibrated 
and a photo of Harry Horn flashed 
on the screen. "Ten thousand 
credits for this man, dead or alive. 
Contact Lazar of the Security Police. Harry Horn. Thirty-four, 
five feet, eleven inches, one hundred and seventy- two pounds." 

Lynn Brickel snapped off the 
humming machine. She frowned. 
Horn had been high in the Martian 
Security Pob'ce, one of Lazar 's 
top men. Now Horn turned out 
to be a spy for Earth. Why hadn't 
she been told? Was Green losing 
his trust in her? Hadn't she 
iielped McLean and Sanderson 
escape from Mars? 

Her short tunic shimmered as 
she began to pace the floor. She 
stopped short as a hum splashed 
through the room. She went quickly to the door and pressed a red 
button on the wall. 

But the vibration of the elevator 



not reach her ears. Puzzled, 
she opened the door, stepped into 
the marble hall. She shrugged, 
started to return to her apartment 
when the sound of footsteps on 
the stairs halted her. She waited. 

He came into view. Harry Horn. 
There , was no mistaking his face. 
It had flashed on and off the tel.ecaster throughout the day. 

"Brickel?" he said, coming up 
to her. 

His white coveralls/werp spotted 
with grime. There was a dark 
bruise on his right cheek. 

"Yes," she said. 

"I'm Harry Horn." 

"I know." 

"YouVe got to help me.'^ His 
voice was urgent, pleading- He 
brushed past her, into her room. 
She walked in after him, shut and 
locked the door, leaned her back 
against it, 

"You can't stay here," she said. 

"Are you alone?" 

'Tfes," she said. "I'm alone.'^ 



no 



He went through the apartment, 
returned to the front room. "I 
had to make sure." He sank i^to 
the low divan, covered his face 
with his hands. 

She walked toward him. "You 
can't stay here," she repeated. 

He looked up at her, his eyes 
frightened. ^'Do you have any 
idea of what Lazar will do to me 
once he gets his fat hands around 
my throat? He won't kill me right 
away," 

"Why come to me?'' 

"You can help me." 

"What can I do?" 
"You can help me get away. 
A turbo-engine space ship. That's 
all I need. It's small and fast." . 

"But why come to me? You 
haven't explained." 

"You helped McLean and Sanderson." ^ 

"How do you know this?" 

"We're both in the same organization but not in the same unit. 
The leader of my unit instructed 
me to go to you." 

"I see. Who is your leader?" 

"I can't tell you. You know 
that. I wouldn't ask you your 
leader's name." 

T YNN shrugged slim shoulders. 

"It wouldn't make any difference. He is not stationed on 
Mars." 

Horn jumped ta his feet. "You 



will help me?" 
"If I can." 

"Can you get me the ship?" 

"I suppose. But we'll have to 
wait for night. It is dangerous to 
do anything now. Ten thousand 
cre.dits. Lazar wants yotSP awful 
bad. He offered five for both 
McLean and Sanderson." 

"I was very close to Lazar in 
the Security Police. I know too 
much." 

"We all make mistakes." 

"I envy your logic. But I can't 
see it that way. I was considered 
too good an agent to make a mistake." 

"It's too late to^ory over it now. 
When it is^ dark I'll contact — a 
friend — and have the ^ace ship 
ready." 

Horn grinned. "You're still not 
sure of me?" 

"It isn't that. But you don't 
belong to my unit. We can't name 
names to outsiders." 

"You're right, of course. You've 
been well trained." 

"Are you hungry?" > 

"Yes." 

She set food in front of him and 
watched him eat. 

^What is Lazar like?" she asked. 
"I have heard of him." 

"Cruel," he said. "A sadist. 
Death is the easy way out when 
you're in Lazar 's hands." ^ 

"It will soon be dark," she said. 



He stood up, his hunger Satisfied. ''Tell me," he said, "was it 
difficult getting Sanderson and 
McLean out of Mars?" 

"No," ^^id. "Not difficult at 
all." 

"Good." He went to the interphone. He dialed, spoke^ "You 
may come up now." 

"What are you doing?" her face 
paled. 

He turned to her, smiling. "Lazar was wondering how Sanderson 
and McLean escaped. You were on 
the master list of suspects. I was 
waiting for you to confess." 

Lynn stiffened. "It— it was a 
trick." 

"That's right Brickel. Too bad. 
You're too pretty to die." 

"That- — that was a message to 
Laz3X. 

"Yes. He'll be here shortly." ^ 

Lynn slipped her hand in the 
pocket of her tunic, brought out a 
small blaster. 

"Don't be a fool," Horn said. 
"Maybe you'll be spared. Why take 
your hfe? Just tell all you know?" 

Lynn ^iled. "I wasn't thinking of taking my life. But yours." 

Horn frowned. "Don't be an idiot." He advanced toward her. 
Lynn shook her head slowly. "Now 
it's my turn to be clever." Horn's 
face went wild. "You can't escape 
Xazar ! Listen to me — " She blasted him. 



T YNN opened the door. 
-■^ Lazar stood there, fat and 
ugly. There were two men of the 
Security Police with him. • 

"Come in,", she invited. 

They came in. She shut the 
door. Lazar looked down at the 
dead Harry Horn. 

"You said dead or alive," Lynn 
reminded Lazar. "You owe me 
ten thousand credits." 

"What happened?" Lazar snapped at her. His flesh-bedded eyes 
studied her. 

"He came to me for help. I 
had to bide my time. I told him 
I'd help him. I was waiting fcJI 
the chance to get to you. He was 
by the interphone a few minutes 
ago. It was the chance I need 
I pulled my blaster, covered hi 
He made a dash for freedom so 
I had to kill him." 

"This is crazy," one of the 
said. ^^Hotil must have had h 
confession. But now what do we 
do for evidence?" 

"Shut up!" Lazar snapped, -^tk 

"Your word is good, isn't it, 
Lazar?" Lynn said. 

"What do you mean?" 

"The ten thousand credits. As 
a loyal citizen I've earned them." 

"You'll get your credits," Lazar snarled, frustration in his eyes. 

"I know I will," Lynn said, smiling. ' 



ccurate 



EVEN the strongest disbeliever 
in the "Flying* Saucer Scare" 
sometimes thinks twice when he 
recalls that the things were spotted on radar. He's willing to concede that the human eye can be 
bamboozled by an optical illusion — 
that's what he thinks the Saucers 
were — but what about radar? Can 
you fool it? 

The answer is yes ! The tricks and 
vagaries of radar are just beginning to be understood. Radar itself is all right — it's simply that 
the atmosphere through which its 
waves must pass, has a 'tendency to 



play tricks on those waves. 

For example, where a layer of 
cold air bounds a layer of hot air, 
an "inversion barrier" is set up, 
which means that radar waves do 
not pass through this invisible 
boundary entirely. A portion of 
them are reflected. The effect is 
complicated and depends on many 
factors. Dr. Menzel, the physicist 
tells of the effect of such a boundary on a naval radar unit. It fired 
at a radar target for a long time 
until it was discovered that it was 
bombarding the image of an island 
a hundred miles away! 




"Get down Hiere €af$ure the darn thing before if rans mwayV* 



113 



- REVIEWING CURRENT SCIENCE FICTION BOOKS 


Hard cover science fiction is booming and many fine novels 
and antltoiogies are available at ail bookstores or by writing 
direct to the publishers, Cach month IMAGINATION will review 
several titles candidly as a guide to /our book purchases. 

TAiES FROM GAVAGAN'S BAR 



by L, Sprague DeCamp an4 Fleich^ 
er Pratt, 228 pages, |S^00. Twayne 
Publishers^ New York, N. Y. 

Anything can happen in Gavagan's Bar. These delightfully whimsical and droll stories of the DeCamp-Pratt duo will excite many a 
chuckle. This nicely made-up book 
offers twenty-three incidents which 
have happened to the incredibly 
varied clientele of New York's most 
elusive bar. Note the "elusive'* — not 
"exclusive." For anyone at all 
comes into Gavagan's! 

There was the sad story of the 
party giver who confused "gin'' 
with "djinn." There was the poetess who prayed for a baby — she 
wasn't married. There was ... to 
go on is impossible. 



Good fantasy, entertaining, wellwritten, amusing, is a rare* commodity. But not, apparently, with DeCamp and Pratt. If occasionally 
their little whimsies pall, the remedy is simple; instead of trying to 
do the book through, sample it occasionally. 

It is possible to suspect the division of labor in this book. I'd 
guess that Pratt was the idea man 
and DeCamp the writer. There are 
so many elegant little flourishes 
that could be only DeCamp 's. On 
tlje other hand, there are as many, 
clever situations — ^that's Pratt. i 

Fantasy has always seemed a 
poor second to science-fiction as en-* 
tertainment. But a few more sto* 
ries like this . . . well. 



114 



SCIENCE FICTION LIBRARY 



"5 



THE BEST SCIENCE FICTION STORIES-1953 



dited by Everett F. Bleiler and T. 
\ Dikty, 279 pages, Frederick Fell, 
nc. New York, 

Anthologies of s-f pour from the 
,resses and often it is difficult to 
see the point of their ^ existence. 
Not so with the* Bleiler-Dikty efforts. There is hardly a poor story 
in this volume — and^some are extraordinarily good. Arthur Porges 
**The Fly" is an example of a virtuoso's skill in terror and horror 
though there is not a line of fantasy 
'n the story. Richard Matheson has 
powerful story "Lover, When 
ou're Near Me", providing an exellent standard for judging. 

But unquestionably, the finest 
thing in the anthology is the cri


tique of riiodem scidlice-fictlon called ^The Trematode" by Alfred Besr 
ter. It is an analytical treatment 
of the relationship between sciencefiction and literature, done with 
discernment, wit and. taste. 

With a critical eye but an optimistic soul; Bester mercilessly dis^ 
sects science-fiction — and its readers ! — coming up with novel and 
startling conclusions. 

There are many good stories in 
this anthology, but even they pale 
before the tour de force that is 
Bester's essay. It's not hard to'" 
understand why B.^iler and Dikty 
chose this stimulating and provocative introduction. You won't want 
to miss it! 



THE WHITE WIDOWS 



by Sam Merwin, Jr, 224 pages f 
$2.95. Douhleday and Co,, Inc, 
New York, N. Y, 

It's unfortunate that one must begin with "it's a good story, but 
• . . ", yet that is Sam Merwin's 
latest offering. Normally an excellent writer, Merwin proves that 
.here. The trouble is, he has no story to tell. ' For a hundred and fifty-odd pages, you wade through the 
trials of a biologist's novel approach 
to haemophilia ^ smoothly written 
of course— finally to come to grips 
with the Amazon horde, planning 
to set the world on fire in order 
t# set up the inevitable matriarchy. 
This weak theme is the backbone 
of the story. And it's not enough. 
On the other hand, to be fair, it 



must be said that the characterization is first rate, the reactions of 
human beings are real, and the 
writing is first rate. 

In a phrase, poor story, good 
writing. Usually in science-fiction 
it's the other way around and in 
Merwin's. case this judgment isn't 
necessary — ^usually. 

You might go out of your way to 
read this book if you had absolutely 
nothing better to do or if you're a 
Merwin aficionado. Fortunately you 
can expect better things from Merwin and I'm sure the next book will 
be better, more ^ like his classic 
"House of Many Worlds." It proves 
you can't start with a straight novel, smile lightly and throw in an 
s-f pitch! 



SO far I admit I haven't been 
personally enthusiastic at all 
about science fiction movies. 
Usually the original writer has been 
so buried under Hollywood cliches 
that the flavor of the story is gone. 
Also there's the probably perfectly yalid point that the mass audience wouldn't understand a 
straight, undiluted science fiction 
story, one that wasn't carefully explained to them somewhere. 

You have the non-science of a 
Rocketship X-M, or you have the 
technically wonderful Destination 
Moon (my favorite still, I think) 
with, however, stock ebaracter;^ and 
the Woodpecker throfwn in for exposition. Tk0 Day the Earth 
Stood Still was much better presented, and on the whole quite beiievabiy charaeterize^ (although 
tlm reasons i&r the att^mptei vEIsdn^ of tiis eartk boy friend 



sounded contrived and pulpy). 
However, I still wish they would 
make a few more like War of the 
Worlds. 

I should also like to see a Heinlein or a Kuttner story filmed 
straight, not written down to the 
mass audience. This may very Well 
happen. There is, I suppose, one 
good thing to be said for the children's hour type of space opera 
you'll find on TV. It at least acquaints the audience with some of 
the rudinfients of science fiction, 
however garbled. The transitio^ 
from bad stf movies to good oneir 
shouldn't be too hard for the vieW^ 
er — no harder than the transitioifc 
from -bad stf comics to good stori( 

Some writei?!^ would be much eai 
ier to film straight thatt othe^ 
Ateost aiBisrfehiag ©f Bradbury's, 
e^ampie^ could be translated ^Imjj 
unjdmnged the sare@3a> as 1( 



as Bradbury's mood was kept, since 
you don't need a technological background to appreciate these stories. 
Stories that lean heavily to the science in science fiction would be considerably harder to adapt, I'm sure. 
There would be the danger of making them too documentary, on the 
one hand, and too cluttered up with 
the rudiments of science fiction, 
tacked on human interest of the 
boy meets giri variety, on the other. 

Lots of str pictures are being 
made, and otliers are being discussed. Probably none of them w'll 
ever please all the science fiction 
fans — ^nothing has pleased them all 
yet, thank heavens. 

41 « • 

Now to the famines. 

DESTINY: 25c; (luartrrly; Earl 
Kemp, 3508 N. Slx-fricld Ave., Chicago 13, 111. I'^'ifl Krmp and Malcolm Willits, tlic l*(M I l;i tid. ()! ('in)n 

co-editor of I)csfinj/, turn out one 
of the best lookinj-: "littl. " maj^^uzines you're likely in :<•(■ dn any 
subject, science fictional oi fimI. 

Hobert Johnson's covcf on the 
Number 9 issue, re])rc.sent in^r " The 
Meaning of Destiny," Im ji line 
layout, a synil)()lisin in lilacl^ and 
white. Malcolm Willits and \. t a 
tile writer-artist Julian May huvy 
some exceptionally weU done Interior illustrations in the same issue. 

A feature for several issnes of 
Destiny h.a.s been the answers to the 
topical question, "Why Conquer 
Space?" This issue you can read 
the answers ^iven by Wernher von 
Braun and Jules Simmons. Is anyone collecting- the answers as a series? They would make a fine short 
anthology someday, and possibly 
one with true historical interest. 



A'S BOX ^ 117 

Edward Wood writes on "Eliminate the Double Standard/^ . The 
standard isn't that between 'the 
sexes but that between the professional and amateur branches of 
science fiction. Very good. 

The fiction also is excellent. I'm 
sure you'll enjoy Roberta Collins' 
"The Rebel," a story of a man in a 
modern matriarchy. There's Nancy 
Kemp's "Sundown," very well written also. Destiny is a magazine 
I'm sure you'll be happy to read 
and proud to show off to your 
friends — and it's a magazine that 
I feel it's an honor to appear in. 

* * * 

YEOk: 15c; bimonthly; Joel Nydahl, 119 S. Front St., Marquette, 
Mich. The current issue of Vega is 
its Annish, or anniversary issue. It's 
something huge and special, as annishes usually are, and if you're 
not a regular subscriber this one 
costs 50c. 

It's like any issue of Vega^ only 
several times more so in quantity. 
Stressed are articles about various 
])hases of fandom, fan activity, and 
science fiction in general. Nothing 
stuffy here though. Seventh fandom may take its activities seriously, hut it presents them 'most enter t a iniiiij^ly. 

Fiction in Vega is reduced in 
quantity over Its early issues. I 
^Ink youll like the one fan story 
of Pred Chappeirs "All Klse is 
Perfect/* Bob Tucker reports on 
^SUto of the Union: 1958." Dean 
Orennell and Harlan Ellison's columns are fine always. 

But perhaps the piece de resistance is Wult Willis' historical article, "Kaiulom Ml Sixen and Sevens." 
You've really nuii.iud ■oniclhing if 



ii8 > * IMAGi: 

i 

youVe never encountered the work 
of Willis. ~ 

•Redd Boggs writes "Annishes Are 
a Plague/' citing the mortality 
among fanzines that expire in the 
blaze of glory of their special issues. Well, that won't happen to 

Yega » • . ^ 

* * * 

SCIENCE FICTION ADVERTISER: 20c; quarterly; 1745 Kenneth 
Road, Glendale 1, Calif. If you're 
a collector of science fiction you 
have doubtless already run across 
the Advertiser and can* appreciate 
it. If you're considering taking up 
collecting, I suggest you start by 
reading through what you'll find 
herei But even if you're not a 
collector at all, just someone who is 
interested in stf, dori't pass the 
'Advertiser by. 

Almost every issue carries an 
evaluation of either an author's 
work, or a theme, or some other aspect of science fiction. The articles 
— often they're really essays — are 
well thought out and thought provoking. Even if you don't agree 
with the writers you'll be stimulated by mentally conjuring up arguments against them. 

In the issue I have here Reginald Bretnor writes "On Taking Science Fiction Seriously." In it he 
deplores the attitude, often encountered, that stf isn't to be so 
taken. ; 

Bretnor discusses the speculative 
content of good jstf, and the danger 
that the speculation may be watered down, leaving only the entertainment value. He , goes well outside the stf tield to discuss the 
modern trend of not thinking for 
oneself. He sees science fiction as 



one of the few entertainment mediums where the reader must use 
his own thinking processes, not 
merely remain passive. ^ 

* * * 

PSYCHOTIC: 10c; monthly; Richard Geis, 2631 N. Mississippi, Portland 12, Oregon. Here's one that 
I hope stays monthly. It's so refreshingly itself. Somewhere in the 
issue I have here Geis says that so 
far as he knows Psychotic and Vega 
are the only monthlies yet (there 
are others, but not too many) . Well, 
Vega is bimonthly now, as I discovered from the Annish. Once a 
month seems to roll around fast 
enough when you're only writing 
one column; I shudder at the prospect of publishing an entire fanzine that often. 

Psychotic, in case you've seen it 
before, is still just as much so as 
ever. In fact, if you haven't sent in 
your dime for it yet you're missing 
something. Physically, the zine is 
dittoed; it's just about the best 
ditto job you'll see. The covers, 
front and back, are line drawings 
by Geis. (Caricaturing on issue 
No. 5.) "The Leather Couch, Where 
the Editor Rambles on, and on, 
and on," is always a choice part of 
the zine, as are Gels' opinions of 
other fan mags in his review section. 

Harlan Ellison's column, 
"Thoughts from Outer Space," covers the pro field. And there's V. L. 
McCain's "It Started with Gold" 
Horace, that is. Anyway, there's 
a lot here, ^nd you should see it 
yourself. 

* * * 

FANTASY-TIMES: 10c; published twice a month; James V. Tau


PANDORA'S BOX 



119 



ra&i, 137-03 32nd. ITe., Flushing 
54, N. Y. Things can change so 
fast in the professional science fiction world that unless you live in 
one of the publishing centers or 
subscribe to a zine like FantasyTimes you may be months out of 
date on current news. 

Here in F-T, for example, you 
find out who is publishing 
^at, which editors have been hired 
or have resigned, what is coming 
up in the science fictional way from 
Hollywood or the book publishing 
companies. 

It may not come out daily, but this 
fanzine will certainly keep you up 
to date on all the news, stf wise. 

* * * 

SKYHOOK; 15c; Redd Boggs, 2215 
Benjamin St. N. E., Minneapolis 
18, Minn. With all the talk going 
on in some of the newer fanzines 
about sixth fan(i.>m and seventh 
fandom, a few of llie really old 
timers still publi: li on (and some 
of the newtimers could take a few 
lessons here, too). Books' Skyhook, 
in its sixth year of ]) u I )li cation now," 
as a definite style of its own. It 
as long since left behind it any 
rudities of its formative stage, 
and is just about as good an examle of a timeless fanzine as you'll 
ind. 

In the new issue Sam Moskowitz 
*tes on. "Fan ^nd the Universe," 
ining that sometimes elusive 
ature, the science fiction fan. He 
efines a fan as anyone who regularly reads science fiction, an active fan as one whose interests in 
stf extend beyond mere reading. He 
goes on to mention some of the stf 
fans, and writers, of historical 
times and quite a list he presents. 



William Atheling jr., in his "The 
Issue at Hand," presents a very well 
written account of the religious 
theme in science fiction, its trends 
and how it may be presented in the 
future. Very good, as is the rest of 
the issue. 



* 



MUZZY: 15c; monthly; Claude R. 
Hall, 807 N. Main, Carlsbad, New 
Mexico. Editor Hall also lists his 
army address, but as army addresses 
are likely to change, you can prob-' 
ably reach him more easily at the 
above, ^ 

Muzzy is a mimeoed fanzine, informal, containing quite a bit of humor. You'll learn about fannish 
personalities here. 

In addition to fanzine reviews 
and a large and interesting letter 
section, Muzzy runs quite a few reverse-twist stories. In the issue at 
hand I especially liked James B. 
DavisV "The Wise Way," or what 
might happen to a man who has 
spent all his life hoping he'll be 
the one to welcome the aliens in. 
peace. 

Another good story is Bob Stewart's "Foul Ball," or what might 
happen to you if you went traveling through time in order to change 
the outcome of a baseball game. 

If you like the less formal type 
of fanzine, one that tries "to acquaint you, perhaps controversially, 
with personalities of the stf field* 
you'll probably enjoy this one. It's 
most entertaining. 

* * * 

KAYMAR TRADER: 10c; monthly; K. Martin Carlson, 1028 Third 
Ave. So,, Moorhead, Minn. Here's 
the fanzine for the died-in-theprinter's-ink collector. Whatever 



120 IMAUl 

you're looking for in the stf line, 
back issue books or magazines, 
even obscure items, you oan probably obtain them through a want 
ad here. Unless you happen to 
see them already listed for sale . . • 
Ad rates are reasonable here, so 
if you're in the buying or selling 
market you can easily afford this 
medium. 

In the issue I have here Joseph 
Miller writes on what current magazines might be worth ten years 
from now. His conclusions: hang on 
to the magazines and you'll get 
about double your money back 
- isomjeday! 

STARLIGHT: bimonthly: Don 
Howard Donnell, 5425 Santa Monica Blvd., Apt. 205, Lo3 Angeles 29, 
Calif. The first two issues of this 
brand new fanzine are being distributed free. After that, it will 
be "Sc a copy, as things are planned now. You will get a very good 
looking photo-offset zine for your 
nickel. 

Starlight plans to try to pay for 
itself by the advertising it carries, 
^d rates are, the editors claim, 
about the same as those in the leading advertising zine. They seem 
.high for a brand new marketthough. I don't know whether 
-the zine will get along financially 
or not. But it's a vary attractive 
give-away item, and certainly well 
worth anyone's nickel. 

The first issue contains a short 
story, **Osan, My Beloved," by Atlantis Hallam, and Bob Tucker's brief autobiography. Why not 
sample this one? It's a fine looking zine. 

$ H: 



PEON: 10c; bimonthly; Charles 
Lee Riddle, 108 Dunham St., Norwich, Conn. This issue is minus a 
couple of its regular columns — 
seems that editor Riddle was recently the victim of a thief who 
made off with his briefcase, which 
contained, among other things, 
copy for Peon, 

Still, he's got plenty of good material in the issue. Carol McKinney's "S F Covers in Ten Easy 
^Lessons" sorts out and classifies 
the various scengM|K)u're likely to 
see in the stf se^HIP of your ijewsstand. Quite entertaining, 

^ 4: i|: 

DAWN: 10c; bimonthly; Russel 
K. Watkins, 110 Brady St., Savannah, Georgia. How come Dawn is 
the Kentucky fanzine from Georgia? It never does say . . . 

This is a dittoed fanzine with a 
varied subject matter. Editor Watkins' tale, "The Paid Pan," is one 
of those stories written around stf 
personalities, but this one manages 
to be quite amusing. Ron EUik 
explains and defends "Seventh Fandom," which previous issues of 
Dawn had dealt somewhat harshly 
with. 

The article *over which I'm still 
shaking my head, though, is Professor George Adamsky's "Astronomical, Pro and Con?" It's apparantly by flying saucer authority 
Adamsky, and it's fascinating reading, as witness some ^ of the conclusions. 

We are told that stars contain 
"the gasses of light/' whereas planets do not; that there are billions 
of planets (probable, but who has 
counted them?); that we can't be 
sure life exists on these planets be


PANDORA'S BOX 



121 



cause we've never photographed 
cities on them . . . Also, everything 
is surrounded by air, since if there 
were no pressure on the outside of 
an object, internal pressure would 
crack it. It may be a different 
kind of air, though. _ 

Read it for yourself. 

* * * 

LOOKING BACKWARD: 2c; Peter Graham, Box 149, Fairfax, 
Oalif. This one is mimeoed on 
sheets of paper the size of a postcard. It comes to you with a genuine postcard for a front cover. 
(With additional stamp, naturally.) 
In fact, if you would rather send a 
self addressed postcard, or a two 
, cent stamp, youl! get this fanzine 
right back with it. 

It's newsy and lots of fun, with 
jokes, bits of verse and fannish doings thrown in. Cfompletely informal. It's a good buy too, for a low, 
^lovr price. 

ifl ^ ^ 

SCINTIT.LA: 10c; Larry Anderson, 27 1() Smoky Lane, Billings, 
Montana/riiis fanzino, now lithoed, 
contains articles, stories and some 
rather k<»'>(1 fan art. In the issue 
I have here Jo Anno Slade writes 
a short-^short, '*Roll Out the Barrel." It. carj-if^s the going-over-Niagai-a- Kails idea to Mars, and it*s 
quit.e a suspense story up to its reverse-punch ending. * 

Also, Forrie Ackerman and Ron 
Ellik are I'opresented in the fan fiction department. Larry Balint rei views fanzines and Terry Carr 
gives out some news. 

This one shows promise in its 
new and improved format. 

3|C 

NITE CRY: 10c; bimonthly; Larry 



Walker, 5921 E. 4th Place, Tulsa, 
Oklahoma. Editors Walker and 
Don Chappell hereby introduce another newcomer to fanzine ranks. 
It's a mimeoed job, quite promising, 
with a diversity of fiction and articles. 

This issue contains two convention reports. Earl Kemp's "Bye 
Bye, Bellevue" is, of course, a tale 
of the Philadelphia World Science 
. Fiction Convention, whereas Don 
Chappairs "Oklacon Report" covers 
the more regional Oklahoma gettogether. 

For a new fanzine this one is 
quite legible and well-pla^nned, and 
probably will show considerable 
improvement with succeeding issues. Best of luck to it. 

♦ y 

OEM TONES: G. M. Carr, 8325 
31st St. N. W„ Seattle 7, Washington. Gem Tones is part of the 
mailing of the Spectator Amateur 
Press Society, or SAPS. There's no 
• price quoted for non-SAP S members, or non-traders of fanzines, 
but you could probably get a sample. 

Each issue is named for a gem. 
Sometime you'll run out, G. M. . . . 
But while the names hold up, fanzine readers can get the news and 
reviews and often caustic comments 
of one of the most decisive fans of 
all. 

That's all there are room for this 
time. More fanzines next issue. 
Remember, if you have a fanzine 
you would like reviewed send it to 
me, Marl Wolf, Fandora's Box, 
IMAGINATION, Box 230, Evanston Illinois. See you next month * . . 

—Mari Wolf 





i>vr^ the 



• • • 




-USTRIAN VIEWS ON STF 

Dear Ed: 

Maybe it will interest you to get 
a letter now and then from a reader who is not an American. 

Madge is one of the very few 
(three at the utmost) publications 
that ever made me feel like writing 
to the editor. I really like your 
magazine. 

Perhaps it will surprise you to 
hear that there is no comparable 
periodical in German language, or 
if there is I have not been able 
to find one. Science fiction, we call 
it Zukunftsromane, is published 
here only in form of books, and the 
level usually is a very low one. 

But the reason why I decided to 
write you was not to tell you what 
I liked but what I do not like. Now, 
down to business. 

Many, perhaps most of your authors, seem to agree that a future, 
higher civilization will, quite naturally, have no time or interest to 
play around with such trifles as 



personal freedom, human rights, 
constitutional rights, and so on. 
Men are sent to other stars or even 
galaxies or into wars and are not 
even permitted to ask what it is all 
about. There is always some "high 
council" or a similar gang and 
these boys decide — of course always 
wisely and in the interest of the 
world — what mankind is going to 
do. To the plebs it is left to admire 
and obey them. , 

This attitude is not very encouraging if one considers that the 
USA is about the biggest hope we 
have left against these "future 
states" we have already got. Remember, we here were in this advanced 
state of development and civilization — ^at least politically — not too 
long ago, and some other nations, 
like the English, have had it on 
their heads for several years. So 
we have a general^ idea of what 
these dreams of your authors are 
like in reality. 

That is, of course, not a fault 
of you who publish Madge, and I 






am not trying to chang 
only sdmething that Btrtic 
incongruous and I wanted 
your attention to it. 

Now your art. It seems to me 
that Americans are not grown up 
enough to be shown a human body. 
(I do not know what thiat has to do 
with growing up, but that seems 
to be the genei-al attitude,) We 
here (in some parts of) Europe 
tend to wag our heads and tails 
when we see that people of all 
times, lands and stars find it selfevident and natural to conform to 
the rules of the Hays-Office. As 
if Hollywood films were not bad 
enough. I have seen Salome ijix 
her veils to a bathing suit, David 
fall in love with Bathsheba through 
a wooden screen, and ^»'irls from the 
Orient or the Pacific islands do their 
seductive dances in two-piece bathing suits. But please don't foster 
that vogue in science fiction.. I 
am afraid, in your country an artist 
must feel like a scientist in the 
iddle ages; either conform or see 
e world through bars. The cover 
of the February issue is such a sad 
example, though in this case it did 
fit the story somehow. 
Last sad point. I know Americans may admire the Germans, 
but must all space ships look 
like their V-2 "revenge weapons"? 
What shall a pointed nose penetrate in empty space? And what 
are "outside" fin& and rudders good 
for? By the way, why this nonsense about escape velocity on page 
123 of the February issue? Since 
Im Verne nobody scenes able to 
get rid of it. Don't you realize that 
you could walk off the Earth if 
you had a road and enough time? 



id to 
^iye at 

beginning— that is, if you 
bed to shoot it out of a gun. 
Otherwise the necessary speed is 
just a question of available time 
contra "g", i.e., the acceleration 
human beings can stand. 

Now please don't take what I 
said about Americans and their art 
seriously. It is just what I might 
feel if I were an American and had 
just got fed up with something. 
Afterall, you are still the only 
country able to ])r()(liu'e good science fiction, in any (jiiantity worth 
mentioning. And you will probably 
have space ships before we have 
an airline! 

So forgive any seemingly rude 
words, and also what I did to the 
English language! Just carry on 
bringing good- science fiction and 
I will be one of the people to whom 
the stars look a little nearer, the 
night after Madge arrives. 

fcmest Wolf 
Wels, 

Vogelweidestrasse 16 

Austria 

The history of mankind can perhaps be summed up as: The Leaders 
and The Led. In a totalitarian state 
"the led** obey but do not necessarily admire. In a democracy *'the 
led** neither have to obey or admire. Majority rules, and only then 
do all obey the dictate of the masses — expressed through The Leaders. 
If the so-called * future states*' of 
which you speak crop up in American science fiction it is only because we here get a kick put of posing such a problem within a story 
and having our hero who represents 



124 



IMAGINATION 



the democracy we are proud of take 
on and defeat the tyrants. Afterall 
a good story must contain some 
element of conflict — good versus 
bad — and dictatorship is our idea 
of evil. So don't be milled that 
we ar0 harbingers of a future 
doom; we only exemplify in fiction 
what we imve accomplished tkms 
far in facti 

The question as to what lengths 
art may go before it be censored is 
one depending upon the mores of a 
given society. In the USA nudity 
for commercial entertainment is 
considered crude rather than artistic. There are pros and cons on 
this subject, naturally, but for good 
taste we generally agree in this 
country that clothing {scant though 
it may sometimes be) should serve 
^both a functional and moral purpose. EeaUsm is a matter of viewpoint. 

Design of space craft wiU of 
course depend upon method of propulsion; the standardized cigar*' 
shaped ship is logically functional 
for atmosphere flight — stjreamlined to cut down air resistance, 
and rudder-fins for easier naviga-tion. Naturally such design is ridiculous for outer space travel where 
any shape will be satisfactory. But 
let's not misinterpret our artists' 
conception of a space ship with any 
admiration for the Nazi ^Wevenge 
weapon". Afterall^ space ships were 
being so depicted in American magazines long before there was a Nazi 
regime. As to disregarding escape 
velocity, we don't see how it can be 
tossed aside until technology proves 
otherwise through actual experience. 
It seems quite likely, that the first 
inter-space venture will be made bf 



a ship with terrific initial thrust. 
Your idea about ''walking" off the 
face of the Earth is intriguing. 
Man, that's one highway that would 
do a terrific tourist business I 

Many thanks for your letter, and 
rest assured th<it Amefican science 
fiction will contirme to supply the 
world with the best entertainment 
along those lines — until get 
the real thing and ew experience 
it in person^ And that will be 9nly 
the beginning for science fiction. 
Write us again, soon .... wlh 

A DELIGHTFUL AFTERNOON 

Dear Mr. Hamlin^: 

This is just a note to tell you 
how very much I enjoyed BLESSED EVENT by Charles F. Myers 
in the February issue of IMAGINATION. This is really some feat. 
My husband has always been a science-fantasy fan, but try as I may, 
I believe this is the first time I've 
ever finished a story of this type. 
After reading- the first para^ph 
I just couldn't put it d^own, I abisolutely howled . • . 

So thank y^u for a delightful 
afternoon! . 

Kay Lurie 
923 N. Edinburgh 
Los Angeles 46, Cal. 

And thank you, Kay, for a delightful letter. You'll be seeing more 
of Charlie Myers in coming issues^ 

. * . wlh 

NON-EMPIRICAL JUDGMENT... 

Dear William: 

A New Year's resolution I Jxav^ 
made, namely, to g-et a missive of 
mine piiblished m IMAGINATION. 



LLi ILKb FROM IHE READERS 



12 S 



■But what to will' lit ah, thnt 
is the (iiit'Mtiua. i rouUi nay noinrthing liko iMm* "I rtally flip my 
lid over Mu<1k«', thr rooU'wl ol l\w 
cool/' hut. you iilii'uiiy tro (liiluK«<i 
with letters of this type. Or I 
could rate the BtorJc» in thi» hiHt 
i^sue, hut tliat's old stuff, too. And 
so, working niy brain to its fullest 
capacity, IVe decided to discuss a 
favorite topic of mine: The non^ 
empirical judgment that the gener^ 
al non-8 tf reading public uses in 
evaluating science fiction. 

One of the major criticisms of 
stf is that it's too fantastic, contains ridiculous ideas, impossible inventions, and that rocket-to-themoon stuff couldn't possibly happen 
—only crackpots would read or 
write such foolish trash. 

Are the ideas arid inventions ex-, 
pressed in science fiction fantastic? Most of them may be in our 
present society, but the no^n-stf 
critic fails to realize that it is im* 
possible to name one invention or 
scientific concept of today that 
wasn't described or mentioned in a 
stf maffazlne years before our present sorii'ty was exposed to the 
reality. 

Bui, IIm'Ii i)ur critics retaliate by 
statiii^^r thnt any])ody can make a 
lucki/ prrilH h.tn of the future. True, 
becall^|* fmm our ])resentday science any M f . Mt.-cni man may predict will' .1 ..tialilo ju'ciiracy what 
the I'utuif iu>lds in store for us. 
Man cannot ronccivc of an entirely 
nem i(^'''^ invention. But from the 
scientific discoveries and theories 
of today» one may use his imaginati^ to foresee the future development of scientific progress. But 
he^ -is where our critics have Ifjft 




4T LAST... 

MoSi 

WHEREVER 
WHUtS TURN 

— Ho me — Works ho p — Garage ^ 
New, Miracle Lubricant Additive 

POWDEREO MOLYBDENUM SULFIDE 

Added to oil or grease, M0S2 makes friction vanish! All moving parts take on new and longer life. 
Widely used in Industrial Plants, this miracle allpurpose lubricant q^ditive is NOW available for 
home use. 



Car engines and chussis 
Household appliances 
Power tools 
Electric motors 
Outboard motors 
Chain drives 
Form macttinery 
Etc. 



Many months normal supply 
only $3.00; order today. 
Booklet, "The Miracle Lubricant", sent With each order. 

tUBE-ADDCO. 

1426 Fow!er Avenue 
Evanston, IIL 



themselves wide open. 

The critics say tbat man can predict future scientific progress, but 
they said before that stf is utterly 
fantastic. Now if man has prophetic powers, then science fiction is 
not fantastic, because it's written 
by men — many of whom work in 
various scientific fieldjs. Consequently our critics are guilty of 
using non-empirical judgment and 
logic. (The making of a statement, 
believing it to be true, but lacking 
sufficient scientific proof to back 
it up.) 

Now let's suppose that the socalled realistic critics hold nevertheless, .to their stubborn •ide:a that 
stf is still screwball literature. AI** 
rightly . • , then our critics are xm*^ 



onsciously saying that man can't 
predict his own futurci It is established fact, through the ages, that 
men predicted scientific development and progress. Thus, the critics remain guilty of non-empirical 
logic and find themselves locked in 
a closet with the key on the outside. 

So if any fans become involved in 
a debate over the prophetic vision 
of science fiction with a group of 
non-stf persons, throw this argument into their faces and watch 
them hang from the ceiling and 
drip green. 

Ray Schaffer, Jr. 
122 N. Wise St. 
North Canton, Ohio 

The many scientific developments 
of the past decade — and before — 
were written about as *^old stuff* in 
stf magazines for many years. To 
us that is proof enough, Ray, The 
scoffers of whom you speak, are 
just not hep, Ray. A few doses of 
science fiction would cure them of 
their fog-bound outlook. They would 
no longer call stf crazy '■ — but 
CRAZY! Real crazy, man! . . . wlh 

A ZORGH ISSUE, BY GOSH! 

Dear Ed: 

IVe just finished reading the 
February issue of Madge, and the 
only way to describe it would be 
to say it's ZORCH ! I have not been 
reading stf too long, but I can say 
that I \Kk& Madge better than any 
other science fiction magazine. 

The best story in the ish was 
THE MAN WHO MADE THE 
WORLD. I thought the idea was 
unique and well presented. The 
next best story was Dwight V. 



Swain's PLANET OP DREAD. 
You were right in teeing off on 
that guy Wegars in the letter section for condemning space opera. 
Any real fan would prefer to read 
a Swain action story than to wade 
through pages of wire diagrams 
and electric circuits! 

You're getting to h^ve the best 
covers in the business. I really 
thought the cover on the February 
ish was swell. I like those "Mac" 
girls! ... 

Robert R. Stewart 
2123 West St. 
Berkeley 2, Cal. 

The ^^Mac*' girl will return soon,. 
Bob, so watch for the July issue 
cover. It's really a wow — pardon 
us, zorch! . • . • ♦ • • wlh 

A BU-BU YET! 

Dear WLH: 

What? Oh, no! As any stf-fan 
knows, the cover on the February 
ish is utterly impossible. What are 
you trying to do, ruin the standards of stf? The female had more 
clothes than the male! You better 
' let dear Mr. McCauley in on the 
facts of life. Tell him he made a 
BU-BU . . . 

PLANET OF DREAD was the 
best story in the ish, even if its 
cover was absurd! I couldn't stop 
until I had finished the yarn. At 
first I was all set to tear into you 
and scream, SPAGE OPERA! But 
on second thought, it was . used so 
well that I decided to leave your 
neck intact. 

Yeditorial : Good plea, boy, but 
why waste it on us? I'm sure that 
anyone' who reads science fiction 
must believe that space travel is 




LETTERS FROM 



coming sooner or later. So instead, 
why not send copies of MADGE to 
' the President, V-P, Cabinet, all 
the Congressmen, top Army, Navy, 
and Air Force men, and the boys 
workinjif on ^m^hnl missiles . . . Instruct them to read the editorial 
and then do something about it. 
See how simple it would be to get 
them started on .space flight? 

And mayhc they might read the 
rest of Ma (Ik*', tfind then you'll have 
all Iho e new readers. With the 
profits you can pay some of the 
bills for making the first space 
ship. Your name will go down in 
history an the inaugurator of space 
flight and will he uttered joyously 
by all the BEMs sitting on other 
planets wiftiting to be discovered! 

Bob Kvanbeck 
1218 21st Ave., N. 
Minneapolis 11, Minn. 

How t'onhi Mri'nulrii have made 
such ft mxHtnhf^ Wrll have to 
catifiini liini n limit that the future — i/dla H it h vlitthcH — horrors! 
^'ut, titt, /;.»/<, (<///• fditorial was not 
^Vftntrtl it drrii' <i h tft r inif of you! 
If (hni't you ' itc to the afore7ncnt iinnd i>rofjU <ifi<f fril (hon not 

to mxHH Madg^l muck too 

mod$8t •••••••••• wlh 

A FRANTIC COVEKI 

Dear Bill: ^ 

I just can't explain myself in 
mere words. Words aren't enough 
to describe the cover on the February issue. 

McCauley outdid himself^? 
I think I'll hav'e a photograph 
taken of itj have it blown up real 
big and hang it on my bedroom 
wall. 



THE READERS 127 

Enough for the cover, now the 
interior. The Editorial, excellent 
as usual. Referring to your last 
line, ril trot out the ladder — but 
who'll climb it— and who'll steady 
the bottom? 

PLANET OF DREAD was a 
very exciting novel. Once I got 
started I couldn't tear my eyes 
away. (Except for dinner, and 
then I gulped down my food!) 

INTRODUCING THE AUTHOR 
was interesting, and the cartoons 
terrific. 

To sum up, the best for February was the cover — real FRANTIC ! 

John G. Fletcher 
347 Oak Rd. 
Glenside, Pa. 

Crazy — Zoreh — Frantic -— Madge 
is getting to be some mag, real 
gone, huh? . . . . . • . wlh 

BOO TO YOU TOO! 

Dear wlh:. (what crazy names editors have!) 

I am thoroughly convinced that 
all editors are fiends. I'll tell you 
a little story ... It became imperative that I rearrange some of my 
mags. After a half hour of sorting 
I managed to clear out a dresser 
drawer. With a smile on my face 
I firayly staggered out of the spare 
room with a few hundred mags on 
my shoulder (and whoever said 
stf is light reading should be shot!) 
and liegan to fill the drawer. It 
was then thait I discovered that 
t^o copies, of Madge placed end-toend are one-eighth t)f aii inch longer th^n the depth of a drawer. 

A trfe fan never gives up. Plac*^ 
ing one foot in the drawer, I pulled 
on the little knobs, trying to pull 



128 



IMAGINATION 



the drawer far enough apart to 
stick two rows of mags in. No luck. 
So I put the foot back in the drawer, braced the other foot firmly 
against the bed, and with a^ arm 
in front of me and one behind I 
strained my sliding muscles. Success! The mags went in. With a 
sigh of relief I sat down on the bed 
and CRASH. My firmly braced 
foot had been braced firmly on an 
iron bar which was now broken in 
two places. I blame you, Ed, for 
having to sleep on the floor last 
night! 

I see you got a terrific cover wx 
the February issue of Madge. It 
would, however, have been better if 
the gal didn't have that heavy belt 
on! And if anyone wonders what 
type of mind I have, let me say 
that I take my lesson from the 
street cleaner who was fired because he couldn't keep his mind in 
the gutter. 

Since this is a new year I'll list 
a few things I dislike about stf 
mags and such. 

I do not like Dwight Swain in, 
any form or order. He is trite, tasteless, and obviously designed for kiddies whose parents decided they are 
too old for comic books. And I 
wish you would stop comparing him. 
to Burroughs. I want to read him 
some day but you're scaring me . 
away. 

I do not like fan snobbishness 
And I'm not in love with the usual 
definitions of reader mtid fan. To 
me a reader is one who likes stf 
but not enough to pay for it. There 
must be millions of these Library 
Legioneers. I maintain that anyone who buys a stf mag more than 
once is a fan. Not one of the active 



fen, but still a fan. 

I do not like your remark of a 
year ago concerning -reprints. There 
is a definite need for reprint mags. 
We aren't all old-timers with complete files from 19 — ? up. 

Above all, I don't like editors 
who send their mags to any of the 
newsstands in a city and then 
smirk in the back pages, asking: 
*^Having trouble finding us at the 
newsstands? Subscribe and stop 
worrying!" A mag like that I 
wouldn't subscribe to if they 
gold-plated the covers. 

In conclusion, I must aim a blast 
at Madge's letter section. I don't 
mind egoboo. But poo ! You have 
nothing but sticky, icky goo ! I 
think it's a matter of exclamation 
points. They can say, ^'Madge is 
great." Period. A simple opinion. Or say, "Madge is great!!!!" 
We know this is a screwball letter 
and can chuckle over it. But when 
they say, "Madge is the greatest! 
I like it! You got a good mag!" 
Cjraaaaaa. 

To all readers : If you are interested in stf and want to get in on 
some fun, don't sit on your hands 
and wait for us to come to you. 
Fandom doesn't know you're alive. 
So write a letter to somebody. Anybody whose letter interests you. 
That is what I did, and everyone 
I've written to turned out to be a 
great guy with a wonderful sense 
of humor. ' Wishful thinking won't 
get you anjrwhere. Right now J 
Grab your, pencil, typewriter, or 
crayon (if they won't give you anything sharp) and start writing. If 
nobody else, write to me! 

As for you, ed, a BOO to you! 

John Courtois 



LETTERS FROM THE READERS 



129 




318 East Commercial St, 
Appleton, Wise. 
Methinks a night on the floor put 
you in an ill humor, Johnny, But 
rest eo^, son, we think you* re a 
real gone ch-aracter! The only 
question is, how far gone? Hah! 

. . ' • • wlh 

^HO COULD ASK FOR MORE! 

flJBpear Mr Hamling: 

Since there must be a first time 
for everything, this is it for me 
and a letter to the editor. 
J. I just finished reading the February issue of Madge. It was terrific! The biggest understatement 
of the year ... I have been reading 
Madge (as well as Galaxy and others) for some time, but the Febru


ary ish topped everything. Not one 
story was the least bit crummy. 
PLANET OF DREAD was about 
the best story IVe ever read in a 
science fiction mag. (And that's a 
lot!) It combined just enough 
science and sex appeal to satisfy 
any r^der. And action! You 
couldn't ask for anything more. 
And in the same issue ROCKET 
TO FREEDOM was also tops. Not 
to mention BLESSED EVENT. 

My Congrats to Madge on being 
the best stf book on the market, 
bar none. You have gained one 
more really solid reader, for life! 

Mike Endres— W4ZAE 
^ 200 Edward St. 

Tallahassee, Fla. 
We hope you live for centuries, 
Mike! , • • . . . • • , wlh 



Back Issues of Imaginaiian Available 

—SEE NEXT PAGE TO SUBSCRIBE FOB COMING ISSUES—' 



March 1952, No. 9 
May 1952, No. 10 
July 1952, No. 11 
September 1952, No. 12 
October 1952, No. 13 
December 1952, No. 14 
January 1953, No. 15 
February 1953, No. 16 
April 1953, No. 17 
May 1953, No. 18 
June 1953, No. 19 



July 1953, No. 20 
AuiTUSt 1953, No. 21 
September 1953, No. 22 
October 1953, No. 23 
November 1953, No. 24 
December 1953, No. 25 
January 1954, No. 26 
February 1954, No. 27 
March 1954, No. 28 
April 1964, No. 29 



) 
) 
) 
) 

) 
) 
) 
) 
) 
) 



Copies are 35c each, or three for $1.00. Eict^^lose cash, check, or money 
order. Address: IMAGINATION, P.O. Box 230, Evanston, Illinois. Orders 
filled promptly, and all copies mailed in heavy protecting envelopes. 



NAME 



ADDRESS 
CITY___ 



ZONE STATE • 



Which price do you pay for your copy 
of IMAGINATION every month ? 

In all probability you're paying- the 35c newsstand price -7- and you 
know you're getting the finest science fiction entertainment for your 
money. But you CAN get the same fine magazine EVERY MONTH for 
just 20c! The answer? Be a subscriber to IMAGINATION and save 
money while you enjoy the best! — As a subscriber you get a BONUS 
issue FREE as part of your subscription, making a total of 26 issues for 
your $5.00 subscription. AND you get SERVICE — Y^nr copies mailed 
in heavy protecting envelopes WEEKS AHEAD OF Ifl^SSTAND PUBLICATION! — If you prefer, take advantage of our special 12 issue 
offer for only $3.00 — - you still get a BONUS copy FREE, and each copy 
still costs you only 25c! So either way — 25 issues or 12 — fill out the 
blank below and subscribe today. You'll be wise — and thrifty too i 
- This special offer good only by writing direct to this magazin,e. 

MAIL YOUR REMITTANCE TO 

IMAGINATION, P.O. Box 230, Evanston, Illinois 



NAME 



ADDRESS 



CITY 



ZONE ....i* STATE 



□ 25 Issues $5.00 (20c per copy — plus FREE BONUS copy — total, 26 issues!) 

□ 12 Issues $3.00 {2&e per copy— --plus f REE BONUS copy— total, 13 issues!) 



Enclosed is □ cash 



□ . check 



□ money orc(er for 



••••••*•«... 



Begin my subscription with the issue. 

All ccuntries otlier than U.S.A. and Canada, $3.50 12 issues, $6.00 35 issues 

PRINTED IN U.S.A. 




