nEBULR 

science Ficnon 



BI-MONTHLY 



,J 1\ 



NUMBER 16 






STORIES I',) S\I)M<A ./. HOUNDS. E. C. 77 HI',. ETC. 




THH Kditor of Nebula Science- 1 'id ion is pleased to announce 
that, as a result of the Reader Opinion Polls on the stories 
published in the magazine during 1955. E. C. TUBB has been 
ehosen the most popular Nebula author of that year. 

We would like to congratulate Mr. Tubb on the remarkable 
achievement of securing this top position for the third consecutive year and take pleasure in printing hereunder his own 
reaction to the results : 

"/ am very pleased and proud to he considered the most 
popular author hy readers of Nehula and even more pleased 
and proud lo have heen so voted for the third year in succession. 
Beiui! human I am selfish enough to want to remain on this liigh 
pinnacle hut also selfish enough to want to read the e< >< >d storie., 
which, I am sure, will appear hy other authors who will do thed 
hest to win this coveted lumour." 

\ . ( HKB. 



nEBULR 

sciencs Ficnon 

Edited by PETER HAMILTON Issue Number Sixteen 

Novel : 

FRONTIER ENCOUNTER Sydney J. Bounds 74 

Novelette : 

DYING TO LIVE E. C. Tubb 3 

Short Stories: 



ALWAYS Robert Silverberg 23 

HOT WATER E. R. James 33 

BARRIER TO YESTERDAY Bob Shaw 46 

THE MORON John Seabright 63 

Special Features: 

Look Here The Editor 2 

Something To Read ... Kenneth F. Slater 101 

Scientifilm Previews ... Forrest J. Ackerman 104 

Fanorama ... Walter A. Willis 106 

Guided Missives The Readers 108 

Front Cover by James Rattigan Back Cover by Arthur Thomson 

Black and White Illustrations by Turner.Thomson, Greengrass and Hunter 

NEBULA SCIENCE-FICTION, price Two Shillings, is printed in Scotland by The Munro Press Ltd.. 
Perth and published by Peter Hamilton at 159, Crownpoint Road, Glasgow. S.E. This edition was 
published in March, 1956, 

Subscription Rates in Great Britain and the British Commonwealth: Six issues, 12/- Stg.; Twelve 
issues 24/- Stg. In the U.S.A. and Canada, Six issues, S2.00; Twelve issues. S4.00. All Rate* 
Post Free. 

Sole distribution rights for Australia and New Zealand have been granted to Messrs. Gordon & Gotch 
(Australasia) Ltd. 

No responsibility can be accepted for loss or damage of unsolicited mss. or artwork 
and while these are invited, adequate return postage should always be enclosed. 
All characters and events in these stories are entirely fictitious. Any resemblance to .persons living 
or dead is purely coincidental. 



Look h 



It was my pleasure to announce on another page that NEBULA 
readers had placed E. C. Tubb in first place through their Ballot Papers 
in 1955, but what of the other writers who strove to please you during 
the same year? Kenneth Bulmer came second — a remarkable achievement considering that he appeared with us only once and for the very 
first time in 1955 — while F. G. Rayer and David S. Gardner tied for 
third place in our "honours list." Mr Gardner was also the most highly 
thought of among my own discoveries, while Robert A. Heinlein was 
favourite American author. 

This result is the direct consequence of the story preference votes 
of NEBULA readers and is the yardstick against which all our authors 
measure their standing in your esteem. A similar award will be presented at the end of 1956 and, if you wish your preferences to be taken 
into consideration — with the obvious result that you will exert considerable influence in the kind of stories printed every two months in this 
magazine— be sure to complete the Ballot Form in this and all future 
issues. 



E. C. Tubb appears for the fourteenth time in this edition of NEBULA 
with "Dying to Live," a story which is in complete constrast to his thirteen 
previous appearances, and which may be something of a new experience 
for many regular readers. However, as you might expect, it is a firstrate science fiction story for all that. 

The short stories include a chilling little fantasy by Robert Silverberg 
who, as you may remember, had his very first story accepted for 
NEBULA No. 7 two years ago. It will interest you to know that he has 
since made a very big name for himself in science fiction writing with 
appearances in many of the better known American magazines, and I 
like to feel that this is yet another instance of a new and talented author 
put on the road to fame by a first appearance in NEBULA. 

In these days when college diplomas are regretably becoming more 
important than real solid experience in the field of industry I think you 
will agree it is refreshing to read in E. R. James' "Hot Water" that in 
the future when this trend will very probably have continued, there still 
exists another kind of learning of far greater real value. 

Bob Shaw writes our longest "short" this time with another of the 
truly original and off-trail yarns with which he is building himself a 
formidable reputation as one of our top authors. Unfortunately, Bob 
is emigrating to Canada in the near future, but he has promised me that 
he will be sending on more of his fine stories just as soon as he gets a 
chance to settle down over there. 

Concluded on page 112 



E. C. TUBB 



Dying To Live 

Now that he was dying to live, living itself scarcely seemed worthwhile 

Illustrated by Harry Turner 

The pistol was a glittering instrument of potential destruction and 
Malchin held it as if torn between fear and fascination of its metallic 
beauty. 

"So this is the end," he said thickly. "You are determined to ruin 
my life and that of my son." 

"Ruin?" May shrugged and moved towards the lounge where her 
suitcase rested on the cushions. " You are too dramatic, John. Edward 
and I love each other. We want to he with one another. Is that so 
unnatural?" 

"But you are my wife!" 

"Your second wife, John," she reminded. She looked at him. 
"I was young when you married me. Foolish, blinded by the wealth 
you had to offer, the life of ease and luxury you made possible. I didn't 
guess then that a woman needs more than that." She picked up the 
suitcase and stepped towards him. "A woman needs affection, John. 
She needs love and understanding and sympathy. She needs . . ." 

"Youth," he said bitterly. "But my own son!" 

"It was fate, John. Some things are bigger than we are and to 
fight against them is useless. I love Edward and, in this world, a 
woman must seek her happiness where she can." She hesitated and 
held out her hand. "Goodbye, John." 

He stared at her, ignoring the proffered hand, and, in his, the pistol 
twitched as though it were a thing alive. 

"So you mean it." he said, and there was pain in his voice. "You 
are going to leave me." 

"Yes, John." 

3 



NEBULA 



"1 should kill you," he said. "I should kill him for ruining my 
life, but can a man kill his own flesh and blood?" He bowed his head 
and the pistol pointed towards the floor. "I love you," he whispered. 
"Is bitterness always the fruit of love?" 

"Love is bitter-sweet," she said softly, and for a moment it seemed 
as if she would drop the case and throw her arms around him. Then, 
from the distance, the horn of a car was heard and she stiffened. 
"Goodbye, John. We shall never see each other again." 

She hesitated a moment, her hand still outstretched, then, as he 
made no move to respond to her gesture, she sighed and, turning on 
her heel, walked towards the door. 

He lifted his head as she moved away and the pistol in his hand 
levelled at her slim, straight back. Tension gripped him and his hand 
trembled. Once it seemed as though he would call her back then, as 
the door closed behind her, he sobbed and sank listlessly into a chair. 

He held the pose for a long five seconds, milking the scene for all 
it was worth then, haggardly, he went into the final soliloquy. 

He cut it as short as he could but even then he knew It was too 
long. He lifted the pistol and, glancing at it, sighed, and slowly aimed 
it at his temple. He stared before him, a man broken by the conflicting 
surge of emotions and who had seen his world and happiness crumple 
around him. Then he pressed the trigger and. as the report echoed 
around him, stiffened then slumped in the chair. 

And that, he thought bitterly, was the perfectly apt ending to a 
perfectly crummy play. 

May had the start of him and had almost finished cleaning her face 
by the time he got to their dressing-room. He waited until she had put 
on her street cosmetics then sat tiredly before the big mirror. 

"Poor crowd tonight," said May, as she struggled into her dress. 
"Susan gave me the figures. Twenty-seven paid seats and the rest freeentry. Ferenstien must be laughing." 

"What else can he expect?" Malchin wiped his face with tissue 
and stared at his reflection. "Putting on rubbish like that is a waste 
of time. My guess is that he was backed by the author." 

"Oh, I don't know," said May. "It has its moments." 

"Had, you mean," corrected Malchin. "You don't imagine it's 
going to run a fifth night, do you?" He turned from the mirror as a 
knock came at the door. "What is it?" 

"Mr Ferenstien wants to see you in his office," said a voice. 



DYING TO LIVE 



5 



"Important" 

"What did I tell you?" Malcbin scowled as he brushed a few flecks 
of powder from the shoulders of his one good suit. The play had been 
in modern dress so he'd had to use his own clothes. "Four nights and 
we get a week's pay and a so-sorry-goodbye." 

He was right. 

Ferenstien wasn't alone when they entered his office. The author of 
the plan, a thin, weedy, studious type, was with him. Of the two the 
author looked the more miserable. Ferenstien came straight to the 
point. 

"We had twenty-five paid seats tonight," he said. "Last night we 
had thirty-two and fifteen the night before that. On opening night we 
had fifty-three, a record. We're closing down." 

"Twenty-seven," said May. Ferenstien looked at her. 

"Twenty-seven what?" 

"Twenty-seven paid seats tonight. You said that we had twentyfive but it was twenty-seven." 

"So it was twenty-seven, does that make me solvent?" He spread 
his hands. "I'm sorry, people, but you can see how it is. If people 
won't pay to see live shows then I can't pay you. That's sense, isn't it?" 

"It would be better sense to have a decent play," said Malchin. 
"I spent two weeks learning that part. Why don't you find some decent 
authors?" 

"There's nothing wrong with the play," said the author quickly. 
"I've been trying to persuade Mr. Ferenstien to remain open. Once the 
word-of-mouth advertising gets around people will be queueing up for 
tickets." He appealed to Malchin. "Tell him what you think, Mr. 
Malchin. After all, you're an experienced actor and you know how 
these things are." 

Malchin sighed. Self-preservation dictated that he should agree 
with the author. If he could talk Ferenstien into staying open it would 
mean an extra week's pay for May and himself. But against that was 
the fact that the play was basically bad. Reluctantly he shook his head. 

"The play," he said gently, "stinks. It will never do anything else 
but stink. Only a moron would pay to be bored for two hours and we 
haven't enough of that type of moron." 

"But when you first read it you said that it was a good play!" 
The little man almost seemed to be on the verge of tears. He looked 
accusingly at Ferenstien. "You said so too." 

"So we made a mistake," Ferenstien shrugged. "It happens all 



6 



NEBULA 



the time. Next time, maybe, you'll have a smash hit. Come and see 
me then." He looked expressively towards the door. 

"But my money!" The author looked more miserable than ever. 
"You said that I would get rich." 

"You took a gamble," said Ferenstien shortly. "I hired you my 
theatre and attended to everything. You could have made a lot of 
money and, maybe next time you will." He looked towards the door 
again and this time the little man took the hint Ferenstien sighed as 
he closed the door after him. 

"These authors!" 

"Poor man," said May. "Did you have to be so hard on him?" 

"Why don't you buy decent plays," said Malchin. "That way you 
could make an honest profit." 

"Buy them from where?" Ferenstien spread his hands. "What 
the mannikin theatre doesn't use the TV will. What they don't want 
ain't no good anyway. Can I afford to pay more than the MT for a 
good play? Be your age, Malchin, you know I can't." 

He spoke nothing but the truth and Malchin knew it. No good 
play had to go abegging nowadays. If an author could write what the 
producers wanted he was on easy street. The mere fact that no one 
had bought his play should have warned the little man that he had a 
stinker. Instead of taking the warning he'd backed his play with his 
own money and, inevitably, he'd lost it. 

Ferenstien passed over a cheque. Malchin took it, studied the 
amount, then nodded and slipped it into his pocket. 

"You'll let us know when anything else comes up?" 

"Til remember you," promised the theatre owner. "But I won't 
be able to fix you up here any more." 

"Why not?" Malchin knew the answer before he heard it. "You're 
switching to MT relay!" 

"Sure. I'm putting in a big screen and converting the wings and 
dressing rooms. I'm employing a few girls to sell soft drinks and 
snacks and I'll fill the house every day." Ferenstien looked at May. 
"I might be able to fit you in if you're interested." 

"No thanks," said May firmly, "Fm an actress and that's what 
I'm going to stay." 

"Then you'd better act in MT," said Ferenstien. "As far as I 
know, this is the only legitimate theatre left in the country, and the 
supply of suckers is pretty well exhausted. An Angel is rarer than a 
Dodo." He looked at Malchin. "What are you going to do? Sign 



DYING TO LIVE 



7 



on at the studios?" 

"Not me." Malchin looked at May for encouragement Ferenstien shrugged. 

"Well, it's your business, but to me there's only one way out." He 
rose and held out his hand. "Good luck, anyway. Maybe I'll be seeing you." 

He didn't sound too enthusiastic. 

On the way home Malchin thought about it. Ferenstien was right, 
of course, at least he was right when it came to financial details. The 
live theatre was finished. Movies had helped to kill it and TV had put 
it in its coffin. The mannikin theatre had finally screwed down the lid. 
Now actors worked for the MT or they didn't work at all or, like 
Malchin and May, worked for some sleazy gyp artist more interested in 
easy money than legitimate art. 

He sighed and May stared up at him. 

"Worried, John?" 

"We'll get by." He forced a smile. "We've managed so far and 
I'll find something for us to do." 

"Work?" She frowned. "I suppose that you could get a job 
loading supplies or watching the dials at an automation factory. Is that 
what you meant?" 

He hadn't and didn't bother to explain that he had less chance of 
getting a job in industry than of playing Hamlet in a full-scale live production. Automation had brought its own problems. The mechanisation of the factories, while increasing production and lowering costs, 
had created a vast unemployment problem. It had been solved by a 
strict adherence to union policy. No overtime. No non-union workers. 
Four, six-hour shifts a day and a four-day week. It had worked and, 
at the same time, created a tremendous demand for entertainment. 

The movies had tried to fill it until the artistes' union had finally 
managed to ban any but live shows. No movies, no recordings, no 
records for public playing. The mannikin theatre had come along 
offering better spectacle than movies and better presentation than TV. 
Now almost every home had its MT tube and the old movie houses and 
theatres had all been converted to the new medium. Like industry, 
the world of entertainment had saved itself at the expense of efficiency, 
but many, like Malchin. thought that the new medium was worse than 
the old. 

Young men could make the change and accept the loss of the live 



8 



NEBULA 



theatre. But Malchin was no longer young. He remembered the old 
days on tour, the thrill of a first night, the packed houses and autograph 
hunters. He didn't want to lose all that and, altogether with it, the 
fine old tradition of the theatre. To him there was something sacred in 
the smell of grease-paint, the heat of the footlights, the presence of a 
watchful, critical audience. To him nothing else was real theatre. 

He sighed again then looked up as the European Stratrocket sent 
a thin trail of fire across the heavens. For a moment he felt regret that 
the planets were still out of reach. It would have been fun to tour the 
colonies with a company. He jerked back to reality at the sound of 
his name. 

"John!" A fat, chubby man came smiling towards them. "And 
May! It's good to see you again." 

"Hello, Marks." May returned the smile as she held out her hand. 
"How's the world treating you?" 

"Not bad." Marks steered them towards the flashing gilt and neon 
of a bar. "Not bad at all. And you?" 

"Fine." 

They didn't resume the conversation until they were seated and 
Marks had ordered drinks all round. A big TV screen against one wall 
showed a succession of commercials but Malchin was pleased to see 
they had no MT tube. Mostly the mannikin theatre was unsuitable for 
public bars and refreshment rooms. The plays were too long and the 
effect too hypnotic for it to pay. He sipped at his Martini and stared 
at the crowd around him. 

Even though it was well past midnight the place was busy. It 
would stay busy all the twenty-four hours it was open each day. The 
six-hour four-shift work-system had broken down the last barrier 
between day and night and, in order to consume the mounting production of the factories, life remained at a high tempo. 

"I nearly starved before I got wise," said Marks. He beamed at 
them across the table. "It became impossible to book dates for the 
show so I had to disband the company." 

"You paid off the road-show!" May made expressions of sympathy. "After all that time, too!" 

"Best company on the road," admitted Marks, "but they had to go. 
I've placed most of them since though and we still keep in touch." 

"How?" Malchin fished for his cherry. "How did you place 
them, I mean?" 

"I'm an agent," said Marks. "Doing all right too." 



DYING TO LIVE 



9 



"An agent!" Malchin swallowed the cherry whole, Marks nodded. 

"That's right Look me up when you are free." He produced a 
couple of cards. "I've got an in with the studios and they'll take almost 
anyone I send. They like experienced actors, of course, but what the 
devil? Anyone who's been on the boards can take an MT part with 
his eyes shut." 

"You're an MT agent?" Malchin looked disgusted. "You!" 

"Why not?" Marks signalled for more drinks. "There's plenty 
of work at the studios. They run some of those plays for weeks and 
they aren't short ones either. Five, even ten hours at a stretch. They 
can use a cast of thousands. I tell you, John, it's the big thing now." 

"Maybe," said Malchin sourly. "But it isn't real theatre." 

"It pays," said Marks pointedly. He glanced at his wrist "Look, 
I'm in a hurry right now but I'd like to see you both again. Look me 
up tomorrow, or whenever you can. Right?" 

Malchin nodded and May smiled. They were thoughtful all the 
rest of the way home. 

The man at the desk stared at the card then looked up. 

"Experienced?" 

"Thirty years in all parts," said Malchin indignantly. "Would 
you call that experienced?" 

"Not as far as we're concerned. I mean have you worked MT 
before?" 

"No," admitted Malchin. "Does it matter?" 

"Wastes time." The man stamped the card, handed it to Malchin. 
and jerked his thumb towards a door. "Indoctrination through there. 
Next?" 

Indoctrination was a small room fitted with tiered seats and a low 
stage. Malchin found a vacant seat, squeezed into it, and looked at 
the bored man on the platform. He waited patiently until the seats 
were full and then pressed a button. 

"Right. Now that we won't be interrupted we can get on with it 
All of you are actors so I won't bother giving you the usual stage procedure. As this is your first time with us, however, there are certain 
things you must know." He paused and lit a cigarette. 

"First, and most important of all, you must bear in mind that you 
are never really on-stage at all. No matter what happens to you it 
can't affect you physically. It's up to you not to let it affect you mentally either. All the actors you see on MT tubes are mannikins. They 



10 



NEBULA 



are about two inches high and each has a Thoren-type positronic brain. 
Those details needn't concern or worry you. The point is this. You. 
your mental awareness that is, will be transmitted to the mannikin. For 
the time being it will be you, your body and mind. In brief it will be 
just as though you've been converted into a mannikin. You will live 
on stage and most probably die there. Don't let that worry you. At 
the instant of death, or when your role is finished, you will be recalled 
back to your own body. Any questions?" 

A young man in the back row stuck up his hand. "Can we speak 
our parts?" 

"The actual mannikins cannot make a sound," explained the 
instructor. "Speaking, when necessary, is done by you in your cubicles. 
Microphones pick up the sound and we blend it at control." The 
instructor drew at his cigarette. "Let me put it another way. Consider the mannikin as a part of you, such as a hand or a foot. You 
control it, but it cannot speak. You can speak but the sounds will come 
out of your mouth, not that of the mannikin. If you move, however, 
it will be the mannikin which moves, not you." He smiled at them. 
"Forget the science and stop worrying about how it's done. It works, 
that's all you need worry about." 

"How about learning our parts?" It was the young man again 
and Malchin began to suspect that he was planted just to ask relevant 
questions. 

"Most of the cast have no speaking parts to learn," said the 
instructor. "When you become star players you'll have to be rehearsed 
just the same as for movies or the regular stage. You'll get a schedule 
telling you what you're supposed to do and how to do it. If you flop 
we cross you off our list. If you forget to remember that no matter 
what happens on stage it can't hurt you, you'll turn psycho and we 
cross you off just the same." He crushed out the cigarette. "Right. 
Go through the door and get to work." He pressed the button again 
and sat down with a patient expression. Malchin wondered just how 
many times a day he had to stand there and go through the same routine. 
A recorder would have done the same job just as well but recorders 
were banned. He sighed and followed the rest of the crowd through 
the door. 

It led to the casting room and selectors handed out sheets of paper 
to those they had cast. Malchin stared at his then looked at the man. 
"A slave?" 

"Yes. No speaking part. You get killed. Next?" 



DYING TO LIVE 



11 




"Killed!" 

"Why not?" The man was impatient. "Get into the ready-room 
Hurry, we're running late as it is." 

The ready-room was a barber's shop where they shaved his head 
until it was as naked as an egg. 

Malchin tried to protest, then kept quiet when told that it was that 
or back on to the street (or him. He had already gathered that the 
studios had a black-list and he didn't want to get on it. Still, looking 
down at his carefully tended locks as they fell around him he wondered 
whether it was all worth it. He wondered still more when they sent 
him into a room divided into small cubicles each containing elaborate 
chairs surrounded by electronic equipment. Then he found out why 
his head had had to be shaved. 

"The helmet fits, so." The technician stepped back and smiled at 
him. "Comfortable?" 

"Does it matter?" Malchin was bitter. Never before in his life 
had he known of an actor treated as a bit of machinery and he didn't 
like it. 



12 



NEBULA 



"We like you to be comfortable," explained the technician. He 
moistened Malchin's wrists and ankles and clipped on more electrodes 
"There. Now don't worry about a thing. When I throw the switch 
you'll be motivating the mannikin and from then on it's up to you." 
He glanced at a wall clock. "You've got three minutes. Better check 
your script so that you won't be making any mistakes." 

"What script?" Malchin gestured with the paper. "This? All it 
says is that I'm cast as a slave and will die in the arena. Call that a 
script?" 

"It's enough. You'll find yourself in the waiting room and someone 
will help you at the right time." The technician smiled again. "Just 
don't worry. Act natural. As an actor you should be able to do this 
with your eyes shut." He glanced at the wall-clock again. "Ready?" 

Malchin nodded. 

It was the first time he had died and he didn't like it a bit. He 
said so long and loudly until the technician, who must have heard the 
identical complaint at least a thousand times before, lost patience. 

"What's the matter with you?" he snapped. "You get paid, don't 
you?" 

"That's not the point," said Malchin stiffly. His freshly-shaven 
head ached and he had a sour taste in his mouth. He glowered at the 
electrodes on wrists and ankles. "A man's still got some rights. They 
should have told me what to expect." 

"Why should they?" The technician shrugged as he checked a row 
of dials. "What difference would it have made?" 

"I would never have accepted the part had I known. I'm not one 
to complain, but there are limits. Wait until the union hears about 
this." 

"The union?" The technician shrugged. "What can they do about 
it? It would be a lot easier for us not to have to use you actors at all. 
We could do a lot better with edited recordings." He produced a 
package of cigarettes, lit one and offered the package to Malchin. 
"Smoke?" 

"Thanks." Malchin puffed it into life and relaxed in the chair. 
"Can I go now?" 

"Not yet. It takes a little while for you to get readjusted. Later, 
when you're used to it, you can get straight up and out." The technician 
glanced at the dials again. "I'll tell you when." 

Malchin nodded and sat quietly smoking. His initial shakes had 



DYING TO LIVE 



13 



gone and, though he was still upset by the whole thing, he felt the warm 
glow of an actor who has played a difficult part well. He looked at a 
black screen against the wall. 

"Did you catch the show?" 

"No." 

"You missed something. It was a costume piece, early Roman, 1 
think, with lots of blood and fighting." He frowned as he thought about 
it "I was a slave. A bit part. You'd have thought that they would 
have given an experienced actor a better part than that." 

"Experienced?" The technician smiled through the smoke of his 
cigarette. 

"Experienced," said Malchin firmly. "Real theatre, I mean. You 
can't call this real." 

"No?" 

"No," repeated Malchin. "I'm talking about real flesh and blood 
actors. I . . ." He broke off at the other's smile. "You know what 
I mean," he finished weakly. Then, as the technician kept smiling. 
"All right, so you people think you're smart But I haven't forgotten 
what you did to me and I'm going to do something about it. You'll 
see." 

"All right," said the technician. "So you're going to do something 
about it. So what?" He dropped his cigarette and trod on it. He 
glanced at the dials and unsnapped the electrodes from Malchin's ankles 
and wrists. "You can go now." He stamped and signed the card 
Malchin had received at the front desk. "Give them this on the way 
out." 

"What is it?" 

"Your resistance index and approved work. You've got a strong 
psyche and quick recovery. You'll be good for all the work you want. 
It also authorises you to collect your pay." 

He smiled as Malchin almost ran out of the door. 

Acutely conscious of his shaven head Malchin left the studios and 
caught a moving way towards the centre of town. The shame of his 
bald scalp was offset by the welcome feel of the money in his pockets 
but, as he paid his fare, he saw that the conductor was grinning at him. 
He scowled after the man as he walked down the strip collecting fares. 

Some people didn't know when they were well off. 

He dropped off for a quick snack and, over his coffee, he decided 
what next to do. May would be waiting for him at the apartment, but 



14 



NEBULA 



he didn't feel like going home just yet. He doubted whether the money 
he had earned would justify himself in her eyes for breaking faith. 
Anyway, he was still burning with injured pride and the memory of what 
had been done to him and wanted to do something about it. 

The usual crowd of actors hung around outside the offices of the 
union. All of them were "resting" and they eyed his shaven head with 
mingled expressions of envy and contempt. He brushed past them into 
the reception office where a girl, blonde, bored and over-painted, waved 
him to a chair while she operated the intercom. 

"Mr. Langtree?" 

The box squawked. 

"Mr. Malchin to see you, sir. Official business." 

The box squawked and the receptionist gestured towards the inner 
door, "Mr. Langtree will see you now." 

Langtree was tall, thin, hollow-cheeked and as full of fight as an 
over-fed cockerel. He nodded to Malchin and pointed to a chair. His 
other hand held a telephone and he barked into it between pauses of 
listening. He didn't pause long. 

"No. No. Not a chance. No. Live shows only, Pernod, and if 
you want to stay in business you'd better remember that. If I catch 
you so much as playing a record over that public address system of yours 
I'll have the unions clamp down on you. All of them. No. No. 
That's better. No. Okay." 

He slammed down the receiver and wiped his face with a handkerchief. 

"Well, Malchin? What can I do for you?" 

"I'm making a complaint," said Malchin. He flushed as Langtree 
stared at his naked head. "All right, go ahead and laugh. That's all 
everyone seems to do if they don't spit. Make up your mind which 
you want to do and get it over with. If this lousy union would remember what it's supposed to do instead of holding out its hand for dues all 
the time I wouldn't have to walk around like this." 

"Get a wig," suggested Langtree. "Most of the boys and girls wear 
them now. No one need know." 

"Get a wig," echoed Malchin bitterly. "What the hell? I thought 
that you were supposed to be helping us." 

"I am." Langtree mopped his face again and Malchin remembered that the thin man had been instrumental in the banning of movies. 
"What's the complaint?" 



DYING TO LIVE 



15 



"I died today," said Malchin, and shuddered. "They didn't tell 
me what I was letting myself in for. They cast me as a slave and threw 
me to the lions." He shuddered again at the memory. "I thought 
there was a law against things like that." 

"Like what?" 

"Killing people. Cruelty. That sort of thing." 
"You weren't hurt, were you?" Langtree seemed eager. Malchin 
shrugged. 

"That depends on what you mean by 'hurt'?" 
"No pain, I mean. Was there?" 

"No," said Malchin reluctantly. "1 can't say there was actual 
pain, but it sure played hell with my nerves." 

"A pity," said Langtree regretfully. "I'd heard a rumour that they 
were letting pain-sensation through a little. Wanted to make the shows 
more realistic. Seems that some of the actors they employed grew used 
to it and started to laugh at the wrong time. If I could prove they 
were letting pain through I could slam down on them." He looked 
sharply at Malchin. "Sure they didn't bribe you to forget?" 

"I'm sure. It wasn't nice but there was no pain that I remember." 

"Good." Langtree relaxed in his chair. "We can't allow them to 
do as they like with us, not if they don't pay for it." He seemed to 
remember something. "Well? What did you want to see me about?" 

"I told you. They killed me today." 

"So what? You got extra pay for it, didn't you?" 

"That isn't the point," said Malchin. "They didn't even tell 
me what to expect. They just connected me up and threw the switch. 
Before I knew what it was all about I was kicked into an arena and a 
huge lion was coming for me." He shuddered. "Have you ever been 
eaten by a lion?" 

"Not that I can remember," said Langtree drily. "Was it bad?" 

"It was hell! First it knocked me down and slavered all over me. 
I guessed they'd have a close-up of the scene so I acted plenty scared. 
Not," he corrected himself, "that I had to act. It was too real for that. 
Then it bit my legs off, slowly, as if it were enjoying it. It clawed me 
and, just when I was getting the willies, it bit off my head." Malchin 
looked ill as he thought about it. "I was never so relieved in all my 
life as I was when I came to in the chair." 

"Bad," sympathised Langtree. "Still, they pay double rates for 
maiming and death. Treble for death by torture. What more do you 
want?" 



16 



NEBULA 



"Choice of parts," snapped Malchin. "From what I hear they 
don't give a damn about the cast. Aside from the stars they just take 
anyone they fancy. Lions, slaves, soldiers, anything on the bill. You 
either take it or they do without you." 

"True," admitted Langtree. "Still, as an old trouper you should 
know that that is nothing new. How many parts did you play in your 
early days? And glad to get them I'll bet." 

"That was different," said Malchin. "I was learning my trade." 

"You're still learning," said Langtree. "Personally I can't see what 
you've got to complain about." 

"I do. And I haven't paid dues for the past thirty years to get 
the brush-oif when you need help." 

"You'll get it," said Langtree, "when you need it. But what do 
you want me to do?" 

"File an injunction against the MT studios and make them give 
choice of parts. Better still, file an injunction and force them to close 
down." 

"That's impossible. On what grounds? Would it increase employment if they offered choice of parts?" 

"No, but it wouldn't be so bad if you selected your part." 

"It would slow down production. Did the movies ever give a bit 
player a choice. Of course they didn't and the same principle applies. 
As for shutting them down, I daren't do it. Do you realise that they 
employ more artists, not counting the kindred trades allied to the theatre, 
than could ever be employed by regular theatres? If I tried it I'd be 
thrown out of office and rightly so. Agreed?" 

"I suppose you're right," said Malchin reluctantly. Unemployment 
had been the spectre of the theatre ever since the first actor had put on 
grease-paint. Too many eager young hopefuls and too few openings for 
them. Radio and movies had supplied a large audience and had cut 
down employment even more. Television had increased the audience 
and thrown still more actors out of work as one theatre and variety 
house after the other had shut down or been converted. The mannikin 
theatre with its low production costs and world-wide audiences, its casts 
of thousands and its continual change of plays, had saved the profession. 
That, and the long and bitter struggle to ban any but live shows. 

"You're an intelligent man," said Langtree. "We've done what we 
could but there's a limit. With the set-up they've got any bum off skid 
row could fill a part. We're lucky still to be in business at all." He 
rose and held out his hand. "Sorry, Malchin. I know how you feel 



DYING TO LIVE 



17 



but we've got to face it. The legit theatre is dead and it's going to stay 
that way. Bring me a genuine complaint, something like them using 
non-union labour, cut-rates, violation of ethics, anything like that and 
I'll act fast enough. But you can't expect me to cut my own throat." 
He looked significantly towards the door. 

Outside the office Malchin wasted some breath and energy cursing 
the union, the MT theatre, the modern craze for gore and the universe 
in general. He was recovering his breath when a man stopped and 
sneered at him. 

He was tall, thin, with a mane of long, black hair sweeping back 
from a high forehead and curling neatly over his collar. His clothes 
were a rusty black, stained and spotted with age and wear. His nose 
was a beak, his eyes heavily lidded, his thin mouth contemptuous. He 
looked like a caricature of a Shakespearian actor, which he was. He 
also looked like the popular version of a theatrical genius, which he 
wasn't. He stared down his long nose at Malchin, curled his lips and, 
in sonorous tones, addressed the street in general. 

"Oh, see ye this bald-pated traitor! See his naked scalp, the pale 
witness of his shame! See this craven who has sold his birthright for 
a mess of pottage! Oh . . ." 

"Oh, go to hell," snapped Malchin. And walked quickly away. 
The sooner he took Langtree's advice the better, he was getting tired of 
sneers and laughter. 

The costumer, a short, fat Levantine, took one look at Malchin's 
bald head and reached silently for a box of wigs. 

"Plenty of customers, eh?" Malchin sorted through the box, picked 
out a wig the colour of his late hair, and tried it on. Good, but it 
wouldn't delude May. He tried again. Better, but the shade was a 
little off. He tried a third time and frowned at the shaggy effect. 

"The barber down the street will trim it for you," suggested the 
costumer. "Wife?" 

"Yes." 

"Tell her you're letting your hair grow long." The Levantine 
rubbed his hands together. "Business," he said, answering Malchin's 
earlier question, "is terrible. Wigs, yes. Lots of wigs. Costumes, no. 
No one wants full-size costumes any more. No one that is aside from the 
people going to fancy-dress parties." 

'Too bad." Malchin squinted at himself in the mirror. "Ill take 
this one. Will it wash?" 



18 



NEBULA 



"Better than your own hair." The costumer sighed as if in admiration of the wig. "You know, if I was but ten years younger I'd apply 
to be an actor. The money is good, the work simple. No more study, 
learning of parts, deportments, the tricks of stage-craft. Realism. 
Everything for realism. It makes it all very simple." 

"That's what you think," snapped Malchin. "Let me tell you it 
takes skill and courage to be eaten by a lion." 

"So?" The fat man raised his eybrows. "Was that you?" 

"You saw the show?" It was one of Malchin's grievances that he 
was unable to see himself in a part. "Was it good?" 

"I think so," admitted the Levantine. "It's running all day and 
I'm catching up on it in parts. I tuned in to the arena scene. Were 
you the one who was ripped open and flung, still living, into the fire?" 

"No. I was the one who had my head bitten off by a lion." 

"Oh." 

"You mean to tell me that they didn't even give me a close-up?" 

"There were so many," soothed the costumer. "At least twenty 
slaves and ten lions all on-stage at once." He dropped his eyes at 
Malchin's expression. "But it was wonderful background. Wonderful!" 

"I bet that it was," said the actor bitterly. "All that and not even 
a close-up ! Why, back in movies they would have made a threeminute scene of that episode. I put everything I had into it." 

"Maybe next time," suggested the fat man. "It takes practice to 
be able to die good." 

"Not that it makes any difference," said Malchin. "They don't 
even give us our own faces. You can't recognise anyone but the stars 
and there's talk of them having to toe the line. They'll have to take 
what's given them soon, the same as the bit players. Imagine having 
a star who doesn't look like what you expect!" 

"It won't be the same," admitted the fat man. "But it's realistic, 
you've got to admit that." 

"What," said Malchin bitterly, "has entertainment got to do with 
realism? How much for the wig?" 

May wasn't home when Malchin arrived back at the apartment 
and secretly he was glad of it. May was a nice girl, they had been 
married for a long time now, but she had strong ideas of tradition and 
the degenerating influence of the mannikin theatre. Until today Malchin 
had agreed with her but the mounting pile of unpaid bills had worn 
away his resolve never to prostitute his art. 



DYING TO LIVE 



19 




His death had gone a long way to restore his previous convictions 
but, looking at the pile of groceries he had collected, he began to admit 
that there were worse ways of earning money. A man, even an actor, 
has to eat. Even if he has to die to do it. 

Putting away the food he glanced into a mirror to reassure himself 
that his wig resembled his own lost hair. It did, the barber had been 
skilled at his trade, and Malchin began to think up a story to account 
for the replenished refrigerator. He was still trying to think of one 
when she came in. 

"May!" He looked at the pile of paper bags she was carrying and 
helped her to carry them into the kitchen. "AH this food! Where did 
you get it?" 

"From the store, of course. Where did you think?" 

"I meant where did you get the money to pay for it?" 

"I did some modelling." she explained. "A friend of mine, a girl 
I used to know years ago, fell sick and asked me to fill in for her." 

"Modelling?" He looked at her. Ten years ago maybe, but she'd 
worn a little since then. Still, though he said it himself, she had the 
sort of figure which looked good behind footlights and it was barely 



20 



NEBULA 



possible that she spoke the truth. Barely. 

"Yes, modelling," she said defiantly. "Why?" 

"No reason." He stepped towards her before she could open the 
refrigerator. "You look simply wonderful, darling. Give me a kiss." 

"Mind my hair," she warned, and allowed him to peck her cheek. 
"Anything good on the MT tube?" 

"You know that I can't stand to watch that distortion," he said 
loyally. "Why?" 

"Turn it on while I get supper," she ordered and pushed him out 
of the kitchen. "They should be reaching the end of Decline and Fall 
about now and I'd like to see how they're doing." 

Reluctantly he switched on the tube and, sitting down, let the false 
realism of the mannikin theatre engulf him. Even though he tried to 
maintain a professional detachment he had to admit its effectiveness. 
The characters looked and acted as if alive. They fought and spoke, 
struggled and died as if they were men and women instead of two-inch 
high mannikins of synthetic flesh and blood, activated by electricity and 
animated by the consciousness of real people. 

He watched them, noting the way the scanners swung to pick out 
the high spots, the way red fluid, just like blood, spurted from gaping 
wounds. That was the worst of the mannikin theatre. The modern 
craze was all for blood, blood, and still more blood. Psychologists 
explained it by saying that it was the natural result of sublimating the 
natural desire for combat, that viewers were rested and relaxed by the 
vicarious pleasure of seeing the violence of the MT tube. Whatever 
the reason violence was popular and, as the mannikins were cheap and 
an entire city could be built on a table-top, the producers had really 
let themselves go. 

Malchin was morbidly watching the writhings of an impaled slave 
when May sat beside him. 

"They tell me," she said casually, "that an actor like that gets 
treble time." 

"He's welcome to it," said Malchin briefly. He stared at a warrior 
bristling with arrows until he resembled a feathered pin-cushion. "Say 
what you like about the mannikin theatre, but you could never get that 
effect on a regular stage." 

"But it isn't the same, is it?" she said. He hesitated. 

"Well, in a way I suppose it is," he mused. 'They do use real 
actors, you know, and they get effects impossible any other way." He 
stared at the big, full-coloured screen. "You could call it a combination 



DYING TO LIVE 



21 



of movies and theatre with a bit of radio thrown in. Those mannikios 
are alive in a way. They can't feel, of course, but it isn't as if they 
were just robots." 

"They get good money, too," said May wistfully. "Especially if 
they get torn apart or anything like that." 

"Yes." Malchin cleared his throat. "May." 

"Yes, John?" 

"May, I . . ." 

The buzzing of the videophone saved him. Irritably he turned off 
the MT tube and switched on the videophone. Marks grinned at them 
from the screen. 

"John!" His eyes shifted a little. "And May! Glad to have 
caught you in. I thought you might have been out celebrating." 

"What is it, Marks?" Malchin wished that the agent had chosen 
some other time to call. 

"Work, my boy. Work for the pair of you, as much as you can 
use." He stared down at something on his desk, invisible on the 
screen. "I've your reports back from the studios and you're both triple 
A. Peerless are planning something really big and they can use you. 
It's one of these science fiction things. They want five hundred monsters and they've a new gimmick which pays double rates. They've 
fixed up a bomb arrangement in the middle of these things, they're five 
inches tall, so they've got plenty of room, and when the hero's ray hits 
them they explode." He chuckled. "The twist is that they don't die, 
see? They just crawl around on their tendrils trailing their broken 
bodies. I tell you that it's the biggest thing yet! Naturally I've booked 
you both. Report at the studios at ten tomorrow. 'Bye." 

Malchin was very thoughtful as he returned to his chair. 

"May." 

"Yes, dear?" 

"I didn't know that you'd seen Marks." 

"I didn't like to tell you," she confessed. "Anyway, you saw him 
too." 

"I was saving it for a surprise." he said weakly. "I only went to 
ask him for a loan and he talked me into it." 

"Me too," she said, and squeezed his hand. 

"It isn't as if they were just robots," he defended. "It takes quite 
a lot to manage a mannikin." 

"Yes, dear." 

"And we needed the money." 



22 



NEBULA 



"Yes, dear." 

"So you do understand, don't you?" 

"Of course I understand." She squeezed his hand again. "I think 
that you were very brave taking a job like that. Which part did they 
give you?" 

"A slave," he said, not without pride. "The sort of part they 
would never give to a woman. They had a Hon bite off my legs, maul 
me, and then tear off my head." He scowled as he thought about it. 
"I don't know where they get some of their actors. The one who took 
the part of the lion must have been a sadistic pervert. He positively 
enjoyed doing it." He looked at May. "And you?" 

"Just a bit part," she said hastily. "Nothing important." 

"A crowd scene." He nodded. "Never mind, May. Everyone has 
to start somewhere. It won't be long before you're back with top 
billing." He stretched and unashamedly turned on the MT tube. 
"Supper ready yet?" 

May nodded and went out into the kitchen. She was glad that he 
hadn't been too curious. It may have been coincidence or perhaps 
the casting director worked on a pet theory of his own, but she couldn't 
confess that she had taken the part of the lion. 

John would never forgive her. 

E. C. TUBB 



THE NEXT ISSUE ! ! ! 

H a spaceship was to land in your town tomorrow the first 
thing you— and the authorities— would want to do would be to 
establish contact with its inmates. But if this was found to 
be quite impossible . . . ? 

You can read of the absorbing situation which develops 
from such circumstances in a new novelette by popular 
ARTHUR SELLINGS to appear for the first time in NEBULA 
No. 17. 

Other stories in the same issue include another outstanding 
novel by KENNETH BULMER, plus shorter stories by DAN 
MORGAN, ERIC FRANK RUSSELL and many others. 

Order your copy now to avoid disappointment — it will be 
available in May. 



ROBERT SILVERBERG 



Always 

She would never leave him for as long as his life would last 
Illustrated by Arthur Thomson 



"I hope you have your set tuned in today, Mr George Marks," the 
T.V. announcer said. "Because this is your lucky day." 

George Marks glanced up from his reverie in surprise when he heard 
his name mentioned. Ever since his mother had died he had only halfwatched the television set, keeping a perfunctory eye on the moving 
images while letting his mind dwell constantly on the great lonely gulf 
that had suddenly opened before him: the dull prospect of living out the 
forty or fifty years remaining to him all alone, without his mother. 

"Yes, Mr Marks," the announcer continued, looking earnestly at the 
camera as if for all the world he were talking directly to George, "the 
winner of the Grand Lottery is none other than — yourself!" 

Marks gasped. Every year he had taken a Lottery ticket, just as a 
matter of course; everyone bought one. In '83 he had won a ten 
thousandth prize, and he and his mother had taken a week's vacation 
on Sidella. In '89 he had been successful again, this time taking twelvethousandth prize, and they had given him a free Solar System tour. But 
all the other years he had regularly put down his three credits and just 
as regularly failed to place. 

"This year's Grand Prize — hold your hat, Mr Marks, if you're tuned 
in — is — holding your hat? — a small, uninhabited, lovely little Earth-type 
planet in the Procyon system! Did you hear that, Mr Marks? A planet 
all your own!" 

A planet all my own! If only my mother could— George began, 
and cut the thought off. / have to learn to stop thinking about her. 
He tried to concentrate on what the announcer was saying. 



23 



24 



NEBULA 



"Here's some background on our lucky winner, ladies and gentlemen. George Marks is 36, unmarried, lives with his mother in Appalachia North. He's employed as a clerk in the Appalachia North General 
Consumer's Bank, and has previously won in the Lottery in 2183 and 
2189, so he's no stranger to good fortune! Mr Marks, if you'll stop in 
at the nearest Lottery Office first thing tomorrow, all arrangements for 
visiting your private planet will be made. 

"And now on to the second prize winner. Hang on to your stubs, 
because " 

Marks snapped off the set and leaned back, contemplating the swinging pendulum of the antique Swiss clock on the wall. The clock read 
8.03; automatically he translated from the old-fashioned system and saw 
that it was now exactly 20.03, Appalachia Standard Time. 

King George. He liked the sound of that. A small, uninhabited 
planet in the Procyon system, eh? Probably overflowing with fertility. 
For the first time since his mother's death, George felt strong and independent. He decided to become a farmer; he'd move to his new planet 
(unlike most of the first prize winners, who sold their winnings immediately) and live there, majestically, alone. Certainly, George thought, it 
would be better to live alone as a king than alone as a bank clerk! 

He'd be a pioneer; he'd build a house, plow his land, swim and 
fish, make his own schedules. Life suddenly had some meaning again. 

It meant, of course, that he'd no longer be able to visit his mother's 
grave. But she would understand, George thought. He briefly considered the idea of taking her along, reburying her on his new planet, 
but he dismissed the thought as both impractical and a little grotesque. 

The phone rang. Doubtless someone from the bank, or maybe one 
of his mother's old friends, calling up to congratulate. He let it ring. 
He didn't need any congratulations. 

He began to write down a list of the things he'd take with him. 
Household effects, books, things necessary to build a new life on the new 
planet. (It would need a name, too, George thought. Procyon VI is 
a bit cold and empty as a name. His mother's name? No, George 
thought. A planet named Frieda just doesn't sound right). 

The list grew and grew, until finally the little old clock signalled 
11.00, which George translated out to 23.00; time for bed. He slept 
uneasily, dreaming of the new life ahead. 

There was some trouble getting the spaceline to transport everything 
George wanted to take, but the Lottery people were very accommodating 



ALWAYS 



25 



about paying the extra costs. George made a last trip to his mother's 
grave, where a nasty scene developed when some press photographers 
tried to get shots of him paying his last farewell, and headed straight for 
the spaceport. 

No one was on hand to see him off. 



The air was fresh and clean on Procyon VI — George had tried fruitlessly to find a name for it. It was, indeed, an Earth-type planet, smaller 
than Earth but with greater density so. that the gravity was still approximately 1G; the oxygen-nitrogen ratio was a good one, and the land was 
fertile and heavily vegetated. It would have made a fine little planet for 
colonizing, if the Lottery forces hadn't gotten to it first. And because 
the Lottery was just about the most powerful force on Earth — over a 
billion people bought a three-credit ticket or two every year — once the 
Lottery had picked the little planet for its prize there wasn't much anyone could do about it. 

The men from the spaceship helped George set up his prefabricated 
home in a couple of hours (he had given up the idea of building one) 
and then took off, after making sure that George's radio was working; 
there was a colony on Procyon II, in case he got lonely. He assured 
them that he had no possible desire for company — he had been telling 
them this since the voyage began, to their increasing displeasure — and, 
with some relief, they blasted off, leaving George sitting amid a heap of 
packing cases outside his house, staring out at his planet. 

He had put the house down in a natural clearing by the side of a 
small but swift stream, a hundred yards or so from a thickly vegetated 
jungle. The survey people had assured him that the planet was inhabited 
only by a few species of small animals and some fish. He was planning 
to live off his hunting and farming, once his supply of synthetics ran out. 

George opened one of the packing cases, found the little folding bed 
he had brought along, and installed it in one corner of the little house. 
As he went back outside, he was startled to hear a pleasant voice call to 
him, breaking the silence. 

"George? Come here, George," the voice said, half-purring. Slowly, 
only partly believing, he turned, and saw what seemed to be a lovely 
female figure stretched out in the soft grass about twenty yards away. 
She was beckoning to him. 

Hallucination, he thought, as he approached, nibbling his lips nervously. She was blonde, and young, and well-built; she looked almost 
like Miss Robbins from the bank, but her hair was blonder, her bosom 



NEBULA 



was bosomier. and her teeth were straight and even, unlike Miss 
Robbins'. 

"I'm so glad you're here, George," the figure said, wriggling voluptuously. "I've been waiting so long for you." 

George stared. She beckoned with her arms; he drew so close he 
could detect her gentle perfume, could see the colour of her lovely 
eyes 

One was blue, one was brown. 

The instant he noticed the discrepancy, the brown eye immediately 
turned blue. 

He noticed she was not breathing. At once, her breast began to 
rise and fall visibly. 

There was a fairly strong breeze blowing, but her hair remained as 
motionless as if it were made of copper wire. As George observed this, 
her hair began to move with the wind. 

"Come here, George," she said, and the appeal was hard to resist. 

But he moved a few feet back instead. There were legends of this 
sort of thing— sirens, space loreleis. Strange extra-terrestrial monsters 
that cast telepathic projections to lure unsuspecting Earthmen to their 
dooms. None of these legends had ever been documented; they were 
only tales told by grizzled space-hands. He felt a hot burst of anger 
that this should happen to him, on his planet, the planet he had been 
told was uninhabited, the planet that was his kingdom, his private world. 

"George?" The figure stretched, leaned back, almost writhed with 
impatience. 

"You're a monster!" he said. A vivid picture leaped into his mind 
of some grey reptilian thing, oozing out of the ground, with a horde of 
squid-like tentacles and great bulging eyes, with the stale coffin-smell of 
an incredibly ancient being. 

The girl suddenly melted and the monster he had pictured took 
shape before his eyes. His reaction was instantaneous and instinctive. 
"Mother!" he yelled, closing his eyes and throwing his arm in front Of 
his face. "Mother!" 

When he looked up the figure was still there, smiling sweetly, wearing the old lavender dress his mother had worn just before her death. 
Her hair was slightly disarranged, as usual, and altogether it was a perfect 
likeness of the old woman. George stared, feeling a mixture Of terror 
and rage, and then broke and ran for his house. 

"George, dear! Why are you running away from me?" 

George dashed through the open doorframe of the house — he hadn't 
attached the door yet — and fumbled through the opened packing-case till 



ALWAYS 



27 



he came across the Webley blaster he had stowed there. He widened it 
to lethal range and came to the door. The image of his mother was 
standing there. 

"Let me come in, George," it said. "I'll help you unpack." She 
smiled again. It was her voice, George thought. Her voice exactly. 
He shivered and shook at the sight of his mother come to life again. 

"Get away or I'll shoot," he said coldly. "Back up or I'll blast you 
whatever you are." He gestured with the Webley, and drew his finger 
tighter on the stud. He wondered for a moment if the figure might 
actually be his mother; she had said to him, on her deathbed. "Ill 
always be with you, George, darling. Always. Wherever you go, your 
old mother will protect you." But then he remembered the lovely girl 
with the mismatched eyes, and the monster, and jolted back to reality. 

"Get back into your own form or I'll cook you," he called out. He 
pulled the trigger back tighter, tighter, wondering what would happen 
when the beam of the Webley shot out and blasted the old lavender 
dress and the crinkly lace around her throat, and then wondering if he 
would be able to shoot the figure at all, even though he knew it was not 
his mother but only a blasphemous copy picked from his brain. He 
broke into a sweat and started to draw back the trigger. At the last 
second, the form of his mother swirled and changed. 

"You win," said a tiny, wizened, rubbery, gnome-like figure. It was 
roughly humanoid in shape, with a pair of thick, long, powerful-looking 
arms and a subsidiary pair much thinner, culminating in delicate, tapering fingers. "You'd never have shot at the mother-image anyway, but 
I thought I'd save you the trouble of trying. This is my real form. Can 
I come in now?" 

"No," George said. "You stay where you are and tell me what you 
want. How do I know if this is your true form?" 

"You'll just have to take my word, I suppose. But look: I drew the 
other three forms right out of your mind, didn't I? What was the first 
thing on your mind? Admit it? That girl from the bank. You didn't 
picture her too clearly, though, which is why I botched the eye-colors. 
Then you thought of that monster, clear and vivid, and I produced that 
image. And finally you called on your mother, and I turned into her. 
But this is a new form; you didn't have it on your mind at all, did you?" 

"No," George admitted. "But what do you want?" 

The little old creature sat down on the edge of a packing case. 
"Why don't you put your gun away first? I don't mean to harm you, 
George. Quite the opposite, really. Believe me. I only want your 
love. That's why I took the first shape. The monster was an accident. 



28 



NEBULA 



I want you to love me, and I want to love you. Please believe me, 
George." 

George licked his lips. "This is fantastic," he said, stepping 
cautiously out of the doorframe. "Explain yourself. Who are you, 
where do you come from, what do you want. Quickly and concisely, or 
I'll blast you." 

"You know you don't mean that, George. I see it in your mind; 
you're just saying it to be brave. But I'll tell you who I am. I've 
been living on this little planet for centuries, or maybe millenia. My 
race discovered the secret of immortality ages ago, and I was stranded 
here more years ago than I can remember, unable to reach a rescue 
party. We're telepathic, as you see, but only over short distances. I've 
lost all hopes of ever being found. My people come from far off, too 
far off for you to know what star I mean. It's been very lonely here, 
and I've had a lonely life. My people voluntarily gave up childbearing 
when our planet began to get overpopulated — immortality and children 
don't go together on a small world — and I've never known what it is to 
love, or to be loved. And I'm an old woman, George, old and terribly 
lonely." 

"You're a woman?" He stared at the small, gnarled, green-skinned 
body. "A woman?" 

"Yes," the alien said. "A functional female. But an old one, 
George. And when you landed I saw how lonely you were, and I 
wanted to help you. We need each other, George. Can't you see how 
badly we need each other?" 

She wavered, flickered, and turned back into the image of his mother 
for a moment, and reached out a wrinkled hand to him. 

"Accept me this way, George. Pretend that I'm your mother come 
back to life again. After a while the pretence will become reality. We 
can live together the way we did in the old days, with the little old clock 
on the wall and the bridge game after dinner and " 

"Keep out of my mind!" He drew the blaster again. "The answer 
is no!" A wave of fear went through him. The alien was surely dangerous, whatever its — her — story. He had heard the old tales of the incnbi 
of space which lure men into yielding up their minds to them. He fired 
a blaster shot suddenly at the little alien, but she leaped nimbly to one 
side. 

"Yon won't be able to hit me," she said, taking once again his 
mother's shape. "I can always see one step ahead of you. But why do 
you fear me, George? Let me be your mother. I'll always be with yon, 
George, darling. Wherever you go, your old mother will protect you. 



ALWAYS 



29 



Always. I still mean that." 

"No!" he screamed. He fired again, and a third time, but missed. 

"I'll leave you now, then," she said. "But I'll be back, when you 
need me. I'll always be with you, George, darling. Always." 

George watched the figure of his mother stride oft into the jungle, 
walking with all the old jauntiness, and, as soon as she was gone, let himself sink limply down on a packing case. After a while, he got the radio 
going, and tuned in to the Procyon II operator. 

He explained who he was, and his predicament. 

"What's that? Mindreading extraterrestrial?" the operator said. "No 
such thing." 

"Look," George said, "I didn't ask for your opinion. I just want 
you to send a ship and get me off this planet before something happens 
to me. There's a dangerous alien roaming around near here, and I'm 
in a serious position." 

"All right," came the voice of the operator. "I'll have a rescue ship 
sent Out as soon as possible. We're a little short-handed just now ourselves. It may take a little while. Over and out." 

The contact broke, and George held the dead transmitter for a 
moment, then replaced it. There was no point in unpacking, he decided, 
staring glumly at the packing cases. He'd return to Earth, sell the planet 
— he would have been happier if he'd done that in the first place, he 
realized — and retire on the money he'd get. He would forget all thoughts 
of leaving Earth. Let someone else come out here and play with this 
maternal monster. 

In the meantime, it might be a day or two before the Procyon II 
people got the ship out. He set to work putting up defences against the 
alien. 

He dug a pit and started to conceal it with leaves and branches, 
hoping the alien was not listening to his mind as he worked. And then 
he realised the futility of trying to decoy a telepathic alien into the pit, 
and stopped working. 

There was no way of setting up an electrified fence, which seemed 
to him the most efficient way of keeping the alien away. He put the 
packing cases in a ring around his door as a next best resort, and sat 
behind them, holding the Webley. The only thing he could think of was 
to sit tight without sleeping until the rescue ship arrived. 

Once during the next day George saw the figure of his mother looking at him sadly from the edge of the clearing; she said something, as if 
in reproach, but he was unable to hear it. He unleashed a bolt from the 



30 



NEBULA 




blaster, aiming low so it would pass, not through the tall illusory body 
of his mother but through the real short body of the alien. He narrowly 
missed; he thought he might just have singed her, but he wasn't sure. 
She turned into her true form before disappearing into the forest. 

He sat there resignedly as night started to fall — the days on this 
planet were long, George noted, feeling a touch of sadness at the way 
his plans for a kingdom had been ruined. He could have enjoyed life 
here, he thought ruefully, really enjoyed it. 

Suddenly, as if from nowhere, the ship from Procyon II dropped 
from the sky and came to rest in the clearing. He noted happily that it 
was a large ship, almost identical to the one that had brought him; that 
meant he'd be able to take all his possessions off the planet at once. A 
man clambered down the catwalk of the ship and looked around. 

"Here I am," George shouted. "Over here." He stood up and 
waved, but the man from the ship failed to notice him. George leaped 
agilely over the barrier of packing cases and ran towards the ship. The 
spaceman still didn't seem to hear his calls, and George began to sense 
that something was wrong. He drew close to the other, almost close 
enough to touch him, and still he peered out in the other direction, and 



ALWAYS 



31 



then abruptly the ground opened under George, ship and spaceman vanished, and George, with the sudden chilling feeling that he had been 
tricked, dropped heavily into his own pit, landing crumpled on his left 
leg. He felt the bone bend, and, almost coolly and detachedly, heard the 
loud cracking noise which followed, before sinking into unconsciousness. 

Strong hands lifted him out of the pit, but he barely felt them. 
Powerful arms dragged him inside the house, stretched him on the bed, 
soothed his fever-hot forehead, set and bound the broken leg. Days 
and nights passed, dragged on slowly and George was conscious only of 
a silent, sweet-smelling figure that went quietly back and forth, ministering to his needs. The pain in his leg was a steady red beat of agony, 
except when the silent figure took his head in her lap and rocked back 
and forth, crooning a soft, wordless tune. 

He slept for a long while, a long grey succession of days and nights, 
while the leg slowly healed. Finally, one day he woke up and looked 
around. All of his packing cases had been opened; the antique Swiss 
clock ticked away on one wall, the little bookcase was filled with books, 
everything was arranged just the way it had been on Earth, so long ago. 
Sitting quietly in one corner, knitting, was the lavender-clad figure of his 
mother. 

"How do you feel, dear?" she asked. "Has the fever gone down 
any?" She crossed over and gently felt his forehead. Her hand was 
cool and soothing. 

"My leg . . ." 

"Just about set," she said. "I think we can take the splint off today. 
It's too bad there's no doctor, but I guess we can manage just by ourselves, can't we?" 

He rolled over and looked at her. "You're dead," he said. "Roselawn Cemetry. I bring flowers to you every Thursday." 

"Poor boy," she said. "Still delirious. Rest now, George; we can 
talk some other time." 

"No," he said, sitting half up in the bed. Suddenly he realised 
where he was, what had happened. "You tricked me!" he said accusingly. "You led me right into my own pit with the illusion of that ship." 

"It was for your own good, dear," she said. 

"What happened to the real ship from Procyon II? Have they 
landed yet?" 

"They were here a long time ago," she said, "but I sent them away. 
I told them everythirig was all right." 



32 



NEBULA 



George slumped back in bed. "And I suppose you broke the radio, 
too, for my own good." 

"That was an accident, George. You know the way I always am 
with machinery of any sort." 

He closed his eyes. "That means I'm stuck here, doesn't it?" The 
throbbing in his leg grew stronger. "Stranded for good." 

"Why do you say that? We have each other, don't we? We can 
play bridge, and read, and talk, and when I have my strong days I can 
nelp you with the farm. I've always wanted to work on a farm; it 
seems like such fun! Back on Earth you only had the bank, but here 
well be out of doors all the time, in the fresh air. And fresh air was 
always what you needed so badly, dear." 

His leg was pounding furiously. "After you tricked me into falling 
into the pit " 

"Must we talk about that, George?" 

"After you tricked me," he repeated,"you nursed me back to health, 
didn't you? You saved my life." 

"It was the least I could do, George. But why talk about that? 
Once you're well we can get started with our farm, and fix up the house 

we can make it just like the one we had on Earth, and it'll be just 

as it was in the old days together. Won't it, George?" 

"Yes," he said dully. "Just as it was in the old days." He started 
to rise from the bed; then he realised than any action would be futile, and 
sank back, deadly calm. His leg throbbed fiercely. Suddenly he saw 
before him the great empty sea of miles that stretched out between here 
and Earth, and the other great sea of years before him on Procyon VI. 
Well, why not, he thought, thinking of the sturdy, beloved old woman, 
why not? "I'm sure we'll be very happy together, very happy— 
mother," he said, quietly, through the red haze of pain. "Just as it was 
in the old days." 

"It's wonderful to hear you say that," she said. She bent down and 
kissed him on the forehead, and her lips were cool, and it seemed to 
George that a teardrop fell from her eye and trickled down to his cheek. 
"I'll always be with you, George, darling. Always. And you'll always 
love your old mother, won't you — son?" 

Feeling like a figure trapped in a nightmare, he reached out and 
squeezed her hand. She allowed her shape to waver a little in her joy, 
but she quickly regained control and fondly grasped George's hand, and 
at last, after millenia of lonely emptiness, she began to feed. 



ROBERT SILVERBERG 



E. R. JAMES 



Hot Water 

There is a special kind of training men need 
before they should assume great responsibilities 

Illustrated by John J. Greengrass 

On August 19th, 1986 A.D., Slade Barrimore— Barry to his friends 
paused on the steps of the Administration Block of the Cawdhaw 
Atomic Power Station to allow someone to come out. 

Seeing it was one of the Heat Exchanger Engineers with whom he 
had played snooker in the canteen, he grinned. "Hello, Steve " 

"Uh?" The HE. engineer looked up with a start. His fresh young 
face seemed about to crease in an answering smile. Then the eyes 
blazed, the lips came together with a snap and the face turned deliberately 
away. 

Barry stared after him in horror. 

Would there be much of this sort of thing to face? He dreaded 
going on in. 

Several seconds went by before he realised his shoulders were sagging. He straightened them with a jerk, put his head high and went out 
of the sunshine. 

The hall echoed his footfalls. It seemed he would never reach the 
door at the end marked Manager before someone else came out to snub 
him, but he pushed it open at last. 

A golden blonde coiffeur tilted back and a tanned face gave him the 
impression that Jean Helier had been dreading his arrival all night. Her 
blue eyes stared at him just that much too long and her orange rouged 
Hps fumbled whatever she had been planning to say. 

"Sit down. No, not here. In Mr Stone's anteroom. He'll . . . 
ring when he wants you to go in." 

He nodded. He had tried to date her twice and had thought he 
would be lucky the third time. Without looking at her he went past her 
desk and sat on one of the three standard issue chairs, with the glass 
topped door distorting her image with its corrugations, as it swung shut 
behind him. 



34 



NEBULA 



It was a small room with imitation panelling on the walls and a 
plastic framed picture of a view of the Station with its moorland background on the one facing him. He felt trapped, shut in; yet he was glad 
to be there for a while, as though it were a refuge. 

Sounds of rustling papers behind the other door marked FREDERICK STONE fetched him around. A shadow passed over the glass 
around the legend. It seemed a towering, hungry shadow. 

He moistened his lips, then set his jaw. If they thought he was 
going to make excuses for what he had done, they were mistaken. Yes, 
he had broken the rules, but 

Zzz. The bell. That was for him to go in. 

He passed a hand over his wavy brown hair, set his rather heavy 
jaw and stood up. His shirt was wet with perspiration down his back 
and under his armpits. 

His hand went up to knock But that was silly since the bell 

had gone. He opened his fist and pushed. 

Frederick Stone sat behind a dark oak desk, watching him as he 
walked forward with firm steps. 

"Sit down." The words were sharp but no different from "Old 
Rocky's" usual dry brevities. 

Barry seated himself. 

"You know why you're here," said Old Rocky. His gray eyes held 
no expression as they continued to watch. "Have you anything to say?" 
"No, sir. It was all said at the inquiry." 
"Then you accept full responsibility?" 
"I do." 

"I see." Old Rocky leaned back in his chair. "Now let me just 
go over it once again. When the van came from the hospital, you discovered that someone — who hasn't owned to it, by the way — had not 
passed on the message to the head of your department. It was lunch 
hour and you were in charge because Mr Lever was away and there 
was no one else there. The hospital's requisition was in order and 
urgent, so you decided to handle it yourself. Is that correct?" 

"It is." 

"Yet you were quite aware that, strictly speaking, you lacked the 
necessary authority?" 
"Quite aware." 

"H'm. You ran from the loading bay of Requisitions to the Byproducts Store. You realise you ought to have sent the van around to 
your own loading bay — although that would have meant waiting for Mr 
Lever to return with the key?" 



HOT WATER 



35 



"I do." 

"Yet you took it on yourself to break the rules." Old Rocky's face 
was as expressionless and his voice as dry as ever. "Moreover, you went 
on breaking them. You manhandled the PZ6 isotope container on to 
an ordinary trolley instead of using the tackle provided. Oh, I know 
that both the special deep trolleys were already loaded with shipments Then you wheeled the trolley the shortest way— although 

that was through the No. 3 Development Laboratory. Shelley, the lunch 
duty man, very properly challenged you, but accepted the brief explanation you gave him. He helped you and, since you had not told him of 
the lethal contents of the container, was not alarmed when it overbalanced. You dragged him clear, suffering some slight burning yourself, but he died in hospital." 

"That's " Barry had difficulty in answering through the choking contriction in his throat. " what happened, sir." 

"I see," continued Old Rocky, "that after reporting the accident to 
casualties you went on to make the proper arrangements for the issue 
to the hospital. Do you realise now how much better it would have been 
if you had done that in the first place?" 

Barry nodded, not trusting himself to speak. Old Rocky had rubbed 
his guilt home; the axe would fall at any moment now. He waited . . . 

He waited. His ears sang. The palms of his hands felt clammy 
with a breeze coming from somewhere . . . 

Across the desk, Old Rocky's face was a mask that seemed to gloat 
over his agony. 

On July 17th, 1876 A.D., just over ten years before, Frederick Stone 
— no one called him "Old Rocky" at that time — stood beside a wide 
pool at the foot of a craggy slope in another part of the country. 

He paused in his vigorous towelling to look to the left. The newly 
risen sun was making moving lines of light through the mist coming up 
from the stream purling down over the rocks. He felt fit to return to 
work after his holiday and knew how good it was to be alive. 

His eyes switched up to the Banpeak Atomic Power Station on the 
skyline above the pool. As Safety Officer up there, his salary was more 
than enough to satisfy Laura— and to send their Leslie to the best of 
schools 

"Leslie!" he called. 

His son, eight years old, disappeared beneath the surface and came 
up like a seal, lifting his arms and bringing them down with a mighty 
splash. "Coming, Dad!" 



36 



NEBULA 



He swam as he did everything else, with a vast expenditure of energy 
that Fred had more than once envied, trying to reach too far forward 
with each stroke of an arm and wriggling his entire body from side to 
side as he threshed his legs. 

In front of him, on the slightly frothy water, the sunlight was making 
a strange sort of gleam. It passed through Fred's mind that there was 
something baleful about this shine. Then it disappeared as Leslie's 
sturdy right arm flailed into it. 

Leslie touched the jumble of limestone rocks at the bottom, bobbed 
up like a jack-in-the-box and ran up, wobbling on the uneven bottom, 
with a great flurry of water. 

Fred handed him the towel. 

There was just time to drive back to the house, snatch breakfast, kiss 
Laura and slap Leslie on the back. "See you this evening!" He liked 
his job, hated to be late, even though the Station was running only on 
half power with the No. 2 Pile stripped down— and even though the 
Manager was on holiday somewhere on the continent, and the Assistant 
Manager was not due in until mid-day from a conference at Blackpool. 

He had just settled behind his desk with the correspondence when 
the 'phone rang. 

"Radiation leak near Hot box 6, No. 2 Pile," reported the voice in 
his ear. "Clumber here." 

Fred stood up. The voice was calm, but it had used the slang term 
for the primary disposal tanks used for treating the active waste of fission 
and that suggested urgency to some degree. "Clumber, have you just 
come on duty?" 

"Yes, sir." This time the owner of the voice had remembered that 
Fred was senior officer in the absence of Manager Revell and Assistant 
Lawrence. "Early shift." 

"Night man report anything?" 

"No, sir." There was a slight pause. "Said he'd been sick." 

"Call his hostel. Make them check him over while I'm coming 
down." He banged the telephone on its rest and ran. 

He ran automatically. The No. 6 Hot box — he noted he was using 
the slang himself — contained B. Baltus. B. Baltus was a bacteria which 
had the peculiar and valuable property of absorbing and thriving on a 
diet of radioactivity — that is, of using radio-active atoms to form its 
microscopic parts. B. Baltus, in itself, produced a fever in man, thirty 
per cent lethal at Optimum dose. 

He stopped at a 'phone on the desk of the control room beside 
the dismantled pile. "Can you get me Professor B. N. Baltus at Oxford?" 



HOT WATER 



37 



They would try. The duty man on the working deck of the primary 
separation plant looked up from reading a library book and started to 
his feet. "Get on the 'phone," Fred told him between pants as he 
hurried by, "and tell the switchboard to put through my call to Baltus to 
me in No. 2 Waste Disposal." 

"Baltus, sir?" 

"Yes," Fred waved an impatient arm. "Professor Baltus." 

Clumber, in a plastic coverall straightened from behind the No. 6 
H.A.W. — highly active waste — tank. He tilted back his mask as he 
came towards Fred, and his homely, heavily moustached face was set. 
"They're monitoring Sid — I mean Mr Bulcher now. But he's got a touch 
of gastric flu, so the hostel matron said." 

"What's on his report sheet, Clumber?" asked Fred as he climbed 
into a plastic coverall snatched from the wall. 

Clumber shifted from one foot to the other. "He It looks as 

though he made his last check at 3 a.m." 

Six hours, fifteen minutes ago Fred's wrist watch told him. Bulcher 
had omitted his routine on the one night when it had mattered. Coincidences were always bad! 

Fred slapped the headshield over his face with unnecessary force 
and snatched the Geiger tube from Clumber's grip. They went forward 
together. The tell tale needle climbed. But it wasn't so bad. Evidently 
the source of radiation was behind the concrete wall . . . Since the 
pipes that had fed in the waste liquid came through the concrete, perhaps one of them had burst within the wall 

"Clumber!" 

"Yessir?" 

"Have you checked the tank pressure?" 
"No, sir." 

"Do it then, man. Now!" 

Clumber retreated. "It's off the guage, sir!" he gasped. "100 
pounds per square inch plus " 

"My God. You're sure?" B. Baltus multiplied most quickly in 
gentle heat and at 5 lbs. per sq. in. over atmospheric pressure. If there 
was a leak, pressure should be down, not up. Fred found himself 
looking at the needle jammed as far around the meter's dial as it could 
go, and did not recollect walking around to it. 

100 lbs. per sq. inch plus What was going on in that tank? 

He sprang to the 'phone. 

"Have you got me Baltus, yet?" 

"No sir. We've got his number, though. His home " 



38 



NEBULA 



"All right. Let me speak to the supervisor at the G.P.O. exchange. 
And you stay listening." 

He used his official rating as Acting Manager and the mature voice 
on the 'phone sounded almost frightened as he hinted at urgency. Person 
to person call. He would have priority. They would call him back. 

He spoke to Emergency while he waited. They would send the full 
squad. 

He went back to the blank concrete wall out of which the pipes 
came. "Go around and check the valve the other side," he told Clumber. 

Waiting for the man's report, he scanned the entire concrete face. 
Between it and the one behind it were honeycomb partitions for strength. 
They would confine the burst — if that is what it was. There was no 
other radiation apart from the varying background usual to such places. 

The great concrete-encased, metal tank at his side made him sweat. 
It had received its deadly contents five weeks ago. He remembered 
being present as the moderate waste was drawn off the pile. It would 
have been innoculated with B. Baltus within a day or two. He had 
been away on holiday and had had no time to check progress. 

He found himself sweating. B. Baltus did not reduce the radioactivity one iota. It merely absorbed the elements that caused it, so 
that when it was filtered out of the liquid about 92% of the radio-activity 
went with it and could be buried with it in concentrated form for its 
dangerous lifetime. 

The 'phone pulled him to it. "Got me Baltus?" 

They hadn't. Baltus was lecturing, had been traced and was being 
brought to the telephone. He was an elderly man, Fred remembered. 

"All right. Put me on to whoever innoculated No. 6 Hot box — I 
mean No. 6 H.A.W. tank — of No. 2 Pile. You can find out from records. 

No Get him down on to the working deck of the separation plant 

here. Hurry him." Fred felt he ought to have thought of that before. 

If there was only someone here to whom he could pass the responsibility of this crisis. But Revell was out of the country and Lawrence 
in a train or car on the way and not likely to arrive for hours . . . 

He went back to the wall. The radiation seemed to make a channel 
down to the floor from a point quite close to the pipe. He checked the 
valve against the tank. The regulating wheel spun loose. The valve was 
broken inside! He ought to have checked that before. But there was 
so much to think about . . . 

The pressure went right into that wall. The radioactivity had 
marked a trail downwards. It must be seeping through the honeycomb. 
The honeycomb must be cracked. 



HOT WATER 



39 



Clumber ran in, puffiing. "Valve O.K., sir." 

Another man followed him. "What's wrong, Mr Stone?" 

"What are you doing here, Springfields?" snapped Fred. Springfields was an outsider, a man given a laboratory here for some biological 
research. A doctor ot biology or something similar. "Oh, all right. 
Stay. Perhaps Hey, do you know anything about B. Baltus?" 

"No. Why?" 

"Stay with me." Fred picked up the 'phone. It was an instrument 
of the devil, keeping him waiting. They had nothing further on Baltus. 

"I'm going on to the working deck of primary separation next door," 

he told them. "Get me " He ticked off names he thought might 

have useful knowledge or abilities. "And get on to records again. I 
want three things. The Surveyor's report on the rock when this Station 

was built. The last three reports of the Buildings Inspector. And 

and . . ." 

Everything around him seemed to stop still, like a film that has 
stopped running as a shocking thought came up from his subconscious. 

His son had been bathing in that pool at the bottom of the limestone slope, and he was just beginning a check on radioactive substances 
that might possibly have escaped from the Power Station Area. 

"Leslie!" he gasped. 

All else forgotten, he blundered towards the door. Someone was in 
his way. "Get to hell " It was Springfields — the doctor of something or other — shaking him. 

Springfields was speaking to him. "What about your son?" 

"He was in that pool . . ." 

"At the bottom of the twenty waterfalls?" 

"He was swimming, and I saw a gleam on the water Get out 

of my way!" 

"You can't leave here, man. You think he's been in water that's 
been contaminated by a leak? I know where you live. Leave it to me." 

Three more men were coming through the doorway. "Get out of 
here!" roared Fred and they backed in confusion. "All right!" he told 
Springfields. "You go. You will . . ." 

"He'll be in the hospital in ten minutes, I promise you." 

Fred watched him go at the double. After he had passed through 
the open doorway, Fred could have screamed. He sucked in air through 
clenched teeth, closed his eyes and fiercely shook off a sudden thought 
that he had never particularly liked Springfields. 

Ringing of the telephone beyond the open door pulled Fred out of a 
well of despair and drew him towards the working deck. Men moved 



40 



NEBULA 



apart to allow him to pass. Others were coming in. 

Orders came from him. His voice sounded harsh — a dry croak 
that he hardly recognised. The Chief Analyst and a Monitoring assistant ran off to get kit for a check on the pool. "Signal back," he told 
them. "You," he told another man, "watch for them and ring me here. 
You're looking for traces of B. Baltus and anything radioactive." 

"For you, sir." A man held out the 'phone to him. 

He took it absently. 

"What is it? Who's there?" said an impatient voice in his ear. 
He performed a mental somersault. "Professor Baltus?" 
"Yes? Who's that?" 

"Hold the line." There was an irritable tut and Fred added: "If 
you dare to hang up, you'll have made your last lecture." 

He turned to the ring of waiting faces. "Emergency Squad?" A 
man lifted an arm. "Ah, Cook. Get in there. There's a pipe from 
No. 6 Hot box leaking into the double wall between here and the dismantled pile. I want that pipe strengthened, the wall taken down and 
the leak stopped and made doubly secure. Treat the pipe as though 
it will explode any moment. For all I know it may. Wear everything 
protective you've got. Understand?" 

"Yessir." 

"And Cook!" The man looked back over his shoulder. "Don't 
forget the valve at the other end of the pipe, in the pile chamber. The 
pressure's blown the valve against the Hot box and may blow the second 
valve — especially when you've plugged that gap." 

"You " The man hesitated. 

Fred fumed with impatience. "Well?" 

"You did say "pressure" didn't you, sir?" 

"Yes. Pressure. P-R-E-S- Oh, get on with it." 

Fred put the 'phone back to his ear. "Baltus?" 

"Yes. What's all this about pressure in a Hot box? What do you 
want me for?' 1 

Fred outlined the situation. "Now," he ended, "I want you to tell 
me what's going on inside that tank. I don't know what I'm handling at 
the moment. Your bacteria's never acted like this before." 

"It can't be " The professors voice sounded strangled. 

Fred's eyes roving over the assembled men picked out a biochemist. 
"You. I've forgotten your name." 

"Cambley, sir. You sent for me. I'm the man who put the culture 
into No. 6." 

"You're the man I want." Fred held Out the 'phone. "Tell Professor 



HOT WATER 



41 




Baltus what you did — exactly what you did." 

Cambley was definite. He was a small, thin man with thin lips. 
He did not care if he was speaking to a famous man. He said his piece 
and stuck to it. Fred warmed to him and nodded approval as he took 
back the 'phone. 

"Well, professor?" 

I don't know. I really don't know. Unless ... But that's 

impossible " 

"What's impossible?" 

Baltus did not answer. Fred's roving eye caught sight of a man 
from records with a book and papers under his arm, and beckoned. 

"This bacteria," said Baltus suddenly, "has never mutated before." 

"Always a first time for everything Mutated? You mean " 

Fred gripped the 'phone very hard. "You mean the radiations have 
changed your bacteria into something else?" 

"It is theoretically possible. I'll come up there " 

"You do that," said Fred. He had what he wanted. Even though 
it seemed now that the truth was probably far worse than he had feared. 



42 



NEBULA 



They knew how to deal with B. Baltus; but with something new 

"If you come by air," he added sarcastically into the 'phone, "you may 
be in time to witness the blow up or see the first victim." Bacteria 
already caused some of the scourges of mankind: tuberculosis, and 
typhoid and 

He put down the 'phone. His watch said 9.55. It had seemed an 
age, but only 55 minutes has passed since he had arrived at the station. 
He picked up the 'phone. "Get me the police," lie said. 

He needed outside help — a lot of it. People had to be warned. He 
could hear the trickle of water . . . deadly water. 

At 11 o'clock he heard that only one hill farm might logically be 
affected since they drew from a well known to connect with the stream 
from the pool. The farmer had worked late and slept late. He had 
been taken to hospital, apparently all right. But his wife who had breakfasted at their usual hour of eight had pains in her stomach. 

At 11.5 Springfields came in and Fred's heart same into his mouth 
and he could not speak. 

"I couldn't get you on the 'phone," said Springfields. His face was 
white and he looked frightened of what Fred might do. "Leslie's still 
alive. They don't know yet." 

"Oh." Fred got the sound out. 

He turned his back on them all for a moment and did not look at 
Springfields when he faced them again. They had to be there. He had 
to stay to tell them what to do. 

At 11.17 the police told him that all villages and towns in the area 
of water flow were being warned by loudspeaker vans as a supplement to 
the earlier broadcast warnings. There were no other cases. Fred 
replaced the receiver. It was too early for that, yet, anyway. 

At mid-day Lawrence entered the Station area, having been given a 
police escort the last few miles. But Fred knew too much of what was 
going on to be allowed to leave. Lawrence could do no more than back 
him up. 

He sat with the others. 

Reports of six suspected cases of fever from mutated B. Baltus came 
in before 3 p.m. By 6 p.m. there were hundreds. 

At 7 the hospital told him that Leslie's fever had gone; the radiation 
poisoning, however, remained. Other cases had missed that. It had 
got into Leslie's blood stream. Baltus, who had arrived during the 
early afternoon, explained to someone within Fred's earshot that the 
bacteria multiplied by division. Having no sex, it just grew larger until 
at a certain size, it split into two complete cells, each a duplicate of the 



HOT WATER 



43 



first. This division would naturally keep halving radioactivity picked up. 

By 8 p.m., the strengthening of the tank and the pipe was complete. 
A sample of the mutated bacteria was obtained and study on it began. 

Lawrence came up shortly afterwards to say that he had been studying 
the plans and records that Fred had sent for. There had been fissures in 
the limestone below the power station, but they had all been plugged 
with twenty feet of concrete treated to make it non-porous. But there 
was undoubtedly a leak downwards that had been missed — or which had 
developed since. 

The Divisional Health Office called to report the progress. There 
seemed to be no epidemic. Number of cases now stood at 285. The 
peak had been at 4 p.m. and fifteen minutes had passed with nothing to 
add to that figure. 

At 8.55 p.m. Lawrence ordered Fred home. He went out of the 
station like a man in a dream. The night sister let him see Leslie. Very 
pale, like death. In a coma. 

Laura was in the waiting room. She watched him sit down. "It's 
the time factor," he said. "If they could have cleared that stuff out of 
his stomach before he digested it . . ." 

She did not say anything. 

He buried his face in his hands. "I'm sorry." Her hand touched 
his cheek before any sound of movement reached him. His arms went 
around her and he buried his face against her gratefully. There were no 
tears in him, only emptiness. 

At 4 a.m. Leslie died without wakening and they went home to a 
house that seemed unnaturally silent. 

During the morning, Lawrence and Baltus called to offer sympathy. 
Baltus said they had the mutated strain licked. The fermentation in the 
H.A.W. tank had been stopped. The farmer's wife had been the only 
fatal casualty. The farmer would be going home within a day or two 
and all other cases were responding to treatment. He evidently did not 
consider Leslie to be his responsibility; as far as he was concerned the 
boy had died of radio-active poisoning — although there was no doubt he 
would have lived much longer if he had not been so weakened by the 
mutated B. Baltus fever. 

Days passed, and, from being thankful for being left alone, Fred 
began to wonder why he was not sent for. Laura and he still had to go 
on living. 

Word came at last in the form of a summons to attend the inevitable 



44 



NEBULA 



inquiry. He went into the Conference Room wondering why he had not 
been consulted on his part. It was not a large room and, only when he 
looked around, did he realise that the Inquiry was being held in secret. 

He barely heard the preliminaries. A long succession of witnesses 
painted in the picture and then an outside consultant took the stand. As 
he spoke, Fred began to understand why everyone had left him alone. 
The man coldly explained that a new fissure had appeared in the limestone beneath the wall dividing the Hot boxes from the pile. This 
fissure, though a mere crack, had strained the double walls and the pipes 
that went through them. Tiny leaks had been sprung in three of the 8 
pipes and a tiny amount of radio-active matter had escaped from the 
leaks each time the pipes were used. This was the preliminary to the 
disastrous escape which the court was called to consider. 

The Chairman, another outsider, a Sir Somebody, called upon Fred 
to explain why he had not discovered the menace hidden in the wall. 

Fred stood up. He was not going to make excuses. "It was entirely 
my responsibility," he said. "I have no excuses." 

Clumber, apparently having asked to add to his previous evidence, 
again took the stand, and to Fred's astonishment, obviously attempted to 
take some of the blame on to his own shoulders. But, equally obviously, 
the court did not listen to him with any seriousness. 

The Chairman's summing up left no doubt as to where the blame 
actually rested, suggested that if more attention to detail had been made 
by the Safety Officer the leak would have been confined to the Power 
Station area, but finally judged to the effect that the whole affair was an 
Act of God. 

The next morning Fred had met Springfields coming out of the 
Manager's office as he was going in. They had stopped, and looked at 
each other awkwardly. 

"Sorry for being so rude to you," said Fred with difficulty. 

Springfields made some attempt to smile and held out his hand. "I 
did do my best. It's been a rotten business." 

Fred went on in to the interview with Manager Revell that he expected to be his last visit to the Banpeak Atomic Power Station. What 
was said to him would decide his entire future. He knew that and 
suffered an agony of apprehension, and yet — even though he had Laura 
to consider as well as himself — he had his principles and would not 
stoop to excusing himself. The date had been August 19th, 1976 A.D. 

Exactly 10 years later, almost to the very hour, he found himself 



HOT WATER 



45 



with the positions of that painful interview reversed, so to speak. Revell 
had seemed to him, then, to have kept him in suspense unnecessarily long. 
And now, here he was doing just the same thing to this sweating young 
man whose eyes were so full of horror. He was accustomed to concealing his thoughts and, although he found it necessary to move somewhat uneasily in his Managerial Chair, he felt confident that his face had 
not betrayed what had been said to him years before, and what he was 
going to say now. 

"Barry," he said, "I think you have the courage necessary to carry 
this thing through to the end I would like to see reached. You will take 
your summer holiday beginning as from today, but then you must return 
and continue with the work you have been doing. The way people feel 
about you will make that difficult, you realise that?" 

The young man did not seem to believe his ears. Well, that was 
how he, Frederick Stone— whom people now surreptitiously called "Old 
Rocky"— had once felt himself. 

"1 1 " Barry found his voice. "Anything you say, sir." 

"Good. I am not without influence. I see from your records that 
you have qualifications far beyond those required for your present post." 
These days there were more atomic engineers than could be absorbed 
by the industry. "I will see what 1 can do towards getting you a transfer." 

"Why — thank you sir!" 

"You will not forget what you have leamt about the importance of 
the rules, will you?" 

"Oh no sir." The horror came back into Barry's eyes dimming 
their brightness. 

Old Rocky nodded. "And meanwhile, just carry on as though nothing 
had happened or was going to happen. If a hint of this transfer gets out, 
you may find it won't materialise." 

Six minutes later, after sitting silently for a while, Frederick Stone 
reached for the telephone that gave him a direct outlet to the G.P.O. 
exchange. Soon after that, he was speaking to another power station 
Manager. 

"I've got a young man here who has just shown that he is not afraid 
to act on his own responsibility. I warn you, Joe, things did not turn 
out as they should have done and his records don't look as they might. 
But he has got the guts needed to take the blame for his own mistakes. 
And he's learnt his lesson. He has all the qualifications you could wish 
for and, within a couple of years, could be ready to take over as your 
assistant manager when Barclay goes on to his pension." 

E. R. JAMES 



BOB SHAW 



Barrier To Yesterday 

The catastrophe had destroyed the past 
for ever. Could it also create a new future? 

Illustrated by Arthur Thomson 

The Philosophy Sled, running with ponderous speed before the 
freshening wind, crunched shudderingly into a patch of rough ice. 
Chandrill jerked into wakefulness as he felt the sled slew to one side. 

"Spill it!" he shouted, pointing up at the gluttonous bellies of the 
sails which were drawing creaks from the masts as the incident direction 
of the wind changed. In seconds the sails were flapping noisily from their 
top booms and Chandrill felt the drag as the rudder bit ice, getting the 
sled under control. 

When they had slowed down, Chandrill leapt over the side and saw 
what he had expected but feared to see. The lugs at the rear of the 
starboard runner had twisted off along the lines of old cracks in the 
metai. 

Two others climbed down onto the ice beside him and Chandrill 
recognised the heavy breathing lido Fearthell, the Philosopher, before he 
looked up at him. Fearthell's lips were drawn tautly over his broken 
teeth and there was a gleam in saliva on his chin — it was obvious that 
he had had a scare. The other person was Sinoon. 

"I thought it would be those," lido Fearthell said. "I thought it 
would be the lugs." 

"It was a chance we took," Chandrill said defensively, rising to his 
teet. "If we hadn't hit the rough patch or if we had had our new set of 
runners ..." 

"I don't like that," interrupted Fearthell. "I don't like that a bit. 
You are implying that I wasn't firm enough with Minnatose when the 
last casting was done on the Metallurgy Sled. Remember it was you 
who said the runner would see us through the Pass. I definitely don't 
like that, Chandrill." 
46 



BARRIER TO YESTERDAY 



47 



"What made the ice so rough, anyway?" asked Sinoon. Chandrill 
glanced across the ice, feeling the old discomfort that was only the 
natural reaction to cessation of motion. 

"At least six of the earlier sleds stopped here for some reason," he 
replied. "You can see the brake and rudder tracks criss-crossing back 
there." 

Looking at her as she strained her myopic blue eyes to pick out the 
tracks in the twilight he wondered hopefully if she was beginning to reconcile herself to the Philosophy Sled. 

"Then if we had been at the head of the lines, if the tribe hadn't been 
held back this wouldn't have happened?" 

There was the faintest note of triumph in Sinoon's voice as she spoke. 
She drew her cap closer around her, narrowing her wide pale lips against 
the wind. 

"That's right," Chandrill replied, making his voice as dead as was 
possible. The six other Lesser Philosophers, all of them nearly as old as 
Fearthell himself, and the two Novices who looked after the running of 
the sled were down on the ice by this time. Chandrill could feel the 
throbbing silence that comes not because there is nothing to say but because there is too much. 

"The thing is," lido Fearthell said, "the thing is — can the iron be 
fixed or can we not move until a new one is cast?" 

Chandrill glanced around the group and then up ahead, towards 
Day, to where the other sleds of the tribe had either halted or were in 
the process of stripping their masts. "There are still parts of the broken 
lugs projecting," he said. "We could make a housing for it on the timber 
former. A box shape that would keep it from moving about too much. 
We might be able to limp along until the new runner is supplied." 

"All right then," Fearthell said, "We'll do that." He told young 
Mondaquee to bring tools and wood. Chandrill put Sinoon out of his 
thinking and went to work on the lugs. 

He had the outside box completed and was about to get in below 
the sled when he heard the crackling whisper of blades on ice. He 
looked Daywards and saw that Minnatose had come back alone from 
the Royal Trio to see what was wrong. Chandrill climbed inside the 
framework of the sled and began shaping wood with the small axe. 

He heard Minnatose stop at the front of the sled and then a period 
of near silence broken only by Fearthell's whistling sibilants. After some 
minutes had gone by he realised that Fearthell had stopped talking and he 
felt vaguely ill at ease. He looked around to see if he could find where 
Minnatose had gone to, then he jumped violently and dropped the axe. 



48 



NEBULA 



Minnatose had slipped quietly up to where Chandrill was working, 
knelt down and had been peering in at him from close up for some time. 
He was grinning at Chandrill's reaction. 

Chandrill cursed himself furiously and picked up the axe to go on 
working, relapsing into his protective sullenness. Minnatose crouched 
outside the sled for another few minutes before he spoke. "Hard at 
work, cousin," he said, still smiling. 

"Yes." 

"You need a new runner for that job." 

"That's right." 

"Know how to get one?" 

"Yes." 

"Well how about it then?" Minnatose slapped his hand against the 
heavy framework of the sled. "I want this sled for a useful job. I could 
have it filled with coal at the next deposit and we could run the furnace 
practically all the time. You could come back to the front of the tribe 
and no harm will come to the Philosophers. I'll disperse them over the 
rest of the sleds." 

"I told you before that I wasn't going to agree to abolish this sled," 
Chandrill said doggedly. "If you need the consent of every member of 
the royal family before you can tear up its charter you just have to wait 
until I'm out of the way." 

Minnatose renewed his grin, stood up and walked away, his skates 
clinking on the ice. Chandrill worked on until he had finished then he 
climbed out from under, staggering a little as his legs gave way, cramped 
from the long crouch. 

When he walked round to the front of the sled Minnatose was ready 
to go and there was something wrong. Something in the air. Chandrill 
glanced round curiously at the two or three Lesser Philosophers who were 
fixedly watching something in the hills to the north. He walked past 
Minnatose. who was looking amused, and found Sinoon climbing down 
from the sled with all her spare clothing in a bundle on her back. 

Chandrill sucked in air. "Where to?" he asked her as she reached 
his level. 

She was trembling slightly but her voice sounded casual. "We don't 
get on well here, Chan. There's no other women on this sled and since 
we fell back in the lines I can't get across to the other sleds in the same 
way. There isn't enough room here either and . . . well, I'm going back 
to the Royal Trio." 

"You're leaving— just like that?" Chandrill asked quietly. 

"Yes." 



BARRIER TO YESTERDAY 



49 




"You're not. Go back up onto the sled. I'm going to talk to 
Minnatose about this." 

Sinoon laughed. "You can't stop me, Chan. And don't annoy 
Minnatose— he might lose his temper." She stepped quickly past him 
and moved out of sight around the front of the sled. 

Go ahead, Chandrill thought, it has happened at last. They've gone 
too far, so let them see the real Chandrill, the smart dangerous invincible 
Chandrill who has always remained hidden for want of a situation or 
opponent big enough to test his mettle. That's what you have always 
told yourself. Now actl 

Somehow he just felt sick and heavy with grief that the split with 
Sinoon had finally come. He set the tool pouch down and walked 
forward after Sinoon. He found that he had been standing for longer 
than he had realised for Minnatose and Sinoon were nearly a quarter of a 
mile from the sled and moving away fast. 

He stared at them until they were only specks. To the north were 
the ever present foothills of the polar mountains and in the south an 
uninterrupted waste of ice out to the horizon. Behind the sled the sky 



50 



NEBULA 



tinged down into the darkness of the eternal Night and in the opposite 
direction grew brighter with the light of the elusive sun just below the 
horizon. 

Chandrill turned back to the sled and noted that, although the sled 
was not a very big structure, there was nobody in sight. They all knew 
what had been happening. He raised cupped hands to shout to one of 
the Novices to come down for the tools, moving and thinking mechanically, when the unbelievable happened. 

Behind the sled, towards Night, a point of brilliant light appeared. 
It was a little above the horizon and, as Chandrill watched, it dipped 
down into the darker background of the far ice then lifted back into 
the sky again. Suddenly he realised that the thing was moving at tremendous speed for it had swollen into a ball as it began to ascend. It 
was much closer. 

Paralysed with fear, Chandrill tilted his head back as the hurtling 
light sped by several miles up. It went straight down the sky and several 
seconds before it reached the horizon the light seemed to split into two, 
shedding a much smaller part. Immediately the larger object passed 
below the horizon there was a bright flare of light that lit up the whole 
region of sky around the point of disappearance. 

Slowly, and of their own accord, Chandrill's knees buckled and he 
found himself kneeling on the ice, unable to move due to the pounding 
elation racing in his chest. He knelt there for a time taking his air in 
noisy gasps, grinning fiercely and blinking tears out of his eyes. Complete and pure happiness was throwing his nervous system into chaos, 
then the spasms passed and he stood up. 

He turned and ran back to the sled, moving with the delicate highstepping nin of somebody that has lived all his life on hard ice. 

The Philosophy Sled, like all the others, was the framework for a 
box mounted on runners. The interior of the box was divided into 
smaller compartments by the struts and ties that braced the masts, and 
pieces of thick fabric nailed to these members made the compartments 
into semi-private cubicles. At the front and rear of the sled were small 
bridges from which it was possible to see down into the cubicles but the 
people of the tribes were incurious by nature and found sled life tolerable. 

Underneath the bridges were the supplies of bread cane which grew 
thickly on the lowermost slopes of the polar mountains. Chandrill let his 
thoughts return to the group on the bridge and realised that Fearthell was 
still talking. 

"I don't understand you, Chandrill," he was saying in his usual tauto


BARRIER TO YESTERDAY 



51 



logical style, "I really don't. At a time when this sled is in need of every 
man you tell me you want to leave the sled! Not only that, but you 
want others to go with you. And for what? 

"Nothing but a meteor! Just a piece of rock from the sky. Nothing 
at all, you might say." 

"That wasn't a meteor," Chandrill stated flatly. 

"What was it then?" 

"I wouldn't like to guess," replied Chandrill, "but I know it wasn't 
a meteor." He kept on speaking, ignoring the amused smile that Fearthell slid around the other men. "And don't worry about your runner. 
Minnatose won't let this sled be left behind. He said he could use it for 
something useful and it's not hard to see his point of view. 

"When I was a boy on the Royal Sleds I heard old Ardinetter, who 
was the Philosopher at that time, talk about the past and the future. The 
world was a challenge to him. He seemed to think it was a privilege 
to live on a world whose spin had almost stopped, stretching the days and 
nights into years so that it was useless even to go underground. Ardinetter believed that we wouldn't always have to follow the sun around the 
world. 

"But that's all we have done. It is our miserable little history." 

"I think I am safe in saying that all of us here are familiar with our 
own history, Chandrill," remarked Fearthell, nodding to the others. 

"I'm trying to show you Minnatose's point of view about the sled," 
Chandrill said curtly. "In the times when the trek was just beginning 
they realised that if they could only reach the poles there would be no 
need to keep moving. The south pole was out because the winds were 
wrong below this lattitude, and the north pole is a thousand miles over 
the mountains. Night would have us before we reached the first peaks. 

"We travel along the southernmost skirt of those mountains, round 
the world and round the world, never getting anywhere. And the only 
way we'll ever break the cycle is by being smart. By using our brains 
to get out. Thai is why this sled was built. It was to be a place where 
the best brains could work on the problem of escape. 

"If you continue to sit there arguing over the possibility of the 
Absolute or the reality of the perceived universe Minnatose will have 
the sled out from under you — and he'll deserve it." 

"I had no idea there was so much empathy between Minnatose and 
you," remarked one-eyed Tronpat. He smiled slightly. 

"There's a logical refutation," Chandrill said sarcastically. 

"All right then," Fearthell put in, "keeping everything on a strictly 
logical basis. Would you explain just how the meteor will carry the 



52 



NEBULA 



tribes to the poles? Can you make it fly again after it has buried itself 
in the ice?" 

"No, I can't, but it is something new," Chandrill said. "It's new 
data. New material to work with, so I say we can't afford to neglect it. 
I'm going to take my own yacht and go out after it. Anybody else?" 
He looked around the group in their loose dark trousers and broad belted 
jerkins. None of them spoke. 

"Party coming back from the rest of the tribe," shouted Novice 
Mondaquee from the rear bridge. Chandrill went down and dragged out 
the body of his little yacht from its makeshift brackets between the timbers at the rear. He had it ready to sail when the party reached the sled. 

It was Minnatose again and behind him were four men in the dark 
blue o£ Ironworkers who were trailing two heavy runners. Minnatose 
glanced up at the bridge as he came up, moving fast, and scraped to a 
halt beside Chandrill. "Throw that thing back in there," he snapped, 
pointing at the yacht, "and get one of these runners onto the sled." His 
face was white and stiff with barely controlled rage and Chandrill felt the 
old nervousness stir in his stomach. 

You took my wife, he thought in an effort to whip up a reckless 
temper. Aloud he said, "One of the boys can do it. It's important to 
me to go." 

Minnatose caught Chandrill's jerkin and twisted it tight across his 
chest. "You know the Pass, don't you? You know the Pass?" 

"Yes," Chandrill said, shocked at his cousin's sudden descent to 
violence. In the long trip round the world there were several places 
from which the mountains could be seen on the southern horizon. The 
Pass was the only point at which they approached the great polar ranges 
of the north; it was actually a narrow strait of ice between two continents. All the sleds of all the tribes converged there to get through to 
the other side. 

"You know the Pass. It's gone! The meteor hit the northern edge 
of it and . . . damn you, Chan! We can't get through!" 

The main sense of Minnatose's words were too much for Chandrill. 
"Damn me!" he said stupidly, trying to get back from the other man. 
"Why damn me?" 

"You were the one that stopped us from getting this sled long ago. 
But for that this tribe would have been in the lead — the advance tribes 
were through the Pass when the meteor struck." 

"You mean," Chandrill demanded, "that because you crippled this 
sled and slowed the tribe by trying to blackmail us with refusing our sail 
cloth and runners, it is my fault?" 



BARRIER TO YESTERDAY 



53 



"Shut up, Chan," Minnatose snarled. "It was you blocked me." 

"What is it? What about the Pass?" It was Fearthell from the 
bridge. Minnatose released Chandrill and strode forward, a tautmouthed giant in the royal white, to beneath Fearthell. He turned back 
to Chandrill and pointed at him. 

"Get that runner on now and get this sled moving," he ordered. 
"I'll need every man at the Pass to get some of the stuff through if it can 
be done. And do it now." 

Chandrill dropped one hand to the haft of the whipstick slung on his 
belt. He stood like that for a few seconds, only then beginning to realise 
that for the first time there was no way ahead for the tribes to take. He 
straightened his jerkin and ran to help the men manoeuvre the runners. 

When Chandrill came up out of his cubicle the Philosophy Sled, the 
last one of all, had neared the Pass. It was darker than usual due to the 
smoke and dust that was riding high above the Pass, and to the north 
were the lines of the sleds belonging to the other tribes. Most of them 
seemed to be deserted. The lines converged a mile ahead and disappeared behind an outshoot of the northern cliff of the Pass. 

When they swung round the curve of the cliff, Chandrill found that 
there was nothing to see ahead but wrecked sleds that had piled headlong 
into each other. There was a ragged wall of them blocking the way. 
Chandrill saw the smoky red smudges of flames to the north, then the 
wind backed suddenly bringing with it the smoke and dust and the sickening sense of disaster. He felt the brakes go on and the sled slowed 
rapidly but not soon enough. The wind smashed back harder and the 
sails twisted their booms round to the rear of the masts. Blinded with 
the flying ash Chandrill heard the masts and rigging crunch down into 
the rear of the sled and then a lurch threw him to the deck. He rolled 
into one of the handrail standards, caught it and managed to get his feet 
onto the diagonal bracing in the side and slide down to the level of the 
runners. 

The wind turned again and drove the smoke back into the Pass 
sufficiently for Chandrill to see several yards. He ran across the ice away 
from the sled which was using up its kinetic energy in a slow spin, dragging a train of rigging and spars. When he was well clear he took his 
skates from his belt and clamped them to his boots, then the darkness 
raged over everything again. Chandrill bent forward into the wind and 
thrust off moving with short quick strokes. 

An indefinite time went by during which he passed two deserted 
sleds, wondering all the time where he was trying to go and why. It took 



54 



NEBULA 



him some time to realise that he was looking tor Sinoon. 

The dark curtain lifted just in time to prevent him running straight 
into the main mass of the wreckage. He turned to the right and headed 
towards the southern end of the Pass faintly visible through the twilight. 
By reckless leaping of scattered timbers he managed to reach the first 
slopes before the smoke closed down. There were runner tracks along 
the edge of the ice here and Chandrill foDowed them. 

The sled marks were heavy and he realised that all the sleds at the 
rear of the lines had come this way, probably being poled along most of 
the way, in the hope of finding a way through to the other side. Something ahead was flaming intermittently with a fierce white light, and as 
he came nearer the light source Chandrill found that it was getting 
warmer. The way ahead became too crowded with close packed sleds 
and he moved up on to the slope feeling as though he was moving 
helplessly through a hazy nickering dream. 

He climbed until he had crossed Over a shoulder of the hill and had 
a view of the Pass below him. A mile ahead, at the narrowest point, 
something that could hardly be seen for the swirling clouds of dust and 
soot was flaming and glaring, shooting weird beams of light in all directions when the movements of the smoke let them through. The floor of 
the Pass leading up to the light was obscured but Chandrill glimpsed men 
moving and he heard their shouts on the wind. 

Far up in the mass of sleds he caught a flash of the near white 
timbers and sails of the Royal Sled of his own tribe. He took off his 
skates and began to run down the slope. 

He fought his way through a stream of men and women who 
wanted to get away from the unknown thing ahead. When he reached 
the sled, a mass of motionless darkness against swirling greyness, he 
found Sinoon curled on the ground close to the bottom of the forward 
ladder. There was no sign of any of the others about. She was motionless except for a slight trembling. The furs she wore had been transformed by mud and water into a mass of sticky spikes. 

Chandrill did not try to find out what had happened to her. He 
lifted her in his arms and looked into the white face with its myopic 
seeking eyes. "You want me to take you out of this?" he asked. Sinoon 
nodded and let her head fall against his shoulder. Chandrill turned and 
climbed back up the hill, sliding in the mud. At the top of the shoulder 
he could go no further. He set Sinoon on the ground in the lee of a rock 
and dropped down beside her. 

For a moment he felt good that he had brought her up out of the 
smoke and chaos to where they could rest then he remembered that it 



BARRIER TO YESTERDAY 55 

made no difference. They were dead anyway. 

Alone he might have had a chance to cross to the other side of the 
mountains, but not with Sinoon. There was nothing to do now but sit 
and wait until it got dark. Until they were dead. Down below them in 
the Pass the sounds were dying out but Chandrill no longer cared. For 
most of the tribes the trek was over and perhaps they were luckier than 
those who had got through the Pass. For them there was nothing but 
another circuit of the world ahead with nothing to do but think about 
how, when they again reached the Pass, there would be no way 
through . . . 

"Sinoon! Sinoon!" The shout, faint as it was coming up the slope, 
startled Chandrill. He had forgotten Minnatose. 

He shot a glance at Sinoon, who rested with her eyes closed and did 
not seem to have heard it, then got to his feet and looked down the slope. 
Minnatose was weaving up the hill following the tracks in the snow and, 
all at once, there was nothing else in the world save Chandrill and his 
cousin and the wavering line of footprints joining them together. 

"Don't come any further," he shouted causing Minnatose to raise 
his head and see him. Minnatose stared up the hill at him for long 
seconds and then he shouted something. 

Just one word, "You," and he started up the hill again, and Chandrill knew what it was for. The way in which Minnatose stared up the 
slope, stumbling unseeingly over rocks and brush, made it obvious. 

He felt for the whipstick and got it out of its sling. It was a length 
of springy steel an eighth of an inch in diameter which had a handle at one 
end. Keeping his eyes fixed on Minnatose he groped in his pouch and 
brought out a needle-pointed piece of steel about six inches long which 
he fitted over the end of the rod. 

"I've warned you," he shouted, drawing his arm back, but the words 
had no visible effect. Chandrill had not expected them to, he had just 
felt it necessary to give the other man every chance. Minnatose came on 
up the hill, his eyes blank. 

Ignoring the sick feeling in his stomach Chandrill brought his arm 
down hard. He heard the steel head go whistling down the slope and 
Minnatose went down sideways with it buried in the bulge of his thigh. 
Chandrill automatically groped for another head, the finisher, then 
checked his hand — he would not be able to make another throw. Not 
at a man anyway. 

Minnatose began to get some control over the noises he was making 
and sat up holding his leg with both hands. He had on his face the 
hurt, indignant look of the bully who has been hit and is now convinced 



56 



NEBULA 



that he must bully harder than ever to teach the offender a much needed 
lesson. Chandrill turned and pulled Sinoon to her feet. 

"Come on, Sin," he whispered, "we'll have to keep moving," He 
reckoned that it would take Minnatose at the most twenty minutes to 
recover and stop his leg bleeding and then he would be coming after 
him. With a sudden flash of insight Chandrill realised that there was 
nothing else in life for Minnatose but to kill the one that had been, as he 
saw it, the cause of the end of his world. It was logical. One man had 
stripped him of everything; of the past and the future— even life, but a 
fine piece of irony was there. By virtue of having deprived him of so 
much that man had provided him with one remaining, shining, all-important goal. Revenge. 

Chandrill knew that better than he knew anything and he was running because, although he had the normal man's disbelieving indifference 
to the idea of simply dying, he was horribly afraid of the intimate reality 
of being killed. He wanted to die in his own way. 

South of the Pass, along the bottom slopes of the mountain continent, things had not changed at all because nobody had ever travelled that 
far away from the tribal route. The wind blew from the north having 
carried the sleds round the world, tried to squeeze its massive invisible 
self through the Pass and swung along the line of the hills. Since the 
instant in which the Pass had been destroyed the only evidence that there 
was still time was in the green sky which had grown several shades 
darker as the long night slid ponderously across the ice sea from the 
east. 

Chandrill's foot went blindly over the edge of a crevice and he threw 
himself back, bearing down on Sinoon for support. Her knees buckled 
under his weight and they fell awkwardly onto the stiff coating Of snow 
that had fallen ages ago before the last water had become permanently 
frozen. 

From where he lay, too tired to get up now that he was down, 
Chandrill stared dully at the fresh clean greyness of newly split rocks and, 
underneath them, the snow-scattered brownness of upthrown soil. It 
took the facts a long time to penetrate, then he sat up and looked down 
into the crevice. 

The first thing he knew was that this was not a natural formation 
at all. It was a long shallow gouge in the surface of the hill. One end 
of it pointed out across the silent horizon of ice and the other on up the 
slope. The top of it was not visible because a few hundred yards above 
him the hill he was on reached its highest point then fell away again on 



BARRIER TO YESTERDAY 



57 



the other side. Miles beyond the low ridge thus formed the actual mountains rose distantly. 

Sinoon had gone to sleep lying against him, in the position in which 
she had fallen, with the ease of a tired child. She was a child, Chandrill thought not for the first time. He got to his feet and pulled Sinoon 
up beside him. 

"Come on, Sin," he whispered. "Up this way." She walked with 
him blindly, dragging her feet and leaning on him. 

At the top of the slope the green-white lumpy ground dropped away 
from them in a long gentle fall into some rough land covered with stunted 
trees and briar clumps. Almost at his feet the furrow started in the hard 
snow, narrow at first then broadening out as it went down the hill until 
at the bottom it was thirty feet wide. Near the broad end the gouge was 
kinked round a sled-sized rock and, lying outside the trail of violence 
altogether, was the thing that had caused it. 

It was a shining silver egg that had been split open almost vertically 
from the end nearest Chandrill practically the whole way through to the 
other end. Inside the egg was a tangled mass of crumpled metalwork 
and massed interlacing wires. 

Chandrill knew with an instinctive judgement, that held good even 
for things as far outside his sphere of knowledge as this, that he was 
looking at the ultimate development of the sled. A machine that moved 
through the sky — like a meteor. 

The picture of a mother ship roaming between the stars came to 
him suddenly. He could almost see the great machine approaching his 
own tiny sun, the unforeseen accident which sent it winging down, too fast 
for a landing on his own world, the panic aboard as the mountains 
appeared ahead right across the horizon, the futile efforts to bring the 
ship round to go through the one gap in the barrier and the spectacular 
failure which had snuffed out his race. Chandrill felt his mind reel with 
the very bigness of the concept 

This glittering shattered thing must have been the flier's equivalent 
of his own ice yacht. Chandrill knew then why he had been so uplifted 
when he had seen the light in the sky. Something, some half-memory 
inherited, had whispered that here was the way out for the tribes. 

He walked down the slope keeping inside the track of the egg and 
peered into it hoping to see and at the same time afraid of seeing the 
creature that might be inside. He was unable to see more than a few 
feet into the interior because of the masses of plates and equipment that 
blocked his vision and a dense grey-white gas that lingered far inside 
the hull. At the open end of the egg was a squat machine, heavily 



NEBULA 



flanged and moulded to one half of the hull which Chandrill took to be 
the floor. 

He clambered along the upthrown earth and rock that formed a 
motionless sculptured wave around the egg to the front, the end that he 
would have expected to have received the most of the damage. There 
the smooth line of the hull was surprisingly unbroken. He worked his 
way right round to the rear of the egg and reached the windward side of 
the gash in the hull where he caught a wisp of the cloudy whiteness from 
inside. It reeked of ammonia and something else . . . 

"Wake up, Chan! Wake up! Please. Wake up . . ." The voice 
in Chandrill's ears grew louder and more insistent and at last he had to 
relinquish sleep and return to the ice and the cold green sky. Sinoon 
was bending over him and the sight of the scared, tear-streaked mask 
that was her face brought him back to reality. 

"What's the matter?" Chandrill sat up. The inside of his mouth 
was parched. 

"He's here," she said, pulling at his arms. "It's Minnatose. He's 
on the other side of the hill. I'm afraid. Get up." She shook him 
violently, overflowing with nervous panic. Chandrill wondered what 
Minnatose had done to change her former admiration to this. He got 
to his feet unsteadily and blinked as it came to him that if he had 
received a larger dose of the gas he would not have come out of it at all. 

They ran from the silent egg towards one of the larger clumps of 
briars and dropped down behind it. Lying down, Chandrill saw through 
the stalks that the ground was so heavily scattered with rock and earth 
that they had left no trail to their hiding place. Just at that moment 
Minnatose appeared on the skyline. 

Chandrill's hope that he would not need a weapon faded out for 
Minnatose was carrying one of the long, heavy knives used for cutting 
down bread canes. He was standing stock still at the top of the hill 
staring down the slope at the gleaming machine. His thigh was clumsily 
bandaged. Minnatose started walking down the hill. 

Chandrill felt Sinoon begin to tremble and a sudden flood of guilt 
and responsibility sent him looking around for something that he could 
use for fighting. There were lots of stone splinters nearby but nothing 
that looked nearly heavy enough, and he sent his gaze further out. 
About thirty yards from him he saw something rather peculiar lying in 
the lee of the huge rock. It was an almost perfectly round piece of 
metal about a foot in diameter. It looked very heavy and Chandrill 
wondered if he could reach it before Minnatose could stop him. 

"Keep quiet and lie still," he whispered to Sinoon. He pressed his 



BARRIER TO YESTERDAY 



59 



stomach up from the ground and poised, ready to spring forward with all 
the strength he could muster. 

It was in that moment of supreme concentration on it that the round 
object moved. It rolled over revealing that, on the side which had been 
turned away from Chandrill, it was partly made of transparent stuff 
through which could be seen a swirling gaseous movement reminiscent of 
the gas in the egg. 

The shock of the event, coming just at that vulnerable instant, drove 
the air from his lungs and brought with it a flood of reactive weakness. 
He dropped back onto the ground beside Sinoon. She was staring at 
him, slowly getting more afraid as his own fear leaked through to her by 
way of his eyes. 

Chandrill examined the object and realised that he had not seen it 
properly the first time. A trick of matching colours had prevented him 
from seeing that the object was not a complete, separate entity. 

It was, in fact, the helmetted head of something sprawled on the 
ground. 

Something wearing a white one piece garment that completely 
covered its body. The realisation in some way relieved Chandrill for 
the idea of an alien creature lying there in the snow was more acceptable 
to his mind than the one of a curious looking sphere which could move 
of its own accord. He watched the alien for a full minute in which it 
made no further move, then he decided that it must be nearly dead. 

"Try and get this, Sin," he whispered. "It's difficult to grasp but 
try to get it anyway." He told her his theory about the egg and about 
the alien in white lying nearby, then snapped, "Don't move or make a 
noise!" 

She lay very still for a long time then said, "Where is it?" 

Chandrill turned round to face the alien and pointed to it. The alien 
was lying in the same place and in the same position except for one thing. 
The helmet was now lifted a few inches clear of the ground and the 
transparent window was facing directly towards where Chandrill and 
Sinoon lay. 



Long cold seconds rolled over Chandrill as he realised that the alien 
had seen them and that he did not know what to do about it. On his 
left was the ruined space craft with Minnatose out of sight now on the 
far side of it. On his right was the silent, sentient alien in white, perhaps dying perhaps ready to spring into ferocious and deadly action. 
There was no way for Chandrill to tell. 



60 



NEBULA 



The wind rolling in from the dark ice and down the line of the hills 
was loud and then quiet in his ears. The green sky seemed to be pressing 
down on everything, holding it still. 

Quite suddenly over a distance of thirty yards, the alien seemed to 
reach out an invisible hand which passed through ChandruTs skull and 
took hold of his brain. The sensation paralysed him. Then the alien 
spoke. As Chandrill felt it, the process was not so much one of speaking as of writing the words directly onto the surface of his brain with the 
finger of an invisible hand. 

Being, it said, / can feel the fear in you and your companion and I 
can feel the blind kill-longing in the other one which is near my ship. 
1 have an aversion for these things and will not tolerate them near me. 
You shall explain your circumstances to me so that 1 may decide what 
to do. Prepare your report and project it to me thus . . . 

Chandrill received a wordless description of how to gather his 
thoughts, poise and launch them from his mind. He was not sure that he 
could do it and he knew that unless the instructions were constantly reiterated in the same way he would forget them in ten minutes. As well 
as that he received a faint disturbing inkling of just how far the alien 
would go to preserve its peace of mind. 

Wondering just why he felt it so important to get everything just 
right he began to prepare his explanation. He tried to compress the history of the tribes into one compact, cohesive mass. He thought of the 
dark futility of the eternal trek round the world and of the original aims 
of the Philosophy Sled, and its failure. He sketched in his own life, the 
struggles with the others to make them accept his beliefs, the struggles 
with himself to act on them. Chandrill thought of the recent events; the 
light in the sky, the destruction of the Pass and the flight from the cousin 
■ who needed to kill him . . . 

He fixed his eyes on the dark window with its sluggish movement of 
mist inside then, praying that he could do it right, launched his message. 
The alien made a hoarse pain sound and clapped what might have been 
two arms, made shapeless with the white covering, over its helmet. From 
the far side of the sky-craft came the sound of a stone as though dislodged by a sudden movement. 

Before Chandrill had time to wonder what had happened the words 
began forming inside his head. Such strength, they said, / did not 
expect such strength. A mistake on my part. I have very little time — 
the 'being you call Minnatose, the one with the dark shadow over his 
mind, has seen me and is coming. Listen. Inside my ship there are 



BARRIER TO YESTERDAY 



61 



millions of books on microfilm. I see that your knowledge of optics 
is sufficient for you to develop a way to read them. There are aids to 
deciphering also. There is yet a chance for your people because the 
engine of the ship is not destroyed and has manual controls. . . . 
Wild hope surged up in Chandrill. 

No. The ship will never fly again, so you cannot leave this world 
on it nor could you even reach the poles. But with the engine whole . . . 
What had the alien meant? 

"A chance for your people . . ." the alien had said. What chance? 

Silently, and moving with incredible speed in spite of his wounded 
leg, Minnatose tore across the space which separated the sky craft and the 
alien. He had the cane knife at the ready as he tore through the briars 
in front of where the alien lay. Chandrill was dimly aware of Sinoon 
burying her face in her arms. It was impossible for him to know if 
Minnatose realised before he made his dive that it was not Chandrill he 
was tackling. 

Chandrill watched his cousin crash down through the briars onto the 
alien and there was a sudden silent upheaval as the two bodies met. The 
alien seemed to enfold Minnatose and it became horribly apparent that 
it possessed more than four limbs, more than six, and all of them in the 
white garment whose purpose Chandrill was beginning faintly to understand. 

The struggle was short and sharp. Chandrill saw fleetingly the cane 
knife raised in Minnatose 's hand then there was a loud hissing explosion. 
A cloud of the white mist which had been inside the hull of the ship 
stood out around the fighters — and the contest was over. All movement 
ceased in the tangled mass and the cloud was ripped away by the wind 
bringing the stench of ammonia to ChandriU's nostrils. 

He pulled Sinoon to her feet and ran with her towards the egg put 
of the way of the gas and brought her round to the engine end. She sat 
down wordlessly when he told her to. Chandrill climbed up onto the 
metal of the ship and looked at the engine. 

What had the alien meant? 

On top of the squat casing was a long graduated slot with a knob 
at One end of it which looked as though it was intended to be pulled 
along. Chandrill moved it a little and nothing happened so he moved it 
back to its original position. He stared hopelessly around the tangle of 
wreckage. What was the use of the ruined hulk if it would never fly 
again? The certainty of imminent death bore down On him, worse this 
time because it had been preceded by hope of life. 



NEBULA 



"A chance for your people ..." the alien had said. What chance? 
Chandrill began to think back to all that the alien had told him about 
the engine. First, that it was whole . . . The concept that the alien had 
projected when it meant "engine' 1 was very complex. He began to 
examine the fast-fading mental symbol that had been imprinted on his 
brain. The word "radioactive" was strongly connected with it. Chandrill had a faint understanding of what that meant for there were caves in 
several parts of the foothills which always shone with a faint radiance. 

Suddenly he understood the engine a little. He pushed the knob 
far up the slot to the very end of its run and depressed two buttons above 
it. This time when he moved the knob only a fraction of an inch the 
scattered snow and ice behind the egg hissed and melted. There was a 
faintly luminous beam reaching out from the engine to the hill where the 
steam was rising. And this had happened when he had moved the knob 
only a hundredth of its full distance. 

This tremendous energy was made available by moving the tiny 
knob and Chandrill knew that it would last a long, long time. This was 
the power which could hurl the egg to the stars but which now spent 
itself in heat because the converter which changed that power to lift was 
destroyed. But the power would always be there, and with the engine 
mounted on a hilltop it could spread its heat for miles. It would be a 
huge eternal hearth for the tribes to gather around and settle. A hearth 
that would be warm all through the long night. 

With a stationary culture not drained of time and energy by the 
necessity to keep moving his people could begin to do something. Then 
the tribes would begin their real destiny — one with a future. 

Chandrill jumped down onto the ground and smiled as he saw 
Sinoon standing near the boulder off to one side. She had had a bad 
time recently and it would take a lot of work to get her back to normal, 
but she should be all right. 

"Come on, sleepy," he called out to her. "There's work to be 
started. By the time we get all the way back to the Pass, spread this 
news and get them out here with all their food and sleds for building 
you'll really be tired." Chandrill walked over to Sinoon. He could not 
help noticing as he went that the hill with its natural shelter would be 
a pretty good site for the first town that his world had seen in a long, 
long time. 



BOB SHAW 



JOHN SEABRIGHT 



The Moron 

A little knowledge is a dangerous thing — especially 
when it turns out to be a little too muchIllustrated by Harry Turner 

It was getting late, the inspector was due, and she had a headache, 
all of which tended to make Miss Weston a little impatient with her 
history class. 

"Now children,. 5 ' she snapped. "Once again and this time please 
try to get it right. From seventy -three. Ready? Go!" She sat down 
and closed her eyes as twenty ten-year olds lifted their voices and shrilled 
their mnemonics. 

"Nineteen hundred seventy-three 
Blake crashed on the moon did he." 

'''Nineteen hundred seventy-five 
Church circled and returned alive." 

"Nineteen hundred eighty-one 
Duer landed and the job was done." 

"Very good!" Miss Weston opened her eyes and started to her feet 
as a man walked through the open door and smiled at her. "I'm Carter, 
the inspector. I listened to your class from outside in the passage.'' He 
beamed down from the dais at the mixed class below him. "They 
certainly seem to have a grasp of essential history." 

"I do my best, sir," said Miss Weston. She glanced at the calm, 
almost benign face of the inspector. "They are troublesome at times 
but I think that I have taught them what they should know." 



63 



64 



NEBULA 



"I'm sure that you have," he said politely. He took a book from 
his pocket and glanced at it. "According to the schedule this class 
should know essential history from nineteen hundred sixty-five until the 
present day. Fifty years. A total of twenty dates." 

"They know them, sir," said Miss Weston. She tried hard to be 
calm and competent but it was hard to forget that, if Carter wanted to, 
he could revoke her teaching licence and throw her out of her employment. He seemed to sense what was in her mind. 

"There's no need for alarm, Miss Weston," he said gravely. "We of 
the teaching profession realise that, no matter how hard we might try, 
there is always the awkward child, the backward child, the difficult child. 
It is our duty to find them and so bring them up to the level of the rest. 
No one can expect a hundred per cent perfection." 

"No, sir," she said gratefully. "Thank you, sir" 

"Not at all." He stared at his book again. "With your permission 
Til just run through a spot-check on this class." 

"Certainly, sir." Asking her permission was, as Miss Weston knew, 
an empty formality but it served to bolster her domination over the 
class. Carter nodded, cleared his throat, and pointed to a freckle-faced 
youngster. 

"You! What's your name?" 

"Johnny, sir. Johnny Thome." 

"Well, Johnny, when did we first land on Mars?" 

"Uh?" The boy's face was twisted with thought then, as he remembered his teaching, it cleared. "Nineteen hundred ninety-two. Leman 
landed on Mars, too truel" 

"Very good!" Carter swung his finger. "You there! What 
happened in nineteen hundred eighty-seven?" 

"Nineteen hundred eighty-seven. Venus found to be a lemon." 

"And you!" The finger swung towards a red-headed boy in a blue 
jersey. "What's your name?" 

"Tommy, sir. Tommy Prentice." 

"Well, Tommy, this is a hard one. When did we first reach 
Mercury?" 

"Nineteen ninety-eight, sir." Tommy shuffled his feet and lowered 
his eyes from Miss Weston's expression. 

"You know that isn't true, Tommy," she said quickly. "Now, repeat 
after me. Nineteen hundred ninety-nine. Mercury reached by Devine." 

"The man asked me who was the first," said Tommy sullenly. 
"Devine was the second." 

"But . . ." 



THE MORON 



65 



"That will do, Miss Weston," rapped Carter. He shut his book and 
slipped it into his pocket. "Tommy, stand out before the class and wait 
for me. Miss Weston, give them something to occupy their time while 
you are away. We will wait for you outside." 

Miss Weston bit her lips as she watched the man and boy leave the 
room. 



The office was a large, brightly lit affair tastefully decorated and 
hung with charts and schedules appertaining to the school. The supervisor, a remarkably young man for the position he held, smiled as the 
inspector entered and held out his hand. 

"Back so soon? Everything satisfactory, I hope." 

"Far from it." Carter stepped aside and gestured for Miss Weston 
and Tommy to enter. "A blatant case of false teaching. Tommy, when 
did we first reach Mercury?" 

"Nineteen hundred ninety-eight, sir." 

"You see?" Carter looked significantly towards the supervisor. He 
nodded and looked grave. 

"I see what you mean. Miss Weston, take the boy outside and then 
return. Ask my secretary for the complete file on this student." He 
sighed as he sat down and gestured the inspector to a chair. "I'll not 
attempt to minimise the importance of this discovery. Carter, but I'd like 
to make one thing quite clear. I have the utmost confidence in Miss 
Weston." 

"The boy has received wrong education," said Carter. "His history 
is inaccurate. As Miss Weston is his teacher in that subject she can 
hardly be free from all blame." 

"Agreed." The supervisor glanced up as Miss Weston returned 
with the file. "I was just telling Inspector Carter that I have the utmost 
confidence in you, Miss Weston," he said encouragingly. "I feel certain 
that you would not have taught the boy wrong facts." 

"I would never do that," she said quickly. "I can't understand how 
he could have got his dates so confused. The mnemonic is very plain. 
Nineteen hundred ninety . . ." 

"Yes, yes," interrupted the supervisor. "We know all that, thank 
you. But the fact remains that the boy has been mis-educated. As his 
teacher you can realise how concerned we are about it." 

"I can't understand it," she repeated. She was on the verge of 
tears. "I try so hard and they're so slow in learning. I . . ." 

"Let's get to business," snapped Carter. He had no patience with 

c 



66 



NEBULA 



emotion. "According to the schedule there is only one date for the 
landing on Mercury. Nineteen ninety-eight isn't mentioned at all. 
If Tommy knows that date then someone must have taught it to him. 
1 think we can discount childhood fantasy and stubbornness?" 

"Naturally." The supervisor nodded and opened the file. "Tommy 
has followed the scheduled pattern for his class and age. Elementary 
reading, essential history, basic general knowledge. Quite normal." 

"How about his recreation?" 

"Scheduled games and pastimes. The usual football, swimming, 
with some attention to Law and Crime and Red and White. His index 
for Law and White are as they should be; he likes to be on the winning 

side." 

"Home life?" Carter snapped the question as if it left a bad taste 
in his mouth. The supervisor riffled the pages of the file. 

"Both parents dead. Lives with his grandfather who . . ." 

"Wait!" Carter glared at Miss Weston. "Did you know this?" 

"Of course. But Tommy had always arrived at school on time and 
is decently dressed and fed. He seemed a nice, normal boy until this 
happened. 1 simply cannot understand why he should be so bad." 

"There seems to be a great deal you fail to understand, Miss 
Weston," said Carter acidly. "Surely you don't need to be reminded of 
the importance of your position? In your charge is the next generation 
of men and women, potential fathers and mothers whose children will, 
in turn, come to you for education. How you teach them, what you 
teach them, will have repercussions extending much further than any 
of us can imagine. Personally, I find it incredible that you could allow a 
boy in your class to deviate so widely from the norm." 

"I'm sorry, sir," she said, and this time did break into tears. Carter 
glared at her until she managed to control herself. 

"I'm glad to see that you realise how lax you have been. Bring in 
the boy." 

Tommy entered the room, a little scared, but mostly defiant. He 
looked at his teacher, then at the supervisor, finally at Carter. 

"Now, Tommy," said the inspector. "You keep saying that we first 
reached Mercury in nineteen hundred and ninety-eight. That isn't true. 
You don't seem a boy who would lie for the sake of it so why do you lie 
at all?" 

"I'm not lying," said Tommy. 

"You are lying," snapped Carter. "You know your mnemonics, 
don't you?" 
"Yes, sir." 



THE MORON 




"Then you know that Devine reached Mercury in nineteen ninetynine. Why do you insist that he didn't?" 

"I'm not. All I said was that we first reached Mercury a year 
before that." 

"You can say anything you wish but that doesn't make it true, does 

it?" 

"No, sir." 

"Then you admit that you're lying?" 
"No, sir." 

"Then you want us to believe that the history books are wrong?" 
"No, sir." 

"Then what do you mean?" 

"I don't know, sir." Tommy screwed his face up. "All I know is 
what Granddad told me. He said - • ." 

"Never mind what he said," shouted Carter. "He tells you nothing 
but lies. Lies, do you hear! The only truth is that which is taught to 
you in school." He calmed himself with a visible effort. "That will be 
all. Tommy. You may take him back to his class now, Miss Weston, 
but don't let him talk to the others. In fact it would be better if he 



NEBULA 



didn't go home tonight. You can find him a bed in the boarder's wing, 
I suppose?" 

"Certainly." The supervisor nodded to the teacher. "But what 
about his guardian?" 

"I'll attend to him," promised Carter. "I'll take the address and get 
onto the job right away." 

He reached for the file. 

Tommy lived in a lower class apartment down in a section of the 
city long scheduled for demolition. Carter carefully walked up seemingly 
endless flights of stairs, not touching the handrail or the walls and when 
he reached the top he was breathing hard and his face was moist with 
perspiration. He knocked and an old man answered the door. 

"Mr. Prentice?" 

"That's right." The old man looked over his visitor's shoulder 
and squinted down the stairs. Carter stepped into the room. 

"If you're looking for Tommy, don't bother. He won't be home 
tonight." 

"Not coming home?" The old man shut the door and looked 
anxious. "Nothing wrong, I hope?" 

"Physically, no. Mentally, a great deal I'm afraid." Carter stared 
about him and sat on the edge of a chair. "You are his guardian, I 
understand?" 

"That's right. I've taken care of him since his parents died. Why?" 

"The guardian of a young person has a tremendous responsibility, 
Mr Prentice. As great as that Of the parents themselves. I trust that 
you realise that?" 

"Sure I do. Why?" The old man sank into a sagging chair and 
reached for a pipe. He loaded and lit it and blew smoke towards his 
visitor. "Who are you? Police?" 

"Not exactly. I'm Inspector Carter of the Ministry of Education. 
I've come to talk to you about Tommy." 

"Tommy's a good boy," said the old man firmly. "There's nothing 
wrong with Tommy." 

"Not yet," admitted the inspector. "But if things go on as they have 
been there will be a great deal wrong with him before he grows up." He 
leaned forward on his knees. "Mr Prentice, you know, of course, that 
for fifty years now it has been a criminal offence to interfere with the 
functions of the schools?" 

"I've heard of it," admitted the old man casually. "I never did see 
any reason for it. It seems unnatural to me." 



THE MORON 



69 



"I'll tell you the reason," said Carter patiently. "Education is now a 
science. We have carefully selected and arranged all necessary facts and 
information so that the young mind can readily assimilate them. We 
work on a strict schedule and we have eliminated doubt. Our teaching 
is the truth. All that any child or adult needs to know is incorporated 
in our curriculum. We cannot tolerate unskilled interference with our 
duties." 

He leaned back as tobacco smoke swirled towards him. 

"Not that that is any hardship to the average parent, you understand. 
Even a hundred years ago people were only too willing to rid themselves 
of an unpleasant task. The schools then did more than just instill the 
rudiments of education with their meals, medical services and general 
welfare. But that is beside the point." He paused. "To put it briefly, 
Mr Prentice, you must stop giving Tommy false education." 

"Me?" 

"You." 

"Now wait a minute," snapped the old man. "I've never told Tommy 
a lie in all his life." 

"No?" Carter shrugged. "Did you tell him that we first reached 
Mercury in nineteen ninety-eight?" 

"I did, and it's true. Boris Stazingroph reached Mercury that year. 
I remember it well." 

"That," said Carter calmly, "is a lie." He raised his hand against 
the other's protest. "Let us be reasonable, Mr Prentice. If it were the 
truth then it would be in the history books." He reached into his pocket 
and drew out the teaching schedule. "See? Here is every date in essential history. No mention is made of nineteen ninety-eight. Doesn't 
that prove that your statement is a mischevious untruth?" 

"No," snapped the old man. "It only means that you've altered 
history to suit yourselves." 

"Not altered, Mr Prentice," said Carter quickly. "Edited. There 
is quite a difference." 

"Not to me there isn't," snorted the old man. "When you try to tell 
me that things which I know happened never did, then that is alteration. 
As a school inspector you should be ashamed of yourself for teaching 
such rubbish." 

Carter sighed. The old fool was going to prove stubborn. It was 
strange how the old still clung to the outworn things of the past. He 
looked at the old man. Browbeating alone would be useless.. Browbeating coupled with explanations might just possibly work. Carter 
fought down his instinctive anger and leaned forward in his chair. 



70 



NEBULA 



"You have made a statement which you cannot possibly prove," he 
said gently. "Not unless you are a certified historian with access to the 
restricted documents. In such a case you would be allowed to communicate such information only to other historians. You could never 
prove yourself right and history books wrong." 

"That doesn't make me a liar," grumbled the old man. 

"It makes you the worst of liars," snapped Carter. "It makes you a 
fanatic who is unable to grasp the truth. Every schoolchild will deride 
you for being so stupid as not to know essential history." 

"The history you and those like you have selected for them to learn," 
reminded the old man. "What was wrong with Boris Stazingroph being 
the first to reach Mercury? Couldn't you fit him into one of your stupid 
mnemonics?" 

"The mnemonics are the greatest aid to learning yet discovered, said 
Carter. "The rhymes enable every child to absorb all revelant data." 

"Poppycock!" said the old man. "We never had such things when 
I was at school and we learned well enough." 

"Did you?" Carter felt it increasingly difficult to control his anger. 
"In your time a child attended elementary school for eleven years. In 
that time they learned to read and write, to do simple mathematics and 
acquire a smattering of general knowledge. None of that general knowledge was of the slightest use to them after leaving school. Even with 
eleven years tuition many of them left school unable to read or write. 
That, to me, is a clear condemnation of the teaching system then used." 

"The percentage was low," protested the old man. "There will 
always be a few who are unable to learn." 

"I disagree," snapped Carter, "and I can quote figures to prove it. 
But let us go on. Some children went to higher schools. Some even 
went to Universities. Many men and women had a total of twenty-four 
years of education before being ready to enter the world of business. 
Twenty-four years, Mr Prentice! A third of a lifetime. Do you still 
claim that the systems then in use were efficient?" 

"They were doctors and scientists," protested the old man. "They 
had to learn a specialised trade." 

"Perhaps, but need they have taken so long to learn it?" Carter 
smiled, well aware that he had made his point. One day, perhaps, 
when things had settled, it would be possible to look back on that terrible 
waste of potential without feeling anger, but it was still too recent for 
any intelligent man to fee! anything but angry frustration at the stupidity 
of the past. 

"You spoke of doctors," Carter said. "They had to learn Latin, 



THE MORON 



71 



why? They had to learn a mass of irrelevant information about things 
which could not possibly concern them, why? It took six years to train 
a man to extract teeth. It took seven years to train a man to perform 
the most intricate operation. If a man could learn so much extra in that 
single year then isn't it obvious something was wrong?" 

"Doctors were taught Latin so as to make them international," said 
the old man weakly. "Dentists had to know about heart conditions and 
things like that." 

"Why?" said Carter. "'A dentist attends to teeth, nothing more. 
If he works in collaboration with an expert on anaesthesia there is no need 
for him to know more than the essentials of his trade. Specialisation, 
Mr Prentice. We now train a dentist in eighteen months, a doctor in 
four years, an expert on anaesthesia in one." 

"Perhaps," said the old man doggedly. "But the history books still 

lie." 

"They do hot lie," shouted Carter. "They contain all the essential 
truth a child needs to know. We have cut away the rubbish which 
cluttered up our educational system. All the tedious lists of Kings and 
Statesmen. All the wars and conquests and battles. We have eliminated 
old boundaries which no longer exist. The past is dead, Mr Prentice, 
why should we bother ourselves to learn of it?" He leaned forward and 
held out his teaching schedule. 

"This is the truth, all of it. If a thing is not in this book then that 
thing does not exist. It is a lie! We want no part of it. Tommy will 
learn all he needs to know from this book. Later, when he has decided 
what he wants to be, he can acquire more education. He can spend four 
years in a hospital and learn to become a doctor. He can spend two 
years in a laboratory and learn chemistry; one year to become an elementary teacher; three years to obtain his degree in higher electronics and 
atomic theory. He will start his business life as a young man Mr 
Prentice, not one with most of his youth and a third of his life wasted 
before he begins." 

"Standardisation." said the old man sickly. "You are turning out 
minds like you would turn out motor cars. They are all the same. They 
are taught the same things. There is no room for argument or discussion 
or separate viewpoints." 

"Exactly." Carter smiled as he realised that the old man had 
grasped the underlying principle. He lifted his teaching schedule as a 
different man in a different age would have lifted his bible. 

"Teaching stripped down, simplified, denuded of unessentials. A 
total of fifty-three dates in history. Twenty books which constitute the 



72 



NEBULA 



world's classics. Five symphonies; three operas; three ballets; eight 
plays; four poems; one religion; three dances, one atomic theory; one 
political party; seven inventors." He paused for breath and, when 
Carter spoke again, it was in a calmer tone of voice. 

"Can't you understand, Mr Prentice? We don't want Tommy to 
grow up a freak. How will he feel if he has no mutual topic of conversation? What will his friends think of him if he pretends to knowledge they do not and cannot have? As things are everyone is equally 
at home on every subject. They know all there is to know about them 
and there is no room for argument. It makes for friendliness and understanding." 

"It makes for morons," said the old man disgustedly. "You and 
your education! All you've done is to write off most of history and 
nearly all of everything else. You haven't raised the standards of education at all. All you've done is to eliminate the things worth knowing 
so that the dumbest moron can call himself equal to the highest intelligence. I want something better than that for Tommy." 

"Better?" Carter shrugged. "For an old man, Mr Prentice you 
have a short memory. "Is a freak 'better'? Is a self-styled highbrow 
'better'? Do you want Tommy to grow up to be a normal, well integrated individual or a fanatical fool despised by everybody? People do 
not like those who think themselves above the rest, Mr Prentice. They 
will call Tommy a liar and he'll be held in contempt because of it. Is 
that what you want?" 

"No." 

"Then why teach him untruths?" 

"They aren't untruths. I keep telling you that I know what 
happened. It is no lie. It's you that are lying." 

"Please." Carter forced himself to remain calm. "When you talk 
like that you make me doubt your sanity. Are you telling me that you 
are right and that the rest of us are wrong?" 

"I didn't say that." 

"You inferred it. If everyone denies that Mercury was reached in 
nineteen ninety-eight, and you insist that it was, then who is right? 
Remember, we can prove what we say by the history books. What proof 
have you?" 

"None. But it happened, I know it did." 

"Exactly, none," said Carter triumphantly. "You can't prove your 
statement but we can prove ours. So you are wrong, aren't you? You 
must be wrong." 

"You are twisting my words," said the old man doggedly. "I know 



THE MORON 



what happened." 

"You are an old man," said Carter brutally. "You are getting 
senile. In fact I think that the Courts would agree that you are too old 
to be a capable guardian to a young boy. Perhaps Tommy should 
reside at school as a boarder." 

"No." The old man looked pleadingly at the inspector. "You 
can't take him away from me. You wouldn't do that, would you?" 

"Why not? You are obviously hurting his mind with your idle 
fantasies. You will make him dissatisfied and discontent. He'll be 
quarrelsome and unhappy. In the end he will doubt the truth of the 
rest of his teaching. He may even believe that the World State hasn't 
existed since the beginning of history. Do you want to arouse nationalism and internecine strife again?" 

"No," said the old man. "I wouldn't want to do that." 

"Very well then." Carter looked shrewdly at the old man. "When 
did we first reach Mercury?" 

"Nineteen hundred and . . •" The old man caught himself just in 
time. "I don't remember." 

"Are you sure? Wasn't it in nineteen ninety-eight?" 

"I don't remember." 

"I see. What if Tommy should ask you again? What if he should 
ask you other questions?" 

"I don't know." The old man stared at his hands. "Are you going 
to take Tommy away from me?" 

"Perhaps. Answer my question." 

"I'd tell him to ask his teacher." 

"Does the teacher know best?" 

"Always. Are you going to take him away?" 

"No." Carter rose with a smile of triumph. "Not unless you forget 
what I told you. If I find that you have been interfering again then I 
won't hesitate." He stepped towards the door. "Good evening, Mr 
Prentice. Think over what I have said." 

The inspector was smiling as he left the apartment and walked 
down the stairs. It was good to be alive in such a well ordered world. 
It was good to be intelligent and the equal to anyone he might meet. It 
was wonderful to have power and to be able to use it as it should be 
used — to protect the young children from the hates and fears of their 
elders. His smile grew broader as he thought about it. 

Inspector Carter was always smiling but there was nothing strange 
about that. It was just that he was always happy. 

A moron is a happy man. JOHN SEABR1GHT 




wiii'i the aliens — the aliens, however, had a new approach 
Illustrated by Alan Hunter 

The alien spaceship was sighted long before it crossed Pluto's orbit, 
while it was still a silver pinpoint in the black void revealed by the 
telescopes. It was travelling at incredible speed, swinging through a Jong 
curve that would eventually bring it well within the solar system. 

The year was 1990. Man had pushed his frontiers out from Earth 
in tiny, manned rocketships. The lunar base was developing fast; Mars 
had at last revealed that the canals did not really exist; and a lonely 
outpost on Titan, largest of Saturn's moons, marked the furthest reach 
of Man's domination ... as yet. 
74 



FRONTIER ENCOUNTER 



75 



On Earth, the United Nations Organization had finally achieved a 
balance of power— not world government, but a compromise, with each 
nation agreeing to pool certain resources. Since the brief holocaust of 
atomic warfare in 1960, the governments of both east and west had 
realized the futility of trying to persuade other races to their way of life. 

And so, when news of the alien ship was telecast, the peoples of 
the Earth looked to the Security Council for guidance. But in that 
towering structure of steel and glass on New York's waterfront, there 
was only fear and wonder, a frozen helplessness to grapple with the 
greatest problem mankind had ever faced. 

From another star system, an alien science had flung a ship across 
the void of space — and two different civilizations were about to make 
contact. The big question mark was : would the aliens prove friendly, 
or hostile? And if friendly, what sort of communication was possible? 

Endless discussions took place while the silver ship grew large in 
the telescopes. The military were all for destroying the alien ship before 
it could bring others of its kind; social scientists welcomed the opportunity to exchange knowledge with another civilization; between the two 
viewpoints, the Security Council swung like a pendulum . . . while time 
grew short and the peoples of Earth anxious. 

It was decided that an attempt at communication must be madewhile remote-controlled rockets with atomic warheads stood by in case 
of need. And, of course, contact must be made as far from Earth as 
possible. A direct ship-to-ship approach had insuperable difficulties; 
a joint landing on one of the outer planets or their satellites was 
indicated — the obvious choice was Titan. 

Titan, that distant world of frozen rock, where a handful of Earthmen struggled to establish a colony . . . 

"Johnny!" Olive Paton's voice rose to a shrill note. "You can't 
attend the conference looking like that. Comb your hair — change into 
something more formal— and wear a starched collar for once. This is 
important, maybe your big chance, and appearances do count." 

Johnny Paton glanced in the mirror. 

"Guess you're right, dear," he said easily, "but there's no time now. 
I'm due at Lucas's office ... see you later." 

He slipped out of the square prefab before his wife could continue 
her criticism of his personal appearance; not that he minded — after five 
years of marriage, he was well-used to her fault-finding — but he did not 



76 



NEBULA 



like to hurt her feelings and was constitutionally unfitted to bother about 
his dress. 

He shambled along the compressed-rock avenue of the residential 
section like a great shaggy bear, his uncombed hair resembling a ball 
of rag-wool, his tweed jacket hanging casually from stooped shoulders. 
His eyes, except when he concentrated on some problem of interest to 
him, were inclined to take on a vacant expression and he walked with 
an air of preoccupation. 

Life, for Johnny Paton, was largely a matter of observing other 
people; although not essentially lazy, he was easy-going to the point of 
not bothering to exert himself. It was a habit which irritated his wife, 
who admired the quality of commercial enterprise more than any other 
in a man. 

There were times when Johnny wondered why Olive had married 
him at all — certainly the atmosphere of romantic love had long since 
disappeared from their life. 

Crossing the square before Administration, where Lucas's office was 
located, he looked beyond the transparent wall enclosing the colony, to 
the rugged terrain of Titan. A frozen ice-field stretched bleakly to the 
horizon, with here and there the sunlit surface of a crag of rock illuminating the dark shadows. And, hanging in the deep blue sky, Saturn 
majestic and breath-takingly beautiful, the knife-edge of the rings all 
aglitter. 

No matter how long he stayed on Titan, Johnny knew he would 
never get used to that sight ... but now his gaze searched for a silver 
light in the sky, a light that was not a star although it had come from 
the stars. 

He found the alien ship. It was nearer, much nearer. The thought 
quickened his step and he entered Admin with something like eagerness 
showing on his face. Lucas's office door was open and the room 
crowded. 

The Director was saying : " so it's up to us. Earth has dropped 

the baby in our lap. If we fail, the best that can happen is that we'll 
all lose our jobs. We don't need to think about the worst. We mustn't 
fail!" 

There was silence. Johnny looked at the faces around him and 
knew that words were being marshalled, questions formulated, suggestions crystallized. This encounter with an alien civilization was a problem without precedent. There was no formula, no routine to follow. 
It had to be thought out from fundamentals. 



FRONTIER ENCOUNTER 



77 



"Hit 'em with atomics — then examine anything that's left." 

These terse words came from Colonel Grant, military adviser to the 
colony. He was a tall, upright man with a neatly-brushed moustache, 
very fair of complexion — there was never any indecision about Grant, 
who had a natural tendency to act first and think afterwards. 

Lucas, the Director, smiled wryly. 

"Perhaps you'll get your chance later, Colonel. Orders are to uj 
a friendly approach first — anyway, the fact that the aliens have crossed 
interstellar space argues a science superior to our own. Maybe atomics 
won't affect them." 

"Language will be the difficulty," said Ted Raginsky. "It's asking 
too much to expect them to use a language based on Earth forms. I'd 
like to try communicating with pictures — a representational drawing of 
a spaceship should mean something to them. Or maybe abstract art 
will find some touchstone in their sensory equipment." 

"It's possible," Lucas conceded. "After all, our own language has 
developed from picture-signs. You're the artist, Ted — it's up to you." 

"First," said Norma Bush, the colony's mathematician, "we need 
to effect contact. I suggest a geometric symbol, say a triangle set within 
a circle. We could lay it out in neon tubes and flash a signal with 5 
basic rhythmic pattern — periods of light in harmonic progression, for 
example." 

"We'll try that," Lucas decided, and scribbled a note on his pad. 
"How about you, Johnny — any hope of hypnotizing them?" 
Paton shook his head doubtfully. 

"Inducing hypnosis is basically a matter of suggestion. We're 
up against the language barrier again." 

"Pity ... an alien under hypnosis would be useful for study pur. 
poses." 

Grant laughed. 

"I don't think Paton will be much use in this direction," he said. 
"He's all right for pulling teeth, but anything bigger and he's out of his 
depth!" 

Which was just what Olive might have said, Johnny thought. 

After the conference, Johnny Paton started aimlessly across th e 
square. The problem of what contribution he could make in dealing 
with the aliens was uppermost in his mind, and he was deaf and dumb 
to everything going on around him. 



78 



NEBULA 



The pressure of a hand on his arm brought him out of his reverie. 

"I called and called," Norma said, "but we didn't seem to be on 
the same plane of existence. I want you to help me lay out the signal, 
Johnny. Will you?" 

"Sure, Norma." 

He changed direction and walked with her to the store sheds. 
Physical action took his mind off his own problems and lightened his 
mood — or maybe it was simply because he was with Norma. 

"Don't let that brass-brained colonel get you down," she said. "I 
happen to know that Lucas is expecting you to make a major contribution to this business — you'll think of something, Johnny." 

"It's not so simple. Even now, hypnotism does not have full 
academic status. The practical applications, for dentistry and childbirth 
are accepted, of course; hypnoanalysis is being used more and more in 
mental hospitals— and ordinary people have discovered its beneficial 
qualities as a method of relaxation . . ." 

Johnny Paton's thoughts ran on and his words came easily. He 
couldn't talk to Olive like this; Norma was sympathetic to his problems 
and that made all the difference. 

A strange girl. Norma, tall and bony — was that why she was still 
unmarried, he wondered? — a girl for whom mathematics was the primary 
language. She had a homely face and awkward gait, but her voice was 
soft, seeming to share in his thoughts. It was impossible not to like her. 

"There are all sorts of odd phenomena connected with the hypnotic 
state," Johnny said, "most of them unexplored. Time distortion is just 
one. Our sense of time is a subjective thing and, under hypnosis, can 
be varied. There is the case of a girl who picked and counted, 'in her 
mind'. 862 cotton bolls, carefully selecting each one and occasionally 
looking beneath the leaves to make sure she had not missed any— all in 
three seconds of actual time measured by the observer!" 

"In another instance, a professional violinist used this 'special time' 
while in a self-induced trance, to practise and review long pieces of 
music. She found that her memory improved strikingly and her technical performance was better." 

"It seems to be general with this type of phenomenon, that the 
subject experiences fully on all levels; by that, I mean you could expect 
to see and hear clearly, to feel the things you handle. The hallucinations 
are rich in detail. In one case, where a social problem was given to a 
subject in trance, she reported that she interviewed each of the persons 
concerned ! 



FRONTIER ENCOUNTER 



79 



"It's possible," Johnny concluded, "that I might be able to use the 
time distortion effect somehow. Assume we eventually arrive at communication with the aliens; obviously it would be a long drawn-out 
affair, with each side striving to grasp the basics of the other's language 
and way of life — then I'll place one of our people under hypnosis and 
suggest that time slows down. By this means, it should be possible to 
review all that has gone before almost simultaneously — again, I could 
pose a specific problem in dealing with the aliens and get an answer 
in a matter of seconds." 

"Sounds good," Norma said. "I'll volunteer as a subject once I've 
some data to work on. Math can be an awfully long process, and any 
technique for getting a quick result would be welcome. I think you've 
got something there, Johnny . . . now let's get this signal operating." 

They helped each other into spacesuits and passed through the airlock to the poisonous methane-and-ammonia atmosphere of Titan. 

Olive Paton said: "I hope you've prepared a plan to lay before 
Lucas, Johnny." 

Johnny swallowed a piece of vita-bread and washed it down with 
black coffee. He never felt his best over breakfast. 
"No, not yet," he mumbled. 

"Well, really!" Olive's voice grew sharper. "It's time you had, 
then. I don't want to spend the rest of my life in this hole. I only 
came because you were keen on it, and because I saw the chance for 
you to better your position. You might think of me sometimes ... if 
you can impress Lucas, you could step into a good job when we return 
to Earth." 

"I'm working on something," Johnny said half-heartedly. 

"You want to work on the Director — he can do you some good. 
The Colonel, now, he spends a lot of time in Lucas's office. He has a 
plan for dealing with this enemy spaceship " 

"We don't know that it's hostile," Johnny protested. 

"Hostile or not, he's prepared for action! I wish you were a bit 
more like him— I can't imagine Colonel Grant sitting down to breakfast 
unshaven. He's always smartly dressed. You're too lazy for anything . . . you might at least speak to me at breakfast instead of just 
sitting there. I don't see much of you as it is ! " 

Johnny Paton sighed, finished his coffee and left the prefab. Olive 
was right, he supposed, but that didn't make life any easier— he just 
wasn't her sort of person. 



80 



NEBULA 



During the night, the alien ship had reached Titan. It hung in the 
sky, half-a-mile above Norma's flashing sign, a metal sphere with no 
visible means of support. Five hundred yards in diameter, Johnny 
calculated, and no rocket tubes, no windows or ports, no external attachments. Just a plain metal sphere, bright and silvery in the sun. No 
sign of a crew, either. 

Outside Admin, Maclver was talking to Schultz, the colony's 
physicist. 

"Morning, Johnny," Maclver said. "We've been discussing our 
visitor. Schultz reckons they're studying us radiologically " 

"That is so," Schultz boomed. He was a heavy man with a guttural 
accent. "I say they keep themselves shut up for fear of an attack. 
Undoubtedly there is provision in the ship for visual observations, also 
for discharging energies -there will be moving panels that are now 
closed. So they have radiations and watch a screen in safety. 

Maclver grinned, 

"Quite the psychologist, isn't he, Johnny? But there's another 
point, too — while they stay shut up like a clam, just out of reach, we 
can't get at them. And they're above us, a superior position. If they 
stay that way, it could be bad for our morale." 

"The Colonel, he has an atomic weapon trained on the ship," Shultz 
stated. "Is foolish that. If he fire, what happens to us at such short 
range?" 

Johnny stared at the silver sphere and wondered how its inhabitants 
felt. Perhaps this was their first encounter with another race . . . 
"It's moving! 1 could swear " 

"Ja, ja!" Shultz exclaimed excitedly. "They are going to land.' 

Johnny started running for the store-sheds. Lucas was just ahead 
of him with Ted Raginsky. AH three scrambled into spacesuits and 
passed through the airlock. 

"Wonder what they'll look like?" Raginsky said over the inter-com 

The sphere came slowly down and a tripodal landing apparatus 
slid smoothly from its belly. As each leg settled on the ground and took 
the weight of the spaceship, they sank back into the metal hull, gradually 
easing that vast bulk to the rock surface. 

"Pneumatics," Lucas said. "We have one thing in common." 

Johnny walked right round the ship and rejoined the Director and 
Raginsky. 

"No change," he reported. "Seems they're not ready to open up 

yet." 



FRONTIER ENCOUNTER 



81 



Lucas turned and looked back at the group of inter-connected domes 
of the colony, and saw other space-suited figures coming towards the 
ship. He frowned slightly. 

"I suppose I should forbid so many people to come outside at once, 
but it seems pointless. If the aliens are hostile, we can't do much to 
protect ourselves anyway." 

They settled to wait for the aliens to show themselves. 

A couple of hours passed. Shultz had rigged radiation meters to 
test the ship's skin; Norma set up a handlamp that flashed to an arithmetical progression; Raginsky was alternately sketching and complaining how difficult his job was in a spacesuit; someone else was taking 
photographs. 

Then three metal panels slid silently back in the ship's hull, revealing transparent windows. The windows were high up so that the men 
outside could not see into the ship; no alien showed himself. 

"Direct observation now," Shultz commented. "Undoubtedly they 
arc losing their fear of us and will reveal themselves in due course." 

"We can't all hang about waiting for them," Lucas decided finally. 
"Our air cylinders won't last indefinitely and we must have someone 
here when they do make a move. The only thing for it is a rota. I'll 
stay, with Shultz and Miss Bush — the rest of you return to the colony. 
1 want you Johnny, with Raginsky and Maclver, to relieve us two hours 
from now." 

Johnny Paton made for the observatory dome, stripped off his 
spacesuit in the air-lock and climbed the stairs. Quite a crowd had 
gathered there, taking it in turns to look at the alien spaceship through 
a small telescope. Duprez had continually to explain that it was not 
possible to depress the fifty-inch sufficiently to observe at ground level. 

Surprisingly, Olive was there, talking with Colonel Grant. Grant 
was assuring those about him that there was nothing to fear. 

"Everything's under control," he said loudly. "The first sign of 
any danger and I'll blow them clean off Titan!" 

Johnny found an empty chair and sat down. He studied his watch; 
another ninety minutes before he went outside again. 

Ted Raginsky yelled: "Something's happening. There's a hatch 
opening — they're coming out!" 

Johnny swung round, startled, and saw that a metal panel had 
opened low down in the hull of the alien ship, revealing a brightly-lit 



82 



NEBULA 



interior. He hastened in the direction of the ship with Maclver and 
Raginsky. 

All three were nervous, excited. They were unarmed and about 
to face the unknown ... did the aliens feel as bad, Johnny wondered? 
The final seconds dragged relentlessly, then, from the hatchway, came 
three strange figures. 

Each was a metal sphere, about a yard in diameter, with an inset 
of transparent glass; from behind the glass, three circular eyes looked 
out. They moved on tripodal, jointed legs with an unsteady gait. 

Maclver said: "I suppose we should have guessed they'd need 
spacesuits, too— after all, Titan is no more their world than it is ours. 
He paused, staring. "They seem to be having difficulty in adjusting 
to the new gravity." 

It was some minutes before the aliens mastered their difficulties, 
then they inspected the various items of equipment Shultz had left 
behind. Raginsky tried to interest them in one of his drawings; and 
was ignored after a cursory examination of his work. 

The aliens made no sound as they moved about, and showed little 
desire to communicate with the Earthmen. Instead, a shallow truck 
which moved on ball-bearings, was brought from the ship and Shultz's 
instruments loaded on to it— then truck and aliens disappeared into the 
spaceship and the hatchway closed. 

"Now," said Maclver thoughtfully, "did they take that stuff because 
they thought it might represent a danger? Or did they remove it to 
study at their leisure?" 

Johnny called up Shultz on the intercom and told him what had 
happened. The physicist sounded annoyed, then became interested. 

"You think, maybe, we have discovered something in common, 
Johnny? A basic technology?" 

"1 wouldn't know," Johnny answered. 

Lucas came out to discuss the situation with Maclver. The 
psychologist said: 

"I don't like a feeling I have, that we're looking on this encounter 
from the wrong angle. ,We — and by 'we' I mean all members of the 
human race— have a tendency to consider ourselves the lords of creation, 
to regard other forms of life as below ourselves in intelligence. It's 
dangerous to overlook the fact that we have only got as far as interplanetary tarvel, while the aliens have crossed the unimaginable gulf 
between the stars. That could mean they are used to dealing with other 
races than their own, while we are not." 



FRONTIER ENCOUNTER 



83 



"In that case," Luca.s said quietly, "our ultimate course of action 
may rest with the Colonel." 

Norma had workshops build her a simple abacus, an oblong frame 
with wires stretched across it and beads to move along the wires. She 
carried this to the spaceship and waited for the aliens to come out. 

Shultz and an assistant were carrying out tests on the metal hull, 
completely ignored by those inside. 

"This is something quite new," Shultz said. "I suspect they are 
able to control the atomic structure of metals to obtain quite remarkable 
qualities. If we ever learn how they do it, the process will revolutionize 
industry." 

Norma saw three eyes watching from a window high up in the ship. 
She began to move the beads on her abacus, performing simple arithmetic sums; she worked slowly, methodically repeating her calculations 
and, all the while, looking up at the high windows. 

Presently, a single alien came through the airlock, hauling a truck 
behind him; on it were Shultz's instruments, and something else — something alien. Roughly spherical in shape and about a foot in diameter, 
it was constructed of glowing wires about a compact, central unit of 
metal cylinders. 

The alien left the truck and moved toward the abacus. Norma 
stood to one side and waited. She saw an extra "arm" appear from 
the metal sphere, equipped with pincers. Rapidly, the alien moved the 
beads, copying exactly each calculation she had made. Then the alien 
revolved about on his tripodal legs and vanished into the ship. 

Norma looked at the physicist, and sighed. 

"Now, what does that mean?" she murmured. "Do they really 
understand the basis of our mathematics? Or was he simply imitating 
my actions?" 

Shultz didn't answer. He stared at his instruments with a puzzled 
frown. 

"Something odd here, and this " He prodded cautiously at the 

ball of glowing wires. "What is this? I must get these things to the 
laboratory at once and perform tests." 

He set the truck in motion and found that it moved effortlessly. 
Surprised, he stopped the truck and started it again, pushing it this way 
and that with the pressure of his fingers; it responded perfectly. 

Incredible, Shultz thought — and not entirely due to the low gravity 
Somehow, they had reduced friction to a minimum . . . 



84 



NEBULA 



Lucas turned from the window as the door of his office opened. 

"Sit down, Colonel," he said. "I have decided to make a demonstration of military force," 

Colonel Grant looked pleased. He seated himself across the desk 
from the Director, stiff as a ram-rod with his hands resting precisely 
one on each knee. 

"I'm under your orders," he answered formally. 

Lucas smiled wanly, nodding. 

"Quite so, Colonel — and I want it clearly understood that the action 
I propose is not in the nature of an attack. I simply want a demontration of our striking force so that I can study the reaction, if any, of 
our visitors." 

"That is understood." 

The Director cut the end of a cigar and spiked it; he applied a 
match slowly, blowing out scented blue smoke. 

"I'm in a difficult position," he remarked casually. "All of us here 
are concerned with this unique encounter . . . but the responsibility for 
failure or success is mine alone. It is too much responsibility for one 
man." 

He paused and, when he continued, seemed to be talking more to 
himself than to Grant. 

"My own inclination is to treat the aliens as friendly and do all 
in my means to further communication between our two races. Certainly, they have shown no sign of hostile intent, as yet. However, the 
possibility of war, no matter how remote, must be assumed . , " 

"We, here, are expendable. In fact, I doubt if we could make any 
effective defence of this colony if the aliens chose to attack us. Remember, their ship has come from the stars— and that presupposes a science 
in advance of our own. It comes to this, then; that we must learn as 
much as we can of the aliens' armament and transmit that information 
to Earth. You are following my argument, Colonel?" 

"Yes, but I still think we ought to blast them first and " 

" and throw away the chance of scientific advancement through 

contact with another race? No, Colonel, I can't agree to that. Although 
we are but a handful of men remote from Earth, and this ship is but 
one ship, the significance of this encounter is bigger than anything else 
that's happened in the history of Man." 

Lucas drew on his cigar. He drummed on the desk with his 
fingers. Then he rose and paced the room. 

"We must do all we can to promote a friendly relationship. Playing 



FRONTIER ENCOUNTER 



85 



a double role, we must also act as Intelligence agents for Earth. It is 
a sobering throught, that this one ship may be able to destroy Earth . . . 
it may be, we don't know. That is why there must be no possible 
misunderstanding of our intent. I propose, therefore, that you shoot 
a target ship into space and annihilate it by remote-controlled atomic 
weapon, at a safe distance from Titan, of course." 
"I'll arrange the demonstration at once." 

"Good! That's settled then — I hope I didn't take you away from 
anything important, Colonel?" 

Grant looked the Director straight in the eyes. 
"No, nothing important," he replied calmly. 



Olive Paton tired of waiting for the Colonel to return and walked 
back to the prefab she shared with her husband. Johnny's never going 
to get anywhere, she thought, he's no use to me — I'm sick of him! 

Her first husband had made promises he couldn't keep, had no 
intention of keeping. Her life had been one long series of frustrations, 
but she never lost her ideal. She knew what she wanted of life. She 
wanted to be at the top, hostess to the elite of society. When Alan had 
been killed in an accident, she'd looked round for another passport to 
the things she wanted. 

Johnny Paton had seemed a good bet at the time. He was still 
young, and rising in his career. He was easy-going, but that was all to 
the good — she would supply the driving force and Johnny would climb 
rapidly. That's how it had seemed to her then . . . now she was forced 
to admit that Johnny Paton couldn't be driven. She had tried and 
failed, and was ready to discard him. 

The Colonel wouldn't need driving. He had his eye on the top 
of the ladder and plenty of initiative. All she had to do was attach 
herself like a limpet and let him carry her along. But she had to be 
careful; society disapproved of women who openly flaunted the convention of marriage. She had to make the Colonel commit himself 
before she finally broke with Johnny. 

She sighed; it would be good to get away from Titan! She was 
sick of breathing a chemical atmosphere, of living under a glass dome 
and looking at ice-fields. She wanted to live in a real house again, 
not this utility prefab with its maddening restrictions on space. She 
wanted bright lights and parties — and news of social events that was 
not months out of date. 



86 



NEBULA 



Yes, Olive Paton decided, it was certainly time she came to art 
arrangement with the Colonel. 

"Johnny!" Shultz sounded excited as he gripped Johnny Paton's 
arm. "Come to the lab and see what I've got. Everyone else is too 
damn busy and I must show somebody." 

"Sure, I'll come," Johnny agreed amicably. 

He wasn't really interested but it was too much bother to invent 
an excuse for not going with the physicist. Anyway, he had nothing 
else to do. 

Shultz had a test piece rigged up on his bench. Johnny didn't 
know what was supposed to happen, but it was obvious that the physicist 
had arranged two groups of apparently similar equipment for purposes 
of comparison. 

"These instruments were designed to measure small amounts of 
radiation of different types," Shultz explained breathlessly. "They are 
mass-produced and tested to very fine limits. It is inconceivable that 
there should be any detectable difference in performance. Watch 
closely, please." 

He connected a main switch and adjusted a dial. Immediately the 
group of instruments on the left began to register, while those on the 
right did not 

"I have released the smallest amount of radiation I can control. 
Johnny. Ordinarily, I would not be able to measure such an amount. 
Ordinarily, I repeat — with the instruments on the right . . ." 

He turned the dial a little more. The instruments on the left 
reacted promptly, while the others barely flickered to life. 

"This second set of instruments, on the left, are those which were 
taken aboard the alien ship and then returned." 

Again, he moved the dial, and this time both groups registered the 
same degree of radioactivity. 

"We have now reached the normal minimum level at which these 
instruments operate," Shultz said quietly. "Do you understand what 
that means?" 

"The aliens have changed them in some way." 

"True, though an understatement. They have taken my instruments — which are an end product of advanced technology, remember — 
and subtly altered the mechanism so as to extend their range beyond 
anything Terran scientists have been able to achieve! And this with 
a science which must be alien to them . . ." 



FRONTIER ENCOUNTER 



87 



Johnny was silent, thinking over the implications of Schultz's discovery - . His gaze wandered to the sphere of glowing wires that had 
come from the ship. 

"How about that?" he asked, "Have you found out what it is?" 

Shultz shrugged. 

"It has its own source of energy. It radiates. It is, I suspect, 
an application of inter-atomic energies, totally different in kind from 
our own crude releases of nuclear power. What its use is. I have no 
idea." 

"Looks like they understand our science, but we can't understand 
theirs," Johnny said. "And that's going to disturb the vanity of some 
folk back on Earth!" 

"Everything's ready, Mr. Lucas." 

Colonel Grant sat at the control board of the rocket firing station, 
his hand poised above shiny metal keys. He waited for the word of 
command. 

The Director of the Titan colony stared through powerful binoculars 
at the alien spaceship and the small group of figures beside it. Maclver 
he recognised, and Ted Raginsky, among the spherically-suited aliens. 

"Carry on, Colonel," he said. 

Grant pressed down a firing key— and, from a point hidden by 
towering blue ice-walls, a slender rocket roared into the sky. Within 
seconds, it was but a tell-tale flame heading out to space. 

Lucas held his breath. It was a critical moment. If the aliens 
misunderstood . . . 

The Colonel pressed a second key and the atomic weapon was 
launched, following the target ship into the void. It would home on 
the target with radio-precision, its greater velocity shortening the gap 
until contact was made. 

"How long?" Lucas asked. 

"Eighteen minutes." 

The aliens. Lucas noted, had returned to their ship. He used the 
intercom to call Maclver. 
"Well?" he said. 

"Nothing much," the psychologist answered. "They saw our two 
rockets go up and watched them, then went into the ship. That's all." 

"All right. Return to the colony— just in case." 

Lucas looked at his watch. These were going to be the longest 
eighteen minutes of his life. What reaction would the aliens show, he 



83 



NEBULA 



wondered? He kept his binoculars on the spaceship; Maclver and 
Raginsky had disappeared and the ice-field was deserted. He began 
to imagine what might happen if the aliens failed to appreciate that 
this was simply a demonstration . . . and beads of sweat formed on his 
forehead and the palms of his hands. 

"Colonel," he said, "no matter what the aliens do, you will not take 
any action against them except at my direct command." 

"Very good, sir," Grant replied. There was just a hint of contempt 
in his voice, a soldier's natural suspicion of any non-military superior. 

The minutes passed with leaden slowness; then, far out in space, 
a brief and intense light flared and died away. 

Lucas let the air from his lungs in a noisy grunt. 

"They'll have instruments to tell them what that means, I imagine." 

The Colonel had his glasses focussed on the ship now. 

"Something's happening out there," he said sharply. 

A conical structure rose from the top of the spaceship; it revolved 
slowly, and sunlight flashed on a metal surface. Nothing else appeared 
to happen and, presently, the whole structure was retracted into the ship. 

Lucas contacted Shultz over the intercom. 

"What did you make of that, professor?" 

"Nothing was recorded on any of my instruments," the physicist 
said. "I assume they broadcast energy-waves of a kind unknown to 
our science. Sorry I can't be more helpful." 

After that, at regular intervals, the metal cone was elevated above 
the alien ship; it revolved and was lowered. This occurred for some 
hours; then Lucas received an urgent call to attend the observatory. 

Duprez was seated in a swivel chair immediately below the eyepiece of his fifty-inch telescope and he was in a state of excitement. 

"M'sieur Lucas, I have made a great discovery! Look, please, 
for yourself." 

He slid from his seat to let the Director take his place. Saturn 
was large in the view and off-centre; Lucas saw what he took to be one 
of the smaller satellites — and was puzzled by its movement. 

"You are watching Hidalgo, an asteroid whose orbit is a long 
ellipse about the sun," Duprez informed him. "It is near aphelion, 
which brings it close to the orbit of Saturn. You observe its movement?" 

"Yes, but what significance has it?" 
Duprez's eyes shone. 

"You are watching such an event no man has seen before, m'sieur— 



FRONTIER ENCOUNTER 



89 



an interference with celestial mechanics! Hidalgo has left its orbit 
and is moving towards Titan. Some force has been applied to the 
asteroid, to shift it from the natural course it has pursued for counties* 
centuries . . . and Titan is about to inherit a moon of its own!" 

Lucas knew then that the aliens had reacted with a demonstration 
of their own, that mankind was totally outclassed by these beings from 
the stars. 

The supply rocket from Earth arrived on schedule; and the only 
deviation from normal routine on account of the situation on Titan was 
the inclusion of two passengers. 

Lucas met them in his office. Hetherington, the UN observer, 
had pale white hands which contrasted strangely with his ruddy cheeks; 
he also had the habit of keeping his eyes lowered, as if he could not 
bear the direct gaze of another person. 

"Well, Mr. Hetherington," Lucas said, "I can't pretend this development is unexpected. I suppose you are replacing me in command here?" 

"No, no!" Hetherington appeared horrified by the suggestion. 
"Certainly not — it is just that the Security Council feel they should 
have a representative on the spot. I may, perhaps, tender advice from 
time to time, but you are in no way superseded by my arrival. The 
United Nations have complete confidence in your ability to handle any 
situation that might arise. Regard me as — er — a neutral observer." 

"1 see." Lucas smiled faintly; it seemed that no-one was rushing 
to lift the burden of responsibility from his shoulders. And he thought 
he knew why. If anything went wrong, he was to be the scapegoat . . . 

He turned, looking towards his second guest. 

Wayland was a sharp-featured man with very bright eyes and 
a name that was well-known to millions of Earth's televiewers. 

"You want a story, I suppose?" Lucas said. 

"Yep! Folk on Earth are getting tired of official handouts. 1 
don't imagine it's your fault, but somewhere between here and Earth, 
a lot of news is getting censored. I'm here on behalf of Tele-News 
and my reports will be broadcast driect to the public." 

Wayland paused, a hint of regret in his voice. 

"I can't use telecasting direct, of course — only sound radio. But 
I've a cine-camera and tape-recorder with me. I'll be putting over the 
full story when I return to Earth." 

Hetherington interposed : "It may not be politic to tell the public 
too much " 

"The public pays your salary and are damn well entitled to know 



90 



NEBULA 



what's going on," Wayland fired back. "I'm ready to respect Mr. 
Lucas's wishes if he wants a particular piece held back for a time . . . 
but that's as far as I'm prepared to go." 

The Director cleared his throat and avoided looking at Hethering
ton. 

"It may be as well to prepare the peoples of Earth for eventual 
contact with the aliens," he said. "I have no objection to your reporting 
the facts, Mr. Wayland — I have every objection to you presenting a 
distorted version of the truth for the sake of a story!" 

"Hell, people aren't interested in facts and figures — they want a 
full-blooded story. f want an interview with the aliens. I want to 
know what they look like and how they behave. I want to know what 
they eat and how their ship works. I want " 

"You want too much," Lucas said drily. "I'm serious now, facts 
only. I'll check your script before you broadcast and I'll cut out every 
adjective . . . anyway, t think you'll find the truth sufficiently disturbing." 

"Yeah?" Wayland gave the Director a sharp look. "I'd like to 
get busy right away. Can you spare someone to show me around?" 

Lucas thought quickly. 

"Difficult," he said, "we're so busy " He paused, reviewing 

names in his head. "Yes, of course, there's Johnny— Johnny Paton . . ." 

Grant was waiting for them when Johnny and Wayland returned 
from the ship. He moved in on the Tele-News man, like a hawk swooping on its quarry. 

"Wayland," the Colonel said, "I want to talk to you." 

"I'm listening." 

Grant looked sideways at Johnny, and waited; Johnny grinned and 
ambled away. 

"I understand you're broadcasting direct to Earth, your own story, 
uncensored. Is that true?" 

"Within limits," Wayland answered cautiously. "Lucas " 

"Lucas," the Colonel exploded, "is a fool, and a dangerous fool 
at that! This alien spaceship represents a menace to Earth. You've 
talked to Shultz' 1 " 

"Yes." 

Grant pointed up through the transparent dome of the colony. 

"And you see that? Titan has a moon! Shultz reckons they have 
a greater control of atomic power than we have— I don't understand 
it completely, but it seems they are able to control the binding energies 



FRONTIER ENCOUNTER 



91 



of atomic nuclei in a way we can't. It's simpler and more efficient. 
The results speak for themselves; they reduce friction between moving 
surfaces; they create new properties in metals; they move an asteroid 
out of its orbit . . . and Lucas just sits and looks on!" 

"What do you want me to do about it?" Wayland asked. 

"Tell people back on Earth what could happen if this ship were 
allowed to return home. Tell them what would happen if a whole fleet 
of alien ships descended on Earth. Tell them our only chance fosurvival is to destroy this one ship, now!" 

Wayland looked thoughtfully at the Colonel. 

"Does it occur to you that the aliens might be in constant communication with their home planet?" 

"That's a chance we have to take. With Lucas in command here, 
my hands are tied. But if the people of Earth can be roused to a sense 
of their danger, then perhaps I'll be allowed to strike before it's too late." 

"Do you really believe you can destroy this ship. Colonel?" 

Grant smiled grimly. 

"I'd have a damned good try!" he said. 

Wayland thought about it and shook his head. 

"No," he decided, "I'm betting on Lucas. He seems to know what 
he's doing, and if he's right " 

"If!" Grant turned his eyes upward and his palms outward in a 
gesture of hopelessness. "And if he's wrong — what then?" 

Wayland had no answer for that. 

Johnny Paton walked slowly back towards his prefab. Neither 
Norma nor Ted Raginsky had offered much hope for communicating 
with the aliens, and until a mutual basis for understanding was effected, 
he could do nothing to put his scheme into operation. It looked as if 
he would never get his opportunity. Even Maclver was doubtful of 
working out a psychology for them. 

"It's their three eyes," the doctor had said. "We can't comprehend 
what sort of visual field that opens up for them. Certainly, it will be 
radically different from our own -but just how different and in what 
way, I don't know. And we haven't seen them without their spacesuits 
yet — maybe they have other senses, different from anything we can 
imagine. Even if Schultz gets to the bottom of their physical sciences, 
we may be no nearer true understanding." 

Johnny sighed; the situation looked like dragging on until the alien 
ship departed . . . 



NEBULA 



He reached the front door of his prefab and found it open. That 
was unusual. So, too, was the disorder of the living room. 
"Olive?" he called. 

He could hear her moving in their bedroom, but she did not answer. 
He crossed to the door and pushed it open. His wife was packing; 
one suitcase stood ready and she was throwing things into another. 

Johnny said stupidly: "Where are you going?" 

Olive Paton looked at him briefly, not ceasing her hurried packing. 

"To Earth," she said; and added, seconds later, "with Colonel 
Grant." 

Johnny was silent. He could read nothing in her face and his own 
feelings were too mixed to permit of coherent speech. He said, with 
a struggle: 

"But how?" 

"The supply ship returns to Earth four hours from now. We'll 
be on it." 

She closed the lid of the case and snapped the fastenings, looped 
a strap about it, performing these operations with mechanical efficiency. 
She straightened up, facing him. 

"This is good-bye, Johnny." 

"Olive, wait " There ought to be something he could say, he 

thought desperately, but what? "Let's sit down and talk it over." 
She laughed hollowly. 

"Too late, Johnny ... I'm moving out. You're no good, a failure, 
and I don't want to waste my life. Maurice can give me what I want 
and I'm grabbing the chance while I'm still young." 

She picked up her suitcases and pushed past him. 

"Goodbye," she said, and was gone. 

"You're going to let him leave?" Wa viand asked incredulously. 

"I can't very well use force to keep him here," Lucas returned. 

"Why not? Till after the rocket's left, anyway. You're to command here, and the alien spaceship constitutes an emergency — Colonel 
Grant's action is practically mutiny!" 

The Director stood looking from his office window, through the 
curving dome of the colony to the tiny supply ship. He liked this 
business even less than Wayland. 

"He threatened to surrender his commission and return as a cilivian 
. . . and that would have placed me in an awkward position with certain 
VIP's back on Earth. No. it's better to let him go. Hetherington " 



FRONTIER ENCOUNTER 



93 



"Hetherington will jump at the chance to advise UN that you be 
removed from command," Wayland said. "At least, allow me to make 
a statement — Tele-News can be a potent force for swaying public opinion 
in your favour." 

"No!" Lucas's voice revealed gathering determination. "I won't 
be drawn into a political squabble. Grant and I represent differing 
viewpoints, and those viewpoints will be echoed on Earth. I believe 
he is wrong and that friendly relations with the aliens are possible, 
despite their obvious superiority — and that it is important not to be 
panicked into hostile action. I can't condemn the Colonel for his 
views; he is an honest man and bound to stand by his beliefs — that's 
why I am allowing him to return to Earth to put his case before the 
United Nations." 

He was silent a moment, smiling at the Tele-News man. 

"It will take time, anyway, for Grant to get things moving and bring 
a war fleet out here. I hope to prove his action unnecessary before 
then." 

Wayland snorted. 

"You're an idealist, Lucas! Grant is out for personal power and 
you'll be trampled in the mud. Your only chance is to stop him now. 
Sure, you can send in factual reports — but Grant will be on the spot, 
and that counts for more than the written word. He can tell any story 
he likes and you won't be there to defend yourself." 

"I'm not worried for myself," the Director said lightly. "My job 
is to ensure that no harm comes to the people of Earth from this alien 
visitation." 

Wayland said, doggedly : "You're wrong. Grant should be stopped 
before it's too late . . ." He switched tactics. "How about Paton?" 

Up and up, the rocket soared, its tail flame dwindling to a pin-point 
of light in the deep blue of the sky. Norma had no eyes for the Earthbound supply ship; she watched Johnny Paton and tried to read his 
feelings as he turned away. 

And it was incredibly difficult to read any feelings at all in his face. 
His eyes were calm, there were no tears, no sign of regret or guilt; not 
even a hint of relief. He moved slowly, carelessly, as if it were not his 
wife who had left him for another man. 

Norma wanted to say something helpful, but the only phrases that 
came to mind were awkward for her tongue. She smiled bleakly: it was 
impossible to be sympathetic in mathematical symbols, and words had 



94 



NEBULA 



never seemed real to her. 

You ought to be glad, Johnny, she thought — that woman wasn't 
worthy of you. Forget her! There are other women . . . there's me. I 
love you, Johnny, only you never seem to notice. I wish I could be 
brazen about it. I wish . . . 

But she couldn't speak first, she realised; she wasn't that sort of 
person. And Johnny wasn't likely to notice her. No man had, not the 
way she wanted. Her conversation was limited to math, her face too 
homely— a double handicap. 

She sighed; romance wasn't for her . . . 

Johnny said: "Hi, Norma." 

She smiled then. 

"Our visitors are building something outside their ship — coming to 
look at it?" 

"Sure," he said. 

They walked in silence to the airlock and put on spacesuits. Johnny 
never said a word about his wife — and he didn't look as if he would be 
seeking consolation elsewhere. Johnny was too easy-going to exert himself; he was content to let life slip by, a casual observer. In time, he 
would forget Olive and be content in his own company. 

Norma, with her unsatisfied desires, her loneliness, envied him his 
detachment. 

They reached the ship, which was now the scene of some activity. 
The aliens were out in force. Norma counted, two, four, eight, fourteen 
of them. They were constructing a chamber — or rather a double chamber, with the two compartments separated by a transparent wall. 

Maclver and Schultz were keeping an interested eye on this new 
development. 

"What's it going to be when it's finished?" Norma asked. 
Shultz shook his head. Mclver said: 

"I've got an idea . . . Lucas will want to know about this." He 
called the Director over the intercom, ending the conversation with, 
" and bring an engineer with you." 

Lucas came out with Fosdike, a stumpy man with thinning hair and 
blue eyes; he had been largely responsible for the design of the Titan 
colony. 

"Well, Maclver?" Lucas said. 

"Just watch, and you'll get the idea," the psychologist answered imperturbably. "If I'm right, they're almost finished." 

Fosdike grunted, scanning the building operation with a professional 

eye. 



FRONTIER ENCOUNTER 



95 



"More like half-finished, if you ask me," he said. 
"Exactly! Their half . . ," 

Norma became excited. "I see what you mean, doctor. They have 
built the shell of a building with two halves. One section is complete — 
well, near enough — even to an airlock. They'll pump in an air supply 
and equip it the way they want — the other half is for us. A meeting 
place without the drawback of spacesuits!" 

Lucas looked at the engineer. 

"Can you finish our half, Mr Fosdike?" 

"Sure, nothing easier — I'll set some men to work right away." 

"Good!" The Director paused. "But don't let anyone think our 
problems are over. We still have to find a method of communicating " 

"It occurs to me," Maclver said quietly, "that our friends may have 
ideas about that, too!" 

Hetherington kept his gaze on the floor as he spoke. 

"You know, Mr Lucas, it could have been a serious mistake to 
quarrel with Colonel Grant. If the aliens turn out to be hostile " 

"I did not quarrel with the Colonel," Lucas said emphatically. "We 
held different opinions and went our own ways, that's all — there is a 
difference. And our visitors show every indication, so far, of wishing 
to establish peaceful relations." 

"So far." Hetherington fluttered pale hands. "But with no adequate defence, no military officer ... my report can hardly suggest that 
you have handled the situation with due regard for the safety of those 
on Earth." 

"You — and your report — and your long-range, sit-on-the-fence 
bureaucrats — can go to hell!" Lucas said angrily, heading for the door. 
He stopped on his way out, turning, to add: "For your information, Mr 
Hetherington, it is most unlikely, in the event of hostilities, that either 
you or I will be called to account for Our actions. This colony will 
almost certainly cease to exist . . ." 

He slammed the door after him, and felt better immediately. Hetherington irrated him beyond measure with his pose of observer, his 
advice, his confidential reports to Earth. Lucas thought he would rather 
have been deposed altogether ... no, he didn't mean that. The situation 
on Titan was developing nicely and he wanted to see it through. 

Crossing to the airlock, he met Johnny Paton. One look was enough 
to decide that Johnny would let things slide unless he was taken in hand. 
The Director changed his plans on the spot. 



NEBULA 



"Johnny," he said. "I want you with me when I enter the Forum." 
Raginsky had coined this name for the building erected by the aliens. 
"Come along — Fosdike reports our section is complete." 

"Sure," Johnny said, without interest 

They dressed in spacesuits and left the colony, walking across the 
ice towards the Forum. Fosdike was standing by, with Ted Raginsky 
and Norma. Three aliens were already in their half of the building. 

Lucas viewed them with interest. Out of their space-suits, they 
looked somewhat like overgrown caterpillars, long and segmented, with 
six short legs and furry down. It was their colour that caught the eye, 
banishing any sensation of horror. Each alien form shimmered through 
a rainbow of colour, silver and blue and pink and breath-takingly beautiful. 

Norma said: "I watched one of them come out from his suit, like a 
spring uncoiling. He must have been wound up in a ball inside." 

"Let's go in," Raginsky said impatiently. "Those colours fascinate 
me— I've got to get to work with my paints." 

"Next time," Lucas told him. "Sorry, Ted, but I want Johnny to 
come with me. Johnny and Miss Bush." 

Raginsky turned away, disappointed, and Lucas went towards the 
airlock. Norma took Johnny's arm and pushed him forward. All three 
passed inside the Forum. It was warm, the air sterile; the room was 
small and equipped with three chairs facing the transparent wall beyond 
which the aliens were visible. 

It was somehow embarrassing to be stared at by a non-human with 
three eyes. 

Norma giggled. "Reckon they've never seen anything like us before. 
I feel practically naked without my spacesuit!" 

Just then, a mechanical voice filled the chamber: 

"Welcome, Earthmen, to the Galactic Union . . " 

Even Johnny was jolted from his lethargy. 

"They can't possibly speak English!" he said, denying the evidence 
of his own ears. 

The voice went on: 

"You will wish to know many things, among them how it is possible 
for us to speak to you with your own language. Our people have 
visited many planets throughout the galaxy and this problem is always 
our first concern. From long experience we have evolved a system. 
Ever since we landed we have been studying you and recording your 
speech, and this which you hear now is a mechanical translation. 



FRONTIER ENCOUNTER 



98 



NEBULA 



"We cannot, of course, speak your tongue. But we are intelligent 
and have great experience in communicating with other races. The 
machine we use is automatic; we feed in your speech and ours to a set 
pattern and an adaptation is made; the broadcast is also mechanical. 
You know for yourself that it works . . . 

"This ship is the vanguard of our expanding empire. In the years 
to come, other ships will visit you, bringing knowledge of scienti6c and 
artistic cultures of which you cannot dream. Have no fear for we mean 
you no harm; the Galactic Union has never molested another race. 

"We have much to offer and, in return, seek only information of 
your people and way of life. Our purpose is to unite all intelligent lifeforms, no matter of what kind, throughout the galaxy. Trade with other 
worlds will eventually come. You have everything to gain by joining 
the Union, nothing to lose. 

"At present, you appear to be below the cultural level of most races 
throughout the galaxy, but that need not alarm you. It is understandable 
in so young a people — and we will help you to advance to a higher level. 
We have a simple mechanical aid for this purpose, which will be demonstrated in due course. 

"In one hundred years from now, your way of life will have changed 
utterly. No longer will you be shut away in your tiny comer of the 
universe. You will have access to the ideas of races who evolved before 
your planet cooled, and beings whose form is totally unlike anything you 
may imagine, for we of the Union have only one quality in common — 
intelligence. We come from the central stars of the galaxy and our 
composite civilization is greater than that of any single race. Welcome, 
Earthmen, to the Galactic Union!" 

Lucas's eyes glistened. He would have given much to have Colonel 
Grant with him just then; but the Colonel was no longer important . . . 
when this news broke on Earth, there could be few who would throw 
away the chance of joining a galactic civilization. 

Norma dreamt of incredible new mathematics which would be 
opened up to her. 

Johnny thought of Olive, and was sorry for her. The Colonel wasn't 
going to be a big-shot now and she wouldn't get the things she wanted. 
He wondered if she would come back . . . 

The mechanical voice began again: 

"We come now to our method of teaching. If you find your consciousness slipping away, do not resist— there is nothing to fear. Listen 



FRONTIER ENCOUNTER 



99 



carefully. You are seated comfortably, relaxed, with your hands resting 
lightly on your knees. One hand feels lighter than the other, so much 
lighter that it seems to float in the air of its own accord . . . 

Johnny started violently. This was — hypnotism! Often he had 
used a similar technique to induce a trance — now he was the subject 
Lucas and Norma were responding, he noted, and let himself relax again. 

"I am going to count, slowly, and the higher I count, the more 
relaxed you will become. I am starting to count. One— two — three — 
four — five " 

He was sinking into sleep, floating away ... the voice droned on, 
changing subtly. Now it was no longer counting. Somewhere, a metronome was ticking, ticking . . 

"The metronome is slowing down — slowing down — slowing 
down " 

Time itself was slowing down. No longer was he conscious of an 
objective time. Personal, experienced time was ail that counted. He 
had all the time in the world to learn what it was the aliens had to teach 
him . . . 

Carefully graduated knowledge filtered into his mind. Step by step, 
information about the Galactic Union was presented; a background 
sketched in and the life of the aliens shown against it. Johnny began to 
comprehend the extent of the universe, the diversity of life-forms, the 
miracle of intelligence. 

Till now, mankind had been a child playing in a nursery, unaware 
of the adult world outside. Adolescence passed in the trance and maturity dawned. The maturity of the species . . . Man was about to take his 
place in the ultimate civilization. 

"You will remember everything you have learnt," the voice said. 
"Wake now." 

Johnny and Norma were alone in the observatory. It was night on 
Titan and the enveloping atmosphere was a rich darkness studded with a 
myriad lights. The stars alone shone with a new meaning . . . Man was 
not alone. 

The alien ship had gone, pushing out the frontiers, seeking other 
worlds and other races. 

They watched until the ship was a point of light lost among the stars, 
until they could not tell it from all the glittering gems that made up the 
universe. Other ships would come — and Earthmen would build their 
own starships and a-visiting. 

No longer would the stars seem cold and distant. They were lamps 



100 



NEBULA 



burning in the windows of friendly homes throughout a vast city, lamps 
to show where intelligent life existed. A new era had dawned for the 
peoples of Earth ... 

Johnny turned away, awed by bis new knowledge. On the morrow, 
the entire staff of the Titan colony would be returning to Earth, each with 
his appointed task in the new civilization. There was so much to do, so 
many things to be made ready for the coming of their friends. 

"They've changed everything," Norma said quietly. "We belong 
now . . ." 

"Yes, we belong," Johnny echoed, but his meaning was different. 
Leaving the observatory, he took her hand; and Norma's eyes shone as 
bright as any star. 

SYDNEY J. BOUNDS 



Universal . . . 

Is the word for India's only Digest magazine. 

Published entirely in English, "Digest Universal" contains 
40 pages of articles, news and reviews on a wide variety of 
subjects of lasting interest, particularly to a more thoughtful 
section of the public. 

Send cheque or postal order for 10/6 today to receive 
12 monthly issues of this thought-provoking magazine, mailed 
to you direct from India, to 

UNIVERSAL AGENCIES 

1, Kylepark Crescent, Uddingston, Lanarkshire, Scotland. 



New Hard-Cover Science-Fiction Reviewed by 
KENNETH F. SLATER 



The third novel from Charles 
Eric Maine is perhaps his best 
yet. Which is, of course, the way 
tt should be. However, CRISIS 
2000 (Hodder & Stoughton, 10/6) 
will not appeal to all readers, 
and I'd advise those who like 
Galactic epics to leave it alone. 
The scene is confined to the site 
of the Festival of Earth (circa 
2,000 A.D.) and is mainly concerned with the activities of a 
small group of characters. 
"Characters" is the right word, at 
that. There is Senator Drazin, a 
loud-mouthed gentleman who 
has invited any "living creatures 
anywhere else in this universe of 
ours" to attend and watch the 
Triumph of Man. Senator Drazin 
is one of the most shaken of the 
group when his offer is taken up. 
and a batch of beings land in the 
Festival grounds, erect an impassable energy wall, and start 
what may be an invasion! (The 
fact that all the beings look exactly like Drazin is just one more 
staggering fact . . .) 

Wayne, in charge of the Festival, calls for help, which arrives 
in the persons of Colonel Kyle 
(an offensive type — he believes in 
shooting a long time before you 
see the whites of their eyes) and 
Jon Dexter (Dex) of the F.B.I. 
Dex is not certain that Kyle is 
right, and does considerable 
fence-sitting throughout. Drazin 



is in favour of giving the aliens 
a chance to prove whether their 
intentions are honourable or not, 
but when after a warning the 
"Dupes" advance their fire-wall, 
causing a lot more damage to the 
Festival buildings, he is forced to 
give in to Kyle, who calls up an 
attack force — which is unsuccessful in doing anything but damaging itself. The story moves along 
quite rapidly, with some backgiound incidents (including a 
love-interest element) and does 
reach some quite high levels of 
tension. The climax of the releasing of an atomic bomb, the 
discovery of the truth about the 
aliens, the adventures of Dex and 
Dr. Farrow (a lady scientist) inside the fire-wall, are all excellent. However, I was not quite 
able to get along with the singlemindedness of the various folk. 
Dex was more interested in Dr. 
Farrow than anything else; Kyle 
wanted to blow 'em off the earth 
tc the exclusion of all other ideas; 
Drazin was of the open-armed 
welcome school, and in their 
lesser parts everyone else was 
equally one-tracked. Nevertheless, 
very readable. 

Also very readable is Chad 
Oliver's SHADOWS IN THE 
SUN (Max Reinhardt, 9/6). Paul 
Ellery is making a sociological 
survey of an American small 
town," Jefferson Springs, and 

101 



102 



NEBULA 



comes up with a list of coincidences. No one in the town 
had been there more than fifteen 
years. A Texan town, settled for 
132 years — in which every family 
had uprooted itself and gone 
away, no disasters, floods or epidemics to cause. The town's 
culture is typical. So typical that 
it forms the impossible "average." 
Those are the two main points 
which worry Paul, and make him 
unsettled . . . and then when he 
sees a dark globe settle close to 
an outlying farm, passengers descend, and the globe takes off, 
well, he knows he is up against 
something far from "average." 
The reader is then taken into a 
complex philosophical study of 
the gentle art of colonisation — if 
your populace is too great for 



your lands, should you take land 
by force? Really civilised human 
races don't do that — they infiltrate 
gently, assuming a veneer of the 
barbaric culture, and carrying on 
their own culture underneath. 
The "savages" are pushed out, 
gently but firmly aided on the 
way their own culture is going — 
into the big-city groups ! You perhaps gather from that just where 
Earth stands on Mr. Oliver's 
scale of reference and, yes, you 
are right. What Paul has discovered is an infiltration of civilised man into savage Earth. Just 
what Paul does about it, what his 
final decision is, I'll leave Mr. 
Oliver to tell you — for you really 
must read this one. 

In BEYOND THE BARRIERS 
OF SPACE AND TIME (Sidgwick & Jackson, 10/6) expert 
anthologist Judith Merril has 
attempted— very successfully — to 
select "s-f" stories which are outside the confines of the material 
world. A difficult task, but one 
not impossible, as this work 
shows. "The Wall Around the 
World," by Theodore Cogswell, 
deals with the seclusion and 
forced development of psi-trained 
humans', a flavouring of witchcraft lifting the story way above 
the normal. "Crazy Joey" by 
Mark Clifton & Alex. Apostolides 
covers the problems of concealment for the lone telepath. 
Anthony Boucher's "The Ghost 
of Me" and others by John Collier and John Wyndham, demonstrate that humour is not lacking 
in the s-f field; a rather terrible 
revenge is taken by the redskin 
in "Medicine Dancer" by Win. 
Brown, and horror by Bradbury 
comes in "The Veldt." The inclusion of Rhoda Broughton in 



New and used Science 
Fiction Pocket Books 
and Magazines . . . 

Fahrenheit 451: 

Ray Bradbury (U.S.A.) 3/3 

Planet of the Dreamers: 

J. D. McDonald (U.S.A.) 2/6 

Beyond Eden: 

David Duncan 3/3 

The Currents of Space: 

Isaac Asimov 2/6 

New Tales of Space and 
Time: 

Edited by H. J. Healy 2/6 

Utopia 14: Kurt Vonnegut 3/6 
"Other Worlds," 

all issues each 3/
"Imagination," 

1954 and 1955 issues each 3/
FANTAST (MEDWAY) LTD. 

c/o NEBULA Science-Fiction, 
159, Crownpoint Road, 
GLASGOW S*. 



SOMETHING TO READ 



103 



the list of authors indicates that 
Miss Merril has not overlooked 
the older and more "standard" 
weird concepts, and helps to make 
the book a balanced whole, sure 
to appeal to all readers who do 
not limit "s-f" to "space-fiction," 
a current term 1 deplore. 

The other collection is the work 
of one author, Robert Sheckley, 
a comparative newcomer to the 
field, but one who has definitely 
made a name as a reliable author. 
To me, half the enjoyment in 
Sheckley's work is the very simple 
things he takes as a starting point. 
Food packaging, for instance, becomes the delightful story of two 
space-men, right out of food, 
who find an alien store of packed 
foodstuffs. The consequences are 
little short of hilarious, and give 
the title to "UNTOUCHED BY 
HUMAN HANDS" (Michael 
Joseph, 12/6). Chivalry is all 
very well, and so far as humanity 
is concerned it could be practised 
more frequently with excellent 
effects; however, in the case of 
"The Monsters," it was hardly 
the thing. Construction contractors have problems — Mr. 
Sheckley dreams up one confronting a not-too-efficient constructor of galaxies. But not all 
of the work is in a light vein — in 
"The Ritual" two space explorers, dying of hunger and 
thirst, are faced with a (literally) 
long song and dance before they 
receive aid — a case of total misunderstanding. Horror, refined, 
is contained in "Warm." Of all 
the thirteen stories in the collection, none can be picked as the 
best, but each is perhaps the best 
of its kind so far written by Mr. 
Sheckley. 




the new novel 
by 




author of 
SPACEWAYS 
and 

TIMELINEB 



Published at 10/6 net by 
HODDER & STOUGHTON 




***.<-— /Hp 

PREVIEWS 



News and advance Film Reviews Direct from Hollywood's 
FORREST J. ACKER MAN 



In issue No. 13 I produced my 
portable pulpit (it's collapsible 
and I carry it with me to every 
pieview; I have only to add 
steam and it immediately expands upright) and climbed upon 
it not to praise BRIDE OF THE 
ATOM but to bury it. My sermon was showing that issue, and 
the reason I wore dark glasses 
was not to disguise the fact, but 
because I took a very dim view 
ol the moral of the picture, 
namely that this was the thousandth scientist in scientifilm 
history (or histrionics) who had 
"tampered in God's domain." By 
the time my review had appeared 
the title of the picture, as yet 
generally unreleased (and for this 
a' least we can be grateful), had 
been changed to BRIDE OF 
THE MONSTER. But whether 
she eventually appears on your 
marquee as the Bride of the 
Atom, Electron, Monster, Creature, Thing or Neutrino, beware 
of this mesalliance of pseudoscience and melodrama. And if 
by any good fortune this celluloid insult to the intelligence is 
co-featured with THE PHANTOM FROM 10,000 LEAGUES, 
run, do not walk, in the opposite 
direction from this eminently 
missable double bill. 

The younger generation, consulting the dictionary for the first 

104 



time for the definition of a 
"league," is forever leaping to 
the conclusion that old Jules 
Verne was off his or Davy Jones' 
locker when he wrote 20,000 
LEAGUES UNDER THE SEA 
because it would be impossible 
to go that deep — you'd run out of 
earth. Eventually they rediscover 
what others of us did long ago, 
and Verne fans before us, that 
Old Jules' title was meant to describe the nautical mileage 
travelled by the Nautilus during 
its undersea adventures. However! When the producers title 
their picture THE PHANTOM 
FROM 10,000 LEAGUES, that 
"from" is the preposition that 
makes it altogether a fantastic 
proposition. Since a league is 
roughly 3 miles, the Phantom 
obviously has come from a distance of 30,000 miles — really out 
of this world — and after seeing 
the picture (just for you, Dear 
Reader, just for you) I immediately asked myself: "Was this 
trip necessary?" 

The "phantom" is a kind of 
Greater Alligator who hangs 
around the shallow waters (about 
one-thousandth of a league) beneath the surface of the Pacific 
Ocean about 50 feet from the 
pebbly shore of Catalina Island. 
There's an exposed deposit of 
uranium out there on the ocean 



SCIENTIFILM 

floor, and a Scientist (it says in 
the script) has hypoed it with a 
dose of his discovery, called 
HEF, short for Hydro Energy 
Force. This irritated uranium 
now gives forth a shaft of lethal 
light in protest at having been 
tampered with. Before the picture is through a bunch of people 
have been killed, for no good 
reason that I can remember, and 
beast, uranium and scientist have, 
via a stockshot, been blown to 
Kingdom Come. 

The morale of the foregoing, 
as spoken on the screen, was a 
variant of the Immortal Phrase 
above. This time it came out: 
"Nature has many secrets that 
man must not disturb. This was 
one of them." 

Walt Willis and I, wishing to 
become independently wealthy 
over nite, are forming a company 
called KFH Productions (Kanu 
Fathom Hit), and plan a series of 
films including IN LEAGUE 
WITH THE PHANTOM, THE 
PHANTOM WITH 10,000 
LEGS, 10,000 PHANTOMS IN 
THE LAGOON, and THE 
FATHOM OF THE OPERA. 

If the insects are about to replace people, on the screen, this 
phenomenon may be attributed 
tc the phenomenal success of a 
"sleeper" called TARANTULA 
which is doing anything but putting audiences to sleep and has 
opened the eyes of avaricious producers anxious to cash in on a 
new good thing. THEM! is even 
being revived on the basis of the 
box-office of TARANTULA. 
Actually, THEM! was by far the 
superior s cientifilm — but it's 
TARANTULA that's getting the 
big patronage and paving the 
way for THE DEADLY MAN


PREVIEWS 105 

TIS, THE ANTMAN (with 
American sci-fi artist turned actor, 
Paul Blaisdell, creating and operating the gi-ant); CREATURE 
FROM GREEN HELL (superwasp); and Ivan Tors' THE 
INSECT STORY; with Ray 
Harryhausen studying scripting 
possibilities of Curt Siodmak's 
Amazing Stories classic, THE 
EGGS FROM LAKE TANGANYIKA. 

TARANTULA is not a bad 
picture, despite the money it's 
making. It was developed from 
a half-hour telefilm in the Science 
Fiction Theater series called 
"Food for Thot." The plot 
practically wrote itself, and there 
are scarcely any surprises in it for 
the s.f. fan, but everyone I have 
talked to has without exception 
had praise for the technical 
effects. The ever-growing tarantula that wreaks havoc (what 
else?) on the countryside is 
superbly effective. It was too 
easy to dispose of the giantarantula in the final reel by an aerial 
flame-bomb bath; I felt cheated. 
There should have been an 
extra reel with the scientist growing giant himself and destroying 
his creation, dying in mortal combat. But it still wasn't bad. And 
the sight of the scientist in the 
final stages of acromegalic dissolution, his features running like 
asphalt on a scorching day, have 
not come our way since the horrifying make-up job on Charles 
Laughton as the Hunchback of 
Notre Dame. Dandy for dieters 
who would like to lose weight 
faster by skipping a meal 
altogether! 

And — praise be to the 9 Billion 
Names of God — I didn't hear 
anything about anybody monkeying with something they should 
have left alone. 



WALTER WILLIS writes for you 



In a recent issue of Wireless 
World a contributor bemoans the 
way the spaceships of science 
fiction still seem to be using outmoded radio techniques . . . like 
calling "Over" after each message 
as if it were still beyond human 
ingenuity to design a set that 
would transmit and receive simultaneously. He can't have read 
much science fiction, because he 
doesn't know the half of it. Most 
of our current spaceships are 
using radio equipment so far behind the times it's a wonder that 
when they are tuning in on the 
latest from Earth Control they 
don't get the Savoy Orpheans. 
The item that's always annoyed 
me most are those blooming 
rheostats. Every time an author 
takes you into the Mad Scientist's 
laboratory or a spaceship control 
room it's a hundred to one there'll 
be some character there madly 
twiddling a rheostat. Now a rheostat happens to be a big ignorantlooking wirewound variable resistance that was last used to 
control the filaments of valves 
when they still had directly-heated 
filaments and looked rather like 
drunken electric light bulbs. 

Of course the trouble is that 
rheostats and big glass valves . . . 
or, as the Americans call them, 
toobs . . . were all the rage back 
in the 'Twenties when sf started, 
and most of the writers learned 
what they know about radio. 



which isn't much, from sf stories 
crammed in between articles describing How to Astound Your 
Friends by Building This Loudspeaker Radio Apparatus Guaranteed to Play. All the authors 
aren't like this of course — George 
O. Smith knows nearly as much 
about electronics as the characters 
in his stories — but most of them 
fall output over input when they 
try to be authentic. What they 
need is an Electronics Consultant. 
As an old ham from way back 
(I once built a piece of apparatus 
so like a mass of spaghetti that it 
might have been designed by 
Signor Macaroni himself) I'm 
willing to offer my services for a 
moderate fee, in the interests of 
scientific truth, the integrity of 
science fiction, and me. I could 
even advise' the film industry on 
such points as that modern radio 
and TV sets don't leap into life 
the moment the heroine switches 
them on: even if it's Marilyn 
Monroe, they still need a little 
time to warm up. Take the 
B.B.C. too, and "Journey Into 
Space." 

Now I haven't been listening to 
this programme much recently — 
I chop the firewood at a different 
time these days — but from what 
I remember a sample five minutes 
used to go something like this. 

Our intrepid spacemen are 
about 50 million miles from 
Earth, three in one ship and one 
in another ... 



106 



FANORAMA 



107 



"Freighter No. 1 to Discovery, 
Freighter No. 1 to Discovery. 
Over." 

'Discovery to Freighter No. 1. 
Discovery to Freighter No. L 
Over." 

'Freighter No. 1 to Discovery. 
Are you receiving me? Over." 

'Discovery to Freighter No. 1. 
Receiving you loud and clear, 
strength QSFL5. Are you receiving me? Over." 

'Freighter No. 1 to Discovery. 
Receiving you loud and clear, 
strength N3F. I have an 
Important Message. Over." 

'Discovery to Freighter No. 1. 
What is your Important Message? Over." 

'Freighter No. 1 to Discovery. 
Stand by to receive Important 
Message. Over." 

'Discovery to Freighter No. 1. 
Standing by to receive Important Message. Over." 

'Freighter No. 1 to Discovery. 
Here is Important Message. 
Important Message begins. The 

Mars In vasion Fleet 

aaaaagggghhhh!" 

'Jet, I think there's something 
wrong." 

'Discovery to Freighter No. 1. 
Important Message not received. Repeat Important Message. Over." 



"Jet, he doesn't answer." 

"Discovery to Freighter No. 1. 
Am not receiving you loud and 
clear. Are you receiving me 
loud and clear? What is your 
Important Message. Over." 

"Freighter No. 1 to Discovery. 
Receiving you loud and clear. 
Here is Important Message. 
Orders must be obeyed without 
question at all times. That is 
all. Over and out." 

"I don't care, Jet. I've still got 
a feeling there's something 
wrong." 

Now visualise this situation. 



Here we have two Earth spaceships, the only ones in the entire 
Universe. Is it really necessary 
for them to proclaim their identity every time they open their 
transmitters, or indeed at all? One 
would think that space was 
packed with spaceships like sardines all the way from Mercury 
to Uranus, all blaring away at one 
another like commercial radio 
stations. 

Of course science fiction people 
aren't the only ones who do this. 
Take the climax of the average 
aeroplane film . . . 
"Able Baker 69 Roger Lodger 

calling Control. Over." ' 
"Control to Able Baker 69 Roger 

Lodger. Receiving you loud 

and clear. What is your report? 

Over." 

"Able Baker 69 Roger Lodger 
to Control. Wing has dropped 
off, fusilage is on fire and dashboard clock has stopped. Instructions requested. Over." 

"Control to Able Baker 69 Roger 
Lodger. Stand by for instructions. . . . Hello, Able Baker 69 
Roger Lodger. Try winding it 
up. Over." 

"Able Baker 69 Roger Lodger 
calling Control. Too late. 
Other wing has fallen off. Tell 
them I died for good old 
BO AC and give my love to Sir 
Miles—" CRUNCH. Screams. 
Ambulance noises. 

"Control to Able Baker 69 Roger 
Lodger. No longer receiving 
you loud and clear. Come in, 
Able Baker 69 Roger Lodger. 
Over." 

Now if these people hadn't 
been so fond of the sound of their 
own names that brave young test 
pilot would have had a less untimely death, and the Important 
Message would have come 
through so we could all have 
switched back to the Third Programme. 




Dear Mr. Hamilton: I have 
received a copy of NEBULA No. 
14 and am very pleased with it. 
Most specifically with Kenneth 
Bulmer's powerful "Sunset." I 
had the pleasure of meeting the 
author at the Cleveland Convention some months ago and, had 
1 known at the time that he had 
produced this effort, I would have 
treated him with cringing deference. It's a remarkably trenchant 
story and precisely the kind of 
thing we are denied over here, 
due to the general belief that 
"downbeat" stories are to be 
avoided. 

The same holds true in Eric 
Frank Russell's "Down, Rover, 
Down." For some reason or 
other the average American 
seems to prefer stories with a 
build-in pat on the back: even 
when social aberrations are presented, there is generally a hero 
who is eventually able to rectify 
the situation with the aid of the 
omnipresent Underground and 
restore matters to rights — the said 
"rights" being an approximation 
of today's mores. 

Consequently, I find it refreshing to read stories like these in a 
science fiction magazine with a 
broader policy, particularly when 
they are so well written as these 
two. 

I just could not let NEBULA 
108 



go by without going on record 
for my admiration of it 

ROBERT BLOCH, 

Wise, U.S.A. 

" Many thanks for your letter, 
Robert. I was extremely glad 
to hear from you. As you 
remark, I have always 
attempted to follow a broader 
policy when choosing the 
stories to appear in NEBULA 
than is possible for the majority 
of other Editors who are unfortunately tied down by a 
long list of narrow taboos and 
rules which considerably limit 
their choke of material regardless of its quality. If a 
story is well written and of 
good entertainment value, I am 
prepared to consider it, providing, of course, that any 
"risky" ingredient is a necessary part and not merely 
dragged in for vulgar effect. 



Deal - Ed. : I was interested by 
the letter from Frances Evans 
and your reply in NEBULA 
No. 13, and I would like to point 
out that although your stories 
carry a different influence there 
still seems to be a lot of American 
idiom in them, phrases like "this 
was for sure," "that's for me," 



GUIDED MISSIVES 



109 



and that most horrible of circumlocutions "in back of" instead of 
"behind." // Winter comes can 
Spring be far "in back of"? — 
Shelley. 

However that's a small point. 
I really want to take Frances 
Evans to task when she talks 
about taking science fiction into 
the sphere of good literature. 
There are several writers in this 
country who do serious work 
(a term I personally prefer) and 
who have ventured into the field 
of fantasy, George Orwell's 
"1984" for example or Aldous 
Huxley's "Ape and Essence." 

The point is surely that the 
great writer is a man who feels 
intensely and who can communicate his feelings to us. If he has 
something of universal significance to say then his work lives 
and his writings become "literature," i.e. they are usually read 
(or ought to be read) by every 
fresh generation. 

BOB LINDON, 

Ilford, Essex. 

* // seems to me that you are 
inclined to be confusing the 
issue, Bob. Science fiction is 
a new and independent form of 
literature against which a 
majority of critics are biased 
owing to the deplorable standard of many so-called science 
fiction magazines. Consequently 
if we in NEBULA concentrate 
on publishing only material of 
the highest standard obtainable, it seems to me that we 
are doing a great deal to make 
it possible for science fiction to 
be universally accepted as having a definite contribution to 
make to the kind of "litera.ture" to which you refer. 



ONE GUINEA PRIZE 

To the reader whose Ballot 
Form (below) is first opened at 
the NEBULA publishing office. 

All you have to do, both to 
win this attractive prize and to 
help your favourite author win 
the 1956 Author's Award, is to 
number the stories in this issue 
in the order of your preference 
on the Ballot Form below and 
post it to "Nebula," 159, Crownpoint Road, Glasgow, S.E., immediately. 



Dying to Live 



Always 



Hot Water 



Barrier to Yesterday 



The Moron 



Frontier Encounter 



Name, and Address 



Mrs. Ciunie of Hamilton wins 
the One Guinea Prize offered in 
NEBULA No. 14. The final result 
of the Poll on the stories in that 
issue was: — 

1. SUNSET 

By Kenneth Bulmer 35.8% 

2. PUSHOVER PLANET 

By James White 24.6% 

3. QUIS CUSTODIET 

By E. C. Tubb 16.8% 

4. DOWN ROVER DOWN 

By Eric Frank Russell 7.6% 
4. QUESTION ANSWERED 

By Mark Trent 7.6% 
4. THE BEAUTIFUL MARTIAN 

By Sydney J. Bounds 7.6% 
The result of the Poll on the 
stories in this issue will appear 
in NEBULA No. 18. 



110 



NEBULA 



! BACK 
NUMBERS . . . 

Ensure many extra hours of 
reading pleasure by sending 
today for back issues of 
NEBULA 

Limited quantities of all 
numbers from No. 1 to No. 
15 are avaUable at 2/- or 
35c each post free, or the 
entire 15 available issues 
can be had for 25/- or £4.00 
post free 

Cash with order in all cases, 
please, to 

NEBULA 

159 CROWNPOINT RD 
GLASGOW, S.E. 



Dear Ed. : You probably need 
no more comment upon your 
excellent magazine from over 
here, but may I say a few words 
anyway. I have had a number 
of copies of science fiction magazines from a gentleman in 
London with whom I have been 
corresponding, and my pat on 
the back goes to NEBULA. 

My letter is chiefly prompted 
by a letter in issue No. 12 from 
Mr. W. H. Cazly of Huntingdonshire. I feel sure that if Mr. 
Cazly will examine his feelings 
on the "American slant" in 
science fiction, or for that matter any other type of story, he 
will find that what he is really 
objecting to is the unsuccessful 
attempt at American language 
and point of view by writers who 
don't quite know how to do it. 
I wonder if you really know over 
there how very seldom a British 
author is able to create a really 
American character. I am quite 
willing to believe that our writers 
miss the mark by just as much 
when they try to build a 
Britisher. You know, an American hates a phoney (Americanism) as fiercely as you do over 
there. I assure you, a man who 
tries to graft an Oxford accent on 
to one that was "made in U.S.A." 
is just as much a subject of 
amusement here as would be a 
Yorkshireman who tried the 
same thing there. Incidentally, 
for Heaven's sake don't blame 
us for all the deformities our 
poor language suffers. Take a 
trip through the Shires and listen 
closely. 

What I am trying to say is 
that, level for level, economically 
speaking, our language is surprisingly alike. There is an unfortunate tendency to compare the 
language of an educated Ameri


GUIDED MISSIVES 



111 



can with that of an uneducated 
Britisher on our part, and the 
reverse on yours, and in that we 
are both wrong, of course. 

FLOYD W. ZWICKY, 

Illinois, U.S.A. 

* / am quite sure that no-one 
will doubt what you say for a 
moment, Mr. Zwicky. The 
point which Mr. Cazly was 
trying to make is that there 
seems to be a needless emulation of things A merican, 
whether of high or low standard, by British authors, publishers, film producers, and the 
man in the street, which seems 
to have little or no counterpart in the U.S.A. 

Although most of us in 
Great Britain have a great 
respect for the United States, 
we feel that it is an unhealthy 
symptom indeed when a significant proportion of our population begins to prefer stories 
and films couched in the jargon 
of American gangsters (whether 
written in this country or elsewhere) to material written in 
reasonable English regardless 
of its source. 



Dear Mr. Hamilton : A line of 
appreciation. I like the single 
column layout of NEBULA, its 
clear print and lack of typographical errors, coupled with 
the fact that the stories printed 
are not space-opera nor boymeets-girl disguised as science 
fiction. The cover illustrations 
are fine and, unlike one of your 
correspondents, T like pictures of 
spaceships on alien landscapes. 

Mrs. E. MAYER, 

London, S.E.18. 



Dear Ed.: In NEBULA No. 
14 James \yhite's "Pushover 
Planet" takes first place although 
1 can't understand why the Lednang creature committed suicide 
leaving the Terrans an opportunity of solving the problem of 
inter-stellar flight. 

Second came "Sunset" by Kenneth Bulmer. This was an excellent story of what the future 
may be like. 

John Newman's "Universe 
Times Two" was a very welcome 
addition. We rarely find good 
astronomical features in science 
fiction magazines. 

PETER BUCKLE. 
Leeds, 13. 

* Many thanks to both of you 
for your interesting comments 
on NEBULA No. 14. As I 
have said so many times before, it is letters of critical 
comment like these which 
help me to know exactly what 
everyone enjoys so that I 
may continue to print it in 
future issues. For those of you 
who cannot find the time to 
write a letter but who wish 
to help your favourite author 
win the 1956 Nebula Author's 
Award, there is always the 
Ballot Form on page 109. 



f| THE HAPPY MAGIC OF fj 

!• FRIENDSHIP m$. 

:: PEN — PERSONAL — H 
:| LIFE PARTNERSHIPS ;J 

» All ages. All districts. Photos. 
j: Send 5d. stamps for fascinating 
;* details and free photogravure 
II book to JJ 
|: EDNA HANSON || 

« DENTON, MANCHESTER •• 

•::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::t:«:: : .: 



112 



NEBULA 



LOOK HERE— from page 2 

An exceptionally talented newcomer, John Seabright, contributes 
"The Moron," the last of our short stories in this issue. I think you will 
agree that this is an outstanding first appearance and I am sure that if he 
can maintain this high standard Mr Seabright will be back with us again, 
and often! 

Finally, we have "Frontier Encounter," another outstanding human 
interest novel by Sydney J. Bounds, with just the spice of space-opera for 
which so many of you have been asking. Syd tells me that his latest 
book is shortly to be published by Fulshams Press Ltd., so I hope that all 
our Bounds' fans will be on the lookout for it now. 

This, with all the usual features, is my offering this time, and I do 
hope that you enjoy it. 

Before concluding I would like to mention two science fiction conventions which are to be held in the near future. The first is our own 
"Cytricon II" — Second Kettering Science Fiction Convention to most of 
us — to be held at the George Hotel, Kettering, over Easter week-end. I 
hope to be there myself and I very much look forward to having a chat 
with any NEBULA readers who manage to come along. 

Unfortunately, owing to awkward geographical complications, I 
will not be able to make it to the Seventh Annual Midwestern at the 
North Plaza Hotel, Reading Road, Cincinnatti, on May 26th and 27th, 
but I have been asked by Don Ford, its Chairman (and from whom 
further details are available at 290 Maple Ave., Slaronville, Ohio), to 
extend a warm invitation to all our American readers to go along and 
have a really enjoyable week-end. 




GALAXY A really ft% anthology. 1 « . /« 
GALAXY sfk :t *d by II. L. f«.U ' 
— jfc«^w from bis own modern slant magarim-, is Tlli-: CALAXY SCIENCE 
FICTION OMNIBUS. Contributors include 
amongst many others -Asimov, Wyndham, Leibcr. Mcintosh, Simak, Sturgeon and Clifton. 

B L E I & D I The great editorial team 1 ftlfi 
BLEI & Dl "f ta?ib-r ami Dikty 
r*m B. a hi scores another triumph with THE 
YEAR'S REST SCIENCE FICTION NQVBLS: Second Series. Speculation, 
humour and excitement are nicely blended in work 
bv Leinster, Robinson. Foster Crossen. and Coldand-Krepps. (S.-e also BEST SF STORIES: 5.) 

TIME JUMP Often S I- novels sag | 'tjff'A 
TIME JUMP between a 'gimmick' 

IIIMP "I M ' nm S altd a 'will-he-make-it' 

i int juriK emiMf , imy s „ b ,. s pl , nph , m 

COSTIGAN'S NEEDLE, are convincing, so when 
they go through its eye and disappear we reaily 

wmt to know whv and when-. 

GRAYSON The abo\c are only a few J^. 
GRAYSON "I tin- St-iviKv Fiction littles 
FRAYtON Published by CKAYSON AND 
C.RAVSON of 16 Maddox Street. 
Loudon. Our list is not hUjiw like you we are 
oniy interested in the best. 



