PROTT By MARGARET ST. CLAIR 

"READ IT" said the 
spaceman. "You'll 
, find it interesting — 
under the circumstances. It's not 
long. One of the salvage crews 
found it tied to a signal rocket 
just outside the Asteroid Belt. 
It'd been there quite a while. 

"I thought of taking it to somebody at the university, a historian 
or somebody , but I don't suppose 
they'd be interested. They don't 
have any more free time than 
anybody else." 

He handed a metal cylinder to 



Fox, across the table, and ordered 
drinks for them both. Fox sipped 
from his glass before he opened 
the tube. 

"Sure you want me to read it 
now?" he asked. "Not much of a 
way to spend our free time." 

"Sure, go ahead and read it. 
What difference does it make?" 

So Fox spread out the emtex 
sheets. He began to read. 

1~\ATING a diary in deep space 
offers special problems. Philosophic problems, I mean — that 



PROTT 



81 



immense "When is now?" which, 
vexatious enough within a solar 
system or even on the surface of 
a planet, becomes quite insoluble 
in deep except empirically or by 
predicating a sort of super-time, 
an enormous Present Moment 
which would extend over everything. And yet a diary entry must 
be dated, if only for convenience. 
So I will call today Tuesday and 
take the date of April 21 from 
the gauges. 
Tuesday it is. 

On this Tuesday, then, I am 
quite well and cheerful, snug 
and comfortable, in the Ellis. The 
Ellis is a model of comfort and 
convenience; a man who couldn't 
be comfortable in it couldn't be 
comfortable anywhere. As to 
where I am. I could get the precise data from the calculators, but 
I think, for the casual purposes 
of this record, it's enough to say 
that I am almost at the edges of 
the area where the prott are said 
to abound. And my speed is almost exactly that at which they 
are supposed to appear. 

I said I was well and cheerful. 
I am. But just under my euphoria, just at the edge of consciousness. I am aware of an 
intense loneliness. It's a normal 
response to the deep space situation, I think. And I am upborne 
by the feeling that I stand on 
the threshold of unique scientific 
discoveries. 



rpHURSDAY the 26th (my 
days are more than twentyfour hours long). Today my 
loneliness is definitely conscious. 
I am troubled, too. by the fear 
that perhaps the prott won't — 
aren't going to — put in an appearance. After all, their existence is 
none too well confirmed. And 
then what becomes of all my 
plans, of my smug confidence of 
a niche for myself in the hall of 
fame of good investigators? 

It seemed like a brilliant idea 
when I was on Earth. I know the 
bursar thought so. too, when I 
asked for funds for the project. 
To investigate the life habits of 
a non-protoplasmic form of life, 
with special emphasis on its reproduction — excellent! But now? 

Saturday, April 30. Still no 
prott. But I am feeling better. I 
went over my files on them and 
again it seems to me that there 
is only one conclusion possible: 

They exist. 

Over an enormous sector in the 
depth of space, during many 
years, they have been sighted. 
For my own comfort, let's list 
the known facts about prott. 

First, they are a non-protoplasmic form of life. (How could they 
be otherwise, in this lightless, 
heatless gulf?) Second, their bodily organization is probably electrical. Simmons, who was electrical engineer on the Thor, found 




 



that his batteries showed discharges when prott were around. 
Third, they appear only to ships 
which are in motion between certain rates of speed. (Whether motion at certain speeds attracts 
them, or whether it is only at certain frequencies that they are 
visible, we don't know.) Fourth, 
whether or not they are intelligent, they are to some extent 
telepathic, according to the reports. This fact, of course, is my 
hope of communicating with 
them at all. And fifth, prott have 
been evocatively if unscientifically described as looking like big 
poached eggs. 

On the basis of these facts, I've 
aspired to be the Columbus — or, 
more accurately, the Dr. Kinsey 
— of the prott. Well, it's good to 
know that, lonely and rather worried as I am, I can still laugh at 
my own jokes. 

May 3rd. I saw my first prott. 
More later. It's enough for now: 
I saw my first prott. 

May 4th. The Ellis has allangle viewing plates, through 360 
degrees. I had set up an automatic signal, ' and yesterday it 
rang. My heart thumping with an 
almost painful excitement, I ran 
to the battery of plates. 

There it was, seemingly some 
five yards long, a cloudy, whitish 
thing. There was a hint of a large 



yellow nucleus. Damned if the 
thing didn't look like a big 
poached egg! 

I saw at once why everyone 
has assumed that prott are lifeforms and not, for example, minute spaceships, robots, or 
machines of some sort. The thing 
had the irregular, illogical symmetry of life. 

I stood goggling at it. It wasn't 
alarming, even in its enormous 
context. After a moment, it 
seemed to flirt away from the 
ship with the watery ease of a 
fish. 

I waited hopefully, but it didn't 
come back. 

11/f AY 4. No prott. Question: 
since there is so little light 
in deep space, how was I able to 
see it? It wasn't luminous. 

I wish I had had more training in electronics and allied subjects. But the bursar thought it 
more important to send out a 
man trained in survey techniques. 

May 5. No prott. 

May 6. No prott. But I have 
been having very odd thoughts. 

May 8th. As I half-implied in 
my last entry, the ideas I have 
been having (such odd ideas — 
they made me feel, mentally, as 
if some supporting membrane of 
my personality were being over


PROTT 



93 



strained) were an indication of 
the proximity of prott. 

I had just finished eating lunch 
today when the automatic signal 
rang. I hurried to the viewers. 
There, perfectly clear against 
their jet-black background, were 
three prott. Two were almost 
identical; one was slightly smaller 
in size. I had retraced over and 
over in my mind the glimpse of 
the one prott I had had before, 
but now that three of them were 
actually present in the viewers, I 
could only stare at them. They're 
not alarming, but they do have 
an odd effect upon the mind. 

After several tense seconds, 1 
recovered my wits. I pressed a 
button to set the automatic photographic records going. I'd put 
in plates to cover the whole spectrum of radiant energy, and it 
will be interesting when I go to 
develop my pictures to see what 
frequencies catch the prott best. 
I also — this was more difficult — 
began to send out the basic 
"Who? Who? Who?" in which 
all telepathic; communicators are 
trained. 

I have become reasonably good 
at telepathy through practice, but 
I have no natural talent for it. I 
remember Mcllwrath telling me 
jokingly, just before I left New 
York, that I'd never have trouble with one of the pitfalls of 
natural telepaths — transmitting a 
desired answer into the mind of 



a subject by telepathy. I suppose 
any deficiency has some advantageous side. 

I began, to send out my basic 
"Who?" It may have been only 
a coincidence, but as soon as the 
fourth or fifth impulse had left 
my mind, all three prott slid out 
of the viewing plates. They didn't 
come back. It would seem that 
my attempts at communication 
alarmed them. I hope not, 
though. 

When I was convinced that 
they would not return for a while, 
I began to develop my plates. 
Those in the range of visible 
light show the prott very much 
as they appear to the eye. The 
infra-red plates show nothing at 
all. But the ultra-violet-sensitive 
ones are really interesting. 

Two of the prott appear as a 
network of luminous lines intricately knotted and braided. For 
some reason, I was reminded of 
the "elfish light" of Coleridge's 
water snakes, which "moved in 
tracks of shining white." The 
third prott, which I assume to 
have been the smaller one, gave 
an opaque, flattened -ovoid image, definitely smaller than that 
of its companions, with a round 
dark shadow in the center. This 
shadow would appear to be the 
large yellow nucleus. 

Question: Do these photographic differences correspond to 
organizational differences? Prob


84 




 



ably, though it might be a matter of phase. 

Further question: If the difference is in fact organizational, 
do we have here an instance of 
that specialization which, among 
protoplasmic creatures, would 
correspond to sex? It is possible. 
But such theorizing is bound to 
be plain guesswork. 

May 9th (I see I gave up dating by days some while ago.). 
No prott. I think it would be of 
some interest if, at this point, I 
were to try to put down my impression of those "odd thoughts" 
which I believe the prott inspired 
in me. 

In the first place, there is a reluctance. I didn't want to think 
what I was thinking. This is not 
because the ideas were in themselves repellent or disgusting, but 
because they were uncongenial to 
my mind. I don't mean uncongenial to my personality or my 
idiosyncrasies, to the sum of differences that make up "me," but 
uncongenial to the whole biological orientation of my thinking. 
The differences between protoplasmic and non-protoplasmic 
life must be enormous. 

In the second place, there is a 
frustration. I said, "I didn't want 
to think what I was thinking," 
but it would be equally true to 
say that I couldn't think it. 
Hence, I suppose, that sensation 



of ineffectuality. 

And in the third place, there is 
a great boredom. Frustration 
often does make one feel bored, 
I suppose. I couldn't apprehend 
my own thoughts. But whenever 
I finally* did, I found them 
boring. They were so remote, so 
incomprehensible, that they were 
uninteresting. 

But the thoughts themselves? 
What were they? I can't say. 

How confused all this is! Well, 
nothing is more tiresome than to 
describe the indescribable. 

Perhaps it is true that the only 
creature that could understand 
the thoughts of a prott would be 
another prott. 

MAY 10th. Were the "odd 
thoughts" the results of attempts on the protts' part to 
communicate with me? I don't 
think so. I believe they were 
near the ship, but out of "viewshot," so to speak, and I picked 
up some of their interpersonal 
communications accidentally. 

I have been devoting a good 
deal of thought to the problem 
of communicating with them. It 
is too bad that there is no way 
of projecting a visual image of 
myself onto the exterior of the 
ship. I have Matheson's signaling 
devices, and next time — if there 
is a next — I shall certainly try 
them. I have little confidence in 
devices, however. I feel intui


PROTT 



85 



tively that it is going to have to 
be telepathy or nothing. But if 
they respond to the basic "who?" 
with flight . . . well, I must think 
of something else. , 

Suppose I were to begin the 
attempt at contact with* a "splitquestion." "Splits" are hard for 
any telepath, almost impossible 
for me. But in just that difficulty, 
my hope of success might lie. 
After all, I suppose the prott 
flirted away from the ship at my 
"who?" because mental contact 
with me was painful to them. 

Later. Four of them are here 
now. I tried a split and they went 
away, but came back. I am going to try something else. 

May 11th. It worked. My 
"three-way split" — something I 
had only read about in journals, 
but that I would never have believed myself capable of — was astoundingly effective. 

Not at first, though. At my first 
attempt, the prott darted right 
out of the viewers. I had a moment of despair. Then, with an 
almost human effect of hesitation, reluctance, and inclination, 
they came back. They clustered 
around the viewer. Once more I 
sent out my impulse; sweat was 
running down my back with the 
effort, And they stayed. 

I don't know what I should 
have done if they hadn't. A split 



is exhausting because, in addition to the three normal axes of 
the mind, it involves a fourth 
one, at right angles to all the others. A telepath would know what 
I mean. But a three-way split 
is, in the old-fashioned phrase, 
"lifting yourself up by your 
bootstraps." Some experts say it's 
impossible. I still have trouble 
believing I brought it off. 

I did, however. There was a 
sudden rush, a gush, of communication. I'd like to try to get it 
down now, while it's still fresh in 
my mind. But I'm too tired. Even 
the effort of using the playback 
is almost beyond me. I've got to 
rest. 

T ATER. I've been asleep for 
four hours. I don't think I 
ever slept so soundly. Now I'm 
almost myself again, except that 
my hands shake. 

I said I wanted to get the communication with the prott down 
while it was still fresh. Already 
it has begun to seem a little remote, I suppose because the subject matter was inherently alien. 
But the primary impression I retain of it is the gush, the suddenness. It was like pulling the cork 
out of a bottle of warm champagne which has been thoroughly 
shaken up. 

In the middle, I had to try to 
maintain my mental balance in 
the flood. It was difficult; no won


86 




 



der the effort left me so tired. But 
I did learn basic things. 

One : identity. The prott are 
individuals, and though their designations for themselves . escape 
me, they have individual consciousness. This is not a small 
matter. Some protoplasmic lifeforms have only group consciousness. Each of the four prott in 
my viewer was thoroughly aware 
of itself as distinct from the 
others. 

Two : difference. The prott 
were not only aware of identity, 
they were aware of differences of 
class between themselves. And I 
am of the opinion that these differences correspond to those 
shown on my photographic 
plates. 

Three: place. The prott are 
quite clearly conscious that they 
are here and not somewhere else. 
This may seem either trivial or 
so basic as not to be worth bothering with. But there are whole 
groups of protoplasmic life-forms 
on Venus whose only cognizance 
of place is a distinction between 
"me" and "not-me." 

Four: time. For the prott, time 
is as it is for us, an irreversible flowing in one direction only. 
I caught in their thinking a hint 
of a discrimination between biological (for such a life-form? 
That is what it seemed) time and 
something else, I am . not sure 
what. 



Beyond these four basic things, 
I am unsure. I do feel, though it 
is perhaps overoptimistic of me, 
that further communication, communication of great interest, is 
possible. I feel that I may be 
able to discover what their optimum life conditions and habitat 
are. I do not despair of discovering how they reproduce themselves. 

I have the feeling that there is 
something they want very much 
to tell me. 

1V|AY 13th. Six prott today. 

According to my photographic record, only one of them 
was of the opaque solid-nucleus 
kind. The others all showed the 
luminous light-tracked mesh. 

The communication was difficult. It is exhausting to me physically. I had again that sense of 
psychic pressure, of urgency, in 
their sendings. If I only knew 
what they wanted to "talk" 
about, it would be so much easier 
for me. 

I have the impression that they 
have a psychic itch they want me 
to help them scratch. That's silly? 
Yes, I know, yet that is the odd 
impression I have. 

After they were gone, I analyzed my photographs carefully. 
The knotted light meshes are not 
identical in individuals. If the 
patterns are constant for individuals, it would seem that two of 



PROTT 



67 



the light-mesh kind have been 
here before. 

What do they want to talk 
about? 

May 14th. Today the prott — 
seven of them — and I communicated about habitat. This much 
is fairly certain. It would appear 
— and I think that from now on 
any statement I make about them 
is going to have to be heavily 
qualified — it would appear that 
they are not necessarily confined 
to the lightless, heatless depths 
of space. I can't be sure about 
this. But I thought I got the hint 
of something "solid" in their 
thinking. 

Wild speculation: do they get 
their energy from stars? 

Behind their sendings, I got 
again the hint of some other more 
desired communication. Something which at once attracts and 
— repels? frightens? embarrasses? 

Sometimes the humor of my 
situation comes to me suddenly. 
An embarrassed prott! But I suppose there's no reason why not. 

All my visitors today were of 
the knotted network kind. 

May 16th. No prott yesterday 
or today. 

May 18th. At last! Three prott! 
From subsequent analysis of the 
network patterns, all had been 
here to interview me before. We 



began communication about habitat and what, with protoplasm, 
would be metabolic processes, but 
they did not seem interested. 
They left soon. 

Why do they visit the ship, 
anyhow? Curiosity? That motive 
must not be so powerful by now. 
Because of something they want 
from me? I imagine so; it is again 
an awareness of some psychic 
itch. And that gives me a lead 
as to the course I should follow. 

The next time they appear, I 
shall try to be more passive in 
my communications. I shall try 
not to lead them on to any particular subject. Not only is this 
good interviewing technique, it is 
essential in this case if 1 am to 
gain their full cooperation. 

MAY 20. After a fruitless wait 
yesterday, today there was 
one lone prott. In accordance 
with my recent decision, I adopted a highly passive attitude toward it. I sent out signals of 
willingness and receptivity, and 
I waited, watching the prott. 

For five or ten minutes there 
was "silence." The prott moved 
about in the viewers with an effect of restlessness, though it 
might have been any other emotion, of course. Suddenly, with 
great haste and urgency, it began to send. I had again that 
image of the cork blowing out of 
the champagne bottle. 



88 




 



ITS sending was remarkably 
difficult for me to follow. At 
the end of the first three minutes 
or so, I was wringing wet with 
sweat. Its communications were 
repetitive, urgent, and, I believe, 
pleasurable. I simply had no 
terms into which to translate 
them. They seemed to involve 
many verbs. 

I "listened" passively, trying to 
preserve my mental equilibrium. 
My bewilderment increased as 
the prott continued to send. Finally I had to recognize that I 
was getting to a point where intellectual frustration would interfere with* t my telepathy. I . 
ventured to put a question, a 
simple "Please classify" to the 
prott. 

Its sending slackened and then 
ceased abruptly. It disappeared. 

What did I learn from the interview? That the passive approach is the correct one, and 
that a prott will send freely (and 
most confusingly, as far as I am 
concerned) if it is not harassed 
with questions or directed to a 
particular topic. What I didn't 
learn was what the prott was 
sending about. 

Whatever it was, I have the 
impression that it. was highly 
agreeable to the prott. 

Later — I have been rereading, 
the notes I made on my sessions 
with the prott. What has been the 



matter with me? I wonder at my 
blindness. For the topic about 
which the prott was sending — the 
pleasurable, repetitive, embarrassing topic, the one about which 
it could not bear to be questioned, 
the subject which involved so 
many verbs— that topic could be 
nothing other than its sex life. 

When put this baldly, it sounds 
ridiculous. I make haste to qualify it. We don't, as yet — and what 
a triumph it is to be able to say 
"as yet" — know anything about 
the manner in which prott reproduce themselves. They may, for 
example, increase by a sort of 
fission. They may be dioecious, as 
so much highly organized life is. 
Or their reproductive cycle may 
involve the cooperative activity 
of two, three or even more different sorts of prott. 

So far, I have seen only the two 
sorts, those with the solid nucleus, and those with the intricate 
network of light. That does not 
mean there may not be other 
kinds. 

But what I am driving at is 
this: The topic about which the 
prott communicated with me today is one which, to the prott, 
has the same emotional and psychic value that sex has to protoplasmic life. 

(Somehow, at this point, I am 
reminded of a little anecdote of 
my grandmother's. She used to 
say that there are four things in 



PROTT 



89 



a dog's life which it is important 
for it to keep in mind, one for 
each foot. The things are food, 
food, sex, and food. She bred 
dachshunds and she knew. Question: does my coming up with 
this recollection at this time mean 
that I suspect the prott's copulatory activity is also nutritive, 
like the way in which ameba conjugate? Their exchange of nuclei 
seems to have a beneficial effect 
on their metabolism.) 

Be that as it may, I now have 
a thesis to test in my dealings 
with the prott! * 

May 2 1 . There were seven 
prott in the viewer when the signal rang. While I watched, more 
and more arrived. It was impossible to count them accurately, 
but I think there must have been 
at least fifteen. 

They started communicating 
almost immediately. Not wanting 
to disturb them with directives, 
I attempted to "listen" passively, 
but the effect on me was that of 
being caught in a crowd of people 
all talking at once. After a few 
minutes, I was compelled to ask 
them to send one at a time. 

From then on, the sending was 
entirely orderly. 

Orderly, but incomprehensible. 
So much so that, at the end of 
some two hours, I was forced to 
break off the interview. 

It is the first time I have ever 



done such a thing. 

Why did I do it? My motives 
are not entirely clear even to myself. I was trying to receive passively, keeping in mind the theory I had formed about the 
prott's communication. (And let 
me say at this point that I have 
found nothing to contradict it. 
Nothing whatever.) Yet, as time 
passed, my bewilderment increased almost painfully. Out of 
the mass of chaotic, repetitive 
material presented to me, I was 
able to form nor one single clear 
idea. 

I would not have believed that 
a merely intellectual frustration 
could be so difficult to take. 

The communication itself was 
less difficult than yesterday. I 
must think. 

I have begun to lose weight. 

JUNE 12th. I have not made an 
entry in my diary for a 
long time. In the interval, I have 
had thirty-six interviews with 
prott. 

What emerges from these sessions, which are so painful and 
frustrating to me, so highly enjoyed by the prott? 

First, communication with 
them has become very much easier. It has become, in fact, too 
easy. I continually find their 
'thoughts intruding on me at times 
when I cannot welcome them — 
when I am eating, writing up my 



90 




 



notes, or trying to sleep. But the 
strain of communication is much 
less and I suppose that does constitute an advance. 

Second, out of the welter of 
material presented to me, I have 
at last succeeded in forming one 
fairly clear idea. That is that the 
main topic of the prott's communication is a process that could 
be represented verbally as — ing 
the — . I add at once that the 
blanks do not necessarily represent an obscenity. I have, in fact, 
no idea what they do represent. 

(The phrases that come into 
my mind in this connection are 
"kicking the bucket" and "belling the cat." It may not be without significance that one of these 
phrases relates to death and the 
other to danger. Communication 
with prott is so unsatisfactory 
that one cannot afford to neglect 
any intimations that might clarify it. It is possible that — ing 
the — is something which is potentially dangerous to prott, but 
that's only a guess. I could have it 
all wrong, and I probably do.) 

At any rate, my future course 
has become clear. From now on 
I will attempt, by every mental 
means at my disposal, to get the 
prott to specify what —ing the 
— is. There is no longer any fear 
of losing their cooperation. Even 
as I dictate these words to the 
playback, they are sending more 
material about — ing the — to me. 



JUNE 30. The time has gone 
very quickly, and yet each 
individual moment has dragged. 
I have had fifty-two formal interviews with prott — they appear in 
crowds ranging from fifteen to 
forty or so — and countless informal ones. My photographic record shows that more than ninety 
per cent of those that have appeared have been of the luminous 
network kind. 

In all this communication, what 
have I learned? It gives me a sort 
of bitter satisfaction to say: 
"Nothing at all." 

I am too chagrined to go on. 

July I. I don't mean that I 
haven't explored avenue after 
avenue. For instance, at one time 
it appeared that — ing the — had 
something to do with the intersections of the luminous network 
in prott of that sort. When I attempted to pursue this idea, I 
met with a negative that seemed 
amused as well as indignant. 
They indicated that — ing the 
— was concerned with the whitish body surfaces, but when I 
picked up the theme, I got another negative signal, And so on. 
I must have attacked the problem from fifty different angles, 
but I had to give up on all of 
them. 

— ing the — , it would appear, 
is electrical, non-electrical, solitary, dual, triple, communal, con


PROTT 




 



stant, never done at all. At one 
time I thought that it might apply to any pleasurable activity, 
but the prott signaled that I was 
all wrong. I broke that session off 
short. 

Outside of their baffling communications on the subject of 
— ing the — , I have learned almost nothing from the prott. 

(How sick I am of them and 
their inane, vacuous babbling! 
The phrases of our communication ring in my mind for hours 
afterward. They haunt me like 
a clinging odor or stubbornly lingering taste.) 

During one session, a prott 
(solid nucleus, I think, but I am 
not sure) informed me that they 
could live under a wide variety 
of conditions, provided there was 
a source of radiant energy not 
too remote. Besides that scrap of 
information, I have an impression that they are grateful to me 
for listening to them. Their feelings, I think, could be expressed 
in the words "understanding and 
sympathetic." 

I don't know why they think 
so, I'm sure. I would rather communicate with a swarm of dogfish, which are primitively telepathic, than listen to any more 
prott. 

I have had to punch another 
hole in my wristwatch strap to 
take up the slack. This makes 
the third one. 



July 3rd. It is difficult for me 
to use the playback, the prott 
are sending so hard 1 . I have 
scarcely a moment's rest from 
their communications, all concerned with the same damned 
subject. But I have come to a 
resolve: I am going home. 

Yes, home. It may be that I 
have failed in my project, because of inner weaknesses. It may 
be that no man alive could have 
accomplished more. I don't know. 
But I ache to get away from 
them and the flabby texture of 
their babbling minds. If only 
there were some way of shutting 
them off, of stopping my mental 
ears against them temporarily, I 
think I could stand it. But there 
isn't. 

I'm going home. I've started 
putting course data in the computers. 

JULY 4th. They say they are 
going back with me. It seems 
they like me so much, they don't 
want to be without me. 
I will have to decide. 

July 12th. It is dreadfully hard 
to think, for they are sending 
like mad. 

I am not so altruistic, so unselfish, that I would condemn myself to a lifetime of listening to 
prott if I could get out of it. But 
suppose I ignore the warnings of 
instinct, the dictates of con


PROTT 



93 



science, and return to Earth, anyhow — what will be the result? 

The prott will go with me. I 
will not be rid of them. And I 
will have loosed a wave of prott 
on Earth. 

They want passionately to send 
about — ing the — . They have 
discovered that Earthmen are potential receptors. I have myself 
to blame for that. If I show them 
the way to Earth . . . 

The dilemma is inherently 
comic, I suppose. It is none the 
less real. Oh, it is possible that 
there is some way of destroying 
prott, and that the resources of 
Earth intelligence might discover 
it. Or, failing that, we might be 
able to work out a way of living 
with them. But the danger is too 
great; I dare not ask my planet 
to face it. I will stay here. 

The Ellis is a strong, comfortable ship. According to my calculations, there is enough air, 
water and food to last me the 
rest of my natural life. Power — 
since I am not going back — I 
have in abundance. I ought to get 
along all right. 

Except for the prott. When I 
think of them, my heart contracts 
with despair and revulsion. And 
yet — a scientist must be honest — 
it is not all despair. I feel a little 
sorry for them, a little flattered at 
their need for me. And I am not, 
even now, altogether hopeless. 
Perhaps some day — some day — I 



shall understand the prott. 

I am going to put this diary in 
a permaloy cylinder and jet it 
away from the ship with a signal 
rocket. I can soup up the rocket's 
charge with power from the fuel 
tanks. I have tried it on the calculators, and I think the rocket 
can make it to the edge of the 
gravitational field of the Solar 
System. 

Good-by, Earth. I am doing it 
for you. Remember me. 

FOX put the last page of the 
manuscript down. "The poor 
bastard," he said. 

"Yeah, the poor bastard. Sitting out there in deep space, year 
after year, listening to those 
things bellyaching, and thinking 
what a savior he was" 

"I can't say I feel much sympathy for him, really. I suppose 
they followed the signal rocket 
back." 

"Yeah. And then they increased. Oh, he fixed it, all right." 

There was a depressed silence. 
Then Fox said, "I'd better go. 
Impatient" . 

"Mine, too." 

They said good-by to each 
other on the curb. Fox stood waiting, still not quite hopeless. But 
after a moment the hateful voice 
within his head be&an: 

"I want to tell you more about 
— ing the — " 