
VOOSE FALSE TEETH? 



The makers of POLIDCOT offer you 
Double Your Money Back unless this 



POLI-GRIP 




Many tried powders, « T -j 
found they failed! $ 

Read what they say 
about this new way, 

"For ten years my teeth wouldn't stay 
tight for more than two hours a day. I 
tried powders, but nothing worked till 
your new cream, Poli-Grip, came along," 
Mrs. T. W , Medfield, Mass. 
**I like the cool taste of Poli-Grip and 
the smooth way it holds my teeth. It is 
easy to apply and hAlds tight for so long." 

Mrs. L. W. N., Ottumwa, Iowa 
"I found your new cream, Poli-Grip, very 
pleasant and mild-tasting and it held my 
loose plates very tight, longer than anything I've tried." 

Mrs. H. D. M., Beadentown, Florida 
"I like the wonderful holding strength 
of your new cream better than anything 
I've ever used. I like Poli-Grip*a refreshing taste, too." 

H. B. V., East Canaan, Conn. 
"I definitely prefer Poli-Grip to other 
products I've tried. It holds my plate . 
tighter and feels comfortable longer. PoliGrip is cooling, soothing, never gritty.™ 
Mrs. K. 1»* Los Angeles, Calif, 




Double Your Money Back Unless it Gives You 
MORE COMFORT. MORE SECURITY 

THAN YOU EVER HAD BEFORE 



Yes, the people who make Polident, the world's largest 
selling denture cleanser, are standing right behind their 
new adhesive cream, Poli-Grip, with an ironclad guarantee. You get double your money back, if Poli-Grip doesn't 
hold your plates tighter, longer than anything you've ever 
tried. 

And that's not all. See if you don't find that Poli-Grip 
does all these wonderful things for you, toof 

1. . . . form a cushion between your plate and gums to 
eliminate the friction that makes gums sore and raw. 

2. . . . hold shallow lowers, despite lack of suction. 

3. . . . seal the edges of plates so food particles can't get 
underneath to cause irritation. 

4. . . . enable you to eat hard-to-chew foods in comfort, 
like steak, apples, celery, even com-on-the-cob. 
. . . give you full confidence to laugh, talk, sing without 
fear of embarrassment due to slipping plates. 

6. hold plates tight even during strenuous 

sessions of coughing or sneezing. 
Won't life be wonderful with all these torments behind you? Be sure to be among the 
first to learn the glorious- eomfort of holding 
loose false teeth tight and snug with PoliGripl Buy a tube at your drugstore as soon 
as possible. 



5. 



Take a tip from £Mr. Industry" 




E. V. RICKENB ACKER 
fmldtnt one* Gef)*roi Manager of 



Eddie Riekenbacker cashed In 
on an I. C. S. course and natural leadership to win the top 
man 0/ industry title for 1951. 

Mr. Riekenbacker took an LCS, course in 
automotive engineering when he was a kid working in a bicycle shop. That was the start of the 
famous Riekenbacker formula for making opportunity, being ready when it came. Last year a 
Forbes Magazine survey — polling business executives, securities analysts and others in the world of 
finance — found him top man of industry for 1951. 
Of total votes received, his name led all others. 

Hero of two world wars, top-drawer racing 
driver and automotive engineer, the hard-won 
success of the dynamic head of Eastern Air Lines 
is an. inspiration for all who have the determination to get ahead and the intelligence to go 
about it in the right way. Think through, then 
follow through. 

To make your opportunity — to be ready when it 
comes — obtain specialized training through I.C.S. 
With more than 400 courses to choose from, it's 
easy to increase your knowledge and aptitudes. 
Fill in and mail the coupon below today! 



INTERNATIONAL CORRESPONDENCE SCHOOLS [CS 



BOX 3969.Y, SCRANTON 9, PENNA. 



Without cost or obligation, pleew lend me (he booKlft about Hie course BEFORE which I hive marked X: 

ART □ Hailing 

□ Cummtfctil Art C Steam Fitting 
U tttpUM end Boo* D Ail Conditioning 

Illustrating Q ElfKtrkian 
P Cartooning BUSINESS 

□ Snow Card and Sign Lettering 
O Fiiiimn Illustrating 

AUTOMOTIVE 



ItwJ Ri 
C C'iwel-Ga; Znt net 
AVIATION 

Aeronautical Engineering Ji, 

□ A i reran Engine Mechanic 

□ Airplane Drifting 
BUILDING 

O AicBiiecture 

□ Arch. Draftini 

D Building Contractor 
C til ima ting 

C Carpenter and Will Work 

□ Carpenter For amain 

□ Reading Blueprint) 
G Home Planning 

□ Plumbing 



□ Certified Public Accountant 
C Attounling 
G Bookkeeping 

□ Stenography end Typing 
D iKfttn M 

O Federal Tat 

C business Coirwpondence 

□ Personnel and Libci Relations 

□ Advertising 

□ Retail Business Management 

□ Managing Small Busmtsi 

□ Stlet Management 

□ Salesmanship 

D traffic Management 
CH EM I STAY 

□ Ch em real Engineering 
DChemntiy 

tj Analytical Chemistry 
C Petroleum— Nil I Gas 

□ Pulp and Papti Making 



CIVIL.STflUCTUHAL □ 
ENGIN EER1 NG 

□ Civil Engineering 

□ Structure! Engineering 

□ Surveying end Mapping 
Struct or at Drafting 

□ Hifhwiy Engineering 

□ Reading Blueprints 

□ Cnncrete Construction 

□ Sanitary Enjineerin( 
DRAFTING 

□ Aircraft malting 

□ Architectural Drartlnaj 

□ Electrical Oralting 
C Mechanical Drnfllna. 

□ Structural Dulling 

□ Sfteet Melet Drafting 

C Mine Survey in t «n0 Draft, 
ELECTRICAL 

□ Electrical Engineering 

□ Electrician .... . 

□ Electrical Msintenence 

□ Electrical Drafting 

□ Eletlric Power and light 

□ Linemen 
HIGH SCHOOL 

□ High ScNool Subiects 



O Phase tewl inflfiutfu ttwt lt.t. —mm 
training hr com pan in. 



College Preparatory 
Hatrtemairo 
Commenial 
Good English 
MECHANICAL 
AND SHOP 
Mechanical Engineering 
Industrial Engineering 
Industrial Super.™ on 
Fere manshift 
Mocrtan.cal Driltini 
Machine Ces icn-Draflinjj 
Machine Shop Fraclice 
Tool Design 

HHluttrU Instrumentation 
Machine Shop. |r iprttion 
Raiding Blueprint j 
Toolmak ing 
Gas-Electric ~ ■" 



Stationary Strum Enxipeerinf 



RADIO.TEL EV1S10N, 
COMMUNICATIONS 

□ General Radio 

□ Radio Operation 



□ Television 

□ Electron its 

□ Telephone Work 
RAILROAD 

D Locomciive Engine** 
C Diesel Lucemotivt 

□ Air Br akts □ Cat InipectM 
ORailruad Adminittiation 

TEXTILE 

□ Teitila Engineering 

□ Cotton Manufacture 

□ Rayon Manufacture 



Heat Treatment— Metallurgy O Woolen Manufacture) 

. Metal Work □ Loom Filing 

Sheet Metal fatt.rn Draft mi □ Finishing end Dyelruj 



Re'; ;.POWER 
Cf.mbusticn Engineering 
Diet el -Flee trie 
Electrklight and Power 



O Tent ire Resigning 
HOME ARTS 

□ Dressmaking and Designing 

□ Cookery 

C Tea Room Management 



-Age


-Home Ai 



NOW PUBLISHED EVERY MONTH 

STARTLING 

UlftlllLlllU 


stones 


Vol. 28, No. 2 A THRILLING PUBLICATION 


December, 1952 


Featured Novel 




THE LONG VIEW Fletcher Prott 

There was nothing to hold them together except knowing they 
might he the very last people on Uller — or, perhaps, the Brat! 


10 


Three Novelets 




WHOEVER YOU ARE Judith Merril 

The Earth-Rocket left for the stars — and returned with aliens 


62 


LOVE THAT AIR! Kendell Foster Crossen 

A galaxy full of customers — and he bad only himself to sell 


92 


THE CHILDREN Miriam Allen de Ford 

Maybe McElroy shouldn't have begun that time travel business 


110 


Short Stories 




SAIL ONI SAIL ON! Philip Jose Farmer 

Christopher Columbus had a strange surprise in store for him 


55 


THE BOOK OF THE DEAD H. H. West 

There are more ways to conquer a world than lighting for it 


79 


SHOW ME THE WAY TO GO HOME Gordon R. Dickson 

"Hey diddle diddle, the talking cat and tie Cupeiians ..." 


83 


Features 




VIDEO-TECHNICS Pot Jones 

CURRENT FAN PUBLICATIONS Jerome Bixby 


6 
9 
51 
142 


N L PINES, Publisher FANNY ELLSWORTH. Managing Editor 
EDWARD R. ROFHEART, Art Director SAMUEL MINES, Editor 


Cover Painting by 
EMSH 



STARTLING STORIES l*uMtshed CTery month by Bettor Publications, inc.. It L. Pine*. Preiident. at 11JS E. Valle Are.. 
KokonKi Ind. fcrtltomi and eiecutlre offices, 10 East «th St.. Mew Tori 1«. H. T. Entered as second-QUas matter at th# 
po^i oillce tit Kokoiuo. Ind.. under the act of March 3. 1619. Copyright. 1951. bj Better Publications. Inc. Subscription (it 
Issued) B.00; single copies. Lit; foreign and Canadian twauge eatra. lo poilMHiUai "itit tfeta > WM|*wt P'" 3 * 5™Si 
postal zone number. ■ any. Manuscripts will not M relumed unless ■Ww rf l gM *T s£4f-«ddrw«ed stumped enTel opes and 
are submitted at the author's risk. Names of »li charaetars used is swrles and aerni- Action i articles are fictitious. K tho 
name Of U» Mm Pr™oo at rtimkm Institution la used. It is a colneidoor*. December. 1852. {,*£J*^, ^ usk 




Hi 
I 



The Talk of the Locker Rooms! 

JOE (In Lee Shirts and Pants) 1 1 wear my Lee Chetopa Twill Shirts 
and Pants everywhere. They're good looking and easy to work in! I 
keep a fresh pair in my locker for street wear, 

PETE (in Lee Overalls): Never wore an overall longer, or made of a 
tougher fabric, than these Lee Jelt Denim Overalls! 

BOB (In Lee Dungarees): Lee Work Clothes sure have 'em all beat 
for looks and wear and comfort! 

UNION-MADE • SANFORIZED. • GUARANTEED THI H. D. LEE COMPANY 




i 



mm 



A Science Fiction Department Featuring Letters from Readers 



WE ARE but lately returned from the hamlet of Brooklyn, to which we were beguiled by invitation to observe the unveiling of 
a baby electric brain about to be mass-produced 
for business. If you are one who reads science 
fiction with your tongue occasionally in your 
cheek, we heartily wish you had been there. For 
1 what we saw was so much like what you have 
read in stories labeled fiction that it became necessary to pinch ourself and mutter that this was 
real, real, real, not a story. 

Elecom 100 is the name of the little monster 
we saw in action. It is the baby brother of such 
giant computers as EDVAC. built for the Army, 
and ENIAC, built for Bell Telephone. It was 
designed by Dr. Samuel Lubkin, a cherubic, 
modest sort of genius who had a large hand in 
building its big brothers and who showed off 
his baby to the press with a refreshing candor 
about its growing pains. 

Digital Computer 

Technically speaking, Elecom 100 is a digital 
computer. It is not a "brain" in the sense that 
it is capable of real thinking, but computation is 
a kind of thought at that and the end results are 
sometimes startlingly similar. 

When we arrived the demonstration was well 
under way. Correspondents, male and female, 
were perched on folding chairs, paying heed to 
Dr. Lubkin who was explaining, with disarming 
informality, as much as he could make intelligible in lay terms. A typewriter seemed to be 
busily clattering somewhere. We gathered that 
Elcom 100 had just demonstrated its superiority 
over logarithms by solving ten lines from a 
seven-place table faster and more accurately 
than a hurnano id -ope rated slide rule, had computed a weekly payroll in a flash and figured up 
a correspondent's income tax for him in exactly 
1-5 seconds. For this alone it could have a promising future. 

The machine took the form of an upright 



U-shaped panel, covered with vacuum tubes. In 
front of this was a common steel office desk with 
a typewriter in a center well. The sound seemed 
to come from here. There was an operator sitting at the typewriter but he didn't seem to be 
doing anything. Yet the typewriter was obviously chattering at a great rate. 

We got a word in during a lull. "Who's typing?" we asked Dr. Lubkin. 

"The machine," he replied, as though it were 
the most ordinary answer in the world. 

Stranger Than Fiction 

For ourselves, gooseflesh appeared on all areas 
of our epidermis and the small hairs on the back 
of our neck stood up. Sure — we've read it a 
hundred times, we've bought dozens of stories 
in which it goes on. But this wasn't a story — 
we were watching this. If you don't think it's 
different we just hope you get a chance to see it. 

"We have taught the machine the rules of a 
game called NIM," Dr. Lubkin now announced. 
"Would anyone like to play?" 

A rash reporter would. NIM is a game of 
combinations, somewhat like a more complicated 
tic-tac-toe. It is played with marbles, divided 
into groups, each player being free to take as 
many marbles as he likes from one group, in 
each move. The trick is to take the final marble 
and to do this you have to leave the correct 
number of marbles always behind you. 

Seven groups of marbles were used. The 
human was given his choice of making the first 
move or letting the machine move first. The 
reporter who wanted to play elected to go first 
and took some marbles from the first group. 
This information was then typed into the machine, after which the operator sat back. Lights 
flashed all over the board, the panel hummed 
busily. Then the typewriter chattered into action, and again I felt that atavistic, primordial 
lifting of the hackles as the machine, in obvious 
.(Continued on page 126) 



WHAT SECRET POWER 
DID THIS MAN POSSESS? 




Benjamin Franklin 

(A Rosicrucian) 



Why was this man great? How docs anyone — man or woman — achieve greatness? Is 
it not by mastery of the powers within ourselves? 

Know the mysterious world within you! Attune yourself to the wisdom of the ages! Grasp 
the inner power of your mind! Learn the 
secrets of a full and peaceful life! Benjamin 
Franklin— like many other learned and great 
men and women — was a Rosicrucian. The 
Rosicrucians (NOT a religious organization) 
first came to America in 1694. Today, headquarters of the Rosicrucians send over seven 
million pieces of mail annually to all parts of 
the world. 

%ke Rosicrucians 

SAM IOSE • (AMORC) • CALIFORNIA 




THIS BOOK FREE! 

Wrlt« for YOUR FREE 
COPY of "The Mastery of 
Life" — TODAY. No obligation. No salesmen. A nonprofit organization. Addresst 
Scribe M.A.V. f 



SEND THIS COUPON 



Scribe M.A.V. 

The ROSICRUCIANS (AMORC) 
San Jose, California 

Please send me the jree book. The Mdiiny o] UU, which 
explains how 1 may learn to use my faculties and powers 

NAME . ■ 



ADDRESS— CITY 



Operation Television 




by PAT JONES 



FTNHERALDED and unpublicized, an event 
occurred on tv last summer that made history in the medium. Listed only on programs as 
"The Proceedings of the American Medical Association," it did not capture the imagination or 
attention of a very large audience. Sounded too 
dry, and not at all entertaining. Yet for the first 
time in tv history the general public was admitted to an operating amphitheatre during the 
course of an actual operation. 

For eight minutes the tv audience watched Dr. 
Fogelson as he operated on a patient suffering 
from a duodenal ulcer, while the surgeon, former 
Chief of Staff of Wesley Memorial Hospital, 
and associate professor of the Medical School of 
Northwestern University, explained in simple 
terms, for the benefit of his layman audience, 
precisely what he was doing. 

Similar presentations have for several years 
been telecast over closed circuits for the benefit 
of the medical profession alone; this marked the 
first time, however, that the interested layman 
could be an armchair observer of the skill and 
competence displayed by one of the nation's foremost surgeons. 

Almost to the last minute some diehards 
argued that the general public was neither 
"mature" nor "objective" enough to take such 
advanced tv fare in its stride. It was, the more 
liberal view that the American public should 
become increasingly aware of the tremendous 
progress that has been made by American 
science in the past fifty years. 

At the turn of the century it would have been 
considered foolhardy £ven to attempt to perform 
an operation for a duodenal ulcer. And to think 
of a camera's eye catching the event and relaying 
it to an audience of hiyman across the country 
would have been sheer madness — except, perhaps, to an advanced student of science fiction 



who knows quite well that today's fiction is 
tomorrow's fact. 

Ad Schneider, Special Events Producer at 
NBC, tells us that to the participating medical 
men it was all "part of the routine." Complimented on his performance, the surgeon smiled 
indulgently at the television technicians. "Why 
boys," he said, "I just did what you fellows told 
me." 

The operation lasted for nearly four hours, 
and the eight minutes which was televised were 
fitted into a full hospital schedule. No allowances were made for the televising, other than 
admitting the technicians and their equipment to 
the operating room. 

There were several unique features on the program, not the least of which was the way in 
which it was introduced. Across the tv screen 
undulated a pip of light, accompanied by a regular ta-thuntp, la-thump, la-thump. It was a 
pictorial representation of a normal heartbeat, 
accompanied by the sound of the heart valves as 
they functioned. 

This was done by adapting to the tv screen a 
tape recorder which reproduced the sound of a 
normally beating heart, and an electron cardioscope for visualizing the cardiac sounds as they 
are heard. At present this device is used to record cardiac ausculation for teaching purposes. 
By listening to tape recordings, medical students 
can learn to recognize immediately every type 
of faulty heartbeat. A heartbeat recorded on 
tape may in the future provide a permanent 
record in -a doctor's files, independent of his 
memory and written notes. 

We hope you'll be watching the next time 
scientific history is being made on your tv 
screen. You'll be interested to know that AMA 
has two such meetings yearly. Look for the next 
one. If it's on tv, you're in for a fascinating 
experience. 



There was nothing to hold them togethet 
but knowing they might be the 
last people on Viler — or the first. . . . 



I 

THE waiter set down Greta Manning's dessert. "It's something they bring from 
Freya," said her father. "Called 'Dream Potion' 
I believe. Whatever we think of the intelligence 
of those psychs, I'm obliged to admit that they 
have elevated cookery to the status of a fine art. 
Good?" 

"Mmmm," said Greta, allowing the pink concoction to caress her palate as she used her 
tongue to maneuver into a corner behind her 
teeth the capsule she knew she would find in it. 
"Too bad you don't eat sweets." 
ll 



12 



"I do not consider It a 
Theodore Manning, serenely. He turned 
to the bald-headed man. "The electronic caluculator shows that with my 
bodily chemistry, there is a high probability that I might lose as much as four 
years off my life." 

The bald-headed man nodded. "Gambling is unscientific," he said, with the 
air of a man repeating a formula. 

Greta put one hand on the table. "I 
think I'll go and make myself beautiful," 
she said, "if you don't mind waiting for 
a minute before we go in for the show." 

Theodore Manning nodded ; the bald- headed man stood up courteously. As 
the girl vanished through the hangings 
in a swirl of soft lights he sat down 
again and said : "Your daughter making 
herself beautiful impresses me as almost as unnecessary a task as proving 
Einstein's field theory." 

Manning nodded. "Both sides of the 
family brought physically eugenic 
lines," he said. "It's the temperamental 
number that's dangerously high. She's 
a 39, even though she is a DD, As a matter of fact, that's one of the things I 
wanted to talk to you about before the 
Association went into open session. I 
think it's always advisable to get as 
many of these details settled in advance 
as possible, and there are certain points 
in the program we have worked out in 
the Terran Council that we would be 
unwilling to — expose for public discussion." 

The bald-headed man said : "You can 
always count on the support of the Odin 
delegation for any truly scientific plan." 

"The immediate relation of this plan 
to scientific advancement may not be 
obvious — " began Manning, and then 
stopped as Greta came in again, the 
rainbows of her party dress dancing 
around her. ( She had read the message 
in the capsule and rid herself of both 
via the disposal chute.) 

"Most perfect of fathers," she said, 
"your imponderable fraction of a daughter remembers that she has forgotten to 
tell you about something. I have a date. 



STARTLING STORIES 

loss," said For after 



the show this evening." 
"Night-spotting," said Manning. 
"Who is it this time?" 

"Edgar Braun." she said, looking at 
the tablecloth. "He's found a new one. 
It's only twenty minutes' flight, and he 
says the dancers do rituals from 'way 
back in the twentieth century. They 
come from some place called Bali, where 
the Japanese were an imperial people. 
Imagine!" 

Manning had a slight frown. "Isn't 
this the third or fourth time you've been 
going somewhere with this young man ?" 
he said. "Emotional involvements are 
unscientific." 

"Oh, pooh!" She reached over gaily 
and patted his cheek. "I'm as emotionally involved with him as I am with the 
Secretary. He just knows a lot of queer 
places, and we have a good time. It isn't 
anything like an acquaintance." 

The bald; headed man, who had been 
glancing from one to the other, said: 
"Edgar Braun. That's a rather common 
name on Odin, where I come from. Is 
he from there, by any chance ?" 

GRETA flashed him a glance. "I think 
he was originally. But he came here 
to take his Ph.D. in vulcanology at Hawaii, because you have so few volcanoes 
on Odin." 

The bald-headed man toyed with his 
spoon, and dropped it as the waiter began to collect the debris of the dinner. 
"Most of the Brauns tend to be moderates. There's a psych streak somewhere 
in the line, I've been told." 

Greta laughed. "You needn't worry 
about Edgar. If there was a psych 
streak in his line, be must have come 
to Terra to get rid of environmental influences that could develop it. He's a 
perfectly good DD. I've seen his card; 
after all, my parent taught me that." 
She glanced demurely at Manning. "In 
fact his full number is DD-24-19. Well, 
in the first place, anyone with a 19 temperamental rating couldn't possibly be 
a psych personality, no matter how deeply the tendency might be embedded in 



THE LONG VIEW IS 

his genes. And — " she flashed a glance apologize to them, then saw the baldat her father" — do you really think I headed man watching her with frowncould be interested emotionally in a 24 ? ing concentration, and sailed past to the 
Ten points below me in intelligence? place in the middle, thrusting her thumb 
He'd try to repeat jokes on me to make into the socket. 

sure I understood. In fact, he does." The "Stellania" reached its last won
Theodore Manning emitted a sigh and derful chords. There was a breathless 

reached under the edge of the table to pause, the screen disappeared, and they 

insert his thumb in the register which were looking into the depths of a stage 

would automatically charge the presi- that seemed to run back into infinity. A 

dent of the Association for the Advance- blue light lay at one corner, a yellow one 

ment of Science with the price of the at the other. No matter how often Greta 

dinners. "No, I suppose not," he said, had seen it, there was always a thrill in 

"Even the psychs tell us that women the opening of the eternal contest, and 

d Sttianjtp 71&W Wahid 

TAKE a silicone world with silicone life . . . silicone life? Why not? 
Life doesn't necessarily have to have our ow n carbon-oxygen metabolism — there are many chemical combinations possible- But given a silicone 
world with silicone animals and plants. Fletcher Pratt has constructed a 
tale in which the science is authentic and consistent and never out of 
character with the story. If you want an inside look at how this was 
done, read the author's own notes on the planet Uller which you will 
find elsewhere in this issue. 

THE LONG VIEW, along with two companion pieces on the silicone 
planet, is already scheduled for book publication later in the year. Aside 
from its interest as a scientific exercise it abo happens to he a gripping 
and sophisticated story which we found quite enthralling. We don't 
have to invite you to let us know how you like it. You will. 

— The Editor 



have a greater capacity for imo n rsonal 
associative pleasure than men. What is 
the ancient word? — 'gold-excavating' — 
or something like that. I think I hear 
the 'Stellania' : shall we go in ?" 

The bald-headed man stood aside for 
Greta to take the second p'ace, as Manning, with the assurance of a man who 
is bored by merely petty courtesies, and 
whose position has entitled him to too 
many of them, led the way from the dining-stall down the corridor, the yellow 
lightnings of his physicist's evening 
dress flashing around him. 

The amusement room was already 
full, but as Manning strode down the 
aisle, a couple of techs next to a vacant 
seat scrambled out apologetically to take 
places farther back. Greta started to 



she gripped the base of the finger-controls more firmly as out of the blue 
depth -swam a p'anet, attended by twin 
moons. Another swam into view on the 
yellow side; from the lightings on them, 
it was evident that they were satellites 
of different stars. A tiny dot that would 
be a space-ship arced from the blue 
planet to one of its moons. The music 
took a rapid beat to indicate times and 
distances. 

Greta, watching in frowning concentration as she made her calculations, felt 
the bald-headed man relax beside her 
with a little chuckle. He said : "I'm glad 
I'm here as a visitor and don't feel obligated to play. Counting the primary 
of that b'ue planet, that makes it a problem of four bodies. They don't make it 



14 



STARTLING STORIES 



that complicated for us on Odin." 

She flashed him a glance. "There are 
a lot of techs and low-number scientists 
in for the Association meeting. Sssh, 
I want to think." 

<"|N THE yellow planet there was a 
" pinpoint of light, the indication to 
those familiar with the game that it 
possessed atomic explosives, and another space-ship dot soared away from 
it hunted vaguely through the space between and then returned to the surface. 
The bald-headed man said: "They're 
giving you plenty to work with; space 
travel on both of them." 

Prom one of the moons of the blue 
planet, a spaceship dot rose jerkily. 
"Damn !" said Greta, her fingers flying. 
"I was afraid someone would start too 
soon. There hasn't been time to establish the rotational relations. There!" 

The space-ship swept around in a 
graceful curve to the blue planet's other 
moon, and the girl watched intently as 
the bald-headed man said: "Don't you 
often find yourself overruled by a majority? I find it frustrating." 

"Not very often," said Greta, eyes 
still on the stage. "This machine is set 
to accept the nearest accurate calculation, and the majority only controls 
when it's a question of calculations of 
the same order of accuracy. I'm pretty 
good at math, so I get away with quite 
a lot. . . ." 

She broke off suddenly as two spaceships left the yellow planet in a long 
curve. Then : "Somebody playing on the 
yellow side is good ; look at that, they're 
orbiting around each other and getting 
maximum mutual course correction." 

She pressed keys; the music gave a 
skirl, and two, three, four space ships 
left the blue planet for its outer moon, 
curving in sharply. "Good girl, if you 
did it," chuckled the bald-headed man. 
"That will give greater distance capacity and better angle of approach." 

Greta didn't answer ; her lips a little 
parted, she had become utterly absorbed 
in the great game, as miniature space


ship after space-ship left the two planets 
and maneuvered toward each other in a 
maze more intricate than three-dimensional chess. Someone who had chosen 
to play on the blue side made a mistake, 
two of the space-ships collided and 
dropped back toward the planet as she 
said, "Damn !" again, and "We haven't 
an unlimited number of those." But 
then someone on the other side blundered, too, and one of its ships shot off 
at a long tangent to the very limit of 
the theatre, from which there came a 
flash to announce it was lost. 

In the central space the opposing 
fleets were marshalling, the yellows 
moving the more rapidly, but also more 
raggedly, not seeming to have quite the 
precision Greta's accurate calculations 
were giving their opponents. They approached each other; there were little 
flashes here and there, and the miniature space-ships began to disappear as 
hits were scored. The losses were not 
all on one side, but the blues, with their 
compact formation and better maneuvering, were clearly gaming, gaining. 
Suddenly, the yellow fleet split apart, 
was decimated, in full retreat. A murmur rose from the audience as the pursuing blues swept them away — all but 
one, which almost unnoticed, slipped 
past the outskirts of the blue fleet toward 
its home planet. 

It closed in suddenly, there was the 
flicker of light that meant a super-nuclear bomb, the whole planet began to 
burn, and abruptly the curtain was 
closed and the lights in the amusement 
room came on. 

Greta, her face downcast, turned toward her father. He was sitting with 
his hands still on the controls, a smile 
that might be triumph on his countenance. 

"Oh!" said the girl, "You did that! 
It wasn't fair!" 

"The phrase is unscientific and tinged 
with emotionalism," saidTheodore Manning. " 'Fair' is a term from the old 
civil courts, I believe, relating to the 
period before it became possible to 



THE LONG VIEW 



15 



achieve scientifically accurate results 
from a given combination of factors." 



II 



Jl HEODORE MANNING snapped 
the key on the phone to the "Out ; Make 
Record" position, adjusted the panel beside his chair to show the face of anyone at the door without showing his 
own and sat down. 

"Do you care for tobacco?" he said; 
"Or a spray of some kind in the room?" 

"No thanks," said the bald-headed 
man. "Without neglecting the amenities, 
we're a little more austere on Odin than 
the home planet, and I never acquired 
either habit." 

"Pity," said Manning, taking out a 
cigar and lighting it. "You miss a good 
deal." He drew in a couple- of reflective 
puffs, and then; "As a matter of fact, 
I'm rather glad my daughter isn't here." 

A small smile was visible at the corner of the bald-headed man's mouth. "I 
have been wondering when the exalted 
President of the Association for the 
Advancement of Science would get 
around to explaining why he invited a 
minor delegate from Odin to dinner." 

"Sarcasm does not become you," said 
Manning. "Nor does false modesty. As 
a matter of fact, here on Terra we call 
the Odin scientists who are disposed to 
cooperate with our more advanced elements the Lauria group, and leave it at 
that." 

"I see," said Lauria, and waited. 

"I suppose you have considered means 
of dealing with the psychs yourself." 

The bald-headed man's impassiveness 
suddenly deserted him. "We've considered it to the point of over-production of adrenalin!" he cried. "But what 
can we do? We not only have them to 
fight, but the damned moderates! We 
tried to get the marriage rejection regulation repealed on Odin, just for that 
one planet, and do you think we could 
do it? I Tl be damned if we could! Moderates!" He spat the word. "And they 
call themselves scientists!" 



"I am glad you feel so strongly about 
it," said Manning. "The more advanced 
scientists here on Terra have long since 
reached the conclusion that the only way 
to break up this connection between the 
moderates and those confounded witchdoctors, the psychs, is to eliminate the 
latter from the Association entirely." 

"Wouldn't the psychs appeal to the 
political authorities?" 

Manning smiled. "That might have 
some weight on a few of the outer 
planets, where the environment is still 
incompletely subdued; Magni, f-jr example, or even to a lesser degree, your 
own. I can assure you that on Terra or 
Venus or Thor, the political authorities 
are only a kind of game for people of 
low I. Q.'s — techs, or artists or servs. 
We merely go before them and present a 
scientifically established fact, and they 
make the necessary changes in the regulations." 

"AH right, then." Lauria patted himself on the top of his naked skull. "The 
political authorities won't interfere if 
you succeed in eliminating the psychs 
from the Association as unscientific. 
But how do you propose to accomplish 
that? They have votes in the Association, and so do the damned moderates." 

"Did it ever occur to you how the 
votes of the psychs are cast in the 
parent Association?" 

"No. What difference does it make?" 

"It makes a good deal, as it happens. 
The psychs are inordinately proud of 
always being a unit on every question. 
They consider this agreement one of the 
proofs of the 'fact', as they call it, that 
psychology is really a science." 

"Yes, I have heard something about 
that," said Lauria. "In fact, they took 
away the license to practice of one on 
Odin because he couldn't agree with the 
others on a diagnosis." 

11/fANNING said: "You wander into 
^"-^ reminiscence, which is unscientific. 
Therefore, when any question comes up 
for decision, the vote of the psychs is 
cast as a unit — and it is cast by the No. 



16 



STARTLING STORIES 



1 psych, the one with the highest intelligence rating." 

"Who is at present old Henrik Kool," 
said Lauria. "As stubborn a man as I 
know about. Do you suggest that the 
next man in line might be more amenable and that Kool is not immortal?" 

"I suggest nothing of the kind. The 
resort to violence is barbarous, and all 
our advanced group would be the first 
to condemn it. Moreover, the next man 
in line is Walter Trevenna, I believe, 
and we should gain nothing by substituting him for Kool. No. We have 
developed a far better and more subtle 
plan." 

"Go ahead." 

"What would you say if I told you that 
I know of a psych with an 11 intelligence rating?" 

Lauria's eyes opened wide. "I would 
first say that you were perpetrating a 
joke and then, if convinced you are serious, that I'm surprised he hasn't already been made No. 1 psych. Why, 
you're only a 16 yourself!" 

Manning smiled again. "It's no joke, 
and it's perfectly extraordinary that a 
man with one of the lowest intelligence 
figures ever reached should be a psych. 
Or perhaps, I shouldn't call him a man 
yet. He's not even thirty years old, and 
hasn't been declared adult. The name is 
Lajos Harkavy — I believe Hungarian 
by ancestry — and his full rating is 
BC-11-71. Quite aside from the fact that 
his temperamental figure is so high that 
he couldn't be anything but a psych, 
he's interested in painting." He gave a 
note of utter contempt to the last word, 
and stopped, but as Lauria continued to 
look at him without saying anything, 
went on: 

"Well, our proposal is simply to have 
him declared adult." 

Now Lauria frowned. "I don't see . . ." 
he began, and then; "Let me ask two 
questions: how would having a man 
with that degree of intelligence at the 
head of the psych interest help our position? And how do you expect the Association to declare so young a man 



adult? Is that why you want my help?" 

Manning said; "That's three questions and not two, as a matter of scientific accuracy. I'll take up the first one 
first. Lajos Harkavy has received general scientific and special psychological 
training, but as I was just remarking, 
he seems to have a temperamental feeling for the arts. That is, if he were 
head of the psychs, one of two things 
could be expected. Either any unified 
action on their part would be paralyzed 
by internal conflicts among them, or he 
would remain perfectly indifferent to 
what happened to the general body. As 
a matter of fact, I believe it would not 
be too difficult to get him to go to Freya, 
where the atmosphere would take care 
of it that he enjoyed himself harmlessly 
without ever bothering us again. And 
as he has a good 120 years expectation 
of life yet, that would guarantee us a 
free hand for this length of time. I 
think it is not beyond possibility that 
we could get the regulations altered in a 
satisfactory manner; even eject the 
psychs altogether from the Association." 

T AURIA nodded. "Your line of rea* J soiling is convincing," he said "And 
I withdraw my third question. I'll be 
glad to help in any way I can. But the 
other one is still more serious; how do 
you propose to have him declared 
adult?" 

"There is one case in which any member of the Association can be declared 
adult and admitted to full participation, 
provided he has a low-number intelligence rating. That is — when he marries." 

"I see. So you propose to set up an 
acquaintance looking toward marriage 
for this Harkavy. Did you have anyone 
special in mind?" 

Manning laid down his cigar. "I have. 
My daughter, Greta Manning." 

Lauria made a sound which could not 
be interpreted in words. 

"Divorce your mind from emotionalism," said Manning, "and consider the 



THE LO 

matter rationally. In the first place, the 
psychs will hardly object to the idea of 
their future leader marrying my daughter. The objections, if any, would come 
from our advanced group, and it is 
precisely for this reason that I asked 
you to drop in tonight — to tell you that 
the idea has my entire approval. In the 
second place, their intelligence numbers 
are within three points of each other, 
which makes it a eugenically desirable 
permanent union." 

"But — " began Lauria. 

Manning raised a hand. "In science, 
we must learn to reject merely emotional appeals: that is the thing that distinguishes us from the psychs. I am 
quite aware that she is my daughter, 
and I have the normal paternal feelings 
toward her. However, as we were remarking earlier, her temperamental 
number is dangerously low, and I have 
reason to believe that she has been contacting some of the moderates, perhaps 
is involved with them. We managed to 
get a spy ray on Toijiru Shigemitsu, 
and it reported she had met him at least 
once." 

"You overwhelm any objections I can 
make before I think of them," said 
Lauria, "but I still have one more. How 
do you know the acquaintance will result 
in a marriage? That is, may not this 
Harkavy already have an emotional involvement?" 

"It doesn't matter. People with anywhere near as low an intelligence number as his are excessively rare, and if 
either she or Harkavy should reject the 
acquaintance, they might be forced to 
take it up again at the age of compulsory marriage. As for any emotional 
involvement Harkavy has at present, it 
may be dismissed; his intelligence rating is so high that he could not conceivably be allowed to marry any such person. For that matter, I don't think he 
has much opportunity where he is ; he's 
out on Uller." 

"That's one of the aberrant planets, 
isn't it? Silicone chemistry as I remember, and just barely habitable." 



rG VIEW 17 

"That's right. Why anyone should 
want to go there, I can't imagine, but 
he seems to consider it a good place to 
practice his art." 

Lauria said; "Very well, you can 
count on my support when the matter 
of the acquaintance comes up before 
the Eugenic Committee. I presume you 
yourself will have to offer objections 
simply for the sake of appearances?" 

Ill 

66 A 

xaLLL ready for a big evening?" 
said Edgar Braun lightly, as the serv 
closed the door of the flyer behind them. 

"Mmm-hm," said Greta. "I'm glad 
you picked an evening suit with brown 
radiations; it will go nicely with my 
rainbows." 

"I keep telling you we're temperamentally made for each other," he said, 
throwing in the switch. "If you'll only 
let me apply for an acquaintance — " 

The little machine soared, ducked 
lightly to the left in response to the 
warning signal indicating an incoming 
rocket express, and steadied toward the 
north, 

"Have you ever thought of the potentialities of model numbers?" asked 
Greta. 

"Oh, listen, Gree— " ~ 

"You listen. I've told you a dozen 
times that I refuse even to think about 
marriage or getting emotionally involved until this thing is decided, one 
way or another. Besides, if we lose, 
there won't be any chance for emotion. 
The advanced group is getting awfully 
close to putting through that regulation 
about not being able to refuse any marriage recommended by the Eugenk 
Committee. Father's stopped talking 
about it, and that means he's about 
ready to act. Where's the meeting going 
to be held tonight?" 

"At a casino on the shore of Lake 
George. Paul found a spy ray planted 
in the Rodman place. As a matter of 
fact . . ." His voice trailed off. 



18 



STARTLING STORIES 



"As a matter of fact, what?" 

"Nothing. You'll find out when you 
see Toijiru." 

It was dark inside the flyer as the 
silver ribbon of the Hudson grew small 
beneath the moon and a Montreal-New 
York carrier flashed above them in the 
opposite direction, its port-lights gleaming like a string of fireflies. Edgar 
Braun swung the flyer expertly into the 
long slant. "Take a look back, will you?" 
he said. "Just to check on whether we 
have a tail." 

Greta swung the basket-seat around 
and craned her neck. "Not unless he's 
beneath us," she said. "Who else is coming tonight?" 

"Just Toijiru and Paul Frasser. It's 
a special ; something came up. All right, 
close down, I'm going in." 

The flyer slid down the slope, bounced 
once on the surface of the lake in a 
cloud of spray, and rounded to the pier, 
where a serv hooked it in and swung 
back the door. As they climbed out the 
lights from the casino windows caught 
Greta's dress and once more turned it 
to a garment of rainbows, while the 
soft beat of music came from within. 

"This is a queer place to hold a meeting," sa ; d Greta. "Are you sure that the 
spray and the drinks won't affect our 
thinking?" 

"Toijiru thought of that. There are 
some little summerhouses on the hill at 
the back, and after you and I have had 
a dance or two, we're to go out there 
and meet them. I have the directions." 

The outer door slid back as he placed 
his hands in the black-light ray. and they 
were in the corridor, being greeted by 
a bowing superior serv, who bowed still 
more deeply at the full unit Braun slid 
into his hand, and led the way to the 
inner door. 

A FINE wave of spray met them with 
a pulse-tingling effect at the door; 
a dance had just ended, and exoticallyclad couples were laughing and talking 
as they made their way back to the 
tables. As the serv led them to ene, 



Braun said; "I don't suppose you have 
any idea of what your father is planning for the Association meeting?" 

"Sssh," said Greta, "you never can 
tell who might overhear." Then as they 
sat down; "Not precisely, only it's going to be something pretty tricky. He 
had dinner with the head delegate from 
Odin tonight, and yesterday it was one 
from Venus, and they both belong to 
the advanced group already." 

"I don't see how — " said Braun, and 
paused to give an order to the waiter, 
then completed his remark. " — how 
that makes any difference." 

"Don't you ? They'd vote for anything 
he proposed. He must be getting them 
ready to vote for something he doesn't 
propose." 

"I wouldn't have thought of that." 

"I know, Ed. That's one of the reasons I won't accept an acquaintance 
with you." 

The orchestra swung into a smooth 
rhythm that had its origin on one of the 
outer planets, and Edgar Braun, his 
face a little stricken, stood up and offered her his hand. The spray, as usual, 
was intensifying his emotions. As she 
pillowed her head against his shoulder, 
Greta said ; "Just this one. It's a long 
dance, and I think we can slip out when 
it ends. Come on, play up and pretend 
you're deliriously happy with me." 

He swung her through the movement 
of the dance, then they paused for a 
moment, making a pretense of consultation before he led her toward the exit 
at the back. There were gravel paths 
beyond the outer door here, winding 
up the slope among the trees, with 
muted lights set close to the ground to 
prevent stumbling. "Put your arm 
around me," commanded Greta, as they 
passed a turn-off that led to one of the 
summer-houses. "We have to make it 
look good, even if- we don't feel that 
way." 

"But I do," said Braun. "That's just 
the trouble. Here's the one, I think." 

He swung her round the curve past a 
screen of bushes and up to the summer


house. A light flashed dazzlingly in 
their faces, then shut off abruptly, and 
Paul Frasser's voice said; "It's all right. 
We're here." 

The little kiosk was intended for only 
two people, and the four of them had to 
squeeze close into the seat. Somebody 
touched the transparent weather-shielding into position, and Toijiru Shigem


itsu's voice said out of the dark ; "This 
is a very special meeting, particularly 
for you, Greta, They're getting ready 
to move." 

"1 know that already," said the girl. 

"You don't know all of it. Your father 
is going to have an order of acquaintance put through the Eugenic Committee for you." 



20 STARTLING 

There was a momentary silence. Then 
Greta said, low and hard; "I won't accept. I'll reject the acquaintance even 
before it starts." . 

"You had better hear the rest of it," 
said Shigemitsu. "He isn't going to offer 
it himself ; in fact, I wouldn't be surprised if he pretended to object. The 
acquaintance is one he could object to — 
Lajos Harkavy, who's going to be leader 
of the psychs as soon as he is declared 
adult." 

They couldn't see her mouth work in 
the dark, but it was a minute or two 
before she answered. "I've heard of him. 
Isn't he—?" 

Shigemitsu said; "He has one of the 
best intelligence numbers ever recorded, 
lower even than yours. The Eugenics 
Committee will put on every bit of pressure it can to bring the acquaintance to 
a marriage." 

TN THE dark someone who must have 

been Edgar Braun touched and 
squeezed the girl's hand as Shigemitsu 
paused and then went on : "The trouble 
is that Harkavy's temperamental rating is bad — " 

"I thought that one of the reasons I 
was working with you people was to do 
away with all that." 

"Let me go on. I use the word 'bad' 
only in the sense that the advanced 
group use it. Harkavy has psych training, but he appears to be more interested in painting, and Paul's contacts 
say that he's pretty lazy, just about the 
type the advanced group would want to 
use as a stooge. With him at the head 
of the psychs, they might be able to get 
through any number of new regulations 
— even the one they've been trying for 
to make all marriages compulsory." 

Paul Frasser's deep voice added; 
"They might even make their own group 
into a kind of sacred priesthood; without the psych vote, we're outnumbered 
badly in the Association." 

Greta said ; "They're a priesthood already, a grinding priesthood that has 
already wiped out nearly every bit of 



STORIES 

personal liberty in the worlds. Why, 

think, if — " 

Shigemitsu said ; "Yes. But we haven't 
much time." 

"All right, then," said Greta. "The 
practical question; what do you want 
me to do?" 

"Accept the acquaintance. We haven't 
any grounds for protesting it now before the Eugenic Committee or in the 
Association, and we don't understand 
what's going on. Perhaps your father 
suspects you of working with the moderates, or perhaps it's only that he 
wants to bring the psychs to his support somehow. Find out what this Harkavy chap is like and what he intends 
to do. Find out what his connection with 
your father's group is. Plant a spy-ray 
on him if you can." 

Greta shivered a little in the dark, although it was very warm with the four 
of them in the restricted summer-house. 
"You remember what we were talking 
about? What if my father's group succeeds in getting through the regulation 
making marriages compulsory after an 
acquaintance has been accepted? And 
I'm stuck for the rest of my life with 
this — this — " 

Shigemitsu said quietly ; "I have two 
sons. One of them had scientific status, 
and went to Venus. He didn't like what 
was happening in the swamp-mines 
there, and he couldn't get anyone interested, so he tried to organize some 
of the servs themselves in protest. They 
tried him for trying to elevate civil 
authority over scientific, reduced him to 
a tech, and sent him to Freya. He's still 
there, oh, quite happy- when we hear 
from him — breathing in that Freya 
atmosphere and unable to do his own 
thinking. He will probably live another 
hundred years, but we count him as already dead." 

Greta shivered again and rustled upright. "All right. I see what you mean. 
Only it's a little hard to take a chance 
on mortgaging your whole life just to 
find out something that ought to be easy 
to fin,d out, anyway." 



THE LONG VIEW 



Braun held the door open for her, 
then followed her out onto the path. The 
sound of footsteps came from somewhere up the slope, and she said; " — 
lovely, but I do want one more drink before we go home." 

"You're entitled to one more at least," 
he said aloud, then under his breath and 
with his head close to he rs; "Gree! 
There's one way you can get out of this 
acquaintance, and not have anyone object. You can take up a non-marriage 
connection with me. Will you ?" 

"No, Edgar." She put a hand on his 
arm. "I wouldn't be in this at all if I 
didn't believe that everyone should be 
allowed to live his own life, without 
scientists or anyone else telling them 
what to do. To do what you suggest 
would be choosing compulsion to avoid 
another." 

Behind them in the dark Paul Frasser 
said to Shigemitsu; "She is very young. 
One might almost think that she really 
considered emotional decisions as having value. Are you not afraid that this 
Harkavy will convert her fully to the 
psych position? It would be a pity to 
lose our best spy in the advanced 
group." 

"I don't think you need to be concerned," said Shigemitsu. "If we lose 
our spy in the advanced group, we gain 
one with the psychs. She can hardly 
refuse to continue working with us in 
view of what we could make known of 
her past activities. A charge of betrayal 
of trust is quite as serious as one of 
inciting social unrest to the advantage 
of the civil authorities." 



w, 



IV 



HEN the annunciator sounded, 
Greta was deep in the Diophantine 
analysis of a second-order Riemann 
equation. She sighed, put down her calculator, shot the results thus far attained into a recorder, and pressed the 
button. The face that looked from the 
box was that of a stranger ; young, thin 
and straight, with lines of humor 



showing around the mouth, 
"Miss Manning?" it said. 
"Yes." 

"I am Lajos Harkavy. May I see yoa 
for a few minutes?" 

"Why — I thought you were on Uller." 

"I was. That's one of the things I 
want to see you about." 

Her face became ever so slightly 
frigid. "I don't know — " 

"Surely you can spare me a few minutes — under the circumstances. I'll even 
promise to be entertaining." 

"All right. It's the 8 button, 42nd 
story." 

She frowned as she switched the connection off, touched the inter-room communicator and made sure her father 
wasn't home, and almost as a reflex 
gesture, checked her eye-shadow before 
the entrance-wall slid back. He was 
taller than she expected, and wearing 
an inflatable as though he had just come 
from a space-liner. 

"Won't you come in?" she said, indicating a chair. 

"Thank you." He waited for her to sit 
down before taking his own place, and it 
occurred to her that was exactly what 
an irrational psych would do, expecting 
her to be impressed by the antique 
minor courtesy. "I understand we have 
been named for an acquaintance," he 
said. 

"The Eugenics Committee passed it 
this morning. How did you find out so 
quickly?" 

Lajos Harkavy smiled. "Not very 
difficult. Even out on our little paradise 
on Uller there are copies of the priority 
lists, and it wasn't hard to guess that 
with our respective ratings, they'd at 
least make a try at bringing us together. 
What I want you to do is reject the 
acquaintance." 

Greta felt a totally irrational anger 
at being asked to do what she had herself intended to do. "Indeed!" she said. 
"May I ask why you don't reject it yourself?" 

"You may. And I'll answer that it's 
for reasons personal to me, which won't 



22 



STARTLING STORIES 



seem logical to you as an advanced 
scientist, but it will have to do for the 
moment. I want to present you with the 
reasons why you should reject in your 
own interest." 

"And what are they?" 

He looked around the room. "I notice 
you haven't any room-spray on, and not 
a single picture in the place. You 
wouldn't like the way I live. I like 
sprays, I like fun — and I paint pictures." This last was uttered with subtle 
overtones of defiance. 

"That might turn out to be the basis 
of an incompatibility making a rejection 
of marriage necessary after the acquaintance period. It isn't one for rejecting the acquaintance." 

He grinned. "All right, you're an advanced scientist, and I'm what you 
would call a psych, with a poor temperament rating. I find pure mathematics, 
or pure science of any kind, an unholy 
bore. What could we say to each other, 
. or do together, during an acquaintance ?" 

Greta said; "That's what you said 
before, only you're putting it in other 
words. It's an ingenious device in dialectics, but you'll have to do better. And 
besides, my own temperament rating is 
39 ; I could just as easily be a moderate. 
You're making assumptions." 

TTE GRINNED sardonically. "And 
you're trying to change the ground 
of the discussion. I'm onto that one. 
Let's see — why else should you refuse 
the acquaintance? For one thing, I'm 
living on Uller, at least until I finish 
the series of paintings I'm working on. 
You wouldn't like it there." 

"You don't have to tell me. I looked it 
up when this acquaintance warrant 
came through. The weather is terrible, 
the water tastes like soap and has to 
be distilled, the animals are foul, and 
you have to use an artificial day-night 
routine. That only answers your last 
objection. There would be plenty we 
could do together, mostly on the adventure side." 



"What ambition!" said Lajos, and 
stretched his legs lazily. "And what an 
ambition ! But don't think you'll get me 
into anything like that. 1 prefer airconditioned rooms with a slight spray 
in them, and the only adventure I'm interested in is the kind that concerns — 
females." 

"And yet you want one to refuse an 
acquaintance! I'm still waiting to hear 
why I should." 

For answer, Lajos got up and paced 
slowly across the floor, then back again. 
Then he came over to Greta's chair and 
in a new voice, quite low, said ; "Is there 
any chance of a spy-ray around this 
place?" 

"I don't think so, but — " 

"No. I don't dare risk it. But believe 
me, there's a very good reason, not 
connected with myself at all — " 

Greta stood up. "Now you've made 
me curious. I suppose that, being a psych, 
you deliberately applied the stimuli to 
bring it about, but you succeeded. 
There's a park just across the river on 
the old Palisades. Let's go look at na-. 
ture." 

He didn't say anything more as she 
dialled for the duty serv to bring the 
runabout to the terrace, or when they 
got in and soared away across the 
stream, and she was well enough aware 
of the possibility of a spy-ray being 
planted in the machine not to say anything either. 

The park was bright and green in the 
fresh spring air ; Greta parked the runabout at the entrance and they strolled 
down a walk between a double row of 
monstrous blue lilies from one of the 
outer planets, to a bench. 

Greta seated herself and said ; "Now 
will you tell me about it?" 

He frowned. "All right, I will. It's 
just this : if you follow me to Uller on 
an acquaintance, there's a good chance 
you may never be able to get back." 

"Why not?" 

"Your father hasn't told you? About 
the shortages? And the reason why the 
production committee has been moved 



THE LONG VIEW 



23 



to Venus? Didn't he tell you?" 

She shook her head. "Not a word." 

"It's a pretty carefully guarded 
secret. But the essence of it is that 
there's a major shortage of beryllium, 
and it's system-wide." 

"For moderators in power plants and 
ship drives ? Why can't they use the oldstyle carbon moderators? They still do 
in some places." 

"On planets. You forget that when 
you use a carbon moderator in the double reaction for interstellar drive, it's 
so inefficient that it doubles the consumption of ffssionables. The system has 
enough uranium to hike along for quite 
a while yet on normal consumption 
rates, what with the discovery of an 
occasional new planet that* can be 
worked for uranium, but if you double 
everything up, we'll soon be in the position they were here on Terra when the 
oil reserves began to run out." 

Greta said; "That is, things slowing 
up everywhere, and revolutions, and — " 



"Not quite as bad as that. There are 
plenty of power sources and plenty of 
uranium to keep the planets running 
individually, and even for interplanetary travel, where there are two habitable planets in the same system, and 
they only use the primary reaction 
drive. But interstellar travel is going 
to go right out the window, and soon. 
That is, unless something happens." 

"So that's why — " began Greta, and 
flushed. 

"Why what?" said Lajos. 

"I was just going to say that must be 
the reason for that regulation last year 
— the one restricting interstellar travel 
to people with scientific status and requiring an authorization from a local 
board." 

"I daresay that's part of it. But it 
seemed to me that you were going to 
say something else." 

"You psychs are too clever by forty 
per cent." The girl's voice had an edge 
[Turn page] 




"ni IMAGINE Ml dancing with a scarecrow! How 
can he be so careless about his hair? It's straggly, 
unkempt, and . . . Oh-oh — loose dandruff! He's got 
Dry Scalp, all right. He needs 'Vaseline' Hair Tonic.' 1 



Mr/r/oofa Setter... 
scc/pfee/s 6e#er... 
' when ywchectDrySccr/pj 



HI TOOK HER TIP, and look at his hair now! 
'Vaseline' Hair Tonic can do as much for you. 
Just a few drops a day check loose dandruff. . . keep 
hair naturally good-looking. It contains no alcohol 
or other drying ingredients. Gives double care to 
both scalp and hair . . . and it's economical, too! 

Vaseline HAIRTONIC 



TRADE MAR 



VASELINE ii the registered trade mark of the Chwebrough Mfg. Co., Cont'd 



Litten to 01. CHRISTIAN, 
•tarring JEAN HER5HOLT, 
On CBS Wedsodny night*. 



24 



STARTLING STORIES 



to it. "Thank you for the information — 
and for your solicitude about my welfare. Now I'll give you a piece of information, too. I never had any attention of accepting an acquaintance with 
you, and I wouldn't accept one with a 
man who paints, even if he had an intelligence rating of point one. Does that 
answer your question?" 

T^O HER surprise, Harkavy merely 
rose from the bench, and stood 
frowning. He was very tall, she observed. "No," he said, "it doesn't. Not 
at all. I don't understand why a member of the advanced group, who would 
be left in control of practically everything if interstellar travel were cut off, 
and could sit in their corners doing 
mathematical puzzles all day while 
everyone else worked for them, should 
develop so much heat over the prospect." 

"You don't have to — " she began, but 
before she could say any more two 
figures in the decent blue uniforms of 
Regulator Techs turned the corner of 
the path and came straight toward 
them. One of them stepped up to the 
young man. 

"You are Lajos Harkaw?" he said. 

"Yes." 

"Please come with us. The charge is 
making an unauthorized interstellar 
voyage, contrary to regulations." 

Greta clutched the arm of one of the 
Regulators. "What are vou going to do 
to him?" 

The man shrugged. "It's a major regulation. Probably they'll deport to 
Freya as temperamentally unstable. 
That's the usual line." 

"But you can't do that!" 

"I'm not doing it." said the Regulator. 
"If you've got a song and dance, give 
it to the Rating Committee." 

Greta said; "You can't do it, and I'll 
tell you why. We both have scientific 
status, and this is the first day of an 
accepted acquaintance. I think the order 
of the Eugenics Committee takes precedence over any violation of regulations except acts of violence. And I 



don't want to go to Freya." 

"It sure does, lady," said the Regulator, stepping back, and turning to his 
companion; "Get your phone out and 
check that, will you, Morgan?" 



iRETA stood looking out the window toward where the depressing landscape of Uller stretched under brown, 
rubbery grasses to the shore of the 
slick-looking Matteran Sea. A lorcha 
was coming in from the Cape Holland 
fishing station, the deck-hand swinging 
his arms to keep warm, as he waited 
for the craft to slide in to the gate of 
the processing plant where he could 
hook in the automatic draw. 

The girl said; "The spy-ray was a 
mistake. He waited until he said goodnight, then handed me the disc and said, 
'By the way, here's your plaything. 1 
like to keep a certain amount of privacy.' I suppose I had it coming." 

Paul Frasser did not stir from his 
seat. "A man with his intelligence is 
hard to handle. But I'm beginning to 
wonder if the whole operation wasn't a 
mistake. From what I can make out, 
there's nothing in him we can use. All 
he's interested in is painting and nightspots. " 

Outside the sun rim met the horizon 
redly, and the day wind that had ruffled 
the surface of the sea to long undulant 
swells was falling. Greta turned, the 
edges of her hair redly outlined bv the 
light. 

"There's something — almost mysterious in him," she said. "And after all, he 
did find out about the beryllium shortage." 

Frasser grunted. "That could have 
happened in a number of ways. After 
all, he's going to be titular leader of the 
psychs some day. Maybe someone in 
your father's group thought it would be 
a good idea to let him know. What does 
he say about it, by the way?" 

"That it's a problem for applied 



THE LONG VIEW 



25 



scientists, and he isn't interested." 

"That's what I told you, Gree. People 
who put a wall of mystery around themselves generally haven't much behind it 
except a desire to amuse themselves, and 
I will say that Harkavy is devoting 
himself to that with all the resources of 
his high-power intelligence. Calling him 
mysterious is just a relic of the prescientific age. What's mysterious about 
him?" 

"Well — he won't even sleep at my 
quarters. 

"Is that surprising? Probably has 
someone coming to his. It wouldn't be 
the first time it had happened on Uller. 
Better break the acquaintance. We have 
work to do." 

The sun was half way below the horizon now, and the lights were beginning 
to stream automatically from walls and 
ceiling in compensation. Greta Manning 
shook her head : 

"No, Paul. The job of trying to make 
it a world, a universe, where everyone 
gets a square deal whether they have a 
high, eugenic number or not, means 
everything in the world to me. You 
know that. That's why I accepted this 
acquaintance in the first place, when I 
didn't want to a bit. But I've accepted 
it now and given my word, and so has 
Lajos ; and I won't pull out and I won't 
cheat, either." 

Frasser snorted. "Emotionalism ! Unscientific — " 

"Isn't it just to give everybody a 
chance at unscientific emotionalism that 
we're doing what we are, Paul ? To keep 
people from being bred like animals for 
the production of more pure scientists ? 
There are alreadly too many." 

Frasser said ; "That sounds odd, coming from — oh, well, let's not quarrel. 
We're in this together, and up to our 
necks." 

"Yes, aren't we, though!" She was 
cheerful again in a second. "What time 
is it? I've got to go. I promised Malya 
Bryussov I'd come over and look at the 
new method of calculating high primes 
she thinks she's found, but I don't be


lieve it's anything more than Lucas and 
a calculating machine." 

rpHE air-lock at the door hissed slight*■ ly as she ran out. Frasser sat in 
frowning silence for a moment, then got 
up and put on his heated garments ; no . 
matter how long he stayed on Uller, he 
could not find himself comfortable at a 
temperature of 7° C. His quarters were 
on 2nd Street, which meant he had only 
a brief walk past the buildings of fused 
sandstone, built squat and monolithic 
to withstand the hurricane winds of 
Uller, before reaching the square, with 
its pylon-like beam tower in the center 
and the Communications Center on the 
other side. 

Work had just closed down for the 
day, and in the hall inside people were 
tapping their communication-boxes for 
letters and the reels of the day's news. 
Frasser nodded to one or two, pretended 
not to notice a superior tech who was 
coming ■ toward him and would either 
want a promotion or the endorsement 
of an authorization for an interstellar 
flight, and went down the broad staircase that led to the long-range communications room. 

"I want a tighMjeam communication 
to Terra," he said to the clerk behind 
the desk. "To Toijiru Shigemitsu, DD32-28, New York, Terra." 

The clerk started to punch in the 
numbers, then looked up. "Pardon me, 
sir, but are you a scientist? There's a 
new reg — " 

"What the hell would I be asking for 
an interstellar tight beam for if I 
wasn't?" demanded Frasser. He fished 
in a pocket, produced the metal identifier, flung it on the counter, and viciously punched his thumb down on the 
checking machine. "What's your name 
and number? You deserve a report for 
disrespect." 

The clerk's lip trembled slightly. 
"Ector Mariseal, sir, RB-122-18. I'm 
sorry, sir, but I hadn't seen you before." 

"All right," said Frasser. "I'll drop 
it. When will you have the beam set up?" 



26 STARTLIN 

"I don't know, sir. They're having a 
little trouble at Station No. 6 — a gonflar 
got In and damaged the tower — and 
Terra may be on that side. But I'll put 
an urgent on it. Do you want me to call 
you at your quarters, or will you take 
It here?" 

"Might as well wait. I haven't anything else to do." 

"Will you take the fourth compartment, sir? You know where the reels 
are?" 

Frasser nodded, initialed the five-unit 
chit the clerk shoved at him, and pushed 
down the hall to the compartment 
marked "4," where it occurred to him to 
have any incoming calls at his quarters 
transferred to the Center. A light spray 
would do him good, he decided, so he 
turned one on, and then settled himself 
to contemplate the reels of the day's 
news. There was a picture of the gonftar 
being driven from Station 6, one after 
another of its six legs developing an odd 
hurrying motion as the stimulus-whip 
was applied to that section by armored 
guards; a mentally unstable tech who 
had murdered his wife was telling his 
tale to a psych ; and then a woman with 
a long face began to explain how much 
she would do if elected — and Frasser 
turned the machine off. 

l^ROM the speaker in the wall a voice 
said abruptly; "Your connection, 
sir," and Shigemitsu's voice followed, 
slightly blurred by crossing light years 
of space; "Toijiru Shigemitsu here." 

"Watakmhi-wa uta-wo kiki-tai," said 
Frasser. 

"Sora wa umai," came the answer. "I 
think we may omit the remainder of the 
challenge and response, my friend. I 
recognize your voice. Why do you call?" 

"She's getting balky. Resisted the 
suggestion that she break off the acquaintance before it ran its full term." 

Shigemitsu said; "Have you considered that he may have decided that 
it would be useful to turn the connection 
into a marriage, and is applying his 
knowledge of psychology to her?" 



1 STORIES 

"Bah! It's Just those romantic Ideas 
we noticed before she left. She talks 
about having given her word, and that 
sort of thing." 

"You don't think she's really attracted to him?" 

"Only to the biological function extent. Otherwise, he's about as useless a 
piece of furniture as I've ever seen." 

"Still, it might be useful to have him 
at the head of the psychs and her in our 
interest." 

"He's going to refuse the appointment and turn artist. At least that's 
what she thinks. And she's too valuable 
a piece of property for our side to be 
wasted like that." 

"I see." Shigemitsu was silent for two 
ticks. Then: "The other matter?" 

"You mean Bizzi? 1 don't think we 
can bring him over. I talked to him for 
a couple of hours. He agreed that there 
was a strong possibility that Niflheim 
was extremely rich in beryllium, just 
as you deduced from the registers. Also 
that there would be a big promotion 
waiting for anyone who could find a 
way to get at it through that fluorine 
atmosphere. But in the first place, he 
didn't think it could be done, and in the 
second, he didn't seem interested. 
Wants things to go on the way they are. 
After all, he's an 18, which would make 
him pretty close to No. One man out 
here if all interstellar travel were cut 
off. He's an applied scientist, sure, but 
there aren't more than two or three 
pures on the planet." 

"Did you try putting the girl on 
him?" 

"Yes, and ran into more romantic 
ideas. She said that she wouldn't cheat 
while conducting an acquaintance with 
Harkavy." 

"My friend," said Shigemitsu, "you 
are insufficiently subtle. It is a quality 
of race which has nothing to do with 
intelligence. I think I perceive the answer to our problem. You are keeping a 
careful check on Harkavy's movements?" 

"As close as I can. The spy-ray failed ; 



THE LONG VIEW 



27 



he found it where she planted it and 
gave her back the disc, so I had to go 
back to primitive methods and have him 
personally followed. So far the reports 
have been devoid of interest." 

VVEN over the long-range beam, 
^ Frasser could hear the slight hissing sound with which Shigemitsu habitually began one of his trap-questions. 
"What do the reports concern?" he 
asked. 

"Matters like this; subject spent the 
afternoon in a glassine hut on Cape 
Lion, painting a view of the Matteran 
Sea. Subject spent the evening having 
dinner with his acquaintance, took her 
to her quarters after a session in the 
game-room, and then spent a good part 
of the night at the Cave of the Four 
Winds night-club in the company of a 
lady who calls herself Roselle La 
Blanche, and who makes a profession of 
exhibiting her torso — " 

"One moment." 

"Yes?" said Frasser. 

"You have the key to the situation in 
your hands. How often do these nightclub visits take place?" 

"Frequently." ' 

"And you have just told me that the 
girl will not, as you put it, 'cheat' while 
conducting an acquaintance with Harkavy? Does it not occur to you that she 
would take an unreasonably romanticized attitude toward his connection with 
this ecdysiast?" 

"I never thought of such a thing." 

"Begin thinking of it." Shigemitsu 
was crisp. "You are dealing with a person who lacks the normal scientific objectivity, a temperamental 39. Arrange 
to take her to this night-club when the 
two of them are there together. You will 
not need to apply any other pressures." 



II 



VI 



lER VOICE apologetic, Greta said; 
"I'm sorry I couldn't make it last night. 
But I was working on a new postulated 
geometry that turned out to be per


fectly logical at speeds in excess of n 
prime. The beauty of it is that it's perfectly useless; there aren't any speeds 
in excess of n prime." 

Frasser gazed at her a moment.. "I 
sometimes wonder if that isn't the trouble," he said. "You people in the pure 
sciences have precedence over everyone 
else, but the only time you're happy is 
when your work is useless. And now the 
machine is running down. Are you going to wear that?" 

Greta glanced down at her costume, 
which was being touched to multicolored flames as it caught the lights 
from walls and ceiling. "My rainbow 
dress? Why not? It's a party." 

"It's unusual for the guests to wear 
luminant clothes in the place we're going. It's a little on the rough side, and 
they're apt to be taken for — well, professionals." 

"Oh." She considered. "I don't suppose it would hurt me to be propositioned, but you're probably right. Wait 
a minute." She disappeared into the 
back and presently returned in a dress 
which, while still definitely for the evening, gave off only soft tones of green. 
Paul Frasser tried the communication 
box, found it locked, and was gazing at 
the ceiling when she came back. "I have 
the flier on the roof," he said. "It didn't 
seem worth while bringing it in for the 
time I'd wait for you." 

He stepped ahead of her to the elevator. "Where is this place?" she asked 
as they emerged on the shadowy roof, 
shivering slightly at the impact of the 
chill Uller night. 

"Way out past the cape. Most of the 
habitues come from the tide-control 
project; techs and servs, and a fairly 
hard gang at that." 

The flier took off smoothly, bucked 
once, and straightened out on course. 
Far below and to the right there was a 
blaze of brilliance around New Ravenna's interstellar port, and conveying 
machines were waddling clumsily up to 
deposit their burdens in the huge bulk 
of an interstellar freighter. 



"They're pushing it hard on liquid 
silicones from the fisheries," remarked 
Frasser. "Trying to stock-p^e lubricants 
against the date when there won't be 
any interstellar travel." 

Greta shuddered slightly beside him. 
"But what's going to happen to all those 
people?" she asked. "The tchs and 
servs who have been brought in here to 
do the work on the promise of more 
money and quick home leaves?" 

"They'll have to stay on Uller, that's 
all. But I think sympathy for them is 
Wasted. They're not first-class minds 
and the resources of this place are sufficient to provide everything they really 
need. What gets me down is that your 
father's precious advanced group is 
quite ready to put applied scientists in 
the same category. Getting the warning 
about the beryllium shortage is one 
thing we can thank you for." 

"Have you been in touch with 
Shigemitsu?" asked the girl. "Is he going to do anything in the Association 
Council?" 

"I doubt if he'll try to do anything 
immediately. If he would make the information about the shortage public, it 
would not only stir up the techs and 
servs, but the applied scientists would 
be charged with the responsibility for 
not having foreseen and provided 
against the shortage, and as a result, 
our moderate group would be just about 
blown apart." 

"If we could only . . ." began Greta; 
then, "There's the Cape." 

"I have it on the screen. Button up, 
we're going in." He worked controls. 
Below them, the contours of the formless black mass of the night club building were picked out by infra-red in the 
moonless night of Uller in answer to his 
landing beam, and as the flier slid in, 
servs hooded against the cold came running out to guide it to the ramp of the 
underground hangar. 

The door cut off the stars behind; 
Paul Frasser handed Greta out, accepted the offered check and steered her 
toward the elevator, where a bored serv 



i STORIES 

slowly returned to his pocket a reel and 
the eye-piece through which he had been 
contemplating it. 

HPHE first thing of which Greta became conscious when they reached 
the level of the club itself was a quantity 
of spray in the air that almost made her 
head swim ; the next was that the place 
was circular, and in accordance with its 
name, was decorated to resemble some 
huge, rock-hewn cave back in Terra. 
There was no dancing at the moment; 
the decorative scheme had been carried 
into the permanent music, which was 
that of winds howling through an 
aeolian harp. The lights were dim; she 
had reached their table before she could 
see enough of her surroundings to make 
out that Paul Frasser had not exaggerated about the character of the place. 
Most of those present were clearly techs 
and servs, some still in their working 
garments, accompanied by shrill-voiced 
girls to whom the low level of the lighting was a charity. 

Frasser ordered drinks and looked 
around. "Well, what do you think of 
low life?" he asked. "Some of the dancing is really remarkable, though." 

The spray was having its effect; she 
felt a thrill of adventure tingle up and 
down her spine. "Do they have fights?" 

"If they do, they're stopped pretty 
quickly. Do you see those two techs at 
that third table? They're Regulators. 
Hello, there's Derek Hyde!" He half 
stood and waved to a man sitting alone 
at a table across the room, who got up 
and sauntered over, bringing his drink. 

There were introductions; Derek 
Hyde accepted an invitation to join the 
couple, and it was explained to him that 
Miss Manning had come for the dancing. 

"Good idea," said Hyde. "ItVbetter 
in a place like this than in the regular 
establishments. More emotional and unrestrained. They have one girl here who 
would be wonderful anywhere in the 
system. Her name's Roselle La Blanche, 
and I think she comes from Venus ; how 



THE LONG VIEW 



29 



she drifted here, I haven't any idea. Just 
about due, too." 

The music became one of the quick 
double-steps from the inner planets and 
couples covered the floor Greta said: 
"Where do the women come from?" 

"Most of them are servs from New 
Ravenna," said Frasser.- "They have to 
have an ostensible profession, you 
know." 

The music stopped, but instead of 
taking up its windy background rhythm 
again, swung into a quicker pace that 
changed and rose to a pitch of the most 
intense emotion. Then, suddenly, all the 
lights went out, to flash back on as abruptly, showing a girl standing alone in 
the center of the floor. 

"That's her, now," said Derek Hyde. 

There was no doubt that she was 
somebody, and fully conscious of it, as 
she caught up the beat, and with a slow, 
seductive movement, began to weave 
through a figure, the strings of opals in 
which she seemed to be entirely clothed 



picking up the light from floor, wall, 
ceiling, in a thousand shifting patterns. 
One of the opal-chains came loose and 
slithered across the floor as she moved ; 
then another, and another, as the men in 
the audience began to shout and stamp, 
until finally, in a sudden whirl of motion, she lost the last chain of opals just 
as the helmet of dark hair broke from 
her head to cover her nearly to the knees 
and the lights were extinguished for a 
second time. 

"You were right," said Gret, "that 
was wonderful." 

"So is she," said Paul Frasser. "I 
wouldn't mind knowing her myself. In 
fact—" 

Derek Hyde turned toward him. "It's 
no use, old man. She's already got a 
connection — with that high number 
psych out here. You know, the crazy 
one, that's turning down his scientific 
rating to be an artist. Harkvaly, or 
something like that." 

[Turn page] 





$0? 



AND THE BIGGEST SQUARE 
DEAL IN WORK CLOTHES IS STILL 




/Iaster ClothI 1 

overalls 

/Brown Ducks ... for tough, he-man jobs 

These Brown Duck Overalls (bib and waist type) with coats lo match, are amattngly popular with linemen, electricians, welders, steel workers, foundrymen, 
truck drivers, plumbers, etc. They appreciate the heavy, high count, 11 oz. 
Carhartt brown duck that guarantees extra protection on the job. They're rain 
repellent, full cut and roomy for added work ease, are built to outlast several 
pairs of ordinary overalls. Insist on Carhartt Brown Ducks by name . . . get off 
the extra features, of this famous make of work clothes. 





These NEW Carhartf 
Work Caps Are Tops, Too! 

Here'j (he tail word in a neat, snarl, big peat 
Haliey-ityle worltcap lW ii tailored for comfort and good loolct. Ideal for spoilt wear and 
^(nighty inexpensive., 




HAMILTON CARHARTT OVERALL CO. 

Detroit I A, Mich. Atlanta. Go, 

Corhartr Park, Irvine, Ky , Dallas, Te«. 

MAKERS Of UNION MADE 
ittOKK CLOTHES FOft 63 YEARS 



STARTLING STORIES 



AS THE emotion-intensifying spray 
touched her, it set Greta's fingers to 
gripping the table so hard they hurt. 
In a quick intense voice, she said : "Do 
you mean_ Lajos Harkavy?" 

"Yes,*that's the one. Why?" 

Frasser said : "Miss Manning is here 
on acquaintance with him." 

"Oh, look here," said Hyde, "I'm 
sorry. I didn't mean — " 

"Paul," said Greta, "get the superior 
serv. I want to talk to her at once. I 
don't care what it costs. Use my rank. 
I want to talk to her. I have to talk to 
her." 

Around them the music had risen 
again and couples were dancing. As 
Frasser beckoned for the serv, Greta's 
hand went out in an impulsive gesture 
and tipped over her drink, but it sank at 
once into the absorbent table. 

Derek Hyde said again, "I'm really 
sorry — " 

"It doesn't matter," said the girl. 
"Please go away." 

Paul Frasser said, "Really, Greta, I 
had no idea — " 

"It doesn't matter, I tell you. I want 
to talk to her." 

Roselle La Blanche came down between the tables behind the superior 
serv. Her hair had been hastily gathered up, and she had thrown something 
around her ; the techs whistled at her as 
she passed, and one or two of them tried 
to pinch her. 
The superior serv said, "This is Miss 
Manning. She's a high-ranking pure 
scientist and wanted to talk to you." 

Roselle La Blanche slid into the pl&ce 
vacated by Derek Hyde. "To me?" she 
said. "Why, certainly, honey, though I 
don't know what about. I don't know 
about anything that would be good for a 
pure scientist." She giggled a little. 

Greta said, "About just one thing. Do 
you have a connection with Lajos 
Harkavy?" 

The beautiful, slightly vapid face of 
the dancer hardened. "I don't know 
that it's any of your business." 

"Tell me!" 



"You're being emotional. Honey, they 
always told me that people with scientific rating were rational. I was going 
to ask you for a unit and a half for 
bringing me out here, but I'll give it to 
you for free. You oughta take a treatment." She stood up, flashed a come-on 
smile at Frasser, and was gone. 

For a minute Greta didn't say anything. Then, with both hands on the 
table, she said, "Paul, have you a message going soon?" 

"Yes. It's technical." 

"Make it partly personal. Tell Edgar 
■ Braun I'm coming back to him as soon 
as the next ship leaves. And take me 
back to my quarters." 

At the elevator, he checked suddenly. 
"Dammit," he said, "wait for me. I forgot to leave anything for the serv." 

But it was not the serv he hurried 
back into the club to speak to; it was 
Derek Hyde, and he said, "Here. You 
did a wonderful job. It worked out just 
right." 

66T'LL GO with you because I promised," said Greta. "But you might 
as well know now that I'm going to refuse the marriage." Her voice was flat. 

Lajos Harkavy stopped tightening the 
strap on his portable easel. "Any particular reason?" he asked. 

She felt herself flushing and halfturned her head. "No. Just the general 
one that we don't seem temperamentally 
suited to each other." 

"I would have said quite the opposite. 
In fact, you make me wonder, frankly, 
whether some ulterior factor has not 
developed that — " 

"Oh, you and your psychology!" She 
stamped her foot, and then suddenly 
flashed into a smile. "There's no use 
quarrelling about it though, now. Let's 
have as good a time as we can out of 
what's left. Where are we going?" 

"To a place about eight hundred miles 
north of here — MacMurray Forest. 
Ever hear of it?" 

"Didn't some of your pictures come 
from there?" 



THE LO 

He slung the easel and box of paints 
on his back. "Yes, but not at this time 
of year. The colors are really spectacular when the leaves begin to come out, 
and I want to try to catch them with 
luminescents that will give the effect of 
changing light. Got the food package?" 

He pushed the button for the wall 
slide, then clicked the communicator. 
"Harkavy. Will you send my flier up? 
and drop a report on wind conditions at 
seventeen degrees north, MacMurray 
Forest area on the seat." 

The sun was just coming up to the 
southeast as they stepped out of the 
elevator head onto the wind-blown roof 
and the sky was streaked from south to 
north with long fingers of dun-colored 
cloud, red along their lower edges. Greta 
glanced at them and said, "Could you 
catch something like that with your 
luminescents ?" 

He shook his head. "I could probably, 
but it's too opaque to produce an emotional reaction. That would only be representational painting." 

"But how do you go about it if you 
want to tell the people who look at your 
pictures something about the feeling we 
get up here on the roof at dawn, with 
hardly a flier in sight, and the loneliness and this gloomy city below. We 
could be the last people on Uller — or the 
first. Oh, I wish — " 

He glanced at her sharply. "What?" 

"Nothing. Here comes the flier. " 

The plate in the roof slid back and the 
flier appeared on its elevator, looking 
rather like a pious insect with its vanecases folded over its back. Lajos 
climbed in, took the food package and 
painting equipment and snapped them 
into a locker, then said, "Button in 
tight. I'm going to give her a rocket 
shot unless you think you want to look 
at the scenery below." 

"No thank you. The scenery on this 
planet doesn't impress me. In fact, I 
could do without it for the rest of my 
life." 

He fingered the controls and opened 
the key to the rocket fuel line. "Is that 



G VIEW 31 

why you've decided not to go through 
with the marriage?" 

"No, I — Oh, stop trying to fish 
around in my mind." 

TJIS only answer was to step on the 
power button, and Greta was jerked 
sharply into the buffers as the flier 
slanted upward with air screaming 
around it. The rocket cut out and the 
pressure eased as they began to tilt 
downward ; Harkavy set the vane-openers to automatic and said, "You're right 
about the painting. It's up to the artist 
to convey every type of emotion — to 
find means to make absolutely anyone 
experience what he felt at the time. 
The only trouble is that I wouldn't know 
how to go about making a given member 
of the advanced group experience any 
emotion whatever." 

"I'm a member of the advanced 
group." 

"Only by heredity, and with a low 
temperament rating. One of the difficulties of our so-called civilization is 
that the capacity for emotion has been 
practically bred out of the upper scientific levels in the interest of obtaining 
eugenic qualities that will give greater 
intelligence. And if the advanced group 
succeeds in putting through the regulation making it impossible to refuse a 
marriage ordered by the Eugenic Committee, it will be worse than ever." 

"I hadn't thought of it that way," 
said Greta. "But it did seem to me that 
the regulation would be — unjust." 

There was a clicking as the helicopter 
vanes took over. Harkavy peered downward to get his bearings, took the wheel 
and said, "A desire for justice, in fact, 
even the concept of justice, is a purely 
emotional matter itself. Unscientific. 
Don't you remember studying about 
some of the archaic political states on 
Earth, where the elected non-scientific 
authorities could declare certain things 
were true or not, even prohibit scientific 
research along some lines?" 

Greta said, "I should think that, feeling the way you do, you'd try to do 



32 STARTLIN 

something about it. The new marriage 
regulation, I mean. After all, your intelligence number is low enough to make 
you a policy-maker." 

Harkavy shrugged. "Association politics doesn't interest me. Evolution will 
take care of the matter in time. Although if it's controlled as sharply as 
the advanced group wishes, man is certainly going to evolve into two subspecies, one species with all the intelligence and no emotion, and the other 
absolutely the reverse. In fact, I think 
we're some distance along that road 
now." 

"You're a fatalist." She leaned over 
to look at the incredible sight of an Ullerian forest swimming up toward them, 
with its curious wilted-looking thintrunked trees just breaking into the 
tenderest of green leaves at the tips of 
their branches, the sunlight touching 
the spicules of quartz in their trunks to 
a thousand changing colors, while here 
and there a dead tree stood like a single 
milky jewel. 

The flier sank smoothly toward a 
cleared area in a vaTley between two 
hills, did a slight upward slant and came 
to rest on the slope. "Let's eat our 
breakfast inside," said Greta. "I don't 
mind glassine, but you'll need all the 
space in the hut for your painting 
things." 

"All right. What's the menu?" 

"I have no idea. The hostel put it up ; 
I just told them I wanted two meals for 
two people, one of them a hungry man." 

She produced the three cans marked 
for breakfast, turned the-heating keys 
and began to lay disposable dishes on 
the table Harkavy detached from the 
wall. 

"Continuing our former conversation," said Harkavy, "what both the 
pure and applied scientists have lost 
sight of is that the original purpose of 
science was to serve mankind as a 
whole. They look down on us psychs and 
barely allow us the name of scientists, 
but it's something we can't forget, because people are our raw material." 



I STORIES 

"Oh, I don't think the moderates have 
forgotten it," said Greta. "They just 
don't want all their researchers under 
the control of the advanced group, and 
for their interests. Here, try some of 
this. It smells delicious. Meat of some 
kind. By the way, there aren't any animals around here, are there?" 

"Not likely to be," said Harkavy. 
"That is, not dangerous ones, although 
there might be a few little 'cone-cats 
around. The gonftar country is down 
toward the sea, and you don't usually 
find burex unless there are gonflars for 
them to prey on." 

TVTHEN they finished the meal, Hark** avy decided that the view from the 
opposite hill was better and got out his 
equipment to walk over. Greta accompanied him to the hilltop, but after he 
had set up his glassine hut and begun 
to work, he began answering her remarks with a series of grunts, so she 
went outside to wander among the trees 
and look at the mosses that crawled 
over the ground under them in patterns 
as intricate as snowflakes. 

She could see quite a distance between 
the thin trunks so there wasn't any danger of getting lost, but she herself hardly realized how far she had gone until 
she heard a shout muted by distance and 
turned to see Harkavy waving her frantically toward him. As she ran toward 
him she became aware of a muffled roaring sound in the distance like the sea 
beating on a beach, and abruptly she 
was running into an increasing gusty 
rush of wind. A fallen opalescent log 
caught her foot, and down she went, 
with a sharp shard from one of the broken branches penetrating her cold-suit 
and cutting her knee, but she was up 
again in a minute and running. Out of 
the corner of her eye, she caught a flicker of something white, and then she was 
beside Harkavy. 

"Too late," he said, pointing. The 
whole area between them and the hill 
where the flier stood was filled with tossing waves and beyond it toward the 



THE LONG VIEW 



33 



south a white crest was rushing, while 
the continually rising wind tore at them. 

"What is it?" she asked. 

"The spring bore. It's my fault;. I 
forgot about it; I even forgot this was 
the right area for it." 

"What's the spring bore?" 

"You haven't been here long enough 
to learn about all the niceties of our 
climate. You know the poles freeze in 
winter ; big ice-caps melt almost as large 
as those on earth. When they begin to 
melt in the spring, the rivers start running toward the central seas, but at first 
it's only a trickle here and there, because ice-jams form at their.tsourcepoints. Then one day the water pressure 
behind gets to be too much for the icejam, and she goes out like that." 

"Will it last long? Can we get back to 
the flier?" 

"Can't tell how long. May have to 
stay here over night, maybe not. Let's 
get the hut braced, though. The winds 
that follow these bores are usually something." 

He worked more rapidly than she 
would have imagined, picking up fragments of the quartz tree limbs and 
stacking them around the base of the invisible glassine hut. Greta limped after 
him until he stopped her with; "You'd 
better get inside and sit on my chair. 
Moving around isn't doing that cut on 
your knee any good, and the first aid 
kit's over in the flier. Here, wait — " 

He ran rapidly down to the shore of 
the roaring torrent and returned with a 
piece of ice. "Here, put this on it. That 
will stop the bleeding." 

"Isn't it silicious?" asked Greta. 

"Not enough to worry about. Spring 
ice is pretty clear; you can even drink 
the water from it." 

Greta said, "Ouch" at the touch of the 
ice, then, "Do you know, I was thinking 
about your luminescent colors and the 
effect of changing light. In math we 
have a series of equations known as the 
Weierstrass analystics, a development 
of Hamilton's work in optics. I think a 
formula could be worked out on that 



basis which would give you perfectly 
predictable results, even with luminescent colors." 

Harkavy frowned. "I thought you 
pure mathematicians were disinterested 
in practical results," he said. Then, "It 
isn't just a matter of predictable results 
in a physical sense. We know pretty 
much what we're getting that way, even 
with luminescents. It's the resulting 
emotional reaction that concerns us as 
painters. That's where the whole quarrel with the advanced group lies. They 
aren't prepared to admit as a science 
anything that doesn't give a predictable 
result." 

"Elementary school observation, Mr. 
Harkavy." "I know. I was clearing 
the ground. But I'm convinced that 
there is a real science of psychology, and 
the only way we can reach it is by way 
of the arts, by producing emotions 
through artistic means and then checking on how we got what we did." 

She looked past him out through the 
glassine wall to where the arms of the 
rubbery trees were whipping in the 
wind. "I almost wish — Lajos, what's 
that?" 

A LONG the direction of her pointing 
finger, among the trunks, a creature like a biologist's nightmare was 
shuffling toward them, its reptilian head 
low as it sniffed the ground, and its 
three pairs of squat legs moving in uneven undulations. 

"Burax!" said Harkavy. "I said there 
wouldn't be any this far north. Well, I 
was wrong. He must have smelled the 
blood where you cut yourself. They've 
developed a taste for mammalian blood 
that makes them a little more dangerous 
than a flock of tigers." 

He was working at the side of his painting-case, which dropped open to 
reveal a white object about a foot and a 
half long, surmounted by a tube which 
ended in a transparent conical noozle. 

"What — " began Greta, as the burax, 
appearing to catch sight of them for the 
first time, lumbered forward in a clumsy 



STARTLING STORIES 



charge. Harkavy snapped a gap in the 
glassine, and as the creature closed in, 
a jet of something white sprang from it, 
straight into the reptilian face and long 
jaws. The jet seemed to go right in; 
Greta saw that where it struck there 
was a bubbling that seemed to come 
from the very interior of the animal's 
head, its two middle legs clawed forward as the front legs doubled up, and 
it lay twisting and heaving outside the 
hut. 

"What did you do to it?" asked Greta, 
contemplating that silent agony. 

"Gave it a dose of pure hydrofluoric 
acid. They're just about indestructible 
to anything else. I'm afraid we're going 
to be chilly in here, though." He pointed 
to where the drip from the nozzle of the 
gun had cut a long series of slashes in 
the glassine wall, through which the 
chill was flowing into the hut. 

VIII 

liATER, talking to Frasser, Greta 
explained. " — And in the morning he 
waded over and brought back the flyer 
and here I am," she finished. "Chemistry isn't my branch, so I don't know 
quite how peculiar it is, but I do know it 
isn't usual." 

"It's so damned unusual that I can't 
think of a good explanation offhand," 
said Frasser. "But it does hook up with 
a couple of other things." 

"What sort of things?" 

Frasser frowned, and his rather pop 
eyes opened a trifle wider. "Look here," 
he said, "how real is this painting of 
his?" 

Greta sipped from her glass. "Very 
real. I've seen some of his pictures at 
the studio, and I saw him begin on one 
while we were on the trip. And they're 
good ; not that I'm an art critic, but as 
he explained to me, he's working on the 
conveyance of emotion by means of pictures, and I think he's getting somewhere. I don't know any better way of 
telling it than saying that when the light 
shifts in one of them you seem to feel 



something more than that — " 

"You talk like a psych — or a low-level 
tech. However that's not the point. 
There isn't any chance, then, that the 
painting is a cover for some other form 
of activity?" 

"It could be. After all — " she gave a 
little hard bark of a laugh" — I haven't 
been with him too many of his waking 
hours and comparatively few of his 
sleeping ones. He could be running half 
a dozen things on the side. Like that 
dancer. But why all the questions?" 

"The night before you left Marius 
Rizzi went to Harkavy's studio and 
spent practically the entire night there. 
In connection with your story I think 
this makes it practically certain that 
they're up to some scientific activity together. And the only research projects 
Rizzi has registered with the Uller 
Council are in connection with carbonnitrogen-silicone chain molecules, nothing at all about hydrofluoric acid." 

"Then the project isn't authorized, 
whatever it is. Can't you bring charges 
before the Council ?" 

Paul Frasser made a mouth. "And 
take the chance that it's all strictly on 
the level and I'd run into a false accusation charge? No thanks; Marius Rizzi 
is a physical chemist and an 18. I'd have 
to know a lot more about what I was 
charging him with before I tackled a 
customer like that. But let's figure this 
out ; you've been in Harkavy's quarters ; 
what's the layout, and is there space 
enough to house a laboratory of any 
kind?" 

Greta closed her eyes in an effort oi 
memory. "It's down — one of the underground quarters. When you come off the 
elevator you're in a rather small square 
room that he uses for a reception room. 
On the left toward the back is the door 
of his studio, so." She traced an imaginary plan with her finger. "The 
studio runs all the way back; it's a big 
oblong room. Next to it, right behind 
the reception room, is the dining-room, 
and running the length of both of them, 
to the right of the reception room as you 



THE LO 

come in, is a long bedroom and living 
room, with shifting partitions and one 
of those antique fireplaces." 

"No doors or sliding panels that 
might lead to more rooms?" 

"Not off the reception room. It has 
doors in three walls and the elevator 
panel. Or the dining room either; that 
has three doors and the food delivery 
tube. And 1 don't think the studio. It 
would have to be pretty well concealed, 
and I can't imagine why he'd want to 
conceal it that carefully. There might 
be an entrance to another quarters 
through the bathroom or one of the 
closets off the bedroom; I never thought 
of looking." 

Frasser said, "I think you better had. 
We want to be sure." 

"But I've broken the acquaintance 
and given notice." 

"I know. But this is so important we 
can't afford to overlook a thing. 'I'll tell 
you how it can be arranged. I'll have 
somegne watch the place and notify you 
when he goes out, so you can slip in. 
There's every chance in the world that 
the door-lock is still tuned to your voice 
and even if it isn't and you have to get 
the building officer to let you in, there 
wouldn't be anything queer about your 
going to the quarters of an acquaintance. That's why you're the only one 
who can do it without arousing suspicion — his or anyone's." 

/^RETA shuddered a little. "I hate to 
^ think of how I'd explain myself if 
he came back and found me there. Why 
is it so important to find out whether he 
has a laboratory?" 

"Merely because of what you've just 
been telling me. About some kind of gun 
that projects high-speed jets of hydrofluoric acid. Do you realize what that 
means?" 

"No. What?" 

"Taken in conjunction with the meeting with Rizzi it probably means that 
our young artist, our time-waster is going to have a try at Niflheim for beryllium, and that he's close to the solution 



G VIEW 35 

of the major problem. Do you see?" 

"Work it out for me, Paul. I told you 
chemistry wasn't my branch." 

"The trouble with Niflheim is staying 
alive. The atmosphere has a certain percentage of free fluorine, enough to kill 
you quick, mixed up with a weird collection of the gaseous fluorides of practically all the non-metals in existence. It's 
been sampled. That looks all right to 
start with because you can build a protective suit like a space suit out of metal 
and after the free fluorine has attacked 
the outer surface and formed a thin 
coating of fluoride, nothing more happens, just the way aluminum reacts with 
water-vapor in the air to a small extent. 
But there are rains on Niflheim and they 
consist mostly of hydrofluoric acid, 
which isn't very good for a protective 
suit, even when it's made of the Vang 
metal they use in rocket-tubes. The 
joints aren't very safe and one little 
crack could play hell with the man inside the suit. 

"Besides, there's the little problem of 
seeing your way around. We just don't 
know of any glass or transparent plastic 
that would last more than a couple of 
hours in Niflheim's atmosphere. A man 
would be quite blind there, even if he 
were safe otherwise. The only way to 
be certain would be to build out of something that already has so much fluorine 
in it that it can't take on any more. Like 
Teflon." 

"What's Teflon?" 

For answer Frasser got up and went 
to the spool cabinet, extracted a spool 
and put it into the speaker. "Hubbard's 
list of elementary chemical compounds," 
it announced, and ejected the index 
strip, on which Frasser made his selection. The machine clicked and gurked. 
"Teflon," it said, "a plastic composed of 
very long chains of linked CF 2 units. 
Hardness 4.5. Tough. White to grayish 
in color, translucent in very thin sheets. 
Can be extruded and pressed into shapes 
at temperatures around 205 degrees. 
Easily machined, requiring no lubrication during the process. Subject to cold 



36 STARTLIN 

flow under continuous high pressure. As 
the carbon-fluorine bond is extremely 
strong, remains absolutely inert chemically at normal temperatures, and cannot be stuck to anything whatever. 
Known since the twentieth century." 

FRASSER switched the machine off. 
"There you are," he said. "But notice 
that the man said translucent in very 
thin sheets, while you said the nozzle of 
Harkavy's gun was transparent. Sure 
about that?" 

"I certainly am. It looked as though 
the liquid came from inside the thing 
and some kind of pressure were applied 
to it inside the nozzle and from another 
source." 

"Could be. Good mechanical arrangement. They probably made it as a test 
piece, to see whether their material 
would stand up without leaking under 
service conditions. But I don't think 
there's much doubt that they've succeeded in producing a transparent form 
of teflon, and they probably have another, opaque form with greater hardness that working parts can be made of. 
That's Rizzi's doing, damn him." 

Greta stirred in her seat. "There's 
something 1 don't understand," she said. 
"Why are he and Lajos keeping it so 
secret if they're really going to Niflheim 
and have the means? It would be of immense benefit to the whole of humanity 
if they could get at the beryllium. Any 
Council, even the central one, ought to 
be glad to authorize it." 

Paul Frasser's smile was more like a 
snarl. "If you don't know the answer to 
that one, you're more emotionally romantic than I thought. For one thing, 
your father's little playmates aren't too 
anxious to have beryllium found. If interstellar travel stops, they'll stay right 
where they are on most worlds, sitting 
on top of the heap. For another thing, 
if Rizzi and Harkavy pull it olf by themselves they'll gain so much credit and so 
many votes, right in the association, 
that they can practically write their, 
own ticket. We won't even be able to 



r STORIES 

hold the moderates in line. And with a 
psych running things, we might as well 
go back to the old days when political 
officers controlled even scientists." 
"I see." 

"So the first thing is to find out where 
they're making the stuff, get the formula 
if possible, keep them from using it before we can take some action. It's too 
bad you broke the acquaintance now. 
You might have been able to make him 
talk." 

Greta said, "We all make mistakes, 
don't we ?" and stood up. "I'll stay in my 
quarters to hear from you about Lajos 
being out. Make it as soon as you can; 
I have my special travel permit, and 
want to be on my way back to earth." 

"Oh, that reminds me," said Frasser. 
"Your adored parent seems to have become somewhat excited about your 
breaking off the acquaintance with Harkavy. While you were out on your little 
jaunt among the burax we got word that 
Roger Ingelhide is on his way here." 

Greta stopped. "That's queer. He 
usually only does political errands for 
father. Like rounding up support for a 
new regulation or getting somebody disenrolled as a scientist." 

IX 

TThE perpetual violent wind of Uller 
drove the rain in little hard level pellets 
that stung right through the transparent face-hood of Greta's raincoat as sr.* 
climbed from the ground car, pressed 
the lever that would send it into ths 
automatic garage and let herself into 
the weather-hall of the building where 
Lajos Harkavy had his quarters. 

An old serv was guiding a cleaning 
machine down the hall. He smiled and 
lifted a hand in recognition, and Greta 
wished she hadn't been seen, but there 
was nothing she could do about it now. 
She felt her heart beating rapidly, and 
decided that this was what it must have 
felt like to be one of those persons who 
took other people's property — she 
couldn't remember the word for them — 



THE LO 

back in the archaic ages before science 
took control and the Eugenics Committees bred anti-social behavior practically out of existence. 

The elevator slid smoothly downward. 
Greta stepped across the narrow hall, 
approached the sonic plate and pronounced the phrases that would give it 
the combinations of sound that under 
the subtle analysis of the device would 
be as much her own as her finger-prints ; 
"This is Greta Manning; one, two, 
three, five, six, why, piebald, gentian." 
Frasser had been right; the door slid 
back and the lights in Lajos' reception 
room came on. 

He hadn't changed anything, but she 
had hardly expected him to. She turned 
into the bed and living room, touched 
the reception room lights to silence and 
stood for a moment, looking around in 
the dimmer radiance that flowed from 
walls and ceiling at her entrance. Right 
ahead Lajos had moved one of the partitions around the corner where the bed 
was, probably to use spray while he 
slept; there couldn't be any door in that 
corner. To her left another partition 
with an open swinging door in it permitted a glimpse of the fireplace. He 
had changed things there, too, making 
that part of the room into more of an 
Intimate corner for reading, and when 
Greta went through the door, she saw 
that a projector was hung on the partition. 

The fireplace itself might, just might 
conceal a panel leading to another 
apartment ; if Lajos were clever enough 
to have covered up his scientific activity 
so well, he was clever enough to have 
thought of that. She stepped to it, 
touched the light to greater brilliance, 
and began examining the intricate carving of the mantelpiece for any detail 
that might indicate a door-button. 

With the greatest clarity the speaker 
in the wall pronounced, "This is Lajos 
Harkavy ; one, two, three, five, six, why, 
piebald, gentian." 

Greta had just time to put the lights 
out with a panicky jab of her finger 



fG VIEW 37 

when the light in the reception room 
came up at the entry of someone and 
Lajos' voice said, "Come in. I think I 
can guarantee — " He stopped. 

Another voice, somewhat heavier said, 
"Beg pardon?" 

Lajos said, "Be comfortable and take 
off your cold-suit. I was saying that I 
had wired this place with detectors so 
that you need not worry about spy-rays. 
Privacy on Uller is expensive; we have 
so little outdoor life. Will you have a 
spray, or a drink or tobacco?" 

Greta crouched and crept toward the 
back of the room, where at a pinch she 
might slip through into the dining 
room, blessing the softness of the silicoid floor. 

The heavy voice said, "I do not myself 
indulge, but I would not find it disturbing if you wish to do so." 

Lajos said, "You pure scientists seldom do. What can I do for you ?" 

In the dark Greta tripped on some- ' 
thing and almost fell, but saved herself 
with the arm of a big chair. 

CHE heard the heavy voice say, "Mr. 
^ Harkavy, I want you to judge the importance with which my mission is regarded by the fact that, even with the 
extremely restricted amount of interstellar travel available, I was alloted a 
reaction car for the sole purpose of coming out here to see you." 

"I am honored, Mr. Ingelhide." 
(Greta could imagine the slightly malicious gleam in Lajos' eyes as he said 
this.) "You could always reach me on a 
closed beam circuit." 

"This is not a matter that could be 
discussed in that way. Let us put it that 
it is a matter of negotiation." 

There was a momentary silence in 
which each seemed to be waiting for the 
other to say something. Evidently Lajos 
won, for it was the heavy voice of Ingelhide that spoke first; "I am here as the 
personal representative of the President 
of the Association for the Advancement 
of Science." 

"I am more than honored." 



38 



STARTLING STOKIES 



"His daughter has just given up her 
acquaintance with you." 

"Yes. She decided we were not temperamentally suited for marriage with 
each other." 

Ingelhide's voice was heavy with disapproval, "In our group I am afraid we 
cannot recognize the existence of temperamental difficulties as scientific. But 
1 w ill not labor the point. The heart of 
the matter is that a certain situation has 
resulted." 

"You mean the beryllium shortage?" 

"You know a good deal, don't you, Mr. 
Harkavy? That is one aspect of it, yes. 
A certain group calling themselves the 
moderates, chiefly composed of applied 
scientists, are trying to make use of the 
difficulties caused by this shortage to 
make themselves dominant in the Association, that is, throughout civilization 
everywhere. We believe they intend to 
degrade both the pure scientists and the 
psychologists to the level of techs. I 
need not point out to you how dangerous 
this would be, for you personally, and 
for civilization as a whole." 

"Go on." 

"The test case will be the proposal for 
a new marriage regulation, making all 
marriages proposed by the Eugenics 
Committee compulsory. The moderates 
propose to defeat the regulation. As this 
will constitute a vote of no-confidence in 
the present Council, a new one would 



have to be elected, dominated by tha 
moderates, and they would then proceed 
with the rest of their program." 

Greta could hear Lajos give a little 
laugh. "Very ingenious, aren't they? 
But I don't see why you should come out 
here to tell me about this, I have no 
vote; I'm not even an adult, officially." 

"That is what I came here for. The 
President of the Association authorizes 
me to say that it would be possible to 
pass a special regulation conferring 
adulthood on a man of your intelligence 
rating. The psychs would hardly oppose 
it, and with the help of the advanced 
group, there would only be a certain 
number of moderates in opposition." 

"I see," said Lajos. "Provided I came 
out for the new marriage regulation afterward." 

Ingelhide's voice was smooth. "Naturally, we would be cooperating. You 
would automatically have a seat on the 
Council. It might even be possible to 
have you given the rating of a pure 
scientist." 

"I am more flattered than ever." 

"As for the young lady in question, if 
it met with your approval, once the new 
marriage regulation was passed one of 
the first acts of the Eugenics Committee 
would be to pronounce a marriage between you and her eugenically desirable." 

"You haven't overlooked a thing, have 



THE ADVENTURES OF 



IT SMELLS GRAND 




AROMA SWEET AS ANV ROSE


IT PACKS RIGHT 




PACKS TO PLEASE YOUGOOONESS KNOWS/ 



THE LONG VIEW 



3!! 



you?" Greta held her breath until she 
almost strangled, waiting for what was 
coming next. It did not come at once; 
there was the click as the doorpanel to 
the studio slid back, the muffled sound of 
Lajos' footsteps and then his voice : 

"Mr. Ingelhide, does this picture 
mean anything to you?" 

"It appears to be a representation of 
two people standing on a cliff at twilight. Why, they're moving! And the 
twilight's getting darker!" 

"That's the effect of luminescents. 
The painting hasn't anything else to say 
to you ?" 

Ingelhide's voice was slightly puzzled. 
"It is very skilfully rendered," he said 
tentatively. 

GRETA heard Lajos sigh. "Thank you 
for the compliment. I came out here 
to Uller to paint it because this is the 
only world that would provide me with 
the necessary effects. And it is supposed 
to convey the terror of a failing and falling world, in which two people have no 
resource against the dark but each 
other. Either I have failed to make this 
clear, or you have not understood it. It 
doesn't matter. But surely you can see 
that you have as little understanding of 
the emotions that actuate me as I have 
of the calculations that actuate you. The 
answer to your proposal is no, and no 
again." 



Ingelhide's voice took on a dangerous 
edge. "We may be forced to make other 
arrangements — " 

"I have no doubt you will try. Now, 
listen to me. You think you are offering 
me the keys of the universe. Bah! I 
already have greater prospects than any 
you can dream of, and I shall not be indebted for their fulfillment to a group 
which intends to fasten a tyrannical 
stasis on mankind in the name of science. Good-bye, Mr. Ingelhide; I wish 
you a pleasant journey back to earth." 

"If you feel that way about it — " 

"I do. Good-bye." 

There was the click of the elevator 
door-panel. Greta heard Lajos' feet go 
pad, pad, then she was suddenly bathed 
in light and his voice said, "You can 
come out now," 

Her face flaming, but as boldly as possible, she walked through into the reception room. "I suppose you knew it was 
me, and not just anyone?" 

"Of course. As I told that rather 
crude gentleman who brought your father's message, I have detectors on the 
place. The little box just over the door 
to the dining room, which you probably 
never noticed, reported that the lights 
had been on. Since you are the only 
other person for whom the door has 
been tuned — I must have that looked 
after, by the way — it was obvious that 

[Turn page] 




UNCLE WALTER 



T SMOKES SWEET 



PUFF 
J GROWS) 



IT CAN'T BITE! 

SIR WALTER RALEKH5 BLEND OF CHOICE KENTUCKY 
6URLEVS IS EXTRA-AGED TO GUARD AGAINST 
TONGUE BITE, AND SIR WALTER RALEIGH NEVER 
LEAVES A SOGSy HEEL IN YOUR PIPE. STAYS 
LIT TO THE LAST POFP. 




40 STAKTLIP> 

you had come to the place while I was 
out, and were still here. I thought something like that might happen when I 
found I was being followed on going out. 
That's why I hurried back." 

Greta said coolly, "I'm surprised you 
didn't haul me out for Ingelhide's benefit." 

"Oh, that would never do. You see, I 
aiow you're spying for the moderates, 
md I'd rather have you let them know 
exactly where I stand than turn you in 
to your father's group. He'd be likely 
to banish you to one of the less pleasant 
planets ; has a» emotion in his makeup, 
you know." 

"Very chivalrous of you," said Greta, 
trying to make the remark sarcastic. 
"What makes you think I'm spying for 
the moderates?" 

Lajos put his fingertips together. 
"First: you tried to plant a spy-ray on 
me. That's comprehensible in a girl 
who wants to know something about the 
man she is probably going to marry, but 
suspicious. Second : the same ship that 
brings you to Uller also brings Paul 
Frasser, an agent of the moderates, and 
although you have no contact With him 
on board, you visit his quarters after 
you arrive. Third : you break off the acquaintance for no assignable reason and 
at a most pecular time. Fourth: when 
we went on the trip to MacMurray Forest, you defended the moderates against 
the advanced group. Fifth : you slip into 
my quarters while I'm out to look for 
something. Did you find it, by the way?" 

"Are you sure you're perfectly right 
on all those points, Mr. Harkavy ? No, I 
didn't find it. May I go now?" 

"As you wish." He touched the button 
for the doorpanel. 

As she stepped through, she turned. 
"Good-bye, Lajos Harkavy. There's one 
thing about me, though. At least I don't 
cheat." 

She saw his mouth gape in amazement behind the closing panel. 

T^HE clerk at the hostel said Mr. Fras■*- ser was out and would be back late, 



3 STORIES 

but had left w-ord that she was to wait 
if she came and gave her the key. Also 
an urgent closed-beam transcript had 
just come in for him; would she take it 
up? 

Paul Frasser's suite had two rooms 
and a window, but the supply of reading 
spools seemed limited to technical material in fields that did not interest Greta, 
and the window offered no resources but 
the pitch-black clouded night of Uller, 
studded here and there with a trail of 
light as a flyer went past. There didn't 
seem to be much to do but sit down and 
think, so Greta did that for a while, 
wondering how much more Lajos knew 
and what he meant to do next. The latter seemed reasonably obvious; he was 
going to make a try for Niflheim and 
its beryllium. But he'd need a special 
permit to use a reaction car for interstellar travel in that case, and he'd have 
to get it either from the Uller Council or 
the main council of the Association, 
back on earth. And to get either one, 
he'd probably have to have moderate 
support in the councils. 

Of course! thought Greta, when she 
got this far, that was the point. That 
was why Lajos hadn't done anything 
but let her go when he found her spying 
on him. He must be already in touch 
with some of the moderates, and his bold 
answer to Ingelhide had been deliberately given in her hearing, so she would 
take word of it back to Frasser. He was 
playing the same kind of game aa the 
rest, and very cleverly, just as he had 
fooled her into thinking he was carrying 
on an honest acquaintance while he was 
really having an affair with that naked 
dancer. 

Come, Greta, she told herself at this 
point, you mustn't get bitter, it's bad 
for your emotional stability. Where 
were we? Oh, yes, Lajos must have been 
in touch with the moderates. Then the 
closed-beam, transcript she had brought 
up for Frasser would be an instruction 
from Shigemitsu and the other leaders 
back on earth about the new policy of 
cooperating with the psychs. 

Without any sense of eavesdropping, 



THE LO 

and because she had always been treated 
as one of the leaders of the group, Greta 
dropped the spool into the player. It 
gave the series of code clicks that indicated a closed-beam transmission which 
could be heard on just this one single 
player out of all those in the universe, 
and then Shigemitsu's voice came out, 
with that tiny suggestion of hissing accent that no one of Japanese, ancestry 
ever quite lost: 

"Your news is the best you could possibly send, and renders the success of 
our project practically certain if properly followed up. Of course, you will have 
perceived already that it is necessary to 
obtain the details of this new teflon 
process either from Rizzi or Harkavy 
before they can use it for a trip to Niftheim. The others are agreed with me 
that you are to stop at nothing, even 
primitive means, in obtaining it. Even 
if interstellar travel is restored on the 
fullest basis, our group cannot fail to be 
placed in charge of it, and this will permit us to have a majority in any council 
at any time. I do not think it will even 
be necessary to unseat the present council by a vote on the new marriage regulation ; drop further efforts to persuade 
voting members along that line. I am 
glad you used your influence to obtain a 
special travel authorization for the girl. 
Her usefulness there is ended, and she 
is so emotional that she might cause 
trouble. We will have to dispose of her 
somehow when the program for the exclusion from the scientific rolls but that 
can be settled in due course. Remember 
that Rizzi is not dangerous in himself ; 
it is Harkavy you must watch and work 
through." 

A S THE message clicked off, Greta sat 
** perfectly still, gripped by a kind of 
numb, cold horror. This was the result 
of her effort to make the world — the 
worlds — better places for people to live 
in. She was a puppet, a spy for a gang 
even more cynical than the advanced 
group headed by her father. At least 
the advanced group had ideals of a certain kind, even if she thought they were 



JG VIEW « 

wrong, but Shigemitsu and his crew 
were after nothing but personal power, 
just as in the primitive period. There 
was no one, no one, she could trust. Of 
what use all the scientific advances man 
had made through centuries if they only 
led back, by another route, to the same 
cold struggle for power? Lajos had been 
right, and the result of careful breeding 
for intellectual attainment and emotional stability under the Eugenics Committees had turned most scientists into 
automata, whose only emotional satisfaction lay in making other people do as 
they wished. 

The door opened and Paul Frasser 
came in, pulling open the fastenings of 
his cold-suit. "Hello," he said, without 
apologizing for keeping her waiting. 
"Did you find it?" 

Greta said, "There's a closed-beam 
urgent for you on the player from Shigemitsu. He says you're to get Harkavy's teflon process at any cost, and to 
ship me home because I'm not useful 
here any more." 

The tone she used made Frasser give 
her a sharp look. "Closed beam is supposed to insure the privacy of communications," he said. 

"If you're going to have spies, you 
must expect them to spy on you, too. 
Especially when you cheat them," she 
replied, anger and despair mingling in 
her voice. 

"Oh, come," he said, "this business of 
cheating is becoming what the psychs 
call a fixation with you. Look at matters 
rationally." 

"I am. I have. And what I see is that 
you're no more interested in people as a 
whole than my father. You and your 
gang just wanted my help to get in control of interstellar communication — and 
then I'm not useful any more." 

Frasser shrugged. "Somebody has to 
control it." 

"Why not the councils of all the sciences, the way it's supposed to be 
done ?" 

"Somebody has to control them, too. 
To decide which line of scientific endea


42 



STARTLING STORIES 



vor will yield the greatest benefit to humanity." 

Greta said fiercely, "Yes, I've heard 
that before. Well, I'm through. When 
I get back to earth, I'll have nothing 
more to do with your 'movement.' No, 
wait, I will too. I'll denounce it in open 
Council or the convention of the Association." 

"I think not." 

"What will prevent me?" 

"Your own rational view of the consequences. Stop and think about it logically and scientifically. You'll be accusing part of the Council and a good many 
members of the association of conduct 
inimical to the advancement of science. 
Do you think they'd rather listen to you 
or order you for examination as emotionally unstable? They wouldn't dare 
let the political power have such a 
chance to upset the system of scientific 
regulations." 

"LIE WAS right, Greta realized as her 
>" first flush of anger began to cool, 
and she remembered the years of struggle it had taken to set science free from 
the control of the old political governments, in which not the most intelligent, 
but the most cunning came to the top — 
with their wars and jealousies and eugenically bad strains breeding unchecked. 
She said, "My father — " 

Frasser cut her off with a laugh. "If 
he doesn't know all about it already, he's 
more of a fool than I think. The only 
trouble is that he can't identify the people mainly responsible. You know that. 
Try talking to him, and you'll find yourself on a transport for Freya as the first 
victim of his purge." 

Greta dropped her head a little. "I 
just wish there was someone I could 
trust," she said slowly, and groped her 
way to the door. 

Paul Frasser watched her go with 
something that was not quite a sneer 
on his face. He was about to put Shigemitsu's message through the player 
when something struck him, and he 
stepped rapidly across the room to the 



phone. "Hello," he told the hostel 
switchboard, "I want Derek Hyde, 316422 on visual. Closed circuit." 

There was a momentary wait before 
Hyde's head appeared on the plate, his 
hair tousled with sleep. "Hello, Hyde," 
said Frasser. "Nobody with you? Good. 
I know it's late and you love your rest, 
but this is an emergency. Remember 
that Mannjng girl, the good looking one 
we took to see Roselle La Blanche? She's 
been working with us, but I'm afraid 
we're going to have trouble, and it's got 
to be headed off. 1 sent her over to locate 
something at Harkavy's quarters. Don't 
know whether she found it or not, but 
she's just been here in a mood that 
makes me pretty certain she's going to 
turn sour." 

Hyde had a finely chiseled face of the 
type that would have been called "aristocratic" in the old days. "What do you 
want me to do?" he asked. "Look her 
up and make love to her?" ' 

"Stop being a fool and listen. There's 
just one danger, and that is that she'll 
go to Harkavy. I want you to get in 
touch with that building officer at his 
quarters, the one who gave you the tipoffs before, and have him notify you at 
once if she turns up there again. If she 
does, neither one of them must go out of 
the place alive and conscious." 

Derek Hyde's aristocratic features 
appeared to be undergoing a revolution. 
The lines from nose to mouth pinched in 
and the eyebrows went up in the center. 
"But that's physical violence!" he 
squealed. "That's anti-social conduct! 
They'll psych me ! They'll take away my 
mind !" 

"Listen, you're playing in fast company now, up with the low intelligence 
number people. You do what I say, or 
something a lot worse than a psych will 
happen to you. I don't care how you arrange it, and I don't want to know, but 
that girl knows too much for the good 
of either of us, and she mustn't get it 
to Harkavy. Now move, before the roof 
falls in." 

He snapped off the connection and 



THE LO 

turned frowningly to listen to Shigemitsu's message. 

XI 

The speaker said, "This is Greta 
Manning. May I come in?" Lajos 
Harkavy turned over in bed, snapped 
back the covers with one motion, 
dropped a night-suit around him with 
another, snapped the back-switch, said 
"Come," and stepped around the partition to meet her as the door of the reception-room slid back and its lights came 
on. 

The hood of her cold-suit was back, 
but she had not taken it off ; at the expression on her face, he checked any intention to make a light remark and motioned her to a seat. He said, "I'd like to 
spare you any embarrassment, but I'm 
afraid that as you came to see me, you'll 
have to speak first." 

"All right," she said. Her voice was 
nearly toneless. "I had to come and tell 
you. I couldn't feel honest otherwise." 

Lajos didn't sit down or say anything. 

"You're not making it easy," she said. 

"I beg your pardon." He stepped to 
the back of the room, turned a button 
and the place was filled with the faint 
scent of the pine mountains, of earth. 
"It's not an emotional spray," he said, 
"merely a relaxer," and crossed to sit 
down opposite her. "Have you seen 
Malya." ' 

"No. Yes. I came for something else." 
The spray was already taking effect, 
and she felt better. "I just wanted to 
let you know that when I took the job of 
— spying on you, I didn't have any idea 
of what was really going on." 

"How do you mean?" 

The girl made a gesture with one 
hand. "I wonder if you understand. ■ I 
think you probably do, even if you won't 
say so. The reason I wanted to help the 
— the moderates was because my 
father's group wanted to make the pure 
scientists — oh, you know, a privileged 
caste, and I didn't like it, even if I do 
rate as a pure scientist." 



G VIEW 43 

"I know. We talked about that back 
on earth. In the park beside the Hudson." 

"And you told me that interstellar 
travel was going to end very soon." 

"Yes," said Harkavy, "I told you that. 
I told it to you deliberately, and it 
wasn't quite true, because I thought you 
were in the clear and I didn't want to 
see you get mixed up in the fight. There 
isn't much mercy for anyone in it. Actually, there will be enough beryllium for 
a small amount of space travel for them 
foreseeable future. But the people who 
control it are going to control all the 
worlds. They can always send enough 
of their own group in to win a vote in 
the Council." 

Greta said; "That's what I wanted 
to tell you. The moderates are as bad 
as the advanced group. All they want 
is to control. They want to put the rest 
of us down to tech status. And Paul 
Frasser's one of them." 

"I know it." 

"And send anyone who stands against 
them to some place like Freya." 

"I know that, too." 

"All right, did you know Toijiru 
Shigemitsu was one. of them, too?" 

Lajos changed his position. "No, I 
didn't. He has always behaved publicly 
like a real moderate, not a member ot 
the group. Thank you." 

"All right," said Greta, "now let me 
ask you a question. Are you and Rizzi 
planning a trip to Niflheim for beryllium? Because that's what Shigemitsu 
thinks, and he's going to do anything he 
possibly can to prevent it." 

Lajos stood up and walked across the 
floor, his forehead set in a'frown. "If 
I could be sure. . . ." 

"Of me? If I could be sure of you. 
How do I know that what you told Ingelhide was just to impress me? Just 
as when you told me that interstellar 
travel was going to stop completely, 
only it isn't." 

"We don't seem to be getting anywhere — * 

The red light beside the door flashed. 



p 



STARTLING STORIES 



Lajos stepped over to it and switched 
the button to the "In" position, and the 
voice said; "Urgent. Package delivery." 

AT THE sound of the click Lajos 
**■ opened the delivery box in the wall 
to reveal a small container in dark 
plastic. "I wonder what that could be," 
he said, and pressed the opening slit. 
The box split ; out on the table leaped a 
bright-colored something like a manyhearted jewel which turned and twisted 
urgently. In a flash Greta leaped from 
her seat, dashed it to the floor and 
stamped on it, while Lajos stood looking at where it had been with slack face 
and a foolish smile. Greta slapped him, 
hard. "Come out of it!" she said. 

Lajos put one hand slowly up to his 
cheek, then turned to her, blinking. 
"What happened?" he said. "What was 
it?" 

"A topological knot. They're hypnotic 
unless you know enough about pure 
mathematics to keep from being caught 
by them." She lifted her foot. "I think 
it's safe for you to look at it now, 
though. It wasn't made of very good 
material, and I've bent it out of shape. 
They use them as tests in higher mathematical training." 

Lajos gazed at the object curiously, 
but did not attempt to pick it up. "It 
occurs to me," he said, "that you could 
just as easily have let me be hypnotized 
by that thing. I'd haye done almost anything you told me, wouldn't I?" 

"Yes." 

HE GRINNED wryly. "In any .case, 
I'll have to trust you to a certain 
extent. Sending that thing here means 
that someone is disturbed enough about 
what I'm doing to be willing to take a 
chance on having his mind wiped out for 
anti-social behavior. It also means 
there'll be a follow-up, and whoever it 
is will be plenty dangerous." 

"I think I know who it Is," said Greta. 
Frasser. Shigemitsu told him tp stop at 
nothing to get your transparent teflon. 
I told him about it." 



"[_" 

The voice plate, in firm tones, saidj 
"This is a Regulator Tech. Lajos Harkavy, you are to open the door at once." 

"He thinks he's got you under," whispered the girl. 

There was a silence from outside 
which seemed to prolong itself unbearably. Harkavy suddenly bounced through 
the side door into the studio, and was as 
rapidly back with the painting case and 
began unsnapping it just as the voice 
plate ejaculated; "Lajos Harkavy, I 
shall be forced to violate your privacy 
unless you admit me at once." 

"Here," he said, thrusting the queerlooking weapon he had used in the Mac- Murray Forest into the girl's hands. 
"You work it with this lever. Hold him 
off if he gets in. I'm going to call for 
help — if they haven't cut the circuit." 

The crack of an impulse-whip sounded 
against the door panel and a six-inch 
bulge appeared in it, as Harkavy 
bounded into the studio again. Wham! 
The budge widened and a crack ran 
across it. Slam! The crack became a 
gap through which a red glow showed as 
the next charge crashed into the door, 
splitting it right across. Greta crowded 
back toward the studio door to avoid 
the shock of the next one. Wham- bango! It sent the fragments of the door 
flying, and part of the charge tore into 
a chair across the reception room. 

Into the gap stepped Derek Hyde, the 
impulse-whip under his arm. 

"Where's Harkavy?" he demanded. 

"Right here." Greta felt him beside 
her. "But you needn't worry about me. 
That weapon the young lady has is 
loaded with enough hydrofluoric acid to 
burn a hole right through you." 

"I'll take my chance on that," said 
Hyde and raised the whip. 

"Let him have it!" cried Harkavy. 

"It's violence! I can't!" moaned the 
girl, and collapsed as Harkavy threw 
her to the floor, tumbling across her to 
avoid the charge that spurted into the 
studio and tore something from the wall 
with a crash. 



THE LO 

Harkavy caught just a glimpse as the 
impulse-whip was lowered to finish them 
. . . and something hit Hyde from behind. The machine dropped from under 
his arm and an expression of the most 
intense surprise came across his face as 
he stood stock-still, utterly frozen, 
weapon under arm, finger on trigger. 
The next moment the place was swarming with half a dozen Regulator Techs, 
paralyzers in hand, and with Marius 
Rizzi frowning through the group. 

ONE of the Regulators said; "Get 
that impulse-whip, Laurie. This is 
about the worst case of violence I've 
ever seen, and I think we better take 
him along without releasing anything 
but the legs." 

Rizzi helped Greta up as one of the 
Regulators ran the release mechanism 
over Hyde's legs and shepherded him 
clumsily toward the elevator. Harkavy 
said; "Marius, you were certainly the 
god from the machine, I was trying to 
phone you when that maniac started 
breaking in, but I couldn't reach you. 
What in the nine worlds persuaded you 
to show up just at this time, and with a 
bodyguard." 

Rizzi said ; "Our little friend — " and 
then stopped and looked at Greta. 

"It's all right," said Harkavy. "She's 
on our side." 

Rizzi flashed a frown, but went on; 
"Our little friend Roselle — " 
"Roselle!" cried Greta. 
"Roselle la Blanche is one of our very 
best agents," said Harkavy, calmly. 

"Lajos! Did you know it was because 
of her that I broke the acquaintance? 
They told me you had a connection with 
her." 

"I do, but not the kind they meant. 
Go on. Marius, this sounds important." 

"Our friend Roselle called and said 
Hyde had called her in a state of considerable excitement. He said he was 
being forced into an act of violence, and 
if he didn't come through, he wanted her 
to have his belongings. Well, the act of 
violence had to be against one of us, and 



rG VIEW 45 

as you had been watched and I hadn't, I 

got busy with a friend of mine in the 
Regulator oflice and came over here." 

Harkavy said ; "Let's go into the living room away from that wreck of a 
door and work this out. I don't like the 
implications." 

He led the way through to the seats 
in front of the fireplace, seated himself 
and said ; "This is Frasser's crowd ; the 
moderates. Greta was working for them 
until she found out what they were 
really up to, and she tells me they know 
about your transparent teflon. That 
must be what they're after." 

"I told them about it," said Greta. 
"And then a closed beam came through 
from Shigemitsu on earth, telling Frasser not to stop at anything." 

"I don't think he needed the encouragement," said Harkavy. "However, the 
question is what happens next. I don't 
think we can really pin anything on 
Frasser over this irruption of Hyde's. 
He'll have the guy pre-conditioned not 
to break under questioning, and even 
if he does, Frasser can always claim he 
exceeded instructions. And Frasser 
isn't the only man the moderates have 
on .Uller. I'd rather let him alone and 
watch him than have them transfer the 
executive to someone we don't know 
about yet," 

"May I speak?" said Greta. "There's 
a point that occurs to me. When they 
sent me here, that night, it was to find 
your laboratory and either have you up 
for unauthorized research or get the 
teflon process for themselves. Now 
Hyde comes in here and tries to blow 
you apart. It seems to me that this 
represents a change in emphasis from 
wishing to use the stuff themselves to 
preventing you from using it, and that's 
something you'll have to take into account." 

"I believe you're right," said Rizzi. 
"And that means we'll have to work 
fast, before they or the advanced group 
can put a crimp in us from the. Central 
Council. We only have two of the 
suits ready, but I think that gives us 



48 STARTLtt 

enough to just make it, if — " 

"If what?" asked Greta. 

"If we can get the travel authorization and the reaction car." 

"You don't have to have it if you'll 
take me with you," said Greta. "I have 
a special authorization that was given to 
me when I broke the acquintance." 

"I don't know that I care for that 
idea," began Harkavy, but Rizzi put out 
a hand. "I'm in favor of it. The fact 
that the moderates are onto our plan 
means that we wouldn't have much 
chance of getting away with a big ship 
and a heavy load in any case. A reaction car will just hold three, one to 
handle the machine and two to work 
outside, and all we need is a sample of 
the stuff, not a cargo. Also, I have my 
pilot's license. But there are problems." 

"Such as?" said Greta. 

"We'll have to line the air-lock of the 
car with teflon and arrange a pressuregear to clear it of fluorine after use. 
That isn't difficult in a technical sense 
with the new process, and it won't take 
long, but the minute we start work, 
we're advertising where we're going, 
and I'm afraid Frasser will use the opportunity to pull something on us." 

XII 

MaSCARIADES was the name of 
the captain of the port, and by ancestry 
he was a Greek. At the present moment 
he looked acutely unhappy, although his 
control tower had been run up to afford 
an exceptionally fine view of the port 
and the weather was, for Uller, uncommonly pleasant. 

"I am very sorry," he said, "but in 
view of the complaint that you are about 
to make a journey to a point other than 
that covered by your papers, I cannot 
give you a clearance or furnish you with 
fuel." 

"Who made the complaint?" asked 
Greta. 

"Don't waste time," said Rizzi. "We 
know who made it. I'm the pilot of 
record, Mr. Mascariades, and therefore 



5 STORIES 

the ship's captain. What evidence is 
there to support the complaint?" 

"The fact that you have altered the 
air-lock of the car to resist a non-terrestrial type atmosphere." 

"You know an awful lot, don't you?" 
said Rizzi. "I think — " 

"Wait a minute," said Harkavy. 
"That's not the way to handle this, 
Marius. Mr. Mascariades, will you get 
us a phone connection with the Council 
executive office? On visual." 

"Certainly," said the captain, his relief showing in his voice, and turned to 
the instrument. In a moment a squarish 
face appeared on the screen, and a voice 
said; "Council Executive; Toller speaking." 

"Mr. Toller," said Harkavy. "I am 
one of the passengers on reaction car 
VAK-321. authorized journey for Miss 
Greta Manning. We have just been 
refused clearance on the ground that 
our papers do not show the correct 
destination. I beg to submit that the 
destination is Earth, as stated, but we 
intend to make a stop-over at Niflheim." 

The square face showed no sign of 
relaxing, "TW Uller Council has already 
been apprised of that fact. It cannot 
authorize a clearance for Niflheim." 

"Why not?" 

"Because valuable equipment belonging to the Association will not be allowed 
to enter so corrosive an atmosphere." 

"We have protected the airlock of the 
car. Exterior protection is unnecessary." 

"Your unsupported statement is insufficient. The council has considered 
this question in view of information 
reaching it, and has decided that an 
analysis of the protective coating will 
be required." 

Harkavy said ; "That should be simple 
— " but Rizzi put a hand on his arm. 
"Just a moment," he said. "May we 
call back?" 

"Certainly," said Toller, and the connection was abruptly broken. 

Rizzi plucked at Harkavy's arm, pulling him a little aside. "It won't do," he 



THE LONG VIEW 



said. "Frasser is a perfectly competent 
physical chemist. With an analysis of 
our transparent teflon he could duplicate it just about as fast as he could 
set up the apparatus." 

"I see. And then he'd keep us here on 
some other pretext while he made the 
Niflheim exploration a general Association project with himself at the head of 
it Very neat." Harkavy turned; "Mr. 
Mascariades, will you excuse us for a 
moment? *We need to confer in view of 
the situation." 

"Gladly," said the port captain. "You 
can use my inner office there. It is soundproofed and has no spy ray — unless 
someone has installed one recently." He 
took on an anxious look. "Believe me, 
Mr. Harkavy, we techs will do anything 
permitted by the regulations to help 
you out" 

TPTHEN they were in the office with 
" Rizzi perched on a desk and the 
other two in the seats, Harkavy said; 
"Maybe you can suggest something, 
Greta. The way this thing is rigged, 
Frasser can get the transparent teflon 
process by an analysis. We should have 
lined that air-loek with opaque, but it's 
a little late to think of that now, and 
besides it would make the controls hard 
to get at." 

The girl said; "Wouldn't the logical 
thing be to appeal from the Council to 
the general body of the Uller Association? There ought to be enough psychs 
and fair-minded applied scientists in it 
to give you a majority." 

"There are two reasons why that 
won't work out," said Harkavy. "One is 
that we aren't exactly coming to court 
with clean hands after trying to slip 
away, so we couldn't be sure of holding 
the majority in line for a special, unauthorized project The other is even 
more so; Frasser and his merry companions would appeal to Central Council 
back on earth, and either the advanced 
group would demand the new marriage 
regulation as the price of letting it go 
through, .or they'd make it a Central 



Council project. What we have to do 
is get there first and make the demonstration ourselves. It's the only way 
Marius and I can get enough promotion 
and backing. He'll have to take over if 
I can't be declared adult and take my 
place in the rankings." 

Greta had been frowning. Now she 
said ; "Would it help if it could be proved 
that the lining would stand Niflheim's 
atmosphere without making a chemical 
analysis ?" 

"It would help an awful lot," said 
Rizzi. "Even the moderates would find 
it hard to think up another objection in 
time. As I understand the captain out 
there, all we have to furnish is proof, it 
doesn't matter what kind. If it can be 
done." 

"1 think it can," she said, and stood 
up. "I want a spectroscopic light projector and a recorder for it. Also an 
electron microscope scalded in angstroms. And samples of fluorine and 
hydrofluoric acid." 

"Those you can have," said Rizzi, 
"and the executive will have to send 
inspectors if you're going to make a 
test. But you'll probably get Frasser 
along with them." 

They did ; accompanied by techs bearing the equipment and a pair of representatives from the Council executive, 
one of them the square-faced Toller, the 
other a melancholy looking man bearing the name of Senef. Frasser greeted 
the others with the calm courtesy demanded of scientists in the presence of 
the lower ratings, and it was not until 
they stood before the opened door of the 
air-lock with Greta adjusting the projector to play on it that he said; "What 
do you propose to do?" 

"I don't know that I care to tell you," 
said Greta. "Do you have official status 
to ask ?" She turned to one of the techs. 
"I want the microscope set in phase to 
catch the reflection from the metal surface under the coating, and the recorder 
to pick up the result. Can you do that?" 

"Miss Manning." It was Toller. "I 
have the official status to ask, and I do 



18 



STARTLING STORIES 



ask what you propose to do." Behind 
him Harkavy and Rizzi exchanged 
glances. 

"Very well. I propose to demonstrate 
mathematically that this coating is impervious to the conditions on Niflheim." 

Frasser said; "Gentlemen, I submit 
that this is absurd. A simple chemical 
analysis — " 

"Would prove that the coating is 
impervious to fluorine under the conditions on Uller, not on Niflheim. Chemistry isn't my branch, but I do know you 
can't reproduce the Niflheim conditions 
in a laboratory. They're too complex." 

"I don't think mathematical proof 
would be acceptable." 

The melancholy Senef spoke for the 
first time. "The Council's regulation 
asked for proof but did not specify the 
nature of it. You have given us a 
good deal of trouble already, Mr. Frasser, and I am afraid you will have to be 
bound by our decision." Once more 
Harkavy and Rizzi exchanged glances. 

"All right," said Greta to one of the 
techs. "Cut in the power. No, that's not 
quite right. There's a fadeout toward 
the UV. Can you get that set? There; 
it looks as though it's coming through 
correctly now. Record, and then move 
the projector slowly along." 

pRETA tripped the holder and the 
^ record came out, a long band bearing a series of waving intricate curves. 
"Now will you run light tests on those 
samples of fluorine and hydrofluoric, 
and bring the records to me in the control tower, while I analyze this one?" 

She led the way across the field past 
the firing pits to the control. When the 
group had gathered around the table in 
Mascariades' office, she spread the record of the light test out. 

"Now, gentlemen," she said, "these 
curves represent the passage of light of 
different wave-lengths through the lining material. It went through twice, 
but that needn't concern us. Notice that 
it isn't a straight line, as you might expect, but a wavy curve; the different 



wave-lengths of light encountered varying resistances from the molecules of 
the material." 

"The phenomenon is a familiar one," 
observed Toller. 

"I know," said Greta. "Now as far 
as a mathematician is concerned a wave 
is not a picture of something; it's a 
graphic method of expressing a periodic 
function. I'm going to reverse the process here and derive the function from 
the graph. The grid in the record will 
give us our coordinates. Have you got a 
hand calculator and a sheet of paper?" 

She wrote rapidly as the figures ticked 
in the calculator, then turned to the two 
Council executives. "Observe that this 
function has a variable in it, due to the 
molecules of the lining being affected 
differently by light of different wavelengths ; and that as it progresses evenly 
where the record runs out into, the infrared and UV at the two ends, it is probably an infinite series. Since that is the 
case, the values of the variable, z, can 
only be described by a Weierstrass 
analytic power series. 

Toller turned to Senef; "Is that correct? In astronomy we don't deal in this 
sort of thing." 

Senef said; "It's correct enough; almost elementary. But I don't see what 
you expect to prove by it, Miss Manning. 
The series is convergent." 

"You will in a minute," said the girl. 
"Ah, here's the record on those other 
two tests now. Let's take the fluorine 
one first. The one for the acid is just 
a check." Again she wrote and the calculator clicked. She handed the result to 
Senef. "Will you glance that over and 
see if it isn't correct? I want you to 
notice that it's another convergent series. That is, it approaches a finite number." 

Senef 's melancholy features took on a 
touch of glee. "I think I see what you're 
driving at. Yes." 

"But if we combine the two," said 
Greta, and wrote again, "the result is a 
new series, and as you will see, it's divergent. It reaches to infinity; that is, 



THE LO 

the only point at which a combination of 
fluorine and the lining material could 
take place would be infinity." 

Senef patted his hands together softly. "Admirable!" he said. "Thoroughly 
convincing. Toller, this is the proof we 
asked for. We probably should have 
known better than to doubt people of 
this order of intelligence." 

"If you're satisfied — " began Toller. 

"I'm not," said Paul Frasser. 

Senef faced him. "I do not know that 
your opinions are a factor. Captain Mascariades, you may give this car an immediate clearance and a supply of fuel 
adequate for reaching Earth with a 
stop-over at Niflheim." 

XIII 

'Ml HE meeting is open," announced 
President Manning, and the twenty-two 
members of the Central Council of the 
Association for the Advancement of 
Science stopped their low buzz of conversation and settled back. 

"We still have pending the matter of 
the new marriage regulation," Manning 
said. "In the interests of — " 

Old Henrik Kool raised his hand and 
said; "Floor." 

"Pending business should be disposed 
of first." 

Kool said ; "I appeal from the decision 
of the chair. I have new business of 
such urgency that until it is disposed 
of we cannot deal properly with the 
pending business, and indeed the attitude of this body toward it may be 
altered by a change in the Council's 
composition." 

"Please record ballots on the appeal," 
said Manning, and turned to face the 
voting board where the balloting done 
by keys in the arms of the seats was 
automatically recorded. "Two first rate 
scientists in favor of the appeal, six 
votes ; two second rate, four votes ; nine 
third rate, nine votes ; total nineteen out 
of thirty-five. The appeal is supported. 
Mr. Kool, state your new business." 

"I wish to present Lajos Harkavy, 



G VIEW 49 

BC-11-71, who has succeeded in reaching Niflheim and returning with proof 
that it contains ample supplies of beryllium to last the whole system for many 
hundreds of years of unrestricted interstellar travel, and that it can be 
handled safely." 

"Is there any confirmation of the 
facts?" asked Manning, as calmly as 
though he did not know what was coming. 

A man near the middle of the room 
raised his hand. "The chemical section 
confirms," he said. "Not only was a 
Quantity of high-grade beryllium ore 
brought back, but also optical crystals of 
calcium fluoride of high indicated value." 

"You may present," said Manning. 

Kool stepped to the door and admitted 
Harkavy, Greta and Rizzi, leading them 
to seats at the front of the council room. 
When they were seated he faced the 
group. "In view of the achievement of 
Lajos Harkavy, I ask a seat on this 
Council for him, with the rank of first 
rate scientist ; and I ask a seat for Marius Rizzi, his assistant, with the rank of 
third rate scientist." 

A woman with dark hair, one of Manning's advanced group, claimed the 
floor and said ; "Objection. If Rizzi made 
the discoveries, he should be promoted, 
but not Harkavy." 

Kool said; "Mr. Rizzi, will you tell us 
about it." 

Rizzi stood up. "The process by which 
protective plating for use in a fluorine 
atmosphere was developed was entirely 
due to Harkavy. I furnished only the 
laboratory and technical assistance." 

The objector remained on her feet. 
"Unauthorized research !" 

Harkavy spoke for the first time. 
"The research was done on Uller. That's 
why I went there. It's an outer, class C 
planet, and no authorization is required, 
provided only local materials are used." 

The woman sat down, but another 
man raised his hand. "I have an objection as a member of the Eugenics Committee. According to our records, Mr. 
Harkavy is not an adult, and therefore 



50 STARTLES 
cannot have either the rating you ask 
or a seat on this Council." 

"I will move a regulation by this 
body to declare him adult," said Kool. 
"In view of attainments beyond those 
of anyone here, it is deserved." 

The objector looked at a note and 
clung to his point. "According to the 
records, Mr. Harkavy lacks two years of 
the required age. If we are to make 
special regulations in individual cases, 
we might as well not have any regulations at all. It is hopelessly unscientific. 
Science admits of no exceptions." 

Harkavy stood up. "May I speak? I 
could name a few exceptions science 
admits, and I can name one in the regulations. When a person of my age has 
made a marriage authorized by the Eugenics Committee, he is assumed to be 



; STORIES 

stable enough to be declared adult." 

"But you're not married. You'e not 
even on acquaintance." 

"Oh, yes I am. Ask Marius Rizzi if 
you wish." 

Rizzi said; "As captain of a ship in 
deep space, I was authorized to perform 
marriages, even when not authorized. 
Of course, there were only three of us 
aboard, and it wasn't much of a ceremony, but when they asked me, I could 
not very well refuse — could I?" 

In the applause and murmurs that 
ran through the group it was a couple of 
minutes before Henrik Kool could get 
enough attention to say; "In the light of 
the evidence before us. I do not think 
there can be any objection to voting the 
regulations I have asked." 
. There was not. 




To the immaculate public servant, the Alien in human 
form wag a deadly menace which must be hunted down 
and destroyed. But you may disagree -when you read— 

DOUBLE MEANING 

A Brilliant Novel 

By DAMON KNIGHT 



Coming in Next Month's Issue — Plus Many Other 
Ouistandine Stories and Features! 



The Story Behind This Month's STARTLING Novel 

THE SILICONE WORLD 



ON THE following pages are reproduced the author's notes on THE LONG 
VIEW. We are presenting them in article form not only because they 
supply to the interested reader an absorbing technical background to the 
novel, but because they form a revealing picture of the wheels and gears that 
click and whir in a stf author's mind when he really sets out to do a job— 
the exhaustive research and planning which he will undertake in order that 
the completed work will be solid as a rock. Fletcher Pratt speaking — 



t / 



Ti 
n 



1HE planet is 
. named Uller (it 
seems that in interstellar travel the 
names of Norse 
gods, instead of 
Greek, were applied 
to the few habitable 
worlds). It is the 
second planet of the star Beta Hydri, 
right angle 0.23, declension -77:32; GO 
(solar) type star, of approximately the 
same size as the sun; distance from 
earth 21 light years. 

Uller revolves around Beta Hydri in a 
nearly circular orbit, at a distance of 
105,000,000 miles, making it a little colder than earth. A year is of the approximate length of that on earth. A day lasts 
26 hours. 

The axis of Uller is in the same plane 
as the orbit, so that at a certain time of 
the year the north pole is pointed directly at the sun, while at the opposite 
end of the orbit, it points directly away. 
The result is highly exaggerated seasons. At the poles the temperature runs 
from 120' C. to a low of -80° C. At the 
equator it remains not far from plus 10° 
C. all year round. Strong winds during 
the summer and winter, from the hot to 
the cold pole. Few winds during the 
spring and fall. The appearance of the 
poles varies during the year from baked 
deserts' to glaciers covered with solid 
C0 2 . Free water exists in the equatorial 
regions all year round. 



2. SOLAR MOVEMENT AS SEEN 
FROM ULLER. , 

As seen from the north pole — no sun 
visible on Jan. 1. On April 1, it bisects 
the horizon all day, swinging completely 
around. April 1 to July 1, it continues 
swinging around, gradually rising in the 
sky, the spiral converging to its center 
at the zenith, which it reaches on July 
1. From July to October 1 the spiral 
starts again, spreading out from the center until on October 1 it bisects the horizon again. On October 1 night arrives 
again and stays until April 1. 

At the equator, the sun is visible bisecting the southern horizon for all 26 
hours of the day on January 1. From 
January 1 to April 1 the sun starts to 
dip below the horizon at night, to rise 
higher above it during the day. During 
all this time it rises and sets at the 
same hours, but rises in the southeast 
and sets in the southwest. At noon it is 
higher each day in the southern sky, 
until April 1, when it rises due east, 
passes through the zenith and sets due 
east. From April 1 to July 1, its noon 
position drops down to the north until 
on July 1, it is visible all day, bisected 
by the northern horizon. 

3. CHEMISTRY AND GEOLOGY OF 
ULLER. 

Calcium and chlorine are rarer than 
on earth ; sodium is somewhat common


52 



STARTLING STORIES 



er. As a result of the shortage of caleium there is a higher ratio of silicates 
to carbonates than exists on earth. The 
water is slightly alkaline, and resembles 
a very dilute solution of sodium silicate 
, (water glass). It would have a pH of 
8.5 and would taste slightly soapy. Also, 
when it dries out it leaves a sticky, and 
then a glassy, crackly film. Rocks look 
fairly earthlike, but the absence or 
scarcity of anything like limestone is 
noticeable. Practically all the sedimentary rocks are of the sandstone type. 

4. ANIMAL LIFE. 

Life developed as it did on earth, in 
the permanent waters, but because of 
the abundance of silicon, there was a 
strong tendency for the microscopic organisms to develop silicate exoskeletons, 
like diatoms. The present invertebrate 
animal life of the plant is of this type 
and is confined to the equatorial seas. 
They run from amoeba-like objects to 
things like crayfish, with silicate skeletons. Later, some species of these started taking the silicon into their soft tissues, and eventually their carbon-chain 
compounds were converted to silicone 

type chains, from - - to 

11.11 

1 J 1 
- Si - - Si - O- Si with organic radi
l I I 

cals on the side links. These organisms 
were a transitional type, with silicone 
tissues and water body fluids, resembling the earthly amphibians, and are 
now practically extinct. There are a few 
species, something like segmented 
worms, still to be seen in backwaters of 
the central seas. 

A further development occurred when 
the silicone-chain animals began to get 
short-chain silicones into their circulatory systems, held in solution by OH or 
NH 2 groups on the ends and branches 
of the chains. The proportion of these 
compounds gradually increased until the 
water was a minor and then a missing 



constituent. The larger mobile species, 
then, were practically anhydrous. Their 
blood consists of short-chain silicones, 
wtih quartz reinforcing, and their armor, 
teeth, etc., of pure amorphous quartz 
(opal). Most of these parts are of the 
milky variety, variously tinted with 
metallic impurities, as are the varieties 
of sapphires. 

These pure silicone animals, due to 
their practical indestructibility, annihilated all but the smaller of the carbon 
animals, and drove the compromise types 
into odd corners as relics. They developed into a fish-like animal — with a very 
large swim-bladder to compensate for 
the rather higher density of the silicone 
tissues — and from these fish the land 
animals developed. Due to their high 
density and resulting high weight, they 
tend to be low to the ground, rather 
reptilian in look. Three pairs of legs are 
usual in order to distribute the heavy 
load. There is no sharp dividing line 
between the quartz armor and the silicone tissue. One merges into the other. 

The dominant pure silicone animals 
only could become mobile and venture 
far from the temperate equatorial regions of Uller, for they alone were independent of the planet's violent climate, 
since they neither froze nor stiffened 
with cold, nor boiled off when it got really hot. Note that all animal life on this 
planet is cold-blooded, with a negligible 
difference between body and ambient 
temperatures. Since the animals are silicones, they don't get sluggish, like cold 
snakes. 

5. PLANT LIFE. 

The plants are of the carbon metabolism-silicate shell type, like the primitive 
animals. They spread out from the equator as far as they could go before the baking polar summers killed them. They had 
normal seasonal growth in the temperate zones, and remained dormant and 
frozen solid during the winter. At the 
poles there is no vegetation — not because of the cold winters, but because 



THE SFUCONE WORLD 



53 



of the hot summers. The cold winter 
winds frequently blow over dead trees 
and roll them as far as the equatorial 
seas. Other dead vegetation, because of 
the highly silicious water, always gets 
petrified, like the petrified forest, unless 
it gets eaten first. What with the quartzspeckled hides of the living vegetation, 
and the solid quartz of the dead, a forest 
is spectacular. 

The silicone animals live on the plants. 
They chomp them up, dehydrate them, 
and convert their silicious outer bark 
and carbonaceous interiors into silicones 
for themselves. When silicone tissue is 
metabolized, the carbon and hydrogen go 
to C0 2 and H 2 0, which are breathed out, 
while the Silicon goes into SiO., which is 
deposited as more teeth and armor. 
(Compare the terrestrial octopus, which 
makes armor plating out of calcium 
urate instead of excreting urea or uric 
acid.) The animals can, of course, eat 
each other, too, or try to make a meal 
of the small carbonaceous animals of the 
equatorial seas. 

Further note that the animals cannot 
digest plants when they are cold. They 
can eat them and store them, but the 
disposal of the solid water and C0 2 is 
too difficult a problem. When they warm 
up, the water in the plants melts and 
can be disposed of, and things are simpler. 

All rivers are seasonal, running from 
the polar regions to the central seas in 
the spring only, or until the polar cap is 
completely dried out. 

The Fluorine Planet 

The planet named Niflheim is the 
fourth planet of Nu Puppis, right angle 
6:36, declension -43:09; B8 type star, 
blue-white and hot, 148 light years distant from the earth, which will require 
a speed in excess of light to reach it. 

Niflheim is 462,000,000 miles from its 
primary, a little less than the distance 
of Jupiter from our sun. It thus does 
not receive too great a total amount of 
snergy, but what it does receive is of 



high potential, a large fraction of it being in the ultra-violet and higher frequencies. (Watch out for really superspecial sunburn, etc., on unwarned personnel.) 

The gravity of Niflheim is approximately 1 g, the atmospheric pressure approximately 1 atmosphere, and the average ambient temperature about -60° C; 
-70° F. 

2. ATMOSPHERE. 

The oxidizer ih the atmosphere is free 
fluorine (F„) in a rather low concentration, about 4 or 5 per cent. With it appears a mad collection of gases. There 
are a few inert diluants, such as N s 
(nitrogen), argon, helium, neon, &c, but 
the major fraction consists of CF 4 (carbon tetrafluoride) , BF 3 "boron trifluoride), SiF 4 (Silicon tetrafluoride), PF S 
(phosphorous pentafluoride) , SF 6 (sulphur hexafluoride) and probably others. 
In other words, the fluorides of all the 
non-metals that can form fluorides. The 
phosphorous pentafluoride rains out 
when the weather gets cold. There is also 
free oxygen, but no chlorine. That would 
be liquid except in very hot weather. It 
sometimes appears combined with fluorine in chlorine trifluoride. The atmosphere, on examination, has a slight yellowish tinge. 

3. SOIL AND GEOLOGY. 

Above the metallic core of the planet, 
the lithosphere consists exclusively of 
fluorides of the metals. There are no oxides, sulfides, silicates or chlorides. There 
are small deposits of such things as bromine trifluoride, but these have no great 
importance. Since fluorides are weak mechanically, the terrain is flattish. Nothing tough like granite to build mountains 
out of. Since the fluoride ion is colorless, the color of the soil depends upon 
the predominant metal in the region. 
As most of the light metals also have 
colorless ions, the colored rocks are rather rare. 



54 1 STARTLIN 

4. THE WATERS UNDER THE 
EARTH. 

They consist of liquid hydrofluoric 
acid (HF). It melts at -83° C. and boils 
at 19.4° C. In it are dissolved varying 
quantities of metallic and non-metallic 
fluorides, such as boron trifluoride, sodium fluoride, etc. When the oceans and 
lakes freeze, they do so from the bottom 
up, so there is no layer of ice over free 
liquid. 

B. PLANTS AND PLANT METABOLISM. 

The plants function by photosynthesis, taking HF as water from the soil, 
and carbon tetrafluoride as the equivalent of carbon dioxide from the air to 
produce chain compounds, such as: 

H H H H 

I I L 1 

- C - C - C - C 
I'll 

F F F F 

and at the same time liberating free 
fluorine. This reaction could only take 
place on a planet receiving lots of ultraviolet because so much energy is needed 
to break up carbon tetrafluoride and 
hydrofluoric acid. The plant catalyst 
(doubling for the magnesium in chlorophyl) is nickel. The plants are colored 
in various ways. They get their metals 
from the soil. 

5. ANIMALS AND ANIMAL METABOLISM. 

Animals depend upon two main reactions for their energy, and for the 
construction of their harder tissues. The 
soft tissues are about the same as the 
plant molecules, but the hard tissues 
are produced by the reaction : 

H H H F F F 

1 I 1 111 
- C - C - C - + F 2 C - C - C - + HF 

III III 
F F F F F F 

resulting in a Teflon boned and shelled 



STORIES 

organism. He's going to be tough to do 
much with. Diatoms leave strata of 
powdered teflon. 

The main energy reaction that occurs 
among this type of life is expressed in 
the following formula: 

H H H 

- C - C - C - , . . +F, ->-CF 4 + HF 



The blood catalyst metal is titanium, 
which results in colorless arterial blood 
and violet veinous, as the titanium flips 
back and forth between tri- and tetravalent states. 

7. SOME EFFECTS ON INTRUDING 
ITEMS: 

Water decomposes into oxygen and 
hydrofluoric acid. All organic matter 
(earth type) converts into oxygen, carbon tetrafluoride, hydrofluoric acid, etc., 
with more or less speed. A rubber gas 
mask lasts about an hour. Glass first 
frosts and then disappears. Plastics act 
like rubber, only a little slower. The 
heavy metals, iron, nickel, copper, monel, 
etc., stand up well, forming an insoluble 
coat of fluorides at first and then doing 
nothing else. 

8. WHY GO THERE? 

Of great interest, naturally, are the 
properties of the planet which we may 
employ. 

Large natural crystals of fluorides, 
such as calcium difluoride, titanium tetrafluoride, zirconium tetrafluoride, are 
extremely useful in optical instruments 
of various forms. Uranium appears as 
uranium hexafluoride, all ready for the 
diffusion process. Compounds of such 
non-metals as boron are obtainable from 
the atmosphere in high purity with very 
little trouble. All metallurgy must be 
electrical. 

There are considerable deposits of 
beryllium, and they occur in high concentration in its ores. 

—Fletcher Pratt 



Columbus had a surprise In store for him. 




Sml On! Sml On! 

Br PHILIP JOSE FARMER 



EIAR SPARKS sat wedged between 
the wall and the realizer. He was motionless except for his forefinger and 
his eyes. From time to time his finger 
tapped rapidly on the key upon the desk, 
and now and then his irises, grayblue as 
his native Irish sky, swiveled to look 
through the open door of the toldiUa in 
which he crouched, the little shanty on 



the poopdedc. Visibility was low. 

Outside was dusk and a lantern by 
the railing. Two sailors leaned on it. 
Beyond them bobbed the bright lights 
and dark shapes of the Nina and the 
Pinta. And beyond them was the smooth 
horizon-brow of the Atlantic, edged in 
black and blood by the red dome of the 
rising moon. 



55 



56 STARTLIK 

The single carbon filament bulb above 
the monk's tonsure showed a face lost 
in fat — and in concentration. 

The luminiferous ether crackled and 
hissed tonight, but the phones clamped 
over his ears carried, along with them, 
the steady dots and dashes sent by the 
operator at the Las Palmas station on 
the Grand Canary, 

Zzisss! So you are out of sherry already . . . Pop ! . . . Too bad . . . Crackle 
. . . you hardened old winebutt . . . Zzz 
. . . May God have mercy on your 
sins. . . . 

Lots of gossip, news, etcetera . . . 
Hisses! . . . Bend your ear instead of 
your neck, impious one. . . The Turks 
are said to be gathering . . . crackle . . . 
an army to march on Austria. It is 
rumored that the flying sausages, said 
by so many to have, been seen over the 
capitals of the Christian world, are of 
Turkish origin. The rumor goes they 
have been invented by a renegade Rogerian who was converted to the Muslim 
religion. . . I say . . . zziss ... to that. 
No one of us would do that. It is a 
falsity spread by our enemies in the 
Church to discredit us. But many people 
believe that. . . . 

How close does the Admiral calculate 
he is to Cipangu now? 

Flash! Savonarola today denounced 
the Pope, the wealthy of Florence, Greek 
art and literature, and the experiments 
of the disciples of St. Roger Bacon . . . 
Zzz! . . . The man is sincere but misguided and dangerous ... I predict he'll 
end up on the stake he's always prescribing for us. . . . 

Pop . . . This will kill you . . . two 
Irish mercenaries by the name of Pat 
and Mike were walking down the street 
of Granada when a beautiful Saracen 
lady leaned out of a balcony and emptied 
a pot of . . . hiss ! . . . and Pat looked up 
and .... 

Crackle. . . Good, hah ? Brother Juan 
told that last night. . . . 

PV . . . PV . . . Are you coming 
in? . . . PV . . . PV. . . Yes, I know 
it's dangerous to bandy such jests about, 



G STORIES 

but nobody is monitoring us tonight. . . 
Zzz. . . I think they're not, anyway. . . . 

And so the ether bent and 'warped 
with their messages. And presently 
Friar Sparks tapped out the PV that 
ended their talk the pax vobiscum. Then 
he pulled the plug out that connected 
his earphones to the set and, lifting 
them from his ears, clamped them down 
forward over his temples in the regulation manner. 

A FTER sidling bent-kneed from the 
toldilla, punishing his belly against 
the desk's hard edge as he did so, he 
walked over to the railing. De Salcedo 
and de Torres were leaning there and 
talking in low tones. The big bulb above 
gleamed on the page's redgold hair and 
on the interpreter's full black beard. It 
also bounced pinkishly off the priest's 
smoothshaven jowls and the light scarlet robe of the Rogerian Order. His cowl, 
thrown back, served as a bag for scratchpaper, pens, an ink bottle, tiny wrenches 
and screwdrivers, a book on cryptography, a sliderule, and a Manual of Angelic 
Principles. 

"Well, old rind," said young de Salcedo 
familiarly, "what do you hear from Las 
Palmas ?" 

"Nothing now. Too much interference 
from that." 

He pointed to the moon riding the 
horizon ahead of them. 

"What an orb!" bellowed the priest. 
"It's as big and red as my revered nose!" 

The two sailors laughed, and de Salcedo said. "But it will get smaller and 
paler as the night grows, Father. And 
your proboscis will, on the contrary, become larger and more sparkling in inverse proportion according to the square 
of the ascents — " 

He stopped and grinned, for the monk 
had suddenly dipped his nose, like a 
porpoise diving into the sea, raised it 
again, like the same animal jumping 
from a wave, and then once more 
plunged it into the heavy currents of 
their breathe. Nose to nose, he faced 
them, his twinkling little eyes seeming 



SAIL ON! 

to emit sparks like the realizer in his 
toldilla. 

Again, porpoise-like, he sniffed and 
snuffed several times, quite loudly. Then, 
satisfied with what he had gleaned from 
their breaths, he winked at them. He 
did not, however, mention his findings 
at once, preferring to sidle towards the 
subject. 

He said, "This Father Sparks on the 
Grand Canary is so entertaining. He 
stimulates me with all sorts of philosophical notions, both valid and fantastic. For instance, tonight, just before 
we were cut off by that," — he gestured 
at the huge bloodshot eye in the sky — 
"he was discussing what he called 
worlds of parallel time tracks, an idea 
originated by Dysphagius of Gotham." 

"It's his idea there may be other 
worlds in coincident but not contacting 
universes, that God, being infinite and 
of unlimited creative talent and ability, 
the Master Alchemist, in other words, 
has possibly — perhaps necessarily- — created a plurality of continua in which 
every probable event has happened." 

"Huh?" grunted de Salcedo. 

"Exactly. Thus, Columbus was turned 
down by Queen Isabella, so this attempt 
to reach the Indies across the Atlantic 
was never made. So we would not now 
be standing here plunging ever deeper 
into Oceanus in our three cockleshells, 
there would be no booster buoys strung 
out between us and the Canaries, and 
Father Sparks at Las Palmas and I on 
the Santa Maria would not be carrying 
on our fascinating conversations across 
the ether. 

"Or, say, Roger Bacon was persecuted 
by the Church, instead of being encouraged and giving rise to the Order whose 
inventions have done so much to insure 
the monopoly of the Church on alchemy 
and its divinely inspired guidance of 
that formerly pagan and hellish practice." 

De Torres opened his mouth, but the 
priest silenced him with a magnificent 
and imperious gesture and continued. 

"Or, even more ridiculous, but thought 



SAIL ON! .. 57 

provoking, he speculated just this evening on universes with different physical 
laws. One, in particular, I thought very 
droll. As you probably don't know, Angelo Angelei has proved, by dropping 
objects from the Leaning Tower of Pisa, 
that different weights fall at different 
speeds. 

"My delightful colleague on the Grand 
Canary is writing a satire which takes 
place in a universe where Aristotle is 
made out to be a liar, where all things 
drop with equal velocities, no matter 
what their size. 

Silly stuff, but it helps to pass the 
time. We keep the ether busy without 
little angels." 

De Salcedo said, "Uh, I don't want to 
seem too curious about the secrets of 
your holy and cryptic order, Friar 
Sparks. But these little angels your 
machine realizes intrigue me. Is it a sin 
to presume to ask about them?" 

The monk's bull roar slid to a dove 
cooing. 

"Whether it's a sin or not depends. 
Let me illustrate, young fellows. If you 
were concealing a bottle of, say, very 
scarce sherry on you, and you did not 
offer to share it with a very thirsty old 
gentleman, that would be a sin. A sin 
of omission. 

"But if you were to give that desertdry, that pilgrim-weary, that devout, 
humble, and decrepit old soul a long, 
soothing, refreshing, and stimulating 
draught of lifegiving fluid, daughter of 
the vine, I would find it in my heart to 
pray for you for that deed of lovingkindness, of encompassing charity. And 
it would please me so much I might tell 
you a little of our realizer. Not enough 
to hurt you, just enough so you might 
gain more respect for the intelligence 
and glory of my Order." 

T~lE SALCEDO grinned conspiratorially and passed the monk the bottle 
he'd hidden under his jacket. As the 
friar tilted it, and the chug-chug-chug 
of vanishing sherry became louder, the 
two sailors glanced meaningfully at each 



58 STARTUP 

other. No wonder the priest, reputed to 
be so brilliant in his branch of the Alchemical Mysteries, had yet been sent off 
on this half-baked voyage to devil-knewwhere. The Church had calculated that 
If he survived, well and good. If he didn't, 
then he would sin no more. 

The monk wiped his lips on his sleeve, 
belched loudly as a horse, and said, 
"Gracias, boys. From my heart, so deeply buried in this fat, I thank you. An 
old Irishman, dry as a camel's hoof, 
choking to death with the dust of abstinence, thanks you. You have saved mv 
life." 

"Thank rather that magic nose of 
yours," replied de Salcedo. "Now, old 
rind, now that you're well greased again, 
would you mind explaining as much as 
you are allowed about that machine of 
yours ?" 

Friar Sparks took, fifteen minutes. At 
the end of that time, his listeners asked 
a few permitted questions. 

"... and you say you broadcast on 
a frequency of 1800 kc?" the page 
asked. "What does kc. mean ?" 

"K stands for the French kilo, from 
a Greek word meaning thousand. And 
c stands for the Hebrew cherubim, the 
'little angels.' Angel comes from the 
Greek angelos, meaning messenger. It 
is our concept that the ether is crammed 
with these cherubim, these little messengers. Thus, when we Friar Sparks 
depress the key of our machine, we are 
able to realize some of the infinity of 
'messengers' waiting for just such a demand for service. 

. "So, 1800 kc. means that in a given 
unit of time 1,800,000 cherubim line 
up and hurl themselves across the ether: 
the nose of one being brushed by the 
feathertips of the cherub's wings ahead. 
The height of the wingcrests of each 
little creature are even, so that if you 
were to draw an outline of the whole 
train, there would be nothing to distinguish one cherub from the next, the 
whole column forming that grade of little angels known as C. W." 
"C.W.?" 



3 STORIES 

"Continuous wingheight. My machine 
is a C.W. realizer." 

Young de Salcedo said, My mind reels. 
Such a concept! Such a revelation! It 
almost passes comprehension. Imagine, 
the aerial of your realizer is cut just so 
long, so that the evil cherubim surging 
back and forth on it demand a predetermined and equal number of good angels 
to combat them. And this seduction 
coil on the realizer crowds 'bad' angels 
into the left-hand, the sinister side. And 
when the bad little cherubim are crowded so closely and numerously that they 
can't bear each other's evil company, 
they jump the spark gap and speed 
around the wire to the 'good' plate. 

"And in this racing back and forth 
they call themselves to the attention of 
the 'little messengers,' the yea-saying 
cherubim. And you, Friar Sparks, by 
manipulating your machine thus-andso, and by lifting and lowering your key, 
you bring these invisible and friendly 
lines of carriers, your etheric and winged 
postmen, into reality. And you are able, 
thus, to communicate at great distances 
with your brothers of the Order." 

"Great God !" said de Torres. 

TT WAS not a vain oath but a pious 
exclamation of wonder. His eyes 
bulged ; it was evident that he suddenly 
saw that man was not alone, that on 
every side, piled on top of each other, 
flanked on every angle, stood a host. 
Black and white, they presented a solid 
chessboard of the seemingly empty cosmos, black for -the nay-sayers, white for 
the yea-sayers, maintained by a Hand 
in delicate balance and subject as the 
fowls of the air and the fish of the sea 
to exploitation by man. 

Yet de Torres, having seen such a 
vision 33 has made a saint of many a 
man, could only ask, "Perhaps you could 
tell me how many angels may stand on 
the point of a pin?" 

Obviously, de Torres would never wear 
a halo. He was destined, if he lived, to 
cover nis bony head with the mortarboard of a university teacher. 



SAIL ON! 

De Salcedo snorted. 

"I'll tell you. Philosophically speaking, 
you may put as many angels on a pinhead as you want to. Actually speaking-, 
you may put only as many as there is 
room for. 

"Enough of that. I'm interested in 
facts, not fancies. Tell me, how could 
the moon's rising interrupt your reception of the cherubim sent by the Sparks 
at Las Palmas?" 

"Great Caesar, how would I know ! 
Am I a repository of universal knowledge? No, not I! A humble and ignorant 
friar, I! All I can tell you is that last 
night it rose like a bloody tumor on the 
horizon, and that when it was up, I had 
to quit marshaling my little messengers 
in their short and long columns. The 
Canary station was quite overpowered, 
so that both of us gave up. And the 
same thing happened tonight." 

"The moon sends messages ?" asked de 
Torres. 

Not in a code I can decipher. But it 
sends, yes." 
"Santa Maria!" 

"Perhaps," suggested de Salcedo, 
"there are people on that moon, and they 
are sending." 

Friar Sparks blew derision through 
his nose. Enormous as were his nostrils, 
his derision was not small bore. Artillery 
of contempt laid down a barrage that 
would have silenced any but the strongest of souls. 

"Maybe," de Torres spoke in a low 
tone, "maybe, if the stars are windows 
in heaven, as I've heard said, the angels 
of the higher hierarchy, the big ones, 
are realizing-uh-the smaller? And they 
only do it when the moon is up so we 
may know it is a celestial phenomenon?" 

He crossed himself and looked around 
the vessel. 

You need not fear," said the monk 
gently. "There is no Inquisitor leaning 
over your shoulder. Remember, I am the 
only priest on this expedition. Moreover, 
your conjecture has nothing to do with 
dogma. 

"However, that's unimportant. Here's 



SAIL ON! 59 

what I don't understand. How can a 
heavenly body broadcast? Why does it 
have the same frequency as the one I'm 
restricted to? Why — ?" 

"I could explain," interrupted de Salcedo with all the brashness and impatience of yi uth. "I could say that the 
Admiral and the Rogerians are wrong 
about the earth's shape. I could say the 
earth is not round but is flat. I could 
say the horizon exists, not because we 
live upon a globe, but because the earth 
is curved only a little ways, like a greatly 
flattened out hemisphere. 

"I could also say that the cMrubim are 
coming, not from Luna, but from a ship 
such as ours, a vessel which is hanging 
in the void off the edge of the earth." 

"What?" gasped the other two. 

TTAVEN'T you heard that the King of 
Portugal secretly sent out a ship 
after he turned down Columbus' proposal ? How do we know he did not, that 
the messages are not from our predecessor, that he sailed off the world's rim and 
is now suspended in the air and becomes 
exposed at night because it follows the 
moon around Terra, is, in fact, a much 
smaller and unseen satellite?" 

The monk's laughter woke many men 
on the ship. 

"I'll have to tell the Las Palmas operator your tale. He can put it in that 
novel of his. Next, you'll be telling me 
those messages are from one of those 
fire-shooting sausages so many credulous laymen have been seeing flying 
around. No, my dear de Salcedo, let's not 
be ridiculous. Even the ancient Greeks 
knew the earth was round. Every university in Europe teaches that. And we 
Rogerians have measured the circumference. We know for sure that the Indies lie just across the Atlantic. Just as 
we know for sure, through mathematics, 
that heavier-than-air machines are impossible. Our Friar Ripskulls, our minddoctors, have assured us these flying 
creations are mass hallucinations or else 
the tricks of heretics or Turks who want 
to panic the populace. 



60 



STARTLING STORIES 



"That moon radio is no delusion, I'll 
grant you. What it is, I don't know. But 
it's not a Spanish or Portuguese ship. 
What about its different code? Even if 
it came from Lisbon, that ship would 
still have a Rogerian operator. And he 
would, according to our policy, be of a 
different nationality than the crew so 
he might the easier stay out of political 
embroilments. He wouldn't break our 
laws by using a different code in order 
to communicate with Lisbon. We disciples of St. Roger do not stoop to petty 
boundary intrigues. Moreover, that realizer would not be powerful enough to 
reach Europe, and must, therefore, be 
directed at us." 

De Torres shivered and crossed himself again. 

"Perhaps the angels are warning us 
of approaching death ? Perhaps ?" 

"Perhaps? Then why don't they use 
our code? Angels would know it as well 
as I. No, there is no perhaps. The Order 
does not permit perhaps. It experiments 
and finds out; nor does it pass judgment 
until it knows." 

"I doubt we'll ever know," said de Salcedo gloomily. "Columbus has promised 
the crew that if we come across no sign 
of land by evening tomorrow, we shall 
turn back. Otherwise," — he drew a finger across his throat — kkk! Another 
day, and we'll be pointed east and getting away from that evil and bloodylooking moon and its incomprehensible 
messages." 

"It would be a great loss to the Order 
and to the Church," sighed the friar. 
"But I leave such things in the hands of 
God and inspect only what He hands me 
to look at." 

With which pious statement Friar 
Sparks lifted the bottle to ascertain the 
liquid level. Having determined in a 
scientific manner its existence, he next 
measured its quantity and tested its 
quality by putting all of it in that best of 
all chemistry tubes — his enormous 
belly. 

Afterwards, smacking his lips and ignoring the pained and disappointed looks 



on the faces of the sailors, he went on 
to speak enthusiastically of the waterscrew and the engine which turned it, 
both of which had been built recently at 
the St. Jonas College at Genoa,. If Isabella's three ships had been equipped 
with those, he declared, they would not 
have to depend upon the wind. However, 
so far, the Fathers had forbidden its 
extended use because it was feared the 
engine's fumes might poison the air 
and the terrible speeds it made possible 
might be fatal to the human body. 

After which he plunged into a tedious 
description of the life of his patron saint, 
the inventor of the first cherubim realizer and receiver, Jonas of Carcassonne, 
who had been martyred when he grabbed 
a wire he thought was insulated. 

The two sailors found excuses to walk 
off. The monk was a good fellow, but 
hagiography bored them. Besides, they 
wanted to talk of women. . . . 

TF COLUMBUS had not succeeded in 
•*- persuading his crews to sail one more 
day, events would have been different. 

At dawn the sailors were very much 
cheered by the sight of several large 
birds circling their ships. Land could 
not be far off ; perhaps these winged 
creatures came from the coast of fabled 
Cipangu itself, the country whose houses 
were roofed with gold. 

The birds swooped down. Closer, they 
were enormous and very strange. Their 
bodies were flatfish and almost saucershaped and small in proportion to the 
wings which had a spread of at least 
thirty feet. Nor did they have legs. 

Only a few sailors saw the significance 
of that fact. These birds dwelt in the 
air and never rested upon land or sea. 

While they were meditating upon that 
they heard a slight sound as of a mar 
clearing his throat. So gentle and fai 
off was the noise that nobody paid any 
attention to it, for each thought his 
neighbor had made it. 

A few minutes later, the sound camt 
again. This time it was louder and deeper like a lute string being twanged. 



SAIL ON! 

Everybody looked up. Heads were 
turned west. 

Even yet they did not understand that 
the noise like a finger plucking a wire 
came from the line that held the earth 
together, and that line was stretched 
to its utmost, and that the violent finger 
of the sea was what had plucked the line. 

It was some time before they understood. 

They had run out of horizon. 

WHEN they saw that, they were too 
late. 

The dawn had not only come up like 
thunder, it vas thunder. And though 
the three ships heeled over at once and 
tried to sail closehauled on the port tack, 
the suddenly speeded up and relentless 
current made beating hopeless. 

Then it was the Rogarian wished for 
the Genoese screw and- the woodburning 
engine that would have made them able 
to resist the terrible muscles of the 
charging and bull-like sea. 

Then it was that some men prayed, 
some raved, some tried to attack the 



SAIL ON! 61 

Admiral, some jumped overboard, and 
some sank into a stupor. 

Only the fearless Columbus and the 
courageous Friar Sparks stuck to their 
duties. All that day the fat monk 
crouched wedged in his little shanty, 
dotdashing to his fellow on the Grand 
Canary. He ceased only when the moon 
rose like a huge red bubble from the 
throat of a dying giant. Then he listened 
intently all night and worked desperately, scribbling and swearing impiously 
and checking cipherbooks. 

When the dawn came up again in a 
roar and a rush, he ran from the toldilla, 
a piece of paper clutched in his hand. 
His eyes were wild, and his lips were 
moving fast, but nobody could understand that he had cracked the code. 

Their ears were too overwhelmed to 
hear a mere human voice. The throatclearing and the twanging of the string 
had been the noises preliminary to the 
concert itself. Now came the mighty 
overture; as compelling as the blast of 
Gabriel's horn was the topple of Oceanus 
into space. 



It was a fantastic prison world . , , where slave-creatures 
of a hundred spheres dreamed and plotted escape! (lead— 

PLANET OF THE DAMNED 

A Novel of Forgotten Men by JACK VANCE 
• 

FEATURED IN THE DECEMBER ISSUE OF 
OUR NE1T CObtPANlOfi MAGAZINE 

SPACE STORIES 

NOW ON SALE — TWENTY-FIYE CENTS AT ALL STANDS 



WHOEVER 



The Earth-Rocket left lot the stais . . . 

and returned bearing aliens, who claimed 
to have only the noblest intentions. 
Dared we disbelieve them? 



I 



THIS is a love story. That is to say, 
it is a story of the greatest need and 
greatest fear men know. It is also a 
story of conquest and defeat, of courage 
and cowardice, and the heroism that is 
a product of both of them. It begins in 
security and isolation.; it ends in victory 
and desecration. Whoever you are, this 
story has happened to you already, and 
will again. Whoever you are, however 
you live, you are writing the ending to 
the story with every breath you take, 
with every move you make. 

In the cabin of the Service rocket, 
Scanliter Six, Sergeant Bolster and his 
new crewman, Pfc. Joe Fromm, were 
playing checkers. It was the bored third 



heard the click of the keys cutting tape 

on the receiver. 

The sergeant returned his attention 
to the checker board, and jumped two 
men before he bothered to look up at the 
viewer. He saw a streak of light move 
upward and across the screen in a wide 
expected curve, from right to left; 
reached over to inspect the fresh-cut 
tape, and grunted approval. 

"BB-3, coming in at 26", 13', 37", all 
correct," he said. "Check 'em off, Joe. 
That's nine, thirty-eight, and one-ohseven at the point of entry. All in correlation. Transmission clear. It's your 
move." 

Fromm picked up the clipboard with 



YOU ARE By JUDITH MERRIL 



day of a routine one-week tour of duty 
on the Web, checking the activities of 
the scanner-satellites that held the tightwoven mesh of e-m-g in a hollow sphere 
of protective power cast around the 
System. 

Fromm studied the board soberly, 
sighed, and moved a man into unavoidable trouble. Bolster smiled, and both 
of them looked up momentarily as they 



the scanlite-station checkoff chart, and 
marked three tiny squares with his initials, almost without looking. He was 
still staring at the view-screen, empty 
now of everything but the distant specks 
of light that were the stars. 

"Hey," Bolster said again. "It's your 
move. " 

Joe Fromm didn't even hear him. The 
scanner outside completed its revolution 



63 



M STARTLIN 

around the small ship, and . . . there it 
was again! The flaring trail of rockets 
traveled across the screen, independent 
of the up-and-down motion of the revolving scanner. 

rpHE sergeant grunted again. "What's 
*- the matter? Didn't you ever see one 
home before ?" 

"That's the first," Fromm said without turning. "Shouldn't we be recording 
the tape?" 

"Not yet." Bolster surveyed the 
checker board sadly ; he'd have a king 
on the next move ... if Fromm ever 
made another move. "All we got now 
is radar-recog. Then . . . there you 
are . . ." He nodded at the renewed 
clacking of the keys. "That'll be the 
code-dope coming in. Then we wait till 
after it hits detection, and we get the 
last OK, before we send the tape to the 
Post." 

He explained it all dutifully just the 
same. It used to be when they sent a 
new man out, they at least took him on 
a practice tour first. "Look, make a 
move will you ? You got a whole year 
here to sit and look at 'em come in." 

With difficulty, the Pfc. took his eyes 
off the viewer, touch a piece on the board 
at random, and pushed it forward, leaving Bolster with the choice of a threeman jump to nowhere, or the one-man 
jump that would net him his king. The 
private leaned forward to finger the tape 
as it emerged from the receiver, reading 
off the replies to code-dope demands, and 
signal responses, with a certain reverent 
intensity. "Did you ever see an illegal 
entry?" he asked. "I mean, an attempt? 
Somebody told me there was one on this 
sect. . . ." 

At that instant the BB-3 hit the detector field awaiting it at the point of 
entry on the Web, and generated mechanical panic in an entire sequence of 
scanlite instruments. Synchronized 
pulses from the three scanlite stations 
circling the point of entry transmitted 
their frustration in the face of the unprecedented and unpredicted; and the 



3 STORIES 

tape in the cabin of Scanliter Six vibrated out of the recorder under the 
furious impact of the chattering keys. 

Alarm bells began to shrill: first in 
the small cabin, directly over the sergeant's head ; then in similar cabins on 
four other Scanliter rockets within 
range; finally, about two minutes later, 
in the Exec Office at Phobos Post, which 
was the nearest Solar Defense base to 
the point of entry at the time. 

Pfc. Joe Fromm stopped his hesitant 
query in mid-word, feeling vaguely 
guilty for having brought the subject 
up. Sergeant Bolster knocked over the 
checker board reaching for the tape. He 
read it, paled visibly, passed it across 
to the private, and started transmitting 
to the Post almost at the same instant. 

On Phobos, a Signal Tech. depressed 
three levers on his switchboard before 
he stopped to wonder what was wrong. 
Green Alarm meant emergency calls to 
the O.D., Psychofficer, and P.P.. Chief. 
The Tech. sent out the summons, then 
stopped to read the tape. 

DYTEKTR FYLD EYPORT: BB-3 EM 
EADASHNZ INDKAT ALYN LIF— RYPYT ALYN HF— UBORD. RYPYT: 
DYTEKTR FYLD RYPORT VIA SKANLITS 9-38-107 TU SKANLITR 6 SHOZ 
NO UMN LIF UBORD BB-3. 

BOLSTER, SGT/SKNR 6 

By the time the Phobos Post Commander got up from his dinner table, the 
Psychofficer put down the kitten he was 
playing with, and the Public Relations 
Deputy pushed back the stool at her 
dressing table, the crews of all five Scanliters within range of the point of entry, 
as well as the Signals Tech. on Phobos, 
knew all the pertinent details of what 
had occurred. 

The Baby Byrd HI, a five-man starscout, under command of Captain James 
Malcolm, due back after almost a full 
year out of System, had approached a 
point of entry just outside the orbit of 
Saturn on the electro-magneto-gravitic 
Web of force that surrounded the Solar 
System. It had signalled the correct 
radar recognition pattern, and replied to 



WHOEVER 

the challenge of the scanlite stations 
circling the point of entry with the anticipated code responses. Accordingly, 
the point had been softened to permit 
entry of the ship, and a standard detector field set up around the soft spot. 

Thus far, it was routine homecoming 
for a starscout. It was only when the 
BB-3 entered the detector field that the 
automatics on the scanner-satellite stations began to shrill the alarms for 
human help. The field registered no 
human electro-magnetic emanations on 
board the BB-3. The e-m pattern it got 



YOU ARE 65 

The membrane of force that guarded the 
System from intrusion had, in turn, to 
be guarded and maintained by the men 
who lived within it. The scanner-satellites were as nearly infallible as a machine can be; they might have run 
effectively for centuries on their own 
very slowly diminishing feedback-power 
systems. But man's security was too 
precious a thing to trust entirely to the 
products of man's ingenuity. Each year 
a new group of the System's youth was 
called to Service, and at the end of the 
year, a few were chosen from among 



— JiMi fo/rfact — 

IT HAS been remarked before that science-fiction writers, peering into 
the future, tend to be rather gloomy about the human race. We can 
only say they have plenty of reason. Case in point is the Army Air 
Force order during the recent Hying saucer tumult to "shoot on sight" — 
an order later rescinded with confusion. As though gifted with prevision, 
Judy Merril had already written and sold us a story of man's first contact 
with aliens from outside; of the confusion, the fear, the suspicion of that 
contact. 

She's done more than write a glib story of the mechanics involved, 
with the conventional ending. She's dug under the surface, uncovered 
the motives most of us hide, produced people as real in their future 
problem as those you know. And her conclusion? It will keep you wondering until the very end. 

— The Editor 



was undoubtedly alive . . . and just as 
undeniably alien. 

For the third time in the history of 
the Web, an attempt at entry had been 
made by unauthorized aliens ; and those 
aliens were apparently in sole possession 
of a Solar starscout. The third attempt 
. . . and the third failure : the BB-3 was 
already secured in a slightly intensified 
smaller sphere of the same e-m-g mesh 
that made up the Web, suspended at midpoint between the three circling scanlite 
stations. 

II 

INTERNAL vigilance is most assuredly the price of the peace of the womb. 



the volunteers to man the Scanliters that 
serviced the satellite stations which 
comprised the Web, 

For even the most adventurous of 
youths, one further year of Scanliting 
was usually enough; they came back 
from their fifty tours Outside prepared 
to keep their feet on solid ground, and 
to forget the brief experience of facing 
the unknown. But each year, too, there 
were a few of them who learned to crave 
the intoxication of danger, who could 
no longer be content to settle back into 
the warm security of the System. It was 
these warped veterans of the Web who 
became Byrdmen. 

Secure within the womb-enclosure of 
the Web, five billion Solar citizens could 
wreak their wills upon their little 



worlds, and carry on the _ 
complex design for nourishment of all 
the intra-System castes and categories. 

Otuside, the emissaries of mankind 
streaked through the heavens on their 
chariots of Are, spreading the Solar culture through galactic space, spawning 
the seeds of men between the stars. First 
went the Baby Byrds, to scout new lands 
beyond the farthest outposts; then the 
Byrds, with their full complements of 
scientists, and giant laboratories, to test 
the promise of the newly-charted planets; and after them, the giant one-way 
starships went. 

Somehow there were always just 
enough bold desperate souls, yearning 
for danger and ready to die for a dream, 
to fill the human cargo-couches of the 
colony ships: the Mayflowers and Livingstons and Columbos that left the 
safety of the Web forever to fix new 
germ-cells of humanity on far-flung 
planets in the speckled skies. 

Inside the Web, on four inhabited 
planets and half a thousand habitable 
asteroids, men lived in the light of the 
sun by day, and drew their warmth and 
power from it. By night, they turned to 
rest at peace; each one under his own 
sector of the high-domed sky, the hollow 
sphere of force through which no alien 
source of light could penetrate and still 
retain identity. 

The Web glowed always with the mingled and diffracted energy of all the 
universe Outside; no photon passed its 
portals, no smallest particle of energy 
came through without the necessary 
pause for hail-and-password that maintained the calm security of the Web's 
inner light. 

Scanliter Six was already proceeding 
at full speed toward the trapped BB, 
acting on normal emergency procedures, 
when the keys taped out the order from 
Commander Hartson on Phobos post to 
do just that. No stars showed on the 
viewer; they had stopped the rotation 
of the scanner and the screen held a 
steady picture of the three Scanlite stations with a fuzzy hump in the center 



STARTLING STORIES 

ever more that was too bright to look at comfortably. Scanner rays could not possibly 
penetrate the thick field that held the 
BB-3 suspended in the Web. 

"Well," Bolster said sourly. "Here's 
your chance to be a hero, kid." 

Joe Fromm knew it was childish of 
him to be excited. He tried not to look 
interested. "Yeah?" he said. 

"Yeah. What happens now is, we get 
there and code in that the situation is as 
reported. Then the brass has a conference and they decide somebody has got 
to investigate, so they ask for volunteers. We're the laddies on the spot. The 
other boys are all on Stand-by according 
to this. ..." 

He waved the orders tape at Fromm, 
who caught it and read it through carefully. 

"And if we were on Stand-by instead 
of Proceed, you know what we'd be 
doing right now?" the sergeant went on, 
enjoying his own discomfort as loudly 
as possible. "I'll tell you what. We'd be 
standing all right, right smack where we 
were when the tape came in. Not one 
second closer." 

"Stand-by is supposed to mean that 
you get into the best position for observation," the Pfc. recited. 

"Sure. The best position for observation, kid, is in-scan and out of blowup 
range. So you take ypur choice: you 
stay where you are when the tape comes 
in, or you back out as far as you can and 
stay in-scan. Anyhow, we're the boys 
on the spot, see? They're going to want 
a volunteer to board the Beebee, and I 
got a hunch," he finished with a faint 
note of hope, "that I might come out of 
this in one piece just on account of you 
are probably going to want to be a hero." 

"Could be," Fromm said nonchalantly. 
"You're senior; after all, it's your privilege." 

He was delighted that he managed to 
keep a poker face through the statement. 



JOE FROMM stepped out of the airlock into space, and let himself float 
free, orienting, for a slow count of five. 



WHOEVER 

He had done it a hundred times and 
more in drill, but it felt different now. 
As in the drill, he made a routine extra 
check of his equipment: tank, jetter, 
axe, welder, magnograpple, mechitape 
recorder, (no radio in an insul-suit), 
knife, gun, signal mirror, medikit. All 
OK. 

He set the jet at gentle and squirted 
off toward the glowing ball of force that 
held the starscout. Two more squirts, 
and he was as close as he could get. He 
flashed the mirror twice at Bolster in 
the Scanliter, to start the passageway 
in the sphere opening. This was the last 
contact till he came out again. If he.». . . 

If I come out again ... he thought 
the whole phrase through deliberately, 
and was surprised at the way his mind 
accepted the possibility, and dismissed 
it. He felt tremendously alive, almost 
as if each separate cell was tingling with 
some special vigor and awareness. And 
in the center of it all, in some hidden 
part of himself, he was dead calm, almost amused. Was this what they called 
courage? 

He flashed the mirror again. Bolster 
was certainly taking his time. All he had 
to do was throw a switch. Fromm began 
flashing angry code with the mirror and 
kept it up, knowing Bolster couldn't answer and rejoicing in the knowledge, 
until he saw the opening appear in the 
ball of force, and begin to expand. 

Then he realized it wasn't simply 
throwing a switch. Once the passageway-mechanism was put into operation, 
it had to keep going on its own, opening 
and closing at intervals so as to permit 
him egress, and still not let enough 
e-m-g through in either direction to 
disturb the power-stasis inside. It took 
only a little bit of computer work . . . 
but quite a bit more intricate checking 
of the relays, to make certain the automatics would not fail. 

He had to hold himself back to keep 
from diving through as soon as the hole 
was as big as his suit ... but he waited, 
as he had been trained to do, until it 
stopped enlarging. The computer knew 



YOU ARE «7 

better than he did how much space he 
needed. 

Then he squirted forward and 
through. The BB looked strange, hanging there in the middle of nothing, with 
an air of polite impatience, waiting to 
finish its passage into the System. 

Joe grinned, and duly spoke his 
thought out loud for the record. "Every 
single thing that passes through your 
head," they'd said over and over again 
in school. "When you're on any kind of 
solo operation, you want to be sure the 
guy who takes over knows everything 
you did, no matter how crazy it seems. 
An idea that doesn't connect for you 
could make sense to him." 

So Joe Fromm told the mechitape attachment on his suit that the starscout 
looked impatient. He kept talking, describing his actions and thoughts and 
emotions, as he approached the ship 
cautiously, and opened the outer lock 
door. More waiting, and he informed the 
tape that the air lock was in operating 
condition. 

Then he was in the ship, and omitted 
to mention in his running commentary 
that he was scared silly. Down the corridor . . . open the cabin doors one at a 
time . . . empty, empty . . . not empty. 
Go on in, Joe; he's out cold; couldn't 
hurt a fly. 

"One of the aliens is in this cabin. 
This is the third door I have opened, 
second cabin to the right going down 
the corridor from the lock to Control \ . . 
he's either dead or unconscious . . . hope 
they're all like that . . . he's big . . . hope 
they're not all like that. Maybe ten feet 
tall, sort of curled up on the bunk, might 
have been asleep." Might still be, might 
wake up. 

He gulped and decided he'd better put 
it on record. "Might still . . ." No, that 
was foolish. These characters had registered e.m. radiations on the instruments in the stations. They couldn't stay 
conscious inside the e.m.g. field without 
insul-suits. Anything strong enough to 
stop a BB in its tracks would stop a man 
too. 



68 



STARTLING STORIES 



But it's not a man ; it's . . . "It's defiditely humanoid . . . hard to believe any 
alien creatures could evolve so much like 
humans. No tenacles, nothing like that. 
Arms and hands look like ours . . . fingers too. He's wearing some kind of 
robe . . . hard to get it loose with these 
gloves on, can't see the legs for sure, but 
the arms are human all right. Face is 
different, something funny about the 
mouth, sort of pursed-up-looking. 
Closed, can't see the inside . . . guess I 
can try and open it . . . no, later, maybe. 
I better take a look around. Anyhow, 
this guy is a lot like you and me only 
almost twice as big. Not very hairy, 
dark skin, big black eyes . . . how can' 
anything that's not human have eyes 
that look at you like that, even when 
he's out cold? I don't know . . . going 
out now, next cabin, second door on the 
left . . . 

"Here's another one ... on the floor 
this time, kind of crumpled up . . . must 
have been standing when the field hit, 
and fell down. Nothing new here . . . 
wait a minute, this fella must have cut 
his hand on something when he fell . . . 
yeah, there's an open locker door, with 
an edge. Blood is dried, looks like it's a 
lot darker than ours, but it's crazy how ' 
human it looks anyhow . . . Going out 
again now ... in the corridor, no more 
doors here . . ." 

There were two more of them in the 
control room : one strapped in the pilot's 
seat, squeezed in really; he just about 
could make it. The other was slumped 
over the solar analog computer. 

"Looks like he was checking the landing data," Fromm reported. "These 
guys sure were confident. Two of 'em 
off shift when they were coming in, and 
everything set for a normal landing. 
Didn't they figure on any trouble at all ? 
They should have realized they couldn't 
just sit down on one of our planets. 
Hell, they knew about the Web; they 
gave the code-dope straight, and they 
decelerated to approach, and had the 
correct angle ... I don't get it . . . Here 
goes once around the room now. I will 



check all instruments. 

"Starting from the door, and turning 
right: Star-chart microviewer intact 
and operating, films filed properly, I 
think. Won't take time to check them all 
now, but they look right . . . Radio desk 
appears in normal condition for use, 
can't test . . . Space suit locker is full of 
strange stuff, will come back to examine 
. . . analog comps come next; this guy is 
sprawled all over them . . ." 

He followed his nose around the cylindrical room, till he came back to the door 
again. Everything was, or seemed to be, 
in good working order. A few adjustments had been made in levers and handholds, to fit the aliens' larger hands; 
otherwise, virtually nothing had been 
touched except for normal use. 

"Okay, I guess I better start on the 
locker now . . ." But he didn't want to; 
he felt suddenly tired. Not scared any 
more . , . maybe that was it. Now he 
knew he was safe, and there weren't any 
booby traps or anything seriously wrong, 
he was feeling the strain. Let Bolster 
do some work too, he thought angrily, 
and almost said it out loud for the tape. 
Then he realized that his sudden pique 
was really just weariness, and at the 
same time he became acutely aware of 
hunger and an even more pressing biological urge. Time to go home, Joe. 
Always leave the party early, that's how 
to stay popular. 

He ought at least to get the robe off 
one of the creatures first, and make sure 
about their anatomy, but he had an odd 
reluctance to do it. They were too human 
... it seemed as if it wasn't fair somehow to go poking around under their 
clothes. 

Hell! Let Bolster do it! He left the 
ship. 

in 

.A.LONE in the Scanliter; Joe Fromm 
played his mechitape into the permanent 
recorder, and turned up the volume so 
he could hear it himself, and get everything clear for his report to Phobos. 



WHOEVER 
Some of the stuff sounded crazy, but he 
could tell what part was fact and what 
was just his own imagination. He 
chewed on a pencil end, and occasionally 
noted down something he should be sure 
to remember. 

Altogether, composing the report was 
more painful than visiting the ship had 
* been. He had just started putting it onto 
the transmitter when, he saw the indicator for the outer lock light up. Bolster 
sure hadn't stayed on that ship long! 
He felt better now about coming back 
himself. 

The sergeant came inside shedding 
his insul-suit, and bursting with excitement. 

"You should of looked in that locker, 
kid!" He was triumphant. "Anyway, 
it's a good thing for me you didn't. This 
is the kind of good luck bonuses are 
made of." He removed an envelope carefully from the storage pocket on the outside of the suit. "Got your stuff in yet? 
I want to shoot this to them fast!" 

"I just started . . ." Fromm said. 

"Well, we'll flash this, and you can 
finish up afterwards." 

He handed the envelope to the younger 
man, and started climbing out of the leg 
pieces of the suit. "Go on ! Read it, man !" 

Fromm opened the flap and unfolded 
a piece of official Service stationary. To 
whom it may concern ; it said on too. and 
then right underneath : To the Staff Officers of Solar Defense : 

"The other men have asked me to 
write this message, and I guess I can 
do it all right, but I'm afraid I'll have 
to be pretty informed. I've tried to write 
it up in military report style, only it's 
■ just not the kind of thing that Service 
language fits. 

"For one thing, the very first line of 
the report form stopped me, because we 
don't know where we are. Only the Captain knew our orders and he's dead now, 
and we couldn't find his log, or any of 
his papers, anywhere in the ship. 

"We've set a course for the big fellas 
by backtracking on the analog comps. 
That means it will take them almost as 



YOV ARK »9 

long to get back as it took us to get there, 
but that's just as well, because it will 
bring them in about the time our tour is 
due up, and maybe that'll make it easier 
for them to get in. 

"We've done our best to explain to 
them all the dangers involved — not being 
sure of the course, even, and being pretty 
sure you folks won't let them through. 
But we can't talk to them as easy as they 
talk to us. We can get over general 
ideas all right, and any kind of thought 
that has a solid object nearby to attach 
to, but the idea of people, of humans 
that is, not wanting to let them into the 
System — well, even if we talked the same 
language . . . that is, if they talked a 
language at all that we could leam. . . I 
don't think they could understand that 
idea. 

"I'm not going to try to tell you 
anything about them because if they get 
far enough to show you this, they can 
explain everything themselves. This 
message is just to let you know that the 
four of us are here, safe and sound, and 
staying behind of our own free will. 
Since Captain Malcolm's suicide, there's 
nobody to order us home, and we like it 
here. Besides, there isn't room enough 
in the BB for more than five people — 
humans, I mean — or four of them (they 
need more food). And they want to send 
four along on the trip; I think they 
picked out their leading scientists in 
different fields, so they can get as much 
information as possible, and be able to 
answer your questions. 

"I don't know. Probably a Psychofficer 
or some of our scientists will be able to 
communicate better with them on this 
kind of thing. We get along fine for 
everyday purposes, but you see, I'm not 
even sure what kind of scientists they're 
sending. 

"The only thing the others and I are 
sure of, and that's what this message is 
for, is that you can trust these big fellas 
up to the limit. They've treated us fine, 
and they . . . well, it's a funny way to 
put it, but "like" isn't strong enough 
. . . they just seem to love everybody, 



70 



STARTLING STORIES 



humans as well as their own kind. 

"We will wait here for further orders. 
You can probably figure out where we 
are from the analog comp records. 

"Respectfully yours, 
"George Gentile, Byrdman 1st Class, 
and on behalf of 

"Johann Grauber By/2 
Tsin Lao-Li, By/2 
Arne Carlsen, By/3." 

44T DID a tour of duty with Jim Malcolm once," the Commander said 
slowly. "He was a pretty good guy. I . . . 
liked him. It's hard to think of him committing suicide. I wish this Gentile had 
been a little more specific." 

Lucille Ardin, Public Relations Deputy at Phonos Post, skimmed the message 
tape rapidy, and passed it along to the 
Psychofficer. She cocked one feathery 
eyebrow cynically. "These boys just 
don't make sense,"'she said. "They've 
been sold something all right . . . but 
what?" 

The Commander sh >ok his head, waiting for Dr. Schwartz to finish reading. 
"Well, Bob?" he said, as soon as the 
Psychofficer looked up. "What do you 
think?" 

"I'd like to see that log," Schwartz 
said thoughtfully. 

"So would I!" Commander William 
Hartson had earned his position as Assistant Chief of Staff for Solar Defense. 
He was that rare thing: an officer admired equally by the general public and 
by the men who worked under him. At 
sixty-eight years of age, he was still in 
the prime of health and vitality — but old 
enough to have seen his fill of violence, 
danger, and death. He was indecisive in 
action; but a decision involving the lives 
of others would be made with care. 

Bob Schwartz had worked with Hartson long enough to understand these 
things. "This Captain . . .?" he asked, 
"Malcolm? Would you say he was . . . 
well, a fairly typical line officer?" 

The Commander permitted himself a 
faint smile. "Trying to figure the 'military mind' again, Bob? As a matter of 



fact, I think Jim Malcolm is — was one 
of the few officers who'd fit your picture pretty well. Courage, devotion, precision — a stubborn s.o.b., who went by 
the rule book himself and figured everybody else could do at least as much . . . 
but the kind who'd lay down his life for 
his Service without thinking twice. It's 

just suicide that doesn't make sense " 

Hartson's voice broke off, and for a 
moment the only sound in the room was 
the shuffling of paper. Schwartz still 
held the message tape, running it 
through his fingers as if the feel of it 
would somehow help him to understand 
its meaning better. Lucy Ardin pushed 
away the pad on which she'd been scribbling Hartson's explanation of the forcesphere that was holding the BB-3 captive and its alien crew unconscious. 

"God, what a story!" she whispered 
reverently into the silence. She ground 
out a half-smoked cigarette in the Commander's big ash-tray, and stood up; 
the silver-sequinned dinner gown in 
which she'd answered the alarm glittered painfully under the overhead light. 
It was entirely typical of Lucy that 
when the call-bell rang in her bedroom, 
she had pushed back the stool from her 
dressing table without taking even the 
extra instant's time to complete the 
slash of crimson on her lips. Then picking up the portfolio that was always 
ready for use, she had arrived at the 
Exec Office, with the lipsticking finished 
en route, within seconds after the two 
men who lived on the Post. 

"All right," she said briskly. "What 
happens now? We stitch up some sixtentaeled strait-jackets and make our 
visitors nice and safe, then we take the 
field off and haul 'em down? Where to? 
What do we do with them afterwards? Who gets to interview them?" 

The Psychofficer looked up sharply, 
and Hartson chuckled. "Relax, Bob. I'm 
afraid it's our baby all the way down the 
line. I wish I was looking forward to it 
like you two are. I have a hunch it may 
turn out to be something of a mess. . . 
The aliens, by the way, are humanoid, 



Miss Ardin. Perhaps you'd like to see 
the tape again? I believe theres' a detailed description . . . hey, Bob? You're 
done with it, aren't you ?" 

"Sorry." Schwartz handed it to the 
girl, and snapped out of his abstracted 
mood. "Is it safe to leave them in the 
stasis a little longer, Bill ?" he asked. 

"Can't ' say for sure. With humans, 
twelve hours doesn't do any harm. These 
fellas may be dead already for all we 
know. Best we can do is assume thev 
react like us." 

"It seems to me that log must be somewhere on the ship," the Psychofflcer said. 
"If there's time, I think it might be a 
good idea to try and find it — before we 
decide anything. A man like Malcolm 
would have made sure the papers were 
safe, if he had any way to do it at all." 

"You're right." Hartson, too, came 
up from his reflections, and sprang into 
action. "You're damned right! If it's 
there we can find it. And if we can't — 
well, that's an answer too!" 

rv 

JoE FROMM went back to the BB-3 
with two other men from the stand-in 
Scanliters that had now been ordered up 
to assist. Between them, they searched 
the Byrd from nose to nozzles, and behind a panel in the electrical repair 
cabinet, they found the ship's papers: 
charts, orders, and the missing log. 

Fromm took time to open the log and 
look at the last page: he hardly had to 
struggle with his conscience at all over 
it. Under the dateline, in neat typing, it 
said: 

"Carlsen should have been back an 
hour ago. Under the circumstances, that 
means they've got him too. My error 
was in not leaving after I talked to Tsin 
last week. Three of us could have 
brought the ship back. Alone, I don't 
believe I can do it. 

"I have considered taking off anyhow, 
simply in order to make certain the 
natives do not gain any further knowledge of the ship. My only chojgps now 



YOU ARE Tl 

are betrayal or self-destruction, and between these two, I am afraid I have no 
real choice. I must therefore pick the 
most effective means of suicide, and 
after giving the matter careful thought, 
have determined that a systematic destruction of the control room is a wiser 
procedure than the complete removal of 
the ship from the planet. 

"By following this course of action, I 
can at least hope that a future expedition, or perhaps even a rescue-ship, will 
find this log and understand the danger 
here. 

"This evening. I shall have my last 
supper in style. Tomorrow, I shall finish 
the dismantling of the controls, and hide 
this book, together with the more important of the ship's papers . . . and 
may God have mercy on my soul!" 

Below that, in almost equally neat 
and legible a script, were two paragraphs. 

"Once more I have delayed too long. 
Gentile, my firstclassman, is at the outer 
lock now, and he has three of the natives 
with him. Apparently they now have 
him sufficiently under control so that he 
will do for them what they have not 
dared to do for themselves. They are 
coming into the ship. 

"I expect they are coming for me, and 
I cannot risk exposing myself to their 
control. I know too much that they can 
use. The work of dismantling the controls is barely started ; I'm afraid the enlisted men can still repair it readily, but 
none of them, after all, even know where 
we are; the star-charts and orders will 
be hidden with this log. I can only hope 
the papers remain hidden until the right 
people come to find them." 

Underneath, there was a careful signature: "James Malcolm, Captain, Solar 
Byrd Service, in command Baby Bird 
III," and in parenthesis below that, ona 
word of macabre humor, "(deceased)." 

They ordered Scanliter Six down to 
Phobos Post, to bring in the papers of 
the BB-3. There was too much material 
to transmit by radio. 

Bolster grinned and slapped his Pfc. 



ft STARTLES 

on the back. "We're both a couple of 
bloomin' heroes," he said. "Just the kind 
of a hero I like to be. Some other guys'll 
be around when they decide to blast that 
Baby, and you and me can watch it all 
from the Post." 

"Blast it ?" Joe looked up from the log, 
holding his finger in the page. "You're 
kidding. Why would they. . ." 

"Brother, you got the reason wrapped 
around your finger. One look at that, and 
they'll blow those babies clear back to 
where they came from ! You can take a 
chance on a guy who fights fair, but 
these fellas — " 

"How do you know they're fighting 
us?" Fromm demanded. "You saw the 
Byrdman's note, the one you brought 
in. . . This guy Malcolm was off his 
rocker I* 

"Well, I'll buy that one, too. You can't 
tell with the brass when they get an 
idea in their heads. But look, kid, you 
gotta grow up some. That note I 
brought in — it's pretty easy to get a guy 
to write something like that if you got 
him hypnotized to start with, and you're 
twice his size anyhow — not to mention 
there being a whole planetful of your 
kind and only four of his. I can tell you 
anyhow, that's how the brass'll see it. 
Solar Defense doesn't take chances." 

"Did you read what it says here?" 
Fromm insisted. "The part where Malcolm tells about talking to Tsin? It just 
doesn't make sense to take it the way he 
did. He was space-happy, that's all. The 
Commander isn't going to swallow this 
stuff." 

"You wait and see," the sergeant said 
again. "And when you do, you're gonna 
be awful glad you're down there instead 
of here." 

"I . . . look, I know this sounds 
crazy. . ." Fromm put the log down 
finally, and blurted out the rest of it. 
"I'd like to stick around. If anybody 
goes back out there, I want a chance to 
take another look at those guys. You 
think you could take somebody from 
one of the other ships down with you, 
and leave me here?" 



5 STORIES 

"It not only sounds crazy," Bolster 
said. "It is crazy. But it's your body, son. 
You want to stick around, you can bet 
nobody else does." He shook his head 
uncomprehendingly, and began punching 
Out a message to Scanliter Twelve, 
where Chan Lai would jump at the 
chance to change spots with his weakwitted Pfc. 

44T ORDERED him to return to ship 

A immediately. He refused. His exact 
words, insofar as I recall them, were, 
'Captain, I wish I could do as you desire 
me to — or even better, that I could convince you to come with me and visit 
our friends. They are our friends. If 
you would give them a chance to talk 
with you, I think you might understand 
better. It is hard to explain with just 
words. But I simply cannot go back now. 
(Emphasis is mine . . . JM) You are a 
married man, sir. Perhaps I might feel 
differently if there were some love waiting for me at home too. But I am young 
and not yet married, and . . ." 

"I broke in here, thinking that I might 
be able to use persuasion, where authority had failed. I pointed out that there 
was very little likelihood he would ever 
be married, if I decided to take up the 
ship, abandoning him and Gentile on 
the planet — as of course, I have every 
right to do in view of their outright insubordination. The natives here, for all 
their startlingly humanoid appearance, 
are twice our size, and are almost certainly not suitable for breeding, from a 
purely biologic viewpoint. 

"He replied quite earnestly that he 
hoped I would not take that drastic 
step . . . that he did not wish to remain 
permanently among the natives, but that 
he felt he 'had to' stay long enough to 
become fully acquainted with them and 
with their way of life, and to 'be healed 
of all the hurts and scars of a lifetime 
in the System.' 

"The conversation went on for some 
time, but the parts I have already recorded contain the gist of it. There was 
one thing Tsin said, however, that I 



feel should be included here, along with 
the train of thought that followed it. If 
anything should happen to me or to my 
ship, I suspect it will in some way be 
connected with my low susceptibility to 
the emotional point he seemed to be trying to make. 

"Tsin reminded me, during the conversation, of a story I have always considered rather bathotic : that of the little 
orphan girl, in the days before the creches, who threw a note over the high wall 
of the 'orphanage' saying : 'Whoever you 
are, I love you.' 

"This anecdote. I gathered, was supposed to define for me the nature of the 
emotional 'healing' he was receiving at 
the hands — or I suppose I should say the 
minds — of the natives. 

"This particular bit of bathos has been 
annoying me for years. I have had the 
story related to me at least three times 
previously, always to illustrate some 
similarly obscure emotional point. And 
I have always wondered afterwards what 
the end of the story might have been. 

"Now it seems very important to be 
able to foresee the results of the child's 
action. What happened when the note 
was picked up and read? And why did 
the child write it ? 

"It is this last question, I think, that 
oothers me the most. A sentimentalist 
might answer that she meant it, but I 
!ind this unlikely. At best, I believe, she 
neant that she hoped whoever found it 
would love her ; and that is the very best 
nterpretation I can put on it. It seems 
(ven more likely that her motive was 
iven more specific: if she threw such a 
HUet doux over the wall regularly, I 
ihould think eventually one of the sentimentalists would have found it, made 
lome response, and provided the means 
for her to get over the orphanage wall 
into the world outside. 

"The natives here have a fairly highlySeveloped technology, and quite obviously a very highly-developed psychology or 
mental science of some sort. They are 
telepaths, after all. And they have taken 
no pains to conceal from us their interest 



YOU ARE 1i 

in acquiring a means of space travel. 

"There is nothing to pin down, no way 
to make certain of their real attitudes 
toward us. They have greeted us warmly, and have done nothing to indicate any 
hostility, or to harm us in any way — 
nothing but walk off with two of my crew 
in an apparently friendly fashion. 

"Perhaps the wisest course of action 
would be to leave now, while I still have 
two men on board. But it is a hard decision to make — to maroon two of my men 
on an alien planet. 

"If I believed for a moment that Gentile and Tsin are responsible for their 
own actions, I should not hesitate to 
make that decision. But their behavior 
is so entirely 'out of character' that 1 
can see no explanation except that the} 
are acting under some form of hypnotic 
control. As I see it, my duty is to make 
every effort, including main force, to return them to the ship before I leave." 

V 

MM ARTSON read it for the fourth 
time, and slapped the typescript down on 
the desk. "I . . . hell, Jim Malcolm was a 
friend of mine ! How can I tell ? It sounds 
like him . . . sure! It sounds like every 
report he ever wrote, except where it 
sounds like him being pie-eyed in a bullsession." 

He sat down, and let the blank bewilderment he felt show in his eyes as he 
faced the Psychomcer, "Well, what do 
you say ? I can't decide this one by myself." 

Courtesy turned him, halfway through 
the question, to face the PR Chief on the 
other side of the desk. Courtesy, and 
common sense, both. Officially, Lucy's 
job was just to get out the news — or to 
keep it in, as seemed wisest. The catch 
was in that last phrase. In practice, she 
was both public censor and interpreterat-large for the Post ; and her Civil Service appointment made her the only authority on Phobos who was independent 
of the Service. 

The Commander had been dealing with 



74 



STARTLING STORIES 



the P.R. Bureau long enough so that in 
six months at the Post, Lucy had never 
yet had any cause to remove her velvet 
glove. It was easy to forget sometimes 
about the iron beneath it: one might 
almost think that she forgot herself. 

"I'll check to Doctor Schwartz," she 
demurred now. 

Schwartz managed a smile. "Will you 
please stop being polite?" he asked. 
"You've got an opinion. Let's hear it." 
She hesitated, and he added: "I don't 
even like what I'm thinking. I better 
think it a little more before I say it." 

"All right." Her voice was controlled, 
but her eyes gleamed with excitement. 
She was talking at Schwartz, almost 
ignoring the Commander. "I think these 
fellas have the biggest thing since e-m-g. 
It's the one thing we haven't been able 
to crack at all ; you know it as well as I 
do. They've got the unbeatable weapon 
— the psychological weapon. You can't 
fight 'em, because you don't want to. 
People call modern P.R. mass hypnotism, 
but the techniques we've got are child's 
play compared to what those guys can 
do. They've got the real thing. The 
question is, can we get it away from 
them? Has Psych Section got any way 
of handling something this hot ?" 

"I take it," Hartson put in drily, "that 
you are convinced of the accuracy of 
Captain Malcolm's interpretation of the, 
events?" 

She looked puzzled. "Why . . . yes. 
How else can you explain it? Has there 
ever been a case of desertion like that 
before ?" 

"Never," he said crisply, and turned to 
the Psychofficer again. "All right. Bob. 
You've had some time now. Say your 
piece." 

"Let me start this way," Schwartz 
said hesitantly. "I think Lucy is right 
in one respect anyway . . . what they've 
got is an irresistible weapon. If it is a 
weapon. But to accept that idea, we'd 
have to presuppose the existence of a 
war, or at least hostility between them 
*and us. There's a verse that's been 
running through my head for the last 



hour. I'm sorry, Bill, to b« so roundabout. Just try to put up with me a 
few minutes, will you?.I can't quite remember the whole thing, but it's about 
an 'enemy' who 'drew a circle to keep 
me out.' Then there's a line I remember 
clearly: 'But love and I knew better. We 
drew a circle to bring him in.' You see 
what I'm driving at ? Certainly our basic 
attitude toward any alien is potentially 
hostile. They are guilty until proven 
innocent." 

"We've been all over that ground, 
Bob," Hartson broke in. "I know your 
opinion, and you ought to know mine 
by now. I don't like it either, but it's the 
reason why we have been consistently 
successful in such contacts." 

"Consistently victorious. I'd say. All 
right, let's just put it that I am emotionally more inclined to accept Gentile's attitude than Malcolm's. I see no evidence 
to support the view that these people 
are using a hypnotic weapon; it is at 
least as likely that the feeling they projected at our men was honest and uncalculated. Why not assume for a moment 
that the occupants of that ship really are 
four of their leading scientists, sent here 
to exchange knowledge with us ?" 

"You've got a point there," Lucy Ardin said unexpectedly. "An act of aggression against these four could make . 
trouble if they were on the level to start 
with. I think it gets down to a good oldfashioned problem in shielding. Has 
Psych Section got any way of handling 
these boys if we bring them in. Doc ?" 

He considered for a moment. 

"That depends. We've got anti-hypnotics, and we've got personnel specially 
trained against susceptibility to hypnosis. But the Beebee had the same 
drugs, and should have had some trained 
personnel too. There's a point. Bill. I'd 
like to see the basic psych ratings on all 
five of those men, if you can get 'em. Especially Malcolm's. I could get the papers myself," he added, smiling weakly, 
"Through channels, it wouldn't take 
more than three or four weeks. Can you 
get 'em fast?" 



WHOEVER 

«T CAN TRY." Hartson jumped at the 
chance for concrete action. He rang 
for an aide, and scribbled an order to 
Records in his own handwriting. "Put 
this on the facscan," he said briskly, and 
give it a top-rush priority. I think I see 
what you're getting at, Bob," he said, as 
the door closed behind the uniformed 
girl. "I remember I was kind of surprised myself when I heard Jim had gone 
into the Byrd Service. Couldn't imagine 
him going Outside voluntarily. He was 
an Earthman all the way through. Why 
he didn't even believe Marsmen were 
really human. Is that what you wanted 
to know?" 

"Part of it. That much was pretty 
clear in his report. I want to know the 
comparative resistance of the crew members to hypnosis, and what the other 
men's attitudes were toward alien life — 
things like that." 

"I thought all Byrdmen had to pass 
standardized tests for that," the PR 
Chief said, just a little sharply. 

"They do. At least, the enlisted men 
do. But there's still a range of individual 
variation. And officers . . . well, they 
have a tough time getting enough men 
to command the Beebees. I think just 
about any regular line officer who volunteered would pass the test . . ." 

He looked to Hartson for confirmation, and got a reluctant nod; then he 
went on. "Even with the men, it depends 
where they took their tests. That'll show 
on the papers. Psych Section isn't too — 
efficient — in some spots." 

"I'll bear that in mind," Lucy said 
tautly. "But I'd still like to know just 
how much Psych Section right here is 
equipped to do. You say you've got the 
drugs and the personnel, Doctor. All 
right, then, if the Commander brings 
these fellows in alive, can you handle 
them? If you can't . . ." She shrugged. 

"That depends." The Psychoffieer declined the challenge of her tone, and went 
on deliberately: "We can handle it all 
right ... if it's as simple a thing as hypnosis. It happens that I don't believe 
Captain Malcolm was right about that. 



YOU ARE 75 

I can tell better after I see his psych 
ratings . . ." 

"All right ! Then I take it we're going 
to sit around here for the next few hours 
waiting to see what the tests say? That 
gives you a little more time to make up 
your mind. Well, if I'm going to spend 
the night here, I'd like to be a little more 
comfortable. Do you mind if I run home 
for a change of clothes while we're waiting, Commander ?" 

Hartson eyed the shimmering stiffness 
of her dinner gown unhappily. "I'm sorry, Miss Ardin. I hope you'll understand. 
This qualifies as a Major Policy decision, 
and I'm afraid I'll have to ask you not to 
leave until we are finished with whatever 
we decide." 

She shrugged again, and sat down. 
"Could I have a typer then? I could be 
getting some of my story into shape." 

Schwartz laughed. From the vantage 
point of the smoking jacket and carpet 
slippers in which he'd answered the 
emergency call, he said easily, "Bill, 
couldn't you order something from Supply for the lady ? S.I. coveralls, or something like that ? It might make a difference in our decision if she could be more 
comfortable." 

"I can do that," Hartson said shortly. 
"And of course you may have any equipment you wish, Miss Ardin." 

"Thank you, Commander," she said, 
too sweetly. "I'm sure it will help. I wonder if perhaps we could facilitate matters 
by sending for the doctor's uniform too? 
If I'm to be made more flexible, I suspect 
a change of clothes might make him 
more decisive." 

Hartson grinned. "She's got a point 
there, Bob," he said mildly. 

"All right !" The Psychoffieer stood up 
abruptly, paced the length of the small 
room, and wheeled to face 'them. "All 
right, I'll tell you what I think. I think 
the human race is too damn scared and 
too damn hungry to be able to face this 
thing. Hungry for security, for reassurance, for comfort — for love. And scared ! 
Scared of anything different, anything 
Outside, anything one degree more in


76 



STARTLING STORIES 



tense than the rules allow. 

"Also — pardon my bluntness, Bill — I 
think Captain Malcolm's reaction was 
typical of all that's sickest in our System. The very fact that we are seriously 
sitting here considering how much of a 
menace these four individuals represent 
— four humanoid beings, who come 
armed with nothing but a message of 
love! That very fact — that we sit and 
stew over it, I mean — makes them dangerous. 

"You want to know what I think? I 
think what they've got — whether it's a 
weapon or a natural way of life, whether 
it's hypnotism or open-hearted honesty, 
or anything else, is — not unbeatable, not 
ultimate, not any of the other adjectives 
that've been thrown around here tonight, 
but, specifically, irresistible. 

"I think all of us — you, Bill, wanting 
to do the 'blameless' thing — and you, 
suffering through hours of torment in 
those ridiculous clothes because they're 
supposed to make you 'attractive' — and 
maybe me most of all, hating to say what 
I know because it's brutal — all of us and 
the rest of the System too, have one crying need that the lousy culture we've 
made for ourselves can't possibly fulfill. 

"We want love. We need love. Every 
poor blessed damned soul among us. And 
we need it so much, it can be used as a 
weapon against us ! 

"Understand, please, just because it's 
important to me to have it on the record, 
that I don't for a moment believe it's 
hypnotism they're using. I think they 
mean it. But . . ." 

"Well, at last!" Lucy Ardin sighed 
and moved a tense finger for the first 
time since he'd started talking. "Then 
you think you can handle it?" 

VI 

ScHWARTZ stared at her in amazement. . "Didn't you hear anything I 
said ? No. No, I don't think I can handle 
it, or that anybody else can. I don't believe it's hypnosis, but I can't see that 
that matters. Or rather, I might feel 



more at ease about it if I could believe 
that. 

"Damn it, Bill, I hate this ! I want you 
to understand clearly that the advice I 
am giving you is against my own inclinations and instincts. Now look : if it is to 
be regarded as a weapon — and I see no 
other way we may regard it from the 
point of view of Solar Defense — then it 
is irresistible. There is no way to tie or 
bind the minds of these — people — except 
by keeping them unconscious, which 
would automatically defeat any purpose 
of investigation . . ." 

He picked up his copy of the summary 
and excerpts from the log, riffled 
through the pages, and threw it down 
again, sadly. "Bill, I'd give all my ratings, and ten years off my life for the 
chance to talk to those guys myself, and 
find out . . . but my advice as an officer 
of Solar Defense is that we have no 
choice but to destroy the aliens before 
they regain consciousness." 

Both the others were on their feet as 
he finished. 

"God damn it, Bob!" Hartson shouted. 
"You can't just . . ." 

"Don't you see?" Lucy Ardin's crisp 
voice cut in? "All he's saying is he 
doesn't know; None of us know, and I 
want to find out! I'm not scared of it. 
Maybe you need love that bad, Psychofficer, but / don't I" She sat down again, 
triumphant and breathless. 

The Commander ignored her. "Is that 
your last word, Bob? Shall I take that 
as your decision ?" 

"I'm afraid so, Bill. You heard Lucy 
just now. Remember what Malcolm was 
wondering, about the end of the story of 
the little orphan girl? That's one answer. In terms of the little girl, it would 
mean that whoever found the note 
took it back inside and told the authorities that one of their children was writing dirty notes — so the kid could be investigated. That's just one ending. There 
are lots of others, but don't forget the^ 
one he was afraid of. Don't forget all the 
sentimentalists — like me for instance. 
If I were to forget my duty as an officer 



WHOEVER 

of the Service, I would want nothing 
more than to get the little girl out of the 
orphanage, just so she could love them. 

"And don't forget, either, that there 
would be any number of different answers besides. And that everyone would 
feel strongly about his own solution. 
You have your choice, Commander. You 
can destroy them in the name of Security 
and Safety — or you can risk a Systemwide civil war, and total 'conquest' by an 
alien race. What'll you have ?" 

Commander Hartson smiled wryly. 
"I'll take, vanilla," he said distinctly, and 
rang for an aide. The uniformed gir! appeared in the doorway. "Jenny," he said, 
"I want orders typed up for countersigning to arrange all details for the moving 
of the Baby Byrd III to Deimos Isolation 
Post immediately. The ship will be piloted by Pfc. Joseph Fromm, now aboard 
the Scanliter Twelve. We will want a 
continuous radio report from the pilot 
starting with his entry into the ship. 

"Separate orders are to go to Scanliters Seventeen and Twenty-two, to follow the BB-3 in with all artillery on the 
ready. They are to maintain radio silence, with vocal reception open. Private 
Fromm is to know nothing of the readyfire orders. The word "apple" will be the 
signal to .fire, if I decide it is necessary 
to destroy the ship. Is that all clear?" 

"Yes, sir." 

The door closed quietly behind her, 
and Bob Schwartz stood up and walked 
around the desk to shake the Commander's hand. 

"They say you're a great man. Kill," he 
said quietly. "I'm beginning to think 
you are. Now, I'd like to ask a favor I'm 
not entitled to. I did my duty as I saw 
it, and gave you my advice as an officer 
of the S.D. Now I'm asking for a privilege as an old friend. If you're going to 
try bringing that ship in, I'd like to be 
aboard her on the way. I want to be 
there when they come to. I'm a qualified 
observer and it shouldn't take more than 
an hour to get me up there. It won't be 
much of a delay." 

The Commander's voice was icy. "I 



YOU ABE . 77 

think you know that's impossible, Bob. 
Certainly you're qualified— too qualified. 
We have to have a man on that ship, but 
we only need one man, and he has to be 
expendable. The only qualifications he 
needs are to know how to pilot the ship, 
and to be able to talk continuously. We 
already have a volunteer for the job, and 
he's acceptable. If you want to give him 
any instructions about what to look for 
or what to talk about, you have five minutes to prepare them. After that, the 
action will start. You understand, I am 
taking your advice. But I feel I must 
first prove to myself that your premises 
are correct. I want to see just how irresistible they are." 

He turned to the P.R. Chief, and went 
on as coldly : "You are free to leave now, 
Miss Ardin. You'll want to hear the reports as they come in, I imagine. It 
should be about twenty minutes before 
the ship is actually under way." 

pFC. JOE FROMM walked through the 
^ inner airlock into the BB-3, climbed 
out of his space suit, and made a quick 
examination of the cabins. Three of the 
aliens, still unconscious, were bound ankle to ankle and wrist to wrist on the 
floor of one cabin. That door was to be 
locked. The other cabin was empty, as it 
was supposed to be. 

"Cabins okay as planned," he muttered into the mouthpiece, strapped to 
his chest. "Corridor and cabinets clear." 
He entered the control room, and tested 
the manacles restraining the outside 
limbs of the alien who had formerly occupied the pilot's seat, and was now secured in a specially built chair. "Alien in 
control room unconscious and I'd say 
pretty safe, the way he's tied down. Instrument check: electronic controls, 
okay; radar, okay; rocket controls . . ." 

He went down the list, cheerful with 
the familiar routine, talking easily, untroubled by the need for extra breaths 
between words that had plagued his inspection of the aliens. 

"I am now strapping myself into the 
pilot-seat, and preparing for takeoff. 



78 • STARTLIN 

Ready to leave as soon as I am signaled 
free . . . signal received, blasting off now 
. . . utilizing minimum acceleration, coming in at Deimos on direct approach . . . 
the fella in the control room here seems 
to be wiggling his toes . . .you wouldn't 
think they'd have toes just like us, would 
you? . . . he's coming to, all right ... I 
am on direct course to Deimos at min-axe 
Still ... I think maybe everything'll 
work out okay . . ." 

He had to watch the instruments with 
one eye and the alien with the other. The 
— whatever he was — didn't seem to be 
trying to bust loose at all. 

"He's moving his head now, and looking around . . . looking at his handcuffs, 
and the chair, trying to turn his head 
around to see where his legs are cuffed 
underneath, but he isn't struggling at all 
. . . looking me over now ... I caught his 
eye for a minute just then, or he caught 
mine. I think he wants me to look at him 
again, but I'll try not to. He has to be 
able to fasten my attention on something 
to hypnotize me, dosen't he ? I am moving my eyes around, checking instruments, and thinking as many different 
thoughts as I can ... 

"We are now approaching an orbit 
around Mars, decelerating. My radar 
screen shows too Scanliters following us 
. . . should they be so close inside range 
in case it is necessary to fire on us? . . . 
Please don't . . . that's not my thought! 

"It . . . he's thinking at me . . . they 
are telepaths, all right. He doesn't seem 
to, I don't know, the first thought I was 
sure wasn't mine was, please don't fire 
on us, we are friends. It seemed so natural I started to say it. His thoughts 
aren't in clear words now ... I heard 
once that to 'receive' stuff like this you 
have to not concentrate . . . something 
like that. Maybe I'm trying too hard . . . 
No. I'm too tense . , . that was his 
thought, not mine, he was telling me not 
to be so tense and I'd understand . . . 

"He says — you can call it 'says; it's 
enough like talking — he says they're 
friends, they like us. They want to be 
friends. He keeps saying it different 



3 STORIES 

ways but it's the same feeling all the 
time, with different — pictures, I guess to 
go with it . . ." 

Pictures! Hey, stay out of there! 

"He wants me to ... to love him. 
That's what he says. He . . . (men don't 
feel that way about each other . . . no! 
. . . loves me. he loves all — not men, some 
kind of thought for his own people, and 
all — living creatures — those are on his 
home planet. He loves all men, this time 
he means men." 

That was silly of me . . . he wasn't 
being nasty . . . he just meant love . . . 
that picture was mine ... 

"He says the pictures I get for meanings are all my own, so I might get his 
meaning wrong sometimes. He makes a 
picture in his mind, the way he'd visualize a thought on his world, but I see it the 
way it would be on mine . . . 

"Listen, Captain Malcolm just didn't 
understand. This is important i. . . they 
don't mean the kind of thing we do when 
they say iove.' They mean liking and 
sharing and ... we haven't got the right 
words for it. but it's all right. It's not a 
grabby feeling, or taking anything, or 
hurting anybody. There's nothing to be 
afraid of. The only thing that Captain 
got right was that story about the 
kid " 

On Phobos Base, Lucy Ardin's typer 
clacked eagerly, while Bill Hartson and 
Bob Schwartz turned from the viewer 
together. Hartson was a soldier ; his face 
was stern and set, as he reached for the 
mike. The only emotion he showed was 
the single flash from his eyes to his 
friend's when he looked at Schwartz and 
saw the tears of frustration rolling unashamed down the psychofficer's face. 

. . the one who threw the note over 
the wall. That is the way they feel. He's 
telling me now, to tell all of you, he's 
agreeing, he says I understand now, 
it's the way human beings love when 
they're kids, like the note the girl wrote : 
Whoever you are . . ." 

The Commander spoke one word. "Apple." 

"... I love you." 



THE 



BOOK of the DEAD 



By H. H. WEST 

There are more ways to conquer a world than by fighting tor it 



IT WAS the 218th year after the Great 
Famine, but the Keeper of Things 
Found was hungry. He straightened his 
thin shoulders and tried to stop shivering as he passed between the soldiers at 
the entrance. Soldiers weren't the only 
people important to the Tyrant. They 
got the heaviest skins and the most food, 
but the Keeper of Things Found was 
important too. He could read and was 
excused from fighting. This was 'fortunate because, of the increasing pain 
surrounding the lump in his chest. 

The soldiers remained silent, fearful 
of the man passing between them. 
Everything found in the ruins had to 
be turned over to him by order of the 
Tyrant. Little enough was found. 
Every man had heard from generations 



back of the mysterious death that lurked 
in the ruins. Only fools and demons 
went near the ruins now. 

"Well?" The Tyrant stood spraddlelegged before the fire. Fear sawed at 
the nerves of the others who yearned 
but dared not move closer to the warm 
flames. 

"This book was brought in by a soldier," The Keeper forced his voice to be 
firm because this was so important. "He 
had to take shelter during a battle with 
the Hill People, in a ruin. His goatskin 
caught on the knob of a big metal box. 
When he jerked it free, the door of the 
box opened. This frightened him because the box was battered as if he repeated poundings had not opened it * 

The Tyrant kicked, a burning log. 



80 STARTUP 

"Read it!" 

"It is called 'The Diary of Coronado 
Gomez," the words came fast lest the 
Tyrant refuse to listen, "The numbers 
1952 appear below the name. ..." 

"Not all of it ! A page here, one there." 

The Keeper swallowed and began : 

i Page 1 

Last night I am wakened from a 
sound sleep by Pedro's shouts. "General! General!" he calls with terrified 
urgency. "The atomic war! Without 
warning, it is here!" He is shaking a 
tassel of teletype streamers at me. 
"Look, General. What will we do? 
Panic will break in the streets!" 

I brush the papers from under my 
nose. Pedro tries to speak more coherently. During the night, he says, an 
atomic war began between America and 
Russia. Each country accuses the other 
of dropping the first bomb, making the 
initial attack. 

"All right, Pedro, all right," I say 
patiently. "Let a day or two pass before 
this appears in the press." His mouth 
drops in awe of my calm. "No need to 
spoil our fiesta." 

"But surely, General," he sputters, 
with face as white as the mushrooming 
atomic clouds he sees in his mind. "You 
cannot keep this quiet I" 

PEDRO thinks only of mushrooming 
clouds, he forgets how his atomic 
knowledge has rid me of the treacherous 
lump growing in my side. "The news 
will get about, Pedro, but slowly. The 
borders are closed. You will speak to 
radio and communications people." 

Pedro stares at me, his whiskers 
trembling. I laugh. Who is he to understand radio-active cobalt? "Since you 
have started my day so early, do not 
forget the arrangement for dinner tonight. My German friends are dining 
with me to celebrate the fiesta. I will 
wear full uniform in deference to Field 
Marshall von Streuve, who is invited 
along with the scientists. But, I am forgetting the Church," I say for I cannot 



G STORIES 

resist adding to Pedro's troubles, "lavite Father Alvarez also." 

Pedro bows out gnawing his mustache in anxiety. He is wondering how 
he will get Father Alvarez, who does not 
like the Nazis or me, to accept this 
invitation. 

The Keeper of Things Found looked 
up hopefully, but the Tryant only 
scratched himself boredly. The Keeper 
quickly turned the pages. 

Page 2 

My guests arrive — all but Father Alvarez, who sends his regrets. When we 
are settled comfortably, I read aloud 
the confidential war bulletins. I shake 
my head with much concern. This is 
indeed a tragedy. Every country is 
rushing into the war on the side of the 
Americans or the Russians. Even some 
of our closest neighbors are offering 
bases and supplies. 

"I must pronounce a policy of 
strictest neutrality," I say, "Russia and 
America each accuse the other of making the initial attack." I appeal to my 
guests, "Which am I to believe?" 

My guests laugh until tears are upon 
their cheeks. Poor Nazis with so few 
pleasures and no Fuehrer. I am kind 
and generous to them. I offer them 
asylum when they escape Germany at' 
the time of Hitler's death. Their gratitude is touching. Yes, they will help me 
train my army. They will call me 
Fuehrer. A great honor, which I refuse. 
I ask only that they show me how to 
make scientific weapons and efficient 
soldiers. This pleases them. They are 
full of brains. And pride. Secretly they 
think Coronado Gomez is a crude 
simple-minded peasant. Their arrogance grows in proportion to the power 
of the military machine they build. They 
see, perhaps in the fullness of time, a 
new German Empire rising. But that 
is not what Coronado Gomez sees. . . . 

This morning I am visited by a young 
American. He is greatly distraught. He 
wishes to return home. The borders are 
closed. All right I tell him. Return 



THE BOOK OF THE DEAD 



81 



home. Return or stay is nothing' to me. 
either way. 

But this is not all. Since his country 
has no diplomats here, he says with 
some embarrassment, he will deliver a 
message from me to his government. 

"A message?" I ask, "Who in Washington, or wherever your government 
sits now, cares about a message from 
me?" 

"Don't you realize," he cries in surprise, "what is happening? Europe is 



neighbors. They are fighting each other 
with incendiaries and explosives. A 
plane strafed my border patrol by mistake. I protest. Everyone is careful 
thereafter. They do not want trouble 
with Coronado Gomez. In such a short 
time, my army has become the only one 
in the world still intact. A fine army it 
is and commands proper respect. Nothing is certain in the rest of the world but 
destruction. With China and India 
fighting each other, the Asiatic prob


Look Forward to ■ 




No Charge to the Membership 

By ROGER DEE 

In which a galactic emissary visile a sciencefiction fan, and holds his head in his hand 
while he makes a most interesting offer! 



Coming Next Month] 



being overrun by the Russian army. 
London, Paris, Rome, Washin — the 
world capitols — they're gone . . . smoking ruins . . ." he runs out of breath. 
"And manpower," he gasps, "there is 
a tremendous manpower shortage." 

"Yes, too bad. And," I nod to him, 
"the manpower shortage will become 
worse. In the end the great powers will 
no longer be great. Still," I add philosophically, "that is the way of things." , 

"But," he is more agitated than ever, 
"we must stand together. The free 
world! The Americas! Can't you see 
what will happen otherwise?" 

"The question," I agree courteously, 
"is an interesting one, isn't it?" 

He leaves in dismay. Americans are 
so excitable. 

T HAVE had little time for my journal 
of late. Neutrality brings with it 
many details. The war is now worldwide. It has made enemies among my 



lem of overpopulation is solving itself. 
Ah well. . . . 

"Turn more pages!" snarled the Tyrant, "You love words too much." 

The Keeper read hastily: 

Page 32 

This afternoon I am going over estimates of my stock piles. I have plenty 
to last until some sort of peace comes. 

"Father Alvarez is here," Pedro says 
from the doorway, but the priest does 
not wait to be announced. 

He strides in with his robes flowing 
and holds out some papers. "I have," 
he begins without formality, "received 
notification that I will be needed tomorrow because of these executions." 

I glance at the papers. A list of 
names. Those of my German friends — 
all of them. Scientific and military too. 

"Oh, that ..." I pause. "We have 
no one of their faith here. I thought 
you would not mind." 



82 



STARTLING STORIES 



"You acknowledge then," the priest 
demands, "your intention of murdering 
these men?" 

"Now, Father," I soothe him. "Execution is the word. Execution for treason. They plot to kill me and set up 
Field Marshall von Streuve as their new 
Fuehrer." 

He gazes at me silently whispering 
something to himself. Then his voice 
becomes accusing. "You intended all 
along to murder these Germans. You 
brought them here. They trained your 
peasant army. They built you an atomic 
bomb. One atomic bomb ! You sent out 
a plane and dropped that bomb. Was 
it on Washington or Moscow ? It didn't 
matter which, did it?" 

Father Alvarez is smarter than most 
men and considerably bolder. 

"You knew," he goes on, "there'd be 
no questions asked. That first atomic 
bomb spelled war no matter where it 
fell. I am going to publish the story of 
these men," he slaps the execution lists 
fiercely. "I am going to broadcast it 
everywhere until the whole world knows 
that you alone are responsible for this 
holocaust." 

I speak to him kindly. After all, not 



he nor anyone else can stop the war 
now. "No restraint will be placed upon 
you. But why do you bother? Soon it 
will all be over — no one will be left but 
us. "I console him." I will build you a 
nice little Vatican of your own." He 
turns away and is gone. A troubled 
man. 

He does not matter. No one matters 
now. Coronado Gomez has succeeded 
where Caesar, Napoleon, Hitler and the 
others failed. Coronado Gomez has 
made himself Dictator of the World ! 

The Tyrant's voice rose. "This book 
contains nothing. You have your 
orders! Find out how these earlier 
people were able to move carts without 
using oxen. With such knowledge I will 
annihilate the Hill People! I will rule 
the world! And," his great fist sought 
out the lump on the Keeper's chest, 
"when I do," he laughed loudly as the 
blow landed, "There'll be no more of 
this senseless reading." 

Painfully doubled over and wishing 
for death, the Keeper crept toward the 
door. But the Tyrant's good humor was 
so contagious th£ two soldiers clouted 
the Keeper heartily, and he lay still 
upon the ground. 




Curt Temple pits his slim Earth knowledge against the most perfect 
intelligence in the cosmos to save the world — and the tcoman 
he loves. Be sure to read THE GODS HATE KANSAS, 
a novel by JOSEPH J. MILLARD in November 

FANTASTIC STORY MAGAZINE 



NOW PUBLISHED BI-MONTHLY — 25c PER COPY AT ALL STANDS! 



SHOW ME 
THE WAY TD 
GD HOME 

By Gordon H. Dickson 

Hey diddle diddle, the cat 
and the Cuperians, . . . 




IOME, come," said Kris His, "Cheer up, 
' Meki." 



"I can't," groaned Meki Ton. 

"Have some of this pressed duck and Napoleon brandy; there's a good fella. It'll 
make you feel better." 

"No thanks, Kris," said Meki, hollowly. 
"It would choke me." 

, The two Cuperians were seated in the 
palatial living room of the Princess suite at 
Chateau Hotel in Miami. Luxury surrounded 
them. A feast fit for a king was laid out on 
the table in front of them; but they were 
doing it poor justice. This, however, was 
not surprising. They had been on Earth for 
two weeks now and the strain was telling on 
them. 

"Buried," groaned Meki. "Buried alive. 
83 



M STARTLE 

Oh, these stupid humans." 

Kris His looked anxiously at his 
friend, knitting his black brows worriedly. They looked remarkably alike, 
these two — but then Cuperians always 
do, conforming to a general type which 
is tall, brunette and Mongoloid in appearance — but to anyone experienced 
in Cuperian physiognomy it would have 
been apparent immediately that Kris 
was the older and more responsible of 
the two. 

"Look," he said soothingly, "Why 
don't you go tell it to the cat." 

"That stupid animal !" said Meki bitterly. "It'll never understand. I've been 
trying to get the situation through its 
thick skull for five days now." 

"Try again," urged Kris. "It may be 
stupid, but it's our strongest hope right 
now." 

"The trouble with it," said Meki, "is 
that it hasn't any sense of social responsibility." He sighed. "Oh, well. 
Come here, cat." 

A FINE blue Persian, which had been 
napping on the cloth of gold bedspread in the master bedroom came 
strolling in through the door in response 
to Meki's telepathic command. It sauntered to a position on the carpet facing 
the two men and sat down. 

"I'm here." said the cat. Kris looked 
over at Meki with a slight expression 
of surprise. 

"Oh, you've taught' it to talk?" he 
said. 

"Yes," sighed Meki. "I had a wild 
hope that it might get to gossiping with 
the bellboy or something like that. But 
it can't seem to grasp the concept of 
talking for the pleasure of it." 

"Oh," said Kris, "Well, go ahead." 
Meki nodded and turned to the cat. 

"Now, pay attention," he commanded 
sternly. "Who are you?" 

"I'm here," said the cat. 

"I know you're here, you pea-brained 
idiot!" yelled Meki. "I asked who you 
were." 

"Gently, gently," remonstrated Kris. 



STORIES 

"Well, who are you ?" 

"Cat," said the cat. 

"And who am I?" 

"Nice," said the cat. 

"I am not nice," roared Meki. "I'm 
Meki. I'm one of the evil Cuperians 
that's going to blow the world up and 
destroy all the fish and pour all the 
cream down the sewers. Now. who am 
I?" 

"Meki," said the cat. Meki mopped 
his brow with relief. 
"And who is he?" 
"Kris." 

"Good, good," said Meki. "Is he an evil 
Cuperian, too?" 

"Yes," said the cat. Broad smiles 
broke out on the faces of the two Cuperians. They leaned forward hopefully. 

"Now," said Meki, "think carefully. 
How did we get here?" 

"Your ship crashlanded," said the 
cat. "And both of you had been conditioned never to let inferior creatures 
like humans know of the presence of 
superior creatures like evil yous. So 
you automatically buried the ship and 
hid all traces, and have been waiting 
here for someone to rescue you. There 
are more yous out on the moon, but they 
don't know you're in trouble because 
you have no way to signal them. But if 
people knew you were evil Cuperians — 
Cuperians— Cuperians — " 

" — then the scanning station — " 
prompted Meki. 

" — then the scanning station with 
their psych scanners would notice it and 
investigate, and find you and take you 
away. The scanning station can't find 
you now because it is set for human 
minds. So all you can do is let the 
humans find out, but you can't let humans find out because you are conditioned not to let humans find out. But — " 
finished up the cat, "I'm not an intelligent creature, so you can tell me." 

"Fine, fine," said Meki. "Now, don't 
you think you should do something 
about it?" 

The cat looked at him blankly. 

"Idiot!" exploded Meki, suddenly. 



SHOW ME THE WAY TO GO HOME 



"I'm telling you to — to — " He choked off 
suddenly, vocal cords straining, face 
turning a bright crimson in his unsuccessful attempt to force the forbidden 
order to betray their presence past his 
conditioned block. 

"Relax," said Kris, patting his friend 
on the shoulder. "If the creature can't 
understand, it can't understand." 

"I'm hungry," said the cat. 

With a furious gesture, Meki swept 
his plate of pressed duck onto the floor 
in front of it. 

"Here!" he bellowed. "Eat; stuff 
yourself ! Choke ! Ungrateful beast !" 

"Not ungrateful beast," said the cat 
gravely. "Hungry beast." 

"Oh, go away," said Meki, despairingly, and the cat, much to its own disgust, 
turned obediently away from the pressed 
duck and trotted into the bedroom. There 
it meowed piteously until Meki wearily 
remembered himself and carried the 
pressed duck in to it. 

T REALLY don't know," said Meki, 
*■ sadly, coming back from the bedroom, "We've tried just about every 
way conceivable to attract attention." 

"Did the- hotel manager get in touch 
with you about the bill we've been running up here?" 

"Oh, yes," sighed Meki, "my reflexes 
took over and I talked him out of it. He 
ended by suggesting we stay here permanently. I can't take it, I tell you!" 
he added, wildly. "I'll develop paranoic 
tendencies, see if I don't!" 

"Come now!" said Kris, shocked. 
"We've been in some tough spots before 
this. Remember the ice fields of Urana, 
or the lava prospecting on Drusus." 

"But that," said Meki, his voice cracking, "that was plain ordinary hardship. 
It's this insane barbaric opulence. I ask 
for a glass of cold water and they give 
me a glass of warm water with chunks 
of frozen water in it — " his voice rose 
to a scream. "Isn't that funny? Isn't 
that ridiculous? Ha-ha-ha — " and he 
went off into a shriek of hysterical 
laughter. 



"Meki!" roared Kris. 

"Not cold water," screamed Meki, 
"half-cold, half warm. Tricky, eh? 
Clever, eh? Ha-ha-ha-ha — " 

Kris slapped him, sobering him up. 

"Now, that's better," said Kris, as 
Meki buried his nose in the Napoleon 
brandy. "Keep your chin up. I've got 
the feeling that cat will be the saving of 
us yet. Meanwhile, we'll do what we 
can." 

"If I ever get out of this," said Meki 
fervently, "I swear I'll never go prospecting again." 

"And I, too," said Kris. "However, 
let's get down to ways and means. What 
all have we tried so far? We started 
a fire — " 

"And they arrested that little old lady 
on our recommendation," said Meki. 

"We robbed a bank — " 

"The morning paper says the police 
are baffled," 

~ "And we called on that scientist — 
what's-his-name ?" 

"Luodomann," said Meki. "The one 
who was preparing a report on ten years 
of work to prove the existence of extraterrestrial life." 

"Oh, yes," sighed Kris glumly. "He 
shot himself when we proved logically 
that he was wrong. But — " he said, 
brightening — "there's something you 
don't know about. I sent in a fake income tax return under your name." 

"I know," said Meki. "I spied on you, 
stole the return back from the mailman 
and burned it." 

"Oh," said Kris. There was a moment 
of bitter silence. Suddenly however, ha 
sprang from his chair, jubilantly. 

"I've got it," he cried. "Let's take the 
cat and go get drunk and get picked up 
by the police. One of us is bound to 
babble." 

Meki's face lit up. 

"The very thing!" he echoed. "Here, 
cat!" 

The cat came running eagerly into the 
room. Meki picked him up. 

"Come on, boy," said Meki, jubilantly. 
"We're going to paint the town red." 



STARTLING STORIES 



A RMING themselves with a good supply of the money stolen from the 
bank, they hurried out of the hotel and 
hunted up the worst section of town. It 
was a dirty, dingy saloon below street 
level where a slovenly bartender lazily 
flicked flies from the glasses with his 
bar-towel. The three comrades lined up 
at the bar, the cat on top of it. 

"Gimme a shot," said Meki. 

"Gimme a shot," said Kris. 

"Gimme a shot," said the cat. 

The bartender stared at the cat. 

"A talking cat?" he said incredulously
Meki's face lit up. But Kris' reflexes 
had already taken over and the words 
flowed in a smooth stream from his 
mouth. 

"Of course, naturally," he said cheerfully to the bartender. "You've heard of 
this play, Harvey, where the hero has 
an invisible rabbit, or Pooka. Well, 
Pookas may be invisible, but cats are 
not. You've certainly seen cats before. 
And this is a persian cat. If a Pooka 
can talk - ; so can a persian. Of course — " 
he leaned across the bar and shook the 
bartender warmly by the hand. "Of 
course, I knew you'd understand. As I 
said to my friend, bartenders aren't surprised by anything. And you aren't. 
Hah! Hah!" and he laughed heartily. 

"Hah, hah," echoed the bartender 
weakly, not sure whether this was a joke 
or not. And then Meki, much to his own 
disgust, found words forcing themselves 
past his lips. 

"My friend," he said confidentially, 
leaning over the bar, "is a ventriloquist." 

"Oh," said the bartender, relieved. 

"Gimme another," said the cat. 

"Heh, heh," said the bartender, pouring another shotglass full for the cat. 
"Cute little devil, isn't he?" 

"Er-yes," said the two Cuperians, 
watching in some surprise as the cat 
tossed .off his second shot glass with 
flying tongue and shoved it forward for 
a refill. For the first time a sinking 
sensation made itself felt in the breasts 



of Meki and Kris. 

"You know," said the former, voicing 
this in a whisper in the latter's ear. 
"Maybe it would have been just as smart 
to leave him at home." 

Meki's fears were only too well founded, the next couple of hours disclosed. 
At the end of that time the two Cuperians, drink as they might, were only 
slightly high; but the cat, owing to its 
smaller blood content, was roaring 
drunk. It staggered down the bar, caterwauling happily. 

"Shh," said Meki, nervously, grabbing it by the shoulder. 

"Lemme go," said the cat, making an 
ineffectual swipe at him with one paw, 
"I can lick any torn in the room." 

"But," pointed out Kris, "there aren't 
any toms in the room here." 

"Then lesh go find some," said the cat, 
embracing him. "I don't want to fight 
you. You're my buddies. You're the 
nicest, most evil Cup-Cuperians in the 
world." 

The faces of Kris and Meki lit up, but 
a split second later their reflexes had 
taken over and they were holding the 
cat's jaws firmly closed. 

"What did he call you guys?" asked 
the bartender, suspiciously. 

"Canarians," said Kris, glibly. "From 
the Canary Islands, you know." 

"Oh," said the bartender, and they 
carried the struggling feline outside. 

"Damn it!" said Meki. "If we'd only 
been able to stay there, maybe the cat 
would have talked some more." 

"Well, there's other bars," Kris 
pointed out reasonably. "Suppose we 
try one down the line here a way." 

T^HE other bars, however, proved to 
-*- be pretty much of a repetition of the 
first. That is to say, they would have 
a few drinks, the cat would start talking, and at the first suspicious word, 
they would find themselves hustling it 
outside. To top all this off, the cat passed 
out in the fifteenth bar and could not be 
persuaded to say another word. The two 
Cuperians sat in dispirited silence in the 



SHOW ME THE V 

last bar, a small cosy place by the name 
of Louie's Nite Club and gloomed at 
their drinks. That is to say, they 
gloomed until Meki was suddenly struck 
with the bright side of the matter. 

"Say," he said, happily, making a 
grab for his glass and missing. "Kris. I 
do believe I'm getting a little drunk." 

"Well, I'll be flipped," said Kris, trying to focus on his glass which seemed 
to be doing a sort of geometric dance 
with four or five hazy duplicates of itself. "I think I am a little that way myself." 

"Of course," said Meki, closing one 
eye slyly, "we aren't really drunk. Not 
us Cuperians on this weak human liquor. 
But maybe we're just a little bit high 
enough to get by. Do you suppose we're 
drunk .enough to be picked up by the 
police. " 

"Could be," agreed Kris. "Let's go 
find out." 

"Let's," said Meki. "But first, let's 
take a little nap." 

"Good idea," said Kris. "Just the 
thing. Good night." 

But Meki, his head down on his arms, 
was already snoring; and Kris, with a 
tolerant smile at the younger Cuperian's 
ability to hold his alcohol, lost no time 
in following his example. 

He woke up later — but after that 
things got hazy. 

Kris returned to consciousness because Meki was shaking him. Through 
bleared and aching eyes, he looked 
around him. Five inches in front of his 
nose was a cement wall on which somebody had scrawled in pencil: 

"Stone walls do not a prison make, 
"Nor iron bars a cage." 

He pondered this for a few seconds, 
becoming conscious of an aching head 
and the fact that he appeared to be lying 
on some rather hard surface. Finally, 
deciding the matter was worth investigating, he rolled over to discover the 
fact that he was in a cell and that Meki 
was standing over him, excitedly waving a newspaper. 



AY TO GO HOME 8T 

"Wake up!" Meki was shouting. 
"That cat has got us in a fine mess." 
He shoved the newspaper into Kris' 
hands and indicated an article on the 
front page. "I hypnotised the jailer 
into getting me a copy of the morning 
paper. Read what it says about us." 

Kris groaned, sat up. and focused with 
difficulty on the item indicated : 

MANIACS PLEAD CAT AS ONLY 
DEFENSE 

Kris' eyebrows shot up in surprise. 
He read on : 

"Two maniacs were taken into custody this morning after a drunken debauch with a cat leading through a number of bars. Bartender Otto Bikonsky 
at the Blue Point Bar called police when 
the maniacs ran out of money and insisted that the cat write a check for 
further funds. When the cat made no 
move to do so, a loud argument ensued, 
climaxed by the arrival of the police. 
Upon being taken to Headquarters, the 
maniacs refused to furnish any information about themselves, referring all 
questions to the cat and stating loudly 
that since it (the cat! had gotten them 
into this, it was up to the cat to get them 
out. To date the cat has refused to utter 
a word and a sanity hearing is scheduled before Judge Custer P. Polk, affectionately known in courthouse circles 
as 'Committin' Custer.' A careful check 
of city banks today revealed that the 
cat possesses no checking account." 

"Well?" said Kris, looking painfully 
up at Meki. 

"Kris," said Meki, shaking him. "For 
Snark's sake, Kris, I'm frightened. You 
see what it says — maniacs. Kris, maybe 
they're right. Maybe we are going insane. Remember those two just like us 
that got marooned on Kathol? When the 
survey station found them they were 
already in an insane asylum and so badly infected they had to be left there. 
Remember ?" 

Kris shuddered. 

"I hadn't thought of that," he said. 
"Kris, we've got to <ret out of here." 



88 



STARTLING STORIES 



"AH right, all right," said Kris, supporting his aching head. He took a minute to sort out his thoughts and then 
sent out a mental call. 

SOME seconds elapsed, and then a 
portly individual in an olive-drab 
uniform came waddling down the corridor between the cells. He stopped before 
their door and stared at them glassily. 

"Well, open it up!" snapped Meki, 
impatiently. The portly individual 
stared, shook himself, produced a key 
and unlocked the door. 

"Now, show us the way out," said 
Kris. Automaton-like, the jailer preceded them up the corridor, ran headlong into a steel door and knocked himself out. 

"Now isn't that just like a human?" 
said Meki in deep disgust. "Can't think 
for themselves at all under hypnosis. 
Now, how are we going to get through 
the door?" 

"It doesn't seem to be locked," said 
Kris, pushing at it cautiously. It 
yawned open and they stepped through 
into a room containing a high desk and 
several uniformed individuals in various 
poses of relaxation. 

"Jailbreak !" yelped one, whipping out 
his gun. He stared at it in surprise and 
then began to suck childishly on the barrel. The others smiled and nodded and 
indicated a door in the far wall. 

They went through- the door into another corridor, down an elebator and 
out of the building. They went back to 
the Princess suite at their hotel, and 
opened the door. 

The cat. uttering glad cries, flung itself into their arms. . . . 

"Now what?" asked Kris morosely, 
when they had finished a light but nourishing snack of crepes suzettes and 
opened a jereboam of champagne. 

"I ran away," said the cat, proudly. 

"We know!" snapped Meki. "You've 
told us fifteen times already." 

"I didn't say a word," added the cat, 
preening itself. 

"Thanks," said Kris, sourly. He 



poured some champagne into a coffee 
cup. "Drink that and keep quiet." 

The cat lapped happily. Kris turned 
back to Meki. 

"Now what?" he repeated. 

"Kris," said Meki, desperately. "We 
can't waste any more time. I can feel 
paranoic tendencies nibbling at my 
sanity right now. Varve yourself and 
see if you don't notice the same thing." 

Kris did, and shuddered. 

"You're right," he said. "That foolish 
business of getting drunk speeded up 
the process." 

"Listen, Kris," said Meki. "We've got 
to signal the moon direct." 

"But how?" protested Kris. "All 
they've got on this godforsaken planet 
is radar, and I don't know a thing about 
that. And an operation as delicate as 
that can't be handled by direct hypnosis." 

Meki groaned. 

"Oh, why didn't I study my ancient 
sciences like Professor Smrgi wanted 
me to. If he said it once, he said it a 
hundred times, 'Meki, you never know 
when it may come in handy to be able 
to make a catapult or to levitate yourself.' And I just laughed. If I can just 
get out of this, I'll make it a point to 
go back and apologize." 

"I've got it," said Kris, snapping his 
fingers. "How about a large mirror? 
We could flash them a message in interstellar code." 

Meki grimaced sourly. 

"It's a penal offense to make backward natives work for you," he said. 

"I know," said Kris, solemnly. "But 
think which you prefer. Fifty years at 
hard labor or an indefinite stay — maybe 
a permanent stay, if we. become mentally infected — on Earth." 

The alternatives were only too clear. 
Meki faced up to them like the Cuperian 
he was. He shook hands solemnly with 
Kris. 

"We'll do it," he said. 
"I'll help," said the cat. 
"Oh, no you don't," said Meki, swiftly. 
"We don't want you balling up the 



SHOW ME THE V 

works again. Kris, what can we do with 
him?" 

Kris thought. 

"I've got an idea," he said. He turned 
to the cat. "How would you like to learn 
to read?" 

"Read ?" repeated the cat. 

"You'd love it," said Meki, heartily. 
"Everybody does when they first learn 
how. Kris, you teach him while I order 
up some material." He picked up the 
phone and put in a call to the cigar 
counter in the lobby for all the bloodand-thunder they had in the way of 
pocket books and magazines. By the 
time a bellboy came staggering up with 
an armload of these articles, Kris, with 
the aid of the morning newspaper had 
rendered the cat semi-literate. 

"You'll pick up more words as you go 
along," Kris informed the cat, as he and 
Meki left the feline surrounded by garish covers. "Oh, one other thing — 
you've seen Meki and I answer the 
phone ?" 

The cat nodded. 

"Well, you know how it's done. If 
anybody should call while we're gone, 
you tell them we've left town and take 
a message. Got it?" 

"Yes," answered the cat 

"Good," said Kris, and they went out. 

A FTER driving around in a taxi for 
some time, they decided that the 
best thing would not be one big mirror, 
but innumerable smaller mirrors, 
mounted on al! the rooftops in town and 
operated in unison. Accordingly, they 
got out of their taxi in a central portion 
of town and sent out a mental call. 

Immediately, all through the business 
section, normal activity ceased. The 
butcher, the baker, the candlestick 
maker (the president of Waxies, Inc., 
that is, who happened to be vacationing 
in town at the time) to say nothing of 
innumerable other people in all sorts of 
trades and professions, immediately felt 
a sudden distaste for their usual functions and a corresponding overwhelming 
urge to rush up on the rooftop of what


'AY TO GO HOME 89 

ever building they happened to be in 
and construct mirrors. Cheering and 
laughing happily, they threw away their 
typewriters, adding machines, stethoscopes, and monkey wrenches, tore down 
all sorts of reflecting surfaces and went 
scurrying up stairs and out onto shingles, eaves, or tiles. Within a certain 
rough circle of area, the town took on 
an air of carefree holiday and festival, 
while outside that area people pointedly 
ignored what was going on within — unless, that is, they happened by accident 
to cross the boundary line, in which case 
they were struck by the industrious 
madness that went on around them. 

"Very good," said Meki, to Kris, 
watching a bank executive smash a store 
window and take out a large dressing 
room mirror, while the proprietor of 
the store cheered happily. "But I wish 
they'd hurry. I'm beginning to get a 
funny feeling." 

Kris mopped the perspiration from 
his brow. 

"I must be out of shape," he said. 
- "I'm having a rough time handling these 
people. Are you sure you're doing your 
share?" He looked suspiciously at Meki. 

"My share?" muttered Meki, avoiding 
his eye. "Me? Certainly? Why not? But 
why? Why—" 

"Meki!" cried Kris, staring at his 
friend. "Snap out of it. What's wrong 
with you ?" 

"Me ?" answered Meki, in an odd tone. 
"Nothing. Nothing could be wrong with 
me. But — " he suddenly clutched at 
Kris' sleeve. 

"Look!" he hissed. "That little man, 
over there. He's staring at me." 

"Nonsense," said Kris, trying to disengage himself. "He isn't even looking 
at you." 

"He is. He was," said Meki wildly. 
"But you won't admit it. You're all 
against me. All of you. But I'll beat 
you yet. You want to take me back to 
Cuper for- psycho-conditioning. But I 
won't let you." And, under the sudden 
surge of Meki's mind, little bodies of 
men around the town began pulling 



»0 STARTLE 

down their mirrors and getting into 
fights with others who were still putting 
theirs up. 

Kris fell back, the horror of realization printed on his face. They had delayed too long. Meki was already mentally infected. That meant that he with 
his only slightly higher stability rating 
had only a matter of minutes left. The 
scanning station personnel would have 
to reach them in less than six hours in 
order to save them. After that the 
damage of infection would be beyond 
repair. There must be some way to get 
through to the station in time. In a last 
surge of desperate effort, his mind 
sought for an answer — and found it. . . . 

T EAVING Meki madly engaged in 
tearing down what they had built, 
he groped his way to the nearest telephone. And as his mind sunk into insanity, the last thing he remembered 
was his voice babbling desperately into 
the mouthpiece. 

He awoke to the blissful peace of the 
infirmary in the scanning station. An 
orderly was bending over him. 

"Am I — " he croaked. 

"You'll be all right," said the orderly, 
his kindly Cuperian face beaming down 
on him. "How do you feel? Want another shot of nerve-titillator?" 

"No thanks," sighed Kris, relaxing. 
"Meki ?" 

"He's all right, too," said the orderly. 
"And the cat sends you his love. We 
offered to take him off Earth with you 
two, but he preferred to stay with the 
humans he was used to. Affecting scene 
at the end, there, though. He took my 
hand in both paws and shook it with 
tears in his eyes." 

"Did he?" said Kris, feeling, despite 
himself, a little touched. "Tell me, what 
happened ?" 

"Well, according to what he told me, 
you didn't make too much sense over 
the phone. But as you surmised, there 



3 STORIES 

had been all sorts of noble heroes in 
those books and magazines he had been 
reading, so that when you told him that 
the city was doomed to be destroyed by 
invading Cuperians, but that he could 
save himself, he bravely decided to stick 
by his guns and warn Washington. 

"He immediately made a long distance 
call to the FBI and informed them of 
the situation, insisting that he be put 
through to the President. I gather they 
gave him a rough time, but knuckled 
under when they found where the call 
was coming from. I guess they figured 
anyone with enough money to rent the 
Princess suite deserved to be listened to 
for a minute or two. The upshot of it 
was that the cat spoke to the President 
and told him off rather sharply about 
the inadequacy of the space-warning setup in that area of the country. At any 
rate it was enough to make the FBI 
start a routine investigation, and of 
course our scanners picked it up at once 
and deducted your presence." 

"And — " ventured Kris, hesitantly, 
"- — the mirrors?" 

"What mirrors?" asked the orderly. 
"You were both babbling about them, 
but we didn't see anything out of the 
ordinary about the mirrors where you 
were." 

"Never mind," said Kris, happily, relaxing. "Just a hallucination I guess. 
Ah, it'll be good to get back to Guper." 

"To Cuper?" said the orderly, surprised. "Oh, I forgot you didn't know. 
It's been decided to raise Earth to interstellar apprenticeship level, and all citizens having any knowledge of the planet 
have been requisitioned for work in the 
human cities — with adequate mental 
shields, of course. For you and Meki 
it'll be quite familiar territory, won't 
it?" 

There was a long moment of silence. 

"I think I'll take that shot of nervetitillator after all," said Kris, in a dull 
voice. "Better make it a double." 



Read Our Companion Magazine* 

THRILLING WONDER STORIES - SPACE STORIES - FANTASTIC STORY MAGAZINE 




All the thrills 
of the West , , . 
corralled 
into one 
exciting 
magazine . . . 

Subscribe now to Ranch Romances 

16 issues only $3 

Everyone who enjoys hard-hitting stories of the Old West will find a paylode of thrills iu eaoh exciting issue of RANCH ROMANCES. 

Every page of RANCH ROMANCES is branded with the rip-roaring 
action of frontier days as hard-riding men and their glamorous women recreate the pulse-quickening drama of the untamed West. Here is the roar of 
blazing guns, the lurking danger of the lonely range, the smashing, surging 
action that leads to excitement and romanee. 

Yes, all the thrilling adventure of the wild West is yours when you subscribe to RANCH ROMANCES. And what's more, you'll get it at a big 
saving . . . because if you were to buy 18 copies individually, they'd cost 
you $4.00. But as a subscriber, you get them for only $3.00 — a saving of a 
full dollar. Think of it— for only $3. less than the cost of the average book, 
—you get 18 issues of RANCH ROMANCES . . . more than 2200 pages 
of hard-hitting, pulse-quickening western reading. And remember, all 
RANCH ROMANCES stories are brand NEW; there's not a reprint in 
the entire batch. 

So, fill in and mail the coupon below with $3. Do it right now to make 
sure you don't miss a single copy of RANCH ROMANCES. 





Ranch Romances • Dept. SS-12 • 10 East 40th Street ■ New York 16, N. Y, 

Count me in. Partner" Please enter a subscription to RANCH ROMANCES in my name at ths special rate of 16 
issues (32 weeks) for only $3. My remittance is enclosed 



Nam 



AddressCitr 



_Zont _ 



_Stat«_ 



(Add Postage: Canada 50c, Foreign $1.00) 



Jeff awarded himself a day off and took Mona around the city 



THE Solar Visicasting System owjied 
and occupied its own building on the 
Avenue of the Planets in Nuyork. The 
Visibuilding, as it was known, was one 
hundred and seventy storeys of imposing steel, stone and glass, terraced and 
scalloped in the most modern design. In 
it were the five hundred huge studios in 
which SVS produced the shows which 
were visicast through its thousands of 
affiliates all over Terra and, since they 



had built hundreds of coaxial satellites, 
throughout the Galactic Federation. 
There were thirty storeys filled with clerical help, script girls, page boys and the 
stenographers' pool. There were forty 
storeys of executives — the higher you 
went the more important the executive, 
culminating finally in the private office 
of the president of the network, which 
occupied the entire 170th floor. 
In studio 100-C, they were rehearsing 



He Had a Galaxy Full of Prospective Customers 

92 



LOVE THAT AIR! 

a novelet by 
KENDELL FOSTER CROSSEN 



the Galaxy Gaieties. They were doing a 
costume piece on the musical, and in one 
corner of the studio they'd built a field, 
complete with babbling brook, towering 
trees, and such scarce Terran animals as 
horses and cows. The rehearsal was temporarily at a standstill while the director 
argued with a representative of Nojul, 
Ransome, Denning and Eeee, the advertising agency. The latter claimed that 
the makeup on one of the cows didn't 



look authentic, while the director was 
patiently explaining they'd used the best 
research man in the business. 

Jeff Reynolds had taken advantage of 
the lull to make a date for lunch with 
Mona Parker, the beautiful star. Having 
accomplished this, he blew her a kiss and 
started to leave. The director saw him. 

"Jeff, boy," he called. "You like?" 

"What's your rating V Jeff asked. 

"Two thousand fifty-four on the Beel


But He Had Only One Product to Sell— Himself ! 

93 



STARTLING STORIES 



son Rating. Two thousand fifty-three on 
the Stooper." 

"Then I like," Jeff replied. "I love. I 
adore. And you're a sweetheart." 

"I love you, boy," the director said 
and went back to his argument with the 
advertising representative of Fleet 
Chairs — "Treat Your Seat to a Fleet" — 
who sponsored the show. 

Jeff left the studio and entered the 
Level Converter. As he stepped in, he 
noticed a small, handsome man heading 
energetically for the studio. He was Guy 
dolla Moran, vice president in charge of 
network programs. Although there were 
plenty of official reasons why he might 
visit the studio, Jeff knew that he was 
going to ask for a luncheon date with 
Mona Parker. He grinned to himself, 
imagining the expression on the vice 
president's face on being turned down. 

After a varied career as writer and director, Jeff Reynolds was the supervisor 
for night-time visicasts for SVS. The 
next step up, if he could make it, was a 
vice presidency. It was generally agreed 
in the industry that Jeff was a young 
man who was going places. 

He always drank Martian whisky on 
the rocks, bought all his clothes at 
Tookes Brothers, and said the things 
that were expected of rising young executives. The only thing that might mar 
his prospects was that Guy dolla Moran 
was his immediate superior and they 
were both interested in the same girl. 
But Jeff was confident of the outcome. 
He knew that Mona also went out with 
dolla Moran, but he was sure that she 
was merely being politic. And he was 
equally certain that dolla Moran would 
accept the whole thing with good grace 
when he realized that the" best man had 
won. Jeffry was also well aware that the 
president of SVS, Matthew Anderson*, 

•Matthew Anderson, only a few years older than Jeff, was 
considered the top maa in visicasting circles. His reputation 
stemmed from the time when, as a mere vice president, hie 
influence nanard the election laws of Beta Hydri III to be 
changed Since that time, the president of Beta Hydrl ia 
the man who receives the most box tops (from Wheatley'a 
Toasted Comet Pops, of course) from the visiacreen audience. Only those persons owning a viaisereen set are eligible to vote. Whenever advertising or vialcaating men get 
tfl talking ahop over their Martian-whisky-on-the-rocas 
aooner or later the conversation will get around to the 
sheer genius of Matthew Anderson. 



thought highly of him and this was an 
important factor, 

T TPSTAIRS, Jeff had to see one of their 
regular writers whose latest script 
he was rejecting. The writer listened in 
bewilderment while Jeff told the latest 
funny story and then explained that he 
didn't like the story. 

"I didn't feel it in here," he said, 
thumping his chest, when the writer demanded to know why he didn't like it. "I 
love you, sweetheart, but you've got to 
hit me." 

Looking as if he'd like to, the writer 
picked up his script and departed. Keeping a close eye on the time, Jeff saw 
three more writers. One he told that 
they all loved his script and they only 
wanted a few changes; if he'd rewrite 
the lead character, change the motivation, and give it a new ending, they'd 
buy it. The second writer wanted an increase in his rate and was treated to a 
long story of how production costs were 
going up. The third one was a new writer they were considering for a new show 
and Jeff raved over every idea they discussed, although Tie privately concluded 
the fellow was a troublemaker. He wanted to introduce too many new, untried 
ideas. 

After the session with writers, Jeff 
dropped in on two producers and a stage 
designer and went over plans for shows 
coming up the next day. Then he just 
had time to dash to the conference room 
for a general discussion of the new script 
on their biggest dramatic show. Guy 
dolla Moran, John Leeds, the script editor, Al Lemster, the director, and Veno 
Harrison, the writer, were already there 
waiting for him. He noticed that dolla 
Moran looked less friendly than usual. 

As they always did at these conferences, the rest of them relaxed in various poses and prepared to hear Guy dolla 
Moran read the script aloud. There had 
been a time when the vice president had 
considered himself an actor and he read 
scripts with considerable feeling. 

He read the first line of the script and 



LOVE THAT AIR! 



99 



leaned back, closing his eyes. "I'm seeing it," he explained. He always offered 
the same explanation, but as the rest of 
them were also in some stage of seeing or 
feeling it, they paid no attention. 

"Good," he said after a moment of silence. "Am I right, boys?" The others 
quickly agreed. 

The reading of the script went fine for 
six or seven pages, but then dolla Moran 
read a line and when he'd finished seeing 
it he was frowning. 

"No, Veno," he said, shaking his head. 
"My mother wouldn't understand that 
line. Am I right, boys?" 

There was total agreement from all ex


place, Veno. After all, I'm not a writer." 
He continued with the reading. At the 
end of the script there were only some 
three hundred lines that needed rewriting and everyone was agreed that they 
had a good script. 

Jeff Reynolds rushed off to a meeting 
with the network censor and they managed to cut offensive things from ten 
shows before lunch time. 

Mona Parker was waiting by the studio door when Jeff arrived. Downstairs, 
they grabbed a helicab and went to the 
Venusian Haven for lunch. The food 
there was good, the tables nicely secluded, and there would be sure to be one 



— (Bhstkhsw. of the WceA — 

ONE of Ken Crossen's most popular stories was the inimitable THINGS 
OF DISTINCTION (SS, March 1952) in which he performed a 
wicked bit of vivisection upon galactic hucksters. Carrying on the tradition, Mr. Crossen returns to the fray with a new dose of insecticide for 
the advertising moguls — -the brethren of the ulcer. Some of the characters 
you've met before appear briefly herein, though it is not actually a sequel 
to THINGS OF DISTINCTION. It is fun though, with many a sage 
bit of thinking concealed beneath the gimmicks and gags. 

— The Editor 



cept the writer. "I don't get you," he 
said. "What kind of a criticism is that? 
We got an audience of twenty-seven billion on this show. Who's writing for your 
mother ?" 

Four pairs of eyes stared reproachfully at him. 

"You don't understand, Veno," Jeff 
said gently. He'd been a writer himself 
and he understood them. "If Guy's mother wouldn't understand it, then it's got 
to go. I've met Guy's mother and let me 
tell you she's a very unusual woman." 

"She'd have to be to have produced 
him," the writer muttered. But he said 
it so low that only John Leeds heard him 
and he managed to turn his snicker into 
a cough. 

"Then we're agreed," Guy dolla Moran 
said, marking the script with his blue 
pencil. "You'll think up something in its 



or two visigossips there who would report them as an item on the next visi
cast. 

After a couple of drinks and a leisurely lunch of Sabikian pheasant, Jeff proposed for the twenty-seventh time. And 
for the twenty-seventh time, Mona said 
maybe. 

"Of course, I love you," she said, "but 
I've got to think of my career. If I were 
to marry you now, Guy would be furious. 
He might even convince the sponsor that 
they should get a new star for the show. 
But if you get to be a vice president, he 
wouldn't dare to fire me then." 

"And if I don't get to be a vice president, you might marry him. Is that it V 

"A girl could do worse," Mona said. 
She reached over and patted his hand. 
"But even if I married him, I'd still love 
you. You know that, dear." 



STARTLING STORIES 



"Of course, dear," he said bitterly. 
"Come on. We'd better get back to the 
shop. It's the early bird that catches the 
vice president." 

"Don't you mean that catches the 
worm," Mona said doubtfully. 

"Same thing," Jeff snapped. He signed 
the check and they went out and took a 
helicab back to SVS. 

"Will I see you tonight ?" he asked as 
they reached the door of her rehearsal 
studio. 

"I don't know," she said. "Check with 
me later, will you, darling?" 

"You mean if dolla Moran doesn't ask 
you, then you'll go with me ? I had a date 
with you last night, so it's his turn tonight if he wants you. Is that the idea?" 

"Don't be dreary," she said coldly. 
"I'm free, Terran and twenty-one." 

"Plus," he said savagely and headed 
for the Level Converter. 



II 



HEN he reached his office, there 
was a facsimile-memo on his desk asking 
him to go to the president's office as soon 
as he returned from lunch. He left a 
visitape for his secretary and took the 
Level Converter to the top floor. 

He stepped off the Converter into the 
small office of Anderson's secretary. She 
gave him a friendly smile an'd waved him 
on through the door that was marked 
private. 

With the exception of the small cubicle 
for the secretary, the entire top floor 
was given over to the private office of 
Matthew Anderson. He was looked upon 
as a creative executive, and the decor 
was planned accordingly. His desk was, 
naturally, at the far end of the floor. A 
conveyer belt, made to resemble an oldfashioned cobblestone walk, ran from 
the doorway to his desk, winding 
through a pleasant little woodland, at 
one point arching over a small stream. 
Artificial birds, perched in the artificial 
trees, occasionally chirped excerpts from 
popular opera. 

The ceiling of the office was at least 



two hundred feet above the floor. Altairan artists had created small clouds to 
float about near the ceiling and there 
was a control panel under Anderson's 
desk so that he could make a small 
amount of, rain fall over the forest. 
Above the clouds there was a miniature 
Solar System, with the planets wheeling 
about the sun in the proper fashion. A 
concealed spotlight constantly played on 
the third planet in the tiny system. 

Nearer to the desk, there was a wellstocked bar, with two bartenders in constant attendance. Since the bartenders 
were Algolians, who cannot hear any 
sound below the supersonic level, their 
presence was no threat to office secrets. 

Jeff Reynolds was still sulking over 
Mona, so he ignored the conveyer and 
walked across the office to the desk. By 
the time he arrived, some fiften minutes 
later, he was in better humor, although 
it was not helped by seeing Guy dolla 
Moran seated beside the president's 
desk. 

"Jeff, boy," Anderson said warmly. 
"How's it going, boy ?" 
"Great," Jeff said. 

"It always goes all right with Jeff," 
Guy dolla Moran put in. "He's a sweetheart, that boy." 

"I love you, Guy," Jeff said automatically as he dropped into a chair. 

The president of SVS beamed at his 
two assistants. "Jeff, we've just been 
talking about you," he said. 

"It's not true," Jeff said in mock horror. "I am dentalized by Toothsavers, 
I'm always up in the air with Mummer, 
I treat my seat to a Fleet, my best 
friends do tell me that I need a Ransome 
Halo, and I was seduced by the sponsor's maiden aunt on a Lover's Carpet." 

The last was a reference to the J. C. 
Lover Carpet Trust, whose slogan was 
"Nobody can resist a Lover's carpet," 
and the other two men dutifully laughed 
at the familiar office joke. 

"The thing is," said Anderson, "we got 
a problem. A toughie. Guy and I were 
talking it over and he said you were just 
the boy to solve it. You know, I think he 



LOVE THAT AIR! 



97 



was right about you after all." 

"It just shows," Jeff said, "that the 
Denebian cannibal was right when he 
said you can't keep a vice president 
down. They'll always come up with some 
kind of an idea." He was suspicious of 
any recommendations from Guy dolla 
Moran. 

"Love that boy," Guy said lightly. 

"Now this is just off the cuff," Anderson said, "but you can pick up the details 
later. Our trouble is on Acamar Two. 
It's a Class C planet and trade agreements were signed a little over a year 
ago. We were on the ball right away and 
made our usual arrangements. We put 
up half the money for Acamarans to 
build their own visistations. Our usual 
contract, with them agreeing to carry a 
reasonable percentage of our shows. Guy, 
how many affiliates do we have on Acamar Two now?" 

"One hundred and one, Matt." 

"One hundred and one affiliates," Anderson said, "and they're not carrying a 
single commercial show off the network 
at present." 

"How come?" Jeff asked. 

"That's the problem, boy. Glad to see 
you getting right to the core of it. 
They're carrying enough sustaining 
shows so we can't accuse them of breaking the contract, but the minute we sell 
a show, they drop it and pick up another 
sustainer. I don't have to tell you that 
our sponsors are all raising hell over the 
thing." 

"Even the sustainers draw a small audience," the vice president said. "Am I 
right, Matt?" 

"Right, Guy. They're fighting us." 

"If they didn't have visicasting before," Jeff said, "maybe they just 
haven't accepted the medium yet." 

"Wrong track, boy," Anderson said. 
"They took to it like a rocket takes to 
space. In addition to our affiliate stations, there's something like a hundred 
independents. They got big ratings, 
everyone of them. There are close to a 
billion visisets on the planet." 

"Commercial resistance ?" Jeff asked. 



rpHE President shook his head. "They 
*- carry plenty of commercials on the 
independents, all native products. And 
I've seen reports showing that the native 
products have increased their sales three 
hundred per cent since they started 
using visicasting. But they won't listen 
to our advertising. Most of our sponsors 
have opened branches on Acamar and 
they're selling nothing. A great big 
doughnut. It's serious, boy." 

"Rugged," Jeff agreed. It hardly 
sounded like a job for him, but if Anderson had been convinced that it was there 
wasn't much he could do about it. 

"So far," Anderson continued, "we've 
been protected against the advertisers 
trying to make deals directly with the 
Acamaran independent stations because 
there's a Federation law against it. But 
we've just learned that the Planetary 
Association of Manufacturers is bringing pressure on the Congress to repeal 
the law. We've got to work fast." 

Jeff nodded, still not sure what they 
were driving at. 

"Well, it's all yours, boy," Anderson 
said. "Clean this one up and you'll be 
solid. There might even be a little promotion." 

"Wait a minute," Jeff said. "Just what 
is it you want me to do ?" 

"Clean it up," Anderson snapped. 
"Straighten them out so they start using 
our commercial shows. My secretary's 
already made a reservation for you on an 
afternoon flight. She'll tell you what 
time you're leaving. See her on anything 
else. Get on the ball, boy." 

"Who's in charge in our Acamaran office?" Jeff asked. 

"An Acamaran. I think his name is 
Tokka. He's vice president in charge of 
Acamar, but you'll be in charge when 
you get there. I've already dictated a 
visitape on it." 

"Tokka? Is that his first or last 
name ?" 

The president looked at the vice president and the latter responded. "I think," 
he said, "that Acamarans have only one 
name." 



98 



"What kind of life on Acamar?" Jeff 
asked. 

"What kind of life?" repeated Anderson. He seemed to be losing his patience. "The kind of life that won't buy 
our commercial shows, that's the kind. 
Don't bother me with details, Jeff, boy. 
Nobody ever got anywhere by standing 
around asking questions." 

"Jeff '11 take care of it," Guy dolla Moransaid. "Am I right, lover boy?" 

"When were you ever wrong?" Jeff returned, being careful to keep any suggestion of irony out of his voice. He turned 
and trudged back through the artificial 
forest. 

Anderson's secretary handed him his 
reservation on the Pan-Galactic Spaceways and told him that his ship took off 
at four that afternoon. He had about an 
hour to make it. She told him that she'd 
also made a reservation for him at the 
Bahari Hotel in Azoi City, the capital of 
Acamar. She too was unable to tell him 
anything about the natives of Acamar. 

By this time he was convinced that 
the whole thing was a scheme of dolla 
Moran's to get him away from Mona 
Parker. He strongly suspected that 
every experienced troubleshooter in SVS 
had already fallen down on the job and 
that dolla Moran had seized upon it as a 
perfect method to get him out of the way 
and at the same time stop his rapid advancement in the company, He'd never 
thought about it before, but dolla Moran 
probably wouldn't like the idea of another V.P. in the same department. 



STARTLING STORIES 



H 



hi 



US suspicions only increased his 
frustrated anger. Even if he were right, 
if the mess on Acamar was completely 
insoluble, there was nothing he could do 
about it. He'd still have to go to Acamar 
and fall flat on his face in an orderly 
fashion. To protest the assignment 
would be the quickest way to become unemployed. 

He stopped off at his office and told his 
secretary he'd be away for a few weeks. 



Just on the off chance that he might 
come through, he left a few orders for 
his assistant which he knew would be 
beyond that young man's ability. There 
was no point in giving the company the 
idea that his department could run just 
as well without him. 

He stopped at the rehearsal studio to 
see Mona, but they were in the midst of 
a scene and an associate producer told 
him that they wouldn't break for another hour. There was nothing to do but 
go without seeing her. He left her a note 
and went downstairs. 

A helicab took him to his apartment 
and he packed. He saw that he still had 
a few minutes to spare. A rather pleasant idea had occurred to him. Another 
cab quickly carried him to the main offices of the Fleet Seatery Trust and the 
magic name of the Solar Visicasting System succeeded in getting him sandwiched in between two regular appointments. 

Old Homer Van Fleet, president of the 
chair trust, scowled at him. "Well, young 
man," he said, "I hope you've come to 
tell me that you people are going to do a 
better job for me." 

"I believe we're doing a pretty good 
job," Jeff said. "The show has a big rating and I've seen the reports of your increase in sales since you started sponsoring Galaxy Gaieties." 

"That's generally true," Van Fleet 
said, "but there are a number of spots 
throughout the Federation where you're 
not delivering. Now — " 

"That's what I wanted to discuss with 
you," Jeff interrupted hastily. "I'm just 
on my way — catching a space liner in 
just a few minutes, in fact — to Acamar 
to clean up the trouble there. It occurred 
to me that there's a way you might be of 
some help— and perhaps get a bit of a 
jump on other manufacturers in the 
area." 
"How?" 

"Galaxy Gaieties is one of the most 
popular visiscreen shows in the universe," Jeff said, "and I think we can 
safely say that Mona Parker is the best 



LOVE THAT A1K! 



known and best loved visistar in the Federation. I believe that it might be of 
considerable assistance if she and the 
show went to Acamar on a personal appearance tour." 

The old man looked at him from his 
little shrewd eyes. "That would cost 
more money, wouldn't it ?" 

"Yes, sir, but I believe it would be 
well-spent. These new planets may feel 
left out of things and it might give them 
the idea that Fleet Chairs is interested 
in all aspects of their comfort." 

"Maybe you got something," the old 
man said. "I'll give it a thought. Glad 
you came around, young man. Like to 
.see you people on your toes." 

Jeff took the hint and left. A helicab 
got him to the spaceport with a few minutes to spare. He felt sure that Homer 
Van Fleet was going to ta''e his suggestion and it was with considerably more 
cheer that he boarded the space liner. 

There was as yet no regular passenger line to Acamar Two and it was a 
testament to the power of SVS that the 
liner swerved a few light years off her 
course and stood by while a lifeboat delivered Jeff Reynolds to the second planet in Acamar's orbit. 

The spaceport on Acamar was a small, 
but attractive spot on an island in a lake. 
As he entered the main building, Jeff 
caught his first glimpse of Acamarans. 
Having already traveled about the Federation he was prepared to accent almost 
any form of intelligent life, but the Acamarans were humanoid in their general 
outlines. They seemed to average about 
five feet in height although there were 
a few who were taller. He guessed that 
their weight was about proportionate to 
that of Terrans. They all were dvossed 
in clothes similar to those worn on Terra. 
Their Jaces were more animal-like and 
they had rather prominent buck teeth. 
There was something just a bit rat-like 
in their faces, but it was not at all unpleasant. He also noticed that their faces 
were covered with soft brown hair and 
that they had broad fiat tails protruding 
from their clothes. 



A helicab, almost as modern as the 
ones on Terra, took him to his hotel. It 
was a long enough ride to give him a fair 
impression of Azoi City. None of the 
buildings were over two or three storeys 
in height ; although the flatness was 
rather startling at first, he soon found 
them pleasant to look at. More than half 
the streets were broad canals, filled with 
water, and to his surprise he liked the 
effect. He remembered vaguely having 
read that once a Terran city had had 
such canals in the place of streets. Although it was already night, looking 
down, in the soft light of street lamps, 
he saw a handful of young Acamarans 
swimming in the canal and felt a fleeting 
kinship with them. 

He had dinner in the hotel. To his relief, the menu included a wide variety of 
Terran foods. He thought of trying to 
learn something about the planet, but 
realized that it would be easier and more 
efficient to get it from the local SVS vice 
president, so he went to bed early. 

rpHE following morning, he breakfast-1 ed in the hotel, then called a helicab 
and directed it to the Solar Visicasting 
building. It turned out to be the only tall 
building in the city. On Terra its fifty 
storeys would have seemed minute ; here 
it towered over the city. 

A few minutes later he was shaking 
hands with an Acamaran. 

"I am Tokka, vice president in charge 
of operations here," he said. He spoke 
excellent Terran, the only evidence that 
it wasn't his native tongue showing in a 
slight struggle between the sibilants and 
his buck teeth. "Mister Anderson notified me you were on your way. I am glad 
to have you here, Mister Reynolds." 

"Thank you," Jeff said. He found himself liking the Acamaran, alien though 
he was. "I hope you won't feel that it's a 
matter of someone coming in to take 
over. It's not that at all, Mister Tokka." 

"Please. On Acamar we do not go in 
for formal titles, just as we have never 
adopted your custom of two or more 
names. Please call me Tokka." 



100 



STARTLING STORIES 



"Then call me Jeff. We're really not so 
formal on Terra. In spite of our names 
and titles we usually call each other baby 
or sweetheart." 

"I've noticed," Tokka said dryly. 
"Now, how would you like to approach 
our problem. Jeff?" 

"Well," Jeff said, "I suppose I should 
learn as much as possible about the planet and your people. By the way, I've never seen an Acamaran before last night, 
yet there's something familiar about 
your race. What are your antecedents?" 

"As you must know," Tokka said, 
"there is some relationship between all 
peoples of-the galaxy. One species forges 
ahead on this planet, another species develops on that one. We Acamarans belong to the order known on Terra as 
Rodere. I believe that certain of our own 
anthropologists have classified us as 
Rodere Erectus. As to our more specific 
class, you probably find the teeth and 
the tail familiar clues." 

Although many forms of Terran animal life had vanished years before. Jeff 
Reynolds had once been a steady visitor 
to the Terran Museum of Ancient History. Suddenly he remembered why the 
Acamarans had seemed familiar. 

"Beavers," he exclaimed. 

"Exactly," Tokka said, nodding. "We 
are closely related to the form of life you 
knew as beavers. On your planet, they 
remained stationary on the evolutionary 
scale, while on Acamar the same life 
form continued to develop." 

"Then that explains the canals, the 
reason for almost every home being surrounded by water." 

"Of course. My ancestors built their 
homes in water and so this has become 
traditional in our architecture. The same 
influence restrains us from building 
what you once called skyscrapers. In 
many of the older houses here, you will 
also find a traditional door built below 
the surface of the water. Your ancestors 
lived in caves and trees, so your architecture has featured cave-like apartment houses and the towering structure 
of the tree. There is emotional securitv 



in retaining some aspect of the patterns 
of our beginnings." 

Jeff would have liked to pursue the 
subject further, but he reminded himself 
that he was here on business. 

"You know why I'm here?" he asked. 

Tokka nodded. 

"What is your own theory about it?" 
Jeff asked. "Surely you, as an Acamaran, 
should be able to know why the stations 
here will not carry any of our commercial shows. Or why Terran products 
don't sell here." 

"To my shame, I should," Tokka said. 
"Unfortunately, we Acamarans have not 
had your experience in such matters. I'm 
afraid it is beyond my rather simple 
mind. It is true that the Terran manufacturers have done nothing to adapt 
their products to our needs, but this 
should not stop all sales. So far as Terran advertising is concerned, I have been 
able to arrive at onlv one conclusion." 

"What's that?" 

"Well, it may be that your advertising 
is so subtle that we are unable to perceive the essence of its influence." 

"Too subtle?" Jeff exclaimed in surprise. He'd heard many criticisms of 
Terran advertising, but to the best of his 
knowledge this was the first time anyone 
had ever accused it of being too subtle. 
He could hardly believe his ears. 

Tokka nodded vigorously. "That is my 
theory. Perhaps you will.ije able to discover if it is correct. You see, even now, 
we have had very little contact with you 
Terrans. We have had access to much of 
your literature, both visual and audio, 
and we have learned and adopted a great 
many of your customs and fashions. But 
since we have had very little direct contact, I'm sure there are psychological 
factors which escape us. Surely a race 
like yours, so much more advanced than 
mine, must be more subtle in youfmethods of influencing sales." 

"Maybe," Jeff said doubtfully. 



J 



IV 

EFF snent most of the da-/ carefully 



LOVE THAT AIR! 



101 



wading through a great mass of reports. 
Even with the explanations Tokka offered, they made very little sense to him. 
He agreed to have dinner at Tokka ! s 
home, so they left the office early and 
made a brief tour of Azoi City. With the 
slight architectural difference, there 
were many reminders of Terran cities. 
Where there were Terran and Acamaran 
stores side by side, it was impossible to 
tell them apart. Window displays and 
outside signs would be identical. Yet 
Jeff noticed that Acamarans, strolling 
along the walks on either side of the canals, would pause to look into the Terran 
windows, then walk on. But when they 
stopped to gaze at the same display in an 
Acamaran store they would invariably 
end by entering. 

After a while, he noticed that there 
seemed to be an unusual number of dentists in the ciy. And nearly all dental offices carried a sign announcing they specialized in "dental amputations." Jeff expressed his curiosity. 

"One of the penalties of civilization," 
Tokka explained. "In more primitive, 
times my people used their teeth to cut 
down trees which were utilized in constructing our homes and dams. The continual use kept our teeth sharpened 
down to the proper length. But now we 
have become mechanized and our teeth 
serve only to eat our food. As a result, 
our front teeth continue to grow 
throughout our lives. At regular periods, 
we must have the teeth amputated or 
they would get so long that we would 
not be able to eat at all." 

That night Jeff had dinner at Tokka's 
home, meeting the rest of the family. 
He learned that Acamarans didn't use 
the husband and wife designation, common on most planets, but merely referred to their "mates" with nothing in 
the reference to indicate sex. 

It was a pleasant evening. There was 
a close family feeling in Tokka's home 
which Jeff had seldom seen in Terran 
homes. He liked both Tokka and Ghamik, and even enjoyed it when the three 
small children all climbed on his lap at 



once and demanded that he tell them a 
Terran story. 

The following day there was a visitape 
from the home office announcing the decision to send The Galaxy Gaieties to 
Acamar on a personal appearance tour. 
Considerably cheered up by it, Jeff went 
out with Tokka on a round of the local 
advertising agencies and the independent visiscreen stations. 

By the end of the second day, Jeff Reynolds was in a greater confusion about' 
Acamar Two than he had been before 
leaving Terra. He had examined hundreds of pages of local advertising copy, 
and had absorbed a great deal more in 
the rehearsal and actual visicasts of numerous local shows. As near as he could 
tell, their advertising was about on a par 
with that of Terra perhaps a thousand 
years earlier. It was crude, dogmatic 
and bumbling. Yet he sat in with dozens 
of studio audiences and watched them 
rush out to buy the product the minute 
the show was over. He visited homes to 
watch the visiscreen and again saw the 
observers rush out to buy as soon as the 
show went off the air. He had to confess 
— but only to himself — that on at least 
two occasions he had felt a faint desire 
to respond in the same fashion. It was, 
to put it mildly, baffling. 

"It it's not a question of subtlety," 
Tokka suggested, "perhaps there is some 
difference in the metabolism of our two 
races, since our advertising fails to move 
you just as yours fails to reach us." 

This was so obviously silly on the face 
of it that Jeff didn't bother to even answer. And at the end of two days Mona 
Parker arrived on Acamar and he firmly 
puslied the problem from his mind. 

"Isn't it wonderful, darling?" she 
greeted him. "Our sponsor suddenly decided to send us here for a personal appearance tour. We'll be here all of two 
weeks. And now you can start showing 
me this quaint little society." 

"Simply wonderful," Jeff agreed. He'd 
decided, with a sudden flash of intuition, 
not to tell her his own part in the personal appearance tour. It might make 



102 STAKTLIN 

her start feeling; sorry for Guy dolla 
Moran as the victim of a trick. It was 
enough that Jeff was himself aware of 
having gotten the better of the vice 
president. 

The actual appearances didn't start 
until the following day, so Jeff, awarded 
himself a well-earned day off and took 
Mona around the city. At first, he was 
slightly annoyed at her obvious condescension about the Acamarans, but he 
was so delighted to be with her that he 
soon forgot it. 

That night they had dinner together, 
then danced until quite late. Afterward, 
at Mona's insistence, they went for a 
midnight swim in the canal in front of 
her hotel. Then she invited him to 
her rooms for a goodnight drink. This 
was the first time she'd ever done this 
and he wondered if it weren't the romantic result of the three moons which 
sailed lazily above Acamar II. 

COME three hours later, a deliriously 
k -' happy young visiscreen executive returned to his own hotel. The fact that 
this left him a bare two hours of sleep 
was unimportant and his auto-intoxication brought him briskly out of bed at 
the proper time. Even the brave new 
world had not basically changed the actions of young men who thought they 
were in love. 

His elation carried Jeff to the offices 
where in about two minutes it deserted 
him. The cause was the man who sat in 
a chair talking to Tokka. It was Guy 
dolla Moran. 

"Jeff, boy," the vice president cried. 
"How are you, sweetheart?" 

"Fine," Jeff said with false heartiness. 
He pulled himself up out of the shattered 
remains of what had been a victory and 
tried to be natural. "How are you, baby ? 
Long time no see." 

"Never felt greater," the vice president said. It was obviously the truth, Jeff 
thought ruefully. "Matt and I thought 
I'd better run up here and see that the 
personal appearance of the Gaieties gets 
the old personal touch. And while I'm 



; STORIES 

here, I thought I might as well check in 
early and go over the results of your little mission." 

"Oh," Jeff said, all too aware that 
there were no results. 

"Tokka here has been giving me a 
rundown on what you've been doing," 
the vice president went on. "Not good, 
baby, not good. I love you, Jeff, boy, but 
you're not using the old thinker." 

"You think I'm missing something?" 
Jeff asked. 

"It's a big problem, boy, and you've 
got to take a bigger look at it, I don't 
think you can even begin to think it out 
until you've been over the whole situation. I've just been telling Tokka I think 
the two of you ought to take a swing 
around the whole planet. Say about two 
weeks of finding out how they do out in 
the corn belt — if they have any corn." 

Jeff saw the idea at once. Mona Parker was scheduled to be in Azoi City for 
two weeks and then she'd return to 
Terra. Guy dolla Moran wanted him to 
wander around over the planet for two 
weeks. His face tightened. 

"Of course it's only a suggestion," the 
vice president said. "You think I'm 
wrong, lover? What say we call Matt 
and leave it up to him. He's the one who 
gets paid for thinking, so we might as 
well let him do it. What do you say, 
sweetheart ?" 

Jeff knew when he was licked. He 
knew that Anderson had already been 
sold on, the idea or dolla Moran would 
have never suggested calling him. "No," 
he said slowly, "you're right, Guy. Absolutely right. It's a wonderful suggestion. Tokka and I will start out in a 
day or two." 

The vice president was shaking his 
head, more in sorrow than in negation. 
"Not the SVS way, sweetheart," he said. 
"You know that. You know what Matt 
always says. 'If it's worth doing now, 
then it was worth doing yesterday.' 
Just before you came in, I had Tokka 
call and charter a cruiser for the two of 
you. We have to move fast, boy. Am I 
right?" 



LOVE T 

"You're right," Jeff said wearily. He 
tried not to see the grin on the vice 
president's face as he and Tokka left. 

Once before they took off, he tried to 
call Mona, only to get the message that 
she'd left to meet Mr. dolla Moran. Jeff 
glumly climbed into the cruiser and they 
left Azoi City. 

Things in what dolla Moran had called 
the corn belt were no different than in 
Azoi City. The Acamarans would look 
at Terran advertising in utter boredom 
and never go near a store. They would 
take one look at local advertising and 
bolt to spend their money. Even Tokka 
reacted exactly the same way as the 
other members of his race and no ad 
ever failed to send them all scuttling for 
the nearest vendor. It was maddening. 

By dint of constantly urging Tokka 
on from one place to another, they managed to cover the entire planet in thirteen days. It was the evening of the 
thirteenth day when they landed back 
in Azoi City. Jeff immediately called 
Mona, only to learn that she had already 
left with Mr. dolla Moran. His only hope 
had been that the vice president had 
gone back to Terra after getting rid of 
him and that he would still have a stolen 
twenty-four hours to spend with the 
star. With that hope col'apsed, he finally consented half-heartedly to go home 
with Tokka. 

There was a happy reunion between 
Tokka and the rest of the family, which 
only made Jeff feel worse. There was a 
quite good dinner, but he failed to taste 
a single bite of it. Afterward they all 
sat down to watch the visiscreen. 

There was a quite good dramatic show 
on, but Jeff only stared at it blankly. 
Then it was time for the commercial. 
The minute it started, he recognized it 
as the one for an Acamaran drink called 
Aqui-cola. He'd checked the particular 
ad any number of times — and had even 
tried the drink, which he thought horrible — so Jeff displayed little interest. He 
was vaguely aware that the family suddenly seemed restless, then a moment 
later he found himself in the grip of an 
uncontrollable yearning for Aqui-cola. 



AT AIR! 103 

He leaped to his feet and joined the 
others in a rush for the kitchen. 

The case of Aqui-cola in the refrigerator lasted only a few minutes while 
they all guzzled happily. Jeff himself 
consumed three bottles before his 
strange thirst abated. 

"Lucky you put in a supply today," 
Tokka said to Ghamik. "We'll have to 
pick up some more tomorrow. Something must have happened." There was 
now a puzzled frown on Tokka's face as 
they went back into the living room. 

V 

I^HE commercial . had been replaced 
by an Acamaran announcer who wore 
an apologetic expression. 

"My dear friends," he was saying, "I 
wish to extend the apologies of Aquicola, the independent stations of Acamar, and myself for the commercial 
which was just visicast. Due to Circumstances beyond our control, the advertising was entirely too strong. Until 
we can locate the trouble, we are signing off." 

"So that was it," Ghamik said, getting 
up and turning off the set. 

Jeff was staring at the visiscreen with 
a puzzled air. Finally he turned to Tokka. "I don't understand," he said. "As 
near as I can remember that advertising copy was exactly the way it was 
when we checked it. I don't see where 
there was a single word changed." 

"Words?" said Tokka, looking as puzzled as Jeff. "Of course, they were not 
changed. The only change was in the 
essence of the advertising." 

"But how can you change the essence 
without changing the words?" Jeff 
wanted to know. "And why did such a 
small change suddenly affect me? I've 
never had such a reaction in my life. I , 
felt almost hypnotized." 

"That's right, you did get it this 
time," Tokka cried. "Perhaps my original theory was correct, but in reverse. 
Perhaps because we are a primitive people we are the ones using the more subtle advertising. Of course, that's it. I 



104 STARTLD 

had completely forgotten that the more 
primitive the race, the more acute the 
sense — " The Acamaran broke off and 
looked bewildered. "But that can't be 
right either. If it were, we would be 
more susceptible to your advertising, not 
less." 

"You left me back among the asteroids," Jeff said. "What the devil are you 
talking about?" 

"The advertising, Jeff. If ours was 
more subtle than yours, then yours 
would overpow 7 er us. If yours was more 
subtle than ours, then ours would overpower you. But neither works that way. 
Can it be — but no, that is utterly impossible. You do use perfume and — " 

"Perfume?" interrupted Jeff. "What 
does perfume have to do with it?" 

"But everything," said Tokka. "You 
must know that. You do use some perfume we can sense, so it must be a matter — ", 

Jeff interrupted again. "Are you trying to tell me that you use some kind of 
perfume to overcome sales resistance?" 

"Of course: Everyone does — don't 
they?" 

"And it comes out of that set?" Jeff 
asked, gesturing toward the visiscreen. 
"Naturally — ■" 

"And you have one perfume that will 
make everyone rush out for an Aquicola, another that will make everyone 
want a new suit, a third to create the 
desire for a new helicar — a different 
scent for every product you manufacture?" 

"Yes, yes," Tokka said. "But surely 
you do, too. Doesn't everyone? Is there 
any other way?" 

Jeff leaned back and counted slowly 
up to ten. Then he opened his eyes and 
looked at Tokka. "If you have such 
scents, why do you bother with advertising copy at all? Why not just spray 
out the scent and forget about commercials ?" 

"We used to do it that way," Tokka 
said, "before we came in contact with 
you Terrans. But we were anxious to 
leam, and your commercials seemed 



i STORIES 

such an entertaining custom, so we 
adopted them and used the seent at the 
same time. Do you mean that you have 
never used such scents?" 

"I'll tell you all about the history of 
advertising later," Jeff said. "Right 
now we have a date." He grabbed the 
startled Tokka by the hand and dashed 
from the house, almost falling into the 
canal in his haste. 

TT TOOK a dozen calls before Jeff 
A found that Guy dolla Moran and 
Mona Parker were having dinner in 
something called The Blue Dam. A 
hastily summoned helicab took them to 
the restaurant. A headwaiter pointed 
out the table and Jeff marched down 
upon it, with the excited Tokka in tow. 

"Well, Guy, old sw T eetheart," Jeff said 
as he reached the table, "your troubles 
are all over. Hello, Mona." 

Instead of the smile he'd expected, 
the visiscreen star glared up at him. 
"Jeffry Reynolds," she said, "don't ever 
speak to me again." She got up and 
swept away in the general direction of 
the rest rooms. 

"Now what's the matter with her?" 
Jeff said. 

"You know how it is, baby," Guy dolla 
Moran said. "Women are sensitive about 
some things. You shouldn't have been 
so open about your little pleasures." 

''Little pleasures?" Jeff said. "What 
little pleasures?" 

"Taking a little jaunt around Acamar 
with an alien female," the vice president 
said. "Not only an alien female, but one 
who is married. Not the thing to do, 
Jeff, boy." 

"Female," repeated Jeff, looking from 
dolla Moran to Tokka. "Do you mean 
he — I mean she — I mean — oh, hell." 

"Exactly, sweetheart. Of course, Tokka is a female — and up until now I 
thought a happily married one." 

Jeff stared dumbly at Tokka. 

"I am a female," Tokka said. "But 
what he is suggesting is utterly alien 
to our culture. It is impossible, in addition to being untrue, as you know." 



LOVE THAT AIR! 



"But — " said Jeff, gesturing toward 
the h?ndsome tweed suit Tokka wore. 

"Oh, the suit," Tokka said. "We were 
quite taken with Terran clothes when 
we first saw them and quiek'y adopted 
them. It wasn't until very recently that 
we discovered males and females on 
Terra dressed somewhat differently. By 
that time individuals on Acamar had 
become accustomed to whichever type 
of dress their fancy had first hit upon, 
so no one bothered trying to conform to 
a rule which seemed to have very little 
sense. You see, Jeff, on Acamar, except 
for mating there is no importance placed 
on the sex of the individual. So I'm 
afraid it never occurred to me to mention it to you. I'm sorry." 

"I'm afraid." dolla Moran said 
smoothly, "that Mona will not be inclined to accept that story. I do, of 
course, but Mona tends to be more oldfashioned in her concept of morality." 

"I'll straighten that out later." Jeff 
said impatiently. "In the meantime — " 

"In the meantime." the vice president 
interrupted, "not only have you fallen 
down on the job. hut you've been leading what many Terrans might consider 
an immoral life. You both must be aware 
of the morality clause in your contracts. 
I was going to leave a memorandum in 
the morning, but since you're here you 
might as well know vou are both through 
at SVS." 

"But vou can't fire us," exclaimed Jeff. 
"I've got—" 

"Of course, you have an explanation," 
dolla Moran said. "I understand about 
those things, sweetheart. I've traveled 
around to the planets and I've had my 
fun — more quietly, it's true. But unfortunately I am not a major stockholder in 
the Solar Visicasting System and T'm 
afraid the others are less broadminded. 
Now, I do wish you'd leave so that Mona 
will feel that she can return to our 
table." 

For a moment, Jeff stood and glared 
at his late superior. Then he turned 
and strode from the room. Tokka followed. 



VI 



i30 STUNNED was he by the sudden 
developments, it was several days before Jeff Reynolds really began thinking about what had happened. 

In the meantime, he had taken a job, 
along with Tokka, at one of the independent visicasting stations. Within a 
couple of weeks, he had a good understanding of the Acamaran methods. 

One night there was a conference 
betwen Jeff. Tokka, Ghamik, and a 
number of leading Acamarans. After 
it was over, Jeff was ready to return 
to Terra. 

Since he no longer had the great network back of him, it was not a simple 
matter to return. But after a delay of 
a week, with the aid of a friend or two 
on Terra, he managed to have one of 
the space liners stop by and pick him up. 

His first day back in Nuyork was a 
busy one. He first went to the local 
offices of the Galactic Federation, then 
set out to make a number of appointments by visiphone. At eleven o'clock, 
he showed up for the first one, at the 
office of Homer Van Fleet. This time he 
was kept waiting slightly longer than 
the time he'd called before, but he was 
soon shown in to the large private office. 
But instead of the blunt-featured old 
financier, he was facing a quite attractive young woman. 

"I beg your pardon." he said. "There 
must be some mistake. I had an appointment with Mister Van Fleet." 

"No mistake. Mister Reynolds," she 
said with a smile. "I am Leesa Van 
Fleet. Father is home sick today, but 
he said that I should see you. I checked 
with him when you called this morning." 

"Well, that's nice," Jeff said. "That 
is, I don't mean that it's nice that he's 
ill — well, you know what I mean." 

She smiled and waited. 

"1 have two things to discuss with 
you," Jeff said. "I'll take up the least 
important first. I believe your company 
still has the practice of paying a five 
per cent commission on anyone who sug


106 STAKTLIK 

gests a new product and a new market." 
She nodded. 

"Fine. Incidentally, I also have a free 
suggestion. For the Acamaran market, 
which will very soon open, design a new 
chair with a built-in tail rest. Now, 
then, I expect you normally have a considerable waste of wood in building 
chairs?" 

"Yes," she said. 

"My suggestion is that this wood be 
pulped, then pressed into bars, small 
canes, and such, with a small amount of 
flavor added and sold on Acamar." 

"Flavored wood. Mister Reynolds ?" 

"Flavored wood," he said. "You see, 
Acamarans are evolved from beavers. 
As a result of civilization, they no longer 
gnaw on wood and they have a lot of 
tooth trouble. So the idea is a sort of 
wood candy, on which they can gnaw, 
obtaining a flavor and preserving their 
teeth. I wouldn't be surprised that it 
might be a bigger business than chairs. 
And I have an excellent advertising program worked out for it. Which brings 
me to my second point — it's rather 
lengthy and I wonder if we might not 
discuss it over lunch ?" 

"I think that would be very nice," she 
said. 

After a more than pleasant luncheon, 
Jeff Reynolds hurried off to keen his 
other appointments. It was a full -afternoon and it was shortly after four 
o'clock when he arrived at the SVS 
building. He went immediately to the 
top floor. After exchanging a few words 
with the president's secretary, he 
stepped on the conveyor path and- was 
whisked through the small forest. 

In addition to Matthew Anderson and 
Guy dolla Moran, there were four other 
men sitting there in the private office. 
With the exception of one man, they all 
seemed to be rather disgruntled. 

"Sorry I'm a few minutes late, gentlemen," Jeff Reynolds said as he stepped 
off the conveyor. "Pressure of business, 
you know." 

"What's the meaning of this Reynolds?" Anderson demanded severely. 



; STORIES 

He indicated the one man who did not 
seem annoyed. "Jones here demanded 
that we all get together to hear you. I 
tried to point out that you are no longer 
connected with SVS, but he still insisted on it and would offer no explanation. Naturally, since he is the largest 
stockholder. . . ." 

"Naturally," Jeff said. He looked over 
the assembled men. "I believe you gentlemen together hold all of the shares 
in the Solar Visicasting System. Ranging from Mister dolla Moran who owns 
two shares to Mister Jones who owns 
two hundred thousand." 

"We own all the shares," Jones said. 

"Fine," Jeff said cheerfully. "I have 
a proposition to put to you, but first I 
have another small matter to bring up. 
I have been seeing a number of important Terran industrialists today, including the owner of the Jet Rocket Tobacco 
Company. Do any of you gentlemen 
happen to smoke Jet cigarettes?" 

From the shaking heads, it was evident that none of them did. 

"As you know." Jeff continued, "Jet 
cigarettes do their advertising on a rival 
network. That is perhaps the reason no 
one here smokes them. We might, however, nut them in the category of potential clients of SVS. I have just given six 
packages of Jet cigarettes to Mr. Anderson's secretary. 1 suggest that we have 
them brought in and all of you try them. 
Remember that Jet cigarettes are longer, that the harmful ingredients found 
in other cigarettes have been removed. 
Light a Jet and be space happy." 

rpHE six men looked at him as if they 
•*■ had suddenly been offered proof that 
he was insane. 

"If you ask Mr. Anderson's secretary 
for the cigarettes now, or within the 
next thirty seconds, she will give them 
to you. If you want them after the time 
period is up, they will cost you fifty 
credits per package." 

"What sort of nonsense is this?" demanded one of the stockholders. "Giving 
us a lot of advertising fiddle-faddle and 



LOVE T 

saying you'll sell us ordinary thirtyunit cigarettes for fifty credits." 

"I believe," drawled Guy dolla Moran, 
"that the colloquial expression is that 
he's blown his space plates." 

"Just a minute." It was the man 
named Jones. "As the majority stockholder, I insisted that the rest of you 
be here. I did so because this young man 
phoned me and said that he had proof 
that our stock could be worthless tomorrow. At his suggestion, 1 checked with 
Charlie Lane at Planetary Association 
of Manufacturers. Charlie assured me 
that he knew what he was talking about. 
I don't know why he's talking about Jet 
cigarettes either, but I suggest that we 
hear him out." 

"Thank you, Mister Jones," Jeff said. 
"My proposition, gentlemen, is this. The 
six of you own all the stock of the Solar 
Visicasting System. I am suggesting 
that each pf you sell me one-half of your 
stock and that one of you sell me an 
additional share. This, you will say, will 
give me control of SVS, and you will be 
quite right. But it will also save the 
company and make your remaining 
shares more valuable than they have 
ever been. Incidentally, I expect to pay 
each one of you exactly one credit for 
the half he turns over to me." 

There was an excited babble of voices 
from the angry men. 

"This farce has gone far enough," 
said Matthew Anderson. "I suggest that 
we call in the Galactic police." 

"Sales resistance, eh?" Jeff said cheerfully. He pul'ed a small atomizer from 
his pocket and pressed the trigger. There 
was a soft hissing sound, although no 
spray was visible. 

"What the — " began Anderson, only 
to break off. Startled expressions appeared simultaneously on the faces of 
the six men. Two of them started searching through their pockets. 

"Light a Jet and be space happy," one 
of them repeated. 

"Your secretary," said another to Anderson. "I think he said she had some." 

As one man, the six of them rose and 



AT AIR! 107 

ran across the office. Jeff Reynolds 
pulled a Jet cigarette from his pocket 
and puffed happily on it. 

A few minutes later, the six men reappeared, walking back through the 
artificial forest. Each of them puffed on 
a cigarette. Beyond them, Matthew Anderson's secretary stood in the doorway, 
a puzzled frown on her face and her 
hands full of money. 

"A great smoke," Anderson said as 
they came up. "I don't know how I happened to overlook them before." 

"Light a Jet and be space happy," 
Guy dolla Moran said joyfully. 

VII 

Jeff Reynolds waited, smoking 

his own cigarette. After a moment 
bewildered frowns appeared on their 
faces. Six pairs of eyes swiveled toward 
Jeff. 

"How did you do that?" demanded' 
Jones. 

"With this," Jeff said, holding up the 
atomizer. "Total cost of the experiment 
— less than one credit." 

"You mean you sprayed something in 
the air that made us have to buy Jet 
cigarettes ?" 

Jeff nodded. "I could as easily have 
made you have an irresistible desire to 
sell me your stock, but I thought you 
might appreciate a more normal commercial application." 

"It can apply to other products?" Anderson asked. 

Jeff nodded again. "This," he said, 
"is the secret of why our advertising 
failed so miserably in competition with 
Acamaran advertising. The Acamarans 
have been using these scents for years. 
They took up our commercials because 
they thought them entertaining, but this 
is the sales force. There are as many 
different scents as there can ever be 
products. With this formula, gentlemen, 
the people can be rn^de to buy anything." 

"Or do anything?" asked one stockholder. He was a well-known Federa


JOS 



STARTLING STORIES 



tion politician and very prosperous. 

"Yes," said Jeff. "The things done, 
however, would have to be limited by 
ethical considerations." 

"Of course, of course," the politician 
said hastily. 

Jeff was all too familiar with the expression he saw on the faces in front of 
him. "I might add," he said, "that the 
secret process for this formula is duly 
patented under the monopoly laws of 
the Federation. It is owned by the newly-owned corporation of Tokka, Ghamik, 
Tishtiri, Azrak, Khamis and Reynolds. 
I am, by the way, the majority stockholder." 

This brought them rudely back to 
reality and they stared at him with 
speculation. 

"There are two ways the new advertising medium can be used," Jeff said. 
"Certain changes could be made in our 
visicasting system, making it necessary 
for everyone to buy new visiscreen sets. 
The new ones would have a built-in attachment which enables the scent to be 
sprayed into the room. We could still 
go on using advertising copy, although 
the actual selling will be done by the 
secret process. As you may have noticed, it has no noticeable odor. It can 
be mixed in proportion to affect any 
form of life in the Federation. On Acamar, for example, their senses are more 
acute than ours so that the mixture that 
worked for them had no effect on "us. 
On the other hand, the process can be 
introduced directly into the air by a 
company representing advertisers. Some 
such method as low-flying heli-cars dusting cities. I imagine we could get the 
Federation to allocate time channels so 
there would be no confusion." 

There was a long silence. "In connection with your first method," one of 
the men said ironically, "I suppose 
you've also arranged to cut yourself in 
for a slice of the visiscreen set manufacturing business?" 

"Of course," Jeff said. "By the way, 
the process can also be used in connection with the dramatic end of visicast


ing. For example, in crime shows, we 
might use a mixed formula which would 
set up a hatred for law-breakers and a 
love of our police force. Or in a comedy, 
we can hypo the script by a formula 
which, will make everyone think it is 
very funny." 

"Then there are the love stories . . ." 
one of the men said dreamily. 

"Gentlemen," Jones interrupted, "all 
of this makes interesting speculation, 
but I suggest that we face the fact that 
young Reynolds has us over a jetengined barrel. I suggest that we sell 
him one-half of our combined shares, at 
the stipulated price. I will provide the 
extra share he demands." 

There was some grumbling, but they 
all finally agreed. The transfer of stock 
was soon accomplished and Jeff gravely 
paid out six credits. 

"I suppose," Matthew Anderson said, 
"that you will want my resignation 
now." 

"Why, I love you. Matt, boy," Jeff 
said. "I wouldn't think of firing you — 
as long as you keep on the ball. At the 
present, T have only one administrative 
change to suggest." His glance passed 
over Guy dolla Moran like a breath of 
winter. 

"Anything you suggest," Anderson 
said eagerly. 

"We must have in the neighborhood 
of a million offices throughout the galaxy," Jeff said. "In growing to such 
size, it is inevitable that some departments lag behind others in the progress. 
I imagine that a deplorable situation 
which I noticed on Acamar exists everywhere. I suggest that the creative end 
of SVS is more than adequately manned, 
but that we need comparable talent in a 
department which is often neglected. We 
have a man who is ideally suited for 
what I have in mind. I suggest that our 
Mr. Guy dolla Moran be made the executive vice president in charge of all SVS 
restrooms." 

"Excellent." Anderson said briskly. 

The new executive vice president muttered something, but it was inaudible. 



LOVE T 

"I love you, Guy, boy," Jeff said as 
he left the office. 

News travels fast in the big networks. 
Jeff Reynolds stopped off briefly in his 
old office and then went downstairs. 
Mona Parker was waiting in the lobby, 
looking more beautiful than ever. When 
she caught sight of him, she ran forward 
and threw her arms around his neck. 

"Oh, Jeff," she exclaimed. "I've just 
heard the news. You're wonderful. Are 
you taking me to dinner tonight?" 

Jeff Reynolds carefully disengaged 
the arms from around his neck. "I'm 
afraid not," he said. "I'm sure it would 
be pleasant, but I must think of my 
career. I doubt if it would do me any 
good to be seen with a mere actress. 



\T AIR! 109 

And I'm sure my fiancee would not approve." 

"Your fiancee?" 

"Yes. Leesa Van Fleet. We became 
engaged at noon today. A charming 
girl." He took a second atomizer from 
his pocket and sprayed gently before 
walking on. 

Miss Mona Parker, glamorous star of 
the Galaxy Gaieties, turned and rushed 
off in a different direction. Later, the 
visinews reporters were to describe her 
mad dash all over Nuyork and have a 
prominent analyst offer a technical, 
and entirely wrong, explanation of why 
she had been seized with an uncontrollable desire for sour grapes when 
the nearest ones were on Vega IV. 




// you enjoyed this story you'll like 

THE CAPHIAN CAPER 

By 

KENDELL FOSTER CROSSEN 



Manning Draco and his arch-foe Dzanku play a life-and-death 
game of words— on a planet where Time misbehaves! 



Featured in the December Issue of 

THRILLING WONDER STORIES 

On Sale at All Stands — 25c Per Copy! 



THE CHILDREN 



a novelet by 



MIRIAM ALLEN de FORD 



McElioy would never have started that time travel business if 
he'd known the future would reach out and sock him in the ]awl 



I 



I THINK," said Dr. Schultz brusquely, 
"that this is a preposterous and essentially unscientific project. There is 
nothing new about the experiment itself ; it was first announced nearly twenty years ago, in 1952, before the British 
Association. We have been using it ever 
since, and we know the effect remains 
good for periods up to five years. Longer 
— even immensely long — periods are 
merely supererogatory. 

"As for the other aspect of McElroy's 
proposal, involving the possible future 
discovery of means of time-travel, that 
seems to me the wildest of unscientific 
speculations. I don't know how the rest 
of you feel, but so far as I am concerned. 
I do not favor lending the resources of 



the International Association for the Advancement of Science to this harebrained 
proposition." 

Kemet Ali cleared his throat. As chairman of the IAAS, his chief asset w as his 
unfailing tact. But before he could begin, James McElroy, his earnest eyes 
peering through his spectacles, spoke up. 

"May I say just a word?" he asked. He 
was too thin, and gray hairs showed already among the brown. His voice still 
had the deadened quality it had displayed ever since his personal catastrophe six months before. But there could 
be no doubt of the continuing keenness 
of mind of this brilliant young geneticist 
who had actually become one of the most 
valued workers on the IAAS staff soon 



after he had achieved his Ph.D and Sc.D. 
simultaneously at the incredibly early 
age of twenty-two. 

"I am quite aware," he said, "that 
there is every chance the experiment I 
propose will be an utter failure. Careful 
as we should be, in the light of previous 
experience, never to prophesy what scientific discoveries may or may not be 
made in the future, I agree that practicable time-travel may well be a chimera 
mankind will never bring into actuality. 



"But I can't see that it will do any 
harm to take so simple a chance — and if 
it should succeed, we shall have proved 
at least one point of immense value, 
which is that for all time to come humanity as a species can insure its practical 
immortality, at least as long as the earth 
itself is livable. 

"I want very little of you — only permission to place my tape-recording in 
our innermost vaults, and the use of a 
very small space in our concession in 



Antarctica. I shall be interfering with 
nothing and nobody, in the little room I 
shall take up. And if — I say if — a month 
from now even one of the persons at 
whom my message is aimed should be 
able to visit this place and time, the result would in some ways be the most astounding revelation of all scientific history." 

"Would you expect these — -these visitors to give us detailed information about 
their own eras?" asked Dr. Duseldina 
Moro. 

"That I doubt very much ; I think in 
the first place they would be unable to do 
so, lest the actual course of history be 
interfered with ; and in the second place 
I doubt if we should be equipped to understand if they did try to tell us. 

"But if I, standing here a month from 
today, can secure actual living evidence 
that those phials buried in Antarctica 
can still be used a hundred, a thousand, 
who knows how many thousands of 
years in the future — that, while civilization continues, depleted human stock 
can always be renewed and regenerated — " 

"Exactly," interrupted Schultz rudely. 
"And what makes you think, Dr. McElroy, that you should be chosen as the perfect human specimen? Why not conduct 
first a scrupulous inquiry and select the 
young man, anywhere on earth, whom 
we all judge to be, mentally and physically, the fittest subject — or several such 
men, for that matter?" 

¥TE STOPPED short, sensing the em" barrassed hush around the conference table. McElroy stammered : "I wank 
ed to spare expense and labor. Dr. 
Schultz. And I don't consider myself 'the 
perfect human specimen' or anything 
near it. I only felt that for this first experiment it would be better to use someone in our own organization. As a geneticist T know I carry no serious recessive 
defects. And — and I felt — " 

Kemet Ali scribbled a hasty note and 
passed it down to Schultz. The biochemist read it and reddened uncomfortably. 



G STORIES 

It said, in the chairman's easy American 
idiom, "Give the poor guy a break." 

"Very well." Schultz conceded abruptly. "I withdraw my opposition. Perhaps 
you are right. We can use other subjects 
later, if this first experiment succeeds. 
As I don't expect it to!" he bristled. 

His colleagues averted their faces. 
They had all been remembering, as 
Kemet Ali had reminded Schultz, how 
near they had come to losing McElroy altogether. For a while the psychologists 
had feared he would never recover fully 
from the shock of that dreadful day 
when his adored young wife and their infant son had burned to death before his 
eyes. 

Dr. Norah Wong came to the rescue of 
the difficult moment. 

"I notice." she said in her singsong 
voice, "that there is a slight error in your 
prospectus Dr. McElroy. You name the 
25th of next month for the possible visit 
of the — er — the time-travelers — if any. 
It is the next day we meet, the 26th." 

Young James McElroy flushed. 

"I know," he mumbled. "I just wanted 
— if you don't mind — I shall of course 
make a full recording by tridimens-telescreen. It will be the same as if you were 
all here. I shall present it the next day 
at the April meeting." 

You mean," Nigel Wycliffe put in helpfully in his nrecise accent, "sinc^ you 
yourself are the — the subject, you would 
prefer that this first — hypothetical 
meeting he made in private?" 

"Exactly," McElroy siad gratefully. 
"After all. if any of — of the results do 
arrive, and if they should be odd, or — or 
unsatisfactory — " 

"Of course," Dr. Moro seconded him. 
"Of course Dr. McElroy does not want 
twenty onlookers at this meeting. We all 
undo stand." 

"You have the recording ready?" 
asked the chairman. 

"All ready, just as I read it to you yesterday. And I have the vials ready too, 
in glycerol deep freeze. As soon as I have 
your permission, I can fly to Antarctica, 
bury them, and mark the spot as I have 



THE CHILDREN 



113 



indicated in my instructions." 
"How many V 
"I thought three." 

"I should make it five," said Kemet Ali. 
"After all, there is always the possibility 
of one of them being lost or spoiled. And 
you don't know how many times one may 
be used and the results merely added to 
the record, before the point may be 
reached when time-travel is in effect." 

"If it ever is!" Schultz exploded. 

"If it ever is," the chairman responded 
blandly. "I take it, ladies and gentlemen, 
there is no further objection to giving 
Dr. McElroy unanimous consent ? Thank 
you. On April 26th, then, we shall hear 
his report." 

"We shall hear that nothing happened!" grumbled the irrepressible 
Schultz. 



II 



*N 2150. it was decided that the IAAS 
headquarters had become obsolete and 
inadequate. . The buildings were all torn 
down and the site cleared for an entirely 
new construction. In the course of demolition, the innermost vaults were uncovered. A committee of the Association 
opened the vaults and went over the contents. One thing they found was a twentieth century tape-recording apparatus, 
marked : "To be opened by any competent 
scientist." They opened and reproduced 
it, with mingled feelings of interest and 
amusement. 

"This James McElroy — I've seen his 
name in footnotes now and again — certainly believed in long-range projects," 
one of them remarked. "I wonder if anything happened on April 25, 1970? I 
don't suppose they put it in the records, 
for fear of influencing future developments." 

"What shall we do with this thing?" 
inquired one of his colleagues. "Just put 
it back in the new vaults, to wait for our 
forthcoming buildings to fall to ruins in 
the course of time?" 

"No. I think first we ought to follow 



instructions, as a duty to the progress 
of science." 

"But we haven't achieved time-travel, 
or any prospect of it." 

"True, but we can do as McElroy said 
— locate one of his phials buried in the 
Antarctic— at 72° 20' S., 155° 15' E., 
near the South Magnetic Pole, and see if 
the contents are still viable. Leave the 
rest of them in situ. If the thing works, 
then we add the information, at the proper time, to McElroy's recording, with 
data of name, place, and so on for possible future discoverers, and redeposit the 
recorder in our new vaults. We shall 
have to get official authority, of course." 

"Suppose nothing happens?" 

"Then even so, I think we should say 
so — though I agree that in that case 
there would be little likelihood of any 
success later on. Too bad we'll never 
know the end of the story." 

The experiment succeeded, and the 
record was duly made. 

In 2900, during the Second Dark Age 
following the Last Plague and the Terminal Atomic War, the IAAS buildings 
erected in 2150 lay a mass of ruins on the 
shores of the Pacific Ocean. The blasted 
earth around them had long lost its 
radioactivity, but the huge tumbled confusion of steel and stone was a forbidding 
and a forbidden place to the roving bands 
of illiterate and superstitious hunters 
who were the only human beings left 
alive in what had been a metropolitan 
area. When the leader of one of these 
groups sighted, in his tribe's wanderings, what had become known as the 
Devil's Castle, he hastily ordered his followers to turn in another direction. 
There was nothing to hunt, anyway, for 
miles around the desolate place, unless 
one wanted to eat lizards and scorpions. 

But rumors and hearsay and legends 
grew up and seeped into the ears of children listening to stories by the carhpfire. 
Because the Devil's Castle was terrible, 
soon it began to take on a fearful fascination as well. Curiosity and venturesomeness do not die out of the human 



114 STARTLING 

race Decause knowledge is under a cloud. 
Boys and girls dreamed and egged one 
another on to boasts and dares; young 
people, restless and bored, planned halfmeant expeditions and forays. Perhaps, 
they told one another, somewhere in that 
ruined landmark lay hoards of jewels 
and strange metals, such as had been uncovered sometimes in the forsaken 
cities, to reward a bold invader. But time 
would go on, and the hunting would be 
bad and need all their energy, and the 
young people would grow up and seek 
mates, and the children would come, and 
then there was no leisure or taste at all 
for adventures into the unknown. 

A YOUNG man named Bom was the 
£*- one who did finally dare to search the 
ruins — all alone, in a world where the 
only safety and comfort came from close 
huddling in one's own native group. • He 
was a strange young man, unpopular 
with other youths or with the girls, given to daydreaming by himself when he 
should be out hunting for the tribe, inarticulate and dissatisfied — a young man 
who, a thousand years before or a thousand years after, would have been a pioneer, a searcher, a discoverer. When 
from afar, on one of his clan's endless 
journeyings for food, he glimpsed the 
Devil's Castle for the first time since 
early childhood, the urge was too strong 
for him to resist. He was terribly frightened, not least from the difficulties of escaping from the band. At night when all 
the others slept, and by the perilous possibility that after his adventure he 
might never be able to find them again. 
That was a much more real and dreadful 
danger than the stories he nevertheless 
half-believed, of malevolent demons 
guarding the hidden treasures. 

He escaped unseen and unheard, and 
dawn found him before the tangled pile 
of broken ruins. No demons worse than 
cold and fog and wind assailed him. If 
the clan had missed him by now. they 
would never follow him here or guess 
' that he had come here: doubtless they 
thought he h-rt strayed too far from the 



STORIES 

sheltering fire and a cougar or bear had 
caught him — these predators were becoming bolder and venturing nearer to 
human camps as the hunters killed off 
more and more of their prey. 

Valiantly Bom set to work to explore 
the Devil's Castle. His plan had been to 
leave when trie sun was halfway across 
the sky toward the west, so as to catch 
up with, his tribe before night if possible. 
He burrowed through tunnels and under 
heavy stones that balanced menacingly 
above his head ; he scrabbled in the earth 
and search roofless rooms crowded with 
strange broken objects whose use he 
could not even imagine. But nowhere 
were there jewels or any other treasure 
he could use — only twisted pieces of 
metal not fit to be fashioned into weapons, or shards of glass and hunks of plastic material unusable as ornaments or 
tools. In his explorations he came upon a 
huge underground wall of stone and cement, in the middle of which was a series of heavy metal dials. Bom guessed 
that this was a sort of door, such as he 
had seen in houses in the deserted cities. 
The cement had cracked, and it was possible to tear out pieces of it large enough 
to allow him to enter what had been the 
inner vaults of the IAAS. 

It was a complete disappointment. 
There was nothing inside but shelves 
upon shelves of what he did not know 
was microfilm, and a little metal box with 
characters etched on it he could not read, 
and containing only some unguessable 
object. He dropped it back where he had 
found it. 

He had delayed too long in leaving. 
The sun was setting when he found his 
way to the open air again, his hands 
empty after all his search. The hungry 
coyotes had begun to gather. He fought 
hard, but they were too many, and there 
were no tribesmen near to hear his 
screams and hurry to his rescue. 

Ill 

Mn THE summer of 4016 an archaeological expedition under the snonsorshin 



THE CHILDREN 



of the University of Teheran began excavation in the buried ruins of the IAAS 
buildings. Very quickly they became 
aware that their speculations, based on 
philological study of the few remaining 
ancient microfilm records, were justified, 
and. that this was the remains of some 
sort of center of. twentieth century science. The whole civilized world followed 
their progress by telaudioview. News 
commentators in the international 
tongue assured fascinated watchers and 
listeners in Greenland and China, in Argentina and Africa — for these local 
names were still used to indicate natural 
divisions of the World Territory — that 
this was the greatest archaeological discovery of the age. When at last the innermost vault was uncovered and 
opened, with its priceless store of microfilm — and an unexplained human skeleton lying well preserved not far away — 
the commentators chattered like magpies. 

But suddenly their descriptions 
stopped abruptly, and they turned to 
other aspects of the expedition. 

WHEN llarduk Bal, the director-in" chief, came upon the tape-recording 
in its rustless alloy case, he sent for the 
head philologist to decipher the inscription. Then the recording was fitted to its 
primitive transmitter — it was totally unadaptable to a modern reproducer — and 
llarduk Bal had it translated by an expert in twentieth century English. 

As soon as he had heard the translation, he got in teletouch with the Executive Council of World Government. The 
newly elected World President himself 
called Harduk Bal back after the Council's consultation. 

"All right, go ahead." he told the archaeologist. "It's worth trying, long as 
it has been even since that additional 
record in 2151. But we'd better not make 
it public till we see if it works. We don't 
want to have your expedition made a 
laughing-stock if the experiment should 
be a failure, as it probably will be. Tell 
your publicity director to cut off further 



news till we've tried the thing out." 

"But the time-travel part, sir," Harduk Bal objected. "1 know the mathematicians keep reporting they have made 
progress — they've been saying that for 
fifty years at least — but actually we have 
no more time-travel now than they had 
in 2150— or in 1970." 

"Listen, Harduk Bal." The president 
touched the button which made the conversation secret. "This is for your ears 
alone; we heard it only last week and 
the Council is not ready yet tojnake it 
public. I think I can say confidently that 
by the time it would be needed— about 
twenty-six years from now— time-travel 
will be a demonstrated thing." 

"Wonderful! Really, at last!" 

"We hope so. We're almost sure. But 
even if we're wrong, and this new method is another failure, we could still do 
the rest of the experiment, and add our 
statement to the one made in 2150. There 
ought to be four vials left, and surely before the last one is used up, time-travel 
will be a commonplace mode of transportation, and future generations, if not 
we ourselves, can take advantage of it — 
that is, if the stuff is still any good." 

"Right, sir. I'll see that the whole 
thing is kept quiet until the Council's 
ready to release it. And you, I take it, 
will send somebody to that location in 
the Antarctic." 

"Immediately. Do^you know, Harduk 
Bal, 'I envy the young man or woman, 
twenty-six years from now, who is going 
to make that journey back to 1970!" 

"I do too. But I'm afraid nobody alive 
today is qualified !" chuckled the archaeologist. "By the way," he added, "what 
do I do now with the original tape-recording?" 

"You'd better send it to me. I'll have 
it redeposited in the vaults of World Government headquarters in London. It 
aoesn't matter where it is, so long as if s 
left for future excavators, a thousand or 
so years from now, of the site you're exsite. And I imagine there won't be much 
•'n a place that, some far-off day, will ro" 
stitute an archaeological investigation 



H6 STARTUN 

cavating, by the time you get through 
with it. 

"It's a sobering thought, isn't it ? Our 
most elaborate constructions some day 
will be ruins, just as that scientific center of yours is now." 

"But according to this thing," answered Harduk Bal cheerfully, "our past 
will still be our future, even then, and 
good old mankind will still keep moving 
onward and upward ! And perhaps they 
already knew that for sure, away back 
in 19701" 

In 5891, or 91 GM, Kel 87459X2ZA of 
the third generation after the Great Migration was a candidate for his doctorate 
in Terraarchaeology at Skyros Institute 
of Science. As a subject for his thesis, he 
proposed — as did every other budding 
Terraarchaeologist — a specimen excavation on the Parent Planet. 

"I don't know. Kel," his department 
head frowned. "It's too bad that a student as promising as you are didn't get 
interested in a field with more possibiliites — one that hasn't been worked over 
until nearly all the good sites have been 
excavated long ago, in the nostalgic rush 
back to Earth after we'd left it permanently. There's still an immense amount 
of work to be done on the ancient Martian remains, or on those puzzling buried 
structures on Planet 3 in Alpha Centauri. 
But there's not muf h worth while left in 
the old home except in the dried-up ocean 
beds, and they're more rewarding to a 
palaeontologist than to an archaeologist." 

"There's one site," said Kel daringly. 
"The last World Government Center." 

The professor shook his hairless head. 

"Now, my boy, you know that's totally impossible. Didnt you learn in elementary school that it was a strict injunction of the Migration Charter that 
the London Center should be left inviolate, as a symbol of the planetary origin 
of man ?" 

"Of course I learned it — and I'm not 
the only one who thinks it's an idiotic superstition unworthy of civilized beings. 



1 STORIES 

It's worse — there may be important historical material there that we need and 
ought to have. 

"What do you suppose has become of 
those buildings after nearly a hundred 
years of neglect? They're probably a 
heap of weathered rubble by now. A fine 
symbol!" 

"They're not overgrown with vegetation, anyhow," said the professor grimly, "considering that the reason we had 
to abandon Earth in the first place was 
the drying up of the surface water and 
the consequent death of all vegetation, 
after the collapse of the moon. No, perhaps a thousand years from now, when 
nobody is alive with even a tradition of 
Earth as our former home, Terrarchaeology will revive, and then no place on 
Earth may be considered too sacred to 
be delved into. But not today. The Interplanetary Congress would never give 
you a permit." 

44T OOK. I'm not going to injure their 
-*-' beautiful ruins. I've got a specific 
thing I want to look for. We took away 
loads and loads of records from the 
World Government Center when we left. 
But I'm certain there is more there, of 
infinitely greater importance. 

"See here — listen to this : it's a standard text you use in your own classes, the 
Compendium of World Surveys by Cort 
27463Q5HW. 'The original pians of the 
Center included underground, impregnable vaults, in which World Government's most vital records could be stored 
in permanent safety. However, when the 
Great Migration 'occurred, searchers 
found no trace of these vaults under any 
Government building. This does not 
mean necessarily that they did not then 
or do not now exist ; the required speed 
and enormous magnitude of the Migration operations made it impossible to 
make a complete and thorough investigation. Unfortunately, the setting aside of 
the Center as a Sacred Symbolical Area 
has prevented any further research.' 

"The minute I read those words for 
the first time, professor, I decided to 



THE CI 

make Terrarehaeology my field, and to 
be the one to hunt for and discover the 
lost vaults of the World Government 
Center and recover whatever they contain. With the new Supra finders, which 
did not exist a hundred years ago, they 
can be located without harming or moving a stone of the upper buildings. 

"I know you can't authorize me to go 
ahead. But will you give me a strong 
recommendation of my ability, that 1 can 
take to the Interplanetary Congress? 
That's all I want. The rest is up to me." 

Th e professor gave up. 

"That much 1 can do for you, Kel, and 
will, very gladly. But 11] have to add that 
I advised you against attempting the 
project." 

"Don't worry about that professor." 
Kel smiled impishly. "I don't suppose it 
has occurred to you that this year's 
chairman of the Congress happens to be 
Mora 84912M6RG. and that Mora 84912M6RG happens to be my Chief Guardian? I'll get a hearing, anyway, and if I 
have your backing I'm confident of making them see the light. It would be a 
pretty fine medal on the chest to be able 
to say that the year you were chairman, 
the hidden records of World Government 
were recovered, and that the person who 
made them available was your own 
ward !" 

Six months later Kel landed his equipment near the gaunt, deserted Center. 
It was another month before the Supra 
finders located the vaults. There was 
richness there indeed to be stored in his 
Contragrav ship. And buried among the 
records, he found a queer, inexpressibly 
anicent-looking metal box. marked in difficult twentieth century English, "To be 
opened by any competent scientist." 

Kel, under the circumstances — fortunately, he even knew the language — 
deemed himself sufficiently competent 
not to wait till he got the box home to 
Skyro. What he heard as he listened to 
the recording sent him headlong to the 
ship, to telebeam first the professor and 
then the Congress. Before he returned 
home with his priceless plunder, he made 



ILDREN 117 

a quick trip to the Antarctic, where the 
ice, though much thinner than in earlier 
days, still provided the only unevaporated water on the surface of the ravaged planet. Continuing deep freeze 
was easy in the Contragrav. 

By Kel's time, travel to the past was 
as commonplace as space-travel. He was 
strongly tempted to go back to April 25, 
1970, himself, to take a look at the remarkable James McElroy — say an hour 
or so before McElroy's appointed meeting with somebody yet unborn when Kel 
would have made his journey. But young 
and romantic as he was, Kel 87459X2ZA 
was also a responsible scientific worker. 
And so he handed over the tape-recording and the vial to the proper authorities, 
to let them conduct the experiment, 
while he buried himself in the other material he had found in the Center's vaults, 
to prepare what eventually became the 
most famous thesis ever presented by a 
candidate for the degree of Ter.D. 

The gray parched earth grew ever 
more desolate as the centuries rolled 
over it. The Antarctic ice dissolved inch 
by inch, then evaporated in the unoxygenated air. The two vials left lay finally 
on bare rock. 

Soon, under the sun's radiation, their 
contents died at last. 

IV 

ORD 20977F8EN stood for a moment at the entrance to the grounds of 
the IAAS Center. This was the right 
place and of course there could be no 
question as to the exact time. It was five 
minutes to three o'clock on the afternoon 
of Saturday, April 25, 1970. Unaccustomed emotions swept him — puzzlement, 
curiosity, frustration, and a' sense of 
anticlimax. In a way his entire twentyfive years of life had led up to this moment ; when it was over ana he was back 
again in his own time and place, he 
would have to begin some entirely new 
career, with his reason for living hitherto no longer in existence. 
He was carefully dressed in the prop


US STARTUP 

er clothing for a young man of the twentieth century, and in the jacket he found 
a pocket into which he could insert the 
tiny apparatus that would insure his safe 
return home. He had been just as carefully schooled in the English of the period, in its American version. Except for 
the wig, to simulate twentieth century 
hair, he looked like any tall, handsome 
youth of 1970. 

What interested him more than this 
James McElroy to whom he had been dispatched, more even than the solution of 
all the vague hints and allusions he had 
heard since childhood, was the landscape 
around him. At home there were no great 
bodies of untamed water like this. There 
were hills, far higher than this one on 
whose summit he stood now, but they 
were not planted with grass and trees; 
indeed, he suspected, from the proximity 
of the site to the ocean below him, that 
all this verdure had been cultivated by 
man, and that the natural aspect of the 
hill would be that of a sand dune. He 
knew, of course, the geography of his 
Io6ation. He was on a flat-topped hill 
overlooking the Pacific Ocean, in a portion of Earth once known interchangeably, it seemed, as the United States of 
America and California. 

As he tore his gaze reluctantly away 
from the view — who knew how much 
time he would have for sightseeing when 
he left, and it might well be dark then as 
well — and prepared to turn it in at the 
gate in the massive brick wall, he saw a 
girl walking slowly up the path, trundling some kind of machine. As he 
watched, she paused at a thick clump of 
bushes and pushed the machine inside, 
arranging twigs and branches elaborately so as to conceal it from any passer-by. 
lord's eyes lighted up with interest; in 
the second before she hid the thing, he 
had recognized it as a primitive timetravel equipment, such as he had seen in 
museums at home. Deliberately he waitxl until the girl caught up with him. 

"Excuse me," she said in twentieth 
:entury English that had exactly the 
same slight stiffness as his own, "but is 



G STORIES 

this the headquarters of the International Association for the Advancement of 
Science?" 
Gord smiled. 

"What is your century?" he asked. 

She jumped, and stared at him with 
long, heavily fringed dark eyes. 

"The — the forty-first," she stammered. "How did you know ? Are you — " 

"I am from long after you — almost as 
long as you are after the time we find 
ourselves in now. I take it that you too 
have been sent to see a man named James 
McElroy?" 

"Why, yes. All my life — " 

"All mine too. Let's go in together." 

"What's it all about, do you know?" 

"No more than you. Perhaps we shall 
find out now. What is your own language ?" 

"Interlingua. And yours?" 

"A modified Interlingua too, but I 
doubt if you'd understand mine or I 
yours. Let's stick to this one, since we've 
both learned it well." 

"My name is Wia Rustum." She held 
out her hand, but Gord did not take it; 
people of his time seldom touched one 
another casually. He noticed, however, 
that the little finger was complete — 
doubtless her little toes too — not rudimentary as his were. That, he had been 
taught, was the only physical change in 
mankind in the past four thousand years, 
unless one counted the loss of head-hair 
before adolescence, or the increasing 
■number of babies born without a vermiform appendix. 

"Call me Gord," he said. "The rest of 
it is just for official identification." 

He noticed with approval that her perceptions were sensitive; she had withdrawn her hand swiftly the instant she 
received no answering gesture from him. 
She did not seem pretty to Gord, despite 
her chiseled features and her smooth 
light-bronze skin through which the 
w r arm blood showed ; her lustrous black 
hair, arranged in some strange fashion 
which he presumed must be that of women of the time they were visiting, repelled him. Obviously she was of Dure 



THE CI 

Earth descent ; there was no trace in her 
of any off -planetary mixture. 

They had reached the group of white 
stone buildings. "This one in the middle 
is probably the main structure," Gord remarked. "We can go in there and ask 
for this James McElroy." 

A small door in an L-shaped wing 
opened abruptly, and a young man of 
about their own age stood framed in the 
doorway. He peered out at them anxiously. 

44W7E ARE looking for a man named 
" James McElroy," Wia Rustum 
told him. 

"1 am McElroy." The man's voice 
shook with excitement. "Are you — f 

"Yes," said Gord gravely. "It seems 
that we have both been sent to visit you." 

"Come in ! Come in !" 

He beckoned them into a room that reminded Wia of reconstructions of primitive architecture she had seen — a sort of 
ancient office, with a desk and filing cabinets and chairs, to which McElroy waved 
them fussily. They sat down gingerly, 
but the chairs were more comfortable, in 
spite of their odd shape, than either of 
them had expected. 

"You won't mind, will you," said McElroy, "if I make a record of our conversation ?" 

"Of course not," Wia answered politely. Gord only nodded, perplexed; in his 
experience, records were always kept of 
all conversations, however trivial, 
though he wondered how the primitive 
machine standing against an inner wall 
was expected to work. 

Their host sat down at his desk. He 
seemed hardly to know how to begin. 

"Are you all that are coming?" he 
blurted. 

"All?" Gord echoed. "I know only 
that I myself was sent to you. I met this 
young woman just outside here, and it 
appears that she too has been sent." 

"Then you're not both from the same 
approximate time?" 

Gord laughed. 

"Hardly. I am as far from her in time 



ILDREN 11S 

as she is from you. You should see the 
obsolete object she traveled here on, and 
has hidden in your grounds. It's a wonder to me that she could travel ten years 
back in that thing." 

Wia Rustum flushed. 

"It's a very fine traveler," she said defensively. "Why, it's an enormous improvement on the first ones, only twentyodd years ago." 

Gord felt the pocket-sized traveler in 
his jacket and concealed his smile. 

McElroy was watching them intently. 
His hands were shaking, in some almost 
unbearable agitation, but he was getting 
better control of his voice. 

"You must both be utterly bewildered," he said. "Unless you have been 
told all about this?" 

They both shook their heads. 

"All 1 know," said Wia, "is that ever 
since I can remember I have been told 
that on my twenty-fifth birthday I was 
to make a journey back to 1970 to see a 
man named James McElroy, at the International Association for the Advancement of Science." 

"1 also — at these headquarters, on 
Earth," Gord agreed. "The guardians 
said that was why I had to learn to speak 
twentieth century American English, 
and study your history and geography 
and customs, though I was not in training to be a Terrarchaeologist. I had lessons with Kel 87459X2ZA himself," he 
added proudly. 

"I don't know about any guardians," 
said Wia Rustum, "but I had a special 
World Government Council scholarship 
right through school, and the famous 
Harduk Bal, who excavated this very 
site in 4016, gave me my final instructions only a week ago." 

"In 4016!" McElroy exclaimed. "And 
what year is it now, in your time ?" • 

"Why, 4042. of course." 

"And in yours ?" he asked, turning to 
Gord. 

"This is Year 117 GM — of the Great 
Migration — or, according to your calendar, I suppose it would be 5917." 



STARTLING STORIES 



Me 



IcELROY gaped at them. He seemed 
overwhelmed. In a dazed tone he 
said to Wia: "And you say time-travel 
was discovered only in your own lifetime?" 

"The first short trips were made in 
4020." 

"I see. So any earlier — tell me, has 
either of you any message for me, from 
a time earlier than your own ? Probably 
you, young lady — good heavens, I 
haven't asked either of you your name !" 

"I am Wia Rustum. You may call me 
Wia. James. Yes, I was told to say — but 
maybe Gord has a message too." 

"Gord 20977F8EN," the young man introduced himself belatedly. "Call me just 
Gord. Yes, I was given a message also, 
but I was told it would be unnecessary 
if any traveler from an earlier era should 
be at the meeting. Was yours about 
somebody named Mark Iverson?" he 
asked Wia. 

"Yes, it must be the same." 

"You give it, then." 

With the air of one repeating a lesson 
learned by rote, the girl recited : 

"In 2150. a committee of the IAAS, in 
charge of tearing down the old buildings 
and erecting new ones, discovered the 
tape-recording and followed instructions. 
Mark Iverson was born the following 
February. Means of travel into the past 
had not yet been discovered, and so it 
was merely added to the record that this 
child was born but that he died at the 
age of five when a Moon-plane on which 
he was a passenger was destroyed 
in a collision with a meteor." 

James McElroy closed his eyes for a 
moment. His face was white. 

"Another!" he muttered. "Little Jim 
—and Adela — and now this child." 

He took a deep breath. 

"Tell me," he asked Wia, "did your 
message say if the child's mother was 
with him — and who she was ?" 

"How would anyone know that ?" Gord 
-interrupted. "Oh, yes, of course — in that 
age—" 



"No," said Wia, "that is all I was 
taught to say, and I haven't the slightest 
idea what it means. Did you have more 
than that in your message, Gord ?" 

"It was just the same. But I do remember once asking Kel what tape-recording they .were referring to, and he 
said it was one he found in the old World 
Government Center in London, here on 
Earth, and that it was now safe in the 
archives of the Interplanetary Congress 
on Skyro." 

"At this moment, it is in the vaults 
under the IAAS buildings, right here," 
said McElroy. The color was coming 
back to his face. "I w T onder how much it 
has wandered, up to your time, Gord — 
and where it will wander afterwards ! 

"So now three vials are accounted for. 
and the other two must have been lost or 
useless, or else I would either have more 
visitors today than you two, or your message would be longer. 

"I know I'm trying your patience. 
None of this can make sense to you. 
Please bear with me just a little longer, 
and then. I'll explain as well as I can. I 
don't suppose," he added wistfully, "that 
either of you could tell me anything in 
detail about life as you know it in your 
respective times ? No, don't bother to answer. I told my colleagues only last 
month why that would logically be quite 
impossible. 

"But perhaps you can satisfy me on 
one point. I noticed, Wia, when you gave 
your message, that you spoke of 'travel 
into the past.' Does that mean that timetravel is all one-directional? Gan't you 
go forward into the future?" 

Wia looked at Gord. "We can't," she 
said. "Can you?" 

"No, and I doubt if men ever will. I 
could tell you why — it's elementary 
mathematics. But unless you're familiar 
with the Moitier Concept discovered in 
your Year 3845 — " 

"And the Gregi Correlary of 3907," 
Wia added. 

McElroy smiled. 

"I'm not a mathematician," he said, 
"and even if I were — " He shrugged. 



THE CHILDKKN 



1Z1 



"Well, that question was for the benefit of my colleagues, particularly of my 
friend Wycliffe. I imagine I'd get the 
same kind of answer if I queried you 
about Moro's specialty, or Schultz's, or 
Wong's, or Kemet Ali's, or any of the 
others. We can't change history by altering the past, though I do wonder why 
there was so long a gap between Mark 
Iverson's birth and yours, Wia." 

"Well, of course the Second Dark Age 
came in between — " 

"Better not, Wia," Gord warned her. 
"I know what the Interplanetary Congress would do to me if I tried to scramble up history by leaking it into the 
past." 

Wia looked frightened. 

"Don't worry, Wia," McElroy said reassuringly. "You haven't said anything 
that could do any harm. We in 1970 have 
been prepared for a quarter of a century 
for the onset of some such interregnum. 
In fact, we've expected it much sooner 
than, apparently, it will arrive. And plenty of us also have the faith that civilization will revive and go on to greater 
heights. You and Gord are both evidence 
of that — in more ways than you know. 

"Now if I may ask you both just a few 
more questions, I'll solve the whole riddle 
for you. You, Gord. Can you tell me 
about your mother?" 

"M Y M0THER? " Gord knit his 
J-'-l brows. "How would I know about 
that ? I'm just like everybody else. I was 
produced in my local Cenitorium and 
reared in mv local Pedenid. How would I 
know which particular ovum gestated 
me. any more than I would know which 
particular sperm-cell activated it ? All I 
know is that I must have a bit of native 
Martian heredity, since I have superexpansible lungs, and the Martian stigmata 
on my spine." 

"I see," said James McElroy slowly, 
gazing at the young man with a sort of 
baffled wonder. "So in your time all children are laboratory products, are they? 
No haphazard breeding — the geneticist's 
dream come true! Don't you have any 



sex life at all V 

Gord reddened angrily. 

"Naturally I have," he said in an 
offended tone. "I'm twenty-five years 
old today. I'm a perfectly normal human 
being. I've belonged to a sex group 
since I was eighteen, like any other man. 
But you can't mix up sex and reproduction. It isn't civilized!" 

"We do," McElroy answered dryly. 
"And you, Wia. Did you come out of a 
test-tube too?" 

"As a matter of fact, I did," said Wia, 
looking surprised. "How did you know? 
I mean, my mother was one of those 
selected for controlled eugenic maternity by the Biogenetics Laboratory. But 
naturally I know who she is — in fact 
she reared me until I formed my first 
love-union, and I never was sent to a 
nursery. I live near her now, and I see 
her often: I said goodbye to her just 
before I left on this time-journey. 

"But I do agree with Gord on one 
thing. I don't want to be rude, but it 
does seem terribly dangerous and rather 
disgusting to let just any woman have 
a child by any man. We don't do that 
even in direct parentage. How do you 
know they have the right kind of heredity?" 

"We don't," said McElroy mildly. "I'm 
a geneticist myself. Wia, of an antique 
variety. I'm not denying that our science and our culture are far behind 
yours. As far, perhaps" — a bit of malice 
spiced his tone — "as yours may be behind Gord's here. But let's not wrangle 
over our comparative social mores. Tell 
me about your mother. What is her 
descent? For instance, of what nationality is she?" 

It was Wia's turn to flush in anger. 
Her dark eyes flashed. 

"If you're implying." she retorted, 
"that I'm a monogene, it's an outrageous 
lie. If you're any kind of geneticist, 
James McElroy, you know perfectly well 
that one can't parcel out the chromosomes like so many building-blocks. I 
may display more of the characteristics 
of one of the ancient races — the one 



122 STARTLE* 

they called white, I suppose, to which 
you seem to belong — than of the others ; 
but I can assure you that, whoever my 
father may have ben — and that, of 
course, I can't know — my mother has 
her Class A certificate attesting that her 
ancestry includes every one of the civilized types of mankind!" 

"Didn't they teach you about this age 
we're in now, Wia?" Gord intervened 
sarcastically. "In this era they favored 
monogenes. You were penalized if you 
had even a trace of interracial heredity. 
I can't imagine what they would have 
done about my trace of Martian — except that thev hadn't even reached Mars 
yet!" 

"No, the Moon's as far as we've attained to," said McElroy placatingly. 
"And please believe me, Wia, I didn't 
mean my question in a derogatory way. 
I'm — I'd like to know a lot about your 
mother — I'd like to know about Gord's, 
if he could tell me, because — 

"Oh, Lord, let me try to tell this in 
the simplest way I can. 

"In August, 1952, at a meeting of 
the British Association for the Advancement of Science — there were still separate national associations then, instead 
of one Internationa], as now — a Dr. 
Parkes reported on a new method of 
freezing germ-cells, by the use of glycerol. The cells were quick-frozen to 
minus 79° Centigrade, and though crystals formed, the glycerol crystals did 
not crush the cells, as those of other 
freezing media had done. In consequence, less than ten per cent of the cells 
died, and the rest retained vitality and 
fertility for an indefinite time, so long 
as they were kept at the same temperature. Do you follow me?" 

"Of course," answered Wia. "We employ a more refined technique of the 
same sort. It is used to preserve the 
sperm of superior and distinguished 
men, to be used as sires for eugenic 
maternity. In fact," she added with an 
embarrassed laugh, "I have always 
dreamed that 1 myself — " 
McElroy looked embarrassed too. 



a STORIES 

"And you, Gord?" he asked. 

"We have a much better method, but 
naturally I understand what you mean." 

"Well, we too began to employ this 
method experimentally soon after it was 
announced, and it worked. But we had 
used it only for short-time experiments, 
and mostly with animals." 

VI 

C'ORD glanced inquiringly at Wia. 
"Don't you remember?" she whispered. 
"In this time, they still had all kinds of 
living animals besides man — natural 
ones, not synthetics." "Oh, yes. I'd forgotten," he said. McElroy went on. 

"Where I differed from the others was 
in the fact that I believed firmly in the 
ultimate discovery of time-travel. Without that, naturally there was not much 
point in conducting experiments which 
would extend beyond the probable span 
of the lives of the experimenters. I don't 
know exactly what your life-expectancy 
is — " 

"About a hundred years," said Wia. 

"Somewhere around 150," said Gord. 

"Ours today is in the late seventies. 

"But, I reasoned, if the cells could be 
kept frozen for hundreds or even thousands of years, and if meanwhile timetravel into the past could be discovered, 
then it would be possible to prove the 
practical immortality of the human race. 
There were other important scientific 
correlaries too, but this alone justified 
trying it." 

"But how could you keep up a temperature of minus 79° Centigrade — we 
don't use that scale but I gather that it 
is very cold — long after the people who 
first prepared the cells were dead and 
gone?" Gord asked. 

"In the Antarctic Continent. The 
IAAS had a concession there, where 
vials of sperm could be deeply buried 
and the site marked. It will be countless 
centuries before that ice will begin to 
melt. I made a tape-recording, with full 
instructions, and placed it in our vaults 
here. If it were found before time


THE CHILDREN 



123 



travel, then the results of the experiment were simply to be added to the 
recording. My idea was that eventually, 
as the ages passed, these buildings would 
fall into ruins, and some day the vaults 
would be found and opened. 

"I find from your message, Wia, that 
actually the first time the recording was 
reproduced was less than two hundred 
years from now — I hadn't thought of 
our headquarters' becoming obsolete 
and being rebuilt. But obviously, after 
that, somebody did find the recording in 
the ruins of those new buildings and 
you. Gord, said that in your day it was 
found in London and is now on some 
planet outside the Solar System. 

"Are you beginning to understand?" 
Wia found her voice first. 
"You mean we — " 
"You two — and Mark Iverson." 
There was a stunned pause. Then 
Gord said tautly : 

"Will you be so good, James McElroy, 
as to describe to us the men whose 
sperm-cells were in those vials?" 

"There was only one man," answered 
McElroy almost inaudibly. 

"But then," Wia exclaimed, "that 
must mean — Gord, you and I must be 
half-brother and sister! And that little 
boy back in the twenty-second century 
— he was our half-brother too!" 

"Yes — you see, I — " McElroy began. 
Gord interrupted him, his face white 
with rage. 

"How could you?" he cried hoarsely. 
"How could you upset our entire genetic 
pattern, on which our civilization and 
even our continuing existence are based ? 
We don't indulge in slapdash parenthood 
the way you people did back in your 
barbaric age. Our births are all carefully calculated to produce just the 
right number of each type of body-mind 
needed to maintain a balanced economy. 
With all the completely unknowable 
characteristics of a haphazard man of 
your era, how can the resulting child be 
sure of its abilities and potentialities?" 

His voice shook, and his face was a 
mask of fury and despair. 



ayOV DID THAT to me! And my 
■*■ own people let it happen to me ! My 
own guardians knew — they've always 
known — that I was a freak. For the 
sake of some frivolous bit of scientific 
knowledge, they let me be created a different being from anybody else in the 
world. They trained me for this idiotic 
journey back in time, so that I might 
hear from your own lips just what you 
had done to me ! 

"And now I am to go back home, my 
purpose fulfilled. And what is my life 
to be from now on ? How is anyone ever 
to know what I am best fitted for, what 
my place is in society? 

"I don't know what your future will 
be like, Wia Rustum." He turned savagely on the girl who stared at him wideeyed, her dark face bloodless. "We 
aren't concerned with brothers or sisters. For all I know, any girl in my sex 
group might be my sister, though it's 
not likely — and what would it matter? 
None of us is ever born except from a 
regulated union of ova and sperm, and 
only the best of us are ever selected to 
contribute our own cells for reproduction. 

"None of us but me!" he concluded 
bitterly. He jumped to his feet and 
glared at McElroy. 

"But I — " McElroy began weakly. 
Gord snarled at him. 

"I congratulate you on the success of 
your experiment ! I can't wait any longer 
to find out what plans my Chief Guardian has for me next !" 

He put his hand in his pocket and 
pressed a trigger. 

The next instant McElroy and Wia 
Rustum were alone in the room. 

McElroy buried his face in his hands. 
A soft hand touched his shoulder. He 
looked up at Wia's compassionate face. 

"Don't feel bad," she murmured. "I 
know you didn't mean any harm. They'll 
calm him down. Surely, if their culture 
is so advanced, they wouldn't have let 
him be produced only as a — " 

"An experimental animal?" His tone 
was as bitter as Gord's had been. 



124 STARTLE" 

"I suppose so. They'll fit him into the 
normal life of their time, I'm certain of 
it" 

McElroy shook his head. 

"And what about you, Wia?" 

"Don't worry about me. They've always told me that after what they spoke 
of as my 'twenty-fifth birthday project' 
I could go on quietly with my own life 
and my own work. I have a very good 
job with the Council of World Government," she said proudly. 

"And aren't you too horrified at the 
thought that your father is one of us 
twentieth century barbarians?" 

"It is an upsetting thought," she replied frankly. "But you've told us you 
are a geneticist, and primitive as genetics must be in you)' time, I'm confident 
you wouldn't have used cells in your 
experiment that came from a defective 
man." 

Her voice grew coaxing. 

"I don't suppose you could tell me, 
could you? Really, we're not nearly so 
fussy as Gord's people seem to be. 
Naturally, we don't let just anybody 
who wants to, have children. But lots 
of women have them by men they actually know — if they can get certificates 
on both sides, they often have them by 
their own love-partners." Her face fell. 
"In fact, Tir and I were planning — well, 
now, of course, we'll have to give that 
up; I see I could never be certified." 

"So I've ruined your life too by my 
rash experimentation, have I?" 

"Nonsense," said Wia stoutly. "I don't 
live in a one-track world like my dear 
half-brother! I've got Tir, and my work, 
and plenty of other interests. 

"But just the same, I wish you mould 
tell me. I'd promise never to let my 
mother find out. Women who are chosen 
for eugenic maternity would always 
rather not know." 

"Tell you what, Wia?" 

"Who my father was, of course!" 

McElroy's face was a study. Before 
he could find words, Wia forestalled him. 

"Oh, Great Radiation ! How stupid of 
me ! Of course ! I see it all now. If only 



S STORIES 

that silly Gord had waited till you could 
make him understand!" 

"I'm afraid I don't understand you 
myself, my dear." 

"Certainly you do. You don't need to 
pretend. I'm not always as dense as I 
must have seemed just now. Naturally, 
for a momentous project like that, there 
was only one thing you could have done." 

JAMES McELROY'S heart, which had 
ached for seven months, suddenly 
throbbed with joy. He smiled at his 
daughter, who, in this strange meeting, 
was of exactly his own age. 
"Then you don't mind, Wia?" 
"Mind? I should have known I could 
trust you. The idea of Gord's saying 
that you had made a freak of him ! Did 
he think you picked out just anybody at 
random to become our father? It must 
have taken you months or years to decide on the man with the veiy finest 
mind and the best body alive in your 
time. Whom else could you have chosen, 
with the very lives of future beings at 
stake? 

"That's all I need to know about my 
father. I'm not interested in his race or 
nationality or whatever you call it, or 
his age or what he looked like. That hotheaded Gord ! He got himself so wrought 
up I honestly think he'd have believed 
any silly balderdash you told him." Wia 
laughed merrily. "Why," she went on, 
wiping her eyes, "he probably would 
have believed you if you'd told him the 
most ridiculous thing you could think of 
— even that you yourself were the man V 

Her eyes were mirrors of innocent 
candor. 

"Then you wouldn't consider me a — 
a good eugenic specimen, Wia?" McElroy asked painfully. 

Wia sobered contritely. 

"Oh, dear," she apologized, "that 
wasn't very polite, was it? But really, 
James, don't you have mirrors in your 
era? You seem about the same age as 
Gord and I are, yet even with your 
smaller life-expectancy, I can see that 
you're going to be prematurely old. Why, 



THE CHILDREN 



125 



look, there are grey hairs at your temples. And you seem unable to see without that glass thing across your eyes. 
Besides. I noticed right away how unstable you are emotionally. 

"I'm sure," she added courteously, 
"that you have a fine mind. You must 
have, to have thought of this whole thing 
in your primitive era. And you must 
be forward-looking, or you wouldn't have 
believed in time-travel when other people didn't. I like you very much. But 
naturally, as a geneticist yourself, you 
would hardly select yourself as the best 
possible ancestor for anybody, would 
you?" 

McElrqy smiled with stiff lips. 

"You're very perspicacious, my dear. 
I hope you won't ever regret the father 
I did pick out for you." 

"I shan't. And don't worry about 
Gord, either; he'll get over his shock. 
Anyway, neither of us will ever have 
children of our own now. And that 
other little boy — Mark Iverson — died 
when he was five. So the line ends with 
us, and you can set your mind at rest." 

She took McElroy's cold hand in her 
warm one. 

"Paternity means a lot to people in 
your time, doesn't it?" she said sympathetically. "More than it does in ours 
— or maternity either — and much more, 
evidently, than it does in Gord's. 

"Look, James, I know how you're 
feeling. You must feel responsible for 
our existence, Gord's and mine, almost 
as if you really were our father. Don't. 
We'll get along all right. 

"Do you know what I think you ought 
to do? I think you ought to have a child 
of your own. I'm sure you're as good a 
potential ancestor as lots of people of 
your time, and any defects you trans


mitted would be diluted out in the generations after you. Have you any children already?" 

"I had — I had a son — but he was 
killed." 

"Like poor little Mark Iverson. Well, 
have another." 

"His mother was killed with him. We 
— I loved her very much." 

"Oh, I'm sorry. But even so — oh, I 
forgot; you people are sort of monogamists, aren't you?" * 
"Sort of." To his surprise', McElroy 
found himself smiling faintly. 

"Then perhaps — don't you think you 
might find someone else you would want 
to have a child by? I'm afraid that's a 
clumsy way to put it; your customs are 
so unfamiliar to me. But I do feel you're 
the kind of man who ought to marry — 
isn't that the word ? — and have sons and 
daughters of your own again." 

"You may be right, Wia. I hadn't 
thought of it that way. Thank you for 
coming today. I feel my whole experiment was justified by its producing 
you." 

"What a nice thing to say! I've liked 
meeting you too, James. I don't expect 
they'll want me to come to see you again, 
but I'll never forget you. Neither will 
Gord. And think about what I said, 
won't you ? Why, just think, if you take 
my advice today, I may know some remote descendant of yours myself!" 

He took her hand. 

"Goodbye, Wia. I promise you I'll 
think about it." 

He stood at the door and watched 
his daughter stride across the lawn to 
the bushes where her time-travel machine was hidden. There were tears in 
his eyes, but his heart was strangely 
light. 



NOW IN PREPARATION — THE BIG 1953 EDITION OF 

WONDER STORY ANNUAL 

WATCH FOR IT AT YOUR FAVORITE NEWSSTAND! 



THE ETHER VIBRATES 



'Continued from page 6) 



reply, wrote out its instructions to take the number of marbles it had decided upon from the 
group it had selected. In about four moves it 
was obvious the machine had won. And it won 
all the rest of the games. 

"It is entirely possible for a human to win," 
Dr. Lubkin explained. "But in order to do so 
he must start by making a correct first move 
and then he must make every following move 
correctly. Vie cannot afford to make a single 
mistake because the moment he does he has lost 
the game. -The machine makes no mistakes." 

We had a question. "In a game with so many 
combinations, there must be more than one correct choice at many points. How does the machine choose the one move it will make?" 

Does It Think? 

Well, we got an answer. But we went down 
for the third time about halfway through it and 
the best we can do is to reproduce the essence 
of it as. we remember. 

"The machine computes all the possible combinations for every move," Dr. Lubkin explained. He was very nonchalant about the fact 
that there are so many thousands of combinations that it staggers the imagination and that 
the machine does all his computation in about 
three seconds. "Where several choices are possible, it is quite capable of selecting the one 
which seems the most direct route to its goal." 

"Isn't that thinking?" we asked. 

"No. It looks like thinking, but it is not. It 
is computation, not thought." 

Having built it, he should know. But feats of 
computation, amazing facility in adding or calculating—this we expect from a machine. None 
of this seared us so much as the sight of it playing a game with a human opponent. Watching 
the, lights scamper over the panel, listening to 
the typewriter clack out its instructions, we 
found it impossible to fight down the thought of 
a huge and powerful brain lurking behind the 
steel doors. It was just a little bit chilling. 

Built-in Memory 

Later, over corned beef sandwiches and cokes, 
we cornered Dr. Lubkin and made like a fan. 
"The publicity," we reminded him, "says that 
the machine has a memory of 102,400 words of 



nine decimal digits each. How do you build 
memory into a machine?" 

"Simple enough," he said. "If you send an 
electrical impulse of a certain pattern through 
a wire, it passes through and is gone. But suppose you send another through on the heels of 
the first and another and another — continuously. 
Suppose vou bring your wire around and make 
a complete circuit out of it and keep this impulse going through it continuously. You might 
say then that the pattern exists simultaneously 
all through that circuit. This is equivalent to 
memory. Any new impulse coming through 
must then be matched to that existing impulse, 
which can 'recall' it by accepting or rejecting 
it." 

That much we could understand, at least in 
theory. 

"Could the machine be taught to use words 
instead of numbers?" 

"Easily, as it is already using some words. 
But it would have to be a very basic basic English, for most of our words have about nine different meanings and the machine would not be 
able to hedge-hop among them like a human. It 
would have one fixed interpretation for each 
word." 

The $64 Question 

Then we asked the $64 question. "Dr Lubkin, science-fiction writers, carrying the conception of these machines on into their future 
development, depict them as having achieved 
actual consciousness. Do you think they will?" 

"No," he said promptly. "They compute, they 
don't reason. I don't see how they can develop 
consciousness." 

Think or not, Elecom 100, the first of its type, 
is on its way to Aberdeen Proving Grounds, 
having been purchased by the Army to solve 
problems related to fire control in artillery. A 
mathematically inclined Lieutenant from the 
Army was present at the demonstration to explain the Army's interest in the machine. It is 
just big enough to handle certain problems 
which are not vital enough to join the waiting 
]i st for the really big computers but are too 
much for human mathematicians to spend 
months over doing the required computations. 

An improved model 110 is now being assembled and special designs to handle specific office 



THE ETHER 

problems for business, such as magazine circulation, will be available. The price? A mere 
$62,500. 

"Will Elecom do everything the big machines 
will do?" Dr. Lubkin was asked. 

"Yes, but slower. That's why the really big 
jobs will wait for the big calculators, but the 
waiting list is months long. This one will handle the medium jobs which wouldn't get to the 
big machines." 

We emerged from Brooklyn feeling that we 
had had a foot inside the door of a world hitherto described only in our own magazines. These 
men we had been talking to were not writers or 
science-fiction fans. They were hard-headed 
realists who were investing money in an enterprise they hoped to see prosper. It was an enterprise to sell American business men as 
science-net ion-y a gadget as we had ever seen. 
It was just a little bewildering. We liked it. 




A HINT of treachery has crept into what 
we fondly supposed to be a mutually trusting correspondence between ve fans and ye ed. 
Some of you characters have been sending us 
three, four and more letters per issue with the 
result that we have to check like mad to keep 
two letters from the same person going into one 
column. We lost track of letters from Wally 
Parsons and Hank Moskowitz long ago, seems 
like two or three come in every day. And a 
certain Gregg Calkins who shall here be nameless — we understand he's bigger than us — and 
even Snarly Seibel, who had people actually asking for him, turned up with two letters this 
month. And Dave Hammond and J. T. Oliver 
bombard us with postcards crammed to the edges 
with word; — restrain yourselves, willya? 

AND VITAMINS 

t»r P«ggy Uindemann 

Dear Mr. Mines: I'm slightly astonished that 
anyone should be astonished to read "that the rich 
gel richer and the poor get — children". 

Menninger suggested that it might be the emotional satisfaction which the having of progeny 
gives to the unsuccessful. Durham points out. in 
"Man Against 'Myth" tkat most social myths are 
arguments either that the status quo is desirahle. 
or that it is unavoidable, and gives as one instance 
the frequency to which allusions are made to the 
tooth and claw methods of preservations by species, 
and the not so often quoted, hut obviously commoner, mode widespread method of prolificacy 



VIBRATES 127 

(Is this a word?). Do you think it possible that 
all species of animals tend to have larger families 
when they are underfed? Has anyone ever tested 
the possibility? 

I think Mrs. Colby a bit wrong in saying that 
religious people — does she mean only Catholics?— 
have large families because of fear of their religious mentors ; these people believe that "artificial" methods of birth control are displeasing to 
God, I suppose it would be heavy as stealing on 
their consciences. Although I have heard many 
religious young women, after their first few children, decide that one or another means is ethical 
enough. 

People also seem to have the peculiar notion thai 
hungry people are dangerous. Now, a man who is 
used to eating reasonable-sized meals may be dangerous when he doesn't' get them, but if there are 
any cases in the history books of underfed peoples 
engaging in wars, I just haven't heard of them. 

There are the Japanese, but war does not now 
seem so natural to them as to the Germans — at 
least the Germans seem to have had a little more 
choice of leadership. 

Of course, it has been only a short time that 
man has tried to use the scientific method to study 
himself. To me, it seems that anthropology has 
taught us more than psychology or sociology, but 
that as in other studies, what man learns about 
man should increase by an upward spiral. I am 
sure that a few hundred years from now, no parents will be allowed to whip their children, that 
no parents wilt be allowed to take the consequences 
of their children's misdeeds — but how to kee» them 
from killing themselves? — that children will be 
reared in almost child-proof environments, so that 
they are unable to kill themselves accidentally. It 
seems likely, too. that children will be allowed to 
visit relatives or friends indefinitely at will. Abo, 
that educational methods will be far, far, different, and that democracy may spread to the conduct of business, as well as schools. 

I think it possible that marriages will have to 
be renewed, by proof of compatibility, and that 
married couples who do not seem to be happy with 
each other will have to agree to psychological reconditioning — that marriages will be difficult as 
divorce is easy, although I rather think marriage 
is here to stay. And that divorce will be less frequent than it is now, because men and women will 
be more friendly with each other. 

And I feel sure as sure that science will find 
some faster than light transportation with no feeling of acceleration, no more than we feel from 
the Earth's, without having to double talk for Einstein. — Seaside. Oregon 

Deleted was four pages of a slashing attack 
on the mythology of theology — let's keep it clean. 
But orchids to you. Peggy Lindemann. for the 
first original idea of the decade.* Tt should be 
made difficult to slay married, we agree with 
you. Just as the state of New Jersey requires 
all motor cars to be checked twice a year for 
safety, marriages should be checked every year 
or so and if people are not getting along they 
should be reconditioned or forcibly separated. 
What an idea! Does Kinsey know about this? 



128 



STARTLING STORIES 



SINCERELY 

by M. McNeil 

D'rcd : 

horrible way to address someone 
i read in the last 

issue that ti don't want verse letters 

ohhhhhhhhh 

ohhhhhhhh 

ohhhhhhh 

ohhhhhh 

ohhhh 

hhb 

h 

also o 

it had to happen it was fated to happen 

a bad ish of SS )) (raised eyebrows (they wouldn't 

fit in riteside up) ) 

oghod 

cover ; very lousy, bergeyish cheesecake 

popp shnuld go back to wherever he corned from 

i repete ;" oghod 

the stories were a rather poor attempt to write slick 
fiction, (eeeck, i wasn't going to punctuate) 
selfconscious 

freeman j i cant say what i want to say about u 
i rerepeat; oghod — 2010 McC tendon, Houston 2$, 
Texas 

Oh no obno no nonononono 
what's 

verse than verse? 
Blank blank blank 
they whom the gods 
would destroy they 
-first 

drive into fandom 
beware 

CALLING ALL INTERPRETERS 

by Nancy Share 

Saludos, SayamI Ja, mein liddle flower . . 'tis 
1 again. This time I have a special purpose for 
writing to you. Since you already know how I 
feel about your selection of stones. I won't go into 
that at this time. I proceed to enlighten you-all 
Sam . . are you a lot, or are vou a little??? (Plenty—Ed.) 
To wit: 

Will you, fair flower (I've been reading too 
many Pearl Buck bo< iks lately ) . please give me 
some space in one or (nertz . I'll get it right 
yet!) two (yippee made it!) of yo mags for a 
little advertisement?? No. no . don't search 
eagerly thru this envelope, because there ain't 
no money in it. In case yo ain't already guessed 
it . . I wish to^havc "free" (there is such a word?) 
space! Ye< ' Stop protesting . I can't hear ya 
anyway. You'll give me some free space? How 
nice! I blink my eyebrows at you! (I really can. 
you. know) Now follows the ad: 

I'm co-editing a new all artzine (PEXINK) 
with Racy Higgs. We need material muchly and 
quickly, so would any fan artists who can do good 
work please contact me? We want all illos to be 
full page (on r egular 8i;xll paper) cither in ink 



or pencil . and can be sent already stenciled if 
the artist prefers. If any of you artists reading this 
ad want to see your work in a good zine, contact 

me as soon as you can, for we want to have this 
zine ready by the latter part of September or early 
in October. (Hey Sam .*. lookee at me! I'm an 
editor now too! We awesome characters ought to 
get together . . . can you draw? (Would we buy 
Finlay if .1 could? — Ed.) I'll even accept some of 
your illos if they're any good! Indeed I will I) 
End of ad. See . . it wasn't asking for too much 
space was it? I was going to make it longer, but 
1 figured you might want to put a lead novel in 
the mags, so I chopped it up some. 

After seeing the results of that letter of mine 
you printed. I hereafter will highly recommend 
all spinsters to send in letters to you and your 
mags They shall he spinsters no mo if you print 
their letters. I got proof. You should see the 
proposals 1 go' from men ( I think that's what 
thev were ) who had read that letter you printed 
(Sam . . I want that five bucks back that I gave 
you to print that letter). When you print this 
one (O, you is, ain't you???!) sign my real name 
to it (which just happens to be Mae West) will 
ya? Fine. Well. I have entertained you long 
enough ... so I shall quietly fade away to the 
place where all thn c * old soldiers are always going. (Are you an old soldier too?) — P.O. Box 31. 
Dant-iltc, Pa. 

Egad. :ire we running a matrimonial agency 
now? If you think you got proposals on the 
first letter, what do you think is going to happen with a letter signed Mae West? 

HUNGER AND SUCH 

by Richard Harter 

Dear Sam : What are you trying to do — be the 
best mag on the market ? Such issues as the August 
and September ones make vou definitely the leader 
in SF. 

Some of your readers doubted that hunger 
caused overpopulation. The book "Geography of 
Hunger" deals with this subject. In it somewhere 
is a list of nations, their birthrates and their protein consumption. As the protein consumption goes 
up. the birthrate goes down and vice versa. 

Also after a careful study of the distribution of 
population you could make the claim that every 
nation in the world is L'NDERpopulated. Take 
China, for example. It is an Al example of a maldistributed population. In certain areas it has the 
highest population concentrate on earth, yet most 
of China is practically an unsettled land. 

The reason of course, is a cultural one. Usually 
the culture is set so that it only intensifies the 
hunger Thus, regardless of Jiow tew people there 
are and how much land there is, they will starve. 
Starving in the midst of plenty, they call it.— 
Uinhvtorf, S Dakota 

Credit an assist from T-Iarter — this is exactly 
what we said in our editorial. Which, incidentally seemed like a fairly important piece of information to us, hut has caused no earth-shaking 
reactions that we've been able to discover so far. 



THE ETHER VIBRATES 



ENERGETICALLY YOURS 

by Waily Parsons 

Dear Sam: I just started to reread TEV (August) when I came upon a letter by R. W. Durham. 
I think your explanation of the rocket principle 
will still leave him somewhat confused. You neglected his idea of a sucking action of a vacuum. 
So I shall explain, (ahem!) 

Energy flows from a high potential to a low 
potential if the two potentials are connected by a 
suitable conductor. Witness the effect of joining 
the terminals of a dry cell with a piece of copper. 
Or raise a twenty pound body through ten feet. 
You exert two hundred foot-pounds of energy. 
Release the body and it will release the two hundred foot pounds of potential energy in falling to 
its former position. 

Expanding gasses leave a rocket tube because 
they have greater pressure than the surrounding 
pressure (in space this is zero.) Thus you have 
yjur action and reaction sets in. Try this : take 
a .-shaped glass tube, hollow, open at both ends, 
each arm separated by a valve. Fill each arm 
party with water to a different level. Open the 
valve and observe. You will see the pressure in 
each arm equalizing — high potential in one arm 
low potential in the other. That's why the vacuum 
doesn't nullify the effect of expanding gasses. 

Since this is not one of my usual six-page letters maybe it will see print, eh? Anyway, I thought 
I'd show off my third form physics a little. — 73 
Sprucehill Rd., Toronto. Ontario 

So a seven page letter heads for the wastepaper basket. How many'd you send in this 
month — three or "four ? Thanks for the erudition. Only nobody asked you why the gasses 
come out the rear end of the rocket, they asked 
you howcome they push when there's nothing 
to push against ? 

SEIBEL FOR ALL 

by Ken M. Butland II 

Dear Sam, Ed, and all other editors: This is 
to inform you that your cause is lost, forgotten, 
buried and cremated. I've decided to join forces 
with the Snarler. Who am I ? Nobody yet. But 
with the (huh? what a handwriting — Ed) on my 
side how can I miss? 

This boy Seibel is on the ball, I'm sure you 
agree with me. 

Well, T must retire now and start thinking up 
irks for you next month. Goo-by.— 8107 Quoit St., 
Doivney, Cat. ^ 

Sure agree with you that he's on the ball— 
the trouble is it's the wrong ball. Alpha Centauri would be about right. Wait — what is. this ? 
Two letters from the Snarler himself. He's in 
the Navy. The mood seized him one day, so 
he up and enlisted. Somebody better tip off the 
brass before the whole seafaring establishment 
is disorganized. Anyway, he writes to rave 
about THE LOVERS (your very first baby 



rave Snarly?) saying, quote: "If you'd published stories like this before you wouldn't have 
had nasty old me flagellating you half to life," 
Gadzooks, imagine our embarrassment at being 
forced into the position of having to agree with 
him ! 

ANCHORS AWEIGH 

by Snarly Sabrerooth Seibel 

Dear Slice: I happened to wander across one 
of your favorite magazines while I was in the big 
city of Oklahoma City this weekend. (What ocean 
is that on? — Ed.) Purely accidental, you understand. I didn't go in search of a bookstore, enter 
and dig around in their copious pikes of literature 
for the sole purpose of reading the October issue 
of STARTLING. 

I see I am being received with enthusiastic applause, by the admiring hoards. Gifts are being 
cast at my feet ; I have a new .30-30 rifle, in a short 
time I can start a lead mine on the land behind 
me (they won't all miss — Ed.) and soon I can 
build me a mansion of bricks.. I feel flattered that 
my name was mentioned . far more in your magazine than any other name. 

Now of course I can't please everyone. A small 
few but yet notable contributed their irritated replies to my letter. First of all what business is it 
of yours what I say? The letters are to Sam and 
if he sees fit to print them is it necessary for you 
to have a fit? I met no arguments, only anger. I 
cannot reply to anger for there is no reason behind 
it and I am a reasonable man. 

A woman's being unreasonable and pitifully illogical and emotional I can well understand. It's 
an inherent weakness of their sex just as much 
as their enjoyment over their prowess at captivating 
hapless males. But a man's beins; so I cannot understand and therefore their reaction and behaviour 
is a reprehensible thing that they should fall to a 1 
chattering, mindless woman's level. 

Ah, but do not misunderstand me. I am far from 
being a misogynist. There is no pleasure greater 
to me than a woman's company— but only if she is 
a woman and not a scatterbrained child. Perhaps 
you will press the point as a contradiction but a 
look at facts will prove such thinking false. I will 
not give you those facts if you do not know them, 
then you are sexless and therefore do not need 
them, nor are interested, (huh?— Ed.) 

It is a waste of time to tell a fool facts because 
he or she will ignore them and continue on an 
erratic course. I have dwelled too long on a 
subject boring to me and that is overlong. (amen — 
Ed.) 

What was that about me defecating a ream of 
white paper and offering it for public consumption? I know better than to send you any stories? 
You give me too much credit then, for I accept 
the challenge. I can outwrite any author except 
Kris Neville. And why don't you have him write 
a story for you? I shall begin and we shall see 
what public reaction is. All you have to do is 
publish it, if you have the nerve. 

Reading your editorial, it smacks in a few thousand places of sidelong jokes at me. Mind now, 
it's all only conjectures. I know, I know, (harmonize) IF THE SHOE FITS, WEAR IT. 



STARTLING STORIES 



I am in the process of reading A S YL U M 
EARTH — you're sure this creature can write? He 
isn't a Ubangi eunuch you dug up on one of your 
vacations, is he? He doesn't seem to understand 
all he knows about. The love scene was about as 
interesting as the copulation of two oysters. On 
your dinner plate yet. If you're going to have 
sex in your stones, at least put a little more realism in it. (Here Seibel goes clinical. Navy influence? — Ed,) 

What I want in women is rather rare, in fact I've 
never met the full combination except in a painting, 
so I while away my life by suffering chasing 
women. . 

Come to think of it, Sam, I'll bet more people 
like me than don't. Usually the people who have 
a peeve are the ones who write in while those who 
are satisfied feel no need to do so. I believe there 
were two who approved of me. I thank you, sirs. 
You are gentlemen and I am your friend. And 
don't say you'd hate to have me for a friend, 
Sam! (Took the words right out of our mouth — 
Ed.) 

You have a nice cover on this issue, Sam. Just 
keep it up and someday it'll creep all through 
your magazine. When it does I'll read it from cover 
to cover. Very neatly portrayed, appealing to intelligence. Now do it for the stories instead of leaving them on a putrescent level of sub-human decadency. 

I shall write that story and you'll willingly buy 

it. 

So Steinbeck is "nauseating, depraved and_ 
mad" in his portrayal of people? A mind locked 
behind doors must have said that. I know the 
people he wrote about and that's the way people 
are. Try to disprove me.— P.O. Box 445. Olivehurst, Calif 

How'd they ever pass this kid for the Navy? 
They must be trying to lose the cold war. Now 
he's not only got practically all of the men sore 
at him, but he's added all the women. What's 
the old adage about judging a man by the enemies he's made? With Seibel that includes just 
about everybody. Except Ken Butland. And 
probably not even him very long. Still we gotta 
admit we like Seibel ourselves. It's his modesty. 

HEROES AND VAT 69 

by Dick Clarkson 

Dear Sam : Where was Seibel ? You didn't 
have a letter by him in the Oct. ish of SS. Now. 
I'd grown right fond of that bhoy ... in a tear-histhroat-out sort of way. Now I can't call him 
names. Wotla letdown. 

But to ye editorial. Never fear . . . my ideas of 
eds and their offices were nothing like that. Or 
not much at any rate. I had thought more on 
these lines : All editorial offices have a hard, severe 
oak cfask trimmed with brightly colored rejection 
slips. There are two piles on top of the desk. One 
is labeled "rejected", and has two subdivisions — 
"crad" and "new author." The other is filled with 
fan letters. This pile is in a box labeled "wastebasket". There is but one secretary, and she would 
never make Marilyn Monroe jump off her calendar. 



The name of the secretary is Marilyn Monroe. 

The editor spends his day at important conferences with (1) his wife, (2) fans, and 13) the old 
Emperor Vat the 69m. And stories are NOT 
bought fifteen minutes before the mag hits the 
stands. No fan would even think of such absurdity. 
Why be so slow? Five minutes is better. 

But why go on with this? You have dispelled 
my slightest doubts. What with the prices and all 
today, you can't afford a lush palace or a gold 
inlaid desk. The only thing coming down these 
days is rain, and even that soaks you. But as to 
s-f editors being nine feet tall . . . why, Sam ! I 
knew you were shy, but then all us Martians are. 

May I ask Baidowsky just what his letter was 
all about? Here be goes off into great detail about 
how wonderful Sarge Saturn was, and after a long, 
loud "let's-have-him-back," he ups and says he don't 
want him. Now, to my alleged mind, that meanetb 
nothing or less. 

Now, as to the battle (or whatever it might be 
called by the by-now-forgotten perpetrators ) on 
great heroes who are invincible and have all the 

luck, etc, etc I dunno. I doubt that it's as 

bad as all that. S-F heroes are only the outstanding type that come along every now and then. 
Sure, they're out of the ordinary. Sure, they're 
different than you or I. Why? Mister, how much 
would you enoy a story based on a hero who leads 
the type of life you, or I. or the average "Joe 
Phann" or "John Citizen" leads? Not much. Pretty dull, I'd say. Who cares what time the average 
guy eats breakfast? • Nobody. But when the hero 
eats breakfast, you know damn well that something's gonna happen. Why do you suppose that 
the authors tell a story about this hero? Because 
he's done something radically different. He's, a 
different type of guy, and does different kinds ofthings. I know. I'd soon put down a story written 
about the average guy. But the s-f heroes aren't 
average : they DO things. That's why they're 
written about. -If the heroes had never done anything important, why, there'd be no story. Savvy? 

As to gals scantily dad, and (shhhhhh) (muffle) 
sex. why, it DOES exist, you know. Sure, you 
know. Then what in the name of the great green 
Gnu is all this blather about? There. Let that end 
it. So be it. Amen. 

I see you finally got deCamp in there. Somebow, that guy always gives me a bang. And this 
one was not at all different. Where has he been 
recently and of late? I haVen'l seen him — that I 
remember — since further back (in SS and/or 
TWS ) than I care to mention. 

And the letter column was the best since I dunno 
when. too. Conger than last isb. and long letter 
columns always satisfy. You have a new format 
CI don't have to po.nt thai ou^ too hard ), and 
only one thing remains. You guessed it. Trim 
those edges. Change nothingj but trim .'em. Then 
we'll all be happy. And, uh, Sam . . . there's a fan 
outside to see you. — 410 Kcnshujton Rd., Baltimore 
29, Md. 

So the Baidowskys are beginning to get you 
too, eh? And the Seibels? Confusing, what? 
As to trimmed edges, I dunno, but keep an eye 
on the February issue. 



THE ETHER VIBRATES 



131 



NEW TREND 

by Tim Haggard 

Dear Mr. Mines : Having come all the way 
with my favorite type of escape reading I feel the 
need of a letter to the editor for the first time 
in my thirty years of reading. 

I started way back with Gernsbaek, the first 
issues of Amazing Stories (when Buck Rogers' 
first name was Anthony) moved along the spaceopera trail with Argosy and Mimsey, staggered 
thru the thirties with Professor Jamison and his 
endless adventures, came along thru the glorious 
nova days when sociology and intelligence crept 
into stf, and still read most of the magazines. 

Now I think I detect another trend — with your 
group of magazines pushing it. LOVE. And sure 
enough, a group of fans are yelling. 

I can't remember any magazine that seemed to 
allow sex (or love) to creep into anything but the 
ending paragraphs, with die exception of something named Spicy Science Stories, which was 
published for a little while by a house which called 
itself Culture Publishing Company. 

At any rate, I will keep watching to see how 
this new trend of yours turns out. Our fans seem 
to forget that a lot of writing has gone into what 
is now the biggest development in publishing since 
the end of the war. 

Remember, we have lots of new fans. And no 
one can tell exactly what some of them want. Fans 
who screamed loudly at the picture "The Thing" 
never seemed to realize that it was the first Stf 
movie most movie-fans had seen. The slick "corn" 
— excellent plotting, dialog, and action, probably 
made more readers than anything in the past five 
years. Same applies to the "Day the Earth Stood 
Still." 

But my hat's off to you, Mr. Mines. Glad to see 
you trying something new— even if it turns out 
badly. Who knows, ten years from now you may 
be praised at the conventions as the founder of a 
new style. 

I'll be watching to see how you make out. No 
more letters too. Circulation figures will speak 
better than I can. Good luck. — Hotel Stanford, 43 
West 32nd St., New York J, N. V. 

P.S. I forgot to say I like your magazines. 

Of course there's nothing new. about sex — 
that's the amazing part of the whole business,, 
that it is always greeted with a new furore. But 
don't be misled; we have no intention of publishing Sexy Startling Stories. As we seem to 
be explaining endlessly ; we are interested in 
better — i.e. more realistic — stories. If that occasionally involves sex, well this is human nature 
and more realistic. But no author gets orders 
to put sex into a story and sex is not what we 
are selling. Thanx for good wishes. 

BREAKDOWN 

by Carol McKinney 

Dear SM: I just finished reading a great novel, 
not one that barely carries you along with the plot 
(often losing you before your interest is really 



captured) but one that sends you eagerly ahead, 
wondering what the magic of words in the next 
line, paragraph, or chapter may hold for the entranced imagination. I consider it one of the 
truly great novels in science fiction today and 
wonder if perhaps there wdl not be others who 
feel the same way ? 

Of course I'm referring to -BIG PLANET by 
Jack Vance in the September issue of SS. Your 
short introduction did not begin to do it justice ; 
it is, indeed, gorgeous adventure with fascinating 
incidents and people. 

The other three stories were also very good, 
with OBLIGATION by Roger Dee leading them. 
All things considered, I will say that I've enjoyed 
this issue of SS more than any other. (If these 
incredibly good stories and novels continue I know 
someone who will break down and buy a subscription ! ) 

The cover was mediocre, however, and not worth 
any rave notices. You've done much better in the 
past. 

If there are any fen in the Provo area will 
they please contact me? In case they're interested 
in trading sf mags, that is. Also, if anyone else 
wants to trade by mail please write, no matter 
how old this issue may he when it gets to you. 
(Attention: foreign fen!)— 385 North 8th East, 
Provo, Utah 

Have been watching the mails breathlessly 
ever since. Where's that three bucks for the 
subscription ? 

KJCK IN THE TEETH 

by Ancel G. Taflinger 

My dear Samuel: No, this is NOT my first 
letter to a Science-Fiction (please note caps) 
magazine, but it is the first in which I have been 
inspired by actual nausea to take an editor to task 
"in the exercise of his official duties". 

I am at a loss to account for the bad taste which 
led you to print "Major Venture and the Missing 
Satellite" in the August issue of Startling. I read" 
this monstrous parody because I read every Science-Fiction magazine "from kiver to kiver," being one of those freaks who reads some twelve to 
fifteen hundred words per minute. Thus, if 1 skip 
a story, I fail to get my full half-hour of enjoyment from the magazine and. even in these days, 
two-bits is two-bits. Nonetheless, I found it not 
only a poor job of writing, but failed to detect any 
Mifigestion of humor whatever. In plain language 
— it stinks I 

I hold no brief far Captain Future and Charles 
E. Fritch may be E. Hamilton in disguise, attempting to get Future's fans off his neck by making 
the superman ridiculous, for all I know. Still, even 
the C F stories written by your house names 
were well-done, well-characterized, well-motivated 
and, in general, extremely interesting. Any and 
all types of Science-Fiction have been grist for my 
mill since my first experience of it— a single installment of "After a Million Years" found in a 
dog-eared copy of Argosy- Al! story in 1923. (By 
the way, I've wondered for 27 years how that 
story came out). I LIKE space-opera, but it must 
be earnest, sincere and well-written. This Major 



132 



STARTLING STORIES 



Venture tripe has none of these qualities. 

Granted that Venture is attempted humor, it is 
still an insulting kick in the teeth to those of us 
who looked upon Future as an impossible Superman but an idealistic Superman who used his 
powers for the benefit of good against the forces 
of evil. Not that I am an idealist. I am currently 
working toward a*Ph.D. in Business, where there 
ts little room for idealism. Still, there are such 
things as ethics — 

And, while in the vein and the mood, I must take 
"violent exception to the lead novel THE LOVERS 
and your editorial in support of it. The exception is 
not taken to the concept, which is as old as the 
warnings of the prophets, nor to the language, 
which to my mind is an effort at pure sensationalism having no place in either Science-Fiction or 
Fantasy — which this story is. I take my exception to the poor writing which might well grace 
the pages of Amazing or Fantastic but not those 
with the usual high standards of Startling arid 
TWS. 

As a long-time writer, I well know the difficulties of good characterization. Perhaps Farmer is 
a new author whom you are nursing along. If so, 
well and good, but why tout him so highly on this 
story. As noted before, I read it, but without interest. The characters were wooden and. in large 
measure stereotyped, the action is obscured by stiff 
writing and, for me, at least, the author's purpose 
never became clear. The purpose of narrative 
fiction is to create emotion in the reader. (See any 
textbook on writing). This one failed completely. 
"Warm emotional story—". Maybe to you, as editor, but not here. 

For Heaven's Sake, Mines, don't repeat Palmer's 
mistake and go overboard for something. Just 
because most of your readers are avid for ScienceFiction is no reason to ram a type or style down 
our throats. Merwin never printed a single letter which approved St. Clair. Yet because he 
liked her stories, we got them. Yours is the responsibility as editor to select stories but "thou dost 
protest too much when you defend your choices editorially in advance. Palmer soured me and I've 
never gone back to his former or present magazines. Bixby waft wise in getting away from Planet before Paul Anderson's mimeographed lead 
stories ruin it completely. I don't want to abandon 
the Thrilling group because of editorial insistence. 

All I'm asking, Samuel, is that you continue to 
keep up the usual Thrilling Standards, with no 
more lapses than can be prevented. Just don't try 
to force ANY stories down our throats with editorial comment. 

I know this letter is far too long but I couldn't 
get it all said in fewer words. — 1151 East 60th St. 
Chicago. 37, 111. 

We had just hauled off to let you have it 
when we remembered that long before you see 
this, the November tab will have burst upon the 
stands in all its glory and with it the crop of 
letters (only a small part of which we could 
print) raving madly about THE LOVERS. We 
will leave it to these embattled fen to take care 
of you. Except for a short word to the rest of 
vou. We recently attended a publisher's lunch


eon wherein were two guest speakers, Alfred 
Bestor and Ted Sturgeon. Bestor's talk covered 
the rise and change of science fiction from the 
early flernsback days — material which was more 
or less new to the book publishers, but would 
be entirely familiar to you fans. Then Ted 
Sturgeon got up to talk. What he had prepared, or intended to say, we'll never know. 
But he spotted us sitting there and he spent 
twenty minutes raving about THE LOVERS. 
We hadn't even sent him a free copy of the mag 
either. From the theme to the writing, Sturgeon, one of the Snest writers in the stf field, 
had nothing but respect for Farmer's skill, 
warmth and bigness in handling so difficult a 
theme. When you stop to think about it, do you 
realize how badly that delicate theme could have 
been botched ? The defense rests. • 

MATHEMATICS YET 

by Ray Capella 

Dear Sam: Hoo boy! Popp pops up with a 
TRIANGLE cover for SS ! Things must really be 
jumping in the ol' editorial- like territory! You 
daring boy, you. First the change in cover format, 
now a Popp TRIANGLE! 

This may come as a shock, old boy — but I isn't 
kicking about it because — here now, Mines, come 
on wake up. "Wake! For the sun. that scattered 
into flight the stars afore him from the field of 
night . . " Ah, that's better. 

Siriusly, no matter what the little peepul may 
say about this TRIANGLE cover, it is very well 
done! Matter of fact. I'm no longer even kicking 
about the cover-format change — not since the margin strips are being colored with more taste. Will 
appreciate even more when the right hand strip 
matches in color with the title-color, as in the August '52 ish. 

As for this sex-in-stf er — discussion we're having: Come now, fellow BEMs and assorted little 
monsters, aren't we being slightly silly i Leave us 
just take the editorial viewpoint: Sex in stf when 
it is only an essential, or entirely part of the story. 
Otherwise. Phoo ! on those who put sex in it for 
sex's sake. I can take an stf yarn with sex in it — 
have done so — and enjoy it, so long as it follows 
the above prescription. You said it, Sam! 

BUT — Sam, why not apply the same to covers? 
And if you don't, please alternate between girlie 
covers 'n stf covers by Schomburg or Emsh, huh? 
I say this, 'cause you dropped hints in the latest 
TWS about coming TRIANGLE covers. Looking 
back on stf. I see TRIANGLES all over the fieldmore than I can bear. °-0% of 'em are like that. 
So . . . let's keep those Stf covers that have been 
coming to us through SS. Personally. I think 
they've reached the standard set by Bonestell ! 

And don't tell me you don't have any word on 
what's done to SS on the art staff! That's a lotta 
jetwash. Bixby said that to me at the NYCON. 
I remember be looked rather disgruntled — probably 
'cause there was no bar to go with the CON ( a 
reason that left yours truly feeling bad too. You 
can have a word in the staff — you've been making 



THE ETHER VIBRATES 



133 



changes already! — 480 Clinton Ave., Brooklyn 16, 

N.Y. 

What the heck is a triangle cover ? We 
counted four side? to the niag. Doesn't a triangle have three? Might set a new vogue in 
magazines yet. Like three-cornered pants. Hoo 
boy. 

LOCK THE DOOR 

by Mike Chandler 

Dear Bureau of Mines: As I crawled from mine 
cage this murky morning I discovered a copy of 
SS for September. Wow ! Griambots and zipangotes vet! Oh. Sam, wotta storv BIG PLANET 
is! I rate THE PERFECT GENTLEMAN second. Good plot. In 3rd place THE OBLIGATION furp!) Last is NIGHT TALK. El Putrid.— 514 (V. Si. Kary St., Carthage, Texas. 

P.S. Any fans in Marshall. Shreveport or East 
Texas, please write me! 

No beefs on BIG PLANET, which was a 
joy to read, even to these tired old eyes. But 
THE PERFECT GENTLEMAN was a writer's story, lad, takes another writer to appreciate the sheer perfection of it. Like Sturgeon 
and THE LOVERS. 

AULD LANG SYNE 

by Norman Clarke 

Dear Sammy: BRING BACK CAPTAIN FUTURE. Anthologize him, reprint him. give us 
original CF stones, but BRING HIM BACK!!! 
The sooner, the better. Charles E. Fritch's MAJOR VENTURE AND THE MISSING SATELLITE made me yearn for my old hero all the 
more. By the way, that little gem was the funniest 
stf story I ever read. 

Your August editorial regarding the lead novel, 
THE LOVERS, was the best you've ever written 
since you took over the reins of TWS/SS. And 
since vour inaguration as king, you've never printed a better novel than THE LOVERS. Terrific 
story, that. Hard-cover material turns up quite 
frequently in both your mags. 

The novelets and shorts made the August issue 
the answer to a stfan's prayer. The Bergey cover, 
though, left something to be desired. 

I agree with John Brunner 100%. MORE AND 
GHASTLIER MACHINES to grace TWS/SS's 
covers. — 2328 Pine Street, Seaford, L,L. 

Okay, stop twisting our arm. If you gotta 
twist, twist Jerry's arms, they're tentacles anyway and cot no bones. I'm glad one Cap Future 
fan could see there was good clean tun in Major 
Venture and isn't howling for blood. You want 
some original CE stories in an anthology ? 
H'mnimm. 

ORGANIZATION 

by Robert A. Flaring 

' Dear Sir: TRIGGER THOUGHTS by Curt 



Storm rang a bell and I dug out Durant's STORY 
OF PHILOSOPHY. In the preface to the second 
edition Durant says: 

"Human knowledge had become unmanageably 
vast ; every science had begotten a dozen more, 
each subtler than the rest." 

He goes on to mention the tremendous advances 
made by astronomy, geology, physics, physiology, 
anthropolgy, archeology, history, theology, political 
theory, inventions, economic greeds and philosophy. 
He then said, "Human knowledge had become too 
great for the human mind. All that remained was 
the scientific : ,/ecialist who knew more and more 
about less and less »nd the philosophical speculator 
who knew less and less about more and more. The 
specialist put on blinders in order to shut out from 
his vision all the world but one little spot to which 
he glued his nose. Perspective was lost. "Facts' 
replaced understanding: and knowledge, split into 
a thousand isolated fragments, no longer generated 
wisdom. 

"In this situation, the function of the professional teacher was clear. It should have been to mediate between the specialist and the nation—" 

Didn't someone say that it would have taken scientists working separately 20 or 30 years to develop the atom bomb? The Manhattan project was a 
good example of coordination and cooperation under the worst of circumstances due to the need for 
extreme secrecy. 

If this type of organizing and thinking were 
applied to research in cancer, tuberculosis etc.. 
they would be just as successful. 

True, there is more and more exchange of ideas 
among and within the sciences but as Curt Storm 
infers, the scientists would be indignant at any 
attempt at control and interference by an "outsider." 

t sympathize with them, but believe it will eventually come about.— 787 K. 200, Cleveland 19, Ohio. 

Happy we are that somebody brought this up 
—though we haven't read Durant for years we 
think he rates as a crystallizer of thought, a 
weeder out of underbrush a man with the priceless gift of making the obtuse seem simple. Well 
do we remember his matchless paraphrasing of 
Spinoza and then our own catastrophic attempts 
to read Spinoza in the original. 

A PAT ON THE HEAD 

by Rory M. Faulkner 

Dear Mr. Mines : Well, you've done it again. 
Put out a top-notch issue of Startling in this September- number. The novel by Jack Vance is the 
most fascinating thing I've seen in a long time. I 
have always been utterly bewitched by stories of 
wanderings — the Odyssey used to be my favorite 
when a child — and this one certainly took its hero 
over plenty of territory. The atmosphere and descriptions of the big planet intrigued me as much 
as the story. Vance achieved an effect of sheer 
beauty seldom found in a s-f yarn. And those beautiful, beautiful names — Myrtlesee, Jubilith, Tsalombar. Beaujolais— they are sheer music to pronounce. 
The whole place seems so real one can almost draw 



STARTLING STORIES 



a map of it. PEease put me down for that reservation on the first ship to Big Planet ! 

Of the other three stories, I think the little short 
one. Night Talk appeals to me most. Then conies 
The Obligation— this one is really outstanding. 
The Perfect Gentleman is cute, but not very 
thought provoking. 

As for the cover, I like all the blood, fire and 
gore, but I am not so sold on the pop-eyed gal 
with ex-opthalmic goitre. Give me the NEW 
Bergey — anytime. ( iood -heaven s — who'd ever 
think I'd be calling for that guy? 

If this goes on— SS will outshine all the others 
in the field. One thing — PLEASE don't publish 
any of those tough detective ^ales a la Mickey 
Spillane, only thinly veneered as s-f. If I want detective stories I can read detective magazine*! 

Farewell, with another pat on the head from 
the great-gramma.— Geneva Place. Covina, 
Calif. 

P.S. Unlike Marian Bradley. I still have an 
aching yen to see over the top of the next hill 
myself ! 

THE PERFECT GENTLEMAN not very 
thought provoking;? Depends upon what you 
think about, nicht wahr? Should we have our 
minds sent out to be dry-cleaned? 

THE WOMEN 

by Marian Cox 

Dear Sam : Being a woman of considerable determination, I'm still actively crusading for more 
men on magazine covers. James Oggeruio, apparently, likes women on the covers. That's his privilege. However, may I point out to him that in 
his little survey of those who dislike scantily clad 
girls, he has neglected to mention one rather large 
group? Women. Wc have no over-powering desire to see beautiful babes on the covers. A luscious lassie leering at us from airless space doesn't 
strike us as being particularly impressive. If anything, she impresses us as being utterly ridiculous. 
No girl in her right mind would brave the discomforts of a vacuum clad in nothing but a little bit 
of metal upholstery. ( And speaking of discomfort, 
if you'd like an idea of how uncomfortable those 
things would be, just try wearing a strapless. Boned 
bra for an hour or two. Go on. Sam — I dare you! ) 

We poor gals demand the right to be clad sensibly when we appear on covers. Not that we expect you to deprive the poor men of their clothes — 
just distribute things a little more evenlv. After 
all. why should we freeze, stop breathing, etc.. 
just so the male sex can be comfortable. Let the 
old softies try flitting through space in their underwear! Let them give up the foolish practice of 
breathing 

And while I'm on this subject of equal rights for 
women. I'd like to put in a plug for a newlyfnrmed fan club designed to give woman a few 
equal risrhts in fandom. It's THE FANETTES. 
and as the name imnlies. all members are females. 
We have a zine. THE FEMZIN'E. put out entirely by fern fans. The first issue will have been 
mailed by the time this letter sees print. The gals 
who are members have really entered into the 
spirit of the thing, and expect to have a lot of fun 
in the club, Dues are 50^ a year and any further 
information will be sent on request. Come on, gals, 



here's your chance to prove that you're just as 
good a fan as most of these men who protest so 
loudly against gals who are fans. And you'll have 
a wonderful time as well! 

The September SS was very good. 1 enjoyed 
everything, but one sentence in the guest editorial 
amused me no end. Says Mr. Leinster, "Nobody 
needs any longer to be on the defensive for his 
flair for science fiction." Ha! He should meet 
my family. That sentence would be retracted so 
fast your head would swim! 

Sam. please give us hack the old cover arrangement? And the old type contents page? Please? 
And what happened to the little line at the bottom 
of the contents page that kept us poor readers 
from hounding the magazine dealer to death about 
the new STARTLING? Let's have it back, 
please. 

Loved that Finlay Ulo. Why not have more of 
his stuff?— 79th Ada. Sq.. Sioux City. Iviva. 

One reason you can't have more Finlay is 
that he is the most meticulous worker there ever 
was. He slaves over each drawing, frequently 
staying up all night over one. Consequently his 
output is limited by the rigorous hands of the 
clock. There's only so much a man can do in 
his braking hours. Buh-lieve me, we get all the 
Finlays we can. 

We have given a lot of thought (three minutes) to your invitation to try wearing a- strapless, boned bra for an hour or two and enthusiastically decline. Even without the natural attributes which would make it necessary and fitting, we still somehow have the idea it would 
be thoroughly uncomfortable. The metal upholstery, of course, is on the way out anyway, except for them ferns as absolutely require it. And 
judging by trends in the trade, it looks as if it 
won't be long before ferns will appear on covers 
and on beaches without the hitherto indispensable aid of these appliances. And with that 
will go the glamor, I bet. 

FARMER FAN 

by James R. Harris 

Dear Sam : A new era has been opened in science fiction and (take a bow, Sam) STARTLING 
has opened it with a bang with THE LOVERS. 

I have been reading stf for about 15 years now 
and without a doubt THE LOVERS ranks as the 
No. 1 story of them all. Sure. I like Bradbury, 
Phillips, etc., but you can safely put Philip Jose 
Farmer at the head- of my list of favorite writers. 

Take heed. Sam, this LOVERS will draw some 
unfavorable comment, but I'll bet the favorable 
letters are tar more numerous. It is the best 
science fiction story I have ever read. Let's have 
more. 

By the way, your cover for August was the 
best you have had iji years, a perfect combination 
with THE LOVERS. 

On the side — collectors take note — I have several English stf pocket books and also a few British editions of American stf mags which I offer 



THE ETHER VIBRATES 



135 



for sale or trade to anyone. Any fans interested 
just drop me a line. Let's have another Farmer 
story at the earliest possible date.— 29l6 l /t Hampton St., Ashland, Ky. 

Is that service ? A Farmej story in this very 
issue. And keep an eye on TWS fot MOTHER, 
a new novelet by your favorite boy. 

MOLDILY PHILOSOPHICAL 

by Dgvg Hammond 

Dear Sam Mines : I just finished BIG PLANET 
by Jack Vance. It was as good as I had hoped, 
and maybe a little better. It was richly colorful, 
magnificently tipped-in, and really gorgeous. Now, 
with a few more stories like THAT under his belt 
I'm looking for Vance to surpass some of Edgar 
Rice Burroughs' work! 

Now don't wrinkle your royal brow, sir. I 
KNOW that Edgar Rice Burroughs had a trite 
lot, I KNOW his heroes are dull, six feet tall and 
grey-eyed without exception, and I KNOW his science is ridiculous, his English poor, and all that, 
BUT when it came to telling a story, a moving, 
dramatic! action-filled extravaganza ERB had no 
peers. 

Vance can tell a story and his characters are 
very real. Just a touch more to settings and impressions and BIG PLANET would have just had 
the emotional haze around it that make CHESSMEN OF MARS, LAND THAT TIME FORGOT, and AT THE EARTH'S CORE good 
stories. 

So what did I say ? 

I liked the letter column as usual. No letters 
there by me, but Marian Bradlev mentioned my 
name, even if tinflatteringly ; and Joe Gibson mentioned the Philadelphia Science Fiction Society ; 
and Bix, in his personals section, was probably 
meaning me when he mentioned the initials ,L D.H." 

I'd like to get raoldily philosophical right now. 
or start crusading for some personal thing, or 
just shoot off my big mouth, but I've gotta stencil 
the next issue of the PSFS NEWS. My public 
awaits.— Box 89, Rumtrmcde, New Jersey. 

Marian Bradley will have your scalp if you 
spell her name with ah "o"' instead of an "a," 
so I fixed it for you. Just between us-. 'Nothing 
public about these discussions. Thanks for egoboo on BIG PLANET. Every once in a while 
we like to run a story which doesn't baffle anyone, but is just fun to read. 

GARRULOUS 

by Joe Gibson 

Dear Sam: Now this Sept. STARTLING I like! 
— 24 Kensington Ave., Jersey City 4, NJ. 

Now there's a boy who listens. We said make 
'em short and he sure did. In case your public 
is wondering whether or not you sprained your 
typewriter finger we'll tell them, Joe. We asked 
for them short. 



NOTE TO MOSKOW1TZ 

by Bobby Gene Warner 

Dear Editor; After reading the lead novel in 
the August issue of STARTLING, I have but one 
thing to say. And that is — well, with this lump 
in my throat, what can I say ? It was good. It 
was science fiction. True science fiction. The best 
of science — and that means above the level of Astounding—or what have you. And I defy anyone to 
say that it was not. It is the type of story I would 
like to read each and every time I pick up an issue 
of a science fiction magazine. I can see no reason 
why it should not see hard-cover printing in the 
near future. THE LOVERS was the sort of 
story which makes STARTLING startling. I am 
sure that I speak for all fandom when I say : 
MORE, PLEASE J 

And that cover— can it be Earle K. Bergey ? The 
old splotch and blotch Bergey of days gone by? 
If it is— then I gladly take back each and every 
nasty thought I've ever harbored about him for 
lo ! these many vears. (About six, I think.) That 
cover was G&EAT t Oh for the original. (Well, 
I can want, can I not?) (You can not! — Ed.) 

Wal, it sure seems that 1952 is going to be SS's 
BIG year. If more stories like The Lovers, PassPort to Pax, etc., continue to appear between your 
hallowed pages, 1952 will be your REST year. Of 
course. 1953 will be better. Then 1954 even better, 
and so on into infinity. 

Oh, chuckle, chuckle. Do we get a sequel to 
MAJOR VENTURE AND THE MISSING 
SATELLITE? But I suppose that's up to Charles 
E. Fritch, huh ? 

The best letter in TEV was written by D. Y. 
Cummins. I suppose she was referring to psychoanalysis (or maybe autosuggestion .' ) when she 
said . and by inward probing, discover and 
remove the cause of which jitters are the result." 
Thank you, Mr, Cummins, for a very intelligent 
letter. 

Oh, Henry M, Cap. Fut. is done and dead of a 
too-deep inhalation of Stardust. So let him be, 
will you. And Grag's rusty ; the android's long 
since decomposed; Simon Wright is making electric brains for John W. Campbell, Jr. ; and Joan 
C. is married to a Martian Murp, and now has 
five pseudo-kids, so she can't do much in the way 
of galactic gallivanthi' these days._ In short — the 
old Cap's gone (sob). So let Sam alone, huh? 
(There, now, Sam, if he hounds you agam, I shall 
personally. Thingamabob him — right across his 
"posterior!) 

In case this sees print — Hey, fen, I need certain 
issues of STARTLING and THRILLING WONDER from 1940 to present. They MUST be 
MINT. I'll pay 30c' each for the ones I need. 
Maybe more if they're Minty Mint. Send me lists 
of what you have. 

( Now, Sam, after all the nice things I said, 
ancha gonna print my plug? Huh? Puleeze?) — 
P.O. Box 63, Bessmay. Texas. 

With all the plugs we've printed we should 
be able to retire to a stud farm in Kentucky. 
And none of your double meanings either. As 
to Cap Future, Moskowitz is in there slugging 
yet. 



136 STARTLH 
FROM JAPAN 

by Tets-u Yano 

Dear Sir : I beg your pardon that my English 
is not so correct and you will very much annoyed 
to read my letter. Why I write you is as to the 
Science Fiction. 

I am 28 years old and have a wife and one baby 
and my profession is photographer and have a little 
photo-finishing shop. I learned English 8 years 
when I were student at high school and university— 
I studied law. I could not graduate university because I entered in Army last war. But my English 
is very poor. 

I have one clever brother-in-law. He is a professor of Architecture. Many nights we used to 
have pleasant talk which concerned Universe, other 
planet and so on. You can imagine. In several 
field in fiction. 1 have much interest in scientific 
story especially concerned with other planet, rocket, etc 

In Japan there are many magazine that contain 
something like "literature' but we have not "scientific-fiction magazine." As to mystery, there is 
one named HOSEKI (Jewel)— then I have to read 
American magazine. After I had read through 
several numbers I thought in my mind that something unknown interesting field ur career shall be 
opened. I cannot remember which is better to use 
— shall or will — with this fact that I am reading! 
science fiction. 

Of course I like camera but I like printed page 
better. I mean I like book. I don't know my 
future figure, but if possible I want to work in 
the field which have some concerning with science 
fie lion. 

Then I made up my mind that after now I will 
read S-F seriously and systematically. Why 1 
used the word "systematically." Even when I read 
PLANET MENDER or something like such fiction, if I did not know the solar system I can't understand the story precisely. But why Watson can 
fly so fast to Mercury from Mars? By what space 
ship? 1 can't imagine. 

My scientific knowledge is so poor, and I want 
to get teacher or kindness guide who teach me 
that which book first and second — systematic reading for me. 

If you may mention me the necessary book and 
publisher. I am very much pleased. Many times 
I hesitated that to whom can I write and ask for 
help. To Mr. Blish? No. Supposing he is very 
busy. To Mr. Editor of science magazine., He is 
some busy too. But I dare write you by rriy poor 
English. Mr. Mines. 

Please show me my way to read and to understand science fiction, please. If I could get your 
reply, I am very much appreciated. 

Good luck to you and your magazine.— $67 Vokoya Uosakicho. Higashinadaku, Kobe, Japan. 

Fen who have been lusting for Japanese postmarks on their mail have a chance to meet a 
charming personality with an alert intelligence 
and do a good turn too by answering some of 
Mr. Vano's burning questions. I'm sure he'd be 
delighted to correspond with American fen, poor 
fellow. We have recommended a few books to 
him, alsr dropped the thought that if he just 



G STORIES 

keeps reading stf long enough he'll catch on. 
But in the meantime, why not write him yourselves ? 

THE BEST THINGS IN LIFE ARE FREE 

by Patrick M. f. Kelly 

Sam : Shame on you for the take-off of Capt. 
Future in the current issue of SS. I hope every 
C.F. fan will take you to task. As for your comment on my letter in TWS — there is no contradiction. Free thinking (?) is as much a bias as those 
of II Duce. Hitler and Stalin.— 2601 S. Figuerosa 
St., Los Angeles. 7. CaL 

How's that again ? 
ALL BURNED UP 

by Eunice E. Shaver 

Dear Mr. Mines: I am sick and tired of you 
calling that column of personal correspondence between you and a few picked friends a "fan column." 
I have written you six or seven letters, which, perhaps were not so witty or interesting to you as 
yuur friends' drivel, but which may have been of 
interest to some other reader of your magazine. 

Although. I am sorry to say it. STARTLING 
STORIES remains my favorite Science Fiction 
Magazine. 

I don't care if you read this letter or not, but 
I assure you I feel much better for having written 
it.— 612 Hamilton St.. Houston 3. Texas. 

We're spoiling you, Eunice, this is the secohd 
letter of yours we've used. Friends, did you 
say? Friends? Ha! 

BACK TALK 

by L. Sprague de Camp 

Dear Sam : Herewith some comments on the 
recent letters by Messrs. Browne, Gross, and Miller un exotic words m stories, and your replies. 

First a correction : Van Vogt once told me that 
he rhymed with "joked." 

Second, an answer : About odd astronomical 
names. ' the Babylonians began the custom of 
naming planets after their gods (Nabu. Ishtar, 
Nerigal. etc. ) because they thought they were their 
gods, which is how the pseudo-science of astrology 
started. Eater the Greeks took over the custom, 
naming the visible planets after the corresponding 
gods in their own pantheon: Hermes. Aphrodite, 
Aries, etc. And finally the Romans did likewise, 
whence Mercurius, Venus, Mars, etc. 

Then the Arabs named many stars, but being 
Muslims and lacking a multiplicity of gods, they 
named them alter ordinary things, e.g. Deneb, 
"tail." And in still later times, after the invention 
of the telescope, astronomers named other celestial objects after other Graceo-Roman mythological 
figures, other astronomers, and so on. 

Third, a question: Can anybody solve a problem that has long bothered writers of stories laid 
in an exotic setting: the remote past, the remote 
future, or another world? Nomely, what to name 



THE ETHER VIBRATES 



133 



people and places. 

Obviously Jones and Smith, Chicago and Berlin won't do. One can make up nonsense-syllables 
like Bu and Ga, but these are unconvincing because real languages aren't like that. There 
wouldn't be enough . such syllables to go round. 
(Chinese, though nominally monosyllabic, uses 
many compounds of two or three syllables to avoid 
ambiguity. ) 

Or one can adopt names from Terran history 
and mythology, but it knocks a hole in my suspension -of -disbelief when I came across "Denictno" 
in the chronicles of Conan, .for I know that this 
is modern Italian for the Classical Greek "Demetrios" and shouldn't turn up in Howard*! imaginary 
prehistoric world. It also gives me pause when 
(as has twice happened in recent years) I come 
across "Rhiannon" as an extra-terrestrial name, 
knowing that Rhiannon was an ancient Welsh goddess. 

Or one can do as I sometimes do: invent an exotic language of logical grammar and phonology, 
modelled alter some Terran tongue, as Gozashtandou is suggested by Persian. But then some readers balk at the resulting words even when they 
are quite pronounceable if you look at them. 

The trouble seems to be the modern system of 
teaching children to read. This "sight-reading" 
treats words as units to be recognized by shape, 
as if they were Chinese ideograms, without bothering with tfie sound-significance of individual letters. The children learn to read faster earlier than 
they otherwise would, but never fully master the 
fantastic vagaries of English spelling, and when 
they meet a word of unfamiliar shape it throws 
them completely. N'ever having learned to look 
at a word, phonetically, they find it. as one of 
my critics once put.it, "a pain in the neck" to do 
so. 

Of course in "The Glory that Was" I had no 
choice; I had to call Perikles Xanthippou Perikles Xanthippou because that was the historical 
character's real name. Most of these Greek names 
have quite simple translations, but if I had referred 
to Perikles as Surrounder the son of Yellow 
Horse (which is what Perikles Xanthippou means) 
[ fear I should have confused more readers than 
the other way. 

Well, what's the answer? If the readers can't 
propound a final one, perhaps they can have some 
fun kicking the subject around. One could confine 
one's stories to homey tales of soda-jerkers named 
Henry Jones who accidentally mix up an elixir of 
life when filling an order for a banana split. Such 
stories are all right too, but if science-fiction ever 
conies to consist exclusively of them I fear I shall 
find it just too dull and have to go back to working 
for a living.— Walling ford, Pa. 

Gad. not real work — ! Anything but that. 
Though offhand we lean toward the theory that 
some of Sprague's stories represent some work, 
or a reasonable facsimile thereof. 

Two letters from Craig Sutton — a tearful plea 
for trimmed edges, a rave for BIG PLANET, 
a nod for guest editorials, a gripe about the 
short stories, a sneer at Bradley and R. K. Freeman and this: 
•", . . .And being the stupidest fan today, I 



still can't see so much as a remote connection 
between fruit bugs and me. I'll be twice damned 
if I look like a fruit bug . . . given, I'm ugly. 
But 1 am XOT a fruit bug. Somebody else recommended that the good doctor put the humans 
into bottles and study them. That I agree to. 
Maybe then we could get a good analogy." 

As to whether you are a fruit bug or not — on 
that we cautiously reserve decision pending the 
arrival of a photograph for study purposes. And 
putting you into a bottle is a fascinating idea — 
don't tempt me. But as 1 have explained until 
my arm is weary, you don't have to be a fruit 
bug. I he life force works for all living creatures. Doncha remember the Egyptians, Babylonians, Persians — all the races which built up 
mighty empires and then got tired? 

STF-STARVED SCOTS 

by Matt A. Elder 

Dear Sam : Here speaketh a voice from out of 
Scottish fandom. From this forgotten corner of 
the world come my praises. Long have I searched 
in the realm of the Back Number, but I'll eat a 
haggis if I could find a letter from the Republic of 
Scotland. 

I only have the first seven SS's for this year . . . 
(Ed. has here deleted a page of listings. Matt 
likes Leinster. Chandler, St. Clair, Kuttner. de 
Camp, Brackett, raves about Crossen and 
Schomburg, sneers at the March SS cover and at 
Alex Victor.) 

Would some nice American fen please correspond with me? And another request. Does any 
kind person feel like being charitable? We pore 
stf-starved Scots will be pleased to accept anything in even hal treasonable condition — please? 

Well. Sam, if SS and TWS keep on coming as 
good or better I for one will have nothing to 
grouse about. My best wishes to you. 

I am very sorry I could not write this in tartan 
ink but we may get around to that before my second half-yearly report. Till then I will live on my 
hopes to see this in the ranks of the honoured in 
SS. — 37 Moray Place. Glasgou; Scotland. 

Was about to offer to trade you some back 
copies of SS for a haggis, until I looked it up 
in Webster . . . urg. You can have them for 
free. Anybody who'll eat that deserves them. 

PLUG 

by J. T. Oliver 

Dear Mr. Mines: Today I had the great pleasure 
of meeting one of your newer writers, a guy 
named Roger Dec. He is a very nice, friendly sort 
of fellow, about .17, really intelligent and a bit 
modest. He has a Pontiac, a couple of dogs and 
one charming and beautiful wife, who is equallv 
friendly and easy to know. We were really pleased 
with them and re'gret they couldn't stay longer. 
Roger is now working on a second novel and several shorter items. He has stories scheduled for 



several magazines other than yours as well_ as a 
couple of anthologies. I don't think it will be 
long before he's one of the Big Name writers. It 
couldn't happen to a nicer guy! He takes writing 
seriously. It isn't just something that he does for 
money; he likes it and wants to do the best possible job. 

New SS is pretty good. The novel is interesting 
and the other items were pretty good. Cover was 
excellent— 315-27t h St., Columbus, Ga. 

Dee -lighted. 

ON BELIEF AND SUCH 

by Rev. C. M. Moorhead 

Sir : At the risk of |tarting another "religious 
war" I would like to say a few things in answer 
to some remarks made by Mrs. Mary Corby in 
the September 1952 issue of STARTLING STORIES. 

She said. "The two great enemies of birth-control 
are ignorance and religion." Why is it that many 
people use "religion" as the scape-goat for all the 
world's ills and woes? This is a great age for 
"passing the buck" and I find that the out-worn 
word "religion" comes in for more than it's share. 

I confess that I grow weary from the way the 
word is overworked. Religion is a broad subject ; 
I'd like for the lady to be more specific. To 
what religion is she alluding? There are 13 extant 
religions today and each has it's following. Does 
the word, as she used it, refer to Christianity? If 
so, to which branch does she refer? Christianity is 
divided into 3 main branches : Roman Catholic, 
Greek Orthodoxy and Protestantism. Which of 
these three is opposed to birth-control ? Which 
of these three discharged the doctors from the hospital for giving birth-control advice to their patients ? 

Again, she said, "In the better feittfoun tries . . . 
knowledge of birth-control has been disseminated 
m spite of the opposition of the church." Another 
hroajt general term. What is meant by the term 
"church?" 

A person cannot judge all Christianity by one 
segment of it! I wonder if people realize that many, 
many churches of liberal protestantism not only 
teach but urge birth-control, and this not hecause 
it was forced upon them, but because it seemed the 
humanitarian thing to do. As a minister. I myself, 
have given such advice to many young couples who 
have come to me for pre-marital counselling. 

Finally, while she does not state it in so many 
words, yet the implication is there, that "religion" 
is to blame for the abortions racket. I think that 
is carrying the thing a little too far. My observations have been, and I do not claim infallibility, 
that many of the women caught in the abortion? 
racket are either too lazv to use contraceptives or 
are caught in the family-way out of wedlock! 
The chief reason why so many girls are caught in 
the family way out of wedlock is because their 
parents are too "damned" cowardly to tell them 
the facts of life, sufficiently early to avoid that pitfall. So don't blame the "church" for that. 

I get sick and tired of the attitude that Christianity is the basis for all the world's ills. There 
are altogeher too many people, who parrot-like, 
quote what someone else said without taking the 
trnuhle to see if the person quoted is correct. 



Some wit once said. "We believe only what we 
want to believe." and after reading the fan letters 
in S.S. and T.W.S., I am convinced that he hit 
the nail squarely on the head ! 

And now I will crawl back into my web behind 
the organ. — Community Church. Kcllcys [stand, 
Ohio. 

We have a small suspicion that Rev. Moorhead may have put his finger squarely on it 
when he says "we believe only what we want to 
believe." May turn out yet that belief is a matter of the ductless glands. 

CLASSICS AND ULCERS 

by Jan Gardner 

Dear Sam: Just finished reading the Oct. ish of 
STARTLING STORIES. Cover was excellent. 
Kind of made me shiver even in all this summer 
heat. At first glance it would appear the new format 
for your front covers cause the illustration to shrink 
up too much but the compensation of no lettering 
will probably justify this format in the eyes of those 
readers who delight in tacking up exceptional covers 
on club house walls. This way all they gotta do is 
snip off the edges containing the mag title and story 
titles and zippo, an unmarred reproduction of space 
or BEMS or whatever presents itself. Maybe you 
should print the mag with two identical front 
covers on the front; that way the more intense 
strata of fandom can whip out their three-dimensional-illusion photo viewers, pop in miniature reproductions of the cover and EGAD'S MAN 1 It's 
come alive ! Etc.. etc. Might even make money out 
of it (Phew . . . how corny can I get? Anything 
for a sob, in this day and age). 

Now for the meat of your mag ; the ETHER VIBRATES. (Whoops, should have said the stories. 
Oh well ; might as well be hanged for something 
good.) I was seriously considering becoming a stf 
editor as being the quickest and easiest way to get 
my own stories published until I read your heroic 
saga of editordom. Now I've changed my mind; 
I'll keep on grinding out my brilliant classics and let 
the editor develop ulcers reading 'em. As an author 
I stand a chance to survive. As an editor the longevity graph seems dangerously low. Besides, what 
are you guys gonna do for a living when we finally 
do land On Mars? At least the authors can become 
roving reporters. Yuk, yuk. 

After reading your fascinating reader's column 
and noting the excellent plotting, characterization 
(and how!) and smash endings (but they're all so 
much alike; a street number and a state: let's have 
more originality) in each letter I was prepared to 
cast my eagle optics on the first page of the first 
story, namely ASYLUM EARTH. Now here, I 
seys, is a story! It's even got sex in it! Held me 
spellbound to the last page. Need more be said? By 
the way . . . hint, hint . . in case Elliott writes a 
sequel to this masterpiece, I gotta idea for a smash 
beginning. Brings the same characters right into 
the story with vim and vigor, all loose ends immediately tied up. (Gee, I didn't know you were so 
brilliant. Oh but I'm not. I'm just modest about it. 
Transcript 1,199 taken from thought records of 
eventful, historic making conversations between the 
conscious and sub conscious minds of earthlinjj 
Jjann Ggardnerr, Esq, Etc., Etc.) Said idea available at reasonable terms. Nothing cheap about me; 



nosiree. 

THE GUIDED MAN was a welcome diversion 
in stf humor. This type of stuff I can stand lots 
more of. Reams and reams of it, as long as it's as 
well written as deCamp's delightful opus. Real humor is sorrowfully lacking in stf and me being a 
serious kind of a guy, I need stuff like that to cheer 
me up, Thanxs much. 

THROWBACK was okay in a fair sort of way. 
That scoundrel Jon irked me considerably with his 
frigid attitude. Al! that fun he could of had . . . 
oh well, just a story. What am I saying! Maybe it 
was better than fair after all, to get me that interested. 

NOTICE OF INTENT was an excellent short 
story. I enjoyed this one very much. Interesting, 
worthwhile motivation. The author writes from 
the heart it seems as well as from the brain and the 
linger tips. 

GRAVESONG was tops in my opinion. Tliis 
sort of story has a marvelous blend of realism and 
atmosphere in it, something that seems to come as 
a result of a good handling as well as a well balanced plot. I'd like to see a full length novel by 
Miller with a similar style. How about it? 

DISPOSAL could have been disposed of by the 
same rings that made the story passable-fair. It 
missed being sparkling humor by a sizable hairbreadth. 

Having taken the stories apart (thereby satisfying my rejection-slip-ego) let's start on the illos. 
Here let it be known to all and sundry that the 
following gilt edged comments are only one artist's opinion. (Yup, I'm an artist too; I say this 
in full realization that my genius is irnfortuiiately 
not appreciated by this war-weary world, but some 
day ... ah yes, some day ! ... my portraits will 
hang in the rogues gallery . . . oops, I mean in the 
art galleries. P.S. to Ed. You may delete these 
asinine parathentical ramblings if you wish; I think 
they stink too, but it's a sure-fire way of seeing a 
letter in print. Oh no! NO! ANYTHING BUT 
THAT! NOT THE WASTE BASKET I) 

Finlay, as always, is super-superb. Any story 
endorsed by his drawings is qualification enough 
for me to plunge into it with avid interest. How 
about several illustrations through the pages of the 
lead novel? It has always seemed to me that this 
sparked the format up to such a degree that the 
reader's interest was drawn on and on as if his eyeballs were made of iron and the illos had some 
weird magnetic property about them, especially 
where a moderate sprinkling of lightly clad femmes 
are present. 

On the whole your illustrations are clear-cut. 
presentable and further the story-interest. I don't 
know who did the illo on P. 109 but stuff like this 
and what Finlay turns out is very eye-catching; 
good pen and ink stuff with clear line technique is 
always in a class by itself. 

The features? To tell the truth (what a shock) 
I don't read 'em unless the title sounds extra-good; 
ETHER VIBRATES is enough of a feature for 
my poor brain to absorb. Like I say it's the meat 
of the mag; then I go on to the stories for the 
psycho-therapy their entertainment-value gives me. 
— Apradelon, Canterbury, N.H. 

The question is whether you or I can stand 
more of THE GUIDED MAN kind of humor. 
I probably am a pushover for the farce type 



TO PEOPLE 
Who Want To Write 

but can't get started 

Do you have that constant urge to write 
but fear that a beginner hasn't a chance ? 
Then listen to what the former editor of 
Liberty said on this subject : 

"There is more room for newcomers in the writing field 
today than ever before. Some of the greatest of writing 
men and women have passed from the scene in recent 
yesra. Who will take their places? Who will he the new 
Robert W. Chambers, Edgar Wallace, Rudyard Kipling? 
Fame, riches and the happiness of achievement await the 
new men and women of power." 



SELLS FOUR ARTICLES AT 
BEGINNING OF COURSE 

"Before I had finished the third assignment, 1 sold four articles thai 
have brought in over twice the cost 
of the complete course. Had anyone 
told me when I began the N.I. A. 
Course, that I could do that, I would 
hare considered him crazy." — Walter F. Roper, 95 Benedict Terrace, 
Longmeadow, Mass. 



Writing Aptitude Test — FREE! 

THE Newspaper Institute of America offers a froo Writing Aptitude Test. Its object is to discover new recruiti 
for the army of men and women who add to their income 
by fiction and article writing. The Writing Aptitude Test 
is a simple but expert analysis of your latent ability, your 
powers of imagination, logic, etc. Not all applicants pass 
this test. Those who do are qualified to take the famous 
N. I. A. course based on the practical training given by 
big metropolitan dailies. 

This is the New York Copy Desk Method which teaches 
you to write by writing. You develop your individual style" 
instead of trying to copy that of others. Although you work 
at home, on your own time, you are constantly guided by 
experienced writers. You "cover" actual assignments such 
as metropolitan reporters get. It is really fascinating work. 
Each week you see new progress. In a matter of morithj 
you can acquire the coveted "professional" touch. Then 
you're ready for market with greatly improved chances of 
making sales . 

Moil the Coupon Now 

But the first step is to take the FREE Writing Aptitude 
Test. It requires but a few minutes and costs nothing. So 
mail the coupon now. Make the first move towards the most 
enjoyable and profitable occupation — writing for publication! Newspaper Institute of America, One Park Avenue, 
New York 16, N. Y. (Founded 1925) 

VETERANS: COURSE APPROVED FOR VETERANS' TRAINING! 




*f Wr 

I about 



Newspaper Institute of America 
One Park Ave., New York 16, N. T. 

Sena me, without cost or obligation, your 
Writing Aptitude Teat and further information 
about writing for profit. 



Mr. I 
Mm. 
Miss i 



Copyright 1951, Newspaper Jnstituts of America. 



St Von Ms Qju%u, 
Wohd %amBA and (Pu}jh&


YOUR BEST BETS ARE 

POPULAR CROSSWORD PUZZLES 
BEST CROSSWORD PUZZLES 
VARIETY CROSSWORD PUZZLES 

and 

NEW CROSSWORD PUZZLES 

Now on Sale at All Stands! 



THE DANGER IS REAL 



©f^IVIL defense officials every^— ' where face a real handicap 
in our American talent for putting things off. We read that 
there is danger of war — but 
not before 1953, or 1954, or 
1956. We sigh and relax. We 
know in our hearts that the 
danger is real. But we are content to wait until -it is at our 
very doors before taking the first steps to protect 
ourselves. 

Let's face it. So long as we need armed forces in 
a state of readiness, Main Street must be ready, too. 
We must get ready and stay ready for as long as 
the threat of aggression exists — five years, ten years, 
fifty years if need be. 

The Kremlin never stops plotting to get what it 
wants. Some of us are still in the planning stage of 
the fight to keep what we hold most dear. The 
time to get busy is now. If an attack comes it can 
be met only by people who are trained and waiting, not by people who merely meant to be. What 
would you do if it happened tomorrow? You don't 
know? Then join your local civil defense organization today! 



comedy in which the hero suffers and suffers 
the slings and arrows of outrageous fate, but as 
I have somewhere explained before, I cut my 
baby teeth on P. G. Wodehouse and haven't 
ever outgrown it. Let's face it — it is 'my unshakable, if wobbly belief, that real humor is 
one of the highest intellectual exercises. Why 
for, because in order to be a humorist, a man 
has to have an exceptionally well balanced mind, 
so that he can see the ludicrous and the ridiculous in anv situation. 

If you don't think that is a highly intellectual 
exercise try it. So why is Milton Berle funny 
did you say? Who says? 

As to ulcers — does it begin with heartburn 
in the morning? Where's that bicarb? f can 
still taste my breakfast. Letter columns like this 
one in four magazines are undoubtedly taking 
years off my life, but the only thing that sustains me is the high call of giving these classic 
(urp!) fan letters to the world. May I be forgiven for that. 

Space is all but used up again, kids — here's 
what we can squeeze in : Sylvia Kinder, 143 
Wabash St., San Bernardino, Cab is organizing a fan club, wants members. Francis H. P. 
Knight, 7 Goscote Place, Walsall; Staffs, England chats entertainingly about old-time stories. 
Gwen Cunningham is living in a trailer, adds 
her rave about THE LOVERS and suggests 
calling him Phillippe Jose Agricola. 

Hilary F. Wiggin, 162 Maple St., Maiden, 
48, Mass. is impressed with THE LOVERS, 
points out that it deals with people, thus shares 
greatness with Bradbury — the best. Celia Block, 
Box 1031 Sioux City, Iowa, likes the letter 
column, defends scantily clad girls on the covers 
as understandably adding interest and wonders 
if she is the only stf fan in Sioux City. Look up 
Marian Cox, Celia. Pat Davis of Seven Springs. 
N.C. reports that she found THE LOVERS 
rather slimy and wonders if we threw it in just 
to start a fight. George Edwards, 5323 Mission Woods Terr., Kansas City 3, Kans., wants 
to start a stf club. Terry Carr, 134 Cambridge 
St., San Francisco, Cat, gripes about the lack 
of humor in this column and emotes: 
STARTLIXG is a magazine 
With covers beyond compare. 
The layout's good as are the yarns. . , 
But something isn't there. 
I miss the wit that Menvin showed. 
And the column that he ran. 
But don't mind me a bit SaMincs 
I'm just a Memnn fan. 
Bobby Gene Warner, Box 63, Bessmay, Texas wants back numbers of SS and TWS from 



140 



1939 to 1944, will pay 25c a head In good condition. John Donahue Jr. of 619 Drake Ave., 
Roselle, N.J., is only 11 years old and his parents won't let him read THE LOVERS because 
of the pictures. (Put it in the trunk for five 
years, John. Maybe SPACE STORIES would 
be better for you ?) James F. Lynch wants dates 
of stories: VALLEY OF CREATION— July, 
1948, THE DARK WORLD— Summer 1946, 
THE BLUE FLAMINGO — January 1948. 
Mike Wigodsky says BIG PLANET is Vance's 
best and wants to know if ASYLUM EARTH 
is KINDERGARTEN (yep, we explained that 
in an early issue.) Bob Lloskins, Lyons Falls, 
N.Y., liked BIG PLANET and Leinster's guest 
editorial, offers for sale Margulies & Friend's 
MY BEST SCIENCE FICTION STORIES 
at a discount. 

Joseph L. Green of 823 Magnolia Ave., Panama City, Fla. applauds our — ahem — courage in 
printing so unique a story as THE LOVERS. 
Arthur Brandenwein of 306 West 100th St., 
New York, suggests we read COSMIC 
FORCES OF MU dealing with the theory that 
our sun revolves about a superior sun. Mildred 
Moore of 116 William St., Hightstown, N.J. 
reports there is a stf book club called "The 
Reader's Service Book Club" at 119 E. San 
Fernando St., San Jose, 21, Cal., and wants 
correspondents. Jim Lewis of 440 Morningside 
Dr., Miami Springs, Fla., has a rave for 
GRAVESONG wearies of idealistic heroes who 
sacrifice themselves to save an undeserving, 
humanity. Richard Geis likes supermen heroes; 
Gregg Calkins liked our editorial in the September ish ; Douglas O. Clark, of Pacific, Missouri wants fen to write their radio stations and 
ask for stf programs ; Star Traveler Joe Semenovich says we think we got problems running a 
prozine, how about his problems running a fanzine ? 

Jim Rutherford, c/o The PHOENIX, 4222 
E. Cambridge, Phoenix, Ariz., wants to meet 
some southwest and Mexican fans. Bob Feller 
of 6516 E, Fairfield, Los Angeles, 22, Cal. is 
onI/13 years old, but read THE LOVERS 
with the feeling of having discovered something terrific; Rhoda Coulson, 1770 Columbia 
Rd. N.W., Washington, D.C., hated Major Venture to pieces, Delray Green, R.R."#4, Muncie, Indiana, wants Cap Future, a sequel to 
THE GUIDED MAN, more Manning Draco 
and Magnus Ridolph. Peter Frailey, 5055 
Bradley Boulevard #4, Bethesda, Md., liked 
ASYLUM EARTH AND THE GUIDED 
MAN . . . and we give up. . . . See you in the 
next issue. — The Editor 



W MAKE EXTRA MONEY -m* 



. EVERY BUSINESS EVERYWHERE 
USES UNION LABEL BOOK MATCHES 

No experience needed to ears big daily commission!. 
Be a di reet factory representative of the world 's largest 
exclusive UNION LABEL Book Match manufacturer. 
Prospects everywhere. Feature 
Glamour Girls, Hillbillies, 
" scenics and dozens of other 

styles— Double Bocks— Jumbo 
Books — nearly 100 color combinations. New. bigger portfoli'6 | 
makes this fastest selling line I 
a real profit maker for you. I 
Write TODAY for full details. 



High School Cours e 

at Home 



1 Many Finish in 2 Years 



entrance exams. Standard H. S. texts sqpplied. Diploma. 

Credit for H. S. inbjecta atrwdr completed. Single subject, tf 
desired. High school education livery important (or advancement 
in business and Industry end socially. Don't be handicapped all 
mar lite. Be a Hiih School aredoate. Start yoox training- now. 
Eros Bulletin on request. No obligation, 

AMERICA* SCHOOL Btpl. K-950, Onnl »l »<>. Bum" 37 




FREE — Amazing Book on 

RHEUMATISM, ARTHRITIS 

If von suSer the aches, tains and discomforts of Rheumatism, 
as manifested in ARTHRITIS. NEURITIS. SCIATICA or 
LUMBAGO, send today for the FREE Book. It reveals important facts about why drugs and medicine give only temporary relief without removing causes. Explains fully a proven 
specialized system of treatment that may save you years of 
distress. No obligation. Sprite for this FREE Book today! 
•ALL CLINIC. Dept. 504, Excelsior Springs, Mo. 




Box 36, Studio TD 



l SO to BO days with our Homo 
RESULTS GUARANTEED. Ma.Ho 
Popular! Havej Foul Big Opportunity I 
vision. Stage Appearances! For FREE 

WRITE, 

your age. Dummy Catalog 23c. 
FRED MAHER SCHOOL OF VENTRILOQUISM 

Detroit 34, ftllshiflan Kensington station 



YOU ARE UNDER ARREST! 



CRIME DETECTION! 

We have taught thousands this exciting, profitable, 
pieS38iit profession. Let us teach you, 
own homa. team Finger Printing, 
Fire Arms Identification I Pol ice 
Photography and Criminal Investigation thoroughly, quickly and at 
email cost, 

Over 800 of All American Bureaus 

ot Identification employ Students or graduates ol 
I. A. S. You. too, can fit yourself to fill a responsible crime detection job with good pay and Bteady 

employment. But don't delay — jjet the details now. r D F T 1 M 

Let os show you how easily and completely we can r I*, e. i i * 

prepare you for this fascinating work, during spare Send for ThriUinK 

time.myonrowuhome.yoomaypayaayouleBrn. "BLUE BOOK 

Write today . . . Now ... Be aura to state age. OF CRIME ' 

INSTITUTE OF APPLIED SCIENCE 

1920 Sunityside Aye., Dept. 796V, Chitojo 40, 111. 





OIL fysLL. CUul on, 
America's Exciting 
Picture Magazine 




Get the New Issue ot SEE Today 
Only 15c at All Stands 



DO YOUR SHARE! 




The 
VnHeA 
Way 



for ALL Red Feather Services 



Contribute to Your Local Community Chest 



REVIEW OF THE CURRENT 

SCIENCE 
FICTION 

FAN PUBLICATIONS 



RECEIVED a card from Barclay de La"y 
Johnson, of 878 Oak Street, Winnetka, 
Illinois ... as follows: 
Dear Jerry : 

Forgot to mention it, but (for your review) 
the cost of my stf club directory is a dime. 

Okay. Bark, we'll pass the word along . . . 
but what stf club directory? First we've heard 
of it. 

Next, a letter from Donald Susan, co-editor 
of THE PENDULUM, who wants to round 
up some foreign correspondents for the 'zine. . . 




fen are invited to send him stf news-items 
from Australia, New Zealand, Canada, France, 
Germany and Mexico. Address: 706 Grant 
Street, McKeesport, Pennsylvania. Also, a fanclub has flowered in that vicinity {B. de L. J., 
please note), and members are urgently desired. 
Local chapters will be formed in Pittsburgh. 
McKeesport, thereabouts. AM interested parties 
please call Susan— Pittsburgh : LEhigh 1-0318 
— or write him at above address. 

Next, an item which, though not a fanzine 
in the strictest sense, gets a mention: APPROACH TO INFINITY, a bcKjklet of stf 
art by Morris Scott Dollens. Elegantly printed. 
Contains about fifteen typical (i.e. magnifiquc) 
Dollens black-and- whites. Price: 30tf. ppd. . . . 
from Roy A. Squires, 1745 Kenneth Road. Glendale t, California. 

FANTASTIC WORLDS, 1942 Telegraph Avenue, 
Stockton, California. Editor: Edward W. Ludwig. 



Published quarterly. 25? per copy; #1.00 per year. 

The long-awaited first issue . . . and not bad, not 
bad at all. If it had come in cold, minus advance 
hoopla, we'd probably have screamed with amazed 
delight. As is, FW ranks toward the top in format 
and production ; only slightly under that in content 
(a personal opinion, mind, based on our fervid indifference to fantasy, toward which FW appears to 
lean). Keep an eye on it, though ... in fact, why 
not subscribe? 

SCIENCE FANTASY BULLETIN, 12701 Shaker 
Boulevard, Apt. 616, Cleveland 20, Ohio. Editor: 
Flarfan Ellison, Published monthly. 15ff per copy; 
$1.50 per year. 

Big news this ish is contained in Harlan's editorial, DECLARATION OF INDEPENDENCE, 
which relates how it came to pass that the BULLETIN and its editor are no longer associated 
with the CLEVELAND SCIENCE FICTION 
SOCIETY, 

Anyone for murder? 

Dave Kyle's article IN DEFENSE OF MY 
FANHOOD takes top honors. Also many stories, 
poems, articles, poems, features. A comer. 

THE BOB SHAW APPRECIATION MAGAZINE, 170 Upper N'Ards Road, Belfast, North 
Ireland. Perpetrated by Walter Willis. 

We raised all three eyebrows at this one, and 
thought, in a stunned tone of thought, "Now, what 
in the hell?" • 

Upon perusal, however, the pages proved to contain entertaining sequences of words, which led one 
on and on, and left one with the conviction that 
Shaw, whoever he is, richly deserves either to be 
appreciated or to appreciate his biographers. 

THE DIRECTORY OF ANGLO-FANDOM, No. 
1 Stratford Square, off Shakespeare Street, Nottingham, England. Editor: John Gunn, Esq. (Librarian, 
British Fantasy Library). 

Title is self-explanatory . . . the names and 
addresses of several hundred English fans, plus a 
rundown on the contents of the British Fantasy 
Library. , 

RENAISSANCE, 40-14 10th Street, Long Island 
City 1, New York. Editor: Joseph Semenovich. 
Published irregularly. I0(* per copy; three for 25f. 

The superiority of this, Semenovkh's fourth fanzine effort, over his monstrous first issue of some 
months ago, is eloquent proof of something or 
other ... of the great gouts of blood, sweat and 
tears that must have sprung from the Semenovich 
personage in the interim, we imagine. Anyhoo, not 
bad : and constantly on the up-grade. Stories, arti' 
cles, features . . , and an amusing touch on the 
very last page, to which, in his editorial on the page 
preceeding, Semenovich refers the reader with the 
words : "And now to my capable co-editor, Warren 
[Freiberg]," thus setting the scene for Mr. Freiberg's editorial. 

On the last page, however, in half-inch letters, 
is the following intelligence: 




EAT ANYTHING 
WITH FALSE TEETH 

If you have trouble with plates that 
slip, cock and cause sore gums— try / 
Btifnmi Plasti- Liner. One applica-r! 
tion makes platei fit snugly without fj 
powder or Omit, because Brimuis S 
Plasti-Liner hardens permanently to 
your plate. It relines and refits loose plates in a 
way no powder or paste can do. Even on old rubber plates you get good results six months to a 
year or longer. VOL CAN EAT ANYTHING I Simply lay 
soft strip of Plasti-Liner on troublesome upper or 
lower. Bite and it molds perfectly. Easy to use, tasteless, odorless, harmless to you and your plates. Re* 
movable as directed. Plate cleaner included. Money 
back if not completely satisfied. If not available at 
your drug store, send $1.25 for reliner for 1 plate. 
PLASTI-LINER INC., Buffalo 1 1, New. York — Depf. 47-J 



BRIM MS PLASTI-LINER 

THE PERMANENT DENTURE RELINER 




AfPlllllUlUT 

n I BECOME AN EXPERT IBM 

Aluuumnm 

Executive Accountant* aid C. P. A 'a earn S4.0M to tlO.OCC. a rear. 
Thousands of firms end then. Wi train yon thorolj at ham* in spar* 
time far C. P. A'J oxamitBtion- or executive accountina- volition*. 
Prelum. eiB«riene*unn*c»sBaiT. Parional training QBd«r tnwrri jioo 
of itatf of C. P. A'a. Placement awuil and help. Write for free 
book. "Accountancy, the Profe.-lon That Psyi." 

LA SALLE Extension University. 417 So. Dearborn St. 

A Correspondence Institution Dept. 12329-H Chicago 5, 111. 



Learn Profitable Profession 
in QO days at Home 



MEN AND WOMEN, IB TO 60. Swedish Maaaaffa 
■j make bis money working full or span tirn* 
ctors or tn hospitals, health re aorta, aanatoriuras, clube, private practice. A dignified interest ine carver! Qualify tor your graduation 
Certificate. TborougB instruction at home as In 
class rooms, Write for Illustrated Book— FREE! 

» ***** The College of Swedish Massage 

-•f £ \ Dept. 263-R, 41 E. Pearson, Chicago II 

RUPTURED? 

Get Relief This Proven Way 

Why try to worry along: with trusses that gouge your 
flesh— ureas heavily on hips and spine — enlarge opening — 
fail to bold rupture? You need the Cluthe. No leg-straps 
or cutting belts. Automatic adjustable pad holds at real 
opening— follows every body movement with instant increased support in case of strain. Cannot slip whether at 
work or play. Light. Waterproof. Can be worn in bath. 
Send for amazing FREE book, "Advice To Ruptured," and 
details of liberal trutbful 60-day trial offer. Also endorse, 
ments from grateful users in your neighborhood. Write; 
CLUTHE SONS, Dep t. 33, Bloomfield, New Jo nay 

m Free Yourself 

FROM 

1 Tobacco Habit 

SiSE If you want to stop smoking and Just 
can't, try world-famous no-to-bao 
Lozenges. See how quickly NO-TO-BAOj 
may help stop your craving for tobac-i 
co. Rush $1 to tjo-to-bac, for 7 days' 
supply. (For heavy smokers — 16 days' 
supply-^$2.) Satisfaction guaranteed 
or money back. Write: 

NO-TO-BAG CO. 

DEPT. $ HEWLETT, NEW YORK 



143 




Famous Hub Checks, I 
Dupli cate, Square Edge , HeaviA 
est Game Check, Cut and Stack ^ 
Accurately. Supplied in any color. 

FREE CATALOG Expose: The^Open Book, 
Sealed Book, Scientific Betting, Master Key System, 
How to Control Fair Dice, Runup System, Plastic 

"The Old Reliable" l^%? Tds ior 

K. C CARD Co., 843 S. Wobash, Chicago 5 



T 



Sound like (he HE-MAN you are 

STRENGTHEN your vole* thlB tested eclenHfle ' 
V*s-you may now be able io Improve the POT 
el your speaking and ilnging voice ... In the prti 
of your own room! Self -train Ins loacons. mostly ill 
NO music required. 

FREE BOOK WrltB T0DAY fOT Eugene Feueritlnee£s irroat - 1 
FREE! You must State your age. Booklet mailed postpaid In plain 
wrapper. No salesman will allTsond yonr Mine »nd«re RIGHT rfowi 
Prefect Voice Institute. 210 I.Clinton ft,, Studio MY-*, Chicago ft. III. 




AMAZINt COMFORT -NO 1KCIAL flTTIHC 

RUPTURE EASER 




Double $495 



A strong, form fitting washable support. Back lacing adjustable. 
Snaps up In front. Adjustable lee strap. Soft, flat groin pad. No 
Steel or leather bands. Unexcelled for comfort. Also used as after 
operation support. Mall orders giro measure around the lowest part 
of (he abdomen and state riant or left side or double. We Prepay 
Postage Except on C.O.D.'a. 

Ovtr 400,000 Satisfied Iter.! 10 Day Trial Offer 

Monty-back guarantee if you don't gal blamed relief 
Delay may be nr/eui — ORDER TODAY I 
Pi PER BRACE CO. 
•11 Wyandotte Dopt. TF-122 Kansas City 6, Mo. 




mm 



money. Know how to break and 

train horses. B'rfle today for thU boot 
FREE, together with special offer of 



BEERY SCHOOL OF HORSEMANSHIP 

Dept. 8212 Pleaiont Hill, Ohio 



INVENTORS 

Learn how to protect your invention. Specialty prepared 
"Patent Guide" containing detailed information concerning 
patent protection and procedure with "Record of InTention" 
form will be forwarded to jou upon request — without obligation. 

CLARENCE A, O'BRIEN A HARVEY JACQBSQN 

Registered Patent Attorney $ 
28-K Dittrid National Blda. Washington 5. 0. C 



ATTENTION! 
This zine 
IS 
RUN 
BY 
ONLY 
ONE PERSON 
AND THAT BEING 
JOE SEMENOVICH 

We have a vision of the editorial falling-out that 
must have, occurred : an unkind word, perhaps, or 
a mild disagreement over the merits of an item 
submitted for publication: then suddenly harsh 
words, uttered in loud sharp tones ; the clenched 
fist, the drawn blade ; the stormy exit of M, Freiberg ; the cry of "Stop the presses !" and the rumble 
of an A. B. Dick slowing to a halt ; the glaring 
eyes and hoarse sounds of breathing as the stencil 
bearing Mr. Freiberg's editorial was ripped bodily 
from the cylinder and torn to shreds, and the aforequoted magnificent declaration substituted. . . ,. 

H*m . . just remembered : Freiberg lives in 
Chicago. 

Hoo ha. Note: RENAISSANCE is hard-up for 
material . . . stories, articles, poetry, art, even letters. 

OOPSLA!. 761 Oakley Street, Salt Lake City 16. 
Utah. Editor: Gregg Calkins. ^Published every 
sixth Tuesday. t@4 per copy; £1.00 per year. 

Another one that deserves the appellation of 
"steady corner." Contents and production are of 
excellent fan-quality. 

Despite the fact that we Jumped all over Ken 
Beale several months ago, and would do so again 
under like circumstances, we offer our opinion that 
his column, THE JAUNDICED EYE, is about the 
most enjoyable thing in the zinc. We venture 
further, and say that it is one of the most professionally written columns in the fan field. 

STRAIGHT UP, 37 Willows Avenue, Tremorfa, 
Cardiff, Glam., South Wales, Great Britain. Editor: 
Fred Robinson. 

Crammed, as always, with a variety of readable 
items . . . news fan and pro, advertisements, a report on the LonConCom, fanzine reviews. And a 
story. Only eighteen lines long, thank God. 

Mimeographing considerably improved
GHUVNA, 148 Landon Street, Buffalo 8, New 
York. Editor: Joe Fillinger, Jr. Published irregularly. 10^ per copy. 

A big one t . . seventy pages. Mostly fiction, some 
of which is quite tolerable. Also poems, departments, articles — most impressive among the latter 
being Al Leverentz' AN ARTICLE ON THE 
SALEM AFFAIR. 

Charlie Momberger fco-editor of GHUVNA) 
is responsible for most of the artwork this isti, and 
concerning him we will make two comments: If he 
isn't employing a swipe-file, and tracing line for 
line from the work of more able illustrators, he's 
one of the best fan-artists around ; if he is proceeding in the above manner — which is not so godawful 
as to be beneath certain pro-artists we could name 
—then he still has a deft touch and a pack of talent. 



and will probably hit the promags before long. 

VARIANT WORLDS, 1234 Utica. Brooklyn 3, 
New York. Published (theoretically) every six 
weeks. 15<f per copy, 

Sheldon Deretchin just walked out of our office. 
He was walking backwards, facing our desk as he 
dwindled. His arms were outstretched, fingers 
clawed, in a gesture of agonized solicitation. His 
eyes pled with us. 

He said, as he vanished from out sight, "Please, 
give VARIANT WORLDS a good review, Imh ?" 

So . . . live a little we'll do it. 

VARIANT WORLDS is neatly reproduced. It 
contains stories, various editorial ramblings, -departments, a poem, and an upside-down page, 

We had ourselves a hell of a laugh over that 
page! 

SCIESCE FICTION NEWS LETTER, P. O. Box 
702, Bloomington, Illinois. Editor: Bob Tucker. 
Published irregularly. 

We don't propose to dwell on this one, having 
said again and again that it is top-rate and that 
its imminent demise is a damn shame. 

STAR LANES, 1558 W. Hazelhurst Street, Ferndale 20, Michigan. Editoresses: Orma McCortnick 
and Nan Gerding. 20t' per copy; six copies for 
jl.OQ. 

Poetry, ranging from fair to rather good. Particularly liked the Lorraine. 

It's Friday afternoon . . . 4:56 . . . excuse 
us if we cut this short. See you next month. 

—JEROME B1XBY 

P. S. Three weeks after the above writing; 
Sept. 2,5:40 P. M. 

just got this thing back from the press, and 
there are three wide-eyed little inches to fill. 
We could simply reach for a fanzine and give it 
the treatment ; but we're not quite up to that 
task, having just returned to our desk after four 
wonderful, dazzling, hectic days in . . . guess 
where. You're so right. And we couldn't focus 
to read a Goodyear blimp, much less a fanzine. 
Just a few words on how we feel about the 
Convention, then : 

We had the time of our life. We met the most 
wonderful bunch of people we've ever come 
across under one roof. We attended one of the 
most terrific shindigs we ever attended. We 
spent four days in a world apart ... a vastly 
stimulating little world, and, somehow, as encouraging a one, populated with exciting personalities the likes of which are scarce as hen's 
chompers in this wide outside world we have returned to. . . . 

It was a time we shall never forget. We're 
looking forward to the next one, and the next, 
and to seeing all you swell people again. We 
hope each and every one of you had a helluva 
time too. 




WRITE far FREE 
CATALOG with 14 
HNS SAMPLE CARD 

Thousands of 
.Cujfomeri. 



QUALITY READING-MAGNIFYING OR 
BIFOCAL GLASSES FOR FAR AND NEAR 
ADVANCE SPECTACL E CO MPANY. Jnc 
537 S. Dearborn St., Dept. Kffsl Chicago 5, lllinoi: 



T 



ft No classes to attend. Easy spare-time train- 1 
fling coven big choice of subjects. Friendly \ 
I 1 instructors ; standard texts. Full credit Eor\ 
B 1 previous schooling. Diploma awarded.! 
■ I Write now for FREE catalog! 

j WAYNE SCHOOL Coioiog han-2 J 

/2S27 Sheffield Av»„ Chicago 1 4, Illinois / 



rrh 





DENT'S 3 


EAR WAX DROPS for 

fail temporary roHef of 
accumulated wax condition 

TOOTHACHE 1 

ask your druggist for DENT'S 
TOOTH GUM, TOOTH DROPS or POULTICE 




OLD 


LEG SORES 






is« Viscose Application. Heals nuop ol« 
caused by l&g^congestion, varicose Y^"^ 

results in JO days, describe j-our 
■I a FREE BOOK. 

— VISCOSI COMPANY 
140 N, Dearborn Sf. Chicago 2, 111. 



falls to a 
trouble a 



BE A DETECTIVE 

WORK HOME or TRAVEL. Experience unnseesiary. 

DETECTIVE Particulars FREE. Writa 
CEO. T. H. WAGNER, 125 W. 86th St., N. Y. 



BE A /Vh44£ 

MAKE S50-S60 A WEEK 

Practical nurses are needed In svoT* 

community... doctors rely on ttiem... 
patients appreciate their cheerful, expert cara, Toil oan learn practical 
nursing at home In spare time. Course 
endorsed by physicians. S3rd yr. Earn 
while learning. High School not re* 

ien. 18 to 60. Trial plan. Write nowl 

CHICAGO SCHOOL OF NURSING 
Dept. 4212, 41 East Pearson Street, Chicago 11, lil. 

Please send fre« toohtet, Mtd 16 sample lesson page*, 

Namt.. . 

City. , 




quired. Men 



State. /igt 



When You Visit Your Favoriie 
Newsstand, Look for the Slogan 



A THRILLING 
PUBLICATION 



145 



ON THE COVERS OF THE 
MAGAZfNES YOU BUY1 



Ke<fir<in« Specialist Savs: Where 01*^1 IOT 

LOSE WEIGHT & KlUUUL 



UNDERWRITERS 




Relaxing • Soothing 
Penetrating Massage 




TAKE OFF EXCESS WEIGHT! 



Don't Stoy FAT -You Can Lose 
POUNDS and INCHES SAFELY 



Without Risking 
HEALTH 



Take pounds off — keep 
slim and trim with Spot 
Reducer! Remarkable new 
invention which uses one 
of the most effective reducing methods employed 
by masseurs and turkish 
baths— MASSAGE! 



yr» IKE a tnagic wand, the 
J* "Spot Reducer" obeys 
your every wish. Most 
arty part of your body where 
it is loose and flabby, wherever you have extra weight 
and inches, the "Spot Reducer" can aid you in acquiring 
■ youthful, slender and graceful figure. The beauty of this 
scientifically designed Reducer is that the method is so 
simple and easy, the results 
quick, sure and harmless. No 
exercise or strict diets. No 
steambaths, drugs or laxatives. 



With the SPOT REDUCER you can now enjoy the 
benefit* of RELAXING. SOOTHING massage in the 
privacy of your own hornet Simple to use — Jult plus 
In, grasp handle and apply over most any pari at the 
body— stomach, hips, chest, neck, thighs, arms, buttock), etc. The relaxing, soothing massage breaks 
down FATTY TISSUES, tones the muscles and flesh, 
and the increased awakened blood circulation carries 
away waste tat— helps you regain and keep a firmer and 
more GRACEFUL FIGURE! 

Your Own Private Masseur at Home 

When you use the Spot Reducer, it'* almost like having your own private masseur at home. It's fun reducing thia way! It not only helps you reduce and keep 
slim— but also aids in the relief of those types of aches 
and pains— and tired nerves that can be helped by 
massage! The Snot Reducer is handsomely marie of 
light weight aluminum and rubber and truly a beautiful invention you will be thankful you own. AC 110 
volts. Underwriters laboratory approved. 



TRY THE SPOT REDUCER 10 DAYS FREE IN YOUR OWN HOME! I 



Mail this coupon with only $1 for your Spot Reducer on approval. Pay 
postman 58.95 pEus delivery— or send S9.9S (full price) and we ship 
postage prepaid. Use it for ten days in your awn home. Then if not 
delighted return Spot Reducer for full purchase price refund. Don't 
delay! You have nothing to lose — except ugly, embarrassing, undesirable pounds of FAT. MAIL COUPON now! 



ALSO USE IT FOR ACHES AND PAINS 





CAN'T SLEEP 

Relax with electric 
Spot Reducer. See how 
soothing its gentle 
massage can be. Helps 
you sleep when massage can be of benefit. 



MUSCULAR ACHES: 

A handy helper for 
transient relief of 
discomforts that can 
be aided by gentle, 
relaxing massage. 



LOSE WEIGHT 
OR NO CHARGE 



USED BY EXPERTS 

Thousands have lost 
v/ei oht this way — in 
hips, abd o men. legs, 
arms, nscks, buttocks, 
etc. The same method 
used by stage, screen 
and radio personalities 
and lea-ding reducing 
salons. The Spot Reducer can be used in 
your spare time, in the 
p rivacy ot your own 

ORDER IT TODAY 



SPOT REDUCER CO., Dept. B-129 
1025 Broad St., Newark, New Jersey 



r 



will pay postman only $8-95 

SPOT REDUCER within lO day! 
refund of (nil purchase price, 
rj I enclose 412. 38. Send BeLu> 



City State . 



W A WEEK i> CASH 

PAID DIRECT TO YOU 




JUST LOOK 

The Large Benefit This Low 
Cost Policy Provides! 

The Service Life Family Hospital Plan 
covers you and your family for about 
everything— for. every accident, and tor alt 
common and rare diseases after the policy 
has been in force 30 days or more. Very 
serious disease such as cancer, tuberculosis, heart disease, diseases involving female 
organs, sickness resulting in a surgical 
operation, hemia, lumbago and sacroiliac 
conditions originating after the policy is 
in force six months are all covered . . . 
Hospitalization caused by attempted suicide, use of intoxicants or narcotics, insanity, and venereal disease is naturally 
excluded. 

The money is all yours— for any purpose you want to use it. There are no 
hidden meanings or big words in the 
policy. We urge you and every family and 
also individuals to send for this policy 
on our 10 day free tr :_ ' ' '—and be convinced that no otl. al plan offers 
you so much for j .00 a month' 



TWO SPECIAL FEATURES 
MATERNITY 




l<»fit> AtSnuUEiti *C»t 

women who wai some diy 
have babie, wfll want to 
lake ad van tafe of a special 

Pays S50.00 forchfldbirth 
confinement either in the 
hospital or at home, after 
policy has been in force 
10 months. Double the 

an** POLIO , 



For Hospital Bills. _ 

up to S50U.C0 

For Doctor's Bills whil* in 
the hospital, up to S500.0Q 
For Orthopedic Appliances, up to £500.00 

TOTAL OF Sl.500.00 



Policy Pays for a Day, a Week, 
a Month, a Year-ywf as long as 
umessary for you to be hospitalized! 

3c A DAY IS ALL YOU PAY 

for this outstanding new Family Protection 

Wonderful news! This new policy covers everyone from infancy to age 70! When sickness 
or accident sends you or a member of your family Co the hospital— this policy PAYS 
$100.00 PER WEEK for a day, a month, even a year ... or just as long as you stay in the 
hospital. What a wonderful feeling to know your savings are protected and you won't have 
to go into debt. The money is paid DIRECT TO YOU to spend as you wish. This remarkable new Farnily Hospital Protection costs only 3c a day for each adult 18 to 59 years of 
age, and for age 60 to 70 only 4Hc a day. This policy even covers children up to 18 years 
of age with cash benefits of $50.00 a week while in the hospital— yet the cost is only 1 l ie 
a day for each child! Benefits paid while confined to any recognized hospital, except 
government hospitals, rest homes and clinics, spas or sanitariums. Pick your own doctor. 
Naturally this wonderful policy is issued only to individuals and families now in good 
health; Otherwise the cost Would be sky high. But once protected, you are covered for 
about every sickness or accident. Persons covered may return as often as necessary to the 
hospital within the year. 



This is What $100.00 a Week 
Can Mean to You When in the 
Hospital for Sickness or Accident 

Money melts away fast when you or a 
member of your family has to go to the 
hospital. You have to pay costly hospital 
board and room . . . doctor's bills and 
maybe the surgeon's bill too . . . necessary 
medicines, operating room fees— a thousand and one things you don't count on. 
What a Godsend this READY CASH 
BENEFIT WILL BE TO YOU. Here's 
cash to go a long way toward paying heavy 
hospital expenses— and the money left over 
can help pay you for time lost from your 
job or business. Remember— all cash benefits are paid directly to you. 



Examine This Policy Without 
Cost or Obligation— Read It— 

Talk It Over— Then Decide 
10 DAYS FREE EXAMINATION 

You are invited to inspect this new kind o! 
Family Hospital Plan. We will send the 
actual policy to you for ten days at no cost 
or obligation. Talk it over with your bank, 
er, doctor, lawyer or spiritual adviser. Then 
make up your mind. This policy backed by 
the full resources of the nationally known 
Service Life Insurance Company of Omaha. 
Nebraska— organized under the laws of 
Nebraska and with policyholders in every 
state. SEND NO MONEY— just your 
name and address ! No obligation, of course ! 



REMEMBER — $100.00 A WEEK CASH BENEFIT IS ACTUALLY S14.25 PER DAY I 

The Ser*i« lit* Insurance Company 
Hospital Department K-l 7, Omaha 2, Nebraska j 

Please rush the new Family Hospital Protection j 
Plan Policy to me on 10 days Free Inspection. , 
I understand that I am under no obligation. I 




SERVICE LIFE INSURANCE COMPANY 

AuMt of $12,700,000 04 of January 1, 1952 
tfofpital D«partm*nt K-17, Omaha 2, Nebratka 



\ City or Town Sunt., 



No other 
antifreeze 
gives your 
carthe same 
complete 

protection! 

-PRESTONE 




BRAND 



ANTIFREEZE 



fate SET 



Just put "Prestone" antifreeze in and forget it till 
spring! No "boil-away" 
worries ... no repair bills 
— its special inhibitors 
give the world's best protection against rust, clogging and foaming. 



Kale SAFE 



High compression engines 
and car-heaters make nonevaporating ami - freeze 
more important now than 
ever. There's not one drop 
of boil -away alcohol or 
methanol in "Prestone" 
anti-freeze. 



fate SURE 



With "Prestone" brand 
anti-freeze in your car, 
you're sure you've bought 
the best. It's America's 
No. 1 brand. No other 
anti-freeze gives your car 
the same complete protection. It's guaranteed! 



NATIONAL CARBON COMPANY 

A Division of Union Carbido and Carbon Corporation 

IO E*at 42»tf Stmt, New York 17, H.T. 

Tb* t*rm» "Prsitone" ond "E>»roody" o»« regittersd trode-mor 
of Union Carbide and Carbon Corporation 





W HAL. 


JJOO «» or. 

QUART CAMS 



