
TO 

h 



CONTENTSiVFEBRUARY, 1953 

VOL. 17, No. 3 



What Makes Us Overeat? 
Coast of Pearls ... .... 

Scalped by Wild White Men 

Lottery Luck _ 

They Moke Pain a Pleasure . 
Scourge of the Carolines ... 

An Old Salt at Epsom 

Is Science Fiction Fact? 

FICTION 

Blood on the Blossoms 
The Monkey „ „ ... 
The Last Assignment 

FEATURES 

End of Arguments . ... ... 

Picture Stories -. .... — . — .„ 

■ Crime Capsules ... 
Scenario— by Gibson ..... ..„. ... _. _ ,_ _ 

Stranger and Stranger _.. .... _ _ 

Pointers lo Better Health ... .... _ ... _ 

Home Plan No. 97, by W. Watson Sharp . 

Double Column 

Picture Mystery, featuring Kath King ... 
Talking Points „. „ _ „. _. .... ' „ „. .... 

' Cartoons .... .... .... _ 7, 11, 14-15, 19, ; 

Names in cartoons and writings other than 



Manuel Francisco 1 

... ,., .... Jack ,Godwin 8 

Max Millman 12 

Peter Hargraves 1G 

Athol Yeomans 20 
Sydney George 



Rubci' 



32 



James Holledge 56 

Bill Delany CO 

Ray Heath 66 

Berna Morris 36 

Gary Scrimgeour 40 

D'Arcy Niland BO 



'nnted by Cumberland -/nivwvrs Ltd., Mdcquor 

:avolccde Mi i i ■■ ■ iv Li:i ■ ■ i r, : 

should be ac6<r-.--. r \_ frank s ; 
^rctiuced bv -!-.n K. G. M; p,:hlinhl.--] Co. rty. Ltd., Svdnev Publisher KEr
or, JAMES HOLI LL [ T SMITH • Car 



tunur, ALBERT A. munnni ■ rroaucrior, w 

WALTER T. CHARLES • Promotion, JOHN M'lNNETT • Cir-j'a-ion i pi'. ■■ ■ 

• At ERT EDDIE 



ADVERTISING 

r t:: Patrick Pty. Ltd., 56 " 



. 5663 . 



MANUEL FRANCISCO 



Neither alcohol W opium can compare to the indication 
eaused by Mexico's pcyote~the most ml .wreotic o£ all. 



WHEN DE QUfflCY wrote his fantastic "Confessions o£ An English 
Opium Eater," he no doubt believed 
that he was setting down on paper 
the most incredible hallucinations, 
visions and other drug-induced symptums and phenomena man is capable 
at experiencing. 

Ho had good reason to think so. 
De Quiney remained an opium addiirl throughout his entire adult life, 

hnvlnfl become a slave to the drug 



while still a student at Oxford University. 

But De Quiney was wrong when he 
assumed that the fantasies produced 
by opium are the ultimate in druginduced illusions. In the North 
American continent, in widespread 
areas of the dry lands of the western 
states-such as the Rio Grande basin 
—and southward in Mexico, grows a 
plant which has been described as 
"the most evil narcotic in the world. 1 



JAVAICADI, February, 1953 



Compared to the exudate of this 
plant, opium produces merely mild 
day-dreams. Compared to it, marijuana — which grows widely in many 
areas of the United States and presents a serious problem to the authorities—creates little more than childlike imaginings. 

Use of this drug — which contains as 
many as nine different alkaloids, some 
of them strychnine-like in their 
effects, the others morphine -like — is 
spreading rapidly among certain 
American Indian tribes, among some 
Negro groups, and even into Canada 
and the Hudson Bay region. This 
despite the fact that opposition to use 
oE the drug on the part of civil authorities in the United Stales, Canada 
and Mexico has never been abated. 
Denunciations of the devil -pi ant are 
of no avail. Addicts of the super-drug 
BO revere its effects that they consider themselves members of a semireligious cult! 

This drug is peyotl— as it is termed 
in Mexico; peyote as it is generally 
designated elsewhere. It is found 
in the flesh and juice of a small, 
spineless, carrot -shaped cactus, and 
jt may be eaten or prepared as a 
thick brownish liquor which constitutes the most devastating drink 
known to man. Sometimes it is mixed 
with fermented fruit juices, but this 
fs generally rare and actually designed to dull its terrific effects; confirmed peyote addicts seldom drink 
whisky, wine or beer under the firm 
conviction that these drinks are bad 
for their health and will ultimately 
kill them! 

Its effects are so exhilarating and 
seemingly so miraculous in many 
ways that it had attained a wide 
variety of names — a "god," a "demon." "The Giver of Visions," "Key 
to Earthly Paradise," "Drink of All 
Evil"— depending on the point of view. 

The first stage of "intoxication" 



which occurs after only a moderate 
amount is taken, is great physical 
and mental exhilaration, due to the 
quick action of the strychnine -like 
alkaloids. For this reason, many of 
the Mexican Indians take peyote as 
a stimulant during foot races, when 
on long and fatiguing journeys, or 
when doing heavy work. It is also 
used in moderation as a stimulant 
during ritual dances. 

The second stage is one of profound 
depression, nausea and wakefulness. 
Despite his misery, the addict finds 
it impossible to sleep for at least 
twelve hours, even if he takes no 
more of the drug. 

In the final stage— which sets in 
after more peyote is consumed and 
is produced by the morphine-like 
alkaloids— the addict experiences 
visual hallucinations of the most 
fantastic kind, as well as derangements of the senses of touch, hearing, 
and smell. He often develops a 
strange super -sensory power which 
enables him to "see" at incredible distances and read the thoughts of 
others— or at least appear to do so — 
with uncanny accuracy. In this stage, 
he may point out the location of lost 
or stolen objects, identify criminals 
such as thieves, and predict the 
future. His faith in his supernatural 
power at this stage is so great that 
he sometimes appears to work "mirac
The effects, however, are often 
unpredictable and often overlap, due 
to the opposed effects o£ the stimulating and depressing alkaloids battling against each other. Often in 
the early stages a form of paralysis 
of the muscles resembling lockjaw 
may set in; the addict requiring as 
much as four or five minutes to utter 
a single word. 

There may be a heightened reflex 
action of the skin, making it quiver 
at the slightest touch. 



CAVALCADE, February, 1953 5 



In the stage of fix tr erne peyote 
intoxication, the pupils of the eyes 
are widely dilated, although the 
addict is totally blind to his actual 
surroundings. II ho attempts to walk, 
ho weaves and stumbles like an 
alcoholic, and all his bodily movements lack co-ordination, while he 
trembles constantly. He may have 
the agonizing sensation thai his face, 
tongue, and all his limbs are swollen 
to enormous size; sometimes he may 
actually "feel" the pain and at others 
only suffer mental anguish due to 
i riis imagined deformity. 

The actions of peyote addicts, too, 
are highly unpredictable while under 
the Influence of this drug. A man 
may be sitting absolutely motionless, 
apparently wholly lost in the ecstatic 
kaleidoscope of visions that constantly 
surge before his vacant eyes, when 
suddenly lie will leap to his feet and 
"run amok," frothing at the mouth 
and with only one thought in his 
brain— to kill anyone and everyone 
he can reach. Usually he is quickly 
seized and overpowered, and the 
murderous impulse soon passes — but 
often human slaughter lias been the 
result of peyote intoxication. 

Two amazing effects of such a drug 
are that consciousness is never lost 
in any stage of intoxication. Even 
though the addict may be acting like 
a madman his conscious mind is fully 
aware of what he is doing through 
some form of "split-personality" release. There are no hangovers or 
ill after-effects. 

Finally, the addict, at the height of 
his intoxication, is completely without worry and feels himself especially 
favoured by the gods and in temporary possession of godlike powers. 
Among the Indian tribes that belong 
to the peyote "cult" are the Huichols, 
Kiawns, Comanches, Caddos. Otos, 
Zacatecas, Tarahumares, Winnebagos 
and the Delawares of Oklahoma. 



The Delawares provide interesting 
insight into why peyote has gained 
such a grip on So many Indian tribes. 
Oppressed in the past by the white 
man, transported by force from their 
original lands to unknown and undesirable soil, their religion and customs gradually disintegrated under 
the humiliating reservation system. 
Mostly poverty-ridden, they naturally 
turned to a panacea which permitted 
them to forget, for a time, their 
miseries and relive their past glories. 

There are many elaborate preliminary ceremonies. Among the Huichols 
of Mexico, for example, the men deck 
their heads with brilliant feathers, 
while the women wear bands of red 
and yellow feathers across their 

A great fire blazes in the patio of 
the temple, which is a vague combination of Spanish and AmericanIndian architecture, built of -white 
stucco. To one side, several old men 
beat an insistent rhythm on native 
drums, for it is believed that steady 
drumming enhances tho effects of the 
peyote. A medicine man sits near 
the fire beside an enormous pot of 
peyote liquor, chanting weird melo
The scene is a crazy hodgepodge of 
cultures — on the walls and floor of 
the patio are jars of holy water, a 
stuffed fetish skunk tied to a stick, 
several small clay birds, and a Crucifix. 

Now the dancing begins, a quick, 
leaping walk in which both sexes 
participate. Twilight is deepening, 
but that makes no difference; nobody 
can sleep while the peyote is in him. 
As the dancers eat slices of peyote 
from ]ionres attached to their belts or 
swig from the great pot, the frenzy 
of their movement increases, their 
bodies turning and jerking convulsively with each leaping step. They 
drool and spit in a manner that would 



6 CAVALCADE, Februory, 1953 



be disgusting to us, for the alkaloids 
in the drug greatly increase the flow 

Taken in any form, peyote is extremely disagreeable to ingest, at 
least in the early stages of intoxication when the senses are still keen. 
It has an extremely bitter taste and a 
very unpleasant odor. If eaten, it 
must be thoroughly chewed, and even 
if drunk, the nausea is very great. 
Furthermore, to attain complete 

consumed. 

During the first night, not much 
peyote is consumed, since the purpose 
is to avoid extreme nausea and "drag 
out" the orgy as long as possible. 
Throughout the second day the feasting and moderate peyote consumption 
continue, for everyone is full of unnatural energy and sleep is impossible. The second night is the same 
as the first, but the third morning 
there is the greatest feasting of all— 
and then the peyote debauch is on. 

Now everyone eats and swills 
peyote as fast as he or she can. Suddenly a man with glazed eyes screams 
out a vision: "So-and-so is a man of 
evil; I see him in such-and-such a 
place making love to the wife of 
Such- and -Such." Another may mumble, "If Ramon Figueroa will place 
his 1-ands on my head, he will be 
cured of his tuberculosis." Still 
another may shout, "I see rain beyond the mountains; it will be here 
on the morning of the fourth day 
and our crops will be saved from 
drought." 

Often these "visions" are uncannily 
accurate. It may be that certain 
senses — dormant at ether times— are 
immeasurably heightened by peyote 
intoxication. Clairvoyance and telepathy may actually occur. 

Naturally, some of the "revelations" result in pandemonium, on 
the spot


There is another type of peyote 
vision — a panorama of patterns and 
events in unbelievably vivid colours 
resembling certain dreams, but far 
more realistic. 

Women in the dreamer's embrace 
change into flowers and vice-versa, 
visions of the entire earth are seen, 
the dead appear and deliver messages, 
incalculable riches lie everywhere, 
and the dreamer soars through space 
from star to star. There appears to 
be no limit whatever to the diversity 
and magnificence of these peyote 

Regardless of how much it is revered by the ignorant and superstitious, peyote is nevertheless one of 
the most vicious drugs in the world. 
Its effects are largely hallucinatory, 
and the "good" it does is largely due 
to faith on the part of the cultists. 

Stamping out the use of peyote will, 
unfortunately, be a long and difficult 
process in which education will probably prove more successful than 
legislation, which so far has proved 
dismally inadequate. 

The appalling truth is that at this 
very moment, the use of peyote, instead of decreasing, is increasing by 
leaps and bounds. 




CAVALCADE. February, 1953 J 




THE 



JACK GODWIN 



WHISPERING 

POLE 



The : 



i the mad, blood- crazed head 
of Cheka, Russia's dreaded secret 
police— sent half a million people to 
their death, spoke in the softest drawing room tones. As an American 
newspaper reporter once put it: "He 
purrs at you and you get icicles down 

Just what turned this mild-mannered scholarly idealist into a fanatical revolutionary is one of the 
riddles of history. Scion of a wealthy 
hind-owning family, Felix Edmundo


vich Dzerzhinsky was bora in Vilna 
in 1877. A Pole by ancestry, he became a Russian through adoption. 

At 18 Dzerzhinsky joined the illegal 
Social Democratic Party, much to the 
horror of his relatives. The Czarist 
police caught him red-handed, operating an underground printing press. 
Young Felix got his first taste of the 
interrogation methods he was later to 
perfect— two fingers of his left hand 
were squashed in his own press to 
make him "sing." 

Dzerzhinsky did not sing. Sent to 
Siberia, he escaped, was recaptured 



H CAVALCADE. February, 1953 



and promptly escaped again. In 1905 
he fought in the unsuccessful revolution that followed Russia's disastrous 
war with Japan. High on the police 
blacklist, Dzerzhinsky was hunted 
from town to town until 1912, when 
the law caught up with him for the 
last time. Nine years hard labour in 
a Siberian hell-camp was the sentence. 

He was still behind barbed wire 
when the revolution of March, 1917, 
tore the Czarist Empire to shreds. 
Together with tens of thousands of 
other political prisoners, Dzerzhinsky 
found himself at liberty. 

He joined up with the most radical 
of the parties struggling for powerLenin's Bolsheviks. He rose quickly 
in their ranks and by November 7, 
1917, when his party overthrew the 
ramshackle "provisional government," 
Dzerzhinsky had become one of the 
Bolshevik top-notchers. 

Tho Bolsheviks seized power, but in 
order to hold it they needed an instrument of suppression. With his unerring knack of picking the right man 
for the job, Lenin ordered Dzerzhinsky to create it. 

On December 20, 1917, the most 
dreaded secret police force the world 
has ever known was born. Dzerzhinsky christened his organisation 
''Extraordinary Commission to Fight 
Counter Revolution and Sabotage," 
but soon everyone knew it by its abbreviated Russian initials: "Cheka." 

At first Soviet citizens thought it 
to be merely another government department. Dzerzhinsky had different 
ideas. He remembered the clumsily 
brutal but ineffective methods of the 
Czarist police, whose efforts always 
seemed to trail one step behind the 
revolutionaries. He formulated an entirely new way of dealing with one's 
opponents, something he called "pure 

On August 30, 1918, Lenin addressed 
a mass meeting at the Michelson Fac


tory in Moscow. The Bolshevik boss 
was walking through the ranks of 
saluting workers when a dark-haired 
young girl blocked his path, raised a 
heavy army pistol and fired three bullets into him. 

The girl was Dora Kaplan-Roid, an 
anarchist belonging to the Socialist 
Revolutionary Party. She faced the 
firing squad bravely and never had 
the satisfaction of knowing that one 
of her shots had lodged near Lenin's 
spine and was to be the indirect cause 
of his death four years later. 

For two days, while surgeons fought 
for the life of the dictator, an ominous 
silence hung over the Russian capital, 
Then, simultaneously with the news 
that Lenin would recover, came the 
Terror. 

During the night, Dzerzhinsky 's 
Chekists rounded up 500 ex -capitalists, 
nobles and intellectuals in Moscow 
and Petrograd. None of them lived to 
see the following morning. 

Herded like sheep into the cellars 
of government buildings, the condemned victims were called out one 
by one. A courtyard was the usual 
execution chamber. The prisoner was 
told to kneel and a pistol placed 
Against the top of his spine. At that 
moment the engine of a heavy army 
lorry began to roar, drowning out 
the shot. Three minutes later the 
vard was ready for the next victim. 

The purge did not end with those 
first 500— it had only begun. Before 
Dzerzhinsky 's lesson in "pure terror" 
was over, the tally had risen to ten 
times that number. 

The Cheka frankly admitted that 
their victims had nothing to do with 
the attempt on Lenin's life. ''We are 
not interested in complicity," wrote 
Dzerzhinsky 's adjutant, Latsis, "but 
we mean to slrike fear into the hearts 
of all those who. would oppose the 

People were not arrested— they dis


CAVALCADE, Fehruary, 1953 9 



AVERAGE. 

I think that you woul 



Forty inches on the tape 
Around my monly chest. 
But when o ninety round the 



■ famines 
-".iquidai 



«ere wiped out withiliowed into nothinfiI." A phantom hand 
the dark and rubbed 
lis il he had never 
Dzvr/h in sky's '"pure 



niddlc 



)£ 191R ' 



the 



state of quaking hysteria. C 
less word or unfoiarded ac 
on: of nowhere reached the 
of the Cheka. and the offei 



number of victims of the Cheka during its four years of existence. In 
the course of the Civil War alone, 
14,000 former landowners, 11,000 teachers and 1220 priests were "liquidated." 
When, in December, 1331, Dzerzhinsky 
reported to Lenin that "the task with 
which you have entrusted me is completed," nearly half a million people 
had learned the meaning of "pure 
terror." 

The Cheka was official iy dissolved. 
However, this merely meant that it 
continued to function under a different, name and leader. Re -christened "State Political Administration"' 
—"OGPU," it was placed under the 
command of another Pole, Vyaeheslav 
Menzhinsky, who had been carefully 
groomed for the job. 

Lenin had another task waiting for 
Dzer/hinsky. In January, VJ22, tht 
"Whirper.ng Pol' 1 " he came Cc;nxrr.i. u itir 
for Railroads. Seven years of wa r , 
revolution and civil war had left Russia's rail syiiem in almost total collapse. With worn out rolling stock and 
hopelessly inefficient personnel, the 
state railways- -lifeline of the Soviei 
government— hod all but ceased to 
function. 

Half a dozen prcviuj? Cummissar? 
had failed tn remedy the situation. 
Lenin pinned his last hope on the 
Kad-eyed Pole who had made a 
science out of terror. 

The mon:ir.i: after his appointment. 
Diefihlnsky appeared at '.he Mogilev 
railway station, "There was an express train from Orsha due here at 
7.25— 3D minutes aflo. Where ia it?" 
lie asked thp surprised station master 

The officio', answered that he, did 
nut know. Apparently the train had 
not left Orsha at all, 

"Wire the station master there and 
ask him what is the matter," ordered 
Dzerzhinsky. 

The wire was sent and for o full 
hour the ex-C'.tsa chief waited for 



10 CAVALCADE, February, 1953 



an answer. None came. The station 
master at Orsha was drunk and 
simply did not bother to reply. 

Dzerzhinsky and his siaff took a 
special train [or Orsha mid found the 
station master still far Trom sober. 

Ten minutes later he looked 
down the muzzles of a firing squad. 
The salvo crashed out, and Dzerzhinsky softly announced to the watching 
personnel: "Comrades, as from today the Orsha-Mogilev express will 

After two years, during which 940 
state employees wore executed for 
' sabotage," Dzerzhinsky had the Russian railways in some semblance of 

Simultaneously, he undertook the 
momentous job of rounding up Russia's one million stray children. These 
waifs, whom the civil war had made 
homeless and parentless, were overrunning the country like a plague. 

In March, 1322, Dzerzhinsky launched the combined forces of Red Army 
and OGPU on a full-scale drive 
against the orphans. "Be kind to 



them," he ordered, "they are victims 
of a war they did not start." 

He ruthlessly slashed his own and 
his under] ings' salaries to build magnificent, marble - tiled orphanages. 
Soldiers and OGPU-men delivered the 
dirt- encrusted waifs by the truckload. When the year ended, another 
million youngsters were growing up 
into fanatical servants of the Soviet 



Dzerzhinsky received his last appointment in February, 1924, shortly 
after Lenin's death. As head of the 
Supreme Economic Council of the 
Soviet Union, he had a ringside seat 
to watch the life-and-dcath struggle 
between Stalin and Trotsky for 
supreme power. Dzerzhinsky was one 
of the few who backed the silent, 
pipe-smoking man from Georgia. 

His choice turned out to be right, 
but he did not live to see it confirmed. After a healed session of the 
Economic Council on July 5, 1928, 
Dzerzhinsky suffered a stroke. The 
same evening the high priest of violence died peacefully in his bed. 




CAVALCADE, February, 1953 



WHAT MAKES US 

OVEREAT? &X 




r PHE one and only important cause 
of obesity is overeating. Although 
in the past, heredity, the glands and 
abnormalities of metabolism were 
blamed for excessive weight, to-day 
these theories have been largely discarded. Practically all authorities in 
the field of nutrition and metabolism 
agree that the only time superfluous 
fat accumulates in the body is when 
the food intake is greater than that 
utilized in energy or work. 

We require food for life and 
health. This, of course, is common 
knowledge. What we often forget, 
however, is that we sit down at the 
table to eat not so much for the purpose of self-preservation as because of 



hunger and appetite. It isn't always 
easy to tell where hunger ends and 
appetite begins. The two terms are 
not synonymous. Hunger is an instinct: we are born with it. It is independent of learning or conditioning. 
In a physiologic sense, hunger may 
be defined as the unpleasant sensation 
in the pit of the stomach resulting 
from a lack of food. 

Appetite, on the other hand, is an 
emotion. It is a desire for a repetition of some pleasant taste, smell or 
experience of the past. We are not 
born with our appetites, but acquire 
them as time goes on. The savoury 
flavours of sweets, pastries, relishes 
and the like tempt us to return tn 



12 CAVALCADE, Februory, 1953 



these foods again and again. The 
feeling of contentment from a wellfilled stomach is another experience 
(hat we like to return to altogether 
too often. 

We might say that hunger is a 
necessity and appetite a luxury. In 
the final analysis all overeating (and, 
for that matter, undereating as well) 
is caused by a disturbance of our 
appetite -regulating mechanism. A 
plump person who declares that he 
overeats because he is hungry really 
means to say that his appetite, for one 
reason or another, keeps making unreasonable demands on him. 

The amount of air and water in 
our bodies is regulated with a remarkable degree of precision by 
mechanisms which automatically 
cause their prompt elimination 
should they accumulate to an excessive degree. The same, however, is 
not true of food. All superfluous 
calories are deposited in the form 
of fat tissue. 

Since appetite is an emotion, it is 
inconstant, flexible, capricious and 
changeable. It can be controlled and 
disciplined almost at will. 

Factors capable of influencing our 
abnormal cravings for foods are 
numerous and varied. But they may 
be classified in several fairly distinct categories. If you belong to the 
large army of over-eaters the chances 
are that it is because of one or more 

There are many instances of obesity in adults traceable to early childhood or even infancy. The youngster 
who is forced or coaxed to "finish 
the cereal" or drink an extra glass of 
milk may react in one of two opposite ways: he may rebel against it 
and present his mother with an obstinate feeding problem, or he may 
become overimpressed with the importance of food and continue to 
overeat for the rest of his life. 



In a similar way, the child whose 
good behaviour is rewarded with 
chocolates and sweets is bound to 
remain convinced of the desirability 
of these delicacies for many years tc 
come. Even more damaging is the 
bad example set by gluttonous parents. Children are more likely than 
not to follow suit. Example is thi 
best teacher, even though the teaching be fallacious and misleading. 

It has been known for some time 
that obesity "runs" in certain families. It has been shown, for instance, that when both parents are 
stout, more than 70 per cent, of the 
offspring can be expected to be overweight. When only one parent is 
dbese, the figure is approximately 40 
per cent,, and when, both father and 
mother are of normal weight, less 
than ten per cent, of the children 
can be classed as obese. Until recently, heredity was held responsible 
for this phenomenon. Today the belief prevails that obesity is solely 
an acquired characteristic. Twofold 
evidence supports the newer point 
of view. Fat people with obese parents respond to weight reduction 
treatment the same as those whoseparents were lean or of normal 
weight. And the weight of identical 
twins may vary greatly from time 
to time while all other characteristics such as height, build and the 
colour of the eyes and hair remain 
constantly the same. 

It has been stated, and very aptly 
too, that many people overeat becausa 
of emotional starvation. They find 
food a handy gratification. 

Worry, fear, anxiety and fatigue 
will cause one person to lose his 
appetite completely; the next may react by overeating. "When you are 
emotionally upset, do you eat more 
or less?" A large majority of several hundred fat people answered 
"more." They admitted that when


CAVALCADE, February, 1953 13 



ever they became nervous or upset, 
they just couldn't stop nibbling or 
chewing. This explains the truism 
that many people worry themselves 
into obesity. 

The mental angle of obesity is portrayed perhaps best of all in the person who, strange as it may seem, 
employs obesity as a defence mechanism. He clings to his fat because 
it relieves him from certain responsibilities, such as marriage, an unpleasant job or rough playing with 
the boys, that he prefers not to 
shoulder. 

There was a time not so very long 
ago when obesity was looked upon 
as a symbol of good health and prosperity. Fat was synonymous then 
with power, strength and robu=t 
health. Double chins and spare tyres 
were regarded by many as shields of 
protection against illness and disease 
In other words, instead of recognising obesity as a detriment to health 
and life, as we do today, our grandparents saw in it a perfectly barmless and even beneficial state of nutrition. 

Today the hazards of obesity are 
no longer questioned. Life insurance statistics show conclusively that 
excessive weight not only predisposes its victims of a long list of 
serious conditions such as diabetes, 
heart disease and high blood pressure 
but shortens their life expectancy to 
a shocking degree. One outstanding 
figure for people between the ages 
of 45 and 50 will suffice: as little 35 
25 pounds of excess weight diminishes 
their life expectancy by fully 25 per 

Sound knowledge and sensible eating practices are gradually replacing 
misinformation, superstition and indifference. Today more people seek 
medical advice for weight correction 
than ever before. Even more important, parents, teachers, nurses and 



public health workers have come to 
the inevitable realisation that the 
best way to combat obesity is by 
prevention. 

Charts showing man's daily dietary 
requirements and listing the calori: 
value of foods are easily available 
nowadays. A lack of specific information may lead to widespread dietary indiscretion. ' 

For instance, the size of the meal 
does not always reflect the number 
of calories it contains. A bulky meal 
composed largely of fruits and vegetables may yield fewer calories than 
a smaller one containing large 
amounts of cream, butter and sugar 
It is up to us to select our foods 
wisely, making sure that our diet hqs 
both the proper food elements and 
calories. 

Rome people overeat because they 
fail (usually as a result of habit) to 
diminish their food intake when their 
activities lessen. This type of overeating has been labelled "relative 
overeating," and it is responsible fothe obesity seen so frequently in the 
vptired athlete, in the person who has 
changed to a less active occupation, 
in the patient convalescing from an 
illness or an operation and in the 
man or woman who lias slowed down 
with advancing age. 

Supposing John Doe. aged 20, weighing 154 pounds, is a hard worker and 
wishes tn retain his present weight. 
He requires a daily diet containing 
4000 or perhaps even 4500 calories 
However, when he reaches middle 
age or changes to lighter work, he 
must diminish his caloric intake at 
once or obesity will surely result. 
The familiai' middle-aged spread and 
the notorious matronly appearance 
are no longer looked upon as something inevitable. All that we have 
to da to prevent this dangerous 
type of growth is curtail our caloric 
intake in accordance with our activi


■1 CAVALCADE, Februorv, 1953 



l ies and our work at physical 

''I was never fat until my operation 1 ' is a comment frequently made 
by obese patients, implying that the 
operation is to blame. Nothing could 
be farther from the truth. Here is 
a situation where more than one 
factor usually comes into play. First 
of all. convalescence means lessened 
activity, with all its dangers of relative overeating. Secondly, friends 
and relatives bring fruit and chocolates and urge us to eat more and 
more, presumably for the purpose of 
helping us regain health and strength 
more rapidly. And finally, after a 
serious operation or illness, worry, 
frustration and a sense of insecurity 
may enter the picture and cause still 

The hypothalamus is a small structure in the brain, just above the 
pituitary gland. It has been observed 
that the appetite increases following 
inflammation, injury or tumour of 
this structure. However, the number 
of obesity cases resulting from the 
disturbance of the hypothalamus is 
exceedingly small. 



More is known at the present 
time about the composition of foods 
and about man's dietary requirements 
than ever before. The physician of 
today sees in the fat man or woman 
a patient entitled to all the sympathetic professional care and attention accorded the diabetic or arthritic 
person. 



permanently is to remove its cause. 
Prevention should be started early, 
best of all by the parents who are 
in an excellent position to surround 
their children with wholesome eating influences. In older people, the 
proper use of mental hygiene coupled 
with intelligent understanding encourages temperate Gating and drinking practices. 

The treatment of obesity calls for 
a thorough appraisal of all the factors responsible for excessive eating 
in each separate case. This can be 
accomplished only through 



i of physi



CAVALCADE, Februory, 1953 15 



Man-eating groper and murderous rivals PETER HARGRAVES 

are only two of the hazards o£ pearling. 




COAST OF PEARLS 



f\NE night in the 1890's, a" well^ known white pearling master of 
Broome — just' in from a three- weeks' 
cruise with a good haul of the lustrous gems—sat in on a poker game. 
At dawn he rose from the table broke 
—money, pearls, even his lugger had 
been lost. 

Hs returned to his bungalow and 
swore roundly as, in entering, he 
stumbled over the half of a massive 
golden-lip pearl shell he had used for 
years as a doorstop. 

Looking down at it, he noticed an 
unusual blister on the lining. On an 
impulse he opened it with his knife. 
Inside, a ehanee in a million, was a 
perfect rounded pearl, worth more 
than all he had lost. 

For 80 years, like a magnet, the 
chance of such a lucky strike has 



been luring adventurers to Australia's 
northern coast. From Broome .in the 
west to Thursday Island in the east, 
they have ranged the warm, azure 
waters offshore for the elusive pearl. 

In the heyday of the industry before World War I, more than 500 luggers worked the 3000 miles that comprise the pearling grounds. Now the 
total has shrimk to less than 100 
vessels. 

Exotic, colourful and cosmopolitan 
Broome, on mangrove -fringed Hoebuck Bay, has long been regarded as 
the pearling capital of the Commonwealth. 

To it, in days gone by, went pearl 
buyers, divers, speculators and rogues 
from all over the world. In their 
wake followed Asiatic sirens of all 
varieties to ply an age-old trade in 



16 CAVALCADE, February, 1953 



swarmed with Japanese, Wortb more than £50C0, it \ 

Malays, Manilamen, Indo- snide pearl, that is one stolen 

«nd South Sea Islanders. It dishonest diver and smuggled i 

cial melting pot, where men for secret .tale, 

lour as they sought for gems Bef.:rc the diver could dispu 



The first big pearl found on the m,r - named Pedro Marquez. 

;oast was Black's ir. 1873. Black was Marquez en.isted the aid of 

he captain of a -Jading schooner, who °t Qe * desperadoes, Charlie Ilageil 

■bought the pearl from a nigger for Norwegian, and Simeon Espada, 

, broken pocket knife." A few month* Ritf.gur.inn. Together t.-.e trio oH"l 

atcr, he sold it in London for £2500. pearl to a buyer from Forth, M 

md Australia's "Coast of Pearls" be- Liehglid. for £508. 

:sme famous. Knowing its value, Liebglid eag. 

Many uf the greatest pearis agreed to meet them with the c 

Similarly meant little to their original after dark. They felected as the r 

inders. The "Southern Cross." a dctvous the derelict schooner N 

!our-inch-long oddity of eight pearls beaeMd down the bay near Dan.i 



jold for a Liebg'.it kept the appointment and 
the following morning his body wan 



ilong the sandy beach at Ba'.dwi.i was battered in. Strangely the £300 

c north-west coast, when he sud- was found intact in his pocket. Ap
- spied the strangc-lookuiK white parently the killers had taken fright 

in the seaweed and fled without it. 

picked it up and raced horn. To-day Liebglid lies buried in 

: squalid shack in which he lived B " '' ' f :re ^ •• 1 « u ^ u « is . 

his drunken. ne'er-do-well B nd r^pad^ are b.u ied in the firour.ds 

r. With trembling hand* the °* PEntl Gao1 ' ***** J" hanK " 

examined the boy's find and his for the muld " a ,[umlh lat "
y eyes lit up. "They're pearls. The fatal pearl mysteriously dis
ight," he decided. "Might be appeared What happened to it was 

i something." never discovered, as the three killers 

wn at the jetty was the pearling refused to talk. 

ir of a shrewd character named The life of trie pearl diver teemed 

>er" Kelly. To him Clarke sold with hazards. In the early days of 

Southern Cross" for ten pounds t i, t . industry, men were frequently 

i bottle of rure. stricken with paralysis by a too-swift 

nmy Clarke, who died at Broome ascent from deep water; drowned by 



t the deadliest c 



CAVALCADE, February, 1953 17 



A, 



it o£ J 



BRITISH resident 
1 Hong Kong has a native I 
servant who goes around tlie \ 
house as quietly as a mouse 
for fear of disturbing his 
master. One day he asked 
the boy to call him the next 
morning at seven as he had 
an important engagement. At 
seven the boy entered his 
master's room. By the bed 
he left a note. When the 
British.v awoke later he read: 
"Sit, it is seven o'clock. Will 
you kindly get up, please?" 



mies. They seldom attacked a man 
in diving dress. When they did, 
they could be generally frightened off 
by the sudden release of air bubbles 
from the valve in the helmet. 

In 1915, a Koepanger named Francis 
Paddy came up with a spine-tingling 
account of the flesh-eating habits of 

He was working in a good patch of 
pearl shell where only a few days 
before a fellow" diver had been lost. 

Killer whales had chased an old 
humpback right up to the lugger. The 
lines of the submerged diver had become entangled in the ferocious fight 
that followed and snapped. He had 
sunk to the bottom and been drowned. His body had not been located. 

But that was the luck of the game. 
As Francis Paddy moved at work 
over the ocean bed, his mind intent 
on pearls, he had no time to think of 
his missing mate. Suddenly, in some 
rocks ahead, he' spied a huge black 

It was a groper. Oblivious of his 
presence, it was wrenching and tug


ging at an object lying on a rock. 

Francis Paddy got one glimpse of 
its "monstrous head, thick, leathery 
lips and great eye of liquid green" 
before he gave the urgent signal. 
"Up! Danger! Quick!" 

The groper was trying to tear the 
body of the dead diver out of bis 
thick enveloping suit— to feast upon 
its soft, succulent, sought-after human 
flesh. 

Of all the motley band of divers of 
bygone years the Japanese were considered the most skilful. Europeans 
did not seem to have their phlegmatic 
indifference to the hardships, danger 
and boredom of the life. 

An exception was the noted Australian diver, the late Clarence Benham, who went to Thursday Island 
in his youth in the 1890's to make a 
pearling fortuna 
He never made the fortune, but he 



did 



his 



the 



annals of pearling — principally 
through a savage, underwater fight to 
the death with a Jap. 

At 20, Benham commanded his own 
lugger, the Gertrude. Prospecting for 
new, unworked ground one season, 
he came upon a promising bed in 
Baisek Pass in Torres Strait. 

He had only been there a short 
time, however, when a Japanese lugger, Pearl Queen, arrived on the 
scene. With much gesticulation its. 
skipper ordered the Australian off, 
claiming the spot was his. 

Benham ignored him, donned his 
dress and went down for a load of 
shell. Within a matter of minutes, i> 
signal on his line told him that a 
Japanese diver was descending also. 

Down through the green dimness 
Clarrie Benham watched the Jap 
slowly slide. He landed in the sand 
only 50 feet away and made straight 
for Benham — swinging a large iron 
bolt. 

Six feet away he paused. Then 



18 CAVALCADE, February, 1953 



bolt upraised, he lunged for Benham's 
arm with his other hand. 

But the Australian was ready. He 
grabbed the outstretched hand and 
yanked it towards him. Losing his 
balance the Jap toppled over on the 

One kick with his heavy, leadsoled boot and Benham had done 
what the Jap had intended to do to 
him— smashed in his glass face-piece. 
Then he jumped astride the body 
and stayed there until it went limp. 

Back, on the Gertrude, Benham and 
his crew watched as the Japs hauled 
up their comrade's body and sailed 



They did not seem impressed by his 
shouted opinion that the poor fellow 
must have fallen on a sharp piece of 
coral and so broken his face-piece. 

A variety of reasons, including the 
cultured pearl, have been put forward for the present stagnation of 
the pearling industry. 

All of them arc no doubt contributory causes. The real reason, however, may be the scarcity of men like 
these old-time pearlers. It is an 
occupation that requires a special 
degree of toughness, courage and enterprise. 





A Military Commission ponderously 
took evidence, sitting at Port Lyon, in 

Denver. 

It was headed by Colonel Tappan, 
of the 1st Colorado Cavalry— an 
officer who hated the sight of Chivington. 

But he could find no evidence to 
prove that Cbivington's action had 
not been justified, and the affair fizzled out. 

The Indians took advantage of the 
public sympathy. Within a few months 
they were back at their old tricks, 
burning farms and killing whites, 

After three more years of skirmishing and bloodshed, General Hancock set forth from the east with an 
expedition of hmvily-ai-med men. 
His aim was to persuade the Indians 
to enter the newly-formed reservations by a judicial show of the 
strength of the white man. 

Out in the plain country, he contacted a band of Sioux in the district 
to the west of Fort Larned. He 
negotiated with the chiefs, and they 



made appointments for further conferences. 

They did not keep their promise, 
and the patient Hancock made fresh 
meeting-times with them. The Sioux 
did not bother to appear at the appointed time, and the General awoke 
next morning to find them gone. They 
had stolen everything they could from 
the cavalry camp as a parting gesture. 

But despite continued treachery, 
the peace-making efforts of the military leaders from the East were 
eventually successful. In a few years 
the Indian attacks had dwindled to 
practically nothing, and most of the 
tribes were settled in reservations. 

Twenty years later, while Colonel 
Chivington was addressing a large 
public gathering, he mentioned the 
massacre. "No matter what was 
said," he stated, "I still stand by what 
we did at Sands Creek." 

He could not have expected the 
reaction to his words. The packed 
audience rose to their feet as one and 
cheered the old army man. 




CAVALCADE, February, 1S53 23 




of Eat 



and the r 
' from Tunis. 
. Australia's pioneer lottery was 
! 'Tatt's"- now weH-known throughout 
the work!. In its Infancy the project 
: wan really struggling.— but not on 
account of public disinterest. Originally the Post Office declined to handle 
letters addressed to Tatter-sail's, Hobait. The Tasmanian Government 
wasn't unduly worried. Agents in 
Hobart and Launceston were Receiving enormous mail deliveries 
daily— and there was no mention of 
Tattersall's on the envelopes, must 
of which had been posted in Vic
Nowndays the Commonwealth Government is no! too proud to extract 
a substantial payoff from the Tasmanian institution. Their gain is 
poundage on postal notes and money 
orders as v.-eU as postage. Two hun. 
drcd thousand Tasmanian tickets are 
sold each fortnight, with a couple 
of heavier Melbourne Cup consultations annually. Those sales aggregate a lot of poundages and posture 

In fact, the Post Master General's 
Department draws top prize of the 
list, augmented by the rake- off from 
the Queensland Golden Casket and 
the New South Wales and Western 
Australian State lotteries. Tasmanian 
officialdom doesn't fare badly either. 
Apples, Cascade Ale, and chocolates 
are far behind Tatt's on the schedule 
of State revenue-earning commodi


butclier from Kngland purchased an 
hotel in Pitt Street, Sydney. His 
name was George Adams, and the 
property he bough! was known as 
O'Brien's pub. Adams, with a :lair for 
Showmanship, set ;ib-,u: attracting th c 
drinking public to his bar. First, he 
rechristened his hotel, Tattersall's. 
after the famous English sporting 



club. Next, he imported chunks of 
special marble from throughout the 
world and huilt-in the now famous 
Marble Bar. 



). Adar 



iaUy 



gentry to use his pub. He 
run a sweep for his customers on th 
1881 Sydney dp. It was a succe; 
right at the beginning. The £2,000 11 
stakes came in during the first da> 
Pub Sweeps- soon hecam. 



>-ell-k::: 



the 



1. Adai 



1. The 

was doing 
e, and drawii 
atomers to his 
iaUy the mora! 
tge. The resu 
■ declared ill< 



roil


South Wales 

Adams transferred his sweep bi 
ness to Brisbane, but the Purit; 
Hushed with their success, were 
on his heels. Sweeps were outlawed 



Tasmania in 1895, am 
himself free of his 1 



*d s 



Jth t 



1st foe 



First prize in present day "Tatt's" 
is £10,000, while the hig Mclhoume 
Cup consultation is worth £50.000. 
Although many winners of Geo. 
Aoiarns' sweepstakes have found that 
the money led them to trouble, the 
founder himself profited w.-ll from 
his idea. When he died in 1904, he 



of 1 



. .. Lh.-.-r. 
bin sha/ 



, tea; mi 



ir.d he 
(Ctrica! 



The Queensland Golden Casket 
came into being at the end of World 
War L Annual payments for tickets 
exceed £3 millions while a quarter 
of a million investors share £2 mil


It 



as only after some vicious 
nt (hat the New South Wales 
-rottery come into being. Its 



CAVA CAD3. Ceb-uciy. '953 25 




1931, . 



x) the Pre 



. John T. Ur 



way to help the penniless State hospitals. He settled for lotteries, and 
made his public announcement. 

The roar of protest from many 
quarters was ear -splitting. Controversy raged for a month. Lang offered 
his critics six months within which 
to produce an alternative scheme for 
raising money for hospitals. 

The protests dropped in pitch to a 
restless mumble. The legislation went 
through. 

The N.S.W. Lottery has rolled more 
fhan £27 million into State revenue 
vaults since Mrs. N. E. Morton, of 
Manly, near Sydney, won the first 
£5,000, twenty-one years ago, while 
£48 million has gone to prize winners. 
It is one government enterprise 
which shows a profit. 

Director of the N.S.W. Lottery is 
Mr. Marcus Quinlin, a cheerful 
quietly-spoken, friendly man in his 

26 CAVALCADE, February, 1953 



middle fifties. His staff of inn indud 
men end women clerks, ticket-seller 
accountants and tellers. 

The New South Wales lottery offi: 
las! year wrrve to an investor ir. -tl 
NeWcastle district- They sent a resu 
sheet and informed him that it w 
believed that he had won a prii 



of his shade. He had sawn out tl 
piece carrying his ticket. His pri 



but his agents collect them in groups 
of four. 

Fate dealt differently with 72-yearold Walter Western. He had bought 
tickets in the lottery regularly since 
its inception. One day the right result 
came through. A press reporter huried to tell him the good news. He 
had won the £6,000 at last— but, as 
though he had grown tired of waiting, the old man had died the evening before. 

Lottery winnings have brought 
security and stability to many, hut to 
some they have meant trouble, maladjustment and hatred. In New South 
Wales two brothers fought over a 
lottery share; father sued his son; 
son sued his mother. In Queensland, 
two sisters swore a deadly and permanent enmity. 

An Englishman named Whittaker 
won £40,000 in the Calcutta Sweepstakes. At the time he owned a ser


■ vicing garage, a modest bank t 
H and his n-.nc.-cu was 
H English lass. The lucky winner sold 

■ bis property, ran out on his girl, ur.d 
B invaded Paris. There he obtained for 
B himself a gla:;io.-ous .Mademoiselle ar.d 
H a plush flat He enjoyed a life of luxH ury for a brief twelve months— then 
I his mademoiselle's other bey friend 
H murdered him. There was still £5,000 
H I?ft of his fortune. 

A Sydney public servant could 
H easily hold the record average for 

■ success with more than one ticket. 

■ With his first two tickets he won first 
B; and second prizes in the State Lottery. His only other speculation was 
a half share in a ticke; with a friend. 



some ten years later. It tfcdn't pay a 
dividend. "I knew I was wasting that 
two and ninepence," he said. 

If you haven't yet speculated in 
lotteries, perhaps you are waiting for 
the gigantic British organised world 
lottery, discussed in 1948. Some oi 
Britain's biggest bankers, brekers and 
insurance tycoons were talking of a 
colossal lottery, with a first prise of 
100 million pounds and ten second 
prizes of five million pounds. The experts could see no difficulty in selling 
2,000 millon tckcts at £1 each. Such 
a turnover would nett the British 
Treasury £950 million. Don't ask us 
how the winner would cope with 
his £100 million. We couldn't count 
that much. 




Do You Work Better Lying Down? 

Recently studies conducted at 
Colgate University, U.S.A., suggest 
that mental efficiency would be 
greater if office workers were provided with mattresses instead of 
desks, so that they could lie down on 
the job. Numbers of undergraduates 
were tested lying down, with their 
feet propped up slightly higher 
than their heads. The results showed 
that the students thus reclined were 
able to do mathematical problems 7.4 
per cent, faster than when sitting 
upright — and their accuracy was 14 
per cent, better. 
Can Monkeys Talk? 

Ernest P. Walker, assistant director 
of the American National Zoo, believes they can. He has recorded 50 
words used by a little douroueouli 
monkey kept in his home. Muriel, as 
she is called, has made certain sounds 
which Walker hopes will be the basis 
for a future douroucouli-English dictionary. "Wuk," Walker has decided, 
means danger. A trilling sound made 
by blowing the lips means good, generally used of food or of people 
Muriel likes. 

Can They Cure Crossed Eyes? 

They can, and the earlier the 
treatment is started the easier the 
job. With children it is advisable to 
consult a doctor about it before the 
age of four. The eyes of older children, and even adults, can also he 
straightened, but it may then be too 
late to improve the sight. It is a mis


take to believe that a child will outgrow crossed eyes. The only solution 
is medical treatment. Doctors have 
four methods of correcting crossed 
eyes. One is the use of glasses, 
where the child Is near or farsighted, and in some cases that is all 
that is necessary. Sometimes the placing of a patch over the good eye is 
advocated. This forces use of the 
weak eye, causing its vision to improve. Exercises for the eye muscles 
(orthoptics) is another help. The 
surest method, however, is surgery — 
a simple operation, about equivalent 
in its effects to a tonsil removal. 

Are Women Sicklier Than Men? 

Although women live longer than 
men, recent findings of a U.S. Public 
Health Survey indicate they have 
more sickness during their life. 
Researchers canvassed 35 blocks in 
the city of Baltimore once a month 
for five years, recording details of 
family illness. They reported that 
about 75 per cent, of the women and 
54 per cent of the men were sick 
to the point of going to bed at least 
onee a year. In three-fifths of the 
87 different diseases reported that 

were greater sufferers than men. 
Neuritis, thyroid ailments, headache, 
nervousness and liver and gall bladder complaints troubled women the 
most. Men were most affected by 
ulcers, bronchitis, heart disease and 
hernia. 



28 CAVALCADE, February, 1953 





30 CAVALCADE, February, 1953 



CAVALCADE. February, 1953 31 



they 



MAKE PAIN 

a 

PLEASURE 

rpHE small, meek appearing elderly 
man stood in a dingy room in 
a New York tenement building. A 
smile played on his lips as he walked 
over to a dresser and took four 
needles from a drawer. Some of the 
needles were five or six inches long. 
One by one he inserted them into his 
body for their full length. 

The gentle smile left the little 
man's face and was replaced by a 
look of absolute ecstasy. There was no 



An e\Mmiualkin of the make-up of the 
uEiui-r fish science calls a iiuisodiis; 

ROBERT J. GALWAY 



indication of pain. Just an ecstasy 
that seemed to possess every fibre of 
his already scarred body. 

His name was Albert Fish, and 
the act of inserting needles into his 
body was but one of the many ways 
in which he achieved happiness, contentment. Another of his methods of 
obtaining strange satisfaction was to 
beat his body with a brass studded 
paddle until it was a bloody mass of 
torn flesh. To Albert Fish, sex end 
pain were the same. 

The above statements have not been 
taken from a best-selling novel They 
are part of the court records transcribed in New York City during the 
murder trial of Albert Fish. He eventually died in the electric chair for 



32 CAVALCADE, February, 1953 



the brutal murder of an 11-year-old 
child. 

Many people are familiar with 
the meaning of the word sadist. 
They know that a sadist gets an 
emotional kick out of inflicting pain 
on other people. Less familiar is the 
meaning of a word that is the exact 
opposite to sadist. The word is 
mnsochist and means a person who 
gets an emotional kick by inflicting 
pain on himself, or having someone 
else inflict the pain. 

Psychiatrist tells us that all of us 
can have a certain degree of masochism in our make-up and still be 
considered perfectly normal. As an 
example, they point to people who 
get satisfaction out of applying iodine 
to a cut. The stinging sensation produced by the iodine makes the bearer 
feel strong and self righteous. Similarly, many people take delight in 
extracting a splinter from their own 
hand or finger. 

Everybody knows of, or has heard 
about, the woman who receives steady 
beatings from her husband or boy 
friend. The neighbours shake their 
heads and wonder why the "poor 
dear" doesn't leave the brute. They 
figure she must really love him, or 
stick to him because of the kids. 
Well, that is true in some cases. But, 
in a lot of cases the little lady sticks 
to the brute because she's an out-anout masochist. She loves her regular 
beatings. Punch by punch, bruise by 
bruise, she gets a kick out of it. If 
she was told this she'd be insulted, 
but it's a psychiatric fact. 

According to Sigmund Freud masochism is a kind of sadism "turned 
against oneself." Until recently, some 
sexologists regarded sadism as a very 
active and masculine trait, and masochism as a very passive and feminine 
trait. However, it is now known that 
there are a great many masochists 



who are extremely virile in naturf 
and appearance. 

une of the world's greatest sex>' 
uiogists, Havelock Ellis, points oni 
mat advanced cases of masochisn, 
usually show indications of sexuai 
deficiency. This in turn means thk 
masochist requires stronger than nor. 
mai stimulation to obtain a state 01 
sexual emotion. 

Psychiatrists are often asked: What 
causes a person to become a masochist? And they are the first to admit they only know part of the 

While there is no general definite 
agreement as to what causes a person to become a masochist most authorities do agree -that it stems back to 
some childhood incidents, or series of 
childhood incidents. One of the most 
accepted theories is based on the 
[act that most masochists were children who were denied parental affec
As a child, as a means of getting 
attention, the youngster took to injuring itself in various ways. Or, 
knowing that if it couldn't get love, 
the child realised it could get attention by being punished if it was bad. 
And that punishment was also usually 
applied on the buttocks, often bare. 
It is a known fact that most masochists pick a portion of their body 
near their sex organs to wound, which 
ties in with the theory of childhood 

Who knows? Now that child physical punishment is becoming more 
and more obsolete, masochism may 
eventually die out. Psychiatrists tell 
us that no child can develop into a 
normal adult unless it receives plenty 
of affection from its parents and 
those close to it. If that is so it is 
a cheap price to pay to eliminate one 
of mankind's dangerous perversions. 

CAVALCADE. Februory. 1953 33 



CURIOUS CANINE. . . . 

A renowned American murder 
case was once solved by a dog. A 
mongrel named Sailor, he was inherited by Emmett Hoffee when 
his brother, Harry Hoffee, died. Six 
years later, Sailor had grown old and 
Emmett thought it would be a nice 
sentimental gesture to take him on 
a visit to Harry's former farm before 
he died. Sailor no sooner arrived at 
the old place, near Fairfield, Illinois, 
before ho dashed out into a paddock 
and feverishly began to dig. Presently he unearthed a jar containing 
a letter from Harry's widow to her 
lover and detailing plans for her 
husband's murder hy poisoning. 
Now remarried, the widow was interrogated by the police and confessed 
to the murder of her former husband. 

STILL WILD WEST. . . . 

A mounted desperado recently 
galloped up to a Colorado service 
station and, flourishing a six-shooter, 
rifled the so# drink and chocolate 
machines of 1G dollars. He dashed 
out to his trusty steed, jumped 
aboard and hightailed it back into 
the west over a nearby fence. Two 
deputy sheriffs set off in pursuit but, 
hampered by the righ-powered car 
upon which modern upholders of the 
law have to depend, soon had to give 
up the chase. 



SMELL OF MURDER. . . . 

Modern criminology records only 
one man who actually smelled out 
a murderer. His name is Dr. Lerner, 
of Boston, and he hit the headlines 
a few years ago over a patient with 
a cold he was called in to treat. 
About the man, and his room, the 
doctor noticed a peculiar aroma which 
had remained in his nostrils since his 
student days — the odour of a medical 
dissecting room. Dr. Lerner, on leaving, notified the police, who paid 
the ma n a hasty call. As a result, 
the patient, Oscar Bartolini, was convicted of murdering and dismembering his employer, Mrs, Grace Asquith, 
parts of whose body had just been 
found floating in Boston Harbour. 
UNSOLVED. . . . 

What happened to the new courthouse in the frontier town of Talbot, 
Arizona, must be one of those elusive 
perfect crimes. After six months' 
construction work, the building was 
completed on September 24, 1889, 
which was thereupon declared a public holiday by the mayor. AH day 
long the townsfolk celebrated. But 
that night someone perpetrated one 
of the most baffling unsolved mysteries. The courthouse literally disappeared. When Talbot woke next 
morning, the site was once again a 
vacant lot. Overnight, someone had 
removed it— and every nail, piece of 
timber and other material used in ; (s 
construction. 




eh— Brown, didn't you say?" 

"Now look, Professor, my boss is 
willing to pay you dough, real dough 
to get this new— what you call it— this 
annoy thing — " 

Elwood's lips quirked slightly, hut 
his face was wooden. 

"It's a new metal alloy." 

"Well, my boss wants it. He'll pay 
and pay good." 

"Sorry, Mr. Brown. You see, I'm 
signing over all claims to the govern. 

The bubbling fury in Scaife exploded. He took a furious stsp toward 
Elwood. His feet sank into the freshly 
dug earth of the flower bed. There 
was a roar of rage from the fawncolored dog, and the animal hurled 
himself at Scaife's throat. 

"Down Trin! Down!" Elwood made 
a flying leap and circled the slavering 
creature's throat with his arms. 

"Wait in the front room there," 
Elwood jerked his head at the cottage a short distance away. "I'll lock 
Trin up for the night." 



Scaife watched as the professor 
tugged the reluctant dog around the 
corner of the laboratory adjoining 
the cottage. 

He turned swiftly, pounded through 
the maze of paths to the doorway. 

He closed the door with quick purpose. His small intense eyes darted 
about, stopped suddenly as he saw. 
through the rear windows, the dim 
figure of tlie professor. Elwood was 
fastening the still angry Trin into a 
wire enclosure about a hundred yards 
in back of the house. 

For all his hulking ungainliness 
Scaife moved swiftly through the 
room. His black, questing eyes .froze 
into little points of intensity as they 
fell on the untidy desk. His thick 
gloved fingers pawed through the litter of papers. 

Then he straightened slowly, his 
fingers clamped rigidly on a large 
yellow envelope. He flattened the 
bulky folder between his palms, and 
his lips drew back from his teeth in 
a thin smile. 

There was the sound of a door 
closing in another part of the cottage and the thud of approaching 
footsteps. Scaife dropped the envelope back on the desk and was staring 
down into the charred embers on the 
dead hearth when Professor Elwood 
swung into the room. 

Elwood blushed his hands together 
and switched on a lamp. 

"Sorry to keep you waiting for that 
drink. Trin was being a little obstreperous." He laughed as he set a 
decanter and two glasses on the 
corner of the paper- strewn desk. 

He stopped, the decanter poised over 
the glasses; his eyes glued to the yellow envelope lying atop the litter on 
his desk. 

"Good heavens! I thought I mailed 
that!" He snatched the envelope and 
turned to the wall beside the desk. 



38 CAVALCADE, February, 1953 



He swung aside a large pin-studded 
map and started twirling the dial of 
a safe imbedded in the panelling. 

"Trin and I do our best to protect 
ourselves from my absent-mindedness, 
but sometimes even h e can't help me." 

The professor slipped the yellow 
envelope into the safe and pulled at 
the ponderous door. Scaife sprang 
forward. The poker glinted balefully 
in the lamplight as it crashed on the 
back of Elwood's skull. 

For the space of half a breath there 
was silence in the room. Scaife stood, 
the poker still raised, and his breath 
was a slobbering noise in his throat. 
With a stifled grunt the professor's 
body crumpled to the floor, rolled 
slightly, and came to rest on its back. 
A trickle of blood oozed from one 
ear and drooped slowly onto the rug. 
From the wire enclosure in the rear 
of the house came a wild sobbing 
howl that rose to a thin pinnacle of 

Scaife faced the back windows and 
the fat folds of his face whitened. He 
hunched his shoulders, turned, and 
stepped across Elwood's body to the 
safe. His little black eyes gleamed. 
His small teeth clicked audibly as 
he patted the yellow envelope and 
slipped it into his pocket. 

For a silent, careful moment he 
stood, his eyes searching the room. 
Finally they rested on the body at 
his feet. He touched it callously with 
the toe of his shoe. 

"You dumb cluck!" 

He stepped across the body again 
and made his way to the door. He 
gave a last glance about, and the 
door clicked behind him. 

Scaife started forward. At the edge 
of the flower bed he paused. In the 
deepening twilight he could still see 
the nodding shapes of the flowers. 
The dusk was heavy with their scent. 

Something like a growl came from 



Scaife's throat. He gave a low snorting laugh, and brought his heel 
down on a clump of yellow pansies, 
grinding them into the soil. He kicked 
viciously at some tulips, gave another 
low laugh, and clomped through the 
middle of the flowers. Suddenly he 
staggered, clutched wildly at the air, 
and fell forward with a thudding 

From somewhere in the distance 
came a dull clanging sound. 

For a moment Scaife lay still, then 
he pulled his face out of the moist 
friable soil and sat up. He spat out 
a mouthful of dirt. 

"Goddam flowers—" He stopped, his 
mouth falling open, his eyes fastened on a thin copper wire hidden in 
the thick growth about a foot above 
the ground. He twisted his neck 
right and then left; the wire followed 
the contour of the bed. 

"Damned dumb cluck and his 
homemade burglar traps!" 

Scaife struggled to get to his feet, 
then stopped— his fingers clawing the 
earth— listening. Again there was a 
heavy clang from behind the cottage. 
Scaife's thick lips slackened. A trickle 
of moisture crept from one corner of 
his mouth. His eyes bulged as he 
stared at the copper wire. 

"Oh, my gosh!" His voice rose to 
a shriek. "He's loose! He's loose!" 

A high keening sound came from 
around the house. Frantically Scaife 
pawed the ground, trying to regain 
his feet, but something was wrong 
with one ankle. He thudded back 
down among the flowers, struggling 
with his clumsy gloved fingers to 
reacli the gun under his left arm. But 
even as he clawed at his coat, the 
whining sound grew to a moan and 
a blast of terror, and the great snarling dog charged around the corner 
of the house. 

Scaife screamed only once. 



CAVALCADE, February, 1953 39 




HE TRIED 10 HELP A LITTLE MITE IN 
DISTKESS — BUT NO ONE UNDERSTOOD 



rpHE afternoon was hot. To the 
south over the city a line of 
clouds loomed, bloated with rain. 
Above the sky was a tight blue, 
whitened with the heat that boats up 
from city streets and is beaten down 
pgain. 

The people in the street were languid. They walked, and licked their 
dry lips, and looked at the distant 
clouds, hoping. The leaves of the 
trees drooped listless, pale near the 
trunks, and almost seemed to pant 
for breath themselves. Early evening settled, unnoticed. 

Two pubs echoed each other across 
the tramline. The thin ting of cash 
register bells slid through a hole ii. 
the hum of voices, the clink of 
glasses, the running of beer. Men, 
thin, stooped, pot-bellied, spitting, 
sat and swore and drank on the steps. 
Voices rose )oud, sank soft, and the 
heat clamped down in waves over 
them. Sports-shirts stuck to running 
backs. It was near closing-time. 
From the restless hum an occasional 
voice stood out. A few men walked, 
lazy-kneed, down the steps, and scattered. Two of them paused on the 
edge of the pavement. One spat and 
%viped his mouth with the back ul 
his hand. 

I "Well ... I guess EU he gettiii' 
along, Jim." 
"Goodnight." 

They paused, neither making a 



move, feeling the heat. A mutual 
embarrassment, a flash of dislike, 
took them. They grunted, ashamed, 
and moved off. 

The young one crossed the street, 
head down and thrust forward. His 
eyes, shaded from the still strong 
glare by the rim of his hat, were 
hard. The second pub faced him; 
the same men sat on the steps, the 
same barmaids .overfrothed the 
glasses, and the sticky money fled 
backwards and forwards across the 
same wet counter. The same heat 
beat, fell, washed upon his back and 
eyes, and clamped around his temples. 
He passed the pub, going down the 
alley at its side, past the steps. 

"Hey, Jim! Come and have a 

"No thanks, Ted, going home." 

The voices echoed off the buildings. 
Even in the shade '. . . here . . . out 
of the wind ... it was so bloody 
hot. The beer hadn't made him any 
cooler ... he sweated more. What's 
for tea? He didn't feel like anything to eat. And with Lorry, big 
with their second child, tired and 
grumbling, and Ruth peevish after a 
day at school. . . . 

He turned into his street, head 
down, as though not to see the ironspiked railings, the dull brown 
facades, the curve -worn polished 
steps, the brass door-knockers, cleaned so elaborately every day; as 




LOWDOWN ON LOVE: Asked 1 to write a composition on love, 
this is what one pert little 11-year-old moppet turned in: "Lave 
is something that makes two people think they are pretty when 
nobody else does. It also makes them sit closer together on a 
seat when there is plenty of room at both ends. Love is 
thing that young people have but that old people don't have 
because it is all dimples and star-like eyes and curls that old 
people don't hove. It is something that makes two people very 
quiet when you are around, also very quiet when you ain't, only 
in a different way. When they do talk, it's all about dreams 
and moonshine." 




though not to hear the game of 
cricket of the kids, the gossip over 
three-feet high dividing front fences; 
the greetings. 

Lorry was standing on the steps 
of the house, near the ornate, oid 
wooden seat. He looked at her and 
a spurt of pity took him. He kissed 
her on the cheek, but she repulsed 
him, irritated, annoyed. He looked 
down at the green step. She felt 

"Ruth's not home yet," she said 
flatly. 

"She's probably gone to one of the 
kid's places. I wouldn't worry." 

"I'm not worrying, but she's later 
(hnn usual. It's after six." 

A flash of irritation hit up inside 
again: "She'll he home. It's not the 
first time . . ." 

Hs sighed, sat down on the seat, 
hat. back on his head, feet on the 
railing, legs wide apart, and rolled a 
limp cigarette. His wife seemed 
small standing on the step beside 

"Jim, I wonder if you'd better ask 
the kids if they've seen Ruthy. She's 
late for her tea now." 

"She'll be all right. Stop worrying." 



She sat down on the seat beside 
him. He turned to her with a sudden wave of sympathy. 

She nodded her head sideways noncommittally, and plucked her apron 
with her hands. 

"Not too bad," she said. "I wish 
Ruth would come." 

Jim said, "I'll go and ask the kids." 

She sat and watched him go down 
the three steps into the street. He 
slumped from the kerb, trying to be 
nonchalant, slightly slouched, face 
thin. He spoke to one of the kids 
playing a game, and got a short 
answer. He moved on, . looking lost 
among the short, anxious forms of 
the children, and started talking to 
an urchin sitting in the gutter. 

After a while he walked back unconcernedly, pretending to look at 
the game of cricket. He sat down. 

"What happened?" Lorry asked. 

"They haven't seen her since she 
left school at three o'clock." 

"Did she go home with anyone?" 

Well, young Georgte says she went 
off towards King's Cross by herself." 
A little, doubtful, nagging tone came 
into his voice. "He said she was 
crying." 



"She fell over and broke her new 
school-case at playtime.'" He repeated the child's words. 

"Jim, you'd better go and look for 
her." A frayed edge flickered in her 
he was half asking, half 
demanding. 

He got up and went down the 
steps again, his hat on the back of 
his head, his eyes scaled. 

"Go over and sea Miss Mars ton, 
the teacher," she said, "and go over 
to young Jenny's place. If she's not 
there, go to the police," With the 
last words, her voice rose shrill. He 
was hurrrying, determined. 

The crowds of people were thick 
on the pavements. The hot wind 
blowing straight along the roadway 
swept down to sort them out and 
instead fused them into one melting 



On the corner Guido 
poised on the kerbstone, y iicnging 
rock amidst the tide that swept past 
him in a bunch across the road. Ho 
looked old; the belching wind wispei] 
his hair around his ears, grey blackstreaked hair combed straight back 
from a high furclu'nd, a small face, a 
round chin. Pivoting, he bit his 
lower lip. Somebody jostled him, 
turning one shoulder sideways. The 
lost look came back into grey eyes. 
He licked his lips. 

Drink . . , something to drink. He 
glanced across at the hotel. Hot to 
swill beer across that trough. Nearly 
closing time. The sweat banded his 
brow where the thin grey hair clung. 
He wiped his face with a handker- chief. Coffee. Relief snatched at 
him, then an acute physical disgust 
at the thought of the coffee-house. 

An immense feeling of aloneness and 
exhaustion swept up to him. This 



heat . . . this wind . . . this damn 
country. For once he wanted the 
touch of a hand on his elbow, a 
greeting in his own tongue, a friend. 
He walked slraight into someone. 

"S'all right, mate." 
His feelings swept out in gratitude 
towards this stranger for the words. 
He wanted to stop him, thank him. 
But the man was gone. He drifted 
down the street. A blind clock-face 
. milk-bar showed just after six. 



He d 



42 



CAVALCADE, February, 1953 



The breeze was fresher and the 
people fewer. On his left was a park, 
hot. The grass brown and crisp with 
sharp hidden seeds in it. Seats were 
scattered around the edges, painted 
wood with concrete legs, like modern 
sphinxes. The shaded ones were all 
taken— people talking, reading, smoking, looking with one eye at playing 
children. The ones in the sun were 

The children's playground at the 
bottom of the park was closed and 
the people drifted off in groups, talking, brushing grass seeds from their 
clothes. 

As traffic sounds receded from his 
mind, as people kaw figures that 
passed, as the breeze that blew coolly 
now on his face soothed him, a restless sadness rose up over Guido. All 
these people . . . home. No friend? 
Where anywhere? 

His mouth drooped, upper lip heavy 
with an exhausted ache; his wrists 
were useless at his side, his eyes tired 
yet restless, their greyness drawing 
up and flaunting his sadness. A belltower struck seven. It was evening, 

He looked across the park and saw 
a little girl sitting on a seat by herself. She was Eve, perhaps six, On 
her knees she nursed a case, arms 
folded on top of it, and her face above 
it with big anxious eyes, and drawn
CAVALCADE. February, 1953 43 



in, tight, small lips. She wasn't pretty. 
She was dirty, and her hair was untidy. Her school tunic was not long 
enough to hide a slack stocking, 
black, its white garter drooping 
gloomily. Her feet swung in the air 
and she was looking at the ground 
in front of her. All his self-pity and 
loneliness were routed. He felt alive 
again; the pang o£ an emotion had 
touched him. 

The little girl lifted her head and 
he saw she was crying. A dirty handkerchief clasped in her hand win 
lifled to smear her cheeks. 

Gtlido rose and walked towards her 
and sat beside her on the seat. Tiie 
feeling of the lonely for loneliness, 
of the lost for the lost, sprang up 
between them. He soothed her, 
searching for words. 



A guilty feeling of annoyance nibbled 
his stomach. Thank God it was a bit 

As he turned the corner a sail of 
hot air hit him, just one puff, and the 
sweat again beaded his forehead. Jim, 
walking fast, felt stifled. He slowed 
down, relaxed. Excused himself by 
scanning the road in the distance, 
looking inside the corner fruit shop. 

There were few people, and the 
sun was low so that it burnt gold 
the windows of the flats on the other 
side of the road. He strolled towards 
The Cross. On the main road, the 
traffic swelled thicker. He unconsciously walked a little faster, turned 
down a sharp little hill into another 
main road, his feet sliding forward 
in his shoes. Turned another corner 
and knocked at a door opening on to 
the street. 

No, Miss Marston hadn't seen her. 
Was anything the matter? Yes, she d 
been upset in class about breaking 



her school case, but she hadn't said 
anything. 

He turned back to the tram lines, 
crossed the street, went down the 
roadway opposite, steep, made of 
wooden blocks, sticking out of soft 
asphalt and looking like cobblestones. 
Another house with an iron fence and 
painted concrete verandah like his 
own, and next door to a factory. 

Ne, Jenny hadn't gone to school today . . . into town with her mother 
. . . hadn't -seen Ruth since Friday. 
Sorry, anything wrong? 

H e followed the curve of the road 
which brought him out right in the 
centre of the shopping area. He felt 
a little lost. Where te now? He war 
taken aback by the sudden closure of 
his ways of escape. 

A tide of annoyance crept inside 
him. What was the matter with her 
anyhow? What she needs is a good 
hiding— running away from home. A 
shot of fear glanced him: if she hadn'i 



run away? He turned sharply, retraced his steps towards the lights, 
past the pub where he had been 
drinking a while back. The anger 
in him began to grow and with it a 
pale fear. 

The traffic— a taxi narrowly missed 
him— angered him. People seemed 
callous. The lights hurt his eyes . . . 
the hot day. Anger flashed up inside 
him against his wife, his kid, himself. 
He walked down the street, avoiding 
people's eyes, and looking in each 
milk bar, searching figures. The 
police? What could they do? Emptiness sank into his belly. 

He came to a park where he knew 
there was a children's playground, 
and crossed the road quickly, looking sharply for traffic. The playground was closed— it was growing 
dark. He strolled along the path 
through the middle of the park, 
slouching, striving for ease, his selfi feeling as though they 




ARCHIBALD THE MONUMENT 

44 CAVALCADE, February, 1953 



CAVALCADE, February, 1953 45 




were running away from his body. 

He was in an arena of peoplepeople who sat around and stared. 
He spat a glance from hot eyes al 
them. Hadn't they got anything better to do than sit and stare, stare at 
him? 

The anger flared up, cramped his 
chest. Quickly he crossed the road 
back towards the lights, on the other 
side this time. His hands were sticky 
with anger. Then he saw her. 

She was standing at the window al 
a radio store, licking an ice cream, 
her face dirty. She was watching a 
toy electric monkey in the window. 
Its grey fuzz bearded face was nodding from side to side, knocking on 
one side against a blue fan held in its 
moving hand; a lorgnette in its other 
hand came to its eyes and dropped, 
came to its eyes ■ and dropped; a 
frenetic grin bared its little teeth as 
its jaw slacked, halted and rose again. 
She turned and laughed upwards 
toothily at a man holding her hand. 
Jim's fists clenched, knuckles whit


ened. The filthy dago! Anger disintegrated his brain ... the man 
smiled back at her . . . and its 
strength swept into his body. He fell 
at the couple, one hand grasping at 
tlie girl, the other gripping the man's 
shoulder, spinning him round against 
the plate glass window. The man 
slumped against the window, falling, 
Amazement and terror whipped the 
smile from his eyes. 

"You filthy ; If I catch yov 

near my kid again 111 kill you." 

"Please, mister," Guido said. "She 
is crying. She has fear, and I—" 

''Get going or I'll break your flavin' neck!" Jim shouted. He snatched 
up the battered schooicase and grabbed the girl's arm. 

"Daddy, he bought me an ice 
cream," she said. "I was crying— I 

"You come along with me, you little 
brat!" Relief made him angry. He 
hadn't anything to be afraid of now. 
No more worry — so, reaction. 

"Please, that's-a right, mister," 
Guido said. He was scared, eager to 
explain, pleased with what he'd done. 
He'd done a good turn: he wasn't so 
much a stranger: he'd helped some
"Get going, I said!" Ji m was shouting. 'Til break your filthy neck 
dago!" 

He pushed Guido back, and Guido 
loolted bewildered. Jim tugged at 
Ruth's arm" and' began walking. 

A woman's voice came from the 
crowd gathering on the footpath. 
"What's happening?" 

"Just a migrant fighting,". a man 
answered. "They think they can come 
j^ e y>,* lere and do as they damn well 

The monkey inside the plate glass 
window grinned. 



46 CAVALCADE. February. 1933 




STRANGER 




BEER PROOF . . . 

A British manufacturer has just 
came up with a beer -proof piano. 
Built of solid oak, it contains no 
sharp edges to bruise drinkers who 
might fall or be pushed by other 
souses against it. Beer mugs and 
cigarettes slide off sloping lids. The 
keys are covered with a fire- proof 
plastic that cannot be picked off and 
is immune to cigarette burns. Neither 
money, food, nor other articles suggested by insbrimecl nsnalers can be 
thrown into the works. Even the 
string assembly has been so built 
that "it cannot be removed to be 
played on as a harp in some Bacchic 
outpouring of song." 
INDIAN INSIGHT . . . 

The medicine men of the American 
Red Indians possessed many strange 
still inexplicable, powers. The Papago Iribe thought their chief medicine man, White Smoke, knew the 
secrets of life and death and could 
foretell the future; -and perhaps their 
faith in him may not have been misplaced. In the Frontier Museum of 
Oklahoma are documents containing 
many of his uncanny predictions. 
Researchers into the documents recently transcribed a prophesy of his 
made more than 100 years ago which 
seems to foretell both the Atom and 
the Hydrogen Bombs. "After many 
tomorrows,'' White Smoke is recorded as saying, ''a great fire %veapon will 
come from the sky and kill many 
warriors. Soon after that, a still 



greater fire weapon will come and 
destroy all remaining warriors." 
SKEETER SIREN . . . 

That exasperating buzz of mosquitoes which can ruin your sleeping 
hours is caused by the vibration of 
the wings of the insistent little diva 
bombers as they hover for the attack. The marauding visitor herself 
(only the female mosquito does the 
biting) is unaware she is making the 
noise and how it can both warn and 
torture the victim. Experts believe 
that generally her humming is a love 
call. Experimenters in Cuba, some 
time ago, succeeded in duplicating by 
means of a record an amplified version of one single mosquito's love call 
—and thereby lured to death 40,000 
male mosquitoes. 
JUST AVERAGE . . . 

Zealous American statisticians seem 
to have a mania for averages. Recently they have been attempting to 
find: the average age of the signers 
of the Declaration of Independenca 
(44 years they eventually deduced); 
the average American bedtime hour 
(11 p.m.); the average building height 
in New York City (five storeys); the 
amount of lipstick an average American woman consumes (over five years 
the equivalent of her height); the 
average annual mileage of the American family car (10,000 miles); and the 
amount of blood pumped daily by the 
average human heart (enough to 
fill an ordinary railway tank truck). 




CAVALCADE, February, 1953 51 



Anyway, who'd want to 3wlm in these sylvan surroundings? This demure, 
modest miss — with another ex-tablecloth job— seems to be a bit worried about 
a neckline she thinks is plunging too iar. Personally we'd be more worried 
about plunging into the dank-looking pool behind her. She's sweet, we know, 
and plenty decorative anywhere: but don't you think she'd look even 
belter with a real Australian background of surf and sun and sand? 



CAVALCADE, February, 1953 




BLOOD PRESSURE DRUG, . . . 

American heart specialists are hopeful that the next five years will see 
the development of a drug that will 
control blood pressure in much the 
same way as insulin controls diabetes. What is wanted is an ideal 
drug that will keep the pressure low. 
ered continuously, have no toxic or 
unpleasant effects and be taken in 
easy pill form. As yet it is only 
a dream, but there are several promising drugs in various stages of 
laboratory development. The sooner 
one is perfected, the easier and less 
dangerous life will be for the 15 
million Americans, end countless 
other millions around the world, suffering from high blood pressure. 
POLIO PREVENTION. . . . 

For 40 years, it has been believed 
that the polio virus goes from the 
mouth, nose and throat (where it is 
picked up) directly to an attack on 
the nervous system. There was little 
chance of dealing with it once it was 
in the brain and nerves, and thus it 
was thought almost unassailable. Now 
Dr. Bodian, of John Hopkins University, and Dr. Dorothy Horstmann, of 
Yale, in separate experiments with 
monkeys and chimpanzees, have established that the virus first spends 
8-15 days in the victim's blood stream 
before escaping into the nervous system. In the blood stream it would 
be vulnerable to attack, it is believed, 



by germ-fighting anti-bodies. These 
anti-bodies are formed in the blood 
of people who have been attacked 
by polio. As with T.B., many people 
contract mild cases of polio in their 
youth, but recover from them without being aware of it. Blood from 
these previous victims could protect 
those who have never had it. 
T.B. TERRORS. . . . 

Now that the first Hurry of excitement over the new tuberculosis drugs 
has subsided, we can, perhaps, sum 
up their true value. The drugs are 
derivatives of nicotinic acid, a B vitamin. They have produced a number 
of spectacular improvements in 
chronic T.B. c.ases in the U.S.A., but 
it is now doubted if they are capable 
of completely wiping out the disease 
around the world as was first claimed 
by their supporters. At Sea View 
Hospital in New York City, their 
use effected almost unbelievable improvements in a number of patients 
whose lives had been despaired of. 
In a remarkably short time, they 
gained weight and strength, enabling 
them to get cut of bed, and traces 
of T.B. germs disappeared from their 
sputum. The general view, however, 
is to wait and see what the long-term 
results will be. Some experts believe 
that the T.B. germs will develop a 
resistance to the drugs (as they have 
to streptomycin) and thus lessen 
their effectiveness. 



CAVALCADE, Februory, T9S3 55 



JAMES HOLLEDGE 



SCOURGE 
OF THE 
CRROLIRRS 



Suddenly the dm stn Pr *d, as effec- 'Yeah, br 
tively as if someone had turned off the bandit. 



Uickly and methodically, everyone 
shepherded into the centre of the 
x- 'Hurry up!" commanded the 



several bu! 

/alls. 

; kept ru; 



56 CAVALCADE. Fcbruory. 1953 



e snarl and eyes as cold as ice, 
e other four raided the cabaret's 
sh. register and relieved the cusomers of their money and valuables. 
No one made a move, and a few 
moments later the bandits backed out 
With their loot. They jumped aboard 
B large sedan waiting at the door 
jnd roared away into the night. 

Co ley Cain— daring, cold-blooded, 
Erafty desperado whose weird green 
eyes had earned him the niclmame 
of ''Tiger"— had written another epiMs in his crimson career. In the 
larly I930's such scenes were common in both the American States of 
North and South Carolina. Feared, 
hated and hunted to the death, he 
led a bloodthirsty gang on a crime 
rampage that is almost without equal 
in the history of the modern gangs. 

Of an old and respected Southern 
Samily, Coley Cain was born in the 
tobacco town of Raleigh. He first fell 
foul of the police in high school, 
■when he joined a youthful gang in 
pillaging railway trucks. Soon caught 
I he and his companions— all sons of 
important Raleigh citizens — were 
W freed on suspended sentences. 

■ His education was completed at a 
1 well-known Carolina university, but 

he failed to distinguish himself. Even 
F before he graduated, he had thrown 
I in his lot with a man whom he reI *ered above all others— a shrewd, 
I well-connected safebreaker and gang 

leader named Tick Proctor, then the 
■ kingpin of Carolina crime. 
I Proctor first hit the headlines in 

1928 with a flock of daring safe rob
■ beries— banks, department stores, garages and so on— all over the twin 
states. When that field became too 
hot, early in 1930, he turned to holdups, and the authorities soon realised 
that a dangerous new menace had 
been added to his team. It was the 
snarling, trigger-happy Coley Cain. 

Not until 1934 did the police score 



in the fight against the mobsters. In 
October of that year Tick Proctor 
and four of his brood were trapped 
in a beautiful, white -columned raaaSion they were openly occupying in 
Raleigh's exclusive residential section. 

But if the police thought the nabbing of the leader and his principal 
cohorts — who all received long terms 
uf imiirisonmcnt— was going to break 
the gang they were mistaken. Coley 
Cain was still at large, and he proceeded to weld the remnants of 
Proctor's crime empuv into an even 
greater menace to law and order. 

"The Tiger" disdained the ordinary 
routine of a hold-up. Olten when 
he approached a store or roadhouSi 1 
bent on plunder, hp exulted in first 
spraying the vicinity with a barrage 
of machine gun fire. 

Not until May, 1935, did the authorities realise that the police equipment 
was quite inadequate to cope with 
"The Tiger" and his brood. Then, 
upon the urging of Raleigh Police 
Chief H. L. Pierce, who was soon to 
trap him, they were provided with 
flic arsenal, bullet-proof cars and tear 
gas without which it would be impossible to check the modern 
gangster. 

Chief Pierce's first break came on 
the night of September 11, 1935, when 
an observant patrolman reported an 
unattended sedan on a suburban 
street. That itself was not significant, 
but the fact that the corners of the 
rear window had been sawn out was. 
No one goes around making holes 
in car windows — unless with the idea 
of using them to spray lead through. 

A squad converged on the car and 
then disappeared to various hiding 
places in the darkness around it. Two 
hours later their patient vigil was 
rewarded. Another car appeared 
around the corner and dawdled down 
the street, 

Near the sedan it stopped and Its 



CAVALCADE, Febroorv, 1953 57 



lights went out. The watchers wailed 
tensely as the occupants apparently 
inspected the lie of the land. Then 
suddenly the doors opened. Four 
figures climbed out and raced towards 
the sedan. 

From behind bushes, trees and 
fences police sprang. Chief Pierce 
rapped, out the command: "Reach!'' 
"Three pairs of hands obeyed. The 
fourth figure, however, cursing with 
rage, went for his gun, A dozen 
fingers began squeezing triggers. The 
night was lit up by the blue and 
yellow flame of their shooting. The 
gangster went down, clutching his 

Handcuffs were clapped on all four 
prisoners. They had been on a holdup in a stolen car and were returning 
to make a getaway in their own 
vehicle. The man on the ground 
had been hit only once — a wound in 
the hip from which he was soon to 

Pierce went over to him and shone 
a torch into his face, although hii 
men had already told him it was 
Coley Cain himself. He saw the 
killer's eyes and knew it had not 
been exaggeration to call them cold, 
green, venomous, malevolent 

Cain cursed up at him. '"Yeah, 
copper," he snarled. "It's Cain, all 
right, in person. You started this, but 
I'm going to finish it — later." 

When news of Cain's capture spread 
through the city, crowds gathered 
outside the gaol, "in the hospital ward 
of which he was incarcerated under 
strong guard. Lynching talk was rife, 
but the men were finally persuaded 
to disperse after assurances that Cain 
would get what was coming to him. 

They were probably not satisfied 
with the sentence of life imprisonment he drew a few months later— 
especially as Cain boasted that no 
gaol could hold him. 
He kept his word. On May 17, 1338, 



the Carol jnas were electrified with 
the news that, with another mad-dog 
named Roy Cobb, he had blasted his 
way out of Caledonia Prison with 
guns smuggled into him. 

Cain and Cobb swept into a ma 1 
orgy of violent crime. Garage proprietors, storekeepers and madhouse 
operators lived in constant fear of the 
preying pair, who appeared out of the 
night in a crescendo of gunfire. 

But the sands were running out for 
Cain, and, ironically, despite the 
packs of hunters on his heels, one 
solitary Slate trooper named Charles 
Hennecy was to be his nemesis. 

On the night of September 7, 1936. 
patrolling i n a police car, Hennecy 
and his partner received a radio 
warning to be on the alert for e 
certain stolen car. Soon after, as a 
matter of routine, they pulled into a 
roadhouse outside the town of Florence to look over the cars in the 
parking lot. 

Immediately they spied the number of the stolen car they were searching for. Inside were two women. At 
the sight of the police, one of them 
blared a warning on the horn and 
shouted: "Coley! Eay! It's the cops!" 

Realising now whom they were up 
against, Hennecy packed the two 
women into the police car and sent 
his partner off with them to "Florence 
for assistance. 

Left alone, he changed his mind 
and decided to go in after the quarry 
himself. Gun in hand he entered the 
roadhhouse. Frightened customers 
told him the two mobsters had run 
out the back door on hearing the 
woman's warning. 

Hennecy pushed his way to the 
rear of the roadhouse and looked out 
the door. Flames burst from a dense 
patch of bush and bullets thudded 
into the woodwork. Taking cover, the 
trooper began to trade shots with 



58 CAVALCADE, February. 1953 



£ soon as they realised they had 
only one man to contend with, the 
pair made a break for it. Spraying 
rear doorway with lead, they 
dashed around the side of the roadhouse for their parked car — and the 
Tommy guns concealed therein. 

Seconds later all hell broke loose 
as they unleashed a blasting fire 
■ against the building. Shouting a 
warning to everyone to fall on the 
floor, Hennecy crawled to a window 
to continue the duel. 

Courageously answering their fire 
with his automatic, he had the satisfaction of seeing Coley Cain slump 
to the ground with a slug in his 
stomach. 

Cobb ran forward, grasped his inert 
partner and dragged him over to 
the car. He dumped his body in the 
back and then, still keeping up the 
rat-tat-tat from hit machine gun, he 
shot the car out of the yard and 



out on to the adjacent highway. 

Within a matter of minutes, score? 
of officers had been thrown into the 
chase, but the gangster car got away. 
Then, at dawn, came a report from 
Clinton. 65 miles away. The body of 
a man had been found in a ditch outside the town. 

It was Coley Cain, dumped there 
by his fleeing partner when he died 
from loss of blood from the wound 
Hennecy's accurate lire had inflicted. 

A few hours later Cobb was cornered. On his own he had no chance, 
and he submitted quietly. He soon 
went back to prison for the rest of 

The Carolinas settled down again 
to normal living. The most potent 
criminal menace in their history, who 
had made a mockery of law and order 
for years, was wiped out — through 
the courage of a solitary officer who 
saw his duty and did it. 




am^' JET 




CAVALCADE, February, 1953 59 



Admiral Eous was responsible for our 
present- day standards of turf behaviour 

LD SALT 
AT EPSOM 




TT is said that there are btit four 
unchanging and unchangeable 
British traditions: Westminster Abbey, 
the Changing of the Guards, fish and 
chips— and the Derby at Epsom. 

Even the famous Alexander Dumas, 
a Frenchman and not very sympathetic to British tradition, was impressed by the atmosphere surround


ing the famous English race classic. 

"In England," he wrote, "the races, 
;vml particularly the Epsom races, are 
not like our Marche or Chantilly, a 
luxury of the rich. No, Derby Day 
is a national fete for rich and poor, 
for gentleman of leisure and worker 
alike. It is looked forward to for 11 
months, talked about for six, planned 



60 



1953 



three and remembered and dismissed longer than it was looked forard to, talked about and prepared 

The rules of the Classic, as estabed by the 12th Earl of Derby some 
years ago, said that it would be 
pen to three-year -old horses of both 
exes, and the concept has been main
In 1844, however, a keen and shrewd 
Hique succeeded in not only entering a four-year-old horse, but had 
Bie transient pleasure of watching it 
Win the Derby. 

' The clique's inspiration for such 
fluplicity was fundamental: it had 
backed the horse — Running Rein by 
name— for £50,000. 

It was a sad ending to the deception 
that, due to the efforts of Lord George 
Eentinck, the Jockey Club disqualified 
Running Rein when it was proved 
Eat it was really a four -year -old 
named Maccabeus. 

The incident proved two things: 
lirst, that the Sport of Kings lent itself to hugger-mugger and, second, 
that the Jockey Club was composed 
Of a lot of old sleepy -heads, for it 
had already been warned that Running Rein was a "ring in." More, it 
.had permitted another horse to race 
fcwhich, had it not met with interference from Running Rein, might have 
"Wfin the Classic; and later events in'dicated that this horse, Leander, was 
also a four- year- old. 

So, 64 years after the first English 
Derby, it was clear that horse racing 
was in a pretty bad mess. Courses 
abounded in crooks, blackmailers and 
touts; horses were being pulled and 
doped; and it was even whispered 
that the Jockey Club handicapper wa-; 
not averse, for a consideration, to 
|weighting a horse many pounds under 
its true handicap. 

Racing, in fact, needed a dictator 
jwho could lift it out of its near


financial and complete ethical bankruptcy. It found the man in Admiral 
Henry Rous. 

Following the "Running Rein Affair," Rous, as a steward, set about 
the business of reforming the English 
turf. 

Sacking the whole Jockey Club 
staff, he managed within a short time 
to raise the club's income to £13,000. 
and reorganised the system of handicapping. Then he turned his attention to the racing itself. 

A contemporary writer said: 

"His bold and manly form, erect 
and stately to the last, in a shooting 
or pea jacket, wearing black boots or 
leggings of the same colour, dog whip 
in hand, ready for mounting his old 
bay horse for the course, no matter 
what the weather might be, was an 
imposing sight. 

"Before the start he would take tip 
his position close to the 'Bushes' like 
an equestrian statue, silent and motionless, the reins resting on the neck 
of his horse ... his eyes, once fixed 
on the runners, were seldom removed 
until he had discovered all he wanted 
to see in the different starters." 

In an age of heavy gamblers, Rous 
believed that it was the "small 
people" who suffered most by unwise 
betting. 

"Let the rich man ruin himself if 
he pleases," the Admiral said; yet he 
did not hesitate to denounce aristocrats in his best quarter-deck manner if he believed that they were 
relying less on fortune and their 
jockey's ability than on co-operative 

lack of effort. 

His tongue, accustomed to rising 
above sea storms, blistered jockeys 
and trainers whom he suspected of 
skulduggery. Above all, he loathed 
the deification of joekeys, whom he 
called "precocious, petted mannikins." 

"Any man who follows the advice 
of his jockey is bound to be ruined," 



CAVALCADE. February, 1953 61 



he said, with a fortbrightness that 
brooked no contradiction. 

"Admiral Rous was the greatest man 
I ever knew," Lord Coventry ones 
said. "The standard of racecourse behaviour to-day is a greater monument to him than any Rous Memorial 
at Newmarket." 

Admiral Rous was the kind of man 
who was bound to succeed in anything he undertook. Although his 
brother 'was the influential Lord 
Stradbroke, Rous' rise in the Royal 
Navy was due to his own ability to 
command, his unswerving sense of 
duty, and his seamanship. 

His final exploit was to sail a frigate 
1,500 miles in 20 days, while it was 
rudderless, without a keel, and leaking at the rate of two feet of water 
every hour. 

The frigate ran aground on the 
Labrador coast during a thick fog 
and could, without loss of face for its 
commander, have been abandoned; 
but Rous, as stubborn on the sea as 
he was on the racecourse, brought 
her safely to England. Then, fed up 
with the sea, he retired and prepared 
to devote the rest of his life to racing. 

In spite of the Admiral, nevertheless, the very composition of the sport 
made a complete clean-up impossible. 
The courses were still peopled by 
roughs, toughs and tricksters— and all 
of tli em did not come from the 

The Admiral learnt, for instance, 
that one starter was making a nice 
income— reputedly £1,000 a year— 
from presents received from rich 
owners. He cited a case where one 
horse was given an 80 yards start to 
win the St. Leger. Another, who 
lived in a house owned by a jockey, 
paid tribute by allowing the jockey's 
mount invariably to get a flying start 
oh the field. 

Never a man to delegate responsibilities to anyone else, the "Sailor 
62 CAVALCADE, February, 1953 



on Horseback" often earned the title 
bestowed on him by galloping his 
horse on to the course and, rid in,; 
alongside a suspect jockey, urging tht 
latter by threats to loosen the strangle 
hold he had on his mount. 

The jockey, fearing the Admiral 's 
hurricane tongue more greatly than 
any penalty that might follow, invariably loosened his hold. Then, to 
make it official, Rous persuaded the 
Jockey Club to introduce a plan 
which provided for suspension of 
jockeys who indulged in hanky-panky 
prejudicial to the fair name of horse 

It was a piece of turf legislation 
that, perhaps more than any other 
single factor, prevented the "precocious manniklns" from co-operating too 
wholeheartedly with the big gamblers 
of the day. 

The administration side of horse 
racing became his whole life. Even 
the racing stable he had built over 
the years became neglected as he set 
out with the zeal of an evangelist, 
to rid the turf of its rogues, raceriggers and "lurk-men." 

He didn't — couldn't altogether succeed, but he at least set a pattern 
of racecourse behaviour and discipline 
that is, by and large, followed to this 

So, when the "little man" goes these 
days to the Derby, he may be moderately sure that, apart from having 
his pocket picked or falling in with 
a tout, he will get a pretty "fair" go 
and won't noticeably be helped to 
lose his money by the duplicity of 
the rider of his chosen horse. 

For, whether the jockeys realise it 
or not, the course at Epsom is shadowed by the figure of a motionless, 
mounted man who, binoculars at the 
ready, is studying across the years 
their activities— and, it could be, their 



■ 




TWO LEUELS 



Oft 



Two level houses are the obvious and usually 
satisfactory solution of most of the problems presented by sloping building lots. 

The accompanying plan shows a suggestion on 
these lines for a three bedroom house on land which 
slopes from the street. 

The living room and kitchen are situated at the 
upper level, the former being large enough to serve 
the dual purposes of lounge room and dining room. 

From the entry a short flight of steps leads down 
to the bedroom wing and a similar flight leads upwards to the deck over the wing. 

There are three bedrooms, each with built-in 
wardrobes, and a well fitted bathroom. The 
laundry is placed in one comer under the bedroom 
.wing. 

The minimum frontage required to accommodate 
this house is 60 feet and the overall area 1400 
square feet. 



CAVALCADE, Februar 




IS 



SMNCE FICTION 



mm 




TVTEVER was a man in a stranger 
situation: eight months' .flying 
time from, the earth, locked in a 
man-made star that was a self-contained airship— and now, with his ship 
out of control and only one hour's 
oxygen left . . . 

Only Action, of course; but even as 
fiction, perhaps no stranger than the 
people who, only a few months ago, 
bought tickets for the first trip to 

One of the people who read the 
science fiction story wrote: "When 
Benson (this character we referred 
to) had only one hour's air left, what 
would happen to him? Would he stay 



up, floating round through eternity, 
or would he fall to earth? Also, if 
it took eight months to reach the 
height to which they had gone, how 
long would it take him. to reach earth 
again?" 

Quito legitimate questions, too; and 
questions which open up the whole 
of the bigger question— why science 
fiction? 

There is a flood of such stories now, 
in every country in the world. Jacques Lombard, a French novelist, 
writes "The Crystal Corpse," introducing scientifically accurate facts 
new to Action; Hollywood produces 
"When Worlds Collide," dramatising 



66 CAVALCADE, February, 1953 



catastrophe which we can only coll 
the end of the world." The U.S.A. 
reduces month after month magnines filled exclusively with such 
ems. generally culled "science ftc*on " A fairly good working deflni
lal' in the stories of to-day is different from the material, of sciencefiction of the past. Jules Verne wrote 
science fiction when he wrote "A 
Voyage to the Moon," "Round the 
World in Eighty Days" and "Floating 
&land." H. & Wells wrote science 
fiction in "The Time Machine"— and 
Conan Doyle wrote science fiction of 
another type when he took tile knowledge gained by geologists and based 
on it "The Lost World." 

The general tendency of science 
fiction is to look forward— to guess 
what is coming next. Verne, impressed by the introduction of the 
first clumsy submarines, imagined a 
highly efficient submarine, the "Nautilus," a fantastic idea to his publisher and readers then; but practical 
and in use to-day. His imagination 
captured by the sudden spurt of speed 
that came with steam power and the 
internal combustion engine, he 
dreamed a voyage round the world in 
80 days. The people who laughed at 
that would have had him declared 
insane had he mentioned journeying 
around the world in the few days 
it would take a modern plane. 

Aircraft were once kept at a low 
flying level because when you get 
high, ozygen becomes scarce, and men 
can't breathe. Then it became possible to equip planes and pilots with 
their own private oxygen supply: 
the state of the air outside didn't 
matter: they were inside and they 
had air, 

The creative mind of the author 
starts to dream— back comes the old


est question in the world: are there 
people on other stars? If we can 
travel outside the earth's air with 
our own oxygen, can we reach another star and find out? So an author 
imagines that somebody does this. 

Very quickly he comes up against 
the problem of gravity. The airship 
in which his hero travels has to have 
the kick to outrun gravity— because 
that, like oxygen, diminishes as you 
move away from the earth's surface. 

Then comes another question— when 
the ship is free of gravity, and cruising through space, the people in the 
ship are free of gravity, too, and 
there is nothing to hold them to the 
flour -they float up in the air of 
their vessel. Their weight changes; 
their muscular power varies— so the 
author has to study the effects of 
gravity an,d all the ways a person 
would be affected by the lack of or 
absence of gravity. 

Because— and this is the whole point 
of science fiction— while the story is 
a riot of imagination as to what could 
happen, the author has to be certain 
that it COULD happen, as a scientific 
possibility. He has to study science 
first. 

The questioning reader asks, "What 
will happen to the man when his 
oxygen is used up?" The man will 
die, of course; because the human being, wherever ho is, cannot live without oxygen. Now— what will happen 
when he dies? It depends on the circumstances of his ship; so long as it 
is powered and directed, it may float 
around in space indefinitely. But once 
it loses its powerAll around it there are heavenly 
bodies, each of which has its particular measure of gravity, to exert some 
pull. And the space ship will not fly 
back to earth (or "fall" back to earth) 
simply because that is where it started from; it will "fall" to whichever 
of its surrounding heavenly bodies 



CAVALCADE, February, 1953 67 



BERNARD SHAW'S caustic 
wit did not always score 
him the victories he expected. 
When Cornelia Otis Skinner 
opened in New York in his 
play, "Candida,' 1 he cabled 
her: "Excellent — Greatest." 
Miss Skinner modestly cabled 
back: "Undeserving such 
praise." Shaw saw a golden 
ops jns-t unity and impishly 
cabled agaia: "Meant the 
play." But he had struck a 
tartar. Miss Skinner, bristling, anri'.vci-cc;: ''So did I." 



exerts the strongest gravitational attraction upon it at the moment. Thus, 
scientifically, it could be "washed up" 
by gravity upon, say. Mars or the 

The science fiction approach demands a pretty wide view of the universe. It begins with a wide, sweeping picture of a vast space in which 
there are a lot o£ worlds, each with 
its own seasons, its own climate, its 
own air, its own gravity, its own 
vegetation. Of these worlds the earth 
is only one. Travel a million miles 
into space, and the earth has become 
only a distant star." 

Perhaps, alighting on the world o£ 
Uranus, all earthlings die: we know 
that two gases, oxygen and hydrogen, 
mixed in the proportion of one to 
two, form a substance which we call 
"water" and which helps keep us 
alive. But it is possible that on 
Uranus oxygen and hydrogen don't 
mix to form a "water"— and that if 
any life existed there, it would be 
supported not by what we call oxygen, but by something else which 



would not support an earth-man for 
a minute. We breathe oxygen: we 
drink a fluid of which oxygen is a 
part; without air and water, we die. 

You need some imagination to gei 
the picture— but that is the kind of 
picture from which the science fiction 
author starts. From there out he doss 
just about what the whodunnit author 
does with crime: he spins a story of 
human beings involved in these particular circumstances; but just as the 
whodunnit author deals in death, the 
means of inflicting it, the means of 
detecting criminals, and bringing 
them to justice, so the science fiction 
writer deals instead with the facts of 
gravity, space, distance, speed. 

He tries, imaginatively, to picture 
a world where man is master of his 
natural limitations— and he creates 
his situations to answer the questions 
of wonder which are in every man's 

The primitive man asked, "How far 
away is the moon?" It took a long 
time to get an answer, but he did, 
eventually, get it. The modern man 
asks, '"Is there life on Mars? If so, 
what sort of people would the 
Martians be? Could they live here? 
Could we live there?" And he has 
no answers to those questions. Scientists test for life on Mars and answer 
"Maybe." Then the science fietlonser 
tills the gaps. 

Thus, though the science Action 
story may strike a note of being impossible, that is hardly the word to 
use. The situations may be unlikely 
— or maybe they could only occur a 
long way in the future. But they are 
scientifically possible. The science fiction writer isn't so worried about 
that. He knows better than most 
people how hard it is to get the 
money that would build the jet craft 
that could reach Mars. But he doesn't 
want to build it: he just wants to give 
a peep into the possible future. 



CAVALCADE, February, 1953 



But behind these bits of business, 
the science fiction man is as concerned with people as any other kind 
of author. His men are keen, alert, 
brave adventurers. They are concerned with success more than with 
love (though they have time for that, 
too). They live in the atmosphere 
of machinery and formulae, rather 
than in the life of money and love. 
Their main enemy is rivalry or jealousy; their main problem is space 
conquest. 

By the inverse process, of course, 
there is the science fiction idea with 
which Orson Welles stampeded 
America 15 yeaTS ago— the invasion 
from without. The men from Macs 
land. The Flying Saucer comes from 
another planet to find out what goes 
on here. The idea is irresistible that 
if there is someone on those faraway 
worlds, they will know, or want to 



know, about us. So science fiction 
closes that gap, too, to the tune that 
if we don't find them they may find 

But it comes down to the final fact 
that science fiction is not an innovation, but a revival. More detailed and 
more daring than the science fiction 
of Verne, because of the extra capabilities we now have, and the extra 
things we now know, and the further 
hopes we now entertain. 

In a world kept science -conscious by 
every news release of atom bombs 
and nuclear fission, it seems that a 
greater part of this new knowledge 
must come to be reflected in fhi 



science Actio: 
the forerunner of 



■ -day 




CAVALCADE, February, 1953 69 



Rnsumatic pains for 2 Years 

— Symptom-free in 4 Days! 

London Doctor's Cose Book sAows dramatic 
results of fhh revolutionary new treatment 




YOU CAN BANISH RHEUMATIC PAIN THIS WAY 




OF FOREARM 
lUMBflSD j WRIST 

S .,'.„!1N. [U-\ 



IMPORTANT W 



1 " TidNIS [IRDW 

MALGIC Adrenaline Cream 



CAVALCADE. February, 1953 




DANGER 
SIGNAL 




m&(S,^^ mJ>zs&>s& zss&iBPM 





76 CAVALCADE, February, 1953 





Pel 



manism 



Scientific Tra 



of Mind, Memory and Personality 



The Pelman Coarse is a complete training of the mind, memory, 
and personality. Ir quickens the perceptions, develops the ability to 
concentrate, increases memory power and firms the will. Good habits 
of mind and memory are created, and the individual rates high in 
all those matters included in the terms skill and competence. 

It formulates the procedure of sound judgment, increases interest 
power, resulting in greater initiative, readier acquisition of useful 
knowledge and the making of wider social and cusini'ss contacts. 

The sum total is so to occupy the mind that there is no room 
fo r groundless fears. Men and women Pelmanists are self-possessed, 
capable of assessing the significance to them of outside events, of 
resisting the pressure of circumstance and of adapting themselves Co 
new and sometimes bewildering situations. 



i have 



i Pelm 



ributes and que 

Self -Confidence Judgment Social Ease 

Concentration Will-Power Initiative 

Decisiveness Self -Control Observation 

and a Hold-fast Memory. 

Pelmanism develops these qualities quickly and permaner 



>othIy i 



these qualitie 
inly, and largely without c 



"THE EFFICIENT MIND" 



then 
effort. 

ilraon Cours, 



iTO THE PELMAN INSTITUTE. 



CAVALCADE, February, 1953 19 



THE LAST 

ASSIGNMENT 

: SHOULD THE REPOBTER EXPOSE HIS WIFE AS 

THE CHEAP LITTLE TRICKSTER SHE WAS? 



/"\NE afternoon as I came into work 
" a bit late and with a lousy headache, I heard Stevens, the news 
editor, going into a song and dance 
in the reporters' room. 

"Isn't Thomas in yet?" he bawled. 
"Why can't I ever find that man 
when 1 want him?" 

"Why, Stevie, what's he done now?" 
one of the Big Room men asked; they 
were all there in a group sorting out 
their assignments. 

Stevens only glared, his face red. 
and his horn-rimmed glasses seeming 
to magnify the anger in his eyes. But 
I was genuinely puzzled, and that's 
how I approached him: "Hiya, Stevie. 
What's wrong? Got me in the gun 

He gasped truculently at me, and 
then muttered belligerently: "Come 
into my office straightaway." 

Stevens deposited his rotund mass 
in the chair, and craned his neck 
like a fighting cock: ''Listen, you recall a small assignment I gave you 
yesterday?" 

"You mean the circus opening?" 

"I don't mean the ladder In Mother 
Murphy's stocking! Of course, I mean 
the circus opening." 

■'Well, what's the matter?" I asked. 



"I turned in a rattling good story, 
if you ask me." 

''Sure, you turned in a story all 
right. Good stuff. Colourful. Picturesque. Best special I ever had on 
a circus opening." 

"Then why the grouse?" 

"Why the grouse! You lazy-brained, 
tippling lummox I That circus— it 
didn't open last night That's the 
grouse." 

"What?" 

'It's to open to-night." 

There was nothing I could do but 
stutter in fatuous bewilderment. 

"You wrote it from the publicity 
sheet, didn't you? Pure imagination. 
And here I am with a column of 
news about something that's not yet 
happened." 

■'Well, Stevie . . . I'm sorry. I 
didn't feel up to going. I—" 

"You're sorry! What am 1 going to 
say to the heads? Heaven help me. 
1 can't get you. Sometimes I think 
I'm dealing with a pimple-faced cadet 
with more imp than ink in his veins." 

I just stood there while he told me 
off. There was nothing else to do. 
I had it coming. Finally, in a calmer 
voice, he said: "Look here, Jim, this 
is no place for a man with a type


D'ARCY N I LAND • FICTION 

CAVALCADE, February, 19S3 81 




HEADACHE 
COLDS, FLU 




AT ALL NEWSAGENTS 



82 CAVALCADE, February. 1953 



writer in one hand and a bottie in 
the other. This is the third time I've 
had you en the carpet in two months. 
For the last two years you've been 
going downhill, and for the last six 
months— well, to put it bluntly, you've 
been a burden to us." 

I could have told him I had been 
going downhill longer than that: rive 
years, six. 

"By rights I shoidd sack you (or 
this, but I won't. I know you're a 
good man. 1 know what you can do 
if you'll only pull yourself up." 

He stood up and leaned over, his 
hands on the desk: "I'm going to give 
you one more chance." 

"That's fair enough. I won't let 
you down again." 

"Okay," he grunted. "It's up to you. 
Now this is the assignment. The 
Polish princess, Wanda Krevitska, arrives here from the Continent today. She's on a lecture tour to raise 
funds for Korean war orphans. You 
can contact her at the Hotel Regards 
Have the interview back as early as 
you can. And by hell, Jim, I want a 
story— her background, adventures, 
the profile touch, you know— not just 
a few society page skimmings." 

I reached the Hotel Regarde and I 
wis lull of ambition to turn in a 
good story, 

I fronted the manager of the hotel, 
a little man, penguin-neat and smelling of scented bathwater. 

He said: "I'm afraid the Princess 
can see no one. She is very travelweary and has not yet recovered from 
her excitement. She has asked me to 
say that she will be ready to make a 
statement to the Press later— somelime after four o'clock." 

By bribing the liftman, I got the 
room number. The Princess' personal 
maid opened the door — she was 
dressed to go out— and tried to shut 
it, but I got my foot into place end 
was inside before she could do any


HOW TO PLAY THE 
MOUTH ORGAN 
IN 30 MINUTES 




thing about it. She said tilings in 
Polish, glared at me, and finally 
Mampeii inh; the bedroom. 1 thought 
she wasn't coming back, but she did. 
and coldly informed me that Her 
Highness would see me in a lew 
minutes. 

F "That is most gracious of Your 
Htgliness," I called. 
I "It really is very bold of you," 
came Her Highness' voice, "and I 
should by rights refuse to see you." 

''Your Highness has nut been called 
charming for nothing." 

That seemed to please her and she 
laughed. 

"Pour yourself a drink. You see, I 
know the weakness of your newspapermen. In five little minutes I will 
have finished dressing." 

I took her advice, only I poured 
two. She certainly sounded charming 
and courteous. Her English was good; 
so was her Polish accent. 

"Tell me, Your Highness, how is 
the fund for the Korean war orphans 
progressing?" 

"Ah, people have been so kind. You 
know, already 1 have collected over 
a hundred pounds; money just waiting here for me when I came. People 
are so good. Now really I should—" 
She came from her bedroom into the 
lounge, speaking, but the words shortened to a dead sileneu a:- she saw me, 
and I just stared at her. Instantly 
there was nothing on her face but a 
slight smile of interrogation. 

"Would you like a 1 drink?" she 
asked, sweeping over towards the 
decanter. She was sheathed in red, 
with her black hair piled high. 

"So you're Wanda Krevitska. And 
do you really think yon make a good 
Polish princess, old girl?" 
"I beg your pardon? What do you 

"I must be the last man you ever 
expected to meet here — in this 
country, in this city, in this hotel. 




Instruments. Exclusive models ovolloble on small payments to any port of 



Free. ■ illustrated catalogue and descrlpiTION "INSTRUMENT FAVORED) . 

SAMPSONS, Dept. 4 

481 Kent St., Box 4184, G.P.O., 
Sydney. 



CAVALCADE, February, 1953 83 



you think I've bad my 

s! You've never had a 
Ltiment in your life. You 
w anything that's not selercenary. Did the playboy 
iS with give you the life 
i provide? Or did he—" 
•lieve me, I tried to stay, 
Idn't. I wanted to live— my 

rraveiling around the world 

he saps that fall for your 
appeals for afflicted Korean 

Iked to the window and I 
isr with my eyes. This was 
:r old stunts, the play for 



> Only 

j REGULAR 
- r guys 
^ c_j J can be regular guys'' 

i ■ , .. n ■ els unhealthy 

..' — // injins our of your s ysl.m wllh prnpsr roplorily, lonai 
/ up tJis "inner man": k. E ps ynar s kln dear and hoolthy. 
..^ ■ 7 Schumnnn's is piemanl Id Inks . . . and dosw'l form 
n habit. For hsallh— SCHUMANN'S I 

In cases ol Rlieuraatisni, Neuritis. Sciatica, 
Lumbago, all lice Acid Conditions and Constipation 
be sure you take your S chum a nil's. 

SCHUMANN'S " salts' 

1/9 & 3/3 at all themiu, and wore*. 
-OR MEN: SHAVE — SHOWER — SCHUMANN'S. 



CAVALCADE, February, 1953 85 



MEN 

here's a 

NEW LEASE 
OF LIFE 





IMPORTANT 

The natural production of hormone 
can slow down or cease completely at 
any time. That is why, whatever your 
age, you need NU-MAN if you suffer 
from just one of these symptoms. 

FOR MEN ONLY 

NU-MAN 
FREE! ISSSsrli 

FREE SAMPLE. Tear this out 
ond writs today to — 

A. B. WARD & CO., 

Dept. CZ3, Box 3323, 
G.P.O., Sydney, N.S.W. 
Udies! Write for details of Mandrex 
— a general tonic for women. 



forgiveness, the role to exact sympathy. It was all so familiar.it burned 
like a smell in my nostrils. She 
clasped her hands together and wrung 
them to convince me of her sincerity: 
"Oh, Jim, do try to believe me. It's 
been such a struggle. You're a good 
man. I never deserved you. It's all 
my fault, I know, but I couldn't help 
myself. And I tell you the truth when 
I say it has been a struggle." 

She sat down beside me and pleaded: "Don't you see what will happen 
if you expose me? The shame, the 
disgrace. All I have built up will 
[opple, smeared out. I'll be back 
where I started. Haven't you any 
heart? You wouldn't do it, Jim. You 
wouldn't: I know you wouldn't." 

I edged away from her, stood up, 
emphasising the barrier between us: 
"You took the risk of discovery when 
you started this pose. Someday somebody was bound to find you out. How 
ironical that it should be me." 

"Please . . . it's in your power to 

"That's what I mean. I crack the 
whip now. You sent me on the down 
path, caused me to lose respect even 
for myself. Life's meant nothing to 
me since you crushed it so completely. Why should I consider you?" 

She started to stare wildly, panic 
beginning in her, and there was a 
sob in her voice. It wasn't any part 
of histrionics now. 

'Tm not the self-sacrificing hero 
type," I told her. "Not any longer." 

The tears came then, harsh, flowing 
down her cheeks, bringing her age 
up to what it was: "Don't wreck my 
life. Look Jim, listen! We can go 
away together. Remarry. We can have 
a wonderful time. I'll be honest with 
you. I swear it. What if I do take 
some of that money I collect? They 
still get enough. My work is worth 
something. You can share it with 
me. Jim, please, please." 



S6 CAVALCADE, Februory, 1953 




"Startling In Its Frankness" 

"I sincerely believe your book to be the answer to every married coupes, 
ouestions on problems important to real happiness. There s no doubt it 
■is startling in its frankness and of untold value to every one who desires 
health and happiness". 



Why no! Read It for .5 Days on Approval? 

You be the sole judge of this splendid work ond then il you oro not 
thoroughly so.is(i.d Iho, it -ill b« . e.u.sello. end ,u.d, .0 ....0.0 o 

question, return i» ond th. prise ol the book .ill b. refunded in full. 



WORLD WIDE MAIL ORDER PTY. LTD. 
Publishing Dept. 4, Dcon Place, SYDNEY 




CAVALCADE, February, 1953 87 




Down in the foyer of the hotel 1 
It even more bitter. I went down 
e street and hit the pub. I had 
three whiskies. Then I found a phone 
booth and dialled the office number. 

wouldn't go back there. Id turn in 
the story. I'd ask Stevens for a rewrite man and give it to him. But 
I wouldn't go back. 

Then, when the line was open, and 
Stevens voice grunted in my ear, 
RfunB up- .£«-.)f3$y 
I couldn't do it. I think that in a 
way I still loved her. She'd had a 
scare. That was enough. She'd get 
cut of town now. Maybe she d climb 
i the straight and naiTow. If stie 
didn't somebody would cop her 
sooner or later. But I couldn't do it. 

I moped about for an hour or so, 
needing every drink I had. Then I 
went back to the office to hand in 
my resignation. I didn't care that I 
was tanked up. Stevens could go to 
hell. When he saw me he gave one 
bellow and opened up: "So you re 
back. Nice of you to let us know you 
work here. You've got a story, of 

C "There is no story." ( 

"You're damned right there a no 
story. You sot, you never went near 
her, did you? Well, this is it, Thoma-. 
You can get your time. Yours 
I through." 

He got my back up: "You re no 
firing me you screaming meemy. In 
pulling out. And I tell you there V 
ho story. And I was with her, am 
it's like your damned hide to tei 
me I'm a liar. I just left her, not five 
minutes ago." . 

"Five minutes eyeswash! You blundering no-hoper, do I look like a babe 
in the wood? Wanda Krevitska J 
dead. She jumped out of a window 
two hours ago." 

I went away after that, and started 
a little paper in the country. Maybe 
I'M come to the top again some day. 



Health and Vigour 

IMPROVE WITH NEW 
HORMONE PRODUCT 



"VITO-GLAND" 




Shu was suffering from laryngitis 
could not scream when tin 
entered licr room— to murder her. 




BENJAMIN SIEGEL 



THE CAGED HEART 



SHE wasn't asleep, but had drifted 
into an in-between state where 
the weariness of her body was a 
floating pleasure, the lightness of her 
limbs a temporary escape from fear 
in the immediate fact of being iE. 

It didn't last. The doorbell sounded 
viciously, and Beth was frightened 
again. She didn't move while the 
memory of the sounded throbbed, its 
potential repetition an agony. It 
came again, and Beth got out of bed 
and threw a robe around her. She 



hesitated at the door, unlocked it, 
and flung it open like a challenge. 

It was only her big and brusque 
and, right now, very angry downstairs neighbour. Mrs. Clausen said: 
"My kitchen is all wet, a regular 
flood. You—" She frowned past 
Beth at the open bed in its davenport 
frame. "You were sleeping so early?" 
she asked. "You're sick?" 

"Just a cold." It came out a 
whisper, grotesque,' without resonance. Beth smiled apologetically and 



90 CAVALCADE, February, 1953 



(WD BAD BREATH. TDD!) 

Take ^ 

1*0 

CHLOROPHYLL 
TABLETS 

STAY FRESH ML OtfEH ! Ml DftYi 
No tnoiiti how hot the day. how 
Ho3y the room, what lime of 
the month -bo «> fresh a. 
though you had itepped lifihi 
out of a ihow-r twH. p'electt 



Take Emode Chlt.ropl.yll Tablctr 



2/7 



PER PACKET 

EXTRA ECONOMY SIZE, 7/10 
AT ALL CHEMISTS 



CAVALCADE, February, 1953 



Around the world, 
more cars are protected by 

Mobiloil 

than by any other oil! 

Mobiloil will give YOUR engine full protection \ 

and economy at all speeds and temperatures 

plus improved performance. Mobiloil is the «* CH |)jL I 

World's Quality Oil-why accept anything less? <^vu^> 




SEX 
KnCUJLEDGE 

If you are married, or about to 
be, you should 
send for . . . 

SEX EDUCATION 
IN PICTURES 

by David Farrell, 11/- post free 

SEND NOW 

Also available — "The 
Sex Factor in Marriage," 
by Helen Wright, 8/6, 
post free. For other sex 
literature send SidStamp. 

EDUCATIONAL 
EXTENSION COLLEGE, 

Dept. 6G, 
Box 1430, G.P.Q.. Sydney 



svcrs from hor. He looked down 
t her and his smile came off and his 
Hp sti2ened and protruded 



<:Hly. 



side ff 



,d quickly 
the bed away from him, but he 
faster. He gabbed her arm and 
jerked her to her feet She felt her 
head spinning and he pushed h«r 
away from him and she fell against 
the bookcase, "Tea." Jerry said. 

Beth went into the kitchen. Sne 
should be thinking, she should be 
doir.s something. Her thoughts darted 



i-.-bu i 



Ha 



suddenly large and pounding, 
and she rested her forehead against 
the coolness of the refrigerator. 
Automatically she set so:ne watef 
boihna and took a cup and saucer, 
put a '.ea tan in '.he cup, set them on 
the table. She opened the refrigera
•'WoiV said Jerry behind her. "Just 
like old Utr.es." 

Bc'.h started, tooh out the cream 
pitcher end put it cn the tabic. Jerry 
marie a deploring sound with his 
tongue. "You've forgotten so soon 
that I like it straight." Sitting at 
the table, an ordinary husband being 
served a midnight snark by an ordinary wife. Beth filled his cup with 
boiling water. 

"Cmcful with 'hat," he grinned, 
•'you wouldn't want to scald me." 

Beth set the ketUe back on tha 
stove. "I'm not well," she whispered 
painfully. 'I'm netting back into 
bed." 

"You're waiting while I have my 
tea. Sit down." 

She sat and watched him, the ease 
of his manner, the normal scene, the 
family. She jumped up and ran for 
the door, and he was on. her effortlessly, pressing her to the floor, his 
fingers in the flesh of her neck. Beth 
breathed the dust of the carpet. It 



94 CAVALCADE, February, 1953 



YOUR BRAIN 



It h merely the vehicle through which YOU direct 
every actio,, of your lif e . 

Like an electric motor it hai to be activated by an outside 
eiwr^isni}; turir, Ymii lhiiu>;lils arc tint the inner expression 

iii-liii'Vi'iivnf of y i hi i- ili'Mi'i.' .1 fiinr innhiiiort for greater 

achievement in life. You can learn how to direct your 
thought energy towards n specific objective to produce 
positive results. Learn how to marshal your mental powers 
to improve your business and social career. 
The Rosierucian teachings enable intelligent men and worn*,, 
to benefit almost immediately from the guidance of greal 
intelligence -.v!ni have progressed far beyond the boundaries 
of conventional study. If you sincerely feel you are now 
ready, with on open, mind unfettered by orthodox prejudice, 
io accept new and absorbing truths, write for our free 32 
page book "The Mastery of Life." 

Dedicated to an ins pi vim- ob'celtvc, the attainment of the 
universal Brotherhood of Mankind, the Rosicrucians are a 
Non-Religious, Non-Political, Non-Profit Making Fraternity. 
"The Mastery of Life" has been written to enable progressive, 
thinking men and women to obtain an insight into the 
advanced teachings of this Fraternity. You are invited, 
though not ur^ed, to write for this book. No assurance is 
nnpiird that every applicant recti vino. "The ivhsccry of Life" 
will be accepted for membership of the Rosicrucians. 



ribePMD, The Rosicrucians (AMORC) . San Jose, California, 
ease send me, without cost, the book, "THE MASTERY 

e LIFE." . 



CAVALCADE, Februory, T953 



Australian HOUSE and HARDEN 



i the most important pnjeit ol tk yoor. . 



HOW TO LIVE OFF 
TWO ACRES 



Hera li ihc Icalurt HOUSE AND GARDEN roadori 



HOW TO LIVE OFF TWO ACRES a -ritier, by « 

/few fo AVfl off two acres 

commences ft We MARCH fern of 




/Wfry row/off 
Vege table talture 
A small area orchard 
Flower-farming 
Pig-raising 
i Bee-keeping 
■ own cow 



Australian 

HOUSE and GARDEN 



order roim copr NOW 



96 CAVALCADE, February, 1953 



But he released tier and stood tip, 
carefully brushing his knees, straightening his tie. "Not yet," he smiled, 
"Everything's better when it's slow." 

Beth got up and went to the bed 
and sat there, watching him dully 
through the effort of keeping her 
head from spinning away. 

"You ought to see a doctor," she 
whispered. "Maybe you can still be 

That was the wrong thing to say. 
That was the end of her respite, 
the limit of his desire to prolong. It 
took his smile away, it brought out 
the thing that was in hiding. He 
came toward liei- unci his eyes made 
her sick, and she closed her own 
against him. She felt h.is hands on 
her, his nails pressing into her 

She didn't struggle, as if she wanted 
it to come quickly, like the time of 
her operation, the ether cone bringing oblivion. From a vast distance 
she heard the angry doorbell, heard 
it closer as Jerry drew away from 
her, his eyes losing (he dead thing, 
becoming alert and frightened . 

Beth whispered, "The fire escape. 
You can get away," looking up at 
him without hate. It was enough to 
have him banished, to try to forge* 
him. He wheeled suddenly and 
heaved up the window and went 
through. Beth waited. She went tc 
the window to shut it, and saw him 
in haste on the slick iron steps. She 
saw, without comprehending, the slip 
on the wet step and the desperate, 
futile clutch at the railing below her. 
She heard his wild cry, and she 
turned from the window in sickness. 

The doorbell continued to ring. 
Like a robot, Beth went first to the 
kitchen to turn the refrigerator setting again off the defrost position. 
Then she let in the irate Mrs. Clausen 
and the hailed-out-of-bed janitor. 



SMOKING GOT YOU DOWN? 

STOP 
SMOKING 

in 1 DAY or LESS 



MM BAN1S 

l I 



BE A NON-SMOKER 
WRITE FOR FREE BOOKLET 



JACK ELWOOD (Dept. C2/3I 



t Z444, G.P.O., Sydns 



FAT 



, hid wnrry. It ■-■ vin^rj-i Iv. c:-=d 
lu.-ullhy. Why tolerait; it when 
can taka off pounds of uncomfortable 

FORd" TABLETS? S A ' new scienti 
treatment,^ reborn men^ed^ by Docti 



NOEL P. FORD 

M.P.S. (Syd. Univ.) Chemist 
247 KING STREET, NEWTOWN, 
SYDNEY. Phone: LA 1712 



CAVALCADE. February, 1953 97 




Turn back the clock 
ten years! 




After thirty yea,, of age, your body slow, down Its own natu.a 
manufacture of hormones. You Start to need them. 1 he result 
par" of what we call ■'growing old." It show, in sta, ha,r, muscletone, mental alertness and general health. 

FORTEX is a penetrating cream, richly laden with hormones. It 
massage, into s our skin in a few seconds. It uses the stm s natural 
channels to feed these hormones directly mto your system. 
Within five days - often only two or three day, - - you feel the 

,lm ndou eff ect, ft turns bad the clock ten year,! Smce men and 
women are physically different, then ™^™^ ^ 
ferent too. Therefore there is FORTEX BLUE tor mm ana 
FORTEX YELLOW for women. Ask your chem.st for FORTEX 
YELLOW Hormone Tonic and restore your natural health within 

five days! 

MONEY-BACK GUARANTEE 





MONEY-BACK GUAR 

ionic is somewhat expe 


N ! b 


please use it as 


directed 


nee (his remarkable 
r a full week. 








hen, if you wiih, 




Kinfo 


X Ply. Ltd., 


ox 111, 




™not m mV J rc than quart 


r of 


he contents u. 


ed. You 


.P.O., Sydney, wit 
ill receive an imm 


_diate refund at the w 


lole 


f your purcha 




his offer shows h 


w confident Kinfort i 


tha 


this modern 




3 nic will improve y 


jur health noticeably w 


thin 






Fortex" is sold by 


chemists everywhere. 


The) 


y'difficuUiZ , 


nmediate 




esalers. Bat if you ha 






i buying 


art Uom all who 


„. eolltae t: Kinfort Pi) 


*Ltd 


(Makers of F 


ne Drugs 


Fortex" locally, pU 
Am 1B74-), Box 11 


, G.P.O., Sydney. 






Cov, 253 



