AUTHENTIC 




I DAeMOON 
MIS HEAVEN 

< 

—T 



ONTHLY 
No. 16 



Authentic 

SCIENCE FICTION 



A full-length novel 

THE MOON IS HEAVEN 
by 

H. J. CAMPBELL 

■MH§ Technical Editor : H. J. Campbell, 
F.C.S., F.R.H.S., M.S.C.I. 



Printed in Great Britain ami Published by: 
HAMILTON & CO. (STAFFORD) LTD., 
1 & 2 Melville Court, Goldhawk Road, 
London, W.12. 




projectiles 



COMPLAINT 

I think your stories arc all 
very good and I like the Old 
Growler series. 1 like H- JCampbdTs stories, but 1 have 
one complaint: he spoils it by 
using " you did this " and 
" you did that." Personally, it 
bores me, I like all your 
authors, especially Roy Sheldon 
and his characters Spear and 
Manners, and the way he leaves 
one of them in a precarious 
position at (he end of a chapter 
and goes on to the other, leaving you in suspense. 

R. PRIOR ffiognor Regis) 



* 



SUMMARY 

The International Science 
Fiction Club has recently been 
reviewing your books and here 
is a summary of its opinidns. 
(Membership of our Club is 
open to anyone over 14 and 
under 30 who sends his or her. 
name and age to this address 
for details.) 

Summary : No. 1 quality 
61%. No. 2 quality 94 ,J ,.. 
No. 3 quality 10%. No. 4 
quality 89%, No. 5 quality 
51%, No. 6 quality 18%. No. 

7 (We did not read this. We 
arc sick of Rov Sheldon.) No. 

8 58%. No. 9 69%. No. 10 



52%. No. II 70%. No. 12 



P. D. HAMILTON 
(Lanark) 

/ hank you for a very useful letter. Peter, We wish your 
Club every success and hope 
that you will send us other 
summaries from time to lime. 
We know from letters that we 
have several reader* in your 

area; we hope they join. 



QUERIES 

Is there an Earth Satellite 
Vehicle Programme in work? 
When can we expect the first 
spaceflight? What of the atomic 
reactors beinj; experimented 
with in the States? 

S.J.A. (Chadderton) 



Amaica has been working 
on a Satellite Vehicle Programme for some time; it is 
almost certain that the Russians 
are doing the same thing. And 
of course, our own British 
experts have been deuling with 
the question. The American 
atomic reactors are being used 
to obtain electrical power from 
turbines for ordinary factory 
use and for marine propulsion. 
The first space flight {unmanned) will probably take 
[Unci- within the next ten years, 
in our opinion. 



MEMORY 

In The Last Mutation a 
mutant is put away at ihc age 
of two. After twemy-'our 
years he is set free. He catches 
a glimpse of a city and immediately recognises i[ as London, 
He must have had a remarkable memory. 



Come now. he had more 
than a glimpse. He flew over 
it in a 'copier. Besides, as it 
says on page 18, he knew it 
was London because he could 
see the giant Security building 
not jut distant. Another thing 
is that the whole point of the 
Story is that the mutant had a 
remarkable memory '. 



MORE MACARTNEY 

Have just finished Ten Yean 
to Oblivion and now I warn 
more Macartney, but it isn't 
quite your best ycl: you have 
never equalled Energy Alive. 
Von would hnio beaten it easily 
with The Last Mutation, this 
was a better story in many 
ways— but that awful style. . . . 

K. POTTER (Lancaster) 



are only two American magazines that run better covers 
than yours. Keep it. and iret 
even better if you can. 

P. F. WILSON (Bedford! 

We certainly do take notice 
of our readers' letters. The 
main points oj every one of 
them are taken oui and filed 
together, so thai we can see at 
a glance what your views are 
to the various aspects of our 
magazine. Thanks for ■ the 
compliments about our covers. 



ALL DEPENDS 

1 have been having an argument with some friends. Perhaps you could settle it for 

elementary. How lonii would 
it take to get to Venus? 

K. J, SLOAN E (Sclsey) 

All depends on how fast you 
an- travelling ' Seriously, the 
journey wotihl lake 145 days if 
you used the most economical 
route, i.e.. the one requiring the 
least fuel. In {his. you just 
need fuel far taking-af) and 
landing, the greater pint of the 
journey being curried • 



fre 



herwe 



the 



COVERS 

It seems you do take notice 
ot your readers' views after all! 
From No 9 your covers have 
been first rale— well, perhaps 
not first, but pretty good anyway. You can have the -M-:.faclion of knowing that there 



orbits. That is the route that 
will be used first. When better 
rockets become available, and 
heller fuels, it may he possible 

straight line between the 
planets. This will make the 
journey much shorter, bill it 
will have to he done under 



Editorial 

high tide 



The tide of Science fiction in 
coming in again. Somehow or 
other — maybe it's something i" 
do with ihc moon 1 — people 
are getting space-conscious. 
They do that cvety now and 
again, you know. Then ihc 
majority of them turn over and 
go lo sleep again. 

But here's the point : at each 
swing of the pendulum, that 
majority nets less and less- So 
that devotees of SF arc joined 
at intervals hy a kind of flotsam 
that comes lo stay. 

Wc get the repercussion here 
by increased demand that goes 
on demanding. It's interciinii 
to find people popping up all 
over the country and askin;: for 
ASF. Sometimes they ask only 
once and we never hear of 
them again. 

But just lately there has been 
a concerted uprush of people 
who are still with us— many of 
them having taken out two and 
three year subscriptions. 

Now. we are not so conceited 
as lo think that ASF does this 
all by itself! There are many 
factors thai make people turn 
to SF, But it is good tidings, 
because the more subscription-: 
we get, the solider is our working foundation. If things go on 
like this, there'll be a number 
of improvements coming up. 
By the way have you taken out 
a sub? 

* 



Many SFaOB arc walking 
around with black bands on 



their arms. Wc almost feel 
like doing the same. GALAXY 

That was a fine magazine 
with fine stories and a fine 
future. We know the circumstances under which it died and 
we can assure all fans who do 
not already know it, that 
GALAXY did not die because 
of lack of sales. Even now it 
may be resurrected. 



It is nice to sec national 
ma^izines with large circulations running space features — ■ 
even if some of them we rather 
inaccurate! Things like this 
and the recent SF serial in the 
News Chronhlt hv well-known 
science writer Ritchie Calder 
help lo raise the prestige and 
public awareness of science 



Oi course, we have to put up 
wiih thin-- like ihe film " Man 
from Planet-X" but even that 
might not do so much harm as 
some people think. In the early 
sta-es of a new literary form, 
we must keep a level head and 
he tolerant with those to whose 
head the subject goes! 

But by all means lei us not 
keep silent. ASF is firmly 
behind everyone who voices a 
demand for better and more 
accurate science fiction. 



THE 



MOON IS HEAVEN 

By H. J. Campbell 



CHAPTER ONE 
Three Weeks To Go 

The sand is so hot you almost wish you were wearing a 
space suit. A noon-day sun makes the world an oven as 
you stand waiting just outside the danger zone in a part of 
South America that has the double distinction of being called 
Cntopaxi and being slap in latitude nought. It has another 
distinction, too, when you come to think of it. 

This mountain in Ecuador will be the first to take the 
blast of a rocket that ought to reach the Moon. If it doesn't 
reach the Moon, you reckon they'll put up an epitaph to 
those who didn't make it. And your name will be on the 
list. 

Not at the top, of course. Up there will be the worldfamous name of Atah Kark, the man who did so much to 
get the whole thing going, and who will combine the duties 
of astronaut and surveyor on the trip. Then will come the 
pilot and the chemist and the technologist and the man who 
risked his life to save his friends — someone always does that 
on a trip like this. 

And then, way down at the bottom, will be your name. 
Any name would do. Few know it. No one will recognise 
it. liut they will call you Mike, the thick-headed journalist 
who qualified for the [»st of observer because he happened 
to be exactly the right size and have the kind of lungs that 
don't mind being knocked about a bit. 

Through the window of the hut, in the centre of the safety 
zone, she rises up. Tall, sleek, unfinished. A rocket that 
will be the embodiment of several million pounds, several 
million hearts and — the embodiment of man's desiring. 

You drain your coffee cup, slip the empty vessel on to the 



5 



6 THE MOON IS HEAVEN 

conveyor belt that takes it back to the kitchen, and wander 
over to the window. A tall, sleek symbol of man's questing 
fingers, exploring mind; an expression of his conceit, really. 
This, he says, is all very well, but it's too small. Man has 
the power to reach for the stars, why be content with just 
one world? Let's all go to the Moon! 

Well, not all of us, not at first. Just a few to pave the 
way, to take the slipperincss off the stepping stone to space. 
To build the domes, rig the air plants, do a bit of mining. 
Get the whole thing straightened out for when the big white 
chiefs come along. 

And so the money came dribbling in. A bit from here; a 
bit from there. Soon there had been enough to buy a bit 
of mountain, then to put up a few shacks and stock out with 
some apparatus. The snowball started rolling. People 
didn't want to be left out. It came in by sixpences and 
thousands. One little boy. who dreamed of following you 
one day, sent in his model rocket and told you to sell it for 
what it was worth. But everybody knew just how much it 
was worth — to the boy. There were several things like that. 

After a year or two, the Government had realised that 
something was afoot. Thinking it over, they decided it was 
quite a good idea, really. This going to the Moon. It 
would have its uses— apart from prestige. So they chipped 
in with a couple of million — an amount equivalent in value 
to the fin, maybe, on the boy's rocket—and gave you a 
technologist to go with it and with you to the Moon. 

You reckon he'll have a flag tucked away somewhere. 

Atah Kark found his name appearing in even more papers 
and magazines. His project, too. By about 1958 things 
looked as though they might come to fruition after all. Now, 
in 1963 there are only a few weeks to go and (hen — the 
thought of it, the still, small voice of it makes you go cold 
somewhere down inside. 

You think of the emptiness of that space out there. And, 
if anything should go wrong, the long, long way to fall— into 
the Sun. 



THE MOON IS HEAVEN 7 

A figure breaks away from the knot around the rocket and 
strides across the danger zone towards the hut. Atah Kark, 
coming to vet your latest report to the Press. A stickler for 
accuracy, Atah. Won't let anything through that isn't as 
true as knowledge will let it be. Never mind about sensation 
or drama or stuff like that. Tell 'em the truth and if they 
don't like it they can do the other thing. This is the real 
thing, with real problems and setbacks. The people who 
pay the piper must hear the real tune. 

For yourself, you don't care two pins. A lifetime in 
journalism makes for cynicism about what pcop'.c want when 
they pay for a thing.' But Atah has faith. Maybe that's 
what kept him going over all the years of frustration and 
ridicule. Like when that other " scientist " back in '51 
reckoned that Atah didn't know as much as he said he did. 
Reckoned in print, ton. Hut when the world's experts in 
astronomy and astronautics mildly pointed out that Atah 
knew much more than he said he did. the other man climbed 
down — and Atah climbed up. It happened every now and 
then. 

The hut duor swings back and Atah comes in. His normal 
intent, searching expression is there, but it's split by a grin. 
Dressed at ease in a loose tunic and baggy panls, Atah 
drops himself into a chair and presses the button that will 
bring a steaming coffee cup from the kitchen out back. 

The smooth Somerset accents drift across the still air in the 
hut. " This'll be your third from last report, won't it?" 

You raise an eyebrow and come away from the window, 
giving him a quizzical look. His heavy laugh shoots out of 
him and fills the hut. 

" Last before the blast-off, I mean! There'll be others, 
don't you worry.'' 

" I'm not worrying," you say. " It's just that I'm 
scared." 

The coffee cup comes whizzing along. Atah lifts it neatly 
from the belt and raises it to his lips, looking at you over 
the rim. 



THE MOON IS HEAVEN 



" We're all scared. Don't let that worry you, either. I 
wouldn't want anyone on this trip who wasn't a bit scared. 
Wouldn't react right in emergency." 

" So you reckon there'll be emergencies?" 

He sets the cup down. It's too hot. " Bound to be. 
You can't do a thing like this and demand that everything 
go according to plan. But we can handle all the minor 
things that might go wrong — so long as we act quickly 
enough." 

" And the major things? Can we handle those?" . 

Atah stares through the window. You reckon that from 
where he's sitting he can just see the tip of the rocket's nose. 
Pie stares at it for a few moments, then looks back at you 
and smiles. 

" Some of them. Most of them that might occur on the 
trip. But there are one or two things we expect to find on 
the Moon that may not be there. The emergencies might 
tome long after we've landed safely." 

And they'll go on, you think. Right until we get back 
here on Earth, or make some corner of a lunar crater a little 
piece of England with our bodies laid in a row. But that 
teriainly doesn't worry you. You don't care where you die. 
Moon or Earth. It's just that you don't want to die. 

You take the typescript from your pocket and slide it 
across the table 1o Atah. " I've told them that a tube blew 
on us," you say. " And pointed out that we should be 
space-borne in about three weeks." 

Atah looks up. His untidy hair hangs a bit over his forehead, making him appear very much like a schoolboy who's 
more interested in things than appearances. Which is probably just about right. 

" I don't know that wc ought to tell 'em that last bit," 
he says. " It'll be the first concrete date we've given for 
departure. They'll swarm out here like flies. Clutter up 
the place." 

It's your turn to grin. " The whole truth?" you smile. 
" Isn't that what you wanted?" 



THE MOON IS HEAVEN 9 

Atah sighs. He's got a lot on his plate without all this, 
you reckon. But he's not the kind to shirk or delegate. If 
it's his job, he does it himself. 

" All right," he grunts at last. " Let it go. It'll give 
the London Circle enough time to get out here." 

" They're on their way already," you announce. "Had 
a cable from Sed Linell today. About thirty of them. Should 
be here in a day or two." 

You like the smile that creeps over Atah's face. A smile 
that tokens pride, the real, true kind of pride. He's glad 
the Circle are coming, you can see that. 

" Good," he says. " They won't clutter anything up. 
I'll be pleased to see 'em again, too. They're good boys." 

Yes, they're good boys, you agree. And the thought takes 
you both back a few years, so that you are both silent, both 
knowing that you're thinking about the same things. 

The London Circle. A small group of people who met 
regularly to talk about space flight and astronautics mingled 
inextricably with the more imaginative types of fiction. _ And 
Atah had been the link between fiction and fact, so that some 
who began as pure fictionists came to realise the solid 
scientific foundation for space flight — and were fired with the 
concrete idea of reaching the Moon. 

Of course, there had been one or two pessimists among 
them. Bat the pessimists were part of it all, and were 
accepted by the Circle as an inevitable offshoot of something 
requiring faith and an impersonal approach. 

And Atah had always been there. At every meeting, he 
was around to tell you how fast you must go, what fuel you 
need and hundreds of other things that lots of people would 
charge for. Slowly and softly he had made everyone see 
the utter necessity of reaching the Moon, until quite unconsciously they were supporting him to the limit— with their 
eyes wide open. Atah had converted them simply by telling 
them the truth. 

It'll he good to have them along. So that they can be 
in at the peak- point, actually see the rocket leave and 



10 THE MOON IS HEAVEN 

dwindle away in the sky, followed by their generous portion 
of good will. A good will that, under Sed Linell's organising, 
let them scrape up enough to bring thirty of them half-way 
across the world. 

And what a world it is, you think. Still the same old 
stuff that started with a man dropping out of a tree and 
clubbing the man who dropped out beside him. The old 
stuff that goes on and on, without significantly altering the 
basic structure of things. Millions die. Millions come alive. 
The sun rises and sets on it all, day after day, century after 
century. And here and there a few men think and work on 
problems like' getting to the Moon. Making the biggest 
advances of all. 

You stop thinking about all that when you see that Atah 
has turned his attention again to your report. You light a 
cigarette and watch his lean face move slightly under the 
influence of the thoughts inside his head. His eyes travel 
rapidly across the pages. ■ His nose twitches as the smoke 
from your cigarette reaches him. He doesn't smoke himself. 
Doesn't care whether yon do. Has more important things 
to think about. 

He reaches the last page, the last line, the last word. He 
lays the typescript aside and looks at you. Then a slow 
smile comes. 

" All right," he says. " Let it go through. If they come, 
the mob, they won't like it, but it'll be their own fault." 

A bead of sweat dribbles down your temple and you agree 
with him that they won't like it. Wherever they are, they 
don't realise the drudgery of it all. Even your down-toearth reports won't have disillusioned them much. They are 
still carried away by the drama, the sensation of it. When 
they come they won't like the heat and the dryness and the 
primitive conditions you work under. 

They'll have visions of a grandstand view from alcrete 
buildings surrounding the launching site. Bars and cafes 
where they can congregate and talk and drink away the waiting period. 



THE MOON IS HEAVEN 11 

Instead, they'll have to find their own places out on the 
mountain top, between boulders, on the blistering sand and 
rock. And there won't be enough refreshment for more than 
a tenth of them. They'll have to fight for it. 

The money wasn't spent in making a tourist spot. Every 
penny of it was needed for essentials. There's not one luxury 
on the site— unless it's Reina, the manager's daughter. 

You stop thinking about Reina because you know it doesn't 
do you any good, and watch Atah finish his coffee. He 
stands up and stretches, then moves towards the door. 

" Going back so soon?" you ask. 

" That tube needs a lot of attention," he answers. " And 
we don't want to waste time." 

You watch him go, swiftly striding again across the danger 
zone, and you know his thoughts are all on the blown tube. 
Everything else blotted out of existence. You reckon that's 
the way he gets so much done. He makes time. 

You turn away from the window, go back to the table 
and pick up the pieces of paper that represent your reason 
for existence here. Just as you're going out of the hut, the 
door opens in your face and Reina comes in. You step 
back, reckoning that the transmission of your report can wait 
a while. 

" Hullo, Mike," she says wearily. " Like to get me a 
coffee?" 

One or two steps, one or two movements and her request 
is granted. She sprawls in a chair, one arm flung across 
the table, the other hanging down. Her flaming red hair 
is untidy, a straggling wisp of it dangling in front of her wide 
blue eyes. 

You step up and deftly smooth the hair away from her 
eyes. " Bad for the vision," you say. 

She smiles and, tired as she is, a twinkle comes to her 
eye. She purses her lips as though she's trying not to smile, 
and lifts the coffee cup. You sit down beside her. You 
don't know what to say. She says it for you, glancing at 
the papers sticking out of your pocket. 



12 



THE MOON IS HEAVEN 



" Are you telling them it's only three weeks?" 
" Yep." 

" And Atah's okayed it, I guess. Well, things' 11 start 
getting crowded around here. I'll be glad when it's over." 

"So will I," you say. "When we've been up there, 
stayed a bit and come back — that's when I'll be glad." 

Reina wrinkles her nose at you. " Coward!" she laughs. 

And the way she says it, the ways she laughs, tells you 
you're not a coward in a way that nothing else could. But 
then, you happen to be very fond of Reina. That may have 
something to do with it. 

" So. I'm a coward," you smile back. " Okay. But 
I'm going. I'm going right up there where you want to 
go. I'll bring you back a bit of moon-rock, or send you a 
post-card or something. Do you accept things like that from 
cowards?" 

She settles back in her chair and doesn't look all that tired 
any more. She's enjoying herself, all right. 

" A post-card, eh?" she says. "Or a stick of moonrock?" There's something behind all this, you reckon. You 
know Reina. " Guess you haven't heard yet," she goes on. 
" But you will." 

" Heard what? Has something happened? Don't tell 
me the trip has been cancelled!" 

That's the only way to get anywhere with Reina, you've 
discovered. Joke about everything. Play the fool and shemight play it, too. Then you might get something serious 
out of her. 

But this time she isn't going to play. " Oh, you 11 hear 
about it soon enough, Mike. Don't let it bother you." 

She finishes her coffee and gets up. You walk with her 
to the door. Outside in the blinding sun, Reina puts on a 
straw sombrero. 

" See you at dinner, Mike," she says, and walks off towards the rocket. 

Her boyish figure in the untidy slacks gets smaller and 
smaller. You stand there watching her, watching the sway 



THE moon is Heaven 



13 



of her hips, the tilt of the sombrero. She looks too slight 
and frail to be out here on the top of a mountain, the only 
woman among a couple of dozen men. 

Her face is so smooth compared with theirs. Her movements so much more graceful. Her heart so much more 
human. 

Then you reckon it might be the heat of the sun after all, 
and anyway that transmission has got to be - done. So you 
turn away, whistling. 



CHAPTER TWO 



The Day 

Morning drums impatiently on your eyelids, making you 
blink and blink again. The sunlight hurtles through the 
window and splodges a yellow smear on the wall in a 
geometric pattern whose name you've forgotten. You close 
your eyes again momentarily. Then you reopen them as a 
loud clang rings through the air. With that kind of row 
going on you might as well wake up. 

You swing your legs off the bed and as your feet touch 
the floor, it comes to you. This is the dayl 

It runs through you like a shock and you think once again 
that those three weeks didn't take long to pass. It almost 
seems that you went to bed last night with three weeks to 
go, and then woke up this morning to find it's today after 
all. 

But, of course, it wasn't like that at all. As you start 
pulling on your clothes, you start to think of all the things 
that have happened in those three weeks. Quite a few things. 
The first important one was when the London Circle turned 
up. 

Thirty happy faces, sixty willing hands to help with any 
kind of work that wanted doing. That was a great help and 
a great relief for everybody. There'd been plenty of rough 
jobs knocking around that had stayed that way -because 
Atah didn't want to waste technical skill by detailing people 
to do them. It didn't take the London Circle long to get 
things ship-shape, even to make several dozen trips on the 
mountain railway and dragging up their own food and a 
good bit more for everybody else. 

Great lads, they were. Yet the climax came when Sed 



14 



THE MOON IS HEAVEN 15 

Linell, on behalf of the whole Circle, presented Atah with 
a chronometer that had been subscribed for by the Circle. 
Atah hadn't known quite what to do. He'd just stood there 
with the gleaming instrument in his hands, looking from it to 
the ring of smiling faces and back again. 

Then he'd led them all off to the rocket and let them all 
come in by fours and watch him installing the chronometer 
in the control room. Then they'd carried him back to the 
refectory and made him drink ten glasses of orangeade in 
quick succession. You'd stood by, watching it happen, 
wondering how many other world-experts on anything could 
be treated — and want to be treated — like this. There was 
something about space flight. And something about Atah. 

The whole thing had been a high-spot in the dreary work 
of the project, something that made everybody forget the 
heat and weariness and the dull aching boredom of doing 
routine jobs. And then it was all over and everybody went 
back to normal. 

You yourself managed to get another two chapters finished 
of the book about it all. Even as you were writing them, 
you couldn't help hoping you'd put the final chapters in 
yourself when you'd all got back to Earth. 

The sultry days had passed. Things had got nearer and 
nearer to finality. Tension began to mount. A few people 
even got jittery and irritable, but Atah's sense of humour 
kept things going happily for almost everyone. 

And then you'd got the shock of your life. Even now the 
thought of it makes you wobble as you pull on a sock, so 
that you have to sit down on the edge of the bed. 

For days you'd puzzled about Reina's remarks to you 
about finding out something, but you just couldn't get it. 
You knew it was something to do with not being able to 
send her a post-card or a stick of moon-rock, but that was 
all. For a frantic moment, you thought that maybe they'd 
decided not to let you go up with them after all. But that 
wasn't so. You'd tackled Atah about it and he'd thought 
you were slightly mad. But then, he always had. 



16 



And then, one morning at breakfast, out it had come. 
When the whole crew were sitting round the table tucking 
into eggs and bacon and liver and chips, Atah had looked 
across at Reina and said : 

" You're looking tired, Reina. D'you feel fit?" 

The girl had smiled. "We're all looking tired, Atah. 
Guess we'd better all take a few days' rest before the blastoff." 

That was when you had chipped in. " What do you want 
to rest for, you won't be blasting off?" 

Reina had smiled a superior smile, with a mischievous 
glint in her eye at the same time. "Oh, won't I, Mister 
Observer? Just wait and see!" 

Everyone had looked up at that. Reina— bla sting-off ? 
The whole thing seemed ridiculous. Maybe she had a touch 
of the sun. But no. Atah was coughing awkwardly and 
sending Reina a glance that wasn't the kind good-looking 
women usually get. 

" I told you I hadn't finally decided, Reina " 

" Oh, come on, Atah. Face up to it. They might as 
well know straight away." She had turned her impudent, 
flaming head towards you and lifted up her chin, tip-tilting 
her nose. 

" Gentlemen, I am coming with you to the Moon! I 
talked Atah into it, and it took some doing, so don't any 
of you try to talk him out of it." 

Well, she'd dropped her bomb. And the concussion of 
it held everyone silent while the eggs and the bacon and the 
liver and the chips got colder and colder. You joined the 
rest in staring at her silently, until she spoke. 

" Mike, for heaven's sake close your mouth. You look 
awful!" 

" But," you said. " But " 

Then Clavier, the chemist, helped you out. His high 
French eyebrows had risen still higher, his little bit of a beard 
jutting out like an inverted cactus, expressive hands spreading 
wide, one with a knife, one with a fork. 



THE MOON IS HEAVEN 



17 



" But, mademoiselle! How can you? You say you fly 
wiz us, but what of the fuel, the weight? You are petite, 
yes, but still you are an object for consideration in that 
respect." 

" I don't know whether to blush or to be angry," Reina 
replied. " Maybe I won't do either of those things. There 
are very good reasons why I should come to the Moon with 
you. Atah and I have discussed them and he has decided 
that I am right He is making a small adjustment in the 
amount of equipment we are carrying." 

The technologist, Schnabel, didn't like that. " Zo! Vee 
are to do wizout things, eh? Just zo Reina comes to the 
Moon, eh? And vat if we leave somzing zat is important? 
What happens then?" 

Just like Schnabel, you thought. He's the only one of the 
crew who tries to stand on his dignity, tries to find fault 
with other people's decisions. You reckon if there's going 
to be any " human relations " trouble on the Moon, it'll 
come from Schnabel. 

Atah wasn't coughing any more. His lips were set and he 
was looking at Schnabel. It suddenly struck you that the 
technologist had made a criticism of Atah's judgment, his 
wisdom in adjusting the equipment to compensate for Reina's 
weight. It amounted almost to an accusation of jeopardising 
everyone's safety. Risking the success of the project. 

If it had been you, you might have stormed and ranted 
at Schnabel, telling him what kind of person be is. But it 
wasn't you. It was Atah. He spoke calmly. 

" We are not doing without anything, Schnabel. To compensate for Reina's weight, I have simply transposed a few 
pieces of equipment from the manned rocket to the unmanned follow-ups. I had already allowed for one of them 
to be under-weight to meet just such an emergency as this. 
We have all been working on this project for years. I am 
not likely to leave behind essential things." 

Schnabel just grunted and turned away— his usual reaction 
when proved wrong. Then Leeson, the American pilot, put 



IS 



THE MOON IS HEAVEN 



a word in — a quite, reasoning word as suited his temperament. 

" I guess we don't quarrel with your judgment, Atah. 
Most of us know you don't take chances like that- But-^ 
er — it'd be nice to know why you changed your mind about 
having women on the trip — -mind you, I'm all for it!" 

Reina got up from the table and began to move towards 
the door. Atah watched her with a slight smile on his face. 

" Reina's quite a capable technician, I've discovered. And 
she can cook and sew and— well, I think she'd be useful on 
the Moon." 

The girl flashed him a grateful glance and slipped through 
the door. When she'd gone, Atah lowered his voice. 

" Now listen, chaps. That's not the only reason Reina's 
coming. There's a bigger, better one. But you've all got 
to keep your mouths shut about it and not let on to her that 
you know a thing. Just have some regard for her feelings." 

You were as interested as anyone, and this business made 
you impatient. " Okay, Atah, we'll do that. But what's 
this big reason?" 

" Well. As you know, we've got to make our own return 
fuel. To do that we're assuming certain things about the 
Moon's composition. We may Ibe wrong. If we are, then 
we may have to stay on the Moon a heck of a long time. 
We may never get back to Earth; you all know and accept 
that possibility. 

" Reina's a queer girl. She's got her own ideas about 
things and people. Down here she fits into the codes because it's convenient. Up on the Moon there aren't any 
codes. And she reckons we'll be lonely if we can't get back. 
That's why she's coming. 'It's a great thing for her to doeven I see that. Let's respect her for it." 

There was a slightly awkward pause while the information 
sank into everybody's heads. You felt a touch of nausea, 
feeling the way you do about Reina. And then the nausea 
was replaced by a burning rage as Schnabel let out a coarse 
guffaw. You stepped across to strike him, but he was up 



"f HE MOON IS HEAVEN 19 

and away before you reached him, out of the hut and laughing his way towards the rocket. Atah had grasped your 
arm. 

" I know how you feel, Mike, but take it easy." 

You'd swung round on him, still with the glare on your 
face. " You know how I feel?" 

" Sure I do. I'm not all that blind or up in the clouds, 
you know. I'm looking to you. Mike, to keep an 'eye on 
Re in a— and Schnabel." 

With that, the breakfast table was cleared and everyone 
went about their duties. All day while you wrote, you 
thought of Reina— on the Moon with five men. 

You find that you finished dressing some time ago. You've 
been sitting on the edge of the bed, staring out of the window. 
But you don't start thinking the old stuff. You don't tell 
yourself that now because you are leaving Earth, Earth never 
looked so beautiful. 

Come to think of it, the Moon won't look so very different 
from this. Cotopaxi is a mixture of bright and dark as the 
morning sunlight slams against the rock and glides over the 
shadows. And there isn't even a black sky to rest your eyes 
against. You can quite imagine that, compared to this arid 
dustbowl, the Moon will be heaven. 

Anyway, the breakfast bell goes and there's no time to 
think about things like that. You slip off the bed and walk 
straight out of the bedroom on to the sand— everything's on 
ground level here. A few yards along and you arrive at the 
refectory. The others arrive more or less at the same time, 
too. 

There's an air of excitement about that very soon catches 
you as well. Atah is looking as though this is the day he's 
been waiting for all his life. Which it probably is. Leeson 
appears a little strained now that his pilotship will shortly be 
put to the critical test. Clavier walks around the breakfast 
table several times, telling everyone there's no need to be 
nervous and deliberately making his own hands shake. 



iO THE MOON IS HEAVEN 

Schnabel just sits and looks as if indigestion is the least that's 
wrong with him. 

But it's Reina you look at most. You take a chair near 
her and lift her coffee cup off the belt for her. 

"Thanks, Mike. How d'you feel?" 

"Fine, fine. Somebody's taken my stomach away, but 
that doesn't matter. How about you?" 

She suddenly looks at you as though you're the only person 
she could tell this to, the others are too busy with their own, 
feelings. "Oh, Mike, I've been looking forward to this! 
You can't know what it means to me. I'm all a-tremble, 
but not with fear." 

" Good girl," you say. " Hope you won't be disappointed 
when you get up there. It's a pretty dead world, you know." 

" Oh, I'll love if! Not for long, of course. I'll want to 
come back. But just for a little while." 

Just for a little while. Now that Reina's coming, you 
know that the time will be all too short. Unless there's 
difficulty in making return fuel, and Reina— but you don't 
think about that. Not now. 

You start to speak again to Reina, but Atah begins and 
everyone falls silent. 

"Today's the day, chaps — and Reina! We blast-off at 
noon. Take it easy. Rest all you can, don't eat or drink 
too much, and if you must smoke, smoke only a little. There's 
nothing at all for you to do. Reina's father has everything 
i-nder control. 1 for one am going to lie down and read. 
See you here for a last cup of coffee at eleven-thirty!" 

He gets up and leaves the room. You and Reina drink 
!he coffee, and, by unspoken agreement, you both stand up, 
smile at each other and cross to the door. As you pass 
through it, you notice Schnabel following Reina with his 
piggy little eyes. 

You both stroll leisurely across the sand and on to the 
danger zone, towards the rocket. Complete and ready, the 
locket stands there with her nose pointing, up at the limitlessness above, a tall, sleek challenge to the expanding 



THE MOON IS HEAVEN 21 

universe. Way over to one side, the smaller unmanned jobs 
are standing. Waiting to be launched as soon as the main 
rocket is under way, bringing up mining equipment and 
chemical apparatus for Clavier. 

As you get near the main rocket, you both have to bend 
your heads back sharply to see its nose. Even a tail fin 
is twice as tall as you are. And the air-lock is way above 
you. 1 

Altogether the whole thing is an awesome sight. Something that makes you silent, that would make anyone silent. 
More grand than the Pyramids, more significant than Stonehenge, greater potentialities than the Ark. As you both 
stand there looking up at the great machine that will wing 
you a quarter million miles through space, you feel some 
kind of a bond rise up between you. Your arm comes up 
and rests lightly on Reina's shoulder. She doesn't move for 
several minutes, and then she turns her head and smiles at 
you. 

Strangely enough you don't even want to kiss her. The 
idea behind it all is too big for that. Kissing wouldn't help, 
might make it bad. The only thing is to climb into the 
rocket and take off for the Moon together. And that will 
happen at noon. 

Instead, you walk away to one side and sit down on a 
boulder. You talk about the Moon, about Atah, about the 
Moon, about Schnabel and Leeson and Clavier, about the 
Moon. You talk until it's time for coffee. But never once 
do you talk about yourselves. 

Back in the refectory,' with coffee cups steaming and light 
bread rolls freshly brought up by the London Circle boys 
from the town way down below, Atah sends his gleaming 
eyes from one to the other. His intent stare rests on each 
one for a few seconds before drifting off to the next. Finally 
he nods with satisfaction. 

" Good. I can see you've all been resting. Everyone 
knows what to do. All you have to do is do it." 

His heavy laugh rings round the hut and sets up just the 



22 THE MOON IS HEAVEN 

kind of atmosphere that you find around a coach taking 
school kids off for their annual beano. But there's a much 
deeper current underlying all this. A much more serious 
idea behind it all. 

" I don't think we'll be worried by the mob," Atah goes 
on. " A special detachment of police from Popayan has 
arrived. They've put a cordon round the site that ought 
to keep wild elephants out. We'll let the L.C. chaps come 
out and see us on to the ship. Then they'll clear off the 
danger zone while we blast-off." 

" That's a fine idea, Atah," Leeson drawled. " Those 
boys've done a great job around here these last few days. 
It's only right to let them see as much as possible." 

There was a general murmur of approval. Everyone kept 
off the topic of Rcina. The public didn't know yet that a 
woman was going on the trip — that had been the hardest 
part for you, not being allowed to break the story. But 
Atah thought they'd best get the news when you were all 
safely up in space. 

Atah puts down his cup. He turns and walks out of the 
door. You all follow him. 



CHAPTER THREE 



Blast-off 

A great cheer goes up from the mobs who have by now 
assembled on the other side of the' police cordon. The sight 
of you all walking across the danger zone must have done 
something to them. Their shouts and yells are the kind of 
thing you find at football matches and boxing bouts, very 
similar to the mass response to a dictator's exposition or 
the last night at the Proms. 

From the service huts on the other side of the danger 
zone, another procession starts out. It is the London Circle, 
led by Sed Linnell and the site manager. There's drama in 
the air, an electrical tension that makes your nerves quiver. 

Not for the first time, you think that maybe you were 
a fool to come in on this crazy scheme. Flying to the Moon ! 
Trusting yourself to a rocket that hasn't even been tested. 
Going a quarter million miles out into space — for what? So 
that you can be the first reporter on the Moon? So that 
you can be with Reina? So that you won't let Atah Kark 
down? You don't know. It doesn't matter. You're going 
and that's all there is to it. 

Both processions arrive at the rocket about the same time. 
The London Circle are all on edge 'now that the critical 
moment has come. For years they've dreamed about seeing 
the first manned rocket take off for the Moon. And now 
they're going to do just that. It's too much for one or two 
of the ladies. They just can't stand it, and are having a 
quiet, unobtrusive cry. 

Atah Kark and Sed Linnell shake hands, jovially and 
smiling. Then everybody else shakes hands, some not so 
jovially, some not smiling. The site manager gives Reina 

23 



24 THE MOON IS HEAVEN 

a quick kiss. He's trying to be happy, but finding it a little 
difficult. 

It's not so very different, you think. Not so very different 
from a terminal railway station in wartime, with the men off 
to battle and the kids off to the safety of the countryside. 
Some are glad, some are sad, some are just indifferent. And 
that's the way it is here — only, very few are indifferent. 

Leeson climbs into the air-lock, both its doors wide open 
now. Another .shout goes up from the crowd and you can 
almost feel the telephoto lenses peering at you on the end 
of the television cameras back among the mob, and the commentator's excited voice telling the world that the pilot has 
boarded the rocket. 

Clavier bids an emotional adieu to all and sundry, turning 
his face towards the place where he knows the cameras are, 
and then climbs in after Leeson. Schnabel is next, and he 
does it with Teutonic abruptness, simply giving everyone a 
curt nod. 

Then the row really starts as Reina starts up the ladder. 
Even in her slacks and at that distance, her flaming hair 
-must make her unmistakable. You can imagine just how 
confused the commentator must be, searching for words trying to keep his mind on the job. Even the London Circle 
let out a great murmur— a murmur which rapidly changes 
to a cheer. Then with a quick wave of^her hand, Reina is 
gone from view inside the ship. It's your turn. ' 

Your handshakes are done, your partings over. You place 
a foot on the ladder and begin to climb, trying to ignore 
the sickly feeling way down inside you. It seems a long 
way up and the hand rails are hot. When you get to the 
air lock, your legs are playing tricks. But you have to keep 
up appearances so you turn and wave to them on the ground, 
the little pool of upturned faces. They wave back. You 
swing round and enter the rocket, just as Atah Kark begins 
to come up. 

Once inside, you forget about Earth and the ground. From 



THE MOON IS HEAVEN 25 

now on all that exists in the past, something yon might come 
back to some day, if you're lucky. 

Rapidly you climb the little ladder that runs alongside the 
fuel tank and get up into the living quarters, which is a room 
about a tenth of the size of the fuel tank. The others are 
already strapping themselves down on the soft mattresses. 
You go over to yours, giving Reina a meaningless grin on 
the way.. 

You lie down on the mattress with your hands along the 
length of your body, wrists and ankles lying in the rowlocklike clasps. You hesitate a moment and then jab each index 
linger against the buttons that snap the clasps tight. It's 
rather like being strapped down for vivisection and you don't 
iike it. Even though you've been through the drill a dozen 
times before, it doesn't seem any better. But you've just 
got to put up with it. 

Steps on the ladder outside and Atah Kark comes in. As 
usual, he's smilim;. He goes over to the control board and 
has a word with the pilot, who is strapped close to the board 
so that he's near enough to do things when the rime comes. 
Everything seems all right. Atah takes a quick look round, 
glances at the chronometer donated by the London Circle, 
and climbs on to his mattress. 

" Three minutes to noon, everybody. Watch the clock." 

In your mind's eye you can imagine it. Everyone leaving 
the danger zone, getting away from the blast. Getting right 
outside yourself and the rocket and the Earth, you can see it 
happening. The Earth is whirling round on its axis at 0.28 
miles per second at the equator. And you are on the 
equator. As soon as the rocket leaves Earth, it will be flung 
away by Earth's motion as well as by the power of its 
motors. That way, a useful bit. of velocity wilt be gained. 

You glance at the chronometer. In exactly two minutes 
from now the great craft will hurtle upwards and spin outwards in a long curve towards the Moon. You raise your 
head and look round at the others. They arc taking it easy, 
eyes closed, body relaxed. You try to relax yourself. 



U6 



THE MOON IS HEAVEN 



You glance at the chronometer. One minute to go. What 
can one do in a minute? Nothing. You haven't even got 
time to get up and leave the ship. Before you'd get halfway down the ladder, the manager would have pressed the 
remote control release button and the ship would fly upwards. And you'd be crushed against the metal like a fly 
under an invisible swat. 

You glance at the chronometer. The second hand is 
sweeping round, racing towards zero second. You find you 
can see it without raising your head. Fifteen seconds. Ten 
seconds. Five. Three. Two 

Twelve noon exactly ! 

The roar is much less !oud than you had expected, but 
the pressure is worse. A great oppressive giant wants to 
sieve you through the mattress, and all the time he croons a 
high whine into your ears. 

Your head has been caught on the turn. You can't move 
it. You can't even close your eyes. You just have to lie 
there under that crushing hand and watch the chronometer. 
Two lines of thought go on at once. One is silly, made up 
of funny things about the London Circle — because they gave 
you the chronometer. 

The other is not funny. It's all about astronautics. You 
don't know much about it, but you've picked up a few 
details from the technical points in your articles. You know 
that the rocket will rush straight up under a thrust of four 
gee to about sixty-two miles. That should take about 
fifteen seconds. It seems to be taking days. 

Then it will curve over towards the horizontal and gravity 
won't have much effect thereafter, and will very soon fade 
out altogether, but that won't stop the crushing. You know 
that it's not gravity that's pushing you down. It's just the 
acceleration, and until the rocket's reached escape velocity 
that is getting bigger. 

Through your confused and muddled brain the thought 
comes that Hermann Oberth did the work on this " synergic 
curve " and found that it enables a big reduction in mass 



THE MOON ts HEAVEN 



27 



ratio to be made. You reckon that's good. You'd agree 
with anyone about anything if only they'd stop this crushing. 

And then, very rapidly, it gets less. You -realise the 
automatic timed direction rocket must have been fired 
minutes ago. The ship has turned and slowed. 

Suddenly a swift, cold panic hits you. The crushing has 
been completely gone and it seems to have taken your weight 
with it. You feel bodyless, insubstantial. But understanding comes and you smile at this, your first experience of 
free-fall. 

Atari's voice rolls through the cabin, still cheery, still confident that all's well. 

" You can get up when you like everybody. Take it 
easy to begin with. Don't bump your heads!" 

You bring your fingers down on the release buttons and 
feel the clasps open. Gripping the mattress with both hands, 
you gingerly swing your legs round. They seem lo want to 
go a lot farther than you meant them to. Yet when you try 
to stop them, they rush back and hit the wall. Muscular 
co-ordination has got to he learnt all over again. 

Finally you manage to sit up. Atah is floating around 
the pilot, chatting about the course and suchlike things. The 
others are silting up like you, staring a little scaredly around 
them — except Rcina. She is sitting cross-legged in the 
geometric centre of the cabin, with no support whatever, and 
looking mighty pleased with herself. She gives you a taunting grin. 

" Lot of people said that women wouldn't make out very 
well in free-fall, Mike, didn't they? Looks like they were 
wrong, eh?" 

' ' Wait until you get on to the Moon, my lady. See how 
you like it then !" 

You shoot out a hand so as to point to her. The action 
iifts you right off the mattress and carries you across space 
and bumps you into her. You both move off in two new 



28 THE MOON IS HEAVEN 

directions like a couple of billiard balls, Reina laughing all 
the while. 

Atah swings round gently, a soft smile on his face. 

" Grap a strap, you two. I don't want to spoil your fun 
in free fall, but don't let it go to your heads, will you?" 

You suddenly feci very foolish, even though you know 
that Atah didn't mean it that way. A strap looms up in 
front of you and you grab it. You are now half-way up 
the wall. Looking around, you see that Reina is way up 
on the ceiling. The whole thing strikes you as being quite 
ridiculous. 

Hand over hand, you pull yourself down and back to 
your mattress. But when you try to lie on it you find you 
can't. Each time your body hits it you bounce back with 
the reaction and hover in the air just above it. You decide 
to stay there. It's as good a place as anywhere else. 

Atah has been doing a bit of juggling with his instruments. 
Taking bearings on various things. He gives the pilot a 
gentle pat on the back and grins round at you. 

"Dead on : course," he says. "Not bad at all. I expected a small error. Now we won't have to correct for it. 
That'll give us all the more fuel for reducing velocity on 
landing." 

That's fine, you think. But it won't be for some time 
yet. 'It's going to take about eighty -three hours to get to 
the neutral point between Earth and Moon. And that's quite 
a while when there's nothing to do but float about like a 
departed spirit. 

Then Leeson comes to the rescue. He dives a hand in his 
pocket without taking his eyea off the dials and screens, 
and brings out a small package. 

" Surprise for you chaps," he says, and you can feel him 
grinning. " Something to while away the time." 

The small package comes sailing through the air towards 
yon. You reach out and pluck it. You miss it and have 
tu watch it go whizzing by. Then, strangely enough, it 



the moon is heaven 



29 



sticks itself against the metal bulkhead. A little shove carries 
you across to it. 

Wedging yourself between the mattress and the wall, you 
unwrap the parcel, everyone else looking on with puzzled 
expressions. As soon as you take the paper away, a pack 
"f cards becomes visible. You let out a whoop of joy. 

Leeson laughs. " Thought that'd please you. They're 
sheet steel that's been magnetised. If you play with them 
on the floor they won't get away from you." 

He's right, too. When you let them go they drift slowly 
down to the floor and stay there, disarranging themselves 
<mly slightly as they strike it. 

" Come on then," you say. " Is it okay for us to play?" 

." Yep. You won't be needed for a while. Do what you 
like. And there's no' law up here, remember. You can 
gamble if you want to!" 

" Okay then. How about it. Clavier? Schnabel? 
Keina? What shall it be?" 

" Poker," says Clavier, climbing off his mattress and 
pronouncing it " Powcarc." " I have zee poker face!" 

That's the last thing he's got, but still. Schnabel looks at 
the cards, purses his lips and then shrugs. " For a little 
while I will play. Then, I wish to read." 

He scrambles down, too. Reina has floated across to a 
cabinet. She knows what's in them all because she loaded 
them. Now she turns round with a packet of sandwiches. 
The sight of them makes you feel hungry suddenly. 

Reina gives herself a little push, glides over to the control 
pane! and deposits a small pile of sandwiches in the air beside 
Atah and the pilot. Then she gives a quick swirl and shoots 
down to the three of you on the floor. 

You start thinking that she dcei it very gracefully. That 

free-fall is her element. She floats so well, so charmingly 

even if she is depositing nothing but a prosaic pile of sandwiches. 

You settle down to the game. The hours drift by. It's 
quite pleasant. You can eat and play and cast occasional 



30 THE MOON IS HEAVEN 

glances at Reina. After a while, Leeson announces that the 
ship will definitely take care of itself for a bit and joins in 
the play. 

Leeson suggests a gamble, that you play for pieces of the 
Moon. All aie in high spirits, so all agree. Within an hour 
or so you find that you are the owner of the Leibnitz mountains, the crater Albategnius and the Marc Ciisium. Since 
the Knglish name for the latter is " Sea of Grists," you're 
not so sure you want it. but there it is. 

You carry on playing until everyone possesses a few 
thousand lunar square miles and then by common consent it 
becomes time to sIccd, 

And it's the weirdest sleep you've ever had. You don't 
exactly dream of falling out of trees, but you certainly wake 
up sweating once or twice. And finding yourself unsupported 
doesn't help any. Fitful, you reckon they'd call it. Across 
the way when you wake up each time, you can see Reina 
curled up against the wall. You get an inane desire to go 
across and do something silly— push her up to the ceiling oz 
something. Pour water over her and see it not run off. 
Things like that. 

The thought strikes you that almost everyone has been 
acting a bit light-headed lately. Maybe that's what free-fall 
docs to you after a bit. You chuckle and go back to sleep. 
A snatch of a dream comes where you're dressed up in purple 
robes, lording it over a sea of Schnabels, until a crisis occurs 
and you have to run up the Leibnitz mountains. 

After a while you wake up feeling hungry. You propel 
yourself across to Reina, noticing on the way that Atah is 
still awake and doing things with the instruments. You dig 
Reina in the ribs and watch her float away as though she 
were just a balloon filled with gas. 

She rotates as she rises and looks so peculiar as she rubs 
her eyes that you can't help laughing. That wakes her up 
pretty quick and she glares at you. But when you mention 
hunger it seems to remind her of something and she forgets 
about your laughter. Within a few minutes she's got the 



the moon is heaven 31 

food out and tucking into it beside you, only she's upside 
down relative to you. You have a short, silly argument with 
her about who is up and who is down. You seem to be 
looking at each other for longer than is necessary. 

After another play of cards, another sleep, another feed, 
you reckon time is getting near. Atah confirms it. 

" You'd better eat all you want and do anything else that's 
necessary, and then strap yourselves down. This is the most 
unpleasant part, but you've just got to put up with it." 

Unpleasant's the word, you think. Not so much the sensation as the boredom. Fourteen hours of deceleration ! First 
so gentle that you hardly feel it, slowly increasing until it 
Starts to pin you down — only this time your mattresses will 
iiave to be up on the ceiling, because the rocket will come 
down tail first. 

You hope everything's all right with the motors. If they 
fail, then the rocket can't help smacking the Moon at a speed 
of two miles a second. But they won't fail. Atah's sure 
of it. And there's the extra braking fuel that was saved by 
not having to correct the course. Everything's going to be 
all right. You tell yourself that again. 

One by one everybody settles their affairs and shifts their 
mattresses up to the ceiling. They strap themselves down. 
So do you. Atah is the last to do it. Leeson has a special 
remote control mirror and set of firing buttons so that he can 
operate the motors and see the dials from his mattress. 
I'm firing now," he says. 

You watch his finger come down on a button. There's a 
faint roar, a very gentle tug at you. And you know you 
arc landing on the Moon. 



CHAPTER FOUR 



Arrived and Alive 

' Gradually, very gradually, the pressure increases. Leeson 
brings finger after finger down on the buttons, tiring motor 
after motor as the rocket streaks down towards the Moon's 
inhospitable surface. 

You he back on your mattress and try to sleep. But sleep 
doesn't come. The uncomfortable weight pushing you away 
from the rocket's tail keeps you awake, and you think of 
what's going to happen when you land. 

If all goes well, the rocket will settle gently on its tail and 
stand there until the blast-off for Earth again. In the meantime, a dome must be built for everyone to live in and to be 
waiting for the next party to the Moon. Surveys must be 
made so that your successors will have a better idea of what 
minerals and other materials are available. Air must be 
made. 

But the biggest job of all will be the production of six 
hundred tonnes of hydrogen as fuel for the return trip. 
Unless that can be made there will be no return trip. Not 
until another rocket turns up. And that would not be for 
eight to ten months. If the unmanned rockets arrive safely, 
you'll have food for three months, no more. 

As you lie there looking at the situation, there seems to be 
so many things that can go wrong. You've every confidence 
in Atah Kark. You know he's spent years studying just this 
situation. BuE you can't help thinking that something unforeseen is bound to happen. You hope it will be a minor 
point. 

" How's it going, Lee?" Atah asks. 

The drawling American sends Atah a quick smile then 



32 



fklS 1400N IS HEAVEN 33 

swings back to the mirror showing his instrument readings. 
" Not too bad. Still a good bit of fuel in hand, and velocity's 
dropping nicely. I don't think there'll be any trouble." 

There is silence for a few moment. Then Clavier chips in. 

" Atah, I am not scared, you understand, it is just that 
I am but a chemist and do not know these things. What 
about meteors? I seem to remember that the Moon is 
showered wiz these things. Maybe one will hit us?" 

Schnabel grins superiorly. Atah just smiles in his friendly 
fashion. " Maybe it will. But it's not likely. We have a 
one in ten thousand chance of being hit." 

But Clavier wasn't finished yet. " And when we land? 
Is it the same then?" 

" No. The chances are even greater that we won't be hit 
by a meteor. Remember that the Moon has an atmosphere. 
It's only ten to the minus four as dense as Earth's at sea 
level, but it stretches up much higher and stops all but the 
largest meteors. And the very large ones are so few that 
we can ignore them." 

A happy sigh comes from Clavier. " Good," he says. 
" That is fine. Now I will sleep!" 

You twist your head round towards Reina — and find she's 
looking at you. She turns away immediately. You lie there 
looking at her, at the flowing red of her hair. 

There is a sudden high-pitched shriek that seems to come 
frum nowhere and everywhere. You try to sit up but the 
clasps hold you firmly down. 

" Don't worry!" Atah Kark's voice says. " We've 
allowed for this." 

You can see him getting out of bis mattress and making 
his way up the wall, pulling heavily on the straps, fighting 
against the deceleration thrust. A moment or two later, 
Schnabel follows him. You can see the two of them up 
there, doing things to the wall. It's dirhcuit, you can tell 
that. It must be like trying to mend a telephone wire at the 
top of a pole in a tornado. 

But finally they are through. The whine stops quite sud


34 



THE MooH is heaven 



denly, and the two men start the long crawl back to their 
mattresses. Atah grins at Clavier. 

" You must have put a voodoo on us," he says. " That 
one in ten thousand chance came off. But it was only a 
small meteor; it vaporised in the wall. We've lost a bit of 
air, but there's no great damage done." 

But there would have been, you think. There would have 
been a lot of damage to everybody apart from the ship. 
Every atom of air would have been torn from your lungs, 
leaving you pop-eyed and gaping— if Atah hadn't allowed 
for that chance. The ten thousand to one chance. 

You hope he's allowed lor all the chances of that order. 
Things shouldn't be too bad then. 

Leeson's voice comes across hard. " Got to step it up a 
lot now, chaps. Take the strain!" 

You settle back and wait for it. It comes. Leeson's 
fingers button the boosters into operation and that hand 
comes back and slams you against Ihe mattress. This is 
almost worse than when you were coming off the Earth. 

Leeson looks tense. You can see him blinking rapidly as 
his eyes flit from dial to dial. His lips fold themselves in 
so that you can't see them any more. You realise what kind 
of a man he must be, to be able to carry on making precision 
judgments under this strain. You guess it must be training. 
You're too modern to believe in breeding. 

Then you can see him relax. His lips come into view 
again and he sighs. He shifts his head and sees that everyone is looking at him. He grins. 

" We made it," he says. " There's no worry now. 
Haven't you noticed there's no drag any more?" 

Suddenly you realise he's right. The ship isn't decelerating 
at nearly such a rate now. There's only a very gentle hand 
against you. The rocket must be nearly down. You must 
be practically on the Moon ! 

" Hell!" Atah exclaims. 

He has got up off his mattress and gone across to the tiny 



tllE MOOH IS HftAVEN 



35 



radarscope. He is now peering into it, staring at the shimmering screen. 

You release yourself from the clamps and go across to 
him. The others, except Leeson, do the same and get there 
about the same time as you do. You are all in a huddle 
round Atah and the screen. 

"What iss wrong?" Clavier wants to know. " Sometlung bad?" 

Atah has a frown on his face for the first time since the 
trip began. That doesn't look so good. 

"Pretty bad," he answers, almost absently. "Pretty 
bad. We're dead above a mountain range. That meteor 
must have knocked us slightly off course. A tiny change 
would make a big difference at that distance." 

" But what does it mean, Atah?" Reina says, looking 
worried. " Is it really serious?" 

That brings Atah to full consciousness of his surroundings. 
" Well, we've just got to wait and see. It shouldn't be 
long now. Instead of landing on a plain, we're landing on 
a mountain range. A number of things may happen." 

He switches off the 'scope and sits down. You know he's 
trying to work out ways of avoiding things. You guess he 
hasn't got long. He looks across at Leeson, who hasn't said 
a word. 

" When do we touch down, Lee?" 

" Count twelve from now," Lee answers. " As soon as 
that. I'm sorry." 

" Nothing to be sorry about," Atah returns quickly. 
"You others, grab the mattresses. We're liable to get 
lhaken about a bit. Stay where you are until the ship is 
Completely at rest. Don't try any heroics. Just take it " 

There's no sense in his going on. A rasping noise comes 
from outside and the control room shudders and tilts. You're 
grasping your mattress so you don't fall away, but you can 
feel the room trying to throw you as if it were a mad horse, 
Or it were slap in the middle of an earthquake. 



36 



THE MOON IS HEAVEN 



The tilt angle changes, there come one or two thuds and 
then silence and : stillness. 

The first Earthmen have landed on the Moon ! 

After a short pause, Atah says: "Everybody all right?" 

Everybody says they are. Reina is off her mattress and 
standing impatiently by the door. 

" Come on!" she cries. " Let's go out and see the Moon!" 

" Hold it, Reina," Atah calls. " One or two things to 
be done first. You'll be out there quite a while soon." 

Atah goes over to a large cabinet and swings back the 
doors. Inside is a rack of spacesuits. Atah takes one and 
goes across to the other side of the room. 

" Dress up now, chaps. And test properly. You only 
make one mistake with these things — and we all have to pay 
for it. Don't take chances!" 

Schnabel spits out some coarse gutturals. You can see 
the tumble has upset him a bit, a blow to his dignity. 

" Vy' do we not put on the suit in zee air-lock? Vy dress 
up here?" , 

Atah is already nearly inside his. ' ' Because the air-lock 
may be damaged; the outer door, that is. And if so, and we 
opened the inner one — well, you know what would happen." 

" Very wise," says Clavier. 

Reina, much mollified, pulls on her own suit. 

You get into your suit and flex your legs and arms. It's 
not too bad. The woven plastic covering gives you a fair 
amount of freedom and the helmet could be worse. Although 
you can't move your head up and down, you can at least 
twist it sideways. 

The training you've had in the use of the thing comes back 
to you. You flick over the radio switch and listen. There's 
a bit of static but through it you can hear Atah Kark quite 
clearly. You glance around and see that everyone is now 
suited. 

" Right," says Atah. " Let's go." 

He opens the control room door and passes through. You 
all follow him. Down the ladder, past the empty fuel tank 



THE MOON IS HEAVEN 



37 



1o the air-lock. Atah waits until you are all around, then he 
turns the valves on the inner door. It swings open. 

Straightaway you can see how wise Atah was. Through 
the open inner door there is a vision of incredible lights and 
darks — where it should all be dark. 

" Looks as though we've had it," Atah's voice comes over 
the radio, " That outer door has taken a pretty stiff knock. 
Can you put it right, Schnabel?" 

The technologist pushes forward importantly and steps into 
the air-lock. He goes over to the damaged outer door and 
runs his gloves over it. He takes his time, while everyone 
stands impatiently waiting to get out and see the Moon. 

" Yes," he says at last. " Yes, I can do it. It vill take 
a time, of course. Several weeks— and a lot of help. But 
I can do it." 

Several weeks. That means Schnabel has got himself a 
nice soft job straight away. The air-lock is urgent. You 
Can't leave until it's done. So, while all the rest are putting 
up the dome and making the hydrogen, Schnabel will be 
tinkering with the door. 

" All right," says Atah. " Make it your first priority. 
Now let's get out of here!" 

You all crowd round the outer door and fiddle with the 
Valves. They are useless for their original purpose, but they 
it ill have to be undone before the door will swing open. 

At length, after a bit of swearing, you get the door open. 
As it swings back, you remember that Reina's radio was 
probably on, too, and she must have heard. Well, she 
wanted to come. 

And then you don't think about Reina any more. The 
landscape in front of you calls for every tiny morsel of your 
attention. The rocket appears to be lodged in a crevice 
about fifty feet above a wide plain that's brilliantly white. 
Across it, several miles away, there is another range of 
mountains, tall and jagged with great black chasms dotted 
about. 

And the sky! There were no windows on the rocket and 



38 THE MOON IS HEAVEN 

this is your first view of space without air. It's black. 
Blacker than anything you've ever seen. Blacker, it seems, 
than the absence of light has a right to be. And it's speckled 
with burning points, red, white, green and amber. Millions 
of them! 

Then you turn your head and see the Earth ! 

It looks pathetic, somehow, up there, hanging in the sky. 
A multicoloured circle with continents that look vaguely like 
the face of an unhappy baby, about to cry, not sure whether 
it should, or whether it even wants to. And you've come 
from there, all that way away. 

Everyone must be feeling the same way, because there's 
silence for a good few minutes while you all cluster on the 
white rock just outside the air-lock and stare at the bleak, 
cold, dead world. 

Then Atah doubles hack into the rocket and comes out 
again a few seconds later with the tiny radar transmitter. 
He places it on the ground, swings the aerial round to face 
Earth and taps out a few pulses. It is the prearranged signal. 
The first message ever to be received on Earth from outside 
sources. You can imagine them waiting for it on Earth. 
See it make the front pages. The signal they've been waiting for. 

" ARRIVED AND ALIVE." 

" Well," says Atah. " That's the drama over. Now to 
get cracking. We must get that dome up before we thought. 
There's no air left in the rocket and these suits will only keep 
us going a short time." 

Schnabel looks around and grunts. ' ' This is hardly the 
place for the dome, is it? Hadn't we better find a place 
first?" 

You yourself are already getting just a little tired of this 
surliness from Schnabel. God knows what it'll be like before 
the end of the trip. But Atah nods and agrees. You reckon 
he must have a pretty good respect for Schnabel's technical 
ability. 



THE MOON IS HEAVEN 



" Yes," Atah says. " Let's find the easiest way down to 
ihe plain." 

Leeson has thoughtfully brought a coii of rope with him, 
which is a good idea. Most people think that because the 
Moon's got a gravity so much less than Earth," you can 
skip and jump about like a fabulous mountain goat. But 
you can't. You can still slip and fall pretty deep distances. 
The fall might not be too bad, but its effect on your space 
suit would probably put an end to you. 

Even so, the lower gravity does make things easier. Leeson 
doesn't have to strain as he pays out the rope to Atah. He 
just stands at the top of the crevice while Atah scrambles 
over the rocks and plants his feet firmly on the ground. His 
muscles can quite simply take the reduced weight. 

Very soon Atah disappears from sight behind the rocks. 
Then, a few seconds later, he tells you over the radio that 
he's reached the plain. All come down, he says, but lower 
the equipment first. 

Leeson pulls the rope up again while you and Clavier 
run back to the rocket. Just as you are swinging open the 
equipment room door, Schnabel and Rcina turn up, too. 

" I can help," Reina says. " I can carry some stuff." 

She says it as if she's afraid you might stop her. 

" Sure you can," you say. " You'd better, too, if you 
want to earn your grub I Catch this ! ' ' 

You toss her a box of bolts. She fields it cleverly, gives 
you a grimace and walks back to the edge of the crevice. 
Schnabel is scrabbling about inside the equipment room. A 
few moments later, he comes out with a great load of stuff 
and when you try to take some from him, he grunts and 
brushes past. You must admit that if he works like this all 
the time, he'll be worth his weight and maybe a little of his 
nature. 

Then you grab an armful yourself and hike it back to 
Leeson. Clavier turns up with another load as you make 
your way back. In this way, very soon the whole of the 
equipment carried by the rocket gets piled up beside Leeson 



40 



THE MOON IS HEAVEN 



who is doing his best to disperse it down to the plain. You 
discover that Schnabel is going down with each load to guide 
it and then coming back for the next. You start to revise 
your ideas about him. 

It nearly comes to a fight when Clavier insists on giving 
Schnabel a rest, but things iron out in the end and the rest 
of the equipment gets carried down. Then you all follow 
it. Again Schnabel turns up trumps by making Leeson go 
down by rope, saying that he, Schnabel, has been up and 
down enough times now to know his way. Anyway he'll 
have to be up here quite a bit, working on the air-lock. 

You all assemble around Atah on the edge of the plain. 

" I think we ought to remain here," he says. " Partly 
to enable Schnabel to get up and down without a long walk 
to base. And partly because there's more likely to be snow 
in the crevices nearby than out on the plain!" 

" True," Clavier agrees. " True. And we will be wiser 
to drill here, too. This is where the reservoirs are likely to 
be, as you say." 

" Drill," says Atah, looking up at the sky. " We can't 
start that until the trailers arrive. They should be here soon. 
Let's get started on that dome. I hate these suits!" 



CHAPTER FIVE 



Beginnings 

The thin steel sheets that were housed close to the rocket's 
hull don't take long to set up. The fifteen of them are 
quickly assembled in the shape of. a hemisphere, the actual 
sealing up job done by Schnabel. You watch him as he 
cuts the groove for the base with a small oxywelder, the rock 
turning to a sluggish lava and then solidifying round the 
base of the steel sections as Clavier gently lowers them down. 
Making a nice, air-tight fit. The man knows his job all 
right. 

Then he climbs the rungs on each section and gets the 
Welder to work on the seams, sweeping it down in long, easy 
arcs, using up a couple of dozen rods to fill the cracks. 

While he does that, Clavier goes off and scrambles up the 
lower parts of the mountain. Soon he disappears down a 
Crack. He is looking for snow. Reina and Leeson arrange 
the oxygen bottles that'll give the dome its first atmosphere, 
""hey link them up with alitubing and connect a manometer 
: common duct that will be pushed into the dome. 
Atah Kark is busying himself with the rest of the equipment, 
Checking its efficiency, seeing if the jolt damaged it at all. 
You just make accurate notes of all that's going on. Partly 
r the sake of the archives and partly for those who come 
. There may not be anyone alive to tell them the story, 
r job is to make sure that every pitfall, every difficulty 
I recorded in full detail. Atah thinks that's essential. 

Suddenly Atah's voice comes over the radio. " Here's 
the first trailer ! ' ' 
You all swing round and fdlow his pointing hand. Way 
p in the sky there is a moving dot. It's the time-controlled 



4i 



42 THE MOON IS HEAVEN 

braking jet on the trailer rocket. Slowly, very slowly it drops 
lower and lower. There seems no doubt that it's going to 
land on the plain. 

And it does. There mast have been a superfluity of fuel 
for the jets continue to burn for a few seconds after the tail 
fins touch down. But before they are out, you and Reina 
are racing across the plain towards it. Atah crackles through 
to you again, his voice terribly near. 

" Don't run so fast! There's not all that much rush, and 
I don't want you to get heat stroke!" 

You both slow down and walk towards the trailer rocket 
at a fast pace. You're anxious to see what has turned up. 
Reina impulsively reaches out a hand towards the rung on a 
fin. You grab her arm and pull it back. Then you look 
sheepish. 

" Sorry," you say. " I thought it was hot. Forgot about 
the atmosphere not being nearly the same here." 

She gives you a satisfied grin through the window of her 
helmet and starts to say something. Then, as if remembering that everyone could hear it over the radio, she stops and 
turns back to the fin. In a second or two she is up by the 
release lever. She tugs at it and jumps clear. 

You both back away from the rocket and wait while the 
clockwork disruption mechanism works itself out. Then 
there's a silent disintegration before your eyes. Even though 
you've seen it many times hack on Earth when they were 
testing the trailers, you still find it intriguing the way the 
rocket just falls to pieces in a perfectly orderly manner, 
releasing its contents gently to the ground and turning itself 
into several pieces of useful metal and a perfect nuclear 
reactor. 

But just as you step forward, the ground shudders terrifically, and Atah's voice calls loudly over the radio, telling 
you to duck. Without waiting to see the cause of it all, you 
sweep out an arm and place it heavily behind Rcina's 
shoulders, bringing her down to the ground with you. You 
lie there, staring into the fine layer of Moon dust. 



THE MOON IS HEAVEN 43 

" Okay, you two," Atah says. " Up you get. Heck!" 

He sounds quite a bit put out and you wonder why. But 
as soon as you turn round to face the dome, you see why. 
On the harsh white surface of the plain there are several 
black and gleaming objects that weren't there before. 

" What's happened?" Reina wants to know. " What was 
that shudder?" 

You point to the bits and pieces. " Another trailer. Only 
this one didn't land the way it should. Looks like its load 
of equipment has gone under. Hope it wasn't essential." 

But even as you say it, you know that it must have 'been 
essential. Atah Kark would not load up a trailer with stuff 
that wasn't really needed. It's just a question of the degree 
of necessity. 

" Suppose it was the mining plant?" Reina asks in a low 
voice. 

You won't suppose that. You won't suppose that until 
it's no time for supposing any more. That mining plant is 

the key to return fuel. Without it No. No, you're not 

supposing that. 

" Let's get this equipment back," you say abruptly. 
" We'll find out soon enough what's gone." 

Stuff that would be unliftable on Earth is quite light as 
you both return with armfuls of it to the dome. You are 
carrying the nuclear reactor; Reina has the rest of the 
apparatus. Pretty important apparatus, too. It's going to 
supply you all with air by the electrolysis of snow or water. 
That's if Clavier does his stuff properly — and he'd better. 

Atah and Leeson are poking about in the wreckage of the 
second trailer as you' pass them on the way to the dome. 
You call out to them, forgetting for the moment that your 
voice will go over the radio. 

" What's the score? Anything serious?" 

Atah doesn't look up. He is scrabbling intently among the 
bits and pieces, picking up odds and ends. Leeson looks 
over at you and shakes his head inside his helmet. 

" All depends on your viewpoint. It's not survival stuff 



44 



THE MOON IS HEAVEN 



we've lost, but Atah's surveying kit. He may not be able 
to tap resources so well." 

Well, you think. That's bad for Atah, but it could be a 
lot worse for everybody. You aren't going to worry about 
it. 

Hugging the reactor safely against your chest, you walk on 
to the dome. There are things you'd like to say to Reina, 
but the thought of the others hearing stops you. At the 
dome, you see that Clavier has turned up again and is at 
work on the oxygen supply equipment. He looks up as your 
jet black shadow falls across him. 

" You are the most untransparent man I have ever seen," 
he says good humouredly. " Kindly step aside if you wish 
to continue breathing — Ah, what have you there? The 
apparatus for electrolysis? Bien\ Now I can work. I have 
found a big, big — how you say? — deposit of snow. We will 
have plenty of air." 

That at least is something, you think. Air and food will 
keep you going, even if it's not very pleasant. You should 
be able to last out until Schnabel gets that lock fixed. 

The technologist has already welded the alitubing into the 
base of the dome. Now Clavier carefully unscrews the valve 
that releases oxygen from the bottles. The mercury in the 
manometer slowly drops as the vacuum inside the dome 
begins to fade away. It's becoming livable inside there. 

Pretty soon, everyone is standing around watching the 
oozing of the oxygen into the dome, watching the mercury 
drop until there is no vacuum at all, but a positive pressure. 
Then Clavier cuts off the supply. Reina steps towards the 
air-lock in the side of the dome and starts to open it. Clavier 
calls her. 

" Not yet, Mademoiselle Reina, please! There may be a 
leak of some size." He turns to Schnabel. " Not that I 
doubt your work, my friend, but we cannot take chances, 
eh?" 

The technologist nods without answering. You can see 
he's confident that there won't be a leak. And he's right. 



THE MOON IS HEAVEN 45 

As you aJl stand and watch, the level of the mercury stays 
the same. There are no leaks. No appreciable leaks, that 
is. And it's only appreciable leaks that count. 

" Ators\" says Clavier. "You can go in now, Reina." 

Schnabel has made just as good a job of the air-lock as 
he has of the welding. It functions perfectly. Only large 
enough to hold two at a time, it is absolutely air-tight and 
safe. The door to comfort and security. 

Reina and Schnabel go through, followed by Leeson and 
Clavier. Then you and Atah step inside and fasten the 
outer door. 

Inside the dome the others have already removed their 
suits and are looking flushed with excitement and exertion. 
Reina looks marvellous. You take your own suit off and 
feel a new springiness in your step come with the freedom. 

Reina had already placed certain things on the site before 
the dome was put up. Now she starts to make good use 
of them by preparing a cup of tea. A great shout of approval 
goes up, from Atah as well. 

You must admit, the scene looks quite cosy. Light comes 
from the lamps attached to the space suits, which have been 
laid around the floor. Later on there will ,bc a single ceiling 
lamp fitted. Six bunks are arranged round the circular wall. 
At the moment they are just rude supports, but soon the. 
mattresses from the control room will be brought down. They 
should make for a good night's sleep. 

In the centre of the room is a. small nuclear heater, its 
temperature level controlled by cadmium rods, on which 
Reina made the tea. It will have the second function of 
keeping the dome warm during the long lunar night. You 
remember that Atah chose it because it's the only form of 
heater that doesn't consume air. For air will not be all that 
plentiful. 

Next to the heater stands a cabinet that houses Reiha's 
domestic utensils — the bare essentials for eating and drinking. 
There won't be any washing on this trip. No shaving either. 
You reckon the men are going to look pretty grim by the 



46 THE MOON IS HEAVEN 

time its over. Anyway, the Moon is at least devoid of parasitic fauna ! 

You all sit round on the bunks, sipping tea. Atah outlines the routine. 

" We'll work by Earth time, of course. It's the only 
sensible thing to do. That London Circle chronometer will 
keep accurate if it's wound up regularly. Quite an 
anachronism, really! You'll see to the winding, Reina, will 
you? " 

Everyone laughs about the anachronism. Reina nods. 
" Sure. I'll mark oif the days, too. Earth days and lunar 
days." 

" Good," Atah nods. " The next thing is to get the electrolysis working. What d'you need there, Clavier?" 

Clavier raises his eyebrows and spreads his hands, coming 
perilously near to spilling the tea. " Help," he says. " Lots 
of help for moving the snow. I shall need a great deal of 
snow and the — the deposit I have found will not last very 
long." 

" You want us to dig for water?" Atah asks. 

" That would be marvellous. If we can find a reservoir, 
our troubles will be greatly simplified, but greatly!" 

Atah glances across at Schnabel. "What about that? 
When can you start, Schnabel?" 

The technologist shrugs. " Straight away, if you wish. 
But there is the air-lock. I cannot do both. Wc cannot leave 
here until the air-lock is repaired. Suit yourself." 

Atah frowns a little, then chases it away with an effort. 
" How about showing Leeson and Mike how to use the drill? 
Then you can work mainly on the air-lock and just supervise 
the mining. Would that be all right? " 

Schnabel grunts. " If they can learn, I can teach." 

" Take it as read, then. Now, Clavier, you know you've 
got to collect the hydrogen from the electrolysis. It's got to 
be compressed and liquified. Can you handle that?" 

" Oh, yes," Clavier responds. " I have a compressor on 



THE Moon is hSaveN 



47 



Hie third trailer rocket. '1 shall pump the hydrogen straight 
into the fuel tank up there in the main rocket." 

" Can you do all that without help?" 

Reina jumps in. " I can help with that. I shan't'be cooking ail day!" 

Clavier smiles. " Delighted, mademoiselle." 

" Well," Atah says, standing up. " That takes care of 
things for now. Let's get going, shall we?" 

Most everyone has finished drinking tea. Yon all climb 
into space suits again and troop through the air-lock. Out 
on the plain the last two trailer rockets have arrived, intact. 

"Thank God for that!" Atah breathes over the radio. 
" There's your compressor, Clavier. And Schnabcl's mining 
stuff. You two get cracking, eh? Mike, Leeson and I will 
bring the stuff down from the control room. Reina can be 
attached to Clavier." 

Like heck, she can, you think. You've got your own 
ideas who she's going to be attached to. 

Clavier and Schnabel go off across the plain towards the 
trailers, while Reina starts rigging the electrolysis apparatus. 
She seems to know what she's doing. 

You follow Atah and Leeson up the rocks towards the 
ship, which is standing more or less on its tail, but with a 
pronounced list, about fifty feet up the slope, in a shallow 
crevice. 

Climbing is fairly easy, even in the suits. It's almost 
exhilarating to be able to propel yourself upwards by a hefty 
shove of the hand. But you take care not to catch the suit 
on one of the jagged points. The woven plastic is tough but 
you can't ask too much of it— and momentum has the same 
value of mass times velocity here as it has on Earth. 

The ladder presents less difficulty going up than it did 
coming down. You manage to get through the outer door of 
the air-lock quite easily. Then, up to the control room. 

" Throw the mattresses down," Atah instructs you. 
" There's no need to carry them. I'll bring the chronometer." 

You bet he will ! While you and Leeson drag the mat


48 



the Moon is heaven 



tresses to the door and tip them out down to the air-lock, 
Atah carefully unscrews the chronometer from the wall and 
carries it gingerly over to the door. He's not taking any 
chances with his present from the London Circle. 

Leeson and you climb down the ladder past the fuel tank. 
You both do it quickly, getting used to the one-sixth gravity. 
But, looking back, you see Atah coming down a rung at a 
time, one hand steadying the chronometer, which he has 
strapped to his chest anyway. 

You glance at Leeson and smile. He smiles back. You 
both understand Atah. 

Getting the mattresses through the damaged air-lock is a 
bit difficult but you finally manage it. Then there's the slow 
climb down the rock with them. At length you get them 
over to the dome, but Clavier won't let you go in. It appears 
he has let the air out. You ask why the blazes he did that 
and he tells you." 

" A brainwave, Mike. A veritable brainwave. Why, I 
say to myself, why make zee oxygen out here and pump it 
into the dome, when I can release it in there immediately? 
It would be foolish, my friend." 

He shakes his head and says it as if it had been your idea 
from the start. Apparently he let the air out by getting 
Schnabel to weld a pipe through the wall. This pipe leads to 
a tank outside which will be filled with snow. Inside the 
dome, the pipe will drip water into a smaller tank in which 
the anode will be lodged, run through the present oxygen 
alitube. „ 

Another pipe from the outside tank will lead straight from 
the compressor, where the cathode will give off hydrogeH. As 
Clavier said, a veritable brainwave! Just 30 long as the 
compressor and the two tanks remain in electrical contact. 
But Clavier probably knows how to deal with that. 

" Fetch some snow," he says. " Fetch lots of snow. We 
must start electrolysis as soon as possible." 

Leeson looks at you and grins. " No snowball fights," he 
says. " This is seriousl" 



TBI MOON 15 HEAVEN 49 

You leave Clavier and Reina fiddling with the tanks and 
things, and get yourselves each a bag from the pile of equipment. They are roomy and tough, but lighter than most 
feathers. 

Atah catches sight of you. " Hi !" he calls. " My bags! 
What are you doing with my specimen bags?" 

Leeson waves to him and drawls out the answer. " Collecting snow ! As Schnabel would say : air or specimens, suit 
yourself I" 

A jumble of voices comes over the radio. Atah's and 
Schnabel's. The technologist is saying something about sarcasm, Atah is giving you the green light. You make the 
jumble worse by laughing into your mike and swing away 
towards the rocks. 

The radio clears and Clavier chimes in with directions. 
" Right down the gap where the ship is. Then turn right. 
The snow is a few dozens of feet away. Bring a lot of it!" 

Simplest thing in the world, you think. Dive down a' 
canyon and haul out half-a-hundredweight of snow. Easy. , 
However, it's got to be done. 

Anyway, at the edge of the crevice you find it's not going 
to be so bad getting down. The sides of the canyon are very 
rough, full of footholds. Leeson goes down first, switching 
on his suit-lamp. It's uncanny how no beam appears. Just 
a circle of light on the walls. You know that's because there's 
no air with dust particles to disperse the light, but it's still 
uncanny. 

You have your own lamp on and see that Leeson has 
reached the bottom. Immediately, the beams become visible, 
glancing off the dust particles his feet stir up on the ground. 
Particles that settle so slowly. 

" Here it is," Leeson exclaims. " Here's the snow!" 

He has been working his way ahead along the canyon, 
avoiding the smaller crevices leading down out of this one, 
and now his lamp shines on a patch of scintillating whiteness. 

Impulsively he steps forward on to it — and immediately 
sinks from view. 



CHAPTER SIX 



Survey 

For a moment you don't believe it. It's incredible the way 
he just disappear^ from view in a couple of seconds. 

Then you decide that Leeson needs your attention. 
" What's happened?" you ask into the mike. 

" What's happened?" Leeson mimics. " He sees a man 
fall into a snow pit and he asks what's happened. Holy 
mackerel ! " 

Then follows some more epithets on snow, the Moon and 
reporters at large. While it's going on, you lie down flat and 
feel your way carefully forward. At one point your hand 
plunges down and touches something hard that's vibrating. 
Leeson's helmet! 

" All right," you say to him. " Stop beefing and reach 
a hand up here. I'll pull you out." 

His language slackens as he does so. You grasp his hand 
and heave, thinking it's a good job he had his helmet on 
with its oxygen supply. By now he'd probably be drowned 
or something. He comes out easily enough, his weight being 
only one-sixth normal, whereas your muscle power is the 
same as on Earth. 

Very soon his natural good humour comes hack and he's 
laughing. "After which little interlude," he says, "let's 
go gather snow— with care!" 

You do that. You both fill your bags with the stuff, which 
is very finely divided, almost like a powder. Then you get 
back up the crevice with them, a task that's not at all simple 
and one that raises your temperature considerably above the 
flow level of your suit's insulation. Sweat starts running off 
you. 



5° 



THE MOON IS HEAVEN 51 

Back at the dome. Clavier and Reina have rigged the setup for electrolysis. " Tip it in the tank," Clavier instructs. 
" We will start up straight away." 

The others cluster round to watch the establishment of the 
process that is going to give them breath — and hydrogen for 
the return. 

" What' 11 the capacity be?" Atah asks. • 

" If it works as it should," Clavier replies. " One tonne 
of oxygen and one-eighth tonne of hydrogen per hour. Maybe 
a little less,." 

Atah does a bit of mental calculation. " That means it'll 
take us 4,800 hours at the least to get 600 tonnes of hydrogen. 
That's thirty weeks. We'd better find that reservoir!" 

Reina chips in with a bit of domesticity. " We've food 
enough for that length of time, but in case anything goes 
wrong I suggest we start a rationing scheme. Use it wisely, 
in other words." 

~" Everything's got to be used wisely," Atah returns. 
" But I'm sure you can do that, Reina. Work it out yourself." 

Clavier gives out an exclamation. " Start the compressor, 
Reina. At once!" He turns to the rest of you. "See! It 
works. See the mercury falling in the manometer. The dome 
is filling 1" 

Leeson appears to be struck by a sudden thought. " What 
about the carbon dioxide formed by our breathing? What 
happens to that?" 

Clavier lays a gloved hand gently on the pilot's shoulder. 
" Taken care of, my friend. Both the carbon dioxide and 
the water from our breaths will be sucked out by my separator. The water will be run back for electrolysis and the 
carbon dioxide will be liquefied and stored. Later, for others 
maybe, it will be useful for making organic compounds." 

The pilot raises his eyebrows in admiration. Atah smiles 
slowly. Schnabel grunts. The technologist has been standing 
by impatiently, obviously niffed at losing the limelight to 



52 



tflE MOOiJ IS HEAVEN 



Clavier. He feels, you reckon, that his is the most important 
work to be done. 

, Apart from that, the scene is peaceful. Almost like a 
research station on Earth. People standing around in listlessly interested attitudes watching a process at work. The 
sun's rays melting the snow in the tank, so that a constant 
stream of water runs through to the anode in the dome. The 
uncannily silenj: piston stroke of the compressor, ramming 
down the hydrogen from the cathode, turning it into a liquid. 
And above it all, the unmoving, unmoved terrain that has 
stood there changeless for centuries, eons. For a moment it 
strikes you as wrong that man should come and set up his 
domes and compressors and things. Disturb the peace, dig 
into the rocks, electrolyse the snow. But that's sheer sentimentality, and there's no room in the modern world for that. 
You stop thinking of that. 

" Well," Schnabel grunts. " Are we going to do some 
mining now that we have seen the miraculous electrolyse! 
at work? I would like to start on the air-lock immediately." 

Atah frowns and Clavier represses a comment with a firm 
effort. 'Reina unashamedly turns up her nose (as far as she 
can within a space helmet) and walks away towards the compressor. Leeson's jaws are champing drily inside his helmet. 
No one seems to like Schnabel. But then, he probably 
doesn't like himself. 

"I think it's time for a rest," Atah says. "We've 
accomplished quite a bit already, and we don't want to tire 
ourselves. I think we'll go into the dome and get some 
sleep. That is, if you think the air supply is safe, Clavier?" 

The chemist shrugs elaborately and lifts his eyebrows. " I 
cannot be certain, of course. But at least / am prepared to 
come in with you! Such is my faith in the apparatus." 

" Good enough," Atah smiles. " How about you others?"
Everyone but Schnabel agrees that a rest would be a good 
thing right now. The technologist may be afraid of the electrolysis apparatus, or he may just want to make himself 



T HE MOON IS HEAVEN 53 

out different. Whatever it is, he announces that he has no 
need of a rest, that important things need doing, and that he 
intends to go up and make a start on the air-lock — if Atah 
doesn't mind, of course! 

" Not at all, Schnabel," Atah says. " I'm glad you can 
keep going. But don't knock yourself up, will you. We'll 
be needing you quite a bit later on, you know." 

Schnabel smiles, if you can call it that. " I know. But I 
shall not knock myself up, as you say. I will ibe fitter than 
all of you at the end." 

And he walks away towards his equipment. Reina, who 
came back from the compressor just in time to hear the last 
few remarks, hisses inside her helmet. " Oh, the beast. The 
horrible, arrogant beast!" 

Then she turns away and makes for the dome's air-lock. 
She can't have realised what everybody else has realised — 
that Schnabel must have heard every word she said. But 
the technologist gives no sign of having heard. He collects 
up his gear and moves off towards the rocks. 

Atah follows him for a moment with his eyes, serious, 
troubled eyes. 

" Well, let's go inside," he says. " A bit of sleep will do 
us good." 

After.a while, you wake up. At first it's the old stuff; 
you don't know where you are. But that doesn't last for 
long. You pretty soon realise that you're up on the Moon, 
separated from the vacuum of space by a few millimetres of 
steel. You remember, too, that you are dependent for breath 
on that bubbling contraption over in one corner. If the 
current should fail. . . . 

But it's not as bad as that, really. You've all got spare 
oxygen bottles for the space suits, that would last long enough 
for the electrolysis apparatus to be repaired. 

You lie there thinking about things like that. And thinking about Reina. You start to wonder why she really wanted 



54 THE MOON IS HEAVEN 

to come, deep down inside herself. But that line of thought 
comes near to hurting at times, so you drop it. 

Instead you think that she'd better calm down a bit or 
else leam to shut her radio off when she wants to let fly. 
You reckon a man like Schnabel doesn't react at all well to 
being called an arrogant beast. Even if he is one. 

But is he? That's a problem you've been trying to solve 
for years, with Schnabel and other people. Right now he's 
up there, working on the ship. Trying to get the air-lock 
repaired so that everybody will leave safely. He's wrestling 
with steel and rivets while you just lie and stare at the dim 
ceiling. Can a man who does that be arrogant? 

But you still don't get a chance to work it out, because 
you hear a noise and look up to see that Atah is getting 
off his mattress. You don't respond for a moment. You just 
lie there and watch him. 

Fully dressed like everybody else, he stands there for a 
moment rubbing his chin. The stubble is beginning to make 
itself felt. Then he jerks the hand up and sweeps his untidy 
forelock back into place somewhere on the top of his head. 
He stoops and picks up his helmet. Time to speak, you 
reckon. 

" Going out, Atah?" you say in a low voice so's not to 
wake the others. 

"Yes," he replies, fingering the helmet. " IVe had 
enough sleep. Thought I'd make a short survey. Get a little 
farther afield." 

He stops, still fingering the helmet. Suddenly you catch 
on. He'd like someone to go with him. Not because he's 
frightened or anything like that. You know why he wants 
someone else. A witness. So that if he comes across something incredible, there'll be someone to bear him out. 
Scientific confirmation, he'd probably cail it. 

" Mind if I come with you?" you ask. " I won't get in 
the way. Besides, I ought to come along so's to write it up 
later," 



THE MOON 13 HEAVEN 55 

" That' d be fine," Atah smiles. " Get your helmet on 
then." 

As you swing down off the mattress, another figure looms 
up in the dimness. It's Reina. 

" I'm coming, too," she says. " I want to see the Moon!" 

Atah chuckles. " All right. Come if you will. But it's 
not going to be a luxury tour." 

You laugh, and the laughter disturbs another sleeper. 
Leeson. He sits up with a jerk and stares around. He yawns 
and flops back on his mattress. Then he jerks up again suddenly and swings himself down. 

" Where's everybody going without me?" he asks, stifling 
another yawn. " You wouldn't be doing the shanghai trick, 
would you? Leaving me here just because I fell into a snow 
pit!" 

«. " Okay, okay," Atah says. " Let everybody come! Why 
not wake Clavier and let out a yell for Schnabel? Then we 
could all push off and leave the dome unattended!" 

He reaches down for his helmet and has it on before anybody else. You reach for your own and pull it on. Then 
you catch sight of the sleeping chemist. 

" What about Clavier?" you ask Atah. " Do we let him 
sleep?" 

Atah nods. "Yes. He probably needs it, being an 
emotional type. And anyway there ought to be someone here 
to keep an eye on the electrolysis gear." 

Reina giggles into the radio. " Fat lot of eye-keeping he's 
going to do." 

" He'll wake if anything goes wrong," Atah says. " These 
chemists have an instinct! Let's get going anyway." 

After checking your suits, Atah and Leeson step into the 
air-lock. You wait with Reina while they pass through. 
There are one or two things you'd like to say to her, but 
there's only the radio and what you want to say wouldn't 
apply to Leeson and Atah. When the all-clear buzz sounds, 
you open the inner door and wave Reina into the lock. You, 



56 THE MOON IS HEAVEN 

step in yourself, close the inner door and open the outer one. 
Once more you are out on the dead, cold Moon. 

Aran, has already grabbed himself a bag and a hammer. 
He's striding off across the plain with Leeson close behind. 
You give Reina a shove and walk fast to catch up. 

"Wonder how friend Schnabel is getting on," Leeson 
says. 

Atah sends him a swift look, then looks away. You nudge 
Leeson and point to the radio antenna on your helmet. 
Leeson nods, remembering that if Schnabel has his radio on 
he can hear all you say. 

" Making a good job of it, I reckon," Leeson adds, giving 
you a broad grin. " That guy sure knows his stuff." 

You reckon it's time to change the subject. " Looking 
for anything in particular, Atah?" you ask. " Or is this a 
general survey?" 

Atah doesn't slacken his stride. " Well, it's general in a 
way. We've got to collect data and then classify it. But I 
want to keep my eye open for sedimentary rocks. This 
atmosphere is attenuated all right, but there's a slim chance 
that a bit of weathering took place in the past. It'd be fine 
evidence to come across sedimentary." 

He's probably right. You wouldn't know, although you 
get the general idea of it. The Moon was formed from cooling 
gases that turned into rock, igneous rock. And when igneous 
rock is weathered, it becomes sedimentary rock. That much 
comes back to you from high school days. It's all you need 
to know. 

The pace you're all making would be fantastic on Earth. 
Here the lesser gravity lets your muscles do amazing things. 
Even Reina is taking six-foot strides. Within a few minutes 
you are nearly across the plain. 

You glance around. Under your feet the rock is grey 
with occasional bright streaks that lead away into the distance 
behind you. The greyness is caused by innumerable tiny 
pits, diminutive replicas of the craters. Every now and then, 
Atah bends down and peers into one of the larger pits. Some


tHl MOON IS HEAVEN 



57 



times he takes a slam at it with his hammer, picks up some 
of the resulting fragments ant! pops them in his bag. The 
whole thing looks like a Nature ramble. 

Above you the sky is jet black and peppered with eyes 
that stare at you boldly, unwinking, as if asking - what are 
you doing here. You stare back at them and tell them silently 
that you've as much right to be there as they have, since 
you are part of the same scheme as they are and are following 
through your destiny just as they are. Then you think this 
is getting a bit too theatrical and turn away. 

The Earth is still up there, only with a different face now. 
It's been turning all the while you were asleep. Rolling 
round just the way it's been doing for millions of years. 
That's the theme of it, the thing that gets you. Once, long 
ago when you went down to Cornwall for a holiday and 
stood in a cave at the foot of the towering cliffs, you felt how 
long these rocks had stood there, unchanged, unchanging 
while men went about their silly tasks and troubles. 

It's the same up here only more so. More dramatic, more 
overpowering. All this is bigger than the Cornish cliffs. 
Older, too, probably. And all that time, it's been looking 
down on the turning Earth, remote and lifeless while nations 
and cultures rose and fell. 

Until a few men looked up at its pale radiance and let 
an idea take fire within them. Until they'd thought and 
worked and badgered people and raised money and worked 
more and thought more and finally worked it out and made 
the thing that would take them up and let them down in the 
midst of that radiance that wasn't pale any more. From now 
on, you think, irrevocably, the face of the Moon will be 
changed. Its own changes will look down on the changes 
below and it will be left to Mars or Mercury to keep the 
changeless vigil. And in time, of course, their tum would 
come. Until at last the very outermost planet would come 
under man's reaching hand. 

And so on. Beyond the Solar System. Beyond the 'Galaxy. 
Out to the place where Einstein says space curves back on 



58 



THE MOON IS HEAVEN 



itself. And then — and then — but you can't take it from 
there. You want an Einstein for that. 

Suddenly you realise that Reina is talking to you. You'd 
been walking along, staring up at Earth, round at the 
mountains, the plains, the crater rings, and you'd not been 
taking in the stuff coming over the radio. You hadn't, in 
fact, noticed that Atah and Leeson have turned back towards 
the dome. 

" I said are you going -to walk all round the Moon?" 
Reina repeats. " Because if that's your idea, you can do it 
alone ! ' ' 

You laugh and turn back with her, hurrying to catch up 
with the others. You remain silent, still thinking the great 
thoughts about eternity and such like. It's all so big! 

Back at the dome, you all go through the air-lock. You 
and Reina go in last. When you get inside you find Atah 
and Leeson staring down at Schnabel. He is on the floor 
and there's a thin trickle of blood running from his head. 



CHAPTER SEVEN 



Rebellion 

On the face of it, things don't look so good, you tell yourself. You glance at Reina to see how she's taking the sight 
of it. Quite well. She immediately drops on one knee and 
lifts Schnabel's head. Quite the wrong thing to do, medically, but it shows the right spirit all the same. 

" He's alive," she says over the radio. No one has taken 
his suit off yet. 

"Thank God for that," Arab breathes. "What happened, d'you suppose?" 

Leeson grunts. " Clavier don't seem to be around. Noi 
his suit. Reckon they didn't see eye to eye about something 
or other." 

That's about the size of it, you think. Schnabel must have 
come back and started something with Clavier.* The excitable chemist no doubt retaliated as no' gentleman should 
— unless he's dealing with someone who isn't a gentleman. 

Atah has got his helmet off and is kneeling by Reina. He 
stretches out a hand and touches Schnabel's forehead gently. 

" Not too bad," he says. " It'll take some precious water 
to clean it up, but that can't be helped. This is a bad 
business. Not the cut on his head. The whole position, I 
mean. We can't have private wars and do our jobs 
properly. ' ' 

His voice has an odd kind of ring to it, coming through 
your helmet, as though he's a long way away and weak and 
trembly. Leeson slips his helmet off and goes over to the 
water canister. He dips a cup into it and fetches it back. 
All three of them get to work on Schnabel. You don't know 
what to do. 



59 



60 THE MOON IS HEAVEN ' 

Then it comes to you. Somebody's got to do it. You might 
as well. 

You edge over to the air-lock and quietly open the inner 
door. They don't look up as you go in and close the door 
behind you. Within seconds you are out of the dome again. 

Bending down and searching the ground carefully, you 
find what you are after. Something that you might have 
seen on the way back from the survey if you hadn't been 
so engrossed with philosophy. Near the door the moon dust 
has been disturbed; A lot of it is just chaotic scrabblings 
where everybody's feet have been, but there is one track 
leading out of the mess that leads in a new direction. Up to 
the rocks, but not towards the space ship. You follow it. 

It's only when you come to the base of the rocks that you 
realise it is not going to be as simple as you thought. The 
trail just peters out and for the life of you, you don't know 
where to go. 

So you sit down and think it out. You put yourself in 
Clavier's position. -Try to be Clavier. What is a chap like 
that likely to do? He's upset, naturally, with the business 
of hitting Schnabel. And at being insulted. But the 
dominant idea in his mind will be that he's let the side down, 
or whatever the Continental equivalent of " not cricket " is. 
In that case, he's likely just to go on walking, moving away 
from the dome and the ship. Not really knowing what he's 
doing or where he's going. 

And men who do that usually move in a straight line, or 
pretty nearly. It's only when a person is trying to go straight 
that they get off trail. 

So you get up and start climbing, not worrying about 
whether you are on course, just moving forward and up, 
hand over hand, foot after foot. It's quite pleasant in a 
way. You realise you must have a mountain-climbing streak 
in your nature. Something that you'd never discovered before. You had to come all the way to the Moon to find out. 

But then after a bit, it isn't so pleasant. You are getting 



TSs teooti ts HSAVSN 61 

quite high up and the exertion is telling on you. You begin 
to wish that you'd let Clavier find his own way back. 

And then you see him. Obviously he's found the climb 
a bit arduous, too. He's sitting dejectedly on a. stump of 
rock with his helmet in his hands, the nearest he can get to 
cupping his chin, you suppose. 

You come up behind him and while still some distance 
away you speak to him. 

" Hullo, Clavier. Having a quiet think?" 

He spins round as if you've threatened to clout him with a 
rock. Then he jumps to his feet, sails a couple of feet 
into the air and lands in a sprawling position that can't be 
doing any good to his dignity. He stands up and faces you. 

" Why did you come after me? I will not go back. Not 
even for you, Mike, will I go back!" 

" Take it easy," you say. " If you don't want to go 
back, then don't. Why should I worry?" 

He slumps down again and looks up at you. " I'm sorry, 
Mike. My nerves, you know, they are not so well. That pig 
of a Schnabel " 

He suddenly stops and you know what's going through his 
mind. " It's ali right, Clavier," you tell him. " They can't 
hear you. Everyone's in the dome, with their helmets off." 

" All right, then. That pig of a Schnabel, he comes down 
soon after you leave — oh, yes, I saw you go. 1 was not 
asleep ! He comes down and he starts on me as soon as he 
enters the dome. First the air is stuffy. It is not good air. 
There is not enough of oxygen and too much of carbon 
dioxide. Then the apparatus— my apparatus is not working 
properly. Not efficient. It needs a technologist." 

Clavier is working himself up again. You try to calm 
him down but it doesn't do much good. 

" He goes over to jny apparatus," he goes on. " I tell 
him not to touch it. He touches it. He tries to alter the 
settings. I get up and go over to him, trying to convince 
him, Mike, that 1 know the best settings — after all, it is the 
problem I have studied most of all. Then he insults me. 



62 



THE MOON IS HEAVKW 



Says I am not a good chemist, not a chemist at all. That 
the trip would have been better without me. Mike, I could 
not help myself. I strike him. Hard. He falls to the ground. 
I come away and climb the rocks. Now I think that perhaps 
he was right. The trip may have been better without me." 

" Tripe," you say. "' Utter tripe. God, man, what the 
devil would we do for air if you weren't here? You don't 
think that fool of a technologist could do it, do you? Be a 
little realistic. Clavier. And don't let him get at you. That's 
what he's after. To get you annoyed. Don't let him." 

Clavier chuckles, and it does you good to hear it. " Whatever he was after, he got something else!", 

" Sure he did, and serve him right but — I wouldn't do it 
again unless it's really necessary. It takes a lot of water to 
bathe his wounds!" 

Clavier jumps up. " Water! My water! They are using 
my water to wash that pig of a Schnabel?" 

" Now calm down. Clavier. What else should they do? 
Let him bleed to death or get impetigo or something?" 

Clavier stares at you with round eyes. " Impetigo? Could 
he really get that, Mike? Just from a little cut like that?" 

Crazy as it is, this seems to be the way to handle it. " You 
never know, Clavier. Little cuts lead to serious things sometimes. Impetigo, asthma, pyorrhoea — anything." 

He claps your shoulder with a heavy glove. " Mike, I will 
do it no more. It is too serious 1" 

" Okay, then. Let's get back. I'd like some food. How 
about you? " 

I'm starving," he admits. 

You lead him back down the rocks to the plain. Then 
across the plain to the dome. You hope everything's going 
to be all right. Schnabel might want to get a bit of return 
for that cut head. 

But once inside the dome, you see that it isn't so. Whereas 
the other three arc standing around sipping tea and munching food, the technologist is sitting by himself in a comer. 



THE MOON IS HEAVErf 



63 



back to everybody, reading. Although he must know who it 
is coining in, he doesn't look up. 

" Don't provoke him," you say to Clavier before he gets 
his helmet off. "Just ignore him. Have some tea and 
tucker." 

Clavier sends Schnabel one short glance and then does as 
you say. Reina has already poured out two more cups and 
arrange more sandwiches on a plate. You're pleased you've 
been able to bring some bread up in air-tight containers; 
bread that's been sterilised by electron bolts. 

You lay your own helmet down on the floor and tuck into 
the sandwiches. The tea is hot and strong, just the way you 
like it. Maybe it was a good idea bringing Reina— apart 
from her just being Reina. 

" We'll have a better meal soon," she says. " As soon as 
everything's organised. I hope you'll all be prepared to eat 
three meals a day at set times. That'll help the rationing 
scheme and divide the day for us." 

" So," says Leeson, with a sly glance at Reina. " So, 
we're going to have a woman nagging us, even on the 
Moon ! ' ' 

Reina turns her nose up at him and calls -across to the 
reading Schnabel. 

" Would you like some tea? And some sandwiches, 
Schnabel?" 

The man's head shakes twice. " No, thank you." 
" You'll be hungry soon, and then there won't be any 
left." 

" No, thank you!" 

Reina gives up. She looks at the rest of you and shrugs. 
She begins to clear away. Atah looks across to Schnabel and 
coughs. 

" When d'you intend to get back to the air-lock, 
Schnabel? That's your priority number one. And you ought 
to start teaching these others to use the mining apparatus." 

Everyone except Atah looks deep into their teacups, or 
suddenly finds something of absorbing interest in their sand


64 THE kOON iS HEAVtjj 

wiches. You know this isn't going to be nice- — especially for 
Atari. 

Schnabel grunts and answers without looking up, " I 
work on the air-lock no more. Such treatment as I get here 
does not please me. They can learn about mining themselves. I am staying here." 

" You'll be here a long time, Schnabel," Atah points out. 
" None of us can leave here until that lock is repaired." 

" I know that. Perhaps, later, I will decide to do it. Not 
now. I wish to read." 

" There's not a lot of time," Atah explains. " It's a long 
job." j 

■ '.' Do it yourselves, then," Schnabel snaps. "No one is 
stopping you. You can repair it and dig as much as yon 
wish. My equipment is at your disposal." 

Atah remains silent for a moment. You sneak a quick 
glance across and see that Schnabel has not moved. He still 
has his back to the company. You look at the others. Reiria 
is fuming inwardly. So is Leeson. Clavier is at least preserving an exterior of other-worldliness. 

" Very well, we will do that," Atah says at last. He 
swings round. " Will you three give me a hand? Reina'd 
better stay here and watch the electrolysis gear. You know 
how to work it?" 

" Sure I do," Reina replies. " But I'd rather come with 
you." She sends a meaning glance towards Schnabel. 

" I know. But here's where you must give way to men," 
Atah says gently. " I don't think you'd be as useful as the 
others." 

" All right. But I think we ought to take shifts." 

" Maybe we'll do that later. For the moment we must get 
all the heavy work done. Let's go." 

The four of you climb into your suits. It seems to you 
that you've done nothing but climb into and out of space 
suits ever since you landed on the Moon. And this won't be 
the last time, you reckon. 

As you go through the air-lock, Reina glances regretfully 



THE MOON IS HEAVEN 



65 



at the suit on her bunk, shrugs and turns away. You're glad 
she's able to see reason. So many women you've known 
aren't like that. 

Outside the dome you go over Schnabel's equipment. He 
seems to have left a good deal of it up by the rocket. But 
the small reactor from the second trailer rocket is still here. 

"That reactor had better be taken up," Atah says. 
" We'll be needing power." 

You and Leeson grab the nuclear reactor and start up the 
rocks with it, followed by Atah and Clavier bearing the 
smaller items. It's not so easy getting the reactor up the 
rock-face, but herculean effort on Leeson' s part helps a lot. 
After a good deal of mild cursing you arrive at the ship with 
it. 

" Good show," Atah commends. " That's a big job done. 
Doesn't look much, perhaps, but power is essential and 
vou've supplied it." 

Okay, you think, okay. Now let's get cracking on that 
door. Closer examination shows that a jagged rock point 
must have clouted the air-lock because there's a sharp indentation in the outer door. Then it must have taken a whack 
from a blunt prominence which buckled the whole thing, 
ripped it in places and tore it away from the valves. To 
you, it looks hopeless. Not so to Atah. 

He stands back and gives the door a long stare, thumping 
it once or twice with his gloved hand before turning to face 
the rest of you. 

" Not so bad, really, you know. Shouldn't take as long 
as I thought. 1 expect Schnabel realised that. I suggest we 
take the door right off." 

You don't argue. You don't know anything about it. But 
you can't help wondering what Sclmabel was doing up here 
while you were all resting. Nothing seems to have been 
accomplished. 
Anyway you take the job assigned to you and plug the 
grinder into the reactor. Then you bring the revolving head 
up to the rivets and grind them down flat. It's not quite as 



65 



THE MOON IS HEAVEN 



easy as it sounds, but it's not too tough. You're fascinated 
by the way the metal filings drift down like dust, slowly and 
straight, with no air currents to waft them back and forth. 

Once you've got a little way down the door and levelled 
off about ten rivets, Leeson comes along with a little piledriver and punches the body of them out. Atah has gone 
inside to do a bit more inspecting, while Clavier keeps a wary 
eye on the reactor. The whole thing becomes very 
monotonous. 

And it goes on for quite a while. After a bit, Leeson and 
Clavier change places. You wonder if Leeson knows anything about reactors. If he does, it looks as though you are 
the only person on this trip who doesn't know any science 
stuff. Guess that's why you're the labourer. 

But you don't mind, really. It's almost uncanny how 
you can do all this grinding, and Clavier keep up a constant 
crash-crash with the pile-driver, and yet not a sound comes 
to you. Labouring is much more pleasant in silence, you 
decide. 

At length, all the rivets are down and all the bodies 
punched out. The door is free. You call a warning to Atah 
over the radio and stand back. The door tumbles forward 
and slams down onto the rocky edge of the crevice. In fact, 
it practically falls into the crevice, but Leeson jumps forward 
and grabs it. On Earth he'd never have made it, but here 
the door weighs so little that he is easily able to swing it 
round away from the yawning gap. 

Atah has been doing things to the inside of the valves. 
Now he steps out with a grin. " Things are going fine," he 
announces. " Just a little more work on those valves and 
they'll be functioning as before. Can yon straighten out the 
door?" 

You don't know. You've never done anything like it 
before. But you nod and say something encouraging. You 
can't imagine anyone telling Atah that a thing like straightening put a door couldn't be done— except perhaps if that anyone was Schnabel. 



THE MOON IS HEAVEN 



67 



" Right, then." says Atah. " Clavier, will you give mc 
a hand on these valves?" 

Leeson and you look at each other then at the door. 
Luckily the pile-driver has an attachment that's fairly blunt. 
You reckon it'll go quite a long way towards ironing out the 
bumps. 

Then you don't reckon any more. You just stand stock 
still for a fraction of a second. Then you turn and scramble 
off down the crevice towards the plain, moving with much 
less than recommended care. 

But how can you take care when your head is still ringing 
with Reina's screams that came over the radio. 



CHAPTER EIGHT 



Sentence 

It's not as though Reina is the kind of girl who will scream 
at seeing a mouse or an earwig — even if such things existed 
on the Moon. When Reina screams, you can pretty well be 
sure it's something more serious than attention -getting. And 
you've a pretty good idea of what it is in this case. 

You can hear Atah calling to you over the radio, telling 
you to be more careful, not to take such leaps, not to take 
such chances. You know they are all coming down after 
you, ignoring the air-lock for now. But this is one time when 
you don't want Atah's advice, one time when you're not 
going to take it. You guess he'll understand. 

All the while you are clambering over the rocky ledges, 
with criminal disregard for the space suit's safety, there is 
one dominant thought in your mind. Reina's voice came 
over the radio, must have come through the mike in her 
space helmet. Could she have been wearing it? No. Not 
when she'd been told to stay in the dome and watch the 
electrolysis gear. In that case, her head most have been 
near the helmet when she screamed. And you can remember 
quite clearly seeing her helmet lying on her bunk. . . . 

You reach the plain a long way ahead of the others and 
streak across it towards the dome. You curse strongly as you 
wrestle with the valves on the air-lock, wrenching the door 
open and jumping inside. Almost before it's safe to do so, 
you swing back the inner door. It's almost all you can do 
to close it behind you so that the others can get in, Then 
you turn to face the scene in the dome. ' 

You don't face it very long. Just long enough to take in 
the situation, to see Reina standing by her bunk' with a 
saucepan in her hand, to see Schnabel facing her and about 



OS 



THE MOON IS HEAVEN 69 

to lunge forward, his face streaked with red weals. Then you 
lunge forward yourself! 

Schnahel had swung round a little at your entrance. That 
way, you catch him off balance. Your shoulder aends him 
crashing down on to a bunk and you fall on top of him, 
pounding at his face and body. In a way it's unfair on him, 
your having a space helmet on. He can't do a thing to your 
face. There's just no way he can knock you out. He just 
has to lie there and take a pasting. 

While you're doing it, you can imagine the prelude. The 
things that led up to Rcina screaming into her helmet. And 
the imaginings help you to put more weight behind your 
punches. You even start to take pleasure in thrashing him, 
getting your own back indirectly for all the insults and surliness the man has been throwing around since the trip started. 

Then you find yourself being pulled away from him. Aran's 
voice comes across, still calm and quite mild. " Better ease 
up now, Mike. Guess he's had enough." 

When you stand back, you see he's right. Schnabel doesn't 
get up. He just stays on the bunk and groans. And the 
groans swell in intensity every time he makes a movement. 
You reckon you've made a good job of it. 

By this time most of the others have their suits off. You 
and Atah do the same. You catch Reina's eye. It has a 
gleam in it that makes your pulse pound. It might be the 
exertion, hut you. don't think so. That gleam tells you a lot 
you wanted to know. 

Atah is standing over Schnabel, who has rolled over on to 
his back and is stariilg at the roof, gritting his teeth against 
the groans that outrage his dignity. 

" Well, Schnabel, you had that coming, I'm afraid," Atah 
says. " Your behaviour hasn't been all that co-operative, 
you'll admit. And this last episode with Reina was the last 
straw. I only hope you've learned a lesson of some kind. 
If you're prepared to forget everything and start being 
properly human again, 1 guess we could arrange to forget it 



70 T HE MOON IS HEAVEN 

too." He sends a glance to Reina and you. You both nod. 
Heck, you don't want any wars going on! 

" What d'you say then, Schnabel?" Atah concludes. 

But the technologist just stares at the roof and remains 
silent. His face is beginning to swell. His muscles must feel 
like toasted fish roes. In a way, you can imagine he finds it 
difficult to forget. 

" All right," Atah says. He has no mercy for the technologist now. " You remember the agreement you signed 
before the trip, Schnabel? You remember the clauses in it? 
That wasn't a Civil Agreement, Schnabel — remember? There 
was too much State backing for this trip to run the risk of 
having men turn out like you. But you seem to have forgotten the penalties. When you get back to Earth, Schnabel, 
you will be hanged. That is the penalty for deliberately 
endangering the lives of this party. And you are going to pay 
that penalty if I have to carry you back to Earth in my 
arms." 

Atah's voice is quiet and undramatic. For all that, the 
dreadful irrevocability of it strikes through all of you. You 
can see that on their faces. But Schnabel's face is in no condition for the niceties of expression. It's almost as though 
he hasn't heard. 

But he must have done. He must have heard the words, 
the sentence. Because it was a sentence, really Schnabel is 
as good as dead now. 

Atah tums away from the man and faces you all. " Well, 
now. What about some more tea, Reina?" 

Just like that. And you can see he's right. There's no 
sense in making a great issue of it—especially when you all 
have to stay in the same dome with the condemned man. 
Best thing is to forget all about it until you get back to 
Earth. Or at least, to try and forget all about it. 

" Okay," Reina says, catching on as quickly as "usual. 
" It'll be ready in a moment." 

Nobody asks her what Schnabel did, and she doesn't try 
Lo tell you, Bui you're going to find out sometime, you 



THE MOON IS HEAVEN 



71 



guess. After all, what you gave him might not have been 
enough. Although what he's going to get probably will be. 

Then, as Reina prepares the meal and the others flop down 
on their bunks, removing their outer suits, the thought strikes 
you. This capital punishment business will break out all over 
again when this affair comes to a head on Earth. Some will 
say it's a good thing. Others will point out that it didn't 
make any apparent difference to Schnabel's behaviour and 
that now the behaviour is over and done with, why waste a 
good technologist who's had Moon experience? 

And the whole sordid thing will be related always to the 
first Moon trip. Something that should go down in the 
archives as a great and important conquest will be remembered as the affair which brought capital punishment into the 
news again. For that's the way people's minds work. Always 
have. 

And all because of Schnabel. You wonder if Atah Kark 
has thought of that angle yet. 

Maybe he has, maybe he hasn't. Possibly it doesn't make 
much difference either way. He's had enough setbacks 
already. One more won't affect him a great deal. Besides, 
he has got to the Moon. 

Reina doesn't take long about the tea, and you are soon 
all sitting round as before, only this time Schnabel is still 
Hat out on his bunk. Considering the situation, the conversation is not too bad, not too stilted, not too forced. 

" What d'you think of the set-up?" Leeson asks Atah. 
" D'you think we're on schedule?" 

" We haven't done so badly," Atah says. " This dome 
was a big point — and its air supply, of course. The next 
chaps up here will have that laid on. The two main problems 
now are the air-lock and the return fuel. The first, 1 think 
we can handle in time. The second, I'm not so sure about. 
I'd be much happier if we could find a reservoir." 

" The electrolysis, it is not efficient?" Clavier asks. He 
sounds almost hurt. 

Atah tries to mollify him. " It's wonderfully efficient. 



72 



THE MOON IS HE A. V H N 



Clavier. You did a magnificent job there. We've got good 
air unlimited and the carbon dioxide concentration is suitably 
low. But the hydrogen output is low too. Not your fault. 
You can't get more out of the snow than is in there. At this 
rate it will take thirty weeks to make enough to get back. 
I don't want to stay that long. I don't think we could stand 
it, temperaroe nt ally." 

" I guess you're not so far wrong there, Atah," Leeson 
puts in. He glances across at Schnabel. " Things could get 
a lot worse than they are in thirty weeks. We've only been 
here a day or so and look at the situation!" 

" Don't let's dramatise it," you say. " I'd say things are 
pretty well under control now. I don't see how they could 
get much worse. Not that they're all that bad now." You 
glance quickly at Reina. . She looks away, but not quickly 
enough. 

" You're right," Atah agrees. " We don't want to dramatise it. But we must be prepared. In any case, I'd like to 
get away from here in a week or two at the most. The next 
trip can be for longer. There's a lot of work to be done on 
the data we've collected." 

" You mean we've done our job?" Leeson asks in a surprised tone. 

" No, no," Atah puts in quickly. " But we 'will have done 
in a week or two. It shouldn't take longer than that. After 
all, the main thing was to get here. True a little selenoscience 
would be a good thing to take back with us. But only 
a little. We mustn't try to do the job of half a dozen 
expeditions." 

" That's just because you'll probably be on them all," 
Leeson counters . with a grin. "This may be the only trip 
for us. There are plenty more wanting to take our places." 

" That's as it should be. We don't want only a handful 
of men with Moon experience. The more the better. In 
fact, I doubt if I'll come on the next one. There are plenty 
to take my place, too, you know." 

Personally, von doubt it. Oh, there are plenty who'd like 



THE MOON IS HEAVEN 



73 



to take Atah's place. But very few of them could do so with 
the same efficiency, with the same calm grip of things. No, 
you reckon Atah ought to be on that next Moon trip. For 
yourself, you're not so sure. You've got other ideas of how 
to spend your life. Ideas that somehow get mixed up with 
Reina. You reckon you could spend a year or two writing 
things about this trip and the Moon in general. That would 
be enough for you. 

" What about you, Reina," you say. " You haven't said 
anything. ' ' 

" Oh, I don't know," she replies. " I guess I'll have had 
enough in a couple of weeks. I'll confess that when we 
worked it out at thirty, I was a little scared. I didn't intend 
to be up here that long." 

Maybe there's a look in her eyes, maybe there isn't. You 
imagine you see one anyway. And anyway, you imagine 
it's connected with those ideas of yours. You could be 
wrong. It's going to hurt if you are. 

" If we" are honest, that probably goes for all of us," 
Clavier says. " I, too, was a little scared when we worked 
it out at thirty weeks. But now there is a chance of leaving 
earlier, I think we ought to take it. I will start right now to 
look for a reservoir." 

He gets up and reaches for his suit. Atah laughs and calls 
to him. 

" Hold it, Clavier, You don't have to start digging this 
very minute. It wouldn't do much good if you did. How'd 
you know where to dig?" 

" Where to dig? Why anywhere. I would keep digging 
until I found the reservoir." 

" Keen digging in one place?" Atah says with a slight 
smile. 

" Why no," the chemist explains eagerly. "After digging 
a little way and not finding a reservoir of hydrogen, I should 
start somewhere else. And so on until I did find one." 

" And how far would vou dig before giving up? And 
where would you go next? The Moon's a pretty big thing. 



74 



THE MOON IS HEAVEN 



you know. By the time you'd found one that way, we'd 
probably have enough from the electrolysis anyway. In 
other words, it would lake you all of thirty weeks!" 

You all laugh. Even Clavier joins in. "Of course, of 
course," he says. "lama fool, a veritable fool." 

" I wouldn't go so far as that," Atah says kindly. " But 
you need to know a bit more about mining before you start 
your digging." 

" Very well, you tell me, I learn. And then— I dig." 

Atah goes over to the few selected books you brought on 
the trip. Textbooks, mostly. Tomes of reference that might 
or should have some bearing on the problems you're likely 
to come up against. He chooses a volume and brings it back. 

" Read this," Atah says. " Skim most of it. Just take 
in the details of geodesic diagnosis so you'll know what it's 
all about. Then go on to the part dealing with actual mining 
procedure. You've got the latest dope on nuclear digging 
there." 

" Heyl Why should Clavier do all this? He did the electrolysis, now he wants the glory of mining a reservoir!" 
Leeson says it jokingly, but there's a grain of seriousness in 
.it. 

The pilot must feel that he's cut out for better things than 
just lugging mattresses about and straightening out doors. 

" AH right," Atah laughs. " Both of you read it. Make 
the finding of the reservoir a joint effort. Mike and I will 
work on the air-lock. You'll also have to get the details of 
the mining for the records, Mike." 

" I know," you say. " I know. 'I'll spend my time vacillating between the rocket up there and Clavier's borer down 
here. If I get giddy, Reina will have to pull me round." 

" Which is a very small job for so capable a woman," 
Reina says. "/ want to do something better than that. 
You've all been allotting yourself little bits of glory. Now 
how about some for me?" 

Here again there's a grain of seriousness beneath the 
banter. And you love her for it. 



THE MOON IS HEAVEN 75 

" H'm," says Atah. " Wouldn't it be good enough for you 
to be just a kind of handywoman, lending your excellent 
services wherever needed?" 

" That would be just fine! Then, when my children ask 
me what I did on the Moon, I shall be able to tell them 
that I was a handywoman. Puff out my chest and tell that 
I lent excellent service where necessary. Holding a hammer 
here, carrying a cadmium rod there." 

" Well," begins Atah, with one of his rare flashes of wit, 
" if I'd known you'd got some children, I'd never have let 
you come. How many, by the way?" 

Reina's caught off guard and blushes. She looks wonderful. " Never mind the jokes," she laughs. " What am I 
going to da}" 

" I have it!" Clavier exclaims. " A beautiful job. And 
very important. The compressor, he is pumping the hydrogen into a small tank. What we need now is a pipe running 
from the compressor to the fuel tank in the rocket up there. 
Reina can build it! Hoy, hoy!" 

For a moment everyone is rather taken aback by his 
enthusiasm and his terminal ejaculation. Then it sinks in. 
He wants Reina to fix up a pipe so that the compressor can 
pump the separated and liquified hydrogen straight into the 
rocket's fuel tank. 

" Can you do that, Reina?" Atah asks, giving her a tiltheaded look. 

" 1 — I don't know. But if Clavier tells me how, Fit have 
a jolly good try." 

" It sounds a good idea. Go ahead with it," says Atah. 

" Right away?" Clavier asks excitedly. He's rearing to 
go
" No," Atah says. " Not right away. I suggest we all 
have a few hours' sleep again. We've got to keep an eye 
on our rest, you know. There's no sense in tiring ourselves 
out." _rfr 

The rest of ybu except Clavier agree, and the general 



76 THE MOON IS HEAVBrf 

approbation soon silences his objections. He compromises by 
taking the mining book to bed with him. 

You all lay down on your bunks, loosening your clothing 
and letting your bodies sink down into the soft material of 
the mattresses. By common consent, there's no talking any 
more. 

You lie there for a while, thinking, occasionally sending a 
furtive glance across at Reina who is barely visible in the 
dimness, and wondering what the heck you're doing on the 
Moon, and after a while you fall asleep. 

Something wakes you. For some time you don't know 
what it is., You lie on your mattress, breathing hard, and 
staring into the dimness around you. Then you look across 
at the electrolysis tank. The sight of it sends quivers of fear 
through you and you realise why you're breathing hard. 

There aren't any bubbles of oxygen coming from the tank. 



CHAPTER NINE 



Ambush 

It doesn't make sense to begin with. As you get off the 
bunk and stagger over to the electrolysis tank to take a 
better, but still hazy, look, you keep remembering that everything was all right when you went to sleep. The air was 
good — Atah had remarked on it — and the bubbles were 
coming up nicely. Now there is no water in the tank and 
no bubbles of life-giving oxygen. 

You swing your head round crazily and stare at the carbon 
dioxide extractor. That isn't working, either. The 
atmosphere must be choked with the respiratory product. 

Suddenly the vagueness clears away as you realise how 
poisonous carbon dioxide is. You take a befuddled stride 
across the dome and drag the space suit on to yourself. 

With the helmet in place and the valve on, you start to 
feel a little better. But you don't sit and congratulate yourself. Instead, you spring across the dome and shake the 
others. When you have stirred them all up, you come back 
to Reina and force her into a suit. You look round and find 
the others have followed your example, swiftly realising that 
something's wrong with the air. 

Only when Reina's helmet is securely on her head do you 
flop down on the bunk and start to think. And then it comes 
home to you with a wham. 

You went around shaking them all into wakefulness. But 
you didn't do it to Schnabel. Because Schnabel wasn't there, 

Atah has been examining the tank, with Leeson and 
Clavier clustered round him. He looks up with a frown 
plainly visible through his helmet. 



n 



78 



THE MOON IS HEAVEN 



" This couldn't have happened on its own. could it. 
Clavier?" 

" But no. No!" the chemist exclaims. " It would be impossible. Someone has " 

He breaks off and looks towards Schnabel's bunk, his 
eyes wide, his mouth open. 

" You're right," you say. " Sehnabel did it, I'm sure of 
it. He thought we'd go under. Then he could go back to 
Earth alone with a trumped-up story— and not be hanged." 

" The man must be mad," Leeson says. " He'd never 
be able to handle the ship alone. He's not a pilot — and even 
I could not do it." 

" Maybe he's mad at that," Atah sighs in a tired voice. 

" Mad enough to kill us all so that he could escape. ' Well, 
we can't do any more to him than we could before. He 
hasn't worsened his position any." 

" Mike!" Reina's voice cuts through the radio at full 
intensity. " Mike, look. He's taken the oxygen bottles!" 

Following her pointing finger, you see she's right. The 
wall rack that should-iiold spare bottles for the suits is empty. 
So Sehnabel anticipated that you might wake up. 

The others take a look, too. ^nd one by one their faces 
freeze. 

" That gives us about eight hours to live — unless we do 
something about it," Atah announces. " I think we'd better 
make an inspection." 

" If he has ruined my apparatus, I will kill him," Clavier 
says slowly. 

As Atah moves over to the air-lock, he looks back at the 
chemist. " I must admit you'd have some excuse," he says. 
And then, with Leeson, he passes through. 

You let Clavier go next as he is so anxious about his gear.. 
When he has gone, you and Reina go into the lock. Before 
opening the outer door, you give her a smile and gently' 
squeeze her gloved hand. ..She smiles back at you and' 



THE MOON IS HEAVEN 79 

returns the pressure. Then you are out on the Moon again. 

Even before you get out, your helmet is full of Clavier's 
continental epithets, describing clearly and with emphasis a 
whole range of animals and 'their habits. You guess he's 
seen the damage done to his apparatus. And you find you 
are right. 

" The pig has 'bored a hole in the supply tube," Clavier 
explains, almost with tears in his eyes. " Also, the viper 
has done things to my generator. It will take hours and 
hours to repair. I will kill him ! " 

"You'll probably find it difficult," Atah says. "No 
doubt he's got his radio on and can hear every word we 
say. He won't be back, I'm thinking." 

You've got your own ideas about that. If he doesn't 
come back, then he's got even less time to live than you 
have, there's less oxygen in his suit because of the time he 
spent working on the air-lock while you were all sleeping. 
But then you remember the spare bottles. He must have 
about a hundred and fifty hours' supply in them. Even so, 
that's still only a hundred and fifty hours. And Schnabel 
didn't seem the kind of man who would go away and die so 
easily. . You guess he,'ll 'be back if he gets the chance. And 
you're half inclined to give .hjm the chance, just so that you 
can get your hands on him. 

But there is no time for such thoughts. In fact, your time 
for any kind of thought is running out fast. That makes you 
think of Reina. And she makes you think of the generator. 

" You'd better take command, Clavier," Atah says. 
" Just tell us what you want done. We'll do whatever you 
say, only let's be quick about it." 

"That is kind," the chemist returns. "Well, suppose 
you and Reina work on the supply tube? You can replace 
il with the pipe that Reina would have used for the line to 
the fuel tank. That will have to wait; it will be quicker 
than trying to repair this hole. Mike and Leeson can help 
me with the generator." 



80 THE MOON IS HEAVEN 

You and the pilot arc only too willing to do thai. As 
Atah and Reina go off to see about the pipe, you both set 
to work under Clavier's guidance. His words are quick and 
sharp. Direct and to the point. There is never any fumbling 
for the right term or the correct adjective. He is more like 
a surgeon than a chemist — never looking up from his busy 
hands, just asking for things and telling you what to do and 
how to do it even while he's doing something intricate himself. It's a wonder to you how he manages such delicate 
work with the space suit gloves on, 

He must know the generator inside out and several other 
contortions, too, for you can see that he tackles each problem 
in just the right order to get the whole thing done in the 
minimum of time — with no retraced steps, or premature solderings. This is just one more' thing that increases your 
admiration for Clavier. You begin to realise what the trip 
would have been like without him. 

While you're working, you try to forget that somewhere 
inside the dome a clock is ticking. Try to forget that as the 
Earth above you slowly turns, so the available hours are 
passing. It doesn't do your work any good to remember 
things like that. 

The generator is obviously the biggest problem, for 
although there are three of you working on it, and only two 
on the pipe-line, Atah and Reina finish their task long before 
the generator is repaired. They come and lend four more 
hands to the job. 

But it still takes a long time. These nuclear generators 
are so very tiny that every inch of space is crammed with 
intricate mechanisms. The three or four blows that Schnabel 
must have given it, certainly did a whole lot of damage. 
You're just thankful that Clavier's around. Otherwise the 
damage would probably be permanent. 

At length, Clavier gives a grunt and squats back on his 
haunches, being careful not to touch the seat of his suit on 
the' scorching lunar surface; it wasn't built to take temperatures like that. 



THfi'MOOH IS HEAVEN 81 

" Gentlemen," he announces. " I think it is done." 

You glance down at your oxygen gauge and reckon it's 
just about in time. Another hour and — but there's no need 
to think of that. Not now, you hope. 

" If some of you will go and fetch more snow, the rest of 
us can go inside and see if it is all right," Clavier adds. 

That broken pipe had let all the water out of the outside 
tank, down onto the surface to be vaporised and lost forever 
as the molecules attained escape veiocity and shot off into 
space. The outside tank is now empty. 

" What about it, Reina?" you ask. " Shall we get the 
snow?" 

" Sure," she says, and before anyone can raise an objection, she darts off to get the bags, unceremoniously tipping 
Atah's specimens onto the ground. 

Leeson gives you a grin. You don't know whether it's 
because of the specimens or because Reina is coming with 
you. It doesn't matter which it is. Leeson is all right. 

"Quick as you can then," Clavier instructs, as the rest 
of them move off towards the air-lock on the dome. " Don't 
linger more than is necessary." 

What did he mean by that, you think. Maybe you're 
imagining things. 

But you are certainly not imagining Reina's hand in yours 
as you both start out for the rocks, swinging your bags 
jauntily. Life seems suddenly sure again. She looks up at 
you and smiles. The kind of smile that sends a little beating 
pulse to your temple. 

You curse this radio business. It's quite certain that the 
others won't have taken their helmets off yet, because the 
air supply isn't functioning. And there's so much you want 
to say to Reina. You've never courted in so much silence 
before. But you make out pretty well all the same. 

It doesn't take long to get down into the crevice and to 
fill the bags with snow, packing it down lightly so's to get a 



82 



THE MOON IS HEAVE N 



maximum load. Every now and then while you're doing it, 
you look at Reina. 

On the way back, still hand in hand with the bags over 
your shoulders, 'Reina looks up at the speckled stardust in 
the sky. She makes you stand still a moment and look too. 

" You know," she says, not caring whether the others 
hear. " With those stars spread out up there, it's almost 
as if we are angels and the Moon is heaven." 

And as she says it she presses' your fingers inside their 
thick glove. It doesn't matter about the air-lock. The 
generator is unimportant. And Schnabel is Just a horrible 
nightmare that doesn't mean a thing in reality. For you, for 
a moment at least, the Moon is heaven. 

And then it's time to start thinking about the dome and 
the lack of air inside it. Already the voice of Clavier is 
coming over the radio, murmuring impatience with you both. 

You tighten your grip on Reina's hand and make her run 
towards the dome. At the tank, you stop and tip the snow 
from the bags. It melts as soon as it touches the metal, 
which is kept at just the right temperature by Clavier's 
ingenious method of partially shielding the sun's rays. 

" Water should be coming through any moment now," you 
say into the radio. "We'll stay out here until we hear 
from you." 

"And while you are waiting, you turn and look at Reina. 
You stand very close together. As close as the suits permit. 
Even inside her helmet her hair flames and gleams. You 
want to run your fingers through it, to feel the texture of it. 

Then Clavier's voice jumps you and you spring apart. It 
seems so near. 

"Mike," Clavier says. "Will you increase the power 
about two notches?" 

" Okay," you reply. " Wait a bit." 

By now you know quite a bit about the workings of .the 
generator. It's a fairly simple matter to step up the power 
output. 



tBb Moon is heaven S3 
" How's that?" you ask. 

"Just a little more — hold it! Right. I think that will 
do. She is working beautifully again. You can come in 
now. ' ' 

You don't want to but you must. It'd just seem damned 
silly if you (both stayed out on the Moon when there's 
warmth, air and food inside the dome. But somehow those 
things don't seem as attractive as they did a while back. 

Even so, you lead her to the dome. As the outer door 
swings back, you send a casual glance towards the generator. 
It seems to be all right. Your eyes move up to the sky, down 
to the rocks — and you catch a hint of movement in between 
two of the lower ones. 

It doesn't take long for you to realise what that movement 
is caused by. Even if the Moon isn't heaven, fate couldn't 
be playing into your hands better than this. 

You give Reina a gentle push into the lock and say: 
" I'm for a cup of hot tea and an hour's rest on a nice soft 
mattress. No reading, no talking. Just sleeping. " 

But she looks mightily surprised when you stay outside 
and close the door on her, motioning for silence with your 
other hand. Just .as the door closes, you see her surprised 
expression change to one of near-understanding. Another 
moment or two, you reckon, and she'll have sized it up. 
Good girl. 

Then you drop down behind a pile of equipment and lie 
in wait for Schnabel. 

Reina must have done a pretty quick job of letting the 
others know what's happening, for within a moment or two 
Clavier's voice ceases and Atah's take over. 

" Okay, Mike. That was a fine job you did. Now you 
can take the rest you wanted. Here, have a cup of tea." 

Good old Atah. That way, Schnabel will think you're in 
the dome with the others. He's going to get a surprise. 

'.' Can!t we take our helmets off now? " says Reina. " The 
air's all right, isn't it?" 



64 



THE MOON IS HEAVEN 



" Sure it is," Atah replies. " Besides, how can Mike 
drink his lea through his helmet!" 

There is a general outburst of laughter that quiokly fades 
away as they take off their helmets. Then a deep silence 
comes down. You switch off your microphone in case 
Schnabel should hear your breathing. He's no fool. 

And that thought is not very comforting. You played 
the hero all right by staying out here and waiting for him, 
But what are you going to do when you get him? He's not a 
moron who can he tracked down with ease. This is going to 
be difficult. It might even get rough. 

You try not to think about that. There's not much to 
choose between Schnabel and you where weight is concerned. 
This affair is pretty certain to come to a fight. And he'll 
probably lead you up among the rocks before starting to take 
the offensive. And there are some nice deep fissures up there 
to be thrown down. Fissures that would be a heck of a 
job to get out of. 

Another factor is that you've only got a little less than 
an hour's supply of oxygen on your suit. You've got to 
be back inside the dome by then. 

You begin to get a little cramped, sitting on your haunches, 
trying not to make the slightest movement in case Schnabel 
gets warned off. Stealthily you stretch out one leg, pull it 
back and stretch the other, under cover of the equipment. 
That technologist is being very fly. He's waiting a long time 
tor the all clear. 

And then you start to wondering whether you imagined 
the movement. It might be. These lights and darks can 
play tricks with eyes used to an infinite number of halftones. It may well be that the hint of movement you saw 
was just caused by a current of air sweeping up from your 
mouth over the helmet's glass front — or something like that. 
Maybe you are just being a fool, sitting out here while the 
others sip hot tea. The thought of it makes your mouth 
unnaturally, dry. You'd give a lot for a cup of tea now. 



THE MOON IS HEAVEN 85 

You'd almost give Schnabel. In fact, you think you'll call 
it a day and put up with the ribald ridicule from the others 
when you go in empty-handed and unaccomplished. 

But just as you are going to rise, someone else rises over 
among the rocks. A space-suited figure. And it can't be 
anyone else but Schnabel. He comes forward, instinctively 
crouching, making his way towards the generator. You let 
him get within a hundred yards of it. Then you stand up 
and rush him. 



CHAPTER TEN 



Knave of Diamonds 

The moment you start moving you realise you did it too 
soon. Schnabel has been keeping his eye on the dome even 
as he sidled up to the generator. He sees you as soon as you 
make the first move. And, as you'd expected, he turns and 
flees towards the rocks. 

Well, it just means that he's got a little more lead than 
you'd wanted him to have. Otherwise the position is not 
much worse than it could ever be. 

You watch his feet, trying to calculate his stride. It's a 
big one and it carries him across the plain at about eight or 
nine miles an hour. His leg muscles are pretty powerful. 

But then so are yours. In fact, you make them so and 
force them to fling your feet against the ground so that your 
own great lolloping strides are bigger than Schnabel's. 
Gradually you gain on him. 

Even so, it's too gradual. Before you are within fifty feet 
of him, he has reached the rocks and with one tremendous 
bound,, sails up several dozen feet and lands on a ledge. He 
throws one quick glance behind him, sees you about to jump 
too, and sets off higher and higher. 

This is the worst stage almost. Here you have so many 
factors. You've got to watch out that the rocks don't tear 
your suit. You've got to be careful not to smash your helmet 
against a sharp point, for the plastic probably wouldn't be 
able to withstand that. And you've got to keep an eye on 
Schnabel so that you don't lose him, and so that he doesn't 
spring out on you as you round a boulder. 

Higher and higher you climb, until the plain and the dome 



THE MOON IS HEAVEN 87 

are part of another world, a model world laid out on the 
floor. You know that if you switched on the radio and 
called for help, they would all come running. But somehow 
you look upon this as your own job. Something you've got 
to do alone. There's no reason for it. You just feel it that 
way. 

Then suddenly, you come up on a fairly ^-ide ledge. 
Schnabel is standing on it, his back to the rising cliff behind 
him, a small boulder in an upraised hand. 

" Don't come any farther, Mike," he says over the radio. 
" This little stone would make a pretty hole in your helmet." 

You rather doubt it, but you don't want to make the 
experiment just yet. So you switch on the microphone and 
talk to him, 

" You'd do that to me, would you, Schnabel?" 

He laughs unpleasantly. " With pleasure, Mike. I still 
have one or two aches and pains that were caused by you. 
I should enjoy killing you." 

A question comes into your mind. You voice it. " Then 
why the hell don't you do it?" 

" Because, Mister Reporter, T want you to know a few 
things before you die. I shall get even more enjoyment 
from that!" 

Same old stuff, you think. The killer must tell his victim 
what a great and clever guy he is. All part of the megalomania, you suppose. And in the way that such things work 
out, a part of your mind goes wandering off on a line'of its 
own. It starts mulling round the old theory of yours that 
psychological states are inherited according to the rules of 
continuous variation. Just as there are infinite degrees of 
height between the two extremes, so there are infinite degrees 
of manias, phobias and complexes. And just as some people 
grow taller after they should have reached their own particular maximum, so some people take on psychological 
growths after they should have reached mental maturity. 



88 



THE MOON IS HEAVEN 



Bat all that's got nothing to do with the matter in hand, 
»nd y»u'd be the first to deplore it. So you listen to 
Schnabel and all the while you are sizing up the situation, 
wondering how you are going to take the offensive and put 
a stop to this boulder-hurling business. 

" Yea, you are going to die," Schnabel says. " It's true 
that we aH are sometime, but you will die very soon now. 
I just wanted you to know that I have tricked everybody on 
this trip— yes, even the indomitable Atah Kark. You see. 
Mike, I did not come here just to be part of an historic 
experiment. Man's conquest of space does not interest me 
— except as an opportunity to make myself independent for 
the rest of my life." 

You wonder what the blazes he's getting at, how the hell 
coming to the Moon can make a man independent. True, you 
expect to make a little out of your books and articles on the 
subject, but that wouldn't make you independent for more 
than a year. Independence for a lifetime means a lot of 
money. 

Schnabel seems to read your thoughts. " You don't know 
how I can do that? No. Because you and all the others 
were so fired with the potentialities of Moon flight in regard 
to the rest of space that you were blind to the other possibilities. The Moon is full of diamonds, Mike. Look." 

He slips his free hand into the suit's wide pocket and 
fetches out a number of things that gleam brightly in the 
sunlight. They are diamonds all right. Nothing else could 
possibly give off such beautiful rays. 

" See?" he goes on. " Here is my independence. A 
fortune in diamonds for me when I return to Earth. That 
is why I came here, Mike. That is what I was looking for 
when you all thought I was working on the air-lock and you 
all took a quiet rest while the queer technologist got on with 
the work ! ' 1 

" So?" you say. " And what happens when everybody 
else comes up here and gets a fistful of diamonds apiece? 
Won't the diamond market collapse?" 



THE MOON IS HKAVBN 



" Of course it will. And a good thing too. These things 
have far too much value attached to them ! But it will be 
too late to affect me. You see, Mike, I have already contracted with the world's largest diamond concern to deliver 
these gems. My money is waiting for me. I get it on 
delivery, and the concern has everything ready for immediate 
production of these baubles. They will clean up the field 
some time before the next party gets back from the Moon." 

You must admit there's a good deal of sense in what he 
says. It looks as though the scheme's foolproof. Too bad 
he won't get away to reap the benefit. Because now more 
than ever you've no intention of letting him do this thing. 

To think that during all the preparations back on Earth, 
during al] the work and trouble and propaganda and setbacks, Schnabel was thinking only of getting a pocketful of 
diamonds ! 

" So," he goes on. " You see that you have to die. Also, 
of course, the others must. too. It's a pity that the lovely 
Reina must turn into dust here on the Moon. I was thinking 
of taking her back with me, but of course she would talk. 
And anyway, I shall not be short of lovely women when I've 
got my fortune." 

You stand there on the ledge and gradually tense yourself 
for the lunge. You try to look beaten because you are 
pretty sure that Schnabel can see your face through the 
helmet. You reckon it'll be any moment from now. 

" I suppose you're right," you say. " You seem to have 
worked it out in detail." 

He laughs. " Yes, right down to the last detail, Mike!" 

And it's the laugh that's his undoing. Men can't be truly 
on guard when they are laughing. So as soon as the guffaw 
starts, you send yourself forward, your legs ramming down 
on the rock, your shoulder pointed straight at his chest. 

Even so, he's pretty quick. His hand comes down with 
the boulder and lets it fly. But the angle is wrong. It 
misses. Just as well, you think. 



90 TH« HOOD IS HEAVKN 

Then you make contact. Both of you go down onto the 
rocky ledge. Schnabel is cursing and flailing with his arms. 
He's still got a good grip, In it, you both roll around on 
the rock, getting near the edge, where a fissure yawns blackly 
down and down. 

You know very well what he's trying to do. That's 
because his^magination is not working too well. His idea is 
to get you off the ledge. You could do that to him, of course, 
but then there'd be no proof that he's dead and out of the 
way. You reckon there's a much better method of dealing 
with the redoubtable Schnabel. 

You wait your opportunity, just making sure that he 
doesn't send you down into the abyss. And then it comes. 
You find your hands free at the same time as you both roll 
near a jagged rock. You bring your hands up with fingers 
spread wide. You grasp his helmet tightly. You bring it 
down with as much force as you can muster onto the jagged 
rock. It cracks and flies apart. 

That's all there is to it. He doesn't take even a minute 
in dying. The vacuum of space does things to his lungs and 
eyeballs that don't make for beauty. Compared to this, his 
previous appearance was one of cupidian charm. You turn 
away, not because it makes you sick. But because you are 
tired of it all. Now that it's over, the reaction sets in. 

But there's no time to sit and stare at the sky while you 
get your mind orientated again. There's only a few minutes* 
oxygen left in your bottle and you've already noticed that 
Schnabel isn't carrying the spares. Even if he were, they 
wouldn't be much good, because you can't change them out 
in space. For the same reason you can't usethe bottle on 
his spacesuit. You reckon he must have hidden the spares 
up in the rocks somewhere. 

However, there'll be time to look for those later if necessary. The great thing now is to get Schnabel's body down 
to the dome in as .short a time as possible. 

You tuxa back to frjri] and lift him up. He is quite light 



THE MOON IS HEAVEN 



91 



for so big a man. Of course! It's the Moon's lesser gravity. 
You seem to be slightly out of touch with things at the 
moment. Maybe that's because you never killed a man 
before. . . . 

It's a funny thing, but you find yourself being terribly 
gentle with Schnabel's body as you lower it down the rocks. 
You know full well that he's dead and that a dew knocks 
won't hurt him. Yet somehow you find it so difficult to let 
the carcass fall even a few feet while you climb down after 
it. You have to do so, of course, otherwise you'd never get 
down, but it sends a queasy feeling of indecency through you. 

In fact, you are highly relieved apart from the exertion, 
when you reach the plain. You don't mind dragging the 
body because you have the excuse that your helmet is too 
big to allow him to be thrown over your shoulder. And 
you're not too keen on having him that near you, anyway. 

At the air-lock, you press the button that sounds a buzzer 
telling you that the inner door is closed. Then you open the 
outer door and start to drag Schnabel inside. But suddenly 
you reckon there's no sense in doing that. He might just 
as well stay out here. You lay him down by the door, in 
the shade of the equipment. He'll keep quite cool that way. 

Then you go into the air-lock and through into the dome. 
They must have heard the buzz, for they all stand and watch 
the air-lock expectantly. Even when you've stepped out of 
it, they continue to stare for a moment or two. Then they 
turn to you. Atah raises his eyebrows and says something. 
But you are fiddling with your suit and can't hear him. 
Leeson comes over and helps you off with it, casting meaning 
looks at the dust all over it. 

When you've got the suit off, a cup of steaming tea comes 
into view. You take it and flop down onto a bunk, giving 
Reina a grateful glance as you do so. Then you look up at 
Atah Kark. 

" What was that?" you ask. " I didn't hear before." 
" I just wanted to know what had happened," Atah 



92 T BE MOON IS HEAVEN 

replies. " Reina came in and made elaborate signs for 
silence, then she wrote down that you'd said something about 
having tea and a rest yet had stayed outside and cautioned 
her not to say anything. She told us she reckoned you'd 
seen Schnabel and were going after him. We rather thought 
you'd be bringing him back— if you came back." 

" I did firing him back," you say. " He's outside. I 
didn't think you'd want him in here. He's not a pretty 
sight." 

" Alive?" says Leeson. 

" Dead," you reply. Leeson looks delighted. Clavier 
appears disappointed. " There was a fight up in the rocks. 
He tried to fling me over a precipice. I smashed his helmet 
on a rock." 

You tell it simply, because this is no time for drama. 
You've had enough of that for quite a while. And the others 
probably have, too. 

Apart from a little gasp that Reina lets out, they remain 
silent for several minutes. You reckon you know what they 
are thinking. In their mind's eye they are seeing the pictures 
that were taken of experimental animals suddenly exposed 
to the highest vacuum attainable on Earth. A vacuum that's 
only a small fraction of the one up here. Those pictures 
were not nice to look at. They weren't meant to be. They 
were intended as a warning to space travellers as to what 
happens to an organism under those circumstances. You can 
see from everybody's faces that they are remembering those 
pictures. 

Well, they're lucky. You don't have to remember them. 
You've seen the real thing. 

" I see," says Atah. " It seems as though the wheels of 
justice have been anticipated. Maybe we've stopped them 
turning (he wrong way, though." 

So he had been thinking about that capital punishment 
aspect of things. You reckon there are not many aspects 
that miss Atah. 



■r b * Moon is heaven 



" Of course, there'll be an enquiry when we get back, but 
I don't think there'll be much trouble. In fact, I have the 
military prerogative to execute any of this party that might 
harm the rest or the project. On this occasion it was delegated 
to you, Mike. He was under sentence of death, anyway. 
And then that business of the electrolysis apparatus was 
enough to take the matter into our own hands." 

" And he was after the generator again when I rushed 
him," you say. " Besides.. I killed him in self-defence." 

" I'm sure you did, Mike," says Atah. " We're all sure 
you did, aren't we?" 

The res v t of them nod and grunt agreement. But you can 
tell that they don't really mean it. At the back of their 
minds they think you killed Schn.tbel deliberately. And when 
yOB come to think of it, you probably did. At least you set 
nut after him with that idea at the back of your mind. Just 
because he was struggling with you when it came off doesn't 
really alter the case. 

For a moment you don't know what to think of it. Then 
you realise that men like Atah and Clavier would not sanction 
murder", however much they disliked the victim. No, they 
know that this expedition was not safe while Schnabel was 
alive. Five lives might have perished for his one. It was 
meet and right that you should kill him. You're going to 
try and believe that. 

Ihen you look up from your tea cup and catch Reina's 
eye. She is smiling at you, and there's nothing behind her 
smile. Nothing, that is, which tells you she disapproves of 
what you've done. Quite the reverse in fact. And the things 
that are behind her smile tell you that there's no need to 
think about it any more. 

" There's something else about Schnabel that you ought to 
know," you tell Atah. " He had these in his pocket." 

You bring ont the diamonds that Schnabel had flaunted 
before you, and throw them onto the mattress. They all 
crowd round to look at them. 



94 



THE MOON t S MBAVBN 



" He had already made ;\ deal with a diamond concern to 
handle these," you explain. " He planned to get rid of us 
right from the time before we left Earth. His idea was to 
po back alone with these and b^ ...ne independent. He said 
that was his sole interest in space flight." 

Atah looks sad. You can understand his feelings. 

" I seem to have made a great mistake in choosing him for 
the trip," Atah says slowly. " Apparently his knowledge 
was a good deal less than I believed." 

You don't get it. What's his knowledge got to do with it? 
Surely it's his attitude that counts. You say so. 

" No, Mike," Atah replies. " I can understand the 
attitude. It would be a big temptation to walk off with a 
handful of diamonds. No, it's his lack of knowledge. You 
sec. these aren't diamonds. Oh, they are pretty and might 
even have some sort of value. But they are definitely not 
diamonds. And Schnabel should have known that. He 
should have known that any diamonds on the Moon would be 
deep down inside the crust anyway. But apart from that, 
Schnabel should not have been led astray by popular 
accounts of these things. He ought to have remembered that 
there's no evidence for the existence of carbon on the Moon. 
And after all, what are diamonds but tightly compressed* 
carbon?" 

" But— but," you say. " They sparkled so beautifully!" 

Atah smiled. " Lots of things do. If you still think these 
may be diamonds, watch." 

He lifts one off the bunk and throws it across the dome. 
It hits the wall on the far side and splinters into several 
pieces. And diamond is the hardest substance known ! 

" You win," you say. " It would almost have been worth 
letting Schnabel take these back to Earth and try to claim 
his fortune. Imagine him devoting his life to space travel— 
and then this!" 

You all laugh, because it's good to laugh. Because you've 



THE MOOfc IS HEAViM 



95 



ail had enough of serious things. Because Che Moon is beginning to get everybody down a little bit. 

" All right," says Atah. " We couldn't rest while you 
were out there, Mike, so 1 think we'll all take a long sleep. 
Then when we wake up— there's work to be done. We want 
to leave here in two weeks, at the latest." 

" Amen." comes a chorus from you and Clavier and 
Leeson and Reina. Dear Reina. You don't dream of her 
wHen you bunk down. Which is disappointing. 



CHAPTER ELEVEN 



The Days Go By 

Time goes quickly, you find, when you're working hard. 
Ten days. Earth days, have passed by since you killed 
Schnabel. And a lot has happened since then. 

The work has been hard and long, so hard and so long 
that your muscles are permanently aching now and you would 
rather stoop than stand upright. But it's been a pleasant 
time. Everyone has worked in harmony with the others. 
Maybe Schnabel's example stays fresh in the mind, maybe 
the common desire to get back to Earth has something to do 
with it. Whatever it is, there are no scenes of temperament, 
no outbursts of temper or irritability. The work goes well. 
It's fun when the whole crowd are singing into the radio. 
Maybe it's not very musical, but it's fun. 

In a way you're surprised. Conditions haven't been all 
that rosy. Setbacks have come often. Hours of work have 
been wasted because of some unforeseen, unforeseeable event 
that's tied up with lunar conditions. Yet even Clavier has 
kept his excitability on the production plane. 

Of course, a big factor is that the end is in sight. For some 
lime now, you've all known that short of an act of God, 
you're going to make the dead-line. The certainty of that 
came when Clavier found his reservoir. A day of rejoicing, 
that. 

The busy little chemist had studied his book well. He and 
Leeson had pored over it and argued over it, coming always 
to Atah Kark for arbitration. Then they had gone out and 
dug. It hadn't taken them many hours to get a working 
grip of the mining apparatus. A few experimental borings, 



9 6 



THE MOON IS HEAVEN 97 

during which poor Leeson nearly ran the point of the drill 
through his toe, and they were set to get going in earnest. 

Atah supplied them with geodesic data that he'd got on 
his surveys and off they went. The first few drillings didn't 
come to anything, apparently. Showing that geodesic 
diagnosis is not entirely infallible. When they'd got down 
to the theoretical depth they'd packed up and moved on. 
Gradually, they had got more and more depressed. It seemed 
as though there were no reservoirs on the Moon at all. 

Then they struck — -no, not oil. Hydrogen. The drill 
suddenly went soft and slid down several inches. A strong 
current shot from the central bore, a current that was quickly 
shut off while both Clavier and Leeson rushed back to the 
dome with the great news. 

" We have found it!" Clavier cried. " It is there, out 
among the rocks on the other side of the plain. A — what you 
call?— a gusher, yes!" 

"He's right, too," Leeson had beamed, thrilled like a 
schoolboy to have accomplished something at last. " There 
ought to be enough for half a dozen trips to Earth." 

" Let's hope there is," Atah had replied. " That'll be 
fine for the next crraps who come along. Now how about 
getting it to the ship?" 

There had been quite a silence after that. In the rush of 
joy at finding the gusher, no one'd thought of the difficulty 
of getting the gas right across the plain and up into the fuel 
tank. At the beginning it had been hoped that a reservoir 
would be found much nearer than this one. However, the 
problem had to be solved. 

" We will find a way," Clavier had said confidently. " We 
have the source, we must find a way ! Come, Leeson, let us 
attack this problem." 

And they had both gone off into a huddle in the corner of 
the dome, while Reina made them some food in reward for 
their good work, 

Where Reina's concerned, you reckon there isn't one of 
you who isn't pleased that she's up here. True, there are 



98 THE MOON IS HEAVEN 

limits set automatically on what you can talk about, how 
you can act and the degr^ to which you can swear. But 
those very limitations provide some kind of a link with the 
cool green grass of Earth, and every other colour that isn't 
black or white. 

With Reina around, none of you feel that you are so very 
far away from home after all. The mere presence of a higher 
toned voice helps to create the illusion that this is something 
in the nature of a stage-set. It's rather like the sudden 
appearance of a flock of English nurses out in Burma or the 
Middle East during the war. The sand and grime and*jungle 
took a back seat for a while and were replaced by images 
of home. 

That's the way it was here with Reina. It doesn't even 
only take you back to the launching site in Ecuador. Each 
one of you gets visions of his home town and the women 
walking down the main street with their shopping bags. The 
whole set-up doesn't seem nearly so remote. 

Even Atah Kark is pleased he allowed her to come. For 
some time, he had considered that there was no place for 
women on the Moon, or in a spaceship. No doubt he was 
sincere about it, too. But he's come round now. He's glad 
Reina's here. 

As for your own feelings on the matter — well, they don't 
really bear comment. You'd been pretty fond of her back 
at the launching site, but now it was more than that. Having 
seen her stand up to conditions and disappointments that 
many men would quail under, you reckon she's got what it 
takes. You want to marry her, and it's the first time you've 
ever felt like that. 

Reina's certainly given you drive, anyway. Once upoi 
a time that seems so long ago, you were a dithering kind O 
a person compared to what you are now. You used to ga 
around, writing the odd article or short story and managini 
to live for a while on the proceeds. You took a series o 
odd jobs that you knew would never lead anywhere. L 



THE MOON IS HEAVEN 99 

fact, this space flight affair was the first proper job you'd 
ever had. 

Even in the early stages of that, you'd written. .a few 
articles and reports. Stuff that could have been done in 
half the time you took to do it. 

But you're not like that now. The Moon and Reina have 
changed all that. In addition to Writing voluminous accounts 
of everything that happens, putting in every tiny detail in 
case it should some day be important and the people who 
want to know are a quarter of a million miles away from 
where it happened — in addition to all that, you've put in a 
good few hours with Atah on the ship's air-lock. You've 
straightened out the door unaided while Atah carried on 
working at the valves. You've done quite a bit of riveting 
and you've spent a long time holding things up to the frame 
while Atah bashed away on the other side. 

But you've got a terrific compensation. The air-lock is 
now in perfect condition. Atah and you tried it out a day 
or so ago and there wasn't one leak. You had filled the 
ship with oxygen from the spare bottles and taken your 
helmets off inside the rocket. It made the return trip seem 
almost accomplished. 

There had been quite a celebration that day, too. A double 
celebration, because Reina had finally got the pipe-line running from the compressor to the fuel tank. She got into the 
spirit of things by letting you all have a double ration of 
sugar in your teal - But she wouldn't allow alcohol. Leeson 
was all for it, but Atah agreed with Reina. 

" When wc get back to Earth, Leeson. I'll take you into 
a bar and you can drink the place dry. I might do the 
same myself!" 

" Holy mackerel!" Leeson had shouted. " That's worth 
waiting for." .He turned to the rest of you. " Imagine seeing Atah drinking beer!" 

" Oh, no, not beer," Atah expostulated in a shocked 
voice. "Whisky. Neat whisky 1" 

Then there had been a long night of soothing sleep during 



100 



THE MOON IS HEAVEN 



which tired and aching muscles recouped a little— but only 
a little — of their energy. 

A few days later there had been another celt-bration. This 
time, it was because Clavier and Leeson had managed the 
impossible. They'd got a pipe running from the reservoir 
to the compressor. An hour or two after that and liquid 
hydrogen was filling up the tank in the ship. It was mainly 
a question of waiting then. Waiting for the remainder of 
the six hundred tonnes to form. 

It was then that the question of Schnabel's body had 
cropped up. The day after you'd killed him, you had taken 
his body away from the dome and hid it in the shade of 
some rocks. You didn't want to have to look at it every 
time you came out of the dome. The question jiow was 
yhether it was to be taken back to Earth. 

" Of course, the enquiry people would very much like to 
have a look at it," Atah said. 

"Well, let 'em come up and see it!" Leeson had suggested. " It's here any time they want to. L think it's a 
sheer waste of fuel and space to take a dead body. Especially 
the body of a man like Schnabel was." 

Clavier puts in a word. " He had no relatives, you know. 
No one will want to claim his body. Leeson is probably 
right." 

" Of course he's right," Rcina had chipped in. " Who d 
want a body like that? Besides, think of the state it'll be in 
by the time we get back. It's all right now in the cold. But 
it won't be cold in the ship. I say let's leave it and use 
the extra fuel for navigating." 

" Yes, that's a big point," Atah had conceded. " The 
ship will have to take off at an angle; we can't straighten 
her up, I'm afraid. The extra fuel would enable us to have 
a much larger safety margin for changing direction once 
we're off." 

" Look," you'd put in. " It's not as though we're planning to bum the body or hack it to pieces. In that shade. 



THE MOON IS HEAVEN 101 

it'll keep for ages. It'll always be here if anyone wants it. 
Let's leave it that way." 

And so it had been settled. Schnabel's body was to remain 
on the Moon, where he had expected to get rich quick. You 
reckoned there were many parallels in history. 

And now you stand and wait for Reina to come and get 
snow with you. You guess she's doing things to herself" 
inside the dome, combing her hair and things like that. 
Throughout the whole business she's managed to keep looking attractive. Not smart or glamorous, of course, but easy 
enough on the eye to make you resent the other men's glances. 

The air-lock opens and she comes out. This must be the 
hundredth or two hundredth time you've both been down 
the crevice for snow. But you don't mind. It's about the 
only time, you get a chance to be alone together. 

The snow deposit is getting pretty low now. There was" 
no time to search for a water reservoir. But there will 
probably be enough to keep things going until you blast off, 
which will probably be tomorrow or the day after, depending 
on what Atah thinks about the chances and whether Leeson, 
who is now checking his instruments, says the ship is spaceworthy. 

You take Reina's hand as she comes up, not caring 
whether the others can see you. They got pretty used to the 
idea that there's something between you and Reina. 

When you get down in the crevice you- almost lose your 
courage. You'd intended to do something that has never 
been" done before. But now it seems such a silly thing. You 
keep worrying about it all the while you and Reina fill the 
bags with snow. 

She is so intuitive about you now that she notices it. Maybe 
she found that your hand clasp was not so close as usual or 
something like that. Anyway, she touches your arm and 
looks up into your face, illuminated by the suit lamps. The 
expression in her eyes asks you a question, and gives you an 
answer at the same time. 



102 



THE MOON TS HEAVEN 



Suddenly your courage comes back. You put down the 
bag of snow and lead Reina a little way away from the 
deposit. Then you get down on your knees and scrape your 
finger in the thick Moon-dust on the bottom of the crevice, 
shining your lamp so that Reina can see what you're doing. 

When you've finished, you hear a little gasp from her over 
the radio. You wonder if you've torn it. Then she drops 
to her knee beside you and scrapes her finger in the dust. 
She scrapes just one word: YES. It's all you wanted to 
know. You take her into your arms and press her tightly. 

Then you gather up the snow and return to the dome. 
You start to wonder how long those words will stay there, 
undisturbed by wind and weather, possibly undisturbed by 
the next expedition, they could remain there for eternity. 
The ultimate question, the ultimate answer to all the world's 
problems : 

WILL YOU MARRY ME? YES. 

Atah calls you early the next day and reminds you that 
this is blast-off day. A surge of excitement runs through yoo 
and dispels every vestige of tiredness you felt immediately 
on waking. 

It's the same with the others. You are all up and about 
with much more speed and enthusiasm than usual. Reina 
prepares breakfast. And it's a fine breakfast, too. There's 
no sense in leaving good food behind on the Moon, and you 
won't be needing any on the trip back to Earth, so she 
fetches everything out of her larder and if it's at all applicable 
to breakfast, she uses it anyway. 

Then you all make the best of the finest meal you've had 
since landing. Something that will keep you going until 
someone presents you with steak and chips on Earth. 

After that there are all the preparations. The mattresses 
have to be taken back to the control room — your job, that. 
Various other things have to be stowed away. The carbonij 
copy of your reports has to be left in a conspicuous positioa


THE MOON IS HEAVEN 103 

inside the dome — just in case something goes wrong on the 
■way back. Atah. has to check the clockwork firing device 
that's going to send the ship off into space again. And 
Clavier has to see to the dismantling of his electrolysis 
apparatus. He's almost crying. 

Leeson carries Atari's specimens up to the ship, arid then 
you assemble for the blast-off. 



CHAPTER TWELVE 



The Great Loss 

Atah takes a last look round. You look round with hira 
and feel that it's all a bit of a mess. The dome looks neat 
enough, but the hits of trailer rocket and odd items of equipment make the crater seem a fair-ground after a Bank holiday 
crowd has pushed off. That can't be helped, though. 
Things' 11 look a lot worse when the next expedition gets 
under way with a bigger dome and one or two tunnels and 
a launching site. 

On the whole, you feel you've all done a pretty good job. 
You've got to the Moon and you've laid the foundations fot 
the lunar base. The rest is up to others. 

" (E think that's all," says Atah. " We can climb aboard 
now." 

Climbing the ladder, you look back and see that Atah is 
setting the clockwork mechanism. Fifteen minutes he said 
he was allowing you. Then the great roar and off into space. 
You start feeling nervous again. 

Atah runs across the plain and starts to climb, the ladders 
" Hurry up!" he calls. " Don't admire the scenery." 

That's all very well, but this may be the last time yon 
ever look at the Moon. The next few trips probably won't 
need an observer as a special member. And anyway, you'M 
not too sure you want to come back for quite a while.; 
You're not getting younger and there's an age limit qh| 
spacemen. No, you reckon this is your last view of a world; 
composed of black and white, and hardness, always hardness, 1 . 
Except the dust, which is soft and silky. 

So you send one long raking glance across the Moon'* 



104 



THE MOON IS HEAVEN 105 

surface and then turn into the air-lock. Then you go up' 
alongside the fuel tank and into the control room. 

Clavier, Leeson and Reina arc already there. Already 
clamping themselves down onto their mattresses. . You go 
across to your own, take off your suit and hang it on the 
rack. You won't be needing it any more. Then you lie 
down on the sponginess and clip the clamps over your wrists. 

Atah comes in and goes across to Leeson in the pilot's 
mattress. " Okay?" he asks. 

Leeson looks up with a grin. " I guess so, Atah. How 
long have we got?" 

Atah glances at the London Circle chronometer and mentally calculates. " Between eight and ten minutes," he says 
at last. " Time enough?" 

" Oh, sure," Leeson replies. " I can't do anything about 
it anyway. I just like to know." 

So you all lie there, waiting. The chronometer doesn't 
tick, so you've no idea how fast time is passing. But Atah 
can see the face of it. He'll call out when time gets near. 

Nobody says anything. You reckon everybody has a sense 
of apprehension. Unconsciously, perhaps, you are all thinking that this isn't a bit like it was on Earth where the launching was a big thing, attended by all sorts of experts, subject 
to all sorts of last minute checks. On the face of it, it seems 
all right. But you never can tell. 

" Two minutes," says Atah. 

Automatically, you try to settle yourself more comfortably. 
It's like being in a dentist's waiting room. You know the 
-kind of thing that's going to happen. You hate it, but 
you've got to go through with it. Memories from past 
experience of the same thing come crowding in and you relive 
the agony of the past — all to no purpose at all. 
" One minute." 

There's that mad desire to undo the clamps and rush away 
from it. You know it's too late, that you can't do anything: 
about it, ; but still you want to try. 

" Thirty seconds." 



406 THE MOON IS HEAVEN 

Your mouth is dry and your eyes seem to be right out of 
■their sockets. You glance across at Reina and see that she 
3ias her eyes closed. You decide to do the same. 

" Ten seconds. Eight. Seven. Five. Three. TwoZero." 

For one terrible moment, you think the thing has failed, 
■that there won't be an explosion, that the ship won't rise. 
"Even as you think it, you realise what a queer thing the 
human mind is. A moment ago you didn't want it to happen, 
4iow it would be catastrophic if it didn't. 

But it does. There's the same old roar, the same giant 
iha'nd smashing down into your face, the foot on your chest 
■making it difficult for you to breathe. 

And then the air is filled with lights. Maybe it's because 
you've been working hard and got weak. Perhaps you 
"haven't been having enough of the right things to eat. What.ever it is, you feel consciousness slipping from you, and the 
.control room becomes quite black. 

In a way it's quite a relief. 

It's laughter that greets your return to consciousness. 
■Reina's laughter. For a second, you wonder if she's 
-hysterical, but then you see that it isn't that. 

She is sitting up above your mattress looking down at you 
and laughing. " You look so funny with your mouth open," 
ihe says. 

Abruptly it pulls you back to full consciousness as nothing 
.else could, and you close your mouth sharply. In a moment 
■you open the clasps and sit up — and the movement carries 
■you off the mattress. You wonder if you'll never get used to 
•free-fall conditions. 

But in a way it's a good thing, for you sail up towards 
;Reina and collide with her. 

" All right, you two," says Leeson with a grin. "Cut 
•out the capers. We're going to change direction." 

It's then that you realise this is a serious business. The 
•ship must have reached escape velocity while you slept and 



TH8 MOON IS HEAVEN 107 

then gone into free-fall while yon woke up. You can see 
that Atah has been working at the course. 

" A five second burst on number three jet ought to do 
it," he says. 

"Five seconds!" Leeson exclaims. " D'y°u really mean 
that?" 

" 'Fraid so. We came up at a terrific angle you know. 
We're many thousands of miles out now." 

" Well, with a five second burst, all I can say is that it's 
just as well we left Schnabel back there," Leeson says. 

" You're telling me," Atah returns. " I'm damned glad 
you people talked me into it. I don't think we'd have got 
back otherwise." 

" All right, then. Back in your mattresses, you folks. 
This won't hurt, but we'd better not take chances." 

So you all do that. Except Clavier. He hasn't even got 
up. He's still lying there with his eyes closed peacefully. 
You reckon he just can't be bothered to do anything until 
the ship lands. He's been working hard enough for ten men. 

Leeson gives one look round to see that you're all clamped 
down and then reaches out for the fire control buttons. 
Looking along the top of your nose, you can see him depress 
one, his eyes on the chronometer. A jerk pushes you down 
into the mattress, but it's a very gentle one. Then you see 
Leeson's finger come away and you know it's all over. 

Immediately, Atah starts to work on his calculations again. 
Within a few minutes he looks up and beams. " We should 
come down within five miles of where we started from," he 
says. 

" That'll be siap in the middle of a sandy plain, then," 
Reina laughs. " Just like home." 

You get out of your clamps and gingerly swing your legs 
round so that you at least have the semblance of sitting, 
even though you are several inches above the mattress. You 
feel better that way. 

Looking round the room, you see that Clavier still hasn't 
got up. Hasn't even undone the clasps on his wrists. Then 



THE MOON IS HEAVEN 



you see the colour of his face and your stomach gets tighter 
-than it's ever been. You swallow hard and push yourself 
gently off the mattress towards Clavier's. Eeina tries to 
come, too, but you motion her away. 

" Stay where you are for a moment," you say to her. 
" Just stay where you are." 

Hovering over Clavier, you can see that it's true. The 
acceleration was too much for his heart. Clavier won't be 
.doing any more electrolysis, on the Moon or anywhere else. 

" Atah," you say. " Atah, look." 

He puts down his slide rule and floats over. There is deep 
concern on his face as he reaches out a hand and feels for 
Clavier's pulse. Then he turns away quickly and goes back 
io his slide rule. He sits with his back to the room, staring 
.at the rule. But his shoulders quiver. 

Leeson, who has sized things up, is looking straight at his 
instrument pane), his jaw set hard— just in case. 

Reina is unashamedly crying. You go across to her and 
slip an arm round her shoulder. 

" He was a great guy," Leeson says. " I'm glad I came 
■with him." 

" Yes," you say. " Yes. I guess'we all feel like that. 
He did so much— worked so hard— was such a cheery guy : 
Him and his apparatus." Suddenly you swing round to 
Atah, who's back is still turned to you. " Atah," you say. 
" Atah, they mustn't take it down, his electrolysis gear. It 
must stay there. Always." _ 

Atah turns tired shoulders to you. His face is lined with 
■the responsibilities he's been bearing for years and the great 
iurden he's been bearing these last few weeks. 

" It will," he says. " It will stay there." 

The horrible thing about it is there's nothing to cover 
Clavier's body with. There's no use for sheets so you didn't 
carry them on the ship. And it doesn't seem right to drape 
a spacesuit over him. Yet it doesn't seem right to leave him 
like that. 



THE MOON IS HEAVEN 



109 



But life has to go on. The ship still has to he piloted. 
Calculation still has to be made so that the ship won't wander 
off course. And Reina has to be cheered up. Sorrowing 
won't do anybody any good. Least of all Clavier. 

So you sit with Reina and talk about the future of the 
Moon. Atah and Leeson catch on too and interpolate odd 
remarks to keep things going. 

" The next generation will think this was a pretty clumsy 
business," you say. And Reina knows who you mean by 
the next generation. " They'll think we took a heck of a 
long time about doing very little. I can imagine that the 
■first men on Mars will have a much easier time of it, using 
our experience." 

" They will too," says Leeson. . " But they won't have 
■the distinction we've got. We're the first men to enter 
space!" 

" And I'm the first woman," says Reina proudly. " I'll 
never forget you for letting me come, Atah." 
" That's nice," he replies. 

It's pretty hard to keep talking when you're all so tired. 
In fact, you very nearly fall asleep while somebody's talking. 
Then,- after a while, you do fall asleep. With your arm 
found Reina. 

Leeson's voice calls you back to consciousness. " Back 
to your mattresses all of you. We're landing!" 
Oh, God, you think. That again! 

But it's not so bad as it might be. And there's plenty of 
fuel so there's no risk being run. You just lie back on the 
mattress and imagine what's going to happen down below. 

One thing that's pretty certain is that you won't like the 
reception. No bands and flags for you. 

You reckon you must be about the only man who's proposed to a girl without kissing her first. And she's probably 
the first girl to marry a man under the same conditions. All 
in all, you're a pretty unique pair! 

The deceleration starts to grab at you, but you don't mind. 



110 THE HOON IS HEAVEN 

It doesn't matter any more. Maybe you're being selfish, but 
nothing seems to matter any more. The world is a great 
place, whether by that you mean Earth or Moon. Great 
places, both of them. 

And then the force drops away. The ship lurches a little 
and then stays motionless. 

" Well," says Atah. " We seem to have made it. Let's 
go and see what they think of the men in the Moon." 



THE END 



All characters in this story are fictitious and imaginary 
and bear no relation to any living person. 



Ill 

our book review 



We just hare to devote the 
whole of this space to a notice 
of only one book. For it is a 
work of tremendous importance 
for everyone who has ever read 
a word of science fiction, and 
cannot be too strongly recommended to all with the slightest 
■interest in space travel. 

THE EXPLORATION OF 
■SPACE is a new non-fiction 
•work from the pen of Arthur 
C. Clarke. B.Sc.. F.R.A.S., 
Chairman of the British Interplanetary Society. It is a kind 
of extension of his earlier 
INTERPLANETARY FLIGHT 
and is put out by the same publisher— Temple Press. Bowling 
tfjrccn Lane, London, E.C.I, at 
■12/6. 

There are 198 pages, fourteen plates (four in full colour) 
and a host of clear, fullyexplanatory drawings in the 
text. The hook is entirely nontechnical and can be understood 
toy any intelligent layman, 
whether he already knows anything of the subject or not. 

Eighteen chapters in lucid 
'language, dotted with Clarke's 
iowq brand of humour, deal 



with every aspect of extraterrestial exploration. And we 
mean every. 

The book starts with the 
shaping of the Dream, the ideas 
that have come down to us 
from the past. It covers the 
rocket in a way that makes 
this vehicle understandable to 
anyone. It then goes on to 
deal fully and completely with 
escape from Eanh. life in space, 
s'.:iv 'ijjLiiion. the Lunar and 
Martian bases, the inner and 
outer planets, space stations, 
other suns than ours, and even 
has a chapter on journeys to 
the stars. 

There is a full, but simple, 
discussion of all the problems 
involved in. space exploration — 
medical, engineering, political 
and legal. And there is a fine 
resume of the effect that the 
conquest of space will have on 
mankind. 

Through it all, you can be 
sure that every fact presented 
is accurate, and that every 
opinion- — clearly labelled as 
such — is based on the author's 
extensive experience in this 
field of human enquiry. 



Authentic Science Fiction is a periodical published on the I5th 
.of each month. This issue is No. 16, and has a publishing date 
.of December 15th, 1951. The contents are copyright and must not 
toe reproduced in whole or in part except with the written peranission of the publishers. Science fiction manuscripts are invited, 
but in all cases return postage and cover should be enclosed'No responsibility is accepted for damaged or lost MSS. 



AUTHENTIC SCIENCE FICTION 



In answer to many queries the 
following stories have appeared: 



No. 


1 


MUSHROOM MEN FROM MARS 


by Lee Stanton 




2 


RECONNOITRE KRELLtC II 


by |on ]. Deegan 


No. 


3 


GOLD MEN OF AUREUS 


by Roy Sheldon 


No. 


4 


OLD GROWLER 


by ]on J. Deegan 


No. 


5 


SEVEN TO THE MOON 


by Lee Stanton 


No. 


6 


PHANTOM MOON 


by Roy Sheldon 


No. 


7 


ENERCT ALIVE 


by Roy Sheldon 


No. 


S 


WORLD IN A TEST TUBE 


by H. J, Campbell 


No. 


9 


OLD CROWLER AND ORBIS 


by Jon ). Deegan 


No. 


10 


MAN, WOMAN — AND ANDROID 


by George Hay 


No. 


1 t 


THE LAST MUTATION 


by H. J. Campbell 


No. 


12 


TEN YEARS TO OBLIVION 


by Clem Macartney 


No. 


13 


BEAM OF TERROR 


by Roy Sheldon 


No. 


14 


PLANET OF POWER 


by Jon J. Deegan 


No. 


15 


REPORT FROM MANDAZO 


by Lee Stanton 



SUBSCRIPTIONS 



Why not make sure of your copy of 
AUTHENTIC SCIENCE FICTION by placing 
an order direct with the publishers? Rates: 

io/6 for six issues; n/- for twelve issues, mail included, 
or I. Jo, 3.00 dollars, respectively 



AUTHENTIC SCIENCE FICTION 

1 & 2 Melville Court, Goldhawk Road 
London, W.12 



Kill TOBACCO 




VICTOR INSTITUTE (GHL. 50) 

VICTOR HOUSE, LAWSON ROAD. 
COLWYN BAY. NORTH WALES 



