Galaxy 



FEBRUARY 1952 

SCIENCE FICTION ANC 



WHERE TO? by ROBERT A. HEINLEIN 

WHERE WERE WE? by I. S PRAGUE de CAM! 



me 



tar 10 Days 




ANYTHING IN LIFE YOU WANT! 



Whether you want an increased income, a new ttODBtj 
a fair union contract, a happier marriage, or 
simply a good night's sleep, here is a remarkable niiiliotl 
for turning your desires into REALITIES: 

THE MAGIC OF BELIEVING 

(The Science of Setting Your Goal — and then Rem hllW ll) 
by Claude M. Bristol, writer, lawyer, IwctHtti 
|&This unusua] book shows you how to put yum intttf mtttd 

to woik — how to utilize the power of your mil icloul 

mind to help you overcome obstacles and such , . I m whlttvtl 
you want to accomplish. 

Here is the secret of what women call intuition-- rcl i>;ii .in leaders 
call revelation— gamblers call hunch— top executives call personal magneliim. "The 
Magic of Believing" shows you; 

• How yoci can win success by working less hard than you do now. 

• How belief makes things happen. 

• How to get what you want easily through a process of making menial pictures. 

• How to use "the law of suggestion" to step up your effectiveness in everything you do. 

• How to let your imagination find the ways and means of pushing obstacles 
aside for you. 

• How "the mirror technique" will release your subconscious. 

• How to project your thoughts and turn them into achievements. 

You can put this powerful force to work for you at once. In jujl 10 dayi you will bruin to iti 
how this remarkable method can change your entire life! It will reveal to you wlui slips to take; 

. see; what to say; when and how. "The Ma^ii <>i Itilievirig" csn 
riches, dreams into reality; failure into success. 

READ THIS REMARKABLE BOOK 10 DAYS FREE 
See for yourself— without risk or obligation— how "The Magic 



"I got a job I have been 
wincing and trying to get 
over a year."— D. M. luide. 
Englewood, Calif. 

"An exceedingly practical 
analysis of the technique of 
rtiL-ntal power ... a guidebook :o success."— Mrs. R. 
Bondwmt, Portland, Ore. 

"This book is magic! Startling and instantaneous results seem to follow every 
chapter. Truly one of the 



of Believing" reveals the prank- a] way to get mure of everything 
' jut of life. Mail coupon below. 



FREE EXAMINATION COUPON 

PRENTICE-HALL, Inc., Dept. M-GAL 352 
70 Fifth Avenue. New York II. N. Y. 

Without obligation, send me a. copy of "THE MAGIC OP* BE- ■ 

LI13VING." by ('liiiidn M. Ilrist.nl. far 1(1 DAYS' li'HK HI TRIAL. I 

At the end of 10 days I will either return Mm Lunik una owe I 

notliine — or keep it ami -end only IF 1.0(1 plus a few pennies for ' 

posrane and parkins, and then (].M a luimlli imlil tint lew price I 
of only |3,W U paid. 

Name ! 

Address , J 



City 

SAVE. Sond S3. 95 WITH THIS COUPO 
flinu eharoei. Same return prh" — 
completely satisfied. 



. .Zone State 



ship- | 



sack if not 



SCIENCE FICTION 



Aaslttcinr Editor 

EVELYN PAIGE 

Art Director 

W. I. VAN DER POEl 

Production Manoger 

J, J. De MARIO 

Advertising Manager 

JOHN ANDERSON 



Covar bf 
RICHARD POWERS 

Illustrating 

WHERE WERE WE? 
and WHERE TO? 

GALAXY SeitnC Fictifm 
it published monthly by 
Galaxy Publishing Corporation. Main offices : 421 
Hudson Street, New York 
14, N. Y. 35c per copy. 
Subscriptions : (12 copies) $3.50 per year in the 
United Slices, Canada, 
Mexico, South and Cen(111 America and U.S. 
Possessions. Elsewhere 
K.50. Entered as secondtins matter Jt the Post 
Office. New York, N. Y. 
Copyright, 1951, by Galaxy Publishing Corporalion. Robert M. Guinn, 
president. All rights, 
including translation, reserved. All material submitted must be accompanied 
by sell -add teased stamped 
envelopes. The publisher 
assumes no responsil>ilii j 

(or unsolicited material. 
AH stories printed in this 
magazine are fiction, and 
any similarity betweencharacters and aciuil persons 
ia coincidental. 



FEBRUARY, 1952 Vol. 3, No. 5 

CONTENTS 

ARTICLE SURVEY 

WHERE WERE WE? 

by t. Sprague de Camp 4 

WHERE TO? 

by Robert A. Heinfein 13 

NOVELET 

CONDITIONALLY HUMAN 

by Walter M. Miller, Jr. 30 

SHORT STORIES 

DOUBLE STANDARD 

by Alfred Coppei 23 

DR. KOMETEVSKY'S DAY 

by fritz Letter 64 

FRESH AIR FIEND 

by Kris Neville 8° 

BOOK-LENGTH SERIAL -Installment 2 

THE DEMOLISHED MAN 

by Alfred 1 Besfer 101 

FEATURES 

EDITOR'S PAGE 

by H, 1. Gold 2 

GALAXY'S FIVE STAR SHELF 

by GrofT ConJcfin 84 

FORECAST 87 



PrJefad m tbU.VA. 
by the Gulnn Co.. Inc. 



Rag- U.S. Pit. Off. 



Open Letters 



WRITES Howard Kaminsky, 330 Church Avenue, Woodmere, N. Y.: 
"As you point out. prediction is 
not the purpose of science fiction; 
the fact is that human society 
evolves, as does all life, by the 
emergence of novel integrations, 
reducible to their original components only by backwards logic. 
When conjecture is extended millenia into the future, the chance 
of hitting anything even faintly 
related to future reality (social 
patterns, individual motivations, 
cultural principles, etc) are almost nothing. All science fiction 
begins and ends with the present 
—that is, it extrapolates present 
tendencies into an environment 
constructed out of present cultural components, or their opposites. The insights achieved by 
this method are not inconsiderable, but let us not fool ourselves 
as to what the insights see into." 

I don't, of course, want to 
spoil the point of the articles by 
de Camp and Heinlein in this 
issue. However, finding the significance of science fiction is urgent now, when it has suddenly 
become so important to so many 
people. 

The interpretations, as usual, 
arc glib and superficial: 



• Science fiction is a substitute 

for those who can't accept mystic 
prophecy. 

• By creating fictitious futures, 
either on Earth or in space, it assures readers that civilization will 

survive. 

• By providing ghastly cataclysms and police states, it convinces the reader that the present 
isn't so bad, after all. 

If these are factors of importance, they are, it seems to me, 
secondary to Mr. Kaminsky's 
thesis: 

• "All science fiction begins and 
ends with the present — that is, 
it extrapolates present tendencies 
into an environment constructed 
out of present cultural components, or their opposites." 

. If science fiction were in the 
business of prediction, it should 
have forecast: the release of 
atomic power before the development of rocketry ; our ability 
right now to wipe venereal disease and insects off the planet; 
the fact that 90% of all prescriptions Today could not have been 
filled only ten years ago; the 
enormous growth of — science fiction itself! 

By creating fictitious futures, 
it does no more than reveal the 
unsuspectedly healthy optimism 



2 



GALAXY SCIINCE FICTION 



that exists in our own era. In 
other words, rather than escape, 
whether into time or space, science fiction explores present positive tendencies, outlooks, hopes. 
I'm sure some of these will come 
true, but even that doesn't matter. What counts is that there is 
a strong core of health in this 
sick-seeming period of ours, and 
science fiction often finds it. 

Even the ghastly cataclysms 
and police states that science fiction creates, presumably to convince the reader that the present 
isn't so bad, reveal this healthy 
attitude. We are witting to explore. If we can get back, fine, 
but we'll risk one-way trips. 

Science fiction is no awesome 
cerebral escape machine. It tells 
us about ourselves and our era. 
What it tells is usually encouraging — and extremely entertaining. 
Isn't that enough? Which branch 
of literature offers more? 

T^ROM Graham B. Stone, Box 
61, The Union, University of 
Sydney, NSW, Australia, comes 
an appeal: "We are planning a 
science fiction fan convention in 
Sydney, weekend of March 22nd, 
1952. I can be reached at the 
above address. Fans in Melbourne could look up D. H. Tuck 
at 13 Gordon Street, Footseray; 
in Perth, R. N. Dard at 232 
James Street." 
I was in the Pacific as a cora
OPtN UTTERS 



bat engineer, and, although science fiction wasn't as urgent to 
me as some other matters at the 
time, I do know that readers 
Down Under live on science fiction K-rations. I hope this mention helps to end the drought. 

Mr. Stone also suggests borrowing certain outmoded art layouts from another magazine. His 
suggestion happens to coincide 
with several dozen angry letters 
asking whether we aren't equally 
angry over the "shameless lifting" of our cover design by that 
same magazine. 

No, we're not angry, though we 
would like to know when we may 
have it back again. We are developing some other ideas; would 
the magazine in question prefer 
to have us send them over now, 
or wait and see how they work 
out after publication? 

It is also amusing to note that 
Prelude to Space (
 Novel No. 3) was 
the only book reviewed in that 
magazine which did not have a 
publisher, and The Stars, Like 
Dust (serialized in GALAXY as 
Tyranri) startled its reviewer because the book did not originate 
there. The reviewer will go on 
being startled. GALAXY, of 
course, will continue to credit 
periodicals in which' stories first 
appeared — including our unsportsmanlike imitator. 

— H. L. COLD 

S 



WHERE WERE WE? 






By 




L S PRAGUE 




de CAMP 


Here, sorrily, h the miserable 


record 


of science fief ion's early predictions. Con

sider it well— will our record be better? 



lines. The latter are of two kinds: 
inverted monorail cars suspended 
from a cable which in turn is held 
up by captive balloons; and great 
dirigible airships propelled by 
electricity, with sails for auxiliary 
motive power and lifeboats equipped with parachutes. One of these 
latter monsters can fly to London 
in 36 hours. 

When Gabriel sits down in a 
restaurant, he sees a "mirror" 
(like a television screen) on which 
the menu appears. After making 
his choice he presses numbered 
buttons below the screen, and 



ABO^T the middle of the 20th 
century, Gabriel Weltstein 
J .m lands in New York: a 
young man from a Swiss colony 
in Africa, who has come thither to 
arrange the sale of his colony's 
main product, wool. As he has led 
a simple bucolic life, the big city 
fascinates and awes him. The 
streets are roofed over with glass, 
illuminated by magnetic lights, 
and jammed with pedestrians. 
There is little wheeled traffic save 
the carriages of the world-ruling 
banker aristocracy. Overhead 
weave elevated railways and air


« 




 



presently the table opens up and 
his meal rises from below. When 
he presses another button a facsimile of the day's newspaper appears on the screen. Although the 
season is a New York summer, 
the restaurant is cool. A balloon 
floats overhead, tethered to the 
restaurant by a double canvas 
tube through which hot air is exhausted to the stratosphere white 
cold air is sucked down from- the 
heights to replace it. 

Later Gabriel meets other wonders: the municipal heating system which gets hot water from 
the depths of the earth; the pneumatic-tube network by which a 
subscriber can communicate almost instantly with any other in 
the city, the suicide houses where 
people are given a painless end, 
and so on. Then comes the day 
when he snatches a beggar from 
under the hoofs of the coachhorses of one of the wicked bankers. The beggar turns out to be a 
leader of the oppressed masses, 
and Gabriel is launched upon his 
adventures. 

An alternate time track? Not 
exactly. This is the New York of 
the present time as described 60 
years ago by Ignatius Donnelly in 
his prophetic novel Caesar's Column, which sold over a million 
copies. 

The enthusiastic Ignatius 
(1831-1901) should be familiar to 
all science fiction addicts, for, be


sides writing three novels in th 
genre, he converted the lost Atlantic from a speculation of scholars into a popular cult. His Atlanti: The Antediluvian World 
ran through 50 editions and is 
still in print. In The Great Cryptogram he performed the same 
service for the theory that Bacon 
wrote the plays of Shakespeare. 

Born in Philadelphia of Irish 
parents, Donnelly studied law 
and migrated to Minnesota, 
where he led an active political 
career, becoming lieutenant-governor at 28 and being one of the 
founders of the Populist Party. 

Time has played an ironical 
trick on Donnelly. Many of the 
political measures he advocated, 
deemed dreadfully radical at the 
time, are now taken for granted. 
Donnelly is remembered^ however, not for these sotirra" ideas 
but for his promotion of the 
pscudo -scientific and pseudoscholarly cults of Atlantism and 
Baconianism! 

T^ONNELI.Y'S three novels, 
*~-^ Caesar's Colum, Dr. Hu&uet t 
and The Golden Bottle, were published in the early 90s. The first 
deals with the uprising of the 
masses against a Jewish oligarchy. (Donnelly showed antiSemitic animus in this story, 
which he later seemed to have 
outgrown.) However, the masses 
have become so degraded by their 



WHERE WERE WET 



servitude that they kill off their 
own more enlightened leaders, 
and the world sinks into barbarism. Dr. Huguet deals with the 
Negro problem by the now-familiar device of transposing souls. 
To make his hero appreciate the 
■light of the American Negro, 
y onnelly puts him into the body 
f one. And The Golden Bottle 
i an alchemical dream wherein 
.he narrator is given a liquid that 
turns base metal to gold. By this 
power he becomes a financial 
titan, and conquers and reforms 
the world. 

Caesar's Column is one of many 
stories written between 1880 and 
1910 which try to foresee the 
shape of things in mid or late 
20th century. We can, therefore, 
for the first time in history, en joy 
the sensation of seeing ourselves 
as our ancestors predicted us. 

Many of these narratives are 
pretty poor fiction by modern 
landards. Thus Edward Bellmy's Looking Backward (1888), 
» prophecy of an ideal Socialist 
future, which had an enormous 
sale at the time, is unreadably 
dull. Bellamy puts his hero to 
sleep in 1887 and awakens him in 
2000; after that, all that happens 
is that the hero listens to interminable lectures from people on 
the social and economic organization of 2000. Yet even the worst 
of these yarns sheds light on 
man's ability to foresee his, future. 



We often hear of such successful 
prophecies: Jack London's The 
Iron Heel is cited as a forecast of 
Fascism, while it is said that an 
inventor was once denied a patent 
on a periscope because Jules 
Verne had described it in detail 
in Twenty Thousand Leagues 
under the Sea. 

But you can't prove prophetic 
insight by citing successes alone, 
for if you make enough guesses 
about the future of anything you 
will make some hits by luck. 
What, then, of the failures? For 
instance, while Donnelly in Caesar's Column foresaw air travel, 
and while his pneumatic tubes 
and magnetic lights have analogues in the real world, he anticipated nothing corresponding 
to the automobile. 

Many writers of futuristic novels devoted much space to the 
mechanical wonders of the future 
world. They made some good hits 
and some even remarkable misses. 
In these old novels we come 
across the transatlantic telephone, 
the electric light, and the flashlight in The King's Men by Grant, 
O'Reilly, Dale and Wheelwright 
(1884), a lively tale despite the 
extraordinary number of collaborators that wrote it. It is a 
story of an abortive conspiracy 
'to restore King George V to the 
throne of the British Republic. 
This king is fat, foolish, and 
lecherous, quite different from the 



6 




 



frigidly correct and conventional 
man who actually occupied the 
British throne under that title. 
But with all their improvements 
the authors still fill their 20thcentury scenes with horse-drawn 
carriages and servants in powdered wigs. 

OR take A. D. 2000 by Lt. A. 
M. Fuller, USA (1890). Lieutenant Fuller, like Bellamy, puts 
his hero to sleep and awakens him 
in 2000, to find electric clocks 
like ours, a New York subway 
system not unlike the real one, 
and a national newspaper printed 
in many places by a "sympathetic 
telegraph" — a kind of radio-teletypewriter. Street traffic is a 
mixture of horse-buggies and 
"electric drags ;" underground 
pneumatic railways span the continent. Air travel is by dirigible 
balloon or airship, and he sends 
his hero off to discover the North 
Pole in one. 

Similarly Frank Stockton of 
lady-or-tiger fame, in The Great 
Stone of Sardis (1898), had the 
Pole reached by submarine, as 
Sir Hubert Wilkins once tried to 
do in fact. The story combines 
considerable imagination and 
some of Stockton's folksy humor 
with glaring logical lapses and a 
feeble knowledge of the science 
actually of Stockton's own time. 
Evert Bellamy, who paid little 
attention to technical matters. 



credited his future Americans 
with a device like Muzak. 

Several authors foresaw the 
wide use of aluminum — but at the 
same time foresaw the wide use 
of moving sidewalks and monorail trains, which have not materialized. The latter were to be 
of two kinds: one suspended from 
an overhead rail like the real interurban line at Wupperthal in 
the Ruhr, Germany, which is still 
running. (Recently it had a slight 
mishap when a publicity man 
gave a baby elephant a ride. The 
beast, disliking the motion, 
plunged out a door into the Wupper River, from which it was recovered indignant but unharmed.) 
The other kind stood on a single 
rail, being kept upright by gyroscopes. The streamlined Dieselelectric train was not foreseen, 
though the Diesel engine was patented in 1892 and the streamlined 
train in. 1865. 

In general, pre -automobile authors missed the automobile completely, despite occasional mention of electric bicycles and the 
like ; or at least they had no conception of its importance in modern economics, social custom, city 
planning, road-building, and traffic management. They also missed 
motion pictures, and the radio 
and related electrical communications (teletype, television, radar, 
etc.). 

In the matter of aircraft, some 



WHERE WERE WET 



7 



like Grant et aL, Bellamy, and 
Stockton ignored them. Others 
bet on the dirigible airship instead 
of the airplane — a poor choice. In 
their prophecies of aircraft these 
authors illustrate one of my 
points; that prophets are fairly 
safe with generalities, but their 
score gets progressively worse as 
they try to become more particular. H. G. Wells and Rudyard 
Kipling both tried their'hands at 
detailed aeronautical prophecies 
with amusing results. 

In When the Sleeper Wakes 
(1899) Wells awakens his "sleeper," Graham, about 2100. Graham's money has accumulated by 
compound interest until he owns 
most of the world, which is ruled 
in his name by the "Council" of 
trustees of his fortune. There are 
"aeroplanes" (large, fast transport aircraft with wings in tandem) and "aeropiles" (small insectlike fliers for private use). 
Their military potential has never 
been developed because the Council came into power and stopped 
all war before they were perfected. 

By 1907 aircraft had been reduced to reality, and in Well's 
The War in the Air, published 
that year, Germany sets out to 
conquer the United States with 
a fleet of rigid airships of the type 
that Count Zeppelin (who, by 
the way, served as a Union officer 
in the U. S. Civil War had been 



developing. These craft are accompanied by a swarm of parasite airplanes, or Drachtenfiieger, 
suspended from them as the U. 
S. Navy actually did with the 
unfortunate Akron and Macon. 

"CMRST the Germans sink the 
American fleet with bombs 
from the airplanes. The idea of a 
cheap little airplane manned by 
a cheap little aviator sinking a 
huge expensive battleship appeals 
to the average reader's Davidand-Goliath prejudice had long 
fascinated speculative writers. 
Like many prophecies, the idea 
turned out to be true, but not 
the whole truth — as witness the 
Battle of the Philippine Sea, 
where the Japanese threw 404 
carrier planes against the American fleet and lost them all without seriously harming a single 
ship. 

Then Well's airships went on 
to destroy New York City and 
seize strategic points about the 
nation. Meanwhile Britain and 
France attacked Germany and 
an Asiatic Empire attacked everybody. The Asiatics used flattened 
airships (like oversize flying saucers) and swarms of one-man 
ornithopters. The pilots of the 
latter landed and attacked their 
antagonists with samurai swords 
— not so funny as it sounds, for in 
World War II Japanese aviators 
actually wore such swords in 



a 




 



their cockpits, and Russian aviators are now said to climb into 
theirs with Cossack sabers. 

Finally civilization was smashed and everything simmered down 
to barbarism — a favorite theme 
with Wells, who never realized 
that with- the increase in powers 
of destruction has gone an almost 
as impressive increase in powers 
of organization and reconstruction. 

In a later and inferior novel 
(too much editorializing and not 
enough story). The World Set 
Free (1914), Wells foresaw the 
destruction of cities by atomic 
bombs dropped (by hand!) from 
airplanes. This time civilization 
was saved from collapse when the 
King of England and the French 
Ambassador to the United States 
got together and called a conference of heads of nations to set 
up a world government, as people 
in real life have made two fumbling, half-hearted, and not very 
successful efforts to do. 

Kipling's short With the Night 
Mail (1909) bets on the airship 
for long-range transportation, but 
assumes that its lift will be , 
greatly increased in proportion to 
its size by "Fluery's gas." Mechanically, Kipling's aircraft have 
little to do with modern airliners, 
but his description of aerial traffic control has a ring of reality. 
And being, like Wells, a master pf 
narrative technique, his tale is 

WHERE WERE WE? 



infinitely more readable than 
those of amateurs like Bellamy. 
None of these early aeronautical 
prophets foresaw the nature of 
aerial combat: their aircraft fight 
with rifles, or by ramming, or by 
grasping each other with steel 
jaws. 

In the sphere of culture most 
prophetic novels are weak, Developments in the arts are largely 
ignored. Most of them assume us 
to be wearing the beards, stiff collars, and street-sweeping dresses 
of late -Victorian days; when they 
do hazard a clothes- prophecy, 
they put the men in knee-breeches 
or the like. No doubt the authors 
would be amazed to see an American street in summer with the 
men hatless, coatless, and tieless, 
and the women in dresses of knee 
or calf length, or even (in suburbs 
and resorts) in shorts and halters. 
They would be horrified by a 
modern bathing beach, and the 
flourishing nudist movement 
would reduce them to gibbering 
incoherence. 

WHILE, some prophets mentioned the emancipation of 
women, none grasped the lengths 
to which it has gone, with lady 
senators and army, colonels. They 
never dreamed of "good" women 
with makeup,, smoking, swearing; 
and, drinking — acts which in their 
days, were restricted to what they 
called "unfortunate females." 

9 



Their heroines shriek and swoon 
at the slightest shock in true Victorian tradition. None foresaw the 
most important Western cultural 
developments of late decades: the 
grotesque prohibition episode in 
America with its resulting rise in 
organized crime; the decline in the 
influence of religion; the rise in 
the living standards of most lower-income groups; and the stupendous rise in the rate of divorce 
and remarriage. 

Well, not quite. Victor Rous■eau (Emmanuel) in his The 
Messiah of the Cylinder (1917) 
foresaw a world ruled by an 
Atheistic Socialist tyranny which 
encourages such horrors as divorce and birth control. However, 
the s pious Christian Russians 
come to the rescue of the oppressed Good People, destroy the 
Socialist armies in a war fought 
with death-rays and airplanes 
with jaws, and restore the oldfashioned virtues. That's right — 
the Russians! 

Which brings us to political 
prophecies. The authors tried 
everything. The world may be 
happy under a purified Capitalism, or groaning under a Capitalist dictatorship. Sometimes Socialism has brought about a 
Utopian millenium (Bellamy^; 
■ometimes it has engendered a 
tyranny as bad as that of the real 
U.S.S.R. The prophets erred in 
■eeking political simplicity, 



whereas reality has been infinitely 
various, inconsistent, and untidy. 
The authors have repeatedly 
made Great Britain into a republic or a Socialist dictatorship, but 
none foresaw the present mild 
bumbling democratic Socialist 
monarchy, a more contradictory 
conglomeration than any author 
ever imagined. Several writers 
have annexed all of North America to the United States, to the 
intense annoyance of Canadians 
and Mexicans who think they're 
doing all right and have no desire 
to join the Yanquis. 

Usually the prophets (being 
Americans and Britons — I haven't 
read much of the Continental 
literature) have either proclaimed 
or hoped for the triumph of democracy, with a few exceptions. 
That delightful old imperialist 
Kipling put the world under an 
irresponsible Aerial Board of 
Control, while Lieutenant Fuller 
reformed the United States along 
the lines one would expect from 
a naively well-meaning military 
man: He had a single political 
party and got rid of such disorderly manifestations of democracy as juries and labor unions. 

And what of war? The earlier 
prophets failed to foresee the 
mechanization and complexity of 
modern warfare; while some introduced airplanes, most retained 
horse cavalry. So did the Russian 
Red Army, but not without ex
ALAXY SCIENCE FICTION 



tensive modernization. The tank 
was foreseen only in two shorts, 
one by Wells (The Land Ironclads, 1903) and the other by 
Colonel Swinton of the Royal 
Engineers, who was one of the 
actual inventors of the tank. 

For first-class war prophecies 
we have to come to later times: 
to Hector Bywater's The Great 
Pacific War (1925) and Floyd 
Gibbon's The Red Napoleon 
(1929). Bywater, a British naval 
expert, told of an American-Japanese war of 1931-3. In many 
respects it followed the course of 
the real one: the Japanese took 
Guam and the Philippines; then 
we took Truk, Angaur, and retook the Philippines, brought the 
Japanese fleet to bay, and defeated it. 

Bywater, trying to be conservative, underestimated the range 
and striking power of modern 
Beets, and vastly underestimated 
the power of the airplane. Amphibious operations and new warship construction play but little 
part in his war. In his preface he 
says: "It would have been easy, 
for example, to bring the Japanese battle fleet to Hawaii . . . 
but to do so would have been to 
expose the narrative to the wellmerited ridicule of informed critics." Shades of Pearl Harborf Of 
course in 1931 the airplane was 
not so effective as a decade later, 
and landing-craft had not even 



been invented. Prophecy should, 
however, by rights anticipate 
such developments. 

GIBBONS tells of the nearly 
successful effort of Ivan 
Karakhan, Stalin's successor, to 
conquer the world in order to establish communism and to abolish racial inequality. During 
1932-6 his armies overrun all the 
Old World and then, using the 
European and Japanese fleets, he 
hurls great expeditions across the 
oceans to Mexico and both coasts 
of Canada to attack the United 
States. If Bywater underestimated the possibilities of such 
operations, Gibbons greatly overestimated them. But his climactic 
naval battle is more nearly in accord with technical possibilities 
than Bywater's; the American 
surface fleet is outnumbered, but 
American superiority in submarines and airplanes turns the 
tide. 

Gibbons *s shortcomings are 
ideological. In decrying the Red 
Menace he overlooked the Fascist 
Menace, destined to make an 
earlier (though not necessarily 
more dangerous) attempt at 
world conquest. And he makes 
his villain Karakhan call enlightenedly for racial equality and 
the brotherhood of man. like most 
modern statesmen, while Gibbons 
himself appeals to Ms readers* 
basest prejudices by ranting 



WHERE WERE WE? 



11 



about the "yellow hordes." Both 
Gibbons and Bywater thought the 
Japanese-Americans of Hawaii 
would revolt; actually, in World 
War II, they provided the U. S. 
Army with loyal soldiers whose 
combat records were magnificent. 

Thus the later Victorian prophetic story-writers managed to 
be right in a few broad and simple respects in their prophecies of 
the latter half of the 20th century. They foresaw that the world 
would become more mechanized, 
populous, and complicated; that 
Socialism would grow and would 
attain power in some countries; 
that faster transportation, especially by air, would affect men'i 
lives. 

As they got more specific and 
detailed, though, they went further astray, and some important 
developments they overlooked 
pretty generally — the autombile, 
radio, and motion picture; the 
internal combustion engine in its 
many forms; prohibition, birth, 
control, and wide-spread divorce; 
the fading away of the old Judeo-Christian nudity tabu; and 
so on. Their ratio of success is 
little greater than that to be expected by luck; it seems greater 



because we remember the successful forecasts and forget the 
wild guesses. 

The science fiction of the present appears to be considerably 
better grounded scientifically, sociologically and psychologically, 
in its higher forms. Even if we 
cannot point to any one story and 
say with confidence, here is the 
real future, the mere concept of 
a different future is an enormous 
advance. When the Martians 
land, or tyranny clamps down on 
the world, or we bomb ourselves 
into barbarism, science fiction 
readers at least won't rush about 
crying: "It's impossible! It just 
can't be I" They'll have been 
through it all before. 

The possibility, in fact, if we 
judge by the older prophecies, is 
that we'll turn out to have been 
too conservative. Not only pessimistically but otherwise, for science fiction also envisions happy 
futures as well as doomed ones. 
It will be interesting, to put it 
calmly, to see what some citizens 
of 2000 A. D. will say in reviewing 
the stories in 
. I'd rather like to be one of 
them. 

— t, SPRAGUE DE CAMP 



By simply existing today, we can ace how far our science fiction ancestors' 
prophecies were from the astonishing reality of the present. But remember — they 
lacked the scientific techniques we control and could only hope and guess. 
Utilizing modern methods of extrapolation, Robert A. Heinlein indicates, in the 
Brat article, what — and what not — to expect in the year 2,000 A.D. 



» 




 



WHERE TO? | 

By 

ROBERT A. 
HEINIEIN 

The coming events easting their shadows 
before them do not need any microscopes 
to be seen — they need reducing gtasses! 



MOST science fiction consists of big-muscled stories about adventures in 
space, atomic wars, invasions by 
extraterrestrials, and such. All 
very well — but now we will take 
time out for a look at ordinary 
homelife half a century hence. 

Except for tea leaves and other 
magical means, the only way to 
guess at the future is by examining the present in the light of 
the past. Let's go back half a 
century and visit your grandmother before we attempt to visit 
your grandchildren. 



1900: Mr. McKinley is president and the airplane has not yet 
been invented. We'll knock on 
the door of that house with the 
gingerbread, the stained glass, 
and the cupola. 

The lady of the house answers. 
You recognize her — your own 
grandmother, Mrs. Middleclass. 
She is almost as plump as you 
remember her, for she "put on 
some good healthy flesh" after 
she married. 

She welcomes you and offers 
coffee cake, fresh from her modern kitchen (running water from 



WHERE TO? 



*3 



a hand pump; the best coal range 
Pittsburgh ever produced). Everything about her house is 
modern — hand-painted china, 
souvenirs from the Columbian 
Exposition, beaded portieres, shining baseburner stoves, gas lights, 
a telephone on the wall. 

There is no bathroom, but she 
and Mr. Middleclass are thinking 
of putting one in. Mr. Middleclass's mother calls this nonsense, 
but your grandmother keeps up 
with the times. She is an advocate 
of clothing reform, wears only one 
petticoat, bathes twice a week, 
and her corsets are guaranteed 
rustproof. She has been known to 
defend female suffrage — though 
not in the presence of Mr. Middleclass. 

Nevertheless, you find difficulty in talking with her. Let's 
jump back to the present and try 
again. 

The automatic elevator takes 
us to the ninth floor, and we 
pick out a door by its number, 
that being the only way to distinguish it. 

"Don't bother to ring," you 
say? What? It's your door and 
you know exactly what lies beyond it — 

Very well, let's move a half 
century into the future and try 
another middleclass home. 

It's a suburban home not two 
hundred miles from the city. You 
pick out your destination from 



the air while.the cab is landing 
you — a cluster of hemispheres 
which makes you think of the 
houses Dorothy found in Oz. 

You set the cab to return to 
its hangar, and you go into the 
entrance hall. You neither knock 
nor ring. The screen has warned 
them before you touched down on 
the landing flat and the autobutler's transparency is shining 

With: PLEASE RECORD A MESSAGE. 

Before you can address the 
microphone, a voice calls out, 
"Oh, it's you! Come in, come in." 
There is a short wait, because 
your granddaughter is not at the 
door. The autobutler has flashed 
your face to the patio, where she 
was reading and sunning herself, 
and has relayed her voice back 
to you. 

She pauses at the door, looks 
at you through one-way glass, 
and frowns slightly: she knows 
your old-fashioned disapproval 
of casual nakedness. Her kindness 
causes her to disobey the family 
psychiatrist — she grabs a robe 
and covers herself before signaling the door to open. 

You have thus been classed 
with strangers, tradespeople, and 
others who are not family intimates. But you must swallow 
your annoyance; you cannot object to her wearing clothes when 
you have disapproved of her not 
doing so. 

There is no reason why she 



14 




 



should wear clothes at home. The 
house is clean — not somewhat 
clean, but clean — and comforable. The floor is warm to bare 
feet; there are no unpleasant 
drafts, no cold walls. All dust is 
precipitated from air entering 
this house. All textures, of floor, 
of couch, of chair, are comfortable to bare skin. Sterilizing 
ultra-violet light floods each 
room whenever it is unoccupied, 
and, several times a day, a 
"whirlwind" blows house-created 
dust from all surfaces and whisks 
it out. These auto-services are 
unobtrusive because automatic 
cutoff switches prevent them from 
occurring whenever a mass in 
a room is radiating at blood temperature. 

Such a house can become untidy, but not dirty. Five minutes 
of straightening, a few swipes at 
children's fingermarks and her 
day's housekeeping is done. Oftener than sheets were changed 
in Mr. McKinley's day, this 
housewife rolls out a fresh layer 
of sheeting on each sitting surface and stuffs the discard down 
the oubliette. This is easy; there 
is a year's supply on a roll concealed in each chair or couch. 
The tissue sticks by pressure until pulled loose and does not obscure the pattern and color. 

You go into the family room, 
sit down, and remark on the 
lovely day. 



"Isn't it?" she answers. "Come 
sunbathe with me." 

The sunny patio gives excuse 
for bare skin by anyone's standards. Thankfully, she throws off 
the robe and stretches out on a 
couch. You hesitate a moment, 
After all. though, she is your own 
grandchild, so why not? You undress quickly, since you left your 
outer wrap and shoes at the door 
(only barbarians wear street 
shoes in a house) and what remains is easily discarded. Your 
grandparents had to get used to 
a mid-century beach. It was no 
easier than this. 

On the other hand, their bodies 
were wrinkled and old, whereas 
yours isn't. The triumphs of endocrinology, of cosmetics, of 
plastic surgery, of figure control 
in every way are such that a man 
or a woman need not change 
markedly from maturity until old 
age. A person can keep his body 
as firm and slender as he wishes 
— and most of them so wish. This 
has produced a paradox ; the 
United States has the highest percentage of old people in all its 
two and a quarter centuries, yet. 
it seems to have a larger propor-^ 
tion of handsome young citizens 
than ever before. 

("Don't whistle, son! That's 
your grandmother — ") .• 

This garden is half sunbathing: 
patio, complete with shrubs arid 
flowers, lawn and couches, and 



half swimming pool. The day, 
though sunny, is quite cold — but 
not in the garden, nor is the 
pool chilly. The garden appears to 
be outdoors, but is not; it is 
covered by a bubble of transparent plastic, blown and cured on 
the spot. You are inside the 
bubble; the Sun is outside; you 
Gimnot sec the plastic. 

She invites you to lunch; you 
protest. 

"Nonsense!" she answers. "I 
like to cook.** 

Into the house she goes. You 
think of following, but it is deUciously warm in the March sunshine and you are feeling relaxed 
to be away from the city. You 
locate a switch on the side of 
the couch, set it for gentle massage, and let it knead your troubles away. The couch notes your 
heart rate and breathing; as they 
slow, so does it. When you fall 
asleep, it stops. 

Meanwhile your hostess has 
been "slaving away over a hot 
stove" To be precise, she has allowed a menu selector to pick out 
an 800-calory, 4 -ration-point 
luncheon. It is a random-choice 
gadget, somewhat like a slot machine, which has in it the running 
inventory of her larder and which 
will keep hunting until it turns up 
a balanced meal. Some housewives claim that it takes the art 
out of cookery, but our hostess 
is one of many who have accepted 



it thankfully as an endless source 
of new menus. The choice is limited today as it has been three 
months since she had done grocery shopping. She rejects several 
menus; the selector continues patiently to turn up combinations 
until she finally accepts one based 
around fish disguised as chops. 

Your hostess takes the selected 
items from shelves or the freezer. 
Al! are prepared; some are precooked. Those still tt> be cooked 
she puts into her — well, her 
"processing equipment." though 
she calls it a "stove." Part of it 
traces its ancestry to diathermy 
equipment and other features 
derived from metal enameling 
processes. She sets up cycles, 
punches buttons, and must wait 
two or three minutes for the meal. 

Despite her complicated 
kitchen, she doesn't eat as well 
as her great grandmother did — too 
many people and too few acres. 

Never mind; the tray she 
carries out to the patio is well 
laden and beautiful. You are 
both willing to nap again when 
it is empty. You wake to find 
that she has burned the dishes 
and is recovering from her "exertions" in her refresher. Feeling 
hot and sweaty from your nap, 
you decide to use it when she 
come out. There is a wide choice 
offered by the 'fresher, but you 
limit yourself to a warm shower 
growing gradually cooler, fol


16 




 



lowed by warm air drying, a short 
massage, spraying with scent, and 
dusting with powder. 

Your host arrives home as you 
come out; he has taken a holiday 
from his engineering job and has 
had the two boys down at the 
beach. 

His wife sends the boys in to 
'fresh themselves, then says, 
"Have a nice day, dear?" 

He answers, "The traffic was 
terrible. Had to make the last 
hundred miles on automatic. 
Anything on the phone for me?" 

"Weren't you on relay?" 

"Didn't set it. Didn't want to 
be bothered." He steps to the 
house phone, plays back his calls, 
finds nothing he cares to bother 
with — but the machine goes 
ahead and prints one massage. 
He pulls it out and tears it off. 

"What is it?" his wife asks. 

"Telestat from Luna City — 
from Aunt Jane," 

"What does she say?" 

"Nothing much. According to 
her, the Moon is a great place and 
she wants us to come visit her." 

"Not likely!" his wife answers. 
"Imagine being shut up in an 
air-conditioned cave." 

"When you are Aunt Jane's 
age, my honey lamb, and as frail 
as she is, with a bad heart thrown 
in, you'll go to the Moon and like 
it Low gravity is not to be 
sneezed at. Auntie will probably 
live to be a hundred and twenty, 



heart trouble and all.** 

"Would you go to the Moon?" 
she asks. 

"If I needed to and could afford it. Right?" he asks you. 

You consider your answer. Life 
still looks good to you and stairways are beginning to be difficult. 
Low gravity is attractive, even 
though it means living out your 
days at the Geriatrics Foundation 
on the Moon. 

"It might be fun to visit," you 
answer. "One wouldn't have to 
stay." 

TTOSPITALS for old people on 
the Moon? Let's not be 
silly — 

Or is it silly? Might it not be 
a logical and necessary outcome 
of our world today? 

Space travel we will have not 
fifty years from now, but much 
sooner. It's breathing down our 
necks. As for geriatrics on the 
Moon, for most of us no price 
is too high and no amount of 
trouble is too great to extend the 
years of our lives. It is possible 
that low gravity (one-sixth, on 
the Moon) may not lengthen 
li ves ; nevertheless it may — we 
don't know yet — and it will most 
certainly add greatly to comfort 
on reaching that inevitable age 
when the burden of dragging 
around one's body is almost too 
much, or when we would otherwise resort to an oxygen tent to 



WHERE TO? 



lessen the work of a wornout 
heart. 

By the rules of prophecy, such 
a prediction is probable, rather 
than impossible. 

But the items and gadgets suggested above are examples of 
timid prophecy. 

What are the rules of prophecy, if any? 




Look at the graph shown here. 
The solid curve is what has been 
going on this past century. It 
represents many things — use of 
power, speed of transport, numbers of scientific and technical 
workers, advance in communication, average miles traveled per 
person per year, advances in 
mathematics, the rising curve of 
knowledge. Call it the curve of 
human achievement. 

What is the correct way to project this curve into the future? 



Despite everything, there is a 
stubborn "common sense" tendency to project it along dotted 
line number (1) like the patent 
office official of a hundred years 
back who quit his job "because 
everything had already been invented." Even those who don't 
expect a stowing up at once tend 
to expect us to reach a point of 
diminishing returns — dotted line 
number (2). 

Very daring minds are willing 
to predict that we will continue 
our present rate of progressdotted line number (3) — a 
tangent. 

But the proper way to project 
the curve is dotted line number 
(4), because there is no reason, 
mathematical, scientific, or historical, to expect that curve to 
flatten out, or to reach a point of 
diminishing returns, or simply to 
go on as a tangent. The correct 
projection, by all known facts today, is for the curve to go on up 
indefinitely with increasing steepness. 

The timid little predictions 
earlier in this article actually belong to curve (1) or, at most, to 
curve (2). You can count on 
changes in the next fifty years 
at least eight times as great as 
the changes of the past fifty years. 

The Age of Science has not yet 
opened. 

axiom : A "nine-day wonder" 



GALAXY 



of disease is revising relations between sexes to an extent that will 
change our entire social and economic structure. 

3. The most important military 
fact of this century is that there 
is no way to repel an attack from 
space. 

4. It appears utterly impossible that the United States will 
start a "preventive war." We will 
fight when attacked, either directly or in a territory we have 
guaranteed to defend. 

5. In fifteen years the housing 
shortage will be solved by a 
"breakthrough" into new technology which will make every 
house now standing as obsolete 
as outdoor privies. The housing 
is taken as a matter of course on 
the tenth day. 

axiom : A "common sense" prediction is sure to err on the side 
of timidity. 

axiom : The more extravagant 
a prediction sounds, the more 
likely it is to come true. 

So let's have a few free-swinging predictions about the future. 

Some will be wrong — but cautious predictions are sure to be 
wrong. 

1. Interplanetary travel is waiting at your front door, c.O.n. It's 
yours when you pay for it, which 
the government is doing at least 
on an experimental basis. 

2. Contraception and control 



shortage will get worse until then. 

6. We'll all be getting a little 
hungry by and by. 

7. The cult of the phony in art 
will disappear. So-called "modern 
art" will be discussed only by 
psychiatrists. 

8. Freud will be classed as a 
pre -scientific, intuitive pioneer, 
and psychoanalysis will be replaced as a growing, changing 
"operational psychology" based 
on measurement and prediction. 

9. Cancer, the common cold, 
and tooth decay will all be conquered. The revolutionary new 
problem in medical research will 
be to accomplish "regeneration," 
i.e., to enable a man to grow a 
new leg, rather than fit him with 
an artificial limb. 

10. By the end of this century 
mankind will have explored the 
Solar System, and the first ship 
intended to reach the nearest 
star will be abuilding. 

1 1 . Your personal telephone 
will be small enough to carry in 
your handbag. Your house telephone will record messages, answer simple queries, and transmit 
vision. 

12. Intelligent life of some sort 
will be found on Mars. 

13. A thousand miles an hour 
at a cent a mile will be commonplace; short hauls will be made 
in evacuated subways at extreme 
speeds. 

14. A major objective of ap


WHERE TO? 



}9 



plied physics will be to control 
gravity. 

15 We will not achieve a 
"world state" in the predictable 
future. Nevertheless, Communism 
Will vanish from this planet. 

16. Increasing mobility will 
disenfranchise a majority of the 
population. About 1990 a constitutional amendment will do 
away with state lines while retaining the semblance. 

17. All aircraft will be controlled by a giant radar net run 
on a continentwide basis by a 
multiple electronic "brain." 

18. Fish and yeast will become 
our principle sources of proteins. 
Beef will be a luxury; lamb and 
mutton will disappear, because 
sheep destroy grazing land. 

19. Mankind will not destroy 
itself,, nor will "civilization" be 
wiped out. 

Here are things we won't get 
soon, if ever: 

Travel through time. 

Travel faster than, the speed of 
light. 

Control of telepathy and other 
E S.P. phenomena. 

"Radio" transmission of matter. 

Manlike robots with manlike 
reactions. 

Laboratory creation of life. 

Real understanding of what 
"thought" is and how it is related to matter. 

Scientific proof of personal survival after death. 



A permanent end to war. (I 
don't like that prediction any better than you do.) 

PREDICTION of gadgets is a 
parlor trick anyone can 
learn; but only a fool would attempt to predict details of future 
history (except as fiction, so 
labeled). There are too many unknowns and no techniques for 
integrating them even if they 
were known. 

Even to make predictions about 
overall trends in technology is 
now most difficult. In fields 
where, before World War II, 
there was one man working in 
public, there are now ten, or a 
hundred, working in secret There 
may be six men in the country 
who have a clear picture of what 
is going on in science today. 
There may not be even one. 

This is in itself a trend. Manyleading scientists consider it a 
factor as disabling to us as the 
dogma of Lysenkoism is to Russian technology. Nevertheless 
there are clear-cut trends which 
are certain to make this coming 
era enormously more productive 
and interesting than the frantic 
one we have just passed through. 
Among them are: 

Cybernetics : The study of 
communication and control of 
mechanisms and organisms. This 
includes the wonderful field 
of mechanical and electronic 



20 




 



"brains" — but is not limited to it. 
(These "brains" are a factor in 
themselves that will speed up 
technical progress the way a war 
does.) 

Semantics: A field which seems 
concerned enly with definitions 
of words. It is not; it is a frontal 
attack on epistemology — that is 
to say. how we know what we 
know, a subject formerly belonging to long-haired philosophers. 

New tools ot mathematics and 
logic, such as calculus of statement. Boolean logic, morphological analysis, generalized symbology, newly invented mathematics 
of every sort — there is not space 
even to name these enormous 
fields, but they offer impetus to 
every other field — medicine, social relations, biology, economics, 
anything. 

Biochemistry: Research into 
the nature of protoplasm, into 
enzyme chemistry, viruses, etc., 
give hope not only that we may 
conquer disease, but that we may 
someday understand the mechannisms of life itself. Through this, 
and with the aid of cybernetic 
machines and radioactive isotopes, we may eventually acquire 
a rigor of chemistry. Chemistry is 
not a discipline today: it is a 
jungle. We know the chemical be* havior depends on the number of 
orbital electrons in an atom and 
that physical and chemical properties follow the pattern called 



the Periodic Table. We don't 
know much else, save by cut-andtry, despite the great size r*nd 
importance of the chemical industry. When chemistry L ..is 
a discipline, mathematical chemists will design new materials, 
predict their properties, and tell 
engineers how to make them — 
without ever entering a laboratory. We've got a long way to go 
on that one! 

Nucleonics: We have yet to 
find out what makes the atom 
tick. Atomic power? Yes, we'll 
have it, in convenient packages — 
when we understand the nucleus. 
The field of radio -isotopes alone 
is larger than was the entire 
known body of science in 1900. 
Before we are through with these 
problems, we may find out how 
the Universe is shaped and why. 
Not to mention enormous unknown vistas best represented 
by ? ? ? 

Some physicists are now using 
two time scales, the T-scale. and 
the rau-scale. Three billion years 
on one scale can equal a mere 
split-second on the other scale— 
and yet both apply to you and 
your kitchen stove. Of such anarchy is our present state in physics. 

For such reasons we must insist that the Age of Science has 
not yet opened. 

The greatest crisis facing us is 
not Russia, not the Atom bomb, 
not corruption in government, not 



encroaching hunger, nor the morals of the young. It is a crisis in 
the organization and accessibility 
Of human knowledge. We own an 
enormous "encyclopedia" which 
isn't even arranged alphabetically. 
Our "file cards'* are spilled on the 
floor, nor were they ever in order. 
The answers we want may be, 
buried somewhere in the heap, 
but it might take a lifetime to lot eate two already known facts, 
place them side by side and derive a third fact, the one we 
Urgently need. 

Call it the Crisis of the Librarian. 

We need a new "specialist" who 
is not a specialist but a synthesist. We need a new science to 
be the secretary to all other 
sciences. 

Fortune-tellers can always be 
sure of repeat customers by predicting what the customer wants 
to hear ... it matters not whether 
the prediction comes true. Contrariwise, the weather man is 
often blamed for bad weather. 

Brace yourself. 

In 1900 the cloud on the horizon was no bigger than a man's 
hand — but what lay ahead was 
the Panic of 1907, World War I, 
the panic following it. the Depression,. Fascism, World War II, 
the A topi Bomb, and Red Russia. 

The period immediately ahead 
Will be the. roughest, crudest one 
in the long, hard b.ist,acy of. pian


lcind. It will probably include the 
worst World War of them all. 
Even if we are spared that awful 
possibility, it is certain that there 
will be no security anywhere, save 
what you dig out of your own inner spirit. 

¥)UT what of that picture we 
" drew of domestic luxury and 
tranquility for Mr. and Mrs. 
Middleclass, style 2000 A. D.? 

They lived through it. They 
survived. 

Our prospects need not dismay 
you. not if you or your kin were 
at Bloody Nose Ridge, at Gettysburg — trudged across the Plains 
or went through the wars anywhere in the world. You and I 
are here because we carry the 
genes of uncountable ancestors 
who fought — and won — against 
death in all its forms. We're 
tough. We'll survive. Most of us. 

We've lasted through the preliminary bouts; the main event 
is coming up. 

But it's not for sissies. 

The gathering wind will not destroy everything, nor will the Age 
of Science change everything. 
Long after the first star ship 
leaves for parts unknown, there 
will still be outhouses in upstate 
New York, there will be steers in 
Texas, and, no doubt, the English 
will stop for tea. 

Stick around. 

—ROBERT A. ItEINLEIN , 




. 



DOUBLE 

STANDARD 

By ALFRED COPPEL 

He did not have the qualifications to go 
into space— so he had them manufactured! 

Illustrated by MAC KUAN 



IT WAS after oh -one-hundred 
when Kane arrived at my 
apartment. I checked the hall 
screen carefuUy before letting him 
in, too, though the hour almost 
precluded the possibility of any 

DCUILE STANDARD 



inquisitive passers-by. 

He didn't say anything at ell 
when he saw me, but his eyes 
went s bit wide. That was perfectly natural, after all. The illegal plasti -cosmetician had done 



his work better than well. I wasn't 
the same person I had been. 

I led Kane into the living room 
and stood before him, letting him 
liave a good look at me. 

"Well," I asked, "will it work?" 

Kane lit a cigarette thoughtfully, not taking his eyes off me. 

"Maybe," he said. "Just 
maybe." 

I thought about the spaceship 
standing proud and tall under the 
stars, ready to go. And I knew 
that it had to work. It had to. 

Some men dream of money, 
others of power. All my life I had 
dreamed only of lands in the sky. 
The red sand hills of Mars, 
moldering in aged slumber under 
a cobalt- colored day ; the icy 
moranes of lo and Callisto, where 
# the yellow methane snow drifted 
in the faint light of the Sun; the 
barren, stark seas of the Moon, 
where razor-backed mountains 
limned themselves against the 
star fields — 

"I don't know. Kim; you're 
asking a hell of a lot, you know," 
Kane said. 

"It'll work," I assured him. 
"The examination is cursory after 
the application has been acted 
on." I grinned easily under the 
flesh mask. "And mine has." 

"You mean Kim Hall's application has," he said. 

I shrugged. "Well?" 

Kane frowned at me and blew 
smoke into the still air of the 



room. "The Kim Hall on the application and you aren't exactly 
the same person. I don*t have to 
tell you that." 

"Look," I said. "I called you 
here tonight to check me over and 
because we've been friends for a «good long time. This is important 
to me, Kane. It isn't just that I 
want to go. I have to. You can ■ 
understand that, maybe." 

"Yes, Kim," he said bitterly. 
"I can understand. Maybe if I 
had your build and mass, I'd be 
trying the same thing right now. 
My only chance was the Eugenics 
Board and they turned me down 
cold. Remember? Sex-linked predilection to carcinoma. Unsuitable for colonial breeding 
stock — " 

I felt a wave of pity for Kane 
then. I was almost sorry I'd 
called him over. Within six hours 
I would be on board the spaceship, while he would be here. 
Earthbound for always. Unsuitable for breeding stock in the 
controlled colonies of Mars or 
Io and Callisto. 

I thought about that, too. I 
knew I wouldn't be able to carry 
. off my masquerade forever. I 
wouldn't want to. The stringent 
physical examination given on 
landing would pierce my disguise 
easily. But by that time it would 
be too late. I'd be there, out 
among the stars. And no Earthbound spaceship captain would 



24 




 



carry my mass back iostead of 
precious cargo. I'd stay. If they 
wanted me for a breeder then — • 
okay. In spite of my slight build 
and lack of physical strength, I'd 
still be where I wanted to be. In 
the fey lands in the sky . . . 

"I wish you all the luck tn the 
world, Kim," my friend said. "I 
really do, I don't mean to throw 
cold water on your scheme. You 
know how few of us are permitted 
off -world. Every one who makes 
it is a — " he grinned ruefully— 
"a blow struck for equality." He 
savored the irony of it for a 
moment and then his face grew 
serious again. "It's just that the 
more I think of what you've done, 
the more convinced I am that you 
can't get away with it. Forged 
applications. Fake fingerprints 
and X-rays. And this — " He made 
a gesture that took in all of my 
appearance. Flesh, hair, clothes. 
Everything. 

"What the hell," I said. "It's 
good, isn't it?" 

"Very good. In fact, you make 
me uncomfortable, it's so good. 
But it's too damned insane." 

"Insane enough to work," I 
said. "And it's the only chance. 
How do you think I'd stack up 
with the Eugenics Board? Not a 
chance. What they want out there 
is big muscle boys. Tough 
breeders. This is the only way for 
me." 

"Well," Kane said. "You're big 



enough now, it seems to me." 

"Had to be. Lots to cover up. 
Lots to add." 

"And you're all set? Packed 
and ready?" 

"Yes," I said. "All set." 

"Then I guess this is it." He 
extended his hand. I took it. 
"Good luck, Kim, Always," he 
said huskily. "I'll hear if you 
make it. All of us will. And we'll 
be cheering and thinking that 
maybe, before we're all too old, 
we can make it, too. And if not, 
that maybe our sons will — without having to be prize bulls, 
either." 

He turned in the doorway and 
forced a grin. 

"Don't forget to write," he said. 

THE spacefield was streaked 
with the glare of floodlights, 
and the ship gleamed like a silvery spire against the desert 
night. 

I joined the line of passengers 
at the checking desk, my halfkilo of baggage clutched nervously against my side. My heart 
was pounding with a mixture of 
fear and anticipation, my muscles 
twitching under the unaccustomed tension of the plastiflesh 
sheath that hid me. 

All around me were the smells 
and sounds and sights of a spaceport, and above me were the stars, 
brilliant and close at hand in the 
dark sky. 

23 



The queue moved swiftly toward the checking desk, where a 
gray-haired officer with a seamed 
face sat. 

The voice of the timekeeper 
came periodically from the loudspeakers around the perimeter of 
the field. 

"Passengers for the Martian 
Queen, check in at desk five. 7f 
is now H minus forty -seven." 

I stood now before the officer, 
tense and afraid. This was critical, the last check-point before I 
could actually set foot in the 
ship. 

"It is now H minus forty-five" 
the timer's metallic voice said. 

The officer looked up at me, 
and then at the faked photoprint 
on my papers. 

"Kim Hall, age twenty-nine, 
vocation a gri -technician and hydroponics expert, height 171 centimeters, weight 60 kilos. Right?" 

I nodded soundlessly. 

"Sums check within masslimits. Physical condition index 
3.69. Fertility index 3.66. Compatibility index 2.99." The officer 
turned to a trim-looking assistant. 
"All check?" 

The uniformed girl nodded. 

I began to breathe again. 

"Next desk, please," the officer 
said shortly. 

I moved on to the medics at 
the next stop. A gray-clad nurse 
checked my pulse and respiration. 
She smiled at me. 



"Excited?" she asked. "Don't 
be." She indicated the section of 
the checking station where the 
breeders were being processed. 
"You should see how the bulls 
take it," she said with a laugh. 

She picked up an electrified 
stamp. "Now don't worry. This 
won't hurt and it won't disfigure 
you permanently. But the ship's 
guards won't let you aboard without it. Government regulations, 
you know. We cannot load personal dossiers on the ships and 
this will tell the officers all they 
need to know about you. Weight 
limitations, you see." 

I almost laughed in her face at 
that. If there was one thing all 
Earth could off er me th at I 
wanted, it was that stamp on my 
forehead : a passport to the 
stars ... 

She set the stamp and pressed 
it against my forehead. 1 had a 
momentary* fear about the durability of the flesh mask that covered my face, but it was unnecessary. The plastiskin took the 
temporary tattoo the way real 
flesh would have. 

I felt the skin and read it in 
my mind. I knew exactly what it 
said. I'd dreamed of it so often 
and so long all my life. My ticket 
on the Martian Queen. My pass 
to those lands in the sky. 

CERT SXF HALL, K RS MART 

ouebn SN1775690. 
I walked across the ramp and 



• ALAXT SCIENCE FICTION 



into the lift beside the great 
tapering hull of the rocket. My 
heart was singing. 

The timer said: "It is H minus 
thirty -one." 

And then I stepped through the 
outer valve, into the Queen. The 
air was brisk with the tang of 
hydrogenol. Space-fuel. The ship 
was alive and humming with a 
thousand relays and timers and 
whispering generators, readying 
herself for space. 

I LAY down in the acceleration 
hammock and listened to the 
ship. 

This was everything I had 
wished for all my life. To be a 
free man among the stars. It was 
worth the chances I had taken, 
worth the lying and cheating and 
danger. 

The conquest of space had split 
humanity in a manner that no 
one could have foreseen, though 
the reasons for the schism were 
obvious. They hinged on two 
factors — mass and durability. 
Thus it was that some remained 
forever Earthbound while others 
reached for the sky. And bureaucracy being what it was, the decision as to who stayed and who 
went was made along the easy, 
obvious line of demarcation. 

I and half the human race were 
on the wrong side of the line. 

From the ship's speakers came 
the voice of the timer. 

DOUBlt STANDARD 



"It is ff minus ten. Ready yourselves for the takeoff." 

I thought of Kane and the 
men I had known and worked 
with for half of my twenty-nine 
years. They, too, were forbidden 
the sky. Tragic men, really, with 
their need and their dream written in the lines of pain and yearning on their faces. 

The speaker suddenly snapped: 

"There is an illegal passenger 
on board! All persons will remain 
in their quarters until he is apprehended! Repeat: there is an 
illegal passenger on board! Remain in your quarters!" 

My heart seemed to stop beating. Somehow, my deception had 
been uncovered. How, it didn't 
matter, but it had. And the important thing now was simply to 
stay on board at all costs. A 
space ship departure could not be 
delayed. The orbit was computed. 
The blastaway timed to the millisecond . . . 

I leaped to the deck and out of 
my cubicte. A spidery catwalk 
led upward, toward the nose of 
the ship. Below me I could hear 
the first sounds of the search. 

I ran up the walk, my footsteps sounding hollowly in the 
steel shaft. A bulkhead blocked 
my progress ahead and I sought 
the next deck. 

The timer said: "It is H minua 
air." 

It was a passenger deck. I 




could see frightened faces peering out of cubicles as I ran past. 
Behind me, the pursuit grew 
louder, nearer. 

I slammed open a bulkhead 
and found another walk leading 
upward toward the astrogation 
blisters in the topmost point of 
the Queen. 

Behind me, I caught a glimpse 
of a ship's officer running, armed 
with a stun-pistol. My breath 
rasped in my throat and the 
plastiskin sheath on my body 
shifted sickeningly. 

"You there.' HaltP' The voice 
was high-pitched and excited. I 
flung through another bulkhead 
hatch and out into the dorsal 
blister. I seemed to be suspended 
between Earth and sky. The stars 
glittered through the steelglas of 
the blister, and the desert lay 
below, streaked with searchlights 
and covered with tiny milling 
figures. The warning light on the 
control bunker turned from 
amber to red as I watched, chest 
heaving. 

u It is H minus three," the timer 
said. "Rig ship for space." 

I slammed the hatch shut and 
spun the wheel lock. I stood filled 
with a mixture of triumph and 
fear. They could never get me out 
of the ship in time now — but I 
would have to face blast away in 
the blister, unprotected. A shock 
that could kill . . . 

Through the speaker, the cap


tain's talker snapped orders: 
"Abandon pursuit.' Too late to 
dump him now. Pick him up 
after acceleration is completed." 
And then maliciously, knowing 
that I could hear: "Scrape htm 
off the deck when we're in space. 
That kind can't take much." 

I felt a blaze of red fury. That 
kind. The Earthbound kind! I 
wanted to live, then, more than I 
had ever wanted to live before. 
To make a liar out of that sneering, superior voice. To prove that 
I was as good as all of them. 

"It is H minus one," said the 
timer. 

Orders filtered through the 
speaker. 

"Outer valves closed. Inner 
valves closed." 

"Minus thirty seconds. Condition red." 

"Pressure in the ship. One-third 
atmosphere. " 

"Twenty seconds." 

"Ship secure for space." 

"Ten, nine, eight — " 

I lay prone on the steel deck, 
braced myself and prayed. 

"Seven, six, 6ve — " 

"Gyros on. Course set." 

"Four, three, two — " 

The ship trembled. A great 
light flared beyond the curving 
transparency of the blister. 

"Up ship!" 

A hand smashed down on me, 
crushing me into the deck. 

I thought: / must live. I can't 



71 




 



<Sie. I won't die! 

I felt the spaceship rising. I 
felt her reaching for the stars. 
I was a part of her. I screamed 
with pain and exaltation. The 
hand pressed harder, choking the 
breath from me, stripping the 
plastiskin away in long, damp 
strips. 

Darkness flickered before my 
eyes. I lay helpless and afraid and 
transfigured with a joy I had 
never known before. 

Distorted, half-naked, I clung 
to life. 

%W7"HEN I opened my eyes, they 
were all around me. They 
stood in a half-circle, trim, 
uniformed. Their smooth faces 
and cropped hair and softly 
molded bodies looked strange 
against the functional steel angularity of the astrogation blister. 

I staggered to my feet, long 
strips of plastic flesh dangling 
from me. 

The Queen was in space. I was 
in space, no longer Earthbound. 

"Yes," I said, "I lived! Look 
at me!" 

I stripped off the flesh mask, 
peeled away the red, full lips, the 
long transformation. 



"I've done it. Others will do it, 
too. Not breeders — not brainless 
ornaments to a hyper -nyrnphoid 
phallus! Just ordinary men. Ordinary men with a dream. You 
can't keep the sky for yourselves. 
It belongs to all of us." 

I stood with my back to the 
blazing stars and laughed at 
them. 

"In the beginning it was right 
that you should be given priority 
over us. For centuries we kept 
you in subjection and when the 
Age of Space came, you found 
your place. Your stamina, your 
small stature, everything about 
you fitted you to be mistresses of 
the sky . . . 

"But it's over. Over and done 
with. We can all be free — " 

I peeled away the artificial 
breasts that dangled from my 
chest. 

I stood swaying drunkenly, defiantly. 

They came to me, then. They 
took me gently and carried me 
below, to the comfort of a white 
bunk. They soothed my hurts and 
nursed me. For in spite of it all, 
they were women and I was a 
man in pain. 

— ALFRED COPPEL 



The Big News Next Month . . . 

THE YEAR OF THE JACKPOT 
by Robert A. Heinlein 

A remorselessly logieol novelet based on actual, provable statistics! If* fiction, of 
course, but you may find that fact hard to rememberl 



DOUBLE STAND Alt D 



Conditionally 

They were such cute synthetic creatures, it 
was impossible not to love them. Of course, 
that was precisely why they were dangerous! 



THERE was no use hanging 
around after breakfast. His 
wife was in a hurt mood, 
end he could neither endure the 
hurt nor remove it. He put on 
his coat in the kitchen and stood 



for a moment with his hat in hia 
hands. His wife was still at the 
table, absently fingering the handle of her cup and staring fixedly 
out the window at the kennels 
behind the house. He moved 





 



Human 



By WALTER ffl. MILLER, JR. 

Illustrated by DAVID STONE 



quietly up behind her and 
touched her silk-clad shoulder. 
The shoulder shivered away from 
him, and her dark hair swung 
shiningly as she shuddered. He 
drew his hand back and his bewildered face went slack and 
miserable. 



"Honeymoon's over, huh?" 
She said nothing, but shrugged 
faintly. 

"You knew I worked for the 
F.B.A.," he said. "You knew I'd 
have charge of a district pound. 
You knew it before we got married." 




"I didn't know you killed 
them," she said venomously 

"I won't have to kill many. 
Besides, they're only animals." 

''Intelligent animals!" 

"Intelligent as a human imbecile, maybe." 

"A small child is an imbecile. 
Would you kill a small child?" 

"You're taking intelligence as 
the only criterion of humanity," 
he protested hopelessly, knowing 
that a logical defense was useless 
against sentimentality. "Baby — " 

"Don't call rrie baby! Call them 
baby!" 

Norris backed a few steps toward the door. Against his better 
judgment, he spoke again. "Anne 
honey, look! Think of the good 
things about the job. Sure, everything has its ugly angles. But 
think — we get this house rent= 
free; I've got my own district 
with no bosses around; I make 
my own hours; you'll meet lots of 
people that stop in at the pound. 
Ifs a fine job, honey!" 

She sipped her coffee and appeared to be listening, so he went 
on. 

"And what can I do? You know 
how the Federation handles employment. They looked over my 
aptitude tests and sent me to 
Bio -Administration. If I don't 
want to follow my aptitudes, the 
only choice is common labor. 
That's the law." 

"I suppose you have an apti


tude for killing babies?" she said 
sweetly. 

Norris withered. His voice went 
desperate. "They assigned me to 
it because I liked babies. And because I have a B.S. in biology 
and an aptitude for dealing with 
people. Can't you understand? 
Destroying unclaimed units is the 
smallest part of it. Honey, before 
the evolvotron, before Anthropos 
went into the mutant-animal business, people used to elect dogcatchers. Think of it that way— 
I'm just a dogcatcher." 

Her cool green eyes turned 
slowly to meet his gaze. Her face 
was delicately cut from cold marble. She was a small woman, 
slender and fragile, but her quiet 
contempt made her loom. 

He backed closer to the door. 

"Well, I've got to get on the 
job." He put on his hat and 
picked at a splinter on the door. 
He frowned studiously at the 
splinter. "I — I'll see you tonight." 
He ripped the splinter loose when 
it became obvious that she didn't 
want to be kissed. 

He grunted a nervous good-by 
and stumbled down the hall and 
out of the house. The honeymoon 
was over, all right. 

He climbed in the kennel-truck 
and drove east toward the highway. The suburban street wound 
among the pastel plasticoid cottages that were set appro* mately 
two to an acre on the lightly 



32 




 



wooded land. With its population 
legally fixed at three hundred 
million, most of the country had 
become one big suburb, dotted 
with community centers and 
lined with narrow belts of industrial development. Norris wished 
there were someplace where he 
could be completely alone. 

As he approached an intersection, he saw a small animal sitting on the curb, wrapped in its 
own bushy tail. Its oversized 
head was bald on top, but the 
rest of its body was covered with 
blue-gray fur. Its tiny pink 
tongue was licking daintily at 
small forepaws with prehensile 
thumbs. It was a cat-Q-5. It 
glanced curiously at the truck as 
Norris pulled to a halt. 

He smiled at it from the window and called, "What's your 
name, kitten?" 

The cat-Q-5 stared at him impassively for a moment, let out a 
stuttering high-pitched wail, 
then: "Kiyi Rorry." 

"Whose child are you, Rorry?" 
he asked. "Where do you live?" 

The cat-Q-5 took its time 
about answering. There were no 
houses near the intersection, and 
Norris feared that the animal 
might be lost. It blinked at him, 
sleepily bored, and resumed its 
paw-washing. He repeated the 
questions. * 

"Mama kiyi," said the cat-Q-S 
disgustedly. 



"Thafs right, Mama's kitty. 

But where is Mama? Do you suppose she ran away?" 

The cat-Q-5 looked startled. It 
stuttered for a moment, and its 
fur crept slowly erect. It glanced 
around hurriedly, then shot off 
down the street at a fast scamper. 
He followed it in the truck until 
it darted onto a porch and began 
wailing through the screen, 
"Mama no run ray! Mama no 
run ray I" 

Norris grinned and drove on. 
A class-C couple, allowed no children of their own, could get quite 
attached to a cat-Q-5. The felines 
were emotionally safer than 
the quasi-human chimp-K series 
called "neutroids." When a pet 
neutroid died, a family was 
broken with flpief; but most 
couples could endure the death 
of a cat-Q or a dog-F. Class-C 
couples were allowed two lesser 
units or one neutroid. 

His grin faded as he wondered 
which Anne would choose. The 
Norrises were class-C — defective 
heredity. 

HE found himself in Sherman 
III Community Center — 
eight blocks of commercial buildings, serving the surrounding suburbs. He stopped at the message 
office to pick up his mail. There 
was a memo from Chief Franklin. He tore it open nervously and 
read it in the truck. It was some


CONDIMONALLY HUMAN 



39 



thing he had been expecting for 
several days. 

Attention All District Inspectors: 
Subject: Deviant Neutroid. 

You will immediately begin a systematic and thorough survey of all 
animals whose serial numbers fall in 
the Bermuda-k-9° series for birth 
dates during July 2234. This is in connection with the Delmont Negligency 
Case. Seize all animals in this category, impound, and run proper sections of normalcy tests. Watch for 
mental and glandular deviation. Delmont has confessed to passing only one 
non-standard unit, but there may be 
others. He disclaims memory of deviant's serial number. This could be * 
ruse to bring a stop to investigations 
when one animal i% found. Be thorough. 

If allowed to reach age-set or adulthood, such a deviant could be dangerous to its owner or to others. Hold 
all seized K-9°s who show the slightest 
abnormality in the normalcy testa. 
Forward to central lab. Return standard units to their owners. Accomplish 
entire survey project within seven 
days. 

C. Franklin 

Norris frowned at the last sentence. His district covered about 
two hundred square miles. Its replacement-quota of new neutroids was around three hundred 
animals a month. He tried to estimate how many of July's influx 
had been K-99s from Bermuda 
Factory. Forty, at least. Could 
he do it in a week? And there 
were only eleven empty neutroid 
cages in his kennel. The other 
forty-nine were occupied by the 
previous inspector's "unclaimed" 
inventory — awaiting destruction. 

14 < 



He wadded the memo in his 
pocket, then nosed the truck onto 
the highway and headed toward 
Wylo City and the district wholesale offices of Anthropos, Inc. 
I They should be able to give him 
; a list of all July's Bermuda K-99 
serial numbers that had entered 
his territory, together with the 
retailers to whom the animals had 
been sold. A week's deadline for 
finding and testing forty neutroids would put him in a tight 
squeeze. 

1 He was halfway to Wylo City 
! when the radiophone burzed on 
his dashboard. He pulled into the 
slow lane and answered quickly, 
I hoping for Anne's voice. A polite 
professional purr came instead. 
"Inspector Norris? This is Doci tor Georges. We haven't met, but 
1 I imagine we will. Are you ex, tremely busy at the moment?" 
Norris hesitated. "Extremely," 
he said. 

"Well, this won't take long. 
One of my patients — a Mrs. 
Sarah Glubbes — called a while 
I ago and said her baby was sick. 
I must be getting absent-minded, 
because I forgot she was class C 
until I got there." He hesitated. 
"The baby turned out to be a 
neutroid. It's dying. Eighteenth 
order virus." 
"So?" 

"Well, she's — uh— rather a peculiar woman, Inspector. Keeps 
telling me how much trouble she 


 



had in childbirth, and how she 
can't ever have another one. It's 
pathetic. She believes it's her own, 
Do you understand?" 

"I think so," Norris replied 
slowly. "But what do you want 
me to do? Can't you send the 
neutroid to a vet?" 

"She insists it's going to a hospital. Worst part is that she's 
heard of the disease. Knows it 
can be cured with the proper 
treatment — in humans. Of course, 
no hospital would play along 
with her fantasy and take a neutroid, especially since she couldn't 
pay for its treatment." 

"I still don't see — " 

"I thought perhaps you could 
help me fake a substitution. It's 
a K-48 series, five-year-old, 
three-year set. Do you have one 
in the pound that's not claimed?" 

Norris thought for a moment. 
**I think I have one. You're welcome to it, Doctor, but you can't 
fake a serial number. She'll know 
it And even though they look 
exactly alike, the new one won't 
recognize her. It'll be spooky." 

There was a long pause, followed by a sigh. "I'll try it anyway. Can I come get the animal 
now?" 

"I'm on the highway — " 
"Please, Norris! This is urgent. 

That woman will lose her mind 

completely if — " 

"All right, I'll call my wife 

and tell her to open the pound for 

CONDITIONALLY HUMAN 



you. Pick out the K-48 and sign 

for it. And listen — " 
"Yes?" 

"Don't let me catch you falsifying a serial number." 

Doctor Georges laughed faintly. "I won't, Norris. Thanks a 
million." He hung up quickly. 

Norris immediately regretted 
his consent It bordered on being 
illegal. But he saw it as a quick 
way to get rid of an animal that 
might later have to be killed. 

He called Anne. Her voice was 
dull. She seemed depressed, but 
not angry. When he finished talking, she said, "All right, Terry," 
and hung up. 

TtY noon, he had finished checking the shipping lists at the 
wholesale house in Wylo City. 
Only thirty-five of July's Bermuda-K-99s had entered his territory, and they were about 
equally divided among five pet 
shops, three of which were in 
Wylo City. 

After lunch, he called each of 
the retail dealers, read them the 
serial numbers, and asked them 
to check the sales records for 
names and addresses of individual buyers. By three o'clock, he 
had the entire list filled out, and 
the task began to look easier. All , 
that remained was to pick up the 
thirty-five animals. 

And that, he thought, was like 
trying to take a year-old baby 



away from its doting mother. He 
sighed and drove to the Wylo 
suburbs to begin his rounds. 

Anne met him at the door when 
he came home at six. He stood on 
the porch for a moment, smiling 
at her weakly. The smile was not 
returned. 

"Doctor Georges came." she 
told him. "He signed for the — " 
She stopped to stare at him. 
"Darling, your face! What happened?" 

Gingerly he touch the livid 
welts down the side of his cheek. 
"Just scratched a little," he muttered. He pushed past her and 
went to the phone in the hall. 
He sat eying it distastefully for 
a moment, not liking what he had 
to do. Anne came to stand beside 
him and examine the scratches. 

Finally he lifted the phone and 
dialed the Wylo exchange. A 
grating mechanical voice answered, "Locator center. Your 
party, please." 

"Sheriff Yates," Norris grunted. 

The robot operator, which had 
on tape the working habits of 
each Wylo City citizen, began 
calling numbers. It found the offduty sheriff on its third try, in 
a Wylo pool hall. 

"I'm getting so I hate that infernal gadget," Yates grumbled. 
"I think it's got me psyched. 
What do you want, Norris?" 

"Cooperation. I'm mailing you 
three letters charging three Wylo 



citizens with resisting a Federal 
official — namely me — and charging one of them with assault. I 
tried to pick up their neutroids 
for a pound inspection — " 

Yates bellowed lusty laughter 
into the phone. 

"It's not funny. I've got to get 
those neutroids. It's in connection 
with the Delmont case." 

Yates stopped laughing. "Oh. 
Well, I'll take care of it." 

"It's a-rush-order, Sheriff. Can 
you get the warrants tonight and 
pick up the animals in the morning?" 

"Easy on those warrants, boy. 
Judge Charleman can't be disturbed just any time. I can get 
the newts to you by noon, I guess, 
provided we don't have to get a 
helicopter posse to chase down 
the mothers." 

"That'll be all right. And listen, 
Yates — fix it so the charges will 
be dropped if they cooperate. 
Don't shake those warrants 
around unless they just won't 
listen to reason. But get those 
neutroids." 

"Okay, boy. Gotcha." 

Norris gave him the names and 
addresses of the three unwilling 
mothers. As soon as he hung up, 
Anne touched his shoulders and 
said, "Sit still." She began 
smoothing a chilly ointment over 
his burning cheek. 

"Hard day?" she asked. 

"Not too hard. Those were just 



3* 



6 A I A X V SCIENCE FICTION 



three out of fifteen. I got the other 
twelve. They're in the truck." 

"That's good," she said. 
''You've got only twelve empty 
cages." 

He neglected to tell her that 
he had stopped at twelve for just 
this reason. "Guess I better get 
them unloaded," he said, standing up. 

"Can I help you?" 

He stared at her for a moment, 
saying nothing. She smiled a little and looked aside. "Terry, I'm 
sorry — about this morning. I — I 
know you've got a job that has 
to be — " Her lip quivered slightly. 

Norris grinned, caught her 
shoulders, and pulled her close. 

"Honeymoon's on again, huh?" 
she whispered against his neck. 

"Come on," he grunted. "Let's 
unload some neutroids, before I 
forget all about work." 

7X1 HEY went out to the kennels 
together. The cages were inside a sprawling concrete barn, 
which was divided into three 
large rooms — one for the fragile 
neuter humanoid creatures, and 
another for the lesser mutants, 
such as cat-Qs, dog-Fs, dwarf 
bears, and foot-high lambs that 
never matured into sheep. The 
third room contained a small gas 
chamber with a conveyor belt 
leading from it to a crematoryincinerator. 

Norris kept the third locked 



lest his wife see its furnishings. 

The doll-like neutroids began 
their mindless chatter as soon as 
their keepers entered the building. Dozens of blazing blond 
heads began dancing about their 
cages. Their bodies thwacked 
against the wire mesh as they 
leaped about their compartments 
with monkey grace. 

Their human appearance was 
broken by only two distinct features: short beaverlike tails decorated with fluffy curls of fur, 
and an erect thatch of scalp-hair 
that grew up into a bright candleflame. Otherwise, they appeared completely human, with 
baby-pink skin, quick little 
smiles, and cherubic faces. They 
were sexually neuter and never 
grew beyond a predetermined 
age-set which varied for each 
series. Age-sets were available 
from one to ten years human 
equivalent. Once a neutroid 
reached its age-set, it remained 
at the set's child-development 
level until death. 

"They must be getting to know 
you pretty well," Anne said, 
glancing around at the cages. 

Norris was wearing a slight 
frown as he inspected the room. 
"They've never gotten this excited before." 

He walked along a row of 
cages, then stopped by a K-76 to 
stare. 

"Apple cores!" He turned to 



CONDITIONALLY HUMAN 



37 



face his wife. "How did apples 
get in there?" 

She reddened. "I felt sorry for 
them, eating that goo from the 
mechanical feeder. I drove down 
to Sherman III and bought six 
dozen cooking apples." 

"That was a mistake." 

She frowned irritably. "We can 
afford it." 

"That's not the point. There's 
a reason for the mechanical feeders. He paused, wondering how he 
could tell her the truth. He blundered on: "They get to love whoever feeds them." 

"I can't see — " 

"How would you feel about 
disposing of something that loved 
you?" 

Anne folded her arms and 
stared at him. "Planning to dispose of any soon?" she asked 
acidly. 

"Honeymoon's off again, eh?" 

She turned away. "I'm sorry, 
Terry. I'll try not to mention it 
again." 

He began unloading the truck, 
pulling the frightened and 
squirming doll-things forth one 
at a time with a snare-pole. They 
were one-man pets, always 
frightened of strangers. 

"What's the Delmont case, 
Terry ?" Anne asked while he 
worked. 

"Huh?" 

"I heard you mention it on the 
phone. Anything to do with why 



you got your face scratched?" 

He nodded sourly. "Indirectly* 
yes. It's a long story." 

"Tell me." 

"Well, Delmont was a greenhorn evolvotron operator at the 
Bermuda plant. His job was taking the unfertilized chimpanzee 
ova out of the egg-multiplier, 
mounting them in his machine, 
and bombarding the gene structure with sub-atomic particles. 
It's tricky business. He flashes 
a huge enlargement of the ovum 
on the electron microscope screen 
— large enough so he can see the 
individual protein molecules. He 
has an artificial gene pattern to 
compare it with. It's like shooting sub-atomic billiards. He's got 
to fire alpha- particles into the 
gene structure and displace certain links by just the right 
amount. And he's got to be quick 
about it before the ovum dies 
from an overdose of radiation 
from the enlarger. A good operator can get one success out of 
seven tries. 

"Well, Delmont worked a week 
and spoiled over a hundred ova 
without a single success. They 
threatened to fire him. I guess he 
got hysterical. Anyway, he reported one success the next day. 
It was faked. The ovum had a 
couple of flaws — something 
wrong in the central nervous system's determinants, and in the 
glandular makeup. Not a stand



 



ard neutroid ovum. He passed it 
on to the incubators to get a 
credit, knowing it wouldn't be 
caught until after birth." 

"It wasn't caught at all?" Anne 
asked. 

"Funny thing, he was afraid it 
wouldn't be. He got to worrying 
about it, thought maybe a mental-deviant would pass, and that 
it might be dangerous. So he went 
back to its incubator and cut off 
the hormone flow into its compartment." 

"Why that?" 

"So it would develop sexuality. 
A neutroid would be born a female if they didn't give it suppressive doses of male hormone 
prenatally. That keeps ovaries 
from developing and it comes out 
neuter. But Delmont figured a 
female would be caught and 
stopped before the final inspection. They'd dispose of her without even bothering to examine for 
the other defects. And he could 
blame the sexuality on an equipment malfunction. He thought it 
was pretty smart. Trouble was 
they didn't catch the female. She 
went on through; they all look 
female." 

"How did they find out about 
it now?" 

"He got caught last month, trying it again. And he confessed to 
doing it once before. No telling 
how many times he really did it." 

Norris held up the final kick


ing, squealing, tassel-haired doll 
from the back of the kennel truck. 
He grinned at his wife. "This little fellow, for instance. It might 
be a potential she. It might also 
be a potential murderer. All these 
kiddos are from the machines in 
the secti on where De 1 m out 
worked." 

Anne snorted and caught the 
baby -creature in her arms. It 
struggled and tried to bite, but 
subsided a little when she disentangled it from the snare, 
"Kkr-r-reee." it cooed nervously. 
"Kkr-r-reee!" 

"You tell him you're no murderer," Anne purred to it. 

Norris watched disapprovingly 
while she fondled it. One thing 
he had learned: to steer clear of 
emotional attachments. It was 
eight months old and looked like 
a child of two years — a year short 
of its age-set. And it was designed 
to be as affectionate as a human 
child. 

"Put it in the cage, Anne," he 
said quietly. 

She looked up and shook her 
head. 

"It belongs to somebody else. 
If it fixes a libido attachment on 
you, you're actually robbing its 
owner. They can't love many 
people at once." 

She snorted, but installed the 
thing in its cage. 

"Anne — -" Norris hesitated, 
hating to approach the subject. 



CONDITIONALLY HUMAN 



"Do you — want one — for yourself? I can sign an unclaimed one 
over to you to keep in the house. 
It won't cost us anything." 

Slowly she shook her head, and 
her pale eyes went moody and 
luminous. "I'm going to have one 
of ray own," she said. 

He stood in the back of the 
truck, staring down at her. "Do 
you realize what — " 

"I know what I'm saying. 
We're class-C oh account of 
heart -trouble in both our families. Well, I don't care, Terry. I'm 
not going to waste a heart over 
one of these pathetic little artificial animals. We're going to 
have a baby." 

"You know what they'd do to 
us?" 

"If they catch us, yes — compulsory divorce, sterilization. But 
they won't catch us. I'll have it 
at home, Terry. Not even a doctor. We'll hide it." 

"I won't let you do such a 
thing." 

She faced him angrily. "Oh, 
this whole rotten world!" she 
choked. Suddenly she turned and 
fled out of the building. She was 
sobbing. 

N ORRIS climbed slowly down 
from the truck and wandered 
on into the house. She was not 
in the kitchen nor the living room. 
The bedroom door was locked. 
He shrugged and went to sit on 



the sofa. The television set was 
on, and a newscast was coming 
from a local station. 

". . . we were unable to get 
shots of the body," the announcer 
was saying. "But here is a view 
of the Georges residence. I'll 
switch you to our mobile unit in 
Sherman II, James Duncan reporting." 

Norris frowned with bewilderment as the scene shifted to a 
two-story plasticoid house among 
the elm trees. It was after dark, 
but the mobile unit's powerful 
floodlights made daylight of the 
house and its yard and the police 
*copters sitting in a side lot. An 
ambulance was parked in the 
street. A new voice came on the 
audio. 

"This is James Duncan, ladies 
and gentlemen, speaking to you 
from our mobile unit in front of 
the late Doctor Hiram Georges' 
residence just west of Sherman 
II. We are waiting for the 
stretcher to be brought out. and 
Police Chief Erskine Miler is 
standing here beside me to give 
us a word about the case. Doctor 
Georges* death has shocked the 
community deeply. Most of you 
local listeners have known him 
for many years — some of you 
have depended upon his services 
as a family physician. He was a 
man well known, well loved. But 
now let's listen to Chief Miler." 

Norris sat breathing quickly. 



40 




 



There could scarcely he two Doctor Georges in the community, 
but only this morning . . . 

A growling drawl came from 
the audio. "This's Chief Miler 
speaking, folks. I just want to 
say that if any of you know the 
whereabouts of a Mrs. Sarah 
Glubbes, call me immediately. 
She's wanted for questioning." 

"Thank you. Chief. This is 
James Duncan again. I'll review 
the facts for you briefly again, 
ladies and gentlemen. At seven 
o'clock, less than an hour ago, a 
woman — allegedly Mrs. Glubbes 
— burst into Doctor Georges' dining room while the family was at 
dinner. She was brandishing a 
pistol and screaming, 'You stole 
my baby! You gave me the wrong 
baby! Where's my baby?' 

"When the doctor assured her 
that there was no other baby, she 
fired, shattering his salad plate. 
Glancing off it, the bullet pierced 
his heart. The woman fled. A peculiar feature of the case is that 
Mrs. Glubbes, the alleged intruder, has no baby. Just a minute — just a minute — here comes 
the stretcher now." 

Norris turned the set off and 
went to call the police. He told 
them what he knew and promised to make himself available 
for questioning if it became necessary. When he turned from the 
phone, Anne was standing in the 
bedroom doorway. She might 



have been crying a little, but she 
concealed it well. 

"What was all that?" she 

asked. 

"Woman killed a man. I happened to know the motive." 

"What was it?" 

"Neutroid trouble." 

"You meet up with a lot of 
unpleasantness in this business, 
don't you?" 

"Lot of unpleasant emotions 
tangled up in it." he admitted. 

"I know. Well, supper's been 
keeping hot for two hours. Shall 
we eat?" 

rpHEY went to bed at midn : ght, 
but it was after one when he 
became certain that his wife was 
asleep. He lay in darkness for a 
time, listening to her even breathing. Then he cautiously eased 
himself out of bed and tiptoed 
quietly through the door, carrying his shoes and trousers. He 
put them on in the kitchen and 
stole silently out to the kennels. 
A half moon hung low in a misty 
sky, and the wind was chilly out 
of the north. 

He went into the neutroid room 
and flicked a switch. A few sleepy 
chatters greeted the light. 

One at a time, he awoke twenty-three of the older doll-things 
and carried them to a large glasswalled compartment. These were 
the long-time residents ; they 
knew him well, and they came 



CONDITIONALLY HUMAN 



with him willingly — like children 
after the Piper of Hamlin. When 
he had gotten them in the glass 
chamber, he sealed the door and 
turned on the gas. The conveyor 
would automatically carry them 
on to the incinerator. 

Now he had enough cages for 
the Bcrmuda-K-99s. 

He hurriedly quit the kennels 
and went to sit on the back steps. 
His eyes were burning, but the 
thought of tears made him sicker. 
It was like an assassin crying 
while he stabbed his victim. It 
was more honest just to retch. 

When he tiptoed back inside, 
he got as far as the hall. Then he 
saw Anne's small figure framed 
in the bedroom window, silhouetted against the moonlit yard. 
She had slipped into her negligee 
and was sitting on the narrow 
windowstool, staring silently out 
at the dull red tongue of exhaust 
gases from the crematory's chimney. 

Norris backed away. He went 
to the parlor and lay down on 
the couch. 

After a while he heard her 
come into the room. She paused 
in the center of the rug, a fragile 
mist in the darkness. He turned 
his face away and waited for the 
rasping accusation. But soon she 
came to sit on the edge of the 
sofa. She said nothing. Her hand 
crept out and touched his cheek 
lightly. He felt her cool finger


tips trace a soft line up his temple. 

. "It's all right, Terry," she 
whispered. 

He kept his face averted. Her 
fingers traced a last stroke. Then 
she padded quietly back to the 
bedroom. He lay awake until 
dawn, knowing that it would 
never be all right, neither the 
creating nor the killing, until he 
— and the whole world — completely lost sanity. And then everything would be all right, only 
it still wouldn't make sense. 

A NNE was asleep when he left 
the house. The night mist had 
gathered' into clouds that made a 
gloomy morning of it. He drove 
on out in the kennel-truck, meaning to get the rest of the Bermuda-K-9°s so ■ that he could 
begin his testing. 

Still he felt the night's guilt, 
like a sticky dew that refused to 
depart with morning. Why should 
he have to kill the things? The 
answer was obvious. Society 
manufactured them because killing them was permissible. Human 
babies could not be disposed of 
when the market became glutted. 
The neutroids offered solace to 
childless women, kept them satisfied with a restricted birth rate. 
And why a restricted birth rate? 
Because by keeping the population at five billions, the Federation could insure a decent living 




 



standard for everybody. 

Where there was giving, Norris thought glumly, there was 
also taking away. Mart had always deluded himself by thinking 
that he "created," but he created 
nothing. He thought that he had 
created — with his medical science 
and his end to wars — a longer life 
for the individual. But he found 
that he had only taken the lives 
of the unborn and added them to 
the years of the aged. Man now 
had a life expectancy of eighty, 
except that he had damn little 
chance of being born to enjoy it. 

A neutroid filled the cradle in 
his stead. A neutroid that never 
ate as much, or grew up to be 
unemployed. A neutroid could be 
killed if things got tough, but 
could still satisfy a woman's craving to mother something small. 

Norris gave up thinking about 
it Eventually he would have to 
adjust to it. He was already adjusted to a world that loved the 
artificial mutants as children. He 
had been brought up in it. Emotion came in conflict with the 
grim necessities of his job. Somehow he would have to love them 
in the parlor and kill them in the 
kennel. It was only a matter of 
adjustment. 

A T noon, he brought back another dozen K-99s and installed them in his cages. There 
had been two highly reluctant 



mothers, but he skipped them 
and left the seizure to the local 
authorities. Yates had already 
brought in the three from yesterday. 

"No more scratches?" Anne 
asked him while they ate lunch. 
They did not speak of the night's 
mass -disposal. 

Norris smiled mechanically. **I 
learned my lesson yesterday. If 
they bare their fangs, I get out 
without another word. Funny 
thing though — I've got a feeling 
one mother pulled a fast one." 

"What happened?" 

"Well, I told her what I wanted 
and why. She didn't like it, but 
she let me in. I started out with 
her newt, but she wanted a receipt. So I gave her one; took the 
serial number off my checklist. 
She looked at it and said, 'Why, 
that's not Chichi's number!* I 
looked at the newt's foot, and 
sure enough it wasn't. I had to 
leave it. It was a K-99, but not 
even from Bermuda." 

"I thought they were all registered," Anne said. 

"They are. I told her she had 
the wrong neutroid, but she got 
mad. Went and got the sales receipt. It checked with her newt, 
and it was from O'Reilley's pet 
shop— right place, wrong number. I just don't get it." 

"Nothing to worry about, is it 
Terry?" 

He looked at her peculiarly. 



CONDITIONALLY HUMAN 



41 



off 




"Ever think what might happen 
if someone started a black market 
in neutroids?" 

They finished the meal in silence. After lunch he went out 
again to gather up the rest of the 
group. By four o'clock, he had 
gotten all that were to be had 
without the threat of a warrant. 
The screams and pleas and tears 
of the owners left him gloomily 
despising himself. 

If Delmont's falsification had 
been widespread, he might have 
to turn several of the thirty-five 
over to central lab for dissection 
and ultimate destruction. That 
would bring the murderous wrath 
of their owners down upon him. 
He began to understand why bioinspectors were frequently shifted 
from one territory to another. 

On the way home, he stopped 
in Sherman II to check on the 
missing number. It was the 
largest of the Sherman communities, covering fifty blocks of commercial buildings. He parked in 
the outskirts and took a sidewalk 
escalator toward O'Reilley's address. 

It was on a dingy sidestreet, 
reminiscent of past centuries, a 
street of small bars and bowling 
alleys and cigar stores. There was 
even a shop with three gold balls 
above the entrance, but the place 
was now an antique store. A light 
mist was falling when he stepped 
off the escalator and stood in 



front of the pet shop. A sign hung 
out over the sidewalk, announcing : 

J. "DOGGY" O'REIMEY 
PETS FOR SALE 
DUMB BLONDES AND GOLDFISH 
MUTANTS FOR THE CHILDLESS 
BUY A BUNDLE OF JOY 

Norris frowned at the sign and 
wandered inside. The place was 
warm and gloomy. He wrinkled 
his nose at the strong musk of 
animal odors. O'Reilley's was not 
a shining example of cleanliness. 

Somewhere a puppy was yapping, and a parrot croaked the 
lyrics of A Chimp to Call My 
Own, which Norris recognized 
as the theme song of a popular 
soap-opera about a lady evolvotron operator. 

He paused briefly by a tank of 
silk-draped goldfish. The shop 
had a customer. An elderly lady 
was haggling with a wizened 
ifianager over the price of a half 
grown second-hand dog-F. She 
was shaking her last dog's death 
certificate under his nose and demanding a guarantee of the dog's 
alleged F-5 intelligence. The old 
man offered to swear on a Bible, 
but he demurred when it came 
to swearing on a ledger. 

The dog was saying, "Don' sell 
me, Dada. Don* se'.l me.** 

Norris smiled sardonically to 
himself. The non-human pets 
were smarter than the neutroids. 


 



A K - 1 08 could speak a dozen 
words, and a K-99 never got farther than "mamma," "pappa,** 
and "cookie." Anthropos was 
afraid to make the quasi -humans 
too intelligent, lest sentimentalists proclaim them really human. 

He wandered on toward the 
back of the building, pausing 
briefly by the cash register to inspect O'Reilley's license, which 
hung in a dusty frame on the wall 
behind the counter. "James Fallon O'Reilley . . . authorized 
dealer in mutant animals ... all 
non-predatory mammals including champanzee-K series ... license expires June 1, 2235." 

It seemed in order, although 
the expiration date was approaching. He started toward a bank of 
neutroid cages along the opposite 
wall, but O'Reilley was mincing 
across the floor to meet him. The 
customer had gone. The little 
manager wore an elfan professional smile, and his bald head 
bobbled in a welcoming nod. 

"Good day, sir, good day ! 
May I show you a dwarf kangaroo, or a — " He stopped and 
adjusted his spectacles. He 
blinked and peered as Norris 
flashed his badge. His smile 
waned. 

"I'm Agent Norris, Mr. O'Reilley. Called you yesterday for that 
rundown on K-99 sales." 

O'Reilley looked suddenly nervous. "Oh, yes. Find *em all?" 



Norris shook his head. "No. 
That's why 1 stopped by. There's 
some mistake on — " he glanced 
at his list— "on K-99-LJZ-3S1. 
Let's check it again." 

O'Reilley seemed to cringe. "No 
mistake. I gave you the buyer'i 
name." 

"She has a different number.* 

"Can I help it if she traded 
with somebody?" 

"She didn't. She bought it here. 
I saw the receipt." 

"Then she traded with one of 
my other customers!" snapped 
the old man. 

"Two of your customers have 
the same name — Aclelia Schultz? 
Not likely. Let's see your duplicate receipt book." 

O'Reilley's wrinkled face set itself into a stubborn mask. 
"Doubt if it's still around." 

Norris frowned. "Look, pop, 
I've had a rough day. I could 
start naming some things around 
here that need fixing — sanitary 
violations and such. Not to mention that sign — 'dumb blondes.* 
They outlawed that one when 
they executed that shyster doctor 
for shooting K-108s full of 
growth hormones, trying to raise 
himself a harem to sell. Besides, 
you're required to keep sales records until they've been microfilmed. There hasn't been a 
microfilming since July." 

The wrinkled face twitched 
with frustrated anger. O'Reilley 



CONDITIONALLY HUMAN 



45 



shuffled to the counter while 
Norris followed. He got a fat 
binder from under the register 
and started toward a wooden 
stairway. 

"Where you going?" Norris 
called. 

"Get my old glasses," the manager grumbled. "Can't see 
through these new things." 

"Leave the book here and 
check it," Norris offered. 

But O'Reilley was already limping quickly up the stairs. He 
seemed not to hear. He shut the 
door behind him, and Norris 
heard the lock click. The bioagent waited. Again the thought 
of a black market troubled him. 
Unauthorized neutroids could 
mean lots of trouble. 

TTMVE minutes passed before the 
old man came down the stairs. 
He said nothing as he placed the 
book on the counter. Norris noticed that his hands were trembling as he shuffled through the 
pages. 

"Let me look," said the bioagent. 

O'Reilley stepped reluctantly 
aside. Norris had memorized the 
owner's receipt number, and he 
found the duplicate quickly. He 
stared at it silently. "Mrs. Adele 
Schultz . . . chimpanzee-K-99LJZ-351." It was the number of 
the animal he wanted, but it 
wasn't the number on Mrs. 



Schultz's neutroid nor on her 
original copy of the receipt. 

He held the book up to his eye 
and aimed across the page at the 
light. O'Reilley's breathing became audible. Norris put the 
book down, folded two thicknesses of handkerchief over the 
blade of his pocketknife, and ran 
it down the seam between the 
pages. He took the sheet he 
wanted, folded it, and stowed it 
in his vest pocket. O'Reilley was 
stuttering angrily. 

Norris turned to face him coldly. "Nice erasure job, for a carbon copy." 

The old man prepared himself 
for exploding. Norris quietly put 
on his hat. 

"See you in court, O'Reilley." 

"Wait!" 

Norris turned. "Okay, I'm 
waiting." 

The old man sagged into a deflated bag of wrinkles. "Let's sit 
down first," he said weakly. 

Norris followed him up the 
stairs and into a dingy parlor. 
The tiny apartment smelled of 
boiled cabbage and sweat. An 
orange-haired neutroid lay asleep 
on a small rug in a corner. Norris 
knelt beside it and read the tattooed figures on the sole of its 
left foot— K-99-LJZ-351. Somehow he was not surprised. 

When he stood up, the old man 
was sagged in an ancient armchair, his head propped on a 




 



nd that covered his eyes. 

"Lots of good explanations, I 

ess?" Norris asked quietly. 

"Not good ones." 

"Let's hear them, anyway." 

O'Reilley sighed and straightened. He blinked at the inspector 
and spoke in a monotone. "My 
missus died five years back. We 
were class-B — allowed one child 
of our own — if we could have one. 
We couldn't. But since we were 
class-B, we couldn't own a neutroid either. Sorta got around it 
by running a pet shop. Mary — 
she always cried when we sold a 
neut. 1 sorta felt bad about it 
myself. But we never did swipe 
one. Last year this Bermuda 
shipment come in. I sold most of 
'em pretty quick, but Peony here 
—she was kinda puny. Seemed 
like nobody wanted her. Kept her 
around so long, I got attached to 
her. 'Fraid somebody'd buy her. 
So I faked the receipt and moved 
her up here." 

"That all?" 

The old man nodded. 

"Ever done this before?" 

He shook his head. 

Norris let a long silence pass 
while he struggled with himself. 
At last he said, "Your license 
could be revoked, you know." 

"I know." 

Norris ground his fist thoughtfully in his palm and stared at 
the sleeping doll-thing. "I'll take 
your books home with me to
CONDITfONALLY HUMAN 



night." he said. "I want to make 
a complete check for similar 
changes. Any objections?'* 

"None. It's the only trick l*ve 
pulled, so help me." 

"If that's true, I won't report 
you. We'll just attach a correction to that page, and you'll put 
the newt back in stock." He hesitated. "Providing it's not a deviant. I'll have to take it in for 
examination." 

A choking sound came from 
the armchair. Norris stared curiously at the old man. Moisture 
was creeping in the wrinkles 
around his eyes. 

"Something the matter?" 

O'Reilley nodded. "She's a deviant." 

"How do you know?" 

Th< dealer pulled himself erect 
and hobbled to the sleeping neutroid. He knelt beside it and 
stroked a small bare shoulder 
gently. 

"Peony," he breathed. "Peony, 
girl — wake up." 

Its fluffy tail twitched for a 
moment. Then it sat up, rubbing 
its eyes and yawning. It looked 
normal, like a two-year-old girl 
with soft brown eyes. It pouted 
at O'Reilley for awakening it. It 
aaw Norris and ignored him, apparently too sleepy to be frightened. 

"How's my Peony-girl?" the 
dealer purred. 

It licked its lips. "Wanna g'ass 

47 



o* water, Daddy," it said drowsily. 

Norris caught his breath. No 
K-99 should be able to make a 
speech that long, even when it 
reached the developmental limit. 
He glanced at O'Reilley. The old 
man nodded slowly, then went to 
the kitchen for a glass of water. 
She drank greedily and eyed her 
foster- pa rent. 

"Daddy crying." 

O'Reilley glowered at her and 
blew his nose solemnly. "Don't 
be silly, child. Now get your coat 
on and go with Mister Norris. 
He's taking you for a ride in his 
truck. Won't that be fine?" 

"I don't want to. I wanna stay 
here." 

"Peeony/ On with you!" 

She brought her coat and 
stared at Norris with childish 
contempt. "Can Daddy go, too?" 

"Be on your way !" growled 
O'Reilley. "I got things to do." 

"We're coming back?" 

"Of course you're coming back! 
Git now — or shall I get my 
spanking switch?" 

Peony strolled out the door 
ahead of Norris. 

"Oh, inspector, would you be 
punching the night latch for me 
as you leave the shop? I think 
I'll be closing for the day." 

Norris paused at the head of 
the stairs, looking back at the old 
man. But O'Reilley closed himself inside and the lock clicked. 
The agent sighed and glanced 



down at the small being beside 
him. 

"Want me to carry you. 

Peony?" 

She sniffed disdainfully. She 
hopped upon the banister and 
slid down ahead of him. Her 
motor -responses were typically 
neutroid — something like a 
monkey, something like a squirrel. But there was no question 
about it; she was one of Delmont's deviants. He wondered 
what they would do with her in 
central lab. He could remember 
no instance of an intelligent mutant getting into the market. 

Somehow he could not consign 
her to a cage in the back of the 
truck. He drove home while she 
sat beside him on the front seat. 
She watched the scenery and remained aloof, occasionally looking around to ask, "Can we go 
back now?" 

Norris could not bring himself 
to answer. 

WHEN he got home, he led her 
into the house and stopped 
in the hall to call Chief Franklin. 
The operator said, "His office 
doesn't answer, sir. Shall I give 
you the robot locator?" 

Norris hesitated. His wife came 
into the hall. She stooped to grin 
at Peony, and Peony said, "Do 
you live here, too?" Anne gasped 
and sat on the floor to stare. 
Norris said, "Cancel the call. 



CONDITIONALLY HUMAN 



49 



1**11 wait tin tomorrow." He 
dropped the phone quickly. 

"What series is it?" Anne asked 
excitedly. "I never saw one that 
could talk." 

* **// is a she" he said. "And 
she's a series unto herself. Some 
of Delmont's work." 

Peony was looking from one to 
The other of them with a baffled 
face. "Can we go back now?" 

Norris shook his head. "You're 
going to spend the night with us. 
Peony," he said softly. "Your 
daddy wants you to." 

His wife was watching him 
thoughtfully. Norris looked aside 
end plucked nervously at a coiv 
ner of the telephone book. Suddenly she caught Peony's hand 
end led her toward the kitchen. 

"Come on, baby, let's go find 
a cookie or something." 

Norris started out the front 
door, but in a moment Anne was 
back. She caught at his collar 
and tugged. "Not so fast!" 

He turned to frown. Her face 
accused him at a six-inch range. 

"Just what do you think you're 
going to do with that child?" 

He was silent for a long time.. 
"You know what I'm supposed 
to do." 

Her unchanging stare told him 
that she wouldn't accept any evasions. "I heard you trying to get 
your boss on the phone." 

"I canceled it. didn't I?" 

"Until tomorrow." 



He worked his hands nervously. "I don't know, honey — I just 
don't know." 

"They'd kill her at central lab, 
wouldn't they?" 

"Well, they'd need her as evidence in Delmont's trial." 

"They'd kill her, wouldn't 
they?" 

"When it was over — it's hard to 
say. The law says deviants must 
be destroyed, but — " 

"Well?" 

He paused miserably. "We've 
got a few days to think about it, 
honey. I don't have to make my 
report for a week." 

He sidled out the door. Looking 
back, he saw the hard determination in her eyes as she watched 
him. He knew somehow that he 
was going to lose either his job 
or his wife. Maybe both. He shuffled moodily out to the kennels to 
care for his charges. 

A GREAT silence filled the 
^* house during the evening. 
Supper was a gloomy meal. Only 
Peony spoke; she sat propped on 
two cushions at the table, using 
her silver with remarkable skill. 

Norris wondered about her intelligence. Her chronological age 
was ten months; her physical age 
was about two years ; but her 
mental age seemed to compare 
favorably with at least a three 
year old. 

Once he reached across the ta


50 




 



b!e to touch her forehead. She 
eyed him curiously for a moment 
and continued eating. Her temperature was warmer than human, but not too warm for the 
normally high neutroid metabolism — somewhere around 101°. 
The rapid rate of maturation 
made I.Q. determination impossible. 

"You've got a good appetite, 
Peony," Anne remarked. 

"I like Daddy's cooking better," she said with innocent bluntness. "When can I go home?" 

Anne looked at Norris and 
waited for an answer. He managed a smile at the flame-haired 
cherub. "Tell you what we'll do. 
I'll call your daddy on the phone 
and let you say hello. Would you 
like that?" 

She giggled, then nodded. "Uhhuh ! When can we do it?" 

"Later." 

Anne tapped her fork thoughtfully against the edge of her 
plate. "I think we better have a 
nice long talk tonight, Terry," she 
said. 

"Is there anything to talk 
about?" He pushed the plate 
away. "I'm not hungry." 

HE left the table and went to 
sit in darkness by the parlor 
window, while his wife did the 
dishes and Peony played with a 
handful of walnuts on the kitchen 
floor. 

CONDITIONALLY HUMAN 



He watched the scattered lights 
of the suburbs and tried to think 

of nothing. The lights were peaceful, glimmering through the trees. 

Once there had been no lights, 
only the flickering campfires of 
hunters shivering in the forest, 
when the world was young and 
sparsely planted with the seed of 
Man. Now the world was infected 
with his lights, and with the 
sound of his engines and the roar 
of his rockets. He had inherited 
the Earth and had filled it — too 
full. 

There was no escape. His rockets had touched two of the planets, but even the new worlds 
offered no sanctuary for the unborn. Man could have babies — if 
allowed — faster than he could 
build ships to haul them away. 
He could only choose between a 
higher death rate and a lower 
birth rate. 

And unborn children were not 
eligible to vote when Man made 
his choice. 

His choice had robbed his wife 
of a biological need, and so he 
made a disposable baby with 
which to pacify her. He gave it a 
tail and unly half a mind, so that 
it could not be confused with his 
own occasional children. 

But Peony had only the tail. 
Still she was not born of the seed 
of Man. Strange seed, out of the 
jungle, warped toward the human 
pole, but still not human. 

51 



TVTORRIS heard a car approach
* ing in the street. Its headtights swung along the curb, and 
it slowed to a halt in front of the 
house. A tall, slender man in a 
dark suit climbed out and stood 
for a moment, staring toward the 
house. He was only a shadow in 
the faint street light. Norris could 
tot place him. Suddenly the man 
napped on a flashlight and 
played it over the porch. Norris 
caught his breath and darted toward the kitchen. Anne stared at 
him questioningly, while Pt-ony 
peered up from her play. 

He stooped beside her. "Listen, 
chilcV" he said quickly. "Do you 
know what a neutroid is?" 

She nodded slowly. "They play 
in cages. They don't talk." 

"Can you pretend you're a neutroid?" 

"I can play neutroid. I play 
neutroid with Daddy sometimes, 
when people come to see him. He 
^ives me candy when I play it. 
When can I go home?" 

"Not now. There's a man coming to see us. Can you play neutroid for me? We'll give you lots 
of candy. Just don't talk. Pretend you're asleep." 

"Now?" 

"Now." He heard the door 
chimes ringing. 

**Who is it?" Anne asked. 

"I don't know. He may have 
the wrong house. Take Peony in 
the bedroom. I'll answer it." 



His wife caught the child-thing 
up in her arms and hurried away. 
The chimes sounded again. Norris stalked down the hall and 
switched on the porch-light. The 
visitor was an elderly man, erect 
in his black suit and radiating 
dignity. As he smiled andnodded, 
Norris noticed his collar. A clergyman. Must have the wrong 
place, Norris thought. 

"Are you Inspector Norris?" 
The agent nodded, not daring 
to talk. 

- "I'm Father Paulson. I'm calling on behalf of a James O'Reilley. I think you know him. May 
I come in?" 

Grudgingly, Norris swung open 
the door. "If you can stand the 
smell of paganism, come on in." 

The priest chuckled politely. 
Norris led him to the parlor and 
turned on the light. He waved 
toward a chair. 

"What's this all about? Does 
O'Reilley want something?" 

Paulson smiled at the inspector's brusque tone and settled 
himself in the chair. "O'Reilley is 
a sick man," he said. 

The inspector frowned. "He 
didn't look it to me." 

"Sick of heart. Inspector. He 
came to me for advice. I couldn't 
give him any. He told me the 
story — about this Peony. I came 
to have a look at her, if I may." 

Norris said nothing for a moment. O'Reilley had better keep 


 



his mouth shut, he thought, especially around clergymen. Most of 
them took a dim view of the 
whole mutant business. 

"I didn't think you'd associate 
with O'Reilley," he said. "I 
thought you people excommunicated everybody that owns a neutroid, O'Reilley owns a whole 
shopful." 

"That's true. But who knows? 
He might get rid of his shop. May 
I see this neutroid?" 

"Why?" 

"O'Reilley said it could talk. Is 
that true or is O'Reilley suffering 
delusions? That's what I came to 
find out." 

"Neutroids don't talk." 

The priest stared at him for a 
time, then nodded slowly, as if 
approving something. "You can 
rest assured," he said quietly, 
"that I'll say nothing of this visit, 
that I'll speak to no one about 
this creature." 

Norris looked up to see his wife 
watching them from the doorway. 

"Get Peony," he said. 

"It's true then?" Paulson asked. 

"I'll let you see for yourself." 

Anne brought the small childthing into the room and set her 
on the floor. Peony saw the visitor, chattered with fright, and 
bounded upon the back of the 
sofa to sit and scold. She was 
playing her game well, Norris 
thought. 

The priest watched her with 



quiet interest. "Hello, little one.* 

Peony babbled gibberish. Paulson kept his eyes on her every 
movement. Suddenly he said, "I 
just saw your daddy, Peony. He 
wanted me to talk to you." 

Her babbling ceased. The spell 
of the game was ended. Her eyes 
went sober. Then she looked at 
Norris and pouted. "I don't want 
any candy. I wanna go home." 

Norris let out a deep breath. "I 
didn't say she couldn't talk," he 
pointed out sullenly. 

"I didn't say you did," said 
Paulson. "You invited me to see 
for myself." 

Anne confronted the clergyman. "What do you want?" she 
demanded. "The child's death? 
Did you come to assure yourself 
that she'd be turned over to the 
lab? I know your kind! You'd do 
anything to get rid of neutroids!" 

"I came only to assure myself 
that O'Reilley's sane," Paulson 
told her. 

"I don't believe you," she 
snapped. 

He stared at her in wounded 
surprise; then he chuckled. "People used to trust the cloth. Ah, 
well. Listen, my "child, you have 
us wrong. We say it's evil to create the creatures. We say also 
that it's evil to destroy them after 
they're made. Not murder, exactly, but — mockery of life, perhaps. 
It's the entire institution that's 



CONDITIONALLY HUMAN 



S3 



evil. Do you understand? As for 
this small creature of O'Reilley's 
■ — well, I hardly know what to 
make of her, but I certainly 
wouldn't wish her — uh — 
d-e-a-d." 

Peony was listening solemnly 
to the conversation. Somehow 
NorriS; sensed a disinterested 
friend, if not an ally, in the 
priest. He looked at his wife. Her 
eyes were still suspicious. 

"Tell me, Father," Norris 
ssked, "if you were in my position, what would you do?" 

Paulson fumbled with a button 
of his coat and stared at the floor 
while he pondered. "I wouldn't 
be in your position, young man. 
But if I were, I think I'd withhold 
her from my superiors. I'd also 
quit my job and go away." 

It wasn't what Norris wanted 
to hear. But his wife's expression 
suddenly changed; she looked at 
the priest with a new interest. 
"And give Peony back to O'Reilley," she added. 

"I shouldn't be giving you advice," he sriid unhappily. "I'm 
duty-bound to ask O'Reilley to 
give up his business and have 
nothing further to do with neutroids " 

"But Peony's human," Anv 
argued. "She's different." 

"I fail to agree." 

"What!" Anne confronted bim 
again. "What makes you b'iman?" 



"A soul, my child." 

Anne put her hands on her hips 
and leaned forward to glare down 
at him like something unwholesome. "Can you put a voltmeter 
between your ears and measure 
it?" 

The priest looked helplessly at 
Norris. 

"No. r ' she said. "And you can't 
do it to Peony either!" 

"Perhaps I had better go," 
Paulson said to his host. 

Norris sighed. "Maybe you better, Padre. You found out what 
you wanted to know." 

Anne stalked angrily out of the 
room, her dark hair swishing like 
a battle-pennant with each step. 
When the priest was gone, Norris 
picked up the child and held her 
in his lap. She was shivering with 
fright, as if she understood what 
had been said. Love them in the 
parlor, he thought, and kill them 
in the kennels. 

"Can I go home? Doesn't Daddy want me any more?" 

"Sure he does. baby. You just 
be good and everything'll be all 
right." 

NORRIS felt a bad taste in his 
mouth as he laid her sleeoing 
bedy on the sofa half an hour 
later. Everything was all wrong 
and it promised to remain that 
way. He couldn't give her bsck to 
O'Reilley, because she weld be 
caught again when the auditor 




 



came to microfilm the records. 
And he certainly couldn't keep 
her himself — not with other Bioagents wandering in and out every 
few days- She could not be concealed in a world where there 
were no longer any sparsely populated regions. There was nothing to do but obey the law and 
turn her over to Franklin's lab. 

He closed his eyes and shuddered. If he did that, he could do 
anything — stomach anything — 
adapt to any vicious demands 
society made of him. If he sent 
the child away to die, he would 
know that he had attained an 
"objective" outlook. And what 
more could he want from life than 
adaptation and objectivity? 

Well — his wife, for one thing. 

He left the child on the sofa, 
turned out the light, and wandered into the bedroom. Anne was 
in bed, reading. She did not look 
up when she said, "Terry, if you 
let that baby be destroyed, I'll..." 

"Don't say it," he cut in. "Any 
time you feel like leaving, you 
just leave. But don't threaten me 
with it." 

She watched him silently for a 
moment. Then she handed him 
the newspaper she had been reading. It was folded around an advertisement. 

BIOLOGISTS WANTRD 

by. 

ANTHROPOS INCORPORATED 

for 



Evolvotron Operator! 
Incubator Tenders 
Nursery Supervisors 
Laboratory Personnel 

NEW ATLANTA PLANT 
Call or write: Personnel Mgr. 
ANTHROPOS INC. 

Atlanta, Ga. 
Note: Secur Work Department 
release from present job 
before applying. 

He looked at Anne curiously. 
"So?" 

She shrugged, "So there's a job, 
if you want to quit this one." 

"What's this got to do with 
Peony, if anything?" 

"We could take her with us." 

"Not a chance," he said. "Do 
you suppose a talking neutroid 
would be any safer there?" 

She demanded angrily, "Why 
should they want to destroy her?" 

Norris sat on the edge of the 
bed and thought about it. "No 
particular individual wants to, 
honey. It's the law." 

"But why?" 

"Generally, because deviants 
are unknown quantities. They 
can be dangerous." 

"That child — dangerous?" 

"Dangerous to a concept, a 
vague belief that Man is something special, a closed tribe. And 
in a practical sense, she's dangerous because -she's not a neuter. 
The Federation insists that all 
mutants be neuter and infertile, 
so it can control the mutant population. If mutants started repro


CONDITIONALLY HUMAN 



55 



ducing, that could be a real threat 
in a world whose economy is so 
delicately balanced." 

"Well, you're not going to let 
them have her, do you hear me?" 

"I hear you,*' he grumbled. 

/~VN the following day. he went 
down to police headquarters 
to sign a statement concerning 
the motive in Doctor Georges' 
murder. As a result. Mrs. Glubbes 
was put away in the psychoward. 

"It's funny, Norris," said Chief 
Miler, "what people'll do over a 
neutroid. Like Mrs. Glubbes 
thinking that newt was her own. 
I sure don't envy you your job. 
It's a wonder you don't get your 
head blown off. You must have 
an iron stomach." 

Norris signed the paper and 
looked up briefly. "Sure, Chief. 
Just a matter of adaptation." 

"Guess so." Miler patted his 
paunch and yawned. "How you 
coming on this Delmont business? 
Picked up any deviants yet?'* 

Norris laid down the pen 
abruptly. "No! Of course not! 
What made you think I had?" 

Miler stopped in the middle of 
his yawn and stared at Norris 
curiously. "Touchy, aren't you?" 
he asked thoughtfully. "When I 
get that kind of answer from a 
prisoner, I right away start 
thinking — " 

"Save it for your interrogation 



room," Norris growled. He 
stalked quickly out of the office 
while Chief Miler tapped his pencil absently and stared after him. 

He was angry with himself for 
his indecision. He had to make 
a choice and make it soon. He 
was climbing in his car when a 
voice called after him from the 
building. He looked back to see 
Chief Miler trotting down the 
steps, his pudgy face glistening 
in the morning sun. 

"Hey, Norris! Your missus is 
cn the phone. Says it's urgent." 

Norris went back grudgingly. 
A premonition of trouble gripped 
him. 

"Phone's right there," the chief 
said, pointing with a stubby 
thumb. 

The receiver lay on the desk, 
and he could hear it saying, 
"Hello — hello — " before he picked 
it up. 

"Anne? What's the matter?" 

Her voice was low and strained, 
trying to be cheerful. "Nothing's 
the matter, darling. We have a 
visitor. Come right home, will 
you? Chief Franklin's here," 

It knocked the breath out of 
him. He felt himself going white. 
He glanced at Chief Miler, calmly sitting nearby. 

"Can you tell me about it 
now?" he asked her. 

"Not very well. Please hurry 
home. He wants to talk to you 
about the K-99s." 



56 



GAIAXY SCIENCE FICTION 



ave the two of them met?" 
"Yes, they have." She paused, 
as if listening to him speak, then 
said, "Oh. that! The game, honey 
■—remember the game?" 

"Good," he grunted. "I'll be 
right there." He hung up and 
started out. 

"Troubles?" the chief called 
after him. 

"Just a sick newt." he said, "if 
it's any of your business." 

CHIEF Franklin's helicopter 
was parked in the empty lot 
next door when Norris drove up 
in front of the house. The official 
heard the truck and came out on 
the porch to watch his agent walk 
up the path. His lanky, emaciated 
body was loosely draped in gray 
tweeds, and his thin hawk face 
was a dark and solemn mask. He 
was a middle-aged man, his skin 
seamed with wrinkles, but his hair 
was still abnormally black. He 
greeted Norris with a slow, almost sarcastic nod. 

"I see you don't read your 
mail. If you'd looked at it. you'd 
have known I was coming. I 
wrote you yesterday." 

"Sorry, Chief, I didn't have a 
chance to stop by the message 
office this morning." 

Franklin grunted. "Then you 
don't know why I'm here?" 
"No, sir." 

"Let's sit out on the porch,** 
Franklin said, and perched his 



bony frame on the railing. "We've 
got to get busy on these Bermuda-K-99s. Norris. How many 

have you got?" 

"Thirty-four, I think." 

"I counted thirty-five." 

"Maybe you're right. I — I'm 
not sure." 

"Found any deviants yet?" 

"Uh — I haven't run any 1<sts 
yet, sir." 

Franklin's voice went sharp. 
"Do you need a test to know 
when a neutroid is talking a blue 
streak?" 

"What do you mean?" 

"Just this. We've found at least 
a dozen of Delmont's units that 
have mental ages that correspond 
to their physical age. What's 
more, they're functioning females, 
and they have normal pituitaries. 
Know what that means?" 

"They won't take an age-set 
then," Norris said. "They'll grow 
to adulthood." 

"And have children.** 

Norris frowned. "How can they 
have children? There aren't any 
males." 

"No? Guess what we found in 
one of Delmont's incubators." 
"Not a—" 

"Yeah. And it's probably not 
the first. This business about padding his quota is baloney! Hell, 
man, he was going to start his 
own black market! He finally admitted it, after twenty-hours* 
questioning without a letup. He 



CONDITIONALLY HUMAN 



57 




was going to raise them, Norris. 
He was stealing them right out 
of the incubators before an inspector ever saw them. The K-99s 
— the numbered ones — are just 
the ones he couldn't get back. 
Lord knows how many males he's 
got hidden away someplace!" 

"What're you going to do?" 

"Do.' What do you think we'll 
do? Smash the whole scheme, 
that's what! Find the deviants 
and kill them. We've got enough 
now for lab work." 

Norris felt sick. He looked 
away. "I suppose you'll want me 
to handle the destruction, then." 

Franklin gave him a suspicious 
glance. "Yes, but why do you 
ask? You have found one, haven't 
you?" 

"Yes, sir," he admitted. 

A moan came from the doorway. Norris looked up to see his 
wife's white face staring at him 
in horror, just before she turned 
and fled into the house. Franklin's bony head lifted. 

"I see," he said. "We have a 
fixation on our deviant. Very 
well, Norris, 111 take care of it 
myself. Where is it?" 

"In the house, sir. My wife's 
bedroom." 

"Get it." 

"IVTORRIS went glumly in the 
house. The bedroom .door 
was locked. 

"Honey," he called softly. 



59 




 




There wes no answer. He knocked 
gently 

A key turned in the lock, and 
Ins wife stood facing him. Her 
eyes weTe weeping ice. 

"Stay back I" she said. He 
could see Peony behind her, sitting in the center of the floor and 
looking mystified. 

Then he saw his own service 
revolver in her trembling hand. 

"Look, honey — it's me." 

She shook her head. "No, it's 
not you. It's a man that wants 



to kill a little girl. Stay back." 

"You'd shoot, wouldn't you?" 
he asked softly. 

"Try to come in and find out," 
she invited. 

"Let me have Peony." 

She laughed, her eyes bright 
with hate. "I wonder where Terry 
went. I guess he died. Or adapted. 
I guess I'm a widow now. Stay 
back, Mister, or I'll kill you." 

Norris smiled. "Okay, I'll stay 
back. But the gun isn't lo-.d~d." 

She tried to slam the door; he 



CONDITIONALLY HUMAN 



59 



caught it with his Foot. She struck 
at him with the pistol, but he 
dragged it out of her hand. He 
pushed her aside and held her 
against the wall while she clawed 
at his arm. 

"Stop it!" he said. "Nothing 
will happen to Peony, I promise 
you!" He glanced back at the 
child-thing, who had begun to 
cry. 

Anne subsided a little, staring 
at him angrily. 

"There's no other way out, 
honey. Just trust me. She'll be 
all right." 

Breathing quickly, Anne stood 
aside and watched him. "Okay, 
Terry. But if you're lying — tell 
me, is it murder to kill a man to 
protect a child?" 

Norris lifted Peony in his arms. 
Her wailing ceased, but her tail 
switched nervously. 

"In whose law book?" he asked 
his wife. "I was wondering the 
same thing." Norris started toward the door. "By the way — find 
my instruments while I'm outside, will you?" 

"The dissecting instruments?" 
•she gasped. "If you intend — *J 

"Let's call them surgical instruments, shall we? And get 
them sterilized." 

He went on outside, carrying' 
the child. Franklin was waiting 
for him in the kennel doorway. 

"Was that Mrs. Norris I heard 
screaming?" 



Norris nodded. "Let's get this 
over with. I don't stomach it so 
welt." He let his eyes rest unhappily on the top of Peony's 
head. 

Franklin grinned at her and 
took a bit of candy out of his 
pocket. She refused it and snuggled closer to Norris. 

"When can I go home?" she 
piped. "I want Daddy." 

Franklin straightened, watching her with amusement. "You're 
going home in a few minutes, little newt, Just a few minutes." 

They went into the kennels together, and Franklin headed 
straight for the third room. He 
seemed to be enjoying the situation. Norris hating him silently, 
stopped at a workbench and 
pulled on a pair of gloves. Then 
he called after Franklin. 

"Chief, since you're in there, 
check the outlet pressure while I 
turn on the main line, will you?" 

Franklin nodded assent. He 
stood outside the gas-chamber, 
watching the dials on the door. 
Norris could see his back while 
he twisted the main-line valve. 

"Pressure's up!" Franklin 
called. 

"Okay. Leave the hatch ajar 
so it won't lock, and crack the 
' intake valves- Read it again." . 

"Got a mask for mc?" 

Norris laughed. "If you're 
scared, there's one on the shelf. 
But just open the hatch, take a 




 



reading, and close it. There's no 
danger." 

Franklin frowned at him and 
cracked the intakes. Norris quietly closed the main valve again. 

"Drops to zero!" Franklin 
called. 

"Leave it open, then. Smell 
anything?" 

"No. I'm turning it off, Norris." He twisted the intakes. 

Simultaneously, Norris opened 
the main line. 

"Pressure's up again!" 

Norris dropped his wrench and 
walked back to the chamber, 
leaving Peony perched on the 
workbench. 

"Trouble with the intakes," he 
said gruffly. "It's happened before. Mind getting your hands 
dirty with me, Chief?" 

Franklin frowned irritably. 
"Let's hurry this up, Norris. I've 
got five territories to visit." 

"Okay, but we'd better put on 
our masks." He climbed a metal 
ladder to the top of . the chamber, 
leaned over to inspect the intakes. 
On his way down, he shouldered 
a light-bulb over the door, shattering it. Franklin cursed and 
stepped back, brushing glass fragments from his head and shoulders. 

"Good thing the light was off," 
he snapped. 

Nprris handed him the gasmask and put on his own. "The 
main switch is off," he said. He 



opened the intakes again. This 
time the dials fell to normal 
open-line pressure. "Well, look — 
it's okay," he called through the 
mask. "You sure it was zero before?" 

"Of course I'm sure!" came the 
muffled reply. 

"Leave it on for a minute. We'll 
see. I'll go get the newt. Don't let 
the door close, sir. It'll start the 
automatics and we can't get it 
open for half an hour." 

"I know, Norris. Hurry up." 

Norris left him standing just 
outside the chamber, propping 
the door open with his foot. A 
faint wind was coming through 
the opening. It should reach an 
explosive mixture quickly with 
the hatch ajar. 

He stepped into the next room, 
waited a moment, and jerked the 
switch. The roar was deafening 
as the exposed tungsten filament 
flared and detonated the escaping 
anesthetic vapor. Norris went to 
cut off the main line. Peony was 
crying plaintively. He moved to 
the door and glanced at the 
smouldering remains of Franklin. 

TREBLING no emotion what*■ ever, Norris left the kennels, 
carrying the sobbing child under 
one arm. His wife stared at him 
without understanding. 

"Here, hold Peony while I call 
the police," he said. 

"Police? What's" happened?" 



CONDITIONALLY HUMAN 



41 



He dialed quickly. "Chief 
Miler? This is Norris. Get over 
here quick. My gas chamber exploded — killed Chief Agent 
Franklin. Man, it's awful! Hurry." 

He hung up and went back to 
the kennels. He selected a normal 
Bermuda-K-99 and coldly killed 
it with a wrench. "You'll serve 
for a deviant," he said, and left 
it lying in the middle of the floor. 

Then he went back to the 
house, mixed a sleeping capsule 
in a glass of water, and forced 
Peony to drink it. 

"So she'll be out when the cops 
come," he explained to Anne. 

She stamped her foot. "Will 
you tell me what's happened?" 

"You heard me on the phone. 
Franklin accidentally died. That's 
all you have to know." 

He carried Peony out and 
locked her in a cage. She was too 
sleepy to protest, and she was 
dozing when the police came. 

Chief Miler strode about the 
three rooms like a man looking 
for a burglar at midnight. He 
nudged the body of the neutroid 
with his foot. "What's this, Norris?" 

"The deviant we were about to 
destroy. I finished her with a 
wrench." 

"I thought you said there 
weren't any deviants." 

"As far as the public's concerned, there aren't. I couldn't 
see that it was any of your busi


ness. It still isn't." 

"I see. It may become my business, though. How'd the blast 
happen?" 

Norris told him the story up 
to the point of the detonation. 
"The light over the door was 
loose. Kept flickering on and off. 
Franklin reached up to tighten 
it. Must have been a little gas in 
the socket. Soon as he touched 
it— wham !" 

"Why was the door open with 
the gas on?" 

"I told you — we were checking 
the intakes. If you close the door, 
it starts the automatics. Then 
you can't get it open till the 
cycle's finished." 

"Where were you?" 

"I'd gone to cut off the gas 
again." 

"Okay, stay in the house until 
we're finished out here." 

WHEN Norris went back in 
the house, his wife's white 
face turned slowly toward him. 

She sat stiffly by the living 
room window, looking sick. Her 
voice was quietly frightened. 

"Terry, I'm sorry about everything." 
"Skip it." 

"What did you do?" 

He grinned sourly. "I adapted 
to an era. Did you find the instruments?" 

She nodded. "What are they 
for?" 



62 




 



"To cut off a tail and skin a 
tattooed foot. Go to the store 
and buy some brown hair-dye 
and a pair of boy's trousers, age 
two. Peony's going to get a crewcut. From now on, she's Mike." 

"We're class-C, Terry! We 
can't pass her off as our own." 

"We're class-A, honey. I'm going to forge a heredity certificate." 

Anne put her face in her hands 
and rocked slowly to and fro. 

"Don't feel bad, baby. It was 
Franklin or a little girl. And from 
now on, it's society or the Norrises.'* 

"Whafll we do?" 

"Go to Atlanta and work for 
Anthropos. I'll take up where 
Delmont left off." 

"Terry!" 

"Peony will need a husband. 
They may find all of Delmont's 
males. I'll make her one. Then 
we'll see if a pair of chimp-Ks 
can do better than their makers." 

Wearily, he stretched out on 
the sofa. 

"What about that priest? Suppose he tells about Peony. Suppose he guesses about Franklin 
and tells the police?" 

"The police." he said, "would 
then smell a motive. They'd figure it out and I'd be finished. 
We'll wait and see. Let's don't 
talk; I'm tired. We'll just wait 
for Miler to come in." 

She began rubbing his temples 



gently, and he smiled. 

"So we wait," she said. "Shall 
I read to you, Terry?" 

"That would be pleasant," he 
murmured, closing his eyes. 

She slipped away, but returned 
quickly. He heard the rustle of 
dry pages and smelted musty 
leather. Then her voice came, 
speaking old words softly. And he 
thought of the small child-thing 
lying peacefully in her cage while 
angry men stalked about her. A 
small life with a mind; she came 
into the world as quietly as a 
thief, a burglar in the crowded 
house of Man. 

"/ will send my /ear before 
thee, and I will destroy the peoples before whom thou shaft 
come, sending hornets to drive 
out the Hevite and the Canaanite 
and the Hethite before thou enterest the land. Little by little I 
will drive them out before thee, 
till thou be increased, and dost 
possess the land. Then shaJt thou 
be to me a new people, and I to 
thee a God . . ." 

And Dn the quiet afternoon in 
May. while he waited for the police to finish puzzling in the kennels, it seemed to Terrell Norris 
that an end to scheming and 
pushing and arrogance was not 
too far ahead. It should be a 
pretty good world then. 

He hoped Man could fit into it 
somehow. 

— WALTER M. Mil I ( It. JR. 



CONDITIONALLY HUMAN 



6S 




GAlAXr SCIENCE FICTION 



DR. KOMETEVSKY'S 
DAY 

By FRITZ UIBER 

Before science, there was superstition. After 
science, there will be . . . what? The biggest,, 
most staggering, most final fad of them alii 



//"■~%UT it's afl predicted 
here! It even names 
P # this century for the 
next reshuffling of the planets," 
Celeste Wolver looked up unwillingly at the book her friend 



Madge Carnap held aloft like a 
torch. She made out the illstamped title, The Dance of the 
Planets. There was no mistaking 
the time of its origin; only paper 
from the Twentieth Century aged 



Illustrated by DAVID STONE 



DR. KOMETEVSKY'S DAY 



to lhat particularly nasty shade 
of brown. I ndeed , the book 
seemed to Celeste a brown old 
witch resurrected from the Last 
Age of Madness to confound a 
world growing sane, and she 
couldn't help shrinking back a 
trifle toward her husband Theo- ■ 
dor. 

He tried to come to her rescue. 
"Only predicted in the vaguest 
way. As I understand it, Kometevsky claimed, on the basis of 
a lot of evidence drawn from folklore, that the planets and their 
moons trade positions every so 
often." 

"As if they were playing Going 
to Jerusalem, or musical chairs," 
Celeste chimed in, but she 
couldn't make it sound funny. 

"Jupiter was supposed to have 
started as the outermost planet, 
and is to end up in the orbit of 
Mercury," Theodor continued. 
"Well, nothing at all like that 
has happened." 

"But it's begun," Madge said 
with conviction. "Phobos and 
Deimos have disappeared. You 
can't argue away that stubborn 
little fact." 

That was the trouble; you 
couldn't. Mars' two tiny moons 
had simply vanished during a 
period when, as was generally the 
case, the eyes of astronomy 
weren't on them. Just some hundred-odd cubic miles of rock — 
the merest cosmic flyspecks — yet 



they had carried away with them 
the security of a whole world. 

T OOKING at the lovely garden 
landscape around her, Celeste Wolver felt that in a moment the shrubby hills would 
begin to roll like waves, the 
charmingly aimless paths twist 
like snakes and sink in the green 
sea, the sparsely placed skyscrapers dissolve into the misty clouds 
they pierced. 

People must have felt like this, 
she thought, when A ris t arches 
first hinted and Copernicus told 
them that the solid Earth under 
their feet was falling dizzily 
through space. Only it's worse for 
us, because they couldn't see that 
anything had changed. We can. 

"You need something to cling 
to." she heard Madge say. "Dr. 
Kornetevsky was the only person 
who ever had an inkling that anything like this might happen. I 
was never a Kometevskyite before. Hadn't even heard of the 
man." 

She said it almost apologetically. In fact, standing there so 
frank and anxious-eyed, Madge 
looked anything but a fanatic, 
which made it much worse. 

"Of course, there are several 
more convincing alternate explanations ..." Theodor began 
hesitantly, knowing very well that 
there weren't. If Phobos and 
Deimos had suddenly disinte


66 




 



grated, surely Mars Base would 
have noticed something. Of 
course there was the Disordered 
Space Hypothesis, even if it was 
little more than the chance phrase 
of a prominent physicist pounded 
upon by an eager journalist. And 
in any case, what sense of security were you left with if you 
admitted that moons and planets 
might explode, or drop through 
unseen holes in space? So he 
ended up by taking a different 
tack : "Besides, if Phobos and 
Deimos simply shot off somewhere, surely they'd have been 
picked up by now by 'scope or 
radar." 

"Two balls of rock just a- few 
miles in diameter?" Madge questioned. "Aren't they smaller than 
many of the asteroids? I'm no 
astronomer, but I think I'm 
right." 

And of course she was. 

She swung the book under her 
arm. "Whew, it's heavy," she 
observed, adding in slightly 
scandalized tones, "Never been 
microfilmed." She smiled nervously and looked them up and 
down. "Going to a party?" she 
asked. 

Theodor's scarlet cloak and Celeste's green culottes and silver 
jacket justified the question, but 
they shook their heads. 

"Just the normally flamboyant 
garb of the family," Celeste said, 
while Theodor explained, "As 



it happens, we're bound on business connected with the disappearance. We Wolvers practically 
constitute a sub-committee of the 
Congress for the Discovery of 
New Purposes. And since a lot 
of varied material comes to our 
attention, we're going to see if 
any of it correlates with this bit 
of astronomical sleight-of-hand." 

Madge nodded. "Give you 
something to do, at any rate. 
Well, I must be off. The Buddhist temple has lent us their 
place for a meeting." She gave 
them a woeful grin. "See you 
when the Earth jumps." 

Theodor said to Celeste, "Come 
on. dear. We'll be late." 

But Celeste didn't want to 
move too fast. "You know, 
Teddy." she said uncomfortably, 
"all this reminds me of those old 
myths where too much good fortune is a sure sign of coming disaster. It was just too much luck, 
our great- grandparents missing 
World III and getting the World 
Government started a thousand 
years ahead of schedule. Luck 
like that couldn't last, evidently. 
Maybe we've gone too fast with 
a lot of things, like space-flight 
and the Deep Shaft and — " she 
hesitated a bit — "complex marriages. I'm a woman. I want complete security. Where am I to find 
it?" 

"In me," Theodor said 
promptly. 



DR. KOMETEVSKY'S DAY 



67 



"In you?" Celeste questioned, 
walking slowly. "But you're just 
one-third of my husband. Perhaps I should look for it in Edmund or Ivan." 

"You angry with me about 
something?" 

"Of course not. But a woman 
wants her source of security 
whole. In a crisis like this, it's 
disturbing to have it divided." 

"Well, we are a whole and, I 
believe, indivisible family," Theodor told her warmly. "You're not 
suggesting, are you, that we're going to be punished for our polygamous sins by a cosmic catastrophe? Fire from heaven and 
all that?" 

"Don't be silly. I just wanted 
to give you a picture of my feeling." Celeste smiled. "I guess 
none of us realized how much 
we've come to depend on the idea 
of unchanging scientific law. 
Knocks the props from under 
you." 

Theodor nodded emphatically. 
"All the more reason to get a line 
on what's happening as quickly 
as possible. You know, it's fantastically far-fetched, but I think 
the experience of persons with 
Extra-Sensory Perception may 
give us a clue. During the past 
three or four days there's been a 
remarkable similarity in the 
dreams of ESPs all over the 
planet. I 'm going to present 
the evidence at the meeting." 



Celeste looked up at him. "So 
that's why Rosalind's bringing 
Frieda's daughter?" 

"Dotty is your daughter, too, 
and Rosalind's," Theodor reminded her. 

"No, just Frieda's," Celeste 
said bitterly. "Of course you may 
be the father. One-third of a 
chance." 

Theodor looked at her sharply, 
but didn't comment. "Anyway, 
Dotty will be there," he said. 
"Probably asleep by now. All the 
ESPs have suddenly seemed to 
need more sleep." 

As they talked, it had been 
growing darker, though the luminescence of the path kept it from 
being bothersome. And now the 
cloud rack parted to the cast, 
showing a single red planet low 
on the horizon. 

"Did you know," Theodor said 
suddenly, "that in Go//»Ver's 
Travels Dean Swift predicted that 
better telescopes would show 
Mars to have two moons? He got 
the sizes and distances and periods damned accurately, too. One 
of the few really startling coincidences of reality and literature." 

"Stop being eerie," Celeste said 
sharply. But then she went 
on, "Those names Phobos and 
Deimos — they're Greek, aren't 
they? What do they mean?" 

Theodor lost a step. "Fear and 
Terror," he aaid unwillingly. 



tfi 




 



"Now don't go taking that for an 
omen. Most of the mythological 
names of major and minor ancient gods had been taken — the 
bodies in the Solar System are 
named that way, of course — and 
these were about all that were 
available." 

It was true, but it didn't comfort him much. 

TAM a God, Dotty was dreaming, ana* I want to be by my~ 
self and think. I and my godfriends like to keep some of our 
thoughts secret, but the other 
gods have forbidden us to. 

A little smile nickered across 
the lips of the sleeping girl, and 
the woman in gold tights and 
gold-spangled jacket leaned forward thoughtfully. In her dignity 
and simplicity and straight spined grace, she was rather like a 
circus mother watching her sick 
child before she went out for the 
trapeze act. 

/ and my god-friends sail off 
in our great round silver boats, 
Dotty went on dreaming. The 
other gods are angry and scared. 
They are frightened of the 
thoughts we may think in secret. 
They follow us to hunt us down. 
There are many more of them 
than of us. 

AS Celeste and Theodor entered 
the committee room, Rosalind Wolver — a glitter of plati


num against darkness — came in 
through the opposite door and 
softly shut it behind her. Frieda, 
a fair woman in blue robes, got 
up from the round table. 

Celeste turned away with outward casualness as Theodor 
kissed his two other wives. She 
was pleased to note that Edmund 
seemed impatient too. A figure in 
close-fitting black, unrelieved except for two red arrows at the 
collar, he struck her as embodying very properly the serious, 
fateful temper of the moment. 

He took two briefcases from 
his vest pocket and tossed them 
down on the table beside one of 
the microfilm, projectors. 

"I suggest we get started without waiting for Ivan," he said. 

Frieda frowned anxiously. "It's 
ten minutes since he phoned from 
the Deep Space Bar to say he 
was starting right away. And 
that's hardly two minutes walk." 

Rosalind instantly started tor 
ward the outside door. 

"I'll check," she explained. "Oh, 
Frieda, I've set the mike so you'll 
hear if Dotty calls." 

Edmund threw up his hands. 
"Very well, then," he said and 
walked over, switched on the picture and stared out moodily. 

Theodor and Frieda got out 
their briefcases, switched on projectors, and began silently checking through their material. 

Celeste fiddled with the TV 



DR. KOMETEVSKY'S DAT 



and got a newscast. But she found 
her eyes didn't want to absorb 
the blocks of print that rather 
swiftly succeeded each other, 
so, after a few moments, she 
shrugged impatiently and 
switched to audio. 

At the noise, the others looked 
around at her with surprise and 
some irritation, but in a few moments they were also listening. 

"The two rocket ships sent out 
from Mars Base to explore the 
orbital positions of Phobos and 
Deimos — that is, the volume of 
space they'd be occuping if their 
positions had remained normal — 
report finding masses of dust and 
larger debris. The two masses of 
fine debris are moving in the 
same orbits and at the same velocities as the two vanished 
moons, and occupy roughly the 
same volumes of space, though 
the mass of material is hardly a 
hundredth that of the moons. 
Physicists have ventured no statements as to whether this constitutes a confirmation of the Disintegration Hypothesis. 

"However, we're mighty pleased 
at this news here. There's a 
marked lessening of tension. The 
finding of the debris — solid, tangible stuff — seems to lift the 
whole affair out of the supernatural miasma in which some of 
us have been tempted to plunge 
it One-hundredth of the moons 
has been found. 



The rest will also be!" 

Edmund had turned his back 
on the window. Frieda and Theodor had switched off their projectors. 

"Meanwhile, Earthlings are going about their business with a 
minimum of commotion, meeting 
with considerable calm the 
strange threat to the fabric of 
their Solar System. Many, of 
course, are assembled in churches 
and humanist temples. Kometevskyites have staged helicopter 
processions at Washington, Peking, Pretoria, and Christiana, demanding that instant preparations be made for — and I quote 
—'Earth's coming leap through 
space.' They have also formally 
challenged all astronomers to produce an explanation other than 
the one contained in that strange 
book so recently conjured from 
oblivion, The Dance of the 
Planets. 

"That about winds up the story 
for the present. There are no 
new reports from Interplanetary 
Radar, Astronomy, or the other 
rocket ships searching in the extended Mars volume. Nor have 
any statements been issued by the 
various groups working on the 
problem in Astrophysics, Cosmic 
Ecology, the Congress for the 
Discovery of New Purposes, and 
so forth. Meanwhile, however, we 
can take courage from the words 
of a poem written even before Dr. 



70 



OAIAXY SCIENCE FICTION 



Kometevsky's book : 

"This Earth is not the steadfast place 
. We landsmen build upon; 
Fjom deep to deep she varies pace. 
And while she comes is gone. 
Berleatli my feet I feel 
Her smooth bulk heave and dip; 
Willi velvet plunge and soft uprecl 
She swings and steadies to her keel 
Like a gallant, gallant ship." 

W7HILE the TV voice intoned 
" the poem, growing richer as 
emotion caught it up, Celeste 
looked around her at the others. 
Frieda, with her touch of feminine helplessness showing more 
than ever through her businesslike poise. Theodor leaning forward from his scarlet cloak 
thrown back, smiling the halfsmile with which he seemed to 
face even the unknown. Black 
Edmund, masking a deep uncertainty with a strong show of decisiveness. 

In short, her family. She knew 
their every quirk and foible. And 
yet now they seemed to her a 
million miles away, figures seen 
through the wrong end of a telescope. 

Were they really a family? 
Strong sources of mutual strength 
and security to each other? Or 
had they merely been playing 
family, experimenting with their 
notions of complex marriage like 
a bunch of silly adolescents? Butterflies taking advantage of good 
weather to wing together in a 



glamorous, artificial dance — until 
outraged Nature decided to wipe 
them out? 

As the poem was ending. Celeste saw the door open and Rosalind come slowly in. The Golden 
Woman's face was white as the 
paths she had been treading. 

Just then the TV voice quickened with shock. "News! Lunar 
Observatory One reports that, although Jupiter is just about to 
pass behind the Sun, a good coronagraph of the planet has been 
obtained. Checked and rechecked, 
it admits of only one interpretation, which Lunar One feels dutybound to release. Jupiter's fourteen moons are no longer visible!" 

The chorus of remarks with 
which the Wolvers would otherwise have received this was 
checked by one thing: the fact 
that Rosalind seemed not to hear 
it. Whatever was on her mind prevented even that incredible statement from penetrating. 

She walked shakily to the table 
and put down a briefcase, one 
end of which was smudged with 
dirt. 

Without looking at them, she 
said, "Ivan left the Deep Space 
Bar twenty minutes ago, said he 
was coming straight here. On my 
way back I searched the path. 
Midway I found this half-buried 
in the dirt. I had to tug to get it 
out — almost as if it had been cemented into the ground. Do you 



OR. 



KOMETEVSKY'S DAY 



71 



feel how the dirt seems to be in 
the leather, as if it had lain for 
years in the grave?" 

By now the others were fingering the small case of microfilms 
they had seen so many times in 
Ivan's competent hands. What 
Rosalind said was true. It had a 
gritty, unwholesome feel to it. 
Also, it felt strangely heavy. 

"And see what's written on it," 
she added. 

They turned it over. Scrawled 
with white pencil in big, hasty, 
frantic letters were two words: 

"Going down!" 

The other gods, Dotty dreamt, 
are combing the whole Universe 
for us. We have escaped them 
many times, but now our tricks 
are almost used up. There are no 
doors going out of the Universe 
and our boats are silver beacons 
to th* hunters. So we decide to 
di&gu.ne them in the only way 
they ( an be disguised. It is our 
fast cfance, 

EDMUND rapped the table to 
gain the family's attention. 
"I'd say we've done everything 
we can for the moment to find 
Ivan. We've made a thorough local search. A wider one. which 
we can't conduct personally, is in 
progress. All helpful agencies 
have been alerted and descriptions are being broadcast. I suggest we get on with the business 



of the evening — which may very 
well be connected with Ivan's 
disappearance." 

One by one the others nodded 
and took their places at the round 
table. Celeste made a great effort to throw off the feeling of unreality that had engulfed her and 
focus attention on her microfilms. 

"I'll take over Ivan's notes," 
she heard Edmund say. "They're 
mainly about the Deep Shaft." 

"How far have they got with 
that?" Frieda asked idly. "Twenty-five miles?" 

"Nearer thirty, I believe," Edmund answered, "and still going 
down." 

At those last two words they all 
looked up quickly. Then their 
eyes went toward Ivan's briefcase. 

Our trick has succeeded, Dotty 
dreamt. The other gods have 
passed our hiding place a dozen 
times without noticing. They 
search the Universe lor us many 
times in vain. They finally decide that we have found a door 
going out of the Universe. Yet 
they fear us all the more. They 
think of us as devils who will 
some day return through the door 
to destroy them. So they watch 
everywhere. We lie quietly smiling in our camouflaged boats, yet 
hardly daring to move or think, 
for iear that the faintest echoes 
of our doings will give them a 



72 




 



clue. Hundreds of millions of 
years pass by. They seem to us 
no more than drugged hours in 
a prison. 

Theodor rubbed his eyes and 
pushed his chair back from the 
table. "We need a break." 

Frieda agreed wearily. "We've 
gone through everything." 

"Good idea," Edmund said 
briskly. "I think we've hit on 
several crucial points along the 
way and half disentangled them 
from the great mass of inconsequential material. I'll finish up 
that part of the job right now 
and present my case when we're 
all a bit fresher. Say half an 
hour?" 

Theodor nodded heavily, pushing up from his chair and hitching 
his cloak over a shoulder. 

"I'm going out for a drink," 
he informed them. 

After several hesitant seconds, 
Rosalind quietly followed him. 
Frieda stretched out on a couch 
and closed her eyes. Edmund 
scanned microfilms tirelessly, 
every now and then setting one 
aside. 

Celeste watched him for a 
minute, then sprang up and 
started toward the room where 
Dotty was asleep. But midway 
she stopped. 

Not my child, she thought bitterly. Frieda's her mother, Rosalind her nurse. I'm nothing at alt. 



Just one of the husband's girt 
friends. A lady of uneasy virtue 
in a dissolving world. 

But then she straightened her 
shoulders and went on. 

¥JOSALIND didn't catch up 
-**-with Theodor. Her footsteps 
were silent and he never looked 
back along the path whose feeble 
white glow rose only knee-high, 
lighting a low strip of shrub and 
mossy treetrunk to either side, no 
more. 

It was a little chilly. She drew 
on her gloves, but she didn't 
hurry. In fact, she fell farther and 
farther behind the dipping tail 
of his scarlet cloak and his plodding red shoes, which seemed to 
move disembodied, like those in 
the fairy tale. 

When she reached the point 
where she had found Ivan's briefcase, she stopped altogether. 

A breeze rustled the leaves, and, 
moistly brushing her cheek, 
brought forest scents of rot and 
mold. After a bit she began to 
hear the furtive scurryings and 
scuttlings of forest creatures. 

She looked around her halfheartedly, suddenly realizing the 
futility of her quest. What clues 
could she hope to find in this 
knee-high twilight? And they'd 
thoroughly combed the place 
earlier in the night. 

Without warning, an eerie tingling went through her and she 



OR. 



KOMETEV SKY'S DAY 



73 



was seized by a horror of the 
cold, grainy Earth underfoot — 
an ancestral terror from the days 
when men shivered at ghost 
stories about graves and tombs. 

A tiny detail persisted in bulking larger and larger in her mind 
— the unnaturalness of the way 
the Earth had impregnated the 
corner of Ivan's briefcase, almost 
as if dirt and leather co-existed 
in the same space. She remembered the queer way the partly 
buried briefcase had resisted her 
first tug, like a rooted plant. 

She felt cowed by the mysterious night about her, and literally 
dwarfed, as if she had grown several inches shorter. She roused 
herself and started forward. 

Something held her feet. 

They were ankle-deep in the 
path. While she looked in fright 
and horror, they began to sink 



still lower into the ground. 

She plunged frantically, trying 
to jerk loose. She couldn't. She 
had the panicky feeling that the 
Earth had not only trapped but 
invaded her; that its molecules 
were creeping up between the 
molecules of her flesh; that the 
two were becoming one. 

And she was sinking faster. 
Now knee-deep, thigh-deep, hipdeep, waist-deep. She beat at the 
powdery path with her hands and 
threw her body from side to side 
in agonized frenzy like some sinner frozen in the ice of the innermost circle of the ancients' hell. 
And always the sense of the dank, 
grainy tide rose inside as well as 
around her. 

She thought, he'd just have had 
time to scribble that note on his 
briefcase and toss it away. She 
jerked off a glove, leaned out as 




74 




 



KOMETEVSKY'S DAY 7S 



far as she could, and made a frantic effort to drive its firigers into 
the powdery path. Then the 
Earth mounted to her chin, her 
nose, and covered her eyes. 

She expected blackness, but it 
was as if the light of the path 
stayed with her, making a little 
glow all around. She saw roots, 
pebbles, black rot, worn tunnels, 
worms. Tier on tier of them, her 
vision penetrating the solid 
ground. And at the same time, the 
knowledge that these same sorts 
of things were coursing up 
through her. 

AND still she continued to sink 
at a speed that increased, 
as if the law of gravitation applied to her in a diminished way. 
She dropped from black soil 
through gray clay and into pale 
limestone. 

Her tortured, rock-permeated 
lungs sucked at rock and drew 
in air. She wondered madly if a 
volume of air were falling with 
her through the stone. 

A glitter of quartz. The momentary openness of a foot-high 
cavern with a trickle of water. 
And then she was sliding down a 
black basalt column, half inside 
it, half inside gold-flecked ore. 
Then just black basalt. And always faster. 

It grew hot, then hotter, as if 
she were approaching the mythical eternal fires. 

76 



AT first glance T h eo d o r 
thought the Deep Space Bar 
was empty. Then he saw a figure 
hunched monkeylike on the last 
stool, almost lost in the blue 
shadows, while behind the bar, 
her crystal dress blending with 
the* tiers of sparkling - glasses, 
stood a grave-eyed young girl 
who could hardly have been 
fifteen. 

The TV was saying, "... in 
addition, a number of mysterious disappearances of high-rating 
individuals have been reported. 
These are thought to be cases of 
misunderstanding, illusory apprehension, and impulse traveling — 
a result of the unusual stresses 
of the time. Finally, a few suggestible individuals in various 
parts of the globe, especially the 
Indian Peninsula, have declared 
themselves to .be 'gods' and' in 
some way responsible for current 
events. 

"It is thought — " 
The girl switched off the TV 
and took Theodor's order, explaining casually, "Joe wanted to 
go to a Kometevskyite meeting, 
so I took over for him." When 
she had prepared Theodor's highball, she announced, "I'll have a 
drink with you gentlemen," and 
squeezed herself a glass of pomegranite juice. 

The monkeylike figure muttered, "Scotch -and -soda," then 
turned toward Edmund and 


 



asked, "And what is your reaction to all this, sir?" 

THEODOR recognized the 
shrunken wrinkle-seamed face. 
It was Colonel Fortescue, a military antique long retired from 
the Peace Patrol and reputed to 
have seen actual fighting in the 
Last Age of Madness. Now, for 
some reason, the face sported a 
knowing smile. 

Theodor shrugged. Just then 
the TV "big news" light blinked 
blue and the girl switched on 
audio. The Colonel winked at 
Theodor,. 

"... confirming the disappearance of Jupiter's moons. But two 
other utterly fantastic reports 
have just been received. First, 
Lunar Observatory One says that 
it is visually tracking fourteen 
small bodies which it believes 
may be the lost moons of Jupiter. 
They are moving outward from 
the Solar System at an incredible 
velocity and are already beyond 
the orbit of Saturn!'* 
The Colonel said, "Ah!" 
"Second, Palomar reports a 
large number of dark bodies approaching the Solar System at an 
equally incredible velocity. They 
are at about twice the distance 
of Pluto, but closing in fast! We 
will be on the air with further details as soon as possible." 
The Colonel said, "Ah-ha!" 
Theodor stared at him. The old 



man's self-satisfied poise was almost amusing. 

"Are you a Kometevskyite?" 
Theodor asked him. 

The Colonel laughed. "Of 
course not, my boy. Those poor 
people are fumbling in the dark. 
Don't you see what's happened?" 

"Frankly, no." 

The Colonel leaned toward 
Theodor and whispered gruffly, 
"The Divine Plan. God is a military strategist, naturally." 

Then he lifted the scotch -andsoda in his clawlike hand and 
took a satisfying swallow. 

"I knew it all along, of course," 
he went on musingly, "but thii 
last news makes it as plain as a 
rocket blast, at least to anyone 
who knows military strategy. 
Look here, my boy, suppose you 
were commanding a fleet and got 
wind of the enemy's approach— 
what would you do? Why, you'd 
send your scouts and destroyers 
fanning out toward them. Behind 
that screen you'd mass your 
heavy ships. Then — " 

"You don't mean to imply — " 
Theodor interrupted. 

The girl behind the bar looked 
at them both cryptically. 

"Of course I do!" the Colonel 
cut in sharply. "It's a war between the forces of good and evil. 
The bright suns and planets are 
on one side, the dark on the 
other. 

The moons are the destroy


DR. KOMETEVSKY'S DAY 



77 



crs, Jupiter and Saturn are the 
big battleships, while we're on a 
heavy cruiser, I'm proud to say. 
We'll probably go into action 
soon. Be a corking fight, what? 
And all by divine strategy!" 

He chuckled and took another 
big drink. Theodor looked at 
him sourly. The girl behind the 
bar polished a glass and said 
nothing. 

T~\OTTY suddenly began to 
turn and toss, and a look 
of terror came over her sleeping 
face. Celeste leaned forward apprehensively. 

The child's lips worked and 
Celeste made out the sleepy-fuzzy 
words: "They've found out where 
we're hiding. They're coming to 
get us. No! Please, no!" 

Celeste's reactions were mixed. 
She felt worried about Dotty and 
at the same time almost in terror 
of her, as if the little girl were 
an agent of supernatural forces. 
She told herself that this fear was 
an expression of her own hostility, 
yet she didn't really believe it. 
She touched the child's hand. 

Dotty's eyes opened without 
making Celeste feel she had quite 
come awake. After a bit she 
looked at Celeste and her little 
lips parted in a smile. 

"Hello," she said sleepily. "I've 
been having such funny dreams." 
Then , after a pause, frowning, 
*'I really am a god, you know. It 



feels very queer." 

"Yes, dear?" Celeste prompted 
uneasily. "Shall I call Frieda?" 

The smile left Dotty's lips. 
"Why do you act so nervous 
around me?" she asked. "Don't 
you love me. Mummy?" 

Celeste started at the word. Her 
throat closed. Then, very slowly, 
her face broke into a radiant 
smile. "Of course I do, darling. I 
love you very much." 

Dotty nodded happily, her eyes 
already closed again. 

There was a sudden flurry of 
excited voices beyond the door. 
Celeste heard her name called. 
She stood up. 

"I'm going to have to go out 
and talk with the others," she 
said. "If you want me, dear, just 
call." 

"Yes, Mummy." 

F^DMUND rapped for attention. Celeste, Frieda, and 
Theodor glanced around at him. 
He looked more f right f ul ly 
strained, they realized, than even 
they felt. His expression was a 
study in suppressed excitement, 
but there were also signs of a 
knowledge that was almost too 
overpowering for a human being 
to bear. 

His voice was clipped, rapid. 
"I think it's about time we 
stopped worrying about our own 
affairs and thought of those of 
the Solar System, partly because 



73 




 



I think they have a direct bearing 

on the disappearances of Ivan 
and Rosalind. As I told you, I've 
been sorting out the crucial items 
from the material we've been presenting. There are roughly four 
of those items, as I see it. It's 
rather like a mystery story. I 
wonder if, hearing those four 
clues, you will come to the same 
conclusion I have." 

The others nodded. 

"First, there are the latest reports from Deep Shaft, which, as 
you know, has been sunk to investigate deep-Earth conditions. 
At approximately twenty -nine 
miles below the surface, the delvers have encountered a metallic 
obstruction which they have tentatively named the duraspherc, 
It resists their hardest drills, their 
Strongest corrosives. They have 
extended a side -tunnel at that 
level for a quarter of a mile. Delicate measurements, made possible 
by the mirror -smooth metal surface, show that the duraspherc 
has a slight curvature that is 
almost exactly equal to the curvature of the Earth itself. The suggestion is that deep borings made 
anywhere in the world would encounter the durasphere at the 
same depth. 

"Second, the movements of the 
moons of Mars and Jupiter, and 
particularly the debris left behind 
by the moons of Mars. Granting 
Phobos and Deimos had duras


pheres proportional in size to that 
of Earth, then the debris would 
roughly equal in amount the material in those^ two duraspheres* 
rocky envelopes. The suggestion 
is that the two duraspheres suddenly burst from their envelopes 
with such itanic velocity as to 
leave those disrupted envelopes 
behind." 

It was deadly quiet in the committee room. 

"Thirdly, the disappearances of 
Ivan and Rosalind, and especially 
the baffling hint — from Ivan's 
message in one case and Rosalind's downward-pointing glove 
in the other — that they were both 
somehow drawn into the depths 
of the Earth. 

"Finally, the dreams of the 
ESPs, which agree overwhelmingly in the following points: A 
group of beings separate themselves from a godlike and telepathic race because they insist 
on maintaining a degree of mental 
privacy. They flee in great boats 
or ships of some sort. They are 
pursued on such a scale that 
there is no hiding place for them 
anywhere in the universe. In some 
manner they successfully camouflage their ships. Eons pass and 
their still -fanatical pursuers do 
not penetrate their secret. Then, 
suddenly, they are detected." 

Edmund waited. "Do you see 
what I'm driving at?" he asked 
hoarsely. 



DR. 



KOMETEVSKY'S DAY 



7* 



HE could tell from their looks 
that the others did, but 
couldn't bring themselves to put 
it into words. 

"I suppose it's the time-scale 
and the value-scale that are so 
hard for us to accept," he said 
softly. "Much more, even, than 
the size-scale. The thought that 
there are creatures in the Universe to whom the whole career 
of Man — in fact, the whole career of life — is no more than a 
few thousand or hundred thousand years. And to whom Man is 
no more than a minor stage property — a trifling part of a clever 
job of camouflage." 

This time he went on, "Fantasy 
writers have at times hinted all 
sorts of odd things about the 
Earth — that it might even be a 
kind of single living creature, or 
honeycombed with inhabited caverns, and so on. But I don't know 
that any of them have ever suggested that the Earth, together 
with all the planets and moons 
of the Solar System, might 
be . . ." 

In a whisper, Frieda finished 
for him, "... a camouflaged fleet 
of gigantic spherical spaceships." 

"your guess happens to be the 
precise truth." 

At that familiar, yet dreadly 
unfamiliar voice, all four of them 
swung toward the inner door. 
Dotty was standing there, a sleepstupefied little girl with a blanket 



caught up around her and dragging behind. Their own daughter. 
But in her eyes was a look from 
which they cringed. 

She said, "I am a creature 
somewhat older than what your 
geologists call the Archeozoic Era. 
I am speaking to you through a 
number of telepathically sensitive 
individuals among your kind. In 
each case my thoughts suit themselves to your level of comprehension. I inhabit the disguised 
and jetless spaceship which is 
your Earth." 

Celeste swayed a step forward. 
"Baby . . ." she implored. 

Dotty went on, without giving 
her a glance, "It is true that we 
planted the seeds of life on some 
of these planets simply as part 
of our camouflage, just as we gave 
them a suitable environment for 
each. And it is true that now 
we must let most of that life be 
destroyed. Our hiding place has 
been discovered, our pursuers are 
upon us, and we must make one 
last effort to escape or do battle, 
since we firmly believe that the 
principle of mental privacy to 
which we have devoted our existence is perhaps the greatest good 
in the whole Universe. 

"But it is not true that we look 
with contempt upon you. Our 
whole race is deeply devoted to 
life, wherever it may come into 
being, and it is our rule never to 
interfere with its development


al 



OA1AXT SCIENCE FICTION 



That was one of the reasons we 
made life a part of our camouflage — it would make our pursuers reluctant to examine these 
planets too closely. 

"Yes, we have always cherished 
you and watched your evolution 
with interest from our hidden 
lairs. We may even unconsciously 
have shaped your development in 
certain ways, trying constantly to 
educate you away from war and 
finally succeeding — which may 
have given the betraying clue to 
our pursuers. 

"Your planets must be burst 
asunder — this particular planet in 
the area of the Pacific — so that 
we may have our last chance to 
escape. Even if we did not move, 
our pursuers would destroy you 
with us. We cannot invite you 
inside our ships — not for lack 
of space, but because you could 
never survive the vast accelerations to which you would be subjected. You would, you see, need 
very special accommodations, of 
which we have enough only for 
a few. 

"Those few we will take with 
us, as the seed from which a new 
human race may — if we ourselves 
somehow survive — be born." 

TJOSALIND and Ivan stared 
dumbly at each other across 
the egg-shaped silver room, without apparent entrance or exit, in 
which they were sprawled. But' 



their thoughts were no longer of 
thirty-odd mile journeys down, 
through solid earth, or of how 
cool it was after the heat of the 
passage, or of how grotesque it 
was to be trapped here, the fragment of a marriage. They were 
both listening to the voice that 
spoke inside their minds. 

"In a few minutes your bodies 
will be separated into layers one 
atom thick, capable of being 
shelved or stored in such a way 
as to endure almost infinite accelerations. Single cells wilt cover 
acres of space. But do not be 
alarmed. The process will be 
painless and each particle will 
be catalogued for future assembly. Your consciousness will endure throughout the process." 

Celeste looked at her goldshod toes. She was wondering, 
wilt they go first, or my head? 
Or will I be peeled like an apple? 

She looked at Ivan and knew 
he was thinking the same thing. 

T TP in the committee room, the 
^ other Wolvers slumped 
around the table. Only little 
Dotty sat straight and staring, 
speechless and unanswering, 
quite beyond their reach, like a 
telephone off the hook and with 
the connection open, but no voice 
from the other end. 

They had just switched off the 
TV after listening to a confused 
medley of denials, prayers, Kom


D 8 . KOMETEVSKY'S DAY 



ctevskyite chatterings, and a few 
'astonishingly realistic comments 
on the possibility of survival. 

These last pointed out that, on 
the side of the Earth opposite 
the Pacific, the convulsions would 
come slowly when the entombed 
spaceship burst forth — provided, 
as seemed the case, that it moved 
without jets or reaction. 

It would be as if the Earth's 
vast core simply vanished. Gravity would diminish abruptly to 
a fraction of its former value. The 
empty envelope of rock and water 
and air would slowly fall together, though at the same time 
the air would begin to escape 
from the debris because there 
would no longer be the" mass required to hold it. 

However, there might be definite chances of temporary apd 
cvf;n prolonged survival for individuals in strong, hermetically 
sealed structures, such as submarines and spaceships. The few 
spaceships on Earth were reported to have blasted off, or be 
preparing to leave, with as many 
passengers as could be carried. 

But most persons, apparently, 
could not contemplate action of 
any sort. They could only sit and 
think, like the Wolvers. 

A faint smile relaxed Celeste's 
face. She was thinking, how beautiful! It means the death of the 
Solar System, which is a horrifying subjective concept. Objec


tively, though, it would be a more 
awesome sight than any human 
being has ever seen or ever could 
see. It's an absurd and even brutal 
thing to wish — but I wish I could 
see the whole cataclysm from beginning to end. It would make 
death seem very small, a tiny 
personal event. 

Dotty's face was losing its 
blank expression, becoming intent and alarmed. 

"We are in contact with our 
pursuers," she said in the familiar-unfamiliar voice. "Negotiations are now going on. There 
seems to be — there is a change in 
them. Where they were harsh and 
vindictive before, they now are 
gentle and conciliatory." She 
paused, the alarm on her childish 
features pinching into anxious 
uncertainty. "Our pursuers have 
always been shrewd. The change 
in them may be false, intended 
merely to lull us into allowing 
them to come close enough to destroy us. We must not fall into 
the trap by growing hopeful ..." 

They leaned forward, clutching 
hands, watching the little face as 
though it were a television screen. 
Celeste had the wild feeling that 
she was listening to a communique from a war so unthinkably 
vast and violent, between opponents so astronomically huge 
and nearly immortal, that she 
felt like no more than a reasoning 
ameba . . . and then realized with 



to 




 



an explosive urge to laugh that 
that was exactly the situation. 

"No!" said Dotty. Her eyes began to glow. "They have changed! 
During the cons in which we lay 
sealed away and hidden from 
them, knowing nothing of them, 
they have rebelled against the 
tyranny of a communal mind to 
which no thoughts are private 
. . . the tyranny that we ourselves 
fled to escape. They come not to 
destroy us, but to welcome us 
back to a society that we and 
they can make truly great!'* 

TT^RIEDA collapsed to a chair, 
•■- trembling between laughter 
and hysterical weeping. Theodor 
looked as blank as Dotty had 
while waiting for words to speak. 
Edmund sprang to the picture 
window. Celeste toward the TV 
set. 

Climbing shakily out of the 
chair, Frieda stumbled to the picture window and peered out beside Edmund. She saw lights bobbing along the paths with a wild 
excitement. 

On the TV screen, Celeste 
watched two brightly lit ships 
spinning in the sky — whether 
human spaceships or Phobos and 
Deimos come to help Earth rejoice, she couldn't tell. 

Dotty spoke again, the joy in 
her strange voice forcing them 
to turn. "And you. dear children, 
creatures of our camouflage, we 



welcome you — whatever your future career on these planets or 
like ones — into the society of enlightened worlds! You need not 
feel small and alone and helpless 
ever again, for we shall always 
be with you!" 

The outer door opened. Ivan 
and Rosalind reeled in, drunkenly 
smiling, arm in arm. 

"Like rockets." Rosalind 
blurted happily. "We came 
through the durasphere and solid 
rock . . . shot up right to the 
surface." 

"They didn't have to take us 
along," Ivan added with a bleary 
grin. "But you know that already, 
don't you? They're too good to 
let you live in fear, so they must 
have told you by now." 

"Yes, we know," said Theodor. 
"They must be almost godlike in 
their goodness. I feel . . . calm." 

Edmund nodded soberly. 
"Calmer than I ever felt before. 
It's knowing. I suppose, that — 
well, we're not alone." 

Dotty blinked and looked 
around and smiled at thena all 
with a wholly little-girl smile-. 

"Oh, Mummy," she said, and 
it was impossible to tell whether 
she spoke to Frieda or Rosalind 
or Celeste, "I've just had the 
funniest dream." 

"No, darling," said Rosalind 
gently, "it's we who had the 
dream. We've just awakened,." 

—FRITZ IIIBFR 



DR. KOMETEVSKT'S DAY 




THE PUPPET MASTERS, by 
Robert A. Heinlein. Doubleday & 
Co., Inc., New York, 1951. 219 
pages, $2.75 

BETWEEN PLANETS, by Robert A. Heinlein. Charles Scribmr's 
Sons, New York, 1951. 222 pages, 
$2*50 

WITHIN these two books can 
be found nearly the whole 
spread of the complex Heinlein 
character — the hard-boiled, almost Huxleyan sophisticate, the 
somberly mature player with 



ideas in The Puppet Masters (serialized last fall in GALAXY) and 
the hard, muscular, action writer 
for the teen-age crowd who gives 
them wonderfully adventurous 
concepts of a future life in space. 

The Puppet Masters, with its 
chilling concept of the alien invader in the form of a parasite 
that gloms onto one's shoulders 
and thereby converts one into 
merely another molecule in the 
mass-society of the encroaching 
slugs, is a fascinatingly repulsive 
job- Since it appeared here, to 



64 




 



•ay more would be immodest. 

Ia Between Planets, a violent 
tale of the revolt of the Venus 
and Mars colonies against the 
deadening bureaucracy of Earth, 
we have a magnificently real and 
vivid Picture of the Possible, even 
including the charmingly intellectual crocodiles Heinlein picks 
as the dominant ltfe-foem of 
Venus. 

The hero is a very real teen-age 
boy who had been born in space 
and was thus a "citizen of the 
world" and a "displaced person" 
when war broke out. 

Without question, the tale will 
appeal to adult Science Fiction 
readers as well as to their sons— 
and daughters. 

LODESTAR, by Franktyn Branley. Thomas Y. Crowell Co., New 
York, 1951. 248 pages, $2.50 

fTTHIS juvenile suffers from the 
-* fact that its author is a high 
school science teacher who too 
often tries to put over a bit of 
knowledge or information along 
with the adventure. The story 
tells of the first rocket trip to 
Mars, and technically has much 
of interest in it. Branley has paid 
attention to a lot of the minutiae 
of space travel that more careless 
writers either do not know or take 
as matters of course. 

The distressing result is that 
the characterizations are pain


fully amateur snd the plot entirely so, while the science and the 
imagination exposed in the book 
are generally first-rate. It is the 
awkward and often patronizing 
writing down to youth that is a 
little difficult to stomach. It's 
surprising — Mr. Branlcy's own 
students must have shown Uitn 
how alert kids are today. 

THE BEST SCIENCE FICTION STORIES, 1951, Edited 
by Everett F. Bleiler and T. E. 
Dikty. Frederick Felt, I PC., New 
York, 1951. 352 pages, $2.95 

THIRD in the Fell series of 
annual winnowings of the science fiction crop, this Attractive 
volume contains 18 stories, of 
which 12 rate as "B" or better on 
my grading scale. This is a very 
high 'average for contemporary 
science fiction anthologies. 

The book has a long introduction, in which we arc indoctrinated with the concept of science 
fiction as ethnography. Well, 
maybe. 

The stories I mark as follows: 
"A" — Bill Brown's "Star Ducks" 
(delightful!), Roger Young's "Not 
to be Opened," Katherine MacLean's "Contagion," Alfred 
Bester's lovely "Oddy and Id,* 
Damon Knight's "To Serve Man" 
(which everybody Loves!), Dick 
Matheson's "Born of Man and 
Woman," Ray Bradbury's "The 



* * * * * SHEt" 



IS 



Fox in the Forest" (what a terrific story!), Fredric Brown's 
"The Last Martian," and, last 
but not least, the outstanding 
science fiction story of 1951, 
Fritz Leiber's "Coming Attraction," which, of course, created a 
row when it was in GALAXY. 

"B" stories — R. Bretnor's "The 
Gnurrs Come from the Voodvork 
Out" (which really isn't science 
fiction at all, Cyril Kornbluth's 
"The Mindworm" (which would 
have been "A" if only there 
wasn't already a story called 
"The Girl with the Hungry Eyes", 
Leiber, 1949), and William Temple's ''Forget Me Not," great in 
concept, but pointless in that it 
literally goes nowhere. 

The other six tales are not 
worth mentioning, so I won't 
mention them. 

FOUNDATION, by Isaac Asi~ 
mov. Gnome Press, New York, 
1951. 255 pages, $2.75 

THIS, Asimov's fourth book in 
two years, is obviously the 
first volume of several which will 
tell the history of the whole 
period between the First and 
Second Galactic Empires, and 
how the Centuries of the Dark 
Ages were reduced from a postulated three hundred to less than 
ten through the workings of Hari 
Seldon's Foundation for Psychohistory. 



This first volume - carries the 
story from the start of the Foundation, with a selection from the 
memoirs of Gaal Dornick, Seldon's biographer, clear through 
to the episode of Hober Mallow, 
first of the galactic Merchant 
Princes. In between, there is the 
magnificent career of Salvor Hardin, Politician, in two stories; and 
the relatively undistinguished tale 
of Limnar Ponyets, Trader and 
predecessor of the Merchant 
Princes. 

Asimov has obviously studied 
the trends and trajectories of 
past human history, and has 
transposed them with sometimes 
unnecessary literalness to the 
enormous scale of a Galactic civilization. From the priest -preservers of the remnants of an 
ancient culture to the merchantile 
sea captains opening up the 
China Sea and the first great 
capitalists of the Venetian era, 
the trends of our own world's 
history are mirrored in this book 
on a vastly magnified scale. 

Woven throughout is a strand 
of belief by the author that, tomorrow, psychological sciences 
will have advanced to a point 
where they can prophesy — and to 
some degree control — the future 
movements of humanity as a 
whole. 

The result is a book of real 
intellectual entertainment and adventure. 




 



WHO GOES THERE? by John 
Campbell, Jr. Shasta Publishers, 
Chicago, 2 nd Ed., 1951. 231 
pages, $3.00 

'i^HIS is a reissue of a collection 
■* of Campbell's short stories, 
first published in 1948, to take 
advantage of the publicity surrounding the movie The Thing, 



which theoretically was based on 
the title story of this collection. 
The connection between the two 
is not excessively close. 

It is a pleasure to have the 
group of seven Campbell shorts 
on hand again. Every one of 
them is definitely worth having in 
your permanent library. 

— GROI'F COINKIJr


• SYMBOIJC LOGIC 

• CONSTRUCTION OF ROBOTS 

• COMPUTING MACHINERY 



and other 
scientific 

-nil :r( l. 



COURSES or Guided Study by Mail^beginning or advanced— individuals or study groups. Fitted to your interests and needs. From $9 to $35 

am immensely enjoying this I Available: 

opportunity to discuss and team." I Robot Design A Conduction Plans— 

~a member of the Foeuit,, I "SIMON"— $35. 

Dartmouth Medico! School I "SOUEE"-$S. 

Write: EDMUND C. BERKELEY and Associates 

Inventor of "SIMON", Merhmtiral Brain & "SQ1JEE". Robot Squirrel 
Author »f ' iruint Brain* or Machines that Think" (Wiley — 1949) 
M W«nI Ilih St., fopt. C2. New Vorh 11, N. Y. 



NEXT MONTH'S CONTENTS PAGE 


NOVELET 




THE YEAR OF THE JACKPOT 




SHORT STORIES 




MANNERS OF THE AGE 


by H. B. Fyf« 


THE SEVENTH ORDER 




CATCH THAT MARTIAN 




INTRODUCING 




FOR YOUR INFORMATION 


by Willy ley 


BOOK-LENGTH SEBIAL -Conclusion 




THE DEMOLISHED MAN 




FEATURES 




EDITOR'S PAGE 


GALAXY'S FIVE STAR SHELF 



* * * * ★ SHELF 



17 



Pre -Pub Iication Oiier 



Only one thing could equal owning o complete file of 
GALAXY Science Ficrion . . . having on ANTHOLOGY of 
GALAXY stories! 

Published by Crown, it's a really huge book . . , over 500 
pages, more than a quarter of a million words of fovorite 
GALAXY stories in convenient form . . . c giant reading bargain 
otiOnly $3.00 a copy. 

But we have an offer that makes this giant bargain even more 
gigantic: 

Twelve quality-crammed issues of 
 
monthly at the newsstand come to $4.20 a year. 

A copy of THE 
 READER is $3.00. 
Total: $7.20. 

But . . . IF YOU ACT AT ONCE, you gel your Special Readers' 
Pre-Publicaticn copy of THE 
 READER 
. . . p/us the next twelve big issues of GALAXY ... for only $5,951 

You'll wont them both. Don't wait because this h a prepubficafion offer and cannot be kept open long. Mail the 
coupon below with $5.95 today. 



GALAXY Publishing Corp. 
421 Hudson Street 
New York 14, N. Y. 

Yes, start □ (01 extend P) my tubstriptioii right away — and mM me 
my copy ot THE GAIAXY SCIENCE FICTION DEADER 01 toon m U roll* 
off the prewes! 1 •ndo*e $3.95 at payment m fwll for both. 



Address 

City ..... 

Start with the... 



•1 



fresh air fiend 



By KRIS NEVILLE 

Sick and helpless, he was very Ivcky to have a 
faithful native woman to nurse him. Or was he? 




HE rolled over to look at 
the plants. They were 
crinkled and dead and 
useless in the narrow flower box 
across the hut. He tried to draw 
his arm under his body to force 
himself erect. The reserve oxygen 
began to hiss in sleepily. He tried 
to signal Hertha to help him, but 



she was across the room with her 
back to him, her hands fumbling 
with a bowl of dark, syrupy medicine. His lips moved, but the 
words died in his throat. 

He wanted to explain to her 
that scientists in huge laboratories 
with many helpers and millions 
of dollars had been unable to End 



Illustrated by KARL ROGERS 



FRESH AIR FIEND 



■ cure for liguna fever. He wanted 
to explain that no brown liquid, 
made like cake batter, would cure 
the disease that had decimated 
the crews of two expeditions to 
Sitari and somehow gotten back 
to cut down the population of 
Wihlanihaven. 

But, watching her, he could 
understand what she thought she 
was doing. At one time she must 
have seen a pharmacist put chemicals into a mortar and grind 
them with a pestle. This, she must 
have remembered, was what people did to make medicine, and 
now she put what chemical appearing substances she could 
locate — flour, powdered coffee, 
lemon extract, salt — into a bowl 
and mashed them together. She 
was very intent on her work and 
it probably made her feel almost 
helpful. 

Finally she moved out of his 
field of vision; he found that he 
could not turn his head to follow 
her with his eyes. He lay conscious but inert, like waterlogged 
wood on a river bottom. He heard 
sounds of her movement. At last 
he slept, 

HE awakened with a start. His 
head was clearer than it 
had been for hours. He listened 
to the oxygen hissing in again. 
He tried to read the dial on the 
far wall, but it blurred before 
his eyes 



"Hertha,** he said. 
She came quickly to his cot. 
"What does the oxygen register say?" 

"Oxygen register?'* 
He gritted his teeth against the 
fever which began to shake his 
body mercilessly until he wanted 
to scream to make it stop. He 
became angry even as the fever 
shook him: angry not really at 
the doctors; not really at any one 
thing. Angry because the mountains did not care if he saw them; 
angry that the air did not care if 
he breathed it. Angry because, 
between planets, between suns, 
the coldness of space merely 
waited, not giving a damn. 

Several years ago — ten, twenty, 
perhaps more — some doctor had 
finally isolated a strain of the 
filterable virus of liguna fever 
that could be used as a vaccine: 
too weak to kill, but strong 
enough to produce immunity 
against its more virulent brother 
strains. That opened up the Sitari 
System for coloni2ation and exploration and meant that the men 
who got there first would make 
fortunes. 

So he went to the base at Ke. 
first selling his strip mine property and disposing of his tools 
and equipping his spaceship for 
the intersolar trip ; and at Ke 
they shot him full of the disease. But his bloodstream built 
no antibodies. The Weakened 



OAIAXY SCIBMCf FICTION 



virus settled in his nervous system 
and there was no way of getting 
it out. The doctors were very 
sorry for him, and they assured 
him it was a one- in- ten -thousand 
phenomenon. Thereafter, he suffered recurrent paralytic attacks. 

If it had not been for the advance warning — a pain at the 
base of his spine, a moment of 
violent trembling in his knees — ■ 
he would have been forced to 
give up solitary strip mining altogether. As it was, whenever he 
felt the warning, he had to hurry 
to the nearest colony and be hospitalized for the duration of the 
attack. He had had four such 
warnings on this satellite, and 
three times he had gone to Pastiville on Helio and been cared for 
and come away with less money 
than he had gone with. 

His bank credit, once large, 
had slowly dribbled away, and 
now he made just about enough 
from his mining to care for himself during illness. He could not 
afford to hunt for less dangerous, 
less isolated work. It would not 
pay enough, for he knew how to 
do very little that civilization 
needed done. He was finally 
trapped; no longer could he afford a pilot for the long flight 
from Helio to a newer frontier, 
and he could not risk the trip 
alone.. 

He lay waiting for the new 
spasm of fever and stared at 



Hertha who, this time, would 
care for him here and he would 
not need to go to a hospital. Perhaps, after a little while, he would 
be able to save enough to push 
on, through the awful indifference 
of space, to some new world 
where, with luck, there would be 
a sudden fortune. 

Then he could go back to 
civilization. 

He realized bitterly that he 
was merely telling himself he 
would go back. He knew there 
was only one direction he could 
go, and that direction was not 
back. 

Hertha waited, hurt-eyed, moving her pudgy hands helplessly. 

When the shaking subsided, 
he explained through chattering 
teeth about the oxygen register 
across the room, and she went 
away. 

HPHE fever vanished completely, 
leaving him listless, His hand, 
lying on the rough blanket, was 
abnormally white. He wiggled the 
fingers, but he could not feel 
the wool. 

His mouth was dry and he 
wanted a drink of water. 

Hertha moved out of his range 
of vision. He shifted his head on 
the damp pillow and watched her 
out of the corner of his eye. 

He had never heard her real 
name, but she did not seem to 
object to his name for her. 



FRESH AIR FIEND 



r una (hat which began ; 
Out of mc the years roll; 
Out of me God and man; 
I am equal and wliole; 
God chances, and man, 
And the form ot them bodily; 
I am the soul. 

He tried to sit up again, but he 
Was very weak. He wanted to 
quote it to her and tell her what 
he had never told her: that the 
name of it was Hertha and that 
it had been written long ago by a 
man named Swinburne, and he 
wanted to explain why he had 
named her after a poem, because 
it was very funny. 

The harsh light hurt his eyes 
and made him feel dizzy. He lay 
watching her as she bent toward 
the oxygen dial, wrinkling her 
face in animal concentration, trying to read it for him. Her puzzled 
expression was pathetic; it reminded him of the first time he 
had seen her. 

The walls began to spin 
crazily, for the hut had been 
intended for only one person. 

He remembered the first time 
he saw her, cowering in a filthy 
alleyway in the Miramus. At first 
he thought she had taken some 
food from a garbage pail and was 
trying to conceal it by holding it 
to her breast. But when the flare 
of a rocket leaving the field two 
blocks away lit the area for a 
moment, he saw that she was 
holding a tiny welikin, terribly 
mangled, looking as if it had just 



been run over by a heavy transport truck. He took it away from 
her and threw it into the darkness, 
shuddering. 

"It was dead," he said. 

She continued to stare at him, 
starting to cry silently, big, round, 
salt tears that she brushed at 
with reddened hands. 

"My — my — " she stammered. 

He had an eerie feeling that 
she was trying to say, "My baby," 
and he felt a little chill of pity 
creep up his spine. 

"What do you do?" he asked 
kindly. 

"Sweep floors. I work a little 
for the Commander's wife. 
Around her home." 

"How did you get here?" 

Still crying, she said, "On a 
rocket." 

"Of course. What I meant was 
..." But he did not need to 
ask how she had gotten passed 
the emigration officers. Some influential man — such things could 
happen, especially when the destination was a relatively new frontier, such as Helio, where there 
was little danger of investigation 
— had seen to it that certain answers were falsified; and a little 
money and a corrupt official had 
conspired to yroduce a passport 
which read, "Mentally and physically fit for colonization." 

The influential man had, in effect, bought and paid for a personal slave to bring with him to 



92 




 



the stars. She would not know of 
her legal rights. She would be 
easily frightened and confused. 
And then something had happened, and for some reason she 
had been abandoned to shift for 
herself. Perhaps she had run 
away. 

He looked away from her face. 
This was none of his affair. 

"Never mind," he said. He 
reached into his pocket and gave 
her a, few coins and then turned 
and walked rapidly away, suddenly anxious to see the bright, 
remembered face of the young 
colonist, Doris, Don's friend; a 
face that would chase away the 
memory of this pathetic creature. 

After a moment, he heard the 
pad of her feet hopefully, fearfully following him. 

SHE was standing beside his 
cot again, and he concentrated to make the walls stop 
spinning. 

"It had a blue line." 
"Yes, I know. Where?" 
She showed him with her fingers. "This much." 

"Halfway up?" he prompted. 
Dumbly, she nodded. 
He looked at the plants. 
"Hertha, listen. I've got to talk 
before the paralysis comes back. 
You'll have to listen very carefully and try to understand. I'll 
be all right in about ten days. 
You know that?" 



She nodded again. 

He took a deep breath that 
seemed to catch in his throat. 
"But you'll have to go outside 

before then." , 

Hertha whimpered and fluttered her hands nervously. 

"I know you're afraid," he said. 
"I wouldn't ask you, but it has 
to be done. I can't go. You can 
see that, can't you? It has to be 
done." 

"Afraid!" 

"Nonsense!" he said harshly. 
"There's nothing to be afraid of. 
Put on the outside suit and nothing can hurt you.*' 

Moaning in fear, she shook her 
head. 

"Listen, Hertha! You've got to 
do it. For me.'" He did not like 
to make the appeal personal. He 
would have preferred to convince 
her that fear of the outside was 
groundless. It was not possible. 
He had attempted, again and 
again? to explain that the tiny 
satellite with its poison air was 
completely harmless as long as 
she wore a surface suit. There 
was no alien life, no possible 
danger, outside this tiny square 
of insulated hut and breathable 
air. But it was useless. And the 
personal appeal was the only 
course remaining. It was as much 
for her sake as his; she also 
needed oxygen, but she could 
never understand that fact. 

"For you?" she asked. | 



FRESH AIR FIEND 



He nodded, feeling the fever 
rise. His face twisted in pain, and 
he stared pleadingly into her cowlike eyes : dumb eyes, animal eyes, 
brown and trusting and . . . 
loyal. The paralysis struck. His 
voice would not come up out of 
his chest and the dizziness 
swamped his mind, and, in fever, 
he was once again in Pastiville, 
the nearest planet with an oxygen 
atmosphere. 

TTERTHA followed him up the 
alley, out into the cheap 
glitter of Windopole Avenue, a 
rutted, smelly street which was 
the center of the port-workers* 
section. She followed him across 
Windopole, up Venus, across 
Nineshime. He turned into the 
Lexo Building, which had become shabby since he had seen 
it last, when it had been freshly 
painted. She did not follow him 
inside, and he breathed a sigh of 
relief and tried to put her out 
of his mind as he walked up the 
stairs to the room 17B. 

After a moment's hesitation, his 
heart knocking with pleasant anticipation, he pressed the buzzer. 

"Come in." 

He found the knob, twisted 
open the door, entered. 

"Why Jimmy!" the girl said in 
what seemed to be surprise and 
heavy delight. She crossed to him 
quickly and offered her lips to be 
kissed. "It's good to see you!" 



He took half a step backward, 
trying to keep the shock out of 
his face. 

"Oh, it's so good to see you, 
Jimmy! Sit down. Tell me all 
about it, about everything. Did 
you make loads and loads of 
money? When did you get back? 
How's the lig fever?" 

He sat down, scarcely listening, 
studying the apartment, feeling 
vaguely ill. She was chattering,, 
he realized, to overcome her embarrassment. 

"The books you ordered came. 
I've got them right here. They're 
all there but some poetry or other. 
There was a letter about that, but 
the people just said they didn't 
have it in stock. I opened it to 
see if it required an answer. Just 
a sec. I'll get them for yo« " 
She left the room with quick, nervous strides. 

The apartment had been redone 
since he had seen it. There were 
now expensive drapes at the windows, imported from somewhere; 
a genuine Earth tapestry hung 
above the door. Plump silken 
pillows scattered on the floor and 
a late model phono -general in 
the corner, with a gleaming cabinet and record spool accessory 
box. 

She came back with the books, 
neatly done up in a bundle. 

"I guess you still read as much 
as ever? Don said you always 
were a great reader." 



$4 




 



Uncomfortably, he stood up. 

She put the books on a low 
serving table, moistened her lips 
to make them glistening red. 
"Sit down, Jimmy!" 

He still stood. 

"Jimmy!" she seid in mock 
anger. "Sit down! Goodness, it's 
good to have a fellow Earthman 
to talk to. I was so busy when 
you came by the other time, we 
scarcely had a minute to talk. I'd 
just got here, you remember . . . 
Well, I'm settled now, so we'll 
just have to have a nice, long 
talk." 

He shifted on his feet. 

"I don't suppose you've heard 
from Don?" Her voice was 
strained, almost desperate. "Isn't 
it the oddest thing, him knowing 
you and me, and both of us right 
here?" 

"He told me to write how you 
were getting along?" 
"... Oh." 

He smiled without humor and 
felt like an old man. He wanted 
to explain how he had looked forward to seeing a person from his 
own planet again. Now he wanted 
to remind her of the girl he remembered: When she had just 
arrived, still unpacking, eager to 
start as a junior secretary for the 
League. 

"Thank you for letting me send 
the books here," he said. The 
sickness was heavy in the pit of 
his stomach, and suddenly he was 



hard and bitter. He quoted softly: 

"The world forsaken. 
And out of mind 
Honor and labor. 
We etifill not find 
The slars unkind." 

"Old poetry? I guess you realiy 
do read a^" Then unde rstanding 
made her eyes wince. "That 
wasn't intended to be very complimentary, was it, Jimmy?" 

Her name was no longer Doris; 
it was any of a thousand, and 
her perfume, heavy in* his nostrils, 
was not her perfume or any individual's. She was there before 
him; she was real. But along with 
her were a thousand names and 
a thousand scents. There was the 
painful nostalgia of recognizing a 
strange room. 

Awkwardly he said, "1 really 
must go. I'd like to have a long 
talk, but—" 

Her lips parting in sudden artificiality, she crossed to him, 
reached for his hand with her own, 

In his mind was the heavy futility of repeating the same thing 
senselessly until it lost all meaning. 

"I apologize about the poem," 
he said, because he knew that 
it was not his place to speak of it. 

"That's all right," she said with 
hollow cheerfulness. Her mouth 
jerked and her eyes darkened. 
"Please don't go yet." 

The palms of his hands were 



FRESH AIR FIEND 



fa 



moist. He looked around the 

apartment again, and he did not 
want to ask, to bring it out in 
cruel words. It was not the sort 
of thing one asked. 

"I really must go," he repeated 
Ievelly. 

She put her hands on hi* 
shoulders. "Please ..." 

And then he saw that she intended to bribe him in the only 
way she knew how, and he said, 
"Don't worry, I won't tell Don." 

He saw relief on her face, and 
then he was out of the apartment, shaken. He felt as if he had 
been kicked in the stomach, and 
he was sickened and his hand 
trembled. He wanted to talk to 
someone and try to explain it. 

Hertha was waiting when he 
came out to the street. 

fT^HE fever passed; control of 
his body returned. 
"For you?" Hertha asked. 
He half propped himself up on 
the cot. He waved his hand 
weakly. "Those dead plants. You 
must throw them out and bring 
in more." 

He listened tensely, imagining 
that he could hear the precious 
oxygen hiss in from the emergency tank to freshen and revitalize the dead air. Halfway 
down on the dial. Not enough 
for ten days, even for one person, 
unless the air was replenished by 
bringing in plants. 



"Hertha, we've got to purify 
this air. Now listen. Listen carefully, Hertha. You've seen me dig 
up those plants on the outside?" 

"Yes, I watch when you go out. 
I always watch, Jimmy." 

"Good. You've got to do the 
same thing, You've got to go out 
and dig up some plants. You've 
got to bring them in here and 
plant them the way I did. You 
know which ones they are?" 

"Yes," she said. 

He closed his eyes, trying to 
think of a way to make her see 
how vital a thing a tiny plant 
could be. The complex chemistry 
of it bubbled to the surface of 
his mind. He wanted to tell her 
why the plants died in the artificial human atmosphere and had 
to be replaced every week or so. 
He wanted to tell her, but he 
was growing weaker. 

"They purify the air by releasing oxygen. You understand?" 

She nodded her head dumbly. 

"You must brin^ > n * great 
many plants, Hertha. Remember 
that — a £reaf many. Don't forget 
that. When you go outside, 
through the locks, we lose air. 
Air is very precious, so you must 
bring in a great many plants." 

"Yes, Jimmy." 

"And you must plant them as 
I did." 
"Yes, Jimmy." 

He began to talk faster, in a 
race with the growing fever. 



9* 




 



"I've gathered most of the oxygenating plants around the hut. 
So you may have to go into the 
forest to get enough." 

"The— the forest?" 

"You must, Hertha! You 
must!" 

Her mouth twisted as if she 
were ready to cry. "For you. Yes, 
for you I will go into the forest." 

The fever came back. His mind 
wandered away. 

HE was walking in the open 
air. He walked from Nineshime to Venus, down Venus to 
Windopole, up Windopole to 
"The Grand Eagle and Barrel." 
He went in. Hertha came with 
him and sat down by his side at 
the bar. 

The bartender looked at him 
oddly. "She with you, Mac?" 

He turned to look at her; her 
dumb, brown eyes met his. He 
wanted to snarl: "Get the hell 
away! Leave me alone!" But he 
choked back the words. It was 
not Hertha he was angry with. 
She had done him no injury. She 
had merely followed him, perhaps because she knew of nothing else to do; perhaps because 
of temporary gratitude for the 
coins; perhaps in hope that he 
would buy her a drink. When the 
anger passed, he felt sorry for 
her again. 

He said, "Want a drink?" 
She shook her head without 



changing expression. 

He looked at her and shrugged 
and thought that after a while 
she would get tired and go away. 
He ordered, and the bartender 
brought a bottle and one glass. 

Hertha continued to stare at 
him; he tried to ignore her. 

He drank, He thought it would 
get easier to ignore her as the level 
of the bottle fell. It didn't. He 
drank some more. It grew late, 

"I gotta explain," he said, the 
liquor swirling in his mind. 

She waited, cow-eyed. 

"Ernest Dowson. Man's name. 
He wrote a poem — Beata Solitude I wanna explain this. Man 
lived long, long, long, long time 
ago. You listenin*? Okay. That's 
good. That's fine. He said — it's 
ver" importan' you should unnerstan' this — he said how you put 
honor and labor out of your mind 
when you . , , you're out here. 
What he meant, it's . . . it's . . , 
you see . . . Now I gotta make 
you see all this. So you listen real 
close while I tell it to you. There 
was a man named ..." 

He wanted to explain how the 
frontier does things to people. 
He wanted to explain how society 
is a tight little box that keeps 
everything locked up and hidden, 
but how society breaks down and 
becomes fluid in the stars, and 
how people explode and forget 
what they learned in civilization, 
and how everything is unstable. 



FRESH AIR FIEND 



IT 



"This man, his name's — " he 
■aid. 

He wanted to explain how the 
barsh elements and brute nature 
•nd space, the God-awful emptiness and indifference and the 
sense of aloneness and selfishness 
snd . . . 

There were a thousand things 
he wanted to tell her. They were 
ell the things he had thought 
•bout as he followed the frontier. 
If he could get it all down right, 
he could make her see why he 
had to follow the frontier as long 
as there was anything left inside 
of him. 

Maybe the rest of the people 
out here were that way, too. 
Maybe he had seen it in Doris' 
eyes tonight. Maybe that was 
why society broke down in the 
■tars and civilization came only 
when men and women like him 
were gone. 

He did not want to know how 
the rest felt. He did not know 
whether it would be more terrifying to learn that he was alone, 
or that he was not alone. 

But just for tonight, he could 
tell the alien creature beside him. 
It would be safe to tell Her — if 
the idea had not rusted inside of 
him so long that there were no 
longer any words to fit it. 

But first he had to make her 
see his home planet and the great 
cities and the landscaped valleys 
itnd the majestic mountains and 



the people. He had to make her 
see the vast sweep of the explorers 
who first carried the race to a 
million planets, who devised * 
faster-than-light ships and metals 
to make the ships out of, metals 
to hold their forms in the crucible 
beyond normal space. He had to 
make her see the colonists who 
tied all the world together with 
spans of steel commerce and then 
moved on in ever-widening 
circles. He wanted to give her the 
whole picture. 

Then he wanted to explain the 
surge, the restlessness of the men 
at the frontier. Different men, he 
thought; from the womb of civilization, but unlike their brothers. 
The men who pushed out and out 
Searching, always searching. He 
was afraid to find out if their 
reasons were the same as his. For 
himself, he had seen a thousand 
planets and a thousand new lifefdrms, But it was not enough. 
There were the vast, blank, 
empty. indifferent reaches of 
space beyond him, and that was 
what drove him on. 

This he wanted to say to 
Hertha: No matter how far you 
go, the thing that gets you is 
that there's nothing that cares; 
no matter how far, the thing is 
that nothing cares; the thing is 
that nothing cares. It gets you. 
And you have to go on because 
some day, somewhere, there may 
be — something. 




 



But he lost the trend of his 
thoughts completely, and he had 
another drink. 

"Decent people come out 
here ..." 

What was he going to say about 
decent people? 

"Stupid !" he cried, slapping 
her in the face. 

She rubbed her cheek. "Stupid?" 

He wanted to cry, for he had 
not known that he was brutal. 
"Can't you see?" he screamed, 
and it was necessary to explain 
it to her; and then it was not 
necessary. "You're like the awful, 
indifferent, mindless blackness of 
space, unreasoning!" 

"Unreasoning," she repeatedcarefully. 

"You're Bertha!" 

"I'm Hertha," she said, 

ri^HE period of calmness that 
returned after the fever was 
crystal and lucid, preceding, he 
knew, a severe, prolonged seizure. 

"I'm afraid," she told him. 
shivering, "but I will go." 

He watched her get into the 
light surface suit, clamp down the 
helmet with trembling hands. He 
was shaking with nervousness as 
she hesitated at the lock. Then 
she pulled it open. It clicked behind her. He heard the brief hiss 
of the oxygen replacing the air 
that had whooshed out. 

And he felt sorry for her, alone. 



terrified, on the scaly, hard surface of the tiny satellite. He closed 
his eyes, pictured her walking 
past his strip mine, past the 
gleaming heap of minerals ready 
for the transport. 

He felt tears in his eyes and 
yet he could not entirely explain 
his feelings toward her—half 
fear, sometimes half affection. But 
more important than that: Why 
was she with him? What were her 
feelings? Had some sense of gratitude made her come? Affection? 

He could not understand her. 
At times she seemed beyond all 
understanding. Her responses were 
mindless, almost mechanical, and 
that frightened him. 

He remembered her dumb, 
apologetic caresses and her pathetically clumsy tenderness — or 
reflex; he could never be sure— 
and her eager yet reluctant handa 
and the always slightly hurt, 
slightly accusing look in her eyes, 
as if at every instant she was 
ready for a stinging blow, and her 
great sighs, muted as if fearing to 
be heard and . . . 
& He was drunk, screaming 
meaninglessly, and the bartender 
threw him out. The pavement cut 
his face. When he awoke, it was 
morning and he was in a strange 
room and she was in bed beside 
him. 

She said, M I am Hertha. I 
brought you home. I will go with 
you." 



FRESH AIR FIEND 



The paralysis set in. He could 

not move. The tears froze on his 
cheeks, and he lay inert, thinking 
of her almost mindlessly fighting 
for his life in the alien outside. 

Then she was back in the hut. 
So soon? 

She looked at him, smiled 
through the transparent helmet 
at him. He could hear the precious oxygen hiss in to compensate for the air that had been lost 
When she entered. 

He could see her eyes. They 
were proud. Relieved, too, as if 
she had been afraid he would be 
gone when she returned. He" felt 
she had hurried back to be sure 
that he was still there. 

She knelt by the flower bed 
■nd, without removing her suit, 
she held up the plant proudly. He 
could see the hard-packed dirt in 
the roots. Fascinated, he watched 
her scrape a planting hole. He 
watched her set the plant delicately and pat the soil with care. 

Then she stood up. 

He tried to move, to cry out. 
He could not. 

He watched her until she went 
out of the range of his fixed eyes. 
She was going to the airlock 
again. 

After a moment he heard the 
familiar hiss of oxygen. 

She was going to get a great 
number of plants. 

But one at a time. 

—KRIS NEVILLE 



STATEMENT OF THE OWNERSHIP. MANAGE MENT, AND CIRCULATION REQUIRED 
BY THE ACT OF CONGRESS OF AI GUST 
24. 1912, AS AMENDED BY THE ACTS OF 
MARCH J, 1933. AND JULY 5. \H€ ( lulc 
39. United Slates Code. Section iiJ) of GalHtJ 
Science Fiction, published mom lily *t New 
York. N. Y. for October 1, HttL 

1. The names aod addresses of the publisher, 
editor, managing editor, and business m.n.igers 
tie: Publisher, Galaxy .Publishing Corp., 421 
Hudson Street, New York 14. N. Y. : Editor. 
Hoiace Gold, >05 East Hlh Street, New York 
Citr; Managing editor. Vera Cerutti, I Wishinglon Square North. New York City, ftminesi 

2. The owner is: (If owned by » corporainii. . iti name and address must be itated and 
also immediately thereunder, the mimes and 
addresses of stockholders owning or hoMing 1 
percent or more of total amount u{ stork. If 
not owned by a corporation, tic ri*rnrs am! 
addresses ol the individual owners muff be 
given. If owned by a partnership «' other un. 
incorporated firm, its name and address, is well 
as that of each inbavicaul member, must he 
given. ) Galaxy Publishing Corp., 421 Hud tun 
Street. New York 14. N. T. ; (stoskli..l.ter) 
Bernard Kiufman. 2 Horatio Street. New Yotk. 
N. Y. 

3. The known bondholders, mortgagees, and 
Mher security holders owning or holding I percent or more of total amount of bonds, mortgages, or other securities are: (If there art none, 
jo state.) None. 

4. Paragraphs 2 and 3 include, in cases where 
the stockholder or security holder appears upon 
the booki of the company as trustee or in any 
other fiduciary relation, the nimc of the person 
or corporation for whom such trustee it acting; 
alio the statements in the two paragraphs show 
the affiant! full knowledge and belief as to the 
cirturaitamrt and conditions under which stockholders and security holders who do nut appear 
■pen the book] of the coir.pany as truiteet, hold 
stock and ■ r. , i. ■ .-■ in a capacity other than 
that of a bona fide owner. 

5. The average number of copies of each i"ue 
Of lint publication sold or distl luted, Ihiough 
the mails or otherwise, to paid subscribers during the 12 months preceding the d.itc shown 
above was: (This information i< tetpjircsj Iron) 
daily, weekly, semiweekly, and Biweekly newspapers onlj.) 

GALAXY PUBLISHING CORP, 
BERNARD KAUFMAN, ('undent 

Sworn to and subscribed belurc me tint 'Jtll 
day of October. 1951. Donald M. C..rv< uunn, 
rwmftjlflMI of Deeds, New Yctll City New 
York County Clerk's No. S3, Commission expires August 14, 1953. 



100 



OA1AXY SCIENCE FICTION/ 



the 



demolished 



man 

By ALFRED BESTEI 

At with all premeditated murder, one thing was 
unpremeditated. Could Reich, with his riches — 
and a crooked Esper — correct it quickly enough? 

Illustrated by DON S18L£t* 



SYNOPSIS 

When telepathy emerged as an 
extracted recessive characteristic, 
possessors of extra-sensory perception became valuable members 
of society. Every industry and 
profession had its Espers, who, in 
addition to having normal skills, 



were able to probe the mind for 
unknown or concealed meanings. 
Members of the Esper Guild and 
known as "peepers," they were 
divided into classes according to 
the depth they could penetrate: 
3rds could peep the conscious 
mind; 2nds dug past that to the 
preconscious and subconscious; 



THE DEMOLISHED MAN 



101 



while lsfs, the elite of the Guild, 
could explore every crevice of 
the deeply burred unconscious 
mind. 

Because of Espers, premeditated murder was doomed. Telepaths could peep the intent of a 
killer before the crime, or peep 
the evidence needed for conviction after the murder. No killer 
had escaped the dreaded Demolition Chamber in Kingston Hospital in 70 years. 

Despite this, Ben Reich, piratical owner of Sacrament, Inc., 
was driven to plan the murder of 
his bitter commercial enemy, 
Craye D'Courtney, of the 
D' Courtney Cartel on Mars. A 
recurrent nightmare about a Man 
With No Face made him realize 
that killing was the only solution 
to the economic war. 

With the aid of Augustus T8, 
E. M.D.I {Esper Medical Doctor 
1st class), and Jerry Church, a 
2nd class peeper ostracized from 
the Guild, Reich went to a party 
at Maria Beaumont's house. In 
the course of an ancient game 
called "Sardine" which Reich instigated by sending his hostess an 
old book containing the game, 
Reich slipped up to the hidden 
suite of D'Courtney and murdered him. The killing was unexpectedly witnessed by D'Coutt' 
ney's daughter, Barbara, who ran 
from the house in hysterical terror with the murder weapon in 
her hand, and mysteriously dis


appeared into the giant city. 

Reich, using a song that had 
been fiendishly written on order 
to stick in the memory like a fish 
hook, had prevented peepers from 
probing his intent to murder. Now 
he had to get out and find the 
girl. But he forced T8 to stay 
with him so they could make 
an unsuspicious exit. Thanking 
Maria Beaumont for the interesting evening, however, Reich 
found blood falling from the ceiling where D' Courtney's dead 
body lay in the room above, spattering on his, cuff. 

The slaying was discovered. 
Reich was trapped in the house 
with his victim, while the one 
witness who could bring him to 
Demolition was free to go anywhere she pleased . . . even to 
Preston Powell, Esper Prefect of 
the Police Psychotic Division . . . 
a 1st, deadly in his ability to 
pry into unconscious motivations. 

VII 

AT 12:30 a. m .. the Emergency Patrol arrived at 
/ > Beaumont House in response to precinct notification: 
"GZ. Beaumont. YLP-R" which, 
translated, meant : "An act or 
omission forbidden by law has 
been reported at Beaumont 
House, 9 Park South." 

At 12:50, the Panty Pickups 
arrived in response to an anonymous call: "Get up to The Gilt 



>«4 




 



Corpse. Man dead in a brawl." 
They were summarily ejected by 
the police and hung hopefully 
around |he house. 

At 1 :D0 A. M., Preston Powell 
arrived at Beaumont House in 
response to a frantic call from a 
deputy inspector: "I tell you, 
Powell, it's Felony Tripte-A! I 
don't know whether to be grateor scared; but I know none of 
is equipped to handle it." 
"What can't you handle?" 
* "Look here, Powell. Murder's 
.abnormal. Only a distorted 
^Thought Pattern can produce 
[death by violence. Right?" 
} . "Yes." 

i "Which is why there hasn't 
been a successful Triple-A in 
■over seventy years. A man can't 
walk around with a distorted pattern, hatching murder. You peepers always pick 'em up before they 
Ko into action." 

I "So far," agreed Powell. "Now 
Siere's a killing that must have 
been carefully planned . . . and 
the killer was never noticed, even 
by Maria Beaumont's peeper 
secretaries. That means there 
couldn't have been anything to 
itice. He must have a passable 
attern and yet be abnormal 
ough to murder. How the hell 
we resolve a paradox like 
at?" 

'No idea yet. Any prospects?" 

"Nothing but inconsistencies, 
s don't know what killed 
Courtney; his daughter's dis


appeared ; somebody robbed 

D'Courtney's guards of one 

and we can't figure how. And 

besides — " 

"Don't go any further. I'll be 
right over." 

The great hall of Beaumont 
House blazed with harsh white 
ligh t Uni formed police were 
everywhere. The white-smocked 
technicians from Lab were scurrying like beetles. Four Moltecs, 
glittering snails of coils and glowing tubes, clucked fussily over 
the floors, nursed by Moltec 
squads who worked with the 
drilled precision of eclipse camera 
crews. In the center of the hall, 
the party guests were assembled. 

As Powell came down the east 
ramp, he felt the wave of hostility 
that greeted him. He telepathed 
quickly to Charley $$on, Police 
Inspector 2: "What's the situation, Chas?" 

"Scramble." 

Switching to their informal palice code of scrambled images, 
reversed meanings and personal 
symbols, $$on continued; "Peepers here. Play it safe." He brought 
Powell up to date. 

"/ see. Nasty. What's everybody 
doing lumped out on the Hoot? 
You staging something?" 

"The villain-friend act." 

"Necessary?" 

"It's a rotten crowd. Pampered, 
You'll have to do some tricky 
coaxing to get anything out of 
them, ril be the villain; you b+ 



>bbed 
hour 
And 



HE DEMOLISHED MAN 



109 



their friend, of course." 

"Right. Start recording."' 

Halfway down the ramp, Powell halted. An expression of 
shocked indignation appeared on 
his face. 

"$$son!" he snapped. Every eye 
turned to him. 

Inspector $$on faced Powell. 
In a brutal voice, he said: "Here, 
sir." 

"Is this your concept of the 
proper conduct of an investigation? To herd a group of innocent 
people together like cattle?" 

"They're not innocent," $$on 
growled. ''A man's been killed." 

"$$on, they will be presumed 
to be innocent and treated with 
every courtesy until the murderer 
is uncovered." 

"What?" $$on sneered. "This 
rotten, lousy, high-society pack 
of hyenas — " 

"How dare you! Apologize at 
once!" 

$$on took a deep breath and 
clenched his fists angrily, then 
turned to the staring guests. "My 
apologies," he grumbled. 

"And I'm warning you, $$on," 
Powell snapped, "if anything like 
this happens again, I'll break you. 
Now get out of my sight." 

Powell descended to the floor 
of the hall and smiled at the 
guests. "Ladies and gentlemen, of 
course I know you all by sight. 
I'm not that famous, so let me 
introduce myself. Preston Powell, 
Prefect of the Psychotic Division. 



Two antiquated titles, eh? Prefect and Psychotic. We won't let 
them bother us." He advanced toward Maria Beaumont with hand 
outstretched. "You've had a trying time, I know. These boors in 
uniform." 

A pleased rustle ran through the 
guests. The glowering hostility 
began to fade. Maria took Powell's hand dazedly, mechanically 
beginning to preen herself. 

"Dear Prefect ..." She was 
an aging little girl, clinging to 
his arm. "I've been so terrified." 

Powell snapped his fingers behind him. To the captain who 
stepped forward, he said : "Conduct Madame and her guests to 
the study. No guards." 

The captain cleared his throat. 
"About Madame's guests. One 
of them arrived after the felony 
was reported. An attorney, Mr. 
Jordan." 

Powell found Sam Jordan, Attorney-At-Law 2, in the crowd, 
and telepathed to him. 

"What brought you here, 
Sam?" 

"Business. Called by my 
cli(Ben Reich)ent." 

"That shark. Wait here with 
Reich. Well get squared off." 

"That was an effective act with 
$$on." 

"Hell. You crack out scramble?" 

"Not a chance. But I know you 
two. Gentle Chas playing a bully 
is one for the books." 



104 




 



$$on broke in from across the 
hall where he was apparently 
■ulking: "Don't blow it, Sam." 

"Are you crazy?" At the suggestion that Jordan might smash 
the most sacred ethic of the 
Guild, he radiated a blast of indignation that made $$on grin. 

All this in the second while 
Powell kissed Maria's brow with 
chaste devotion and gently disengaged himself from her tremulous 
grasp. 

"Ladies and gentlemen — to the 
■tudy, please." 

The crowd of guests moved 
off, conducted by the captain. 
They were chattering with renewed animation. Through the 
buzz and the laughter, Powell felt 
the iron elbows of a rigid telepathic block. He recognized those 
elbows and permitted his astonishment to show. 

"Gin! Gus TZr 

"Oh. Hello, Powell" 

"You? Lurking & Slinking?" 

"Gus?" $$on popped out. 
""Here? I never tagged him.** 

"What the devil are you hiding 
lor?" 

Chaotic response of anger, chagrin, fear of lost reputation, selfdeprecation, shame— 

"Ease off, Gus. Won'f do you 
any harm to let a little scandal 
rub off on you. Make you more 
human. Stay here & help. Got a 
hunch I can use another 1st This 
one is going to be a Triple-A 
mtinker" 



A FTER the hall was cleared of 
guests, Powell examined the 
three men who remained with 
him. Sam Jordan was a heavy-set 
man, thick, solid, with a shining 
bald head and a friendly bluntfeatured face. Little T8 was nervous and twitchy . . . more so 
than usual. Too bad the plastic 
surgeons couldn't add six inches 
to his height. Would solve a lot 
of T8's psychological problems. 

And the notorious Ben Reich. 
Powell inspected him for the first 
time. Tall, broad-shouldered, determined, exuding a tremendous 
aura of charm and power. There 
was kindliness in that power, but 
it was corroded by the habit of 
tyranny. Reich's eyes were fine 
and keen, but his mouth was too 
small and sensitive and looked 
oddly like a scar. A magnetic 
man, with something about him 
that was repelling. 

Reich smiled. Spontaneously, 
they shook hands. 

"Do you take everybody off 
guard like this, Reich?" 

"The secret of my success," 
Reich grinned. 

An unexpected chemotropism 
was drawing them together. It 
was dangerous. Powell tried to 
shake it off. 

He turned to Jordan: "Now 
then, Sam?" 

"Reich called me in to represent him and all the other suspects. No telepathy, Pres. This 
has got to stay on the objective 



THE DEMOLISHED MAN 



level. I'm here to see' that it does. 
I'll have to be present at every 
examination." 

"You can't stop peeping, Sam. 
You've got no legal right. We can 
dig out all we can — " 

"Provided it's with the consent 
of the examinee. I'm here to tell 
you whether you've got that consent or not." 

Powell looked at Reich. "You 
understand your legal rights and 
duties?" 

"Vaguely." 

"Vaguely?" Powell smiled. "I'm 
supposed to believe that from the 
Shark of Sacrament?" 

"Sometimes the shark plays 
possum. This is one of those 
times." 

"Well, I'll lay it out for you. 
Every man has the right to refuse 
telepathic examination . . . just as 
he has the right to refuse oral 
interrogation." 

"We've still got the Fifth 
Amendment," Jordan said. 

Powell nodded. "But the law 
holds that you can't answer some 
questions and refuse to answer 
others. It's got to be all or none." 

"I understand," said Reich. 

"Of course, if you stand on the 
Fifth Amendment in a Triple-A 
Felony and refuse to answer any 
questions in any manner, you 
force us to draw the conclusion 
that you have guilt to conceal." 

"You're not required to respond 
to that," Jordan cut in. 

"I was going to ask about the 



peeping," Reich said. 

"Well," Powell replied, "if you 
decide to open the door, you've 
got to answer all questions, but 
you don't have to submit to telepathic examination. That's optional. Oral replies will satisfy the 
law." 

"In fact," Jordan added, "the 
law requires the police examiner 
to request permission for a TP 
probe on each separate question. 
If you refuse permission, I'm here 
to make it stick. You don't have 
to confide anything in me. You 
tell me you don't want to be 
peeped and I'll see to it that 
you're not. I don't have to know 
what's in your mind to do that." 

"Of course," Powell said pleasantly, "there are many questions you can't possibly object to 
being peeped on. For instance, 
if I asked you what you had for 
dinner tonight ..." 

"He'd have every right in the 
world to refuse telepathic examination on that point." 

Powell turned to Reich. "Want 
it that way?" 

Reich nodded. 

"Sam's a 2nd. I'm a 1st. I can 

pull slick stuff on him. Want to 
wait until you can get hold of 
another 1st to represent you? Ifs 
your right." 

"No," Reich said slowly. "I 
trust Jordan. I. trust you. I don't 
think he'll let you pull any stuff 
on him. I don't think you'll try." 

"Thanks. What was the idea 



©AlAXY SCIENCE FICTION 



of getting a lawyer so fast? Are 
you mixed up in this mess?" 

"You don't run Sacrament 
without building up a stockpile 
of secrets that have got to be 
protected." 

"Why should Jordan represent 
the other guests?" 

"Get out of there, Pres." 

"Stop throwing blocks, I'm just 
trying to get his general emotional 
response to the rest of the suspects." 

"You've got no right to get it 
that way." 

"The hell I haven't That one 
was decided by the Carmody 
Case twenty-five years ago. We 
can build up the general background so long as we dont look 
for specific data." 

"Yes, provided the oral question clearly indicates the purpose 
and scope of the peeping. Yours 
did nothing of the kind." 

"I'll rephrase the question." 
Powell said, before Reich could 
answer. "Did you feel that any 
or all of the other guests particularly required the services of Mr. 
Jordan, a leading Esper Attorney? I'd like to peep your answer 
on that for your general emotional response." 

"You don't have to give permission," Jordan said. 

"I won't," Reich replied. 

"Will you give me an oral 
answer?" 

"I will," Reich said. "They 
were all scared. Maria was pet


rified. She begged me to help. 
This was the best I could do." 

"Would you care to tell me 
why you refused to be peeped on 
that answer?" 

"Don't even bother," Jordan 
advised. "Fres has no right to 
ask that. No one has. The Matter 
of the Estate of Alan Courtney 
settled that." 

"Hell," Powell said ruefully. 
"You've stopped me. Let's start 
the investigation." 

They turned and walked toward the study. Across the hall, 
$$on scrambled and asked : "Pres, 
why'd you let Sam tie you in 
legal knots?" 

"While he was busy tying the 
legal *knots, 1 got the one thing 
I was after." 

"What was that?" 

"An answer on the record from 
Ben Reich. He's opened the door, 
Chas. He can't dose it any more." 1 

There was a moment of stunned 
silence, and then, as Powell went 
through the North arch to the 
study, a broadcast of fervent admiration followed him: "I bow, 
Pres. I bow to the Master." 

THE "study" of Beaumont 
House was constructed on the 
lines of a Turkish Bath. The floor 
was a mosaic of jacinth, spinel 
and sunstone. The walls, crosshatched with gold wire cloisonne, 
were glittering with inset synthetic stones . . . ruby, emerald, 
garnet, chrysolite, amethyst, to


THE DIMOMSHID MAN 



pa? ... all containing various 
portraits of the owner. There were 
scatter rugs of brocatelle, and 
scores of chairs and lounges. 

Powell entered the room and 
walk-d directly to the center, 
leaving Reich, T8 and Jordan behind them. He looked around 
him, accurately gauging the mi« 
psyche of these sybarites, and 
meisiKing the tactics he would 
havt- to use. 

He lit a cigarette. "You all 
know, of course, that I'm a peeper. 
Probably this fact has alarmed 
some of you. You imagine that 
I'm standing here like some fabulous monster, probing your 
mental plumbing. Well, Jordan 
wouldn't let me if I could. And, 
frankly, mass peeping is a trick 
no Esper can perform. It's difficult enough to probe a single individual. It's impossible when 
dozens of Telepathic Patterns are 
confuting the picture. And when 
a group of unique, highly individual people like yourselves is gathered, we find ourselves completely 
at your mercy." 

"And lie said / had charm," 
Reich muttered. 

"Tonight," Powell went on, 
"you were playing a delightful 
ancient game called 'Sardine.* I 
wish I had been invited, Madame. 
You must remember me next 
time ..." 

"I will,** Maria promised. "I 
will, dear Prefect." 

"In the course of that game, 



old D'Courtney was killed. We*re 
almost positive it was premeditated murder. We'll be certain 
after Lab has finished its work. 
But let's assume that it is a 
Triple-A Felony. That will enable 
us to play another ancient game 
called 'Murder.' " 

There was an interested response from the guests, Powell 
continued on the same casual 
course, carefully turning the most 
shocking crime in seventy yean 
into a morsel of amusement. 

"In the game of 'Murder.' " he 
said, "a make-believe victim is 
killed. A make-believe detective 
must discover who killed the victim. He asks questions of the 
make-believe suspects. Everyone 
must tell the truth except the 
killer, who is permitted to lie. The 
detective compares stories, deduces who is lying, and uncovers 
the killer. I thought you might 
enjoy playing this game." 

A voice asked, "How?" 

Another added. "I'm just one 
of the tourists." 

"A murder investigation," Powell smiled, "explores three facets 
of a crime. First, the motive. Second, the method. Third, the opportunity. Our Lab people are 
taking care of the second and 
third. The first we can discover 
in our game. If we do, we'll be 
able to crack the other two problems that have Lab stumped now. 
Did you know that they can't 
figure out what killed D'Court


106 




 




ney? Did you know Jhat D'Courtney's daughter has disappeared? 
She left the house while you 
were playing 'Sardine.' Did you 
know that D'Courtney's guards 
were mysteriously short-circuited? Somebody robbed them 
of a full hour in time. We'd all 
like to know how." 

They were hanging at the very 
edge of the trap, fereathless, fascinated. It had to be sprung with 
infinite caution. 

"Death, disappearance, and 
subjective time machines . . . 
we can find out all about them 
through motive. I'll be the make


believe detective; youll be the 
make-believe suspects. You'll tell 
me the truth ... all except the 
killer, of course. We'll expect him 
to He. But we'll trap him and 
bring this party to a triumphant 
finish if you'll give me permission 
to make a telepathic examination 
of each of you." 

"Oh! M cried Maria in alarm. 

"Wait* Madame. All I want ia 



THE DEMOLISHED MAN 



109 



your permission. I won't have to 
peep. Because, you see, if all 
the innocent suspects grant permission, then the one who refuses 
must be guilty." 

"Can he pull that?" Reich 
whispered to Jordan. 

Jordan nodded. 

"Just picture the scene for a 
moment." Powell was building 
the drama for them, turning the 
room into a stage. "I ask formally: 'Will you permit me to 
make a TP examination?* Then 
I go around this room." He began 
a slow circuit, bowing to each 
of the guests in turn. "And the 
answers come : 'Yes. Yes. Of 
course. Why not?' And then suddenly a dramatic pause." Powell 
stopped before Reich, erect, terrifying. " 'You, sir,' I repeat. *Will 
you give me your permission to 
peep?* " 

They all watched, hypnotized. 
Even Reich was aghast, transfixed by the pointing finger and 
the fierce scowl. 

"Hesitation. His face flushes 
red, then ghastly white as the 
blood drains out. You hear 1 '' the 
tortured refusal: 'No!'" The Prefect turned and enveloped them 
all with an etcctrifying gesture: 
"And in that thrilling moment, 
we know we have captured the 
killer!" 

He almost had them. Almost. 
But Tom Moyse had bastardy 
ir his soul; Gloria Blomefield, Jr., 
had adultery in her soul ; Tony 



Asj had shame in her soul; Nick 
Boutman had perjury in his soul. 

"No!" Maria cried. They all 
shot to their feet and shouted: 
"No! No!" 

"/( was a beautiful try, Pres, 
but there's your answer." 

Powell was still charming in 
defeat. "I'm sorry, ladies and gentlemen, but I really can't blame 
you. Only a fool would trust a 
cop." He sighed. "One of my 
assistants will tape the oral statements from those of you who care 
to make statements. Mr. Jordan 
will be on hand to advise and 
protect you." He glanced dolefully at Jordan. "And louse me." 

"Don't pull at my heart-strings 
like that, you faker. This is the 
best Triple-A in seventy years. 
My big chance. Are you going to 
sob me out of it?" 

"Hell." Powell said. He winked 
at Reich and left the room. 

LAB was finished in the lavish 
orchid Wedding Suite. Kr^t, 
abrupt, testy, harrassed, handed 
Powell the reports and said, "This 
is a lousy assignment!" 

Powell looked down at 
D'Courtney's body. "Suicide?" 
he snapped. He was always peppery with Kr]/$t, who was comfortable with no other relationship. 

"Not a chance. No weapon." 

"What killed him?" 

"We don't know." 

"Why, he's got a hole in his 



1 10 




 



head you could jet through to the 
Moon !" 

"Entry above the uvula. Exit 
below the fontanelle. Death instantaneous. But what drilled the 
hole through his skull? We don't 
know!" 

"Hard ray?" 

"No burn." 

"Crystalization?" 

"No freeze." 

"Nitro vapor charge?" 

"No ammonia residue." 

"Acid?" 

"Acid spray couldn't burst the 
back of his skull like that." 

"A dirk or a knife?" 

"Impossible. Have you any 
idea how much force is necessary 
to penetrate like this? Couldn't 
be done." 

"Well, I've just about exhausted penetrating weapons. No, 
wait. What about a projectile?" 

"Not a chance here. There's 
no projectile. None in the wound. 
None in the room." 

"Damnation!" 

"I agree." 

"Have you got anything for 
me? Anything at all?" 

"Yes. He was eating candy before his death. Found a fragment 
of gel in his mouth . . . bit of 
standard candy wrapping." 

"And?" 

"No candy in the suite." 
"He might have eaten it all.** 
"No candy in his stomach. 

Anyway, he wouldn't be eating 

candy with that throat." 



"Why not?" 

"Psychogenic cancer. Bad. He 
couldn't talk, let alone eat 
candy." 

"Hell and damnation. We need 
that weapon, whatever it is.** 

"Go find the daughter," Kri/^t 
said. "I'm telling,, you she's got 
it. She popped the old man and 
blew out of here with it." 

"You mean to tell me she went 
to all this trouble? Waited until 
they were visiting? Waited until 
the middle of the night? Then 
killed him this biza.rre way? Tell 
me why." 

"I can't tell you why she killed 
him," Kr^t said with frantic 
calm. "I can't tell you how she 
killed him." Suddenly he burst 
out: "I can't even tell time! Powell, I resign." 

Which made Kr^t's seventeenth resignation in two years. 
Ignoring it, Powell fingered the 
sheaf of reports, staring at the 
waxen body, whistling a crooked 
tune. He remembered reading a 
romance once about an Esper 
who could read a corpse . . . like 
that old myth about photographing the retina of a dead eye. He 
wished it could be done. 

"Well," he sighed at last, "they 
licked us on motive, and they've 
licked us on method. Let's hope 
the Moltec crew can give us something on opportunity, Kr^t, or 
we'll never bring Reich down." 

"Reich? Ben Reich? What 
about him?" 



THE DEMOLISHED MAN 



III 



"It's Gus T8 I'm worried about 
most," Powell murmured. "If 
he's mixed up in this . . . What? 
Oh, Reich? He's the killer, Kr^t. 
I slicked Sam Jordan down in 
Maria Beaumont's study. Staged 
an act and misdirected Sam while 
I peeped his client. This an off 
the record, of course, but I got 
enough to convince me Reich's 
our man." 

"You did?" Kr%t exclaimed. 

"But that's a long way from 
Demolition, brother. A long. long 
way." * 

Moodily, Powell took leave of 
the Lab Chief, loafed through the 
anteroom and descended to field 
headquarters in the picture gallery, 

"And I like Reich," he muttered. 

HpHE Moltec (Molecular Distortion Detector) was simply 
a mechanical bloodhound. In the 
XXth Century, when explosive 
firearms were in use, it was the 
custom of malefactors to destroy 
the identifying numbers on their 
weapons with file and acid. They 
were unaware that the blow of 
the too! which punched the numbers into the weapon so altered 
the molecular structure of the 
metal that the figures could be 
detected by X-ray and other 
methods after the surface had 
been obliterated. 

The Moltec operated similarly. 
You might walk carefully across 



a floor, with dry feet, sweeping; 
away all footprints, leaving no 
visible train — unaware that your 
step left an unmistakable and 
characteristic molecular stress 
trail. This trail the Moltec followed, crawling over floor, ramp 
and stairs, clucking and buzzing 
mononraniacally. 

The trail was printed in tiny 
arrows on a gridded scald map 
of transparent plastic film, 
printed in a separate color for 
each suspect. When the investiga tion was completed, the transparencies were stacked one on top 
of the other, and when you looked 
down into the pile you saw at a 
glance all the twisting, turning 
human paths, 

$$on set the packed charts before Powell, who examined the 
twining colored threads for a 
moment and then looked up 
wearily. 

"/ know, Pres. It would have 
been easier if they hadn't spotted 
D' Courtney's blood dripping 
through the floor. But when they 
all tore up there in a posse, that 
loused us." 

Powell inspected the collective 
map again. Threads of color wandered through the great hall of 
Beaumont House, the music 
room, the study, the stage, the 
fountains, and finally into the 
Panty Projection Room. From 
there a thick river of prismatic 
color streamed back through 
the hall, up the stairs, through the 



III 




 



picture gallery into the Wedding 
Suite. 

"There's the girl." $$on indicated a yellow trail of arrows 
that started in one of the bedrooms of the Wedding Suite, 
came down the corridor, entered 
the orchid room, and, after a few 
confused circles, left the room and 
led straight through the house to 
the street. 

Powell and $$on began the 
lightning exchanges that characterized peeper conversations: 

"Who's this, Chas? The peachand-emerald colored trails. They 
left the house too." 

"Couple of guests who couldn't 
stomach that Sardine game, bless 
'em. Left early. One is a psychsong-writer named Duffy Wyg&. 
The other's Wally Chervil's boy. 
Young Galen" 

"Oops." 

"No, he's in the right orbit. 
Pres. He doesn't belong to Beaumont's Carnal Circle. I got it 
straight from the peeper secretaries. Gaily crashed the party on 
a bet. Apparently he couldn't jet 
out fast enough." 

"Pick 'em up anyway and have 
a talk, Charley." 

"In the works." 

"Right. Which trail is Reich's?" 

"Why Reich in particular? 
What? Him?" 

"Uh-huh." 

"My God. 1 What it must be 
tike to be a 1st." 

"Take your Guild exams and 



find out Which is Reich?" 

"Took 'em again last month. 
Failed again. Reich is the scarlet 
trail." 

"Thought so. Look at it, Chas. 
Reich went up to the orchid suite 
twice and came down twice. See 
that?" 

"Yep. And?" 

"That could be opportunity. 
He went up once with the posse; 
but he went up once before to 
kill D'Courtney" 

"You'll never prove it. Pres." 

"Can the guards help?" 

"Nope. They've lost one solid 
hour. Kri.At says their retinal 
rhodopsin was destroyed. That's 
the visual purple . . . what you 
see with. As far as the guards 
are concerned, they were on duty 
and alert. Nothing happened until the mob suddenly appeared 
and Maria was screeching at them 
for falling asleep on the job . . . 
which they swear they did not." 

"But we know it was Reich.'* 

"You know it was Reich. Nobody else does." 

"He went up there while th$ 
guests were playing the Sardine 
game. He kerflumoxed the guards' 
visual purple some way and 
robbed them of an hour of time. 
He went into the orchid suite and 
killed D'Courtney. The girl got 
mixed up in it, somehow, which 
is why she ran." 

"How did he kerfiumox? How 
did he kill D'Courtney? And 
why?" 



THE DEMOLISHED MAN 



113 



*'I don't know any of the answers . . . yet." 

"You'll never get a Demolition 
that way." 

"That I do know." 

"You've got to show motive, 
method and opportunity, objectively. The Moitec evidence won't 
stand up alone. It'll need powerful supporting evidence. All 
you've got is a peeper's knowledge 
that it was Reich who killed 
D' Courtney ." 

"Uh-huh." 

"Did you peep how or why?" 

*'Couldn't get in deep enough 
, . . not with Sam Jordan watching me." 

"And you'll probably never get 
in. Sam's too careful." 

"Damnation! Charley, we need 
the girl" 

"Barbara D'Courtney?" 

"Yes. She's the key. If she can 
tell us what she saw and why 
she ran, we'll satisfy a court. Collate everything we've got so far 
{which is practically nothing} 
and file it. It won't do us any 
good without the girl. Let everyone go. We'll have to backtrack 
on Reich . „ . see what collateral 
evidence we can dig up, but — *' 

"But it won't help without that 
goddam girl." 

"Times like this, Charley, I 
hate women. For Christ's sake, 
why are they all trying to get 
me married." 

Image of a horse laughing. 

Sar(censored)castic retort. 



Sar (censored )donic reply, 
(censored) 

TJAVING had the last word, 
Powell got to his feet and 
left the picture gallery. He crossed 
the overpass, descended to the 
music room and entered the main 
hall. He saw Reich, Jordan and 
T8 talking intently alongside the 
fountain. Once again he fretted 
over the frightening problem of 
T8. If the little peeper really was 
mixed up with Reich, as Powell 
had sensed at the party last week, 
he might be mixed up in this 
killing. 

The idea of a 1st class Esper, 
a pillar of the Guild, participating in murder was unthinkable; 
and, if actually fact, hell to prove. 
Nobody ever got anything from 
a 1st without full consent. And 
if T8 was (incredibly, impossibly, 
100-1 against) working with 
Reich, Reich himself might prove 
impregnable. 

Resolving on one last propaganda attack before he was forced 
to resort to police work, Powell 
caught their eyes, and directed a 
quick command to the peepers: 
"Sam, Gus — jet. I want to say 
something to Reich I don't want 
you to hear. I won't peep him or 
record his words. That's a 
pledge." 

Jordan and T8 nodded. Reich 
watched them go and then looked 
at Powell. "Scare 'em off?" he 
inquired. 



114 




 



"Warned them off. Sit down, 
Reich." 

They sat on the edge of the 
basin, looking at each other, a 
chemotropic smile on their lips. 
They sat in a warm, friendly silence. 

"No," Powell said after a pause, 
"I'm not peeping you." 

"Didn't think you were. But 
you did in Maria's study, ch?" 

"Felt that?" 

"No. Guessed. It's what I 
would have done." 

"Neither of us is very trustworthy, eh?" 

"It's the cowards and sore 
losers who hide behind fair play." 

"What about honor?" 

"We've got honor in us, but it's 
our own code . . . not makebelieve rules.'' 

Powell shook his head sadly. 
"You're two men, Reich. One of 
them's wonderful; the other's rotten. If you were all killer, it 
wouldn't be so bad. But there's 
half louse and half saint in you, 
end that makes it worse." 

"I knew it was going to be bad 
when you winked." Reich grinned. 
"You really scare me, Powell. I 
never can tell when the punch 
is coming or which way to duck.'* 

"Then, for God's sake, stop 
ducking and get it over with," 
Powell said. His voice burned. 
"I'm going to lick you on this 
one. Ben. I'm going to strangle 
the lousy killer in you, because 
I admire the sainjt. This is the 



beginning of the end for you. You 
know it. Why don't you make it 
easier for yourself?" 

"And give up the best fight of 
my life with the best enemy I 
ever met?" 

Powell shrugged angrily. They 
both arose. Instinctively, their 
hands met in the four-way clasp 
of final farewell. 

"I lost a great partner in you, 
Pres," Reich smiled. 

"You lost a great man in your* 
self, Ben." 

"Enemies?" 

"Enemies." 

VIII 

' I^HE police prefect of a city of 
-1 seventeen and one-half millions cannot be tied down to an 
office. He does not have a desk. 
He does not have files, memoranda, dossiers. He has three Esper secretaries, memory wizards 
all, who carry within their skulls 
the minutiae of his business. They 
accompany him within headquarters like a triple index. Occasionally, one of them joins him on the 
field while the others remain behind to act as his proxy. Surrounded by his flying squad, 
Powell jetted through headquar* 
ters, assembling the material for 
his fight. 

To Commissioner Crabbe he 
laid out the broad outlines once 
more: "We need motive, method 
and opportunity, Commissioner. 



THE DEMOLISHED MAN 



115 



We've got opportunity, but it 
won't stand alone. Mr. Peetcy'U 
never buy it. It's got to be bolstered by the other two. I'm 
speaking of objective evidence for 
the court. Now, I'm ready to go 
all out on Ben Reich and Sacrament. I want to ask you a straight 
question — are you willing to go 
all out too?" 

Crabbe, who resented Espers, 
turned purple and shot up from 
the ebony chair behind the ebony 
desk in his ebony -and -silver office. "What the hell is that supposed to mean?" 

"Don't sound for undercurrents, sir. I'm merely asking if 
you're tied to Reich and Sacrament in any way. Will it be possible for Reich to come to you 
and ask to have the rockets 
cooled?" > 

"God damn your impudence, 
Powell—" 

"Excuse me, sir, I'm just trying to be realistic. I'm a career 
criminologist. You're a politician. 
Politicians must have support. 
Has Reich been one of your supporters?" 

"No, he's not." 

"Sir: On December fourth last, 
Commissioner Crabbe discussed 
the Langley Case with you. Extract follows: 

Powell: There's a tricky financial angle to this business, Commissioner. 
Sacrament may hold 
us up with a demurrer 



and attempt seizure 

of the Langley assets. 

Crabbe : Reich's given me his 
word he won't; and I 
can always depend on 
Ben Reich. He backed 
me up for County 
Attorney. 

End quote." 

"Right. I thought I was reaching for something." Powell 
dropped his tact and glared at 
Crabbe. "What about your campaign for County D. A.? Reich 
backed you for that, didn't he?" 

"He did." 

"And I'm supposed to believe 
he hasn't continued supporting 
you?" 

"Yes, you are. He backed me 
then. He has not supported me 
since." 

"Then I have the beacon on 
the Reich murder?" 

"Why do you insist that Ben 
Reich killed that man? It's ridiculous. You've got no proof. Your 
own admission." 

"Do I have the beacon on the 
Reich murder?" 

"You do." 

"But with strong reservations. 
Make a note, boys. He's scared 
to death of Reich. Make another 
note. So am I." 

TO his staff, Powell said: "Now 
look, you all know what a 
coldblooded monster Peetcy is. 
I swear he gives me nightmares 
. . . screaming for facts, facts. 



116 




 



We'll have to produce evidence 
to convince.- him he ought to prosecute. To do that, we're going to 
pull the Rough & Smooth on 
Reich." 

"Brief us," $$on said. 

"Go back to your Academy 
training, gentlemen. Remember 
that ancient device for tailing a 
tough subject? Assign a clumsy 
operative and a slick one to the 
subject. The cluck didn't know 
the smoothie was on the job. 
Neither did the subject. After 
he'd shaken the rough tail, he 
imagined he was clear. That made 
it a cinch for the slicker. That's 
what we're going to do to Reich." 

"Check." said $$on. 

"Go through every department. 
Pull out the hundred dumbest 
cops you can locate. Put 'em into 
plainclothes and assign' em to 
Reich. Go up to Lab and get hold 
of every crackpot robot gimmick 
that's been submitted in the last 
ten years. Put all the gadgets to 
work on Reich. Make it a rough 
tail, but the kind he'll have to 
work to shake." 

"Any specific areas?" $$on inquired. 

"All except one. Why were they 
playing 'Sardine? 1 Who suggested 
the game? Beaumont's secretaries 
went on record that Reich 
couldn't be peeped because he 
had a song kicking around in his 
skull. What song? Who wrote it? 
Wherc'd Reich hear it? The 
guards were blasted with some 



kind of Visual Purple Ionizer. 
Check all research on that sort of 
thing. What killed D'Courtney? 
Let's have lots of weapon research. Backtrack on Reich's relations with D'Courtney. What 
and how much does Reich stand 
to win by D'Courtney's death?" 

"All this Rough? We'll louse 
the case, Pres!" 

"Maybe. I don't think so. 
Reich's a successful man. He'll 
imagine he's outsmarting us every 
time he outmaneuvers one of our 
decoys. Keep him thinking that. 
The Pantys'll tear us apart. Play 
along with it. We're all going to 
be blundering, outwitted cops, 
and while Reich's eating himself 
fat on that diet — " 

"You'll be eating Reich," $$on 
grinned. "What about the girl?" 

"She's the one exception to the 
rough routine. We level with her. 
I want a description and photo 
sent to every police officer in the 
county within one hour. On the 
bottom of the stat announce that 
the man who locates her will automatically be jumped five grades." 

"Sir: Regulations forbid e/evotion of more than three ranks." 

"To hell with regulations," 
Powell snapped to his secretary. 
"Five grades to the man who 
finds Barbara D'Courtney. I've 
got to get that girl." 

IN Sacrament Tower, Ben Reich 
shoved every piezo crystal off 
his desk into the startled hands 



THE DEMOLISHED MAN 



117 



of his intimidated secretaries. 

"Get the hell out of here and 
take this with you," he growled. 
"For a while the office coasts 
without me. Understand?" 

"But the Tycho estimates . . ." 

"You people handle it. Submit 
the estimates. Brush off Salzman 
on the City Contract. Remember 
to have Laslow bid on those 
Venus auctions. Send Pickfield 
the Mandamus Writs. Sign the 
shop contracts with Amalgamated 
Brotherhood and don't bother 
me." 

"Mr. Reich, we'd understood 
you were contemplating taking 
over the D'Courtney interests now 
that Craye D'Courtney's dead. 
If you — " 

, "I'm taking care of that right 
now. That's why I don't want 
to be bothered." 

He pushed them out, slammed 
the door and locked it. He went 
to the phone, punched BD-12,232 
and the image of Jeremy Church 
appeared against a background of 
pawnshop, debris. 

"You?" Church snarled. 

"Still interested in reinstatement?" 

Church started. "What about 
it?" 

"You've made yourself a deal. 
I want a lot in return." 

"For God's sake, Ben, anything! Just ask me." 

"Unlimited service. You know 
the price I'm paying. Are you 
selling?" 



"I'm selling, Ben! Yes!" 

"I want that blind son of a 
bitch. The red-headed one." 

"Keno Quizzard? He isn't safe, 
Ben. Nobody gets anything frgm 
Quizzard." 

"Set up a meeting. Same place. 
This is like old times, eh, Jerry? 
Only this time it's going to have 
a happy ending." 

rpHE usual line of applicants 
was assembled in the anteroom of the Esper Guild Institute when Powell entered. The 
hopeful hundreds, all ages, all 
sexes, all classes, dreaming that 
they had the magic power that 
could make life the fulfillment of 
fantasy, unaware of the heavy 
responsibility that power entailed. The repugnant odor of 
those wishes came to Powell from 
the line: Read minds and make 
a killing on the market . . . 
(Guild Law forbade speculation 
or gambling by peepers) . . . 
Read minds and know the answers to all the exam questions 
. . . (That was a schoolboy, unaware that Esper Proctors were 
hired by Examination Boards to 
prevent that kind Of peepercheating) . . . Read minds and 
know what people really think 
of me . . . Read minds and know 
which girls are wilting' . . . 

At the desk, the receptionist 
wearily broadcast on the broadest TP band: "If you can hear 
me, please go through the door 



118 




 



or the left marked Employees 
Only." 

To sn assured young society 
woman with a checkbook in her 
hand, she was saying : "No, 
madam, the Guild does not 
charge for training and instruction, so spend your money on 
something else. We can do nothing for you." 

Deaf to the basic test of the 
Guild, the woman turned away 
angrily. 

li you can hear me, please &o 
through the door on the left . . . 

An elderly Negro suddenly detached himself from the line, 
glanced uncertainly at the receptionist, and then limped to the 
proper door. Powell nodded to 
the receptionist and followed the 
Latent. 

Inside, Jennings and Whitehead were enthusiastically shaking the surprised man's hand and 
patting him on the back. Powell 
joined them for a moment and 
added his congratulations. It was 
always a happy day for the Guild 
when they unearthed another 
Esper. 

Powell walked down the corridor toward the president's suite. 
He passed a kindergarten where 
thirty children and ten adults 
were mixing speech and thought 
in a frightful patternJess stew. 
Their instructor was patiently 
broadcasting: "Think, class. 
Words are not necessary. Remember to break the speech reflex. 



Repeat the first rule after me . . . n 
And the class chanted: "Eliminate the larynx." 

Powell winced and moved on. 
The wall opposite the kindergarten was covered by a gold plaqUC 
on which was engraved the sacred 
words of the Galen Pledge: 

1 will look upon I urn who shall havje 
taught me this art as one of my parents, I will sjiare my substance with 
i mm and I will supply his nece.sitiea 
if lie be in need. I will regcrd his 
offspring even as my own brethren and 
I will teach them this art by pr. ept, 
by lecture and by every mo 1<* of 
libelling; and 1 will teach this i t to 
ell others. * 

The regimen I adopt shall Lo for 
the benefit of mankind aocorc ng to 
my ability and judgment, and r t (or 
hurt or wrong. I will give no <" .idly 
thought to any, though it be -d of 
me, nor will I counsel such. 

Whatsoever mind 1 enter, thci : will 
T gD for the benefit of man, irfi i lliag 
from ali wrongdoing and corr '.ion. 

Whatsoever thoughts I see or h-.r in 
the mind of man which ought ■ tu 
he noised abroad, 1 will keep Si ence 
thereon, counting such things as r.-.cred 
secrets. 

In the lecture hall, a class erf 
3rds was earnestly weaving simple basket patterns while they 
discussed current events. There 
was one little overdue 2nd, a 
twelve-year-old urchin who was 
adding zigzag ad libs to the dull 
discussion and peaking every zig 
with a spoken word. The word* 
rhymed and were barbed comments on the speakers. It was 
very amusing and amazingl> precocious. 



THE DEMOLISHED MAN 



11? 



Powell halted and, below the 
class threshold, asked the instructor: "Who's rfie infant phenomenon?" 

"Dennis McCaltion." 

"Reported him to the Board 
yet?" 

"Going to send one in today." 

"Well, add a recommendation 
from me. Suggest he be sent directly to an alpha class. tf he 
keeps on like this, he may establish a new peeper rating . . . above 
the lsf." 

Hilf a dozen 2nds were taking 
their exams for advanced rating 
in the seminar room. They were 
clustered around Molly Chindo, 
the anient from Kingston Hospital, chatting, smoking, and uneasily evading Molly's mental 
passes. Molly was still ravishing 
. . . a blue-eyed, black-haired 
nymphomaniac who was also 
oligophrenic. It was a dirty trick 
to introduce the sexual angle and 
confuse the examinees, but a 1st 
rating had to be earned the hard 
way, and Molly was only one 
in a series of severe tests. 

A group of college-age kids was 
loafing outside the president's 
suite, endlessly grousing about 
the endless educational problems 
of the peepers . . . the long hours 
of extra work at the Institute after 
their regular college lectures . . . 
the rigorous code of Guild ethics 
. . . the gloomy aspects of their 
futures, endless work, endless devotion to service . . . 



"Oh, brother! If we could only 
get lost from peeping, how fast 
we'd shake it. Who wants to go 
through life like a walking saint? 
They ought to write an llffi 
Commandment: 'Thou shalt not 
deprive any man of the right to 
go to hell.' " 

They signed off when Powell 
approached. As he entered the 
suite he said: "It isn't so bad. 
You get used to being admirable 
after a while." The spoken words 
shamed them, and a good thing 
too. They were in that stage 
when youngsters resist conditioning. 

That couldn't be encouraged. 

rFiHE president's suite was in an 
uproar. All the office doors 
were open, and clerks and secretaries were scurrying, Old T'sungHsai, the president, a portly 
mandarin with shaven skull and 
benign features, stood in the center of his office and raged. 

"I don't care what the honorable scoundrels call themse lvtfs," 
T'sung Hsai roared. "Talk to me 
about racial purity of the Guild, 
will they? I'll fill their concave 
ears. Miss Prinn!" 

Helen Prinn crept into T-H's 
office. 

"Take a letter to these devils. 
To the League of Esper Patriots. 
Greefings, Powell. Your august 
presence honors these humble 
eyes. My threadbare office is 
perfumed with the joy of your 



no 




 



many-jeweled visage . . . The organized campaign to cut down 
Guild taxation for the education 
of Espers for the benefit of mankind is the action of a nest of 
roaches resisting the sterilization 
of a filthy kitchen. New paragraph . . 

T-H wrenched himself from his 
diatribe and bowed profoundly to 
Powell. "And has a joyous wife 
yet been found to enlarge the tree 
of your celestial family?" 

"Not yet, sir." 

"Damn it, Powell, get married!" T-H bellowed. "I don't 
want to be stuck with this job 
forever. Paragraph, Miss Print! ; 
You speak of the hardships of 
taxation, of preserving the aristocracy of Espers, of the unsuitability of the average man for 
Bsper training. What the hell do 
you want, Powell?" 

"I want to use the grapevine, 
sir." 

"Well, don't bother me. Vve 
got this three-tongued League 
of Lice on my back. Speak to 
Jenny about it. Paragraph, Miss 
Prinn : You parasitic bastards 
want Esper powers turned into a 
monopoly, and no taxation so 
you can keep your loot like the 
corrupt, unashamed leeches you 
are—" 

Powell tactfully closed the door 
and turned to Jenny James, who 
was quaking in a corner. 

"Really scared. Jenny?" 

Image of an eye winking and 



n question mark quaking. 

"When Papa T-H blows hie 
top, we like him to think we're 
petrified. Makes him happier" 

Powell dropped the official police description and portrait of 
Barbara D'Courtney on the secretary's desk. "Here's something 
you can do for me, Jenny." 

"What a beautiful girl!" Jenny 
exclaimed. 

"I want this sent out on the 
grapevine, marked urgent. Pass 
the word that the peeper who locates Barbara D'Courtney for me 
will have his Guild taxes remitted 
for a year." 

"Jeepers!" Jenny sat bolt upright. "Can you do that, PreaP* 

"Council agreed to it." 

"This' If make the grapevine 
jump!" 

**/ want it to jump. I want 
every peeper to jump. Jenny, ff 
I want anything for Xmas, I 
want that girl." 

QUIZZARD'S casino had been 
cleared and polished during 
the afternoon break . . . the only 
break in the gambler's day. The 
eo and roulette tables were 
brushed, the gold birdcage 
sparkled, the hazard and h<*nk 
crap boards gleamed green and 
white. On the cashier's desk, rold 
sovereigns— the standard coi" of 
gambling and the underworldwere racked in tempting stacks. 
Reich sat at the billiard (genuine 
antique) tabic with Jerry Church 



THE DEMOLISHED MAN 



21 



and Keno Quizzard, the blind 
croupier. Quizzar'd was fat with 
flaming red beard, dead-white 
skin and malevolent dead-white 
eyes. 

"Your price," Reich told 
Church, "you know already. And 
I'm warning you, Jerry, don't 
try to peep me. If you get into 
my head you're getting into 
Demolition." 

Quizzard murmured in his 
clabbered blind man's voice: "As 
bad as that? I don't hanker for 
a Demol, Reich." 

"Who does? What do you 
hanker for, Keno?" 

Quizzard reached back and 
with sure fingers pulled a rouleau 
of sovereigns off the desk and 
let them cascade from one hand 
to the other. "Listen to what I 
hanker for." 

"Name the best price you can 
figure, Keno." 

"You got a hundred Ms laying 
around?" 

"Hundred thousand? Right. 
That's the price." 

"For the love of . . . " Church 
popped upright and stared at 
Reich. "A hundred thousand!" 

"Make up your mind, Jerry," 
Reich said. "Do you want money 
or reinstatement?" 

"It's almost worth — No. Am 
I crazy? I'll take reinstatement." 

"Then stop drooling." Reich 
turned to Quizzard. "I know you, 
Keno. You've got an idea you 
can find out what I want and 



then shop around for higher bids. 
I want you committed right now. 
That's why I let you set the 
price." 

"Yeah," Quizzard said slowly. 
"I had that idea, Reich." He 
smiled and the milk-white eyes 
disappeared in folds of skin. "I 
still got that idea." 

"Then I'll tell you right now 
who'll buy from you, A man 
named Preston Powell. I don't 
know what he can pay." 

"Whatever it is, I don't want ,. 
it," Quizzard spat. 
. "I'm still waiting to hear from 
you." 

"I told you it's a deal. I'm 
committed." 

"I don't hear you, Keno." 

"He knows, Jerry?" 

"He knows," Church muttered, 
"He's been around." 

With grudging respect, Quizzard reached into his pocket and 
withdrew his key chain. Reich 
followed suit. The keys were 
small platinum cylinders, radiant 
to operate photo-electric locks, 
but capable if you knew how — ■ 
and the underworld knew how — 
of burning a tiny temporary tattoo into the skin. Reich and Quizzard stripped their arms and each 
tattooed the other above the elbow with the characteristic design of his key. It was the under- < 
world's inviolable contract. A 
thief named Whittmaker had 
once conceived the idea of entering into such a contract for the 



122 




 



purpose of burglary through a 
key duplicated from the tattooed 
design. He failed. It was impossible to duplicate the key. He also 
lost an ear. Plastic surgery had 
no difficulty in duplicating that. 

"All right," Reich said, "now 
listen to this. First job. I want 
a girl. Her name is Barbara 
D' Courtney." 

"The killing?" Quizzard nodded 
heavily. "I thought so." 

"Any objections?" 
> Quizzard jingled gold from one 

hand to the other and shook his 
head. 

"I want the girl. She blew out 
of the Beaumont House last night 
and no one knows where she 
landed. I want her, Keno. Before 
the police get her." 

Quizzard nodded. 

"She's about twenty-five. About 
five-five. Around a hundred and 
twenty pounds. Really stacked." 

The fat lips smiled hungrily. 
The dead-white eyes glistened. 

"Yellow hair. Black eyes. Black 
eyebrows. Heart-shaped face. Full 
mouth and a kind of aquiline 
nose . . . high bridge, sharp nostrils. She's got a face with character," 

"Got the picture. Clothes?" 

"She was wearing a silk dressing gown last time I saw her. 
» Frosty white and translucent . . . 
like a frozen window. No shoes. 
No stockings. No hat. No jewelry. 
She was off her beam enough to 
tear out into the streets and dis


appear. I want her." Something 
compelled Reich to add: "I want 
her undamaged." 

"With her hauling a freight like 
that? Have a heart, Reich." Quizzard licked his fat lips. "You 
don't stand a chance. She don't 
stand a chance." 

"That what a hundred Ms are 
for. I stand a good chance if you 
get her fast enough." 

"I may have to slush for her.** 

"Then slush. Check every 
bawdy house, bagnio, Blind Tiger 
and Frab Joint in the city. 1 want 
the girl. Understand?" 

Quizzard nodded, still jingling 
the gold. "I understand." 

Suddenly Reich reached across 
the table and slashed Quizzard's 
fat hands with the edge of his 
palm. The sovereigns chimed into 
the air. 

"And I don't want any doublecross," Reich growled in a deadly 
voice. "Don't try any." 

IX 

/~|NE week of attack and defense, lunge andriposte, all 
fought on the surface while, deep 
below the agitated waters, Powell 
and Augustus T8 circled like 
silent sharks awaiting the onset 
of the real war. 

Elsworth Finney, patrol officer 
now in plainclothes, believed in 
the surprise attack. He waylaid 
Maria Beaumont during a theater 
intermission, and before her hor


THE DEMOLISHED MAN 




rifted friends bellowed: "It was a 
frame. You was in cahoots with 
the killer. You set up the murder. 
That's why you was playin* that 
Sardine game. Go ahead, deny it." 

The Gilt Corpse squawked and 
ran. As Officer Finney set off in 
hot pursuit, he was peeped deeply 
and thoroughly by one of Madam 
Beaumont's friends. 

T8 to Reich: The cop was telling the 
truth. His department believes Maria 
was an accomplice. 

Reich to TS: All right. We'll throw 
her to the wolves. Let the cops have 
her. 

In consequence, Madam Beaumont was left unprotected. She 
took refuge, of all places, in the 
Loan Brokerage that was the 
source of her enormous income. 
Officer Finney located The Gilt 



Corpse there three hours later 
and subjected her to a merciless 
grilling in the office of the peeper 
Credit Supervisor. He was unaware that Preston Powell was 
just outside the office, chatting 
with the Supervisor. 



Powell to staff: She got the game oat 
of a book Reich gave her. Probably 
purchased at Winters. They handle 
that stuff. Pass the word. Did he ask 
for it specifically? Also, check fTt 
the appraiser. How come the only 
intact game in the book was 'Sardine?' Peetcy'Il want to know. And 
where's that girl? 



124 



OALAXY SCIENCE FICTION 



Dodo Wraught, patrol officer 
now in plainclothes, was going to 
come through on his big chance 
with the suave approach. To the 
manager and staff of Winters, hedrawled : "I'm in the market for 
old game books . . . the kind my 
very good friend, Ben Reich, 
asked for last week." 

T8 «• Reich: IVe been peeping 
■roniid. They're going i<> eheek that 
book ... . tenl Mari». 

Reich in I H : I, .'i 'em. I'm eoveretl. 
I've got to concentrate on that girl. 

The manager and staff carefully explained matters at great 
length in response to Officer 
Wraught's suave questions. Many 
clients lost patience and left the 
store. One sat quietly in a corner, 
too wrapt in a crystal recording 
to realize he was left unattended. 
Nobody knew that Charley $$on 
was completely tone-deaf. 

Pimcll <•> staff: Reich apparent!* 
f. mi ml the book, accidentally. Stumbled 
over it tvhilc he was looking for a 
present for the Beaumont. P»s» the 
word. And where's that jrirl? 

In conference with the agency 
that handled copy for the Sacrament Jumper (the only Nulgee 
Family Air Rocket on the market) Reich came up with a new 
advertising program. 

"You can't sell transportation 
on an efficiency basis," he said. 
"People won't buy our Jumper 
because it's the best piece of ma


chinery for the money. We can 
tell 'em it's more efficient and 
cheaper than the D'Courtney 
product until we're blue in the 
face. It won't do any good. This 
bankbook comparison campaign 
of yours stinks." 

"Granted, Mr. Reich," the account man said alertly. "Its scope 
was out of orbit. Our synthesis 
was faulty." 

"The fact is this." Reich continued. "People always anthropomorphize the products they use. 
They give them pet names and 
treat them like family pets. A 
man won't buy a Jumper if it's 
merely efficient. He wants to love 
it." 

"Check!" the account man 
cried. "Your idea has a sense of 
scope that dwarfs us, Mr. Reich. 
Now we know who we're rooting 
for." 

"We're going to anthropomorphize our Jumper," Reich said. 
"Let's find a girl and vote her 
the Sacrament Jumper Girl. We'll 
make every consumer identify his 
Jumper with this girl. When he 
buys one, he's buying her." 

"Check, Mr. Reich. Check!" 

"Start an immediate campaign 
to locate the Jumper Girl. Get 
every salesman onto it. Comb the 
city. Give it lots of play in the 
Pantys and papers. I want the 
girl to be about twenty-five, fivefive, hundred and twenty pounds. 
Lots of bounce." 

"I understand the psychology. 



THE DEMOLISHED MAN 



US 



Girl." 

"She ought to be a blonde with 
dark eyes. Full mouth. Good 
strong nose. I've had one of my 
peeper artists prepare a sketch 
of my idea of the Jumper Girl. 
Look it over, have it reproduced 
and passed out to your crew. 
There's a promotion for the man 
who locates the girl 1 have in 
mind." 

T8 to Iteirh: I've been peeping some 
more. They're sending a man into 
Sacrament to dig up something between miii and that appraiser, fry. 

It<-i. It lo TH: Something between me 
and fri ! Powell couldn't be that 

dumb. < Id he? Maybe I've been 

overrating him. 

Expense was no object to 
Alfred Finely, who believed in the 
disguises of plastic surgery. 
Freshly equipped with Mongoloid 
features, he took a job in Sacrament's accounting department 
and attempted to unearth Reich's 
financial relations with ^ry. It 
never occurred to him that his 
intent had been thoroughly 
peeped by Sacrament's Esper 
Personnel Chief and reported upstairs, and that upstairs was 
quietly chuckling. 

Powell to Itaffl The idiot was looking 
for bribery recorded in Sacrament's 
bookll Tli is should lower Reich's 
opinion of U by fifty per cent; which 
makes him fifty per eent more vulnerable. Where*! that girl? 



At the board meeting of "The 
Hour" (the only round - 1 heclock paper on Earth, twentyfour editions a day) which was 
actually a Sacrament houseorgan, Reich announced a new 
charity to be begun at once and 
publicized immediately. 

"Well call it 'Sanctuary,' " he 
said. "We offer aid to the submerged millions in the world in 
their time of crisis. If you've been 
evicted, bankrupted, terrorized, 
swindled ... if you're frightened 
for any reason and don't know 
where to turn . . . turn to Sanctuary." 

"It's a hell of a promotion,** 
the managing editor said, "but 
it'll cost like crazy. What's it 
for?" 

"Public relations," Reich 
snapped. "The D'Courtney 
crowd's turned itself into the 
Great White Father. It's time 
Sacrament took over the role." 

Reich left the board room, went 
down to the street and located a 
public phone booth. He called 
Ellery West. "I want a man 
placed in every Sanctuary office, 
a full description and photo of 
every applicant relayed to me at 
they come in." 

"I'm not asking any questions, 
Ben, but I wish I could peep you 
on that." 

"Suspicious?" Reich snarled. 

"Just curious." 

"Don't let it kill you." 

As Reich left the booth he wa» 




 



accosted by a mousy man who 
wore an air of inept eagerness. 

"Oh, Mr. Reich. Lucky I 
bumped into you. The word just 
came down about Sanctuary and 
I thought a human interest interview with the originator of that 
wonderful charity might — " 

Lucky he bumped into him! 
The man was Quinn, "The 
Hour's" famous peeper reporter. 
Probably tailed him down and— 
Tenser, said the Tensor. Tenser, 
said the Tensor. Tension, apprehension and dissension have begun. 

"Was there ever a time when 
you didn't know where to turn? 
Were you ever afraid of death 
or murder? Were — " 

Tenser, said the Tensor. 

Reich dove into a Public 
Jumper and escaped. 

T8 lit Reich: The CO pa are reall.r 
after (try. God knows what kind of 
rod herring Powell's following, but 
fl'x away from toil I think the 
■nfelv margin's mrren»ing. 

Reich in T8: Not until I've found 
that girl. 

Marcus f'ry had left no forwarding address and was pursued 
by Prof. Elias Johnson's "Aural 
Selector" (a mechanical bloodhound responsive to the particular aura surrounding the human 
psyche ) , Dr. E. G. Howard's 
"Probability Prognosticator" (a 
mechanical divinator). and Wm. 
Elgin's "Electrodianetiphore" (a 



mechanical device defying all description). 

The "Aural Selector" ended up 
in Greenland; the "Probability 
Prognosticator" broke down in 
Kimberly; the "Electrodianetiphore" reached Shanghai, and 
Marcus fry arrived in Moscow 
where Powell located him at a 
book auction conducted at breakneck speed by a peeper auctioneer. Powell interviewed fry in 
the foyer before a window overlooking the remains of Red 
Square. 

Powell to naff: All dear. Reich 
hou^lil (lie hook, had il appraised, 
sen! il hs a sift. The hook wan in 
bad condition and the onlv came 
Maria could select was '.Sardine. 1 
We'll never pin anything on Reieli 
wilh that. I know how Peeler*! mind 
works. Damn it, where's that airl? 

Three operatives in succession 
were smitten with Miss Duffy 
Wyg& and retired in disgrace to 
don their uniforms once more. 
When Powell finally reached her, 
she was at the 4,000 Ball, escorted 
and patrolled by Sam Jordan 
who gave her advice and counsel. 
She elected to talk. 

Puwrll lo Staff i I ealled EUerv We*t 
down ui Sacrament ami )■<• support! 
her 8 lory. VY-i did complain admit 
gambling and Reich bought n psyeJbsonje to ttttn il. Mi- picked up lhat 

ndiuMilocfc hv accident. Whti about 
thai gimmick Reich naed am the. 
guard*? And what about that eirl? 

"As far as this strike is con


THE DEMOLISHED MAN 



127 



reined," Reich told the executives 
of African Mines, Ltd., a subsidiary of Sacrament, "it's my 
opinion it's a ruse fomented by 
the D'Courtney gang, and I'm 
going to throw tt back in their 
teeth." 

"I must disagree with you, Mr. 
Reich. Our attorney has been conferring with the strike committee. 
He's an Esper, of course. It seems 
that when the labor union negotiated the contract last year, 
they failed to express their demands clearly. That failure was 
b result of their decision not to 
employ Esper counsel for reasons 
of economy ... a decision they 
now regret. That is the issue. I 
hardly think that the D'Courtney 
Cartel is — " 

"You're not paid to think. Just 
listen to me. Tell personnel down 
at the mines to stage a beauty 
contest. They're going to elect 
Barbara D'Courtney the pin-up 
girl of the African Mines. They'll 
send a delegation to New York 
tc meet her and make the presentation to her and have a hell of 
a time; and they'll invite her back 
for a grand tour. If she accepts, 
what'll you bet the D'Courtney 
gang ends the strike?" 

TV. i.. KrWh: V,*wlV* Mill h '..m, I, t■■>*. Tliis limr be'a after ihr gimmick 
yon umnI OA D'Conrl u» '- liodvgiiur.l*. You're parfMtrr ««IV. Hi* 
idctiH nr<" crazy, 

Raich la T8: I'll got (ftrfaaanl to 
in. In • 'ii I'll Mf« on that; l>nt 
• 1 1- mil out of Imi- ii 11 lit tve gi-l 

128 I 



ibr girl. I*re got to gt-l bar! 

In response to bitter criticism. 
Commissioner Crabbe revealed 
that Police Laboratories had discovered a new investigation technique which would break the 
D'Courtney Case within 24 hours. 
It involved photomagnetic analysis of the Visual Purple in the 
corpse's eyes which would yield 
a picture of the murderer. 
Rhodopsin researchers were being 
co-opted by the police. 

An anonymous person with a 
clabbered voice phoned Wilson 
J^maine at Central Tech and 
casually attempted to purchase 
Dr. ^maine's interest in the 
Drake Estate for a small sum. 
The clobbered voice sounded too 
crafty to %maine (who had never 
even heard of the Drake Estate) 
and he called Central's Law 
School. He was informed that the 
Drake Estate on Callisto, valued 
at half a million, had just beat 
reopened for litigation. Dr. 
maine was a probable legatee. 
The psychologirt jetted for Callisto one hour later. 

1'mvHI i<> staff: Indicating !4maina 
jnifthl In- oar man mi lite RhodoptJfl 
angle. I < the only Vbaal I'Jiy-iologi-l m disappear aftrr Crabbc't innoancemeot, Pbm the word lo Ston 
l«i tail him to Cafl'«l<> and handle it. 
What aboal that girl? 

Meanwhile, the slick side of the 
Rough & Smooth was quietly in 
operation, As The Gilt Corpse 

AIAXY 5C(ENCE FICTION 



was entertaining Reich with her 
squawking flight, a bright young 
attorney from Sacrament's legal 
department was deftly decoyed 
to Paris and held there anonymously on a valid, if antiquated, 
vice charge. An astonishing 
double of that gentleman went to 
work for him. 

TJt In Reich: Check your legal depiiii "out. I can't. peep what's polity 
on, Imi something's fishy. This idangrrous. 

Reich brought in an Esper Efficiency Expert 1, ostensibly for 
a general checkup, and located 
the substitution. Then he called 
the man with the clabbered voice 
who had multifarious connections. A plaintiff suddenly appeared and sued the bright young 
attorney for barratry. That ended 
the substitute's connection with 
Sacrament painlessly and legitimately. 

Powell lo staff : We're being- licked. 
ReicVs slit muring every <loor in our 
face . . . Rough & Smooth. Kind 
out olio's doing the legwork for him, 
and find th.il girl. 

While Alfred Finely was cavorting around Sacrament with 
his brand-new Mongolian face, 
one of Sacrament's young scientists, who had been badly hurt 
in n laboratory explosion, apparently left the hospital a week 
early and reported back for duty. 
He was heavily bandaged, but 



eager for work. It was the old 

Sacrament spirit. 

T8 lo Reich: I've finally figured it. 
Powell isn't dumb. He's running his 
investigation on two levels. Don't 
pay any attention lo the one that 
whows. Watch out Tor ihe one underneath. I've peeped something about 
it hospital. Cheek it. 

Reich checked. It took three 
days and then he called the man 
with the clabbered voice. Sacrament was burgled of $50,000 in 
laboratory platinum and the Restricted Room was destroyed in 
the process. The newly returned 
scientist was unmasked as an impostor, accused of complicity in 
the crime and handed over to the 
police. 

Powell lo staff: Which means we'll 
never prove Reieh got thai Evhodopsin stuff fro n hie own lab. flow in 
Cod's name did he unslick onr triek? 
Can'1 «e do anvtbing on nnv l-velr 
Where's lhaf girl? 

While Reich was laughing at 
the ludicrous search for Marcus 
^ry, his top brass was greeting the 
Continental Tax Examiner, an 
Esper 2, who had arrived for a 
long delayed check on Sacrament's books. This despite the 
fact that Reich owned three Continental Senators. One of the new 
additions to the Examiner's squad 
was a peeper ghostwriter who 
prepared her chief's reports. She 
was an expert in official work . . • 
mainly police work. 



THE DEMOLISHED MAN 



129 



T« to Reich) I'm suspicious »F thai 
K* :i i ■ '■ -.111.1.1. Dnn'l lake any 

chances. 

Reich smiled grimly and turned 
his company books over to the 
squad. Then he sent Hassop, his 
Code Chief, to Ampro on that 
promised vacation. Hassop obligingly carried a small spool of 
exposed film with his regular 
photographic equipment. That 
spool was Sacrament's secret 
books, cased in a thermite seal 
which would destroy all records 
unless it was opened properly. 
The only other copy was in 
Reich's invulnerable temporalphase safe at home. 

Powell to staff: Ami thai hurt about 
ends everything f»>r us. Have linkup 
doable-tailed Rough & Smooth. He's 
probnbtv jtol vital evidence iiii hitn, 
«o Reich's pot him beautifully protected. Damn it, we're licked. 1 say 
il. Mr, Pectey says it. You know it. 
Where i« tbal missing girl? 

¥ IKE an anatomical chart of 
' the blood system, colored red 
for the arterial and blue for the 
venous, the two networks of the 
underworld and overworld grapevines spread. From Guild headquarters the word passed to instructors and students, to their 
families, friends, casual acquaintances. From Quizzard's Casino 
the word was passed from 
croupier to gamblers, confidence 
men, heavy racketeers, hustlers, 
steerers and suckers, 

On Friday morning, Fred Deal, 



Esper 3. awoke, bathed, breakfasted and departed to his regular 

job. He was chief guard on the 
floor of the Mars Exchange B ink 
in Maiden Lane. Stopping to buy 
a new commutation ticket at the 
Pneumatique, he passed the time 
with Biddy MacNaughton, Esper 
3, on duty at the Information 
Desk. Biddy passed Fred the 
word about Barbara D'Courtney 
and Fred memorized the TP picture she flashed him. It was a 
picture framed in dollar signs. 

On Friday morning, Lonzo 
(Snim ) Whittmaker was awakened by his landlady, Chooka 
Frood, with a loud scream for 
back rent. 

"You already makin' a fnibby 
fortune with 'at loopy yella-head 
girl you pick up," Snim complained. "You runnin' a golmine 
withat spook stuff downinna 
basement. Whaddya want from 
me?" 

Chooka Frood pointed out to 
Snim that the yellow-headed girl 
was not crazy. She was a genuine 
medium. Chooka did not run 
rackets: she was a legitimate fortuneteller. If Snim did not come 
through with six weeks roof and 
rolls, Chooka would be able to 
tell his fortune without any 
trouble at all. Snim would be 
out on the asphalt. 

Snim arose. Already dressed, 
he descended into the city to get 
h imself crowned . He inspected 
the charity stands he had set up 



130 




 



on various corners . . . small steel 
coffers with slots in the top and 
signs on the side that read: end 

STARVATION ON CALUSTO. This was 

Snim's private charity and not 
very profitable. The coffers were 
empty. 

It was too early to run up 
to Quizzard's and work the sob 
on the more prosperous clients, 
and anyway there had been that 
tattoo difficulty with Keno. Snim 
touched his new ear delicately 
and tried to sneak a ride uptown 
on the Pneumatique. He was 
thrown out by the peeper change 
clerk and walked. It was a long 
haul to Jerry Church's hockshop, 
but Snim had a gold and pearl 
pocket-pianino up there and he 
was hoping to cadge Church into 
advancing another sovereign on 
It He had to get himself crowned 
today. 

Church was absent on business 
and the clerk could do nothing 
for Snim. Snim told the sob to 
the clerk about hi£ landlady 
crowning herself every day with 
the new spook-shill she was using 
in her palm-racket and still trying 
to milk him when she was rolling. 
The clerk would not weep even 
for the price of coffee. Snim departed. 

When Jerry Church returned 
to the hockshop for a brief timeout in his wild quest for Reich, 
the clerk reported Snim's visit 
and conversation. What the clerk 
did not report, Church peeped. 



He tottered to the phone and 
called Reich. Reich could not be 
located. Church called Keno 
Quizzard. 

Meanwhile, Snim was growing 
a little desperate. He trudged 
downtown to Maiden Lane and 
cased the banks in that pleasant 
esplanade around Bomb Inlet. He 
was not too bright and made the 
mistake of selecting the Mars 
Exchange for a con. It looked 
dowdy and provincial. Snim had 
not learned that it is only the 
powerful and efficient institutions 
that can afford to look secondrate. 

Snim entered the bank, crossed 
the crowded main floor to the row 
of desks opposite the tellers* 
cages, and stole a handful of deposit slips and a pen. As Snim 
left the bank, Fred Deal glanced 
at him once, motioned wearily to 
his staff, then pointed to Snim 
who was disappearing through the 
front door. 

"He's getting ready to pull the 
'Adjustment' routine. Let him go 
ahead with it. We'll pick him up 
after he's got the money and get 
a conviction." 

Unaware of this, Snim lurked 
outside the bank, watching the 
tellers' cages closely. A citizen 
was making a big withdrawal at 
Cage Z. This was the fish. Snim 
hastily removed his jacket, rolled 
up his sleeves and tucked the pen 
in his ear. As the fish came out 
of the bank, counting his money, 



THE DEMOLISHED MAN 



131 



Snim slipped behind him, darted 
up and tapped the man's 
shoulder. 

"Excuse me, sir," he said 
briskly. "I'm from Cage Z. I'm 
afraid our teller made a mistake 
and shortcounted you. Will you 
come back for the adjustment, 
please?'' 

Snim waved his sheaf of slips, 
•swept the money from the fish's 
fins and turned to enter the bank. 
As the surprised citizen followed 
him, Snim slipped into the crowd 
and headed for the side exit. He 
would be out and away before 
the fish realized he'd been skinned. 

It was at this moment that a 
rough hand grasped Snim's neck. 
He was swung around face to face 
with a bank guard. In one chaotic 
instant, Snim contemplated fight, 
flight, bribery, pleas, Kingston 
Hospital, the bitch Chooka Frood 
and her yellow-headed ghost girl, 
his pocket-pianino and a man 
named Strenn who owned it. 
Then he collapsed and wept. 

The guard flung him to another 
uniform and shouted: "Take him, 
boys. I've just made myself a 
mint!" 

"Is there a reward for this little 
guy, Fred?" 

"Not for him. For what's in his 
head. I've got to call the Guild." 

At nearly the same moment 
late Friday afternoon. Ben Reich 
and Preston Powell received the 
identical information: 



"i;ir! answering ■<> ihr description 
of Itiirtinra D'Courtnc? can lie found 
in Chooka Freed*! Fortune Art. 99 
Button W«i Side/ 1 

X 

FAMOUS last bulwark in the 
Siege of New York, Bastion 
West Side was a war memorial. 
Its ten torn acres were to have 
been maintained in perpetuity as 
a denunciation of the insanity 
that produced the final war. But 
the final war, as usual, proved to 
be the next-to-the final. Number 
99 was an evicerated ceramics 
plant. A succession of blazing explosions had burst among the 
stock of thousands of chemical 
glazes, fused them, and splashed 
them into a wild splotchy reproduction of a Lunar crater. This 
was the Rainbow House of 
Chooka Frood. 

The top floors had been patched 
and subdivided into a warren of 
cells so complicated and confused that a man could slip from 
cell to cell while the floors were 
being searched, and easily evade 
the most painstaking cordon. 
This unusual complexity netted 
Chooka large profits each year. 

The lower floors were given 
over to Chooka's famous Frab 
Joint, where vice was served to 
order, either grossly or subtly. 

But the cellar of Chooka 
Frood's house was the phenomenon that had inspired her most 
lucrative industry. It was worth 



13? 




 



the hazardous trip to Bastion 
West Side. You threaded your 
way through twisting streets until you reached the streak of 
jagged orange that pointed to the 
door of Chooka's Rainbow House. 
At the door you were met by an 
obscenely solemn person in XXth 
Century formal costume who 
asked: "Frab or Fortune?" You 
replied "Fortune" and were conducted to a sepulchral door where 
you paid a gigantic fee and were 
handed a phosphor candle. Holding the candle aloft, you walked 
down a deep stone staircase. 

Around the rim of the cellar, 
on stone benches, sat the other 
future-seekers, each holding his 
phosphor candle. You joined the 
throbbing, burning silence and 
sat quietly, your candle joining 
the constellation of stars, until at 
last there came the high chime of 
a silver bell. 

Clothed in a cascade of flaming 
music, Chooka Frood entered the 
cellar and paced to the center of 
the floor. 

■ "And there, of course, the illusion ends," Powell said to himself. 
Hf stored at Chooka's not^to 
no^e. flat eyes. "Maybe she can 
act." he muttered nop?f»'U'. 

Chooka stopped in the mMd'e 
o( t li e floor, loo'-'"^ mu?'i Wke a 
frpwsy Medusa, then lifted her 



"I am come here to you," 



Chooka intoned in a hoarse 
voice, "to help you look into the 
deeps of your hearts. Look dawn 
into your hearts, you which are 
looking for revenge on a man 
named Zerlan from Mars . . . 
for the love of a red -eyed woman 
of Callisto ... for the wealth of 
that stingy uncle in Paris . . . *" 

"Why, damn me! The woman's 
a peeper!" 

Chooka stiffened. Her mouth 
hung open. 

"Kou're receiving me, * aren't 
you, Chooka Frood?" 

The answer came in frightened 
fragments. It was obvious that 
Chooka Flood's natural ability 
had never been trained. "Who? 

Which is . . . your" 

As carefully as if he were communicating with an infant 3rd, 
Powell soelled it out: "Name — 
Preston Powell. Occupation — Police Prefect. Intent — to question 
a girl named Barbara D'Courtney. 
I have heard she's participating 
in your act." Powell transmitted 
a picture of the girl. 

It was pathetic the way Chooka 
tried to block. "Get . . . our.' Out 
of here!" 

"Why haven t you come to tha 
Gtff'M 9 Why aren't you in contact 
with vot'r own o°(in/«?" 

"Ge.Wim peeper. Get out." 

"You're a godi^m peeper, too. 
Why .' yvmn't you lot us train you? 
Whtti ' : -"J of lif* h thin for vou? 
Th<* work waiting for 

you, Cl.jjka." 



THE DEMOLISHED MAN 



"Real money?" 

Powell repressed the wave of 
exasperation that rose up in him. 
It was not exasperation with 
Chooka. It was anger at the relentless force of progress and evolution that insisted on endowing 
man with increased powers without removing the vestigial vices 
that prevented him from using 
them. 

"We'll talk about that later, 
Chooka. Where's the girl?" 

"There is no girl." 

"Peep the customers with me. 
That old goat obsessed with the 
red-eyed woman ..." Powell explored gently. "He's been here 
before. He's waiting for Barbara 
D'Courtney to come in. You dress 
her in sequins. You bring her on 
after about half an hour. He likes 
her looks. She does some kind of 
trance routine to music. Her dress 
is slit open to the thigh and he 
likes that." 

"He's crazy. I never — " 

"And the woman who was 
loused by a man named Zerlan? 
She's seen the girl often, believes 
in her. Where's the girl, Chooka?" 

"No.'" 

"I see. Upstairs. Where upstairs, Chooka? You can't misdirect a lsf. Maybe if you'd let 
the Guild train you — fourth 
room on the left of the angle 
turn. That's a complicated labyrinth you've got up there, Chooka. 
Let's have it once again to make 
sure . . 



Helpless and mortified, Chooka 
suddenly shrieked: "Get out of 
here, you lousy cop!" 

"Excuse it, please," said Powell. 
"I'm on my way." 

He arose and left the room. 

rw^HAT entire investigation occurred within the second it 
took Reich to step from the 
eighteenth to the nineteenth step 
on his way down to Chooka 
Frood's rainbow cellar. Reich 
heard Chooka's " furious screech 
and Powell's reply. He turned and 
shot up the stairs to the main 
floor. 

As he jostled past the door attendant, he thrust a sover< ign 
into the man's hand and hissed: 
"I wasn't here. Understand?" 

•"No one is ever here, sir." 

He made a quick circuit of the 
Frab rooms. Tension, apprehension and dissension have begun. 
He brushed by the girls and 
other creatures who solicited him, 
then locked himself into the 
phone booth and punched BD12,232. Church's anxious face appeared on the screen. 

"We*re in a jam. Powell's here." 

"Oh, my God!" 

"Where in hell is Quizzard?" 

"I thought he'd be there." 

"Powell was in the cellar, peeping Chooka. You can bet Quizzard wasn't there. Where in hell 
is he?" 

"I don't know, Ben. He went 
down with his wife and — " 



134 




 



"Powell must have located the 
girl. I've got maybe five minutes 
to beat him to her. Quizzard was 
supposed to do that for me." 

"He must be upstairs in the 
coop." 

"Is there a quick way to get 
up to the coop? A shortcut I 
can use to beat Powell to her?" 

"If Powell peeped Chooka, he 
peeped the shortcut." 

"Maybe he didn't. Maybe he 
was concentrating on the girl. It's 
a chance I'll have to take." 

"Behind the main stairs. 
There's a marble bas-relief. Turn 
the woman's head to the right. 
The bodies separate and there's 
a door to a vertical pneurnatique." 

Reich hung up, left the booth, 
found the bas-relief, twisted the 
woman's head savagely and 
watched the bodies swing apart. 
A steel door appeared. He yanked 
the door open and stepped into 
the open shaft. Instantly a metal 
plate jolted up against his soles 
and with a hiss of air pressure 
he was lofted to the top floor. A 
magnetic catch held the plate 
while he opened the shaft door 
and stepped out of the pneurnatique. 

He found himself in a corridor 
that slanted up at an angle of 
thirty degrees and leaned to the 
left. It was floored with canvas. 
The ceiling glowed at intervals 
with small flickering globes of 
radon. The walls were lined with 
doors, none of them numbered. 



"Quizzard!" Reich shouted. 
, There was no answer. 

Reich ran halfway up the corridor, and then at a venture tried 
a door. It opened to a narrow 
cubby entirely filled with an oval 
bed. Reich crawled across the 
foam mattress to a door on the 
opposite side, thrust it open and 
fell through. He found himself on 
a landing. A flight of steps led 
down to a round anteroom 
rimmed with doors. 

"Quizzard!" he shouted again. 

There was a muffled reply. 
Reich spun on his heels, ran to 
a door and pulled it open. A 
woman with eyes dyed red by 
plastic surgery was standing just 
inside and Reich blundered 
against her. She burst into unaccountable laughter. Reich 
backed away, reached for the 
door, apparently missed it and 
seized the knob of another, for 
he did not come out into the circular foyer. 

He found himself staring up 
into the angry face of Chooka 
Frood. 

"What the hell are you doing 
in my room?" Chooka screamed. 

Reich shot to his feet. "Where 
is she?" 

"Get out of here, Ben Reich.'* 

"Barbara D'Courtney — where 
is she?" 

Chooka turned her head and 
yelled: "Magda!" 

The red-eyed woman came into 
the room. She held a TP scram


THE DEMOLISHED MAN 



135 



bier in her hand and she was still 
laughing; but the gun was trained 
on his skull 

"I want the girl, Chooka, before Powell gets her." 

"Get him out of here, Magda!" 

Reich clubbed the woman 
across the eyes with the back of 
his hand. She fell backward, 
dropping the gun, and into a 
corner, still laughing. Reich ignored her. He picked up the 
scrambler and aimed it at 
Cliouka's temple. 

"Where's the girl?" 

"You go to hell!" 

Reich pulled the trigger back 
into first notch. The radiation 
charged Chooka's nervous system with a low induction current. 
She stiffened and began to tremble, but she still shook her head. 
Reich yanked the trigger back 
to second notch. Chooka's body 
was thrown into a break-bone 
ague. 

"Third notch is death notch," 
he growled. "Where is she?" 

Chooka was almost completely 
paralyzed. "Through . . . door," 
she croaked. "Fourth room . . . 
left . . . after turn." 

Reich dropped her and let her 
fall in a heap alongside the laughing red-eyed woman. He ran out 
of the bedroom, came to a corkscrewed ramp. He mounted it, 
took a sharp turn, stopped at the 
fourth room on the left. He thrust 
open the door and entered. There 
was an empty bed, a single 



dresser, an empty closet, a single 

chair. 

"Gulled!" he snarled. 

The bed showed no sign of use. 
Neither did the closet. He yanked 
at a dresser drawer that was 
partly open. It contained a frost 
white silk gown and a stained 
steel object that looked like a 
malignant flower. It was the murder weapon. 

"My God!" Reich breathed. 

He snatched up the gun and 
inspected it. Its chambers, still 
contained the cartridges without 
slugs. The one that had blown 
the top of Craye D'Courtney's 
head out was still in place under 
the hammer. 

"It isn't Demolition yet. 1 ' Reich 
muttered. "Not by a da:vtncd 
sight." He folded up the revolver 
and thrust it into his pocket. At 
that moment he heard a distant clabbered laugh. Quizzard's 
laugh. 

Reich stepped quickly to the 
twisted ramp and followed the 
sound of the laughter to a plush 
door hung on brass hinges and 
set deep in the wall. Gripping the 
scrambler at the alert with the 
trigger set for Death Notch, 
Reich pulled open the door. 

He was in a small round room, 
walled and ceilinged in midnight 
velvet. The floor was a one- way 
mirror that gave a clear uninterrupted view of a boudoir on the 
floor below. It was Chooka's 
Voytur Chamber. 



136 




 




chair with the girl in his arms, 
his blind eyes staring, Reich 
came to the appalled conclusion 
that the woman's fall was no accident; for Quizzard suddenly 
dropped. The girl tumbled out 
of his arms and fell into the chair. 

There was no doubt that Powell had accomplished this on a 
TP level, and for the first time 
in their war Reich was physically 
afraid. Again he aimed the scrambler, this time at Powell's head 
as the peeper walked to the chair, 

Powell said, "Are you all right, 
Miss D'Courtney?" When the girl 
failed to answer, he bent down 
and stared into her blank, placid 
face. He touched her arm and 



In the boudoir, Quizzard sat in 
a deep chair, his blind eyes blazing. The D'Courtney girl was 
perched on his lap, wearing an 
astonishing slit gown of sequins, 
evidently the costume the girl 
wore for Chooka's fortune act. 
She sat quietly, her yellow hair 
smooth, her deep dark eyes staring placidly into space. 

"How does she look?" Quizzard 
asked a small faded woman who 
stood across the boudoir from 
him, with her back against the 
wall and an incredible expression 
of agony on her face. It was 
Quizzard's wife. 

"Lost," his wife answered in a 
faint voice. "Dead." 

Quizzard fumbled for the girl's 
head and drew it down. He kissed 
her passive mouth. 

"She doesn't took dead now, 
does she?" 

"She doesn't know what's happening." 

"She knows," Quizzard shouted. 
"She isn't that far gone. If I only 
had my eyes!" 

''I'm your eye^, Keno." 

"Then look for me. Tell m< !" 

Reich cursed and aimed the 
scrambler at Quizzard's head. 
Then Powell entered the boudoir. 
The woman saw him at once. 

"Run, Keno! Run!" 

She thrust herself from the wall 
and darted toward Powell, her 
hands clawing for his eyes. Then 
she fell prone and never moved. 
As Quizzard surged up from the 



THE DEMOLISHED MAN 



137 



repeated: "Are you all right? Do 
you need help?" 

At the word "help" the girl 
whipped upright in the chair in 
a listening attitude. Then she 
thrust out her legs and leaped 
from the chair. She ran past Powell in a straight line, stopped 
abruptly and reached out as 
though grasping a doorknob. She 
thrust an imaginary door open 
and burst forward, yellow hair 
flying, dark eyes wide with alarm 
... a lightning flash of wild 
beauty. 

"Father!" she screamed. "For 
God's sake! Father!" 

She ran forward, stopped short 
and backed away. She darted to 
the left, stopped and struggled 
with imaginary arms that held 
her. She fought and screamed, her 
eyes still fixed, then stiffened and 
clapped her hands to her ears as 
though a violent sound had 
pierced them. She fell forward to 
her knees and crawled.. Then she 
stopped, snatched at something 
on the floor, and remained 
crouched on her knees. 

With sickening certainty. Reich 
knew she had relived the death 
of her father. She had relived it 
for Powell. And if he had peeped 
her ... 

Powell went to the girl and 
raised her from the floor. She 
arose as gracefully as a dancer, 
as serenely as a somnambulist. 
The peeper put his arm around 
her and took her to the door. 



Reich followed him all the way 
with the muzzle of the scrambler, 
waiting for the best shooting 
angle. He was invisible. He, could 
win safety with a shot. Powell 
opened the door, then suddenly 
looked up. 

"Go ahead." Powell called. 
"One shot for the both of us. 
Go ahead!" He stared up at the 
invisible Reich, waiting, hating, 
daring. 

Reich turned his face away 
from the man who could not see 
him. 

Powell took the docile girl 
through the door and closed it 
quietly behind him, and Reich 
knew he had permitted safety to 
slip through his fingers. 

XT 

CONCEIVE of a camera with 
a lens distorted so that it 
can only photograph over and 
over the scene that twisted it into 
shock. Conceive of a bit of recording crystal, traumatically warped 
so that it can only hear the same 
terrifying phrase. 

"She's in hysterical recall," Dr. 
Johnny Jeems of Kingston Hospital explained to Powell and 
Mary Noyes in the living room of 
Powell's house, "She responds to 
the key word 'help' and relives 
one experience ..." 

"The death of her father," Powell said, 

"Oh? I see. Outside of that 



138 



GAIAXY SCIENCE FICTION 



t . . catatonia." 

"Permanent?" Mary Noyes 
asked. 

Jecms looked surprised and indignant. He was one of the 
brighter young men of Kingston 
Hospital and fanatically devoted 
to his work. "In this day and age? 
Nothing is permanent except 
death, Miss Noyes, and up at 
Kingston we've started working 
on that. Investigating death from 
the nosogenic point of view, we've 
actually — " 

"Later, Johnny," Powell interrupted. "No lectures tonight. Can 
I peep her?" 

Jeems considered. "No reason 
why not. I gave her the Deja 
Eprouve Series for catatonia. 
That shouldn't get in the way." 

"What's the Deja Eprouve 
Series?" Mary asked. 

"A gr< at new treatment," Jeems 
said excitedly. "Patient goes into 
catatonia. It's flight from reality. 
The conscious mind wishes it had 
(fever been born. It attempts to 
revert back to the foetal stage. 
You understand?" 

Mary nodded. "So far." 

"We use Deja Eprouve. That's 
psychiatric French for 'something already experienced, already tried.* Many patients, on 
the basis of the wish, feel that an 
act of experience in which they 
never engaged has happened. We 
synthesize this Deja Eprouve for 
the patient. We send the conscious mind back to the womb 



and let it pretend it's being born 
all over again. We- make the catatonic wish come true. Got that?" 
"Got it." 

"On the surface, consciously, 
the patient goes through development all over again at an accelerated rate . . infancy, 
childhood, adolescence and finally maturity." 

"You mean Barbara D'Courtney is going to be a baby, learn 
to speak, walk?" 

"Right. Takes about three 
weeks. By the time she catches 
up with herself, she'll be ready to 
accept the reality she's trying to 
escape. She'll have grown up 
to jt, so to speak. This Is only on 
the conscious level. Below that, 
she won't be touched. You can 
peep her all you like. Only 
trouble is she must be pretty 
scared down there. You'll have 
trouble getting what you want. 
Of course, that's your specialty. 
You'll know what to do." 

Jeems stood up abruptly. "Got 
to get back to the shop." He made 
for the front door. "Always delighted to be called in by peepers. 
I can't understand the recent hostility toward you people . . . "' 
He was gone. 

"That was a significant parting note." 

"What'd he mean, Pres. 3 " 

"Peepers haven't been dning 
business with enough normals, 
We keep to ourselves too much. 
That starts economic pressures 



THE DEMOLISHED MAN 



139 



and prejudices. Have to bring 
that up in Council later. Bring 
Barbara down, Mary." 

Mary brought the girl downstairs and seated her on the low 
severe dais. (Powell had recently 
reconverted his decor to XXth 
Century Swedish.) Barbara sat 
like a calm statue. Mary had 
dressed her in blue leotards and 
combed her blonde hair back, 
tying it into a fox-tail with a blue 
ribbon. 

"Lovely outside; mangled inside. Damn Reich!" 

"What about him?" 

"I was so mad at Chooka 
Frood's coop, I handed it to that 
red slug Quizzard and his wife." 

"What did you do to Quizxard?" 

"Basic neuro-shock. Come up 
to the Lab sometime and we'll 
show you. If you make 1st, we'll 
teach you. It's like the scrambler, 
but psychogenic." 

"Fatal?" 

"Forgotten the Pledge? Of 
course not." 

"And you peeped Reich through 
the floor? How?" 

"TP reflection. The Voyeur 
Chamber wasn't wired for sound. 
It had open acoustical ducts. 
Reich's mistake. He was transmitting down the channel and I 
swear I was hoping he had the 
gut- to shoot. I was going to blast 
hit •vith a Basic that would have 
m?"~' ■ case history." 

"Why didn't he shoot?" 



"He had every reason to kill 
us. He thought he was safe, didn't 
know about the Basic, even 
though Quizzard's Decline & Fall 
jolted him. But he couldn't." 

"Afraid?" 

"Reich's no coward. He just 
couldn't. Unconscious inhibition 
of some sort, but I don't know 
what. Maybe next time it'll be 
different. That's why I'm keeping 
Barbara D'Courtney in my 
house. This is one place where 
she'll be safe." 

"She'll be safe in Kingston 
Hospital." 

"But not quiet enough for the 
work Vve got to do." 

"•/>" 

"She's got the detailed picture 
of the murder locked up in her 
hysteria. When I've got it, I've 
got Reich" 

Mary arose. "Exit Mary 
Noyes." 

"Sit down, peeper! Why d'you 
think I called you?" 

"No, you don't Mr. Powell." 
Mary burst into laughter. "So 
that's it. You want me for a chaperone. Victorian word, isn't? So 
are you, Pres. Positively atavistic." 

"I brand that as a He. I'm 
known as the most progressive — " 

"And what's that im^ge? 
Knights of the Round Table. Sir 
Galahad Powell. And there's 
sametliing underneath that. I — " 
Suddenly she stopped laughing 
and turned pale. 



14* 




 



"What'd you dig?" 

"Forget it, Pres. And don't 
peep me for it. If you can't reach 
it yourself, you'd better not get 

it second-hand. Especially from 
me." 

He looked at her curiously for 
a moment. "All right, Mary. Then 
we'd better go to work." To Barbara D'Courtney he said : "Help, 
Barbara." 

Instantly she whipped upright 
on the dais in a listening attitude, and he probed delicately 
. . . Sensation of bedclothes . . . 
Voice calling dimly . , . "Whose 
voice, Barbara?" Deep in the 
preconscious she answered : "Who 
is that?" "A friend, Barbara." 
"There's no one. No one. I'm 
alone." And she was alone, racing 
down a corridor to thrust a door 
open and burst into an orchid 
room to see — "What, Barbara?" 
"A man. Two men." "Who?" "Go 
away. Please go away. I don't 
like voices. There's a voice 
screaming in my ears ..." 

She was screaming while terror 
made her dodge from a dim figure 
that clutched at her to keep her 
from her father. "What is your 
father doing, Barbara?" "He — ■ 
no. you don't belong here. There's 
only the three of us. Father and 
me and — " A flash of the face. 
"Look again, Barbara. Sleek 
head. Wide eyes. Small straight 
nose. Small sensitive mouth. Like 
a scar. Is that the man? Look at 
the picture. Is that the man?" 



"Yes. Yes." And then all waS 
gone. 

She was kneeling again, placid, 
doll-like. 

Powell wiped perspiration from 
his face and took the girl back 
to the dais. Hysteria cushioned 
the emotional impact for her, He 
was reliving her terror, naked 
and unprotected. 

"It was Ben Reich, Mary. Did 
you get the picture, too?" 

"Couldn't stay in long enough, 
Pres. Had to run for cover." 

"It was Reich, all right. Only 
question is, how in hell did he 
kill her father? What did he use? 
Why didn't old D'Courtney put 
up a fight to defend himself? 
Have to try again. I hate to do 
this to her ..." 

"/ hare you to do this to yourself. Pres." 

"Have to." He took a deep 
breath and said : "Help. Barbara." 

Again she whipped upright on 
the dais in a listening attitude. 
"Not so fast. There's plenty of 
time." "You again?" "Remember 
me, Barbara?" "No, I don't know 
you. Get out." "But I'm part of 
you, Barbara. We're running 
down the corridor together. See? 
We're opening the door together. 
It's so much easier together. We 
help each other." "We?" "Yes, 
Barbara, you and I. When you 
talk to yourself when you're 
alone, you talk to me. That's who 
I am." "Look at father! For pity's 



THE DEMOLISHED MAN 



141 



Sake, help me!" 

She knelt again, placid, dolllike. 

Powell felt a hand under his 
arm and realized he was not supposed to be kneeling too. The 
body before him slowly disappeared, the orchid room disappeared; and Mary Noyes was 
straining to raise him. 

"You first this time," she said 
grimly. He shook his head. "All 
right, Sir Galahad. Cool a while." 

Mary raised the girl and led 
her to the dais. Then she returned to Powell. "Ready for help 
now, or don't you think it's 
manly?" 

"The word is virile. Don't waste 
your time trying to help me up. 
I need brain power." 

"What'd you peep?" 

"D'Courtney wanted to be murdered." 

"The hell you say!" 

"The hell I don't. I've got to 
see D'Courtney's M.D, first thing 
in the morning." 

SAM @kins, E.M.D. 1, received 
$1,000 per hour of analysis, 
two million dollars per year, but 
Sam was efficiently killing himself with charity work. He was 
one of the burning lights of the 
Guild's long-range education plan, 
and leader of the Environment 
Clique which believed that telepathic ability was not a congenital characteristic, but a latent 
quality which could be developed 



by suitable training. 

He invited everyone in the low 
income brackets to bring their 
problems to him, and while he 
was ironing them out he was carefully attempting to foster telepathy in his patients. So far, 
the results had been the discovery 
of 2% Latent Espers, which was 
under the average of the Guild 
Institute interviews, but Sam was 
undiscouraged. 

Powell found him charging 
through the garden, vigorously 
destroying flowers under the impression that he was cultivating. 
He was snorting and shouting 
at plants and patients alike. 

"Damn it, don't you tell me 
that's a zinnia. Don't I know a 
weed when I see it? Hand me 
the rake, Bernard." 

A small man in black handed 
him the rake and said : "My name 
is Walter, Dr. @kins." 

@kins grunted, tearing out a 
clump of green that was neither 
weed nor zinnia, but marigold. 
"Why in hell are you running 
away from Bernard? Who taught 
you that semantic loophole?" 

"I was hoping you'd tell me, 
Dr. @kins," Walter replied. 

"You remind me of Alice 
Bright. Where is that makebelieve slut anyway?" 

A pretty red-headed girl jostled 
through the crowd and smirked; 
"Here I am, Dr. @kins." 

"Well, don't preen yourself because I called you a name." @kins, 



Ul 



GAIAXY SCIENCE FICTION 



frowned at her and continued on 
the TP level: "'I'm a woman,' 
you tell yourself. 'Therefore, men 
desire me. It's enough to know 
that thousands of men could have 
me if I'd let them. That makes 
me real.' Well, it doesn't. It's no 
substitute for living — nothing is." 

(ffikins waited impatiently for a 
response, but the girl merely postured before him. Finally he burst 
out: "Didn't any of you hear 
what I told her?'' 

"I did, teacher." 

"Oh, you. Hi, Pres. How about 
this crowd of dead heads? Too 
lazy to peep a simple question." 

"Lay off that plant, Sam. It's 
a tomato." 

"It's a weed." 

"Sam, you busted botany our 
first year. I'm telling you it's 
tomato." Powell turned to The patients. "What kind of plant is 
that?" 

"Tomato." they said. 

Sam pulled it up. "I'm allergic 
to tomatoes." he announced with 
an air of having had the final 
word. "What's on your mind, 
Pres?" 

"When you get a chance I'd 
like to ask a couple of questions 
about a dead patient." 

"Who?" 

"D'Courtney. Our Mr. Peetcy 
is very curious about him." 

"Oh. Give me another half hour 
with my flock. Say, young Chervils here, waiting to see me too. 
Anything wrong in the family? 



He seemed real upset. Go talk to 
him." 

Powell let out a blast: "CHERVIL!" 

One of Skins' flock flinched and 
Sam turned on the man excitedly. 
"You heard that, didn't you, 
Hopkins?" 

"No, sir. I didn't hear nothing." 

"Then why did you jump?" 

"A bug bit me." 

"It did not!" "kins roared. 
"There are no bugs in my garden. 
You heard Mr. Powell." 

Young Gaily Chervil answered 
from the house and Powell left 
the garden, tf'kins yelled after 
him: "Powell, you've discovered 
the answer. We've got to yell loud 
enough for these lazybones." And 
then he began a frightful rn-'tet: 
"YOU CAN ALL HEAR MB. 
DON'T SAY YOU CAN'T." 

Powell found young Gaily pacing distractedly before the F-^nch 
windows facing the garden. He 
looked up gloomily. "Hi, Mr. 
Powell." 

"Pip. Gaily." 

"Pop, Mr. Powell. Also Bim, 
Bam and (censored)." 

From the garden Skins complained : "Stop broaden rmg. 
You're jamming the band. T~>1k" 

Powell grinned. "How you iixed 
for words. Gaily?" 

"They fail me." 

"Trouble?" 

Gaily nodded. '*YaM belie * Dr. 
fokins?" 

"Not about flowers." 



THE DEMOLISHED MAN 



M3 



"I mean his Idea about everybody being an Esper." 

"We'd all like to believe him. 
He hasn't convinced anybody 
yet." 

"He's got to be right," Gaily 
muttered. "That girl I met at the 
Beaumont party the night 
D'Courtney was killed — " 

"Duffy Wyg&? What about 
her?" 

Gaily burst out: "I'm going to 
marry her." 

"Oh? She isn't a peeper." 

"Dr. @kins says everybody is." 

"Moral support, eh?" 

"Are you against it, Mr. Powell?" 

"The Guild is, Gaily. You know 
why. Sam„@kins is wrong. Guild 
stat : tics show that when peepers 
marry non-peepers, few of their 
children are peepers. It's like 
blue eyes ... a recessive inherited 
characteristic. We can't take a 
chance on losing it." 

"That's the Guild answer, Mr. 
Powell, but I asked you. Are you 
against it?" 

"She's a lovely girl. Gaily. 
Sharp, smart, talented. That's 
why I'm against it." 

"That's why?" 

"For her sake, not yours. Peepers have marrbd outside. The 
marriages always fail because they 
ar * based on equality. Living 
with ?i peeper ma';es an outsider 
feel tippled. Duffy Wyg& would 
end un hating you, loathing herself; no longer sharp, smart, tal


ented, lovely. If you love her. 
Gaily, don't destroy her. Let her 
go." 

(akins came bouncing into the 
room. "It's a great discovery, 
Powell. Sensational. They heard 
me. My brains are hoarse, but, 
by God, they heard me," 

"How many specific responses 
did you get?" 

"Well, none, but that's because 
they're stubborn. Ashamed to be 
peepers. Now, Gaily, what's with 
you? Spit jt out. I've got a 
schedule." 

Young Chervil hesitated. The 
TP band crackled with blocks, 
releases and adjustments. Finally 
it came; "Nothing in particular, 
sir. Just a friendly call." 

"Friendly? Then why that expression, 3 " 

After Gaily had evaded the 
question and left, Powell painted 
the picture, (n'kins was properly 
apologetic, but unimpressed by 
Chervil's courage. Fifteen years 
of happy marriage make a man 
unsympathetic to the trials of 
callow romance. 

"He'll fall in love with a peeper 
and live happily ever after. Now 
what's with D'Courtney?" 

Powell presented the problem. 
Reich had definitely murdered 
D'Courtney. Powell did not know 
why or how; but one point was 
clear and perplexing and would 
have to be cleared up for Mr. 
Peetcy. Reich had thrust the murder weapon into D'Courtney's 



144 




 



mouth and blown out the back 
of his head with it. That was 
virtually impossible with the 
killer struggling with the daughter 
on one hand and the victim on 
the other . . . unless the victim 
was not trying to defend himself. 

"/ see. The answer is yes. He 
was probably happy to die." 
' How? Why?" 

"He was regressing under emotional exhaustion and on the verge 
ol suicide. He came here from 
his home on Mars only because I 
raised such a fuss that it was 
easier for him to give in Retch's 
little gift must have come as a 
welcome surprise" 

"Why was D'Courtney set on 
suicide?" 

"If I knew, he wouldn't have 
been. Reich turned my case into 
a failure. I could have saved 

Courtney." 

"You made any guesses why 
D'Courtney's pattern was crumbling?" 

"Yes. He was trying to take 
drastic action to escape a deep 
guilt." 

"Guilt about what?" 

"His child." 

"Barbara? How? Why?" 

"I don't know. He was fighting symbols of abandonment, desertion, shame, loathing, cowardice. We were J,oing to work 
on that That's all I know." 

"Could Reich have figured and 
counted on all this? That's some


thing Mr. Peetcy is going to fust 

about." 

"He might have guessed — impossible. He'd need expert help 
to—" 

"Hold it, Sam. You've got 
something hidden under that. I'd 
like to get it if I can ..." 

"Go ahead. I'm wide open." 

"Easy now . . . Association with 
festivity . . . Party . . . Conversation at my party. Last month. 
Gus T8. an expert himself, but 
needing help on a similar patient 
of his own, he said. If T8 needed 
help, you reasoned Reich certainly would need help." Powell 
was so upset he spoke aloud. 
"Well, how about that, peeper?" 

"How about what?" 

"Gus T8 was at the Beaumont 
party the night D'Courtney was 
killed He came with Reich, but 
I kept hoping — " 

"Pres. I don't believe Hf 

"Neither did I, but there it is. 
Little Gus was Reich's expert. 
He pumped you and turned it 
over to a killer. What price the 
Galen Pledge now?'* 

"What price Demolition?" 
@kiiM answered fiercely. 

From somewhere inside the 
house came an announcement 
from Snlly (Skins: "Pres. P'- -e.'* 

Powell loped down a h"" T oward the phone alcove. H' iw 
$$on's face on the screen. 

"Lucky I caught you, ' "ss. 
We've got six hours." 

"Take it from the top, $$on." 



THE DEMOLISHED MAN 



145 



"Your Rhodopsin man, Dr. 
Wilson %maine, is back from 
Callisto. Now a man of property 
by courtesy of Ben Reich. I came 
back with him. He's in town for 
six hours to settle his affairs, and 
then he rockets back to Callisto 
to live on his new estate forever." 

"Damn this phone. Who can 
get a picture with words? Will 
J^maine talk?" 

"Would I call you if he would? 
He's grateful to Reich who (I 
am now quoting) generously 
stepped out of the legal picture 
in favor of Dr. %maine and 
justice. If you want anything, 
bring your grapnel." 

" A ND this," Powell said, "is 
■** our Guild Laboratory, Dr. 
^maine." 

%maine was impressed. The 
entire top floor of the Guild building was devoted to laboratory 
research. It was a circular floor, 
almost a thousand feet in diameter, domed with a double 
layer of controlled quartz that 
could give graded illumination 
from full to total darkness, including monochrome light to 
within one-tenth of an angstrom. 

"I haven't much time, Mr. 
Powell," %maine said. 

"Of course not. Very kind of 
you to give us an hour. That may 
be enough for you to help us." 

"Anything to do with D'Courtney?" i^maine asked. 

"Who? Oh, the murder. What


ever put that into your mind?" 

"I've been hounded," J^maine 
said grimly. 

"We're asking for research 
guidance, not information on a 
murder case. What's murder to 
a scientist?" 

J^maine relaxed a little. "Very 
true. You have only to look at 
this laboratory to realize that. 
And I won't be peeped?" 

"Dr. ^maine," Powell said in 
hurt tones. "I gave you the word 
of a scientist." 

"Of course." %maine pointed 
to a bench. "What's all that? 
Symbiosis?" 

"Let's have a look, shall wc?" 
Powell took %maine's arm. To 
the entire laboratory he broadcast: "Stand by, peepers! Here's 
a guy that's got to be buttered. 
He specializes in visual physiology and he's got information ! 
wetnt him to volunteer. Kindly 
fake all kinds obscure-type visual* 
problems and beg for help." 

They came by in droves. A researcher, actually working on a 
problem of a transitor which 
would record the TP impulse, 
hastily invented the fact that TP 
transmission was monochrome 
and humbly requested enlightenment. A pair of pretty girls, engrossed in the infuriating deadend of long-range telepathic 
transmission, demanded of Dr. 
%maine why transmission of visual images always fell off ten 
angstroms, which it did not. The 



140 




 



Japanese team, experts on the 
Galen Node, center of TP perceptivity, insisted that the Galen 
Node was in circuit with the Optic Synapse (it wasn't within two 
centimeters of same) and besieged Dr. %maine with specious 
proofs. 

At 1 :00 p. m., Powell said : "I'm 
sorry to interrupt, but your hour 
is finished and you've got important business to — " 

"Quite all right." %maine interrupted. "Now, my dear doctor, if you would try a transec-. 
tio'n of the optic — " 

At 2:00, a buffet luncheon was 
served without interrupting the 
feast of reason. Dr. %maine, 
flushed and ecstatic, confessed 
that he loathed the idea of being 
rich on Callisto. No scientists 
there. He also confided to Powell 
how he had inherited his estate. 
Seemed that Craye D'Courtney 
originally owned it. The old Reich 
(Ben's father) must have swindled it one way or another, and 
placed it in his wife's name. 
When she died, it went to her son. 
Ben Reich must have had conscience qualms, for he threw . it 
into open court, and Wilson 
J4maine somehow came up with 
it. 

"And he must have plenty more 
on his conscience," %maine said. 
"The things I saw when I worked 
for him! But all these financiers 
arc crooks. You agree?" 

"I disagree about Ben Reich," 



Powell replied, striking the noble 
note. "I admire him very much," 

"Of course," %maine agreed 
hastily. "After all, he does have 
a conscience." 

Powell became a fellow-conspirator and captivated J^mainc with 
a grin. "As fellow scientists we 
can deplore; but as men of the 
world we can only praise." 

"You do understand." J/^maine 
shook Powell's hand effusively. 

At 4:00, Dr. %maine informed 
the polite Japanese that he would 
gladly volunteer his most secret 
work on Visual Purple, in effect, 
handing on the torch to the next 
generation. His eyes moistened 
and his throat choked, with sentiment as he spent twenty minutes carefully describing the 
Rhodopsin Ionizer he had developed for Sacrament. 

At 5:00, the Guild scientists escorted Dr. %maine by launch to 
his Callisto rocket. They filled 
his stateroom with gifts and flowers; they filled his ears with 
grateful testimonials, and he took 
off with the pleasant conviction 
that he had materially benefited 
science and never betrayed that 
fine, generous patron, Mr. Benjamin Reich. 

T>ARBARA was in the living 
room on all fours, crawling 
energetically. She had just been 
fed and her face was eggy. 

"Hajaja," she said. "Haja." 

"Mary! Come quick! She's 



THE DEMOLISHED MAN 



147 



talking! Barbara's talking!" 

"No!" Mary ran in from the 
kitchen. "What'd she say?" 

"She called me dada." 

"Haja," said Barbara. 

Mary blasted him with scorn. 
"She said haja." She returned to 
the kitchen. 

"She meant dada. Is it her fault 
if she's too young to articulate?" 
Powell knelt alongside Barbara. 
"Say dada, baby. Dada?" 

"Haja," Barbara replied with 
an enchanting drool. 

Powell gave it up. He went 
down past the conscious level to 
the preconscious. 

"Hello, Barbara." 

"You again?" 

"Remember me? I'm the guy 
that pries into your private little 
turmoil down here. We fight it 
out together." 

"Just the two of us?" 

"Just the two of us. Do you 
know who you are? Would you 
like to know why you're buried 
way down here in this solitary 
existence?" 

"Tell me." 

"You were born. You had a 
mother and a father. You grew 
up into a lovely girl with blonde 
hair raid dark eyes and a graceful 
figure. You traveled from Mars 
to Earth with your father and 
you were — 

"No. There's no one but you." 

"I'm really sorry, but we must 
go through the agony again" 

"I don't know what you mean, 



but please . . . please !■ Just the 
two of us alone together in the 

darkness." 

"There was your father in th* 
other room, the orchid room, and 
suddenly we heard something 
..." Powell took a deep breath 
and cried: "Help, Barbara!" 

Sensation of bedclothes. Cool 
floor under running feet and the 
endless corridor until at last they 
burst through the door into the 
orchid room and screamed and 
dodged the startled grasp of Ben 
Reich while he raised something 
to Father's mouth. Raised what? 
Hold that image. Photograph it. 
Christ! That horrible muffled explosion. The worshipped figure 
crumpling unbelievably. They 
moaned and crawled across the 
floor to snatch a malignant steel 
flower from the waxen — 

Powell found himself dragged 
to his feet by Mary Noyes. The 
air was crackling with indignation. 

"Can't I leave you alone for a 
minute?" 

"What's the time, Mary?" 

"9:40. / came in and found you 
two kneeling there." Image of 
angry fists. 

"I know. But I got what I was 
after. It was a gun, Mary. Ancient explosive weapon. Clear picture. Take a look ..." 

"Where'd he get it? Museum?" 

"I don't think so. I'm going to 
play a long shot, kill two birds." 

Powell lurched to the phone and 



14a 




 



dialed BD-12,232. Presently, 
Jeremy Church's twisted face appeared on the screen. 
"Hi, Jerry." 

"Hello, Powell." Cautious. 
Guarded. 

"Did Gus T8 buy a gun from 
you, Jerry?" 

"Gun?" 

"Explosive weapon. XXth Century style. Used in the D'Courtney murder," 

"No!" 

"Yes! I think Gus T8 is our 
killer, Jerry. Mr. Peetcy thinks 
so too. I'd like to bring the picture of the gun over and check 
if he bought it from you." Powell 
hesitated and then stressed the 
next words gently: "It'd be a big 
help, Jerry, and I'll be extremely 
appreciative. Extremely. Wait for 
me. I'll be over in half an hour." 

Powell hung up. He looked at 
Mary. Image of an eye winking. 
"That ought to give little Gus 
time to hustle over.'" 

"Why Gus? When did Peetcy 
come up with that notion? I 
thought Ben Reich was — " She 
caught the picture Powell had 
sketched in at Skins' house. "I 
see. Church sold the gun to 
Reich." 

"Maybe. He does run a hockshop, and that's next thing to a 
museum." 

"So you're playing T8 and 
Church against each other." 

"And both against Reich. We've 
failed on the objective level. 



From here on it's got to be peeper 

tricks." 

"But suppose you can't play 
them against Reich. What if they 
call Reich in?" 

"They can't. We started Keno 
Quizzard running for his life, and 
Reich's out sdmewhere trying to 
cut him off and gag him." 

"You really are a thief, Pres!" 

"Why, thank you, Mary. That's 
a lovely compliment." 

XII 

HPHE pawnshop was in darkness. 

A single limited-radiation 
lamp burned on the counter, sending out its sphere of soft light to 
a radius of two feet. As the three 
men spoke, they leaned in and 
'out of the illumination. 

"No," Powell said sharply. 
"You two peepers may consider 
it an insult to have words addressed to you. I consider it evidence of good faith. While I'm 
talking, I'm not peeping." 

Not necessarily, T8 answered. 
His gnome face popped into the 
light. "You've been known to 
finesse, Powell." 

"Not now. What I want from 
you two, I want objectively. I'm 
working on a murder. Peeping 
isn't going to do me any good." 

"What do you want, Powell?" 
Church cut in. 

"I know you didn't sell the 
gun to Gus. You sold it to Ben 
Reich." 

T8's face came back into the 



THE DEMOLISHED MAN 



PAYS s 100°° 



*«^«5|B\F0R A DAY, A WEEK, A MONTH, A YEAR, 
OR EVEN FOR LIFE... 

tW** W ( I »t bol ^4.° oU ' D \ Wonderful news! This new policy coven everyone from infamy to *g* 

.pii^° [r.P --t't?» \ ^" — will' f'*' 1 benefit* so Surprising they should have mx.iui .ipnul 

Hoi" —eUlCS" * \ lor you. Tfcink of id When «iekr.ess i>. lendem n.ml, yo.no r!ie A.,,- 1 

-o'" 1 .*ftP* -CO* 1, v.cA P"* 1 ' ><™ wanl "''< <""" Fsmi| y Protection Plan. I( I'AYS 

pO^* Cn!W a \ ilOfl.OOPHrWEEK-fora.day, amonih, even ■ ye*», itiMt
•vfcHO*' iW Vl '°,^":,poo\ juslas long, infac(, as u's necessary 10 siay i.. (he h»* r il,il. Wli.il • 

I** * . ,1 i c6 .' ^Vif 4 -,ia\. \ n.-1'fi n.knuiv you and jmir ' in Hi could hiivc iliis I'ltll IB . 

4 J p i» ■ : ' ,w w jC i" 1 

ust {j&^Y 3?s A DAY 

^**V*V'*itfS«\ ls YOU PAY 

**y l «t***' *2 in )Tl 1 l) f,c °ljt^ > *'.ni' ^* C (tit , ^ ,t ^ft** 1 * 1 * 11 , \ 'P'° 18 W"i ibttotr ii only IVji . <Ij>- kn c.lIi iluhl: Maui
""Cffil ' 



iO' " \ "ON so thai precious savin;;! may Lie safeguarded and 
d going into debt! The money is paid direcily (O you.o-"" \ YOURS n> use and spend as you wish. No strings -much 
mpany pays you n-clconu: i'isk ivlicn yuu need il mos 



5 liin^ us hospitalization 
member of i Fie family may rem 
indent as many limesin th< 





 



Entirely New Kind of 

HOSPITAL PLAN 

A WEEK DIRECT TO YOU 



While in the Hospital for Sickne ss or Accident 



REMEMBER $100.00 A WEEK IS ACTUALLY $14.28 A DAY! 

Tills, cash benefit actually takes care of mow hospital room expense anywhere id 
the country . . , with probably money left over. Use the money ibis policy nays to 
help covet cosily hospital room and board, surgeon's and doctor's bills, nursing 
Care, hospital "eJirrss", arid what is left over will help pay you for the line lost 
from work or business. Members of your family fiom age IK to 70 receive the 
Cash bene'ii start ins; »'iih the lir.i tla) of tonlinemern in rhe hospital. This remarkable new Family Hospital Plan covers children under IS with cash benefits of 
•50.00 a weeir while in the hospital, for as long as (bey stay! Benefits paid Hi you 
when confined to any rccojrniwd hospital, except government hospitals, r?it 
homes an J sanitariums, dioiis, lifatth toons or spas. Y.iu pick your own doctor. 
Vour good lit,! I ill - and ttic- licihli ai itmr In mil y - is your mow pricelen poiseiu-m Hut it's plain common sense to be prepared should mfiforoin* strike. 

Examine this Policy Without Coil or Obligation Road It— Talk It Ovor— Than Decide 

10 DAYS FREE EXAMINATION 



will send the iciitil polic; 
'. Theti-ind only tl 



This is What $100" a Week 
Can Mean to You When in the 
Hospital for Sickness or Accident 

Money melts away fist when you or ■ 
member of your family has to go to the 



of saying what .. (.,. J. id,. K i 
CASH ULNl'll I Wil l HE TO VOl.'. 
Here's cash to go a lonji way toward 



.-sfndVo 'S'om5'-Ti*, THIS POLKY S9LB BY MAIL 









SERVIC 








 



light. "Then why'd you claim I 
bought it?** 

"To get you here for a talk, 
Gus." He turned toward Church. 
"You had the gun, Jerry. Reich 
came here for it. You did business together before. I haven't 
forgotten the Chaos Swindle ..." 

"Damn you!" Church shouted. 

"It swindled you out of the 
Guild," Powell continued. "You 
and Reich split close to half a 
million between you on that. As 
I recall, you offered your share to 
the Guild for reinstatement ..." 

"And you turned me down!" 

"All I'm asking for is the gun," 
Powell said quietly. 

"Are you offering a deal?" 

"You know me. Jerry. Would 
I make a shady offer like that?" 

"Then what are you paying for 
the gun?" 

"You'll have to trust me to do 
the fair thing; but I'm making 
no promises." 

"I've got a promise," Church 
muttered. 

"You'll have to make up your 
mind — trust me or trust Ben 
Reich. Whet about the gun?" 

Church's face disappeared from 
the light. After a pause, he spoke 
from the darkness. "I sold no 
gun. peeper, and I don't know 
how any gun was used. That's my 
objective evidence." 

"Thanks, Jerry." Powell smiled, 
shruRRed and turned again to 
T8. "I just want to ask you one 
technical question, Gus. Skipping 



over the fact that you're Ben 

Reich's accessory ..." 

"Wait a minute, Powell — " 

"Keep it on the acoustical level, 
Gus, and don't get panicky. All I 
want to know is how Guild conditioning failed with you. You're 
a professional analyst and you 
might be able to locate the flaw 
in our processing before we break 
you.** • 

"Break me? For what?" The 
calm assurance T8 found in Powell's mind, the casual acceptance 
of his ruin as an accomplished 
fact, jolted the little peeper. 

"You'd better start looking for 
a good hockshop location. No, 
you could probably do better with 
a tea-leaf act. But while you're 
still a Guild member, I wish 
you'd devote some attention to 
your own case. How did we fail 
with you? At what level? I'd appreciate a report before you're 
dead." 

"What do you mean, dead?** 

"Exiled. Expelled. Look at 
Jerry. He's a picture of yc» after 
the next council meeting." 

"You'll never prove anything. 
You'll—" 

"You little fool. Haven't you 
ever been at a protested trial? 
Mr. Peetcy won't be handling 
your case. No, you stand before 
the board and T'sung-Hsai, 
f*"kins, Joyce, Chevisance, Vigo, 
Catzerie. Tudor Franion — all IstS 
— start probing. I tell you, you're 
dead." 



152 




 



"Wait, Powell!" The mannequin face was twitching with terror. "The Guild taken confession 
into account. When you get niixed 
up with a damned psychotic like 
Reich, you identify yourself with 
it. He came to me with a nightman- about a man with no face. 
He—'' 

"He was a patient?" 

"Ves. That's how he trapped 
me. But I'm out of it now. Tell the 
Guild I'm volunteering everything. Church is your witness . . .** 

"I'm no witness," Church 
shouted. "You dirty squealer! 
After Ben Reich promised — " 

"Shut up. You were crazy 
enough to trust Reich. I'll bust 
him first. I'll walk into court and 
sit on the witness stand and do 
everything I can to help Powell." 

"You'll do nothing of the kind," 
Powell snapped. "You're still in 
the Guild. Since when does a 
peeper squeal on a patient?" 

"It's the evidence you need to 
get Reich, isn't it?" 

"Sure, but I'm not letting any 
peeper disgrace the rest of us." 

"It could mean your job if you 
don't get him." 

"I want it and I want Reich . . . 
but not at this price. It takes guts 
to hold to the Pledge when the 
heat's on. You ought to know. 
You didn't have the guts." 

"But I was an accessory!" T8. 
shouted. "You're letting me off. 
Is that ethics?" 

"Look at him," Powell laughed. 



"He's, begging for Demolition. No, 
Gus. We'll get you when we get 
Reich . But I can't get him 
through you. Don't forget that 
report." 

He left the circle of light, walked through the darkness toward 
the front door. He had played the 
entire scene for this moment 
alone, but there was no action on 
his hook. 

As Powell opened the door. 
Church suddenly called: "Just a 
minute." 

Powell stopped, silhouetted 
against the cold street light. 
"Yes?" 

"What have you been handing 
T8?" 

"The Pledge. Jerry. You ought 
to remember it." 

"Let me peep you on that." 

"Go ahead." Most of Powell's 
blocks opened. What was not 
good for Church to discover was 
carefulty jumbled and camouflaged. 

"I don't know," Church said 
at last. "I can't make up my 
mind about you and Reich and 
the gun. God knews, you're a 
mealy-mouthed preacher, but I 
think maybe I'd be smarter to 
trust you." 

"I told you I can't make any 
promises." 

"Maybe the whole trouble with 
me is that I've always been looking for promises instead of — " 

At that moment. Powell whirled 
and slammed the door. "Get off 



THE DEMOLISHED MAN 



the floor! Quick!" He vaulted 
onto the counter. "Up here with 
me!" 

A queasy greasy shuddering 
seized the pawnshop and shook it 
into horrible vibration. Powell 
kicked the light globe and extinguished it. 

"Jump for the ceiling light 
bracket and hold on. It's a harmonic gun. Jump!" Church gasped and leaped up into the 
darkness. Powell gripped T8's 
shaking arm. "Too short, Gus? 
I'll toss you." 

He flung T8 upward and 
followed, clawing for the steel 
spider arms of the bracket. The 
three hung in space, cushioned 
against the murderous vibrations 
enveloping the store . . . vibrations that created shattering 
harmonics in every substance in 
contact with the floor. Glass, 
steel, stone, plastic all screeched 
and burst apart. T8 groaned. 

"Hang on, Gus. It's one of 
Quizzard's killers. Careless bunch. 
They've missed me before." 

Destruction loomed up in the 
little peeper's subconscious. Powell knew that this was his crucial 
opportunity. T8's hands relaxed 
and he dropped to the floor. The 
vibrations ceased an instant later, 
but in that split-second Powell 
heard the burst of flesh. Church 
heard it too and raised steam for 

a sfariek. 

"Quier, Jerry' Not yet. Hang 
on!" 



"D-did you hear him?" 
*7 heard. We're not safe yet. 
Hang onr 

The pawnshop door opened a 
slit. A razor edge of light shot 
in and searched the floor. It 
found a broad red and gray organic puddle, then blinked out. 
The door closed. 

"They think I'm dead again. 
You can have your hysterics 
now" 

"I cant get down, Powell. I 
can't step on . . 

"I don't blame you." Powell 
held himself with one hand, look 
Church's arm and swung him toward the counter. Church dropped and shuddered. Powell followed him, fighting hard against 
nausea. 

"Did you say that was one of 
Quizzard's killers?" 

"Sure. He owns a squrd of 
psycho-goons. They're Ben's deputies right now, though. Ben's 
getting panicky." 

"Ben Reich? But it was in my 
shop. I might have been here." 

"You were here. What difference did that make?" 

"Reich wouldn't want ntr 

killed." 

"Wouldn't he?" Image of a 
cat smiling. 

Church took a deep breath. 
Suddenly he exploded: "The goddam son of a bitch!" 

"Don't feel like th;it. .Wry. 
Reich's fighting for his life. You 
can't expect him to be too con


154 




 



siderate of anybody else." 

"Well, I'm fighting, too. Get 
ready, Powell. I'm going to give 
you everything." 

A FTER he finished with 
^* Church and returned from 
headquarters and the T8 nightmare, Powell was grateful for 
the sight of the urchin in his 
home. Barbara D'Courtney had 
a black crayon in her right hand 
and a red crayon in her left. She 
was energetically scribbling on 
the walls, her tongue between her 
teeth and her dark eyes squinted 
in concentration. 

"Baba!" he exclaimed in a 
shocked voice. "What are you 
doing?" 

"Drawrin pitchith for Dada," 
she lisped. 

"Thank you, sweetheart," he 
said. "That's a lovely thought. 
Now come and sit with Dada." 

"No," she said, and continued 
scribbling. 

"Doesn't my girl always do 
what Dada asks?" 

She thought that over. "Yeth," 
she said. She deposited the crayons in her pocket, her bottom on 
the couch alongside Powell, her 
grubby paws in his hands. 

"Really, Barbara," Powell murmured. "That lisping is beginning 
to worry me. I wonder if your 
teeth need braces." 

The thought was only half a 
joke. It was difficult to remember 
that this was a woman seated 



alongside him. Slowly he probed 
through the paralyzed conscious 
levels of her mind to the turbulent preconscious, heavily hung 
with obscuring clouds, behind 
which was the faint, quaint flicker 
of light, isolated and childlike, 
that he had grown to like. But 
that flicker of light burned with 
the hot roar of a nova. 

"Hello, Barbara. You seem 
to—" 

He was answered with a brust 
of passion that made him 
scamper. 

"Hey, Mary!" he called. "Come 
quick!" 

Mary Noyes popped out of 
the kitchen. "You in trouble, 
again?" 

"Our patient's on the mend. 
She's made contact with her Id. 
Down on the lowest level. Almost 
had my brains burned out." 

"What do you want? A chaperone ? Someone to protect the 
secrets of her sweet girlish desires?" 

"I'm the one who needs protection. Come and hold my hand." 

"You've got both of yours in 
hers." 

"Just a figure of speech." Powell glanced uneasily at the calm 
doll face before him and the cool 
relaxed hands in his. ' Come inside with me." 

He went down the black passages again toward the timeless 
reservoir of psychic energy, reasonless, remorseless, seething with 



THE DEMOLISHED MAN 



155 




the never-ending search for satisfaction. He could sense Mary 
Noyes cautiously following him. 
He stopped at a safe distance. 

"Hi, Barbara" 

Hatred lashed out at him. 

"You remember me?" 

The hatred subsided, to be replaced by a wave of hot desire. 

"Pres, you'd better /et. If you . 
get trapped inside that pleasurepain chaos, you're gone." 

"I'd like to locate something." 

"You cant find anything in 
there except raw love and raw 



death, pure mind/ess instinct." 

"i want her relations with her 
lather. 1 want to know why he 
had those guilt sensations about 
her." 

The furnace fumed over again. 
Mary fled. 

Puwell teetered around the edge 
of the pit like an electrician gingerly touching the ends of exposed wires. A blazing bolt 
surged near him. He stepped aside 
to feel a blanket of instinctual 
self-preservation wrap him. He 
permitted himself to be drawn 



156 



GAIAXY SCIENCE FICTION 




t 



down into a vortex of associations. 

Here were tne somatic messages, cell reactions by the incredible billion, organic cries, the 
muted drone of muscle tone, sensory sub-currents, blood-flow, the 
wavering superhetrodyne of blood 
pfi . . . all whirling and churniag 
in the balancing pattern that 
formed the girl's psyche. The 
never-ending make- and -break of 
synapses contributed a crackling 
hail of complex rhythms. 

Powell caught part of Plosive 
image, followed it to the sensory association of a kiss, then 
by cross circuit to the infant's 
sucking reflex at the breast. Her 



mother? No. A wetnurse. Negation. Minus Mother. Powell 
dodged an associated flame of infantile rage and resentment, the 
Orphan's Syndrome. He searched 
for a related Pa . . . Papa . . „ 
Father. 

Abruptly he was face to face 
with his image. It was nude, powerful, its outlines haloed with an 
aura of love and desire. 

Get lost. You embarrass me. 
The image disappeared. Damn it! 
Has she fallen in love with me? 

"Hi, spook." 

There was her picture of herself, pathetically caricatured, the 
blonde hair in strings, the dark 
eyes like blotches, the lovely 
figure drawn into flat, ungracious 
planes. It faded and the image 
of Powell - Powerful - Protective Paternal rushed at him, torrentially destructive. The back of 
the head was D'Courtney's face. 
He followed the Janus image 
down to a blazing channel of 
doubles, pairs, linkages and duplicities to — yes, Ben Reich and 
the caricature of Barbara, linked 
like Siamese twins. B linked t» 
B B & B. Benedictine & Brandy. 
Barbara & Bea. 

Half— 

"Pres!" 

A call far off. directionless. It 
could wait. That amazing image 
of Reich had to — 

"Presfon Powell! This way, you 
ass!" 

"Mary?" 



THE DEMOLISHED MAN 



'his if the third 
d to locate you!" 
"The third time?" 
"In three hours. Please, Pres, 
while I've got the strength." 

He permitted himself to wander upward. The timeless, spaceless chaos roared around him. 
The image of Barbara D'Courtney appeared, now a caricature of 
the sexual siren. 
"Hi, spook." 

In a panic, he plunged away. 
Then the Withdrawal Technique 
went into automatic operation. 
The blocks banged down in 
steady sequence, each barrier a 
step backward toward the light. 
Halfway up, he sensed Mary 
alongside him. She stayed with 
him until he was once more in 
his living room, seated alongside 
the urchin. 

"Mary, I located the weirdest 
association with Ben Reich. Some 
kind of linkage that — " 

Mary had an iced towel. She 
shipped his face with it smartly. 
He realized that he was shaking. 

"Only trouble is you aren't 
working with unit elements. 
You're working with ionized particles ..." He dodged the towel 
and stared at Barbara. "My God, 
Mary, I think this poor kid's in 
love with me." 



cockeyed 



"/ kept meeting myself down 
there." 

" And what about you?" 
'•Me?" 

"Why do you think you refused 
to send her to Kingston Hospital?" she said. "Why have you 
been peeping her twice a day since 
you brought her here? Why did 
you have 'to have a chaperone? 
I'll tell you. Mr. Powell ..." 

"Tell me what?" 

She stung him with a vivid 
picture of himself and Barbara 
D'Courtney and that fragment 
she had peeped days ago . . . the 
fiagment that had made her turn 
pale with helplessly violent jealousy and anger. 

"You're in love with her, and 
the girl isn't a peeper. She isn't 
even sane. I wish I'd let you stay 
inside her mind until you rotted!" 
She turned away and began to 

cry. 

"Mary, for the love of — " 
"Shut up." she sobbed. "There's 
a message for you. F-from headquarters. You're to jet for Ampro 
as s-soon as possible. Ben Reich's 
there. They need you. Everybody needs you. So why should 
I complain?" 

— ALFRED B ESTER 



CONCLUDED NEXT MONTH 




 



TO INTRODUCE THESE DISTINGUISHED RECORDINGS OF 

"200 YEARS OF AMERICAN MUSIC" 

THE AMERICAN RECORDING SOCIETY OFFERS YOU . . . 



ONE OF THESE SUPERB 33'/, rpm 10" long Playing UNBREAKABLE RECORDS 
Prepared by The non-profit Otlum Muxlcal Foundation 



Regularly *4.35 



Yours 
for 
only 



I 




hat electrified the muiic lmnie world a sudden 
rcalilltion that the foremost music heme written 
lixl.iv I* Amtritan mum — and • • ■■ American 
i ■ > : ii i ■ ■ ■ s have been innting ■■■■ i.mi mu-.ii. 
for ibt -i-: 200 yean.' 

Now. an outstanding non-profit ion it mi on 
has embarked on a program ol treating highfidelity recordings ot 200 scats ot Aiucr.tan 
music ' Every form ol musical expression is in< hull . I in this program — symphonic, choral, 
chamber works, folk music . . . music of Aincriii work and at play; music of America 
■{rowing, laughing . . . music born of the love 
of liberty and the love ot fun, the love of good 
living :md (he love of God. Whatever your 
tastes—here is music for you? 

HOW THIS MUSIC CAME TO BE RECORDED 
Rcctfltty, ihe directors of the renowned Alice M. 
Ditlon Fund of Columbia University established 
a Mibvi.iTui.il grant to create the non-profit DitKHi Musical Foundation, whose sole purpose is 
to record and release each month a new highfidelity full -frequency recording of American 
mutic, on Long-Playing records. 

ARC THE RECORDS EXPENSIVE? 
No, to the contrary. Because the Ditson Musical 
Foundation made its recordings available at cost 



INDIAN SUITE 

Bv EDWARD MacDOWELL, A 
concert hall faiorllc since IdSrl. 
this melodic suite Is based on 
genuine Indian themes- legends, 
festivals, 10" A.R.S, recording. 

2ND SYMPHONY 

Bv WALTER PISTON, Winner of 
New Yort Music Critic-. Circle 
Aw aid r ,4.46. this rhythmic 
score has Become a modern masterpiece. 10" A.R.S. recording. 



tu the AimiiLUi Kicnrdiog S"Ctf ay (sole distributing agent for the Foundation's records) 
they arc pmcd below most I.. P. s of tVmp.ir. ihle 
i|uality— only f-LM for 10" rciords ami $4 9$ 
for 12" tccords. The American Recording Society 
Philharmonic Orchestra engages the fines ( .is.nlable conductor! and artists, and all recordings 
are made nith the latest high-fidebiv equipment, 
and ..1 ■ directly trom 1 limited number of 
silver-sputtered masters. 

HOW THE SOCIETY OPERATES 
Your purchase ol either of the Long Playing 
records offered above for only SI .00 does not 
obligate you to buy any additional records trom 
happy 1 



the 



of 



wisT' to 



1 Ret 



ia ted 
Mem:ording 



.ording by a 
i the Special Club price. If you do not 
Purchase any particular rccurd, vou 
irn the form provided for that purpose. 
FREE RECORDS OFFEfED 
With each two records pur chased at the regular 
Club price you will receive an additional record 
of comparable quality ABSOLUTELY FREE. 
However, the number of records which can be 
pressed from silver-sputtered masters is neccs


rflj 



ed. 



the 



AMERICAN RECORDING SOCIETY, 100 AVE. OF THE AMERICAS, N. Y. 13, N. Y. 

I American Recording Society, Dept. 715- Ave. of the Americas, New York 13, N. Y. GX-2 \ 



ill Address 

City 

: OWEN SOUND, ONTARIO 



159 



The Current GALAXY Selene* fiction Novel . . . 

Odd John 

By Ofaf Sfop/edon 

"Odd John" was the nickname given this strange youth . . . 
and odd he certainly was. With his incredibly gifted skill* ond 
his awesomely developed mind, he could have attained power, 
fame, money — an entire nation or even the world! 

But it would have been like a genius, ruling an asylum of 
imbeciles. For Odd John was not of the human race; he belonged 
to the next stage of evolution — Homo Superior! 

He could not be the only one, he reasoned. There must be 
others like himself. But where would he find them? And if he 
did, would they agree to his plan to breed only among themselves ... to create the race that would some day replace Homo 
Sapiens? And what would mankind, with his powerful weapons 
ond unleashed fear, do to stop the threat? 

Mony authors have tried to write the story of Homo Superior 
ond failed — just as Pithecanthropus, describing Modern Man, 
would find it an impossible job. But Stapledon succeeded! This 
is THE masterpiece of superman stories, truly a great work of 
science fiction! 

★ 

The Next 
 Novel . . . 

Four-Sided Triangle 

By Wi//iam F. Temple 

A swiftly paced, rollicking, yet shrewdly thoughtful booltlength story of a machine thai solves one distressing problem 
. . . and creates dozens of olhers even more troublesome. 

A A & 

The price is only 35c c copy (no postage or handling charge) 
or send $2.00 for a full year (six issues) to . . . 

GALAXY PUBLISHING CORP. 

421 Hudson Street New York 14, N. Y. 



7 60 



What Strange Powers 
Did The Ancients Possess? 



EVERY important discovery relating 
to mind power, sound thinking and 
cause and effect, as applied to selfadvancement, was known centuries ago, 
before the masses could read and write. 

Much has been written about the wise 
men of old. A popular fallacy has it that 
their secrets of personal power and successful living were lost to the world. 
Knowledge of nature's laws, accumulated through the ages, is never lost. At 
times the great truths possessed hy the 
sages were hidden from unscrupulous 
men in high places, but never destroyed. 

Why Were Their Secrets 
Closely Guarded? 

Only recently, as time is measured; not 
more than twenty generations ago, less 
than l/100th of 1% of the earth's 
people were thought capable of receiving basic knowledge about the laws of 
life, for it is an elementary truism that 
knowledge is power and that power 
cannot be entrusted to the ignorant 
and the unworthy. 

Wisdom is not readily attainable by the 
general public; nor recognized when 
right within reach. The average person 
absorbs a multitude of details about 
things, but goes through life without 
ever knowing where and how to acquire 
mastery of the fundamentals of the inner 
mind — that mysterious silent something 
which "whispers" to you from within. 

Fundamental Laws of Nature 

Your habits, accomplishments and weaknesses are the effects of causes. Your 
thoughts and actions are governed by 
fundamental laws. Example: The law 



of compensation is as fundamental as 
the laws of breathing, eating and sleeping. All fixed laws of nature are as 
fascinating to study as they are vital to 
understand for success in life. 

You can learn to find and follow every 
basic law of life. You can begin at any 
time to discover a whole new world of 
interesting truths. You can start at once 
to awaken your inner powers of selfunderstanding and self-advancement. 
You can learn from one of the world's 
oldest institutions, first known in America in 1694. Enjoying the high regard 
of hundreds of leaders, thinkers and 
teachers, the order is known as the Rosicrucian Brotherhood. Its complete name 
is the "Ancient and Mystical Order 
Rosae Cruris," abbreviated by the initials "AMORC." The teachings of the 
Order are not sold, for it is not a commercial organization, nor is it a religious 
sect. It is a non-profit fraternity, a 
brotherhood in the true sense. 

Not For General Distribution 

Sincere men and women, in search of 
the truth — those who wish to fit in with 
the ways of the world— are invited to 
write for complimentary copy of the 
sealed booklet, "The Mastery of Life." 
It tells how to contact the librarian of 
the archives of AMORC for this rare 
knowledge. This booklet is not intended 
for general distribution; nor is it sent 
without request. It is therefore suggested 
that you write for your copy to: Scribe 
E. J. L. 

<3k ROSICRUCIANS 

[AMORC 1 
San Jose California 



HOST AMAZING PERFl/AIF OFFER IVER MADE 

These are the SAME, GENUINE, ORIGINAL perfumes ihat you've seen in Harper's, 
Vogue, Madamoiselle, Charm, Glamour, Seventeen and all the other leading fashion 
magazines advertised to sell for as much as 

$3500 » bo„| c . 



rwe O Clo:k 

B\ac'K Satin 

Sortilege 
Gold Sat-n 
Bte3lW e6S 
JJiidnloh: 



BY AOT«to ue 
by Bencn 
by Ciaoane 

bY Anqeaq.10 
bv Charbert 
' by ~« &6 * 

.SolOolK"" ' 



TUSSY 



ALL J© OF THESE EXCi/JWG, ROMANTIC, GMfilOftOUS 
FAMOUS PERFUMES ' 



The manufacturers of these famous per* 
fumes want to acquaint you with their 
proJuct. This bargain offer is made so 
that you can try each one and then decide which better suits your personality. 
Naturally, all these wonderful perfumes 
arc available nt your local drug or department store in regular sizes at the 
lly advertised prices. 




