THE 

ART-TIME 
GOD 




LAST CALL FROM SECTOR 9G 

A Novel of the Bitter Star by LEIGH BRACKETT 




ML 

VOL 6, No. 1 1 • A FICTION HOUSE MAGAZINE • SUMMER, 1955 

!!► Two Novels of Distant Worlds 

OUT OF THE IRON WOMB! Poul Anderson 4 

Behind a pale Venusian mask lay hidden the arch-humanist, the anti-tech killer 
.. .one of those who needlessly had strewn Malone blood across the heavens 
from Saturn to the sun. Now — on the naked rock of the Trojan asteroids — 
the rendezvous for death was plainly marked. 

LAST CALL FROM SECTOR 9G Leigh Bracket* 59 

Out there in the green star system, far beyond the confining grip of Federation, moved the feared Bitter Star, for a thousand frigid years the dark and 
sinister manipulator of war-weary planets. 

i> Five Star -flung Short Stories 

ONCE A STARMAN Joe L. Hensiey 23 

The snares of space were incalculable, Lou Argonne learned. Lightning 
speeds, immense distances, stygian blackness, rushing stars, flaming meteors 
... all piled up inexorably to impale frail Earthman on the spears of vivid 
imagination. 

IMAGE OF SPLENDOR Lu Kella 29 

Cold? Frigid? Why those ruling Earthwomen coud put frost on a hydrogen 
burner, mused the frustrated O'Rielly as he gaily plotted to smash once and 
for all time the ingenious Venus dameblock. 

THE BRIDES OF OOL M. A. Cummings 38 

Ooi was the saddest lover this side of lo . . . either that, or the most skillful 
killer since the invention of Gilk's death-ray. 

DUST UNTO DUST Lyman D. Hinckley 44 

It was alien, but was it dead, this sinister metal city that glittered so malignantly before the advance of the three awed space-scouters. 

ALIEN EQUIVALENT Richard R. Smith 53 

The Martians were a weak, sensitive, dying race, frail and impotent before 
the superiority of the master Earthmen. Only in that grand and devilishly 
clever game of Duchal might sons of the red planet emerge from their shells. 

THE VIZIGRAPH . 2, 91 

Rumbling columns roll ever onward. 

Cover Illustration by Kelly Freds 

T. T. SCOTT, President JACK O'S'JLLIVAN, Editor MALCOLM REISS, Mgr. Editor 

PLANET STORIES • Published quarterly by Love Romances Publishing: Co., Inc., 1658 Summer Street, 
Stamford, Conn. Tho entire contents of this magazine are copyrigi by Love Romances Publii 

Co.. Inc. Reentered as second-claws matter September 80, 19."W, at the Po»t Office at Stamford, Conn. Additional 
entry at New York. N. Y., under the Act of March 3, 1879. All rights reserved. Price 25tf per copy. One-year 
subscription: $1.00; additional postage for Canada 15*; foreign countries 30tf. For advertising rates address: 
Advertising Director, Fiction Bouse, Inc., 1658 Summer Street, Stamford, Conn. printed in u. «. A. 

SSfeta, 173 






•srcAA 



THE YIZIQRAPH 



that h ^jJ^ WcB - to P° lnt . out to ^e winners of illustrations 
?S X!f 7 m /SS? the pia desired ^ our lette " sh ouU reach 
n^Sds T " 5 ° 0n aS P ° Ssible aftCr each issue hit$ the 

As it is now, the letters of winners No. 1 and 2 may arrive 
weeks or even months after No. 3's. Thus No. 3 becomes tte 

S weft Z d m ° re ° ftCn n than n0t his 0r he < fot dioiS 
££ k x f ( 1 1C , Ve ^ same lustration chosen at a much later 

„n£, i • 1 ^ No * 3 alread ? has the P ic safel X tucked 

under his arm, tardy No. 1 misses out on his first selection. 

May this explanation assuage those winners who may be confounded in receiving a pic other than their prime choi 

And not to get too far away from the subject of pic winners 
vith the selections from the Spring issue- DAT frSrv? 
2) Bob H ) Michael W. flm ' J ^ 

A MESSAGE AND A CAUSE 

1148 West 8th Street 
Dear Edit Ashtabula, Ohio 

Thanks for printing my letter in VIZI. If it serves no other 
ofty purpose it should at least get me a few thousand nasty letters 
trom Freas fans. 

r! a L W fi PVr^r t0 b f stin r in » ] y vindictive in this letter since you 
chum that VIZI readers don t enjoy such liL ... Anyway 

now that Ira a mature, sophisticated sub-neo-fan (having worked 
my way up from the fringe-fan classification) I have to write 
■pondmgly mature letters. In the letter that follows I should 
reach the emotional depths of a six-year-old (which is pretty good 
since I have the I.Q. of a three-year-old) Here goes 

Top stories were THE BEAST-JEWEL OF MARS 'and TAHF 
OF A THOUSAND WINGS. Both created the I kind of di^rn 
reality that in my opinion makes the best s-f stories. I couldn't 
figure out the connection between the titles and the stories though 
Are you sure you didn't get your titles crossed? I can see some 
basis for that labored title on CAGE etc, but as for the other 
what the H is a beast-jewel? 

CAGE sounds a lot like the kick-off story for a string of sequels. 
If that s what you intended, Mr. Budrys, take the advice of this 
sub-neo and DON'T. Series never work out too welL you 
know. Law of Diminishing Returns they calls it. 

Your other stories just didn't jell. THE SPACE BETWEEN 
did evoke a few chuckles, though ... and the illo a few other 
emotions. 

The illos were as sloppily drawn as ever and the reproduction 
was Jl s ^ p00 £ , M P° ssibIe « ° nI y Eberle's lusty lass and Emsh's illo 
on THE BEAST-JEWEL OF MARS came through well 

Now that I've covered the (ugh!) stories and the (ugh!) illos. 
I will turn to VIZI and refute all the arguments of the fen— ^ 






THE VIZIGRAPH 



including in my constructive criticism not only the 
BNF and neos, but also the little-old-ladies who 
write in to say how many thrills PLANET gives 
them in their advanced senility. 

The big mixup: You're forgiven, Jack. It wouldn't 
be PLANET without the bungling. . . . You know, 
PS is cither the worst prozine or the best fanzine 
in s-f. . . . You can confuse all great names except 
Mine. 

TUNING: Must you throw in personal messages 
fo your enemies in p.s.'s to your letters? . . . Who 
are 1) Ruch, 2) T. S. Eliot . . . ? 

COURTOIS: Are you kidding? Who gave you 
such a brainwashing? Or did "They" take you over 
and give you a new personality? ... If you're really 
serious, Congrats on having a lot more guts than 
I'd ever have in such a position. 

BRANDT: I guess you're assured of getting your 
letters in print by means of that sort of flattery 
(even eddytors like egoboo) but isn't "leader of s-f" 
going a little too far ... or don't you read any of 
the other mags? 

WALKER: Brackett and PLANET have grown 
synonomous. 

SCOTT: Yea, Eberle often seems to be illustrating 
the wrong story. He turns out some fairly good illos, 
though . . . even if they are inept. . . . Oh, I don't 
know if fen write letters for FUN. I write because 
/ have a Message and a Cause . . to convert the 
world to Paananenism. . . . 

DE GRUNSWALD: I agree 100% ... and gripe 
letters make much better reading than the "PLANET 
is the best s-i mag" letters. 

HOSKINS: Maybe some s-f fans take up a lot 
of room to say nothing but / have a Message and 
a Cat 

MARMOR: You have to comment on PLANETS 
art-work; you can"t talk about her stories without 
being stingingly vindictive. 

ELM: I think all space-opera fans should be banished to AMAZING. I, for one, hope that Cap 
Future remains buried. Some stories are too technical, 
though . . . especially those in one magazine, 
ASTOUNDING. 

BUSBY: I preferred the GEISHA MEMORY title 
(myself). I guess I'm a pre-pro (myself). If the 
stories get any worse I'll have to start writing 
them (myself) and give the field a shot in the arm. 
One thing worries me, though. How will I ever be 
able to sell a story with all the eddytors mad becuz 
of the letters I wrote to them as a neo? 

MUSSELS & BUTCHER: Oh, yeah well prove it! 
(That last bit doesn't refer to anything special. It's 
just a good way to start an argument.) 

KEOGH: Oh. 

PAANANEN: Keenly perceptive and well-thoughtout letter. 

PLETEROSKY: Science-fiction is not here to stay. 
The building of the first space ship will kill s-f. 
The s-f fans will turn to science news mags (like 
the Science Newsletter). When the reports of the 
first explorations of other worlds begin appearing, 
no one will need the fictionalized accounts. There 
will always be imaginative literature of some kind, 
of course, but not of the "pure" s-f variety. You 
may think that s-f will turn to interstellar s-f when 
we begin exploring our solar system, but the zines 
will lose their audience because when people realize 
that interplanetary flight is a reality and that interstellar flight is next, their interest will be drawn 
to the science that would be making these things 
possible . . . not to the fiction that speculates about 
these things. 

As you have probably guessed, this letter is from 



that master of the inept remark, who now signs as 
Stingingly vindictive, 

Victor Paananen 

UNDERGROUND PULPS 

33a North Street 
St. Leonards-on-Sea 
Sussex, England 
Dear Sir, 

I have ruj the Fall '54 issue of PLANET 

STORIES. (Sent me by Carol McKinney.) 

I don't usually write letters to science-fiction magazines, but I just had to congratulate you on the 
cover by Kelly Freas, it was superb, and every bit 
as good as the one on the May issue. At the moment 
I am torn between cutting the cover off and framing it or leaving it on and keeping the magazine 
intact. 

I have a good suggestion as to how this could 
be made possible. How about a plain front 
say with just the date and some of the conter 
it, and loose (or fixed) inside you could ha 
colored plate. It wouldn't even matter if y< , 
advertisements on the back of it, (as you do 
but we could frame it then without h 
the magazine. Boy! What crazy dreams I d< 

I see quite a few letters in VIZI stating th 
writers have trouble with their husbands and fj 
who think they are "nuts" because they read 
has been my experience that people think I r< 
and I quote — "because of the sexy bits" — un 
I think this is one of the main reasons why certain 
people look down on science-fiction, especially 
the magazine concerned has a cover like your Fall 
issue, (don't think I'm griping, 'cause I'm not, I 
liked it) but it does tend to give the impression that 
the contents might be a Little — ahhh — spicy, don't 
you think? 

So you see, a plain cover with the colored plate 
inside the magazine would serve two purposes, one, 
we could frame the picture without cutting the 
magazine, and two, people would no longer sneer 
at us for reading something that to them would 
appear to be "dirty" literature. 

Well, I would just like to say that I have never 
seen PLANET looking so good. 

All the very best, 

Michael R. Birrell 

TUNING OUT TUNING 

411 May fair Ave. 
Ottawa, Ont., Canada 
Dear Jack, 

I had quietly decided several months ago to abandon the somewhat enervating pastime of writing 
letters to magazines; I had settled into that happy, 
near-witless state of vegetation which is possible 
only when one does not give a damn for anything. 
Imagine my sorrow and chagrin, then, when I observed that it would be necessary to drag both my 
typewriter and myself out from under the dustcovers in order to aim some remonstrant remarks at 
that garrulous fellow who is definitely not my uncle: 
Bill Tuning. The condescending tenor of his trite 
effusion fairly roared for a reply. 

Norman J. Clarke (no joker, he, no international 
spy) does not "really believe" that sex is .■ 
fad. He . . . and by that is meant "I" . . . docs 
not "really believe" anything, and he said so in 
the original letter, which was solely bemused speculation on the possibility that sex is not the Eternal 
(Continued on page 91) 



OUT OF THE IRON WOMB! 

By POUL ANDERSON 

Behind a pale Venusian mask lay hidden the arch-humanist, fh* 
anti-tech killer . . . one of those who needlessly had strewn Malone 
blood across the heavens from Saturn to the sun. Now — on distant 
Trojan asteroids — the rendezvous for death was plainly marked. 



THE most dangerous is not the outlawed murderer, who only slays men, 
but the rebellious philosopher: for he 
destroys worlds. 



Darkness and the chill glitter of sbtfs. 
Bo Jonsson crouched on a whirling speck of 
stone and waited for the man who was cooa* 
ing to kill him. 




_ 



PLANET STORIES 



The no horizon. The flying moun
tain on which he stood was too small. At his 
back rose a cliff of jagged rock, losing its 
own blackness in the loom of shadows; its 
teeth ate raggedly across the Milky Way. 
Before him, a tumbled igneous wilderness 
slanted crazily off, with one long thin crag 
sticking into the sky like a grotesque bowsprit. 

There was no sound except the thudding 
of his own heart, the harsh rasp of his own 
breath, locked inside the stinking metal skin 
of his suit. Otherwise ... no air, no heat, no 
uer or life or work of man, only a granite 
nakedness spinning through space out beyond Mars, 

Stooping, awkward in the clumsy armor, 
he put the transparent plastic of his helmet 
to the ground Its cold bit at him even 
through the insulating material. He might 
be able to hear the footsteps of his murderer 
conducted through the ground. 

Stillness answered him. He gulped a 
heavy lungful of tainted air and rose. The 
other might be miles away yet, or perhaps 
yer , atfooting too softly to set up vi
brations. A man could do that when gravity 
was feeble enough. 

The stars blazed with a cruel wintry brilliance, over him, around him, light-years to 
fall through emptiness before he reached 
one. He had been alone among them before; he had almost thought them friends. 
S° ! on a long watch, a man found 

himself talking to Vega or Spica or dear old 
Beetle Juice, murmuring what was in him as 
if the remote sun could understand. But they 
didn't care, he saw that now. To them, he 
did not exist, and they would shine carelessly long after he was gone into night. 

He had never felt so alone as now, when 
another man was on the asteroid with him, 
hunting him down. 

Bo Jonsson looked at the wrench in his 
hand. It was long and massive, it would have 
been heavy on Earth, but it was hardly 
enough to unscrew the stars and reset the 
machinery of a universe gone awry. He 
smiled stiffly at the thought He wanted to 
laugh too, but checked himself for 
wouldn't be able to stop. 

Let's face it, he told himself. You're 
scared. You're scared sweatless. He wondered if he had spoken it aloud. 



There was plenty of room on the asteroid. 
At least two hundred square miles, probably 
more if you allowed for the rough surface. 
He could skulk around, hide ... and suffocate when his tanked air gave out. He had to 
be a hunter, too, and track down the other 
man, before he died. And if he found his 
enemy, he would probably die any, 

He looked about him. Nothing. No sound, 
no movement, nothing but the streaming of 
the constellations as the asteroid spun. Nothing had ever moved here, since the beginning of time when moltenness congealed 
into death. Not till men came and hunted 
each other. 

Slowly he forced himself to move. The 
thrust of his foot sent him up, looping over 
the cliff to drift down like a dead leaf in 
Earth's October. Suit, equipment, and his 
own body, all together, weighed only a couple of pounds here. It was ghostly, this 
soundless progress over fields which had 
never known life. It was like being dead already. 

Bo Jonsson's tongue was dry and thick in 
his mouth. He wanted to find his enemy and 
give up, buy existence at whatever price it 
would command. But he couldn't do that. 
Even if the other man let him do it, which 

is doubtful, he couldn't. Johnny Male 
was dead. 

Maybe that was what had started it ail 

the death of Johnny Malone. 

'TWERE are numerous reasons for basi: 
-L on the Trojan asteroids, but the ma 
one can be given in a single word: stability. 
They stay put in Jupiter's orbit, about six 
degrees ahead and behind, with only minor 
oscillations; spaceships need not waste fuel 
coming up to a body which has been perturbed a goodly distance from where it was 
supposed to be. The trailing group is the 
jumping-off place for trans- Jovian planets, 

the leading group for the inner worlds that 

way, their own revolution about the sun 
the departing ship a welcome boost, 
while minimizing the effects of Jupiter's 
drag. 

Moreover, being dense clusters, they have 
attracted swarms of miners, so that Achilles 
among the leaders and Patroclus in the trailers have a permanent boom town atmosphere. Even though a spaceship and eq 



OUT OF THE IRON WOMB! 



ment represent a large investment, this is 
one of the last strongholds of genuinely private enterprise: the prospector, the mine 
owner, the rockhound dreaming of the day 
when his stake is big enough for him to start 
out on his own — a race of individualists, 
rough and noisy and jealous, but living 
under iron rules of hospitality and rescue. 

The Last Chance on Achilles has another 
name, which simply sticks an V in the 
official one; even for that planetoid, it is a 
rowdy bar where Guardsmen come in trios. 
But Johnny Malone liked it, and talked Bo 
Jonsson into "going there for a final spree 
before checkoff and departure. "Nothing to 
compare," he insisted. "Every place else is 
getting too fantangling civilized, except 
Venus, and I don't enjoy Venus." 

Johnny was from Luna City himself: a 
small, dark man with the quick nervous 
movements and clipped accent of that roaring commercial metropolis. He affected the 
latest styles, brilliant colors in the flowing 
tunic and slacks^ a beret cocked on his sleek 
head. But somehow he didn't grate on Bo, 
they had been partners for several years 
now. 

They pushed through a milling crowd at 
the bar, rockhounds who watched one of 
Achilles' three live ecdysiasts with hungry 
eyes, and by some miracle found an empty 
booth. Bo squeezed his bulk into one side of 
the cubicle while Johnny, squinting through 
a reeking smoke-haze, dialed drinks. Bo was 
larger and heavier than most spacemen — 
he'd never have gotten his certificate before 
the ion drive came in — and was usually content to let others talk while he listened. A 
placid blond giant, with^amiable blue eyes 
in a battered brown face, he did not consider 
himself bright, and always wanted to learn. 

Johnny gulped his drink and winced. 
'•Whiskey, they call it yet! Water, synthetic 
alcohol, and a dash of caramel they have the 
gall to label whiskey and charge for!" 

"Everything's expensive here," said Bo 
mildly. "That's why so few rockhounds get 
rich. They make a lot of money, but they 
have to spend it just as fast to stay alive." 

"Yeh . . . yeh . . . wish they'd spend some 
of it on us." Johnny grinned and fed the 
dispenser another coin. It muttered to itself 
ana slid forth a tray with a glass. "Cmon, 
drink up, man. It's a long way home, and 



we've got to fortify ourselves for the trip. A 
bottle, a battle, and a wench is what I need. 
Most especially the wench, because I don't 
think the .eminent Dr. McKittrick is gonna 
be interested in sociability, and it's close 
quarters aboard the Dog!* 

Bo kept on sipping slowly. "Johnny," he 
said, raising his voice to cut through the din, 
"you're an educated man. I never could figure out why you want to talk like a jumper." 

"Because I am one at heart. Look, Bo, 
why don't you get over that inferiority complex of yours? A man can't run a spaceship 
without knowing more math and physical 
science than the average professor on Earth. 
So you had to work your way through the 
Academy and never had a chance to fan 
yourself with a lily white hand while somebody tootled Mozart through a horn. So 
what?" Johnny's head darted around, birdlike. "If we want some women we'd better 
make our reservations now." 

"I don't, Johnny," said Bo. "I'll just 
nurse a beer." It wasn't morals so much as 
fastidiousness; he'd wait till they hit Luna. 

"Suit yourself. If you don't want to uphold the honor of the Sirius Transportation 
Company — " 

Bo chuckled. The Company consisted of 
(a) the Sirius; (b) her crew, himself and 
Johnny; (c) a warehouse, berth, and three 
other part owners back in Luna City. Not 
exactly a tramp ship, because you can't normally stop in the middle of an interplanetary 
voyage and head for somewhere else; but 
she went wherever there was cargo or people 
to be moved. Her margin of profit was not 
great in spite of the charges, for a space trip 
is expensive; but in a few more years they'd 
be able to buy another ship or two, and 
eventually Fireball and Triplanetary would 
be getting some competition. Even the public lines might have to worry a little. 

Johnny put away another couple of shots 
and rose. Alcohol cost plenty, but it was 
also more effective in low-gee. " 'Scuse me," 
he said. "I see a target. Sure you don't want 
me to ask if she has a friend?" 

Bo shook his head and watched his partner move off, swift in the puny gravity — the 
Last Chance didn't centrifuge like some of 
the tommicker places downtown. It was hard 
to push through the crowd without weight 
to help, but Johnny faded along and edged 



PLANET STORIES 



up to the girl with his highest-powered 
smile. There were several other men standing around her, but Johnny had The Touch. 
He'd be bringing her back here in a few 
minutes. 

Bo sighed, feeling a bit lonesome. If he 
wasn't going to make a night of it, there was 
no point in drinking heavily. He had to 
make the final inspection of the ship tomorrow, and grudged the cost of anti-hangover 
tablets. Besides what he was putting back 
into the business, he was trying to build a 
private hoard; some day, he'd retire and get 
married and build a house. He already had 
the site picked out, on Kullen overlooking 
the Sound, back on Earth. Man, but it was a 
long time since he'd been on Earth! 

A sharp noise slashed through the haze of 
talk and music Bo looked up. There was a 
tall blade haired man, Venusian to judge by 
his kilts, arguing with Johnny. His face was 
ugly with anger. 

Johnny made some reply. Bo heaved up 
his form and strode toward the discussion, 
casually picking up anyone in the way and 
setting him aside. Johnny liked a fight, but 



this Venusian was big. 

As he neared, he caught words: 
girl, dammit." 



-my 



am: 



said the girl. 



'Like hell I 
saw you before 

"Run along and play, son," said Johr, 
"Or do you want me to change that diaper 
of yours?" 

That was when it happened. Bo saw the 
little needier spit from the Venusian's fingers. Johnny stood there a moment, looking 
foolishly at the dart in his stomach. Then 
his knees buckled and he fell with a nightmare slowness. 

The Venusian was already on the move. 
He sprang straight up, slammed a kick at the 
wall, and arced out the door into the dome 
corridor beyoad. A spaceman, that. Knows 
how to handle himself in low- gee. It was the 
only clear thought which ran in the sudden 
storm of Bo's head. 

The girl screamed. A man cursed and 
tried to follow the Venusian. He tangled 
with another. "Get outta my way!" A roar 
lifted, someone slugged, someone else coolly 
smashed a bottle against the bar and lifted 
the jagged end. There was the noise of a 
meeting flesh. 



Bo had seen death before. That needle 
wasn't anesthetic, it was poison. He knelt in 
the riot with Johnny's body in his arms. 



II 



SUDDENLY the world came to an end. 
There was a sheer drop-off onto the next 
face of the rough cube which was the 
asteroid. Bo lay on his belly and peered 
down the cliff, it ran for a couple of miles 
and beyond it were the deeps of space and 
the cold stars. He could dimly see the tortured swirl of crystallization patterns in the 
smooth bareness. No place to hide; his 
enemy was not there. 

He turned the thought over in a mind 
which seemed stiff and slow. By crossing 
that little plain he was exposing himself to a 
shot from one of its edges. On the other 
hand, he could just as well be bushwhacked 
from a ravine as he jumped over. And this 
route was the fastest for completing his 
search scheme. 

The Great Bear slid into sight, down 
under the world as it turned. He had often 
stood on winter nights, back in Sweden, and 
seen its immense sprawl across the weird 
flicker of aurora; but even then he want 
» spaceman's experience of seeing it from 
11, now he had his wish, and 
much good it had done him. 
_ He went over the edge of the cliff, cautiously, for it wouldn't take much of an impetus to throw him off this rock entirely. 
Then his helpless and soon frozen body 
would be just another meteor for the next 
million years. The vague downward sensation of gravity shifted insanely as he moved; 
he had the feeling that the world was tilting 
around him. Now it was the precipice which 
was a scarred black plain underfoot, reaching to a saw-toothed bluff at its farther edge. 
He moved with flat low-gee bounds. Besides the danger of springing off the asteroid 
entirely, there was its low acceleration to 
keep a man near the ground; jump up a few 
feet and it would take you a while to fall 
back. It was utterly silent around him. He 
had never thought there could be so much stillness. 

He was halfway across when the bullet 
came. He saw no flash, heard no crack, but 
suddenly the fissured land before him ex


. 



OUT OF THE IRON WOMB! 



plodcd in a soundless shower of chips. The 
bullet ricocheted flatly, heading off for outer 
space. No meteor gravel, that! 

Bo stood unmoving an instant, fighting 
the impulse to leap away. He was a spaceman, not a rockhound; he wasn't used to this 
environment, and if he jumped high he 
could be riddled as he fell slowly down 
again. Sweat was cold on his body. He 
squinted, trying to see where the shot had 
come from. 

Suddenly he was zigzagging off across the 
plain toward the nearest edge. Another bullet pocked the ground near him. The sun 
rose, a tiny heatless dazzle blinding in his 
eyes. 

Fire crashed at his back. Thunder and 
darkness exploded before him. He lurched 
forward, driven by the impact. Something 
was roaring, echoes clamorous in his helmet. 
He grew dimly aware that it was himself. 
Then he was falling, whirling down into 
the black between the stars. 

There was a knife in his back, it was 
white-hot and twisting between the ribs. He 
stumbled over the edge of the plain and fell, 
waking when his armor bounced a little 
against stone. 

Breath rattled in his throat as he turned 
his head. There was a white plume standing 
over his shoulder, air streaming out through 
the hole and freezing its moisture. The 
knife in him was not hot, it was cold with 
an ultimate cold. 

Around him, world and stars rippled as 
if seen through heat, through fever. He 
hung on the edge of creation by his fingertips, while chaos shouted beneath. 

THEORETICALLY, one man can run a 
spaceship, but in practice two or three 
are required for non-military craft. This is 
not only an emergency reserve, but a preventive of emergencies, for one man alone 
might get too tired at the critical moments. 
Bo knew he wouldn't be allowed to leave 
Achilles without a certified partner, and unemployed spacemen available for immediate 
hiring are found once in a Venusian snowfall. 

Bo didn't care the first day. He had taken 
Johnny out to Helmet Hill and laid him in 
the barren ground to wait, unchanging now, 
till Judgment Day. He felt empty then, 



drained of grief and hope alike, his main 
thought t dull dread of having to tell 
Johnny's father when he reached Luna. He 
was too slow and clumsy with words; 
comforting hand would only break the old 
man's back. Old Malone had given six sons 
to space, Johnny was the last; from Saturn to 
the sun, his blood was strewn for nothing. 

It hardly seemed to matter that the Guards 
office reported itself unable to find the murderer. A single Venusian should have been 
easy to trace on Achilles, but he seemed to 
have vanished completely. 

Bo returned to the transient quarters and 
dialed Valeria McKittrick. She looked impatiently at him out of the screen. "Well," she 
said, "what's the matter? I thought we were 
blasting today." 

"Hadn't you heard?" asked Bo. He found 
it hard to believe she could be ignorant, here 
where everybody's life was known to everybody else. "Johnny's dead. We can't leave." 

"Oh . . . I'm sorry. He was such a nice 
little man — I've been in the lab all the time, 
packing my tilings, and didn't know." A 
frown crossed her cleax brow. "But you've 
got to get me back. I've engaged passage to 
Luna with you." 

"Your ticket will be refunded, of course," 
said Bo heavily. "But you aren't certified, 
and the Sirius is licensed for no less than two 
operators." 

"Well . . . damn! There won't be another 
berth for weeks, and I've got to get home. 
Can't you find somebody?" 

Bo shrugged, not caring much. "Ill circulate an ad if you want, but — " 

"Do so, please. Let me know.** She 
switched off. 

Bo sat for a moment thinking about her. 
Valeria McKittrick was worth considering. 
She wasn't beautiful in any conventional 
sense but she was tall and well built; there 
were good lines in the strong high boned 
face, and her hair was a cataract of spectacular red. And brains, too . . . you didn't get to 
be a physicist with the Union's radiation labs 
for nothing. He knew she was still young, 
and that she had been on Achilles for about 
a year working on some special project 
was now ready to go home. 

She was human enough, had been to most 
of the officers' parties and danced and 
laughed and flirted mildly, but even the 



10 



PLANET STORIES 



dullest rockhound gossip knew she was too 
lost in her work to do more. Out here a 
woman was rare, and a virtuous woman unheard-of; as a result, unknown to herself, 
Dr. McKittrick's fame had spread through 
more thousands of people and millions of 
miles than her professional achievements 
were ever likely to reach. 

Since coming here, on commission from 
the Lunar lab, to bring her home, Bo Jonsson had given her an occasional wistful 
thought. He liked intelligent women, and he 
was getting tired of rootlessness. But of 
course it would be a catastrophe if he fell in 
love with her because she wouldn't look 
twice at a big dumb slob like him. He had 
sweated out a couple of similar affairs in the 
past and didn't want to go through another. 
He placed his ad on the radinews circuit 
and then went out to get drunk. It was all 
he could do for Johnny now, drink him a 
final wassail. Already his friend was cold 
under the stars. In the course of the evening 
he found himself weeping. 

He woke up many hours later. Achilles 
ran on Earth time but did not rotate on it; 
officially, it was late at night, actually the 
shrunken sun was high over the domes. The 
man in the upper bunk said there was a message for him; he was to call one Einar Lundgard at the Comet Hotel soonest. 

The Comet! Anyone who could afford a 
room to himself here, rather than a kip in 
the public barracks, was well fueled. Bo 
swallowed a tablet and made his way to the 
visi and dialed. The robo-clerk summoned 
Lundgard down to the desk. 

It was a lean, muscular face under close 
cropped brown hair which appeared in the 
screen. Lundgard was a tall and supple man, 
somehow neat even without clothes. "Jonsson," said Bo. "Sorry to get you up, but I 
understood — " 

"Oh, yes. Are you looking for a spaceman? I heard your ad and I'm available." ' 

Bo felt his mouth gape open. "Huh? I 
never thought — " 

"We're both lucky, I guess." Lundgard 
chuckled. His English had only the slightest 
trace of accent, less than Bo's. "I thought I 
was stashed here too for the next several 
months." 

"How does a qualified spaceman happen 
to be marooned?" 



Tm with Fireball, was on the Drake— 
heard of what happened to her?" 

Bo nodded, for every spaceman knows exactly what every spaceship is doing at my 
given time. The Drake had come to Achilles 
to pick up a cargo of refined thorium for 
Earth; while she lay in orbit, she had somehow lost a few hundred pounds of reactionmass water from a cracked gasket Why the 
accident should have occurred, nobody knew 
. . . spacemen were not careless about inspections, and what reason would anyone 
have for sabotage? The event had taken 
place about a month ago, when the Sirius 
was already enroute here; Bo had heard of 
it in the course of shop talk. 

"I thought she went back anyway/' he 
said. 

Lundgard nodded. "She did. It was the 
usual question of economics. You know 
what refined fuel water costs in the Belt; 
also, the delay while we got it would have 
carried Earth and Achilles past optimum 
position, which'd make the trip home that 
much more expensive. Since we had one 
more man aboard than really required, it was 
cheaper to leave him behind; the difference 
in mass would make up for the fuel loss. I 
volunteered, even suggested die idea, because . . . well, it happened during my 
watch, and even if nobody blamed me I 
couldn't help feeling guilty." 

Bo understood that kind of loyalty. You 
couldn't travel space without men who had 
it 

*The Company beamed a message: I'd 
stay here till their schedule permitted an 
undermanned ship to come by, but that 
wouldn't be for maybe months," went on 
Lundgard. "I can't see sitting on this lump 
that long without so much as a chance at 
planetfall bonus. If you'll take me on, I'm 
sure the Company will agree; I'll get a 'message to them on the beam right away." 

"Take us a while to get back," warned 
Bo. "We're going to stop off at another 
asteroid to pick up some automatic equipment, and won't go into hyperbolic orbit till 
after that. About six weeks from here to 
Earth, all told." 

"Against six months here?'* Lundgard 
laughed; it emphasized the bright charm 
of his manner. "Sunblazc I'll work foe 
free." 



OUT OF THE IKON WOMB! 



11 



"No need to. Bring your papers over tomorrow, huh?" 

The certificate and record were perfect!/ 
in order, showing Einar Lundgard to be a 
Spacetech 1/cl with eight years' experience, 
qualified as engineer, astronaut, pilot, and 
any other of the thousand professions which 
have run into one. They registered articles 
and shook hands on it. "Call me Bo. It really 
is my name . . . Swedish." 

"Another squarehead, eh?" grinned Lundgard. 'Tm from Soudi America myself." 

"Notice a year's gap here," said Bo, pointing to the service record. "On Venus." 

"Oh, yes. I had some fool idea about settling but soon learned better. I tried to farm, 
but when you have to carve your own land 
out of howling desert — Well, let's start 
some math, shall we?" 

They were lucky, not having to wait their 
turn at the station computer; no other ship 
was leaving immediately. They fed it the 
data and requirements, and got back columns of numbers: fuel requirements, acceleration times, orbital elements. The figures 
always had to be modified, no trip ever 
turned out just as predicted, but that could 
be done when needed with a slipstick and 
the little ship's calculator. 

Bo went at his share of the job doggedly, 
checking and re-checking before giving the 
problem to the machine; Lundgard breezed 
through it and spent his time while waiting 
for Bo in swapping dirty limericks with the 
tech. He had some good ones. 

The Shins was loaded, inspected, and 
cleared. A "scooter" brought her three passengers up to her orbit, they embarked, settled down, and waited. At the proper time, 
acceleration jammed them back in a thunder 
of rockets. 

Bo relaxed against the thrust, thinking of 
Achilles falling away behind them. "So 
long," he whispered. "So long, Johnny." 



Ill 



IN ANOTHER minute, he would be 
knotted and screaming from the bends, 
and a couple of minutes later he w T ould be 
dead 

Bo clamped his teeth together, as if he 
would grip consciousness in his jaws. His 
hands felt cold and heavy, the hands of a 



stranger, as he fumbled for the supply 
pouch. It seemed to recede from him, down 
a hollow infinite corridor where 
talked in a language he did not kn 

"Damn," he gasped. "Da. 
damn, damn, damn." 

He got the pouch oper 
stars wheeled around him. The 
buzzing in his head, like cold \ 
buzzing and buzzing in the enormous ringing emptiness of his skull. Pain ja£ 
through him, he felt his eardrums pop 
as pressure dropped. 

The plastic patch stuck to his metal gauntlet. He peeled it off, trying not to hi 
the fury ripping in his nerves. His boJ\ 
slow, inert, a thing to fight. There was no 
more feeling in his back, was he dead already? 

Redness flamed before his eyes, red like 
Valeria's hair blowing across the stars. It 
was sheer reflex which brought his arm 
around to slap the patch over the hole in his 
suit. The adhesive gripped, drying fa 
the sucking vacuum. The patch bellied out 
from internal air pressure, stfai 
loose and kill him. 

Bo's mind wavered back 
opened the valves wide on his I 
thermostatic capacitors pumped 1 
into him. For a long time he lay there, only 
lungs and heart had motion. His throat felt 
withered and flayed, but the ra 
through it was like being born again. 

Born, spewed out of an iron 
hollowness of stars and cold, to lierock while the enemy hunted him. 
dered and wanted to scream agi 

Slowly he groped back b 
His frostbitten back tingled as it w a 
again, soon it would be afire. He could feel 
a hot trickling of blood, but it was along his 
right side. The bullet must have spent 
of its force punching through the armor, 
caromed off the inside, scratched his ribs, 
and fallen dead. Next time he probably 
wouldn't be so lucky. A magnetic-driven .30 
slug w r ould go right through a he! 
splashing brains as it passed. 

He turned his head, feeling a grc 

and looked at the gauges. This had 
cost him a lot of air. There was only about 
three hours worth left. Lundgard could kill 
\ simply by waiting. 



12 



PLANET STORIES 



It would be easy to die. He lay on his 
back, staring up at the stars and the spilling 
cloudy glory of the Milky Way. A warmth 
was creeping back into numbed hands and 
feet; soon he would be warm all over, and 
sleepy. His eyelids felt heavy, strange that 
they should be so heavy on an asteroid. 

He wanted terribly to sleep. 

There wasn't much room in the Sirivs, 
the only privacy was gained by drawing 
curtains across your bunk. Men without 
psych training could get to hate each other 
on a voyage. Bo wondered if he would reach 
Luna hating Einar Lundgard. 

The man was competent, a willing worker, 
tempering his cheerfulness with tact, always 
immaculate in the neat blue and white of the 
Fireball Line which made Bo feel doubly 
sloppy in his own old gray coverall. He was 
a fine conversationalist with an enormous 
stock of reminiscence and ideas, witty above 
a certain passion of belief. It seemed as if 
he and Valeria were always talking, animated voices like a sound of life over the 
mechanical ship-murmurs, while Bo sat 
dumbly in a corner wishing he could think 
of something to say. 

The trouble was, in spite of all his efforts, 
he was doing a cometary dive into another 
bad case of one-sided love. When she spoke 
in that husky voice of hers, gray gleam of 
eyes under hair that floated flaming in nullgee, the beauty he saw in her was like pain. 
And she was always around. It couldn't be 
helped. Once they had gone into free fall he 
could only polish so much metal ->nd tinker 
with so many appliances; after that they were 
crowded together in a long waiting. 

— "And why were you all alone in the 
Belt?" asked Lundgard. "In spite of all the 
romantic stories about the wild free life of 
the rockhound, it's the dullest place in the 
System." 

"Not to me," she smiled. "I was working. 
There were experiments to be done, factors 
to be measured, away from solar radiation. 
There are always ions around inside the orbit of Mars to j amble up a delicate apparatus." ^ 

Bo sat quiet, trying to keep his eyes off 
her. She looked good in shorts and halfcape. Too good. 

"It's something to do with power beam


ing, isn't it?" Lundgard's handsome face 
creased in a frown. "Afraid I don't quite understand. They've been beaming power on 
the planets for a long time now." 

"So they have," she nodded. "What we're 
after is an interplanetary power beam. And 
we've got it." She gestured to the baggage 
rack and a thick trunk full of papers she had 
put there. "That's it. Hie basic circuits, factors, and constants. Any competent engineer 
could draw up a design from them/' 
"Hmmm . . . precision work, eh?" 
"Obviously! It was hard enough to do on, 
say, Earth — you need a really tight beam in 
just the right frequencies, a feedback signal 
to direct each beam at the desired outlet, relay stations— oh, yes, it was a ten-year research project before they could even think 
about building. An interplanetary beam has 
all those problems plus a number of its own. 
You have to get the dispersion down to a 
figure so low it hardly seems possible. You 
can't use feedback because of the time lag, so 
the beams have to be aimed exactly right — 
and the planets are always moving, at miles 
per second. An error of one degree would 
throw your beam almost two million miles 
off in crossing one A. U. And besides being 
so precise, the beam has to carry a begawatt 
at least to be worth the trouble. The problem 
looked insoluble till someone in the Order 
of Planetary Engineers came up with an idea 
for a trick control circuit hooked into a special computer. My lab's been working together with the Order on it, and I was making certain final determinations for them. 
It's finished now . . . twelve years of work 
and we're done." She laughed. "Except for 
building the stations and getting the bugs 
out!" 

UNDGARD cocked an oddly sardonic 
±J brow. "And what do you hope for from 
it?" he asked. "What have the psychotechs 
decided to do with this thing?" 

"Isn't it obvious?" she cried. "Power! 
Nuclear fuel is getting scarcer every day, and 
civilization is finished if we can't find another energy source. The sun is pouring out 
more than we'll ever need, but sheer distance 
dilutes it below a useful level by the time it 
gets to Venus. 

"We'll build stations on the hot side of 
Mercury. Orbital stations can relay. We can 



OUT OF THE IRON V/OMB! 



13 



get the beams as far out as Mars without too 
much dispersion. It'll bring down the rising 
price of atomic energy, which is making all 
other prices rise, and stretch our supply of 
fissionables for centuries more. No more 
fuel worries, no more Martians freezing to 
death because a converter fails, no more clan 
feuds on Venus starting over uranium 
beds — " The excited flush on her cheeks was 
lovely to look at. 

Lundgard shook his head. There was a 
sadness in his smile. "You're a true child of 
the New Enlightenment," he said. "Reason 
will solve everything. Science will find a cure 
for all our ills. Give man a cheap energy 
source and leave him forever happy. It won't 
work, you know." 

Something like anger crossed her eyes, 

"What are you?" she asked. "A Humanist?" 

"Yes," said Lundgard quietly. 

Bo started. He'd known about the anti
psychotechnic movement which was growing 

on Earth, seen a few of its adherents, but — 

"I never thought a spaceman would be a 

Humanist," he stammered. 

Lundgard shrugged wryly. "Don't be 
afraid. I don't eat babies. I don't even get 
hysterics in an argument All I've done is use 
the scientific method, observing the world 
wkhout preconceptions, and learned by it 
that the scientific method doesn't ha s 
the answers." 

"Instead, " said Valeria scornfully, "we 
should all go back to church and pray for 
what we want rather than working for it." 

"Not at all," said Lundgard mildly. "The 
New Enlightenment is — or was, because it's 
dying — a very natural state of mind. Here 
Earth had come out of the World Wars, 
racked and ruined, starving and chaotic, and 
all because of unbridled ideology. So the 
physical scientists produced goods and machines and conquered the planets; the biologists foond new food sources and new 
cures foe disease; the psychotechs built up 
their knowledge to a point where the socioeconomic unity could really be planned and 
the plan worked. Man was unified, war had 
sunken to an occasional small 'police action,' 
people were eating and had comfort and 
security — all through applied, working science. Naturally they came to believe reason 
would solve their remaining problems. But 
this faith in reason was itself an emotional 



reaction from the preceding age of unreason. 
"Well, we've had a century of enlightenment now, and it has created its own troubles which it cannot solve. No age can handle the difficulties it raises for itself; that's 
left to the next era. There are practical problems arising, and no mater how desperately 
the psychotechs work they aren't succeeding 
with them." 

"What problems?" asked Bo, feeling a 
little bewildered. 

"Man, don't you ever see a newscast?** 
challenged Lundgard. The Second Industrial 
Revolution, millions of people thrown out 
of work by the new automata. They aren't 
going hungry, but they are displaced and 
bitter. The economic center of Earth is shifting to Asia, the political power with it, and 
hundreds of millions of Asians are skeptical 
aboard this antiseptic New Order the West 
has been bringing them: cultural resistance, 
and not all the psychotechnic propaganda in 
the System can shake it off. The men of 
Mars, Venus, the Belt, the Jovian moons are 
developing their own civilizations— inevitably, in alien environments; their own ways 
of living and thinking, which just don't fit 
into the neat scheme of an Earth-dominated 
Solar Union. The psychotechs themselves are 
being driven to oligarchic, unconstitutional 
acts; they have no choice, but k's making 
them enemies. 

"And then there's the normal human energy and drive. Man can only be safe and 
sane and secure for so long, then he reacts. 
This New Enlightenment is really a decadent age, a period where an exhausted civilization has been resting under a holy status 
quo. It can't last. Man always wants something new." 

"You Humanists talk a lot about 'man's 
right to variability,' " said Valeria. "If you 
really carry off that revolution your writings 
advocate you'll just trade one power group 
for another — and more fanatic, less lawful, 
than the present one." 

"Not necessarily," said Lundgard, " After 
all, the Union will probably break ut>. It 
can't last forever. All we want to do is 

sten the day because we feel that it's out1 its usefulness." 

Bo shook his head. "I can't see it," he said 
heavily. "I just can't see it All those people 
— the Lunarites» the violent clansmen oa 



14 



PLANET STORIES 



Venus, the stiff correct Martians, the asteroid 
rockhounds, even those mysterious Jovians 
— they all came from Earth. It was Earth's 
help that made their planets habitable. We're 
all men, all one race." 

"A fiction," said Lundgard. "The human 
race is a fiction. There are only small groups 
with their own conflicting interests." 

"And if those conflicts arc allowed to 
break into war — " said Valeria. "Do you 
know what a lithium bomb can do?" 

There was a reckless gleam in Lundgard's 
eyes. "If a period of interplanetary wars is 
necessary, let's get it over with," he answered. "Enough men will survive to build 
something better. This age has gotten stale. 
It's petrifying. There have been plenty of 
shake-ups in history— the fall of Rome, the 
Reformation, the Napoleonic Wars, the 
World Wars. It's been man's way of progressing." 

"I don't know about all those," said Bo 
slowly. "I just know I wouldn't want to live 
through such a time." 

"You're soft," said Lundgard. "Down underneath you're soft." He laughed disarmingly. "Pardon me. I didn't mean anything 
personal. I'll never convince you and you'll 
never convince me, so let's keep it friendly. 
I hope you'll have some free time on Luna, 
Valeria. I know a little grill where they serve 
the best synthosteaks in the System." 

"All right," she smiled. "It's a date." 

Bo mumbled some excuse and went aft. 
He was still calling her Dr. McKittrick. 

IV 

YOU can't just lie here and let him come 
kill you. 
There was a picture behind his eyes; he 
didn't know if it was a dream or a long 
buried memory. He stood under an aspen 
which quivered and rustled as if it laughed 
to itself softly, softly, when the wind embraced it. And the wind was blowing up a 
red granite slope, wild and salt from the 
Sound, and there were towering clouds lifting over Denmark to the west. The sunlight 
rained and streamed through aspen leaves, 
broken, shaken, falling in spatters against 
the earth, and he, Bo Jonsson, laughed with 
the wind and the tree and the far watery 
glitter of the Sound. 



He opened his eyes, wearily, like an old 
man. Orion was marching past, and there 
was a blaze on crags five miles off which 
told of the rising sun. The asteroid spun 
swiftly; he had been here for many of its 
days now, and each day burdened him like 
a year. 

Got to get out of here, he knew. 

He sat up, pain tearing along his furrowed breast. Somehow he had kept the 
wrench with him, he stared at it in a dull 
wonder. 

Where to go, where to hide, what to do? 

Thirst nagged him. Slowly he uncoiled 
the tube which led from the electrically 
heated canteen welded to his suit, screwed 
its end into the helmet nipple, thumbed 
down the clamp which closed it, and sucked 
hard. It helped a little. 

He dragged himself to his feet and stood 
swaying, only the near-weightlessness kept 
him erect. Turning his head in its transparent cage, he saw the sun rise, and bright 
spots danced before him when he looked 
away. 

His vision cleared, but for a moment he 
thought the shadow lifting over a nearby 
ridge was a wisp of unconscicrusness. Then 
he made out the bulky black-painted edge of 
it, gigantic against the Milky Way, and it 
was Lundgard, moving unhurriedly up to 
kill him. 

A dark laughter was in his radio earphones. "Take it easy, Bo. I'll be there in a 
minute." 

He backed away, his heart a sudden thunder, looking for a place to hide. Down! Get 
down and don't stand where he can see you! 
He crouched as much as the armor would 
allow and broke into a bounding run. 

A slug spat broken stone near his feet. 
The powdery dust hung for minutes before 
settling. Breath rattled in his throat. He saw 
the lip of a meteoric crater and dove. 

Crouching there, he heard Lundgard's 
voice again: "You're somewhere near. Why 
not come out and finish it now?" 

The radio was non-directional, so he 
snapped back: "A gun against a monkey 
wrench?" 

Lundgard's coolness broke a little; there 
was almost a puzzled note: "I hate to do 
this. Why can't you be reasonable? I don't 
want to kill you." 



* 



OUT OF THE IRON WOMB! 



15 



~The trouble," said Bo harshly, "is t! 
want to kill you." 

"Behold the man of the New Enlight 
mend" Bo could imagine Lundgard's grin. 
It would be tight, and there would be s 
on die lean face, but the amusement 
genuine. Didn't you believe sweet reasonableness could solve everything? This is only 
the beginning, Bo, just a small prelim; 
hint that the age of reason is dying. I've 
already converted you to my way of think* n g» by the very fact you're fighting me. 
Why not admit it?" 

Bo shook his head — futile gesture, looked 
in darkness where he lay. There was a frosty 
blaze of stars when he looked up. 

It was more than himself and Johnny 
Malone, more even than the principle of the 
thing and the catastrophe to all men which 
Lundgard's victory meant. There was something deep and primitive which would not 
let him surrender, even in die teeth of annihilation. Valeria's image swayed before him. 

Lundgard was moving around, peering 
over the shadowy tumble of blackened rock 
in search of any trace. There was a magnetic 
rifle in his hands. Bo strained his helmet to 
the crater floor, trying to hear ground vibrations, but diere was nothing. He didn't know 
where Lundgard was, only that he 
near. 

Blindly, he bunched his legs and spf 
out of the pit. 

THEY found th easteroid where 
had left her recording instruments. It 
was a tiny drifting fragment of a v 
which had never been born, turning endlessly between the constellations; the 5 
moored fast with grapples, and Valeria 
donned a spacesuit and went out to get her 
apparatus. Lundgard accompanied her. As 
there was only work for two, Bo stayed behind. 

He slumped for a while in the pi : 
letting his mind pace through a circle of futility. Valeria, Valeria, Valeria — O strong 
and fair and never to be forgotten, would he 
ever see her again after they made Luna? 

This wontt do, he told himself dully. I 
should at least keep busy. Thank God fo? 
tvork. 

He wasn't much of a thinker, he knew 
that, but he had cleverness in his hands. It 



was satisfying to watch a fin 
right under his tools. Wor ! 
the falseness of Lundgard's ph The 

man could quote history all he wanted; 
e a glittering circle of logic around Bo's 
awkward brain, but it didn't tacts. 

Maybe this century was headed fur tiv 
maybe psydiotechnic governm 
another human self -limitation and should be 
changed for something t 
the truth remained that mosi were 

workers who wished no more than peace in 
which to create as best they could. All the 
high ideals in the universe weren't worth 
breaking the Union for and s ; the 

work of human hands in a single burst of 
annihilating flame. 

/ can feel it, down inside me. But why 
I say it? 

He got up and went over to the baggage 
rack, remembering that Lundgard had dozens of book-reels along and that reading 
would help him not to think about what he 
could never have. 

On a planet Bo would not have dreamed 
of helping himself without asking first But 
custom is different in space, where there is 
no privacy and men must be a unit if they 
are to survive. He was faintly surprised to 
see that Lundgard's personal suitcase was 
locked; but it would be hours, probably, before the owner got back: dismantling a recorder setup took time. A long time, in 
which to talk and laugh with Valeria. In the 
chill spatial radiance, her hair would be like 
frosty fire. 

Casually, Bo stooped across to Lundgard's 
sack-hammock and took his key ring off the 
hook. He opened the suitcase and lifted out 
some of the reels in search of a promising 
title. 

Underneath them were neatly folded 

clothes, Fireball uniforms and fancy dress 

mas. A tartan edge stuck out from be
and Bo lifted a coat to see what clan 

was. Probably a souvenir of L 

isian stay — 

Next to the kilt was a box which he recognized. L-masks came in such boxes. 

How the idea came to him, he did not 
know. He stood there for minutes, looking 
at the box without seeing it. The ship was 
very quiet around him. He had a sudden 
feeling that the walls were closing in, 



16 



PLANET STORIES 



When he opened the box, his hands 
shook, and there was sweat trickling along 
his ribs. 

The mask was of the latest type, meant to 
fit over the head, snug around the cheeks 
and mouth and jaws. It was like a second 
skin, reflecting expression, not to be told 
from a real face. Bo saw die craggy nose and 
the shock of dark hair, limp now, but — 
^ Suddenly he was back on Achilles, with 
riot roaring around him and Johnny Malone's body in his arms. 
^ No wonder they never found that Venusian. There never was any. 

Bo felt a dim shock when he looked at the 
chronometer. Only five minutes had gone by 
while he stood there. Only five minutes to 
turn the cosmos inside out. 

Very slowly and carefully he repacked the 
suitcase and put it in the rack and sat down 
to think. 

What to do? 

Accuse Lundgard to his face — no, the 
man undoubtedly carried that needier. And 
there was Valeria to think of. A ricocheting 
dart, a scratch on her, no! It took Bo a long 
time to decide; his brain seemed viscous. 
When he looked out of a port to the indifferent stars, he shuddered. 

THEY came back, shedding their spacesuits in the airlock; frost whitened the 
armor as moisture condensed on chilled surfaces. The metal seemed to breathe cold. 
Valeria went efficiently to work, stowing the 
boxed instruments as carefully as if they 
were her children. There was a laughter on 
her lips which turned Bo's heart around inside him. 

Lundgard leaned over the tiny desk where 
he sat. "What y doing?" he asked. 

"Recalculating our orbit to Luna," said 
Bo. "I want to go slow for a few million 
miles before going up to hyperbolic speed." 

Why? It'll add days to the trip, and the 
fuel— " 

"I . . . I'm afraid we might barge into 
Swarm 770. It's supposed to be near here 
now and, uh, the positions of those things 
are never known for sure . . . perturbations . . ." Bo's mouth felt dry. 

"You've got a megamile of safety margin 
or your orbit would never have been approved," argued Lundgard. 



"Hell damn it, I'm the captain!" yelled 
Bo. 

"All right, all right . . . take it easy, skipper." Lundgard shot a humorous glance at 
Valeria. "I certainly don't mind a few extra 
days in ... the present company." 
She smiled at him. Bo felt ill. 
His excuse was thin; if Lundgard thought 
to check the ephemeris, it would fall to ruin. 
But he couldn't tell the real reason. 

An iron-drive ship does not need to drift 
along the economical Hohmann "A" orbit 
of the big freighters; it can build up such 
furious speed that the sun will swing it 
along a hyperbola rather than an ellipse, and 
can still brake that speed near its destination. 
But the critical stage of acceleration has to 
be just right, or there will not be enough 
fuel to stop completely; the ship will be 
pulled into a cometary orbit and run helpless, the crew probably starving before a resale vessel can locate them. Bo dared not risk 
the trouble exploding at full drive; he would 
drift along, capture and bind Lundgard at 
the first chance, and then head for Earth. He 
could handle the Sirius alone even if it was 
illegal; he could not handle her if he had to 
fight simultaneously. 

His knuckles were white on the controls 
as he loosed the grapples and nudged away 
from the asteroid with a whisper of power. 
After a few minutes of low acceleration, he 
cut the rockets, checked position and velocity, and nodded. "On orbit," he said 
mechanically. "It's your turn to cook, Ei . . . 
Einar." 

Lundgard swooped easily through tlie air 
into the cubbyhole which served for a galley. 
Cooking in free fall is an art which not all 
spacemen master, but he could — his meals 
were even good. Bo felt a helpless kind of 
rage at his own clumsy efforts. 

He crouched in midair, dark of mind, a 
leg hooked around a stanchion to keep from 
drifting. 

When someone touched him, bis heart 
jumped and he whirled around. 

"What's the matter, Bo?" asked Valeria. 
"You look like doomsday." 

"I ... I ..." He gulped noisily and 
twisted his mouth into a smile. Just feeling a 
little off." 

"It's more than that, I think." Her eyes 
were grave. "You've seemed so unhappy the 






OUT OF THE IRON WOMB! 



17 



whole trip. Is there anything I can do to 
help?" 

"Thanks ... Dr. McKittrick . . . but—" 
"Don't be so formal," she said, almost 
wistfully. "I don't bite. Too many men think 
I do. Can't we be friends?" 

"With a thick-headed clinker like me?" 
His whisper was raw. 

"Don't be silly. It takes brains to be a 
spaceman. I like a man who knows when to 
be quiet." She lowered her eyes, the lashes 
were long and sooty black. "There's something solid about you, something so few people seem to have these days. \ wish you 
wouldn't go feeling so inferior. * 

At any other time it would have been a 
sunburst in him. Now he thought of death, 
and mumbled something and looked away. 
A hurt expression crossed her face. "I won't 
bother you," she said gently, and moved off. 
The thing was to fall on Lundgard while 
he slept — 

The radar alarm buzzed during a dinner 
in which Lundgard's flow of talk had battered vainly against silence and finally given 
up. Bo vaulted over to the control panel and 
checked. No red light glowed, and the autopilot wasn't whipping them out of danger, 
so they weren't on a collision course. But the 
object was getting close. Bo calculated it was 
an asteroid on an orbit almost parallel to 
their own, relative speed only a few feet per 
second; it would come within ten miles or 
so. In the magnifying periscope, it showed 
as a jagged dark cube, turning around itself 
and flashing hard glints of sunlight off mica 
beds — perhaps six miles square, all crags 
and cracks and fracture faces, heatless and 
lifeless and kindless. 



LUNDGARD yawned elaborately after 
dinner. "Excuse," he said. "Unless 
somebody's for chess?" His hopeful glance 
met the grimness of Bo and the odd sadness 
of Valeria, and he shrugged. "All right, 
then. Pleasant dreams." 

After ten minutes — now! 

Bo uncoiled himself. "Valeria," he whispered, as if the name were holy. 

"Yes?" She arched her brows expectantly. 

"I can't stop to explain now. I've got to 
2 — Planet — Summer 



do something dangerous. Get back aft of the 
gyro housing." 
"What?" 

"Get back!" Command blazed frantically 
in him. "And stay there, whatever happens." 
Something like fear flickered in her eyes. 
It was a very long way to human help. Then 
she nodded, puzzled but with an obedience 
which held gallantry, and slipped out of 
sight behind the steel pillar. 

Bo launched himself across the room in a 
single null-gee bound. One hand ripped 
aside Lundgard's curtain, the other got him 
by the throat. 

What the hell—" 

Lundgard exploded into life. His fist 
crashed against Bo's cheek. Bo held on with 
one hand and slugged with the other. 
Knuckles bounced on rubbery muscle. Lundgard's arm snaked for the tunic stretched on 
his bunk wall; his body came lithely out of 
the sack. Bo snatched for that wrist. Lundgard's free hand came around, edged out to 
slam him in the larynx. 

Pain ripped through Bo. He let go and 
sailed across the room. Lundgard was pulling out his needier. 

Bo hit die opposite wall and rebounded — 
not for the armed man, but for the control 
panel. Lundgard spat a dart at him. It burst 
on the viewport over his shoulder, and Bo 
caught the acrid whiff of poison. Then the 
converter was roaring to life and whining 
gyros spun the ship around. 

Lundgard was hurled across the room. 
He collected himself, catlike, grabbed a 
stanchion, and raised the gun N again. "I've 
got the drop," he said. "Get away from 
there or you're a dead man." 

It was as if someone else had seized Bo's 
body. Decision was like lightning through 
him. He had tried to capture Lundgard, 
failed, and venom crouched at his back. But 
the ship was pointed for the asteroid now, 
where it hung gloomily a dozen miles off, 
and the rockets were ready to spew. 

"If you shoot me," said Bo, "I'll live just 
long enough to pour on the juice. We'll hit 
that rock and scatter from hell to breakfast." 

Valeria emerged. Lundgard the 

needier to cover her. "Stay where you arc!" 
he rapped. 

"What's happening?" she said fearfully. 



18 PLANE1 

said Lundgard, "Bo's 
goi attacked me — " 

rath boiled black in the pilot. He 
snarled, "You killed my partm must'a 

to kill us too." 

mean?" tleria. 

should I know?" s 
mped his orbit, that's all. 
be reasonable. Ge ie l_" 

in his suitcase, Valeria/' Bo fo 
Is out of a tauten l "A Ve
nusian shot my partner. You'll find his face 
and his clothes in Lundgard's things. I'd 
know tl n the middle of the su 

She hung for a long v 
Bo couldn't see her. His , 
the asteroid, keeping the ship's nose pointed 
at it. 

^Is that true, Einar?" she asked finally. 
"No," said. "Of course not. I do h 
Venusian clothes and a mask, but—" 

Then why are you keeping me cov^ 
too?" 

Lundgard didn't answer at once. The only 
noise was the murmur of machinery and the 
dense breathing of three pairs of lungs. 
Then his laugh jarred forth. 

"All right," he said. "I hadn't meant it 
to come yet, or to come this way, but all 

"Why did you kill Johnny?" Tears stung 
Bo's eyes. He never hurt you." 

"It was necessary." Lundgard's mouth 
twitched. "But you see, we knew you were 
going to Achilles. to pick up Valeria and 
her data. We needed to get a man aboard 
your ship, to take over when her orbit 
brought her close to our asteroid base. 
You've forced my hand — 1 wasn't going to 
capture you for days yet. I jed the 

Drake's fuel tanks to get myself stranded 
there, and shot your friend to get his berth. 
I'm sorry." 

hy?" Horror rode Valeria's voice. 
"I'm a Humanist. I've never made a secret of that. What our se< s that some 
of us aren't content just to talk revolution. 
We want to give this rotten 
nized society the shove that will bring on its 
end. We've built up a small force, not much 
as yet, not enough to accomplish anything 
lasting. But if we had a solar power beam 
it would make a big difference. It could be 
adapted to direct military uses, as well as 



STORIES 

! ymg energy to our machines. A lens 
ct, a concentration of solar radiation 
strong enough to burn. Well, it seems worth 
try in 

"And what do you intend for u 
"You'll have to be kept prisoners for t 
while, of course," said Lundgard. "It won't 
rous. We aren't beasts." 
" said Bo. "Just murderer 
"Save thedramaites," sn 
' I have the gun. Get away from rJ 
troJs." 

»k his head. There was a wild ham; in his breast, but his voice surprised 

m with steadiness: "No. I've got the upper hand. I can kill yov if you move. Yell if 
he tries anything, Valeria." 

Lundgard's eyes challenged her. "Do you 
want to die?" he asked. 

Her head lifted. "No," she said, "but I'm 
not afraid to. Go ahead if you must, Bo. 
It's all right." 

V>0 FELT cold. He knew he wouldn't. He 
-*-> was blulhng. In the final showdown he 
rash her. He had seen too many 
withered space drained mummies in his 
time. But maybe Lundgard didn't realize 
that. 

"Give up," he said. "Ycu can't gain a 

mn thing. I'm not going to see a billion 
people burned alive just to save our necks. 
Make a bargain for your life." 

"No," said Lundgard with a curious gentleness. "I have my own brand of honor. 
I'm not going to surrender to you. You can't 
sit there forever." 

Impasse. The ship floated through eternal 
silence while they waited. 

"Ail right," said Bo. 'Til fight you for 
the power beam." 

How's that?" 

"I can throw this ship into orbit iround 
the asteroid. We can go down there and settle the thing between us. The winner can 
jump up here again with the help of a jet 
of tanked air. The lump hasn't got much 
ity." 

Lundgard hesitated. "And how do I 
know you'll keep your end of the bargain?" 
he asked. "You could let me go through the 
airlock, then dose it and blast off." 

Bo had had some such thought, but be 
might have known it wouldn't work. "What 






OUT OF THE IRON WOMB I 



19 



do you suggest?** he countered, never taking 
his eyes off the planetoid. "Remember, I 
don't trust you either." 

Lundgard laughed suddenly, a hard yelping bark. "I know! Valeria, go aft and remove all the control-rod links and spares. 
Bring them back here. I'll go out first, taking half of them with me, and Bo can follow 
with the other half. He'll have to." 

"I— no! I won't," she whispered. "I can't 
let you—" 

"Go ahead and do it," said Bo. He felt * 
sudden vast weariness. It's the only way we 
can break this deadlock." 

She wept as she went toward the engine 
room. 

Lundgard's thought was good. Without 
linked control-rods, the converter couldn't 
operate five minutes, it would flare up and 
melt itself and kill everyone aboard in a 
flood of radiation. Whoever won the duel 
could quickly re-install the necessary parts. 

There was a waiting silence. At last Lundgard said, almost abstractedly: "Holmgang. 
Do you know what that means, Bo?" 

"No." 

"You ought to. It was a custom of our ancestors back in the early Middle Ages — the 
Viking time. Two men would go off to a 
little Island, a holm, to settle their differences; one would come back. I never thought 
it could happen out here." He chuckled 
bleakly. "Valkyries in spacesuits?" 

The girl came back with the links tied in 
two bundles. Lundgard counted them and 
nodded. "All right." He seemed strangely 
calm, an easy assurance lay over him like 
armor. Bo's fear was cold in his belly, and 
Valeria wept still with a helpless horror. 

The pilot used a safe two minutes of low 
blast to edge up to the asteroid, "111 go into 
the airlock and put on my spacesuit," said 
Lundgard. "Then I'll jump down and you 
can put the ship in orbit. Don't try anything 
while I'm changing, because I'll keep this 
needier handy." 

"It won't work against a spacesuit," said 
Bo. 

Lundgard laughed. "I know," he said. 
He kissed his hand to Valeria and backed 
into the lock chamber. 1'lic outer valve 
closed behind him. 

"Bo!" Valeria grabbed the pilot by the 
shoulders, and he looked around into her 



face. "You can't go out there, I won't let 
you, I— " 

"If I don't," he said tonelessly, "we'll 
orbit around here till we starve." 

"But you could be killed!" 

"I hope not. For your sake, mostly, I hope 
not," he said awkwardly. "But he won't 
have any more weapon than me, just a 
monkey wrench." There was a metal tube 
welded to the leg of each suit for holding 
tools; wrenches, the most commonly used, 
were simply left there as a rule. "I'm bigger 
than he is." 

"But — " She laid her head on his breast 
and shuddered with crying. He tried to comfort her. 

"All right," he said at last "All right. 
Lundgard must be through. I'd better get 
started." 

"Leave him!" she blazed. "His air won't 
last many hours. We can wait." 

"And when he sees he's been tricked, you 
think he won't wreck those links? No. 
There's no way out." 

It was as if all his life he had walked on a 
road which had no turnings, which led inevitably to this moment. 

He made some careful calculations from 
the instrument readings, physical constants 
of the asteroid, and used another minute's 
maneuvering to assume orbital velocity. 
Alarm lights blinked angry eyes at him, the 
converter was heating up. No more traveling 
till the links were restored. 

Bo floated from his chair toward the lock. 
Good-bye, Valeria," he said, feeling the 
bloodless weakness of words, "I hope it 
won't be for long." 

She threw her arms about him and kissed 
him. The taste of tears was still on his lips 
when he had dogged down his helmet. 

Opening the outer valve he moved forth, 
magnetic toots clamping to the hull. A gulf 
of stars yawned around him, a cloudy halo 
about his head. The stillness was smothering. 

When he was "over" the asteroid he 
gauged his position w r ith a practiced eye and 
jumped free. Falling, he thought mostly of 
Valeria. 

As he landed he looked around. No sign 
of Lundgard. The man could be anywhere 
in these square miles of cosmic wreckage. 
He spoke tentatively into his radio, in case 



_ 



20 



PLANET STORIES 



£ urK d be within the horizon: 

"Hello, are you there?" 

"Yes. I'm coming." There was a sharp 
cruel note of laughter. "Sorry to play this 
dirty, but there are bigger issues at stake 
than you or me. I've kept a rifle in my tooltube all the thvic . . . just in ca l-bye, 
Bo." 

.hind 

him. Bv; turned and ran. 



VI 



A v c lip of the crater, his 

•*"*• ung, seeking his enemy. There! 

It was almost a reflex which brought his 
arm back and sent the wrench hurtling across 
the f n, Before it had struck, 

Bo's feet lashed against the pit edge, and 
the ed him toward Lundgard. 

en have to be good at throwing 
things. The wrench hit the lifted rifle in a 
soundless shiver of metal, tore it loose from 
an insecure gauntleted grasp and sent it 
spinning into shadow. Lundgard yelled, 
spun on his heel, and dove after it Then the 
flying bod)- of Bo Jonsson struck him. 
^ Even in low-gee, matter has all its inertia. 
The impact rang and boomed within their 
armoj ed and fell to the ground, 

locking irmt and hammering futilely at helping over, Bo got on top, his hands 
n Lundgard's throat — where the 
throat should have been, but plastic and alloy 
held fast; instinct had betrayed him. 

Lundgard snarled, doubled his legs and 
Bo was sent staggering back. Lundgard crawled erect and turned to look for 
the rifle. Bo couldn't see it either in the nearso ^ j here no light fell, but his 

wrench lay as a dark gleam. He sprang for 
that, hand on it, bounced up, and 

ed at Lundgard. A swing shocked his 
own muscles with its force, and Lundgard 
lure! 

Bo moved in on him. Lundgard reached 
into his tool-tube and drew out his own 
ch. He circled, his panting hoarse in 
Bo's earphon 

"Tin's ... is the way . . . it was supposed 
to b< Bo. 

iped in, his weapon whirling down 
to shi in on the other helmet. Lund
gard shook a dazed head and countered. The 



impact roared and echoed in Bo's helmet, on 
into his skull. He smashed heavily. Lundgard's lifted wrench parried the blow, it slid 
off. Like a fencer, Lundgard snaked his 
shaft in and the reverberations were deafen
Bo braced himself and smote with all his 
er. The lilt sang back through iron and 
alloy, into his own bones. Lundgard ! 
gered a littk i hunched himself and stru< 
return. 

They stood with feet braced apart, trading 
fury, a metal rain on shivering plastic. The 
stuff was almost unbreakable, but not quite, 
not for long when such violence dinned on 
it. Bo felt a lifting wild glee, something 
savage he had never known before leaped 
up in him and he bellowed. He was stronger, 
he could hit harder. Lundgard's he 
would break first! 

The Humanist retreated, using his wrench 
like a sword, stopping the force of bl 
without trying to deal more of his own. His 
left hand fumbled at his side. Bo hardly 
noticed. He was pushing in, hewing, hewing. Again the shrunken sun rose, to flash 
hard light off his club. 

Lundgard grinned, his face barely visible 
as highlight and shadow behind the pla 
His raised tool turned one hit, it slipped 
along his arm to rap his flank. Bo twisted 
his arm around, beat the other wrench . 
for a moment, and landed a crack like a 
thunderbolt. 

Then Lundgard had his drinking hose 
free, pointing in his left hand. He thumbed 
down the clamp, exposing water at fifty degrees to naked space. 

It rushed forth, driven by its own vapor 
pressure, a stream like a lance in the wan 
sunshine. When it hit Bo's helmet, most of 
it boiled off . . . cooling the rest, which 
froze instantly. 

Blindness clamped down on Bo. He 
leaped away, cursing, the front of his helmet 
so frosted he could not see before him. 
Lundgard bounced around, playing the hose 
on him. Through the rime-coat, Bo could 
make out only a grayness. 

He pawed at it, trying to wipe it off, 
knowing that Lundgard was using this captured minute to look for the rifle. As he 
some of the ice loose, he heard a si 
of victory — found! 



OUT OF THE IRON WOMB! 



21 



Turning,, he ran again. 
Over that ridge! Down on your belly! A 
slug pocked the stone above him. Rol 
over, he got to his feet and bounded off toward a steep rise, still wiping blindness off 
his helmet. But he could not wipe the bitter 
vomit taste of defeat out of his mouth. 

His breathing was a file that raked in his 
throat. Heart and lungs were ready to tear 
loose, and there was a cold knot in his guts. 
Fleeing up the high, ragged slope, he sobbed 
out his rage at himself and his own stupidity. 

At the top of the hill he tiirew himself to 
the ground and looked down again over a 
low wall of basalt. It was hard to see if anything moved down in that valley of night. 
Then the sun threw a broken gleam off 
polished metal, the rifle barrel, and he saw 
Einar Lundgard walking around, looking 
for him. 

The voice came dim in his earphones. 
"Why don't you give up, Bo? I tell you, I 
don't want to kill you." 

"Yeh." Bo panted wearily. "I'm sure." 
"Well, you can never tell," said Lundgard 
mildly. "It would be rather a nuisance to 
have to keep not only the fair Valeria, but 
you, tied up all the way to base. Still, if 
you'll surrender by the time I've counted 
tm — " 

"Look here," said Bo desperately, "I've 
got half the links. If you don't give up I'll 
hammer 'em all flat and let you starve." 

"And Valeria?" The voice jeered at him. 
He knew his secret was read. "I shouldn't 
have let you bluff me in the first place. It 
won't happen a second time. All right: one, 
two, three — " 

Bo could get off this asteroid with no 
more than the power of his own leg 
jets from the emergency blow it the 

bottom of an air tank would correct his 
c as needed to bring him back to the 
<s. He wanted to get up there, and inside warm walls, and take Valeria in his 
hands and never let her go again. He wanted 
to live. 

" — six, seven, eight — " 
He looked at his gauges. A lot of oxyhelium mixture was gone from the tanks, 
but they were big and there was still several 
atmospheres' pressure in each. A couple of 
hours' life. If he didn't exert himself too 



much. They screwed directly ink> valves in 
the back of his armor, and — 

M — ten. All right, Bo." Lundgard started 
moving up the slope, light and graceful as a 
bird. It was wide and open, no place to hide 
and sneak up behind him. 

FIGURES reeled through Bo's mind, 
senselessly. Mass of the asteroid, effective radius, escape velocity only a few feet 
per second, and he was already on one of the 
highest points. Brains! he thought with a 
shattering sorrow. A lot of good mine have 
done me! 

He prepared to back down the other side 
of the hill, run as well as he could, as long 
as he could, until a bullet splashed his blood 
or suffocation thickened it. But I want to 
fight! he thought through a gulp of tears. I 
want to stand up and fight! 

Orbital velocity equals escape velocity divided by the square root of two. 

For a moment he lay there, rigid, and his 
eyes stared at death walking up the slope but 
did not see it. 

Then, in a crazy blur of motion, he 
brought his wrench around, closed it on a 
nut at one side, and turned. 

The right hand air tank unscrewed easily. 
He held it in his hands, a three foot cylinder, 
blind while calculation raced through his 
head. What would the centrifugal and Goriolis forces be? It was the roughest sort of 
estimate. He had neither time nor data, 
but— 

Lundgard was taking it easy, stopping to 
examine each patch of shadow thrown by 
some gaunt crag, each mei ir where a 

man might hide. It would take him several 
minutes to reach the hillt< 

Bo clutched the loosened tank in his arms, 
throwing one leg around it to make sure, 
and faced away from Lundgard. He hefted 
himself, as if his body were a machine he 
must use. Then, carefully, he jumped off the 
top of the hill. 

It was birdlike, dreamlike, thus to 
noiseless over iron desolation. The sun fell 
behind him. A spearhead pinnacle 
after his feet. The Southern Cross flamed in 
his eyes. 

Downward — get rid of that downward 
component of velocity. He twisted the tank, 
pointing it toward the surface, and cautious





22 



PLA 



ly opened the blow valve with his free hand. 
Only a moment's exhaust, everything gauged 
by eye. Did he have an orbit now? 

The ground dropped sharply off to infinity, and he saw stars under the keel of the 
world. He was still going out, away. Maybe 
he had miscalculated his jump, exceeded escape velocity after all, and was headed for a 
long cold spin toward Jupiter. It would take 
all his compressed air to correct such a mistake. 

Sweat prickled in his armpits. He locked 
his teeth and refused to open the valve 
again. 

It was like endless falling, but he couldn't 
yet be sure if the fall was toward the asteroid 
or the stars. The rock spun past him. Another face came into view. Yes, by all idiot 
gods, ks gravity was pulling him around! 

He skimmed low over the bleakness of it, 
seeing darkness and starlit death sliding beneath him. Another crag loomed suddenly 
in his path, and he wondered in a harsh 
clutch of fear if he was going to crash. Then 
it ghosted by, a foot from his flying body. 
He thought he could almost sense. the chill 
of it. 

He was a moon now, a satellite skimming 
low above the airless surface of his own 
midget world. The fracture plain where 
Lundgard had shot at him went by, and he 
braced himself. Up around the tiny planet, 
and there was the hill he had left, stark 
against Sagittarius. He saw Lundgard, standing on its heights and looking the way he 
had gone. Carefully, he aimed the tank and 
gave himself another small blast to correct 
his path. There was no noise to betray him, 
the asteroid was a grave where all sound was 
long buried and frozen. 

He flattened, holding his body parallel to 
the tank in his arms. One hand still gripped 
tiie wrench, die other reached to open the 



STORIES 

• valve wide. 

The surge almost tore him loose. He had 
areening lunatic moment of flight in 
h the roar of escaping gas boiled 
through his armor and he clung like . 
to a runaway witch's broom. The sun 
blinding on one side of him. 

He struck Lundgard with an impact of 
velocity and inertia which sent him spinning 
down the hill. Bo hit the ground, reo 
and sprang after his enemy. Lundgard was 
still rolling. As Bo approached, he came to 
a halt, lifted his rifle dazedly, and had it 
knocked loose with a single blow of the 
wrench. 

Lundgard crawled to his feet while Bo 
picked up the rifle and threw it off die 
asteroid. "Why did you do that?" 

"I don't know," said Bo. "I should just 
shoot you down, but I want you to surrender." 
Lundgard drew his wrench. "No," he said. 

"All right;- said Bo. "It won't take long." 

When lie got up to the Sinus, using a 
tank Lundgard would never need, Valeria 
had armed herself with a kitchen knife. "It 
wouldn't have done much good," he said 
when he came through die airlock. She fell 
into his arms, sobbing, and he tried to comfort her. "It's all over. Ail taken care of. 
We can go home now." 

He himself was badly in need of consolation. The inquiry on Earth would clear him, 
of course, but he would always have to live 
with the memory of a man stretched dead 
under a wintery sky. He went aft and replaced the links. When he came back, 
Valeria had recovered herself, but as she 
watdied his methodical preparations and 
listened to what he had to tell, there was diat 
in her eyes which he hardly dared believe. 

Not him. Not a big dumb slob like him. 




ONCE A STARMAN 



By JOE L HENSLEY 

The snares of space were incalculable, Lou Argonne learned. Lightning speeds, immense distances, Stygian blackness, rushing stars, 
flaming meteors .! . all piled up inexorably to impale frail Earthman 
on the spears of vivid imagination. And there was no road back. 



"Y5 



OU docs out here are a funny lot," 
Lou Argonne said. 

The man who sat beside him on 
the plastic bench was silent for a long moment and Lou thought it was very like the 
man to take much time to consider before 
saying anything. 

Doctor Earl looked up into the gray 
Martian sky which was visible through the 



plastic dome that covered the hospital and 
the hangars for its rocket port. 

"Why do you say that?" he asked. "On 
Earth I might make more money, but it 
would not be the same. My existence out 
here is comfortable and I feel that I am 
doing something important. Men have to 
go to the stars, and other men, like nv : 
have to treat them when they are ill." 

23 



21 



PLANET STORIES 



Lou gave the doctor a somber look. "John 
Canar should not ha ited the light
drive, Doctor Earl. Men weren't meant for 
the stars — n< too young a race. 

We haven't matured. An Andromedan told 
me that right before I went, before I . . ." 
"Before you went off your head, Lou?" 
Doctor Earl said, his voice lighter. "Don't 
try to hide it from yourself, because that's 
just what happened. You went crazy, to put 
it in simple words. Now you've got to learn 
to live with it, to know it can happen, just 
the same as a man with ulcers or diabetes 
has got to learn to live with that. And don't 
blame your trouble on John Canar, or Andromedan philosophy. If Canar hadn't invented the light-drive then someone else 
would have. And from what I've read, the 
Andromedans don't think Genus Homo 
good for much of anything." He looked 
down at his watch and arose brusquely. 
"I've got an appointment. See you tomorrow." 

After the footsteps had died away Lou 
looked back up at the sky. 1 iS no 

feeling now. It looked only cool and gray 
and clean. Even with night drawing on 
swiftly it did not resemble the blackness 
of space. 

But at first it had. Even the distances 
across the wide rooms of the hospital had 
been intolerable and looking out into the 
fiat grayness of the sky had doubled him 
up, clutching the bed rails for support. 

They had been kind, all of them, doctors 
and nurses and other patients. Lou had 
been surprised how quickly he got over the 
first feelings now that there was a solidity 
to cling to; how soon he was able to look 
out over the flat Martian landscape without 
that awful vertigo. 

But he knew that he would never forget 
those last few hours out from Mars and the 
hospital, when he had felt his heart begin 
to slow toward the final stopping. Strapped 
down, able to partially know what had happened, with the intravenous feeding bottle 
gurgling above him. He had hated and 
cursed John Canar, the light-drive inventor, 
and every man who had ever gone out into 
the snare that was space. And feeling the 
heart, that should have pounded wildly at 
the fear within him— begin to slow. 
It had been one of those one-in-a


ihousand chances. For a millisecond the 
"infallible" screens had gone down on the 
last leg of the Andromeda run. Tiny bits 
of cosmic debris had ripped through the 
ship. Lou, on the bridge, had looked down 
at his hand in sudden pain. The tip of his 
right index finger was mutilated and a 
stream of blood jetted out. Other smaller 
pieces had torn through his body at fasierthan-light speeds. He had grabbed at the 
finger and suddenly seen the usually friendly stars outside the observation window. 
The fear had come then. Somehow those 
stars seemed to glare malevolently at him. 
He had begun to scream. 

That was the last he remembered until 
he came to in the ship's tiny sickbay. 

And how, here he was, at this great 
hospital on Mars. 

TN THE corridors soft light shown down 
-L from cunningly concealed apertures in 
the walls. It gave the illusion of an J 
day, which is what it was meant to do. For 
the hospital was of Earth, situated out here 
partly because the very sick could better 
stand the strain of landing against its lesser 
gravity. There were other reasons: Earth 
had little time for its space-injured in these 
halcyon days of expanding light-drive 
empire. 

Lou paused in the corridor. Through the 
blue-glassed window he could see the red 
basketball that was the sun. How far away 
was it? At a million miles a second, low 
speed for the light-drive, a couple of 'minutes. A touch of the old sickness came; he 
hurried on past the window. 

It was a phobia— a fancy name. It was 
a fear of too fast speeds and too immense 
distances and of the blackness that crushed, 
and the rushing stars that impaled one on 
the spears of imagination. 

It could happen any place. Once, when 
Lou was younger, and third watch officer 
of a freighter, he had $t(tn an epidemic of 
it. The atomic motors had broken down and 
.n sucked irresistibly toward 
something, probably a dwarf star. The 
atomics had been fixed, finally, but three 
men of the crew had lost themselves to the 
moment of tension. One had cried; all qj 

d cried. Lou, in the cabin next to the 
dispensary, had heard him all of the 



ONCE A ST ARM 



back to Mars— and that had been many 
days. No words, only the sobbing that was 
terrifying in its aloneness. 

Doctor Earl had told him that some 
recovered and went back out into the holes 
between the stars. That they were better men 
because they had learned to live with the 
fear, to rationalize it away.' Very few of 
them had recurrences, he said. 

But Lou supposed that more of them 
re like Johny, the old man who slept 
in Lou's "up" ward and could not go past 
a window. The old man had been here so 
long that he had become as silent as the 
smooth machine that was the hospital. He 
never smiled and he said very little to anyone, though Lou remembered that he had 
been kind when Lou first came into the 
ward. But now he had retreated back into 
the soft shell of silence. Sometimes, at 
night, Lou would coax the old man into a 
game of checkers, but it was always a silent, 
listless game which Lou invariably won. 

LOU hesitated at the door and then 
went in. 

Doctor Earl was waiting for him in the 
examining room. Lou sat down and took 
one of tlie proffered cigarettes. 

"Lou," the doctor said seriously, M y ou 
have a big decision ahead of you and there 
are two alternatives that you can take. I'm 
going to lay them out for you and tell you 
what chances you can expect for yourself in 
each one. The decision is up to you, but I 
will ask you not to make it today — not even 
if you're sure. Think about it tonight." He 
waved a hand through the air. "Take even 
longer if you want and come and see me 
when you've made up your mind." 

Lou leaned back, trying to relax in the 
soft chair. 

"First of all you can go back to Earth on 
company pension," the doctor explained. 
"You've had our primary treatment. Your 
body is well and your mind is mended to 
a limited extent. We can dope you up and 
send you back. Of course we hope you 
wont want to go back; however some 
choose it. We find that, as a class, they 
usually do very well for themselves on 
Earth 'and are fairly happy in their choice. 
But if you go you will never be allowed 
to £0 to space again, not even to the moon." 



"Why should 1 care," Lou murmured. 
It v if the doctor had not heard 

him. "There is a second choice, which we 
hope you will consider very strongly. You 
have probably heard about it. You can sta 
here on Mars and try further treatments/' 
His voice was softer. "We have a dr. 
give." He broke off and stared at his cigi 
rette for a moment and then lifted h 
to Lou's/ 'Did you ever have a dream and 
remember something that had happened to 
you before, remember it in detail?" 
"Almost every night," Lou said. 
The doctor moved the hand with the 
cigarette impatiently. "With this drug you 
will live it again, not just remember 
leaned back in the chair. "Yesterday you 
told me that man had not matured enou; 
for space; that we were ahead of our 
In a way you are right. Certain phases of 
our science have not caught up with other 
parts. Psychiatry is one of the undeveloped 
fields, but we are learning." 

On me you're learning . . . Lou thou 
"Because of this," the doctor droned on, 
"we were not prepared to deal, when the 
time came, with traumatic psychoses such 
as you have. Now, only recently, we havt 
developed a 'half-cure.' With it there is .1 
chance, not a big one I admit, that you m; 
do better by yourself in that fraction of a 
second when the screens went down. And 
there is a chance that you may not do 
well." 

Like old Johny, Lou thought. T/v 
they did to Johny. 

"You've been a space officer," th< 
continued. "From your record you were a 
good one, and Lord knows that it's hard to 
get trained personnel enough to kt 
ships up. There is another reason, m< 
personal to you: Sometimes space i 
are happy only in space. No amount of 
money or success that they get on Earth 
ever makes them happy. The aptitu< 
that you took soon after you arrived ! 
indicate that you might be one of the 
want to go back to Earth," 1 
will not listen to a decision from 
Doctor Earl said. "Give it s< 
an." 
ill not change my mind." 
For the first time, Lou saw sometl 
akin to anger on the doctor's face. 



26 



PLANET STORIES 



come back and tell me tomorrow," Doctor 
Earl said. 

Walking back down the corridor, Lou's 
mind ran wildly. To return to Earth — a 
man dreamed of that, dreamed and planned. 
A house by the sea, in a temperate zone — 
someplace where the soft ocean waves could 
soothe and calm. To do nothing, for nothing was necessary. Then a woman and 
someday children. 

How long it had been. He had been 
eighteen when he went into the Academy. 
Now he was thirty-four and during the almost thirteen years since graduation he had 
only touched Earth a few times. But he had 
dreamed. 

There was the company pension. It 
should be enough to allow him to get by 
very well. If he wanted a job there were 
plenty open to an ex-spaceman. 

And yet somehow, even as he decided, 
there was a moment's doubt. What had that 
look of anger meant on the doctor's face? 
Some are not happy unless they are in 
space? 

HE WENT back to the ward. It ? 
empty now, except for Johny. All of 
the others were at the evening meal. The 
old man looked up briefly at him and 
somberly nodded, his eyes saying nothing. 
Lou nodded back and went on. The excitement had driven all thoughts of food from 
his mind. He took his shoes off, propped 
up his pillow, and lay back against the bed. 

He was not aware that the old man had 
come up, so deep was he in thought. 

The voice broke through: "You're going 
back, eh?" 

Lou set up straight and looked at the old 
man. For the first time he saw something 
akin to interest in the deep-set eyes. Johny 
sat on a neighboring bed, hunched over, his 
wrinkled, but still strong arms crossed. 

"Back to Earth, Johny. No more eight 
on and eight off. Back to a place where you 
can take two steps without running into a 
steel bulkhead, " Lou said softly. 

"You have had enough of space and the 
worlds out there," the old man said, his 
voice unquestioning. 

"All I ever want." 

The old man frowned. "Why did you go 
into space in the first place?" 



Lou thought about it for a moment. 
"Why is a man a policeman, or a doctor, or 
a lawyer? When I was a kid I wanted to go 
to the moon more than anything else. My 
folks lived right outside Kansas City and 
every night at nine o'clock I could hear the 
mail rocket go over on its way to Los 
Angeles." Lou laughed, suddenly self-conscious. "It got to the place where I couldn't 
go to sleep until the mail rocket had gone 
over. Then, when I was eight years old, 
Canar invented the light-drive. I was twelve 
when the first ship left for Vega. I tried to 
stowaway and got caught." 

The old man cut in: "But you did not 
like it in space?" 

Lou frowned, searching for an answer. 
"Yes, I liked it. At least at first I liked it." 
"And now you are afraid?" 
Lou looked at the old man, saying nothing
"You feel that it has turned on you; that 
something which was your friend is not 
now so friendly," the old man said. "I 
know — it was that way with me too at 
first." 

"But not now?" Lou asked. 
"Not now," the old man said. He looked 
down at the floor. "Now there is only the 
fear left and the longing." He looked back 
up and his eyes closed. "Someday I shall 
be able to look out that window in the 
corridor and see the stars. Someday I will 
ship again. Maybe it will be tomorrow that 
I beat it; I take the drug again then. Maybe 
it will be five years, or ten. But it will be 
someday. Then I will go back to the place 
I live." 

"You mean Earth?" Lou asked. 
The old man smiled. "A Starman's home 
is only one place — out there." 

That night Lou dreamed he was on a 
strange planet. The night was warm, pungent with strange smells. A new world, a 
virgin world, a place for Earth's overcrowded billions. And then, suddenly, there was 
flame overhead, the white, whistling flame 
of atomic motors. They were leaving him 
behind. He stretched out his arms to the 
white trail above him. Then the ship was 
gone. He was alone. 

He awoke then and it was morning. 
With a quickening of interest he looked 
down the ward to where old Johny slept. 



ONCE A ST ARM AN 



27 



The bed was empty. They must have already 
come for him. 

Lou dressed slowly and went to the 
dining room. The bright lights of the ovc 
head flouresccnts seemed to make the polished metal of the serving counters even 
more antiseptic in appearance. The food was 
good, but Lou was not hungry. 

He overtook the procession on the way 
back to the ward. It was Doctor Earl, two 
orderlies and a nurse. One of the orderlies 
was pushing a hooded wheelchair. Lou 

Iked behind them to the ward. 

They helped the old man out of 
chair as Lou watched. Johny's eyes were 
shut tightly and the thin, old body trembled 
as he lay on the bed. 

Lou felt a sudden wave of anger surge 
within him as the orderlies and the nurse 
picked at the old man, covering him, adjusting the bed. He touched Doctor Earl's 
arm as the man came past. "How m. 
times before you give up?" 

The doctor looked somberly at him. 
"When he does," he said, and pulled his 
arm away and walked out of the ward. 

LOU packed his gear that afternoon. The 
interview with Doctor Earl had been 
yery calm and emotionless. The man had 
not asked him to reconsider again. 

Now there were only the few days of 
waiting. 

He spent them idly. He read a few books 
from the hospital's immense library and in 
the afternoons he swam in the heated patients' pool. Now that the decision was 
finally made he felt a torpor, as if something important had been lost and yet the 
loss was not of a value that could be considered and regained. 

Several times he tried to talk to Johny, 
but the old man was either asleep or pretended to be when Lou came back to the 
ward. It was not until the night before Lou 
was to leave that he caught the old man 
awake. 

He went back and sat down on an empty 
bed next to the old man's. Johny's face was 
emotionless now. Only his eyes showed the 
fear. 

"I'm going back tomorrow, Johny," Lou 
said. 

"Good luck to you." 



"It's funny, but I don't know your last 
name," Lou said softly. "I'd like to write 
you after I get back and see if — well you 

"Don't write," Johny said stolidly. "You 
won't anyway. Once you get out of here 
you'll want to forget everything about it. 
Besides, I never read my mail anymore." 

"I'll take a chance, H Lou said, smiln 

"All right," the old man sighed. "It's 
lar — John R. Canar." 

For a moment the name made no com 
tion in Lou's brain . . . "John Canar," he 
said. "You invented the light-drive." 

"I had to do with it — it bears my 
Johny said. 

"I tried to stow away on your ship when 
you went to Vega," Lou said softly. "You 
must have made a lot of money out of the 
drive. I thought you had retired." 

The old man looked up at him for an 
instaot, a shadow of expression passing 

oss his face. "I didn't work on it i 
money. I wanted to go to the stars." Me 
looked pointedly at Lou. "And now I 
want to go to sleep." 

Lou got up and moved away, feeling 
mildly hurt and resentful. 

Three times that night he dreamed the 
dream. Once it began in the Andromedan 
system. There was a feeling of unfamiliar, 

1 yet familiar constellations in the si 
There was that moment of half -beauty, 
half -fear that comes to every man who I 
ever seen a world that is not his own, and 
vet, in a peculiar way, has exerted ownership over that strange world. There were 
dim remembered twilights under double 
suns. And always there was that moment 
in time when the screens had gone down, 
that moment of complete fear. 

Each time Lou awakened in a cold sweat 
only to drift restlessly off into sleep again. 
The second time was worse for it began on 
Earth. It was a memory of things past, 
rockets overhead, soft fields of midw estern 
grain beneath his feet. The dream skipped 
portions of his life away, like stones across 
a millpond, only touching the fluid surface, 
vet rippling it. Once again it built into a 
crescendo that ended only in final blackout . . . when the screens went down. 

The third time he was on the m< 
pressure-suited, alone. In the distan


— 



28 



PLANET STORIES 



space ship blotted out a portion of the 
horizon and he was walking toward it. It 
was a long walk. Then there were the 
shining insides of the ship, still fascinating, 
though not as mysterious as they had been 
on the first trip— flight— and then the 
screens went down. This time he did better. 
There was still the feeling of surprise 
when he saw the blood running down his 
hand and the stars still smirked at him 
from outside. But his hands had reached 
up, with only a slight tremble, for the 
controls. 

^ He awoke again with a vague feeling of 
disquietude. 

It was morning. 

He went to the dining room for his last 
meal. He ate. He went back to the ward. 
His things had already been picked up and 
sent out to the ship. 

An hour later he was walking woodenly 
up the ramp of the ship that would carry 
him back. He stopped and stood there for 
a moment, looking up into the gaping hatch. 
Someone motioned to him impatiently 
from it. 

He turned away and began to run. He 
did not stop until he came to the pneumotube and set its control for the hospital. His 
hands worked feverishly at the knobs as 
he warily watched for a sign of pursuit 
from the ship outside. None came. 

DOCTOR EARL said: "I knew you'd be 
k." He looked at Lou contempla
dy. "You asked me once why I was out 
here. Now I can tell you. I've treated almost 
a thousand men like you in ten years — men 
who had space phobia. Maybe two-thirds 
of those men told me they would choose 
to go back to Earth. A few of them, maybe 
fifty, did go back, but most were like you. 
Even John Canar got to the ship before he 
changed his mind. That was the first time 
he had to make the choice, a long time ago. 
He knows now." 

"Knows what, Doc?" Lou asked softly. 

Doctor Earl twisted in his chair, search


ing, it seemed to Lou, for the right words. 
"Knows that he is different," he said finally. 
"Maybe not better, but different than the 
average man. You live half of your life out 
there in the stars and it changes you. You 
are not an Earthman anymore, you're a 
Starman." 

"When do I take the drug, Doc?" Lou 
asked. 

Doctor Earl studied him and then smiled. 
"I think I can tell you, Lou. You've had 
the drug. Sometimes we don't tell them." 
"I don't understand, Doc." 
"You've had a thousand doses of it; in 
every meal, in every drink of water, from 
the first day you arrived here." 
"But Johny?" 

"Light doses didn't work for him; he's 
built up an immunity to anything but massive doses given intravenously." The doctor 
shifted in his chair. "There are a millionmillion planets out there available to us 
through the light-drive. We've got maybe 
a million men in space. Earth bases her 
economy on those men. We're out of the 
shell— hatched— and we can't go back 
again. A Starman is Earth's most valuable 
asset. So you see we couldn't let your phobia 
dictate your choice for you. You had to be 
given the drug and a chance to make a 
rational choice without the inhibition of the 
phobia." He smiled. "What have you been 
dreaming of?" 

"I see what you mean," Lou said. "AH 
I've dreamed of since I came here are the 
stars." He thought for a moment. "What if 
I'd gotten aboard that ship?" 

"You woud have gone back to Earth. 
We wouldn't have stopped you. The drug 
only makes your choice more rational by 
letting you* see your fear over again for 
what it is." 

^ Lou stood up. "Thank you, Doctor. Now 
I'd like to go back to the ward and see 
someone." 
>hny?" 

"Yes," Lou said. "I want to tell him I'm 
going home/' 



IMAGE OF SPLENDOR 



By LU KELLA 



From Venus to Earth, and all the way between, it was a hell of a 
Id for men . . . oncf Apprentice Burnerman ORielly particularly. 



THE intercom roared fit to blow 
O'Rielly back to Venus. "Burner 
Four!" 

"On my way, sir!" 

At the first flash of red on the bank of 
meters Apprentice Burnerman O'Rielly had 
slammed the safety helmet on his head; he 
was already throwing open the lock to the 
burner room. The hot, throbbing rumble 
whipped around him and near crushed his 
breath away. Power! Power of the universe 
trapped here and ready to destroy its captors 
given one chance! Swiftly O'Rielly unlocked 
the controls and reset them. The throbbing 
rumble changed tone. 

Old Callahan's voice crackled now 
through the helmet's ear contact. "Well, Mr. 
O'Rielly?" 

"Fusion control two points low, sir." 

O'Rielly wondered had Callahan passed 
out, was so long before the old Burner 
Chief demanded hoarsely, "Didn't you lock 
them controls before blast-off?" 

"If every control hadn't been locked in 
correct setting," O'Rielly answered from 
his own angry bewilderment, "the error 
would have ed before blast-off — 
wouldn't it, sir? 

"So a control reset itself in flight, hey?" 

"I don't know yet, sir." 

"Well, Mr. O'Rielly, you better know 
before we orbit Earth!" 

The icy knot in O'Rielly's stomach jerked 
tighter. A dozen burners on this ship; why 
did something crazy have to happen to 
O'Rielly's? In a hundred years, so the instructors — brisk females all — had told 
O'Rielly in pre-flight school, no control had 
ever been known to slip. But one had moved 
here. Not enough to cause serious trouble 
this far out from Earth. On blast-down, 



ith one jet below peak, thi 

I could throw the ship, crash it, the 
whole lovely thing and all aboard gone in 
a churning cloud. 

Sweat pouring off him, O'Rielly 
around his burner. Design of the tl 
been bossed by dames of course; 
Earth wasn't any more? Anyway, nol 
could get to a burner except through its 

i room. Anyone entered or It 
a bell clanged, lights flashed and 

tred beside the Burnerman's i 
on the Burner Chief's console up in the 
flight room full of beautifully effn 
cers. Ever .since Venus blast-off O.'Riellj 
been in Four's watch room. Nobody had 
passed through. O'Rielly knew it. Callahan 
knew it. By now the Old Woman herself, 
Captain Millicent Hatwoody, had pro) 
inquired what was in charge of Burner 
Four. 

Well, ma'am, O'Rielly searched t 
cranny where even a three-tailed mouse of 

us could have stowed away. His first 
flight, and O'Rielly saw himself washed 
out, busted to sweeper on the blast-off 
stan, ne God-forsaken satellite. He 

staggered back into his watch room. And 
his brain was suddenly taken apart and 
slapped together again. Felt that v 

She was sitting on his bunk. No threetailed mouse. No Old Woman either. Oh, 
she was a female human, though, this creature at which O'Rielly stood gaping. Yes, 
ma'am! 

"I was in your burner room." Her voice 

iied the rest of her, a blend of loveliness unlike anything outside a Ruy's most 

t dreams. "I couldn't stand the heat 
any longer and I couldn't open that big 
door. So I moved one of your controls a 

2Q 






tiny bit. All the noise in there, naturally 
you couldn't hear me walk out while your 
back was turned resetting the control." 

O'RIELLY suddenly felt like turning her 
over his knee and whaling her until 
she couldn't sit for a year. Tins, mind you, 
he felt in an age where no Earth guy for 
a thousand years had dared raise so much 
as a breath against woman's supremacy in 
all matters. That male character trait, however, did not seem to be the overpowering 
reason why O'Rielly, instead of laying violent hands upon this one's person, heard 
himself saying in sympathetic outrage, "A 
shame you had to go to all that bother to 
out here!" 
"You're so kind. But I'm afraid I became 
rather sticky and smelly in there." 

"They ought to cool the air in there with 
perfume! I'll drop a suggestion in the Old 
Woman's box first chance I get." 

"You're so thoughtful. And do you have 
bathing facilities?" 

"That door right there. Oh, let me open 
it for you!" 

"You're so sweet." Her big dark eyes 
glowed with such pure innocence that 
O'Rielly could have torn down the universe 
and rebuilt it just for her. 

Yes, ma'am, O'Rielly was floating on a 
pink cloud with heavenly music in his head. 
Never felt so fine before. Except on the 
Venus layover when he'd been roped into 
a dice game with a bunch of Venus lads 
who had a jug to cheer one's parting with 
one's money. 

>ell suddenly clanged fit to wake the 

hile the overhead lights flashed 

wildly. Only the watch room door. Only 

Callahan here now. Old buzzard had a 

drooped nose like a pick, chin like a shovel. 

\2T\ he talked he was like digging a 

hole in front of himself. "We! : bout 

that control?" 

"What control?" 

"Your fusion control that got itself two 
points low!" 

"Oh, that little thin; 

Callahan said something through his 
teeth, then studied O'Rielly sharply. "Hey, 
you been wetting your whistle on that 
Venus vino again? Lemme smell your 
breath! Bah. Loaded yourself full of chloro


SET STORIES 



phyll again probably. All right, stand aside 
whilst I see your burner." 

"Charmed to, Burner Chief Callahan, 
sir," O'Rielly said while bowing gracefully. 

"Higher than a swacked skunk's tail 

again/' Callahan muttered, then snapped 

over his shoulder, "Use your shower!" 

O'Rielly stood considering his shower 
door. Somehow he doubted that Burner 
Chief Terrence Callahan's mood, or Captain 
Millicent Hatwoody's, would be improved 
by knowledge of she who was in O'Rielly's 
shower now. Not that the dear stowaway 
was less than charming. Quite the contrary. 
Oh, very quite! 

"You rockhead!" Only Callahan back 
from the burner. "Didn't I tell you to 
shower the stink off yourself? Old Woman's 
taking a Venus bigwig on tour the ship. 
Old Woman catches you like you been 
rassling skunks she'll peel both our hides 
off. Not to mention what she'll do anyway 
about your fusion control!" 

"Burner Chief Callahan, sir," O'Rielly 
responded courteously, "I have been think
"With what? Never mind, just keep on 
trying whilst I have a shower for myself 
here." Wherewith Callahan reached hand 
for O'Rielly's shower door. 

"Venus dames," O'Rielly said dreamily, 
"don't boss anything, do they?" 

Callahan yelped like he'd been bit in the 
pants by a big Jupiter ant. "O'Rielly! You 
trying to get both of us condemned to a 
Uranus moon?" Callahan also shot a wild 
look to the intercom switch. It was in OFF 
position; the flight room full of fancy goldlace petticoats could not have overheard 
from here. Nevertheless Callahan's eyes 
rolled like the devil was behind him with 
the fork ready. "O'Rielly, open your big 
ears whilst for your own good and mine 
I speak of certain matters. 

"Thousand years ago, it was, the first 
flight reached Venus. Guys got one look at 
them dames. Had to bring some home or 
bust. So then everybody on » Earth got a 
look, mostly by TV only of course. That 
did it. Every guy on Earth began blowing 
his fuse over them dames. Give up the shirt 
off his back, last buck in the bank, his own 
Earth dame or family — everything. 

"Well, that's when Earth dames took 



PLANET STORIES 



over like armies of wild cats with knots 
in their tails. Before the guys who'd brought 
the Venus dames to Earth could say anything they was taken apart too small to pick 
up with a blotter. Earth dames wound up 
by flying the Venus ones back where they 
come from and serving notice if one ever 
set foot on Earth again there wouldn't be 
enough left of Venus to find with an electron microscope. 

"T7ENUS boys rared up and served no
V tice that if Earth ever got any funny 
notions, right away there wouldn't be 
enough Earth left to hide in an atom's eyebrow. Touchy as hornets on a hot griddle, 
them Venus guys. Crazier than bed bugs 
about war. Could smell a loose dollar a 
million light years away too. Finagled 
around until they finally cooked up a deal. 

"No Venus dames allowed within fifty 
miles of their port. Earth guys stay inside 
the high-voltage fence. Any dame caught 
trying to leave Venus thrown to the tigers 
for supper. Same for any Earth guy caught 
around a Venus dame. In return, Earth 
could buy practically everything at bargain 
iient prices." 

"Oh, I was shown the history films in 
pre-flight," O'Rielly said, still dreamily. 
"But not a peek of any Venus dame." 

'Tray heaven you'll never lay eyes on 
one nor have one get within ten foot of 
you! Even though you'd know she'd be your 
damnation wouldn't make a whit difference 
■ — you'd still act sappier than thirty-seven 
angels flying on vino." Callahan suddenly 
d at O'Rielly. "Holy hollering saints!" 

"Now, now, Burner Chief Callahan, sir," 
O'Rielly responded with an airy laugh. "No 
Earth guy for a hundred twenty-five years 
been near one and lived to tell it, has he?" 

"So the whispers run," Callahan murmured with a queer flame dancing into his 
eyes. "So the old whispers still run." 

"Never a name, though. Never how it 
was done." O'Rielly snorted. "Probably just 
a goofy tale set loose by some old space 
bum." 

"Oh?" Callahan bristled up like a bad 

name had been bandied about. "Seen them 

ditty bags Venus bigwigs have, ain't you? 

• big enough to stuff a cow in. Notice 

nobody ever dares question a big


wig's bags, even through customs? Just run 
'em through the big Geiger that tells 
whether there's any fusionable junk inside. 
Well, our boy got himself one of them 
bags, stuffed himself inside and joined a 
bigwig's pile of 'em. 

"Didn't pull it whilst on the Venus port 
during a layover either, when a crew check 
would of turned him up missing. Pulled 
it on vacation. Started on the Earth end. 
Made himself a pair of beards to paste on 
his ears of course. Wove Jupiter wiggle 
worms in to keep the beards moving. 
Wasn't like the real thing, but good enough 
to flimflam Venus guys." 

With suddenly enlivened interest 
O'Rielly looked at Callahan. "Hey, how 
come you know so much?" 

"Hah? What?" Callahan blinked like 
waking from a trance; even groaned to 
himself, something that sounded J ike, 
"Blabbering like I'd had a nip myself -or 
one of them dillies was radiating neatb/."/ 
Then Callahan glared fit to drill holes in 
O'Rielly's head. "Look! I was a full Burnerman before you was born. Been flying the 
spaces hundred twenty-five years now. Had 
more chances to hear more — just hear more, 
you hear! Only tried to clear your mind 
about Venus dames so you could put your 
brain on your control mess. So now put 
it! If you ain't high on vino and ain't been 
made nuts by a Venus dame, what answer 
do we feed the Old Woman?" 

"Search me," Apprentice Burnerman 
O'Rielly responded cheerfully. 

"Of all the loony apprentices I ever had 
to answer the Old Woman for! Awp, lemme 
out where I can think of something to save 
me own neck at least!" 

Was all O'Rielly could do to keep from 
rolling on the deck with glee. Old Callahan 
had been flimflammed for fair! The dear 
little stowaway was saved! And O'Rielly 
would now think of grand ways to save her 
lovely neck and his own forever. 

O'Rielly's shower door, however, opened 
abruptly. O'Rielly had not opened it. 
O'Rielly, however, suffered a cruel stab of 
dismay. Surely his dear stowaway had been 
listening through the door. Why didn't she 
have brains enough to stay hid until Callahan was gone! 

At sight of her, of course, Callahan's 



IMAGE OF SPLENDOR 



33 



eyes near popped from his old head. 
"Berta!" 

"Oh, I'm Trillium," she assured Callahan 
tly. "But Grandmamma's name is 
Berta and people say I'm just like she was 
a hundred and twenty-five years ago." 

"TTAH? What?" Callahan blinked like 
-LJ- his brain had been taken apart and 
was being slapped together again. "O'Rielly! 
Awp, you angel-faced pirate, couldn't you 
hide her somewheres better than that? Shut 
up, you don't have to explain to me, but 
God help the whole universe if we don't 
flimflam the Old Woman!" With which 
ominous remark, rendered in a zesty devilmay-care manner, however, Callahan threw 
himself into O'Rielly's shower. 

O'Rielly stood looking thoughtfully at 
lovely, womanly, exquisite Trillium. Just 
like that, O'Rielly felt as sparkling of mind 
as a spiral nebula. "My locker!" he crowed 
with inspiration and yanked open the doors 
under his bunk. He glimpsed a black ditty 
bag, also the cap and coverall uniform of a 
ige boy. 

"I threw them in there before you came 
on duty before blast-off," Trillium explained. "I knew the burner room would 
be warm." 

Trillium — with her shape — passing as a 
boy hustling bags through this ship. O'Rielly 
chortled as he tucked her under his bunk. 
"Now don't you worry about another 
thing!" 

"Oh, I'm not," she assured him happily. 
"Everything is going just the way Grandmamma knew it would!" 

O'Rielly's shower opened and Callahan, 
glowing like a young bucko, bounced onto 
the bunk. "Well, did you hide her good 
this time? No, don't tell me! I want to be 
surprised ii the Old Woman ever finds 
her." 

"If what old woman finds whom?" a 
voice like thin ice crackling wanted to know. 

The watch room's door had opened. 
Wouldn't think the Old Woman was a day 
over seventy-five, let alone near two hundred. Cut of her uniform probably lent a 
helping hand or three to the young snap 
of ter figure. Frosty blue of fancy hair-do, 
she was, though, and icy of eye as she 
Z — Planet — Summer 



1 at O'Rielly and Callahan still lolling on the bunk. 

Her voice was an iceberg exploding. "At 
attention!" 

Never in his right mind would any 
crewman dare fail to come stiffly erect the 
instant the Old Woman appeared. Behind 
her stood a colorfully robed specimen of 
Venus man. Handsome as the devil himself. 
Fit to snap lesser men in two with his highly be jeweled hands. Fuzzy beards trailed 
from his ears and kept twitching lazily as 
he sneered at the spectacle of two men 
meekly acknowledging the superiority of a 
woman. 

She was fit to put frost on a hydrogen 
burner. "Mr. Callahan, I asked you a question, did I not?" 

"Believe you did, ma'am," Callahan responded cheerfully. "And the answer is, 
ma'am, that Apprentice Burnerman O'Rielly 
and me was discussing — ah — matrimony, 
ma'am. Mr. Apprentice Burnerman O'Rielly 
here is considering it, ma'am." 

Wasn't too bad a fib. The more O'Rielly 
thought of Trillium, the more ideas he got 
of doing things he'd never dreamt of before in his life. Yes, ma'am! 

fig your time talking nonsense!" 
Old Woman's look was nt to freeze 
O'Rielly's brain, then she gave Callahan 
the look. "I sent you down here to find the 
answer to that fusion control slippage!" 

"Oh, you'll have the best answer you ever 
heard of before long, ma'am!" Callahan 
assured her heartily. "The subject of nonsense—I mean, women — merely chanced to 
arise whilst we was scientifically analyzing 
the control phenomenon, ma'am. Naturally 
I offered this innocent young Burnerman 
the benefit of me long years of experience. 
Why," Callahan said with a jaunty laugh, 
"dames mean nothing to me. Indeed 
twouldn't bother me none if there wasn't 
one of the things left in the world! Present 
company excepted, of course," Callahan 
hastened to say with a courtly bow. 

ay at attention!" Old Woman sniffed 
the air near Callahan's face, then in 
O'Rielly's vicinity. "Smothered it with 
chlorophyll probably," she muttered 
through her teeth, "if it is that vino." Something horrible as a plague flickered in her 
eyes, then the old ice was there aea»n. "Ap


)i 



PLANET STORIES 



prentice Burnerman, don't you know what 
your shower is for? Then use it! Mr. Callahan, remain at attention while I inspect 
this burner!" She tendered a cool glance at 
the Venus bigwig. "Care to join me, Your 
Excellency?/' 

"May as well." His Excellency glanced 
at O'Rielly and Callahan much as he might 
at a couple of worms. Could bet your last 
old sox no female ever told any Venus 
man what to do. 

The shower units were equipped so no 
Burnerman need be more than two steps 
from his responsibility. To keep the Old 
Woman from possibly blowing her gaskets 
completely, O'Rielly simply stepped in, 
shut the door, flipped a switch and tingled 
as he was electronically cleansed of person 
and clothes. By time he finished, the Old 
Woman and His Excellency were already 
coming out of the burner room, dripping 
with sweat. 

Old Woman opened the shower with her 
customary commanding air. "You first, 
Your Excellency." 

"My dear Captain," His Excellency replied like a smoothly drawn dagger, "always the lesser gender enjoys precedence." 

No Earth dame ever admitted any guy 
was even equal to any female. Old Woman, 
a prime symbol of her gender's superiority, 
whipped a razor edge onto her own words. 
"Facilities of the Captain's quarters are 
more satisfactory." 

"No more so than those of the Ai 
dorial Suite." 

SEEMING to grind her teeth, the Old 
Woman turned abaiptly to leave 
O'Rielly's watch room. Was all O'Rielly 
could do to keep from busting out laughing 
for joy. 

Old Woman had been flimflammed 
for fair! Dear Trillium was saved! And 
betwixt O'Rielly's grand brain and Callahan's great experience she'd be happy forever. 

A fine loud "thump," however, was now 
heard. Old Woman whirled back and 
yanked open the doors under O'Rielly's 
bunk. 

f all tte sappy hiding places!" CalUhan yelped, in surprise of course. 

Ilium?" His Excellency bellowed as 



if stung by one of the sabre-tailed hornets 
of his native planet. "Trillium!" 

"Trillium," O'Rielly pleaded in loving 
anguish, "why do you have to keep coming 
out of hiding just when nobody's going to 
find you?" 

Her eyes merely became deep pools in 
which O'Rielly would have gladly drowned 
himself if he could. 

"There are rewards," the Old Woman 
said with the deadly coldness of outer space, 
"for Earthmen found in a Venus woman's 
company, and for her leaving her planet. " 

"Shut up!" His Excellency's ear beards 
were standing straight out sideways. "I'll 
handle this!" 

"May I remind His Excellency," the Old 
Woman snapped, "that I represent Earth 
and her dominion of space gained by right 
of original flight!" 

"May I remind the Captain," His Excellency declared fit to be heard back to his 
planet, "that 1 am the Personal Ambassador 
of the President of Venus and this thing 
can mean waj 

"Yes! War in which people will actually 
die!" As His Excellency paled at that grisly 
remark, the Old Woman spoke through her 
teeth at O'Rielly, Callahan and Trillium. 
"All right, come along!" 

O'Rielly joined the death march gladly. 
He felt the way Callahan looked: ready to 
wrap his arms around Trillium's brave 
loveliness and protect it to his last breath 
of life. 

Old Woman led the way to her office. 
Jabbed some buttons on her desk. Panels 
on opposite walls lit up. 

"Presidents of Earth and Venus, please," 
the Old Woman stated evenly. "Interplanetary emergency." 

Highly groomed flunkies appeared on the 
panels and were impersonally pleasant. 

"Madame President's office. She is in 
a Cabinet meeting." 

"Mr. President's office. He is in personal 
command of our glorious war efforts." 

Old Woman sighed through her teeth. 
"Venus woman aboard this ship. Stowaway. 
Rattle that around your belfries." 

The flunkies' faces went slack with shock, 
then were replaced by a blizzard of scrambled faces and torrents of incoherent voices. 
Finally on the Earth panel appeared the 



IMAGE OF SPLENDOR 



35 



famous classic features. M The facts, if you 
please, Captain Hatwoody." 

The Venus panel finally held steady on 
universally notorious features that were as 
fierce as an eagle's, in a fancy war helmet. 
"Trillium! My own granddaughter? Impossible! Dimdooly," Mr. President roared 
at his Excellency, "what's this nonsense?" 

"Some loud creature is interfering," 
Madame President snapped with annoyance. 

"Blasted fools still have the circuits 
crossed," Mr. President swore. "Some silly 
female cackling now!" 

The parties in the panels saw each other 
now. Each one's left hand on a desk moved 
toward a big red button marked, ROCKETS. 

"So," Mr. President said evenly. "Another violation by your Earthmen." 

"By your granddaughter, at least," Madame President replied coolly. 

"An innocent child," Mr. President 
snapped, "obviously kidnapped by those 
two idiotic Earthmen there!" 

"Oh, no, Grandpapa," Trillium said 
swiftly; "I stole away all by myself, and 
Mr. ORielly and Callahan have been very 
helpful." 

"Impossible!" Grandpapa President's ear 
beards stood near straight up as he roared, 
"You couldn't have stolen away by yourself! 
Trillium, tell the truth!" 

"Very well. Grandmamma told me how." 

«r\BVIOUSLY Trillium's poor little 

V-/ brain has been drugged," His Excellency Dimdooly declared. "Grandmamma 
Berta wouldn't know the first thing about 
such things!" 

"Impossible! " Grandpapa President 
agreed. "I've been married to her for a 
hundred and twenty-four and a half years 
and she's the finest rattle-brain I ever 
knew!" 

"She learned," Trillium stated emphatically, "a hundred and twenty-five years ago." 

"Hundred twenty-five," Grandpapa 
president growled like a boiling volcano. 
c some Earthman. . . . Never did 
catch the devil. . . . Berta? Impossible!" 

Madame President's shapely finger now 
rested full on the button that could launch 
the fleets of war rockets that had been 
pre-aimed for a thousand years. "I'm afraid 
your Ambassador is unwelcome now," Ma


dame President stated coolly. "Your granddaughter's actions have every mark o 
invasion tactic by your government." 

"What do you mean, her actions?" 
Grandpapa President's finger now lay poised 
on the button that had been waiting a thousand years to blow Earth out of the universe. 
"My grandchild was kidnapped by men 
under your official command! Weren't 
Trillium dear?" 

"No. One of us stowing away was the 
only way we Venus women could bring our 
cause to the attention of Earth's President. 
If Earth will only stop buying from Venus, 
you won't have any money to squander on 
your wars any longer no matter what happens to we revolutionaries!" 

"Revolutionaries? Such claptrap! And 
what's wrong with my wars? People have 
to have something to keep their minds off 
their troubles! Nobody around here 
hurt. Oh, maybe a few scratches here 
there. But nobody on Venus dies fron 
things any more." 

it Venus men are so excited all 
time about going to war they haven't time 
for us women. That's why we always radiated such a fatal attraction for Earthmen. 
We want to be loved! We want our own 
men home doing useful work!" 

"Well, they do come home and do useful 
work! Couple weeks every ten months. 
Proven to be a highly efficient arrangement." h 

"More boys to run off to your old wars 
and more girls to stay home and be lonely!" 

"Now you just listen to me, Trillium!" 
Grandpapa President was all Venus manhood laying down the law. "That's the way 
things have been on Venus for ten thousand years and all the women in the universe can't change it!" 

"I have been in constant contact with my 
Cabinet during these conversations," Madame President said crisply. "Earth is terminating all trade agreements with Venus 
as of this instant." 

Grandpapa's beards near pui 
his e; 'It's not legal! You can't get 

tis!" 
iur finger off that trigger, bo 
a heavenly voice similar to Trillium's advised from the Venus panel. 

ereupon Grandpapa glared to 



■'. / Oi Ut\lEj 



36 

side. "Berta! What arc you doing I 
I am deciding matters of the inter
planetary nature!" 

"Were/' Features more beautifully 
than Trillium's crowded onto the p 
too. "From now on I'm doing the decides You're only my wife! ' 
"And new President of Venus, 
by unanimous vote of all 

n possible! The men run Venus! Nobody's turning this planet into another Earth 
where a man can't even sneeze unless some 
woman says so!" 

him away, girls," Berta ord 
coolly, whereupon her sy 

His bellows, h could be h< 

riband me, you fool creatures! 
Is! Guards!" 

pour brc -1 him. 

! while you're in the 

tch of surrender communiq 
.Ten are in control everywhere 
mmy," Trill" 
His Excellency, "you have 
bush with me long enough. Now say it!" 

D DOOLY— the mi 
who had sneered at the sight of mere 
mien kowtowing to a m< an — 

[led up fit to bio- . then all 

the gas went out of him. His car beards, 
, still had enough zip left to flutter 
butterflies. "Yes, Trillium dear. 1 
i. Please marry m 
rice." 

I, Grandmamma," Trillium said 
with a highly self-satisfied air, "it wi 
And just like you said, Earthmcn m 
nothing once I knew we Venn i had 

our own men in our pov 

hose crewmen there, 'mamma 

it said, "seem to be proof en< 
that we Venus women no longer ra 
threat to Earth's tranquility.'* 
s, ma'am, O'Rielly sure feJ 
thing all of a sudden 
the hangover from that crap game with 
no. He looked away from Trillium 
and took a look at Callahan. Old guy looked 
away from Grandmamma President like he 
packing the second biggest headache 
in history. 



IS 



"Hmmmm, yes," Madame President of 
Earth observed. "Reactions agree perfectly 
with the psychoanalytical research project 
we have been conducting on the subject of 
the Venus female influence. Madame President of Venus, congratulations on your victory! 

''Long may the superior sex reign on 
Venus too! We shall be delighted to receive 
an Ambassadoress to discuss a new trade 
treaty at your earliest convenience." 

"Thank you for cancelling the old trade 
agreements at the psychological moment," 
Grandmamma President said cordially. 
"What with the communications mixup, we 
managed to have the scenes on these panels 
broadcast throughout all Venus. When the 
rug went out from under the top man, the 
tide really turned in our favor. Now, Trillium, you take over Dimmy's credentials." 

"The Ambassadorial Suite, too," Madame President of Earth said graciously. 
"Anything else now, Berta?" 

"I should like," Grandmamma President 

i said charmingly, "that Mr. O'Rielly 

and Mr. Callahan be suitably rewarded for 

ting our revolution better than they 

knew." 

"Of course," Madame Pi af Earth 

delighted to oi No doubt Captain 

Hat woody kr: ■. afd would satisfy 

their needs best." 

The Madame Presidents switched to a 
private circuit, Trillium dragged Dimdooly 
off somewhere and the Old' Woman eyed 
O'Rielly and Callahan. Especially she eyed 
Callahan, like running chilled drills through 
his old conniving brain. "I award the pair 
of you five minuU e before returning 

to your static: 

"Oh, well," O'Rielly muttered, once he 
and Callahan were safely be. .^hot, 

"could have been reward sup
pose." 

"What you expect for being flimflammed 
by a foreign dame, the rings of Saturn? 
Lucky we ain't programmed to be hung, 
shot and thrown to the cro eakfast." 

Callahan's old pick-and-shovel face wore 
a little grin like the cat that nobody could 
prove ate the canary. 

"You — I mean, that Earth guy a hundred 
twenty-five years ago," O'Rielly said in 
sudden thought. "If Venus dames wanted 



IMAGE OF SPLENDOR 



37 



to be loved so bad, why did Trillium's 
Grandmamma let him go?" 

"Venus guys wasn't so busy playing war 
all the time," Callahan mumbled, like to 
himself, "they'd of found out the answer 
centuries ago. Yep, guess our boy was the 
only guy on Earth or Venus to find out and 
live. Dames bossing both planets now, 
though, his old secret won't be one much 
longer. Venus dames could of let it out 
centuries ago themselves but didn't, just to 
spite Earth probably. Later, was part of 
organizing to take over Venus, I guess." 

O'Rielly still had memories of the way 
he had felt about Trillium before her revolution. "Ail right, Callahan, why did 'our 
boy' leave Grandmamma?" 



"Yes, ma'am," Callahan sighed like he 
hadn't heard a word O'Rielly said, "you 
could sweet-talk 'em, kiss 'em and hold 'em 
tighter'n Billy-be-damned. And that's all." 

"I'm not sure," O'Rielly said, "what you 
mean by, 'that's all.' " 

"Anybody ever seen anybody but a Venus 
guy come built with ear beards? Course 
no f ." 

"But I thought our boy was wearing 
the best fakes ever." 

"Ain't nothing can match the natural 
growed-on variety, no, ma'am. Venus guy 
kisses a Venus dame, his beards grabs her 
roundst the ears." 

"So what?" 

"Tickles 'em, boy, tickles 'em!" 




THE BRIDES OF OOL 



By M. A. CUMMINGS 






The Goddess of Love had never showered Oo/ with her favors 
He was the saddest lover this side of /o . . . either that, or th<a 
most skillful lady killer since the invention of Gilk's death-ray. 



AS THE soft tones of the morning gong 
ZA sounded through the cabin Ooi 
-*• -*- yawned and stretched. Thca he 
grinned, remembering. This was the first 
morning of his honeymoon. Of course, 
honeymoons were even more out-of-date 
than marriage services. But Lor is had 
wanted both and Ool was willing to let 
her have her way. 

Funny to think that after all this time 
Loris was really his. His hand caressed the 
form lying beside him, the flesh smooth 
cold as marble. 

He sat up suddenly, staring at 
the girl. The pearly lustre of her skin had 
i to a chalky white, and he could see 
no sign of breathing. Frantically he felt for 
a heartbeat. There was none. Loris — his 
beautiful Loris, was dead. 

As the lights glowed on the board, the 
young Watcher forgot discipline, even forgot the inter-office video. Stumbling into 
the captain's office, he shouted, 

j Commander Ool. He's requesting 
permission to land — " he gulped, came to 
attention, "sir." 

The captain was equally startled. But 
years of training helped him to keep 
control. 

onder where he's been all this time. 
No report from him in weeks. Permission 
granted. And tell him to report up here 
at once. The Old Men will want to hear 
about this. I wouldn't want to be in his 
boots." 

"If I'd been gone this long I wouldn't 
bothered to come back," the Watcher 
said. 

:ey'd have found him sooner or later. 
He couldn't stay up forever," the captain 
S3 



said. "Better get those signals out/ And 
the young Watcher went back to his post, 
shaking his head over anyone foolish 
enough to anger the Old Men, while the 
captain put through a call to Committee 
[quarters. 

Between the frequent tests and long periods of questioning, Ool was also wondering where he had been. Two weeks gone 
out of his life without the slightest glimmer of a memory about them. Two weeks 
of floating in space. Had Loris been dead 
all the time? Or had she died while he lay 
unconscious? Had he— could he have killed 
her without knowing it? 

Furiously Ool tried to assemble his 
thoughts, to force his tired brain back over 
all that had happened, trying to find some 
explanation. 

He could remember perfectly except for 
the last two weeks. The Invasion — whidi 
had threatened to wipe out Civilization. 
When, in the last desperate moments, the 
untested Gilkite rays had been used, and 
like an invisible screen, had held off the 
foe. How he alone had stood for hours at 
the machines, after Gilk, the froglike 
Martian inventor had run from the scene, 
howling with terror. 

The crowds claiming him as the hero of 
the hour, screaming for the sight of him. 
Then the meeting with Loris — Loris of 
the silver hair, the long slim body which 
gleamed like pearl, the husky voice. 

It had been a struggle to get the Old 
Men to grant them permission to mate, 
for Loris was a Venusian and not at all the 
proper sort of mate for a Warrior. But 
with the success of Gilkite, there might 
be no more need for Warriors — so permission was granted. And now Loris was dead. 




39 



40 



PLANET STORIES 



Once more Ool was summoned before 
the committee. 

"The committee agrees," said the Oldest 
Man, "that you could not have been responsible for the death of your mate." 
"The Gilkite— M Ool began. 
"Only Gilk knows positively what to 
expect from it, and he cannot be found, 
ever, our scientists have given you 
every known test. And believe me, Captain, 
if there were the slightest suspicion in the 
minds of any one of them, the order would 
been given for your immediate destruction. We would take no chances on 
:f being a carrier of death raj 
"And Loris?" 

>u will remember that the committee 

sed this mating. Although Loris' ances
like those of all of us — were Terraris, 

rations had adapted themselves to 

life on Venus. We do not know what 

have taken place; how they will 

cd by situations which are normal 

tO u 

Ool stood silent. In his own mind, that 
did not answer the question of what had 
happened to Loris, or what had gone on 
during the two wee! 

■i fortunately," the Oldest Man went 
on smoothly, as if answering his thoughts, 
have no way of telling what did hapThere was a flaw in the communica; system of your ship. Shortly after you 
took off the Security Screen went blank." 

ie prisoner felt the blood slowly rising 
in his face. The screen had gone blank, but 
it had been no accident. 

HE REMEMBERED Loris coming up behind him as he worked on the screen, 
/hat are you doing?" she asked airily. 

"Sh," he warned. He worked a moment 
more, then the screen went blank. 

'This is one ship that isn't going to have 
any Security Check for a while," he announced with satisfaction. 

"Won't you get into trouble?" 
"Probably, but it will be worth it." He 
grinned at her appreciatively. Loris 
ring a robe of misty green, through 
\\ her body gleamed as though she 
I in the midst of a soft cloud. Ool 
k Jiis head. 



"Good thing I turned it off lid. 

If some old Security Watcher could see yoa 
now, his hardened arteries would probably 
break into a million pieces." 

Loris laughed huskily and stretched her 
arms above her head. The green mist settled 
slowly around her ankles. He could remember his vague surprise that the pearly-hued 
flesh was not cold as she came into his arms, 
but warm, quite warm — 

Was he imagining it, or was there a 
twinkle in the eye of the Oldest Man? 

"The Old Men," he was saying drily, 
"are not too old to have memories. The 
destruction of a Security Check could be 
considered a major crime but, since there 
is no war, the committee is willing to take 
into consideration your excellent record as 
Commander of the Patrol — and the circumstances. It is regrettable that we cannot tell 
what did happen to your mate, but the 
committee agrees that you are not to blame. 
You are free to go, Captain." 

Ool walked out into the sunlight. He 
was free but Loris was dead. 

He soon found that he was not alone in 
his grief. Messages poured in. With the 
familiarity they always feel toward their 
heroes, the people had made his loss their 
own. And- when he met Tanya, the exoctic 
Martian dancer, they shared his happiness. 

There was no attempt this time to disconnect the Security Screen, so the Watchers 
were able to tell exactly what happened. 
The two merely fell asleep. Ool — as he 
must have done before — slept for several 
days, as if he had been drugged, then awoke 
to find himself a widower for the second 
time. Nothing had happened, but Tanya 
was dead. 

The examination to w r hich Ool was submitted now was even more thorough than 
the one he had undergone earlier. The results were the same. Once more he was 
found innocent. 

But if the committee absolved him, many 
of the people did not. Black looks were 
thrown at him, people began to edge away 
from him in the streets. 

Ool did not blame them. To him, it was 
as simple as it was to them. Two women 
had mated with him; two women were 
dead. The fault was his. 

There were plenty of places where they 



THE BRIDES OF OOL 



41 



didn't care who you were or what you had 
done as long as you had the price of a 
drink. Ool found them all. In them gathered 
the outcasts of half a dozen planets — 
thieves, murderers, saboteurs — and in the 
midst of them, Captain Ool, the pride of 
the Interplanetary Patrol, tried to drink 
himself into oblivion. 

He was well on his way one night sitting 
alone at his table when a girl came to the 
door and looked in, as if searching for 
someone. Not the sort of girl you'd expect 
to find in a place like this; she was clean 
and healthy. Her short golden curls gleamed 
through the blue haze, and her firm-muscled 
young body in its short tunic was the focus 
of many bleary eyes as she threaded her v 
between the tables. 

"Ool, I've been looking for you," she 
cried. He looked at her hazily. 

"You don't want me," he spoke carefully, 
managing not to slur his words. "I'm Ool, 
the lady killer. I'll get you if you don't 
watch out." He giggled and tipped up the 
bottle. It was empty so he waved the waiter 
over. 

"My capac — capacity's increasing," he 
told the girl. "At first I couldn't finish one 
bottle. Now I can almost finish two." 

"Ool, listen — " she caught at his arm. 

He brushed her aside and reached for 
the bottle in the waiter's hand. 

The girl beckoned the waiter aside, whispered to him. He shook his head, then 
nodded as she slipped something into his 
hand. They came to the table. 

"You'd better go with the lady," the 
waiter advised, but Ool ignored him and 
took another drink. The waiter lifted him 
to his feet. Through the thickening fog Ool 
saw the man's fist go back. 

Then came the oblivion he wanted. 

HE AWOKE in what seemed to be a 
laboratory. It seemed familiar. So did 
the voices he heard, both talking at once. 
They broke off as he moved. 

"Ryyn, he's coming to," the girl's voice 
cried. 

Ool looked up. Standing over him were 
two figures in white tunics. Both had the 
same blue eyes and short golden hair. He 
closed his eyes and shook his head to clear 
it then wished he hadn't 



The girl laughed happil 
"You're not seeing double," she assured 
him. "Don't you remember us?" 

Ool opened his eyes once more. The 
words, the girl's tone, set his fuzzy brain 
to working. Of course — the man was Ryyn, 
who had been one of his best friends at 
the Academy. Ryyn, whose brilliant mind 
had already won him a recommendation for 
a place on the committee; the youngest nun 
ever to be considered. 

Then the girl — the girl who had come 
after him — must be Ryaa, his twin sister. 
Ool remembered her as a slim, boyish kid. 
There was certainly nothing boyish about 
her appearance now. 

Ool tried to sit up and instantly Ryaa was 
by his side, helping him. 

"Just take it easy," she advised. "Ryyn is 
going to give you something to make you 
feel better." 

"Ryaa, I am not in the business of making hangover remedies," Ryyn growled. But 
at the same time he thrust something into 
Ool's hand. "Drink," he command* 
Ool obeyed, shuddering. 
"Anything that tastes that bad should 
either kill or cure," he said. H P be 

better for me if it killed." 

"Don't say that," Ryaa cried. "Ryyn is 
going to help you, aren't you?" 

"Nobody can help me." He buried his 
face in his hands. "For all I know I really 
may have killed them." 
Ryyn nodded. 

"There's always that chance but I don't 
think so. Anything that deadly would show 
up in a test. But I'll have to know more 
about what happened — " 

Step by step he led Ool back over every 
detail, from his meeting with each girl to 
her death. 

Ryaa sat beside Ool, her hand in his, 
trying not to wince when he tightened his 
grip at some painful memory. 

"Thanks," Ryyn said at last. "I think 
that's all I need right now. Sorry if I had 
to hurt you but I'm not in a position to keep 
up with the news. If we can do anything 
you'll have Ryaa to thank for it. She 
dragged me away from my experiments 
and made me promise to do what I could 
— or else," he grinned at his sister, "she 
threatened to foul things up and leave 



42 

somewhere in space indefinitety." 

Ool stared at tlie girl beside him. This 
didn't sound like the quiet little Ryaa he 
had known. But her scarlet face showed 
that at least a part of Ryyn's statement was 
true. 

"Now," Ryyn continued, "I have things 
to do. Ryaa, why don't you take this big 
iow in tow, and the two of you go out 
and have a good time?" 

''Do you think it's wise?" Ool asked. 
^'Oh, yes," Ryaa breathed. Ryyn grinned. 
"I think so. I want you to forget as 
completely as possible that this conversation 
ever took place. For a few days try not to 
think about it or me. It will help me if 
you don't." 

When Ool began to be seen in public 
with another girl, excited whispers spread 
the news rapidly. Sympathetic glances came 
Ryaa's way but she seemed not to notice 
them. Before long some of her gaiety 
transferred itself to Ool, and for a time he 
forgot the tragedy hanging over him. 

He was reminded abruptiy by a summons 
from Ryyn. 

"I know the answer," he told Ool, "but 
we will have to have proof. The committee 
has given permission for an experiment. If 
Ryaa is willing to take a chance — " 

"I'll do anything to help Ool," Ryaa said 
fervently. 

"I thought so," her brother answered. 
"So I asked the committee to grant you 
two permission to mate." 

"No," Ool cried hoarsely. "Not Ryaa. 
I don't want her to die too." 

"Nothing will happen to Ryaa if you 
both do exactly as I say. It's our only 
chance to prove your innocence. Besides, 
I've already made the announcement. 
There's nothing you can do about it now." 
Ool glared at him helplessly, then sank 
into a chair. Ryaa came to him and put her 
arms around him. 

"You said you were willing to do what 
Ryyn wanted. So am I. If he says I'll be 
all right, I will." 

ell," Ool was only half convinced. 
"If it's all right with Ryaa. What do you 
want us to do." 

"Just one thing right now — just stay 
Jbere till I give the word." 



PLANET STORIES 



Ryyn's announcement spread quickly, 
and the reception was what might have been 
expected. The people were shocked. 

"I don't think the committee should 
allow it," was the usual comment. 

"There may be more women than men 
in the Universe, but if Ool keeps on mating 
with them, we'll soon be even, "remarked 
someone with misplaced humor. 

WHEN Ryyn had decided that the news 
had spread enough, he gave them the 
word. Ryaa had voted for the space ship 
to show that she really wasn't afraid of the 
jinx, but Ryyn forbade that. He had personally chosen a resort, and had used his 
influence to overcome the owner's reluctance. It was Ryyn, too, who had the wouldbe interviewers and most of the curious 
crowd cleared away. 

Several of the remarks made by the crowd 
had started Ool to worrying again. And in 
spite of her brave remarks, he knew that 
Ryaa was afraid too. 

"You don't have to go through with 
this," he told her. "No one would blame 
you for walking out." 
Ryaa shook her head. 
"It will be all right," she insisted. Standing on tiptoe, she caught his face between 
her hands and pressed her lips to his. 

"That's how much I think of your old 
curse," she murmured and fled into the 
other room. 

When she returned she had changed into 
a sheer blue gown that just matched her 
eyes, and did nothing to hide her perfectly 
formed body. Ool stared. He knew that she 
had grown up but he hadn't realized how 
beautiful she had become. 

He took a step toward her. But there, 
standing beside her, were the ghostly figures 
of Loris and Tanya. He stopped abruptly 
and his arms fell to his sides. 

"I must say you don't act much like an 
ardent bridegroom," Ryaa complained. 
"After all, we're supposed to behave normally. " She caught his arms and drew them 
around her. Slipping her arms around his 
neck she raised her face to his. 

Ool's arms tightened around her and his 
lips met hers. 

Behind Ryaa a chair disintegrated with 
a whispered sigh, unheard by the lovers. 



THE ES OF OOL 






But they did hear the crash of splintering 
glass as two struggling figures hurtled into 
the room. Ryaa clung to Ool as the fighters 
threshed around them, unrecognizable at 
first. Then a slim, golden-haired figure 
seemed to be forcing his opponent down. 
"Ryyn," Ryaa exclaimed. "But who — " 
The two figures were struggling over 
some sort of a weapon. A sudden twist of 
Ryyn's wrist sent it hurtling across the 
room. Ool scooped it up — a strange sort 
of gun — and stclod ready to aid Ryyn. But 
it was no longer necessary for Ryyn had 
pinned the other's arms behind him and 
now forced him to his feet. He was a dark, 
squat Martian, who looked like a malevolent 

f r0 & . 

"Gilk!" The name broke from Ooi's 

incredulous lips. 

"Gilk," Ryyn agreed. "The only person 
who had reason to hate you and was clever 
gh to think up such a fiendish plot. 
Too clever, really, to be caught in such a 
simple trap, with you two doing your best 
to give it away. We were lucky that he was 
with hate, so he didn't notice." He 
called out and two guards came into the 
room, one from the door and the other 
through the broken window. Behind t 
came the members of the committee. 

"Here's our murderer," Ryyn told them. 
"It shouldn't be hard to prove that he ki 
the others now that we saw him try to kill 
Ryaa and Ool." 

"Not Ool," Gilk snarled. "I didn't want 
him to die. Only her. Ool would 
stayed alive to suffer again." 

"But why?" Ool asked. "We were 
friends." 

"Friends!" Gilk spat the word at hi 
"After all that you did to me. I invented 
Gil kite — I alone — the only thing powerful 
enough to halt an entire invasion force. But 
you received all the glory." 

"Because you were a coward," R 
cried, stepping in front of Ool. "You ran 
away and left him to face the entire 
alo; ; i 

"I wasn't a coward," Gilk told her in 

& hurt tone. "There was always a chance 

that something might go wrong; that it 

might not stop them. Patrol Commanders 

lentiful enough; Ool could have been 



replaced. But there is on Gilk. No 

one could have replaced me." His voice 
rose to a shriek. "Then Ool took all the 
credit, and they laughed at me. But their 
great hero isn't a hero any longer." 

"You arranged all that, didn't you?" 
Ryyn asked. 

"Of course I arranged it. No one else 
would be clever enough. But for me it was 
simple. A little preparation of mine, slipped 
into the bride's clothing or perfume. Just 
a matter of timing. But this time I couldn't 
get to her things ahead of time. I sup 
that was your idea. I had to come and do 
it myself. And I will!" 

With a swift motion he slipped f. 
Ryyn's grasp. A needle glittered in his 
hand as he threw himself toward Ryaa. 

The guards stood helpless. Neither of 
them could fire without hitting Ryaa. Ryyn 
started forward but Ool was ahead of him. 
With one hand he sent Ryaa sprawling out 
of danger. With the other, which still held 
the gun, he struck Gilk a smashing blow 
across the face. 

The Martian staggered backward, trip 
and fell. He screamed once and was still. 
n bent over him. 

"He fell on the needle," he announced. 
"At least it was quick." 

"Now I don't suppose that anyone will 
ever know how to make Gilkitc," one of 
the guards said as they picked up the body. 

"Perhaps it's just as well," said the Oldest 
Man. "It's too dangerous a secret for anyone 
to possess. But tell us, Ryyn. What made 
you think of bin. 

Ryyn smiled. 

"The tools of our trades have changed 

quite a bit through the ages," he said. "But 

ally people haven't. The First Murderer 

that we know of killed his brother out of 

jealousy. It's still an important motive 

"And with the motive established it 
wasn't hard to find your killer?" said the 
Oldest Man. "But you also mentioned that 
when the experiment was over, you thought 
Ool might petition the committee to set 
aside this latest mating." 

Ryyn glanced at Ool, kneeling beside 
, gathering her into his arms. 

"I think we'd belter forget that part, six," 
he suggested. 




DUST UNTO DUST 

By LYMAN D. HINCKLEY 

It was alien but was it dead, this towering, sinister 
city of metal that glittered malignantly before the 
cautious advance of three awed space-scouters. 

MARTIN set the lifeboat down care- in awed silence at the city a quarter-mile 

fully, with all the attention one away, 
usually exercises in a situation where He saw the dull, black walls of buildings 

the totally unexpected has occurred, and shouldering grimly into the twilight sky, 

he and his two companions sat and stared saw the sheared edge where the metal city 




id the barren earth began . . . and 

bered observing, even before they 

landed, the too-strict geometry imposed on 

entire construction. 

He frowned. The first impression * as . . . 

malignant. 

lond and slight, with enough nose 
for three or four men, unbuckled his safety 
belt and stood up. "Shall we, gentlemen?" 
and with a graceful movement of hand and 
arm he indicated the waiting city. 

Martin led Wass, and the gangling, 
scarecrow -like Rodney, through the stillness 
overlaying the barren ground. There wa» 



only the twilight sky, and harsh and black 
against it, the convoluted earth. And the 
city. Malignant. He wondered, again, what 
beings would choose to build a city — even 
a city like this one — in such surroundings. 
The men from the ship knew only the 
surface facts about this waiting geometric 
discovery. Theirs was the eleventh interplanetary flight, and the previous ten, in the 
time allowed them for exploration while 
this planet was still close enough to their 
own to permit a safe return in their ships, 
had not spotted the city. But the eleventh 
expedition had, an hour ago, with just 

42 



46 



PLANET STORIES 



thirteeen hours left during which a return 
flight could be safely started. So far as was 
known, this was the only city on the planet 
— the planet without any life at all, save 
tiny for a million years or more. 

.And no matter which direction from the 
a man moved, he would always be 
going north. 

''Hey, Martin!" Rodney called through 
his helmet radio. Martin paused. "Wind," 
Rodney said, coming abreast of him. He 
glanced toward the black pile, as if sharing 
Martin's thoughts. "That's all we need, 
isn't it?" 

Martin looked at the semi-transparent 
figures of wind and dust cavorting in the 
distance, moving toward them. He grinned 
a little, adjusting his radio. "Worried?" 

Rodney's bony face was without expression. "Gives me the creeps, kind of. I 
wonder what they were like?" 

Wass murmured, "Let us hope they aren't 
immortal." 

Three feet from the edge of the city 
Martin stopped and stubbed at the sand 
with the toe of his boot, clearing earth 
from part of a shining metal band. 

Wass watched him, and then shoved 
aside more sand, several feet away. "It's 
here, too." 

Martin stood up. "Let's try farther on. 
Rodney, radio the ship, tell them we're 
going in." 

Rodney nodded. 

After a time, Wass said, "Here, too. How 
far do you think it goes?" 

Martin shrugged. "Clear around the city? 
I'd like to know what it is — was — for." 

"Defense," Rodney, several yards behind, 
gested. 

aid be," Martin said. "Let's go in." 

The three crossed the metal band and 
walked abreast down a street, their broad 
soft soled boots making no sound on the 
dull metal. They passed doors and arches 
and windows and separate buildings. They 
moved cautiously across five intersections. 
And they stood in a square surrounded by 
the tallest bi m the city. 

Rodney broke the silence, hesitantly. 
"Not— not very big. Is it?" 

Wass looked at him shrewdly. "Neither 
the — well, shall we call them, people? 
you noticed how low everything is?" 



Rodney's laughter rose, too quickly. 
Then, sobering — "Maybe they crawled." 

A nebulous image, product of childhood's 
vivid imagination, moved slowly across 
Martin's mind. "All right!" he rapped out 
— and the image faded. 

"Sorry," Rodney murmured, his throat 
working beneath his lantern jaw. Then — 
"I wonder what it's like here in the winter 
when there's no light at all?" 

"I imagine they had illumination of some 
sort," Martin answered, dryly. "If we don't 
hurry up and get through this place and 
back to the ship, we're very likely to find 
out." 

Rodney said quickly, "I mean outside." 

"Out there, too, Rodney, they must have 
had illumination." Martin looked back 
along the straight, metal street they'd 
walked on, and past that out over the bleak, 
furrowed slopes where the ship's lifeboat 
lay . . . and he thought everything outside 
the city seemed, somehow, from here, a 
little dim, a little hazy. 

He straightened his shoulders. The city 
was alien, of course, and that explained 
most of it . . . most of it. But he felt the 
black city was something familiar, yet 
twisted and distorted. 

"Well," Wass said, his nose wrinkling 
a bit, "now that we're here ..." 

"Pictures," Martin decided. "We have 
twelve hours. We'll start here. What's the 
matter, Wass?" 

The blond man grinned ruefully. "I left 
the camera in the lifeboat." There was a 
pause. Then Wass, defensively — "It's almost as if the city didn't want to be photographed." 

Martin ignored the remark. "Go get it. 
Rodney and I will be somewhere along this 
street." 

Wass turned away. Martin and Rodneystarted slowly down die wide metal street, 
at right angles to their path of entrance. 

Again Martin felt a tug of twisted, distorted familiarity. It was almost as if . . . 
they were human up to a certain point, the 
point being, perhaps, some part of their 
minds. . . . Alien things, dark and subtle, 
things no man could ever comprehend. 

Parallel evolution on two inner planets 
of the same system? Somewhere, sometime, 
a common ancestor? Martin noted the 



DUST INTO DUST 



47 



rfioulcler-higii doors, the heavier gravity, 
remembered the inhabitants of the city vanished before the thing that was to become 
man ever emerged from the slime, and he 
decided to grin at himself, at his own imagination. 

Rodney jerked his scarecrow length about 
quickly, and a chill sped up Martin's spine. 
" What's the matter?" 

The bony face was white, the gray eyes 
were wide. "I saw — I thought I saw — something — moving — " 

Anger rose in Martin. "You didn't," he 
said flatly, gripping the other's shoulder 
cruelly. "You couldn't have. Get hold of 
yourself, man!" 

Rodney stared. "The wind. Rci; 
re isn't any, here." 

"... How could there be? The buildings 
protect us now. It was blowing from the 
other direction." 

Rodney wrenched free of Martin's grip. 
He gestured wildly. "That — " 

"Martin!" Wass' voice came through the 
receivers in both their radios. "Martin, I 
can't set out!" 

RODNEY mumbled something, and 
Martin told him to shut up. 
-iss said, more quietly, "Remember that 
metal band? It's all clear now, and glil 
ing, as far as I can see. I can't get across 
it; it's like a glass wall." 

.Yre trapped, we're trapped, they 
are — " 

"Shut up, Rodney! Wass, I'm only two 
sections from the edge. I'll check here." 

Martin clapped a hand on Rodney's 
shoulder again, starting him moving, toward the city's edge, past the black, silent 
buildings. 

The glittering band was here, too, like 
t halo around a silhouette. 

"No go," Martin said to Wass. He bit 
at his lower lip. "I think it must be all 
around us." He was silent for a time, exploring the consequences of this. Then — 
"We'll meet you in the middle of the city, 
where we separated." 

Walking with Rodney, Martin heard 
Wass' voice, flat and metallic through the 
radio receiver against his ear. "What do 
you suppose caused this?" 

He shook his head angrily, saying, 



"Judging by reports of the rest of the 
planet, it must have been horribly radioactive at one time. All of it." 

"Man-made radiation, you mean." 

Martin grinned faintly. Wass, too, had 
an active imagination. "Well, alien-made, 
anyhow. Perhaps they had a war." 

Wass* voice sounded startled. "Antiradiation screen?" 

Rodney interrupted, "There hasn't been 
enough radiation around here for hundreds 
of thousands of years to activate such a 
screen." 

Wass said coldly, "He's right, Martin." 

Martin crossed an intersection, Rodney 
slightly behind him. "You're both wrong," 
he said. "We landed here today." 

Rodney stopped in the middle of the 
metal street and stared down at Martin. 
"The wind — ?" 

"Why not?" 

"That would explain why it stopped so 
suddenly, then." Rodney stood straighten 
When he walked again, his steps were 
firmer. 

They reached the center of the city, ahead 
of the small, slight Wass, and stood watching him labor along the metal toward them. 

Wass' face, Martin saw, was sober. "I 
tried to call the ship. No luck." 

"The shield?" 

Wass nodded. "What else?" 

"I don't know — •" 

"If we went to the roof of the tallest 
building," Rodney offered, "we might — M 

Martin shook his head. "No. To be 
effective, the shield would have to cover the 
city." 

Wass stared down at the metal street, as 
if he could look through it "I wonder 
where it gets its power?" 

"Down below, probably. If there is a 
down below." Martin hesitated. "We may 
have to . . ." 

"What?" Rodney prompted. 

Martin shrugged. "Let's look.** 

He led the way through a shoulder-high 
arch in one of the tall buildings surrounding the square. The corridor inside was dim 
and plain, and he switched on his flashlight, 
the other two immediately following his 
example. The walls and the rounded ceiling of the corridor were of the same dull 
metal as the buildings' facades, and the 



48 



PLANET STORIES 



streets. There ^de of doors 

and arches set into either side of the corridor. 

It was rather like . . . entering a gigantic 
metal beehh 

Martin chose an arch, with beyond it a 
I ramp, which tilted downward, gleaming in the pale circle of his torch. 

A call from Rodney halted him. "Back 
here," the tall man repeated. "It looks like 
a sv rd." 

The three advanced to the end of the 
central corridor, pausing before a great 
arch, outlined in the too-careful geometrical 
figures Martin had come to associate with 
:ity builders. The three torches, shining 
through the arch, picked out a bank of 
buttons, handles . . . and a thick rope of 
j which ran upward to vanish unexpectedly in the metal roof. 

"Is this it," Wass murmured, "or an 
auxiliarj . 

Martin shrugged. "The whole city's no 
more than a machine, apparently." 

"Another asumption," Wass said. "We 
have done nothing but make assumptions 
ever since we got here/' 

"\\ hat would you suggest, instead?" 
Martin asked calmly. 

Rodney furtively, extended one hand 
toward a switch. 

"No!" Martin said, sharply. That was 
one assumption they dared not make. 

Rodney turned. "But — " 

"No. Wass, how much time have we?" 

"The ship leaves in eleven hours." 

"Eleven hours," Rodney repeated. 
"Eleven hours!" He reached out for the 
switch again. Martin swore, stepped forward, pulled him back roughly. 

He directed his flashlight at Rodney's 
thin, pale face. "What do you think you're 
doing?" 

e have to find out what all this stuff's 
for!" 

"Going at it blindly, we'd probably execute ourselves." 

"We've got to—" 

"No!" Then, more quietly— "We still 
have eleven hours to find a way out." 

"Ten hours and forty-five minutes, " 
Wass disagreed softly. "Minus the time it 
takes us to get to the lifeboat, fly to the 
ship, land, stow it, get ourselves aboard, 



and g^t the big ship away from the planet. 
And Captain Morgan can't wait for us, 
Martin." 

"You too, Wass?" 

"Up to the point of accuracy, yes." 

Martin said, "Not necessarily. You go 
the way the wind does, always thinking of 
your own tender hide, of course." 

Rodney cursed. "And every second we 
stand here doing nothing gives us that much 
less time to find a way out. Martin — " 

"Make one move toward that switchboard and I'll stop you where you stand!" 

WASS moved silently through the darkness beyond the torches. "We all have 
guns, Martin." 

"I'm holding mine." Martin waited. 

After a moment, Wass switched his flashlight back on. He said quietly, "He's right, 
Rodney. It would be sure death to monkey 
around in here." 

"Well ..." Rodney turned quickly toward the black arch. "Let's get out of here, 
then!" , 

Martin hung back waiting for the others 
to go ahead of him down the metal hall. 
At the other arch, where the ramp led 
dov/nward, he called a halt. "If the dome, 
or whatever it is, is a radiation screen there 
must be at least half-a-dozen emergency 
exits around the city." 

Rodney said, "To search every building 
next to the dome clean around the city 
would take years." 

Martin nodded. "But there must be central roads beneath this main level leading 
to them. Up here there are too many roads." 

Wass laughed rudely. 

"Have you a better idea?" 

Wass ignored that, as Martin hoped he 
would. He said slowly, "That leads to another idea. If the band around the city is 
responsible for the dome, does it project 
down into the ground as well?" 

"You mean dig out?" Martin asked. 

"Sure. Why not?" 

"Were wearing heavy suits and bulky 
breathing units, we have no equipment" 

"That shouldn't be hard to come by." 

Martin smiled, banishing Wass' idea. 

Rodney said, "They may have had tbtir 
digging equipment built right in to themselves." 



DUST UNTO DUST 

Anyway," Martin decided, "we can take 



a look down below 

"In the pitch dark," Wass added. 

Martin adjusted his torch, began to lead 
the way down the metal ramp. The incline 
was gentle, apparently constructed for legs 
shorter, feet perhaps less broad than their 
own. The metal, without mark of any sort, 
gleamed under the combined light of the 
torches, unrolling out of the darkness before 
the men. 

At length the incline melted smoothly 
into the next level of the city. 

Martin shined his light upward, and the 
others followed his example. Metal as 
smooth and featureless as that on which 
they stood shone down on them. 

Wass turned his light parallel with the 
floor, and then moved slowly in a circle. 
"No supports. No supports anywhere. What 
keeps all that up there?" 

"I don't know. I have no idea/' Martin 
gestured toward the ramp with his light. 
"Does all this, this whole place, look at all 
familiar to you?" 

Rodney's gulp was clearly audible 
through the radio receivers. "Here?" 

"No, no," Martin answered impatiently, 
"not just here. I mean the whole city." 

"Yes," Wass said dryly, "it does. I'm 
sure this is where all my nightmares stay 
when they're not on shift." 

Martin turned on his heel and started 
down a metal avenue which, he thought, 
paralleled the street above. And Rodney 
and Wass followed him silently. They 
moved along the metal, past unfamiliar 
shapes made more so by gloom and moving 
shadows, past doors dancing grotesquely 
in the three lights, past openings in the 
occasional high metal partitions, past something which was perhaps a conveyor belt, 
past another something which could have 
been anything at all. 

The metal street ended eventually in a 
blank metal wall. 

The edge of the city — the city which was 
a dome of force above and a bowl of metal 
below. 

After a long time, Wass sighed. "Well, 

• >per . . . ? ' 

"We go back, I guess," Martin said. 

Rodney turned swiftly to face him. 
4 — Planet — Summer 



49 



Martin thought the tall man was holding 
his gun. "To the switchboard, Martin?" 

"Unless someone has a better idea," 
Martin conceded. He waited. But Rodney 
was holding the gun . . . and Wass was . . • 
Then — "I can't think of anything else." 

Then began to retrace their steps along 
the metal street, back past the same dancing 
shapes of metal, the partitions, the odd 
windows, all looking different now in the 
new angles of illumination. 

Martin was in the lead. Wass followed 
him silently. Rodney, tall, matchstick thin, 
even in his cumbersome suit, swayed with 
jaunty triumph in the rear. 

Martin looked at the metal street lined 
with its metal objects and he sighed. He 
remembered how the dark buildings of the 
city looked at surface level, how the city 
itself looked when they were landing, and 
then when they were walking toward it. 
The dream was gone again for now. Idealism died in him, again and again, yet it 
was always reborn. But — The only city, so 
far as anyone knew, on the first planet 
they'd ever explored. And it had to be like 
this. Nightmares, Wass said, and Martin 
thought perhaps the city was built by a race 
of beings who at some point twisted away 
from their evolutionary spiral, plagued by 
a sort of racial insanity. 

No, Martin thought, shaking his head. 
No, that couldn't be. Viewpoint . . . his 
viewpoint. It was the haunting sense of 
familiarity, a faint strain through all this 
broad jumble, the junkpile of alien metal, 
which was making him theorize so wildly. 

Then Wass touched his elbow. "Look 
there, Martin. Left of the ramp." 

Light from their torches was reflected, as 
from glass. 

"All right," Rodney said belligerently 
into his radio. "What's holding up the 
procession?" 

Martin was silent. 

Wass undertook to explain. Why not, 
after all? Martin asked himself. It was in 
Wass' own interest. In a moment, all three 
were standing before a bank of glass cases 
which stretched off into the distance as far 
as the combined light of their torches would 
reach. 

"Seeds!" Wass exclaimed, his faceplate 
pressed against the glass. 







_ 



50 



PLANE) :IES 



n blinked. He thought how little 
time they had. He wet his lips. 

ass* gloved hands fumbled awkwardly 

at a catch in the nearest section of the bank. 

Martin thought of the dark, convoluted 

land outside the city. If they wouldn't grow 

. . Or had they, once? "Don't, 

Torchlight reflected from Wass' f; 
he turned his h< 

like children. . . . "We don't 
ed, what they'll do." 

fully, "if we 

ilm place by the deadline 

ating the 

raised his arm tensely. "Opening 

ink doesn't help us find a way out 

rted up the ramp. "Be:
still holding the gun. His mind, 
Liken up with childhood's imaginor a plant to grow in this environIdn't need much water. Mayhe had a vision of evil plants attacking them, growing with super-swiftness at 
the air valves and joints of their suits 
iily the little moisture in the atmos


THEY stood before the switchboard 
Martin and Wass side by side, 
Rodney, still holding his gun, slightly to 
the l 

Rodney moved forward a little toward 
the switches. His breathing was loud and 
rather uneven in the radio receivers. 

rUn made a final effort. "Rodney, it's 

still almost nine hours to take off. Let's 

h awhile first. Let this be a last resort." 

Rodney jerked his head negatively. "No. 

Now. I know you, Martin. Postpone and 

postpone until it's too late, and the ship 

es without us and we're stranded here 

to eai and gradually dehydrate our
hat else 

itch. 

ed, knocking him to the floor. 

.ey's gun skittered away silently, like 

a live thing, out of the range of the torches. 

The radio receivers impersonally recorded 

0*e grating sounds o: obs. 



"Sorry," Martin said, without feeling. He 
turned quickly. "Wass?" 

The slight, blond man stood tinmoving. 
"I'm with you, Martin, but, as a last resort 
it might be better to be blown sky high 
than to die gradually — " 

watching Rodney, struggling 
I up. "J agree. As a last resort. We still 
have a little time, 

ill, spare figure lo wed 

and tired in the torchlight, now that he was 



.rtin, I 



artin turned his back. "Skip it, Rodhe said gently. 
"Wat* ss said thoughtfully. "There 

must be reservoirs under this city somcwhci 

Rodnej sai< does v . 

Martin glanced at Wass, then started out 
ot" the switchboard room, not looking back. 
"It got in and out of the city some 
Perhaps we can leave the san^e w. 

Down die ramp again. 

u Thei ramp," Wass mur
mured. 

Rodney looked down it. "I wonder how 
many there arc, all told." 

Martin placed one foot on the metal 
incline. He angled his torch down, picking 
out shack metrical shapes, dupli< 

or" the ones on the present level. "We'll 
find out," he said, "how many there are." 

Eleven levels later Rodney asked, M ] I 
much time have we now?" 

"Seven hours," Wass said quietly "uni'd 
take-off." 

"One more level," Martin said, ignoring 
the reference to time. "1 . . . think it's the 
last." 

They walked down the ramp and stood 
ther, silent in a dim pool of artificial 
on the bottom level of the alien 

Rodney played his torch about the metal 
figures carefully placed about the floor, 
rtin, what if there are no reservoirs? 
What if there arc cemeteries instead? Or 
cold storage units? Maybe the switch I 
pulled — " 

"Rodney! Stop tl 

Rodney swallowed audibly. "Thi 

me . . ." 
"The first time T was ever in a I 
me. 1 w. : n," 



DUST UNTO DUST 



51 



"This is different/' Wass said. "Built-in 

traps — " 

"They had a war," Martin said. 

Wass agreed. "And the survivors retired 
here. Why?" 

Martin said, "They wanted to rebuild. 
Or maybe this was already built before 
the war as a retreat." He turned impatiently. "How should I know?" 

Wass turned, too, persistent. "But the 
planet was through with them." 

"In a minute," Martin said, too irritably, 
"we'll have a sentient planet." From the 
corner of his eye he saw Rodney start at 
that. "Knock it off, Wass. We're looking 
for reservoirs, you know." 

They moved slowly down the metal 
avenue, between the twisted shadow shapes, 
looking carefully about them. 

Rodney paused. "We might not recognize 

Martin urged him on. "You know what 
a man-hole cover looks like." He added 
dryly, "Use your imagination." 

They reached the metal wall at the end 
of the avenue and paused again, uncertain. 

Martin swung his flashlight, illuminating 
distorted metal shapes. 

Wass said, "All this had a purpose, 
once . . ." 

"We'll disperse and search carefully," 
Martin said. 

"I wonder what the pattern was." 

"... The reservoirs, Wass. The pattern 
will still be here for later expeditions to 
study. So will we if we don't find a way to 
get out." 

Their radios recorded Rodney's gasp. 
Then — "Martin! Martin! I think I've 
found something!" 

Martin began to run. After a moment's 
hesitation, Wass swung in behind him. 

"Here," Rodney said, as they came up to 
him, out of breath. "Here. See? Right 
here." 

Three flashlights centered on a dark, 
metal disk raised a foot or more from the 
floor. 

"Well, they had hands." With his torch 
Wass indicated a small wheel of the same 
metal as everything else in the city, set beside the disk. 

From its design Martin assumed that the 
disk was meant to be grasped and turned 



He wondered what precisely they were 
standing over. 

"Well, Skipper, are you going to do the 
honors?" 

Martin kneeled, grasped the wheel. It 
turned easily — almost too easily — rotating 
the disk as it turned. 

Suddenly, without a sound, the disk rose, 
like a hatch, on a concealed hinge. 

The three men, clad in their suits and 
helmets, grouped around the six-foot opening, shining their torches down into the 
thing that drifted and eddied directly beneath them. 

Rodney's sudden grip on Martin's wrist 
nearly shattered the bone. "Martin! It's all 
alive! It's moving!" 

Martin hesitated long enough for a coil 
to move sinuously up toward the opening. 
Then he spun the wheel and the 1 
slammed down. 

He was shaking. 

AFTER a time he said, "Rodney, Wass, 
it's dust, down there. Remember the 
wind? Air currents are moving it." 

Rodney sat down on the metal flooring. 
For a long time he said nothing. Then — 
"It wasn't. . . . Why did you c 
hatch then?" 

Martin did not say he thought the other 
two would have shot him, otherwise. He 
said merely, "At first I wasn't sure myself." 

Rodney stood up, backing away from the 
closed hatch. He held his gun loosely, and 
his hand shook. "Then prove it. Open it 
again." 

Martin went to the wheel. He noticed 
Wass was standing behind Rodney and he, 
too, had drawn his gun. 

The hatch rose again at Martin's direction. He stood beside it, outlined in the 
light of two torches. 

For a little while he was alone. 

Then — causing a gasp from Wass, a harsh 
expletive from Rodney — a tenuous, questing alien limb edged through the hatch, 
curling about Martin, sparkling in ten thousand separate particles in the torchlight, 
obscuring the dimly seen backdrop of geometrical processions of strange objects. 

Martin raised an arm, and the particles 
swirled in stately, shimmering spirals. 

Rodney leaned forward and looked over 



52 



PLANET SI 



the edge of the hatch. He said nothing. He 
eyed the sparkling particles swirling about 
Martin, and now, himself. 

"How d I, from his safe 

distance. 

"We'll ha- t a flashlight," 

Martin answ< 

Rodney, all - be of assistance 

now, lowered a rope with a torch swinging 
lly on the end of it. 

The torch came to rest about thirty feet 
down. It shone on gently rolling mounds 
ine, white stu 

Martin anchored tin soundly, and 

paused, half across the lip of the hatch 
to stare coldly at Wass. "You'd rather 
monkey with the id blow your
self to smithereei 

Wass sighed and I to meet Martin's 

L\ize. Martin looked at him disgustedly, and 
ihen began to descend the rope, slowly, 
peering into the infinite, sparkling darkness 
.^ressin^ around him. At the bottom of the 
rope he sank to his knees in dust, and then 
held even. He stamped his feet, and 
- then, as well as he was able, did a standing 
jump. He sank no farther than his knees. 

He sighted a path parallel with the avenue above, toward the nearest edge of the 
city. "I think we'll be all right," he called 
out, "as long as we avoid the drifts." 

Rodney began the descent. Looking up, 
Martin saw Wass above Rodney. 

"All right, Wass," Martin said quietly, 
as Rodney released the rope and sank into 
the dust. 

*"Not me," the answer came back quickly. 
"You two fools go your way, I'll go mine." 

"Wass!" 

There was no answer. The light faded 
swiftly away from the opening. 

The going was hard. The dust clung like 
honey to their feet, and eddied and swirled 
about them until the purifying systems in 
their suits were hard-pressed to remove the 
fine stuff working in at joints and valves. 

"Are we going straight?" Rodney asked. 

"Of course," Martin growled. 

There was silence again, the silence of 
almost-exhausted determination. The two 
men lifted their feet out of the dust, 
and then laboriously plunged forward, to 
sink again to the knees, repeated the act, 



times without number. 

Then Wass broke his silence, taunting. 
"The ship leaves in two hours, Martin. Two 
hours. Hear me, Rodney?" 

Martin pulled his left foot from the 
sand and growled deep in his throat. Ahead, 
through the confusing patterns of the 
sparkling dust, his flashlight gleamed 
. He grabbed Rodney's arm, 
pointed. 

A gi 

Rodney stared. "Wass!" he shoul 
found a way out!" 

Their radios recorded Wass' laugi 
"I'm hboard now, Martin. I — " 

Th( a tinkle of breaking gl; 

.;king faceplate. 

The grate groaned upward and stopped, 
incoherently into the radio 
i moment, and then he began to sen 

Martin switched off his radio, sick, 
turned it on again when they rea< 
the § in the metal wall. "Well?" 

"I've been trying to get you," Rodney 
. frantically. "Why didn't you answ< 

"We couldn't do anything for him." 

Rodney's face was white and drawn. "But 
he did this for us." 

"So he did," Martin said, very quietly. 

Rodney said nothing. 

Then Martin said, "Did you listen until 
the end?" 

Rodney nodded, jerkily. "He pulled three 
more switches. I couldn't understand it all. 
But — Martin, dying alone like that in a 
place like this — !" 

Martin crawled into the circular pipe 
behind the grate. It tilted up toward the 
surface. "Come on, Rodney. Last lap." 

An hour later they surfaced about two 
hundred yards away from the edge of the 
city. Behind them the black pile rose, the 
dome of force shimmering, almost invisible, 
about it. 

Ahead of them were the other two scoutships from the mother ship. Martin called 
out faintly, pulling Rodney out of the pipe. 
Crew members standing by the scoutships, 
and at the edge of the city, began to run 
toward them. 

"Radio picked you up as soon as you 

entered the pipe," someone said. It was the 

jing Martin heard before he collapsed. 



ALIEN EQUIVALENT 

By RICHARD R. SMITH 

Martians were weak, sensitive, a dying race, frail and impotent 

before the superiority of master Earthmen. Only in the sly and 

mentally skillful game of Duchal might sons of the red planet 

emerge gloriously from their shells. 



CHESTER FARRELL emerged from the 
narrow alley and paused before the 
barbed wire fence. 
y Behind him, the Martian city was a maze 
of strange sounds, angular buildings, acrid 
odors and dark shadows. 

Before him, beyond the fence, three spaceships pointed their bows toward a starstudded sky. The slender ships gleamed 
dully in the starlight as they rested on the 
red desert 

He touched the money in his pocket to 
reassure himself that at last, he had the fare 
for the trip to Earth. 

His eyes scanned the heavens, searched 
for the bright light that was Earth. 

Earth! In itself, the planet meant little to 
him. The seas, mountains, valleys and forests did not cause the burning desire inside 
him. 

He closed his eyes and remembered a 
brick house in Cleveland and the brownhaired woman and chubby boy who lived 
there. He recalled slender, soft fingers that 
touched him gently and a small form that 
waddled uncertainly across their living room 
floor. 

Three years ago, he had left Louise and 
Sammy on Earth. He had come to Mars to 
make a small fortune. 

The dream had not materialized: the 
Mars Mining Corporation didn't want to 
pay their employees good salaries although 
the ores transported to Earth sold for tremendous profits. They paid their employees 
as little as possible. 

It was simple: Governments wanted colonists on Mars to exploit the planet. Mars 
Mining wanted colonists to remain and operate their mines. The two groups, political 



and business, collaborated and . . . while the 
trip to Mars cost only a hundred dollars, 
the return trip to Earth cost one thousand 
dollars. 

Because of the high price of living on 
Mars and the low salaries, the fee was an 
encouragement to remain on the planet. 

It had taken him three years to save 
enough money to rejoin his family. 

Bitterness filled him as he studied the 
motionless ships. Convertible spaceshi] 
The bulkheads inside the hull were collapsible and the space in a ship was constantly 
adjusted into different size storage holds and 
passenger compartments. 

During the voyage to Earth, he w r ould be 
the only passenger and would occupy a coffin-like compartment. Every other available 
foot of space would be filled with valuable 
ores. 

When the ship returned to Mars, the passenger compartments would be spacious, 
luxurious and comfortable. They would be 
filled with hundreds of propaganda-fed, 
eager colonists who were unaware of the 
economic trap before them. 

As he turned and followed the fence toward the spaceport's office buildings he 
heard the faint sounds behind him. 

A whisper of movement across the red 
sand. 

An animal? 

He glanced uneasily at the tiny lights 
from the office buildings. In the thin atmosphere, light carried a long distance and was 
deceptive. The lights seemed near but he 
knew he still had a fifteen minute walk 
ahead of him. 

Once more he heard the indefinable sou* id 
behind him. 

53 



M 




EIsS3 



ALIEN EQUIVALENT 



55 



His imagination? 
A Martian? 

An Earthman, a sound of harsh breathing 
d him. 

HE LEAPED to one side as the sounds 
neared his back. 

< late. Something crashed into the side 
of his head and bright lights danced gaily 
inside his skull. 

fell and rolled frantically across the 
and. 

he scrambled to his feet he saw his 
.er, a husky, powerfully built man. A 
blackjack dangled loosely from a hand. 

he could rise a knee struck him 
He sank to the ground. 
The man was on him, pinning him to the 
sand. 

Farrell's nostrils were filled with 
man's acrid body odor. 

knife glittered in the starlight as it 
sed gently against his thn 
"Tell me where the money is," the man 
ordered. "It'll save time." 

Too stunned to speak, Farrell nodded at 
his coat pocket. 

The man removed the money and counted 
rapidly, somehow managing to keep the 
knife in his hand while he flipped the bills. 

isfied, he stuffed the bills in a p< i 
and raised the knife for a fatal lunge. 

His arms pinned at his sides by the man's 
knees, Farrell knew only one thing could 
save him: WORDS. 

"I can get you five times that much," he 
said quickly, the words crowding each other 
At haste. 
It worked: the knife wavered, hesitated. 
If he had screamed, "Don't kill me!" he 
would have been killed instantly but the 
simple statement had aroused his assailant's 
curiosity. 

"Five times that much?" the man repeated 
gruffly. 

Phobos, the largest and closest of the two 
moons, moved visibly across the dark sky. 
Suddenly, they were no longer in the shadow 
of a building. Moonlight flowed across the 
man's face and for the first time, he saw 
his features. 

He looked up at a rough, almost brutal 
face with thick lips, fierce eyes, blunt, broken nose and bushy eyebrows. 



"Five thousand dollars," Farrell confirmed. 

"Where?" 

"Dankor city. You've heard of a Martian 
game called rhakal?" 

He frowned. "Yeah, I heard of it. I also 
heard Earthmen don't win very often." 

"I won," Farrell told him. "Five thousand. I spent most of it but I saved the 
thousand to go back to Earth. If you don't 
kill me, 111 win five thousand for you." 

His adversary grinned wryly and lowered the knife toward Farrell's throat. "This 
sounds like a trick." 

"Trick? How can I trick you? Dankor is 
off limits to Earthmen. You and I will be 
the only — " 

The man cocked his head and asked, 
"You have any Martian friends in Dankor?" 

Farrell laughed at the thought, "Martian 
friends?" 

Some of the wariness left the other's 
face. 

Everyone knew no Earthman had a Martian friend. The Martians were a fading but 
proud race. They resented Earthmen and 
submitted bitterly to their presence. Martians did not associate with Earthmen. To do 
so would mean loss of social standing and 
almost always loss of their lives by the hand 
of some fanatical anti-Earth group. 

Martians submitted to the invasion of 
their planet by colonists because they had 
no choice: they were few in number, a weak, 
dying race. Inwardly, they hated Earthmen 
and, given the chance, would rid Mars of all 
colonists. 

While his antagonist considered the offer, 
Farrell's mind whirled rapidly. How could 
he escape? His body was trapped beneath 
the man's weight, unable to move. Call for 
help? He quickly discarded the idea: on one 
side was a Martian city and on the other 
was the spaceport. The group of crude stone 
buildings were inhabited by aliens. Martians 
might come and watch him die if he called 
for help but they'd never try to save him. 
The spaceport was deserted except for the 
empty, waiting spaceships and the office 
buildings were too far away for anyone to 
hear a cry. 

He could do nothing. 

"I'll give you a chance," his enemy said 
as he rose to his feet. "You win five thou





55 



PLANET STORIES 



sand for me and I'll let j the thou
sand and your life." He placed the knife in 
a sheath and stubby revolver from 

a pocket. "If you make a wrong move, 111 
blast you in half. I don't like to use this 
thing because it's noisy, but — " He waved 
the gun and the action seemed to complete 
the sentence in itself. 

«T ET'S take a irrell suggested as 

-Lf he rose shakily and brushed red sand 
from his clothes. 
"No." 

"It'll take an ho dk there," Farrell 

protested mildly. 

"Well walk," the man stated. "Well 
walk and well take the most deserted 
streets." 

Farrell led the rough the small 

Martian city that bordered the spaceport and 
across a narrow si desert to Dankor 

canal. 

At the canal, he turned and followed it 
northward, walking on the huge, weathersmoothed stones that formed one wall of the 
large waters 

Thousands i >w them, muddy 

water gurgled roaringly as it moved southward to the Martian farmlands. In the clear 
atmosphere, the opposite wall of the canal 
ten miles away was a thin, dark line. 

"What's your name?" Farrell asked 
suddenly. 
"Tharp." 
"Where do you \ 
"None of your busi 

They walked in silence, the two moons 
casting double shadows from each of their 
bodies. 

With a sinking n in his stomach, 

Farrell realized the odds were against his 
seeing his family again. 

"How did you learn 1 had the money?" 
Farrell asked. 

Tharp grinned broa< lien anyone 

makes a reser n the flight to Earth, 

the news gets around. round to me." 

His laughter in the thin 

atmospln 

After \ trs-, they ar
rived at the outskirts of Dankor. Although 
s off-limits, the j 'rolled infre
quently and even I publicly 

known schedu 



Dankor was a small cluster of low crumbling buildings. The streets were littered 
with filth and pale Martians dressed in rags 
shuffled aimlessly with blank eyes as if their 
world had already died. 

Jars of brilliant fireflies on roof tops illuminated the village. Imprisoned in the 
transparent containers, the fluttering in 
cast an eerie, pulsating glow on the dij 
buildings. 

Farrell paused before a thick wodoor and kicked it with his right foot. ' 
first time I came here," he explained, "I almost broke my knuckles before they h< 
me." 

A few minutes later, the door opcm 

"Come in," a bony, wizened Martian 
invited. 

Tharp remained a few paces behind Farrell as they c; e room. 

The stench of the place made their stomachs churn sickly. 

A group of listless Martians sat in 
r of the floor and watched a large cubeshaped object. Two Martians on opp 
sides of die cube sat before small control 
pane 

The Earthmen watched as one Martian 
touched a button on his control panel. A 
green ball inside the cube rose a few in< 

The other Martian pushed a button and 
a brown ball at the top of the hollow cube 
dropped a few inches. 

A thin Martian with grey hair and wal 
eyes asked, "You vish gamble?" 

Farrell nodded his head affirmatively. 

The Martian smiled weakly and inquired 



is vager? Mone 



in broken English, "Vhot 
or duchal?" 

"What in hell is duchal?" Tharp asked. 

"It's hard to explain," Farrell confessed. 
"But, we'll have to wait until those M.: 

hrough and you'll see what duchal is 
when they finish." 

FarrelJ squatted on the cold floor. 

Tharp sat two yards to one side. 

Silently they watched the Martian g; 

minutes later the emaciate 
rose from their positions behind t 
trol boards. 

"Is tl ;?" Tharp asked. 

See the Martian with th< 
tunk ho lost the game. The 



ALIEN EQUIVALENT 



bl 



due: 






: measure 






THEY watched intently as a strange machine was brought into the room. The 
two gamblers sat close to each other. A 
third Martian attached electrodes to their 
heads, then flipped a lever on the ancient, 
rusty machine. 

The Martian who lost the game grimaced 
V with pain. 

A needle on the machine's single dial 
. moved all the way to the right, then quickly 
returned to its original position. 

An expression of joy spread the vicfo 
thin lips into a wide smile. 
A i nds later, the 

moved from their heads. 
Tharp grunted his bafflement. 
"Duchal," Farrell explained quickly, 
"means an expression of sorrow or pain. By 
means of that machine, the winner was able 
to receive in his brain the sensation of the 
loser's physical and mental agony at losing 
the game." 

"That's what the betting?" Tharp 

asked unbelievingly. 

s. It's the same principle as humans 
who play games merely for the disappointed 
expression on the loser's face. The Martians 
do it a little differently: they have a machine that transmits the loser's pain into the 
victor's brain. The Martians are constructed 
in such a way that the agony of another 
person, implanted in their minds, is very 
pleasant to them." 
1 They must be cra2\ 

Farrell shrugged his shoulders. "Maybe. 
Anyway, you have a choice. You can bet the 
thousand dollars or a certain amount of 
duchal." 

"If we bet duchal and lost, we'd only 
have to pay the Martians a little . . . sensation of agony at losing the game?" 
"Right" 

Tharp laughed. "Hell, let's bet duchal. 

That'd be better than losing a thousand 

** bucks if we should lose the game." He 

slipped his hand into a pocket and the 

cloth bulged in Farrell's direction. "And 

What's the difference? Farrell thought. 
If xv e win or lose, you'll kill me. You can I 
lea\ • ve to report you to the pol 



the game," Farr 
d. "I'll tell you what buttons to pu 

"Okay. Tell the Martians we want to I 
an amount of duchal worth five thousand. 
How much would that be on the dial on tli.it 
gimmick?'' 

Farrell pointed at the graduation to the 
extrcnu- right of the dial. "See that Un< 
That would be worth five thousand in 
duchal. The same amount the Martian I 

Tharp smiled as he remember^ 

ily the Martian gambler had paid ti 
amount o( duchal, If they lost the 
he'd have no trouble paying the gambling 
debt. 

"Five tin Farrell told the 

Martian. "Well bet duchal." 

Martian smiled happily, disappe; 
for a few minutes and returned with a Iar< 
bag. 

Without ceremony he spilled the cont< 

Tharp gasped when he saw the 
tps : anklets, rings and bi 
studded with diamonds. They 1 
worth more than eight thousand dolla 

hy the hell are they living in dumps 
like this when they have that kind of stuff? 
They could buy — " He hesitated as jf the 
incompleted sentence indicated an infini 
list of article 

"It means nothing to them," Farrell explained. "They have a different m< 

item. Most Martians are so poor, even 
the rich ones can't buy anything more valuable than fooch clothes and shelter. And the 

irtians are too stubborn to trade with 
Farthmcn." 

He reflected idly that on all of Mars the 
only place where the two races associ.. 
was in gambling rooms like this. Even there, 
the Martians' attitude w r as stiff and busin< 
like. 

The group of aliens shuffled about imily, impatient for the game to begin. 

"You ready ' Farrell asked. 

"Sure/' 

"rpi 11- object of the game is to get rhJ- V the top of the cube to 

The Martian will try to get the 
ones at the bottom to the top. The 1 
governed by the control panels. It's like 
mension Chinese checkers." 



58 



PLANET STORIES 



"Sasush rhakol," a Martian said loudly. 
"The game has started. Push the top 
green button." 

Tharp thrust with a grimy ringer. 
The game lasted several minutes. Each 
time it was their turn to move, Farrell told 
Tharp what button to push. Even while the 
game progressed, the husky man watched 
Farrell out of the corners of his eyes. Farrell realized that even with the distraction of 
the game, he'd have no chance to launch 
a surprise attack on his enemy. 

Finally the Martian gambler rose. His 
colorless lips spread in a wide grin of anticipation. 

"We lost!" Tharp exclaimed. 
Farrell agreed, "We lost. Anyway, all we 
lost was a little duchal." 
^ The Martians gathered around the two 
Earthmen; attached electrodes from the alien 
machine to Tharp's head. 

Three minutes later, Tharp still sat with 
the electrodes attached to his skull. The 
Martians were impatient 

"What's the matter?" Tharp inquired angrily. The game between the Martians, it 
only took the loser a few seconds to pay the 
duchal!" t 

"That's right," Farrell agreed. "But look 
at the dial." 

Tharp stared at the motionless instrument. 

"Duchal is an expression of mental or 
physical agony," Farrell reminded him. 
"Concentrate and feel sorry you lost." 

He assumed a thoughtful expression. The 
indicator wavered slightly. 

"Not so good. See, there are ten graduations on the dial. The needle has to touch 
the tenth before you pay the amount of 
duchal you owe. So far, the needle hasn't 
passed the first graduation. In other words, 
you haven't paid a tenth of the duchal!" 

Tharp drew his revolver. 

The Martians did not like the sight of a 
gun in an Earthman's hand. They had no 
way of knowing that it was meant for Farrell and not themselves. A dozen aliens 
threw themselves on Tharp and quickly 
disarmed him. 

Ten Martians held an outraged Tharp 
motionless while an eleventh removed alien 



handcuffs from his tunic and placed pairs 
around his wrists and ankles. 
Farrell recovered his money. 
"Martians aren't thieves," he informed 
the angry man who struggled in vain at the 
metal bindings. "And therefore, they like 
to see everyone pay their debts. They'll keep 
you here until you pay the wager. You see, 
by being behind the control board and pushing the buttons, you're the one who has 
to pay the duchal although I told you what 
buttons to push." 

"A trick!" Tharp A. 

Tharp's face reddened. "You won't get 
far," he threatened. "I'll pay this duchal in 
a few minutes; they'll let me free and 
I'll— " 

"You don't realize," Farrell interrupted, 
"Martians are sickly, sensitive people and . 
they're adept at projecting sensations of 
agony from their brains. On the other hand, 
Earthmen are strong physically and know 
nothing about projecting physical or mental pain — " 

He paused to watch three Martians who 
removed gleaming, sharp knives from their 
tunics. 

They pressed the blades against Tharp's 
arms. 

The knives cut through his coat, shirt and 
flesh. The cloth reddened quickly. 

"They want their duchal payment," Farrell informed him. "They'll get it if they 
have to slice you to ribbons." 

Tharp's wild eyes stared at the dial before him. The needle touched the second 
graduation, then settled to the "O" position. 
"You see," Farrell continued, "it's a matter of equivalent. Earthmen are so strong, 
they have to really suffer physically before 
they can match a duchal payment that a 
Martian can create as easy as snapping his 
fingers!" 

Once more, the glittering knives bit into 
Tharp's flesh. 

He screamed with pain. 
"Get help! Get help before they kill me!" 
Farrell went for help. 
But, once beyond the thick door that 
suddenly suffocated Tharp's shrill screams 
of pain, he didn't run for help. 
He walked slowly. 



LAST CALL FOR SECTOR 9G 

By LEIGH BRACKETT 

Out ihere in the green star system; far beyond the confining 

grip of the Federation, moved the feared Bitter Star, 

for a thousand frigid years the dark and sinister 

manipulator of war -weary planets. 



M 



ARTIE said monotonously, "There is 
l\ someone at the door sir shall I an-ZjL swer? There is someone at the door 
sir shall I — " 

rham grunted. What he wanted to 

'was go away and let me alone. But he 

Id only grunt, and Artie kept repeating 

-stupid question. Artie was a cheap off~""T)fand make, and bougl and he lack
ed some cogs. Any first class servall would 
have seen that the master had passed out in 
his chair and was in no condition to receive guests. But Artie did not, and presently Durham got one eye open and then he 
began to hear the persistent knocking, die 
annunciator being naturally out of order. 
And he said quite clearly. 

"If it's a creditor, I'm not in." 

" — shall I answer?" 

Durham made a series of noises. Artie 
took them for an affirmative and trundled 
off. Durham put his face in his hands and 
struggled with the pangs of returning consciousness, He could hear a mutter of 
voices in the hall. He thought suddenly 
that he recognized them, and he sprang, or 
rather stumbled up in alarm, hastily combing his hair with his fingers and trying to 
pull the wrinkles out of his tunic. Through 
a thick haze he saw the bottle on the table 
and he picked it up and hid it under a 
chair, ashamed not of its emptiness but of 
its label. A gentleman should not be drunk 
on stuff like that. 

Paulsen and Burke came in. 

Durham stood stiffly beside the table, 
hanging on. He looked at the two men. 
M Well," he said. "It's been quite a long 
time." He turned to Artie. "The gentlemen 
are leaving." 

Burke stepped quickly behind the servall 



and pushed the main toggle to OFF, Artie 
stopped, with a sound ridiculously like a 
tired sigh. Paulsen went past him and locked the door. Then both of them turned 

in to face Durham. 

Durham scowled. "What the devil do you 
tli ink you're doing?" 

Burke and Paulsen glanced at each 6tl 
as though resolve had carried them this far 
but had now run out, leaving them irresolute in the face of some distasteful task. 
Both men wore black dominos, with the 

Is thrown back. 

"Were you afraid you'd be re* 
coming here?" Durham said. A small pulse 
of fright began to beat in him, and this w .is 
idiotic. It made him angry. "What do you 
want?" 

Paulsen said in a reluctant voice, not 
looking at him, "i don't want an 
Durham, believe me." Durham had once 
been engaged to Paulsens sister, a thing 
both of them preferred not to ren 
but couldn't quite forget. He went on, "We 
were sent here." 

Durham tried to think who might 
sent them. Certainly not any of the girls; 
certainly not any one of the people he owed 
money to. Two members of the Terran 
World Embassy corps, even young and still 
obscure members in the lower echelons, 
were above either of those missions. 

"Who sent you?" 

Burke said, "Hawtree." 

"No," said Durham. "Oh no, you got the 
name wrong. Hawtree wouldn't send for 
me if I was the last man in the gal.: 
Hawtree, indeed." 

"Hawtree," said Paulsen. He drew a 
deep breath and threw aside his domino. 
"Come on, Burke." 

59 




^i^*r&*:. . 



r 
















i>^ 




Burke took off his domino. They came 
on together. 

Durham drew back. His shoulders dropped and his fists came up. "Look out," he 
said. "What you going to do? Look out!" 

"All right," said Burke, and they both 
jumped together and caught his arms, not 
because Durham was so big or so powerful 
that he frightened them, but because they 
disliked the idea of brawling with a 
drunken man. Paulsen said, 

"Hawtree wants you tonight, ^ and he 
wants you sober, and that, damn it, is the 
way he's going to get you." 

AN HOUR and seven minutes later Durham sat beside Paulsen in a 'copter 
with no insigne and watched the roof of 
his apartment tower fall away beneath him. 



Burke had stayed behind, and Durham 
wore the Irishman's domino with the cowl 
up over his head. Under the domino was 
his good suit, the one he had not sent to 
the pawnbroker because he could not, as yet, 
quite endure being without one good suit. 
He was scrubbed and shaved and perfectly 
sober. Outside he did not look too bad. 
Inside he was a shambles. 

The 'copter fitted itself into a northsouth lane. Paulsen, muffled in his cowl, 
i lent. Durham felt a similar reluctance 
to speak. He looked out over The Hub, and 
tried to keep from thinking. Don't run to 
meet it, don't get your hopes up. Whatever 
it is, let it happen, quietly. 

The city was beautiful. Its official name 
was Galactic Center, but it was called The 
Hub because that is what it was, the hub 

61 



62 



PLANET STORIES 



I 



and focus of a galaxy. It was the biggest 
city in the Milky Way. It covered almost 
the entire land area of the third planet of 
a Type G star that someone with a sense of 
humor had christened Pax. The planet was 
chosen originally because it was centrally 
located and had no inhabitants, and because 
it was within the limits of tolerance for the 
humanoid races. The others mostly needed 
special accommodations anyway. 

And so from a sweet green any world 
with nothing on it but trees and grass and 
a few mild-natured animals The Hub had 
grown to have a population of something 
like ten billion people, spread horizontally 
and stacked up vertically and dug in underneath, and every one of them was engaged 
in some governmental function, or in espio-, or in both. Intrigue was as much a 
part of life in The Hub as corpuscles are 
a part of blood. The Hub boasted that it 
the only inhabited world in space where 
no single grain of wheat or saddle of mutton was grown, where nothing was manured and nobody worked at a manual 

'.m loved it passionately, 
th moons were in the sky ■ >ne 

! and low, like a whii -ung 

it of reach. The other > us . 

It had an atmosphere, and < e d as 

use and supply base for the planet 
ndling the billions of tons of shipiat kept it going. The two of them 
us spectacle- overhead, but 
id not bother to see them' The 
low of the city paled them, made 
n unimportant He was remembering 
lie had seen it when he was fresh 
from Earth, for the first time— the supreme 
capital, beside which the world capitals 
were only toy cities, the heart and center 
ilaxy where the decisions were 
made and the great men came and went 
He was remembering how he had felt how 
fee had been so sure of the future that he 
never gave it a second thought. 
But something happened. 

^ at? 
Liquor, they said. 
fo f not liquor, the hell with 
< j always carry my drinks. 
Liquor, they said, and the accic, 
The accident. Weil, what of it? Didn't 



other people have accidents? And anyway, 
nobody really got hurt out of it. He didn't, 
and the girl didn't— what if she wasn't his 
fiancee?— and the confidential file he had 
in the 'copter hadn't fallen into anybody's 
hands. So there wasn't anything to that. 

No. Not liquor and not the accident, no 
matter what they said. It was Hawtree, 'and 
a personal grudge because he, Durham' had 
had Hawtree's daughter out with him in 
the 'copter that night. And so what? He 
was only engaged to Willa Paulsen, not 
married to her, and anyway Susan Hawtree 
knew what she was doing. She knew darn 
well. 

Hawtree, a grudge, and a little bad luck. 
That's what happened. And that's all. 

The 'copter swerved and dropped onto 
a private landing stage attached to a penthouse. Durham knew it well, though he 
hadn't seen it for over a year. He got out, 
aware of palpitations and a gone feeling in 
the knees. He needed a drink, but he knew 
that he would have to go inside first and 
he forced himself to stand up and walk 
beside Paulsen as though nothing had ever 
happened. The head high, the face proud 
and calm, just a touch of bitterness but not 
too much. 

Hawtree was alone in the living room 
He glanced at Durham as he came in 
through the long glass doors. There was 
a servall standing in the comer and Hawtree said to it, "A drink for the gentleman, 
straight and stiff." 

A small anger stirred in Durham Hawtree might at least have given him the 
choice. He said sharply, "No thanks." 

Hawtree said, "Don't be a fool." He 
looked tired, but then he always had Tired 
and keyed up, full of the drive and the 
brittle excitement of one who has juried 
peoples and nations, expressed as black 
marks on sheets of varicolored paper for 
so long that it has become a habit as necessary and destructive as hashish. To Paulsen 
he said, "I'll ring when I need vou " 

Paulsen went out. The servall placed the 
drink in Durham's hand. He did not refuse 

"Sit down," said Hawtree, and Durham 
sat, Hawtree dismissed the servall. Durham 

*w,?f* ? ** dfink md fclt b ^ter. 
Well, he said, "I'm listening/' 



LAST CALL FROM SECTOR 9G 



63 



"You were a great disappointment to me, 
Durham. " 

"What am I supposed to say to that?" 

"Nothing. Go ahead, finish your drink, 
I want to talk to a man, not a zombie." 

Durham finished it angrily. "If you 
brought me all the way here to shake your 
finger at me, I'm going home again." That 
was what he said aloud. Inside, he wanted 
to get down and embrace Hawtree's knees 
and beg him for another chance. 

"I brought you here," said Hawtree, "to 

a job. If you do it, it might mean 

that certain doors could be opened for you 

fectly still. For a moment 
id not trust himself to speak. Then he 
d, "I'll lake it." 

Certain do- at's what I've waited 

for, living like a bum, dodging creditors, 
hocking my shoes, waiting for those doors 
to open again, 

HE TRIED not to show how he felt, 
sitting stiffly at ease in the chair, but 
a red flush began to burn in his cheeks and 
his hands moved. About time. About time, 
damn you, Hawtree, that you remembered 
me. 

Damn you, oh damn you for making 
me sweat so long! 

Hawtree said, "Did you ever hear of 
tta Dik?" 

"No. What is it?" 

"A planet. It belongs to a green star 
m, chart designation KL421, Sub-sector 
9G, Sector 80, Quadrant 7. It's a very isolated system, the only inhabited one in 9G, 
as a matter of fact. 9G is a Terran quota 
sector, and since Nanta Dik is humanoid, 
it's become headquarters for our nationals 
who are engaged in business in that subsector." 

Durham nodded. Unassimilated territory 
lying outside the Federation was divided 
among Federation members, allowing them 
to engage in trade only in their allotted 
sectors and subject to local law and license. 
This eliminated competitive friction between 
Federation worlds, threw open new areas 
to development, and eventually — usually 
under the sponsorship of the federated 
world — brought the quota sectors into the 
vast family of suns that had already spread 



over more than half the galaxy. There were 
abuses now and again, but on the w I 
as a system, it worked pretty well. 

"I take it that Nanta Dik is where I'm 
going." 

"Yes. Now listen. First thing in the 
morning, go and book a third-class passage 
to Earth on the Sylvania Merchant, leaving 
on the day following. Let your friends 
know you're going home. They won't be 
surprised." 

"Don't rub it in." 

"Sorry. When you reach tin 
walk across the main rotun the 

newsstand. Drop your ticket and your 
port, folded together, go on to the newsstand and wait. They will be returned to 
you by a uniformed attendant, only 

will be in a different n. 
your ticket will now be on a freighter outbound for Nanta Dik. You will then embark at once. Is that all clear?" 

"Everything but the reason." 

"I'll come to that. How good is your 
memory?" 

"As good as it ever was." 

"All right. When you reach Nanta Dik 
a man will meet you as you leave the ship. 
He will ask if you are the ornitho!< 
You will say yes. Then— pay close attention 
to this— you will say, The darkbhds will 
soon fly. Got that?" 

"The darkbirds will soon fly. Simple 
enough. What's it mean?" 

"S>G is a rich sector, isolated, improperly 
policed, underpopulated. There has been 
a certain amount of trouble, poaching, claim 
jumping, outright piracy. The 'darkbirds' 
are a couple of suspected ships. We want 
to set a trap for them, and you know how 
things are on The Hub. If a man buys a, 
pair of socks, the news is all across the 
galaxy in a week. That's the reason for all 
the secrecy." 

"Is that all?" 

"No." Hawtree got up, turning his I 
on Durham. He said harshly, '%i 
Lloyd." It was the first time he had used 
Durham's Christian name. "This is an important job. It may not seem like one, but 
it is. Do it. There's somebody else who 
ited you to have another chance." 

Durham did not say anything. He waited 
f or | to turn around and face him 



64 



PLANET STORIES 



and say the name. But he didn't, and finally 
Durham said, 
"Susan?" 

"I don't know what she sees in you," said 
Hawtree, and pushed a button. Paulsen 
came in. Hawtree jerked a thumb at Durham. "Take him back. And tell Burke to 
e him the money." 

Durham went out and got into the 
'copter. He felt dizzy, and this time it was 
not from drinks or the lack of them. He 
sat, and Paulsen took the 'copter off. 

Hawtree watched it from inside the glass 
doors until it was out of sight above the 
roof. And another man came from behind 
a door that led into Hawtree's private study, 
and watched it with him. 

"Are you sure about him?" asked the 
man. 

"I know him," Hawtree said. "He's a 
slob." 

"But are you sure?" 

"Don't worry, Morrison," Hawtree said. 
"I know him. He'll talk. Bet you a hundred 
he never even makes the spaceport." 

"Blessed are the fools," said Morrison, 
"for they shall inherit nothing." 



II 



BAYA sat on the bed and watched him 
pack. She was from one of the worlds 
of Mintaka, and as humanoid as they came, 
not very tall but very well shaped, and 
colored one beautiful shade of old bronze 
from the crown of her head to the soles of 
her feet, except for her mouth, which was 
a vivid red. 

"It seems funny," she said, "to think 
of you not being here tomorrow." 

"Will you die of missing mc 

"Probably, for a day or two. I was comfortable. I hate upheavals.". 

Durham reached across her for his small 
stack of underwear. She was wearing the 
yellow silk thing that made her skin glowby contrast. He saw that it was dubiously 
clean about the neck, and when he paused 
to kiss her he noticed the tiny lines around 
her mouth and eyes, the . indefinable look 
of wear and hardness that was more destructive to beauty than the mere passing 
of years. Yesterday they had been two of 
a kind, part of the vast backwash left be


hind by other people's successes. Today he 
was far above her. And he was glad. 

"The least you could do," she said, 
"would be to make this a really big evening. But I suppose you couldn't run to 
that." 

"I've got money." Burke had given him 
some, but that was for expenses and he 
would neither mention it nor touch it. 
"Artie brought a pretty good price, so did 
the furniture." There was nothing left in 
the apartment but the bed, and even that 
was sold. He had bought back a few of 
his better belongings, and he still had a 
wad of credits. He felt good. He felt joyous 
and expansive. He felt like a man again. 
He poured two drinks and handed i 
to Bay a. 

"All right," he said, "here's to a big 
last evening. The biggest." 

They had cocktails in a bar called The 
Moonraker because it was the highest point 
in that hemisphere of the city. It was the 
hour between sunset and moonrise, when 
the towers stood sharply defined against 
a sky of incredible dark biueness, with the 
brighter stars pricked out in it, and the dim 
canyons at the feet of the towers were lost 
in the new night, spectral, soft and lovely. 
And the night deepened, and the lights 
came on. 

They wandered for a while among the 
high flung walkways that spanned the upper 
levels of the towers so that people need not 
spend half their lives in elevators. They 
skirted the vast green concourse from which 
the halls of government rose up white and 
unadorned and splendid. They only skirted 
one corner of it, because this galactic Capitol Hill ran for miles, dominating the whole 
official complex, and one enormous building of it was fitted up so that the nonhumanoid Members of Universal Parliament 
could "attend" the sessions in comfort, 
never leaving their especially pressurized 
and congenially poisonous suites. Between 
humanoid and non-humanoid there were 
many scientific gradations of form. But for 
governmental purposes it boiled down 
simply to oxygen-breather or non-oxygenbreather. 

"Human or not," said Durham, standing 
on an upper span, with the good liquor 
burning bright inside him, "human or not, 



LAST CALL FROM SECTOR 9G 



65 



they're only men like me. What they've 
done, I can do." 

'This is dull," said Baya. 
"Dull," said Durham. He shook his head 
in wonderment, staring at her. She was 
beautiful. Tonight she wore white, and her 
hair curled softly on her neck, and her 
mouth was languorous, and her eyes — her 
eyes were hard. They were always hard, 
always making a liar out of that pliant, 
generous mouth. "Dull/' he said. "No wonder you never got anywhere." 

She flared up at that, and said a few 
things about him. He knew they were no 
longer true, so he could afford to be amused 
by them. He smiled and said, 

et's not quarrel, Baya. This is goodbye, remember. Come on, we'll have a drink 
.at the Miran." 

They floated down on the bright spider 
web levels of the walkways, drifting east, 
stopping at the Miran and then going on 
to another drinking place, and then to another. The walks were thronged with other 
people, people from hundreds of stars, 
thousands of worlds. People of an infinite 
variety of sizes, shapes and colors, dressed 
in every imaginable and unimaginable 
fashion. Ambassadors, MP's, wives and 
mist couriers, calculator jockeys, 

topologists and graph men, office girls, hairdressers, janitors, pimps, you-name-it. Durham saw them through a golden haze, and 
loved them, because they were the city and 
he was a part of them again. 

He was out of the backwash of not-being. 
Hawtree had had to give in, and this footling errand to some dust speck nobody ever 
heard of was simply a necessary device to 
save his own face. All right, Hawtree, fine. 
We will go along with the gag. And you 
may inform the haughty Miss Hawtree, who 
can, believe us, be also the naughty Miss 
Hawtree, that we don't know if we want 
her back or not. We'll see. 

"_take me with you," Baya was saying. 
Durham shook his head. "Lone trip, 
honey. Can't possibly." 

"Are you ashamed of me, Lloyd? That's 

ou're ashamed to take me to Earth." 
"No. No. Now, Baya — " 
He looked at her. His vision was a bit 
blurred by now, he could see just enough 
5 — Planet — Summer 



background to wonder how the devil they'd 
got to this closed-in-looking drinking place. 
But Baya's face was clear enough. She was 
crying. 

"Now, Baya, honey, it s not that — it s not 
that at all." 

"Then why can't I go with you to 
Earth?" 

" Because — listen, Baya, can you keep a 
secret?" He laughed, and his own laughter 
sounded blurred too. "Promise?" 

"Promise." 

"I— " 

DEAD stop. The words rattled on his 
tongue, but remained unspoken. Why? 
Was it because of Baya's eyes, that wept 
tears but had no sorrow in them? He could 
see them quite clearly, and they were not 
sorrowful at all, but avid. 

"I promised, Lloyd. You can tell me." 
There was a table under his hands, with 
an exotically patterned cloth on it. He had 
no memory of having sat down at it. There 
was a wall of plasticoid cement covered 
with a crude mural in bright primaries. 
There was a low, vaulted ceiling, also 
painted. There were no windows. 

"How did we get here?" Durham asked 
stupidly. "It's underground." 

"It's just a place," Baya said impatiently. 
And then she said sharply, "What's the 
matter with you?" 

Blood and fumes hammered together in 
his bulging temples, and his back felt cold. 
"Where's the men's room, Baya?" 

Her mouth set in anger and disgust. She 
called, "Varnik!" 

A tall powerful man with a very long 
neck and skin the color of a ripe plum came 
up to die table. He wore an apron. 

Baya said, "Better take him there, 
Varnik." 

The plum colored man took him and ran 
him to a door and put him through it. From 
there a servall took over. It was very efficient. 

"Are you through, sir?" 
"God, no. Not nearly." 
One more word and you would have been 
through. Forever. Drunken blabbermouth 
Durham, smart aleck Durham, would-be 
big shot Durham, ready to babble out his 
secret and blow his last chance of a come


6fi 



STORI! 



back. But why did B e to be so in
ntly curious? 
Why, indeed? 

He began to feel b red. 

After a time he made it to the row of 
basins and splashed cold water on his face 
and head. There was a mirror above the 
basin. He looked into it. "Hello, bum/' he 
said. 

Face it, Durham. You're a drunken bum. 
You are exactly what Willa Paulsen said 
you were, what Susan Hawtree said you 
were, what they all said you were. You get 
a second chance, and you go right out and 
get drunk and blow it Or, almost. Another 
minute and you'd have blabbed everything 
you know to Baya. 

Baya, who cried because he wouldn't tell 
her; who had brought him to this rathole. 
He took a clearer look at it when he went 
shakily out of the men's room. The place 
almost empty, and it had a close, 
smothery feeling. Durham had never liked 
these underground streets, this vaguely undemi-world that wound itself around 
the foundations of the city. It was considered smart to go slumming here, but 
this place was somehow wrong. 

There were a man and woman at a table 
across the room, a young, pale green couple 
who pretended too carefully not to sec him. 
There was Varnik, the plum colored proprietor, at a tall desk beside the main door. 
And there was Baya at their table. 

handed him a glass when he came 
over. " Feel better? I ordered you a sedative." 
Without sitting down he put the glass to 
his lips. It did not taste like any sedative 
lie member, and he thought he had 

tried them all. 

1 don't want it." 

m't be a fool, Lloyd. Take it." Her 

!S were cold now, and he was suddenly 

quite sure why he had been brought here. 

Durham said softly, "Good night, tramp. 

od night and good-bye." He ran around 

the table and made a rush for the entrance. 

rnik stepped from the tall desk to bar 

his way, holding out a piece of paper. 

he said. "Your check." 

Durham heard three chairs scrape behind 
him. He did not pause. He bent and drove 
the point of his shoulder as hard as he 
could at a spot just above Varnik's wide 



belt. Varnik let go a gasping sigh and 
wheeled away. Durham went out the door. 
The underground street was brightly 
:hted. It ran straight to right and left, 
under a low roof, and disappeared on either 
hand around a right angle turn. Durham 
went to the left for no particular reason. 
There were people on the street. He dodged 
among them, running. They stopped and 
stared at him, and there was an echo of 
other feet behind him, also running. He 
sped around the corner, and it occurred to 
him that he was completely lost, that he 
did not even know what part of the city 
lay above him, or how far. There were 
different levels to this under-city, following 
down the foundations, the conduits and 
tubes and sewers and pumping stations. For 
the first time he began to feel genuinely 
trapped, and genuinely afraid. 

The street ran straight ahead until it 
ended against a buttressed foundation wall. 
There were doors and windows on either 
side of it. People lived here. There were 
joints, some fancy-exotic for the carriage 
trade, others just joints. A couple of smaller 
streets opened off it, darker and more winding. Durham plunged into one, pausing 
briefly to look back. Fleeting like deer 
around the corner were the young pale 
green couple who had sat at the other table 
in Varnik's. There was something about 
the purposeful way they ran that sent a 
quiver of pure terror through Durham's 
insides. 

H e ^n hard as he could, 

wondering who the devil they were and 
what they wanted with him. 

What did anyone want with him, and 
the small bit he carried? 

TpiHE narrow street wound and twined. 
-L Clearly echoing along the vault of the 
roof he could hear footsteps. One. Two. 
Coming fast. He saw an opening no wider 
than a crack in the wall. He turned into 
it. It was quite dark in there and he knew 
he could not go much farther, and that 
fact added to his burden of shame. There 
had been a time when this much of a 
sprint would hardly have breathed him. 
He tottered on, looking for a place to hide 
in, and there wasn't any, and his heart 
banged and floundered against his ribs, and 



LAST CALL FROM SECTOR 9G 



67 



the muscles of his thighs were like wet 
strings. 

There was a square opening with blank 
walls all around it and a great big manhole 
cover in the middle. There was the way he 
had come in, and. there was another narrow 
way he might have come out, but Varnik 
was coming through it, running a little 
crooked and breathing hard. He stopped 
when he saw Durham. Baya, panting up 
behind, almost ran into him. Varnik 
grunted and sprang. 

With feeble fierceness, Durham resisted. 
It got him nowhere. The plum colored man 
struck him several times out of pure pique, 
cursing Durham for making trouble, for 
bruising his gut, for making him run like 
this. Baya stood by and watched. 

"Will you behave now?" Varnik demanded. He whacked Durham again, and 
Durham glared at him out of dazed eyes 
and felt the world tilt and slide away from 
him. 

Suddenly there were new voices, footsteps, 
confusion. He fell, what seemed a long 
way but was really only to his hands and 
knees. 

The young couple had come into the 
square space. They were small lithe people, 
muscled like ocelots, and their skin color 
was a pale green, very pretty, and characteristic of several different races, but no good 
for identification here. The girl's tunic had 
slipped aside over the breast, and the skin 
there was a clear gold, like new country 
butter. They both had guns in their strong 
little fists, and they were speaking over 
Durham to Varnik and Baya. 

"We will question this man alone." 
"Oh, no," said Varnik angrily. "You 
don't get away with that." Baya bent over 
Durham. "Come on, lover," she said. "Get 
up." Her voice was cooing. To the strangers she said, "That wasn't our deal at all." 
"You failed," said the girl with the twocolored skin, and she fired a beam with 
frightening accuracy, exactly between 
them. A piece of the wall behind them 
fused and flared. Varnik's eyes came wide 
open. 

"Well," he said. "Well, if that's the way 
you feel about it." 

He turned. Baya hesitated, and the muzzle of the gun began to move her way. She 



snarled something in her own language and 
decided to go after Varnik. 

Durham got his hands and feet bunched 
under him. He didn't know what he was 
going to do, but he knew that once he was 
left alone with the two small fleet strangers 
he would eventually talk, and after that it 
would not matter much what happened 
to him. 

He said to them, hopefully, "You have 
the wrong man. I don't know — " 

There were the five of them in the small 
space. There were the two couples facing 
each other, and Durham on his knees between them. And then there was something 
else. 

There was a spiky shadow, perfectly 
black, of undetermined size and nameless 
shape, except that it was spiky. 

Baya did not quite scream. She pressed 
against Varnik, and they both recoiled into 
the alley mouth. The young couple paled 
under their greenness, and they, too, drew 
back. Durham crouched on the ground. 

The shadow bounded and rolled and 
leaped through the air and hung cloudlike 
over Durham's head. Suddenly it shrieked 
out, in a high, toneless voice like that of 
a deaf child, a clatter of gibberish in which 
one syllable stood clear, repeated several 
times. 

"Jubb!" said the shadow. "Jubb! Jubb! 
Jubb!" 



Ill 



JUBB. 
It might have been a name, a curse, 
or a battle cry. Whatever it was, the young 
couple did not like it. Their faces twisted 
into slim masks of hate. They raised their 
guns at the shadow, and the shadow 
laughed. Abruptly it bunched up small and 
shot at them. 

Durham heard them yell, in pain or 
fright or both, and he heard their running 
feet, but he did not see what happened to 
them. He was going away himself, down 
the narrow alley that Varnik and Baya were 
no longer interested in blocking. When he 
reached the end of the alley he came out 
onto a well lighted street with lots of 
people on it, but he still did not feel 

Varnik and Baya were not far away. J 



S8 



PLAl 



l Uiillltd 



ung against a wall, with her mouth 

en. She was not used to running. 

standing beside her lo< 

su!k\-. He scowled at Durham when he 

ie out of the alley. Durham stopped, 

himself and read)- to yell for help. 

But Varnik shook his h tyuh!" he 

said. 

n panted. "What's the matter you 

said Varnik. "Those two little 
n ones, they are not playing for fun. 
it black one — H He quivered all 
I'm afraid. I see you again, Baya." 
:it away. Baya was close onto tears, 
partly from her own fright, partly from 
i fury and frustration. But she did not 
She turned and looked at Durham. 
hat got into you?" she said. "It was 
all set, and then you had to louse it up." 
She cursed him. "It's just like you, Lloyd, 
me a nice chunk of money." 
ho are those people, Baya?" 
didn't tell me. I didn't ask." 
d strangers, eh?" 
"Turned up this afternoon at my apartment. 1 should think you could tell. They're 
not the type J run with." 

o." He frowned, still breathing hard 
1 w iping sweat from his face. "How did 
they know about us?" 

shrugged, and said maliciously, 

icbody must have told them. Well, so 

long, Lloyd. I wish you all the luck you 

'ked off slowly, patting her hair 

into e line of her 

• ;s. She did not I k. Durham 

her for a second. Then he began 

{,) fast as he could in the opposite 

. keeping in the brightest lights. 

a bit he found a stairwalk. He rode 

»n it through two levels, and all the 

the roots of his hair were prickling 

and lie was darting nervous glances over his 

r and into the r his head 

Jubb. Jubb. Jubb. 

icd Van i could go away 

still n'^y hed the 

surface. The s ;eem to have 

followed him, but how could you tell? liven 
a city as brilliantly lighted as The Hub al


*i\ 






night. He 



listening for that high, flat, hooting voice. 
It did not speak to him, and he hailed a 
skycab, appalled by how little time he had 
left to catch the pre-dawn ferry. 

He made it with no minutes to spare. 
He found a place on the dark side and 
settled himself for the four-hour run, and 
then everything caught up to him at' once 
and he began to shake. He sat there in the 
grip of a violent reaction, living over again 
Hawtree's instructions and the evening 
with Baya and the nightmare run through 
the underground streets, and the coming of 
the shadow. The dark birds will soo?i fly. 
Was that enough for people to kill for? It 
might be if they had an interest in those 
ships, but the young couple did not look 
the type. And the shadow? 

He shivered and looked out the port. The 
long thin shadow of the ship extended itself indefinitely into space, but all around 
it there was light, and the curve of the 
planet below was a blaze of gold. Down 
there was Haw tree and a big part of his 
life. Above and ahead was the hu^e cool 
face of the moon, and that was the°future, 
all unexplored. Durham clenched his cold 
hands together between his knees and 
thought, I've got to do this, stay sober and 
do it, a little for Haw tree but mostly for 
myself. A man can't look at himself twice 
the way I did tonight. Once is all he can 
stand. And once ought to be enough. 

The brightness blurred and swam. P 
ently he slept, and his dreams were 
thronged with shadows hooting "Tubb! 
Jubb! Jubb!" 

Four hours later Durham walked across 
the vast main rotunda of the lunar spaceport, dropping his little bundle of passport 
and ticket as casually as he could. He continued on to the newsstand and made a 
pretense of looking over the half credit 
microbooks, waiting. 

While he waited he wondered. He wondered how the young couple had known 
about Baya. He wondered what the shadow 
md where it came from, and why it 
had defended him from the young couple, 
and what was the meaning of the rather 
ridiculous word "Jubb." He wondered if 
he wasn't crazy not to pick up his ticket to 
Earth and use it. 
He wanted ad; jjv. 



LAST CALL FROM SECTOR 9G 



69 






A uniformed attendant came and said, 
"I think you dropped this, sir." 

He held out a passport with a ticket 
folded in it. Durham examined them, put 
them in his pocket, and tipped the attendant, who went away. Durham bought three 
microbooks and moved on. He could not 
see anybody watching him, and he told 
himself it was only nerves that made the 
skin creep on his back as though eyes were 
boring into it. 

The switch had been made all right on 
his papers. His name was now John Mills 
Watson and he had a passage to Nanta 
Dik aboard the freighter Margaretta K. He 
still wanted a drink. He was determined 
J: he would not go and get it, and he 
headed grimly for a stairwalk that led down 
to the port cab system. He had almost 
stepped onto it, and then from the loudspeakers all over the huge rotunda a voice 
boomed out, saying, 

"Mr. Lloyd Durham, please come to the 
Information Desk.'* 

Durham flinched as though somebody 
had struck him. He thought, Hawtree's 
sent word to recall me. Perhaps it was a 
trap. 

HE APPROACHED the desk cautiously, 
while his name continued to blare 
forth from the loudspeakers. Somebody was 
standing there. A woman, with her back to 
him. He had not seen that back for over 
a year, not since the night of the accident, 
but he had not forgotten it. 

"Hello, Susan," he said. 

She turned around, and he added bitterly, 
"He needn't have sent you." He was convinced now that she had come to call him 
back. 

She seemed surprised. "Who?" 

"Your father." 

"Dad? Good heavens, Lloyd, you don't 
suppose he knows I'm here!" She was tall, 
as he remembered her, and handsome, and 
beautifully dressed, and very self-assured. 
She smiled, one of those brittle things with 
no humor in it, and then she asked, "How 
long have you before take-off?" 

Durham said slowly, "Time enough." 

"We can't talk here." 

"No. Come on, I'll buy you a drink." 

Tliey walked in silence to the crowded, 



noisy spaceport bar. They found a place and 
sat down. Durham ordered. Susan Hawtree 
sat opening and closing her handbag as 
though the operation was of the most absorbing interest. 

He asked, "Why did you come here?" 
"It seemed as though somebody ought 
to say good-bye." 

"Who told you I was leaving?" 
"I have a friend in the travel office. She 
tells me if anybody I know books passage, 
home." 

"Convenient." 
"Yes." 

The drinks came. There was a clatter 
of voices, speaking in a thousand tongu< 
laughing, crying, saying hello and good-b 
and till we meet again. Susan turned her 
glass round and round in her fingers, and 
Durham watched her. 

"I'm sorry, Lloyd. Sorry everything could 
not have turned out better." 
"Yes. So am I." 

"I hope you'll have better luck at home." 
"Thanks." 

Another silence in which Durham tried 
hard to figure her angle. 

He said, "I heard you tried to talk your 
father into giving me another chance. 
Thanks for that." 

She stared at him blankly and shook her 
head. "You know how Dad feels about 
you. I've never dared mention your name." 
A cold feeling settled in the pit of Durham's stomach. There's somebody else, 
Lloyd, who wanted you to have another 
chance. Fatherly intuition? 
Or a big fat lie? 

Let's face it, Durham, why would Hawtree send you on a mission to the dog 
pound? There are ten billion people on 
The Hub. He could have found somebody 
else. 

The whole business smells. It reeks. 
But wait. Suppose he sent Susan here 
to test me; to see if I'd talk? Not too believable, but a pleasanter belief than the 
alternative. Let's see. 

"Susan. Look, I can say this now because 
I'm going home and that's the end of it. 
We won't see each other any more. I should 
never have got engaged to Willa^ I didn't 
love her. It was you all the time/' 

He caught the quick glint of tears ia 



79 



PLANET STORIES 



• ■ -. 




\. *■•,?•. 






her eyes and was app for him? 

Susan Hawtree? 
s why I went with you that ni 
jpered. "I thought I could take 
i her. I thought I could make you be 
what you ought to be — oh, damn 
i .should never have come hei 
1 up and walked rapidly a 
from the table. He followed her, with his 
I his mouth both wid 

ery strange happening u 
him. 

sure. She 

on have to g >r some
thing 

>, but — Susai n with n 

1 o talk to you." 

nothing to > 
But she went to the stairwalk with him, 
and rode down, her face turn, 
her head held so high she seemed to t 
over him. 



"Susan," he said. "Do you think — could 
you give me — M 

No, that's not the gambit. But what do 
y OU say — Susan, I'm a changed man. Susan, 
wait for me? 

The stairwalk slid them gently off onto 
a very long platform. There was a crowd on 
it, sorting itself into the endless lines of purple monorail taxis that moved along both 

les. 

"Susan." 

"Good-bye, Lloyd." 

"No, wait a minute. Plea t't know 

quite how — " 

Suddenly they were not alone. A young 

couple had joined them. The color of their 

skin had changed from pale green to a 

n burnt orange, and their clothing was 

different, but Durham recognized °them 

without difficulty. A hard object prodded 

him in the side, and the young man, smil
said to him, "Get into that cab/' The 

oman, also smiling, said to Susan 



LAST CALL FROM SECTOR 9G 



71 



£ 






Hawtree, "Don't scream. Keep perfectly 
quiet." 

Susan's face went white. She looked at 
Durham, and Durham said to the young 
man, "Let her go, she has nothing to do 
with this!" 

"Get in the cab," said the young man. 
"Both of you." 

"I think," said Susan, "we'd better do 
it. 

They got in. The doors closed automatically behind them. The young man, with 
his free hand, took out a ticket and laid 
it in the scanner slot, with the code number 
of the ship's docking area uppermost. The 
taxi clicked, hummed, and took off smooth
Durham saw the ticket as the young man 
; removed it from the scanner. It was a pasto Nanta Dik aboard the freighter 
iargaretla K. 



IV 



THE MONORAILS came out onto the 
surface in bunches like very massive 
cables and then began to branch out, the 
separate "wires" of the cables eventually 
spreading into a network that covered the 
entire moon. The taxi picked up speed, 
clicking over points as it swerved and 
swung, feeling its way onto the one clear 
track that led where its scanner had told 
it to go. Durham was aware obliquely of 
other monorail taxis in uncountable numbers going like the devil in all directions, 
and of other types of machines moving 
below on the surface, and of mobile cranes 
that walked like buildings, and of an horizon filled with the upthrust noses of great 
ships like the towers of some fantastic city. 
Beside him Susan Hawtree sat, rigid and 
quivering, and before him on the opposite 
seat were the two young people w T ith the 
guns. 

Durham said, in a voice thick with anger 
and fright, "Why did you have to drag 
her into it?" 

The man shrugged. "She is perhaps part 
of the conspiracy. In any case, she would 
have made an alarm." 

"What do you mean, conspiracy? I'm 
going home to Earth. She came to say goodbye — ■■ Durham leaned forward. "You're 



the same two bastards from last night. What 
do you — " 

"Please," said the man, contemptuously. 
He gestured with the gun. "You will both 
sit still with your hands behind your heads. 
So. Wanbecq-ai will search you. If cither 
one should attempt to interfere, the other 
will suffer for it." 

The wiry young woman did her work 
swiftly and efficiently. "No weapons," she 
said. "Hai! Wanbecq, look here!" She began to gabble in a strange tongue, pointing 
to Durham's passport and ticket, and then 
to Susan's ID card. Wanbecq's narrow eyes 
narrowed still further. 

"So," he said to Durham. "Your name 
has changed since yesterday, Mr. Watson. 
And for one who returns to Sol III, yea 
choose a long way around." 

Susan stared hard at Durham. "What's 
he talking about?" 

"Never mind. Listen, you — Wanbecq, is 
that your name? Miss Hawtree has nothing 
to do with any of this. Her father — " 

"Is a part of the embassy which sent 
you out," said Wanbecq, flicking Susan's 
ID card with his finger. "Do not expect 
me to believe foolishness, Mr. WatsonDurham." He spoke rapidly to Wanbecq-ai. 
She nodded, and they both turned to Susan. 

"Obviously you were sent with instructions for Mr. Durham, Will you tell us 
now what they were?" 

Susan's face was such a blank of amazement that Durham would have laughed if 
the situation had not been so extremely 
unfunny. 

"Nobody sent me with anything. Nobody even knows I came. Lloyd, are these 
people crazy? Are you crazy? What's going 
on here?" 

He said, "I'm not sure myself. But I 
think there are only two possibilities. One, 
your father is a scoundrel. Two, he's a fool 
being used by scoundrels. Take your pick. 
In either case, I'm the goat." 

Her white cheeks turned absolutely crimson. She tried twice to say something to 
Durham. Then she turned and said to the 
Wanbecqs, "I've had enough of this. Let 
me out." 

They merely glanced at her and went 
on talking. 

"You might as well relax," said Durham 



PLANET STORIES 



to her, in colloquial English, hoping the 

Wanbecqs could not understand it. "I'm 

7 you got into this, and I'll try to get 

i out, but don't do anything silly." 

She called him a name she had never 

learned in the Embassy drawing rooms. 

There was a manual switch re in the 

. of the taxi, high i sealed in 

with a special plastic. It said EMEU 

it. Susan took off her shoe and swung. 
The plastic shattered. Susan dropped the 
shoe and grabbed for the switch. Wanbecq 
yelled. Wanbecq-ai leaped headlong for 
in and bore her back onto the seat. She 
was using her gun flatwise in her hand, 
solely as a club. Susan Jet out one furious 
wail. 

And Durham, moving more by instinct than by conscious thought, grabbed 
j-ai's uplifted arm and pulled her 
nailing onto his lap. 
cq started forward from the opposite scat. 

"Don't," said Durham. He had Wanbecqat's wrist in one hand and her neck in the 
other, and he was not being gentle. Wanbecq-ai covered him, and the two of them 
together covered Susan. Wanbecq stood 
with his knees bent for a spring, his gun 
flicking back and forth uncertainly. Wanbecq-ai had stopped squalling. Her face 
was turning dark. Susan huddled where she 
is, half stunned. Durham shifted his grip 
on Wanbecq-ai's arm and got the gun "into 
his own hand. 

"Now," he said to \\ 'Drop it." 

Wanbecq dropped it. 
Durham scrabbled it in with his heel 
until it was between his own feet. Then he 
heaved Wanbecq-ai forcibly at her husband. 
It was like heaving a rag doll, and while 
Wanbecq was dealing with her Durham 
managed to pick up the other gun. 

Susan lifted her head. She looked around 
with glassy ey^s and then, with singleminded persistence, she got vp. 
Durham said si Sit down!" 

Si^an reached up for the emergency. 
Durham smacked her across the stomach 
with the back of his left hand, not daring 
to take his eyes off the Wanbccqs. She 
doubled over it and sat down again. Durham said, "All right now, damn it, all of 
vou sit stilP" 



npHE t. on its humming rail, far
J- ther and farther into the reaches of the 
spaceport. Below there were the wide clear 
spaces of the landing aprons, and great 
ships standing in them, their tails down and 
their noses high in the air, high above the 
monorail, towering over the freight belts 
and the multitude of machines that served 
them. 

Ahead there was the onracing edge 
of twilight, and beyond it, coming swiftly, 
was the lunar night. 

Durham said to Wanbecq, "What's this 
all about?" 

Wanbecq sneered. 

"You know," said Durham, "there's a 
law against changing the color of your 
skin for the purpose of committing criminal acts. That's so the wrong people won't-. 
get blamed. There's a 1 nst carrying 

lethal weapons. There is humorously 

enough, a law against esp >a The 

Hub. You know I'm going to turn you 
over to the authority 

Again \\ sneered. He was a hate
ful little man, but he looked so young and 
so proudly martyred that Durham almost 
felt sorry for him. 
Almost. Not quite. 

"On second thought," he said, "I guess 
I'll save you both for Jubb." 

That was a random shot, prompted by 
the memory of how their faces looked 
when the shadow-thing had squealed that 
word at them. It hit. \Vanbecq's face became distorted with a fanatic hatred, and 
Wanbecq-ai, rubbing her throat, croaked, 
"Then you are in league with The Beast." 
She pronounced that name with unmistakable capitals. 

"Who said I was?" asked Durham. 
"The darkbird came to help you. It told 
us Jubb had claimed you." 

"It did," said Durham softly, "did it?" 
The dark birds will soon fly. The dark 
birds merely refer to a couple of ships 
engaged in poaching. That's what you say, 
Mr. Hawtree. 

"What is a darkbird? You mean that 
shadow thing 

"They are the servants, the familiars of 
The Beast," said Wanbecq. "The instruments by which he hopes to enslave all 
humanity. Do not pretend, Mr. Durham." 



LAST CALL FROM SECTOR 9G 



"I'm not. This Jubb — what is h< 
The Beast?" 

mbecq stared at and Durlntm 

made a menacing gesture. "Come 01 
to know." 

"Jubb is the ruler of Senya Dik." 
"And Senya Dik?" 

"Our sister planet. A dark and evil sister, 
plotting our destruction. A demon sister, 
Mr. Durham. Have you ever heard of the 
Bitter Star?" 

"I never heard of any of it but I find it 
interesting. Go on." 
hoever controls the darkbirds controls 
J he Star, and whoever controls the Star can 
nything he wishes. This is Jubb." 
sVanbecq thrust out his hands. "You're human, Mr. Durham. If you have sold your 
soul, take it back again. Fight with us, not 
iilSt us/' 

"I assume," said Durham, "that Jubb 
is not human." 

Wanbecq-ai made an abrupt sound of 
disgust. "This is silly, Mr. Durham. If you 
know so little why are you coinc to Nanta 
Dik at all?" 

Durham did not answer. He did not have 
any answer to that one. Wondered if ever 
he would have it. 

"If you are so ignorant," continued Wanbecq-ai viciously, "of course you don't know 
that the Terran consul Karlovic is over his 
head in intrigue, conniving with Jubb in 
order to make this treaty of Federation." 
rham sat up straight. "A treaty of 

e sector," said Wanbecq slowly, "will 
belong either to the human race or to the 
beast, but it cannot belong to both." 

leration," said Durham, answering 
his own question. And suddenly many 
formless things began to fit together into 
a shape that was still cloudy but had a 
sinister solidity. In order for a solar system 
to become a member of the Federation its 
member planets were required to have 
achieved unity among the ith 

common citizenship, a common council, 
common laws. And in order for a subsector to become federated, all its so! 
terns must have reached a like accord. 

In this case, since the system of the two 

Diks was the only inhabited one in the 

r, the two things were the same. 



73 

The fate of 9G rested solely on tl 
of two planets. 

If 9G remained unfederated, the company or companies engaged in mining or 
other business under local license could 
continue to operate in almost any way they 
chose as long as they kept the local officials 
happy. They could strip the whole area of 
its mineral resources, pile up incredible 
fortunes, and leave the native worlds with 
nothing. But if 9G became a member of 
the Federation, Federation law would immediately step in, and Federation enfor< 
ment of same, and if there were any 
of native rights, the people responsible 
would sutler for it. 

Postulate a company. Postulate a connection between it and Hawtree. Postulate and 
postulate. 

At around three hundred miles an hour 
the taxi plunged into the twilight zone. 
Light sprang on automatically. Outside it 
became dark very swiftly, and the darkness 
roared, and glittered with a million lamps. 
"Who," asked Durham, "is principally 
against your two worlds uniting so that 
the treaty can go through?" 

"All of us," said Wanbecq fiercely. 
"Shall we give up our rights, our independence, our human institutions, everythn 
our race has stood for — " 

Wanbecq-ai cried out, "We will never 
unite, never! No one can force us to betray 
our species!" 

Susan began to cry. 

"Please," said Durham. "Bab?. You're 
all right." 

"You hit me." 

"I had to. I'll apologize later. Be quiet 
now, Susan, please." He turned back to the 
Wanbecqs. "Everybody on Nanta Dik fee 
that way?" 

"There are traitors everywhere," said 
Wanbecq darkly. "Some of them, unfortunately, are in positions of pov 

"They won't be for long," said Wanbecq-ai. "Look here, Mr. Durham, you're 
going to Nanta Dik with We 

aren't the only ones who want to know what 
it is. Jubb has sent a darkbird for you. Take 
my advice. Tell us your message and 
back to The Hub * 

Susan said in a nasty muffled v< 
re insar 



74 



PLANET STORIES 






with a message to the milkman. He lost 
his job because he couldn't be trusted." 

Without rancor, Durham said, "You're 

absolutely right, darling. And wouldn't it 

be strangely fitting if that's why I got my 

job back again?" He said to the Wanbecqs, 

►dy tipped you off about me. Who?" 

know him oniy as a friend of 

.anity." 

ody must have sent you here from 

"On our world there are many friends 
of humanity. Think of them, Mr. Durham, 
kiss the Bitter Star." 

Tl i taxi slowed, strongly, smoothly. The 
blurred panorama of lights and ships 
-able into individual shapes. 
Durham stared out ahead. There was the 
form of a freighter, ugly and immensely powerful, on a landing apron only 
partially lighted. The Margaretta K. 
Durham asked, "Who owns her?" 
ersal Minerals." 
bo owns Universal Minerals?" 
I people, I think, all Earthmen." 
tl Minerals on 
Nanta Dik?" 

A little reluctantly, Wanbecq said 
"There is a man named Morrison." 

e name rang no bell in Durham's 
mind. It brought no visible reaction to 
Susai t, though he was watching 

it closely. 

"And how," he asked, "does Morrison 
feel about humanity?" 

"Ask the Bitter Star," said Wanbecq, 
and the taxi slid to a halt beside the platform on which Durham now saw that 
several men were standing. Wanbecq and 
Secq-ai hunched forward expectantly. 
"No," said Durham. "I'm getting out, 
but you're not." He nudged Susan. "Get 
ready." 

The doors slid open automatically. Susan 
scrambled out. Durham went right behind 
her, twisted like a cat in the opening, and 
splashed a brief warning blast off the floor 
at the feet of the Wanbecqs, who had raised 
a frantic cry and were trying to follow. 
aid breathlessly, 
The men who had been standing on the 
platform were now rushing forward. Three 
were lean and butter-colored. One was a 



burly Earthman, who said in a tone of 
amazement, "What the hell — " 

"Hold it!" Durham shouted. He swept 
Susan behind him and tried to cover all 
fronts at once, not knowing whether the 
men were there to capture him or were only 
there by chance and responding to the 
Wanbecqs' cm for help. "These people 
attacked us. I nave passage on your ship — " 

From out of the night there came a shrill, 
flat, hooting cry of "Jubb! Jubb! Jubb!" 

The butter-colored men yelled. They 
scattered away and out, their feet scrabbling 
on the platform. The Earthman was slower 
and more belligerent. He turned around 
and the spiky little blob of darkness ca 
leaping at him. He put up his hands an^ 
struck at it, and the darkbird hooted as the 
fists passed through it, crackling. The 
Earthman opened his mouth in a round 
shocked O and went rigid, rising up on 
the tips of his toes. The darkbird seemed 
to merge with his skull for the fraction of 
a second, and he crumpled down with his 
mouth still open and his chest rising and 
falling heavily. The darkbird swooped toward Durham. 

Durham fired at it. 

It soaked up part of the beam and left 
the rest, like a well-fed cat rejecting an 
overplus of milk. It darted past Durham 
and into the taxi, where it bounced agilely, 
once and twice. Wanbecqand Wanbecq-ai 
fell down on the floor. The doors closed 
softly and the taxi mechanism whirred and 
the rail hummed as it took off, heading 
back to the main terminal. The darkbird 
returned to Durham. 

Susan said in a strange voice, "What is 
that?" 

"Never mind now. Come on." 

He started to drag her toward the ramp 
that led down from the platform. She 
fought him. She was getting hysterical, and 
he didn't blame her. The darkbird followed 
along behind. When they readied the level, 
Susan planted her feet mulishly and refused 
to go any farther. 

"I don't dare leave you alone out here," 
he said desperately. "Come along to the 
ship and the captain will see that you get 
back safely — " 

The darkbird circled and dived at Susan. 
She bolted. It dived at Durham. He bolted 



LAS /■ FROM SEC. 



75 



fa 

1 

i 



t 



off to the right, to the edge of the 
n, where he caught up with S 
bey ran between t 
a spur of the freight-be m. It 

still now, not carrying any freight, 
d to run across it to the other side, 
but the darkbird drove them back. It 
immediately apparent, of course, that the 
y was herdin ated at it 

i Susan alone, but it did not 
(ion to him. And he thought, it wants 
> go somewhere, so it won't knock us 
be? It's worth a try. 
took Susan and jumj 
and ran. 

kbird touched him, ever so gently. 

d to yell, gave up, and tottered back 

where it wanted him to p,i\ with every 

nerve in him pulled taut and twaagKng in 

a horrible half-pleasurable fashion that 

made his legs and arms move unnaturally, 

though he were dancing. The darkbird 

followed, once again placid and uncon
ned. 

They went along the belt Fo dis
tance. It was limber, sagging a bit between 
the giant rollers, and it boomed under their 
ith a sharp slapping sound. Susan 
stumbled so often he picked her up and 
cried her. There was nobody to call to, 
, to ask for help. The towering ships 
re far away. 
The darkbird nudged him again at I. 

a landing apron where a very 
looking ship stood in the solitary 
of impending take-off. The flood 
blinking at twenty-second internal warning to stand clear, and Durham rm si s through 

opic nightmare, v. white-faced girl 

in his arms. 

Dark, light. Black, bright. A ha: 
haustion swam before his 

; in it, jerky shapes in an old film, 

in in antique penny peep show. Day, night. 

Dark, bright. The things m un
human things clad in fai ure 

s. Durham screamed. 

tried to run again, and the 
touched him. Once more tl. the un
le twitching of the ner he 

danced in the black, bright, day, night. He 

I into a large box that was 
for him, and he kept going until 



the end wall of har J n 

. and saw the sigh
ing shut and I dipping into pk ; 

snick-snick or the other, and it T?as 

late even to try to get our 
He set Susan down as gently as he c< 

sank down be . The flo< 

up under him sharply. There v. 'g m g 

and clattering of . erhead, 

a sickening s lurch, Tl 

tern of the light changed outsid( 
round windo >x. lc 

n, in which his h 
showed like two sickly- white butt< 
his knees. There were mi tollow 

and far away, and then a second lurch, a 
lift, a drop, and after that a larger motion 
encompassing the box and the entire locus 
in which it stood. 

Durham put his face in his hands and 
gave up. 



V 



QUSAN - let 

lO me out. She was pounds 

thing. Durham started up. He must have 

slept or passed out. The box was pert 

still now. There was no sense of motion. 

But he could tell by the chan 

that the ship was in spa, 

Susan was by one of th She 

was pounding on it \ 
plement, the heel of her shoe. Durl 
went to her and glanced out. Cold s 

e out on him, and he gra] ' 
hand. 

"Stop it! Are yo 
,hoe from her and threw it across the 
small space of the hen he felt of the 

;, peering at it, frant 
:• cracked it. 

"I'm going it," said Susan grim
and gro] 
. ier. 
"Look." He sh I turned her 

to the v -i air 

out theft 

The box now stood in a ,npty 

tld see the ci the ship's 

hull, ribbed with tremendous strut 

., and a deck of metal pl.r 
in the green light. Green ligh 
have a yello type h kind 



76 



PLANET STORIES 



that the sun gives off. Well, yes — but suppose that the sun was green? 

Nanta Dik circles a green star. 

So does Senya Dik. Those creatures outside the ship were anything but humanoid. 
Jubbs darkbird herded us in here. Easy. 
Now we know. 

"What about the air?" asked Susan. "Let 
go of me." 

"It's poisonous. Can't you tell by looking at it?" It rolled and roiled and sluggishly shifted in vapors of thick chartreuse and 
vivid green. "And don't you remember, 
they were wearing pressure suits? They 
couldn't live in our atmosphere. We surely 
couldn't live in theirs." 

There was no answer. 

"Susan. Susan?" 

"I want to go home," she said, and began 
to a 

"There now, Susie. Take it — " 
m't call me Susie!" 

"All right, but take it easy. I'll find out 
what the situation is and then I'll — " 

"You'll what? You'll make a mess of 
things just like you always have. You'll get 
me into more trouble, just like you got me 
into this. You're no good, Lloyd, and I 
wish I'd never seen you. I wish I'd never 
come to say good-bye!" She rushed to the 
window and began to pound on it again, 
this time with her fists. 

Durham hauled her away and shook her 
until her jaw rattled together. "I'm sorry 
you came too," he said savagely. "You're 
the last person in the galaxy I'd pick to be 
in trouble with. A damned spoiled female 
with no honesty, no courage, no nothing 
but your father's position to trade en." He 
wrapped his arms tight around her. "Hell, 
this is no time to be quarrelling. Let's both 
keep our mouths shut. Come on, honey, 
we're not dead yet." 

She choked a little, and stood trembling 
against him. Then she said, 

"I think I fell over a chair a while ago. 
Maybe there's a lamp. Let's look." 

The green light was dim, but their eyes 

were used to it. They found a lamp and 

d it on. The box was flooded with a 

clear white glare, very grateful to Earthly 

m looked around and said 

slowly, "III be damned." 

The box was about the size of a small 



room. It had in it an armchair, a bunk, 
compact cupboards and lockers, a sink and 
hotplate, and a curtained-off corner with a 
sanitary device. Durham turned on one of 
the sink taps. Water came out. He turned 
it off and went and sat down in the armchair. 

"I'm damned," he said again. 
"Freezer," said Susan, looking into 
tilings. "Food concentrates. Pots and pans. 
Blanket. Change of clothes — all men's. 
Booze, two bottles of it. Rack of microbooks. Somebody went to a lot of trouble." 
"Yes." 

"Pretty comfortable. Everything you 
need, all self-contained." 
"Uh." 

"But Lloyd — it's only for one." 
He said dismally, "We'll take turns on 
the bunk." But it wasn't the bunk that 
worried him. He went and looked out of 
the other window. By craning his head he 
could see an assembly of storage tanks, pressure tanks, pumps, purifiers, blower units, 
all tightly sealed against any admixture of 
Senyan air. That, too, was only for one. A 
most ghastly claustrophobia came over Durham, and for a moment he saw Susan, not 
as a spoiled and pretty girl, but as his rival 
for the oxygen that was life. 

Susan said, "Lloyd. Something is coming in." 

For an instant he thought she meant into 
the box, and then he realized that the 
reverberating clang he heard must be the 
hatch door of the hold. He joined her at 
the opposite window. 

There were two — no, three dark shapes 
coming toward the box, moving swiftly 
through the green and chartreuse vapors. 
They undulated on two pairs of stubby legs 
set fore and aft under a flexible lower body. 
Their upper bodies, carried erect, were 
rather bulbous and tall, with well-defined 
heads and two sets of specialized arms, the 
lower ones thick and powerful for heavy 
work, the upper ones as delicate as an 
engraver's fine tools. Their skin was a glossy 
black, almost like patent leather. They wore 
neat harnesses of what looked like metal 
webbing in the way of dress, and on the 
breast strap each one carried an insigne. 

"Ship's officers," Durham guessed. 
"Probably one of them's the captain/' 



T CM. M SECTOR 9G 



% 



V 






"They're horrible," said Susan. She 
way from t; until the 

end of the bunk caught her behind the 
is and she sat down. 
Durham laughed. "J mo
e are. We're used to the idea of 
non-humanoids. There are a lot of them 
on The Hub, but they're mostly segrcL 
by necessity, so we practically never really 
sec any. But now we're the ones who have 
to be segregated. And the reality is quite 
another thins from the idea, isn't it?" 

H BACKED away himself, 
two, until shame made him stop. The 
three non-humanoids came and looked with 
large iridescent eyes, through the window. 
Their oddly shaped mouths moved rapidly, 
so he knew that they were talking, and 
their slender upper arms v 
expressive as the hands of so many girls at 
a sorority tea. Then one of them turned 
and did something to the wall of the box, 
and suddenly Durham could hear them 
My. There was a speaker device beside 
vindow. Durham sprang at it. 
in you hear me? Can you hear me out 
there? Listen, you have no right to do this, 
you've got to take us back! Miss Hawtree 
is the daughter of — " 

[r. Durham." The voice, was unhuman 
but strong, and the esperanto it spoke was 
per understandable. calm 

self and listen to what 1 ha> 

late your fee 
[ah!" 
" — but there is nothing 1 can do stbout 
it. 1 have my orders, and I 
"From Jubb?" 

ill be fully informed when you 
reach Senya Dik. Meanwhile, I can assure 
you that no harm will come to you, now 
or later. So please put your fears at rest. A 
little patience — " 

Suvin had leaped up. Now she flung herself upon the speaker mil 



met 






ur presence was un and I 

it's going to be rather difficult for 
both. But you must make the best of it. In 
d to air and water, I must caution you 
that the supply will hardly be adequate 
>u both unless you are extremely careful/ 



This had n< ore. 

"You mean — " 

"I mean that you must use no more water 

is absolute!;, for drinking 

and preparing your food. The food you 

share b( you, on half rat 

As for the air — " 

"Yes," said Durham. "What about the 

"I believe that activity has the effect of 
increasing your metabolism, thereby consuming more oxygen. So I would advise you 
both to move and speak as little as possible. 
Remain calm. Remain quiet. In that way 
you should be able to survive. It is not that 
we are grudging. It is simply that we cannot 
share any of our supplies with you, because 
you are alien life forms and totally incompatible. If we had known there would be 
two, we would have prepared. As it is, you 
must work together to conserve." 

"But," said Susan, "but this isn't fair, it 
isn't right! You'll take me back or my 
father will see to it — " 

"Keep this speaker open," said the Senvan, "so that you will be sure to hear the 
audio signal, a sustained note repeated at 
intervals of forty seconds. Prepare to enter 
overdrive." 

He did not say good-bye. He merely went 

with his two officers. Susan screamed 

after them. Durham clapped his hand over 

her mouth, and took her forcibly and put 

her on the bunk. 

"Lie there," he said. "Quiet. Didn't ) 
hear him? Don't move, don't talk." 

He sat down in the chair. >usly 

trying not. to brc ply. 

But — " 

"Don't you say shut up to me, LlThis is all your fault." 

"My fault? Mine? Because you had to 
shove yourself in — " 

"Shove myself? Father was right about 

And it is your fault. If you hadn't 

1 me to ride down with you — n 

"Oh, shut up, damn it, that's just like 

a woman! If you knew your next breath 

.our last one you'd still have to use it 

for talk. You want to asphyxiate us both 

with your gabbling?" 

She was quiet for a long while. Then he 
realized that she was crying. 



78 



PLANET STORIES 



"Lloyd, I'm scared. " 

"So am I." He began to laugh. "When 
I come to think of it, it was your father that 
got us both into this. I hope he sweats 
blood in great gory streams/' 

"You're a drunken ungrateful swine! If 
dad really did give you another chance — " 
"Ah ah! Remember the oxygen! He did. 
And I was such a fatheaded idiot I thought 
it was on the level. I even reformed." He 
laughed again, briefly. "Overcome with 
gratitude, I did exactly what I was supposed 
not to do. I sobered up and held my 
ton l 

"I don't understand at all." 
"I was supposed to talk, Susan. I was 
given a message, and I was supposed to 
babble it all over The Hub. I don't know 
exactly what that message was intended to 
trigger off when it got into circulation, 
•ably a war. But 111 bet I know what 
I triggered off by not talking. Trouble for 
your old man." 

"I don't believe a word of it." 
Durham shrugged. It was very little 
effort to reach out and lift a bottle from 
a nearby cupboard. He opened it and took 
a long pull. Then he looked at the bottle, 
shook his head, and passed it to Susan. 

She made a derisive noise, and he shrugged again. 

it's right. Funny thing. First I was 
stricken with remorse and determined to 
be worthy. Now I'm just mad. Before I 
get through, I'm going to hang your father 
higher than Haman." 

The audio signal, shrill and insistent and 
sounding somehow as unhuman as'the voices 
of the Senyans, came piercingly through 
the speal 

Susan gasped. "Wherever they're taking 
us— they're not going to kill us, are they?" 
"I think they want to question us. I 
think some dirty work is going on, one of 
those million-credit-swindle things you hear 
about once in a while, and I think your 
father is right up to his neck in it. If I'm 
right, that's the chief reason you were 
brought along." 

"I think you're a dirty low down liar," 
she said, in a voice he could hardly hear. 

The signal continued to squeal. Durham 
moved to the bunk. 
"Slide over." 



"No." 

But she did not fight him when he pushed himself in beside her and took her in 
his arms. 

"The haughty Miss Hawtree," he said, 
and smiled. "You're a mess. Hair in your 
eyes. Make-up all smeared. Tears dripping 
off the end of your nose." 

The light dimmed, became strange and 
^erie. 

"They could have made this damned 
bunk a little wider." 

"It doesn't matter. After a trip like this, 
I won't have any reputation left, anyway. 
Nobody would believe me on oath." 

The fabric of the ship shifted, strained, 
slipped, moved. The fabric of Durham's 
body did likewise. He set his teeth and 
said, 

"Don't worry, dear. I can always ask the 
captain to marry us." 

By the time the audio-signal shrilled 
again, heralding a return to solar system 
speeds and space, it seemed that ages had 
passed. 

THEY did not talk about marriage now, 
even in jest. They hated each other! 
"Cabin fever," they had said politely for 
a while, making excuses. But they did not 
bother with excuses any more. They just 
had simply and quietly loathed each other, 
as the long, timeless time went by. 

Pity, too, thought Durham, looking at 
Susan where she lay in the bunk. She's really 
a handsome wench, even without all the 
makeup and the hairdo and those incredible 
undergarments that women use, as though 
they were semi-liquescent. Just lying there 
in her slip now, she looks younger, gentler, 
nice and soft, as though she'd be pleasant 
to hold in your arms again if you had the 
strength and the oxygen and if you didn't 
hate her so. 

"Lloyd?"' 

"Huh?" 

"How long before we land?" 

"How should I know?" 

"Well, you could find out." 

"You find out. You can yell as loud as 
I can. Louder." 

"I'll yell," said Susan ominously. "The 
second I get out of here, I'll yell so loud 
the whole galaxy will hear me." 



LAST CALL FROM SECTOR 9G 



■ 



"I should think they've already heard 
you clear out to Andromeda." 

The lights dimmed. The peculiar noises 
and wrenchings that went with coming out 
of overdrive began. Durham braced himself. 

"It's too bad you reformed," said Susan. 
"You used to be amusing company, at least. 
Now you're sour and bad tempered. You're 
also — " 

What he was also Durham never heard. 
There was a crashing, roaring, rending 
impact. The chair went out from under 
him so that he fell face up into the ceiling. 
The lights went out entirely. He heard a 
thin faint sound that might have been 
Susan screaming. Then the ceiling slid 
away from him and spilled him down a 
wall. As he went scrabbling past the window 
he looked out and saw that there were 
now long vertical rents in the outer hull 
through which the stars were shining. 
The pumps had stopped. 

A long settling groan and then silence. 
The artigrav field was dead. Durham 
floated, along with everything else that was 
not bolted down. 

"Susan," he said. "Susan?" 

"Here." 

They met and clung together in mid air 
while the hull began a slow axial rotation 
around them. 

"What happened?" 

"We hit something." 

"The Senyans — " 

;ey must all be done for. The hull is 
split open. Head-on ram, I think, just as 
we came out of overdrive. They wouldn't 
have had time to get space armor." 

'Then are we — " 

"Hush. Don't talk. Just wait and see." 

They clung together, silent. The hull 
turned without sound, and the stars shone 
in through the long slits, into the empty 
vacuum of the hold. 

"Lloyd, I can't breathe." 

"Yes you can. We still have as much air 
as ever. It just isn't circulating now." 

"I don't know if I can stand this, Lloyd. 
It's such an awful way." 

"There isn't any way that's good 
won't be so bad, really. You'll just go off 
to sleep." 

"Hold onto me?" 

"Sure." 



"Lloyd." 

"What?" 

"I'm sorry." 

"So am I." 

The hull turned and the ilittered. 

The vitiated air grew foul, grew thick and 
leaden. The man and woman floated in the 
closed space, their arms tight around each 
other, their faces close together. 

Something jarred against the hull. 

"Lloyd! I see a light!" 

"It's only a star." 

"No. Look through the window. Moving—" 

Men, humans, wearing pressure suits, 
had come into the hull. Two of them were 
dragging oxygen bottles. They came up to 
the box and flashed their lights in through 
the windows. They knocked and made reassuring signs. After a minute or two fresh 
oxygen hissed in under pressure through 
the air duct. Susan laughed a little and then 
fainted. Durham still held her in his arms. 
Everything got pleasantly dark and far 
away, lost in the single simple joy of 
breathing. 

There were sounds and motions but he 
did not pay much attention to them, and 
he was mildly surprised when he happened 
to float past a window and noticed that now 
there was only space outside, very large and 
full of hot and splendid lights. When he 
passed the other window he saw part of a 
ship, and he understood that the box was 
being hoisted across the interval between 
it and the wreck. It seemed a remarkably 
kind dispensation of fortune to have provided a ship at exactly the right time and 
place, and not just any ship but one equipped with the specialized tackle required 
for moving heavy loads in space. 

A mighty cargo hatch swallowed the box. 
Susan came to, and they waited, weakly 
hysterical, Durham not even noticing that 
a spiky shadow had slipped in with the 
box. Suddenly again there was man-made 
light, and then the sound of heavy air 
pumps reached them. The pumps stopped, 
and, quite simply, men came in and opened 
the door of the box. 

There was a considerable noise and confusion, everybody talking at once. Durham 
lost track of Susan. He was only partly conscious of what he was doing, but he felt 



80 



PLANET STORIES 



that everybody was in a hurry to get something done. Then there was a cabin with 
a port in it, and beyond the port there was 
space, and in that space a great light flared 
blindingly and was gone. 

VI 

MORRISON said, "Murder is a harsh 
word, Durham. After all, they weren't 
human." 

"There's no such difference under Federation la
/re not under Federation law here." 
"No. And you're engaged in a life-ormake sure you don't come 
under it. This happened to be one of the 
i parts." 
Morrison looked at him in mild surprise. 
"You figured that out, Durham?" He was 
kindly looking man, the conventional father type. Susan was staring at 
him in blank horror, as though she could 
not believe what she was hearing. "I wasn't 
told you were that bright. Well, you're 
right. Universal Minerals and its various 
dummy corporations in this sub-sector are 
making such profits as you wouldn't believe 
if I told you, and we have no intention of 
giving it up." 

en if you have to slaughter a whole 
.■ship's crew. \\ hat did you do, tow an asteroid into position?" 

Morrison shrugged. "Special debris is not 

>rnmon." 
"You could have killed us, too, you 
know," Durham said angrily. "You could 
have killed her. Hawtree wouldn't have 
liked that." 

"It i ..d to take. It was a 

small one." He looked Durham 
up and down. "You made us one whale 
of a mess of trouble. If my yacht wasn't a 
good bit faster than Jubb's ship, we'd have 
been whipped. What happened to you? 
Why didn't you talk like you were supposed to?" 

"You'd die laughing." 
"I can control my emotions. Go ahead." 
Durham told him. "Virtue/' he finished 
sourly, "is sure enough its own reward. I 
should have stayed drunk. I was happier 
that way. What happened to the Wanbeccp?" 



Morrison was still laughing. "They had 
not come to when their taxi reached the 
terminus. The port police picked them up." 
He took a bottle out of a locker and pushed 
it and a glass across the cabin table to 
Durham. "Here. You've earned it. Wait 
till I tell Hawtree. And he was so sure of 
you. Just goes to show you can't trust 
anybody." 

Susan said, "But why?" Shock was making her mind move slowly. It was a minute 
before they realized she was referring to 
the Senyan ship. 

She added, very slowly, "It's true about 
my father?" 

"I'm afraid it is," said Morrison. "But 
I wouldn't worry about it too much. He's 
a very rich man. He's also a shrewd one, 
and it looks now as though he's gokig to 
be all right. Give her a drink, Durham, 
she needs it. Would you like to lie down, 
Miss Hawtree? All right, then, I'll tell you 
why." 

He leaned over her with no look of 
kindness at all. "Get this all clearly in mind, 
Miss Hawtree, so you'll understand that if 
at zny time you try to hang me, you'll hangf 
your father too. We're partners, equally 
guilty. You understand that." 

"Yes." She looked so white that Durham 
was frightened. But she sat quietly and 
listened. 

"For years now," Morrison said, "I have 
managed the company here, and Hawtree 
has used his position with the Embassy to 
see that I have a free hand. He sees that no 
complaints get to ears higher up. He sees 
that any annoying red tape is taken care of. 
Most important of all, he sees that any 
official communication from either of the 
Diks that might be unfavorable to us is 
permanently lost in the files — including all 
requests for aid in achieving Federation 
status. Our connection, naturally, is one of 
the best kept secrets in the galaxy. 

"We had very easy sailing until Jubb 
to power on Senya Dik. Jubb is an 
able leader. He knows what's happening 
to the resources of the sector, and he knows 
the only way to put a stop to it. Unfortunately for us, all the leaders on Nanta Dik 
aren't fools either, and there is a growing 
movement toward unification. Jubb has 
pushed it and pushed it, so that we've been 



LAST CALL FROM SECTOR 9G 



81 



forced to take more and more vigorous 
steps. The human supremacy groups, made 
up of such people as the Wanbecqs, have 
been very useful. And of course Senya Dik 
has its lunatic fringe too, in reverse but 
equally useful. But Jubb started a campaign 
of petitioning the Embassy. He poured it 
on so hard that Hawtree knew he wasn't 
going to be able to pigeonhole all the petitions forever. Furthermore, it was obvious 
that Jubb knew there must be collusion 
somewhere and was hammering away to 
find it. So Hawtree sent for me." 

"And," said Durham, "you said, 'Let's 
start a war between the two planets. Then 
unification can't possibly take place, and 
Jubb will have too much on his hands to 
bother us.' Maybe he'll even be eliminated. 
And you went looking for a goat." 

"Exactly. You were given a message about 
dark birds that would have significance only 
to a Nantan. The Wanbecqs were put on 
your trail. All you had to do was talk." 

"What if I had talked too much?" 

"How could you? You didn't know anything. And Hawtree's story would be that 
he had simply given you passage home, 
which you had bought." 

"And anyway," said Durham thoughtfully, "I would have been either dead in an 
alley somewhere, or aboard a ship going 
to Nanta Dik — which I would not have 
reached." 

"It was a flexible situation." 

Susan said, "Then you admit that you — n 
She could not finish. 

MORRISON turned on her irritably. 
"You very nearly wrecked us, Miss 
Hawtree. Durham's disappearance wouldn't 
have raised a ripple, but the daughter of 
a highly placed diplomat vanishing was 
quite another thing. Your father had to 
think fast and talk faster, or public curiosity 
would have forced an investigation right 
then. Fortunately the Wanbecqs helped. 
They painted a pretty dark picture of Jubb, 
and Hawtree was able to smooth things 
over since everybody knew you'd been 
sweet on Durham and had obviously gone 
to say good-bye. Hawtree did such a good 
job, in fact, that he had the whole Hub 
seething with indignation against Jubb even 
6 — Planet — Summer 



before I left. So it turned out well, in 
spite of you." 

"But why did you have to wreck the 
ship?" 

"Well, we had to get you back. We 
couldn't let Jubb have Mr. Durham to use 
as a witness against us, and we certainly 
couldn't let him have Hawtree's daughter 
to use as a club over Hawtree. Now, you 
see, the situation is this." 

He nodded to the cabin port beyond 
which the bright flare had come and gone, 
leaving nothing but emptiness. 

"There's nothing left of the ship but 
atoms, and no one can say what happened 
to it. Jubb does not have you two, but he 
can't prove it as long as you're kept out 
of sight. So we keep you out of sight, and 
at the same time press demands to Jubb for 
your return. It looks as though he's hiding 
you, or has killed you, in fear of the storm 
he has raised. The more he doesn't give you 
up the more human opinion turns" against 
him, and the more his own people figure 
he's made them nothing but trouble. Meanwhile, the Wanbecqs are on their way home 
with a big story. We can still have our war 
if we want it. And Jubb's days are numbered." 

Durham said slowly, "What if he decides 
to use the Bitter Star?" 

Morrison stared at him, and then 
laughed. "Don't try to frighten me with 
my own bogeyman. I took a story a thousand years old and resurrected it and talked 
it up until it caught. But that's all it is, a 
story." 

"Are you sure? And what about the darkbirds? They seem to get around. Won't they 
tell Jubb where we are?" 

"He'd have a hard time proving it on 
the word of a shadow. Besides, there are 
defenses against them. They won't interfere." 

"I suppose," said Durham, taking the 
bottle into his hand as though to pour 
again, "that it wouldn't bother you to 
know that one of them is in here now." 

Morrison did not take his eyes from 
Durham's face. "Hawtree made a stinking 
choice in you. Put down that bottle." 

Durham grinned. He raised the bottle 
higher and chanted, "Jubb, Jubb, Jubb!" 

Morrison said between his teeth, "Tim 



82 



PLANET STORIES 



would have had to be done anyway." Still 
watching Durham, he reached one swift 
hand into the belt of his tunic Susan made 
a muffled cry and started to get up. None 
of the motions were finished. A shadow 
came out from the darkness of a corner 
behind Morrison's chair. It flicked against 
him and he fell across the table, quite still. 
The darkbird came and hung in the air 
in front of Durham. 

"Jubb," it said. 

Durham put down the bottle and wiped 
the sweat off his forehead. He looked at the 
darkbird, feeling cold and hollow. 

"I want to go to him. You understand? 
To Jubb." 

Up and down it bounced, like the nodding of a head. 

Susan said, "What are. you going to do?" 

"Try and steal a lifeboat." 

"I'm going with you." 

"No. Morrison doesn't want to kill you, 
but don't push him too far. You stay. Then 
if I don't make it you'll still be — " He 
broke off. "That's taking a lot for granted, 
isn't it? After all, Hawtree is your father."
She whispered, "I don't care." 

"It's the biggest decision you'll ever 
make. Don't make it too fast." He kissed 
her. "Besides, if you wait, you may not 
have to make it at all." 

He took Morrison's gun and went out, 
and the darkbird went with him, bunched 
small and darting so swiftly that the two 
men it struck down never saw it. Durham 
turned aside into the communications room, 
and the darkbird saw to it that there was 
no alarm. He damaged radio and radar so 
that it would take some time to fix them. 
Then he went on down the corridor to the 
plainly marked hatch that led to Lifeboat 
No. 1. He got into it, with the darkbird. 
As soon as the boat hatch itself was shut, 
automatic relays blow him free of the pod 
on a blast of air. 

"Jubb," said the darkbird. It touched 
him, and to his amazement there w T as no 
shock, only a chilly tingling that was not 
unpleasant. Then it simply oozed out 
through the solid hull, the way smoke oozes 
tli rough a filter, and was gone. 

Durham had no time for any more astonishments. The controls of the lifeboat were 
designedly very simple and plainly rmtked, 



Durham got himself going and away from 
Morrison's ship as fast as he could. But be 
knew that it was not going to be anything 
like fast enough if the darkbird didn't 
hurry. 

It hurried. And Durham was closer to 
Senya Dik than he realized. In less than 
three hours he was in touch with a planetary 
patrol ship, following it in toward the green 
blaze of KL421, and a dim cool planet 
that circled it, farther out than the ori>it of 
Earth around Sol, but not quite so far as 
Mars. 

VII 

THE spaceport was in a vast flat plain. 
Far across the plain Durham could see 
the dark outline of a city. He stood at the 
edge of the landing area, between two 
Senyan officers from the ship. He wore a 
pressure suit from the lifeboat's equipment, 
and the wind blew hard, beating and picking and pushing at the suit and the bubble 
helmet. It was difficult for Durham to stand 
up, but the Senyans, braced on their four 
sturdy legs, stood easily and swayed their 
upper bodies back and forth like trees. 

They were big. He had not really understood how big they were until he stood beside them. He gathered that they were 
waiting for a ground conveyance, and he 
was not surprised. Light air cabs were 
hardly suited to their build. 

He had talked briefly to Karlovic by 
radio, and he was impatient to get to the 
consulate where Karlovic was waiting for 
him. The minute or two in which they 
waited for the truck seemed interminable. 
But it came, a great powerful thing like 
a moving van, and one of the Senyans said, 

"Permit me?" 

With his two lower arms he lifted Durham onto the platform. The two Senyans 
spoke to the driver and then got on themselves. The truck took off, going very fast 
in spite of its size. The Senyans held Durham between them, because there was nothing for a human to hang to, and nowhere 
to sit down. 

They left the spaceport. Huge storage 
buildings lined the road, and then smaller 
buildings, and then patches of open country, 
inexpressibly dreary to Durham's eyes. High 



LAST CALL FROM SECTOR 9G 



83 



I 






Overhead the sun burned green and small 
in a sky of cloudy vapor from which fell 
showers of glinting rain. Poison rain from 
a poison sky. Durham shivered, and a deep 
depression settled on him. Nothing hopeful 
would be done in this place. Not by humans. 

The truck roared on. Durham watched 
the city grow on the murky horizon, rising 
up into huge ugly towers and blocky structures like old prisons greatly magnified. It 
was a big city. It was a frightening city. He 
wished he had never seen it. He wished he 
was back in The Hub, standing on a high 
walk with the good hot sun pouring on him 
and no barriers between him and the good 
clean air. He wanted to weep with mingled 
weariness and claustrophobia. Then he noticed that little crowds had collected along 
the way into the city. They shouted at the 
truck going by, and waved their arms, and 
some of them threw stones that rattled off 
the sides. 

"What's the matter?" Durham asked. 

"They are members of the anti-human 
party. Prejudice cuts both ways, a thing our 
neighbors of Nanta Dik do not seem to 
understand. Human and non-human are 
intellectual concepts. On the emotional level 
it is simply us or not-us. You arc not-us, 
and as such quite distasteful to some. What 
I do not understand is how they knew you 
were coming." 

"Morrison must have got his radio working. He's been using the extremists here 
just like the ones on Nanta Dik, to make 
trouble." 

"There are times — " said the Senyan 
grimly. "But then I make myself remember 
that there are scoundrels among us, too." 

The truck rumbled through the traffic of 
wide boulevards, between rows of massive 
buildings that had obviously never been designed with anything so small and frail as 
human beings in mind. There were Senyans 
on the streets, apparently going about whatever business they did, and Durham wondered what their home life was like, what 
games the children played, what they ate 
and how they thought, what things they 
worried about in the dark hours of the 
night. He felt absolutely alien. It was not 
a nice feeling. 

Presently the truck turned into an open 
circle surrounded by mighty walls of stone. 



In one place bright light shone cheerfully 
from the windows, and the Senyan said, 
"That is the consulate." 

They set him off and showed him where 
the airlock was. Durham performed the 
ritual of the lock chamber, frantic to get 
out of the confining suit. When the inner 
door swung open he began to tear at the 
helmet, and a man came in saying, "Let 
me help." 

When Durham was free of the suit, the 
man looked at him with very tired, very 
angry eyes. "I'm Karlovic. Jubb's waiting. 
Come on." 

He led Durham down an echoing corridor that dwarfed them by its size. The 
colors of the polished wood and stone were 
not keyed to the glaring yellow light, and 
the rooms that Durham could see into as 
he passed were not keyed to the small incongruous furnishings that had been forced 
upon them. Somewhere below there was a 
throbbing of pumps, and the air smelted of 
refresher chemicals. 

Durham said, "You knew I was being 
brought here, didn't you?" 

Karlovic nodded. "You, yes. The girl, 
no. She was an overzealous mistake on the 
part of the darkbird. Yes, I was in on it. 
I hoped that finally we could get proof, a 
witness against whoever in the Embassy was 
working with Morrison. Hawtree, is it? I'm 
glad to know his name." 

He pushed open a door. TTie room beyond it was only half a room, cut in the 
middle by a partition of heavy glass. On 
the other side of the glass wall was the 
thick green native air, and three Senyans, 
one of whom came forward when Durham 
and Karlovic came in. A darkbird hovered 
close above him. He said to Durham, 

"I am Jul*." 

There were communicator discs set in 
the glass. Jubb motioned Durham to a chair 
beside one. "First let me offer the apology 
that is due you. You were carrying a message which was not true, which would 
have made the people of Nanta Dik believe 
that we were about to come against them 
with the Bitter Star. The darkbirds warned 
me, and I felt that I had no choice. I could 
not let that message be delivered." 

Durham said, "No one could blame you 
for that." 



84 



PLANET STORIES 






"You understand, I had another motive, 
too." 

"Yes. I don't think you could be blamed 
for that, either." 

JUBB looked at him with his large inscrutable eyes, totally alien, unmistakably intelligent. "I didn't know what you 
would be like, Mr. Durham, whether you 
would be in sympathy with your employers 
or not. Now of course it is evident that you 
can't be." 

Durham said quietly, "I've been to a 
lot of trouble already to put a rope around 
their necks. I'm ready to go to a lot more. 
They've used me like — He could not 
think of the right word. Jubb nodded. 

"Contempt is not an easy thing to take. 
I know. Then you will help?" 
"In any way I can." 

"I want you to go back with me to The 
Hub, Mr. Durham. Before, I was helpless 
without proof. Now, as head of a planetary 
government, I can insist on seeing the 
ranking Ambassador himself, and I can 
bypass Hawtree now that I know who he is. 
I want you to be my witness." 

"Nothing," said Durham, "would please 
me more." 

"Good," said Jubb. "Good. Karlovic, it 
looks as though the end of our long fight 
may be in sight at last. Take good care of 
Mr. Durham. He is more precious than 
gold. 

"Meanwhile, Morrison had made us a 
problem on transportation. We provided 
that particular ship for the consul's comfort, 
when there was reason for him to travel in 
our territory, and we had planned to refit 
it so that it would accommodate two on 
the return journey. Now I must ask a ship 
from our friends on Nanta Dik, and that 
may take a little time. So rest well, Mr. 
Durham." 

He went out, and Karlovic led Durham 
back into the hall and from there into a tall 
gloomy chamber that had a shiny little 
kitchen lost in one corner of it. There was 
a table and chairs. Durham sat down and 
watched Karlovic busy himself with packages of food. 

"You don't look very happy about all 
this," he said. 
n "I'm -not unhappy. I'm worried." 



"About what? Morrison can't do 
thing now." 

"No? Listen, Mr. Durham, the emperors 
of Rome only ruled part of one little world, 
but they didn't give it up easily. Morrison 
won't, cither. Remember, things are so bad 
for him now they can't possibly get any 
worse, only better." 

Durham looked out the window. It was 
a double one, with a vacuum between the 
panes and protective mesh on the outside. 
The green air pressed thick against it. The 
sun had wheeled far over, and the shadows 
of the buildings were long and black. 

"Do you stay here much?" he asked. 

"I have lately," said Karlovic. "I had to. 
My life wasn't safe on Nanta Dik. You've 
no idea how high their feelings run there, 
thanks to Morrison." He began to set the 
table. Durham made no move to help. He 
was tired. He watched the shadows lengthen 
and fill the circle of lofty walls with their 
darkness. 

"Couldn't the government there protect 
you?" 

"Only part of the government wants to. 
And Morrison is working hard to frighten 
them with all this propaganda about the 
Bitter Star." 

^Propaganda. That's what he said. Is it?" 
"Absolutely— as far as the Senyans using 
iHs concerned. But the tiling itself is real. 
It's in the city here. I've seen it." 

Karlovic put the heated containers on 
the table and sat down. He began methodically to eat. 

"It's kind of a weird story. Probably it 
could only have happened on a world like 
this, with a totally non-human, bio-chemical 
set-up. Senyan science started early and advanced fast, a good deal faster than it did 
on Nanta Dik, for some reason. They did 
a lot of experimenting with solar energy 
and atomics and the forces that lie just on 
the borderline of life — or maybe intelligence would be a better word." 

"Aren't the two more or less synonymous?" 

"A hunk of platinum sponge or a mess 
of colloids can be intelligent, but never 
alive. The Star is. The darkbirds are. 
They're not matter, they're merely a nexus 
of interacting particles. But they live and 
think." 



LAST CALL FROM SECTOR 9G 



85 



V 




"What about the Star?" 
"The scientists were trying for an energy 
matrix that would absorb solar power and 
store it like a battery. Something slipped, 
and the result was the Bitter Star. It absorbs 
solar power, all right, but in the form of 
heat, and it will take heat from anything. 
And it doesn't give it up. It merely absorbs 
more and more until every living thing near 
it is frozen and there's no more heat to be 
had. The Senyan scientists didn't know 
quite what to do with this thing they had 
created, but they didn't want to destroy it, 
either. It had too many angles they wanted 
to study. So they made the darkbirds, on the 
same pattern but without the heat-hunger, 
and with a readier intelligence, to be a 
bridge between themselves and the Star, to 
control it. They studied the thing until it 
proved too dangerous, and they prisoned 
it by simply starving it at a temperature 
of absolute zero. So it has stayed ever since, 
but the darkbirds still guard it in case anything should happen to free it again. They 
almost seem to love it, in some odd unfleshly way." 

Durham frowned. "Then it could be 
used against Nanta Dik." 

"Oh yes," said Karlovic sombrely. "In 
fact it was, once. The Star shone in their 
sky in midsummer, and the crops blackened 
and the rivers froze, and men died where 
they stood in the fields'. The Senyans won 
the war. That was a thousand years ago, 
but the Nantans never quite forgot it." 

He got up and went morosely to the 
sink, carrying dishes. "I keep telling Jubb 
he ought to get rid of the thing. It's a 
sore point. But — " 

Somewhere below there was a very loud 
noise. The floor rose up and then settled 
again. Almost at once the air was full of 
dust, and an alarm bell began a strident 
ringing. Karlovic's mouth opened and closed 
twice, as though he was trying to say something. He let the dishes fall clattering 
around his feet, and then he ran with all 
his might out of the room and along the 
hall. 

Durham followed him. There was now 
no sound at all from below. The pumps 
had stopped. 

Karlovic found his tongue. "Cover your 
face. Don't breathe," 



DURHAM saw a thin lazy whorl of 
greenish mist moving into the hall. 
He pressed his handkerchief over his mouth 
and nose and made his legs go, hard and 
fast. He was right on top of Karlovic when 
they stumbled into the airlock. It was still 
clear. 

They helped each other into their 
suits, panting in the stagnant air. Then, 
through the helmet audio, Durham could 
hear sounds from outside, muffled shouts 
and tramplings. Karlovic went back into ( 
the consulate where the green mist was 
•already clinging around his knees, and 
looked out a window into the circle. Over 
his shoulder Durham could see Senyans 
milling around and he thought they were 
rioters, but Karlovic said, "It's all right, 
they're Jubb's guards." 

They went back to the airlock, and from 
there into the open circle. Senyans escorted 
them hastily into the adjoining building, 
and Durham saw that guard posts were 
being set up. There was a gaping hole in 
the side of the consulate and the pavement 
was shattered, and there were pieces of 
machinery and stuff lying around. Durham 
figured rapidly in his head how much 
oxygen he had in his suit pack, and how 
long it would take to repair the consulate 
and get the air conditioning working again, 
and how long it would be before a ship 
could get here from Nanta Dik. He looked 
at Karlovic, whose face was white as chalk 
inside his helmet. 

"The lifeboat," he said. 
Karlovic nodded. Some color came back 
into his face. "Yes, the lifeboat. We can 
live in it until the ship comes." He ran 
his tongue over his lips as though they 
were very dry. "Didn't I tell you Morrison 
wouldn't give up easy? Oh lord, the lifeboat!" He began to jabber urgently at the 
Senyans in their own tongue, and again his 
expression was agonized. Durham didn't 
need to be told what he was thinking. If 
anything happened to that lifeboat, they 
were two dead men on a world where 
humans had no biological right to be. 

They were brought into a room where 
Jubb was busy with a bank of communicators and a batch of harried aides. The room 
was enormous, but it did not dwarf the 
Senyans, and the sombre colors did not seem 



86 



PLANET STORIES 



deposing in their own light. Jubb said, as 
they came in the door, 

"I've had a heavy guard set on your 
lifeboat. I don't think anyone can repeat 
that hit-and-run bombing — " He cursed in 
a remarkably human fashion, naming Morrison and the Senyan fools who let themselves be used. "You are all right, Karlovic 
— Mr. Durham? Quite safe? I've ordered 
a motor convoy. There are signs of unrest 
all over the city — apparently word has gone 
out that you, Durham, are carrying the unification agreement for my signature, and 
that the terms are a complete surrender on 
our part to human rule. Does it cheer you 
two to know that the human race is not 
alone in producing fools and madmen? 
Once on the spaceport you will be safe, my 
naval units will see to that, and my troops 
are already in the streets. They have orders 
to look out for you. Go with fortune." 

They were taken out another way, where 
three heavy trucks and several smaller 
vehicles were drawn up. The Senyans in 
them wore a distinctive harness and were 
armed, and the vehicles all had armor plated 
bodies. Durham and Karlovic were lifted 
into one of the trucks, which was already 
filled with Senyan soldiers. The convoy 
moved off. 

Durham braced himself in a corner and 
looked at Karlovic. "Happened fast, didn't 
it? Awfully fast." 

"Violent things always do. You're not 
much used to violence, are you? Neither am 
I. Neither are most people. They get it 
shoved at them." 

"I don't think we're through with it 
yet," said Durham. 

Karlovic said, *T told you." 
For some time there was only the rushing 
and jolting of the truck, the roar of motors 
and a kind of dim uneasy background of 
sound as though the whole city stirred and 
seethed. Durham was frightened. The food 
he had eaten had turned against him, he 
was stifling in his own sweat, and he 
thought of Morrison cruising comfortably 
somewhere out in space, smoking cigarettes 
and drinking good whiskey and sending 
down a message now and then, the w r ay 
a man pokes with a stick at a brace of 
beetles, stirring them casually toward death. 

in an agony 



of hate and fear, and the taste of them was 
sour in his mouth. 

Somebody said to them, "We're on the 
spaceport highway now. It won't be long." 
^ A minute later somebody shouted and 
Karlo\ ic caught the Senyan word and 
echoed it. "Barricade!" The truck rocked 
and whirled about and there were great 
crashes in the night that had fallen. Durham 
was thrown to his knees. The truck raced 
at full speed. There were sounds of fighting 
that now rose and now grew faint, and the 
truck lurched and swerved, and then there 
were more roars and crashes and it came 
violently to a halt. The Senyans began firing 
out of the loopholes in the armored sides. 
Some of them leaped out of the truck, 
beckoning Durham and Karlovic to come 
after them. A large force of rioters was 
attacking what remained of the convoy, 
which had been forced back into the city! 
Four of the Senyan soldiers ran with the 
two men into a side street, but a small body 
of rioters caught up with them. The soldiers 
turned to fight, and Karlovic said in a 
that was now curiously calm, 

"If we're quick enough they may lose 
sight of us in the darkness." 

He turned into an areaway between two 
buildings, and then into another, and Durham ran beside him through the cold green 
mist and the dim glow of lamps that glimmered on the alien walls. The sound of 
the fighting died away. They turned more 
corners, hunting always for the darkest 
shadows, hoping to meet a patrol. But the 
streets were deserted and all the doors 
barred tight. Finally Durham stopped. 
"How much oxygen you got left?" 
Karlovic peered at the illuminated indicator on the wrist of his suit. "Hour. Maybe 
less." 

Both men were breathing hard, panting, 
burning up the precious stuff of life. Durham said, 

"I won't last that long. Listen, Karlovic 
Where is the Bitter Star?" 

Karlovic's face was a pale blur inside 

his helmet. "You crazy? You can't " 

Durham put his two hands on the shoulders of Karlovic's suit and leaned his 
helmet close so that it clicked on Karlo\ 
"Maybe I'm crazy. In thirty, forty min. $o what will k w&ttet 



LAST CALL FROM SECTOR 9G 



87 



then? Listen, Karlovic, I want to live." He 
pointed back the way they had come. "You 
think we can walk through that to the 
spaceport in time?" 

"No." 

"We got anyplace else to go? * 

"No." 

"All right then. Let's give 'em hell/ 

"But they're not all our enemies. Jubb, 
my friends — " 

"Friend or enemy, they'll clear the way, 
We might just make it, Karlovic. You said 
the darkbirds control it, and you can talk 
to them." He shook Karlovic viciously. 
"Where is it? Don't you understand? If we 
use it we can hound Morrison out of space!" 

Karlovic turned and began to walk fast, 
sobbing as he went. "The darkbirds will 
never let us. You don't know what you're 
doing." 

"I know one thing. I'm sick of being 
pushed, pushed, pushed, into corners, into 
holes, where I can't breathe. I'm going 
to — " He shut his teeth tight together and 
walked fast beside Karlovic, starting at 
every sound and shadow. 

By twining alleys and streets where nothing moved for fear of the violence that was 
abroad that night, Karlovic led Durham 
to an open space like a park with vast locked 
gates that could keep a Senyan out but not 
a little agile human who could climb like 
a monkey with the fear of death upon him. 
Beyond the gates great wrinkled lichens as 
tall as trees grew in orderly rows, and a 
walk led inward. The lichens bent and 
rustled in the wind, and Durham's suit 
was wet with a poisonous dew. 

The walk ended in a portico, and the 
portico was part of a building, round and 
squat as though a portion of its mass was 
underground. They passed through a narrow door into a place of utter silence, and 
a darkbird hung there, barring their way. 

"Jubb," said Durham. "Tell it Jubb has 
sent us. Tell it the Bitter Star must be 
freed again to destroy Jubb's enemies." 

Karlovic spoke to the shadow. Others 
came to join it. There was a flurry of 
ting and chittering, and then the one 
Karlovic had been speaking to disappeared 
in the uncanny fashion of its kind. The 
others stayed, a barrier between the two 
men atld a ramp that led steeply down. 



Karlovic sat down wearily on the chill 
stone. "It isn't any use," he said. "I knew 
it wouldn't be. The darkbird has gone to 
ask Jubb if what we say is true." 

Durham sat down, too. He did not even 
bother to look at the indicator on his wrist. 
No use. The end. Finish. He shut his eyes. 

There was a stir and a hooting in the 
air. Karlovic gasped. Then he began to 
shake Durham, laughing like a woman who 
has heard a risque story. "Didn't you hear? 
The bird came back, and Jubb said— -Jubb 
said Morrison has been preaching the war 
of the Bitter Star, so let him have it." 

He grasped Durham's suit by the shoulders and pulled him to his feet, and they 
ran with the cloud of shadows, down into 
the dimness below. 

VIII 

THERE was a small sealed chamber with 
a thick window, and beyond it was a 
circular space, not too large, walled with 
triple walls of glass with a vacuum between. 
The air was full of darkbirds, moving without hindrance through the walls or hovering where they chose, above the thing that 
slept inside. 

Durham blinked and turned his head 
away, and then looked back again. And 
Karlovic said softly, "Beautiful, isn't it? 
But sad, too, somehow, I don't know why." 

Durham felt it, a subliminal feeling without any reason to it, like the sadness of a 
summer night or of birth and laughter or 
of gull's wings white and swift against the 
sky. The Star shone, palely, gently. He tried 
to see if it was round or any other shape, if 
it was solid or vaporous, but he could not 
see anything but that soft shining, like 
mist around a winter moon. 

Durham shook himself and wondered 
why, when he was already so sure of death, 
he should be so afraid. "All right," he 
said. "How is it freed?" 

"The darkbirds do that. Watch." 

He spoke to them, one word, and in the 
glass-walled prison there was a stirring 
and a swirling of shadows around the soft 
shining of the Star. Durham saw a disc set 
in the metal overhead. One of the darkbirds 
touched it. There was an intense blue flare 
of light, and Durham felt the throbbmg 



PLANET STORIES 



of hidden dynamos, a secret surge of power. 
The glass walls darkened and grew dim, 
the low roof turned and opened to the sky. 
And through the barrier window, Durham 
•ied the waking of a star. 
He saw the frosty shining brighten and 
spread out in slow unfurling veils. There 
was a moment when the whole building 
seemed filled with moonfire as cold as the 
breath of outer space and as beautiful as 
the face of a dream, and then it was gone, 
nd the darkbirds were gone with it. 
"Come on," said Karlovic, a harsh incongruous voice in the stunned darkness that 
was left behind, and Durham came, up the 

Pramp and out into the parklike space beyond, and all the tall lichens were standing 
dead and sheathed in ice. 

High above, burning cold over the city, 
a new star shone. 

They followed it, th rough a silence as 
p as the end of the world. Everything 
had taken cover at the rising of that star, 
and only the two men moved, the thermal 
units of their suits turned on high, through 
streets all ghzed with ice and cluttered here 
and there with the wreckage and the dead 
of the rioting. The darkbirds were forcing 
the Star to stay high, but even so nothing 
could live long without protection in that 
Jdcn, terrible winter. 
The road to the port lay blank and bare. 
They found one of the smaller vehicles, its 
driver dead beside it. Karlovic got it going, 
moving the great levers with Durham's 
help. After that they rushed faster through 
the empty night. Durham shut his eyes, 
thinking. 

He opened them, and the spaceport of 
nya Dik lay black and deserted around 
him, and Karlovic was gasping to him for 
help. Together they pulled down the lever 
that stopped their conveyance. They scrambled down and ran out toward the small 
lifeboat, slipping and stumbling, dying inside their suits. 'They fell into'the airlock, 
and Durham slammed the door and spun 
the wheel, waiting out the agonizing seconds while the tiny chamber cleared and 
then refilled, and they could tear off their 
helmets and breathe again. They looked 
at each other and la and hugged 

each other, and 1. u f arid then 

went in to the cabin. 



The communicator was flashing its light 
and burring stridently. 

Durham switched it on. Jubb's face appeared in the tiny screen. "You are safe? 
Good, good. For a moment I thought — ! 
Listen. I have word from my patrol that 
Morrison has other ships with him now, 
spread out to catch you if by chance you get 
through. That is what decided me to use 
the Bitter Star. I am angry, Karlovic. I am 
tired of mockery and lies and secret violence. 
I am tired of peace which is only a cloak 
for another man's aggression." 

A darkbird came into the cabin and hung 
over Durham's shoulder. "It will carry your 
messages," said Jubb. "I am leaving now 
for the port,. and my own flagship. We co 
together. Good luck." 

Hie screen went dead. Durham said, 
"Strap in, we're taking off." 

rpHE Star, with its herding pack of shad-A. ows, set a course that took them steeply 
up out of Senya Dik's shadow, into the full 
flood of the green sun's light. The darkbird spoke by Durham's shoulder, and 
Karlovic said, 

"The Star must feed — or recharge itself, 
as you would say, with solar heat. Watch 
it, Durham. Watch it grow." 

He watched. The Star spread out its 
misty substance, spreading it wide to the 
sun, and the soft shining of it brightened 
to an angry glare that grew and widened 
and became like a burning cloud, not green 
like the sunlight but white as pearl. 

Far off to one side of it Durham saw the 
glinting of a ship's hull. He pointed to it 

Karlovic worked with the communicator. 
In a minute the screen lit up, and Morrison's 
face was in it. 

"Hello, Morrison," he said. "Hello, 
thief." 

Morrison's face was as hard' and white 
as something carved from bone. 

"It ^wasn't just an old wive's tale, Morrison," he said. "It was true, and here it is. 
The Bitter Star, Morrison." 

lovic reached over and shook him, 
pointing out the viewport. Coming swiftly 
in to\ m was a small ship, curiously 

I before. 

"Space-sweep," Karlovic said. "Those 
funny bulges are torpedo tubes, and the 



LAST CALL FRO 

torpedoes carry heavy scatter charges to clear 
away debris so the ore ships can come in. 

Durham said to the image in the screen, 
"Call him off." - " . 

Morrison showed the edges of his teeth, 
and asked, "Why should I 

Durham nodded to Karlovic, who spoke 
to the darkbird. It disappeared. Within a 
few seconds the Star had begun to move. It 
moved fast, the angry gleaming of its body 
making a streak like a white comet across 
the creen-lit void. It wrapped itself around 
the space-sweep, and then it lifted and the 
ship continued on its way unchanged. 
Morrison laughed. 

The sweep rushed on toward the lifeboat. 
Its tubes were open, but nothing came out 
of them. Durham shifted course to clear it, 
and it blundered on by. In the screen, Morrison's image turned and spoke to someone, 
and the someone answered, "I cant, they 
just aren't there." 

Morrison turned again to Durham, or 
rather to the image of him that was on 
his own screen. "I know what I'm supposed 
to say now, but I'm not going to say it. I ve 
cot Miss Hawtree with me, had you forgotten that? I don't think you've suddenly 
acquired that kind of guts." 

Durham shook his head. "I don t need 
them. I want you alive, Morrison. But I 
don't give a tinker's damn what happens 
to anybody else in this whole backside of 
nowhere you call 9G. Nobody and nothing. 
And I have the Bitter Star to back me up. 
I am wondering how many loyal employees 
of Universal Minerals, and how many 
stupid Wanbccqs are going to sacrifice their 
lives just to keep me from getting my 
hands on you. Call them up, Morrison, and 
count them out, and we'll send the Star to 

see them." 

The Star glowed and glimmered and 
crew to a great shining, and a look of worry 
deepened on Karlovic's face. Morrison did 
not answer, and Durham could see the 
thoughts going round and round in his 
mind, the possibilities being weighed and 
evaluated. Then the someone who was behind Morrison and out of scanner range 
said in a queer flat voice, 

M The tug Vamey calling in, sir. They 
boarded the sweep/' 

"Well?" 



M SECTOR $G 

"All dead, sir. Frozen. I 
frozen. 1! to tell you tl ;oing 

home." 

"All right," said Morrison softly. ' Durham, I'm going home too, to D*. 
Let's see if you can follow me there 

He broke contact. In the di 
ham sav right speck that 

rison's ship make a wheeling cur\ 
speed away. Durham said grimly to Karlovic, 

"Tell the darkbirds to follow with the 
Star. And then get hold of so; on 

Nanta Dik, somebody with authority. Tell 
them everything that's happ< 
Morrison is all we want. We'Usec ho 
close they let him get to home." 
H I don't know," said Karlovic, 
busy with the communicator. Half ai 
later he sighed and blanked the 
"They're sending up a squadron to intercept Morrison. But they're scared. They're 
scared of the Star. I've promised then: 
and nothing had better happen, Durban 
Durham said. "We'd better send v. 

to Jubb." . a , 

For what seemed an eternity they 
through the green blaze of the sun, after 
the ship Durham could no longer see. And 
ahead of the lifeboat, a light and a portent 
in the void, went the Bitter Star with its 
attendant shadows. And Durham, too, began to worry, he was not sure why. Jubb's 
flagship closed up to them, a vast dark 
whale beside a minnow. And after a while 
a tiny bright ball that was a planet came 
spinning toward them. Karlovic poini 

Hung like a net across space, between 
them and the planet, was a series of glittering metallic flecks. 
"The squadron." 

The communicator buzzed. Karl 
snapped it on, and the face of a Nantan 
officer appeared on the screen. 

"We have Morrison," he said. "Come 
no closer with the Star." 

Karlovic spoke to the darkbird. Durham's 
hands, heavy with weariness, slowed the 
lifeboat until it hung almost motionless. 
Jubb's great dark cruiser slowed also. Above 
and between them burned the Bitter Star. 
It had ceased to move. 

Durham said, "The Star will come 00 
closer. " 



90 

"Mr Karlovic," said the Nantan. "Bring 
four hfeboat in slowly, and alone." 

The lifeboat came in among the ships 
or the squadron. r 

"Now," said the Nantan officer, "withdraw the Star." 
Karlovic said, "Jubb will do so—" 
"No," said Durham suddenly, "Jubb will 
not Look there!" 



PLANET STORIES 



CJHINING with a furious light, the Star 
y had torn itself away from the clustering 
shadows that hung around it. 

Durham's heart congealed with a foretaste of icy death. The face of the Nantan 
officer paled, and Karlovic said in a voice 

Tru rV^i* 6 [lk voke at a11 . "I must 
talk to Jubb. 

He reached out to shift their single 
screen, and the Nantan officer said "Wait 
he is speaking on our alternate. I can adjust 
the scanner — " ' 

The picture flopped, blurred, and cleared 
again, showing now in addition to the 
officer a part of the Nantan's alternatechannel screen. Jubb was speaking, and it 
seemed to Durham that the Senyan's strange 
face was clearly, humanly alarmed. 

He said, "I cannot withdraw the Star. 
Nq, this is not a lie, a trick— hold your 
fir^, you idiots! I'm the only hope you 
have now. The Star has profited % the 
lesson of its docility a thousand years ago, 
when it let itself be led back into captivity 

1^7 £tV rown> t0 ° much - Jt ca ™<* be 
brought back to any world." 

J*?!? h ^ Io ^ ked 0ut at the dutiful 
deadly th,ng blazing so splendidly in the 
void. Can it be destroyed ?" 

-If"Sey d wn k I b " rdS ^ deStr ° y k '" ^ ' Ubb The Nantan officer, speaking from lips 

the color of ashes, said to tht image of 

Jubb on the screen, "You have one nfinute 

to get it out of here before I fire " 
Jubb turned his face away and spoke to 

something they could not see 
Durham turned to Karlovic. "He said, 

If they will.' Does that mean—" 

rt,. 1 t0 l d ^" Said Karl °vic, looking out 
the port, that the darkbirds were created 
to guard the Star. And that, in a way they 
love it Who can say how much?" Y 



They watched. 

Out in space the little cloud of darkbirds 
moved toward the Star. Then, hesitantly, 
they stopped. ' 

"They won't," said Karlovic, in a whisper. Not even for Jubb." 

Again Jubb spoke to the unseen messenger, as quietly a s though it was a casual 
order. And presently a troubled movement 
rippled the swirling darkbirds 

Suddenly they moved, again herding the 
Star Slowly at first, then more and more 
sw,ftly until it was only a streak of brilliant light, the darkbirds drove the Star 
straight toward the sun. And it was less a 
driving than an urging, a tempting, a promise ot glory, a sweet betraying call from 
the mouth of the eternal Judas. The darkbirds led it, and it followed them 

In a moment, in that greater blaze, the 
star was lost to view. 
, Kar !°^ c ', s t breath came out of him in a 
long sigh The only way it could be destroyed. Even its appetite for thermal 
energy could not swallow a sun." 
, " The /^birds are coming back," Durhamsaid. Then, wonderingly, "But they're 

thltr darkbird u s were c «ning back from 

An/n !V Un '] >Ut n0t toward J ubb 's ship. 
And not toward any planet They were flying like blurring shadows toward outer 
space, and if they heard Jubb's calling voice 
they paid no heed at all b 

uc2!Z K soae '" Kariovic said ' unbc 
"Yes," said Jubb, very slowly. "Ther 
obeyed that order, but it was the last " He 
looked at the humans facing him, the men 
of Earth and the men- of 4nta bik, Z 
he said, Do you see now that there is no 
difference between us, that we of Senya Dik 
can teach betrayal just like men?" 

Durham looked out into the shining void 
but there was no sign now of the fleet and 
flying shadows Intelligences, minds, beyond 
the understanding of heavy creatures like 
himself and Jubb. He wondered how far 
they would go, how long they would live, 
what things they would see. 

Darkbirds darkbirds, will you come back 
some day when we of flesh are ghosts and 
shadows, to frolic on our lonely worlds? 






THE VIZIGRAPH 



91 



THE VIZIGRAPH 

(Continued from page 3) 
and Essential thing it has been so long assumed 

Mr'. Tuning claims, joyously no doubt, that he 
has seen no signs of its popularity waning, innocently assuming that the import of my letter was that 
in a week or so, people would say, "Oh, I m bored 
with this Sex routine. To heck with it! Im going 
to collect butterflies instead," and that Sex would 
then vanish from the earth, an obsolete pastime. Mr. 
Tuning then goes on to apologize for not having 
lived under a rock ... but that's all right; we 
understand that some landlords are a bit particular 
about their tenants. 

Mr. Tuning, climbing bis soapbox and pulling 
slightly then goes on to make the thunderous observation that "Sex has proved to be a satisfactory 
method of propagating the race for quite some 
time now— longer than you or I are capable ot 
grasping." I said it before, little Willie, and I 
reiterate: Sex has proved to be most unsatisfactory, 
and for the salient reasons backing up this claim 
I refer you to my original letter on the subject . . . 
which reasons I still find most convincing and 
irrefutable. . - 
Also, in passing, may I say, Mr. Tuning, that I 
wish you would refrain from telling me what 1 
am capable of grasping"? I don't believe you are 
qualified to do so; whether you are qualified tor 
*»*hing would be an interesting topic for discussion ... for somebody else to undertake. Im 
prejudiced. ■ , - , 

Although I fail to see how Plato happened to be 
dragged into this, I will admit that I did not know 
that he "decried sex as retarding his work. At 
least, I did not know that lie, in particular, thus 
decried it; I do know that the sentiment has been 
rather common through the ages among men (and 
women) who have work to do, as opposed to those 
who merely attend to their jobs. Whether or not 
Plato was homosexual is entirely irrelevant— and, 
at that, homosexuality is nothing but another aspect 
of that Sexuality which you, Mr. Tuning, praise and 
designate as Immortal, Holy, Purifying, Exalting or 
what-have-you. The only objective (note that word 
"objective"; please eschew all ad hominem conclusions) difference between homo- and hetero-sexuality 
lies in the matter of fecundation. 

That we were created with sex I do not deny, 
nor see any need to do so. And because there was 
"throughout time" the impulse for man and woman 
to cleave to each other is no reason at all to 
assume that such will forever be the case. I will 
not give you opportunity to "deflate (my) arguments" concerning cases where men have not needed 
women, for I present no such arguments. What has 
•one before fails to interest me. I am not concerned 
with men needing women any more than I am 
with stallions needing mares, dogs needing bitches, 
etc. What I am concerned with is the possibility 
that Sex is just a phase in evolution, and that there 
may (and I believe, should) be a totally different 
method of propagation in some dim future, when, 
perhaps, humans will be not quite so pitiably human, 
and the dominant life-form of our time (thats us) 
will be regarded as something similar to amoebae. 
Somewhere else in the VIZI, a charming female 
said "phoo" to me, in re the same subject, said 
female being one Elinor Busby. At that, she was 
somewhat more concise, and considerably more realistic than title self-styled "Uode,~ She says that sex 



is the most intimate possible relationship between 
two humans. Ah-ah, Elinor; never heard of telepathy? 
Or aren't you a Believer? 

Then there was something about women not being 
women, the hidden meaning of which I have not 
been able to ascertain. And then, the good Elinor 
says ... ah, then, she says, "At its best, Sex is fun. ' 
Hoo-ray! At last, a keen, incisive definition and 
rarson d'etre. You are so right, fortunately or unfortunately, as the preference may be. You have. hit 
it, Miss B.: 

Sex is the height of hedonism. 
Yours sincerely, 

Norman 

E PLURIBUS TENNESSEE 

Route No. 4 
Trenton, Tenn. 

Dear Editor, 

I'm sincere. I like PLANET. Maybe the dollar 
enclosed will help prove diis. Yes, I'm subbing to 
PLANET. May the Ghods of fandom have mercy 
on me. . , 

Attention lovable Uncle Bill Tuning, don t you 
think that you're making an ass out of your own 
starved little ego? Let me be frank, Bill, I've always 
enjoyed reading your sage (you said so yourself, 
remember?) comments on life and fandom. But 
come a little closer, I will tell you a few facts. In 
the first place, Tennessee Williams is one of the 
best of the current crop of writers, and athoi 
I liked Hemingway's THE OLD MAN AND THE 
SEA I find very little of his other fiction appealing. 
Not that this means anything, but calling fans 
asses just because you disagree with their likes in 
authors is going one or three steps too far. Somehow, the dirt on paper rarely seems to come completely out of the writer and on to the printed page. 
It stays on his own hands. . . . Have I made my 
point? I like your letters, Uncle Bill, but I <k> hate 
to see you make a fool of yourself. 

A word to John Courtois. John, my boy, I don't 
think you owe anybody an apology. What yojx said 
I took as your way of trying to be funny. Maybe 
it's another case of wearing that old shoe. If, of 
course, it fits. t 

But still give the boy, Courtois, one lllo tor hi* 
guts. Next, comes Joe Keogh, and Val Walker. 
Sincerely, 

Jambs Lewi* 

THE BIG PULP SECRET 

1014 N. Tuckahoe St. 
Falls Church, Va. 

Dear Jack, . . . . 

By George, it is a pleasure to win an original; 
I was no end surprised. While we're on the subject 
of illustrations, I note one Victor Paananen's comparison of Finlay and Freas. My boy, this just isn't 
done! Granted, Frank isn't Finlay's successor, he 
is one darn good artist. Unfortunately, you haven t 
i work. And it is for the very same 
that you haven't seen Finlay in PS at all. 
1 11 let you in on a secret: PLANET does not use 
the best quality book paper. It uses what is quaintly 
regarded as "pulp" paper. Due to this fact, the 
printing quality is not all it might be. This is no 
criticism of the printers (they may be reading 
this ... ), but hne-line work simply won't print 
on pulp t 

I believe Lowndes tried it once on one oi 
mags-4ic never used Finlay on that paper again, 



— 






92 



PLANET STORIES 



Now is that Finlay 

He does exquisite line work. He is undoubtedly 
a craftsman. But Freas has it all over Finlay in 
that he i* versatile. 

ever to Emsh, I suppose I should be 
▼ery enthusiastic about him, since h ost) a 

local boy, coming from nearby Maryland. But frankiy, I consider him the m 

However, his work . and he is 

prolific, so I guess he'll continue to sell. 

I feel that at this point i ike up my 

crusade where I Idt off by answering Mussell & 
Butcher's letter. Friends, as most of us know, the 
westerns and detectives and loves all have a much 
larger audience than poor ol' stf. And because of 
this, a lot of publishers have been putting out all 
sorts of trash. But because they a is no 

excuse for poor stf. Not that PS is exactly^ sub-par, 
y understand. But PS is behind the times. Beauty 
may be only skin deep, but all too many of today's 
■J buyers go by the skin beauty. And I 
think Jack would be the last to deny that a beautiful 
format and cover, etc. can help sales. Stf buyers are 
much more selective. But actually, that's not the 
point. Mags that aren't put on display just don't sell. 
And pulps just aren't getting the display they used 
to get. I am not suggesting that PS drop the VIZI; 
I'd be the first to protest. I am not suggesting that 
a different fiction policy be assumed. PLANET hasn't 
really changed since 1939, if that's when it first 
appeared. ... It needs a change in format. A healthy 
change. Because without it, you won't get any 
PLANET at all. Fiction House did drop all their 
other pulps, y'know. And I believe they dropped 
their other publications too, though I'm not sure 
on that. I'd hate to see PS follow suit. 

You know, I kinda thot that Budrys hadn't done 
tht Winter cover. It's nice to see it all straightened 
up. For that matter, give first prize for letters to 
Algis, so he can have the von Stroheim. Second to 
'Lfncle Bill," and third to Courtois for the infernal 
rye to unburden himself. Strikes me that he had 
"quit writing to PS" or some such thing. Amazing 
how long it takes him to taper off. 

But Pat, you forgot the most important reason 
someone writes to PLANET: to gH an original ! Maybe that's why I've decided to take up letter-hacking, 
eh? Really, I seem to have reversed things a little 
by being a letter-hack after becoming an actifan. 
mmmm „^ mm m Ted E. White 

DEEP GOES THE PONIARD 

Box 1313 
~ La Grande, Oregon 

Dear Sir, 

I purchased a copy of your magazine a few days 
ago and was rather startled to see the reincarnation 
of a long dead ghost. Your publication resembles 
the ancient issues of the early ASTOUNDING era, 
circa 1933-38. You seem to place it on the news 
racks complete with idiotic letters and arguments 
of fen vs. fan, and ish for issue. I have a sneaking 
feeling that there is a faint whiff of plagarism in 
style ii not content 

I wonder about these people that haunt your 
letters pages. Are they true ghosts or are they the 
same ones that used to carry on the same silly 
letter-battles in the dead old days? The names are 
not the same but the style and the bubble-headed 
oral droolings from the thickened Mongoloid lips 
are exact in every detail. 

I feel the same way now that I felt twenty years 
ago, and I wonder, minutely, for an indefinite 
measure of duration, if the editors of these escape 



trash have the same infantile measure of 

o the printed word. I note with nc-utraj? 

feelings that your measure of circulation has forced 

you to curtail your publication dates and humbly 

point to the mental quality of your readers. 

With deep respect for your stories and disrespect 
for your correspondents, I remain, 
Yours truly, 

Jac. Du Vois 

SEX AND SUCCESS 

Post Office Box 566 
~ r ,. San Diego 12, Calif. 

Dear Ed 

I just can't resist PLANET for several reasons. 
Mostly, it's the wave of nostalgia that overcame me 
! the poor little feller sitting by itself 
on the newsstand surrounded by all those pocket 
sized books that are all the rage today. PLANET 
is a mighty big fish in a mighty small pond these 
days— fact is, it might have the pond all to itself, 
for all I know. 

I hope it continues to remain in its present format 
ior many years to come. These young whippersnappers can't know what happy memories PLANET 
revives for us oldsters. What a pleasure to fondle 
the rough paper, feel the rough edges, gaze at the 
wonderful gaudy cover, and to recall the happy years 
of my youth. 

cn ^ c T u i m Y A eye teeth on DOC SAVAGE and the 
SPIDER and the SPICY pulps. For the pulps which 
constituted the SPICY stable, we New York City 
kids had to ride the tubes to Newark to buy them, 
but oh boy, they were sure worth the trouble 

1HE VANISHER in the Winter issue reminds me 
of the best of DOC SAVAGE from the good years 
(1933-38). For a few minutes I expected to find 
myself back in the Hidalgo Trading Company with 
Doc, Ham, Monk, and Renny. Shaara's cliff-hanger 
style reminds me very much of Kenneth Robeson's 
peak period. Anyway, keep up the good work, Mr. 
Editor, and please keep holding down the fort for 
the pulp tradition. I have never despaired that pulps 
will one day regain their former glory! 

Before closing, I'd like to suggest that your 
publisher seriously consider reviving the old SPICY 
format. Laugh if you will, but those pulps were 
really good, and there's just nothing like them 
around today. (As George Gobel would put it you 
cant hardly get them no more!) Is this true or 
raise: Millions of pocket books are sold to guys 
who hunt avidly for a few descriptive passages in 
™ e n l match the " warm " scene on the cover 

w J el, » why not declare a new deal for these guys' 
Why make them hunt for it? Why not just admit 
that sex is here to stay? Put out some pulps whose 
editor admits that all of his writers are instructed 
to include sex in all manuscripts submitted Of 
course there should be no four-letter words' no 
blatant obscenity, but frankly advise the reader' that 
he has indeed found a home; that every issue will 
provide the vicarious satisfaction he hankers for 
Such a pulp will sell, if I'm any judge of human' 
beings. 

For quite a few years I've had the notion that 
a publisher who had the nerve to undertake such a 
project, and frankly admitted it in a series of 
signed editorials, would be surprised and gratified 
at the sudden healthy upsurge in his bank balance 
But not until PLAYBOY made its appearance have 
I had any proof positive of my theory. If the publisher of PLAYBOY had been the least bit sneaky 
about his policy, he would probably be a "dead 



THE VIZIGRAPH 



!W 



vk" by now. But his policy is so utterly frank 
and disarmim bave been stymied. 

Now it" I had the savvy and know-how of you 
fellows, I'd ! mental series of pulps. 

I'd title them: FRESH DETECTIVE, FRESH ADVENTURE, I SH SC J; 
ENCE-FICTION. I'd editor: My in all 
four pulps about freedom from C the need 
for a "fresh" approach in publishing, the evils of 
bluenosery, and finally J would state that my magazines while emphasizing spiciness, would decmhasize sadism of the Mickey Spiilanc category. 

In other words: Sex is healthy if approached in 
an open, tongue-in-cheek fashion. That would be 
my editorial policy, just as it was in the original 
SPICY pulps of 15 years ago. 

Well, all of this has nothing to do with PLANET, 
and I seem to have gone off on a tangent. However 
I wanted to let somebody in on my ideas, even 
though they are probably impractical. Somebody in 
the pulp industry would surely have given my ideas 
some consideration by now. But if the bills ever 
start piling up, and the creditors ever start yapping 
at Mr. Scott's heels, he really ought to give my 
ideas a try before throwing in die towel. 
Since 

I. L. Jacobs 



CHASTE 

11121 Tascosa Dr. 
Dallas 28, Texas 
Dear Jack, 

Well, whattaya know, a clean PLANET. I never 
thought I'd see the day when it didn't feature some 
nude pursued by an anxious male, or something of 
the sort. Even the inside illos are strictly s-f. What 
happened? Your mother catch you at it or something? , 

I guess you realize that many of your readers buy 
PLANET strictly for its superb letter column. VIZI 
seems to have some hidden personality with which 
even MADGE can't compete. Keep it up. 
SIN? surely enough, 

George Jennings 

TOP KICKER 

11th Airborne Division 
Fort Campbell, Ky. 

Dear Sir, . . . 

This short note contains a gripe against the letter 
that John Courtois wrote regarding Christianity and 
dogs. I suppose one can dismiss said letter as the 
penned effort of one who wrote on the spur of the 
moment, and is now feeling kind of silly that the 
thing ever made the printed page. 

I also feel that the editor should never have permitted such tripe to reach the columns of VIZI. 
I feel the editor made a mistake when he gave 
Courtois the satisfaction of seeing "that tiling" in 
print. ' . . 

Item: Dear Courtois: See your local pastor before 
going off half cocked about Christianity being an 
experiment. See your local vet before you say a dog 
is "all animal and all hunter." I can think of a lot 
of animals that are "more animal" than dogs. A 
dog is a hunter because he must hunt to satisfy his 
hunger. When someone puts raw meat in front of 
his nose three times a day he stops hunting ... but 
does he stop being a dog! 

Job I am a CI feel personally 



insulted when someone calls me an animal, biologically or otherwise. Your letter was a personal affront 
Christians (and dogs). 

Sgt. John Rayhurn 

LASTING IMPRESSION 

2444 Valley St 
Berl ilif. 

Dear Editor, 

You had me wondering about Algis Budrys until 
the Spring PLANET hit the stands. At first I had 
visions of Science-Fiction's first AU-Americ 
(". . . he can write, paint, edit . . .") but now 
that you printed the letter of explanation and apologized in public I imagine that nothing will come 
of my stupendous plans. Ah, well, there's 
Jerome Bixby if we have to pick a one-man 

Freas' artwork for Budrys' story was terrific. It 
may be the texture of the paper he uses, but the 
way the shadowing and blending work in together 
is simply overwhelming. For inside illustrations I 
don't think there's a better artist than Freas to be 
had by PS. Bok and Finlay might be better than 
Kelly, but Senor Freas doesn't have to worry about 
the competition around Love Romances. And p 
sonally, I don't care for Finlay's work that is aprx 
ing now; back in the old issues he seemed to be 
much better. 

Courtois' letter just proves that mere is a U 
danger encountered when being a letter-hack. If a 
person happens to make a mistake and write a lei 
that annoys everyone, he hasn't much chance to 
rectify the situation. John did, of course, but his is 
a rather isolated case. The tough part about it all 
is the letter is in print, and there are probaN 
thirty or forty thousand copies around this nation. 
If a person slips up on the radio his goof doesn't 
hang around to haunt him. But a guy has to be 
ful when writing to stf mags — especially 
PLANET. Extensive laboratory tests have proved 
that the woodpulp paper used on this fine, hightype publication can take quite a beating, and doesn't 
start falling apart until at least 100 years 1 
passed; and by that time the letter writer hardly 
gives a darn any more. 

Ever since Sol Galaxan graced your pulpy pi 
PLANET has been infamous for the pen names it 
uses. And unless fifty million Frenchmen are wroi 
V. E. Thicssen is a phoney moniker. Looking b 

;s I find many fascinating psuedonyms 
(Oliver R. Oslow, Byron Tustin, Evelyn Goldstein, 
etc.), but none have as much power as V. E. Thi 

i. Even the great Derfla Lopec can not hold a 
candle to this magnificent example of the "mysterious 
author." Keep using such powerful pen-names . . . 
they fascinate me! 

In the event that you print this dashing attempt 
at writing scintillating prose, it may be that some 
readers would be interested in joining the KPITGOPF ("Keep PLANET In The Good Old Pulpy 
Format") Association that I have formed. Those of 
you who have the desire to serve your country should 
write me. Perhaps we can form chapters and all that; 
and I plan to send out autographed pictures of 
go Beepenshuck to all members. A truly wonderful organization like this deserves your support! • 
All the best, 

Don Wegars 

Ed's Note: Fifty million Frenchmen, led by Marshal 
Wegars, are wrong. The name V, B. Thiessen is as 
legitimate as the eagles the gentleman wore atop 
his shoulders when he penned CITY OF ILLU


91 



PLANET STORIES 



SION. He was then Lt. Col. V. E. Thsessen attached fo the Yokohama Engineer Depot. 

WHAT HATH VENUS? 

38 Blendworth Crescent 
Leigh Park 
Havant 
Hants 
England 
Dear Sir, 

The Winter issue of PS came my way just 
days ago, and although pressure of work h; 
enabled me to read the prof< 

have had a deal of amusement out of the VIZIGRAPH. With your permission I would like to 
assist Samuel Johnson in his dis 

ii, you've asked for it! 
e is fairly evidential r< i my 

assertion that only Carbon, with Silicon as a shaky 
runner-up, are capable of building into a living 
organism. The reasoning is Biochemical in nature 
and the evidence is all about us, (that ambiguity 
may stand); just grant me that the we are 

aware of are the only ones available t< 
up' i 

Have you ever wondered what the difference is 
between living and inert matter? Both may contain 
the same atoms, yet there is this amazing difference, 
why? 

Biochemists have unearthed the extremely poignant 
tl living matter — protoplasm if you like — is 
uposed mainly of those atoms which have the 
ability to coagulate into large molecules. Perhaps 
I should have emphasized -EXTRAORDINARILY 
< ge. Quite obviously, from life of all varieties on 
this Earth, Carbon is the supreme "Coagulator." Any 
dogmatist could make an excellent case for 
Carbon being unique in bringing about recognizable 
life, but dogmatism is the antecedent of pro,.. 
is no concern of those participating in & 
While on the point it might be as well to stress that 
only concern is recognizable life. 
The main constituents of protoplasm are. Carbon, 
Nitrogen, Hydrogen, and Oxygen, with dashes of 
Sulphur, Phosphorus, Iron, Calcium, Potassium, 
nam and Chlorine. I entirely fail to grasp why 

mention Fluorine. 

Going forward a step, I must ask you to reread 

my letter. I was arguing AGAINST a critic who 

assumed that the Venusian atmosphere was mainly 

1 of Carbon Dioxide. Also I must condemn 

you for saying that sight observation means nothing, 

n continuing . . . "the spectrograph is even 

better than chemical Analysis." (!) 

I do not wish to be impolite but, you do have 

idering a little. A Spectrograph, to start with, 

is merely an apparatus for obtaining and photograph
«*g Common sense tells us that a glorified 

camera cannot hope to compete with chemical analysis 

when it comes to discovering th ;ition of 

que and of depth. In any case, Spec
iiy analyse reflected light which is an 

it upon our own eyes, but the same thing 

^ 's me on to dispute your assertion that 

the V biosphere is most probably Carbon 

•; but something must be corrected first. 
ULTRA-VIOLET, not infra-red, gives the best result 
ining Spectrographs of Venus. This was 
I years ago. (By an American Astronomer I believe.) Also, whatever light you photograph 
•i do not penetrate any farther into the atmosall that occurs is penetration of HAZE. 



Now I must defend "Plastic Clouds;* 
The depth of refractive atmosphere on Venus can' 
be estimated at five miles. (This from calculations 
upon the extensions of the crescent extremities 
when the planet is at favorable phases.) 

The alh-do is extremely high, (six tenths), which 
alone supports the assumption of clouds. 

If the atmosphere was composed only of gases, 

or even gases and dust, a certain amount of blue 

would be absorbed giving a reddish tinge to 

ed light. (Here I must break off for a 

moment to apologize for an unintentional mistake 

in the letter you attack, somehow I wrote "a 

tie f( say though that 

nistake was obvious, for what visible light is 

there in that region?) To resume, Venus, far from 

being reddish, is silvery white, and the only ex
mation within the realms of reason is, that light 

is reflected from SOLID or LIQUID globules of 

matter. 

Markings, such as are found by observing Venus 
are faint, diffuse, and give the impression of being 
atmospheric disturbances. This leads to an easy 
deduction. Atmospheric disturbances are winds, 
winds apart from zephyrs, cannot be unless there 
is all three of, Land, Sea, Atmosphere. 

Right? If there are seas it is likely that we can 
expect water vapor. 

We already have Formaldehyde, and the Sun supplies plenty of Ultra- Violet light to form the plastic. 
And if you want a brief explanation as to why this 
doesn t show up on a spectrogram, the temperature 
needed to vaporize this compound is only found 
beneath the layers that actually reflect light. On to 
the next point. 

The Earth WOULD present a reddish appearance 
to an observer elsewhere for reasons you have all 
but given yourself. Our atmosphere does absorb the 
snorter wave radiation because particles in the atmosphere arc approximately equivalent in size, thus scattering this light while allowing the longer wave 
radiations to pass through relatively unimpeded 
From thjj it is easy to see that, only die longer 
radiations will reflect with any power. 

I refute that the Red Moon has nothing to do 
with the Earth's color. & 

Once again, (I do wish you'd read what I say 
before you criticize), I did not assert that the 
Martian atmosphere only passes red light to the 
surface, and to say that Mars would have to be 
predominantly red in order to reflect that color 
betrays an abysmal ignorance of the physics of light 
Inere is sufficient material in this letter to further 
that statement. 

All I have to say to you about Retrograde satellites is that their motion is always assumed to be 
orthodox, or retrograde, relative, Not to US, Nor to 
the PLANET, but to the planetary orbit. I think 
perhaps you had better enquire what the ecliptic is 
also tundra. Your use of both is rather bewildering' 
I trust that I haven't offended you with the tone 
of my letter, or that you won't blush over your 
statement re "Pseudo critics Gabble." 

Just one last thing, your address intrigues me. 
will you explain it to me? 

To Dwayne Thorpe: How on Earth (?) did you 
find out? ' 

To Morgan Harris: I could enjoy a discussion on 
the points you raise. Willing? 

I would just like to venture an opinion,, in this 

Format" discussion. Those people I know who 

have read Science-Fiction for any number of years 

have a nostalgic affection for the large, untrimmed, 

pulp type of magazine, and will often buy one i 



THE VIZIGRAPH 



95 



I for the atmosphere it creates. Many of the 
"digest size magazines print better stones, but I 
personally would feel a loss if PLANET, which is 
indisputably the best of the pulps, changed. 
All the best to all, 

A. Keith Kr 

PAST SHUFFLE 

c/o Permanent Poker Game 
Student Union 
University of Tulsa 
Tulsa, Oklahoma 
Dear Editor, ... 

I take time out from my activities only to correct 
a bad impression some people may be getting about 
college students. I believe that the efforts of Val 
Walker and Bill Tuning may lead some to believe 
that all college students do is study. 

Now I, for one, have been going to college tor 
five years and have never been to class, yet I have 
received an education of invaluable aid for the future. 
Vou see, I am learning the proper way to nil an 
inside straight. r
Now I ask you, isn't that useful education? What 
will Walker and Tuning have to face die world 
with when they finish college— just a mass of 
philosophy, psychology and literature, that's what. 
I doubt if either Walker or Tuning could tell you 
the mathematical chances of coming up with a royal 
flush three straight deals, (185,973,859,087,567,001 
to 1). Now there is a jolly worthwhile bit of busi
I repeat, please dear fen, don't believe that college 
is all work and study. The true college student never 
leaves the student-union, except of course for such 
necessities as dances, parties, basketball and football 
games. , r 

I will bet two blue chips that the first man on 
the moon will have to know the proper technique 
of filling an inside straight: not die theory of some 
ancient philosopher. (I'll bet Mr. Henodist can't 
play a decent hand of poker.) 

Oh yes, PLANET is very good. 1 read it while 
the dealer shuffles. 

Sincerely, 

Jack O Clubs 

SWEET BREATH FROM THE NORTH 

365 Seventh Avenue 
Ville Lasalle, Que. 
Dominion of Canada 

Dear Sir, , 

Up into the dismal fastnesses of Quebec (or at 
least what we believe is the popular American conception of our fair province) has come the winter 
issue of your magazine. Like a sweet breath from 
heaven it dissipates our boredom and enriches our 
lives with fantasy. Each new jewel it offers is more 
superb than the last, each delightful story an illustration of man's genius. 

Only who would realize it from that cover? Tell 
me is that beautiful face gazing at me a satire on 
modern woman? Perhaps Mr. Budrys intimates that 
the has too much freedom, and should have prominently displayed controls so that she can be turned 
off when need be. Then again, maybe he suggests 
(mat woman's devious mind is too hard to comprehend, and dials would make it easier for slowwitted males to understand her. Since I found no 
leference to the cover in the stories, I can only 
imagine what it represents. Seriously, though, it does 
not do jus&e, to. -your stories. 



A plaudit for BOTTOM IS UP. Banks has poked 
f un ver igly at an important human weak
ness: the inability of most people to probe beneath 
the veneer that the individual presents to the world, 
in order to find his real character. Curry s THE 
RECLUSE invokes interesting connotations. As man s 
freedom so important to him that he will give up 
the possibility of returning to his work, his society, 
and even his family to retain it? It appears that 
Effron has forgotten one thing in his otherwise enjoyable story THE ULTIMATE EVE. He tells us 
that Commander Ydnas had been selected after extensive testing and conditioning. Therefore we must 
assume he was of superior intelligence. Also, as a 
commander, he obviously had had some scientific 
training. Yet he did what even the amateur scientist 
is taught not to do. He made only one test. Even 
supposing that blindness was unknown on his 
planet, he should have, and in fact would have, 
realized that one test for such an important weapon 
was not enough. All in all, vour short stones were 
very interesting, while your longer ones w«re somewhat lower in standard. 

If I may be so bold, could 1 register a plea for 
more "social theme" and philosophical stories? Of 
course there are those whose constant howl tor 1 
thought and more action in science-fiction seems to 
have hypnotized many an editor. My only reply is 
if that' is what they desire, they should go buck 
to comics. What has made science-fiction noteworthy 
is not its science which is often unreliable; but its 
desire to analyze the causes of man's behavior, and 
its attempt to understand what effects this beha> 
will have on the future. Thus mature science fiction 
is more concerned with the stimulus and result of 
the action, while space opera glories mainly in the 
action itself. As can be seen, many of the recent 
class's in this field (Orwell's j NINETEEN 1 EIGHTYFOUR Polil and Kornbluth's THE SPACE MERCHANTS) are in the mature »ci«ce-fiction class. 
n the ones that aren't (Bradbury s THE 'MARTIAN CHRONICLES, Henlein s THE GREEN 
HILLS OF EARTH) show a far deeper appreciation of human character than is found in space 
opera If science-fiction should concern itself mainly 
with adventure, it will eventually degenerate to the 
level of other pulp fiction. 

"Christianity can be best described as a two thousand-year experiment in false logic." I can see now 
why Mr. Courtois annoys some of your readers. 
However, as Americans are so eager to point out, 
yours is a free country. It can only remain so as 
lone as people follow John's example in voicing 
their ideas, no matter how contrary they may be to 

public opinion. . 

John's views on Christianity are rather dogmatic 
and ta is usually the case with dogmatism, partially 
untrue. Broadly speaking, religion is composed of 
two basic factors— faith and morality, die former 
dealing with the supernatural or divine and the 
latter with social practice. Therefore this logic must 
be viewed in terms of both these facets. 

While I agree with his opinion of faith, the same 
judgment cannot be applied » morality. Why ? 
Simply because no one has been able to define and 
prove what constitutes morality. Because we know 
nothing of the mental and spiritual life of other 
worlds? our conception of morality is limited • to 
one planet. Since we have no reason to assume 
not to assume) that our visualization of morality 
has any connection with the universal or highest 
existing form of this, our definition of morality 
needs be based simply on theory and, thus, remain 
■ lw .an only conclude that since man 







96 



PLANET STORIES 



proven what is goodness, he can never 

make the sweeping claim that any moral pattern 

is logical or illogical. Which is what our friend in 

his conceit has done. But if we cannot prove what 

raiity, how can we assess the Chris
' as an ethical doctrine? The native of New 

Guinea a few centuries ago found eating his enemies 

part of his social pattern. On the other 

American or Canadian would not. Thus 

I believe that any conception of goodness can only 

be valued in relation to the needs of the society 

rols. 

ion (in the modern sense of the term) 
highly complex, with many factors intermeshing 
and interdepending upon one another within it. 
Co-operation is essential in such a structure, for ii 
■>ple or nations stri for their own per
sonal ends, since these ends conflict, clashes will 
occur. As the selfishness is continued the 
strife becomes more widespread with the r 
th • ndence begins to break down, which 

in turn causes a decay in the civilization. The past 
world wars are ample proof of that. John tells us 
tk* 1 -'ity is illogical because it doesn't allow 

us -teal, or kill when we wish (although 

eem to hinder some people). Unfortunately, he has not examined the problem very 
illy. 
For co-operation to succeed people must trust 
'her. They can hardly do this if they are 
istantly hurting each other— whether it be by 
killing or erratic mating. Hence our moral 
bich attempts to stop these pain-inflicting 
actions and thus create a mood of trust among 
• gradually, of course, the moral code becomes 
a legal one and thus receives a greater assurance 
that it will be heeded. 

Of course man is frustrated. However, rather than 
this being the fault of Christianity, it results from 
the tragedy that man has gained great scientific 
:e, while his moral maturity has not kept 
pace. Frustration is caused by the fact that he is a 
v, °: *1 given to physical expression in a 

society, which because of its scientific power cannot 
tolerate violence. With the advent of the thermonuclear weapon, this conflict between the scientific 
and moral natures of man is accentuated. 

Thus the frustration, at least nationally, is likely 
to grow worse. We have two choices. Either we give 
way to these frustrations as John intimates we 
should, and destroy our civilization; or we conquer 
the soiully destructive habits and the desires that 
emanate from them, and go on to create our 
t Utopia." Thus John has actually twisted the meaning to be derived from his example. He claims that 



Christianity is bad because it does not allow man 
to do what he wants. In reality, this is good, ioc 
as I have shown, by doing so Christianity is protecting man's social structure and his progress. The 
ling up can perhaps be shown more clearly in 
a syllogistic form. 

Major Premise: co-operation is essential to civilization. 

►i Premise: Christianity, by eradicating socially 
e habits and creating trust among people, 
induces co-operation. 
Cc«] therefore the moral doctrines of Chris
tianity are essential and thus logi 
John claims that he does not take himself seriously. One wonders if this could not be a means of 
saving face when the replies to his letters start 
pouring in. 

In closing, let me congratulate you on your policy 
of controversy in the VIZI GRAPH. It the 

i letter columns I have come across in a sciencefiction ma 

So 'til PLANET becomes planet-wide, I remain, 

Glen Sikbrassb 

PROGNOST1CATOR? 

Box 72 

T . T , ,. Kilgore, Texas 

Dear Editor: 

STARTLING STORIES has gone from bi-monthly 
to quarterly and has combined with its two companion magazines. That makes three paper pulps left, I 
believe, in the entire science-fiction field. 

PLANET is through. I now see that you have no 
intention of changing PLANET. So I'll say good bye 

v . . . because when this letter appears in the 
shredded pages of PLANET it will probably be the 
last issue. 

'Bye for always, 

Jim Georgb 

ART SUPREME 

P.O. Box 1545 

~ c . Marysville, Calif. 

Dear Sir: 

I've read and re-read Mr. Marmor's letter and can 
come to only one conclusion: he can't be pleased Another Joe K. ? 

He should remember a picture is worth many man? 
words. ' ' 

Keep Freas and Emsh, by all means. 
Enough. . . . 

Yours truly, 

Johnny Fritz 



T 



o J 

S i 



2 
O 



< 

u J 

en 
< 



