TYRANN By ISAAC ASIMOV 


And an Overlord's Trousers 

ARTEMISIA did not have to 
feign uneasiness. She spoke 
^to Gillbret, who, with the 
captain of the guard, was at the 
door. Half a dozen uniformed men 
hovered discreetly in the background. She asked, quickly, "Has 
anything happened to father?" 

"No, no," Gillbret reassured her. 
"Nothing has happened that need 
concern you at all. Were you 
asleep?" 

"Just about," she replied, "and 
my girls have been about their own 
affairs for hours. There was no one 
to answer but myself and you nearly frightened me to death." 

She turned to the captain suddenly, with a stiffening attitude. 
"What is wanted of me, captain? 
Quickly, please. This is not the time 
of day for a proper audience." 



110 




 



Gillbret broke in, before the 
other could more than open his 
mouth, "A most amusing thing, 
Arta. The young man, whatsisname 
— you know — has dashed off, breaking two heads on his way. We're 
hunting him on even terms now. 
One platoon of soldiers to one fugitive. And here I am myself, hot on 
the trail, delighting our good captain with my zeal and courage." 

Artemisia managed to look completely bewildered. 

Under his breath, the captain 
muttered a monosyllabic imprecation. His lips scarcely moved. He 
said, "If you please, my Lord, you 
are not quite plain, and we are delaying matters insufferably. My 
Lady, the man who calls himself the 
son of the ex-Rancher of Widemos 
has been arrested for treason. He 
has managed to escape and is now 
at large. We must search the Palace for him, room by room." 

Artemisia stepped back, frowning. "Including my room?" 

"If your Ladyship permits." 

'^1 do not. I would certainly 
know if there were a strange man 
in my room. And the suggestion 
that I might be having dealings 
with such a man, or any strange 
man, at this time of night is highly 
improper. Please observe due respect for my position, captain." 

It worked quite well. The captain could only bow and say, "No 
such implication was intended, my 
Lady. Your pardon for annoying 
you at this time of night. Your 



statemeat that you have not seen 
the fugitive is, of course, sufficient. 
Under the circumstances, it was 
necessary to assure ourselves of your 
safety. He is a dangerous man." 

"Surely not so dangerous that he 
cannot be handled by you and your 
company." 

GILLBRET'S high-pitched voice 
interposed, "Captain, come, 
come. While you exchange courtly 
sentiments with my niece, our man 
has had time to rifle the armory. I 
would suggest that you leave a 
guard at the lady Artemisia's door, 
so that what remains of her sleep 
will not be further disturbed. Unless, my dear," and he twinkled his 
fingers at Artemisia, "you would 
care to join us." 

"I shall satisfy myself," said 
Artemisia, coldly, "in locking my 
door and retiring, thank you." 

"Pick a large guard," cried Gillbret. "Take that one. A fine uniform our guards have, Artemisia. 
You can recognize a guard as far 
as you can see him by his uniform 
alone." 

"My Lord," said the captain, impatiently, "there is no time. You 
delay matters." 

At a gesture from him, a guard 
fell out of the platoon, saluted 
Artemisia through the closing door, 
then the captain. The sound of ordered footsteps fell away in both 
directions. 

Artemisia waited, then slid the 
door quietly open an inch or two. 



TYRANN 



1" . 



The guard was there, legs apart, 
back rigid, right hand armed, left 
hand at his alarm button. He was 
the guard suggested by Gillbret, a 
tall one. As tall as Biron of Widemos, though slimmer of shoulders. 

It occurred to her, at that moment, that Biron, though young and 
therefore rather unreasonable in 
some of his viewpoints, was at least 
large and well-muscled, which was 
convenient. It had been foolish of 
her to snap at him. Quite pleasantlooking, too. 

She closed the door, and stepped 
toward the dressing room. 



BIRON tensed as the door slid 
away again. He held his breath 
and his fingers stiffened. 

Artemisia stared at his neuronic 
whips, which he had aimed instantly at her. "Be careful!" 

He puffed out his breath in relief and stuffed each whip into a 
pocket. They were very uncomfortable there, but he had no proper 
holsters. He said, "That was just in 
case it was somebody looking for 
me." 

"Come out. And whisper." 
She was still in her night-robe, 
woven out of a smooth fabric with 



1T2 




 




which Biron was unfamiliar, 
adorned with little tufts of silvery 
fur, and clinging to the body 
through some faint static attraction 
inherent in the material so that 
neither buttons, clasps, loops, nor 
seam-fields were necessary. Nor, as 
a consequence, did it do more than 
merely faintly dim the outlines of 
Artemisia's figure. 

Biron felt his ears reddening, and 
liked the sensation very much. 

Artemisia waited, then made a 
little whirling gesture with her 
forefinger and said, "Do you 
mind?" 



Biron looked up at her face. 
"What? Oh, I'm sorry." 

He turned his back to her and 
remained stiffly attentive to the faint 
rustling of the change of outer garments. It did not occur to him to 
wonder why she had not used the 
dressing room, or why, better still, 
she had not changed before opening the door. There are depths in 
feminine psychology, which, without experience, defy analysis. 

She was in black when he turned, 
a two-piece suit which did not reach 
below the knee. It had that more 
substantial appearance that went 
with clothing meant for the outdoors, rather than for the ballroom. 

Biron said, automatically, "Are 
•we leaving, then?" 

She shook her head. "You'll 
have to do your part first. You'll 
need other clothes yourself. Get to 
one side of the door, and I'll have 
the guard in." 

"What guard?" 

She smiled briefly. "They left a 
guard at the door, at Uncle Gil's 
suggestion." 

The door to the corridor ran 
smoothly along its runners an inch 
or two. 

The guard was still there, stiffly 
immobile. 

"Guard," she whispered. "In 
here, quickly." 

There was no reason for a common soldier to hesitate in his obedience to the Director's daughter. 
He entered the widening door, with 
a respectful, "At your service, my 



TYRANN 



113 



L — " and then his knees buckled 
under the weight which came down 
upon his shoulders, while his words 
were cut off, without even an interrupting squawk, by the forearm 
which slammed against his larynx. 

Artemisia closed the door hurriedly and watched with sensations 
that amounted almost to nausea. 
The life in the Palace of the Hinriads was mild almost to decadence, 
and she had never before seen a 
man's face congest with blood and 
his mouth yawn and puff futilely 
under the influence of asphyxia. 
She looked away. 

Biron bared his teeth with effort 
as he tightened the circle of bone 
and muscle about the other's throat. 
For a minute, the guard's weakening hands ripped futilely at Biron's 
arm, while his feet groped in aimless kicks. Biron heaved him clear 
off the floor. 

And then the guard's hands fell 
to his sides, his legs hung loosely 
and the convulsive and useless 
heavings of the chest began to subside. Biron lowered him gently to 
the floor. The guard sprawled out 
limply as though he were a sack 
which had been emptied. 

"Is he dead?" asked Artemisia, 
in a horrified whisper. 

"I doubt it," said Biron. "It 
takes four or five minutes of it to 
kill a man. But he'll be out of 
things for a while. Do you have 
anything to tie him up with?" 

She shook her head. For the moment, she felt quite helpless. 



Biron said, "You must have 
some Cellite stockings. They would 
do fine." He had already stripped 
the guard of weapons and outer 
clothing, "And I'd like to wash 
up. In fact, I have to." 

IT WAS pleasant to step 
through the detergent mist in 
Artemisia's bathroom. It left him 
perhaps a trifle overscented, but the 
open air would take care of the 
fragrance, he hoped. At least, he 
was clean; and it required merely 
the momentary passage through the 
fine, suspended droplets that shot 
past him forcefully in a warm air 
stream. No special drying chamber 
was required, since he stepped out 
dry as well as clean. They didn't 
have this on Widemos, or on Earth. 

The guard's uniform was a bit 
tight, and Biron did not like the 
way the somewhat ugly, conical 
military cap fit over his brachycephalic head. He stared at his reflection with some dissatisfaction. 
"How do I look?" 

"Quite like a soldier," she said. 
•He 'said, "You'll have to carry 
one of these whips. I can't handle 
three." 

She took it between two fingers 
and dropped it into her bag which 
then was suspended from her wide 
belt by another micro-force, so that 
her hands remained free. 

"We had better go, now," she 
said. "Don't say a word if we meet 
anyone; let me do the talking. Your 
accent isn't right, and it would be 



114 




 



impossible to talk in my presence 
unless you were directly addressed, . 
anyway. Remember, you're a common soldier." 

The guard on the floor was beginning to wriggle a bit and roll 
his eyes. His wrists and ankles were 
securely tied at the small of his 
back with stockings that had the 
tensile strength of more than an 
equal amount of steel. His tongue 
worked futilely at his gag. 

He had been shoved out of the 
way, so that it was not necessary to 
step over him to get to the door. 

"This way," breathed Artemisia. 

AT THE first turning, there was 
a footstep behind them and a 
hand came down on Biron's shoulder. 

Biron stepped to one side quickly and turned, one hand catching 
the other's arm, while his other 
snatched at his whip. 

But it was Gillbret, who said, 
"Easy, man!" 

Biron loosened his grip. 

Gillbret rubbed his arm. "I've 
been waiting for you, but that's no 
reason to break my bones. Let me 
stare admiringly at you, Farrill. 
Your clothes seem to have shrunk 
on you, but not bad; not bad at all. 
Nobody would look twice at you in 
that get-up. It's the advantage of a 
uniform. It's taken for granted that 
a soldier's uniform holds a soldier 
and nothing else." 

"Uncle Gil," whispered Artemisia, urgently, "don't talk so 



much. Where are the other 
guards?" 

"Everyone objects to a few 
words," he said, pettishly. "The 
other guards are working their way 
up the tower. They've decided that 
our friend is on none of the lower 
levels, so they've just left some men 
at the main exits and at the ramps, 
with the general alarm system in 
operation as well. We can get past 
it." 

"Won't they miss you, sir?" 
asked Biron. 

"Me? Hah! The captain was 
glad to see me go for all his toescraping. They won't look for me, 
I assure you." 

They were speaking in whispers, 
but now even those died away. A 
guard stood at the bottom of the 
ramp, while two others flanked the 
large, carved double door that led 
to the open air. 

Gillbret called out, "Any word 
of the escaped prisoner, men?" 

"No, my Lord," said the nearest. 
He clicked his heels together and 
saluted. 

"Well, keep your eyes open." 
And they walked past them and 
out, one of the guards at the door 
carefully neutralizing that section 
of the alarm as they left. 

It was night-time outside. The 
sky was clear and starry, the ragged 
mass of the Dark Nebula blotting 
out the specks of light near the 
horizon. Palace Central was a dark 
mass behind them, and the Palace 
Field was half a mile away. 



TYRANN 



115 



But after five minutes of walking 
along the quiet path, Gillbret grew 
restless. 

"There's something wrong," he 
said. 

Artemisia said, "Uncle Gil, you 
haven't forgotten to arrange to have 
the ship ready?" 

"Of course not," he snapped at 
her, as nearly as one could snap in 
a whisper, "but why is the Field 
Tower lit up? It should be dark." 

He pointed up through the trees, 
to where the Tower was a honeycomb of white light. Ordinarily, 
that would indicate business at the 
Field, ships leaving for space or 
arriving from it. 

Gillbret muttered, "Nothing was 
scheduled for tonight. That was 
definite." 

They saw the answer at a distance, or Gillbret did. He stopped 
suddenly and spread his arms wide 
to hold back the others. 

"That's all," he said, and giggled 
almost hysterically. "This time Hinrik has really messed things properly, the idiot. They're here! The 
Tyranni! Don't you understand? 
That's Aratap's private armored 
cruiser." 

Biron saw it, gleaming faintly 
under the lights, standing out 
among the other undistinguished 
ships. It was smoother, slimmer, 
more deadly feline than the Rhodian vessels. 

Gillbret said, "The captain said a 
'personage' was being entertained 
today, and I paid no attention. 



There's nothing to do now. We 
can't fight Tyranni." 

"Why not?"- Biron demanded, 
savagely. "Why can't we fight 
them? They have no reason to suspect trouble and we're armed. Let's 
take the Commissioner's own ship. 
Let's leave him with his trousers 
down." 

He stepped forward, out of the 
relative obscurity of the trees and 
on to the bare Field. The others 
followed. There was ,no reason to 
hide. They were two members of 
the royal family and an escorting 
soldier. 

But it was the Tyranni they were 
fighting now. 

SIMOK ARATAP of Tyrann had 
been impressed the first time 
he had ever seen the Palace 
Grounds at Rhodia years earlier, 
but it had turned out to be only a 
shell that had impressed him. The 
interior was nothing but a musty 
relic. Two generations earlier, 
Rhodia's legislative chambers had 
met on these grounds and most of 
the administrative offices had been 
quartered there. Palace Central had 
been the heartbeat of a dozen 
worlds. 

But now the legislative chambers 
(still existing, for the Khan never 
interfered with local legalisms) met 
once a year to ratify the executive 
orders of the past twelve months. 
It was only a formality. The Executive Council was still, nominally, in continuous session, but it 



116 




 



consisted of a dozen men who remained on their estates nine weeks 
in ten. The various executive bureaus were still active, since one 
could not govern without them 
whether the Director or the Khan 
ruled, but they were now scattered 
over the planet; made less dependent upon the Director, more conscious of their actual masters, the 
Tyranni. 

Which left the Palace as majestic as it had always been in stone 
and metal and that only. It housed 
the Directorial family, a scarcely 
adequate corps of servants, and an 
entirely inadequate corps of native 
guards. 

Aratap felt uncomfortable in the 
palatial shell and was unhappy. It 
was late, he was tired, his eyes 
burned so that he longed to remove 
his contact lenses, and, most of all, 
he was disappointed. 

There was no recognizable pattern of motive and counter-motive. 
He glanced occasionally at his military aide, but the major was 
listening to the Director with expressionless stolidity. As for Aratap 
himself, he paid little attention. 

"Widemos's son! Indeed?" he 
would say, in abstraction. Then 
later, "And so you arrested him? 
Quite right!" 

But it meant little to him, since 
events lacked a design. Aratap had 
a neat and tidy mind which could 
not bear the thought of individual 
facts loosely clumped together with 
no decent arrangement. 



Widemos had been a traitor, and 
Widemos's son had attempted a 
meeting with the Director of Rhodia. He had attempted it first in 
secret and when that had failed, 
such was the urgency, he attempted 
it openly with his ridiculous story 
of an assassination plot. Surely that 
must have been the beginning of a 
pattern. 

And now it fell apart. Hinrik 
was giving up the boy with indecent haste. He could not even wait 
the night, it seemed. And that did 
not fit at all, or else Aratap had 
not yet learned all the facts. 

HE FOCUSED his attention on 
the Director. Hinrik was senselessly beginning to repeat himself. 
Aratap felt a twinge of compassion. The man had been made into 
such a coward that even the Tyranni themselves grew impatient 
with him. And yet it was the only 
way. Nothing but fear could insure 
absolute loyalty. 

Widemos had not been afraid, 
and, despite the fact that his selfinterest had been bound at every 
point with the maintenance of Tyranni rule, he had rebelled. Hinrik 
was afraid and that made the difference. 

And because Hinrik was afraid, 
he sat there, lapsing into incoherence as he struggled to wheedle 
some gesture of approval. The major -would give none, of course, 
Aratap knew. The man had no 
imagination. He sighed and wished 



TYRANN 



117 



he had none, either. Politics was a 
filthy business. 

So he said, with some air of 
animation, "I commend your quick 
decision and your zeal in the service 
of the Khan. You may be sure he 
will hear of it." 

HINRIK brightened visibly, his 
relief obvious. 
Aratap said, "Have him brought 
in, then, and let us hear what our 
cockerel has to say." He suppressed 
a desire to yawn. He had absolutely 
no interest in what the "cockerel" 
had to say. 

It was Hinrik's intention at this 
point to signal for the captain of 
the guard, but there was no necessity for that. The captain stood in 
the doorway, unannounced. 

"Excellency," he said and strode 
in without waiting for permission. 

Hinrik stared hard at his hand, 
still inches from the signal, as 
though wondering whether his intention had somehow developed 
sufficient force to substitute for the 
act. 

He asked, uncertainly, "What is 
it, captain?" 

The captain said, "Excellency, 
the prisoner has escaped." 

Aratap felt some of the weariness disappear. What was this? 
"The details, captain!" he ordered, 
and straightened in his chair. 

The captain gave them with a 
blunt economy of words. He concluded, "I ask your permission, Excellency, to proclaim a general 



alarm. They are still only minutes 
away." 

"Yes, by all means," stuttered 
Hinrik, "by all means. A general 
alarm, indeed. Just the thing. 
Quickly! Quickly! Commissioner, I 
cannot understand how it could 
have happened. Captain, put every 
man to work. There will be an investigation, Commissioner. If necessary, every man on the guards 
will be broken. Broken! Broken!" 

He repeated the word in nearhysteria, but the captain remained 
standing. It was obvious that he had 
more to say. 

Aratap said, "Why do you 
wait?" 

"May I speak to your Excellency 
in private?" asked the captain, 
abruptly. 

Hinrik cast a quick, frightened 
look at the bland, unperturbed 
Commissioner. He mustered ' a 
feeble indignation. "There are no 
secrets from the soldiers of the 
Khan, our friends, our — " 

"Say your say, captain," interposed Aratap, gently. 

The captain brought his heels together sharply. "Since J am ordered 
to speak, your Excellency, I regret 
to inform you that my lady Artemisia and my lord Gillbret accompany the prisoner in his escape." 

"He dared to kidnap them?" 
Hinrik was on his feet. "And my 
guards allowed it?" 

"They were not kidnaped, Excellency. They accompany him voluntarily." 



118 




 



"How do you know?" Aratap 
was delighted, and thoroughly 
awake. It formed a pattern now, 
after all. A better pattern than he 
could have anticipated. 

The captain said, "We have the 
testimony of the guard they overpowered, and the guards who, unwittingly, allowed them to leave the 
building." He hesitated, then added 
grimly, "When I interviewed my 
lady Artemisia at the door of her 
private chambers, she told me she 
had been on the point of sleep. It 
was only later that I realized that 
when she told me that, her face was 
elaborately made up. When I returned, it was too late. I accept the 
blame for the mismanagement of 
this affair. After tonight, I will request your Excellency to accept my 
resignation, but, first, have I still 
your permission to sound the general alarm ? Without your authority, 
I could not interfere with members 
of the royal family." 

But Hinrik was swaying on his 
feet and could only stare at him 
vacantly. 

Aratap said, "Captain, you would 
do better to look to the health of 
your Director. I would suggest you 
call his physician." 

"The general alarm," repeated 
the captain. 

"There will be no general 
alarm," said Aratap. "Do you understand me? No general alarm! 
No recapture of the prisoner! The 
incident is closed ! Return your men 
to their quarters and ordinary 



duties and look to your Director. 
— Come, major." 

THE Tyrannian major spoke 
tensely once they had left the 
mass of Palace Central behind 
them. 

"Aratap," he said, "I presume 
you know what you're doing. I kept 
my mouth shut in there on the basis 
of that presumption." 

"Thank you, major." Aratap 
liked the night air of a planet full 
of green and growing things. Tyrann was more beautiful in its way, 
but it was a terrible beauty of arid 
rocks and mountains. 

He went on, "You cannot 
handle Hinrik, Major Andros. In 
your hands, he would wilt and 
break. 'He is useful, but requires 
gentle treatment if he is to remain 
so." ■ I: 

The major brushed that aside. 
"I'm not referring to that. Why not 
the general alarm? Don't you want 
them?" 

"Do you?" Aratap stopped. "Let ' 
us sit here for a moment, Andros. 
A bench on a pathway along a 
lawn. What more beautiful and 
what place is safer frem spy beams? 
Why do you want the young man, 
major?" 

"Why do I want any traitor and 
conspirator?" 

"Why do you, indeed, if you 
only catch a few tools while leaving the source of the poison untouched? Whom would you have? 
A cub, a silly girl, a senile idiot." 



TYRANN 



119 



There was the faint splashing of 
an artificial waterfall nearby. A 
small one, but decorative. Now that 
was a real wonder to Aratap. 
Imagine water, spilling out, running to waste, pouring down the 
rocks and along the ground. He had 
never educated himself out of a 
prim indignation over it. 

i( A S IT is," said the major, "we 

.XJL have nothing." 

"We have a pattern. When the 
young man first arrived, we connected him with Hinrik and that 
bothered us because Hinrik is — 
what he is. But it was the best we 
could do. Now we see it was not 
Hinrik at all; that Hinrik was a 
misdirection. It was Hinrik's daughter and cousin he was after and that 
makes more sense." 

"Why didn't he call us sooner? 
He waited for the middle of the 
night." 

"Because he is the tool of whoever is the first to reach him, and 
Gillbret, I am sure, suggested this 
night meeting as a sign of great 
zeal on his part." 

"You mean we were called here 
on purpose? To witness their 
escape?" 

"No, not for that reason. Ask 
yourself. Where do these people 
intend going?" 

The major shrugged. "Rhodia is 
big." 

"Yes, if it were the young Farrill alone who was concerned. But 
where on Rhodia would two mem


bers of the royal family go unrecognized? Particularly the girl." 

"They would have to leave the 
planet then." ■ 

"And from where? They can 
reach the Palace Field in a fifteenminute walk. Now do you see the 
purpose of our being here?" 

The major said, "Our ship?" 

"Of course. A Tyrannian ship 
would seem ideal to them. Otherwise, they would have to choose 
among freighters. Farrill has been 
educated on Earth, and, I'm sure, 
can fly a cruiser." 

"Now there's a point," the major agreed. "Why do we allow the 
nobility to send out their sons in 
all directions? What business has 
a subject to know more about 
travel than will suffice him for local trade? We raise soldiers against 
us." 

"Nevertheless," said Aratap, 
with polite indifference, "at the moment, Farrill has a foreign education and let us take that into account 
objectively, without growing angry 
about it. The fact remains that I am 
completely certain they have taken 
our cruiser." 

"I can't believe it." 

"You have your wrist-caller. 
Make contact with the. ship, if you 
can." 

The major tried, futilely. 
Aratap said, "Try the Field 
Tower." 

The major did so, and the small 
voice came out of the tiny receiver, 
in minute agitation. "But, Excel


120 




 



lency, I don't understand. There is 
some mistake. Your pilot took off 
ten minutes ago." 

Aratap was smiling. "You see? 
Work out the pattern and each little 
event becomes inevitable. And now 
do you fully understand the consequences?" 

THE major did. He slapped his 
thigh, and laughed briefly. "Of 
course!" 

"Well," said Aratap, "they 
couldn't know, of course, but they 
have ruined themselves. Had they 
been satisfied with the clumsiest 
Rhodian freighter on the field, they 



would surely have escaped and 
(what's the expression?) I would 
have been caught with my trousers 
down this night. As it is, my trousers are firmly belted and nothing 
can save the three of them. And 
when I pluck them back, in my 
own good time" — he emphasized 
the words with satisfaction — "I 
will have the rest of the conspiracy 
in my hands as well." 

He sighed and found himself beginning to feel sleepy once more, 
"Well, we have been lucky, and 
now there is no hurry. Call Central 
Base and have them send another 
ship after us." 



TYRANN 



121 



CHAPTER X 

Maybe! 

BIRON FARRILL'S training in 
spationautics back at Earth had 
been largely academic. There had 
been the university courses in the 
various phases of spatial engineering which, though half a semester 
was spent on the theory of the 
hyperatomic motor, offered little 
when it came to the actual manipulation of ships in space. The best 
and most skilled pilots learned their 
art in practice and not in schoolrooms. 

He had managed to take off without actual accident, though that was 
more luck than design. The Remorseless answered the controls far 
more quickly than Biron had anticipated. He had manipulated several ships on Earth out into space 
and back to the planet, but those 
had been aged and sedate models, 
maintained for the use of students. 
They had been gentle, and very, 
very tired, and had lifted with an 
effort and spiraled slowly upward 
through the atmosphere and into 
space. 

The Remorseless, on the other 
hand, had lifted effortlessly, springing upward and whistling through 
the air, so that Biron had fallen 
backward out of his chair and all 
but dislocated his shoulder. Artemisia and Gillbret, with the greater 
caution of the inexperienced, had 
strapped themselves in, and were 



bruised against the padded webbing. The Tyrannian prisoner had 
lain pressed against the wall, tearing at his bonds and cursing in a 
monotone. 

Biron had risen shakily to his 
feet, kicked the Tyrannian into a 
brooding silence and made his way 
along the wall-rail, hand over hand 
against the acceleration, back to his 
seat.. Forward blasts of power 
quivered the ship and reduced the 
rate of increasing velocity to a bearable pressure. 

They were in the upper reaches 
of the Rhodian atmosphere by then. 
The sky was a deep violet and the 
hull of the ship was hot with air 
friction, so that warmth could be 
felt within. 

It took hours thereafter to set the 
ship into an orbit about Rhodia. 
Biron could find no way of readily 
calculating the velocity necessary to 
just overcome Rhodia's gravity. He 
had to work it by hit and miss, 
varying the velocity with puffs of 
power forward and backward, 
watching the massometer, which indicated their distance from the planet's surface by measuring the 
intensity of the gravitational field. 
Fortunately the massometer was already calibrated for Rhodia's mass 
and radius. Without considerable 
experimentation, Biron. could not 
have adjusted the calibration himself. 

Eventually, the massometer held 
steady and over a period of two 
hours showed no appreciable drift. 



122 




 



Biron allowed himself to relax, and 
the others climbed out of their 
belts. 

ARTEMISIA said, "You don't 
have a very light touch, my 
lord Rancher." 

"I'm flying by touch, my Lady," 
Biron replied, curtly. "If you can 
do better, you're welcome to try, but 
only after I myself disembark." 

"Quiet, quiet," said Gillbret. 
"The ship is too cramped for pettishness, and, in addition, since we 
are to be crushed into an inconvenient familiarity in this leaping 
prison pen, I suggest we discard the 
many 'lords' and 'ladies' which will 
otherwise encrust our conversation. 
I am Gillbret, you are Biron, she is 
Artemisia. I suggest we memorize 
those terms of address, or any variation we care to use. And as for 
piloting the ship, why not use the 
help of. our Tyrannian friend 
here?" 

The Tyrannian glared, and Biron 
said, "No. There is no way we 
could trust him. And my own piloting will improve as I get the hang 
of this ship. I haven't cracked you 
up yet, have I?" 

His shoulder hurt still as a. result of the first lurch and, as usual, 
pain made him peevish. 

"Well," said Gillbret, "what do 
we do with him?" 

"I don't like to kill him in cold 
blood," said Biron, "and that won't 
help us. It would just make the Tyranni doubly excited. Killing one of 



the master race is really the unforgivable sin." 

"But what is the alternative?" 

"We'll land him." 

"All right. Where?" 

"On Rhodia." 

"What?" 

"It's the one place they won't be 
looking for us. Besides, we've got 
to go down pretty soon, anyway." 

"Why?" 

"Look, this is the Commissioner's ship, and he's been using it for 
hopping about the surface of the 
planet. It wouldn't be provisioned 
for space voyages. Before we go 
anywhere, we'll have to take complete inventory aboard ship, and at 
least make sure that we have enough 
food and water." 

Artemisia was nodding vigorously. "That's right. I wouldn't have 
thought of that myself. Very 
clever, Biron." 

Biron made a deprecating gesture," but warmed with pleasure, 
nevertheless. It was the first time 
she had used his first name. She 
could be quite pleasant when she 
tried. 

Gillbret said, "But he'll radio our 
whereabouts instantly." 

"I don't think so," said Biron. 
"In the first place, Rhodia has its 
desolate areas, I imagine. We don't 
have to drop him into the business 
- section of a city, or into the middle 
of one of the Tyranni garrisons. 
Besides, he may not be so anxious 
to contact his superiors as you might 
think. - — Say, private, what would 



TYRANN 



123 



happen to a soldier who allowed 
the Commissioner of the Khan to 
have his private cruiser stolen from 
him?" 

■ The prisoner did not answer, but 
his lip-line became pale. 

Biron would not have wanted to 
be in the soldier's place. To be 
sure, he could scarcely be blamed. 
There was no reason why he should 
have suspected trouble resulting 
from mere politeness to members 
of the Rhodian royal family. Sticking to the letter of the Tyranni 
military code, he had refused to 
allow them aboard ship without the 
permission of his commanding officer. If the Director himself had demanded permission to enter, he 
would have to deny it. But in the 
meantime, they had closed in upon 
him, and by the time he realized 
he should have followed the military code still more closely and had 
his weapon ready, it was too late. 
A neuronic whip was practically 
touching his chest. 

Nor had he given in tamely, even 
.then. It had taken a whip-blast at 
his chest to stop him. And even so, 
he could face only courtmartial and 
conviction. No one doubted that, 
least of all the soldier. 

THEY had landed two days later 
at the outskirts of the city of 
Southwark. It had been chosen deliberately because it lay far from 
the main centers of Rhodian population. The Tyrannian soldier had 
been strapped into a repulsion unit 



and allowed to flutter downward 
some fifty miles from the nearest 
sizable town. 

The landing, on an empty beach, 
was only mildly jerky, and Biron, 
as the one least likely to be recognized, made the necessary purchases. Such Rhodian currency as 
Gillbret had had the presence of 
mind to bring with him had scarcely sufficed for elementary needs, 
since much of it went for a little 
bi-wheel and tow-cart, on which 
Biron could carry the supplies away 
piecemeal. 

"You might have stretched the 
money further," said Artemisia, "if 
you hadn't wasted so much of it on 
the Tyranni mush you bought." 

"There was nothing else to do," 
said Biron, hotly. "It may be Tyranni mush to you, but it's a wellbalanced food, and will see us 
through better than anything else I 
could have gotten/' 

He was annoyed. It had been 
stevedore's work, getting all that 
stuff out of the city and then aboard 
ship. And it had meant a considerable risk, buying it at one of the 
Tyranni-run commissaries in the 
city. He had expected appreciation, 
not carping. 

There was no alternative, actually. The Tyranni forces had evolved 
an entire technique of supply 
adapted entirely to the fact that they 
used tiny ships. They couldn't afford 
the huge storage spaces of other 
fleets, which were stacked with the 
carcasses of whole animals, neatly 



124 




 



hung in rows. They hacf to develop 
a„ standard food-concentrate containing what was necessary in the 
way of calories and food-factors and 
let it .go at that. It took up only 
one-twentieth of the space that an 
equivalent supply of natural animal 
food would take, and it could be 
piled up in the low-temperature 
storeroom like packaged bricks. 

<<TT7ELL, it tastes awful," said 
V V Artemisia. 

"You'll get used to it," retorted 
Biron, mimicking her petulance, so 
that she flushed and turned away 
angrily. 

What was bothering her, Biron 
knew, was simply the lack of space 
and all that accompanied the lack. 
It wasn't just a question of using 
a monotonous food-stock because, 
in that way, more calories could be 
packed to the cubic inch. It was 
that there were no separate sleeping 
rooms, for instance. There were the 
engine rooms and the control room, 
which took up most of the ship's 
space. (After all, Biron thought, 
this is a warship, not a pleasure 
yacht.) Then there were the storeroom, and one small cabin, with 
two tiers of three bunks on either 
side. The plumbing was located in 
a little niche just outside the cabin. 

It meant crowding; it meant a 
complete absence of privacy; and it 
meant that Artemisia would have to 
adjust herself to the fact that there 
were no women's clothes aboard, 
no mirrors, no washing facilities. 



Well, she would have to get used 
to it. Biron felt that he had done 
enough for her, gone sufficiently 
out of his way. Why couldn't she 
be pleasant about it, and smile once 
in a while? She had a nice smile, 
and he had to admit she wasn't bad 
outside her temper. But, oh, that 
temper ! 

Well, why waste his time thinking about her? 

The water situation was the 
worst. Tyrann was a desert planet 
in the first place, where water was 
at a premium and men knew its 
value, so none was included on 
board ship for washing purposes. 
Soldiers could wash themselves and 
their personal effects once they had 
landed on a planet. During trips, a 
little grime and sweat would not 
hurt them. Even for drinking purposes, water was barely sufficient 
for the longer trips. After all, water could be neither concentrated 
nor dehydrated, but had to be carried in bulk, the problem being 
aggravated by the fact that the water content of the food concentrates 
was quite low. 

There were distilling devices to 
re-use water lost by the body, but 
Biron, when he realized their function, felt squeamish and arranged 
for the disposal of waste products 
without attempt at water recovery. 
Chemically, it was a sensible procedure, but one has to be educated 
into that sort of thing. 

The second takeoff was, comparatively, a model of smooth


TYRANN 



125 



ness, and Biron spent time playing 
with the controls afterward. The 
control board resembled only in the 
dimmest fashion those of the ships 
he had handled on Earth. It had 
been compressed and compacted 
frightfully. As Biron puzzled out 
the action of a contact or the purpose of a dial, he wrote minute directions on paper and pasted them 
appropriately on the board. 

Gillbret entered the pilot room. 

Biron looked over his shoulder. 
"Artemisia's in the cabin, I suppose?" 

"There isn't any place else she 
could be and stay inside the ship." 

Biron said, "When you see her, 
tell her I'll make up a bunk here in 
the pilot room. I'd advise you to do 
the same, and let her have the cabin 
to herself." He muttered, "It wasn't 
bad enough — we had to bring along 
a damn girl." * 

"You have your moments, too, 
Biron," said Gillbret. "You'll have 
to remember the sort of life she's 
used to." 

"All right, I do remember it, and 
so what? What sort of life do you 
think I'm used to? I wasn't born 
in the mine fields of some asteroidal 
belt, you know. I was born on the 
biggest ranch of Nephelos. But if 
you're caught in a situation, you've 
got to make the best of it. Damn it, 
I can't stretch the hull of the ship. 
It will hold just so much food and 
water, and I can't do anything about 
the fact that there isn't any shower. 
She picks on me as if I personally 



manufactured this ship." It was a 
relief to shout at Gillbret. It was a 
relief to shout at anybody. 

The door opened again, and 
Artemisia stood there. She said, 
freezingly, "I would refrain, Mr. 
Farrill, from shouting if I were 
you. You can be distinctly heard 
all over the ship." 

"That," said Biron, "does not 
bother me. And if the ship bothers 
you, just remember that if your 
father hadn't tried to kill me off 
and marry you off, neither one of 
us would be here." 

"Don't you criticize my father." 

"I'll criticize anyone I please." 

Gillbret put his hands over his 
ears. "Please!" 

IT BROUGHT a brief halt. Gillbret said, "Shall we discuss the 
matter of our destination now? It's 
obvious at this point that the 
sooner we're somewhere else and 
get out of this ship, the more comfortable we'll be." 

"I agree with you there, Gil," 
said Biron. "Just let's go somewhere 
where I don't have to listen to her 
clacking. Talk about women on 
spaceships!" 

Artemisia ignored him and addressed Gillbret exclusively. "Why 
don't we get out of the Nebular 
area altogether?" 

"I don't know about you," said 
Biron, at once, "but I've got to get 
my Ranch back and do a little something about my father's murder. I'll 
stay in the Kingdoms, thanks." 



126 




 



"I did not mean," said Artemisia, 
"that we were to leave forever; 
only till the worst of the search was 
over. I don't see what you intend 
doing about your Ranch, anyway. 
You can't get it back unless the 
Tyranni Empire is broken to pieces, 
and I can't see you doing that." 

"You never mind what I intend 
doing. It's my business." 

"Might I make a suggestion?" 
asked Gillbret, mildly. He took silence for consent, and went on, 
"Then suppose I tell you where we 
ought to go, and exactly what we 
ought to do to help break the Empire to pieces, just as Arta said." 

"Oh? How do you propose doing that?" said Biron. 

Gilibret smiled. "My dear boy, 
you're taking a very amusing attitude. Don't you trust me? You look 
at me as though you think that any 
enterprise I might be interested in 
was bound to be a foolish one. I 
got you out of the Palace, you 
know." 

"I know that. I'm perfectly willing to listen to you." 

"Do so then. I've been waiting 
for over twenty years for my chance 
to get away from them. If I had 
been a private citizen, I could have 
done it long since; but, through the 
curse of birth, I've been in the public eye. And yet if it hadn't been 
for the fact that I was born a Hinriad, I would not have attended the 
coronation of the present Khan of 
Tyrann, and in that case I would 
never have stumbled on the secret 



which will someday destroy that 
same Khan." 

"Go on," said Biron. 

"The trip from Rhodia to Tyrann was by Tyranni warship, of 
course, as was the trip back. A ship 
like this, I might say, but rather 
larger. The trip there was uneventful. The stay on Tyrann had its 
points of amusement, but, for our 
purposes now, was likewise uneventful. On the trip back, however, a meteor hit us." 

"What?" 

GILLBRET held up a hand. "'I 
know it's an unlikely accident. The incidence of meteors in 
space, especially in interstellar 
space, is low enough to make the 
chances of collision with a ship 
completely insignificant, but it does 
happen, as you know. And it did 
happen in this case. Of course any 
meteor that does hit, even when it 
is the size of a pinhead, as most of 
them are, can penetrate the hull of 
any but the most heavily armored 
ship." 

"I know," said Biron. "It's a 
question of their momentum, which 
is a product of their mass and 
velocity. The velocity more than 
makes up for their lack of mass." 
He recited it glumly, like a school 
lesson, and caught himself watching Artemisia furtively. 

She had seated herself to listen 
to Gillbret, and she ivas so close 
that they were almost touching. It 
occurred to Biron that her profile 



TYRANN 



127 



was beautiful as she sat there, even 
if her hair was becoming a little 
bedraggled. She wasn't wearing her 
little jacket, and the fluffy whiteness of her blouse was still smooth 
and unwrinkled after forty-eight 
hours. He wondered how she managed to do that. 

The trip, he decided, could be 
quite wonderful if she would only 
learn to behave herself. The trouble 
was that no one had ever controlled 
her properly, that was all. Certainly not her father. She'd become too 
used to having her own way. If 
she'd been born a commoner, she 
would have been a very lovely creature. 

HE WAS just beginning to slip 
into a daydream in which he 
controlled her properly and brought 
her to a state of proper- appreciation of himself, when she turned 
her head and met his eye calmly. 
Biron looked away and fastened his 
attention instantly on Gillbret. He 
had missed a few sentences. 

"1 haven't the slightest idea why 
the ship's screen had tailed. It was 
just one of those things to which 
no one will ever know the answer, 
but it had failed. • Anyway, the meteor struck amidships. It was 
pebble-size and piercing the hull 
slowed it just sufficiently so that it 
couldn't blaze its way out again 
through the other side. If it had 
done that, there would have been 
little harm to it, since the hull could 
be temporarily patched in no time. 



"As it was, however, it plunged 
into the control room, ricocheted 
off the far wall and slammed back 
and forth till it came to a halt. It 
couldn't have taken more than a 
fraction of a minute to do so, but 
at an original velocity of a hundred 
miles a minute, it must have crisscrossed the room a hundred times. 
Both crewmen were cut to pieces, 
and I escaped only because I was in 
the cabin at the time. 

"I heard the thin clang of the 
meteor when it originally penetrated the hull, then the click-clack of 
its bouncing and the terrifying 
short screams of the two crew men. 
When I jumped into the control 
room, there was only the blood 
everywhere and the torn flesh. The 
things that happened next I remember only vaguely, although for 
years I lived it over step by step in 
my nightmares. 

"The cold sound of escaping air 
led me to the meteor hole. I slapped 
a disk of metal over it and air pressure made a decent seal of it. I 
found the little battered spacepebble on the floor. It was warm to 
the touch, but I hit it with a spanner and split it in two. The exposed 
interior frosted over instantly. It 
was still at the temperature of space. 

"I tied a cord to the wrist of 
each corpse and then fastened each 
cord to a towing magnet. I dumped 
them through the airlock, heard the 
magnets clank against the hold, and 
knew that the hard-frozen bodies 
would follow the ship now where


128 




 



ever it went. You see, I knew I 
would need the evidence of their 
bodies to show that it had been the 
meteor that had killed them and 
not I, once we returned to Rhodia. 

"But how was I to return? I was 
quite helpless. There was no way / 
could run the ship, and there was 
nothing I dared try there in the 
depths of interstellar space. I didn't 
even know how to use the subetheric communication system, so 
that I couldn't SOS. I could only 
let the ship travel on its own 
course." 

"But you couldn't very well do 
that, could you?" Biron asked. He 
wondered if Gillbret were inventing this, either out of simple romantic imaginings or for some severely practical reason of his own. 
"What about the Jumps through 
hyperspace? You must have managed those, or you wouldn't be 
here." 

"A Tyranni ship," said Gillbret, 
"once the contfols are properly set, 
will make any number of Jumps 
quite automatically." 

Biron stared his disbelief. Did 
Gillbret take him for a fool? 
"You're making that up," he said. 

"I am not. It's one of the damned 
military advances which won their 
wars for them. They didn't defeat 
fifty planetary systems, outnumbering Tyrann by hundreds of times 
in population and resources, just 
by playing mumbledy-peg, you 
know. Sure, they tackled us one at 
a time, and utilized our traitors very 



skillfully, but . they had a definite 
military edge as well. Everyone 
knows that their tactics were superior to ours, and part of that was 
due to the automatic Jump. It meant 
a great increase in the maneuverability of their ships and made 
possible much more elaborate battle 
plans than any we could set up. 

"It's one of their best-kept secrets, this technique of theirs. I 
never learned it until I was trapped 
alone on the Bloodsucker (the Tyranni have the most annoying custom of naming their ships 
unpleasantly, though I suppose it's 
good psychology) and watched it 
happen. I watched it make the 
Jumps without a hand on the controls." 

"And you mean to say that this 
ship can do that, too?" 

"I don't know. I wouldn't be 
surprised." 

BIRON turned to the control 
board. There were still dozens 
of contacts he had not determined 
the slightest use for. Well, later! 

He turned to Gillbret again. 
"And the ship took you home?" 

"No, it didn't. When that meteor 
wove its pattern through the control room, it didn't leave the board 
untouched. It would have been a 
most amusing coincidence if it had. 
Dials were smashed, the casing 
battered and dented. There was no 
way of telling how the previous setting of the controls had been 
altered, but it must have been 



TYRANN 



129 



somehow, because it never took me 
back to Rhodia. 

"Eventually, of course, it began 
deceleration, and I knew the trip 
was theoretically over. I couldn't 
tell where I was, but I managed to 
maneuver the visiplate so that I 
could tell there was a planet close 
enough to show a disc in the ship 
telescope. It was blind luck, because 
the disc was increasing in size. The 
ship was heading for the planet. 

"Oh, not directly. That would be 
too impossible to hope for. If I had 
just drifted, the ship would have 
missed the planet by a million miles, 
at least, but at that distance I could 
use ordinary etheric radio. I knew 
how to do that. It was after this 
was all over that I began educating 
myself in electronics. I made up my 
mind that I would never be quite so 
helpless again. Being helpless is 
one of the things that isn't altogether amusing." 

BIRON prompted, "So you used 
the radio." 
"Exactly, and they came and got 
me." 

"Who?" 

"The men of the planet. It was 
inhabited." 

"Well, the luck piles up. What 
planet was it?" 

"I don't know." 

"You mean they didn't tell you?" 

"Amusing, isn't it? They didn't. 
But it was somewhere among the 
Nebular Kingdoms!" 

"How did you know that?" 



"Because they knew the ship I 
was in was a Tyranni vessel. They 
knew that by sight, and almost 
blasted it before I could convince 
them I was the only one on board 
alive." 

Biron put his large hands on his 
knees and kneaded them. "Now 
hold on and pull back. I don't understand this. If they knew it was a 
Tyranni vessel and intending blasting it, isn't that the best proof that 
the world was not in the Nebular 
Kingdoms? Anywhere in the Galaxy but there." 

"No, by the Galaxy." Gillbret's 
eyes were shining, and his voice 
climbed in enthusiasm. "It was in 
the Kingdoms. They took me to the 
surface and what a world it was! 
There were men there from all over 
the Kingdoms. I could tell by the 
accents. And tbey had no fear of 
the Tyranni. The place was an 
arsenal. You couldn't tell from 
space. It might externally have been 
a rundown- farming world, but the 
real life of the planet was underground. Somewhere in the Kingdoms, my boy, someivbere, there is 
that planet still and it is not afraid 
of the Tyranni and it is going to 
destroy the Tyranni as it would 
have destroyed the ship I was on 
then, if the crew men had been 
still alive." 

Biron felt his heart bound. 

For a moment, he wanted desperately to believe. 

After all, maybe. 

Maybe ! 



130 




 



CHAPTER XI 

And Maybe Not! 

BIRON said, "How did you 
learn all this about its being 
an arsenal? How long did you stay? 
What did you see?" 

Gillbret grew impatient. "It 
wasn't exactly what I saw at all. 
They didn't conduct me on any 
tours, or anything like that." He 
forced himself to relax. "Well, 
look, this is what happened. By the 
time they got me off the ship, I 
was in more or less of a bad state. 
I had been too frightened to eat 
much (it's a terrible thing, being 
marooned in space) and I must 
have looked worse than I really 
was. 

"I identified myself, more or less, 
and they took me underground. 
With the ship, of course. I suppose 
they were more interested in the 
ship than in myself. It gave them a 
chance to study Tyranni spatio-engineering. They took me to what 
must have been a hospital." 

"But what did you see, uncle?" 
asked Artemisia. 

Biron interrupted, "Hasn't he 
ever told you this before?" 

Artemisia said, "No." 

And Gillbret added, "I've never 
told anyone till now. I was taken 
to a hospital, as I said. I passed research laboratories in that hospital 
that must have been better than anything we have on Rhodia. On the 
way to the hospital I passed fac


tories in which some sort of metalwork was going on. The ships that 
had captured me were certainly like 
none I've ever heard about. 

"It was all so apparent tfo me at 
the time that I have never questioned it in the years since. I think 
of it as my 'rebellion world,' and 
I know that someday swarms of 
ships will leave it to attack the Tyranni, and that the subject worlds 
will be called upon to rally round 
the rebel leaders. From year to year 
I've waited for it to happen. Each 
new year I've thought to myself: 
This may be the one. And each 
time, I half hoped it wouldn't be, 
because I was longing to get away 
first, to join them so that I might 
be part of the great attack. I didn't 
want' them to start without me." 

He laughed shakily. "I suppose 
it would have amused most people 
to know what was going on in my 
mind. In my mind. Nobody thought 
much of me, you know." 

Biron said, "All this happened 
over twenty years ago, and they 
haven't attacked? There's been no 
sign of them? No strange ships 
have been reported? No incidents? 
And you still think — " 

Gillbret fired at him, "Yes, I do. 
Twenty years isn't too long to organize a rebellion against a planet 
that rules fifty systems. I was there 
just at the beginning of the rebellion. I know that, too. Slowly, since 
then, thej- must have been honeycombing the planet with their underground preparations, developing 



TYRANN 



131 



newer ships and weapons, training 
more men, organizing the attack. 

"It's only in the video-thrillers 
that men spring to arms at a moment's notice, that a new weapon is 
needed one day, invented the next, 
mass-produced the third and used 
the fourth. These things take time, 
Biron, and the men of the 'rebellion world' must know they will 
have to be completely ready before 
beginning. They won't be able to 
strike twice. 

"And what do you call 'incidents?' Tyranni ships have disappeared and never been found. Space 
is big, you might say, and they 
might simply be lost, but what if 
they were captured by the rebels? 
^There was the case of the Tireless 
two years back. It reported a 
strange object close enough to 
stimulate the massometer, and then 
was never heard of again. It could 
have been a meteor, but was it?" 

"The search lasted months. They 
never found it. / think the rebels 
have it. The Tireless was a new 
ship, an experimental model. It 
would be just what they would 
want." 

BIRON said, "Once having 
landed there, why didn't you 
stay?" 

"Don't you suppose I wanted to? 
I had no chance. I listened to them 
when they thought I was unconscious, and I learned a bit more 
then. They were just starting at that 
time. They couldn't afford to be 



found out then. They knew I was 
Gillbret oth Hinriad. There was 
enough identification on the ship, 
even if I hadn't told them myself, 
which I had. They knew that if I 
didn't return to Rhodia there would 
be a full-scale search that would 
not readily come to a halt. 

"They couldn't risk such a 
search, so they had to see to it that 
I was returned to Rhodia. And 
that's where they took me." 

"What?" cried Biron. "But that 
must have been an even greater 
risk. How did they do that?" 

"I don't know." Gillbret passed 
his thin fingers through his graying hair, and his eyes seemed to be 
probing uselessly into die backward 
stretches of his memory. "They 
anesthetized me, I suppose. That 
part all blanks out. Past a certain 
point there is nothing. I can only 
remember that I opened my eyes 
and was back in the Bloodsucker. I 
was in space, just off Rhodia." 

"The two dead crewmen were 
still attached by the tow magnets? 
They hadn't been removed on the 
'rebellion world?' " asked Biron. 

"They were still there." 

"Was there any evidence at all 
to indicate that you had been on 
the 'rebellion world?' " 

"None, except for what I remembered." 

"How did you know you were 
oft Rhodia?" 

"I didn't. I knew I was near a 
planet; the massometer said so. I 
used the radio again, and this time 



132 




 



it was Rhodian ships that came for 
me. I told my story to the Tyrannian Commissioner of that day, 
with appropriate modifications. I 
made no mention of the 'rebellion 
world,' of course. And I said the 
meteor had hit just after the last 
Jump. I didn't want them to think 
I knew that a Tyrannian ship could 
make the Jumps automatically." 

"Do you think the 'rebellion 
world' found out that little fact? 
Did you tell them?" 

"I didn't tell them. I had no 
chance. I wasn't there long enough. 
Conscious, that is. But I don't know 
how long I was unconscious and 
what they managed to find out for 
themselves." 

Biron stared at the visiplate. 
Judging from the rigidity of the 
picture it presented, the ship they 
were on might have been nailed in 
space. The Remorseless was traveling at the rate of ten thousand miles 
an hour, but that was nothing to 
the immense distances of space. The 
stars were hard, bright and motionless. They had a hypnotic quality about them. 

He said, "Then where are we 
going? I take it you still don't know 
where the 'rebellion world' is?" 

"I don't. B.ut I have an idea who 
would be in charge. I am almost 
sure I know who would be in 
charge." Gillbret was eager about 
it. 

"Who?" 

"The Autarch of Lingane." 
"Lingane?" Biron frowned. He 



had heard the name some time 
back, it seemed to him, but he had 
forgotten the connection. "Why 
he?" 

"Lingane was the last Kingdom 
captured by the Tyranni. It is not, 
shall we say, as pacified as the rest. 
Doesn't that make sense?" 

"As far as it goes. But how far 
is that?" 

"If you want another reason, 
there is your father." 

"My father?" For a moment, 
Biron forgot that his father was 
dead. He saw him standing before 
his mind's eyes, large and alive, 
but then he remembered and there 
was that same cold wrench inside 
liim. "How does my father come 
into this?" 

"He was at court six months ago. 
I gained certain notions as to what 
he wanted. Some of his talks with 
my cousin, Hinrik, I overheard." 

"Oh, uncle," said Artemisia, impatiently. 

"My dear?" 

"You had no right to eavesdrop 
on father's private discussions." 

GILLBRET shrugged. "Of 
course not, but it was amusing, 
and useful as well." 

Biron interrupted, "Now wait. 
You say it was six months ago that 
my father was at Rhodia?" He felt 
excitement mount. 
"Yes." 

"Tell me. While there, did he 
have access to the Director's collection of Primitivism? You told me 



TYRANN 



133 



once that the Director had a large 
library of matters concerning 
Earth." 

"I imagine so. The library is 
quite famous and it is usually made 
available to distinguished visitors, 
if they're interested. They usually 
aren't, but your father was. Yes, I 
remember that very well. He spent 
nearly a day there." 

That checked. It had been half 
a year ago that his father had first 
asked his help. Biron said, "You 
yourself know the library well, I 
imagine." 

"Of course." 

"Is there anything in the library 
that would suggest that there ex- % 
ists a document on Earth of great 
military value?" 

Gillbret was blank of face; obviously, blank of mind. 

Biron said, "Somewhere in the 
last centuries of prehistoric Earth 
there must have been such a document. I can only tell you that my 
father thought it to be the most 
valuable single item in the Galaxy, 
and the deadliest. I was to have 
gotten it for him, but I left Earth 
before I could, and in any case," his 
voice faltered, "he died too soon." 

But Gillbret was still blank. "I 
don't know what you're talking 
about." 

"My father mentioned it to me 
first six months ago. He must have 
learned of it in the library on 
Rhodia. If you've been through it 
yourself, can't you tell me what it 
was he must have learned?" 



But Gillbret could only shake his 
head. 

Biron said, "Well, continue with 
your story." 

"They spoke of the Autarch of 
Lingane, your father and my 
cousin," Gillbret said. "Despite 
your father's cautious phraseology, 
Biron, it was obvious that the Autarch was the organizer of the conspiracy. 

"And then," he hesitated, "there 
was a mission from Lingane and the 
Autarch himself was at its head. 
I — I told him of the 'rebellion 
world.' " 

"You said a while ago you told 
nobody," Biron objected. 

"Except the Autarch. I bad to 
know the truth." 

"What did he tell you?" 

"Practically nothing. Buc, then, 
he had to be cautious, too. Could 
he trust me? I might have been 
working for the Tyranni. How 
could he know ? But he didn't close 
the door altogether. It's our only 
lead." 

"Is it?" Biron said. "Then we'll 
go to Lingane. One place, I suppose, is like another." 

Mention of his father had depressed him, and, for the moment, 
nothing mattered much. Let it be 
Lingane. 

LET it be Lingane! That was 
easy to say. But how does one 
go about pointing the ship at a tiny 
speck of light thirty-five light years 
away? Two hundred trillion miles. 



134 




 



A two with seventeen zeroes after 
it. At ten thousand miles an hour, 
(current cruising speed of the Remorseless) it would take well over 
two million years to get there. 

Biron leafed through the "Standard Galactic Epherneris" with 
something like despair. Tens of 
thousands of stars were listed in. 
detail, with their positions crammed 
into three figures. There were hundreds, of pages of these figures, 
symbolized by the Greek letters 
rho, theta, and phi. 

Rho was the distance from the 
Galactic Center in parsecs; theta, 
the angular separation, along the 
plane of the Galactic Lens from the 
Standard Galactic Baseline (the 
line, that is, which connects the 
Galactic Center and the sun of the 
planet Earth); phi, the angular 
separation from the Baseline in the 
plane perpendicular to that of the 
Galactic Lens, the two latter measurements being expressed in radians. Given those three figures, one 
could locate any star accurately in 
all the vast immensity of space. 

THAT is, on a given date. In addition to the star's position on 
the day for which all the data 
were calculated, one had to know 
the star's proper motion, both 
speed and direction. It was a small 
correction, comparatively, but necessary. A million miles is virtually 
nothing compared with stellar distances, but a long way with a ship. 
There was, of course, the ques


tion of the ship's own position. One 
could calculate the distance from 
Rhodia by the reading of the massometer, or, more correctly, the 
distance from Rhodia's sun, since 
this far out in space the sun's gravitational field drowned out that of 1 
any of its planets. The direction 
they were traveling along with reference to the Galactic Baseline was. 
more difficult to determine. Biron 
had to locate two known stars other 
than Rhodia's sun. From their apparent positions and the known distance from Rhodia's sun, he could 
plot their actual position. 

It was roughly done, but, he felt 
sure, accurately enough. Knowing 
his own position and that of Lingane's sun, It was only a matter of 
adjusting the controls for the 
proper direction and strength of the 
hyperatomic thrust. 

Biron felt lonely and tense. Not 
frightened. He rejected the word. 
But tense, definitely. He was deliberately calculating the elements 
of the Jump for six hours later. He 
wanted plenty of time to check his 
figures. And perhaps there might 
be the chance for a nap. He had 
dragged the bedding out of the 
cabin and it was ready for him. 

The other two were, presumably, 
sleeping in the cabin. He told himself that that was a good thing and 
that he wanted nobody around bothering htm, yet when he heard the 
small sound of bare feet outside, he 
looked up with involuntary eagerness. 



TYRANN 



135 



"Hello," he said. "Why aren't 
you sleeping?" 

Artemisia stood in the doorway, 
hesitating. She said, in a small 
voice, "Do you mind if I come in? 
Will I be bothering you?" 

"It depends on what you do." 

"I'll try to do the right things." 

She seemed too humble, Biron 
thought suspiciously, and then the 
reason for it came out. 

"I'm awfully frightened," she 
said. "Aren't you?" 



He wanted to say no, not at all, 
but it didn't come out that way. He 
smiled sheepishly and said, "Sort 
of." 

Oddly enough, that comforted 
her. She knelt down on the floor 
beside him, and looked at the thick 
volumes opened before him and at 
the sheets of calculations. 

"They had all these books here?" 

"You bet. They couldn't pilot a 
ship without them." 

"And you understand all that?" 



136 




 



"Not all that. I wish I did. I 
hope I understand enough. We'll 
have to Jump to Lingane, you 
know." 

"Is that hard to do?" 

"No, not if you know the figures, which are all here, and have 
the controls which are all there, and 
if you have experience, which I 
haven't. For instance, it should be 
done in several Jumps, but I'm going to try it in one because there'll 
be less chance of trouble, even 
though it means a waste of energy." 

He shouldn't tell her; there was 
no point in telling her; it would be_ 
cowardly to frighten her; and she'd 
be hard to handle if she got really 
frightened, panicky frightened. He 
kept telling himself all that and it 
did no good. He wanted to share it 
with somebody. He wanted part of 
it off his own mind. 

He said, "There are some things 
I should know that I don't. Things 
like the mass-density between here 
and Lingane affect the course of 
the Jump, because that mass density 
is what controls the curvature of 
this part of the universe. The 
'Ephemeris' — that's this big book 
here — mentions the curvature corrections that must be made in certain standard Jumps and from that 
you're supposed to be able to calculate out your own particular corrections. But then if you happen to 
have a super-giant star within ten 
light years, all bets are off. I'm not 
even sure if I used the computer 
correctly." 



"But what would happen if you 
were wrong?" 

"We could re-enter space too 
close to Lingane's sun." 

She considered that, then said, 
"You have no idea how much better 
I feel." 

"After what I've just said?" 

"Of course. In my bunk, I simply 
felt helpless and lost, with so much 
emptiness in all directions. Now I 
know that we're going somewhere 
and that the emptiness is under our 
control." 

"I don't know about its being 
under our control," Biron said 
doubtfully. 

She stopped him. "It is. I know 
you can handle the ship." 

And Biron decided that maybe 
he "might at that. 

ARTEMISIA had tucked her 
legs under her and sat facing 
him. She said, "You know, I had 
an awfully queer sensation in the 
bunk, almost as if I were floating. » 
That was one of the things that 
frightened me. Every time I'd turn, 
I'd give a queer little jump into the 
air and then flop back slowly as if 
there were springs in the air holding me back." 

"You were sleeping in a top 
bunk?" 

"Yes. The bottom ones give me 
claustrophobia, with another mattress only six inches over my 
head." 

Biron laughed. "Then that explains it. The ship's gravitational 



TYRANN 



137 



force is directed toward its base, 
and falls off as you move away from 
it. In the top bunk, you were probably twenty or thirty pounds lighter 
than on the floor. Were you ever 
on a passenger liner? A really big 
one?" 

"Once. When father and I visited Tyrann last year." 

"Well, on the liners they have 
the gravitation in all parts of the 
ship directed toward the outer hull, 
so that the long axis of the ship is 
always 'up,' no matter where you 
are. That's why the motors of one 
of those big ships are always lined 
up in a cylinder running right along 
the long axis. No gravity there." 

"It must take an awful lot of 
power to keep an artificial gravity 
going." 

"Enough to power a small 
town." 

"There isn't any danger of our 
running short of fuel, is there?" 

"Don't worry about that. Ships 
are fueled by the total conversion 
of mass to energy. Fuel is the last 
thing we'll run out of. The outer 
hull will wear away first." 

She was facing him. (He noted 
that her face had been cleaned of 
its makeup and wondered how that 
had been done; probably with a 
handkerchief and as little of the 
drinking water as she could manage. She didn't suffer as a result, 
for her clear white skin was the 
more startlingly perfect against the 
black of her hair and eyes. Her eyes 
were very warm, thought Biron. 



The silence had lasted a little too 
long. He said, hurriedly, "You 
don't travel very much, do you? I 
mean, you were on a liner only 

once?" 

SHE nodded. "Once too often. 
If we hadn't gone to Tyrann, 
that filthy chamberlain wouldn't 
have seen me and — I don't want to 
talk about that." 

Biron let it go. He said, "Is that 
usual? I mean, not traveling?" 

"I'm afraid so. Father is always 
hopping around on state visits, 
opening agricultural expositions, 
dedicating buildings. He usually 
just makes some speech that Aratap writes for him. As for the rest 
of us, however, the more we stay 
in the palace, the better the Tyranni 
like it. Poor Gillbret! The one and 
only time he left Rhodia was to 
attend the Khan's coronation as 
father's representative. They've 
never let him get into a ship again." 

Her eyes were downcast and, 
absently, she pleated the material 
of Biron's sleeve where it ended at 
the wrist. She said, "Biron." 

"Yes — Arta?" He stumbled a 
bit, but it came out. 

"Do you think Uncle Gil's story 
can be true?" 
"I don't know." 
"Do you suppose it could be his 
imagination? He's been brooding 
about the Tyranni for years, and 
he's never been able to do anything, of course, except to rig up 
spy beams, which is only childish, 



138 




 



\ 

and he knows it. He may have built 
himself a daydream and, over the 
years, gradually come to believe in 
it. I know him, you see." 

"It's possible, but let's follow it 
up a little. We can travel to Lingane, anyway." 

They were closer to one another. 
He could have reached out and 
touched her, held her in his arms, 
kissed her. 

And he did so. 

It was a complete non sequittir. 
Nothing, it seemed to Biron, had 
led to it. One moment they were 
discussing Jumps and gravity and 
Gillbret, and the next she was soft 
and silky in his arms and soft and 
silky on his lips. 

His first impulse was to say he 
was sorry, to go through all the 
silly motions of apology, but when 
he drew away, and would have 
spoken, she still made no attempt 
at escape but rested her head in the 
crook of his left arm. Her eyes remained closed. 

So he said nothing at all and 
kissed her again, slowly and thoroughly. 

It was the best thing he could 
have done, and at the time he knew 
it, -. ( -v' ,; ' 

Finally, she said, a bit dreamily, 
"Aren't you hungry? I'll bring you 
some of the concentrate and warm 
it for you. Then, if you want to 
sleep, I can keep an eye on things 
for you. And — and I'd better put 
on more of my clothes." 

She turned as she was about to 



pass out the door. "The food concentrate tastes very nice after you 
get used to it. Thank you for getting it." 

Somehow that, rather than the 
kisses, was the treaty of peace between them. 

WHEN Gillbret entered the 
control room, hours later, he 
showed no surprise at finding Biron 
and Artemisia lost in a foolish kind 
of conversation. He made no remarks about the fact that Biron's 
arm was about his niece's waist. 

He asked, "When are we Jumping, Biron?" 

"In half an hour," said Biron. 
The half-hour passed; the controls were set; conversation languished and died. 

At zero time, Biron drew a deep 
breath and yanked a lever the full 
length of its arc, from left to right. 

It was not as it had been aboard 
the liner. The Remorseless was 
smaller and the Jump was consequently less smooth. Biron staggered and for a split-second things 
wavered. 

And then they were smooth and 
solid again. 

The stars in the visiplate had 
changed. Biron rotated the ship so 
that the star-field lifted, each star 
moving in a stately arc. One star 
appeared finally, brilliantly white 
and more than a point. It was a 
tiny sphere, a burning speck of 
sand. Biron caught it, steadied the 
ship before it was lost again, and 



TYRANN 



139 



turned the telescope upon it, 
throwing in the spectroscopic attachment. 

He turned again to the "Ephemeris," and checked under the column headed "Spectral Characteristics." Then he got out of the pilot's 
chair and said, "It's still too far. 
I'll have to nudge up to it. But 
anyway, that's Lingane right 
ahead." 

It was the first Jump he had ever 
made, and it was successful. 

CHAPTER XII 

The Autarch Comes 

THE Autarch of Lingane pondered the matter, but his cool, 
well-trained features scarcely creased 
under the strain of thought. 

"And you waited forty-eight 
hours to tell me," he accused. 

Rizzett said boldly, "There was 
no reason to tell you earlier. If we 
bombarded you with all matters, 
life would be a burden to you. We 
tell you now, because we still make 
nothing of it. It is queer, and in 
our position, we can afford nothing 
queer." 

"Repeat this business. Let me 
hear it again." 

The Autarch threw a leg upon 
the flaring window-sill and looked 
outward thoughtfully. The window 
itself represented perhaps the 
greatest single oddity of Linganian 
architecture. It was moderate in size 
and set at the end of a five-foot 



recess that narrowed gently toward 
it. It was extremely clear, immensely thick and , precisely curved, not 
so much a window as a lens, funneling the light inward from all directions, so that, looking outward, 
one eyed a miniature panorama. 

When the position of die sun 
made the lenslike windows a focus 
for impossible heat and light, they 
were blanked out automatically, 
rather than opened; rendered 
opaque by a shift in the polarization characteristics of the glass. 

And certainly the theory that a 
planet's architecture is the reflection of a planet's place in the Galaxy would seem to be borne ' out 
by Lingane and its windows. 

Like the windows, Lingane was 
small, yet commanded a panoramic 
view. It was a "planet-state" in a 
Galaxy, which, at the time, had 
passed beyond that stage of economic and political development. 
Where most political units were 
conglomerations of stellar systems, 
Lingane remained what it had been 
for centuries; a single inhabited 
world. This did not prevent it from 
being wealthy. In fact, it was almost inconceivable that . Lingane 
could be anything else. 

It is difficult to tell in advance 
when a world is so located that 
many Jump- routes may use it as a 
pivotal intermediate point; or even 
must use it in the interests of optimal economy. A great deal depends on the pattern of development of that region of space. There 



140 




 



is the question of the distribution 
of the naturally habitable planets; 
the order in which they are colonized and developed; the types of 
economy they possess. 

Lingane discovered its own 
values early, which was the great 
turning-point of its history. Next 
to the actual possession of a strategic position, the capacity to appreciate and exploit that position is 
most important. Lingane had proceeded to occupy small planetoids 
with neither resources nor capacity 
for supporting an independent 
population, choosing them only because they would help maintain 
Lingane's trade monopoly. They 
built servicing stations on those 
rocks. All that ships could need, 
from hyperatomic replacements to 
new book-reels, could be found 
there. The stations grew to huge 
trading posts. From all the Nebular Kingdoms, fur, minerals, grain, 
beef, timber poured in; from the 
Inner Kingdoms, machinery, appliances, medicinals, finished products of all sorts. 

So that, like its windows, Lingane's minuteness looked out on all 
the Galaxy. It was a planet alone; 
but it did well. 

THE Autarch said turning from 
the window, "Start with the 
mail ship, Rizzett. Where did 
they meet this cruiser in the first 
place?" 

"Les« than one hundred thousand 
miles off Lingane. The exact co


ordinates don't matter. They've 
been watched ever since. The point 
is that even then, the Tyranni 
cruiser was in an orbit about the 
planet." 

"As though it had no intention 
of landing, but rather was waiting 
for something." 

"Yes." 

"No way of telling how leng 
they'd been waiting?" 

"Impossible, I'm afraid. They 
were sighted by no one else. We 
checked thoroughly." 

"Very well," said the Autarch. 
"We'll abandon that for the moment. They stopped the mail ship; 
which is, of course, interference 
with the mails and a violation of 
our Articles of Association with 
Tyrann." 

"I doubt that they were Tyranni. 
Their unsure actions are more those 
of outlaws; of prisoners in flight." 

"You mean the men on the Tyranni cruiser? It may be what they 
want us to believe, of course. At 
any rate, their only overt action 
was to ask that a message be delivered directly to me." 

"Directly to the Autarch." 

"Nothing else?" 

"Nothing else." 

"They at no time entered the 
mail ship?" 

"All communication was by visiplate. The mail capsule was shot 
across two miles of empty space 
and caught by ship's net." 

"Was it vision communication 
or sound only?" 



TYRANN 



141 



"Full vision. That's the point. 
The speaker was described by several as being a young man of 'aristocratic bearing,' whatever that 
means." 

THE Autarch's fist clenched 
slowly. "And no photo-impression was taken of the face? That 
was a mistake." 

"Unfortunately there was no 
reason -for the mail captain to have 
anticipated the importance of doing 
so. If any importance exists. Does 
all this mean anything to you, sir?" 

The Autarch did not answer the 
question. "And this is the message?" 

"Exactly. A tremendous message 
of one word that we were supposed 
to bring directly to you; a thing 
we did not do, of course. It might 
have been a fission capsule, for instance. Men have been killed that 
way before." 

"Yes, and Autarchs too," said 
the Autarch. "Just the word 'Gillbret.' One word, 'Gillbret.' " 

The Autarch maintained his indifferent calm, but a lack of certainty was gathering and he did not 
like to experience a lack of certainty. He liked nothing which 
made him aware of limitations. An 
Autarch should have no limitations, 
and on Lingane he had none that 
natural law did not impose. 

Under the Autarchy, Lingane increased its wealth and strength. 
Even the Tyranni, attacking thirty 
years earlier at the height of their 



power, had been fought to a standstill. They had not been defeated, 
but they had been stopped. The 
shock, even of that, had been permanent. Not a planet had been conquered by the Tyranni since the 
year they had attacked Lingane. 

Other planets of the Nebular 
Kingdoms were outright vassals of 
the Tyranni. Lingane, however, 
was an Associated State, theoretically the equal "Ally" of Tyrann, 
with its rights guarded by the Articles of Association. 

The Autarch was not fooled by 
the situation. The chauvinistic of 
the planet might allow themselves 
the luxury of considering themselves free, but the Autarch knew 
that the Tyranni danger had been 
held at arm's-length this past generation. Only that far. No farther. 

And now it might be moving in 
quickly for the final, long-delayed 
bear hug. Certainly, he had given 
it the opportunity it was waiting 
for. The organization he had built 
up, ineffectual though it was, was 
sufficient grounds for punitive action of any type the Tyranni might 
care to undertake. Legally, Lingane 
would be in the wrong. 

Was the cruiser the first reaching 
out for the final bear hug? 

The Autarch said, "Has a guard 
been placed on that ship?" 

"I said they were watched. Two 
of our — " he smiled one-sidedly — 
"freighters keep in massometer 
range." 

"What do you make of it?" 



142 




 

/ 



"I don't know. The only Gill r 
bret I know whose name by itself 
would mean anything is Gillbret 
oth Hinriad of Rhodia. Have you 
had dealings with him?" 

The Autarch said, "I saw him on 
my last visit to Rhodia." 

"You told him nothing, of 
course." 

"Of course." 

Rizzett's eyes narrowed. "I 
thought there might have been a 
certain lack of caution on your part; 
that the Tyranni had been the recipients of an equal lack of caution on 
the part of this Gillbret— the Hinriads are notable weaklings these 
days — and that this now was a device to trap you into final selfbetrayal." 

"I doubt it. It comes at a queer 
time, this business. I have been 
away from Lingane for a year or 
more. I arrived last week and I 
shall leave in a matter of days 
again. A message such as this 
reaches me just when I am in a position to be reached." 

"You don't think it is a coincidence?" 

"I don't believe in coincidence. 
And there is one way in which all 
this would not be coincidence. I 
will therefore visit that ship. 
Alone." 

"Impossible, sir." Rizzett was 
startled. He had a small, uneven 
scar just above his right temple and 
it showed suddenly red. 

"You forbid me?" asked the Autarch, drily. 



And he was the Autarch, after 
all. Rizzett's face fell and he said, 
"As you please, sir." 

ABOARD the Remorseless, the 
wait was proving increasingly 
unpleasant. For two days, they 
hadn't budged from their orbit. 
Gillbret watched the controls with 
relentless concentration. His voice had an edge to it. 

"Wouldn't you say they were 
moving?" 

Biron looked up briefly. He was 
shaving, and handling the Tyranni 
erosive-spray with finicky care. 

"No," he said, "they're not moving. Why should they? They're 
watching us, and they'll keep on 
watching us." 

He concentrated upon the difficult area of the upper lip, frowning impatiently as he felt the 
slightly sour taste of the spray 
upon his tongue. A Tyrannian 
could handle the spray with a grace 
that was almost poetic. It was undoubtedly the quickest and closest 
non-permanent shaving method in 
existence, in the hands of an expert. 
In essence, it was an extremely fine 
air-blown abrasive that scoured off 
the hairs without harming the skin. 
Certainly the skin felt nothing more 
than the gentle pressure of what 
might have been an air-stream. 

Biron was surveying his face in 
the mirror, Pondering how he 
would look in sideburns down to 
the angle of the jaw, when Artemisia said from the doorway, "I 



TYRANN 



143 



thought you were .going to sleep." 

"I did," he said. "Then I woke 
up." 

He looked at her and smiled. 

She patted his cheek, then 
stroked it gently with her fingers, 
"It's smooth. You look about eighteen." 

He carried her hand to his lips. 
"Don't let that fool you." 

SHE said, "They're still watching?" 

"Still watching. Isn't it annoying? These damned dull interludes 
that give you time to sit and 
worry." 

"I don't find this interlude at all 
dull." 

"You're talking about other aspects of it now, Arta." 

She said, "Why don't we cross 
them up and land on Lingane?" 

"We've thought of it. I don't 
think we're ready for that kind of 
risk. We can afford to wait till the 
water-supply gets a bit lower." 

Gillbret said loudly, "I tell you 
they are moving." 

Biron crossed over to the control 
panel and considered the massometer readings. 

He looked at Gillbret and said, 
"You may be right." 

He pecked away at the calculator 
for a moment or two and stared at 
its dials. 

"No, the two ships haven't 
moved relative to us, Gillbret. 
What's changed the massometer is 
that a third ship has joined them. 



As near as I can tell, it's 5,000 miles 
off, about 46 degrees rho and 
192 degrees from the ship-planet 
line, *if I've got the clockwise 
and counterclockwise conventions 
straight. If I haven't, the figures 
are, respectively, 314 and 168 degrees." 

He paused to take another reading. "I think they're approaching. 
It's a small ship. Do you think you 
can get in touch with them, Gillbret?" 

"I can try." 

"All right. No vision. Let's 
leave it at sound, till we get some 
notion of what's coming." 

It was amazing to watch Gillbret 
at the controls of the etheric radio. 
He was obviously the possessor of 
a native talent. Contacting an isolated point in space with a tight 
radio-beam remains, after all, a task 
in which the ship's control panel 
information can participate only 
slightly. He had a notion of the 
distance of the ship which might be 
oft by a hundred miles plus-orminus. He had two angles, either 
or both of which might easily be 
wrong by five or six degrees in any 
direction. 

This left a volume of about ten 
million cubic miles within which 
the ship might be. The rest was 
left to the human operator, and a 
radio beam which was a probing 
finger not half a mile in cross-section at the widest point of its receivable range. It was said that a 
skilled operator could tell by the 



144 




 



feel of the controls how closely the 
beam missed the target. Scientifically, that theory is nonsense, of 
course, but it often seemed that no 
other explanation was possible. 

In less than ten minutes, the activity gauge of the radio was jumping and the Remorseless was both 
sending and receiving. 

In another ten minutes, Biron 
could lean back and say, "They're 
going to send a man aboard." 

"Ought we to let them?" asked 
Artemisia. 

"Why not? One man? We're 
armed." 

"But if we let their ship get too 
close?" 

"We're a Tyrannian cruiser, Arta. 
We've got three to five times their 
power, even if they are the best warship Lingane had. They're not allowed too much by their precious 
Articles of Association, and we've 
got five high-caliber blasters." 

Artemisia said, "Do you know 
how to use the Tyranni blasters? I 
didn't know you did." 

Biron hated to turn the admiration off, but he said, "Unfortunately, I don't. At least, not yet. But 
then the Linganian ship won't 
know that, you see." 

HALF an hour later, the visiplate showed a visible ship. 
It was a stubby little craft, fitted 
with two sets of four fins as though 
it were frequently called upon to 
double for stratospheric flight. 
At its first appearance in the 



telescope, Gillbret had shouted in 
delight, "That's the Autarch's 
yacht," and his face wrinkled into 
a grin. "It's his private yacht. I'm 
sure of it. I told you that the bare 
mention of my name was the surest 
way to get his attention." 

There was the period of deceleration and adjustment of velocity on 
the part of the Linganian ship, until it hung motionless in the 'plate. 

A thin voice came from the receiver: "Ready for boarding?" 

"Ready!" said Biron. "One person only." 

"One person," came the response. 

It was like a snake uncoiling, the 
metal-mesh rope looping outward 
from the Linganian ship, shooting 
at them harpoon-fashion. Its thickness expanded in the visiplate and 
the magnetized cylinder that ended 
it approached and grew in size. As 
it grew closer, it edged toward rim 
of the cone of vision, then veered 
oft' completely. 

The sound of its contact was 
hollow and reverberant. The magnetized weight was anchored, and 
the line was a spider-thread that did 
not sag in a normal weighted curve 
but retained whatever kinks and 
loops it had possessed at the moment of contact. These moved 
slowly forward as units under the 
influence of inertia. 

Easily and carefully, the Linganian ship edged away and the line 
straightened. It hung there then, 
taut and fine, thinning into space 



TYRANN 



145 



until it was an almost invisible 
thing, glittering with incredible 
daintiness in the light of Lingane's 
sun. 

Biron threw in the telescopic attachment, which bloated the ship 
monstrously in the field of vision, 
so that one could see the origin of 
the half-mile length of connecting 
line, and the little figure that was 
beginning to swing hand over hand 
along it. 

It was not the usual form of 
boarding. Ordinarily, two ships 
would maneuver to near-contact, so 
that extensible airlocks could meet 
and merge under intense magnetic 
fields. A tunnel through space 
would thus connect the ships and 
a man could travel from one to the 
other with no further protection 
than he needed to wear aboard ship. 
Naturally, this form of boarding 
required mutual trust. 

By space-line, one was dependent 
upon his spacesuit. The approaching 
Linganian was bloated in his; a fat 
thing of air-extended metal mesh, 
the joints of which required no 
small muscular effort to work. Even 
at the distance at which he was, 
Biron could see his arms flex with 
a snap as the joint gave and came 
to rest in a new groove. 

And the mutual velocities of the 
two ships had to be carefully adjusted. An inadvertent acceleration 
on the part of either would tear the 
line loose and send the traveler 
tumbling through space under the 
easy grip of the faraway sun and of 



the initial impulse of the snapping 
line — with nothing, neither friction 
nor obstruction, to stop him this 
side of eternity. 

The approaching Linganian 
moved on confidently and quickly. 
When he came closer it was easy 
to see that it was not a simple hand 
over hand procedure. Each time the 
forward hand flexed, pulling him 
on, he would let go and float onward some dozen feet before his 
other hand reached forward for a 
new hold. 

It was a brachiation through 
space. The spaceman was a gleaming metal gibbon. 

ARTEMISIA asked, "What if 
he misses?" 
"He looks too expert to do that," 
said Biron, "but if he does, he'd 
still shine in the sun. We'd pick 
him up again." 

The Linganian was close now. 
He had passed out of the field of 
the visiplate. In another five seconds, there was the clatter of gauntleted feet on the ship's hull. 

Biron yanked the lever that lit 
the signals which outlined the ship's 
airlock. A moment later, in answer 
to an imperative series of raps, the 
outer door was opened. There was 
a thump just beyond a blank section of the pilot room's wall. The 
outer door closed; the section of 
wall slid away; and a man stepped 
through. 

His suit frosted over instantly, 
blanking the thick glass of his hel


146 




 



met and turning him into a mound 
of white. The air grew cold. Biron 
elevated the heaters and the renewing gush that entered was warm 
and dry. For a moment, the frost 
on the suit held its own, then began to thin and dissolve into a dew. 

The Linganian's blunt metal fingers were fumbling at the clasps of 
the helmet as though he were impatient with his snowy blindness. 
It lifted off as a unit, the thick, soft 
insulation inside rumpling his hair 
as it passed. 

Gillbret exclaimed, "Your Excellency!" In glad triumph, he said, 
"Biron, it is the Autarch himself." 

But Biron, in a voice that struggled vainly against stupefaction, 
could only gasp, "Jonti!" 

CHAPTER XIII 

The Autarch Remains 

THE Autarch gently toed the suit 
to one side and appropriated 
the larger of the padded chairs. 

He said, "I haven't had that sort 
of exercise in quite a while. But 
they say it never leaves you once 
you've learned, and, apparently, it 
hasn't in my case. Hello, Farrill. 
My lord Gillbret, good day. And 
this, if I remember, is the Director's daughter, the lady Artemisia." 

He placed a long cigaret carefully between his lips and brought 
it to life with a single intake of 
breath. The scented tobacco filled 
the air with its pleasant odor. "I 



did not expect to see you quite so 
soon, Farrill," he said. 

"Or at all, perhaps?" asked 
Biron, acidly. 

"One never knows," agreed the 
Autarch- "Of course, with a message that read only 'Gillbret;' with 
the knowledge that Gillbret tould 
not pilot a spaceship; with the further knowledge that I had myself 
sent a young man to Rhodia who 
could pilot a spaceship and who 
was quite capable of stealing a Tyrannian cruiser in his desperation 
to escape; and with the final knowledge that one of the men on the 
cruiser was' reported to be young -. 
and of aristocratic bearing; the conclusion was obvious. I am not surprised to see you." 

"I think you are," said Biron. "I 
think you're as surprised as hell to 
see me. As an assassin, you should 
be. Do you think I am worse at deduction than you are?" 

"I think very highly of you." 

The Autarch was completely unperturbed, and Biron felt awkward 
and stupid in his resentment. He 
turned furiously to the others. 
"This man is Sander Jonti; the 
Sander Jonti I've told you of. He 
may be the Autarch of Lingane besides, or fifty Autarchs. It makes 
no difference. To me he is Sander 
Jonti." 

Artemisia said, "He is the man 
who — " 

Gillbret put a thin and shaking 
hand to his brow. "Control yourself, Biron. Are you mad?" 



TYRANN 



147 



"This is the man! I am not 
mad!" shouted Biron. He checked 
himself with an effort. "All right. 
There's no point yelling, I suppose. 
Get off my ship, Jonti. That's said 
quietly enough. Get off my ship." 

"My dear Farrill, for what 
reason?" 

Gillbret made incoherent sounds 
in his throat, but Biron pushed him 
aside roughly and faced the seated 
Autarch. "You made one mistake, 
Jonti. Just one. You couldn't tell 
in advance that when I got out of 
my dormitory room back on Earth, 
I would leave my wristwatch inside. 
You see, my wristwatch strap happened to be a radiation indicator." 

The Autarch blew a smoke ring 
and smiled pleasantly. 

Biron said, "And that strap 
never turned blue, Jonti. There was 
no radiation bomb in my room that 
night. There was only a deliberately planted dud ! If you deny it, you 
are a liar, Jonti, or Autarch, or 
whatever you call yourself. 

"What is more, you planted that 
dud. You knocked me out with 
Hypnite and arranged the rest of 
that night's comedy. It makes quite 
obvious sense, you know. If I had 
been left to myself, I would have 
slept through the night, and would 
never have known that anything 
was out of the way. So who rang 
me on the visiphone until he was 
sure I had awakened — awakened, 
that is, to discover the bomb, which 
had been deliberately placed near 
a radiation counter so that I could 



not miss it? Who blasted my door 
in so that I might leave the room 
before I found out that the bomb 
was only a dud after all? You must 
have enjoyed yourself that night, 
Jonti." 

Biron waited for effect, but the 
Autarch merely nodded in polite 
interest. Biron felt the fury mount. 
It was like punching pillows, whipping water, kicking air. 

HE SAID harshly, "My father 
was to be executed. I would 
have learned of it soon enough. I 
would have gone to Nephelos, or 
not gone. I would have followed 
my own good sense in the matter, 
confronted the Tyranni openly or 
not as I decided. I would have 
known my chances. I would have 
been prepared for eventualities. 

"But you wanted me to go to • 
Rhodia; to see Hinrik. But, ordinarily, you couldn't expect me to 
do what you wanted. I wasn't likely to go to you for advice. Unless, 
that is, you. could stage an appropriate situation. You did! 

"I thought I was being bombed 
and I could think of no reason. 
You could. You seemed to have 
saved my life. You seemed to know 
everything; what I ought to do 
next, for instance. I was off-balance, confused. I followed your advice." 

Biron ran out of breath and 
waited for an answer. There was 
none. He shouted, "You didn't explain that the ship on which I left 



148 




 



Earth was a Rhodian ship and that 
you had seen to it that the captain 
had been informed of my true identity. You didn't explain that you 
intended me to be in the hands of 
the Tyranni the instant I landed on 
Rhodia. Do you deny that?" 

There was a long pause. Jonti 
stubbed out his cigaret. 

Gillbret chafed one hand in the 
other. "Biron, you are being ridicu"lous. The Autarch wouldn't — " 

Then Jonti looked up and said 
quietly, "But the Autarch would. 
I admit it all. You are quite right, 
Biron, and I congratulate you on 
your penetration. The bomb was 
a dud planted by myself and I sent 
you to Rhodia with the intention of 
having you arrested by the Tyranni." 

Biron's face cleared. Some of the 
futility of anger vanished. He said, 
"Some day, Jonti, I will settle that 
matter. At the moment, it seems you 
are Autarch of Lingane with three 
ships waiting for you out there. 
That hampers me a bit more than I 
would like. However, the Remorseless is my ship. I am its pilot. Put 
on your suit and get out. The spaceline ,is still in place." 

"It is not your ship. You are a 
pirate, not a pilot." 

"Possession is all the law here. 
You have five minutes to get into 
your suit." 

"Let's avoid dramatics. We need 
one another and I have no intention 
of leaving." 

"I don't need you. I wouldn't 



need you if the Tyranni home fleet 
were closing in right now and you 
could blast them out of space for 
me." 

"Farrill," said Jonti, "you are 
talking and acting like an adolescent.. I've let you have your say. 
May I have mine?" 

"No. I see no reason to listen." 

"Do you see one now?" 

Artemisia screamed. Biron made 
one movement, then stopped. Red 
with frustration, he remained poised 
and helpless. 

Jonti said, "I do take certain 
precautions. I am sorry to be so 
crude as to use a weapon as a 
threat. But I imagine it will help 
me force you to hear me." 

The weapon he held was a pocket-blaster. It was not designed to 
pain or stun. It was the lethal 
model. 

JONTI said, "For years, I have 
been organizing Lingane 
against the Tyranni. Do you know 
what that means? It has not been 
easy. It has been almost impossible. 
The Inner Kingdoms will offer no 
help; we've known that from long 
experience. There is no salvation 
for the Nebular Kingdoms, except 
from themselves. But to convince 
our native leaders of this is no 
friendly game. Your father was active in the matter and was killed. 
Not a friendly game at all. Remember that. 

"And your father's capture was a 
crisis to us. It was life and horrible 



TYRANN 



149 



death to us. He was in our inner 
circles and the Tyranni were obviously not far behind us. They 
had to be thrown off-stride. To do 
so, I could scarcely temper my dealings with honor and integrity. They 
fry no eggs. 

"I couldn't come to you and say, 
'Farrill, we've got to put the Tyranni on a false scent. You're the 
son of the Rancher and therefore 
suspicious. Get out there and be 
friendly with Hinrik of Rhodia so 
that the Tyranni may look in the 
wrong direction. Lead them away 
from Lingane. It may be dangerous; you may lose your life, but 
the ideals for which your father 
died come first.' 

"Maybe you would have done 
it, but I couldn't afford to experiment. I maneuvered you into doing 
it without your knowledge. It was 
hard; I'll grant you. Still, I had no 
choice. I thought you might not 
survive; I tell you that frankly. But 
you were expendable; and I tell 
you that frankly. As it turned out, 
you did survive, and I am pleased 
with that. 

"And there was one more thing, 
a matter of a document — " 

Biron said, "What document?" 

"You jump quickly. I said your 
father was working for me, so I 
know what he knew. You were to 
obtain that document and you were 
a good choice, at first. You were 
on Earth legitimately. You were 
young and not likely to be suspected. I say, at first! 




"But then, with your father 
arrested, you became dangerous. 
You would be an object of prime 
suspicion to the Tyranni; and we 
could not allow the document to 
fall into your possession, since it 
would then almost inevitably fall 
into theirs. We had to get you off 
Earth before you could complete 
your mission. You see, it all hangs 
together." 

"Then you have it now?" asked 
Biron. 

The Autarch said, "No, I have 



150 




 





not. A document which might have 
been the right one has been missing from Earth for years. If it is 
the right one, I don't know who 
has it. May I put away the blaster 
now? It grows heavy." 

BIRON said, "Put it away." 
The Autarch did so. He 
said, "What has your father told 
you about the document?" 

"Nothing that you don't know, 
since he worked for you." 

The Autarch smiled. "Quite so!" 



But the smile had little of real 
amusement in it. 

"Are you through with your explanation now?" 

"Quite through." 

"Then," said Biron, "get off the 
ship." 

Gillbret said, "Now wait, Biron. 
There's more than private anger to 
be considered here. There's Artemisia and myself, too, you know. 
We have something to say. 'As far 
as I'm concerned, what the Autarch 
says makes sense. I'll remind you 



TYRANN 



151 



that on Rhodia I saved your life, 
so I think my views are to be considered." 

"All right. You.saved my life," 
shouted Biron. He pointed a finger 
towards the airlock. "Go with him, 
then. Go on. You get out of here, 
too. You wanted to find the Autarch. There he is ! I agreed to pilot 
you to him and my responsibility 
is over. Don't try to tell me what 
to do." 

He turned to Artemisia, some of 
his anger still brimming over. "And 
what about you ? You saved my life, 
too. Everyone went around saving 
my life. Do you want to go with 
him, too?" 

She said, quietly, "Don't put 
words into my mouth, Biron. If I 
wanted to go with him, I'd certainly 
say so." 

"Don't feel any obligations. You 
can leave any time." 

She looked hurt and he turned 
away. As usual, some cooler part of 
himself knew that he was acting 
childishly. He had been made to 
look foolish by Jonti and he was 
helpless in the face of the resentment he felt. And besides, why 
should they all take so calmly the 
thesis that it was perfectly right to 
have Biron Farrill thrown to the 
Tyranni, like a bone to the dogs, in 
order to keep them off Jonti's neck ? 
Damn it, what did they think he 
was ? 

He thought of the dud bomb, 
the Rhodian liner, the Tyranni, the 
wild night on Rhodia, and he could 



feel the stinging of self -pit}' inside 
himself. 

The Autarch said, "Well, Farrill?" 

And Gillbret said, "Well, 
Biron ?" 

Biron turned to Artemisia. 
"What do you think?" 

ARTEMISIA said, calmly, "I 
think he has three ships out 
there, and is Autarch of Lingane, 
besides. I don't think you really 
have a choice." 

The Autarch looked at her, and 
he nodded his admiration. "You 
are an intelligent girl, my Lady. It 
is good that such a mind should 
be in such a pleasant exterior." For 
a measurable moment, his eyes lingered. 

Biron said, "What's the deal?" 

"Lend me the use of your names 
and your abilities, and I will take 
you to what my lord Gillbret called 
the 'Rebellion World.' " 

Biron said, sourly, "You think 
there is' one?" 

And Gillbret said, simultaneously, "Then it is yours." 

The Autarch smiled. "I think 
there is a world such as my lord 
described, but it is not minei" 

"It's not yours?" exclaimed Gillbret, stunned. 

"Does that matter; if I can find 
it?" 

"How?" demanded Biron. 

The Autarch said, "It is not as 
difficult as you might think. If we 
accept the story as it has been told 



152 




 



us, we must believe that there exists a world in rebellion against the 
Tyranni. We must believe that it is 
located somewhere in the Nebular 
Sector and that, in twenty years, it 
has remained undiscovered by the 
Tyranni. If such a situation is to 
remain possible, there is only one 
place in the Sector where such a 
planet can exist." 

"And where is that?" 

"You do not find the solution 
obvious? Doesn't it seem inevitable 
that the world could exist only 
within the Nebula itself?" 

"Inside the Nebula!" 

Gillbret said, "Great Galaxy, of 
. course!" 

And at the moment, the solution 
did indeed seem obvious and inescapable. 

Artemisia asked, timidly, "Can 
people live on worlds inside the 
Nebula?" 

"Why not?" said the Autarch. 
"Don't mistake the Nebula. It is a 
dark mist in space, but it is not a 
poison gas. It is an incredibly attenuated mass of sodium, potassium, and calcium atoms that 
absorb and obscure the light of the 
stars within it, and, of course, those 
on the side directly opposite the 
observer. Otherwise, it is # harmless, 
and, in the direct neighborhood of 
a star, virtually undetectable. 

"I apologize if I seem pedantic, 
but I have spent the last several 
months at the University of Earth 
collecting astronomical data on the 
Nebula." 



"Why there?" said Biron. "It is 
a matter of little importance, but I 
met you there and I am curious." 

"There's no mystery to it. I left 
Lingane originally on my own business. The exact nature is of no importance. About six months ago, I 
visited Rhodia. My agent, Widemos — your father, Biron — had been 
unsuccessful in his negotiations 
with the Director, whom we had 
hoped to swing to our side. I tried 
to improve matters and failed, since 
Hinrik, with apologies to the lady, 
is not the type of material for our 
sort of work." 

"TTEAR, hear," said Biron. 

-L-L The Autarch continued, 
"But I did meet Gillbret, as he may 
have told you. So I went to Earth, 
because Earth is the original home 
of humanity. It was from Earth that 
most of the original explorations 
of the Galaxy set out. It is upon 
Earth that most of the records exist. The Horsehead Nebula was explored quite thoroughly; at least, it 
was passed through a number of 
times. It was never settled, since 
the difficulties of traveling through 
a volume of space where stellar observations could not be made were 
too great. The explorations themselves, however, were all I needed. 

"Now listen carefully. The Tyranni ship upon which my lord 
Gillbret was marooned was struck 
by a meteor after its first jump. Assuming that the trip from Tyrann 
to Rhodia was along the usual trade 



TYRANN 



153 



route (and there is no reason to 
suppose anything else) the point 
in space at which the ship left its 
route is established. It would 
scarcely have traveled more than 
half a million miles in ordinary 
space between the first two Jumps. 
We can consider such a length as 
a point in space. 

"It is possible to make another 
assumption. In damaging the control panels, it was quite possible 
that the meteor might have altered 
the direction of the Jumps, since 
that woidd require only an interference with the motion of the 
ship's gyroscope. This would be 
difficult, but not impossible. To 
change the power of the hyperatomic thrusts, however, would require complete smashing of the 
engines, which, of course, were not 
touched by the meteor. 

"With unchanged power of 
thrust, the length of the four remaining Jumps would not be 
changed, nor, for that matter, 
would their relative directions. It 
would be analogous to having a 
long, crooked wire bent at a single 
point in an unknown direction 
through an unknown angle. The 
final position of the ship would lie 
somewhere on the surface of an 
imaginary sphere, the center of 
which would be that point in space 
where the meteor struck, and the 
radius of which would be the vector sum of the remaining Jumps. 

"I plotted such a sphere, and 
that surface intersects a thick ex


tension of the Horsehead Nebula. 
Some six thousand square degrees 
of the sphere's surface, one-fourth 
of the total surface, lie in the Nebula. It remains, therefore, only to 
find a star lying within the Nebula 
and within one million miles or so 
of the imaginary surface we are discussing. You will remember that 
when Gillbret's ship came to rest, 
it was within reach of a star. 

"Now how many stars within the 
Nebula do you suppose we can find 
that close to the sphere's surface? 
Remember there are one hundred 
billion radiating stars in the Galaxy." 

BIRON found himself absorbed 
in the matter against his will. 
"Hundreds, I suppose." 

"Five!" replied the Autarch. 
"Just five. Don't be fooled by the 
one hundred billion figure. The galaxy is about seven trillion cubic 
light years in volume, so that there 
are seventy cubic light years per 
star on the average. It is a pity that 
I do not know which of those five 
have habitable planets; we might 
reduce the number of possibles to 
one. Unfortunately, the early explorers had no time for detailed 
observations. They plotted the positions of the stars, the proper motions, and the spectral types." 

*'So that on one of those five 
stellar systems," said Biron, "is located the 'rebellion world?' " 

"Only that conclusion would fit 
the facts we know." 



154 




 



"Assuming Gil's story can be 
accepted." 

"I make that assumption." 

"My story is true," interrupte4 
Gillbret intensely. "I swear it." 

"I am about to leave," said the 
Autarch, "to investigate each of the 
five worlds. My motives in doing 
so are obvious. As Autarch of Lingane 1 can take an equal part in 
their efforts." 

"And with two Hinriads and a 
Widemos on your side, your bid 
for an equal part, and, presumably, 
a strong and secure position in the 
new, free worlds to come, would 
be so much the better," said Biron. 

"Your cynicism doesn't disturb 
me, Farrill. The answer is obviously yes. If there is to be a successful 
rebellion, it would, again obviously, 
be desirable to have your fist on 
the winning side." 

"Otherwise some successful privateer or rebel captain might be 
rewarded with the Autarchy of Lingane." 

"Or the Ranchy of Widemos." 

"And if the rebellion is not successful?" 

"There will be time to judge 
when we find what we look for." 




IRON said slowly, "I'll go with 
: you." 



"Good ! Then suppose we make 
arrangements for your transfer 
from this ship." 

"Why that?" 

"It would be better for you. This 
ship is a toy." 



"It is a Tyrannian warship. We 
would be wrong in abandoning it." 

"As a Tyrannian warship, it 
would be dangerously conspicuous." 

"Not in the Nebula. I'm sorry, 
Jonti. I'm joining you out of expediency. I can be frank, too. I 
want to find the 'rebellion world.' 
But there's no friendship between 
us. I stay at my own controls." 

"Biron," said Artemisia, gently, 
"the ship it too small for three." 

"As it stands, yes, Arta. But it 
can be fitted with a trailer. Jonti 
knows that as well as I do. We'd 
have all the space we needed, then, 
and still be masters at our own controls. And it would effectively disguise the nature of the ship." 

The Autarch considered. "If 
there is to be neither friendship nor 
trust, Farrill, I must protect myself. You may have your own ship 
and a trailer to boot, outfitted as 
you may wish. But I must have 
some guarantee for your proper behavior. The lady Artemisia, at least, 
must come with me." 

"No!" said Biron. 

The Autarch lifted his eyebrows. 
"No? Let the lady speak." He 
turned toward Artemisia, and his 
nostrils flared slightly. "I dare say 
you would find the situation very 
comfortable, my Lady." 

"You, at least, would not find 
it comfortable, my Lord. Be assured of that," she retorted. "I shall 
remain here." 

"I think you might reconsider 
if— " 



TYRANN 



155 



"I think not," interrupted Biron. 
"The lady Artemisia has made her 
choice." 

"And you back her choice?" 

"Entirely. All three of us will 
remain on the Remorseless. There 
will be no compromise on that." 

"You choose your company 
oddly." 

"Do I?" 

"I think so." The Autarch 
seemed idly absorbed in his fingernails. "You seem so annoyed with 
me because I deceived you and 
placed your life in danger. It is 
strange then, is it not, that you 
should seem on such friendly terms 
with the daughter of a man such as 
Hinrik, who in deception is certainly my master." 

"I know Hinrik. Your opinions 
of him change nothing." 

"You know everything about 
Hinrik?" 

"I know enough." 

"Do you know that he killed 
your father?" The Autarch's finger 
stabbed toward Artemisia. "Do you 
know that the girl you are so deeply concerned to keep under your 
protection is the daughter of your 
father's murderer?" 

CHAPTER XIV 

. The Autarch Leaves 

THE tableau remained unbroken 
for a moment. The Autarch lit 
another cigaret. He was quite relaxed, his face untroubled. Gill


bret had folded into the pilot's seat, 
his face screwed up as though he 
were going to burst into tears. The 
limp straps of the pilot's stressabsorbing outfit dangled about him 
and increased the lugubrious effect. 

Biron, paper-white, fists clenched, 
faced the Autarch. Artemisia, her 
thin nostrils flaring, kept her eyes 
not on the Autarch, but on Biron. 

The radio signaled, the soft clickings crashing with the effect of cymbals in the small pilot room. 

Gillbret jerked upright, then 
whirled on the seat. 

The Autarch said lazily, "I'm 
afraid we've been more talkative 
than I'd anticipated. I told Rizzett 
to come get me if I had not returned in an hour." 

The visual screen was alive now 
with Rizzett's grizzled head. 

Gillbret said to the Autarch, "He 
would like to speak to you." He 
made room. 

The Autarch rose from his chair 
and advanced so that his own head 
was within the zone of visual transmission. 

He said, "I am perfectly safe, 
Rizzett." 

The other's question was heard 
clearly. "Who are the crew members on the cruiser, sir?" 

And Biron stood next to the Autarch, suddenly. "I am Rancher of 
Widemos," he said, proudly. 

Rizzett smiled gladly and broadly. A hand appeared on the screen 
in sharp salute. "Greetings, sir." 

The Autarch interrupted, "I will 



156 




 



be returning soon with a young 
lady. Prepare to maneuver for contact airlocks." iHe broke the visual 
connection between the two ships. 

He turned to Biron. "I assured 
them it was you on board ship. 
There was some objection to my 
coming here alone otherwise. Your 
father was extremely popular with 
my men." 

"Which is why you can use my 
name." 

The Autarch shrugged. 

BIRON said, "It is all you can 
use. Your last statement to 
your officer was inaccurate." 
"In what way?" 

"Artemisia oth Hinriad stays 
with me." 

"After what I have told you?" 

Biron said sharply, "You have 
told me nothing. You have made 
a bare, statement, but I am not likely to take your unsupported word 
for anything. I tell you this without any attempt at tact. I hope you 
understand me." 

"Is your knowledge of Hinrik 
such that my statement seems implausible to you?" 

Biron was staggered. Visibly and 
apparently, the remark had struck 
home. He made no answer. 

Artemisia said, "I say it's not so. 
Do you have proof?" 

"No direct proof, of course. I 
was not present at any conferences 
between your father and the Tyranni. But I can present certain' 
known facts and allow you to make 



your own inferences. First, the 
Rancher of Widemos visited Hinrik six months ago. I've said that 
already. I can add here that he was 
somewhat over-enthusiastic in his 
efforts, or perhaps he overestimated 
Hinrik's discretion. At any rate, he 
talked more than he should have. 
My lord Gillbret can verify that." 

Gillbret nodded miserably. He 
faced Artemisia, who had turned 
to him with moist and angry eyes. 
"I'm sorry, Arta, but it's true. I've 
told you this. It was from Widemos 
that I heard about the Autarch." 

The Autarch said, "And it was 
fortunate for myself that my Lord 
had developed such long mechanical ears with which to sate his lively curiosity concerning the Director's meetings of state. I was 
warned of the danger, quite unwittingly, by Gillbret when he first 
approached me. I left as soon as I 
could, but the damage, of course, 
had been done. 

"Now, to our knowledge, it was 
Widemos's only slip, and Hinrik, 
certainly, has no enviable reputation as a man of any great independence and courage. Your father, 
Farrill, was arrested within half a 
year. If not through Hinrik, 
then how?" 

"In our business, we take our 
chances, Farrill, but he was warned. 
After that, he made no contact, 
however indirect, with any of us, 
and destroyed whatever proof of 
connection with us he had. Some 
among us believed that he should 



TYRANN 



157 



leave the Sector, or, at the very 
least, go into hiding. He refused 
to do either. 

"I think I can understand why. 
To alter his way of life would 
prove the truth of what the Tyranni must have learned, endangered the entire movement. He 
decided to risk his own life only. 
He remained in the open. 

"For nearly half a year, the Tyranni waited for a betraying gesture. They are patient, the Tyranni. 
None came, so that when they 
could wait no longer, they found 
nothing in their het but him." 

"It's a lie!" cried Artemisia. "It's 
all a lie. It's a smug, sanctimonious, lying story with no truth in 
it! If all you said were true, they 
would be watching you, too. You 
would be in danger yourself." 

"My Lady, I do not waste my 
time. I have already tried to do 
what I could toward discrediting 
your father as a source of information. I think I have succeeded somewhat. The Tyranni will wonder if 
they ought to listen further to a 
man whose daughter and cousin 
are obvious traitors. And then 
again, if they are still disposed to 
believe him, why, I am on the point 
of vanishing into the Nebula where 
they will not find me. I should 
think my actions tend to prove my 
story rather than otherwise." 

Biron drew a deep breath and 
said, "Let us consider the interview 
at an end, Jonti. We have agreed 
to the extent that we will accom


pany you and that you will give us 
needed supplies. That is enough. 
Granting that all you have just said 
is true, it is still beside the point. 
The crimes of the Director of Rhodia do not involve his daughter. 
Artemisia oth Hinriad stays here 
with me, provided she agrees." 

"I do," said Artemisia. 

"Good. I think that covers everything. I warn you, by the way. You 
are armed; so am I. Your ships are 
fighters, perhaps; mine is a Tyrannian cruiser." 

"Don't be silly, Farrill. My intentions are quite friendly. You 
wish to keep the girl here? So be 
it. May I leave by contact airlock?" 

Biron nodded. "We will trust 
you that far." 

THE two ships maneuvered 
closer, until the flexible airlock 
extensions pouted outward toward 
one another. Carefully, they edged 
about, seeking the perfect fit. 

The airlock extensions reached 
out, hovered on the brink of instability and then, with a noiseless jar, 
the vibrations of which hummed its 
way into the pilot room, settled 
into place, clamps automatically 
locking in position. An airtight seal 
had been formed. 

Biron drew the back of his hand 
slowly across his forehead and some 
of the tension oozed out of him. 
"There it is," he said. 
The Autarch lifted his spacesuit. 
There was still a thin film of moisture- under it. 



158 




 



"Thanks," he said, pleasantly. 
"An officer of mine will be right 
back. You will arrange the details 
of the supplies necessary with him." 

The Autarch left. 

BIRON said, "Take care of 
Jonti's officer for me for a 
while, will you, Gil? When he 
comes in, break the airlock contact. 
All you'll have to do is remove the 
magnetic field. This is the photonic 
switch you'll flash." 

He turned and stepped out of 
the pilot room. Right now, he 
needed time for himself. Time to 
think, mostly. 

But there was the hurried footstep behind, him, and the soft voice. 
He stopped. 

"Biron," said Artemisia, "I want 
to speak to you." 

He faced her. "Later, if you don't 
mind, Arta." 

She was looking up at him, intently. "No, now." 

Her arms were poised as though 
she would have liked to embrace 
him, but was not sure of her receptions. She said, "You didn't believe 
what he said about my father." 
"It has no bearing," said Biron. 
"Biron," she began. It was hard 
for her to say it. "I know that part 
of what has been going on between 
us has been because we've been 
alone and together and in danger, 
but — " She stopped again. 

Biron said, "If you're trying to 
say you're a Hinriad, Arta, there's 

Concluded 



no need. I know it. I won't hold 
you to anything." 

"No. Oh, no!" She caught his 
arm and placed her cheek against 
his hard shoulder. She was speaking rapidly. "That's not it at all. It 
doesn't matter about Hinriad and 
Widemos at all. I — I love you, 
Biron." 

Her eyes went up, meeting his. 
"I think you love me, too. I think 
you would admit it if you could 
forget I were a Hinriad. Maybe you 
will now that I've said it first. You 
told the Autarch you would not 
hold my father's deeds against me. 
Don't hold his rank against me, 
either." 

Her arms were around his neck 
now. Biron could feel the softness 
of her breasts against him and the 
warmth of her breath on his lips. 
Slowly his own hands went up and 
gently grasped her forearms. As 
gently, he disengaged her arms. 

He said, "I am not quits with 
the Hinriads, my Lady." 

She was startled. "You told the 
Autarch — " 

He looked away. "Sorry, Arta. 
Don't go by what I told the Autarch." 

She wanted to cry out that it 
wasn't true, that her father had not 
done this thing, that in any case — 

But he turned into the cabin and 
left her standing in the corridor, 
her eyes filling with hurt and 
shame. 
