
starflight 

by . . . Sam Merww Jr. 



In mind and heart Fran -was a 
woman grown — but her body was 
that of a child. Who could have 
foreseen the glory of her destiny? 



There were no cracks in the 
ceiling of Fi'ancesca Hawley-Bey's 
spacious dormitory cell. The sturdy 
flexibility of Us reddish Martian 
desert-sand phisl ic structure forbade cracking. But there were the 
familiar shadows cast by slight 
irregularities in its curved expanse, 
and she lay flat on her back on her 
sleeping-oval, abstractedly studying 
them. 

She wondered what had happened to the sense of power, of 
destiny, that had Iain only halfdormant behind her routine conscious thoughts from her early 
r childhood until her matriculation, 
one Mars-year earlier, at Newsorbonne. At home, coupled with the 
love and understanding of her 
parents, brothers and neighbors, in 
the compact little world of the ICA 
(Industrial - Cultural - Agricultural) complex, it had buoyed her 
consistently against the slowness of 
her physical growth. 

"You are Franccsca," it had told 
her. "You arc capable of any accomplishment you may choose to 
set your mind to." 

Under the impact of social failure and loneliness and, more im


There is a liveliness, a sophistication, and a sparkling humor in Sam Mertt itt's 
best science fiction stories which the pocket hook publishers hat e been quick 
to recognize, and he has acquired an enviable renott » in that field. He if by 
no means a newcomer to our pages, but seldom has he written quite such a briU 
liantly perceptive and imaginatively appealing interplanetary novelette as 
this, with its life-size portrait of the most unusual woman you'll ever meet. 



4 



portant, the feeling that she didn't 
count at all with anyone, the sense 
of power had withered and died. 
At the moment Francesca felt that 
she had died with it. 

Although she was thirteen Marsyears old — twenty-thrce-and-a-half 
Earth-years — she still looked like a 
little girl. And that was why — although she was bright enough in 
her studies — her parents had kept 
her at home for so long. 

"They should have drowned me 
in the canal at birth!" she told 
herself bitterly, wondering if she 
were ever going to grow up and 
begin living, like the other girls in 
the dormitory around her, without 
bitterness and without fear. 

Outside, the entire university 
was athrob with excitement on this 
cold bright Martian day. Just an 
hour earlier, the entire faculty and 
student body had turned out en 
masse to greet Dr. Colin Franz, 
generally accepted as the Solar System's greatest living scientific 
genius, on his first visit to Newsorbonne. Here he was to remain, 
for a scries of conferences and 
panel meetings with Martian scientists during a festive fortnight, to 
be climaxed by the bestowal of the 
highest honor the University could 
convey — that of Doctor of Martian 
Metaphysics. 

Everyone had attended the ceremonies — except the infirmary inmates and Francesca Hawley-Bey. 
Increasingly, in creating a cocoon 
of anonymity to shield her social 



STAR-FLIGHT 5 

avoiding public gatherings of all 
kinds. 

Dr. Franz had been one of her 
childhood heroes, of course. But 
she preferred the sanctuary of her 
cell to risking public notice as 
either a freak or a prodigy. For she 
was neither — she was merely a 
young woman wearing a little girl's 
body. 

There was a flicker of light from 
her communicator and she sat up 
to answer it, wondering who could 
want to talk to her in her loneliness and isolation. She hoped it 
wasn't bad news from home — or, 
worse, word that her parents were 
coming to see her. For them to 
have to witness the fullness of her 
failure would have been the most 
unendurable of all possible nightmares. 

But, when she switched on twoway, an impersonal voice said, 
"Hawley-Bey?" And, at her affirmative, "You are requested to report at once to Dean Ybarra's 
office.'* 

Adjusting her clout and bolo, 
and giving her straight tawny hair 
a pat witli the pneumatic comb, 
Francesca battled panic that clutched at her knees, her throat, her 
diaphragm. Never before had she 
been summoned by the dean. It 
could only be, she decided, the 
Bio-Gen term-test final. She had 
taken the examination casually, doing little preparation, and taping 
her answers as fast as she could 
talk. It had not occurred to her, 



failure, Francesca had taken to before or since, that anything could 



6 



FANTASTIC UNIVHRSE 



have gone wrong. But apparently 
her optimism had been unwarranted. 

She wished she had never come 
to the university at all. She wished 
that she had remained on the ICA 
complex, 9,000 kilometers away, 
where she had been born, surrounded by her family and friends 
who loved and understood her. The 
Industrial - Cultural - Agricultural 
complex was a typical self-contained 
Martian agrarian community. Hardworking, homely, human — and 
above all, happy — were the adjectives which tame instantly to hec 
mindvwhen she remembered what 
life had been like on the complex. 

Thanks to the expense of traveling and the fact that her parents 
were chained to their hard-won 
fields by the exacting demands of 
the fanning profession, Francesca 
had seen neither her loved ones nor 
her home for two whole terms at 
Ncwsorbonne — almost a full Martian year. 

Riding the moving strip to the 
Administration Building across, the 
spacious and brilliant university 
campus, she felt overwhelmingly 
homesick. Yet she had no desire 
to be sent home in disgrace before 
her third and final term, since such 
a reprieve from her misery would 
have been a cruel blow to her parents . . . 

Dean Ybarra's desk was a waferthin slab of diamond -hard desert 
wood that jutted out from the 
wedge-shaped room's one solid 
wall, its only ornaments were a 



communicator, a. crystal stylus and 
a sonic telereader. 

At his back, as he regarded her 
from the sitting-oval behind it, was 
a curving picture window, which 
embraced in its bright circumference a nugnificcnt^panoramic view 
of the vermillion and turquoise 
towers of the university, each rising from the flat, ruddy soil like a 
gigantic upended dragonfly with 
furled wings. 

The third wall was a solid hank 
of vidar-screens, all of them blank 
at the moment. 

Dr. Ybarra asked politely: "Miss 
Hawley-Bey?" and, when she nodded, motioned her to a sitting-oval 
on the near side of the desk. His 
dusky, sensitive comeliness was, she 
thought, even more striking in 
ilosetip than when seen on a visiSCreen or from far back in a crowded lecture hall. 

He regarded her intently, his 
brows arching in amazement as if 
he could not quite believe she was 
real. Then he said, "There's something I should very much like to 
discuss with you." * 

Fear was clutching at her all 
over now. But somehow she managed to reply, her voice unsteady, 
"I know. It's that last Bio-Gen 
final. I'm afraid I didn't study for 
it." 

His thick black eyebrows rose a 
centimeter higher. "If you didn't, 
Miss Hawley-Bey, you must have 
discovered a new process of learning. Your tape was so close to 
perfect the department had to look 



STAR- FLIGHT 



7 



for loopholes to downgrade you a 
fraction or two. As yon know, it's 
against university pol icy to give 
perfect grades outside of nontheoretical mathematics." 

Then what had he summoned 
her for, she wondered, her breath 
catching in her throat. 

He hesitated, then said, "Dr. 
Franz wants to talk to you." 

She couldn't believe it. "Dr. 
Franz wants to talk to trie?" Then, 
as her suspicion mounted, she demanded: "What for?'' She had no 
intention of. being put on record 
as any sort of a freak. 

"I'm afraid he'll have to tell you 
that himself," said the dean. 
"Since you are enrolled in my department, it was simply my obligation to summon you. That obligation I have now fulfilled." 

"But how did Dr. Franz ever 
hear of me?" she asked, still incredulous, still suspicious. 

"I'm afraid only Dr. Franz can 
tell you that," was the dean's reply. 

II 

Dr. Franz was gazing out the 
window of the big inner office 
when she was ushered into his presence. He was even taller than 
Franccsca's conception of him — 
taller, more powerful and somehow 
younger, though he was actually far 
from a young man. He said, without turning as she approached him, 
"They were wise to use color as 
they have at this university. The 



total effect is not only one of cohesion. It gives each building an 
individuality of its own." 

As he spoke he swung about to 
look down at her with unexpectedly bright blue eyes, lie said, "Tell 
me, what do you know about John 
Franklin?" 

So unanticipated was the question that, for a long moment, Francesca had almost literally to chase 
her suddenly fugitive thoughts 
about the room. Finally regrouping 
them into a semblance of mental 
order, she said: 

"Not very much, sir— except 
that he is supposed to be a remote 
ancestor of mine on both sides of 
my family. I believe he was a famous organic scientist of the preEinsteinian era." 

"You mean you know he was," 
Dr. Franz said. And from the 
warmth and friendliness of his 
smile, she derived a distinct impression that this very great man 
— perhaps the greatest of the entire 
Solar System — was not talking down 
to her. She felt her fear and diilidence dissolve. 

"All right," she said, "I know 
he was. But just what has John 
Franklin to do with me?" 

He studied her in silence for a 
full minute, his hands behind his 
back. "I suppose you detest the 
fact you're taking an uncommonly 
long time growing up physically," 
he said at last. 

She should have been furious-— 
yet, curiously enough, she wasn't 
at all. Despite his blunUicss, Dr. 



8 



FANTASTIC UNIVERSE 



Franz" manner was neither insulting nor intrusive. 

She blurted out, with a vehemence which startled her, "It's 
horrible." 

A smile touched Dr. Franz's 
strong, mobile mouth. He said, 
"Has it ever occurred to you that 
you should be grateful? Have you 
considered the possibility that what 
seems to you arrested development 
may be perfectly normal for a person destined to live far longer than 
the hundred years of the average 
human life span on Mars?" 

She had to sit down, so utterly 
unexpected was the idea. For an 
instant it took her breath away. 
Then, perversely, she heard herself 
saying, "But what has toy arrested 
development to do with John 
Franklin?" 

"Possibly everything," Dr. Franz 
said. "You see, John Franklin was 
not merely a great scientist for his 
time. He was also one of the longest-lived. Officially, he died at the 
age of a hundred fifty-three — and 
there are some misguided individuals who claim he is not. dead yet." 

"You mean" — again she struggled to keep her voice from 
faltering — "that I'm a sort of Mendellian throwback to John Franklin?" 

"It's a definite possibility," he 
told her. 

"And you came all the way to 
Ma rs — to Newsorbonne — j ust to 
look me up?" she asked. 

He smiled again at her disbelief. 
"Let's say I wanted to see Mars," 



he told her, "and there was the 
little matter of this degree they're 
awarding me. However, essentially, 
I came to see you." 

"But how did you know of me?" 
she asked. 

He dropped into a sitting-oval 
opposite her, and lit a cigarette 
with muscular brown fingers. He 
said, "My associates and I have 
been tracing the descendants of 
John Franklin throughout the 
Solar System for years. Why shouldn't we know of you, a double descendant?" 

"There's no reason, I suppose," 
she said. "But why?" 

"Before I answer that, Francesca," he replied, using her name 
for the first time, "I must ask you 
to pledge yourself to absolute 
secrecy." 

She said, with a flash of bitterness, "Even if I wanted to talk, 
who would listen to me?" 

"Bad as that, eh?" he said regarding her with sympathy. 

She thought, / like ibis man, 
even if be is famous! 

"What is the most important 
scientific project now under way in 
the Solar System?" he asked abruptly as if pleased by the candor in 
her eyes. 

She thought a moment, then replied promptly, "The development 
of Titan and the "major Saturnian 
moons for colonization." ' 

He shook his head. "A mere stop 
gap," he said. "Expensive, dangerous, and profitless. Even if the 
Saturnian moons are opened up, 



STAR-FLIGHT 



they are certain to suffer, in the 
course of two or three generations, 
as greatly from depletion and overpopulation as Mars, or Earth itself. 
No, France-sea, some of us have 
been looking a lot further - . ." He 
paused. 

"You mean — star-drive?" she 
asked, wonderingly. "But I 
til ought — " 

"You thought it was far beyond 
our reach," he told her. "Well, 
until very recently, it has been. The 
speeds demanded to make it practical have presented almost insurmountable problems. But believe 
me, we're getting close." 

Emotions profoundly stirring 
took hold of Francesca at the 
thought of humanity, so long bound 
to one planet and so recently 
spreading to its neighbors, sweeping the vast and glittering expanses 
of the galaxy. She said, "Why has 
it been kept a secret for so long?" 

Dr. Franz rose again and paced 
the floor. He said, "We had to 
keep it a secret. The increased imminence of crowding populations 
have caused planetary isolationism 
to rear its ugly head again— chiefly 
on Earth. Certain powerful groups 
have become so haunted by the 
spectre of Malthusian starvation 
that they can conceive of star-travel 
only as a means of enrichment 
through exploitation. They are 
seeking to make a planetary 
monopoly of it." 

lie stood in front of her, looking 
duwn at hex. "The narrow path 
they have chosen," he went on, "is 



the path of planetary destruction. 
In the long run it can only invite 
war and utter disaster. Yet startravel can lead to the ultimate' liberation of man. It will give him 
not only a world, but a universe 
in which to achieve maturity. It 
will enrich him immeasurably, on 
a scale undreamt of by the ancient 
Spaniards who brought wealth to 
the Old World from the Americas. 
Contact with hundreds — perhaps 
thousands — of habitable alien 
worlds will enlarge his horizons of 
though! and tolerance beyond all 
previous comprehension." 

He regarded her gently, with a 
sardonic half-smile. "The element 
of irony in this effort to make a 
monopoly out of what should belong to mankind as a whole is that 
its promoters, while they may succeed in solving the scientific problems confronting them, have not 
yet faced honestly what may prove 
the most difficult problem of all 
— the ability of any man or woman 
now living to make the journey. 
Do you understand, young lady?" 

"Oh . . ." she said. She thought 
about it for a moment. "You mean 
the time element?" 

"Exactly," Dr. Franz replied. 
"Even at light-speed — which has 
not yet been retained under laboratory conditions — it's a four-year 
journey to Proxima Cenrauri. And 
Proxima Centauri is only the nearest of the stars. Should we someday surpass the speed of light — 
which is not now improbable — it 
will take years, perhaps decades. 



IO FANTASTIC UNIVERSE 



to reach even relatively neighboring stars whose systems must be 
explored — if star-travel is to realize its potentialities." 

The implication sank home. 
"Then you think that I" — her voice 
sounded very small and far away — ■ 
"may be capable of living long 
enough." 

He looked at her wilh vast understanding and sympathy. "That," 
he told her, "is one of the things 
I came to Mars to find out. Untested, you are still our most promising discovery to dale. You combine what appears, from your 
record, to be a most unusual 
longevity potential with a quick, 
intuitive mind." 

"But I'm such a drip!" she protested out of the depths of her 
soul. "I'm afraid of people." 

He rose and helped her out of 
the sitting-oval and placed his huge, 
gentle hands on her shoulders. He 
said, " "Franceses, remember — you 
haven't grown up yet. And that, in 
a way, makes my own responsibility 
the greater." 

"I'm mature in years," she replied quickly, afraid of disappointing this great man who had come 
■ so unexpectedly into her life. 

"I know you are," he told her, 
letting his hands laU away from 
her shoulders. "But that's not the 
branch of the problem I'm considering. Remember, what I have just 
told you about star-travel and con* 
ditions on Earth must remain secret. Even on my own planet, only 
a very few people know the truth. 



If it were even suspected that I 
told anyone on Mars . . ." He 
paused, shrugged his shoulders and 
added, "It could mean my freedom, even my life. Already I am 
under suspicion for refusing to cooperate in their monopolistic 
schemes. 

"But for the moment I am considering you, not myself," he went 
on. "Suppose the tests I hope to 
give you prove that your life-span 
is greater than normal. The confirmation cannot be kept a secret — 
not with man's age-old yearning for 
immortality. Consider what it 
would mean to you. From that moment on, you would be living in a 
glass cage, watched, studied, spied 
upon, an object of hope and feat 
and envy for fifty billion people 
on Earth, Venus and Mars. You 

will be abandoning all right to 
call your life your own. You 'will 
become a project." He walked to 
the window and back, his face somber. "Arc you willing to become 
a project?" 

She understood — or thought she 
understood — what Dr. Fran - / meant. 
Much of it was certain to be hateful, unbearable— if she passed the 
tests successfully. Yet there would 
be compensations. She would no 
longer need to be ashamed of her 
slow development. Rather, it 
would be a source of immense 
pride. 

And, balanced against her sense 
of usclessncss, would be the feeling of importance, not only to herself but to all of humanity. And, 



STAR-FLIGHT 



I I 



in the background, would be always die sustaining thought that 
not mere longevity but the road lo 
the stars was her real aim. 

She said quietly, "I am willing, 
Dr. Franz." 

Ill 

THE two weeks that followed 
passed with a swiftness undreamed 
of to Franceses. Never, since she 
had contracted poiar-pox as an infant on the complex, had she been 
so fussed over, so attended, so 
special. Sometimes with Dr. Franz, 
sometime 1 ; with Dean Ybarra, and 
occasionally with lesser scientists 
she was given rigorous daily tests. 

First her cell structure was 
studied, her metabolism, her muscular and neural tune and development. Then her glands came under 
scrutiny, her brain, her reproductive processes. She was given exhaustive and exhausting physical 
tests, for both reaction- timing and 
endurance. 

Dr. Franz himself put her at least 
s dozen times under hypnosis for 
thorough psychiatric examination. 
Even when she slept she wa.< a 
guinea pig. with injections silently 
at work within her and various 
meters strapped to her limbs. 

Then, as suddenly as it began, 
it was all over and Dean Ybarra, 
his dark eyes alert with interest, 
was telling her: 

"We want you to go home for a 
rest — until we've had time to evaluate the results of these tests. Since 



you've become in a way a university project, I've arranged an indefinite leave of absence and Newsorbonnc is paying your expenses. 
You'll receive notification as soon 
as the results have been correlated. 
You've earned a vacation — so enjoy 
it. I only wish J could share it 
willi you." 

It was, she thought as she packed 
at the dorm, an odd thing for the 
dean to have said to her. Why 
should he want to share a vacation 
with her? He had been friendly, 
true, and he was charming — perhaps too charming, since rumor had 
ft that he was target number-one 
for at! of the unattached university 
females. But why had he singled 
her out? Until two weeks earlier, 
he had not even known she was 

She decided Dean Ybarra was 
merely being polite and continued 
resolutely with her packing. Curiously enough, now that her life at 
the university had assumed a purpose it had conspicuously lacked 
before, she actually hated to leave. 
She even felt resentful about it. 

Yet, when she alighted from the 
transplanet-ship at Rimballa Station, after the long six-hour, 9,000kilometer flight from Ncwsorbonnc, 
and saw the familiar, rather battered air-car awaiting her with hoc 
father's grizzled, kindly figure beside it, she was unable to restrain 
her emotion. An all-engulftiu; wave 
of security swept over her as they 
embraced. 

He said, gently, "Mother's wait


12 



FANTASTIC UNIVERSE 



ing in the car. She was afraid she'd 
make an idiot of herself out here." 

And Francesca wondered how 
much they knew. But it was not 
until they were safely in the air, 
for the short 200-kilometer run 
to the complex, that she s.iiil , 
"What have they told you about 
me?" 

"Oh, just that Dr. Franz has tested you," replied her father. "We 
simply can't realize that it may be 
you. But we should have realized 
— your slow growth and everything." 

"We'd hoped, of course," her 
mother put in. "But it just didn't 
seem possible. You see, darling, we 
know. And now that it's happened, 
we both wish it had been someone 
else's child. You won't be our baby 
any more — you'll belong to everybody." 

"Hold the ovibos," said Franceses. "Just how long has this conspiracy been going on?" 

Her parents looked at one anoLher and her mother looked away, 
sobbing quietly. It was her father 
who said, "It began a long, long 
time ago — before our families 
came to Mars. We were marked for 
marriage almost before we were 
born. The known descendants of 
John Franklin . . ." 

Francesca felt as if one of the 
angora goats on the ICA complex 
had butted her in the solar plexus. 
She looked at her parents and read 
in their eyes that it was true. 

"Then you and daddy," she said 
io her mother, "planned it all 



along. You had it planned for you. 
But I don't . . ." 

Recalling the casual good nature 
of her parents with each other, 
their obvious mutual affection, all 
the little kindnesses and tolerances 
that had gone into their life together, she couldn't believe it. Her 
father, apparently reading her 
thoughts, placed an arm about her 
shoulder, and drew her close wiiliin its circle. 

He said, "Little Mouse, it's not 
as bad as all that. Your mother 
and I would have fallen in love 
under any circumstances. As a matter of fact, 1 believe it helped us 
fall in love. It gave us something 
special to live for." He straightened proudly. "We gave ourselves 
gladly to (he cause of learning — or 
helping others learn — a little more 
about increasing the life-span. Of 
course there was no question * of 
star-travel then." 

"My poor little girl!" said Francesca's mother, her weathered face 
crinkling. "What's going to happen to you ?" 

Francesca pulled herself free of 
her father's clasp. She managed to 
smile. She said, "Cheer up, people, 
the final results aren't in yet. I may 
not outlive Methusaleh. I very much 
fear I may not be able to outlive 
anybody." 

She was outwardly cheerful, but 
in her secret thoughts were grave 
doubts, reawakened suspicions. If 
the experiments in human biology 
of which she was the result had 
been going on for centuries — 



STAR-FLIGHT 



13 



which she accepted without question — why all the secrecy? Surely 
they could not have been conducted 
merely to increase the human lifespan which already had been expanded past the century-mark. 

Now that she was out of the intense, definitive atmosphere of the 
Bio-Gen department of Newsorbonne, there were a number of 
things she could no longer take for 
granted. Her parents had submitted 
cheerfully to an arranged marriage 
with the idea in mind that they 
were — or might be— helping humanity conquer longevity. But she 
alone had been trapped by [he lure 
of being a pioneer star-flier. 

She wondered how close Solar 
Science was to actual star-flight — 
even if it were close at all. Yet she 
had given her vow of secrecy to 
Dr. Franz as to the actual nature 
of the tests she had undergone. 

What price secrecy? 

She observed with delight the recently erected plastic houses enlarging the ICA complex, and 
stared in wonder at the newly reclaimed desert land and the increased amount of water in the 
once-dead canal. She was happy to 
be home, to be freed from the tensions and lonelinesses of the university. 

Yet doubt and suspicion still 
gnawed at her. 

Her brother, Flicker, offered a 
diversion. He was waiting at the 
airfield, taller, stockier, and far 
more grown up than he had been 
on the day of her departure for 



the university. He waved a greeting and then, the instant they were 
within earshot, called out: "Welcome home, Sis ! I never thought 
they'd be making all this fuss over 
a girl, and my sister ;i! that!" 

She ruffled his tow head and said, 
"Hello, darling. I've brought you 
a new Mars-ball mallet— one of 
the new ones with a spun-sand 

head." 

"You did?" said Flicker. "That's 
wonderful. Where is it?" 

"You wait till she gets unpacked," warned her father. "And 
watch your language, too." 

Her mother helped her put her 
things away. "I worried so much 
about your going to the university, 
dear, - ' she said. "1 was afraid you'd 
have a hard time fitting in— because you still look so very young. 
But now I know your father was 
right. We're both very proud of 
you. You seem so — so grown up." 

Francesca was so surprised at 
this comment that she almost dropped the bolo-and-clout she was putting in the clothes-keeper. She 
said, "Do I really, mother?" 

And her mother, close to tears 
again, nodded with lips tightly compressed.. Finally she said, "It's in 
the way you carry yourself. Your 
poise — your assurance. I've missed 
you terribly, my dearest, but I guess 
it's been worth it." 

Francesca became thoughtful. 
The metamorphosis, if it actually 
was one, had come in the past two 
weeks. But she did feel a flood of 
new confidence, along with a nos


K 4 



FANTASTIC UNIVERSE 



talgic sadness for a rather nice little 
girl gone forever. 

IV 

That evening, tall Victor Faur£Olssen rame over from the- other 
side of the complex: in his red airhopper to call on her and, ultimately, to ask her to go to the midseason hop with him three nights 
hence. Just one Mars-year ago, 
Francesca would have been thrilled. 
But now, neither Victor nor the 
invitation excited her. He seemed 
uncommonly slow of wit and 
tongue and, while the dance promised to be fun in its way, it hardly 
loomed as an event. 

Nevertheless, she told him she'd 
love to go and permitted him to 
kiss her good-night. My first kiss, 
she thought, and I might as wellbe playing Mars-ball for all the 
thrill it gives me. She hoped something would happen to her some 
day that would live up to its advance billing. 

Notification of the results of her 
tests reached her two days after her 
arrival home. Stunningly, she 
learned that she had shown subnormal hard-radiation resistance, 
and was therefore no longer to consider herself a likely candidate for 
longevity. Strangely, once she had 
digested this news, she realized 
that it came as no surprise. Subconsciously, she had been ready for it. 
What did surprise her was that 
Dean Ybarra brought it in person. 

"I wanted to break it to you 



mysel f , " he tol d her, looking 
strangely cosmopolitan in the simple rurality of the Hawlcy-Bey living-kitchen. "After all, I feel 
partly responsible. It must be an 
awful letdown." 

Francesca thought that over for 
a lull minute before replying, "It 
is a letdown, of course," she said, 
at last. "I won't try to deny that 
I liked the attention I got after two 
terms of neglect. But in a way, it's 
a relief, too. After all, being a 
new Methuselah isn't exactly a bed 
of polar lichens to look forward 
to." 

She wondered at her ability to 
lie— for she was lying with a purpose and subtlety hitherto unknown 
to her. Whatever Dr. Franz had 
done to her under hypnotics, he 
had done well and thoroughly. 
That he had done something was 
evident in her reaction to news of 
her "failure." She supposed she 
ought to be worried about that — ■ 
but somehow she wasn't. 

"But it was sweet of you to 
come all the way out here to tell 
me," she said. 

"It was the least I could do." 
He stared down for an instant at 
his scuffed san-pacs. Then he raised 
his eyes and regarded her steadily. 
"You must know by now that I'm 
fascinated by you, Francesca." 

"Syrtis!" said Francesca, honestly 
surprised. She remembered again 
that Dean Ybarra was one of the 
major catches of the universi ty. Not 
only was he reputed to have all 
sorts of lovely co-eds dancing about 



aim, but— if rumor were true— faculty wives as well. 

He smiled ruefully, with a little 
boy's candor, and said, "There's 
something about that amazing 
adult mind of yours locked in a 
lovely child's body that is like nothing I have ever known — or even 
imagined." 

"Watch yourself, Dr. Ybarra," 
she told him lightly. "They'll be 
giving you a workout in the psycholabs unless you're careful. Are you 
sure you don't want to be a mortice 
to me?" 

She could have bitten her 
tongue out. Dean Ybarra was far 
and away the most attractive young 
man she had ever known, however 
briefly. She liked the distinguished 
contours of his handsome face, the 
easy style with which he wore his 
clothes, and the large luminous eyes 
that met hers so admiringly. She 
wondered what it w-ould be like to 
be kissed by him. 

An alarm bell rang within her. 
This, she reminded herself, was no 
time to be falling in love. Besides, 
she didn't even know Dean 
Ybarra's first name. It proved to 
be Li-sun— and it took little urging from her parents to persuade 
him to stay overnight. 

That evening, in the long, paleyellow twilight, she showed him 
around the complex on Flicker's 
air-scooter. Proudly, she displayed 
the warehouses full of dehydrated 
foods, the musk oxen, the angora 
sheep, the tame boars, the longfcathcrcd poultry, and the irrigated 



STAR-FLIGHT ig 

pastures in the atoiniailly-heated 
and watered soil. 

When they got back, and were 
approaching the house with its 
cheerful lights, he took her into 
his arms as if she were a doll and 
looked down at her and whispered 
softly, under the brilliant Martian 
starlight, "I hope what I'm going 
to do isn't going to make you hate 
me." 

And, while she was singing with 
excitement and anticipation like a 
high-tension cable, she heard herself laugh softly and say, "It won't 
— it couldn't." 

His kiss set her whole body 
aflame. She knew, rapturously, that 
the last trace of the little girl I hat 
had plagued her for so long had 
vanished forever. For no little girl 
could have felt as she did in his 
arms. 

Not until much later, when she 
was alone in her own cell on her 
own rest-oval, did the warning 
voice within her make itself heard 
again with an admonition — not a 
demand — that she should hold her 
emotions in tight rein. 

Into the darkness, Francesca 
whispered, "Now you tell me. I'm 
respectfully and hopefully afraid 
you're just a little too late." 

The following morning, after 
breakfast, Li-sun Ybarra said, "I'd 
like to take a look at the 1 atomic 
installations, Fran. Remember — 
this is my first visit to a complex. 
While I know all about the soil 
transmuters in theory, I have never 
seen one of them in actual use." 



1 6 FANTASTIC 

' Franccsca regarded him doubtfully. She said, "I don't know 
whether we should. No one's Supposed to go inside unless he's a 
member of the Atomic Commission." 

"But I'm an honorary member," 
said the dean, pulling out his pastaidentifier and showing her a 
punched metal tape. "Besides, I'm 
safe enough. I've been working 
around atomic labs most of my 
adult life." 

"Okay, then," she said, a trifle 
doubtfully, "I guess it will be all 
right. But please be careful." 

When they reached the squat little group of thick concrete buildings housing the atomic power 
plant which kept the complex alive, 
Li-sun dropped his AC card in the 
robot-watcher and waited for the 
heavy, lead-lined steel door to 
swing open. Then he led the way 
inside. 

After making a thorough inspection of the installations, he said to 
I'rancesca, "You wait here in the 
main hall, honey. I'd like to take 
a look at the power-chamber itself." 

"Be careful, darling," she said 
.in routine warning. She waited, 
idly, for htm to reappear. 

Then, suddenly, she heard him 
cry, "Fran, I'm afraid I pushed the 
wrong lever. The red lights are 
on!" 

Thanks to the emotional excitement under which she was laboring, Francesca reacted without 
thought. All that surged through 



UNIVERSE 

her was the knowledge that, somehow, Li-sun Ybarra had trapped 
himself in the power-plant itself 
and accidentally released the insulating shield. Nor was he wearing the 
shielding garments which were customarily donned as an additional 
safeguard hy visitors planning to 
enter the chamber. 

To rescue him before he received 
serious, perhaps fatal, radiation 
burns it was necessary for her to 
pass through the opposite end of 
the hot-room and rc-arm the shield 
from the emergency lever which 
had been installed there for just 
such occasions. She had less than 
five seconds to accomplish this, 
Earth- time. 

She didn't stop to debate the 
wisdom of donning a shielding garment herself. For one tiling, there 
wasn't lime— not if (lie red lights 
had flashed. For another, she knew 
it wouldn't be necessary. She ran 
quickly around the bulk of the leadand-graphite block, reached the 
corridor and pulled the emergency 
lever before she could count to 
four. 

Then she leaned against the no 
longer dangerous wall of the chamber in a state of near -collapse. 
Somehow, she managed to call out 
to Li-sun and ask if he was all 
right. He replied, in an odd tone 
of voice, "Thanks, darling. I think 
I am." 

A second later he appeared and 
put his arm around her and helped 
her out into the pale sunlight. 
From intuition, perhaps from the 



expression on his face, she knew 
what was coming. 

"We'd better rush you to an infirmary," he said. "You didn't 
wear a shielding garment." 

"There wasn't time, Li-sun," she 
said, simply. "There wasn't time. 
Arc you sure you're all right?" 

He stared straight ahead, and 
for a moment she thought she had 
deceived him. But doubt grew 
within her once more, when he 
said, "I'm not worried about myself. It's you I'm concerned 
about." 

From some unsuspected inner 
source she drew the courage to 
meet his dark gaze. "There's no 
reason to be, is there?" she asked. 
"You never really turned off the 
shield!" 

He opened his mouth to lie, but 
was unable to face her steady regard. Finally he just shook his head. 
They sat there on the told ground 
— miserable, silent. It was possible, 
she supposed that he was feeling as 
betrayed as she was. 

Finally he said, "I didn't know 
until just the Other day that Dr. 
Franz has been suspect with the 
Solar System Institute for some 
time. A number of them seem to 
believe that he has been dragging 
his feet on star-drive." 

"How can they feel that?" she 
asked indignantly, "when he has 
given so much of his time and 
energy to the project? Without his 
genius to guide them, what could 
they have accomplished?" 

"They feel he opened the door 



a little, then slammed it in their 
faces," said the dean somberly. 

"But why should he do that?" 
asked Franceses. 

"Perhaps because he doesn't 
want to share the credit for what 
he feds is his own discovery," said 
Dr. Ybarra. "Or perhaps he doesn't think people are ready for it. 
Who knows? I didn't believe it 
myself until now." 

"Then why did you come here 
to see me?" she asked him angrily. 
"Why didn't you merely send me 
my notification of failure?" 

"Because, having been in on your 
tests from the very first, I didn't 
believe vou had failed," was the 
reply. "Also — though you won't believe mis — because I couldn't get 
out of my head and heart my admiration for you as a woman." 

"Why did you have to deceive 
me?" she asked him. "Why didn't 
you come right out and ask me?" 

"How could I?" he countered. 
"If I openly doubted the results 
of the tests without actual proof 
I — well, it was out of the question. 
Can't you see that?" 

"I see a great many things," the 
girl told him bitterly. "Tell me, 
did you unshield the plant?" 

He shook his head. "I could 
hardly have asked you to take such 
a risk just to satisfy my curiosity." 

She got up, brushing off the rear 
of her clout. She said, carefully, 
evenly, "I suppose you take it for 
granted I risked radiation bums to 
save you because Dr. Franz' tests 
lied about my being too susceptible 



FANTASTIC U N1VERSK 



to hard radiation. What made you 
think that?" 

"Dr. Franz made an Earthman's 
mistake," said Ybarra. "He forgot 
that the thin Martian atmosphere 
makes all of us natives show a 
higher resistance ratio to radiation. 
He made your figure too low, even 
for a subnormal Martian." 

"I see." Franccsca looked 
thoughtfully at nothing. "Well, 
now that you know, what are you 
planning to do about it? Will you 
talk to your precious Solar Institute 
heads and get yourself a 'more remunerative job?" At that moment, 
she detested him more than anyone she had ever known in her 
entire life. 

"I don't know," he said, miserably. "And if I did, I wonder if it 
would be safe to tell you." 

"Keep right on wondering," she 
said. "And I'd like it very much 
if you caught the next ship back to 
Newsorbonne." 

V 

She walked back toward the 
house, leaving him standing there 
alone. And though her recently regained self-assurance had been dealt 
a cruel blow, her thoughts were not 
on herself. 

She knew, of course, that Dr. 
Franz would have to be informed 
at once. Dr. Ybarra's discovery 
that her reported failure on the 
star-flight tests was actually a huge 
success could very well affect the 
entire plan. 



Ybarra came striding after her, 
and what she had thought was 
sturdy masculine assurance now 
seemed like overgrown-puppy awkwardness. "What do you think I 
should do, Franccsca?" he said. 

And Francesca said, without 
looking around at him, "Why don't 
you jump in a canal? It would completely solve your problem." 

It was a stupid, cruelly childish 
remark — -and she was overcoi n e 
with remorse the moment she bud 
uttered it. But she was new to being a woman, and she had been 
bitterly disillusioned. She refused 
to look up when Ybarra seized het 
by the shoulders, and spun her 
around. 

"What makes you so sure I'm 
not on your side?" he said. "Why 
are you so certain I'll go running 
to the authorities?" 

"Put yourself in my place for a 
moment," she said, still rel using 
to look at him. "Why should I 
believe anything you say? Now, if 
you please . . . !" 

She turned her back on him, and 
walked on toward the house alone. 
Li-sun Ybarra, looking grimly perplexed, fallowed her at a respectful 
distance. Since there was no ship 
leaving the airport for several 
hours, there was little either of 
them could do about the crisis that 
had estranged them. 

They were polite when they had 
to talk— but nothing more: Furiously, Francesca was wondering how 
to get a message off to Dr. Fran2 
without running the risk of having 



STAR- FLIGHT 



19 



it ihtercep ted . She thought of 
Flicker, but he was visiting another complex with the local Marsball team. And she knew it would 
take too long to track down Victor 
Faute-Olssen and get his help. 

After one frigid interchange 
with Li-sun, during the mid meal 
interlude, she caught her parents 
exchanging a meaningful glance 
tliiit said, as if the wordy had been 
spelled out in two-meter letters — 
"lover's quarrel." She felt like 
wringing a few necks—or just one 
to be more precise. 

"A magnificent fowl," said Lisun, smiling at Francesca's mother 
as he dropped an empty food-holder in the disposal unit. 

"With a warm smile, his hostess 
said, "Don't flatter me. It's the 
cooking unit. Actually, there's almost nothing to da." 

"But the stuffing," he persisted. 
"Surely, that is your own special 
artistry!" 

Francesca's mother dimpled 
modestly and Franceses felt almost 
physically ill. Buttering up her parents like that! She wondered what 
Li-san hoped to gain by it, Abruptly, without excusing herself, she 
left the table for the living section 
of l be room, and turned on the 

vidaraews, 

".' . . The Solar System's most 
renowned scientific genius has disappeared from his quarters at 
Newsorhonne University, where be 
has been an honored visitor for 
several weeks. Up to vidar-time, 
there has been no suggestion of 



foul play, according to university 
and planetary police, who have been 
called in tn help solve Hie iwys+ery 
of Dr. Franz' disappearance. There 
is, however, a persistent rumor 
that recent investigations conducted by Dr. Franz on Earth, Venus 
and Mars have been sharply criticized by the Solar Institute, where 
Dr. Franz is currently employed, 
and that an investigation was about 
to be launched . . ." 

As she listened, Franceses, 
though outwardly stunned, felt a 
growing inner awareness that she 
was -being secretly prepared for this 
sudden disaster — if it was a disaster. From her subconscious 
"fame reassuring messages — messages which spoke of a time and a 
place for rendezvous. 

She turned an accusing look of 
inquiry on Li-sun, who had risen 
to join her before the vidar-screen. 
But he merely shook his head and 
said in a near-whisper, '"Someone 
else must have discovered the flaw 
I saw in your report. " 

She looked up at him, appalled. 
If that were so, the university or 
Solar Institute authorities would 
probably be on their way to question her. And if they used hypnoticsShe was going to have to get 
away herself — and quickly. She 
turned to her mother, who was regarding her sympathetically. "I'm 
going to lie down for a bit," she 
said. "This is terribly upsetting." 

She wished diere was some way 
she could manage to say good-bye 



10 



FANTASTIC UNIVERSE 



to them decently. But it was out 
of the question. If the hue and 
cry was really up, it would be unfair to drag them in on it any 
further. Oddly, she had a feeling 
that Li-sun would be able to explain it Lo them. And she hated 
herself for trusting him in anything. 

With a last look around her at 
the familiar things that had been 
part of her life before she'd gone 
to the university — the electronic 
doll, the picture reading tapes in 
their neat little blue wall-case, the 
school desert-laurel wreaths in 
their atmosphere-proof dtsplayer — 
Francesca slipped out through the 
window-wall gate. 

Qukkly, quietly, unobtrusively, 
she made her way around the rear 
of the house to the overhung port 
where Fickes's air-scooter stood. 

Li-sun Ybarra was waiting for 
her there, smoking a cigarette. 
"Don't be afraid, Francesca," he 
said. "I'm not here to stop you. 
I'm going with you wherever you 
g°-" 

She regarded him with scorn. 
"So you can turn in a full report 
to those who sent you?" she asked 
caustically. He shook his head 
and told her, "Nobody sent me 
here — unless Dr. Franz did it 
through post-hypnotic suggestion — 
he had me under twice." He paused 
thoughtfully, and added, "There's 
no sense trying to stop me, Fran. 
Tm riding with you wherever you 
go. I don't know what Colin Fcanz 
has done, or what he is planning 



to do. But I intend to make sure 
you aren't hurt." 

She stood there, looking at him, 
frowning, trying to make up her 
mind. He stepped close to her, 
gripped her elbows, and said softly, "Try to get one thing through 
your lovely little head, Fran. 
Somewhere along the line, I've 
fallen in love with you. I couldn't 
do anything against you if I wanted to." 

She was touched by his obvious 
sincerity. But at the moment- and 
ever since the vidarnews dispatch 
— love seemed a remote, an unimportant factor. She said, because she 
was a woman after all, "Why me? 
Why a biological freak and an 
inexperienced girl instead of one 
of the Newsorbonne beauties who 
SO openly pursue you?" 

He just looked at her and then 
replied, "I think you know the answer to that. Now— what do you 
want me to do?" 

"I'd like you to stay here," she 
said. Then she stopped and 
frowned again. "But that wouldn't 
do, would it? Not if the authorities 
Came here and found you. You'd 
tell them too much, even if you 
tried to keep sHent." 

"I've thought of that, Fran," he 
said. "What do you want me to 
do?" 

She climbed aboard the airscooter and got the tiny A-motoi 
going. "Come along then," ahe 
said. "But stay out of sight when 
we get to Victor's. It might coinplicate things." 



STAR-FLIGHT 



VI 

When Fran asked Victor FaurcOlsscn to loan her his red air-hopper he was more than happy to 
let her have it. "Just bring it back 
in time for the dance tomorrow 
night," he told her, looking into 
her eyes adoringly 

"You'll get it back in time," she 
promised. 

At the moment she did not know 
in time for what- — nor how it would 
be returned. But it would be. Somehow she'd see to that -even [hough 
her Martian honesty seemed a trifle 
ridiculous at the moment. 

She got it going, slowly circled 
the farm, and picked up Li-sun 
where he was waiting behind a distant outbuilding. Why, she wondered — why didn't she simply leave 
him there? She could have done 
so easily enough. But she recognized 
and accepted the fact that she was 
not operating as a free agent. Dr. 
Franz had planted his instructions 
deep in he r subconscious, to emerge 
only when needed. 

"Where are we going, Fran?" 
Li-sun asked her as she headed the 
hopper, straight as an arrow, toward the southwestern desert with 
its low swirl of endless dust-clouds, 
her hand firm on the controls. 

Francesca shook her head slightly. She couldn't have told him even 
if she had wanted to. But deep in 
her mind she knew. 

The space-ship was waiting in 
its immense desert pothole, sheltered from prying eyes from die 



sky by the overhang of an ot berimed cliff. 

Dr. Colin Franz came out of the 
purple shadows to meet them as 
they landed. "Good!" he said. "You 
got here cruickly — and I sec you 
brought Dr. Ybarra with you." 

"1 wasn't sure you wanted me 
to," said the girl simply. "But he 
insisted on coming." 

"1 wanted to he sure no harm 
Cftine to Francesca," said Li-sun 
Quietly, putting an arm around her. 

"We can talk it over on the way 
to Farth," said Dr. Franz, leading 
the way to the space-ship's port 
with the easy agility of a man of 
half his self-acknowledged ninety 
years. He did not once pause, 
though the ground sloped steeply. 

Li-sun stopped and looked at the 
simple, efficient beauty of the big 
craft before entering. "This ship," 
he said, "is it one of your creations, 
Dr. Franz? I've never seen or heard 
of anything like it." 

Dr. Franz smiled. "No, it was 
planned and built by far wiser beads 
and hands than mine — a long while 
ago. Rut we have little time. The 
opposition has already moved faster 
than I expected they would." He 
ushered them into a comfortable, 
yet strange, cabin, where amazingly few and uncomplex instruments 
studded a small panel against the 
curved wall. 

There was none of the brief but 
sharp acceleration-pressure of the 
orthodox interplanetary space-ship. 
They taxied out of the pothole and 
took off as smoothly and easily as 



FANTASTIC UNIVI-RSK 



22 

a cat rising and leaping lightly 
from a sleeping-oval. 

In what seemed an incredibly 
short time. Mars was fading behind them in the viewing screen, 
its variegaled pink-and-grecn markings dwindling to a confused blur 
of color, rust-red in hue. Li -sun 
turned from the dramatic spectacle 
of the heavens and said simply, 
"Why Earth, Dr. Franz? I should 
think your enemies . . ." 

' 'Because Earth is our destination," the scientist replied. "I don't 
think they can give us much trouble." 

"Tell me, Doctor," said the 
young bio-geneticist a few thoughtful moments later, "why should 
there be an opposition anyway?" 

"Because," Dr. Franz explained 
patiently, his bronzed face grave, 
"being human, I have made mislakes. I permitted myself to display 
far too open an opposition to the 
Earth-monopoly plans for star-flight 
so a rden 1 1 y d ef en d ed by som e of 
my colleagues. As a result they consider me a traitor to Earth." 

He sighed and smiled faintly at 
Francesca before continuing. "You 
must be familiar with the very human tendency to grow careless when 
the end of a long and difficult task 
is in sight," he said. "Well, I fear 
that has happened to me. I made 
my mistake on Earth by revealing 
my opposition too openly and I 
made a mistake on Mars — by downgrading you, my dear, too sharply 
on your hard-radiation resistancequotient.'* 



"But I cannot understand the 
need for the decept ion at all i" 

Li-sun said. 

Dr. Franz sighed ruefully. "My 
first error made it necessary," lie 
told them. "When Francesca passed 
her tests with flying colors, all but 
the final phase of my assignment 
was complete. Had my suspicious 
colleagues known this, they would 
have put obstacles in my path — as, 
having learned through my stupidity, they have so often tried_/o 
do. v 

"You see, Francesca, the fact that 
you are a Martian as well as the 
first completely successful result of 
the John Franklin experiment is 
bound to make these Earth-moaopoLists squirm. And they aren't the 
type to scjuirm long without taking 
steps. You see, essentially, as good 
executives, they are men of action. 
I fear, my dear, that from now x>n, 
you and I are virtually outlaws." 

"What about. Li-Sun?" the girl 
asked, concerned. 

"Li-sun will emerge with a vast 
reputation," Dr. Franz said. "It is 
highly probable that, in time, he 
may take my place in the SI 
hierarchy." 

"But I am unworthy," said the 
bio-gencticist. 

"You are young," was the reply. 
"And now, if you will excuse inc. 
I must sleep." 

He lay back on his rest-oval and 
closed his eyes and, in a matter of 
seconds, was breathing heavily and 
evenly. 

Almost at once, Li-sun was on 



his feet, stalking fhe cabin like a 
cat exploring a strange house. 

"Darling,'' he said soflly, "this 
15 incredible. Look at the simplicity of the panel, the depth of the 
viewing-screen pattern I Remember 

how easily we took off from Mars?" 

She moved closer to him reading 
the meaning implicit in his comment, "You mean, Li-sun, that this 
is an alien vessel?" 

He .shook his head, staring at the 
furnishing around them. "No, it's 
made for humans, quite obviously. 
But it is not a Solar System ship. 
It's far too advanced technologically." 

She stared at him with a wild 
surmise. "Do you think it could be 
a star-ship?" 

He shook his head. "I'm sure it's 
not. It hasn't bulk or power enough 
—unless all our scientists are 
wrong in theory. But isn't she a 
beauty!" 

Desperately, hungrily, she longed 
to be in his arms. Insistent voices 
within her kept warning her that 
time was short for them. She said 
softly, "Don't make mc jealous, 
dear." 

He laughed and drew her close 
and "whispered, "You still look 
about nine years old. 1 wonder what 
you'll look like when you're ninety. 
You'll probably be in the first 
flower of your youth." 

She said, "Li-sun, why has this 
happened to me? Why do / have 
to be different? I feci like some 
coldly studied specimen in a biology 
lab. It's hard for me to believe that 



FLIGHT 23 

mother and father would cooperate 
on such an experiment — and Mars 
only knows how many before them. 
Oh, Li, darling, I think it's horrible. 
I feeJ horrible." 

He held her close while she wept 
and then said gently, "You mustn't, Fran. You have been extraordinarily favored — and you must be 
prepared to accept extraordinary 
burdens — as must those who love 
you." 

"Do you really love me?" she 
whispered. 

"Would I be here if I didn't?" 
he said. Then, frowning, "It's 
strange, come to think of it, that 
Dr. Franz expected me. It's almost 
as if I were under some sort of 
compulsion. Do you suppose...? 
I was joking when I mentioned it 
before." 

He looked at her and they exchanged a long glance of understanding. Not only she, but Li-sun, 
had been put under post-hypnotic 
compulsion by Dr. Franz during 
the tests at the university. 

vn 

Tiif.re was a flicker of new light 
on the viewing screen, some time 
later, and the soft sound of a low 
musical note. Dr. Franz awoke at 
once, catlike, moved swiftly to the 
viewing screen, and began to press 
levers. 

"Pursuit — are they chasing us?" 
Francesca asked faith. 

The older scientist smiled and 
said, without looking away, "Hard


24 



f?A NTASTIC universe 



]y. There's nothing in the System 
today that can catch this ship. But 
they've set up an interception pattern." 

' 'They won' t destroy us ? " Lisun's dark eyes were regarding 
Frantesca anxiously. 

"Hardly!" Dr. Franz said. 
"There is too much they want to 
learn. Besides, I could easily destroy them. This ship was built for 
interplanetary exploration. It is 
equipped for all sorts of contingencies." 

Dr.' Franz' deft fingers fiickered 
over a number of pushbuttons and, 
in the viewing screen, the whole 
universe seemed to dance crazily. 
When it had steadied, the interception pattern was behind them. 

Li-sun, who had been studying 
the older man, said, "Dr. Franz, 
who built this ship? And how did 
you know of it?" 

Fugitive half-memories and bits 
of barely recalled information, 
whirling about in kaleidoscopic 
fashion, suddenly settled into a 
pattern in Francesca's brain. She 
said, slowly, "He knew of it because he's really John Franklin — 
and I think it was he who put it 
on Mars." 

Dr. Franz sat down and looked 
at her with undisguised admiration. 
"Yes, I am John Franklin," he said 
simply. "I am John Franklin — and 
many other people. You see, I 
have had to keep creating new personalities for myself every hundred Farth-years or so. People grew 
suspicious otherwise." 



Franccsca felt her whole being 
fall into focus. She looked at this 
man and realized she must for a 
long time have known that he was 
John Franklin — at least, since early 
i n the tes ting period at Me wsorbonne. Knowing, she felt not affection — the idea of having this remote, double-ancestor brought 
suddenly to life was too large and 
too sudden for that — but an increase in trust. However, the one 
personal question remained. 

"Why me, John Franklin?" she 
said. "Why did you choose me?" 

He smiled at her. "My dear, you 
are an induced miracle. During the 
span of my life in this Solar System, I have realized as never before the importance of patterns. In 
my own rather larger cosmos, we 
live so much longer that men and 
events move more slowly. We are 
human, never fear. But our metabolism is nowhere near as rapid as 
that of the average Solar System 
man or woman. 

"For that reason I have had an 
unparalleled opportunity to study 
life and history in the making and 
mi making." And, after a brief 
pause, "It is — though the simile is 
far from exact and perhaps unfortunate — like the study of fruit-flies 
or other short spanned creatures in 
a laboratory. I have been able to 
watch Earth find itself and expand 
to other planets. In my own small 
way, I have tried to help." 

1 That sti 1 1 doesn't answer my 
question," said Francesca, 

"I hope it will lead to your un


STAR-FLIGHT 



25 



derstanding," was the reply. "You 
must have guessed by this time that 
my home is in another star-system, 
far from this sun of yours. You 
people call it Bobtcs, although we, 
of course, have anotfier name for 
it. My people, thanks partly to their 
long life-span, have been roving the 
starways a long time. With my partner, I was sent into this sector on 
an exploratory survey. We landed 
on Earth in your late eighteenth 
century and, shortly afterward, my 
partner was caught off-guard and 
slain by a group of wandering nomadic tribesmen. 

"Had we followed instructions, 
either of us, it would not— it could 
not — have happened. But we were 
experienced interstellar travelers 
and grew careless. I have never forgiven myself, for we loved each 
other very deeply." He paused and, 
briefly, his light blue eyes were 
clouded. 

Then he cleared his throat and 
went on : "Unfortunately, I was 
not only left bereaved but marooned 
— for even the simplest of star-ships 
Deeds two to operate it. The intricacies of faster- th a n-light drive forbid any sleep period. And a startrip, especially from such a remote 
region of our universe as this Solar 
System, is a long journey. It is long 
even for us." 

"1 think I understand," Li-sun 
put in, "In order to return, you 
had to discover or create a new 
partner." 

John Franklin nodded. "That 
was my first and, for a long lime. 



my only assignment. Luckily, there 
were humans on Earth, however inadequate for my purposes. It was 
necessary for me to employ genetics 
— to breed, if I may put it crudely. 
At least it was possible. On many 
other systems, it would have been 
out of the question."^ 

He shuddered. "Believe me, it 
was not easy. And my disappointments, to say nothing of my emotional involvements, were endless. 
Remember, I am human, too, whatever you may think me now. 1 
loved, I lost, and I saw promising 
blood-lines destroyed by sickness or 
war or accident. And, gradually, I 
became increasingly involved in the 
progress of Solar society. 

"That is how I became aware 
of patterns — and why your emergence at this time, Francesca, is 
nothing less than an induced miracle. For Solar System humanity is 
going to need help in the near future more than it ever has before." 

"I don't understand," said Lisun, knitting his brows. "Surely, 
with all of our recen t devel opmen t — " 

"Remember the appalling atomic 
wars on Earth that preceded spaceflight and colonization of the other 
planets?" said John Franklin. "If 
only humanity — Solar humanity — 
could have had outside help to 
speed up their science, to show 
them the way out of the political 
and economic dead-ends that bred 
that holocaust! But at the time I 
had no dedicated helper capable of 
taking mc oQi the Earth, so that I 



a6 



FANTASTIC UN1VFRSE 



could bring the aid so desperately 
needed. For a time, I thought, I 
would sec the planet's utter destruction." 

"How docs that period of horror hold a significant relationship to 
the present?" Li-sun wanted to 
know. 

"Unless Solar humanity is shown 
the road to the nearer stars there 
will be a repetition of the disaster," 
John Franklin replied. "Already 
Earth, Venus, Mars and the large 
moons of Jupiter are being exploited to the full. All that remains 
are the great moons of Saturn. And 
at the present rate of progress ihcy 
will not be available much longer. 
Once the System is packed full, 
trouble will come again. And this 
time the weapons of destruction 
are too dreadful to contemplate." 

A third time, Francesca asked, 
"But why did you choose me?" 

John Franklin shifted his position to look fully at her. '"Because 
you are the first person capable of 
star-flight ever born in the Solar 
System. You are Virginia Dare and 
Peregrine White and all the others 
rolled into one. You are the first 
successful result of my genetic experiment. You have the Intelligence, 
the radiation- resistance and above 
all, you have the longevity. You 
are the rebred golden palomino or 
the giant urus of Europe— a lost 
strain reborn. You are, to all intents and purposes, a Boolean, not 
a child of this sun." 

She looked at him, seeking in 
his face some reassurance that 



would make her feel human still. 
And she found it — in the kind wisdom of his eyes and the smile that 
lifted his deeply-lined mouth. She 
said, her voice faint, "Then I am 
to go to the stars with you, John 
Franklin ?" 

He nodded. "I cannot order you. 
But you will." 

She looked at Li-sun and saw 
that he, too, was smiling at her. 
And she knew then that he loved 
her and that she loved him in return with all her heart. She got 
up and stood before the viewing 
screen watching a tiny Earth begin 
to swim into view. 

At that moment, she wanted to 
be touched or talked to by no man. 
She wondered how much her parents had known — or could have 
known. Nor could she blame John 
Franklin for what he had done to 
her. > 

Worst of all, she could not even 
weep. There was no place for her 
to go— except to the stars. No possible other place. 

VIII 

A few thousand miles outside 
Earth's atmosphere, there was another, more determined, effort to 
intercept their ship. Like gleaming 
blue-hooded hornets, the ships of 
Solarian warriors came weaving 
into their pattern. Their bolts shot 
across the bows of the alien spaceship and ricocheted harmlessly 
away from its dark hull. 

"I believe they're trying to bum 



STAR- FLIGHT 



us!" Li-sun cried suddenly. "Why? 

why?" 

"Because they fear us," said John 
Franklin simply. "In their first attempt they sought only to surround 
and capture us. But when they saw 
what manner of ship this is, and 
how easily we cut-maneuvered them 
they became mortally terrified. And 
because fear grows by what it feeds 
on, and we are headed toward 
Earth, they are determined to destroy us." 

"What are we going to do?" 
Francesc* asked. 

For answer, the older man rose 
once more and returned lo the 
seemingly simple instrument panel. 
Again his strong, sensitive fingers 
flickered over a pushbutton pattern. 

This time, the planet in front of 
them, as well as the attacking ships 
seemed to blur and explode on the 
screen. Then, again, the pursuing 
..raft were behind them and they 
were circling to enter the atmosphere of a much closer Earth. 

"What did you do?" Li-sun asked, his face as grim as death. 

John Franklin smiled. "It is 
(.ailed missile-evasion," he said, "as 
nearly as I can translate it in terrestrial terms. Since 1 am leaving this 
pinnace with you, perhaps it is time 
to explain." 

"You're leaving it with me?" Lisun was incredulous. "To what 
purpose, sir?" 

"It will help a little," he said. 
"Not only you, but Solar humanity. While Solar ships are vastly 
efficient this vessel has many fea


tures they will no) be able to duplicate for many decades. Let me 
show yon. Come over here, young 
man." 

Francesca watched in silent wonder as her still-living ancestor demonstrated the various powers of 
what he called a pinnace. For the 
rest, she sought to reorientate her 
thinking and readjust her emotions 
in terms of the future, the incredible future that had expanded so 
suddenly and miraculously before 
her. 

Emotional adjustment proved the 
harder task. She watched Li-sun as 
be Listened eagerly to what John 
Franklin was saying about atmospheric deceleration, hovering controls, visibility screens, take-off 
regulation and the like. And she 
was woman enough to wish he were 
not quite so interested. Didn't the 
sweet idiot know this was the last 
period they would have alone together? 

John Franklm had not told her 
just how long the trip to Bootes 
would take in Earth or Mars years. 
Nor had she been able to summon 
the courage to ask. But within herself, somehow, she knew that -it 
was going to be a long, long trip. 
She wondered how she would look, 
grown to her full maturity, at its 
conclusion. And then she instantly 
despised herself for such vain and 
frivolous thinking. 

They* landed beneath the atmosphere-clouded stars of Earth. A dim, 
sorry spectacle the planet seemed 
alter the blazing black skies of 



2 8 



FANTASTIC UNIVERSE 



space, and the brighter spectacle of 
a Martian night. 

Under John Franklin's supervision, Li-sun brought the pinnace 
in as easily, as lightly, as a feather 
on a desolate mountainside somewhere in a region in deep central 
Asia that reminded Francesca of 
vidarshors she had seen of the 
Moon's dark hemisphere. 

"There is little time. They will 
soon track us down," warned John 
.Franklin. 

He left the two of them alone 
together in the cold night air while 
he disappeared behind a towering 
boulder formation into the mountain itself. 

"I don't want to go," said Francesca, dinging to him fiercely. *T 
don't want to leave you." 

"Be quiet, darling." He kissed 
her ijuickly, passionately. "You 
have no choice. Besides, if you 
think I want you around in the 
full bloom of youth while I'm decaying into senility you underrate 
my ego." 

But his voice trembled a little 
and she loved him for his complete honesty. She said, "Try to 
have a grandson as handsome as 
yourself, waiting for my return." 

"It won't be easy," he assured 
her. And then he was no longer 
firmly in command of himself. He 
cried, "Why can't I go to the stars 
with you?" And then, quickly, 
"Don't answer that, darling." 

But Francesca was no longer listening. A great patch of the mountainside was sliding back upon it


self, revealing a huge, dimly-lit 
cavern. And in the cavern was an 
immense vessel of intricately incredible design — a ship as unlike a 
Solar interplanetary spacer as Ihat 
evolved craft resembled one of the 
early automotive vehicles on twentieth-century Earth. It whispered of 
boundless power, of unfathomable 
human achievement, of freedom in 
galactic flight. 

"Look at it!" Li-sun's voice was 
reverent. 

"Yes, look at it," said John 
Franklin, who had emerged to stand 
beside them once more. "Look at 
it well, Li-sun, for you will never 
see its like again. By the time one 
— or both of us — return to bring 
to the Solar System die guidance 
and aid its people must have to 
survive, you will be long gone." 
His eyes were compassionate. 
Li-sun*s gaze moved from John 
Franklin to . Francesca and all at 
once he looked haggard and afraid. 
He said, "Leaving me here — as perhaps you must — have you given 
thought as to what I am to do?" 

"Your task will be a great one, 
Li-sun," John Franklin said. "You 
will carry on my work here. 
You have the pinnace, to control 
human expansion through the S.olar 
System — and you have sufficient 
knowledge and qualifications to continue my experiment. There will 
be other Francescas — your MendeIian law makes that certain — and 
you must seek them out and prepare them, for they will be E.uth'i 
ambassadors to trje stars. 



STAR- FLIGHT 



29 



"And when your life is fading, 
you must prepare others to carry 
on the work, to see lluft these 
planets do not destroy themselves 
before we can return. Can you do 
it?" 

"I can try," said Li-sun, meeting 
the starman's gaze unflinchingly. "I 
can try." 

"You'll do," said John Franklin, 
turning back toward the great ship 
in the cavern. 

Li-sun looked after him, then 
turned to Franccsca, who flung herself, sobbing, into his arms. She 
could weep now, but there was no 
relief in her tears — only grief. 



"Darling, live well — for me," 
she said. 

His own eyes were full and his 
voice unsteady, as he said, "I'll do 
my best — and perhaps when you 
come back, I'll have a grandson 
ready for you." 

"Come Francesca!" called John 
Franklin from the star-ship entrance. "They have tracked us here. 
We have little time." 

"I'm coming," said Francesca. 
Somehow she tore herself from Lisun's embrace and stumbled toward 
the great ship within the cavern. 
It was going to be a long voyage 
back . . . 




Among the Contributors to Next Month's Issue 
will be 

THEODORE STURGEON, Near the Darkness" 

CHARLES W. PRICE, Jr., with "The Elephant Hound" 
ETHEL G. LEWIS, tvith "Device for Decadence" 
RICHARD STOCKHAM, with "Back to Normal" 
I'\ B. BRYNING, with "Infant Prodigy" 

ROBERT F. YOUNG, with "The Fust Sweet Sleep of Night" 

and many others 



the 

nostopath 



by . . . Bryce Walton 



1 n fifty million miles of space 
there was never a man quite so 
cut off from happiness as Barton. 



Barton watched the transport 
dissolve into space. I ; rom the asteroid Tower he watched it until 
its blinker that distinguished it 
from a few billion stars winked 
out for good. And then, surprisingly enough, he felt very happy 
about being absolutely alone, fifty 
million miles from Earth, and a 
lot farther than that from anyplace 
else that could ever make any difference. 

Only later— he never knew how 
much later— did he begin thinking 
seriously about what the psychologist had told him — that he might 
go insane. 

He couldn't understand why it 
was that he had had such a bad 
t ime at home on Earth with 
Beatrice, Jackie and the whole 
damn family routine. And, that 
now, where he should be unhappy, 
he was enjoying himself for the 
first lime since he could remember. 

He felt free. It was like a vacation. He could sleep as long as he 
liked. When he woke up he didn't 
have a headache as he usually did 
at home, and he didn't feel the 
pressure all around him, 



A phobia can be a terrifying thing, utterly beyond the control of the unfortunate victim. Fear of high places and ef open spaces, fear of animals and 
confined spaces — all these can cheat * man of happiness and darken the 
future for him. But the kind of fear which Bryce Walton so matter fully 
depicts in this exciting story is unique, for it is linked to the greatest 
of human needs in a world where space travel is a reality, and a man must 
dream of home fires brightly burning, or run the risk of losing his sanity. 



30 



THE NO: 

If you didn't mind being alone, 
the Tower was a great place to 
spend some time — but whether you 
could stand two years of it was 
another question. The big observation room was comfortably furnished. The lounge was a bachelor's 
dream. 

He'd always wanted to .be creative, self-expressive. There were 
home-study courses in practically 
everything. Crafts, wood-working, 
metal-working, leather-craft, carpentry, sculpting, woodwork, 
modeling in clay, soap, with pieces 
of wire and bits of cardboard and 
string and odd shapes of metal. 
There were art-studies, and courses 
in literature and music and anyUiing a man could ever become interested in — alone. 

He read all the little psychology 
pamphlets on how to get along 
willi himself. 

His official duties were light, 
routine, very simple. As a Watcher, 
he only had to Watch, check instruments, keep the atomic power 
units functioning — or rather check 
them to be sure they were still functioning properly. The warn ing 
signal.'; were automatic. All he had 
to do was receive them, if they ever 
came, and send on the warning to 
the Military Base on Linden in 
Sector 24. 

The chances of an enemy ship 
appearing within range of the instruments were slim. So Barton 
didn't worry about some Centaurian goopship somewhere out in the 
void. At least the theory was that 



i'opath 31 

it was an enemy from Centauris. 
No one really knew. The war could 
go on for hundreds of years widiout anyone ever iinding out who 
it was with or why. 

The psychologist had said that 
the Watch could only be kept by 
one. More than one was too risky. 
It seemed that one could remain 
sane much more easily than two 
together. Something about the danger of interrelated conflict. 

He made up an especially rigorqus routine for himself, and stuck 
by it with fortitude, but somewhere, sometime, the routine went 
to pieces. Time became a vague and 
meaningless and utterly unnecessary imposition which he abandoned. And for a long time, he 
never knew how long, he took 
refuge in sleep. Sleep had always 
been his kindest friend, and ally 
against depressions and worry. 

He didn't check the chronos, and 
when he did accidently glance at 
one he would find that a week, 
sometimes months had passed, unnoticed and unmourned. 

He forgot about all the studies 
and crafts too. And when sleep itself became boring, he took a deeper and more dramatic refuge in 
memory. It was funny, but his past, 
as he relived it, was more vivid and 
interesting than when he actually 
had been living it. 

He got the feeling that perhaps 
this might be dangerous, and at 
those times he would attempt to 
face the present reality on the asteroid. Sometimes there was the 



33 FANTASTIC 

present and he had to look at it. 
There was just that darkness out 
there. There was nothing familiar 
about it, and that was the trouble. 
And it never had any real substance or significance — except the 
significance of loneliness, alienness and brooding fear. You CQuHn"t relate to the great hollow night, 
nor the thousand dots of lights. 

Anything was better than to let 
the mind start traveling away out 
there into — whatever it was. 

And to look out at the piece of 
space debris he was living on was 
no better than trying to relate to 
the emptiness, the awful emptiness, 
that went beyond it. The asteroid 
was roughly cylindrical, maybe 
twenty-five miles long and seven 
miles thick, with crags and gashes 
breaking in scars on its surface 
forming only jumbles of blackened 
stone. It had no meaning al all, 
nothing to relate to, nothing to go 
out to — without a feeling that you 
would go but one way and keep 
on going ; 

It was* totally unfamiliar, inhuman, alien to the warm blood of a 
man. There had never been any 
kind ot : life there, probably not 
. even some alien spore from somewhere else no human had ever seen. 
Not even simple flora, or an invisible germ. Not even light of any 
familiar kind, but a muted deathly 
kind of reflection of the Belt's 
weak light. There hadn't even been 
time until man came along. 

But one man couldn't put much 
time into all that emptiness. 



UNIVERSE 

He looked out at the asteroid as 
it was one last time. He saw one 
hasty vision of harsh rock, ragged 
black pits, craters and twisted 
frozen magma, dully lit with nonhuman light, and eery shadows 
like living holes of nothing creeping over the rough slope. 

He knew he couldn't look out 
there at it again. 

When later he got the idea for 
a New Deal for Watchers, he knew 
that it was right and that the officials back on Earth would act on 
his suggestion. He worked the 
whole thing out carefully, summed 
it up in a report, and sent it by 
spacegram directly to the Com- mander-in-Chief. 

The reply from Headquarters 
came in even as he was working, 
preparing things for the colonists. 
Headquarters was pleased with his 
report, and they were acting on it 
at once. His report checked with 
those of other Watchers — and no 
one man could stand it, even as 
Barton had said, and from now on 
every Watcher would have company, his family and others. 

It was such an obvious way out 
that Barton wondered why he had 
been the first to think of it. 

Barton had been on the asteroid 
one year and eight months when 
the ship arrived, its signal preceding it by twenty minutes. He 
signaled back, prepared thegravetic 
hooks that would bring the ship 
into the Tower, through the interconnecting locks. 

He had time to shave, dress care


Tm: nos 1 
full 7 in his nyfon uniform, before 
they arrived. It was the first time 
he had bothered with his physical 
appearance much for a long time. 
He was a bit surprised at how he 
looked — no different than he had 
when he'd left Earth two years 
back. 

They came out of the lock into 
the big observation room and greeted him with a great deal of respect 
and enthusiasm. There were men, 
women and children — craftsmen, 
scientists, technicians, doctors, and 
(hough he had some qualms about 
their attitude about giving up life 
on Earth to live on an asteroid, the 
doubts soon went away. They were 
proud to serve, and, as one of them 
later pointed out — "This is better 
than feeling guilty about not doing 
enough for the war effort against 
those damn invisible Centaurians !*' 

It took him quite a while to get 
acquainted with ail of them because, 
under the best of conditions, it still 
took him a while to get to know 
anybody — but within the next few 
months they were all close friends, 
intimate and close in a new and 
finer way than he had ever known 
friendships to be on Earth. 

But on that first day when they 
arrived,, he scarcely even saw them. 

He was waiting for Beatrice and 
his son, Jackie. 

They were the last to enter. The 
others, exclaiming, explored the 
Tower rooms, and then drifted out 
through the tubeways and into the 
various domes that Barton had built 
for them to live in. 



TOPATH 33 

"Look! How did he do it all?" 
"Why — it's unbelievable!" 
"What a splendid achievement!" 
And then there didn't seem to 
be anything else in the Universe 
except Barton and the two who 
came toward him. The lock seemed 
dim, much longer than it had before, like a Jong hallway. But there 
they were, coming toward him. 
Beatrice leading Jackie by the hand. 
They were leaning toward him, expectantly, with flushed faces, and 
he could feel the climax rising up 
all around him. 

Hor they had waited a long time 
and had traveled fifty million miles, 
across space, the greatest gulf of 
all . . . and all the time thinking 
of him, and knowing that it was 
all on his account, and that at the 
end of the funnel of space and 
time, he was waitinq. 

She dropped Jackie's hand and 
ran laughing with joy into Bartons 
arms. 

Suddenly he felt not only gladness that they were here, but a 
sudden great joy in having her in 
his arms, a feeling he bad never 
felt with her before, lie remembered the quarrels they had bad 
before, the irritations the nagging 
and how sometimes, even though 
he'd loved his wife and kid and 
home, he would stay out at night 
on some pretext or other, then feel 
guilty for it. He remembered how 
she had cried and accused him of 
not loving her on that day when 
he had volunteered to be a 
Watcher. 



34 FANTASTIC 

Now she seemed altogether different, like someone else. The long 
absence, and the long journey, had 
changed a lot of tilings. Time and 
space clasped together, its coldness 
and immeasurableness became closeness and warmth. 

"Oh, God, I'm so happy, so 
happy," she whispered over and 
over. 

"So am I," Barton said. 

She looked up at him. She wasn't crying now at alt. She was 
smiling. She seemed strong and 
proud of him now. Everything was 
sure different this time. Jackie stood 
there looking very grown up and 
capable of taking care of himself, 
and even he had changed a lot. 
Vaguely, Barton remembered that 
Jackie had been a spindly kid, always whining and begging and staring with big accusative eyes. 

"We played the records so we 
could hear your voice every day 
and not forget it," Beatrice said. 
She put her arm about his waist. 
He held her very tightly, hardly 
believing things could have changed 
so much. 

"Come over here,- Bea, you and 
Jackie." He led them over to the 
big observation panes. "Look," he 
said. He waved his hand out over 
the surface of the asteroid, at the 
domes and tubeways he had built, 
at the schoolhouse for the kids, the 
gymnasium and all the rest of it. 

Beatrice stared, then shook her 
head slowly as her hand gripped 
Ids arm. "It was .1 wonderful won


UNIVERSE 

derful thing," she said softly- "You 
did — all of this — all yourself?" 

He nodded. "Of course I had a 
long time to do it." 

"Oh, darling, it must have seemed a lot longer than it was too." 

"It would have, but I had something to really work on, and a lot 
to look forward to." 

A little man with a fatigue suit 
and an old woman who looked 
something like Barton's mother had 
looked before she died, came running in. "I tell you, it's unbelievable!" He grabbed Barton's hand. 
"You mean to tell me, young man, 
that you did all this — alone?" 

"There sure wasn't anyone else 
here to lend a hand," smiled Barton. 

"Why the kitchens are wonderful," the woman said. "And the 
schoolhouse, and the playground 
for the children! And those toys — 
did you build those too?" 

"Toys?" Jackie said. 

"Well, I learned a lot about carpentry and all kinds of crafts here," 
Barton said. "And I had some extra 
time, so I made some things for the 
kids." 

"For me too," Jackie said. But 
not whiningly this time, but as 
though to suggest that if Barton 
hadn't made any toys for him too, 
he would understand and he wouldn't feel hurt about it at all. 

"'Sure," Barton said. "Go 
through that door, Jack ic. We're 
going to live in there. You have 
a room of your own in there. You 
go in there and see what it's like." 



THH NOSTOPATII 



35 



Solemnly, with dignity in spite 
of his anticipation, Jackie went 
through the door. 

"I feel like one of those pioneer 
women from the old days,*' laughed the woman. 

"We're going to do a lot with 
this asteroid," said the little man 
in the fatigue suit. "We'll transform it into a garden in space. 
Why — Barton— this is a great idea. 
We'll create our own society here. 
We'll make out own simple laws, 
live in the kind of simplicity that 
we never had on Earth." 

"That's what I figured," Barton 
said. "I can't figure why they didn't 
do this before. All that trouble 
with Watchers, finding out whether 
they could stand the loneliness." 

"And you thought of this," 
Beatrice said . . . 

Here was a little world, his 
world, a few people each necessary 
and known to the other, a simple 
set of rules, measurable goals, 
realizable, clear, understandable to 
all, and every one of them with a 
personal feeling of dignity and belonging. 

There wasn't a one of them who 
wasn't a lot happier here than they 
had ever been all caught up in 
their individuality and lost in the 
big. too complex social machinery 
from, which they had come. 

Later they wanted to call it 
BARTON'S WORLD, and erect 
sorue kind of a monument but the 
idea embarrassed Barton. They considered him as their leader. But 
actually there was no leader. They 



were ecjuals and each had a role to 
play and they were happy. None 
of them had ever been so happy 
before. 

It ended abruptly, without even 
any kind of warning, except that 
flashing signal just five minutes 
before the cruiser came out of 
space. 

Barton ran to the intercom. "A 
ship's coming in here," he yelled. 
He felt Beatrice's presence beside 
him. She was calm though and her 
hand was warm and confident on 
his shoulder. 

"What's the matter?" she asked. 

"I don't know yet," he said. 
"But I've got a feeling maybe 
they" 1 1 want us to go back to 
Earth!" 

"But— nobody wants to go 

back." 

"I know that! But what if the 
war's over, and officially we're not 
supposed to stay here anymore?" ' 

He yelled into the intercom. 
"Everybody stay there in the domes, 
and if there's trouble, we'll tight 
for what we decided on. If they 
want us to go back to Earth, we'll 
try to reason with them. If they insist, then we'll light as best wc can 
with the weapons we made." 

He turned. "Bea — take Jackie 
and lock yourselves in Jackie's 
room. If they try to force us to 
leave, go on into the dome where 
we agreed you could hide." 

"But you — " 

"I'll do what I can. Maybe it'll 
work out all right. Go on — run — 
get out of here!" 



36 FANTASTIC 

He was proud of her. She walked, very straight and brave, to the 
door, turned, smiled at him confidently, and then went through the 
door and closed it. How different 
she was from the nagging, almost 
childish person — 

The door of the lock opened. 

"I'm Commander Maxson. This 
is Lieutenants Holt, Warren and 
Soderman. Mr. Barton, I know it's 
been a long, long time, but greetings! The war's over, Barton! All 
over!" 

Barton scarcely heard the words, 
He was trying to figure out what 
the expressions on their faces were 
supposed to mean. Their faces were 
•puckered and their eyes were too 
wide, and they looked at him with 
a strangely withdrawn look, partly 
shock one would think, and one of 
therri was turning pale as though 
he was sick. That was Holt. 

"We're glad to see you, Barton." 

The commander was short and 
fat with a lot of gold braid and a 
pink face but with wrinkles around 
his eyes that gave him a somewhat 
pleasant appearance. He looked all 
around the observation room, then 
back at Barton; then stuck out 'his 
hand. He shook hands quickly, then 
jerked his hand away. His lingers 
were shaking. The other two just 
kept staring at Barton. 

"What in hell's the matter with 
me?" Barton yelled. 

"Oh — nothing, nothing!" Commander Maxson said quickly. 



UNIVERSE 

"We're — just — surprised to see you 
looking— so well, that's all." 

"Surprised? Why?" 

"What a damn awful stink !"' 
Holt said. He gasped and took one 
step and then made a choking , 
sound and sat down. 

They all kept staring at Barton. 
The little man, Soderman with the 
thick lips and the disturbingly black 
eyes rubbed his mouth nervously. 
"Come on, Commander, let's not 
waste any time. Let's get him out 
of here!" 

"Yes, and as rapidly as possible," 
said Warren. He was tall, angular, 
and had a cynical kind of look to 
iiim. 1 

Holt's lips were white and he 
held his nose. "This place is rotten \" he said. 

"I'm afraid we'll have to be 
leaving now, heading back to 
Earth," Maxson said. 

"Why?" 

"Well, it's j ust one of those 
official things ! Ah — you don't mean 
you want to stay here!" 

"He must be crazy," Warren 
said. He laughed a little. 

"I want to stay," Barton said. 

"Well, maybe it will be possible 
for you to rome back. But it'll have 
to be done through the regular 
channels. Meanwhile — " 

"I don't want to leave," Barton 
insisted. "Not a person here wants 
to leave." 

The other three looked around 
quickly. "They don't, huh," grinned 
Warren. 

"Via their, well, president, sort 



THE NO 

of," Barton said. "Nothing military about it. They just elected 
me—" 

"President," Warren said. 

"Yes, that's right." Barton backed away a few steps. "It was my 
idea, setting up the colony here, so 
that's why they did it, I guess. But 
now that the war's over we'd all 
like to stay on. An agreement was 
signed !by everybody. They all 
agreed that they would rather stay. 
I'll show you — " 

Holt tried to get up. He sank 
back down, holding his stomach. 
Soderman and Warren made a 
jump for Barton. He turned quickly, ran to the door behind which 
Beatrice and Jackie were hiding. 

"What's the idea?" Barton said. 
"Can't you even talk a thing over 
without trying to beat a guy up?" 

Commander Maxson wiped bis 
mouth again. "Barton, listen to me 
now. You know what pressure a 
Watcher has to live under, being 
alone and — well, you knew before 
you v olun t e er e d . It ca n affect a 
man in peculiar ways. But our psychologists can fix things up." 

"We all have a right to stay 
here!" Barton yelled. 

"But new the war's over," Maxson said. "We captured a Centaurian ship finally, got information 
and captured several others. It was 
quick and easy then, soon as we 
understood a little about them. It'll 
be at least a thousand years before 
any other ships get here from Centauris. There'll be no need of 
Watchers." 



CO PATH J 

"But we all want to stay here 
anyway," Barton said. 

The four men looked quickly 
around again, then at one another . 

"How many of you are here?" 
Warren said. His grin broadened 
a little. 

"Twenty-five," Barton said. "But 
you should have a record of that. 
It's all in my report." Maybe 
they'd been way out in some other 
sector all the time, didn't understand the change in set-up. 

"Commander," Warren said, 
"let's get out of here. I would 
suggest—" 

"I haven't asked you for any 
suggestions," Commander Maxson 
said. He kept on looking at Barton. 
He seemed very ill-at-ease. "Wc 
have to go back, Barton," he whispered. 

"That damnable smell," Holt 
groaned. 

Barton ran ro the observation 
panes. "Just take a look! I don't 
see why you don't believe — or understand! But look there!" 

The officers looked at one another oddly, all except Warren who 
merely seemed bored. Holt managed to get up as the commander 
motioned, and all of them walked 
toward Barton and looked out as 
Barton indicated. 

"What an awful rock to spend 
two years on," Soderman said. "One 
week on it would finish me." 

"I'm sick," Holt said. "I never 
smelled anything so damn awful!" 

"Everyone of those people out 
there in those domes want to stay 



38 FANTASTIC 

here," Barton explained patiently, 
proudly. "They're happy, happier 
than they'd ever be or ever were 
on Earth." He flicked on the intercom. "Listen to them." 

They listened. Barton heard the 
sounds of living out there, picked 
up by the sensitive mikes, voices, 
whisperings, people living where 
there had never been any life before. 

As though very tired, Maxson 
tu rned away, pressed his eyes. 
Without looking tip, he said, "We 
understand how it's been here. Barton. Maybe we don't act like it, but 
we understand. We've all been out 
in space plenty ourselves." 

"Come on," Warren said. "For 
God's sake, Commander, let's get 
out of here before we start seeing 
ghosts." 

"Ghosts," Barton said. He 
smiled. Maybe they were spacehappy. Maybe they had been out 
into space too long. 

"I can't stand the smell," Holt 
said. "I — I've got to go back 
aboard. 1*11 get some oxygen 
masks." 

"Go ahead," Maxson said. "And 
stay there." 

"Thanks," Holt said and staggered into the lock and closed the 
door. 

"Come on. Barton. It's not up 
to me to change the rules. Maybe 
when you're back on Earth we can 
arrange for you to come back. If 
you'll come along with us—" 

Barton backed to the door that 
concealed Beatrice and Jackie. 



univfhsf; 

Warren and Soderman walked 
over, stood on either side of the 
commander. 

"You've done excellent work 
here," Maxson said. "Believe mc, 
we'll all of us always be grateful 
for wliat you've done. Whether 
you understand it or not now. 
Rank, medals, commendations, 
nothing can adequately repay you 
for what you've done." 

"just staying here would be reward enough," Barton said. "Here 
with my family." 

"Family — " Max-sop said. He repeated it hoarsely. 

"Yes — Beatrice, my wife, and 
my son, Jackie." Maybe it would 
be better he decided then to introduce his family to the commander. 
The commander seemed like a decent person, and maybe that would 
be a thing worth trying. II that 
didn't work then they would have 
to fight for what they thought was 
right. 

Anyway, he wouldn't let any of 
them through the door. They could 
look in. 

He opened the door. He flicked 
on the light. Soderman and Warren peered into the room. Maxson 
kept on looking at Barton a moment, then he looked in too. Barton could sec Jackie and Beatrice. 
Jackie had the toy rocket Barton 
had made for him, and he stood 
there straight and smiling and 
brave. Jackie wasn't afraid of them, 
and he wasn't going to be upset if 
Barton had to leave. Things were 
different now. 



THE NOS 

Smiling, poised, Beatrice walker! 
toward them, then stopped and 
bowed slightly. 

Barton introduced everybody. 
Sod cr man and Warren just kept 
on Staring into the room, saying 
nothing. Commander Maxson finally turned back to Barton, seeming 
very tired now. His shoulders 
sagged. All of them must have had 
a very rough time in space somewhere, Barton thought." 

"Guess I haven't been a very 
good host," Barton said, "Let's all 
have something to eat, a drink, and 
talk this over." 

"No, no," Commander Maxson 
said. "Thanks though. But-^rcilly 
— we've got to be going now,* 

Barton smiled. "Well, 1 guess 
now you can see why I've got to 
stay here. My family here anil 
everything. There wouldn't be any 
reason for my going back to Earth, 
would there? What good would it 
do now?" 

The commander stammered a 
little bit, then said, "Ah— Barton, 
listen. I'll make a little deal with 
you. Your friends and your family 
can stay if you'll come back to 
fiatth with us. Ah — wait a minute 
now. You'ii come with us as a kind 
of representative, you understand? 
I didn't know the others were here. 
My orders don't include them. Just 
you. You come, they can stay. And 
no doubt you'll soon be back here 
with them. In fact, I can practically 
guarantee it." 

Barton didn't trust any of them 
now, not even the commander. He 



jerked the revolver from under his 
coat. 

"I'm a good shot," he said. 
"There are fifteen charges here." 

The officers stared at his hand. 
Warren grinned again. "Now wait 
a minute. Barton. You know you — 
a Watcher can't possibly have any 
kind of handgun like — ** 

They made a unified rash and 
he started firing. For a moment 
then, something important that had 
burned inside Barton almost went 
out. Something was operating he 
couldn't understand. The gun fired 
all right, and he knew he couldn't 
miss. But the officers kept running 
as though protected by some kind 
of force. 

Maybe the charges were deficient. 
No — that couldn't be. 

He yelled at them to get back, 
and he emptied the charges, but 
nothing happened. He felt that sudden awful emptiness, the terror 
that comes when all depends on 
some logical pattern that is suddenly something else. 

He threw the heavy gun directly 
into the commander's face. He saw 
it strike the puffy neck, but the 
commander didn't seem to feel it. 
Barton struck out savagely with his 
fists, and this time reality came 
back. Warren swung backward and 
sprawled on the floor. Blood ran 
out of his mouth and then he was 
twisting to get up. 

Barton got through the door, and 
locked it against them. "Beatrice!" 

They stood in one another's arms 
in the center of the room. Bravely, 



40 FANTASTIC 

Jackie watched them, ready to fight 
or to hide, but unafraid. Overhead, 
through Lhe small opaque square of 
the ceiling, the brilliant white 
memories of a million suns shone. 

"Listen, Bea. I've got to go back 
to Earth!" 

"No — no that's not right." 

"I know. But I've got to. If I 
fight against it, it'll only cause 
trouble for the rest of you." 

"You can't go alone." 

"I've got to. If I go, and the 
rest of you stay here, maybe I can 
convince the authorities that you 
and the others should stay here. 
Then maybe I can come back. I'll 
do everything I can to get back." 

"I know you will." 

"But if I don't come back, you'll 
still be all right, you and Jackie." 

"Yes. But we'll miss you." 

He held her face in his shaking 
hands. "Why is it so different now? 
Before when I left you cried and 
accused me of leaving you^-and 
everything. Now — you're like a different person." 

"I found out that I really loved 
you," she said. "I loved you, not 
for what you could give to me — 
but just because I loved you." 

He felt good this time, even 
though he had to leave them. He 
didn't feel guilty. He didn't want 
to go, but still he felt good. 

He told her how he felt and she 
nodded, and she understood. She 
smiled up at him and her hands 
were warm against his back. "You 
know how much Jackie and I love 
you — •" 



UNIVERSE 

"Yes. And you know how much 
I love you." 

He pressed her to him and crushed his last kiss upon her. It was — 
was so different too— all of it, as 
she let him drink deeply, openly, 
without qualification, of the sweetness of her. Her whole body 
yearned to him, muscle and bone 
and flesh to flesh. It had never 
been that way before. 

This time, he didn't even have 
to say good-bye. 

When he came out, the officers 
were waiting. He saw the case one 
of them had brought in, now open, 
full of needles, bits of steel, 
syringes — 

He didn't even have time to tell 
them he was ready to go with them. 
They overpowered him with 
weight. He hardly felt the needle 
in his arm. 

The psychologist walked to the 
window. Commander Maxson 
leaned forward in his chair. "3 
sympathize with Barton," he said, 
"But your idea — it's wasteful, impractical." 

"Is it?" The psychologist said. 
"My job is to do what I can, psychologically, for those under my 
jurisdiction. In that sense, my job 
is the same as any other officer's. 
In that area, my authority is superior to anyone else's. I'm sending him back." 

"I can't see it," Maxson said. 
"One man — insane — millions of 
credits of expense — to take a man 
into — where— nowhere?" 



"Into life — for him at least 
"But you said yourself he could 
probably never be. cured!" 

"Cured! But I guess he deserves 
some happiness." The psychologist 
pressed the buzzer of the intercom. 
Outside the window, Chicago blinked off and on in the later evening, 
for the first time in over five hundred years. "Bring in Mr. Barton 
please." 

Maxson shrugged. "All right, 
have it your way. But you think he 
can sustain all this fantasy, make 
it stay real, hold it all together 
with his own logic? To him, it was 
all so damn real— the domes, the 
life up there, people, his family — " 

"I hope he can. Anyway, here 
on Earth, he was always pathological anyway. You see, he was a 
nostopath/' 

"What the devil's that?" 

"Pathogenic homecoming. It 
differentiates the sickness attributable to coming home from that of 
nostalgia. It's common among soldiers, oddly enough. It's a sickness 
resulting, not from being away 
from home in combat, but from 
having to return home. Home is 
the pathogenic agent." 1 

"That's a strange twist." 

"Yes. Many beg to remain in 
combat rather than return to the 
unbearable sense of responsibility,, 
obligation and growing guilt of being the head of a family — a role 
they never feel capable of. Their 
civilian adjustment was always precarious, liable to snap any time. 



41 

home life was never anythin','- but a temporary illusion." 
"Ummmm," Maxson said. 
"Barton volunteered to be 
Watcher for only one reason, Maxson — to get away from home. And 
he structured his fantasies so he 
would never feel it necessary to return to Earth." 

"He transported his family," 
Maxson said, "in his own mind, to 
that asteroid, and a whole colony 
to keep them company." 

"But this time it was 'the kind 
of family he wanted, and the 
friends he wanted, lie certainly 
would never again have the desire 
to come back to Earth to a family 
— that was no longer here." 

Maxson looked out the window. 
"Well, what about his real family? 
The one that, as far as he's concerned, isn't here on Earth at all 
any more? His wife and kids. It 
must be a devil of a thing for 
them." 

The psychologist smiled, rather 
sadly. "There was a pretty real basis 
for Barton's marital apprehension. 
Unconsciously, he knew his wife 
had no real love or respect for him, 
that there was nothing but a morbid dependency on him, that she 
would always demand more of him 
than any human being could supply." 

Maxson turned abruptly. "What 
— you mean his wife here — she 
doesn't give a damn?" 

"Not now. She's already found 
somebody else." 

"The devil!" 



42 FANTASTIC 

"Yes, someone else. But, in a 
sense, her new find isn't much more 
real to her than Barton's fantasyimportation to a far asteroid is to 
him. She's feeing in him only what 
she needs to feed her own sick 
emptiness, not what he really is. 
I'm not sure that Barton's way isn't 
the most humane. It's better to 
create your needs harmlessly out of 
thin air, than to warp and twist 
and distort another human being 
for that purpose." 

The door opened. Barton entered, an attendant on either side 
of him. 

The psychologist smiled at him. 
"Hello, Barton. I've finally got it 
through. You're going back." 

Fox the first time since coming 
back to Earth, Barton smiled. 
"Thank you, sir. I'm — I'm more 
grateful than I can tell you. When 
do I leave?" 

"At once. We're all very interested in what you did on that asteroid, Barton. It's a kind of social 
experiment. We're all anxious to 
see how it turns out. You'll send 
me regular reports?" 

"Of course, sir. I — I just can't 
wait to see my wife and kid again." 

"But you're not anxious or anything about them ?*' 

"Oh, no, sir. They're perfectly 
able to take care of themselves 
now. My being away for two years, 
it sure changed them a lot." 

They shook hands, and then Barton, with an attendant on either 
side, went out. The psychologist 



UNIVERSE 

stared at the door a long time after 
it closed. Then he sat down. 

"You mean to tell me," Maxson 
said sharply, "that Barton's seen his 
wife and kids here and doesn't even 
recognize them?" 

The psychologist interrupted. 
"They were brought together here, 
the first day, but Barton — well, it 
wasn't even a case of his seeing 
them as someone else. It was complete negative hallucination. He 
didn't see them at all." 

"I wonder," Maxson said, as he 
wont toward the door, "what my 
wife sees when she looks at me? I 
wonder — '* 

The psychologist smiled. "Maybe 
you could wonder what your wife 
would look like — if you really saw 
her as she is." 

Only thb psychologist was 
there to see the ship leave that was 
taking Barton back home. 

Watching the ship disappear into 
space, becoming just another small 
star that went out, the psychologist 
thought of the words from the 
fragments of Master Eckhart. And 
always after that when he thought 
of Barton, whom no one ever heard 
from again, he thought of those 
words: 

"That I am a man, this 1 share 
with other men. That I see and 
hear and that I eat and drink is 
what all animals do likewise. But 
that 1 am I is only mine and helongs to me; to no other men, not 
to an angel nor to God." 



an 

apartment 
for 
rent 

by . . . "Ruth Sterling 

Choosing an apartment was really a 
life and death matter to them. But 
how could Conroy have known? 



"G°° D morning," the woman 
said with a smile. "My husband and 
I were passing the Park Towers And 
noticed the sign. We came to inquire if the apartment is still available." 

Mr. Conroy looked up from his 
morning paper at the couple who 
had stepped with incredible lightness into the real-estate office and 
were now standing expectantly before his desk. With a discerning 
eye, trained in the fine art of char 
acter appraisal through years of 
dealing with only the most affluent 
and exclusive of clients, he nodded 
approval and his pursed lips squeezed out a refined smile. 

At last, he thought jubilantly, 
here were the only two people who 
would fit into the magnificent Park 
Towers apartment. 

"Certainly," he said, staring 
with admiration at the woman. 
What an extraordinarily lovely creature she was. To Mr. Conroy, who 
was not yet indifferent to romance, 
she conjured up the witchery of 
springtime and a host of perfumed 
visions. With difficulty, his eyes 
shifted to the man. He noticed the 



You might think being married to a distinguished research physician uith 
degrees from Harvard and Johns Hopkins and writing '"boy-meels-girl" stories 
for the "smooth-paper" publications would take up most of Ruth Sterling's 
time. But having crashed Collier's and the most exacting of the literary 
reviews, she has decided she has a bent for fantasy and would like to 
crash that field too. For a story as good as this, why shouldn't we oblige? 



43 



44 FANTASTIC 

smooth cut of his suit and the nicely 
mannered way he offered a cigarette 
from a gold case, and decided unequivocally that here was a gentleman. 

What a perfect match they were 
for the apartment so recently vacated. This woman, by all standards 
of artistic justice, required the 
proper setting. In a flash of imagery he placed her in the apartment, 
with her slender patrician elegance 
moving graciously among clusters 
of deep-red roses, or bending over 
to light the silver candlesticks with 
her face a pale radiance over the 
flames. 

Yes, they definitely belonged 
there. 

His slender mustache expanded 
with satisfaction at his correct judgment "I shall be very happy Lo 
show the apartment to you," he 
said with the gratification of one 
bestowing a welcomed gift. "Just 
one moment, please. I'll get the keys 
and tell my secretary I'm leaving." 

From an adjoining room he heard 
the woman say, "Oh, Timothy, for 
a moment I was afraid," and her 
husband's reassuring, "now Kendreth, I told you it would be better 
jf" we did it properly." 

Mr. Conroy turned the word, 
"Properly" over in his mind, following it to several conclusions, and 
firmly rejecting each in turn. "It 
doesn't matter," he smiled, pleased 
at his worldly approach. "The important thing is to rent the plaice." 

Unfortunately he had never met 
the original tenants of the apart


UNIVERSE 

ment. They had moved in before he 
had taken over management of the 
building. But he had enjoyed receiving the rent checks from them 
each month. Not for any mercenary 
reasons, but because occasionally 
with a check would come a little 
amusing note, a complaint usually 
about some minor defect that needed repairing, delightfully and inoffensively phrased. 

Where another tenant would have 
stated brusquely, "The faucet needs 
fixing, please be quick about it," a 
message from them might say the 
same tiling with milder reppoachment: "We enjoy the hot water, it's 
a shame to see so much of it go 
down the drain." 

The man, Mr. Conroy understood, had been a successful writer, 
and his wife, a designer, her professional talent accounting for that 
exquisitely furnished home. He had 
always planned to pay them a personal visit, as he liked to have social 
contact with his tenants. But before 
he could get around to it it was too 
late. 

It was only a month before that 
they had left on that ill-fated airtrip to Mexico. He had read about 
the crash in the papers, with shocked recognition of their names. Decause he felt he had known them so 
well, he took it as a keen, personal 
loss. 

They left behind them an expensive apartment, and even in these 
days of still moderately distressing 
shortage, it had not been easy to 
rent. The first to take it after the 



AN APARTMENT FOR RENT 



accident bad been the Westerns, 1 
gray-haired gentle pair whose folksy 
manners seemed better suited to * 
farm than to urban luxury. Desperate as they had been for a. place to 
live, they had lasted exactly two 
days. Being a man of great sensitivity, Mr. Conroy had understood, 
and the reason they had given for 
leaving he had accepted with delicacy. 

"Certainly," he had nodded his 
head as they complained that the 
rooms were cold, and far, far too 
chilly for June. The kind of coldness, they said, that no amount of 
head could ever penetrate. And also 
— they groped for the words to explain the mood — it had a queer, 
dispiriting effect upon them. 

"Certainly," he had continued to 
nod as they said they would be happier away from the place. Naturally, if people reconsider theix 
finances, they do not wish to tell 
strangers they have made an expensive mistake. Mr. Conroy graciously accepted their apologies plus 
a full month's rent, and hung out 
the sign again. He waited, but not 
for long. 

It was, in fact, only a matter of 
hours before people began to crowd 
his office, compete for his favor. 
He finally decided upon a large 
woman with a determined mouth 
who wore her mink cape with a 
casualness only the very rich can 
afford. A mink cape, he deduced, 
usually suggests ability to pay. 

But it did not, could not, provide 
the necessary warmth against a deep, 



soul-embalming chill. In a few days, 
she too was gone. 

"This nonsense has AOHG too 
far," Mr. Conroy said to himself. 
Bitten wtih curiosity, however, he 
had visited the apartment for the 
first time. It was an ineffably lovely 
place. Cool yes, but it was a relaxing, inviting coolness. 

And now here was mis pair who 
looked AS if they could appreciate a 
fine thing. 

He put on his hat and joined 
them. ■ 
"All tighty, my car is out front," 
he said. 

A few minutes later, they entered 
the white building, stepped into the 
grilled self-service elevator and rose 
to the nineteenth floor. Mr. Conroy 
fitted a key into a door set among 
mirrored panels. He swung the door 
wide and turned with an arch smile 
and x nourishing bow. 

"Enter, Madame." 

He stood by quietly as he watched the impact of the perfection 
within expressed on their faces. 
The woman moved slowly about, 
her lips trembling. She touched 
pieces of china, ran her hands over 
the velvet draperies, caressed the 
brocaded silk chairs and sank into 
the yielding sofa. 

"Oh, Timothy." She extended 
her arms, and against the shadows 
her hands seemed like pale, carved 
bits of fluted china. 

"Like it ?" Mr. Con roy asked 
softly. 

The man leaned over and kissed 
her check. "Whatever you wish, 



46 FANTASTIC 

Ken d retti." Sh e rested her f ace 
against his shoulder. "Yes, Timothy, this is home." 

The renting agent cleared his 
throat. "Let me show you the rest 
of the apartment. * He strode to the 
windows and drew apart the drapes. 
Tiny lances of sunlight pierced the 
semi-darkness and glittered on the 
silver candlesticks. 

"There is a wonderful view of 
the river from the balcony." He 
danced tip three steps and walked 
out onto the flagged terrace. After a 
moment the man and the woman 
joined him. They leaned against the 
parapet and gazed out into the distance 

"The river looks so blue from 
here," the woman said. Mr. Conroy 
hopped about impatiently. Her husband grinned at his wife. "Come, 
dear, we're keeping Mr. Conroy 
from his appointed rounds." 

"Thank you," Mr. Conroy said. 
"Let me show you the bathroom. 
It's simply — " he shook his head 
and pursed his lips expressively — ■ 
"it's simply the last word in bathrooms." 

They followed him languidly 
back across the living room, and 
through the hallway. He flung open 
the bathroom door and flicked up 
the switch. 

"See, a plexiglass shower compartment, a separate dressing alcove 
for m'lady. Everydiing you could 
possibly wish for in a bathroom," 
He sighed in admiration. 

"Wonderful," the man said. 
"The acoustics are good too. Do 



UNIVFRSH 

you sing in the shower, Mr. Conroy?" 

Mr. Conroy hesitated, glancing 
at the woman. "I take baths." He 
quickly opened an adjoining door 
and stepped aside to let them enter. 

"The bedroom. Cross ventilation, 
plenty of closet space. Angora 
rugs." 

"Lovely," the woman sighed, 
"And the kitchen. Ah, what a 
kitchen." In his enthusiasm, he almost pushed them aside rudely. He 
apologized with a distracted murmur and scampered away. 

"Here you are, sir. If you wish to 
dabble in recipes, you can mess 
about to your heart's content. This 
kitchen, Madame, is a cook's delight." 

"A splendid arrangement," the 
man agreed. They returned to the 
living room. 

"Well — what do you think ?" 
Mr. Conroy asked, fearing an inevitable question. It came. 

The woman leaned forward, a 
puzzled expression on her face. 
"Tell us f Mr. Conroy, why hasn't 
this beautiful apartment been rented?" 

A con f ession bubbled on Mr. 
Conroy's tongue, but hi? suppressed 
it. Besides, it wasn't chilly here at 
all. It was warm, fragrant, a tribute 
to the senses. 

"My dear," he lied, "you are the 
first, the very first to have the opportunity to take this place since it 
became vacant Many people have 
wanted it, but I felt it would be 
better to wait until the proper in


AN APARTMENT FOR RENT 



habitants came along. You two, I 
feel, seem to belong here." 

'"Why, thank you, that is indeed a 
compliment." The woman rose and 
stood before the fireplace. It should 
be Ht, Mr. Conroy thought, and was 
suddenly aware of an insidious 
coldness that seemed to curl around 
him. He shivered. A moment ago it 
had been so pleasant here. He looked at the others and hesitated, wondering if he should share his feelings with them. But the chill was 
insistent and froze out all business 
consideration. And his hands felt 
clammy. 

"Do you feel cold?" he asked. 

"Why, no." The woman leaned 
toward him, her voice flowing from 
sweet, smiling lips. "Not at all," 
her husband added. "It's cozy here." 

Well then, Mr. Conroy thought, 
why spoil it? He stood up briskly, 
anxious to terminate the business, 



47 

less chill and 



to get out into ai 
easier to breathe. 

"It's settled then ?" 

"Settled. We'll take it.** 

"Good. You have made an excellent choice." He put on his hat and 
walked to the door. As far as he 
was concerned, they were light behind him. He opened the door, held 
it long enough for two people to 
pass through, and closed it. 

Inside, a gentle, disembodied 
feminine tinkle vibrated through 
the air. 

"There you go, you funny littleman, thinking we're still with you. 
We just had to come hotrc, since 
there is nothing, absolutely no plateto live, even out there. Darling, do 
you think he would have understood if wc told him that the housing shortage is universal?" 

"1 doubt it." Her husband vibrated a yawn. 




In our very next issue one of science fantasy's most brilliant writers boldly 
strips the veils from the most terrifying of human mysti fies, so near thk DARKNESS by Theodore Sturgeon is an entertainment special touched by greatness. 



rafferty^s 
reasons 

by . , . Frederik Pobl 



In that chill, cruel "Utopia" one 
remorseless obsession dominated 
Rafferty. He must kill the man who 
expected him to vote for Mudgins, 



It was the year of all Ihc projects, and nearly Election time. Vote 
for muaghtsi screamed the posters. 
Hp put us bnck to work! 

Even Rafferty was back at work, 
taken off the technological dole, 
and he sat there in his boss' office, 
looking at him and hating him. Fat 
old John Girty, his boss. A Mudgins man from the old Fifth Precinct 
days, a man with the lowest phase 
number in the state. 

'■Riffraff !" Girty stormed. "A. 
good job is wasted on a bum like 
you. You wish you were back on 
relief !" 

Rafferty only nodded, his face 
full of misery, his heart black murder. 

"Mark my words, you'll wrctk 
the whole project !" Girty said 
ominously. "And when the Projects 
go, the Machine will come back." 

Rafferty nodded again. He wasn't 
listening, although he appeared to 
be. He was watching his hand on 
the desk. The hand was movinp 
crawling slowly over the chippef 
plastic top like a thick-legged 
spider. It was crawling toward 
letter opener. 

"Take warning, Rafferty," said 



frederik Pohl believes this to be jms about the best science fiction short 
story he has ever written. To agree — as we do — is to pay Air. Poht a very 
high compliment, for he has an enviable record of fine starter to hit credit 
They include several unusual anthologized yarns and a widely popular pocke! 
book novel, gladiator- at- law, written in collaboration with Cyril Komblitth. 
The hateful John Girty of this story is an insidiously terrifying individual. 



48 



RATFERTY S REASONS 



40 



Girty. "You're a trouble-maker. 
Thank heaven I've got a few loyal 
workers in the Project, to tell me 
about skunks like you ! Don't let 
me hear about any complaints from 
you again. If you don't like your 
job, you can quit." Of course, he 
couldn't, and Girty knew it. But it 
was a way lo end the conversation, 
and he turned and stalked out of 
the room. 

Rafferty sat there, watching his 
hand, but it was only a hand again. 
His hand, weak and helpless like 
himself, and Ihe letter opener was 
only a letter opener. He got up 
after a while and leaned absently 
against the hooded computer that 
could have unemployed them all— 
if it weren't for Mudgins and his 
New Way. You couldn't say he was 
thinking, exactly, although there 
was a- lot to think about in the silent computer under its sealed plastic cover. But he couldn't be doing 
that 

Not under the New Way. 

It was half an hour before Rafferry opened his books again, before 
he dipped his pens in the red ink 
and tin- Mack ink and wrote down 
the figures. If Rafferty was capable 
of pride, he was proud of the way 
he kept the Project's books. Midlines had taught him how to keep 
books, and even Mudgins granted 
that machines were useful for that 
sort of thing. The dark fever inside 
him slowly receded, and the artist 
that lived in Rafferty, (lie creator 
inside of every man, admired the 
cool neat numbers that he made. 



He lived with the cool numbers 
all the long afternoon. {Vole for 
Mudgins and the Ten-Hour Day! 
the slogans said.) And they calmed 
him. But when the end of the day 
came and fat John Girty came out 
of his office and look down his 
blade hat and walked out, without 
a smile, without a word — 

Then it was that the Mack heat 
inside Rafferty surged up again, and 
the smoke of it bit his nostrils. Nut 
for ten minutes did he get up to 
leave himself, not until all the others had gone and no one was there 
to see him tremble as he walked 
out with a look of utter desperation in his eyes. 

Rafferty walked past the lines of 
tables, walked up the slideway, and 
to the far corner of the balcony 
before he put down his tray. All 
by himself he sat there, as far as 
he could get from the other people 
who were eating their Evening 
Issue meal. He sat down and ate 
wh.it w as bef o re him, n ot raring 
what it was or how it tasted, for 
everything tasted alike to Rafferty. 
All bitter with the bitterness that 
is the taste of hatred. 

"I hate him," Rafferty said 
woodcnly. "I would like very much 
lo kill him. I think it would be 
nice to kill him. Fat Girty, some 
day I will kill you." 

Rafferty talked to himself, hardly making a sound, never moving 
His lips. It wasn't thinking out loud, 
because it wasn't thinking, only 
talking, and it was not out loud. 
Wherever he was. Rafferty talked 



50 FANTASTIC 

tOi himself. No one heard him, no 
one was meant to hear him. 

"I hate your lousy guts," RafTcrty 
would say, and the man beside 
him would smile and bob his head 
and never know that RafTcrty had 
said anything at all. 

He would talk to people who 
weren't there. When he first went 
on the Projects, Rafferty thought 
that some day he would say those 
things to people. Now lie knew 
that he would never say them to 
anyone but himself. 

"You are a cow," RafTcrty said. 
He was talking to Girty, who wasn't anywhere near the New Way 
cafeteria where the Projects personnel ate. "You say I'm a troublemaker, when I only want them to 
leave me alone. You think I make 
mistakes with the numbers in the 
books. I don't. I never make mistakes when I write down numbers 
and add them. But you think I do." 

If Gi rty had been there, he would 
have denied it — because how could 
Rafferty make mistakes after the 
machines had taught him ? But 
Girty wasn't there, and the rest of 
the people around RalTerty in the 
cafeteria went on eating and talking and reading, except for a few 
as silent and solitary as RafTcrty 
himself. None of them heard him. 

RafTcrty picked up the big dish 
and put it away from him, picked 
up a smaller dish and put it down 
in front of him, touched a fork to 
the soggy but vitamin-rich and expertly synthesized pic. 

"Your secretary," said RalTerty 



UNIVERSE 

in his silent voice, "she makes mistakes, though. Perhaps I should 
kill her too, cow." 

Rafferty finished the pic and 
went down the stairs. 

"You blame me for everything," 
Rafferty sard, pushing silently 
through the crowd at the coffeebeverage urn. He put a Project-slug 
in the slot and held the lever down 
while his cup filled with three 
streams of fluid, one black, one 
white, one colorless. "You don't 
treat me right, cow," he said, and 
turned away. 

A man jostled him and scalding 
pain ran up RafTcrty's wrist as the 
hot drink slopped over. 

RafTcrty turned to him slowly. 
"You are a filthy pig," he said 
voicelessly, smiling. "Your mother 
walked the streets." 

The man muttered, "Sorry," over 
his shoulder. 

RafTcrty sat down at another table 
with a party of three young Project girls who never looked at him, 
but talked loudly among themselves. 

"I'll kill you, Girty," RalTerty 
said, as he stirred the coffee-beverage and drank tt. 

"1*11 kill you, Girty," he said, 
and went home to his dormitory 
bed. 

John Girty said peevishly: "I 
Want you all to try to act like human beings this morning. We have 
an important visitor from Phase 
Four." 

The Project, nodded respectfully 



RAFFERTY*! 

and buckled down to work and 
when the important visitor arrived 
and stood with Girty, looking over 
the busy room, not even Rafferty 
looked up. 

But the visitor looked at Rafferty, 
and said something in an undertone to Girty. "Oh, well, of 
course," said Girty. "We get all 
kinds here. That one has a bad 
record. He was some kind of an 
artut, or picture painter, or something like that under the Old Way. 
They take a lot of work, those 
marginal ones, and, as you see, 
they're likely to turn out sullen." 

The visitor said something 
again and ' Girty laughed. "He 
might not like it," he said with 
heavy, angry humor. "Heaven help 
us all if we ran this Project the 
way he likes. But come on into my 
private office. You'll be interested 
in our overtime schedule — " 

They were gone, and Girty was 
right, Rafferty did not resent the 
way they talked about him, no more 
than St. Lawrence, roasting on his 
grid, would have resented a sneering word from his torturers. Rafferty hadn't the scope left to resent 
small injuries. 

The electronic call-me-up whispered on old Miss Sandburg's desk, 
and she limped into Girty's office, 
clutching her stenographer's pad as 
though it might bite. She was a sour 
one too, for all she was second in 
command of the Project office. She 
had been a wife and a mother 
once, and they said that she didn't 



REASONS 5 1 

really want to work. But she worked, of course. 

Rafferty sat hunched over his 
books, looking a* John Girty's door 
without turning his head. He saw 
old Ellen Sandburg go in, and saw 
her come out again ten minutes 
later, with the spider-web lines 
sharper around her eyes, and the 
white lips pressed hard together. 
"You arc a slave," Rafferty said 
without a sound. "You let him bully 
you because you like to be a slave. 
But I don't." 

But he was working with the 
cool numbers then, and he lost himself. The zeroes and fives and decimals moved in orderly progression, 
and there was no hate in (hem, 
nothing but chill straightness that 
never changed. 

Only at three o'clock in the afternoon, when he had to take the 
Saturday payroll into fat John 
Gi rty's office to be checked and 
verified, did the coolness fall away 
and leave him burning. "I won't 
kiss your foot," said Rafferty, and 
opened the door without knocking. 
"I'm as good as you are, cow," said 
Rafferty. and dumped the carton of 
pay envelopes silently on Girty's 
desk. 

But Girty hardly looked at him, 
only grunted with his fat, angry 
cow's grunt and thumbed irritably 
through the envelopes. But when 
Rafferty went back to his desk the 
numbers would not go right. They 
were hot red and smoldering black, 
and they swirled and bloated before his stinging eyes. He sat there 



52 FANTASTIC 

and watched them swirl and swell 
as fat as fat John Girty. He just 
sat there, Rafferty did, holding his 
pen over the ledger, moving his 
lingers as though he were writing, 
but never touching pen to paper 

until five o'clock, early Saturday 
quilting time. 

Then fat John Girty came out 
of his office and dumped the pay 
envelopes on Rafferty's desk again, 
and took his hat and left. The 
clerks and the girls put away their 
papers, and took their coats from 
where they had hidden them behind the .sheeted bookkeeping machines and lined up before Rafferty's desk to get their pay. 

"The Project pays you to work, 
not to collect money." That was 
what Girty said. "On the Project's 
time you work. You get paid on 
your own time. You get off early on 

Saturdays anyhow*." 

It wasn't fair. But all Rafferty 
could do when Girty went out of 
the office was to stare after him 
for a second, with his own hot, 
black heart showing in his eyes, 
and try to rush through handing 
out the payroll. 

"You're a coward, .Girty," he 
said without a sound, and handed 
a fat yellow envelope of Projectvouchers and Project-slugs to Ellen 
Sandburg. 

"Yon know that I hate your guts, 
so you run away," he said. "But it 
won't help you, cow. You can run 
away. But I can catch you." 

Fifteen minutes start John Girty 



UNIVERSE 

had. No more. But it took Rafferty 
over an hour to make it up. An 
hour of looking in all the expensive, free-market restaurants where 
Girty might be, pressing his forehead against the glass like an urchin 
on Christmas day, only with the 
blackness coming out of no urchin's 
eyes. 

The streets were packed, and 
crowds bumped against Rafferty, 
some careless and impolite, some 
doddering and apologetic, and once 
or twice a man as bleak and frozen 
as Rafferty himself. 

It was week-end going-out night, 
an d cv et y s t r eet coin er had its 
Mudgins Demonstrator on his flagdraped platform, frightening the 
passers-by with prophecies of the 
return of Unemployment and the 
Machine. Rafferty noticed that he 
was hungry, but he didn't have time 
to eat, not while he was looking 
for Fat John Girty and while the 
letter opener was secretly fondled 
in his pocket. 

And then at the end of the 
search, to see John Girty just as 
he was coming out of the biggest 
free-market restaurant of all and 
get into a taxtcab, A taxicab, Lhat 
cost real money. And there was 
Rafferty, with two dollar bills of 
real money in his pocket, hoarded 
over months, and a pocketful of 
Project-vouchers and Project-slugs. 

He did it. He took another cab 
to follow Girty, but he sat with his 
heart in his mouth behind the cab 
driver, watching the clicking black 
numbers on the meter and doing 



rafferty's REASOMS 



53 



something that was close to praying. But of course it wasn't really 
praying, under the New Way. 

Rafferty snarled voiceless curses 
at the cab driver, who had looked 
so openly suspicious of his Project 
suit and his panther's eyes, and so 
contemptuous of Rafferty's fumbling directions as he tried to keep 
them on the trail of the fat mail in 
the cab ahead. 

"I ought to kill you. too," Rafferty told the driver, but silently. 
"I ought to cut your throat the way 
I'm going to cut the fat cow's throat 
with what I have hidden here." 

The driver sat on his little bucket 
.scat, where they had ripped out 
the automatic control apparatus to 
make room foi a human driver under the New Way, and never knew 
that murder was right behind him. 
But it was only a short ride — fortunately for Rafferty's two dollars. 
The meter said forty cents. 

"I ought to kill you," Rafferty 
said again, not looking at the driver 
who was fumbling for change but 
staring at the enormous white Old 
Way building Girty had gone into. 
"You deserve to be killed. I'll give 
you a tip, and you'll go and tell 
the Mudgins police that I'm following Girty to cut his throat. Take 
my money and tell the police, that's 
what you'll do." He picked up the 
half dollar from the driver's palm 
and left the dime. "X ought to kill 
you too." 

But the driver couldn't tell them 
what he didn't know, so Rafferty 
bought a newspaper at a stand and 



stood looking at the headlines obstinately until he heard the cab 
drive away. The headlines on the 
news stories said Liquidation of 
80,000 Wilfully Unemployed and 
Legislators Hail Mudgins Way 
and Project Kitchens to Get New 
Wonder Yeast Meal, but it had 
been a long time since Rafferty had 
read even a headline in a newspaper, and he didn't read them 
now. He only looked at them unseeing until the cab was gone, and 
then he looked up at thf big white 
building. It Was a Turkish bath. 

"Fat old cow," Rafferty laughed 
silently. "So fat you go to a place 
like this to die." 

Rafferty tore the newspaper in 
half and threw it on the street, and 
then he went in, one hand on the 
thing in his pocket, although the 
man in the lobby looked at him 
oddly. 

He had to pay a dollar, real 
money, to get in, and that left him 
with forty-live cents and the Project-vouchers, the useless Projectvouchers that they wouldn't take in 
a free-market place like this. But 
he didn't need even forty-five cents, 
not for what he had in mind. 

But there was a problem. Pie had 
to put all his clothes in a locker, 
all of them. He stood there naked, 
a lean, bent man with panther's 
eyes, wishing he had a pocket. But 
there was no pocket in his skin, 
and he had to ( leave the long, sharp 
letter opener in the locker. 

Once upon a time, it seemed to 
Rafferty, a long, long time ago. 



54 FANTASTIC 

someone who then had been that 
wlikh was Rafferty now had been 
in a plate like this. That was during what they called the "Old 
Way," although, it seemed to Rafferty, they hadn't called it that 
then. There was something there 
thai did not add up neatly in his 
mind, but he was walking through 
a hot, steamy corridor of tile, and 
he didn't bother about that any 
more. It was damp underfoot, and 
there were splashing showers 
alongside. He stepped into a shower 
and let the water thunder on him. 

And he turned his face up into 
the stream and cowered back, out 
of sight, as fat old John Girty 
puffed pinkly past. 

Girty was naked as a newborn, 
soft as a moulted crab, flabby as a 
pink harem eunuch. "I spit," Rafferty soundlessly told the roaring 
water. "Fat, soft thing. You're 
dirty, cow. 

"Fat and dirty — 

"I'll kill you, Girty." 

Rafferty stood in the steam 
room, peering across the corridor 
at the massage tables where fat 
Girty was presenting his flabby 
pink flesh to be thumped. Rafferty 
couldn't see through the clouded 
glass and so he had to keep opening the door, and every time he 
opened it steam billowed out and 
drafts knifed in on the men who 
sat naked on wooden benches in 
the steam. The metal door burned 
Rafferly's hand, he noticed, but it 
was a cool thing compared to the 



UNIVERSE 

black heat that stung his throat inside him. 

Girty was still waddling and 
puffing around the massage table, 
talking to the rubber. Raffcrty let 
the door to the steani room dose 
on him, and squinted around the 
little cube of hell he was in. There 
were dim loose shapes sprawled 
around the walls. Some were fat 
and many were old, but none was 
as flabby as John Girty. 

There were three lights on the 
wall of the steam room, head high, 
candle pale. There was a fourth 
light that was burned out, and Rafferty sat down in the little dark 
under it, waiting until it was time. 

"T have a knife to kill you with," 
he crooned soundlessly. "Fat cow. 
I have a knife to cut you with and 
stab you with. I'll kill you, Girty." 

Rafferty sat there with patient 
violence, like an avalanche waiting 
on cue in the wings of a spectacular drama. He was in no hurry; he 
might perhaps move very fast indeed, fast as lightning or the star 
rays that shoot across the void, but 
he would not be hurrying. 

There was no time for such as 
Rafferty, and no longing for waiting to come to an end, and no regret 
for time lost. Though perhaps there 
once had been, before Mudgins, 
and the New Way, and the machines that taught Rafferty and those 
like Rafferty how to do the work 
of machines. 

It was time to look out the door 
again, and he got up, squinting his 
white-hot eyes against the steam, 



RAFFERTY S REASONS 



and walked over. In the massage 
room Girty was on the table now, 
with a white towel Over his ugliness. A tall, brown man in trunks 
clapped goggles to Girty's eyes and 
pressed a switch that lit a shimmering violet light overhead. 

"Close the door, damn it!" One 
of the dim white shapes behind 
KaiTerly was sitting up and swearing at him. 

"Your mother loved hogs," Rafferty said without voice, but he 
closed the door and walked out. 

This was the part that wis hard 
to do. He walked backward and 
sidewisc Irke a crab, keeping his face 
hidden from even the closed, goggled eyes of Girty. He climbed onto 
a slab next to Girty and lay down 
with Ins head turned away. 

"Pat goggles on me, you filthy 
pig," he soundlessly ordered the 
rubber. "'Hide my face before Girty 
looks this way." His averted eyes 
saw a sign on the wall: 

Swedish Rub $1.00 

Salt Rjib 75 

Sun Lamp & Manage .... 1.50 

RafTerty had a twenty- five- centpiece and two dimes. And the 
Project-vouchers, of course, but not 
for here. The rubber came, then, 
and covered RafTerty. He looked at 
him thoughtfully for a moment before he spoke, but all he said was: 

"Good evening, sir. Swedish rub 
today?" 

RafTerty nodded, looking expres* 
sionlcssly into the rubber's coarse, 



tanned face. He could not speak 
out loud, so close to Girty's fat but 
listening ears, but he only had to 
nod. "Anything, filthy pig," he 
said soundlessly. "One dollar is 
nothing. Perhaps I will pay you 
with the same knife 1 pay Girty 
with." 

The rubber assembled his 
greases and cloths and RafTerty 
waited until it was time. He thought 
about the one dollar of real money 
that someone in this place would 
expect him to pay, but of course 
he would have paid all his bills in 
full, for ever, before he came to 
the cashier's window again. He 
thought of the letter opener, lost 
to him in the locker down below. 
But the knife was better, eight 
inches long and carefully honed, 
with a thin blade that would slash 
a throat or go between two ribs. 

"It will make meat out of Girty," 
he told the un hearing rubber. "Perhaps it will make meat out of you. 
I know it will make meat out of 
me, too, but not until I have finished with fat Girty." 

It was good diat the knife was 
there, to solve all his problems at 
once. He waited until it was time. 

Girty's lamp went out, and his 
rubber rolled him over, and Girty 
immediately began talking to the 
man. RafTerty could hear the hardmuscled cupped-hand slaps on the 
sagging pink flesh, and Girty's 
wheezing, jolting voice. "I'll kill 
you, Girty," lie said, and it was 
like a hymn. "I'll kill you, Girty," 
he said without sound. 



^6 FANTASTIC 

Girty was saying proudly, "Hell, 
I've — Ugh — worked with Mudgim 
just like — ugh — that. Ever since the 
old Fifth — ugh — Precinct days. He 
and I—" 

Rafferty wasn't listening, not exactly. He was letting the words How 
over him as unnoticed as his rubber's attentions, waiting for it to be 
time. There would be some sort of 
signal, it seemed to him, and then 
lie would make meat out of Girty. 

Not exactly listening, he caught 
a sudden change in Girty's voice 
and for a second he tensed, thinking perhaps it was die signal. 
"Easy, sir," said his rubber, thinking he had hit a sore spot. 

But Rafferty didn't relax until he 
realized that the change in Girty's 
voice was because he was greeting 
a friend. Rafferty peered and saw 
another man, as pink as Girty but 
nothing like as fat, as old but not 
nearly as flabby, advancing as bare 
as a baby and talking to Girty. 

"Lay down with dogs, you fool," 
said Rafferty venomously, not making a sound, "and yon get up with 
fleas. I warn you, Girty-lovcr. I'll 
kill you too, with a knife that will 
hack your heart out before you 
even see it. Cows." 

Rafferty's rubber flopped him 
over then, and for a plunging moment it seemed to Rafferty the man 
would surely see the knife. But he 
didn't say anything, only: "Easy, 
sir. Let me know if I'm too brisk." 

Rafferty lay face down on the 
slab, watching his fingers crawl 
across the cloth beside his face. 



UNIVERSE 
'The hands can kill you, Girty," 
be said voicclessly. "Rut the knife 
rs better. Go and run, with your 
Girty-loving friend. Wherever you 
go, I'll be there." 

They were talking, Girty and the 
Girty-lover, and Rafferty reached 
out to taste the conversation. The 
friend was complaining, while another masseur eased the kinks out 
of his shoulders, The friend was 
saying, "Sixty hours? That's a good 
long work week, yes. And it keeps 
them out of troubLc, I'm not denying it. But there's a fatigue factor, 
]ohn. After sixty hours a worker 
is bound to make mistakes." 

Girty said: "Not if he's been disciplined. Give them the New Way 
treatment, that's all." He laughed, 
like a pig's squeal. "I'd like to see 
them make mistakes then." 

His friend said: "I don't hold 
with the treatments." 

Girty said, after a moment, in s 
voice that was still a cow's voice, 
but the voice of a shocked and 
stern cow: "Are you again si 
Mud gins ?" 

Rafferty stopped feeling the texture of the conversation then, because what did it matter to him? 
The Girty-lover was defensive and 
over- emphatic, and Girty himself 
was hostile and only slowly allowed himself to be soothed. They 
were talking about full employment and the horrors of the Old 
Way and the Machine, and the 
Girty-lover was petulantly insisting 
that the machine-education treatments had — unspecified — faults. 



rafferty': 

Rafferty didn't listen. The New 
Way treatments were machines 
droning and flashing in your ears 
and hammering, hammering, hammering at you until you couldn't 
make a mistake, not in the things 
they taught you to do. Because you 
were half machine yourself, by the 
time they finished fluxing and 
forging your mind. And full employment was overtime at the Project and an end to the — the studio, 
or whatever that word was, that 
once had meant something back in 
the days of the Machine and — and 
Art, whatever that word was. 

But what did it matter to Rafferty, that he should listen? Better to 
lie there with the secret knowledge 
of e igh t inches of hon ed steel, 
waiting. 

John Girty was saying in his 
hoarse cow's rumble, "I tell you, 
Mudgins saved us from going to 
hell in a handbasket! You don't 
remember the Old Way. Love. 
Churches. And crackpots making 
speeches — -about anything. Voting 
— for anybody, anybody you liked. 
Mudgins cleaned all that up. 'Keep 
them busy,* he said, 'and you'll 
keep them out of trouble.' Get rid 
of the Machine, put people back 
to work. If they don't want to 
work the way they ought to — make 
them ! I remember, back in the 
Fifth—" 

Rafferty wasn't listening, not exactly, but the words were fuel to 
keep him going. But the rubber 
was through with him, and flopped him right-sidc-up again, and 



REASONS 57 

again there was that moment when 
the universe stopped, waiting to sec 
if the man would see the knife. 

The rubber said cheerfully, 
"There you are, sir. That'll fix you 
up. Now how about a little suntan to tone up the skin?" His hand 
was already on the switch, and the 
tube overhead flared violet. Rafferty stared ragingly at it through 
his goggles, hating . the darkened, 
shapeless core of the light. 

Girty's oration broke off: " — but 
that's the way Mudgins always— 
Hey. Say, excuse me, but — Hey." 

Rafferty froze. From the coiner 
of his eye he saw John Girty ponderously pushing himself up on 
one flabby arm, staring at him with 
d oubt in the w ri nklcd little eyes . 
Near-sighted Girty — but he had 
recognized Rafferty ! 

It was the moment of the knife. 
Quite slowly Rafferty lowered his 
legs to the floor. "Dirty cow," he 
said soundlessly. He felt the knife, 
keen and ruthless in his hand. 
Eight slim inches to kill with. 
"Dirty, dirty, dirty," he chanted — 

but it was not soundlessly. "Dirty, 
dirty, I'll kill you, Girty." It was 
loud now, his own voice. 

Oh, they tried to stop him. He 
could have laughed at that, if he 
had remembered how. Try to stop 
Rafferty, widi an eight-inch killing 
knife! They were all shrieking and 
yowling and running about at once, 
and they grabbed at him, but he 
brushed them off like the staining 
soot of the air. And they got in 
his way, but it cost them. He hack


■jfe FANTASTIC 

cd and stabbed and sliced and slew. 

lie was a Spartacus, and a Lizzie 
Borden, swordsman and butcher. 
He slabbed every one of them to 
the heart and ripped Ihem up and 
down, and for the first time in 
longer than he could know, Rafferty was Rafferty, Mister RafTerly, 
a man who had once been a human being and, God save the mark, 
an artist, and not a mere flesh 
ersatz for a bookkeeping machine. 
Kill and slice and tcarLThcy overturned furniture, squealing and 
thundering, like a trapped horse 
kicking at the flaming, booming 
walls of its stall. But he killed 
them all, many times, this Rafferty 
who was Spartacus and Lizzie Borden — 

And, at the last, a warrior of the 
Samurai as well. 

When he had killed Ihem enough 
to slake the fever, he killed himself. Into the pit of the stomach 
and up. fie felt the blade slide and 
slice, too sharp to tear, a warrior's 
weapon. The eight-inch steel made 
cat's meat of his bowels and heart 
and lungs. Rafferty felt himself 
dying, but it was worth it, it was 
worth it, it was worth everything 
in the world . , . 

After he committed suicide, he 
sat there and watched his victims 
running about. It was several seconds before he noticed that he wasn't dead. 

Gtrty"s friend demanded: "Do 
you still think the machine treatments arc good?" 



UNIVERSE 

Girty said: "Ow. The ugly son 
beat me black and blue." He rubbed bio bruised pink paunch, staring 
at the door where they had carried 
Rafferty out, weeping. 

"You're lucky," said Girty's 
friend. "Suppose he really had a 
knife, instead of that old cigar butt 
he picked up. Suppose somebody 
else on your Project cracks tip, only 
this one gets a gun somewhere." 

Girty said petulantly, "Where 
would anybody get a gun these 
days?" He was getting his breath 
back, and his nerve. 

"Suppose he did," his friend insisted. 

Gitty said truculently: "Watch 
yourself. I don't stand for antiNew Way talk. So Rafferty cracked 
up. I knew he was a weak one. You 
can't make an omelette without 
breaking eggs, and what's it to me 
if somebody like Rafferty gets 
broken?" . 

He measured his words carefully. 
"People like Rafferty are troublemakers, they don't want to work, 
they don't want full employment. 
They liked the soft, rotting life under the Old Way and the Machine. 
If you don't give them treatments, 
they'll make trouble now. Sure, 
some of them crack up — like sometimes you put a casting in the press 
and it cracks, because it's brittle. 
Worthless. Mudgins knows what 
to do with the worthless ones. Make 
them ("it, or break them." 

"But I don't like Mudgins and 
his treatments," Girty's friend said 
violently . . . but not out loud. He 



RAFl'liRTY S REASONS 



sat up, wondcringly. He wasn't in 
the habit of talking to himself and 
he wondered if other people ever 
talked like that to themselves. 

Girty, unhearing, was brooding: 
"You'd think even a piece of trash 
like RafTerty would want to he part 
of something. Why wouldn't he? 
But no, he has to work up some 
crazy resentment — try to kill me. 
Why ? What reason could he 
have?" 

Girty's friend could not give him 



the answer, though he might have 
had suspicions. Mudgins could 
have answered him, and a few 
others around Mudgins or elsewhere. A few in high places who 
didn't need even touch-up courses 
under the machines, could have told 
him Rafferty's reasons. But only a 
few. The others, the many, many 
millions, they could never say what 
the reasons were; because some of 
them had never known them, and 
some had had to forget. 




A magazine whose availed aim is to bring its readers the best in mystery 
fiction must ever be on the alert for the totally unexpected. For the totally 
unexpected — and all of the experts agree on this — is the uarp-aftd-ttoof 
essence of a "surprise treat." And a surprise treat in truly magnificent selling 
is THE RED FOX OF THE CUMBERLAND*, a brand tieu true crime story and 
it's by the well known Leslie Charteris and in fantastic universe's 
compan'ton-in-crime, the saint detective magazine. //'/ on sale now. 



hawks 
over 
shem 

by ... . Robert E. Howard 
and L. Sprague de Camp 

Nothing could silence the scorn 
of Conan's laughter ringing free. 
For the day of the hawks was his 
greatest day under the flaming sun. 



1'he tall figure in the white 
cloak wheeled, cursing angrily, his 
hand at his scimitar hilt Not lightly did men walk the nighted streets 
of Asgalun, capital of Shemitish 
Pelishttya, for in the deserted 
wharfsheds and the dark, winding 
alleys of its unsavory river quarter, 
anything might happen. 

"Why do you follow me, dog?" 
he demanded. His voice was harsh, 
the Shemltic gutturals heavy with 
the accents of Hyrkani.i. 

Instantly another tall figure 
emerged from the shadows. He was 
clad, as was the first, in a cloak of 
white silk, but unlike the man who 
had challenged him he was barckneed and bare-headed. 

"I do not follow you!" The accent was different from the Hyrkanian's. "Cannot a stranger walk the 
streets without being insulted by 
every clumsy drunkard?" 

The two glared at each other, 
each gripping his hilt with a hand 
tense with passion. 

"I have been followed since 
nightfall," accused the Hyrkanian. 
"I have heard stealthy footsteps 



So stalwart a warrior is conan the barbarian, so fierce in battle and so everlastingly vital that his supremacy remains unchallenged in the entire wide sweep 
of fantastic literature. And we doubt if any writer of fantasy-adventure yarns 
ever penned his tales with more zest, exuberance and meticulous attention to 
exotic detail than the late, great Robert E. Howard, Enhance those talent.' 
with the witty, lively satire of a Spragne de Camp, and the collaboration which 
emerges ;j bound to be one of those unusual reading events which happen onuor twice in a lifetime. We make no attempt to conceal our pride in this story. 



60 



HAWKS OVER SIIEM 



6l 



along each of these- alleys. Now you 
come unexpectedly into view, in a 
place most suited for murder!" 

"Ishtar confound you!" said the 
oilier. "Why should I follow you? 
I have lost my way. I have never 
seen you before, and I hope never 
to see you again, vou Hyrkanian 
dog!" 

"Insolent swine!" cried the 
Hyrkanian in a gust of anger, unsheathing his scimitar. 

Then a stealthy pad of feet 
brought him round, springing back 
and wheeling to keep both the 
stranger and the newcomers before 
him. But the other man had drawn 
his own saber and was glaring past 
him. 

Three huge figures loomed formidably in the shadows, the dim 
starlight glinting on the curved 
blades of their upraised weapons. 
There was also a glimmer of white 
teeth and eyeballs against dark 
skins. 

For an instant there was tense 
stillness. Then one of the newcomers demanded in the liquid speech 
of the Kushites of the black kingdoms: "Which is our dog? Here 
be two clad alike, and the darkness 
makes them twins." 

"Cut both clown," replied another, who towered half a head 
above his huge companions. "We 
shall then make no mistake and 
leave no witnesses." 

So saying, the three Kushites 
came on in deadly silence, the giant 
advancing on the stranger, the other 
two on the Hyrkanian. 



The stranger did not await the 
attack. With a resounding oath he 
ran at the approaching colossus and 
slashed furiously at his head. The 
giant caught the stroke on his uplifted blade and grunted beneath 
the impact. The next instant, with 
a crafty twist and a wrench, he had 
locked his opponent's blade under 
his guard and torn the weapon 
from his hand. As it fell ringing 
on the stones a searing curse ripped from the stranger's hps. 

But even as the giant swept his 
broad scimitar aloft, the stranger 
sprang in under his lifted arm and 
drove his poniard to the hilt in the 
other's chest. Blood spurted along 
the stranger's wrist, and as he leapt 
back the scimitar fell waveringly, 
to cut through his silken kaffiyeh 
and glance from the steel cap beneath. With an anguished groan 
the giant sank to the ground. 

The stranger caught up his saber 
and turned to stare at the Hyrkanian, who was parrying the attack 
of the two remaining Kushites 
coolly, retreating slowly to keep 
them in front of him. He suddenly 
slashed one across the breast and 
shoulder, so that he also dropped 
his sword and fell to his knees with 
a moan. As he fell he gripped the 
Hyrkanian's knees and hung on 
like a leech. 

The Hyrkanian kicked and 
struggled in vain. The black arms, 
bulging with iron muscles, held 
him fast, while the surviving Kushite redoubled the fury of his 
strokes. 



62 



FANTASTIC UNIVERSE 



Even as the Kushite swordsman 
drt-w breath for a stroke that the 
hampered Hyrkanian could not 
have parried, he heard the rush of 
feet behind him. Before he could 
turn, the stranger's saber drove 
through him with such fury that 
the blade sprang half its length 
out of his breast, while the hilt 
smote him. fiercely between the 
shoulders. Life went out of him 
with an inarticulate cry. 

The Hyrkanian caved in the skull 
of his other antagonist with his 
hilt and shook himself free of the 
corpse. He turned to the stranger, 
who was pulling his saber out of 
the twitching body it had transfixed. 

"Why did you come to my aid?" 
he i 11411 ired. 

The other shrugged. "We were 
two men beset by rogues. Fate made 
us allies. Now, if you wish, wc 
will take up our quarrel again. You 
said I spied upon you." 

"I see my mistake and crave your 
pardon," answered the Hyrkanian 
promptly. "I know now who has 
been skulking after me." 

He wiped and sheathed his 
scimitar and bent over each corpse 
- in turn. When he came to the body 
of the giant slain by the stranger's 
poniard, he paused and murmured: 
"Soho! It s Keluka the Sworder! 
Of high rank this archer whose 
shaft is panelled with pearls!" 

He wrenched from the limp finger a heavy, ornate ring, slipped it 
inlo his sash, and laid hold on the 
garments of the dead man. "Help 



me to dispose of this carion, brother, so that no questions shall be 

asked." 

The stranger grasped a. bloodstained jacket in each hand and 
dragged the other two bodies after 
the Hyrkanian down a reeking dark 
alley, in which rose the broken 
curb of a ruined and forgotten 
well. The corpses plunged into the 
abyss and struck far below with 
sullen splashes. With a light laugh 
the Hyrkanian turncd
"Thc gods have made us allies," 
he said. "I owe you a debt." 

"You owe me nought," answered 
the other in a surly tone. 

"Words cannot level a mountain. 
I am Farouz, an archer of Xayarsha's Hyrkanian horse. Come with 
me to a more seemly spot, where 
we can converse in comfort." 

The stranger sheathed his saber 
grudgingly and followed the Hyrkanian. Their way led through the 
gloom of reeking alleys and along 
narrow winding streets. Asgalun 
was an amalgam of splendor and 
decay, where opulent palaces rose 
among the smoke-stained ruins of 
buildings of the remote past. A 
swarm of suburbs clustered about 
the walls of the forbidden inner 
city where dwelt King Akhlrom 
and his nobles. 

The two men came to a newer 
and more respectable quarter, 
where the latticed windows of overhanging balconies almost touched 
one another across the street. 

"All the shops are dark," grunted the stranger. "I cannot under


HAWKS OVER SHEM 



63 



stand it. A few days ago the city 
was lighted like day, from dusk to 
sunrise." 

The Hyrkanian nodded, then explained with a shrug: "One of 
Akhirom's whims. Now he has another, that no lights shall burn in 
Asgalun. What his mood will be 
tomorrow, Melek-Qarth only 
knows." 

They halted before an iron-bound 
door in a heavy stone arch, and the 
Hyrkanian rapped cautiously. A 
voice challenged from within and 
was answered by a password. The 
door was opened, and Farouz pushed into thick darkness, drawing 
I lis companion with him. The door 
closed behind them. A heavy 
leather curtain was pulled back, revealing a lamp-lit corridor and a 
scarred old Shemite. 

"An old soldier turned to wineselling," said the Hyrkanian. "Lead 
us to a chamber where we can be 
alone, Khannon." 

"Most of the chambers are 
empty," grumbled Khannon, limping b ef ore them . "I'm a rained 
man. Men fear to touch the cup, 
since the king banned wine. May 
Melek-Qarth smite him with 
gout!" 

The stranger glanced curiously 
into the larger chambers adjoining 
both sides of the corridor, where 
men sat at food and drink. Most 
of Khannon's customers were typical Pelishtim — stocky, swarthy men 
with hooked noses and curly blueblack beards. Occasionally one saw 
men of the more slender type that 



roamed the deserts of eastern Shem, 
or Hyrkanians or black Kushites 
from the mercenary army of Pelishtiya. 

Khannon bowed the two men 
into a small room where he spread 
mats for them. Then he set before 
them a great dish of fruits and 
nuts, poured wine from a bulging 
skin, and limped away muttering. 

"Pelishtiya has come upon evil 
days, brother," drawled the Hyrkanian, quaffing the wine of Kyros. 
He was a tall man, leanly but 
strongly built. Keen black eyes, 
slightly aslant, danced restlessly in 
a face with a yellowish tinge. His 
hawk-nose overhung a thin black 
mustache. His plain cloak was of 
costly fabric, his spired helmet was 
chased with silver, and jewels glittered in the hilt of his scimitar. 

Farouz looked at a man as tall 
as himself, but who contrasted with 
him in many ways. The other had 
thicker limbs and greater depth of 
chest: the build of a mountaineer. 
Under his white kaffiyeh his brown 
face, youthful but already seamed 
with the scars of brawls and battles, 
showed smooth-shaven. His natural 
complexion was lighter than that 
of the Hyrkanian, the darkness of 
his features being more of the sun 
than of nature. A hint of stormy 
fires smoldered in his cold blue 
eyes. He gulped his wine and 
smacked his lips in appreciation. 

Farouz grinned and refilled his 
goblet. "You fight well, brother. If 
Xayarsha's Hyrk.uiims were not so 



64 FANTASTIC 

infernally jealous of outsiders, 
you'd make a good trooper." 

The other merely grunted. 

"Who are you, anyway?" persisted Farouz. "I've told you who 
I am." 

"I ,am Ishbaq, a Zuagir from 
the eastern deserts." 

The Hyrkanian threw back his 
head and laughed loudly, bringing 
a scowl to the face of the other 
man, who said: "What is so funny 
about that?" 

"Do you expect me to believe 
you?" 

"Do you say I lie?" snarled the 
stranger. 

Farouz grinned. "No Zuagir ever 
•spoke Pelishtic with an accent like 
yours, for the Zuagir tongue is but 
a dialect of Shemitish, no more 
different from Pelishtic than the 
speech of us eastern Hyrkanians is 
from that of Turan. Moreover during our light with the Kushites you 
called upon strange gods — Crom 
and Manan nan— whose names I 
have heard before from the barbarians of the north and west. But 
do not be concerned. I am in your 
debt and can keep a secret." 

The stranger half started up, 
grasping his hilt. Farouz merely 
smiled and took a sip of wine. After an instant of almost ominous 
tension the stranger sank back and 
acknowledged with an air of discomfiture: 

"Very well. I am Conan, a Cimmerian, late of the army of King 
Sumuabi of Akkhariya." 

The Hyrkanian grinned and 



UNIVERSE 

stuffed grapes into his mouth. Between mastications he said: "You 
could never be a spy, friend Conan. You are too quick and open 
in your anger. What brings you to 
Asgal un?" 

"A little matter of revenge." 
"Who is your enemy?" 
"An Anaki named Otbbaal," said 
Conan, "may the dogs gnaw his 
bones !" 

Farouz whistled. "By MelekQaxth, you aim at a lofty target! 
Are you not aware that this man 
is a general of all King Akhirom's 
Anakian troops?" 

"Crom! It matters as little to me 
as if he were a collector of offal." 

"What has Othbaal done to 
you?" 

Conan said: "The people of 
Anakiya revolted against their king, 
who's an even bigger fool than 
Akhirom. They asked aid of Akkhariya. Sumuabi hoped they would 
succeed and choose a friendlier 
king than the one in power, so he 
called for volunteers. Five hundred 
of us marched to help the Anakim. 
But this accursed Othbaal had been 
playing both sides. He led the revolt to encourage the king's enemies to come out into the open, and 
then betrayed the rebels into the 
arms of the king, who butchered 
the lot. 

"Othbaal also knew we were 
coming, so he set a trap for us, and, 
ignorant of what had happened, we 
fell into it. Only I escaped with 
my life, and that by shamming 
death. The rest of us cither fell on 



HAWKS OVER SHEM 

the field, or were put to death with 
the fanciest tortures the king's Sabatcan torturer could devise." 

The moody blue eyes narrowed. 
"I've fought men before this and 
thought no worse of them afterwards, but in this case I swore I'd 
pay back Otlibaal for his perfidy. 
When I got back to Akkhariya I 
learned that he had fled from Anakiya for fear of the people and had 
come here. How has he risen so 
high so quickly?" 

"He is a cousin or something of 
King Akhirom, ' ' s aid Farouz. 
"Akhirom, though a Pelisti, is also 
a cousin of the king of Anakiya 
and was brought up at that court. 
The kings of these little Shemitisb 
city-states are all more or less related, which makes their wars all 
quarrels within the family and all 
the more bitter in consequence. 
How long have you been in Asgalun?" 

"Only a few days. Long enough 
to learn that the king is mad. No 
wine indeed!" Conan spat. 

"There is more to learn," said 
Farouz. "Akhirom is indeed mad, 
and the people murmur under his 
heel. He holds his power by means 
of three bodies of mercenary troops, 
with whose aid he overthrew and 
slew his brother, the previous king. 
First, the Anakim,, whom he recruited while an exile at the court 
of his cousin the king of Anakiya. 
Secondly, the black Kushitcs, who 
under their General Imbalayo yearly gain more power. And thirdly, 
the Hyrkanian horse, like myself. 



65 

Their general is Xayarsha, and 
among him and Imbalayo and Othbaal there is enough hatred and 
jealousy to have started a dozen 
wars. 

Farouz paused an instant, then 
went on: "OthbaaL came here last 
year as a penniless adventurer. He 
has risen partly by his relationship 
to Akhirom, and partly by the machinations of an Ophirean slavewoman named Rufia, whom he won 
at gaming from Xayarsha and then 
refused to return when the Hyrkanian had sobered up, which is another reason for there being 'little, 
love between them. There is a 
woman behind Akhirom, too. She 
is Zeriti the Stygian, a dangerous 
witch. Men say that she has driven 
him mad by the potions she has 
fed him to keep him under her governance. If that's true, then she 
defeated her own ends, for now 
nobody can control him." 



Conan set down his goblet and 
looked straight at Farouz. "Well, 
what now? Will you betray rne to 
the Anakim, or did you speak truth 
when you said you'd keep my secret?" 

Turning in his fingers the ring 
he had taken from FCeluka, Farouz 
mused: "I, too, owe Qthbaal a 
heavy debt. I'll do more than keep 
your secret. I will aid you in your 
vengeance ! For months I have been 
looking for some outsider whom 
I could trust in this enterprise." 

Conan started forward, his iron 
fingers gripping the Hyrkanian's 



66 



FANTASTIC UNIVERSR 



shoulder. "Do you speak the 
truth?" 

"I.c-l these potbellied Shemitish 
gods smite me if I lie! Listen to 
me carefully now . . 

II 

Lati-R, two hooded figures halted in a group of palms among the 
ruins of Asgalun. Before them lay 
the waters of a canal, and beyond 
it, rising from its bank, the great 
ba.slioned wall of sun-dried brick 
which encircled the inner city. The 
inner city was really a gigantic 
fortress, sheltering the king and 
his trusted nobles and mercenary 
troops, and forbidden to common 
men without a pass. 

"We could climb the wall," muttered Conan. 

"And find ourselves no nearer 
our enemy," said Farouz, groping 
in the shadows. "Here!" 

Conan saw the Hyrkanian fumbling at a shapeless heap of marble. 
"This is a very ancient ruined 
shrine," grumbled Farouz. "But 
perhaps — ah !" 

He lifled a broad slab, revealing 
steps leading down into darkness. 
Conan frowned suspiciously. 

Farouz explained: "This tunnel 
leads under the wall and up into 
the house of Othbaal, which stands 
just beyond." 

"Under the canal?" 
I ; .u mi.- nodded, his expression 
thoughtful. "Once Othbaal's house 
was the pleasure-house of King 
Uriaz, who slept in a stecl-wallcd 



chamber, guarded by tame lions — 

yet fell before the avenger's dagger 
in spile of his precautions. He prepared secret exits from all parts of 
his houses. Before Othbaal took the 
dwelling it belonged to his rival 
Xayarsha. The Anaki knows nothing of the secret, so come!" 

With drawn swords they groped 
down a flight of stone steps and 
advanced along a level tunnel in 
total blackness. Conan's groping 
fingers told him that the wills, 
floor, and ceiling were composed 
of huge blocks of stone. 

As they advanced, the stones became slippery and the air grew 
dank. Drops of water fell on Conan's neck, making him shiver and 
curse. They were passing under 
the canal, but after a moment the 
dampness abated. Farouz whispered a warning, and they mount cm! 
another flight of stairs. 

Ai the top the Hyrkanian rumbled with a catch. A panel slid 
aside and a soft light streamed in. 
Farouz slipped through the opening and, after Conan had followed, 
closed it behind them. 

It became one of the inlaid 
panels of the wall not differing 
to the sight from the other 
panels. They stood in a vaulted 
corridor, while Farouz pulled his 
leafliyeh around to hide his face and 
motioned Conan to do likewise. Farouz then led the way down the 
corridor without hesitation. The 
Cimmerian followed, sword in 
hand, glancing to right and left. 
They passed through a curtain 



HAWKS OVER SHEM 



of dark velvet and came upon an 
arched doorway of gold-inlaid 
ebony. A brawny black, clad only 
in a silken loin-cloth, started up 
from his do^p, sprang to his feet, 
and almost instantly swung a great 
scimitar. But he did not cry out 
and it was easy to see why. His 
open mouth revealed the cavernous 
emptiness of the mouth of a mule. 

"Do it quietly!" snapped Farouz, 
avoiding the sweep of the mute's 
sword. As the man stumbled from 
his wasted effort, Conan tripped 
him. He fell sprawling and Farouz 
passed his sword resolutely through 
[he dark body. 

"That was quick and silent 
enough!" breathed Farouz with a 
scowl. "Now for the real prey!" 

Cautiously he tried the door, 
while the giant Cimmerian crouched at his shoulder, eyes burning 
like those of a hunting tiger. The 
door gave inward and they sprang 
into the chamber. Farouz closed 
the door behind them and set his 
back to it, laughing at the man 
who had leaped up from his divan 
with a startled oath. Beside him 
a woman half rose from the cushions and screamed. 

Farouz said: "We've run the 
hnrk to cover, brother !" 

For a fraction of a second Conan 
took in the spectacle. Othb.ial was 
a tall, lusty man in the prime of 
life. His thick black hair was gathered in a knot at the nape of his 
neck and his black beard was oiled, 
curled, and precisely trimmed. Late 
as the hour was, he was fully clad 



67 

in silken kilt and velvet vest, under which gleamed the links of a 
mail-shirt. He dived for a scabbarded sword that lay on the floor 
beside the couch. 

As for the woman, she was not 
conventionally pretty but still good 
to look at— red-haired, with a 
hroad, slightly freckled face, and 
brown eyes sparkling with intelligence. 

"Flelp!" shouted Othbaal, rising 
to meet the Cimmerian's rush. 
"They have come to kill me!" 

Farouz started across the wide 
floor not more than a step behind 
Conan. But suddenly he turned and 
leaped back to the door through 
which they had come. With half an 
ear Conan was aware of a commotion in the corridor outside. He 
heard the thump of some heavy 
object rammed against the door, 
the next instant his blade was crossing that of the Anaki. The swords 
clanged in mid-air, showering 
sparks, flashing and flickering in 
the lamplight. 

Both men attacked almost simultaneously, smiting furiously, each 
too intent on the life of the other 
to gi ve much thought to showy 
swordplay. Each stroke had full 
weight and murderous will behind 
it. They fought in tight-lipped silence. 

As they circled, Conan saw, over 
Othbaal's shoulder, that FfljOUX had 
braced his shoulder against the 
door. From the other side came increasingly heavy blows, which had 



FANTASTIC UNIVERSE 



already torn the bolt loose. The 
woman bad vanished. 

"Can you deal with him?" said 
Farouz. "If I let this door go, his 
slaves will pour in." 

"All right so far," grunted Conan, parrying a ferocious slash. 

"Be quick, then, for I cannot 
hold them much longer." 

Conan plunged in with fresh 
ferocity. Now it was the Anaki 
whose attention was devoted to 
parrying the Cimmerian's sword, 
which beat on his blade like a 
hammer on an anvil. The sheer 
strength and fury of the barbarian 
began to tell. 

6th baa 1 paled under his swarthy 
skin, ami his breath came in gasps 
as he gave ground, blood streaming from gashes on his shoulders 
and thighs. Conan bled too, but 
there was no slackening in the 
headlong fury of his attack. 

Othbaal was close to the tapestried wall when suddenly he sprang 
aside, just as Conan lunged. Carried off-balance by his wasted 
thrust, the Cimmerian plunged forward and his sword-point clashed 
against the stone beneath the tapestries. At the same instant Othbaal 
slashed at his foe's head with all 
his waning power. 

But the sword of Stygian steel, 
instead of snapping like a lesser 
blade, bent and sprang straight 
again. The descending scimitar bit 
through Conan's helmet into the 
scalp beneath. But before Othbaal 
could recover li is balance, Conan's 
heavy blade sheared upward 



through steel links and hip-bone to 
grate into the man's spinal column. 

The Anaki reeled and fell with 
a Jinking cry. For an instant he 
clawed in agony at the heavy carpet, trying desperately to rise. Then 
a convulsive shudder passed over 
him, and lie went limp. 

Conan, reeling with the fury of 
battle, was driving his sword in 
silent frenzy again and again into 
the slumped form at his feet. So 
drunken with blind rage was he that 
he failed to realize that his antagonist was dead until Farouz called 
out: 

"Follow me, Conan! They've 
stopped their attack to bring up a 
heavier ram. Wc can run for it." 

Dazedly Conan raked the blood 
f rora his eyes, and tore off his 
riven headpiece, exposing his 
square-cut black mane. A crimson 
torrent descended into his face, 
blinding him anew. He stooped 
and tore a strip from Oihbaal's kilt 
to bind up his head. 

"See that door?" cried Farouz, 
pointing. "Ruiia fled that way, the 
slut! If you're ready we'll run for 
it." 

Conan saw an inconspicuous 
little door to one side of the couch. 
It had been concealed by draperies, 
but Ruiia in her flight had disarranged them and left the portal 
wide open behind her. 

Farouz took from his girdle the 
ring that he had pulled from the 
finger of the killer, Keluka. He 
ran across the floor, dropped the 
ring near Othbaal's body, and con


HAWKS OVER 3HEM 



tinucd on toward the small door. 
Conan, weaving slightly, followed 
him, though he had to crouch and 
almost turn sideways to get 
through. 

Swiftly they emerged into another corridor. Farouz led Conan 
by a roundabout route, turning and 
twisting through a maze of passages, until Conan was hopelessly 
lost. By this means they avoided 
the main body of household retainers, gathered in the corridor 
outside the principal entrance to 
the room where they had slain Othbaal. 

Once they aroused feminine 
screams from a room they passed, 
but Farouz kept on. Presently they 
reached the' secret panel, entered 
it, and groped in darkness until 
they emerged once more into the 
silent grove. 

Conan stopped to get his breath 
and tighten his bandage. He said: 
*'Why did you drop that ring?"' 

"To blind the avengers of blood. 
Khosatral ! AH that trouble, and 
the strumpet got away." 

Conan grinned wryly in the darkness. Kufia evidently did not regard 
Farouz as a rescuer. The brief picture that Conan had obtained, in 
the second before he had closed 
with Othbaal, returned vividly to 
his mind. Such a woman, he 
thought, would suit him perfectly. 

Ill 

Within the massive walls of the 
inner city of Asgalun a stupendous 



69 

event was coming to pass. Under 
the shadows of the balconies stole 
a veiled and hooded figure. For 
the first time in three years a woman was defiantly walking the 
streets of Asgalun. 

Realizing her peril, she trembled 
with a fear that was not inspired 
wholly by the lurking shadows 
which might well have masked 
skulking thieves. The stones hurt 
her feet in her tattered velvet slippers, which was not at all surprising. For three years the cobblers 
of Asgalun had been forbidden to 
make street-shoes for women. Indeed, King Akhirom had decreed 
that the women of Pelishtiya should 
be shut up like reptiles in cages. 

Rufia, the red-haired Ophirean, 
favorite of Othbaal, had wielded 
more power than any woman in 
Pelishtiya save Zeriti, the king's 
witch-mistress. And now, as she 
stole through the night, an outcast, 
the thought that burned her like 
a white-hot brand was the realization that the fruits of all her scheming had been spilt in a second by 
the sword-stroke of one of OthbaaFs many enemies. 

Rufia came of a race of women 
accustomed to swaying thrones with 
their beauty and wit. SJie scarcely 
remembered her native Ophir from 
which she had been stolen by Kothian slavers. The Argossean magnate who had bought her and 
raised her for his household had 
fallen in battle with die Shemites, 
and as a supple girl of fourteen 
Rufia had passed into the hands of 



70 FANTASTIC 

a prince of Slygia, a languorous, 
effeminate youth whom she quickly 
C&ttte to twist around her pink fingers. 

Then, after some years, had come 
the raid of a band of wandering 
freebooters from the barbariandominated lands beyond the Sea 
of Vilayet upon the prince's pleasure-island in the upper Styx, with 
slaughter, fire, and plunder, crashing walls and shrieks of death, and 
a red-haired girl screaming in the 
arms of a tall Hyrkanian chieftain. 

Because she came of a race whose 
women were rulers of men, Rufia 
neither perished nor became a 
whimpering toy. When Xayarsha 
enlisted his band under Aklnrom 
in Anakiya, as part of Akhirom's 
successful effort 'to seize the kingdom of Pelishtiya from his hated 
brother, Rufia had gone along. 

She had not liked Xayarsha. The 
sardonic adventurer was coldly 
masterful in his relations with women, allowing none to command or 
persuade him in the slightest. Moreover he possessed a lust that no one 
woman, however ardent, couldwholly satisfy. Because Rufia could 
endure no rival, she had not been 
displeased when Xayarsha had 
gambled her away to his rival Othbaal. 

The Anaki was more to her taste. 
The man had intelligence, tremendous vitality, and strength of mind 
and body. He only needed a stimulant to his ambition, and Rufia had 
supplied, that. She had started him 
up the shining rungs of die ladder 



UNIVERSE 

— and now he was dead, slain by a 
pair of masked murderers who had 
sprung from nowhere. 

Engrossed in her bitter thoughts, 
she looked up with a start as a tall 
hooded figure . stepped from the 
shadows of an overhanging balcony 
and confronted her. A wide cloak 
was drawn close around him and 
his coif hid his features. Only his 
eyes burned at her, almost luminous 
in the starlight. She cowered back 
with a low cry. 

"A woman on the streets of Asgalun!" The voice was hollow and 
ghostly. "Is this not against die 
king's commands?" 

"1 do not walk streets by choice, 
lord," she answered. "My master 
has been slain, and I fled from his 
murderers." 

The stranger bent his hooded 
head and stood statue-like for an 
instant, his eyes regarding her somberly. Rufia watched him nervously. There was something gloomy 
and portentous about him. He 
Seemed less like a man pondering 
the tale of a chance-met slave-girl 
than a stern-faced prophet weighing the doom of a sinful people. 
At hist he lifted his head. 

"Come," said he, "I will find a 
place for you." 

Without pausing to see if she 
obeyed he stalked away up (he 
street. Rufia hurried after him. Shecould not walk the streets all 
night, for any officer of the palace 
guard would strike off her head 
for violating the edict of King Akhirom. This stranger might be lead


HAWKS OVER SHEM 



71 



ing her into worse slavery, but she 
had no choice. 

Several times she tried to speak 
to him, but his grim silence struck 
her silent in turn. His unnatural 
aloofness frightened her. Once she 
was startled to see furtive forms 
stealing after them. 

"There are men following us !" 
she exclaimed. 

"Pay them no heed," answered 
the man in his weird voice. 

Nothing more was said until 
(hey reached a small arched gale 
in a lofty wall. The stranger halted 
and called out. He was answered 
from within. The gate opened, revealing a black mute holding a 
torch. In its light the height of the 
robed stranger was inhumanly exaggerated. 

"But this— this is a gate of the 
Great Palace!"' stammered Rufia. 

For answer the man threw back 
his hood, revealing a long pale oval 
of a face, in which burned those 
strange luminous eyes. 

Rufia screamed and fell to her 
knees. "King Akhiioni!" 

"Yes, King Akhirom, faithless 
and sinful one!" The hollow voice 
rolled out like a knell. "You were 
vain and foolish beyond belief to 
ignore the command of the Great 
King, the King of Kings, the King 
of the World, which is the word 
of tfae gods! You have walked the 
street in sin, and shamelessly set 
aside the mandates of the Good 
King! Seize her!" 

The following shadows closed 
in, becoming a squad of Negro 



mutes. As their fingers touched her 
flesh, Rufia fainted. 

The Ophirean regained consciousness in a windowless chamber whose arched doors were securely bolted with bars of gold. 
She stared wildly about for her 
captor and shrank down to see him 
standing above her, stroking his 
pointed graying beard while his 
tei'rible eyes burned into her soul. 

"l.ion of Shem !" she gasped, 
struggling to her knees. "Have pity 
upon me!" 

As she spoke she knew the futility of the plea. She was crouching before the man whose name 
was a curse in the mouths of the 
Pelishtim, the man who, claiming 
divine guidance, had ordered all 
dogs killed, all vines cut down, all 
grapes and honey dumped into the 
river. 

She was at the mercy of one who 
had banned all wine, beer, and 
games of chance, and believed that 
to disobey his most trivial command was the blackest sin conceivable. He roamed the streets at night 
in disguise to see that his orders 
were obeyed. Rufia's flesh crawled 
as he stared at her with wide unblinking eyes. 

"Blasphemer !" he whispered. 
"Daughter of evil ! O MelekQarth!" he cried, flinging up his 
aims. "What punishment shall be 
devised for this demon in human 
form ? What agony terrible 
enough, what degradation vile 
enough lo render justice? The gods 
grant me wisdom!" 



72 FANTASTIC 

Rufia rose to her knees and pointed at Akhirom's face. "Why call 
on the gods?" she shrieked. "Call 
on Akhirom! You are yourself a 
god!" 

He stopped, swayed, and cried 
out incoherently. Then he straightened, and looked down at her. llcr 
face was white, her eyes staring. 
To her natural acting-ability was 
added the terror of her position. 

"What do you see, woman?" he 
asked. 

*'A god has revealed himself to 
me ! In your face, shining like the 
sun ! I burn, I die in the blaze of 
your glory!'" 

She sank her face in her hands 
and crouched trembling. Akhirom 
passed a shaking hand over his 
brow. 

"Yes," he whispered, "I am a 
god! I have guessed it; I have 
dreamed it. I alone possess the wisdom of the infinite. Now a mortal 
has seen it also. I am not a mere 
mouthpiece and servant of the gods, 
but the god of gods himself! Akhirom is the god of Pelishtiya — 
and of the earth. The false demon 
Melek-Qarth shall be cast down 
from his place and his statues melted up . . ." 

Bending his gaze downward he 
ordered: ' Rise, woman, and look 
upon thy god !" 

She did so, shrinking before his 
awful gaze. A change clouded 
Akhirom's eyes as he seemed to 
sec her clearly for the first time. 

"Your sin is pardoned," he intoned. "You were the first to hail 



UNIVERSE 

your god. Henceforth you shall 
serve me in honor and splendor." 

She prostrated herself, kissing 
the carpet before his feet. He clapped his hands. A eunuch entered 
and bowed. 

"Go quickly to the house of 
Abdashtarth, the high priest of 
Melek-Qarth," he said, looking over 
the servant's head. "Say to him: 
This is the word of Akhirom, who 
is the one true god of the Pelishtim, and shall soon be the god of 
all the peoples of the earth. On 
the morrow shall be the beginning 
of beginnings. Hie idols of the 
fake Melek-Qarth shall be destroyed, and statues of the true god 
shall be erected in their stead. The 
true religion shall be proclaimed, 
and a sacrifice of one hundred of 
the noblest children of the Pelishtim shall celebrate it . . ."* 

IV 

Before the temple of MelekQarth stood Mattenbaal, the first 
assistant to Abdashtarih. The venerable Abdashtarth, his hands tied, 
stood quietly in the grip of a pair 
of brawny Anaki soldiers. His long 
white beard moved as he prayed. 

Behind him other soldiers stoked 
the fire in the base of the huge 
bull-headed idol of Melek-Qarth. 
Ia the background towered the 
great seven-storied ziggurat of Asgalun, from which the priests read 
the will of the gods in the stars. 

When the brazen sides of the 
idol glowed with the heat within, 



HAWKS OVER SHEM 



73 



Mattenbaal stepped forward, 
raised a piece of papyrus, and read: 

"For that your divine king, Akhirom, is of the seed of Yakin-Ya, 
who was desrended from the gods 
when they walked the earth, so is 
a god this day among you! And 
now I command you, all loyal Pelishtim, to recognize and bow down 
to and worship the greatest of all 
t;oJs, the god of gods, the Creator 
of the Universe, the Incarnation of 
Divine Wisdom, the king of gods, 
who is AkMrom the son of Azumelek, king of Felishtiya! 

"And inasmuch as the wicked 
and perverse Abdashtarth, in the 
hardness of his heart, has rejected 
this revelation and has refused to 
bow down before his true god, let 
him be cast into the fire of the idol 
of the false Melek-Qarth !" 

A soldier tugged open the brazen door in the belly of the statue. 

Abdashtarth cried: "He lies ! 
This king is no god, but a mortal 
madman! Slay the blasphemers 
against the true god of the Pelishtim, the mighty Melek-Qarth, lest 
the all-wise one turn his back upon 
his people!" 

At this point four Anakim picked up Abdashtarth as if he had been 
a log of wood and hurled him 
feet-first through the opening. His 
shriek was cut off by the clang of 
the dosing door, through which 
die same soldiers had tossed hundreds of the children of the Pelishtim in times of crisis under his 
fanatical command. Smoke poured 
from the vents in the statue's ears, 



while a look of smug satisfaction 
spread over the face of Mattenbaal. 

A great shudder rippled across 
the throng. Then a frenzied scream 
broke the stillness. A wild-haired 
figure ran forward, a half-naked 
shepherd. With a shriek of 
"Blasphemer!" he hurled a stone. 
The missile struck the new high 
priest in the moudi, breaking his 
teeth. 

Mattenbaal staggered, blood 
Streaming down his beard. With a 
ronr the mob surged forward. Taxation, starvation, tyranny, rapine, 
and massacre — all these the Pelishtirn had endured from their mad 
king. But this tampering with their 
religion was the last straw. Staid 
merchants became madmen. Cringing beggars turned into hot-eyed 
fiends. 

Stones flew like hail, and louder 
rose the roar of the mob. Hands 
were clutching at the garments of 
the dazed Mattenbaal when the 
armored Anakim closed in around 
him, beat the mob back with bowstaves and spear-shafts, and hustled 
the priest away. 

With a clanking of weapons and 
a jingling of bridle-chains, a troop 
of Kushite horse, resplendent in 
headdresses of ostrich- feathers and 
lions' manes and corselets of silvered scales, galloped out of one 
of the streets leading into the great 
Square of Melek-Qarth, Lhcir white 
teeth gleaming in their dark faces. 

The stones of the mob bounced 
off their bucklers of rhinoceros


74. FANTASTIC 
hide, but with unabated fury they 
urged their horses into the press, 
slashing with curved blades and 
thrusting long lances through the 
bodies of the Asgalunim. Men 
rolled howling under the Stamping 
hooves — until at last the rioters 
gave way, fleeing wildly into shops 
and alleys, and leaving tfw square 
littered with writhing bodies. 

The black riders leaped from 
their saddles and began crashing 
in doors of shops and dwellings, 
heaping their arms with plunder. 
Screams of women sounded from 
within the houses. There was a 
crash of lattice-work, and a whitedad, body struck the street with a 
bone-crushing impact. Another 
horseman, laughing, pissed his 
lance through the body as it lay. 

The giant Imbalayo, in flaming 
silk and polished steel, rode roaring 
among his men, beating them into 

order with a heavy Leaded whip. 
They mounted and swung into line 
behind him. In a canter they swept 
off down the street, a dozen human 
heads bobbing on their lances as 
an object-lesson to the maddened 
Asgalunim who crouched in their 
coverts, glaring with hate. 

The breathless eunuch who 
brought news of the uprising to 
King Akhirom was swiftly followed by another, who prostrated 
himself and cried: "Divine king, 
the general Othbaal is dead ! His 
servants found him murdcrt d in 
his palace, and beside him was the 
ring of Keluka the Sword er. Now 
the Anakim cry out that he was 



UNIVERSE 

murdered by the order of the general Imbalayo. They search for Keluka in the Kushites' quarter and 
fight with the Kushites!" 

Rufia, listening behind a curtain, 
stifled a cry. Aknlrom's far-away 
gaze did not alter. Wrapped in 
aloofness he replied: "Let the Hyrkanians separate them. Shall private 
quarrels interfere with the destiny 
of a god? Othbaal is dead, but 
Akhirom lives forever. Another 
man shall lead my Anakim. Let 
the Kushites handle the mob until 
they realize the sin of their unbelief. My destiny is to reveal myself 
to the world in blood and fire, until all the tribes of the earth know 
me and bow down before mc! You 
may go." 

V 

Night was falling on a tense 
city as Conan Strode through the 
streets adjoining the quarter of the 
Kushites, In that section, occupied 
mostly by soldiers, lights shone and 
stalls were open by tacit agreement. 
All day revolt had rumbled in the 
quarters, for the mob was like a 
thousand-headed serpent of fire. 
Stamp it out in one place and it 
broke out in another. The hooves 
of the Kushitc mounts had clattered from one end of the city lo 
the other, bringing death. 

Only armed men now traversed 
the streets. The great iron-bound 
wooden gates of the quarters were 
locked as in times of civil war. 
Through the lowering arch of (he 



HAWKS OVER SH EM 



75 



great gate of Simura cantered 
troops of black horsemen, the 
torchlight crimsoning their naked 
scimitars. Their silken cloaks 
flowed in the wind and their black 
arms gleamed like polished ebony. 

Conan had lurked in his quarters 
until his head-wound had healed 
to a degree. Having achieved his 
revenge, he had not quite decided 
what to do next. He did not want 
to return to Akkhariya, which was 
a small place, even for a Shemitish 
city-state, with no great wealth. 
Moreover the fiercely exclusive racial and national pride of the people 
woidd prevent an outsider like Conan from rising very high. 

The unsettled condition of Asgahtn provided troubled waters to fish 
in, but here his expectations of 
profitable mercenary service had received another check. Three groups, 
differing widely in race and culture, contended with venemous 
j ealousy for domi nance over the 
rich city-state. 

None would accept the Cimmerian, because each suspected him of 
being a spy that one of the other 
bodies of mercenaries was trying 
lo plant in their midst. Perhaps, 
thought Conan, he would do better 
under one of the Hyborian rulers 
to the north, who would pick men 
solely on a basis of fighting ability. 
Another day or two and he would 
see. 

He entered a cook-shop where 
girdled warriors gorged and secretly guzzled wine, and ordered a joint 
of beef. When the joint arrived he 



dug his teeth into it with even 
more than his usual gusto, for the 

success of his vengeance had made 
his spirits soar. While devouring a 
mass of meat that would have satisfied a lion, he listened to the talk 
around him. 

"Where are Che Anakim?" demanded a mustached Hyrkanian, 
tian lining his jaws with almondcakes. 

"They sulk in their quarter," answered another. "They swear the 
Kushitcs slew Othbaal and show 
Keluka's ring to prove it. Kcluka 
has disappeared and Imbalayo 
swears he knows nothing about it. 
But there's the ring, and a dozen 
had been slain in brawls when the 
king ordered us to beat them apart. 
By Asuta, this has l.ieen a day of 
days !" 

"Akhirom's madness brought it 
out," declared another in a lowered voice. "How soon will it be 
before this lunatic dooms us all by 
some crazy antic?" 

"Careful," cautioned his mate. 
"Our swords are his so long as 
Xayarsha orders. But if revolt 
breaks out again, the Anakim are 
more likely to fight against the 
Kushites than with them. They say 
Akhirom has taken Othbaal's concubine Ruha into his harem. 

"Naturally that angers the Anakim more, for they suspect that 
Othbaal was slain by the king's 
orders, or at least with his consent. 
But their anger is as nothing beside that of Zcriti, whom the king 
has put aside! The rage of the 



76 FANTASTIC 

witch, they say, makes a sandstorm 
of the desert seem like a spring 
breeze." 

Conan's moody blue eyes blazed 
as he digested this news. The memory of the red-haired wench had 
haunted his imagination during the 
last three days. With such a companion the long road to Koth would 
be a pleasant one, he told himself, 
and the thought of stealing her 
out from under the nose of the 
mad king added spice to the prospect. 

He remembered then that in Asgalun there was one person who 
could really help him in this enterprise^ — Zeriti the Stygian. If he 
was any judge of human motives 
she would be glad to do so*. 

He Jeft the shop and headed 
toward the wall of the inner city. 
Zeriti's house, he knew, was in an 
isolated part of Asgalun. To get 
to it he would have to pass the 
great wall, and the only way he 
knew of doing so without discovery was through the tunnel that 
Farouz had shown him. 

Accordingly he crossed the 
canal and made his way to the grove 
of palms near the shore. Groping 
in the darkness among the ruins, 
he found and lifted the slab. Again 
he advanced through blackness and 
dripping water, stumbled on the 
other stair, and mounted it. He 
found the catch and emerged into 
the corridor, which was now dark. 
The house was silent, but the reflection of lights elsewhere indicated that it was still occupied, doubt


UNI VERSE 

less by the slain general's servants 
and women. 

Uncertain as to which passageway led to the outer air, he set off 
at random, passed through a curtained archway — and confronted 
six giant slaves who sprang up 
glaring. Before he could retreat he 
heard a shout and a rush of feet 
behind him. Cursing his luck he 
ran straight at them. A whirl of 
steel and he was through. 

Leaving a writhing form on the 
floor beh in d h im, ihe d ash ed 
through a doorway on the other 
side of the room, while curved 
blades sought his back, and sang 
through the air behind him. The 
instant he slammed the door steel 
clattered on the wood and glittering points showed through the 
panels. He shot the bolt and 
whirled, desperately searching f or 
an exit. His gaze encountered a 
gold-barred window. 

With a headlong rush he 
launched himself full at the aperture. The soft bars tore out with 
a crash, taking half the casement 
with them, before die impact of 
his forward-plunging body. He 
shot through space as the door 
crashed inward and a dozen insensately enraged figures crowded 
into the room. 

When Conan plunged through 
the window, he had no idea of 
what lay in the^darkness ahead of 
him. Shrubs broke his crashing 
fall. Springing up, he saw his pursuers crowding through the window he had just shattered. He was 



HAWKS OVER SHEM 



in a garden— a great shadowy place 
of trees and ghostly blossoms. His 
hunters blundered among the trees 
while unopposed he reached the 
wall, sprang high, caught the coping with one hand, and heaved 
himself up and over. 

He halted to orient himself. 
Though he had never been in the 
inner city, he had heard it described often enough so that he carried 
a mental map of it. He was in the 
Quarter of the Officials. 

Ahead of him, over the flat roofs, 
loomed a structure that could only 
have been the Lesser West Palace, 
a great pleasure-house adjoining 
the famous Garden of Abibaal. 
Sure of his qround, he hurried 
along the street into which he had 
dropped and soon emerged on to 
the broad thoroughfare that traversed the inner city from north 
to south. 

Late as it was, there was much 
stirring abroad. Armed Hyrkanians 
rode past. In the great square between the two palaces Conan heard 
the jingle of reins on restive horses 
and saw a squadron of Kushitc 
troopers sitting astride their steeds 
under the torchlight. There was 
reason for their alertness. Far away 
lie heard tom-toms drumming sullenly among the quarters. The wind 
brought snatches of wild song and 
distant terrified shouts. 

With his soldier's swagger Conan passed unnoticed among the 
mailed figures. When he plucked 
the sleeve of a Hyrkanian to ask 
the way to Zeriti's house, the man 



77 

readily gave him the information. 
Conan, like everyone else in Asgalun, knew that however much the 
Stygian regarded Akhirom as bet 
special property, she by no means 
considered herself his exclusive 
possession in return. There were 
mercenary captains as familiar with 
her chambers as was die king of 
Pelishtiya. 

Zeriti's house -adjoined a court 
of the Hast Palace, to whose gardens it was connected so that Zeriti, in the days of her favor, could 
pass from her house to the palace 
without violating the king's order 
for the seclusion of women. Zeriti 
was the daughter of a free chieftain, and had been Akhirom's mis* 
tress but not his slave. 

Conan did not expect difficulty 
in gaining entrance to her house. 
He knew that when she pulled hidden strings of intrigue, men of all 
races and conditions were admitted 
to her^mdience chamber, where 
dancing-girls and the funics of the 
black lotus offered entertainment. 
That night there were no dancinggirls or guests. 

A villainous-looking Zuagir 
opened the arched door under a 
burning cresset and admitted the 
Cimmerian without question. He 
showed Conan across a small court, 
up an outer flight of stairs, down a 
corridor, and into a broad chamber 
bordered by fretted arches hung 
with curtains of crimson velvet. 

The large, lamp-studded room 
was empty, but somewhere sounded the scream of a woman in pain. 



78 FANTASTIC 

Then came a peal of musical laughter, also feminine and indescribably 
vindictive and malicious. 

Conan jerked his head to catch 
the direction of the sounds. Then 
he began examining the drapes behind the arches to see which concealed doors. 

' - • VI 

In the Great East Palace, where 
slave-girl. 1 ; and eunuchs glided on 
bare feet, no echo reverberated of 
the tumult that seethed outside the 
walls. In a chamber whose dome 
was of gold-filigreed ivory, King 
Akhirom, clad in a white silken 
robe that made him look even 
more ghostly, sat cross-legged on 
a couch of gemmed ivory and stared 
at Rufia kneeling before him, his 
eyes fanatically gleaming. 

Rufia, kneeling on a cushion of 
cloth-of-gold, wore a robe of crimson silk and a girdle of satin sewn 
with pearls. But amidst all this 
splendor the Ophirean's eyes were 
shadowed. She had inspired Akhirom's latest madness, but she had 
not mastered him. Now he seemed 
withdrawn, with an expression in 
his cold eyes that made her shudder. 

Suddenly he spoke: "'It is not 
filling for a god to mate with mortals." 

Rufia started. She opened her 
mouth to speak, then found that 
fear had bound her tongue. 

"Love is a human weakness," he 
continued. "I will cast it from me. 



"UNIVERSE 

Gods are beyond love. Weakness 
assails me when I lie in your arms." 

"What do you mean, my lord?" 
she ventured. 

"Even the gods must sacrifice, 
and therefore I must give you up, 
lest my divinity weaken." He clapped his hands, and a eunuch entered on all fours. "Send in the 
general Imbalayo," he ordered. 

The eunuch banged his head 
against the floor and crawled out 
backward in conformity with the 
most recently instituted customs of 
the court. 

"No!" Rufia sprang up in wild 
terror. "You cannot give me to 
that beast!" 

She fell to her knees, catching 
at his robe, which he drew back 
from her. 

"Woman!" he thundered. "Are 
you mad ? Would you assail a god ?" 

Imbalayo entered uncertainly. A 
warrior of barbaric Darfar, he had 
risen to his present high estate by 
wild lighting and crafty diplomacy. 
But shrewd, brawny, and fearless 
though he was, he could not be 
sure of the mad Akhirom's intentions from moment to moment. 

The king pointed to the woman 
cowering at "his feet. "Take her!" 

Imbalayo grinned and caught up 
Rufia, who writhed and screamed 
in his grasp. She stretched her arms 
toward Akhirom as Imbalayo bore 
her from the chamber. But Akhirom said nothing, sitting with 
hands folded and gaze detached. 

There was one other spectator. 
Crouching in an alcove, a slim 



HAWKS OVER SHEM 



79 



brown-skinned girl watched the 
grinning Kushite carry his captive 
up the hall. Scarcely had he vanished when she fled in another direction. 

Imbalayo, the favored of the 
king, alone of the generals dwelt 
in the Great Palace, which was really an aggregation of buildings 
united in one great structure and 
housing the three thousand servants 
of Akhirom. 

Following winding corridors, 
crossing an occasional court paved 
with mosaics, he came to his own 
dwelling in the southern wing. But 
even: as he came in sight of the door 
of teak, banded with arabesques of 
copper, a supple form barred his 
way. 

"Zeriti !" Imbalayo recoiled in 
awe. The hands of the handsome, 
brown -skinned " woman clenched 
and unclenched in controlled passion. 

"A servant brought me word 
that Akhirom has discarded the 
red-haired jade," said the Stygian. 
"Sell her to me! I owe her a debt 
that I would pay." 

"Why should I?" said the Kushite, fidgeting impatiently. "The 
king has given her to me. Stand 
aside, lest I hurt you." 

"Have you heard what the Anakiln shout in the streets?" asked 
the Stygian. 

"What is that to me?" was his 
scornful reply. 

"They howl for the head of Imbalayo, because of the murder of 



Othbaal. What if I told them their 
suspicions were true?" 

"I had nothing to do with it!" 
he shouted. 

"I can produce men to swear 
they saw you help Keluka cut him 
down." 

"I'll kill you, witch!" 

She laughed. "You dare not! 
Now will you sell me the redhaired jade, or will you fight the 
Anakim ?" 

Imbalayo let Rufia. slip to the 
floor. "Take her and begone!" he 
snarled. 

"Take your pay!" she retorted 
and hurled a handful of coins in 
his face. 

Imbalayo's eyes burned red and 
his hands opened and closed with 
suppressed fury. 

Ignoring him, Zeriti bent over 
Rufia, who crouched dazed with 
the hopeless realization that 
against this new conqueror the 
wiles she had used upon men were 
useless. Zeriti gathered the Ophirean's red locks in her fingers and 
forced her head back, to stare fiercely into her eyes. Then she clapped 
her hands and four eunuchs entered. 

"Take her to my house," Zeriti 
ordered, and they" bore the shrinking Rufia away. Zeriti followed, 
breathing softly between her 
teeth. 

Zeriti straightened up from her 
task and dropped the heavy whip. 
The undraped shoulders of the 
woman bound to the divan were 



80 FANTASTIC 

crisscrossed with cruel red welts — 
a prelude to a more ghastly fate. 

The witch took from a cabinet 
a piece of charcoal, with which 
she drew a complex figure on the 
floor, adding words in the mysterious glyphs of the serpent-worshippers who had ruled Stygia before the Cataclysm. She set a small 
golden lamp at each of the five 
corners of the figure and tossed 
into the flame of each a pinch of 
the pollen of the purple lotus which 
grows in the swamps of southern 
Stygia. 

A strange smell, sicken ingly 
sweet, pervaded the chamber. Then 
she began to incant in a language 
that was old before purple- towered 
Python rose in the lost empire of 
Acheron, over three thousand years 
before. 

Slowly a dark something took 
form. To Rufia, half dead with pain 
and fright, it seemed like a pillar 
of cloud. High up in the amorphous 
mass appeared two glowing points 
that might have been eyes. Rufia 
felt an all-pervading cold, as if the 
thing were drawing all the heat 
out of her body by its mere presence. 

The cloud gave the impression 
of being black without much density, as Rufia could see the wall 
behind it through the shapeless 
mass, which slowly thickened. 

Zeriti bent and snuffed out the 
lamps — one, two, three, four. The 
room, lit by the remaining lamp, 
was now dim. The pillar of smoke 



UNIVERSE 

was hardly discernible except for 
the glowing eyes. 

At that instant a sound made Zeriti turn. It was a distant, muffled 
roar, faint and far-off but of vast 
volume. It was the bestial howling 
of many men. 

Zeriti resumed her incantation, 
but there came another interruption — angry words in the voice of 
the Zuagir, a tormented cry, the 
crunch of a savage blow, and the 
thud of a body. Inibalayo burst in, 
a wild-looking figure with his eyeballs and teeth gleaming in the 
light of the single lamp. 

"Dog!" exclaimed the Stygian, 
drawing herself up like a python 
from its coil. "Why did you come 
here?" 

"The woman you took from 
me!*' roared Imbalayo. "The city 
has risen and there is death everywhere. Give me the woman before 
I kill you!" 

Zeriti glanced at her rival and 
drew a jeweled dagger, crying: 
"Gereshef! Khaza! Help me!" 

With a roar Imbalayo lunged. 
The Stygian's supple uuickness was 
futile. Before she could leap aside 
the broad blade plunged through 
her body, and emerged between her 
shoulders, standing out a full ten 
inches. With a choking cry she 
stumbled, and the Kmbite 
wrenched his scimitar free. At [hat 
instant Conan appeared at the door. 

Evidently taking the Cimmerian 
for one of the witch's servants, the 
Kushite bounded across the floor, 
his saber whistling in a fearful 



HAWKS OVER SHEM 



8l 



slash. Conan leaped back. The 
sword missed his throat by a finger's 
breadth and nicked the door- frame. 

As he leaped, Conan tore out his 
own sword and struck a fierce backhanded blow in return. It was not 
within reason that the giant should 
recover from his missed cut in time 
to parry, but Imbalayo somehow 
twisted his body, arm, and blade 
all at once to catch a blow that 
would have felled a lesser man by 
sheer impact. 

Back and forth they su rged, 
swords clanging. Then recognition 
dawned in Imbalayo's features and 
he fell back with an accusing cry 
of "Amra!" 

Now Conan knew that he must 
kill this man. Though he did not 
remember ever seeing him before, 
the Kushite had recognized him 
as the leader of a crew of black 
corsairs who under the name of 
Amra, the Lion, had plundered the 
coasts of Kush and Stygia and 
Shem. 

If Imbalayo revealed Con.in's 
identjty to the Pcli.shti'm, the vengeful Shcmites would tear Conan 
apart — with their bare hands if 
need be. Bitterly though the Shemites fought among themselves, 
they would unite to destroy the redhanded barbarian who had raided 
their coast. 

Conan lunged and drove Imbalayo back a step, feinted, and 
struck at the Kushite's head. The 
force of the blow beat down Imbalayo's scimitar and came down 
stunningly on the bronze helm* ' 


and Conan's sword, weakened by 
deep notches in the blade, broke 
off short. 

For the space of two heartbeats 
the two barbarian -warriors confronted each other, Imbalayo's 
bloodshot eyes seeking a vulnerable 
spot on Conan's form, his muscles 
tensing for a final, fatal spring and 
slash. And then — 

A shapeless mass of cloudy 
something, hitherto unnoticed in 
the gloom, swept forward and fastened itself on Imbalayo's back. 
Imbalayo screamed like a man being roasted alive. He kicked and 
squirmed and tried to reach back 
with his sword. But the luminous 
eyes glowed over his shoulder and 
the smoky substance lapped around 
him, drawing him slowly backward. 

Conan reeled back from the 
sight, his barbarian's fears of the 
supernatural rising like a choking 
lump in his throat. 

Imbalayo's shrieks ceased. His 
body slid to the ground with a 
soft squashy sound". The cloudy 
thing was gone. 

Conan advanced cautiously. Imbalayo's body had a curiously pallid, 
collapsed appearance, as if the demon had extracted all the bones 
and blood, leaving only a manshaped bag of skin with a few 
organs inside it. The Cimmerian 
shuddered. 

A sob from the divan called his 
attention to Rufia. With two strides 
he reached her and cut her bonds. 
She sat np, weeping silently. 



FANTASTIC UNIVERSE 



Suddenly a voice shouted: "Tinbalayo! In the name of all the 
fiends, where are you? It's time to 
mount and ride! I saw you come 
in here!" 

A mailed and helmeted figure 
dashed into the chamber. It was 
Farouz ! He recoiled at the sight 
of the bodies and cried: "Oh, you 
cursed savage, why must you slay 
Imbalayo at this time? The city has 
risen. The Anaki are fighting the 
Kusliites, who were already engaged 
in a life-and-death struggle. I ride 
with my men to aid the Kushites. 
As for you— I still owe you my 
life. But there is a limit to all 
things! Get out of this city and 
never let me see you again!" 

Conan grinned wolrxshly. "It 
wasn't I who killed him, but one 
of Zeriti's sorcery-summoned demons after he slew the witch. I had 
never believed in such things — 
until now. Look at his body if you 
don't believe me, Xayarsha!" 

The Hyrkanian started. "What 
do you call me?" 

"I knew you when we entered 
the bouse of Othbaal. No one but 
the master of the house could be 
so familiar with its secrets. And 
that house had once belonged to 
Xayarsha the Hyrkanian. Well, 
now, have you no greeting for your 
old friend Rufia?" 

Rufia had been cowering behind 
Conan. Xayarsha plucked at his 
mustache. "Good. I'll take her back 
to my house. We have — ■" 

The distant roaring of the mob 
became louder. 



"No," said Xayarsha distractedly, "I must go to put down the 
sedition. But how can I leave her 
to wander the streets half-naked?" 

Conan said: "Why not throw in 
your lot with the Anakini, who will 
be as glad to get rid of this mad 
king as are the Asgalunim? With 
Imbalayo and Othbaal dead you're 
the only general alive in Asgalun. 
Become the leader of the revolt, 
put down the crazy Akhtrom, and 
set some docile cousin or nephew 
in his place. Then you'll be the 
real ruler of Pelishtiya!" 

Xayarsha, listening like a man 
in a dream, gave a sudden shout of 
laughter. "Done!" he cried. "To 
horse! Take Rufia to my bouse, then 
join the Hyrkanians in battle. Tomorrow I shall rule Pelishtiya, and 
you may ask of me what you will. 
Farewell for now!" 

VII 

In the great Square of MelekQarlh, the tossing torches blazed 
on a swirl of straining figures, 
screaming horses, and lashing 
blades. Men fought hand-to-hand: 
Kushites and Shemites, gasping, 
cursing, and dying. 

tike madmen the Asgalunim 
grappled the black warriors, dragging them from their saddles, 
slashing the girths of tbe frenzied 
horses. Rusty pikes clanged against 
lances. Fire burst out here and diere, 
mounting into the skies until the 
shepherds on the Libnun Hills 
gaped in wonder. 



HAWKS OVRR SHKM 



83 



From the suburbs poured a torrent of figures converging on the 
great square. Hundreds of still 
shapes, in mail or striped robes, 
lay corpse-pale under the trampling 
hooves, and over them the living 
screamed and hacked. 

The square lay in the Kushite 
quarter, into which the Anakim 
had come ravening while the bulk 
of the Kushites had been fighting 
the mob elsewhere. Now withdrawn in haste to their own quarter, the ebony swordsmen were 
overwhelming the Anakim by sheer 
numbers, while the mob threatened 
to engulf both bodies. 

Under their captain, Bombaata, 
the Kushites retained a semblance 
of order that gave them an advantage over the unorganized Anakim and the leaderless mob. The 
maddened Asgaltinim were smashing and plundering the houses of 
the blacks, dragging forth screaming women. 

The blaze of burning buildings 
made the square swim in an ocean 
of fire, while the shrieks of their 
women and children as they were 
torn to pieces by the Shemites made 
the Kushites fight with more than 
their usual fury. 

Somewhere arose the whir of 
Hyrkanian kettle-drums above the 
throb of many hooves. 

"The Hyrkanians at last!" panted Bombaata. "They've loitered 
long enough. And where in Derkcto's name is Imbalayo?" 

Into the square raced a frantic 
horse, foam streaming from its bit


rings. The rider, reeling in the 
saddle, screamed: "Bombaata! 
Bombaata !" as he clung to the 
mane with bloody hands. 

"Here, fool!" roared the Kushite, catching the other's bridle. 

"Imbalayo is dead!" shrieked the 
man above the roar of the flames 
and the rising thunder of the 
kettle-drums. "The Hyrkan i ans 
have turned against us! They slay 
our brothers in the palaces ! Here 
they come!" 

With a deafening thunder of 
hooves and drums the squadrons 
of mailed lancers burst , upon the 
square, riding down friend and 
foe. Bombaata saw the lean exultant face of Xayarsha beneath the 
blazing arc of his scimitar, and then 
a sword fell and the Kushite with 
it. 

On the rocky spurs of Libnun 
the herdsmen watched and shivered, and the clangor of swords 
was heard miles up the river, where 
pallid nobles trembled in their gardens. Hemmed in by mailed Hyrkanians, shrieking Anakim, and 
frantic Asgalunim, the Kushites 
died fighting to a man. 

It was the mob that first turned 
its attention to Akhirom. They 
rushed through the unguarded 
gates into the inner city, and 
through the great bronze doors of 
the East Palace. Ragged hordes 
streamed yelling down the corridors through the Golden GaLes into 
the great Golden Hall, tearing 
aside the curtain of doth-of-gold to 
reveal an empty throne. 



84 FANTASTIC 

Silken tapestries were ripped 
from the walls by grimed and 
bloody fingers. Sardonyx, tables 
were overthrown with a clatter of 
golden vessels. Eunuchs in crimson 
robes fled squeaking and slavegirls shrieked in the hands of ravishers. 

In the Great Emerald Hall, King 
Akhirom stood like a statue on a 
fur-strewn dais, his white hands 
twitching. At the entrance to the 
hall clustered a handful of faithful 
servants, beating back the mob with 
swords. A band of Anakim plowed 
through the throng and burst the 
barrier of black slaves. 

As the wedge of swarthy Shemitish. soldiers rushed forward, 
Akhirom seemed to come to himself. He dashed to an exit in the 
rear. Anakim and Pelishtim, mingling as they ran, chased the fleeing 
king. After them came a band of 
Hyrkanians with Xayarsha at their 
head. 

Akhirom ran down a corridor, 
then turned aside to dash up a 
winding stair. The stair curled up 
and up until it came out on the 
roof of the palace. But it did not 
"stop there. It continued on up into 
the slender spire that rose from 
the roof, from which Akhtrom's 
father, King Azumelek, had liked 
to observe the stars. 

Up went Akhirom, and after 
him came the pursuers, until the 
stair became so narrow that only 
one man could negotiate it, and 
the pursuit slowed f or lack of 
breath. 



UNIVERSE 

King Akhirom came out on the 
small circular platform at the top 
of the tower, surrounded by a low 

wall, He slammed down the stone 
trapdoor and bolted it. Then he 
leaned over the wall. Men swarmed 
on the roof, and below them others gazed up from the main courtyard. 

"Sinful mortals!" screeched 
Akhirom. "You do not believe I 
am a god ! I will show you ! I am 
not bound to the surface of the 
earth as you are, but can soar 
through the heavens like a bird! 
You shall see, and then you will 
bow down and worship me as you 
ought! Behold!" 

Akhirom climbed to the top of 
the wait, balanced an instant, and 
dived off, spreading his arms as if 
they had been wings. His body 
described a long, steep parabola 
downward, missing the edge of the 
roof and plunging on down, the 
wind whistling in his garments, 
until he struck the stones of the 
courtyard below with the sound of 
a melon hit by a sledge-hammer . . . 

North from Asgalun, through 
the meadowlands of western Shem, 
ran the long road to Koth. Along 
this road, as the sun rose, Conan 
and Rufia rode at a canter. Conan 
best rode his own horse and the 
Opliircan woman rode a riderless 
horse which Conan had caught on 
the streets of Asgalun that night 
She wore clothes from the chestj 
of Zcriti— tight for her full figure, 
but adequate. 



HAWKS OVER SHEM 



8 5 



Rufia said: "If you had stayed in 
Asgalun, Conan, you could have 
risen to high position under Xayarsha," 

"And who begged me not to 
turn her back to him ? Suppose you 
tell me that." 

"I know. He was a told unfeeling master. But — " 

"Besides, I rather liked the fellow. If I had stayed there, sooner 



or later one of us would have had 
to kill the other over you." 

The Cimmerian chuckled and 
slapped the bag of loot from Zeriti's house, so that I he coins and 
ornaments jingled. "I shall do as 
well in the North. Come on there, 
beat some speed out of that nag! 
Do you want Xayarsha's Hyrkanians to catch us before we've even 
had breakfast-'" 



C^O y°" rea ^ !ze f ^ a{ 7 0Ur favorite science fiction and fantasy magazmt h 
still a monthly, and if you're having difficulty finding us on your local 
newsstand — there's a nay to gel us on time . . . 

d@ you still want the greatest possible variety — every thirty days — 
within the entire range of fantasy and science fiction by the most compitent, 
the old favorites and our new discoveries . . . 



do 



you want to commence with the new, next issue that is multipler red with the ti/imet of Theodore Sturgeon, Ethrl (7. l»vfis, F. B. Bryning, 
Richard Stockham, Robert F. Young, Charles W . Price, Jr., John Wyndham, 
F-velyn E. Smith . . . 

^/lO/l • • • y ou have to do is clip the coupon and mail it to 

us — with your check or money order- — and rANTASTic universe will promptly 
on a monthly schedule turn a simple trip to your mailbox into a shinmgly 
adventurous journey clear across the Galaxy . , , 



KING-SIZE PUBLICATIONS, Inc. 
471 Park Avenue, New York 22, N. Y. 

I enclose $3.75 {check or money orJer) for which please send me a yet 

subscription (12 issues) to FANTASTIC UNIVERSE. 

NAME 



CITY, ZONE. STATE_ 



pink 



fluff 

by , . . Craig Rice 



The pink fluff came and went — 
like the wind-blown spume of a 
shark - infested sea. But their 
happiness was a shining shield. 



"PJ^RI-ING," I said, wiping the 
lather off my face as I came out of 
the bathroom, "of course I know 
you dye your hair, but 1 didn't 
know you dyed it pink." 

My lovely wife Amelia didn't 
respond wilh !hc smile I'd expected. She sat there in front of the 
dressing table where she'd been 
combing her naturally blonde hair, 
and frowned at the comb. 

I took it out of her hand and 
pulled the pink fluff out of it. 

"It's funny," Amelia said slowly. "It's been turning up in my 
comb. And in d ust bal I s on the 
floor. I can't imagine where it comes 
from." 

I examined the fluff. I( felt incredibly sofl, and somehow it 
seemed to be warm. I dropped it 
in the wastebasket. 

"Well," I said, "if you will insist in living in a Victorian museum 
piece of an old mansion, instead of 
a neat, new, ranch-type bungalow — " 

Amelia was in no mood for 
jokes or laughter. She turned on 
me, her eyes blazing. "You listen 
to me, Dan Anderson. If you 
think you could get me into one 



// has been said — and often repeated — that if a dog bites a man you'd be 
wise to ignore the incident. But if a man bites a dog — that s newt. And 
when one oj the really great names in th* mystery story field surprises tit with 
a story such as this, made resplendent by Merlin's wand and with fantasy's 
brightest diadem crowned, that too is news — and a thrilling reading experience. 



86 



PINK FLUFF 



B7 



of those— chickencoops — you're 
sadly mistaken. To be brutally 
frank, you're ticky in the COCOi" 

Then I got mad. "It's a fine 
thing for the family of an architect who designs those chickencoops, as you call them, to live in 
a house that was buiit in the lavender decade." 

And in thirty seconds, we were 
quarreling bitterly. 

Suddenly I noticed some more 
of the pink fluff. Little balls of it, 
on the floor. 

"If wc must live here," I snapped, "at least you could keep the 
place tidy." 

There was even more of it on 
the floor. 1 went out, slamming 
the door. 

I calmed down a little and tiptoed down the hall to see how 
the rest of the family were faring. 
In the room next to ours, Judy, 
our almost two-year-old daughter, 
was beginning to wake up with 
her usual gurgle of joy at being 
alive. 1 went on down to the room 
occupied by Ricky, my ten-year-old 
orphaned half-brother. 

At the moment it was occupied 
by some tremendous structure he 
was building with an Erector set 
which, so far, resembled a working model of the Eiffel Tower. I 
shook him awake and reminded 
him he had an hour to get off to 
school. 

By then, I was all over my temper. I felt heartily ashamed of myself. I went back in the bedroom 
and put my arms around Amelia. 



"Darling wife," I said, "forgive 
mc. I love you, and if you love 
this house, I love it too." 

The quarrel was over. 

While Amelia put fresh powder 
on her face, I noticed that the pink 
fluff had disappeared. I thought for 
a moment that Amelia had picked 
it up. But when I glanced in the 
wastebasket, it wasn't there. 

That should have warned us that 
there was something ominous in 
the offing. But it didn't. 

Walking down the street, I looked at the new little houses that 
had grown up almost overnight on 
both sides of the boulevard. Amelia 
was right. They did look a little 
like chickencoops. Nice, shiny-new 
chickencoops that cost eleven thousand and up, and that had the last 
word in kitchen an d plumbi ng 
equipment, to be sure. But I had 
to admit there was a certain alikcness to them. I turned around and 
looked back at our mansion. 

It was big, old, ugly, and the 
pain t on its tu rrcted eaves had 
turned yellow. The trees in the 
huge, neglected front yard needed 
pruning, and the spotty grass and 
weeds contrasted unhappily with 
the trim little green squares in front 
of the chickencoops. 

Inside, to be strictly honest, it 
had a kind of charm that was beginning to work even on me. There 
was a wide, old-fashioned downstairs hall, with a magnificent spiral 
staircase leading up to the second 
floor. To the right was what used 
to be called a drawing room with 



88 



FANTASTIC UNIVERSE 



an elaborately carved, white marble 

fireplace. To the left was a "ladies 
parlor," and here the fireplace was 
smaller, and of veined black 
marble. 

There was a dining room, a library-den, and an enormous kitchen 
that had been subjected to a halfhearted attempt at modernization. 
Next to it were the bedroom and 
bath that belonged to Gloria, our 
all-purpose maid. She had been 
dubious about the house in the first 
place, and announced that she was 
glad she was on the first floor. I 
suspected that she though t the 
house was haunted. 

There was a central heating system that had been put in forty 
years before and I was waiting apprehensively for winter to see if it 
would work. There was a gas stove 
and a Frigidaire that had been put 
in twenty years before, and one or 
the other was always giving us 
trouble, especially when we expected guests for dinner. 

Upstairs was our bedroom, a big 
sunny room with windows overlooking what we hoped would 
someday be a garden. It too had a 
little fireplace. There was a bathroom big enough to stable a horse, 
a tub that was almost a swimming 
pool, a washstand done in marble. 
There was a little cozy room 
Amelia persisted in calling a sewing room, though in the three 
years of our marriage I'd never 
seen her sew on a button. 

There was Judy's nursery, another bath, and Ricky's always clut


tered room. Finally there was an 
empty room that might someday 
be a guest room, but that right 
now was used for stuff we hadn't 
decided where to put. The furniture had come with the house. We'd 
added in what we'd brought from 
a four-room flat, but the two didn't 
mix on friendly terms. 

It was a house that only a maverick like Amelia could love. But 
she'd fallen in love with it at sight 
and insisted on renting it on [lie 
spot. Well, I loved Amelia, so I 
could love her house too. I went 
on to my office feeling good. 

I came back late for dinner, and 
feeling terrible. It had been one 
of those days when the clients were 
difficult, the boss was difficult, and 
the office stenographer was just a 
plain old-fashioned pain. 

Amelia was in a mood to match 
my own. She'd been fighting with 
plumbers all day. 

I made an unfortunate remark 
about the plumbing in the chickencoops, and she slapped me, I went 
into the "library" — no books were 
unpacked yet — and sulked there 
until Gloria stalked in, in a mood 
worse than Amelia and I put together. She motioned me out to 
the kitchen, and I followed. 

"Mist' Anderson, I can't cook 
wi th all this stuff all over th c 
place." 

There was pink fluff all over the 
floor, and on the drainboard, and 
some of it had even become entangled in the electric mixer. I 
scowled at it. The damned stuff 



PINK 

bad to come from somewhere. I 
picked up a handful of it. It felt 
strange in my hand. It seemed to 
have no weight at all, and it had 
that warm, soft feeling I'd noticed 
tlie first time I'd touched it. It almost seemed to move in my hand. 

Suddenly Amelia burst into the 
kitchen and flung her arms around 
me. "Sweetheart," she half -sobbed, 
"forgive me. I was just cross. If 
you want to move into one of those 
— those little houses — I will, I 
will." 

I held her tight and said, "You 
forgive me. And if you love this 
house, we stay here." 

Gloria beamed and said, "You 
two get out of my kitchen so's I 
can serve dinner." 

We walked into the dining room. 
I intended to talk -very seriously to 
Amelia about the pink fluff I'd 
picked up. But when I opened my 
hand v it was gone. Gone as though 
it had evaporated, like pink cotton candy at the circus. 

I paused and looked back toward 
the kitchen floor. Nothing was 
there. I wanted to ask Gloria if 
she'd swept it all out the back 
door, but somehow I didn't dare 
to. 

That was the night the roof 
leaked. 

We'd played with Judy for a 
while and tucked her in bed. She 
was the kind of baby who giggled 
most of the time and was a pure 
joy to play with. When she was 
half-way asleep, we looked in on 
Ricky to comment favorably on his 



FLUFF 89 

construction job, and then settled 
down in our room, Amelia on the 
chaise lounge, me in the easy chair. 

I told her about my troubles with 
a strong-minded client who had 
her own disquieting ideas about 
architecture, and she told me of 
her troubles widi the plumbers, and 
everything was as serene as could 
be. 

It was a serene- feeling room, 
anyway. The brocaded wall paper 
had faded, but to a pleasant shade. 
At first we'd tried our own furniture in it, but a Hollywood bed 
and modernistic dressing table had 
proven so definitely out of place 
that we had stored them in the 
unoccupied room across the hall. 

Amelia was enchanted with the 
dressing table that had come with 
the house, and I had to admit it 
not only belonged in the room, 
but had a certain charm. 

The only picture was a large 
oval oil painting over the mantel, 
of a young woman who was as 
blonde as Amelia and almost as 
good to look at, and whose clothes 
— she had on something slightly 
revealing, of an odd shade of pink 
— had been fashionable a good 
fifty or sixty years ago. Her hair 
was loose around her shoulders, 
and altogether, she was pleasant to 
have around. 

The rental agent had told me 
the house had originally been built 
for her, but that was all the information he had volunteered. 

It was spring, but we had a 
tiny fire going. The rain was beat


go 



FANTASTIC UNIVERSE 



ing against the window, making 
the room seem even more cozy. I 
padded down to the kitchen for 
some cold beer, and everything was 
wonderful. Then water began to 
drip from the ceiling. 

1 swore and raced up the attic 
stairs, while Amelia raced down to 
the kitchen for pans. I barked my 
shins trying to find the attic light, 
which didn't make me feel any 
better. Water was dripping through 
the roof and seeping through the 
floor to our room below. Some of 
it went down my back, and that 
made me feel still worse. 

There was no way of fixing the 
roof till morning, so I put the 
biggest pan on the attic floor and 
went on downstairs. There I made 
the mistake of sounding off about 
the house again. Hie plumbing 
was bad, the yard looked like a 
jungle, the heating system probably 
didn't work, and now, the roof 
leaked. 

Tears formed in Amelia's eyes, 
but Ihey were ninety percent tears 
of rage. She came right back at 
me with her opinion of houses designed by Anderson and Anderson, and we were off again. 

And then the pink fluff on the 
floor caught my eye. 1 may have 
imagined it, but it seemed to be 
at least an inch deep. For some 
reason or other, that was the last 
straw as far as I was concerned. 

I can't remember just what I 
said, but 1 know it was sharp and 
bitter. 1 picked up a blanket from 
the foot of the bed and stalked 



indignantly downstairs to sleep on 
the couch in the living room. 

Only 1 didn't sleep. I turned 
over half a dozen times, trying to 
get comfortable and not succeeding. All I could think of was that 
I'd lost my temper with Amelia 
again and snapped at her. 

I'd just about decided to go back 
upstairs and make up, when I heard 
her soft footsteps coming down. 

"Dan," she whispered, "Danny 
darling, I'm sorry. I'm so terribly 
sorry." 

"I'm the one to be sorry," I said, 
and kissed her. 

There was nothing more to be 
said. I picked up the whole hundred and two pounds of her and 
carried her up the stairs, kissing 
her a few more times on the way, 
and tacked her in the bed. 

"I'll call Mr. Miller first thing 
in the morning about the roof," J. 
promised her. "And I'll stick 
around in the morning and deal 
with the plumbers." 

I noticed as I reached for the 
light that she'd swept up the pink 
fluff from the floor. Or had she? 
For some reason, I didn't want to 
ask. 

In the morning the sun was 
bright, the sky was blur, and 
everything was fine. Judy giggled 
and gurgled in her high chair all 
through breakfast, and Gloria had 
made an omelet. The invasion of 
pink fluff seemed like a bad 
dream. 

I started calling Mr. Miller right 
after breakfast and reached him 



PINK 

about nine o'clock. He sounded as 
apologetic as though he had bored 
the hole in the roof himself, and 
promised to have workmen over 
within an hour. 

Wc played with Judy until the 
plumbers came, and then put her 
in her play pen. 

Dp to then everything had been 
perfect, but you know plumbers. 
The first fifteen minutes I was 
filled with sympathetic understanding for Amelia and her struggles 
of yesterday. By the end of the 
second fifteen minutes a real 
Donnybrook was going on, a 
three-way one. 

I was arguing with the plumbers, 
they were arguing with Amelia, 
and she was arguing with me. The 
only people who seemed to be getting along were the plumbers. In 
the middle of it Amelia ran up 
the stairs and 1 heard the bedroom 
door slam. In her play pen, Judy 
began to bawl. 

Gloria came out from the 
kitchen, gave me a dirty look, 
picked up Judy and carried her out 
with .her. 

"Do the job any, way you want 
to," I told the plumbers. "Hell, 
this old rattletrap is falling apart 
at the seams anyway." And I raced 
upstairs after Amelia. 

She was sitting on the edge of 
the bed, looking as though she was 
going to cry or throw something 
;it me. Probably the former. And 
that infernal pink stuff was all over 
the place. I felt a cold feeling all 
over. 



FLUFF 91 

Amelia wasn't going to cry, she 
wasn't going to throw anything. 
She was staring at the pink fluff 
and her face was pale. 

I sat down beside her and put 
an arm around her. 

"Darling," I said, "we can figure out where this comes from. A 
lot of stuff accumulates in an old 
house like this — and in new ones, 
too," I added hastily. "Something 
pink in the house is getting mixed 
up -with it. The chances are, it's 
that pink chenille robe of yours. A 
little lint comes off and mixes with 
the dust." 

It was a good explanation, and 
I was proud of it. "So," I said, 
"we'll get that robe out of the 
house right away." 

She gave me a funny look that 
I didn't quite like. 

"That pink chenille robe went 
to the laundry three days ago," she 
said quietly. Much too quietly. 

An absolutely unreasoning rage 
shook me. Not at Amelia. But at 
this infernal dust that seemed determined to drive us either out of 
our home, or out of our minds. 

I kissed Amelia again to make 
sure she wouldn't think I was angry at her and said again, "Don't 
worry, darling." 

It didn't make me feel any better 
to look down and see that the floor 
was spotless again. Maybe the 
breeze through the open window 
had blown the fluff away. 

But I didn't think so. 

"Angel," I said, "I'm going to 
take everything pink out of this 



92 



FANTASTIC UNlVliRSB 



house. Everything, understand? I'll 
begin with this room." 

There was a pink blanket folded 
on the foot of the bed. I grabbed 
that, and looked at the bedspread. 
It too had come with the house, 
and it was a lovely thing, But it 
was a faded rose-pink. I ripped it 
off the bed. Fortunately the draperies were blue, or they'd have 
come down quickly enough. 

I went through the closet. On 
the last hanger there was an ashesof- roses knitted suit. I pulled it off 
the hangar and said, "Sweetheart," 
I'll buy you another one. Two 
other ones." 

She smiled at me. A sweet smile, 
but a wan one. 

I laid the bedspread on the floor 
and dumped the other stuff on top 
of it. 

"Lingerie?" I asked her. "Slips, 
nightgowns, anything?" Then I remembered that she always wore 
white, blue, or Nile green. Luckily 
for her. 

I went into Judy's nursery. Without awakening her I removed a 
crib blanket, a couple of sweaters, 
a tiny pair of pajamas, and some 
- socks. Then I stopped in Ricky's 
room. I hardly expected my lively 
young half-brother would be hiding anything pink in the way of 
wearing apparel but I looked 
around just the same. There was a 
roll of pinkish crepe paper involved 
in some project he was making for 
a school exhibit. I took that along. 
I wasn't taking any chances now. 
There was a pink towel in the 



bathroom, and it went swiftly into 
the collection. Downstairs, I went 
through the rooms as though I 
were searching for the crown 
jewels. I found a luncheon set with 
a pink linen border, and Gloria 
had a pink flannelette nightgown 
for which I had to pay her two 
dollars. 

Back in our bedroom, I looked 
it over. I knew there wasn't another pink item in the house. I 
started to tie the corners of the 
bedspread together. 

"Danny," Amelia said, "none of 
those things are the right shade of 
pink." 

I looked at them, and I knew 
she was right. The pink fluff had 
been an odd shade of pink, one 
that I'd never 'seen before. But I 
didn't want Amelia to worry. 

"Xint mixed with dust could be 
a different shade," I said in what 
I hoped was a stern voice. I tied 
my collection up as neatly as I 
could. It made a bundle about the 
size of a basket-shrouded litter of 
unwanted kittens. 

"I'm going to take it down to 
the office," I told her. "That 
means I'll have to take the car, 
but you ought to rest anyway. These 
last few days have been rough for 
you. And I'll be back early." I 
kissed her on the cheek. 

She really smiled, not wanly this 

time. "I can picture papa Anderson when pink fluff begins to turn 
up all over his oflice." 

I was thinking the same thing, 
but I wasn't smiling about it. 



PINK. 

On a sudden impulse, I stopped 
at old man Miller's office. He wasn't in, but his secretary was— a grayhaired woman with a face like a 
recently sharpened axe. She told 
:ne he'd he back late in the afternoon. 

"Ask him to call me," I said. 
"Or better yet, have him come to 
see me at the house." 

She lifted her eyebrows. "I'm 
sure he arranged for the roofers 
to be there — " 

"They're doing a fine job," I 
told her. "It's something else." I 
caught my breath and lit a cigarette. "Miss Pearcc, do you know 
anything about — previous tenants?" 

She scowled. "Mr. Miller can 
tell you more. I've only been here 
about twenty years, but — " She 
consulted a card file. "The last tenAnts were a couple named Braun. 
They only stayed a few months, 
.though Mr. Braun paid up the rent 
to the end of the lease." 

"Very generous of him," I said, 
wondering if I could raise enough 
money to do the same. 

"I remember them," she said. 
"Mrs. Braun was seriously ill, and 
had to be taken to a quite different 
climate. That was about ten years 
ago." 

Amelia. Where would I take her? 

"The house has been empty 
since," she told me. She looked 
at me narrowly as though expecting 
■i complaint. "It's been kept in excellent condition, except for that 
loose shingle on the roof. I'm sure 



FLUFF 93 

Mr. Miller must have told you that 
there was a caretaker went in three 
times a week to clean and dust and 
air (he house. Thftt was stipulated 
in the original owner's will." 

I nodded. "There was nothing 
to complain about," I said reassuringly, and somehow managing a 
smile. 

I remembered vaguely what old 
Mr. Miller had said about the 
original owner. A widow who'd 
died, childless, somewhere in her 
eighties or nineties. Her will had 
stipulated that the house must be 
kept up, tenanted or untenanted. 
Too bad she hadn't included the 
yard in the stipulation. The bequest 
went into an estate, the income 
from which was parceled out to remole relatives somewhere in Oregon. 

"Do you have the name of the 
caretaker?" I said. "I'd like to talk 
to hi in— or her." This time I managed the kind of smile I usually 
reserved for a rich client. 

"A Mrs. Daly," she said. "IT 
you'll wait a minute, I'll find her 
address." She found it, and wrote 
it down for me. Mrs, T. Daly, 86 i 
Rfvtr Slreet. 

I thanked her and, incredibly, 
she smiled at me. I bet her checks 
were lame for days. 

Mrs. T. Daly was at home. She 
was a husky, gray-haired, middleaged woman who mistook me first 
for an insurance collector, then 
for a vacuum cleaner salesman, and 
finally invited me in. 

She'd gone to the old house 



FANTASTIC 

every Monday, Wednesday and Friday, lo dust, dean the Hours, and 
make sure everything was in order. 
Once a month she washed the windows. 

"And you can't say I didn't keep 
the plate spotless, Mr. Anderson." 

"It was spotless when we moved 
in," I said. Rather, I lied. 

No, she could tell me nothing 
about the house. She didn't even 
know who had built it, or how 
many tenants had lived in it since. 

"Tell me." I said, choosing my 
words tare-fully, "were you ever 
bothered much by dust?" 

That brought a grin to her face. 
"There's not much dust in a bouse 
where there's no living person 
about to stir it up, and with me 
( leaning three times a week — oh, 2 
certain amount would come in 
through the tracks around the windows and under the doors. But I 
say, there's always a little dust 
everywhere." 

I held mv breath for a moment. 
"Mrs. Daly, what color was the 
dust?" 

She stared at me blankly. I wondered if she was considering calling 
the men in the white coats. 

"Why," she said at last, "dust 
color, of course." 

There was nothing to be learned 
here. I thanked her and went 
away. 

To say that Dad, to say nothing 
of the office help, looked with surprised disfavor at my lugging a collection of pink odds and ends into 
the office was putting it mildly. 



UNIVERSE 

Very mildly. But I brazened it out 
through the front lobby, the front 
office, and finally dumped the 
bundle on the floor oi my sire':, 
inner sanctum. 

"Are you planning to do your 
laundry here in the office from now 
on?" he asked coldly. 

'"Dad," I said, trying to catch my 
breath, "don't ask questions now. 
Just let me put this in a safe place, 
and lock it in." 

I'll say this for him, and I could 
have said it when I was nine years 
old. Me doesn't ask unnecessary 
questions. He indicated the coat 
closet without a word. I stuffed the 
bundle in the closet, shut and locked the door, and sank onto a chair 

He looked at me severely. "You 
should have been here ibis morning. That Mrs. Dickenson who 
wants a house under twenty thousand has been reading Hollywood 
magazines, and she's dead set on 
ft running brook meandering 
through her living room." 

"Tell her to come back next 
week," 1 said, "and I'll guarantee 
hex the brook, with speckled trout 
in it yet. Plus Lake Michigan in 
the dining room, and Lake Ontario 
in the bedroom." 

"How about the bathroom?" Anderson, Senior, asked. 

In spite of myself wc grinned 
at each other. "It'll have to be Lake 
Superior," I said. Mrs. Dickenson 
weighed a good hundred and 
eighty pounds. 

After a minute or two. Dad's 
face sobered. "What's the matter, 



PftffK 

Dan?" he asked. He'd never called 
me Danny. No one but Amelia 
had that privilege — and that she 
abused it goes without saying. 

"Something about the house," I 
said. "Something's getting into the 
house." 

"Termites?" he said. "I warned 
you kids when you rented the 
place." 

"No, not termites." Suddenly I 
couldn't tell him, much as we understood each other. Hard-headed 
Dad would probably call a doctor 
and have me certified. "I'll tell you 
about it — well, later," I promised. 

As I said, he never asked questions. 

"But," I said, trying to keep desperation from my voice, "what do 
you know about the house?" 

"Nothing except what we dug 
up when you decided to rent it. It 
was built around eightcen-cighty 
for a Mrs. Aval lone, at a cost that 
was a fortune in those days. It was 
way out in the country then." 

"No chickencoops built around 
it," I muttered. 

"What was that?" 

"Never mind," I said. "Co on." 
I hoped my voice didn't sound as 
hoarse as it felt. 

"She died, a widow, in the early 
ninctcen-lwcnties, at the age of 
eighty. She left the house to an 
estate, and the income to some distant cousins. The place is well built, 
btit the roof and plumbing need 
repairs. The heating system is in 
good repair." 

"I know all that," I said. He 



fluff gg 

hadn't told me about the heating 
system, but I w,j-; grateful for the 
information. At least, as grateful 
as I could be about anything under 
the circumstances. 

"Dan," he asked again, "is anything wrong?" 

I Stood up. "No, Dad. Everything's fine." I hoped the lie didn't 
show in my face. I felt a sudden 
terrible urgency to get back to the 
house. Amelia was alone there, except for the easily scared Gloria, 
and the two kids, one of them under two years old. "No," I repeated, "everything's perfect. I'll be in 
as usual in the morning." / hope, 
I said to myself. "And please keep 
that door locked," I finished. 

If a traffic cop had stopped me 
on the way home, I'd have been 
given ninety days for speeding. 1 
didn't know why I had to be there 
in Such a hurry, I just knew that 
I did. 

Amelia met me at the door, and 
I could sec by her face that there 
was trouble. 

"Why didn't you go to the office?" she demanded. "I tried to 
call you and you hadn't been 
there." 

"I did go to the office," I snapped bade, "1 had couple of stops 

to make first, But I went to the 
office, and if you don't believe it, 
call up again. They'll tell you." 

For a minute I thought she was 
going to slap mc. Then she turned 
away and walked slowly into the 
"ladies parlor." I went up the stairs 
just as slowly. 



96 fantastic 

There were wisps of pink fluff all 
over the place. On the staircase, in 
the hall, and a good inch of it on 
the bedroom floor. I had just stepped inside when I heard Kicky call 
me. I went down to his room. 

"Dan," he complained, "how can 
I ever finish my construction job 
when this doggone j unk keeps 
blowing in here?" 

I looked at his model. Every 
joint was clogged with pink fluff. 

"I'll take care of it," I promised 
him, and I meant it. , 

I went on down to Judy's nursery. She was sitting up in her crib, 
laughing and gurgling, and she was 
playing with a bit of the infernal 
stuff with her tiny fingers. I pulled 
it away from her, picked her up 
and ran down the stairs to Gloria. 

Gloria was dressed, and halfpacked. 

"I'm not staying here no more, 
Mist' Anderson," she said. "Not 
when I could be smothered in my 
sleep." 

"Gloria," I begged. She'd been 
with uq for three years, and she just 
couldn't do this to us now. 
"Gloria, please. Only for a few 
minutes. Then we'll all leave." 

Judy began to whimper, and 
that clinched the argument. Gloria 
took her from my arms into her 
own ample ones. "Not too long 
though," she warned me. 

She didn't have to warn me. It 
wasn't going to be too long. 

I pulled Amelia out of the 
"ladies parlor" and half-dragged 
hef up to the bedroom. The pink 



UNIVERSE 

fluff seemed to be about four inches 
deep now. 

"Start packing," I commanded, 
"and fast. We're getting out of 
here, all of us." I shot out the door 
and down to Ricky's room. "We're 
moving in half an hour," I told 
him. "Get all your stuff together." 

He stared at me and then at his 
construction job. "I can't leave 
this."' 

"We'll take it with us," I said. 
"But hurry!" 

"But Dan," he said. "I like it 
here. Think how swell the yard 
will be in the summer when we 
get it fixed up. We can have a dog, 
and Judy can have her play pen 
out there and — ■" 

I almost clipped him one. "You 
heard what I said," I snapped. 

All the way from downstairs I 
could hear Gloria crooning soothingly to Judy. 

When 1 get back to the bedroom, 
Amelia was standing right where 
I'd left her. The pink foam-like 
stuff was up to our knees. I swore 
at her for the first time in my life, 
and started ripping things we'd 
need out of dresser drawers. I 
could feel the fluff rising. I knew 
that it was only a matter of time 
before it would smother us. 

"Stop that," Amelia said sharply. "I'm not going anywhere." 

I said, "Do you want to kill us 
all?" Panic was rising in me like 
the beginning of a tidal wave. 

"I am not going," she said. 

I slapped her. Hard. 



PINK 

I could almost breathe the stuff 
now. 

"How can you want us to leave," 
she whispered. Tears not from" anger, formed in her eyes. "Tvc been 
happy here. I've always been completely happy here. I love this 
house, and I love you. We have 
our ups and downs, our small quarrels that don't mean a thing, 
but — " 

I forgot everything but Amelia. 
"I'll always be completely happy 
wherever you are," I told her 
softly. 

By the time I got through kissing her, 1 discovered that the pink 
fluff was gone. I could hear Ricky 
whistling cheerfully in his room. 
Appetizing smells and the faint 
sound of Judy singing to herself 
came from the kitchen where 
Gloria had evidently changed her 
mind. 

We went down the stairs, our 
arms around each other, and just 
then the doorbell rang. 

It was old Mr. Miller. For the 
moment I'd forgotten him, and 
what I'd wanted him for. It was 
Amelia who did the gracious thing. 
She invited him in, and ushered 
him to the most comfortable chair 
in the cozy little "ladies parlor" 
that was lighted and warmed now 
by the late afternoon sunlight, and 
fetched a tray with sherry and 
glasses. 

Mr. Miller was small, and genlle, 
and white-haired. 1 I'd guessed his 
age at somewhere in the seventies. 

He sipped his sherry, looked at 



FLUFF 97 
me anxiously and said, "I do hope 
there's nothing wrong." 

"Not a tlu'ng," I said. "Everything's fine." And this time I meant 
it. 

He gave a sigh of relief. "I'm 
glad to hear that. Sometimes these 
old houses — ■" 

"I'm an architect," I reminded 
him, "and I know these old houses 
are built to last. A leak in the roof 
can happen to any house, Why 
over in the new development — " 
I stopped myself fast. If I'd finished what I had started to say, 
Amelia would never have let me 
hear the last of it. 

"If it's ever on the market," I 
said, "we'll probably buy it.** 

"We love this house," Amelia 
said. 

"And we'll probably live here a 
long time," I told him. "That's 
why I invited you here. When you 
live in a house, you like to know 
who built it, who lived in it— all 
about it, in fact A .house is more 
than four walls and a roof that 
looks like a — -a chickencoop." 

From across the room, Amelia 
kissed me with her eyes. She rose 
and refilled Mr. Miller's sherry 
glass. 

"Thank you, my dear." He 
smiled at her. "This house has a 
rather curious history. I knew the 
original owner." 

I could have kissed him. 

He went on, "Even when I met 
her, she was a very beautiful woman, though she was in her eighties. 
I'm sorry to say, she had not been 



98 FANTASTIC UNIVERSE 



a very nice girl, in her youth. She 
was an actress — no, what you 
would call in these days, a show 
girl. 

"She was famous— perhaps I 
mean notorious — because she was 
so beautiful, She married a rich 
man, and bore him a son. But life 
became dull for her and she fell 
in love with an even richer man." 
He paused. "I know this from her 
diary. She showed it to me. It wasn't the money, understand. It was 
that she loved him." 

Amelia came over to me and 
perched on the arm of my chair. 
She squeezed my hand. 

"She ran away with him," little 
Mr. Miller said, turning his glass 
around in his hand, "and took her 
son with her. Her husband refused 
a divorce. In those days — ■" he 
paused, not having to add anything. 
"She, her lover and the boy lived 
in Europe," he went on. "Her husband killed himself. It was a terrible shock to her. She insisted on 
returning to America. Her lover 
agreed, but he declined to marry 
her." 

It was strange to hear a story of 
love and death told in such gentle 
terms. 

"Instead he built this house for 
her. It cost what was a fortune, in 
those days. He settled money on 
her. She had everything she wanted 
and so did the boy. But ten years 
later, the boy died of pneumonia, 
and within the same month, her 
lover was killed in an accident." 

The lovely, smiling lady who 



looked down from over the fireplace in our bedroom ! 

"She lived here until she died,'* 
littie old Mr. Miller said. "I managed her affairs the last years, and 
she talked to me a great deal. I was 
—as I told you — given the honor 
of reading her diary. I drew up her 
will. Shortly before she died — it 
was in nineteen twenty-one— I was 
a young man then. I was only 
forty." 

At the age of twenty-eight, I 
fc.lt like a mere child. 

"She wanted the house to survive. And she told me that she 
had been completely happy there. 
Here, I should say. She told me 
she would never let anyone live in 
the house who was not completely 
happy. I remember she laughed, 
and said that if anyone lived here 
who was not completely happy, she 
would come back and drive them 
out." 

He wiped off his eyeglasses. "A 
remarkable woman." 

"She must have been," I said, 
with all my heart. Amelia leaned 
over and kissed me on the ear. 

Mr. Miller rose and said, "I 
must go." He chuckled. "I wish I'd 
been born early enough to see her 
on the stage. She had an unusual 
nickname, you know." 

I didn't need to ask. My mind's 
eye had matched up the color in 
the portrait with another color. But 
from pure "politeness, I asked, 
"What was it?" 

Old Mr. Miller chuckled again 
and said, "Pink Fluff." 



run 
around 
the 
moon 

by . . . Mali Carter 

Lars had won undying fame as an 
historic figure in man's conquest 
of space. But what price glory 
— if the children drove him mad? 



\\/hfn hp retired, after half an 
active lifetime in space, Lars Hcndricssen's one overmastering desire 
was to seek out bis birthplace in 
Minnesota and turn the old Ilcndricssen farm into a garden. The 
nun who had opened up the IiarthVenus and Ganymcdc-Neplunc 
runs, and taken the famous Argonaut III on the first circumnavigation of Pluto, had had more than 
his share of adulation. He no longer rejoiced in rewards, and hat! 
developed a deep aversion to tensions, and disasters, to fea-stings and 
crowds and the company of mixed 
crews in mclal-skinned ships. 

All he wanted was a chance to 
restore the old homestead in strict 
accordance with bis heart's desire — 
to putter around the grounds, but 
peonies in the potato patch, azaleas 
in the alfalfa field and chrysanthemums in the carrot beds. He wanted 
to cat good Earth food, drink good 
liarth wines, sleep on a foam mattress and watch lively Earth entertainment in deep focus, full color 
television. 

•Above all, he wanted to be left 
alone. 

As might have been expected, 



There may be a bear I warming lilt to the time-honored refrain: ''Hail, the 
conquering hero comes!'' But if a man is unaware of his own greatness, and 
seeks only serenity and the quiet sympathy of boyhood friends in :he town 
of bis birth such rousing music may grate harshly on his ears. And if the 
children of an unfamiliar generation add to the cacophony with a defiance 
all their own — well! You'll chuckle over this amusing and unusual yarn. 



99 



1 00 



FANTASTIC UNIVERSE 



things didn't work out that way. 
He didn't mind the local-boymakes-good greeting he received on 
his arrival, for the people who 
feted him and made speeches in 
his honor at the Municipal Building, the Country Club and elsewhere were folks he had known in 
childhood, and hadn't seen for 
twenty-five years. 

But he hadn't expected it to 
last. In the course of an incredibly 
active, dangerous career in deep 
space and on alien planets, there 
had coine to htm no inkling of how 
his renown had grown. The first 
indication of the extent of his 
celebrity came shortly after his return, when Representative Luther. 
O'Brien delivered his welcoming 
speech from the steps of the town 
hall. 

Lars listened, politely but with 
only half an ear, from his place 
beside the Congressman until he 
heard a phrase so startling that he 
stiffened to instant attention. "A 
man's achievements must be memorable indeed when a community 
such as ours deems it an honor and 
a privilege to rename an entire 
township in his honor — " 

Turning to Mrs. Leonidas Williams, the one-time Nettie Olssen 
who had blossomed into a plump, 
and matronly civic leader, he whispered, "Just what is Mr. O'Brien 
talking about?" 

Nettie stared at him with disbelief for an instant, then pointed toward the big red-white-and-blue 



banner stretched across the courthouse square. It read: 

WELCOME HOME TO 
HENDRICSSENVILLE, 
LARS HENDRICSSEN 

Lars felt as if he had been 
ploughed through by a high-velocity midget meteor while doing outside skinwork on the Titian run. 
But he decided, grimly, that there 
was nothing to do but accept the 
unavoidable. Events, he thought, 
were bound to take a more reasonable turn when once the excitement 
died down. 

However, as the days lengthened 
into weeks and the weeks became 
months Lars realized sadly that the 
excitement wasn't going - to die 
down. It merely coalesced into a 
steady stream of demands on his 
time — visits from celebrities, television interviews, and requests for 
lecture appearances before civic and 
young people's groups. 

"Why can't they let me alone?" 
he asked his old first mate, Harvey 
Willets, his first welcome guest in 
a long time. "I've simply done my 
duty. Now I want a little time to 
myself." 

"I never thought I'd live to see 
the day when I'd be calling you a 
modest man," said Willets, deadpan as ever, "but apparently the 
millennium has arrived. You, skipper, are famous — a celebrity, a 
great man. And fame exacts a high 
price." 

"For two credits," growled Lars, 



RUN AROUND THE MOON 



IOI 



"I'd sign on for the Io colony. At 
least, out there, I'd have plenty of 
solitude." 

Willets promptly laid two crisp 
one-credit bills on the table between 
them. Lars, with an indeterminate 
low sound of rage, just as promptly knocked them to the floor. 

"I won't let them run me Out of 
my own home," he said angrily. 
Then, seeing the laughter in Willets' eyes, he found himself reluctantly smiling. 

Picking up the credits, Willets 
said, "It's your own fault for being such a top-echelon hero, Lars." 

The next morning, while Willets 
was still there, the Argonaut- III 
arrived, The giant triple-traction 
haulers that brought the gallant old 
spaceship to the still only halfrenovated Hendricssen farm set it 
down on Its empennage smack in 
the middle of his struggling azalea 
bed. 

Its bright metal skin scarred by 
meteors and shadowed by the ineradicable burns of subspace travel, 
the ship which Lars had piloted to 
distant Pluto eight years earlier, 
resembled an oversized, old-fashioned pot-bellied stove. In such 
rural surroundings, it was a monstrosity. Coming up on the run 
from the distant south pasture, 
where he had been seeding turf, 
Lars looked at it in total disbelief. 

A sizable crowd was clustered 
around it, fringed with cameramen 
and television technicians. Seeing 
Representative Luther O'Brien and 
Mrs. Williams in its van, he shout


ed at them, "What does this mean? 
Why did you—" 

That was as far as he got. Smiling with pride, the former Nettie 
Olssen stepped forward, bringing 
both Lars and herself within range 
of a live television camera. 

"In the name of the citizens of 
HendricssenvilEc," she announced, 
"I take great pride in presenting 
-you with a spaceship which has 
played an historic role in the history of interplanetary exploration. 
A glorious role, Lars Hendricssen, 
thanks entirely to you." 

Then, turning to Congressman 
O'Brien, who was anxiously crowding into the picture, she added: "I 
should also like publicly to thank 
our able representative, Luther 
O'Brien, who made very certain 
that the Argonaut III would not 
be dismantled by a wrecking crew 
and sold for scrap metal. Here, on 
the farm where Lars Hendricssen 
first saw the light of day, it will 
provide a fitting monument to the 
unforgettable achievements of Hendricssen ville's first citizen." 

"I was born on the stroke of 
midnight," growled Lars to Harvey 
Willets, who had slipped up sympathetically beside him. "So where 
do they get that 'light of day' 
stuff?" 

"W aLch it, skipper — you're on 
television," whispered his former 
aide. "They expect you to make a 
speech." 

When it was over and most of 
the crowd had left, Lars peered out 
at the monstrosity from tile win


I OS! 



FANTASTIC UNIVERSE 



dow-wall of his renovated living 
room. Despairingly, he said, "I 
thought I'd seen the last of that 
ugly old flying coffin. Whatever 
possessed them to set it down right 
in the middle of my azalea bed?" 

"Cheer up," said Willets, as 
irrepressible as ever. "Back in the 
early twentieth century, D'Annunzio, the Italian writer-adventurer, 
had half a battleship mushrooming 
up from the middle of his lawn. 
The king gave it to him for taking 
Fiume." 

"Outside of official reports, I 
never wrote a line in my life," said 
Lars, aggrievedfy. "So why do they 
have to wish that horror on me? 
It was the balkiest mule of a ship 
I ever had to handle." 

"You can say that again," Willets agreed. "But I went out on 
her later, when they fitted powerpacks in her stern instead of the 
old turbo-atomics. She didn't look 
any better. Hut at least she ran like 
a milk-horse." 

"Humph," said Lars. "It they 
had Lo put a ship in my gatden, 
why didn't they choose one of the 
new Star-yacht class? They're a lot 
trimmer and tidier . . ." 

"And a lot more expensive," 
Willets pointed out. "I got it from 
one of the television lads that the 
town picked her up for under a 
thousand credits, transportation included." 

"A half-billion credits worth of 
junk!" said Lars with bitterness. 
Then, "Holy Phoebus, look at those 
kids !" 



Like gaudy insects in their 
bright-colored playclothes, children 
of all ages and sexes were swarming over the retired spaceship. They 
were scaling the emergency ladders, climbing in and out of the 
tailports, and scrambling over the 
fins. And, as Lars added with a 
roar, "Hey!" the little beasts started trampling his rosebushes. 

He made a move to go out and 
chase them away. But Harvey Willets restrained him. "Watch it, skipper," he warned. "You'll only add 
to your troubles. You'd better turn 
it into a project." 

"I'll project 'em right out of 
the universe!" said the irate exspaceman. Then, curiously, "What 
sort of a project ?" 

Willets shook his head in mock 
reproach. "The easy life must be 
softening you up, skipper," he said. 
"That ship's presence here is a 
great thing for those kids. It gives 
them an advantage and an opportunity no other kids have anywhere 
on Earth. You'll never be able to 
drive them away. So you'd better 
use some of your famous executive 
ability and get them organized. 
The ship's disarmed, so they can't 
hurt themselves. Set them up in 
ground maintenance, space-crew — 
the whole works. They'll go for it." 

"J didn't quit space to wet-nurse 
a pack of kids," said Lars. But as 
he watched his rosebushes suffer, 
he shuddered, quaffed a long drink 
of Martian lichenwasser, and strode 
purposefully out of the house. 

"First," he told the youngsters, 



RUN AROUND THE MOON 



I03 



after making a survey of the Argonaut III, "we've got to put the ship 
in condition for a trip to Venus. 
That means . . ." He went on, detailing the special types of equip mcnl needed, amplifying and 
explaining, assigning various groups 
of the eager-eyed boys and girls to 
preliminary tasks, appointing squad 
leaders and crew-chiefs. 

It took quite a while and when 
he was through, he looked around 
at the children for approval. And 
a slouching boy of perhaps thirteen said in an uneven, adolescent 
voice, "But Captain Lars, we don't 
want to go to Venus. That's old 
stuff. We want to go a great deal 
farther out." 

At least, it was a beginning. As 
a space-skipper, Lars had been the 
absolute czar of all he surveyed. 
His word had been final, on every 
vital mailer from diet to life-anddeath decisions concerning deepspace repairs. He was used to being 
obeyed — or else. Hut these kids, in 
an enlightened twenty-first century, 
expected to have their own way, 
and could be nifuriatingly stubborn 
about it 

After a week of tussling with 
them, he took his problem to Harvey Willcts, who had stayed on as 
a sympathetic spectator. "It isn't 
that the little beggars aren't bright 
enough — or tough enough. It's just 
that they haven't the slightest idea 
of discipline." 

"Why don't you try a little physical chastisement?" the former first


mate asked. "A single whack often 
accomplishes miracles." 

The next morning, when one of 
the boys — a plump, over-intelligent 
specimen with an annoying giggle 
■ — laughed at one of Lars' detailed 
instructions, Lars put him across 
his knees. The boy let out one yelp 
of outrage as Lars' large, spacehardened hand smote him with a 
resounding smack, then took his 
1 Ee k i ng in s i I ence. The others 
watched in wide-eyed disbelief. 

Finished, Lars set the lad on his 
feet and said, "Now, next time try 
to remember who's skipper around 
here." 

All of the children walked away 
and left him standing there alone, 
by h is ru incd flower beds. That 
afternoon, he received a visit from 
Mrs. Williams, nee Nettie Olssen. 
She was sweet, reasonable and — 
visibly outraged. She said, "Lars, 
do you realize you can be sent to 
prison for using violence on a 
child. It took considerable persuasion on my part to talk Binnie Martin's parents out of bringing 
charges." 

Lars scratched his head and said, 
"But what am I going to do with 
them? They're making a mess of 
my flowerbeds, I've done my best 
to get them organized, but without 
authority—" He looked at her 
helplessly. 

"Some of the other children's 
parents and I have talked it over," 
said Mrs. Williams firmly. "We're 
aware that you've been away from 
Earth a long time — and thai you've 



104 FANTASTIC 

been more than generous of your 
time. We've decided to make a 
community project out of it. We're 
going to have the children organize a trip lo the Moon." 

"The Moon!" Lars exclaimed incredulously. "They aren't interested 
in anything this side of the asteroids." 

"We know." Nettie Williams 
was as gently composed as only a 
very determined woman can be. 
"But we're going to make this seem 
very real. We're willing to let them 
stock the ship with supplies, just 
as they would in a regular journey. 
Then, when it's finished, they canhave a big picnic and pretend it's 
a real journey." 

"Nettie Williams !" said Lars, 
aghast. "Have you ever tasted spacerations ? They're like dehyd rated 
sawdust." 

"Never mind," said Nettie Williams, smiling. "The children will 
love it. It will be great adventure 
to them, and to children adventure 
and hardships go together." 

"I only hope you're right," said 
Lars doubtfully. "But at any rate, 
I'll do what I can to help. I can 
promise you that." 

. "Oh, I was sure of you. I told 
them you'd be cooperative," she 
exclaimed, rising. She lifted a 
plump, white-gloved hand and patted his leathery cheek. "You know, 
Lars, you're really a very sweet man 
— and a very handsome one." 

Lars shuddered and, from the 
next room, he could hear Harvey 
repressing sounds of mirth. He 



UNIVERSE 

flushed crimson and managed to 
bow the lady out without further 
entanglement. 

When she had gone, he turned 
to Harvey helplessly and said, 
"What am I going to do now?" 

"I never thought I'd hear that 
question from you," was his 
amused reply. "You'd belter do 
exactly as the lady says." Then, 
more seriously, "Skipper, how about 
you and me taking a fortnight's 
trip? I've got a little lodge going 
begging up by Great Slave Lake in 
Canada, and it's the height of the 
trout season." 

Lars, who had succeeded in convincing himself that he had aged 
more rapidly during his retirement 
than in all the years of his spacetravels, sighed heavily, and said, 
"Thanks, fellow. It sounds wonderful, but" — his expression grew grim 
— "I'm not going to be driven out 
of my own home by a pack of moonstruck kids." 

"As long as the old Argonaut is 
there, I don't see — " Harvey shook 
his head and then turned his face 
away to hide the gleam that came 
into his pupils. He changed the 
subject abruptly with. "I wonder 
if you realize how completely the 
new power-pack system takes all 
the guesswork out of space-flight, 
skipper. If you're determined 
against your better judgment to go 
to Pluto nowadays they just put a 
Pluto- pack in your ship — scientifically powered and geared to get 
you out there, and back with per


RUN AROUND THE MOON 



105 



feet orbital plotting. It even takes 
tare of the landing problem." 

"Robots !" said Lars with a trace 
of bitterness. "They don't need 
human crews any more. Let's face 
it. We're old hat." 

"It's simply progress you're railing against," said Harvey. "You 
can't run away from it. Well, if 
you won't come north with me, I 
guess I'll have to stay here and 
help you over the hurdles with the 
kids." 

"Thanks, friend," said Lars, 
gcatefully. 

"Don't mention it," Harvey said. 

The project proved to be a 
frightful headache, but it worked. 
Somehow, the kids were willing to 
forego their dry runs to Uranus 
and Saturn in favor of a "real" 
picnic trip to the Moon. Under the 
tutelage of Lars and Harvey, they 
stocked the Argonaut III with 
enough space-rations to carry it to 
Proxima Ccntauri and back — 
though the very sight of the familiar red-and-blue packets was 
enough to make Lars physically ill. 
They packed her with medicines 
and electronic equipment. They 
oiled her and painted her and polished her until she looked better 
than she had on her first trip. 

l-'inally, the great day arrived. 
It dawned, sunny and warm _and 
free of mosquitoes and Lars went 
Out into the garden for a final inspection. There he found an earlyrising Harvey with an eager group 
of the older boys installing what 
looked to him like a power-pack in 



the engine hold a few feet from 
the ship's tail. 

"What's this?" he asked his former aide, in amazement. "It looks 
real." 

Harvey winked at him. "It's a 
dummy," he said blandly, in a whisper. "But don't tell the kids. They 
think they're really going to the 
Moon today." 

"Conspiring behind my back," 
said i he harried ex-skipper in mock 
anger. "A week in the brig for that, 
Willcts." 

"Mr. Willets to you, skipper," 
said Harvey. 

Lars grinned faintly, then 
sighed. He said, "Wouldn't it be 
wonderful if they actually did take 
off. I almost believe the little rascals could handle it, even without 
one bf the new power-packs." 

"Would you really like to see 
them go?" Harvey asked. 

"Yes, I believe I would," said 
Lars with another sigh. "A real trip 
would in all likelihood permanently aire them." 

"It's a pity," said Harvey. "T 
agree with you that it would make 
spacemen out of them — or else. 
They've got enough provisions inside to stock a whole he-man's 
flotilla." 

He went back to work, superintending the installment of the dummy power-pack. 

Not wishing to interface with his 

unwelcome charges, Lars remained 
in the house when the picnic began. He watched the kids, clad in 
their "official" spacemen's regalia. 



FANTASTIC UNIVERSE 



1 06 

climb into Hie ugly old ship. He 
saw them seal her up as if it were 
for real. And then, unbelieving, 
he saw flame spurt from her jets 
and watched in utter consternation 
as the unwieldly old space-boat rose 
slowly into the air. 

She was a thousand feet above 
the earth when her power-plant 
really caught. In a matter of seconds, she was gone, leaving only a 
faint trail of rapidly dispersing 
smoke behind her in the atmosphere. 

Stunned, and visibly shaken. Lars 
turned to his former first-mate. He 
said, his voice low, "What did you 
do, Mr. Willed?" 

Harvey looked incredulous. He 
said, "I told them to send me a 
dummy. Naturally, to get it, I had 
to tell them at the depot it was for 
you." 

"For mc!" groaned Lars. ''Do 
you realize what this means? I'll 
never dare to show my face around 
here again. I — I'm done for." 

"Don't worry," soothed 1 I irvcy. 
"It will blow over in good time 
and you can come back here. After 
all, it wasn't your fault. And the 
kids will be all right. I saw to 

"You saw to it!" said Lars accusingly, piercing his former mate 
with an eagle eye before which far 
tougher spacemen had quailed. 

"I had to do something." said 
I larvey. "Skipper, those kids were 
killing you." 

"A very neat trick," said Lars 
bitterly. "But what have you ac


complished? They'll be back in a 
matter of hours. It doesn' t take 
long to encircle the Moon nowadays — or hadn't you noticed?" 

"That," said Harvey blandly, 
"depends upon which moon you're 
talking about." 

"Harvey! - ' said Lars. "Harvey, 
you didn't . . . ! Where in space 
did you send them?" 

"Oh, I put through an order for 
a power-pack to Triton, out Neptune way. It's going to take them 
a couple of months. But they'll be 
back in time for the Fall opening 
of school." 

"But great Jupiter!" cried Lars. 
"Their parents! And Nettie Williams! They'll have me in jail." 

"Not if they can't find you," 
was- Harvey's unabashed reply. 
"And when the kids get back, you'll 
be a hero all over again. On my 
honor. I fixed it so they'll make 
it." 

The communicator began to buzz 
insistently. Lars started forward to 
answer it but his friend restrained 
him. "Better not," he advised. 
"They'll be furious and unreasonable now. My aircar is waiting outside, primed with fuel. And the 
lodge isn't deeded in my name. I 
inherited it from my poor old 
Uncle Francis. Let's go." 

The communicator buzzed again, 
still more insistently. Lars looked 
at it, then at the charred patch of 
garden where the Argonaut had 
rested, minutes before. He said, 
"What sort of gear do we need to 
catch those trout?" 


you 
created 
us 

by . . . Tom Godwin 



It was a Pandora's Box of cold, 
inhuman monsters which man's 
destructiveness had inflicted on 
the world. Would they ever die? 



\\ !■ saw the things for the first 
lime in the Spring of 1953. A dust 
storm was raging across the southern Nevada desert that night, milking a roaring, swirling medium 
thorough which his headlights penetrated for a limited distance and 
forcing him to drive slowly despite 
llic importance of his being in San 
h'rancisco before noon of the following day. He was a hundred 
miles north of Las Vegas when he 
saw them — suddenly caught in the 
illumination of his headlights as he 
swung around a curve. 

There were two of them, and 
they were leaping up the embankment onto the highway, less than 
a hundred feet ahead of him, and 
in the first instant of seeing them 
he thought they were huge and 
grotesquely misshapen men. For an 
instant the swirling dust partly obscured them. Then they looked toward him as they bounded across 
the highway, and he knew they 
wvre not men. Their eyes blazed 
green as no human eyes ever could. 

He was almost ahreast of them 
as they leaped down the opposite 
embankment and he saw them 



You've seen them in the documentary film triumphs of science fiction's coming 
of age — the dreadful puffball shapes flitting in reddening sunlight before 
the shattered windshield of a careening ear, Ihe ghastly terrors which a child 
stricken mute desperately tries to recall, the meteorlike pits full of Medusalike 
stirring* without intelligible form and substance. Yes, you've seen their 
like before. But never quite such horrors as these, by a brilliant newcomer 
to the science fiction fold, in a setting as chill as hoar frost in December. 



YOU CREATED US 



£15 



quite clearly for a moment. They 
tan on two legs, as men normally 
would run, but they were gray and 
scaly things eight feet tall. They 
had reptilian, lizard-like laces and 
they ran stooped forward a little 
as if to balance their heavy tails. 

His tires screamed above the roar 
of the wind as he jammed on the 
brakes and reached for the spotlight control. He was beyond them 
when his car slowed to a stop and 
the beam of the spotlight finally 
picked them out. It was a disappointing glimpse, for it revealed 
only their gray backs disappearing 
into the windswept darkness to the 
west. 

He backed down the highway to 
the place where they had crossed, 
and got oat with a flashlight to 
look at the tracks. They were still 
visible in the soft silt beyond the 
highway. Great three-toed imprints 
Ihcy were, clawed, with the first 
and fifth toes set far back, as the 
digits are set on the foot of a lizard. 

He absently rubbed the back of 
his head, which felt oddly numb, 
and followed the trades for some 
distance out across the desert. The 
wind had erased them by tlie time 
he had followed them for six hundred feet and when he returned to 
the car, frowning uneasily, the 
tracks by the highway had also disappeared. 

Back in his car, he checked the 
mileage from Las Vegas with his 
map and compass. He found the 
lizard-things had come from the 



direction of the atomic bomb test 
site and that they had been going 
toward the Funeral Range, which 
bounded Death Valley along its 
eastern side in that area. 

There was a village fifteen miles 
from where he had halted and he 
stopped there for a sandwich. Two 
hours later, and a hundred miles 
farther on, the numbness which he 
had noticed only subconsciously, 
suddenly left the back of his head. 
With Its going, the realization and 
fear came to him. 

He had seen things that had not 
existed upon earth for a hundred 
million years, if ever— and he had 
been no more than mildly interested. He had seen them at close 
range as his car swerved past them. 
He had seen the powerful bulk of 
them, had seen the way their jaws 
were lined with knife-like serrations. Either of them could have 
torn him into ribbons in a matter 
of seconds. 

Yet, knowing that, he had followed their tracks out into the darkness armed only with a flashlight. 
He had not been afraid and only 
a mindless fool would have been 
unafraid under such unusual circumstances. 

He had told no one in the village of what he had seen as he ate 
his sandwich. At the time it had 
seemed of little importance to him. 
Now, it was too late to tell them. 
He could not go back and say: "By 
the way, I forgot to> mention it 
When I was here before. I saw a 
couple of creatures as large as young 



FANTASTIC UNIVERSE 



Tl6 

dinosaurs cross the highway fifteen 
miles south of here.' 1 

It was not too late to inform 
the Army authorities, of course. 
But what would they think of a 
phone call in the middle of the 
night from a madman or a drunk 
with a wild story of lizard-monsters EOming from the atomic bomb 
test site? 

And what if he should risk losing the promotion to superintendent of his company's San Francisco plant by driving back to the 
army base and telling the authorities in person what he had seen? 
Would they believe an incredible 
story which he could not prove and 
which would indicate that he was 
not sane. 

And in addition he wore a silver 
plate on his skull where a piece of 
Chinese shrapnel in Korea had almost taken his life. Would not that 
be enough in itself to insure that 
all concerned would dismiss what 
he had seen as a hallucination 
caused by the old brain injury? 

He knew it had been no hallucination. Yet he had reacted in a 
manner not at all normal. Why? 
What had dulled his mind and 
caused him to accept it all with 
merely casual interest? Had the 
lizards done something to him, exerted some kind of hypnotic influence over him, as snakes were said 
to be able to do when they preyed 
on small birds? Or was it that the 
old injury under the silver plate on 
his skull had manifested itself at 
last, and he had made the first ter


rifying step into insanity that 
night? 

Which was it? 

He had no way of knowing fer 
sure and fear and uncertainty rode 
with him for the rest of the 
night . , . 

The demands of his job kept him 
in San Francisco for two year:*. During the first year he watched the 
papers carefully for any scoffingly 
skeptical reports of lizard-monsters 
in southern Nevada. There were 
none and even before the year was 
out he almost succeeded in forgetting what he had seen. He almost 
succeeded in making himself believe he had been tired and drowsy 
f rom the nigh t drivf tag and ha d 
been deceived by no more than 
two clouds of dust whipping across 
the highway. 

Yet there had been the green 
glow of their eyes in his headlights 
and there had been their tracks. 
Surely he could not have imagined 
the tracks! And if he had not 
imagined them, then the lizardthings might still be in the Funeral 
Range along the east side of Death 
Valley. 

The creatures had been going 
toward a particular section of the 
Funerals — a place on their summit 
called Chloride Cliff. He had once 
visited Chloride Cliff and he knew 
that a trail led down from it into 
Death Valley, proceeding past an 
old mine that had known no activity for many years. 

It occurred to him that the mine's 
many tunnels would be a perfect 



YOU CREATED US 



hiding place for the lizard-things — 
until he remembered that Chloride 
Cliff was a point of interest to the 
Death Valley winter tourist traffic. 
It was only a three-mile hike from 
the end of the dirt side-road up to 
the abandoned diggings and even 
though, only a minor number of 
tourists would care to make the 
hike, it could be safely presumed 
that at least two or three a week 
would climb all the way up to the 
mine. Which meant that at least 
fifty people must have been to the 
mine since the night he had seen 
the lizards. 

He met many different people in 
his work and he acquired the habit 
of bringing Death Valley into the 
conversation whenever he could do 
so in a casual manner. A man from 
Los Angeles supplied the first clue 
unimportant though it was in itself. 
His informant described the various 
points of interest in Death Valley 
with a detailed and painstaking clarity: Dante's View, Scotty's Castle, 
Ubehebe Crater and all the other 
places. But of the old mine he 
could only say vaguely: 

"There were some tunnels there 
on a steep mountainside. I don't 
remember now what they looked 
like nor how many there were . . ." 

Later, he met a man from Oregon who told him, when hj inquired about the mine: "I remember climbing up to it, but I've 
forgotten now just what the tunnets were like." 

A client of his firm from Ohio 
mentioned the mine in the same 



vague way, as did three young mining engineers from Colorado. The 
young mining engineers, even 
though green and inexperienced, 
should in obligation to their profession have observed the old 
workings with more than casual 
interest. 

Instead, they couldn't even recall the formation of the rock, although they remembered well the 
mines at Skidoo, Bullfrog, Rhyolite 
and the other old camps in that 
area. 

A question arose, and became 
an obsession with him: Were the 
lizards living in the tunnels and 
using their hypnotic -powers to 
make people -forget what they had 
seen? 

Then the? tormenting problem of 
the lizards lost some of its importance as the shadow of war grew 
increasingly darker throughout 
1955. On May 10, 1956 he received a letter from his superiors, 
ordering him to the east coast and 
saying in part: 

"With war almost certain to come 
within the next few months, San 
Francisco's vulnerability as a target 
area for enemy bombs makes further expansion of the San Francisco plant extremely unwise . . ." 

He debated only briefly about 
what he would do. He would go 
to the east coast, of course, but 
not before he had gone to Death 
Valley. He could drive his own car 
east, with the side trip to Death 
Valley taking no more than an extra 
day at the most. And it would be 



FANTASTIC UNIVERSE 



his last and only chance to learn 
the truth about the lizard-things . . . 

Death Valley was blue with 
haze under the warm spring son 
as he rolled down, the long grade 
from Daylight Pass, between mountains decked in the brightest of 
May time finery. To his left was the 
harsh, canyon-riven Funeral Range 
and he drove slowly after he 
passed the Stovepipe Wells junction so that he would not miss the 
dirt road he was seeking. He came 
to it and followed it down into 
the broad wash and up the long 
slope to the foot of the mountain. 

He parked his car near the beginning of the trail, and slipped 
on a light jacket — and dropped an 
automatic pistol in the right pocket 
and a small camera in the left. lie 
hesitated a moment, and then decided that a notebook and pencil 
might also prove of value. 

He started up the trail then, in 
his growing excitement forgetting 
to take the key out of the car. He 
remembered the oversight when he 
was a hundred feet up, but he did 
not turn back. The important 
thing was to reach the old tunnels, 
and to take pictures of them, even 
if he saw nothing. Light-and-shadow impressions on camera film 
would be incapable of a memory 
lapse and could not fade away. 

He was sweating when he 
reached the end of the first and 
steepest half of the climb. His 
breath came hard and panting, but 
he refused to stop to rest. He followed the trail in a fast walk, the 



mountain rearing steeply above him 
and the canyon wall dropping 
swiftly away below. 

He came first upon the old camp, 
where the few remaining buildings 
were warped with age, and the 
empty, crooked windows gaped vacantly. He passed the abandoned 
structures with hardly a glance, his 
attention on the steep mountainside above him where he coultl already see waste dumps that marked 
the location of the mine tunnels. 

It was impossible to fully control 
his impatience and he was breathing hard again when the steep trail 
encircled one of the dumps and [fee 
first tunnel appeared suddenly before him. He stopped in his tracks, 
his hand on the pistol, and studied 
the deserted excavation while his 
breathing slowed toward normal. 

There was nothing to see — only 
the empty, yawning, poital of the 
tunnel and- the small, flat area, of 
the waste dump before it. Then, as 
he stood there, a wisp of a breeze 
stirred and brought an odor to him 
from the tunnel. It was, unmistakably, the odor of decaying flesh. 
And with H same the sensation of 
being watched. 

He took the camera f rom h i <: 
pocket- — the camera that would 
view the portal with its cold mechanical eye and record exactly 
what it saw. He found his hands 
were trembling unaccountably and 
his fingers had hecome awkward 
and wooden. He tried to control 
the trembling, fearful he would 
drop the camera before he could 



YOU CREATED US 



119 



use it, and he tried at the same 
time to set it for the proper range. 

Suddenly the camera dropped out 
of" his hands. He grabbed at it frantically, striking it with the side of 
his hand instead of catching it. It 
was knocked to one side by the 
blow, and out over the edge of the 
dump. It bounced once, spun outward in a wide arc and struck the 
rocks far below with a shattering 
sound. 

When lie turned back toward 
the tunnel the lizard- thing had 
emerged from the shadows and was 
standing nine feet in front of him, 
watching him. 

His right hand stabbed for the 
pistol in his pocket while he made 
a split-second appraisal of the creature. It stood upright on its big, 
long-toed feet, towering a full two 
feet higher than the tunnel opening at its back. Its arms and hands 
were almost human i n shape, 
though huge and scaled, and the 
eyes in its massive, reptilian face 
were regarding him with a degree 
of intelligence that chilled him to 
the core of his being. 

His fingers touched the butt of 
the pistol in his pocket, reached 
around it, and went numb and 
lifeless. 

He knew, then, why his hands 
had trembled and caused him to 
drop the camera and lie noticed, 
without surprise, that the lizard had 
permitted his left hand to return 
to normal. But the right hand that 
gripped the pistol still remained 
limp and numb. 



The lizard spoke to him then, 
soundlessly, in his mind: 

Co to the tunnels above. 

A strange coldness seemed to be 
touching his brain, and he obeyed 
without attempting to resist. But 
his mind was clear and he saw 
something he had not noticed before — the tracks of wild burros and 
mountain sheep in the trail ahead 
of him. The tracks led only one 
way, toward the upper tunnels. 

He recalled with a shudder the 
odor of decaying flesh, and wondered if the lizards let some of the 
meat age, as a man might let cheese 
age to improve its flavor. 

There werk three of them 
standing before the portal of one 
of the upper tunnels, A thought 
came to him from the center one 
as he stopped before it: 

We have been expecting you. 

He asked the question that he 
was sure could have but one answer: 

"Arc you mutants from the 
atomic bomb test site?" 
Yes. 

The coldness still hovered 
around his mind, but he was no 
longer afraid, nor even nervous. 
For some reason they wanted him 
to be calm and at ease. But the 
coldness impinging on his brain was 
not enough to make him forget the 
importance of learning all he could 
about them. 

"When did it start?" he asked. 
"And what were you, before?" 

// began in the Spring of Nine


120 



FANTASTIC UNIVERSE 



teen fifty-two. The radiations from 
the bomb blast affected the eggs of 
an ordinary desert lizard. I and 
jour others were the result. 

"But the two I saw crossing the 
highway were already grown." 

We reach the adult stage in one 
year. 

He wondered how they had provided themselves with food, to 
grow to such a size in so short a 
time. 

The lizard answered his unspoken question: 

The mutation created by your 
bomb represents evolution to the 
near-perfect level. We can subsist 
on anything organic, including all 
kindt of desert vegetation, even 
though we prefer meat. 

He wondered if there were only 
five of them, if they were incapable 
of reproduction. 

The lizard's thought came: 

We can reproduce. There are 
many of us in these tunnels and 
there will be many more when this 
year's eggs hatch. 

So the lizards were mutations as 
he had suspected from the night of 
his first encounter with them. The 
hard radiations from the bomb had 
altered a desert lizard's eggs, and 
had done something to the developing embryo that was the equivalent 
of a hundred million years of cvoItil ion— or perhaps a thousand 
million. 

True evolution was slow — a selective process of trial and error 
over millions of years. What had 
been the hit-or-miss likelihood that 



the lizard's eggs would be profoundly affected by the radiations? 
One chance occurrence out of a 
hundred million? 

It did not matter, because the 
laws of chance were blind and 
without memory. A tossed coin 
would, in the long run, tome up 
exactly fifty percent heads and fifty 
percent tails. But a coin had no 
memory and it could come up 
heads for a hundred times in succession. And the laws of chance 
evolution, produced by the hard 
radiations, had no memory either. 
They would as calmly produce one 
successful mutation out of a hundred million failures in one year 
as in a hundred million years. 
They would — and they had. 
He asked the lizard another question: "Why is it that I saw you 
that night on the highway and remembered when the others — the 
ones who have seen you up here — 
can't remember?" 

That was partly due to the brain 
injury you once had. and partly to 
the fact we were only one year old 
and bad not fully learned how to 
use our hypnotic powers. 

"Why do you hide?" he asked. 
"Why are you so afraid that humans will know of your existence?" 

The lizard's face remained expressionless but he sensed amusement in the way it regarded him. 

What would be their reaction if 
they knew of us? They would want 
to see us caged, placed on exhibit. 
They would want their scientists to 



YOU CREATED US 



121 



examine us. And when they found 
their minds were helpless before 
ours, they would want to destroy 
as- Your species and mine are too 
different for them to ever exist side 
by side. 

"What are you going to do?" he 
asked. "You cao't stay here always. 
There will be too many of you. 
Someday you will have to let humans know of your existence." 

That is being arranged. 

"[Tow do you mean?" 

We are letting you humans prepare the way for us. 

For a moment he was puzzled. 
Then, suddenly, he knew what the 
lizard meant. The insanity of hate 
and fear and suspicion that filled 
the world — the insanity that was 
growing each day and could result 
only in war. 

There is no distance limit to our 
telepathic influence, the lizard said. 
We can concentrate upon influencing the important few among your 
enemies — the policy makers, the 
agitators, the ones in position to 
make war. This we are doing. With 
your own government, we have 
only to make certain that an enemy 
attack will find you unprepared. 
This, too, is being done. 

He thought of the exaggerated 
claims so often made of American 
military power and of the seldompublished truth : that the United 
States was vulnerable to any surprise attack, and lacked even a 
practical warning system. 

How much of that ignorance was 
due to the mumbo-jumbo of Se


curity? Surely people would demand an adequate warning and 
defense system if they knew the 
true peril of their circumstances. 
But Security did not dare tell them, 
for in theory such a disclosure 
would give information to the 
enemy! It was better to pretend 
that an adequate defense system 
already existed, better to label such 
difficult problems "Top Secret" and 
file them away and forget them. 

The amusement was stronger in 
the lizard's thought: 

This mania for secrecy has been 
very useful to us arid we have encouraged its growth. 

"So you would have Asia destroy the United States?" 

Let us say the western hemisphere. 

"And then what? What would 
you do with a country made unlivable by radiation from the 
atomic and hydrogen bombs?" 

We are immune to bard radiations. 

The coldness and numbness 
around his brain seemed to he increasing and the scene was beginning to take on a quality of nightmare unreality to him. He knew 
they were doing something to his 
brain, to make him forget as they 
had made all the others forget. 

He did the only thing he knew 
to do. He wrote a short sentence 
on the notebook in his pocket, 
quickly, before the lizard could 
realize what his intentions were, 
and awkwardly because he had to 
use his left hand. 



122 



FANTASTIC UNIVERSE 



He half expected the lizard to 
halt the writing before it was completed. But the lizard did no more 
than stare at him with its scaly face 
expressionless. He wrote only one 
sentence — afraid to risk discovery 
by writing more. He was convinced 
that the one sentence would be 
enough. It would convey the needed warning, even if the lizards did 
make him forget that he had ever 
seen them. 

"So you'll have the western hemisphere attacked ?" he asked. 
"You'll have us killed with bombs 
and bacteria until there are none 
of us left to oppose you. What 
about liurope and Asia? What will 
you do with them?" 

Destruction of human life on 
the western hemisphere will give 
us time and room to expand. While 
doing so we will continue to excite 
the various nations of liurope and 
Asia into war and mutual destruction. 

"You have it all thought out, 
then?" 

We 4>ave. It H P*ff simple. We 
have only to entourage the human race's own tendencies and capacities for self -destruction. 

"There are other tendencies, 
too." 

Yes— the ones you would texm 
noble or humanitarian. It is necessary for our survival that we suppress the humanitarian instincts 
among you. And none of you will 
ever know what is being done to 
you. 

There was a moment of silence, 



and then the lizard's thought came 
swiftly again: 

Do you remember tyrannosaurus 

rex? 

Tyran n o saurtts rex — th e most 
formidable of all die reptiles, the 
mightiest engine of destruction to 
ever walk the face of the earth. He 
had been a biped, with daws capable of handling objects, and he 
had possessed teeth — timmcd jaws 
so massive that no other creature 
had dared oppose him. He had 
been the supreme species and 
should have survived. 

But there had been little rodentlike animals, the remote ancestors 
of horses and elephants, tigers and 
men, and they had eaten the eggs 
of tyrnnnosanrux rex. Tyrannosaurus rex had not even noticed die 
little animals, and had become 
extinct without ever knowing the 
reason why. 

Survival of the fittest — and how 
do you fight something you cannot 
see? How do men fight something 
which can control their minds and 
keep them ignorant of its existence ? 

He had partially resisted their 
power before. What if he could 
re-tain his resistance and remember 
what he had seen, and lead other 
men to the tunnels and show them 
the lizards? 

The thought of the lizard came: 

They would see nothing and 
would have you confined as an insane person. 

Did the statement imply that the 
lizards could not completely dc


YOU CREATED US 



Stroy (its resistance to (heir hypnot ic powers? 

You will forget. It was necessary to engage you in conversation 
for a while, to distract your attention while we broke down (be 
resistance the brain injury had given 
yon. And it has entertained us to 
some extent to observe your reactions. 

"You can't hope to have all of 
lis killed," he said. "There will be 
some uf us who will live through 
the getfln warf are, some of us who 
won't get enough of the radioacnv< i dust to die. Those who survive 
may someday learn what you did 
lo them." 

Our plans include making use 
<> f the survivors. They will be a 
useful source of labor and food. 

He was sharply aware again of 
i he i anion odor that emanated from 
the lizards and of the burro and 
sheep tracks he had seen. 

"You will — eat us?" 

Of course. Now, you will go. 

The muscles of his legs obeyed 
the command, without volition on 
his part. He did not even try to 
resist. His right hand still remained limp and helpless on the 
pistol and there was only the one 
hope left— to teach his car and the 
safety of a greater distance before 
they learned what he had written 
in the notebook. If he could only 
retain just a little of his memory, 
together with the warning he had 
written to himself, he would find 
a way to destroy the lizard nest. 

He began the steep descent, not 



looking back. He passed the first 
lizard he had seen. It was standing 
in the same place, watching him 
with the same cold intelligence in 
its eyes and the same carrion odor 
emanating from it. 

He hurried on, down to the 
w.;.rpcd and empty shells that had 
been houses and past them. Lite 
suddenly returned to his right hand 
and he slopped a moment to look 
back the way he had come. But the 
tunnel portals were not visible from 
where he stood— only the lower 
sides of the high waste dumps. 

He went on in a fast walk, gripping the notebook in his pocket as 
though the feel of it might help 
him remember and help him hold 
off the encroachment of the cold 
numbness around his mind. 

But the numbness increased as 
he walked and he broke into a run 
as the fear ot forgetting what he 
had seen intensified. It became 
greater, an apprehension that was 
close to terror. He was still running when he reached the final and 
steepest half of the trail. 

He did not pause for breath, 
not even when he fell once and almost slid over the edge of the trail 
and down into the rocky bottom of 
the canyon far below. There was 
something far more important than 
his individual survival involved 
and if only he could reach his car 
with the warning he had written 
to himself . . . 

He was bruised and staggering 
with exhaustion when he came at 
last to his car. But he could still 



124 



FANTASTIC UNIVERSE 



remember and he still held the 
notebook firmly clasped in his 
hand. He started the engine the 
moment he was behind the wheel 
and tore the top sheet from the 
notebook, to put it in his billfold 
where he would be certain to see it 
again, no matter what happened to 
him. The writing on it was clumsy 
and scrawling but it was legible: 

Mutants — tunnels — hypnotic 
powers — invisible — DANGER. 

He folded the note carefully, 
thinking of the world as it would 
be when the bombs and bacteria 
had played their roles — thinking of 
the dead, shattered cities and the 
lifeless fields, and the long, slow 
process of evolution that had begun as a speck of protoplasm in an 
Archeozoic sea two billion years 
before. 

It had been a long way up from, 
that mindless speck of protoplasm, 
up and up through the fishes and 
the lung-fishes, and the amphibians, and then higher still through 
the Age of Reptiles and the Age 
of Mammals, to Man. Man, naked 
and defenseless, with neither fangs 
nor claws, who had arisen to dominate the world. 

And now a new species had appeared, created by chance, to destroy Man as thoroughly as Man's 
remote mammalian ancestors had 
destroyed tyrannosaurus rex. If he 
ever forgot what he had seen, if 
the lizards were not checked, there 
would be a quick end to the long, 
long climb toward the stars. It 
would be violence and death and 



radioactive dust swirling across a 
lifeless land . . . 

From high on the mountain behind him came a thought, cold and 
taunting with amusement: 

Remember! You, yourselves, 
created us. 

Then the full force of the numbness swept through his mind, and 
memory and consciousness fled. 

He shook his head, wondering 
what had caused the fleeting vertigo, and unfolded the paper in his 
hand curiously. He read: Mutants 
- — tunnels — ■ hypnotic powers — 
'invisible — DANGER. 

It seemed to him he could remember it as a memorandum he 
had written before leaving San 
Francisco, something to remind him 
to look at the tunnels. He tore the 
paper into bits and threw them out 
the window of the car, where the 
Death Valley wind set them to 
spinning and dancing. 

Death Valley . . . For a moment, as he drove through the 
swirling scraps of paper, it seemed 
to him the name should have some 
grim significance. And, for a moment, it seemed to him he could 
sense something far behind hira 
on the mountain regarding him 
with sardonic amusement. 

Then the feeling passed as he 
remembered he had found nothing 
but empty tunnels there and he 
drove on, thinking, for some 
strange reason, of the mighty 
tyrannosattrus rex - dying out because some little animals he did 
not notice were eating his eggs. 



weather 
prediction 

by . . . Evelyn E. Smith 



Passman couldn't remember phone 
numbers. But his faulty dialing 
gave him a tip on the -weather 
that came from pretty high up! 



George Passman's wi f e had 
often told him he ought to have 
his memory trained because he was 
so bad about telephone numbers. 
Even after someone would carefully 
write a number down for him, he 
was apt to mix up the figures in 
dialing, so that he seldom got the 
person he wanted. 

More often he got a harsh noise 
indicating that the telephone company disapproved of the combination of letters and figures he had 
just evolved. This trouble with the 
telephone had been a constant 
source of friction between him and 
his wife during the twelve uneventful years of their marriage. 

"Please, George," Elinor begged, as she sat before the dressing 
table dragging her dull blonde hair 
into a Psyche knot at the nape of 
her neck, "see if you can't get it 
right just this once. WEather 
6-1212; that's W-E-" 

"I know, I know," George said 
irritably. 

And he did know, he did understand—up to the moment he got 
his hands on the telephone. Then 
something went wrong. Friends 
had often suggested that he try 
psychoanalysis, but Elinor had re


Few writers excel Evelyn E. Smith in the difficult art of instilling a witty 
and rapier-like irony into stories as innocent of guile as a rosy cherub at a 
flower show. How, for instance, could the innocence of Air. Passman have been 
surpassed, until he latched on to something as big as the universe of stars? 



125 



12(5 



FANTASTIC UNIVERSE 



pudiated the suggestion indignantly, knowing that analysts tended to 
blame the wife for whatever was 
wrong with the husband, and not 
wanting George to get any ideas. 

Although there was an extension 
on the table between the beds. 
George went to the phone in the 
living room, carefully shutting the 
door between. Elinor knew that it 
made him nervous to have anyone 
watch him in the act. and wondered what he did in the office. Was 
he able to conquer his phobia — 
or whatever it was — there, or did 
he delegate all telephoning to his 
secretary. 

She had finished dressing when 
he came back ten minutes later. 
"You might have given me the 
weather report first," she observed, 
looking pointedly at the shaker and 
glasses he carried on a small lolc 
tray. 

He poured two drinks. "Going 
to be a storm tonight," he announced. 

"But, George, that's impossible! 
There isn't a cloud in sight. And 
the sun's been just — pouring all 

"Look, I didn't make up the 
weather report. All I did was call 
the telephone company and that's 
what I was told." 

"There must be some mistake." 
Elinor reached for the extension 
and dialed while he poured himself 
a second drink. 

She hung up and looked at him. 
" 'Tonight fair and slightly cooler,' " she cjuoted, " Vith a low of 



fifty-eight degrees. Barometer rising . . .' George, if you got the 
wrong number, why didn't you say 
so? Why did you have to make 
something up?" 

"Didn't make anything up," 
George mumbled. "That's what he 
told me." 

She put on her sheared beaver, 
which doubled as evening wrap, 
without waiting for him to help 
her. They rode down in the elevator 
without speaking. In front of the 
apartment house she waited for 
George to bring the car from the 
garage in the basement. That was 
one nice thing about living in Forest Hills; there was place to keep 
a car. 

They drove off toward Hie 
bridge, resentment in the set of 
George's shoulders. Exactly like a 
child, she thought without tenderness. After a few minutes, she 
reached forward and turned on the 
radio. Dance music terminated in 
an announcer's mention of the fact 
that the barometer Was rising and 
it would be fair and slightly cooler 
that night but warm and sunny the 
next day. 

"Going to rain tomorrow," 
George muttered. 

"Nonsense," she said. 
It was not quite eight when they 
got to West Forty-fifth Street. She 
waited outside a little bar they liked 
while George took the car to a 
parking lot; she didn't like to sit 
in a bar alone. When he came back 
they each had a couple of Martinis 
and by then it was eight-twenty and 



WEATHER PREDICTION 



time to go to the theater. The CotIons were already waiting for them 
in the lobby, and all four Wfftlt on 
in together. 

"Don't mind George," Elinor 
said in a loud whisper to Mrs. Cotton, as the men checked their coats, 
"he's sulking again. He got the 
wrong number when he was trying 
to find out the weather from the 
telephone company and, rather than 
admit it, he made up a weather 
report." 

Both ladies tittered and Mr. Cotton chuckled, "Technological age 
still got you, eh, George?" 

"It's going to storm," George 
said stubbornly. The other three 
laughed. 

During the last act of the play 
ihey heard the unmistakable sound 
of thunder outside. When they got 
out of the theater rain was pouring 
in torrents. Elinor looked at her 
husband, compressed her lips tightly, and said nothing. After all , he 
couldn't have produced the storm 
himself, no matter how much she'd 
have liked to blame him for it. 

"We might stay under the marquee until the rain stops," Mrs. 
Cotton suggested, "because we 
won't possibly be able to get a cab 
in this weather." 

"The rain won't stop," George 
said. 

"Go get the car, George," Elinor 
told him. "We'll drop Herb and 
Lou off first." 

The Cottons ch erased grateful 
acknowledgment. "But George'll 



get wet," Mrs. Cotton murmured 
perfunctorily. 

"He doesn't mind. Do you, 
dear?" 

George made a growling sound 
and plunged out into the storm. 

As soon as he had gone, Mrs. 
Cotton asked, "But how did he 
know it was going to rain?" 

"It was a lucky guess," Elinor 
said. "Don't encourage him." 

But when George had returned 
with the car, and the Cottons had 
been packed into the back seat, Mrs. 
Cotton repeated her question. 
"How did you know, Georgc?" 

"I keep telling you. I called the 
telephone company and that's what 
the guy told me." 

"They don't have men answering the phone," his wife said, moving away from him so that the wet 
wool of his coat wouldn't mat her 
fur. "Only girls." 

"I don't care," George replied. 
"A man answered the phone. I 
asked him what the weather was 
going to be — " 

"But you don't ask," both ladies 
said in unison. "They just play a 
record when you dial that number," 
Mrs. Cotton explained. "Nobody 
can hear you ..." 

"This guy did. He said it was 
very kind of me to ask and he had 
scheduled a storm— a rainstorm." 

The other three shifted in their 
seats. Mrs. Cotton leaned over toward George so that the odor of 
Arpege filled the front seat. 
"There's liquor on my breath," he 
said, "but I'm not drunk. Elinor 



128 



FANTASTIC UNIVERSE 



had just as much as I, and she's 
sober as a — a judge." He laughed 
as if he had said something funny. 

"Well, I don't know,'' Mr. Cotton offered. "It takes some people 
differently than others. I don't mean 
to say you haven't got a strong 
head, but if you happen to have 
what they call an alcohol idiosyncrasy — " 

"Did you dial WE 6-1212?" 
Mrs. Cotton asked George in the 
sharp tone usually reserved for her 
own husband. 

He looked a little disturbed. 
"No, it wasn't quite like that — 
slightly different somehow. Like 
WE 6-2121 or maybe . . . anyhow 
different. I suppose that could explain it." 

Mrs. Cotton sat back satisfied. 
"Of course that explains it. You 
got the wrong number and some 
practical joker lived there. That's 
all" 

"Of course," Elinor echoed. 
"That must be it." 

"But it is raining," Mr. Cotton 
pointed out. 

"Just a coincidence," his wife 
said. 

The car drew up before the Cot


tons' apartment house on West 
Seventy- third. "Why don't you stay 
with us tonight?" Mrs. Cotton asked. "It's risky driving back to the 
Island in this weather." 

"No, thanks," George answered, 
before Elinor had a chance to say 
anything. "We might as well get 
back tonight." 

"We could have gone in for a 
little while," his wife rebuked him 
as they drove through the park. "At 
least until the rain stopped." 

"The rain won't stop." 

She laughed, a little too shrilly. 
"Don't be silly, George. It has to 
stop sometime." 

"Does it?" He looked at her, 
and she didn't like his expression. 
"Well, I suppose it will. After forty 
days and forty nights. That's how 
long he told me it was going to 
last. But it won't make any difference to any of us then." 

They turned on Fifty-ninth Street 
and swung east. George would see 
a psychoanalyst the next day, Elinor 
decided, no matter what. 

They drove across the bridge. She 
knew it was just her imagination, 
but the river seemed appreciably 
higher. 


