THE METEORIC STREAM By WILLY LEY 

THEY fell into the atmosphere like a swarm of angry missiles from the 
Moon. Just where they hit the 
atmosphere first is not known, 
but it must have been somewhere 
out over the Pacific Ocean. Then 
they were seen over Saskatche
106 



wan, going east. They were, it 
was established later, some 35 
miles above sea level and they 
moved, as became apparent afterward, with that velocity which 
mathematicians and physicists 
call the "circular velocity." At 
that velocity, the degree of curva
AlAXY SCIENCE FICTION 



turc of a ballistic trajectory is the 
same as the degree of curvature 
of the Earth's surface, so that the 
altitude above sea level does not 
change. Expressed in figures the 
circular velocity is a little less 
than five miles per second. 

If it were to happen today, 
there would be frantic phone calls 
to newspapers and to police stations about a missile attack, or 
flying saucers. But the date was 
the 9th of February, 1913. 

It was seen from Saskatchan 
all the way across the Great 
Lakes to the Bermuda islands, 
and by ships out at sea beyond 
Bermuda. Unfortunately much of 
western New York State, Pennsylvania and Maryland happened 
to be covered by an unbroken 
overcast that evening. If the sky 
had been clear all along the path 
of the meteoric procession, it 
could have been seen by some 
thirty million people. Because of 
the overcast, only 141 observations could be put on record. All 
but six of them came from Canada and mostly from Ontario; one 
came from Michigan; one from 
New Jersey; two from Bermuda 
and two from ships at sea. 

rr^O the regret of all astronomers, not a member of the 
astronomical fraternity was a witness to the event. And only one of 
the witnesses used some optical 
aid: a high school boy in Trenton, 



N.J. had the good sense to run 
back into his room to get an 
opera glass. 

The cloudy layer and the absence of trained observers handicapped the investigation of the 
phenomenon a good deal. But by 
collecting diligently everything 
that could be learned, Professor 
C. A. Chant of the Royal Astronomical Society of Canada did 
succeed in putting a rather complete picture together. As seen in 
western Ontario, this is what happened : 

At about 9:05 on the evening in question, there suddenly appeared in the 
northwestern sky a fiery red body 
which quickly grew larger as it came 
nearer, and which was then seen to be 
followed by a long tail. Some observers 
state that the body waa single, some 
that it was composed of two distinct 
parts, and others that there were three 
parts, all traveling together and each 
followed by a long tail. 

The front portion of the body appears 
to have been somewhat brighter than 
the rest, but the general color w; ] m 
fiery red or golden yellow. To some the 
tail seemed like the glare from the 
open door of a furnace; to othera it 
was like the illumination from a 
searchlight; to others like the stream of 
sparks blown away from a burning 
chimney by strong wind. 

Many of the observers said later that they thought at first that 
somebody had fired a large skyrocket, partly because of the color 
which reminded them of burning 
fireworks, partly because of the 



THE METEORIC STREAM 



107 



long tail, in which they believed 
they saw sparks. But a sky-rocket 
lasts for just so long and then 
falls, while this fie<ry red body 
did not. 

Before the astonishment aroused by 
this first meteor had subsided, other 
bodies were seen coming from the 
northwest, emerging irom precisely the 
same place as the first one. Onward 
they moved, at the same deliberate 
pace, in twos or threes or fours, with 
tails streaming behind, though not so 
long nor so bright as in the first case, 
They all traversed the same path and 
Were heading for the same point in 
the southeastern sky. Gradually the 
bodies became smaller, until the last 
ones were but red sparks, some ol 
which were snuffed out before they 
reached their destination. Several report that near the middle of the great 
procession was a fine large star without 
a tail, and that a similar body brought 
up the rear. 

To most observers the outstanding 
features of the phenomenon was the 
slow majestic motion of the bodies; 
and almost equally remarkable was the 
perfect formation which they retained. 
Many compared them to a fleet of airships, with lights on either side and 
forward and aft; but airmen will have 
to practice many years before they will 
be able to preserve such perfect 
order . . . 

While all witnesses agreed on 
the general picture, the date, the 
time and the direction of motion, 
there was considerable disagreement on the number of bodies* 
Most witnesses said "fifteen of 
twenty;" a number went higher, 
thinking that there must have 

10» 



been "between fifty and a hundred," while a few witnesses 
maintained that there had been 
"thousands." This, aside from the 
simple fact that some people have 
better eyes than others, depended 
on hoijj the counting was done. 

The very first body, for exam- i 
pie, could have been counted as 
three by some, while most would 
probably count it as one, even 
though it seemed to consist of 
several parts. The most reliable 
statement is probably that of the 
pupil of Trenton High School, 
Cecil Carley, who used an opera 
glass. He wrote : "There were 
about ten groups in all and each 
group, as seen through the opera glass, consisted of from 20 to 
40 meteors." 

While each observation was not 
very good — from the professional 
point of view — alt together contained enough pertinent information to calculate a number of figures. Some of them have already 
been mentioned. Over Canada, 
the meteorites were 35 miles high 
and moved with a velocity of 
about five miles per second. The 
distance between the various 
groups in the procession must 
have varied from a minimum of 
about 50 miles to a maximum of 
about 100 miles. The total length 
of the meteoric procession, therefore, was about 1,000 miles. 

For any single observer in Canada, the fantastic display lasted 


 



between three and four minutes. 
Whenever natural phenomena 
are reported by chance witnesses, 
the things they don't say are 
very often as important as the 
things they do report. 

It is important in this case, for 
example, that not a single observer reported that a meteorite 
dropped out of the procession and 
fell to the ground. Some thought 
sparks were falling from the tails, 
and that is probably correct. But 
the main bodies stayed in place. 
Nor did any one of the Canadian 
observers report that the groups 
of the procession shifted while 
he was watching. Everyone saw 
the groups maintain their distance from each other. The sequence of the groups also did not 
change: a large golden red body 
(or bodies) first, then a number 
of smaller ones of similar appearance, a bright tailless body, 
then again some others, and small 
red ones last. 

But while the procession traversed the cloud -covered eastern 
United States, a change did take 
place. The reports from Bermuda 
leave no doubt, as far as time of 
appearance and direction of 
travel were concerned, that the 
same meteoric procession was 
seen. But the description of the 
appearance differs markedly from 
the "Canadian reports. 

The large tailless body was 
now in the lead and was emit


ting sparks. The others followed 
after it and were apparently not 
quite as bright any more. 

There is, as we now know from 
high altitude rocket work, very 
little air resistance at a height 
of 35 miles. But over a distance 
such as the one from Toronto to 
Bermuda, even this slight air resistance must have made itself 
felt. The procession, traveling 
under kinetic energy only, had 
lost altitude. Professor Pickering 
calculated, from the Bermuda reports, that the procession was 
only about 30 miles above sea 
level when the islands were 
reached. / 

As regards the fact that the 
"fine tailless star," which had 
been in the middle of the procession when over Canada, was 
in the lead and sparking over 
Bermuda, Prof. Pickering arrived 
at an interesting conclusion. That 
tailless meteor, he said, was probably an iron meteorite, while all 
the others were either stony meteorites or so-called stony irons. An 
iron meteorite, having a higher 
specific gravity, has, of course, 
a greater kinetic energy than a 
body of lesser specific gravity 
traveling with the same velocity. 
Because of its higher kinetic energy, it had gradually forged 
ahead and assumed the lead. 

The ships out at sea were not 
far enough beyond Bermuda for 
thei^ crews to see a further step 



THE METEORIC STREAM 



in the history of the meteoric procession. If there had been a ship 
a thousand miles or so southeast 
of Bermuda — say on a line drawn 
from Bermuda to St. Helena — it 
might have reported a still lower 
altitude, and, in all probability, 
a longer interval between the 
tailless meteor and the other 
groups which followed. It was almost certain that the procession 
fell into the Atlantic Ocean before reaching the African coast. 

That night was a night of large 
meteors. Three bright fireballs 
and one group were reported a 
few hours later, going west. A 
single bright fireball had been 
seen 45 minutes before the procession began, traveling in the 
same direction. And after the procession there was one going east. 

From all this, Prof. Pickering 
concluded that during that night 
our planet had overtaken a swarm 
of relatively large meteorites, 
which traveled roughly along the 
orbit of Earth and with about 
the same velocity, relative to the 
Sun. The point is that the swarm 
extended over an area somewhat 
bigger than the diameter of 
Earth. Because of that, some 
were caught on one side of the 
planet and some on the other. 
The result, seen from the ground, 
was, of course, meteors going in 
opposite directions. 

As is customary after a strange 
phenomenon, a number of re


searchers invaded the libraries 
looking for similar events in the 
past. There were plenty of bright 
fireballs going east or going west. 
There were bright fireballs with 
long tails and bright fireballs 
without tails. There were fireballs 
which fead disappeared below the 
horizon, and there were fireballs 
which had exploded in full view 
of the witnesses. Sometimes even 
pieces had been salvaged. But the 
researchers had to go back ten 
centuries to find another actual 
procession. It was seen in the vicinity of Cairo in 1029 A. D., 
only nobody had bothered then 
to write down details. The source 
merely said that "in the month of 
Redjeb (August) many stars 
passed, with a great noise and 
a brilliant light." 

That does not mean, naturally, 
that another thousand years will 
go by until another meteoric procession occurs. It may happen 
next year, or next month, or tomorrow. But one almost wishes 
that there will be an overcast 
again, with only astronomical observatories sticking out through 
the cloud layer. Because now, 
with world tension as high as it 
is, nine out of ten observers would 
interpret such a procession as a 
military attack. 

It would be like throwing a 
rock into a nest" of hornets — a 
cosmic joke on blind-angry humanity.