The Altruist By JAMES H. SCHMITZ 

When something disappears, there is always 
a reason. But if may be pleasanter to have 
the mystery than find out the explanation I 



PUT them right there!" 
Colonel Olaf Magrums|_ sen said aloud. 
He was referring to his office 
scissors, with which he wanted 
to cut some string. The string, 
designed for official use, was almost unbreakably tough, and 
Colonel Magrumssen had wrapped one end of it around a package containing a set of reports of 
the Department of Metallurgy, 
which was to be dispatched immediately. The other end of the 
string led through a hole in the 
wall to an automatic feederspool somewhere behind the wall, 
and the scissors should have been 
on a small desk immediately un


der the point where the string 
emerged, because that was where 
the colonel always left them. Just 
now, however, they weren't there. 

There wasn't anything else on 
the desk that they might have 
slipped behind; they weren't lying on the floor, and the desk had 
no drawers into which he could 
have put them by mistake. They 
were simply and inexplicably 
gone. 

"Damn!" he said, holding the 
package in both hands and looking about helplessly. He was all 
alone in the Inner Sanctum which 
separated his residential quarters 
from the general office area of 
the Department of Metallurgy. 



136 




 



The Sanctum, constructed along 
the lines of a bank vault, contained Metallurgy's secret files 
and a few simple devices 
connected with an automatic 
transportation system between 
Metsllurgy and various other 
government departments. There 
was nothing around that would 
be useful in the present emergency. 

"Miss Eaton!" the colonel bellowed, in some exasperation. 

Miss Eaton appeared in the 
doorway a minute later, looking 
slightly anxious and slightly resentful, which was her normal 
expression. Otherwise, she was a 
very satisfactory secretary and 
general assistant to the colonel. 

"Your scissors, Miss Eaton!" 
he ordered, holding up his package^ "Kindly cut this string!" 

T1*ISS Eaton's gaze went past 
•1" him to the desk, and her expression became more definitely 
resentful. 

"Yes, sir," she said. She stepped up and. with a small pair of 
scissors attached by a decorative 
chain to her belt, cut the string. 

"Thank you," said the colonel. 
''That will be all." 

"There's a Notice of Transfer 
regarding Charles E. Watterly 
lying on your desk," Miss Eaton 
said, "You were to pass on it 
early this mOrning." 

"I know." The colonel frowned. 



"You might get out Watterly's 

record for me, Miss Eaton." 

"It's attached to the Notice of 
Transfer," Miss Eaton told him. 
She went out without waiting for 
a reply. 

The colonel dropped the package into a depository that would 
dispatch it to its destination untouched by human hands, and 
turned to leave the Inner Sanctum. Still irritated by the disappearance, he glanced back at 
the desk. 

And there the scissors were, 
just where he remembered having 
left them! 

The colonel stopped short. 
"Eh?" he inquired incredulously, 
of no one in particular. 

A long - forgotten childhood 
memory came chidingly into his 
mind . . . 

"Lying right there!" a ghostly 
voice of the past was addressing 
him again. "// if were a snake," 
the voice added severely, rubbing the lesson in, "it would bite 
you!" 

The colonel picked up the 
scissors rather gingerly, as if 
they might bite him. at that. He 
looked surprised and alert now, 
all distracting annoyances forgotten. 

Colonel Magrumssen was a 
logical man. Now that he thought 
back, there was no significant 
doubt in his mind that, the evening before, he had left those 




 



scissors on that desk. Nor that, 
after opening the Sanctum and 
sealing the package this morning, 
he had discovered they were gone. 

Nor, of course, finally, that 
they now had returned again. 

Those were facts. Another fact 
was that, aside from himself, nobody but Miss Eaton had entered 
the Inner Sanctum meanwhile — and she hadn't come anywhere 
near the desk. 

Touching a sticky spot on one 
of the blades of the scissors, the 
colonel dabbed at it and noticed 
something attractively familiar 
about the pale brown gumminess 
on his linger. 

He put the finger to his mouth. 
Why. certainly, he told himself — • 
it's just taffy. 

His mind paused a moment. 
Just taffy! it repeated. 

Now wait a minute, the colonel thought helplessly. 

One could put it this way, he 
decided : at some time last night 
or this morning, an Unseen 
Agency had borrowed his scissors 
for the apparent purpose of cutting taffy with them, and then 
had brought his scissors back . . . 

T)ERHAPS it was the complete 
improbability of that explanation which made him want to 
accept it immediately. In the 
humdrum, hard-working decades 
following Earth's Hunger Years, 
Colonel Magrumssen had become 



a hobbyist of the Mysterious, and 
this was the most mysteriouslooking occurrence he'd yet run 
into personally. He'd been trained 
in espionage during the last counter-revolution, and while the lack 
of further revolutions ultimately 
had placed him in an executive 
position in Metallurgy, his interests still lay in investigating 
the unexplained, the unpredictable, m human behavior, and 
elsewhere. 

As a logical man. however, he 
realized he'd have to put in his 
customary day's work in Metallurgy before he could investigate 
the unusual behavior of a pair of 
orrice scissors. 

He locked the double doors of 
the Inner Sanctum behind him — 
locked them, perhaps, with exceptional attention to the fact 
that they were being locked — and 
went into the outer offices, to 
decide on Charles E. Watteiiy's 
Notice of Transfer. / 

The Department of Metallurgy, 
this section of which was under 
Colonel Olaf Magrumssen's supervision, was as smoothly operating an organization as any 
government coordinator could 
want to see. So was every other 
major organization — the simple 
reason being that employees who 
couldn't meet the stiff requirements of governmental employment were dropped quietly and 
promptly into the worldwide 



THE ALTRUIST 



labor pool known as Civilian 
General Duty. Once CGD swallowed you, it was rather difficult 
to get out again: and life at those 
levels was definitely unattractive. 

Charles E. Watterly's standing 
in Metallurgy was borderline at 
best, the colonel decided after 
going briefly over his record — a 
rather incredible series of preposterous mistakes, blunders, slipups and oversights. Watterly's 
immediate superior had made up 
a Notice of Transfer as a matter 
of course and sent it along to the 
colonel's desk to be signed. Signing it would send Charles E. 
Watterly automatically to Civilian General Duty. 

The colonel was a tolerant 
man. He didn't care a particular 
hang how the Department of 
Metallurgy fared, providing his 
own position wasn't threatened. 
But even colonels who failed to 
keep thei r subordinates in line 
could wind up doing Civilian 
General Duty. 

could afford to give the 
unfortunate Watterly one more 
chance, the colonel decided. A 
man who could operate so consistently against his own interests 
should be worth studying for a 
while! And since Watterly's superior had passed the buck by 
making out the Notice of Transfer, the colonel summoned Miss 
Eaton and ^instructed her to have 
Watterly placed on his personal 



Staff, on probation. 

Miss Eaton made no comment. 
The airtight organization which 
was beginning to haul humanity, 
uncomfortably and sometimes 
brutally enough, out of the catastrophic decline of the Hunger 
Years did not encourage comment on one's superior's decisions. 

"Mr. John Brownson of Statistics is here to see you," she 
announced. 

"TT^HE two per cent Normal 
» Loss," John Brownson, a 
personal assistant of the Minister 
of Statistics, informed Colonel 
Magrumssen presently, "has 
shown striking variations of late, 
locally. That's the situation in a 
nutshell. The check we're conducting in your department is of 
a purely routine nature." 

He was relieved to hear that, 
the colonel said drily. What did 
Statistics make of these variations? 

Brownson looked surprised. 

"We've made nothing of them 
as yet," he admitted. "In time, 
we hope, somebody will." He 
paused and looked almost embarrassed. "Now in your department, we have localized one area 
of deviation so far. It happens to 
be the cafeteria." 

The colonel stared. "The cafeteria?" 

"The cafeteria," Brownson continued, flushing a trifle, "shows 



146 




 



currently a steady point three 
increase over Normal Loss. Processed foodstuffs, of course, are so 
universally affected by the loss 
that almost any dispersal point 
can be used conveniently to check 
deviations. Similar changes are 
reported elsewhere in the capital 
area, indicating the possible development of a local trend . . ." 

"Trend to what?" the colonel 
demanded. 

Brownson shrugged thoughtfully. He wasn't, he pointed out, 
an analyst; he only produced the 
statistics. 

"Well, never mind," said the 
colonel. "Our poor little cafeteria, eh? Let me know if anything else turns up, will you?" 

Now that was an odd thing, he 
reflected, still idly, while he gazed 
after Brownson's retreating back. 
When you got right down to it, 
nobody actually seemed to know 
why there should be a two per 
cent untraceable loss in the annual manipulations of Earth's 
commodities! People like Brownson obviously saw nothing remarkable in it. To them, Normal 
Loss had the status of a natural 
law. and that was that. 

Why, he realized, his reaction 
hovering somewhere between 
amusement and indignation, he'd 
been fooled into accepting that 
general viewpoint himself! He'd 
let himself be tricked into accepting a "natural law" which in


volved an element of the 
completely illogical, the inexplicable. 

The colonel felt a flush of 
familiar excitement. Look, he 
thought, this could be — why, this 

is big! Let's look at the facts! 

He did. And with that, almost 
instantly, a bieathtakingly improbable but completely convincing explanation was there in his 
mind. 

Furthermore, it tied in. perfectly with the temporary disappearance of his office scissors that 
morning! 

Colonel Magrumssen conceded, 
however, with something like 
awed delight at his own cleverness, that it was going to be a 
little difficult to prove anything, 

frHE problem suddenly had become too intriguing to put off 
entirely till evening, so the colonel sent Miss Eaton out to buy 
a bag of the best available taffy. 
And he himself made a trip to 
his private library in his living 
quarters and returned with a 
couple of books which had nothing to do with his official duties, 
He proceeded to study them 
until Miss Eaton returned with 
the taffy, which he put in a 
drawer of his desk. Then, tapping 
the last page of the text he had 
been studying — the chapter was 
titled "Negative Hallucinations" 
— he reviewed the tentative con


TNE ALTRUIST 



elusions he'd formed so far. 

The common starting point in 
the investigation of any unusual 
occurrence was to assume that 
nothing just occurred, that everything had a cause. The next step 
being, of course, the assumption 
that anything that happened was 
part of a greater pattern of 
events; and that if one got to see 
enough of it, the greater pattern 
generally made sense. 

The mysterious disappearance 
and reappearance of his office 
scissors certainly seemed unusual 
enough. But when one tied it in 
with humanity's casual acceptance of the fact that some two 
per cent of Earth's processed 
commodities disappeared tracelessly every year, one might be 
getting a glimpse of a possible 
ma^pr pattern. 

The colonel glanced back over 
a paragraph he had marked in 
"Negative Hallucinations": 

Negative hallucinations are comprehensive in the sense that they also 
negate the sensory registration of any 
facts that would contradict them. Install in a hypnotic subject the conviction that there is no one but himself 
in the room; he will demonstrate that 
he docs not permit himself to realize 
that he cannot see when another person 
present places both hands over his 
eyes . . . 

Assuming that it wasn't too 
logical of humanity to take Normal Loss for granted, one could 
conclude that humanity as a 



whole might be suffering from a 
very comprehensive negative hallucination — in which case, it 
wouldn't, of course, be permitting 
itself to wonder about Normal 
Loss! 

It was a rather large assumption to make, the colonel admitted; but he might be in a 
position to test it now. 

For one then could assume also 
that there was somebody around, 
some Unseen Agency, who was 
benefiting both by Normal Loss 
and by humanity's willingness to 
accept Normal Loss without further investigation. 

An outfit who operated as 
smoothly as that shouldn't really 
have bungled matters by returning his scissors under such suspicious circumstances. But even 
that sort of outfit might be handicapped by occasional members 
who weren't quite up to par. 
Somebody, say, who was roughly 
the equivalent of a Charles E. 
Watterly. 

The notion satisfied the colonel. He unlocked a desk drawer 
which contained a few items of 
personal interest to him. A gun, 
for one thing — in case life eventually turned out to be just a 
little too boring, or some higherup decided some day that Colonel Magrumssen was ripe for a 
transfer and CGD. A methodical 
man should be prepared for any 
eventuality. 



141 



GAIAXY SCIENCE FICTION 



Beside the gun, carefully 
wrapped, was a small crystal 
globe, a souvenir from a vacation 
trip he'd made to Africa some 
years before. There had been a 
brief personal romance involved 
with the trip and the globe; but 
that part of it no longer interested the colonel very much. 

The thing about the globe right 
now was that, when one pressed 
down a little button set into its 
base, it demonstrated a gradual 
succession of tiny landscapes full 
of the African sunlight and with 
minute animals and people walking about in it, AU very lift-like 
and arranged in such a manner 
that one seemed to be making a 
slow trip about the continent. It 
was an enormously expensive 
little gadget, but it might now 
be worth the price he'd paid for 
it. 

The colonel wrapped the globe 
back up and set it on the desk 
next to the bag of taffy. Then he 
went about finishing up the 
day's official business, somewhat 
amazed at the fact that he 
seemed to be accepting his own 
preposterous theory as a simple 
truth — that invisible beings 
walked the Earth, lived among 
men and filched their sustenance 
from Man's meager living supplies . . . 

But he hadn't, he found, the 
slightest desire to warn humanity 
against its parasites! That had 

THE ALTRUIST 



nothing to do with the fact that 
nobody would believe him anyway. So far, he rather approved 
of the methods employed by the 
Unseen Agency. 

By the time the next twentyfour hours were over, he also 
might have a fair idea of its purpose. 

He laughed. The whole business was really outrageous. And 
he realized that, for some reason, 
that was just what delighted him 
about it. 

TIE was sitting in his study, 
shortly after nine o'clock that 
evening, when he had the first 
indication that his plans were beginning to work out. 

Up till then, he had remained 
in a curiously relaxed frame of 
mind. Having accepted the apparent fact of the Unseen 
Agency's existence, the question 
was whether its mysterious powers went so far that it actually 
could read his thoughts and 
know what he intended to do before he got around to doing it. 
Jf it could, his tricks obviously 
weren't going to get him anywhere. If it couldn't, he should 
get results — eventually. He felt 
he lost nothing by trying. 

He was aware of no particular 
surprise then when things began 
to happen. It was as if he had 
expected them to happen in just 
that way. 

T4t 



He had pushed away the papers he was working on and 
leaned back to yawn and stretch 
for a moment. As if by accident, 
his gaze went to the mantel above 
the study's electronic fireplace, 
where he had placed the little 
crystal globe showing Africa's 
scenic wonders. He had left it 
switched to the picture of a 
burned brown desert, across 
which a troop of lean, pale antelopes trotted slowly toward a 
distant grove of palm trees. 

From where he sat, he could 
see that the crystal no longer 
showed the desert view. Instead, 
Kilimanjaro's snow-covered peak 
was visible in it, reflecting the 
pink light of an infinitesimal 
morning sun. 

The colonel frowned slightly, 
permitting a vague sense of disturbance — an awareness of something being not quite as it should 
be — to pass through his mind. 
Presumably, that awareness would 
reflect itself to some degree in 
his expression and might be noticed there by a sufficiently alert 
observer. 

He dismissed the feeling and 
turned back to his papers. 

What he caught in that moment, from the corner of his eye, 
couldn't exactly be described as 
motion. It was hardly more than 
a mental effect, a fleeting impression of shifting shadows, light 
and lines, as if something had 



alighted for an instant on the 
farthest edge of his vision and 
been withdrawn again. 

The colonel didn't look up. A 
chill film of sweat covered the 
backs of his hands and his forehead. That was the only indication he gave, even to himself, of 
feeling any excitement. Without 
moving his eyes, he could tell that 
the gleaming crystal globe had 
vanished from its place on the 
mantel. 

TTOW did they do it? In some 
way, they were cutting off 
the links of awareness that existed 
between all rational human beings. They were broadcasting 
the impression that they, and the 
things they touched, and the 
traces of their activities did not 
exist. Once the mind accepted 
that, it would refuse to acknowledge any contradictory evidence 
offered by its senses of reasoning 
powers. 

He'd started out by assuming 
that there was something there, 
so the effect of the negative hallucination was weakened in him. 
Every new advance in understanding he made now should 
continue to weaken it — and there 
was one moment when the Unseen Agency's concrete reality 
must manifest itself in a manner 
which his mind, at this point, 
couldn't refuse to accept. That 
was the instant in which it was 



144 




 



manipulating some very concrete 
item, such as the crystal globe, in 
and out of visibility. 

It was obvious, at any fate, 
that the Agency couldn't read his 
thoughts. He'd tricked it, precisely as he'd set out to do, into 
making a hurried attempt to resolve his apparently half-formed 
suspicion that someone might 
have been playing with the globe 
behind his back. It showed a certain innocence of mind. But, 
presumably, people who had such 
unusual powers mightn't tie accustomed to the sort of devious 
maneuvering and conscious control of emotion and thought 
which was required to survive at 
an acceptable level in the colonel's everyday world. 

He became aware suddenly of 
the fact that the crystal globe 
had been returned to its place on 
the mantel. For that same instant, he was aware also of a 
child - shape, definitely a girl, 
standing on tiptoe before the 
mantel, still reaching up toward 
the globe — and then fading 
quickly, soundlessly, beyond the 
reach of his senses again. 

That was considerably more 
than enough — 

He'd been thinking of some 
super-powered moron, of the 
Charles E. Watterly type, not a 
child! But it made even better 
sense this way, and it took only 
a few seconds ot flexibility to 



adapt his plans to include the 
new factor, 

THE colonel took two white 
cards and a lead pencil out 
of a drawer of the desk at which 
he was working. He unhurriedly 
printed three words on the first 
card and five on the second. Putting the cards into his pocket, he 
finally looked up at the globe. 

As he expected, it "showed the 
scene he'd last been studying ( 
himself — brown desert, the grove 
of palms and the antelopes. 

He gazed at it for a moment, 
as if absently accepting this correction of the Unseen Agency's 
lapse as any good hypnotic subject should. And then, still casually, he took the bag of fresh 
taffy he'd had Miss Eaton buy 
that afternoon out of the desk 
drawer. He opened it, opening 
his mind simultaneously to the 
conviction that the child-shape 
would come now to this new bait.. 

Almost instantly, he realized, 
with a sense of sheer delight, that 
she was there! 

At any rate, there was an 
eagerness, an innocent greed, 
swirling like a gusty, soundless 
little wind of emotion about him, 
barely checked now by the necessity of remaining unseen. He took 
out a piece of the taffy and 
popped it solemnly into his 
mouth, and the greed turned into 
a shivering young rage of frus


THE ALTRUIST 



145 



tration. and a plea, and a prayer: 
Oh. make him look away! Just 
once! 

The colonel put the paper bag 
into his pocket, walked deliberately to the mantel and propped 
one of the two cards up against 
the globe. 

There was a fresh upsurge of 
interest, and then an almost 
physically violent burst of other 
emotions behind him. 

For the three words on the card 
i saw vou! 

Whistling soundlessly, the colonel waited a moment and replaced that card with the next 
one. He scratched his jaw and, 
as an apparent second thought, 
produced three pieces of taffy 
from his pocket, which he arranged into an artistic little pyramid in front of the card- He 
turned and walked back to his 
desk. 

When he looked around from 
there, the card was gone. 

So were the three pieces of 
taffy. 

He waited patiently for over a 
minute. Something white fluttered 
momentarily before the globe on 
the mantel and the card had 
reappeared. For a moment again, 
too. the child became visible, 
looking at him still half in alarm, 
but also half in laughter now, 
and then vanished once more. 

Reading what was written on 




146 



3AIAXY SCIENCE FICTION 



the card, the colonel knew he'd 
won the first round anyway. His 
reaction wasn't the feeling of 
alert, cautious triumph he'd expected, but a curious, rather unaccountable happiness. 

The five words he'd printed on 
the card had been: 
don't worry — i won't tell 
That message was crossed out 
now with pencil. Underneath it, 
two single words had been printed 
in a ragged slope, as if someone 
had been writing very hurriedly: 
thank you! 

T>Y two o'clock that night, the 
colonel was still wide awake, 
though he had followed his methodical pattern of living by going 
to bed at midnight, as usual. 
Whatever the Unseen Agency's 
reaction might be, it wouldn't be 
bound by any conventional restrictions. 

There was the chance, of 
course, that they would decide 
it was necessary to destroy him. 
Since he couldn't protect himself 
successfully against invisible opponents, the colonel wasn't taking any measures along that line. 
He'd accepted the chance in 
bringing himself to their attention. 

They also might decide simply 
to ignore him. He couldn't, he 
conceded, do much about it if 
they did- Everyday humanity 
had its own abrupt methods of 



147 



dealing with anyone who tried 
to dispel its illusions, and he, for 
one, knew enough not to make 
any such attempt. But the "Unseen Agency should have curiosity 
enough to find out how much he 
actually knew and what he intended to do about it. . . . 

His eyes opened slowly. The 
luminous dial of the clock beside 
his bed indicated it was threethirty. He had fallen asleep 
finally ; and now there were— 
presences — in his room. 

After his first involuntary 
start, the colonel wag careful not 
to move. The channels of awareness that had warned of the arrival of the Unseen Agency 
seemed to be approximately the 
same he had used unwittingly in 
sensing the emotions of the child 
earlier that night. Under the circi^mstances, he might regard 
them as more reliable than his 
eyes or ears. 

Apparently encouraged by his 
acceptance of the fact, his mind 
reported promptly that the child 
herself was among those present 
— and that there was a new quality of stillness and expectancy 
about her now, as if this were a 
very important event to her, too. 

Of the others, the colonel grew 
aware more gradually. But as he 
did, he discovered the same sense 
of waiting expectancy about 
them, almost as if they were trying to tell him that the next 



move actually was up to him, not 
them. In the instant he formed 
that conclusion, his feeling of 
their general presence seemed to 
resolve itself into the recognition 
of a number of distinct personalities who were presenting themselves to him, one by one. 

The first was a grave, aged 
kindliness, but with a bubble of 
humor in it — almost, he thought, 
surprised, like somebody's grandmother ! 

Two and Three seemed to be 
masculine, darker, thoughtfully 
judging. 

And, finally, there was Four, 
who appeared to come into the 
room only now, as if summoned 
from a distance to see what her 
friends had found — a personality 
as clear and light as the child's, 
but an adult intelligence nevertheless. Four joined the others, 
observant and waiting. 

Waiting for what? 

That, the colonel gathered, was 
for him to experience in himself 
and understand. His awareness of 
their existence had been enough 
to £.-:tract their attention to him. 
Moving and living securely beyond the apparent realities of 
civilization, as if it were so much 
stage scenery which had hypnotized the senses of all ordinary 
human beings, they seemed ready 
to welcome and encourage any 
discoverer, without fear or hostility, as one of themselves. 



148 




 



He could sense dimly the quality of their strange ability, and 
the motives that had created it. 
The ruthless mechanical rigidity 
of the human society that had 
developed out of the Hunger 
Years had been the forcing factor. 
These curious rebels must have 
felt a terrible necessity to escape 
from it to have found and developed in their own minds a 
means of bypassing society so 
completely — the means being, essentially, so perfect a control of 
the outgoing radiations of thought 
and emotion that they created 
no slightest telltale ripple in the 
ocean of the subconscious human 
mind and left a negative impression there instead. 

But they were not hiding from 
anyone who followed the same 
path they had taken. 

There was a sudden unwillingness in him to go any further in 
that direction at the moment. 
Full understanding might lie in 
the very near future; but it was 
still in the future. 

As if they had accepted that, 
too, he could sense that the members of the Unseen Agency were 
withdrawing from him and the 
room. Four was last to go, lingering a moment after the others 
had left, as if looking back at 
him; -a light, clear presence as 
definite as spoken words or the 
touch of a hand. 

A moment after she had left. 



the colonel realized, with something of a shock, that for the first 
time in his adult life, he had 
fallen in love. . . . 

FIRST thing he did next morning was to have himself measured fur a new uniform of the 
kind he'd always avoided — the 
full uniform of his rank, white 
and gold, and with the extra little 
flourishes, the special unauthorized richness of cloth that only 
a colonel -and-up could afford or 
get away with. It was the sort 
of gesture, he felt, that Four 
might appreciate. And he had a 
reason for wanting to stay aw;»y 
from Metallurgy that morning 
for the four hours or so it might 
take to complete the suit. 

He was in the position of a 
strategist who, having made an 
important gain, can take time out 
to consolidate it and consider his 
next moves. He preferred to do 
that beyond the range of any too 
observant eyes — and mind. 

That Four and her kind should 
be content to live — well, like 
mice, actually — behind the scenery of the world, subsisting on 
the crumbs of civilization, was 
ridiculous. They seemed to have 
no real understanding of their 
powers, and of the uses to which 
they could be put. 

It was the most curious sort of 
paradox. 

The colonel found a park bench 



THE ALTRUIST 



4» 




iso 




 



and settled down to investigate 
the problems presented by the 
paradox. 

He was, he decided^a practical 
man. As such, he'd remained occluded, till now, to their solution 
of the problems of a society with 
which he was basically no more 
contented than they had been. 
But he had adjusted effectively 
to the requirements of that so* 
defy, while they had withdrawn 
from it in the completest possible 
fashion this side of suicide. 

To put it somewhat differently, 
he had learned how to influence 
and manipulate others to gain 
for himself a position comfortably near the top. T/iey had 
learned how to avoid being 
manipulated. 

But if a man could do that— • 
without losing the will to employ 
his powers intelligently! 

The colonel checked the surge 
of excitement which arose from 
that line of reflection, almost 
guiltily. The structure of society 
might be — and was — more than 
ripe for an overhauling. But he 
was quite certain that Four's people would not be willing to follow 
his reasoning just yet. Their 
whole philosophy of living was 
oriented in the opposite direction 
of ultimate withdrawal. 

But give me time, he thought. 
Just give me time! 

Four showed herself to him 
that afternoon. 



He'd returned to his office — 
the white-and-gold uniform had 
created a noticeable stir in the 
department— and instructed Miss 
Eaton to send someone out for 
at lunch tray from the cafeteria. 

A little later, he suddenly realized that Four was standing in 
the door of the office behind him. 
He knew then that, for some reason, he had expected her to come. 

He was careful not to look 
around, but he sensed that she 
both approved of the white uniform and was laughing at him for 
having put it on to impress her. 
The colonel's ears reddened 
slightly. He straightened his 
shoulders, though, and went on 
working. 

Next, the child-shape slipped 
by before his desk, an almost 
visibility. He glanced up at it, 
end* it smiled and disappeared as 
abruptly as if it had gone through 
a door in mid-air and closed the 
door behind it. A moment later. 
Four stood just beyond the desk, 
looking down at the colonel, no 
less substantial than the material 
•f the desk itself. 

He stared up at her, unable to 
speak, aware only of a slow, 
strong gladness welling up in him. 

Then Four vanished — 

Someone had opened the door 
of the office behind him. 

"Your lunch, sir," the familiar 
voice of Charles E. Watterly muttered apologetically. 



The colonel let his breath out 
slowly. But it didn't matter too 
much, he supposed. Four would 
be back. 

"Thank you, Watterly," he 
said, with some restraint. "Set it 
down, please." 

Watterly's angular shape appeared beside him and suddenly 
seemed to teeter uncertainly. The 
colonel moved an instant too late. 
The coffee pot lay on its side in 
the brown puddle that filled the 
lunch tray on the desk. The rest 
of the contents were about evenly 
distributed over the desk, the 
carpet, and the white uniform. 

On his feet, flushed and angry, 
the colonel looked at Watterly. 

"I'm sorry, sir!" Watterly had 
fallen back a step. 

Now, this was interesting, the 
colonel decided, studying him 
carefully. This was the familiar 
startled white face, its slack 
mouth twisted into an equally 
familiar, frightened grin. But why 
hadn't he ever before noticed tha» 
incredible, cold, hidden malice 
staring at him out of those pale 
blue eyes? 

Not a bungler. A hater. The 
airtight organization of society 
kept it suppressed so well that 
he had almost forgotten how the 
underdogs of the world could 
hate! 

He let the rage in him ebb 
away. 

Anger was pointless. It was 



G A I A X Y SCIENCE FICTION 



the compliment one paid an 
.equal. To withdraw beyond the 
, reach of human malice, as Four 
and the rest of them had done, 
was a better way — for the weak. 
For those who were not, the 
simplest and most effective way 
was to dispose of the malicious 
by whichever methods were handiest, and forget about them. 

A T seven in the evening, Miss 
Eaton looked in at the colonel's central office and inquired 
whether he would need her any 
more that day. 

"No, thank you, Miss Eaton," 
said the colonel, without looking 
up. "A few matters I want to 
finish by myself. Good night." 

There was silence for a moment. Then Miss Eaton's voice 
blurted suddenly, "Sometimes it's 
much better to finish such matters in the morning, sir!" 

The colonel glanced up in sur-, 
prise. Coming from Miss Eaton, 
the remark seemed out of character. But she looked slightly 
resentful, slightly anxious, as always, and not as if she attributed 
any importance to her words. 

"Well, Miss Eaton," the colonel said genially, while he wondered whether it had been a 
coincidence, "I just happen to 
prefer not to wait till tomorrow." 

Miss Eaton nodded, as though 
agreeing that, in that case, there 
was no more to be said. He lis


tened to her heels clicking away 
through the glass-enclosed aisles 
of the general offices, and then 
the lights went out there, and 
Colonel Magrumssen was sitting 
alone at his desk. 

It was odd about Miss Eaton. 
He was almost certain now it had 
been no coincidence. Her personality which, for a number of 
years, he'd felt he understood 
better than one got to understand 
most people, had revealed itself 
in a single sentence to be an 
entirely different sort of personality — a woman, in fact, about 
whom he knew exactly nothing! 
At any other time, the implications would have fascinated him. 
Tonight, of course, it made no 
difference any more. 

His gaze returned reflectively 
to a copy of the Notice of Transfer by which Charles E. Watterly 
had been removed from Metallurgy some hours before, to be 
returned to the substratum of 
Earth's underdogs, where he obviously belonged. 

It had seemed the logical thing 
to do, the colonel realized with 
a feeling of baffled resentment. 
What did one more third-rate 
human life among a few billions 
matter? 

But it seemed his unseen acquaintances believed it did matter, very much. Somewhere deep 
in his mind, ever since he had 
signed the Transfer, a cold, dead 



THE ALTRUIST 



13-3 



area had been growing which 
told him, as clearly as if they had 
announced it in so many words, 
that he wouldn't be able to contact them again. 

Notices of Transfer weren't revocable, but he felt, too, that it 
wouldn't have done him much 
good if they had been. One committed the unforgivable sin, and 
that was that. 

He had pushed Watterly back 
down where he belonged. And he 
was no longer acceptable. 

There was one question he 
would have liked answered, the 
colonel decided, as he went on 
methodically about the business 
of cleaning up his department's 
top-level affairs for his successor. 

What, actually, was the unforgivable sin? 

A^half hour later, he decided 
he wasn't able to find the answer. 
Something involved with Christian charity, or the lack of it, 
apparently. He had sinned in degrading Watterly. Civilization 
similarly had sinned on a very 
large scale against the major part 
of humanity. And so they had 
withdrawn themselves both from 
civilization and from him. 

He shook his head. He might 
still be misjudging their motives 
— because it still didn't seem 
quite right! 

On the proper form and in a 
neat, clear hand, he filled out his 
resignation from Metallurgy and 



from life, to make it easy for the 
investigators. He frowned at the 
line headed reasons given and 
decided to leave it blank. 

He laid down the pen and 
picked up the gun and squinted 
down its barrel distastefully. And 
then somebody who now appeared to be sitting in the chair on 
the other side of his desk remarked : 

"That mightn't be required, 
you know." 

THE colonel put the gun down 
and folded his hands on the 
desk. "Well, John Brownson!" he 
said, politely surprised. "You're 
one of them, too?" 

The assistant to the Minister 
of Statistics shrugged. 

"In a sense," he admitted. "In 
about the same way that you're 
one of them." 

The colonel thought that over 
and acknowledged that he didn't 
quite follow. 

"It's very simple," Brownson 
assured him, "once you understand the basic fact that we're 
all basically altruists — you and 
I and every other human being 
on Earth." 

"Alt altruists, eh?" the colonel 
repeated doubtfully. 

"Not, of course, always consciously. But each of us seems to 
know instinctively that he or she 
is also, to some extent, an irrational and therefore potentially 




 



dangerous animal. The race is 
developing mentally and emotionally, but it hasn't developed 
as far as would be desirable as 
yet." 

"That, at any rate, seems to 
be a fact," the colonel conceded. 

"So there is a conflict between 
our altruism and our irrationality. To solve it, we— each of us — 
limit ourselves. We do not let our 
understanding and abilities develop beyond the point at which 
we can trust ourselves not to use 
them against humanity. Once 
you accept that, everything else 
is self-explanatory." 

Now how could Brownson hope 
to defend such a statement, the 
colonel protested after an astonished pause, after taking a 
look at history? Or. for that matter, at some of the more outstanding public personalities in 
their immediate environment? 

But the assistant to the Minister of Statistics waved the objection aside, 

"Growth isn't always a comfortable process," he said. "Even 
the Hunger Years and our present social structure might be regarded as forcing factors. The 
men who appear primarily responsible for this stage of mankind's development may not 
consciously look on themselves as 
altruists, but basically, as I said, 
that is the only standard by 
which we do judge our activities 



— and ourselves! Now, as for 
you — " 

"Yes?" said the colonel. "As 
for me?" 

"Well, you're a rather remarkable man, Colonel Magrumssen. 
You certainly gave every indication of being prepared to expand 
your understanding to a very unusual degree — which was why," 
John Brownson added, somewhat 
apologetically, "I first directed 
your attention to the possible implications of Normal Loss. Afterward, you appear to have fooled 
much more careful judges of human nature than I am. Though, 
of course," he concluded, "you 
may not really have fooled them. 
It's not always easy to follow 
their reasoning." 

"Since you're being so informative," the colonel said bluntly, 
"I'd like to know just who and 
what those people are." 

"They're obviously people who 
can and do trust themselves very 
far," Brownson said evasively. 
"A class or two above me, I'm 
afraid. I don't know much about 
them otherwise, and I'd just as 
soon not. You're a bolder man 
than I am, Colonel. In particular, I don't know anything about 
the specific group with which you 
became acquainted." 

"We didn't stay acquainted 
very long." 

"Well, you wouldn't," Brownson agreed, studying him curi


6 A I A X Y SCIENCE FICTION 



ously. "Still, it was an unusual 
achievement." 

THE colonel said nothing for a 
moment. He was experiencing 
again a hot resentment and what 
he realized might be a rather 
childish degree of hurt, and also 
the feeling that something splendidly worthwhile had become irretrievably lost to him through a 
single mistake. But, for some 
reason, the feeling was much less 
disturbing now. 

"The way it seemed to me," he 
said finally, "was that they were 
willing to accept me as an equal 
—whatever class they're in — until I fired Watterly. That wasn't 
if. then?" 

"No, it wasn't. They were 
merely acknowledging that you 
hat! acepted yourself as being in 
that class, at least temporarily. 
That seems to be the only real 
requirement." 

"If I knew instinctively that I 
couldn't meet that requirement, 
on a completely altruistic basis," 
the colonel said carefully, "why 
did I accept myself as being in 
their .class even temporarily?*' 

John Brownson glanced reluctantly at the gun on the desk. 
For a moment, the colonel was 
puzzled. Then he grinned apologetically. 

"Well, yes, that might explain 
it." he admitted. "I believe I've 
had it in mind for some time. 



Lift had begun to look pretty uninteresting." He poked frowningly at the gun. "So it was just a 
matter of satisfying my curiosity 
—first?" 

"I wouldn't know what your 
exact motive was," Brownson 
said cautiously. "But I presume 
it went beyond simple curiosity." 

"Well, supposing now," said 
the colonel, tapping the gun, 
"that on considering what you've 
told me, I decided to change my 
mind." 

Brownson smiled, "If you 
change your decision, you'll do it 
for good and sufficient reasons. 
I'd be very happy — and, incidentally, there's no need to blame 
yourself for Watterly. Watterly 
knew he couldn't trust himself in 
any position above Civilian General Duty. If you hadn't had him 
sent back there, he would have 
found someone else to do it. Setfjudgment works at all levels." 

"I wasn't worrying much about 
Watterly," the colonel said. He 
reflected a moment. "What actually induced you to come here 
to talk to me?" 

"Well," said Brownson carefully, "there was one who expressed an opinion about you so 
strongly that it couldn't be ignored. I was sent to make sure 
you had the fullest possible understanding of what you were 
doing." 

The colonel stared. "Who ex


THE ALTRUIST 



>57 



pressed an opinion about me?" 
"Your Miss Eaton." 

"]V|ISS Eaton?" The colonel 
almost laughed. For a moment, he'd had a wild, irrational 
hope that Four had showed concern about him. But Four hardly 
would have been obliged to go to 
John Brownson for help. 

"Miss Eaton," Brownson smiled 
wryly, "has a wider range of 
understanding than most, but not 
enough courage to do anything 
about what she knows. The 
bravest thing she ever did was 
to speak to you as she did tonight. After that, she didn't know 
what else to do, so — well, she 
prayed. At any rate, it seemed to 
be a prayer to her." 

"For me?" 

'Wes, for you." 

"Think of that!" said the colonel, astonished. "That was why 
you came?" 

"That's it." /■ 

The colonel thought about 
Miss Eaton for a moment, and 
then of what a completely fascinating, interesting world it was 
— if one could only become really 
aware of it. It seemed unreasonable that people should be going 
through life in blind, uneasy dissatisfaction, never quite realizing 
what was going on around and 
behind them. . , . 

Of course, a good percentage 
of them might drop dead in sheer 



fright if they ever got a sudden 
inkling of what was there. For 
one thing, quiet power enough 
to extinguish nine-tenths of the 
human life on Earth between one 
second and the next. 

And the thought of that power 
and various perhaps not too rational manipulations of it, he re* 
fleeted truthfully, might have 
been the really fascinating part 
of it all to him. 

"Well, thank you, Brownson," 
he said. 

There was no answer. 

WHEN the colonel looked up, 
the chair on the other side 
of the desk was empty. Brownson 
seemed to have realized that he'd 
done the best he could. The 
others, being wiser, would have 
known all along there was nothing to be done. His self -judgment 
stood. 

"Damn saints!" the colonel 
said, grinning. The trouble was 
that he still liked them. 

Trying not to think of Four 
again, he picked up the gun and 
then a final thought came to 
him. He laid it down long enough 
to write neatly and clearly behind reasons given on the resignation form: if it wkke a snakk, 

IT WOULD BITE YOU? 

A slim hand moved the gun 
away and a light voice laughed 
at the inscrutable message he had 
written. Then his own hand was 



GAIAXT SCICNCE FICTION 



taken and he smiled back at 
Four, while the room stayed substantial and he did not. 

It was remarkable how easily 
and completely one could retreat 
from the world, clear to the point 
of invisibility. There had always 
been people like that, people 
who could lose themselves in a 
crowd or be totally unnoticeable 
at a party. They just hadn't carried their self-effacement far 
enough. Probably the pressure of 
reality hadn't been- as savage as 
it Was now, to compel both extremes of assertion and withdrawal. 



Normal Loss would rise an 
infinitesimal amount, the colonel 
thought with amusement — he'd 
have to live, too. The world 
wouldn't know why, of course. 

The devil with this world. He 
had his own to go to, and a 
woman of his own to go with. 

"You didn't really think I was 
going to kill myself, did you?" 
he asked Four, feeling the need 
to make her understand and respect him. "It was only a trick 
to get your attention." 

"As if you had to," she laughed tenderly. 