Field Study By PETER PHILLIPS 

WHAT'S it today?" 
asked the neurotic 
Mrs. Francis Pake. 
"Overtime or that night out?" 

"I can't tell you for certain, 
sweet. I'll phone you. I'm nearly 
sure, but — " 

"This is it," said Betty Pake. She 
got up from the breakfast table. 
"Change your job or change your 
wife. Quite simple, Frank. I 
thought I'd married a man, not an 
accounting machine." 

She said a lot more before Pake 
finished his breakfast. He sighed, 
missed when he pecked for her 
cheek, and left. 

The Mitchell embezzlement 
which had kept him in the office 
all hours for the past three months 
had been finally straightened out 



yesterday, and full material for the 
indictment handed over. Tonight, 
dine, dance and drink with Betty 
— unless something new turned 
up. She rated the break, of course, 
apart from the fact that her nerves, 
unsettled by a quiet life, played 
hell with his digestion. Maybe she 
should have married a younger 
man, with time and money to spare 
for her idea of living. 

He realized uncomfortably that 
he was half hoping something 
would prevent the date. 

The assignment this morning, for 
instance. It was out of the ordinary. 
No books to examine or reluctant 
employees to quiz politely but inexorably. He got straight onto it 
before going to the office. 

Early as it was, the waiting room 
in which he found himself was 
full. Forty patients at least. An obvious Parkinsonism stumbled to a 
bench. Every disease seemed to be 
represented there, from cancer to 
cretinism. 

He recalled the chief's instructions: make no fuss, get in line with 
the others, take what he hands out 
and — bring it back. 

"You have an appointment?" 
asked the dull-eyed, dull-voiced 
receptionist. 

"No, but if this is an open session, I'll hang around on the offchance. My time's my own." 

"Name?" 

"Shando. James." 

Did those dull eyes light up ? No 
reason to. So far as he knew, the 
quack had no reason to suspect a 
Federal investigation. 

"Sit down, please." 

What was it, Pake asked himself as she went into an inside office 
— faith healing? That wouldn't fix 
peritonitis. But that was only a report. He'd have to wait and ask 
careful questions. Careful, because 
patients don't usually question 
doctors on their training and background. 

He looked casually at the man 
next to him. A young Eurasian, 
drawn-in, huddled, gloved hands 
clasped together, as if in silent, 
fierce prayer. 

"What ails, feller?" 

The Eurasian seemed to shrink 
even further into himself, shook 
his head almost imperceptibly. 



Please don't notice me. It was as 
plain as words. 

Then Pake saw the patch of silvery skin beneath the ear. He muttered, "Hell," and jerked away. 

"Sorry, sorry." The faintest of 
whispers. "Not contagious." 

"Maybe not, but you shouldn't 
be here. You should be- — " Pake 
stopped, uneasy. There was a world 
of misery in the man's eyes. 

If the fake beyond that door was 
giving fake hope to poor devils 
like this . . . But that didn't make 
it a government matter. It was up 
to the state, or the local branch of 
the F.M.A. He didn't call himself a doctor, of course, nor did 
he advertise. But did that put him 
in the clear? 

Pake cursed the brevity of his 
instructions. "If you question him," 
the chief had said, "make it 
simple. You can be normally curious, but that's all. And if he gets 
cagy, cut it out. You're not going 
as an agent. You're just an errand 
boy, Frankie, and you know as 
much as I do." 

The receptionist came back, 
walked over to him. 

"It seems you did have an appointment," she lied calmly. "This 
way." 

A DOOR closed behind him. 
Pake, off-guard, found himself talking before he had taken in 
the scene. "This is good of you, 
doctor, but I had no appointment. 
I don't like jumping the line." 



112 




 



"I am entitled to use my discretion. You are an interesting case. 
Sit down. And please don't call me 
doctor. In the healing profession, 
that title is reserved for those who 
have taken the Hippocratic oath. 
My name is Trancore." 

Pake shut his mind to a thousand questions and concentrated on 
one. "How do you know about my 
case? You've never seen me before." 

"My receptionist," said the man 
behind the desk, "has intuitive 
diagnostic ability." 

THAT settled it, Pake thought. A 
first-water quack. Heck, he'd 
never had a day's real sickness in 
his forty years. Mild post-nasal 
drip, maybe, but that was probably 
a penalty for oversmoking. He felt 
the tickle of it at the back of his 
throat now. He blew his nose. It 
gave him a few seconds to think 
and observe. 

The "healer" was quite unremarkable except for an almost unnoticeable Asiatic tinge of skin. 
His features might have been the 
compounded norm of a thousand 
faces flittingly seen during a subway rush-hour. He'd be lost in a 
crowd. No, put him in a crowd 
and he would be the crowd — The 
fantastic thought touched Pake's 
consciousness and slid away before 
he could examine it. 

The office, rented furnished, was 
quite unimpressive. Old-fashioned 
wooden desk, cheap chairs, battered 



filing cabinet, empty, Pake was 
willing to bet. 

"Symptoms?" Trancore asked. 

"Seems you can tell me," Pake 
said with a trace of belligerence. 

"Let's say the recital is part of 
the treatment. I don't wish to 
guess." 

It should be an "interesting 
case." Pake had spent an hour boning up on it at a medical library. 
An obscure disease, a complexus of 
symptoms calculated to faze the 
most expert diagnostician for a 
while. It would certainly defeat the 
snap diagnoses and miraculously 
swift cures attributed to this phony. 
And no doctor could confirm it 
without the most exhaustive physical examination, which this fellow 
didn't go in for, apparently. 

As Pake was talking, Trancore 
looked into a drawer of his desk. 
His face was without expression. 

He looked up only when Pake 
finished, and smiled. "Prognosis, 
death within eleven months, eh? 
But you won't die. Take this in 
water." He put a plastic capsule 
within Pake's reach. 

"But this is crazy! How do I 
know — " 

"You don't. I make no claims. 
What did you expect, a long, obscure rigmarole? You can take the 
capsule or leave it. How many 
tokens — pounds — do you have with 
you?" 

"But listen, doctor—" 

"I'm not a doctor. How much?" 

"Around fifty, I suppose." 



FIELD STUDY 



113 



"Give me twenty- five for the 
capsule, which you take on faith. 
If you take it." 

"You say I'll die if I don't?" 

"I said nothing of the kind. I 
have no intention of running foul 
of your laws. Please make up your 
mind." 

Pake took it. 

" A S MUCH personality as a 

-X~\. boiled duck," Pake reported to his chief. "But somehow I 
couldn't get around to asking 
questions." 

The chief tossed the capsule in 
his palm. "That doesn't matter. 
This is all we wanted." 

The laboratories took five hours 
to break it down, make tests and 
come up with the final, headscratching nonsense line: just a 
mess of soluble protein with no 
discernible physiological reactions. 

"That was yours," the chief said. 
"These were brought in by the 
others, a plainclothes man from 
Police H.Q., an employee of the 
National Medical Association, an 
official of the N.M.A., and a private 
investigator." 

Pake leafed through the reports. 
"The same?" 

"Yes. But here are three reports 
on capsules given to genuine 
patients and 'borrowed' for analysis 
afterward. The patients didn't miss 
a thing, even though the operative 
substituted similar capsules containing water and a vegetable dye. It 
took five minutes for the laboratory 



to discover that that's all the 
'borrowed' capsules contained, 
also." 

Pake began to laugh. Then he 
remembered the leper. "Can't 
Trancore be booked for fraud?" 

"How? He makes no claims for 
the damned things. And in several 
instances, he's given them away. 
But don't you see the implication 
of these reports?" 

Pake nodded. "Patients get 
water. Investigators get something 
just- as useless — except for giving 
laboratory men a headache. So he 
knows who is what. I don't get it." 

"You will. I'm turning the case 
over to you, Frankie." 

"I'm interested. But how come 
it's on our level?" 

"It's international. Come and 
meet the United Nations." The 
chief frowned as he rose. "I've 
been trying to put my finger on 
something since you came in. Now 
I've got it. Your voice." 

"What's wrong with it?" 

"Not a thing. Sounds clearer, 
somehow." 

Pake stood very still. He swore, 
slowly, then cleared his throat. 
There was nothing to clear. "My 
post-nasal drip!" He blew his nose 
frantically, pointlessly. "It's gone!" 

SIR Greville Gray of London, 
Luchaire of Paris, Frend of 
Berlin, Stawowy of Prague — Pake 
.heard substantially the same story 
from each. 

In Harley Street, London's spe


11,4 




 



cialist district, Trancore had rented 
a £50 a week consulting room, 
given free treatment to two cardiac 
cases, then pulled out when the 
waiting list grew unmanageable — 
or when he'd fulfilled his unknown 
purpose. 

Gray, chairman of the English 
Medical Association, had interviewed him officially. 

"Impudent little devil called 
me 'the chief witch-doctor.' I nearly assaulted him." Gray squared 
his massive shoulders. "When I 
said we'd prosecute, .he flatly denied that he practiced medicine at 
all. 'To arraign me,' he said, 'you 
would have to prove that I give 
treatment, that I charge for it, make 
claims for it, and that it may prove 
harmful. You cannot even prove 
the first accusation.' I pointed out 
that he dispensed capsules and 
charged for them. He said, 'They 
expect something material, like the 
evil-smelling charms you give them. 
I offer them a capsule. They take 
it or leave it. It makes no difference. They pay or don't pay. That 
makes no difference, either. I prefer them to pay. It makes my stay 
shorter.' 

"I asked whether he expected 
me to believe that his patients were 
cured no matter what course they 
took. 'They are not my patients,' he 
said. 'If, after they have visited me, 
a cure is effected and they claim 
my instrumentality, then that is not 
my responsibility.' 

"In a word, he disclaims every


thing, even success. Two days later, 
when a newspaper followed up a tip 
about so-called 'miracle cures,' a 
reporter found a queue stretching 
out into the street — and an empty 
office. Ten weeks later, the fellow 
turns up in Paris, and the business 
starts over again." 

"But not," said Dr. Luchaire 
gently, "the same man." 

Sir Greville shifted uneasily in 
his chair. "A good disguise." 

"Photographs?" asked Pake. 

His chief, smiling a little, handed him two buttonhole camera 
enlargements. There was an elusive 
similarity, a strained family likeness; but neither was patently of 
the man Pake had seen that morning. 

Pake said, "The norm of a 
crowd. If it's the same man, he's 
a human chameleon." 

ATTEMPTS to get fingerprints 
had been curiously unsuccessful. Either he had had them obliterated through surgery or he put on 
gloves before touching anything. 
Maybe he made sure to touch nothing. The last idea was fantastic, but 
what wasn't about this case? 

Pake asked, "Why has no effort 
been made before to collate available material, if this has been going on for so long?" 

Dr. Frend of Berlin grunted. 
"The medical profession is not an 
international police force. There is 
fraternal exchange of information 
in periodicals, naturally, but no 



FIELD STUDY 



115 



medical man would risk his reputation by lending credence to such a 
fantastic rumor as, for instance, the 
cure of an advanced leukemia." 

"But that man was my own 
patient!" Dr. Stawowy of Prague 
was indignant. 

"I'm not challenging your veracity or ability. Genuinely mistaken 
diagnoses are not unknown," Frend 
said coldly. "I was merely explaining to this gentleman why there 
has been such delay in instigating 
an international investigation. The 
matter was brought into the open 
only recently at a European congress, of which I happened to be 
chairman. The feeling of the meeting was that these rumors should 
be traced to their source, as a professional and public duty. I agreed 
to act as coordinator of a small 
sub-committee appointed for this 
purpose. That is why we are here. 
Personally, I am not convinced that 
this man is anything more than a 
faker and an opportunist." 

Michaels of the N.M.A. shook 
his head. "A man from an adjacent 
office was carried in to him a couple 
of days ago with every symptom 
of a burst appendix. This 'faker' 
protested at first, .said he wasn't a 
doctor. Then he asked to be left 
alone with him. Ten minutes later, 
that man walked out unaided." 

"Nicely stage-managed," said 
Frend. "He was a stooge." 

"We checked. It's difficult to believe there was collusion. The patient is a solid, decent citizen. He 



said the pain began to go when 
Trancore had been looking at him 
for a while. In his own words, he 
felt something moving in his guts, 
and then the pain stopped." 

"I find it less difficult to believe 
that he was a stooge," repeated 
Frend obstinately. 

Pake's chief intervened. "Gentlemen, my department has received 
instructions to give you every assistance in obtaining information 
about this man. Mr. Pake will be 
in charge. We are not concerned 
with the medical side of the case, 
but only with its legal aspects." 

HE paused, dropped diplomatic 
language. "Though why in 
hell it should be my department 
instead of the police, or the D.A.'s 
office, or the Bureau of Public Welfare, or the Bureau of Immigration 
is something I still haven't figured." 

Sir Greville Gray said, "In every 
instance where a direct law-enforcement agency was about to "investigate, even before his identity papers 
could be asked for, the man has 
disappeared. His nationality is unknown. He operates only for as 
long as he can escape widespread 
notice and police attention. That's 
why the few newspaper stories that 
have appeared are quite disconnected and based solely on speculation. 
Your approach must be very discreet." 

"Seems it'll have to be invisible, 
too," Pake said. "He knows I'm 



116 




 



an operative already. But he cured 
my — " 

Pake stopped. Maybe his postnasal drip had cleared up of its 
own accord. It was a comforting 
thought. He wished he could believe it. 

IN HIS office— "I'm sorry, 
sweetkin," he told the phone. 
"Just can't make it tonight. I've 
got to stay on this case. It's — er — 
detective work. The police are helping me." 

The nerve-edged vehemence of 
his wife's voice grated on his ear. 
He held the receiver an inch away. 

"So you think you're a real Gman now, a big tough hero running around with a bottle of rye 
and a blonde. Well, listen, hero, I 
hope they shoot first. I'm through." 

"It's nothing like that, hon. 
You're getting mixed up, anyway. 
Bureau men don't drink on duty. 
And you're pretty hard to please — 
you called me an accounting machine this morning. But look, lovesome, I'll be home around seven. 
It's just that I have to stay near a 
phone. We could play checkers. 
And I promise I'll grab me a day 
off—" 

He held the receiver six inches 
from his ear. "I'm sorry," he said 
again loudly and lowered the 
phone, which was still angrily vibrating, to the cutoff. 

There was a note on the kitchen 
table when he got home. 

"An old school friend called. 



Anyway, that's my story, hero. And 
we're going places. Don't wait up." 

Pake sighed. Hero ... He curled 
his lean body up in a chair by the 
phone with a book. 

The call came at midnight: 
"He's skipped." 

"I was waiting for that. I've seen 
the papers. Keep on it." 

Pake turned back to the midnight editions. There were few 
facts. Three patients had been interviewed. From the descriptions, 
one was the Eurasian with leprosy 
he had seen that morning. 

The word-of -mouth snowball 
and the inevitable newspaper swoop 
had taken just two weeks this time. 
In Paris, Trancore had lasted a 
month. 

One newspaper admitted that 
they had an anonymous call claiming a miracle cure, days previously, 
but had put it down to a cultist bid 
for publicity. 

The phone rang again. The caller 
said, "If this guy doesn't come out 
of his office soon, these newspapermen will bust the door down. What 
shall I do?" 

"You're on loan from the police, aren't you? If they try that, 
identify yourself and threaten to 
book 'em. You don't need to mention that Trancore isn't in that office 
anyway." 

The phone spluttered disbelief. 

Pake grimaced. "I know how 
you feel, sergeant. Maybe he flew 
out of the window. He was picked 
up as he came out of the front 



FIELD STUDY 



117 



entrance, and I'm waiting to hear 
where he holes up. But spin those 
reporters some yarn and keep them 
there if you can." 

Pake shook his head as he put 
the phone down. 

He took a freshening shower. 
Past twelve was a fine time for 
newspapermen, police and miracle 
healers to be about their business — 
did Trancore ever sleep, or had he 
gone in for all-night sessions? — 
but Accountancy Branch men 
worked office hours. 

Discreet investigation guaranteed, every cent traced through the 
best-cooked books. That was probably Washington's line of thought: 
if Accountancy could do it with 
embezzled cents, they could do it 
with elusive fake doctors. 

But these cents didn't add up. 
It didn't make sense. 

Nonsense. A whole row of thaumaturgical non-cents. 

Accountancy could trace a cent. 

So, logically, they could scent a 
trace. And sense a non-scent . . . 

Uh-uh. Pull yourself together, 
hero . . . 

Pake lolled his tongue at the 
mirror. Clean and pink, no fuzz or 
sign of civilized costiveness. 

Constipation. Post-nasal drip. 
And leprosy. 

He leaned forward until his 
forehead touched the mirror. His 
eyes showed red tracery beneath 
drooping lids. What did real Government men — not the office-bound 
type — do to stay awake? 



Pake recalled Betty's crack about 
rye and a blonde. And he remembered a nearly full bottle. 

He answered the insistent phone 
with a glass in one hand. 

He jotted the address of a cheap 
rooming house, dressed and left, 
thoughtfully putting the bottle in a 
pocket. 

THE man on watch said, "Room 
five. Going in?" 
Pake shrugged. "I don't know. 
If I do, he'll probably float out of 
a back window; This kind of thing 
isn't up my alley." 

The watcher looked surprised. 
"Why, you're F.B.I., aren't you?" 

"Not so's you'd notice," said 
Pake gloomily. He shivered a little 
in the after-midnight chill. 

Someone was emerging from the 
building. The watcher drew Pake 
into the shadow of an unlighted 
shop doorway. "It's him, anyway." 
Then he frowned. "No. Sorry. Same 
build, but — " 

"For my money," Pake murmured, peering across the road, 
"you were right first time. The 
norm of a crowd." 
"Hey, whadya doing?" 
Pake shook off the restraining 
hand. "I don't know," he said 
again. "Ask him for a light, maybe. This can't be played according 
to the Detectives' Manual. If there 
is such a thing. I wouldn't know. 
If he vanishes in a puff of smoke, 
call the psychiatric ward ambulance 
— for me." 



118 




 



Pake's lanky strides quickly overtook the slow-moving man. 
"Pardon me — " 

The man turned. "Good morning, Mr. Pake. I congratulate you 
on your acuity of perception and 
your imagination. How are your 
nasal passages?" 

The world reeled a little on its 
axis. 

"Walk with me," said Trancore, 
and took Pake's arm. "But first 
signal to your policeman that he 
needn't follow us." 

Frankie Pake flapped a limp, 
dismissing hand at the watcher in 
the shadows, and walked on into a 
dream. 

"Am I mad?" he asked simply, 
after a while. 

"No. You're saner than most. 
Your higher cortical centers are 
momentarily dulled by fatigue and 
alcohol, giving full reign to intuition. 'Hunch' you term it. An endearing quality when allied with 
imagination. A saving grace, indeed, of your race." 

"You're from India?" 

"Trancore is a good Indian 
name. Incidentally, fatigue is a disease." 

Pake said, "Don't cure me; I 
couldn't bear to wake up. When 
do we start running like hell to 
stay in the same place? Pardon 
me." 

Trancore shook his head as 
Pake, still walking, upended a 
bottle to his lips. The sidewalk was 
crowding up and the lights bright


ening in nagging neon as they 
neared Broadway. 

Pake lowered the bottle. "You 
still here?" 

"You expect me to disappear? 
I could, quite easily, by convincing 
you of my non-presence, as I did 
when I walked past those men outside my office. Or I could slip into 
a crowd and, within limitations, 
alter the apparent cast of my features to conform seemingly with 
an average. But don't you want to 
ask me some questions?" 

Pake pondered this. "Maybe I 
do. Why do you want to answer 
them?" He was feeling less like 
a real G-man and more like an 
Accountancy Branch investigator 
every moment. "You figure I'm 
harmless, huh?" he added resentfully. "Like my wife?" 

"By no means. If I weren't about 
to conclude my own particular investigation, I would say that you 
were most dangerous to me. Your 
imagination is quite highly developed." 

Pake stopped. He grabbed Trancore's sleeve. "I can't walk and 
think," he announced. He dumped 
the empty bottle by a fire-plug. 

THEY sat on high stools in the 
garish light of an open-fronted 
soft-drinks bar. 

"If this is going to be a jag," 
Pake said, "I suggest we lay a 
foundation of milk." 

Smells wafted in from the street, 
the delicate and the insistent inter


FIELD STUDY 



119 



mingled: rubber, hot oil, burned 
gasoline, cheap perfume, sweat, 
dust, peppermint: astringent tang 
of warm steel, of leather, even of 
stone. It had been a hot day before 
the sun went down. 

Pake sniffed appreciatively. 

"It's a sense we abuse and neglect," he said as the milk was 
served. "You did cure my postnasal drip, didn't you?" 

Trancore had been watching him 
with a half-smile. "All those questions in your mind, yet you relish 
this rediscovery above all. I don't 
despair of you." Trancore sipped 
his milk. "The infection was cured 
by your body. I helped. I can't tell 
you how, unless you have five hundred years to spare." 

"Hardly," Pake said. "I haven't 
twelve hours to spare, if I'm to 
save my job. Or my reputation. 
Which, or either, I'm not sure." 
He caught Trancore's amused eye. 
"All right, that's not true. But I 
need answers to a pretty lengthy 
questionnaire. Who, when, what, 
why, where — you know." 

"You're convinced I'm a telepath?" 

"Aren't you?" 

"Not in your sense of the term, 
which is a semantic misnomer in 
any case. As a diagnostician, I sense 
abnormalities in physiological functioning. As a psychologist, I sense 
— difference. In purpose and function. When you came into my 
waiting room, I knew you were 
not there as a patient. Your pres



I 

ence was a disharmony. The same 
with your colleagues. As for your 
name and your occupation, they 
are naturally blazed so clearly on 
the surface of your mind that even 
your native clairvoyants could read 
the information." 

"That," Pake breathed, "takes a 
load off my mind. You don't, for 
instance, know what I'm thinking 
about that dark-haired ex-blonde 
who just served us those shakes?" 

"The one with the excellent pectoral development? No. Your own 
muzzy picturafe and thalamic concepts are your own. I can't interpret 
them." 

Pake said, "Fine. You know all 
about the aphrodisiac effects of 
alcohol, though. Are you too big 
for me to understand, or can I see 
you clear and self-explanatory 
against the background of Broadway?" 

Trancore did not reply for a 
moment. He was looking at the 



120 




 



other occupants of the bar. There 
was something like pity in his eyes. 
Not pity, though, Pake decided, 
searching hard for another word. 



Something bigger; less human, perhaps. Or more human. Compassion ? 

Trancore said, as if to himself, 



FIELD STUDY 



121 



"The girl with the bright face 
laughing at the febrile witticisms of 
her unpleasant escort: three-quarters 
of her right lung has gone." 

Pake felt he was overhearing 
something he shouldn't. But he 
said, "You could put her right?" 

"I could stop the rot in that 
lung, Pake. But she would return 
to that back room full of smoke 
and dust. She would still travel 
on a crowded subway to an overheated office. She'd still starve herself to buy clothes to keep in 
fashion. I don't have a cure for 
those things." 

"That's the first time you've admitted you have a cure for anything." 

Frankie Pake felt confused, despite his acceptance of the situation — which still surprised him. 
And he felt grudgingly humble. 
He saw, as if for the first time, the 
face of the man who called himself 
Trancore. 

It had been the norm of the 
crowd, a pale blur in a flashlight 
shot of a moving mob. Now it was 
individual, seen clear and not 
through a wavering mask. The underlying personality was revealed, 
strong, but with no desire for domination. 

There were those once-precious 
pulps that Betty had scornfully banished to an out-of-the-way cupboard 
when they'd moved into the apartment. Clues there, maybe? Mutant 
superman in hiding? Spy from a 
far galaxy? — ouch! No ray- guns, 



no squirming, tentacled horrors, 
no — 

A little sanity, a little sobriety, 
little hero . . . 

"What are you, Mr. Trancore?" 

"A healer. That is my profession." 

"And now suppose you answer 
the question." 

"Is your head clear?" 

PAKE, remembering the rye, 
said, "Strangely, it is. But I'm 
a little drunk from the neck down, 
and the dream-state persists." 

"I wish," said Trancore? — and it 
seemed the most foolish, yet the 
most significant thing that Pake 
could remember hearing him say — 
"I wish sometimes that I could 
escape reality so easily, by imparting to it the patina of a dream. 
You all do that." He got up. "I'm 
going to work now. I have about 
eight hours. You will be my guide." 
"What do you want to see?" 
"This city at play in the predawn hours." 

Pake gave a humorful grunt. 
"My wife would suit you better in 
the role of guide. She's playing 
pretty hard right now." 

He explained. He wanted to explain. Betty was suddenly vivid in 
his mind: beautiful but fretful, at 
odds with life, yearning for the 
opiate of soft lights and sweet music, afraid to face herself, afraid 
to proclaim her interest in humanity in case such a generalized belief should hurt her in some way. 



122 




 



Trancore listened sympathetically 
as Pake spoke of the broken date 
and his own preference for the 
quiet life. 

Trancore said, "Surely she'll appreciate the irony of this when you 
tell her?" 

"The hell she will ! If she knows 
I've been painting the town without her, even in line of duty — " 

Trancore asked, "Do you know 
where she's likely to be?" 

Pake looked at him curiously. 
"There's a couple of spots she 
fancies." 

"Could we go there a little 
later?" He held up his hand as 
Pake was about to veto the idea. 
"I promise you there'll be no unpleasant consequences if we meet 
her." 

Pake believed him. Pake would 
have believed in a panhandling 
green hippo with puce spots at that 
moment. The apparition would have 
been absorbed without comment 
into the basic fantasy of this situation. 

THEY started at Brondine's, 
where it was boasted that any 
potable man had ever devised for 
the delectation of palate and the 
drugging of senses could be served 
— with second choice on the house 
if first choice wasn't in stock. 

Trancore asked for the first 
twelve favorites, took them in turn 
without a blink. 

Pake stuck to rye, watched, and 
listened. 



"Your palates," observed Trancore, "are more civilized than your 
minds." 

"But why," asked Pake in wonderment, "are you still upright?" 

"I make sure to eliminate the 
poisons in the alcohol, and thus the 
toxic effects. As a rule, I don't 
drug. But when in Rome — " 

Something lit up in Pake's mind. 
Fantasy came to fantasy. He remembered a story. "Now I get it. 
You're from the future!" 

Trancore laughed, genuinely. 
"Your imagination deserves something better than comic strips to 
work on. It's fascinating, but depressing, to see science negated by 
superstition, and your concept . of 
time is the greatest superstition. 
Let's go. A game shop next." 

He meant a pinball arcade. 

He cheated abominably. Pake 
watched a steel ball bump the thousand pin twenty times, defying gravity. "Surgical manipulative technique," Trancore murmured. 

A strabismic attendant, called by 
the clanging of the surfeited machine, shouldered through the 
matching crowd and squinted unbelievingly. 

"Whatcha doon?" The attendant demanded menacingly. 

"Or this," Trancore said gently. 
"The same technique." 

The man pressed a hand to his 
eyes and made an animal noise. 
Then he looked at his fingers, held 
up one, two, three; blinked at the 
lights. 



FIELD STUDY 



123 



Pake grasped Trancore's arm, 
pulled him outside. He was suddenly quite sober. There was a 
strange harshness in his voice. 

"Do you have to impress me? 
The world needs your knowledge 
and" — he waved at the glitter of 
Broadway — "you fritter time and 
energy mooching around here. You 
don't cure a girl of T.B., but you 
fix that old thug's squint." 

"A whim. Alone, I can do so 
little." 

"Why do you do anything?" 

TRANCORE fingered a green 
bill reflectively. "Even a healer 
must eat. Field research is expensive. And we are pledged to live 
as far as possible within the framework of the society we examine, 
applying our skills to that end. In 
that way, we reduce the possibility 
of observation affecting the subject 
we observe. 

"By using the hypnotic and telekinetic techniques which I have 
developed in my own profession, I 
could obviously earn sufficient of 
your tokens for subsistence during 
my period of study by gambling, 
for instance; but that would not be 
ethical." 

Pake imagined a poker player 
who not only reshuffled cards as 
they were being dealt to him, but 
who could disappear, if his opponents queried his success, by erasing 
the fact of his presence from their 
minds. 

"You could teach — " he began. 



"And run foul of the witch-doctors who briefed you yesterday? 
Think, Mr. Pake! Would you give 
a hypodermic and a gallon of cocaine to an aboriginal tribe suffering from toothaches? Besides, these 
techniques have taken me five hundred years to learn." 

"That's why I thought — " 
"That I was from the future? I 
might be, in terms of possibility. 
We are," said Trancore, "no older 
than you, as a race, in terms of 
universal evolution. But as individuals, we are longer-lived. The 
biggest single advance you will 
make as a race will be when you 
increase the life-span of the individual." 

Pake thought that over, and fantasy was far from his mind. 

"You could help us," he said. 

"We may, when you become 
more than ephemerate. And, for 
psychological reasons, that must be 
achieved by your own efforts." 

"Are we so contemptible?" 

"Would we study you if you 
were? Our architects, our musicians, 
even our fiction writers do fieldwork in this territory, write scholarly theses when they return. Anthropology, in our sense of the 
term, embraces all the arts and 
sciences. We are all scholars. Occasionally we innovate, and you benefit." 

"Why do you tell me this?" 

Trancore shrugged. For the first 
time, Pake noticed that they were 
standing in the middle of a busy 



124 




 



sidewalk. They might have been 
in the middle of the Gobi desert 
for all the notice people took of 
them. A plump man walked 
straight toward them, frowned, 
then detoured carefully around the 
spot where they stood. Pake wondered what the man thought he 
saw. Probably a puddle or brokenup sidewalk. 

"I like you," Trancore said simply. "And you will remember very 
little that you can impart to others 
and expect any measure of belief. 
And you have imagination enough 
to control your terrestrial chauvinism and your natural resentment at 
being studied. It may comfort you 
to know that, in the physical 
sciences, your race is considered to 
be quite well advanced." 

It did, somehow. Yet — 

ALL the niggling, back-mindbiting inferiorities that man 
has ever suffered, from the time he 
was first chased by a sabertooth to 
his feeling of helplessness when 
science outran his emotional control, suddenly seemed to crowd together into Pake's brain for a 
staggering second. 

"Resentment isn't the word," 
Pake said slowly. "I could kill 
you." 

"But you won't. Others would. 
Now you understand why our visits 
are unannounced. And they will 
remain so until all men are as essentially civilized — that is to say, nonaggressive — as you are." 



Pake knew the question was 
really unimportant and that its true 
answer would be incomprehensible, 
anyway. But he asked it. 

Trancore smiled. "Your preoccupation with the physical sciences . . . 
No, I don't have a spaceship 
garaged anywhere. Your popular 
concept of time may be superstition, but the limiting speed of light 
is not. We don't travel. We arrive. 
I'm afraid the distinction is not 
clear to you, but it will have to do. 

"And now — " The slender man 
took Pake's arm. Crowds brushed 
against them again. "Quick visits 
to a burlesque show, an all-night 
cinema. And perhaps we could look 
in at those nightclubs where your 
wife might be. I owe you a favor. 
Then I must return home." 

They cabbed to three clubs before they found Betty. 

"You are not members, we are 
booked up, it is evening dress 
only," objected the hastily summoned manager. 

"Are you mad?" asked Trancore 
pleasantly. "Or is your memory so 
very short?" 

The manager thumb-and-fingered 
his eyes, then beamed at them. 

"Good evening, gentlemen. Good 
to see you again.. This way." 

"Teach me that trick," muttered 
Pake as they followed him. 

He looked down at his open 
overcoat and tweed suit. 

"Tell me, am I wearing a soft 
shirt or a boiled one?" 

"Boiled." 



FIELD STUDY 



125 



"Good. I like to be formal." 

Trancore stopped at the entrance 
to the big circular room. The manager left them and hurried back to 
his private office with the conviction of a frantic headache to be 
numbed with aspirin immediately. 

"Do you see her?" Trancore 
asked. 

Pake glanced around the soft-lit 
tables. He looked hard at one table. 
He made a wry face. 

"Boiled," he said, "has more 
than one meaning. Or maybe Betty 
just can't resist using that torso of 
hers as a prop. I wish she wasn't 
wearing that dress at that angle of 
inclination. Would you think me 
so uncivilized, Trancore, if I 
walked up and poked Football 
Shoulders in one of those roving 
eyes of his?" 

"You are not altogether without 
blame in this arisement," Trancore 
observed mildly. "You make insufficient allowance for her. You are 
reasonably well-adjusted. She is 
not." 

"I'd like to adjust that damned 
dress." 

"Primitive possessiveness. You 
disappoint me, Pake," Trancore 
said, but his eyes were laughing. 

Betty looked up as they approached. Her eyes weren't quite 
focused. "Frankie . . . What the 
hell! Lookit what the river washed 
up!" 

She grabbed the table for support as Football Shoulders rose 
suddenly, rubbed his forehead. 



"Phone call or — or something," he 
muttered. "Pardon me. Must go." 

Betty did a double-take like a 
puppet as the shoulders lumbered 
off. "Wheel me home. What 
goes — " 

Pake said, "Meet Mr. Trancore." 

TWO men walked slowly along 
the footpath of a great girdered 
bridge. The taller man had a hesitation in his walk and stooped a 
little, as if burdened. 

Halfway across, they stopped and 
watched in silence the slow dawn 
rose-gilding the towers of Manhattan. 

A tugboat below, looking no 
larger than a water beetle, made its 
loud, self-important noise. As much 
noise as an ocean-going liner. 

Pake had put Betty in a cab, had 
walked with Trancore, had asked 
many more questions, and learned 
very little. Now he asked the final 
question as Trancore turned and 
held out his slender hand. 

"Good-by, Mr. Pake." 

"At least tell me — which star?" 

"You haven't seen or named it 
yet. Take care of Mr. Trancore for 
me, won't you? You'll find his address in this pocket. Good-by." 

Pake took the hand. For a crazy 
moment, despite what he knew, he 
expected it to be withdrawn from 
his grasp suddenly, to see a figure 
drawn heavenward along a lancing 
path of light. 

But there was merely a sigh from 
the lips of the slender man, who 



126 




 



collapsed limply into Pake's ready 
arms. 

PAKE told his chief, "Those 
quacks can examine him until 
they drive the poor devil crazy, but 
he won't be able to tell them any 
more. His name is Chandra Trancore, a second-rate doctor who disappeared from his practice in Madras province ten months ago. He 
has less idea of what he has been 
doing during those months than 
they have." 

"How do you explain it?" 
Pake stood by the window of the 
office and inhaled deeply. Somewhere nearby there was a windowbox with gardenias. He caught their 
scent as well as if they had been 
under his nose. 

He said, "I don't. And I'd like 
you to hurry through my resignation as fast as you can, chief." 

"I still don't understand why, 
Frankie. We're pals, aren't we, 
apart from official status? I know 
I've had to drive you hard lately. 
Had to drive myself, too. Sorry I 
put you on this off-routine stunt. 
But if you want to rest up for a 
while — ■" 

Pake inhaled again, audibly. 
Someone was cooking spaghetti 
bolognese quite a distance away. "I 
want to be free to take legal action 
on behalf of Trancore if those 
witch-doctors have him arrested on 
some trumped-up charge just to 
give themselves more time to examine him. I'll take personal re


sponsibility for seeing him home 
to India." 

"You can do that without resigning. I'll fix special leave, if you 
insist on being crazy." 

"That's not all, though." Pake 
wondered how he could explain, 
regretfully decided it was impossible. "I'm taking an intensive twoyear course for a new career." 

"So you told me. I thought you 
were drunk. Anyway, how will 
Betty take to a fool idea like that? 
She goes for the bright lights, 
doesn't she? And I thought her — 
nerves were edgy." 

"She's all for it," Pake said, and 
was amused at his chief's gapemouthed disbelief. "A neurosis is a 
disease. And she met Trancore. I'll 
send you a card when we get 
started." 




[HE card arrived three years 
later. It was headed: 



M'Beli Medical Mission Station 
Upper Congo 

Pake wrote: ". . . probably the 
most backward tribe mentally and 
physically in the whole of Africa. 
Some trouble from the witch-doctors at first, but I've settled down 
quite nicely now and I think they're 
beginning to trust me, with Betty's 
help. The women love her. Tribal 
customs are fascinating. Watch out 
for my name in the Anthropological 
Review." 