BETELGEUSE BRIDGE By WILLIAM TENN 

YOU tell them, Alvarez, old 
boy; you know how to talk 
to them. This isn't my kind 
of Public Relations. All I care about 
is that they get the pitch exactly 
right with all the implications and 
complications and everything just 
the way they really were. 

If it hurts, well, let them yell. 
Just use your words and get it 
right. Get it all. 

You can start with the day the 
alien spaceship landed outside 
Baltimore. Makes you sick to think 
how we never tumbled, doesn't it, 
Alvarez? No more than a hop, skip 
and a jet from the Capitol dome, 
and we thought it was just a lucky 
accident. 

Explain why we thought it was 
so lucky. Explain about the secrecy 
it made possible, how the farmer 
who telephoned the news was 
placed in special and luxurious custody, how a hand-picked cordon of 
M. P.s paced five square miles off 
into an emergency military reservation a few hours later, how Congress was called into secret session 
and the way it was all kept out of 
the newspapers. 

How and why Trowson, my old 
sociology prof, was consulted once 
the problem became clear. How he 
blinked at the brass hats and striped 
pants and came up with the answer. 

Me. I was the answer. 

How my entire staff and I were 
plucked out of our New York offices, where we were quietly earning 
a million bucks, by a flying squad 
of the F. B. I. and air-mailed to 
Baltimore. Honestly, Alvarez, even 
after Trowson explained the situation to me, I was still irritated. Government hush-hush always makes 
me uncomfortable. Though I don't 
have to tell you how grateful I was 
for it later. 

The spaceship itself was such a 
big surprise that I didn't even wet 
my lips when the first of the aliens 
slooshed out. After all those years 
of streamlined cigar-shapes the 
Sunday Supplement artists had 
dreamed up, that colorful and rococo spheroid rearing out of a barley field in Maryland looked less 
like an interplanetary vessel than 
an oversized ornament for a whatnot table. Nothing that seemed like 
a rocket jet anywhere. 

"And there's your job," the prof 
pointed. "Those two visitors." 

They were standing on a flat 
metal plate surrounded by the highest the republic had elected or appointed. Nine feet of slimy green 
trunk tapering up from a rather 
wide base to a pointed top, and 
dressed in a tiny pink and white 
shell. Two stalks with eyes on them 
that swung this way and that, and 
seemed muscular enough to throttle 
a man. And a huge wet slash of a 
mouth that showed whenever an 
edge of the squirming base lifted 
from the metal plate. 

"Snails," I said. "Snails!" 

"Or slugs," Trowson amended. 
"Gastropodal molluscs in any 
case." He gestured at the roiling 
white bush of hair that sprouted 
from his head. "But, Dick, that 
vestigial bit of coiled shell is even 
less an evolutionary memento than 
this. They're an older — and smarter 
— race." 

"Smarter?" 

He nodded. "When our engineers got curious, they were very 
courteously invited inside to inspect 
the ship. They came out with their 
mouths hanging." 



I BEG AN to get uncomfortable. 
I ripped a small piece off my 
manicure. "Well, naturally, prof, 
if they're so alien, so different — " 

"Not only that. Superior. Get 
that, Dick, because it'll be very important in what you have to do. 
The best engineering minds that 
this country can assemble in a 
hurry are like a crowd of South Sea 
Islanders trying to analyze the rifle 
and compass from what they know 
of spears and windstorms. These 
creatures belong to a galaxy-wide 
civilization composed of races at 
least as advanced as they; we're a 
bunch of backward hicks in an unfrequented hinterland of space 
that's about to be opened to exploration. Exploitation, perhaps, if 
we can't measure up. We have to 
give a very good impression and 
we have to learn fast." 

A dignified official with a briefcase detached himself from the 
nodding, smiling group around the 
aliens and started for us. 

"Wbew!" I commented brilliantly. "1492, repeat performance." I 
thought for a moment, not too 
clearly. "But why send the army 
and navy after me? I'm not going 
to be able to read blueprints from 
• — from — " 

"Betelgeuse. Ninth planet of the 
star Betelgeuse. No, Dick, we've already had Dr. Warbury out here. 
They learned English from him 
in two hours, although he hasn't 
identified a word of theirs in three 
days! And people like Lopez, like 



64 




 



Mainzer, are going quietly psychotic trying to locate their power 
source. We have the best minds we 
can get to do the learning. Your 
job is different. We want you as a 
top-notch advertising man, a public 
relations executive. You're the 
good impression part of the program." 

The official plucked at my sleeve 
and I shrugged him away. "Isn't 
that the function of government 
glad-handers ?" I asked Trowson. 

"No. Don't you remember what 
you said when you first saw them? 
Snails! How do you think this 
country is going to take to the idea 
of snails — giant snails — who sneer 
condescendingly at our skyscraper 
cities, our atomic bombs, our most 
advanced mathematics? We're a 
conceited kind of monkey. Also, 
we're afraid of the dark." 

There was a gentle official tap on 
my shoulder. I said "Please!" impatiently. I watched the warm little 
breeze ruffle Professor Trowson's 
slept-in clothes and noticed the tiny 
red streaks in his weary eyes. 

"Mighty Monsters from Outer 
Space. Headlines like that, prof?" 

"Slugs with Superiority Complexes. Dirty Slugs, more likely. 
We're lucky they landed in this 
country, and so close to the Capitol, too. In a few days, we'll have 
to call in the heads of other nations. 
Then, sometime soon after, the 
news will be out. We don't want 
our visitors attacked by mobs 
drunk on superstition, planetary 



isolation or any other form of tabloid hysteria. We don't want them 
carrying stories back to their civilization of being shot at by a suspendered fanatic who screamed, 
'Go back where you come from, 
you furrin seafood!' We want to 
give them the impression that we 
are a fairly amiable, fairly intelligent race, that we can be dealt with 
reasonably well." 

I nodded. "Yeah. So they'll set 
up trading posts on this planet instead of garrisons. But what do I 
do in all this?" 

He punched my chest gently. 
"You, Dick — you do a job of public relations. You sell these aliens 
to the American people!" 

THE official had maneuvered 
around in front of me. I 
recognized him. He was the Undersecretary of State. 

"Would you step this way, 
please?" he said. "I'd like to introduce you to our distinguished 
guests." 

So he stepped, and I stepped, 
and we scrunched across the field 
and clanked across the steel plate 
and stood next to our gastropodic 
guests. 

"Ahem," said the Undersecretary politely. 

The nearer snail bent an eye toward us. The other eye drew a bead 
on the companion snail, and then 
the great slimy head arched and 
came down to our level. The creature raised, as it were, one cheek 



BETELGEUSE BRIDGE 



65 



of its foot and said, with all the 
mellowness of air being pumped 
through a torn inner tube, "Can it 
be that you wish to communicate 
with my unworthy self, respected 
sir?" 

I was introduced. The thing 
brought two eyes to bear on me. 
The place where its chin should 
have been dropped to my feet and 
snaked around there for a second. 
Then it said, "You, honored sir, 
are our touchstone, the link with 
all that is great in your noble race. 
Your condescension is truly a tribute." 

All this tumbled out while I was 
muttering "How," and extending a 
diffident hand. The snail put one 
eyeball in my palm and the other on 
the back of my wrist. It didn't 
shake; it just put the things there 
and took them away again. I had 
the wit not to wipe my hands on 
my pants, which was my immediate 
impulse. The eyeball wasn't exactly 
dry, either. 

I said, "I'll do my best. Tell me, 
are you — uh — ambassadors, sort 
of? Or maybe just explorers?" 

"Our small worth justifies no 
titles," said the creature, "yet we 
are both; for all communication is 
ambassadorship of a kind, and any 
seeker after knowledge is an explorer." 

I was suddenly reminded of an 
old story with the punchline, "Ask 
a foolish question and you get a 
foolish answer." I also wondered 
suddenly what snails eat. 



The second alien glided over and 
eyed me. "You may depend upon 
our utmost obedience," it said 
humbly. "We understand your 
awesome function and we wish to 
be liked to whatever extent it is 
possible for your admirable race to 
like such miserable creatures as ourselves." 

"Stick to that attitude and we'll 
get along," I said. 

BY AND large they were a 
pleasure to work with. I mean 
there was no temperament, no upstaging, no insistence on this 
camera angle or that mention of a 
previously published book or the 
other wishful biographical apocrypha about being raised in a convent, 
■like most of my other clients. 

On the other hand they weren't 
easy to talk to. They'd take orders, 
sure. But ask them a question. Any 
question: 

"How long did the trip take 
you?" 

" 'How long' in your eloquent 
tongue indicates a frame of reference dealing with duration. I hesitate to discuss so complex a problem with one as learned as yourself. 
The velocities involved make it 
necessary to answer in relative 
terms. Our lowly and undesirable 
planet recedes from this beauteous 
system during part of its orbital 
period, advances toward it during 
part. Also we must take into consideration the direction and velocity 
of our star in reference to the cos


66 




 



mic expansion of this portion of the 
continuum. Had we come from 
Cygnus, say, or Bootes, the question could be answered somewhat 
more directly; for those bodies 
travel in a contiguous arc skewed 
from the ecliptic plane in such a 
way that — " 

Or a question like, "Is your government a democracy?" 

"A democracy is a rule of the 
people, according to your rich etymology. We could not, in our lowly tongue, have expressed it so 
succinctly and movingly. One must 
govern oneself, of course. The degree of governmental control on 
the individual must vary from individual to individual and in the 
individual from time to time. This 
is so evident to as comprehensive a 
mind as yours that I trust you forgive me my inanities. The same 
control applies, naturally, to individuals considered in the mass. 
When faced with a universal necessity, the tendency exists among 
civilized species to unite to fill the 
need. Therefore, when no such 
necessity exists, there is less reason 
for concerted effort. Since this 
applies to all species, it applies even 
to such as us. On the other hand — " 

See what I mean ? A little of that 
got old quickly with me. I was 
happy to keep my nose to my own 
grindstone. 

THE government gave me a 
month for the preparatory 
propaganda. Originally, the story 



was to break in two weeks, but I 
got down on my hands and knees 
and bawled that a publicity deadline required at least five times that. 
So they gave me a month. 

Explain that carefully, Alvarez. I 
want them to understand exactly 
what a job I faced. All those years 
of lurid magazine covers showing 
extremely nubile females being 
menaced in three distinct colors by 
assorted monstrosities; those horror 
movies, those invasion-from-outerspace novels, those Sunday Supplement fright-splashes — all those 
sturdy psychological ruts I had to 
retrack. Not to mention the shudders elicited by mention of 
"worms," the regulation distrust of 
even human "furriners," the superstitious dread of creatures who had 
no visible place to park a soul. 

Trowson helped me round up the 
men to write the scientific articles, 
and I dug up the boys who could 
pseudo them satisfactorily. Magazine mats were ripped apart to make 
way for yarns speculating gently 
on how far extraterrestrial races 
might have evolved beyond us, how 
much more ethical they might have 
become, how imaginary seven-headed creatures could still apply the 
Sermon on the Mount. Syndicated 
features popped up describing 
"Humble Creatures Who Create 
our Gardens," "Snail-Racing, the 
Spectacular New Spectator Sport," 
and so much stuff on "The Basic 
Unity of all Living Things" that I 
began to get uncomfortable at even 



BETELGEUSE BRIDGE 



67 



a vegetarian dinner. I remember 
hearing there was a perceptible 
boom in mineral waters and vitamin 
pills. . . . 

And all this, mind you, without 
a word of the real story breaking. 
A columnist did run a cute and 
cryptic item about someone having 
finally foufid meat on the flying 
saucers, but half an hour of earnest discussion in an abandoned 
fingerprint-file room prejudiced 
him against further comment along 
this line. 

THE video show was the biggest 
problem. I don't think I could 
have done it on time with anything 
less than the resources and influence of the United States government behind me. But a week before 
the official announcement, I had 
both the video show and the comic 
strip in production. 

I think fourteen — though maybe 
it was more — of the country's best 
comedy writers collaborated on the 
project, not to mention the horde 
of illustrators and university psychologists nrho combined to sweat 
out the delightful little drawings. 
We used the drawings as the basis 
for the puppets on the TV show 
and I don't think anything was 
ever so gimmicked up with Popular Appeal — and I do mean 
Popular — as "Andy and Dandy." 

Those two fictional snails crept 
into the heart of America like a 
virus infection: overnight, everybody was talking about their anthro


pomorphic antics, repeating their 
quotable running gags and adjuring 
each other not to miss the next 
show. ("You can't miss it, Steve; 
it's on every channel anyway. Right 
after supper.") I had the tie-ins, 
too: Andy and Dandy dolls for the 
girls, snail scooters for the boys, 
everything from pictures on cocktail glasses to kitchen decalcomanias. Of course, a lot of the tie-ins 
didn't come off the production line 
till after the Big Announcement. 

When we gave the handouts to 
the newspapers, we "suggested" 
what headlines to use. They had a 
choice of ten. Even the New York 
Times was forced to shriek "REAL 
ANDY AND DANDY BLOW IN 
FROM BETELGEUSE," and under that a four-column cut of 
blonde Baby Ann Joyce with the 
snails. 

Baby Ann had been flown out 
from Hollywood for the photograph. The cut showed her standing between the two aliens and 
clutching an eye-stalk of each in 
her trusting, chubby hands. 

The nicknames stuck. Those two 
slimy intellectuals from another 
star became even more important 
than the youthful evangelist who 
was currently being sued for bigamy. 

Andy and Dandy had a tickertape reception in New York. They 
obligingly laid a cornerstone for the 
University of Chicago's new library. They posed for the newsreels everywhere, surrounded by 



68 




 



Florida oranges, Idaho potatoes, 
Milwaukee beer. They were magnificently cooperative. 

F.OM time to time, I wondered 
what they thought of us. They 
had no facial expressions, which 
was scarcely odd since they had no 
faces. Their long eye-stalks swung 
this way and that as they rode down 
shrieking Broadway in the back 
seat of the Mayor's car; their gelatinous body-foot would heave 
periodically and the mouth under it 
make a smacking noise, but when 
the photographers suggested that 
they curl around the barely clad 
beauties, the time video rigged up 
a Malibu Beach show, Andy and 
Dandy wriggled over and complied 
without a word. Which is more 
than I can say for the barely clad 
beauties. 

And when the winning pitcher 
presented them with an autographed 
baseball at that year's World Series, 
they bowed gravely, their pink shelltops glistening in the sunlight, and 
said throatily into the battery of 
microphones: "We're the happiest 
fans in the universe!" 

The country went wild over 
them. 

"But we can't keep them here," 
Trowson predicted. "Did you read 
about the debate in the U. N. General Assembly yesterday? We were 
accused of making secret alliances 
with non-human aggressors against 
the best interests of our own species." 



I shrugged. "Well, let them go 
overseas. I don't think anyone else 
will be more successful extracting 
information from them than we 
were." 

Professor Trowson wriggled his 
short body up on a corner of his 
desk. He lifted a folderful of typewritten notes and grimaced as if his 
tongue were wrapped in wool. 

"Four months of careful questioning," he grumbled. "Four 
months of painstaking interrogation 
by trained sociologists using every 
free moment the aliens had, which 
admittedly wasn't much. Four 
months of organized investigation, 
of careful data-sifting." He dropped 
the folder disgustedly to the desk 
and some of the pages splashed 
out. "And we know more about 
the social structure of Atlantis than 
Betelgeuse IX." 

We were in the wing of the Pentagon assigned to what the brass 
hats, in their own cute way, had 
christened Project Encyclopedia. I 
strolled across the large, sunny 
office and glanced at the very latest 
organizational wall-chart. I pointed 
to a small rectangle labeled "Power 
Source Sub-Section" depending via 
a straight line from a larger rectangle marked "Alien Physical 
Science Inquiry Section." In the 
small rectangle, very finely printed, 
were the names of an army major, 
a WAC corporal, and Drs. Lopez, 
Vinthe and Mainzer. 

"How' re they doing?" I asked. 

"Not much better, I'm afraid." 



BETELGEUSE BRIDGE 



69 



Trowson turned away with a sigh 
from peering over my shoulder. "At 
least, I deduce that from the unhappy way Mainzer bubbles into his 
soup spoon at lunch. Conversation 
between sub-sections originating in 
different offices on the departmental 
level is officially discouraged, you 
know. But I remember Mainzer 
from the university cafeteria. He 
bubbled into his soup the very same 
way when he was stuck on his solar 
refraction engine." 

"mHINK Andy and Dandy are 
JL afraid we're too young to 
play with matches? Or maybe apelike creatures are too unpleasantlooking to be allowed to circulate 
in their refined and esthetic civilization ?" 

"I don't know. Dick." The prof 
ambled back to his desk and leafed 
irritably through his sociological 
notes. "If anything like that is true, 
why would they give us free run 
of their ship? Why would they 
reply so gravely and courteously to 
every question? If only their answers weren't so vague in our 
terms! But they are such complex 
and artistically minded creatures, so 
chockful of poetic sentiment and 
good manners that it's impossible 
to make mathematical or even verbal sense out of their vast and 
circumlocutory explanations. Sometimes, when I think of their highly 
polished manners and their seeming 
lack of interest in the structure of 
their society, when I put that to


gether with their spaceship which 
looks like one of those tiny jade 
carvings that took a lifetime to accomplish . . ." 

He trailed off and began riffling 
the pages like a Mississippi steamboat gambler going over somebody 
else's deck of cards. 

"Isn't it possible we just don't 
have enough stuff as yet to understand them?" 

"Yes. In fact, that's what we always come back to. Warbury 
points to the tremendous development in our language since the advent of technical vocabularies. He 
says that this process, just beginning with us, already affects our 
conceptual approach as well as our 
words. And, naturally, in a race so 
much further along — But if we 
could only find a science of theirs 
which bears a faint resemblance to 
one of ours!" 

I felt sorry for him, standing 
there blinking futilely out of gentle, 
academic eyes. 

"Cheer up, prof. Maybe by the 
time old Suckfoot and his pal come 
back from the Grand Tour, you'll 
have unsnarled a sophistry and we'll 
be off this 'Me, friend; you come 
from across sea in great bird with 
many wings' basis that we seemed 
to have wandered into." 

And there you are, Alvarez: a 
cheap advertising smallbrain like 
me, and I was that close. I should 
have said something then. Bet you 
wouldn't have nodded at me heavily 
and said, "I hope so, Dick. I des


70 




 



perately hope so." But, come to 
think of it, not only Trowson was 
trotting up that path. So was Warbury. So were Lopez, Vinthe and 
Mainzer. So was I, among others. 

I HAD a chance to relax when 
Andy and Dandy went abroad. 
My job wasn't exactly over, but the 
Public Relations end was meshing 
right along, with me needed only 
once in a while to give a supervisory spin. Chiefly, I maintained 
close contact with my opposite 
number in various other sovereign 
states, giving out with experienced 
advice on how to sell the Boys from 
Betelgeuse. They had to adjust it to 
their own mass phobias and popular myths; but they were a little 
happier about it than I had been, 
without any clear idea of what public behavior to expect of our visitors. 

Remember, when I'd started, I 
hadn't even been sure those snails 
were housebroken. 

I followed them in the newspapers. I pasted the pictures of the 
Mikado receiving them next to 
their nice comments on the Taj 
Mahal. They weren't nearly so nice 
to the Akhund of Swat; but, then, 
when you think of what the Akhund said about them — 

They tended to do that everywhere, giving just a little better 
than they got. For example, when 
they were presented with those 
newly created decorations in Red 
Square (Dandy got The Order of 



Extraterrestrial Friends of Soviet 
Labor, while, for some abstruse 
reason, The Order of Heroic Interstellar Champion of the Soviet People was conferred upon Andy), 
they came out with a long, ringing 
speech about the scientific validity 
of communist government. It made 
for cheering, flower-tossing crowds 
in the Ukraine and Poland, but a 
certain amount of restiveness in 
these United States. 

But before I had to run my staff 
into overtime hours, whipping up 
press releases which recapitulated 
the aliens' statement before the 
joint houses of Congress and their 
lovely, sentimental comments at 
Valley Forge, the aliens were in 
Berne, telling the Swiss that only 
free enterprise could have produced 
the yodel, the Incabloc escapement 
in watches, and such a superb .example of liberty; hadn't they had 
democracy long enough to have had 
it first, and wasn't it wonderful? 

By the time they reached Paris, 
I had the national affection pretty 
much under control again, although 
here and there a tabloid still muttered peevishly in its late city final. 
But, as always, Andy and Dandy 
put the clincher on. Even then I 
wondered whether they really liked 
DeRoges' latest abstraction for itself alone. 

But they bought the twisted 
sculpture, paying for it, since they 
had no cash of their own, with a 
thumb-sized gadget which actually 
melted marble to any degree of 



BETELGEUSE BRIDGE 



71 



pattern-delicacy the artist desired, 
merely by being touched to the appropriate surface. DeRoges threw 
away his chisels blissfully, but six 
of the finest minds in France retired to intensive nervous breakdowns after a week of trying to 
solve the tool's working principles. 
It went over big here: 

ANDY AND DANDY PAY 
AS THEY GO 

Betelgeuse Business Men 
Show Appreciation for 
Value Received 

This newspaper notes with 
pleasure the sound shopper's 
ethics behind the latest transaction of our distinguished 
guests from the elemental void. 
Understanding the inexorable 
law of supply and demand, 
these representatives of an advanced economic system refuse 
to succumb to the 'gimmies.' 
If certain other members of 
the human race were to examine carefully the true implications of . . . 

SO WHEN they returned to the 
United States after being presented at the British Court, they 
got juicy spreads in all the newspapers, a tug-whistle reception in 
New York harbor and the mayor's 
very chiefest deputy there on City 
Hall steps to receive them. 

And even though people were 
more or less accustomed to them 
now, they were somehow never 



shoved off page one. There was the 
time a certain furniture polish got 
a testimonial out of them in which 
the aliens announced that they'd 
had particularly happy and glossy 
results on their tiny shell toppers 
with the goo; and they used the 
large financial rewards of the testimonial to buy ten extremely rare 
orchids and have them sunk in plastic. And there was the time — 

I missed the television show on 
which it broke. I had gone to a 
sidestreet movie theater that night 
to see a revival of one of my favorite Chaplin pictures; and I'd never 
enjoyed the ostentatious greet-thegreat hysterics of Celebrity Salon 
anyway. I hadn't any idea of how 
long the m.c, Bill Bancroft, had 
waited to get Andy and Dandy on 
his program, and how much he 
was determined to make it count 
when the big night arrived. 

Reconstructed and stripped of 
meaningless effusion, it went something like this: 

Bancroft asked them if they 
weren't anxious to get home to the 
wife and kiddies. Andy explained 
patiently, for perhaps the thirtyfourth time, that, since they were 
hermaphrodites, they had no family 
in any humanly acceptable sense. 
Bancroft cut into the explanation 
to ask them what ties they did 
have. Chiefly the revitalizer, says 
Andy politely. 

Revitalizer? What's a revitalizer? 
Oh, a machine they have to expose 
themselves to every decade or so, 



72 




 



says Dandy. There's at least one 
revitalize! in every large city on 
their home planet. 

Bancroft makes a bad pun, waits 
for the uproarious audience to regain control, then asks: And this 
revitalizer — just what does it do? 
Andy goes into a long-winded explanation, the gist of which is that 
the revitalizers stir up cytoplasm in 
all animal cells and refresh them. 

I see, cracks Bancroft; the pause 
every decade that refreshes. And 
then, after being refreshed, you 
have what as a result? "Oh," muses 
Dandy, "you might say we have no 
fear of cancer or any degenerative 
disease. Besides that, by exposing 
ourselves to revitalizers at regular 
intervals throughout our lifetime 
and refreshing our body cells, we 
quintuple our life expectancy. We 
live five times longer than we 
should. That's about what the revitalizer does, you might say," says 
Dandy. Andy, after thinking a bit, 
agrees. "That's about it." 

Pandemonium, and not mild. 
Newspaper extras in all languages, 
including the Scandinavian. Lights 
burning late at night in the U. N. 
Headquarters with guards twenty 
deep around the site. 

When President of the Assembly 
Sadhu asked them why they'd never 
mentioned revitalizers before, they 
did the snail equivalent of shrugging and said the Betelgeuse IX 
equivalent of nobody ever asked 
them. 

President Sadhu cleared his 



throat, waved all complications 
aside with his long brown fingers 
and announced, "That is not important. Not now. We must have 
revitalizers." 

It seemed to take the aliens a 
while to understand that. When 
they finally became convinced that 
we, as a species, were utterly entranced with the prospect of two 
to four centuries of life instead of 
fifty or sixty years, they went into 
a huddle. 

BUT their race didn't make these 
machines for export, they explained regretfully. Just enough to 
service their population. And, while 
they could see as how we might 
like and must obviously deserve to 
have these gadgets, there was none 
to ferry back from Betelgeuse. 

Sadhu didn't even look around 
for advice. "What would your people want?" he asked. "What 
would they like in exchange for 
manufacturing these machines for 
us? We will pay almost any price 
within the power of this entire 
planet." A rumbling, eager "yes" 
in several languages rolled across 
the floor of the Assembly. 

Andy and Dandy couldn't think 
of a thing. Sadhu begged them to 
try. He personally escorted them to 
their spaceship, which was now 
parked in a restricted area in Central Park. "Good night, gentlemen," said President of the 
Assembly Sadhu. "Try— please try 
hard to think of an exchange." 



BETELGEUSE BRIDGE 



73 



They stayed inside their ship for 
almost six days while the world almost went insane with impatience. 
When I think of all the fingernails 
bitten that week by two billion people . . . 

"Imagine!" Trowson whispered 
to me. He was pacing the floor as 
if he fully intended to walk all the 
way to Betelgeuse. "We'd just be 
children on a quintupled life-scale, 
Dick. All my achievement and 
education, all yours, would be just 
the beginning! A man could learn 
five professions in such a life — and 
think what he could accomplish in 
one!" 

I nodded, a little numb. I was 
thinking of the books I could read, 
the books I might write, if the bulk 
of my life stretched ahead of me 
and the advertising profession was 
just a passing phase in the beginning of it. Then, again, somehow 
I'd never married, never had had 
a family. Not enough free time, I 
had felt. And now, at forty, I was 
too set in my ways. But a man can 
unset a lot in a century — 

In six days the aliens came out. 
With a statement of price. 

They believed they could persuade their people to manufacture 

a supply of revitalizers for us if 

An IF writ very large indeed. 

Their planet was woefully short 
of radioactive minerals, they explained apologetically. Barren 
worlds containing radium, uranium 
and thorium had been discovered 
and claimed by other races, but the 



folk of Betelgeuse IX were forbidden by their ethics to wage aggressive war for territorial purposes. 
We had plenty of radioactive ore, 
which we used chiefly for war and 
biological research. The former 
was patently undesirable and the 
latter would be rendered largely 
unnecessary by the revitalizers. 

So, in exchange, they wanted our 
radioactive elements. All of them, 
they stated humbly. 

ALL right, we were a little surprised, even stunned. But the 
protests never started to materialize. There was an overwhelming 
chorus of "sold!" from every quadrant of the globe. A couple of generals here, a few militaristic 
statesmen there managed to raise 
direly pointing forefingers before 
they were whisked out of position. 
A nuclear physicist or two howled 
about the future of sub-atomic research, but the peoples of the earth 
howled louder. 

"Research? How much research 
can you do in a lifetime of three 
hundred years?" 

Overnight, the United Nations 
became the central office of a planetwide mining concession. National 
boundaries were superseded by 
pitchblende deposits and swords 
were beaten into pickaxes. Practically anyone with a good, usable arm 
enlisted in the shovel brigades for 
two or more months out of the year. 
Camaraderie flew on the winds of 
the world. 



74 




 



Andy and Dandy politely offered 
to help. They marked out on detail 
contour maps the spots to be mined, 
and that included areas never suspected of radioactivity. They supplied us with fantastic but clear 
line-drawings of devices for extracting the stuff from the ores in which 
it assayed poorly, and taught us the 
exact use of these devices, if not 
their basic principle. 

They hadn't been joking. They 
wanted it all. 

Then, when everything was running smoothly, they buzzed off for 
Betelgeuse to handle their part of 
the bargain. 

THOSE two years were the most 
exhilarating of my life. 
And I'd say everyone feels the 
same, don't they, Alvarez? The 
knowledge that the world was 
working together, cheerfully, happily, for life itself. I put my year in 
at The Great Slave Lake and I 
don't think anyone of my age and 
weight lifted more pitchblende. 

Andy and Dandy came back in 
two huge ships, manned by weird 
snail-like robots. The robots did 
everything, while Andy and Dandy 
went on being lionized. From the 
two ships, almost covering the sky, 
the robots ferried back and forth in 
strange, spiral aircraft, bringing revitalizes down, carrying refined 
radioactive elements aloft. No one 
paid the slightest attention to their 
methods of instantaneous extraction 
from large quantities of ore: we 



were interested in just one throbbing thought — the revitalizers. 

They worked. And that, so far as 
most of us were concerned, was 
that. 

The revitalizers worked. Cancer 
disappeared; heart disease and kidney disease immediately arrested. 
Insects which were introduced into 
the square one-story lab structures 
lived for a year instead of a few 
months. And humans — doctors 
shook their heads in wonder over 
people who had gone through. 

All over the planet, near every 
major city, the long, patient, slowly moving lines stood outside the 
revitalizers, which were rapidly 
becoming something else. 

"Temples!" shouted Mainzer. 
"They look on them as temples. 
A scientist investigating their operation is treated like a dangerous 
lunatic in a nursery by the attendants. Not that a man can find a 
clue in those ridiculously small motors. I no longer ask what their 
power source can be — instead, I ask 
if they have a power source at all!" 

"The revitalizers are very precious now, in the beginning," Trowson soothed him. "After a while, 
the novelty will wear off and you'll 
be able to investigate at your 
leisure. Could it be solar power?" 

"No!" Mainzer shook his huge 
head positively. "Not solar power 
— solar power I am sure I could 
recognize. As I am sure that the 
power supply of their ships and 
whatever runs these — these revital


BETELGEUSE BRIDGE 



75 



izers are two entirely separate 
things. On the ships I have given 
up. But the revitalizers I believe I 
could solve. If only they would let 
me examine them. Fools! So terribly afraid I might damage one, 
and they would have to travel to 
another city for their elixir!" 

We patted his shoulder, but we 
weren't really interested. Andy and 
Dandy left that week, after wishing 
us well in their own courteous and 
complex fashion. Whole population 
groups blew kisses at their mineralladen ships. 

Six months after they left, the 
revitalizers stopped. 

"AMI CERTAIN? Trowson 
JiX. snorted at my dismayed face. 
"One set of statistics proves it: 
look at your death rate. It's back to 
pre-Betelgeuse normal. Or ask any 
doctor. Any doctor who can forget 
his U. N. security oath, that is. 



There'll be really wild riots when 
the news breaks, Dick." 

"But why?" I asked him. "Did 
we do something wrong?" 

He started a laugh that ended 
with his teeth clicking frightenedly 
together. He rose and walked to 
the window, staring out into the 
star-diseased sky. "We did something wrong, all right. We trusted. 
We made the same mistake all natives have made when they met a 
superior civilization. Mainzer and 
Lopez have taken one of the revitalizer engine units apart. There 
was just a trace of it left, but this 
time they found the power source. 
Dick, my boy, the revitalizers were 
run on the fuel' of completely pure 
radioactive elements!" 

I needed a few moments to file 
that properly. Then I sat down in 
the easy chair very, very carefully. 
I made some hoarse, improbable 
sounds before croaking: "Prof, do 



76 




 



BETELGEUSE BRIDGE 77 



you mean they wanted that stuff 
for themselves, for their own revitalizers? That everything they did 
on this planet was carefully 
planned so that they could con us 
with a maximum of friendliness all 
around ? It doesn't seem — it just 
can't — why, with their superior 
science, they could have conquered 
us if they'd cared to. They could 
have — " 

"No, they couldn't have," Trowson whipped out. He turned to face 
me and flung his arms across each 
other. "They're a decadent, dying 
race; they wouldn't have attempted 
to concjuer us. Not because of their 
ethics — this huge, horrible swindle 
serves to illustrate that aspect of 
them — but because they haven't the 
energy, the concentration, the interest. Andy and Dandy are probably representative of the few remaining who have barely enough 
git-up-and-go to trick backward 
peoples out of the all-important, 
life-sustaining revitalizer fuel." 

The implications were just beginning to soak in my cortex. Me, 
the guy who did the most complete 
and colossal public relations job of 
all time — I could just see what my 
relations with the public would be 
like if I was ever connected with 
this shambles. 

"And without atomic power, 
prof, we won't have space travel!" 

He gestured bitterly. "Oh, we've 
been taken, Dick; the whole human 
race has been had. I know what 
you're going through, but think of 



me! I'm the failure, the man responsible. I'm supposed to be a' 
sociologist! How could I have 
missed? Hon? It was all there: the 
lack of interest in their own culture, the overintellectualization of 
esthetics, the involved methods of 
thought and expression, the exag- . 
gerated etiquette, even the very first 
thing of theirs we saw — their ship 
— was too heavily stylized and intricately designed for a young, 
thrusting civilization. 

"They had to be decadent; every 
sign pointed to that conclusion. 
And, of course, the fact that they 
resort to the methods of fueling 
their revitalizers that we've experienced — when if we had their 
science, what might we not do, 
what substitutes might we not develop! No wonder they couldn't 
explain their science to us; I doubt 
if they understand it fully themselves. They are the profligate, inadequate and sneak-thief heirs of 
what was once a soaring race!" 

I WAS following my own unhappy images. "And we're still 
hicks. Hicks who've been sold the 
equivalent of the Brooklyn Bridge 
by some dressed-up sharpies from 
Betelgeu.se." 

Trowson nodded. "Or a bunch 
of poor natives who have sold their 
island home to a group of European 
explorers for a handful of brightly 
colored glass beads." 

But of course we were both 
wrong, Alvarez. Neither Trowson 



78 




 



nor I had figured on Mainzer or 
Lopez or the others. Like Mainzer 
said, a few years earlier and we 
would have been licked. But Man 
had entered the atomic age sometime before 1945 and people like 
Mainzer and Vinthe had done nuclear research back in the days when 
radioactive elements abounded on 
Earth. We had that and we had 
such tools as the cyclotron, the betatron. And, if our present company 
will pardon the expression, Alvarez, we are a young and vigorous 
race. 

All we had to do was the necessary research. 

The research was • done. With a 
truly effective world government, 
with a population not only interested in the problem, but recently 
experienced in working together — 
and with the grim incentive we 
had, Alvarez — the problem, as you 
know, was solved. 

We developed artificial radioactives and refueled the revitalizers. 
We developed atomic fuels out of 
the artificial radioactives and we got 
space travel. We did it comparatively fast, and we weren't inter


ested in a ship that just went to the 
Moon or Mars. We wanted a star 
ship. And we wanted it so bad, so 
fast, that we have it now, too. 

Here we are. Explain the situation to them, Alvarez, just the way 
I told it to you, but with all the 
knee-bending and gobbledegook 
that a transplanted Brazilian with 
twelve years Oriental trading experience can put into it. You're the 
man to do it — I can't talk like that. 
It's the only language those decadent slugs understand, so it's the 
only way we can talk to them. So 
talk to them, these slimy snails, 
these oysters on the quarter shell, 
these smart-alecky slugs. Don't forget to mention to them that the 
supply of radioactives they got from 
us won't last forever. Get that down 
in fine detail. 

Then stress the fact that we've 
got artificial radioactives, and that 
they've got some things we know 
we want and lots of other things we 
mean to find out about. 

Tell them, Alvarez, that we've 
come to collect tolls on that Brooklyn Bridge they sold us. 