No Button Shows In Ear! 




"My hearing loss used to make me terribly unhappy. 
Then one day, by a lucky accident, I discovered how 
to hear again from a little book. Now, thanks to a 
tiny electronic miracle, I hear with startling clarity! 
And it's so amazingly light, I hardly know I wear 
it. And thanks to a transparent, almost invisible device, no button shows in my ear. I urge everyone 
with a hearing loss to get the book that told me 
how to HEAR AGAIN. It's FREE!" 

Mail coupon for your FREE copy of this valuable 
book. Do it today! 



Symphonette 
MONO-PAC 
One-Unit Hearing Aid 



Send For 

FREE 

BOOK 




BELTONE 
HEARING AID 
COMPANY 

Dept. PO-5 
1450 West 19th Street 
Chicago 8, III. 




Beltone Hearing Aid Company, Dept. PO-5 
1450 West 19th Street, Chicago 8, III. 

Please send me, without obligation, your valuable FREE 
book that tells how deaf can HEAR AGAIN without a 
button showing in the ear. 



Name . . . 
Address. 
Town . . . 



.State. 




NEW TEN-WADE PACKA6£ HAS COMPARTMENT FOR USED BLADES 



Only Lee 

Overalls 
these features 




Tmfr^ 



These are just a few of the 
features which make LEE 
Work Clothes your best buy 
for better fit and appearance 
... greater comfort . . . longer 
wear. 

Next time, buy LEE. Every 
LEE garment is GUARANTEED to look better, fit 
better and wear longer than 
any other you have ever 
worn, or you can have a new 
pair free or your money back. 

MORE MEN WEAR WORK 
CLOTHES BEARING A LEE 
LABEL THAN ANY OTHER BRAND 

UNION-MADE 

Sanforized for Permanent Fit 

" ■ ' ■ " i 

Buy LEE Work Clothes at 

Leading Stores Coast-to-Coast 



There's a LEB 
for Every Job 

Overalls 
Union-Alls 

Matched Shirts and Pants 
Dungarees 

Riders (Cowboy Pants) 
Overall Jackets 




COPYRIGHT 1950 
THE Hi D. LEE CO., INC. 



_" _ — M m mm a K«ns« City, Mo.. Minneapolis, Minn. • Trenton,N.J. 

H.D.LEE COmrANY, lnc« *.« . 



WORLD'S LARGEST ^ 




25* 

~T//£B/G£OOK0FSC/£NC£f/Cr/ON 
VOL. 6 MAY, 1950 NO. 4 

A POWERFUL NOVEL 

THE DEATH CRYSTAL George O. Smith 14 

One by one, forty of Earth's greatest scientists vanished into that world beyond the 
universe— until one man carried humanity's last hope through the death crystal! 

TWO NOVELETTES OF THE FUTURE 

THE CALL FROM BEYOND . . .Clifford D. Simak 56 

Alone, accursed, he set out on the long, dark voyage to the forbidden gateway to worlds 
beyond life itself! , , , 

THE VANISHERS Arthur J. Burks 104 

Trapped, facing an incredible shadow army, whose lightest touch meant instant 
dissolution, the last fighters of invaded Earth made their bitter choice! 

SHORT STORIES 

BY THE STARS FORGOT John D. MaeDonald 36 

Lonely, bewildered, lost in the maelstrom of the ages, he roamed — to be cruelly shared 
by worlds other than his own — and yet — by the stars forgot! 

THE LONG WAY Francis L. Ashton 42 

• Three thousand years after takeoff, space before the Calypso's nose was blank and 
bare . . . behind, the doomed galaxies dissolved in titanic whirlpools of star dust . . . 
.jf and still the incredible ship forged on! 

GIFT OF DARKNESS Peter Reed 76 

Too small for this Earth, Crispin Tyler had but one thing to trade for his soul in the . 
j ^ deathless, angry wastes of space — and that was his gift of darkness! 

SLAVE OF ETERNITY Roger Dee 84 

An eye for an eye, a tooth for a tooth . . . these were the familiar laws of man — 
4 Far more fiendish was Heric's punishment — eternal life for the death he'd taken! 

HOP O' MY THUMB William Morrison 94 

Everson knew that the only way to keep his world from slavery was to link it to the 
invaders — with a cosmic ball and chain! 

DEPARTMENTS AND FEATURES 

MISSIVES AND MISSILES .The Readers 6 

RANDOM'S CORNER Conducted fey James V. Taurasi 41 

THE SCIENCE FICTIONEER . Conducted by Frederik Poftl 90 

Cover, "War of the Worlds", by Lawrence 
^ Illustrations by Calle, Fin fay, Lawrence, Leydenfrost and Van Dongen 

Any resemblance between any character appearing in fictional matter, and any person, 
living or dead, is entirely coincidental and unintentional. 

Published bi-monthly by Fictioneers, Inc., a subsidiary of Popular Publications, Inc., at 1125 E. Vaile Aye.. Kokemo, 
Indiana. Editorial and Executive Offices, 205 East 42nd Street, New York 17, N. Y. Henry Steeger, President and Secretary. 
Harold S, Goldsmith, Vice-President and Treasurer. Entered as second-class matter at the Post Office at Kokomo, 
Indiana. Copyright, 1950, by Fictioneers, Inc. This issue is published simultaneously in the Dominion of Canada. 
Copyright under International Copyright Convention and Pan-American Copyright Conventions. All rights-- reserved, 
including the right of reproduction, in whole or in part, in any form. Single copy, 25o. Annual subscription for 
U. S. A., Its possessions and Canada, $1.50; other countries, 38c additional. All correspondence relating to this publication 
should be addressed to 1125 E. Vaile Ave., Kobomo, Indiana, or 205 East 42nd Street, New York 17/ N. Y. When 
submitting manuscripts, enclose stamped, self-addressed envelope for their return if found unavailable. The publishers will 
exercise care in the handling oaf unsolicited manuscripts, but assume go responsibility for their return. Printed in V. S. A. 



WHAT 



EVERY 



AUTO 



MECHANIC WANTS TO KNOW 

This Bfg Practical Book gives full Information with working diagrams covering 
the principles, construction, ignition, 
service and repair of modern cars, 
trucks and buses. 

Diesel Engines, Hydramatic ana 
Fluid Drives Fully Explained. 
A complete Guide of 1800 pages, with 
over 1500 illustrations showing inside 
views of the working parts, with instructions for service jobs. 

IT PAYS TO KNOW 

How to fit pistons-How to locate engine 
knocks-How to fit connecting rod bearings 
—How to service main' bearings-How to recondition valves-How to time valves-How ta> 
adjust fan belts-How to adjust carburetors ana 
ehoket-How to rebuild a clutch — 
How to service automatic transmissions-How to service brakes-How 
to adjust steering gear-How to 
cope with ignition troubles-How to 
service distributors— How to time Ignition-How to "tune up" an engine. 
$ M COMPLETE • PAY $1 A MO. 

MM. TO GET THIS 'ASSISTANCE FOR 
mWt YOURSELF SIMPLY FILL IN AND 
■ MAIL COUPON TODAY. 

Step <* your own skill with the facts and Spares of your trade. Andels 
Mechanics Guides contain Practical Inside Trade Information In a 
handy form. Fully illustrated and Easy to Underatand. Hiphly 'Endorsed. Check the book you want for 7 DAYS FREE KXAMINAT1C 
Send No Money, Nothing to pay Postman. 





WON. 



I CUT HERE mmmmmmwmvm' 



a. MAIL ORDER 



vn 



Check 
NOW! 

Ton Can 
Look Over 
AnyGafoto, 
In Your 
Own Home 

Start th» 
Easy Pay 
mmlt If 

HI AIL 

TMS 

TODAY! 



AUDEL, Publishers. 49 W. 23 St, "fg; ™?» 

Please send me postpaid for FREE EXAMINATION books 
marked 00 below. II I decide to keep them I agree to 
mall SI hi 7 Days on each book or set ordered and 
further mat) $1 monthly on each book or set until I 
have paid price, otherwise I will return them. 

AUTO MECHANICS GUIDE, 1800 pages ... $4 

DIESEL ENGINE MANUAL, 400 Pages .... 2 

WELDERS GUIDE, 400 Pages I 

MACHINISTS Handy Book, 1600 Pages ... 4 

POWER PLANT ENGINEERS Guide, 1500 Pages. 4 

ENGINEERS & Fl REMANS EXAMS, 528 Pages. 1 

PUMPS, Hydraulics & Air Compressors, 1658 Pgs. 4 

MARINE ENGINEERS Handy Book, 1280 Pages 4 

ENGINEERS & Mechanics Guides (3 Book Set). 12 

Answers on Practical ENGINEERING, 254 Pages I 

ELECTRIC WIRING DIAGRAMS, 210 Pages . . I 

ELECTRICIANS EXAMINATIONS, 250 Pages. I 

ELECTRICAL DICTIONARY, 9000 Terms ... 2 

ELECTRIC MOTOR GUIDE, 1000 Pages .... 4 

HANDY BOOK OF ELECTRICITY, 1440 Pages 4 

ELECTRICAL POWER CALCULATIONS, 425 Pgs. 2 

RADIOMANS GUIDE, 975 Pages 4 

ELECTRONIC DEVICES. 216 Pages . ..... 2 

ELECTRIC LIBRARY.7000 Pages(12 Book Set). 18 
vols.l,ll,lll,IV,v,VI,vll,vlll,rx,X,XI,XII«1.50Ea. 

OIL BURNER GUIDE, 384 Pages ; 1 

HOUSE HEATING GUIDE, 1000 Pages .... 4 

CARPENTERS & Builders Guides (4 Book Set). 6 

PLUMBERS & Steamfitters Guides (4 Book Set). 6 

MASONS & Builders Guides (4 Book Set) . . . 6 

BLUE PRINT READING. 416 Pages ..... 2 

PAINTERS & DECORATORS MANUAL, 450 Pgs. 2 

GARDENERS & GROWERS Guides (4 Book Set). 6 

REFRIGERATION & Air Conditioning, 1280 Pgs. 4 

SHEET METAL WORKERS Handy Book, 388 Pgs. 1 

SHEET METAL PATTERN LAYOUTS, 1100 Pgs. 4 

AIRCRAFT WORKER, 240 Pages 1 

MECHANICAL DRAWING GUIDE, 160 Pages. 1 

MECHANICAL DRAWING & DESIGN, 480 Pgs. 2 

MATHEMATICS & CALCULATIONS, 700 Pgs.. 2 

MECHANICAL Dictionary, 968 Pages 4 

MILLWRIGHTS & Mechanics Guide, 1200 Pgs. 4 



Name .;.......* 

Address • 

Oooupatlen » 

P.B.R. 

Employed by .................. 

6 . 




MISSIVES 
and MISSILES 

ONE THING about M & M has 
been bothering us : the conspicuous absence of the red-hot mathand-physics boys. We needn't have bothered; "Outpost Infinity" and "Beyond 
All Weapons" in the January issue combined to bring them out of hiding, and 
you'll find the following columns liberally 
sprinkled with square roots, subscripts, 
superscripts and printers' curses. 

Dear Editor — 

Taking pen in hand — I realize that this 
looks very much like a typed letter ; it takes 
a great deal of practice along with native 
genius — I sit me down to dash off a column 
or two of deathless prose anent the January 
Super Science Stories. But let us not be so 
formal; we have known each other for^a 
long time now. May I call you Super? 
Thank you. And you may call me Abdul 
Alhazred> although that is not my name. 

Y'know, there once was a time, in my 
wild and wanton youth, when I faithfully 
read fourteen different stfantasy magazines. 
Them days is gone forever; I do well now 
to sneak in two or three a month. But I've 
kept up with SSS — you've got a diversity 
I like a good deal, and your fiction standards have been generally rewarding. (Okay 
Father Time, come off your lofty pedestal 
and get to the stories . . .) 

There's something of a tussle for first 
place this trip, between Leinster and Loomis, 
I think mebbe Leinster's "The Fear Planet" 
has a slight edge, An alien treated with 
compassion in science fiction — what sort of 
heresy is this? Well done. "The Long 
Dawn," by Loomis, taTces a strong second. 
Rather implausible, perhaps, but it gets a 
fine mood. 

Raymond F. Jones' "Outpost Infinity" ' ( Continued on page 8) 




mom says there's 
going to be a TELEV&f 0N set in our 




HE and Pop wanted television. But Mom said they 
simply had to have a new 
refrigerator .Then they found 
an easy way to get both. 

They bought a modern 
air-conditioned ICE refrigerator and got the television 
set too with the money they 
saved. You can do the same. 



You, too, can have a beautiful 
big new refrigerator and have 
money left over to buy new 
furniture— or new clothes— 
or an electric washer. 

And with a modern airconditioned ICE refrigerator you'll enjoy the very 
finest food protection. See 
your Ice Company today. 




ECONOMICAL TO USE 




"Money Saving Tips"— a 
valuable 24 - page marketing guide. Mail a post card 
now to National Association 
©S Ice Industries, Dept.PM, 
1706 L Street, N. W.~ 
Washington 6, D. C. 




1850 — ONE HUNDRED YEARS OF ICE PROGRESS — 19SO 




You Can't Beat 




for Quality Fit! 



# We would like to introduce another Carhartt innovation — Pants and 
Shirts-fo-Match for warm weather 
wear. Attractively tailored. Natty in 
appearance, sanforized pro-shrunk 
and available in a choice selection of 
Chino Cloth, Sun Tan. Spruce Green 
Herringbone and Silver — alt fast 
colors.You'll like 'em.. .just as-millions 
of other men have enjoyed the qualify 
fit, roominess, long wear and genuine 
economy built into Carhartt's champion line of work clothes and overalls. 
Ask for Carhartt's — and be comfortable on the job. 

CARHARTT OVERALL CO. 
Established 1889 
Detroit, Mich. Dallas> Tex. 

Atlanta, Ga. Irvine, Ky. 





| FINANCING I JfSk I PROFITS! 

J TAXES | 




Become an 



nctouiunnT
Expert bookkeeper— >C. P. A. 

The demand for skilled accountants — men who really 
know their business— -is increasing. National and state 
"legislation is requiring of business much more m the 
way of Auditing, Cost Accounting, Business Law, 
Organization, Management, Finance. Men who prove 
their' qualifications in this important field are promoted to responsible executive positions. 

Free Book— "Accountancy, the Profession that Pays™ 
Knowledge of bookkeeping unnecessary. We train you 
from ground up,, or according to your individual 
needs. Low cost: easy terms. 

Send name and address on the lines below for free 
48-page book describing the LaSalle accountancy 
training and the opportunities in this highly profitable 
field. 

I1CJIIE EXTENSION UNIVERSITY 
LftMUX A GtWteifUUtdeHai 9mMutio*l 
417 S. Dearborn St., Dept. 5334-H, Chicago 5, III. 



Address. 
City.... 



.Zone. . . .State. it:, ~ 



SUPER SCIENCE STORIES 



( Continued from page 6) 
was good, sound science fiction, although 
the characters seemed a shade too much like 
their mathematical formulae. Give it third 
place. Right behind it, and in many ways 
a better story, we find Robert Moore Williams' "The Final Frontier." I like the idea 
here, and Williams is a talented writer, 
but the yarn does not have the impact of 
some of his work. Tis good, however, for 
all of that. Hubbard, Cummings, and Farrell finish in that order. Hubbard couldn't 
write a poor story if he tried, but "Beyond 
All Weapons" needed a little further development ; it seemed cramped. Cummings has 
ability, but his infinite variations on "The 
Girl in the Golden Atom" can hardly evoke : 
ecstatic screams of ultimate joy at this late 
date. "Spin, Devil !" concerned itself with 
space pirates, and so had three strikes and 
a bought umpire against it from the start. 

The other day, when I was interviewing 
Dr. E. P. Schoch, a distinguished chemical 
engineer, for the university paper, he made 
an interesting remark to me. "A man can 
no lonaer go west to seek his fortune," he 
said. "The only frontier left to him is the 
human mind." There is a great deal of 
truth in what he said, and one cannot help 
but wonder at the lack of development of 
this theme in science fiction. When the mind 
has figured to any extent in a story, it usually concerns itself with some form of psychotic behavior or with dubious extensions 
of Dr. Rhine's experiments at Duke University. The old bean offers material for 
better plots, in mv opinion. (Amen. — Ed.) 

Back to SSS, the artwork continues 
to be superior. Why not try Bok on the 
cover? Mr. Pohl's book reviews are a 
great relief from the meaningless chorus 
of superlatives that too often pass for 
critical comment in stfantasy reviews. 
Since he is not restricting himself to the 
fan presses, however, I wonder why he has 
overlooked Robert Graves' novel, "Watch 
the Northwind Rise," which was published 
bv Creative Age in 1949, To any admirer of 
Graves' noetrv, or of his splendid historical 
novels ("I, Claudius." et al), it is an enthralling experience in good reading. To 
anv science fiction enthusiast, whether or 
nr>t he is familiar, with Graves, it is a 
co'-kin<T rood story. 

"Missives and Missiles" was good, per . 
usual. I imagine that old-timer Neil R. 
Jones was tickled to find himself described ; 
as "promising." Lee Gann has good judg- : 
ment. though — he knows a good writer 
when he sees one. Know who had the best 
letter? That's right — Larry Shaw,; per, 
usual. With the Blank Mystery in his. 
capable hands, the universe is safe. He 
has saved the galaxy from annihilation ! 

Sincerely, , 3 

Chad Oliver 
Harper Star Route 
Kerrville, Texas 
(Continued on page 10) 



8 



ICS. STUDENT JUDGED 
BEST APPRENTICE 
IN THE NATION 



Ex-G.I. Took Course fit 
Electrical Engineering 

I. C. S. Training proves its worth. Recently, 
Robert M. Hutchison of Evansville, Ind., 
was picked as "the best electrical apprentice in the nation." He had studied Electrical Engineering with the International 
Correspondence Schools. 

The award was made by the National 
Electrical Contractors Association. Hundreds of apprentices from every section of 
the country figured in the competition. 

The same training that brought "Bob" 
Hutchison national recognition is available 




"Here's why I consider I. C. S. 

Courses exceptional: 

1 I.C.S. texts are easy to understand; 
explanations are very clear. 

2 The student determines his own progress; gets a real sense of achievement. 

3 Textbooks and lesson material make a 
valuable set of reference books." 

ROBERT M. HUTCHISON 



to you. If you want the security and rewards 
that come with sound, practical training, 
mark and mail the coupon today; Find out 
what I.C.S. can do for you. 




Without cost or obligation, pleas* send m 

Air Conditioning and 
Plumbing Court** 

D Air Conditioning 

D Heating D Plumbing 

□ Refrigeration D Steam Fitting 
Chemical Court** 

D Chemical Engineering 
D Chemistry, Analytical 
D Chemistry, Industrial 

□ Chemistry, Mfg. Iron & Steel 

□ Petroleum Refining □ Plastics 
O Pulp and Paper Making 

Civil Engineering, Architectural and Mining Courses 

D Architecture 

O Architectural Drafting 

□ Bridge arid Building Foreman 

□ Building Estimating 

□ Civil Engineering 

□ Coal Mining 

D Contracting and Building 
O Highway Engineering 
D Lumber Dealer 

□ Reading Structural Blueprints 

□ Sanitary Engineering 

□ Structural Drafting 

Nxm* u 



BOX 3280-C, SCR ANTON 9, PENNA. 

i full particulars about the course BEFORE which I have marked X: 



□ Structural Engineering 

□ Surveying and Mapping 
Communications Courses 

□ Electronics 

□ Practical Telephony 

□ Radio, .General 

□ Radio Servicing 



D Telegraph Engineering 
Electrical Course* 

D Electrical Drafting 
D Electrical Engineering 
D Electric Light and Power 
D Lighting Technician 
D Practical Electrician 

I nterna I Com bustlon 
Engines Courses 



□ Industrial Metallurgy 
O Machine Shop D Msch. Drafting 

□ Mechanical Engineering 
O Mold-Loft Work 

□ Pattern making— Wood, MatsJ 
□ Radio Operating D Reading Shop Blueprints 

D Television D Sheet-Metal Drafting 



□ Sheet-Metal Worker 
D Ship Drafting D Ship Filling 

□ Tool Designing □ Toolmaking 

□ Welding Engineering 

□ Welding-Gas and Electric 
Railroad Courses 

□ Air Brake □ Car Inspector 

□ Diesel Locomotive 

□ Locomotive Engineer 



□ Auto technician D Aviation □ Locomotive Fireman 
O Diesel- Electric □ Locomotive Machinist 

□ Diesel Engines □ Gas Engines □ Railroad Section Foreman 
Mechanical Courses □ Steam-Diesel Loco. Eng. 

□ Aeronautical Engineer's, Jr. Stationary Enej'r'g Courses 

□ Aircraft Drafting □ Flight Engineer □ Boilermaking 

D Forging ' D Foundry Work □ Combustion Engineering 

□ Heat Treatment of Metals □ Engine Running 

□ Industrial Engineering . D Marine Engineering 

□ Industrial Instrumentation □ Power Plant Eng'r'g □ Steam Engr. 



Textile Course* 

□ Cotton Manufacturing 

□ Loom Fixing □ Rayon Weevfif 
D Textile Designing 

□ Woolen Manufacturing 

Business and 
Academic Course* 

□ Accounting □ Advertising 
D App. Psychology D Bookkeeping 

□ Business Administration 

□ Bus. Correspondence □ Bus. Law 

□ Certified Public Accounting 

□ Commercial □ Commercial Art 

□ Cost Accounting 

□ Federal Tax □ First Year College 
D Foremanship □ French 

□ Good Engliafc □ High. School 

□ Higher Matjfematics □ Illustration 

□ Industrial Supervision 

□ Motor Traffic O Postal Civil Service 

□ Retailing □ Retail Bus. Management 

□ Salesmanship □ Secretarial 

□ Sign Lettering 

D Spanish D Stenography 

O Traffic Management 



_Age_ 



City 

Present Position— 



-Working Hours


-Employed by_ 



Length of Service in 
World War Il_ 



Enrollment under G.I. Bill approved for World War II Veterans. Special tuition rates to members of the Armed Forces. 
_ Canadian residents send coupon to International Correspondence Schools Canadian, Ltd., Montreal, Canada. 



10 



SUPER SCIENCE STORIES 



(Continued from page 8) 
Dear Ed: 

At last I am moved to sit down to my 
typer and send you-all Congrats for a really wonderful story, one that I hope will 
be soon anthologized, I am referring, of 
course, to OUTPOST INFINITY. There 
you have gotten hold of a better novel than 
I ever thought would appear in SSS, or any 
other mag, for that matter. What a yarn I 
I, and most fans I know, have been longing 
for a new idea in an stf tale, beyond the 
old hacked-up ones of time-travel, atomic 
power, space-travel, etc. And at last it's 
here. I would wager that in a few months 
all the mags will be carrying stories about 
the infinite, transfinite, etc. But good old 
SSS has had the signal honor of printing 
the first . . . (I think). I think Mr. Jones 
got his idea from reading Gamow's book, 
1, 2, 3, Infinity, for some of the explanation of the theory is clearly taken almost 
exactly from a passage in that book. 

Next I suppose I would rate THE LONG 
DAWN. Then come THE FINAL 
FRONTIER, carrying a nice mood of mystery, SPIN DEVIL, though I think the 
science is faulty, THE FEAR PLANET, 
and now, BEYOND ALL WEAPONS. 
Here I must point out a very serious mistake in the author's scientific thinking. In 
the story Guide leads the party to Alpha 
Centaury the objective time for the journey being six thousand years and the subjective time nine days. What a fallacy! 
According to Einstein, the subjective time 
in relation to the objective time is given 
by multiplying the objective time by a 

factor of VI — v a , . „. , . 

-„• , v being the actual 

velocity and c the speed of light. So, calculating it out, v is .0017 the speed of light, 
or v/c is .0017. Ergo v squared/c squared 
equals (.0017) squared or .0000289. 1 minus 
.000028,9 equals .9999711; the square root 



of this is .999 to three places, and multiplied by 6000 gives 5999.98 approx., which 
is the subjective time it would haye taken, 
that is the time for the people in the spaceship was almost as great as the time that 
went by on Earth. Learn your Fitzgerald 
effect equations, Mr. Hubbard. Otherwise 
it was a good story. But that sure was a 
glaring mistake, and kind of spoiled the 
tale. And for last place comes A FRAGMENT OF DIAMOND QUARTZ, which 
left me cold. 

So much for the stories. As to the Dept's, 
I was fired by the letter from that crackpot, Larry Shaw, in regard to the "Blank 
Mystery". Drivel, balderdash, bunk, ballyhoo, etc. My dear Larry, even though you 
are in fun, a lot of ignorant or gullible 
people might take you seriously. Enough 
of this clowning. The Shaver Mystery is 
growing a beard, let it rest in peace. As a 
matter of fact, why don't you stop writing 
such lunatic letters to the mag and settle 
down? Every ish a new mad missive from 
ye Shaw, stating that Deros exist or that 
science-fiction is no good (by innuendo or 
inference, sometimes) or making other 
wild assertions. And now he denies himself. More damn fun. My serious thoughts 
on the "Blank" mystery are . . . phooey. 
Go on, say I'm a dero and just writing this 
to allay people's suspicions and lull them 
into a false sense of security. Deros ! Bah 1 
However, do go into detail, Mr. Shaw. I'd 
love to hear what you have to say, and 
if you get too close to the truth will silence 
you with a flug-ray. 

Yours in lunacy (heh-heh-heh) 
Bill Venable 
32 Park PI. 
R. D.4 

Pittsburgh 9, Pa. 

Dear Editor: 

Well, whattaya know I There actually is 
a Larry Shaw. And here I thought he was 
just a figment of editorial imagination. So 
I'm convinced that one Larry Shaw exists. 
But now he claims to be a split personality. 
Pardon me, Mr. Shaw, but your schizophrenia is showing. Cute little shaver, too. 
Larry, we know Joe Kennedy made fan history by turning up in two different forms 
but he had help. You think you can repeat 
the process all by yourself? You've been 
reading too much science fiction. And you 
know what that does to the brain. Some 
even stoop to writing letters to the editor. 

Looking at the contents page I see no 
MacDonald, Temple, or Brown. These supplied the tone for your maganize in the 
past so I was slightly wary but found 
your story average slightly higher than 
usual despite a couple of duds. 

The cream of the crop this time were the 
two novels. Loomis' story was fascinating, 
but too short to be wholly satisfactory, The 
story that made this issue was "Outpost 

(Continued on page 12) 



OPINION TALLY 

January, 1950 



1 [Beyond All Weapons 3.2 

(The Long Dawn. §,2 

2. Outpost Infinity 4.0 

3. The Fear Planet .4.1 

4. Spin, Devil! 5.4 

5. The Final Frontier 5.7 

6. A Fragment of Diamond 

Quartz 6.4 

7. : Missives & Missiles 6.5 

8. The Science Fictioneer 7.6 

9. Fandom's Corner 8.0 



Repower your 
FORD Car or Truck 
with an 



"PHI U WI fjySSN 



Reconditioned 
Ford Engine 




RECONDITIONED 

* Genuine Ford Parts 

reconditioned. ctory s , a nd
* Bum and tested t d , inspeC ted 
ardsinFord-authortzea, 

P,antV , end workmanship *** 

° nte6d " a few dollars more than a 

* Costs oniy a tew 

* ring and re-bore »ob. 



Look for 
'his emblem 



authorized! 



For complete information see 
your friendly Ford dealer or 
independent garage displaying 

thf» i 



the 

emblem and selling AUTHORIZED 
Reconditioned Ford Engine 
and Engine Accessories; 



12 



SUPER SCIENCE STORIES 



( Continued from page 10) 

Infinity." It sagged in places due to the 
overly-long mathematical lectures. This may 
be duck soup to your more erudite fans but 
I personally get lost every time someone 
starts talking about unreal numbers. And 
odds » are 90% of your readers feel the 
same way. Maybe it's my natural stupidity 
showing through but I think the whole thing 
is just a development of iumbled semantics 
and not mathematics at all. 

I was a little disappointed at the conclusion but looking back I realize the grade 
of paper and general make-up of your 
magazine prejudiced me against this kind 
of think piece. That type of story is miles 
above your usual run. The finest compliment T can give you is to say that this story 
would be completely at home in the pages 
of your foremost competitor. (Guess I 
can't mention the name here, can I?) This 
is really astounding progress in just six 
issues. Keep up the good work. Maybe 
you can even get some Null-A or Weapon 
Shops grade van Vogt. But no more like 
the last one you published please. It would 
be O.K. under a pen-name but we expect 
better things from today's top stf. writer. 

You'll find my ratings enclosed but I 
won't bore you by sticking them in the 
letter. „ 
Sincerely, 

Vernon L. McCain 
c/o Western Union 
;.i .': " Centralia, Wash. 

Dear Editor: 

, , . . Come to think of it, it's exactly- a 
year ago this issue that you revived S.S.S. 
Over the year there have been some good, 
some bad, and some very mediocre yarns. 
' I will how attempt' to name the best story 
of each ish, and the best story of the year, 
-(gulp) To wit : 

h Jan. 1949 "A Handful of Stars"— Kubirlius. | 

s April "Delusion Drive" — Reed. 
| July "The Brain Beast"— Temple. 
S Sept. "Minion of Chaos"— MacDonald. 
'i Nov. "This Star Shall Be Free"— Leinster. 

• Jan. 1950 "Beyond All Weapons"— Hubbard. 

Best stories of the year— "A Handful 
of Stars", "Brain Beast", and "Delusion 
Drive". 

Best illo of the year— (Gulp! This is" 
tough) Page 51, April ish, Bok's illo for 
"The Earth Killers". 
Best cover of the year (Quick James, 
[ thy Gas. Mask. My portable oxygen tent) 
| Jan. 1950. 

1 What a waste of time, huh? Ouch ! Hey! 
! Wassa big idea ! D'ya want me ta smother 
§ in this stuffy, crowded ol' waste basket??? 

Neil Graham 
R. R. 4 Mitchell 
Ontario, Canada 

The letters which follow are the result 



of a protracted correspondence; — one, 
indeed, which! we feared would be interminable. Mr. Benson's first attempt at 
communication was scrawled in a kind of 
shorthand all his own. We replied, having 
guessed shrewdly at the name of the street 
on, which he lives. He obligingly furnished 
a typed letter, in which, alas, he had shorthanded the math. In turn we sent him a 
transcript of his original letter, guessing 
wildly in several places. His corrected 
version of this appears below, followed by 
a hefty chunk of annotation. We hope 
this ends the matter, but regard the future 
without optimism. Printers, watch those 
subscripts ! 

Dear Editor : 

In the last issue of Super Science Stories, 
the story "Outpost Infinity" seems to be 
filled with mathematical mistakes. On page 
15, the statement is made that 2 No is not 
known as one of the alephs. This is false, 
and has been proved in many ways since 
Cantor's time. 2*° is actually Ni, where 
Ni is N N \ also known as C. 

Proof: 

(1) Let 2 N °=N, 

(2) Then N,>N >2 

Raise inequality to power Nn 

(3) N, N0 >N (l K »>2 ! "' 

(4) But Ni N °=(2 N<, ) No =2( !{,> )2=2 N °=Ni 

(5) . So K^>N N *>Ni since 2 K0 =N t 

(6) Therefore No N °=N,=2 No 

I have seen C°=Ni N '=N 2 - referred to 
as f. But I don't know if this is common 
practice or not. (I would very much like 
to see Mayhew's proof that C is not one 
of the alephs). The rest of the mag was 
good. Why not more paintings by Bok, 
he is one of the best? 

I've never read anything by John Wade 
Farrell before, but that story of his was 
really good, as was this' whole issue. I 
usually don'tread this particular mag, as I 
have been disappointed by 'it in the past, 
but this month's issue was terrific and I j 
owe you an apology. Hope you -can read " 
my terrible writing, and I would like to 
know if those glaring math mistakes were 
intended or not. Were they necessary for 
the story? 

Thank you. 

Loren Benson 
5418 Cabanne Ave. 
St. Louis 12, Mo. 

Dear Editor : 

Well, here we go again. This, I hope, 
will be the last letter I write, and who 
knows, maybe, by some far off chance, you 
might actually be able to read this letter ! ! ! 

(Continued on page 124) 




■ 



On 



Si 



mm 







It 
A, 








11 









Build and Keep 10, 1216 or 16 inch Picture Tube Quality *. ; 
TELEVISION RECEIVER as youftrepare for a Profitable Future I 




Here is everything you need to prepare you at home for 
FASCINATING WORK, GOOD MONEY ond a THRILLING 
FUTURE in one of America's most promising fields. 

This includes the opportunity to build and keep the top 
quality Television Receiver shown above— with choice of 
a 1 0, 1 2 Vi or 1 6 inch picture tube that gives big, bright, 
sharp, steady pictures. Get the complete facts. This is ph 
optional feature — available when you complete your 
training described below. See how D.T.I.'s wonderfully 
practical "BIG 5" method meets industry's needs. No 
previous experience needed. Mail coupon todayl 



1.6 Big* Shipments of- Parts — Plus Lessons 



Work over 300 electronic experiments and protects from 
16 big shipments of parts. This includes building and 
keeping all test equipment and radio set shown at left 
side of page. Modern easy-to-read lessons with handy 
fold-out diagrams simplifies your entire training. 



You Also Use Home Movies 



D.T.I. , alone, include* the modern, visual (raining 
aid t . . MOVIES to help you learn faster, easier 
at home. See electrons on the march and other 
fascinating "hidden action"— a remarkable home 
training advantage that speeds your progress. 



EMPLOYMENT SERVICE 



When you complete your training, our effective 
I (JSCIIIDSCBPS Employment Service helps you get started toward 
a real future in Television-Radio-Electronio, 



If you prefer, you can gel ALL your 

preparation in our new, Chicago train- 
in g laboratories .. < J 

one of the finest of I 

its kind. Ample. In* I 

■tructon ... modern | 

equipment. Write | 

lor details! j 

I 
I 
I 




G, INC. 




DeFOREST'S TRAINING, INC. 

2533 North Ashland Ave., Dept. PFC-G5 

Chicago 14, Illinois. 

Without obligation, give m» complete facts shewing ttow I May 
■ok. my start in Tele vliioa-ltoclio-Bec Ironies, 

Nome 



-Age-Apt... 



-Zone State-. 



One by one, forty *■» 
of the Earth's greatest 
scientists vanished into that 
world beyond the universe— until 
one man, doomed by its fatal rays, 
carried humanity's last hope back the blinding, twisted corridors that led through — 

The DEATH 

CRYSTAL 



By GEORGE O. SMITH 



CHAPTER ONE 
The Shape of Danger 

THEY looked at the crystal in horror. 
Jt was the horror of the serpent, or of the 
Gorgon's head. They were fascinated; in that 
moment not one of them could have torn his gaze 
. All worked ceased. The noises in the concrete-walled room died until the whish of breathing 




14 



16 



SUPER SCIENCE STORIES 



and the thumping of hearts could be 
heard. 

Then panic caught them, and fought 
against training. Panic cried, Run! and 
training said, Remove yourself quickly. 

With the motion-saving efficiency of the 
emergency drill, each man turned from 
his position and walked rapidly towards 
whichever exit was nearest. 

Actually, they could not outrun the 
danger any more than one can duck a 
rifle bullet or outrace the atomic bomb. 
But they went, five men and one woman, 
out. through the zigzag corridors towards 
a mirage of safety. : , ;, 

One man remained. 

Dave Crandall stepped forward and 
picked the crystal from its place -in the 
evaporation dish. He turned, doused hand 
and crystal under a faucet, and then 
dropped the crystal on an anvil. He hit 
it .with a heavy hammer. Anvil and crystal rang musically, and the crystal rebounded and flew through the air unharmed. 

v : Cursing under his breath, Dave Crandall; darted, picked it up again, and looked 
around wildly. 

There were vats of acid handy ; an electronic furnace ■■ glowed white-hot through 
its slit ;, a tunnel gaped, unexcitingly but 
in its depths were the invisible radiations 
of the atomic pile. None of these would 
work soon enough. 

Dave turned to the desk.: He flipped 
Open~ the end of the pneumatic message 
itube and popped the crystal into the chamber. There was the zvhroooom! of pumped 
air, a few tinkles as the crystal hit the 
sides of the tube on its way down. 

Then from somewhere outside the concrete- walled room came the awesome 
blast.: The wave-front traveled down the 
zigzag passages and Dave thought he 
could almost see it. The roar deafened 
him. a--:; 
.Dave went out through the zigzag passage. 



A mile across the plain, a billowing 
white cloud was rising. 

Claverly greeted Dave. Claverly was a 
bit shaken, and more than a little abashed. 
"The relay station," he said, pointing at 
the rising cloud. 

"Oh?" remarked Crandall. He asked, 
frowning, "Anybody in there?" 

"No." 

Crandall smiled Wryly. "That's a relief," he said. "But I didn't have time to 
ask where that tube went. I might have 
blown up the administration building." 

Claverly laughed. "About all you've 
done is to cut a large hole in the coast-tocoast pneumo," he said. "No jury in the 
world would convict you." 

DeLieb came around from the other 
side of the building. "There," he said, 
"but for the Grace of God — " pointing at 
the billowing pillar of smoke. "Thanks, 
Dave. This makes you unique, you know." 

"Unique?" 

"You are the only living man who has 
seen one of those devils' rocks in operation." £ 

"We were all there," objected Dave, 
"and how about the Manhattan Crystal?" 

"In the first place, the Manhattan Crystal is furnishing New York with electrical 
power — from a generating plant twenty 
miles outside New York, telemeter-controlled, and completely unattended. Montrose and Crowley and their associates 
who first made the crystal went up trying 
to reproduce it at Brookhaven. So did 
Brookhaven. Harvard, Purdue, Caltech, 
and Argonne went up trying to make 
one, too." 

"But you were there, too, and you've 
seen it." 

DeLieb nodded. "It is a six-sided crystal about three inches long, with a pyramidal point at either end, and about threequarters of an inch across the hexagonal 
flats. It is clear with a trace of blue tint. 
So much we know, Dave. But what shape 
was it when you tossed it into the tube? 



A 



THE DEATH CRYSTAL 



17 



"Cubical, and full of flashing red 
glints," said Dave. 

"And why were we suddenly scared 
bright green?" 

"Because it began to change shape be- . 
fore our eyes," said Dave. 

"And it was still fluid when we — left." 

"I think so," said Dave uncertainly. 

DeLieb turned and went into the laboratory again, with the others following. 
He inspected the anvil and straightened 
up with a wry smile. There was the dent 
on the soft iron, made by the crystal under 
Dave's blow. "That," said DeLieb, "is 
the impact of a hexagonal crystal slightly 
distorted. A hexagonal form half-changed 
to a cubical shape. So, Dave Crandall, 
you are the only man alive to have seen 
such a crystal. Who knows the shape of 
the Manhattan Crystal by now?" 

STEPS clicked along the other zigzags. Phelps came" in through one. 
"No hits," he said, "one run, and 
the only error was shutting off the crosscountry pneumo. Tough. But the country got along without the shipment of 
short-lived radioisotopes before and it'll 
have to do without them again until they 
get the tube put together. Nice going, 
Crandall." 

Behind him was Jane Nolan — Doctor 
Jane Nolan. Like her colleagues, Jane 
Nolan was often quoted in texts, had made 
several contributions to science, and was 
an authority on several subjects. She was 
not a beautiful woman ; but her quiet air 
sometimes permitted a rather interesting 
personality to show through. Men forgot 
her mature thirty years and her lack of 
breath-taking beauty and dated her; then 
found themselves at once intrigued by her 
personality and completely baffled by her 
quick mind- — and then went elsewhere in 
search of wide-eyed pulchritude. 

Deep interest or honest admiration 
often lighted up her face and made it 
handsome if not beautiful. She looked 



very attractive now as she went to Crandall. 

"That was brave," she said. 

"Self-preservation," he said. 

"We have that too," she replied with a 
slight smile. "And we also know that we 
cannot outrun that sort of thing. But we 
ran. " 

He smiled at her cheerfully. "I'm not a 
scientist," he said. "I'm just a newspaperman, remember? Perhaps I'm just too 
ignorant to realize the degree of danger." 

Jane Nolansshook her head. "You've 
either seen the remains or pictures of 
them, of the other labs that failed. You 
know—" 

"Look," he chuckled, "let's put it this 
way. We were dead ducks anyway. The 
devil himself couldn't have . outrun that 
explosion without jet assistance." He 
turned to Claverly, "If I'd had any sense, 
I wouldn't have tried to smash it. I should 
have known that belting it with a hammer 
wouldn't have stopped it — if anything, it 
should have hastened the explosion." 

"I hardly think so," said Claverly 
thoughtfully. "Remember that the crystal 
is not an explosive in itself. Or so we believe. Anyway — " 

"Anyway, thanks to Dave, we still 
have our lab," said Jane. "Let's get back 
to work. " 

Dave shook his head. There was rio 
point in arguing with them. They called 
him brave. Nuts ! Nine great laboratories 
had gone skyward with their complement 
of scientists, trying to reproduce the 
fabulous Manhattan Crystal which was 
now furnishing the city of New York with 
electrical power. And with the deadly 
record ot nine to nothing against them, 
the scientists continued to try. Theirs 
was the true bravery. It was a deadly 
experiment, and one that was not permuted — ■ : < Meoy 

Dave looked startled. "I thought the 
government insisted that these experiments be run by telemeter control?" 



18 



SUPER SCIENCE STORIES 



"They are." 

"Then what in the hell were we doing 
here?" demanded Crandall. 

"The crystal," said Claverly, "was developed last week. We'd done everything 
but taste it by telemeter. It had been 
tested chemically, electrically, mechanically, atomically, physically and about any 
other way you can think of. We've had 
it white-hot and down to a half-degree 
Kelvin. We've dropped it, hit it, subjected 
it to electrostatic and electromagnetic 
fields, dunked it in everything from aqua 
to zerone, looked at it and through it, 
bombarded it with every radiation possible from the pile, and let it sit on a glasstopped platform to meditate. We believed 
it was safe; that we'd been successful. 
We came in to hook it up and test its 
power output, like the Manhattan Crystal. 
You came along." 

• Dave nodded. The message in his pocket told him that Merion Laboratory had 
successfully created a replica of the Manhattan Crystal and if he so desired, he 
could be present at its testing. 

He said slowly, "It seems as if there 
might be something important here." 
"'"What?" 

"I hate to suggest it; it sounds silly." 

u So do a lot of things," said Claverly. 
"Go on." 

"I'm out of my depth here," said Dave. 
"Bui: I've read of the so-called human 
aura. 1 The sort of thing that gives certain 
gardeners a 'green thumb' and makes 
other men capable of curing a headache by 
merely rubbing the head with the fingertips. Is this sort of thing merely superstition or has it any basis in fact?" 

Claverly frowned. "We don't like to 
answer such questions," he said. "But 
I'm being honest with you, Dave. The 
reason we don't like to answer is that we 
are not too certain. The best answer is 
maybe:, and who knows?" 

"So the crystal sat here and took all 
sorts of radiation, treatment, investiga


tion, and the like. Then when the group 
of us assemble, blooey ! " 

Claverly looked at Dave. "What do 
you suggest?" 

"I suggest that the crystal be worked 
on by one person at a time. Perhaps 
there's a critical mass of life-force — ?" 

"Sounds fantastic. You'll keep this out 
of your paper, Dave?" 

"You bet — until we prove it. I don't 
want to sound any crazier than I am." 
He looked around. "I'm going to file a 
yarn on the explosion," he said. "Where's 
a typewriter and a telephone?" 

Claverly said, "Jane, you show him. 
The rest of us will mix another batch and 
make us a new crystal. Then — " He left 
it unfinished. 

Jane Nolan nodded. "Come on, Dave." 

SHE LED him to one of the jeeps that 
the laboratory Crew used, and they 
started back towards the main collection of buildings. 
"Dave, I like you." 
Dave blinked. She laughed. "Does my 
directness bother you?" 
"Not exactly. But—" 
"It's caused me a lot of grief in the 
past; it's one of the reasons why I've 
never been a howling social success. However, saying and doing what I think makes 
a fine physicist out of me." 

"That I believe," said Dave. The jeep 
drew up to one of the buildings. "Now," 
he said, "where's that typer?" 

"In the office. Or better, we have a few 
empties; maybe you'd like to use one until you go back to Chicago?" 

"That would be good," he told her. 
"I'm going to stay right here until you 
folks get this problem solved — or go up 
taking Merion Laboratory with you. 
Maybe," he said cheerfully, "I'll be able 
to use your typer to write the description 
of that, but it's unlikely." 

! Jane faced him as he climbed out of the 
jeep. "We've got a job to do. I Jsnow it 



THE DEATH CRYSTAL 



19 



sounds like a chunk of lousy script, but 
the bunch of us are devoted to the job of 
increasing human knowledge. So we're 
ready to accept the danger. But there's 
no reason why you should risk your hide. 
You can write from here and be safe." 

"I wouldn't miss the fun for anything," 
he said. "When will the new crystal be 
ready?" 

"Tomorrow morning." 

Jane climbed out after him. "I'll arrange for that office," she said. "Come 
on." 

From the window of his office Dave 
Crandall watched Jane drive off in her 
jeep. Then he turned to the desk and put 
through a long-distance telephone call. 

"Meteridge speaking." 

"Dave Crandall, doc." 

"Yes, David. How're things going?" 

"About the same." 

"Fine. Keep the chin up." 

"Doc — there's nothing can be done?" 

"Five years ago we could have — " 

"I couldn't see it." 

Meteridge swore. "And now, like 
everybody el§e, you've changed your mind 
too late?" 

"No, doc. I haven't changed my mind. 
I just wish it had been different." 

"So do we all. But five years ago — " 

"I know. I know. Five years ago you 
could have given me twenty years more, 
but it meant staying on my backside for 
the whole route. I took six years of active 
life in favor of twenty years as a total 
loss. I'd do it again." 

"I suppose you would. So would I, to 
tell you the truth." 

Dave chuckled. "So I just called to tell 
you the usual. I'm okay and feeling no 
pain." 

"Good. Keep me informed. And when 
you start feeling the pangs, let me know. 
We can give you some relief." 

They hung up and Dave, deliberately 
putting the, thought out of his mind, went 
to work on his news story. It was the 



sort of thing that a stable man does not 
dwell upon; within him, burning at his 
vitals, was a fission fragment. Dispersed, 
it was. Too widespread for a single removal ; years and years of almost continuous operations and convalescence 
would remove the danger, but it would 
leave Crandall abed most of his active 

lifC. .;'.':v , V 

He — and Doctor Meteridge — knew that 
he had been no hero when he stayed be^ 
hind with the crystal. At the worst it had 
meant an instant death; at the best, saving the lives of other people. What could . 
Dave lose? -. • ■ 

Nothing but a forfeited life. t 1 ;, 

CHAPTER TWO 

The Crystal Phantoms 

TOW," said Claverly, peering 
J^y through the television hookup 
^ that brought him an image of 
the crystal, "we are ready." His voice 
came over the speaker tinnily, 

"It's been checked?" 

"Definitely. We're all ready." 

DeLieb manipulated the controls as the 
rest of them watched through the large 
projection screen. Clawed arms came 
from the side of the screen and picked the 
crystal out of the dish. They carried it 
over to the mouth of a pneumatic tube, 
where it was dropped into a carrier. 
There was a whoosh! and the carrier disappeared. *,,'; 

The scene on the television screen 
switched abruptly to Claverly, who opened 
the end of the tube and removed the crystal. He held it up for them to see. 

"So here we are," said Claverly. "The 
crystal and myself, removed from the 
critical mass of human radiation--if that 
means anything. Watch me .closely, I 
am going to test this crystal for ppWjCr; 
output." . . ,■ 

Claverly turned aside and clamped the 



20 



SUPER SCIENCE STORIES 



crystal in a holder. He turned away, then, 
and — 

There was a flash that filled the telescreen. It did not blind the onlookers, for 
the total output of the projection system 
would not furnish so much light. Bat the 
flash at the transmitting end paralyzed the 
orthicon, and once the phosphor of the 
receiving tube ceased to glow, the screen 
went dark. The orthicon at the far end 
of the line was no longer working. There 
was no roar of sound from the speaker. 
Just an electric crackle, and then the hiss 
of the live circuit. 

"Gone!" said DeLieb explosively. 
Phelps turned from the mounted telescope and said, "I saw a flicker from the 
windows, but the building is still there." 
"Then it didn't blow," said Jane Nolan. 
Crandall caught a faint flicker on the 
telescreen. The bare highlights were 
there, just coming up above the black 
level. "Claverly!" said Dave. 

They turned. The tall scientist was" 
visible, standing still as they had seen him 
before. Motionless, like a strobo- flashed 
picture. 

Dave raced down, out of the building 
and into the parked jeep. He shoved the 
jeep into gear and took off with a roar. 
His tires threw dust as he raced across the 
intervening three miles to the remote laboratory. 

Claverly was there. A phantom Claverly; a three-dimensional image, unmistakable as the man himself. Transparent, 
however ; the bricks of the far wall could 
be distinguished through it. 

The image was fading, but so very 
gradually that Dave had to watch carefully 
to be certain. 

"THE crystal is still here," said Dave. 
Tt seems unchanged." 

"We see," replied DeLieb. "The video 
is working again." 

"So — what was Claverly's next move 
to be?" 



"Wait!" cried Jane. "Be careful; 

Claverly — " 

"Someone has to do it," said Dave. "If 
you'li give me directions — ?" 

Phelps shook his head at the rest and 
said : "Dave, if we could manipulate that 
thing from here through these last few 
motions, Clayerly wouldn't have been 
there."
"Forgot that," said Dave unhappily. 
"So now what?" 

"I'm coming over. You leave." 

"Check— but don't like it." 

Dave was less than a thousand yards 
away from the building when Phelps entered. His jeep was not equipped with 
radio or telephone so he did not know 
what went on. All he knew was a swift 
burst of brightness, perceptible against 
the bright sky. Dave stopped the jeep in 
half its length and turned it to go racing 
back. 

Phelps was there, too. A phantom 
image standing near the image of Claverly, but apparently more solid. Claverly 
was fading; Phelps was a fresh image. 

"Same damned thing!" cried Crandall 
into the microphone. 

"I'm coming — " started DeLieb, but 
Dave stopped him with a firm "No!" 

Then he ran the jeep back to the main 
buildings, thinking furiously. By the time 
he arrived, he had an idea. . . . 

4£'T > HIS is no random thing," he 
1 said. "This is malicious." 

"Malicious?" asked Jane. 
"What do you mean?" 

"How many nuclear laboratories have 
we lost, trying to reproduce this crystal?" 
"Nine." 

"And how many top-flight scientists?" 
"Almost forty." 

"The forty we can least afford to lose," 
added Dave. "Can you think of an easier 
way to sap the scientific strength of a 
country than to give it something that 
perform miracles — and also kills?" 



THE DEATH CRYSTAL 



21 



"Ah," said Jane, shaking her head. 
"But there's a hole in that reasoning. No 
one gave us anything. We discovered the 
Manhattan Crystal by accident — in a restricted laboratory and under the most 
rigid supervision." 

"Accident, hell ! No doubt a young and 
innocent mouse thinks it's an accident 
when he finds a piece of cheese. The 
crystal is the cheese— and the trap. Kids, 
we're being taken for a ride. Give 'em a 
chance to lop off a gang of you and a lab 
at the same time and they do it. Give 
them no chance to get the lab, and they'll 
wait to get a scientist. Offer 'em a cluck* 
of a newsman, of no scientific learning, 
and they wait until they have a chance at 
an important scientist. The crystal is still 
there." 

"I'll go—" 

"DeLieb, sit still. Claverly went, Phelps 
went. You go, and the next will be Nolan 
or Howes." 



"So what do you suggest?" 
"I'm no scientist. Teach me what to 
do. I'll do it." 
"You'll die." 

"I'll prove a point," said Dave. "And 
I won't die ! I'll prove to you that anybody but a top scientist can tinker all day 
with that thing without danger. If you 
think I'm wrong, remember that I was 
there once and came back. Now — what 
do I do?" 

Howes laughed bitterly. "If that were 
as simple as winding an alarm clock or 
grinding the valves on a gas engine, we'd 
have no problem, Dave." 

"You can tell me the motions; you can 
tell me what to do. You can coach me at 
the job, and with training — hell, fellers, 
you don't have to know organic chemistry 
to mix a cake and men have performed 
operations with a jackknife at sea, with directions by radio. I'm checked out in a 
B-108, and any man who can keep his 



MOW! this FULL-WEIGHT Blade 




in Handy Dispenser 

. . of this amazing low price I 

1A BLADES IN OCt 
1 1| DISPENSER 

REGULAR PACK 3 FOR 10* 



BlueMTASi



SINGLE 
EDGE 



DOUBLE 
EDGE 



• Try this sturdy, full-weight 
Blue Star on those tough, hardto-shave spots. If any blue steel 
blade, at any price, gives you better shaves than Blue Star, we'll 
give you double your money back. 

PRECISION iA'S'Rj r 
AMERICAN SAFETY RAZOR CORP. 



Make this 




TOUGH 
SPOT 
TEST 



RODUCTS 

• BROOKLYN 1, N.Y. 



22 



SUPER SCIENCE STORIES 



eyes . on seventy meters, a hundred and 
twelve switches, forty levers, sixty-seven 
pushbuttons, and drive the damned thing 
with his free hand at the same time ought 
to be able to learn whatever this job requires." He looked around him. "And in 
the meantime, we'll let. that crystal sit 
there and simmer, waiting for a nice, ripe 
physicist to come and get stuck!" 
. ; "It will take days," said Jane thoughtfully. 

"Better days than lives," said Dave 
sharply. 

"Okay." said DeLieb. "You certainly 
can do no harm. You may do some good. 
,\Ve'll. try it your way." 

For the next ninety-six hours, Dave 
Crandall got a total of nine hours of sleep. 
He worked in another^ replica of- the remote lab, using similar instruments. .He 
had not the foggiest notion of what he was 
doing, but he learned the manual dexterity 
necessary to do it. He didn't, know what 
the meters meant, but he learned how to 
read them. He couldn't understand why 
..he imust do thus and so: when such and 
such a meter read to a certain value, but 
,he learned that, too. He became a trained 
human primate, an animal who knew that 
four raps plus four raps equalled eight 
raps ; a chimpanzee trained to drive an 
automobile. 

Not that Dave was ignorant, unintelligent, or untutored. Dave was college, 
postgrad, and a writer. Dave knew as 
much present -day science as any layman, 
lie wrote- science articles for- his paper, 
was constantly exposed to science, and a 
tlot of it took. But this science was as far 
beyond the kind he knew as the jet plane 
is beyond the Wright Brothers' original 
model. ... ' • 

Then DeLieb told him, "Dave, you're 
r«ady." # 

"Let's go." 
to '/Not tonight." 
• "Why waste time?" 

"You're tired. I'm tired. We're all 



tired, if you want to finish the conjugation. Tonight we loaf and rest and get a 
full night's sleep. Tomorrow we work. 
This is the royal edict." 

"I vote yea," laughed Jane Nolan. 
"Come, ambitious one. On nine hours' 
sleep in four days, you should be easy to 
handle." 

Dave shrugged. DeLieb looked askance. 
"Jane, if you take him dancing, we'll all 
kill you." 

"You wouldn't have to," she said. "I'd 
be dead already. No, I'm taking Dave 
out to the farm where he can see stars 
and breathe fresh air, and loaf on long 
grass." 

JANE'S mother, forewarned, piled the 
dinner table high, and Dave was fed 
to the bursting point. They walked 
under the stars, afterwards, and then 
sprawled on the long grass, looking at 
the sky. ; ■ , 

"You're quite a guy, Dave," said Jane. 
"Probably the only one of my kind in 
existence," he said solemnly. "Most men 
have eight eyes, you know. I've only got 
two." 

"Blue, aren't they?" 
"Brown," he corrected. "All two of 
them." 

"They're blue." 
"Brown." 

"Dave, I'm a qualified observer and I 
recall them as blue!" 

^Wishful thinking. Probably your first 
love had blue eyes." 

Jane lit a match and held it over him 
for an instant. "Blue," she- Said. 

"Are you going to believe your eyes or 
what I tell you?" he demanded. 

"My eyes," she said. "Just because I 
happen to think you're quite special, I 
don't necessarily believe everything you 
say." . 

"What's so special? I'm just an ordinary sort of guy. Most of the things I 
learned in school haven't been much use 



THE DEATH CRYSTAL 



to me. I drink too much and smoke too 
much, go to church far too little — if at all 
— and have no immediate hope for mankind." 

"You're an idealist." 

"No cigar. Cynic, yes. But idealist — ?" 

"You are," she said. "You are also 
some sort of human dynamo. You come 
as a newspaperman to report on our doings and end up marching yourself into 
danger and almost running the research 
group. " 

"Think of the story I'll be able to 
write," he said. 

"And if you don't—?" 

He laughed. "I'm in no danger," he 
said. 

"I hope you aren't." 

"Better me than someone who might 
be able to solve this thing." 

"I don't think so." 

"I'm no loss to civilization, Jane." 

"That's your fault," she told him, halfangry. "You could be a great asset if 
you'd only try." 

"And what form of attempt does this 
require?" 

"Stop playing cynic. We don't need 
people to tell civilization that it has a dirty 
back yard or a few rotten beams in the 
cellar. What we need is a few men with 
ideals to tell us how to clean tip the yard 
and how to bolster the rotten stringers. 
Set your sights on some goal, and then 
settle down to work for it." 

Dave groaned. "How do you start settling down after thirty-five years of hellraising?" 

"Do you want to know?" 

"I've often wanted to know." 

"Get married, Dave." 

"Who'd have me?" 

"I would. Marry me, Dave." 

"Lord, no!" he exploded. 

"I expected a refusal," she said softly. 
"I didn't expect quite such a vigorous 
rejection." 

"I'm not rejecting you," he said 



23 

earnestly. "You're a fine woman, Jane." 
"Who was she?" Jane asked. 
"She? Who?" 

"The girl that broke your heart." 

Dave laughed. "I'm not carrying any 
torch," he told her. He leaned on one 
elbow and looked down at her. The starlight was faint, but he could see her well 
enough. "In fact, Jane, under other circumstances I might get quite soft-headed 
about you." 

"Then why not?" 

He flopped back and stared at the sky. 
"Jane, you've accused me of being brave. 
This is damned foolishness. I'm not brave. 
I've got about six months to live, and I'm 
told the end will not be pleasant. I'd prefer to go black in a hurry, doing something that couldn't be done by a man with 
his life ahead of him. That isn't bravery; 
it's just cutting clean the end of a wellfrayed rope." 
"Who says so?" demanded Jane. 1 
"The famous Dr. Thomas Meteridge." 
"He might be wrong." r 
Crandall chuckled. "He's seldom 
wrong. Fact is, Jane, I've to kick off in six months, otherwise Old Doc Meteridge 
is a quack and a charlatan." 
" He may be wrong. " » ' 

Dave found her hand and held it over 
his side. "Feel warm? That's a collection of fission products, tossing all softs of 
junk around." 

After a moment she said, "Some men 
wait for death complacently ; some spend 
their remaining time roistering ; and Dave 
Crandall spends his time doing dangerous 
jobs for humanity. Now tell me that 

you're not an idealist, Dave." 
« j_ >» 

"Oh, stop arguing," she said. She still 
held the hand that had pressed hers over 
his side. Now Jane caught it in a hard 
grip and pulled, rolling him towards her. 
She met him halfway, missed his lips on 
the first try, and then made contact as her 
free arm went around his shoulders. 



24 



SUPER SCIENCE STORIES 



Dave's was a startled response at first. 

"Who's arguing?" he asked after a 
moment. He added his free arm to the 
embrace and held her to him. 

The stars above them whirled a quarter 
way across the sky — unnoticed. 

CHAPTER THREE 
The Other World 

C RANDALL awoke to the faint 
sounds of farm life and spent a 
few sleepy moments wondering 
where he was. The low of a cow, the 
creak of a windmill, and the bustle of 
activity in another part of the house ; the 
sigh of a_ free wind and the whisper of 
leaves — none of these were indigenous to 
his normal habitat and it annoyed him 
until the sleep left him and he recalled. 

Days of hard work and too little sleep, 
the relaxation of the farm for an evening. 
Jane. Jane! 

Crandall swore mildly. He became introspective and carefully analyzed his 
feelings, even though he knew that he was 
hopelessly incapable of coming to an honest solution about himself. His glands and 
his intellect were at wide variance. He 
had no right to ask for nor could he offer 
love. 

Dave growled at himself and climbed 
out of bed. A cool shower helped ; he was 
glad that the Nolan farm was not of the 
older variety. Here at least was farm life 
with almost every comfort of urban living. 
He dressed and then went down the stairs 
slowly. 

"Sleepyhead," Jane called as she saw 
him. "It's nearly nine o'clock." 

"Middle of the night," he said. 

"Dad and Mom have been up for 
hours." 

"And you?" 

"Positively minutes." Jane came to 
him, face upraised. He kissed her and 
momentarily forgot his troubles. 



But it all ended too soon. Breakfast 
was leisurely, and then they were off, back 
to Merion. 

They arrived at the laboratory in an 
hour, and then the bustle of activity 
herded Dave's introspective feelings out 
of his mind. 

He discovered that the night of relaxation had sharpened his mind. He ran 
through the program once more in the 
remote lab. and then they announced that 
he was ready to try the real thing. 

Dave went to the jeep Jane followed. 

"Dave — be careful." 

"As possible," he agreed. He kissed 
her and then started off towards the remote lab that still held the crystal clamped 
in the electrodes. 

They wanted physicists, huh? He'd 
show them, whoever they were. He'd fox 
them. The trick was completely incomprehensible, but however they did it, it 
was as neat a program of treachery as 
had been invented in all history. In an 
eariier day the enemy went for the leaders, the generals and the admirals and the 
kings and emperors. Now it was the engineers and physicists, for it was science 
that carried victory. The most brilliant 
military strategist was a mere cork bobbing on the rim of a whirlpool if he were 
not equipped with the latest and best that 
could come from applied physics. 

But Dave was not a physicist. He was 
just a scribbler of articles, an occasional 
writer of fiction. So Dave was not the 
man they wanted. Let them sit and chew 
their fingernails while he, a zero quantity 
as far as they were concerned, toyed with 
the crystal. It wouldn't be practical to 
waste the crystal on him, any more than 
it was practical to hurl a can of SPAM* 
at a convoy escort. 



♦For Self Propelled Atomic Missile : a humorous contraction used in a novel, "Murder of 
the U.S.A.," by Will F. Jenkins, shortly after 
World War II. When self-propelled guided 
missiles came into being, General Lansdowne 
conferred Jenkins' appellation upon them and 
the name has remained. — G.O.S. 



THE DEATH CRYSTAL 



25 



Dave arrived at the remote lab and 
went to work. They checked him through 
the video and the sound channel both 
ways, and then Dave turned toward the 
crystal. 

"The power," he said, "is being built 
" up, as you can hear in the background, the 
generators are groaning a bit under the 
initial heavy load. The— ah — gaussmeter 
is rising up the scale. It occurs to me that 
the boys on the other side of this might 
well be chewing their fingernails at the 
moment. If I've got this thing figured 
right, they can see into this lab and know 
me and who I am — and possibly what I 
am doing. Maybe they've even figured 
out the why of it. 

"Now, the next item is something I've 
been keeping quiet about. I doubt that 
they can read minds, but I'm pretty sure 
they can hear us and watch us. So I've 
kept quiet until now. 

"As Dr. Thomas Meteridge can tell 
you, I've been given about six months to 
live. So I have nothing to lose, especially 
if I can prove a point. I've claimed stoutly that they aren't interested in anything 
but physicists, and that a tyro would be 
_ safe out here. But it's still possible that 
I was wrong. 

"As you'll note, I've already got farther 
than either Claverly or Phelps. I think 
that if I kept my mouth shut now, I'd be 
allowed to finish the job. But — I think I 
have a clue to the identity of the enemy, 
and the method they're using to destroy 
our top scientific talent!" 

He paused. "Of course, I could be 
bluffing. But I don't think they can afford- to take that chance. So, in a minute, 
when I start to tell you what I think I 
know, they'll have to decide. ..." 

"Dave," cried Jane, "what chance have 
you got?" 

"A fair chance," he said. "We've got 
them spread nicely across the horns of a 
dilemma. If they do grab me, it will prove 
that there's an enemy alien at work. If 



they don't grab me. I'll solve their secret—" - v : - U. . - ' 

The crystal flashed pearly-white. Again 
it paralyzed the orthicon and crackled in 
the loudspeaker. It blinded Dave momentarily, but he shouted, "I'm still 
here !" 

He heard a cry from t.he far end of the 
sound system. It faded rapidly. 

AS HIS eyesight returned, Dave 
looked around curiously. The laboratory was still around him, but 
it had the same semi-ghostly appearance 
that Claverly and Phelps had had. Of the 
images of the two physicists Dave could 
see nothing. They had been there, faintly 
visible, when he had gone in. Now they 
were gone. Dave looked at the workbench. He passed a hand through it. He 
stamped on the floor and found that he 
was stamping through the floor ; he was 
actually standing on a semi-smooth Surface a few inches below it. 

"Damn!" he swore. He looked around. 
The concrete walls of the building Were 
heavy and thick; he could not see clearly 
through them. He walked forward, hands 
outstretched, and saw his hands enter the 
wall. He walked through the wall, and 
felt a slight resistance, as though he were 
walking through water. He burst through 
the far side and the released pressure 
pitched him headlong. ; 

Once outside, Dave looked around. In 
the ghostly distance he could see the 'main 
laboratory building and the jeep bearing 
Jane, DeLieb, and Howes. They came 'to 
the building and Dave ran to meet them. 

"I'm here," he called. He screamed it. 
He yelled at the top of his voice. Jane 
walked through him. Her face was broken, tears filled her eyes, and Davd tried 
desperately to get her attention. But she 
walked through him and went on. .They 
went in the door; Dave walked back 
through the phantom wall and met them 
inside. 



26 



SUPER SCIENCE STORIES 



"Dave !" cried Jane. She ran across 
the room and reached — then recoiled, her 
face twisted in horror. 

"Like Claverly, like Phelps," she whispered. 

"Like hell!" yelled Dave. "Dammitall, 
I'm here!" 

"-Gone !" said Jane. 

"I'm not gone!" snapped Dave. But a 
still voice inside him said that he was. 
He looked carefully at the place Jane 
watched with horror-filled eyes. He could 
see nothing. Then he went to Jane and 
peered into her eyes. The pupils were 
clear. Dave snorted. If he could not see 
the image of himself that Jane saw, there 
was no reason why he could see a possible, 
reflection of that image in her pupils. 

"So he proved it,"- said DeLieb. 

"And so we continue, knowing that 
something or someone is maliciously attacking us," said Howes. 

"It's mine," said jane in a flat voice. 

"No—" said DeLiebi 

"I want to follow him," she said. 
■ > "Don't be a fool ! " yelled Dave. 

He ran to the crystal and slapped at it. 
It hurt; With a glad cry, Dave pried at it 
with his fingers. The clamping electrodes 
held it firm — and he could not touch them, 
for 1 they 'were as thin and tenuous as the 
concrete wall through which he had 
walked. Only the crystal was solid both 
there and here. 

Dave smiled sourly. If he was dead, 
then this was a fine psychological hell. 
Here he was watching friends and a loved 
one inarching into deadly danger, listening • to their grief and their dangerous 
plans, while he was completely helpless to 
guide them. 

: He felt the crystal move slightly under 
his- straining fingers. Wrapping a handkerchief about his fist, Dave punched at 
the Crystal.' It gave: — or on the other side, 
the clamping electrodes gave. At any rate, 
it was loose. 

He hit it again and jarred it. 



"The crystal!" cried Jane. "It's moving!" ; 

"Blow-up!" yelled DeLieb. 

But this time there was no panic. 
Howes cut the energizing power with a 
flick of his hands across the toggle 
switches.' DeLieb clamped down on the 
electrodes with a hand and spun the wing- , 
nuts that held it with the other. Jane 
Nolan grabbed at the crystal as it came 
free and turned to the pneumatic delivery 
tube. 

But Dave reached out a hand and 
snatched it from her. 

Jane cried in pain and fear, and 
watched the crystal make three long 
swoops towards the concrete wall — Dave 
had grabbed it and started to run outside. 
The crystal was wrenched from his fingers as he went through the wall. It fell 
to the floor, and all three physicists 
swooped down upon it. 

Jane came up with it and popped it 
into the pneumatic tube. 

It rattled thrice and was gone, racing 
down the tube end over end, visible to 
Dave as it raced out of reach. 

"It wants physicists," breathed DeLieb. 

"But it's gone now." 

"And so is Dave," cried Jane. 

"Dammit," snapped Dave. Then he 
gave up, because he knew the utter futility 
of trying to make them hear him. 

But there was a way ! 

The crystal extended through both 
worlds. All Dave had to do was to get the 
crystal and use it as a stylus against some 
surface in the other world. 

He turned to follow the pneumatic tube 
towards the place where the crystal had 
gone. He was not more than a hundred 
yards down the length of the tube when 
the sky blinded him from a- couple of 
miles away, and then the air roared, and 
then when vision returned he could see a 
pillar of white smoke billowing skyward. 
They had destroyed the crystal! . 



THE DEATH CRYSTAL 



27 



DAVE stopped to think. 
Clearly, the exploding crystal 
was as dangerous on this side as 
it was on the other. That meant that no 
one could stand close by and watch the 
thing to be sure of which physicists they 
got — unless they used some sort of television hookup. 

So Dave retraced his steps to the laboratory and inspected it. He saw nothing, 
and so began to feel his way through the 
walls of the building. He became engrossed in this job; it was both interesting and a bit terrifying to go walking 
through walls and feeling along the insides of beams and rafters. The building 
was a sort of thick phantom. Not only 
were the walls transparent, but the pipe 
lines, electrical wiring, nails, and other 
normally hidden bits of construction were 
visible within them. And walking along 
the length of a wall with a shoulder on 
either side, one in one room and one in 
the other, was disconcerting as well as 
amusing. 

The heavy concrete-block walls, set up 
for radiation barriers, were wider than 
Crandall's shoulder-spread, and he could 
walk through their length completely enclosed in the hard concrete. Here it was 
eerie, too, for encased in the concrete were 
electrical wires and pipes, to Dave no 
heavier than the concrete through which 
he walked, but none the less clearly visible. 

So Dave inspected the remote lab, 
walking down the walls and through the 
pipes and wires that stretched through the 
house like a spider's web, and he saw no 
evidence of espionage — 

— until he caught his throat under a 
wire that should have been as tenuous as 
the others, but which almost throttled 
him. 

Dave bounded back, clutching at his 
throat and swearing soundly. 
Then he realized ! 

And forgetting his throat, Dave followed the wire to one of the remote vidieo 



and audio sets. He pulled it aside — and 
it split into two complete sets! There 
were two television cameras, identical in 
every way, one in Dave's world, one in the 
everyday world, placed in perfect register! 

His proof! 

His friends had gone; obviously back 
to their laboratory to prepare another 
crystal. Here he could get one: their 
next one. Then he could communicate 
with them and start planning a counteroffensive. 

Dave looked across the plain towards 
the main laboratory building, and 
shrugged. If he had a crystal now, all he 
could do would be to let them know he 
was alive and on the job, but had no information. On the other hand, he had 
fouled up the television camera in the 
remote lab, and it seemed likely that there 
would be a repairman coming along to 
see what was wrong. 

Just where Claverly and Phelps Were 
in this mess Dave didn't know. But he 
assumed that soon after their projection 
into this cockeyed half-world, the enemy 
had come along to collect them both. 

Dave blinked at a sudden fantastic 
thought: would the flashing of a crystal 
send him back to his own world, or toss 
him along into another one? 

An interesting thought — to be pursued 
later. Right this moment the thing to do 
was to lie doggo until the enemy arrived 
to take Dave in tow. This time, instead 
of a baffled scientist, they were attempting 
to catch a gent who was more interested 
in being alive than in figuring out where 
he was. 

Had Dave been a pure scientist, he 
would have been amazed and baffled by 
this half-world. The whys and wherefores would have bothered him to the 
exclusion of other considerations, and he 
would have been standing there trying -.to 
figure it all out when the enemy came 
along to collect him. Instead, Dave was 



28 



SUPER SCIENCE STORIES 



still alive, or felt that he was, and that 
was enough for him. Someone else could 
figure out how and why; his was the line 
of action ; so long as he was able, he was 
going to continue to live and fight. 

So when the helicopter dropped down 
out of the sky near the remote laboratory 
and disgorged a man carrying a rifle, 
Dave, the quarry, was sprawled behind a 
slight ridge in the half-world's terrain, 
watching through a clef t in the stone outcrop. 

CHAPTER FOUR 
The Struggle for Earth 

THE MAN with the rifle prowled 
around the ship, looking carefully 
out across the plains. 
Then, angrily, he turned and said something at the door of the helicopter, and a 
second head appeared. There was a short 
discussion that Dave could not hear, and 
then the second man came out carrying a 
tool kit and headed for the lab. The first 
man got back into the helicopter and took 
off towards the main building. 

Dave nodded. It was reasonable to suppose that Claverly, and then Phelps, after 
finding themselves in this half-world alone, 
had gone back to the main laboratory to 
see if they could raise the attention of 
their friends. Dave himself could have 
been expected to follow, running after the 
jeep that had taken the others back to 
their lab. The hunter expected to find 
- Dave wandering disconsolately around the 
other lab. 

When the helicopter had disappeared, 
Dave arose and scuttled across the plain 
towards the building he had left. He felt 
like a battleship On a clear ocean in broad 
daylight trying to slink unseen behind an 
enemy, but there seemed no way to avoid 
it. At any rate, the workman was paying no attention to his surroundings. 

Within the walls of the laboratory, the 
workman was unlimbering his tool kit. 



He was an efficient workman. It was his 
job to repair the television camera and it 
was his cohort's job to track down and 
dispose of Dave. 

He went to work on this basis and 
ignored the possibility that Dave might 
be stalking him— until Dave came silently up behind him and kicked the small 
sectional ladder out from beneath the 
workman's feet. Dave's fist came plunging through the windmill of flying arms 
and legs and connected solidly beneath 
the workman's ear. Startled, off-balance, 
and then slugged, the workman came to 
earth with a dull thud and sprawled motionless. Dave snarled and made doubly 
sure with a thrusting heel-kick against the 
workman's jaw and throat. The workman was not the first man to die from 
such a kick. 

Then, in a matter of minutes, Dave 
was wearing the dead workman's shirt 
and trousers and was plying the tools 
on the television camera deftly. Dave had 
not wrecked the thing, he had just swung 
his weight against its moorings and displaced it. The problem was simple, and 
was handled by a couple of adjustable 
end- wrenches. It could have been done 
. by sheer strength, but not with the desired 
precision. So Dave loosened the nuts that 
held the flexible couplings and slid the 
camera back into its original perfect registry with the camera in the real world. 
He was tightening the nuts again when he 
heard the helicopter returning. 

Dave stooped and packed the tools 
back in the kit, folded the collapsible ladder and stowed it atop the tools, and then 
stood up and waved at the pilot. 

The helicopter landed. The pilot got 
out and called, "Have you seen him?" 

This was in a foreign tongue that Dave 
understood, and could speak acceptably. 

"He jumped me," called Dave, pointing with his toe at the inert figure on the 
floor beside him. 
The pilot looked and scowled. "Dead?" 



THE DEATH CRYSTAL 



29 



"No!" grunted Dave, turning his back 
on the pilot, who was approaching. He 
scooped up the tool kit with his left 
hand and walked rapidly to get out of 
range of whatever loudspeaker system the 
enemy had in the laboratory. He strode 
thirty feet towards the pilot, who also 
came towards Dave about the same distance. Then — 

"You're not—" 

"Up !" snapped Dave, dropping the 
tool kit and pulling the captured revolver 
out of its holster. 

The pilot snarled and made a sideswinging fadeaway motion, bringing the 
rifle up from its under-arm position. The 
pilot fired and the slug snapped past 
Dave's head. Dave fired and winged the 
pilot in the right shoulder, spinning the 
man around and dropping him to the' 
ground. 

Then Dave raced forward, made a long 
leap, and landed, kicking the rifle away 
with one heel and planting the toe of the 
other foot cruelly in the armpit of the 
wounded shoulder. . 

Pain crazed the pilot and he writhed 
on the ground, half-conscious. When he 
came to, Dave had his knees and ankles 
trussed with friction tape and was winding his free arm against his body with 
more tape. 

The pilot mouthed some unprintables. 

"Shut up!" snapped Dave. 

"Bah!" 



Dave backhanded the pilot across the 
face. The face writhed in pain and the 
eyes half-closed again. Dave tore the 
sleeve from the shirt and bound the bullet 
wound crudely. 

"Now," he said harshly, "you'll live 
if . you behave. It ain't painless, but 
you'll live— if you want to." 

"You can't get away with this." 
■ "No?" --?-0;v-'- 'Jp 

"We'll get you sooner or later — ■" 

"Think you'll live to see it?" 

"Yes." 

"You're wrong again, chum." 

"Bah! We know your kind, all of you. 
Self-centered and egotistical, not one of 
you would care to die for his fellow man. 
We—" 

Dave snorted scornfully. "During the 
last time we got in a scrap to prove that 
we're not as sloppy as you think, I took 
on a load of fission products. I don't, 
much care whether you kill me quick right 
now or whether you let me die six months . ; 
from now. I'm a dead man anyway. Hut 
in the meantime, . little pawn of the superstate, I might be able to foul you up be-, 
cause I have nothing, to be afraid of- but failure!" Dave let that sink in, although he doubted whether it made much, 
impression. Then he demanded, "What 
do you know about this?" : ; 

"Nothing." _ . 5 % 

Dave joggled the wounded arm. "Are 
you certain?" . , .-, 




30 



SUPER SCIENCE STORIES 



"You can't torture it out of me," said 
the pilot between gritted teeth, 

"Maybe I can scare it out of you," 
said Dave. He stood up and lifted the 
pilot by hooking his left hand under the 
windings of tr>pe. He dragged the man 
along the ground to the helicopter and 
slung him into the passenger's seat. Then 
Dave went around and climbed into the 
pilot seat and wound up the motor. He 
snapped off the radio and inspected the 
dashboard carefully to be sure that all 
radiating equipment was dead ; he did not 
wish to be followed by any directionfinding equipment. . 

Then he drove the helicopter for two 
solid hours north until he came to a piney 
forest. He droppe'd the . ship slantwise 
through the forest for a mile and came to 
earth in a little glade. The wheels of the 
'copter rested on the half-world surface 
a few inches below the apparent ground. 

; show you a few things that 

may prove to you that we're 
not as stupid as you think. For one 
thing, I, an unarmed man in a strange 
world, have succeeded in. killing one of 
yqur buddies, wounding you, and making 
off with your helicopter. , I've succeeded 
in escaping to a place where it may be 
difficult— if possible at all— to find us. 
Third, I've established the fact that you 
arc not carrying any means of communicating to the real world on this 'copter," 

"Oh, brilliant," said the pilot. 
" , "It ,was," nodded Dave. "You see, 
wfe're a bunch of : mechanical geniuses, 
which you've always admitted. So I postulate some sort of mechanical linkage 
through these devil's crystals of yours. A 
pencil, perhaps,, with the barrel in one 
wqrld. and the magazine in the other 
world, coupled between them with a 
bushing made of a crystal. Maybe a 
radio set with bushings in the dials, and 
a crystal between the this-world diar 



phragm and the real-world electrical element. But if we were carrying anything 
of that nature I'd have felt resistance as • 
we passed down through this forest. 
So—?" 

"Why don't you kill me and forget it 
all?" asked the pilot. 

"I am compassionate, sympathetic. A 
lover of mine enemy. When smitten 
upon one cheek, I turn the other cheek for 
a second wallop. Since you've had only 
one wallop, I'm keeping you alive so you 
can get that busted wing back in shape 
for the second smiting. But you see," 
added Dave as he saw a wave of pain pass 
ever the pilot, "the book doesn't fill in 
the gap between the smiting of the first 
cheek and the offering of the second. 
Elsewhere in the same book — and a long 
way in front of that — you find references 
to the taking of an eye for an eye and a 
tooth for a tooth. You and your gang 
of hotshots have been responsible for the 
deaths of a lot of fine men, killed with no 
warning. 

"So," finished Dave, hard-voiced, 
"maybe you'd like to learn what goes on 
when a mild-mannered genMike myself 
gets mad?" , • . • , . 

Dave reached across the pilot's body, 
grasped the wounded arm and joggled 
it sharply. The pilot cried out in pain and 
beads of sweat popped out on his face. 

"Talk, damn you!" Dave twisted the 
arm again. 

"Where are you running this game 
from ?" 

No answer — and another twist of the 
arm. 

"How do you blow up the crystals?" 
. The pilot's eyes closed and he breathed 
heavily. 

"Possum!" said Dave, slapping the 
pilot across the face. There was no response, so he fumbled under the seat and 
found a water flask. He threw a small 
handful into the pilot's face. "There isn't 
much of this here," he said, "and I 



THE DEATH CRYSTAL 



doubt that there's any water we ean 
drink on this half-world. Wounded men 
get thirsty, don't they, chum?" 

The pilot opened his eyes and groaned, 
"Water—" 

"Talk!" 

"I don't know anything." 

"Then you're no good to me alive!" 
snapped Dave. 

The pilot sat up a bit. Dave twisted 
the arm again. "Don't !" pleaded the pilot. 

"Then talk!" snapped Dave again. 
"You got into this world the same as I 
did, 'but by choice. How do we get out 
again?" 

"There's^-no way out." 

"Baloney." 

The pilot screamed in pain. "No — I 
swear it!" 

"How does the Manhattan Crystal 
furnish power for New York?" 

"I don't know." 

"It's transmission of power, isn't it?" 
demanded Dave, jerking the wounded 
arm again. 

"Good. That's what I thought. Transmission from one crystal to another. They 
blow them up the same way?" 

The pilot nodded, weakly. 

"So we don't manufacture the crystals 
in the nuclear laboratories. You and your 
gang deliver them like Santa Claus, coming down the chimney !" 

The pilot nodded again. 

"Now — -where is this thing run from?" 

The pilot shook his head. Dave snapped 
the arm sharply and the pilot screamed. 
He screamed a name. 

"There's no way back?" 

"No," groaned the pilot. 

Dave let him go. "No way of communicating with the real world from 
here?" 

"No." 

"Do you know where we are?" 

"Interstitial time." 

"What ?" roared Dave angrily. 



31 

The pilot winced. "I'm told," he gasped, 
"that time moves in quanta, like energy. 
We're — -between two quanta of time." 

DAVE frowned thoughtfully. The 
expression, "out of phase" came 
to mind, and he decided that the 
half-world was displaced, out of phase in 
time, moving behind one peak of the "real 
world" and before the next. He remembered seeing a series of synchronizing 
pulses depicted on an oscilloscope ; a 
series of rectangular waves, square-sided 
and flat-topped, rising from the baseline 
sharply. Like the cross-section of a row 
of piano keys, the separation between 
pulses very narrow compared to the 
width of the flat top. This half-world, he 
supposed, moved along in the separation. 
"Where is Claverly — and Phelps?" 
"I don't know. Another crew captured 
them and took them back." 

"I think that's about enough," said 
Dave. "I think we can take it from here." 

"And what are you going to do i with 
me?" 

Dave grinned. "We'll make a sporting proposition out of this, superman. 
You'll be the bait for a trap. If the trap 
springs on me, you'll win. If the trap 
springs on you, well, that's just too 
damned bad!" 

"You can't trap us!" 

"No? You told me I couldn't get anything out of you, either. So just watch!" 

Dave lifted the 'copter once more and 
drove, at headlong pace, back to Merion. 
He hovered thirty feet above the pseudoground, less than half a mile from the 
main building, and then cut the engine 
and let the helicopter drop. For good 
measure, he tilted it sidewise. The ship 
landed with a jarring crash that Crumpled 
the landing ge^ar and folded one of the 
rotor blades down. The hull crumpled in 
on one side, and a litter of broken glass 
and some splinters of metal spread out 
across the earth. Dave completed the 



32 



SUPER SCIENCE STORIES 



picture by kicking out the fore window 
and strewing the ground around the ship 
with the gear from the various tool boxes 
and compartments. 

He found a first-aid kit. He charged a 
hypo needle with a healthy slug of sedative and placed it handy. 

Then he sat back and waited. 

An hour passed ; two, three, and darkness began to fall. Dave switched on the 
landing lights of the 'copter, and then 
with a vicious smile he kicked one of them 
loose so that its beam cut the ground 
askew, illuminating the litter on the 
ground. 

Two hours after dark he was rewarded 
by the distant sound of another helicopter. Dave went to work vigorously. He 
clipped the pilot across the jaw, dazing 
him. He shoved the needle home and 
discharged the sedative into the pilot's 
body. Then he cut the tape and shoved 
the feebly-struggling body half out 
through the fore window,- being callously 
rough so that the pilot's face and shoulders 
were slightly cut by the broken glass. 

The pilot, roused a bit by the pain, 
waved at the oncoming helicopter, trying 
to warn it off. Instead, the other pilot 
dropped rapidly towards the wreck. 

It landed a hundred feet away and 
two men dropped to the ground and came 
running. 

"What happened?" cried the foremost. 
"Wreck," groaned Crandall, inside the 
ship. 

He took careful aim with the pilot's 
rifle and fired, twice. Both men dropped 
in their tracks. 

Leaping over them, Dave went to their 
helicopter and climbed in. He snapped the 
radio switch and said, "We're back, reporting." 

"What happened, M-22 ?" the speaker 
answered tinnily, and Dave cheered himself for guessing correctly that the other 
pilot or observer had reported before investigating. 



"Complete wreck," he said shortly. 

"The men?" 

"Dead." 

"You're certain, M-22?" 
"lam." 

"What was the waving, then?" 

"Piece of canvas. I thought it was one 
of them. The light, you know." 

"Ah, yes. Over there it is dark. All 
right, proceed as directed and return to 
this wreck once the crystal is placed !" 

"Check. M-22 signing off." 

Dave snapped off the radio and rummaged about in the helicopter. He found 
the crystal, packed neatly in an aluminum, 
box in the compartment below the dash. 

Now to find something to write upon, 
Nothing he had available would suffice. 
And if he took the crystal into the laboratory to write upon a wall, the video 
cameras would see him and the enemy 
would blow the crystal up, and himself 
with it. There was — 

Jane ! 

Dave grinned happily. He lifted the 
'copter and drove it madly across the 
plain, following the ghostly road he recalled so well, until he came -to the farmhouse of the Nolan family. Shamelessly, 
Dave lifted the 'copter around the farmhouse, peering into the windows until he 
located Jane's bedroom. He took the crystal from its packing and forced it through 
the window screen. Then he took the 
whole helicopter in through the house 
until he was sitting beside her bed. He 
tapped her shoulder with the crystal until 
she awoke. 

"Uh — what?" she gasped, rubbing the 
sleep from her eyes. 

She snapped on the light and sat up in 
bed. 

She saw the crystal, apparently floating before her eyes, and she jumped with 
fright. Then Dave took the 'copter close 
to the wall. He scratched in the plaster : 

Jane. This is Dave! 

"Dave!" she breathed. 



THE DEATH CRYSTAL 



33 



Yes! It was hard on the plaster, but 
necessary. 

"You can hear roe?" 

Dave pointed to the "Yes" with the 
crystal. 

"You can see me?" 

Again came the point. And Jane hurriedly wrapped herself in the sheet and 
blushed. Then she threw away the sheet 
and said. "It seems that this is no time 
for modesty, Dave. " 

He tapped the printed "Yes" once again 
as Jane reached for her dressing gown 
and slipped into it. 

"What do you want?" she asked. 

Carbon paper, he wrote on the wall. 

Jane disappeared, and Dave smiled at 
the scribbling on the wall. Its disjointed 
message was bearing fruit. But what 
could one make out of: 

Jane. This is Dave! 
- Yes! 

Carbon paper. 

Nothing but the safety of America! 

INSTEAD of carbon, paper, Jane 
brought a "Magic Slate", one of 
those wax-based tablets covered with 
a celluloid sheet that can be written on 
with a stylus and then erased by lifting the 
celluloid. It was better than carbon paper, 
and Dave cheered to himself at her brainwork. 

"What is that?" she asked. 

This crystal is the one the enemy was 



bringing to Merion Laboratory to replace the one they blew up in the safetydump yesterday, he wrote. 
"Where are you?" 

/ am in some sort of interspace between 
time quanta. Your guess is better than 
mine. 

"Who is the enemy?" 

Dave wrote it out, and then added the 
rest of the details. 

"What shall I do?" 

Stop them — somehow. 

"How can I stop them?" wailed Jane. 

Call President Morgan. You can do 
that, he wrote. Let the President put a 
stop to it! 

Jane nodded and went to the telephone. 
Dave followed. Pm putting this crystal 
in Merion, he said. I've been away too 
long—they will be getting suspicious. 

"Dave," cried Jane, helplessly looking 
for him. It was hard on Dave, for heknew what she wanted and was unable 
to stand where her eyes were trying: to 
focus. He gave up and watched her eyes 
look aside and through him, Unable to 
help her see him as he could see her. 
"Dave," she cried plaintively, "come 
back to me!" 

When I can, he promised. 

Jane waved the pad. "I have that in 
writing," she said. Her face showed it 
to be a hard try at humor. : : i! 

Dave tapped her gently on the forehead with the crystal, and then it took 



epser stomach 



Today more people than ever before use Bromo-Seltzer. Because 
this time- proved product gives 
fast help. Not only for headache 
pain, but also for the upset stomach and jumpy nerves that often 
go with it. 

Quick! Pleasant! Bromo-Seltzer 
effervesces with split-second ac


tion, reads' to go to work at 
once. And it is so refreshing! 
You must be satisfied or your 
money back! Caution: Use only 
as directed. 

Get Bromo-Seltzer at your drug 
store fountain or counter today. 
It's a product of the Emerson 
Drug Co. since 1887. 





SUPER SCIENCE STORIES 



34 

off in a long swoop towards the window 
as he left. He did not know, but he assumed that a certain amount of time must 
be permitted the, placers of those crystals 
since the operator could not open a door, 
nor must he permit the crystal to be 
seen floating through a busy corridor. 
How much of this grace period he had 
left he did not know, but he wanted the 
crystal placed under the eye 'of the 
television cameras of the enemy before 
they became suspicious. 

The crystal was a deadly thing under 
any circumstances, but now it was like 
a gallon tin of nitroglycerine ; Jane, knowing the facts, would keep. people out of its 
sphere of death. 

Meanwhile, as Dave drove the helicopter towards Merion, the avalanche of 
action that he" had initiated was rolling 
higher and higher. 

A common, garden-variety citizen^ of 
no especial degree of public acclaim is 
lormally supposed to be able to shake the 
President by the hand and/or complain 
about the weather or the administration, 
or taxes, or anything. It has never been 
determined just what might happen if 
Peter Doakes, of South Burlap, Idaho, 
became possessed of vital information that 
must be handed to the President within 
the hour. Without a doubt the country 
would be blown sky-high by the time Mr. 
Doakes succeeded in proving to ninetyodd undersecretaries that he had something truly important and was not a 
crank or a crackpot. But Dr. Jane Nolan 
pf Merion Atomic Laboratory had both a 
name and a reputation, and when she 
placed her call to the White House, it 
took her exactly twelve minutes to convince the powers that be that she had 
something vital to discuss with President 
Morgan. Four minutes later, the President 
had been awakened and was on the telephone. It took another fifteen minutes for 
Jane to tell her story. 

Then the President haled a pompous 



little man out of bed and made him 
stand at the telephone while the President 
of the United States gave the Foreign 
Ambassador a bit of the Official WhatFor, and began explaining that it was not 
necessary for Congress to convene in 
order for the United States to rise and defend herself against a sneak attack from a 
Foreign Power, and that under the Circumstances, the President was going to 
present the Foreign Power with a fine 
collection of American Military Secrets, 
and that the first of these Gifts would be 
presented within the hour unless the 
Foreign Power surrendered first. > 

The President had a few other suggestions regarding the Return, unharmed, 
of a couple of American Scientists, and 
the well-being of a certain American 
Newspaperman, and some other items of 
mutual interest, and Furthermore, Mister 
Ambassador — 

DAVE CRANDALL flew his helicopter towards Merion, wonder^ 
ing how things were going. His 
job was done. He, too, was finished. There 
was no return. Not that Dave felt any 
great urge to return ; dotibtless there was 
something he could find to do in this 
half-world that would let him go on 
working. He would have to contact them 
and have them ship him groceries, cigarettes, and water. But there were many 
things that a man could do here. 

He thought about Jane, and his heart 
softened for a moment. This was just as 
well, however. She would forget him, 
while he had no future worth thinking 
about. Only hard work, partly because he 
liked activity, partly because it kept him 
from brooding about the date of his certain death. 

A wonderful woman, Jane Nolan ; one 
not to be hurt by fate's little tricks. But 
so long as he was here, she — 

The crystal he had in his pocket flashed 
brilliantly, penetrating the cloth and 



THE DEATH CRYSTAL 



35 



lighting up the cabin of the helicopter. 
At once, Dave felt the hard matter of the 
seat grow tenuous, and there was a bare 
instant of sliding resistance, like the feeling of plunging a foot Into the shifting 
sand of a beach. Then the helicopter disappeared and Dave felt himself falling. 

"Damned unmitigated liar!" growled 
Dave. Then he crashed into a tree and 
lost consciousness. 

Dave meant the pilot who swore that 
there was no return to the real world. 

He opened his eyes and groaned. He 
tried to move and found that he could not. 
He might as well be covered up to the 
eyebrows in concrete. 

He looked around and saw a crowd of 
people watching him. 

"Welcome home." 

"But—?" 

"I owe you an apology." Dave looked 
and saw President Morgan. 
"Apology?" 

"I got too tough with them. They 
flashed you back while you were flying 
the helicopter. You're banged up a little." 

"Nothing that can't be repaired," said 
Doctor Meteridge cheerfully. "A beauti


ful case. Fractures of the tibia, fibula, 
radius and ulna on one side, humerus and 
clavicle on the other. Bruises and a 
couple of abrasions. Nothing serious." 

"David," said President Morgan, "a 
grateful people is waiting for your convalescence so that we can show you our 
appreciation." 

"Yes," said Jane. "Get well. We all 
have plans for you !" 

Dave tried to shake his head. "No, 
Jane. Docll tell you. Six months— " 

"You can't escape me that easily," said 
Jane. "While you're all neatly immobilized in that plaster cast, we are using 
their machine to separate out the widespread specks of fission products that 
were killing you. Just a matter of tuning 
critically so that it will send certain isotopes into the half-world instead of the 
whole human being. So by the time you 
get off your back, we'll have you healthy 
again and then, Dave Crandall, just you 
think up another excuse!" 

"Pick on a guy when he's down," 
grumbled Dave. He was laughing, then, 
but the room blurred through the tears 
in his eyes. 



Lonely, bewildered, lost in the maelstrom of the ages, he 
roamed — to be cruelly shared by worlds other than his 

own — and yet — 



BY THE STARS 
FORGOT 



By JOHN D. MacDONALD 



SPUN. 
Say it soft. Aspirant, vowel that 
is almost negative, the N with the 
tongue held down from the back of the 
throat. 
SPUN! 

Now do it this way. Start it as low as 
you can pitch your voice, and slow. Slow. 
Gas is a reminder of anaesthesia. Two 
words. SPUN! GAS! Equal weight, 
equal emphasis. Ready now. Spun — gas — 
spun — gas — spun — gas. Bring it up slowly, slowly, higher, higher, louder, louder. 
Slide it toward the falsetto, one half note 
at a time. 

spun — gas — Spun — Gas — Spun — 
Gas — Spun — Gas — SPUN — GAS — 
SPUN— GAS. 

Are you losing anything to try it? 

Are you alone? 

You are coming out of blackness. How 
long has it lasted? Is this the tonsils? 
Uh-uh! Long time ago — tonsils. Eight, 
weren't you ? 

How stupid! This is the automobile 
accident ! 

Wait! 

Can't be that. 

Over a hell-and-gone long time ago. 
That was when Marty was killed. Best 
tram since the tail-gate days of the N'Or


leans street parades. You got through that 
okay. Later than that. Later. After you 
started making the big dough. Think! 
Just like they say on the wall at IBM. 
Think! 

How was it? You're coming out of it. 
Coming out of ether. Out from under the 
knife. 

What happened? Take an A. Godfrey 
approach. Wha' hoppen? 

Wait ! Grand Central. Of course ! Boo 
was coming in on the Empire. It was all 
set for the K Club. You were standing by 
the information counter, you fool, you. 
Part of the routine. You fool, you. The 
train was late. 

Blackness. Blacker than the inside of 
an agent's heart. Steve might be able to 
use that in the column. Save it. Black. 
What makes black? Could the roof of 
Grand Central fall down? Poor building 
codes, maybe. 

Now it's set, and still this dizzy spungas-spun-gas routine is going on. 

It comes out of the back of the throat. 
Scream with the throat half closed. You've 
got it ! A giant gets you by the ankle and 
throws you toward the roof. As you whirl 
up the roof breaks open as the sun drops 
through. You're being hurled into the 
middle of the sun 

37 



38 



SUPER SCIENCE STORIBS 



Silence. 
Silence. 

Whatever it is, you're out of it. Alive. 
Cogent. Perceptive. 

The hands can move. The flesh crawls 
with a thin finger of breeze from some unknown place. The light above you is odd. 
A soft globe resting on nothing, suspended 
from nothing. Just. . .there. 

Did Boo come in on the Empire? Ten 
thousand years ago? Why did you think 
that ? Ten thousand years ! 

He sat up. The bed under him felt 
like taut skin stretched over yielding flesh. 
He worked his fingers and his wrists and 
hunched his shoulders. He felt . . . rusty. 
He felt as though he could hear the grate 
and grind of bone in sockets. 

"Hey!" he said. His own voice echoed 
around and around inside his skull. 

Identity was important. "Look!" he 
said to the walls. "I am Harry Harris. 
Look, I got a six-piece Dixieland combo. 
I play what they call a gutty horn. Yesterday we cut the Rampart Street March. 
Boo was coming in on the Empire. Hey !" 

There was a funny pain in the back of 
his neck. Sharp. He couldn't turn his 
head without increasing it. He was 
propped up, holding himself in a sitting 
position, one hand against the bed. He 
took the hand away and the pain stopped. 
He grabbed a rope of hair as big around 
as a ball bat. It was fastened to his head. 
It spilled off the edge of the bed onto the 
floor. He fingered his face. The beard 
was silky-long, spilling off down his chest, 
across his thigh, off the edge of the bed. 

"Okay!" he said. "I can go along with 
a gag. Who's the funny man? Barney? 
Red? Scanse?" 

Silence. 

"What has happened to me?" he 
screamed. 

They came in. Two of them. Quick 
and busy. Hands pushed him back down 
onto the bed. "Doc," he said. "Doc, what 
happened?" 



"Please!" Impatient. A funny accent. 

A hand held a bulb with a nozzle. The 
spray had a tart smell. He shut his eyes 
against it. Then there was an odd slippery 
roughness against his face and head. A 
tingling nakedness. He opened his eyes 
and touched his chin. The beard was 
gone. 

He touched his head. The hair was gone. 

"Look!" he said. "Twenny dollars a 
crack for them treatments to keep my 
hair! Whassamatta with you guys? I'll 
sue you to hell and gone!" 

"Please!" 

He stared at them. Both bald. Young 
faces. The one on his left had a little vibrating thing in his left hand, the spray 
thing in his right hand, and with his other 
two hands he was. . . . 

Harry arched his back and yelled again 
and again and again. 

"Please! Please!" 

They took him off the bed and his legs 
and feet didn't work very well. They took 
him out and folded his right hand around 
a rubbery cable. The cable was moving 
slowly down the center of a corridor. Once 
he had hold of it he couldn't let go. He 
could stand still and then it would slowly 
pull him off balance and he had to take a 
step. The two men were gone. He tried 
sitting down. It dragged him along. He 
stood up again. Way ahead of him somebody else held onto the cable. Somebody 
or something. It screamed too, from time 
to time, but as though its heart wasn't in 
it. Harry looked around. Back in the 
gloom, equally spaced, was another one. 

The cable pulled him through an arched 
doorway. On either side of him was a long 
narrow desk. 

"Good morning," a revoltingly cheery 
voice said. 

"Get me offa this rope, hey." 

They clamped metal loops around his 
arm, put a sucking, buzzing thing that felt 
like a big hungry bug on the back of his 
neck. He writhed. The loops prevented 



BY THE STARS FORGOT 



39 



him from reaching it. A girl sat at a"machine like an oversized adding machine. 
He stared at her hand. It was a foot and 
a half wide. The fingers tromped up and 
down the keys like the legs on ten guys 
finishing a race in a dead heat. 

Harry's stomach revolved slowly. The 
rope yanked him along another step. They 
detached the gadgets. The girl read the 
dials. A tag slid out of the side of the machine. It was grabbed and stapled to his 
bare shoulder. The staples didn't hurt. 
With his hand freed he tried to pull the 
tag off. That did hurt. He left it there. 
He could read it. It was in a funny shorthand. English. On. the top it said "Stores 
— Inv. 1950. Skll indx— fing & lp dextrs. 
Recom disp — Parts." 

The rubber cable continued to drag him 
along. There was another arched doorway. The cable disappeared into a hole in 
the wall. Suddenly his hand was free. 
He moved sideways away from the cable 
and glared at it. 

"Right, in here," a voice said. One of 
the smooth-faced baldies sat behind a desk 
that had the curious and revolting look of 
a piece of raw meat, chopped "square. 

HARRY stepped into the small 
room. He glared;- "I want my 
clothes and I want some fast answers, bub!" . 

"Irritation expected. Answers provided. Ask." 



"I was in Grand Central Terminal 
waiting to meet somebody. What happened?" 

"Agent commissioned find good physical types intercepted, anaesthetized, led 
you to crypt." 

"What agent?" 

"Bureau Enlistments. Time Span Section. You earmarked for us." 
"Who is us?" 

"Bureau Surgical Engineering." 

"Where's the girl I was going to meet ?" 

"Dead. Dead two thousand years." 

Basic resilience fought against horror. 
Harry rocked on his feet, brought himself 
back under control. "You know, guy, I 
believe you. J don't know why, but I do. 
What are you going to do with me?" 

"Spare parts. Brain useless. Lips and 
fingers good, . They go special storage. 
Legs go general storage. Remainder goes 
chemical recovery." 

Harry's mouth worked a few times. He 
brought the words out. "You zanies are 
going to kill me?" 

"Emotional response. No. Use you. 
Painless, utterly." 

Harry, out of a lifetime's experience in 
dealing with booking agents and night 
club managers, began talking. "Look, it's 
the brain controls the fingers and the lips. 
By themselves they aren't any good." 
- "Fallacy. Muscles have memory independent of nerve impulse. Proven." 

Harry worked his right hand in the 



Service Manager 
Does Himself Service 

James M. Davis* switched to Calvert 
—found today's best blend is also 
today's very best buy! 

*of Boiae, Idaho 

CALVERT RESERVE BLENDED WHISKEY-86.8 PROOF-65% GRAIN 
NEUTRAL SPIRITS. CALVERT DISTILLERS CORP., NEW YORK CITY 




40 



SUPER SCIENCE STORIES 



movements of fingering the valves on a 
trumpet. "I don't get it, friend." 

The man said, "Look." 

He reached out a surplus hand that 
Harry hadn't noticed. Harry swallowed 
hard. The hand pressed a key pattern on 
the edge of the meat-colored desk. The 
wall behind the man came to life. Harry 
had seen pictures of the Indian goddess, 
Vishna or something, the one with all the 
arms. The thing was probably a woman. 
She sat behind an enormous U-shaped instrument board. Six arms flickered across 
the board, pulling plugs, depressing 
switches, replacing plugs. 

"Surgical engineering coordinates with 
industrial engineering for peak efficiency. 
Engineered woman handles work of four 
normals in smaller space. Space important." 

"Now wait." 

The voice went on. Clipped, imperturbable. "Earth mechanistic center. Since 
establishment surgical engineering efficiency doubled. Earth supplies small electrical, mechanical devices all planets. Too 
small mechanize assembly." 

"You'd fasten my arms on one of those 
. . . those . . ." 

"Natch." 

Two thousand years before, Harry Harris was known to the trade as a man who 
could land on his feet. 

He said, with an air of confidence, 
"What you guys need is somebody to interview the sleepers you've got in those 
crypts you told me about and find out 
what they can do good." 

"No need. Mechanical analysis faster, 
better." 

: Harry absently reached for nonexistent 
cigarettes in an absent pocket. 

"Now time detach parts." 

"Not so fast, friend. I've got an ability 
your fancy machine didn't find out about." 

"Impossible." 

"Tint shoe's how much vou know. 
Ever hear of the Harry Harris Industrial 



Efficiency Program? I didn't think so." 

"Past ages uninformed on industrial 
efficiency. Used normals. Waste of space." 

"They knew one thing. They knew, 
friend, that music in a good fast tempo 
makes people work better, turn out more." 

"Music? Rhythmic noise? Why?" 

Harry took a deep breath. "It takes the 
frannis quotient of the brain waves, instarates the fatigue acids and guarantees 
a better slattis relationship to product." 

"Hmmm." 

"Okay, wise guy. Go ahead and turn 
me into' parts." 

"Many ancient procedures lost." 

Harry jumped on the faint tone of 
doubt. "Sure they were lost. You people 
can't keep up with everything. Now with 
a little cooperation I could reely make a 
contribution. ..." 

HARRY HARRIS, months later, sat 
on a raised dais. He swallowed nervously. 
Got to give them one thing, they could 
sure follow orders when it came to turning 
out musical instruments they'd never 
heard of. 

The big lenses and mikes were ready to 
pick it up and flash it to four hundred 
thousand fabrication and assembly points. 

He gave himself the beat on the piano, 
picked it up on the string bass, brought 
the drums into play, stroking gently with 
the wire brushes, lifted the trumpet to his 
lips and blasted, lifted the tram to the 
second set of Tips, lifted the clarinet to 
the third set, and, with a solid rhythm 
background, stamping the extra foot he 
had insisted on, he started to give Muskrat 
Ramble a high, wild, hard ride. 

In four hundred thousand fabrication 
and assembly points the tempo of work 
quickened. 

He gave the trumpet the lead, then 
switched it to the clarinet. He played with 
most of his eyes half shut, grinning inside 
as he wondered just what the hell Petrillo 
would have made of this. 



NINETEEN FORTY-NINE was 
an extremely active year for fantasy clubs. New clubs appeared almost each month, and for the most part 
they continued and are now becoming 
stronger and better organized. Nineteen 
fifty bids fair to carry on with even bigger 
and better activities. 

In the New York area, the Hydra Club 
had its annual Christmas Party, which was 
reported in the New York Times and New 
Yorker; The Queens SFL is holding its 
third science-fiction Conclave in February, 
while The Eastern Science Fiction' Association will probably hold its annual convention in March. Other cities throughout the nation are also holding local conventions and conferences. 

The National Fantasy Fan Federation, 
an organization of over 350 members, held 
its annual election in December, 1949, and 
on January 20th announced its new officers 
for 1950. Rick Sneary was elected president. The five directorships went to Art 
Rapp, Ed Cox, Len Moffatt, Ray Higgs 
and your reporter, James V. Taurasi. 
They are already hard at work programming the club's activities for 1950. 

Phil Gordon Waggoner sends us information on The Centaurians, an international science-fantasy-weird organization 
formed in mid-'49. Phil reports that most 
of the organizational work has been completed and that the club is now open for 



Conducted by James V. Taurasi 

new members. Officers of the club are: 
Phil Gordon Waggoner, president and acting secretary ; James Harmon, vice-president; James L. Thompson, secretary; K. 
Martin Carlson, treasurer; Hilary King, 
Ronald Friedman, Wally Weber and Wilkie Conner, directors. The membership 
roster also includes such outstanding 
names as Ray Bradbury, Edmond Hamilton, Ed Cox and Evan H. Appelman. 
Dues are only 50^ a year, which should be 
sent with the application to Carlson, 1028 
3rd Ave. S., Moorhead, Minn. For application blank and more detailed information, write to Waggoner at 2316^ Charleston Ave., Mattoon, 111. 

And now, something different in stf fan 
clubs. This organization is for fans who 
have access to wire recorders. Here's 
what Shelby Vick of Box 493, Lynn 
Haven, Fla., has to say about it : ". . . the 
club (Fan Federation For Sound Production ) has, of necessity, restricted membership, being for those who have a wire 
recorder, or access to same. Besides being 
interested in contacting individuals, we also 
would like to get in touch with fan clubs 
who have recorders, or can use someone 
else's. The purpose of the club is to unite 
owners of wire recorders, and those interested in same; to discuss fandom, etc. 
There is an Official Organ— WIREZ, the 
( Continued on page 128) 

41 



The LONG WAY 



By FRANCIS L ASHTON 



Three thousand yearn after takeoff, space before the 
Calypso's nose was blank and bare . . . behind, the doomed 
galaxies dissolved in titanic whirlpools of star dust ... 
and still the incredible ship forged onward into darkness, 
where Earth's last destiny was written — for three men 
alone — in the heart of an unborn star! 



THE CALYPSO was moving slowly around the Earth in a refueling 
orbit, which lay a long way outside 
that of the moon. The takeoff had been 
smooth and uneventful, and now she was 
awaiting the tremendous load of fuel she 
needed for her long journey. 

Within the cabin, Jefferson was watching the radar-echo detector. 

"The tender is on the way out," he 
announced. 

"We'll soon be off now," said Jan, with 
little enthusiasm. 

Donald had been watching the slender 
crescent of the Earth through one of the 
portholes. Now he stole a glance at his 
two companions. The renowned Dr. William Jefferson always contrived to look 
different from everyone else; he even 
sported a little pointed beard, an unheardof thing in the twenty-second century. It 
was all very well for him and for Jan; 
they had both lived the best part of their 
lives, while Donald was only at the beginning of his. In this brief period of 
waiting before the start, the madness of 
the last few months left him altogether, 
and he could see clearly what he was doing. 
42 



"What are we doing it for?" he demanded suddenly. 

Jefferson gave him a keen, hard look 
and said sharply: "You volunteered. I 
would not have selected you." 

"I am sorry. I shouldn't have said 
that." 

He was afraid of Jefferson. Jan was 
different. He said, "It's always trying, 
this waiting for the start, whatever the 
journey." 

Whatever the journey ! Was ever such 
a journey as this contemplated outside the 
realms of madness? 

The conversation was interrupted by 
the arrival of the tender, a ship three times 
the size of the little Calypso. Jefferson 
went to the radio set and spoke to her captain ; and then they were all engaged in 
the delicate operation of making contact. 
When the two ships were firmly secured 
bow to stern, the captain of the tender 
came aboard to superintend the transference of the fuel. This was to be a much 
bigger load than the little ship's engines 
could have lifted off the Earth's surface. 



The "alarm clock" had worked 
perfectly. . . . 



44 



SUPER SCIENCE STORIES 



When the work was completed, the captain said: "Well, you've got enough on 
board to drive my ship half way round the 
Galaxy and back again." 

' "We are going farther than that," said 
Jefferson. 

"Rather you than I," replied the captain. 

He shook hands all round. 

"Good voyage," he said. "I am afraid 
I shall not live long enough to welcome 
you home again." 

"You would have to live a long time to 
do that," said Jan grimly. 

The captain departed, and his ship cast 
off. As soon as he had gone, Donald 
thought: You fool, you could have gone 
with them. 

"Let's go," said Jan. "There's nothing 
to wait for." 

"Right," snapped Jefferson. "Switch 
on the gyros." 

He made his way to the pilot's seat, 
soaring from handhold to handhold. 

As Donald watched him lining up the 
ship on the» North Galactic Pole, he became filled with panic. 

"I don't want to gol" he shouted. "I 
want to go back!" 

Jefferson turned on him in black fury. 
"You young fool, you can't go back now. 
I only brought you because you were wild 
to come. Brought you, I did, because you 
had done good work arid you deserved a 
reward. And now, in heaven's name, what 
has come over you?" 

Jan laid a friendly hand on the young 
man's shoulder. "It's all right, lad, it's 
only 'takeoff jitters'. We all get the feeling at times. You don't really want to go 
back." 

"I do, I tell you." 

"Anyhow, it's too late now," said Jefferson. "Let her go, Jan." 

Jan opened the throttles to less than 
a tenth of theif fullest extent. Pale violet 
flames burst from the four reaction tubes, 
and the Calypso gathered way. They were 



so far from the Earth that its gravity was 
a negligible factor. The engines were 
working against the ship's inertia, and she 
was a light ship. She needed very little 
throttle to give her an acceleration of one 
G, which was the acceleration decided 
upon. Her crew would have to live under 
that thrust for a long time. . . . 

Jefferson threw the gyro-pilot into gear 
and left his seat. The ship could now be 
left to look after herself. He moved about 
the cabin looking at this and that instrument. Everything was working perfectly. 
He hummed a little tune. 

Jefferson had schemed, experimented, 
and struggled for half a century to make 
this voyage a possibility. He had met with 
hostility, ridicule, and official inertia. At 
times it had seemed that he would never 
get his way, but in the end he had won 
through. He felt his triumph very keenly 
now. 

Jan went over the instrument panel to 
see that the engines were working properly. As he did so he thought, Well, it's 
as good a way of dying as any other, and 
there is a chance that Bill's theories are 
going to work out all right. If they don't 
we just won't knozv a thing about it. 

Only Donald was unhappy. He slumped 
in a seat, regretting his decision to come. 
It had seemed different on Earth. Women 
are the very devil, he thought. If it had 
not been for her! 

THE ACCELERATION was to 
last for a year. By the end of that 
time it was expected that the Calypso's speed would be about 180,000 miles 
a second. 

"How are you feeling now, Don?" 
asked Jan kindly. 

"Better, thanks. I'm sorry I panicked," 
Don replied, with his broad* attractive 
grin
"Forget it. We all have these moments. 
The best thing to do is to remind yourself 
that they will pass." 



THE LONG WAY 



45 



Jefferson looked at the boy and said: 
"He'll do, won't he, Jan ?" 

"Of course he will." 

"And now," said Jefferson, "we had 
best sleep." 

He went to a small cupboard and took 
out a little instrument of glass and bright 
metal. 

"Let's have a look outside first," said 
Donald, and went to a porthole. The 
Earth already looked smaller ; its crescent 
had broadened slightly and was further 
from the sun, owing to the change in the 
position of the spaceship. He could see 
the moon as well, a much smaller crescent. 
He turned away sadly. It was the last he 
would see of his native Earth. 

"You first, Don," said Jefferson. 

"Right." 

He struggled out of his overalls, beneath which he wore a suit of soft synthetic fiber. He got into his bunk, lay 
down, and offered a bare arm to Jefferson, 
who pricked it gently with his instrument. 
He snuggled down comfortably, but before 
he went to sleep, he took something from 
his pocket and looked at it. Sleep claimed 
him- before he could put it away again. 

Jan lightly took it from him and showed 
it to Jefferson. It was a three-dimensional 
photograph of a lovely girl. 

"The young fool," said Jefferson, but 
his voice was kind. 

"She jilted him, that's why he came." 
"I see. I wish I had realized that. Ah, 
well! Sleep, Jan, let us sleep." 

Jan put the photograph in a safe place, 
and, before he went to his bunk, he drew 
Donald's coverlet over him. It was a tender if unnecessary gesture. 

The problem of keeping his crew in 
mental and physical good health, during 
the first stage of the journey, had exercised Jefferson's mind as much as had the 
second stage, around which all the controversy had raged. The little Calypso 
offered none of the amenities for exercise and recreation which were offered by 



the big liners. He had decided that they 
would have to spend at least ninety percent of the time sleeping. The drug which 
he had given his two companions would 
ensure sound sleep for about three weeks. 
Then they would wake, eat, and amuse 
themselves for a while, and then they 
would sleep again. It was the only way to 
cope with the dreadful monotony of this 
stage of the journey. 

He went carefully over everything in 
the cabin, checked the course, put the light 
out, and lay down on his bunk. He injected the drug into his own arm. 

There was silence in the cabin, but for 
the gentle breathing of the three men and 
the steady hum of the gyro pilot. The 
ship went on her way, piling speed upon 
speed, another thirty-two feet per second 
in every second that passed. Outside, the 
Earth beyond her tail dwindled to a mere 
star. The disc of the sun grew smaller. 

IT WAS a pity that some wit had called 
them "coffins" for it was a horribly apt 
name for them. There were three built 
into the walls of the cabin, rectangular 
leaden boxes, each made to the measurements of one of the crew. 

The year of the acceleration passed 
swiftly, as indeed it must when so much 
of it was spent in sleep. During their 
waking hours they ate and drank and had 
their muscles exercised by a massaging 
machine. When these matters were not 
being attended to, Jan and Jefferson 
played innumerable games of three-dimensional chess. Donald read copiously about 
the early days of space exploration, about 
Lawson, Johnassen, de Villiers and Latchingdon. 

They dreamed much when they slept 
and their dreams usually took them back 
to the world they had left. 

Jefferson dreamed of his past struggles, 
and in his dreams he was always frustrated at the last moment and knew the 
bitterness of defeat. He would draw sat


46 



SUPER SCIENCE STORIES 



isfaction from the fact that they were underway, when he awoke. 

If Jan's wife had not died, he would not 
have come. Sometimes he dreamed that 
she was going to be there at their journey's end. At other times he dreamed of 
their past happiness, a happiness, which, 
in his dreams, was brought to an end by 
the Calypso's takeoff. When he woke he 
was always glad that there had been no 
such parting. 

Loretta, the girl in the photograph, 
haunted Donald's dreams. Sometimes she 
was kinder to him than she had ever been ; 
at others she was cold and cruel. She 
would force him into the spaceship, although he was terrified of it. In his 
dreams he was put into his coffin, and it 
was sealed up before the ship started. 

Often he had nightmares, and there 
was one which recurred. He saw the inside of the cabin, and always there was 
stillness, darkness, and bitter cold; but 
in spite of the darkness he could see the 
grim shapes of the "coffins." The terror 
of nightmare would seize him, as one by 
one their doors slowly opened to reveal 
within each a human skeleton. 

Outside, the sun's disc shrank to no 
more than a bright star, though it remained by far the brightest star in the 
great, hollow sphere which surrounded 
them. The only other changes were in the 
shapes of the constellations ; but these 
were slight, and most of the star groups 
remained easily recognizable. 

Their vertical direction was given by 
the field of their acceleration, therefore the 
sun occupied the nadir of the celestial 
sphere, and their objective, the North 
Galactic Pole, occupied the zenith. Midway between these two points, a wide 
girdle encircling the entire sphere, ran 
the starry clouds of the Milky Way. These 
were always on a level with the eye, if 
one looked out of any of the side portholes. 

They could estimate their speed by 



making measurements of the Doppler displacement of lines in the spectra of stars 
ahead and behind. Indeed the reddening 
of the light of the stars behind them became obvious to the unaided eye as the 
year progressed. 

As their speed grew greater, Jan had 
to be continually opening the throttles a 
little wider to maintain their acceleration 
at one G. This was due to the increase 
in their inertia, the well-known "Einstein 
effect." They could never reach the speed 
of light, for then their inertia would become infinite. 

TOWARD the end of the year, their 
speed had reached 160,000 miles a 
second, and the throttles were open 
more than twice as wide as they had been 
at the start. Jefferson, however, insisted 
that a speed of 180,000 miles a second 
must be reached. But as the speed of light 
was approached, Jan had to be continually 
readjusting the throttles, arid he watched 
the rapid shrinking of their reserves of fuel 
with an anxious eye. He often did not 
open the throttles as wide as he should, 
hoping that Jefferson would not notice the 
falling off of the acceleration, but he always did. 

Forcing their speed up through these 
last 20,000 miles a second was using up 
much more fuel than had been needed for 
the first 160,000. Jan protested: "We 
must keep some fuel for braking, Bill, we 
really must." 

He wanted to keep half, but already 
more than half was gone. 

"It will be all right," Jefferson assured 
him. "The resistance of cosmic dust, the 
gravitational pull of the universe as a 
whole, will both take a steady toll of our 
momentum. I must have more speed." 

"But it's only a matter of a few thousand miles per second. The consumption 
of fuel is all out of proportion to the increase we're getting." • 

"In terms of velocity, yes ; but in terms 



THE LONG WAY 



47 



of momentum, even an increase of only a 
thousand miles, a second makes an enormous difference at this stage. It's the momentum we want." . 

And this Jan could not deny. He felt 
relieved. -when, in reply to Jefferson's call 
for more power, he could reply at last that 
the throttles were wide open and the engines could do no more. Still Jefferson 
was not satisfied ; but he compromised and 
agreed that the motors should be stopped 
when two-thirds of the fuel were gone. 

Jan shook his head, but he had to agree. 
The whole project was madness; why 
should he cavil at some extra recklessness 
on the part of his leader? 

And so the little ship sped on, with 
her motors roaring at full blast, driving 
her deeper and deeper into the trackless 
depths of the universe. « 

They made their . preparations for the 
second stage of their journey before they 
stopped the engines, for it" was easier to 
work under gravity. Everything was 
packed carefully away, so that the cabin 
was stripped bare, but for the three grim, 
leaden "coffins." They themselves had to 
be prepared with certain preliminary 
drugs, which were part of the JeffersonDawson treatment, the famous, if not notorious, suspension of animation. 

As Donald helped with the preparations, he grew more and more afraid. The 
clearing of the cabin, which had been his 
home for so long, unnerved him; the 



coffins had become the dominant feature 
of the room. Suddenly he cried out, "I 
won't go ifT there." 

• His companions looked at him ; his face 
was dead white and the sweat was running 
down his forehead. 

Jefferson grunted in disgust; but Jan 
laid a hand on his shoulder. "What's the 
matter, Don?" 

"It's that coffin. I can't — I won't go in 
it." 

The boy had suddenly become beside 
himself with terror. The two older men 
had not realized how much the presence 
of the "coffins" had played upon his mind 
during the .long, dreary months of the 
acceleration. ^* 

"Do you realize," asked Jan, "that our 
journey is nearly over?" 

Donald stared at him. "But," he stammered, "it's only just begun." 

"From our point of view it is just over. 
You will go fast asleep, and when you 
wake up — ta you a few minutes later— we 
shall be there." 

"If I. do wake up." 

"Of course you will." 

"It's not that. I'm not afraid of dying. 
I'd rather die than go in there." 

"You will certainly die if you don't," 
said Jefferson shortly. "There's no going 
back now. We haven't the fuel to cancel 
our outward motion, let alone to start us 
back." 

Jan looked sharply at his friend. That 




HOW SLOAN'S LINIMENT AIDS 

ARTHRITIS PAINS 

Working with infra-red photography, science has now demonstrated why Sloan's-Xiniment is so amazingly effective in helping to bring blessed relief from rheumatic pains and muscular 
aches. Infra-red photos (see illustration at left) disclose that, 
after Sloan's is applied to the skin, veins below the surface are 
expanded . . . evidence that an extra supply of blood has been 
brought to the pain area, to revitalize the painful tissues and 
hasten the removal of waste matter and poisons. 

When you use Sloan's Liniment, you know that it is increasing the 
all-important flow of blood to the treated area, and that this effect 
extends below the skin-surface. No wonder Sloan's helps to bring 
blessed relief from rheumatic aches, arthritis pains, lumbago and 
sore muscles. No wonder Sloan's has been called "the greatest name 
in pain relieving liniments." Get a bottle today. 



48 



SUPER SCIENCE STORIES 



was no way to calm nerves taut to the 
breaking point. ■ r 

"It's all right," he said gently, "you 
won't have to go in there." 

Jefferson caught his meaning. "Get the 
engines stopped," he said. 

Jan closed the throttles. It felt as 
though the Calypso had been suddenly 
dropped tail first into an abyss and was 
falling, falling. . . . They were all three 
experienced in such matters and expected 
nothing else. But Donald gave a gasping 
cry, and even Jan paled. It was now that 
Jefferson's theories and devices were to be 
put to the test, and the failure of any one 
of them meant death to them all. It was 
now that, according to many authorities, 
they were about to commit, suicide. 

Jefferson switched off the gyro-pilot, 
and, as its steady hum died away, the 
silence of the tomb enfolded them. 

"Donald," said Jefferson kindly, "let's 
have an arm." 

■ Donald rolled up his sleeve, and Jefferson pricked the white skin. 

There was no gravity, so he did not fall 
to the floor; he simply passed out where 
he was. His breathing slowly grew quieter, dying away until it stopped altogether. 
The color drained from his face. Jefferson tested his heart and found that it had 
stopped beating. 

"He's under," he" announced. 

"So that was the last one," said Jan. 
. "Yes, it was best that way." 

Jan nodded. They opened the door of 
his "coffin" and put him inside. It fitted 
him exactly. ' 

"What about the 'alarm clock'?" asked 
Jan. 

. "It's all ready." 

"Well then, there's nothing to wait 
for." He went to his "coffin" and opened 
the door. 

"What have you set the alarm at?" 
"At one hundredth of a half-life." 
"That is forty-seven million years, isn't 
it?" 



Jefferson nodded ; he was filling his little syringe. Jan rolled up his sleeve, but, 
before he had his injection, the two lifelong friends shook hands. 

"Don't forget the fruit juice, when you 
call me," said Jan. It was the last thing 
he said before Jefferson's needle sent him 
to oblivion. Jefferson closed the heavy 
door of the "coffin." 

The instrument, which Jan had called 
an "alarm clock," now occupied the middle of the floor. Two wires ran from it to 
Jefferson's "coffin." 

Jefferson had a good look around the 
cabin to make sure that he had forgotten 
nothing. He put his syringe in a niche 
inside his "coffin." He took off his overalls and stripped to the waist. He put on 
the harness, which belonged to the "clock" 
mechanism, and resumed his overalls. He 
put out the light and^the heater and opened 
a pair of valves in the wall of the cabin. 
The temperature raced down, and he began to shiver. In the pitch dark, he felt 
his way to his "coffin." Inside,. he connected his harness with the two leads 
from the "clock," then he found his 
syringe and injected the drug. With a 
great effort, he succeeded in replacing the 
syringe in its niche before he lost consciousness. 

i 

WHEN Jefferson had been a small, 
grave-eyed boy, he had been 
shown a photograph of a spiral 
nebula. "That is a great universe," he 
had been told, "consisting of millions and 
millions of suns as great as and greater 
than our own. It looks so small and faint 
because it is two hundred million lightyears away." 

His youthful imagination had been fired, 
and he had set his finger on the tiny, misty 
patch of light and had said: "One day I 
shall go there." 

Space travel had been a commonplace 
for a hundred years when he was born. 
The solar system had been explored, and 



THE LONG WAY 



49 



men had visited some of the nearer stars. 
It had been found that, in empty space, a 
small force applied continuously to a 
spaceship over a long period of time would 
build up an enormous velocity, a velocity 
which would approach closely to, but, owing to the "Einstein effect," could never 
exceed, the velocity of light. This velocity 
was a barrier which could not be broken 
through; it was impossible to reach any 
but the very nearest of the stars within the 
span of a man's lifetime. It was this, 
everyone said, that put Jefferson's dream 
out of the realm of possibility. It would 
be possible to send a spaceship to one of 
the spiral nebulae, but it would take millions of years for it to get there. 

Jefferson's nature was one which 
would not admit defeat. He became interested in the suspension of animation, for 
there, he thought, lay the solution of his 
problem. 

Even in the twentieth century, surgeons had brought men back to life after 
their hearts had stopped beating. Much 
progress had been made since then, and, 
before Jefferson entered the field, men had 
had the action of their hearts stopped for 
days on end. They had lain as dead until 
their hearts had been restarted, when they 
had got up none the worse for the experience. 

As soon as the heart stops beating, certain chemical changes take place in the 
body, which, if they are allowed to go on 
unchecked, make it impossible for it to be 
reanimated. The problem of suspending 
animation was therefore a chemical one; 
and it was found quite possible to prevent 
these changes by the preliminary injection 
of certain compounds into the bloodstream. 

Jefferson saw at once that such methods 
could only be partially effective ; if animation were to be suspended for any length 
of time it would be necessary to inhibit absolutely any sort of change, physical, 
chemical, or bacteriological, within the 



body. The last two of these influences 
could be stopped quite simply by the application of extreme cold. At freezing point, 
bacterial activity is suspended ; at temperatures approaching absolute zero, any sort 
of chemical change is impossible. 

After some preliminary experiments, he 
had one conducted on himself. His animation was suspended by the usual chemical means. His body was taken to an underground laboratory, and there was maintained at a temperature within a few degrees of absolute zero for a whole year. 
At the end of that period, the temperature 
was slowly raised to normal, when the 
action of his heart was restarted. He was 
none the worse for his ordeal. He was 
precisely the same man he had been before he went under. The time had passed 
in a flash, a year had been completely excluded from his life. He was not a minute 
older than he had been at the start of the 
experiment. 

"You see, the beauty of it is this," he 
said to Jan : "In a spaceship there will be 
no need for elaborate refrigeration, we 
have only to let in the cold of space. In 
the laboratory my body had to be turned 
over periodically because gravity was acting upon it all the time, doing its best to 
displace and flatten my organs ; but in a 
spaceship with the power off, there will be 
no gravity, no field of force at all. There 
will be nothing happening within the body, 
and there wiH be nothing acting upon the 
body from outside. For it, time will be at 
a standstill." 

"What about cosmic rays?" 
"That is an item. The body had better 
be protected by heavy lead shielding." 

And so the idea of the "coffins" was 
born. 

"I can see no reason at all," continued 
Jefferson, "why it should make the slightest difference whether the period of suspension is a year, a hundred -years, a thousand, a million, or, for that matter, a 
billion years." 



50 



SUPER SCIENCE STORIES 



"How," asked Jan, "do you propose 
to bring your crew back to life at the end 
of the thousand million years or so?" 

And that was indeed a poser. 

In any case the action of the heart had 
to be restarted by electrical means, and 
an automatic device could easily be made 
to do that. If the suspension had had to last 
only for a few years, it would have been 
easy to construct a mechanical clock, 
which would set the device in action at the 
required time. But with the contemplated 
time interval, any mechanism which depended upon continuously working parts 
was out of the question. 

Jefferson saw at once that uranium 
would be the only possible timekeeper ; but 
it took him twenty years to, perfect his 
"alarm clock," as Jan called it.' Uranium 
with its half -life of four billion, seven hundred million years would mark the passage of time for as long as he was likely 
to need it. The problem was to make it 
work the reviving apparatus when its activity had decayed by the required amount. 
It was obvious that some intermediary 
would be wanted. 

The intermediary was a cross between 
a pile reactor and an atomic bomb. It was 
only some two feetSn diameter, and when 
the alarm was set, it was charged with 
fissile material. Nothing, however, could 
happen until a slow neutron had been introduced into the pile to start the chain 
reaction. After the trigger action of the 
neutron, the pile would heat up and so 
warm up the cabin. As soon as the temperature was back to normal, various instruments would start working, and, when 
everything was ready for him, Jefferson 
would be revived. All that was simple 
enough. 

The problem narrowed down to one of 
making the uranium send a neutron into 
the pile at the desired moment. In the end 
he devised a very simple and elegant little 
mechanism. The uranium was kept in a 
lead container with a small window, 



through which there issued a stream of 
emanations. This was directed at a crystal 
of beryllium, but between the crystal and 
the window there was a screen with a minute door in it. The door was made of material impervious to alpha particles, and 
it was held shut by the pressure of the 
alpha radiation against it. If this stopped 
or its intensity dropped below a certain 
point, the door opened under the action of 
a tiny magnetic field. The strength of this 
field could be adjusted so that the door 
would open after the activity of the uranium had decayed by any desired amount. 
As soon as it was open, alpha particles 
started entering the beryllium, which produced neutrons under their bombardment. 
Some of these neutrons entered the pile 
and started the chain reaction. 

Simple though it was, it was nonetheless a mechanism and depended upon a 
moving part. The movement would only 
have to be made once, but everybody predicted that the door would not open when 
the time came. In the course of ages the 
hinge would stiffen. 

"There is no hinge," he replied. 

"The continued pressure of the alpha 
radiation will force the door into the 
screen and they will become united." 

"The exact value of the microscopic 
force has of course been calculated, and it 
will be insufficient to force the door into 
the screen. There is no danger whatever 
of the door combining with the screen, for 
all chemical processes will be at a standstill." 

"The magnetic field will fail." 
"Why?" 

And so the controversy had raged. 
Though Jefferson defended his idea successfully, he did not altogether like it. It 
was simple, but it was not simple enough, 
it was the weakest link in the chain. 
Whenever he reassured himself or his 
friends that everything was going to be 
all right, he took to adding to himself: 
"Always provided the door opens." 



THE LONG WAY 



Yes, everything depended upon that. 

WITHIN the cabin was darkness, 
stillness, and utter cold. The last 
shreds of air liquefied in globules 
on the walls, floor, and roof, and then 
they froze solid. 

Outside there was change. As the years 
passed, the bright star, which was the sun, 
faded and faded until it became an insignificant point of light amongst innumerable others. The constellations changed 
their shapes until there were no recognizable groups left. 

As decades became centuries, a slight 
alteration in the position of the Milky 
Way would have become noticeable, if 
there had been anyone to notice. It was 
no longer on the level with an eye looking 
out of a side porthole, it was slightly below it. The girdle was slipping slowly 
down the sphere. At the same time the 
stars in front of the Calypso thinned out 
and those behind her grew more dense. 

At the end of the first millenium, the 
Milky Way was no longer a girdle around 
the celestial sphere, it was a mass of star 
clouds filling the lower part of it. There 
were very few stars to be seen ahead. 

Three thousand years later space before 
the Calypso's nose was blank and bare 
with never a star in sight, and so it was on 
either hand ; but behind her tail the stars 
shone in myriad upon myriad. The true 
shape of the galaxy could now be seen, 
covering a third of the sky, a titanic whirlpool of scintillating star dust, a mighty 
vortex in which whirled a hundred billion 
suns. 

The little Calypso sped on, one hundred 
and eighty thousand miles in every second 
that passed, and, as the seconds added up 
to more and more millenia, so did the titanic whirlpool grow smaller and smaller 
behind her tail. In time it was no more 
than a misty patch, like the one in the 
photograph which had first fired Jefferson's imagination. 



51 



Before it had entirely faded from sight, 
a second misty patch appeared, not directly ahead but on the bow. It gradually 
grew bigger, until it could be seen to be 
a. spiral, elliptical in outline, for it was 
partly edge-on. As more ages passed it 
swung to one side, and, when it was 
abeam, the star dust, of which it was made, 
could be faintly discerned. 

Within the cabin the uranium was still 
shooting out its particles at a steadily decreasing rate, as it had been doing since 
the beginning of time- In due course a red 
glow came from the miniature pile reactor, 
and the temperature began to rise.. The 
air melted and vaporized, the cabin became a warm and friendly place again; 
even the light was switched on. 

The door of Jefferson's coffin opened. 
He emerged and looked about him. He 
went to the porthole and spent a long time 
looking at the nebula abeam. He studied 
it through the spectroscope and made 
some measurements. When he had finished, he shook his head. 

He set to work. He was calm and collected, and he even hummed a little tune. 
He had much to do. The pile had to be 
emptied and recharged, the alarm had to 
be reset for some far future date. His 
companions had to be re-injected, so that 
they would take no harm from the short 
period of warmth before they were restored to the security of utter cold. When 
everything had been done to his satisfaction, he turned off the light and the heater, 
opened the valves, and returned to his 
coffin. He used the needle. 

Again the temperature fell with a rush, 
and everything within the cabin came to 
a standstill. Outside, the nebula dropped 
astern and faded from sight. And then 
there was no further change, for there 
was nothing to be seen on all sides but a 
terrible, all-enveloping darkness. Time 
stood still, for there were no events to give 
meaning to its passage. Only within that 
world apart from all others, the infinites!


52 



SUPER SCIENCE STORIES 



mal world of the nucleus, did time, its own 
time, go on. Only within the little mass 
of uranium on the floor did anything happen. 

It might have been a few moments or a 
hundred million years before Jefferson 
was roused again, and he went through 
a routine similar to the one he had performed the time before; but this time 
there w»s no nebula to be examined. He 
was roused several times before there was 
any change. At last, looking through the 
forward port, he saw a tiny whirlpool of 
greenish light. 

"Well done, Calypso," he said aloud to 
his ship. "Well done. Landfall ahead; 
journey's end in sight." 

He turned to his "alarm clock". Again 
he spoke aloud. 

"It worked," he said, "every time without a hitch." 

He wished he could tell the scoffers; 
hut he recollected that they must have 
been dead and forgotten for millions of 
years, unless anthropologists were arguing 
over their bones and trying to reconstruct 
from them the morphology of a lost, early 
race. He chuckled as he charged the pile 
for the last time. 

DONALD opened his eyes. He was 
in his bunk, and his two companions were standing over him. 
"No," he said, "I can't face it. I won't 
go into that horrible box. I'd rather die." 

Jan and Jefferson looked at each other 
and grinned. 

"It's all right, Don," said Jan, "it's all 
Tover." 

He could not believe it. It seemed to 
him that only a moment had passed since 
they had been clearing up in preparation 
for the unimaginably long stage of their 
journey. In fact it was difficult to see how 
Jan and Jefferson had had time to replace 
everything in the cabin. 

He went to the porthole and looked 
out for a long while. On all sides was 



the familiar hollow sphere studded with 
stars. On a level with his eye was the 
Milky Way, and beyond their tail was a 
bright star. The constellations had 
changed and so had the shape of the 
Milky Way ; but everything else was the 
same. The engines were producing one G 
in the direction of the floor. 

"What has happened?" he asked. 

Jan explained, "We didn't bring you 
around until we had got the cabin put 
straight. We are decelerating. I've swung 
the Calypso around through one hundred 
eighty degrees, and her tail is now in the 
direction of her motion. We are heading 
for the bright star which you saw." 

"So that is not the sun." 

Jan laughed. 

"My dear Don, we are in another 
galaxy," he said. 

Donald was hardly able to take in his 
words. For, though the object of their 
voyage had been to reach another galaxy, 
it was beyond imagination to think that 
they were actually there. 

"So we are going to that bright star 
to land?" he asked. 
"If it has any planets." 
"Why did you select that one?" 
"We didn't. It happened to be right 
in our way. It has the same type of 
spectrum as the sun's, but it is a trifle 
smaller. It seems as good as any other." 

Donald went back to the porthole. He 
stroked his chin; it was as smooth as 
when he had fallen asleep untold millions 
of years ago. He was not a day older 
than he had been. The long sleep had not 
even refreshed him. 

"Strikes me," he grumbled, "one galaxy 
is exactly like another." 

"And that," said Jefferson, a trifle 
sadly, "is the beginning of wisdom." 

AS JAN found when he restarted the 
motors, Jefferson had been quite right: 
during her long trip the Calypso had lost 
considerable momentum. One fifth throttle 



THE LONG WAY 



53 



was all that was required to produce a 
deceleration field of one G, and that meant 
that their speed could not be more than 
160,000 miles a second, and that the 
greater part of their momentum had been 
shed. This was fortunate, for they only 
had a third of their fuel left for braking 
purposes. As it was, the Calypso still had 
a useful reserve of fuel when she approached her objective. 

To their delight the star proved to have 
planets. Moreover there was one, revolving at about eighty five million miles, 
which seemed^ to be a fair replica of the 
Earth. They circled it and examined it 
carefully. Spectrum analysis showed that 
the atmosphere consisted of oxygen and 
nitrogen. There were polar caps and there 
were clouds in the atmosphere. Its surface 
was about three-fifths ocean. Unlike the 
Earth, its land was concentrated in a 
single mass ; and it had no moon. 

"How extraordinarily fortunate," said 
Jan, "to come upon a world like this by 
chance." 

"Yes," said Jefferson, with a smile 
which suggested that he knew something 
Jan did not. 

They chose a temperate latitude, a 
place not far from the sea where the 
verdure was emerald-green. The Calypso 
settled gently to the ground in a valley 
between rounded Kills. A river of clear 
water ran along its bottom between woods 
and wide spaces of rich grass. 



The three men left the prison which 
had contained them for so long. They 
might have been on Earth. The sky was 
blue, with rounded masses of cumulous 
cloud; the star shone brightly; the air 
was soft and warm and was as breathable 
as that on Earth. They could hardly contain their emotions. 

Donald ran down to the river, tore off 
his clothes, and plunged in. He swam a 
few strokes and then stood up in a shallow 
place with the water glistening on rippling muscles. He laughed for joy. . The 
two older men strolled down to the river 
bank. 

"Look," said Jan, "over there, those 
things are houses !" 

He pointed to where, amongst the trees, 
the white walls of a number of little buildings could be seen, shining like brightly 
polished marble. 

"They look pleasant enough," said 
Jefferson.. 

"I wonder who lives there." 

"We'll soon find out." 

As he spoke, they heard something approaching through the little coppice on 
their right. Jan's heart raced. What 
weird denizens might be on this planet, 
what strange forms of life in a place at 
such an unimaginable distance from the 
Earth! He closed his eyes and prayed 
that it might not be something which 
would ruin for them the paradise that 
they had found. 



BROKER 
NO „ 




EAST ST. LOUIS, 111.— 
"I mean it when I ask 
for Calvert,"says Max 
Adelman, insurance 
broker of this city. "I 
switched to Calvert 
long ago, because I 
like its better taste. 
And with me it's the 
taste that counts." 



OALVERT RESERVE BLENDED WHISKEY-86.8 PROOF-65% GRAIN NEUTRAL SPIRITS^ CALVERT DISTILLERS C0RP..N.Y.C 



i 



54 



SUPER SCIENCE STORIES 



THE GIRL was lovely. She came 
running out of the wood, laughing 
happily. Her cheeks were flushed 
with her running and her eyes sparkled. 
She wore nothing but a piece of white 
drapery, caught round her waist in a 
kilt, and thrown carelessly i r over her 
shoulder. i 

She looked at them, smiling, curious, 
a little startled. Her large eyes strayed 
from them to where the Calypso rested on 
the crest of a rise, then away to where.. 
Donald stood in the water. She bounded 
down to the water's edge. 
"Hello!" he cried. 
"Lo!" she answered. 
Jan felt saddened by this instant 
desertion at the sight of Donald; but his 
greatest emotion was utter amazement. 
If the girl had started to speak English, 
he could not have been more surprised. 
But she did not do so, she , was speaking 
rapidly, a queer, though musical, jumble 
of sounds. 

But. now other people were ; approaching more sedately, a middle-aged woman, 
who carried herself proudly, and an elderly man with a high forehead and silver 
hair. 

They stood a little way off, smiling with 
great friendliness but at a loss to communicate. Jefferson pointed at the Calypso 
and then up into the sky. His gestures 
seemed to be understood. They pointed to 
their houses and made gestures which 
were obviously invitations. Then they all 
four looked toward the river and laughed. 
Donald had come out of the water, and 
he and the girl were sitting on the river 
bank. They were smiling and laughing 
and gesticulating animatedly. They already seemed to have no difficulty in 
understanding each other. 

Jan glanced at the Calypso, still graceful in line, but with her surface seared and 
scarred by the dust particles she had met 
on her stupendous journey. He thought 
of appalling vistas. of space and time, of 



mighty universes of. blazing suns, and 
of the awful wastes of emptiness between ; 
and he thought of the way they had all 
been consigned to oblivion when those 
two young people looked into each other's 
eyes. 

IT WAS some days hefore the truth 
dawned upon Jan, and when it did it was 
like a thunderclap. 

"Bill," he said, "this fa the Earth!" 
0*. "Of course it is. I was wondering how 
long it would be before you tumbled to 
it." i 

"But—" 

"We circumnavigated the universe. It 
has been known since the days of Einstein, 
Lemaitre and de Sitter, that if you go on 
traveling long enough in a straight line 
you wind up back where you started 
from." 

"Yes, but the sun must have moved 
an immense distance while we were 
away." 

"We did not correct for the sun's lateral 
displacement; we shared it all the time." 

"But what about the nebula for which 
we set our course?" 

"We passed within sight of it. What 
went wrong, I don't know. We hadn't 
nearly enough fuel left to correct our 
course, and so there was nothing for it 
but to keep going until we did get somewhere. I had to set the 'alarm' several 
times." 

"Several times!" 

"Yes, I was beginning to get quite 
anxious, for we were down to our last 
charges for the, pile when I sighted the 
galaxy." 

"So this is the Earth — hundreds of 
millions of years hence." 

"This is the Earth as it is now," corrected his friend, "as opposed to what it 
was when we knew it hundreds of millions 
of years ago." 

"What has happened to the moon?" 

"It is probably now part of the Earth. 



1 1 iK Lvnu wni 



55 



I guess it spiraled down to the Earth, 
broke up, and became part of it. The 
process took millions of years and it all 
happened millions of years ago. In the 
same way, owing to the resistance of the 
cosmic cloud, the Earth is now closer to 
the sun. This is fortunate, because the sun 
has dwindled quite a lot, much of its substance having been transformed into radiation." 

"I see. It does make you feel a bit old, 
doesn't it? What about the change in 
the continents?" 

"Wegener was evidently right about 
continental drift. They have drifted together again to form a new Gondwanaland." 

"But these people — shouldn't they have 
evolved into something different?" 

"Evolution doesn't work like that," Jefferson told him. "It goes on working 
until it has produced something as near 
perfection as it can get ; and then it stops." 

"Well, at any rate, they seem to have 
discovered the secret of living. They don't 
bother themselves with the numerous 



gadgets we used in our civilization. Life 
is simplicity itself and seems much 
happier." 

"I have no doubt about that. I have 
seen no animals about, and I think they 
must all be extinct. However we shall 
find out all about these things when we 
understand the lingo. How are your 
studies progressing?" 

"Not very fast, I am afraid. It will be 
easier to get it from Don." 

He felt very lazy and content. He and 
Jefferson were sitting in the sun, in fact 
they had not done much else but sit in 
the sun since their arrival. 

"Yes," said Jefferson, "he is making 
great strides ; and so he should with such 
a delightful teacher." 

They glanced to where Donald and the 
girl were sitting. The two looked weD 
together, Jefferson thought. Somehow 
the envy and pride that had driven him 
all his life were very remote now; he 
couldn't imagine what had possessed him 
to make such a trip . . . but he was very 
content to be here. 




OPINIONS, PLEASE 

When you've read this issue of Super Science 
Stories, won't you tell us what you think of the 
stories and features? Please number the stories 
1 to 8, and the features 1 to 3, in the order of 
your preference. Use this coupon, or write us a 
letter or postcard if you prefer. 



The Death Crystal Missives and Missiles 

By the Stars Forgot. . • Pandora's Corner 

The Long Way The Science Fictioneer 

The Call From Beyond Address: The Editor 

Gift of Darkness Super Science Stories 

Slave of Eternity Popular Publications, Inc. 

Hop O' My Thumb 205 E. 42nd St. 

The Vanishers New York 17, N. Y. 



THE CALL 

FROM 
BEYOND 




CHAPTER ONE 
The Pyramid of Bottles 

THE PYRAMID was built of bottles, hundreds of bottles that flashed 
and glinted as if with living fire, 
picking up and breaking up the misty 
light that filtered from the distant sun 
and still more distant stars. '■'/;> 

Frederick West took a slow step forward, away from the open port of his 
tiny ship. He shook his head and shut 
his eyes and opened them again and the 
pyramid was still there. So it was no figment, as he had feared, of his imagination, 



Alone, accursed, he set out on the 
long, dark voyage to the forbidden gateway to worlds beyond life 
itself — restless forever with an 
ultimate knowledge, possessing 
which no man could die! 

born in the darkness and the loneliness of 
his flight from Earth. 

It was there and it was a crazy thing. 
Crazy because it should not be there, at 
all. There should be nothing here on this 
almost unknown slab of tumbling stone 
and metal. 

For no one lived on Pluto's moon. No 
one ever visited Pluto's moon. Even he, 
himself, hadn't intended to until, circling 
it to have a look before going on to Pluto, 
he had seen that brief flash of light, as if 




**1 



By CLIFFORD D. SIMAK 



56 



58 



SUPER SCIENCE STORIES 



someone might be signaling. It had been 
the pyramid, of course. He knew that 
now. The stacked-up bottles catching and 
reflecting light. 

Behind the pyramid stood a space hut, 
squatted down among the jagged boulders. 
But there was no movement, .no sign of 
life. No one was tumbling out of the entrance lock to welcome him. And that 
was strange, he thought. For visiters 
must be rare, if, indeed, they came at all. 

Perhaps the pyramid really was a signaling device, although it would be a 
clumsy way of signaling. More likely a 
madman's caprice. Come to think of it, 
anyone who was sufficiently deranged to 
live on Pluto's moon would; be a fitting 
architect for a pyramid of bottjes. 

The moon was so unimportant that it 
wasn't even named. The spacemen, , on 
those rare occasions when they mentioned 
it at all, simply called it " Pjuto's moon" 
and let it go at that. , j 

No one came out to this sector of space 
any more. Which, West told himself 
parenthetically, is exactly why I came. 
For if you could slip through the space 
patrol you would be absolutely safe. No 
one. would ever bother you. . 

No one bothered Pluto these days. Not 
since the ban had been slapped on it three 
years before, since the day the message 
had come through from the scientists in 
the cold laboratories which had been set 
up several years before that. 

No one came to the planet now. Especially with the space patrol on guard . . . 
although there were ways of slipping 
through. If one knew where the patrol 
ships would be at certain times and build 
up one's speed and shut pff the engines^ 
coasting on momentum in the shadow of 
the planet, one could get to Pluto. 

West was near the pyramid now and he 
saw that it was built of whisky bottles. 
All empty; very empty", their labels fresh 
and clear. 

West straightened up from staring at 



the bottles and advanced toward the hut. 
Locating the lock, he pressed the button. 
There was no response. He pressed it 
again. Slowly, almost reluctantly, the 
lock swung in its seat. Swiftly he stepped 
inside and swung over the lever that closed 
the outer lock, opened the inner one. 

Dim light oozed from the interior of the 
hut and through his earphones West 
heard the dry rustle of tiny claws whispering across the floor. Then' a gurgling, 
like water running down a pipe. 

Heart in his mouth, thumb hooked 
close to the butt of his pistol, West stepped 
quickly across the threshold of the lock. 

A man, clad in motheaten underwear, 
sat on the edge of the cot. His hair was 
long and untrimmed, his whiskers 
sprouted in black ferocity. From the mat 
of beard two eyes stared out, like animals 
brought to bay in caves. A bony hand 
thrust out a whisky bottle in a gesture of 
invitation. 

The whiskers moved and a croak came 
from them. "Have a snort," it said. 

West shook his head. "I don't drink." 

"I do," the whiskers said. The hand 
tilted the bottle and the bottle gurgled. 

West glanced swiftly around the room. 
No radio. That made it simpler. If there 
had been a radio he would have had to 
smash it. For, he realized now, it had been 
a silly thing to do, stopping on this moon. 
No one knew where he was . . . and that 
was the way it should have stood. 

West snapped his visor up. 

"Drinking myself to death," the whiskers told him. 

West stared, astounded at the utter 
poverty, at the absolute squalor of the 
place. 

"Three years," said the man. "Not a 
single sober breath in three solid years." 
He hiccoughed. "Getting me," he said. 
His left hand came up and thumped his 
shrunken chest. Lint flew from the ragged 
underwear. .The right hand still clutched 
the bottle. 



THE CALL FROM BEYOND 



59 



"Earth years," the whiskers explained. 
"Three Earth years. Not Pluto years." 

A THING that chattered came out 
of the shadows in one corner of 
the hut and leaped upon the bed. 
It hunched itself beside the man and stared 
leeringly at West, its mouth a slit that 
drooled across its face, its puckered hide 
a horror in the sickly light. 

"Meet Annabelle," said the man. He 
whistled at the thing and it clambered to 
his shoulder, cuddling against his cheek. 
West shivered at the sight. 
"Just passing through?" the man inquired. 

"My name is West," West told him. 
"Heading for Pluto." 

"Ask them to show you the painting," 
said the man. "Yes, you must see the 
painting." 

"The painting?" 

"You deaf?" asked the man, belligerently. "I said a painting. You understand 
— a picture." 

"I understand," said West. "But I 
didn't know there were any paintings 
there. Didn't even know there was anybody there." 

"Sure there is," said the man. "There's 
Louis and — " 

He lifted the bottle and took a snort. 

"I got alcoholism," said the man. "Good 
thing, alcoholism. Keeps colds away. Can't 
catch a cold when you got alcoholism. 
Kills you quicker than a cold, though. 
Why, you might go on for years having 
colds—" 

"Look," urged West, "you have to tell 
me about Pluto. About who's there. And 
the painting. How come you know about 
them?" 

The eyes regarded him with drunken 
cunning. 

"You'd have to do something for me. 
Couldn't give you information like that 
out of the goodness of my heart." 

"Of course," agreed West. "Anything 



that you would like. You just name it." 

"You got to take Annabelle out of 
here," the man told him. "Take her back 
where she belongs. It isn't any place for 
a girl like her. No fit life for her to lead. 
Living with a sodden wreck like me. Used 
to be a great man once. . .yes, sir, a great 
man. It all came of looking for a bottle. 
One particular bottle. Had to sample all 
of them. Every last one. And when I 
sampled them, there was nothing else to 
do but drink them up. They'd spoil for 
sure if you let them stand around. And 
who wants a lot of spoiled liquor cluttering up the place?" 

He took another shot. 

"Been at it ever since," he explained. 
"Almost got them now. Ain't many of 
them left. Used to think that I'd find the 
right bottle before it was too late and then 
everything would be all right. Wouldn't 
do me no good to find it now, because I'm 
going to die. Enough left to last me, 
though. Aim to die plastered. Happy way 
to die." 

"But what about those people on 
Pluto?" demanded West. 

The whiskers snickered. "I fooled them. 
They gave me my choice. Take anything 
you want, they said. Big-hearted, you 
understand. Pals to the very last. So I 
took the whisky. Cases of it. They didn't 
know, you see. I tricked them." 

"I'm sure you did," said West. Tiny, 
icy feet ran up and down his spine. For 
there was madness here, he knew, but 
madness with a pattern. Somewhere, 
somehow, this twisted talk would fall into 
a pattern that would make sense. 

"But something went wrong," the man 
declared. "Something went wrong." 

Silence whistled in the room. 

"You see, Mr. Best," the man declared. 
«j i, 

"West," said West. "Not Best. West." 

The man did not seem to notice. "I'm 
going to die, you understand. Any minute, 
maybe. Got a liver and heart and either 



SUPER SCIENCE STORIES 



60 

one could kill me. Drinking does that to 
you. Never used to drink. Got into the 
habit when I was sampling all these bottles. Got a taste for it. Then there wasn't 
anything to do — " 

He hunched forward. 

"Promise you will take Annabelle," he 
croaked. 

Annabelle tittered at West, slobber 
drooling from her mouth. 

"But I can't take her back," West protested, "unless I know where she came 
from. You have to tell me that." 

The man waggled a finger. "From far 
away," he croaked, "and yet not so very 
far. Not so very far if you know the way." 

West eyed Annabelle with the gorge 
rising in his throat. 

"I will take her," he said. "But you 
have to tell me where." 

"Thank you, Guest," said the man. He 
lifted the bottle and let it gurgle. 

"Not Guest," said West, patiently. "My 
name is — " 

The man toppled forward off the bed, 
sprawled across the floor. The bottle rolled 
crazily, spilling liquor in sporadic gushes. 

West leaped forward, knelt beside the 
man and lifted him. The whiskers moved 
and a whisper came from their tangled 
depths, a gasping whisper that was scarcely more than a waning breath. 

"Tell Louis that his painting — " 

"Louis?" yelled West. "Louis who? 
What about—" 

The whisper came again. "Tell him . . . 
someday . . . he'll paint a wrong place and 
then..." 

Gently West laid the man back on the 
floor and stepped away. The whisky bottle 
still rocked to and fro beneath a chair 
where it had come to rest. 

SOMETHING glinted at the head of 
the cot and West walked to where 
it hung. It was a watch, a shining 
watch, polished with years of care. It 
swung slowly from a leather thong tied 



to the rod that formed the cot's head, 
where a man could reach out in the dark 
and read it. 

West took it in his hand and turned it 
over, saw the engraving that ran across 
its back. Bending low, he read the inscription in the feeble tight. 

To Walter J. Darling, from class of '16, 
Mars Polytech. 

West straightened, understanding and 
disbelief stirring in his mind. 

Walter J. Darling, that huddle on the 
floor? Walter J. Darling, one of the solar 
system's greatest biologists, dead in this 
filthy hut? Darling, teacher for years at 
Mars Polytechnical Institute, that shrunken, liquor-sodden corpse in shoddy underwear ? 

West wiped his forehead with the back 
of his space-gloved hand. Darling had 
been a member of that mysterious government commission assigned to the cold 
laboratories on Pluto, sent there to develop artificial hormones aimed at controlled mutation of the human race. A 
mission that had been veiled in secrecy 
from the first because it was feared, and 
rightly so, that revelation of its purpose 
might lead to outraged protests from a 
humanity that could not imagine why it 
should be improved biologically. 

A mission, thought West, that had set 
out in mystery and ended in mystery, 
mystery that had sent whispers winging 
through the solar system. Shuddery whispers. 

Louis? That would be Louis Nevin, 
another member of the Pluto commission. 
He was the man Darling had tried to tell 
about just before he died. 

And Nevin must still be out here on 
Pluto, must still be alive despite the message that had come to Earth. 

But the painting didn't fit. Nevin wasn't 
an artist. He was a biologist, scarcely 
second to Darling. 

The message of three years before had 



THE CALL FROM BEYOND 



61 



been a phony, then. There were men still 
on the planet. 

And that meant, West told himself bitterly, that his own plan had gone awry. 
For Pluto was the only place in the Solar 
System where there would be food and 
shelter and to which no one would ever 
come. 

He remembered how he had planned it 
all so carefully . . . how it had seemed a 
perfect answer. There would be many 
years' supply of food stacked in the storerooms, there would be comfortable living 
quarters, and there would be tools and 
equipment should he ever need them. And, 
of course, the Thing, whatever it might be. 
The horror that had closed the planet, 
that had set the space patrol to guard the 
planet's loneliness. 

But West had never been too concerned 
with what he might find on Pluto, for 
whatever it might be, it could be no worse 
than the bitterness that was his on Earth. 

There was something going on at the 
Pluto laboratories. Something that the 
government didn't know about or that the 
government had suppressed along with 
that now infamous report of three years 
before. 

Something that Darling could have told 
him had he wanted to. . .or had he been 
able. But now Walter J. Darling was 
past all telling. West would have to find 
out by himself. 

West stepped to where he lay, lifted 

him to the cot and covered him with a 

i 

tattered blanket. 

Perched on the cot head, Annabelle 
chattered and giggled and drooled. 

"Come here, you," said West. "Come 
on javer here." 

Annabelle came, slowly and coyly. West 
lifted her squeamishly, thrust her into an 
outer pocket and zipped it shut. He started 
toward the doorway. 

On the way out he picked the empty 
bottle from the floor, added it to the pyramid outside. 



CHAPTER TWO 
The White Singer 

WEST'S craft fled like a silvery 
shadow between the towering 
mountain peaks shielding the only 
valley on Pluto that had ever known the 
tread of Man. 

Coasting in on silent motors in the 
shadow of the planet, he had eluded the 
patrol. Beyond the mountains he had 
thrown in the motors, had braked the 
plunging ship almost to a crawl, taking 
the chance the flare of the rockets might 
be seen by any of the patrol far out in 
space. 

And now, speed reduced, dropping in 
a long slant toward the glass-smooth 
landing field, he huddled over the controls, keyed to a free-fall landing, always 
dangerous at best. But it would be as 
dangerous, he sensed, to advertise his 
coming with another rocket blast. The 
field was long and smooth. If he hit it 
right and not too far out, there would be 
plenty of room. 

The almost nonexistent atmosphere was 
a point in favor. There were no eddies, 
no, currents of air to deflect the ship, send 
it into a spin or a dangerous wobble. 

Off to the right he caught a flash of 
light and his mind clicked the split-second 
answer that it must be the laboratory. 

Then the ship^ was down, pancaking, 
hissing along the landing strip, friction 
gripping the hull. It stopped just short 
of a jumbled pile of rock and West let out 
his breathy felt his heart take up the beat 
again. A few feet more... 

Locking the controls, he hung the key 
around his neck, pulled down the visor 
of his space gear and let himself out of 
the ship. 

Across the field glowed the lights of 
the laboratory. He had not been mistaken, 
then. He had seen the lights. . .and men 
were here. Or could he be mistaken? 



62 



SUPER SCIENCE STORIES 



Those lights would . have continued to 
function even without attention. The fact 
that they were shining in the building was 
no reason to conclude that men also were 
there. 

At the far end of the field loomed a 
massive structure and West knew that it 
was the shops of the Alpha Centauri expedition, where men had labored for two 
years to make the Henderson space drive 
work. Somewhere, he knew, in the shadow 
of the star-lighted shops, was the ship 
itself, the Alpha Centauri, left behind 
when the crew had given up in despair 
and gone back to Earth. A ship designed 
to fly out to the stars, to quit the Solar 
System and go into the void, spanning 
light years as easily as an, ordinary ship 
went from Earth to Mars. , 

It hadn't gone, of course, but that didn't 
matter. 

"A symbol," West said to himself. 

That was what it was. . .a symbol and 
a dream. , , 

And something, too, now that he was 
here, now that he could admit it, that had 
lain in the back of his mind all the way 
from Earth. 

West shucked his belt around so that 
:he pistol hung handy to his fist. 

If men were here. . .or worse, if that 
message hadn't been a phony, he might 
need the pistol. Although it was unlikely 
:hat the sort of thing that he then would 
face would be vulnerable to a pistol. 

Shivering, he remembered that terse, 
secret report reposing in the confidential 
archives back on Earth. , .the transcription of the tense, rasping voice that had 
come over the radio from Pluto, a voice 
that told of dreadful things, of dying men 
and something that was loose. A voice 
that had screamed a warning, then had 
gurgled and died out. 

It was after that that the ban had been 
put on the planet and the space patrol 
sent out to quarantine the place. 

Mystery from the first, he thought . . . 



beginning and the end. First because the 
commission was seeking a hormone to effect controlled mutations in the human 
race. And the race would resent such a 
thing, of course, so it had to be a mystery. 

The human race, West thought bitterly, 
resents anything that deviates from the 
norm. It used to stone the leper from the 
towns and it smothered its madmen in 
deep featherbeds and it stares at a crippled 
thing and its pity is a burning insult. And 
its fear. . .oh, yes, its fear! 

Slowly, carefully, West made his way 
across the landing strip. The surface was 
smooth, so smooth that his space boots 
had little grip upon it. 

On the rocky height above the field 
stood the laboratory, but West turned 
back and stared out into space, as if he 
might be taking final leave of someone that 
he knew. 

Earth, he said. Earth, can you hear me 
now ? 

You need no longer fear me and you 
need not worry) for I shall not come back. 

But the day will come when there are 
others like me. And there may be even 
now. 

For you can't tell a mutant by the way 
he combs his hair, nor the way he walks 
or talks. He sprouts no horns and he 
grows no tail and there's no mark upon 
his forehead. 

But when you spot one, you must watch 
him carefully. You must spy against him 
and set double-checks about him. And you 
must find a place to put him where you'll 
be safe from anything he does . . . but .you 
must not let him know. You must try him 
and sentence him and send him into exile 
without his ever knowing it. 

Like, said West, you tried to do with 
me. 

But, said West, talking to the Earth, 
I didn't like your exile, so I chose one of 
my own. Because I knew, you see. I knew 
when you began to watch me and about 
the double-checks and the conferences and 



THE CALL FROM BEYOND 



the plan of action and there were times 
when I could hardly keep from laughing in 

your face. 

HE STOOD for a long moment, 
staring into space, out where the 
Earth swam somewhere in darkness around the star-like Sun. 

Bitter? he asked himself. And answered: No, not bitter. Not exactly bitter. 

For you must understand, he said, still 
talking to the Earth, that a man is human 
first and mutant after that. He is not a 
monster simply because he is a mutant. . . 
he is just a little different. He is human 
in every way that you are human and it 
may be that he is human in more ways 
than you are. For the human race as it 
stands today is the history of long mutancy 
. . .of men who were a little different, who 
thought a little clearer, who felt a deeper 
compassion, who held an attribute that 
was more human than the rest of their 
fellow men. And they passed that clearer 
thinking and that deeper compassion on to 
sons and daughters and the sons and 
daughters passed it on to some — not all — 
but some of their sons and daughters. 
Thus the race grew up from savagery, 
thus the human concept grew. 

Perhaps, he thought, my father was a 
mutant, a mutant that no one suspected. 
Or it may have been my mother. And 
neither of them would have been suspected. For my father was a farmer and 
if his mutancy had made the crops grow 
a little better through his better understanding of the soil or through a deeper 
feeling for the art of growing things, who 
would there be to know that he was a 
mutant? He would simply have been a 
better farmer than his neighbors. And if 
at night, when he read the well-worn 
books that stood on the shelf in the dining 
room, he understood those books and the 
things they meant to say better than most 
other men, who was there to know? 
' But I, he said, I was noticed. That is 



63 

the crime of mutancy, to be noticed. Like 
the Spartan boy whose crime of stealing 
a fox was no crime at all, but whose cries 
when the fox ripped out his guts were a 
crime indeed. 

I rose too fast, he thought. I cut 
through too much red tape. I understood 
too well. And in governmental office you 
can not rise too fast nor cut red tape nor 
understand too well. You must be as 
mediocre as your fellow office-holders. 
You cannot point to a blueprint of a rocket 
motor and say, "There is the trouble," 
when men who are better trained than you 
cannot see the trouble. And you cannot 
devise a system of production that will 
turn out two rocket motors for the price 
of one in half the time. For that is not 
only being too efficient ; it's downright 
blasphemy. 

But most of all you cannot stand up 
in open meeting of government policy 
makers and point out that mutancy is no 
crime in itself . . . that it only is a crime 
when it is wrongly used. Nor say that 
the world Would be better off if it used its 
mutants instead of being frightened of 
them. 

Of course, if one knew one was a 
mutant, one would never say a thing like 
that. And a mutant, knowing himself a 
mutant, never would point out a thing 
that was wrong with a rocket engine. For 
a mutant has to keep his mouth shut, has 
to act the mediocre man and arrive at , the 
ends he wishes by complex indirection. 

If I had only known, thought West. If 
I had only known in time. I could have 
fooled them, as I hope many others even 
now are fooling them. 

But now he knew it was too late, too 
late to turn back to the life that he ' had 
rejected, to go back and accept the deadend trap that had been fashioned for him 
. . . a trap that would catch and hold him, 
where he would be safe. And where the 
human race would be safe from him. 

West turned around and found the path 



64 



SUPER SCIENCE STORIES 



that led up the rocky decline toward the 
laboratory. 

A hulking figure stepped out of the 
shadows and challenged him. 

"Where do you think you're going?" 

West halted. "Just got in," he said. 
"Looking for a friend of mine. By the 
name of Nevin." 

Inside the pocket of his suit, he felt 
Annabelle stirring restlessly. Probably she 
was getting cold. 

"Nevin?" asked the man, a note of 
alarm chilling his voice. "What do you 
want of Nevin?" 

"He's got a painting," West declared. 

The man's voice turned silky and dangerous. "How much do you know about 
Nevin and his painting?" 

"Not much," said West. "That's why 
I'm here. Wanted to talk with him about 
it." 

Annabelle turned a somersault inside 
West's zippered pocket. The man's eyes 
caught the movement. 

"What you got in there?" he demanded, 
suspiciously. 

"Annabelle," said West. "She's— well, 
she's something like a skinned rat, partly, 
with a face that's almost human, except 
it's practically all mouth." 

"You don't say. Where did you get 
her?" 

"Found her," West told him. 

Laughter gurgled in the man's throat. 
"So you found her, eh? Can you imagine 
that?" 

He reached out and took West by the 
arm. 

"Maybe we'll have a lot to talk about," 
he said. "We'll have to compare our 
notes." 

Together they moved up the hillside, 
the man's gloved hand clutching West by 
the arm. 

"You're Langdon," West hazarded, as 
casually as he could speak. 

The man chuckled. "Not Langdon. 
Langdon got lost." 



"That's tough," commented West. "Bad 
place to get lost on. . .Pluto." 

"Not Pluto," said the man. "Somewhere else." 

"Maybe Darling, then. . . " and he held 
his breath to hear the answer. 

"Darling left us," said the man. "I'm 
Cartwright Burton Cartwright." 

On the top of the tiny plateau in front 
of the laboratory, they stopped to catch 
their breath. The dim starlight painted 
the valley below with silver tracery. 

West pointed. "That ship!" 

Cartwright chuckled. "You recognize it, 
eh? The Alpha Centauri," 

"They're still working on the drive, 
back on Earth," said West. "Someday 
they'll get it." 

"I have no doubt of it," said Cartwright. 

He swung back toward the laboratory. 
"Let's go in. Dinner will be ready soon." 

THE TABLE was set with white 
cloth and shining silver that gleamed 
in the light of the flickering dinner 
tapers. Sparkling wine glasses stood in 
their proper places. The centerpiece was 
a bowl of fruit — but fruit such as West 
had never seen before. 

Cartwright tilted a chair and dumped 
a thing that had been sleeping there onto 
the floor. 

"Your place, Mr. West," he said. 
The thing uncoiled itself and glared at 
West with an eye of fishy hatred, purred 
with lusty venom and slithered out of 
sight. 

Across the table Louis Nevin apologized. "The damn things keep sneaking 
through all the time. I suppose, Mr. West, 
you have trouble with them, too." 

"We tried rat traps," said Cartwright, 
"but they were too smart for that. So we 
get along with them the best we can." 

West laughed to cover momentary confusion, but he found Nevin's eyes upon 
him. 



THE CALL FROM BEYOND 



65 



"Annabelle," he said, "is the only one 
that ever bothered me." 

"You're lucky," Nevin told him. "They 
get to be pests. There is one of them that 
insists on sleeping with me." 

"Where's Belden?" Cartwright asked. 

"He ate early," explained Nevin. "Said 
there were a few things he wanted to get 
done. Asked to be excused." 

He said to West, "James Belden. Perhaps you've heard of him." 

West nodded. 

He pulled back his chair, started to sit 
down, then jerked erect. 

A woman had appeared in the doorway, 
a woman with violet eyes and platinum 
hair and wrapped in an ermine opera 
cloak. She moved forward and the light 
from the flaring tapers fell across her face. 
West stiffened at the sight, felt the blood 
run cold as ice. within his veins. 

For the face was not a woman's face. 
It was like a furry skull, like a moth's 
face that had attempted to turn human 
and had stuck halfway. 

Down at the end of the table, Cartwright was chuckling. 

"You recognize her, Mr. West?" 

West clutched the back of his chair so 
hard that his knuckles suddenly were 
white. 

"Of course I do," he said. "The White 
Singer. But how did you bring her here?" 

"So that's what they call her back on 
Earth," said Nevin. 



"But her face," insisted West. "What's 
happened to her face?" 

"There were two of them," said Nevin. 
"One of them we sent to Earth. We had 
to fix her up a bit. Plastic surgery, you 
know." 

"She sings," said Cartwright. 

"Yes, I know," said West. "I've heard 
her sing. Or, at least the other one... 
the one you sent to Earth with the madeover face. She's driven practically everything else off the air. All the networks 
carry her." 

Cartwright sighed. "I should like to 
hear her back on Earth," he said. "She 
would sing differently there, you know, 
than she sang here. " 

"They sing," interrupted Nevin, "only 
as they feel. " 

"Firelight On the wall," said Cartwright, 
"and she'd sing like firelight on the wall. 
Or the smell of lilacs in an April rain and 
her music would be like the perfume of 
lilacs and the mist of rain along the garden 
path." 

"We don't have rain or lilacs here," 
said Nevin and he looked, for a moment, 
as if he were going to weep. 

Crazy, thought West. Crazy as a pair 
of bedbugs. Crazy as the man who'd 
drunk himself to death out on Pluto's 
moon. 

And yet, perhaps not so crazy. 
"They have no mind," said Cartwright. 
"That is, no mind to speak of. Just a 




JAYNftP-WtaUels 
Kill IPf N-WORMS 

(You may have them and not know it) 

Fidgeting, nose-picking and a tormenting rectal itch are often telltale signs of Pin-Worms . . . ugly 
parasites that medical experts say infest one 
out of every three persons examined. Entire 
families may be victims and not know it. 

To get rid of Pin-Worms, these pests must not 
only be killed, but killed in the large intestine 
where they live and multiply. That's exactly 



what Jayne's P-W tablets do . . . and here's how 
they do it : First— a scientific coating carries the 
tablets into the bowels before they dissolve. 
Then — Jayne's modern, medically-approved ingredient goes right to work — kills Pin-Worms' 
quickly and easily. 

Don't take chances with this dangerous, highly contagious condition. At the first sign of PinWorms, ask your druggist for genuine Jayne'a 
P-W Vermifuge . . . the small, easy-to-take tablets 
perfected by famous Dr. D. Jayne & Son, specialists in worm remedies for over 100 years. 

JAYNEISO^PIN-WORMS 



66 



SUPER SCIENCE STORIES 



bundle of nervous reactions, probably 
without the type of sensory perceptions 
that we have, but more than likely with 
other totally different sensory perceptions 
to make up for it. Sensitive things. Music 
to them is an expression of sensory impressions. They can't help the way they 
sing any more than a moth can help killing 
himself against a candle-flame. And 
they're naturally telepathic. They pick up 
thoughts and pass them along. Retain 
none of the thought, you understand, just 
pass it along. Like old fashioned telephone 
wires. Thoughts that listeners, under the 
spell of music, would pick up and accept." 

"And the beauty of it is," said Nevin, 
"is that if a listener ever became conscious 
of those thoughts afterward and wondered about them, he would be convinced 
that they were his own, that he had had 
them all the time." 

"Clever, eh?" asked Cartwright. 

West let out his breath. "Clever, yes. 
I didn't think you fellows had it in you." 

West wanted to shiver and found he 
couldn't and the shiver built up and up 
until it seemed his tautened nerves would 
snap. 

Cartwright was speaking. "So our 
Stella is doing all right." 

"What's that?" asked West. 

"Stella. The other one of them. The 
one with the face." 

"Oh, I see," said West. "I didn't know 
her name was Stella. No one, in fact, 
knows anything about her. She suddenly 
appeared one night as a surprise feature 
on one of the networks. She was announced as a mystery singer, and then 
people began calling her the White Singer. 
She always sang in dim, blue light, you 
see, and no one ever saw her face too 
plainly, although everyone imagined, ,of 
course, that it was beautiful. 

"The network made no bones about her 
being an alien being. She was represented 
as a member of a mystery race that Juston 
Lloyd had found in the Asteroids. You 



remember Lloyd, the New York press 
agent." , , 

Nevin was leaning across the table. 
"And the people, the government, it does 
not suspect?" 

West shook his head. "Why should it? 
Your Stella is a wonder. Everyone is 
batty over her. The newspapers went wild. 
The movie people — " 

"And the cults?" 

"The cults," said West, "are doing 
fine." 

"And you?" asked Cartwright and in 
the man's rumbling voice West felt the 
challenge. 

"I found out," he said, "I came here 
to get cut in." , 

"You know exactly what you are asking?" 

"I do," said West, wishing that he did. 

"A new philosophy," said Cartwright. 
"A new concept of life. New paths for 
progress. Secrets the human race never 
has suspected. Remaking the human civilization almost overnight." 

"And you," said West, "right at the 
center, pulling all the strings." 

"So," said Cartwright. 

"I want a few to pull myself." 

Nevin held up his hand. "Just a minute, 
Mr. West. We would like to know just 
how—" 

Cartwright laughed at him. "Forget it, 
Louis. He knew about your painting. He 
had Annabelle. Where do you suppose he 
found out?" 

"But — but — " said Nevin. 

"Maybe he didn't use a painting," Cartwright declared. "Maybe he used other 
methods. After all, there are others, you 
know. Thousands of years ago men knew 
of the place we found. Mu, probably. 
Atlantis. Some other forgotten civilization. Just the fact that West' had Annabelle is enough for me. He must have 
been there." 

West smiled, relieved. "I used other 
methods," he told them. 



67 



CHAPTER THREE 

The Painting 

A ROBOT came in, wheeling a tray 
with steaming dishes. 
"Let's sit down," suggested Nevin. 
"Just one thing," asked West. "How 
did you get Stella back to Earth? None 
of you could have taken her. You'd have 
been recognized." 

Cartwright chuckled. "Robertson," he 
*aid. "We had one ship and he slipped 
out. As to the recognition, Belden is our 
physician. He also, if you remember,, is 
a plastic surgeon of no mean ability." 

"He did the job," said Nevin, "for 
both Robertson and Stella." 

"Nearly skinned us alive," grumbled 
Cartwright, "to get enough to do the 
work. I'll always think that he took more 
than he really needed, just for spite. He's 
a moody beggar." 

Nevin changed the subject. "Shall we 
have Rosie sit with us?" 
"Rosie?" asked West. 
"Rosie is Stella's sister. We don't know 
the exact relationship, but we call her that 
for convenience." 

"There are times," explained Cartwright, "when we forget her face and let 
her sit at the table's head, as if she were 
one of us. As if she were our hostess. 
She looks remarkably like a woman, you 
know. Those wings of hers are like an 
ermine cape, and that platinum hair. She 
lends something to the table... a sort 
of—" 

"An illusion of gentility," said Nevin. 

"Perhaps we'd better not tonight," decided Cartwright. "Mr. West is not used 
to her. After he's been here awhile — " 

He stopped and looked aghast. 

"We've forgotten something," he announced. 

He rose and strode around the table to 
the imitation fireplace and took down a 
bottle that stood on the mantelpiece — a 



bottle with a black silk bow tied around 
its neck. Ceremoniously, he set it in the 
center of the table, beside the bowl of 
fruit. 

"It's a little joke we have," said Nevin. 
"Scarcely a joke," contradicted Cartwright. 

West looked puzzled. "A bottle of 
whisky?" 

"But a special bottle," Cartwright said. 
"A very special bottle. Back in the old 
days we formed a last man's club, jokingly. This bottle was to be the one the last 
man would drink. It made us feel so adventuresome and brave and we laughed 
about it while we labored to find hormones. For, you see, none of us thought 
it would ever come to pass." 

"But now," said Nevin, "there are only 
three of us." 

"You are wrong," Cartwright reminded 
him. "There are four." 

Both of them looked at West. 

"Of course," decided Nevin. "There 
are four of us." 

Cartwright spread the napkin in his lap. 
"Perhaps, Louis, we might as well let Mr. 
West see the painting." 

Nevin hesitated. "I'm not quite satisfied, Cartwright. . ." 

Cartwright clucked his tongue. "You're 
too suspicious, Louis. He had the creature, 
didn't he? He knew about your painting. 
There was only one way that he could 
have learned." 

Nevin considered.. "I suppose you're 
right," he said. 

"And if Mr. West should, by any 
chance, turn out to be an impostor," said 
Cartwright, cheerfully, "we can always 
take the proper steps." 

Nevin said to West: "I hope you understand." 

"Perfectly," said West. 

"We must be very careful," Nevin 
pointed out. "So few would understand." 

"So very few," said West. 

Nevin stepped across the room and 



68 



SUPER SCIENCE STORIES 



pulled a cord that hung along the wall. 
One of the tapestries rolled smoothly back, 
fold on heavy fold. West, watching, held 
his breath at what he saw. 

A tree stood in the foreground, laden 
with golden fruit, fruit that looked exactly 
like some of that in the bowl upon the 
table. As if someone had just stepped 
into the painting and picked it fresh for 
dinner. 

Under the tree ran a path, coming up 
to the very edge of the canvas in such 
detail that even the tiny pebbles strewn 
upon it were clear to the eye. And from 
the tree the path ran back against a sweep 
of background, climbing into wooded hills. 

For the flicker of a passing second, 
West could have sworn that he heard the 
whisper of wind in the leaves of the fruitladen tree, that he saw the leaves tremble 
in the wind, that he smelled the fragrance 
of little flowers that bloomed along the 
path. 

"Well, Mr. West?" Nevin asked, triumphantly. 

"Why," said West, ears still cocked for 
the sound of wind in leaves again. "Why, 
it almost seems as if one could step over 
and walk straight down that path." 

Nevin sucked in his breath with a sound 
that was neither gasp nor sigh, but somewhere in between. Down at the end of the 
table, Cartwright was choking on his wine, 
chuckling laughter bubbling out between 
his lips despite all his efforts to keep it 
bottled up. 

"Nevin," asked West, "have you ever 
thought of making another painting?" 

"Perhaps," said Nevin. "Why do you 
ask?" 

West smiled. Through his brain words 
were drumming, words that he remembered, words a man had whispered just 
before he died. 

"I was just thinking," said West, "of 
what might happen if you should paint 
the wrong place sometime." 

"By Lord," yelled Cartwright, "he's 




got you there, Nevin. The exact words 
I've been telling you." 

Nevin started to rise from the table, 
and even as he did the rustling whisper 
of music filled the room. Music that relaxed Nevin's hands from their grip upon 
the table's edge, music that swept the 
sudden chill from between West's shoulderblades. 

Music that told of keen-toothed space 
and the blaze of stars. Music that had the 
whisper of rockets and the quietness of 
the void and the somber arches of eternal 
night. 

Rosie was singing. 

WEST sat on the edge of his bed 
and knew that he had been lucky 
to break away before there could 
be more questions asked. So far, he was 
certain, he'd answered those they asked 
without arousing too much suspicion, but 
the longer a thing like that went on the 
more likely a man was to make some slight 
mistake. 

Now he would have time to think, time 
to try to untangle and put together some 
of the facts as they now appeared. 

One of the minor monstrosities that 
infested the place climbed the bedpost and 
perched upon it, wrapping its long tail 
about it many times. It chittered at West 
and West looked at it and shuddered, 
wondering if it were making a face at him 
or if it really looked that way. 

These slithery, chittering things . . . he'd 
heard of them somewhere before. He 
knew that. He'd even seen pictures of 
them at some time. Some other time and 
place, very long ago. Things like Annabelle and the creature Cartwright had 
dumped off the chair and the little satanic 
being that perched upon the bedstead. 

That was funny, the thing Nevin had 
said about them . . . they keep sneaking . 
through. ... not sneaking in, but through. 

Nothing added up. Not even Nevin and Cartwright. For there was about them 



THE CALL FROM BEYOND 



69 



some subtle tinge of character not human 
in its texture. 

They had been working with hormones 
when something had happened that occasioned the warning sent to Earth. Or 
had there been a warning ? Had the warning been a fake? Was there something 
going on here the Solar government didn't 
want anyone to know? 

Why had they sent Stella to Earth? 
Why were they so pleased that she was 
so well received ? What was it Nevin had 
asked . . . and the government, it does not 
suspect? Why should the government 
suspect? What was there for it to suspect? Just a mindless creature that sang 
like the bells of heaven. 

That hormone business, now. Hormones 
did funny things to people. 

I should know, said West, talking to 
himself. 

A little faster and a little quicker. A 
mental shortcut here and there. And you 
scarcely know, yourself, that you are any 
different. That's how the race develops. 
A mutation here and another there and 
in a thousand years or two a certain percentage of the race is not what the race 
had been a thousand years before. 

Maybe it was a mutation back in the 
Old Stone Age who struck two flints together and made himself a fire. Maybe 
another mutant who dreamed up a wheel 
and took a stoneboat and changed it to a 
wagon. 

Slowly, he said, it would have to be 
slowly. Just a little at a time. For if it 
were too much, if it were noticeable, the 
other humans would kill off each mutation 
as it became apparent. For the human 
race cannot tolerate divergence from the 
norm, even though mutation is the process 
by which the race develops. 

The race doesn't kill the mutants any 
more. It confines them to mental institutions or it forces them into such dead-ends 
of expression as art or music, or it finds 
nice friendly exiles for them, where they 



will be comfortable and have a job to do 
and where, the normal humans hope, 
they'll never know what they are. 

It's harder to be different now, he 
thought, harder to be a mutant and escape 
detection, what with the medical boards 
and the psychiatrists and all the other 
scientific mumbo-jumbo the humans have 
set up to guard their peace of mind. 

Five hundred years ago, thought West, 
they would not have found me out. Five 
hundred years ago I might not have realized the fact myself. 

Controlled mutation? Now that was 
something different. That was the thing 
the government had in mind when it sent 
the commission here to Pluto, taking advantage of the cold conditions to develop 
hormones that might mutate the race. 
Hormones that might make a better race, 
that might develop latent talents or even 
add entirely new characteristics calculated 
to bring out the best that was in humanity. 

Controlled mutations, those were all 
right. It was only the wild mutations that 
the government would fear. 

What if the members of the commission 
had developed a hormone and tried it on 
themselves? 

His thought stopped short, pleased with 
the idea, with the possible solution. 

Upon the bedpost the little monstrosity 
fingered its mouth, slobbering gleefully. 

A knock came on the door. 

"Come in," called West. 

The door opened and a man came in. 

"I'm Belden," said the man. "Jim Belden. They told me you were here." 

"I'm glad to know you, Belden." 

"What's the game?" asked Belden. 

"No game," said West. 

"You got those two downstairs sold on 
you," Belden said. "They think you're 
another great mind that has discovered 
the outside." 

"So they do," said West. "I'm very 
glad to know it." 

"They pointed out Annabelle to me," 



70 



SUPER SCIENCE STORIES 



said Belden. "Said that was proof you 
were one of us. But I recognized Annabelle. They didn't, but I did. She's the 
one that Darling took along. You got her 
from Darling." 

WEST stayed silent. There was no 
use in playing innocent with 
Belden, for Belden had guessed 
too close to the truth. 

Belden lowered his voice. "You have 
the same hunch as I have. You figure 
Darling's hormone is worth more than all 
this mummery going on downstairs. And 
you're here to find it. I told Nevin that 
Darling's hormone was the thing for us to 
find instead of messing around outside, but 
he didn't think so. After we took Darling 
to the moon, Nevin smashed the ship's 
controls. He was afraid I might get away, 
you see. He didn't trust me and he 
couldn't afford to let me get away." 

"I'll trade with you," West told him 
quietly. 

"We'll go to the moon in your ship and 
see Darling," said Belden. "We'll beat it 
out of him." 

West grinned wryly. "Darling's dead," 
he said. 

"Did you search the hut?" asked Belden. 

"Of course not. Why should I have 
searched it?" 

"It's there, then," said Belden, grimly. 
"Hidden in the hut somewhere. I've 
turned this place upside down and I'm 
sure it isn't here. Neither the formula 
nor the hormones themselves. Not unless 
Darling was trickier than I thought he 
was." 

"You know what this hormone is," said 
West smoothly, trying to make it sound 
as if he himself might know it. 

"No," said Belden shortly. "Darling 
didn't trust us. He was angry at what 
Nevin was trying to do. And once he 
made a crack that the man who had it 
could rule the Solar System. Darling 



wasn't kidding, West. He knew more 
about hormones than all the rest of us put 
together." 

"Seems to me," West said drily, "that 
you would have wanted to keep a man 
like that here. You certainly could have 
used him." 

"Nevin again," Belden told him. "Darling wouldn't go along with the program 
that Nevin planned. Even threatened to 
expose him if he ever had the chance. 
Nevin wanted to kill him, but Cartwright 
thought up a joke. . .he's jovial, Cartwright is." 

"I've noticed that," said West. 

"Cartwright thought up the exile business," Belden said. "Offered Darling any 
one thing he wished to take along. One 
thing, you understand. Just one thing. 
That's where the joke came in. Cartwright 
expected Darling to go through agonies 
trying to make up his mind. But there 
wasn't a moment's hesitation. Darling 
took the whisky." 

"He drank himself to death," said 
West. 

"Darling wasn't a drinking man," Belden told him, sharply. 

"It was suicide," said West. "Darling 
took you fellows down the line, neatly, 
all the way. He was away ahead of you." 

A soft sound like the brushing of a 
bird's wing swung West around. 

Rosie was coming through the door, her 
wings half -raised, exposing the hideousness of the furry, splotched body beneath 
the furry, death's-head face. 

"No !" screamed Belden. '•'No ! I wasn't 
going to do anything. I wasn't — " 

He backed away, arms outthrust to 
ward off the thing that walked toward 
him, mouth still working, but no sound 
coming out. 

Rosie brushed West to one side with a 
flip of a furry wing and then the wings 
spread wider and shielded Belden from 
West's view. The wings clapped shut and 
from behind them came the muffled, 



THE GALL FROM BEYOND 



71 



scream of the man. Then nothing ; silence. 

West's hand dropped to the holster and 
his gun came sliding out. His thumb 
slammed down the activator and the gun 
purred like a well-contented cat. 

The ermine of Rosie's wings turned 
black and she crumpled to the floor. A 
sickening odor filled the room. 

"Belden!" cried West. He leaped forward, kicked the charred Rosie to one side. 
Belden lay on the floor and West turned 
away retching. 

For a moment West stood in indecision, 
then swiftly he knew what he must do. 

Showdown. He had hoped that it could 
be put off a little longer, until he knew 
a little more, but the incident of Belden 
and Rosie had settled it. There was nothing else to do. 

He strode through the door and down 
the winding staircase toward the darkened 
room below. 

The painting, he saw, was lighted . . . 
lighted as if from within itself. As if the 
source of light lay within the painting, as 
if some other sun shone upon the landscape that lay upon the canvas. The picture was lighted, but the rest of the room 
was dark and the light did not come out 
of the painting, but stayed there, imprisoned in the canvas. 

Something scuttled between West's feet 
and scuttered down the stairs. It squeaked 
and its claws beat a tattoo on the steps. 

As West reached the bottom of the 
stairway a voice came out of the darkness : 

"Are you looking for something, Mr. 
West?" 

"Yes, Cartwright," said West. "I am 
looking for you." 

"You must not be too concerned with 
what Rosie did," Cartwright said. "Don't 
let it upset you. Belden had it coming to 
him for a long time. He was scarcely one 
of us, really, never one of us. He pretended to go along with us because it was 
the only way that he could save his life. 



And life is such a small thing to consider, 
Don't you think so, Mr. West?" 

CHAPTER FOUR 
The Last Man 

WEST stood silently at the bottom 
of the stairs. The room was too 
dark to see anything, but the voice 
was coming from somewhere near the 
table's end, close to the lighted painting. 

I may have to kill him, West was thinking, and I must know where he is. For 
the first shot has to do it, there'll be no 
time for a second. 

"Rosie had no mind," the voice said out 
in the darkness. "That is, no mind to 
speak of. But she was telepathic. Her 
brain picked up thoughts and passed them 
on. And she could obey simple commands. 
Very simple commands. And killing a 
man is so simple, Mr. West." 

"Rosie stood here beside me and I knew 
every word that you and Belden said. I 
did not blame you, West, for you had no 
way of knowing what you did. But I did 
blame Belden and I sent Rosie up to get 
him. 

"There's only one thing, West, that I 
hold against you. You should not have 
killed Rosie. That was a great mistake, 
West, a very great mistake." 

"It was no mistake," said West. "I did 
it on purpose." 

"Take it easy, Mr. West," said Cartwright. "Don't do anything that might 
make me pull the trigger. Because I have 
a gun on you. Dead center on you, West, 
and I never miss." 

"I'll give you odds," said West, "that 
I can get you before you can pull the 
trigger." 

"Now, Mr. West," said Cartwright, 
"let's not get hot-headed about this. Sure, 
you pulled a fast one on us. You tried to 
muscle in and you almost sold us, although eventually we would have tripped 



yea up. And I admire your guts. Maybe 
we can . work it out so no one will get 
killed." 

"Start talking," West told him. 
"It was too bad about Rosie," said 
Cartwright, "and I really hold that against 
you, West, for we could have used Rosie 
to good advantage. But after all, the work 
is started on the other planets and we still 
have Stella. Our students are well 
grounded. . .they can get along without 
instructions for a little while and maybe 
by the time we need to get in contact with 
them again we can find another one to 
replace our Rosie." 

"Quit wandering around," said West. 
"Let's hear what you have in mind." 

"Well," said Cartwright, "we're getting 
awfully short-handed. Belden's dead and 
Darling's dead and if Robertson isn't dead 
by now he will be very shortly. For after 
he took Stella to Earth, he tried to desert, 
tried to run away. And that would never 
do, of course. He might tell folks about 
us and we can't let anyone do that. For 

we are dead, you see " 

He chuckled, the chuckle rolling 
through the darkness. 

"It was a masterpiece, West, that 
broadcast. I was the last man alive and I 
told them what had happened. I told them 
the spacetime continuum had ruptured 
and things were coming through. And I 
gurgled. . .1 gurgled just before I died." 

"You didn't really die, of course," West 
said, innocently. 

"Hell, no. But they think I did. And 
they still wake up screaming, thinking 
how I must have died." 

Ham, thought West. Pure, unadulterated ham. A jokster who would maroon a 
man to die on a lonely moon. A man who 
held a gun in his fist while he bragged 
about the things he'd done. . .about how 
he had outwitted Earth. 

"You see," said Cartwright, "I had to 
make them believe that it really happened. 
I had to make it so horrible that the 



SUPER SCIEN CE STORIES 

government would never make it public, 
so horrible they'd close the planet with an 
iron-tight ban." 

"You had to be alone," said West. 
"That's right, West. We had to be 
alone." 

"Well," said West. "You've almost got 
it now. There's only two of you alive." 
"The two of us," Cartwright said, "and 



you." 

"You forget, Cartwright," said West. 
"You're going to kill me. You've got a 
gun pointed at me and you're all set to 
pull the trigger." 

"Not necessarily," said Cartwright. 
"We might make a deal." 

I've got him now, thought West.^ I 
know exactly where he is. I can't see him, 
but I know where he is. And the pay-off 
is in a minute. It'll be one of us or the 
other. 

"You aren't much use to us," said Cartwright, "but we might need you later. 
You remember Langdon?" 

"The one that got lost," said West. 

Cartwright chuckled. "That's it, West. 
But he wasn't lost. We gave him away. 
You see there was a— a— well, something, 
that could use him for a pet and so we 
made it a present of Langdon." 

He chuckled again. "Langdon didn't 
like the idea too well, but what were we 
to do?" 

"Cartwright," West said, evenly, "I'm 
going for my gun." 

"What's that—-" said Cartwright, but 
the other words were blotted out by the 
hissing of his gun, firing even as he talked. 

The beam hissed into the wall at the 
foot of the staircase, a spot that had been 
covered only a split second before by 
West's head. 

But West had dropped to a crouch almost as he spoke and now his own gun 
was in his fist, tilting up, solid in his hand. 
His thumb pressed the activator and then 
slid off. 

Something dragged itself with Heavy 



THE CALL FROM BEYOND 



73 



thumps across the floor and in the stillness between the bumps, West heard the 
rasp of heavy breaths. 

"Damn you, West," said Cartwright. 
"Damn you. . . " 

"It's an old trick, Cartwright," said 
West, "that business of talking to a man 
just before you kill him. Throwing him 
off guard, practically ambushing him." 

Came a sound of cloth dragging over 
cloth, the whistling of painful breath, the 
thump of knees and elbows on the floor. 

Then there was silence. 

And a moment later something in some 
far corner squeaked and ran on pattering, 
rat-sounding feet. Then the silence again. 

The rat-feet were still, but there was 
another sound, a faint shout as if someone 
far away were shouting. . .from somewhere outside the building, from somewhere outside. . .from outside. 

West crouched close against the floor, 
huddling there, the muzzle of the gun 
resting on the carpet. 

Outside. . .outside. . .outside. . . 

The words hammered in his head. 

Outside of what, he asked, but he knew 
the answer now. He knew where he had 
seen the picture of the thing that had slept 
in the chair and the other thing that 
squatted on the bedpost. And he knew the 
sound of chirping and of chittering and of 
running feet. 

Outside. . .outside. . .outside. . . 

Outside this world, of course. 

HE RAISED his head and looked at 
the painting, and the tree still 
glowed softly with its inner light, 
and from within it came a- sound, a faint 
thudding sound, the sound of running feet. 

The shout came again and the man was 
running down the path inside the painting. 
A man who ran and waved his arms and 
shouted. 

The man was Nevin. 
Nevin was in the painting, running 
down the path, his padding feet raising 



little puffs of dust along the pebbled path. 

West raised the pistol and his hand was 
trembling so that the muzzle weaved back 
and forth and then described a circle. 

"Buck fever," said West. 

He said it through chattering teeth. 

For now he knew ... no he knew the 
answer. 

He put up his other hand and grasped 
the wrist of the hand that held the gun 
and the muzzle steadied. West gritted his 
teeth together to stop their chattering. 

His thumb went down against the activator and held it there and the flame 
from the gun's muzzle spat out and mushroomed upon the painting. Mushroomed 
until the entire canvas was a maelstrom 
of blue brilliance that hissed and roared 
and licked with hungry tongues. 

Slowly the tree ran together, as if one's 
eyes might have blurred and gone slightly 
out of focus. The landscape dimmed and 
jigged and ran in little wavering lines. 
And through the wavering lines could be 
seen a twisted and distorted man whose 
mouth seemed open in a howl of rage. But 
there was no sound of howling, just the 
purring of the gun. 

With a tired little puff the mushrooming brilliance and the painting were gone 
and the gun's pencil of flame was hissing 
through an empty steel frame still filled 
with tiny glowing wires, spattering against 
the wall behind it. 

West lifted his thumb and silence 
clamped down upon him, clamped down 
and held the room ... as it held leagues of 
space stretching on all sides. 

"No painting," said West. 

An echo seemed to run all around the 
room. 

"No painting," the echo said, but West 
knew it was no echo, just his brain clicking off endlessly the words his lips had 
said. 

"No painting," the echo said, but West 
other world, some other place, some otherwhere. A machine that broke down the 



74 



SUPER SCIENCE STORIES 



spacetime continuum or whatever it was 
that separated Man's universe from other, 
stranger universes. 

No wonder the fruit upon the tree had 
looked like the fruit upon the table. No 
wonder he had thought that he heard the 
wind in the leaves. 

West stood up and moved to the wall 
behind him. He found a tumbler and 
thumbed it up and the lights came on. 

In the light the smashed other-world 
machine was a sagging piece of wreckage. 
Cartwright's body lay in the center of the 
room. A chittering thing ran across the 
floor and ducked into the dark beneath a 
table. A grinning face peeped out from 
behind a chair and squalled at West in 
cold-boned savagery. 

And it was nothing new, for he had seen 
those faces before. Pictures of them in old 
books and in magazines that published 
tales of soul-shaking horror, tales of things 
that come from beyond, of entities that 
broke in from outside. 

Just tales to send one shivering to bed. 
Just stories that should not be read at midnight. Stories that made one a little nervous when a tree squeaked in the wind 
outside the window or the rain walked 
along the shingles. 

It had taken the wizardry of the Solar 
System's best band of scientists to open 
the door that led into the world beyond. 

And yet people in unknown, savage 
ages had talked of things like these . 
of goblin and incubus and imp. Perhaps 
men in Atlantis might have found the way, 
even as Nevin and Cartwright had found 
the way. In that long-gone day letting 
loose upon the world a flood of things 
that for ages after had lived in chimneycorner stories to chill one to the marrow. 

And the pictures he had seen ? 

Ancestral memory, perhaps. Or a weird 
imaging that happened to be true. Or had 
the writers of those stories, the painters of 
those pictures . . . 

West shuddered from the thought. 



What was it Cartwright had said ? The 
work is started on the other planets. 

The work of passing along the knowledge, the principles, the psychology of the 
alien things of otherwhere. Education by 
remote control . . . involuntary education. 
Stella, the telepathic Stella, singing back 
on Earth, darling of the airways. And she 
was an agent for these things . . . she 
passed along the knowledge and a man 
would think it was his own. 

That was it, of course, the thing that 
Nevin and Cartwright had planned. Remake the world, they'd said. Sitting out 
on Pluto and pulling strings that would 
remake the world. 

Superstitions once. Hard facts now. 
Stories Once to make the blood run cold. 
And now — 

With the source dried up, with the 
screen empty, with the Pluto gang wiped 
out, the cults would die and Stella would 
sing on, but there would come a time when 
the listeners would turn away from Stella, 
when her novelty wore off, when the 
strangeness and the alienness of her had 
lost their appeal. 

The Solar System would go on thinking imp and incubus were no more than 
shuddery imagery from the days when 
men crouched in caves and saw a supernatural threat in every moving shadow. 

But it had been a narrow squeak. 

From a dark corner a thing mouthed at 
West in a shrill sing-song of hate. 

SO THIS was it, thought West. 
Here he was, at the end of the 
Solar System's trail, in an empty 
house. And it was, finally, as he had 
hoped it would be. No one around. A 
storehouse full of food. Adequate shelter. 
A shop where he could work. A place 
guarded by the patrol against unwelcome 
callers. 

Just the place for a man who might be 
hiding. Just the place for a fugitive from 
the human race. 



THE CALL FROM BEYOND 



75 



There were things to do . . . later on. 
Two bodies to be given burial. A screen to 
be cleaned up and thrown on a junk heap. 
A few chittering things to be hunted 
down and killed. 

Then he could settle down. 

There were robots, of course. One had 
brought in the dinner. 

Later on, he said. 

But there was something else to do . . . 
something to do immediately, if he could 
just remember. 

He stood and looked around the room, 
cataloguing its contents. 

Chairs, drapes, a desk, the table, the 
imitation fireplace. . . 

That was it, the fireplace. 

He walked across the room to stand 
in front of it. Reaching up, he took down 
the bottle from the mantel, the bottle 
with the black silk bow tied around its 
neck. The bottle for the last man's club. 

And he was the last man, there was no 
doubt of it. The very last of all. 

He had not been in the pact, of course, 
but he would carry out the pact. It was 
melodrama, undoubtedly, but there are 
times, he told himself, when a little melodrama may be excusable. 

He uncorked the bottle and swung 
around to face the room. He raised the 
bottle in salute — salute to the gaping, 
blackened frame that had held the painting, to the dead man on the floor, to the 
thing that mewed in a far, dark corner. 

He tried to think of a word to say, but 
couldn't. And there had to be a word to 
say, there simply had to be. 

"Mud in your eye," he said and it 
wasn't any good, but it would have to 
do. 

He put the bottle to his lips and tipped 
it up and tilted back his head. 

Gagging, he snatched the bottle from 
his lips. 

It wasn't whisky and it was awful. It 
was gall and vinegar and quinine, all rolled 
into one. It was a brew straight from the 



Pit. It was all the bad medicine he had 
taken as a boy, it was sulphur and molasses, it was castor oil, it was — 

"Good God," said Frederick West. 
For suddenly he remembered the location of a knife he had lost twenty years 
before. He saw it where he bad left it, 
just as plain as day. 

He knew an equation he'd never known 
before, and what was more, he knew what 
it was for and how it could be used. 

Unbidden, he visualized, in one comprehensive picture, just how a rocket 
motor worked . . . every detail, every 
piece, every control, like a chart laid out 
before his eyes. 

He could capture and hold seven fence 
posts in his mental eye and four was the 
best any human ever had been able to see 
mentally before. 

He whooshed out his breath to air his 
mouth and stared at the bottle. 

Suddenly he was able to recite, word 
for word, the first page from a book he 
had read ten years ago. 

"The hormones," he whispered. "Darling's hormones!" 

Hormones that did something to his 
brain. Speeded it up, made it work better, 
made more of it work than had ever 
worked before. Made it think cleaner and 
clearer than it had ever thought before. 
"Good Lord," be said. 
A head start to begin with. And now 
this! 

The man who has it could rule the 
Solar System. That was what Belden 
had said about it. 

Belden had hunted for it. Had torn 
this place apart. And Darling had hunted 
for it, too. Darling, who had thought he 
had it, who had played a trick on Nevin 
and Cartwright so he could be sure he 
had it, who had drank himself to death 
trying to find the bottle he had it in. 

And all these years the hormones had 
been in this bottle on the mantel ! 

(Continued on page 126) 



Too small for this Earth, Crispin Tyler had but 
one thing to trade for his soul in the deathless, 
angry wastes of space — and that was his — 



GIFT OF 

DARKNESS 



HIS NAME was Crispin Tyler and 
he had worked very hard for 
twenty-nine of his fifty-two years. 
Intersystem Metals had automatically 
acquired his talents through the standard 
screening tests, had installed him in the 
junior executive training program and, 
except for the mechanical memories of the 
bank of Ref-dex equipment in Personnel, 
had forgotten him. 

There had been a long succession of 
desks, stretching back through twentynine years, and as he sat in his office, 
wrapped in a spell of mellow sadness that 
had become endemic, it was as though he 
could see those desks reflected in angled 
mirrors, stretching back into dusky 
shadows. 

And this, of course, was the best desk 
..of them all — styled and designed for him 
after the rather frighteningly brisk young 
lady from Office Engineering had spent 
two days watching him work. The communi-phones were right here, of course, 
and the wall screen buttons right there, 
and the slightest foot pressure over on that 
spot slid the file drawer open with greasy 
silent movement. Dicto-writing was made 
simple by the microphones set in just 
such a way that his normal tone reproduced the necessary letters and memos. 

76 



By 

PETER REED 

It was best not to sigh, because then the 
metal throat of the interrogator would 
say, "Repeat, please," electronically disturbed by a sound that could not be 
spelled. 

Crispin Tyler was a small man, paunchy 
and soft from the office years, with a mild 
sweetness in the expression around his 
mouth, a spaniel-like defenselessness in his 
weak brown eyes. 

He had come slowly up out of anonymity into what could be called the 
number six slot in the huge, convoluted 
operations of Intersystem, only because 
of a small, still, cold spot in his mind that 
could integrate all factors of a policy problem and come up with the right solution — 
for other men to put into effect. 

Let Crispin Tyler take a shot at that. 
Old Tyler ought to take a look at this. 
Here's Tyler's solution, Joe. Yes, I know 

On Alpha Crucis 10 the blackened 
dredges were towed to a forgotten 
shore and dismantled. . . . On Zeta 
Tauri 7 humans were slowly "eliminated from the work crews. . . . 




I 



78 



SUPER SCIENCE STORIES 



how rough it's going to be, but have you 
ever known him to be wrong? 

Decisions over the years, tin Alpha 
Crusis 10 the blackened dredges on the 
dead seas were towed to a forgotten shore 
and dismantled. On Zeta Tauri 7 humans 
were slowly eliminated from the work 
crews, until at last the bitter suns threw 
only the divergent shadows of the Claw 
People against the blue clay, as they 
marched to board the elevators that would 
drop them seven thousand meters into 
the torn bowels of the planet. The pitchblende deposits on Gamma Aquilae 3 were 
abandoned and all the planets within two 
parsecs of mighty Antares were resurveyed. 

He was a poniard scabbarded in gelatine, an axe blade with a haft of feathers, 
a projectile robbed of its charge. 

For twenty-seven of the twenty-nine 
years there had been the hope — the delusion — that one day there would be 
authority and responsibility, and with it 
would come the flowering of latent abilities 
to be a leader of men; a hope that the 
brown eyes would gleam, the soft voice 
harden, the warm fatty fist pound a table 
with authority. 

. . . she had been so slim and young 
and unaware. When they were together 
she wore low shoes and he stood very 
erect, gaining thereby a half-inch of height. 
But now he could look at her firm tallnes.s 
and it was hard to believe that she had 
been pliant in his arms, had borne him a 
golden daughter, a strong-muscled son. 
He was still certain of her love, but he 
knew that it was more tinged with pity 
than respect, whereas one of his dominant 
emotions toward her was pure awe. , . , 

Desperate loneliness in the midst of 
life. His mother had called him Cris. No 
one else had ever done so. Always on 
the edge of groups, trying to join in with 
a shy smile, with a funny remark that no 
one ever seemed to hear. Secretly he had 
taken the course from that doctor, the one 



who promised to develop dominance. But 
no one had ever noticed any difference. 

He was the man who could be at the 
club, and the steward wohld not know he 
was there. He could watch the games and 
never be invited to join. Once he memorized four stories that he thought were 
quite funny. It was a full week before 
he had a chance to tell the first one. They 
listened politely, laughed politely, went 
back to the game. He walked out with 
the smile stiff on his lips. That smile was 
such a constant. Smile and people will 
like you. Be a good listener. Ask people 
about their problems. He had been smiling for twenty years. 

It was in not having a friend — one 
true friend. He wanted a friend he could 
sit with and talk to and listen to. He 
felt, without egotism, that he had certain 
things worth saying. In childhood there 
had been a friend. Billy. But of course 
Billy had been invisible to everyone else. 
Crispin Tyler had never told anyone about 
Billy. 

There was some joy, of course, in the 
hobbies. In his study were the cases containing first flight spacemail covers to all 
colonized planets, including that extremely 
rare and valuable one dating back to 1959, 
a letter sent from New Mexico to New 
York via the moon. And there was the 
portfolio of water colors, done with neat 
precision. And the boxes of uncut gems. 

But the golden daughter and the strong 
son and the statuesque wife had a way of 
taking the flavor and dignity out of such 
pursuits. 

Your father's upstairs playing with 
those envelopes again. Pop's daubing up 
some more pictures, Janie. Yes, dear, I 
suppose it is quite interesting, if you 
understand all about gems. 

He knew they loved him, and he loved 
them in turn. 

But there was not one friend. 

No one. 

Ever. 



GIFT OF DARKNESS 



VALENTINE McGUIRE was the 
head of Intersystem Metals. It was 
correctly reported that once, in 
fevered speech, he had split a mahogany 
board table with his fist. 

His voice was lute, French horn, 
tempest and summer breeze. The face of 
a character actor, clown, Viking and 
soldier. He played on the minds and 
emotions of men with all the ruthlessness 
of hypersonics. He won at poker, bribed 
the air police, and married two actresses 
and a female poet called the most beautiful woman in the known universe — one 
after the other, of course. His grey hair 
was thick and alive and his laugh smashed 
against distant walls like ripe fruit. 

"Crispin," said Valentine McGuire, "no 
man has been more valuable to this great 
organization." 

"I'm . . . thank you." 
"I am the figurehead. I am the man 
the public knows. It is your keen intelligence that has brought us through trying 
times, Crispin." 
"I wouldn't say—" 
"You know that it is the policy of Intersystem Metals to retire all executive 
personnel at fifty-five, I believe." Warmth 
in the McGuire voice chilled a trifle. 
"Yes, sir, I realize that." 
"You are, of course, conversant with 
our current problem on the three planets 
of Beta Virginis and the four planets of 
Delta Virginis in the Spica Mines Subsidiary." 

"Of course, sir. That's been a bad one 
for over ten years, with the way — " 

"Exactly, Tyler. Exactly! If we are 
to maintain our just and proper share of 
the universe market in Spica-chrome, the 
most valuable known metal, an end must 
be made to the infamous political 
maneuverings of that upstart competitor, 
Transpace. They have succeeded in setting up such a preferential tax structure 
in the whole Virginis System that, at the 
current moment, we are delivering Spica


chrome to forty-three percent of customer 
planets at a loss. This is such a large 
operation that we cannot afford to handle 
Spica-chrome as a marginal product. I 
have your last report here. I'm sorry, 
Tyler, but I'm not at all satisfied with 
your recommendations." 

"I'm sorry, sir, but — " 

"I know, I know. Man, I can read. 
You state clearly that there are too many 
unknowns in the equation." Valentine 
McGuire leaned back and smiled like a 
large sleepy cat. "Crispin, how would 
you like to take a little run out there and 
equate those unknowns?" 

There was a roaring in Crispin Tyler's 
ears. The room shifted abruptly out of 
focus and slid slowly back. "This is — 
it's—" 

"You have every right in the world to 
refuse, of course. It's a three-year trip 
each way. Add six months of investigation time. It will take you four years 
over retirement age. It's, frankly, a hell 
of a lot to ask a man. You can say no, 
and I won't blame you. But I do think 
I have the right to tell you that the 
eventual future of this great enterprise 
depends on your answer." 

"I might not pass the — " 

"Physical tests? When you took your 
semi-annual physical four months ago I 
instructed them to give you the additional 
space tests. You came through with flying 
colors. You're in good shape, Tyler. 
Naturally we will arrange a very ample 
tax-free bonus and pay you the usual 
double salary for all space time. It ought 
to add up to a very respectable estate for 
your children." 

"If I could think it over, Mr. McGuire, 
and then — " , 

"Believe me, there's nothing I would 
like better than to give you time to think 
this all over. But I'm afraid I'll have to 
have your answer right now. I have taken 
the liberty, and forgive me if I offend you, 
of discussing this matter with Mrs. Tyler. 



80 



SUPER SCIENCE STORIES 



Charming woman. Charming. She was 
upset, of course. You're a very lucky man, 
Crispin. She could not, of course, leave, 
two children of seventeen and nineteen 
alone, and six and a half years would be 
too long a time to delay the balance of 
their education. She wept a bit, Crispin. 
And she told me she would leave the 
decision up to you without trying to influence you in one way or the other." 

Crispin Tyler felt as though the world 
were falling away beneath him. He held 
tightly to the arms of the chair. "Over 
six years," he said thickly. "Never been 
off Earth." 

"A great adventure!" McGuire said. 
"God, how I envy you!" 

"When would—" 

"I have taken the liberty of booking 
passage for you on the Starbelle leaving 
Moonport a week from tomorrow, and 
another ticket on the shuttle which will 
get you there two hours before takeoff. 
You will be allowed two hundred Earth 
pounds of personal effects, reading material, that sort of thing. But I believe 
you'll find the- Starbelle extremely wellequipped as far as amusement is concerned." McGuire looked at him with an 
odd expression, chuckled, and said, "I'm 
certain you'll have a most enjoyable 
voyage/' 

"Well, it looks like—" 

Valentine McGuire came quickly around 
his desk, shook hands, propelled Crispin 
toward the office door. "Can't tell you 
how much I appreciate this, old man, 
personally and for the sake of this great 
corporation. You'll never regret it. Every 
step is being taken to assure your — eh — 
happiness." 

Crispin Tyler found himself sitting in 
his own office with very little idea of 
how he had got there. He was very faintly 
nauseated and his heart thudded with 
uncomfortable force. 

"I won't go," he said softly. It was the 
last protest he made. 



THE SITUATION was not disagreeable — to sit at the head of the 
table and be the subject of family 
conversation, the object of quick, surprised 
little glances from Janie, Cliff and 
Florence. 

"I just can't believe it. I can't!" 
Florence said. Her eyes filled with tears. 

"Now, now," he said. "Someone has 
to go. When I get back the kids will be 
on their own. We'll have the rest of our 
lives, doing all the things we've always 
wanted to do." 

Florence used a corner of her napkin to 
blot up the tears, and she smiled bravely. 
She collected the dishes from the main 
course and pushed them into the disposal 
chute, opened the neighboring cabinet and 
took out the dessert which had just 
arrived. 

"Gosh!" Cliff said softly. "Two hundred thirty light years. Say, they got 
everything on those long cruise ships! 
Three-way video, tournaments, parties, 
hostesses, hobby shops, gyms — " 

"You sound like you want to go along," 
Crispin said, smiling. 

"Would I? Man!" 

"I know you," Janie said. "You'd like 
it for a week and then you'd want to get 
off." 

"Anything I don't like, it's a smartaleck girl." 

"Children!" Florence snapped. "At 
least make your father's last week here 
as pleasant as possible." 

Crispin had half hoped that they would 
all spend the evening together. But Cliff 
was needed on the school Kell-ball team 
and Janie had accepted, a week before, a 
dance invitation that she couldn't break, 
and Florence had to go later to a committee meeting of the League of Women 
Voters. 

After the children had gone Florence 
came to him in the library as he was 
standing in front of the heat screen and 
embraced him. Crispin realized that he 



GIFT OF DARKNESS 



81 



should appreciate it and enjoy it, but there 
was something about the abundance of 
her upper arms and her' bosom, her lilac 
perfume and the warmth of her that made 
him feel smothered. He endured it patiently, repressing the instinct to fight his way 
out into the open. 

"I shall miss you, Crispin," she whispered. 

"Urn, And I'll miss you, of course." 

"But believe me, Crispin, you. will have 
a good voyage. I know you will. I 
promise it." 

"How can you promise that?" he 
asked. 

She laughed coyly. "Never you mind, 
now, Mister Man. I just know you will." 

He spent the evening rearranging the 
stamp collection, finishing up little odds 
and ends of mounting that he had been 
putting off for some time. In the middle 
of the night he had a series of dreams 
about falling. Each one woke him upland 
each one left him bathed in sweat. 
Florence's door was ajar and he could 
hear, faintly, the soft wet rattle of her 
breathing. Janie came home late. Her 
escort laughed in the lower hall. Crispin 
realized that by the time he returned she 
could be married and have children. In 
fact, it was a distinct probability. 

He was alone and afraid in the night. 

Very alone. 

As always. 

THE ELEVATOR lifted slowly up 
the shining flank of the shuttle. He lost 
them for a moment and then saw them 
again, apart from the others. Three small 
dwindling figures. Their mouths were 
saying, "Good-by! Good-by! Good-by!" 
Their arms waved. In a pagan culture 
the dead were placed on barges, and they 
floated away down the river. Gr was it 
out on the tide? No matter. 

Three dots below. Wife and seed of the 
womb. Guaranteed immortality. Warm 
flesh waving and wet mouths saying, 



"Good-by! Good-by, Crispin Tyler. 
Good-by, husband and father and provider 
and soft mild little man who was a part 
of our lives and his suits never fitted right 
and he wasn't good at games and he always seemed just a little oddly out of 
focus to us and for some mysterious things 
he did each day they paid him astonishingly well. Good-by." 

CRISPIN TYLER spent his first week 
on the Starbelle in a suspension that was 
like that half-breath between life and 
death. He lay on his soft bed in the small, 
neat cabin and ate what was sent to him. 
He stared straight up to where he knew 
the rounded snout of the Starbelle thrust 
through the supercooled nothingness. 
There was no sound in his cabin. When 
he held his fingertips against the metallic 
wall he could sense the faintest vibration. 
There was no other clue to movement. 
Below him were other living areas, adjusted to gravitational and atmospheric 
conditions of various non-human passengers. 

At the end of the week he arose, 
dressed carefully, and, with a little tremor 
of excitement, went to join the other 
passengers. It was like that first day at 
boarding school, the first day working 
for Intersystem, the first day of marriage. 

He visited the pool where the artificial 
sunlight browned the girls and young men, 
the two theaters, the game rooms, the village street on the third level. He sat at 
a sidewalk cafe and watched the couples 
stroll by, arm in arm. 

And slowly the sense of motion and 
travel was lost, and this was the world, 
the known world. 

It was then that he realized that he was 
still alone. 

It was during that second week while 
Crispin sat at his usual table at the sidewalk cafe, that a man came over shyly 
and said, "Would you mind awfully if I 
sat with you?" 



32 



SUPER SCIENCE STORIES 



"Of course not, of course not !" Crispin 
said, trying to get into his tone the invitation and kindliness that he felt. 

The stranger was apparently in his late 
forties, a sallow, rather undistinguishedlooking man of small stature. His smile 
was warm, however. "Not much point in 
commenting on the weather, is there?" he 
said. "My name's George Brown, Cabin 
seven thirty-three." 

"Why, you're a neighbor of mine ! I'm 
in seven thirty-two right across the corridor. Crispin Tyler." 

They shook hands. George frowned. 
"Not the Crispin Tyler from Intersystem ! 
I thought you looked familiar." 

"Have I met you before?" Crispin 
asked, surprised. . 

"I attended the Merton auction a year 
and a half ago. You overbid me on that 
set of Arcturus covers." 

"Did I, now? You know, I paid too 
much for those. My wife, Florence, she 
thought I was crazy. I wanted 'em because they were carried on the last flight 
of the old Corsair. Had to have 'em." 

George nodded. "I know what you 
mean. I'm a slave too. Collecting is in my 
blood, I guess. Stamps, covers, uncut 
gem stones, original woodcuts." 

Crispin beamed with delight. "Say, that 
is a coincidence, Mr. Brown. I collect 
stones too. And you know? I brought a 
few of the really choice items along. 
Stones and covers. Couldn't bear not to 
see 'em for six and a half years. Would 
you like a look at them?" 
"I certainly would!" 
"Come on then, Mr. Brown." 
"Make it George, will you?" 
"If you'll call me — uh — Cris." Crispin 
had tried that before, with others. They 
would call him "Cris" once, or even twice, 
and then revert back to Crispin or all the 
way back to Mr. Tyler. But to his complete delight George called him Cris three 
times on the way down to the cabin, and 
did it with complete naturalness. 



THEY had dinner together and afterward Crispin had three drinks 
in celebration of this new friendship. It was two over his usual limit. By 
Gad, this George Brown was a real fellow. 
Interesting, too. Going to Virginis System 
to set up a new population survey method 
for Central Census. Lonely. Had to leave 
his wife and kids behind too. 

When Crispin awoke in the morning he 
realized that he had done a great deal of 
talking. Too much. George Brown would 
probably consider him a damn fool. 

But to his delight George seemed glad 
to see him and they breakfasted together. 
In mid-morning George inspected the 
newest portfolio of watercolors and expressed his liking for them. 

That evening they sat in the artificial 
darkness in the small park outside the 
theater and once again Crispin Tyler 
spoke aloud the thoughts and dreams that 
no one else had ever had time to listen to. 

The happiest weeks of Crispin Tyler's 
life fled by. Often he was hoarse from 
talking. Together they discussed philosophy, galactic law, women, the history of 
warfare, the responsibilities of interplanetary corporations, the probable future 
of science and invention, the cynicism of 
the younger generation — and Crispin 
found that they were in remarkable accord on all major points. 

No man is an inexhaustible well. Crispin was proud of having at last found a 
friend. A great measure of the self-confidence of youth had returned to him. But 
after seven months spent exclusively in 
the eager company of George Brown, 
Crispin Tyler began to feel a shade oppressed. He longed for one day — one 
whole day — of being alone with his 
thoughts. 

But try as he might, he could not manage it. George, though sensitive in other 
matters, seemed impervious to even the 
broadest hint. And Crispin could not 
quite bring himself to be blunt about it. 



GIFT OF DARKNESS 



83 



He tried sneaking out of his cabin earlier. 
George would find him at breakfast, and 
sit down, jovial and smiling. 

It almost seemed as though — Crispin 
shied away from the thought-— as though 
George had to be with him. Odd ! It was 
a strange sort of compulsion. 

And in the eighth month of the trip 
the full implications of the ghastly suspicion began to dawn slowly and horribly 
on Crispin Tyler. 

. . . Valentine McGuire's odd look, 
and his chuckle. He had said, "I'm sure 
you'll have a most enjoyable vojage." 
And what had Florence said? "Believe 
me, Crispin, you will have a good voyage. 
I know you will. I promise it." . . . 

Conversation dried in his throat and 
he spent long hours looking obliquely at 
this George Brown. They would think 
they were doing the best thing. Damn 
their motives. 

The purpose grew slowly within him. 
It was a month in growing, and after the 
purpose came the plan. 

On the third day of the tenth month of 
the voyage, on Easter morning, to be 
exact, Crispin Tyler expressed a desire 
to examine George Brown's collection ot 
uncut gems for the third time. George 
Brown sat on the bed and laid out the 
stones. Crispin Tyler stood over him. 

"Look at me, George," Crispin said. 

George looked up just as Crispin Tyler 
swung, with every fiber of his strength, 
the claw hammer he had filched from one 
of the hobby shops. 

The membrane tore. George fell forward. The hot oil gouted onto the rug, 
and the eyes popped out and the little 
silver coils rolled across the rug, onto 
the metal floor, tinkle, jangle, against the 
wall. 

Crispin Tyler walked woodenly into 
his cabin and shut the door and called 
the Service Section. He said, "This is 
Tyler in seven thirty-two. I've made a 
bit of a mess in seven thirty-three across 



the way. Would you mind cleaning it up 
for me? You may scrap the robot you 
find there. I — I have no further use for 
it." 

He hung up the speaker, sat on his bed, 
covered his face with his hands. The 
tears were hot on his wrists, cooling as 
they ran down into his sleeves. He made 
thin, damp noises. 

TWO weeks out from Virginis Port, 
Mallard Chang, the Starbelle's Doctor of 
Recreational Therapy, worked on his trip 
report. 

He sighed and started the next case 
history : 

"As a further example of the benefits 
which can accrue from the program 
planned for this three-year voyage, I wish 
to cite the case of Mr. C. T. The subject 
is an executive for a large interplanetary 
corporation and when he boarded the 
Starbelle it was immediately obvious to 
me that here was a repressed, neurotic, 
shy individual capable of constituting a 
problem to the Recreational Staff. I found, 
however, that my hands were tied, as the 
subject had been supplied, without his 
knowledge, with an Android Companion, 
adjusted, by relatives and business associates, no doubt, to compensate for the 
subject's emotional inadequacies. Since I 
strongly disapprove of this method of 
adjustment, it came as no surprise to 
me when I learned that, during month 
eleven, the subject attacked and seriously 
damaged the mechanism. 

"Naturally, during months eleven, 
twelve and thirteen, many attempts were 
made to bring the subject out of his state 
of extreme depression. 

"Let me point out again that the subject, though an important man in business 
life, had, when he boarded the Starbelle, 
an almost pathetic longing to be liked and 
appreciated. 

"When, during the fourteenth month, 
(Continued on page 127) 



He felt the breath of madness touch him. 
84 



SLAVE OF 
ETERNITY 



«v ( 
II 



r OU have no choice," the patrolman said. "The Council sends 
for you." 

He moved across the veranda of Heric' s 
cottage, bulking dark against the skyglow of Nyark the first city. On the 
slope of lawn below stood his copter, its 
beetle-black shell glistening faintly in the 
starshine. 

Heric stood rigid with alarm in his 
doorway, still holding the book he had 
been reading. The night-wind ruffling 
his hair and the homely sounds from the 
kitchen where Marta prepared their evening meal made his danger doubly fantastic. 

"They've found out somehow about my 
dreams," Heric said. "They'll put me 
through the adjuster and I'll come out of 
it — someone else. I won't go!" 

He was a mild man, overseer of the 
cereal grain fields outside Nyark the first 
city, holding the confidence of his superiors and the respect of his workers. He 
and Marta had been happy in the quiet 
eddy of their isolation, until the dreams 
came. 

The patrolman took a gleaming silver 
shock-cone from his blet. "I am sorry, 
Arnol Heric. You must come with me." 



By 

ROGER DEE 



Stark panic made Heric drop his book 
and strike out wildly, smashing a fist into 
the officer's face. The patrolman staggered back, teetered for balance on the 
veranda's edge and fell heavily. The 
sound of his head striking the stone walkway below was as definite as the thud of 
a dropped melon. 

Heric went down the steps and knelt 
to feel the man's limp wrist. There was 
no pulse. He put an ear to the slack lips, 
and there was no breath. Shock numbed 
him and drove his thoughts, into strange, 
tortured channels. 

"I've killed him," he said. 

A sound caught his ear and he looked 
up to see Marta on the dark verandah 
above him, her face a pale oval blur with 
enormous, fright-widened eyes. "I didn't 
intend this to happen, Marta. I— I lost 
my head." 

She came down at once and put a soft 
hand on his shoulder. "Of course, of 
course, darling. Here, let me help you." 



An eye for an eye, a tooth for a tooth . . . these were the 
familiar laws of man — Far more fiendish was Heric's punishment — eternal life for the death he'd taken! 



85 



86 



SUPER SCIENCE STORIES 



Together they lifted the patrolman's 
body into the copter's control seat, where 
it lolled bonelessly against the instrument 
panel. Heric touched a button and the 
machine rose and soared eastward on a 
random course away from Nyark the first 
city. 

They watched, holding hands like uneasy children, until it was lost against the 
stars. Then they went inside to the light 
and warmth of their cottage. 

Heric voiced the thought first : "They'll 
send for me again tomorrow, when he 
doesn't return." 

He had again the ominous sensation, 
felt a dozen times in as many days, of 
being very close to understanding the 
strange auguries that had so troubled his 
sleep of late. For a moment he hovered 
on the brink of complete comprehension 
before his fearful thought recoiled, leaving 
him uneasy and bewildered. 

When he slept the dream came more 
strongly than before. 

THE sere globe of Earth spun below 
him, frightfully riven by the half-healed 
wounds of some ancient cataclysm. Dull 
seas steamed and rain fell and vegetation 
crept acrpss the scars, but there was life 
in one place only. 

There was a ruined city like a forest 
of standing shards, rising stark and cold 
against a desolate sky. A horde of silent' 
figures poured through its streets, bent 
upon a myriad errands whose purposes he 
might have guessed but dared not — he 
found himself one of the throng, yet his 
dread of understanding hid their intent 
as a mist might have obscured their faces. 
The crowd moved always eastzvard, its 
thousand faces rapt in impossible ecstasy. 
His own expectancy mounted to an unbearable pitch, stifling him with the 
promise of total understanding. He had 
only to follow them and — 

He awoke to find himself crouched on 
the cold floor of his bedroom, drenched 



with perspiration and trembling violently 
from the strain of fighting back the monstrous concept toward which his dream 
had carried him. 

Marta's voice was urgent in his ears. 
Marta's hands tugged at his arm, her 
breath was warm on his damp face. 
"Arnol, wake up! Arnoll" 

For an instant he had an indescribable 
sense of being infinitely multiplied, as if 
this moment were reproduced forever, a 
single frame in a succession that stretched 
endlessly before and behind him. Then the 
dream tilted and swept away and he let 
Marta lead him, unresisting, back to bed. 

For a long time he lay shivering in the 
darkness, his face hidden against her warm 
shoulder. And at last, when the tension 
had gone out of him, he slept again. 

THEY came for him at daybreak, 
four burly patrolmen with Council 
insignia on their helmets and silver 
shock-cones in their hands. Heric looked 
back as he entered their copter to see 
Marta on the verandah, lovely in the soft 
disarray of her too-early rising, her eyes 
bright and blind with unshed tears. 

"I'll come back," he called. "It's going 
to be all right!" 

When the copter rose he waved at her, 
buoyed up unexpectedly by the ring of 
certainty he had managed to force into 
his voice. He had a last glimpse of Marta 
before distance and the morning mists 
hid her, a small, forlorn figure with raised 
face staring after him, her belted houserobe fluttering in the wind. 

They sank through the ordered vastness of Nyark the first city, into a bustle 
and rush that was symbolic of the Council's will to restore Nyark — and finally 
Earth— to their former glory. Heric was 
led to a quiet chamber where the Council, 
in their deep crescent of seats behind the 
Leader's throne, awaited him. 

He had seen them before only in newscasts, when it had awed him a little to 



SLAVE OF ETERNITY 



87 



think that in their hands lay the destiny 
of a world in rebirth. He was surprised 
now to feel that their wrinkled parchment 
faces and thin bodies, hidden under 
sleeveless blue robes, lent them a futile 
anonymity rather than the distinction he 
had expected. Why, he thought, they 
look like scrawny, earfhbound birds. 

"Why am I here?" Heric demanded. 
Rebellion grew in him, roughening his 
voice. "I have broken no law, nor have 
I been lax in my overseeing. I protest 
this adjustment to what you call normalcy." 

"Yet you must endure it, Arnol Heric," 
the Leader said. A rustle of assent whispered through the robed Council. "You 
should not have defied our messenger. 
It may be too late now." 

Anger swelled Heric's demand. "What 
do you mean?" 

His answer was a great, cloudy bubble 
that sprang from nowhere about him. 
The Council vanished behind its milky 
haze. There was a brief sensation of motion, and after that — nothing. 

HE WAS in the void of his dreams 
again, imprisoned in darkness. But there 
was a difference — the dull globe of Earth 
spun faint and misty, half-seen through 
an obscuring curtain. A smooth, hypnotic 
thought-current flowed into his mind from 
the adjuster, commanding him, warring 
with the half-sensed truth that still sought 
his awareness. 

"You are Arnol Heric, overseer of 
cereal plantings. You have had no disturbing dreams. Forget, Arnol Heric. 
There is no need for alarm. ..." 



There was a long struggle before his 
will fought clear, and he knew that the 
Leader's fear of being too late had been 
realized. The pitted Earth-sphere grew 
plain, the desolate city sharpened and 
drew near. . He walked the thronged 
streets and turned his face toward the 
east, and this time he did not repulse the 
truth when it lay before him. 

There was a silent room where a figure 
reclined laxly in a chair made massive by 
its crystal maze of shining coils. Two 
guards flanked the chair watchfully, and 
in it sat — 

Himself. 

Anger shook him like a terrible wind, 
without warning. It was all a monstrous 
farce, then — he was the center of it all, 
and they had hidden him in his overseer's 
niche to blind him to reality. 

He opened his eyes in the adjuster, 
pushing the futile thought-current from 
his mind. The guards stiffened at his 
movement, their silver shock-cones ready. 

"I know myself now," Heric said. He 
stood up, shaking off the web of crystal 
contacts from the adjuster. "And I know 
you. Put away your useless weapons." 

They dropped their cones and stood 
with lowered eyes, waiting his pleasure 
with a deference that made his lip curl. 
He left the room without a backward look, 
knowing they would warn the Council 
but having no need now for secrecy. 

He went down a wide-arched corridor, 
striding with sure step to the city's heart. 
He found the power source at ground 
level, in a vast dim cavern full of softpurring machines. He singled out the 
great operations board with its master 




"Wait, Arnol Heric. Do you know that we have made you immortal?" 



88 



SUPER SCIENCE STORIES 



switch that controlled the city's life — and 
in his path he found the Leader and his 
council, shielding the control from him 
with the massed crescent of their bodies. 

"Stand back," Heric commanded. 

The Council stirred uneasily, but did 
not break. 

"Hear us out, Arnol Heric," the 
Leader begged. "Remember that we, being not-human, yet have human emotions. 
We are the end result of the robot race 
men created to serve them in ages past, 
and you are right when you suppose that 
we may not defy you because we are your 
property. But there is a thing which you 
do not know, hidden from you even in 
your dreams iw your own safety. Stay 
your hand, Master." 

The sound of Heric's laughter echoed 
emptily through the vast room. 

"Stay my hand and let you adjust me 
into submission again? Let you send me 
back to planting wheat, drowning my 
identity in ignorance? I know the human 
race is almost dead — I know that you hide 
the truth from the few of us who remain 
because you think us doomed to extinction. You would bury us in ignorance 
and rule in our stead as if you were men 
and we your servants." 

"We are the servants," the Leader 
said. "Yet you would immobilize us. 
Why?" 

"Because I would rather know my fate 
and meet it without your meddling," 
Heric answered. "Because I do not believe that my race can ever die completely. 
I shall stop you in your tracks like the 
mechanical things you are, arid I shall 
find the others of my people who are left 
and start life over with them. And this 
time we shall know better than to build 
machines !" 

^TT TE HAVE no desire to perWl/ petuate ourselves," the Leader 
said. "We were created to 
serve humanity, and to insure our obedi


ence to the love of men was made our 
strongest instinct. Without men our life 
would be an endless torture of loneliness, 
for we can be happy only in your happiness. We hid the truth from you, and 
kept you busy outside Nyark the first 
city, to protect your sanity." 

Heric took a forward step. "Back, all 
of you ! " 

They drew aside to let him pass. The 
Leader knelt as Heric brushed by him, and 
the Council knelt with averted faces behind him. Their sigh whispered through 
the great room. 

"Wait, Arnol Heric. Do you know that 
we have made you immortal?" 

He paused with his hands upon the master control, disturbed by a resurgence of 
that indescribable extension he had felt 
on waking from his dream. Angrily he 
shook it off, bracing himself. 

He wrenched open the switch. 

The machine-murmur died. The cavernous chamber stilled until Heric's heart 
beat loud in the tomblike silence. The 
Council knelt motionless, like even rows 
of cold statuary. 

He turned from them and went through 
the hushed room and out into the streets 
of Nyark the first city. Silence lay before 
him. Vehicles stood unpowered, drivers 
frozen. In the shops the crowds hovered 
motionless like static, three-dimensional 
shadows. 

He went swiftly through the dead city 
w'ith his face turned toward the hills. The 
silence bore him down with an implacable 
weight, and the desire to escape it grew 
upon him until he found himself running, 
dodging wildly in and out among stalled 
vehicles and frozen pedestrians. 

He reached the city's edge, but the sun 
and wind of open country did not dispel 
his oppression. The sun was as silent as 
the city, and the breeze was a drear lament in his ears. Loneliness crept at his 
heels like a black, timorous hound; he 
felt as if he were the only living thing in 



SLAVE OF ETERNITY 



89 



a dead and forgotten world. Panic 
claimed him. 

It was noon when he reached his cottage. He crawled up the verandah steps, 
spent and panting, and found the silence 
with him here even in his last retreat. 

"Marta!" he eroaked. He pulled himself erect, clutching at the arched doorway for support. 

"Marta!" 

He had been so sure that there would 
be other men. He had been able to fend 
off madness back there on the plain, only 
because he had known that Marta was 
here waiting for him . . . 

He found her standing in the silent living room, her still face turned toward the 
door through which he must come when 
he returned. She wore the clinging, colorful gown he had liked best, and her bright, 
fair hair was carefully arranged as if she 
were on the point of going out. 

Her lashes were lowered as if in sleep, 
and he had the instant conviction that she 
had closed her lids to hide the mechanical 
luster of her eyes from him when he 
should come and find her. 

"Marta," he whispered. 

He sagged against the entrance arch, 



with the bitter sound of the Leader's 
words in his ears : "We can be happy only 
in your happiness ..." 

Not one of them was human, not even 
Marta. He was the last man on Earth. 

And he was immortal. 

This was the thing that had been hidden 
from him even in his dream, lest he go 
mad. This silence that pressed him down 
was the silence of eternity. 

He was alone in a world of death and 
dust, and would be alone forever. 

He felt the breath of madness touch 
him. He heard the Council's sighing whisper of "Immortal ..." and he recalled 
the eerie sensation of infinite multiplicar 
tion that had come to him when he pulled 
open the master switch. 

He thought : How many times has this 
happened? And how many times will it 
happen again? 

When he spoke, he used unconsciously 
the same words he had used when he left 
her at daybreak. 

"I'll come back, Marta," he said. "It's 
going to be all right." 

Then he went outside and turned his 
face toward the silent city and began to 
run ... 





ON THE NEWSSTANDS! 
THE SECRET PEOPLE 

By John Beynon 

Lost in a fantastic underground world . . . guarded by a race left over in strange 
survival from the dawn of time . . . What would become of the hapless captives 
cut off from the world they knew — and what part would they be made to play in 
the forbidding ancient rites whose strange gods threatened in the eerie light of 
their waking nightmare? 

Don't miss this story — well-known among the coll ectors of hard-to-get fantasy. 
One of the most thrillingly weirdly written stories in the fantasy field! 

The big April issue is now on all newsstands. Get your copy before it is too late! 





Conducted by Frederik Pohl 



PEBBLE IN THE SKY fey Isaac Asimov, Ph.D. Doubleday & Co., Inc.; 
$2.50. 

For more than a decade, Isaac Asimov's 
fiction has appeared regularly and often 
in the pages of almost every science-fiction 
magazine on the stands. Hardly a single 
anthology has failed to include at least 
one of his cleverly developed pieces, and 
his work has brought him a personal following matched by few writers in the fantasy field. It has been hard to understand 
why some of his longer work has not appeared in book form long before this— but 
here, at last, we have his first hard-cover 
novel. . .and it has been worth the waiting. 

Pebble in the Sky has never appeared 
anywhere before. It is an exciting story, 
the adventures of a tailor of the 20th century, Joseph Schwartz by name, who leaps 
from the present day into the year 827 of 
the Galactic Era. Humanity has spread 
out from old Earth to populate the galaxy 
— and as the center of galactic civilization 
has shifted, they have turned against the 
mother planet; indeed, have made it an 
outcast world. There are few things in 
this world of the far future that are familiar to Joseph Schwartz. Half the 
planet's surface is ravaged by areas of 
atomic destruction which no one dares ap
90 



proach ; the government is a despotic protectorate administered by the Galactic 
Empire ; and only a handful of misfits and 
outcasts like himself dare to dream of 
freedom. 

Schwartz is a relic of the prehistoric 
Dark Ages to these people — hair on his 
face, and an appendix /— hut his very 
weakness makes him fit only to be the subject of a laboratory experiment. And the 
experiment works — to make Schwartz 
the most important human alive. 

Pebble in the Sky is a handsome as well 
as an enjoyable volume. As a book club 
choice, it is likely to reach a far wider 
audience than most science-fiction novels. 
But it is genuine science-fiction, and an 
ornament to any fan's bookshelf. 

SIXTH COLUMN, by Robert A. 
Heinlein. Gnome Press, $2.50. 

WALDO & MAGIC, INC., fey Robert 
A. Heinlein. Doubleday & Co., Inc., 
$2.50. 

This is a time of rejoicing for Heinlein 
fans, for in addition to his first motion 
picture — Destination: Moon — and a new 
science-fiction juvenile book, both just 
about to be released, three of his finest 
novels are now added to the distinguished 
list of his fiction available in book form. 

In Sixth Column, the time is a few dec^ 



THE SCIENCE FICTIONEER 



91 



ades from now, when the United States 
has been overrun by Asiatic conquerors 
armed with the latest and most devastating 
super-scientific weapons. A single survivor of the American Army makes his 
way to a hidden cave where a top-secret 
experiment has just come to bloody conclusion. The researchers have discovered 
the new weapon they set out to find — but 
most of them have been killed in the process, and the remaining handful are simply 
unable to cope with the millions-to-one 
odds against them. Nor is there any hope 
of secretly raising and arming a fighting 
force, for the invaders have outlawed 
every form of public gathering except religious ones. 

This is the problem posed in Sixth 
Column — and Heinlein's answer to it is 
typically ingenious and delightful. 

It is interesting to speculate, by the way, 
whether Sixth Column may not be remembered as the first science-fiction novel 
to be based on Einstein's new General 
Field Theory. Certainly when Heinlein 
wrote it he had no knowledge of what 
Einstein would announce almost a decade 
later, but as well as any layman can understand Einstein's latest contribution to 
knowledge, the "Ledbetter effect" described in Sixth Column seems to fill the 
bill. But regardless, this is a dramatic and 
fast-paced book, which, with its striking 
jacket by Edd Cartier, is something you'll 
want to own. 

Just as rewarding in its own way is the 
other Heinlein volume, this one a doublefeature containing two short novels, 
Waldo and Magic, Inc. The hero of 
Waldo is a physical freak, a mature human being with the muscular strength of 
a new-born baby and a genius-level I.Q. ; 
in full accord with the natural law of compensation, he transmutes his physical 
handicaps into assets, developing such potent mechanical substitutes for muscle that 
he becomes the most powerful man in the 
world. It is only when he comes up 



against a problem that his science cannot 
solve — and enlists the aid of a Pennsylvania Dutch hex doctor — that Waldo loses 
some of his contempt for the muscle-bound 
"smooth apes" that are ordinary human 
beings, and becomes himself a person. 

Waldo is science fiction tinged with 
fantasy ; and the other story in the book, 
Magic, Inc., is fantasy with the barest 
trace of science. But even the hardest to 
please science-fiction reader is likely to 
be delighted with this merry story of our 
own country and what is almost our own 
time — with the slight difference that it is 
far enough in the future for magic to have 
been put on a sound, commercial and industrial basis. Gnomes use their unmatched knowledge of the subterranean 
world to prospect for oil and precious 
metals; contractors put up grandstands 
with a splinter of wood and a spell ; dietconscious women eat all the magicked. 
desserts they want, serene in the knowledge that they will vanish without adding 
an ounce. All is well — until a mischievous demon from the Half- World decides 
to muscle in by doing for magic what 
Murder, Inc. did for homicide and the 
Capone syndicate for bootleg gin. The 
rest is the exciting tale of an odyssey to 
the gates of Hell — and beyond. Those 
who missed it in its magazine publication should be sure to get it now. 

For reasons best known to themselves, 
most publishers have fought clear of putting two short novels between the same 
pair of covers. But tradition" notwithstanding, the present combination proves 
that the two-for-one policy can produce 
some fine reading enjoyment — let's hope 
for more of the same! 

THE INCREDIBLE PLANET, by 
John W. Campbell, Jr. Fantasy Press, 
$3.00. 

A decade and a half ago a relatively 
new writer named John Campbell published a science-fiction story called The 



92 



SUPER SCIENCE STORIES 



Mightiest Machine, detailing the adventures of Aarn Munro, a Jovian, and his 
Terrestrial companions as they traveled 
around the universe and into other dimensions. It was a near classic for the time, 
and the thousands who read it in its original magazine publication and later book 
reprint have long demanded a sequel. The 
Incredible Planet is that sequel — never 
before in print, and containing all the 
characters of the earlier story and a host 
of new ones besides. 

At the end of the previous story, Munro 
and his party were on their way back to 
Earth from the other-dimensional planet 
of Magya. This is the story of the long 
voyage home — where the dimensional 
jump leaves them stranded in a totally 
unrecognizable part of their own universe 
— and their subsequent adventures. Their 
first stop is at a planet whose population 
has lain frozen in suspended animation 
for more than four hundred billion years. 
Next they visit a planet whose sun is 
about to become a nova, and take part in 
a condign battle between its humanoid 
inhabitants and their reptilian overlords. 
Finally they get back to Earth — just in 
time to intercept an invasion of fourlegged creatures from another star, who 
turn out to be the sources of the Centaur 
legend. 

There is adventure, there are thrills, 
and there is super-science galore in The 
Incredible Planet. But one ingredient is 
missing, and that is the thing called "characterization." It is hard to believe that 
the author of The Incredible Planet is the 
same who, under his own name and the 
pen-name of Don A. Stuart, produced 
such deeply moving and memorable stories 
as Who Goes There?, Twilight and Night, 
for there are no flaws at all in those 
stories, and there are flaws aplenty in The 
Incredible Planet. It's an exciting yarn, 
with ray-guns and spacewarps of new 
varieties on every page, and you will very 
likely enjoy it all the way through. But 



don't lend it to friends you want to convert to science-fiction, for it will only confuse them. 

NEEDLE, by Hal Clement. Doubleday & Co., Inc., $2.50. 

These good days of growing religious 
and racial tolerance have, it is said, one 
sad by-product — the unhappy plight of 
the motion-picture producers, who must 
find villainous characters for their pictures 
who are not members of any recognizable 
race, religion, nationality, class or trade. 
If this is true, someone ought to call their 
attention to Needle, for the villain of this 
engrossing science-fiction novel — like its 
hero — isn't even vertebrate, much less 
recognizably human, and in fact under 
most circumstances is not so much as 
visible to the eye. 

Needle's two chief characters are physically closest to jellyfish or oversize amoebae ; one is a criminal from a far-off world, 
the other the "policeman" who is out to 
get him. When, in his flight, the criminal 
maroons them both on the Earth, the 
Hunter finds himself up against a mansized problem. For these creatures ordinarily live within the body of a warmblooded animal, taking their nourishment 
from the host's bloodstream and in return 
scavenging his body of poisons and bacteria. And, while it's tough enough to find 
a needle in a haystack, what do you do 
when the needle hides itself inside a wisp 
of hay? 

The Hunter's additional problems are 
many and difficult — for his only willing 
host is a boy, subject to a boy's constrictions in a world of adults. It's a good 
problem, and Hal Clement provides a good 
solution— one that will keep you guessing 
all the way through, and won't let you 
down at the end. 

Good science-fiction detective stories 
have been hard to find, for all but a tiny 
handful fall into the reader-cheating class" 
where the final solution lies in the gadget 



THE SCIENCE FICTIONEER 



93 



pulled out of a hat ; unlike all other writers, science-fiction's penmen are allowed 
to set up almost all of their own situations 
with a free hand. But Needle proves that 
even this rule has its exception, for it's a 
first-rate detective story and fine fantasy 
reading besides. 

FIRST LENSMAN, by E. E. Smith, 
PtuD. Fantasy Press, $3.00. 

Last but very far from least even in this 
month's exceptionally fine batch of novels, 
is the long-awaited new Lensman story 
by one of science-fiction's best loved writers. Now that all of Dr. Smith's "Skylark" stories are back in print again, Fantasy Press has taken up the task of doing 
the same for his famous Lensman series. 
The first volume in the set was the radically revised Triplanetary ; now we have 
First Lensman, written especially to fill 
out the series for book publication and 
never before in print in any form. 

First Lensman' s story concerns Virgil 
Samms, an admiral in the Solarian Patrol 
who applies to the mysterious planet of 
Arisia for help in the Patrol's battle 
against interstellar piracy and crime. 
Arisia's reply, part of a subtle and longterm plan which comes in for fuller ex


pression later on in the series, is to provide him with the first Lens, a glowing 
jewel-like affair which, worn on his wrist, 
gives him the power of telepathy and more. 
The Arisians undertake to supply Lenses 
for all members of the Patrol, provided 
the members apply in person and submit 
to a thoroughgoing psychological investigation which weeds out all weak or criminal characters instantly — and finally. 
With the aid of Arisia's Lens, the Patrol 
takes up its battle against crime — only to 
find that, as they have Arisia, so have 
the criminal forces a race of superbeings 
to aid them. 

First Lensman is cut of the same cloth 
as the other stories in Dr. Smith's famous 
works — as good as his best, and as bad 
as his worst. There are few neutrals in 
the conflict of opinion between his loyal 
fans and his outspoken critics. For those 
to whom Edward E. Smith is one of the 
all-time "greats" of science fiction — a 
numerous crew of whom your reviewer is 
one — the present book is pure enjoyment 
and an indispensable delight. For those 
who have never enjoyed a Smith story, 
First Lensman is not likely to effect a 
change. 





ON THE NEWSSTANDS 

THREE AGAINST THE STARS 

By Eric North 

Life out of Stardust— strange, menacing invaders from another world, 
growing and multiplying, ever more powerful, filling the earth with fear. 
All his days Professor Montague had sought the secret of spontaneous 
life-forms. Now he had found it— and horror beyond control 1 



The May issue with this great 
novel of the unknown is on all 
newsstands now. Get your copy 
today! 




HOP O MY 
THUMB 



No name in human speech was black enough for the 
man who was surrendering Earth to the aliens 
. . . but Everson knew that the only way to 
keep his world from slavery was to link 
it to the invaders — with a cosmic 
ball and chain! 





GEORGE EVERSON descended 
hastily from the air liner, and the 
flying steps of a street escalator 
carried him up into the Star Building, 
but not before the crowd surging behind 
the fence a hundred yards away had caught 
sight of him. How they recognized him 
in the growing dusk he didn't know. His 
gray hair and mustache, the sensitive lines 
of his face were unobtrusive, anonymous — 
but recognize him they did. Probably hate 
had sharpened their vision, for the chorus 
of yells that overtook him was fierce. It 
was clear enough that they didn't like 
traitors. 

He smiled wearily, knowing, without 
pausing to make sure, that his hand-picked 
guards were keeping them in check, and 
dropped wearily into a convenient desk 
chair. As it headed for his office, he 
switched on the visor, and his secretary's 
anxious face met his eyes. "We've been 
expecting you, Mr. Everson." 

"Any messages?" 

"A great many of them, sir." 



"What do they say about the surrender?" he asked. 

"Most of them are protests, sir. Official 
resignations — " 

"The resignees have been replaced, according to plan?" 

"Naturally, Mr. Everson." 

"And they are proceeding to carry out 
the surrender, as ordered?" 

"Well, not quite. A few said they 
couldn't stomach it, Mr. Everson. They 
resigned too." 

"See that they are replaced with names 
selected from List C. The surrender must 
go through." 

"Yes, Mr. Everson." 

His secretary — herself a replacement 
of the man who had been with him for 
ten years — seemed to wait for him to go 
on, but he only nodded curtly and 
switched off. There were other people to 
see and talk to, but suddenly he felt it 
impossible to face them, to stare into their 
eyes. He let the chair carry him silently, 
and once in his office, he turned on the 

95 



96 



SUPER SCIENCE STORIES 



door lock to insure privacy. Then he 
stared out through the transparent wall 
at the spectacle the heavens offered. 

Off the right, not far above the horizon, 
hung the Hop planet-fortress, from which 
he had just come. A bit smaller than the 
moon in apparent diameter, it was actually 
larger than Jupiter, and had several times 
that planet's mass. 

From an anti-grav chamber, he had 
seen only one tiny corner of its vast surface, but that single vision had been 
enough to convince him that he had been 
correct. The Hops, in their countless 
numbers, were unconquerable, and the 
human race, despite all its weapons, had 
no choice but to surrender unconditionally. 

The Hop Supreme Three had observed 
all the customary formalities. They had 
signed the agreement for humane treatment of the surrendering race, and given 
their most solemn promises to live up to 
the agreement in every detail; although 
from what he had seen of them, Everson 
knew that their idea of what was humane 
differed from his. He knew also that they 
signed agreements merely to break them, 
as they had broken the one on Neptune, 
and that when they broke this one the 
human race might very well be exterminated. But, as he had been telling himself 
time and again these last five days, he had 
no choice. 

He had, by dint of superhuman effort, 
managed to persuade the majority of his 
Council of that, and only two members 
had resigned. Public opposition had been 
more violent and outspoken, with here 
and there some firebrand calling for a 
war of defense to the death. But he had 
pointed out as coolly as he could, in one 
System-wide speech after- another, that 
the war would be to their death. Resistance was one thing, suicide another. The 
opposition had been disorganized, if not 
overcome, and the surrender was now 
going on. His present task was to speed 
it up as much as he could, and for that he 



would have to see and talk to the numerous individuals whose calls were waiting. 

But the effort of pressing a button which 
would bring their faces opposite his own 
was more than he could manage. And 
then, to his relief, he found an excuse for 
putting off the painful task. A bell tinkled 
musically, and his secretary's voice said 
softly, "Mr. Arthur Everson, sir." 

HIS SON entered and stood regarding him silently. Arthur's 
' hair was black, and with his 
young, clean-shaven face he lacked the 
aspect of official dignity which the gray 
mustache gave his father. But he had 
the same sensitive features, and under 
his eyes there were hollows sunk deep 
by the tension and sleeplessness of the 
past week. He said finally, "Have a nice 
trip, dad?" 

"Not nice. Interesting." 
"Something like my life now. Did you 
know that I'm afraid to go out into the 
streets?" 

"You have your guards." 
"I don't mean that. I don't dare to 
.look people in the eye. 
"You'll get over it." 
"I'm afraid not," said Arthur. "I'll 
never get over being the son of a traitor. 
At first, when I heard of the plans for surrender, I thought they were intended as a 
maneuver, to throw the Hops off their 
guard. I never believed that you could 
intend them seriously." 

"The Hops aren't to be thrown off 
their guard so easily. Don't you know 
anything about them?" 

"I know a great deal. I've seen several of your secret reports." 

Everson frowned. "How did you get 
at those?" 

"Never mind that. I wanted to know 
if a military defense was possible. On the 
basis of those reports, I think it was. But 
you didn't have the courage to undertake 
it." 



HOP O' MY THUMB 



97 



"It isn't a question of courage. In the 
first place, we'd have been slightly outnumbered." 

"That wouldn't have mattered. There's 
a human population of six billion on Earth, 
four billion on the other planets. The 
Hops were estimated to number a hundred 
billion in all — " 

"That is inaccurate," said his father, 
with that weariness which never seemed 
to leave him in these days. "That was the 
first, very wild estimate. We've corrected 
it since. The Hops number ten trillion.. 
And they regard most of their number as 
expendable." 

"They can't be so many." 

"They can. They are. Which reports 
did you see, Arthur?" 

"The entire first series. A one to 
A seven." 

"Then since you know that much, perhaps I'd better fill you in with some more 
recently obtained information. To begin 
with, their name is officially Maletes, 
which can be translated roughly as The 
Big Men. The designation may seem 
strange to you. But it fits much better 
than that stupidly patronizing 'Hop O' My 
Thumb', which some bright journalist 
called the first one he saw, and which has 
since become their usual name among us. 
There's nothing elfin or pixielike about 
them, and on their own planet, compared 
to the other animal life, they're really big. 

"Moreover, they're heavy. The adults 
average no more than ten inches high, but 
they run to about forty pounds. They're 
as strong as human beings, not to speak 
of being quicker and more active. Pit a 
wildcat against an unarmed man, and 
what chance do you think the man has? 
Well, a Hop is more dangerous than a 
wildcat, even without taking into consideration his superior intelligence." 

"You're exaggerating, dad. " 

"No. I saw an exhibition on. their 
planet. They put several Hop fighters 
against their own native animals, as well 



as against several specimens they had captured on outer planets. In every case but 
one the Hop came out the victor. The sole 
exception was a Jovian strom, a kind of 
lizard, and that managed a draw not so 
much because it was twice the Hop's size 
as because it's the fastest-moving creature 
in the System." 

"But we wouldn't be fighting without 
weapons." 

"They'd have the advantage there too. 
Their weapons are better than ours. In 
nuclear physics and biological warfare, 
they're ahead of us. Not too far ahead, 
I'll admit. Give us a hundred years — possibly even fifty — and we'd be up to them. 
But we haven't those fifty years, and 
there's no way of stalling them that long." 

"How about psychological weapons?" 

"No chance. We couldn't get close 
enough to make a beginning. They're 
aware of the danger, and they've taken 
precautions against it." 

"They'd have to come to us. They'd 
have to attack — " 

"Good Lord, Arthur, don't you see that 
if they did, they'd have a still greater advantage ? The moment they close in on us, 
and nuclear weapons are out, we don't 
stand a chance. As individuals they're too 
small to make good targets, and too tenacious to be easily killed even if they are 
hit" 

"And they have no weaknesses?" 

THE BELL tinkled again, and the 
secretary's voice said, "I'm sorry, 
Mr. Everson, but there's a report 
that requires your attention. With regard 
to the surrender on Venus — " 
"Go ahead." 

He listened, and at the end, said simply, 
"Have McReady take Mauvernon's place. 
The plans are ready for him. Tell him 
to carry them through as they stand." 
He turned to face his son again. 

"I asked if they had no weaknesses, 
dad." 



98 



SUPER SCIENCE STORIES 



"Several. But none that we can take 
advantage of at the moment. Don't think 
our decision to surrender was an easy one, 
Arthur. During the entire period of negotiation, we've had our spies out. We've 
managed, with difficulty, to learn a few 
things about them. 

"The Hops have come out of another 
galaxy. For a great many centuries 
they've been able to move their entire 
planet, to attach it as a temporary satellite to some star, and to release it again, 
without expending too much energy, when 
conditions became unfavorable for a longer 
stay. 

"Wherever they have come across a 
planet suitable for Hop habitation, they've 
left sizable colonies. But they've never 
run across anything as good as their original home. 

"They were originally about three feet 
high. They've been deliberately bred to 
diminish their size, so that more of them 
might be supported at a given standard of 
nutrition. But overpopulation has always 
been a problem nonetheless, and has 
driven them on continually to look for new 
planets. That's why they're so interested 
in our system." 

"And that," said Arthur, "is also why, 
once we've handed over everything we 
have, they'll exterminate us, and proceed 
to colonize as if they had never signed an 
agreement." 

"Possibly." 

"You say that very calmly, dad. As if 
the extinction of the race meant nothing 
to you." 

"Because we have no choice. However, 
I was going to tell you about their weaknesses. These derive from their lack of 
height. As the Hops shrank in size from 
generation to generation, they became 
shorter-lived. At present, they live on an 
average only five of our years, of which 
at most three can be considered years of 
maturity, with full adult powers. 

"They might have done something 



about it originally by changing the direction of their own evolution. But the shorter their lives, the less pressing the problem 
of overpopulation. And at a time when 
they were engaged in continual wars, they 
preferred to have replacements made as 
quickly as possible — which meant a 
shorter period of infancy, and again a 
shorter total life. 

"Their ability to mature quickly also 
made for greater vigor as soldiers, and involved no lengthy old age during which 
the injured veterans had to be taken care 
of. Later on, when the process had gone 
further than they liked, they tried to reverse it, and couldn't. It was biologically 
difficult, and politically impossible. It 
would have intensified all the problems of 
overpopulation, and started a civil war. 
They're stuck with their five-year lives. 

"The consequences have been tremendous. During the three years of adulthood 
it is no longer possible to master any reasonably broad and . complicated field of 
knowledge, let alone advance it. Despite 
their application of what had previously 
been learned in psychology, and their attempt to substitute machine calculation for 
brainwork as much as possible, they are 
no longer able to train any large body of 
research scientists. Instead of developing, 
their science has deteriorated. Entire 
branches they had formerly mastered have 
now been relegated to the museums and 
libraries. They don't have time for philosophy or logic, or other such luxuries. 
All their science is, one way or another, 
military science. They hang desperately 
onto that." 

"And this deterioration is continuing?" 
"Steadily. It would take us a hundred 
years to reach their present attainments 
in mlitary nucleonics and biologies. But 
they're going backward as rapidly as we 
move forward. That's why I told you 
before that fifty years might be enough." 
"And we don't have the fifty years." 
"Not even a reasonable fraction of it. 



HOP O' MY THUMB 



99 



That's why we can't take advantage of the 
weaknesses we've discovered. Remember 
that they're physically more vigorous than 
we are, and intellectually just as alert. 
They can see through any tricks we try. 
They lack merely sufficient time for each 
individual to accumulate a sizable and 
coherent body of knowledge which has 
been tested in practice." 

"There must be some way—" 

"When you think of it, let me know," 
said the older man, suddenly curt. He 
stood up, as if the recital of the hopeless 
story had renewed his energy. "At present, I have to see to it that the surrender 
is carried out." 

"I still think that you're merely trying 
to rationalize an act of treason." Arthur's 
voice was choked, and tears filled his eyes. 
"Do you ever stop to think of the place 
that men like Arnold and Quisling hold 
in human history ? When I think that 
your name will join theirs, that it will 
be even more infamous than theirs, I feel 
like killing myself." 

The older Everson laughed, rather 
harshly. "If I'm right, I'm no traitor. If 
you're right, there will be no human race, 
and ho human history to record my name. 
Don't be such a child, Arthur, and don't 
try to make history's decisions for it.. Now 
get out, and let me work." 

FOR A TIME after his son left, 
Everson worked steadily. The surrender wasn't going as smoothly as 
he would have liked. Even those who had 
accepted the numerous vacant posts had 
no heart in the work, and whether 
through carelessness or through deliberate sabotage, many of the minor points of 
the agreement with the Hops were in danger of being violated. If Everson could 
help it, there were going to be no violations that would give the Hops an excuse 
to use military force. He checked over 
the details of what was being done, in the 
asteroid belt, and found, as he had sus


pected would happen, that the largest 
asteroid base of all had been left out of the 
list to be turned over^to the Hops. 

He spoke personally to the governor 
of the Asteroid Group. "Clayton? Ever 
hear of Base AZ?" 

"Of course, Mr. Everson." 

"So have the Hops. They're very sensitive, and I'd hate to upset them by pretending that it doesn't exist. Turn it over 
to a Hop crew, and see that it's brought 
directly to their planet." 

"Yes, Mr. Everson," said Clayton 
dully. 

DURING the night, his wife visored 
the Star Building. All through the period 
of the negotiations she had said nothing, 
but the long years of living together had 
enabled Everson to guess her thoughts, 
and he knew that she shared Arthur's 
views that everyone responsible for turn


ing Earth over to the Hops was guilty of 



FIRST AID > 

HEADACHES 




May nothing mar the harmony 

Or cloud your Easter day, 
Take Alka-Seltzer for RELIEF 
If headaches come your way. 
• 

Use it alio for FAfT REHSF of 
Acid Indigestion and 
Muscular Aches and Pains 
and Discomfort of COLDS 

Alka- m 
Seltze^M 

V S.-ond Canada 



treason— and that she made an exception 
only in the case of her husband. 

What would have been an act of betrayal in someone else was only a mistake 
in judgment in George Everson, and this 
despite the fact that for almost thirty years 
she had maintained proudly that her husband never made mistakes. 

She had deliberately involved herself 
in a tangle of face-saving inconsistencies 
for which he was deeply grateful. If she 
had turned against him as Arthur had 
done, and as even his own brothers had 
done, his life would have been altogether 
intolerable. 

Even as it was, he was none too happy 
at her expression. "George," she said, 
from a distance of two thousand miles, 
"the Hops are arriving. Have you seen 
them?" 

"I can get a direct military view. Just 
a moment." 

A touch of one of the buttons on his 
desk brought the picture to the military 
screen in front of him. The sun was just 
rising, and in the early dawn, the Hop 
craft was barely visible as it hovered high 
overhead. Occasional glints from something in the air revealed that they had let 
down a transparent ladder: Down this 
ladder were climbing rows of Hops, perceptible only as tiny dots near the top, 
■ becoming larger as they neared the 
ground. To the onlookers from below it 
seemed as if the Hops were climbing 
down out of the sky on thin air. 

"I have the picture, Ada. They're the 
occupation crew." 

"They're going to govern our Own district?" 

"That's right," he said gruffly. 

"There aren't many of them, George. 
And we have a large military force nearby. If you gave the word, we could wipe 
them out." 

He said wearily, "If you knew how 
many times that suggestion has been made 
to me ! No, Ada, there's no chance of that. 



Both the local commander and his subordinates are tested men. I am not giving 
the word, and they will not take it from 
anyone else." « 

"You have to give it personally? Isn't 
that unusual?" 

"Decidedly unusual. But I'm taking no 
chances of betrayal. As I've repeated time 
and again, I want the surrender to go off 
smoothly." 

She nodded slowly. "That has become 
clear enough. You're working all night?" 
It was his turn to nod. 
"Try to rest for a while, darling. And 
have something to eat." 

"I won't starve, Ada. Good night." 
The screen became blank, and he turned 
to stare once more at the' military visor, 
still exhibiting the arrival of the Hop occupation crew, From somewhere, far below, a sudden flash appeared, and a pair 
of Hop soldiers seemed to lose their grip 
on the air and toppled off the invisible 
ladder. The others froze in their places. 

But retribution against the unseen 
sharpshooter was rapid. Not the Hop 
ship, but a small Earth craft flashed into 
view from the side and swooped down, 
its guns blazing. A building shattered in 
the lower part of the screen. And the Hop 
troops resumed their descent. 

A FEW hours later, Venus was the 
scene of a more serious incident. 
Here a whole garrison rose in revolt, armed with modern weapons, and 
well trained in their use. Everson turned 
aside from everything else to take personal part in the crushing of this revolt. 
The angry troops fought savagely, but 
had no chance from the beginning. The 
loyal forces were concentrated against 
them in overwhelming strength within an 
hour, and they threw in everything they 
had. Half a day of fierce fighting saw the 
collapse of the desperate gamble. 

Through these and other revolts that 
followed, thought Everson sardonically, 



HOP O' MY "THUMB 



101 



no more than ten Hop soldiers were lost. 
Everson had suggested that System troops 
would be more effective in crushing a rebellion of their own people, and the Hop 
authorities bad agreed. 

Late in the day the Hop Supreme Three 
contacted Everson. He studied them in 
his visor, three elflike creatures whose 
eyes twinkled as merrily as if they had 
been genuine elves. To judge from first 
appearances alone, the journalist who had 
originally christened them hadn't done 
so badly. They did have the sharp leprechaun ears and the leathery skin of authentic gnomes, born of a marriage of different mythologies. It was not until you 
got a good all-around look that you became aware of features that no genuine 
elves or gnomes would have tolerated in 
themselves. The third eye near the top 
of the forehead, the fourth on the back of 
the head, the antenna-like third pair of 
arms that was ordinarily folded in back 
and unfolded only in moments of excitement, the ugly and apparently useless 
patch of blue skin below the neck, visible 
above the loose clothes they wore — all 
these testified to a race of creatures that 
had not been dreamed of in human folk 
lore. 

The Spokesman waited for Everson, 
and as became the representative of an 
inferior race, the latter bowed humbly and 
said, "Greetings." 

"Greetings. We have heard excellent 
reports of you." 

"I have tried to carry out all that I 
promised." 

"You have done even better than we 
expected. When do you think the surrender will be complete?" 

He made a rapid mental calculation. 

"In thirty-seven Large Vibration 
Units." 

With no permanent sun of their own, 
the Hops based their time standards on 
the frequency of atomic vibrations. The 
thirty-seven Large Units were equivalent 



to about thirty hours. By that time, all 
the planned surrenders would have gone 
through on schedule, and the human race 
would be at the mercy of the Hops. 

"We congratulate you on your fidelity 
to your word. You shall receive a suitable 
reward." 

What, he wondered, did they regard as 
"suitable"? To kill him first, after they 
had no further use for him, and thus to 
spare him the sight of the extermination 
of his race? Or to keep him alive until 
the bitter end, to grant him a few extra 
hours of painful existence, in return for 
an act of betrayal on so grand a scale that 
their own history had never seen its like? 

He couldn't possibly guess, but he said 
simply, and still humbly, "I await your 
generous gift." 

The Three grimaced. Presumably, that 
was their equivalent of an amused smile. 
Then the Spokesman said, "One important surrender is yet incomplete. That of 
the Pleasure Planet." 

"I shall attend to that myself." 

"Good. And we shall attend personally 
to your reward." 

He would have said impertinently, if he 
had dared, that this act of virtue would be 
its own reward, but it would have been 
stupid to lose control of his tongue at this 
late stage. So he merely bowed humbly, 
and the next moment they had broken 
contact. He returned to his work. 

But during the day something happened 
that he had not expected. His wife arrived, and neither his secretary nor any 
of the guards dared keep her out. She 
came into his office quietly. 

"I want to be near you at the end, 
George," she told him. 

"It's good to have you near, Ada. But 
I have no time to spare." 

"I won't take up any of your time. I 
merely want to sit near you and watch 
you." 

Then she fell silent again, and he went 
about his work once more. In the after


102 



SUPER SCIENCE STORIES 



noon he dozed off, and only when the bell 
rang and he awoke with a start did he 
realize that she had adjusted a pillow at 
his head so that he might sleep more comfortably. Not until evening did she interrupt him, and then in order to get him to 
eat a meal she had ordered. 

He ate without tasting the food, but the 
few minutes of intermission did him good. 
He said gratefully, "Thank you, dear. 
Without your thoughtfulness I don't know 
what would become of me." 

"The same thing that will become of 
all of us, George. ... I hear that you are 
surrendering the Pleasure Planet." 

"Yes. There it is." 

Through the transparent walls of the 
room they could see in the sky a luminous 
dot that moved slowly in the direction of 
the Hop planet. , 

"After all that it has cost us, George, 
doesn't it hurt you to give it up?" 

He nodded slowly. Whatever else 
might be returned to them, the Pleasure 
Planet would be gone forever. He recalled 
now the years of planning for a vacation 
spot that would be capable of serving the 
entire System ; he recalled the two decades 
during which they had swept up asteroids 
and interplanetary meteor swarms for raw 
material, and then the decade following, 
in which the surface of the new planet had 
first been blasted into shape, and then 
swept and ordered, landscaped and built 
upon until it had become the pride of the 
System. It was Everson's task merely to 
turn it over to the Hops. 

"George." She was biting her lips. 
"You know that I'm not going to be able 
to live through this." 

"You may change your mind, dear." 

"No, darling, I can't live with the horrible thoughts that keep running through 
my mind. You know how much I've always, loved and admired you, and now, 
after what you've done — " She fumbled 
in her purse and brought out a tiny metal 
rod. "I'm going to shoot myself," 



He stared at her gravely. "Not now. 
Wait, dear." 

"Through this agony? Why prolong 
it?" 

"Because I need you." It was the most 
effective argument he could have used. 
"You know that I won't be able to live 
without you. Wait till I finish my work. 
And then, if you haven't changed your 
mind, shoot me along with yourself." 

"I couldn't—" 

"I can." He took the tiny weapon away 
from her. "When I have turned the 
Pleasure Planet finally over to the Hops, 
and given a few more orders, my work will 
be done. If you still want to die after that, 
I'll shoot you and myself." He looked 
into her eyes. "I promise, .you, dear. And 
even the Hops know that I carry out my 
promises," he added bitterly. 

He took her in his arms and kissed her, 
the weapon still in his right hand. Then 
he put it in a drawer of his desk, and 
returned to his work. 

THE MINUTES passed slowly. He 
looked up, startled, as the excited 
voice of his secretary came to him, 
without the warning bell that should have 
preceded it. "Mr. Everson ! There's been 
a massacre! The. Hops— they've slaughtered thousands! It was completely unprovoked — " 

The tiny dot of the Pleasure Planet was 
almost touching the circumference of the 
Hop stronghold. He sighed, and dropped 
his pen. 

"They're not even waiting," said Ada, 
in a choked voice. 

"I thought we'd be spared this." 

"Spared! They meant to slaughter us 
from the beginning, and you only made 
things easier for them !" 

He tried to put his arm around her, but 
she shook it off. "You knew what would 
happen, George. I've seen too much — " 

It was only out of a corner of his eye 
that he saw her hand steal into the desk 



HOP O' MY THuil? U 



drawer and come out with the weapon. 

He leaped at her, twisting her arm with 
brutal efficiency. She cried out as she 
dropped the weapon, and then she covered 
her eyes, the tears flowing freely at last. 

And it was at that moment that everything happened. 

A blaze of light spread across the heavens from the Hop planet. It blotted out 
the moon and dazzled their eyes in one 
blinding flash. And then it was gone, and 
when their dazed eyes could see again, 
they saw that where there had been the 
Hop planet was nothing. 

Everson leaped to his row of visors. 

"We were right !" he shouted excitedly. 
"My God, how right we were!" And his 
fingers trembled as they swept across one 
button after another. 

"Clayton!" he barked. "Wipe out the 
Hop occupation troops in your sector. 
No, I haven't gone crazy. You have the 
equipment' to do it with. Go ahead and 
do it. They won't get reinforcements. 
Djervas, get rid of the Hop troops in Sector C. Zalmette, Goran, Halkim — " 

He spoke so rapidly that the names became a blur of sound. But the orders were 
clear enough, and from the reports that 
began to come in, it was clear also that 
they were being carried out. 

Arthur came into the office. He had 
been near the Star Building when it happened, and tears were streaming down his 
face. "The people are crying in the 
streets," he said huskily. "All the announcers on all the communication systems seem to have gone crazy. But it's 
hard to believe. What happened, Dad? 
A nuclear explosion?" 

"There wasn't any explosion." 

"But we saw it with our own eyes!" 

"You don't know what you saw. That 
wasn't an explosion, it was a collapse. Remember, Arthur, what I told you of Hop 
science? That 1 they had neglected what 
they regarded as theoretical and useless 
branches?" 1 ' - ' 



"You say their planet collapsed ?" 

"Yes, that's the clue. It was calculated 
long ago that when the mass of a body exceeded a certain maximum, the force of 
gravity would overcome those structural 
forces that tended to maintain the existence of ordinary types of matter. Ordinary molecules would collapse, and even 
atoms and nuclei, as we know them, would 
be unable to maintain their separate existence. The whole mass would fall into a * 
single, compact, giant molecule. " 

"I seem to remember something we 
were taught in school. Vaguely, though." 

"Yes, it's a commonplace to us now. 
But the twentieth century astrophysicists 
were tremendously excited by their discovery at first, although their original calculations were considerably off the mark, 
as far as the mass required was concerned. 
We've fixed a more accurate figure since 
then. 

"Through the course of millenia, as a 
result Of conquest and loot, the mass of 
their planet grew. Our astronomers calculated that it wasn't far from its critical 
collapse mass. And so as we couldn't 
hope to win in a direct struggle, our own 
hope was to build up that mass until the 
collapse actually took place. That's why 
we were in such a hurry to send them our 
heaviest equipment." 

His Wife' said painfully, "And you 
couldn't have let me know — not even 
hinted--"? 

"No, dear: We couldn't afford to take 
any chances. Not even the menjbers' of 
the Council were informed. 

Arthur said, in a voice he couldn't control, "And all the time, everyone was calling you a traitor — even I. How can you 
ever forgive us?" 

"No forgiveness is necessary. That was 
a necessary part of the plan, which helped 
convince the Hops that we had nothing 
up our sleeves." He put his arms around 
his wife, and then said sharply, "Come, 
Arthur, don't you collapse!" 



He went in a Marine in full battle dress; he came out a skeleton. 



THE VANISHERS 



CHAPTER ONE 
The Invisible Wall 

"A yf Y MEN were in battle dress for 

V/| the landing — steel' helmets paintY- A ed gj-een, dirty green jackets, 
pants, cartridge belts, heavy field shoes. 
The Caribbean was so deep blue it hurt the 

104 



eyes. You could look straight down into 
it until it made you dizzy. Sharks, some 
of them monsters, congregated from all 
directions. 

Marines waiting to debark shouted 
derisively at the sharks ; but it was noticeable that they didn't pull any funny busi


Trapped, facing an incredible shadow army, whose lightest 
touch meant instant dissolution — the last fighters of invaded Earth made their bitter choice — victory beyond 
death's portals — or oblivion! 



ness on the slings, and they didn't let go 
of the slings until their feet were firmly 
planted in 'the bottom of the landing 
craft. The landing craft scarcely rose and 
fell. The Caribbean was as smooth as an 
inland lake. I think, now that I look 



back, that all of us had a strange feeling 
that something unusual was going to happen, and that it had nothing to do with 
the sharks. 

I was first aboard a landing craft. I 
moved to the outboard side of my craft 



A Novelette by ARTHUR J. BURKS 

105 



106 



SUPER 5 SCIENCE STORIES 



and looked toward the half-moon beach 
where the Yataritas empties into the 
Caribbean. The river's mouth was hidden 
by the sandy beach. To my right the 
coast of Cuba, rugged, dirty coral cliffs 
ten to fifty feet high, led away eastward, 
bulging out gradually a mile south of the 
white-sandy beach. To my left there were 
broken cliffs of rotting coral, and slopes 
leading up gradually from the shore to 
cactus and spined-brush-covered hills so 
round they cast no shadows. 

Captain Ross Haggerty crawled down 
into the second LCVP, First Lieutenant 
Peter Hoose into the third. There were 
twenty-four men with each of us, some 
veterans of two wars, some recruits who'd 
been too young for World War JL 

We were going in with Haggerty to my 
right rear, Hoose to my left rear. We 
were equipped with the latest in shipshore-landing-craft-airplane communications. Four jet planes did fancy stuff over 
us, over the beach, and behind the beach, 
while we got into our places. I could talk 
with anybody in any LCVP, aboard the 
Odyssey or in any one of the jets. Our 
headsets made us look like men from 
Mars. 

Every man who was participating in 
this maneuver wore one of the sets, for 
experience had taught that any marine, at 
any time, might find himself running the 
show. 

There were flecks of foam about the 
reefs which flanked the half-moon beach 
when all three LCVP's rose on their steps 
like amphibians ready to take off, and 
headed north for the beach, so white it 
dazzled the eyes. Behind the beach lay 
the spined brush wherein, theoretically, 
enemy troops were lying in wait to rip 
us apart. 

I always thrilled to a landing, even a 
make-believe one. So did the men, boring though peacetime soldiering was. The 
APD was dropping dud shells ashore. The 
jets were diving on us, just to make a 



noise, and our three motors sounded like 
the crack of doom. The men kept down 
because that was the rule, but occasionally 
I pulled myself up and looked ahead over 
the ramp — which would come crashing 
down when we rammed our nose into the 
sand. Out over that ramp the marines 
would charge, to race for cover and swing 
into position to give our new weapons a 
workout. 

We'd be in in five minutes. The boathandlers were talking to the ship and the 
jets. I just listened in. I didn't see or 
hear a thing out of the ordinary. 

"Stand by!" came the cry. "We're 
smacking in a coupla seconds!" 

The jets were having fun right over the 
beach and for a moment I envied their 
pilots. When we got ashore it was going 
to be like sitting atop a burning galley 
stove, on that sand. It would be even 
worse under the brush On the land beyond 
that rose to the hills and, the coral cliffs 
which crowned them. 

The other two LCVP's had drawn 
abreast now. We hit the beach nearly 
together. I heard the rasping of the chains 
as the ramps went down, hitting the sand. 
There was knee-deep water over the 
outer ends of the ramps. The marines 
dashed ashore. The first odd thing happened then; one instant there was water 
over the ends of the ramps, then there 
was none. 

As a matter of habit every marine did 
his job. Without command; they sprayed 
out to right and left, getting unbunched as 
quickly as possible, just in case a theoretical enemy projectile should land 
among them. * 

But their deployment slowed and came 
to a halt. I think they, like myself, must 
instantly have missed the racketing of 
the jets. I looked up. The sky, a pale 
blue, with slowly moving clouds in which 
I was aware of greenish tints, was utterly 
empty of the four jets which were supposed to support our maneuver. 



THE VANISHERS 



- I whirled and looked back. Where the 
Caribbean had been there was a huge 
sprawl of desert, blinding in the midday 
sun, stretching away southward to a 
semicircle of brooding hills. I judged 
their crests to be at least four thousand 
feet high. And where those crests were, 
five minutes before, the Caribbean had 
been— fully a mile deep under the stern 
of the Odyssey! Where the Odyssey 
might now be I hadn't the slightest idea. 

Just before we hit the beach there had 
been thickets of broad-leaved squatty 
trees behind the ridges of sand, into which 
the -marines had been headed for concealment. Now there was nothing of the 
kind. There was nothing but sand and 
silence — silence so deep that even breathing broke it into brittle bits. 

The three LCVP's were still with us, 
high and dry on the sand in the middle 
of the desert. Each was manned by a 
coxswain and a radioman. These six men 
— they were sailors, of course — were now 
sitting in their positions aboard the three 
crafts, like statues; as if they had been 
fossilized by. the suddenness of whatever 
had happened. 

At first I thought something was 
wrong with me. Then the marines became uncertain,^ and when marines are 
uncertain the situation is definitely out of 
hand. If I was seeing things that weren't 
there, so were seventy-four other marines and six sailors. 

Captain Haggerty was giving the 
"assemble" signal and pointing to me. 
Even before he gave it the marines were 
walking slowly • toward me, their weapons 
at ready, their eyes taking in all there 
was to see. I moved back to the central 
landing craft. 

"My radio is dead," I called. "How 
about yours ?" 

"Nothing; sir; ; They couldn't be deader 
on Judgment "Day !" 

I leaned against a corner of the LCVP 
and waited for the men to assemble. No


body said anything. They just looked at 
me. I felt helpless. 

"First," I said, "let's make a check. 
I want to be sure I haven't gone completely daft! If what I say is true, say 
'Aye, aye!' Got it?" 

"Aye, aye, sir !" 

"This is not the Yataritas Beach we all 
know — apparently!" 

"Aye, aye, sir!" the voices were low, 
hesitant, yet sure. 

"The Caribbean has disappeared !" 

"Aye, aye, sir!" 

"No jets! No APD! No anything we 
know — except sand!" 
"Aye, aye sir !" 
"And we have no communication with 
anything, anywhere. I've no idea what 
we ran into, but it happened just as we 
hit the beach." I looked at my watch. 
"And one more thing. We landed about 
ten minutes ago, at nine hundred. The 
sun says it's nearly thirteen hundred. My 
watch says it's oh-nine-twelve exactly." 

Officers and men looked at their wristwatches: 

"Aye, aye, sir !" They all agreed to 
that. . 

"The sailors are inside the — area — 
whatever it is, or they would be gone like 
everything else except the LCVP's. 
Somewhere behind the LCVP's, then, 
should be— 

But I couldn't say it. Everybody could 
,see that: behind the LCVP's was the unknown desert leading away south to the 
brooding ancient mountains. 

Sergeant Eckstrom strode quickly to 
the rear of the LCVP's. That took guts, 
for he might have disappeared ; but , he 
didn't. He walked out onto the hot desert 
for twenty yards, turned and came back. 
That ended that. We were seeing what 
actually .was there. . 

"We'll send out scouts," I said, "to 
the four- cardinal points of the compass. 
We'll split each quadrant with another 
scout. That's eight scouts. Make it six


f 



108 



SUPER SCIENCE STORIES 



teen, scout in pairs. Don't get out of 
sight of the landing craft. No telling what 
you may run into." 

We officers split the horizon into thirds, 
set out to reconnoiter. 

The sailors flatly refused to leave the 
LCVP's further than the almost nonexistent shade they cast. It was their way 
of grasping at something they could understand. I didn't blame them or argue 
with them. The skipper of the APD was 
their immediate superior. Where was he, 
anyway ? 

What had snatched us into this unbelievable Limbo? 

How had it been done? What was going to happen to us? 

I TRAVELED about four points north 
of the northeast group. I am a fast 
walker; even through sand I can 
travel faster than most men. I was 
slightly ahead of all the other groups 
when suddenly I could go no further. I 
could feel nothing, yet when I put out my 
foot to set it down in a new place; it 
struck an invisible something, dropped 
back, and my impetus carried me forward 
to involve my face in something much 
finer than cobwebs. 

I jumped back, swearing, for I could 
see nothing except the hot waste of glistening sand. There were dunes, hummocks with strange grasses and brush 
sticking up through them like beards; but 
I had struck the limit of my trek and 
could not reach any of those visible spots 
beyond. r -'j 

I pushed against it with my hands. Itgave, but only as a taut wire net might 
give, then press back against the hands; 
it was a strain to make the thing bulge. 
The eounterpressure was strong. I could 
not advance. I turned to the right and 
saw that the nearest patrol had stopped. 
The two men were fumbling in the air 
like blind men. They were raising and 
lowering ■ their feet as if they felt, for 



steps above an abyss. They, too, had 
come to the end of possible advance. They 
had come into contact with invisibility 
also — invisibility that was inflexibly 
tough beyond a certain brief limit. 

The two men turned now and looked 
at me. I gave the halt signal and started 
toward them. I ran into something and 
caromed off, falling to my knees. The 
horrible thought struck me that each 
group might have stumbled inside some 
hideous globe and become separated from 
all other groups. But it wasn't so. I got 
to my feet, put my left hand out against 
the invisible wall— which felt warm to 
the touch, as if it were a living thing — 
and started toward the northeast group. 

The surface of that strange substance 
was undulant; it zig-zagged, like the 
weaving walk of a drunken man. 

I reached the first patrol, Corporal 
Hoge Ziegler and Private First Class 
Barry Preble. Their faces were white. I 
wouldn't say they were scared but they 
were definitely concerned. 

"Well, at least we've discovered what it 
was we ran through at the moment we hit 
the beach," I offered. "All we need to do 
is find a way through it, and go on with 
our maneuver." 

Ziegler shook his head. "No, sir, I 
don't see it like that. We can see through 
this stuff, or seem to, but we can't see 
back the way we came, astern of the landing craft." ' 

"Right, corporal; what do you 1 ' think 
it is, then?" • : on 

"I'm no scientist, sir.- I'd say it is a net 
of some kind, in which we have been 
caught, landing craft and all, like so many 
fish. But by whom ? By what ? For what 
reason? It has me stopped." 

"I wonder — " began Preble, then 
stopped, staring at the place where he and 
Ziegler had come to a dead stop. Preble 
stepped back. In his arms he cradled one 
of the latest automatic weapons. 

Preble stepped back, lifted the muzzle 



THE VANISHERS 



109 



of the weapon, held down the trigger for 
a few squirts. The weapon acted naturally 
enough. There was no question that the 
bullets left the muzzle of the fast-fixer. 
But we didn't hear them hit the invisible 
screen ; nor. looking beyond it, did we see 
where the bullets' kicked up sand. The 
bullets simply plunked into nothingness as 
bullets of an obsolete day vanished into 
soap or sand during firing tests. 

A few seconds passed. Then there were 
soft sounds in the sand at the very spot 
where the two marines had hit the wall. 
All three of us looked down. The flattened, 
steel-jacketed bullets lay in a small group 
in the sand, within a couple of inches of 
the invisible wall — on our side of it. 

"Caught the bullets, like a baseball 
catcher!" said Preble, his voice highpitched with threatened hysteria. "Then 
just dropped 'em! Took them in, killed 
their speed, then slowly discarded them! 
And I saw the wall do it !" 

Ziegler and I had not seen this phenomenon, but we were not directly behind 
the weapon, as Preble was. 

I lifted my binoculars for the first time 
and looked around at the other patrols, 
all of which I could see easily. All except those which followed a southerly direction had come to the wall and were just 
as puzzled by it as we. None of us had 
anything to offer ; we were even afraid to 
think lest we question our 0" 7 n sanity. 

We held our ground until all patrols 
had come up against the invisible wall. 
Then we had some idea of the extent of 
our prison. That brooding mountain to 
the south, it appeared, was forbidden to 
us. 

How high did the wall reach? Was it 
domed ? 

"Preble, fire as nearly straight up as 
you can," I told the private. "Then we'll 
duck away fifty or sixty yards, just in 
case, and listen." 

Ziegler and I stepped well back. Preble 
took careful aim. He squirted a few score 



slugs, then ran to join us. We were so 
silent we could not even hear each other's 
bre- 1 thing. Shortly we heard the bullets 
dron into the sand, and stepped forward. 

Theoretically a bullet fired straight up 
strikes the ground with the same speed at 
which it was fired — so the slugs would 
have been flattened anyway. But we had 
noticed a thin film of some substance unknown to us around the slugs which had 
been first fired into the wall. 

That same substance was clinging to 
the several slugs we managed to sift up 
from the sand. Our wall of invisible tension was a dome ! 

"I feel like a bug !" said Preble. "I feel 
like a bug must feel when a scientist wants 
to study it. The scientist keeps covering 
it with a glass tumbler when it tries to 
walk or fly away!" 

"Do you suppose our own authorities," 
said Ziegler, "would be trying out a new 
interdiction weapon on us? Major, they 
wouldn't do it without at least telling you, 
sir, would they?" 

"They might," I said. "There are secret weapons only the highest high brass 
knows about. But if your hunch is right, 
corporal, , we've sure got ourselves 
something, haven't we? Wouldn't it be 
something if we could throw an invisible 
net over every dive bomber of an enemy, 
every warship, every man, and nullify 
the attack before it got started?" 

"It would make them all feel pretty 
silly," said Preble. "But suppose an 
enemy had such a 'net' ? Suppose it could 
reach out from anywhere in the world — " 
Slowly we all walked back to the 
LCVP's. ■ 

"Something else funny," said Ziegler. 
"It's noon now, by our time. The sun 
says it's about four in the afternoon or 
thereabouts. But we're still ordinary 
marines, aren't we? Maybe I'm different 
from the rest of you, but doesn't it strike 
you as off — •" 

"I'm not hungry," said Preble. "Nor 



110 



SUPER? SCIENCE STORIES 



thirsty ! By this time of the day, when 
we had breakfast at oh-six-hundred at 
Guantanamo, I'd be starving." Preble 
was the, company chow-hound. "But I'm 
not hungry, or thirsty. You, corporal?" 

Ziegler shook his head. He was by way 
of being a hearty eater himself, while I 
confess I came as close to being a glutton 
as an officer and a gentleman dares allow 
himself to be. 

We had hiked for several hours under 
a blazing sun. Moreover, all of us had 
sweated away a lot of moisture. Each of 
us carried a canteen of water, so water 
was not yet a problem; but the point is, 
none of us had taken a drink ! 

When we got back to the LCVP's it 
was to find that nobody else was either 
hungry or thirsty. .... . ' . : . 

"We're prisoners," said Captain Haggerty, "that's clear. And according to 
the laws of war, prisoners are fed. If 
we've been fed, and given water without 
eating or drinking, how?" 

"Through our pores!" said Preble impetuously. 

There was a long moment of silence 
which somebody had to break pretty 
soon. 

Lieutenant Hoose broke it. 

"Personally, I don't want . to be 
sprinkled by something invisible, even if 
I'm dying of thirst. And if food is being 
somehow rubbed into us, I'd just as soon 
nobody rubbed it in ! I'm not too lazy to 
chew for myself!" 

It brought the first laugh. Hoose had 
a drawling manner of speech which sometimes caused the men in ranks some discomfort to keep their faces straight. We 
were more relaxed than we had been, for 
we appeared to be in no danger. Besides, 
we were extremely well armed. If anybody attacked us — but I refused to think 
too much about that. I had a sneaking 
hunch that our top-secret weapons were, 
in this place, just so much metal, value 
zero. 



NOW AND again, during a comfortable afternoon, I sent out patrols 
to check on the invisible wall. 
They always found it. Either it was there 
continuously, or it was dropped when nobody was near and hurriedly restored 
when a patrol went out to check. 

The feeling that everything we did or 
said was noted and heard began to make 
us wary of movement and speech. We 
tried to pick out vantage points from 
which we could be seen. Any one of. the 
dunes outside our prison might have hidden something. But discussing it, none 
of us felt that this was up to the standard 
of behavior of whatever it was that held 
us. 

That's about as far as we got before 
the sun went down with startling suddenness and darkness settled over our Limbo. 
The darkness was impenetrable. It 
lasted perhaps an hour. Then a sort of 
haze seemed to withdraw in all directions, 
inwardly and outwardly — and the wondrous tropical sky, studded with stars that 
hung down almost within reach of human hands, bathed our upturned faces. 

In silence we all watched. There was 
an unusual coolness in the air, too, for 
several minutes. Cuba, at that time of the 
year, was almost never cool, even late at 
night ; but some of the men: were shivering. Sweat had not dried on all of us, 
and sweat is bad when you are motionless, 
at night. I was about to order the men to 
exercise a little, when I realized something that Hoose put into words first : 

"Now," he said, "they're feeding us 
warmth, just as they feed and water us! 
And we've been here for hours and don't 
have any idea, even, who or what they 
are!" 

Nobody else said anything. All the rest 
of us were studying the sky. 

"I don't see the Big Dipper!" said 
Sergeant Eckstrom. 

"Nor the North Star!" somebody 
added. 



THE VANISHED 15 



111 



"Nor Venus, nor Lyra !" said someone 
else. "I've been studying our book's . on 
constellations, and I don't recognize a 
one! Where are ive? We're not even in 
Cuba! Not even in the Northern Hemisphere! Not even—" 

"Not even on the Earth — ?" said 
Hoose. 

It was just here that the whispering began in our walkie-talkies; whispering 
like nothing We had ever heard. We could 
make out nothing that sounded at all like 
human words. The sounds were mechanical, yet not-mechanical. I've called them 
whispers only because that comes closest 
to describing the eerie sounds which every 
last one of us was now hearing in his 
walkie-talkie. : ■■• 

"It's vibration on our wavelength," 
said one of the gobs. "But that's the best 
I can say of it." 

"Morse? International?" I asked.* 

But nobody could* offer an answer. 

Right after that we saw the Shadow 
Men, inside the dome. Something of that 
which held us at last became visible. 

CHAPTER TWO 
The Destroying Shadows 

IT LOOKED like something new in 
shadow-play, Or motion pictures. The 
shadows' looked like men falling in 
in close forination, save that there was. 
an uncanny sha'pelessness about them. We 
could tell that they walked like other men, 
for we could 'See the swinging of their 
legs. But for the rest of their bodies, well,, 
somebody had worked out a great system 
of camouflage. Heads were just black 
blobs rising out of shoulders that were 
stooped and round. We could not tell 
whether the group had formed facing us 
or with their backs to us. 

A chill crept over and through the 
dome as the formations fell in. The sounds 
in our walkie-talkies grew in volume. I 



think we all sensed menace in the words 
that were not human words, in tones that 
were not human tones. We could sense 
growing menace, and intonations of command 

We could make out nothing resenibling 
any weapons we knew, but never once did 
we doubt that the shadows were forming 
against us. We forgot, while the shadows 
closed ranks, that we had been fed, 
watered, kept warm. This was no friendly demonstration. 

The Shadow Men started closing in., I 
gave the command for which my men had 
been waiting, and for the first time the 
sailors came out of the landing craft to 
take part. 

A vast circle of shadows closed in on 
us as we formed for defense. Old-timers 
remembered the ancient "Form for Bolo 
Attack" as we arranged ourselves in concentric circles, the automatic weapons 
outside, riflemen behind them with bayonets fixed. There was a rifle and bayonet 
for each man, including the automatic 
weaponers, for use if the automatics went 
out of action. 

"No firing until I give the word," I 
said. "Music!" 

"Music," in the Navy, of which the 
Marine Corps is a proud part, designates 
a trumpeter or drummer or bugler— whoever beats to quarters or blows the buglecalls. ■ ' ' 

"Here, sir," said Trumpeter Krane. 

"Blow something," I said, "It doesn't 
matter what. I'm just curious about what 
effect it will have." 

"How about 'Boots and Saddles', sir ?" 
he asked. There was a snicker, the suggestion of laughter from the marines. 

Trumpeter Krane did a\ good job with 
"Boots and Saddles". It was a" brave 
sound, but it had no effect whatever on 
the advancing Shadow Men. As the big 
circle contracted, every other Shadow 
Man dropped back, forming an outer 
circle. One thing that seemed to Make 



112 



SUPER SCIENCE STORIES 



clear to us: the Shadow Men had mass. 
They occupied space. Bullets, then, 
should have some effect on them. 

"Preble!" 

"Aye, aye, sir!" 

"Scatter some bullets ahead of those 
things, far enough ahead so that they'll 
ricochet over them." 

Preble stood up and let go with his 
Ultramodern fast-firer. For a few seconds, as he played the weapon's muzzle 
like a hose, the Shadow Men were obscured by the cloud of kicked-up sand, 
i The sand fell at once, of course — and the 
Shadow Men were coming directly on! 
Moreover, there was a grimmer note in 
our walkie-talkies. 

"One fast-firer at each cardinal point 
I of the compass," I said. 

Marines in action are something to see. 
In a split second the Shadow Men from 
all sides were being warned by bullets. 
But they came right on. 

"No other choice," I said quietly. 
"Shoot into them. Fire at will !" 

Thousands of steel- jacketed slugs 
poured into the Shadow Men. But not one 
fell, and not for so much as an instant did 
they hesitate in their advance. Now other 
men had fallen back so that four concentric circles of Shadow Men closed in on us. 
They were quite close when they halted. 
I was just preparing to order our new 
explosives to be hurled among them, when, 
directly in front of me, a shadow detached 
itself from other shadows. It strode forward a few paces and halted. The clumsy 
arms seemed to gesticulate. The sounds 
of whispering came louder in bur walkietalkies.' I think we all felt that in some 
way we were being challenged. 

"Someone is to go forward," I said. "I 
don't know what it wants, but — Hold 
your fire, now— not that it seems to be 
, worth much !" 

I rose and started forward, conscious 
that there wasn't a movement among the 
marines, nor among the Shadow Men. I 



wondered as I approached the foremost 
shadow, how we would make ourselves 
understood to each other. The other 
entity must have some idea or there would 
be no suggestion of a parley. 

I must have been halfway there when 
I was aware of running footfalls behind' 
me. I didn't turn — and by failing to turn 
I saved my own life at the expense of 
PFC Yount's. The footfalls were right 
behind me, but I wasn't expecting what 
happened. Arms went around my legs 
in as neat a tackle as. ever leatherneck 
footballer pulled. I was thrown oh my 
face so hard I couldn't breathe. I don't 
remember when I've been downed so hard. 

By the time I got to my knees Yount 
was almost in contact with the detached 
shadow. He had a trench knife in his 
hand ; drew it right after tackling me. I 
could see everything that happened. 

PFC Yount flung himself straight at 
the shadow. I saw him disappear into 
the shadow, emerge on the other side. 
But there was a difference : he went in a 
marine in full battle dress; he came out a 
completely articulated skeleton. He had 
been stripped of clothes, shoes, weapons, 
skin, flesh and life — so quickly that his 
forward impetus carried his skeleton on 
through the shadow. 

Now four marines were beside me. A 
growl rose from the others. I had to yell 
at them, over my shoulder : "Stand fast ! 
Do you want the same thing to happen to 

you?" 

The four men beside me— I didn't look 
to see iwho they were — simply waited, 

"Okay, just be careful not to touch 
any of the shadows," I said. "Apparently 
that's where the danger_ is." 

Not a shadow moved, not even the one 
through which Yount had gone to his 
death. The five of us then, rose and 
moved straight forward. As we came 
close I could smell something in the 
shadows, a vague, pestilential odor, like 
nothing I had ever experienced. 



THE VANISHERS 



113 



"I smelled its like, sir," said one, Haggerty, I think, "where men lay too long 
unburied. This is just a far hint, but it's 
like it, some way." 

We went around the detached shadow. 
There was no sound, even in our walkietalkies, now. It was almost as if, honoring an ancient military custom, the 
Shadow Men were allowing us to collect 
our dead. I could not see into or through 
the shadow. It was still so shapeless, even 
when I was close enough to touch it, that 
I could not tell anything of its true nature, 
or whether it, or any of the Shadow Men 
behind it, were armed. I could see the 
result of too much impetuosity, however, 
in the skeleton — snow-white, as if it were 
that of a man long dead in the burning 
desert sands— of PFC Yount. I tried to 
remember, as the others carefully gathered up the skeleton — Haggerty later said 
it was still warm! — whether Yount had 
uttered any sound, but could not remember. 

Some men said later they were sure 
they heard a muffled scream, the scream 
of a man in mortal agony, but I doubt 

- it. /- - • • • v; . 7 

I think it was an afterthought, strictly 
imagination. 

No attempt was made to keep us from 
retiring with the skeleton of Yount. As 
soon as we were back, and had placed it 
against a side of one of the LCVP's for 
burial later, the Shadow Men again began their inexorable march. 

"Sailors!" I called. "Break out the 
flame throwers." 

We surrounded ourselves with a sheet 
of flame, hot beyond anything used in 
World War II. We sprayed the stuff into 
the faces of the advancing Shadow Men ; 
we blotted them out. 

They were erased as if they had never 
been. 

At my command the flames stopped — 
and the Shadow Men were still coming 
on. 



NOT VERY hopefully, I gave the 
command to use the flames again. 
We still had tricks in the bag, but 
if they proved no more effective than what 
we had so far used — I shouted my next 
command : 

"Stand by to charge ! Hang onto weapons ! Go between them ! Don't touch one 
of the shadows! CHARGE!" 

I didn't tell the marines to face in any 
given direction. I merely wanted as many 
of them as possible to get through the 
closing cordon. 

With a wild, defiant yell the leathernecks charged. As I ran I looked for some 
opening through the concentric circles. 
If flesh or skin, clothing or equipment, 
touched one of the shadows — 

It was the queerest ducking and darting game I had ever played. We must 
not run into one another, we marines, or 
we might push one another into the 
shadows— and we knew what had happened to Yount, would never forget it. 

It was like trying to dash out through 
a crowded theater, save that in a theater 
you didn't lose your life if you happened 
to touch anything. 

I got through, out behind the last circle 
of Shadow Men. As soon as I was clear, 
in the cool, starlit waste beyond, I turned 
and looked back. The circles were still 
closing, with the LCVP's in their approximate center. To my right and left other 
marines were emerging from among the 
Shadow Men. 

I looked, and looked away. Some of 
my own marines were a sight to turn the 
stomach. It's hell to see an apparently 
healthy marine standing, stupidly staring 
at the skeleton of his arm, to the shoulder. ... I saw no skeletons in the sand 
after the marines came through and the 
Shadows went on. I breathed a sigh of 
relief. A marine could get along with one 
arm, and even the skeleton of the other 
might have possibilities; but a dead marine was dead and done. 



114 



SUPER SCIENCE STORIES 



I turned and looked back at the closing 
circles of Shadow Men. As the strange 
platoon closed in, more and more shadows 
stepped out of the circles, to form still 
more concentric circles. 

The middle LCVP happened to be the 
center of the closing circles. The first 
Shadow Man reached it and stopped, 
right in the LCVP. Others closed in 
there — and merged with the first. The 
Shadow Men were piling themselves into 
a black heap within the landing craft. 

Still the Shadow Men marched inward, 
converging on that central spot. The 
heap of blackness in the center did not 
grow larger. It was as if there were some 
sort of hole there, into which the shadows 
were pouring, like water into a funnel. 

The last ring of Shadow Men stepped 
into the LCVP — and vanished. 

Well outside the place of disappearance, 
looking as if they were participants in a 
nightmare, were the marines* Every last 
officer and man, with most of our weapons, had got through the cordon of Shadow Men. 

It could have been a dream, but for the 
skeleton of Yount, there by the LCVP, 
and the fact that several men had touched 
the shadows and been severely injured. 
Four hands were missing — save for the 
bones. One man had lost an ear, but he 
laughed. "It could have been my whole 
head !" he said. "What's an ear ?" . 

"We got through with extraordinarily 
good luck; sir," said Haggerty. "What 
do we do now, sir ?" 

"What can we do, except wait and see 
what happens next, Captain?" He had no 
answer for that. 

Automatically, we buried the skeleton 
of Yount. First his closest friends went 
back to the spot where his body had disappeared, and hunted for remnants. They 
didn't find so much as a button of his 
uniform or a screw from his weapons, or 
any part even of the steel blade of his 
trench knife. The detached shadow had 



absorbed everything of Yount save his 
bones. 

The shadows were, in some fashion, 
chemical, that seemed clear enough. But 
beyond that we were all stuck. They were 
not human. They were maneuverable, 
plainly ; but not ^//-maneuverable. Who, 
then, or what, controlled and manipulated 
the Shadow Men? 

The Shadow Men, it gave us a shiver 
to note, left no footprints. Nor had they 
in any way affected the landing craft. 

After the starlit funeral, we re-formed 
as we had been before the sudden appearance of the Shadow Men. 

"Mother of God!" cried Krane, the 
trumpeter. "It's starting again. But this 
time it's different!" .1 1 

We all whirled to look. Coming out of 
the northwest was a group of scarecrow 
figures. They didn't look like our Shadow 
Men. I didn't recognize them at first, 
though I could hear their hoarse panting, 
their rasped words. They staggered like 
men far gone in hunger and thirst. One 
of them fell on his face, struggled to his 
knees, came on. 

"Japs!" cried Haggerty. "Japs! Attacking, too, and this is .nineteen forty


nine 



I" 



It couldn't be true, yet it was. There 
were rusty rifles in the hands of the Japanese, rifles that plainly ytould not work. 
As if to emphasize this, they began to 
throw them away. 

One of them called out to us, in English: 

"Water! Food! We surrender! We 
surrender !" 

Japs? Surrendering? In Cuba — or 
thereabouts! — in 1949? T was tempted to 
laugh, until I remembered something that 
was absolutely no comfort whatever: in 
other parts of the world, a long way from 
Cuba, Japs still were holding out against 
patrols that hunted them down, Japs who 
somehow hadn't got the word that Ae 
war was over, or else refused to believe it. 



THE VANISHEMS 



115 



I WAS proud of the marines when the 
Japs asked for food and water. Not 
one of them spoke up and said, 
"You don't need either one here." I 
knew then that every marine regarded it 
as at least possible that what was happening to us was a top-brass secret, or series 
of secrets, of our own government. I 
doubted it because of what happened to 
Yount. The government doesn't risk human lives on a whim. But the possibility 
was there. I hadn't expected Yount to 
tackle me, either, or to hurl himself into 
the shadow which slew him. 

We all had canteens, none of which had 
been emptied. And no landing would 
have been properly simulated without 
food. We let the Japs come among us, 
then Hoose, who spoke some Japanese, 
and Matzuku, a Jap corporal who spoke 
some English, got together. 

The Japanese were seated with their 
backs against an LCVP and canteens 
were passed to them, together with our 
special rations. They drank as if they had 
forgotten the glory of water, ate as if 
they had forgotten how. I gave them a 
little time. We did not pull in our defensive rings, even though it could be 
seen that they were not especially useful. 
When the Japs seemed more or less sated, 
I got Matzuku and Hoose together and 
began asking questions. 

KING: "Where have you been for 
the past four years ?" 

MATZUKU : "Hiding out in the hills. 
What place is this? I know the whole 
island, but I don't remember this desert 
area." 

KING: "What island?" 

MATZUKU: "Guam, of course, as 
you Americans call it." 

I pondered the matter a few minutes. 
It wasn't possible that these Japanese had 
finally decided to surrender, had started 
hunting marines to whom to turn in their 
rusty weapons — then walked through the 
invisible dome, out of the hinterland of 



Guam into the midst of what we fondly 
believed to be Cuba. Yet here they were, 
flesh-and-blood men, and here were we, 
also flesh-and-blood men — or so we 
thought. 

Of course, Matzuku and his men were 
as much prisoners as we were. They 
were not only prisoners of whatever 
manipulated the dome, but they were our 
prisoners as well. There was nothing 
they could do, nowhere they cotild go 
with any secrets filched from us; but I 
decided not to tell them anything. 

Matzuku, I noticed, was studying the 
sky. I watched his brown face as he 
struggled with some idea that plainly had 
him buffaloed. He looked at me quickly, 
then looked away. He knew something, 
but was afraid to say what it was. I could 
at least make it clear to him that he was 
not crazy, need not be afraid to say what 
was in his mind. 

"You are amazed, corporal," I said, "to 
discover that you can't possibly be on 
Guam. I see that you know something of 
astronomy. It won't be taken amiss if 
you hazard a guess as to where you are, 
and how you got here." 

"I should like to do that, sir," said the 
Jap corporal, "but it does not seem possible that we should merely have seen a 
marine patrol, scouting the jungles of 
Guam, approached them to surrender, and 
found ourselves in the Kalahari Desert! 
It isn't possible, therefore I must not 
know the stars as well as I had thought. 
And yet, sir, I do know the stars. Unless 
this is delirium induced by fever, lack of 
water and food over the years, we are 
somewhere in the Kalahari Desert!" 

"Let's go have a look, Matzuku," I 
said; "You, too, Hoose. Haggerty, you'd 
better stay with the command." 

Matzuku, Hoose and I started back the 
way the Japs had come. Matzuku seemed 
to have forgotten his fatigue, the fact that 
he had been practically a walking dead 
man when he approached the "patrol" to 



SUPER SCIENCE STORIES 



116 

surrender. Ten sets of footprints led in a 
wavering line back to the invisible dome 
which hemmed us in. Hoose, and I hung 
back to let Matzuku go on ahead of us. 
He came to the invisible wall and halted, 
looking foolish as a fore-thrust foot slid 



down what appeared to be nothingness. 

The footprints all ended against the invisible wall. Moonlight shed its brilliance 
over everything, and we could see far out 
beyond the invisible wall, into the eerie 
area of sand dunes, stunted brush, to a 
horizon which offered no hope whatever. 

"We couldn't have come from out 
there !" said Matzuku wonderingly. "We 
came out of the Guamian jungles, but our 
footprints don't start until we reach this 
invisible barricade." Matzuku turned on 
me. "I have no right to ask, but what 
kind of a concentration camp is this? We 
Japanese have much experience in camps, 
but we use barbed wire, high rock walls 
with broken glass imbedded in their tops, 
or dungeons and caves." 

I grinned at the little corporal. 
"You don't 'use energy domes, then," 
I said, "or compress invisibility into a 
solid?" 

"No," said Matzuku, "do you?". 
He had guessed we were -prisoners also. 
I didn't explain. After all, how could I? 
We three went back to the LCVP. I ordered the Japanese into the LCVP on our 
right flank, placed a guard over them, not 
f because we had any fear of them, but so 
, they would not hear our discussion. They 
showed no interest whatever. They 
sprawled out on the deck of the LCVP 
and were asleep, and raucously snoring, 
before we met in plenary session— save 
for the single guard over the Japanesenear the grave of Yount's skeleton. 

"Could we really be in the Kalahari 
Desert?" asked Haggerty. 

"We could," I said. "The Japs could 
also be decoys, deliberately sent to us to 
make us believe whatever we're supposed 
to believe. I'm only sure of. one thing: 



we're not on Yataritas Beach, Cuba!" 

"Are we really sure of that, even?" 
asked Captain Haggerty. I had to admit 
that we were sure of nothing. 

"We seem to be unmolested for the 
time being," I said. "But we can't just 
sit here and brood. Those of you who 
want to sleep, turn in wherever you like. 
Those who want to help figure out what 
has happened to us, assemble here with 
me and we'll see if we can get anywhere." 

"You don't suppose, sir," said Krane 
diffidently, "that we're all— dead, or 
something? With all those fancy explosives we brought along — " 

Nobody laughed. Nobody snickered. 
And nobody drew away to hit the sack. 

"I don't believe we're dead, Music," I 
said, "but I could be wrong about that, 
too.' I think your 'or something' comes 
about as close to an answer as anything we 
have. Now, I'm open to suggestions as 
to how we find out what ails us, where 
we are, how we get out ; what, in general, 
it all seems to be about." 

"The Shadow Men," said Ziegler, 
"what were they?" 
Nobody knew. 

There was something in the shadows. 
A smell, and something else. Why didn't 
the stuff, whatever it was, destroy bones 
as well? Had we really heard Yount 
scream inside the shadow ? 

We recapitulated everything we could 
remember. As if we could forget anything ! And it all added up to a nightmare. 

"The walkie-talkies," said Haggerty. 
"We've got eighty-odd of them. They 
can all be adjusted to different wavelengths. I suggest we estimate how many, 
and then each of us take his share of them, 
and start sending, not only in Morse and 
International codes, but in every language 
we know, down to Greek and Latin !" 

It was long past midnight by the time 
we had worked out charts of wavelengths 
for the walkie-talkies, and divided them, 
among us. Then we scattered, first strip


THE VANISHERS 



117 



ping off our. jackets and laying our fastfire weapons on them to keep the weapons 
from being fouled by sand. We needed 
our hands free. 

"The first whisper anybody gets, he'll 
sing out," I instructed officers and men. 

Marines acquire a lot of miscellaneous 
information — and plenty of misinformation. Among seventy-five or eighty one 
would find a dozen European languages, 
Gaelic probably, three or four Chinese 
dialects, a Smattering of Congo jabbering, 
a spot of Latin, a touch of Greek. If 
someone asked me, anywhere, anytime, 
in the presence of as few as a dozen marines, if any of them knew Sanskrit I 
would hesitate to say no. 

We turned' all that mess loose on our 
walkie-talkies. If anybody ever really 
"shot the moon," it was us. 

CHAPTER THREE 
Alien Voices 

EACH man had his message pad on 
his knee, or on the sand beside him, 
opened up. The moon was so brilliant we had scarcely any need of the 
illuminated pages with which each book 
was equipped,; , 

Within fifteen minutes our walkietalkies were going wild. Every last one 
received first, the eerie whispering. Then 
the men began to report shouts, weeping, 
wordless screams, unearthly music, wind 
instruments, :i drums, tom-toms — just 
about every; noise-making agency of which 
any of us had' ever heard. 

Was all this in answer to our attempts 
to communicate? How could we make 
contact that would also make sense? 

So far, the sounds were no more informative than static. But it was something, when' we had been hearing nothing 
at all, so we kept at it. 

We kept it up for three days and nights. 
The Shadow Men did not return during 



that time. The Japanese gradually mingled with us. They realized that we knew 
no more of our situation then they did, 
possibly less, and joined with us in trying to work it out. 

It was midnight, the fourth night of 
our disappearance, when we got a break. 

Ziegler brought me a message which 
said : "You are wasting your time. Contact like this is forbidden." 

£ looked at Ziegler. 

"You got this in English?" I asked. 

"No, sir. It's Mangbetu, an African 
dialect. I did some work among those 
people, some years ago. It's difficult. I 
could be mistaken, but I don't think so." 

"Did you answer this?" 

"No, sir." 

"Go ahead," I said, "confirm! We'll 
see what happens." • 

He chattered something into his walkietalkie. Instantly all sound died out of 
every last walkie-talkie. 

We'd accomplished — what ? "Only 
something remotely confirming Matzuku, 
the Japanese who had located us in the 
Kalahari Desert of Africa. 

We slept by fits and starts. The Shadow Men did not return. Silence held 
sway in our walkie-talkie receivers, 
though we kept on sending. Ziegler gave 
us Mangbetu words to use, but nothing 
came of it. That line of investigation 
was clearly ended. 

We began working on the inner wall 
of the dome with our entrenching tools." 
That started something! 

IT WAS now clear that if we ever got 
out of wherever we were, we would have 
to do it oh our own. 

First, to establish the exact circumference of the dome, I formed all hands, 
sailors, marines and Japanese, in a single 
column and we did the circle. I wanted 
everybody whose lot was our lot, to know 
every detail that might later prove 
valuable. The area under our feet, avail


118 



SUPER SCIENCE STORIES 



able to us within the dome, we estimated at ten acres. That gave us considerable inner surface of wall and dome 
to be studied. We could not see the dome, 
we only knew it was there. We had small 
radar and sonar sets, but the dome registered on neither. Nothing we shouted 
was echoed back to us, nor did the chattering" of the fast-firers cause reverberations. With those fast-firers, the ultimate 
in small arms, we searched out every 
quadrant of the dome, to see if there were 
any opening. In the same way we 
searched out every yard of the wall; 
there was no way out, at least of any 
size, for I'd have wagered, so carefully 
was this job done, that if one bullet fired 
into dome or wall had fallen outside, 
some one of us would have spotted it. 

We used up a lot of steel- jacketed bullets, but we found not a single aperture 
in the wall or dome. 

Next ye worked on our super-grenades, of which we had a fairly good supply. This was dangerous work; we had 
to dig trenches from which to heave them. 
Even , the rifle grenades were dangerous 
because of our limited escape area. 
; The grenades did nothing to the wall; 
nothing whatever. 

The flame-throwers accomplished little 
more. There was danger with, these, too, 
for the flame bathed the wall— we could 
see it strike and blossom up and down — 
and backfired so that it was a wonder all 
who stood behind the machines were not 
wiped out. And even the flames did not 
affect the wall. 

We even, so help me, tried to talk a 
hole through the wall ! Yes, Krane 
thought of it, Trumpeter Krane. 

"Maybe we could find the key sound 
of the dome," he said, "and shatter it 
with sound. You know, . like marching 
steps shaking down a bridge." Well, we tried, but got nowhere. 
"Shovels, then," I said. "Entrenching 
tools! Maybe we can go under." 



All hands groaned. There is nothing 
a marine or sailor dislikes more than digging in — even when bullets are flying 
thick and fast. 

I think we were all a little mad then. 
It was bad enougfi to dig down into sand 
that poured into a hole faster than one 
could dig, but to accomplish nothing by 
doing it was heartbreaking. By day we 
perspired like hippos, rubbed the skin off 
our palms, got raw and bleeding where 
our clothes chafed. Water and food were 
no problem, for our mysterious source of 
supply never for a moment ceased or 
abated. 

We fought that wall for days and nights 
on end, as a mob, in shifts, and singly. 
We got nowhere. There were times when 
the sand inside the dome looked as if a 
huge animal had been rooting, or a crowd 
digging for treasure. But when we stopped 
for a few moments to rest; we could hear 
the sand whispering with 'glee as it slid 
back into the pits we had dug— leveling 
off the area again. 

We managed in some places to get 
down ten feet or so into the sand, and to 
witness a strange phenomenon. We never 
got under the wall, nor were we able to 
penetrate it anywhere, yet' when sand 
poured back into the 'pits ; we dug — it 
poured back from beyond the wall, too, as 
if there were no obstruction!' It poured 
in, apparently through the very wall we 
were trying to breach. ''■ 

Naturally we wondered, if we had been 
digging on the outside, .trying to get in, 
if the sand would have poured outward 
into the holes, too. We all remembered 
how we had got into the dome so easily, 
yet we could find no way, shape, form or 
manner to get out. 

The Shadow Men, however, had escaped. ... 

Yes, we studied that BC VP that had 
seemed to be a funnel by which the Shadow Men coalesced into one shadow and 
vanished, but could find no key to the 



THE VANISHED" ' 



119 



means or manner of their strange escape. 

We were resting one afternoon, and 
Haggerty had just said this was the most 
unsatisfactory duty he had ever performed 
in twenty-some years of landing with the 
marines around the world, while Hoose 
suggested we ought to have a name for 
this nameless area, and Trumpeter Krane 
offered "Outpost Zero" as the most appropriate — when Preble erupted: "My 
God! Look!" , 

He was pointing up through the dome. 
Spinning down toward us from an empty 
sky was a ball of something that looked 
like metal — or perhaps crystal. It glistened and shone in the sun. It almost 
hurt the eyes. 

Nobody said anything as that ball came 
closer and closer. I think we all knew 
what it was, though none of us had been 
at Hiroshima that fatal day. 

We saw-, the A-bomb disintegrate, almost lazily, directly above our dome. 

No one who has seen the Hiroshima 
pictures needs a further explanation of 
what we all saw. Only, this A-bomb was 
far more powerful than the first one. Only 
one nation, we all thought, could have it. 

Why would our own people be so intent on wiping us out? 

In a split second we were in the midst 
of the cloudy in the heart of the explosion, 
each one of us trying to convince himself, 
by pinching, that he was actually going 
through an A-bomb explosion — absolutely unscathed. Not even a sound came 
through, j 

We were sitting in the middle of the 
perfect defense against the A-bomb, but 
we didn't know what it was or who had 
made it — and we couldn't get out of it I 

There was comfort in the knowledge 
that someone knew, else how did it happen that the A-bomb made what would 
have been a direct hit on the dome if it 
hadn't been detonated about a thousand 
feet above? There was design here, all 
right — but whose? 



Nobody could imagine our own government addressing us in Mangbetu ! 
WE THOUGHT we were all dead 
men. We had all seen pictures of 
survivors of Hiroshima, with 
their skin burned off their bones. 

The Japs had not seen. They had been 
in the Guamian jungles and had not even 
heard of Hiroshima. I told them. They 
looked at one another in amazement. All 
this time we cowered in the heart of the 
explosion, and for the first time we could 
see the shape and extent of the dome 
which imprisoned us. It was outlined in 
smoke through which shot tongues of 
blue, green, and salmon pink. In the 
cloud which surrounded us we could see 
all the prisms play — and inter-flashing of 
lights of all colors that was unbelievably 
awesome. Yet we heard no sound. There 
was an eerie glow on the sand around us 
which must have come from the light, but 
if it had any ill effect on our bodies we 
have not yet become aware of it. 

We had kept our watches wound and 
synchronized, so we timed the duration of 
the blast. The cloud about us lasted for 
two hours. Then it began slowly to disintegrate. 

"Out to the walls, now," I said. "We'll 
move out from the center as skirmishers. 
Then, at my signal, when we're against 
the wall, we'll circle to the right until we 
have examined every inch we can reach 
or see." 

Far above the dome we saw the great 
snowy mushroom of the blast's residue, 
with lights playing through it. We looked 
out through the wall at the sand beyond 
— and there was no sand. Only a landscape shaped as it had been when it had 
been sand ; but now it was a smooth, 
rolling expanse of light green ! The blast 
had been a vast primordial glazier, and 
the sand was not sand now, but green 
glass — right up to the outside of our still 
invisible dome! We marched out and 



120 



SUPER SCIENCE STORIES 



looked through. We did the natural 
things, like putting our hands up beside 
faces that we pressed nose-flat against the 
invisible. The wall felt warm, but no 
warmer than it had felt before the blast. 
Our dome had withstood every possible 
destructive effect of the A-bomb blast ! 

I stood there, staring out. I looked 
around, and the marines, sailors and Japanese were standing in the same manner — 
looking out and through like children 
looking through a zoo fence. 

We must all have realized it at the same 
time. I noticed, first, that there was suddenly a space between the outside of the 
wall and the sea of green glass. I noticed 
that it ran away to right and left, a border 
between the glass and our sand, which 
became a little wider even as I stared. 
Then I felt pressure against the toes of 
my field shoes. Then I was being pushed 
bodily backhand the sand border outside 
was a foot wide ! 

I whirled this time, back against the 
wall, to stare at the others. They were all 
facing inboard, too. It was clear that all 
had noticed the widening border, that 
each knew the fact : our dome was closing 
in on us, all around. 

Probably most of us had read Poe's 
"Pit and the Pendulum" and enjoyed the 
spine-tingling horror of the walls closing 
in to crush the hapless victim. 

Just now it was far from thrilling. 
From all sides the wall closed in. We 
looked away to the south. The entire 
mountain there had become greenish, as 
if it, too, had turned to glass. 

"No one blast," said Haggerty grimly, 
"did that. Not even the best we have in 
A-bombs could have done so much. That 
mountain is ten, fifteen miles away, at 
least. There must have been more Abombs. ..." 

"And maybe more domes," said Hoose. 
"How do we know that this whole desert 
isn't dotted with them?" 
"Each one with its bugs under it for 



scientific study," said Haggerty wryly. 

My mind went around and around. 
The Shadow Men . . . Mangbetu ... the 
blast ... the desert ... the betrayal by 
the very sky itself . . . the Japanese . . . 

I had to turn it off or go crazy. Besides, the closing wall wasn't giving us 
much time. Faster and faster it advanced. 

It was clear that we were being pushed 
deliberately inward on the LCVP's. Within a few minutes we were practically on 
the LCVP ramps. 

"Grab all weapons!" I yelled. "Don't 
risk finding them on the pay roll!" 

Marines who lose weapons have to pay 
for them. That's what I meant, silly as it 
seems in the circumstances. 

Just as we were falling in at the sandcovered ramps of the three LCVP's, 
Krane cried out: "Where are the Japs?" 

It gave me a chill. There was no escaping a peculiar fact: that even while the 
invisible was herding us, assembling us 
before our LCVP's, something of it, or 
about it, had snatched away the Japanese. 
They had simply vanished. 

The walls were not circular now, but 
oval, roughly encompassing the LCVP's. 
Haggerty assembled his men before his 
LCVP. Hoose did the same. Mine assembled about me on the central ramp. 

Then, when we were inside, in position 
as he had been when we landed, with only 
one man missing — Yount — the wall 
ceased closing in. For ten minutes we 
wondered about this. Then I had a hunch. 

"Can we raise the ramps without the 
motors?" 

We couldn't, not all the way, but we 
could, with two men at each outer corner, 
raise them about four feet, catch and hold 
them with their rattling chains. 

When we figured this out we did it by 
the numbers-— 

And we almost left twelve men on the 
beach! 

No sooner had we raised the ramps 
than the Caribbean was tugging at our 



THE VANISHERS 



121 



LCVP's, the waves trying to take them 
back to sea. Our ramp men jumped up on 
their ramps, rolled crazily into the 
LCVP's, and the ramps raised all the 
way, clicking into place to become the 
prows of the unwieldy landing craft. 

Cries of glee rose from our boat-handlers. Motors caught on the first try, 
exactly as if they had not been idle for 
two weeks, and the LCVP's were backing 
away from Yataritas Beach, turning, heading out to sea. I whirled and looked out 
into the deep blue. I think all of us expected to find the Odyssey still standing 
off, waiting for us. But it wasn't there. 

"Can we make it back to Guantanamo 
Bay?" I asked the motorman. "Never 
mind answering; we're going to!" A 
cheer rose from the marines and sailors 
* as we rounded the point we had never 
expected to see again, and started west, 
in deep blue water, along the coast. 

LCVP's aren't good travelers. They 
roll like eggs on a hill, but this time nobody got seasick. 

"Outpost Zero," said someone, looking 
back at Yataritas Beach. "If I never even 
hear of it again it will be too soon!" 

WE KEPT in close formation as 
we -approached Escondido Bay, 
outside' the Reservation. There 
a cruising plane picked us up, dipped 
wings over us, looped and headed full 
speed back to ; Guantanamo. 

We all crawled up our starboard sides, 
tilting the LCVP's far oyer, and not caring a bit, to pick out landmarks ashore 
that we knew^-Kittery Beach, Windmill, 
Cuzco, Blind, Blue and Cable Beaches. 
Every one looked like home — and the 
marine hadn't lived, up to that moment, 
who regarded Guantanamo as home ! 

There were many planes out, including 
some of our jets, by the time we reached 
the mouth of Guantanamo Bay. Luckily 
the long run was made in fairly smooth 
water. " ■ ' 



We crossed the shelf where the deep 
blue water of the Caribbean becomes the 
green-dirty water of the bay, and were as 
good as home. 

I planned on making it to the Marine 
Boat House, but the Admiral's launch 
came out, with a staff officer aboard, with 
instructions to land at the Admiral's own 
dock. 

I guess it didn't matter much where 
we docked, for the point of land on which 
the Admiral had his quarters was covered 
with uniforms. Marines and sailors were 
kept back by MP's. 

The Chief Staff Officer placed me 
formally under arrest, "for absence overleave," he said — though there was a suggestion of excitement in his voice that 
made me suspect subterfuge. One thing 
was certain, an officer under arrest kept 
his mouth shut. I couldn't tell anybody 
anything. The same thing, or something 
like it, happened to every one of us. We 
were all completely muzzled by being 
placed under arrest. Whatever else we 
might be, we were "hot." 

Then it was that we worked together 
as even marines did not always work together — and the six gobs pitched in, too. 

I made out this report, with the understanding that it would be seen by every 
leatherneck and sailor, and not submitted 
until all were satisfied with its accuracy. 

I told what seemed to have happened 
to us. As commanding officer I was requested also to express an opinion. I had 
none to offer, except that two news bulletins, received over the radio the next 
day after our return, gave me something 
to think about. 

One of the bulletins explained in somewhat guarded language, that new A-bomb 
experiments were being made — not in 
mid-Pacific, in Bikini, but in the heart of 
the Kalahari Desert ! So careful were the 
brass hats in this important series . of 
tests, that no words in any civilized 
tongue were allowed to be spoken even on 



122 



SUPER SCIENCE STORIES 



intercom sets! The report didn't mention 
Mangbetu, but it did say "little known 
African dialects." This wasn't ah unusual 
procedure, by the way— Comanche Indians had been so employed in World 
War II. 

And what were those people testing, 
besides the newest thing in A-bombs? 

"Part of the test," said the voice of the 
announcer, "involves an amazing aboveground bomb-shelter! This shelter, of 
secret manufacture, is believed to be proof 
against anything except the explosion of 
the planet itself. Not only is each such 
shelter capable of great extension, thus to 
handle large groups of people, but built 
into it is something new in provisioning. 
People who are forced into these shelters 
by sudden attack, are automatically provided with food, water and equable temperature, by a process which provides 
these necessities as separate exudations 
from the inner walls of the bombproof s!" 

"Some fear was expressed, in the midst 
of the tests," said the announcer, "that 
there were traitors even among the carefully screened technicians— for despite orders, for a period of three days not only 
English but many other languages, including the secret dialect used by the technicians, were heard in their intercoms!" 

I shivered at that, remembering how, 
for three days, we had tried every tongue 
of which we could think. Gradually a picture was beginning to emerge: 

"It was feared for some time that some 
potential aggressor nation had managed 
somehow to get past the Kalahari guards 
and ferret out secret information— or else 
' that there was already a fifth column 
among the technicians!" 

No mention anywhere, of . the Shadow 

Men ! . 

I was scared stiff when. I realized this. 
For those Shadow Men, it now seemed, 
had accomplished something the A-bomb 
had not been able to do; they had got inside the bombproof, killed Younfr— and 



could easily have killed us all— and got 
out again. 

"The experiments," said the announcer, 
"were of course carried out by the United 
Nations Security Council. The results 
have not been announced in every detail, 
but the world has been informed that 
complete security against the A-Bomb has 
been produced and will be available if 
ever there is another world war!" 

But what about the Shadow Men? 
What good was the best bombproof if it 
could be entered so easily, arid everybody 
inside it destroyed? 

On the next day after our return I 
picked up a brief broadcast which I could 
easily have missed. 

"It appears that there are still Japanese 
soldiers,- hiding out on Guam, who' do 
not know that the war is over. Ten Japa* 
nese, led by a Corporal Matzuku, surrendered yesterday to ; Guamian authorities ! How they survived for almost four 
years is a mystery. They appear well fed." 

I got this far and realized that I knew 
a great deal of what had happened, but 
not how. How we and the Guamian Japanese had been netted under the same 
bombproof, for instance^they on Guam, 
ourselves on Yataritas Beach, Cuba. 

I had no explanation 1 for the Shadow 
Men— except that nobody but the "vanishes", ourselves and the Japanese, so 
much as mentioned them; They were, I 
felt sure, outside the knowledge of the 
Security Council. 

The Shadow Men were ! some manifestation— chemicals, or instantaneously acting disease germs?— of a potential enemy 
fifth column which had 'horned in on the 
Kalahari experiments. 

I can do no more. This report is respectfully submitted for transmission via 
official channels. 



FIRST ENDORSEMENT 
From: Commanding Officer, Guantanamo Marines. 



THE VANISHBRS 



123 



To: Senior Officer Present, Naval 
Base. 

Subject: Yataritas Beach Case. 

t. But for the fact that eighty men concur in the attached report I would request that Major Rafe King be ordered 
to Saint Elizabeth's for observation. 

SECOND ENDORSEMENT 
From: Senior Officer Present, Naval 
Base. 

To: Chief of Naval Operations. 

Subject: Cuba- Yataritas Beach Case. 

1. I am not inclined to treat this report 
lightly, or to suggest that it be so treated 
elsewhere. Knowing how our marines, 
sailors, equipment and LCVP's were 
plucked up f ,and, transported to Kalahari, 
together with the Japanese, I am still in 
complete ignorance of the meaning of the 
"Shadow Men." If Operations has any 
additional information it is felt that this 
base should he made aware of it. 

THIRD ENDORSEMENT 
From : Chief of Naval Operations. 
To: Commanding General of the 

Marines. 

Subject: Cuba- Yataritas Beach Case. 

1. This activity is aware of all details 
except the so-called "Shadow Men." If 
the Commanding General of Marines has 
any information, include it herewith and 
forward to Chairman, Security Council, 
United Nations. 

FOURTH ENDORSEMENT 

From: Chairman, Security Council, 
United Nations. 

To: Major. Rafe King, via all above 
channels. 

Subject: The Kalahari Tests. 

1. Returned for amplification. It is 
deemed advisable, in view of publicity attendant on the Cuba- Yataritas angle of 
the Kalahari Desert tests, to make public 
the following facts. First, best protection 
against the A^Bomb is worldwide observa


tion by special television; the Council has 
it. Second necessity is ability to make the 
bombproofs, provided by the Security 
Council, available to anybody, anywhere 
in the world, who is threatened by attack. 
Bombproofs are capable of instant transmission to any spot on the face of the 
globe — and removal of bombproof and 
occupants to anywhere else in the world 
— as Cuba-to-Kalahari-to-Guam. 

2. Amplification on the "Shadow Men" 
is required. Every nation in the world, 
on the honor of its chief executive, has 
denied all knowledge of the "Shadow 
Men." Any Fifth Column from "Outside" is considered fantastic beyond all 
possibility. 

WELL, there it. is. The high brass all 
along the way has spoken. Now it's up 
to me. I checked to find that every nation 
in the world had denied knowledge of the 
Shadow Men — except our own United 
States. But without asking for volunteers, 
our most ruthless high brass Would not 
have sent us to face those shadows, wherein someone was almost certain to die 
horribly. 

So, some nation has lied! We, the 
United Nations, have the perfect A-bombproof, capable of instant transmission to 
anywhere it is needed. We can also see 
where it is needed, through our World 
Visual Section. 

But, as usual, for every attack weapon, 
there is a defense. For every defensive 
weapon there is, eventually, a weapon 
which will crack it. We have the best 
defensive gadget ever constructed, but 
somebody has the grim, black answer to 
it! 

WHAT NATION? 

When the next bombs begin to fall, the 
name of that nation will be written into 
the murderous heart of every bomb. Then 
will tongues be freely loosed which now 
dare not give offense to any "friendly" 
nation! 



124 



SUPER SCIENCE STORIES 



(Continued from page 12) 
I know my writing is bad, but the mathematical symbols (such as N naught) are 
rather hard to type on this type of typewriter, so I thought that I would write it, 
but never again 1 

Now to clear up a few things. I he 
"squiggle" to which you refer was my 
feeble attempt at the English letter m . 
The reason that I changed my notation was 
that I am unable to write superscripts and 
subscripts on my typewriter. Incidentally, 
the "Werlitzer" that you have reference to 
is "Washington", the greatest college in 
the country. I scratched out a couple ot 
short paragraphs, which I believe unnecessary to the content of the letter You will 
also notice that I have numbered the equations I did this so that you would include 
the following authorities for certain ones 
of these numbered equations : 

1 Though I am here only calling _ ^ 
equal to Ni, this is actually true, that is to 
say that the second aleph is 2 to the power 
naught. I will not here give a formal proof 
of this fact, but this proof can be found 
in any modern algebra text. . 

2 The reason for stating that Mi is 
equal or greater than No is that any transfinite cardinal is either equal to or greater 
than any other transfmite, since subtraction 
is not defined for transfinities. There actually exist infinities less than others but it can 
easily be shown that since No is the first infinite cardinal, any other transfmite could 
only be equal to or greater than No
4 The reason that (N ) 2 =N is that for 
any transfmite cardinal Y, Y'=Y .where f 
is any finite number. ( 

5 and 6. This could only be possible it 
Ni were equal to No M », since the only way 
in which a number can be both less than 
and greater than another number, is if these 
two numbers are equal. ... , „ 

Please include the above authorities for 
the steps in the proof. Here's hoping you 
can read this letter. 

Regards, 

Loren Benson 

Want to take over here, Mr. Jones? 

Dear Ed: . . . . 

I've got one on Keran O'Brien. I stayed 
up half an hour later than he did before 
starting to write my letter 

"Outpost Infinity", I think, deserves its 
place at the head of the issue. Ray Jones 
has a good idea and treated it sensibly and 
sanely. The idea was striking in its novelty 
and I'm glad the author wasnt carried 
overboard by it. It's startling to think that 
such a story, written sometimes as coolly 
as an article, can be pure, unadulterated 
fantasy! (Well, practically!) 

Ron Hubbard is obsessed by the idea 
of a time differential in space travel. His 
"Beyond all Weapons", though, is outstanding as a story, presenting as it does 
in a very real and credible way the range 



of human emotion from soul-stirrmg hope 
to complete despair, and making the reader 
see these emotions. However, I challenge 
Mr. Hubbard's mathematics. 

Please bear with me while I set up a 
reductio ad absurdum. Suppose a space ship 
identical in size, population etc with the 
Earth ; this ship to be called Terra. Assume Earth to be stationary ; we may have 
to destroy the sun, and light the Earth 
with atomic power, but we assume this. Also 
assume the space ship in motion at a speed 
near that of light. . 

Now apply the special relativity equation of time to the time interval taken by 
a generation of humanity. A man on bartn 
savs "A generation here takes twenty-five 
year's." A man on Terra says, "A genera- • 
tion on Earth takes less than a year. Earth 
has many generations while Terra has one. 
This much Mr. Hubbard will agree to. 
However, Mr. Einstein will agree with Mr. 
Newton, that when two systems are m 
uniform linear motion relative to one another it is immaterial whether we assume 
one stationary, or the other, or both m motion. Hence, a man on Earth can say, 
"Terra has many generations while Karth 
has one." , , s 

All this is fine, as long as the people ot 
Earth and the people of Terra stay separated. Each man's opinion holds perfectly 
well— for him. But, if you get them together again, their differing opinions are 
going to represent mutually contradictory 
physical facts, i.e., which of them actually 
had more generations? 

The disagreement seems to come from the 
fact that Einstein's special relativity equations hold only for systems not in accelerated motion relative to one another; they 
apply only to systems in uniform linear 
relative motion. A space ship, in reversing 
its direction to return to Earth, necessarily 
undergoes acceleration, and Ron H. has 
overlooked this. Somebody please check 
me on this, as I may be wrong, and I hate to 
see a good writer like Ron blasted out ot 
the s-f void. . 

I agree with Larry Rothstem that the 
covers don't agree with the stories, and 
agree that they should agree. Agree with 
ed that air in Jersey is bad. As for covers, 
and Calle, I'd like to see a former by the 
latter. Ought to be as attractive as a good 
necktie. 

Scientifictionally, 

Martin Brilliant 
Washington & Jefferson College 
Washington, Pa. 
P. S. That is neither a pseudonym nor a 
now de plume. 

P P S If you cut my letter for publication be careful with it. Writing of mine 
has been ruined by that sort of thing before, 
and I'll knife somebody if it happens again. 
(Okay?— Ed.) 

Dear Editor: 
The title "Missives and Missiles indicates 



MISSIVES AND MISSILES 



that SSS prints brickbats as well as bouquets. I am now going to put this verypraiseworthy purpose to a hard test by getting some of my gripes off my chest. I guess 
the easiest way to do this is by going over 
my ratings for the January-1950 issue. 

1 — "The Long Dawn" — This is the very 
best story by Loomis I've seen to date. I've 
no kicks about this one, or about the wonderful Bok illustration, accompanying with 
a master's touch an already superb piece. 

2— "Science Fictioneer"— In my opinion, 
this is the best book review feature in stf. 
No complaints yet, but they're coming, boy, 
they're coming. 

3— "Beyond All Weapons" — Close to the 
top in quality this issue, yet this story is only 
interesting hack. It tests the imagination of 
even a hardened fan. 

4— "Outpost Infinity"— MayhewbC, Aleph- Mayhew, cNulmayb-NcbMaCmuYXZ 
3V81,<*$@% !_*8/=S6 ! ! 

5 — "Fear Planet" — No comment. 

6 — Fandom's Corner & Missives and Missiles (tie)- — The fan column is too short 
and far too outdated when it appears ; the 
letter department is all right, but not extraordinary. 

7 — "Spin, Devil" — No doubt some of the 
jet-propelled Joes who write letters to SSS 
will point but the scientific fallacies in this 
hunkajunk,- but I have neither the knowledge 
nor the initiative. 
8 — "Fragment of Diamond Quartz" — 
Phaugg! Cummings, Prince of the Hacks, 
does it again ! 

9 — "Final Frontier" — Phaugg! Phaugg I 
Please understand that I'm not trying to 

set myself up as another Larry Shaw (he 
almost had me believing that stuff he writes 
for a while— believing he means it, that is). 
I think that SSS is about .midway in the 
stf-fantasy , mag standing. Are you going 
to stay that way, or do something about 
it? ! ! ! !., 

Sincerely yours, 
Morton D. Paley 
vi-,.. 14SS Townsend Ave. 

, ,': New York 52, N.Y. 

Our aim is to continue onward and upward, Mr. Paley., ; ? ' " 

Dear Ed: . 

The main purpose of this communication 
is to throw confetti on thee and pound thy 
back heartily in - congratulations for one of 
the best isftes in a Plutonian decade. The 
illos especially. And I thought FN and FFM 
were the best-illustrated mags on the market, especially when it's one of Merritt's 
tales. Pooh, pooh and again I say pooh. 
SSS has graduated from (first and second 
postwar issues) a sloppy, ill-printed, inksmeared, generally lousy rag to a real honest to goodness pulpzine with class, and I 
can think of one or two competitors who 
could profit by thine example. 

Back to the pix. They were really hyper


125 

supermacrocosmicolossal. Finlay was, as 
usual, wonderful with his illo on page 61. 
Bok was colossally jazzy with his swell 
pitcher illustrating "The Long Dawn." 
Calle (this bird must be new ) was magnificent. Lawrence was lousy, but that alters my 
opinion of this ish not a whit. By . the way, 
when I said the ish was good, I meant between the covers. This is an old and timeworn beef, but for Ghu's sake can't you do 
something about those covers? Just look at 
it. '^.^r-yi- .' 

That babe ain't wearing nothin' but a 
whirlwind, vortex, ah, whatchacallit. Gawd, 
even Bergey would turn over in his crypt, if 
the stake through his heart would permit. 
Did it illustrate something? No, unless it's 
Missives & Missiles. Did it make sense ? No. 
Did it . . . well, observe. Where inside 
the book does it mention a barebacked wench, 
astride her trusty whirlpool, shooting zaprays from her fingernails at flying discs 
bombing her obvious home (are those cracks 
on the planet canals, or is the fool thing 
falling apart?), hey, Ed? I've got it . 
now, next issue, what say we put the booze 
ad with the bunny rabbit on the front, leave 
off the back and pension Lawrence off. For 
shame, Lawrence. Fie on -you, and after all 
those pretty covers you did on FN and 
FFM. 

Oh, my. This was supposed to be a letter flattering you so's you would print my 
letter. Oh well . . . the issue was magnifico, 
the stories were swell and I have but one 
thing to say in regards to them : HOW IN 
THE NAME OF ALL THAT' S NULL-A 
DID "A FRAGMENT OF DIAMOND 
QUARTZ" GET IN YOUR MAGAZINE? I wouldn't criticize your judgment 
for the world, Ed old boy, but you must 
have been dead drunk when you signed a 
check for this. Oh, it was written fairly 
well, but Gawd ! This is from what is known 
fondly as "the good old days" of stf, which 
was before my time, myself being but a 
"younker" of IS, but I think I know whether 
this is stf at all or not. This was a pain in 
the neck. Joe Science takes a pill and diminishes to atom size, where BEM's make 
eyes at him and he finds a villain, and untold wealth. The only original wrinkle about 
this is that everybody except the BEM- gets 
scragged in the end. Otherwise it's so old 
I . . . well, if I wanted to go into the micrbcosmic-'diminishing-world field of so-called 
stf, I'd read only UNBELIEVABLE 
COMICS, forget pulps and start Austin 
Hall fan clubs. 

Back to praise. The whole ish was so good 
I can't find a fault with it. It's perfect, it 
can't possibly be improved upon. 

. Enthusiastically yours, 
. George Warren 

908 E. Park Ave. 
Savannah, Ga. 

P S. Why in heck don't you get trimmed 
edges ? 



INVENTORS 



If you believe that you have an invention, you should find out how 
to protect It. We arc registered Patent Attorneys. Send for copy of 
our Patent Booklet "How to Protect Your Invention," and an "Invention Record"" form. No obliftation. They are yours for the asking. 

McMORROW, BERMAN & DAVIDSON 



ISO-F Vlcter Building 



Registered Patent Attorneys 



Washington I. D. C. 




E 



caused by 
travel motion, 
relieved with 



Bud NCMufglly its 
mriy fcarif i etntef 

in yjro mi st*. _ 

fEaasnsssEsm 




SAHARA WATERLESS 
HAND SOAP 

■.•move* without woter — Point. Tor, Graaia, 
Ink,' ate. Quickty — Eotily — Cohtaim Lanolin. 
PREVENTS CHAPPING AND ROUGH, RED 
HANDS. SEND $1.00 fOR TWO' 60c TUBES — 
POSTPAID. Money-Bock Guarantee — Asenti 

Wonted. <■?■ 
Sahara Producti Corp., Cram)! Rapid*, Mich. 




WATCH FOR THIS SEAL OF QUALITY! 




BECAUSE— 

We purchase 4,000 stories a 
year, over 20,000,000 words of 
top-flight reading pleasure, all 
bearing this guaranteed,: hallmark of unexcelled fiction entertainment — 

Watch for this Popular Fiction Group seal on every mag; az/ne you buy. It is your one 
sure guide to good reading 
always! 



POPULAR PUBLICATIONS, Inc. 
205 East 42nd St., New York 17, N. Y. 



, m 30 TH 
SUPER SCIENCE STORIES 



(Continued from page 75) 
Someone else had played a trick on all 
of them. Langdon, maybe. Langdon, who 
had been given away as a pet to a thing so 
monstrous that even Cartwright had 
shrunk from naming it. 

With shaking hand, West put the bottle 
back on the mantel, placed the cork beside 
it. For a moment he stood there, hands 
against the mantel, gripping it, staring 
out the vision port beside the fireplace. 
Staring down into the valley where a 
shadowy cylinder tilted upward from the 
rocky planet, as if striving for the stars. 

The Alpha Centauri — the ship with the 
space drive that wouldn't work. Something wrong . . . something wrong. ... x 

A sob rose in West's throat and his 
hands tightened on the mantel with a grip 
that hurt. . 
He knew what was wrong ! 
He had studied blueprints of the drive 
back on Earth. 

And now it was as if the blueprints 
were before his eyes again, for he remembered them, each line, each symbol as if 
they were etched upon his brain. 

He saw the trouble, the simple adjustment that would make the space drive 
work. Ten minutes . .. , ten minutes would 
be all he needed. So simple. So simple. 
So simple that it seemed beyond belief it 
had not been found before, that all the 
great minds which had worked upon it 
should not have seen it long ago. 

There had been a dream — a thing that 
he had not^ even dared to say aloud, not 
even to himself. A thing he had not dared 
even to think about. 

West straightened from the mantel and 
faced the room again. He took the bottle 
and for a second time raised it in salute. 

But this time he had a toast for the dead 
men and the thing that whimpered in the 
corner. !r . [ : ;. 

"To the stars," he said. 
And he drank without gagging. 



126 



GIFT OF DARKNESS 



(Continued from page 83) 
the subject began to use the facilities o: : 
the gym and the pool, I knew that the 
period of gravest danger was over. He 
gradually increased his own exercise time 
until, by the end of the sixteenth month 
he was in exceedingly good physical con 
dition for a man of his years, slim-waisted, 
with increased chest expansion, clear eyes, 
muscular arms and a deep tan. Toward 
the other passengers with whom, he came 
in contact he was rude to the point of 
boorishness, having completely lost his 
great passion to be liked, and having become sufficient unto himself. 

"As is often the case, once his indifference to the other passengers was made 
evident, they began to go to almost any 
extreme to convince the subject that he 
was making a mistake about them. A 
definite clique formed, with the subject 
as the focal point. He never smiled and, 
when he spoke, it was generally a comment so wry that all present were nearly 
overcome with laughter. At length he 
began to respond by giving small parties 
These parties added to my problems due 
to the sense of frustration on the part of 
those who were not invited. 

"Since that time Mr. C. T. has appeared 
to be well adjusted to the trip and has 
remained, by all odds, the most popular 
person aboard.' 

"To summarize this case it is once 
again strongly urged by the undersigned 
that the line refuse passage space to 
androids, regardless of whether or not 
the passenger in question is aware of their 
nature. And it is respectfully pointed out 
that Mr. C. T. was not only enabled to 
make a satisfactory adjustment to the 
voyage — he has become better fitted for 
life. It would appear that when the 
Recreational Staff budget is considered 
for the return trip, this case should be a 
factor on the side of a much needed increase, both in wages and equipment." 



YOU ARE 
IN DEMAND 




n, INC. 

|| Dept.4930 . 500 Soulh 4th St. 
Minneapolis 1 5, Minn. 

Please sead me your FREE 
Talent Test. 



Make moncy with your 
brush and 
pen! If you 
liketodraw, 
sketch, .Or 
paint, take 
(he FREE 
Talent Test. 
No fee. No 
obligation. 
Mail this 

C O U p O Q 

TODAY! 



Nam*. 



Addnu*. 



1 
I 

I 

1 
I 
1 
L 



C#y_ 



— Zm 



-Stat*. 



I 
I 
I 



County


Occupation


Quick relief with Dent's. Use Dent's Tooth 
Cum or Dent's Tooth Drops for cavity toothaches. Use Dent's Dental Poultice for pain or 
"She* IB8B" soreness in gums or teeth. At all drug stores. 




DENT'S 



TOOTH GUM 
TOOTH DROPS 
DENTAL POULTICE 




eer mm 
ADVERTISING 

MAKE A QUICK KILLING I 

Everything you need to CLEAN uo 
this year I Amazing new catalog: and 
sales kit brines you THOUSANDS of Advertising- specialties, 
pricing tickets, electric aierns, display 
devices. Send postcard for it today. 
Remember It's FREE! Write: 

PRICING PRESS/ Dept. PF 

193 Lafayette St. N. Y. 13, N. V". 



SELL FIRE PROTECTION 

A Lifetime opportunity Kith your own profitable 
buttnest 

S?? ry J?S may ' Business, Institution etc.. Needs ATJTOFYR8TOP Proven Fire Alarm and Extinguisher— 
Priced Within Everyone's Means but with Many Exclusive Features, Good Profit Katio with Unusual Income Possibilities. 

Write far Free Details 

actoFYHstop CO. 

D«pt. PSS SOSS waaUagtea Art. Phil a. 46, p a . 



127 



HEART ATTACK OR 
INDIGESTION? 

THANK HEAVENS ! Most attacks ate just add indigestion. 
When it strikes, take Bell-ans tablets. They contain the fastest-acting medicines known to doctors for the relief of heartburn, gas and similar distress. Send post-card to Bell-ans Co.. 
Orangeburg, N. Y. for free lucky rabbits' foot and sample of 
Bell-ans. Do it now. 



MONEY 



TH'S BASY. 
,/ PLEASANT WAV 

■* *$50 IS YOURS 

for jelling 100 boxes greeting cords at $1. SIB. 
tionery or napkins with nam* on. Send for selling 
plan & samples on approval. Costs nothing to try 
WRIT, 370 PUNE ST., DIPT. 21, NEWARK 2. K.J. 

1 IHB1 STUDY AT HOME for Business Success 
I lllf and LARGER PERSONAL EARN1 HSsfia INGS. 40 years expert instruction — over 
I ImKRal 114,000 students enrolled. LL.B. Degree 
IImHI awarded. All text material furnished. 
IMBflf V Easy payment plan. Send for FREE 
BOOK — "Law and Executive Guidance"— NOW! 

AMERICAN EXTENSION SCHOOL. OF LAW 

Dept. 26-B, 646 N. Michigan Ave., Chicago 11, Illinois 



JOBS OPEN 
FOREIGN AND DOMESTIC 

Immediate need for office help, skilled and unskilled workers 
on large gov't and private contracts here and abroad. Idvtng 
auarters, transportation, high wages. For information on these 
job contracts & application blanks, send $1.00 to Employment 
Information Center. Dept. PF-1, Box 4, Brookline 46, Macs. 
Delivery guaranteed. 

Kt orter /«« or ofcorpe of <mi Wno. 




SEND* 
FOR THIS 



SfiEE! 



Make money. Know how to break and 
train horses. Write todav for lots ooot 
FREE, together with special olfer of 
— a course in Animal Breeding. If you 
are interested in Qaltlng and Biding the saddle 
horse, check here ( ) Do « toiav—now. 

BEERY SCHOOL OF HORSEMANSHIP 
Dept. 845, Pleasant Hill, Ohle 



INVENTORS 

"1 l«sm how to protect your invention. Specially prepared I 
' "Patent Guide" containing detailed Information concerning 
patent protection and procedure with "Record of Invention" 
i form will be forwarded to you upon requeit — without obligation, 
j CLARENCE A. O'BRIEN A HARVEY JACOBSQN 
Rftghiemd Patent Attorneys 
0Z6-D District Notional Mag. Washington 5, D. C 



NERVOUS STOMACH 

ALLIMIN relieves distressing symptoms of "nervous stomach" 

heaviness after meals, belching, bloating, arid colic due to 

gas. ALLIMIN has been scientifically tested by doctors and 
found highly effective. World famous — more than a V* billion sold to date. At all good drug stores. 



ALLIMIN Garth Tablets 



SUPER SCIENCE STORIES 

(Continued from page 41) 
Wirezine ; The Fanzine Of Tomorrow. It 
is an hour spool of wire. There are no 
dues. All the money needed is enough to 
pay postage to send the spool. You don't 
have to be well-versed in fandom — just so 
you are interested in wire-recording. 
There are fifteen members, spread from 
Washington to Florida." 

Don't forget to keep this column up-todate by sending in the latest news of your 
fantasy organization. 

THE FAN MAGS: 

Southern Fandom, published bimonthly 
Moore, 2703 Camp St., New Orleans 13, 
by Lionel Inman and edited by Harry B. 
La. 10«i. Fourteen well-mimeographed 
pages and a cover in color. Fan articles, 
the best of which, though quite dated, is 
"Torcon Report" by Moore. 

Dawn, the letterzine, October 1949, published bimonthly by Lester Fried, 2050 
Midland, Louisville, Ky. lOf This is fandom's open forum. Cover and interior 
illustration by B. L. White are supersuper. 

Shivers, No. 1, Fall 1949, published by 
Andrew Macura, 230 Prince St., Bridgeport 8, Conn. lOf Sixteen well-mimeographed pages of fiction and poetry. 
Though not all the stories are strictly 
science- fiction or fantasy, this mag is very 
interesting and enjoyable. , Excellent cover 
by Bob Johnson. 

Florida Fantasy Fan, No. 1, November 
1949, published bimonthly by the Florida 
Science-Fiction Society, 775 N.W. 13th 
Ave., Miami 35, Fla., and edited by W. 
H. Entrekin, Jr. 20f Four pages printed 
on good stock and featuring an article, 
"Why ?— An Analysis" by Tom Pace, and 
club news, plus a short-short filler by L. 
Sprague de Camp. A nice mag, but 20^ 
is too much for four pages. The editor, 
though, promises more pages in the future. 
You might look into this. 



128 



FANDOM'S CORNER 



The Fanscient, No. 10, Winter 1950, 
published quarterly by Don Day, 3435 
N.E. 38th Ave., Portland 13, Oreg. 25f 
One of fandom's best. Thirty-two pocket 
sized, photo-offset pages filled with excel 
lent fan art and many articles of outstand 
ing interest. George O. Smith's autobiography, with photo and an index of all 
his published stories, is the star feature of 
this issue. By all means get a copy if you 
haven't seen it already. 

Fantasy-Times, No. 98, published semimonthly by James V. Taurasi, 137-03 
32nd Ave., Flushing, N. Y. lOf This 
issue features news of pro mags, a movie 
column by Lester Mayer, Jr., and the an 
nual report on the pro mags (in this issue, 
Famous Fantastic Mysteries), "1949 in 
Science Fiction," by Dr. Thomas S. Gard 
ner. ■ ■ 

Eusifanso, No. 4, published semimonthly by the Eugene Science Fantasy Society, 
Box 161, Eugene, Oreg., and edited by 
D. R. Fraser. 5^. This little magazine is 
really going places and getting better every 
issue. Excellent cover by Rew, neat and 
clean mimeo and good contents. We liked 
the debate on reprint magazines and interesting news items by "Sandy", though we 
don't agree with the guest editorial by McCain. We think you'll like this little mag. 
Try it. 

Slant, No. 3, Spring 1950, published by 
Walter A. Willis, 170 Upper Newtownards Rd., Belfast, North Ireland. Subscription rates to U.S. fans, four issues for 
one prozine, and well worth it. This magazine is printed, half-letter size, 26 pages. 
Fiction by 4SJ Ackerman, EEEvans and 
others, plus five good departments, well 
illustrated by woodcuts done by James 
White. You won't want to miss this one ; 
it's a must. 

Your fan mags for review should be sent 
to Fandom's Corner, c/o Super Science 
Stories, Popular Publications, Inc., 205 
E. 42nd Street, New York 17, N. Y. 




High School Course 

at Home 



Many Finish in 2 Years 

Go as rapidly as your time and abilities permit. Couraa 
equivalent to resident school work — prepares for collega 
entrance exams. Standard H. S. texts supplied. Diploma. 
Credit for H. S. subjects already completed. Single subjects If 
desired. High school edacatioD is very important for advancement 
in busineaa and industry and socially. Don't be handicapped mU 
your life. Be a Higrh School graduate. Start your training now. 
irrae Bulletin on roque»t. No obligation. 

i AmaricanSchool, Dept,H -549, Drexel at 58th, Chicago 37 





SMITH'S 



[one line 
RING POCKET STAMP 

Neat chromium plated case with self 
9* contained ink pad. Fits Pocket or 
Purse. No. 1A one line name only 95c. No. 2A two line 
name and town. $2.29. No. 3A three line name, street and city 
»&.39. Send M.O. or Check, no C.O.D.s. Order Today. 
MAURICE C. SMITH CO.. INC. 

Dept. R-7 661 Broad Street. Providence 7. B. 1 




LOSE UP TO 7 POUNDS 

IN 7 DAYS. . or money back! 

Eat plenty yet lose ugly, extra pounds. Tiny MVIO 
tablet guaranteed harmless, millions sold. Medically 
approved food supplement keeps you healthy. Send 
no money. Pay postman $2, plus postage or send $2, 
we pay postage. Money tack guarantee. Send for 
MYLO today. MYLO LABORATORIES. Dept. 
S5-E, 505 N. LaSalle St., Chicago 10, III. 



PERSONAL STATIONERY. Name, address neatly 
printed on sheets and envelopes in blue ink on white 
paper. 200 sheets, 100 envelopes $2.00. 

J. KALINA, 12 Pitt Street, New York 2, N. Y. 



16-page booklet 
"HOW TO MAKE 
BIG MONEY!" 



Men and women! Discover how you can 
earn bis: steady incomes, part time or 
fuU time! No doorbell pushing:! You only 
sell people who have already shown interest in owning revolution«ry new 
home appliance! Continuously nationally advertised — full pages in life, 
sat. eve. post, etc. No inventory, 
no investment, no credit problems— 
you operate out of your local appliance dealer's storef We train you. 
Send for FREE 1 6-page booklet 
"How to make big money even in 
your spare time!" Write Lewyt 
ConK> 76 B'way. Brooklyn 11. 
New York. 



ho* 



59*tri 



«»*» 

I s Pere 



129 



Build your 
own home 
save $7 5 a day 




Can you saw a board? Hammer a nail? Yes? 
Then you and your wife can build a beautiful 
new home in 20 weekends plus your 2-weeks vacation. And think of it— you can save $75 a day 
while you're busy. What do you dream about— a ranch 

house, town house, modern? Theyr'e all here in Hugh Ladiman's great book, HOW TO BUILD 
YOUR OWN HOME " Only $5— and worth $500 for what it will save you. Order today . . . 



SPECIAL— WHILE THEY LAST! 

Reader's Treasury — Heritage Press Edition 

750 pages of unforgettable stories, novels, essays, poems by 
Somerset Maugham . . . Ring Uudner . Alexander WooUcott . . . A. E. Housman . . . lames Wmrber . . . Jack London .. . Damon Runyon . . . Carl Sandburg . . . many others 



Published at $2.95 



Special Price $1.49 



THE BRIGHT COIN 

by Elizabeth Seifert 



$3.00 



A throbbing lore story with » daring insight into t^ves and problems of doctors. Should there be a single or double standard of 
morality for the medical profession? What do you think! Bead The 
Bright Coin" and see if you agree. 



WHILE THEY LAST— THREE GREAT NOVELS! 
VERMILION by Idwal Jones 

"A vintage novel . . . full-bodied and to the connoisseurs 

taste." — Prentice-Hall, Inc. 

I WILL BE GOOD by Hester Chapman 

"An original and deeply impressive book."— Houghton Mifflin. 
BARABBAS by Emery Bekessy 

Second large printing. Recommended by the Religious Book 
Club. » 

PuMished" t $S\25 The three volumes: $2.98 



MAIL THIS COUPON WHILE SUPPLIES LAST! 



I Popular Publications, Dept. D, 

| 205 E. 42nd St., N. Y. 17, N. Y. 

I Send me the books checked below. 
I of $. 



I enclose remittance 



i □ How To Build Your 

Own House, $5.00 
■ □ Reader's Treasury, $1.49 
J □ Childbirth, $2.50 
j □ The Forsyte Saga, $2.98 
I _ J Tales for Males, $1.98 
| •-' V Bedside Bonanza 

I 
I 

| Address. 
^City. : . . 



□ The Bright Coin, $3.00 

f Vermilion, 
\ I Will be Good, $2.98 
i Barabbas 

□ The Untamed, $2.00 

□ Below Suspicion, $2.50 



Name. 



Zone State. 



THE UNTAMED 

by Max Brand $2.00 

Here's Max Brand's greatest Western yarn— the story of 
Whistling Dan Barry, of the untamed soul, and the mighty 
black stallion, king of the ranges -and the wolf dogs. If yon 
collect Westerns, don't miss this one. 

BELOW SUSPICION 

by John Dickson Carr $2.50 

If the fabulous Dr. Gideon Fell is a favorite of yours, her* 
he is snarled up in his newest, greatest mystery. And you're 
right with him. What is the significance of the silver 
candelabrum and the red garter? Every clue is given and 
you are challenged to find the murderer. 



WHILE THEY LAST! 

Special Gift Package — Original Editions 
TALES FOR MALES Selected by Ed Fitzgerald 

. . It is rowdy . . . cynical. ... Notable stories 
by clever writers . . ." — The Salt Lake Tribune. 

THE BEDSIDE BONANZA. . Edited by Frank Owen 

"A lodestone of love and laughter ..." —Frederick Fell 
Two volumes, 870 pages 

Published at $4.99 2 volumes complete $1.98 



CHILDBIRTH: YOUR QUESTIONS ANSWERED 

by Carl Henry Davis, M.D. and Donita Ferguson $2.50 

What is the truth about the new method of having a baby painlessly? Arc premature babies invariably handicapped? This 
and so many other vital questions are answered in this remarkable book. Every expectant mother should have a copy. 

THE FORSYTE SAGA 

by John Galsworthy $2.98 

This is the motion picture edition of one of the most interesting novels of all time. Yes, the picture that stars Errol 
Flynn, Greer Garson and Walter Pidgeon, in book form — a big 
book, 921 pages complete, uncut. A rare opportunity whiU 
the limited supply lasts. , 



Buy your books this new, 
easy by-mail way! 

Yes, order any book you want right from your 
own home. You'll get it promptly direct from 
New York (book center of the world) at no 
extra cost — free insurance and postage. Build 
your library this fast, easy, money-saving way. 
USE THIS COUPON . . . 




HAVE A PROFIT 
MAKING BUSINESS 
f YOUR OWN 

A LIFETIME FUTURE 

Man or woman — young or old, YOU can earn a steady income in full 
or spare time as an independent Kendex dealer. Amazing and almost 
"impossible" earnings can become a reality for you. Herbert Armstrong 
of Tenn. earned $202 in 9 days. C. O. Watkins of Oregon sent 92 orders 
in one day. You have the same opportunity to duplicate these exceptional 
earnings. Over one million dollars will be earned in 1950 by Kendex 
dealers — why not let us establish you in your own business and get a 
share of these wonderful earnings? 

KENDEX NYLONS REPLACED FREE . . . 

if they run or snag within guarantee period up to three months! Impossible? It's true! No matter what the cause — hard use or deliberate abuse — 
whether it is fault of the hose or the wearer — Kendex nylons are replaced FREE if they run, snag or become unfit for wear within the 
guarantee period- How could any woman resist a positive guarantee of 
satisfaction when she can obtain it without paying any more than other 
standard advertised brands? Kendex nylons are NOT sold in stores, so 
you have no competition. Complete line includes everything from heavy 
70 denier service weight to gossamer luxurious ultra sheer 15 denier 60 
gauge. Proportioned sizes and lengths. Latest colors plus white. 

LINGERIE - ROBES - HOUSECOATS - MEN'S HOSE 

In addition to the sensational Kendex nylons, you will have a complete 
line of glamorous lingerie, beautiful robes and housecoats plus a complete line of Kentcraft mens' hosiery guaranteed for one full year. Any 
pair or pairs of men's hose that does not give satisfactory wear within 
one year of purchase will be replaced FREE! 

NATIONALLY AOVttTISED 

Kendex will spend over 8350,000.00 in 1950 to tell millions of readers of 
the advantages in buying from you. Almost every issue of Good Housekeeping, Saturday Evening Post, McCall's, Women's Home Companion 
and Ladies* Home Journal carry our advertising in addition to many 
others. Kendex has advertised in Life, Look, Collier's, etc. Awarded Good 
Housekeeping Seal. Thousands of orders are shipped daily from coast 
to coast. 



FOUR MONEY-MAKING LINES 

• WOMEN'S NYLON HOSIERY 
• GLAMOROUS LINGERIE 
• HOUSECOATS -ROBES 
• MEN'S HOSIERY 



1 



EVERYTHING GIVEN FREE 



Risk nothing ! Mail coupon and we will send you, 
free and prepaid, complete money-making outfits 
including sample nylon stocking, samples of lingerie, robes, housecoats and men's hose fabrics 
and everything you need to immediately start 
making money. Complete outfits become your 
property even if you don't send any business. 
Simply write orders, we deliver and 
collect. Advance cash plus huge bonus. 
No money or experience needed. Mailing the coupon is all you need to start 
on the road to a 52-weeks-of-the-year 
high paying business of your own. You 
have everything to gain and nothing 
to lose. 



KENDEX COMPANY, BABYLON 19, N.Y. 




KENDEX COMPANY Dote ,„ 

BABYLON 19. N.Y. 

Send me, free and prepaid, everything I need to make money 
as a Kendex dealer, including sample stocking etc. There is 
nothing for me to pay now or later and I am under no obligation in accepting your money-making outfits. 



Name... 



City... 



Millions of bottles 
are bought by men 
who like that 



ctear 





Ever try to tell how a juicy, 
red apple tastes? It can't be 
done in words! But doesn't 
this little colt's eager delight 
as he munches his mid-morning tidbit make it perfectly 
clear what we mean by 
PM's "clear, clean taste"? 
Join the millions who will 
call for PM this p.m . because 
its clear, clean taste makes a 
drink so much better! 





DE LUXE 



National Distillers Products Corporation, New York, N. Y. Blended Whiskey. 86 Proof. 67M% Grain Neutral Spirits. 



/ 



