THAT A WORLD MIGHT LIVE (Novelet — 14,000) by Burt B. Lisfon 

MANFRED DRAKE pounded 
the table for emphasis. "I 
bought you; you're damned 
right I bought you! Just like I buy 
anything I use — man, woman, or 
property. And you're mine, Hayward, 
make no mistake about thatl" 

"The only mistake I made," Luke 
Hayward said hotly, "was in getting 
mixed up with you." :j 
"And you can't unmix, either. Try 1 
it and I'll have you blacklisted from 
here to Timbuctoo." 

The two men glared at each other 
across the table in Drake's office, 
bodies tense with rage, anger coloring their faces. Hayward was making an effort to control his anger, but 
with little success. 

Hayward said, "All I'd have to do 
would be mention your name. . ." 

Drake's smile was a grimace of sadistic pleasure. "You're forgetting our 
contract, my friend. That sword would 
hang over your head wherever you'd 
be." 

Hayward let out his breath in a 
sigh. He wanted to batter that grinning face to a pulp, knowing he 
would get a certain satisfaction from 
it, and also knowing he would be doing something others had wanted des
82 



 



perately to do. But he also knew that 
no matter what the provocation, the 
fact would remain that Drake was 
little more than a midget in size, 
whereas he was a six-footer with the 
build and muscle of a pro football 
player. It just couldn't be done. 

"You don't miss a trick," Hayward 
said. "I should have known, better 
than to trust you or listen to you. It 
wasn't that I hadn't heard about your 
fancy legal tricks and your rotten 
conniving ways. Like with this deal 
I'm on." 

"What was it, then — my charm that 
made you sign up?" 

"You know what it was," Hayward 
replied. "Silonium, the super fission 
element. A whole vein of it down in 
this old shaft we're working. Sure, 
you and I split on whatever we find. 
But if we go ten feet further we'll 
lose a man for every foot we go." 

"So what?" Drake snapped in an.noyance. "Don't be childish. You have 
to take manpower-loss in consideration. Look at the Panama Canal. ..." 

"I know all about the Canal," Hayward said. "They did everything in 
their power to cut down the losses. 
We're doing nothing!" 

"Well, what do you want me to do 
— buy shields, and let the cat out of 
the bag?"' 

"The Ryner Counter showed a 
radiation persistency of ten plus. Hell! 
Radium has only three plus. Have you 
any idea what will happen to the 
muckers and machine men when that 
radiation hits them?" 

"I told you men were cheap!" 
Drake snapped. "Two bucks an hour 
for the best. There's a hundred million in silonium down there." 

Hayward gave it a last try: 
"Shields come to a small price, Drake. 
We only need two. Four hundred dollars and we save lives. Doesn't that 
mean anything to- you?" 

His plea fell on deaf ears. 



"Sure, only four hundred dollars. 
And the whole world finds out what 
we're on the search for. Forget it, 
Hayward. Besides, I'm told that when 
the gamma rays hit, you never know 
it* 

No one knows it, Hayward thought, 
because no one had ever been hit by 
the full potency of a silonium gamma 
discharge. A three plus discharge had 
melted the flesh from the guinea 
Pig. ■ ■ 

Drake went on: "Be sensible, Hayward. Your contract remains effective 
only to the completion of the shaft 
to the main ore body. Once we reach 
that you can tell me to go scratch. 
And you'd still be a full partner; I 
need you as much as you needed me. 
That's why I paid the price I did for 
you — a full partnership." 

"And don't think I won't leave you 
flat the instant we reach the orebody!" Hayward promised. "So fast 
it'll make your head spin." 

He didn't notice the quickly hidden 
look in Drake's eyes. The look that 
said Drake had something in store 
for him that meant no good 

JIM MURCHISON rested the air 
chopper against the rock wall and 
looked with narrowed eyes at the. 
face of the wall before him. "I don't 
like it, Lukel" 

Luke Hayward, who was hunkered 
down by the side of the dump car, 
studied the stocky figure and stolid 
face of his head machine man. Murchison was not the sort to get pessimistic unless there was real cause 
for it. "Why?" 

"Because the last three shotsbrought rock down on us from the 
tunnel roof. I'm blowing sixty yards 
of ore every time I blast. Something's 
going to give;" 

"Vibration caused the falls," Hayward said in reassurance. "There's a 
half mile of solid rock between us and 



THAT A WORLD MIGHT LIVE 



the flooded part." 

But Murchison wasn't assured. 
"According to the plan we have. What 
are the facts, Luke?\ 

Hayward understood what the other 
was driving at. They were digging 
straight into the side of the hill to 
get to the vein of silonium because 
the original shaft, which had been 
sunk from the top of the hill, had been 
flooded. Hidden springs continued to 
flood the shaft and foiled every effort to pump the waters out. 

"They're the only plans we have, 
Jim," Hayward said. "The Happy 
Chance Mine is one of the oldest in 
Arizona. You know that. The Franciscan Fathers worked it in the early 
Seventeenth Century, though they 
were only interested in the silver. Of 
course the real value is in the copper ..." 

Murchison made a snorting sound. 
"My aunt's bustle ! Copper ! You 
oughta know better than try to fool 
an old ore man like me, Luke. What's 
more, Drake's in on this deal. The 
war's over and copper's no longer a 
strategic mineral. He wouldn't monkey with copper." 

Hayward rose to his full length and 
joined the other against the wall. Suddenly he wanted to tell Murchison 
the whole truth. "Maybe you should 
know, Jim," he said. "You're right 
about it not being copper. It's silonium I" 

"Silonium!" 

"Yep! And from the readings on 
my Rynor counter, a vein of it. There 
are only two known deposits of the 
stuff — one in Alaska, the other in 
Mexico." 

"How did you discover it?" 

"That isn't the important thing, 
Jim," Hayward said. "The little man's 
got something at the back of his mind 
about this and knowing him, whatever 
it is won't do anyone good but himself. He's power-mad, Jim." 



Murchison cocked his head to one 
side. "Sounds like the electric dump 
truck is coming. Too early for the 
muckers. Besides, they wouldn't use 
the power truck. Drake, maybe?" 

"Probably. He knows we don't have 
far to go." 

Hayward was right. . . . 

■p\RAKE WAS dressed in tailored 
breeches and boots and the shirt 
he wore was obviously of expensive 
material. He removed the miners' 
helmet and wiped his brow with a 
fine square of linen. 

"You ready to shoot, Murchison?" 
he asked. 

"Soon as my men get back," the 
machine man replied. 

"Never mind them. I understand we 
don't have far to go, right?" 

"I don't know." 

"I didn't hire you for what you 
didn't know. How far to go?" 

Murchison gave the other his back 
and moved down the tunnel. "Ask 
Hayward," he threw over his shoulder. 

"Well...?" Drake turned to the 
engineer. 

"Why don't you be nice for a 
change?" Hayward asked in disgust. 
"Must you always throw that chip 
on your shoulder into everyone's 
face?" 

"It's one way of getting work done. 
By the way there's water seepage 
back in the tunnel about a hundred 
yards." 

"I know. Vibration probably loosened some of the loose shale on the 
roof." 

"Better have some of the muckers 
brace that." 

"Since when have you taken over 
the engineering end of this?" Hayward asked. "You take care of your 
end and I'll take care of mine." 

Drake shrugged. "Just didn't want 
you to get wet," he said. "What do we 
do now, just stand around?" 



 



"Jim'll be back in a second. He's 
got the dynitro planted in the holes. 
He just went in to set up the fuses." 

"Good! Hot as hell in here. Is it 
always this hot?" 

Hayward smiled. "Yeah. Those nice 
clothes won't look so laundered by the 
time you get out." 

Drake looked at the stained and 
worn field clothes Hayward wore. 
"H'mm! Guess I should have worn 
something like you have on ... , 
What— what's that?" 

Hayward, too, had heard the shout. 
He didn't wait but set off at a run 
toward the spot from where Murchison had called. The machine man's 
voice had an odd note of terror behind 
its urgency. He barely stopped in 
time. Murchison was backing along 
the tunnel in slow movement. The 
man was bent forward slightly and his 
hands were extended before him as 
though he were fending something 
off. 

"Jiml What's wrong?" Hayward 
grabbed Murchison's arms. 

"Something came out of the 
ground," Murchison whispered. "Like 
the rounded end of a rocket. Luke I 
It must have been ten feet in diameter." 

"What's that?" Drake demanded. 
He was breathing heavily. He shoved 
Hayward aside and pulled Murchison 
around to face him. "Are you nuts, 
Murchison?" 

Murchison wrenched his arm free 
and shoved the smaller man against 
the wall. "Damn you! Don't tell me 
I'm crazy. I saw it, I tell you!" 

Hayward rushed into the breech. 
"Whatever you saw, Jim, is still there. 
Let's have a look." 

"He must be drunk, Luke," Drake 
slid away from the wall. He brushed 
at the dust on his clothes while his 
eyes raked the stocky man with 
hatred. "We didn't hear anything." 

"We'll know in a minute," Hayward 



said. He took the lead. The other 
two followed in silence. 

'T'HE ONLY sound was the hoarse 
wheezing of Drake's terrified 
breathing. The entire tunnel was 
blocked by the strange shape. Murchison had described it well. It looked 
like nothing more than an immense 
rocket head. As they neared it, however, they noticed a difference. A regular pattern of close-set vanes protruded all around the head. 

"What the hell is it?" Drake's confidence returned when he saw that 
the strange metal thing was immobile. 

"That's not the important question," Hayward said. He tapped the 
metal and skinned his knuckles. 
Words came over the edge of his 
knuckles as he sucked at them: 
"Where did this thing come from? 
That's what I want to know." 

"Look!" Murchison pointed with 
a stubby finger. "Dirt on the edges 
of the vanes. Why, this thing is an 
earth borer." 

"I'll buy that," Hayward said. 
"Those vanes dig the earth out and 
spill it to one side, which means the 
whole head revolves. Fine! Does that 
answer my question?" 

Drake's sullenness returned, and 
with it, his attitude of authority. 
"Suppose we stop wasting our time, 
Murchison, how about blowing this 
thing out of our way?" 

Suddenly thunder filled the air, but 
as the sound of it died, words were to 
be distinguished . . . 

"...Who are you... Who are 
you?. . ." 

They had fallen back before the 
terrible sound. Now, as if in common 
protection, they huddled together. 

And again the metallic voice, "Who 
are you?" 

"There's someone in that thing," 
Hayward whispered. "Walk backward slowly. Easy now. . ." 

"Stop!" the hidden voice called. 



THAT A WORLD MIGHT LIVE 



87 



"Not me," Drake yelled. 

He turned to run and Murchison 
followed his lead. Only Hayward held 
his ground. And from a hidden aperture a beam of blue light sped to envelope the three men in, in its paralyzing grip. They could not move the 
smallest muscle but they could see 
and hear. 

Then the light disappeared but 
their paralysis remained. 

AN OPENING spread in the dull 
*^ metallic hull until it was large 
enough for several men to pass 
through abreast. Two figures showed 
against the dark background of the 
interior, both men. Hayward saw 
their lips move but they were either 
too far from him or they were whispering, for no word of what was said 
came to his ears. Then the men 
stepped out into the tunnel and 
walked slowly over to the frozen men. 

They were of about the same height 
but one was fairly young, the other 
obviously old. They wore close-fitting 
breeches and shirts and their feet 
were encased in high sandals. Their 
heads were bare. 

Now they were close enough for 
the three who were paralyzed by the 
strange blue ray to hear their voices. 

"Best to bring them back with us, 
Raynor,'* the young one said. 

The older one narrowed his eyes in 
speculation. "Yes. We can't leave them 
here, unless we do it permanently." 

The young one shook his head. 
"We'd gain nothing, then. What is 
more we could get information from 
these. They have the look of intelligence. I think Mydor would want to 
question them." 

"Very well," Raynor said. He took 
a pencil-thin tube from a sheath attached to his belt, and pressed a tiny 
switch on the barrel. A spot of orange 
light touched each of the paralyzed 
men. 



And each fell into his own world of 
dark unconsciousness.... 

TPHE RHYTHMIC beat of hidden 
* engines broke the rim of the dark 
world Hayward was in. He stirred and 
opened his eyes and sat erect. He was 
between Murchison and Drake. Both 
men were still out. Hayward took in 
the strange room they were in as he 
shook his comrades until he felt them 
stir under his fingers. 

"Wha-what happened?" Drake 
quavered. "Where are we?" 

"Inside that rocket-like thing, probably," Hayward said wryly. "Take it 
easy, Drake. They'll let us know what 
this is all about, and in their own 
good time. This we do know. We're 
going to visit someone called Mydor. 
And they have the power to kill us." 

Murchison suddenly stood and 
turned a glowering look to the room. 
"We didn't have a chance. But maybe the next time we will." 

"I don't know," Hayward said. 
"That little tube packed dynamite. I 
wonder if they can regulate it for 
power?" 

"We can," a hidden voice said. 
"Until it kills. Please make yourselves 
comfortable. Food will be served you 
soon and it won't be long until we 
reach the air lock at Letta. Then we 
will talk." 

"Let's talk now," Hayward spoke 
to the spot from where the voice 
seemed to issue from the wall. "I'd 
like to ask you people a few questions." 

"Later. There are questions we 
would like answered also." 

They had awakened to darkness, 
but as the voice died away light blossomed from a hidden source. They 
were in a prison without bars, a room 
without windows or doors, yet a room 
which was airy and light. Metal furniture was fixed to the metal walls 
but the upholstery was soft and com


 



fortable. And presently the food appeared en three trays which sped 
from a wall opening which closed as 
quickly as it had opened. 

There was a meat like roast beef, 
vegetables the likes of which they'd 
never before tasted and a cup of 
something that was sweet and cool. 
Hay ward set to eating immediately, 
and Murchison followed with a philosophical shrug, but Drake waited until the others were done before he 
tasted his food. 

"You've got a suspicious soul, 
Drake, but it should be obvious even 
to you if they wanted us dead they 
could have easily done so. Go on, 
eat your food. Unless you're waiting 
for us to fall dead." 

"Sure." Murchison took his lips 
from the rim of the cup. "He's only 
waiting to see if it affects us before 
he tries it." 

"Now wait a minute," Drake said 
hastily. "What the devil! We're all in 
this together. No use getting angry 
and imagining things." 

Always the clever one, Hayward 
thought. Always looking for the ace 
in the hole. Even words can buy men. 
That's how he bought me — with 
words. 

"Y'know," Murchison broke in on 
his thoughts, "I'm just a guy who 
works an air chopper— an ore man. 
But you, Hayward, you're a guy with 
brains and education. What does this 
figure for you?" 

Even Drake waited with held 
breath for Hayward's words. 

"I don't know the whole answer, 
but I'll try a guess. First, this thing 
we're in — ship or whatever you want 
to call it — came from below. But 
from where below ? Far as we know 
there's a thousand miles of solid rock 
beiow that tunnel. Then again, the 
hidden voice spoke of an air lock at 
a place called Letta. Air locks are 
usually pressure chambers. My guess 



is that we're going to a land which 
lies somewhere deep below the surface of the Earth. Right, hidden 

voice?" 

"Ri— " the voice began, and 
stopped abruptly. 

Hayward winked broadly at Murchison. "Guess from here on in until 
we arrive, we talk of things like baseball or boxing . . . . " 

TT MIGHT have been an hour, a 
day, a week that went by before 
the hidden engines stopped their purring. But suddenly while they were 
sitting, each wrapped in his own 
thoughts, a whole section of the wall 
slid into another section and a half 
dozen men were confronting them. At 
their head was the young one who 
had helped to capture them. 

He said, "If nothing is attempted 
on your part, nothing will happen. Do 
I make myself clear?" 

"Perfectly!" Hayward took the 
lead. "Besides, I, for one, am too 
curious about all this to miss all the 
fun by having you knock me out with 
one of those tubes you carry." 

The youngster smiled. He had nice 
teeth and the smile lightened the oddly mature look of his face. "GoodI 
A sensible viewpoint. Mydor will like 
that." And as an afterthought, 
". . .And you. . ." 

"Thanks." Hayward walked beside 
the other as if it were the most natural thing in the world. "You speak 
excellent English. American in accent, I think. Am I right?" 

"Yes." 

Hayward noticed they were pacing 
down by a winding ramp. And shortly 
after, they were facing a closed door. 
By the attitude of their guards Hay.ward guessed they were waiting a signal, so he continued with what he had 
been talking about. 

"Where did you learn the language?" 



THAT A WORLD MIGHT UVE 



89 



"From a recording disk made in 
one of our exploratory outer surface 
ships. We all speak English." 

A light splashed a band of green 
over the top edge of the door. 

Immediately Hayward's companion 
opened the door. He stood to one side 
and issued orders: "The three of you 
take the single bench to the right. 
Breathe through your mouths until you 
see the light above this door flash 
red. That will be the signal the pressure is normal. If you attempt to 
breathe through your noses you may 
find the pressure will puncture the 
ear drums. Take your places now." 

Hayward and his companions followed the other's orders to the letter. 
It was not long before the signal 
flashed red. The youngster arose from 
where he had been sitting at the opposite door to the chamber and nodded for his squad to form. 

As they went forward one of the 
guards brushed against him by accident. The smile flashed suddenly on 
the youngster's lips. And just as 
swiftly did his hand move to his belt 
where the tube lay encased by its 
sheath. Once more the three saw the 
orange flame come from the tip of 
the tube, only now a white beam of 
light followed it, and small though 
the thread of light was, it was so brilliant it dazzled the eyes. 

When vision returned to the three 
captives it was to look with horror 
at a charred and twisted cinder on the 
metal floor. Hayward breathed with 
difficulty and knew he was going to 
be sick in a second unless he could 
control himself. He turned his gaze 
upward to meet the smiling eyes of 
the young man. 

"Why did you do that?" he asked 
in a voice barely above a whisper. 
"You killed him in cold blood!" 

"A natural function," the youngster said. "You are strange people. 
Does it make any difference when 



slaves die?" 

He opened the door and the squad 
came to attention. Three men were 
waiting them in the shallow room. 
One of the three was the one called 
Raynor, the second was another man 
of about Raynor's age, and the third 
was somewhat younger, though not so 
young as their guide. From the deferential manner of the two older 
men, Hayward guessed that this one 
was Mydor. 

Mydor had the look of a leader of 
men. Quite tall and slender, his face 
had the cold look of austerity, the 
lines of complete self-absorption, and 
an assurance that was almost insulting. This man would brook no interference, would not be swayed from 
the dictates of his own judgment. 

Hayward labeled him a megalomaniac on the instant. 

"My Lord." The youngster had 
snapped to instant salute at sight of 
the three. "The prisoners, Sire." 

K/IYDOR STEPPED forward and 
passed slowly back and forth in 
front of the three. His lower lip folded itself over the thin flesh of the upper. 

"Two laborers and a man of the upper classes. You! Who are you? What 
is your rank?" 

Drake, to whom Mydor had addressed his questions, stiffened for an 
instant, then relaxed. His voice was 
unctious in reply: "My name is Manfred Drake and I am the employer of 
these two. I am a financier." 

"A strange word. Is your attire 
common to your rank?" 

Drake smiled. "No, Sire," the word 
came easily. "These are the clothes 
I wore for comfort in the tunnel of 
the mine." 

Mydor turned to his companions. 
He shook his head. "I don't know 
whether or not it was a waste of time. 
This midget and his slaves cannot 



90 



 



be representative of what lies on the 
next level. I'm sure. The exploratorydiscs brought back too many evidences of a superior race. These are 
obviously inferior. Get rid of them." 

There was not an instant to be lost, 
Hayward realized. Already the arm 
of the youngster was moving toward 
the tube in his belt. "If I may say 
something ..." Hayward said swiftly. 

Mydor turned a questioning look. 
Then Raynor whispered something in 
Mydor's ear, and the other nodded. 
"Make it short, surface-man." 

"The appearance of inferiority is 
deceptive. Do not be misled, Mydor." 

The cold face indicated interest. 
But only for a second, "I see. Well, 
perhaps I will have time. . .later. 
Place them under guard, Sopar, and 
see to it they do not escape." 

"It was a lucky thing for you," 
Sopar said, as they marched the 
length of the room, "that Raynor 
spoke in your behalf. Inferiors cannot address superior beings in Atlantis." 

"At-Iantis. . . ?" Hayward hesitated 
over the word. 

"Yes. I think Raynor will visit with 
you later. Now we must place you in 
safekeeping," 

Things moved with kaleidoscope effect and speed. There was a quick 
glimpse of a large plaza, tall buildings gleaming in the sun, men and 
women in strange dress and hundreds 
of uniformed men standing guard. 
Then Hayward and the others were 
hustled into a tubular vehicle which 
was standing before the door of the 
low, long building from which they 
were led, and once more they were 
off into mystery. 

This time there was no questioning the kind of place they were in. 
As Murchison put it, "Guess walls 
and bars do make a prison." 

Nor were they the only imprisoned. 

There was a noticeable difference 



however. The walls were the ones 
enclosing the prison compound. The 
prison itself was a series of barred 
cages set one against another, each 
filled almost to bursting with men 
and women alike. The instant they 
came into the compound the stench 
of unwashed bodies greeted them. The 
odor was so bad Drake instantly became sick. 

It was then they discovered the 
steel beneath the velvet gloves. 

Sopar carried nothing but the tube 
in his belt. But the warders carried 
thonged whips. As Drake bent over 
in nausea two of the warders began 
to lash at him with their whips. 
Sopar stood to one side and watched, 
bright-eyed and smiling. 

Hayward had a real hatred of 
Drake, had always thought of him as 
the most insufferable human he had 
ever known. But this wanton beating 
of him was too much. In a flash he 
was on the nearest guard and before 
the man could turn, had wrenched 
the whip from his hand. 

As Hayward pulled the whip free 
he saw Sopar reach for the tube. 
Sopar's hand never made it. The whip 
lashed out and the end wrapped itself 
around his hand. Before the Atlantean 
could resist, Hayward had dragged 
him close. Sopar tried to bring the 
tube up but he seemed like a child in 
Hayward's grip. 

This fact stayed in the background 
of Hayward's consciousness for the 
moment. He tore the tube from 
Sopar's fingers. A wild scream of exultation rose on the air as Hayward 
threw Sopar to one side and leaped 
at the guard still beating Drake. Murchison, who had seemed to be stunned 
by the quick developments, came to 
Drake's aid also. In an instant there 
was a wild melee. 

"Do not kill them," Sopar shouted 
as he staggered to his feet. "Mydor 
wants them alive." 



THAT A WORLD MIGHT LIVE 



91 



Hayward seemed like a man gone 
mad. He lashed at the warders with 
hammering fists and each time a man 
was struck, he fell like a poled ox. 
Nor were Murchison's blows less effective. But though the two of them 
fought with the fury of ten, the odds 
were altogether against them. Sheer 
numbers finally brought them to the 
ground. And even there the fight was 
carried on. 

Hayward's mouth and nose were 
filled with blood. A lashing thong had 
ripped his cheek from jawbone to ear 
and blood ran down the nose from 
a cut over one eye. Finally enough 
warders came into the fight to make 
it impossible for the two men even to 
move. 

While Hayward was held helpless in 
the grip of several men, Sopar came 
up from behind and struck Hayward 
a terrible blow at the back of the head 
with the butt end of a whip. A second later Murchison was stretched out 
beside his friend, and just as unconscious. 

And all through the battle Drake 
lay on the ground and trembled in 
terror. 

66 . . . NOW! Stand back a bit more. 

That's better. They're coming out 
of it." 

Hayward opened his eyes and small 
as the movement was it brought a 
grunt of pain to his lips. Opening his 
eyes had also reopened the gash over 
the eyebrow. He wiped the flow of 
blood away and brought his gaze to 
focus on the face bent above his. 

He could not guess her age, nor 
was he interested. He knew only that 
she was the most beautiful woman 
he had ever seen. Her lips parted 
slightly to show perfect teeth and he 
heard the soft catch of her breath. 
Then she let her breath out and her 
voice framed m "Oh." 

"I'm all right." He managed a 



smile. "How are my friends?" 

"None the worse for wear. Can you 
manage to stand?" 

He pushed himself erect, and was 
immediately surrounded by a mob of 
prisoners. Murchison elbowed his way 
to his side. Now that he was erect, 
Hayward saw that the girl was quite 
tall, only an inch or so under his own 
height, and she carried herself gracefully under the grey sacking she wore. 
He noticed the sacking seemed to be 
the common uniform for men and 
women alike. 

Once more the girl spoke, and Hayward noticed how immediate was the 
silence which followed her words, as 
if she was used to being heard, as if 
she was used to command. "Who are 
you and your friends? We have never 
seen men of your kind before. Is 
there an undiscovered land on Atlantis we know nothing of?" 

"A land above Atiantisl We are 
from the surface of the Earth." 

She shook her head in perplexity. 
"I don't understand. But that isn't 
important, I suppose. How did Mydor 
get hold of you? The 'Smiling People' 
do not like taking prisoners, unless, 
of course, you have some kind of 
value for him." 

"Before I go into that," Hayward 
said, "mind if I ask a couple of questions? Who are you, and how — or 
rather why— are all of you in prison, 
especially since you say Mydor does 
not like to take prisoners?" 

"We are here to provide sport for 
Mydor's people," the girl said. "I am 
Mama, and these here with me are 
a few of my subjects. The other cages 
are filled with them, also. It seems 
that Mydor is going to use us for 
purposes of morale in a war he is 
planning." She stopped on seeing the 
bewilderment on his face. "I suppose 
none of this makes sense to you," 
she went on. Her lovely lips twisted 
In a wry expression. "Sometimes It 



92 



 



doesn't make sense to me. But Mydor 
ia filled with a lust for power. We 
knew peace for thousands of years, 
then he came on the scene and 
peace died in a bloody bath. Mydor 
wants to fulfill an old prophecy." 
"Prophecy?" 

"The return of the peoples of Atlantis to their rightful place on the 
surface." 

"Luke. Luke. , ." 

Hayward looked away from the 
girl. Murchison was standing close by 
his side. 

"I been listening to this talk but 
it's over my head. What's the girl 
trying to say?" _ 

"It seems we landed in the middle 
of a war. This is Mama, the ruler 
of ... " Hayward stopped in embarrassment. 

The girl smiled. "I am still their 
Queen," she said. "They will follow 
me to the death." She turned and 
Hayward and his companion turned 
with her. The two men saw the faces 
of the men and women who crowded 
the cage light up with hope and courage as their eye9 met those of the tall, 
proud girl. 

One of the prisoners shouted something in a strange tongue. The cry was 
echoed by those in every cage in the 
compound until warders came running from all sides and stood tensely 
about, whips held ready. Hayward 
noticed some carried long tubes like 
the one he had taken from Sopar. 

For a long moment it seemed as if 
Death was about to fill its gorge. 
Then the girl said something in a low 
voice to a man standing near to her. 
He shouted something which instantly stilled the screaming voices. 

"We have no chance by fighting 
them here," the girl said. "Our only 
chance may come when they release 
us." 

"Looks like we're getting company," 
Murchison said, nudging Hayward. 



A, PAIR OF gates had swung wide 
and a torpedo-shaped affair 
rolled into the compound. Several 
dozen men swarmed from its hull and 
came to attention as two others followed them into the open. One of the 
two was Raynor; the other, Sopar. 

Raynor cam« directly to the cage 
which held Hayward and the others. 
He stood for a couple of seconds in 
silence, his face thoughtful, his eyes 
masked. 

"Let the three from the surface 
come forward." 

Raynor's voice brought remembrance to Hayward. Drake ! Where 
was he? Murchison found him in a 
far corner, sullen and frightened. Hayward saw Murchison's head shake 
and his hands move, as if to accent 
what he was saying. Then Murchison 
stopped talking and grabbed Drake by 
an arm and dragged him forward. 

"He's scared to death," Murchison 
said. "Look at him." 

"They'll kill us." Drake's voice 
quivered in fear. "They'll kill us and 
laugh while they're doing it." 

"I don't think so," Hayward said. 
"Certainly not if we don't give them 
reason to. Buck up, Drake. Try acting a man." 

"The gate is open," Raynor said. 

What kind of prison is it? Hayward wondered as he shoved his way 
to the gate and pulled it inward. His 
eyes moved upward and he realized 
why they did not fear any attempt at 
escape. Manning saw what looked like 
a pair of searchlights atop the wall, 
and eight or ten of the guards. The 
searchlights were directed toward the 
cages. Hayward had. an idea that a 
blue beam would spray them should 
there be any attempt at escape. 

"Mydor awaits you£ Raynor said 
shortly as the guards closed in on 
Hayward and his two companions. 
"Come. . ." 



THAT A WORLD MIGHT LIVE 



93 



'TTHEY HAD been ushered into Mydor's personal chamber of the 
palace. Sopar had disappeared shortly after they left the car, but Raynor remained. Now he stood beside 
Mydor who was seated on what appeared to be a gold throne. 

Raynor looked at Mydor who gave 
a short nod, and Raynor addressed 
them: 

"His Majesty, King Mydor, Monarch of all Atlantis, avowed conquerer 
of the surface world from which we 
were exiled, has granted an audience 
to you from the surface world, and 
an opportunity to aid in the conquest 
of that world from which you come. 

"Within a short time armies and 
armaments will be ready for their 
greatest and most glorious action. 
Nothing will avail against them. For 
so it was said in the prophecy, and so 
shall it be." 

Hayward felt all this was the preamble to the important things to follow. It was a build-up which was proscribed. 

". . .Because of the vastness of the 
undertaking, certain measures must 
be taken into consideration. Our exploratory discs have shown and recorded the fact that atomic weapons 
are in use on the surface. We, too, 
have a knowledge of those weapons. 
We have found that there is now an 
element, called silonium by the surface peoples, which can most readily 
be put to destructive use. It is our 
desire to mine and bring this element 
to Atlantis. Our craft of exploration, 
which you discovered, was searching 
for the vein which our instruments 
showed lay somewhere in the vicinity. 

"The great, wisdom of our King 
made easily understandable your presence in the tunnel. You, also, were 
searching for the vein. Only you knew 
its exact whereabouts." 

Hayward let nothing of what waa 
in his mind show in his expression. 



"What do you want of us? To give 
you the exact location?" 

"Precisely!" Raynor said. 

"Not a chance," Hayward said 
softly. 

"That's telling them ! " Murchison 
growled. 

Raynor smiled. Hayward felt a 
quiver of cold run through him. He 
had learned what their smile meant. 

"We shall discover it eventually," 
Raynor said softly. "With or without 
your help. It will only expedite matters, with your help." 

"I'm ready to help," Drake said. 
He stepped forward until he was out 
of Hayward's reach. "This man is my 
engineer. He knows exactly where the 
vein is." 

But Drake was mistaken about being out of Hayward's reach. Hayward 
took a couple of quick steps and did 
what he had always wanted to do. 
Drake was lifted off his feet by the 
blow and fell in a crumpled heap almost at Mydor's feet. 

Instantly the guards who were in 
the room converged on Hayward and 
Murchison with drawn tubes. But 
Mydor raised a plam in a languid 
gesture. The guards fell back. 

"You see, Raynor?" he said. "I 
said you were but wasting time with 
these. I should never have let you 
talk me into granting an audience. 
Inferior beings. Obviously. We need 
only send up several of the rocket 
machines and one of them will strike 
the right place. How much more simple it wil! be that way. Besides, thess 
will furnish the people with sport. 
The first of the hordes of surface 
prisoners." 

DAYNOR bit his Hp. It was obvious 
he was worried about something. 
"Great Lord," he said softly. "How 
right you are." He turned to face the 
two. "Decide now. Death or freedom." 
Hayward's mind worked swiftly 



94 



 



and desperately. "Would you answer 
a single question, Raynor?" 
"Ask it." 

"If we hesitate it's because we have 
been brought into the strangest adventure of our lives. A planet within 
a planet, a world of people which 
history said disappeared thousands of 
years ago. But here you are and have 
been through the ages. Now we are 
being asked to make a decision that 
is the hardest we have ever known. 
We are being asked to destroy our 
planet." 

"Not Quite/ 1 Raynor said. His voice 
took on an odd note of urgency. 
"We will let the people of the surface 
world destroy themselves. Our plans 
are simple. We will manufacture a 
number of silonium atom bombs, send 
up the discs and have the bombs 
dropped at various places. The nations 
of the surface world are ready to go 
to war on an instant's notice. Each 
will think the other is attacking. When 
the carnage is over, when the nations 
are helpless, we will attack." 

Hayward tried to swallow the cotton which had formed in his craw. 
What sort of devilish beings were 
these? He wet his lips, felt an anger 
that was like seething metal take 
hold of him. But before he could say 
anything, Raynor spoke again, this 
time to Mydor. 

"Let me speak to them privately," 
he said. "A few moments alone with 
them and I think I can convince them 
of the wise course to follow." 

Mydor nodded. "Very well, Raynor. 
Not too long, though. I wish to discuss the games for tomorrow. Mama 
and her followers should make fine 
entertainment for the people." 

TJAYNOR ushered them into a small 
ante-room and closed the door. 
Drake, who had been helped to his 
feet and brought with them, vented 
his hatred with looks of promised ven


geance. But the eyes and attention 
of the others were on Raynor, who 
had suddenly placed a finger to his 
lips in a signal for silence. 

A moment went by. Then Raynor 
came close to them. 

"Mydor is insane," were the first 
words he said. "Yes. We must stop 
him. He will commit our world and 
yours to destruction. I surprise you?" 

"Brother, and how," Hayward said, 
matching the other's low tones. 

"It would be a quick death for me 
if I acted otherwise," Raynor went 
on. "Somehow you must be placed 
on the earth-machine so that you can 
get back to your people and warn 
them. You must agree to Mydor's demands." 

"You're against him, then?" Hayward asked. 

"The only one in a high place who 
is. The others are like him— utterly 
mad. No wonder we are called the 
'Smiling People' by others, and with 
hate in their voices. We kill with 
a smile on our lips. Kill and torture. 
Let me think a moment." 

He placed the tips of his fingers to 
his temples and moved back and 
forth about the room for several seconds. Suddenly his face lifted. A light 
of elation showed in his eyes. "I think 
I aave it! This element silonium is 
absolutely necessary. The others from 
which a bomb can be made are not 
in our world, and in yours would be 
too hard to get. Without you we would 
face great delay, and perhaps complete frustration because we are a 
small world." 

"And a strange one," Hayward added. "A world with a sun and a heaven 
like ours." 

"And a man who thinks he is a god. 
Will you trust in me?" 

Hayward looked at Murchison, who 
nodded. But Drake refused to meet 
Hayward's eyes. Hayward smiled. No 
need to worry about Drake, he 



THAT A WORLD MIGHT LIVE 



95 



thought. He's too scared to be of hindrance. Besides, all he wants to do is 
get back. 

"Yes," Hayward said. 

"Good. Then follow my lead," Raynor said. 

i i OY LORD ! " Raynor bowed 
iV1 low. 

"Yes?" Mydor said languidly from 
his throne. 

"They have seen the path of your 
wisdom and have agreed to help." 

"Good. I leave them in your hands. 
Do as you wish, but do it swiftly." 

Raynor bowed again. "I have told 
them they are free and will have 
them brought to my home." 

"Very well. Sopar has the ships in 
readiness?" 

"To leave at a moment's notice, 
Sire."" 

"Then we will do so immediately 
following the games on the morrow. 
Go, Raynor, and give them their instructions." 

Raynor's house was a crystal onestoried affair on the crown of a low 
hill overlooking the city of Letta. 
Night had closed its dark veil over 
the city. A full moon hung low 
against a backdrop of ink. There were 
no stars. 

Hayward, Murchison and Drake, 
refreshed by baths, lolled on a wide 
circular divan. They had just finished 
dining with Raynor. The old man 
had refused to answer any of their 
questions until now. 

"Your lips are trembling with 
words," Raynor said. "Let them spill 
out." 

"Explain all this." Hayward's hand 
took in everything in an outflung gesture. "There is a moon, and we have 
seen the sun, and we have also seen 
that the surface planes are as we 
know them. Yet we are inside the 
planet Earth. I don't understand." 

"You mean we should be as the 



inside of a bowl?" Raynor asked. 
"Well, I don't know whether I can 
make it clear or not. Time and space 
are one and the same. That is the 
truth you must acknowledge. One 
cannot exist without the other. Here, 
time and space are a continuum of the 
same existence. The space you see 
above you is the same which exists 
above the upper surface. And above 
that space man will find another 
world. Worlds which can be likened 
to great circular bands. You have 
been misled. There is no great thickness to your planet, just as there is 
none to ours. I hope I have made myself clear?" 

"Not too well. How do you explain the sun and moon? They seem 
as large and distant as ours," Hayward said. 

"They are." 

Whether it was the truth or not, 
Hayward thought, no one would believe him should he somehow manage 
to get back to the Earth. Suddenly a 
heart-shaped face appeared in the mirror of his mind. Marnal He felt his 
pulses stir at her memory. 

"What kind of game is going to be 
played tomorrow?" he asked. 

Tired lines made wrinkles in the 
drawn face of the old man. "Marna 
and her people will be put to death, 
after they have been tortured." 

."Why?" 

Raynor sighed. "For no reason 
other than to satisfy Mydor 's innate 
cruelty. Once there were three peaceful cities. Now there is only Letta; the 
others were destroyed by Mydor, and 
their people used as slaves or placed 
under arms, or used in the great 
games. Marna was the Queen of Hegga until he attacked her city. Now 
she is awaiting her death and praying 
it will come quickly." 

"And nothing can be done to save 
her?" Hayward demanded. 

"I can't imagine what. They are 



96 



 



unarmed. If axil? the people had 

"Raynor, how do the tubes work? 
Where do you get the ammunition 
for them?" 

"What difference does that make 
to you? You could do nothing to — 
Or am I saying that which I have 
been led to say? What have you in 
mind?" 

"You must have allies, men who 
think as you do." Hayward pointed 
his finger at the old man. "There 
must be more like you. If we could 
rally these, tonight, and release the 
prisoners, give them arms, and escape 
from Letta. ..." 

Raynor clapped his hands explosively. "You have given me the key. 
A single power plant in the heart 
of the city supplies the energy for 
the tubes and ray machines. If we 
can put that plant out of commission 
the tubes and machines will be useless. Then it would be man against 
man, with hand weapons." He rose 
in his excitement and strode about, 
"If only we have time enough tonight. . ." 

"What do you have to do?" Hayward asked. 

"Get to these men I trust. They 
are scattered. Let me think a moment. 
The night is still young. We will go 
ourselves. Come." 

pVEN DRAKE showed signs of the 
" excitement they all felt. The wide 
itreets were filled with traffic, afoot 
and in the torpedo-shaped cars. But 
all made way for Raynor's car with 
its insignia of rank emblazoned on the 
head. With them were four of Raynor's personal guards. 

Their destination was the power 
house. 

As Raynor explained: "They will 
let me in. I will tell the one in charge 
that I am showirjg you the wonders 
of the plant. Once we are in, my men 



will concentrate their fire on the engine which creates the energy we have 
to destroy. It will take hut a second. 
From then on we will have to depend 
on the strength of our arms and the 
swiftness of our feet. I sent out trusted messengers to bring the news of 
what we were doing to certain men, 
and they in turn will follow a plan 
we have long had should an opportunity arise for its use. 

"That opportunity is now at hand." 

The old man was all right, Hayward decided, despite his windiness. 
He felt the weight of the sword Raynor had provided, against the flesh 
of his thigh. It was an unaccustomed 
weight but felt better than anything 
he had ever known before. 

Suddenly his head lifted. The car 
had stopped. 

"We are here," Raynor said. "And 
may luck follow before us." 

A cordon of guards were drawn up 
before the squat building housing the 
power plant. One who was the leader 
came forward with a belligerent strut, 
a strut which changed to stiff attention at sight of Raynor. 

"Acquaint the one in charge of my 
visit," Raynor commanded. 

The man saluted, turned on his heel 
and disappeared into the building. Ke 
was back shortly, showing the way to 
Raynor and his group. 

A stocky man in grey coveralls was 
waiting them within the entrance. He 
waved the leader of the guards away, 
saying, "There is no need for you, 
Captain. The King's Councilor needs 
no supervision. Ah. Are these the ones 
from the surface?" 

"You know...?" Raynor asked. 

"Of course. And also that they have 
cast their lot with us." 

"If I may say something?" Hayward spoke on impulse. 

"Of course," Raynor said. 

'T am an engineer and I marvel at 
the wonder of your tube weapons. It 



THAT A WORLD MIGHT LIVE 



97 



would be a privilege to see the machine which energizes them." 

"Of course, This way." 

The entire group followed the lead 
of the squat man and presently they 
were on a balcony looking down at a 
machine resembling a gigantic dynamo. 

"The most wonderful mechanism 
in the world. The invasion would be 
impossible without it. By tomorrow 
night enough energy will be provided 
to the ray tubes and larger pieces to 
last a year. Our mighty King will — " 

The squat man's voice died in a 
scream of terror as one of Raynor's 
guards lifted him and hurled him 
over the balcony. 

"Quickly," Raynor said. "Now!" 

Four beams of white light sped 
from the small tubes and struck the 
dull metal of the machine. Orange 
glowed where it was struck and presently the stench of molten metal came 
to their ncstnle. And suddenly the 
rays went out. 

"The power's gone," Murchison 
shouted. "Now we can strikel" 

CWIFTLY Hayward led the way to 
the outside. The guards showed 
only faint surprise at the sudden exit. 
Too late did they realize something 
was wrong. By that time the group 
had made good its escape. 

"The alarm will go out swiftly 
now," Raynor said. "But we have the 
advantage. We know where we are 
bound; Mydor is in the dark." 

"How long before we reach the 
pr/son walls?" Hayward wanted to 
know. 

"Not too long, at our speed. That 
is, if we are not stopped?" 

"To hell with that!" Hayward said. 
"I've noticed this thing runs like one 
of our autos." 

The man at the wheel moved over 



and Hayward took his place. "Hang 
onto your hats," Hayward said. 
"We're going places in a hurry." 

"This road leads straight to the 
prison." Raynor leaned over Hayward. "It will be a little while until 
the alarm is out, enough time for us 
to get there." 

"Luke!" Murchison called from 
the back of the car. His voice had a 
pleased note to it. "We've mislaid 
Drake." 

Hayward spun the wheel about in 
a frantic move as he barely missed 
another vehicle at an intersection. 
"What do you mean?" 

"Guess he was too slow," Murchison said. "He ain't here." 

"Then we'll have to go back for 
him," Hayward said grimly. 

"Why? He's no damned good, and 
we'd all be better off if he stayed 
down here." 

"Maybe." Hayward spun the wheel 
and the car almost stood on end as 
it went into a U turn. "But he came 
with us, and he's going back with 
us." He felt a hand on his shoulder 
and looked up to see Raynor bent 
above him. 

Raynor's eyes were thoughtful. 
"Your friend could easily have made 
it to the car. I don't think he wanted 
to." 

Hayward knew a decision had to 
be reached, and quickly. If Drake had 
been left behind in the excitement of 
the get-away, then surely they had 
to go back for him. On the other hand 
Drake might have had other ideas. 
Hayward could feel the electric air 
as the others waited tensely for his 
decision. 

But it was Raynor who forced 
Hayward's hand. "We would be too 
late, anyway. The guards would have 
taken him." 

"I suppose," Hayward said. He 
whipped the car about again. 



98 



 



PRESENTLY they were in the open 
and in a short time the low prison 
walls loomed before them. Hayward 
stopped the car at Raynor's direction 
at the center gate. 

A captain of the guards opened 
the gates at sight of the visitor. Hayward and Murchison acted as though 
they were prisoners, and to add to 
the effect Raynor's personal bodyguard drew their tube guns and held 
them in readiness. 

"I am returning the prisoners," 
Raynor said. 

The captain turned to call warders 
and Raynor put out his hand quickly. 
"My men will conduct the prisoners, 
Captain. If you don't mind?" 

"Not at all, if it is your desire." 

"Thank you. Come along, then." 

In his desire to walk at Raynor's 
side, the captain stepped between the 
bodyguard and prisoners and accidentally bumped against Murchison. 
A startled expression dawned in the 
man's eyes. "The prisoner! He's 
armed I" 

Those were his last words. Another 
second and the alarm would be 
raised. With a gesture surprisingly 
swift for an old man Raynor whipped 
out the short sword concealed under 
his shirt and ran it through the captain. 

The man died without a sound. 

It was the signal for all of them 
to draw their weapons. 

"To Marna's cage I " Hayward 
shouted. Without waiting to see what 
the others would do he set off at a 
run for the cage shouting as he did: 
"Get outl You're freel Get out of the 
cages ! " 

His words aroused not only the 
prisoners but also the guards. Men 
boiled from their quarters at the far 
end of the compound and their figures showed on the wall as they ran 
to the huge ray machines. But when 
they turned them on, nothing happened. Just as when those on the 



ground attempted to blast the escaping prisoners, nothing happened. 

In the meantime Hayward and the 
others had reached the cage where 
Marna was imprisoned. He made his 
voice heard above the voices of the 
excited prisoners. 

"Get their weapons! Get their 
weapons!" 

"You came back for me!" Marna's 
voice was warm and low. 

He turned to see the woman he had 
come for standing beside him. Her 
beauty was a spark that set his heart 
aflame. He had never imagined that 
when love would come it would come 
so quickly, so completely without 
question. A Queen! And she loved 
him. It was to be seen in her eyes, 
felt on her lips as she pressed them 
against his. 

WBJI A&NA1" Raynor's face was 
*■ *■ contorted. "Can you get your 
men organized? The alarm is out and 
Mydor will be here with an army." 

It was amazing how quickly her 
subjects rallied around her. Individual fights raged about the compound 
but now it was apparent that some 
sort of order was being formed by 
the guards. Small groups of them under the leadership of one man or another, pitted themselves against many 
of the escaping prisoners and hacked 
them to pieces before a defense could 
be organized. 

"We've got to have weapons," Marna said. "Attack the guards." 

TT WAS AN order. Hayward was 
shocked by it because it meant 
a command to suicide for many; having no weapons Marna's followers had 
to take arms from the guards by 
sheer force of numbers. Then he saw 
the sense of it. Men had to be sacrificed to gain the end Marna was after: control of the prison compound 
and the weapons. 



THAT A WORLD MIGHT LIVE 



99 



As if it was the most natural thing 
in the world, he took command of 
their immediate group. Using Raynor, Murchison, the four bodyguards 
and himself as a nucleus, he hacked 
his way to the gate through a horde 
of guards. Steel ripped his clothing 
to shreds, razor-sharp sword edges 
nicked him time and again and once 
a wild swing of one of the guards 
almost took his head from his shoulders. But luck stayed with him. He 
ducked in time and his own blade 
swung up and out, to stream red 
with blood as it went completely 
through the man. What Hayward had 
noticed when he took the tube away 
from Sopar was evident now. His own 
strength was superhuman, or the Atlanteans were much weaker than 
Earthmen. 

Ey the time they reached the gate 
a large number of Mama's followers 
were armed. More and more came 
to join them until their force numbered hundreds. The guards had 
been forced to fight a retreating action. Suddenly the withdrawal to the 
gates became a riot. 

"Let them gol" Hayward gave the 
command. "Mania, have some of your 
men guard the women and take them 
to safety. Raynor..." 

The old man's arms hung heavily 
at his side and the face was lined 
with weariness. Blood dripped from a 
cut on his cheek, but the old eyes 
were ablaze with fight, and there 
was no question of the great spirit in 
that frail body. 

"Yes, surface man?" 

"We've got to get back to the city 
and carry the fight to Mydor. How 
do we do it?" 

"You're right. And before they set 
up a new plan. Lookl" He pointed 
up the long stretch of wide road leading from the city to the prison. 

A long line of headlights, like 



fireflies dancing in a row, were swooping down the road toward them. The 
same question was in each mind. 
Mydor? 

"Quick! Along both sides of the 
road. Hide in the grass until we learn 
if they are friends. Raynor, you and 
Murchison take one group; I will 
take another. Get moving!" 

TTHERE WAS no longer any question as to who had come. The 
first two out of the lead car were 
Mydor and Sopar. The youngster 
raised his sword in a signal and men 
streamed from the hundred vehicles. 

The voice of Mydor, coldly contemptuous, was suddenly raised in 
command: "Take no prisoners. Neither man nor woman." 

"I'm going to wipe that look from 
Mydor's face," Hayward whispered 
to Marna. "Besides, we need those 
cars. One thing. I don't want you in 
this thing." 

"You can't keep me out," she said. 

There were many things about her 
he knew nothing of. He knew only 
that he loved her, and felt certain his 
love was returned. But there was time 
for learning more. Was it an hour 
they had spent together in the same 
cage? A day? He knew it was a lifetime, now. And no matter how short 
the time, it had been long enough for 
him to know life held no large meaning without her. He shook his head, 
but smiled as he did so. 

"I can't take a chance," he whispered. "You heard Mydor's words." 

"We had nothing but our hands 
before," she said. "Now there is steel 
in them. I am their Queen, and I must 
lead them." 

He swallowed hard. This was not 
Conpa City, Arizona, or even the 
earth on which that hamlet stood. 
This was a band of rock, a layer of 
a planet, a world like something in a 



100 



 



dream, the home of a people who had 
disappeared from the earth thousandsof years before. He could not break 
the bonds of their customs by using 
phrases familiar to him. 

He cupped his hand under her 
chin and lifted her face to his and 
kissed her hard and she brought her 
body close to his so that he felt the 
swelling breasts quivering against his 
flesh and knew for a wild instant the 
depths of passion in this strange woman. Then he pushed her gently from 
him and nodded once. 

She had won. 

He stood erect, a figure of pent-up 
power, his face a mask of flaming 
anger, his hand with the sword 
clenched in a fist thrust straight out 
before him. 

•""THIS TIME the battle was another 
■ kind. The guards had been unorganized and in scattered units. The 
men Mydor had brought with him 
were trained to fight as a single unit 
and to use battlefield tactics. The 
surprise attack gave them no chance 
to form ranks. And, like the battle 
in the prison compound, it developed 
into man-against-man fights, The difference lay in the type of warrior 
Mama's men were fighting. 

As if it were second nature to Hayward, he saw what the end would 
be. Mydor's minions would win. Already squad leaders were forming 
their men into cells of attack and defense. The scattered fight was being 
directed into channels dictated by Mydor's commanders. Slowly Hayward 
and the rest were being driven back 
toward the prison gates. Those of 
Hayward's men who were caught on 
the other side of die road were 
chopped to bits. 

Around Hayward and Marna and 
Raynor and Murchison, the ground 
was cleared. The enemy glared their 
hatred and respect of the tall Earth 



man. Unfamiliar as the sword and its 
use had been to Hayward, he had created havoc with it. The phenomenal 
Strength he had in this strange world 
had made him a dreaded opponent. 
Yet it was obvious the end was a 
smali matter of time away. 

"It's a hopeless cause," Raynor 
muttered. 

"Not yet," Hayward made answer. 
"This fight, maybe; but I think we 
can get away." He looked about and 
counted some twenty men who were 
in their group. "If we can get to Mydor's craft. . . " 

Once more Raynor's face lit up 
with renewed hope. "If we can, it will 
be clear sailing to the city. His insignia will let us through." 

"What are we waiting for then?" 
Hayward asked. 

His now-familiar bellow of defiance 
rose on the air, and sweeping the 
girl close to his side he charged the 
thin wall of warriors facing them. 

The suddenness of the attack 
cleaved a crack in the thin line, and 
seconds later the fight raged about the 
torpedo-shaped car. Marna, too 
raised her voice in a last desperate 
attempt to rally her dwindling forces. 
They responded nobly, forcing drained 
nerves and muscles to give their last 
reserve of strength in her honor. 

Men fell and were trampled by 
others who made frantic efforts to 
reach the enemy, until a wall of dead 
lay heaped about the car. The screams 
of the wounded and dying rose in a 
horrible souhd, like a hymn to Death. 
So close were they jammed that men 
died and were held erect by the press 
of others. There was no room for 
swinging, only for stab and thrust. 
For an instant the battle hung in the 
balance, and Hayward called on his 
reserve of power. His great figure, 
naked now to the waist, was like an 
avenging angel's, as he hammered by 



THAT A WORLD MIGHT LIVE 



101 



the sheer power of his arm, a path 
to the still open door of the car. 

And rising up to confront him was 
the figure of Sopar. 

No longer was the Atlantean one 
of the 'Smiling People'. His face was 
a smear of red and his eyes gleamed 
in fanatic fervor. His sword flashed 
above his head as he took a single 
step forward and brought it down, 
at the very instant Hayward slipped 
in one of the pools of blood. 

The blade flashed down. 

Hayward tried to keep his balance, 
tried to bring up his own sword in 
protection, but too late. 

Someone caught him a blow on the 
shoulder which knocked him aside. 
It was Raynor, who had plunged headlong at Hayward. It was Raynor who 
took the murderous blow with his 
own body. Sopar's face wore a grimace of hatred as he twisted the sword 
loose from the corpse of Raynor. The 
grimace was still on his face when 
Hay ward's sword cut him in half! 

T IKE PUPPETS propelled by a mad 
master, Hayward, Marna, Murchison and what were left of her forces piled into the elliptical craft. A 
wild man leaped into the driver's seat 
and twisted the wheel in a full turn 
as the engine roared, then purred 
into power. Seconds later they were 
in the clear. 

Hayward turned to the others. 
"We've lost Raynor. What do we do 
DOW?" 

A warrior crawled panting to Hayward's side. "I have been trained as 
pilot. There are two space craft on 
a field outside the city." 

"Like the one that brought us to 
Letta?" Hayward asked. 

"Better. These are larger and are 
more powerful and swifter, Mydor 
constructed them for the day of invasion. Each can hold ten thousand 
men!" 



A laugh that bordered on hysteria 
rushed from Hayward 's throat. To 
think a man could be that mad as to 
attempt invasion of the Earth with 
twenty thousand men. But the laugh 
died almost as quickly as it was born. 
He suddenly remembered what he 
had been told. The mysterious discs 
were to bring the silonium bombs to 
the Earth and drop them. 

The discs! Flying saucers. . . . 

But how had they been brought to 
the Earth? What difference did it 
make now that he knew their purpose, past and future. He had to get 
back to the Earth and somehow warn 
its nations. 

Hayward felt the sudden press of 
warm woman's flesh against his 
shoulder. "Marna, my dearest. . ." 

She whispered, "I go where you 
go. Here life is done for me." 

His bloody hand rose to caress her 
shoulder but fell back to the wheel. 
He could not defile her with its crimson touch. "You say you are a pilot," 
he spoke to the warrior. "But can 
you bring us back to the spot from 
where we were taken?" 

There was a laugh of exultation 
behind the man's words. "Mydor made 
it simple for us. I know. I was head 
of Raynor's bodyguards and knew all 
of the mad King's plans, as well as 
did my dead master. The pilot control is set. It was set the instant Raynor and Sopar came back with you 
and your friends. There was only the 
wait for the proper moment. There 
is even a stock of provisions on 
board." 

For the first time since the battle 
had been joined, Hayward heard 
Murchison's voice. "Food," Murchison said wistfully. "What's that? GodI 
Even crumbs would be welcome." 

"You'll have to hold out, Jim," 
Hayward said. 

"Hold outl My aunt's bustle! 
There's nothing to hold out with. My 



102 



 



belly's saying hello to my backbone." 

"Turn off the road here!" the warrior called suddenly. "It's only a short 
distance." 

T_IAYWARD had never dreamed 
such a ship could be constructed to be made to fly. He had not 
known the size of the ship they had 
come in but had realized it was immense. But this thing before them; 
it was colossal! 

His eyes trained to gauge size, made 
the craft out to be a thousand feet 
in length and two hundred feet 
through the middle. The head of it 
was fifty feet at the widest, and each 
vane was a foot long. It seemed incredible. 

But even more incredible was the 
small number of men set to guarding 
it. 

At sight of the royal insignia the 
guards snapped to attention. Too late 
did they discover the deception. By 
the time they saw it, Hayward and 
the others were on them. Hayward 
and the others were not to be denied. 
The guards died to a man I 

"Show us what to do," Hayward 
ordered. 

"There won't be much to show," 
the warrior said. "The automatic pilot is set and the course has been 
laid for it. Come. We get in through 
the belly." 

Hayward and the warrior had been 
talking close by the ship while the 
others stood about waiting their decision. Suddenly one of them turned 
idly and what he saw made his voice 
rise in a shout of warning. 

"I see the lights of cars coming 
swiftly!" 

"Quickly!" The pilot waved them 
forward. "Inside." He reached up 
against the dull metal and pressed a 
knob which protruded and instantly 
an opening spread and a ladder unfolded its length to the ground. 



A couple of minutes later the last 
of them was in the huge belly of the 
monster ship. Up ahead, in the vast 
pilot's compartment, Murchison, Marna and Hayward watched the pilot 
twist a dial. A humming sound was 
heard, which gave way to a low vibration. The pilot turned, smiled 
briefly, then said; 

"Look below." 

"Look, Luke! It's Drake!" Murchison bawled wildly. "He's with Mydor." 

Murchison had seen right. The tiny 
figure of Manfred Drake was to be 
seen at Mydor's side. Suddenly there 
was nothing to be seen. It was as if 
a screen had been pulled before their 
eyes. The two turned questioning looks 
at the pilot. 

"We're in flight," came the matterof-course answer. 

AS ON THEIR flight from Earth 
neither Murchison nor Hayward 
knew the passage of time. Murchison 
spent most of his time with the pilot. 
But Hayward knew only that here, in 
this brief moment, was his chance to 
know Mania. Nor was she lukewarm 
to the idea. But in both minds there 
lurked the dread thought of what the 
future would bring when both ships 
landed. 

They knew the speed of both was 
about the same and that from what 
the pilot said both ships would land 
not too far from each other in the 
tunnel. This also they knew. The 
fight to the finish would come then, 
and as before it would be hand-tohand; the ray weapons were sti!) 
useless. 

So Hayward and Marna learned ihe 
sweetness of love while they had the 
chance. While, in the darkness of 
outer space between the bands of 
planets, their ship sped on its destined course. 



THAT A WORLD MIGHT LIVE 



103 



They were walking the narrow deck 
close by the pilot's compartment when 
Murchison dashed from it. 

"Marnal Luke! We're coming in!" 

They could feel the deceleration as 
they grouped themselves over the pilot's shoulders. 

"Watch," the pilot said without taking his eyes from the dials on the 
board. "Very soon, now." 

Directly ahead lay a broad plain. 
But as they came closer they saw 
that what had appeared to be flat 
land was really mountainous country. 
And so quickly it almost took their 
breaths away they were flying between two huge basalt-like needles of 
mountains into what must have once 
been a crater. Seconds later darkness 
enfolded them in its sable wings. 

The pilot slid from his seat. "That's 
all," he said. "I've set the alarm to 
let us know when we are through." 

Hayward nodded soberly. "Might 
as well get ourselves set for the last 
battle." 

He counted noses as they filed 
past him to the hatchway. Twenty 
nine, including Marna. A pitiful force 
to throw against Mydor. But one that 
would fight till the breath ran out 
of each body, 

"Listen to the old lady growl," the 
pilot said. He grinned. "She's got to 
dig a new path. The ship Raynor 
used was a tenth this size." 

A sudden thought struck Hayward. 
"Are we on the same path as the one 
who came before?" 

"I don't know," came the answer. 
"But not far off, I'm sure." 

CUDDENLY there was silence. 
^ "Let's go!" Hayward shouted. 
He had given them their instructions. 
Murchison and several others were 
to hurry Mama back along the tunnel to freedom while he and the rest 
fought off Mydor. Hayward knew 
there simply wasn't room in the tun


nel for effective fighting. Two men 
could hold off hundreds. 

He made a silent vow he would be 
one of the two until death took them, 
or rescue came. 

The ship came to a halt with a jar 
which threw them all off balance. Seconds later the last of them were 
through the hatchway. Murchison and 
the girl and another raced off while 
Hayward waited for the other ship to 
come through. 

The seconds that went by were 
eternities. 

For there was horrible uncertainty 
of not knowing where the other ship 
would come through. They could all 
die without having a chance to strike 
a blow should the nose come through 
at the spot where they waited. 

Hayward's lips twisted in a crooked 
grin. He thought suddenly what might 
happen should they come in where 
the vein lay. And with that thought 
came another. The dynitro! It was 
all ready to be set off. Murchison had 
set the charge. If the ship came 
through between the charge and their 
ship. . . ? 

There was a single wild chance to 
take. If it succeeded they were all 
saved. 

"Wait here!" he yelled, and set 
off at a run toward the end of the 
tunnel. 

The wires and battery were all set 
up. Hayward grabbed them up, whirled 
and whipped back toward where the 
others were waiting. He was racing 
against two things : one, he didn't 
know when or where the other ship 
would come through; and second, he 
and the others had to get around the 
nose of their ship in tune. 

He made it back with only seconds 
to spare. Just as he came to a panting halt, there was an unearthly roar, 
and a vast mass shot up through the 
floor of the tunnel. Hayward turned, 



104 



 



handed the battery to the pilot and 
yelled above the tumult: 

"Quickly, Get behind our ship, roll 
the wires out a bit more, and push 
the plunger down!" 

"But what of you, sir?" 

"Don't worry about me. I'll hold 
them off." 

Hayward gauged the distance and 
saw that there was perhaps a hundred 
feet from where the tunnel ended to 
where the nose of the second ship 
pointed its dull metal upward. The 
blast would kill every man between 
the two ships. 

"All of you," he amended his order. "Get behind our ship with the 
pilot. I'll give the signal." 

JLJYDOR WAS the first to step 
from the ship. Behind him came 
Drake. Seconds later a nundred men 
stood grouped about the nose of the 
ship. Mydor's face was devoid of expression. 

"A long chase," Mydor said. "But 
now it is ended, and we have arrived 
at our goal." 

"Not quite," Hayward said. 

"Oh, but we have. You see, your 
friend Drake, here, is going to act 
as my emissary when our invasion 
has begun. He made it plain the people of your planet are stupid, and 
your tale will be laughed at." 



"That's right, Hayward," Drake 
said. "You know how right I am. And 
something else. Our contract is ended, as of this moment." 

Hayward had noticed a surreptitious movement of the men toward 
him. Another moment and they would 
charge. 

"Now!" his voice rang out. And 
with a simultaneous lunge, he hurled 
himself forward and threw the sword 
with all his might at Drake. 

There was the sound and fury and 
flame of a huge explosion and the 
last thing Hayward saw was the body 
of Drake pierced through by the 
sword, fall to the ground. 

Then all sight vanished in blackness .... 

UTTE CAN'T die!" A soft voice 
sobbed. "He can't!" 

Luke Hayward opened his eyes and 
saw the most beautiful eyes in the 
world looking pleadingly into his own. 

"Die?" he repeated painfully. 
"Darling, I've just started to live!" 
He turned his glance away from hers 
and saw Murchison kneeling beside 
the girl. He was grinning broadly, 
and Hayward knew the adventure was 
ended. 

Except for love, and who feared 
that? 

THE END 