TERROR OUT OF ZANADU (Novalet— 10,000) by Robert Moore Williams ... 64 

BEHIND HIM, Richard Burton about him. His face was covered with 

heard the argument begin. He a heavy growth of whiskers, his 

sat down on an outcropping of clothes were ragged and dusty, and 

rock, a part of a small hill which rose he looked a little like a donjal, the 

out of the dry, dusty, seemingly never- leaping hyena of the Martian deserts, 
ending plain which the Martians with Red Malumby was short and squat, 

good reason call Alvadar, Death's He was built on the lines of a grizzly 

Place. He was determined to rest a bear and he had al! the fierce courage 

few minutes while Red Malumby and and terrible strenght of that animal. 
Jake Frederickson « settled their dif- Jacke Frederickson said, "Goddam 

ferences of opinion. it, Red, I just gotta have a drink." 

Jake Frederickson was tall and ''Have I had a drink since you had 

lean; there was something of the wolf one?" Red Malumby answered. 



65 



66 



 



"I ain't seen you take one," Frederickson said. "But you got the only 
canteen of water ill the bunch and for 
all I know — " At the expression on 
Malumby's face, Jake Frederickson 
hastily changed his mind about what 
he was going to say. "Sure, Red, I 
know you wouldn't double-cross me. 
I know it. If you say it, I know it." 
All irritation was gone from his voice, 
Instead of irritation, there were the 
whining notes of fear. 

"You wouldn't ever make a mistake 
about me double-crossing you, would 
you, Jake?" Red Maiumby said. 

At the tone of Malumby's voice, 
Frederickson began visibly to shake. 
His hands and his body trembled. 
His adam's-apple bounced up and 
down. The wolf in him instantly 
changed into a whining puppy. 

"N — no, Red," he stuttered. 

"Good," Malumby said. He laughed 
a little as he said it. Jake Frederickson took a deep breath and seemed 
to come alive again. 

By this time, Sam Carwold and the 
girl had come up. The girl's name was 
Nancy. So far as Burton knew, she 
had no other name. In her presence in 
this group, Burton had always sensed 
a mild enigma, He had always dismissed the enigma by assuming that 
she belonged to Red Malumby, just 
as the gun at his hip belonged to Red, 
the heavy pack on his back, the canteen swinging from his belt. Burton 
had never been quite satisfied that 
this conclusion completely fitted the 
facts of the case. Red Malumby acted as if he wanted her to belong to 
him, but she acted as if she didn't 
intend to have any of that. 

Why worry about the presence of 
a woman here when there is so much 
else at stake, Burton thought. He dismissed her from his mind and 
watched. Carwold was raising hell 
about the water too. 



"Damn you, Malumby, I tell you 
I gotta have a drink. We've all got 
to have one." 

"All right," Malumby said. "Since 
you asked for it you're going to get 
it." Slowly he removed the canteen 
from the webbed belt that he wore. 
Feverishly the two men watched him. 

"Goddamn, a drink at last!" Jake 
Frederickson muttered. 

"Oh man, am I thirsty?" Carwold 
echoed. 

The two men could hardly wait to 
get their hands on the canteen. Only 
the girl remained unmoved by the 
sight. 

"Pour me a drink — Red, oh God, 
■what are you doing?" Frederickson's 
shout turned into a roar of rage. 

JLJALUMBY HAD screwed the top 
from the canteen and had upended it. The water was gurgling from 
it and was dropping straight to the 
hungry sands of the desert. 

"Red, goddamn you!" Carwold 
screamed, trying to snatch the canteen from Malumby's hands. 

Malumby laughed and shoved him 
away. The water continued to gurgle 
from the canteen. The stream stopped. 
A few final drops ran out. Malumby, 
laughing again, threw it back over his 
shoulder. It struck the sand and 
rolled and stopped. 

In this place of death, water was 
life. Malumby knew it, Carwold knew 
it. Carwold thought that Malumby's 
act of pouring the water on the sand 
meant that he was going to die here. 
This just didn't happen to be true, 
but Carwold didn't know it. He made 
the one fatal mistake. He thought Red 
Malumby had double-crossed him. 
Fear rose in him, and he pulled his 
gun. 

If he had just laughed, if he had 
just been able to swear, nothing would 
have happened. But he could neither 
laugh nor swear. He reached for his 



TERROR OUT OF ZANADU 



67 



gun. 

Before Carwold had gotten the gun 
up, Malumby had put a slug through 
his chest. Carwold, sprawling backward on the sand as the explosive 
bullet struck him, writhed and died. 

The three men and woman stood 
staring. Jake Frederickson did not 
move a muscle. The girl looked soberly thoughtful. Burton just sat and 
watched. Malumby shook his head 
and growled. "The damned fool 
thought I was double-crossing him. I 
wasn't but he didn't know." Malumby looked at the muzzle of the gun 
as if the sight of it had somehow suddenly become a little repugnant to 
him, then shrugged. 

"He oughtn't to have been such a 
damned fool as to think I would double-cross hirn. Come on, let's move 
along. We got places to go." 

The girl looked silently at Malumby and came walking across the sand 
to Burton. 

"I am sorry you had to see this 
but that is the way people are some 
time," Burton said. 

"Yes, I know. They're just scared," 

"But you're not!" Burton said. 

She shrugged. "Why should I be 
afraid ? " 

"Oh, Lordy!" Burton said. Inside 
of him he was suddenly aware of a 
feverish wish that this girl might have 
been his daughter. He would have 
liked to have had a daughter like this, 
who was in utter and complete control of herself and of the moment, and 
of the participants in that moment. 
Sure, she had been terrified when Carwold had been killed. Who wouldn't 
be terrified at the sight of real death 
coming up so suddenly and so unexpectedly. But this girl had been able 
to control her terror. She had kept 
from screaming, from running, from 
finding relief in hysterics. In so doing, 
she had come up so tremendously in 
the eyes of Richard Burton that he 



was finding himself wishing she was 
his daughter. 

In this moment, she was stronger 
than Red Malumby, than Jake Frederickson, and maybe stronger than 
Richard Burton. 

But she was more of a mystery 
than ever. If she was in such perfect 
control of herself, what was she doing 
here in this desert? What tremendous 
force had brought her here to face 
death unflinchingly. 

She must be in love, Burton 
thought. But in love with whom? 

She looked at him, one single long 
searching glance, then went striding 
on past him. He had the dazed impression that she had evaluated him 
too, as she had evaluated such diverse 
factors as Red Malumby and Sam 
Carwold and sudden death and water 
spilled forever in the sand — and was 
moving resolutely on in pursuit of 
some goal that only she knew. 

pREDERICKSON and Malumby 
were coming along too. Frederickson was weeping now. He was protesting over and over his loyalty to Red 
Malumby, yelling that no matter what 
happened, Red could be sure that one 
man would never double-cross him 
— and that this man was Jake Frederickson. 

Malumby wasn't buying much of it. 
He wasn't even listening to Frederickson. He was watching the girl, he was 
following her. But Jake was apparently distracting him. Finally he said, 
"Shut your big mouth, Jake." 

Jake Frederickson shut up. 

Burton started to move forward. 
Malumby caught up with him, walked 
beside him. Malumby's eyes were on 
the girl. 

"She's kind of a puzzle, isn't she?" 
Burton said. 

"Puzzle? She's more than that. 
With a woman like that to stand be


68 



 



side him, a man could lick the world!" 

"So he could," Burton said. 

"Damn you, don't you go to getting ideas!" Malumby shot out. 
Then he apologized, a little. "Aw, 
Pop, you're too old for that, I guess." 

"Yeah, I guess so," Burton said. 

Neither of them mentioned the subject again. Nor did either of them 
mention the dead man or the empty 
canteen back there on the desert 
sands. Instead Malumby went to another subject. 

"Pop, you're sure we'll make Zanadu today?" 

T^-NADTJ was not a Martian name, 
^ it was a name given by humans 
to a place on Mars. It came, of course, 
from the lines: "In Xanadu did 
Kublai Khan, a stately pleasure dome 
decree, where Alph, the sacred river 
ran, through caverns measureless to 
man, down to a sunless sea." 

No one remembered the name of 
the man who had given the name of 
Zanadu to the place where they were 
going, but that man had certainly 
known his Coleridge. When he had 
called this place Zanadu, he had not 
had in mind any "stately pleasure 
dome" aspects of the area. There were 
no pleasure dome aspects in this Zanadu, or not as human understood 
pleasure. The man who had named 
this place Zanadu had had in mind 
"the caverns measureless to man," aspect of the place. 

Zanadu was exactly that— measureless to man. So measureless that only 
one man had ever gone there and had 
gotten away safely. Richard Burton, 
now on his way back to Zanadu. Scientific expeditions had asked permission to go there and had been refused, 
for reasons known only to the Martian mind, Thieves had gone there, intending to loot the place. One of the 
thieves had been found wandering in 
the desert, near death from hunger 
and from thirst. The skeletons of 



other intended thieves had been 
found. 

Thieves going to Zanadu always left 
very fast. No thief was ever actually 
able to explain why he had left so fast, 
but unquestionably two things were 
true: there was loot to be taken in 
Zanadu, and there was also something 
in Zanadu which sent marauders 
hurrying away. 

There was loot in plenty in this 
secluded Martian city. The place was 
unguarded as human understood the 
word. Or so it looked from the outside. 

Burton cast a glance at the small 
orb in the sky, the sun as seen from 
Mars. "We had better reach it today," 
he said. "Or tonight. Tomorrow, some 
of us will be crawling." 

"I figured that," Malumby said. 
"That's why I emptied the canteen. 
Sort of burning-our-bridges act. We 
got to get there, now." 

"I see," Burton said. The point 
was slightly obscure but valid just 
the same, or valid enough to have resulted in the death of Sam Carwold. 
"Well, I believe we'll be in bad 
enough shape when we get there to 
fool even Duma Shor." He felt a 
slight twinge of fear at the thought 
of fooling Duma Shor. That Martian 
was old and wise beyond the understanding of an Earthman. Fooling 
Duma Shor was like trying to fool 
a god; you took a mighty big chance 
in trying it. "We ought to make it all 
right." 

"Okay, I'm running on your orders," 
Malumby said. "They took you in 
when you were more dead than alive 
and you are the only human being 
they have ever taken in. If being 
more dead than alive when you get to 
Zanadu is what gets you in, then by 
God, that's exactly the way we are 
going to be when we get there. We 



TERROR OUT OF ZANADU 



69 



got to stay there long enough to get 
the job done." 

«W7E CAN do it," Burton said. 

His dry voice expressed his 
profound belief on this point. Spots 
were already beginning to appear before his eyes, like dancing ghosts at 
the edge of the world, and his legs 
were so heavy that he could hardly 
force them forward. 

"One thing I don't get?" Malumby 
said. 

"What?" 

"I don't get your place in this picture," Malumby said. "Me, I'm easy 
to figure. I'm a thief and I know it. 
Jake, he's a thief and he knows, but 
a weak one and he knows that too, 
so he will never double-cross me. 
Nancy, I can't figure at all. And I 
can't figure you." 

"What's so hard to figure about 
Nancy?" Burton asked. 

"I don't know. I've been trying 
to — well, hit it off with her. It was 
no go. But as soon as I whispered the 
words to her that I was coming here 
to loot this place, that I knew you 
and that you knew exactly how to 
get us in, then she began to play up 
to me. I kinda get the idea that what 
she really wanted was not me, but to 
come here. And that makes no sense 
at all. Because nobody in his right 
mind would want to come here!" 

"I see," Burton said. The girl had 
become more of a problem to him 
than ever. 

"But we were talking about you," 
Malumby continued. "And the fact 
that I can't figure you." 

"What's so hard about that?" 

"Your motive, your real honest-toGod motive," Malumby answered. 
"You ain't a thief, like me. You are, 
or you have been, a pretty big guy 
somewhere. No, don't shake your head 
at me, I wasn't born yesterday, I 
know an ex-big-shot when I see one. 



Yet you came once to this city of 
Zanadu when you were about dead — " 

"I told you I ha<S been a member 
of a scientific party and had gotten 
lost from it." Burton said stiffly. The 
reason he had for getting lost from 
that scientific party was something he 
had no intention of revealing to anyone, let alone to Malumby. 

"Yeah, you told me that, pal, but 
you never told me why you had gotten lost." 

"Why does anyone get lost?" Burton answered irritably. He felt panic 
begin to rise in him. This Red Malumby, even if he was a thief and a killer, was nobody's fool. He saw now 
that he had been making a grievous 
mistake about Red Malumby; he had 
been underestimating him. 

Red laughed. "We won't argue 
about it, Burton. We'll let it go the 
way it lays. That's only part of the 
stuff about you that I can't figure. 
The rest of it is: while you ain't a 
thief, yet you are guiding us here to 
Zanadu; you are showing us how to 
get into the city, how to get ourselves 
accepted there. When we get together 
the pile of stuff we want and the ship 
lands to take us off, and it'll land 
within twenty minutes after I get 
busy on the radio transmitter I got in 
this pack on my back— you will go 
away with us. At least you said you 
will — " He looked questioningly at 
Burton. 

"I'll go away with you," Burton 
said harshly. "I'll have to go. I 
couldn't stand staying there and facing Duma Shor, among other reasons. 
I'll also take my fair share of the 
loot." 

"Why do you want any loot?" 

"Why— well — " Burton stuttered 
over the words. "Why does anybody 
want money?" 

Malumby laughed again. "Okay, 



70 



 



we'll let it go the way you want it. 
You'll get your share; to me, it don't 
matter what you do with it." 

"What do you want your share 
for?" Burton questioned. 

"That's easy. I want it to cut a 
swath with. No, it ain't quite that 
simple either. With the right kind of 
money backing me, I figure I see a 
way to sort of become a big shot 
around Mars myself. That's why I 
want my share of the loot. But I 
still haven't heard why you want 
your shave. What's the cross you're 
bearing, Burton, that's so damned 
heavy that you may have to spend 
maybe half a million bucks to get 
somebody else to carry it for you." 

fVSX THING about this thief, he 
was shrewd. The question: How 
to answer him convincingly, how to 
lie to him? Burton thought about 
that, thought hastily and feverishly. 
He could see no way for him to think 
up a convincing answer on the spur 
of the moment. Even an extra moment's hesitation was in itself a kind 
of an answer. He didn't hesitate. 

"I've told you once, it's my business," he answered. 

Red Malumby laughed. "And that's 
exactly the right thing to say to me, 
sometimes. If you had tried to lie to 
to me I might have been tempted to 
leave two corpses back there in the 
desert. Two dead men wouldn't sit 
any heavier on my conscience than 
one. But you can tell me to go to hell 
—and I'll do it." The glance he threw 
at Burton was shrewd and appraising. "You and me can get along together, Burton. When we make our 
getaway from Zanadu, and you get 
your private business finished, look 
me up. We'll make a team that can 
go places." 

"What if I don't want to go your 
way?" Burton answered. 

"Oh, each of us will have to make 



his own decision on that angle. If 
you want to go with me after we get 
finished here, I'm ready." The man 
looked and sounded as if he meant 
every word he said. 

Burton was too confused and too 
shocked to think. If he had lied, Malumby might have killed him. The 
big thief was certainly capable of 
such an act. A shudder passed over 
Burton. It had been so very close 
and he had not known it. 

There was one thing wrong with 
death. It came up and looked yon 
right in the eye and you didn't recognize it. He thought, with desperate 
bitterness, that there ought to be 
some sort of supernatural law which 
required death to wear a label, a placard saying I AM DEATH. 

But if death wore a label, the game 
would be much too easy. That was 
the way a man learned. Or the way • 
a man died, if he made one mistake 
too many. 

Richard Burfon knew exactly and 
precisely the nature of the worst 
kind of a mistake a man could make. 
He had made one of them. 

The mistake was in coming here, to 
the "caverns measureless to man" 
city of Zanadu, where the life of a 
man was not worth the price of a puff 
of smoke in the wind. The mistake 
was forcing him to risk his life, it 
was forcing him to become a thief. 
Either in the end, or somewhere along 
the line, he was reasonably certain 
his mistake would kill him. 

But that was the chance he had 
to take. 

Within the next hour, he thought 
of one mistake they were making. At 
the thought of it sweat popped out 
on him. 

"Look," he told Malumby. "We 
can't go " straight into Zanadu. 
They would know we were coming 
there deliberately if we did that. No 
one who goes deliberately to Zanadu 



TERROR OUT OF ZANADU 



71 



ever stays there long except Martians, 
maybe. No human has ever done it. 
So we can't go straight there either." 
His pulse began to pound at the 
thought. 

"You oughta said that before I 
threw away the water," Malumby 
said, angrily. 

"But hell, I didn't think it was 
important." 

"It's the damned things that you 
don't think are important that turn 
out to be the most important of all," 
Malumby shouted. "Even if we are 
almost dead of thirst when we get 
there — well, surely they'll let us in." 

"They'll let us in all right, but we 
can't go straight there-." 

"The hell we can't. We can if we 
gotta." Jake Frederickson and the 
girl had stopped and were listening. 

"You went straight there!" Malumby continued. 

"What I did was wander in the 
desert, until I fell from weakness. 
Somebody found me and took me 
there. Death was what 1 was looking 
for, and death was what I thought I 
had found when I passed out. When 
I recovered consciousness, I discovered I had been carried into Zanadu. 
I had been near the place without 
realizing it when I passed out. They 
had either seen me in the desert and 
had sent for me, or some Martian 
had found me and taken me there. 
I got there, though I don't know exactly how." 

The anger slipped away from Malumby's face. "I see," he said. "And 
that means — " 

"It means we're going to have to 
make them come out and meet us. 
The only way we can do this is by 
playing dead." 

"Play on their sympathies, eh?" 
Malumby ruminated. "What if they 
don't come?" 

"Then we'll just stop playing 
dead," Burton said. 



"But—" 

"Yeah, I know. We'll be dead." 
"Hell on wheels!" Malumby gasped. 
"Are you scared to gamble with 
death?" 

"Hell, who hasn't been gambling 
with it all his life? I've always won 
that gamble somehow. I'm not too 
scared of it to take the chance again, 
except, brother, I know I don't like 
it. I've been too close to it at times 
ever to want another taste." 

"Well, you don't have any choice 
any more," Burton said. 

"Hell — " Malumby cast a hurried 
glance over his shoulder as if he was 
regretting a lost canteen left back 
there in the dry desert sands. 

"Don't be Lot's wife," Burton said. 

"What?" 

"She looked back. We can't" 
Fox a. moment, Red Malumby 
looked like he was going to explode. 
Then he began to laugh. The wild 
laughter had a strong tinge of hysteria. 

They went forward, toward Zanadu. 

^ANADU lay to the left. You 
looked along a backbone of barren rock that rose for miles from the 
desert, a dike or an npthrust of some 
kind, then you saw the trees begin, 
those wonderful Martian red wallawalla trees which distill their own 
moisture from air that has hardly 
any moisture in it, distill enough of it 
for themselves with some left over to 
dampen the ground around their 
roots, so that other vegetation cart 
grow. There was a forest of the trees, 
an oasis of them, thousands of them 
there where the rocky dike and the 
desert ended. In them was Zanadu. 

From this distance, seen across the 
shimmering heat waves of the desert 
in the- mid-morning sun, Zanadu 
looked like a picture of paradise. 
Earth Arabs, living in an arid land 



72 



 



of sun and wind and little rain, 
dreamed of heaven as an oasis. To 
those Arabs back on Earth, an oasis 
was life. 

On Mars, also, an oasis was life. 
Zanadu was an oasis. 
Four humans looked longingly at 
it. Looked at it as they looked at life 
itself, as being something utterly desirable, but also very, very far away. 
They looked at Zanadu from redrimmed eyes that no longer correctly 
reported what they saw, looked at it 
and tried to wet dust-dry lips with 
tongues that no longer had a trace of 
moisture left for them to use. 

They had sighted Zanadu the evening before. But they had not gone to 
it because they had been afraid. They 
had spent the night here in this desert, still refusing to go to Zanadu, 
trying to force some resident of Zanadu to come to them, to take pity on 
them in their misery. 

At mid-morning, no one from 
Zanadu had seemed even to see them, 
to note that they existed. 

On Mars, the utterly dry air sucks 
moisture from the human body as a 
strong hand squeezes water from a 
sponge. Humans, having evolved in 
the much damper atmosphere of earth, 
find that their bodies do not readily 
adapt to the dryness of the Red 
Planet, with the result that a few 
hours without water, a period of time 
that to the native Martian would be 
too inconsequential to notice, the human body becomes so badly dried out 
that death will certainly result in a 
few more hours unless moisture is obtained. 

The four humans were in the shadow of a rock, "the shadow of a great 
rock in a dry and desolate land," was 
just as true a picture on Mars as it 
was on Earth during the time Psalms 
were being written. 

Red Malumby for the hundredth 
time lifted a hand to shade his eyes 
and squinted across the sand toward 



Zanadu. "Still nobody In sight," he 
muttered. His voice was a hoarse rasp 
that had lost all resemblance to the 
tones of a human being. 

JAKE FREDERICKSON sat with 
his back against the rock, his eyes 
closed, a continuous mumble of words 
coming from his mouth. To Burton, 
it sounded very much as if Frederickson was trying to pray. Burton rather 
envied Jake this ability. It was an accomplishment he himself had lost. 

The girl, Nancy, sat very still and 
very stiff against the rock. She seemed 
actually to have become a part of the 
rock itself, immovable, fixed in position like the granite of the hills. 

"God, somebody's got to come," 
Malumby croaked. He glanced from 
red-rimmed eyes at Burton. "If you 
guessed wrong — " 

Burton did not spread his hands. 
He hardly had the strength for that. 
"Then I just guessed wrong," he said. 

"Damn you, if you did—" Hot anger showed in Malumby's eyes. 

"Are you trying to scare me, now?" 
Burton said. 

Malumby took his hand away from 
the pistol. Jake Frederickson stopped 
praying and rose creakingly to his 
feet. He stared along the rocky dike. 
As if he was just seeing them for the 
first time, he gasped. "Walla-walla 
trees, by God. Hey, Red, see them 
trees!" Excitement crept into his 
voice. 

"I've been seeing them, off an on, 
ever since sun-up," Malumby said. 

"But where them trees grow, there's 
water, Red. You know that; surely 
you know that." 

"I know it," Malumby said. 

"Water, Red, don't you understand? Water!" 

"Set down," Malumby said. 

"Set down, hell 1 f * Frederickson took 
one jerky step toward the trees he 
saw and the water he imagined. 

Malumby drew the gun. Malumby 



TERROR OUT OF ZANADU 



73 



might be bleary-eyed from tissue hunger but his reactions were still in good 
working order. His draw still had the 
same blinding speed. 

"Set down," he repeated tiredly, 
over the muzzle of the gun. 

Jake Frederickson literally collapsed. He clawed his way back to 
tlie rock and huddled against it, shivering and trembling. His eyes were 
closed but his lips moved again, in 
muttered prayer. 

"You really got the Indian sign on 
him," Burton observed. 

Malumby shrugged and slid the gun 
back into its holster. His manner said 
the whole matter was unimportant. 
His manner also said that he would 
have killed Frederickson and that this 
would have been unimportant too. 

The girl got slowly to her feet. 

"Hey, where are you going?" Malumby said. 

She pointed toward the walla-walla 
trees. "There," she said. "I'm going 
there." There was no defiance in her 
voice but the tone said she was stating a definite fact, that she was going 
there, and all hell wasn't going to 
stop her. 

She started walking off across the 
sand. She stumbled a little, caught 
herself, moved on again. Openmouthed, Malumby stared at her. He 
made no attempt to stop her. Seemingly he did not know what to do. 

It was Burton who got to his feet 
next. "Let's go, boys," he said, speaking from lips that could hardly form 
words. 

"By God, it's okay with me," Malumby croaked. "I'd just as soon die 
over there as over here. Come on, 
Jake." 

Stumbling, staggering, leaving behind them a crooked trail in the sand, 
the four went blindly to Zanadu. 
Alone of all of them, as if some deep 
inner drive forced her forward, the 



girl walked steadily. 

They were within a quarter of a 
mile of the trees when she collapsed. 

"We'll have to carry her," Malumby said. 

Burton, through glazed eyes looked 
toward the trees. Moving toward them 
from the outskirts of Zanadu, walking with a sureness that was full of 
meaning, were four blue-clad priests 
coming from the trees. 

"Help's coming," Burton muttered. 
He had one glimpse of them. Then 
the sand of the desert seemed to come 
up and strike him in the face. He 
knew vaguely that he fell, that he 
was fainting, knew also that voices 
muttered around him in the soft Martian language, that he was being 
lifted. Then he didn't know anything. 

TV[ CHARD BURTON awakened 
slowly. In his ears was the soft 
muted chiming of temple bells, the 
magic bells of Zanadu. Hearing them, 
he went back to the time when he 
had first heard them, when he had 
first come to Zanadu. He had heard 
them then as a sound from another 
world, gentle, peaceful, quietly soothing. They had been the most peaceful 
sound he had ever heard, that other 
time. 

Now they were not quite so peaceful. Now there was a discordant note 
in the ringing of the bells of Zanadu. 
He knew about them, the priests her? 
made them by some special process 
they had never revealed, and they 
were everywhere, in the trees, ringing 
as the trees moved when a wind blew 
in from the desert, in the simple 
houses between the trees. Some of 
them had been set to operate by mechanical means, others operated by 
some magnetic control that was another Martian secret. 

Like prayer wheels in Tibet, there 
were bells in Zanadu, 

Now, somehow, they seemed to 



74 



 



Richard Burton to be ringing a little out of tune, out of harmony with 
each other. A little tremor of alarm 
went through him. What was wrong 
■with the bells of Zanadu? 

He tried to detect the wrongness, 
to dissect himself and to discover 
what there was in him that might 
make the bells sound different. He 
could detect nothing. He decided he 
did not know and did not care, 
leached this decision before he opened 
his eyes. 

He saw instantly that he had been 
in this room before. They had brought 
him back to the same room to which 
they had taken him when he had 
come to Zanadu that other time. That 
other time! Then the bells of Zanadu 
had been a beautiful chiming ringing 
in his ears. 

He forced the thought of that other 
time out of his mind. Never think of 
that I Never. His outraged mind flung 
back the words at him. Never, never, 
never ! like a phonograph with the 
needle stuck in the same groove. 
"That's the only thing you've ever 
really been thinking about." He 
forced the stuck needle back down 
inside of him. 

On the opposite wall, directly in 
front of his eyes, was a picture mosaic. 
He had seen it too, that other time, 
but seeing it had not mattered. He 
had seen it through dazed eyes, that 
other time, as being something very 
beautiful, a scene on Mars, the red 
deserts and the blue mountains with 
the sun on the far horizon, the sun 
shining over a desert where cacti were 
in bloom and where a lone Martian 
camel with its single rider wound its 
way toward a city hidden by wallawalla trees, a city that looked remarkably like Zanadu. 

It was a beautiful mosaic painting. 
Years of patient effort had gone into 
this work. Looking at it as he awakened, Burton saw instantly that this 
picture mosaic was worth a fortune. 



Each tiny piece of the mosaic was 
actually a jewel. Each red cactus 
bloom was a ruby. The far-off sinking sun was a yellow sapphire. The 
frame that surrounded the mosaic was 
gold, two inches wide. 

That other time, he had not noticed the fact that this painting was 
worth a fortune. That fact had not 
mattered then. He noticed it now. 
And he instantly saw one other 
thing: that if he could take this 
mosaic away from Zanadu with him, 
he could sell it to a museum on 
Earth for the limit of that museum's 
resources. To steal this one mosaic 
would put him on easy street forever. 

And this one mosaic was as nothing compared to what was in Zanadu. 
A simple water pitcher was sitting 
on the table near him, a common thing 
on Mars or Earth, but the glaze on 
the pottery pitcher told him that this 
was a rare object indeed, and might 
bring as much as five thousand dollars on Earth. 

Where every object was so valuable, 
a thief could make few mistakes. 

Yes, he had it. That one mosaic 
would be enough for him. Now to get 
it and to get away. Now to find Red 
Malumby and Nancy and Jake Frederickson and — Burton jerked startled 
eyes around as the door of the room 
opened. 

r\TJMA SHOR stood there. The 
Martian was tall and lean almost to the point of emaciation. He 
wore sandals. A light yellow robe was 
thrown carelessly around his shoulders. He stood smiling in the doorway. "Ah, my friend — " That was as 
far as he got. Little by little the 
pleased smile began to go off his face. 

Burton watched with alarm as the 
smiie vanished. It went slowly, a 
smoothing out, one wrinkle at a time. 
Fear did not replace it but the expression that seemed to come into ex


TERROR OUT OF ZANADU 



75 



istence there was one of such utter 
sadness, such depths of understanding 
that Burton felt shock rise in him. 
What had happened to make Duma 
Shor change like this. Duma Shor had 
been his friend, that other time. 

He forced the shock out of his 
mind, forced his face into a smile. 

"Hello, Duma Shor, you old 
sphinx." He spoke in Martian. "It's 
good to see you again." 

Burton said the words and meant 
them and at the sound of them, something of the smile came back to the 
face of the Martian. 

Duma Shor came on into the room 
and sat down on a chair worth a 
king's ransom. Burton swung himself 
out of bed. He was fully clothed; 
they had not undressed him, but had 
taken off his shoes. He pulled them 
back on, hastily. Might need shoes at 
any moment, if the time came to run. 

"It is nice to hear you say that it is 
good to see me," the Martian said, 
politely. 

"Glad to be back here again," the 
human said. "But one thing puzzles 
me — the belis ? What has happened 
to the bells of Zanadu?" 

"You have noticed the change?" 
Duma Shor said. 

"Yes. What caused it?" 

Duma Shor sighed. "So many have 
asked that question and so few have 
lived to find the answer." 

"What? Do you mean there is 
something dangerous in the sound of 
the bells — that they are a warning 
of some kind?" 

"Yes, they are a warning. They 
are a warning that Death came into 
this room with me." Duma Shor's 
eyes were fixed on the eyes of the human as he spoke. "I know it. But do 
you know it?" 

"What — Why, that's nonsense. No 
one came into the room with you." 
Burton felt sweat rise on him. 

"Ah," Duma Shor said. 



AT THE sound something seemed 
to come out of nowhere and 
clutch Richard Burton around the 
throat. An invisible hand grabbed 
him. He could fee! fingers closing 
over his windpipe, clutching him, shutting off oxygen and air from his lungs, 
shutting off life itself if long continued. He snatched up both hands, 
jerked at— nothing. 

The grip of the clutching hand relaxed and was gone from his throat. 

He looked down, dazedly, to see 
what had grabbed him. 

Nothing was visible. "Wh — what 
was that?" he yelled. 

The Martian watched him from eyes 
that held no hint of sympathy or compassion. He did not answer. 

"Damn youl" Burton screamed. 
With the scream, the invisible clutching fingers seemed to grab again at 
his throat. He jerked at them, turned 
startled eyes downward. Nothing was 
there. Or nothing that he could see. 

"Is it as bad as that?" Duma Shor 
said quietly. 

"As bad as what? What are you 
talking about. What was that thing 
that grabbed me?" 

"We call it the Zanadu effect 1" 
Duma Shor answered. 

"Zanadu effect? What — I mean — " 
Burton wiped spurting sweat from his 
face. "What is it?" 

"It is death, eventually, if you do 
not conquer it or get rid of it?" 

"Death? But something grabbed 
me. I felt it. Around my throat." 

"Did you see it?" 

"No. I just felt it." 

"You will never see it. But it will 
always be here. Either conquer it or 
run?" 

"How does one conquer it? How 
does one run from it? I mean — " 

"Usually, we Martians conquer it 
by not being afraid of it. It doesn't 
choke nearly so badly if you are not 
afraid. As to running from it — " Duma 



76 



 



Shor swept up his hand to the open 
window and to the desert. "We will 
give you food and water. You can go 
away from here at your will." 
"But can I?" 

"Oh, sometimes the Zanadu effect 
follows you, for a little ways. But usually not very far. Then all you have 
to fear is the desert." 

The desert! That was enough for 
any human to fear. 

"But I was here before. Nothing attacked me then." At that thought, 
Burton felt a little courage creep up 
in him. 

"Yes, you were here before. But the 
conditions of your coming now must 
somehow be a little different." 

"D-different?" Were these Martians 
telepaths? Had they used telepathy to detect the secret that he and the 
others were hiding so well, their real 
purpose here? "But we were as good 
as dead men. We did not choose to 
come here. We were out of water. We 
had gotten lost. There was no other 
place for us to go. Surely you will not 
turn loose this invisible monster which 
you call the Zanadu effect upon helpless strangers." 

"Never," Duma Shor answered. 

"That's good." At the thought of 
safety, Burton felt much better, much 
relieved. 

"It turns itself loose," Duma Shor 
said. 

"You mean, you can't control it?" 
"Of course not." 

"But you live here with it and it 
never bothers you," the human protested. 

"Perhaps that is because we have 
learned to live with it," the Martian 
answered. 

"But what is it? I mean, if you 
can tell me." 

"What is it?" The Martian seemed 
perplexed. "How can I say for sure 
what it is when I have never seen it? 
It is something exists here in this 
grove of trees, exists perhaps as a 



hovering god." 

"W-what?" The quaver in Richard 
Burton's voice was very clear now, 
especially to him. What was this talk 
of an invisible, hovering god? He 
looked more closely at Duma Shor. 
The Martian was calm and poised 
and completely at ease. If there was 
an invisible hovering god here in Zanadu, Duma Shor was not afraid of 
it. 

Burton's mind was working faster 
now, as if driven by some desperate 
emergency into frantic speed. Suddenly he saw the answer. This talk by 
Duma Shor of an invisible hovering 
god was a subtle psychological trick. 
Duma Shor was trying to scare him. 
In some way or other the Martian 
had divined that their purpose here 
in.Zanadu was to loot the place. There 
were no defenses in Zanadu, no real 
ones. Yet the place was obviously defended by some means, otherwise the 
loot of ages accumulated here would 
already have been stolen by both Martians and humans. Burton knew his 
own kind. They would steal. 

Since they hadn't been able to steal 
from Zanadu, there must be some sort 
of protection around the place. What 
was this protection? What could it be 
except some subtle psychological device that the Martians knew about, 
that Duma Shor had used on him 
without his knowledge. 

"It's got to be that," Burton muttered. At the thought, he felt much 
better. Duma Shor stood regarding 
him thoughtfully. Now the faintest 
trace of a smile was visible on the 
Martian's face. He nodded, as if to 
himself. Behind him, the door opened. 
Malumby stood there. Red didn't 
look so good. 

Malumby's eyes were wild, his shirt 
was torn down the front, and he had 
a gun in his hand. The gun pointed 
toward Duma Shor. 



TERROR OUT OF ZANADU 



77 



(C'Y'OV— WHERE'S Jake Frederickson," Maluraby shouted. 
"I do not know," Duma Shor answered. 

"Damn you, don't lie to me! What 
have you done to him?" Red Malumhy 
made a savage thrusting motion with 
his gun. 

Duma Shor was utterly unconcerned. The bells of Zanadu gave out 
a wild clamor as if they sensed the 
imminence of death and Rich Burton felt a corresponding tremor pass 
over him. He knew Red Malumby. 
Red would just as soon pull the trigger of that gun as not. 

"I have done nothing with him," 
Duma Shor answered. "And if you 
will take my word for it, nobody else 
has done anything to him either." 

"Aaaah!" 

"He's telling the truth," Burton 
spoke quickly. "One thing I will say 
for these Martians here, they always 
tell the truth. What happened to 
Jake?" 

"I'm damned if I know. He's gone." 

"Gone where?" 

"I don't know that, either," 

"Could that be your friend?" Duma 
Shor answered, pointing through the 
window. 

Malumby started to look, then realized that the purpose of this question 
might be to trick him into turning his 
head. A snarl on his face, he jerked 
his eyes back to Duma Shor. "Damn 
you, you can't fool me with that kid 
stuff!" 

Duma Shor had not moved. 

That fact seemed to startle Malumby. If Duma Shor had been moving, 
trying to escape or trying to draw a 
weapon of any kind, Red Malumby 
would have killed him. But Duma 
Shor was not moving. There was no 
sign of threat on his face. Malumby 
stood staring at him. 

Burton did the looking out the window. 



Opening outward there, through an 
avenue between the walla-walla trees, 
the desert was visible. Like an ant in 
the far-off distance, an object was 
moving. It was Jake Frederickson, 
running straight into the open desert. 

"Great God, you've got to save 
him!" Burton gasped. "He'll die out 
there!" 

"Yes, I am sure he. will I" 

"But you've got to send somebody 
after him." 

"What for?" Duma Shor answered. 
"It is not possible to catch one who 
flees from Zanadu." ~* 

"But he'll die!" 

"Yes, but what of it?" For an instant, something very like pain 
crossed the face of Duma Shor. He 
staggered, just a little. Then he spread 
his hands, as if intoning a ritual, and 
began to speak. "All that has known 
life must know death. What does it 
matter if it comes sooner or later? 
It is coming. And no man of Mars 
can evade it." 

Yes, it was a ritual, a prayer of 
some kind. Duma Shor closed his eyes 
when he spoke and intoned the words 
as if he meant every one of them. He 
opened his eyes, spread his hands. 
"You see how simple it is." 

"As simple as mud," Malumby 
growled. "Hell, I know my number 
has gotta come up some time. The 
only question is: when?" He looked 
out the window at the disappearing 
figure of Jake Frederickson. "I 
oughta killed the poor dope when I 
had the chance." 

"It is his right to die when his 
time comes," Duma Shor answered. 
"It is not your right to determine that 
time for him." 

TS/JALUMBY'S grunt said he considered it his privilege to reserve this decision for himself. His 
eyes sought Burton. He jerked his 



7S 



 



head toward Duma Shor. "Can he understand English?" 

Dazedly, Burton shook his head. 
"No." He tried to think why the 
question had been asked
"Well, I got everything all fixed. 
I got a pile of stuff that's worth a 
fortune all gathered together. I've already put in a call for a ship and got 
back a report. The ship's on the way, 
Burton." Malumby's eyes glowed. 

"You are leaving?" Duma Shor 
spoke. 

"Hey, how did you know that?" 
Malumby exploded. He jerked startled eyes at Burton. "But you said he 
didn't understand English." 

"So far as I know, he doesn't," 
Burton answered. He was really 
startled now. In all the time he had 
spent once in Zanadu, he had never 
heard a word of English spoken. How 
had Duma Shor understood them? 
Was telepathy actually involved here? 

"If you are leaving will you permit 
me to give you a present?" the Martian spoke. Turning to the wall, he 
removed the priceless framed mosaic, 
handed it to Burton. "Will you take 
this, as a parting gift?" 

"But that's worth a fortune," the 
astonished Burton blurted out. 

"So I know," Duma Shor answered. 
"But anything worth stealing, is also 
worth giving away." 

Turning to the door, the Martian 
quietly exited. He left behind him two 
utterly astounded human beings. 

"Anything worth stealing — " 

Burton had seen only one thing as 
Duma Shor left, the faintest trace of 
a smile on the ivory clear face— and 
the faintest twitch, as of beginning 
pain. 

"He gave it to me," Burton whispered. "Gave it to me." 

Malumby's decision was instantly 
made. "You can have that. I've got a 
pile of stuff together already. We had 
better get out of her#, but fast." His 



decision made, he turned to the door. 

The girl was standing there. She 
had a gun in her hand. "You utter 
fools," she shouted. "I didn't come 
here looking for something to steal, 
I came here looking for a man." 

"A what?" Malumby gasped. 

"The man I love," the girl answered. Her eyes came up to Burton. 
"He happens to be your son." 

"My son!" Burton gasped. "But he 
isn't here. That's why I was trying to 
steal from this place, why I came 
here the first time. My son and I 
were on a scientific expedition. We 
fell out, quarrelled. He wandered off, 
angry at me. I tried to find him. I got 
lost, wound up here. After I got well, 
I began to look for him. The only 
story I could get was that some Martians had seen him in the desert too. 
They seemed to know something, but 
they demanded huge sums of money 
before they would tell me what they 
knew. So, if I needed money, I came 
here." 

"Your son happens to be here too," 
the girl answered steadily. "I had a 
letter from him, a letter that he sent 
by a native. He came here looking for 
you, trying to find you." Accusing 
tones sounded in her voice as she 
spoke. 

"I can't believe it, I don't believe 
it," Burton babbled. "How could he 
live here in Zanadu?" 

"The same way you could, by not 
caring whether you lived or died when 
you came here. You thought you got 
in here the first time because you 
were near death. That was only partly true. You got in because you no 
longer cared whether you lived or 
died. You thought you had lost your 
son. Nothing else mattered after that." 

She spoke with calm finality. 

"But— but— but— " 

"The only but Is that the ship is 



TERROR OUT OF ZANADU 



79 



not leaving here until I find Jack 
Burton," the girl answered, over the 
muzzle of the gun. 

"To hell with Jack Burtonl" Malumby exploded. He started toward the 
door. 

The girl faced him. "Red, I used 
you. I admit it. I cozened you into 
bringing me here because this was 
where I wanted to come too. But I 
am not leaving here without Jack 
Burton. Now if you want me to pull 
the trigger, just try to leave." 

She meant it, beyond the shadow 
of a doubt she meant it. 

"But—" 

TTHE DOOR was opening again. 

Duma Shor and another man 
were standing there. The man was 
short, with alert black eyes. His face 
was thin and it showed traces of recent suffering, as if some great illness 
had come over him and he was only 
now recovering from it. The girl took 
one look at him. And dropped her gun. 

"Jack, I've come for you. Jack, are 
you able to travel now?" 

"Sure tiling, Nancy," the young 
man answered. She was in his arms, 
crying and kissing, all at the same 
time. The young man's eyes came up 
to Burton. For a long moment the 
eyes of father and son met. Both 
looked startled, both looked as if 
they were seeing a dream come true. 

Both hands came out at the same 
instant. "Dad!" Jack Burton gasped. 

"Son!" Richard Burton spoke. 

Then there were three people crying in each other's arms, three people 
who had found each other, and had 
found happiness. 

Then Burton looked around toward 
Malumby. Red Malumby was on the 
floor. He was gasping and moaning, 
his eyes were protruding from his 
skull. 

"What—" 

"It is the attack of the god of Zan


adu," Duma Shor answered calmly 
enough. "You humans, I believe, call 
it conscience. Or so your son has told 
me, though there may be some difference between what you humans mean 
by conscience and what we Martians 
mean by it." 

"Conscience?" Burton gasped. "But 
that man is dying." 

"No, he isn't. This is the attack. He 
will recover from it and will begin to 
run. You see, the bells — " he paused, 
groping for words. 

"The bells of Zanadu are the trick 
to the whole thing," Jack Bui ton 
spoke quickly, to his father. "They 
are always a little out of tune. I don't 
pretend to know exactly how the Martians work it but they have worked 
out some system of sound waves and 
have set up this system in the form 
of bells. When the bells sound out of 
tune, it means simply that a man — or 
a Martian is being made— afraid. If 
he comes here with nothing to be 
afraid of, he can stay here. But if he 
comes here with theft or hatred in his 
mind, the bells drive him — well insane." 

"The rest of the answer is, leave a 
little of the being afraid always in 
you," Duma Shor spoke. "Just enough 
to twitch a single facial muscle. No 
more than that. Sweat all the rest of 
it out of you. Then you, or anyone 
else, can stay in Zanadu." He broke 
off. Through the trees a man was 
running. It was Jake Frederickson. 
He was calling, feverishly. "Red, 
Redl" 

"And one other little thing saves 
you from the bells of Zanadu," Duma 
Shor spoke. "That is loyalty, the willingness to come to help a friend. That 
man out there got scared and ran. 
Then he remembered he could not 
desert a friend. So he found the courage to come back." 

Jake Frederickson came snarling 
into the room. "I couldn't run off and 



80 



 



leave old Red." He grabbed the body 
of the unconscious Red Malumby in 
his arms. 

Out on the desert, with a vast roar 
of landing jets a ship was coming 
down. The ship that they had planned 
to have come for theml 

With Frederickson carrying the unconscious Red Malumby, with Richard Burton carrying the mosaic, they 
entered the ship. Duma Shor watched 
them leave. 

Across the sands the bells of Zanadu rang clearly and sweetly, but with 
just the slightest trace of discordance 
in them, just enough of a jarring note
to make a man happy to be alive. 
THE END 


