VANGUARD OF THE DOOMED [Novelet— 14,000) by Gerald Vance S 


VANGUARD of the DOOMED 



By Gerald Vance 

Was it chance alone that sent this meteor 
streaking earthward — or did an alien power 
direct it as an opening bid lor conquest? 




F18W CALLING 
WC33M...WF18W callWC33M. . .WF18W 
calling WC33M. ..." 

He repeated the call over and over 
into the microphone, a pleading note 
in his voice. But the loudspeaker remained silent. It had been silent all 
evening. He had repeated his call at 
half-hour intervals, but there had been 
no answer. 

There had been no answer tor a 
week. 

Frowning at the silent loudspeaker, 
Bradley Dunn lighted a cigarette. He 
thought back over the nightmare 
events of the past week, and he wondered if they formed the reason for 
her silence. He had learned little 
about the girl in the brief month of 
their short-wave radio acquaintance. 
He knew that her name was Faye 
Manning, that she seemed to be a 
radio ham like himself — but that was 
about all. 

Faye Manning. ... A voice from a 
short-wave radio loudspeaker. A voice 
belonging to a girl he had never seen. 

Yet that voice had formed a picture 
of her in his mind. It had told him 
things about her that she had never 



9 



10 



 



put into words. It was soft, cultured, 
breaking frequently into clear, silvery 
laughter. It held no affectation, no 
coyness or pretense. It contained 
warmth and sincerity, a quick intelligence that carried her easily over a 
wide range of knowledge. 

Her voice further told him that she 
was an attractive girl, even though it 
seemed unlikely that an attractive girl 
would indulge in a hobby as sedentary as short-wave radio. She had the 
youth and vitality, the self-confidence and zest for life that went with 
good looks. 

In three years of short-wave radio 
broadcasting Dunn had learned a lot 
about voices. But in those three years 
he had never encountered a voice quite 
like Faye Manning's. It held an inexplicable magnetism, a challenge. It 
was a voice that both revealed and 
concealed. For there was also an odd 
yet persistent quality of mystery 
about her. She avoided speaking of 
herself or her surroundings, somehow 
always managing to keep their conversations on an impersonal basis. 

There were times when she had 
seemed downright furtive — conspiratorial. Her radio contacts with him had 
been brief, hurried, made in a lowpitched tone as though she wished 
to avoid being overheard. 

HPHE LAST TIME he had spoken 
to her— almost exactly a week 
ago— there had been a restrained excitement in her words, a hidden tension. . .a hint of dread. 

"Something has happened, Brad," 
she had said. It was one of the few 
occasions she had used his first name, 
both having begun addressing each 
other by their first names only a short 
while before. "I can't explain, but it's 
very important. This set is going to 
see a lot of use, and so I may not be 
able to keep in touch with you for a 
while, Please try to understand." 



He had pressed for an explanation, 
trying desperately to prevent losing 
contact with her, even temporarily. 
His existence had come to center 
about his talks with her, and the 
thought of having them interrupted 
had been as unpleasant to face as 
that of giving up such a vitally necessary function as sight. 

"What is it, Faye?" he had asked, 
"Is there something I can do?" 

"I'm afraid not. In fact, I don't 
know if I'd want anything done. This 
thing that's happened. . .well, it's important, Brad. In a lot of ways. I'll 
have to sign off now. I'll get in touch 
with you later, if I can." 

"Faye, wait! Please. If there's 
something seriously wrong — " 

"I'm sorry, Brad," she had hurriedly broken in. "I really must sign off." 

He had not heard from her since. 

He crushed out the cigarette with 
sudden violence and ran a hand 
through his thick brown hair. Loneliness and discontent showed in the 
pucker between his hazel eyes, in the 
downward curve of his wide mouth. 
His features were mobile and sensitive, clashing with the rugged strength 
that lay in his wide cheekbones and 
the angularity of his jaw. 

He turned away from the radio set 
in a surge of restlessness, and abruptly he was aware of the silence that 
filled the bungalow, a silence that 
seemed to settle most heavily in this 
particular room. He ran a bitter gaze 
over the littered workbench near the 
short-wave apparatus, over the tool 
cabinet and the tier of laden shelves 
beside it, over the studio couch and 
the large, overflowing bookcase 
against the opposite wall. The familiarity of the room mocked him. It 
was a reminder, a symbol of the emptiness of his life. He was twenty-eight, 
an electronics engineer, considered a 
valuable employee by his superiors, 
but for him existence had not yet tak


VANGUARD OF THE DOOMED 



11 



en on real meaning. 

She had brought a needed brightness into his surroundings. Her soft 
voice and silvery laughter had been a 
bridge to a more vivid and interesting 
world. An immaterial bridge, yet one 
he might have crossed. He told himself again that he should have asked 
for her address, should have made an 
attempt to- see her. Certain things she 
had said indicated that she lived in 
the same city, or at least sufficiently 
close to it to do something about meeting her personally. 

But he had hesitated to suggest a 
meeting at too early a stage. It had 
seemed wiser to wait until they knew 
more of each other, until they knew 
what to expect when they met lace to 
face. ■ 

TJER CONTINUED silence weakened his resolution now. He was 
growing seriously worried. He had the 
vague yet persistent impression that 
she was in trouble of some sort, and 
he wanted to know if she was all 
right, if there was something he could 
possibly do. He had been unable to 
locate her in any of the ordinary directories, but she could be traced 
through her radio call letters. 

"Something has happened, 
Brad . . . . " Her words rose in his 
mind again, and he wondered if the 
planetoid that had entered the Solar 
System to menace Earth had anything 
to do with the crisis she faced. The 
Celestial Hammer, as the weirdly behaved object had come to be called, 
had brought fear and confusion into 
millions of lives, and its terrible threat 
may easily have brought disorder into 
Faye Manning's. Thousands of persons had already fled the city in the 
past week. She may have been one of 
them. 

But recalling something else she 
had said, he doubted that. "This set 
is going to see a lot of use. ..." The 



words held no suggestion of intended 
flight. They held instead a hint of 
mystery. What sort of use could she 
have meant, if not that for which an 
amateur broadcasting outfit was intended and for which it was licensed? 
And if she were using her set for the 
proper purpose, why wasn't it possible 
for her to keep in touch with him? 

Slumped in his chair, Dunn shook 
his head wearily. Mystery, questions, 
uncertainty, dread.... He'd had 
enough of that during the past several 
months. Everyone had had enough. 
First the war, with the Slav-Asian 
Powers threatening to engulf the 
world — if atomic weapons did not destroy it first. Then the strangely erratic planetoid that had wandered into 
Earth's path, an even greater threat 
since it was beyond human control. 
Dunn corrected himself. No, not beyond human control, if a madman 
named Everett Stonecrest was to be 
taken seriously. Stonecrest claimed to 
be able to direct the movements of the 
planetoid at will. It was he who had 
dubbed the object the Celestial Hammer. 

With an odd clarity, Dunn remembered a Bible quotation from the 
man's first broadcast: "Is not my 
word as a jire? saith the Lord; and 
like a hammer that breaketh the rock 
in pieces?" 

It had been a clever association of 
ideas — incredibly clever. Few utterances in history had caught more powerfully at human imagination, human 
beliefs. People were tired, of war, 
tired of the destruction, the brutality 
and fear that went with it. They had 
been seeking some hope, some reassurance... some Sign. In the Celestial 
Hammer it had finally appeared. And 
Everett Stonecrest had emerged as an 
oracle, a prophet. 

Dunn straightened with sudden impatience and glanced at his watch. 
The shadow of Everett Stonecrest's 



12 



 



much-publicized yet little-known figure touched only remotely at the 
fringes of his own life. All that mattered to him was a soft voice that had 
been inexplicably silent. 

T_JE TURNED back to the radio 
set and reached for the microphone. He'd make one last attempt to 
reach her this way. After that he'd 
have to try a more direct approach. 

"WF18W calling WC33M . . . 
WF18W calling WC33M. . .WF18W 
calling WC33M. ..." 

He lighted a cigarette and waited. 
The slow minutes passed, mockingly 
soundless. 

No answer. 

He sighed finally and crushed out 
the remains of the cigarette. He rose 
slowly to his feet. He stood looking 
down at the radio set for a brooding 
moment, then reached out to switch 
it off. 

"Hello, WF18W! This is WC33M. 
Am I coming through?" 

The familiar soft voice — but somehow changed. There was an unusual 
haste in it, a frantic urgency. 

"Fayel" he said. He dropped back 
into the chair, groped for the microphone. "Faye!" he said again. 
"I've been trying to get in touch with 
you all week." 

"I know, Brad," she returned swiftly. "I wasn't able to answer. Now 
please listen carefully. I have very 
little time, and what I'm going to say 
is important.... Brad, I have reason to believe that you're in real danger. It's because of your calls to me 
on the radio. Watch yourself, Brad. 
Don't trust strangers who approach 
you for any reason." 

The complete unexpectedness of the 
warning shocked him. He drew a slow 
breath and said through stiff lips, 
"What's going on at your end, Faye? 
I don't understand this." 



"It's my fault. I should have told 
you more about myself than I did. 
I've been a fool.... Brad, you've 
heard of Everett Stonecrest and the 
Celestial Hammer?" 

"Yes, but what — " 

"Please listen. Someone might come 
in at any moment, now. I work for 
Everett Stonecrest. I'm his secretary. 
This is his radio set I'm using." 

"Good Lord!" Dunn breathed. 

"I know what a surprise that must 
be," Faye went on. "It should give 
you an idea why I haven't been able 
to answer your calls. I knew about 
them, of course, but — I haven't 
enough time to explain the situation 
any further, Brad. What I really 
wanted to tell you — " Her voice ended on a gasp. 

There was a silence. Dunn stared at 
the loudspeaker, his brows drawn together over pinched eyes. 

"What is it, Faye?" he demanded 
tensely. "Are you all right?" 

It was a moment before her answer 
came. 

"Why, yes... yes, Brad. As I was 
saying, I'm sorry I haven't been able 
to answer your calls. I... I've been 
very busy." 

Again her voice had changed. The 
difference was unmistakable. Her 
words were flat, deliberate — evasive. 

Dunn sat numbly, conscious of a 
strange new atmosphere, almost as if 
an invisible menace peered at him 
out of nothingness. Was some other 
person listening in? Was Faye now 
under a... a restraint? He searched 
carefully for his next words. 

"Faye, this Celestial Hammer situation. . . I hope it doesn't change things 
too much for you. You're not planning 
to leave, or anything like that?" 

"No, I'll stay with Mr. Stonecrest 
as long as he wants me to." 

Her voice held a lilt of eagerness. 
He was on the right track. 



VANGUARD OF THE DOOMED 



13 



rVUNN GRIPPED the edge of the 
table on which the short-wave 
apparatus stood. His face held a tight, 
strained fixedness. 

He went on, "I've been wanting to 
see you, Faye. Couldn't you get away 
from your work for a while?" 

"I'm afraid not. I'm really very 
busy, Brad. I wouldn't be able to 
leave the house even for ten minutes. 
The situation may last indefinitely." 
She seemed to pause. "I won't be able 
to use this radio set again, so it 
would be best if you didn't try to 
call me again. I hope you'll write, 
though. You'll remember I'm at Mr, 
Stonecrest's Lake Grove house." Another pause. "I've already taken up 
too much valuable time, Brad. I'll 
have to sign off. Hope your worries 
about me are ended. 'Bye." 

"Yes," Dunn said. "Yes. I understand. Thanks for calling, Faye. I'll 
drop you a line as soon as I can. 
Don't work too hard — -and good luck." 

Silence closed down over the room 
once more. Dunn sat staring at the 
loudspeaker, still gripping the table 
edge. 

Faye Manning — and Everett Stonecrest. Everett Stonecrest — and the Celestial Hammer. The relationship 
stunned him. He would never have 
guessed that a relationship could possibly exist. Faye Manning was a 
voice belonging to a girl he had never 
seen, about whom he knew almost 
nothing. Everett Stonecrest was a 
mysterious figure, who in the past 
several days had assumed legendary 
proportions. He had prophesied a miracle — and the miracle had taken 
place. 

It was Stonecrest's radio set that 
Faye had been using. It was in Stonecrest's Lake Grove mansion that Faye 
was staying." 

Or was being kept by force. Dunn 
thought of the queer change in her 
voice, the clever way she had re


sponded to his cues, giving him information under the very nose of whoever it was that had evidently been 
listening. If he had interpreted that 
information correctly, Faye was In 
trouble of some bizarre sort. She was 
asking for help. That appeared to be 
what she had meant by saying she 
hoped he would write. 

He knew it would be useless to 
take those suspicions to the police. 
They would require more substantial 
evidence before they took any action 
against a man of Stonecrest's importance. Stonecrest was the man who in 
some miraculous, inexplicable way had 
saved a large part of the Earth from 
destruction, the man whose very word 
kept at bay a tremendous bludgeon 
in the sky. 

Dunn shook his head. If anything 
at all was going to be done to help 
Faye, he would have to do it. Alone. 
In the face of whatever danger it was 
she had warned him against. This 
danger, it seemed, had arisen because 
of his radio calls to her. It could become an immediate thing if he tried 
to reach her in person. But there were 
impulses that made a man willing to 
face danger. 

HPHE SUDDEN ringing of the doorbell made Dunn straighten tensely in his chair. The sound seemed to 
have come in answer to his thoughts. 
Was this the threat of which Faye 
had warned him? It was too late in the 
evening for a visit by anyone he 
knew. 

He rose slowly to his feet, listening 
to the doorbell ring again. He looked 
at the radio, hesitated, his mind racing. Then his lips flattened against his 
teeth, and he left the room, hurrying 
through the dimly lighted interior of 
the bungalow. He lived alone, having 
kept up the house after the last of his 
parents had gone. The bungalow had 
advantages an apartment lacked, pro


14 



 



viding the space he needed for tools, 
experiments and hobbies. 

In his bedroom Dunn reached under 
the night table beside the bed, where, 
he kept hidden a .45 Army automatic 
in a spring clip holder. He went to 
the front door, flicked on the porch 
light and peered through the door's 
small glass window. 

There was no one on the porch. 
The walk that led to the street was 
empty of life. 

A messenger, Dunn thought abruptly. Perhaps Faye hadn't been certain 
of reaching him by radio and had sent 
a telegram, or a special delivery letter. 
Deciding from the dark front windows 
that nobody was at home, the messenger had just left. 

Dunn hastily unlocked the door and 
started down the steps toward the 
sidewalk. If he hurried, he could catch 
the messenger before — 

The sudden scrape and rustle of 
motion came as he was leaving the 
steps. Senses flaring in alarm, he 
whirled. In the split-second before 
the blow fell, he saw the looming 
dark shape of the man who had been 
hiding in the shadows at the side of 
the porch. He saw the -.upraised arm, 
saw the glinting object gripped in the 
hand. 

Then— a burst of light and pain and 
a rushing descent into darkness. . . . 

YU7HEN DUNN regained conscious■ ness in the shadows at the side 
of the house, where his attacker evidently had dragged him, he found that 
the porch light had been turned off 
and the door closed. Gingerly touching the blood-encrusted bruise on his 
head, he went heavily up the steps 
and let himself in with his key. In 
the bathroom he ran cold water over 
his face and scalp and sent his foggy 
thoughts back over what had happened. 

The attack didn't seem to make 



sense. Someone had gone through a 
lot of trouble just to hit him over the 
head. If this was the peril Faye had 
mentioned, then those behind it appeared to be laying down on the job. 

It was a short time later that he 
thought of the radio set, which he 
now recalled had been left turned on. 
He went to switch it off — and halted 
in angry dismay as he came in sight 
of the table on which it stood. 

Someone had taken a hammer from 
the tool cabinet, had very thoroughly 
and deliberately beaten the set into 
complete ruin. 

CHAPTER II 

T AKE GROVE was an exclusive residential suburb within less than 
an hour's drive of the city. Dunn 
reached it in the early afternoon, driving his coupe. 

He stopped at a service station on 
the edge of the downtown district. 
While the gas tank was being filled, 
he left the car to stretch his legs. He 
noticed the station attendant covertly 
studying him as the latter replaced 
the tank cap. The attendant was a 
lean , shrewd-faced man , around 
Dunn's own age. His eyes might have 
been curious, but they were friendly. 
They seemed to invite the question 
Dunn had been planning to ask. 

"I'm looking for the place where 
Everett Stonecrest lives," Dunn said, 
as he paid for the gas. "Can you tell 
me how to reach it from here?" 

The attendant's interest sharpened. 
"Sure. The house is easy to find." He 
deftly sketched directions. "You 
know Stonecrest?" he asked finally. 

"I've never met him, but I'm hoping to." 

"We'll, you're in for plenty of competition." 

Dunn was faintly startled "How do 
you mean?" 

"All kinds of people have been 



VANGUARD OF THE DOOMED 



15 



passing through town, on their way to 
see this Stonccrest guy," the attendant 
said. "There's been loads of them every day, mostly coming in by train 
and bus. Newspaper reporters, scientists, religious organizations, and just 
plain nosey Parkers. There's a regular mob in front of Stonecrest's place, 
from what I hear. Police had to be 
sent out to keep order." 

The attendant paused, shaking his 
head. "Beats me, the way this Stonecrest got so popular all of a sudden. 
Everybody talking about him, crowds 
of people trying to get in to see him, 
radio and newspapers full of stuff 
about him and that hunk of rock in 
the sky he calls the Celestial Hammer. 
You'd hardly know there was a war 
going on any more. But a week ago 
you wouldn't know Stonecrest was 
alive. Nobody knew anything about 
him— and as far as that goes, they 
still don't. Take me. I've lived here a 
long time, and Stonecrest's lived here 
even longer than that, but I don't 
think I've ever heard his name 
mentioned before that Celestial Hammer pitch of his. I don't know anybody in town who's ever seen him — 
and I know most of the people in 
town, too." 

Dunn nodded his understanding. He 
had spent the morning looking up information on Stonecrest, and the results had been disappointingly meager. 

Among the few facts he had gleaned 
were that Stonecrest was wealthy, 
past middle age, and lived alone with 
a handful of servants. He seemed to 
have no living relatives, no immediate 
friends. He belonged to no clubs or 
organizations, never attended social 
functions of any kind. He was rumored to have a strong interest in 
science and to maintain a laboratory 
in his home. There were numerous 
blank spots in Stonecrest's life that 
apparently were explained by exploration trips to remote and little-known 



regions of the earth. 

TTHE ATTENDANT went on, 
"Wish I knew what to make of 
this Celestial Hammer deal Stonecrest is putting over. Most of the 
people I've talked to really think he 
can control the thing. They think he's 
a messiah, like they say in the newspapers, that he was given a heavenly 
power to keep the world from being 
wiped out by atomic bombs. But me, 
I don't know. Scientists say the Celestial Hammer's a planetoid, something like the moon, only a lot smaller, and made out of common, ordinary 
rock, just like we got here on Earth. 
Sure, there's been talk about the thing 
being too smooth and round to be an 
ordinary planetoid, but that doesn't 
get away from the fact it's made out 
of rock. How can anybody control 
a rock? Especially a rock as big as 
they say the planetoid is?" 

"Stonecrest did it," Dunn returned. 
"Not that I'm plugging for him. But 
Stonecrest said the planetoid wouldn't 
hit Earth — and it didn't. That was 
after most scientists said there was 
no hope that the Earth would escape 
getting hit. The only question was 
where." 

"I know," the attendant said, shrugging. "It was luck, that's all. One of 
those things called a coincidence. 
Stonecrest took a gamble, with all 
the odds against him— and he just 
happened to be right. That doesn't 
mean he's been chosen by God, like 
a lot of people claim." 

"I hope so," Dunn said grimly. "If 
he actually can control the planetoid 
...well, that's too much power for 
any man to have." He climbed back 
into the coupe. 

As though on a sudden impulse, the 
attendant leaned detainingly in the 
window opening. "Look. You were in 
the last war, weren't you?" 

"Three years/' Dunn said, "Euro


16 



 



pean theatre." 

"I . was in Europe myself, and I 
usually know an ex-G. I. when I see 
one. It's something about the way they 
look and talk. And any time I can 
help an ex-G.I. — " 

"Anyhow, if you really got to see 
Stonecrest, I can give you a tip. I 
learned a few things about his place 
lately. There's a side road that leads 
to a service drive at the back of the 
estate. It isn't hard to find. You just 
have to know where to turn off the 
highway." 

The attendant took a pencil and 
a business card from one of the pockets of his uniform shirt. He sketched 
rapidly on the back of the card, explaining as he did so. 

"Here," he said at last. "You'U 
have a better chance of getting in that 
way than at the front. You'd need a 
tank to get through the mob out there. 
The rest is up to you. Good hick. 
And by the way, my name's Jerry 
Camp." 

Dunn gave his own name and extended his hand. "Thanks, Jerry. I'll 
let you know how I make out." 

T_TE STARTED the coupe and continued along the highway that 
led through Lake Grove. Watching 
for the landmarks Camp, had described, he presently found the side 
road that would take him to the rear 
of the Stonecrest estate." 

He did not turn into it at once. A 
considerable distance down the highway he saw signs of a crowd. Long 
lines of cars were parked on both 
sides of the highway, and numerous 
groups of people were visible around 
them. Even at that, Dunn knew he 
was seeing only part of the crowd. 
From what Camp had told him of 
the locality, it was clear that the 
throng overflowed the road that ran 
past the front of the Stonecrest mansion. This road lay parallel to the one 



at whose mouth Dunn had halted. 

Dunn put the coupe back into motion, swinging into the gravel-paved 
side road. His encounter with Jerry 
Camp had been a stroke of luck. He 
hadn't guessed that a crowd would be 
among the obstacles he faced in attempting to learn what had happened 
to Faye Manning. He would have 
been lost in the throng as completely 
as a drop of water in a lake. 

His sense of foreboding grew. Sight 
of the crowd had given him perspective on the incredible situation in 
which — equally incredible — he had become involved. The whole thing had 
seemed unreal before, unreal and distant, like a drama taking place on 
another world. The Celestial Hammer 
had seemed a fantastic, if not wholly 
imaginary, threat. And Stonecrest 
himself had been little more than a 
vague shadow behind the sensations 
of the printed page. 

Even the attack of the previous 
night had seemed an unrelated happening. An attack, Dunn realized, 
that had been made principally to destroy his short-wave broadcasting 
equipment. The evident motive had 
been to silence his calls to Faye. For 
those calls could prove dangerous, if 
authorities were led to investigate the 
reason why they were going unanswered. 

The situation was no longer unreal, 
no longer distant. He was caught up 
in it, being swept along by its living current. 

The crowd had given him a fresh 
view of something else — the vast importance of the Celestial Hammer in 
human affairs and the sinister power 
latent in Stonecrest's apparent control of it. The crowd, Dunn realized, 
had not gathered to mock or to show 
disbelief. It had gathered to seek guidance — to be led. And History showed 
repeatedly that it was upon the backs 
of their sycophantic followers that 



VANGUARD OF THE DOOMED 



17 



men with even less impressive claims 
to leadership had climbed to dominance. 

A terrible weapon in itself, the 
Celestial Hammer was even more potent when regarded as an answer to 
human hopes and beliefs. It was an 
embodiment of might greater than any 
man had ever known. A strange rolej 
Ehinn thought, for an object which 
in the beginning had been considered 
a mere tramp from space, a harmless 
wanderer expected to do no more than 
pass Earth's back fence on its return 
to obscurity. 

ASTRONOMERS had discovered 
the planetoid several months before. The news of its arrival had diverted little attention from the progress of the war with the Slav-Asian 
Powers, a war which at the time had 
produced new reverses for the Western Allies. Calculations based on a 
study of its motion through the Solar 
System had indicated that it would 
pass Earth by a comfortably safe 
.margin. The object itself had not been 
regarded as large enough to cause 
serious disturbances on Earth's surface while in passage. 

The planetoid was described as being approximately four-hundred miles 
in diameter, perfectly spherical in 
shape, with a smooth rock surface of 
high albedo. Its unusual roundness and 
smoothness had been considered puzzling at the very start. There were 
theories that it was of artificial rather 
than natural origin. One even went 
so far as to suggest that the planetoid 
was a space ship, its hollow interior 
containing passengers in a state of 
suspended animation. 

Then, as though to discredit the astronomers who had predicted with 
cold mathematical certainty that it 
would do otherwise, the planetoid 
changed course. Incredibly, inexplicably, it swung directly toward Earth. 



The phenomenon was in utter defiance 
of all laws governing the motions of 
celestial bodies. Science was unable to 
account for it. Some powerful force 
obviously had acted upon the tremendous mass of the planetoid to cause 
its change in direction, but the identity of this force remained unknown. 

The space ship faction among the 
planetoid theorists was briefly triumphant. The shift proved, so they insisted, that the planetoid contained 
intelligent passengers. Earth was about 
to be visited by members of an alien 
race. 

Panic swept Earth's millions as a 
collision with the planetoid now 
seemed inevitable. Scientists pointed 
out that the object was too small to 
cause world-wide destruction. Earth 
might reel slightly under the blow, 
but would continue on its way more 
or less intact. However, if the planetoid struck a thickly inhabited part 
of a continent, such as the Eastern 
United States, devastation would result for hundreds of miles around the 
point of impact. The scene would be 
ravaged by fire and molten rock. 
There would be terrific storms and 
earthquakes, or, depending on the region, volcanic eruptions and vast tidal waves. The area immediately under the planetoid— an area some fourhundred miles in diameter— would be 
ground into complete oblivion. 

The all-important question was, 
where would the planetoid strike? 

Closer, the huge projectile drew— 
ever closer. It became clearly visible 
in the sky, a second moon. And with 
its approach a paralysis of fear gripped 
Earth. The bitter struggle between 
the Western Allies and the SlavAsian Powers slowed to a stop. Of 
what use to seek victory, when in all 
likelihood only extinction might reward the victor? Frightened mobs 
fled great cities everywhere. Other 
mobs abandoned themselves to alco


IS 



 



holic or religious frenzy. 

It was upon this chaotic stage setting that Everett Stonecrest had 
entered to make his epic declaration. 

Careful preparations evidently had 
been made in advance. At the cost 
of what was reported to be a small 
fortune, Stonecrest had negotiated 
with two major radio networks to 
have his broadcast relayed on a nation-wide hook-up from his home in 
Lake Grove. This was the first hint 
given that Stonecrest possessed transmitting equipment of his own. Subsequently arrangements were made 
between the net-works and certain 
eager sponsors whereby any and all 
of Stonecrest's future broadcasts 
would be relayed without expense on 
his part. 

Framed in solemn Biblical terms, 
the announcement had been short. 
Stonecrest claimed to have been given 
the power to save the Earth, or important parts of it, from destruction. 
He would prove this, he said, by halting the planetoid— which he named 
the Celestial Hammer—in its tracks. 
The proof would appear in a matter 
of hours. 

And before the ensuing storm of 
skepticism and derision had time to 
reach its full proportions, Stonecrest's 
proof had made its appearance. The 
Celestial Hammer, which had been 
plunging toward Earth beyond the 
power of any mere words to halt, again 
changed course. It had swung into a 
stable orbit— where it now remained. 

And as if to top the absolutely untoppable, Dunn thought, he himself 
was now speeding toward what was in 
effect Stonecrest's back door. What 
sort of a welcome would he receive? 

A soft voice had brought him this 
far. There was still a long way to 
go
TJEERING down the road, he saw 
a large sprawling house of gray 



stone taking shape through intervening trees. And parked at one side of 
the road, in line with the house, were 
several cars. A group of men were 
visible nearby. It appeared that others 
also had thought of Stonecrest's back 
door. 

Dunn slowed the coupe. He thumbed 
open the glove compartment and lifted out his .45 automatic. The weapon 
had not been taken from him by his 
assailant of the previous night, perhaps having been overlooked in the 
darkness. He shoved the gun into a 
hip pocket. 

He covered the remaining distance 
seated quietly behind the wheel. He 
felt the eyes of the group on him, 
searching and curious, as he added 
the coupe to the queue of cars and 
climbed out. An argument of some 
sort seemed to have been in progress, 
but now there was momentary silence. 

Two of the watching men stood 
with their backs to a gate in a newlooking woven steel fence topped with 
barbed wire. They wore outdoor-type 
clothing, jackets and khaki sport hats, 
in contrast to the others, who wore 
business suits. Both were large, heavy 
men with hard, muscular features, a 
similarity in spirit rather ^han one 
of actual relationship. They had the 
look of men who guard the doors of 
bookie establishments. This was no 
bookie parlor, but Dunn knew they 
were on guard here. 

Beyond the fence were spacious, 
green-carpeted grounds, rolling 
smoothly to break in a wave of carefully-kept shrubbery at the base of 
the gray stone house Dunn had already seen. A number of smaller 
buildings, among them a garage and a 
greenhouse, stood at a respectful distance from the main structure. The 
scene had the aloofness and detachment of a scene on a picture postcard. 

"Another reporter, huh?" one of 



VANGUARD OF THE DOOMED 



19 



the hard-featured men said. He 
glanced sidewise at his companion 
and grinned without mirth. "The 
way these guys keep popping up, eh, 
Harry ? " 

"You said it," Harry returned. He 
shook his head grimly at Dunn. "No 
luck, Mac. Nice idea you and the rest 
of these boys had, but nobody gets 
in this way. I been trying to sell them 
the fact. They won't buy." 

"It isn't reasonable," one of the reporters complained. "Stonecrest is the 
most important guy in the world today. He's news. People want to know 
what he thinks, what he's going to do. 
We can give him free publicity. But 
what do we get here? The Fort Knox 
routine, that's what we get." 

Harry shrugged. "Me and Vic got 
our orders. Mr. Stonecrest's got all 
the publicity he can handle, I figure." 

A plumpish man with a pencil 
tucked behind his ear turned questioningly to Dunn. "Haven't seen you 
around before. What paper you with?" 

■'I'm not a reporter," TJunn said. 

The other seemed disconcerted. "Oh. 
Well, I suppose you want to see 
Stonecrest, too." 

"Everybody wants to see Stonecrest," another reporter put in sour
ly
Dunn shook his head. "I don't." 

T->HE GROUP stared at him with 
fresh interest. "That's a new one 
on me!" Harry exclaimed. "What're 
you after, Mac?" 

"I want to see a girl who's staying here," Dunn said. "Faye Manning." 

Harry and Vic exchanged swift 
glances. The expressions of both underwent an odd change, became 
guarded. 

Harry said slowly, "Me and Vic got 
orders to let nobody in. And nobody 
gets in unless they're expected at the 



house and we get told about it. We 
didn't get told anything about you." 

"I think you will — now," Dunn returned. "Tell Mr. Stonecrest I want 
to see Faye Manning. Tell him I'm 
worried about her health, that it's 
very important I see her at once." 

Scenting news where none had 
seemed forthcoming, the reporters 
crowded about Dunn with eager 
questions. 

"Who's this Faye Manning. She related to Stonecrest?" 

"What do you mean you're worried about her health?" 

"You engaged to the girl?" 

The two guards, Harry and Vic, 
watched the reporters with troubled 
eyes. Abruptly, with a gesture almost 
of pleading, Harry swung back to 
Dunn. 

"Look, Mac. We get our orders 
from the house. You call up there and 
tell them what you want. Mr. Stonecrest says to pass you in, then we 
pass you in. Okay?" 

Dunn shook his head. "It would 
take too long to get him on the 
phone — if I could get him, to start 
with. I've got to see Miss Manning 
as soon as possible. Tell Mr. Stonecrest that. Tell him if I can't talk to 
her, I'll talk to these reporters." 

Scowling at Dunn, Harry chewed 
at his lip and ran a palm along the 
side of his leg. A dim fury seemed to 
struggle in his eyes. "All right," he 
said finally. "All right, Mac." He 
whirled to the gate, fumbled a key 
into the lock and swung one of the 
two gate sections open. Then he 
glanced back"" at the avid faces of the 
reporters. "Come on," he said to 
Dunn. "You go with me. If Mr. 
Stonecrest says to give you the heaveho, I'll have plenty of room to do it 
in." 

He stood with angry watchfulness 
in the gate opening, allowing Dunn 
barely enough room to brush past. 



20 



 



Then he pushed the gale shut and 
swiftly set off down a gravel driveway that ran past the greenhouse and 
the garage beyond it. Dunn followed, 
lengthening his strides to keep up. 

Abreast of the garage, Harry darted a look back and then turned sharply toward the concrete strip that ran 
along the front of the wide structure. 
He came to a sudden stop as Dunn, 
puzzled by the maneuver, turned after 
him. The garage was set back a few 
yards from the driveway. On one side 
the greenhouse cut off the view of 
those at the gate, and on the other 
a building beyond the garage partly 
blocked off the main house. No other 
persons were present. This part of 
the estate was screened and private, 
and awareness of that fact brought 
a cold alertness to Dunn. 

Harry's hand came up from behind 
his back, holding a snub-nosed revolver. His lips were thinned against his 
teeth. 

"You got a rod in your kick, Mac," 
he said in a low, flat voice. "I felt 
it when you went past me, at the gate." 

CHAPTER III 

TXTJNN stood utterly motionlesSj 
feeling a queer inner sinking. 
Harry gestured with the revolver. 

"Get the rod out, Mac. Let it drop. 
And no tricks, if you don't want a 
hole in the head." 

"You wouldn't shoot," Dunn said. 
"Not with the reporters, back there." 

"You think I wouldn't, Mac? I 
could tell the newsies you were a nut, 
gunning for Stonecrest." 

"That wouldn't explain why I wanted to see Faye Manning." 

Harry's eyes seemed to retreat in 
baffled thought. Then his face became 
bleakly set. "I can still fade you, 
Mac," he said softly. 

As he spoke he moved. He lunged 
at Dunn. The revolver rose club-like 



in his hand, swept viciously down. 

Dunn had been poised for action, 
muscles bunched and quivering, like 
a runner awaiting the starting gun. He 
moved explosively. He ducked under 
the blow, swung his body directly into 
Harry's path. The other's momentum 
sent both men sprawling to the concrete strip. 

Dunn heaved and twisted free. As 
he came erect he saw Harry, on hands 
and knees, reaching for the fallen 
revolver. He lashed out with a foot, 
sent the gun skittering across the concrete and into the grass beyond. 

Snarling, Harry shot to his feet and 
drove in at Dunn with a barrage of 
wide-swinging punches. A fist glanced 
off the side of his head, brought a 
ringing giddiness. Another blow caught 
him solidly in the chest, drove the 
wind out of him and sent him staggering back against the front of the 
garage. 

Harry closed in, eager to finish off 
his victim. He was a big man, heavyfleshed, whose muscular face showed 
the scars of past encounters. Dunn 
was the taller of the two, but younger 
and lighter. Harry evidently felt that 
his weight and experience gave him 
an overwhelming advantage. He 
pressed that advantage with reckless 
confidence. 

Dunn felt the garage against his 
back as Harry's bulk loomed up before him. Desperate awareness of his 
danger cleared his head. Bracing himself, he kicked out with his foot. It 
was no time for sporting ethics. Crippling brutality was Harry's own clearly evident purpose. 

Harry gasped and bent almost double, pain wiping the eagerness from 
his heavy features. Dunn pushed 
away from the garage, swung his fist 
in a chopping blow to the side of 
Harry's face. He followed through 
with an uppercut that ba!f straightened the man, and then, as Harry 



VANGUARD OF THE DOOMED 



21 



seemed momentarily to hang in the 
air, knees sagging and features blank, 
Dunn threw his Sunday punch. Harry 
went down like a bag of wet sand, 
lay without moving. 

ry'-W" GLANCED around quickly, 
breathing hard. There were no 
figures in sight, no sounds of alarm. 
The swift and almost silent struggle 
had escaped attention. But Dunn knew 
someone might appear on the scene 
at any moment. He had to act swiftly 
if he were to reach the house without 
further interference. 

He caught Harry under the armpits, dragged him to the greenhouse 
side of the garage, and from there 
around to the back. Harry would 
thus remain out of sight and out of 
circulation until he awoke. 

Dunn ran a handkerchief over his 
face and brushed at his clothes. Except for a few bruises on cheek and 
jaw and some skinned and bleeding 
knuckles, he had come through the 
fight in good shape. His appearance 
Was only slightly less presentable than 
it had been. That was important to 
him where Faye Manning was concerned. 

Making certain that no one had as 
yet appeared, he returned to the front 
of the garage. He retrieved his hat 
from where it had fallen, slapped at 
his pocket to see if the automatic was 
still in place, then set off toward the 
main house. He avoided the driveway, walking on the grass well to one 
side and keeping the greenhouse between himself and the men at the 
rear gate. 

He passed the remaining smaller 
buildings and strode along the side 
of the residence structure. There was 
a porte cochere entrance here, with 
stone steps leading up to a brassbound oak door set between long, narrow leaded glass windows. Beyond the 
porte cochere the driveway swept in 



a gentle curve across a broad expanse 
of lawn and ended at a double gate 
in the tall iron fence that enclosed 
the front portion of the grounds. Several men stood in a group just within 
the gate— more guards, apparently. 

On the other side of the fence was 
a spectacle that touched Dunn with 
awe, even though he had been expecting it from the sounds that had 
reached him. A huge crowd stood peering in at the house, the buzz and 
murmur of voices filling the air like 
the growl of distant thunder. In the 
road beyond, all but choking off traffic, were long ranks of parked cars. 
Horns shrilled querulously as a thin 
stream of vehicles crept along the 
narrow lane that remained. 

Abruptly his wonder sharpened. If 
something wrong were going on at 
the mansion, it was going on in the 
very presence of this crowd. It suggested an incredible audacity— too 
incredible, perhaps, to be real. Briefly he considered the dismaying likelihood that he had misunderstood 
Faye and was making a fool of himself in his melodramatic attempt to 
rescue her. 

But her warning of his danger had 
been definite enough. A warning that 
almost immediately had been climaxed 
by the attack on him, the destruction 
of his radio set. And there had been 
Harry's unmistakable fear of the reporters, a fear that had made him act 
with swift ruthlessness. These things 
were signs pointing out a situation 
that was anything but norma! or 
harmless. What could there be, in 
the circumstances surrounding Stonecrest and the Celestial Hammer, that 
could possibly explain it? 

T~>UNN HAD by now reached the 
steps. He hes'itated a moment, 
gazing up at the door, awareness 
sharp- in him of the mystery and the 
threat that lay beyond it. But beyond 



22 



 



that door as well was the owner of the 
soft voice that had drawn him here. 
There could be no thought of turning 
back. 

The lines of his face tightened. He 
went up the steps. 

He found the doorbell, pressed it. 
He waited. As though from a vast 
distance he heard the deep mutter of 
the crowd, the drone and screech 
of passing cars. But he was alone, 
here. He was an island, withdrawn, 
set apart, a solitary, lonely entity 
that existed only for the opening of 
a door. 

That door opened. It opened slowly, portentously, revealing a stocky 
man in a plain dark suit. His intelligent features had the hardness that 
seemed characteristic of Stonecrest's 
employees, but in this man the hardness somehow had a cultured quality. 

The newcomer stared at Dunn. He 
had the expression of a person who 
sees the impossible and refuses to believe it. 

''How did you get here?" he demanded after a moment. The question 
seemed the most immediate and important thing in his mind. 

"Harry let me in," Dunn said, "at 
the rear gate." 

"Harry let you in," the stocky man 
echoed, spacing the words. He peered 
past Dunn, as though seeking Harry. 
His eyes were bleak. "This. . .well, this 
is irregular," he said, evidently explaining his pause. "Just who are 
you? What do you want?" 

"My name's Bradley Dunn. I'm a 
friend of Faye Manning, and I'd like 
to see her. I've been worried that she 
might not be well." 

"And Harry let you in on the 
strength of that?" 

Dunn shrugged. "I happened to 
mention that if I didn't get to talk 
to Miss Manning I'd talk to the reporters at the gate. They seemed very 



interested in anything I could tell 

them." 

The other nodded thoughtfully. 
Then he leaned closer, his whole manner undergoing a change. He was suddenly friendly and confiding, with 
every appearance of being sincere. 

"Mr. Dunn, I can understand that 
you should be worried about Miss 
Manning. All of us here have been 
caught up in events, and as a result 
we've lost touch with families and 
friends. Naturally that would lead to 
concern about us. But we're all safe 
and sound— Miss Manning included. 
It's just that we have a big job on 
our hands, a lot of problems to face." 
The stocky man waved a hand toward the crowd beyond the fence. 
"There you see part of those probblems." 

"Miss Manning," he went on in 
his confiding tone, "has her own job 
to do. As Mr. Stonecrest's secretary, 
she's had to handle thousands of letters that have poured in here. Frankly, I don't think she'd want to have 
her work interrupted and lose the 
time it would take to assure you she 
was quite all right. 

"Don't misunderstand me, Mr. 
Dunn. We haven't become anti-social, 
or anything of the sort. We're just a 
dedicated group of people. A tremendous thing has happened — a thing that 
can change the world. We consider 
this thing more important than ourselves, more important than our own 
personal affairs." 

The stocky man smiled sympathetically. "So I hope it's clear that 
there's absolutely nothing to worry 
about, Mr. Dunn. I'll tell Miss Manning you inquired about her. I'm certain she'll get in touch with you as 
soon as her work permits." 

JAUNN SHOOK his head. "I appreciate the trouble you've taken 
to explain the situation to me — but 



VANGUARD OF THE DOOMED 



23 



I've got to see Faye Manning. I'll 
know she's all right when she tells 
me about it herself." 

The other's manner changed again. 
His features stiffened and his warmth 
vanished. "I'm afraid it's out of the 
question. We have orders to admit no 
visitors, except on urgent business, and 
then by appointment." 

"If I can't talk to Faye Manning," 
Dunn said deliberately, "I'll talk to 
the reporters, outside." 

"You're bluffing. What could you 
possibly tell them?" 

"I could tell them there was something very funny going on, here." 

"Such as what?" 

"Such as Faye Manning apparently 
being kept prisoner in this house. Such 
as someone knocking me out last 
night and wrecking my radio set, thus 
to keep me from using it to call 
Faye Manning." 

The stocky man blinked. "This is 
too deep for me. I guess I'll have to 
let Miss Manning straighten you out. 
You can talk to her if you positively 
insist on it. . . . This way, please." He 
stepped aside in the open doorway, 
and Dunn strode past him into a 
large oak-paneled hall. The other 
turned very quickly as he swung the 
door shut, his hand darting under 
the lapel of his coat. 

Dunn caught the motion as he was 
removing his hat. A great bell 
seemed to ring in him. Almost wildly, he threw the hat, followed it in 
a lunge at the stocky man. The latter had his weapon out, a small automatic, but the impact of the hat in 
his face confused him for just the 
single instant Dunn needed. 

Flailing with his arm, Dunn knocked 
the automatic from the other's grasp. 
Then his full weight hit the man, 
pressed him back against the door. 
Dunn held him there as he reached 
back into his pocket and jerked his 
own automatic out. He pressed the 



muzzle of the weapon against the 
stocky man's neck. The latter ceased 
his struggles, staring at Dunn in baffled fury. 

Dunn backed away, probing the 
silence that flowed back into the hall. 
No alarmed voices, no approaching 
footsteps. So far, so good. 

His questing glance" fell on two 
telephones on a marble- Lopped table 
against one wall. He gestured at them 
with the automatic, returning his attention to the stocky man. 

"One of those is a house phone, I 
think. Get someone on it. Have Faye 
Manning brought here. No," Dunn 
amended quickly. "Not here. There 
must be an empty room somewhere 
close by. Have her brought there. 
We'll go there and wait for her.... 
And be careful what you say over 
the phone. If you try to give me 
away — " 

The stocky man smiled thinly. 
"What would you do if I did? There's 
no reason why I should co-operate." 

"You're forgetting the reporters," 
Dunn returned. "And the cops. Trick 
me, and I'll make enough noise to 
bring them here by the truck load. 
I might even shoot you in the leg 
for spite. Not that my aim is that 
good. I could make a mistake and hit 
you in the stomach, instead. Maybe 
you know what a .45 bullet does when 
it hits a stomach." 

TTHE OTHER considered the 
thought with a remote, indrawn 
expression. Finally he turned to the 
table and picked up one of the telephones. 

"Careful what you say," Dunn reminded softly. 

"Marty?" the stocky man said into 
the telephone. "This is Gillis. Bring 
Faye Manning to the little sitting 
room at the end of the entrance 
hall .... I know, but bring her anyway. At once. It's important." He 



24 



 



hung up. 

"AH right, Giliis — if that's your 
name," Dunn said. "Let's go." Urgency was mounting in him. It seemed 
incredible that the Others in the house 
were still unaware of his presence. 
His luck could not last. 

"This way," Giliis said tonelessly. 
He started toward the other end of 
the hall. 

Dunn slipped the automatic into 
his jacket pocket, keeping his finger on the trigger. He followed Giliis past a broad staircase and then 
past a number of doors on either side. 
At the end of the hall Giliis opened 
the door to a pleasant, informally 
furnished room that could have been 
considered small only in relation to 
the larger rooms of the house. 

Dunn motioned Giliis well back 
into the room before he entered. He 
left the door slightly open, taking 
up a position that would leave him 
concealed behind its inward swing. 

"Faye Manning is the only one 
who comes in here," he told Giliis. 
"Send away whoever happens to be 
with her." 

The other shrugged with an appearance of coolness, but his dark 
eyes held a baleful gl earn. "It's your 
funeral." 

"Yours could happen a lot faster 
than mine," Dunn said. "Don't forget that." 

Slow minutes passed. The occasional shrilling of car horns drifted in 
faintly from the highway outside. 
There were other vague sounds that 
might have come from within the 
house itself. Dunn ached for a cigarette, not daring to relax his vigil 
long enough to light one. Giliis shifted impatiently, frowning. 

Excitement stirred in Dunn as he 
waited. For weeks Faye Manning had 
been nothing more than a voice from 
a short-wave radio loudspeaker. A soft 
voice that had drawn him, haunted 



him. But very soon, now, he would see 
her. in the flesh. What would she be 
like? And— his wonder sharpened — 
what would she think of him? 

pOOTSTEPS rose into audibility behind the door. Dunn stiffened and 
shot a warning glance at Giliis. Then 
the panel moved, its edge swinging toward Dunn. 

A man's voice said, "Here she is, 
Mr. Giliis." 

The stocky man nodded. "Come in, 
Miss Manning. . . . You can go back, 
Marty." 

A muttered acknowledgment, and 
then the sound of footsteps again, retreating. The slim figure of a girl 
walked into Dunn's field of vision. 
He had only a moment's glimpse of 
her profile as she passed him, not 
knowing he was there. Then he was 
looking at the soft blonde curls clustered at the nape of her neck, at the 
tense line of her back in the simple 
gray suit she wore. 

"Well, what is it?" the girl demanded of Giliis. Her voice was the familiar voice Dunn knew, but tight, 
now, defiant. 

Giliis shrugged, glancing past her, at 
Dunn. "This isn't my party, Miss 
Manning." 

Dunn was swinging the door closed. 
Startled by the sound of the closing 
door as much as by Giliis' glance 
beyond her, at Dunn, Faye Manning 
whirled. She stared at Dunn, her 
widened eyes touching the weapon in 
his hand. 

For a moment he overlooked the 
strangeness of this meeting. He was 
aware only of the girl, aware that she 
stood before him at last. She was no 
longer a voice, disembodied and remote. The bridge had been crossed. 

He was not disappointed. He felt 
somehow that he had known all along 
she would look as she did. Her blonde 
hair framed a small face with fine, 



VANGUARD OF THE DOOMED 



25 



even features. It was a face that needed only laughter to make it beautiful, 
but at the moment it held bewilderment, a vague dread, and showed the 
effects of nervous exhaustion. Her 
skin looked pale and drawn, and her 
luminous gray eyes had dark shadows 
under them. 

Dunn found himself walking forward, wanting suddenly to reassure 
her. She stepped back, a slim hand 
lifting to her throat. Her gray eyes 
were on the automatic. 

He grinned impulsively as the oddness of the situation struck him. "The 
gun is to make Gillis behave," he explained. "I don't usually have one in 
my hand when introducing myself." 

Faye Manning's lips parted in 
startled realization. Her gray eyes 
seemed to light. "Why, you're Bradley Dunn!" she said. "I know your 

"Not any better than I know 
yours." He smiled down at her as 
she abruptly came forward to meet 
him, her slim hand extended. He knew 
then that it was all right, that his 
life would no Ion ger seem empty or 
meaningless. 

She shook her head slowly, her 
eyes grave and steady on his. "You 
came all this way, you put yourself 
into all this trouble — and over a girl 
you'd never seen before." 

"I knew the really important things 
about her," he said. "But right now 
we'd better get ready to — " 

A sudden flicker of motion off to 
one side made him turn sharply. Gillis had been standing several feet 
away, watching. Evidently seeing 
Dunn and Faye engrossed in each 
other, he had seized the opportunity 
to make a dash for the door. 

Dunn swung the automatic. For 
an instant Gillis' back made a perfect target as he paused to fumble 
at the doorknob. But Dunn's finger 
hesitated on the trigger. Regardless of 



the consequences to Faye and himself, he could not shoot a man in the 
back. 

Then, as Dunn belatedly started in 
pursuit, Gillis slipped through the 
door, jerked it shut. Dunn heard a 
metallic clicking. When he reached the 
panel and twisted at the knob, he 
understood. 

The door was locked. 

CHAPTER IV 

■QUNN WHIRLED back to Faye. 

"We've got to get out of here! 
Gillis will have everyone in the house 
after us in another minute." He 
flashed a glance across the room. 
"The windows! They open on .the 
garden, and we can make a run for 
it to the rear gate. There's only one 
guard there, holding off a pack of 
reporters. With the reporters watching, he won't try to stop us." 

She nodded quickly, excitement 
shining in her gray eyes. Then a new 
thought seemed to strike her. She 
caught at his arms. 

"Brad, if something happens — if I 
can't make it, you've got to go on 
without me. It's important, Brad — ■ 
horribly important. Someone has to 
be able to reach the authorities and 
tell them what's going on here." 

"I wouldn't leave you behind," he 
said. "Not after I've come this far 
to find you." 

Her grip on his arms tightened urgently. "Brad, listen to me! This is 
more important than either of us. The 
safety of the United States — all the 
Western Allies, in fact— may depend 
on it." 

He stared at her, dazed. "Faye, you • 
can't mean that Stonecrest — " 

"Listen! Stonecrest is an imposter. 
He isn't Stonecrest at all, but another 
man masquerading as Stonecrest. And 
I'm almost positive I know who that 
man is. His name is Max Borzeny — 



26 



 



and I have reason to believe Brozeny 
is a Slav- Asian secret agent ! " 

"Brozeny!" Dunn whispered. "I've 
heard the name before. During the 
second world war, Max Borzeny was 
a high official in the Nazi secret police—the Gestapo. He was one of the 
most wanted war criminals, too, but 
the Allies never caught up with him." 

A chill dread rose in Dunn. "If what 
you say is true, Faye, then Borzeny 
is right here, in this house. And according to certain evidence, he's able 
to control what in effect is the most 
terrible weapon the world has ever 
known!" 

Somewhere in the house a bell rang 
sharply. 

Abruptly aware of the precious 
seconds that had passed, Dunn caught 
at the girl's hand. "Come on! We still 
have a chance if we move fast 
enough! " 

He led the way to the nearest of 
the windows, released the catch, pulled 
the window open. It was little more 
than a half-dozen feet to the ground. 
He dropped easily, then reached up to 
assist Faye as she swung out after 
him , 

'T'HEY were on the side of the house 
opposite the driveway. From here 
only the far end of the front fence 
was visible, and only a few persons 
were in sight beyond it, walking along 
the street. The greater part of the 
crowd was concentrated around the 
front gate. Dunn and the girl were 
still as much alone as though in a 
wilderness. 

They ran toward the rear of the 
mansion. The smaller buildings came 
into sight. Beyond them was the 
garage, and beyond that the greenhouse which cut off the view of the 
grounds from the rear gate. 

Dunn approached the outbuildings 
from the side. Once he and Faye 
passed them, they could cut in front 
of the greenhouse, to the driveway. 



He turned as a man's voice called 
out behind him. Figures were emerging from the window through which he 
and Faye had fled. One of the men 
was pointing, and Dunn realized that 
he and Faye had been sighted. 

He sent an anxious glance at the 
girl. In her skirts and high heels she 
was finding it difficult to keep up with 
him. 

He caught at her arm. "Your shoes, 
Faye. Kick them off, quick!" 

She swung to a stop beside him, 
obeyed hurriedly. 

"They're coming after us from the 
house," he said. "We've got to hold 
our lead until we ' get to the greenhouse." 

Her gray eyes were pleading. She 
was breathing fast. "Brad. . .if I can't 
make it. . . you've got to go on without me!" 

He shook his head doggedly as they 
set off again. "We've got to make it 
together." 

They passed the first of the outbuildings — and then Faye gasped. In 
almost the same instant Dunn saw the 
reason. Several men were racing toward them across the stretch of grass 
between the outbuilding and the one 
beyond it. The path to the greenhouse 
was being cut off. 

A cold anger swept through Dunn. 
He was lifting the automatic toward 
the oncoming men, when his plunging 
foot came down on a depression in the 
turf. His ankle turned. Suddenly out 
of balance, he stumbled against 
Faye — and both fell sprawling. 

Dunn hit the ground hard, felt the 
automatic jolted out of his hand. Frantically he pushed himself back to his 
feet, whirled to help Faye as she began rising. 

"The rear gate!" he whispered at 
her. "Run for it. It's the only way, 
now." 

She hesitated an instant, her gray 
eyes mournfully intent on his. Then 



VANGUARD OF THE DOOMED 



2y 



she was gone in a flash of silken legs. 

"pvUNN saw that one of the approaching men, moving more 
swiftly than the others, was almost 
upoii him. There would be no time to 
retrieve the automatic. The only thing 
he could do — ■ 

He lunged directly toward the onrushing figures. Crouching, he threw 
his shoulder into the first of the group, 
sent him reeling back into the others. 
Almost immediately there was a tangle of colliding bodies as most of the 
men were unable to check their rush 
in time. They fell heavily to the 
ground amid curses and grunts of 
pain. 

Dunn pushed, kicked, twisted, fighting his way up through the tangle. 
He struck out as a face bobbed in 
front of him, felt his knuckles crunch 
against bone. Another man was coming at him from the sidej and almost 
too late he dodged a swung fist. He 
sent a wild punch at the other's 
middle, was rewarded by a gasp of 
expelled breath. Then arms caught 
him around the knees, and he went 
down again. 

Hands clutched at him, fists pounded at his face and head. Desperately 
he struggled to keep from being overwhelmed, but he knew it was hopeless. 
He heard voices, was dimly aware that 
the reinforcements from the mansion 
had reached the scene. A fist struck the 
side of his jaw, and the world weat 
foggy in a burst of light and pain. 

From a distance he seemed to hear 
a girl's choked scream. And then 
something heavy and hard smashed 
down on his head. His dimming perceptions dissolved in a black nothing
■pvUNN opened his eyes in a small 
windowless room, lighted by an 
unshielded bulb in the low ceiling. 
A blurred face hung over him and he 



blinked several times before he recognized Faye Manning. He lay on 
a concrete floor, and his head, he discovered further, was pillowed on the 
girl's lap. 

"Brad!" she said. "I was beginning 
to think you were dead. How do you 
feel?" 

Knowledge of the girl's presence 
quickened his return to full awareness. 
He forced a grin. "Just seeing you, 
Faye, I feel fine." 

He got his elbows under him, 
struggled to a sitting position on the 
floor. He squeezed his eyes shut as 
pain rang an anvil chorus in his head. 
Other pains swiftly became evident 
throughout his body, blending in a 
dull, steady ache. 

He sent a glance around the room. 
"Where are we?" 

"In one of the storerooms in the 
basement of the mansion." Faye 
hesitated, looking down at her hands. 
Her small face seemed even paler 
than before, and there were smudges 
of dust on her cheeks. "It's all my 
fault," she went on. "I tried to reach 
the gate, but one of the men caught 
me. . . . I'm sorry, Brad. I've brought 
you nothing but trouble." 

He shook his head. "Getting to meet 
you was worth it^ I'd do it all over 
again if I had to." 

"I think I would, too, Brad." 

He saw the meaning in her steady 
eyes, in her grave smile, and it gave 
him a sudden, deep feeling of strength, 
of reassurance. He put his hands on 
her shoulders, and she leaned almost 
tiredly against him, closing her eyes. 
He held her for a long moment. The 
situation had an odd familiarity, as 
though it had been repeated many 
times before. 

He looked past the blonde head 
resting against his cheek, looked at 
the stained, concrete walls of the 
room. They seemed to sharpen around 
him, bringing him back to the problem 



28 



 



of survival. He released the girl, stood 
up, went to the low wooden door. The 
knob turned easily under his hand, 
but the door itself was securely fastened from the other side. Nothing 
short of an ax would open it — and 
guards all too likely were posted nearby. 

He returned to where Faye sat 
watching him, pressing blonde curls 
away from her face with the back of 
one hand. He lowered himself beside her, spoke softly. "Our chances 
seem to depend on how much Borzeny 
thinks you know about the set-up, 
here, and his plans. And there's the 
matter of his identity. Does he know 
you've discovered who he is?" 

"I think he suspects it. That's why 
he was keeping itie prisoner." 

"How did you get on to him?" 

"I went into the library one afternoon, to look up some records," Faye 
began. "I usually did my work in 
another part of the house, and I don't 
think Borzeny expected me there. 
Anyway, I noticed that a panel in the 
wall was open, and there was a safe 
behind it, open, too." 

T_TER FULL lips curved in a wry 
smile. "I suppose it would seem 
the most natural thing in the world 
for a woman to nose around. But I 
had a better reason than that. I had 
been growing certain that something 
definitely queer was going on at the 
house. There was too much out of the 
ordinary happening, too much of an 
attempt to keep it secret. 

"Borzeny — or Stonecrest, as I 
thought of him at the time — explained 
the situation by saying he was engaged in certain important and confidential work for the government. It 
seemed logical enough. Borzeny can be 
very charming and persuasive when 
he wants to be. And besides, I knew 
he had a laboratory in the house and 
spent a lot of time there on experi


ments of some sort. He even had two 
assistants helping him. neither of 
whom could speak English very well. 
He said they were European specialists, loaned to him lay the government. 

"I played along for a while. That's 
why I didn't tell you a lot of the 
things about myself, Brad, that I 
might have told you otherwise. I 
thought I was helping the government." 

She smiled shyly. "You were very 
nice about it, Brad. It was fun, talking to you on the radio. You didn't 
get fresh, and you didn't pry or ask 
questions. You were just... well, 
understanding, always pleasant." 

"I share the same sentiments where 
a girl named Faye Manning is concerned," Dunn said. "But where did 
you get the set you were using?" 

"There was a powerful model of 
standard design in a small studio adjoining the laboratory. All of the real 
Stonecrest's experiments seem to have 
been with short-wave radio apparatus 
of new and highly advanced design, 
but apparently he had one set that he 
could use for ordinary broadcasting. 
He had a special room for it, too. This 
room opened out on a narrow side 
hall, and I could reach it without being seen. I knew I wouldn't have been 
permitted so near to the laboratory. 
Hardly anyone was. Borzeny and his 
assistants kept the laboratory locked 
when they weren't there, and I was 
careful to use the radio only when 
they were in some other part of the 
house." 

Faye paused, and then went on, 
"My father was a radio ham, and he 
taught me how to twiddle the right 
dials. I was lonesome here, at the 
house, wanted someone to talk to. 
Borzeny always tried to discourage me 
from going out in the evenings — for 
security reasons, he said. And the few 
times I did go out, he had me followed. I learned about that quickly 



VANGUARD OF THE DOOMED 



29 



enough. It was one of the things that 
convinced me something strange was 
going on. 

"The secret experiments seemed 
only part of whatever this was. There 
was something odd about Stonecrest 
himself — or Borzeny, that is. He 
avoided meeting people and carried 
on most of his affairs by correspondence. He refused to see unexpected 
visitors, appeared suspicious of almost everyone around him. He didn't 
hire me to work for him until he had 
investigated every detail of my background. Practically all of his employees seemed to be new. I learned 
a short tune later that he had fired 
all the old servants who had worked 
at the house." 

"CAYE changed position on the 
floor, her soft voice quickening. 
"The arrival of this object an the sky 
that Borzeny calls the Celestial Hammer seemed to bring matters to a 
head. There was suddenly a lot of 
excitement. The guards at the estate 
were doubled — not ordinary guards, 
either, but professional toughs. From 
the scraps of information I was able 
to pick up, it seemed clear that Borzeny and his assistants had found they 
could control the object. What they 
used, of course, was the special shortwave apparatus with which they had 
been experimenting,, in the laboratory." 

"So that's the explanation!" Dunn 
said. "I'd been wondering how control 
was possible." 

Faye nooded. "This special apparatus evidently had been built by the 
real Stonecrest. The basic idea, I 
think, was a completely new type fif 
radio communication. But Borzeny 
found he was getting signals with itsignals that came from the Celestial 
Hammer. No ordinary set could have 
picked them up. And when Borzeny 
signalled back, the Celestial Hammer 
responded by moving toward Earth. 



Further experiment showed that a 
great deal of control was possible. 
Borzeny could have sent the object 
back into space if he had wanted to. 
There was no actual intelligence directing the object itself. It was like 
. . .well, it was like a huge machine." 

"There are theories that the planetoid is a space ship," Dunn put in. 
"Suppose it is. A space ship with a 
stone hull would he practical enough, 
where meteors are considered. I don't 
know about the passengers. They 
might all be dead — or in suspended 
animation, as some persons claim. But 
suppose that ship were guided in its 
flight by radio impulses like those 
sent out by Stonecrest's apparatus. 
Perhaps to keep it from hitting a planet, or falling into a sun. If Stonecrest's set sent out impulses of the 
same frequency as those sent out by 
the guiding device, then the ship 
would follow those impulses. That 
would explain how control of the 
planetoid was possible at all." 

He gestured. "Anyway, it's clear 
how Stonecrest — I mean Borzeny — 
obtained his supernatural abilities. 
Obviously, control of the planetoid 
gave him the idea of setting himself 
up as a prophet." 

Faye's blonde head moved , in assent. "He began using the set over 
which I talked to you, Brad. I could 
see we wouldn't be able to keep in 
touch any more, and I tried to let you 
know. Maybe I was too mysterious. 
You kept trying to reach me, and 
Borzeny grew excited over it. He said 
something would have to be done 
about you. I was afraid you were in 
real danger, and I warned you as soon 
as I had a chance to use the set again. 
Borzeny caught me at it. I don't know 
what he might have done if we both 
hadn't managed to give him the diea 
that our talk had been harmless. 

"He already was suspicious of me, 
you see. In fact, I was practically be


30 



 



ing kept a prisoner in the house. I 
was locked in my room every night. I 
got out to radio you only because I 
managed to slip a wad of paper in the 
door catch. The reason for all this 
goes back to that open safe in the library. 

"I investigated it. There were the 
usual things a person keeps in a safe. 
But then I came across a small steel 
box containing certain papers, records and newspaper clippings. All concerned a man named Max Borzeny. 
At the time it didn't seem to mean 
much. Later, thinking back over what 
I had seen, I suddenly realized that 
this Max Borzeny was actually Stonecrest — or was masquerading as Stonecrest. And there was an important official connection between Borzeny and 
the Slav-Asian Powers." 

pAYE SHUDDERED, grimacing. "I 
didn't know how close to death 
I was in those minutes. If Borzeny 
had caught me searching the safe — 
But he didn't. Not actually. I returned 
things as I had found them and was 
working on the records I had come to 
look up, when Borzeny returned to 
the library. He looked at me, and then 
at the open safe — and from that moment on lie took no chances with 
me.... It seems incredible, though, 
that Borzeny could somehow have 
taken Stonecrest's place." 

"Stonecrest did a lot of traveling to 
remote corners of the Earth," Dunn 
said slowly. "Somewhere along the 
line he and Borzeny ran into each 
other. Borzeny was a hunted man, 
and perhaps some actual physical resemblance between Stonecrest and 
himself suggested the switch in identities. It's a matter of record that 
Borzeny spoke excellent English, and 
in addition he was an enormously 
clever and resourceful man. He had to 
be, to have escaped capture as long 
as he did. With a few changes in 



Stonecrest's papers and identification, 
with a bit of careful forgery here and 
there, it wouldn't have been impossible for him to pass himself off as 
Stonecrest .... As for Stonecrest himself, there's no doubt but that he's 
dead — murdered by Borzeny." 

"And it looks very much as if the 
same thing is going to happen to us," 
Faye whispered, her face gray and 
drawn. 

Dunn placed a comforting arm 
about her shoulders. "Not if we play 
our cards right. The main thing to do 
is to keep Borzeny from finding out 
how much we know. We've got to 
convince him that neither of us has 
found out about his real identity and 
connections. Especially you, Faye. As 
for me, I'm just a dumb guy who 
thought your rich boss was keeping 
you incommunicado for romantic reasons. And I was just jealous enough 
to use a gun in trying to pry you 
loose." 

"It might work," Faye said, hope 
struggling in her voice. "I've been 
careful to say nothing about how 
much I knew." 

Dun tightened his arm. "It has 
to work." 

They fell silent, sitting close together on the concrete floor. The girl 
leaned wearily against him, her eyes 
closed. He felt the soft pressure of her 
body, and part of him was content. 
He had come this far to find her. That 
much, at least, had been accomplished. 
The only question now was, what lay 
ahead? 

The silence deepened. And then, 
from somewhere in the distance, Dunn 
heard the sound of approaching footsteps. He straightened tensely, feit 
Faye stir .beside him. Her eyes stared 
into his, suddenly wide and alert. 

They were standing side by side 
when the door opened. A lumpy featured man with beetling eyebrows 
peered warily into the room, sent a 



VANGUARD OF THE DOOMED 



31 



muttered word over one shoulder, then 
entered. Two other men followed. One 
was an obvious tough, like the first 
who had appeared, but the second was 
a well-dressed, military erect man 
with iron-gray hair and cold, sharply 
chiseled features. All held leveled revolvers. 

"Mr. Stonecrest!" Faye said. "We 
were hoping for a chance to explain — " 

"That will be enough out of you, 
Miss Manning," the gray-haired man 
returned curtly. He gestured to the 
lumpy-faced underling. "Get the microphone, Otto." 

The other strode to one of the 
walls, reached into a crevice near the 
floor and drew out a small flat disk.. 
He removed the wires connected to 
it, straightened, strode back. 

The man Faye had called - Stonecrest, but who, Dunn knew, was actually Max Borzeny, smiled thinly at 
the girl. He had pale blue eyes that 
held a flat, unwinking stare— eyes 
that hinted of a nature harsh and 
without mercy. 

"I found your conversation very 
interesting, Miss Manning. That was 
my purpose in leaving you and this 
young man together, here. So, please, 
let there be no childish attempts to 
deceive me." 

CHAPTER V 

A CHILL emptiness filled Dunn. 

Borzeny's words had verified the 
sudden, numbing certainty that had 
leaped in him at sight of the microphone. Borzeny had listened in on the 
talk between Faye and himself, was 
aware they knew of his true identity. 
There was no longer any hope. Borzeny's cold face, the leveled guns, indicated as much. 

Dunn felt Faye draw closer against 
him. Her gray eyes met his in a brief 



glance of despair. 

"All right, we know who you are," 
Dunn told Borzeny. "We know what 
you've been doing here. What do you 
plan to do with us?" 

The imposter lifted his erect, carefully tailored shoulders in a shrug. 
"Dead men tel! no tales, as the saying goes. Dead women, also, I might 
add." 

"You can'f get away with it," Dunn 
said. "This is the United States. People don't vanish here without questions being asked." 

"I'm quite sure I can avoid the 
questions," Borzeny returned with 
faintly smiling calm. "I will produce 
witnesses who will insist they saw you 
and Miss Manning leave here in your 
car. A simple case of elopement. Nothing mysterious, nothing sinister. The 
car itself will be taken care of in accordance with my little arrangement." 

Dunn found he was breathing fast. 
There was a stifled drumming in his 
chest. He forced himself to speak 
quietly. 

"Just when do you intend to start 
making this little arrangement of 

yours?" 

"Immediately," Borzeny said. "I 
am, you see, vacating this house tonight. I do not intend to return, and 
I wish to settle all unfinished business 
before I leave. I regret that I cannot allow you and the charming Miss 
Manning a little more time together." 

Borzeny raised his eyebrows in polite inquiry. "Any further questions?" 

"Yes," Dunn said. Stall, he thought. 
Stall. Every second was precious, now. 
"What are you up to, here? What do 
you hope to gain by your control of 
the Celestial Hammer?" 

Borzeny's eyes lighted with a fanatical gleam. "An excellent point to 
raise. I shall speak frankly. I have, 
after all, nothing to lose. You and 
Miss Manning will very soon be in no 
position to make use of what I shall 
reveal. As for these men here, I can 



32 



 



trust them. Most of the others serve 
for money, but with these two it is a 
matter, of personal loyalty." 

He leaned forward slightly. His 
suavely deliberate manner seemed to 
change, to reflect a kind of fevered 
enthusiasm. "You ask what I hope to 
gain by my control of the Celestial 
Hammer. The answer, my young 
friend, is — mastery of the entire 
world! The, Hammer is the most potent weapon that has ever existed — -a 
weapon more potent, even, than the 
atomic bomb. And my control of it is 
absolute. I can make it obey my every 
command." 

Eorzeny paused, his pale eyes 
flashing at Dunn. "I can, for example, bring the Hammer down on any 
great city I choose — and smash that 
city into complete oblivion! Any city 
on the surface of the Earth. And I 
intend to do just that! My plans have 
been carefully made, and this very 
night I shall swing into action. Washington, the capital of your nation, will 
be first. Then will come the various 
atomic bomb manufacturing sites and 
certain military centers. The country 
will be completely disorganized, completely helpless! 

"That is only the first step in my 
plans. Immediately afterward I shall 
destroy the capital of the Slav-Asian 
Powers. At present the Slav-Asians 
consider me an ally, but they are 
treacherous, and I shall take no 
chances with them. With the dominant nations paralyzed and my power 
clearly demonstrated, the other remaining nations will quickly obey my 
commands. I shall emerge as the ruler 
of the entire world!" 

J^IMLY Dunn was aware of Faye's 
fingers pressing into his arm, as 
though in physical echo of the shocked 
dread that filled him. Borzeny's 
scheme sounded wild— insane. But the 
man's control of the Celestial Hammer 
already had been proved beyond any 



slightest doubt. And with control of 
the Celestial Hammer anything was 
possible. 

Dunn's thoughts leaped frantically. 
Washington, the whole United States 
itself, was in immediate, terrible danger. Borzeny had to be stopped before 
he could put his plan into effect. 
Dunn realized he had to do something — but any move in the face of 
the ready guns would bring instant 
death. 

Borzeny made a sudden gesture. 
"Since your questions appear to have 
been answered, I will now proceed to 
the business at hand." He took a step 
backward, glancing at one of the two 
men beside him. "You take the woman, Franz. I dislike shooting women. .. . Otto, ready!" 

Borzeny lifted his gun. His cold 
features tightened, became intent. 

Dunn had a nightmare feeling. His 
muscles bunched wildly— but he saw 
there would be no time to move. The 
fingers of Borzeny and his henchmen 
were already tightening on the triggers of their weapons. 

A gun roared. 

Franz stiffened, half turned, then 
sprawled in a limp huddle to the floor. 
Borzeny whirled to peer back into the 
dark depths of the basement, and 
Dunn realized now that the shot had 
come from there. 

Another shot sounded. Something 
whined within inches of Borzeny's 
head, passing Dunn and Faye to hit a 
wall, beyond. Dunn didn't wait to see 
what happened next. He took swift 
advantage of his opportunity. Otto 
was nearest, peering through the doorway as he steadied his revolver for a 
shot. Dunn leaped at the man, got an 
arm around his neck, jerked him savagely to the floor. Before the confused Otto could put up resistance, 
Dunii punched him into senselessness. 
Then he snatched up the man's fallen 
gun, swung to where he had last seen 
Borzeny. 



VANGUARD OF THE DOOMED 



33 



The other was gone. He had braved 
the bullets of the hidden attacker to 
dart through the doorway. Dunn 
heard swiftly retreating footsteps. Pursuit was out of the question at the 
moment, since it might draw the fire 
of the person concealed back in the 
basement. 

"ryjNN WAITED. The retreating 
footsteps faded, were gone. 
Somewhere a door slammed. Silence 
fell. 

"Hello, whoever you are ! " Dunn 
called through the open door. "This is 
Bradley Dunn." 

"Gillis, here!" a voice came back at 
once. "Everything all right at your 
end?" 

"Eorzeny's gone," Dunn said. "The 
two men with him are out of action." 

"I'll be right with you." Gillis came 
trotting out of the darkness. "Miss 
Manning all right?" 

"Yes," Faye said. "You saved our 
lives, Gillis. But I don't understand. I 
thought- — " 

Gillis shrugged. "Up to a point, I 
follow orders and ask no questions. 
But there was too much going on in 
this house that I didn't like. The way 
you two kids were being treated made 
me reach my limit. I followed Stonecrest down here — or Borzeny, as his 
real name seems to be— and I heard 
plenty. I thought he was just a rich 
guy using that Celestial Hammer 
thing to get himself a lot of free publicity. I didn't know he was a fake 
planning to set himself up as a dictator. I don't like dictators. And I like 
the old United States just as it is. Let 
it go at that." 

Gillis looked questionmgly at Dunn. 
"Want to make a run for the Law? 
Or should we try to clean house?" 

"We clean house," Dunn said. "And 
the place to start is the laboratory. 
Borzeny will head there first thing. 
He. has an idea about destroying 



Washington, and we've got to stop 
him." 

"Let's go," Gillis said simply. 

Dunn picked up the revolver that 
the dead Franz had been using, thrust 
it into his belt. Then, gripping Faye's 
hand, he followed Gillis through the 
basenrent. 

They reached a flight of stairs, 
mounted to the door at the top. The 
door was locked. Cautioning Dunn 
and Faye to move to one side, Gillis 
shot the lock away. Then he slid a 
fresh clip into his automatic and cara* 
fully inched the door open. The narrow hall beyond was empty, but from 
somewhere in the house shouts of 
alarm were rising. 

"Come on!" Gillis said. "We've got 
to make a rush for it." 

The narrow hall ran past a kitchen 
and opened out into the main hall 
Dunn had already seen. As Dunn and 
the others hurried toward the stairway at the end, the two men appeared. Sighting, Dunn's group, the 
men lifted the guns they held. 

Dunn and Gillis fired almost simultaneously. One of the men clutched 
at his chest and dropped. The other 
whirled back out of sight. 

"Cover me," Gillis barked at Dunn. 
He crept to the end of the hall, peered 
around, then gestured urgently. 

They reached the stairway, raced 
upward. As they reached the landing 
'a gun thundered. Gillis released a 
gasp, clutched at his shoulder. 

Dunn saw Harry at the head of the 
stairs. He snapped a shot at the man, 
missed. Harry was swinging his weapon toward Dunn, when Dunn fired 
again. Harry staggered, fell, rolled 
down the steps. He reached the landing, lay motionless. 

Dunn turned to Gillis. "Can you 
make it?" 

"Bullet went through my arm," Gillis said. "I can still pull my weight." 

They continued up the steps, Gillis 



34 



 



insisting on scouting the way. Several 
men appeared in the hall below them, 
began to mount upward. 

"Hurry!" Gillis whispered. "There's 
still another flight ahead of us." 

'J T HEY POUNDED up the remaining stairway, Giliis maintaining 
his lead. The approaching men shouted 
their discovery of Dunn's group, 
quickening their ascent like hounds 
that had at last sighted their quarry. 

His hand gripping Faye's, Dunn followed Gillis into a dim-lit hall. Gillis 
pointed toward one end. 

"The laboratory's down there." 

Faye said suddenly, "The studio! 
The laboratory will be guarded, but 
there's a door opening into it from the 
studio. I don't think they'll be watching that." 

"Just the thing!" Gillis said. 
"Quick, now!" 

They raced down the hall, turned 
a corner. Gillis slowed, pointing out 
a closed door and motioning for quiet. 
He opened the door slowly, keeping 
well to one sitfe. Then he nodded and 
beckoned. 

With Faye close on his heels, Dunn 
slipped after Gillis into a small room 
containing expensive radio equipment. 
There was a door in an adjacent wall. 
Gillis slipped over to it, placed his 
ear against the panel. Then very slowly he turned the knob. He shook his 
head. . 

Somewhere below in the mansion 
a sudden flurry of gunshots sounded. 
A man screamed. Then more gunshots, making a sustained staccato 
thunder. 

Gillis waved an imperative hand at 
Dunn. Joining the other, Dunn quickly saw his intention. They, poised 
themselves several feet away from the 
locked door. Then, moving as one, 
they threw themselves at the panel in 
a hard lunge. 

The door crashed open. Beyond 



was a huge room crowded with workbenches, cabinets and machinery. Four 
men were present, three of them 
standing on opposite sides of the main 
doorway. 

One of the men was Borzeny, 

The group' seemed to have been expecting something to happen, to have 
been eagerly awaiting it. But action 
had come from a totally unlooked for 
quarter. The men whirled in confused surprise. 

"Get your hands up, all of youl" 
Gillis called sharply, across the room. 

"Never, you swine!" Borzeny spat. 
He swung up his gun. 

Gillis was already triggering his 
automatic, very deliberately. Dunn 
held Otto's revolver at arm's length, 
moving the barret to cover the group 
as he emptied the cylinder in a crashing roll of shots. 

Mingled thunder filled the laboratory. 

Borzeny managed to get off one 
shot before he staggered and slid 
down the wall to the floor, two dark 
holes in his shirt over the chest. A 
bullet from one of his two henchmen 
grazed Dunn's side. Then this man 
stiffened, lifted a hand toward his 
face, dropped. The remaining man 
was turning toward the door, firing, 
when two shots caught him together, 
knocked him sprawling. 

jyjNN SWUNG to the remaining 
man, but he was unarmed, his 
hands in the air. He was elderly and 
bespectacled, with a fringe of white 
hair around an otherwise bald head. 
He stood with his back to a tall complex apparatus that overflowed the 
whole of one workbench. 

Dunn hurried across the room. 
"This thing controls the planetoid, the 
Celestial Hammer?" he demanded. 

"Ja, so," the other answered, his 
lifted hands quivering. 



VANGUARD OF THE DOOMED 



35 



"You know how to operate it?" 
"3a, I know." 

"Get busy, then," Dunn said. "Your 
job is to send the planetoid away from 
Earth — so far away that it will never 
come back. Then you're going to give 
me a hand in smashing this outfit to 
pieces. It's caused enough trouble." 

The old man bent over the apparatus, flipping switches, turning dials. 
A low hum filled the room. 

Beyond the door shots suddenly 
rose and were partly drowned in the 
crash of gunfire. Dunn glanced in 
despair at Gillis. 

The other listened a moment longer, then strangely grinned. "It's the 
cops," he said. "They finally got up 
here. I guess I forgot to mention I 
called them." 

They looked at each other, then 
suddenly grinned. They were shaking 
hands when Faye joined them. 

jQUNN SWUNG the coupe into the 
service station and braked to a 
stop, wincing a little as a twinge of 
pain rose from under the bandage 
against his side. Nestled against him, 
her blonde head against his shoulder, 
Faye stirred sleepily. 

Jerry Camp approached in the clear 
morning sunlight. He glanced casually 
at Dunn, did a double-take, then 
grinned. "Have any luck?" he asked. 

"I certainly did," Dunn said. "I 
promised I'd let you know." 

DIANETICS? 

THt; NEW "science" of dianctics, which 
purports to be able U) make men free 
from psychological, psycho- somatic and 
emotional ills which they are heir to, may 
have this faculty. The writer of this brief 
article is not really in a position to prove 
or disprove their claims, thnvigh he views 
the matter with apprehension, primal i'y 
because it has attained such amazing popularity in so short a time. 

Reliable scientific authorities are cautioning the all -embracing claims 
made by the new science. In the process 
of making a "clear" by use of the inter


Camp noticed Faye for the first 
time. His eyebrows lifted. "I see what 
you mean." He leaned an elbow in the 
window opening. "You get in to see 
Stonecrest? Only I heard over the 
radio a while ago that Stonecrest was 
really some other guy. There seems 
to have been a whale of a big fight 
out at his place last night. A regular 
army of cops showed up, and there 
was a lot of shooting. The cops found 
out that sora£ former Nazi was making like Stonecrest, a guy the government had been hunting for years. And 
what do you know, but that Celestial 
Hammer hunk of rock acted up, too. 
It's swinging away from Earth, the 
radio says. Pretty soon it'll be gone." 

Camp suddenly stared at Dunn. 
"Say, did you happen to have anything to do with all this?" 

Dunn shrugged. With Gillis and 
Faye, he had spent long, exhausting 
hours in explaining the whole affair 
to police authorities. He didn't feel 
like rehashing it, even if briefly. The 
newspapers would print the story soon 
enough. 

"I saw a little of it," Dunn said. 
"Right now, though, I'm on my way 
to get a marriage license." 

"You got a good start, this early 
in the day," Camp said. He sent another glance at Faye. "And if I were 
you, I wouldn't lose any time!" 

THE END 