GORDAK'S CARGO by Milton Lesser 116 

Illustrated by Henry Sharp 

A WISTFUL look crept into 
the spaceman's eyes. He raised 
his glass of fiery ptah to the 
tourist who had cornered him here in 
Kelly's Marsport Bar, and said: "Yes, 
I knew Gordak, and I know the story 
of the Snow-maid. It's been a long 
time." 

"Tell me," the tourist insisted. The 



story of Gordak and the Snow-maid 
had become, in. t/n years, half legendary. Twisted, distorted, it was a veritable saga of the space ways, a 
chimera tale for the eager tourists. 

The spaceman lost himself for a 
time in the amber depths of his drink. 
"To understand," he mused, "you'd 
have to know what Gordak was like. 

L7 



118 



 



And you'd have to know the albino 
girl, Snow. Then there was B'jak of 
the Spider People. You'd have to 
know 'em all." 

"Tell me," the tourist said again, 
eagerly. 

The spaceman drank deeply of the 
heady ptah. "We've come a long way 
in ten years." he said. "A decade ago, 
any extra-terrestrial being not quite 
human was fair prey for the interplanetary circuses. The most fabulous of all was Gordak's, yet Gordak 
himself wasn't quite human. . . " 

Gordak elbowed his way to the 
imported mahogany bar of Kelly's 
Marsport. Spacemen and tourists 
alike moved over readily enough to 
give him all the room he wanted. 
There was something of the macabre 
about the gnarled little half-breed, 
something distasteful and horrid' which 
told people to avoid him. 

Carstairs, however, didn't. He 
pushed his way through to Gordak's 
side and asked, "You're Gordak, 
aren't you?" 

The gnarled little man nodded. 
"You are punctual, I see, Mr. Carstairs. Can you take a spaceship up 
as promptly?" 

"I sure can," Carstairs told him. 
Despite the fact that he was unemployed, he was proud of his spaceman's training. Carstairs could astrogate, and he knew it. His unemployment, of course, did not indicate a 
lack of ability. 2139 was a lean year 
in which the outer-world colonists had 
settled down seriously to the task of 
civilizing the virgin worlds. As a consequence, Luna's astrogation school 
had gradtiated a considerable surplus 
of first-rate astrogators. Carstairs 
had been caught in the shuffle. 

Now he needed a job, badly. The 
rat-race of the legitimate freighter 
service had red-taped his credentials 
on the wrong end of a long waiting 



list. Thus it was that he turned to 
Gordak. 

He showed him the photostat of his 
credentials. The half-breed gave them 
a cursory examination and, satisfied, 
he nodded. "You'll do, Carstairs — 
with one reservation." 

"What's that?" 

"You are to astrogate for me, that 
is all. Outside of that, you are to mind 
your own business." His voice was an 
odd mixture of the deep-throated Martian and the accents of an earth bred 
human. "I'll pay you well: fifty solar 
credits a week." 

If Carstairs sensed the hidden menace in his employer's tones, he ignored it. He said that the set-up 
suited him fine, and when Gordak returned his credentials, he followed the 
little half-breed out of the Marsport 
Ear and hurriedly through the chill 
night air of Marsport Avenue to the 
spaceport. 

HTHE SPACESHIP was one of those 
old freight-tubs which had been 
converted for circus use, with, thirty 
years of extra-asteroidal service behind it. Carstairs realized with a smile 
that this was no Star Queen he was 
getting, and when he mentally compared the smooth lines of that great 
luxury craft with the stubby silhouette of Gordak's P. T, Barnum, he 
chuckled softly to himself. Well, these 
days a job was a job, and Carstairs 
felt thankful enough. 

His first surprise came when Gordak told him to biast off at once. 

"But I'll have to compute an approximate orbit to our destination," 
the astrogator argued. 

"That will not be necessary," Gordak assured him, "since we are not 
yet ready to leave Mars. You will 
rocket the Barnmn to the South-Polar co-ordinates I have designated on 
the chart, At once, Mr. Carstairs." 

Carstairs shrugged and sat down 



©ORDAK'S CAR&O 



119 



in the pilot's seat. He coutd not imagine what Gordak could possibly want 
on the barren tundras of the south-polar region. Equatorial Mars wasn't 
much warmer than Earth's temperate 
zones in mid-winter, but life was at 
least possible. People referred to 
South Polar Mars as the Ice Box, 
and they weren't kidding, even if the 
term were a bit antiquated. Utterly 
lifeless, except for the fanciful rumors 
of the Snow People who existed deep 
within the mountain grottos. Surely 
Gordak wasn't the type to be taken 
in by mere rumor. . . 

When Gordak had not returned for 
three days, Carstairs became restless. 
He had eaten and slept in a monotonous routine and he had read a few 
books from Gordak's library, but the 
endless white blanket of snow outside and the hot-house atmosphere of 
the P. T. Barnum had combined to 
make him restless. Snow Man or whatever Gordak sought out there on the 
ghostly white tundra, he wished the 
little circus-master would find it. 

On the morning of the fourth day 
his boredom got the better of him. It 
may be that he forgot Gordak's warning to mind his own business, or it 
may be that he discarded it in favor 
of the driving impulse of his own restlessness, but at any rate, he left the 
pilot's quarters and descended a ramp 
into the tubby 'low-decks of the ship. 

He came upon the spider man without warning. One moment he stood 
in what had been the main hold of the 
converted freighter, the next, he had 
opened a door and strode into a dimly-lit cubicle. 

The spider man clung with eight 
legs to a gossamer tapestry of countless silver threads, weaving a fairyland of imagery upon the warp and 
woof of his own secretion. The shaggy 
head, as big as a man's, oddly gave 
the suggestion of a neck-like attach


ment between itself and the thorax 
as the creature turned to regard Carstairs. The eyes that stared at him 
were big and lidless, yet almost human. 

"I am B'jak," the words came 
from the spider-mouth in clacking 
monosyllables. 

"You — speak ! " gasped Carstairs, 
amazed. 

"And why not?" the creature called 
B'jak responded. "As a matter of fact, 
my friend, I am something of a linguist. My webs and my knowledge 
of language — these keep me occupied 
when otherwise Gordak's strange trade 
would drive me insane. Of course I 
speak: I have mastered fourteen languages, mostly outer-world dialects, 
with which I amuse myself." B'jak 
dropped soundlessly from his web to 
the floor. He clicked again: "Since 
you are fully human, you are obviously not a new addition to Gordak's cargo. I assume you are the 
new astrogator." 

Carstairs told him he was. But his 
thoughts whirled hopelessly distant 
from his role here on the P. T. Barnum. This spider man had intelligence equal to a human's. Yet he was 
caged to perform at Gordak's shows; 
chained to the will of Gordak; his life 
a feeble flame which Gordak could 
snuff out with no consequences whatever. 

TTHE SPIDER-HEAD nodded on 
the suggestion of a neck. "I 
know what you think, astrogator. 
Someday, perhaps, this will not be. 
In the meanwhile, Gordak accentuates the gravity of the situation by — " 

Carstairs had not heard the outer 
lock open, so engrossed had he been 
with the spider man. Nor did he hear 
Gordak, relieved of his space-suit, 
come stomping down the corridor. 
The door opened suddenly. 

"Mr. Carstairs," the half-breed's 



no 



 



tones were ice, "I thought I told you 
to keep to your instruments. If you 
will be kind enough to leave?" 

Wordless, Carstairs withdrew. But 
something told him io remain within 
sight of the open doorway, and he 
did. He saw Gordak remove a coiled 
lash from his thick belt, saw B'jak 
cower in a corner opposite his web 
of tapestry. Gordak approached the 
web. He looked at it. If there was 
admiration on his face, it left quickly, and Carstairs could see auger 
replace it. 

He watched the lash flick up and 
then down in sure strokes. It slashed 
cruelly into the silver tapestry, and 
moments later, all that was left was 
a tangled mass of gray cottony stuff. 
B'jak cowered in his corner, as a 
spider might retreat to the furthest 
corner of its web when a housewife 
appears with her broom. But, muttering to himself, Gordak left the cubicle. 

In the corridor, he collided with 
Carstairs. He glared at the astrogator, almost on the verge of raising 
his lash again. Finally, he turned on 
his heel and disappeared down the 
corridor. 

Carstairs returned to B'jak's cubicle and called the spider man's name 
several times, but B'jak remained sulking in his corner, unaware of him or 
choosing to ignore him. After a time, 
he returned to the pilot's quarters. 

Presently, Gordak entered. He made 
utterly no reference to the incident 
and Carstairs for his part had no 
desire to broach the subject. Gordak, 
in fact, seemed entirely pleased with 
something. He even smiled his mirthless smile, as he told Carstairs to compute an orbit for Earth. "You may 
radio ahead to New York spaceport," 
Gordak concluded, "and blast off 
whenever you are ready." 

The computation of an orbit is not 
hard work. Much of it is mechanical, 



since the orbit is only a temporary 
one anyway, allowing plenty of room 
for what the spacemen call "ether 
drift" or for any chance encounter 
with cosmic debris. As one half of 
Carstair's brain computed, the other 
half actively considered the strangeness of his employer. Could the apparent motiveless malignity of Gordak 
be explained by the appearance of the 
man ? His body was gnarled and twisted, forged in heli-fires by a cross-eyed 
demon. And his face was a catastrophe. Thick and leathery Martian skin 
hung in great folds from the gaunt 
cheek-bones, draped loosely over the 
sunken cheeks, puffed as if filled with 
air under the deep-set eyes. The nose 
was twisted and broken, it seemed, 
in a score of places, and the mouth 
stretched out in a perpetual leer made 
all the more hideous when Gordak attempted to smile. 

Now, thought the astrogator, If 
Gordak sensed that bis features instilled nothing but revulsion for him 
in men, did he attempt to save his 
warped self-respect by asserting his 
own superiority over the other world 
denizens in his circus troupe? 

Did Gordak vent a thoroughly agitated spleen on B'jak the loan Spider 
Man and the score of other performers 
under his control ? Carstairs found 
this to be a distinct possibility, and 
his attempted indifference to Gordak's 
policies began to move aside and prepare for the entrance of hatred. 

All this went through his mind as 
he computed the orbit, but he forgot 
it momentarily when he pressed the 
blasting levers and lifted the P. T. 
Barnum off the southern tundras. In 
a few moments, Mars became a big 
red globe through the rear observation scope, and in another few moments, Carstairs had turned the ship 
over to automatic, stood up, and lit 
a cigarette, 

Gordak called him through inter


SORDAK'S CARGO 



121 



com. "Mr. Carstairs," the voice said, 
metal-toned, "I need some help 'lowdecks." 

Now, the astrogator knew this 
wasn't part of his job, but on the 
other hand, the entire crew of the P. T. 
Sarnum consisted of himself and Gordak. If Gordak wanted him he had no 
choice but to obey. Putting out the 
cigarette, he descended the ramp and 
searched for Gordak. 

'"THE CIRCUS net is an ingenious 
affair. As he neared his employer, 
Carstairs realized that. Whatever Gordak sought upon the tundras of the 
south polar region, it was apparent he 
had found it, apparent that it twisted 
and writhed futilely now in the net. 
On the outside it is like any other net 
of strong wire mesh, but on the inside 
it is sticky like the web of a spider. 
The more a captive animal struggles, 
the more entangled it becomes. 

"As I open the net," said Gordak, 
panting, "you grab the creature if it 
attempts to flee." 

Carstairs nodded. Gordak's hands 
manipulated the zipper front of the 
net, and presently Carstairs could see 
within the opaque mesh. At first there 
was nothing but a gleaming whiteness, 
but as Gordak spread the opening 
apart to relieve the adhesion, he saw 
an arm, a delicately molded arm of 
glistening white, of a pale sparkling 
white that only the Martian snows, 
untouched and utterly virgin in the 
thin, dustless air, could match. 

"I will call her Snow," Gordak 
declared as the gir! sat up, as one 
might matter-of-factly dub a pet mongrel. 

The girl stood free of her prison 
slowly, like one unaccustomed to the 
newness of a situation, and in no hurry to find out about it. Carstairs 
gasped. If he had ever seen so beautiful a girl before it was in one of 
those fanciful dreams which comes 



once in a lifetime and which you 
know is a d:eam because of the 
impossible beauty of your vision. 

He had to admit, grudgingly, that 
"Snow" was a good name. The whiteness of the girl was of new alabaster, 
of the flawless white that a pearl 
tries to capture but cannot. Even the 
hair, flowing in a cascade of tresses 
almost to her waist, was a sparkling 
silver, an incredible billowing of molten mica. 

Carstairs blushed. The crown of 
that silvery head reached not to his 
chin, and from it to her delicate feet, 
the girl stood naked. Hurriedly he 
draped his long spaceman's jacket 
over her shoulders. It hung loosely 
half-way down the whiteness of her 
legs and the girl looked quizzically at 
Carstairs as if to say, "Now, whatever did you do that for?" 

He smiled at her reassuringly, and 
she smiled back, then said in a voice 
of molten silver, "Quey esi kor?" 

"Honey," Carstairs responded, "I 
don't understand a word of it, but 
don't you worry. Don't you worry 
about a thing." 

"Oh, come now," chided Gordak, 
fumbling with Snow's arm and leading 
her back towards where B'jak's and 
the other cubicles lay. "She's an outerworld creature, Mr. Carstairs. She may 
look human to you, but that shall 
merely be her appeal to our audience. 
She's hardly human, you know." 

Carstairs snorted angrily. "She is 
human!" he insisted. 

For a long while Gordak stared at 
the incredible whiteness of his prisoner. "Perhaps," he mumbled thickly, "perhaps she is almost — woman. 
Yes—" And frowning, Carstairs saw 
something which must have been dead 
a long time come alive in Gordak's 
eyes. 

As the days passed, Carstairs saw 
almost nothing of Snow. Somewhere 
'low decks she lived in her little cu


122 



 



bicle along with B''jak and the other 
members of Gordak's troupe. As for 
Gordak, the man seemed oddly distracted, like a sleep-walker who awoke 
long enough to snap a cursory order 
or two at his employee, but who 
walked about for the most part completely withdrawn. Once he did see 
the two of them together, when Gordak 
took the girl 'bove-decks for a costume to match her strange beauty. 
The half-breed seemed immensely 
pleased with himself, hut Carstairs 
was aware of a new look in the innocent expression of Snow, a look 
which both questioned and pleaded 
and which, he realized angrily, had 
something of fear in it. He tried to 
catch her eye, and when he fancied 
he did he essayed a brief -smile but 
if Snow saw it she gave it no heed. 

Carstairs found himself grumbling 
half aloud, and for want of something 
better to do, he took the ship off automatic and piloted it himself for a 
while. 

ry\E MORNING when they had 
perhaps bisected the distance between Mars and Earth, Gordak 
seemed oddly unnerved. With Carstairs he had always been taciturn, 
although for him that implied a certain amount of sharpness which bordered upon irritability but never quite 
reached it. He told the astrogator: 

"In the future, Mr. Carstairs, 
whenever my work calls me 'lowdecks, I want you to accompany me. 
Bring this," he added, and gave Carstairs a p.g. gun. 

The wicked, snub-nosed proton-grid 
pistol was deadly at close range. Carstairs knew, but that didn't bother 
him. In the event that it was necessary, he knew he could handle the 
weapon. But why should Gordak suddenly need him in such a capacity? 
His sadistic handling of the troupe, 
as evidenced by B'jak, had resulted in 



nothing but a stoney hatred. Now if 
he felt danger lurked ! Iow-decks— 
Carstairs frowned. 

That very afternoon— for convenience, interplanetary voyages are run 
on earth mean time— he joined Gordak in a descent of the ramp. He had 
never seen the creatures of Gordak's 
troupe in their period of recreation, 
but it was apparent to him that they 
could not remain indefinitely in their 
tiny cubicles. What had been the main 
hold of the ship was converted into 
a sort of bare lounge, and to this they 
made their way. 

Never had Carstairs seen anything 
like the scene which met his eyes. If 
a Djinn conducted him on a tour of 
fairyland where elves and gnomes and 
giants and other nameless things 
might play, he would have seen something like it. All the odd creatures 
of a dozen faraway worlds milled 
about in little groups talking. At first 
it seemed impossible to Carstairs that 
they could so talk among themselves, 
but then he was aware of the dark 
bulk of B'jak scurrying about from 
group to group, clicking rapidly with 
his strange voice. For all these creatures the spider man was a master 
linguist ! 

Carstairs took all this in with one 
swift glance, and he would have noticed more, except that at that moment 
he saw Snow. He would have noticed 
that as Gordak entered the lounge, 
the tones of the score of voices 
changed. The languages, of course, he 
could not comprehend: there was no 
Lingua Franca among the denizens 
of Gordak's cargo. But the tones 
changed : resentment replaced what 
had been a babble of conversational 
voices; resentment which Gozed hatred 
in a score of different languages. 
B'jak's clacking became sharper, agitated, frenzied. Then it became sullen, and all the voices were silenced. 

None of this Carstairs noticed. He 



GORDAK'S CARGO 



123 



saw Snow. If he had thought the girl 
beautiful in her wild innocence that 
first day aboard the circus ship, he 
thought her vastly more so now when 
fear covered the innocence like a 
cloak. This time he was sure he had 
caught her eye and when he smiled 
again, she hesitated, almost as though 
for an instant her heart poised undecided before the next beat. Carstairs 
realized that perhaps she associated 
him with Gordak. But then she smiled 
wanly herself and the fear crept from 
her face as he neared her, 

"Keep your gun ready, Mr. Carstairs," Gordak barked, sending his 
creatures one by one through their 
acts. "Step back against that wall, 
please, and remain alerted." 

Carstairs shrugged helplessly and 
did as he was bid, accutely conscious 
of the fear again on Snow's face. 

He drew his eyes away from the 
girl and watched. Now Gordak's rubbery Callistian gyrated about the 
lounge, manipulating his body in incredible contortions. Carstairs knew 
his limbs and torso were jointed like 
the body of a serpent rather than a 
man's, yet still he watched, fascinated. 

A stumble, a mis-step, the slightest 
indication of what to Gordak was an 
unwarranted clumsiness, and the little half-breed would snap his whip, 
shooting the thin lash out across the 
bare shoulders of the Callistian. That 
it hurt was evident by the fact that 
the creatures winced and stumbled all 
the more, but it seemed accustomed to 
such treatment. Gordak felt no fear 
at this point, for he forgot Carstairs 
completely and went about his business, his face twisted in the leer which 
passed for a smile and which Carstairs felt certain had nothing of 
mirth in it. 

A HALF dozen other creatures performed under the tutelage of 



Gordak's whip. Then a giant of a man 
stepped forth, human in form, but 
eight feet tall and proportioned like 
a Hercules, with slate-gray skin and a 
single big green eye surveying Gordak severely from the center of the 
great forehead. Carstairs had heard of 
this creature, had heard of the fabulous strength of Polyphemus, Gordak's Tritonian Cyclops. He watched 
now as the towering being performed 
his feats of strength, bent his metal 
bars, lifted his huge metal weights. 
For all the strength indicated, there 
was something gentle about Polyphemus, and Carstairs saw his utter 
indifference to Gordak's whip as the 
circus-master employed it for what he 
considered a shoddy performance but 
for what, in truth, left Carstairs 
amazed. 

He turned away, slightly sick. Almost human these creatures were — 
surely with as many human traits as 
Gordak himself possessed, yet he treated them like dumb brutes. Well, Carstairs could understand their hatred, 
but he had to admire the Stoical indifference displayed by the performers. He admired it, but he pitied it as 
well. 

Then it was Snow's turn. An angry 
buzzing came from the score of alien 
throats. Their indifference was replaced by hostility. Carstairs could 
sense that, and so could Gordak. 

"Keep your gun ready!" he ordered. 

Carstairs fingered the gun and then 
replaced it in his pocket. B'jak 
crawled over to him and said, "Greetings, astrogator. I see you watch our 
antics." 

Carstairs smiled. He liked the spider man. "It is an order," he explained. 

"Your weapon — " B'jak began, but 
he left the sentence unfinished, aware 
that Carstairs was not listening. 

Snow had started her dance. 

Gordak had robed her in a trans


124 



 



lucent gown of palest blue, a film of 
clear sea-water on the moon's surface 
as Snow's limbs sparkled and flashed 
beneath it. That the dance had captured within it all the voluptuous 
grace of her sex, this Snow did not 
know. That her supple gyrations 
flowed like a stream of the molten 
silver her hair resembled, this too she 
did not know. But Carstairs realized 
it; he knew that .Gordak's albino girl 
danced with an inherent femininity 
which would make all other women 
seem as stiff as automatons. 

Gordak's albino girl! He did not 
like the sound of it. 

Around the room and around again 
whirled Snow. She was lost in the 
maze of her motion: nothing else mattered. For a time, Gordak too seemed 
lost in the beauty of what he watched. 
But there was something loathsome 
about his eyes as they followed 
Snow's flowing pirouettes. The ugliness of his frame, the demoniac countenance; these were as nothing: the 
eyes were pits of hellish desire, intent 
upon Snow! 

After a time, the girl saw Gordak's 
face. She trembled a little, she forgot 
her dance. She stumbled momentarily 
and whimpered, uncomprehending but 
afraid. With an effort Gordak shook 
his head to clear it. He struck out 
with his lash, flicked it across the 
girl's white shoulder. 

A score of throats groaned, muttered, threatened in a score of languages, Stoic no morel 

Snow winced and stumbled again. 
The whip flashed out. Polyphemus 
the Tritonian Cyclops stood up. His 
great barrel of a chest heaved. He 
strode forward one giant step, and 
another. 

B'jak clacked a warning at him in 
some unknown language. 

Polyphemus' giant fists clenched 
and unclenched. A great tear welled up 
in his Cyclops eye, gushed forth, rolled 



down the length of his nose, splashed 
on his tunic. The giant was crying! 

W/'ITH AN oath, Gordak turned 
upon the huge figure. He 
looked long and long into the great 
eye, then he shrugged. "Enough for 
now," he told Carstairs, chuckling. 
"Do you like my show? On earth 
they'll love it. And how they will 
adore my Snow!" 

Wordless, Carstairs watched the 
little figure mount the ramp. Gordak 
turned once and glanced at Snow, 
slumped against a wall, head bowed. 
For an instant that look of loathsome 
intent crept again into his eyes. Then 
he wheeled about and strode up the 
ramp. Carstairs fingered the p.g. gun 
in his pocket, took it out, sighted up 
the ramp towards Gordak. Cursing, 
he hurled the gun to the floor. 

A moment later, he was aware of a 
pressure on his thigh. He looked down 
and saw B'jak the spider man pulling for attention at his trouser leg. 

"She's been here less than a week," 
the loan clicked, "and already they all 
love her." 

"What do you mean?" 

"I have never seen anything like 
it. There is not a being in this lounge 
who would not die for Snow. She is 
so kind, so divinely simple, so understanding. She feels for us all. Everytime Gordak used his lash, it is as if 
he used it on her. She cries. It works 
both ways, astrogator. You saw Polyphemus?" 

"I saw," said Carstairs. "He would 
have killed Gordak — " 

"I know. I stopped him. I cannot 
stop him indefinitely. That is why 
Gordak asked you to join him. If — " 

Overhead, a light winked on. Gordak's voice blared forth. "Mr. Carstairs, I told you you are to tend to 
your own business. Come 'bove-decks, 
please." 

As Carstairs turned to go, Snow 



GORDAK'S CARGO 



12S 



confronted him. She stood on tiptoes 
and peered into his eyes as if in that 
way she could understand him better 
than if she had known him all her 
life. For a long while she peered 
thus, one hand soft and warm on 
t Carstairs 1 shoulder. Then she backed 
away, smiling at him. "Klar esni o 
nan," her voice tinkled. 

"What does she say?" Carstairs 
demanded. 

"She says," B'jak told him, " 'this 
one is different.' " 

COR THREE days Gordak said 
^ nothing beyond what was absolutely necessary to Carstairs. Each 
lived in his own private world of 
thoughts, except when Gordak had a 
desire to venture 'low-decks, at which 
time he ordered the astregator to 
accompany him. 

The P. T. Barnum was coasting 
in free-flight now, and Carstairs knew 
that in a matter of hours he would 
have to begin deceleration. Already 
the lopsided dumbell of the earthmoon system assumed big proportions in the observation window, 
growing all the time. Here in space, 
with no atmosphere to intervene and 
discolor, the moon seemed as silverwhite as the delicate skin of Snow. 

Gordak entered the pilot chamber. 
From the way he weaved uncertainly 
against first one wall and then the 
other of the narrow passageway, Carstairs knew he had been drinking 
heavily. It reminded him oddly of 
the days when each spaceship floated 
in space without a gravity-equalizer. 

The gnarled hand of the half-breed 
rested heavily on his shoulder. "Mr. 
Carstairs," he said, "I am going 'lowdecks." 

Carstairs got up, preparing to put 
the ship on automatic. 

Gordak shook his head. "That will 
not be necessary. Just give me your 
gun." 



The pilot looked at him. Hell, he 
thought. There's no telling what he 
might do down there. But Gordak was 
his employer. Besides, it was Gordak 's weapon, not his. And jobs were 
scarce. He remembered a week on 
Mars when he had not eaten enough 
to keep the desert chill out of his 
bones. 

He gave the p.g. gun to Gordak. 

The little man turned on his twisted legs and stalked down the passageway. For a time, Carstairs heard 
his steps grow fainter, heard them descending the ramp. Then, silence. 

He did not know how long he sat 
there, waiting. But presently a little 
whimpering sound reached his ears. 
He jumped out of his chair. Was 
that the voice of Snow? Silence. 

Came the whimper again. Lord, he 
was jumpy. He must not let his imagination run away with him. 

Carstairs heard the angry grinding 
of metal on metal, then a loud slam. 
Gordak had bolted the 'low-decks 
door. 

The circus-master's steps stamped 
heavily up the ramp. In order to go 
to his own quarters, he would have to 
pass through the pilot chamber. 
Tense — yet he knew not why — Carstairs waited. 

Gordak appeared in the doorway, 
leading Snow by one slim white arm. 
Carstairs stepped forward, muttering 
under his breath. He reached out. 

"Stop, Mr. Carstairs. I warn you, 
stop." Gordak levelled the gun at 
him, steadily. "Now back up. Sit 
down in your seat, please." 

Numbly, Carstairs retreated and sat 
down heavily. Snow looked at him 
again, mutely. This time she did not 
like what she saw, for she turned 
her head and cried softly. 

"Snow — " Carstairs began, but Gordak waved him to silence with his gun. 
Leading the girl behind him, he passed 
through the pilot chamber and into 



 



his own quarters. He closed and bolted the door behind him. 

Carstairs sat there dumbly. Gordak wouldn't dareHe heard an angry battering from 
'low-decks, the clash of metal pounding stridently against metal. Then a 
dull thud. The heavy tred of footsteps up the ramp. 

HTHE HUGE bulk of Polyphemus 
entered the pilot chamber. Behind him crawled B'jak. The great 
single eye of the giant stared at Carstairs for a moment, then B'jak 
clacked something. Polyphemus 
passed through the control room. 

Carstairs heard a great crashing 
sound, repeatedly, like the blows of 
some mighty sledge. He could picture 
the huge fist smashing against Gordak's door. Crashing no more — 

He heard an oath from Gordak, 
heard the blast of the p.g. gun and a 
cry from Snow. He stood bolt upright 
and ran for the passage to Gordak's 
quarters. 

A mighty arm thrust him aside. He 
fell back hard against the wall. 

Polyphemus plunged back through 
the pilot chamber, a kicking and clawing Gordak under one arm. The other 
arm, the one that had hurled Carstairs away, hung limp and bloody 
where the blast from Gordak's gun 
had ripped into it. Down the ramp 
the giant disappeared, 

"Mr. Carstairs!" Gordak cried. 
"Help me. Another gun in the 
chest — " 

Carstairs charged into Gordak's 
quarters. He couldn't let the Tritoni


an take a human like this, even if it 
were Gordak. He couldn't — 

He opened the chest in Gordak's 
quarters and searched about for the 
gun. He found it. 

B'jak touched his leg. "Why not, 
astrogator?" 

Carstairs pushed B'jak away, 
turned to descend the ramp. He saw 
Snow sitting on a chair, watching 
him, a tear in each eye, a crimson welt 
on the side of her face. Mutely, her 
eyes implored. She stared in that uncanny way of hers, reading Carstairs 
it seemed. Then she relaxed. 

Slowly, he dropped the gun. He 
heard screams dimly from somewhere 
'low-decks. He stood still, hardly 
breathing. He remembered B'jak's 
words again, "Why not, astrogator?" 

Later, much later, he jettisoned 
Gordak's body in space, watched it 
puff incredibly fast and float towards the moon. These space accidents were regrettable. 

"Well," said the tourist, after a 
long silence, "so that's what really 
happened. That's the story of Gordak 
and the Snow-maid." 

"That's the story," the spaceman 
nodded, finishing his ptah. He got up 
to go. 

"But wait," the tourist insisted. 
"What happened to Snow?" 

A woman walked over to the table. 
She took the spaceman's hand in hers 
and smiled up at him lovingly from 
under the mass of her billowy silver 
hair. 

"She got married," Carstairs said, 
kissing his wife on the forehead. 



THE END 