THE BOY WHO CRIED WOLF 35? by Kendall Foster Cross 

LAWNS WERE sprinkled with 
new green and the buds in the 
nearby forest were swollen with 
color the day spring came to Universe 
City. A small boy ran out of a white 
suburban house. A cap pistol, with 
ivory handle, rode snugly in the silver-studded holster which was tied to 
his leg with real rawhide. When the 
boy reached the empty lots on the 
corner, he stopped and surveyed the 
streets with the experienced eye of a 



ten-year-old. Not an adult around. 

From one pocket, he drew a large 
kitchen match. He squatted on the 
sidewalk, pulled the head of the match 
along the concrete until it disappeared 
in flame. He held the match on a level 
with his eyes, watching the red and 
yellow flame. It climbed to a shimmering nothing, a thin thread of smoke 
picking up where the flame left off, 
and try as he could the boy was 
unable to see the next step in its 



107 



 



change. His gaze dropped and he 
watched the flame as it crept along 
the match stick, slowly squeezing the 
sap from the wood, its trail a blackened curl behind it. 

It was then that Bobby Edwards 
heard the voice within his head. 

Only it wasn't actually a voice. It 
was more like a thought— -one that 
somebody else was- thinking. He 
looked around, but the streets were 
still deserted. In some way, he knew 
the thought wasn't for him, that he 
was overhearing something that was 
private. He settled back on his heels, 
the dying match in his fingers, and 
listened. . . . 

•yHE SCREEN door closed with a 
bang. Bobby Edwards slid across 
the floor into his father's study, 
watching with interest as his father 
winced then forced a smile as he 
looked up from the papers he was 
grading. 

"I wonder if rubber doors would 
help?" Harlow Edwards said mildly. 
"Or would that set up a destructive 
frustration?" 

Bobby wasn't sure what his father 
was talking about, but he recognized 
the tone. It was the one his father 
used when he was only half serious. 
So he ignored it and came to the reason for his swift return. 

"Dad," he said excitedly, "what is 
Wolf 359? Is it an animal?" 

Harlow Edwards looked startled. 
"Wolf 359?" he repeated. "Where'd 
you hear about it?" 

"Somewhere," Bobby said vaguely. 
"What is it, huh?" 

"It think it's a star," his father said, 
not too sure of his ground. "A minor 
star, I believe, and pretty far away. 
Why?" 

"I heard somebody thinking," 
Bobby said. "It was like a tickling 
inside of my head but I understood 



almost all of it. A funny somebody—" 
He giggled — "Dad, did you ever see 
anybody who looked like a fire?" 

His father's lips pulled up at the 
corners. "No, but I've known a few 
who acted as if they were on fire. 
Never mind," he added hastily. "Tell 
me about the thoughts that tickled." 

"Well, they look like fires," Bobby 
said stubbornly. "There's lots of them 
and they're in a big ship that's maybe like our furnace on the inside only 
much bigger. I guess maybe they come 
from Wolf 359. Anyway, they're on 
their way here and they're going to 
land some time tomorrow. Right in 
the big woods here." 

There was a strange look on his 
father's face and then it faded to be 
replaced by an expression which Bobby knew well. He sighed, wondering 
why it was that no matter what you 
said adults would always twist it 
around some way. 

"Well," his father was saying, 
"that's quite an idea for a story, Bobby. Why don't you run along and 
think about it some more and then 
you can tell me the whole thing at 
lunch?" 

Without waiting for an answer, he 
had turned back to the stack of papers in front of him. Bobby shook his 
head and trudged from the room. 
Adults, he thought, were funny— almost as funny as the man he'd heard 
thinking. He went through the kitchen, scooping up some more matches 
when his mother wasn't looking. 

There was a tree in the Edwards' 
back yard, a towering beech which 
had often served as the jungle which 
was Tarzan's special domain. Bobby 
swung up into it, hooked his knees 
over a limb, rested his shoulders 
against another and relaxed. He 
struck a match on the trunk and 
stared at the flame. The thoughts 
had come more clearly when he had 
held the burning match .... 



THE BOY WHO CRIED WOLF 359 



109 



T_JE WAS still at it when his mother 
called him to lunch, but he 
obediently snuffed the match out 
against the tree and slid to the 
ground. Knowing that it was necessary, he detoured through the bathroom, dabbed bits of water on his 
face and then used the towel to rub 
off the smudges of dirt. He slid into 
his place at the table just as his father entered the dining room. 

"You'd think," his father said to his 
mother, "that a simple narrative style 
would not be too much to expect from 
university students in creative English. 
But most of them show less clarity and 
far less imagination than Bobby." 

"That," said Bobby's mother, "is 
undoubtedly due to the fact that your 
students don't have the advantage of 
a father who is a full professor." 

"I doubt if my influence is that 
telling," Harlow Edwards said. "My 
son's imagination outstrips my own. 
By the way, Bobby, how is your 
story coming along?" 

"It's not a story," Bobby said, 
pushing the words around the half 
sandwich in his mouth. "I heard them 
thinking again." 

"Don't talk with your mouth full 
of food," his mother said. "Now, 
what's this about hearing people 
think?" 

"Bobby came in this morning with 
a wonderful idea for a story," his father explained. "What did they think 
this time, Bobby?" 

While he washed th« sandwich down 
with milk, Bobby debated the possibility of arguing the point now or 
waiting until he had added the new information. He decided on the latter. 

"It ain't just a visit," he said, "like 
I thought at first. They're coming to 
fight us." 

"Do they still look like fires?" 

Bobby nodded. 

"Well," said his father, "I guess 
we'd better stock up on matches — so 



we can fight fire with fire." 

"Don't make fun of him," Bobby's 
mother said. "You know what Dr. 
Stocker said about imaginative children. Why do they want to fight us, 
Bobby?" 

"They need a new place to live and 
they picked here. The place where 
they've always lived ain't any good 
any more." 

"That would be Wolf 359?" his father asked. 

"Yeah. I think they looked at a lot 
of other places but decided on this 
one instead." 

"How are they going to fight us, 
Bobby?" 

"They ain't really going to fight 
us," Bobby said, "but they're going 
to set everything on fire and it'll be 
too hot for any of us to live. That's 
what they thought, anyway." 

"Why are they going to set the 
whole earth on fire?" 

"So that their own fires won't go 
out," Bobby said promptly. "Remember, I said each one of them is a fire? 
But if it goes out, they die. And that's 
what's going to happen to them if they 
stay on Wolf 359." 

"Well," said his father, "if they 
only want a hot place why don't they 
land on our sun? That ought to be 
hot enough for them." 

"They thought of that, Dad, but I 
guess the sun is a little too hot for 
them and won't cool off enough for 
millions of years. But they figure that 
the earth will get just hot enough if 
they start a chain — a chain — " 

"Chain reaction," his father suggested. 

"That's it," Bobby said eagerly. He 
sat up straighter in his chair. "They're 
going to land tomorrow in Hutchins 
Forest, right here next to Universe 
City. Dad, you've got to tell everyone in town and have them there 
when the sliip lands. And they gotta 
have a lot of water and all the fire 



110 



 



trucks and everything. You gotta do 
it, Dad, or it'll be too late." 

"Wait a minute, son, let's not get 
too excited. It's only a story, after 
all." 

"It isn't," Bobby exclaimed. He 
screwed up his eyes the way he did 
when it was important that they believe him. "It isn't. It's all true. I 
heard them think every bit of it." 

"Of course, it's true, Bobby," his 
mother said. She turned to his father 
and spoke in the guarded tones she 
sometimes used. "Harlow, why don't 
you and Bobby take a walk after 
lunch?" 

"Probably is a good idea," his father said. "Some of these things get a 
little too involved for me .... Like to 
take a walk with me after lunch, 
Bobby?" 

"Sure," Bobby said. He knew what 
the walk meant, but that was all right 
too. The more people who knew about 
it the better. 

WHEN LUNCH was over, Harlow Edwards went into his 
study and they could hear the low 
murmur of his voice as he talked to 
someone on the phone. Bobby didn't 
try to hear what was being said. He 
had a good idea, so he concentrated 
on seeing if he could hear the thoughts 
again. He couldn't and after a look at 
his mother's face he decided not to 
strike a match. He hunched down in 
his chair and rubbed the snail shell 
in his pocket. 

When his father came out of the 
study, he was wearing his hat. "Let's 
go, Bobby," he said. 

They walked down the quiet street 
of Universe City and Bobby was 
thinking what it would look like after 
they came. Like a big match, he finally decided. 

When his father stopped in front of 
an office building in the business section, Bobby was not surprised. Still, 



he waited for his father to speak, 

"Well," his father said with an 
air of studied casualness, "here we 
are at Dr. Stoker's office building. 
What do you say we drop in and 
chew the fat with him if he isn't busy? 
I haven't seen Doc in a week or so.'' 

"Okay," Bobby said, suppressing a" 
giggle. He remembered all the other 
times that he'd said or done something 
to confuse his father and they had always taken a walk which somehow 
ended in a visit to the same office 
building. Fathers were funny, he'd 
decided long before, and that explained everything. 

They walked up the one flight of 
stairs and into an office. The nurse 
looked op, smiled at his father and 
disappeared through the door back of 
her. A moment later, Dr. Stoker appeared, a grin on his face. 

"Hi, Harlow, it's good to see you," 
he said. "Hiya, Bobby." 

"We were just walking' by and 
thought we'd drop in to see you," 
Bobby's father explained. "Of course, 
if you're busy — " 

"Not at all. The children of Universe City are just too healthy to 
need a psychiatrist. Nothing wrong 
with any of them that a bicycle or a 
new cap gun won't fix — eh, Bobby? 
Come on in." 

HTHEY FOLLOWED him into the 
private office and Bobby stared 
idly out of the window while his father and the doctor talked about golf 
and baseball. This, he recognized, was 
part of the game so he waited patiently, 

"Say, Bobby," his father said suddenly, with a false air of being struck 
by a new thought, "why don't you 
tell Doc here about your sto — about 
Wolf 359? I'll bet he'd like to hear 
it." 

"Okay," Bobby said indifferently. 
When adults refused to believe you, 



THE BOY WHO CRIED WOLF 359 



111 



he'd learned that it worked better to 
pretend it wasn't too important. He 
repeated the things he'd told his father, watching the way the doctor's 
face kept showing surprise and interest. 

"That's quite a story, Bobby," the 
doctor said when he'd finished. 
"Quite a story for a boy of your age. 
Did you make it up entirely by yourself or did someone help you?" 

"It's not a story," Bobby explained 
patiently. "I heard them thinking all 
of that. They thought some more that 
I could only hear part of because I 
didn't have any matches to light. It 
helps when I light a match. I guess 
maybe they're so close now that's 
why it helps." 

"Not* a story, eh?" the doctor said. 
He swung his chair around and twisted his mouth as though he were going to whistle. He stared at the ceiling the way he had the time Bobby 
had told him about the horsehair that 
turned into a snake. "Not a story, 
eh? Let me see now — seems to me I 
remember something about Wolf 359." 
He winked at Bobby's father. "What 
do you know about it, Bobby?" 

"It's then home, that's all, I guess," 
Bobby said. "It's something like the 
earth only it's all covered with fire." 

"I should think it would be," the 
doctor said. "Wolf 359 is a star so 
far away you can't see it unless you 
have a pretty powerful telescope. It's 
about the faintest star we know 
about. But it's a red star, which 
means it's pretty hot. You know how 
hot boiling water is, Bobby?" 

"Yeah." 

"Well, boiling water is only a little more than two hundred degrees 
hot, but Wolf 359 has a mean temperature of about six million degrees. 
Now, how do you think anyone could 
live there?" 

"They ain't people," Bobby explained. "Not like us anyway. They 



look like a tall fire, maybe." 

"You mean they're just flames all 
the way through? No bones or anything?" 

"Sort of." Bobby struggled for 
words to cover the thoughts he'd 
heard. "Inside, they're mostly pure — 
pure carbon." 

"I guess they'd have to be at that," 
the doctor said with a laugh. "Now, 
look, Bobby— have you got a name 
for these people? You know, like 
we're humans." 

Bobby shook his head. "I guess 
maybe they've got a name for themselves, but they didn't think it. One 
of them, he's kind of like a captain, 
is called Shrxl. But I don't know 
about all of them." 

"No name, huh?" the doctor said. 
"Well, then, let's look at another angle. What did you say they're going 
to do to our earth when they get 
here?" 

"Set it on fire. Then when everything is burning, the rest of them will 
get in ships and come here." 

"Why do they want to set the 
earth on fire, Bobby?" 

"They have to so they can live 
here," Bobby explained once more. 
"They can't live anywhere unless it's 
hotter than anything." 

"But," said the doctor, and he 
looked triumphant, "the temperature 
is six million degrees on Wolf 359. 
So why don't they just stay there?" 

"Because it's cooling off," Bobby 
said. He was thinking about how long 
it took adults to understand anything. 
"Pretty soon it'll be too cold there 
and they'll all die. That's why they 
have to find a place with plenty of 
carbon," 

"I see," the doctor said. He leaned 
back and placed the tips of his fingers 
together. "Now, you say they're going to land in Hutchins Forest tomorrow morning?" 

"That's right." 



112 



 



"Now, why do you suppose they're 
picking that spot to land in? You got 
any ideas on that, Bobby?" 

"Sure. They were thinking there's 
lots and lots of coal under the ground 
there and once they set fire to it then 
everything else will catch fire from 
it like a — a chain— reaction." 

"That ought to prove something," 
Bobby's father said, looking at the 
doctor. "There never has been any 
coal fields around Universe City." 

•"THERE WAS a funny expression 
on the doctor's face. "Not exactly, 
Harlow," he said. "They've just recently discovered that there is a very 
rich vein of coal under the Hutchins 
Forest." He lowered his voice. "Must 
have heard someone talking about it." 
He turned back to Bobby. "Anything else, Bobby?" 

"No, sir— except that everybody in 
town ought to be warned and everybody ought to be out there when they 
come. I — I think they're afraid of 
water and maybe of guns — at least, 
they're afraid we'll have some sort 
of terrible weapons." 

"Of course, we'll have to do something about it," the doctor said 
promptly, but it was a tone which 
Bobby recognized and so he gave up 
hope. "Now, Bobby," the doctor continued,"" "why don't you look at those 
magazines over there while I talk to 
your father? I think you might even 
find a comic book or two if you look 
real hard." 

Bobby obediently marched across 
the room and started looking at the 
magazines, but by straining he could 
hear quite a bit of what the doctor 
was saying to his father. 

"Nothing to worry about," the doctor said, his voice low. "It's very common for children to believe these 
things are real .... many cases where 
they believe that imaginary play


mates are real. . . .mustn't frustrate 
him, .. .question of directing his imagination into more productive channels, that's all ... . Probably comes out 
of an interest in fire. . . . Why don't 
you try buying him one of those chemistry sets for kids? Amazing kits. . . . 
have everything up to and including 
miniature atomic explosions .... work 
at it with him and you'll find he'll 

forget all about Wolf 359 

Although it would be interesting to 
know where he learned about it. It 
doesn't even have a separate listing 
in the encyclopedia ..." 

Bobby put down the magazine and 
walked out with his father. He made 
no more mention of the fire-men who 
were coming. Once, just before they 
arrived home, his father brought it 
up again, but Bobby only said: "Oh, 
thatl" and threw a small rock at a 
sparrow. During the rest of the afternoon, he chased the neighbor's cat, 
tied one of his mother's hair ribbons 
on a dog and skinned both knees while 
rollerskating. 

"CARLY THE next morning, as soon 
as he finished breakfast, Bobby 
went to his room and put on his Hopalong Cassidy shirt and pants. He 
buckled on his belt and holster, tying the holster down to his leg. He 
stood in front of the mirror and 
twirled his Western Hero gun several 
times and then jammed it into the 
holster. After some thought, he dug 
up another old holster and rigged it 
up to fit under his armpit, out of 
sight beneath his buckskin vest. He 
fitted his repeater water pistol in to 
this and swaggered from the room. 

"Thank heavens," he heard hi3 
mother say as he left the house, "he's 
reverted to being a cowboy again." 

He stopped once to exchange a few 
words with Sonny Elliott, who took 
one look at the low-slung holster and 
knew its importance. 



THE BOY WHO CRIED WOLF 359 



113 



"Where you going?" he asked. 

"Hutchins Forest," Bobby said. He 
looked around to see if there were 
any tenderfeet in sight. "There's going to be a raid," he explained. He 
nodded toward the sky. "From up 
there. Wanta come along?" 

"Nah," Sonny said scornfully. "We 
played The Martians Are Coming last 
week — and you made me be the Martians. Besides I'm building— something." 

He was mysterious, but Bobby 
wasn't interested. Instead, he brushed 
aside the mystery with a careless wave 
and went on. He skirted the university 
campus and shortly came out on the 
edge of the forest. 

Entering the forest, he began to 
slip from tree to tree, going so quietly that not a single squirrel scolded 
him for the invasion. 

A few minutes later he reached the 
spot, deep in the woods, where there 
was a slight clearing. It was there 
that he was sure the ship would land. 
He crouched behind a giant oak and 
took up the long vigil, pretending to 
roll a brown paper cigarette. 

And at last it came, with a hiss and 
a sort of silent roar that shook the 
very ground beneath his feet. Like a 
huge ball, the side shimmering with 
contained heat, it dropped between 
the trees and settled to the ground. 
Wisps of smoke drifted up from 
where it touched and the fresh air 
of the forest took on a scorched smell. 
Green leaves shriveled and curled 
where it had brushed against them in 
passing. 

For several minutes it lay there, inert, little flames licking up from the 
dead leaves beneath it. A large square 
patch turned iridescent and vanished, 
leaving a hole from which poured fire. 
The flames reached farther out, twisted hungrily in the air, and began to 
take on form. Each flame budded and 
grew, until a dozen of the flame-men 



stood on the ground, the earth smoldering beneath their febrile feet. Their 
bodies were slender and lambent, 
changing from yellow to deep orange, 
their heads curling to a blueness that 
almost matched the air. Blazing and 
questing, they turned this way and 
that, yearning for the carbon beneath 
tlie ground. 

Crouched behind his tree, Bobby 
Edwards ("marshal" of Universe 
City) brought his hand down in a 
lightning draw, his gun clearing the 
holster without a whisper of sound. 
His left hand fanned down across the 
hammer and the cap cracked spitefully. The flame-men turned to meet the 
tiny flash, their leader swirling nearer 
to the tree. 

"COR A BRIEF moment, flame-man 
and earth-boy stared deeply into 
each other and in that minute the boy 
knew that neither cap nor bullet could 
dim the threatening glow. Straightening up, he flung the Western Hero 
gun into the blaze, watched the metal 
melt and flow. Even as one of the 
flame-men moved toward him, flaring brightly in anticipation, Bobby 
Edwards brought out his water pistol 
in a cross-draw that would have been 
the envy of any boy in the land, 

The stream of water went true to 
its mark, steamed and hissed as it 
struck. The flame-man hesitated, giving up a little of his life in vapor, and 
Bobby Edwards fired again. From 
head and feet, the living fire rushed 
to the wound, forming into an angry 
orange ball. And the water struck — 
struck and struck again. The flames 
licked at the wound and died. Spark 
by spark, the flame-man gave up his 
life, then died in a gush of steam. 
The embers fell to the ground and 
gave their last breath to a dried leaf. 

Flame-men and earth-boy, alike, 
had stood and watched the death 
struggles of the one conquering in


 



vader. The dead ember broke the 
spell. The flame-men wavered, flickering in sudden fear, then fled into 
their ship. The opening in the ship 
flared brightiy and closed. Heat 
flooded from the sides, the metal 
turning an angry red, and the ground 
shook as the great round ball left 
the earth in a rush. It flashed once 
in the sky, like a bright exhaust, and 
was gone. 

The fire in the woods crackled loudly in the remaining silence. Following 
the trail of leaves, it fastened on a 
dead tree, and the flames leaped high. 
Bobby Edeards turned and ran for 
the city. 

On the way, he heard the keening 
wail of a fire siren and knew the 
smoke had been seen. Once he caught 
a glimpse of the red truck hurtling 
through the streets in the direction 
of the forest. 

The screen door banged loudly and 
Bobby skidded to halt in the doorway 
to his father's study. His father was 
bent over a large box, looking as 
pleased as he had at Bobby's first 
train set. Before Bobby could say 
anything, his father looked up and 
gestured happily. 

"Look what we have, Bobby," he 
said. "It's one of the newest chemistry 
sets. I've just been reading the instructions and if we take this bottle of uranium and — " 

He went on in a very real excitement and Bobby began to catch some 
of it. A few minutes later, the two 
of them were busily bringing about a 
minor atomic explosion, while the Universe City firemen were putting out 
the last of the blaze in Hutchins Forest. One of the firemen unknowingly 
stepped on a piece of twisted metal 
and trod it deep into the ground. And 
the chemistry set was such a success 



that the loss of one Western Hero 
cap pistol was never noticed. 

CHRXL LANDED the ship on the 
Flame-Port and, breathing deeply, 
walked through the swirling fire to 
report. 

"Shrxl reporting," he thought to his 
commander, "with one dead. Prtzl was 
killed by an inhabitant of the world 
we visited. My report is that the third 
planet of the sun we observed is unfit 
for habitation. It now supports some 
form of native life — extremely condensed so it must be of a low order — 
which is too dangerous. So barbarous 
are they that even their young carry 
the deadliest weapons known to the 
universe. One such young animal murdered Prtzl and drove the rest of us 
away. We must find a more civilized 
world." 

Shrxl's report was accepted without 
being believed. For centuries the 
flame-men had known the thoughts of 
the strange life on that third planet. 
They knew it was a mighty race, because it had no fear of water, and 
they respected the intelligence of the 
race, had in fact borrowed from that 
intelligence even to accepting its name 
for their home world. So they could 
only conclude that the third planet's 
life form had in some way attacked 
Shrxl with a deadly ray which confused his imagination. 

While the search went on for a habitable world, Shrxl was turned over 
to the care of a flame-therapist. It 
wasn't long before he was so absorbed 
in building miniature water-bombs 
that he completely forgot the horror of 
the day he faced a monster in an alien 
world. 

THE END 


