
Vanguard 

of the 
OOMED 

By GERALD VANCE 



Here are stories so fascinating you'll be transported out of this 
world — out of time and space . . . Interpretations of the 
"other side" so eerie — so shocking, you'll gasp in excitement. 




ADVENTURES 



Answer the challenge to explore the unknown. Pass throug 1 
the forbidden portals of the eternal mysteries with the most 
imaginative minds in the world! 



EVERY STORY A FANTASY CLASSIC 
AT YOUR NEWSSTAND EVERY MONTH 



fl^. H HMB6 A ^0Br* 91 ^ ce ' ne vitable union of 

SBkH| jjBL.- 1^ am J» BBL^ H Science and the Imagina
S^8|B WRnV ^^TO ™ " on fi° a ^y established in 

J Hfettj f 4fa ^y Q a book that changes 

conception of the universe 
as completely as it was revised by Newton and Einstein. 

Living, as we do, at the bottom of the atmosphere, we are really at the 
core, not, as we thought, at the top of the world. Creation stems from us. 
The stars, planets, moons, comets and other heavenly bodies are the Earth's 
electronic accompaniment. Each performs functions in it as vital as those 
of our eyes and hands. 

Until the appearance of this book 

Science-Fiction Writers 
and Their Millions of Readers 

have been like sailors at sea without compass or even a steering-wheel. 
Samuel Roth's The Peep-Role of the Present— introduced by Sir Arthur 
Eddington of the University of Cambridge — has restored them to their 
rightful domain. They can now probe wider, enjoy more deeply. 



DO YOU KNOW THAT: 

the earth is not one of 
points in 



those 
die n 
the 1; 



ight-sky? 
.w of gravity 




velocity? 



Understanding is 
the only badg 
of nobility that time 
does not tarnish. 

Samuel Roth 



The Astonishing Part 

nply written, 
ban a publicjui euuLHLioa to read and 
understand it. 

To prove how sure we 
are that you'll want to 
keep this wonderful 
book once it's in your 
ve'll be 
^ order by 
jf the coupon belet you 

Read It At Our Expense 



pleased 




*m FEBRUARY 1951 



Trade Mark Reqistered U. S. 
Paten 1 Oliice Nob. 37B407 
and 511026 



WILLIAM B. ZIFF 



and Publisher 
B. G. DAVIS 



LYNN PHILLIPS, JR. 

Advertising Director 
H. G. STRONG 

Circularion Director 



HERMAN R, BOLLIM 



L. E. SHAFFER 



&II J-eahiMLA QomfJsds 



THE OBSERVATORY 

By The Editor 

DIANETICS— ? 

CELLULAR LABORATORY 

By H. R. Stanton 

NUMBERS PAY OFF! 

By Milton Matthew , 

THE BOUNCING MOLECULES 

By Carter T. Wainwrlght 

HORSEPOWER HUMBUG . . . 

By Leslie Phelps 

"RUGGEDIZING" 

By A. f. Kadiie 

MIGE1 ROCKET . . . 

By William Karney 

GUTENBERG'S GENIUS 

By Sandy Miller 

HEREDITY AND ATOMS... 

RADAR MATING CALL! 

By Charlie Reeour 

STAR BROADCASTS 

By L. A. Burt 

SOUND MUTANTS! 

. By Jon 'Barry 

VIRUS VENGEANCE 

By Cal Wabk 

PHOGNOST1CATOR PLUS! 

By Pete Bog 9 

CRUSTACEAN PIGEONS! 

By Ma. Long 

TUNING FORKS 

By June Luri. 

WHAT IS LIFE? 

By Ramsey Sinclair 

THE CLUB HOUSE 

By Rog Phillips 

ASTRONOMICAL MADNESS? 

By J. R. MarU . . .\ 

THE READER'S FORUM 



4 



VOLUME 25 



NUMBER 2 



sr'iY STORIES &*nfdete 



VANGUARD OF THE DOOMED [Novelet— 14,000) by Gerald Vance S 

Illustrated by Julian S. Krupa 
Earth Faced destruction, but what bothered Brad Dunn was that a girl he had never met was in dangerl 

THE MAN WHO FORGOT (Novelet— 15,000) by Chariot Creighton 36 

Illustrated by Henry Sharp 
Rond was ready to risl his life to help these strangers— if they would flrsttetl him who he wail 

TERROR OUT OF ZANADU (Novalet— 10,000) by Robert Moore Williams ... 64 

Illustrated by Robert Keys 
H Zanadu's fabled treasure was in danger, why would Its citiien! celebrate by ringing the tower belli? 

THAT A WORLD MIGHT LIVE (Novelet — 14,000) by Burt B. Lisfon 82 

Illustrated by Edmond B. Swiatek 
Thay were hunting for a rare meial — but they found a weird machine from another, and dangerous, world! 

THE BOY WHO CRIED WOLF 35? [Short— 4,800) by Kendall Foster Cross en .... 106 

Illustrated by Leo Ramon Summers 
Had Bobby obeyed his parents' orders not to play with matches, all life would have vanished from Earth! 

GORDAK'S CARGO (Short — 5,800) by Milton Lesser 116 

Illustrated by Henry Sharp 
It was a savage bunch of treats Ggrdalt rounded up. Only one was beautiful— and the most deadly! 

THE WAV OF A V/EEB (Short — 8,400) by H. B. Hictey I2B 

Illustrated by Robert Gibson Jones 
They had only a tiny knife to stave off certain death— and H was in the hand of a whimpering cowardl 

Cover painting by Robert Gibson Jones, suggested by 
• icene from "Vanguard of the Doomed" 




A 1 

the t 



in the 
V-and ; 

w. 



BOUT a month ago one of our readrs gave us a suggestion which, at 
me, aeemed pre# sensible. He had 
mc of our columns in which we bed the lack of fresh story material 



sldon 



ait to 



o-fktio 



ispu 



-the 



the 



l S WE SAID, 



1111,1:^1.10 



3 dug E m 3 to 0 "The m «ub 
use" fiies, selected at random fifteen 
twenty fanzines and spent the better 
rt of two days ^in? through them in 
.rch of a few rookies who might show 
.ugh promise for a tryout in the big 



E CAN TELL y. 
stake and a wi 
that with mucl 



it 



of tin 



it The fact 
re of the famines 
liccSdofiTiiphed and 
iossiblo to read has 
.ir reaction. When 
t are brought out 
loss, that 



ther 



sal 1 



sible 



science fiction 

all— then you'll understand why few . 

them are even planographed, let alor 

actually printed on regular presses. To 



rT DIDN'T take 



t embryo 
pages of 
■mi! 

■ally fas


aloi 



-alili. 



a kind of 
mgh there 
d intelligent 



called "fanzines". According to him, a better than fair percentage of the stories 
contained the very thing we were crying for: new ideas or at least new twists 
to old ideas. He went on to point out that 
some of the most honored names in the 
professional stf magazines had fin 



i that from 
some of the so-called "scoops" 
-items columns were utterly 
s (he statement that ". . .RAP 
didn't ; 



al 



mths 
lazy reporting, 



This : 



plete 



■•HIS IT seems, is on its way to being 
of fandom publicationshad not intended. What we 
did intend was*a report to our readerfriend that his tip about the fanzines was, 
unfortunately, of no value to us. But hefore we close the subject, we would like 
to get in a word or two of praise for 
such publications as Uob Tucker's "Bloomington News Letter" and James V. 
Taurasi's "Fantasy-Times". These two 
stood head, shoulders and torso above the 
others, both from the standpoint of appearance and editorial matter. 



A' 



S THIS colui 



l lot 



around us. Filing cabinets, desks and 
crates of books are being dragged out of 
the office and loaded into waiting trucks. 
Twice, we've had to beat off over-zealous 
moving^ men intent on yanking J;he type


all t 
Advt 



7 Stot 



.rid fa; 
ved to 



York offices, . 
15, I960. We make the move with mingh 
emotions: regret at pulling up 
residing over twenty years in 
feeling of anticipation over nei 



iter 



SO, IN WRITING to either magazine, 
please address your letters and manuscripts to us at S66 Madison Avenue, New 
York 17, N. Y. We'll be there— too! — HB 



The Beast that Ravaged 
a World of Men & Women 

AND BROUGHT THE STIGMA OF SHAME INTO THE 
HOMES OF A WHOLE CONTINENT 




7 



VANGUARD of the DOOMED 



By Qenald Vance 

Was ^il chance alone that sent this meteor 
streaking earthward — or did an alien power 
direct it as an opening bid lor conquest? 




F18W CALLING 
WC33M...WF18W callWC33M. . .WF18W 
calling WC33M. ..." 

He repeated the call over and over 
into the microphone, a pleading note 
in his voice. But the loudspeaker remained silent. It had been silent all 
evening. He had repeated his call at 
half-hour intervals, but there had been 
no answer. 

There had been no answer tor a 
week. 

Frowning at the silent loudspeaker, 
Bradley Dunn lighted a cigarette. He 
thought back over the nightmare 
events of the past week, and he wondered if they formed the reason for 
her silence. He had learned little 
about the girl in the brief month of 
their short-wave radio acquaintance. 
He knew that her name was Faye 
Manning, that she seemed to be a 
radio ham like himself — but that was 
about all. 

Faye Manning. ... A voice from a 
short-wave radio loudspeaker. A voice 
belonging to a girl he had never seen. 

Yet that voice had formed a picture 
of her in his mind. It had told him 
things about her that she had never 



9 



10 



 



put into words. It was soft, cultured, 
breaking frequently into clear, silvery 
laughter. It held no affectation, no 
coyness or pretense. It contained 
warmth and sincerity, a quick intelligence that carried her easily over a 
wide range of knowledge. 

Her voice further told him that she 
was an attractive girl, even though it 
seemed unlikely that an attractive girl 
would indulge in a hobby as sedentary as short-wave radio. She had the 
youth and vitality, the self-confidence and zest for life that went with 
good looks. 

In three years of short-wave radio 
broadcasting Dunn had learned a lot 
about voices. But in those three years 
he had never encountered a voice quite 
like Faye Manning's. It held an inexplicable magnetism, a challenge. It 
was a voice that both revealed and 
concealed. For there was also an odd 
yet persistent quality of mystery 
about her. She avoided speaking of 
herself or her surroundings, somehow 
always managing to keep their conversations on an impersonal basis. 

There were times when she had 
seemed downright furtive — conspiratorial. Her radio contacts with him had 
been brief, hurried, made in a lowpitched tone as though she wished 
to avoid being overheard. 

HPHE LAST TIME he had spoken 
to her— almost exactly a week 
ago— there had been a restrained excitement in her words, a hidden tension. . .a hint of dread. 

"Something has happened, Brad," 
she had said. It was one of the few 
occasions she had used his first name, 
both having begun addressing each 
other by their first names only a short 
while before. "I can't explain, but it's 
very important. This set is going to 
see a lot of use, and so I may not be 
able to keep in touch with you for a 
while, Please try to understand." 



He had pressed for an explanation, 
trying desperately to prevent losing 
contact with her, even temporarily. 
His existence had come to center 
about his talks with her, and the 
thought of having them interrupted 
had been as unpleasant to face as 
that of giving up such a vitally necessary function as sight. 

"What is it, Faye?" he had asked, 
"Is there something I can do?" 

"I'm afraid not. In fact, I don't 
know if I'd want anything done. This 
thing that's happened. . .well, it's important, Brad. In a lot of ways. I'll 
have to sign off now. I'll get in touch 
with you later, if I can." 

"Faye, wait! Please. If there's 
something seriously wrong — " 

"I'm sorry, Brad," she had hurriedly broken in. "I really must sign off." 

He had not heard from her since. 

He crushed out the cigarette with 
sudden violence and ran a hand 
through his thick brown hair. Loneliness and discontent showed in the 
pucker between his hazel eyes, in the 
downward curve of his wide mouth. 
His features were mobile and sensitive, clashing with the rugged strength 
that lay in his wide cheekbones and 
the angularity of his jaw. 

He turned away from the radio set 
in a surge of restlessness, and abruptly he was aware of the silence that 
filled the bungalow, a silence that 
seemed to settle most heavily in this 
particular room. He ran a bitter gaze 
over the littered workbench near the 
short-wave apparatus, over the tool 
cabinet and the tier of laden shelves 
beside it, over the studio couch and 
the large, overflowing bookcase 
against the opposite wall. The familiarity of the room mocked him. It 
was a reminder, a symbol of the emptiness of his life. He was twenty-eight, 
an electronics engineer, considered a 
valuable employee by his superiors, 
but for him existence had not yet tak


VANGUARD OF THE DOOMED 



11 



en on real meaning. 

She had brought a needed brightness into his surroundings. Her soft 
voice and silvery laughter had been a 
bridge to a more vivid and interesting 
world. An immaterial bridge, yet one 
he might have crossed. He told himself again that he should have asked 
for her address, should have made an 
attempt to- see her. Certain things she 
had said indicated that she lived in 
the same city, or at least sufficiently 
close to it to do something about meeting her personally. 

But he had hesitated to suggest a 
meeting at too early a stage. It had 
seemed wiser to wait until they knew 
more of each other, until they knew 
what to expect when they met lace to 
face. ■ 

TJER CONTINUED silence weakened his resolution now. He was 
growing seriously worried. He had the 
vague yet persistent impression that 
she was in trouble of some sort, and 
he wanted to know if she was all 
right, if there was something he could 
possibly do. He had been unable to 
locate her in any of the ordinary directories, but she could be traced 
through her radio call letters. 

"Something has happened, 
Brad . . . . " Her words rose in his 
mind again, and he wondered if the 
planetoid that had entered the Solar 
System to menace Earth had anything 
to do with the crisis she faced. The 
Celestial Hammer, as the weirdly behaved object had come to be called, 
had brought fear and confusion into 
millions of lives, and its terrible threat 
may easily have brought disorder into 
Faye Manning's. Thousands of persons had already fled the city in the 
past week. She may have been one of 
them. 

But recalling something else she 
had said, he doubted that. "This set 
is going to see a lot of use. ..." The 



words held no suggestion of intended 
flight. They held instead a hint of 
mystery. What sort of use could she 
have meant, if not that for which an 
amateur broadcasting outfit was intended and for which it was licensed? 
And if she were using her set for the 
proper purpose, why wasn't it possible 
for her to keep in touch with him? 

Slumped in his chair, Dunn shook 
his head wearily. Mystery, questions, 
uncertainty, dread.... He'd had 
enough of that during the past several 
months. Everyone had had enough. 
First the war, with the Slav-Asian 
Powers threatening to engulf the 
world — if atomic weapons did not destroy it first. Then the strangely erratic planetoid that had wandered into 
Earth's path, an even greater threat 
since it was beyond human control. 
Dunn corrected himself. No, not beyond human control, if a madman 
named Everett Stonecrest was to be 
taken seriously. Stonecrest claimed to 
be able to direct the movements of the 
planetoid at will. It was he who had 
dubbed the object the Celestial Hammer. 

With an odd clarity, Dunn remembered a Bible quotation from the 
man's first broadcast: "Is not my 
word as a jire? saith the Lord; and 
like a hammer that breaketh the rock 
in pieces?" 

It had been a clever association of 
ideas — incredibly clever. Few utterances in history had caught more powerfully at human imagination, human 
beliefs. People were tired, of war, 
tired of the destruction, the brutality 
and fear that went with it. They had 
been seeking some hope, some reassurance... some Sign. In the Celestial 
Hammer it had finally appeared. And 
Everett Stonecrest had emerged as an 
oracle, a prophet. 

Dunn straightened with sudden impatience and glanced at his watch. 
The shadow of Everett Stonecrest's 



12 



 



much-publicized yet little-known figure touched only remotely at the 
fringes of his own life. All that mattered to him was a soft voice that had 
been inexplicably silent. 

T_JE TURNED back to the radio 
set and reached for the microphone. He'd make one last attempt to 
reach her this way. After that he'd 
have to try a more direct approach. 

"WF18W calling WC33M . . . 
WF18W calling WC33M. . .WF18W 
calling WC33M. ..." 

He lighted a cigarette and waited. 
The slow minutes passed, mockingly 
soundless. 

No answer. 

He sighed finally and crushed out 
the remains of the cigarette. He rose 
slowly to his feet. He stood looking 
down at the radio set for a brooding 
moment, then reached out to switch 
it off. 

"Hello, WF18W! This is WC33M. 
Am I coming through?" 

The familiar soft voice — but somehow changed. There was an unusual 
haste in it, a frantic urgency. 

"Fayel" he said. He dropped back 
into the chair, groped for the microphone. "Faye!" he said again. 
"I've been trying to get in touch with 
you all week." 

"I know, Brad," she returned swiftly. "I wasn't able to answer. Now 
please listen carefully. I have very 
little time, and what I'm going to say 
is important.... Brad, I have reason to believe that you're in real danger. It's because of your calls to me 
on the radio. Watch yourself, Brad. 
Don't trust strangers who approach 
you for any reason." 

The complete unexpectedness of the 
warning shocked him. He drew a slow 
breath and said through stiff lips, 
"What's going on at your end, Faye? 
I don't understand this." 



"It's my fault. I should have told 
you more about myself than I did. 
I've been a fool.... Brad, you've 
heard of Everett Stonecrest and the 
Celestial Hammer?" 

"Yes, but what — " 

"Please listen. Someone might come 
in at any moment, now. I work for 
Everett Stonecrest. I'm his secretary. 
This is his radio set I'm using." 

"Good Lord!" Dunn breathed. 

"I know what a surprise that must 
be," Faye went on. "It should give 
you an idea why I haven't been able 
to answer your calls. I knew about 
them, of course, but — I haven't 
enough time to explain the situation 
any further, Brad. What I really 
wanted to tell you — " Her voice ended on a gasp. 

There was a silence. Dunn stared at 
the loudspeaker, his brows drawn together over pinched eyes. 

"What is it, Faye?" he demanded 
tensely. "Are you all right?" 

It was a moment before her answer 
came. 

"Why, yes... yes, Brad. As I was 
saying, I'm sorry I haven't been able 
to answer your calls. I... I've been 
very busy." 

Again her voice had changed. The 
difference was unmistakable. Her 
words were flat, deliberate — evasive. 

Dunn sat numbly, conscious of a 
strange new atmosphere, almost as if 
an invisible menace peered at him 
out of nothingness. Was some other 
person listening in? Was Faye now 
under a... a restraint? He searched 
carefully for his next words. 

"Faye, this Celestial Hammer situation. . . I hope it doesn't change things 
too much for you. You're not planning 
to leave, or anything like that?" 

"No, I'll stay with Mr. Stonecrest 
as long as he wants me to." 

Her voice held a lilt of eagerness. 
He was on the right track. 



VANGUARD OF THE DOOMED 



13 



rVUNN GRIPPED the edge of the 
table on which the short-wave 
apparatus stood. His face held a tight, 
strained fixedness. 

He went on, "I've been wanting to 
see you, Faye. Couldn't you get away 
from your work for a while?" 

"I'm afraid not. I'm really very 
busy, Brad. I wouldn't be able to 
leave the house even for ten minutes. 
The situation may last indefinitely." 
She seemed to pause. "I won't be able 
to use this radio set again, so it 
would be best if you didn't try to 
call me again. I hope you'll write, 
though. You'll remember I'm at Mr, 
Stonecrest's Lake Grove house." Another pause. "I've already taken up 
too much valuable time, Brad. I'll 
have to sign off. Hope your worries 
about me are ended. 'Bye." 

"Yes," Dunn said. "Yes. I understand. Thanks for calling, Faye. I'll 
drop you a line as soon as I can. 
Don't work too hard — -and good luck." 

Silence closed down over the room 
once more. Dunn sat staring at the 
loudspeaker, still gripping the table 
edge. 

Faye Manning — and Everett Stonecrest. Everett Stonecrest — and the Celestial Hammer. The relationship 
stunned him. He would never have 
guessed that a relationship could possibly exist. Faye Manning was a 
voice belonging to a girl he had never 
seen, about whom he knew almost 
nothing. Everett Stonecrest was a 
mysterious figure, who in the past 
several days had assumed legendary 
proportions. He had prophesied a miracle — and the miracle had taken 
place. 

It was Stonecrest's radio set that 
Faye had been using. It was in Stonecrest's Lake Grove mansion that Faye 
was staying." 

Or was being kept by force. Dunn 
thought of the queer change in her 
voice, the clever way she had re


sponded to his cues, giving him information under the very nose of whoever it was that had evidently been 
listening. If he had interpreted that 
information correctly, Faye was In 
trouble of some bizarre sort. She was 
asking for help. That appeared to be 
what she had meant by saying she 
hoped he would write. 

He knew it would be useless to 
take those suspicions to the police. 
They would require more substantial 
evidence before they took any action 
against a man of Stonecrest's importance. Stonecrest was the man who in 
some miraculous, inexplicable way had 
saved a large part of the Earth from 
destruction, the man whose very word 
kept at bay a tremendous bludgeon 
in the sky. 

Dunn shook his head. If anything 
at all was going to be done to help 
Faye, he would have to do it. Alone. 
In the face of whatever danger it was 
she had warned him against. This 
danger, it seemed, had arisen because 
of his radio calls to her. It could become an immediate thing if he tried 
to reach her in person. But there were 
impulses that made a man willing to 
face danger. 

HPHE SUDDEN ringing of the doorbell made Dunn straighten tensely in his chair. The sound seemed to 
have come in answer to his thoughts. 
Was this the threat of which Faye 
had warned him? It was too late in the 
evening for a visit by anyone he 
knew. 

He rose slowly to his feet, listening 
to the doorbell ring again. He looked 
at the radio, hesitated, his mind racing. Then his lips flattened against his 
teeth, and he left the room, hurrying 
through the dimly lighted interior of 
the bungalow. He lived alone, having 
kept up the house after the last of his 
parents had gone. The bungalow had 
advantages an apartment lacked, pro


14 



 



viding the space he needed for tools, 
experiments and hobbies. 

In his bedroom Dunn reached under 
the night table beside the bed, where, 
he kept hidden a .45 Army automatic 
in a spring clip holder. He went to 
the front door, flicked on the porch 
light and peered through the door's 
small glass window. 

There was no one on the porch. 
The walk that led to the street was 
empty of life. 

A messenger, Dunn thought abruptly. Perhaps Faye hadn't been certain 
of reaching him by radio and had sent 
a telegram, or a special delivery letter. 
Deciding from the dark front windows 
that nobody was at home, the messenger had just left. 

Dunn hastily unlocked the door and 
started down the steps toward the 
sidewalk. If he hurried, he could catch 
the messenger before — 

The sudden scrape and rustle of 
motion came as he was leaving the 
steps. Senses flaring in alarm, he 
whirled. In the split-second before 
the blow fell, he saw the looming 
dark shape of the man who had been 
hiding in the shadows at the side of 
the porch. He saw the -.upraised arm, 
saw the glinting object gripped in the 
hand. 

Then— a burst of light and pain and 
a rushing descent into darkness. . . . 

YU7HEN DUNN regained conscious■ ness in the shadows at the side 
of the house, where his attacker evidently had dragged him, he found that 
the porch light had been turned off 
and the door closed. Gingerly touching the blood-encrusted bruise on his 
head, he went heavily up the steps 
and let himself in with his key. In 
the bathroom he ran cold water over 
his face and scalp and sent his foggy 
thoughts back over what had happened. 

The attack didn't seem to make 



sense. Someone had gone through a 
lot of trouble just to hit him over the 
head. If this was the peril Faye had 
mentioned, then those behind it appeared to be laying down on the job. 

It was a short time later that he 
thought of the radio set, which he 
now recalled had been left turned on. 
He went to switch it off — and halted 
in angry dismay as he came in sight 
of the table on which it stood. 

Someone had taken a hammer from 
the tool cabinet, had very thoroughly 
and deliberately beaten the set into 
complete ruin. 

CHAPTER II 

T AKE GROVE was an exclusive residential suburb within less than 
an hour's drive of the city. Dunn 
reached it in the early afternoon, driving his coupe. 

He stopped at a service station on 
the edge of the downtown district. 
While the gas tank was being filled, 
he left the car to stretch his legs. He 
noticed the station attendant covertly 
studying him as the latter replaced 
the tank cap. The attendant was a 
lean , shrewd-faced man , around 
Dunn's own age. His eyes might have 
been curious, but they were friendly. 
They seemed to invite the question 
Dunn had been planning to ask. 

"I'm looking for the place where 
Everett Stonecrest lives," Dunn said, 
as he paid for the gas. "Can you tell 
me how to reach it from here?" 

The attendant's interest sharpened. 
"Sure. The house is easy to find." He 
deftly sketched directions. "You 
know Stonecrest?" he asked finally. 

"I've never met him, but I'm hoping to." 

"We'll, you're in for plenty of competition." 

Dunn was faintly startled "How do 
you mean?" 

"All kinds of people have been 



VANGUARD OF THE DOOMED 



15 



passing through town, on their way to 
see this Stonccrest guy," the attendant 
said. "There's been loads of them every day, mostly coming in by train 
and bus. Newspaper reporters, scientists, religious organizations, and just 
plain nosey Parkers. There's a regular mob in front of Stonecrest's place, 
from what I hear. Police had to be 
sent out to keep order." 

The attendant paused, shaking his 
head. "Beats me, the way this Stonecrest got so popular all of a sudden. 
Everybody talking about him, crowds 
of people trying to get in to see him, 
radio and newspapers full of stuff 
about him and that hunk of rock in 
the sky he calls the Celestial Hammer. 
You'd hardly know there was a war 
going on any more. But a week ago 
you wouldn't know Stonecrest was 
alive. Nobody knew anything about 
him— and as far as that goes, they 
still don't. Take me. I've lived here a 
long time, and Stonecrest's lived here 
even longer than that, but I don't 
think I've ever heard his name 
mentioned before that Celestial Hammer pitch of his. I don't know anybody in town who's ever seen him — 
and I know most of the people in 
town, too." 

Dunn nodded his understanding. He 
had spent the morning looking up information on Stonecrest, and the results had been disappointingly meager. 

Among the few facts he had gleaned 
were that Stonecrest was wealthy, 
past middle age, and lived alone with 
a handful of servants. He seemed to 
have no living relatives, no immediate 
friends. He belonged to no clubs or 
organizations, never attended social 
functions of any kind. He was rumored to have a strong interest in 
science and to maintain a laboratory 
in his home. There were numerous 
blank spots in Stonecrest's life that 
apparently were explained by exploration trips to remote and little-known 



regions of the earth. 

TTHE ATTENDANT went on, 
"Wish I knew what to make of 
this Celestial Hammer deal Stonecrest is putting over. Most of the 
people I've talked to really think he 
can control the thing. They think he's 
a messiah, like they say in the newspapers, that he was given a heavenly 
power to keep the world from being 
wiped out by atomic bombs. But me, 
I don't know. Scientists say the Celestial Hammer's a planetoid, something like the moon, only a lot smaller, and made out of common, ordinary 
rock, just like we got here on Earth. 
Sure, there's been talk about the thing 
being too smooth and round to be an 
ordinary planetoid, but that doesn't 
get away from the fact it's made out 
of rock. How can anybody control 
a rock? Especially a rock as big as 
they say the planetoid is?" 

"Stonecrest did it," Dunn returned. 
"Not that I'm plugging for him. But 
Stonecrest said the planetoid wouldn't 
hit Earth — and it didn't. That was 
after most scientists said there was 
no hope that the Earth would escape 
getting hit. The only question was 
where." 

"I know," the attendant said, shrugging. "It was luck, that's all. One of 
those things called a coincidence. 
Stonecrest took a gamble, with all 
the odds against him— and he just 
happened to be right. That doesn't 
mean he's been chosen by God, like 
a lot of people claim." 

"I hope so," Dunn said grimly. "If 
he actually can control the planetoid 
...well, that's too much power for 
any man to have." He climbed back 
into the coupe. 

As though on a sudden impulse, the 
attendant leaned detainingly in the 
window opening. "Look. You were in 
the last war, weren't you?" 

"Three years/' Dunn said, "Euro


16 



 



pean theatre." 

"I . was in Europe myself, and I 
usually know an ex-G. I. when I see 
one. It's something about the way they 
look and talk. And any time I can 
help an ex-G.I. — " 

"Anyhow, if you really got to see 
Stonecrest, I can give you a tip. I 
learned a few things about his place 
lately. There's a side road that leads 
to a service drive at the back of the 
estate. It isn't hard to find. You just 
have to know where to turn off the 
highway." 

The attendant took a pencil and 
a business card from one of the pockets of his uniform shirt. He sketched 
rapidly on the back of the card, explaining as he did so. 

"Here," he said at last. "You'U 
have a better chance of getting in that 
way than at the front. You'd need a 
tank to get through the mob out there. 
The rest is up to you. Good hick. 
And by the way, my name's Jerry 
Camp." 

Dunn gave his own name and extended his hand. "Thanks, Jerry. I'll 
let you know how I make out." 

T_TE STARTED the coupe and continued along the highway that 
led through Lake Grove. Watching 
for the landmarks Camp, had described, he presently found the side 
road that would take him to the rear 
of the Stonecrest estate." 

He did not turn into it at once. A 
considerable distance down the highway he saw signs of a crowd. Long 
lines of cars were parked on both 
sides of the highway, and numerous 
groups of people were visible around 
them. Even at that, Dunn knew he 
was seeing only part of the crowd. 
From what Camp had told him of 
the locality, it was clear that the 
throng overflowed the road that ran 
past the front of the Stonecrest mansion. This road lay parallel to the one 



at whose mouth Dunn had halted. 

Dunn put the coupe back into motion, swinging into the gravel-paved 
side road. His encounter with Jerry 
Camp had been a stroke of luck. He 
hadn't guessed that a crowd would be 
among the obstacles he faced in attempting to learn what had happened 
to Faye Manning. He would have 
been lost in the throng as completely 
as a drop of water in a lake. 

His sense of foreboding grew. Sight 
of the crowd had given him perspective on the incredible situation in 
which — equally incredible — he had become involved. The whole thing had 
seemed unreal before, unreal and distant, like a drama taking place on 
another world. The Celestial Hammer 
had seemed a fantastic, if not wholly 
imaginary, threat. And Stonecrest 
himself had been little more than a 
vague shadow behind the sensations 
of the printed page. 

Even the attack of the previous 
night had seemed an unrelated happening. An attack, Dunn realized, 
that had been made principally to destroy his short-wave broadcasting 
equipment. The evident motive had 
been to silence his calls to Faye. For 
those calls could prove dangerous, if 
authorities were led to investigate the 
reason why they were going unanswered. 

The situation was no longer unreal, 
no longer distant. He was caught up 
in it, being swept along by its living current. 

The crowd had given him a fresh 
view of something else — the vast importance of the Celestial Hammer in 
human affairs and the sinister power 
latent in Stonecrest's apparent control of it. The crowd, Dunn realized, 
had not gathered to mock or to show 
disbelief. It had gathered to seek guidance — to be led. And History showed 
repeatedly that it was upon the backs 
of their sycophantic followers that 



VANGUARD OF THE DOOMED 



17 



men with even less impressive claims 
to leadership had climbed to dominance. 

A terrible weapon in itself, the 
Celestial Hammer was even more potent when regarded as an answer to 
human hopes and beliefs. It was an 
embodiment of might greater than any 
man had ever known. A strange rolej 
Ehinn thought, for an object which 
in the beginning had been considered 
a mere tramp from space, a harmless 
wanderer expected to do no more than 
pass Earth's back fence on its return 
to obscurity. 

ASTRONOMERS had discovered 
the planetoid several months before. The news of its arrival had diverted little attention from the progress of the war with the Slav-Asian 
Powers, a war which at the time had 
produced new reverses for the Western Allies. Calculations based on a 
study of its motion through the Solar 
System had indicated that it would 
pass Earth by a comfortably safe 
.margin. The object itself had not been 
regarded as large enough to cause 
serious disturbances on Earth's surface while in passage. 

The planetoid was described as being approximately four-hundred miles 
in diameter, perfectly spherical in 
shape, with a smooth rock surface of 
high albedo. Its unusual roundness and 
smoothness had been considered puzzling at the very start. There were 
theories that it was of artificial rather 
than natural origin. One even went 
so far as to suggest that the planetoid 
was a space ship, its hollow interior 
containing passengers in a state of 
suspended animation. 

Then, as though to discredit the astronomers who had predicted with 
cold mathematical certainty that it 
would do otherwise, the planetoid 
changed course. Incredibly, inexplicably, it swung directly toward Earth. 



The phenomenon was in utter defiance 
of all laws governing the motions of 
celestial bodies. Science was unable to 
account for it. Some powerful force 
obviously had acted upon the tremendous mass of the planetoid to cause 
its change in direction, but the identity of this force remained unknown. 

The space ship faction among the 
planetoid theorists was briefly triumphant. The shift proved, so they insisted, that the planetoid contained 
intelligent passengers. Earth was about 
to be visited by members of an alien 
race. 

Panic swept Earth's millions as a 
collision with the planetoid now 
seemed inevitable. Scientists pointed 
out that the object was too small to 
cause world-wide destruction. Earth 
might reel slightly under the blow, 
but would continue on its way more 
or less intact. However, if the planetoid struck a thickly inhabited part 
of a continent, such as the Eastern 
United States, devastation would result for hundreds of miles around the 
point of impact. The scene would be 
ravaged by fire and molten rock. 
There would be terrific storms and 
earthquakes, or, depending on the region, volcanic eruptions and vast tidal waves. The area immediately under the planetoid— an area some fourhundred miles in diameter— would be 
ground into complete oblivion. 

The all-important question was, 
where would the planetoid strike? 

Closer, the huge projectile drew— 
ever closer. It became clearly visible 
in the sky, a second moon. And with 
its approach a paralysis of fear gripped 
Earth. The bitter struggle between 
the Western Allies and the SlavAsian Powers slowed to a stop. Of 
what use to seek victory, when in all 
likelihood only extinction might reward the victor? Frightened mobs 
fled great cities everywhere. Other 
mobs abandoned themselves to alco


IS 



 



holic or religious frenzy. 

It was upon this chaotic stage setting that Everett Stonecrest had 
entered to make his epic declaration. 

Careful preparations evidently had 
been made in advance. At the cost 
of what was reported to be a small 
fortune, Stonecrest had negotiated 
with two major radio networks to 
have his broadcast relayed on a nation-wide hook-up from his home in 
Lake Grove. This was the first hint 
given that Stonecrest possessed transmitting equipment of his own. Subsequently arrangements were made 
between the net-works and certain 
eager sponsors whereby any and all 
of Stonecrest's future broadcasts 
would be relayed without expense on 
his part. 

Framed in solemn Biblical terms, 
the announcement had been short. 
Stonecrest claimed to have been given 
the power to save the Earth, or important parts of it, from destruction. 
He would prove this, he said, by halting the planetoid— which he named 
the Celestial Hammer—in its tracks. 
The proof would appear in a matter 
of hours. 

And before the ensuing storm of 
skepticism and derision had time to 
reach its full proportions, Stonecrest's 
proof had made its appearance. The 
Celestial Hammer, which had been 
plunging toward Earth beyond the 
power of any mere words to halt, again 
changed course. It had swung into a 
stable orbit— where it now remained. 

And as if to top the absolutely untoppable, Dunn thought, he himself 
was now speeding toward what was in 
effect Stonecrest's back door. What 
sort of a welcome would he receive? 

A soft voice had brought him this 
far. There was still a long way to 
go
TJEERING down the road, he saw 
a large sprawling house of gray 



stone taking shape through intervening trees. And parked at one side of 
the road, in line with the house, were 
several cars. A group of men were 
visible nearby. It appeared that others 
also had thought of Stonecrest's back 
door. 

Dunn slowed the coupe. He thumbed 
open the glove compartment and lifted out his .45 automatic. The weapon 
had not been taken from him by his 
assailant of the previous night, perhaps having been overlooked in the 
darkness. He shoved the gun into a 
hip pocket. 

He covered the remaining distance 
seated quietly behind the wheel. He 
felt the eyes of the group on him, 
searching and curious, as he added 
the coupe to the queue of cars and 
climbed out. An argument of some 
sort seemed to have been in progress, 
but now there was momentary silence. 

Two of the watching men stood 
with their backs to a gate in a newlooking woven steel fence topped with 
barbed wire. They wore outdoor-type 
clothing, jackets and khaki sport hats, 
in contrast to the others, who wore 
business suits. Both were large, heavy 
men with hard, muscular features, a 
similarity in spirit rather ^han one 
of actual relationship. They had the 
look of men who guard the doors of 
bookie establishments. This was no 
bookie parlor, but Dunn knew they 
were on guard here. 

Beyond the fence were spacious, 
green-carpeted grounds, rolling 
smoothly to break in a wave of carefully-kept shrubbery at the base of 
the gray stone house Dunn had already seen. A number of smaller 
buildings, among them a garage and a 
greenhouse, stood at a respectful distance from the main structure. The 
scene had the aloofness and detachment of a scene on a picture postcard. 

"Another reporter, huh?" one of 



VANGUARD OF THE DOOMED 



19 



the hard-featured men said. He 
glanced sidewise at his companion 
and grinned without mirth. "The 
way these guys keep popping up, eh, 
Harry ? " 

"You said it," Harry returned. He 
shook his head grimly at Dunn. "No 
luck, Mac. Nice idea you and the rest 
of these boys had, but nobody gets 
in this way. I been trying to sell them 
the fact. They won't buy." 

"It isn't reasonable," one of the reporters complained. "Stonecrest is the 
most important guy in the world today. He's news. People want to know 
what he thinks, what he's going to do. 
We can give him free publicity. But 
what do we get here? The Fort Knox 
routine, that's what we get." 

Harry shrugged. "Me and Vic got 
our orders. Mr. Stonecrest's got all 
the publicity he can handle, I figure." 

A plumpish man with a pencil 
tucked behind his ear turned questioningly to Dunn. "Haven't seen you 
around before. What paper you with?" 

■'I'm not a reporter," TJunn said. 

The other seemed disconcerted. "Oh. 
Well, I suppose you want to see 
Stonecrest, too." 

"Everybody wants to see Stonecrest," another reporter put in sour
ly
Dunn shook his head. "I don't." 

T->HE GROUP stared at him with 
fresh interest. "That's a new one 
on me!" Harry exclaimed. "What're 
you after, Mac?" 

"I want to see a girl who's staying here," Dunn said. "Faye Manning." 

Harry and Vic exchanged swift 
glances. The expressions of both underwent an odd change, became 
guarded. 

Harry said slowly, "Me and Vic got 
orders to let nobody in. And nobody 
gets in unless they're expected at the 



house and we get told about it. We 
didn't get told anything about you." 

"I think you will — now," Dunn returned. "Tell Mr. Stonecrest I want 
to see Faye Manning. Tell him I'm 
worried about her health, that it's 
very important I see her at once." 

Scenting news where none had 
seemed forthcoming, the reporters 
crowded about Dunn with eager 
questions. 

"Who's this Faye Manning. She related to Stonecrest?" 

"What do you mean you're worried about her health?" 

"You engaged to the girl?" 

The two guards, Harry and Vic, 
watched the reporters with troubled 
eyes. Abruptly, with a gesture almost 
of pleading, Harry swung back to 
Dunn. 

"Look, Mac. We get our orders 
from the house. You call up there and 
tell them what you want. Mr. Stonecrest says to pass you in, then we 
pass you in. Okay?" 

Dunn shook his head. "It would 
take too long to get him on the 
phone — if I could get him, to start 
with. I've got to see Miss Manning 
as soon as possible. Tell Mr. Stonecrest that. Tell him if I can't talk to 
her, I'll talk to these reporters." 

Scowling at Dunn, Harry chewed 
at his lip and ran a palm along the 
side of his leg. A dim fury seemed to 
struggle in his eyes. "All right," he 
said finally. "All right, Mac." He 
whirled to the gate, fumbled a key 
into the lock and swung one of the 
two gate sections open. Then he 
glanced back"" at the avid faces of the 
reporters. "Come on," he said to 
Dunn. "You go with me. If Mr. 
Stonecrest says to give you the heaveho, I'll have plenty of room to do it 
in." 

He stood with angry watchfulness 
in the gate opening, allowing Dunn 
barely enough room to brush past. 



20 



 



Then he pushed the gale shut and 
swiftly set off down a gravel driveway that ran past the greenhouse and 
the garage beyond it. Dunn followed, 
lengthening his strides to keep up. 

Abreast of the garage, Harry darted a look back and then turned sharply toward the concrete strip that ran 
along the front of the wide structure. 
He came to a sudden stop as Dunn, 
puzzled by the maneuver, turned after 
him. The garage was set back a few 
yards from the driveway. On one side 
the greenhouse cut off the view of 
those at the gate, and on the other 
a building beyond the garage partly 
blocked off the main house. No other 
persons were present. This part of 
the estate was screened and private, 
and awareness of that fact brought 
a cold alertness to Dunn. 

Harry's hand came up from behind 
his back, holding a snub-nosed revolver. His lips were thinned against his 
teeth. 

"You got a rod in your kick, Mac," 
he said in a low, flat voice. "I felt 
it when you went past me, at the gate." 

CHAPTER III 

TXTJNN stood utterly motionlesSj 
feeling a queer inner sinking. 
Harry gestured with the revolver. 

"Get the rod out, Mac. Let it drop. 
And no tricks, if you don't want a 
hole in the head." 

"You wouldn't shoot," Dunn said. 
"Not with the reporters, back there." 

"You think I wouldn't, Mac? I 
could tell the newsies you were a nut, 
gunning for Stonecrest." 

"That wouldn't explain why I wanted to see Faye Manning." 

Harry's eyes seemed to retreat in 
baffled thought. Then his face became 
bleakly set. "I can still fade you, 
Mac," he said softly. 

As he spoke he moved. He lunged 
at Dunn. The revolver rose club-like 



in his hand, swept viciously down. 

Dunn had been poised for action, 
muscles bunched and quivering, like 
a runner awaiting the starting gun. He 
moved explosively. He ducked under 
the blow, swung his body directly into 
Harry's path. The other's momentum 
sent both men sprawling to the concrete strip. 

Dunn heaved and twisted free. As 
he came erect he saw Harry, on hands 
and knees, reaching for the fallen 
revolver. He lashed out with a foot, 
sent the gun skittering across the concrete and into the grass beyond. 

Snarling, Harry shot to his feet and 
drove in at Dunn with a barrage of 
wide-swinging punches. A fist glanced 
off the side of his head, brought a 
ringing giddiness. Another blow caught 
him solidly in the chest, drove the 
wind out of him and sent him staggering back against the front of the 
garage. 

Harry closed in, eager to finish off 
his victim. He was a big man, heavyfleshed, whose muscular face showed 
the scars of past encounters. Dunn 
was the taller of the two, but younger 
and lighter. Harry evidently felt that 
his weight and experience gave him 
an overwhelming advantage. He 
pressed that advantage with reckless 
confidence. 

Dunn felt the garage against his 
back as Harry's bulk loomed up before him. Desperate awareness of his 
danger cleared his head. Bracing himself, he kicked out with his foot. It 
was no time for sporting ethics. Crippling brutality was Harry's own clearly evident purpose. 

Harry gasped and bent almost double, pain wiping the eagerness from 
his heavy features. Dunn pushed 
away from the garage, swung his fist 
in a chopping blow to the side of 
Harry's face. He followed through 
with an uppercut that ba!f straightened the man, and then, as Harry 



VANGUARD OF THE DOOMED 



21 



seemed momentarily to hang in the 
air, knees sagging and features blank, 
Dunn threw his Sunday punch. Harry 
went down like a bag of wet sand, 
lay without moving. 

ry'-W" GLANCED around quickly, 
breathing hard. There were no 
figures in sight, no sounds of alarm. 
The swift and almost silent struggle 
had escaped attention. But Dunn knew 
someone might appear on the scene 
at any moment. He had to act swiftly 
if he were to reach the house without 
further interference. 

He caught Harry under the armpits, dragged him to the greenhouse 
side of the garage, and from there 
around to the back. Harry would 
thus remain out of sight and out of 
circulation until he awoke. 

Dunn ran a handkerchief over his 
face and brushed at his clothes. Except for a few bruises on cheek and 
jaw and some skinned and bleeding 
knuckles, he had come through the 
fight in good shape. His appearance 
Was only slightly less presentable than 
it had been. That was important to 
him where Faye Manning was concerned. 

Making certain that no one had as 
yet appeared, he returned to the front 
of the garage. He retrieved his hat 
from where it had fallen, slapped at 
his pocket to see if the automatic was 
still in place, then set off toward the 
main house. He avoided the driveway, walking on the grass well to one 
side and keeping the greenhouse between himself and the men at the 
rear gate. 

He passed the remaining smaller 
buildings and strode along the side 
of the residence structure. There was 
a porte cochere entrance here, with 
stone steps leading up to a brassbound oak door set between long, narrow leaded glass windows. Beyond the 
porte cochere the driveway swept in 



a gentle curve across a broad expanse 
of lawn and ended at a double gate 
in the tall iron fence that enclosed 
the front portion of the grounds. Several men stood in a group just within 
the gate— more guards, apparently. 

On the other side of the fence was 
a spectacle that touched Dunn with 
awe, even though he had been expecting it from the sounds that had 
reached him. A huge crowd stood peering in at the house, the buzz and 
murmur of voices filling the air like 
the growl of distant thunder. In the 
road beyond, all but choking off traffic, were long ranks of parked cars. 
Horns shrilled querulously as a thin 
stream of vehicles crept along the 
narrow lane that remained. 

Abruptly his wonder sharpened. If 
something wrong were going on at 
the mansion, it was going on in the 
very presence of this crowd. It suggested an incredible audacity— too 
incredible, perhaps, to be real. Briefly he considered the dismaying likelihood that he had misunderstood 
Faye and was making a fool of himself in his melodramatic attempt to 
rescue her. 

But her warning of his danger had 
been definite enough. A warning that 
almost immediately had been climaxed 
by the attack on him, the destruction 
of his radio set. And there had been 
Harry's unmistakable fear of the reporters, a fear that had made him act 
with swift ruthlessness. These things 
were signs pointing out a situation 
that was anything but norma! or 
harmless. What could there be, in 
the circumstances surrounding Stonecrest and the Celestial Hammer, that 
could possibly explain it? 

T~>UNN HAD by now reached the 
steps. He hes'itated a moment, 
gazing up at the door, awareness 
sharp- in him of the mystery and the 
threat that lay beyond it. But beyond 



22 



 



that door as well was the owner of the 
soft voice that had drawn him here. 
There could be no thought of turning 
back. 

The lines of his face tightened. He 
went up the steps. 

He found the doorbell, pressed it. 
He waited. As though from a vast 
distance he heard the deep mutter of 
the crowd, the drone and screech 
of passing cars. But he was alone, 
here. He was an island, withdrawn, 
set apart, a solitary, lonely entity 
that existed only for the opening of 
a door. 

That door opened. It opened slowly, portentously, revealing a stocky 
man in a plain dark suit. His intelligent features had the hardness that 
seemed characteristic of Stonecrest's 
employees, but in this man the hardness somehow had a cultured quality. 

The newcomer stared at Dunn. He 
had the expression of a person who 
sees the impossible and refuses to believe it. 

''How did you get here?" he demanded after a moment. The question 
seemed the most immediate and important thing in his mind. 

"Harry let me in," Dunn said, "at 
the rear gate." 

"Harry let you in," the stocky man 
echoed, spacing the words. He peered 
past Dunn, as though seeking Harry. 
His eyes were bleak. "This. . .well, this 
is irregular," he said, evidently explaining his pause. "Just who are 
you? What do you want?" 

"My name's Bradley Dunn. I'm a 
friend of Faye Manning, and I'd like 
to see her. I've been worried that she 
might not be well." 

"And Harry let you in on the 
strength of that?" 

Dunn shrugged. "I happened to 
mention that if I didn't get to talk 
to Miss Manning I'd talk to the reporters at the gate. They seemed very 



interested in anything I could tell 

them." 

The other nodded thoughtfully. 
Then he leaned closer, his whole manner undergoing a change. He was suddenly friendly and confiding, with 
every appearance of being sincere. 

"Mr. Dunn, I can understand that 
you should be worried about Miss 
Manning. All of us here have been 
caught up in events, and as a result 
we've lost touch with families and 
friends. Naturally that would lead to 
concern about us. But we're all safe 
and sound— Miss Manning included. 
It's just that we have a big job on 
our hands, a lot of problems to face." 
The stocky man waved a hand toward the crowd beyond the fence. 
"There you see part of those probblems." 

"Miss Manning," he went on in 
his confiding tone, "has her own job 
to do. As Mr. Stonecrest's secretary, 
she's had to handle thousands of letters that have poured in here. Frankly, I don't think she'd want to have 
her work interrupted and lose the 
time it would take to assure you she 
was quite all right. 

"Don't misunderstand me, Mr. 
Dunn. We haven't become anti-social, 
or anything of the sort. We're just a 
dedicated group of people. A tremendous thing has happened — a thing that 
can change the world. We consider 
this thing more important than ourselves, more important than our own 
personal affairs." 

The stocky man smiled sympathetically. "So I hope it's clear that 
there's absolutely nothing to worry 
about, Mr. Dunn. I'll tell Miss Manning you inquired about her. I'm certain she'll get in touch with you as 
soon as her work permits." 

JAUNN SHOOK his head. "I appreciate the trouble you've taken 
to explain the situation to me — but 



VANGUARD OF THE DOOMED 



23 



I've got to see Faye Manning. I'll 
know she's all right when she tells 
me about it herself." 

The other's manner changed again. 
His features stiffened and his warmth 
vanished. "I'm afraid it's out of the 
question. We have orders to admit no 
visitors, except on urgent business, and 
then by appointment." 

"If I can't talk to Faye Manning," 
Dunn said deliberately, "I'll talk to 
the reporters, outside." 

"You're bluffing. What could you 
possibly tell them?" 

"I could tell them there was something very funny going on, here." 

"Such as what?" 

"Such as Faye Manning apparently 
being kept prisoner in this house. Such 
as someone knocking me out last 
night and wrecking my radio set, thus 
to keep me from using it to call 
Faye Manning." 

The stocky man blinked. "This is 
too deep for me. I guess I'll have to 
let Miss Manning straighten you out. 
You can talk to her if you positively 
insist on it. . . . This way, please." He 
stepped aside in the open doorway, 
and Dunn strode past him into a 
large oak-paneled hall. The other 
turned very quickly as he swung the 
door shut, his hand darting under 
the lapel of his coat. 

Dunn caught the motion as he was 
removing his hat. A great bell 
seemed to ring in him. Almost wildly, he threw the hat, followed it in 
a lunge at the stocky man. The latter had his weapon out, a small automatic, but the impact of the hat in 
his face confused him for just the 
single instant Dunn needed. 

Flailing with his arm, Dunn knocked 
the automatic from the other's grasp. 
Then his full weight hit the man, 
pressed him back against the door. 
Dunn held him there as he reached 
back into his pocket and jerked his 
own automatic out. He pressed the 



muzzle of the weapon against the 
stocky man's neck. The latter ceased 
his struggles, staring at Dunn in baffled fury. 

Dunn backed away, probing the 
silence that flowed back into the hall. 
No alarmed voices, no approaching 
footsteps. So far, so good. 

His questing glance" fell on two 
telephones on a marble- Lopped table 
against one wall. He gestured at them 
with the automatic, returning his attention to the stocky man. 

"One of those is a house phone, I 
think. Get someone on it. Have Faye 
Manning brought here. No," Dunn 
amended quickly. "Not here. There 
must be an empty room somewhere 
close by. Have her brought there. 
We'll go there and wait for her.... 
And be careful what you say over 
the phone. If you try to give me 
away — " 

The stocky man smiled thinly. 
"What would you do if I did? There's 
no reason why I should co-operate." 

"You're forgetting the reporters," 
Dunn returned. "And the cops. Trick 
me, and I'll make enough noise to 
bring them here by the truck load. 
I might even shoot you in the leg 
for spite. Not that my aim is that 
good. I could make a mistake and hit 
you in the stomach, instead. Maybe 
you know what a .45 bullet does when 
it hits a stomach." 

TTHE OTHER considered the 
thought with a remote, indrawn 
expression. Finally he turned to the 
table and picked up one of the telephones. 

"Careful what you say," Dunn reminded softly. 

"Marty?" the stocky man said into 
the telephone. "This is Gillis. Bring 
Faye Manning to the little sitting 
room at the end of the entrance 
hall .... I know, but bring her anyway. At once. It's important." He 



24 



 



hung up. 

"AH right, Giliis — if that's your 
name," Dunn said. "Let's go." Urgency was mounting in him. It seemed 
incredible that the Others in the house 
were still unaware of his presence. 
His luck could not last. 

"This way," Giliis said tonelessly. 
He started toward the other end of 
the hall. 

Dunn slipped the automatic into 
his jacket pocket, keeping his finger on the trigger. He followed Giliis past a broad staircase and then 
past a number of doors on either side. 
At the end of the hall Giliis opened 
the door to a pleasant, informally 
furnished room that could have been 
considered small only in relation to 
the larger rooms of the house. 

Dunn motioned Giliis well back 
into the room before he entered. He 
left the door slightly open, taking 
up a position that would leave him 
concealed behind its inward swing. 

"Faye Manning is the only one 
who comes in here," he told Giliis. 
"Send away whoever happens to be 
with her." 

The other shrugged with an appearance of coolness, but his dark 
eyes held a baleful gl earn. "It's your 
funeral." 

"Yours could happen a lot faster 
than mine," Dunn said. "Don't forget that." 

Slow minutes passed. The occasional shrilling of car horns drifted in 
faintly from the highway outside. 
There were other vague sounds that 
might have come from within the 
house itself. Dunn ached for a cigarette, not daring to relax his vigil 
long enough to light one. Giliis shifted impatiently, frowning. 

Excitement stirred in Dunn as he 
waited. For weeks Faye Manning had 
been nothing more than a voice from 
a short-wave radio loudspeaker. A soft 
voice that had drawn him, haunted 



him. But very soon, now, he would see 
her. in the flesh. What would she be 
like? And— his wonder sharpened — 
what would she think of him? 

pOOTSTEPS rose into audibility behind the door. Dunn stiffened and 
shot a warning glance at Giliis. Then 
the panel moved, its edge swinging toward Dunn. 

A man's voice said, "Here she is, 
Mr. Giliis." 

The stocky man nodded. "Come in, 
Miss Manning. . . . You can go back, 
Marty." 

A muttered acknowledgment, and 
then the sound of footsteps again, retreating. The slim figure of a girl 
walked into Dunn's field of vision. 
He had only a moment's glimpse of 
her profile as she passed him, not 
knowing he was there. Then he was 
looking at the soft blonde curls clustered at the nape of her neck, at the 
tense line of her back in the simple 
gray suit she wore. 

"Well, what is it?" the girl demanded of Giliis. Her voice was the familiar voice Dunn knew, but tight, 
now, defiant. 

Giliis shrugged, glancing past her, at 
Dunn. "This isn't my party, Miss 
Manning." 

Dunn was swinging the door closed. 
Startled by the sound of the closing 
door as much as by Giliis' glance 
beyond her, at Dunn, Faye Manning 
whirled. She stared at Dunn, her 
widened eyes touching the weapon in 
his hand. 

For a moment he overlooked the 
strangeness of this meeting. He was 
aware only of the girl, aware that she 
stood before him at last. She was no 
longer a voice, disembodied and remote. The bridge had been crossed. 

He was not disappointed. He felt 
somehow that he had known all along 
she would look as she did. Her blonde 
hair framed a small face with fine, 



VANGUARD OF THE DOOMED 



25 



even features. It was a face that needed only laughter to make it beautiful, 
but at the moment it held bewilderment, a vague dread, and showed the 
effects of nervous exhaustion. Her 
skin looked pale and drawn, and her 
luminous gray eyes had dark shadows 
under them. 

Dunn found himself walking forward, wanting suddenly to reassure 
her. She stepped back, a slim hand 
lifting to her throat. Her gray eyes 
were on the automatic. 

He grinned impulsively as the oddness of the situation struck him. "The 
gun is to make Gillis behave," he explained. "I don't usually have one in 
my hand when introducing myself." 

Faye Manning's lips parted in 
startled realization. Her gray eyes 
seemed to light. "Why, you're Bradley Dunn!" she said. "I know your 

"Not any better than I know 
yours." He smiled down at her as 
she abruptly came forward to meet 
him, her slim hand extended. He knew 
then that it was all right, that his 
life would no Ion ger seem empty or 
meaningless. 

She shook her head slowly, her 
eyes grave and steady on his. "You 
came all this way, you put yourself 
into all this trouble — and over a girl 
you'd never seen before." 

"I knew the really important things 
about her," he said. "But right now 
we'd better get ready to — " 

A sudden flicker of motion off to 
one side made him turn sharply. Gillis had been standing several feet 
away, watching. Evidently seeing 
Dunn and Faye engrossed in each 
other, he had seized the opportunity 
to make a dash for the door. 

Dunn swung the automatic. For 
an instant Gillis' back made a perfect target as he paused to fumble 
at the doorknob. But Dunn's finger 
hesitated on the trigger. Regardless of 



the consequences to Faye and himself, he could not shoot a man in the 
back. 

Then, as Dunn belatedly started in 
pursuit, Gillis slipped through the 
door, jerked it shut. Dunn heard a 
metallic clicking. When he reached the 
panel and twisted at the knob, he 
understood. 

The door was locked. 

CHAPTER IV 

■QUNN WHIRLED back to Faye. 

"We've got to get out of here! 
Gillis will have everyone in the house 
after us in another minute." He 
flashed a glance across the room. 
"The windows! They open on .the 
garden, and we can make a run for 
it to the rear gate. There's only one 
guard there, holding off a pack of 
reporters. With the reporters watching, he won't try to stop us." 

She nodded quickly, excitement 
shining in her gray eyes. Then a new 
thought seemed to strike her. She 
caught at his arms. 

"Brad, if something happens — if I 
can't make it, you've got to go on 
without me. It's important, Brad — ■ 
horribly important. Someone has to 
be able to reach the authorities and 
tell them what's going on here." 

"I wouldn't leave you behind," he 
said. "Not after I've come this far 
to find you." 

Her grip on his arms tightened urgently. "Brad, listen to me! This is 
more important than either of us. The 
safety of the United States — all the 
Western Allies, in fact— may depend 
on it." 

He stared at her, dazed. "Faye, you • 
can't mean that Stonecrest — " 

"Listen! Stonecrest is an imposter. 
He isn't Stonecrest at all, but another 
man masquerading as Stonecrest. And 
I'm almost positive I know who that 
man is. His name is Max Borzeny — 



26 



 



and I have reason to believe Brozeny 
is a Slav- Asian secret agent ! " 

"Brozeny!" Dunn whispered. "I've 
heard the name before. During the 
second world war, Max Borzeny was 
a high official in the Nazi secret police—the Gestapo. He was one of the 
most wanted war criminals, too, but 
the Allies never caught up with him." 

A chill dread rose in Dunn. "If what 
you say is true, Faye, then Borzeny 
is right here, in this house. And according to certain evidence, he's able 
to control what in effect is the most 
terrible weapon the world has ever 
known!" 

Somewhere in the house a bell rang 
sharply. 

Abruptly aware of the precious 
seconds that had passed, Dunn caught 
at the girl's hand. "Come on! We still 
have a chance if we move fast 
enough! " 

He led the way to the nearest of 
the windows, released the catch, pulled 
the window open. It was little more 
than a half-dozen feet to the ground. 
He dropped easily, then reached up to 
assist Faye as she swung out after 
him , 

'T'HEY were on the side of the house 
opposite the driveway. From here 
only the far end of the front fence 
was visible, and only a few persons 
were in sight beyond it, walking along 
the street. The greater part of the 
crowd was concentrated around the 
front gate. Dunn and the girl were 
still as much alone as though in a 
wilderness. 

They ran toward the rear of the 
mansion. The smaller buildings came 
into sight. Beyond them was the 
garage, and beyond that the greenhouse which cut off the view of the 
grounds from the rear gate. 

Dunn approached the outbuildings 
from the side. Once he and Faye 
passed them, they could cut in front 
of the greenhouse, to the driveway. 



He turned as a man's voice called 
out behind him. Figures were emerging from the window through which he 
and Faye had fled. One of the men 
was pointing, and Dunn realized that 
he and Faye had been sighted. 

He sent an anxious glance at the 
girl. In her skirts and high heels she 
was finding it difficult to keep up with 
him. 

He caught at her arm. "Your shoes, 
Faye. Kick them off, quick!" 

She swung to a stop beside him, 
obeyed hurriedly. 

"They're coming after us from the 
house," he said. "We've got to hold 
our lead until we ' get to the greenhouse." 

Her gray eyes were pleading. She 
was breathing fast. "Brad. . .if I can't 
make it. . . you've got to go on without me!" 

He shook his head doggedly as they 
set off again. "We've got to make it 
together." 

They passed the first of the outbuildings — and then Faye gasped. In 
almost the same instant Dunn saw the 
reason. Several men were racing toward them across the stretch of grass 
between the outbuilding and the one 
beyond it. The path to the greenhouse 
was being cut off. 

A cold anger swept through Dunn. 
He was lifting the automatic toward 
the oncoming men, when his plunging 
foot came down on a depression in the 
turf. His ankle turned. Suddenly out 
of balance, he stumbled against 
Faye — and both fell sprawling. 

Dunn hit the ground hard, felt the 
automatic jolted out of his hand. Frantically he pushed himself back to his 
feet, whirled to help Faye as she began rising. 

"The rear gate!" he whispered at 
her. "Run for it. It's the only way, 
now." 

She hesitated an instant, her gray 
eyes mournfully intent on his. Then 



VANGUARD OF THE DOOMED 



2y 



she was gone in a flash of silken legs. 

"pvUNN saw that one of the approaching men, moving more 
swiftly than the others, was almost 
upoii him. There would be no time to 
retrieve the automatic. The only thing 
he could do — ■ 

He lunged directly toward the onrushing figures. Crouching, he threw 
his shoulder into the first of the group, 
sent him reeling back into the others. 
Almost immediately there was a tangle of colliding bodies as most of the 
men were unable to check their rush 
in time. They fell heavily to the 
ground amid curses and grunts of 
pain. 

Dunn pushed, kicked, twisted, fighting his way up through the tangle. 
He struck out as a face bobbed in 
front of him, felt his knuckles crunch 
against bone. Another man was coming at him from the sidej and almost 
too late he dodged a swung fist. He 
sent a wild punch at the other's 
middle, was rewarded by a gasp of 
expelled breath. Then arms caught 
him around the knees, and he went 
down again. 

Hands clutched at him, fists pounded at his face and head. Desperately 
he struggled to keep from being overwhelmed, but he knew it was hopeless. 
He heard voices, was dimly aware that 
the reinforcements from the mansion 
had reached the scene. A fist struck the 
side of his jaw, and the world weat 
foggy in a burst of light and pain. 

From a distance he seemed to hear 
a girl's choked scream. And then 
something heavy and hard smashed 
down on his head. His dimming perceptions dissolved in a black nothing
■pvUNN opened his eyes in a small 
windowless room, lighted by an 
unshielded bulb in the low ceiling. 
A blurred face hung over him and he 



blinked several times before he recognized Faye Manning. He lay on 
a concrete floor, and his head, he discovered further, was pillowed on the 
girl's lap. 

"Brad!" she said. "I was beginning 
to think you were dead. How do you 
feel?" 

Knowledge of the girl's presence 
quickened his return to full awareness. 
He forced a grin. "Just seeing you, 
Faye, I feel fine." 

He got his elbows under him, 
struggled to a sitting position on the 
floor. He squeezed his eyes shut as 
pain rang an anvil chorus in his head. 
Other pains swiftly became evident 
throughout his body, blending in a 
dull, steady ache. 

He sent a glance around the room. 
"Where are we?" 

"In one of the storerooms in the 
basement of the mansion." Faye 
hesitated, looking down at her hands. 
Her small face seemed even paler 
than before, and there were smudges 
of dust on her cheeks. "It's all my 
fault," she went on. "I tried to reach 
the gate, but one of the men caught 
me. . . . I'm sorry, Brad. I've brought 
you nothing but trouble." 

He shook his head. "Getting to meet 
you was worth it^ I'd do it all over 
again if I had to." 

"I think I would, too, Brad." 

He saw the meaning in her steady 
eyes, in her grave smile, and it gave 
him a sudden, deep feeling of strength, 
of reassurance. He put his hands on 
her shoulders, and she leaned almost 
tiredly against him, closing her eyes. 
He held her for a long moment. The 
situation had an odd familiarity, as 
though it had been repeated many 
times before. 

He looked past the blonde head 
resting against his cheek, looked at 
the stained, concrete walls of the 
room. They seemed to sharpen around 
him, bringing him back to the problem 



28 



 



of survival. He released the girl, stood 
up, went to the low wooden door. The 
knob turned easily under his hand, 
but the door itself was securely fastened from the other side. Nothing 
short of an ax would open it — and 
guards all too likely were posted nearby. 

He returned to where Faye sat 
watching him, pressing blonde curls 
away from her face with the back of 
one hand. He lowered himself beside her, spoke softly. "Our chances 
seem to depend on how much Borzeny 
thinks you know about the set-up, 
here, and his plans. And there's the 
matter of his identity. Does he know 
you've discovered who he is?" 

"I think he suspects it. That's why 
he was keeping itie prisoner." 

"How did you get on to him?" 

"I went into the library one afternoon, to look up some records," Faye 
began. "I usually did my work in 
another part of the house, and I don't 
think Borzeny expected me there. 
Anyway, I noticed that a panel in the 
wall was open, and there was a safe 
behind it, open, too." 

T_TER FULL lips curved in a wry 
smile. "I suppose it would seem 
the most natural thing in the world 
for a woman to nose around. But I 
had a better reason than that. I had 
been growing certain that something 
definitely queer was going on at the 
house. There was too much out of the 
ordinary happening, too much of an 
attempt to keep it secret. 

"Borzeny — or Stonecrest, as I 
thought of him at the time — explained 
the situation by saying he was engaged in certain important and confidential work for the government. It 
seemed logical enough. Borzeny can be 
very charming and persuasive when 
he wants to be. And besides, I knew 
he had a laboratory in the house and 
spent a lot of time there on experi


ments of some sort. He even had two 
assistants helping him. neither of 
whom could speak English very well. 
He said they were European specialists, loaned to him lay the government. 

"I played along for a while. That's 
why I didn't tell you a lot of the 
things about myself, Brad, that I 
might have told you otherwise. I 
thought I was helping the government." 

She smiled shyly. "You were very 
nice about it, Brad. It was fun, talking to you on the radio. You didn't 
get fresh, and you didn't pry or ask 
questions. You were just... well, 
understanding, always pleasant." 

"I share the same sentiments where 
a girl named Faye Manning is concerned," Dunn said. "But where did 
you get the set you were using?" 

"There was a powerful model of 
standard design in a small studio adjoining the laboratory. All of the real 
Stonecrest's experiments seem to have 
been with short-wave radio apparatus 
of new and highly advanced design, 
but apparently he had one set that he 
could use for ordinary broadcasting. 
He had a special room for it, too. This 
room opened out on a narrow side 
hall, and I could reach it without being seen. I knew I wouldn't have been 
permitted so near to the laboratory. 
Hardly anyone was. Borzeny and his 
assistants kept the laboratory locked 
when they weren't there, and I was 
careful to use the radio only when 
they were in some other part of the 
house." 

Faye paused, and then went on, 
"My father was a radio ham, and he 
taught me how to twiddle the right 
dials. I was lonesome here, at the 
house, wanted someone to talk to. 
Borzeny always tried to discourage me 
from going out in the evenings — for 
security reasons, he said. And the few 
times I did go out, he had me followed. I learned about that quickly 



VANGUARD OF THE DOOMED 



29 



enough. It was one of the things that 
convinced me something strange was 
going on. 

"The secret experiments seemed 
only part of whatever this was. There 
was something odd about Stonecrest 
himself — or Borzeny, that is. He 
avoided meeting people and carried 
on most of his affairs by correspondence. He refused to see unexpected 
visitors, appeared suspicious of almost everyone around him. He didn't 
hire me to work for him until he had 
investigated every detail of my background. Practically all of his employees seemed to be new. I learned 
a short tune later that he had fired 
all the old servants who had worked 
at the house." 

"CAYE changed position on the 
floor, her soft voice quickening. 
"The arrival of this object an the sky 
that Borzeny calls the Celestial Hammer seemed to bring matters to a 
head. There was suddenly a lot of 
excitement. The guards at the estate 
were doubled — not ordinary guards, 
either, but professional toughs. From 
the scraps of information I was able 
to pick up, it seemed clear that Borzeny and his assistants had found they 
could control the object. What they 
used, of course, was the special shortwave apparatus with which they had 
been experimenting,, in the laboratory." 

"So that's the explanation!" Dunn 
said. "I'd been wondering how control 
was possible." 

Faye nooded. "This special apparatus evidently had been built by the 
real Stonecrest. The basic idea, I 
think, was a completely new type fif 
radio communication. But Borzeny 
found he was getting signals with itsignals that came from the Celestial 
Hammer. No ordinary set could have 
picked them up. And when Borzeny 
signalled back, the Celestial Hammer 
responded by moving toward Earth. 



Further experiment showed that a 
great deal of control was possible. 
Borzeny could have sent the object 
back into space if he had wanted to. 
There was no actual intelligence directing the object itself. It was like 
. . .well, it was like a huge machine." 

"There are theories that the planetoid is a space ship," Dunn put in. 
"Suppose it is. A space ship with a 
stone hull would he practical enough, 
where meteors are considered. I don't 
know about the passengers. They 
might all be dead — or in suspended 
animation, as some persons claim. But 
suppose that ship were guided in its 
flight by radio impulses like those 
sent out by Stonecrest's apparatus. 
Perhaps to keep it from hitting a planet, or falling into a sun. If Stonecrest's set sent out impulses of the 
same frequency as those sent out by 
the guiding device, then the ship 
would follow those impulses. That 
would explain how control of the 
planetoid was possible at all." 

He gestured. "Anyway, it's clear 
how Stonecrest — I mean Borzeny — 
obtained his supernatural abilities. 
Obviously, control of the planetoid 
gave him the idea of setting himself 
up as a prophet." 

Faye's blonde head moved , in assent. "He began using the set over 
which I talked to you, Brad. I could 
see we wouldn't be able to keep in 
touch any more, and I tried to let you 
know. Maybe I was too mysterious. 
You kept trying to reach me, and 
Borzeny grew excited over it. He said 
something would have to be done 
about you. I was afraid you were in 
real danger, and I warned you as soon 
as I had a chance to use the set again. 
Borzeny caught me at it. I don't know 
what he might have done if we both 
hadn't managed to give him the diea 
that our talk had been harmless. 

"He already was suspicious of me, 
you see. In fact, I was practically be


30 



 



ing kept a prisoner in the house. I 
was locked in my room every night. I 
got out to radio you only because I 
managed to slip a wad of paper in the 
door catch. The reason for all this 
goes back to that open safe in the library. 

"I investigated it. There were the 
usual things a person keeps in a safe. 
But then I came across a small steel 
box containing certain papers, records and newspaper clippings. All concerned a man named Max Borzeny. 
At the time it didn't seem to mean 
much. Later, thinking back over what 
I had seen, I suddenly realized that 
this Max Borzeny was actually Stonecrest — or was masquerading as Stonecrest. And there was an important official connection between Borzeny and 
the Slav-Asian Powers." 

pAYE SHUDDERED, grimacing. "I 
didn't know how close to death 
I was in those minutes. If Borzeny 
had caught me searching the safe — 
But he didn't. Not actually. I returned 
things as I had found them and was 
working on the records I had come to 
look up, when Borzeny returned to 
the library. He looked at me, and then 
at the open safe — and from that moment on lie took no chances with 
me.... It seems incredible, though, 
that Borzeny could somehow have 
taken Stonecrest's place." 

"Stonecrest did a lot of traveling to 
remote corners of the Earth," Dunn 
said slowly. "Somewhere along the 
line he and Borzeny ran into each 
other. Borzeny was a hunted man, 
and perhaps some actual physical resemblance between Stonecrest and 
himself suggested the switch in identities. It's a matter of record that 
Borzeny spoke excellent English, and 
in addition he was an enormously 
clever and resourceful man. He had to 
be, to have escaped capture as long 
as he did. With a few changes in 



Stonecrest's papers and identification, 
with a bit of careful forgery here and 
there, it wouldn't have been impossible for him to pass himself off as 
Stonecrest .... As for Stonecrest himself, there's no doubt but that he's 
dead — murdered by Borzeny." 

"And it looks very much as if the 
same thing is going to happen to us," 
Faye whispered, her face gray and 
drawn. 

Dunn placed a comforting arm 
about her shoulders. "Not if we play 
our cards right. The main thing to do 
is to keep Borzeny from finding out 
how much we know. We've got to 
convince him that neither of us has 
found out about his real identity and 
connections. Especially you, Faye. As 
for me, I'm just a dumb guy who 
thought your rich boss was keeping 
you incommunicado for romantic reasons. And I was just jealous enough 
to use a gun in trying to pry you 
loose." 

"It might work," Faye said, hope 
struggling in her voice. "I've been 
careful to say nothing about how 
much I knew." 

Dun tightened his arm. "It has 
to work." 

They fell silent, sitting close together on the concrete floor. The girl 
leaned wearily against him, her eyes 
closed. He felt the soft pressure of her 
body, and part of him was content. 
He had come this far to find her. That 
much, at least, had been accomplished. 
The only question now was, what lay 
ahead? 

The silence deepened. And then, 
from somewhere in the distance, Dunn 
heard the sound of approaching footsteps. He straightened tensely, feit 
Faye stir .beside him. Her eyes stared 
into his, suddenly wide and alert. 

They were standing side by side 
when the door opened. A lumpy featured man with beetling eyebrows 
peered warily into the room, sent a 



VANGUARD OF THE DOOMED 



31 



muttered word over one shoulder, then 
entered. Two other men followed. One 
was an obvious tough, like the first 
who had appeared, but the second was 
a well-dressed, military erect man 
with iron-gray hair and cold, sharply 
chiseled features. All held leveled revolvers. 

"Mr. Stonecrest!" Faye said. "We 
were hoping for a chance to explain — " 

"That will be enough out of you, 
Miss Manning," the gray-haired man 
returned curtly. He gestured to the 
lumpy-faced underling. "Get the microphone, Otto." 

The other strode to one of the 
walls, reached into a crevice near the 
floor and drew out a small flat disk.. 
He removed the wires connected to 
it, straightened, strode back. 

The man Faye had called - Stonecrest, but who, Dunn knew, was actually Max Borzeny, smiled thinly at 
the girl. He had pale blue eyes that 
held a flat, unwinking stare— eyes 
that hinted of a nature harsh and 
without mercy. 

"I found your conversation very 
interesting, Miss Manning. That was 
my purpose in leaving you and this 
young man together, here. So, please, 
let there be no childish attempts to 
deceive me." 

CHAPTER V 

A CHILL emptiness filled Dunn. 

Borzeny's words had verified the 
sudden, numbing certainty that had 
leaped in him at sight of the microphone. Borzeny had listened in on the 
talk between Faye and himself, was 
aware they knew of his true identity. 
There was no longer any hope. Borzeny's cold face, the leveled guns, indicated as much. 

Dunn felt Faye draw closer against 
him. Her gray eyes met his in a brief 



glance of despair. 

"All right, we know who you are," 
Dunn told Borzeny. "We know what 
you've been doing here. What do you 
plan to do with us?" 

The imposter lifted his erect, carefully tailored shoulders in a shrug. 
"Dead men tel! no tales, as the saying goes. Dead women, also, I might 
add." 

"You can'f get away with it," Dunn 
said. "This is the United States. People don't vanish here without questions being asked." 

"I'm quite sure I can avoid the 
questions," Borzeny returned with 
faintly smiling calm. "I will produce 
witnesses who will insist they saw you 
and Miss Manning leave here in your 
car. A simple case of elopement. Nothing mysterious, nothing sinister. The 
car itself will be taken care of in accordance with my little arrangement." 

Dunn found he was breathing fast. 
There was a stifled drumming in his 
chest. He forced himself to speak 
quietly. 

"Just when do you intend to start 
making this little arrangement of 

yours?" 

"Immediately," Borzeny said. "I 
am, you see, vacating this house tonight. I do not intend to return, and 
I wish to settle all unfinished business 
before I leave. I regret that I cannot allow you and the charming Miss 
Manning a little more time together." 

Borzeny raised his eyebrows in polite inquiry. "Any further questions?" 

"Yes," Dunn said. Stall, he thought. 
Stall. Every second was precious, now. 
"What are you up to, here? What do 
you hope to gain by your control of 
the Celestial Hammer?" 

Borzeny's eyes lighted with a fanatical gleam. "An excellent point to 
raise. I shall speak frankly. I have, 
after all, nothing to lose. You and 
Miss Manning will very soon be in no 
position to make use of what I shall 
reveal. As for these men here, I can 



32 



 



trust them. Most of the others serve 
for money, but with these two it is a 
matter, of personal loyalty." 

He leaned forward slightly. His 
suavely deliberate manner seemed to 
change, to reflect a kind of fevered 
enthusiasm. "You ask what I hope to 
gain by my control of the Celestial 
Hammer. The answer, my young 
friend, is — mastery of the entire 
world! The, Hammer is the most potent weapon that has ever existed — -a 
weapon more potent, even, than the 
atomic bomb. And my control of it is 
absolute. I can make it obey my every 
command." 

Eorzeny paused, his pale eyes 
flashing at Dunn. "I can, for example, bring the Hammer down on any 
great city I choose — and smash that 
city into complete oblivion! Any city 
on the surface of the Earth. And I 
intend to do just that! My plans have 
been carefully made, and this very 
night I shall swing into action. Washington, the capital of your nation, will 
be first. Then will come the various 
atomic bomb manufacturing sites and 
certain military centers. The country 
will be completely disorganized, completely helpless! 

"That is only the first step in my 
plans. Immediately afterward I shall 
destroy the capital of the Slav-Asian 
Powers. At present the Slav-Asians 
consider me an ally, but they are 
treacherous, and I shall take no 
chances with them. With the dominant nations paralyzed and my power 
clearly demonstrated, the other remaining nations will quickly obey my 
commands. I shall emerge as the ruler 
of the entire world!" 

J^IMLY Dunn was aware of Faye's 
fingers pressing into his arm, as 
though in physical echo of the shocked 
dread that filled him. Borzeny's 
scheme sounded wild— insane. But the 
man's control of the Celestial Hammer 
already had been proved beyond any 



slightest doubt. And with control of 
the Celestial Hammer anything was 
possible. 

Dunn's thoughts leaped frantically. 
Washington, the whole United States 
itself, was in immediate, terrible danger. Borzeny had to be stopped before 
he could put his plan into effect. 
Dunn realized he had to do something — but any move in the face of 
the ready guns would bring instant 
death. 

Borzeny made a sudden gesture. 
"Since your questions appear to have 
been answered, I will now proceed to 
the business at hand." He took a step 
backward, glancing at one of the two 
men beside him. "You take the woman, Franz. I dislike shooting women. .. . Otto, ready!" 

Borzeny lifted his gun. His cold 
features tightened, became intent. 

Dunn had a nightmare feeling. His 
muscles bunched wildly— but he saw 
there would be no time to move. The 
fingers of Borzeny and his henchmen 
were already tightening on the triggers of their weapons. 

A gun roared. 

Franz stiffened, half turned, then 
sprawled in a limp huddle to the floor. 
Borzeny whirled to peer back into the 
dark depths of the basement, and 
Dunn realized now that the shot had 
come from there. 

Another shot sounded. Something 
whined within inches of Borzeny's 
head, passing Dunn and Faye to hit a 
wall, beyond. Dunn didn't wait to see 
what happened next. He took swift 
advantage of his opportunity. Otto 
was nearest, peering through the doorway as he steadied his revolver for a 
shot. Dunn leaped at the man, got an 
arm around his neck, jerked him savagely to the floor. Before the confused Otto could put up resistance, 
Dunii punched him into senselessness. 
Then he snatched up the man's fallen 
gun, swung to where he had last seen 
Borzeny. 



VANGUARD OF THE DOOMED 



33 



The other was gone. He had braved 
the bullets of the hidden attacker to 
dart through the doorway. Dunn 
heard swiftly retreating footsteps. Pursuit was out of the question at the 
moment, since it might draw the fire 
of the person concealed back in the 
basement. 

"ryjNN WAITED. The retreating 
footsteps faded, were gone. 
Somewhere a door slammed. Silence 
fell. 

"Hello, whoever you are ! " Dunn 
called through the open door. "This is 
Bradley Dunn." 

"Gillis, here!" a voice came back at 
once. "Everything all right at your 
end?" 

"Eorzeny's gone," Dunn said. "The 
two men with him are out of action." 

"I'll be right with you." Gillis came 
trotting out of the darkness. "Miss 
Manning all right?" 

"Yes," Faye said. "You saved our 
lives, Gillis. But I don't understand. I 
thought- — " 

Gillis shrugged. "Up to a point, I 
follow orders and ask no questions. 
But there was too much going on in 
this house that I didn't like. The way 
you two kids were being treated made 
me reach my limit. I followed Stonecrest down here — or Borzeny, as his 
real name seems to be— and I heard 
plenty. I thought he was just a rich 
guy using that Celestial Hammer 
thing to get himself a lot of free publicity. I didn't know he was a fake 
planning to set himself up as a dictator. I don't like dictators. And I like 
the old United States just as it is. Let 
it go at that." 

Gillis looked questionmgly at Dunn. 
"Want to make a run for the Law? 
Or should we try to clean house?" 

"We clean house," Dunn said. "And 
the place to start is the laboratory. 
Borzeny will head there first thing. 
He. has an idea about destroying 



Washington, and we've got to stop 
him." 

"Let's go," Gillis said simply. 

Dunn picked up the revolver that 
the dead Franz had been using, thrust 
it into his belt. Then, gripping Faye's 
hand, he followed Gillis through the 
basenrent. 

They reached a flight of stairs, 
mounted to the door at the top. The 
door was locked. Cautioning Dunn 
and Faye to move to one side, Gillis 
shot the lock away. Then he slid a 
fresh clip into his automatic and cara* 
fully inched the door open. The narrow hall beyond was empty, but from 
somewhere in the house shouts of 
alarm were rising. 

"Come on!" Gillis said. "We've got 
to make a rush for it." 

The narrow hall ran past a kitchen 
and opened out into the main hall 
Dunn had already seen. As Dunn and 
the others hurried toward the stairway at the end, the two men appeared. Sighting, Dunn's group, the 
men lifted the guns they held. 

Dunn and Gillis fired almost simultaneously. One of the men clutched 
at his chest and dropped. The other 
whirled back out of sight. 

"Cover me," Gillis barked at Dunn. 
He crept to the end of the hall, peered 
around, then gestured urgently. 

They reached the stairway, raced 
upward. As they reached the landing 
'a gun thundered. Gillis released a 
gasp, clutched at his shoulder. 

Dunn saw Harry at the head of the 
stairs. He snapped a shot at the man, 
missed. Harry was swinging his weapon toward Dunn, when Dunn fired 
again. Harry staggered, fell, rolled 
down the steps. He reached the landing, lay motionless. 

Dunn turned to Gillis. "Can you 
make it?" 

"Bullet went through my arm," Gillis said. "I can still pull my weight." 

They continued up the steps, Gillis 



34 



 



insisting on scouting the way. Several 
men appeared in the hall below them, 
began to mount upward. 

"Hurry!" Gillis whispered. "There's 
still another flight ahead of us." 

'J T HEY POUNDED up the remaining stairway, Giliis maintaining 
his lead. The approaching men shouted 
their discovery of Dunn's group, 
quickening their ascent like hounds 
that had at last sighted their quarry. 

His hand gripping Faye's, Dunn followed Gillis into a dim-lit hall. Gillis 
pointed toward one end. 

"The laboratory's down there." 

Faye said suddenly, "The studio! 
The laboratory will be guarded, but 
there's a door opening into it from the 
studio. I don't think they'll be watching that." 

"Just the thing!" Gillis said. 
"Quick, now!" 

They raced down the hall, turned 
a corner. Gillis slowed, pointing out 
a closed door and motioning for quiet. 
He opened the door slowly, keeping 
well to one sitfe. Then he nodded and 
beckoned. 

With Faye close on his heels, Dunn 
slipped after Gillis into a small room 
containing expensive radio equipment. 
There was a door in an adjacent wall. 
Gillis slipped over to it, placed his 
ear against the panel. Then very slowly he turned the knob. He shook his 
head. . 

Somewhere below in the mansion 
a sudden flurry of gunshots sounded. 
A man screamed. Then more gunshots, making a sustained staccato 
thunder. 

Gillis waved an imperative hand at 
Dunn. Joining the other, Dunn quickly saw his intention. They, poised 
themselves several feet away from the 
locked door. Then, moving as one, 
they threw themselves at the panel in 
a hard lunge. 

The door crashed open. Beyond 



was a huge room crowded with workbenches, cabinets and machinery. Four 
men were present, three of them 
standing on opposite sides of the main 
doorway. 

One of the men was Borzeny, 

The group' seemed to have been expecting something to happen, to have 
been eagerly awaiting it. But action 
had come from a totally unlooked for 
quarter. The men whirled in confused surprise. 

"Get your hands up, all of youl" 
Gillis called sharply, across the room. 

"Never, you swine!" Borzeny spat. 
He swung up his gun. 

Gillis was already triggering his 
automatic, very deliberately. Dunn 
held Otto's revolver at arm's length, 
moving the barret to cover the group 
as he emptied the cylinder in a crashing roll of shots. 

Mingled thunder filled the laboratory. 

Borzeny managed to get off one 
shot before he staggered and slid 
down the wall to the floor, two dark 
holes in his shirt over the chest. A 
bullet from one of his two henchmen 
grazed Dunn's side. Then this man 
stiffened, lifted a hand toward his 
face, dropped. The remaining man 
was turning toward the door, firing, 
when two shots caught him together, 
knocked him sprawling. 

jyjNN SWUNG to the remaining 
man, but he was unarmed, his 
hands in the air. He was elderly and 
bespectacled, with a fringe of white 
hair around an otherwise bald head. 
He stood with his back to a tall complex apparatus that overflowed the 
whole of one workbench. 

Dunn hurried across the room. 
"This thing controls the planetoid, the 
Celestial Hammer?" he demanded. 

"Ja, so," the other answered, his 
lifted hands quivering. 



VANGUARD OF THE DOOMED 



35 



"You know how to operate it?" 
"3a, I know." 

"Get busy, then," Dunn said. "Your 
job is to send the planetoid away from 
Earth — so far away that it will never 
come back. Then you're going to give 
me a hand in smashing this outfit to 
pieces. It's caused enough trouble." 

The old man bent over the apparatus, flipping switches, turning dials. 
A low hum filled the room. 

Beyond the door shots suddenly 
rose and were partly drowned in the 
crash of gunfire. Dunn glanced in 
despair at Gillis. 

The other listened a moment longer, then strangely grinned. "It's the 
cops," he said. "They finally got up 
here. I guess I forgot to mention I 
called them." 

They looked at each other, then 
suddenly grinned. They were shaking 
hands when Faye joined them. 

jQUNN SWUNG the coupe into the 
service station and braked to a 
stop, wincing a little as a twinge of 
pain rose from under the bandage 
against his side. Nestled against him, 
her blonde head against his shoulder, 
Faye stirred sleepily. 

Jerry Camp approached in the clear 
morning sunlight. He glanced casually 
at Dunn, did a double-take, then 
grinned. "Have any luck?" he asked. 

"I certainly did," Dunn said. "I 
promised I'd let you know." 

DIANETICS? 

THt; NEW "science" of dianctics, which 
purports to be able U) make men free 
from psychological, psycho- somatic and 
emotional ills which they are heir to, may 
have this faculty. The writer of this brief 
article is not really in a position to prove 
or disprove their claims, thnvigh he views 
the matter with apprehension, primal i'y 
because it has attained such amazing popularity in so short a time. 

Reliable scientific authorities are cautioning the all -embracing claims 
made by the new science. In the process 
of making a "clear" by use of the inter


Camp noticed Faye for the first 
time. His eyebrows lifted. "I see what 
you mean." He leaned an elbow in the 
window opening. "You get in to see 
Stonecrest? Only I heard over the 
radio a while ago that Stonecrest was 
really some other guy. There seems 
to have been a whale of a big fight 
out at his place last night. A regular 
army of cops showed up, and there 
was a lot of shooting. The cops found 
out that sora£ former Nazi was making like Stonecrest, a guy the government had been hunting for years. And 
what do you know, but that Celestial 
Hammer hunk of rock acted up, too. 
It's swinging away from Earth, the 
radio says. Pretty soon it'll be gone." 

Camp suddenly stared at Dunn. 
"Say, did you happen to have anything to do with all this?" 

Dunn shrugged. With Gillis and 
Faye, he had spent long, exhausting 
hours in explaining the whole affair 
to police authorities. He didn't feel 
like rehashing it, even if briefly. The 
newspapers would print the story soon 
enough. 

"I saw a little of it," Dunn said. 
"Right now, though, I'm on my way 
to get a marriage license." 

"You got a good start, this early 
in the day," Camp said. He sent another glance at Faye. "And if I were 
you, I wouldn't lose any time!" 

THE END 



By A. MORRIS 

rogator, it is possible say authorities that 
severe mental and emotional harm may be 
done. For apparently the methods of diaaetica are camouflaged variants of conventional psych* logical procedures. It is 
known that laymen are not equipped to 
handle these matte rs. 

Therefore it is with a desire to caution 
the un-:nit:ated that this matter is brought 
up. Psychological analysis is not a toy 
and playing with the human faculties medically is dangerous. Whatever the merits 
of dianetics, its practitioners should make 
this clear. 



The MAN WHO FORGOT 




It's a dangerous thing for a man to lose 



It's a dangerous thing for a man to lose 
his memory. But in Rand's case, amnesia 
could be the means of saving his life . . . 




HE STARTED vaguely at the body. The moon, in quarter phase with 

closely cropped lawn, shell- its bright crescent far brighter than 

blue in color. That didn't it should be even at night, 

seem right. Suddenly he caught a movement in 

The sky was a canopy of black in another direction. A bright ball was 

which a ball of fire rode high. rising above the horizon. 

Off toward the horizon was another "Must be some kind of ship," he 



36 



Rand bant cloier above the girl, feigning not to know of the figure at the door 

37 



38 



 



mumbled. 

But his eyes told him it wasn't. Its 
outlines were too rough. It was another moon, small, very close to the 
earth. 

"The earthl" It was a sharp ejaculation escaping from his lips. He 
stared at the ascending lesser moon, 
the larger one on the opposite horizon, 
the sun that was much too small in a 
sky that was much too black, and 
slowly shook his head. It was not the 
earth. 

A puzzled frown creased his forehead. What was the earth? This 
wasn't the earth, whatever it was. 
But what was the earth? The word 
had risen from some depth of memory 
without its associations. 

"Let's see," he said aloud. "The 
earth has a larger sun. Does it have 
any moons?" 

He searched his thoughts without 
finding a definite answer. He gave up 
the problem of the sky and the earth 
and turned his attention back to his 
immediate surroundings. 

His eyes caught the flash of something bright in a thicket of neatly 
trimmed shrubs. He went over to it 
and dragged it out. It was a suit. An 
emergency suit of the type worn for 
dropping to a planet from above its 
atmosphere. Not a space suit designed 
for working in a vacuum. 

"What's it doing here, I wonder?" 
he thought. 

He examined it curiously. Its bulky 
legs were zippered together. They 
could be unzippered for walking, but 
even then it would be clumsy work. 

Attached to the shoulders was a 
harness with fine strands of cord 
running to a bulky pile of cloth. A 
parachute. 

"Could I have worn it?" he asked, 
and in asking the question he suddenly realized consciously what had 
been troubling him. "I can't remem


ber!" he whispered, surprised and 
troubled. "Let's see. What can I remember?" 

He searched frantically for memories to tie him to the past. There was 
none. His thoughts could go back 
to ten minutes ago. That was all. 

"Why?" he asked numbly. 

He probed his scalp with gentle 
fingers. There was no sign of injury 
that might account for loss of memory. 

"Maybe there's some identification!" he exclaimed. 

He explored his clothing. He had on 
a loose fitting shirt of pastel blue 
cloth that had no mark of identification on it nor pockets that might contain something. His trousers had pockets, but they were empty. They were 
more than empty. They were new, and 
had never had anything in them. 

"All my clothes are new!" he whispered. 

He turned his attention to the emergency suit. It should have markings of 
some kind on it. Perhaps a number. 

Finally he sat down on the blue 
lawn and gave up. There was nothing 
— except a vague feeling that the style 
of the clothing he wore was strange 
and subtly different from any he had 
ever worn before. 

"So," he said tonelessly. "I can't remember my name or where I'm from 
— except that it's a planet called 
earth. And I'm not there, whatever 
this planet is." 

A vague uneasiness began to make 
itself felt within him. An urge grew 
to put a lot of distance between him 
and this spot with its neatly cropped 
lawn and trimmed shrubs. And the 
emergency suit. 

He looked at the thing of plastic 
and glassite, feeling the growth of the 
urge to get far away from it. 

"But it's the only thing linking with 
the past that I have!" he protested. 

From the depths of lost memory 



THE MAN WHO FORGOT 



39 



rose a feeling of panic. A premonition 
of danger connected with the suit. 

He drew back from it, still reluctant 
to leave it. Abruptly it burst into 
flame. The flames were blinding, the 
heat they threw off intense even at 
ten feet. There was no smoke, and 
shortly there was no flame. Only a 
scorched area of ground and some 
charred brush that hadn't quite 
burned away. 

tiJ_J£LLO," a cultured female 
voice sounded at his back. 

He started slightly, his shoulders 
stiffening. Then he turned casually. 

"Hello," he said mildly. 

The girl was dressed in the same 
type of loose-fitting shirt and trousers 
that he himself wore. Her well-proportioned breasts and smoothly rounded hips utterly destroyed the effect 
of masculinity of her attire, however. 

As his eyes came to rest on her 
face the word "beautiful" rose into 
his thoughts. But there was more than 
beauty. Good nature sparkled from 
her eyes and lurked in the corners of 
her lips. Her skin was a soft tan in 
color. Her hair, glistening brown, fell 
in disorder as though recently tossed 
about in the wind. 

"What are you doing here?" he 
asked quickly. 

"I was about to ask you the same 
thing," she said cheerily. "I live here. 
I'm Clara Valkor." She said it as 
though she expected the name to 
mean something to him. 

"Clara Valkor," he said slowly. 
Then he frowned deeply to cover up 
his thoughts. "Have you ever seen 
me before, Clara?" 

"No, I haven't, " she said. 

"You don't know who I am?" 

"No," she said. "Should I?" 

"I don't know," he said slowly. 
"You see, I don't know who I am 
either. I don't even know how I got 
here." He wondered why he hadn't 



told her about the emergency suit. 

"You mean you're a victim of amnesia?" Clara asked incredulously, her 
eyes widening. "Then I'd better get 
you to the, house and call the doctor!" 

"No!" he said. He was surprised at 
the fierce insistence in his voice. 
"That is," he covered up, "I've already examined my scalp. There's no 
injury of any kind. Nothing a doctor 
could do." 

"That's where you're wrong," Clara 
said. "Very few cases of amnesia are 
from head injuries. Most of them are 
purely psychological. An escape mechanism." 

"What do you mean?" he asked, 
feeling himself tremble. 

"I mean—" Clara began. A shout 
interrupted her. 

"Who's this and how'd he get 
here?" the man who had shouted a 
greeting asked when he came up to 
them. 

"This is— Randolph B e e c h e r, 
Karn," Clara said. 

"Glad to meet you, Rand/' Karn 
said. But his eyes as they surveyed 
him didn't match the warmth of his 

Randolph Beecher, he thought. It 
was as good a name as any. But why 
had Clara given him a name rather 
than telling Karn the truth? And 
there had been a flash of dislike in her 
first glance at Karn. 

"Rand dropped out at my invitation," Clara was saying. "I haven't 
said anything about it because I — -well, 
frankly I didn't think he would accept. He's a pretty busy man most of 
the time and can't take a couple of 
weeks off like this as a rule." 

"Busy, huh..." Karn said. "At 
what?" 

"Oh," Clara laughed lightly, "at 
things that would bore you to tears. 
He's a specialist. The history of chess. 
He's writing a book on it." 



40 



 



"Chess!" Karn said disgustedly. 

Rand smiled, guessing that Clara 
had chosen that subject because she 
knew that Karn would avoid it in the 
future. He felt grateful to her. She 
had in one shrewd stroke established 
him as a guest and surrounded him 
with the protection of disinterest in 
his personal affairs. 

But why? He darted her a questioning glance. Her expression was casual. 

"So you're going to be here a couple of weeks," Karn went on. "Well, 
I'll see you around, I suppose. I'll run 
along now. By the way, what part 
of Mars are you from?" 

"He's from Kem Juncture," Clara 
said hastily. "And you should see his 
library! Would you believe it? He has 
over forty thousand books on chess 
alone, some of them dating back to 
the twentieth century!" 

"Any good books?" Karn said. 
With that parting thrust he turned 
and strode away. 

Rand watched him go, hesitating 
to face Clara. He felt her hand steal 
into his. Suddenly he was acutely 
aware of her presence, the magnetic 
attraction of her. 

"Why did you do it?" he asked, 
turning his head and looking down at 
her. 

"When you get better acquainted 
with Karn you'll know," Clara said. 
"He doesn't know that I know it, but 
he's a muspo," 

"Muspo?" Rand echoed. 

"Martian Union police officer. 
Secret police," she said, linking her 
arm in his. "Let's go to the house." 

Rand felt beads of perspiration 
form on his brow and wondered why. 

pjE STEPPED out of the shower 
and began rubbing himself 
briskly. He paused for a second, 
sensing that this shower was a 
habitual thing with him. Another little thing to add to the many accumu


lating, that might eventually add up 
to complete memory. 

"Randolph Beecher," he whispered. 
"It isn't my name, I'm quite sure. 
But already I'm thinking of myself as 
Rand." 

His thoughts went back to the previous day. Clara had brought him 
into the house, a huge rambling affair 
of sandstone, beautifully built. She 
had introduced him to Hans Valkor, 
her father. There had been others, 
too. So many that he could remember 
only a few. 

"Welcome to the House of Valkor," 
Hans had said warmly. Rand had instinctively liked Clara's father. He 
was tall and sturdy, in his late fifties 
with thinning gray hair and a ruddy 
complexion. A man who had lived well 
and made living an art. 

But Rand had sensed an undercurrent of something in Hans. He tried 
to analyze it now as he dressed. Was 
it fear? It seemed partly that, but 
more wariness than fear. That was 
it. Hans was like a man on a battle 
front, suspecting him yet accepting 
him. Ready to shake hands or fight 
for his life. 

And the others. They had been cordial but too quiet. Reserved as though 
saying anything might mean trouble. 

Rand shrugged off his feeling of insecurity and finished dressing. He 
looked about his large airy room with 
a feeling of pleasure. If this room was 
to be his for two weeks it would give 
him time to get his bearings and perhaps decide what to do. Whether to 
continue the masquerade that Clara 
had started or to seek help in discovering his true identity. 

He went to the window and pulled 
back the heavy drapes to look out 
over the rolling landscape and up 
into the black sky at the small moon 
sailing with visible motion above. 

"So this is Mars," he muttered 
thoughtfully. "I have no memory of 



THE MAN WHO FORGOT 



41 



Mars. All my memories and feeling 
seem to be of the Earth. I must have 
come here in that emergency suit, 
dropped from a ship out in space. 
"Why didn't I tell Clara of that? Kem 
Juncture! I'll have to find the library 
and learn a little about Mars and Kem 
Juncture so I'll be able to carry this 
off without giving myself away." 

A soft knock sounded at the door. 

"Come in," Rand said. 

The door opened cautiously. It was 
Clara. 

"Hi," Rand said, grinning cheerfully. "Come on in." 

She entered and closed the door behind her. 

"I'm still suffering from — " he began. 

"Boredom?" she interrupted loudly. 
"After you've relaxed you won't, darling. And after you've been here for 
two weeks you'll forget all about your 
musty old chess books." 

He frowned. She went to a wall 
and motioned for him to come over. 
When he did she lifted back a picture, 
revealing a small button. 

"Microphone/' she formed with her 
lips. 

She let the picture back gently, put 
her arms around his neck, and kissed 
him. 

"Mmmm," she said. "That was nice. 
Kiss me again darling." Her voice 
was intimate, inviting. She placed her 
cheek against his so that her lips were 
against his ear. "You must be very 
careful," she whispered so low that 
he could barely hear the words. 
"Every moment in this house you will 
be watched for the slightest suspicious 
move. After breakfast well go for 
a stroll and then we can talk again. 
But whatever you do don't tell anyone you've lost your memory," 

Her lips caressed his cheek. Her 
lips sought his again. He felt her 
warm body against his, vibrant with 
life, inviting. His arms went around 



her. 

She drew back her head, a half 
smile playing on her lips. In her eyes 
was tenderness, love, and fear. 

He released her, his thoughts whirling. Was her love an act? It seemed 
so, designed to lull the suspicions of 
whoever was watching. But if the 
love were an act the fear definitely 
wasn't. 

Clara was afraid. Her father was 
afraid. 

"Let's go down to breakfast, Rand," 
she said, taking his hand and leading 
him toward the door. "After breakfast I want to show you the grounds. 
They're dad's pride and joy." 

T^ARN WAS alone in the breakfast 
room, eating a baked mushroom 
stuffed with deviled egg. He studied 
Rand with frank curiosity as he entered. 

"How's the chess player after a 
night's sleep in the country?" he 
asked dryly. 

"Never better, Kara," Rand said 
with an attempt at friendliness. 

"Oh! A chess player?" a new voice 
exclaimed. It's owner, a gaunt woman 
with boney shoulders and wrinkled 
face, stood in the doorway eyeing 
Rand possessively. 

"On vacation," Clara said warningry. "I made him promise he would 
neither talk nor play chess while he's 
here." 

"But you can't do that!" the gaunt 
woman said indignantly. "You know 
my love for the game, Clara, and it's 
years since I've seen a chess player. 
You can't!" 

"Why not play her?" Kara asked. 
"Aunt Bessie won't rest now until 
you do. You didn't meet Aunt Bessie 
last night? She was in her room all 
evening, I think." 

"Perhaps later," Rand said uncomfortably. "Pleased to meet you, Aunt 
Bessie." He smiled at her. There 



42 



 



seemed to be a faint disappointment 
in her expression at his sudden surrender. He turned to the table loaded 
with food. 

Clara was filling two plates. Rand 
studied the food in the hopes of finding something familiar. Odors from 
the steaming food taken out of steam 
trays were familiar, but they held no 
associations. Simple recognition was 
all they evoked. 

He took the two plates and held 
them while Clara continued filling 
them. Then he followed her over to 
a secluded nook overlooking a picturesque section of garden beyond a narrow window. 

With the first bite he found that he 
was very hungry. He decided that although he couldn't remember his last 
breakfast or any other breakfast before that, that it must undoubtedly 
be the finest one he had ever had. 

"It's part of dad's way of life." 
Clara said. "Johnson, the cook, used 
to be chef at one of the most famous 
restaurants of all Mars. Dad had to 
buy the restaurant to get his contract 
and order him out here." 

Others were coming in now. Rand 
listened to fragments of conversation 
in the hopes of picking up something 
that might mean something. There 
was nothing but small talk. Four were 
talking of playing tennis after breakfast. 

"Let's hurry," Clara whispered. 

"I'm through any time," Rand said. 
"In fact I'm finished right now." 

Clara nodded and slid back her 
chair. Rand followed her out of the 
room, conscious of the curious glances 
that followed them. He walked beside her in silence until they^ were 
away from the house and in the 
center of a large area of lawn where 
they couldn't possibly be overheard. 

"This ought to be good enough." 
he said abruptly. "Let's sit down here 
and talk. There are a lot of things 



I'd like to know." 

"Naturally," Clara said, stretching 
out lazily on her side and cupping her 
head in her arm. She regarded him 
with a smile, then became serious. 
"First, do you remember anything 
yet? Anything at all?", 

"N— no," Rand said. He had been 
about to tell her he was sure he was 
from the earth. "Something's going on 
here," he said hastily. "What is it? 
Why are you and your father afraid? 
What's Karn to you? Who are all 
these other people? Why are they 
here? Who's aunt Bessie? Why did 
she want to play chess with me and 
then seem disappointed when I said 
I would?" 

Clara studied him thoughtfully. 
"For a man with amnesia," she said 
slowly, "you have a particularly keen 
mind." 

"I have, haven't I?" Rand said. 
"Probably it will help me get to 
the root of who I am eventually. 
That's another thing. Why didn't you 
want Rand to know about it? Is there 
something wrong with losing one's 
memory?" 

"Did you know that Mars is planning on seceding from the interplanetary government?" Clara asked abruptly. 

"I not only didn't know it," Rand 
said, "but I didn't know there was a 
planetary government. What's that 
got to do with my loss of memory? 
You ask as though that had some 
bearing on it." 

Clara looked across the lawn moodily without answering. When she spoke 
it was on a different subject. 

"I'd forgotten that aunt Bessie 
likes to play chess," she said. "Of 
course you'll have to keep stalling 
her. If you played she'd quickly realize you're no expert. If you know how 
to play the game at all. Do you?" 

"I don't know," Rand said truthfully. 



THE MAN WHO FORGOT 



4-3 



"Karn is my brother," Clara said. 
"I'm sure he's a muspo. Dad is a 
loyalist. He's firmly convinced that 
Mars must stay in the interplanetary 
government, that to secede would 
eventually lead to solar war. If he 
knew that his own son was a muspo 
he would — " 

"He would what?" Rand asked, 
when she fell abruptly silent. 

Clara didn't answer. She was looking off in the distance. Rand followed 
her gaze. He caught a brief glimpse 
of a man with a pair of binoculars before he disappeared behind some 
shrubs. 

"I hope he wasn't a lip reader," 
Clara said, troubled. 

"Who was he?" Rand asked. 

"One of Karn's friends," she answered. "The house is always so filled 
with guests. Karn always has a couple. 
Dad has loads of them, mostly loyalists. He doesn't know that Karn is 
against him. Karn's too clever to let 
him catch on. He always agrees 
with dad when political matters are 
discussed." 

Rand reached forward quickly and 
put his arms around Clara. "Here 
comes Karn," he whispered. "Kiss 
me." 

Her arms went over his shoulders. 
Her lips sought his and lingered. Her 
body was tense. Finally she drew 
back and" looked around with an attempt at being casual. 

"Why, Karn isn't anywhere in 
sight! " she said. 

"I know," Rand murmured. 

She turned startled eyes back to 
him. When his lips sought hers again 
she didn't resist. Slowly her body 
relaxed its tenseness. Then, suddenly, 
she was crying softly. 

«J'M GOING into town, Rand," 
Karn said. "Want to come along 
for the ride?" 
Rand and Clara had just returned 



to the house from their walk around 
the grounds and had run into Karn 
as they entered. 
Rand hesitated. 

"Go ahead, darling," Clara said. "I 
want to take a nap anyway." 

"Okay," Rand said, wondering why 
Clara was willing to let him be exposed to her brother's keen mind. 

"See you when you get back, 
Rand," Clara said with a smile. She 
turned abruptly and went to the stairway leading to the second floor. 

Rand followed Karn outside and 
discovered that a car had drawn up in 
front. The man behind the wheel was 
the one who had been spying on him 
and Clara with the binoculars. 

He wanted to draw back, make 
some excuse not to go. But Karn's 
hand was on his arm. The car door 
was open. He stooped down and entered. A second later the car was in 
motion. 

Karn sat beside him, his eyes studying him frankly, a smile playing at 
the corners of his mouth. 

"What do you think of the interplanetary situation, Rand?" he asked 
abruptly. 

Rand shrugged. "I don't think anything about it," he said carelessly. 
"Not interested, to be frank about it." 

"About as interested as I am in 
chess?" Karn said. 

"That's right," Rand said. 

"I might fool you," Karn said 
quietly. "Maybe I know a lot about 
chess." 

Rand swallowed loudly. He wondered why he should be so tense. "Interesting if true," he said, looking out 
the windows at the rolling landscape 
beside the highway. 

"Enough," Karn said quietly, "so 
that I believe you are the man I've 
been requisitioned to find." 

Rand said nothing. By great effort 
he was keeping his trembling from 
showing. He studied his reactions with 



44 



 



intense interest. He was beginning to 
sense that deep in his subconscious 
was something cut off from conscious 
contact that was listening and knowing and perhaps planning. "The real 
me," be decided. 

Karn's chuckle interrupted his 
thoughts. "Still my move, eh?" he 
said. "Well, here we are." 

The car pulled smoothly to a stop 
under the marquee of a restaurant. 
Kara got out and held the door open. 

Rand thought of escape. He looked 
around. There was no place to run 
to, and even if he managed to escape 
he wouldn't know where to go. 

He got out of the car, and suddenly 
he was wondering at his calm. Did it 
rise from subconscious knowledge? Or 
was it merely the product of a fatalism that conditioned him to accept 
what he couldn't avoid? 

Karn's must know that he was unable to remember his past life, that 
he wasn't the chess historian Clara 
had claimed, and that he had come 
from the earth, the mother planet 
that Mars and Karn was planning 
war against. The chauffeur in the 
front seat had probably read his lips 
and gotten the whole story. Maybe 
Karn had checked and found his 
identity as Randolph Beech er was 
fictitious. It would be a simple enough 
matter for the M.U.S.P. to check on 
that. 

And the reason Karn wasn't pointing a gun at him to prevent him from 
escaping must be that he knew there 
was no place to escape to. 

So he preceded Karn into the restaurant calmly as though he were 
unaware that he was a prisoner about 
to be taken to whatever prison lay 
hidden in this place. 

"Right on through to that door at 
the back," Karn said. 

Rand nodded, eyeing the few customers sitting at the tables with blank 
expression. At the door Karn had 



pointed out be paused while Karn 
rapped three short knocks, paused, 
and repeated them. 

The door opened revealing a narrow hallway. Through one door came 
kitchen sounds. They passed several 
other doors. 

"That door was electrically controlled," Karn explained. "There's a 
mike in the door frame that picked 
up my knock." 

He stepped past Rand now and 
went to a door, opening it. 

"After you, Rand," he said. 

The room Rand stepped into was a 
small office. There were four desks 
crowded into it, and on each desk 
were several phones. 

"A bookie joint," Karn grinned. "A 
real one. That's how we finance our 
operations, and it also gives us a 
ready made network of private wires 
for our real work." 

"I don't get it," Rand said. 

"You will," Karn said. "I want you 
to meet Aaron Vorik, our leader. 
Aaron, this is the man I called you 
about." 

"Oh, yesl" the short, dark-haired 
man said, rising. He extended a hand 
in a hawk-like motion. 

Rand accepted it, his thoughts 
mystified by the apparently warm reception. He had expected to be arrested. 

"Sit down, Rand," Kara said. 
Aaron will explain to you what we 
have in mind." 

Rand took a seat slowly, studying 
Aaron Vorik. A product of the universal melting pot, he had the nonracialness that characterizes those 
whose veins carry the blood of all 
races equally mixed. His eyes were 
black and extremely intelligent, his 
mouth large and flexible. 

"It's very simple," Aaron said. "We 
want you to plan all the tactical details of our war of secession from 
Earth," 



THE MAN WHO FORGOT 



TOURING THE long moment of absolute silence that followed, 
Rand was aware of two things. The 
eager, intent expressions on Karia's 
and Aaron's faces, and the surge of 
elation that rose in his mind like a 
flood, filling his consciousness so intensely that he felt it must show on 
his face. 

Then, as though it were some other 
person across the room, he heard himself saying calmly, with a mixture of 
caution and modesty, "But I'm not 
qualified for such a task. Chess is basically similar to war and politics, but 
it doesn't qualify a man to deal with 
the intricacies of actual politics and 
war. Anyway, how do you know my 
sympathies are for the secessionists? 
They might be for the loyalists!" 

"Nonsense!" Aaron Vorik- said. 
"Yon are a master of chess. I've heard 
of you. The master is intrigued by the 
problem— not the ethics of the problem. You cannot refuse. Think of it — 
to be the master planner behind the 
war of worlds! To put on paper the 
deployment of forces in space, the attacks, the defenses, the strategy involving — not inanimate pieces on a 
board — but millions of men and trillions of dollars worth of materials. 
The timing involved! The pattern of 
attack against superior odds ! The 
probing of the mind behind the enemy, 
and tlie estimation of his strategy! 
The challenge !" 

"You say you've heard of me?" 
Rand asked cautiously. 

"Better than that," Arron said. He 
pulled open a drawer and brought out 
a book, tossing it with careless good 
humor toward Rand. 

Rand caught it. The name under 
the title caught his startled eye. It 
was Randolph Beecher. And the title 
was "Chess Logistics." 

"I've read it — since yesterday," 
Aaron said. "With it I could almost 
do the planning myself, but why 
should I when we can have the master 



himself work on the problems involved?" 

Rand only half heard. He was staring at the book in fascination. He 
knew every word in the book. 

He closed his eyes. "On page 
fifty-six," he thought wonderingly, 
"there is a typographical error in the 
third line." Idiy he opened the book 
to that page. The error was there! 

"/ must be Randolph Beecher" he 
thought. He searched his mind for 
some verification, some clue that 
could make him sure. There was nothing except a faint whisper that he 
was not. 

"All right," he heard himself say. 
It startled him. He opened his mouth 
to deny his own words, then closed 

it. 

"Fine. Fine," Aaron Vorik exclaimed, Jumping up and coming 
around his desk to shake hands with 
Rand enthusiastically. "Go out and 
order drinks sent in," he said to Karn. 
"This calls for a celebration." 

While Karn was gone Aaron Varik 
went to a desk and took out a metal 
box. When he opened it Rand saw 
that it was filled with currency. 

"Take a handful," Aaron said. 
"From now on you don't need to 
worry about money. Spend a thousand 
a day if you want. Salt some away, 
just in case, if you wish. I'm doing 
that myself. Here." He took out a 
thick pile of bills and thrust them 
into Rand's hands. 

Karn returned in time to see Rand 
putting the money in his pockets, and 
nodded knowingly. He was carrying 
a tray with three sparkling drinks. 

Rand accepted one. 

"Here's to success," Aaron said. 

Rand sampled the drink cautiously. It was a strange flavor. He asked 
no questions. 

"One thing," Aaron said, smacking 
his lips over the drink, "you wiil go 
on as you have been doing, to all 
appearances. Continue your vacation 



46 



 



visit at the House of Valkor. Karn 
will see to it that you have your own 
car. You can remain oblivious of the 
intrigue going on around you there. 
That's out of your province anyway. 
You can turn moody and start a habit 
of taking afternoon drives by yourself. In a few days when you've established a routine and possible suspicion has died down you can start 
spending a few hours here each afternoon." 

Rand nodded, turning the cold glass 
in his hands absently. 

"We'd better go now," Karn said, 
finishing his drink. 

fLARA WAS nowhere around when 
they reached the house, Karn 
muttered something about having to 
see somebody. This suited Rand. He 
hurried to his room, grateful 'for the 
chance to do some serious thinking 
before he would have to see Clara. 

The biggest mystery, he knew, far 
outweighing the utterly mad offer of 
Aaron Varik for him to mastermind 
the Martian rebellion against the 
Earth, was how Clara had picked the 
name Randolph Beecher for him. Up 
until Aaron had said that he had 
heard of Beecher he had assumed that 
it had just been a name that popped 
into her mind on the spur of the moment. Even then he had decided the 
name must have come from chance 
memory. The fact that Beecher actually was a chess expert only added to 
that belief. But when he had taken 
the book on chess and realized that 
he knew it far better than any casual 
reading in the past that was lost to 
conscious memory could account for, 
he had also realized that Clara's picking of that name couldn't be chance. 

So chance was ruled out. 

"That leaves— design," Rand muttered. "But, in that case, my landing 
at this place after dropping from a 
ship in outer space would also have 



to be design. Possible. My trajectory 
could have been calculated with fair 
accuracy." 

He studied the possibilities this 
gave rise to. Clara and her father 
seemed to be fairly important people 
to rate such a huge estate. Rich, to 
be able to buy a large and famous 
restaurant just to get its chef. 

"Suppose," he thought, "just suppose I'm an Earth agent sent here 
for some reason. I couldn't act alone. 
I would have to have contacts, an 
identity, a place to stay. My contacts would get word I was coming, 
and when I would get here. One of 
them, Clara, would be on the watch 
for me. 

"That makes sense. But then something happened that caused me to 
lose my memory. Maybe I fell too 
fast. Maybe I landed wrong and 
blanked out, my instincts getting me 
out of the emergency suit before its 
chemicals reacted with the atmosphere 
and made it burn. Or before the time 
fire-bomb that might have been in it 
to destroy it went off. 

"But that would be simple amnesia. 
It wouldn't account for my knowledge 
of that chess book. It wouldn't account for the way Clara accepted my 
amnesia. If it were simple amnesia 
and she's the contact I was supposed 
to meet she would get excited about 
it. She'd perhaps know who I am and 
make a positive effort to get me to 
remember." 

He snapped his fingers in excitement at a sudden thought. 

"There's her letting me go for a 
ride alone with her brother 1 " he 
thought. "She wouldn't have done that 
unless — " 

The thought staggered him. 

"Unless she knew that there was 
something in my subconscious that 
would take care of the situation. That 
Aaron Varik would accept me. That 



THE MAN WHO FORGOT 



47 



would mean — hypnotism. In some 
way by hypnosis my true identity and 
past memories have been blocked off 
by hypnosis! Why? There could be 
only one reason. I must be a tactician 
—qualified to do the job Aaron and 
Karn want me to do, with knowledge 
of the forces and deployment of the 
Earth's space navy. If Mars ever 
found that out they would have ways 
of forcing me to talk. So if hypnosis 
could place all that knowledge beyond 
my conscious reach no amount of torture or truth drugs could get it out 
of me." 

He thought this over, nodding with 
quiet satisfaction. 

"That must be it," he decided. 
"And I can see what my objective 
would be. It would be to maneuver 
Martian ships into traps that my subconscious knows to exist, so that 
Earth could win." 

The complexity and diabolical cunning of the plot held him breathless. 
Earth sending her own key man to 
direct Martian war activities so that 
Earth could win I And that man was 
he! 

A confidence took hold of him. At 
the right times his subconscious would 
provide the knowledge he needed. Behind the hypnotically induced curtain 
of his mind his true self was working 
in full consciousness. 

With a queer loneliness he reached 
toward that hidden self, wondering 
who it might be, who he really was. 
And in answer came a faint whisper 
of thought that he could never know 
until his task was done. Until then he 
must remain— Randolph Beecher, the 
Martian. 

TTIERE WAS a discreet knock at 
the door. When Rand called, 
"Come in," a servant entered, carrying neatly pressed formal garb. 

"Your clothing just arrived, sir," 
he said deferentially. "Since there is 



to be quite a party this evening, Mr, 
Valkor suggested I get your dinner 
clothes ready for you. Dinner is in 
half an hour." 

"Thanks," Rand said. 

Twenty minutes later as he was inspecting himself another knock came. 
This time it was Clara. 

"I thought you must be back," she 
said. She surveyed his suit. "It fits 
all right," she said. "I was a little 
afraid I might have the size wrong." 

"Then it was you who ordered 
these?" Rand asked. 

"Who else?" she said. "You didn't 
have your clothes with you and I 
didn't want you to be embarrassed." 
She glanced significantly toward the 
picture behind which the microphone 
was concealed. 

Rand grinned. "You're a honey," 
he said. "How about a kiss?" 

Clara wrinkled her nose at him, but 
she went obediently into his arms. 

"Anything exciting happen with 
Karn ? " she whispered, her lips 
against his ear. 

"Plenty," Rand whispered. "There's 
something I want to know. Who am 
I?" 

He felt her body stiffen against 
him, then slowly relax. 

"I don't know," she answered. "AH 
I know is that— if you are suspected 
of being an Earth spy you will be 
killed. I don't want that to happen." 

"But you knew I was coming," 
Rand whispered. 

"No," Clara said. "I didn't." 

"You must have," Rand whispered. 
"Otherwise how would you pick the 
name Randolph Beecher for me — the 
name I'm obviously supposed to 
masquerade under?" 

"I met Randolph once," Clara said. 
"You look very much like him. 
Enough to be him." 

"Is that the truth?" Rand asked. 

"Yes," Clara whispered. 

Rand took her head in his hands 



48 



 



and held her face away, studying her 
intently. He could see nothing but 
sincerity in her eyes. 

"What's the matter?" she asked 
timidly. 

"Nothing," Rand said, "except that 
a beautiful theory goes out the window and I don't know any mare about 
myself than I did before." 

He released her. 

"Let's go downstairs," he said 
gruffly. 

"We'll have time for a short walk 
before the guests arrive," Clara said. 

A moment later they were walking 
across a broad expanse of lawn. 

"Now," Clara said. "What's this 
beautiful theory you had?" 

"Everything seemed to point toward it," Rand said. "It made me an 
Earth spy with my identity and my 
past, and almost everything else 
blocked off from consciousness by 
hypnosis. You had to be my contact 
that was to give me an identity and 
get me started." 

"I don't understand," Clara said. 
"I never saw you before that moment 
we met on the lawn." 

Rand groaned. "There's only one 
possibility," he said. "You must have 
orders to say what you're saying. It 
must be vital that I have no definite 
knowledge of what I really am. But 
— if that's so — why do I have this 
intense curiosity about myself. It 
seems to me the hypnosis blocks 
would have included an inhibition of 
curiosity about myself. Instead it 
keeps growing. I've got to learn who 
I am. It's becoming a compulsion that 
dominates my thinking. And that's 
wrong if my theory of what's back 
of it is correct." 

"What do you think's back of it?" 
Clara asked. 

"Things seem to indicate," he said, 
"that I'm here to take charge of masterminding the Martian plot for secession, and that my purpose is to so 



mastermind it that Earth forces will 
defeat the Martians. In other words, 
from behind the hypnotic curtain of 
my mind is supposed to come details 
and plans that will seem to ensure 
the Martians of winning, but which 
will ensure their being defeated." 

"What makes you think that?" 
Clara asked, staring at him with wonder. 

"Karn took me to meet Aaron 
Varik," Rand said. "I've been chosen 
— as Randolph Beecher the master 
chess player — to mastermind the Martian plans." 

"No!" Clara exclaimed unbelievingly. "But if that's true, have you 
thought to wonder why they would 
give a total stranger a job like that? 
After all, wouldn't they have a military staff trained for a thing like 
that?" 

. "They undoubtedly have," Rand 
said. "They told me they felt that my 
very lack of experience with those 
things would give me a better slant 
— enable me as a chess genius to make 
planned maneuvers that would be superior to those a military staff could 
work out." 

"Let's suppose you are what you 
think you are," Clara said. "But let's 
go further. Suppose Karn's friend 
really did read your lips and find 
out you're suffering from amnesia. 
Xarn knows I'm a thorough loyalist. 
He might suspect what you suspected 
about me, from the evidence. He and 
Aaron Varik might have come to the 
conclusion that yon were here to do 
the very thing they want you to do. 
And they might have reasoned that the 
best way is to give you full reign and 
let you map their strategy." 

"But why?" Rand asked. 

"Then, through you," she said, 
"they could find out what Earth 
would want them to do to be defeated. They could find out through you 
just what they must avoid. Instead of 



THE MAN WHO FORGOT 



49 



following your plans those plans 
would serve as the danger map in 
their operations!" 

Rand stared at her in surprise. 
"That's something I hadn't thought 
of," he said. 

They walked along in silence while 
Rand frowned over the possibilities. 
Suddenly he gave a short laugh. 

"Suppose," he said dryly, "that the 
planners on Earth thought of that too. 
Suppose they instructed my subconscious to make the only plan that 
could enable the Martians to win. 
Then by the Martians deliberately 
avoiding the plans I work out they 
can't succeed. That would make it 
wonderful. Aaron Varik knowing I'm 
a spy sent to give him a bum steer, 
my bosses knowing he would know 
and instructing me to give him a 
solid strategy, knowing that he would 
deliberately steer away from it." 

"Tliat's possible too," Clara said. 
"You know where it leaves you, don't 
you? Completely in the dark. You 
can't know what to do. You'll work 
out strategies that you're sure will 
succeed. As an Earthman you'll want 
to hold them back and give out a 
plan that yott think will fail— and 
maybe your bosses want you to give 
out the other, knowing how to turn 
it to their own advantage. It'll belike 
the old shell game. You'll never know 
which one the pea is under." 

A melodious chime sounded from 
the direction of the house. 

"We have to go in," Clara said. 

UJT'S BEEN two weeks now, Mr, 
* Seedier," Aaron Varik said. 
"Don't you think it's about time you 
pleaded that you have to get back 
into writing your book and left Valkor House? In your own apartment 
you would have more freedom to 
study effectively the things you must 
know." 

"You're right, of course," Rand 



said. "But I'd like another week. I 
hate to go back." 

"No," Varik said. "This is an 
order." 

"Suppose I just leave the Valkors 
and go to some army base?" Rand 
suggested. 

"No," Aaron Valkor said. "We 
want you in your usual haunts. There 
are Earth spies everywhere. We don't 
want them turning their eyes on you. 
We've gone to elaborate lengths in 
arranging for you to study the_ abili-, 
ties of various space units, the ships, 
the guided missiles, the robot bombs. 
All our plans are built on your living 
your usual daily life." 

"Give me a day to think it over 
then," Rand said. "Anyway I can't 
just rush off without warning." 

"Very well," Aaron said. "But you 
leave for Kern Juncture tomorrow afternoon. When you arrive home you'll 
be contacted by muspo agents there 
who have their instructions." He 
stood up in an attitude of dismissal. 
"I must say it's been a pleasure to 
work with you," he said. "Your ability 
to memorize reams of data is truly 
amazing." He advanced to the door 
with Rand and shook hands. "I'll see 
you in a week or two. Goodbye now." 

Rand went down the hall into the 
restaurant, and out to the waiting car. 
Karn was behind the wheel, his friend 
having left Valkor House that 
morning. 

"Well," Rand said, smiling wryly, 
"I have my orders to leave." 

"I expected as much," Karn said. 
"I'll fly you home myself. When are 
you leaving?" 

"Tomorrow," Rand said. "How 
about borrowing your car this evening. I'd like to go driving with Cla
"Oh," Karn said, "I forgot to tell 
you. Clara had to go to Sill Juncture 
this morning. Her aunt's ill. She 



50 



 



won't be back until late tomorrow." 

"I'll wait to go until she gets back 
then," Rand said. "But why didn't 
she let me know?" 

"It was early this morning," Karn 
said, starting the car. "She asked me 
to tell you about it. Forgot." 

"How far is Sill Juncture from 
here?" Rand asked. 

"Oh Lord, you are wrapped up in 
your dream world of chess I" Karn 
said. "It's half way around the planet. 
Clara took the strata-rocket liner. 
She'll be there two or three hours 
and come right back." 

Rand settled back in frustrated silence, watching the neat rows of trees 
speed past along the highway. He 
began to wonder what was going to 
happen when Karn took him to Kem 
Juncture, wherever that was. 

Suppose the real Randolph Beecher 
was there? Or had he been gotten out 
of the way? And just where was he 
supposed to be living in Kem Juncture? 

It didn't worry him too much. He 
felt sure that somewhere in his subconscious was alt the knowledge he 
needed to get by. He dismissed the 
problem. 

An empty loneliness took possession 
of him. As far back as his memory 
went he had had Clara to depend on, 
there when he wanted her. It had 
been only two weeks, but it encompassed his entire life so far as conscious memory went. 

"I wish she had wakened me," he 
said glumly. 

Karn glanced at him. "You're 
pretty much in love with her, aren't 
you?" he said. "I hope you haven't 
said anything to her about what 
you're doing. She's a loyalist. If she 
knew you were working with us she 
might—" Karn's expression changed 
to amazement. "She would do just 
what she did — run away. I thought 



it was strange for her not to want to 
wake you and tell you. I guess you've 
already said too much to her, huh?" 
He darted Rand a sympathetic glance, 
then returned his eyes to the road. 

"I don't believe that," Rand said. 

"I know my sister," Karn said. 
"She will probably stay at her 
aunt's for several weeks once she gets 
there. She does that. Aunt Bessie has 
been sort of a mother to bee." 

"I'll be ready to leave in half an 
hour," Rand said bitterly. "Is that 
what you want?" 

Karn didn't answer for several seconds. "I imagine it's what Clara 
wants," he said finally. 

¥>AND TORE up the piece of stationery and threw it angrily into 
the wastebasket beside the desk in his 
room. He had wanted the half hour 
to compose a letter to Clara. The half 
hour was up and he was just where 
he started. Nowhere. 

"It's just like everything else," he 
thought bitterly. "Logic paints ii one 
way but it works another. I don't have 
enough to go on. Clara leaves early 
in the morning. Aaron Varik orders 
me to Kem Juncture. Karn is puzzled 
by his sister's behavior and says it 
doesn't make sense unless I told her 
I was working for the Martians, and 
I did. But I'm positive he knew I had 
told her. I'm certain her !eaving was 
not to see an aunt, but in some way 
connected with forcing me to leave 
here." 

He began another note. "Dearest 
Clara," it started. "I'm sorry you 
had to be away when—" 

He threw down the pen and stood 
up. Crumpling the note and dropping 
it on top of the others in the wastebasket he left the room. In the hall 
he encountered a servant. 

"Where's Mr. Valkor's room?" he 
asked. 



THE MAN WHO FORGOT 



51 



"You want Mr. Valkor?" the servant said. "He's in his study. If you'll 
come with me I'll take you to him." 

Rand followed him. He was feeling 
better about it. He could thank the 
hospitable old man and ask him to 
tell Clara to get in touch with him. 

The servant knocked discreetly at 
the paneled door. When Mr. Valkor's 
voice sounded to come in he opened 
the door and stood aside so Rand 
could enter. 

The old man's eyes lit up with 
pleasure. "This is a surprise," he 
said. "I'd hoped to have a chance to 
get better acquainted with you, but 
Clara monopolizes you." 

"I'm sorry I didn't take the opportunity," Rand said. "Now it's almost too late. I'm going to have to 
leave. I hate to, but it's necessary." 

"That's too bad," Mr. Valkor said. 

"Will you tell Clara when she gets 
back from her aunt's at Sill Juncture 
that I had to rush away and would 
like her to get in touch with me right 
away?" Rand said. 

Mr. Valkor's eyebrows lifted in surprise. 

"But Clara has no aunt in Sill 
Juncture!" he said. 

"I must have been mistaken about 
the place," Rand said hastily. "Anyway, will you tell her when she gets 
back?" 

"Yes, of course," Mr. Valkor said. 
He looked as though he wanted to 
say something more, then changed his 
mind. 

He shook hands with Rand and 
went to' the door with him. In the 
hall Rand looked around. No one was 
in sight. On impulse he went past his 
own door to Clara's. He twisted the 
knob cautiously. The door was locked. 
He hesitated, then knocked softly. 

He placed his ear to the door. There 
seemed to be movement on the other 
side. 



"Clara!" he said softly. "This is 
Rand. Are you there?" 

His ears ached from the strain of 
listening for the faintest sound. He 
could swear he felt her standing on 
the other side of the door. 

He looked hastily up and down the 
hall. No one was in sight. Quickly he 
stooped do%vn to the keyhole and tried 
to look through it. The eye of the keyhole was obscured by something. The 
slot tapered from a point down to full 
width. There was a key in it. A key 
on the inside. He squinted, trying to 
see through. 

Suddenly someone touched the key. 
Rand straightened and looked around 
for concealment. Ten feet away was 
the door of a janitor's closet. He hid 
in it. When he closed its door he 
grunted in satisfaction. There were 
half a dozen narrow slits in the upper 
part of the door for ventilation. He 
could see out. 

He had been none too soon. Even 
as he peeked through the slits he saw 
Clara's door open. Karn's friend who 
was supposed to have left stepped out. 
Karn followed him, closing Clara's 
door and locking it, then handing the 
key to his companion. 

"Everything will be all right until 
I get away from here with Rand" 
Karn said. "But keep out of sight. 
You're supposed to have left already. 
Rand would smell something if he saw 
you." 

"Right," the man said as they 
passed by the closet door. 

RAND PUSHED the door open a 
crack. He saw Karn's friend go 
through a door down the hall, and 
Karn go down the stairs. Rand 
opened the closet door and stepped 
out. 

He paused at the door Karn's 
friend had entered. He took a deep 
breath, then twisted the knob and 



52 



 



shoved the door open. 

The man was crossing the room, his 
back to him. He started to turn idly, 
not suspecting anything. Rand was 
on him while he was still blinking his 
surprise. 

A surge of elation flowed through 
Rand as he went into action. He 
hadn't known whether he had the 
skill of fighting, nor had he cared. But 
now he felt assurance as he saw his 
hands -move of their own volition, his 
body weave and duck. 

The man was no mean fighter himself. Rand had gotten in a telling jab 
to the man's jaw at the start that 
had dazed him. He had covered up 
expertly, fighting silently. 

But he was a little slow. Rand 
found that he was a sucker for feints 
to the body. Capitalizing on that he 
landed cruel blows to the man's face, 
slowing him even mere. 

Suddenly there was an opening. 
Rand's fist was coming up from the 
waist even as he saw the opening. 
It landed underneath the jaw, ierking 
the head upward. The man's eyes 
glazed. His knees wilted. 

Hastily Rand looked around for 
something to tie him with. There was 
a fine chain on the drapes at the windows. A sharp tug bro'-ie the chain. He 
wrapped it arotind the man's wrists, 
brought his legs up behind and 
wrapped the rest of the chain around 
his ankles. Two handkerchiefs from a 
dresser drawer formed a gag. 

Breathing heavily, Rand searched 
the man's pockets until he found the 
key to Clara's room. He grunted his 
satisfaction as he found it. He 
straightened and started toward the 
door. It was wide open. 

He grinned. No one had passed or 
they would have seen the fight. 

He closed the door as he went out, 
then hurried to Clara's room. Without hesitation he inserted the key and 
opened the door. He entered and 



closed it behind him before daring to 
look. 

When he did look he saw Clara 
lying on the bed. He leaped to the 
bed and searched for her pulse. It was 
there, slow, indicating that she had 
been drugged. 

"Clara!" he said urgently, shaking 
her head. She moaned drowsily. He 
shook her again. Then he went to the 
bathroom and soaked a washcloth in 
cold water, coming back with it and 
bathing her face. 

She opened her eyes, then closed 
them. 

"Clara!" Rand said. 

"What is it?" she said drowsily. 
Then, "Randl" She opened her eyes 
and sat up in alarm, looking down at 
herself. She saw that she was dressed. 
A frown of bewilderment appeared on 
her face. 

"You've been drugged," Rand said, 
"Wake up. I haven't much time." She 
was shaking her head. She took the 
washcloth from him and placed it over 
her eyes. "Karn's waiting for me to 
take me to Kem Juncture," Rand 
said. "Why did he drug you and tell 
me you had gone away?" 

"Be quiet a minute," Clara said. 
"There was something ... I found out 
something. Oh yes. Karn just got 
word last night that the M.U. S.P. 
through their agents on Earth have 
found out your true identity and the 
key to wiping out your hypnotic bloc. 
They don't intend to do that until 
they've let you map the strategy 
they've assigned you to map for them. 
Once you've done that they'll drug 
you and unlock the, secret plans hidden there. They're sure that by doing 
that they can uncover top secret 
Earth plans and use that knowledge 
to win the war that's coming." 

"And they caught you eavesdropping on them?" Rand asked. 



THE MAN WHO FORGOT 



53 



"Yes," Clara said. "Karn won't 
kill me because I'm his sister, but he 
knows that if Aaron finds out he'll 
order me liquidated, so he drugged me 
to keep me from warning you, hoping that by the time you had gone I 
would decide to keep quiet." 

"Did — " Rand took a deep breath. 
"Did you learn my real name." 

Clara turned her drugged eyes on 
him gravely. 

"Yes," she said. 

"What is it?" Rand asked, his 
voice strained. 

"I can't tell you," she said. "Your 
name is the key that unlocks your 
memory." 

"So much the better," Rand said 
eagerly. 

"No," Clara said. "They would 
know then and kill you. They've 
given you too much data to do otherwise." 

"I don't care," Rand said. "I'll take 
my chances on that. Tell me!" 

"No I" Clara said. 

"I had a fight with Karn's friend," 
Rand said. "I knocked him out and 
tied him up. When he wakes up he'll 
know I got the key to your door and 
talked with you. The masquerade is 
over. You've got to tell me." 

The sharp sound of a key rattling 
in the lock froze them. Rand glanced 
toward the door, then back to Clara. 

"You never woke up," he whispered. "Remember that." 

Clamping his lips together grimly 
he tapped her sharply just under the 
ear with his fist. y 
As she relaxed in unconsciousness, 
he started wiping her face with the 
wet washcloth. He pretended not to 
hear the door open. 

"Wake up I " he said sharply as 
though it were for the hundredth 
time, "Clara! Wake up!" 



UgTOP THAT," Karn's voice 
sounded softly. 

Rand stiffened his shoulders so that 
Kam would think he had been caught 
by surprise. Then he turned slowly, 
his lip curled in an expression of 
anger and contempt. 

"I've heard of brdthers like you, 
Karn," he said. "But I never thought 
you'd go to these lengths to break 
things up between me and your sister. You tell me she's rushed off to 
see an aunt without bothering to tell 
me. I suppose you'd tell her when 
she wakes up that I went away without bothering to even say goodbye to 
her." He was ignoring the snub-nosed 
gun pointed at him. 

"You've gone too far, Rand," 
Karn said in a tired voice. 

"Too far?" Rand said, giving a 
short bitter laugh. "You mean knocking out your friend? How could I do 
that? You said he had already gone?" 

"Too far, Rand," Karn said, his 
voice a monotone. 

"You're the one who's gone too 
far," Rand said. "From now on you 
can go to the devil so far as any help 
from me is concerned. You can tell 
Aaron Varik that, too. And tell him 
why." 

"Too far, Rand," Karn said. "I'm 
going to kill you." 

Suddenly Rand realized he meant 
it. Karn's eyes had changed remarkably. They seemed flatter, baleful as 
a wild animal's. 

"You know," Rand said, pretending amusement, "I really think you 
mean it. I've suddenly discovered the 
real you. You're an egomaniac. I've 
shown you up as a liar and a cheap 
intriguer, and you can't stand my 
knowing you'd stoop to cheap lies, 
so you intend to kill me." 

An aura of hate seemed to expand 
outward from Karn, and slowly draw 
back in. 

"It's not that, Rand," Karn said 



54 



 



gently. "You should have gone with 
me. Don't you see that? Could you 
go with me now and forget all this, 
and do the work we've asked you to 
do? You know you can't. And you 
know too much." 

"All right," Rand said. "I can see 
that you might have to kill me. I don't 
like it, of course. How do you propose 
to do it? Shoot me here in your sister's room, with her lying here 
drugged?" 

"It's an idea," Karn said. "I could 
say I'd - surprised you here. Brother 
shoots sister's attacker." 

"But Clara would brand that a lie," 
Rand said. 

"I don't think so," Karn said. 
"She'd be very unhappy about it all, 
but she wouldn't brand her brother 
a murderer and disgrace her father." 

"And what about Aaron Varik?" 
Rand said. "Would he like it?" 

Rand hoped that this sudden shift 
in the direction of the argument would 
take Karn slightly off guard. As he 
spoke he threw the wet washcloth at 
him and propelled himself forward in 
a long low diving tackle. 

He saw Karn avoid the washcloth 
and his outstretched arms. He was 
sprawling on the floor, realizing he 
had lost his gamble, when he felt a 
stinging pain where his neck joined 
his shoulder. Karn had used the gun 
to paralyze his arm. 

"It was a nice try, Rand," Karn 
said. "Now get up. We're leaving." 

Rand got slowly to his feet. His 
arm bung uselessly at his side. 

"So you don't want to kill me here," 
he said. 

"No," Karn said. "I want to take 
you out over one of the deserts. That 
way you'll never be found. Clara will 
think you went to Kern Juncture and 
forgot her. No one will ever find you 
or be able to prove anything." 

"And you expect me to simply 



walk out of here with you and submit 
to that?" Rand said. "I don't think 
I will. I think 111 stay here. You'll 
be forced to at least knock me out. 
Then you'll have to carry me out. 
That will involve risk." 

"I'll knock you out," Karn said. 
"Then I'll tell dad you suffered a 
heart attack. I'll get a muspo to pose 
as a doctor and have you taken away 
in an ambulance. I can tell dad later 
that you recovered at the hospital and 
went on to Kern Juncture." 

"Okay," Rand said, grinning wolfishly "knock me out." 

He watched Karn advance cautiously. He had knocked Clara out so that 
if Karn examined her when he first 
came into the room he would find 
her genuinely unconscious. When Karn 
hadn't done that, he had stalled for 
time for her to awaken. He stole a 
glance toward the bed now. Clara's 
eyes were open. She was looking at 
him questioningly. He nodded imperceptibly. 

Clara said quietly, "What are you 
doing with that gun, Karn?" 

T^ARN INSTINCTIVELY turned 
^ to look at bis sister. In that instant Rand stepped in and brought 
a short uppercut to the point of his 
jaw. He felt a knuckle crack open 
and realized sickeningly that with one 
arm paralyzed and the knuckle of the 
other hand broken he was done. Then 
elation surged through him. He saw 
Karn's gun drop from his fingers, his 
body begin to slump. 

Quickly he stooped to pick up the 
gun. 

"Hold it" a voice said from the 
doorway. 

Rand straightened. Karn's friend 
was standing there, a gun in his hand. 
He stepped into the room and closed 
the door behind him. 

"It seems the whole situation has 



THE MAN WHO FORGOT 



55 



degenerated completely," he said. "It's 
very unfortunate. The House of Valkor was an excellent front for spying 
on the loyalists and keeping track of 
them." 

He backed toward the phone stand, 
the gun steady in his fist. He lifted 
fee receiver and listened, then laid 
it down. Rand remained still while 
he dialed, his eyes never on the phone 
long enough for Rand to do anything. 

"Aaron?" he said into the phone. 
"This is Eld. You'll have to raid Valkor House immediately. Earn is no 
good to us any more. And Randolph 
Becher knows too much to cooperate 
with us. How much I don't know. His 
sister will have to be taken care of 
too. I'm holding the three of them 
in her bedroom. The father should 
be placed under political arrest, and 
the other guests should be taken in 
and held until we can decide what to 
do. Get things moving at once." 

He dropped the phone back on its 
cradle and advanced slowly toward 
Rand, 

"What do you mean, Karn is no 
good to you any more," Rand asked. 
"Are you planning on liquidating 
him?" 

"We'll have to," Eld said. "He's 
been a good agent but he's too loyal 
to his family. It interferes with his 
judgment. That's why the whole situation as regards you has degenerated. His sister's in love with you. To 
keep your liquidation quiet we'll have 
to silence her. That means her brother 
too, since he wouldn't stand for it." 

Rand saw Kant's eyes flicker open. 
He had to keep Eld from noticing it. 

"By liquidating Karn and his sister and me you mean killing us, I suppose?" he said. 

"I'm sorry," Eld said curtly, "but 
you can see the necessity of it, I'm 
sure. We can't endanger the out — " 

Karn in a swift movement had 
reached out and seized Eld's ankles 



and jerked with his whole body. Even 
a3 he fell Eld had sensed the situation and was adjusting himself to 
break away and leap up. 

Rand saw this and leaped forward. 
As Eld hit the floor Rand kicked the 
gun out of his hand. 

Karn transfered his grip to one 
foot, twisting it and doubling Eld's 
leg sideways. 

Wincing at the pain of his broken 
knuckle Rand picked up Eld's gun 
and brought it down against the top 
of Eld's head. 

It had taken no more than seconds. 
Eld was stretched out senseless. 

"We'll have to move fast," Rand 
said. "He called Aaron. There's going 
to be a raid any minute." 

"I heard him," Karn said bitterly. 
"Sis, you and Rand get a car out of 
the garage. I'll get Dad. In case something happens, the only place for you 
to go is to the Earth Embassy headquarters. There's no place on Mars 
we can hide. The secret police are 
everywhere. Once you get there you'll 
be safe and can be smuggled off the 
planet. Mars isn't quite ready to risk 
war by violating diplomatic immunity. Get going." 

Clara was already off the bed. She 
opened the door. 

"Hurry, Rand," she said. 
On the stairway they paused as the 
Sound of a shot came from the room 
they had just left. 

"Keep going," Rand said gruffly. 
Outside as they ran toward the garage they could hear the distant sound 
of sirens screaming. 

"We'll get the car and stop at the 
front dosr," Clara said. 

She lifted the garage door and ran 
to a sedan, getting behind the wheel 
and opening the other door for Rand. 
The sirens were much louder as she 
drove the car around to the front of 
Valkor House. 



56 



 



Her father was just emerging from 
the entrance carrying Kara across one 
shoulder. When Clara screeched the 
car to a stop, he opened the rear door 
and lowered Karn inside, getting in 
himself. 

"What happened, Dad?" Clara 
asked as she hurtled the car forward. 

"I heard a shot," he said. "I ran 
into your room. The door was wide 
open. Eld had shot Kara. I had my 
own gun from my desk; I'd taken it 
with me because I'd heard the shot. 
I lulled Eld and when Karn told me 
to bring him down to the front I did. 
What are those sirens?" 

"The police," Clara said. 

The car tipped precariously as she 
turned it into a side road. 

"How are we going to make it to 
tbe Earth Embassy?" Kand asked. 
"They'll have every road blocked." 

"We've got to take care of K2rn 
first." Clara said. 

The car leaned dangerously as she 
turned into another road. She had 
gone only a short distance on this 
one when she turned into a driveway 
and stopped. 

"Wait here," she said, getting out 
of the car. 

She ran to the front door of the 
house, a white stucco two-story residence. 

The door was opened by a whitehaired man who listened to her, then 
looked toward the car. He nodded 
vigorously and left the door to open 
the doors of the garage attached to 
the house. 

Clara ran back and drove the car 
into the garage. The doors were closing behind them. 

"Now what's this all about?" the 
man asked, coming up beside the car. 

"The police are after us," Clara 
said. "Rand, this is Dr. Temple, an 
old friend of the family. Karn's 
wounded, Dr. Temple. We've got to 
get him taken care of right away." 



Dr. Temple opened the rear deor 

of the car and held his fingers against 
Karn 's wrist. A moment later he 
dropped the wrist and shook his head. 

"Too late," he said. "Karn's dead. 
How'd it happen?" 

"THERE WAS a moment of stunned 
silence during which Rand stared 
at the still figure half draped over 
Mr. Valkor's lap, shirt front stained 
with thickened blood. 

Mr. Valkor mumbled, "My son — 
dead?" Clara broke into convulsive 
sobs. Rand pulled her head against 
his shoulder. She tried to pull away 
but he held her fiercely. 

Dr. Temple in a kind voice was 
trying to get Mr. Valkor to get out 
of the car. Rand felt Clara relax 
against him, giving way to her grief. 

Faintly the sound of sirens starting 
up again crept into the closed confines of the garage. 

Dr. Temple had succeeded in getting Mr. Valkor out of the car. He 
led him through a door into the hause. 
Rand and Clara were alone with the 
corpse. 

Rand clamped his teeth together. 
His shoulder was waking up. The 
collar bone was broken. Clara's slight 
movement against the left shoulder 
was just enough to keep agonizing 
pains shooting through the right one. 

He looked down at his swelling 
knuckle on the hand pressed to her 
back, a wry expression settling on his 
features. He hadn't done very well, 
he decided. He had been hampered 
too much. Not knowing who he was — 

"Clara," he said softly. "Don't you 
think it's time to tell me who I am? 
Certainly nothing can be served now 
by holding it back. Aaron Varik and 
the secret police ate after us. You're 
brother is dead." 

She shook her head and continued 
sobbing. 



THE MAN WHO FORGOT 



S7 



"Don't you understand?" Rand persisted. "I'm too much at sea this way. 
I don't know what to do. I do the 
wrong things. I should have played 
along with Karn and not tried to see 
you. He wouldn't have let any harm 
come to you. But your supposed going 
away left me stranded emotionally. 
You were the first thing in my memory. I'd been with you every moment 
that I wanted to be. Even when I 
was alone I knew that in a minute 
I could find you and be with you. 
Suddenly that was taken away from 
me. I was like a child when its mother — no, that isn't right either. I love 
you. I don't think that was taken into 
account by those who sent me or 
brought me to Mars. Maybe they 
couldn't understand the effect it 
would have on me to fall in love with 
you. They probably expected me to 
act like a machine— accomplish my 
task, go to wherever I was supposed 
to go when my mission was accomplished, and have my name spoken, 
restoring my full memory. Just like 
that. 

"It might have worked that way 
if I hadn't met you. But from the 
first moment I saw you the urge 
grew in me to find out who I am. Am 
I married? I don't know. I don't 
think so. At least I know I don't love 
anyone but you. And that's grown 
more important than any job I was 
supposed to do. It's got to be settled. 
Tell me my name." 

Clara sniffed loudly and pulled herself erect. 

"No, Rand," she said. "I — I can't 
— yet. Please don't make me. I've 
had all I can take for a while." 

"But why?" Rand asked. "What 
could be upsetting about it? You tell 
me my name, that unlocks my memory, I know who I am and regain 
my full memory and abilities." 

"No!" Clara said harshly, "Please, 
Rand." 



She opened the door of the car 
and ran around the front of the car 
and into the house. Rand stared after her in wonder. 

Suddenly like a bath of ice water 
the thought came to him: "If she 
knows who I am she must know if I'm 
married! That's the only thing that 
could account for her behavior." 

And suddenly he didn't want to 
know who he was. 

Using his elbow clumsily to open 
the car door he climbed out and followed her into the house. Inside was 
a comfortable living room. No one 
was there. 

His shoulder and hand were throbbing. He felt weak, and suddenly he 
felt nauseated. 

He sank into a chair and leaned 
back, closing his eyes. 

DR. TEMPLE turned away from 
the phone. "That takes care of 
the car and Karn's body," he said 
gravely. "It's the only way." 

Clara and her father nodded numbly. Rand paused in his pacing. Three 
days had passed since they had entered Dr. Temple's house. Three days 
during which he had grown more and 
more impatient. Three days during 
which Dr. Temple's calm lack of 
haste had had a maddening effect on 
him. 

Rand had restrained himself. There 
was such a thing as a sense of propriety, and Clara's grief at the loss 
of her brother was very real. But 
there had been times when he could 
have willingly tortured her to force 
her to utter his real name and wipe 
away the hypnotic veil. 

"Why don't you sit down, Rand?" 
Dr. Temple said abruptly. "Try to 
relax. My friend at Kern Juncture 
has undoubtedly received my letter 
by now and taken it to the Earth 
Embassy. It shouldn't be long until 



58 



 



we get a reply and know what to do." 

"I can't help It, doctor," Rand said. 
"I can't stand being caged this way." 

"Physically and mentally," Dr. 
Temple said sympathetically. 'T understand. But I wonder if you understand — " 

"How can I understand anything 
with less than half a mind?" Rand 
said bitterly. "From my first moment 
of memory I've gone around in circles that get me nowhere. I take everything I know and can learn and 
put it together, and it makes sense— 
until the nest thing knocks it apart 
again." He stared pleadingly at Clara's 
averted face. "Karn wouldn't have 
needed to die if I knew who I was," 
he said softly. 

"That's not necessarily true," Dr. 
Temple said kindly. "I'm sure that 
the reason Clara refuses to say the 
words that will restore your memory 
is a strong one." 

"Certainly it is," Rand said. "I 
know the only tiling it can be. Once 
my memory is restored, if I'm caught 
by the secret police they can force information out of me. But there's this 
to say about it, too. Unless my memory is restored I'm liable to be caught. 
I can't think tilings through the way 
I am." 

"Please, Rand," Clara said, her 
hps trembling. "Let's forget about it 
for now. When you reach the Embassy your memories will be brought — " 
The phone shrilled. 

Dr. Temple answered it. His side 
of the conversation consisted mostly 
of silent nods and an occasional, "I 
understand." 

"Everything's arranged," he said 
when he hung up. "This afternoon a 
large highway carrier will call here for 
some furniture. They will have their 
load packed so that there's a hollow 
place for the three of you to hide. 
That truck will deliver my pieces of 



furniture to the Earth Embassy." He 
smiled. "You, too." 

"Wonderful!" Rand exclaimed. He 
turned to Clara with a happy smile. 
"It won't be long now, darling," he 
said. 

Clara returned his smile. But suddenly she turned her head away. Then 
she was crying. Rand went to her and 
put his arms around her shoulders. 

Mr. Valkor coughed significantly 
at Dr. Temple. The two men left the 
room. Rand watched them go, then 
lifted Clara's face. 

"Can't you tell me what's the 
trouble?" he asked. "All I can guess 
is that you must know all about who 
I am, and that I'm married. Is that 
true? For if it is, one thing I know, 
I don't love anyone but you. I'm sure 
of that. If I'm married I'll get a divorce right away. We'll be married — " 

Clara was staring at him, a look of 
amazement on her face. She started to 
laugh hysterically. 

"What's the matter?" Rand said 
helplessly. "Clara! Stop it!" 

Her hysterical laughter stopped 
abruptly. She began crying again. 
Suddenly she struggled free of Rand's 
embrace and ran from the room. 

TPHE RIDE had been as eventless 
* as the stay at Dr. Temple's. The 
huge truck had backed against the 
open garage. The driver and his helper had removed some furniture and 
boxes, revealing a comfortable open 
space in the heart of the load. After 
Mr. Valkor, Clara, and Rand had entered and settled themselves the 
pieces had been put back so that unless the huge carrier were unloaded it 
would appear innocent. 

Rand's shoulder had itched quite a 
bit during the trip, the effect of the 
rapid healing process going on in the 
collar bone which Dr. Temple had 
fastened together with pegs. Finally 



THE MAN WHO FORGOT 



59 



he had fallen asleep. He hadn't 
awakened until Clara had shaken him 
gently and informed him that they 
had arrived. 

He opened his eyes to see the 
lights and unloading platform. Mr. 
Valkor was already stepping out of 
the truck. There were other figures 
out there. One in particular drew 
Rand's attention. He couldn't remember ever having seen the man before, 
but something stirred in his mind at 
the sight of him. 

He got to his feet with Clara's help 
and staggered out of the truck, every 
cell of his body tingling from the 
long ride. 

"Come, this way," the man who had 
attracted Rand's attention said. 

Flanked by Clara and Mr. Valkor, 
Rand followed him. They entered a 
warehouse room, following the man 
along gloomy corridors until they 
went through a door into brightly lit 
comfortable living quarters. 

"You're undoubtedly tired from the 
long trip," the man said. "I'll have 
you shown to rooms where you can 
take hot baths and freshen up before 
having a late dinner." 

Rand hesitated, then decided not 
to protest. He looked at Clara, his 
eyes full of misery. The same fear 
seemed to be reflected in her eyes. 

He started toward her. She turned 
quickly away. 

A moment later another man led 
him out of the room to a self-service 
elevator which went up three floors 
before stopping. 

Half an hour later, exhilarated by 
a soothing bath and shave and clean 
clothing, he was escorted into a luxurious dining room where the man 
who had affected him so remarkably 
was waiting. Mr, Valkor arrived at 
almost the same time. Clara came a 
few minutes later. 

The meal was eaten in silence. 
Rand sensed that everyone was avoid


ing something, Clara had the air of a 
doomed person. Mr. Valkor seemed to 
be holding in an all-consuming grief. 
The stranger seemed to be holding in 
leash eager desire to get ahead with 
something. 

Rand spent his time trying to think 
of something to say, and discarding 
one thing after another. 

Finally the stranger straightened up 
with the air of a man who has waited 
eternally for a bus and sees it approaching. 

"How do you feel — Rand?" he said 
calmly. "Do you feel up to a couple 
of hours of work? Or would you 
rather have a night's sleep first?" 

"I slept most of the way here," 
Rand said. 

"Then if it's all right with you we 
can go to my office and get down to 
business," the man said. 

"Not yet," Rand said. "I want a 
half hour alone with Clara." 

He turned his eyes to her, entreating, demanding. 

Her face cramped strangely. "I'll 
be here when you're through, Rand," 
she said almost inaudibly. 

"Of course she'll be here," the 
stranger said heartily. 

"Please do — what has to be done, 
Rand," Clara entreated. 

"You don't want to be alone with 
me for a minute?" Rand said. 

"Please," Clara said, her face 
cramping again. 

"Right," Rand said gruffly. "Come 
on. Let's get it over with." 

At the door he turned and looked 
back. Clara was watching him, her 
eyes large and pathetic. 

UW/'ELL, GET it over with," Rand 
said half angrily. 

There were several men in the room. 
There was also a microphone in front 
of him where he had been seated, 

"W« want you to tell everything 



60 



 



you have learned about the Martian 
plans for rebellion," the stranger said. 
"Everything." 

"I understand that telling me my 
right name is the key to restoring my 
full memory," Rand said. "How about 
telling me that now? There can't be 
any point in not doing it. I'm safe 
here." 

"We would prefer to have you 
make your report first," the man said. 
"It won't take you long. And when 
you're done we'll restore your mem
• ory." 

"You promise that?" Rand said. 

"We promise," the stranger said. 

"All right," Rand said. In a brittle voice he began talking. Everything he had memorized from the papers Aaron Varik had placed at his 
disposal came out in an even flew. 

Those in the room listened. 

Rand himself listened to his smooth 
flow of calm facts, marvelling at his 
memory, Things that he hadn't realized he had noted in particular came 
out accurately. For the time being he 
was an automaton reciting. 

And finally he was done. A long 
silence settled over the room. Rand 
sat waiting. 

"Well?" he exploded suddenly. 'Tve 
done what I was evidently supposed 
to do. How about it? Do I get my 
memory back now?" 

He looked at the faces that regarded him so silently, so gravely. So pittyingly. 

"Very well," the stranger said. 
"First— may I shake your hand for 
a job well done?" 

"We!l done?" Rand said with a bitter laugh. "I ruined everything, didn't 
I?" 

"No," the man said. "You got everything we wanted. The full details 
of Martian strength, behavior of their 
secret weapons, industrial conversion 
plans. Everything we need to prevent 
the war from even starting. There 



was one death. Like all such things, 
hindsight might have prevented it. 
But everything you were specifically 
conditioned to accomplish has been accomplished. 

"Further, we've found the weaknesses in our present technique of 
hypnotic blocking and directives. 
We'll correct them in future operations 
of this sort." 

The stranger took a deep breath. 

"So we thank you — Major Claude 
Winthrop," he said. 

Claude Winthrop blinked his eyes, 
took in the intent expressions on 
General Archer's face and the faces 
of the others all of them known to 
him. 

He glanced curiously around the 
room. 

"How'd I get here, sir?" he asked. 
"A moment ago I was in — ■" An expression of surprised wonder appeared 
on his face. "So it worked" he exclaimed. 

"Yes, Claude," General Archer said, 
smiling. ' "Right now you're on Mars, 
and your mission has been accomplished." 

"Just like that," Claude said wonderingly. "And I can't remember a 
thing that happened. I can't even 
sense a passage of time. It's as though 
just a moment ago I was going under 
hypnosis." 

He winced and touched his shoulder tenderly. He noticed his bandaged left hand for the first time. 

"Looks like I had some trouble," 
he said wryly. 

"A little," General Archer admitted. "Think hard. Can you recall any 
of it?" 

Claude closed his eyes. A moment 
later he opened them and shook his 
head cheerfully. "Not a thing," he 
said. "I find it hard to believe it's 



THE WAN WHO FORGOT 



61 



so — that I've been doing anything 
since I went under hypnosis. How long 
ago was it?" 

"Two months," the General said. 
"Your hypnosis went in two separate 
stages. One hypnotic focus acted during the trip from the Earth to Mars. 
It was conditioned to cease operation 
the moment you shed your emergency 
landing suit so that if you were captured you would be unable to tell 
anyone how you arrived. The second 
came into operation with the cessation of the first. It operated under 
certain subconscious directives — not 
too well, we find. That phase ended 
just a moment ago after you gave us 
your report. Now if you were to be 
captured you would be unable to recall any of your activity. We have all 
that on the tape recorder. We had to 
get it before returning you to your 
normal memory circuits." 

The General stood up. 

"We have one more test," he said. 
"Follow me." 

X/ffAJOR CLAUDE WINTHROP 
stood up and followed the General, glancing curiously at his surroundings. 

They left the room and passed 
through a corridor into an office. 
Claude looked about him. If he had 
passed this way before he couldn't 
remember. 

He followed the major into a carpeted hall. They came to a door. The 
General opened it and stepped aside 
for Claude to enter. 

There were two people in the room. 
Claude glanced curiously at them; but 
the General was crossing the room 
to another door without doing more 
than nod curtly at the young lady 
and the gray haired man. 

Claude gave them a smile and followed the General, thinking, "Must 
be a waiting room." 



General Archer opened another 
door. Claude followed him. into another hallway. 

"Where are we going, sir?" he 
asked as they continued along this 
hall. 

"To a room that's been assigned as 
your sleeping quarters until we ship 
you back to Earth," the General 
said calmly. 

"Who were those people in that 
waiting room we just passed through?" 
Claude asked. 

"Why," the General said, "I believe 
the man is a Mr. Valkor, and the 
young lady is his daughter, Clara 
Valkor. Know them?" 

"No," Claude said. 

They continued on until they came to the doors of an elevator. The General pressed the button to summon it. 

"Sir," Claude said. 

"Yes?" the General said frowning. 

"I wonder," Claude said. "This is 
highly irregular, but — would it be 
possible for me to meet the young 
lady?" 

The General looked at him with 
what appeared to be amusement. 

"Why?" he said. "Don't tell me 
that you're romantically interested in 
a strange young lady you've never 
metl" He studied the expression on 
Claude's face keenly. "I believe you 
are!" he said softly. "Well, all right. 
Come on. I'll introduce you." 

"Thank you, sir," Claude said. 

"Wait here for a minute, Claude," 
the General said gruffly as they 
reached the door. "I want a few words 
with Miss Valkor first. About business." 

General Archer pushed open the 
door and stepped through, closing it 
firmly behind him. Clara rose to her 
feet, her eyes filled with a mixture 
of agony and hope. 

He shook his head sadly at her, 
"Sorry," he said. "Operation Amne


62 



 



sia has been a most dismal failure. 
The one weakness is that human emotions rise from too deep in the subconscious to be controlled by directives. We'll have to take that into 
account in future operations of this 



sort. You see, my dear, Claude Winthrop wants to meet you. In fact — ■ 
he's standing just outside the door, 
waiting to come in." 

THE END 



CELLULAR LABORATORY 

By H. R, STANTON * 



LIFE'S processes have their most hasic 
levels in the building block of metabolism — the cell. Protoplasm, that primal 
stuff is compounded of cells, and within 
the cell we can best observe the life process at its lowest— and most important — 
activity. 

It would be interesting if we could 
probe into the cell and operate upon it, 
if we could make it our laboratory so to 
speak. Fortunately with modern equipment thia ia possible and biologists are 
dragging out the secrets of life from beneath the objective of microscopes. 

The technique and science of "micromanipulation" common to the science of 
microchemistry, has been extended to the 
field of biology. Using delicate needles, and 
pipettes the microscopist, working under a 
high-powered lense, is able to go into a 



cell with these tools, and operate upon it 
as cooly as a man cutting up a slab of 
beef. Injecting fluids Into the cell, he sees 
the reaction. Using the needle, he may tear 
the cell into shreds watching its healing 
and closing processes. 

In this micro cosmic laboratory, science 
sees the essence of life concentrated. Apparently there is no limit to this technique. 
Since there is no need to deal with smaller 
life-forms — there are no more fundamental 
ones — micro-manipulation is content with 
improving its present tools. The microscopes and their associated equipment look 
like something out of Rube Goldberg, hut 
actually they more nearly resemble a finewatchmaker's equipment. And that's right 
too, for isn't a cell infinitely more complicated than, a watch? 

* * k 



NUMBERS PAY OFF! 

* By MILTON MATTHEW * 



IT'S WELL-KNOWN that the "numbers 
racket" pays off very well— to the 
operators — not to the "suckers". But the 
numbers game we're referring to is one 
which pays off always and to everybody 
—we're referring to legitimate mathematics. You can talk about mathematics until you're blue in the face 
trying to convince the novice that here is 
the key which will initiate him into understanding the secrets of the uni verse — 
hut until one actually takes the plungetalking is no good. Nevertheless it is interesting to point out one or two facts. 

If anyone hopes to do anything in modern science — even in most branches of applied science or technology — unless he's got 
a firm grasp on mathematics even if it's 
only elementary — he's in for a hard time. 
In fact the mental rewards of the study 
of science are almost in direct proportion 



to the amount of mathematics that a person attempts to wrestle with. 

The reason for this isn't hard to understand. Kelvin it was, who said, "until you 
can't measure a thing and assign numbers to it, you don't know what you're 
talking about..." He hit it on the head. 
As an actual check on the hoary old truism, you might give it a whirl sometime. 
Whatever your stage of mathematical 
skill, whether you've just the rudiments of 
algebra or whether you know differential 
equations like your own name, try studying just one stage higher and then go back 
and look over the chemistry and physics 
you've gone through once. You'll be 
shocked at the incredibly increased understanding, at the amassing facility with 
which ideas will come your way. Try it 
and seel 

★ * * 



The Bouncing Molecules 

if By CARTER T. WAINWRIGHT * 



TNVARIABLY it is a startling thing to 
anyone who goes beyond the most eleoitary treatment of gases in physics, 
consider on what flimsy (apparently) 



wish for a physical picture to 

is observation. Remember that phy: 

lefore any clear-cut idea of the Phil 

theory had been determined. lem 

lien that Joule and Clausius pro- P lal 

rather simple idea that a gas °f 
ist of tiny spherical particles 
round at random with a con- It 

ing this simple idea, the pres- com 

a relationship, and a lot of ele- wav 

lathematics, they laid the accu- moc 



proved th 


m correct with amazinf 


sharp 


ness. It v 


as a splendid example 


of. the 


power of 


the mathematical meth 


d. Not 


until Ma; 


-well's famous Electror 






si mathematics to be us 




more pow 


rful, more convincing w 




Each y 


ar has seen the applic 


tion of 


m;i !:Lu-m-i! 
lems bear 


sal methods to physica 
more and more fruit. Noi 


prob 
does it 


seem like! 


that this will decrease. 


Wheth

er wo like 


it or not, mathematical 




have somt 


mysterious relationship 





inn tklni 



HORSEPOWER HUMBUG . . 

* By LESLIE PHELPS * 

sepower" which we en- actually the car, may be still less, 
everyday i 



jely 



USB but which hea 
ban a definite l 
. McCoy. 



tivlv-tlmje thousand foot-pounds per-min- siderably more complicated because the 

fce. That's all there is to it. speed at which the engine is traveling 

But wait a minute— this doesn't mean must be taken into account Thus for ex
le same thing to all people— or does it! ample, the V-2 rocket at its maximum 

that about the familiar wav in which we velocity and thrust is developing over four 

ite our cars The manufacturer says his hundred thousand horsepower! Rocket en
ir has horsepower of one hundred, but gines evidently differ considerably! You 

le tax-collector writer, down the horse- don't find that kind of energy in anything 

swer as twenty-one. Why the riiscvenan- less than an explosion. The explanation 

,1 is simple too. Because horsepower is a 

Actually the manufacturer is giving the ^ , of thc »!» of ^ pcndi ^ ener ^» 

xting of the amount of horsepower that »' «!><•'; time. Where the energy 

in be taken of the flywheel. It's a fair ,s £ r( ' :;l; l[u \ 'srne small, the horse
ltin"- The engine actually develops con- power is tremendous. A perfect example 

derably more than this counting the in- «s that of an explosion, say of a bomb or 

■rnal friction of pistons etc , and the ac- of a dynamite charge. In both cases, as 

Tories it is required to run Therefore ijl the case of a lightning flash, the horse
te total energy put out bv the engine may powers developed are astronomical. 

Setose ^hundred aJ fifty iforsepow* The next time you fire a rifle think 

■ though the useful energy is less— of the tremendous horsepower rating of 

)wn to the hwtidred cited. Because there that explosion. It'll make you appreciate 

; friction hi the transmission and dif- ™at real power isl 

irential etc. , the power available to drive * * * 



63 




TERROR OUT of ZANADU 

By Raiesd Mo&te. WitUami 

Visitors to Zanadu were always welcomed 
by the Martians. But when the time came 
for you to leave — then they dealt the joker! 

BEHIND HIM, Richard Burton about him. His face was covered with 

heard the argument begin. He a heavy growth of whiskers, his 

sat down on an outcropping of clothes were ragged and dusty, and 

rock, a part of a small hill which rose he looked a little like a donjal, the 

out of the dry, dusty, seemingly never- leaping hyena of the Martian deserts, 
ending plain which the Martians with Red Malumby was short and squat, 

good reason call Alvadar, Death's He was built on the lines of a grizzly 

Place. He was determined to rest a bear and he had al! the fierce courage 

few minutes while Red Malumby and and terrible strenght of that animal. 
Jake Frederickson « settled their dif- Jacke Frederickson said, "Goddam 

ferences of opinion. it, Red, I just gotta have a drink." 

Jake Frederickson was tall and ''Have I had a drink since you had 

lean; there was something of the wolf one?" Red Malumby answered. 



65 



66 



 



"I ain't seen you take one," Frederickson said. "But you got the only 
canteen of water ill the bunch and for 
all I know — " At the expression on 
Malumby's face, Jake Frederickson 
hastily changed his mind about what 
he was going to say. "Sure, Red, I 
know you wouldn't double-cross me. 
I know it. If you say it, I know it." 
All irritation was gone from his voice, 
Instead of irritation, there were the 
whining notes of fear. 

"You wouldn't ever make a mistake 
about me double-crossing you, would 
you, Jake?" Red Maiumby said. 

At the tone of Malumby's voice, 
Frederickson began visibly to shake. 
His hands and his body trembled. 
His adam's-apple bounced up and 
down. The wolf in him instantly 
changed into a whining puppy. 

"N — no, Red," he stuttered. 

"Good," Malumby said. He laughed 
a little as he said it. Jake Frederickson took a deep breath and seemed 
to come alive again. 

By this time, Sam Carwold and the 
girl had come up. The girl's name was 
Nancy. So far as Burton knew, she 
had no other name. In her presence in 
this group, Burton had always sensed 
a mild enigma, He had always dismissed the enigma by assuming that 
she belonged to Red Malumby, just 
as the gun at his hip belonged to Red, 
the heavy pack on his back, the canteen swinging from his belt. Burton 
had never been quite satisfied that 
this conclusion completely fitted the 
facts of the case. Red Malumby acted as if he wanted her to belong to 
him, but she acted as if she didn't 
intend to have any of that. 

Why worry about the presence of 
a woman here when there is so much 
else at stake, Burton thought. He dismissed her from his mind and 
watched. Carwold was raising hell 
about the water too. 



"Damn you, Malumby, I tell you 
I gotta have a drink. We've all got 
to have one." 

"All right," Malumby said. "Since 
you asked for it you're going to get 
it." Slowly he removed the canteen 
from the webbed belt that he wore. 
Feverishly the two men watched him. 

"Goddamn, a drink at last!" Jake 
Frederickson muttered. 

"Oh man, am I thirsty?" Carwold 
echoed. 

The two men could hardly wait to 
get their hands on the canteen. Only 
the girl remained unmoved by the 
sight. 

"Pour me a drink — Red, oh God, 
■what are you doing?" Frederickson's 
shout turned into a roar of rage. 

JLJALUMBY HAD screwed the top 
from the canteen and had upended it. The water was gurgling from 
it and was dropping straight to the 
hungry sands of the desert. 

"Red, goddamn you!" Carwold 
screamed, trying to snatch the canteen from Malumby's hands. 

Malumby laughed and shoved him 
away. The water continued to gurgle 
from the canteen. The stream stopped. 
A few final drops ran out. Malumby, 
laughing again, threw it back over his 
shoulder. It struck the sand and 
rolled and stopped. 

In this place of death, water was 
life. Malumby knew it, Carwold knew 
it. Carwold thought that Malumby's 
act of pouring the water on the sand 
meant that he was going to die here. 
This just didn't happen to be true, 
but Carwold didn't know it. He made 
the one fatal mistake. He thought Red 
Malumby had double-crossed him. 
Fear rose in him, and he pulled his 
gun. 

If he had just laughed, if he had 
just been able to swear, nothing would 
have happened. But he could neither 
laugh nor swear. He reached for his 



TERROR OUT OF ZANADU 



67 



gun. 

Before Carwold had gotten the gun 
up, Malumby had put a slug through 
his chest. Carwold, sprawling backward on the sand as the explosive 
bullet struck him, writhed and died. 

The three men and woman stood 
staring. Jake Frederickson did not 
move a muscle. The girl looked soberly thoughtful. Burton just sat and 
watched. Malumby shook his head 
and growled. "The damned fool 
thought I was double-crossing him. I 
wasn't but he didn't know." Malumby looked at the muzzle of the gun 
as if the sight of it had somehow suddenly become a little repugnant to 
him, then shrugged. 

"He oughtn't to have been such a 
damned fool as to think I would double-cross hirn. Come on, let's move 
along. We got places to go." 

The girl looked silently at Malumby and came walking across the sand 
to Burton. 

"I am sorry you had to see this 
but that is the way people are some 
time," Burton said. 

"Yes, I know. They're just scared," 

"But you're not!" Burton said. 

She shrugged. "Why should I be 
afraid ? " 

"Oh, Lordy!" Burton said. Inside 
of him he was suddenly aware of a 
feverish wish that this girl might have 
been his daughter. He would have 
liked to have had a daughter like this, 
who was in utter and complete control of herself and of the moment, and 
of the participants in that moment. 
Sure, she had been terrified when Carwold had been killed. Who wouldn't 
be terrified at the sight of real death 
coming up so suddenly and so unexpectedly. But this girl had been able 
to control her terror. She had kept 
from screaming, from running, from 
finding relief in hysterics. In so doing, 
she had come up so tremendously in 
the eyes of Richard Burton that he 



was finding himself wishing she was 
his daughter. 

In this moment, she was stronger 
than Red Malumby, than Jake Frederickson, and maybe stronger than 
Richard Burton. 

But she was more of a mystery 
than ever. If she was in such perfect 
control of herself, what was she doing 
here in this desert? What tremendous 
force had brought her here to face 
death unflinchingly. 

She must be in love, Burton 
thought. But in love with whom? 

She looked at him, one single long 
searching glance, then went striding 
on past him. He had the dazed impression that she had evaluated him 
too, as she had evaluated such diverse 
factors as Red Malumby and Sam 
Carwold and sudden death and water 
spilled forever in the sand — and was 
moving resolutely on in pursuit of 
some goal that only she knew. 

pREDERICKSON and Malumby 
were coming along too. Frederickson was weeping now. He was protesting over and over his loyalty to Red 
Malumby, yelling that no matter what 
happened, Red could be sure that one 
man would never double-cross him 
— and that this man was Jake Frederickson. 

Malumby wasn't buying much of it. 
He wasn't even listening to Frederickson. He was watching the girl, he was 
following her. But Jake was apparently distracting him. Finally he said, 
"Shut your big mouth, Jake." 

Jake Frederickson shut up. 

Burton started to move forward. 
Malumby caught up with him, walked 
beside him. Malumby's eyes were on 
the girl. 

"She's kind of a puzzle, isn't she?" 
Burton said. 

"Puzzle? She's more than that. 
With a woman like that to stand be


68 



 



side him, a man could lick the world!" 

"So he could," Burton said. 

"Damn you, don't you go to getting ideas!" Malumby shot out. 
Then he apologized, a little. "Aw, 
Pop, you're too old for that, I guess." 

"Yeah, I guess so," Burton said. 

Neither of them mentioned the subject again. Nor did either of them 
mention the dead man or the empty 
canteen back there on the desert 
sands. Instead Malumby went to another subject. 

"Pop, you're sure we'll make Zanadu today?" 

T^-NADTJ was not a Martian name, 
^ it was a name given by humans 
to a place on Mars. It came, of course, 
from the lines: "In Xanadu did 
Kublai Khan, a stately pleasure dome 
decree, where Alph, the sacred river 
ran, through caverns measureless to 
man, down to a sunless sea." 

No one remembered the name of 
the man who had given the name of 
Zanadu to the place where they were 
going, but that man had certainly 
known his Coleridge. When he had 
called this place Zanadu, he had not 
had in mind any "stately pleasure 
dome" aspects of the area. There were 
no pleasure dome aspects in this Zanadu, or not as human understood 
pleasure. The man who had named 
this place Zanadu had had in mind 
"the caverns measureless to man," aspect of the place. 

Zanadu was exactly that— measureless to man. So measureless that only 
one man had ever gone there and had 
gotten away safely. Richard Burton, 
now on his way back to Zanadu. Scientific expeditions had asked permission to go there and had been refused, 
for reasons known only to the Martian mind, Thieves had gone there, intending to loot the place. One of the 
thieves had been found wandering in 
the desert, near death from hunger 
and from thirst. The skeletons of 



other intended thieves had been 
found. 

Thieves going to Zanadu always left 
very fast. No thief was ever actually 
able to explain why he had left so fast, 
but unquestionably two things were 
true: there was loot to be taken in 
Zanadu, and there was also something 
in Zanadu which sent marauders 
hurrying away. 

There was loot in plenty in this 
secluded Martian city. The place was 
unguarded as human understood the 
word. Or so it looked from the outside. 

Burton cast a glance at the small 
orb in the sky, the sun as seen from 
Mars. "We had better reach it today," 
he said. "Or tonight. Tomorrow, some 
of us will be crawling." 

"I figured that," Malumby said. 
"That's why I emptied the canteen. 
Sort of burning-our-bridges act. We 
got to get there, now." 

"I see," Burton said. The point 
was slightly obscure but valid just 
the same, or valid enough to have resulted in the death of Sam Carwold. 
"Well, I believe we'll be in bad 
enough shape when we get there to 
fool even Duma Shor." He felt a 
slight twinge of fear at the thought 
of fooling Duma Shor. That Martian 
was old and wise beyond the understanding of an Earthman. Fooling 
Duma Shor was like trying to fool 
a god; you took a mighty big chance 
in trying it. "We ought to make it all 
right." 

"Okay, I'm running on your orders," 
Malumby said. "They took you in 
when you were more dead than alive 
and you are the only human being 
they have ever taken in. If being 
more dead than alive when you get to 
Zanadu is what gets you in, then by 
God, that's exactly the way we are 
going to be when we get there. We 



TERROR OUT OF ZANADU 



69 



got to stay there long enough to get 
the job done." 

«W7E CAN do it," Burton said. 

His dry voice expressed his 
profound belief on this point. Spots 
were already beginning to appear before his eyes, like dancing ghosts at 
the edge of the world, and his legs 
were so heavy that he could hardly 
force them forward. 

"One thing I don't get?" Malumby 
said. 

"What?" 

"I don't get your place in this picture," Malumby said. "Me, I'm easy 
to figure. I'm a thief and I know it. 
Jake, he's a thief and he knows, but 
a weak one and he knows that too, 
so he will never double-cross me. 
Nancy, I can't figure at all. And I 
can't figure you." 

"What's so hard to figure about 
Nancy?" Burton asked. 

"I don't know. I've been trying 
to — well, hit it off with her. It was 
no go. But as soon as I whispered the 
words to her that I was coming here 
to loot this place, that I knew you 
and that you knew exactly how to 
get us in, then she began to play up 
to me. I kinda get the idea that what 
she really wanted was not me, but to 
come here. And that makes no sense 
at all. Because nobody in his right 
mind would want to come here!" 

"I see," Burton said. The girl had 
become more of a problem to him 
than ever. 

"But we were talking about you," 
Malumby continued. "And the fact 
that I can't figure you." 

"What's so hard about that?" 

"Your motive, your real honest-toGod motive," Malumby answered. 
"You ain't a thief, like me. You are, 
or you have been, a pretty big guy 
somewhere. No, don't shake your head 
at me, I wasn't born yesterday, I 
know an ex-big-shot when I see one. 



Yet you came once to this city of 
Zanadu when you were about dead — " 

"I told you I ha<S been a member 
of a scientific party and had gotten 
lost from it." Burton said stiffly. The 
reason he had for getting lost from 
that scientific party was something he 
had no intention of revealing to anyone, let alone to Malumby. 

"Yeah, you told me that, pal, but 
you never told me why you had gotten lost." 

"Why does anyone get lost?" Burton answered irritably. He felt panic 
begin to rise in him. This Red Malumby, even if he was a thief and a killer, was nobody's fool. He saw now 
that he had been making a grievous 
mistake about Red Malumby; he had 
been underestimating him. 

Red laughed. "We won't argue 
about it, Burton. We'll let it go the 
way it lays. That's only part of the 
stuff about you that I can't figure. 
The rest of it is: while you ain't a 
thief, yet you are guiding us here to 
Zanadu; you are showing us how to 
get into the city, how to get ourselves 
accepted there. When we get together 
the pile of stuff we want and the ship 
lands to take us off, and it'll land 
within twenty minutes after I get 
busy on the radio transmitter I got in 
this pack on my back— you will go 
away with us. At least you said you 
will — " He looked questioningly at 
Burton. 

"I'll go away with you," Burton 
said harshly. "I'll have to go. I 
couldn't stand staying there and facing Duma Shor, among other reasons. 
I'll also take my fair share of the 
loot." 

"Why do you want any loot?" 

"Why— well — " Burton stuttered 
over the words. "Why does anybody 
want money?" 

Malumby laughed again. "Okay, 



70 



 



we'll let it go the way you want it. 
You'll get your share; to me, it don't 
matter what you do with it." 

"What do you want your share 
for?" Burton questioned. 

"That's easy. I want it to cut a 
swath with. No, it ain't quite that 
simple either. With the right kind of 
money backing me, I figure I see a 
way to sort of become a big shot 
around Mars myself. That's why I 
want my share of the loot. But I 
still haven't heard why you want 
your shave. What's the cross you're 
bearing, Burton, that's so damned 
heavy that you may have to spend 
maybe half a million bucks to get 
somebody else to carry it for you." 

fVSX THING about this thief, he 
was shrewd. The question: How 
to answer him convincingly, how to 
lie to him? Burton thought about 
that, thought hastily and feverishly. 
He could see no way for him to think 
up a convincing answer on the spur 
of the moment. Even an extra moment's hesitation was in itself a kind 
of an answer. He didn't hesitate. 

"I've told you once, it's my business," he answered. 

Red Malumby laughed. "And that's 
exactly the right thing to say to me, 
sometimes. If you had tried to lie to 
to me I might have been tempted to 
leave two corpses back there in the 
desert. Two dead men wouldn't sit 
any heavier on my conscience than 
one. But you can tell me to go to hell 
—and I'll do it." The glance he threw 
at Burton was shrewd and appraising. "You and me can get along together, Burton. When we make our 
getaway from Zanadu, and you get 
your private business finished, look 
me up. We'll make a team that can 
go places." 

"What if I don't want to go your 
way?" Burton answered. 

"Oh, each of us will have to make 



his own decision on that angle. If 
you want to go with me after we get 
finished here, I'm ready." The man 
looked and sounded as if he meant 
every word he said. 

Burton was too confused and too 
shocked to think. If he had lied, Malumby might have killed him. The 
big thief was certainly capable of 
such an act. A shudder passed over 
Burton. It had been so very close 
and he had not known it. 

There was one thing wrong with 
death. It came up and looked yon 
right in the eye and you didn't recognize it. He thought, with desperate 
bitterness, that there ought to be 
some sort of supernatural law which 
required death to wear a label, a placard saying I AM DEATH. 

But if death wore a label, the game 
would be much too easy. That was 
the way a man learned. Or the way • 
a man died, if he made one mistake 
too many. 

Richard Burfon knew exactly and 
precisely the nature of the worst 
kind of a mistake a man could make. 
He had made one of them. 

The mistake was in coming here, to 
the "caverns measureless to man" 
city of Zanadu, where the life of a 
man was not worth the price of a puff 
of smoke in the wind. The mistake 
was forcing him to risk his life, it 
was forcing him to become a thief. 
Either in the end, or somewhere along 
the line, he was reasonably certain 
his mistake would kill him. 

But that was the chance he had 
to take. 

Within the next hour, he thought 
of one mistake they were making. At 
the thought of it sweat popped out 
on him. 

"Look," he told Malumby. "We 
can't go " straight into Zanadu. 
They would know we were coming 
there deliberately if we did that. No 
one who goes deliberately to Zanadu 



TERROR OUT OF ZANADU 



71 



ever stays there long except Martians, 
maybe. No human has ever done it. 
So we can't go straight there either." 
His pulse began to pound at the 
thought. 

"You oughta said that before I 
threw away the water," Malumby 
said, angrily. 

"But hell, I didn't think it was 
important." 

"It's the damned things that you 
don't think are important that turn 
out to be the most important of all," 
Malumby shouted. "Even if we are 
almost dead of thirst when we get 
there — well, surely they'll let us in." 

"They'll let us in all right, but we 
can't go straight there-." 

"The hell we can't. We can if we 
gotta." Jake Frederickson and the 
girl had stopped and were listening. 

"You went straight there!" Malumby continued. 

"What I did was wander in the 
desert, until I fell from weakness. 
Somebody found me and took me 
there. Death was what 1 was looking 
for, and death was what I thought I 
had found when I passed out. When 
I recovered consciousness, I discovered I had been carried into Zanadu. 
I had been near the place without 
realizing it when I passed out. They 
had either seen me in the desert and 
had sent for me, or some Martian 
had found me and taken me there. 
I got there, though I don't know exactly how." 

The anger slipped away from Malumby's face. "I see," he said. "And 
that means — " 

"It means we're going to have to 
make them come out and meet us. 
The only way we can do this is by 
playing dead." 

"Play on their sympathies, eh?" 
Malumby ruminated. "What if they 
don't come?" 

"Then we'll just stop playing 
dead," Burton said. 



"But—" 

"Yeah, I know. We'll be dead." 
"Hell on wheels!" Malumby gasped. 
"Are you scared to gamble with 
death?" 

"Hell, who hasn't been gambling 
with it all his life? I've always won 
that gamble somehow. I'm not too 
scared of it to take the chance again, 
except, brother, I know I don't like 
it. I've been too close to it at times 
ever to want another taste." 

"Well, you don't have any choice 
any more," Burton said. 

"Hell — " Malumby cast a hurried 
glance over his shoulder as if he was 
regretting a lost canteen left back 
there in the dry desert sands. 

"Don't be Lot's wife," Burton said. 

"What?" 

"She looked back. We can't" 
Fox a. moment, Red Malumby 
looked like he was going to explode. 
Then he began to laugh. The wild 
laughter had a strong tinge of hysteria. 

They went forward, toward Zanadu. 

^ANADU lay to the left. You 
looked along a backbone of barren rock that rose for miles from the 
desert, a dike or an npthrust of some 
kind, then you saw the trees begin, 
those wonderful Martian red wallawalla trees which distill their own 
moisture from air that has hardly 
any moisture in it, distill enough of it 
for themselves with some left over to 
dampen the ground around their 
roots, so that other vegetation cart 
grow. There was a forest of the trees, 
an oasis of them, thousands of them 
there where the rocky dike and the 
desert ended. In them was Zanadu. 

From this distance, seen across the 
shimmering heat waves of the desert 
in the- mid-morning sun, Zanadu 
looked like a picture of paradise. 
Earth Arabs, living in an arid land 



72 



 



of sun and wind and little rain, 
dreamed of heaven as an oasis. To 
those Arabs back on Earth, an oasis 
was life. 

On Mars, also, an oasis was life. 
Zanadu was an oasis. 
Four humans looked longingly at 
it. Looked at it as they looked at life 
itself, as being something utterly desirable, but also very, very far away. 
They looked at Zanadu from redrimmed eyes that no longer correctly 
reported what they saw, looked at it 
and tried to wet dust-dry lips with 
tongues that no longer had a trace of 
moisture left for them to use. 

They had sighted Zanadu the evening before. But they had not gone to 
it because they had been afraid. They 
had spent the night here in this desert, still refusing to go to Zanadu, 
trying to force some resident of Zanadu to come to them, to take pity on 
them in their misery. 

At mid-morning, no one from 
Zanadu had seemed even to see them, 
to note that they existed. 

On Mars, the utterly dry air sucks 
moisture from the human body as a 
strong hand squeezes water from a 
sponge. Humans, having evolved in 
the much damper atmosphere of earth, 
find that their bodies do not readily 
adapt to the dryness of the Red 
Planet, with the result that a few 
hours without water, a period of time 
that to the native Martian would be 
too inconsequential to notice, the human body becomes so badly dried out 
that death will certainly result in a 
few more hours unless moisture is obtained. 

The four humans were in the shadow of a rock, "the shadow of a great 
rock in a dry and desolate land," was 
just as true a picture on Mars as it 
was on Earth during the time Psalms 
were being written. 

Red Malumby for the hundredth 
time lifted a hand to shade his eyes 
and squinted across the sand toward 



Zanadu. "Still nobody In sight," he 
muttered. His voice was a hoarse rasp 
that had lost all resemblance to the 
tones of a human being. 

JAKE FREDERICKSON sat with 
his back against the rock, his eyes 
closed, a continuous mumble of words 
coming from his mouth. To Burton, 
it sounded very much as if Frederickson was trying to pray. Burton rather 
envied Jake this ability. It was an accomplishment he himself had lost. 

The girl, Nancy, sat very still and 
very stiff against the rock. She seemed 
actually to have become a part of the 
rock itself, immovable, fixed in position like the granite of the hills. 

"God, somebody's got to come," 
Malumby croaked. He glanced from 
red-rimmed eyes at Burton. "If you 
guessed wrong — " 

Burton did not spread his hands. 
He hardly had the strength for that. 
"Then I just guessed wrong," he said. 

"Damn you, if you did—" Hot anger showed in Malumby's eyes. 

"Are you trying to scare me, now?" 
Burton said. 

Malumby took his hand away from 
the pistol. Jake Frederickson stopped 
praying and rose creakingly to his 
feet. He stared along the rocky dike. 
As if he was just seeing them for the 
first time, he gasped. "Walla-walla 
trees, by God. Hey, Red, see them 
trees!" Excitement crept into his 
voice. 

"I've been seeing them, off an on, 
ever since sun-up," Malumby said. 

"But where them trees grow, there's 
water, Red. You know that; surely 
you know that." 

"I know it," Malumby said. 

"Water, Red, don't you understand? Water!" 

"Set down," Malumby said. 

"Set down, hell 1 f * Frederickson took 
one jerky step toward the trees he 
saw and the water he imagined. 

Malumby drew the gun. Malumby 



TERROR OUT OF ZANADU 



73 



might be bleary-eyed from tissue hunger but his reactions were still in good 
working order. His draw still had the 
same blinding speed. 

"Set down," he repeated tiredly, 
over the muzzle of the gun. 

Jake Frederickson literally collapsed. He clawed his way back to 
tlie rock and huddled against it, shivering and trembling. His eyes were 
closed but his lips moved again, in 
muttered prayer. 

"You really got the Indian sign on 
him," Burton observed. 

Malumby shrugged and slid the gun 
back into its holster. His manner said 
the whole matter was unimportant. 
His manner also said that he would 
have killed Frederickson and that this 
would have been unimportant too. 

The girl got slowly to her feet. 

"Hey, where are you going?" Malumby said. 

She pointed toward the walla-walla 
trees. "There," she said. "I'm going 
there." There was no defiance in her 
voice but the tone said she was stating a definite fact, that she was going 
there, and all hell wasn't going to 
stop her. 

She started walking off across the 
sand. She stumbled a little, caught 
herself, moved on again. Openmouthed, Malumby stared at her. He 
made no attempt to stop her. Seemingly he did not know what to do. 

It was Burton who got to his feet 
next. "Let's go, boys," he said, speaking from lips that could hardly form 
words. 

"By God, it's okay with me," Malumby croaked. "I'd just as soon die 
over there as over here. Come on, 
Jake." 

Stumbling, staggering, leaving behind them a crooked trail in the sand, 
the four went blindly to Zanadu. 
Alone of all of them, as if some deep 
inner drive forced her forward, the 



girl walked steadily. 

They were within a quarter of a 
mile of the trees when she collapsed. 

"We'll have to carry her," Malumby said. 

Burton, through glazed eyes looked 
toward the trees. Moving toward them 
from the outskirts of Zanadu, walking with a sureness that was full of 
meaning, were four blue-clad priests 
coming from the trees. 

"Help's coming," Burton muttered. 
He had one glimpse of them. Then 
the sand of the desert seemed to come 
up and strike him in the face. He 
knew vaguely that he fell, that he 
was fainting, knew also that voices 
muttered around him in the soft Martian language, that he was being 
lifted. Then he didn't know anything. 

TV[ CHARD BURTON awakened 
slowly. In his ears was the soft 
muted chiming of temple bells, the 
magic bells of Zanadu. Hearing them, 
he went back to the time when he 
had first heard them, when he had 
first come to Zanadu. He had heard 
them then as a sound from another 
world, gentle, peaceful, quietly soothing. They had been the most peaceful 
sound he had ever heard, that other 
time. 

Now they were not quite so peaceful. Now there was a discordant note 
in the ringing of the bells of Zanadu. 
He knew about them, the priests her? 
made them by some special process 
they had never revealed, and they 
were everywhere, in the trees, ringing 
as the trees moved when a wind blew 
in from the desert, in the simple 
houses between the trees. Some of 
them had been set to operate by mechanical means, others operated by 
some magnetic control that was another Martian secret. 

Like prayer wheels in Tibet, there 
were bells in Zanadu, 

Now, somehow, they seemed to 



74 



 



Richard Burton to be ringing a little out of tune, out of harmony with 
each other. A little tremor of alarm 
went through him. What was wrong 
■with the bells of Zanadu? 

He tried to detect the wrongness, 
to dissect himself and to discover 
what there was in him that might 
make the bells sound different. He 
could detect nothing. He decided he 
did not know and did not care, 
leached this decision before he opened 
his eyes. 

He saw instantly that he had been 
in this room before. They had brought 
him back to the same room to which 
they had taken him when he had 
come to Zanadu that other time. That 
other time! Then the bells of Zanadu 
had been a beautiful chiming ringing 
in his ears. 

He forced the thought of that other 
time out of his mind. Never think of 
that I Never. His outraged mind flung 
back the words at him. Never, never, 
never ! like a phonograph with the 
needle stuck in the same groove. 
"That's the only thing you've ever 
really been thinking about." He 
forced the stuck needle back down 
inside of him. 

On the opposite wall, directly in 
front of his eyes, was a picture mosaic. 
He had seen it too, that other time, 
but seeing it had not mattered. He 
had seen it through dazed eyes, that 
other time, as being something very 
beautiful, a scene on Mars, the red 
deserts and the blue mountains with 
the sun on the far horizon, the sun 
shining over a desert where cacti were 
in bloom and where a lone Martian 
camel with its single rider wound its 
way toward a city hidden by wallawalla trees, a city that looked remarkably like Zanadu. 

It was a beautiful mosaic painting. 
Years of patient effort had gone into 
this work. Looking at it as he awakened, Burton saw instantly that this 
picture mosaic was worth a fortune. 



Each tiny piece of the mosaic was 
actually a jewel. Each red cactus 
bloom was a ruby. The far-off sinking sun was a yellow sapphire. The 
frame that surrounded the mosaic was 
gold, two inches wide. 

That other time, he had not noticed the fact that this painting was 
worth a fortune. That fact had not 
mattered then. He noticed it now. 
And he instantly saw one other 
thing: that if he could take this 
mosaic away from Zanadu with him, 
he could sell it to a museum on 
Earth for the limit of that museum's 
resources. To steal this one mosaic 
would put him on easy street forever. 

And this one mosaic was as nothing compared to what was in Zanadu. 
A simple water pitcher was sitting 
on the table near him, a common thing 
on Mars or Earth, but the glaze on 
the pottery pitcher told him that this 
was a rare object indeed, and might 
bring as much as five thousand dollars on Earth. 

Where every object was so valuable, 
a thief could make few mistakes. 

Yes, he had it. That one mosaic 
would be enough for him. Now to get 
it and to get away. Now to find Red 
Malumby and Nancy and Jake Frederickson and — Burton jerked startled 
eyes around as the door of the room 
opened. 

r\TJMA SHOR stood there. The 
Martian was tall and lean almost to the point of emaciation. He 
wore sandals. A light yellow robe was 
thrown carelessly around his shoulders. He stood smiling in the doorway. "Ah, my friend — " That was as 
far as he got. Little by little the 
pleased smile began to go off his face. 

Burton watched with alarm as the 
smiie vanished. It went slowly, a 
smoothing out, one wrinkle at a time. 
Fear did not replace it but the expression that seemed to come into ex


TERROR OUT OF ZANADU 



75 



istence there was one of such utter 
sadness, such depths of understanding 
that Burton felt shock rise in him. 
What had happened to make Duma 
Shor change like this. Duma Shor had 
been his friend, that other time. 

He forced the shock out of his 
mind, forced his face into a smile. 

"Hello, Duma Shor, you old 
sphinx." He spoke in Martian. "It's 
good to see you again." 

Burton said the words and meant 
them and at the sound of them, something of the smile came back to the 
face of the Martian. 

Duma Shor came on into the room 
and sat down on a chair worth a 
king's ransom. Burton swung himself 
out of bed. He was fully clothed; 
they had not undressed him, but had 
taken off his shoes. He pulled them 
back on, hastily. Might need shoes at 
any moment, if the time came to run. 

"It is nice to hear you say that it is 
good to see me," the Martian said, 
politely. 

"Glad to be back here again," the 
human said. "But one thing puzzles 
me — the belis ? What has happened 
to the bells of Zanadu?" 

"You have noticed the change?" 
Duma Shor said. 

"Yes. What caused it?" 

Duma Shor sighed. "So many have 
asked that question and so few have 
lived to find the answer." 

"What? Do you mean there is 
something dangerous in the sound of 
the bells — that they are a warning 
of some kind?" 

"Yes, they are a warning. They 
are a warning that Death came into 
this room with me." Duma Shor's 
eyes were fixed on the eyes of the human as he spoke. "I know it. But do 
you know it?" 

"What — Why, that's nonsense. No 
one came into the room with you." 
Burton felt sweat rise on him. 

"Ah," Duma Shor said. 



AT THE sound something seemed 
to come out of nowhere and 
clutch Richard Burton around the 
throat. An invisible hand grabbed 
him. He could fee! fingers closing 
over his windpipe, clutching him, shutting off oxygen and air from his lungs, 
shutting off life itself if long continued. He snatched up both hands, 
jerked at— nothing. 

The grip of the clutching hand relaxed and was gone from his throat. 

He looked down, dazedly, to see 
what had grabbed him. 

Nothing was visible. "Wh — what 
was that?" he yelled. 

The Martian watched him from eyes 
that held no hint of sympathy or compassion. He did not answer. 

"Damn youl" Burton screamed. 
With the scream, the invisible clutching fingers seemed to grab again at 
his throat. He jerked at them, turned 
startled eyes downward. Nothing was 
there. Or nothing that he could see. 

"Is it as bad as that?" Duma Shor 
said quietly. 

"As bad as what? What are you 
talking about. What was that thing 
that grabbed me?" 

"We call it the Zanadu effect 1" 
Duma Shor answered. 

"Zanadu effect? What — I mean — " 
Burton wiped spurting sweat from his 
face. "What is it?" 

"It is death, eventually, if you do 
not conquer it or get rid of it?" 

"Death? But something grabbed 
me. I felt it. Around my throat." 

"Did you see it?" 

"No. I just felt it." 

"You will never see it. But it will 
always be here. Either conquer it or 
run?" 

"How does one conquer it? How 
does one run from it? I mean — " 

"Usually, we Martians conquer it 
by not being afraid of it. It doesn't 
choke nearly so badly if you are not 
afraid. As to running from it — " Duma 



76 



 



Shor swept up his hand to the open 
window and to the desert. "We will 
give you food and water. You can go 
away from here at your will." 
"But can I?" 

"Oh, sometimes the Zanadu effect 
follows you, for a little ways. But usually not very far. Then all you have 
to fear is the desert." 

The desert! That was enough for 
any human to fear. 

"But I was here before. Nothing attacked me then." At that thought, 
Burton felt a little courage creep up 
in him. 

"Yes, you were here before. But the 
conditions of your coming now must 
somehow be a little different." 

"D-different?" Were these Martians 
telepaths? Had they used telepathy to detect the secret that he and the 
others were hiding so well, their real 
purpose here? "But we were as good 
as dead men. We did not choose to 
come here. We were out of water. We 
had gotten lost. There was no other 
place for us to go. Surely you will not 
turn loose this invisible monster which 
you call the Zanadu effect upon helpless strangers." 

"Never," Duma Shor answered. 

"That's good." At the thought of 
safety, Burton felt much better, much 
relieved. 

"It turns itself loose," Duma Shor 
said. 

"You mean, you can't control it?" 
"Of course not." 

"But you live here with it and it 
never bothers you," the human protested. 

"Perhaps that is because we have 
learned to live with it," the Martian 
answered. 

"But what is it? I mean, if you 
can tell me." 

"What is it?" The Martian seemed 
perplexed. "How can I say for sure 
what it is when I have never seen it? 
It is something exists here in this 
grove of trees, exists perhaps as a 



hovering god." 

"W-what?" The quaver in Richard 
Burton's voice was very clear now, 
especially to him. What was this talk 
of an invisible, hovering god? He 
looked more closely at Duma Shor. 
The Martian was calm and poised 
and completely at ease. If there was 
an invisible hovering god here in Zanadu, Duma Shor was not afraid of 
it. 

Burton's mind was working faster 
now, as if driven by some desperate 
emergency into frantic speed. Suddenly he saw the answer. This talk by 
Duma Shor of an invisible hovering 
god was a subtle psychological trick. 
Duma Shor was trying to scare him. 
In some way or other the Martian 
had divined that their purpose here 
in.Zanadu was to loot the place. There 
were no defenses in Zanadu, no real 
ones. Yet the place was obviously defended by some means, otherwise the 
loot of ages accumulated here would 
already have been stolen by both Martians and humans. Burton knew his 
own kind. They would steal. 

Since they hadn't been able to steal 
from Zanadu, there must be some sort 
of protection around the place. What 
was this protection? What could it be 
except some subtle psychological device that the Martians knew about, 
that Duma Shor had used on him 
without his knowledge. 

"It's got to be that," Burton muttered. At the thought, he felt much 
better. Duma Shor stood regarding 
him thoughtfully. Now the faintest 
trace of a smile was visible on the 
Martian's face. He nodded, as if to 
himself. Behind him, the door opened. 
Malumby stood there. Red didn't 
look so good. 

Malumby's eyes were wild, his shirt 
was torn down the front, and he had 
a gun in his hand. The gun pointed 
toward Duma Shor. 



TERROR OUT OF ZANADU 



77 



(C'Y'OV— WHERE'S Jake Frederickson," Maluraby shouted. 
"I do not know," Duma Shor answered. 

"Damn you, don't lie to me! What 
have you done to him?" Red Malumhy 
made a savage thrusting motion with 
his gun. 

Duma Shor was utterly unconcerned. The bells of Zanadu gave out 
a wild clamor as if they sensed the 
imminence of death and Rich Burton felt a corresponding tremor pass 
over him. He knew Red Malumby. 
Red would just as soon pull the trigger of that gun as not. 

"I have done nothing with him," 
Duma Shor answered. "And if you 
will take my word for it, nobody else 
has done anything to him either." 

"Aaaah!" 

"He's telling the truth," Burton 
spoke quickly. "One thing I will say 
for these Martians here, they always 
tell the truth. What happened to 
Jake?" 

"I'm damned if I know. He's gone." 

"Gone where?" 

"I don't know that, either," 

"Could that be your friend?" Duma 
Shor answered, pointing through the 
window. 

Malumby started to look, then realized that the purpose of this question 
might be to trick him into turning his 
head. A snarl on his face, he jerked 
his eyes back to Duma Shor. "Damn 
you, you can't fool me with that kid 
stuff!" 

Duma Shor had not moved. 

That fact seemed to startle Malumby. If Duma Shor had been moving, 
trying to escape or trying to draw a 
weapon of any kind, Red Malumby 
would have killed him. But Duma 
Shor was not moving. There was no 
sign of threat on his face. Malumby 
stood staring at him. 

Burton did the looking out the window. 



Opening outward there, through an 
avenue between the walla-walla trees, 
the desert was visible. Like an ant in 
the far-off distance, an object was 
moving. It was Jake Frederickson, 
running straight into the open desert. 

"Great God, you've got to save 
him!" Burton gasped. "He'll die out 
there!" 

"Yes, I am sure he. will I" 

"But you've got to send somebody 
after him." 

"What for?" Duma Shor answered. 
"It is not possible to catch one who 
flees from Zanadu." ~* 

"But he'll die!" 

"Yes, but what of it?" For an instant, something very like pain 
crossed the face of Duma Shor. He 
staggered, just a little. Then he spread 
his hands, as if intoning a ritual, and 
began to speak. "All that has known 
life must know death. What does it 
matter if it comes sooner or later? 
It is coming. And no man of Mars 
can evade it." 

Yes, it was a ritual, a prayer of 
some kind. Duma Shor closed his eyes 
when he spoke and intoned the words 
as if he meant every one of them. He 
opened his eyes, spread his hands. 
"You see how simple it is." 

"As simple as mud," Malumby 
growled. "Hell, I know my number 
has gotta come up some time. The 
only question is: when?" He looked 
out the window at the disappearing 
figure of Jake Frederickson. "I 
oughta killed the poor dope when I 
had the chance." 

"It is his right to die when his 
time comes," Duma Shor answered. 
"It is not your right to determine that 
time for him." 

TS/JALUMBY'S grunt said he considered it his privilege to reserve this decision for himself. His 
eyes sought Burton. He jerked his 



7S 



 



head toward Duma Shor. "Can he understand English?" 

Dazedly, Burton shook his head. 
"No." He tried to think why the 
question had been asked
"Well, I got everything all fixed. 
I got a pile of stuff that's worth a 
fortune all gathered together. I've already put in a call for a ship and got 
back a report. The ship's on the way, 
Burton." Malumby's eyes glowed. 

"You are leaving?" Duma Shor 
spoke. 

"Hey, how did you know that?" 
Malumby exploded. He jerked startled eyes at Burton. "But you said he 
didn't understand English." 

"So far as I know, he doesn't," 
Burton answered. He was really 
startled now. In all the time he had 
spent once in Zanadu, he had never 
heard a word of English spoken. How 
had Duma Shor understood them? 
Was telepathy actually involved here? 

"If you are leaving will you permit 
me to give you a present?" the Martian spoke. Turning to the wall, he 
removed the priceless framed mosaic, 
handed it to Burton. "Will you take 
this, as a parting gift?" 

"But that's worth a fortune," the 
astonished Burton blurted out. 

"So I know," Duma Shor answered. 
"But anything worth stealing, is also 
worth giving away." 

Turning to the door, the Martian 
quietly exited. He left behind him two 
utterly astounded human beings. 

"Anything worth stealing — " 

Burton had seen only one thing as 
Duma Shor left, the faintest trace of 
a smile on the ivory clear face— and 
the faintest twitch, as of beginning 
pain. 

"He gave it to me," Burton whispered. "Gave it to me." 

Malumby's decision was instantly 
made. "You can have that. I've got a 
pile of stuff together already. We had 
better get out of her#, but fast." His 



decision made, he turned to the door. 

The girl was standing there. She 
had a gun in her hand. "You utter 
fools," she shouted. "I didn't come 
here looking for something to steal, 
I came here looking for a man." 

"A what?" Malumby gasped. 

"The man I love," the girl answered. Her eyes came up to Burton. 
"He happens to be your son." 

"My son!" Burton gasped. "But he 
isn't here. That's why I was trying to 
steal from this place, why I came 
here the first time. My son and I 
were on a scientific expedition. We 
fell out, quarrelled. He wandered off, 
angry at me. I tried to find him. I got 
lost, wound up here. After I got well, 
I began to look for him. The only 
story I could get was that some Martians had seen him in the desert too. 
They seemed to know something, but 
they demanded huge sums of money 
before they would tell me what they 
knew. So, if I needed money, I came 
here." 

"Your son happens to be here too," 
the girl answered steadily. "I had a 
letter from him, a letter that he sent 
by a native. He came here looking for 
you, trying to find you." Accusing 
tones sounded in her voice as she 
spoke. 

"I can't believe it, I don't believe 
it," Burton babbled. "How could he 
live here in Zanadu?" 

"The same way you could, by not 
caring whether you lived or died when 
you came here. You thought you got 
in here the first time because you 
were near death. That was only partly true. You got in because you no 
longer cared whether you lived or 
died. You thought you had lost your 
son. Nothing else mattered after that." 

She spoke with calm finality. 

"But— but— but— " 

"The only but Is that the ship is 



TERROR OUT OF ZANADU 



79 



not leaving here until I find Jack 
Burton," the girl answered, over the 
muzzle of the gun. 

"To hell with Jack Burtonl" Malumby exploded. He started toward the 
door. 

The girl faced him. "Red, I used 
you. I admit it. I cozened you into 
bringing me here because this was 
where I wanted to come too. But I 
am not leaving here without Jack 
Burton. Now if you want me to pull 
the trigger, just try to leave." 

She meant it, beyond the shadow 
of a doubt she meant it. 

"But—" 

TTHE DOOR was opening again. 

Duma Shor and another man 
were standing there. The man was 
short, with alert black eyes. His face 
was thin and it showed traces of recent suffering, as if some great illness 
had come over him and he was only 
now recovering from it. The girl took 
one look at him. And dropped her gun. 

"Jack, I've come for you. Jack, are 
you able to travel now?" 

"Sure tiling, Nancy," the young 
man answered. She was in his arms, 
crying and kissing, all at the same 
time. The young man's eyes came up 
to Burton. For a long moment the 
eyes of father and son met. Both 
looked startled, both looked as if 
they were seeing a dream come true. 

Both hands came out at the same 
instant. "Dad!" Jack Burton gasped. 

"Son!" Richard Burton spoke. 

Then there were three people crying in each other's arms, three people 
who had found each other, and had 
found happiness. 

Then Burton looked around toward 
Malumby. Red Malumby was on the 
floor. He was gasping and moaning, 
his eyes were protruding from his 
skull. 

"What—" 

"It is the attack of the god of Zan


adu," Duma Shor answered calmly 
enough. "You humans, I believe, call 
it conscience. Or so your son has told 
me, though there may be some difference between what you humans mean 
by conscience and what we Martians 
mean by it." 

"Conscience?" Burton gasped. "But 
that man is dying." 

"No, he isn't. This is the attack. He 
will recover from it and will begin to 
run. You see, the bells — " he paused, 
groping for words. 

"The bells of Zanadu are the trick 
to the whole thing," Jack Bui ton 
spoke quickly, to his father. "They 
are always a little out of tune. I don't 
pretend to know exactly how the Martians work it but they have worked 
out some system of sound waves and 
have set up this system in the form 
of bells. When the bells sound out of 
tune, it means simply that a man — or 
a Martian is being made— afraid. If 
he comes here with nothing to be 
afraid of, he can stay here. But if he 
comes here with theft or hatred in his 
mind, the bells drive him — well insane." 

"The rest of the answer is, leave a 
little of the being afraid always in 
you," Duma Shor spoke. "Just enough 
to twitch a single facial muscle. No 
more than that. Sweat all the rest of 
it out of you. Then you, or anyone 
else, can stay in Zanadu." He broke 
off. Through the trees a man was 
running. It was Jake Frederickson. 
He was calling, feverishly. "Red, 
Redl" 

"And one other little thing saves 
you from the bells of Zanadu," Duma 
Shor spoke. "That is loyalty, the willingness to come to help a friend. That 
man out there got scared and ran. 
Then he remembered he could not 
desert a friend. So he found the courage to come back." 

Jake Frederickson came snarling 
into the room. "I couldn't run off and 



80 



 



leave old Red." He grabbed the body 
of the unconscious Red Malumby in 
his arms. 

Out on the desert, with a vast roar 
of landing jets a ship was coming 
down. The ship that they had planned 
to have come for theml 

With Frederickson carrying the unconscious Red Malumby, with Rich


A GOOD deal of the energy of electronic equipment manufacturers is going into the production of sturdier and 
stronger components. There was a time 
when if you bo much as breathed against 
a radio tube for example, it would shatter 
under the strain. But with electronic instruments and gadgets filtering so strongly into everything we use, strength and 
endurance is becoming an important sales 

Until recently this wasn't necessary. 
Most radio tubes went into home radios. 
Few are used in industry. Now the picture is changing with industry and mobile 
communications taking over everywhere. 
Rugged, tough tubes and parts are needed. Consequently the manufacturers are 
straining themselves to produce these rug


★ 

THE USE of scale models in scientific 
investigation is no novelty. We have 
huge laboratories for marine research, for 
example, where small accurate scale models of snips are tested in basins. Similarly the aircraft industry uses models and 
small wind tunnels. Cars are often made 
in miniature as are even factory layouts. 
By principles of extension the knowledge 
gleaned from the model can be carried 
over to the full-sized project at great savings in space, money, and energy. 

The most recent miniaturization is that 
of rocket motors. Few people realize how 
incredibly expensive full-scale testing of 
rockets and rocket engines is. The facilities required are enormous and vast testing areas are required. The consumption 
of fuel reaches fantastic proportions, A 
German V-2 will consume as much as 
twelve tons of fuel in one minute 1 When 



ard Burton carrying the mosaic, they 
entered the ship. Duma Shor watched 
them leave. 

Across the sands the bells of Zanadu rang clearly and sweetly, but with 
just the slightest trace of discordance 
in them, just enough of a jarring note * 
to make a man happy to be alive. 
THE END 



★ 



gedized equipments. 

From the labs come developments like 
radio tubes which you can actually drop 
without injuring! Actually there isn't too 
much difficulty in producing these ruggedized parts. It's just been a set-up where 
they weren't really required. 

But nowadays, the radio of a jet plane 
pulling out of a power dive at six gees 
can't afford to fail. Men's lives are at 
stake in a steel mill controlled by electronic tubes. They can't blow out. Therefore the ruggedizing is essential. 

Next time the repairman replaces the 
tube in your TV or your radio he's likely 
to ask if you want them "weak" or 
"strong". Perhaps not quite that — but 
tough tubes are here to stayl 

* , ★ * 



★ 

you have a V-2 motor on a test-Btand and 
you're trying to check its performance for 
minutes at a time, in terms of thrust, fuel 
consumption and so on, the bill for fuel, 
especially if it is one of the newer ones, 
may be expensive — to say the least! 

To overcome this, small-scale rocket engines are now being tested. In every respect they behave exactly like their bigger 
brothers, except that instead of using 
twelve tons per minute, they consume a 
mere pound or two per minute of costly 
research fuel. The answers they give to 
the researchers are perfectly applicable to 
the full-scale rockets though and the tests 
can he conducted with one-tenth the effort and a dozen times the speed, 

Only the final run need be made with 
a full-blown job— and that is just in 

★ * * 



"RUGGEDIZING" 

By A. T. KEDZIE 



MIDGET ROCKET... 

By WILLIAM KARNEY 



GUTENBERG'S GENIUS 

* By SANDY MILLER * 



NO ONE questions the oft made 
statement that the w6rld's greatest 
single invention was that of movable type. 
The Chinese and Gutenberg, both of whom 
are credited with the invention, enabled 
knowledge to be disseminated to everyone. 
With very little change printing came 
down through the ages to the late nineteenth century when Morgenthaler's invention of the linotype, which set type by 
machine, changed the whole picture of the 
printing industry. 

We've often talked about the new revolution which is certainly coming in the 
same industry. When the type comes from 
a linotype it must be arranged in blocks 
and then a copper matte must be made of 
it, a long, time-consuming, tedious complex 
operation. Science fictionists have often 
predicted that the time would come when 
this would no longer be necessary. That 
time is about here. In fact all over the 
world a number of inventions have 
popped up which change typewriting at a 
keyboard directly to the finished engraved 
plate ready to be sent to the printing 



The latest report on the matter refers 
to the American physicist, Dr. Vannever 
Bush, along with two French cohorts, and 
his development of a machine which will 
do just what we've been talking about! 
Naturally a technical change of this type 
takes time, but it is coming inevitably. 

At present the highly developed printing industry is ripe for the utilization of 
more and more machinery which will place 
it in an almost automatic class. With labor unions cooperating actively in the installation of this machinery, modem printing is well on its way to being transformed. 

Since all phases of printing are being 
so automatized, type-setting, making 
mattes, press-operation, folding, binding 
and so on, it looks like the next step is 
a direct link to the writer! Perhaps we'll 
reach the day when the artist sits down 
to his typewriter-printer, bangs away on 
the keys, and from the other end of the 
machine emerges the finished book! 
* * ★ 



HEREDITY AND ATOMS... 

* By JOHN WESTON * 



SHORTLY after the first atomic bombing of Hiroshima, grim rumors of 
monstrous mutations caused by the bomb, 
were circulating in this country and the 
government went out of its way to deny 
these. To the present time we hear very 
little of the consequent effects of atomic 
radiation on the offspring of those inhabitants of Hiroshima who survived the 
bombing. It is likely we will hear a good 
deal though in the years to come. 

Numerous University investigators and 
scientists, among them, the men who investigated the radiation effects on the 
Bikini animals, are beginning to publish 
certain definite statements. This much has 
been ascertained. With plant and animal 
life exposed to radiation, principally gamma radiation or hard x-rays from the 
bomb, the genes and chromosomes have 
been so altered as to cause some monstrous 
mutations. 

Exhaustive research in the laboratory 
on plants and animals too, has shown 
that without question and beyond the shadow of doubt, radiation so effects life 
in an inimical fashion, that man must take 
cognizance of this. A study of human beings who accidentally have been exposed 



to radiation in the course of their work, 
demonstrates that the flesh is as weak. 
It is a definite unquestionable fact that 
even the slightest amounts of radiation 
have a deleterious effect on human beings. 
While radiation in moderate doses may 
not harm human beings, it does in some 
way alter their gene patterns, so that it 
ia actually dangerous and risky for them 
to reproduce. Atomic experts coyly and 
delicately, say that victims of radiation 
exposure should not reproduce for at least 
several months after their exposure. 
No elaboration is made on this statement but you don't have to have the 
imagination of a fantasy writer to realize what they're talking about. 

A dose of radiation, even a few quanta, 
striking the genes of a body, do irreparable damage in some subtle way as 
yet unknown to us. The effect however 
is as if a sixteen inch shell exploded 
amidst a pile of bricks. The bricks settle 
down after the explosion — but they're not 
the same bricks! 

The only moral that can be drawn from 
these facts is— stay away from atomic 
explosions— please — if you can! 

* * * 



81 



That a World Might Live 



It wasn't enough that they 
had to fight a whole world? 
a machine was forcing them 
to try to hill each other! 



MANFRED DRAKE pounded 
the table for emphasis. "I 
bought you; you're damned 
right I bought you! Just like I buy 
anything I use — man, woman, or 
property. And you're mine, Hayward, 
make no mistake about thatl" 

"The only mistake I made," Luke 
Hayward said hotly, "was in getting 
mixed up with you." :j 
"And you can't unmix, either. Try 1 
it and I'll have you blacklisted from 
here to Timbuctoo." 

The two men glared at each other 
across the table in Drake's office, 
bodies tense with rage, anger coloring their faces. Hayward was making an effort to control his anger, but 
with little success. 

Hayward said, "All I'd have to do 
would be mention your name. . ." 

Drake's smile was a grimace of sadistic pleasure. "You're forgetting our 
contract, my friend. That sword would 
hang over your head wherever you'd 
be." 

Hayward let out his breath in a 
sigh. He wanted to batter that grinning face to a pulp, knowing he 
would get a certain satisfaction from 
it, and also knowing he would be doing something others had wanted des
82 



 



perately to do. But he also knew that 
no matter what the provocation, the 
fact would remain that Drake was 
little more than a midget in size, 
whereas he was a six-footer with the 
build and muscle of a pro football 
player. It just couldn't be done. 

"You don't miss a trick," Hayward 
said. "I should have known, better 
than to trust you or listen to you. It 
wasn't that I hadn't heard about your 
fancy legal tricks and your rotten 
conniving ways. Like with this deal 
I'm on." 

"What was it, then — my charm that 
made you sign up?" 

"You know what it was," Hayward 
replied. "Silonium, the super fission 
element. A whole vein of it down in 
this old shaft we're working. Sure, 
you and I split on whatever we find. 
But if we go ten feet further we'll 
lose a man for every foot we go." 

"So what?" Drake snapped in an.noyance. "Don't be childish. You have 
to take manpower-loss in consideration. Look at the Panama Canal. ..." 

"I know all about the Canal," Hayward said. "They did everything in 
their power to cut down the losses. 
We're doing nothing!" 

"Well, what do you want me to do 
— buy shields, and let the cat out of 
the bag?"' 

"The Ryner Counter showed a 
radiation persistency of ten plus. Hell! 
Radium has only three plus. Have you 
any idea what will happen to the 
muckers and machine men when that 
radiation hits them?" 

"I told you men were cheap!" 
Drake snapped. "Two bucks an hour 
for the best. There's a hundred million in silonium down there." 

Hayward gave it a last try: 
"Shields come to a small price, Drake. 
We only need two. Four hundred dollars and we save lives. Doesn't that 
mean anything to- you?" 

His plea fell on deaf ears. 



"Sure, only four hundred dollars. 
And the whole world finds out what 
we're on the search for. Forget it, 
Hayward. Besides, I'm told that when 
the gamma rays hit, you never know 
it* 

No one knows it, Hayward thought, 
because no one had ever been hit by 
the full potency of a silonium gamma 
discharge. A three plus discharge had 
melted the flesh from the guinea 
Pig. ■ ■ 

Drake went on: "Be sensible, Hayward. Your contract remains effective 
only to the completion of the shaft 
to the main ore body. Once we reach 
that you can tell me to go scratch. 
And you'd still be a full partner; I 
need you as much as you needed me. 
That's why I paid the price I did for 
you — a full partnership." 

"And don't think I won't leave you 
flat the instant we reach the orebody!" Hayward promised. "So fast 
it'll make your head spin." 

He didn't notice the quickly hidden 
look in Drake's eyes. The look that 
said Drake had something in store 
for him that meant no good 

JIM MURCHISON rested the air 
chopper against the rock wall and 
looked with narrowed eyes at the. 
face of the wall before him. "I don't 
like it, Lukel" 

Luke Hayward, who was hunkered 
down by the side of the dump car, 
studied the stocky figure and stolid 
face of his head machine man. Murchison was not the sort to get pessimistic unless there was real cause 
for it. "Why?" 

"Because the last three shotsbrought rock down on us from the 
tunnel roof. I'm blowing sixty yards 
of ore every time I blast. Something's 
going to give;" 

"Vibration caused the falls," Hayward said in reassurance. "There's a 
half mile of solid rock between us and 



THAT A WORLD MIGHT LIVE 



the flooded part." 

But Murchison wasn't assured. 
"According to the plan we have. What 
are the facts, Luke?\ 

Hayward understood what the other 
was driving at. They were digging 
straight into the side of the hill to 
get to the vein of silonium because 
the original shaft, which had been 
sunk from the top of the hill, had been 
flooded. Hidden springs continued to 
flood the shaft and foiled every effort to pump the waters out. 

"They're the only plans we have, 
Jim," Hayward said. "The Happy 
Chance Mine is one of the oldest in 
Arizona. You know that. The Franciscan Fathers worked it in the early 
Seventeenth Century, though they 
were only interested in the silver. Of 
course the real value is in the copper ..." 

Murchison made a snorting sound. 
"My aunt's bustle ! Copper ! You 
oughta know better than try to fool 
an old ore man like me, Luke. What's 
more, Drake's in on this deal. The 
war's over and copper's no longer a 
strategic mineral. He wouldn't monkey with copper." 

Hayward rose to his full length and 
joined the other against the wall. Suddenly he wanted to tell Murchison 
the whole truth. "Maybe you should 
know, Jim," he said. "You're right 
about it not being copper. It's silonium I" 

"Silonium!" 

"Yep! And from the readings on 
my Rynor counter, a vein of it. There 
are only two known deposits of the 
stuff — one in Alaska, the other in 
Mexico." 

"How did you discover it?" 

"That isn't the important thing, 
Jim," Hayward said. "The little man's 
got something at the back of his mind 
about this and knowing him, whatever 
it is won't do anyone good but himself. He's power-mad, Jim." 



Murchison cocked his head to one 
side. "Sounds like the electric dump 
truck is coming. Too early for the 
muckers. Besides, they wouldn't use 
the power truck. Drake, maybe?" 

"Probably. He knows we don't have 
far to go." 

Hayward was right. . . . 

■p\RAKE WAS dressed in tailored 
breeches and boots and the shirt 
he wore was obviously of expensive 
material. He removed the miners' 
helmet and wiped his brow with a 
fine square of linen. 

"You ready to shoot, Murchison?" 
he asked. 

"Soon as my men get back," the 
machine man replied. 

"Never mind them. I understand we 
don't have far to go, right?" 

"I don't know." 

"I didn't hire you for what you 
didn't know. How far to go?" 

Murchison gave the other his back 
and moved down the tunnel. "Ask 
Hayward," he threw over his shoulder. 

"Well...?" Drake turned to the 
engineer. 

"Why don't you be nice for a 
change?" Hayward asked in disgust. 
"Must you always throw that chip 
on your shoulder into everyone's 
face?" 

"It's one way of getting work done. 
By the way there's water seepage 
back in the tunnel about a hundred 
yards." 

"I know. Vibration probably loosened some of the loose shale on the 
roof." 

"Better have some of the muckers 
brace that." 

"Since when have you taken over 
the engineering end of this?" Hayward asked. "You take care of your 
end and I'll take care of mine." 

Drake shrugged. "Just didn't want 
you to get wet," he said. "What do we 
do now, just stand around?" 



 



"Jim'll be back in a second. He's 
got the dynitro planted in the holes. 
He just went in to set up the fuses." 

"Good! Hot as hell in here. Is it 
always this hot?" 

Hayward smiled. "Yeah. Those nice 
clothes won't look so laundered by the 
time you get out." 

Drake looked at the stained and 
worn field clothes Hayward wore. 
"H'mm! Guess I should have worn 
something like you have on ... , 
What— what's that?" 

Hayward, too, had heard the shout. 
He didn't wait but set off at a run 
toward the spot from where Murchison had called. The machine man's 
voice had an odd note of terror behind 
its urgency. He barely stopped in 
time. Murchison was backing along 
the tunnel in slow movement. The 
man was bent forward slightly and his 
hands were extended before him as 
though he were fending something 
off. 

"Jiml What's wrong?" Hayward 
grabbed Murchison's arms. 

"Something came out of the 
ground," Murchison whispered. "Like 
the rounded end of a rocket. Luke I 
It must have been ten feet in diameter." 

"What's that?" Drake demanded. 
He was breathing heavily. He shoved 
Hayward aside and pulled Murchison 
around to face him. "Are you nuts, 
Murchison?" 

Murchison wrenched his arm free 
and shoved the smaller man against 
the wall. "Damn you! Don't tell me 
I'm crazy. I saw it, I tell you!" 

Hayward rushed into the breech. 
"Whatever you saw, Jim, is still there. 
Let's have a look." 

"He must be drunk, Luke," Drake 
slid away from the wall. He brushed 
at the dust on his clothes while his 
eyes raked the stocky man with 
hatred. "We didn't hear anything." 

"We'll know in a minute," Hayward 



said. He took the lead. The other 
two followed in silence. 

'T'HE ONLY sound was the hoarse 
wheezing of Drake's terrified 
breathing. The entire tunnel was 
blocked by the strange shape. Murchison had described it well. It looked 
like nothing more than an immense 
rocket head. As they neared it, however, they noticed a difference. A regular pattern of close-set vanes protruded all around the head. 

"What the hell is it?" Drake's confidence returned when he saw that 
the strange metal thing was immobile. 

"That's not the important question," Hayward said. He tapped the 
metal and skinned his knuckles. 
Words came over the edge of his 
knuckles as he sucked at them: 
"Where did this thing come from? 
That's what I want to know." 

"Look!" Murchison pointed with 
a stubby finger. "Dirt on the edges 
of the vanes. Why, this thing is an 
earth borer." 

"I'll buy that," Hayward said. 
"Those vanes dig the earth out and 
spill it to one side, which means the 
whole head revolves. Fine! Does that 
answer my question?" 

Drake's sullenness returned, and 
with it, his attitude of authority. 
"Suppose we stop wasting our time, 
Murchison, how about blowing this 
thing out of our way?" 

Suddenly thunder filled the air, but 
as the sound of it died, words were to 
be distinguished . . . 

"...Who are you... Who are 
you?. . ." 

They had fallen back before the 
terrible sound. Now, as if in common 
protection, they huddled together. 

And again the metallic voice, "Who 
are you?" 

"There's someone in that thing," 
Hayward whispered. "Walk backward slowly. Easy now. . ." 

"Stop!" the hidden voice called. 



THAT A WORLD MIGHT LIVE 



87 



"Not me," Drake yelled. 

He turned to run and Murchison 
followed his lead. Only Hayward held 
his ground. And from a hidden aperture a beam of blue light sped to envelope the three men in, in its paralyzing grip. They could not move the 
smallest muscle but they could see 
and hear. 

Then the light disappeared but 
their paralysis remained. 

AN OPENING spread in the dull 
*^ metallic hull until it was large 
enough for several men to pass 
through abreast. Two figures showed 
against the dark background of the 
interior, both men. Hayward saw 
their lips move but they were either 
too far from him or they were whispering, for no word of what was said 
came to his ears. Then the men 
stepped out into the tunnel and 
walked slowly over to the frozen men. 

They were of about the same height 
but one was fairly young, the other 
obviously old. They wore close-fitting 
breeches and shirts and their feet 
were encased in high sandals. Their 
heads were bare. 

Now they were close enough for 
the three who were paralyzed by the 
strange blue ray to hear their voices. 

"Best to bring them back with us, 
Raynor,'* the young one said. 

The older one narrowed his eyes in 
speculation. "Yes. We can't leave them 
here, unless we do it permanently." 

The young one shook his head. 
"We'd gain nothing, then. What is 
more we could get information from 
these. They have the look of intelligence. I think Mydor would want to 
question them." 

"Very well," Raynor said. He took 
a pencil-thin tube from a sheath attached to his belt, and pressed a tiny 
switch on the barrel. A spot of orange 
light touched each of the paralyzed 
men. 



And each fell into his own world of 
dark unconsciousness.... 

TPHE RHYTHMIC beat of hidden 
* engines broke the rim of the dark 
world Hayward was in. He stirred and 
opened his eyes and sat erect. He was 
between Murchison and Drake. Both 
men were still out. Hayward took in 
the strange room they were in as he 
shook his comrades until he felt them 
stir under his fingers. 

"Wha-what happened?" Drake 
quavered. "Where are we?" 

"Inside that rocket-like thing, probably," Hayward said wryly. "Take it 
easy, Drake. They'll let us know what 
this is all about, and in their own 
good time. This we do know. We're 
going to visit someone called Mydor. 
And they have the power to kill us." 

Murchison suddenly stood and 
turned a glowering look to the room. 
"We didn't have a chance. But maybe the next time we will." 

"I don't know," Hayward said. 
"That little tube packed dynamite. I 
wonder if they can regulate it for 
power?" 

"We can," a hidden voice said. 
"Until it kills. Please make yourselves 
comfortable. Food will be served you 
soon and it won't be long until we 
reach the air lock at Letta. Then we 
will talk." 

"Let's talk now," Hayward spoke 
to the spot from where the voice 
seemed to issue from the wall. "I'd 
like to ask you people a few questions." 

"Later. There are questions we 
would like answered also." 

They had awakened to darkness, 
but as the voice died away light blossomed from a hidden source. They 
were in a prison without bars, a room 
without windows or doors, yet a room 
which was airy and light. Metal furniture was fixed to the metal walls 
but the upholstery was soft and com


 



fortable. And presently the food appeared en three trays which sped 
from a wall opening which closed as 
quickly as it had opened. 

There was a meat like roast beef, 
vegetables the likes of which they'd 
never before tasted and a cup of 
something that was sweet and cool. 
Hay ward set to eating immediately, 
and Murchison followed with a philosophical shrug, but Drake waited until the others were done before he 
tasted his food. 

"You've got a suspicious soul, 
Drake, but it should be obvious even 
to you if they wanted us dead they 
could have easily done so. Go on, 
eat your food. Unless you're waiting 
for us to fall dead." 

"Sure." Murchison took his lips 
from the rim of the cup. "He's only 
waiting to see if it affects us before 
he tries it." 

"Now wait a minute," Drake said 
hastily. "What the devil! We're all in 
this together. No use getting angry 
and imagining things." 

Always the clever one, Hayward 
thought. Always looking for the ace 
in the hole. Even words can buy men. 
That's how he bought me — with 
words. 

"Y'know," Murchison broke in on 
his thoughts, "I'm just a guy who 
works an air chopper— an ore man. 
But you, Hayward, you're a guy with 
brains and education. What does this 
figure for you?" 

Even Drake waited with held 
breath for Hayward's words. 

"I don't know the whole answer, 
but I'll try a guess. First, this thing 
we're in — ship or whatever you want 
to call it — came from below. But 
from where below ? Far as we know 
there's a thousand miles of solid rock 
beiow that tunnel. Then again, the 
hidden voice spoke of an air lock at 
a place called Letta. Air locks are 
usually pressure chambers. My guess 



is that we're going to a land which 
lies somewhere deep below the surface of the Earth. Right, hidden 

voice?" 

"Ri— " the voice began, and 
stopped abruptly. 

Hayward winked broadly at Murchison. "Guess from here on in until 
we arrive, we talk of things like baseball or boxing . . . . " 

TT MIGHT have been an hour, a 
day, a week that went by before 
the hidden engines stopped their purring. But suddenly while they were 
sitting, each wrapped in his own 
thoughts, a whole section of the wall 
slid into another section and a half 
dozen men were confronting them. At 
their head was the young one who 
had helped to capture them. 

He said, "If nothing is attempted 
on your part, nothing will happen. Do 
I make myself clear?" 

"Perfectly!" Hayward took the 
lead. "Besides, I, for one, am too 
curious about all this to miss all the 
fun by having you knock me out with 
one of those tubes you carry." 

The youngster smiled. He had nice 
teeth and the smile lightened the oddly mature look of his face. "GoodI 
A sensible viewpoint. Mydor will like 
that." And as an afterthought, 
". . .And you. . ." 

"Thanks." Hayward walked beside 
the other as if it were the most natural thing in the world. "You speak 
excellent English. American in accent, I think. Am I right?" 

"Yes." 

Hayward noticed they were pacing 
down by a winding ramp. And shortly 
after, they were facing a closed door. 
By the attitude of their guards Hay.ward guessed they were waiting a signal, so he continued with what he had 
been talking about. 

"Where did you learn the language?" 



THAT A WORLD MIGHT UVE 



89 



"From a recording disk made in 
one of our exploratory outer surface 
ships. We all speak English." 

A light splashed a band of green 
over the top edge of the door. 

Immediately Hayward's companion 
opened the door. He stood to one side 
and issued orders: "The three of you 
take the single bench to the right. 
Breathe through your mouths until you 
see the light above this door flash 
red. That will be the signal the pressure is normal. If you attempt to 
breathe through your noses you may 
find the pressure will puncture the 
ear drums. Take your places now." 

Hayward and his companions followed the other's orders to the letter. 
It was not long before the signal 
flashed red. The youngster arose from 
where he had been sitting at the opposite door to the chamber and nodded for his squad to form. 

As they went forward one of the 
guards brushed against him by accident. The smile flashed suddenly on 
the youngster's lips. And just as 
swiftly did his hand move to his belt 
where the tube lay encased by its 
sheath. Once more the three saw the 
orange flame come from the tip of 
the tube, only now a white beam of 
light followed it, and small though 
the thread of light was, it was so brilliant it dazzled the eyes. 

When vision returned to the three 
captives it was to look with horror 
at a charred and twisted cinder on the 
metal floor. Hayward breathed with 
difficulty and knew he was going to 
be sick in a second unless he could 
control himself. He turned his gaze 
upward to meet the smiling eyes of 
the young man. 

"Why did you do that?" he asked 
in a voice barely above a whisper. 
"You killed him in cold blood!" 

"A natural function," the youngster said. "You are strange people. 
Does it make any difference when 



slaves die?" 

He opened the door and the squad 
came to attention. Three men were 
waiting them in the shallow room. 
One of the three was the one called 
Raynor, the second was another man 
of about Raynor's age, and the third 
was somewhat younger, though not so 
young as their guide. From the deferential manner of the two older 
men, Hayward guessed that this one 
was Mydor. 

Mydor had the look of a leader of 
men. Quite tall and slender, his face 
had the cold look of austerity, the 
lines of complete self-absorption, and 
an assurance that was almost insulting. This man would brook no interference, would not be swayed from 
the dictates of his own judgment. 

Hayward labeled him a megalomaniac on the instant. 

"My Lord." The youngster had 
snapped to instant salute at sight of 
the three. "The prisoners, Sire." 

K/IYDOR STEPPED forward and 
passed slowly back and forth in 
front of the three. His lower lip folded itself over the thin flesh of the upper. 

"Two laborers and a man of the upper classes. You! Who are you? What 
is your rank?" 

Drake, to whom Mydor had addressed his questions, stiffened for an 
instant, then relaxed. His voice was 
unctious in reply: "My name is Manfred Drake and I am the employer of 
these two. I am a financier." 

"A strange word. Is your attire 
common to your rank?" 

Drake smiled. "No, Sire," the word 
came easily. "These are the clothes 
I wore for comfort in the tunnel of 
the mine." 

Mydor turned to his companions. 
He shook his head. "I don't know 
whether or not it was a waste of time. 
This midget and his slaves cannot 



90 



 



be representative of what lies on the 
next level. I'm sure. The exploratorydiscs brought back too many evidences of a superior race. These are 
obviously inferior. Get rid of them." 

There was not an instant to be lost, 
Hayward realized. Already the arm 
of the youngster was moving toward 
the tube in his belt. "If I may say 
something ..." Hayward said swiftly. 

Mydor turned a questioning look. 
Then Raynor whispered something in 
Mydor's ear, and the other nodded. 
"Make it short, surface-man." 

"The appearance of inferiority is 
deceptive. Do not be misled, Mydor." 

The cold face indicated interest. 
But only for a second, "I see. Well, 
perhaps I will have time. . .later. 
Place them under guard, Sopar, and 
see to it they do not escape." 

"It was a lucky thing for you," 
Sopar said, as they marched the 
length of the room, "that Raynor 
spoke in your behalf. Inferiors cannot address superior beings in Atlantis." 

"At-Iantis. . . ?" Hayward hesitated 
over the word. 

"Yes. I think Raynor will visit with 
you later. Now we must place you in 
safekeeping," 

Things moved with kaleidoscope effect and speed. There was a quick 
glimpse of a large plaza, tall buildings gleaming in the sun, men and 
women in strange dress and hundreds 
of uniformed men standing guard. 
Then Hayward and the others were 
hustled into a tubular vehicle which 
was standing before the door of the 
low, long building from which they 
were led, and once more they were 
off into mystery. 

This time there was no questioning the kind of place they were in. 
As Murchison put it, "Guess walls 
and bars do make a prison." 

Nor were they the only imprisoned. 

There was a noticeable difference 



however. The walls were the ones 
enclosing the prison compound. The 
prison itself was a series of barred 
cages set one against another, each 
filled almost to bursting with men 
and women alike. The instant they 
came into the compound the stench 
of unwashed bodies greeted them. The 
odor was so bad Drake instantly became sick. 

It was then they discovered the 
steel beneath the velvet gloves. 

Sopar carried nothing but the tube 
in his belt. But the warders carried 
thonged whips. As Drake bent over 
in nausea two of the warders began 
to lash at him with their whips. 
Sopar stood to one side and watched, 
bright-eyed and smiling. 

Hayward had a real hatred of 
Drake, had always thought of him as 
the most insufferable human he had 
ever known. But this wanton beating 
of him was too much. In a flash he 
was on the nearest guard and before 
the man could turn, had wrenched 
the whip from his hand. 

As Hayward pulled the whip free 
he saw Sopar reach for the tube. 
Sopar's hand never made it. The whip 
lashed out and the end wrapped itself 
around his hand. Before the Atlantean 
could resist, Hayward had dragged 
him close. Sopar tried to bring the 
tube up but he seemed like a child in 
Hayward's grip. 

This fact stayed in the background 
of Hayward's consciousness for the 
moment. He tore the tube from 
Sopar's fingers. A wild scream of exultation rose on the air as Hayward 
threw Sopar to one side and leaped 
at the guard still beating Drake. Murchison, who had seemed to be stunned 
by the quick developments, came to 
Drake's aid also. In an instant there 
was a wild melee. 

"Do not kill them," Sopar shouted 
as he staggered to his feet. "Mydor 
wants them alive." 



THAT A WORLD MIGHT LIVE 



91 



Hayward seemed like a man gone 
mad. He lashed at the warders with 
hammering fists and each time a man 
was struck, he fell like a poled ox. 
Nor were Murchison's blows less effective. But though the two of them 
fought with the fury of ten, the odds 
were altogether against them. Sheer 
numbers finally brought them to the 
ground. And even there the fight was 
carried on. 

Hayward's mouth and nose were 
filled with blood. A lashing thong had 
ripped his cheek from jawbone to ear 
and blood ran down the nose from 
a cut over one eye. Finally enough 
warders came into the fight to make 
it impossible for the two men even to 
move. 

While Hayward was held helpless in 
the grip of several men, Sopar came 
up from behind and struck Hayward 
a terrible blow at the back of the head 
with the butt end of a whip. A second later Murchison was stretched out 
beside his friend, and just as unconscious. 

And all through the battle Drake 
lay on the ground and trembled in 
terror. 

66 . . . NOW! Stand back a bit more. 

That's better. They're coming out 
of it." 

Hayward opened his eyes and small 
as the movement was it brought a 
grunt of pain to his lips. Opening his 
eyes had also reopened the gash over 
the eyebrow. He wiped the flow of 
blood away and brought his gaze to 
focus on the face bent above his. 

He could not guess her age, nor 
was he interested. He knew only that 
she was the most beautiful woman 
he had ever seen. Her lips parted 
slightly to show perfect teeth and he 
heard the soft catch of her breath. 
Then she let her breath out and her 
voice framed m "Oh." 

"I'm all right." He managed a 



smile. "How are my friends?" 

"None the worse for wear. Can you 
manage to stand?" 

He pushed himself erect, and was 
immediately surrounded by a mob of 
prisoners. Murchison elbowed his way 
to his side. Now that he was erect, 
Hayward saw that the girl was quite 
tall, only an inch or so under his own 
height, and she carried herself gracefully under the grey sacking she wore. 
He noticed the sacking seemed to be 
the common uniform for men and 
women alike. 

Once more the girl spoke, and Hayward noticed how immediate was the 
silence which followed her words, as 
if she was used to being heard, as if 
she was used to command. "Who are 
you and your friends? We have never 
seen men of your kind before. Is 
there an undiscovered land on Atlantis we know nothing of?" 

"A land above Atiantisl We are 
from the surface of the Earth." 

She shook her head in perplexity. 
"I don't understand. But that isn't 
important, I suppose. How did Mydor 
get hold of you? The 'Smiling People' 
do not like taking prisoners, unless, 
of course, you have some kind of 
value for him." 

"Before I go into that," Hayward 
said, "mind if I ask a couple of questions? Who are you, and how — or 
rather why— are all of you in prison, 
especially since you say Mydor does 
not like to take prisoners?" 

"We are here to provide sport for 
Mydor's people," the girl said. "I am 
Mama, and these here with me are 
a few of my subjects. The other cages 
are filled with them, also. It seems 
that Mydor is going to use us for 
purposes of morale in a war he is 
planning." She stopped on seeing the 
bewilderment on his face. "I suppose 
none of this makes sense to you," 
she went on. Her lovely lips twisted 
In a wry expression. "Sometimes It 



92 



 



doesn't make sense to me. But Mydor 
ia filled with a lust for power. We 
knew peace for thousands of years, 
then he came on the scene and 
peace died in a bloody bath. Mydor 
wants to fulfill an old prophecy." 
"Prophecy?" 

"The return of the peoples of Atlantis to their rightful place on the 
surface." 

"Luke. Luke. , ." 

Hayward looked away from the 
girl. Murchison was standing close by 
his side. 

"I been listening to this talk but 
it's over my head. What's the girl 
trying to say?" _ 

"It seems we landed in the middle 
of a war. This is Mama, the ruler 
of ... " Hayward stopped in embarrassment. 

The girl smiled. "I am still their 
Queen," she said. "They will follow 
me to the death." She turned and 
Hayward and his companion turned 
with her. The two men saw the faces 
of the men and women who crowded 
the cage light up with hope and courage as their eye9 met those of the tall, 
proud girl. 

One of the prisoners shouted something in a strange tongue. The cry was 
echoed by those in every cage in the 
compound until warders came running from all sides and stood tensely 
about, whips held ready. Hayward 
noticed some carried long tubes like 
the one he had taken from Sopar. 

For a long moment it seemed as if 
Death was about to fill its gorge. 
Then the girl said something in a low 
voice to a man standing near to her. 
He shouted something which instantly stilled the screaming voices. 

"We have no chance by fighting 
them here," the girl said. "Our only 
chance may come when they release 
us." 

"Looks like we're getting company," 
Murchison said, nudging Hayward. 



A, PAIR OF gates had swung wide 
and a torpedo-shaped affair 
rolled into the compound. Several 
dozen men swarmed from its hull and 
came to attention as two others followed them into the open. One of the 
two was Raynor; the other, Sopar. 

Raynor cam« directly to the cage 
which held Hayward and the others. 
He stood for a couple of seconds in 
silence, his face thoughtful, his eyes 
masked. 

"Let the three from the surface 
come forward." 

Raynor's voice brought remembrance to Hayward. Drake ! Where 
was he? Murchison found him in a 
far corner, sullen and frightened. Hayward saw Murchison's head shake 
and his hands move, as if to accent 
what he was saying. Then Murchison 
stopped talking and grabbed Drake by 
an arm and dragged him forward. 

"He's scared to death," Murchison 
said. "Look at him." 

"They'll kill us." Drake's voice 
quivered in fear. "They'll kill us and 
laugh while they're doing it." 

"I don't think so," Hayward said. 
"Certainly not if we don't give them 
reason to. Buck up, Drake. Try acting a man." 

"The gate is open," Raynor said. 

What kind of prison is it? Hayward wondered as he shoved his way 
to the gate and pulled it inward. His 
eyes moved upward and he realized 
why they did not fear any attempt at 
escape. Manning saw what looked like 
a pair of searchlights atop the wall, 
and eight or ten of the guards. The 
searchlights were directed toward the 
cages. Hayward had. an idea that a 
blue beam would spray them should 
there be any attempt at escape. 

"Mydor awaits you£ Raynor said 
shortly as the guards closed in on 
Hayward and his two companions. 
"Come. . ." 



THAT A WORLD MIGHT LIVE 



93 



'TTHEY HAD been ushered into Mydor's personal chamber of the 
palace. Sopar had disappeared shortly after they left the car, but Raynor remained. Now he stood beside 
Mydor who was seated on what appeared to be a gold throne. 

Raynor looked at Mydor who gave 
a short nod, and Raynor addressed 
them: 

"His Majesty, King Mydor, Monarch of all Atlantis, avowed conquerer 
of the surface world from which we 
were exiled, has granted an audience 
to you from the surface world, and 
an opportunity to aid in the conquest 
of that world from which you come. 

"Within a short time armies and 
armaments will be ready for their 
greatest and most glorious action. 
Nothing will avail against them. For 
so it was said in the prophecy, and so 
shall it be." 

Hayward felt all this was the preamble to the important things to follow. It was a build-up which was proscribed. 

". . .Because of the vastness of the 
undertaking, certain measures must 
be taken into consideration. Our exploratory discs have shown and recorded the fact that atomic weapons 
are in use on the surface. We, too, 
have a knowledge of those weapons. 
We have found that there is now an 
element, called silonium by the surface peoples, which can most readily 
be put to destructive use. It is our 
desire to mine and bring this element 
to Atlantis. Our craft of exploration, 
which you discovered, was searching 
for the vein which our instruments 
showed lay somewhere in the vicinity. 

"The great, wisdom of our King 
made easily understandable your presence in the tunnel. You, also, were 
searching for the vein. Only you knew 
its exact whereabouts." 

Hayward let nothing of what waa 
in his mind show in his expression. 



"What do you want of us? To give 
you the exact location?" 

"Precisely!" Raynor said. 

"Not a chance," Hayward said 
softly. 

"That's telling them ! " Murchison 
growled. 

Raynor smiled. Hayward felt a 
quiver of cold run through him. He 
had learned what their smile meant. 

"We shall discover it eventually," 
Raynor said softly. "With or without 
your help. It will only expedite matters, with your help." 

"I'm ready to help," Drake said. 
He stepped forward until he was out 
of Hayward's reach. "This man is my 
engineer. He knows exactly where the 
vein is." 

But Drake was mistaken about being out of Hayward's reach. Hayward 
took a couple of quick steps and did 
what he had always wanted to do. 
Drake was lifted off his feet by the 
blow and fell in a crumpled heap almost at Mydor's feet. 

Instantly the guards who were in 
the room converged on Hayward and 
Murchison with drawn tubes. But 
Mydor raised a plam in a languid 
gesture. The guards fell back. 

"You see, Raynor?" he said. "I 
said you were but wasting time with 
these. I should never have let you 
talk me into granting an audience. 
Inferior beings. Obviously. We need 
only send up several of the rocket 
machines and one of them will strike 
the right place. How much more simple it wil! be that way. Besides, thess 
will furnish the people with sport. 
The first of the hordes of surface 
prisoners." 

DAYNOR bit his Hp. It was obvious 
he was worried about something. 
"Great Lord," he said softly. "How 
right you are." He turned to face the 
two. "Decide now. Death or freedom." 
Hayward's mind worked swiftly 



94 



 



and desperately. "Would you answer 
a single question, Raynor?" 
"Ask it." 

"If we hesitate it's because we have 
been brought into the strangest adventure of our lives. A planet within 
a planet, a world of people which 
history said disappeared thousands of 
years ago. But here you are and have 
been through the ages. Now we are 
being asked to make a decision that 
is the hardest we have ever known. 
We are being asked to destroy our 
planet." 

"Not Quite/ 1 Raynor said. His voice 
took on an odd note of urgency. 
"We will let the people of the surface 
world destroy themselves. Our plans 
are simple. We will manufacture a 
number of silonium atom bombs, send 
up the discs and have the bombs 
dropped at various places. The nations 
of the surface world are ready to go 
to war on an instant's notice. Each 
will think the other is attacking. When 
the carnage is over, when the nations 
are helpless, we will attack." 

Hayward tried to swallow the cotton which had formed in his craw. 
What sort of devilish beings were 
these? He wet his lips, felt an anger 
that was like seething metal take 
hold of him. But before he could say 
anything, Raynor spoke again, this 
time to Mydor. 

"Let me speak to them privately," 
he said. "A few moments alone with 
them and I think I can convince them 
of the wise course to follow." 

Mydor nodded. "Very well, Raynor. 
Not too long, though. I wish to discuss the games for tomorrow. Mama 
and her followers should make fine 
entertainment for the people." 

TJAYNOR ushered them into a small 
ante-room and closed the door. 
Drake, who had been helped to his 
feet and brought with them, vented 
his hatred with looks of promised ven


geance. But the eyes and attention 
of the others were on Raynor, who 
had suddenly placed a finger to his 
lips in a signal for silence. 

A moment went by. Then Raynor 
came close to them. 

"Mydor is insane," were the first 
words he said. "Yes. We must stop 
him. He will commit our world and 
yours to destruction. I surprise you?" 

"Brother, and how," Hayward said, 
matching the other's low tones. 

"It would be a quick death for me 
if I acted otherwise," Raynor went 
on. "Somehow you must be placed 
on the earth-machine so that you can 
get back to your people and warn 
them. You must agree to Mydor's demands." 

"You're against him, then?" Hayward asked. 

"The only one in a high place who 
is. The others are like him— utterly 
mad. No wonder we are called the 
'Smiling People' by others, and with 
hate in their voices. We kill with 
a smile on our lips. Kill and torture. 
Let me think a moment." 

He placed the tips of his fingers to 
his temples and moved back and 
forth about the room for several seconds. Suddenly his face lifted. A light 
of elation showed in his eyes. "I think 
I aave it! This element silonium is 
absolutely necessary. The others from 
which a bomb can be made are not 
in our world, and in yours would be 
too hard to get. Without you we would 
face great delay, and perhaps complete frustration because we are a 
small world." 

"And a strange one," Hayward added. "A world with a sun and a heaven 
like ours." 

"And a man who thinks he is a god. 
Will you trust in me?" 

Hayward looked at Murchison, who 
nodded. But Drake refused to meet 
Hayward's eyes. Hayward smiled. No 
need to worry about Drake, he 



THAT A WORLD MIGHT LIVE 



95 



thought. He's too scared to be of hindrance. Besides, all he wants to do is 
get back. 

"Yes," Hayward said. 

"Good. Then follow my lead," Raynor said. 

i i OY LORD ! " Raynor bowed 
iV1 low. 

"Yes?" Mydor said languidly from 
his throne. 

"They have seen the path of your 
wisdom and have agreed to help." 

"Good. I leave them in your hands. 
Do as you wish, but do it swiftly." 

Raynor bowed again. "I have told 
them they are free and will have 
them brought to my home." 

"Very well. Sopar has the ships in 
readiness?" 

"To leave at a moment's notice, 
Sire."" 

"Then we will do so immediately 
following the games on the morrow. 
Go, Raynor, and give them their instructions." 

Raynor's house was a crystal onestoried affair on the crown of a low 
hill overlooking the city of Letta. 
Night had closed its dark veil over 
the city. A full moon hung low 
against a backdrop of ink. There were 
no stars. 

Hayward, Murchison and Drake, 
refreshed by baths, lolled on a wide 
circular divan. They had just finished 
dining with Raynor. The old man 
had refused to answer any of their 
questions until now. 

"Your lips are trembling with 
words," Raynor said. "Let them spill 
out." 

"Explain all this." Hayward's hand 
took in everything in an outflung gesture. "There is a moon, and we have 
seen the sun, and we have also seen 
that the surface planes are as we 
know them. Yet we are inside the 
planet Earth. I don't understand." 

"You mean we should be as the 



inside of a bowl?" Raynor asked. 
"Well, I don't know whether I can 
make it clear or not. Time and space 
are one and the same. That is the 
truth you must acknowledge. One 
cannot exist without the other. Here, 
time and space are a continuum of the 
same existence. The space you see 
above you is the same which exists 
above the upper surface. And above 
that space man will find another 
world. Worlds which can be likened 
to great circular bands. You have 
been misled. There is no great thickness to your planet, just as there is 
none to ours. I hope I have made myself clear?" 

"Not too well. How do you explain the sun and moon? They seem 
as large and distant as ours," Hayward said. 

"They are." 

Whether it was the truth or not, 
Hayward thought, no one would believe him should he somehow manage 
to get back to the Earth. Suddenly a 
heart-shaped face appeared in the mirror of his mind. Marnal He felt his 
pulses stir at her memory. 

"What kind of game is going to be 
played tomorrow?" he asked. 

Tired lines made wrinkles in the 
drawn face of the old man. "Marna 
and her people will be put to death, 
after they have been tortured." 

."Why?" 

Raynor sighed. "For no reason 
other than to satisfy Mydor 's innate 
cruelty. Once there were three peaceful cities. Now there is only Letta; the 
others were destroyed by Mydor, and 
their people used as slaves or placed 
under arms, or used in the great 
games. Marna was the Queen of Hegga until he attacked her city. Now 
she is awaiting her death and praying 
it will come quickly." 

"And nothing can be done to save 
her?" Hayward demanded. 

"I can't imagine what. They are 



96 



 



unarmed. If axil? the people had 

"Raynor, how do the tubes work? 
Where do you get the ammunition 
for them?" 

"What difference does that make 
to you? You could do nothing to — 
Or am I saying that which I have 
been led to say? What have you in 
mind?" 

"You must have allies, men who 
think as you do." Hayward pointed 
his finger at the old man. "There 
must be more like you. If we could 
rally these, tonight, and release the 
prisoners, give them arms, and escape 
from Letta. ..." 

Raynor clapped his hands explosively. "You have given me the key. 
A single power plant in the heart 
of the city supplies the energy for 
the tubes and ray machines. If we 
can put that plant out of commission 
the tubes and machines will be useless. Then it would be man against 
man, with hand weapons." He rose 
in his excitement and strode about, 
"If only we have time enough tonight. . ." 

"What do you have to do?" Hayward asked. 

"Get to these men I trust. They 
are scattered. Let me think a moment. 
The night is still young. We will go 
ourselves. Come." 

pVEN DRAKE showed signs of the 
" excitement they all felt. The wide 
itreets were filled with traffic, afoot 
and in the torpedo-shaped cars. But 
all made way for Raynor's car with 
its insignia of rank emblazoned on the 
head. With them were four of Raynor's personal guards. 

Their destination was the power 
house. 

As Raynor explained: "They will 
let me in. I will tell the one in charge 
that I am showirjg you the wonders 
of the plant. Once we are in, my men 



will concentrate their fire on the engine which creates the energy we have 
to destroy. It will take hut a second. 
From then on we will have to depend 
on the strength of our arms and the 
swiftness of our feet. I sent out trusted messengers to bring the news of 
what we were doing to certain men, 
and they in turn will follow a plan 
we have long had should an opportunity arise for its use. 

"That opportunity is now at hand." 

The old man was all right, Hayward decided, despite his windiness. 
He felt the weight of the sword Raynor had provided, against the flesh 
of his thigh. It was an unaccustomed 
weight but felt better than anything 
he had ever known before. 

Suddenly his head lifted. The car 
had stopped. 

"We are here," Raynor said. "And 
may luck follow before us." 

A cordon of guards were drawn up 
before the squat building housing the 
power plant. One who was the leader 
came forward with a belligerent strut, 
a strut which changed to stiff attention at sight of Raynor. 

"Acquaint the one in charge of my 
visit," Raynor commanded. 

The man saluted, turned on his heel 
and disappeared into the building. Ke 
was back shortly, showing the way to 
Raynor and his group. 

A stocky man in grey coveralls was 
waiting them within the entrance. He 
waved the leader of the guards away, 
saying, "There is no need for you, 
Captain. The King's Councilor needs 
no supervision. Ah. Are these the ones 
from the surface?" 

"You know...?" Raynor asked. 

"Of course. And also that they have 
cast their lot with us." 

"If I may say something?" Hayward spoke on impulse. 

"Of course," Raynor said. 

'T am an engineer and I marvel at 
the wonder of your tube weapons. It 



THAT A WORLD MIGHT LIVE 



97 



would be a privilege to see the machine which energizes them." 

"Of course, This way." 

The entire group followed the lead 
of the squat man and presently they 
were on a balcony looking down at a 
machine resembling a gigantic dynamo. 

"The most wonderful mechanism 
in the world. The invasion would be 
impossible without it. By tomorrow 
night enough energy will be provided 
to the ray tubes and larger pieces to 
last a year. Our mighty King will — " 

The squat man's voice died in a 
scream of terror as one of Raynor's 
guards lifted him and hurled him 
over the balcony. 

"Quickly," Raynor said. "Now!" 

Four beams of white light sped 
from the small tubes and struck the 
dull metal of the machine. Orange 
glowed where it was struck and presently the stench of molten metal came 
to their ncstnle. And suddenly the 
rays went out. 

"The power's gone," Murchison 
shouted. "Now we can strikel" 

CWIFTLY Hayward led the way to 
the outside. The guards showed 
only faint surprise at the sudden exit. 
Too late did they realize something 
was wrong. By that time the group 
had made good its escape. 

"The alarm will go out swiftly 
now," Raynor said. "But we have the 
advantage. We know where we are 
bound; Mydor is in the dark." 

"How long before we reach the 
pr/son walls?" Hayward wanted to 
know. 

"Not too long, at our speed. That 
is, if we are not stopped?" 

"To hell with that!" Hayward said. 
"I've noticed this thing runs like one 
of our autos." 

The man at the wheel moved over 



and Hayward took his place. "Hang 
onto your hats," Hayward said. 
"We're going places in a hurry." 

"This road leads straight to the 
prison." Raynor leaned over Hayward. "It will be a little while until 
the alarm is out, enough time for us 
to get there." 

"Luke!" Murchison called from 
the back of the car. His voice had a 
pleased note to it. "We've mislaid 
Drake." 

Hayward spun the wheel about in 
a frantic move as he barely missed 
another vehicle at an intersection. 
"What do you mean?" 

"Guess he was too slow," Murchison said. "He ain't here." 

"Then we'll have to go back for 
him," Hayward said grimly. 

"Why? He's no damned good, and 
we'd all be better off if he stayed 
down here." 

"Maybe." Hayward spun the wheel 
and the car almost stood on end as 
it went into a U turn. "But he came 
with us, and he's going back with 
us." He felt a hand on his shoulder 
and looked up to see Raynor bent 
above him. 

Raynor's eyes were thoughtful. 
"Your friend could easily have made 
it to the car. I don't think he wanted 
to." 

Hayward knew a decision had to 
be reached, and quickly. If Drake had 
been left behind in the excitement of 
the get-away, then surely they had 
to go back for him. On the other hand 
Drake might have had other ideas. 
Hayward could feel the electric air 
as the others waited tensely for his 
decision. 

But it was Raynor who forced 
Hayward's hand. "We would be too 
late, anyway. The guards would have 
taken him." 

"I suppose," Hayward said. He 
whipped the car about again. 



98 



 



PRESENTLY they were in the open 
and in a short time the low prison 
walls loomed before them. Hayward 
stopped the car at Raynor's direction 
at the center gate. 

A captain of the guards opened 
the gates at sight of the visitor. Hayward and Murchison acted as though 
they were prisoners, and to add to 
the effect Raynor's personal bodyguard drew their tube guns and held 
them in readiness. 

"I am returning the prisoners," 
Raynor said. 

The captain turned to call warders 
and Raynor put out his hand quickly. 
"My men will conduct the prisoners, 
Captain. If you don't mind?" 

"Not at all, if it is your desire." 

"Thank you. Come along, then." 

In his desire to walk at Raynor's 
side, the captain stepped between the 
bodyguard and prisoners and accidentally bumped against Murchison. 
A startled expression dawned in the 
man's eyes. "The prisoner! He's 
armed I" 

Those were his last words. Another 
second and the alarm would be 
raised. With a gesture surprisingly 
swift for an old man Raynor whipped 
out the short sword concealed under 
his shirt and ran it through the captain. 

The man died without a sound. 

It was the signal for all of them 
to draw their weapons. 

"To Marna's cage I " Hayward 
shouted. Without waiting to see what 
the others would do he set off at a 
run for the cage shouting as he did: 
"Get outl You're freel Get out of the 
cages ! " 

His words aroused not only the 
prisoners but also the guards. Men 
boiled from their quarters at the far 
end of the compound and their figures showed on the wall as they ran 
to the huge ray machines. But when 
they turned them on, nothing happened. Just as when those on the 



ground attempted to blast the escaping prisoners, nothing happened. 

In the meantime Hayward and the 
others had reached the cage where 
Marna was imprisoned. He made his 
voice heard above the voices of the 
excited prisoners. 

"Get their weapons! Get their 
weapons!" 

"You came back for me!" Marna's 
voice was warm and low. 

He turned to see the woman he had 
come for standing beside him. Her 
beauty was a spark that set his heart 
aflame. He had never imagined that 
when love would come it would come 
so quickly, so completely without 
question. A Queen! And she loved 
him. It was to be seen in her eyes, 
felt on her lips as she pressed them 
against his. 

WBJI A&NA1" Raynor's face was 
*■ *■ contorted. "Can you get your 
men organized? The alarm is out and 
Mydor will be here with an army." 

It was amazing how quickly her 
subjects rallied around her. Individual fights raged about the compound 
but now it was apparent that some 
sort of order was being formed by 
the guards. Small groups of them under the leadership of one man or another, pitted themselves against many 
of the escaping prisoners and hacked 
them to pieces before a defense could 
be organized. 

"We've got to have weapons," Marna said. "Attack the guards." 

TT WAS AN order. Hayward was 
shocked by it because it meant 
a command to suicide for many; having no weapons Marna's followers had 
to take arms from the guards by 
sheer force of numbers. Then he saw 
the sense of it. Men had to be sacrificed to gain the end Marna was after: control of the prison compound 
and the weapons. 



THAT A WORLD MIGHT LIVE 



99 



As if it was the most natural thing 
in the world, he took command of 
their immediate group. Using Raynor, Murchison, the four bodyguards 
and himself as a nucleus, he hacked 
his way to the gate through a horde 
of guards. Steel ripped his clothing 
to shreds, razor-sharp sword edges 
nicked him time and again and once 
a wild swing of one of the guards 
almost took his head from his shoulders. But luck stayed with him. He 
ducked in time and his own blade 
swung up and out, to stream red 
with blood as it went completely 
through the man. What Hayward had 
noticed when he took the tube away 
from Sopar was evident now. His own 
strength was superhuman, or the Atlanteans were much weaker than 
Earthmen. 

Ey the time they reached the gate 
a large number of Mama's followers 
were armed. More and more came 
to join them until their force numbered hundreds. The guards had 
been forced to fight a retreating action. Suddenly the withdrawal to the 
gates became a riot. 

"Let them gol" Hayward gave the 
command. "Mania, have some of your 
men guard the women and take them 
to safety. Raynor..." 

The old man's arms hung heavily 
at his side and the face was lined 
with weariness. Blood dripped from a 
cut on his cheek, but the old eyes 
were ablaze with fight, and there 
was no question of the great spirit in 
that frail body. 

"Yes, surface man?" 

"We've got to get back to the city 
and carry the fight to Mydor. How 
do we do it?" 

"You're right. And before they set 
up a new plan. Lookl" He pointed 
up the long stretch of wide road leading from the city to the prison. 

A long line of headlights, like 



fireflies dancing in a row, were swooping down the road toward them. The 
same question was in each mind. 
Mydor? 

"Quick! Along both sides of the 
road. Hide in the grass until we learn 
if they are friends. Raynor, you and 
Murchison take one group; I will 
take another. Get moving!" 

TTHERE WAS no longer any question as to who had come. The 
first two out of the lead car were 
Mydor and Sopar. The youngster 
raised his sword in a signal and men 
streamed from the hundred vehicles. 

The voice of Mydor, coldly contemptuous, was suddenly raised in 
command: "Take no prisoners. Neither man nor woman." 

"I'm going to wipe that look from 
Mydor's face," Hayward whispered 
to Marna. "Besides, we need those 
cars. One thing. I don't want you in 
this thing." 

"You can't keep me out," she said. 

There were many things about her 
he knew nothing of. He knew only 
that he loved her, and felt certain his 
love was returned. But there was time 
for learning more. Was it an hour 
they had spent together in the same 
cage? A day? He knew it was a lifetime, now. And no matter how short 
the time, it had been long enough for 
him to know life held no large meaning without her. He shook his head, 
but smiled as he did so. 

"I can't take a chance," he whispered. "You heard Mydor's words." 

"We had nothing but our hands 
before," she said. "Now there is steel 
in them. I am their Queen, and I must 
lead them." 

He swallowed hard. This was not 
Conpa City, Arizona, or even the 
earth on which that hamlet stood. 
This was a band of rock, a layer of 
a planet, a world like something in a 



100 



 



dream, the home of a people who had 
disappeared from the earth thousandsof years before. He could not break 
the bonds of their customs by using 
phrases familiar to him. 

He cupped his hand under her 
chin and lifted her face to his and 
kissed her hard and she brought her 
body close to his so that he felt the 
swelling breasts quivering against his 
flesh and knew for a wild instant the 
depths of passion in this strange woman. Then he pushed her gently from 
him and nodded once. 

She had won. 

He stood erect, a figure of pent-up 
power, his face a mask of flaming 
anger, his hand with the sword 
clenched in a fist thrust straight out 
before him. 

•""THIS TIME the battle was another 
■ kind. The guards had been unorganized and in scattered units. The 
men Mydor had brought with him 
were trained to fight as a single unit 
and to use battlefield tactics. The 
surprise attack gave them no chance 
to form ranks. And, like the battle 
in the prison compound, it developed 
into man-against-man fights, The difference lay in the type of warrior 
Mama's men were fighting. 

As if it were second nature to Hayward, he saw what the end would 
be. Mydor's minions would win. Already squad leaders were forming 
their men into cells of attack and defense. The scattered fight was being 
directed into channels dictated by Mydor's commanders. Slowly Hayward 
and the rest were being driven back 
toward the prison gates. Those of 
Hayward's men who were caught on 
the other side of die road were 
chopped to bits. 

Around Hayward and Marna and 
Raynor and Murchison, the ground 
was cleared. The enemy glared their 
hatred and respect of the tall Earth 



man. Unfamiliar as the sword and its 
use had been to Hayward, he had created havoc with it. The phenomenal 
Strength he had in this strange world 
had made him a dreaded opponent. 
Yet it was obvious the end was a 
smali matter of time away. 

"It's a hopeless cause," Raynor 
muttered. 

"Not yet," Hayward made answer. 
"This fight, maybe; but I think we 
can get away." He looked about and 
counted some twenty men who were 
in their group. "If we can get to Mydor's craft. . . " 

Once more Raynor's face lit up 
with renewed hope. "If we can, it will 
be clear sailing to the city. His insignia will let us through." 

"What are we waiting for then?" 
Hayward asked. 

His now-familiar bellow of defiance 
rose on the air, and sweeping the 
girl close to his side he charged the 
thin wall of warriors facing them. 

The suddenness of the attack 
cleaved a crack in the thin line, and 
seconds later the fight raged about the 
torpedo-shaped car. Marna, too 
raised her voice in a last desperate 
attempt to rally her dwindling forces. 
They responded nobly, forcing drained 
nerves and muscles to give their last 
reserve of strength in her honor. 

Men fell and were trampled by 
others who made frantic efforts to 
reach the enemy, until a wall of dead 
lay heaped about the car. The screams 
of the wounded and dying rose in a 
horrible souhd, like a hymn to Death. 
So close were they jammed that men 
died and were held erect by the press 
of others. There was no room for 
swinging, only for stab and thrust. 
For an instant the battle hung in the 
balance, and Hayward called on his 
reserve of power. His great figure, 
naked now to the waist, was like an 
avenging angel's, as he hammered by 



THAT A WORLD MIGHT LIVE 



101 



the sheer power of his arm, a path 
to the still open door of the car. 

And rising up to confront him was 
the figure of Sopar. 

No longer was the Atlantean one 
of the 'Smiling People'. His face was 
a smear of red and his eyes gleamed 
in fanatic fervor. His sword flashed 
above his head as he took a single 
step forward and brought it down, 
at the very instant Hayward slipped 
in one of the pools of blood. 

The blade flashed down. 

Hayward tried to keep his balance, 
tried to bring up his own sword in 
protection, but too late. 

Someone caught him a blow on the 
shoulder which knocked him aside. 
It was Raynor, who had plunged headlong at Hayward. It was Raynor who 
took the murderous blow with his 
own body. Sopar's face wore a grimace of hatred as he twisted the sword 
loose from the corpse of Raynor. The 
grimace was still on his face when 
Hay ward's sword cut him in half! 

T IKE PUPPETS propelled by a mad 
master, Hayward, Marna, Murchison and what were left of her forces piled into the elliptical craft. A 
wild man leaped into the driver's seat 
and twisted the wheel in a full turn 
as the engine roared, then purred 
into power. Seconds later they were 
in the clear. 

Hayward turned to the others. 
"We've lost Raynor. What do we do 
DOW?" 

A warrior crawled panting to Hayward's side. "I have been trained as 
pilot. There are two space craft on 
a field outside the city." 

"Like the one that brought us to 
Letta?" Hayward asked. 

"Better. These are larger and are 
more powerful and swifter, Mydor 
constructed them for the day of invasion. Each can hold ten thousand 
men!" 



A laugh that bordered on hysteria 
rushed from Hayward 's throat. To 
think a man could be that mad as to 
attempt invasion of the Earth with 
twenty thousand men. But the laugh 
died almost as quickly as it was born. 
He suddenly remembered what he 
had been told. The mysterious discs 
were to bring the silonium bombs to 
the Earth and drop them. 

The discs! Flying saucers. . . . 

But how had they been brought to 
the Earth? What difference did it 
make now that he knew their purpose, past and future. He had to get 
back to the Earth and somehow warn 
its nations. 

Hayward felt the sudden press of 
warm woman's flesh against his 
shoulder. "Marna, my dearest. . ." 

She whispered, "I go where you 
go. Here life is done for me." 

His bloody hand rose to caress her 
shoulder but fell back to the wheel. 
He could not defile her with its crimson touch. "You say you are a pilot," 
he spoke to the warrior. "But can 
you bring us back to the spot from 
where we were taken?" 

There was a laugh of exultation 
behind the man's words. "Mydor made 
it simple for us. I know. I was head 
of Raynor's bodyguards and knew all 
of the mad King's plans, as well as 
did my dead master. The pilot control is set. It was set the instant Raynor and Sopar came back with you 
and your friends. There was only the 
wait for the proper moment. There 
is even a stock of provisions on 
board." 

For the first time since the battle 
had been joined, Hayward heard 
Murchison's voice. "Food," Murchison said wistfully. "What's that? GodI 
Even crumbs would be welcome." 

"You'll have to hold out, Jim," 
Hayward said. 

"Hold outl My aunt's bustle! 
There's nothing to hold out with. My 



102 



 



belly's saying hello to my backbone." 

"Turn off the road here!" the warrior called suddenly. "It's only a short 
distance." 

T_IAYWARD had never dreamed 
such a ship could be constructed to be made to fly. He had not 
known the size of the ship they had 
come in but had realized it was immense. But this thing before them; 
it was colossal! 

His eyes trained to gauge size, made 
the craft out to be a thousand feet 
in length and two hundred feet 
through the middle. The head of it 
was fifty feet at the widest, and each 
vane was a foot long. It seemed incredible. 

But even more incredible was the 
small number of men set to guarding 
it. 

At sight of the royal insignia the 
guards snapped to attention. Too late 
did they discover the deception. By 
the time they saw it, Hayward and 
the others were on them. Hayward 
and the others were not to be denied. 
The guards died to a man I 

"Show us what to do," Hayward 
ordered. 

"There won't be much to show," 
the warrior said. "The automatic pilot is set and the course has been 
laid for it. Come. We get in through 
the belly." 

Hayward and the warrior had been 
talking close by the ship while the 
others stood about waiting their decision. Suddenly one of them turned 
idly and what he saw made his voice 
rise in a shout of warning. 

"I see the lights of cars coming 
swiftly!" 

"Quickly!" The pilot waved them 
forward. "Inside." He reached up 
against the dull metal and pressed a 
knob which protruded and instantly 
an opening spread and a ladder unfolded its length to the ground. 



A couple of minutes later the last 
of them was in the huge belly of the 
monster ship. Up ahead, in the vast 
pilot's compartment, Murchison, Marna and Hayward watched the pilot 
twist a dial. A humming sound was 
heard, which gave way to a low vibration. The pilot turned, smiled 
briefly, then said; 

"Look below." 

"Look, Luke! It's Drake!" Murchison bawled wildly. "He's with Mydor." 

Murchison had seen right. The tiny 
figure of Manfred Drake was to be 
seen at Mydor's side. Suddenly there 
was nothing to be seen. It was as if 
a screen had been pulled before their 
eyes. The two turned questioning looks 
at the pilot. 

"We're in flight," came the matterof-course answer. 

AS ON THEIR flight from Earth 
neither Murchison nor Hayward 
knew the passage of time. Murchison 
spent most of his time with the pilot. 
But Hayward knew only that here, in 
this brief moment, was his chance to 
know Mania. Nor was she lukewarm 
to the idea. But in both minds there 
lurked the dread thought of what the 
future would bring when both ships 
landed. 

They knew the speed of both was 
about the same and that from what 
the pilot said both ships would land 
not too far from each other in the 
tunnel. This also they knew. The 
fight to the finish would come then, 
and as before it would be hand-tohand; the ray weapons were sti!) 
useless. 

So Hayward and Marna learned ihe 
sweetness of love while they had the 
chance. While, in the darkness of 
outer space between the bands of 
planets, their ship sped on its destined course. 



THAT A WORLD MIGHT LIVE 



103 



They were walking the narrow deck 
close by the pilot's compartment when 
Murchison dashed from it. 

"Marnal Luke! We're coming in!" 

They could feel the deceleration as 
they grouped themselves over the pilot's shoulders. 

"Watch," the pilot said without taking his eyes from the dials on the 
board. "Very soon, now." 

Directly ahead lay a broad plain. 
But as they came closer they saw 
that what had appeared to be flat 
land was really mountainous country. 
And so quickly it almost took their 
breaths away they were flying between two huge basalt-like needles of 
mountains into what must have once 
been a crater. Seconds later darkness 
enfolded them in its sable wings. 

The pilot slid from his seat. "That's 
all," he said. "I've set the alarm to 
let us know when we are through." 

Hayward nodded soberly. "Might 
as well get ourselves set for the last 
battle." 

He counted noses as they filed 
past him to the hatchway. Twenty 
nine, including Marna. A pitiful force 
to throw against Mydor. But one that 
would fight till the breath ran out 
of each body, 

"Listen to the old lady growl," the 
pilot said. He grinned. "She's got to 
dig a new path. The ship Raynor 
used was a tenth this size." 

A sudden thought struck Hayward. 
"Are we on the same path as the one 
who came before?" 

"I don't know," came the answer. 
"But not far off, I'm sure." 

CUDDENLY there was silence. 
^ "Let's go!" Hayward shouted. 
He had given them their instructions. 
Murchison and several others were 
to hurry Mama back along the tunnel to freedom while he and the rest 
fought off Mydor. Hayward knew 
there simply wasn't room in the tun


nel for effective fighting. Two men 
could hold off hundreds. 

He made a silent vow he would be 
one of the two until death took them, 
or rescue came. 

The ship came to a halt with a jar 
which threw them all off balance. Seconds later the last of them were 
through the hatchway. Murchison and 
the girl and another raced off while 
Hayward waited for the other ship to 
come through. 

The seconds that went by were 
eternities. 

For there was horrible uncertainty 
of not knowing where the other ship 
would come through. They could all 
die without having a chance to strike 
a blow should the nose come through 
at the spot where they waited. 

Hayward's lips twisted in a crooked 
grin. He thought suddenly what might 
happen should they come in where 
the vein lay. And with that thought 
came another. The dynitro! It was 
all ready to be set off. Murchison had 
set the charge. If the ship came 
through between the charge and their 
ship. . . ? 

There was a single wild chance to 
take. If it succeeded they were all 
saved. 

"Wait here!" he yelled, and set 
off at a run toward the end of the 
tunnel. 

The wires and battery were all set 
up. Hayward grabbed them up, whirled 
and whipped back toward where the 
others were waiting. He was racing 
against two things : one, he didn't 
know when or where the other ship 
would come through; and second, he 
and the others had to get around the 
nose of their ship in tune. 

He made it back with only seconds 
to spare. Just as he came to a panting halt, there was an unearthly roar, 
and a vast mass shot up through the 
floor of the tunnel. Hayward turned, 



104 



 



handed the battery to the pilot and 
yelled above the tumult: 

"Quickly, Get behind our ship, roll 
the wires out a bit more, and push 
the plunger down!" 

"But what of you, sir?" 

"Don't worry about me. I'll hold 
them off." 

Hayward gauged the distance and 
saw that there was perhaps a hundred 
feet from where the tunnel ended to 
where the nose of the second ship 
pointed its dull metal upward. The 
blast would kill every man between 
the two ships. 

"All of you," he amended his order. "Get behind our ship with the 
pilot. I'll give the signal." 

JLJYDOR WAS the first to step 
from the ship. Behind him came 
Drake. Seconds later a nundred men 
stood grouped about the nose of the 
ship. Mydor's face was devoid of expression. 

"A long chase," Mydor said. "But 
now it is ended, and we have arrived 
at our goal." 

"Not quite," Hayward said. 

"Oh, but we have. You see, your 
friend Drake, here, is going to act 
as my emissary when our invasion 
has begun. He made it plain the people of your planet are stupid, and 
your tale will be laughed at." 



"That's right, Hayward," Drake 
said. "You know how right I am. And 
something else. Our contract is ended, as of this moment." 

Hayward had noticed a surreptitious movement of the men toward 
him. Another moment and they would 
charge. 

"Now!" his voice rang out. And 
with a simultaneous lunge, he hurled 
himself forward and threw the sword 
with all his might at Drake. 

There was the sound and fury and 
flame of a huge explosion and the 
last thing Hayward saw was the body 
of Drake pierced through by the 
sword, fall to the ground. 

Then all sight vanished in blackness .... 

UTTE CAN'T die!" A soft voice 
sobbed. "He can't!" 

Luke Hayward opened his eyes and 
saw the most beautiful eyes in the 
world looking pleadingly into his own. 

"Die?" he repeated painfully. 
"Darling, I've just started to live!" 
He turned his glance away from hers 
and saw Murchison kneeling beside 
the girl. He was grinning broadly, 
and Hayward knew the adventure was 
ended. 

Except for love, and who feared 
that? 

THE END 



RADAR MATING CALL! 

★ By CHARLES RECOUR * 



TWO SCIENTISTS of the Interchemical 
Corporation whose primary work is 
with organic chemicals have apparently 
succeeded in unraveling a baffling- secret 
of nature. WhUe their work was mainly 
concerned with moths, it may apply to 
many other animal behavior patterns. 

The problem a terns from an unusual 
fact. Scientists have noted that the male 
moth is able to locate the female moth 



during the mating season over tremendous 
distances (as much as eight miles) and in 
spite of obstacles like fog, rain, snow and 
darkness! Since vision in these insects is 
rudimentary and in any case would not 
explain the matter, the scientists studied 
the insects and theorized. They decided 
that it was possible that the insects sent 
out their mating calls in terms of infrared rays. It was only a theory — but it was 



RADAR MATING CALL! 



a good one. Infra-red rays are ordinary 
electromagnetic radiations whose wavelengths are midway between visible light 
and radio waves. They are at the long end 
of the visible spectrum. We know them as 
heat rays. Any object warmer than its 
surroundings by merely a few degrees 
broadcasts these invisible infra-red radiations. 

The scientists first explored the furry 
thorax of the female moth and discovered 
that its temperature was often as much as 
eleven or twelve degrees above that of the 
surrounding air. The sensitive thermocouple easily detected that difference. This 
was a sure-fire clue. Unquestionably the 
insect was radiating infra-red. An additional fact that aided the discovery was 
the knowledge that certain organic chemicals (which the moth contained) are capable of radiating infra-red in certain bands 
or spectra, and in a certain periodic fashion with peaks and valleys of intensity. 

Thus, in effect, the female moth is a 
brilliantly lighted beacon to the male moth, 
broadcasting subtle radiations which are 
the mating call even though the light is 
invisible. 

A subsequent examination of the male 
moth disclosed that this insect has a posterior section equipped with very fine hairs 



Star Broadcasts 

ic By L A. BURT * 

SINCE NINETEEN forty-three there 
has been increasing activity in a field 
about which practically nothing is known. 
Radio astronomy is taking on more and 
more importance. Since Grote Rebel" discovered our own Sun pouring out radio 
emanations at two meters wavelength, astronomers have been scanning the sky with 
receivers rather than telescopes. 

And an astonishing amount of information has been garnered. It has been discovered that roost stars as well as the sun, 
deliver great quantities of what we would 
call short radio waves. This is not inexplicable in light of the fact that we 
itnow that giant clouds of electrons on the 
S'ui's surface surge back and forth much 
like a primitive oscillator. And when electrons vibrate you get radiation of one kind 
or another. 

There must be some sort of connection 
between the radiation from the stars and 
what goes on in their white-hot interiors, 
a connection that may well provide the 
answer to some problems disturbing atomic 
physicists. Unfortunately there is no way 
for astrophysicists to check their theories, 
though the radiomen can readily do so. 
Eight now the whole subject is ripe for a 
unifying survey. 



in a cluster or clump. The unique and significant thing about these hairs is that 
they are almost all of the same length 
differing only in terms of a multiple of 
the infra-red wave-length! The only resultant conclusion thai can be drawn is 
that they are "radar" receptors for the 
radiation from the female moth. Because 
their lengths bear a definite relationship 
to the waves sent out by the female, they 
resonate or vibrate in accordance with the 
strength of the incoming radiation and 
thus enable the male to track down the female by following the beam ! This is almost like a plane locating an airfield by 
riding a radio beam. 

Checking on the receptor with suitable 
radiation demonstrated the accuracy of 
this reasoning. It appears as if many 
mysterious "calls of Nature" like the flying south of bird-groups etc. will have 
their explanation similarly in terms of radiations, either of the infra-red variety, 
or perhaps of the actual radio or radarwave variety. Whatever the case, it is 
clear too, that Nature has anticipated 
Man in developing electromagnetic radiation detectors, just as she has in most 
other fields of physics. You can't beat 
Nature I 

* * TV


Sound Mutants! 

* By JON BARRY * 

THE MUTATIONS caused by cosmicx-ray, and atomic radiation are old 
bat. A great deal of knowledge concerning 
thir type of mutation has been garnered 
in recent years. And efforts have been 
made to protect against it. Unfortunately 
a new source of mutar.'.- inducing radiation 
fs coming into wide use. It is super- so nics. 
As yet the danger hasn't l>een fottnd in 
human beings or for that matter in animals, but very likely it ejtists. 

Scientists have exposed plarta to ultrasonic blasts and then determined that the 
plant offspring indeed is mutated. The 
parent plants are unaffected, but not 80 

With ultra-sonics coming into wide use 
in industry and in military equipment the 
possible danger from this source must be 
reckoned with. Fortunately ultra-sonics 
has an extremely limited range and it is 
easy to put distance between one's self and 
the danger point. Also not many spursonic device consume great quantities of 
power, thus minimizing further the effects. 

Nevertheless, "forewarned is forearmed." Technicians and scientists working 
with this new technique can take appropriate steps to guard against the danger of 
contamin ation. 



By Kendall tfad&i Gladden 



LAWNS WERE sprinkled with 
new green and the buds in the 
nearby forest were swollen with 
color the day spring came to Universe 
City. A small boy ran out of a white 
suburban house. A cap pistol, with 
ivory handle, rode snugly in the silver-studded holster which was tied to 
his leg with real rawhide. When the 
boy reached the empty lots on the 
corner, he stopped and surveyed the 
streets with the experienced eye of a 



ten-year-old. Not an adult around. 

From one pocket, he drew a large 
kitchen match. He squatted on the 
sidewalk, pulled the head of the match 
along the concrete until it disappeared 
in flame. He held the match on a level 
with his eyes, watching the red and 
yellow flame. It climbed to a shimmering nothing, a thin thread of smoke 
picking up where the flame left off, 
and try as he could the boy was 
unable to see the next step in its 



107 



 



change. His gaze dropped and he 
watched the flame as it crept along 
the match stick, slowly squeezing the 
sap from the wood, its trail a blackened curl behind it. 

It was then that Bobby Edwards 
heard the voice within his head. 

Only it wasn't actually a voice. It 
was more like a thought— -one that 
somebody else was- thinking. He 
looked around, but the streets were 
still deserted. In some way, he knew 
the thought wasn't for him, that he 
was overhearing something that was 
private. He settled back on his heels, 
the dying match in his fingers, and 
listened. . . . 

•yHE SCREEN door closed with a 
bang. Bobby Edwards slid across 
the floor into his father's study, 
watching with interest as his father 
winced then forced a smile as he 
looked up from the papers he was 
grading. 

"I wonder if rubber doors would 
help?" Harlow Edwards said mildly. 
"Or would that set up a destructive 
frustration?" 

Bobby wasn't sure what his father 
was talking about, but he recognized 
the tone. It was the one his father 
used when he was only half serious. 
So he ignored it and came to the reason for his swift return. 

"Dad," he said excitedly, "what is 
Wolf 359? Is it an animal?" 

Harlow Edwards looked startled. 
"Wolf 359?" he repeated. "Where'd 
you hear about it?" 

"Somewhere," Bobby said vaguely. 
"What is it, huh?" 

"It think it's a star," his father said, 
not too sure of his ground. "A minor 
star, I believe, and pretty far away. 
Why?" 

"I heard somebody thinking," 
Bobby said. "It was like a tickling 
inside of my head but I understood 



almost all of it. A funny somebody—" 
He giggled — "Dad, did you ever see 
anybody who looked like a fire?" 

His father's lips pulled up at the 
corners. "No, but I've known a few 
who acted as if they were on fire. 
Never mind," he added hastily. "Tell 
me about the thoughts that tickled." 

"Well, they look like fires," Bobby 
said stubbornly. "There's lots of them 
and they're in a big ship that's maybe like our furnace on the inside only 
much bigger. I guess maybe they come 
from Wolf 359. Anyway, they're on 
their way here and they're going to 
land some time tomorrow. Right in 
the big woods here." 

There was a strange look on his 
father's face and then it faded to be 
replaced by an expression which Bobby knew well. He sighed, wondering 
why it was that no matter what you 
said adults would always twist it 
around some way. 

"Well," his father was saying, 
"that's quite an idea for a story, Bobby. Why don't you run along and 
think about it some more and then 
you can tell me the whole thing at 
lunch?" 

Without waiting for an answer, he 
had turned back to the stack of papers in front of him. Bobby shook his 
head and trudged from the room. 
Adults, he thought, were funny— almost as funny as the man he'd heard 
thinking. He went through the kitchen, scooping up some more matches 
when his mother wasn't looking. 

There was a tree in the Edwards' 
back yard, a towering beech which 
had often served as the jungle which 
was Tarzan's special domain. Bobby 
swung up into it, hooked his knees 
over a limb, rested his shoulders 
against another and relaxed. He 
struck a match on the trunk and 
stared at the flame. The thoughts 
had come more clearly when he had 
held the burning match .... 



THE BOY WHO CRIED WOLF 359 



109 



T_JE WAS still at it when his mother 
called him to lunch, but he 
obediently snuffed the match out 
against the tree and slid to the 
ground. Knowing that it was necessary, he detoured through the bathroom, dabbed bits of water on his 
face and then used the towel to rub 
off the smudges of dirt. He slid into 
his place at the table just as his father entered the dining room. 

"You'd think," his father said to his 
mother, "that a simple narrative style 
would not be too much to expect from 
university students in creative English. 
But most of them show less clarity and 
far less imagination than Bobby." 

"That," said Bobby's mother, "is 
undoubtedly due to the fact that your 
students don't have the advantage of 
a father who is a full professor." 

"I doubt if my influence is that 
telling," Harlow Edwards said. "My 
son's imagination outstrips my own. 
By the way, Bobby, how is your 
story coming along?" 

"It's not a story," Bobby said, 
pushing the words around the half 
sandwich in his mouth. "I heard them 
thinking again." 

"Don't talk with your mouth full 
of food," his mother said. "Now, 
what's this about hearing people 
think?" 

"Bobby came in this morning with 
a wonderful idea for a story," his father explained. "What did they think 
this time, Bobby?" 

While he washed th« sandwich down 
with milk, Bobby debated the possibility of arguing the point now or 
waiting until he had added the new information. He decided on the latter. 

"It ain't just a visit," he said, "like 
I thought at first. They're coming to 
fight us." 

"Do they still look like fires?" 

Bobby nodded. 

"Well," said his father, "I guess 
we'd better stock up on matches — so 



we can fight fire with fire." 

"Don't make fun of him," Bobby's 
mother said. "You know what Dr. 
Stocker said about imaginative children. Why do they want to fight us, 
Bobby?" 

"They need a new place to live and 
they picked here. The place where 
they've always lived ain't any good 
any more." 

"That would be Wolf 359?" his father asked. 

"Yeah. I think they looked at a lot 
of other places but decided on this 
one instead." 

"How are they going to fight us, 
Bobby?" 

"They ain't really going to fight 
us," Bobby said, "but they're going 
to set everything on fire and it'll be 
too hot for any of us to live. That's 
what they thought, anyway." 

"Why are they going to set the 
whole earth on fire?" 

"So that their own fires won't go 
out," Bobby said promptly. "Remember, I said each one of them is a fire? 
But if it goes out, they die. And that's 
what's going to happen to them if they 
stay on Wolf 359." 

"Well," said his father, "if they 
only want a hot place why don't they 
land on our sun? That ought to be 
hot enough for them." 

"They thought of that, Dad, but I 
guess the sun is a little too hot for 
them and won't cool off enough for 
millions of years. But they figure that 
the earth will get just hot enough if 
they start a chain — a chain — " 

"Chain reaction," his father suggested. 

"That's it," Bobby said eagerly. He 
sat up straighter in his chair. "They're 
going to land tomorrow in Hutchins 
Forest, right here next to Universe 
City. Dad, you've got to tell everyone in town and have them there 
when the sliip lands. And they gotta 
have a lot of water and all the fire 



110 



 



trucks and everything. You gotta do 
it, Dad, or it'll be too late." 

"Wait a minute, son, let's not get 
too excited. It's only a story, after 
all." 

"It isn't," Bobby exclaimed. He 
screwed up his eyes the way he did 
when it was important that they believe him. "It isn't. It's all true. I 
heard them think every bit of it." 

"Of course, it's true, Bobby," his 
mother said. She turned to his father 
and spoke in the guarded tones she 
sometimes used. "Harlow, why don't 
you and Bobby take a walk after 
lunch?" 

"Probably is a good idea," his father said. "Some of these things get a 
little too involved for me .... Like to 
take a walk with me after lunch, 
Bobby?" 

"Sure," Bobby said. He knew what 
the walk meant, but that was all right 
too. The more people who knew about 
it the better. 

WHEN LUNCH was over, Harlow Edwards went into his 
study and they could hear the low 
murmur of his voice as he talked to 
someone on the phone. Bobby didn't 
try to hear what was being said. He 
had a good idea, so he concentrated 
on seeing if he could hear the thoughts 
again. He couldn't and after a look at 
his mother's face he decided not to 
strike a match. He hunched down in 
his chair and rubbed the snail shell 
in his pocket. 

When his father came out of the 
study, he was wearing his hat. "Let's 
go, Bobby," he said. 

They walked down the quiet street 
of Universe City and Bobby was 
thinking what it would look like after 
they came. Like a big match, he finally decided. 

When his father stopped in front of 
an office building in the business section, Bobby was not surprised. Still, 



he waited for his father to speak, 

"Well," his father said with an 
air of studied casualness, "here we 
are at Dr. Stoker's office building. 
What do you say we drop in and 
chew the fat with him if he isn't busy? 
I haven't seen Doc in a week or so.'' 

"Okay," Bobby said, suppressing a" 
giggle. He remembered all the other 
times that he'd said or done something 
to confuse his father and they had always taken a walk which somehow 
ended in a visit to the same office 
building. Fathers were funny, he'd 
decided long before, and that explained everything. 

They walked up the one flight of 
stairs and into an office. The nurse 
looked op, smiled at his father and 
disappeared through the door back of 
her. A moment later, Dr. Stoker appeared, a grin on his face. 

"Hi, Harlow, it's good to see you," 
he said. "Hiya, Bobby." 

"We were just walking' by and 
thought we'd drop in to see you," 
Bobby's father explained. "Of course, 
if you're busy — " 

"Not at all. The children of Universe City are just too healthy to 
need a psychiatrist. Nothing wrong 
with any of them that a bicycle or a 
new cap gun won't fix — eh, Bobby? 
Come on in." 

HTHEY FOLLOWED him into the 
private office and Bobby stared 
idly out of the window while his father and the doctor talked about golf 
and baseball. This, he recognized, was 
part of the game so he waited patiently, 

"Say, Bobby," his father said suddenly, with a false air of being struck 
by a new thought, "why don't you 
tell Doc here about your sto — about 
Wolf 359? I'll bet he'd like to hear 
it." 

"Okay," Bobby said indifferently. 
When adults refused to believe you, 



THE BOY WHO CRIED WOLF 359 



111 



he'd learned that it worked better to 
pretend it wasn't too important. He 
repeated the things he'd told his father, watching the way the doctor's 
face kept showing surprise and interest. 

"That's quite a story, Bobby," the 
doctor said when he'd finished. 
"Quite a story for a boy of your age. 
Did you make it up entirely by yourself or did someone help you?" 

"It's not a story," Bobby explained 
patiently. "I heard them thinking all 
of that. They thought some more that 
I could only hear part of because I 
didn't have any matches to light. It 
helps when I light a match. I guess 
maybe they're so close now that's 
why it helps." 

"Not* a story, eh?" the doctor said. 
He swung his chair around and twisted his mouth as though he were going to whistle. He stared at the ceiling the way he had the time Bobby 
had told him about the horsehair that 
turned into a snake. "Not a story, 
eh? Let me see now — seems to me I 
remember something about Wolf 359." 
He winked at Bobby's father. "What 
do you know about it, Bobby?" 

"It's then home, that's all, I guess," 
Bobby said. "It's something like the 
earth only it's all covered with fire." 

"I should think it would be," the 
doctor said. "Wolf 359 is a star so 
far away you can't see it unless you 
have a pretty powerful telescope. It's 
about the faintest star we know 
about. But it's a red star, which 
means it's pretty hot. You know how 
hot boiling water is, Bobby?" 

"Yeah." 

"Well, boiling water is only a little more than two hundred degrees 
hot, but Wolf 359 has a mean temperature of about six million degrees. 
Now, how do you think anyone could 
live there?" 

"They ain't people," Bobby explained. "Not like us anyway. They 



look like a tall fire, maybe." 

"You mean they're just flames all 
the way through? No bones or anything?" 

"Sort of." Bobby struggled for 
words to cover the thoughts he'd 
heard. "Inside, they're mostly pure — 
pure carbon." 

"I guess they'd have to be at that," 
the doctor said with a laugh. "Now, 
look, Bobby— have you got a name 
for these people? You know, like 
we're humans." 

Bobby shook his head. "I guess 
maybe they've got a name for themselves, but they didn't think it. One 
of them, he's kind of like a captain, 
is called Shrxl. But I don't know 
about all of them." 

"No name, huh?" the doctor said. 
"Well, then, let's look at another angle. What did you say they're going 
to do to our earth when they get 
here?" 

"Set it on fire. Then when everything is burning, the rest of them will 
get in ships and come here." 

"Why do they want to set the 
earth on fire, Bobby?" 

"They have to so they can live 
here," Bobby explained once more. 
"They can't live anywhere unless it's 
hotter than anything." 

"But," said the doctor, and he 
looked triumphant, "the temperature 
is six million degrees on Wolf 359. 
So why don't they just stay there?" 

"Because it's cooling off," Bobby 
said. He was thinking about how long 
it took adults to understand anything. 
"Pretty soon it'll be too cold there 
and they'll all die. That's why they 
have to find a place with plenty of 
carbon," 

"I see," the doctor said. He leaned 
back and placed the tips of his fingers 
together. "Now, you say they're going to land in Hutchins Forest tomorrow morning?" 

"That's right." 



112 



 



"Now, why do you suppose they're 
picking that spot to land in? You got 
any ideas on that, Bobby?" 

"Sure. They were thinking there's 
lots and lots of coal under the ground 
there and once they set fire to it then 
everything else will catch fire from 
it like a — a chain— reaction." 

"That ought to prove something," 
Bobby's father said, looking at the 
doctor. "There never has been any 
coal fields around Universe City." 

•"THERE WAS a funny expression 
on the doctor's face. "Not exactly, 
Harlow," he said. "They've just recently discovered that there is a very 
rich vein of coal under the Hutchins 
Forest." He lowered his voice. "Must 
have heard someone talking about it." 
He turned back to Bobby. "Anything else, Bobby?" 

"No, sir— except that everybody in 
town ought to be warned and everybody ought to be out there when they 
come. I — I think they're afraid of 
water and maybe of guns — at least, 
they're afraid we'll have some sort 
of terrible weapons." 

"Of course, we'll have to do something about it," the doctor said 
promptly, but it was a tone which 
Bobby recognized and so he gave up 
hope. "Now, Bobby," the doctor continued,"" "why don't you look at those 
magazines over there while I talk to 
your father? I think you might even 
find a comic book or two if you look 
real hard." 

Bobby obediently marched across 
the room and started looking at the 
magazines, but by straining he could 
hear quite a bit of what the doctor 
was saying to his father. 

"Nothing to worry about," the doctor said, his voice low. "It's very common for children to believe these 
things are real .... many cases where 
they believe that imaginary play


mates are real. . . .mustn't frustrate 
him, .. .question of directing his imagination into more productive channels, that's all ... . Probably comes out 
of an interest in fire. . . . Why don't 
you try buying him one of those chemistry sets for kids? Amazing kits. . . . 
have everything up to and including 
miniature atomic explosions .... work 
at it with him and you'll find he'll 

forget all about Wolf 359 

Although it would be interesting to 
know where he learned about it. It 
doesn't even have a separate listing 
in the encyclopedia ..." 

Bobby put down the magazine and 
walked out with his father. He made 
no more mention of the fire-men who 
were coming. Once, just before they 
arrived home, his father brought it 
up again, but Bobby only said: "Oh, 
thatl" and threw a small rock at a 
sparrow. During the rest of the afternoon, he chased the neighbor's cat, 
tied one of his mother's hair ribbons 
on a dog and skinned both knees while 
rollerskating. 

"CARLY THE next morning, as soon 
as he finished breakfast, Bobby 
went to his room and put on his Hopalong Cassidy shirt and pants. He 
buckled on his belt and holster, tying the holster down to his leg. He 
stood in front of the mirror and 
twirled his Western Hero gun several 
times and then jammed it into the 
holster. After some thought, he dug 
up another old holster and rigged it 
up to fit under his armpit, out of 
sight beneath his buckskin vest. He 
fitted his repeater water pistol in to 
this and swaggered from the room. 

"Thank heavens," he heard hi3 
mother say as he left the house, "he's 
reverted to being a cowboy again." 

He stopped once to exchange a few 
words with Sonny Elliott, who took 
one look at the low-slung holster and 
knew its importance. 



THE BOY WHO CRIED WOLF 359 



113 



"Where you going?" he asked. 

"Hutchins Forest," Bobby said. He 
looked around to see if there were 
any tenderfeet in sight. "There's going to be a raid," he explained. He 
nodded toward the sky. "From up 
there. Wanta come along?" 

"Nah," Sonny said scornfully. "We 
played The Martians Are Coming last 
week — and you made me be the Martians. Besides I'm building— something." 

He was mysterious, but Bobby 
wasn't interested. Instead, he brushed 
aside the mystery with a careless wave 
and went on. He skirted the university 
campus and shortly came out on the 
edge of the forest. 

Entering the forest, he began to 
slip from tree to tree, going so quietly that not a single squirrel scolded 
him for the invasion. 

A few minutes later he reached the 
spot, deep in the woods, where there 
was a slight clearing. It was there 
that he was sure the ship would land. 
He crouched behind a giant oak and 
took up the long vigil, pretending to 
roll a brown paper cigarette. 

And at last it came, with a hiss and 
a sort of silent roar that shook the 
very ground beneath his feet. Like a 
huge ball, the side shimmering with 
contained heat, it dropped between 
the trees and settled to the ground. 
Wisps of smoke drifted up from 
where it touched and the fresh air 
of the forest took on a scorched smell. 
Green leaves shriveled and curled 
where it had brushed against them in 
passing. 

For several minutes it lay there, inert, little flames licking up from the 
dead leaves beneath it. A large square 
patch turned iridescent and vanished, 
leaving a hole from which poured fire. 
The flames reached farther out, twisted hungrily in the air, and began to 
take on form. Each flame budded and 
grew, until a dozen of the flame-men 



stood on the ground, the earth smoldering beneath their febrile feet. Their 
bodies were slender and lambent, 
changing from yellow to deep orange, 
their heads curling to a blueness that 
almost matched the air. Blazing and 
questing, they turned this way and 
that, yearning for the carbon beneath 
tlie ground. 

Crouched behind his tree, Bobby 
Edwards ("marshal" of Universe 
City) brought his hand down in a 
lightning draw, his gun clearing the 
holster without a whisper of sound. 
His left hand fanned down across the 
hammer and the cap cracked spitefully. The flame-men turned to meet the 
tiny flash, their leader swirling nearer 
to the tree. 

"COR A BRIEF moment, flame-man 
and earth-boy stared deeply into 
each other and in that minute the boy 
knew that neither cap nor bullet could 
dim the threatening glow. Straightening up, he flung the Western Hero 
gun into the blaze, watched the metal 
melt and flow. Even as one of the 
flame-men moved toward him, flaring brightly in anticipation, Bobby 
Edwards brought out his water pistol 
in a cross-draw that would have been 
the envy of any boy in the land, 

The stream of water went true to 
its mark, steamed and hissed as it 
struck. The flame-man hesitated, giving up a little of his life in vapor, and 
Bobby Edwards fired again. From 
head and feet, the living fire rushed 
to the wound, forming into an angry 
orange ball. And the water struck — 
struck and struck again. The flames 
licked at the wound and died. Spark 
by spark, the flame-man gave up his 
life, then died in a gush of steam. 
The embers fell to the ground and 
gave their last breath to a dried leaf. 

Flame-men and earth-boy, alike, 
had stood and watched the death 
struggles of the one conquering in


 



vader. The dead ember broke the 
spell. The flame-men wavered, flickering in sudden fear, then fled into 
their ship. The opening in the ship 
flared brightiy and closed. Heat 
flooded from the sides, the metal 
turning an angry red, and the ground 
shook as the great round ball left 
the earth in a rush. It flashed once 
in the sky, like a bright exhaust, and 
was gone. 

The fire in the woods crackled loudly in the remaining silence. Following 
the trail of leaves, it fastened on a 
dead tree, and the flames leaped high. 
Bobby Edeards turned and ran for 
the city. 

On the way, he heard the keening 
wail of a fire siren and knew the 
smoke had been seen. Once he caught 
a glimpse of the red truck hurtling 
through the streets in the direction 
of the forest. 

The screen door banged loudly and 
Bobby skidded to halt in the doorway 
to his father's study. His father was 
bent over a large box, looking as 
pleased as he had at Bobby's first 
train set. Before Bobby could say 
anything, his father looked up and 
gestured happily. 

"Look what we have, Bobby," he 
said. "It's one of the newest chemistry 
sets. I've just been reading the instructions and if we take this bottle of uranium and — " 

He went on in a very real excitement and Bobby began to catch some 
of it. A few minutes later, the two 
of them were busily bringing about a 
minor atomic explosion, while the Universe City firemen were putting out 
the last of the blaze in Hutchins Forest. One of the firemen unknowingly 
stepped on a piece of twisted metal 
and trod it deep into the ground. And 
the chemistry set was such a success 



that the loss of one Western Hero 
cap pistol was never noticed. 

CHRXL LANDED the ship on the 
Flame-Port and, breathing deeply, 
walked through the swirling fire to 
report. 

"Shrxl reporting," he thought to his 
commander, "with one dead. Prtzl was 
killed by an inhabitant of the world 
we visited. My report is that the third 
planet of the sun we observed is unfit 
for habitation. It now supports some 
form of native life — extremely condensed so it must be of a low order — 
which is too dangerous. So barbarous 
are they that even their young carry 
the deadliest weapons known to the 
universe. One such young animal murdered Prtzl and drove the rest of us 
away. We must find a more civilized 
world." 

Shrxl's report was accepted without 
being believed. For centuries the 
flame-men had known the thoughts of 
the strange life on that third planet. 
They knew it was a mighty race, because it had no fear of water, and 
they respected the intelligence of the 
race, had in fact borrowed from that 
intelligence even to accepting its name 
for their home world. So they could 
only conclude that the third planet's 
life form had in some way attacked 
Shrxl with a deadly ray which confused his imagination. 

While the search went on for a habitable world, Shrxl was turned over 
to the care of a flame-therapist. It 
wasn't long before he was so absorbed 
in building miniature water-bombs 
that he completely forgot the horror of 
the day he faced a monster in an alien 
world. 

THE END 



VIRUS VENGEANCE 



By CAL WEBB 



THE FILTERABLE virus, that gigantic molecule, that huge protein compound, which lies at the root of ao many 
of Man's so-far unconquerable diseases, is 
beginning to reveal clues to its behavior, 
clues which may enable scientists to attack 
it with some success. Two tools are in the 
forefront of this battle. The use of radioactive tracers, and the electron microscope, 
both lend their power to the battle with 
the common cold and with polio. 

A new theory, discovered through the use 
of "tracers" leads scientists to believe that 
the viruses attach themselves to the body 
cells by means of electrical attraction, 
much like an ion is attracted to another 
ion of the opposite charge or like an electron is attracted to a positively charged 
plate. In fact, viruses contain within 
themselves, within their large molecular 
structure and in the surrounding environment a fair number of ions or electrically 
charged atoms or molecules. 

Using the electric field created by these 



ions, the viruses are able to attach themselves to the cell wall and then break 
through it. Using a variety of other ions, 
principally of a metallic nature, the scientists destroy or neutralize this electrical 
attraction and thus protect the cell. At 
present it seems to be a matter of preventing the attachment, and ultimate penetration. Once the latter has been achieved, 
it is too late to do anything about it. 

Along with these potentially fruitful investigations, more kimv/1 frige of the growth 
of viruses is being accumulated. For example, the way in which viruses "grow" or 
"reproduce" has been the subject of analysis. The study has been done on viruses 
growing within the cell they have infected. 

This is important because until now 
the only viruses with which scientists had 
thoroughly understood the growth processes, were the "bacteriophages", which are 
viruses which destroy and assimilate bac


PROGNOSTICATOR PLUS! 



By PETE BOSS 



HUGO GERNSBACK, grand old man 
of science-fiction and first editor of 
Amazing Stories, is a man to be reckoned 
with. Book reviewers and scientists have 
taken note of his famous "Ralph" book, 
written back in nineteen eleven, before 
most people had even thought of the idea 
of fiction about the future. The reviewers 
are particularly startled by the book becau e of Gc nj sense of 

prognostication. He called the turn on so 
many familiar gadgets and devices of today that they're convinced he must have 
been in league, with the devil! 

Television, radar, the wide use of the 
automobile, the helicopter and a thousand 
other things were faithfully and accurately foretold in Gernsback's volume. He 
himself had the satisfaction of seeing 
many of these develop even while he was 
editing Amtmfng Stories. 

.One particularly noteworthy prediction 
involved his descHi.Lion of radar. In terms 
of very high frequencies and short waves, 
in terms of pa^ibolu: rwled.ors and transmitting and receiving antennas, Gernsback 
hit the nail on the head. It is rather chilling to read his description and then learn 
that the result only occurred three and a 
half decades later I 

Gernsback frequently gives forth with 
sound predictions even nowadays. He is 



of all forms 
makes a poinl 
Aware of the 
■n war, the ut 
nic bomb etc. 



; fro 



of 



mtal : 



iatui 



The 



3elf-e 



thing about Gem -back's predictions is that 
he is generally not vague, but direct and 
descriptive, accui-atelv foretelling in detail 
what he expects. And time has a way of 
proving him right. 

A study of Gernsback's career in technology and science fjoilf.ii shows lhat he is 
one of the rare types who can see a lot 
farther than his nose, but not in nebulous 
fantasies alone. His detailed des 



of he; 



t the 



blind, talked about during the ea 
teen twenties, are amazingly accurate 
forecasts of what we are developing today. 
The same is true of the brief he held for 
electronic television when it was the fashion to predict that the mechanical scanner 
would lead the field. 

You can't ignore a man like that. Gernsback is representative of the finest type 
of amateur scientist, professional technician and eternal science-fiction fan! 



115 



GORDAK'S CARGO 

By Milton £eM&i 




The girl continu»d to jtruggla 01 the n*t wat heuled up to the ship. ■ i ■ 



Gordak collected freaks from all over 
the Solar System. What he didn't know was 
that he had become their helpless captive! 




A WISTFUL look crept into 
the spaceman's eyes. He raised 
his glass of fiery ptah to the 
tourist who had cornered him here in 
Kelly's Marsport Bar, and said: "Yes, 
I knew Gordak, and I know the story 
of the Snow-maid. It's been a long 
time." 

"Tell me," the tourist insisted. The 



story of Gordak and the Snow-maid 
had become, in. t/n years, half legendary. Twisted, distorted, it was a veritable saga of the space ways, a 
chimera tale for the eager tourists. 

The spaceman lost himself for a 
time in the amber depths of his drink. 
"To understand," he mused, "you'd 
have to know what Gordak was like. 

L7 



118 



 



And you'd have to know the albino 
girl, Snow. Then there was B'jak of 
the Spider People. You'd have to 
know 'em all." 

"Tell me," the tourist said again, 
eagerly. 

The spaceman drank deeply of the 
heady ptah. "We've come a long way 
in ten years." he said. "A decade ago, 
any extra-terrestrial being not quite 
human was fair prey for the interplanetary circuses. The most fabulous of all was Gordak's, yet Gordak 
himself wasn't quite human. . . " 

Gordak elbowed his way to the 
imported mahogany bar of Kelly's 
Marsport. Spacemen and tourists 
alike moved over readily enough to 
give him all the room he wanted. 
There was something of the macabre 
about the gnarled little half-breed, 
something distasteful and horrid' which 
told people to avoid him. 

Carstairs, however, didn't. He 
pushed his way through to Gordak's 
side and asked, "You're Gordak, 
aren't you?" 

The gnarled little man nodded. 
"You are punctual, I see, Mr. Carstairs. Can you take a spaceship up 
as promptly?" 

"I sure can," Carstairs told him. 
Despite the fact that he was unemployed, he was proud of his spaceman's training. Carstairs could astrogate, and he knew it. His unemployment, of course, did not indicate a 
lack of ability. 2139 was a lean year 
in which the outer-world colonists had 
settled down seriously to the task of 
civilizing the virgin worlds. As a consequence, Luna's astrogation school 
had gradtiated a considerable surplus 
of first-rate astrogators. Carstairs 
had been caught in the shuffle. 

Now he needed a job, badly. The 
rat-race of the legitimate freighter 
service had red-taped his credentials 
on the wrong end of a long waiting 



list. Thus it was that he turned to 
Gordak. 

He showed him the photostat of his 
credentials. The half-breed gave them 
a cursory examination and, satisfied, 
he nodded. "You'll do, Carstairs — 
with one reservation." 

"What's that?" 

"You are to astrogate for me, that 
is all. Outside of that, you are to mind 
your own business." His voice was an 
odd mixture of the deep-throated Martian and the accents of an earth bred 
human. "I'll pay you well: fifty solar 
credits a week." 

If Carstairs sensed the hidden menace in his employer's tones, he ignored it. He said that the set-up 
suited him fine, and when Gordak returned his credentials, he followed the 
little half-breed out of the Marsport 
Ear and hurriedly through the chill 
night air of Marsport Avenue to the 
spaceport. 

HTHE SPACESHIP was one of those 
old freight-tubs which had been 
converted for circus use, with, thirty 
years of extra-asteroidal service behind it. Carstairs realized with a smile 
that this was no Star Queen he was 
getting, and when he mentally compared the smooth lines of that great 
luxury craft with the stubby silhouette of Gordak's P. T, Barnum, he 
chuckled softly to himself. Well, these 
days a job was a job, and Carstairs 
felt thankful enough. 

His first surprise came when Gordak told him to biast off at once. 

"But I'll have to compute an approximate orbit to our destination," 
the astrogator argued. 

"That will not be necessary," Gordak assured him, "since we are not 
yet ready to leave Mars. You will 
rocket the Barnmn to the South-Polar co-ordinates I have designated on 
the chart, At once, Mr. Carstairs." 

Carstairs shrugged and sat down 



©ORDAK'S CAR&O 



119 



in the pilot's seat. He coutd not imagine what Gordak could possibly want 
on the barren tundras of the south-polar region. Equatorial Mars wasn't 
much warmer than Earth's temperate 
zones in mid-winter, but life was at 
least possible. People referred to 
South Polar Mars as the Ice Box, 
and they weren't kidding, even if the 
term were a bit antiquated. Utterly 
lifeless, except for the fanciful rumors 
of the Snow People who existed deep 
within the mountain grottos. Surely 
Gordak wasn't the type to be taken 
in by mere rumor. . . 

When Gordak had not returned for 
three days, Carstairs became restless. 
He had eaten and slept in a monotonous routine and he had read a few 
books from Gordak's library, but the 
endless white blanket of snow outside and the hot-house atmosphere of 
the P. T. Barnum had combined to 
make him restless. Snow Man or whatever Gordak sought out there on the 
ghostly white tundra, he wished the 
little circus-master would find it. 

On the morning of the fourth day 
his boredom got the better of him. It 
may be that he forgot Gordak's warning to mind his own business, or it 
may be that he discarded it in favor 
of the driving impulse of his own restlessness, but at any rate, he left the 
pilot's quarters and descended a ramp 
into the tubby 'low-decks of the ship. 

He came upon the spider man without warning. One moment he stood 
in what had been the main hold of the 
converted freighter, the next, he had 
opened a door and strode into a dimly-lit cubicle. 

The spider man clung with eight 
legs to a gossamer tapestry of countless silver threads, weaving a fairyland of imagery upon the warp and 
woof of his own secretion. The shaggy 
head, as big as a man's, oddly gave 
the suggestion of a neck-like attach


ment between itself and the thorax 
as the creature turned to regard Carstairs. The eyes that stared at him 
were big and lidless, yet almost human. 

"I am B'jak," the words came 
from the spider-mouth in clacking 
monosyllables. 

"You — speak ! " gasped Carstairs, 
amazed. 

"And why not?" the creature called 
B'jak responded. "As a matter of fact, 
my friend, I am something of a linguist. My webs and my knowledge 
of language — these keep me occupied 
when otherwise Gordak's strange trade 
would drive me insane. Of course I 
speak: I have mastered fourteen languages, mostly outer-world dialects, 
with which I amuse myself." B'jak 
dropped soundlessly from his web to 
the floor. He clicked again: "Since 
you are fully human, you are obviously not a new addition to Gordak's cargo. I assume you are the 
new astrogator." 

Carstairs told him he was. But his 
thoughts whirled hopelessly distant 
from his role here on the P. T. Barnum. This spider man had intelligence equal to a human's. Yet he was 
caged to perform at Gordak's shows; 
chained to the will of Gordak; his life 
a feeble flame which Gordak could 
snuff out with no consequences whatever. 

TTHE SPIDER-HEAD nodded on 
the suggestion of a neck. "I 
know what you think, astrogator. 
Someday, perhaps, this will not be. 
In the meanwhile, Gordak accentuates the gravity of the situation by — " 

Carstairs had not heard the outer 
lock open, so engrossed had he been 
with the spider man. Nor did he hear 
Gordak, relieved of his space-suit, 
come stomping down the corridor. 
The door opened suddenly. 

"Mr. Carstairs," the half-breed's 



no 



 



tones were ice, "I thought I told you 
to keep to your instruments. If you 
will be kind enough to leave?" 

Wordless, Carstairs withdrew. But 
something told him io remain within 
sight of the open doorway, and he 
did. He saw Gordak remove a coiled 
lash from his thick belt, saw B'jak 
cower in a corner opposite his web 
of tapestry. Gordak approached the 
web. He looked at it. If there was 
admiration on his face, it left quickly, and Carstairs could see auger 
replace it. 

He watched the lash flick up and 
then down in sure strokes. It slashed 
cruelly into the silver tapestry, and 
moments later, all that was left was 
a tangled mass of gray cottony stuff. 
B'jak cowered in his corner, as a 
spider might retreat to the furthest 
corner of its web when a housewife 
appears with her broom. But, muttering to himself, Gordak left the cubicle. 

In the corridor, he collided with 
Carstairs. He glared at the astrogator, almost on the verge of raising 
his lash again. Finally, he turned on 
his heel and disappeared down the 
corridor. 

Carstairs returned to B'jak's cubicle and called the spider man's name 
several times, but B'jak remained sulking in his corner, unaware of him or 
choosing to ignore him. After a time, 
he returned to the pilot's quarters. 

Presently, Gordak entered. He made 
utterly no reference to the incident 
and Carstairs for his part had no 
desire to broach the subject. Gordak, 
in fact, seemed entirely pleased with 
something. He even smiled his mirthless smile, as he told Carstairs to compute an orbit for Earth. "You may 
radio ahead to New York spaceport," 
Gordak concluded, "and blast off 
whenever you are ready." 

The computation of an orbit is not 
hard work. Much of it is mechanical, 



since the orbit is only a temporary 
one anyway, allowing plenty of room 
for what the spacemen call "ether 
drift" or for any chance encounter 
with cosmic debris. As one half of 
Carstair's brain computed, the other 
half actively considered the strangeness of his employer. Could the apparent motiveless malignity of Gordak 
be explained by the appearance of the 
man ? His body was gnarled and twisted, forged in heli-fires by a cross-eyed 
demon. And his face was a catastrophe. Thick and leathery Martian skin 
hung in great folds from the gaunt 
cheek-bones, draped loosely over the 
sunken cheeks, puffed as if filled with 
air under the deep-set eyes. The nose 
was twisted and broken, it seemed, 
in a score of places, and the mouth 
stretched out in a perpetual leer made 
all the more hideous when Gordak attempted to smile. 

Now, thought the astrogator, If 
Gordak sensed that bis features instilled nothing but revulsion for him 
in men, did he attempt to save his 
warped self-respect by asserting his 
own superiority over the other world 
denizens in his circus troupe? 

Did Gordak vent a thoroughly agitated spleen on B'jak the loan Spider 
Man and the score of other performers 
under his control ? Carstairs found 
this to be a distinct possibility, and 
his attempted indifference to Gordak's 
policies began to move aside and prepare for the entrance of hatred. 

All this went through his mind as 
he computed the orbit, but he forgot 
it momentarily when he pressed the 
blasting levers and lifted the P. T. 
Barnum off the southern tundras. In 
a few moments, Mars became a big 
red globe through the rear observation scope, and in another few moments, Carstairs had turned the ship 
over to automatic, stood up, and lit 
a cigarette, 

Gordak called him through inter


SORDAK'S CARGO 



121 



com. "Mr. Carstairs," the voice said, 
metal-toned, "I need some help 'lowdecks." 

Now, the astrogator knew this 
wasn't part of his job, but on the 
other hand, the entire crew of the P. T. 
Sarnum consisted of himself and Gordak. If Gordak wanted him he had no 
choice but to obey. Putting out the 
cigarette, he descended the ramp and 
searched for Gordak. 

'"THE CIRCUS net is an ingenious 
affair. As he neared his employer, 
Carstairs realized that. Whatever Gordak sought upon the tundras of the 
south polar region, it was apparent he 
had found it, apparent that it twisted 
and writhed futilely now in the net. 
On the outside it is like any other net 
of strong wire mesh, but on the inside 
it is sticky like the web of a spider. 
The more a captive animal struggles, 
the more entangled it becomes. 

"As I open the net," said Gordak, 
panting, "you grab the creature if it 
attempts to flee." 

Carstairs nodded. Gordak's hands 
manipulated the zipper front of the 
net, and presently Carstairs could see 
within the opaque mesh. At first there 
was nothing but a gleaming whiteness, 
but as Gordak spread the opening 
apart to relieve the adhesion, he saw 
an arm, a delicately molded arm of 
glistening white, of a pale sparkling 
white that only the Martian snows, 
untouched and utterly virgin in the 
thin, dustless air, could match. 

"I will call her Snow," Gordak 
declared as the gir! sat up, as one 
might matter-of-factly dub a pet mongrel. 

The girl stood free of her prison 
slowly, like one unaccustomed to the 
newness of a situation, and in no hurry to find out about it. Carstairs 
gasped. If he had ever seen so beautiful a girl before it was in one of 
those fanciful dreams which comes 



once in a lifetime and which you 
know is a d:eam because of the 
impossible beauty of your vision. 

He had to admit, grudgingly, that 
"Snow" was a good name. The whiteness of the girl was of new alabaster, 
of the flawless white that a pearl 
tries to capture but cannot. Even the 
hair, flowing in a cascade of tresses 
almost to her waist, was a sparkling 
silver, an incredible billowing of molten mica. 

Carstairs blushed. The crown of 
that silvery head reached not to his 
chin, and from it to her delicate feet, 
the girl stood naked. Hurriedly he 
draped his long spaceman's jacket 
over her shoulders. It hung loosely 
half-way down the whiteness of her 
legs and the girl looked quizzically at 
Carstairs as if to say, "Now, whatever did you do that for?" 

He smiled at her reassuringly, and 
she smiled back, then said in a voice 
of molten silver, "Quey esi kor?" 

"Honey," Carstairs responded, "I 
don't understand a word of it, but 
don't you worry. Don't you worry 
about a thing." 

"Oh, come now," chided Gordak, 
fumbling with Snow's arm and leading 
her back towards where B'jak's and 
the other cubicles lay. "She's an outerworld creature, Mr. Carstairs. She may 
look human to you, but that shall 
merely be her appeal to our audience. 
She's hardly human, you know." 

Carstairs snorted angrily. "She is 
human!" he insisted. 

For a long while Gordak stared at 
the incredible whiteness of his prisoner. "Perhaps," he mumbled thickly, "perhaps she is almost — woman. 
Yes—" And frowning, Carstairs saw 
something which must have been dead 
a long time come alive in Gordak's 
eyes. 

As the days passed, Carstairs saw 
almost nothing of Snow. Somewhere 
'low decks she lived in her little cu


122 



 



bicle along with B''jak and the other 
members of Gordak's troupe. As for 
Gordak, the man seemed oddly distracted, like a sleep-walker who awoke 
long enough to snap a cursory order 
or two at his employee, but who 
walked about for the most part completely withdrawn. Once he did see 
the two of them together, when Gordak 
took the girl 'bove-decks for a costume to match her strange beauty. 
The half-breed seemed immensely 
pleased with himself, hut Carstairs 
was aware of a new look in the innocent expression of Snow, a look 
which both questioned and pleaded 
and which, he realized angrily, had 
something of fear in it. He tried to 
catch her eye, and when he fancied 
he did he essayed a brief -smile but 
if Snow saw it she gave it no heed. 

Carstairs found himself grumbling 
half aloud, and for want of something 
better to do, he took the ship off automatic and piloted it himself for a 
while. 

ry\E MORNING when they had 
perhaps bisected the distance between Mars and Earth, Gordak 
seemed oddly unnerved. With Carstairs he had always been taciturn, 
although for him that implied a certain amount of sharpness which bordered upon irritability but never quite 
reached it. He told the astrogator: 

"In the future, Mr. Carstairs, 
whenever my work calls me 'lowdecks, I want you to accompany me. 
Bring this," he added, and gave Carstairs a p.g. gun. 

The wicked, snub-nosed proton-grid 
pistol was deadly at close range. Carstairs knew, but that didn't bother 
him. In the event that it was necessary, he knew he could handle the 
weapon. But why should Gordak suddenly need him in such a capacity? 
His sadistic handling of the troupe, 
as evidenced by B'jak, had resulted in 



nothing but a stoney hatred. Now if 
he felt danger lurked ! Iow-decks— 
Carstairs frowned. 

That very afternoon— for convenience, interplanetary voyages are run 
on earth mean time— he joined Gordak in a descent of the ramp. He had 
never seen the creatures of Gordak's 
troupe in their period of recreation, 
but it was apparent to him that they 
could not remain indefinitely in their 
tiny cubicles. What had been the main 
hold of the ship was converted into 
a sort of bare lounge, and to this they 
made their way. 

Never had Carstairs seen anything 
like the scene which met his eyes. If 
a Djinn conducted him on a tour of 
fairyland where elves and gnomes and 
giants and other nameless things 
might play, he would have seen something like it. All the odd creatures 
of a dozen faraway worlds milled 
about in little groups talking. At first 
it seemed impossible to Carstairs that 
they could so talk among themselves, 
but then he was aware of the dark 
bulk of B'jak scurrying about from 
group to group, clicking rapidly with 
his strange voice. For all these creatures the spider man was a master 
linguist ! 

Carstairs took all this in with one 
swift glance, and he would have noticed more, except that at that moment 
he saw Snow. He would have noticed 
that as Gordak entered the lounge, 
the tones of the score of voices 
changed. The languages, of course, he 
could not comprehend: there was no 
Lingua Franca among the denizens 
of Gordak's cargo. But the tones 
changed : resentment replaced what 
had been a babble of conversational 
voices; resentment which Gozed hatred 
in a score of different languages. 
B'jak's clacking became sharper, agitated, frenzied. Then it became sullen, and all the voices were silenced. 

None of this Carstairs noticed. He 



GORDAK'S CARGO 



123 



saw Snow. If he had thought the girl 
beautiful in her wild innocence that 
first day aboard the circus ship, he 
thought her vastly more so now when 
fear covered the innocence like a 
cloak. This time he was sure he had 
caught her eye and when he smiled 
again, she hesitated, almost as though 
for an instant her heart poised undecided before the next beat. Carstairs 
realized that perhaps she associated 
him with Gordak. But then she smiled 
wanly herself and the fear crept from 
her face as he neared her, 

"Keep your gun ready, Mr. Carstairs," Gordak barked, sending his 
creatures one by one through their 
acts. "Step back against that wall, 
please, and remain alerted." 

Carstairs shrugged helplessly and 
did as he was bid, accutely conscious 
of the fear again on Snow's face. 

He drew his eyes away from the 
girl and watched. Now Gordak's rubbery Callistian gyrated about the 
lounge, manipulating his body in incredible contortions. Carstairs knew 
his limbs and torso were jointed like 
the body of a serpent rather than a 
man's, yet still he watched, fascinated. 

A stumble, a mis-step, the slightest 
indication of what to Gordak was an 
unwarranted clumsiness, and the little half-breed would snap his whip, 
shooting the thin lash out across the 
bare shoulders of the Callistian. That 
it hurt was evident by the fact that 
the creatures winced and stumbled all 
the more, but it seemed accustomed to 
such treatment. Gordak felt no fear 
at this point, for he forgot Carstairs 
completely and went about his business, his face twisted in the leer which 
passed for a smile and which Carstairs felt certain had nothing of 
mirth in it. 

A HALF dozen other creatures performed under the tutelage of 



Gordak's whip. Then a giant of a man 
stepped forth, human in form, but 
eight feet tall and proportioned like 
a Hercules, with slate-gray skin and a 
single big green eye surveying Gordak severely from the center of the 
great forehead. Carstairs had heard of 
this creature, had heard of the fabulous strength of Polyphemus, Gordak's Tritonian Cyclops. He watched 
now as the towering being performed 
his feats of strength, bent his metal 
bars, lifted his huge metal weights. 
For all the strength indicated, there 
was something gentle about Polyphemus, and Carstairs saw his utter 
indifference to Gordak's whip as the 
circus-master employed it for what he 
considered a shoddy performance but 
for what, in truth, left Carstairs 
amazed. 

He turned away, slightly sick. Almost human these creatures were — 
surely with as many human traits as 
Gordak himself possessed, yet he treated them like dumb brutes. Well, Carstairs could understand their hatred, 
but he had to admire the Stoical indifference displayed by the performers. He admired it, but he pitied it as 
well. 

Then it was Snow's turn. An angry 
buzzing came from the score of alien 
throats. Their indifference was replaced by hostility. Carstairs could 
sense that, and so could Gordak. 

"Keep your gun ready!" he ordered. 

Carstairs fingered the gun and then 
replaced it in his pocket. B'jak 
crawled over to him and said, "Greetings, astrogator. I see you watch our 
antics." 

Carstairs smiled. He liked the spider man. "It is an order," he explained. 

"Your weapon — " B'jak began, but 
he left the sentence unfinished, aware 
that Carstairs was not listening. 

Snow had started her dance. 

Gordak had robed her in a trans


124 



 



lucent gown of palest blue, a film of 
clear sea-water on the moon's surface 
as Snow's limbs sparkled and flashed 
beneath it. That the dance had captured within it all the voluptuous 
grace of her sex, this Snow did not 
know. That her supple gyrations 
flowed like a stream of the molten 
silver her hair resembled, this too she 
did not know. But Carstairs realized 
it; he knew that .Gordak's albino girl 
danced with an inherent femininity 
which would make all other women 
seem as stiff as automatons. 

Gordak's albino girl! He did not 
like the sound of it. 

Around the room and around again 
whirled Snow. She was lost in the 
maze of her motion: nothing else mattered. For a time, Gordak too seemed 
lost in the beauty of what he watched. 
But there was something loathsome 
about his eyes as they followed 
Snow's flowing pirouettes. The ugliness of his frame, the demoniac countenance; these were as nothing: the 
eyes were pits of hellish desire, intent 
upon Snow! 

After a time, the girl saw Gordak's 
face. She trembled a little, she forgot 
her dance. She stumbled momentarily 
and whimpered, uncomprehending but 
afraid. With an effort Gordak shook 
his head to clear it. He struck out 
with his lash, flicked it across the 
girl's white shoulder. 

A score of throats groaned, muttered, threatened in a score of languages, Stoic no morel 

Snow winced and stumbled again. 
The whip flashed out. Polyphemus 
the Tritonian Cyclops stood up. His 
great barrel of a chest heaved. He 
strode forward one giant step, and 
another. 

B'jak clacked a warning at him in 
some unknown language. 

Polyphemus' giant fists clenched 
and unclenched. A great tear welled up 
in his Cyclops eye, gushed forth, rolled 



down the length of his nose, splashed 
on his tunic. The giant was crying! 

W/'ITH AN oath, Gordak turned 
upon the huge figure. He 
looked long and long into the great 
eye, then he shrugged. "Enough for 
now," he told Carstairs, chuckling. 
"Do you like my show? On earth 
they'll love it. And how they will 
adore my Snow!" 

Wordless, Carstairs watched the 
little figure mount the ramp. Gordak 
turned once and glanced at Snow, 
slumped against a wall, head bowed. 
For an instant that look of loathsome 
intent crept again into his eyes. Then 
he wheeled about and strode up the 
ramp. Carstairs fingered the p.g. gun 
in his pocket, took it out, sighted up 
the ramp towards Gordak. Cursing, 
he hurled the gun to the floor. 

A moment later, he was aware of a 
pressure on his thigh. He looked down 
and saw B'jak the spider man pulling for attention at his trouser leg. 

"She's been here less than a week," 
the loan clicked, "and already they all 
love her." 

"What do you mean?" 

"I have never seen anything like 
it. There is not a being in this lounge 
who would not die for Snow. She is 
so kind, so divinely simple, so understanding. She feels for us all. Everytime Gordak used his lash, it is as if 
he used it on her. She cries. It works 
both ways, astrogator. You saw Polyphemus?" 

"I saw," said Carstairs. "He would 
have killed Gordak — " 

"I know. I stopped him. I cannot 
stop him indefinitely. That is why 
Gordak asked you to join him. If — " 

Overhead, a light winked on. Gordak's voice blared forth. "Mr. Carstairs, I told you you are to tend to 
your own business. Come 'bove-decks, 
please." 

As Carstairs turned to go, Snow 



GORDAK'S CARGO 



12S 



confronted him. She stood on tiptoes 
and peered into his eyes as if in that 
way she could understand him better 
than if she had known him all her 
life. For a long while she peered 
thus, one hand soft and warm on 
t Carstairs 1 shoulder. Then she backed 
away, smiling at him. "Klar esni o 
nan," her voice tinkled. 

"What does she say?" Carstairs 
demanded. 

"She says," B'jak told him, " 'this 
one is different.' " 

COR THREE days Gordak said 
^ nothing beyond what was absolutely necessary to Carstairs. Each 
lived in his own private world of 
thoughts, except when Gordak had a 
desire to venture 'low-decks, at which 
time he ordered the astregator to 
accompany him. 

The P. T. Barnum was coasting 
in free-flight now, and Carstairs knew 
that in a matter of hours he would 
have to begin deceleration. Already 
the lopsided dumbell of the earthmoon system assumed big proportions in the observation window, 
growing all the time. Here in space, 
with no atmosphere to intervene and 
discolor, the moon seemed as silverwhite as the delicate skin of Snow. 

Gordak entered the pilot chamber. 
From the way he weaved uncertainly 
against first one wall and then the 
other of the narrow passageway, Carstairs knew he had been drinking 
heavily. It reminded him oddly of 
the days when each spaceship floated 
in space without a gravity-equalizer. 

The gnarled hand of the half-breed 
rested heavily on his shoulder. "Mr. 
Carstairs," he said, "I am going 'lowdecks." 

Carstairs got up, preparing to put 
the ship on automatic. 

Gordak shook his head. "That will 
not be necessary. Just give me your 
gun." 



The pilot looked at him. Hell, he 
thought. There's no telling what he 
might do down there. But Gordak was 
his employer. Besides, it was Gordak 's weapon, not his. And jobs were 
scarce. He remembered a week on 
Mars when he had not eaten enough 
to keep the desert chill out of his 
bones. 

He gave the p.g. gun to Gordak. 

The little man turned on his twisted legs and stalked down the passageway. For a time, Carstairs heard 
his steps grow fainter, heard them descending the ramp. Then, silence. 

He did not know how long he sat 
there, waiting. But presently a little 
whimpering sound reached his ears. 
He jumped out of his chair. Was 
that the voice of Snow? Silence. 

Came the whimper again. Lord, he 
was jumpy. He must not let his imagination run away with him. 

Carstairs heard the angry grinding 
of metal on metal, then a loud slam. 
Gordak had bolted the 'low-decks 
door. 

The circus-master's steps stamped 
heavily up the ramp. In order to go 
to his own quarters, he would have to 
pass through the pilot chamber. 
Tense — yet he knew not why — Carstairs waited. 

Gordak appeared in the doorway, 
leading Snow by one slim white arm. 
Carstairs stepped forward, muttering 
under his breath. He reached out. 

"Stop, Mr. Carstairs. I warn you, 
stop." Gordak levelled the gun at 
him, steadily. "Now back up. Sit 
down in your seat, please." 

Numbly, Carstairs retreated and sat 
down heavily. Snow looked at him 
again, mutely. This time she did not 
like what she saw, for she turned 
her head and cried softly. 

"Snow — " Carstairs began, but Gordak waved him to silence with his gun. 
Leading the girl behind him, he passed 
through the pilot chamber and into 



 



his own quarters. He closed and bolted the door behind him. 

Carstairs sat there dumbly. Gordak wouldn't dareHe heard an angry battering from 
'low-decks, the clash of metal pounding stridently against metal. Then a 
dull thud. The heavy tred of footsteps up the ramp. 

HTHE HUGE bulk of Polyphemus 
entered the pilot chamber. Behind him crawled B'jak. The great 
single eye of the giant stared at Carstairs for a moment, then B'jak 
clacked something. Polyphemus 
passed through the control room. 

Carstairs heard a great crashing 
sound, repeatedly, like the blows of 
some mighty sledge. He could picture 
the huge fist smashing against Gordak's door. Crashing no more — 

He heard an oath from Gordak, 
heard the blast of the p.g. gun and a 
cry from Snow. He stood bolt upright 
and ran for the passage to Gordak's 
quarters. 

A mighty arm thrust him aside. He 
fell back hard against the wall. 

Polyphemus plunged back through 
the pilot chamber, a kicking and clawing Gordak under one arm. The other 
arm, the one that had hurled Carstairs away, hung limp and bloody 
where the blast from Gordak's gun 
had ripped into it. Down the ramp 
the giant disappeared, 

"Mr. Carstairs!" Gordak cried. 
"Help me. Another gun in the 
chest — " 

Carstairs charged into Gordak's 
quarters. He couldn't let the Tritoni


an take a human like this, even if it 
were Gordak. He couldn't — 

He opened the chest in Gordak's 
quarters and searched about for the 
gun. He found it. 

B'jak touched his leg. "Why not, 
astrogator?" 

Carstairs pushed B'jak away, 
turned to descend the ramp. He saw 
Snow sitting on a chair, watching 
him, a tear in each eye, a crimson welt 
on the side of her face. Mutely, her 
eyes implored. She stared in that uncanny way of hers, reading Carstairs 
it seemed. Then she relaxed. 

Slowly, he dropped the gun. He 
heard screams dimly from somewhere 
'low-decks. He stood still, hardly 
breathing. He remembered B'jak's 
words again, "Why not, astrogator?" 

Later, much later, he jettisoned 
Gordak's body in space, watched it 
puff incredibly fast and float towards the moon. These space accidents were regrettable. 

"Well," said the tourist, after a 
long silence, "so that's what really 
happened. That's the story of Gordak 
and the Snow-maid." 

"That's the story," the spaceman 
nodded, finishing his ptah. He got up 
to go. 

"But wait," the tourist insisted. 
"What happened to Snow?" 

A woman walked over to the table. 
She took the spaceman's hand in hers 
and smiled up at him lovingly from 
under the mass of her billowy silver 
hair. 

"She got married," Carstairs said, 
kissing his wife on the forehead. 



THE END 



CRUSTACEAN PIGEONS! 

* By MAX LONG * 

THE HOMING instinct in pigeona and influence them, 
other birds as well as insects is a fa- So far no explanation is forthcoming, 
miliar phenomenon not rery well explained what the mechanism may be in such 
save in the latter case when it is realized 
that insects possess rudimentary — and in 
some case— highly developed parodies of 
radar equipment. Added to this homing 
mysterv must lie the crayfishl 
th 3 latter case when it is realized that 
Experimenting in the warm waters off 
the coast of Bermuda, scientists have 
learned that lobsters exhibit definite hornin;- capabilities. Tagged and marked lobsters were takes! rYom their given beds and 
deposited as much as five miles away. 
Within a short time the same lobsters were 
picked up. Many of the lobsters were 
dropped into the enormous depths of fifteen hundred feet of water. In spite of 
these obstacles, thev managed to make 
their way to their feeding beds. Tides and 
shifting water currents apparently did not 

TUNING FORKS 

■k By JUNE LURIE * 



primitive 
is so poor] 


■ organized compar 
n. The possibility 


d v 
of 


s system 
ith birds, 
radar of 


magnetic ^ 


■uled out at once 
wes are grounded 




e electroliminated 


by water, 
be ruled o 
couldn't t 


Suner-sode (j r fix: ts 

ut because the ene 
e created by a 


als 
obs 


■> seem to 
necessary 


leaves son 
so far bel 


e sort of mental \ 
:vm!lt that mental \ 


ibr 
ibt 


itioa, but 
it! mis. are 


essentially 
permit th 
Knowing 
to one ere 


dertrical in natu 

that this faculty 
ature of the sea, 




we can't 

available 
ill he in

t y. 


foresting 


o see if any othe 


a : 


ossess it. 


That it i 
fact that 


probable is born 
ish i ravel in grouj 




t by the 


Perhaps p 


rt of this is due 
the homing instinc 


a 


r omething 


similar to 







T 



'HE IDEA 



:artling. 



* * 




Dlmpo, holding tha tiny knifa, crept cloier and cloter to tha giant man of Pluto 
128 



The WAY of a WEEB 




It look a frightened little creature from 
Jupiter to f each these Earthmen a new twist 
to the adage: Death makes cowards of us all 



ACROSS the fringes of planetary space the ship of the line 
Virtus flung itself with comet 
speed and a comet tail of atomic flame 
from undamped motors. And huddled 
against a bulkhead sat Dimpo the 
Weeb, his three foot pipestem body 
shaken by sobs, his long ears droop


ing dismally over his thin cheeks, his 
huge, soulful brown eyes gushing oily 
blue tears. 

Ensign Fuller, passing through, saw 
him and heard him and screwed up 
his face in contempt. 

"What're you crying about now, 
Weeb?" Fuller demanded. 



129 



130 



 



"I'm afraid," Dimpo wailed in his 
high, thin voice. 

"Afraid? Of what?" 

"I don't know. Just afraid." 

"There is nothing to be afraid of," 
Fuller told him. "You are on the newest and finest type of ship in the Earth 
Fleet. There is not the slightest chance 
of our being overtaken or attacked by 
a ship of Pluto. You know that much, 
don't you?" 

"Yes." 

"Yes sir, when addressing an officer of the Earth Fleet. You're not 
talking to one of those scraggy prospectors." 

"Yes sir," Dimpo said dutifully. 

"Dimpo—" Fuller paused, his porcine features set in a smirk. "It is 
Dimpo, isn't it? Tell me, what walks 
like a man but has the soul of a 
worm?" 

"A Weeb, sir." Dimpo's eyes were 
downcast. In their three days out he 
had learned the routine. 

"What is it that can swim but is 
afraid of water, that would rather eat 
its dead fellows than go out and 
hunt?" 

"A Weeb, sir." 

"In other words, Dimpo, what is 
the lowest thing in all Creation?" 
"A Weeb, sir." 

"Except for a spit and polish wonder fresh out of Mars Flight School," 
a new voice said. "Nothing is lower 
than that." 

Fuller whirled, his skin blotching 
with anger. It was Crag, one of the 
prospectors they'd hauled off Jupiter 
v. 

For an instant Fuller thought of 
swinging on Crag. But the graying, 
stoop-shouldered man watched him 
easily, gnarled hands that had swung 
a pick from the Asteroids past Saturn 
balled into hard fists. 

"A Weeb," Fuller grated. "A Weeb 
and five crumby rock knockers. And 



we had to swing twenty million mil«i 

off course for thatl" 

"If we'd known the company we'd 
be in we'd have stayed there," Crag 
said. 

This time Fuller was definitely 
going to swing on him. The burly ensign bulled forward and -Crag set himself, an expectantly pleasurable grjn 
on his face. He dropped the grin when 
beyond Fuller's shoulder the captain 
appeared. 

r\IMPO WAS trying very hard not 
to cry. Re couldn't help be*ng 
afraid, any more than any other W>eb 
could help it. And now, with the captain's hard eyes on him. Dimpo 
shrank back and sobbed harder. 

"I've had enough of this," Captain 
Mackey snapped. "Nothing but trouble ever since you fellows and that 
jonah came aboard!" 

The captain's nerves were on edge 
as it was. Caught too far out in space 
by the sneak auaek from Pluto, he 
was racing to beat a probable blockade. Stopping lo pick up the five prospectors hadn't been in his plans at 
all. 

His eyes flickered to a porthole. 
"I've got a good mind to— He's a 
stowaway anyhow. He'd never got on 
board in the first place, if we'd known 
about him." 

Glaring at Dimpo, he shouted, 
"What's he crying about?" 

"He's afraid," Crag said. 

"He ought to be. We'll be lucky to 
see Earth, with a Weeb aboard." 

"Hogwash," Crag said calmly. "We 
got him from Deimos to Jupiter v 
without a crackup." 

Mackey shuddered. "Ugh. How you 
can stand a thing like that is beyond 
me." 

He pushed past Crag and marched 
toward the control room, Fuller falling into step behind him. 

The prospector shook his head. 



THE WAY OF A WEEB 



131 



"See, Dimpo?" 

"I'm sorry/' Dimpo said. "You 
should have left me on Deimos, with 
the rest of the Weebs. I try to be 
brave, like a human, but I just can't." 

"It's your glands," Crag said. "You 
can't help being the way you are." 

"I thought I'd learn, but I guess I 
never will. You should have left me 
on Deimos." 

Which was exactly what Crag was 
thinking. What had ever possessed 
him and his companions to take off 
from the moon of Mars with a Weeb, 
he didn't know now. They'd been, 
he recalled, a little drunk at the time. 
It had seemed funny, when Dimpo 
begged to go, to take him along. 

"A human ,is brave," Dimpo said, 
repeating his catechism. "A human is 
never afraid." He turned his immense 
eyes on Crag. "You're not afraid, are 
you?" 

"What's there to be afraid of?" 
Crag demanded irritably. 

The ship swung over into a sudden 
steep dive that almost tore his guts 
out. 

QN THE DARK screen the points 
of light grew larger, one by one, 
until there were six of them in a neat 
pattern. Peering over the radarman's 
shoulder, Mackey said, "Bracket one 
for data." 

Five of the light spots vanished, the 
remaining one growing large and 
bright. 

"Thirty thousand tons, about our 
own weight," the radarman said. 
"Speed, five Mach absolute, one Mach 
relative. Vector—" 

"I can see the vector," Mackey 
said. He thought aloud, "Maybe we 
ought to take them on. No, I think 
not." 

To the pilot he said, "Two degrees 
left. We'll cut back and outrun them, 
all except the last, maybe." 

Behind him, huddled among the 



five prospectors, Dimpo heard his last 
words. 

"They're going to get us," Dimpo 
sobbed. "I know they will." 

Mackey whirled. "Get that damn 
jinx out of here!" he shouted. 

"See, Dimpo?" Crag said. He led 
Dimpo from the control room and sat 
down beside htm on a pile of gear. 

"They'll get us," Dimpo bleated 
mournfully, the tears coursing down 
his cheeks. "I'm afraid, Crag." 

Disgusted with Dimpo as he was, 
Crag could not help feeling sorry for 
the creature. Weeb or not, Dimpo had 
made a fairly pleasant pet and companion. He had done his best to make 
himself useful, even bringing in a few 
tiny animals for food. 

"Look," Crag said kindly. "Look, 
Dimpo. They can't get us. Really they 

"Honest?" 

"Sure. The only ships Pluto's got 
that could catch us are too small to 
hurt us. And the big ones are a little 
too slow." He paused, wanting to make 
this clear. "You see, Dimpo, it's oh 
account of the high density on Pluto. 
The big ships have a poor mass-thrust 
ratio when they're operating near a 
large planet." 

"I don't understand things like 
that," Dimpo wailed. "I only know 
how I feel." 

"Well, take my word for it." Then, 
to change the subject, "Say, how'd 
you ever sneak up on those little Jupe 
cats so you could kill them? I thought 
those things could hear a pin drop a 
mile away." 

Dimpo stopped crying. His thin 
chest swelled with pride. "I sneaked 
up. Weebs are good at sneaking up. 
We can make ourselves light." 

That much was true, Crag knew. 
He had seen Dimpo almost float above 
the ground on a low density planetoid. 

"I don't understand things like 



132 



 



that," he said, evening the score deliberately. 

"I sneaked up," Dimpo continued, 
beginning to dramatize. He brought 
out a tiny knife with a half-inch blade. 
"Then I stuck them!" 

Staring up at Crag with a gleeful 
grin, he said, "That was good, wasn't 
it?" 

"You bet." The Jupecats ran to 
four inches in length and had no claws, 
but why make Dimpo feel bad? 

Then Ensign Fuller had to come 
along again and glower at the Weeb. 
The tears came once more, with renewed force. 

iiT OOK," Crag said to the captain. 

"I know how you feel about 
Weebs. But we learned this much 
living with Dimpo: a Weeb's got intuition. If Dimpo feels this bad, something's going to happen." 

Beside him, Morris, another prospector, said, "No fooling, Captain." 

They had left Dimpo in the care 
of the other three, for which Mackey 
was thankful. He was no more superstitious than any other spaceman, but 
no less. 

"Those Pluto ships are acting funny, and that's a fact ," he admitted. 

In the last half hour the dark ships 
of Pluto had grown slightly larger on 
the screen, but not much. They were 
definitely not trying too hard to close 
for battle. And that fact, among others, was making Mackey suspicious. 

Pluto had less ships of the first line 
than Earth. Pluto's ships were slower 
and no better armed. Then why had 
Pluto declared war suddenly, not even 
trying to take advantage of a sneak 
attack? 

It didn't make sense, not to a man 
like Mackey, who knew how important even a five hundred mile an hour 
advantage could be. 

"Captain!" the radarman called. 



"Those ships are carrying some kind 
of shields!" 

Mackey looked at the screen, saw 
that only two ships remained, and 
that those had grown larger. He 
rubbed his jaw. 

"We're just about in range. Give 
them a blast." 

Deep within the Virtus there was 
the whine of a roton. A long finger 
of light flicked out at the closer dark 
ship and fell short by a thousand 
miles. 

In reply there came a beam from 
the dark ship, also falling short. But 
there was now a change on the screen. 
The ships of Pluto were holding back. 

Mackey rubbed his jaw again. 
"They're steering clear. So it isn't an 
anti-neutron shield, otherwise they 
wouldn't be scared of our beam." 

He had a difficult decision to make. 
With Jupiter so close now his massthrust advantage had grown. At the 
very least he could figure a five minute lapse before the other Plutonian 
ships caught up. And he wanted information . 

"Maneuver Three," he decided. 
"Let's give them a whirl." 

TN THE CLASSIC pattern of Oneagainst-Two the three ships wove 
flaming paths through space, the Two 
trying to box the One and the One 
eluding them by sheer swiftness. Close 
to his receiver the communications 
man huddled, hoping to intercept a 
command that might reveal a coming 
maneuver. 

"Anything?" Mackey demanded. 

"Nothing," the communications officer grunted. He held up a hand and 
said, "Wait! They're calling us!" 

"What do they want?" 

"Surrender or die," the c.o. 'replied 
laconically. 

Everybody laughed, breaking the 
tension that had built up. "Reply?" 
the c,o. asked. 



THE WAY OF A WEEB 



133 



"No," Mackey told him. "They 
might have a lady on board. And I 
couldn't think of a nice way to word 

it." 

Amid more laughter the radarman 
said, "Two man scout ship out!" 

They watched the tiny ship break 
away from its darker mother ship and 
hurl itself toward the Virtus, Too 
small to carry heavy weapons, the 
scout ship was also small enough to 
outspeed the Virtus. And if it got 
close enough it could do sufficient 
damage to cripple the Earth ship. 

Watching the tiny thing come on, 
Mackey also saw a larger pattern 
evolving. He sucked in a jubilant 
breath. 

"Get set for a one degree swing 
left!" he barked, He watched the 
scout ship bore in closer. 

"Nail it!" 

The beam flicked out again, like a 
snake's tongue darting. It touched the 
scout ship briefly. For an instant a 
miniature sun blazed, and then was 
gone, and with it the tiny ship. 

"Now!" Mackey yelled. 

The Virtus heeled over, running 
wide open now with Mackey babbling almost incoherently to himself. 
He was going to catch the two Plutonians in line with each other. He was 
going to execute the beautiful and ancient naval maneuver of crossing the 
Tl 

"Now!" he crooned. 

They witnessed the awesome spectacle of a great ship atomizing, all its 
fissionables going at once. At a distance of millions of miles it would 
appear as a new star being born. Up 
close there was nothing but light. 
Light so incredibly bright that when 
it was gone the blackness of space 
was more intense than ever. 

<( 1VI Y G0D " said Ensign Fuller, 
A shocked for once into humility by what he had seen. 



For the rest there was a momentary 
silence. No shouting, no back slapping, no jubilation. For an instant 
they had looked into the furnace of 
Creation, all except Mackey for the 
first time. They felt hollow inside. 

And then Dimpo was with them 
again, racing ahead of his three 
guardians to throw himself at Crag. 

"Oh my," he wept frantically. "Oh 
my oh my oh my." Teeth chattering 
in -a paroxysm of terror, he flung his 
arms around the stooped prospector 
and clung tight. 

"Sure, sure," Crag said soothingly. 
He patted Dimpo's furry head. 

"What I saw," Dimpo said. He 
had been looking through a porthole. 
"Oh, what I saw!" 

"I know, I know." 

And over Dimpo's wailing the 
radarman said, "Captain! Something 
funny. That lone baby is trying to 
stick to us, not even waiting for its 
friends." 

Mackey looked and it was true. 
The remaining Plutonian ship was riding parallel, instead of running or falling away as it should have. 

"We'll knock them off too," Ensign Fuller exulted, and some of the 
younger officers joined him, their adrenals pumping again in the hope of 
a two-strike. 

Mackey disregarded them, his thin, 
lined face set in the memory of other 
battles, the knowledge lying heavy 
within him that no two battles ever 
had the same pattern. He had gambled 
his ship once in the hope of learning 
something. 

But he had learned nothing. So far 
there was no ace up Pluto's sleeve. 
And that didn't make sense. Nobody 
ever declared war in the certainty of 
losing. 

"Aren't they doing anything?" he 
fretted. 

The radarman twirled his knobs, 
trying for more detail. "Something," 



134 



 



he said. "They just kicked off another one." 
"Scout?" 

"No sir. Smaller. Too small for 
even a one man job." 

Mackey watched the thing grow on 
the screen from a pinpoint to an object the size of an orange. Definitely 
too small for even a one man job, he 
thought. And not moving fast enough, 
although faster than his own ship 
could travel. 

"Give it a burst," he ordered. 

His gunners were good. They hit it 
perfectly, the computers recording the 
object enveloped by the beam. 

They found themselves waiting for 
the flash. Only this time there was no 
flash. The object was now the size 
of a very large orange. 

Mackey cursed. "Something wrong 
with the detonator. Check it!" 

"It checks," he was told. 

They hit it again with the beam, 
and somehow Mackey and all of them 
knew that it was no good even before 
the beam touched it. Nothing was going to happen, and nothing did. 

There was nothing to do but run. 
The thing was only thirty feet or so 
in length, trailing white flame that 
twisted into corkscrew shapes as it 
twisted and turned and dodged, mimicking every move of the Virtus like 
a distant shadow. 

Except that now it was no longer 
so distant. A hundred miles, maybe, 
and even that being cut down slowly 
but surely. 

With the reflexes born of long experience and a mind devoted to a single business. Mackey had headed for 
Jupiter. In open space you were a sitting duck, but any planet might afford protection. And Jupiter was a big 
planet. 

They hopped the peaks and knifed 
down the valleys, too fast for safety 
and flying blind. And behind them 



came the tiny rocket, and now it was 
fifty miles away. 

And somehow they knew that when 
it hit them they were finished. 

They couldn't dodge it and they 
couldn't outrun it. And as they went 
around another peak they knew it was 
the last one, for the thing behind 
them was only a mile away and coming on with the dread certainty of 
doom. . . 

KTOW THEY lay in a deep crevasse, 
the ship resting on its tail. And 
above them through the methane and 
ammonia fog the ships of Pluto flitted, probing, seeking, poking fingers 
of light through the murk. 

"What happened?" someone asked. 

They had seen the flash behind 
them and sensed the explosion that 
must have caused it, even seeming to 
feel the concussion of such a blast, although it was impossible for them to 
have actually felt it. 

"It hit the mountain," Mackey 
said. 

And that was it. It had hit the 
mountain and he had reacted instantly, seizing the chance to drop into 
this great glacial crack in the planet's 
surface. 

Someone wondered aloud: "What in 
blazes was it?" 

Mackey knew, but the knowledge 
was bitter as gall in him, for there 
was not a single thing he could do 
with it. His face was wan and gray 
with the weight of the knowledge. 

"They dragged out the old proximity fuse," he said. "They tuned it 
to the metal of our hull and stuck an 
old fashioned molecular explosive ^ 
warhead on it and used a molecular 
motor for the rocket." 

He cursed savagely, awkwardly, a 
man not given much to cursing. "Not 
a damn fissionable on it, and that's 
why the beam couldn't blow it!" 

"But they've got the same metal oa 



THE WAY OF A WEEB 



135 



their ships as we have," someone else 
protested. 

"Sure, except for the higher density. And that's what the shields are 
for." 

Through the portholes they could 
see shifting fog, and now and then 
a vague light flickering. And sometimes there would be the darker movements that were shadows of the ships 
of Pluto. 

"They'll go away soon," Ensign 
Fuller hoped aloud. "They must think 
that thing got us." 

Mackey might have let him hope 
on, but honesty won out. "If they'd 
got us they'd pick up radiation from 
the crash. And as long as they're not 
getting it they know we're in one 
piece." 

"We could open a damper," Fuller 
suggested brigh'tly. 

"Too concentrated. Crash radiation 
would be scattered." The captain 
shook his head. "You might as well 
have it straight, men. We're alive, 
but that's about all. That mountain 
had enough iron in it to attract the 
rocket, and there's enough iron in the 
walls behind the ice in the crevasse 
we're in to keep them from picking 
us out of the landscape." 

In an agony of frustrated anger 
he banged his fist into his palm. 

"If we had some scouts of our 
own we might try a couple of decoys. 
Maybe one of them might get 
through." That was the c.o., already 
down to wishing for what might have 
been. "They can't have many of those 
proximity deals." 

"No," Mackey agreed. "Or they 
would have used one sooner." 

Again he banged his fist. "But 
enough, I'll bet, to take care of our 
main fleet when it heads up here!" 

The communications officer blinked. 
"I hadn't thought of that. We've got 
to get a warning through I" 

He reached for his microphone and 



Mackey batted his hand away. 

"One peep out of that and we're 
dead!" the captain snapped. "Why do 
you think I ordered all generators off? 
One emanation of any kind and they'll 
nail us." 

He shrugged. "No, here we are and 
here we'll sit." 

"Not for long," Crag said. "Not 
after the batteries run out." They all 
looked at him as though they'd never 
seen him before. 

But' the other prospectors knew 
what he meant. Their heads bobbed 
in silent agreement, their faces showing no fear but a certain resignation. 

"That fog is methane and ammonia," Crag reminded them. "Not 
water vapor. It's a couple of hundred 
degrees below out there." 

TT WAS NOT yet cold inside the 
ship, but that would (gome in time. 
Already the men were getting up to 
walk past the thermocouple for a 
quick look. 

That was the only activity. Except 
for Dimpo the rest was silence. 

.[ >iii!iio vv.-i.iled ujn cash'-rlv. dr-.-: .ji. 
Crag's best efforts to calm him. 

"I'll die," he wept. "I'm going to 
die. We'll all be frozen — " 

"Shut him up!" someone shouted. 

"There, there," Crag soothed. Too 
late for anything but kindness now. 
"We'll be all right, Dimpo." 

"If it weren't for that damn Weeb 
we might've been," the radarman 
said. His eyes lingered on an escape 
hatch. 

"They're going to throw me out!" 
Dimpo screamed. His little hands 
clutched at Crag. 

"Don't worry," Crag told him. 
"This is one tune the doors and windows stay shut." 

It was a gruesome joke, but at 
least he could still joke. Dimpo's 
great eyes regarded him with wonder. 

"You're not afraid, are you?" Dim


136 



 



po asked. "I'm afraid, Crag. I'll die 
here and I'll never gel to see Earth 
and all the brave people." 

"You won't miss much," Crag 
grunted. 

"Both of you shut up!" That was 
Ensign Fuller, the pink freshness gone 
from his cheeks. 

Dimpo lapsed into silence, the tears 
rolling down his face as he huddled 
close to Crag, And the prospector put 
his arm around the Weeb and held 
him gently, as he might have held a 

"Don't worry," Crag whispered. 
"Captain Mackey'll get us out of this. 
That's how he got all those medals on 
his chest, getting out of tough spots." 

Dimpo looked at the medals and 
was distracted for a moment. So many 
colors and so much glitter denoted an 
unbelievable amount of courage. 

And yet-^jCaptain Mackey seemed 
perturbed. He was pacing up and 
back, peering through the portholes, 
rubbing his hands over his face. Once 
he stopped and looked out a long 
time. 

When he turned back he seemed 
to have reached a decision. 

"Gentlemen," he said, "I think 
we'd better take off." 

"But they're still there!" someone 
protested. 

"More than ever," Mackey agreed. 
He pointed at a porthole and said, 
"Have a look." 

Peering out, they could see the 
faint shadows now and then. It seemed 
that several of them moved very slowly. 

"Looks like they're landing scouts," 
Mackey said. "They can't spot us 
from above, so the obvious answer is 
to send out surface crews." 

TN REALITY he was offering them 
a choice, a choice of dying one 
way or another. If they tried to take 
off they would certainly be blasted, 



either by an enemy beam or by another proximity rocket. 

And if they sat tight they were 
almost as certain to be discovered fay 
a searching party. 

It was a knowledge that sucked 
their bellies in tight. Maybe at that 
very moment there were dim figures 
on the edges of the crevasse; And in 
another moment there might be an 
eruption of flame and a terrible roar, 
and the end of them all. 

"A decision like this should be put 
to a vote," Mackey said. "As for 
myself, I'd rather go out with all guns 
firing. Think about it for a minute." 

They thought about it, all of them 
except Dimpo. The Weeb was too terrified to think. 

"They might miss us," the radarman said. "Maybe ff we just sit it 
out. . . " 

"If we only had some way of knowing how close they were," the c.o. 
fretted. "But to sit here like this — " 

Mackey nodded. "There's a way, 
all right. If one or more of us were 
to get up out of the crevasse. Then, if 
we remain undetected, we sit tight. 
If we're on the verge of being found, 
well, we'd have enough warning so we 
could get aloft. 

"Under the circumstances, however," Mackey continued, "I can't 
very well order anyone to do it." 

And they knew well enough why 
he wouldn't give such an order, To 
their enemy the intense cold was a 
daily hazard, and so was the greater 
gravity. But for an Earthman to climb 
a wall of ice, weighing what he would 
weigh on Jupiter, and knowing that 
a pinhole in his space suit would be 
sure death . . . 

Dimpo, as well as they, understood 
the situation. Yet he was certain that 
volunteers would come forward. Humans were brave, humans were fearless. Especially military men, with 
medals. 



THE WAY OF A WEEB 



137 



But the silence grew long and uncomfortable. And in the end it was 
Crag who broke it. 

"Hell," he grunted. "I'll do it. I'm 
used to operating in a space suit, 
, crawling around god-forsaken terrain 
like tiiis. And at least I know how to 
handle an ice-ax and a rope, which 
you military fellows probably don't." 

Suddenly it seemed to Dimpo that 
his heart had stopped beating. He felt 
no sensations at all, only a queer 
numbness. Crag was gone from Ms 
side, was getting into his space suit 
with the axe and the coil of rope 
at his feet. 

In another minute Crag would be 
gone. And he, Dimpo, would be left 
alone in this ship with all these men 
staring at him and hating him. As 
though he were a — a Weeb. 

All alone, he would be, with the 
only human who might protect him 
far on the outside. 

"I want to go too," Dimpo said. 

Strange, he hadn't wanted to say 
it. He hadn't willed his tongue to 
move. But there the words were; he 
could hear them and it was his own 
voice all right. 

"I want to go. Take me along, Crag. 
Take me with you," he was crying. 

He had his arms around Crag's 
middle, preventing the man from getting the space suit zippered up all 
the way. Very gently Crag tried to 
pry Dimpo loose. 

"You better stay here," Crag said. 
"You'll be safer." 

"Get away from him, you damn 
We?b!" Clutching hands seized him, 
but hs only held on tighter. 

"Let me go with you," Dimpo 
begged. "I'll help, honest I will!" He 
knew he couldn't stay here, not with 
the eyes staring at him full of hate 
and blaming him for everything. 

"I'll help. I will! I'll make myself 
light and help you and I won't get in 
your way or anything. Crag! Crag!" 



/"•RAG STOPPED trying to un^ clench his fingers, stopped pushing him away. The prospector's eyebrows were lifted as the gist of what 
Dimpo was saying struck him. He 
waved away the men who were trying 
so roughly to pull the Weeb from him. 

"Wait a minute," Crag said. "Wait 
a minute." 

It was going to be a climb up that 
wall of ice. It was going to be the 
worst climb he'd ever had, and it 
might just be the beginning. His 
weight would be enormous, but his 
strength would not increase with it. 

On the other hand, Dimpo, in proportion to his own weight, would 
have the strength of a giant! 

"Dimpo," he said, taking the tiny 
face between his rough hands. "Listen, Dimpo, do you really want to 
go?" ": '>-'■ 

"Really, really," Dimpo assured 
him, the oily blue tears flowing. 

"You won't get in my way? You'll 
watch my signals and do everything 
I tell you to do?" 

"I promise," Dimpo said. He had' 
heard prospectors strike bargains and 
he knew just how to word this. His 
great, moist eyes looked into Crag's 
and he said, "I give you my solemn 
oath as a— a Weeb." 

"O.K. Go get your suit." 

With a glad little squeak Dimpo 
ran for his small pile of gear. On the 
long haul from the Asteroids Crag had 
cut down an old suit of his own so that 
it fit Dimpo, and of all Dimpo's possessions that was prized most highly. 

It fit around his thin body loosely, 
complete as any human's space suit. 
The chemical heat packs, the insulation, even the small two-way communications set; everything was there. 
The helmet was too big; that couldn't 
be cut down; but he'd never minded 
that. 



138 



 



Then Crag's hand made the signal 
for "Let's go," and they were moving 
along together. 

Crag took a last look behind him 
at his friends and they jerked their 
thumbs upward. Hand in hand he and 
Dimpo went through the first lock. 
There was a quick hiss of escaping air 
and the lock was slammed behind 
them. 

Another lock and then one more 
and then the last one. 

They were outside the ship, standing off a tail fin in the shifting fog. 
The ship towered alongside them, 
and on the other side was the faintly 
gleaming ice. 

Crag shuffled his feet, saving himself the effort of lifting them. Behind 
him now, Dimpo did the same. The 
Weeb felt the pull of the planet, 
somehow greater than it had been inside the ship, and he took a deep 
breath and rid himself of the extra 
weight. * 

There was a set pattern to this 
kind of climbing and they fell into 
it. Crag inched upward and Dimpo 
stayed on his heels. 

For Dimpo it was easier. He needed 
only a tiny handhold. 

Time and again Crag's foot slipped, 
and each time Dimpo got a hand up 
to steady it. There was a glow of 
pride inside him. He was helping! He 
was really helping! 

The fog was an eerie thing to Dimpo. Accustomed to the crystal clearness of Deimos days and nights and 
the airless clarity of the Asteroids, 
he felt as a man might feel swimming 
in murky waters. The fog swirled and 
shifted gently, and sometimes he could 
see a short distance, sometimes only 
Crag's bulky form above him. 

He saw Crag's hand move now, in 
a desperate signal. Stuck, the signal 



said, and it was a feeble signal. Crag 
was tired. 

But he couldn't be! They couldn't ■ 
back down! They had to keep moving 
upward. To try to back down was 
sure death. 

Dimpo's hand tapped against Crag's 
foot: Keep going. And Crag's signal 
came back: Can't. 

There was only one thing for Dimpo to do. Breathing deeply, he made 
himself lighter yet. A gentle push and 
he moved upward alongside Crag. 
He got his arm under Crag's and 
lifted. 

It would either work, or it wouldn't. 
Either he'd be able to transfer some 
of his own weightlessness to Crag, or 
the. resulting tug was going to pull 
them both loose. 

Dimpo lifted. There was no tug. 
Crag moved upward again. 

TTHEY LAV on the icy surface, Crag 
letting some of his strength flow 
back into his muscles, Dimpo exhausted by the effort of will he had made. 
Overhead, shadows flitted. 

They had to move, they had to get 
going. Crag got up slowly, uncoiling 
the long rope. He fastened it clumsily 
but surely to a projection. 

For an instant Dimpo hoped they 
were going down. He didn't want to 
stay up here in this fog, not with those 
dark shapes above, not with the possibility that at any moment other 
dark shapes might appear closer. 

But Crag wasn't going down. Motioning Dimpo to stay close to him, 
he started away from the edge of the 
chasm, his feet barely lifting from 
the surface so as to conserve strength. 

They shuffled along, moving in a 
wide arc. They edged aroung a hump, 
they inched their way through weirdly 
shaped columns of ice that gleamed 
faintly green in the fog. 

There was a solid lump of ice in 



THE WAY OF A WEEB 



139 



Dimpo's stomach now. The crevasse 
was somewhere behind them now, but 
he didn't know where. If anything 
happened to Crag he'd never be able 
to find it again. 

But suddenly Crag was no longer 
there! Dimpo's body shook with panic. 
Like the stupid Weeb he was he'd let 
his mind wander, he'd lost Crag! 

He was all alone! 

And then, just in time to save his 
sanity, the fog shifted. Near a great 
chunk of ice he saw Crag's figure 
again. He ran, his little heart beating 
wildly, his lips moving in a vow never 
to let Crag out of his sight again. 

He stopped running. His heart 
stopped beating. Terror froze him in 
his tracks, then let him move only 
enough to fade into the shadow of an 
icy pillar. 

The fog had shifted again, and off 
to his right lay the bulk of a scout 
ship! 

And moving away from it and toward Crag were two smaller dark 
shapes ! 

Like wraiths, the men of Pluto. 
Tall, immensely tall, and thin as 
boards, even hi their space suits. They 
were used to such terrain; they moved 
surely ; they moved right for the 
place where Crag was! 

Without thinking, Dimpo switched 
on his two-way. 

"Crag I" he screamed. And then 
just a long scream of terror. 

TOO LATE he realized what he had 
done. The two shapes were 
stopped. Now they were moving again, 
but now they were moving purposefully. 

He'd given himself away. He'd given Crag away, he'd given all of them 
away! 

They hadn't known there was anyone around. They'd just been moving along, and they might just as well 
have passed within fifty feet of Crag 



or himself and never known. 

But now they knew. Coming from 
off to the right, they couldn't see 
Crag yet. But in another minute or so 
they would. 

The prospector was trying to work 
his way into the deeper shadows of 
some nearby icy humps. But he was 
moving at the speed of a snail. He'd 
never make it! They were getting too 
close! 

They'd get Crag! They'd kill him! 
And then he'd be alone, and he didn't 
know how to get back to the ship! 

Maybe there wouldn't even be a 
ship. Now they knew that it was close 
by. As soon as they'd killed Crag 
they'd have all those dark ships down 
here. 

What had he done? 

The only human who'd ever had a 
kind word for him, the only human 
who would protect hirn, and he'd cost 
Crag his life! 

THEY WERE moving faster now, 
those two tall shapes, faster than 
Crag could move. Another minute, a 
matter of seconds, and those terrible 
guns would eat the space suit off 
Crag, eat the skin and the flesh from 
him! 

Dimpo couldn't breathe, But he 
caught a deep breath, sucked it into 
his little lungs. 

He could- hear Crag stumbling, he 
could hear the two tall ones, their 
footsteps rapid now. 

But they couldn't hear Dimpo. Almost floating, with only enough 
weight to give him traction, he made 
no sound at all. To Dimpo the Weeb, 
his t knife with its half-inch blade hi 
his hand, this was old stuff. 

There they were now, right before 
him, their awful guns rigid in their 
hands. Their eyes were forward, intent on what was before them. 

Tiny Jupe cats hadn't heard Dimpo. 
Neither did these towering men of 



140 



 



Pluto. 

There they were, one ahead slightly and one a few feet back to the 
left. 

Nowl 

A SMALL cut, only a few inches 
in length. That was all. No need 
to pause. Faster than a shot the intense coid had done the work. It was 
inside the suit. The towering figure 
was still, frozen forever, a statue of 
ice. 

Once more. Slash. Another statue. 

It was easy, so easy. And there 
was Crag, still desperately stumbling. 

Dimpo floated around him, waving. 
For a moment he thought Crag was 
going to fall. He jumped forward and 
caught the prospector's arms and 
helped him regain his balance. 

Quickly he tapped the message: Are 
you all right? 

Crag nodded. That was good. He'd 
been terribly afraid. What if Crag 
were not all right? Then what would 
he have done? 

But Crag was looking back, pointing at the frozen figures behind them 
and then pointing at Dimpo. You? 
came the taps. 

Dimpo bobbed his helmet, waved 
the tiny knife to show how he had 
done it. He was happy, very happy, 
for the pressure of Crag's hand on his 
arm told him he had done well. 

Now what? Dimpo's taps went, and 
Crag's reply was: Back. And that was 
good, too, because more than anything 
Dimpo wanted to get back to the 
ship, to get out of this awful fog. ■ 

And Crag was wonderful. With the 
infallible sense of direction that had 
taken him across the barrens of Mars 
and the shifting sands of Deimos and 
a hundred other trackless places, he 
was picking his way back. 

Somehow Crag knew. Somehow 
there were signs that had registered 
in his brain, without him even thinking about them. 



Here were the icy mounds he had 
stumbled across in his flight, here 
were pillars of ice, here a jagged, upended cube gleaming faintly. 

Overhead a ship moved now and 
then, making a shadow. But not more 
ships than there had been before. 
They had received no message. 

And there at last the dark hull of 
the scout ship. It would be some 
time before it was missed. There 
would not be two patrols close- together. 

Not much further now, Dimpo 
thought happily. Just a little way and 
they would be at the crevasse. And 
.then a slide down the long rope and 
they would be inside the ship again. 

But Crag was stopping. He was 
looking back, at the scout ship. 

Dimpo's heart contracted in the 
clutch of fear. More scouts? It was a 
two-man, but maybe there'd been a 
third one squeezed in. He was afraid 
to turn and look. 

But Crag was turning him about. 
What was he doing? He was walking 
toward the small ship ! He was waving 
Dimpo to come along! 

Then the ship was directly before 
them and Crag was looking it over. 
Why, Dimpo couldn't see. It was just 
like the big ones, except in" size. The 
same . materials, even, except that it 
didn't have one of those shields 
around it. 

Now Crag was tapping the ship, 
making strange motions with his 
hande. What did he want? Try to lift 
the ship? 

It was impossible. With the first 
thrust of his thin shoulders Dimpo 
knew he could never budge this thing. 
A hundred Weebs might have lifted 
it, but not one. 

But that wasn't what Crag had 
wanted. He was going to tap it out. 
First he was pointing up along the 
side of the ship to an escape hatch, 
now he was pointing to himself, and 



THE WAY OF A WEEB 



141 



now tapping: Lift me. 

So that was it! The hatch was too 
high for him to reach, but maybe with 
Dimpo giving him a boost he could 
make it. 

Dimpo bent low, grabbed Crag's 
ankles. With all the strength he could 
muster he pushed upward, Crag helping as much as he could by pulling 
with his hands. 

Somehow he made it. He had the 
hatch open and was signalling Dimpo 
to come up. That was the easy part 
of it. A leap and he was up there, and 
Crag had a hand outstretched to help 
him in. 

And finally they were inside the 
main compartment and it was just 
like the other rockets Dimpo had 
seen. Crag had his suit off and was 
checking over the controls. 

And now Dimpo knew what Crag 
was going to do. He was going to 
take off in this ship! Before anyone 
knew what was happening he would 
have 'them both out of here! They'd 
be safe I 

He felt the ship lift. But why so 
slowly? It was only up a few hundred 
feet and Crag was stopping it. It 
was tilting, moving slowly to one 
side. It was dropping! 

It was dropping into that awjul 
crevasse, right alongside the Virtus! 

Dimpo began to weep. 

UOURE," THE captain said. "It 
^ wouldn't be too difficult. No 
tougher than shooting a flea off a 
dog's ear at a hundred yards, with a 
bow and a crooked arrow. Standing 
on your head, that is." 

Crag shrugged. "All right. It was 
just an idea. You don't like it, Dimpo 
and I can slide that scout back out 
of the ship-release port and try to 
make it on our own." 
Mackey laughed. 

"No, no, don't get me wrong. I like 
it. I'd like anything better than sit


ting here, wondering if this is my 
last breath." 

He looked at his men. "Well?" 

"It's a lousy break on mass," the 
radarman said. "We total more than 
fifty times the scout. We'll have to 
come darn close." 

"If we don't get hit before we even 
have a chance to try it," someone 
else grumbled. 

"If the dog hadn't stopped — " 
Mackey began disgustedly. "Look 
here, the man and the Weeb are 
waiting. They could have taken off 
without asking us; maybe they still 
have time. They're entitled to a fast 
answer. All right now." 

He raked his eyes around. 
"Hands!" he said. "All in favor..." 

The hands went up. There was no 
need to count. They were all tired 
of sitting and waiting for it to 9it 
them. 

"Good," Mackey said. 

He clapped his hands. "All right, 
engineers! Get those controls wired. 
And make sure those scout motors 
are absolutely balanced. When I push 
the button I'd better not throw a, 
curve." 

He was moving now, the gray gone 
from his face. Any plan was better 
than none, and if he died at least 
he'd die out in space, not in this miserable glacial crack. 

They all felt better now. The engineers vanished down the hatch to 
the ship-release port and came back 
trailing their wires. The radarman 
hummed as he leaned over his switches. Even Ensign Fuller sang snatches 
of a song about rocketeers not having 
ears but only holes in their heads. 

And suddenly Captain Mackey was 
shouting, "Belts, everyone! We hit 
it on all six!" 

His hand went up. "Five-fourthree-two-Hit ! " 

There was no sound, but Dimpo 
could feel the roar in his stomach. 



142 



 



He tried to cut his weight but it was 
no use. He couldn't catch his breath; 
it was all squeezed out of him. He 
couldn't even scream. 

Outside the portholes there was a 
gray wall a thousand miles high and 
it unrolled like a ribbon until suddenly it was gone and there was nothing but black outside. And the radar 
screen was spangled with ships. 

"Fire at will!" Mackey commanded, 
and threw the ship into a crazy spiral 
that gave the gunners no hope of hitting anything. 

The c.o. was pouring stuff into the 
transmitter, praying that enough of it 
got through even if he himself didn't. 

Too fast for them to keep track.. The 
defense computer was calling the enemy blasts: "Miss left port, miss right 
^il, miss right bow, miss. . ." 

They were all misses, some of them 
hundreds of miles off, some of them 
too close for comfort. 

"Dropped one behind!" the radarman yelled. A moment later he shouted, "Lost another!" The ships of 
Pluto were fewer on his screen, and 
each one left behind was a millstone 
from their necks. 

And then at last the only thing that 
counted, the thing they'd been waiting to hear. 

"Here it comes!" 

TT CAME from off their port side, 
from a thousand miles across the 
void, and it was a tiny thing, comparatively, a relic of bygone days. 

It was a missile off the military 
junk heap. It was a slingshot against 
Goliath. And it could do to the Virtus what the slingshot had done to Gohath. 

They watched it come on, watched 
it creep closer, watched its inexorable 
march across the screen. 

"Good thing they didn't use two," 
Mackey said, and picked up the wires 
and the makeshift switch. 



"She's off our bow," he said, checking the screen. "Put her on our tail." 

And they wasted a precious minute 
cutting back so that the thing now 
flew directly behind them. "How 
far?" the captain asked. 

"Hundred miles," the radarman 
said. 

"We'll wait. Keep her steady." 

They waited. They kept her steady. 
They watched their doom move up 
to seventy-five, to fifty miles, to forty 
miles. 

"Pray," said Mackey. 

He pushed a button and a red light 
went on. The release was open. He 
closed the switch. 

It was like being kicked in the 
back by a mule. A flash of fire and 
the scout ship was away, flying blind. 

It had to be close, it had to be 
awfuily close. It had to miss by less 
than a mile, otherwise the relative 
mass of the Virtus would remain 
greater. 

But it was less than a mile! It was 
far less! 

Like an angry hornet the proximity 
rocket spun, its dreadful affinity now 
centered on the closer ship. 

They watched the chase, they saw 
the flash. And then the sky was black 
and there was nothing but space between the Virtus and Earth. 

/"TRAG LOLLED in his seat, a cigar 
clamped between his teeth, and 
watched the blue ball that was Earth 
grow larger through the porthole. Beside him Dimpo sat and trembled. 

"Take it easy," Crag said. 

"Maybe they won't like me," Dimpo moaned. 

"With that medal on your chest? 
Why, you're a hero!" 

Dimpo fingered the medal Captain 
Mackey had pinned on him. It should 
have made him feel brave, but it 
didn't. All he could think about was 



THE WAY OF A WEEB 



143 



the people, the way they'd stare at 
him. 

I wish I was back on Deimos," he 
said. His lips began to quiver and 
the mositure welled up in his eyes. 

"I'm afraid, Crag," he wailed. 

Ensign Fuller, passing up the aisle, 
saw him and paused. "What's with you 
now?" he demanded. 

"I'm afraid," Dimpo wept. 

"Afraid? Of what?" 

Crag shifted the cigar and glared 



up at him. "Just afraid," he said. "A 
Weeb is always afraid. So what?" 

"Nothing," Fuller said. "So nothing." 

He patted Dimpo on the shoulder. 
"Don't worry about a thing. You'll 
be all right, Dimpo." 

"Mr, Dimpo," Crag said. 

"Mr. Dimpo," said Ensign Fuller, 
He was quite serious. 

THE END 



WHAT IS LIFE? 

By RAMSEY SINCLAIR 



FIFTY YEARS ago the bouswSesa enttmsiasm of physicists, chemists and bioloists, led them to believe that the prob


»ught in fifty years! Now, humbly the 
Bfltfste look around at their vast aclpiishments, and with subdued muttcr


They 



matter seems to come from the fact, that 
the genes and chromosomes of the cell 

nature of an electron or an atomic ewm fln> «m orderly ability? No 

ir?», or, "What is lite!" Yet in spite °"^™ w "- m ,„ . .„„ .„,. „,. ,,,, 

• failure to penetrate these mysteries, , There seem to be two basic universal 
ve made such aeag&BB is a -echani- iaws > i )ot at a!i connected m any way exay, that we're encouraged to probe f^I' by contrast In the physical 
r. The answer will come eventually. imU. the second 1— ■ 

Ihhikiafi man deludes himself any with its entropy ; 

• that he will see, for example, at. J™> ™"« 
lation of the mystery of life, in f he ™«- That ls - 1 

of a mechanical cleett'ieal picture. m thc universe see 

•allv this is the basic constitution hut common level. 

are subtleties still too remote and The 0 'h e . r law ' w 

ched. Consider what we know of Itv- "ftr * ton* 

miter and life. gamzation 


irmo dynamics 


ral "ru 


nnmg 
to be 


■ and B 


latter 


coming 
es appa 


really 


in whl< 


:h or

jrowth 


is thc 



:plai 



That the answei- tc 
in the study of the cell 
upon. And right now 
most important single 



robablv the which iloida for al1 in^ganic ma 

in i bioloffv The iesolution of this couflict is the 

s p-zzles in the of the solution of the problem, 

fact that'Vere 1 ^"no''sha?p'''iine between . Ir appears then, that the ultimate 

■ ■ ■ . . ■ . . . r a , ■ . ' tirm nf hn muatarw nf ifo lips 1 11 



. At his nebu- tion of the mystery ■ 



[ably c 



of huge chains. I 
Is they are alive1 though they repr 

more by crystalliz 



uses, crystals, 
ds of the stuIt is a long 



Where science fiction fan clubs get together. 

Conducted by ROG PHILLIPS 



THE NORWESCON is over at thia 
writing, and the next World Science 
Fiction Convention will be held at New 
Orleans next Labor Day. It will be the 
first held in the south, and should have 
a large attendance since it will be within 
reasonable traveling distance of all parts 
of the country. 

I met many old friends there and made 
many new ones. I will be at next year's 
convention. I understand Howard Browne 
will, too. He attended the Norwescon and 
was really sold on the convention! 

The Portland group did a fine job. Fandom has been very lucky in having such 
energetic and intelligent committees for the 
last few conventions, and were able to 
make a real success of it. I hope our luck 
will keep up. It would be tragic if some 
city got it and didn't do anything to make 
it a success. That is the one weakness of 
the present setup. If the time ever comes 
■when a city that gets the convention 
doesn't show signs of putting it over by 
a certain date, there should bo an alternate city to get it. But maybe not... because then the city that did get it would 
be behind the eight ball with a lot of 
fishy "eyes watching to see how they were 
doing. Actually each city that has gotten 
it so far has accepted the challenge and 
faced up to it, even when they discovered 
it was developing into a terrific amount 
of thankless labor. 

Just as soon as I hear from the New 
Orleans directors of next year's convention I will announce in this department 
where you can send your dollar to join. 

Frank Dietz sent me a letter after the 
convention which I'm reproducing here. It 
expresses the sentiments of us all. 

Rog; 

While the memory of seeing you among 
countless others of my fan friends again 
just two short weeks ago lingers close in 
the blur of my memories of the Norwescon in Portland, upon getting home now I 
thought I couldn't do less than write you 
(as one of the audience of The Club 
House) to tell you how we enjoyed having you there (as usual), though anyway 
you know that already; from what I saw 
you had as much fun as any one of us 
who attended. 

What makes me think though, and realize how lucky we are not only to be able 



to attend the conventions, but even sacrifice other things so we can attend, is the 
reactions of those fans I visited on my 
way home who didn't attend. It's the only 
trouble with really making people who 
love science fiction realize all the fun 
there is in a convention. Beforehand, you 
can only say a few hundred words in The 
Club House to urge them to join and attend; it takes a recounting afterwards of 
all the fun each of us had there to show 
them what they missed, and even then, one 
can't give full justice to it; undoubtedly 
my ideas of the most enjoyable moments 
differ from yours. 

Next year the 9th World Science Fiction Convention will- be in New Orleans, 
as you know, i?(|i;idi^l:inl between the East 
and West Coasts. Which I think will give 
the added enjoyment of seeing more attendees from the East — it was disappointing the poor showing we had to make 
as attendees from the East (east 
of the Rockies), really disappointing as I 
don't think there were many over 15 of 
us. But we really had a swell time, more 
than twice worth the trip. 

But then again I really liked the large 
turnout of fans and readers from the 
West — actually I believe the Norwescon 
set a record in having the largest attendance of local persons who were just 
readers till they heard of the convention 
in their locality. 

So now our keynote, our aim during 
the coming year, the Nolacon in '51: join 
now, and be in New Orleans for the convention when it comes next Labor Day. 
And may The Club 'House be as successful 
in digging up attendees as usual! 

Franklin M. Dietz Jr. 
P.O. Box 696 
Kings Park, N.Y. 

And now to the fanzine reviews for this 
month. The first two are written by the 
editors of the fanzines themselves, and 
they did a better job than I could have 
done. They're in business for themselves. 
Give them a boost by subscribing to their 
fanzines ! 

CATACLYSM', edited by Bob Briney 
and Del Close; 561 West Western Avenue, 
Muskegon, Michigan; 10c each, 6'50c. Here 
ia a nice, neatly done little poetry magazine, in a convenient pocket-sized format. 



144 



THE CLUB HOUSE 



Tliis third issue is put together a bit differently from the first two, being stapled 
at the left, hectograph ed on both aides, 
and having a mimeographed cover and 
contents-page. The editors-publishers met 
with difficulties in the way of gelatin 
and supplies, so tins ami the next issue 
are published for them by W. Paul Ganof Fan " 



Twelv. 



the 



offer 



Isabel 



, bv George Craig, Toby Duane, 
e E. Dinwiddie, Ed Roberts, Tom 
jton, Andrew Duane. Phillip Duke, 
Carrie Andrews. Perry Delane, Hamilton 
Parker, Lee Gann, and Orma McCorraick, 
in that order. In spite of the smaller fa


mth i 



othei 



retry 



very 



m;i, -a '.UK's, most of the 
ejscellent and as good as any that 
be found elsewhere. 

As the editor says in EDITORIAL EFFUSIONS: "Herein you will read of various and sundry unusual fantasies and 
honors, from Andre- * 



the 



rabtle 



of the mind in fih'MS in the Woodwork." 
With the material tins fanzine has, I predict it wilt no far— all it needs is a lot of 



FAX-FARE: bi-monthly; 16c, fi-'6Ge; 
. Paul Ganlev, 111) Ward Road, North 
-anda, New York; Associate Editor, 
t E. Briney. This fanzine continues 
ts policy of impr 



I 211 



;al e 
etter than 
and the p 
:o 2l> doubi


. The 



The 



. this 



DeWc, 



-off spot i 
pied by fan writer Euger 
tees off neatly with a humorous, 5000word story entitled THE EPIC OF COLONEL ARCHIBALD. In it, a Sirian mon


wsy 



■ lin 



»ide 



; pa 



of ] 



offered bv the cape.!ude them long 
oman full of truth 
ninals who had inissel, and otherwise 
otoi 



r the first time, Andy Duane 
ing from FAN-FARE: but his 
I-oby takes off in the old "Amazi 
iition with a short, short story 
iround the cover painting— a s 
Surtis Stewart, the artist who I 
three FAN-FA RE covers thus far 
Herman Stowell Kins, fan ai 
'ightly " 



FAN-FARE'S writers, finishes up the issue in grandiose style with a 2500 word 
tale written in a style worthy of a professional, while Don Martin & Ted Blake 
offer more variety in the form of another 
short, short story, sequel to ETERNAL 
PUNISHMENT in the previous issue, and 
reading much the same. 

Certainly not least in this issue's of


ferings is the page of book reviews, taken 
care of adequately by Ed Roberts, Eugene 
DeWeese, and Mike Phillips (no relation 
to Rog). And this ' 



of 



letrj 



aTl, 



by the Duanes, Phillip Duke, 
Kinzer, Keran O'Brien, and finally, Joe 
Shaumburger, whose poem, illustrated by 
Henry Chabot, appears on the last page. 

All in all, an exceptional issue, with 
more and better to come. 

F ANSCIENT: 25c; 6'$1.00; Donald B. 
Day, 3435 N.E. 38th Ave. , Portland 13, 
Ore. . I've corresponded with Don occasionally for three years, and at the Norwescon I had a chance to meet him. He's a 
very likable fellow, over six feet tall. As 
an old friend in Spokane, Washington used 
to say, he's a swell fellow— reminds me a 
great deal of myself. Except that I 
wouldn't have the patience to put out a 
top quality fanzine like Don does. It's 
photo-offset, pocket size, with the typing 
reduced so that each small page has the 
same contents as a large size sine. 



The 



frc 



"Destination I 
feature that makes Fanseient a must for 
the stf fan is its "Author, Author" section Which gives a picture and the list of 
the works of some outstanding stf author 
and a brief sketch of his life. This issue 
tells about Anthony Boucher, who was the 
guest of honor at the Norwescon. I met 
him there, and found him unusually intelligent and gifted. He's the author of 
one of the greater fantasies of all time, 
"Mr. Lupescu". He sold his first story to 
Weird Tales when he was fifteen years 
old! 

John and Dorothy deCourcy have a very 
entertaining bit of fantasy in this issue 
by the title, "Unbelievitudinosity". Forrest J. Ackerman has another, "The First 



the 



Ther 



by 



Lin Carter, and a story by Phillip '. 
Also a list of the articles and stories 
that have appeared in fan publications by 
David H. Keller. Perhaps his best works 
are listed in this group. 

FANTASY-TIMES: 10c; James V. Taurasi, 137-03 32nd Ave. , Flushing, N.Y. . 
The full coverage newszine of fandom, 
carrying all the latest news in all fields 
of science-fantasy, both in fandom and in 
the pro fields. Published twice a month, it 
keeps abreast of the latest happenings. 
For example, in the second August issue 
is the actual cover of the new science fiction magazine, Galaxy, and a short news 
item about the editors of that magazine. 
Mr. Taurasi interviews the editors of the 
various publishing companies about their 
plar.s and forthcoming issues, and dots a 
thorough job of it. Top news of the second Julv issue is Art Itapp's joining the 
army. For the last couple of years Art 
has been one of if not the. most active 
fane, being editor of Spaw.wavp. o::e of 
the most entertaining fanzines of all time. 



146 



 



Good luck, Art, and wherever you are 
when you read "this — as I'm sure you will 
— have a drink on me. And while we're 
at it, we might as well review the new 
Spacewarp as put out by some of the fellows in PAPA. The mimeography is by 
Charles Burbee, the Dittography by Walter Coslet, and the mailing address is F. 
Towner Lanev. Sir, Wcstboro Ave. , Alhambra, Calif. . It's issue number 42, which 
means that AH l!app hrbught out fortyone issues. This one is really big, eightytwo pages! A lot of Art's admirers and 
friends contributed to it, including myself. 

ORB : 20c, 7oc/yr. ; Bob Johnson, P.O. 
Box 941, Greeley Colo. ; August-September 
issue. This is a really outstanding specimen of fan publishing. Regalength paper, 
with a terrific cover in black red and 
gold, with the contents on photo-offset. 
There are some pictures in this issue of 
the editor and his fellow fans, a poem by 
Henry Andrew Ackerman that is a publisher's work of art worth framing. I really can't praise this fanzine enough. It's 
breathtaking, 

DAWN: the fan 
Russell K. Watki: 
Louisville, Ky. . Although this fa 
tains articles and stories of interest, 
main feature is the letter departn 
where runnim; discussions ;imong fans 
carried on. You'll enjoy getting in on tl 
discussions, and if you're a newcomer 
random you can get to know the tr 
prominent fails very quickly through rf 
ing their letters in this zine. In this 
sue, no. 9, is a wonderful little st< 
"Weakling", by R.J. Butler. It's one 
the best stories to appear in fanzi 
lately, in my opinion. 

RHODOMA GN ET1C DIGEST: E 
George Finigan, 2524 Telegraph A' 
Berkeley 4, California. "Being the i 
ceediugs of the rllvp.s Gnomes and Li 
Men's Science-Ficti 
ing Society." If y 
is a fan club wc 
don't, this is a ri 
Its forte seems t 
positive opinions c 
fans and st.f i-ea.ii 



the 



erkeley this 
up. If yoi 

>ne far 



things of,intei 
in general, ana sucli 
policy is worthwhile in that although 
you may often disagree with what is said, 
you will get new slants and ideas. All 
the articles have a good adutt viewpoint. 

SHANGRI-LA: no. 22; official organ 
of the Los Angelas .Science- Fantasy Society; 15c, with regular and associate members getting it free. Forrest J. Ackerman, 
236 1/2 N. New Hampshire Ave. , Los Angeles, Calif, . The LASFSers have a club 
room at 1305 W. Ingraham in L.A.. If 
you're in town drop around and get acquainted. If you live out of town you can 
be an associate member for a dollar a 
year, which brings Slniggy. as the zine is 
called, and all special notices of the club. 



i thoi 



eithei 



' fic 



__ /hat lif< 
in 2150 A.D. would be. This issue is it 
witli the authors of the twelve ideas o! 
the state of things in that year numbering among them liav Bnidburv, A. E. Vai 
Vogt, Eric Temple Hell, and E. Mayn< 
id y< 



thov. 



the: 



off i 



QZ1ANDBY : no. 3; 10c; Lee Hoffman, 
101 Wagner St, , Savannah, Georgia. Bob 
Tucker has a short talc bv the title, "The 
Face on the Futurian Floor." And there's 
a very thought provoking article, "Tomorrow...?" It concerns the precedent 
set by kings of old in granting rights to 
settlers for land that belonged by right 
of possession to the natives here in America and elsewhere on the Earth. I think 
any of you would like Quandry very 
much. Lee Hoffman shows evidence of 
being quite a gifted editor. 

WESTERN STAR: 5c; 12'50c; Jim 
Kepner, 1534 Grant Ave. , San Francisco 
11, Calif. . From its name it sounds like 
a newspaper, and it is a science fiction 
newsletter, a west coast one. Jim belongs 
to the Golden Gate Futurian Society, the 



• to 
sad

local 
day 

up OI 
big . 


Minn club 
westcrcon 
i the dc.vek 
if fair by 


which i 
next ye 
ipmciiis 

subscril 


puvhi 
ar. Yo: 
and 

„ng to 


uv.-; for 

this 


i two 
keep 
that 


ory, 


The 

edito: 


aim of the 
•ial page 


is to "'< 


:,;s;r 


5sed oi 
fando 


i the 


: Of 


the n 
abrc;: 
mind 




0VLCAV it 


s Iml.oi 


y and 


n to 
k,ep 




st of its ( 
its i-olatio 


:urren(. 
n to th. 


affairs, 

; parer 


keonii 

t body 


, the 


55c; 

proittle 


first'' 
Hon,: 
Fant: 


:c fiction i 
two issues 
3, and the 
i*T- Times' 


Hihllcali 
for re 


Dns." J 
to be 


i 77, f . 
threat. 
:he le: 


t the 

Clvb 
wing 
iding 



of 



ddw. 



SPEARHEAD: Thomas H. Carter, 817 
Starling Ave., Martinsville, Virginia; no 
price listed. "A quarterly magazine of 
poetry and comment," David H. Keller 
heads the issue with an article on "The 
World Destruction Theme." It's an excellent article along the lines of something 
I wrote about in The Club House some 
time back, about students of stf writing .' 
articles discussing the various treatments ' 
of one them.e in the broad field of existing stf literature. This is a very fruitful 
and almost untouched field. Science fiction is the cradle of ideas, and perhaps 
ninety percent of the ideas that will 1 
come current a century from now aire; 
exist in this branch of fiction. Also i 
eral nice poems in this first issue. 



THE CLUB HOUSE 



!47 



SHIVERS: 10c; quarterly, Andrew 
Macura, 230 Prince St. , Bridgeport 8, 
Conn. . A good generalzine with short stories, poetry, and articles. The contributors are well known fan names such as 
Hal Shapiro, Ben Singer, Michael Varady, 
Bob Johnson, etc. . An idea worthy of a 
pro story is "Not to be Opened Until 
Morning" by Michael A. Avail one. Very 
interesting is the "Weirdities" by Johnny 
Blyler, which gives several items of the 
Charles Forte type. 

You know, I'm lucky to get all these 
fanzines for review and not have to subscribe to them. Each one is definitely 
worth taking regularly. This one is no 
exception. 

MEZRAB : subscription rate— a letter or 
postcard requesting the next issue. Fair 
enough, though the editors can't get rich 
thataway I Marion and Robert Bradley, 
Box 431, Tahoka Texas. The editorial is 
by Bob, and in it he says Marion will have 
the most to do with the next issue. That 
should be a lot of fun, two people putting 
together a fanzine like this. 

Genevieve K. Stevens has a poem, "Magician" in this issue. Best story of the issue is "Two kinds of Logic", by Bill Oberfield, having the enticing lead, "When the 
victim of murder refuses to stay dead the 
reason can be logical without being obvious. . ." 



UTOPIAN: 25c; E.J. Banks Jr., Ill 
So. 15th St., Corsicana, Texas. Mr. Banks 
is developing a fanzine that shows promise of being one of the top ones. Not only 
that, he's playing an active part in getting 
a Texas fan club started. I think right 
now this zine surpasses tin: others in quantity and quality of fiction. "An Interview 
with Col. D. II. Keller" by Banks is the 
best article. Forty pages, and worth much 
more than a quarter. 

That's all for this time. It isn't all the 
fanzines for review, but all the space I 
can have this time. There are getting to 
be quite a few fanzines being published. I 
wonder how his aeti fan dean is now? Three 
years ago when I started The Club House 
there weren't so many — less than a thousand; but now my guess is that there are 
at least three thousand people who subscribe to fanzines or publish them, and 
correspond with other fans. They're all 
ages, from kids under ten to kids over 
sixty, and from all walks of life. They're 
the people who have discovered the unlimited horizons of fantasy and science fiction, and want to join in the big family 
of those who have also discovered that 
man's mind* is able to travel into other 
realms than the here and now. I'm one of 
them — and perhaps you are too. Then why 
be a hermit? Subscribe to at least one of 
these fanzines. — Rap Phillip* 



Astronomical Madness? 

+ . By J. R. MARKS * 



IF YOU picture the scientific mind as 
necessarily closed and blind to anything 
radical, you're completely wrong. True, the 
traditional picture of the scientist is always painted in conservative closed terms, 
but that's far from the truth. Many scientists, particularly physicists and astronomers, who have seen so many pet theories shattered in the last half -century, 
have minds as wide open as a pair of garage doors. 

Dr. Harlow Shapley, world-famed astrophysicist in a recent article accurately 
and rather picturesquely painted this 
opened-mindedness with a free -swinging 
brush. He said; "scientists must dream of 
the impossible, and promptly design the 
best way to attain it." Doesn't that sound 
like a scicnce-fictionist? 

He points out that science is beginning 
to get a glimpse into what apparently has 
the making of a radical new era, an era 
comparable with the one we've just gone 
through and which saw the introduction 
of the A lice -in- Wonderland idiocy of 
quantum theory and relativity. 

Maybe, Harlow Shapley suggested, space 
does congeal directly into matter! Perhaps 



the Moon is alive! Maybe relativity is a 
complex picture of something simple! Perhaps other planets have invisible Saturnian 
rings ! Maybe a trans-Plutonian shell of 
comets reflect radio waves ! Perhaps the 
galaxy is composed of several— not one! 
Maybe there are unknown elements existing in the interior of stars completely different from anything we can imagine! 

Do all those "perhaps" and "maybes" 
sound like the out-croppings of some staid 
conservative, conventional "scientific" astronomer? 

No, they sound like a small boy who is 
anticipating the pleasures of breaking into 
the pantry or the refrigerator, waiting to 
get at the infinite goodies within. They 
show a completely unbiased almost sciencefiction attitude toward the mysteries of 
science yet to be unfolded. 

As long as men like that exist in the 
foremost ranks of research scientists, 
whatever their field, I don't think we need 
worry about fuddy-duddy conservatives not 
being able to see beyond the ends of their 
noses. Go to it. Dr. Shapley, we're with 
you one hundred per cent...! 

* * * 



The Readers 




F[ iJiJOi-JS HATE TO DIE! 



This is my first letter to AS and because of this I'm kind of nervous, also 
I don't write letters too well. 

I'm 14 years old and buy just as many 
editions of your magazine as I can, even 
though I'm having trouble finding quarters, if you know what I mean. I even 
missed that June issue them guys were 
raving about, doggonit! 

I just put down the October edition of 
AS and had to write and compliment you 
on the cover. You're starting to dress the 
gals up a little mote. I'm afraid mom and 
dad don't approve of me buying magazines 
with that kind of pictures on them (need I 
Bay more?). Of course, it was a little revealing, but not as much as a couple other 
issues I've got. Don't you guys ever run 
out of flesh colored paint? 

Now that I had my say about the cover, 
we turn to the story part of the book. 

1. Weapon From The Stars— It was 
pretty good as most Phillips' stories are. 
' 1 happ 



Prin 



didn' 



get 



Most 



2. Repair Job— -It needs repairs, but it'll 

3. Mr. Lahr Says His Prayers— Phooie. 

4. The Country Beyond The Curve— Real 
good. Sheldon and Phillips both write good 

5. Seven Came Back— It started out 
good and the rest was just about the same. 
Good, I mean. 

C. Gateway to Glory — That was pretty 
good. Let's have more of Mr. Brown. 

How about getting some Edgar Rice 
Burroughs' stories? I've heard a lot about 
them, but I never read any. Also get that 
guy who wrote The Man From Yesterday 
to get Avar out of that jam. I don't think 
he likes to be killed at the end of the 
story. Most heroes don't. 

Anyway, I think you've got the best SF 
magazine that's being put out. 

Ton; Bilello 
2132 Iowa Ave. 
Granite City, IH. 



Judging from some of the sequels we've 
seen that were based on what originally 
very good storicn, icc'rc irnndering if perhaps all heroes shouldn't, be killed off. 
Tliat way we could at least escape from a 
let-down by reading said sequel! — Ed. 

NO SENSE TO THE TITLE? 

Dear Mr. Browne: 

Milton Lesaer'a ALL HEROES ARE 
HATED! takes top honors. It was well 
written, interesting, and by >o less than 
an ex-fan, if this is Iht; sunn; Milt Lesser 
I am thinking of. 

Jones for once forgot about fat beauties 
in scintillating garments and gave us a 
good cover. All I want to know though is 
why the title; it most certainly doesn't fit 
the story. 

Among the shorts, two of them, Maek 
Reynold's ONE OF OUR PLANETS lS 
MISSING was the best. I like this boy's 
stuff, keep them coming. Next came that 
piece of putriditv, THE DAY THE BOMB 
FELL. I won't even bother to finish capi


tal 



it, 



stank. 
lg ed from 
?ven THE 
VIRGINS, 
used to 



da


rn so many 
The rest of the stories r, 
fair to below sea level. Yes, 
WORLD OF RELUCTANT 
I'm getting to hate Williams, he 
be a good author, wha hoppened"; 

1 forgot to ask, I am in need of 
tective, the last few issues of your magazine have been missing the last SO pages. 
If anyone finds out wha hoppened to 162190, please inform me. 

Joel Markman 

15G0 Grand Concourse 

Bronx 57, New York 



It seemed to us, in changing Lcsser'a original title to "All Heroes are Hated.'", we 
had pretty well summed up what the story 
was about, plus adding to the dramatic 
punch of the story itself. In it, the Starmen were hated to pieces by the rest of 
mankind because a misadventure by the 
Starmen had resulted in a virtual quarantine by the rest of the solar system directed against Earth.... Paper is again becoming a problem, which will answer your 
"wha happen" query, • — Ed. 



14S 



THE READER'S FORUM 



THE EIGHTH GRADE COMES TO 
HOLLYWOOD 

Dear Editor: 

Great shades of the bary centric parallax! It's a shame that Hollywood, with all 
its resources, can't hire a good technical 
advisor for its up and coming stf films. 
I just saw a pic called "rocketship X-M". 
Though there were many technical incongruities, there was one that shone above 
all the rest as a perfect example of incompetent technical advice. It happens in 
interplanetary space. Lloyd Bridges looks 
out the port and exclaims, "Meteorites". 
Now mind you, in space! Not only that, 
but to top it all off, everybody agrees with 
him, even the learned prof with a string 
of degrees that even Danny Kaye couldn't 
pronounce. 

Now I have always been laboring under 
the apprehension that those fearsome 
chunks of firmament wandering about in 
space were Meteors, no matter what unique 
form of nomenclature you utilized. And 
still laboring under that apprehension, I 
refrain from trailing that- selfsame chunk 
of matter a meteorite until it has forcefully inbedded itself in another firmament of 
greater mass. (At least that is what they 
taught me in the eighth grade.) 

Maurice Raboid 
Box 4292 

Miami Beach 41, Fla. 

Hollywood can hire a good technical adviser on a science-fiction, picture. For 
"Destination Moon" it used Robert A. 
Heinlein in tltui capacity — and we can't 
imagine a better choice. Bv.t usually film 
producers aim for entertainment first and 
■rerisimilitwilt; second. As we recall the 
"meteorite" scene in "Rocketship X-M", we 
found it vastly entertaining even while 
our critical judgment was being offended! 



THE TRUTH ABOUT WRITERS 

Dear Editor: 

Thanks for a swell editorial. You've hit 
upon something we fans are very enthusiastic about and anxious to know more 
about— the people who write what we read. 
I'm sure that at least 80^ of us would 
appreciate it very much if you would continue to give us this sort of information 
in your editorials. You say you'll be only 
too happy to oblige us fans who want more 
info. Do ya 1 really mean it? 

The cover this issue is rotten ! 
Please give us something that ain't so 
cluttered up. Looks to me like covers with 
on\f one or two objects on them would be 
easier to paint than the present things. 
Why don't we see more of them? 

What has happened to Rog Phillips? His 
story, "Weapon From the Stars" was actually mediocre. He's my favorite author, 



too. Hope he hasn't run out of ideas or 
unyl.hmir. Maybe his ultra-prolifitrness is 
finally catching dp with him. More likely it's just one of those slips all authors 
matt occasional] v. As far as I know, this 
is Hog's first. 

Clifford SiiiiLik's story, "Seven Came 
Back" was the best story this issue. 'Twas 
perfect: Novel idea, smooth writing, no 
holes, emotion-gripping, and a clever ending. 

NejKt came Fredric Brown's "Gateway 
to Glory". It was blood and thunder adventure built around a nirclv-used idea, 
but I still liked it a lot. 

Great gosh! Put clothes on the women in 
the illos! Why that would he a violation 
of one of the established laws of science 
fiction. It would be nice, though, 

Seriously, I don't mind nude women in 
the ilios and covers as long as they don't 
look so derned lewd. But if you get to 
using the kind of fenunes which a certain 
well known artist draws, look out brother! 

This new artist, Hutah, is one of the 
two better-than-mediocre ones you use. 
Keep 'im. That reminds me, why not have 
a cover by Sharp or Terry once and 
awhile. That is, unless you can't get Finlay, Eok or Calle. 

By all means, PLEASE give us a longer 
letter column. 

Tom Covington 
315 Dawson St. 
Wilmington, N. C. 

On/- column rt/n Utit tiny a fen: thumbnail 
sketches of AMAZING STO/ilKS' authors 
was so well received that we're toying with 
the idea of devoting an entire editorial to 
more of them. The only trouble is that so 
many of our writers are sensitive souls* 
with no sense of humor where their own 
peeiiliarilies arc concerned, that putting 
them in.io print may drive some of our top 
names over to one of our more sobersided competitors! — Ed. 

THAT'S TELLING HIM, BROTHER! 

Dear Mr. Browne: 

Just when I was nearly ready to concede that Alexander Blade was offering 
serious competition to science-fantasy's top 
authors, he disillusioned me with a shocking error in his WARRIOR QUEEN OF 
MARS (September, 1950) ; the Blade 
blunder can only be attributed to a complete lack of research plus a boyhood proclivity for reading Buck Rogers Big Little 
Books when he should have been listening 
to his high school chemistry teacher. 

I give you page 15: "Have discovered 
e:-:tni terrestrial human female with C three '. 
H eight 0 three metabolism." Later, Mr. 
Blade confides to his bewildered readers 
that the gal has an alcohol metabolism. 
True, C3H803 is AN alcohol. . .namely 
glycerine, more appropriately written C3 
H5(OH)3. However, I have no doubt that 



J. 50 



 



what Mr. Blade was trying to describe was 
good old ethanol: C2H60 (better written: 
C2H50H). 

E. G. White 
36 Fifth Street 
Woodlawn Beach 
Buffalo 19, N. Y. 

You won't see Mr. Blade around for a 
while. He's gonr back to school; and this 
time, instead of playing left half-back, 
he's going to get an education! — Ed. 

CLEVER AND FUNNY! 

Dear Mr. Editor: 

In your September issue of AMAZING 
STORIES "You Can't Escape From Mara" 
by Mr. Jarvis was the best, hut the 
squeeze was pretty tifrht over Mr. Wyndham's "The Eternal Eve". The worst story 
■was "Yon Might: Ray Virginia Dared" and 
it was readable. 

That was a very cute Observatory you 
wrote this time — shows a sign of cleverness. It was kind of funny too! 

When are you going to get some good 
lllos for inside? How about one from Mr. 
Finlay or am I just dreaming? 

Gerald Hibbs 
Box 852 

Detroit Lakes, Minn. 

We run quite a number of Finlay illustrations in FANTASTIC ADVENTURES. 
Since kis artwork runs more to fantasy 
than science fiction, we rarely are able to 
use him in this magazine. — Ed. 

COVER THE COVERS 

Dear Editor, 



pieces and Mars would become a ringed 
planet like Saturn. As long as the stories 
are going to have mistakes, print a Burroughs story. v 

George 0' Toole 
119 King Avenue 
Yonkers 5, N. Y. 

Perhaps the cover is along the lines you 
have in mind. Straight symbolism, but 
with strong drama lie Meaning. . . . Reprinting Burroughs' classics would be of 
doubtful interest: surely everyone interested in science fiction and fantasy has 
made a point of reading his books.... 
Jarvis will have to answer your question 
about the gravity Machine?, on Phobos; our 
own reaction is that you're overlooking 
something in your reasoning on the 
point. . . . Four last sentence is about the 
most cryptic we're ever come across, especially in view of your request for stories 
by the late Mr. Burroughs. — Ed. 

ONE MAN'S POISON 

Dear Ed: 

I agree full-heartedry with Mrs. Neuman. With all the filth and trash on the 
newsstands, we certainly don't need any 
more, I enjny your magazine very much, 
bui I'm going to stop en;oying it or even 
buying it, : .i its illustration? continue to 
imply sex. Keep AS clean and wholesome! How about it, fellas? 

Patrick Kevin 0'Shauj;li::eFsy 
Newark, New Jersey 

If "implying sex" is "filth and trash", 
then every love story ever told is an implied obscenity. We don't believe that, 

either!- ' - —Ed. 



, why r 



>uld l 



want to fin 
e with ASF. I 
: warm light oi 
rry whether hurt 
AS I read hig 



Congratulations: The cover on the September AMAZING was a definite improvement. By far the best cover in the last 



jepy that I W hethe: 



I don't kne 



your last novel YOU CAN'T ESCAPE 
FROM MARS, Jarvis made a mistake that 
anyone would recognize. In that story the 
Martians had built gravity machines to 



Phobos would 1 



othei 



reddei 



: hint 



to lack, 
are bluer 



-and while the] 
most covers, the overall effect is of a 
:over with no shading whatsoever, simply 
three flat colors. I'll admit it's eye-catching, but so is a highway stop sign. And 
stop signs usually aren't praised for their 
ssthetic appeal. Your covers may sell 
magazines but the lack of this type of 
led to hav 



letitoi 



the 



for 



i definite impro 
md I'd say this 
i acquired shav 



THE READER'S FORUM 



151 



At least this is the first time I've read 
every story all the way through. I especially liked "The Eternal Eve". Incidentally, why should Rog Phillips label one of 
his better storied as beiny by Charles V. 
Devet? He had nothing else in the issue. 

Also, plaudits on your letter column. It 
has had a tendency to be juvenile in the 
past, and the adult letters contained in 
this issue were a welcome relief. Of 
course, you could carry that trend too 
far. 

Vernon L. McCain 
R.F.D. No. 3 
Nampa, Idaho 

Stop signs are designed to be eye-catching; magazine rover?, are designed for the 
same purpose. Nobody ever buys what they 
can't find; we want to make sure our 
■reudtrrt ran f i'nd. their copies. . , , Believe 
us, Charles DeVet i-s Charles VeVet, is an 
excellent craftsman in the writing field 
through his aim efforts, and owes his 
success to the same reason. —Ed. 

HE DIDN'T SAY IT I 



nough to use Sir, 


Dear Ed 


Irowne. "Hi" is 1 pie 


nty. 


At this point I 


should 1 


ly first time to * 


rite to an 


what does the 't' i 


n stf Stan 


ver, I have been 


reading s 


ig to mags long e 


nough to i 



Regards tl 
STORIES, of 



jMi (host 
aliz.? that, 
feat in 



get tired of havinp 
cause of the cove: 
covers at one time 
get buyers, but thii 



V.hlitle, 

same, f 
>uldn' 



, find 



the 



clof 



,ag, look foi 



that stuff." When I am 
finished I would discard it, (am in the 
U.S. Air Force) in the usual place for 
trash, and within a few minutes it would 
seemingly disappear completely— and yet 
only a few men in the barracks claim that 
they read stf. (Didn't mean that your 



mags are trash. Far from it.. .only using 
this as a record of events.) Consequently, 
my vote is for covers in good taste, interesting, and when illustrating a scene from 
one of the stories, you should come closer 
to representing that scene than ha? been 
done in the past. By good taste, I don't 
mean ilia: women aren't allowed. Furthermore, 1 am not a prude, but if 1 wan: undraped or semi-draped women, I purchase 
the mags that cater to that type of trade. 

At this point I should fay, "I suppose 
this letter won't be printed because ..." 
but as stated in my second paragraph, 
I'm an old time stf reader and won't say 
such things. 

As to the stories, I have no complaints 
or comments at this time, and I read all 
Z-D publications in the stf field, that I 
can get hold of. 

Keep up the flow of good stories com


ing. 



Delbert I. Getchel, Sgt. 
2349th O'S Repl. Sqdn. 
2349th Org. Mail Room No. 2 
Camp S ton em an 
Pittsburg, California 

CONVERSATION PIECE 



Mrs 



iag. Boredoi 



Neu 



the 



usual gripes. The covers. They're awful. 

I took a girl friend of. mine to a movie 
last night and on the way home I bought 
your current (September) issue. 

She asked me, quote "Do vou read that 
trash?" unquote. When I asked her 



by 

form of fiction as "trash" 
she "can tell by the cover 
The argument that fol 
go into but when your cc 
potentia 



rite 



; to belie 



.■-fieti... 



: foi 



pulps 



ligent lot. Why 
■edit for it? The other 
ably aimed at people of 
sugnt education and' or low mentality. 
Your magazine is aimed at a more highly 
educated, higher intelligence level. But 
your covers, except for the rocket ships, 
look just like every other pulp on the 
stands. Exception.,: OTHER WORLDS, 
ASTOUNDING SP. 

You published two good stories this 
issue. THE UNEXPECTED WEAPON 
was quite good; somewhat reminiscent of 
A. E. vanVogt. DeVet is not one of the 



152 



 



i it? 



THIS WAY OUT was also -interesting 
Familiar plot, but not quite so hackneyed 
a treatment as in the rest of the stories. 

THIS TABLE RESERVED— interesting solely for the motivating factor that 
brought Trudel back to the "past". 

Ralph P. Bel singer 
1G22 Blair Avenue 
Cincinnati 7, Ohio 



which cannot t 
Any reader i; 
write before c 
tion of the " 



but 



Our guess is that tile boys down 
fire department are science-fictio; 
and they're using - this method in nopei 
you'll turn your collection over to them 
ferha;is their method is a bit drasti , 
we admire their taste, — Ed. 

DON'T CHANGE A THING! 

Dear Sir,^ 

I have just finished vour October issue 
of ." This is the first 
tiine I' have read your mag, much to my 
regret. I have been an avid fan of SP 
mags for the past year and will not 
hesitate to say that yours is the best I 
have read yet. That is not just flattery 
either. 



TnE FIRE BOYS STEP IN! 
Dear Sir: 

I have been an ardent reader of both. 
FA and AS since 13-15, and have decided 
to dispose of my back number issues. 

Before doing so to so-called back issue 
dealers, I would like to have you publish 
in the Reader's Section of FA and in the 
"Reader's Forum of AS, just as soon as 
possible this letter and announcement, that 
I will either sell or exchange even with 
any other reader the hack issues listed 
hereafter at the following rates: 

Any issues I have prior to 1948 of FA 
at 15c each or 2/25c postpaid, and any 
issues of AS prior to 1947 at 15c each or 
2/25'c. - . -.• <jg 

Issues after these dates at 10c or 3'2Sc 
postpaid. 

The only reason for me giving up the 
collection of the magazines is that I have 
too many books accumulating, therefore no 
room to store the magazines, and because 
of a notice from the fire department of a 
fire hazard. 

I am very sorry that I have to give up 
the earlier issue:;, as I sometimes go back 
to them and reread the stories they conilly enjoy this rereading 
expressed in mere words, 
erested in my offer, please 
month after the pubticaletter. 

A. A. Koppelman 
1149 South Mozart Street 
Chicago 12, Illinois 

the 



After thoroughly digesting every word 
of the October issue I have come to a 
conclusion. I was more amused than 
amazed, therefore I think your mag should 
be called AMUSING AND AMAZING 
STORIES. 

All kidding aside, I am placing your 
mag at the top of my SF reading list 
from now on. Just keep up those swell 
stories such as Rog Phillips' "Weapon 
From The Stars". I noticed in your letters 
to the editors that several of your readers 
wanted to make some "drastic" changes in 
your illustrations and methods of selecting stories. This is one reader who is perfectly content with things as they now 
stand. 

I would appreciate your passing on the 
information to your other leaders that I 
am interested in purchasing back issues 
of AS. 

John Montgomery 
Star Route 2 
LitOefield, Texas 

The letter immedioiehi preceding yours, 
John, would seem to be especially written 
for you. Thin is n-hal's known as service. 



ON THE OTHER HAND... 
Dear Sir: 

I have been a science fiction fan since 
the time when the only place you could 
find one was in the ARGOSY WEEKLY, 
WEIRD TALES and THE DETECTIVE 
FICTION WEEKLY (Hay Cummings). 

This letter is written because of the 
misconception you and W. L. Hamlin g 
seem to have as stated in the November 
Observatory, 

I don't give a continental about the accuracy of the premise upon which the 
story is based as long as the story is 
good. I don't give a hang about the 
author either. Except Richard Shaver. I 
burn ever since that two bits I wasted 
on one issue of your magazine that had 
3 stories by him I couldn't finish because 
I gagged on 'em. Ever since then, I have 
looked over the authors to be sure and 
cross off his story. I otherwise read from 
front to back. That includes the shorts and 
editorial comment. I quit reading the 
reader's comments long ago because they 
seemed to pan the stories I liked the best. 

Could I put in one vote for one old 
style story per year with some nice bloody 
rocket ship fights? That sounds pretty 
juvenile I'll admit, but if it weren't for 
people like me, they wouldn't sell a single 
western and a lot less science fiction. 

Norman C. Homiller 
1509 W. Capitol 
Springfield, 111. 

...THE COVERS ARE FINE1 



THE READER'S FORUM 



153 



iiere seems to he a lot of talk about 
covers on AS and FA. I would like 
;ay that I like the covets with the 



. Ther 



jrtai 
that if 



number of people 
woman has anything . 
her hands and face, the picture is sexy, 
immoral and obscene. That is absurd. If 
that were true, the Venus de Milo would 
be obscene, more than fifty per cent of 
the pictures in the Louvre would be obscene, in fact the majority of all the great 
paintings all over the world would be considered obscene. Most of tbose who write 
are of that type. Most of us don't write 
because we think thai beautiful art speaks 
for itself and needs no further defense. 
We recognize art when we see it, and you 
have some very fine artists doing your 
covers. Their fine work should not be 
hampered because a few bigoted people 
■' mderstand fii 



plai 



3 the 



i the 



"the 



subject, but after rem-bnp; sevcra 
of the letters I got rather mad. 

As to other matters, all I can do is adi 
my praises to those you have already re 
ceived and so richly deserved. I hope yoi 
will have another "Toffee" ' 



Thoi 



) Smith i 



ich C tliat Tknc 



Newton W. Hootor 
13 Buckingham St 
Cambridge, Mass. 



d all we have to do is make i 

>py. How a.bout a cover ah 

-.ceskip moulded into the liken 
.utifvl, unclad girl? 

FROM THE EMPIRE! 



■ybadtt 
tilg a 
of a 



am I, in identifying the portion of Earth 
below as the north of Canada with Hudson 
Bay prominent? It tuok me ;en minutes to 
get thai far- withojt on atlas, though.) 

"Sword of I'eace" was the second best 
in this issue, and congratulations for that 
also. "The Man from Arbutus"— with due 
respert to H. B, Hickey — is garbage beside these two. Ar.d "For Each Han Kills" 
and "All Else Is Dust"— which would have 
been tops in any other issue — are merely 
mediocre. 

This may amuse you I culled from (of 
all unlikely placer) a staid, sober arid utterly un-stf-cunscious London evening 
paper the foliow.ng asl ii.i-ihin^ statement: 
THE INTERPLANETARY TRAVELLINES ARE BEGINNING TO HUM! 
(It was actually from a review of Pal's 
"Destination Moon".) 

John Brunner 
"Highlands" 
Woodcote, Reading 
U. K. 

LETTER OP THE MONTH 



First, let me say 'Howdy' to you, 
cause I'm a friend of AS, and have 1 
for some 23 or 24 years. Grew up ' 
it, I might say. I'm one of the great 
jority mentioned in Observatory who 
not club-fans, who shun conventions, 
who never write to the editors. 

The only time I ever wrote to 



Dear Mr. Browne: 

Two days ago I got hold of the English 
edition of the AMAZING containing Abernathy's "Ultimate Peril". I can see that 
with authors like that on top over there 
I'm going to be the luckiest writer this 
side of heaven if I get anything accepted 
hy you! I had read some of Abernathy's 
previous work, but the latest exceeds his 
■ previous efforts absolutely. 

Congratulations further to Robert Gibson Jones, your top artist, for the finest 
and most eye-catching cover I have yet 
seen on an stf magazine, beside which 
such examples of his previous work on 
R. M. Williams' "When Two Worlds Meet" 
are absolutely nothing. It's a picture of 
definite artistic merit, refreshing change 
from the common ones of stf illustrations. 
Why, oh why, is it that so few illustrators, 
and so feiv blurb writers whose one-line 
summary adorns the list of contents, ever 
bother to read the story before they start? 
Anyway, I reckon it's brilliant. (It's a 
mere Britisher, by the way, I am right, 



Adve 



>rthe: 



rietec 



>ughs 



Stei: 



beck to Ferber to Grey to Asch to Ellery 
Queen to Dickens to at. least a hundred 
others old and new; srood, bad, indifferent, 
and mediocre. Including the Bible and a 
large chunk of Shakespeare. So when I 
ite that I have read AS as regularly 



sible, 



my fictio 



I ( 



Author. My IQ i 



ral area of that number above, 
a separate, special part of the 
,ublitr. We have to be, to be able 
inalyze, and enjoy science fiction. 



15-1 



 



othei 



, the 



will AS, 
>ty of 



sed at much that happer 



iut of 



us, continue to be silent during chi 
the course of our vessel of enjoyment and 
stimulation, do not presume that we do not 
know at least part of the answers. We 
may not agree with the author of a story 
—or an editorial policy, for that matter. 
We may find a story as full of holes in 
its theory as a Swiss cheese, and yet say 
nothing, because we are human enough to 
expect" some mistakes, large or small. We 
may dislike the covers, the addition to or 
removal of a Reader's Forum, tie size, the 
type, number of stories, any or all the authors, and yet <:osHinue to buy — and read! 
Because of our basic loyalty to a great 
modern institution, which I claim  to be. Because there are 
always some grains of truth amid the 
straw of typed pages. Because, while our 
friends and relatives smile pityingly and 
shake their heads, we persist in reading to 
our own individual enlightenment and 
mental stimulation. 

This last statement was in for a radical 
change after Hiroshima, by the way; at 
least in my case. I grew up in a small 
town in southern Iowa, where everyone 
knew everyone else and what they did and 
read and thought— practically. So I became, perhaps, a lone-wolf as far as readied. A good 



of 



eithei 



sity < 



thin 



e are many others in 
o mine. We've stood 
tempt for reading wl 
lan the authors themj 
ind keep silent. We 
At i 



aitu


othet 

the 2nd round of the World War, I had 
read every honk on astronomy, geology 
and archeology in the San Diego Puhlic 
Library. All of them, Mr. Author! Manv 
of us hove done the sume, or hetter. 

So dor.'t think we don't check every 
word, every thought, every article in each 
copy of AS we read. Every theory, every 
proposition, every quirk of fact or faction 
comes in for microscopic analysis. 

We're a loyal MOT ; we're logical , we're 
informed. We have a high type of mind. 
We are able to understand things beyond 
the grasp of the average human. We can 
visualize, imagine, prophecy. We expect 
phenomenal progress; we are not aur


will become, pe: 


■haps, 


:st a good sf « 


.-.ihoi-. 


said so much 


. Mr. 


and especially a 


a AS, 


1 years or so, I 


guess 


for hearing m. 


i out, 


:ake a shot at w 


ritrng 


then, if it ever 


hap


s goes to Mr. Hamling, all the 
all probability, shall retire again 
j inarticulate shell, and never 
j again. I feel that this author 
derstood us; that, if he does belerstand, 1 



ha 



Merle Ray Huntley 

856-21st St. 

San Diego 2, Cal. 

You've pretty weU summed up, Merle, the 
response of the ■muU'rity In our editorial 
in the Novemlw iisue. Literally hundreds 
of steady readers of  



ed Hamling to the hilt! 

'TIN BACK HIS EARS!' 



glad Mr. Hamling pinned unkno 
p X's ear back. We non-writing f< 
' lot like 



choice, lone-wolf sf 
stand the smiles and the things not said 
by people who know you read sf, than it 
would be if they called you a damned fool 
who wastes his time reading trash ! And 
that happened, too, occasionally. As a result, I knew more about the probable conditions on planets than mv school teachers 
did; I could vision with Wells and Burroughs and Lovecraft and others what 
might be someday, somewhere. Only I 
couldn't say so out loud. 



. We 



iff, 



silec 



i thn 



At 



occasional story such as "Toffy" (I know 
it was in FANTASTIC ADVENTURES), 
stay home from conventions and club meetings, and save our energy for handing out 
quarters for mags that don't contain silly 

Entertainment comes first, of course, 
but the other types of literature can supply this as well as sf and'or fantasy. The 
sf fan wants more than this; his or her 
overdeveloped imagination, if nothing else, 
demands that extra something, and demands that it at least sound sensible and 
be based on fact. 

For some time I didn't buy AMAZING, 
1 ' Lg it regularly agai" 



t the 



: nd ger. 



from its pages. (This I can't figure out, 
as Other Worlds is just my dish. A clash 
of personalities perhaps?) 

Please add my vote to the keep 'em 
dressed or keep 'em off the cover list. I 
might as well add, now that I'm writing 
at last, that I'd prefer an all fiction 
AMAZING. There are other magazines devoted to articles and science, so why mix 
your brew? 

Dirce S. Archer 
1453 Barnsdale St. 
Pittsburgh 17, Pennsylvania 

(Continued On Page 166) 




You may serve in uniform. You may 
serve on the production front. But this 
much is sure . . . yon will serve your 
country best if you are trained. 

America needs trained men. Aircraft 
and engine mechanics, boilermakcrs, carpenters, iiistrmnent repairmen, machinists, metal workers, patternmakers, 
welders and olher trained craftsmen. Men 



with the training to fill these and other 
skilled jobs are scarce. 

Do you have the ambition and initiative necessary to get the training that 
will help you serve your country best? 
If you have, you can learn at home in 
your spare time from the International 
Correspondence Schools. The coupon will 
start you on your way. 



INTERNATIONAL CORRESPONDENCE SCHOOLS 



156 



 



(Continued From Page 154) 

We, too, feel ifcoi entertaiivment comes 
first, Mrs. Archer. Our stories, illustrations and covers nre chosen with that goal 
first in mind. Now if we can only gel 
readers to agree our selections are really 
entertaining. . . I — Ed. 

SHE KEPT THE COVER! 

Dear Sir: 

At last you have a cover I didn't have 
to tear off at once, or hide the magazine 
— ray youngsters ask why my stories always have "undressed ladies" on the front 
— but now the Nov. issue certainly has 
more feeling of science-fiction and less 
of true-story about it. 

Having only read sf the last year or so 
I guess I'm a newcomer— but a very ardent 
one. I find the sf world wonderfully relaxing for a busy mother, and my husband 
admits I'm becoming quite an authority on 
futuristic ideas. 

In general, I find the stories good reading. Some of the more horrible seem a little strong on the gory side, but I guess you 
have to please everybody. 

Must those inside illustrations be so 
gruesome? More sfl!! 

Peg Schwale 
620 Avalon 
Santa Rosa, Cal. 

The "giant hand and spaceship" cover 
brought on more reader mention (overwhelmingly favorable) than any cover 
we've used since "half -man, half -bomb" 
painting on tin- March, i !);">(), issue containing Abernathi/'s THE ULTIMATE PERIL". There are mare of a similar nature 
in reserve; watch for them! —. Ed. 

RETURN TO FAVOR 



Dc: 



Sfct: 



i of those readers of science-fiction who has been collecting AMAZING 
STORIES since the 1930's, but who has 
not bothered to write any fan letters, join 
any fan clubs, take part in any fan activities in all that time. The important 
thing for me has always been the stories 
you print, and as long as they are good, 
I'm satisfied. 

There was a time in the past few years 
when I had been sorely tempted to forget 
all about AMAZING STOKiES: the material had degenerated Into something of 
which I was not proud. Science fiction 
for me is a definite s;t'iu-e of literature, 
but  had gone to such 
a low state that rather than being a member of the genre, I almost classed it with 
the comic books. 

For the past several months, however, 
your fare has been constantly on the upgrade, and if you continue the good work 
there's no telling how far you can go. 
Most of the stories of recent months have 



been excellent — and that has been particularly true of your featured novels. Most 
specifically, it has been true of the lead 
novel in the November issue — ALL HEROES. ARE HATED! by Milton Lesser. 
This novel has all the earmarks of a science-fiction classic — the great sweep of the 
space-opera, without the rayguns and bugeyed monsters, the vast drama of a universe at unrest — yet with all the dominant 
action taking place right here on Eartli — 
and most important of all, real human 
characters who seemed as real as the people who live down the block, and more so. 
The name Lesser is not a familiar one, and 
I'd certainly like to see more of this author's work. If he could turn out another 
novel or two as good as this one, I'd he 
ready to rank him with Merritt, E. E. 
Smith, and all the past greats. 

As for the rest of the issue, it was good, 
very good, especially BROTHERS UNDER 
THE SKIN and WHO'S THAT KNOCKING AT MY DOOR? — but these are not 
important. ALL HEROES ARE HATED 
was a ci as sic" 

As for science fiction-— what is scienco 
fiction? It is a way of life, tomorrow's 
way of life, manifested in literature today. 

Philip Lang 

920 East 23rd St. 

Brooklyn 10, N.Y. 

Milton Lesser tindoiibu.-dlij will admire your 
taste, Phil, and agree- viih everything yon, 
say about his story. By a strange coincidence, he lives not far from you. Why 
not look him up? — as a fellow sciencefiction fart himself, he'll be glad to meet 
you, we're certain. . . . 'You'll be finding 
more and more stories of tlte ALL HEROES ARE HATED! stature in future 
issues, —Ed, 

"NOW IF I WERE EDITOR..." 

Dear Mr. Browne: 

After reading yrmr i>r.li|i>n;d in the November issue, I am going to have to break 
down my own reiiHance which has been 
steadily building up for twenty-five years 
and write a letter to a magazine editor. 
Yes, I said twenty-five. Twenty-five years 
ago I read my first copy of AMAZING 
STORIES. It was a large magazine, and I 
remember that most of the stories were 
about Aztecs and Jungle Princesses and 
Warlords of Barsoom and maybe a few 
time machines. The covers were as atrocious then as they are now. 

Your writer friend was i|iiite right from 
my point of view. I imagine I represent a 
lot of readers. I buy an average of six stf 
■ magazines each month. There 
rill not miss— not AMAZING- — 
although for some reason I don't understand I have never subscribed. I not only 
do not read the letters in the back of the 
book but am always annoyed when I reach 
.the last story and see that the remaining 
tenth of the book is taken up with a lot 



THE READER'S FORUM 



157 



of stuff for which you do not pay fiction 
rates, and for which I did not buy the 
magazine. However, I have always told 
myself that there are probably a lot of 
people who get a kick out of reading something in print that they have written, and 
they buy the magazine too. The only unfair thing about it is that you hear from 
them and you don't from us silent fans; 
because if you did hear from us we would 
immediately cease to be the silent ones and 
would swell the ranks of the opposition. 

I like your stories as a general rule; I 
buy it anyway and always read them all. 
I did quit during your period of aberration 
over Shaver — pardon, by you I mean the 
magazine, not you personally, as I know 
the Editor was a different person at that 
time. But I would not mourn over the fact 
that you ceas-n-d imbrication as a lot of us 
do over UNKNOWN. 

My ideal stf has never been published: 
or if it has, I haven't been lucky enough 
to find it. What would it be? The cover 
would be a design, or a weird landscape 
or a still life or abstraction ; rule one 
should be NO ACTION SCENES ON THE 
COVER. J only wish mo me day some one 
would try it, a;:d lest the responsf. You 
know you could print an ad for toothpaste 
on the oataide a:id still sell to vour regular readers, so what the heck could you 
lose? Thu stories would be (one booklength novel, two long and at lout Utti 
short and short-shorts) by Van Vogt, 
Campb.-l!, Sturgeon, Pratt, Asimov, Hein)c:ji and a large gvuup of newcomers which 
the Editor woniii rave d. covered. The illustrations would be bv Bok, Cartier and 
maybe Finlay and the Magranans. There 
would not he very many. An interested 
reader makes his own pictures in his head 
and the illustrators' ideas usually don't 
match. And outside of a double editorial 
page in the front, there would not be anything else in the magazine. Ads? Sure, I 
..don't mind. Just like the commercials on 
the radio. But no departments, no letters, 
just stf stories.- Trimmed edges? That 
doesn't matter — who reads the edges of the 
pages? Slick paper? Not as long as pulp 
is cheaper. Spend that dollar for material. 

1 really wish someone would try it. Kick 
out all the extra guff and put a big astronomical chart on the cover: leave off 
the blurbs. Just print the title. And see 
if you sell any less magazines. I am willing to hot that all these actifans, so-called, 
arc such a small minority of your income 
— producing group that you wouldn't even 
notice it if you lost them. They may make 
a lot of noise, but so do a lot of quarters 
dropping into cash drawers all over the 



tntry. 

You brought this on 
thought of doing' it for 
can relax for another H 



self. I have 



Mrs. Marion Carter 
P.O. Box 452 
Delhi, California 



SUP 




.el Engines, Hydramatl 

romislrtr Cir.ip.il ij,00 ;uuti 
■!, 0 vrr : "ip'I l.n.«'r;." .r,. :,:»\ 

Ui :i;,i;'.irTiu:ii lur'sFrvicc'juij 
IT PAYS TO KNOW 



with ignition troubles— ilfm- t;i .. 

!!■(; rl'.-r.rl!-.!lt(,r;i — li,iiv 'i, ! i-m- ij_-ni 

tlon— How to "tune up" an enfint: 
$ m COMPLETE • PAY Jl AMD. t' 




LAW 



1 frtr FKEE book, "THE tAW-TRAINED 



BLACKSTONE COLLEGE OF LAW 

225 N. Michigan Ave.. Dept. 232 Chicago 1, III. 

i»„ A Cerruptmi/rncr Institution foundal in 1890 




In Business Since 1909 rare 
HUH Si II ill id (in! Diner I snSM 
THE NEWELL COMPANY L!^ 
234 Cl.ijmn Sti.. 51. Louis 5, Mo. 



158 



 



No one can say that you haven't given us 
some pretty st'irllirig svg g cations, Marion. 
But some of them, particularly about covers, are a bit too muck so, we're afraid, 
for both organized and unorganized faiidom! — Ed, 



WE WON'T GET MAD 

Dear Mr. Browne: 

 has been my favorite magazine for a long time so don't 
get mad if I find a fault with the stories 
here and there. I really like them. They're 
tops. 

I like time travel stories if they use 
time travel only as an excuse to get me 
into another era of time and make it seem 
that I'm really there. But when they're 
written using a unique twist of events to 
carry the story, they all have the same 
big hole in them. Time is a Coffin, for 
example: He went back because he found 
his body in a cave, and his body was in 
the cave because he went back. But then 
I like stories with an unexpected ending. 
Maybe that was the point of this one. 

Dallas Rose did a good job of building; 
a character out of Ginny for such a short 
story. 

The Mars story was good. I always 
like stories laid on another planet, if I 
can be made to see the planet in my mind. 

My favorite was The Unexpected Weapon. I was going to say that's the kind I 
like best. Why don't you have more like 
that? But what kind is it? Maybe you 
know. If you do, print more of them. 




Costello has been writing some fine stories. Enough said. 

Let's see, have I covered them all? Anyway, there was none that I didn't finish 
and then decide, "there's another good 
one." So you see, _ you've got a steady customer. But then I may be prejudiced, I've 
been reading it so long. 

Oh yes, about the shorts at the end of 
the stories. I don't know if I like them or 
not. If they're good I always wonder why 
the author doesn't write a story around it, 
instead of wasting the idea. 

George Bremer 
909 Superior Ave. 
Gladstone, Michigan 

SOME THINGS TO WRITE ABOUT 

Dear Mr. Browne : 

Very glad to see the letters column in 
the September issue of AS! The opinions 
of the readers are always good. 

But this time I thought the stories were 
excellent, also. In fact, nothing stopped me 
from reading said issue from cover to cover between Saturday afternoon, when my 
husband brought it home, and the present 
moment. Very good I And most of all the 
heroes were human. 

The cover this time was not as bad as 
some I have seen. In fact it was quite colorful. (Was is the word for it, when one 
has a ten-mo nth-old baby daughter.) 

Although I did like your downing 
around in the Observatory, ".here are plenty 
of things and event* tu be observed without that. The cuicome of the Korean crisis, 
what the sc'ieiu:ef:aiov.,.Mi bel'eve in about 
the outcome of this inhere .n the futu-e. . . 
jost loads of things to thick about, some 
of them worry us plenty. (And I do not 
think the ri>lig. mists have very comforting 
solutions. How's about you adding your 
opinions on the subject?) 

If you do print this letter, you might 
pat in a hint for me tliat I would enjoy 
having aotne pen pals, especially others 
who are more than just a little interested 
in the future ami have ideas on this subAnna Lee McLeod 
213 S. Union Ave. 
Havre-de- Grace, Maryland 

We'd like nothing better than to be 
able to knock out a few thousand words 
that would tell our renders what the outcome of the Korean crisis would be, or 
what the future of this planet holds. But 
the fact remains that being an editor 
doesn't make one omnisc:ent~a point that 
some editors and columnists we could 
name have evidently failed to grasp, — Ed. 

WELCOME STEANGER1 

Dear Mr. Browne, 

I am a stranger to the reader's page of 
this magazine, but AS ia no stranger to me 



THE READER'S FORUM 



159 



J life. 

During the war, of course, it was impossible to obtain your mag over here, 
although 1 did manuiv lo obtain a British 
reprint featuring "Wanted Seven Fearleas Engineers" (a smashing yarn by the 
way!), and I can tell you 1 really treasured that mag, It was an oasis in the 
desert, believe me! , 

However, T managed to get a subscription through the currency blockade in '48 
and since then "Happy days are here 
ajtain." 

I have noted many of the requests you 
have from time to time for a revival of 
"Tharn" and "Avar" and I would like to 
add mine to the many. How about it? 
Since "Avar" is dead and "Tharn" is presumably living happily ever after, why not 
create a new character? Say perhaps, "The 
Son of Tharn" or some such sequel. I 
would sure like to read one of those CroMagnon yarns again. 

Things are much brighter on this side 
now as far as sf is concerned. There are 
quite a few Burroughs pocket books being published, as well as many others. In 
'48 you had to hunt like the devil to find 
an sf mag, and brother, I mean hunt! 

About covers, I sigrct with the lady who 
complained in the September issue, let's 
have more conservative covers please, and 
then maybe you will truly be the top mag 
in the field. There was much mention recently about reprints, and 1 agree with 
your policy except that I think you could 
afford to improve your mag further by 
printing sav, one story each month which 
HAS stood the test of time. It must be 
admitted there are SOME stories which 
have not become dated and "Adam Link" 
mentioned by Mrs. Phillips (readers forum 
Sept. issue) is a classical example of this 

Best wishes, and keep up the good work. 

Kenneth E. Smith 
417 Smithdown ltd. 
Liverpool. 15. 
Lanes., England 



Dear Editor: 

In your September issue of AMAZING 
STORIES is a letter written by Mrs. Inez 
Neuman in which she takes you to task 
for the idealized female form that usually 
adorns the  cover. 
She suggested that you put the matter to 
a vote among sf fans. 

I am much in the same boat as Mrs. 
Newman, being a housewife with a three 
year old boy, and may I say right now 
that I heartily second everything Mrs. 
Newman says. Especially the part of her 



New Color Slides! 

and B & IV Negatives! 




BE TALLER 

PERMANENTLY 

Actually be 1 to 3 inches taller. A new 
scientific method for permanent height increase has now been developed. FREE 
INFORMATION. Write NATURAL METHODS, P.O. Box 4!>3, Dept. 1), liriggs Station, 
Los Angeles. 




ILLUSTRATED COMIC 
BOOKLETS 

HE KIND MEN LIKEt 

( VEST POCKET SIZE) 




GHAYKO, Dept. 



LEG SUFFERERS 




LIEPE METHODS, 



B IA D ™f E ctive 

DETECTIVE Particular FREK Write 
GEO. Z. WAGNER, 125 W. 86th SI., H,Y. 



160 



 



Photo Developing & Printing 

8 Exposure Roll . . . 40c 

iHHt--
Repairs 

^ y* Jay's Photo Senna 




ILLUSTRATED LITTLE BOOKS 



PAGEANT SALES CO. 



WHY CANT YOU ADVERTISE? 

This b one inch of advertising space. It Cost! only 
$13.30 and reaches more than 245,000 readers. 
Far complete information write to Ziff-Davis Publishing 
Company, 1 85 N. Wabash Avenue, Chicago 1, Hi. 

CLASSIFIED ADVERTISING 



letter, "Science Fiction slowly tut surely 
is climbing up... change tie cheap, shoddy 
art covers and help give sf a boost upward." 

One more thought before I close — Isn't 
it wonderful that, although the world appears to be about to blow itself up, people 
still have enough faith in humanity to 
dream of mankind in far-off ages reaching 
the most remote stars ! 

Mrs. Ralph Campbell 
7711-6th Ave. 
Battle Creek, Mich. 



One of the reasons — perhaps the basic 
reason— that humanity is still around after 
all these years is thai every veneration lias 
a plentiful sujijihj of dreamem! Sd. 

Dear Sir; 

Count my vote for Mrs. I. Neuman. I 
don't like those sexy covers either, for the 
she states. 



I. Bayler 

2315-26th Ave. 

San Francisco, Cal. 



Tin: short articles 
all right, but I'd 
what is actually 
rds bringing- these 

John L. Camper 
Route No. 1 
Adamsville, Tenn. 



Iv with Mrs. Neuman 
think AMAZING is 
the stands. Please 
i ASF and OW type. 
!ep the good stories 



Dennis Lynch 
2834 Charlaris 
San Marino 9, 



atter 



! Reader's Form 



Inez 



and I want to be 
irst to add a fervent "Amen" 
rks regarding the lurid covers 
.gazines. I have nothing but 
he stories, and only wiih the 
up to their high standards, 
a wife, age 26, and a mother 
■y observant small sons, ages 
: have been reading AMAZING 
nee 1934 when a>i obliging 
; me loose in her files of 
md ASTOUNDING that dated 
I; and FANTASTIC since the 
.it tlie newsstands. So, I have 
s of giving up my science


THE READER'S FORUM 



161 



fiction, even though my Navy husband is 
shocked by my reading material (he is not 
a science-fiction fan and merely judges by 
the cover) ; my grocer from whom I buy 
my literature leers at me conspiringly (I 
am active in community affairs and I am 
sure the word has gotten around that I 
don't confine my reading to "The Ladies 
Home Journal") ; or because my boys 
come to me with an AMAZING or FANTASTIC magazine in their hands and ask 
"Mommy, why is that man (or BEM as 
the case may be) doing such and such to 
that lady on the- book?" 

No, I won't give up AMAZING or FANTASTIC, but I, too, hope that you will 
give ua magazines about which we can be 
proud to say "Yes, this is the sciencefiction you have been, hearing so much 
about lately." 

Mrs. V. W. Vonheeder 
511 Sycamore Street 
San Lorenzo, Cal. 



Launcher Arrow 

By W. R. CHASE 

IN THESE columns scientific hobbyists 
have often been discussed. There were 
the radio "hams", the amateur telescope 
"nuts", and a dozen other categories of 
people who pursue scientific hobbies for 
pleasure, profit and entertainment, and 
who very often contribute something significant. There are other hobbyists, particularly in the field of sports who are 
more vociferous than the above mentioned 
but since their fields are not scientific, 
they haven't been mentioned. Some Qualification must be made here, however. 

The ancient, honorable and still popular 
sport of archery, surprisingly enough, has 
many of the qualifications of a scientific 
hobby, and in light of certain proposals 
which will be discussed, has a right to be 
considered "scientific". 

The only older weapons than the bow 
and arrow are the knife and spear and 
through a long period or' trial and error 
culminating in the English longbow of the 
fifteenth and sixteenth centuries, the bow 
and arrow have attained their ultimate 
status, modified only slightly hy the introduction of metal bows, metal arrows, 
and a little gadget ry like sighting devices. 

Since about nineteen twenty, archery has 
become exceedingly popular, in particular 
many professional people, scientists etc., 
have indulged in it. As might be expected, the scientific minded were not content 
to accept the bow and arrow, in their 
present ultimate form. They knew of 
course that the weapon had evolved by 
trial and arrow. But why does a bow require a particular shape? What happens 




LAW. 



More JJ^ffitK PrestiSK )^ r * M ™S ffTu^fl^^K 



IF NATURE SLEEPS 

|$? E ^J£ ■ eSSwSf rt IW TwSrtf-w man JUS* il.TO Mliw i33 

STANDARD REMEDY COMPANY. Dept. I D-l 



QUIT TOBACCO! 



Uw thousands who havo eomplately obtained satisiactojy 
frosdsm from tobacco with ths old genuine TOBACCO 
BAN IS HER. Sond ior FREE BOOKLET dMcriiing the ill 
chWa si tobneco. and a saio reliablo home t.ealment. 

C GOSTAF H. FlISTAFSON CO. 
2325 E. Victory Blvd. Dept. yq Ft. Worth 3, Texas 





„, "' HEED. 
»** MOHEV 



162 



 



UNHAPPY? LONELY? DISCOURAGED? 

GEGBGE BALL, noted spiritual advisor, 
guides hundreds of people cm their problems — 
LOVE — MABBTAGE — FINANCES — BUSINESS— ETC. 

10 questions or leas answered for $1.00 
(checks certified). Send birthdate, self addiu.-.-cd stamped return envelope to: 

GEORGE BALL 
P. O. BOX 248 
JACKSON ■ ■ ■ MICHIGAN 



APrniiuTAjjT 

11 II BECOME AN EXPERT HH I 



I AS"-: ,.f > 



iversity. 411 So. Deal 



BECOME A 



MENTAL SUPERMAN 

OVERNIGHT! 



ILLUSTRATED BOOKLETS S NOVELTIES 



iso sss. $i.oo 



. r 



BINOCULARS 




ITERION CO., Dept. DE-S 



if you change It! How does the strength 
of the string affect the "cast" or velocity 
of the arrow? Can the bow be imnroved? 
How ahout the arrow? 

After a long detailed experimentation, 
physicist-hobbyists, found Hint the bow and 
i-row were correctly designed, both acirding to experiment and as subsequent 
atheniatical theory predicted! The arch's went so far as to go into elaborate 
atheniatical analyses of shooting and 
found that theory predicted experiment. 
Another amusing-— and perhaps 



it ti 



fai 
Obvi 



facet of arch 
o modern n 
:d this way 



try. : 

arfare. Archers h 
: what ia needed 
in which 



:PpIy 



itop 



n't and the 

luble with the weapon that will, the 
bazooka, the large our, is that the instant 
it's fired it gives awav its position to the 
tankmen. Tf tlx- first shot doesn't nail the 
tank, the bazoo kit n nevs are generally 
lead men. It is obvious then that the 
lsers of anti-tank weapons are somewhat 
■eluctant to use their weapons close-up 
vhere they'll be most effective. The Korein fighting has br.rn,: this theory out. 

So, reason the archers, why not attach 
l tank-killing charge of explosive to a 
huge arrow launched from a large bow? 
There is no flash or flare. The Banners 
are not revealed. Presto, they will wait 
until they're close, knowing they won't be 
spotted. 

The theory may have some merits, but 
generally speaking it would seem rather 
tenuous. Perhaps some variant of this 
technique, using say, the cross-bow, might 
irk. It's worthy of consideration anyhow. 
: archer, like most, fanatic hobbyists is 
willing to try anything once. 

utilizing an automobile spring is another (.-sample of a 
designed oy trial and error which 
theory as well. Analysis hai 



this 



31-I'ect


ly designed according to the 
physics even though the designers didn't 
know Newton from an apple. 

rossbow addicts are as enthusiastic as 
«rs and claim even greater advantages 
for their weapon. 

There is a potential use for both these 
eapons which till now has not even been 
msidered. When spaciai navigation beimes commonplace, a method of flipping 
line or cord between space vessels, is 
operative. This shooting can be done with 
mie sort of a gun like those used in 
resent-day life saving work, but in space 
ily moderate forces aye wanted. Perhaps 
le bow or the crossbow, with their relate simplicity will provide the answer. 
It seems that no matter where you look 
)u can find a relationship between what 
iu might at first regard as totally undated. We haven't heard the last of 
■ossbows or for that matter ordinary 
)ws— nor will we, if the enthusiastic 
rchers have their way! 

★ ★ ** 

PRINTED IN U.S.A. 



Strange Cosmic Forces 



HAVE YOU EVER, in the stilling of night, 
gazed at the heavens overhead? If so, you may 
have wondered if there are living things— perhaps human beings — moving about on the 
numerous worlds in the vast reaehes of space. 
Do you know that the entire universe is alive, 
vihraut with an intelligence and an energy 
that can he harnessed by man on earth? 

What is more important, is that this Cosmic 
mind- force is also within you. You can use it 
to become more positive, vibrant, and exuberant with ideas — to achieve greater 
things in life. 

Write for FREE Book 

Tilt RosnTiic.iuNS (MOT a religions or^iininat ion) ;:.1VC 
for centuries investigated and preserved tlie unusual 
facts about the mysteries of life and of the universe. 
These trull:, they make available to sincere seekers 
everyrelw.re, illnml discrimination. They offer you a 
FREE book. The Mastery of Life, which tells how you 
eun learn to rem ke your life by converting hopes into 
realities. For your I'ree cupy, write today to; 

Scribe X.T.H. 

7&ROSICRUCI ANS (amorc) 

San Jose, California 



