THE MAN WHO FORGOT (Novelet— 15,000) by Chariot Creighton 36 

HE STARTED vaguely at the body. The moon, in quarter phase with 

closely cropped lawn, shell- its bright crescent far brighter than 

blue in color. That didn't it should be even at night, 

seem right. Suddenly he caught a movement in 

The sky was a canopy of black in another direction. A bright ball was 

which a ball of fire rode high. rising above the horizon. 

Off toward the horizon was another "Must be some kind of ship," he 





mumbled. 

But his eyes told him it wasn't. Its 
outlines were too rough. It was another moon, small, very close to the 
earth. 

"The earthl" It was a sharp ejaculation escaping from his lips. He 
stared at the ascending lesser moon, 
the larger one on the opposite horizon, 
the sun that was much too small in a 
sky that was much too black, and 
slowly shook his head. It was not the 
earth. 

A puzzled frown creased his forehead. What was the earth? This 
wasn't the earth, whatever it was. 
But what was the earth? The word 
had risen from some depth of memory 
without its associations. 

"Let's see," he said aloud. "The 
earth has a larger sun. Does it have 
any moons?" 

He searched his thoughts without 
finding a definite answer. He gave up 
the problem of the sky and the earth 
and turned his attention back to his 
immediate surroundings. 

His eyes caught the flash of something bright in a thicket of neatly 
trimmed shrubs. He went over to it 
and dragged it out. It was a suit. An 
emergency suit of the type worn for 
dropping to a planet from above its 
atmosphere. Not a space suit designed 
for working in a vacuum. 

"What's it doing here, I wonder?" 
he thought. 

He examined it curiously. Its bulky 
legs were zippered together. They 
could be unzippered for walking, but 
even then it would be clumsy work. 

Attached to the shoulders was a 
harness with fine strands of cord 
running to a bulky pile of cloth. A 
parachute. 

"Could I have worn it?" he asked, 
and in asking the question he suddenly realized consciously what had 
been troubling him. "I can't remem


ber!" he whispered, surprised and 
troubled. "Let's see. What can I remember?" 

He searched frantically for memories to tie him to the past. There was 
none. His thoughts could go back 
to ten minutes ago. That was all. 

"Why?" he asked numbly. 

He probed his scalp with gentle 
fingers. There was no sign of injury 
that might account for loss of memory. 

"Maybe there's some identification!" he exclaimed. 

He explored his clothing. He had on 
a loose fitting shirt of pastel blue 
cloth that had no mark of identification on it nor pockets that might contain something. His trousers had pockets, but they were empty. They were 
more than empty. They were new, and 
had never had anything in them. 

"All my clothes are new!" he whispered. 

He turned his attention to the emergency suit. It should have markings of 
some kind on it. Perhaps a number. 

Finally he sat down on the blue 
lawn and gave up. There was nothing 
— except a vague feeling that the style 
of the clothing he wore was strange 
and subtly different from any he had 
ever worn before. 

"So," he said tonelessly. "I can't remember my name or where I'm from 
— except that it's a planet called 
earth. And I'm not there, whatever 
this planet is." 

A vague uneasiness began to make 
itself felt within him. An urge grew 
to put a lot of distance between him 
and this spot with its neatly cropped 
lawn and trimmed shrubs. And the 
emergency suit. 

He looked at the thing of plastic 
and glassite, feeling the growth of the 
urge to get far away from it. 

"But it's the only thing linking with 
the past that I have!" he protested. 

From the depths of lost memory 



THE MAN WHO FORGOT 



39 



rose a feeling of panic. A premonition 
of danger connected with the suit. 

He drew back from it, still reluctant 
to leave it. Abruptly it burst into 
flame. The flames were blinding, the 
heat they threw off intense even at 
ten feet. There was no smoke, and 
shortly there was no flame. Only a 
scorched area of ground and some 
charred brush that hadn't quite 
burned away. 

tiJ_J£LLO," a cultured female 
voice sounded at his back. 

He started slightly, his shoulders 
stiffening. Then he turned casually. 

"Hello," he said mildly. 

The girl was dressed in the same 
type of loose-fitting shirt and trousers 
that he himself wore. Her well-proportioned breasts and smoothly rounded hips utterly destroyed the effect 
of masculinity of her attire, however. 

As his eyes came to rest on her 
face the word "beautiful" rose into 
his thoughts. But there was more than 
beauty. Good nature sparkled from 
her eyes and lurked in the corners of 
her lips. Her skin was a soft tan in 
color. Her hair, glistening brown, fell 
in disorder as though recently tossed 
about in the wind. 

"What are you doing here?" he 
asked quickly. 

"I was about to ask you the same 
thing," she said cheerily. "I live here. 
I'm Clara Valkor." She said it as 
though she expected the name to 
mean something to him. 

"Clara Valkor," he said slowly. 
Then he frowned deeply to cover up 
his thoughts. "Have you ever seen 
me before, Clara?" 

"No, I haven't, " she said. 

"You don't know who I am?" 

"No," she said. "Should I?" 

"I don't know," he said slowly. 
"You see, I don't know who I am 
either. I don't even know how I got 
here." He wondered why he hadn't 



told her about the emergency suit. 

"You mean you're a victim of amnesia?" Clara asked incredulously, her 
eyes widening. "Then I'd better get 
you to the, house and call the doctor!" 

"No!" he said. He was surprised at 
the fierce insistence in his voice. 
"That is," he covered up, "I've already examined my scalp. There's no 
injury of any kind. Nothing a doctor 
could do." 

"That's where you're wrong," Clara 
said. "Very few cases of amnesia are 
from head injuries. Most of them are 
purely psychological. An escape mechanism." 

"What do you mean?" he asked, 
feeling himself tremble. 

"I mean—" Clara began. A shout 
interrupted her. 

"Who's this and how'd he get 
here?" the man who had shouted a 
greeting asked when he came up to 
them. 

"This is— Randolph B e e c h e r, 
Karn," Clara said. 

"Glad to meet you, Rand/' Karn 
said. But his eyes as they surveyed 
him didn't match the warmth of his 

Randolph Beecher, he thought. It 
was as good a name as any. But why 
had Clara given him a name rather 
than telling Karn the truth? And 
there had been a flash of dislike in her 
first glance at Karn. 

"Rand dropped out at my invitation," Clara was saying. "I haven't 
said anything about it because I — -well, 
frankly I didn't think he would accept. He's a pretty busy man most of 
the time and can't take a couple of 
weeks off like this as a rule." 

"Busy, huh..." Karn said. "At 
what?" 

"Oh," Clara laughed lightly, "at 
things that would bore you to tears. 
He's a specialist. The history of chess. 
He's writing a book on it." 



40 



 



"Chess!" Karn said disgustedly. 

Rand smiled, guessing that Clara 
had chosen that subject because she 
knew that Karn would avoid it in the 
future. He felt grateful to her. She 
had in one shrewd stroke established 
him as a guest and surrounded him 
with the protection of disinterest in 
his personal affairs. 

But why? He darted her a questioning glance. Her expression was casual. 

"So you're going to be here a couple of weeks," Karn went on. "Well, 
I'll see you around, I suppose. I'll run 
along now. By the way, what part 
of Mars are you from?" 

"He's from Kem Juncture," Clara 
said hastily. "And you should see his 
library! Would you believe it? He has 
over forty thousand books on chess 
alone, some of them dating back to 
the twentieth century!" 

"Any good books?" Karn said. 
With that parting thrust he turned 
and strode away. 

Rand watched him go, hesitating 
to face Clara. He felt her hand steal 
into his. Suddenly he was acutely 
aware of her presence, the magnetic 
attraction of her. 

"Why did you do it?" he asked, 
turning his head and looking down at 
her. 

"When you get better acquainted 
with Karn you'll know," Clara said. 
"He doesn't know that I know it, but 
he's a muspo," 

"Muspo?" Rand echoed. 

"Martian Union police officer. 
Secret police," she said, linking her 
arm in his. "Let's go to the house." 

Rand felt beads of perspiration 
form on his brow and wondered why. 

pjE STEPPED out of the shower 
and began rubbing himself 
briskly. He paused for a second, 
sensing that this shower was a 
habitual thing with him. Another little thing to add to the many accumu


lating, that might eventually add up 
to complete memory. 

"Randolph Beecher," he whispered. 
"It isn't my name, I'm quite sure. 
But already I'm thinking of myself as 
Rand." 

His thoughts went back to the previous day. Clara had brought him 
into the house, a huge rambling affair 
of sandstone, beautifully built. She 
had introduced him to Hans Valkor, 
her father. There had been others, 
too. So many that he could remember 
only a few. 

"Welcome to the House of Valkor," 
Hans had said warmly. Rand had instinctively liked Clara's father. He 
was tall and sturdy, in his late fifties 
with thinning gray hair and a ruddy 
complexion. A man who had lived well 
and made living an art. 

But Rand had sensed an undercurrent of something in Hans. He tried 
to analyze it now as he dressed. Was 
it fear? It seemed partly that, but 
more wariness than fear. That was 
it. Hans was like a man on a battle 
front, suspecting him yet accepting 
him. Ready to shake hands or fight 
for his life. 

And the others. They had been cordial but too quiet. Reserved as though 
saying anything might mean trouble. 

Rand shrugged off his feeling of insecurity and finished dressing. He 
looked about his large airy room with 
a feeling of pleasure. If this room was 
to be his for two weeks it would give 
him time to get his bearings and perhaps decide what to do. Whether to 
continue the masquerade that Clara 
had started or to seek help in discovering his true identity. 

He went to the window and pulled 
back the heavy drapes to look out 
over the rolling landscape and up 
into the black sky at the small moon 
sailing with visible motion above. 

"So this is Mars," he muttered 
thoughtfully. "I have no memory of 



THE MAN WHO FORGOT 



41 



Mars. All my memories and feeling 
seem to be of the Earth. I must have 
come here in that emergency suit, 
dropped from a ship out in space. 
"Why didn't I tell Clara of that? Kem 
Juncture! I'll have to find the library 
and learn a little about Mars and Kem 
Juncture so I'll be able to carry this 
off without giving myself away." 

A soft knock sounded at the door. 

"Come in," Rand said. 

The door opened cautiously. It was 
Clara. 

"Hi," Rand said, grinning cheerfully. "Come on in." 

She entered and closed the door behind her. 

"I'm still suffering from — " he began. 

"Boredom?" she interrupted loudly. 
"After you've relaxed you won't, darling. And after you've been here for 
two weeks you'll forget all about your 
musty old chess books." 

He frowned. She went to a wall 
and motioned for him to come over. 
When he did she lifted back a picture, 
revealing a small button. 

"Microphone/' she formed with her 
lips. 

She let the picture back gently, put 
her arms around his neck, and kissed 
him. 

"Mmmm," she said. "That was nice. 
Kiss me again darling." Her voice 
was intimate, inviting. She placed her 
cheek against his so that her lips were 
against his ear. "You must be very 
careful," she whispered so low that 
he could barely hear the words. 
"Every moment in this house you will 
be watched for the slightest suspicious 
move. After breakfast well go for 
a stroll and then we can talk again. 
But whatever you do don't tell anyone you've lost your memory," 

Her lips caressed his cheek. Her 
lips sought his again. He felt her 
warm body against his, vibrant with 
life, inviting. His arms went around 



her. 

She drew back her head, a half 
smile playing on her lips. In her eyes 
was tenderness, love, and fear. 

He released her, his thoughts whirling. Was her love an act? It seemed 
so, designed to lull the suspicions of 
whoever was watching. But if the 
love were an act the fear definitely 
wasn't. 

Clara was afraid. Her father was 
afraid. 

"Let's go down to breakfast, Rand," 
she said, taking his hand and leading 
him toward the door. "After breakfast I want to show you the grounds. 
They're dad's pride and joy." 

T^ARN WAS alone in the breakfast 
room, eating a baked mushroom 
stuffed with deviled egg. He studied 
Rand with frank curiosity as he entered. 

"How's the chess player after a 
night's sleep in the country?" he 
asked dryly. 

"Never better, Kara," Rand said 
with an attempt at friendliness. 

"Oh! A chess player?" a new voice 
exclaimed. It's owner, a gaunt woman 
with boney shoulders and wrinkled 
face, stood in the doorway eyeing 
Rand possessively. 

"On vacation," Clara said warningry. "I made him promise he would 
neither talk nor play chess while he's 
here." 

"But you can't do that!" the gaunt 
woman said indignantly. "You know 
my love for the game, Clara, and it's 
years since I've seen a chess player. 
You can't!" 

"Why not play her?" Kara asked. 
"Aunt Bessie won't rest now until 
you do. You didn't meet Aunt Bessie 
last night? She was in her room all 
evening, I think." 

"Perhaps later," Rand said uncomfortably. "Pleased to meet you, Aunt 
Bessie." He smiled at her. There 



42 



 



seemed to be a faint disappointment 
in her expression at his sudden surrender. He turned to the table loaded 
with food. 

Clara was filling two plates. Rand 
studied the food in the hopes of finding something familiar. Odors from 
the steaming food taken out of steam 
trays were familiar, but they held no 
associations. Simple recognition was 
all they evoked. 

He took the two plates and held 
them while Clara continued filling 
them. Then he followed her over to 
a secluded nook overlooking a picturesque section of garden beyond a narrow window. 

With the first bite he found that he 
was very hungry. He decided that although he couldn't remember his last 
breakfast or any other breakfast before that, that it must undoubtedly 
be the finest one he had ever had. 

"It's part of dad's way of life." 
Clara said. "Johnson, the cook, used 
to be chef at one of the most famous 
restaurants of all Mars. Dad had to 
buy the restaurant to get his contract 
and order him out here." 

Others were coming in now. Rand 
listened to fragments of conversation 
in the hopes of picking up something 
that might mean something. There 
was nothing but small talk. Four were 
talking of playing tennis after breakfast. 

"Let's hurry," Clara whispered. 

"I'm through any time," Rand said. 
"In fact I'm finished right now." 

Clara nodded and slid back her 
chair. Rand followed her out of the 
room, conscious of the curious glances 
that followed them. He walked beside her in silence until they^ were 
away from the house and in the 
center of a large area of lawn where 
they couldn't possibly be overheard. 

"This ought to be good enough." 
he said abruptly. "Let's sit down here 
and talk. There are a lot of things 



I'd like to know." 

"Naturally," Clara said, stretching 
out lazily on her side and cupping her 
head in her arm. She regarded him 
with a smile, then became serious. 
"First, do you remember anything 
yet? Anything at all?", 

"N— no," Rand said. He had been 
about to tell her he was sure he was 
from the earth. "Something's going on 
here," he said hastily. "What is it? 
Why are you and your father afraid? 
What's Karn to you? Who are all 
these other people? Why are they 
here? Who's aunt Bessie? Why did 
she want to play chess with me and 
then seem disappointed when I said 
I would?" 

Clara studied him thoughtfully. 
"For a man with amnesia," she said 
slowly, "you have a particularly keen 
mind." 

"I have, haven't I?" Rand said. 
"Probably it will help me get to 
the root of who I am eventually. 
That's another thing. Why didn't you 
want Rand to know about it? Is there 
something wrong with losing one's 
memory?" 

"Did you know that Mars is planning on seceding from the interplanetary government?" Clara asked abruptly. 

"I not only didn't know it," Rand 
said, "but I didn't know there was a 
planetary government. What's that 
got to do with my loss of memory? 
You ask as though that had some 
bearing on it." 

Clara looked across the lawn moodily without answering. When she spoke 
it was on a different subject. 

"I'd forgotten that aunt Bessie 
likes to play chess," she said. "Of 
course you'll have to keep stalling 
her. If you played she'd quickly realize you're no expert. If you know how 
to play the game at all. Do you?" 

"I don't know," Rand said truthfully. 



THE MAN WHO FORGOT 



4-3 



"Karn is my brother," Clara said. 
"I'm sure he's a muspo. Dad is a 
loyalist. He's firmly convinced that 
Mars must stay in the interplanetary 
government, that to secede would 
eventually lead to solar war. If he 
knew that his own son was a muspo 
he would — " 

"He would what?" Rand asked, 
when she fell abruptly silent. 

Clara didn't answer. She was looking off in the distance. Rand followed 
her gaze. He caught a brief glimpse 
of a man with a pair of binoculars before he disappeared behind some 
shrubs. 

"I hope he wasn't a lip reader," 
Clara said, troubled. 

"Who was he?" Rand asked. 

"One of Karn's friends," she answered. "The house is always so filled 
with guests. Karn always has a couple. 
Dad has loads of them, mostly loyalists. He doesn't know that Karn is 
against him. Karn's too clever to let 
him catch on. He always agrees 
with dad when political matters are 
discussed." 

Rand reached forward quickly and 
put his arms around Clara. "Here 
comes Karn," he whispered. "Kiss 
me." 

Her arms went over his shoulders. 
Her lips sought his and lingered. Her 
body was tense. Finally she drew 
back and" looked around with an attempt at being casual. 

"Why, Karn isn't anywhere in 
sight! " she said. 

"I know," Rand murmured. 

She turned startled eyes back to 
him. When his lips sought hers again 
she didn't resist. Slowly her body 
relaxed its tenseness. Then, suddenly, 
she was crying softly. 

«J'M GOING into town, Rand," 
Karn said. "Want to come along 
for the ride?" 
Rand and Clara had just returned 



to the house from their walk around 
the grounds and had run into Karn 
as they entered. 
Rand hesitated. 

"Go ahead, darling," Clara said. "I 
want to take a nap anyway." 

"Okay," Rand said, wondering why 
Clara was willing to let him be exposed to her brother's keen mind. 

"See you when you get back, 
Rand," Clara said with a smile. She 
turned abruptly and went to the stairway leading to the second floor. 

Rand followed Karn outside and 
discovered that a car had drawn up in 
front. The man behind the wheel was 
the one who had been spying on him 
and Clara with the binoculars. 

He wanted to draw back, make 
some excuse not to go. But Karn's 
hand was on his arm. The car door 
was open. He stooped down and entered. A second later the car was in 
motion. 

Karn sat beside him, his eyes studying him frankly, a smile playing at 
the corners of his mouth. 

"What do you think of the interplanetary situation, Rand?" he asked 
abruptly. 

Rand shrugged. "I don't think anything about it," he said carelessly. 
"Not interested, to be frank about it." 

"About as interested as I am in 
chess?" Karn said. 

"That's right," Rand said. 

"I might fool you," Karn said 
quietly. "Maybe I know a lot about 
chess." 

Rand swallowed loudly. He wondered why he should be so tense. "Interesting if true," he said, looking out 
the windows at the rolling landscape 
beside the highway. 

"Enough," Karn said quietly, "so 
that I believe you are the man I've 
been requisitioned to find." 

Rand said nothing. By great effort 
he was keeping his trembling from 
showing. He studied his reactions with 



44 



 



intense interest. He was beginning to 
sense that deep in his subconscious 
was something cut off from conscious 
contact that was listening and knowing and perhaps planning. "The real 
me," be decided. 

Karn's chuckle interrupted his 
thoughts. "Still my move, eh?" he 
said. "Well, here we are." 

The car pulled smoothly to a stop 
under the marquee of a restaurant. 
Kara got out and held the door open. 

Rand thought of escape. He looked 
around. There was no place to run 
to, and even if he managed to escape 
he wouldn't know where to go. 

He got out of the car, and suddenly 
he was wondering at his calm. Did it 
rise from subconscious knowledge? Or 
was it merely the product of a fatalism that conditioned him to accept 
what he couldn't avoid? 

Karn's must know that he was unable to remember his past life, that 
he wasn't the chess historian Clara 
had claimed, and that he had come 
from the earth, the mother planet 
that Mars and Karn was planning 
war against. The chauffeur in the 
front seat had probably read his lips 
and gotten the whole story. Maybe 
Karn had checked and found his 
identity as Randolph Beech er was 
fictitious. It would be a simple enough 
matter for the M.U.S.P. to check on 
that. 

And the reason Karn wasn't pointing a gun at him to prevent him from 
escaping must be that he knew there 
was no place to escape to. 

So he preceded Karn into the restaurant calmly as though he were 
unaware that he was a prisoner about 
to be taken to whatever prison lay 
hidden in this place. 

"Right on through to that door at 
the back," Karn said. 

Rand nodded, eyeing the few customers sitting at the tables with blank 
expression. At the door Karn had 



pointed out be paused while Karn 
rapped three short knocks, paused, 
and repeated them. 

The door opened revealing a narrow hallway. Through one door came 
kitchen sounds. They passed several 
other doors. 

"That door was electrically controlled," Karn explained. "There's a 
mike in the door frame that picked 
up my knock." 

He stepped past Rand now and 
went to a door, opening it. 

"After you, Rand," he said. 

The room Rand stepped into was a 
small office. There were four desks 
crowded into it, and on each desk 
were several phones. 

"A bookie joint," Karn grinned. "A 
real one. That's how we finance our 
operations, and it also gives us a 
ready made network of private wires 
for our real work." 

"I don't get it," Rand said. 

"You will," Karn said. "I want you 
to meet Aaron Vorik, our leader. 
Aaron, this is the man I called you 
about." 

"Oh, yesl" the short, dark-haired 
man said, rising. He extended a hand 
in a hawk-like motion. 

Rand accepted it, his thoughts 
mystified by the apparently warm reception. He had expected to be arrested. 

"Sit down, Rand," Kara said. 
Aaron will explain to you what we 
have in mind." 

Rand took a seat slowly, studying 
Aaron Vorik. A product of the universal melting pot, he had the nonracialness that characterizes those 
whose veins carry the blood of all 
races equally mixed. His eyes were 
black and extremely intelligent, his 
mouth large and flexible. 

"It's very simple," Aaron said. "We 
want you to plan all the tactical details of our war of secession from 
Earth," 



THE MAN WHO FORGOT 



TOURING THE long moment of absolute silence that followed, 
Rand was aware of two things. The 
eager, intent expressions on Karia's 
and Aaron's faces, and the surge of 
elation that rose in his mind like a 
flood, filling his consciousness so intensely that he felt it must show on 
his face. 

Then, as though it were some other 
person across the room, he heard himself saying calmly, with a mixture of 
caution and modesty, "But I'm not 
qualified for such a task. Chess is basically similar to war and politics, but 
it doesn't qualify a man to deal with 
the intricacies of actual politics and 
war. Anyway, how do you know my 
sympathies are for the secessionists? 
They might be for the loyalists!" 

"Nonsense!" Aaron Vorik- said. 
"Yon are a master of chess. I've heard 
of you. The master is intrigued by the 
problem— not the ethics of the problem. You cannot refuse. Think of it — 
to be the master planner behind the 
war of worlds! To put on paper the 
deployment of forces in space, the attacks, the defenses, the strategy involving — not inanimate pieces on a 
board — but millions of men and trillions of dollars worth of materials. 
The timing involved! The pattern of 
attack against superior odds ! The 
probing of the mind behind the enemy, 
and tlie estimation of his strategy! 
The challenge !" 

"You say you've heard of me?" 
Rand asked cautiously. 

"Better than that," Arron said. He 
pulled open a drawer and brought out 
a book, tossing it with careless good 
humor toward Rand. 

Rand caught it. The name under 
the title caught his startled eye. It 
was Randolph Beecher. And the title 
was "Chess Logistics." 

"I've read it — since yesterday," 
Aaron said. "With it I could almost 
do the planning myself, but why 
should I when we can have the master 



himself work on the problems involved?" 

Rand only half heard. He was staring at the book in fascination. He 
knew every word in the book. 

He closed his eyes. "On page 
fifty-six," he thought wonderingly, 
"there is a typographical error in the 
third line." Idiy he opened the book 
to that page. The error was there! 

"/ must be Randolph Beecher" he 
thought. He searched his mind for 
some verification, some clue that 
could make him sure. There was nothing except a faint whisper that he 
was not. 

"All right," he heard himself say. 
It startled him. He opened his mouth 
to deny his own words, then closed 

it. 

"Fine. Fine," Aaron Vorik exclaimed, Jumping up and coming 
around his desk to shake hands with 
Rand enthusiastically. "Go out and 
order drinks sent in," he said to Karn. 
"This calls for a celebration." 

While Karn was gone Aaron Varik 
went to a desk and took out a metal 
box. When he opened it Rand saw 
that it was filled with currency. 

"Take a handful," Aaron said. 
"From now on you don't need to 
worry about money. Spend a thousand 
a day if you want. Salt some away, 
just in case, if you wish. I'm doing 
that myself. Here." He took out a 
thick pile of bills and thrust them 
into Rand's hands. 

Karn returned in time to see Rand 
putting the money in his pockets, and 
nodded knowingly. He was carrying 
a tray with three sparkling drinks. 

Rand accepted one. 

"Here's to success," Aaron said. 

Rand sampled the drink cautiously. It was a strange flavor. He asked 
no questions. 

"One thing," Aaron said, smacking 
his lips over the drink, "you wiil go 
on as you have been doing, to all 
appearances. Continue your vacation 



46 



 



visit at the House of Valkor. Karn 
will see to it that you have your own 
car. You can remain oblivious of the 
intrigue going on around you there. 
That's out of your province anyway. 
You can turn moody and start a habit 
of taking afternoon drives by yourself. In a few days when you've established a routine and possible suspicion has died down you can start 
spending a few hours here each afternoon." 

Rand nodded, turning the cold glass 
in his hands absently. 

"We'd better go now," Karn said, 
finishing his drink. 

fLARA WAS nowhere around when 
they reached the house, Karn 
muttered something about having to 
see somebody. This suited Rand. He 
hurried to his room, grateful 'for the 
chance to do some serious thinking 
before he would have to see Clara. 

The biggest mystery, he knew, far 
outweighing the utterly mad offer of 
Aaron Varik for him to mastermind 
the Martian rebellion against the 
Earth, was how Clara had picked the 
name Randolph Beecher for him. Up 
until Aaron had said that he had 
heard of Beecher he had assumed that 
it had just been a name that popped 
into her mind on the spur of the moment. Even then he had decided the 
name must have come from chance 
memory. The fact that Beecher actually was a chess expert only added to 
that belief. But when he had taken 
the book on chess and realized that 
he knew it far better than any casual 
reading in the past that was lost to 
conscious memory could account for, 
he had also realized that Clara's picking of that name couldn't be chance. 

So chance was ruled out. 

"That leaves— design," Rand muttered. "But, in that case, my landing 
at this place after dropping from a 
ship in outer space would also have 



to be design. Possible. My trajectory 
could have been calculated with fair 
accuracy." 

He studied the possibilities this 
gave rise to. Clara and her father 
seemed to be fairly important people 
to rate such a huge estate. Rich, to 
be able to buy a large and famous 
restaurant just to get its chef. 

"Suppose," he thought, "just suppose I'm an Earth agent sent here 
for some reason. I couldn't act alone. 
I would have to have contacts, an 
identity, a place to stay. My contacts would get word I was coming, 
and when I would get here. One of 
them, Clara, would be on the watch 
for me. 

"That makes sense. But then something happened that caused me to 
lose my memory. Maybe I fell too 
fast. Maybe I landed wrong and 
blanked out, my instincts getting me 
out of the emergency suit before its 
chemicals reacted with the atmosphere 
and made it burn. Or before the time 
fire-bomb that might have been in it 
to destroy it went off. 

"But that would be simple amnesia. 
It wouldn't account for my knowledge 
of that chess book. It wouldn't account for the way Clara accepted my 
amnesia. If it were simple amnesia 
and she's the contact I was supposed 
to meet she would get excited about 
it. She'd perhaps know who I am and 
make a positive effort to get me to 
remember." 

He snapped his fingers in excitement at a sudden thought. 

"There's her letting me go for a 
ride alone with her brother 1 " he 
thought. "She wouldn't have done that 
unless — " 

The thought staggered him. 

"Unless she knew that there was 
something in my subconscious that 
would take care of the situation. That 
Aaron Varik would accept me. That 



THE MAN WHO FORGOT 



47 



would mean — hypnotism. In some 
way by hypnosis my true identity and 
past memories have been blocked off 
by hypnosis! Why? There could be 
only one reason. I must be a tactician 
—qualified to do the job Aaron and 
Karn want me to do, with knowledge 
of the forces and deployment of the 
Earth's space navy. If Mars ever 
found that out they would have ways 
of forcing me to talk. So if hypnosis 
could place all that knowledge beyond 
my conscious reach no amount of torture or truth drugs could get it out 
of me." 

He thought this over, nodding with 
quiet satisfaction. 

"That must be it," he decided. 
"And I can see what my objective 
would be. It would be to maneuver 
Martian ships into traps that my subconscious knows to exist, so that 
Earth could win." 

The complexity and diabolical cunning of the plot held him breathless. 
Earth sending her own key man to 
direct Martian war activities so that 
Earth could win I And that man was 
he! 

A confidence took hold of him. At 
the right times his subconscious would 
provide the knowledge he needed. Behind the hypnotically induced curtain 
of his mind his true self was working 
in full consciousness. 

With a queer loneliness he reached 
toward that hidden self, wondering 
who it might be, who he really was. 
And in answer came a faint whisper 
of thought that he could never know 
until his task was done. Until then he 
must remain— Randolph Beecher, the 
Martian. 

TTIERE WAS a discreet knock at 
the door. When Rand called, 
"Come in," a servant entered, carrying neatly pressed formal garb. 

"Your clothing just arrived, sir," 
he said deferentially. "Since there is 



to be quite a party this evening, Mr, 
Valkor suggested I get your dinner 
clothes ready for you. Dinner is in 
half an hour." 

"Thanks," Rand said. 

Twenty minutes later as he was inspecting himself another knock came. 
This time it was Clara. 

"I thought you must be back," she 
said. She surveyed his suit. "It fits 
all right," she said. "I was a little 
afraid I might have the size wrong." 

"Then it was you who ordered 
these?" Rand asked. 

"Who else?" she said. "You didn't 
have your clothes with you and I 
didn't want you to be embarrassed." 
She glanced significantly toward the 
picture behind which the microphone 
was concealed. 

Rand grinned. "You're a honey," 
he said. "How about a kiss?" 

Clara wrinkled her nose at him, but 
she went obediently into his arms. 

"Anything exciting happen with 
Karn ? " she whispered, her lips 
against his ear. 

"Plenty," Rand whispered. "There's 
something I want to know. Who am 
I?" 

He felt her body stiffen against 
him, then slowly relax. 

"I don't know," she answered. "AH 
I know is that— if you are suspected 
of being an Earth spy you will be 
killed. I don't want that to happen." 

"But you knew I was coming," 
Rand whispered. 

"No," Clara said. "I didn't." 

"You must have," Rand whispered. 
"Otherwise how would you pick the 
name Randolph Beecher for me — the 
name I'm obviously supposed to 
masquerade under?" 

"I met Randolph once," Clara said. 
"You look very much like him. 
Enough to be him." 

"Is that the truth?" Rand asked. 

"Yes," Clara whispered. 

Rand took her head in his hands 



48 



 



and held her face away, studying her 
intently. He could see nothing but 
sincerity in her eyes. 

"What's the matter?" she asked 
timidly. 

"Nothing," Rand said, "except that 
a beautiful theory goes out the window and I don't know any mare about 
myself than I did before." 

He released her. 

"Let's go downstairs," he said 
gruffly. 

"We'll have time for a short walk 
before the guests arrive," Clara said. 

A moment later they were walking 
across a broad expanse of lawn. 

"Now," Clara said. "What's this 
beautiful theory you had?" 

"Everything seemed to point toward it," Rand said. "It made me an 
Earth spy with my identity and my 
past, and almost everything else 
blocked off from consciousness by 
hypnosis. You had to be my contact 
that was to give me an identity and 
get me started." 

"I don't understand," Clara said. 
"I never saw you before that moment 
we met on the lawn." 

Rand groaned. "There's only one 
possibility," he said. "You must have 
orders to say what you're saying. It 
must be vital that I have no definite 
knowledge of what I really am. But 
— if that's so — why do I have this 
intense curiosity about myself. It 
seems to me the hypnosis blocks 
would have included an inhibition of 
curiosity about myself. Instead it 
keeps growing. I've got to learn who 
I am. It's becoming a compulsion that 
dominates my thinking. And that's 
wrong if my theory of what's back 
of it is correct." 

"What do you think's back of it?" 
Clara asked. 

"Things seem to indicate," he said, 
"that I'm here to take charge of masterminding the Martian plot for secession, and that my purpose is to so 



mastermind it that Earth forces will 
defeat the Martians. In other words, 
from behind the hypnotic curtain of 
my mind is supposed to come details 
and plans that will seem to ensure 
the Martians of winning, but which 
will ensure their being defeated." 

"What makes you think that?" 
Clara asked, staring at him with wonder. 

"Karn took me to meet Aaron 
Varik," Rand said. "I've been chosen 
— as Randolph Beecher the master 
chess player — to mastermind the Martian plans." 

"No!" Clara exclaimed unbelievingly. "But if that's true, have you 
thought to wonder why they would 
give a total stranger a job like that? 
After all, wouldn't they have a military staff trained for a thing like 
that?" 

. "They undoubtedly have," Rand 
said. "They told me they felt that my 
very lack of experience with those 
things would give me a better slant 
— enable me as a chess genius to make 
planned maneuvers that would be superior to those a military staff could 
work out." 

"Let's suppose you are what you 
think you are," Clara said. "But let's 
go further. Suppose Karn's friend 
really did read your lips and find 
out you're suffering from amnesia. 
Xarn knows I'm a thorough loyalist. 
He might suspect what you suspected 
about me, from the evidence. He and 
Aaron Varik might have come to the 
conclusion that yon were here to do 
the very thing they want you to do. 
And they might have reasoned that the 
best way is to give you full reign and 
let you map their strategy." 

"But why?" Rand asked. 

"Then, through you," she said, 
"they could find out what Earth 
would want them to do to be defeated. They could find out through you 
just what they must avoid. Instead of 



THE MAN WHO FORGOT 



49 



following your plans those plans 
would serve as the danger map in 
their operations!" 

Rand stared at her in surprise. 
"That's something I hadn't thought 
of," he said. 

They walked along in silence while 
Rand frowned over the possibilities. 
Suddenly he gave a short laugh. 

"Suppose," he said dryly, "that the 
planners on Earth thought of that too. 
Suppose they instructed my subconscious to make the only plan that 
could enable the Martians to win. 
Then by the Martians deliberately 
avoiding the plans I work out they 
can't succeed. That would make it 
wonderful. Aaron Varik knowing I'm 
a spy sent to give him a bum steer, 
my bosses knowing he would know 
and instructing me to give him a 
solid strategy, knowing that he would 
deliberately steer away from it." 

"Tliat's possible too," Clara said. 
"You know where it leaves you, don't 
you? Completely in the dark. You 
can't know what to do. You'll work 
out strategies that you're sure will 
succeed. As an Earthman you'll want 
to hold them back and give out a 
plan that yott think will fail— and 
maybe your bosses want you to give 
out the other, knowing how to turn 
it to their own advantage. It'll belike 
the old shell game. You'll never know 
which one the pea is under." 

A melodious chime sounded from 
the direction of the house. 

"We have to go in," Clara said. 

UJT'S BEEN two weeks now, Mr, 
* Seedier," Aaron Varik said. 
"Don't you think it's about time you 
pleaded that you have to get back 
into writing your book and left Valkor House? In your own apartment 
you would have more freedom to 
study effectively the things you must 
know." 

"You're right, of course," Rand 



said. "But I'd like another week. I 
hate to go back." 

"No," Varik said. "This is an 
order." 

"Suppose I just leave the Valkors 
and go to some army base?" Rand 
suggested. 

"No," Aaron Valkor said. "We 
want you in your usual haunts. There 
are Earth spies everywhere. We don't 
want them turning their eyes on you. 
We've gone to elaborate lengths in 
arranging for you to study the_ abili-, 
ties of various space units, the ships, 
the guided missiles, the robot bombs. 
All our plans are built on your living 
your usual daily life." 

"Give me a day to think it over 
then," Rand said. "Anyway I can't 
just rush off without warning." 

"Very well," Aaron said. "But you 
leave for Kern Juncture tomorrow afternoon. When you arrive home you'll 
be contacted by muspo agents there 
who have their instructions." He 
stood up in an attitude of dismissal. 
"I must say it's been a pleasure to 
work with you," he said. "Your ability 
to memorize reams of data is truly 
amazing." He advanced to the door 
with Rand and shook hands. "I'll see 
you in a week or two. Goodbye now." 

Rand went down the hall into the 
restaurant, and out to the waiting car. 
Karn was behind the wheel, his friend 
having left Valkor House that 
morning. 

"Well," Rand said, smiling wryly, 
"I have my orders to leave." 

"I expected as much," Karn said. 
"I'll fly you home myself. When are 
you leaving?" 

"Tomorrow," Rand said. "How 
about borrowing your car this evening. I'd like to go driving with Cla
"Oh," Karn said, "I forgot to tell 
you. Clara had to go to Sill Juncture 
this morning. Her aunt's ill. She 



50 



 



won't be back until late tomorrow." 

"I'll wait to go until she gets back 
then," Rand said. "But why didn't 
she let me know?" 

"It was early this morning," Karn 
said, starting the car. "She asked me 
to tell you about it. Forgot." 

"How far is Sill Juncture from 
here?" Rand asked. 

"Oh Lord, you are wrapped up in 
your dream world of chess I" Karn 
said. "It's half way around the planet. 
Clara took the strata-rocket liner. 
She'll be there two or three hours 
and come right back." 

Rand settled back in frustrated silence, watching the neat rows of trees 
speed past along the highway. He 
began to wonder what was going to 
happen when Karn took him to Kem 
Juncture, wherever that was. 

Suppose the real Randolph Beecher 
was there? Or had he been gotten out 
of the way? And just where was he 
supposed to be living in Kem Juncture? 

It didn't worry him too much. He 
felt sure that somewhere in his subconscious was alt the knowledge he 
needed to get by. He dismissed the 
problem. 

An empty loneliness took possession 
of him. As far back as his memory 
went he had had Clara to depend on, 
there when he wanted her. It had 
been only two weeks, but it encompassed his entire life so far as conscious memory went. 

"I wish she had wakened me," he 
said glumly. 

Karn glanced at him. "You're 
pretty much in love with her, aren't 
you?" he said. "I hope you haven't 
said anything to her about what 
you're doing. She's a loyalist. If she 
knew you were working with us she 
might—" Karn's expression changed 
to amazement. "She would do just 
what she did — run away. I thought 



it was strange for her not to want to 
wake you and tell you. I guess you've 
already said too much to her, huh?" 
He darted Rand a sympathetic glance, 
then returned his eyes to the road. 

"I don't believe that," Rand said. 

"I know my sister," Karn said. 
"She will probably stay at her 
aunt's for several weeks once she gets 
there. She does that. Aunt Bessie has 
been sort of a mother to bee." 

"I'll be ready to leave in half an 
hour," Rand said bitterly. "Is that 
what you want?" 

Karn didn't answer for several seconds. "I imagine it's what Clara 
wants," he said finally. 

¥>AND TORE up the piece of stationery and threw it angrily into 
the wastebasket beside the desk in his 
room. He had wanted the half hour 
to compose a letter to Clara. The half 
hour was up and he was just where 
he started. Nowhere. 

"It's just like everything else," he 
thought bitterly. "Logic paints ii one 
way but it works another. I don't have 
enough to go on. Clara leaves early 
in the morning. Aaron Varik orders 
me to Kem Juncture. Karn is puzzled 
by his sister's behavior and says it 
doesn't make sense unless I told her 
I was working for the Martians, and 
I did. But I'm positive he knew I had 
told her. I'm certain her !eaving was 
not to see an aunt, but in some way 
connected with forcing me to leave 
here." 

He began another note. "Dearest 
Clara," it started. "I'm sorry you 
had to be away when—" 

He threw down the pen and stood 
up. Crumpling the note and dropping 
it on top of the others in the wastebasket he left the room. In the hall 
he encountered a servant. 

"Where's Mr. Valkor's room?" he 
asked. 



THE MAN WHO FORGOT 



51 



"You want Mr. Valkor?" the servant said. "He's in his study. If you'll 
come with me I'll take you to him." 

Rand followed him. He was feeling 
better about it. He could thank the 
hospitable old man and ask him to 
tell Clara to get in touch with him. 

The servant knocked discreetly at 
the paneled door. When Mr. Valkor's 
voice sounded to come in he opened 
the door and stood aside so Rand 
could enter. 

The old man's eyes lit up with 
pleasure. "This is a surprise," he 
said. "I'd hoped to have a chance to 
get better acquainted with you, but 
Clara monopolizes you." 

"I'm sorry I didn't take the opportunity," Rand said. "Now it's almost too late. I'm going to have to 
leave. I hate to, but it's necessary." 

"That's too bad," Mr. Valkor said. 

"Will you tell Clara when she gets 
back from her aunt's at Sill Juncture 
that I had to rush away and would 
like her to get in touch with me right 
away?" Rand said. 

Mr. Valkor's eyebrows lifted in surprise. 

"But Clara has no aunt in Sill 
Juncture!" he said. 

"I must have been mistaken about 
the place," Rand said hastily. "Anyway, will you tell her when she gets 
back?" 

"Yes, of course," Mr. Valkor said. 
He looked as though he wanted to 
say something more, then changed his 
mind. 

He shook hands with Rand and 
went to' the door with him. In the 
hall Rand looked around. No one was 
in sight. On impulse he went past his 
own door to Clara's. He twisted the 
knob cautiously. The door was locked. 
He hesitated, then knocked softly. 

He placed his ear to the door. There 
seemed to be movement on the other 
side. 



"Clara!" he said softly. "This is 
Rand. Are you there?" 

His ears ached from the strain of 
listening for the faintest sound. He 
could swear he felt her standing on 
the other side of the door. 

He looked hastily up and down the 
hall. No one was in sight. Quickly he 
stooped do%vn to the keyhole and tried 
to look through it. The eye of the keyhole was obscured by something. The 
slot tapered from a point down to full 
width. There was a key in it. A key 
on the inside. He squinted, trying to 
see through. 

Suddenly someone touched the key. 
Rand straightened and looked around 
for concealment. Ten feet away was 
the door of a janitor's closet. He hid 
in it. When he closed its door he 
grunted in satisfaction. There were 
half a dozen narrow slits in the upper 
part of the door for ventilation. He 
could see out. 

He had been none too soon. Even 
as he peeked through the slits he saw 
Clara's door open. Karn's friend who 
was supposed to have left stepped out. 
Karn followed him, closing Clara's 
door and locking it, then handing the 
key to his companion. 

"Everything will be all right until 
I get away from here with Rand" 
Karn said. "But keep out of sight. 
You're supposed to have left already. 
Rand would smell something if he saw 
you." 

"Right," the man said as they 
passed by the closet door. 

RAND PUSHED the door open a 
crack. He saw Karn's friend go 
through a door down the hall, and 
Karn go down the stairs. Rand 
opened the closet door and stepped 
out. 

He paused at the door Karn's 
friend had entered. He took a deep 
breath, then twisted the knob and 



52 



 



shoved the door open. 

The man was crossing the room, his 
back to him. He started to turn idly, 
not suspecting anything. Rand was 
on him while he was still blinking his 
surprise. 

A surge of elation flowed through 
Rand as he went into action. He 
hadn't known whether he had the 
skill of fighting, nor had he cared. But 
now he felt assurance as he saw his 
hands -move of their own volition, his 
body weave and duck. 

The man was no mean fighter himself. Rand had gotten in a telling jab 
to the man's jaw at the start that 
had dazed him. He had covered up 
expertly, fighting silently. 

But he was a little slow. Rand 
found that he was a sucker for feints 
to the body. Capitalizing on that he 
landed cruel blows to the man's face, 
slowing him even mere. 

Suddenly there was an opening. 
Rand's fist was coming up from the 
waist even as he saw the opening. 
It landed underneath the jaw, ierking 
the head upward. The man's eyes 
glazed. His knees wilted. 

Hastily Rand looked around for 
something to tie him with. There was 
a fine chain on the drapes at the windows. A sharp tug bro'-ie the chain. He 
wrapped it arotind the man's wrists, 
brought his legs up behind and 
wrapped the rest of the chain around 
his ankles. Two handkerchiefs from a 
dresser drawer formed a gag. 

Breathing heavily, Rand searched 
the man's pockets until he found the 
key to Clara's room. He grunted his 
satisfaction as he found it. He 
straightened and started toward the 
door. It was wide open. 

He grinned. No one had passed or 
they would have seen the fight. 

He closed the door as he went out, 
then hurried to Clara's room. Without hesitation he inserted the key and 
opened the door. He entered and 



closed it behind him before daring to 
look. 

When he did look he saw Clara 
lying on the bed. He leaped to the 
bed and searched for her pulse. It was 
there, slow, indicating that she had 
been drugged. 

"Clara!" he said urgently, shaking 
her head. She moaned drowsily. He 
shook her again. Then he went to the 
bathroom and soaked a washcloth in 
cold water, coming back with it and 
bathing her face. 

She opened her eyes, then closed 
them. 

"Clara!" Rand said. 

"What is it?" she said drowsily. 
Then, "Randl" She opened her eyes 
and sat up in alarm, looking down at 
herself. She saw that she was dressed. 
A frown of bewilderment appeared on 
her face. 

"You've been drugged," Rand said, 
"Wake up. I haven't much time." She 
was shaking her head. She took the 
washcloth from him and placed it over 
her eyes. "Karn's waiting for me to 
take me to Kem Juncture," Rand 
said. "Why did he drug you and tell 
me you had gone away?" 

"Be quiet a minute," Clara said. 
"There was something ... I found out 
something. Oh yes. Karn just got 
word last night that the M.U. S.P. 
through their agents on Earth have 
found out your true identity and the 
key to wiping out your hypnotic bloc. 
They don't intend to do that until 
they've let you map the strategy 
they've assigned you to map for them. 
Once you've done that they'll drug 
you and unlock the, secret plans hidden there. They're sure that by doing 
that they can uncover top secret 
Earth plans and use that knowledge 
to win the war that's coming." 

"And they caught you eavesdropping on them?" Rand asked. 



THE MAN WHO FORGOT 



53 



"Yes," Clara said. "Karn won't 
kill me because I'm his sister, but he 
knows that if Aaron finds out he'll 
order me liquidated, so he drugged me 
to keep me from warning you, hoping that by the time you had gone I 
would decide to keep quiet." 

"Did — " Rand took a deep breath. 
"Did you learn my real name." 

Clara turned her drugged eyes on 
him gravely. 

"Yes," she said. 

"What is it?" Rand asked, his 
voice strained. 

"I can't tell you," she said. "Your 
name is the key that unlocks your 
memory." 

"So much the better," Rand said 
eagerly. 

"No," Clara said. "They would 
know then and kill you. They've 
given you too much data to do otherwise." 

"I don't care," Rand said. "I'll take 
my chances on that. Tell me!" 

"No I" Clara said. 

"I had a fight with Karn's friend," 
Rand said. "I knocked him out and 
tied him up. When he wakes up he'll 
know I got the key to your door and 
talked with you. The masquerade is 
over. You've got to tell me." 

The sharp sound of a key rattling 
in the lock froze them. Rand glanced 
toward the door, then back to Clara. 

"You never woke up," he whispered. "Remember that." 

Clamping his lips together grimly 
he tapped her sharply just under the 
ear with his fist. y 
As she relaxed in unconsciousness, 
he started wiping her face with the 
wet washcloth. He pretended not to 
hear the door open. 

"Wake up I " he said sharply as 
though it were for the hundredth 
time, "Clara! Wake up!" 



UgTOP THAT," Karn's voice 
sounded softly. 

Rand stiffened his shoulders so that 
Kam would think he had been caught 
by surprise. Then he turned slowly, 
his lip curled in an expression of 
anger and contempt. 

"I've heard of brdthers like you, 
Karn," he said. "But I never thought 
you'd go to these lengths to break 
things up between me and your sister. You tell me she's rushed off to 
see an aunt without bothering to tell 
me. I suppose you'd tell her when 
she wakes up that I went away without bothering to even say goodbye to 
her." He was ignoring the snub-nosed 
gun pointed at him. 

"You've gone too far, Rand," 
Karn said in a tired voice. 

"Too far?" Rand said, giving a 
short bitter laugh. "You mean knocking out your friend? How could I do 
that? You said he had already gone?" 

"Too far, Rand," Karn said, his 
voice a monotone. 

"You're the one who's gone too 
far," Rand said. "From now on you 
can go to the devil so far as any help 
from me is concerned. You can tell 
Aaron Varik that, too. And tell him 
why." 

"Too far, Rand," Karn said. "I'm 
going to kill you." 

Suddenly Rand realized he meant 
it. Karn's eyes had changed remarkably. They seemed flatter, baleful as 
a wild animal's. 

"You know," Rand said, pretending amusement, "I really think you 
mean it. I've suddenly discovered the 
real you. You're an egomaniac. I've 
shown you up as a liar and a cheap 
intriguer, and you can't stand my 
knowing you'd stoop to cheap lies, 
so you intend to kill me." 

An aura of hate seemed to expand 
outward from Karn, and slowly draw 
back in. 

"It's not that, Rand," Karn said 



54 



 



gently. "You should have gone with 
me. Don't you see that? Could you 
go with me now and forget all this, 
and do the work we've asked you to 
do? You know you can't. And you 
know too much." 

"All right," Rand said. "I can see 
that you might have to kill me. I don't 
like it, of course. How do you propose 
to do it? Shoot me here in your sister's room, with her lying here 
drugged?" 

"It's an idea," Karn said. "I could 
say I'd - surprised you here. Brother 
shoots sister's attacker." 

"But Clara would brand that a lie," 
Rand said. 

"I don't think so," Karn said. 
"She'd be very unhappy about it all, 
but she wouldn't brand her brother 
a murderer and disgrace her father." 

"And what about Aaron Varik?" 
Rand said. "Would he like it?" 

Rand hoped that this sudden shift 
in the direction of the argument would 
take Karn slightly off guard. As he 
spoke he threw the wet washcloth at 
him and propelled himself forward in 
a long low diving tackle. 

He saw Karn avoid the washcloth 
and his outstretched arms. He was 
sprawling on the floor, realizing he 
had lost his gamble, when he felt a 
stinging pain where his neck joined 
his shoulder. Karn had used the gun 
to paralyze his arm. 

"It was a nice try, Rand," Karn 
said. "Now get up. We're leaving." 

Rand got slowly to his feet. His 
arm bung uselessly at his side. 

"So you don't want to kill me here," 
he said. 

"No," Karn said. "I want to take 
you out over one of the deserts. That 
way you'll never be found. Clara will 
think you went to Kern Juncture and 
forgot her. No one will ever find you 
or be able to prove anything." 

"And you expect me to simply 



walk out of here with you and submit 
to that?" Rand said. "I don't think 
I will. I think 111 stay here. You'll 
be forced to at least knock me out. 
Then you'll have to carry me out. 
That will involve risk." 

"I'll knock you out," Karn said. 
"Then I'll tell dad you suffered a 
heart attack. I'll get a muspo to pose 
as a doctor and have you taken away 
in an ambulance. I can tell dad later 
that you recovered at the hospital and 
went on to Kern Juncture." 

"Okay," Rand said, grinning wolfishly "knock me out." 

He watched Karn advance cautiously. He had knocked Clara out so that 
if Karn examined her when he first 
came into the room he would find 
her genuinely unconscious. When Karn 
hadn't done that, he had stalled for 
time for her to awaken. He stole a 
glance toward the bed now. Clara's 
eyes were open. She was looking at 
him questioningly. He nodded imperceptibly. 

Clara said quietly, "What are you 
doing with that gun, Karn?" 

T^ARN INSTINCTIVELY turned 
^ to look at bis sister. In that instant Rand stepped in and brought 
a short uppercut to the point of his 
jaw. He felt a knuckle crack open 
and realized sickeningly that with one 
arm paralyzed and the knuckle of the 
other hand broken he was done. Then 
elation surged through him. He saw 
Karn's gun drop from his fingers, his 
body begin to slump. 

Quickly he stooped to pick up the 
gun. 

"Hold it" a voice said from the 
doorway. 

Rand straightened. Karn's friend 
was standing there, a gun in his hand. 
He stepped into the room and closed 
the door behind him. 

"It seems the whole situation has 



THE MAN WHO FORGOT 



55 



degenerated completely," he said. "It's 
very unfortunate. The House of Valkor was an excellent front for spying 
on the loyalists and keeping track of 
them." 

He backed toward the phone stand, 
the gun steady in his fist. He lifted 
fee receiver and listened, then laid 
it down. Rand remained still while 
he dialed, his eyes never on the phone 
long enough for Rand to do anything. 

"Aaron?" he said into the phone. 
"This is Eld. You'll have to raid Valkor House immediately. Earn is no 
good to us any more. And Randolph 
Becher knows too much to cooperate 
with us. How much I don't know. His 
sister will have to be taken care of 
too. I'm holding the three of them 
in her bedroom. The father should 
be placed under political arrest, and 
the other guests should be taken in 
and held until we can decide what to 
do. Get things moving at once." 

He dropped the phone back on its 
cradle and advanced slowly toward 
Rand, 

"What do you mean, Karn is no 
good to you any more," Rand asked. 
"Are you planning on liquidating 
him?" 

"We'll have to," Eld said. "He's 
been a good agent but he's too loyal 
to his family. It interferes with his 
judgment. That's why the whole situation as regards you has degenerated. His sister's in love with you. To 
keep your liquidation quiet we'll have 
to silence her. That means her brother 
too, since he wouldn't stand for it." 

Rand saw Kant's eyes flicker open. 
He had to keep Eld from noticing it. 

"By liquidating Karn and his sister and me you mean killing us, I suppose?" he said. 

"I'm sorry," Eld said curtly, "but 
you can see the necessity of it, I'm 
sure. We can't endanger the out — " 

Karn in a swift movement had 
reached out and seized Eld's ankles 



and jerked with his whole body. Even 
a3 he fell Eld had sensed the situation and was adjusting himself to 
break away and leap up. 

Rand saw this and leaped forward. 
As Eld hit the floor Rand kicked the 
gun out of his hand. 

Karn transfered his grip to one 
foot, twisting it and doubling Eld's 
leg sideways. 

Wincing at the pain of his broken 
knuckle Rand picked up Eld's gun 
and brought it down against the top 
of Eld's head. 

It had taken no more than seconds. 
Eld was stretched out senseless. 

"We'll have to move fast," Rand 
said. "He called Aaron. There's going 
to be a raid any minute." 

"I heard him," Karn said bitterly. 
"Sis, you and Rand get a car out of 
the garage. I'll get Dad. In case something happens, the only place for you 
to go is to the Earth Embassy headquarters. There's no place on Mars 
we can hide. The secret police are 
everywhere. Once you get there you'll 
be safe and can be smuggled off the 
planet. Mars isn't quite ready to risk 
war by violating diplomatic immunity. Get going." 

Clara was already off the bed. She 
opened the door. 

"Hurry, Rand," she said. 
On the stairway they paused as the 
Sound of a shot came from the room 
they had just left. 

"Keep going," Rand said gruffly. 
Outside as they ran toward the garage they could hear the distant sound 
of sirens screaming. 

"We'll get the car and stop at the 
front dosr," Clara said. 

She lifted the garage door and ran 
to a sedan, getting behind the wheel 
and opening the other door for Rand. 
The sirens were much louder as she 
drove the car around to the front of 
Valkor House. 



56 



 



Her father was just emerging from 
the entrance carrying Kara across one 
shoulder. When Clara screeched the 
car to a stop, he opened the rear door 
and lowered Karn inside, getting in 
himself. 

"What happened, Dad?" Clara 
asked as she hurtled the car forward. 

"I heard a shot," he said. "I ran 
into your room. The door was wide 
open. Eld had shot Kara. I had my 
own gun from my desk; I'd taken it 
with me because I'd heard the shot. 
I lulled Eld and when Karn told me 
to bring him down to the front I did. 
What are those sirens?" 

"The police," Clara said. 

The car tipped precariously as she 
turned it into a side road. 

"How are we going to make it to 
tbe Earth Embassy?" Kand asked. 
"They'll have every road blocked." 

"We've got to take care of K2rn 
first." Clara said. 

The car leaned dangerously as she 
turned into another road. She had 
gone only a short distance on this 
one when she turned into a driveway 
and stopped. 

"Wait here," she said, getting out 
of the car. 

She ran to the front door of the 
house, a white stucco two-story residence. 

The door was opened by a whitehaired man who listened to her, then 
looked toward the car. He nodded 
vigorously and left the door to open 
the doors of the garage attached to 
the house. 

Clara ran back and drove the car 
into the garage. The doors were closing behind them. 

"Now what's this all about?" the 
man asked, coming up beside the car. 

"The police are after us," Clara 
said. "Rand, this is Dr. Temple, an 
old friend of the family. Karn's 
wounded, Dr. Temple. We've got to 
get him taken care of right away." 



Dr. Temple opened the rear deor 

of the car and held his fingers against 
Karn 's wrist. A moment later he 
dropped the wrist and shook his head. 

"Too late," he said. "Karn's dead. 
How'd it happen?" 

"THERE WAS a moment of stunned 
silence during which Rand stared 
at the still figure half draped over 
Mr. Valkor's lap, shirt front stained 
with thickened blood. 

Mr. Valkor mumbled, "My son — 
dead?" Clara broke into convulsive 
sobs. Rand pulled her head against 
his shoulder. She tried to pull away 
but he held her fiercely. 

Dr. Temple in a kind voice was 
trying to get Mr. Valkor to get out 
of the car. Rand felt Clara relax 
against him, giving way to her grief. 

Faintly the sound of sirens starting 
up again crept into the closed confines of the garage. 

Dr. Temple had succeeded in getting Mr. Valkor out of the car. He 
led him through a door into the hause. 
Rand and Clara were alone with the 
corpse. 

Rand clamped his teeth together. 
His shoulder was waking up. The 
collar bone was broken. Clara's slight 
movement against the left shoulder 
was just enough to keep agonizing 
pains shooting through the right one. 

He looked down at his swelling 
knuckle on the hand pressed to her 
back, a wry expression settling on his 
features. He hadn't done very well, 
he decided. He had been hampered 
too much. Not knowing who he was — 

"Clara," he said softly. "Don't you 
think it's time to tell me who I am? 
Certainly nothing can be served now 
by holding it back. Aaron Varik and 
the secret police ate after us. You're 
brother is dead." 

She shook her head and continued 
sobbing. 



THE MAN WHO FORGOT 



S7 



"Don't you understand?" Rand persisted. "I'm too much at sea this way. 
I don't know what to do. I do the 
wrong things. I should have played 
along with Karn and not tried to see 
you. He wouldn't have let any harm 
come to you. But your supposed going 
away left me stranded emotionally. 
You were the first thing in my memory. I'd been with you every moment 
that I wanted to be. Even when I 
was alone I knew that in a minute 
I could find you and be with you. 
Suddenly that was taken away from 
me. I was like a child when its mother — no, that isn't right either. I love 
you. I don't think that was taken into 
account by those who sent me or 
brought me to Mars. Maybe they 
couldn't understand the effect it 
would have on me to fall in love with 
you. They probably expected me to 
act like a machine— accomplish my 
task, go to wherever I was supposed 
to go when my mission was accomplished, and have my name spoken, 
restoring my full memory. Just like 
that. 

"It might have worked that way 
if I hadn't met you. But from the 
first moment I saw you the urge 
grew in me to find out who I am. Am 
I married? I don't know. I don't 
think so. At least I know I don't love 
anyone but you. And that's grown 
more important than any job I was 
supposed to do. It's got to be settled. 
Tell me my name." 

Clara sniffed loudly and pulled herself erect. 

"No, Rand," she said. "I — I can't 
— yet. Please don't make me. I've 
had all I can take for a while." 

"But why?" Rand asked. "What 
could be upsetting about it? You tell 
me my name, that unlocks my memory, I know who I am and regain 
my full memory and abilities." 

"No!" Clara said harshly, "Please, 
Rand." 



She opened the door of the car 
and ran around the front of the car 
and into the house. Rand stared after her in wonder. 

Suddenly like a bath of ice water 
the thought came to him: "If she 
knows who I am she must know if I'm 
married! That's the only thing that 
could account for her behavior." 

And suddenly he didn't want to 
know who he was. 

Using his elbow clumsily to open 
the car door he climbed out and followed her into the house. Inside was 
a comfortable living room. No one 
was there. 

His shoulder and hand were throbbing. He felt weak, and suddenly he 
felt nauseated. 

He sank into a chair and leaned 
back, closing his eyes. 

DR. TEMPLE turned away from 
the phone. "That takes care of 
the car and Karn's body," he said 
gravely. "It's the only way." 

Clara and her father nodded numbly. Rand paused in his pacing. Three 
days had passed since they had entered Dr. Temple's house. Three days 
during which he had grown more and 
more impatient. Three days during 
which Dr. Temple's calm lack of 
haste had had a maddening effect on 
him. 

Rand had restrained himself. There 
was such a thing as a sense of propriety, and Clara's grief at the loss 
of her brother was very real. But 
there had been times when he could 
have willingly tortured her to force 
her to utter his real name and wipe 
away the hypnotic veil. 

"Why don't you sit down, Rand?" 
Dr. Temple said abruptly. "Try to 
relax. My friend at Kern Juncture 
has undoubtedly received my letter 
by now and taken it to the Earth 
Embassy. It shouldn't be long until 



58 



 



we get a reply and know what to do." 

"I can't help It, doctor," Rand said. 
"I can't stand being caged this way." 

"Physically and mentally," Dr. 
Temple said sympathetically. 'T understand. But I wonder if you understand — " 

"How can I understand anything 
with less than half a mind?" Rand 
said bitterly. "From my first moment 
of memory I've gone around in circles that get me nowhere. I take everything I know and can learn and 
put it together, and it makes sense— 
until the nest thing knocks it apart 
again." He stared pleadingly at Clara's 
averted face. "Karn wouldn't have 
needed to die if I knew who I was," 
he said softly. 

"That's not necessarily true," Dr. 
Temple said kindly. "I'm sure that 
the reason Clara refuses to say the 
words that will restore your memory 
is a strong one." 

"Certainly it is," Rand said. "I 
know the only tiling it can be. Once 
my memory is restored, if I'm caught 
by the secret police they can force information out of me. But there's this 
to say about it, too. Unless my memory is restored I'm liable to be caught. 
I can't think tilings through the way 
I am." 

"Please, Rand," Clara said, her 
hps trembling. "Let's forget about it 
for now. When you reach the Embassy your memories will be brought — " 
The phone shrilled. 

Dr. Temple answered it. His side 
of the conversation consisted mostly 
of silent nods and an occasional, "I 
understand." 

"Everything's arranged," he said 
when he hung up. "This afternoon a 
large highway carrier will call here for 
some furniture. They will have their 
load packed so that there's a hollow 
place for the three of you to hide. 
That truck will deliver my pieces of 



furniture to the Earth Embassy." He 
smiled. "You, too." 

"Wonderful!" Rand exclaimed. He 
turned to Clara with a happy smile. 
"It won't be long now, darling," he 
said. 

Clara returned his smile. But suddenly she turned her head away. Then 
she was crying. Rand went to her and 
put his arms around her shoulders. 

Mr. Valkor coughed significantly 
at Dr. Temple. The two men left the 
room. Rand watched them go, then 
lifted Clara's face. 

"Can't you tell me what's the 
trouble?" he asked. "All I can guess 
is that you must know all about who 
I am, and that I'm married. Is that 
true? For if it is, one thing I know, 
I don't love anyone but you. I'm sure 
of that. If I'm married I'll get a divorce right away. We'll be married — " 

Clara was staring at him, a look of 
amazement on her face. She started to 
laugh hysterically. 

"What's the matter?" Rand said 
helplessly. "Clara! Stop it!" 

Her hysterical laughter stopped 
abruptly. She began crying again. 
Suddenly she struggled free of Rand's 
embrace and ran from the room. 

TPHE RIDE had been as eventless 
* as the stay at Dr. Temple's. The 
huge truck had backed against the 
open garage. The driver and his helper had removed some furniture and 
boxes, revealing a comfortable open 
space in the heart of the load. After 
Mr. Valkor, Clara, and Rand had entered and settled themselves the 
pieces had been put back so that unless the huge carrier were unloaded it 
would appear innocent. 

Rand's shoulder had itched quite a 
bit during the trip, the effect of the 
rapid healing process going on in the 
collar bone which Dr. Temple had 
fastened together with pegs. Finally 



THE MAN WHO FORGOT 



59 



he had fallen asleep. He hadn't 
awakened until Clara had shaken him 
gently and informed him that they 
had arrived. 

He opened his eyes to see the 
lights and unloading platform. Mr. 
Valkor was already stepping out of 
the truck. There were other figures 
out there. One in particular drew 
Rand's attention. He couldn't remember ever having seen the man before, 
but something stirred in his mind at 
the sight of him. 

He got to his feet with Clara's help 
and staggered out of the truck, every 
cell of his body tingling from the 
long ride. 

"Come, this way," the man who had 
attracted Rand's attention said. 

Flanked by Clara and Mr. Valkor, 
Rand followed him. They entered a 
warehouse room, following the man 
along gloomy corridors until they 
went through a door into brightly lit 
comfortable living quarters. 

"You're undoubtedly tired from the 
long trip," the man said. "I'll have 
you shown to rooms where you can 
take hot baths and freshen up before 
having a late dinner." 

Rand hesitated, then decided not 
to protest. He looked at Clara, his 
eyes full of misery. The same fear 
seemed to be reflected in her eyes. 

He started toward her. She turned 
quickly away. 

A moment later another man led 
him out of the room to a self-service 
elevator which went up three floors 
before stopping. 

Half an hour later, exhilarated by 
a soothing bath and shave and clean 
clothing, he was escorted into a luxurious dining room where the man 
who had affected him so remarkably 
was waiting. Mr, Valkor arrived at 
almost the same time. Clara came a 
few minutes later. 

The meal was eaten in silence. 
Rand sensed that everyone was avoid


ing something, Clara had the air of a 
doomed person. Mr. Valkor seemed to 
be holding in an all-consuming grief. 
The stranger seemed to be holding in 
leash eager desire to get ahead with 
something. 

Rand spent his time trying to think 
of something to say, and discarding 
one thing after another. 

Finally the stranger straightened up 
with the air of a man who has waited 
eternally for a bus and sees it approaching. 

"How do you feel — Rand?" he said 
calmly. "Do you feel up to a couple 
of hours of work? Or would you 
rather have a night's sleep first?" 

"I slept most of the way here," 
Rand said. 

"Then if it's all right with you we 
can go to my office and get down to 
business," the man said. 

"Not yet," Rand said. "I want a 
half hour alone with Clara." 

He turned his eyes to her, entreating, demanding. 

Her face cramped strangely. "I'll 
be here when you're through, Rand," 
she said almost inaudibly. 

"Of course she'll be here," the 
stranger said heartily. 

"Please do — what has to be done, 
Rand," Clara entreated. 

"You don't want to be alone with 
me for a minute?" Rand said. 

"Please," Clara said, her face 
cramping again. 

"Right," Rand said gruffly. "Come 
on. Let's get it over with." 

At the door he turned and looked 
back. Clara was watching him, her 
eyes large and pathetic. 

UW/'ELL, GET it over with," Rand 
said half angrily. 

There were several men in the room. 
There was also a microphone in front 
of him where he had been seated, 

"W« want you to tell everything 



60 



 



you have learned about the Martian 
plans for rebellion," the stranger said. 
"Everything." 

"I understand that telling me my 
right name is the key to restoring my 
full memory," Rand said. "How about 
telling me that now? There can't be 
any point in not doing it. I'm safe 
here." 

"We would prefer to have you 
make your report first," the man said. 
"It won't take you long. And when 
you're done we'll restore your mem
• ory." 

"You promise that?" Rand said. 

"We promise," the stranger said. 

"All right," Rand said. In a brittle voice he began talking. Everything he had memorized from the papers Aaron Varik had placed at his 
disposal came out in an even flew. 

Those in the room listened. 

Rand himself listened to his smooth 
flow of calm facts, marvelling at his 
memory, Things that he hadn't realized he had noted in particular came 
out accurately. For the time being he 
was an automaton reciting. 

And finally he was done. A long 
silence settled over the room. Rand 
sat waiting. 

"Well?" he exploded suddenly. 'Tve 
done what I was evidently supposed 
to do. How about it? Do I get my 
memory back now?" 

He looked at the faces that regarded him so silently, so gravely. So pittyingly. 

"Very well," the stranger said. 
"First— may I shake your hand for 
a job well done?" 

"We!l done?" Rand said with a bitter laugh. "I ruined everything, didn't 
I?" 

"No," the man said. "You got everything we wanted. The full details 
of Martian strength, behavior of their 
secret weapons, industrial conversion 
plans. Everything we need to prevent 
the war from even starting. There 



was one death. Like all such things, 
hindsight might have prevented it. 
But everything you were specifically 
conditioned to accomplish has been accomplished. 

"Further, we've found the weaknesses in our present technique of 
hypnotic blocking and directives. 
We'll correct them in future operations 
of this sort." 

The stranger took a deep breath. 

"So we thank you — Major Claude 
Winthrop," he said. 

Claude Winthrop blinked his eyes, 
took in the intent expressions on 
General Archer's face and the faces 
of the others all of them known to 
him. 

He glanced curiously around the 
room. 

"How'd I get here, sir?" he asked. 
"A moment ago I was in — ■" An expression of surprised wonder appeared 
on his face. "So it worked" he exclaimed. 

"Yes, Claude," General Archer said, 
smiling. ' "Right now you're on Mars, 
and your mission has been accomplished." 

"Just like that," Claude said wonderingly. "And I can't remember a 
thing that happened. I can't even 
sense a passage of time. It's as though 
just a moment ago I was going under 
hypnosis." 

He winced and touched his shoulder tenderly. He noticed his bandaged left hand for the first time. 

"Looks like I had some trouble," 
he said wryly. 

"A little," General Archer admitted. "Think hard. Can you recall any 
of it?" 

Claude closed his eyes. A moment 
later he opened them and shook his 
head cheerfully. "Not a thing," he 
said. "I find it hard to believe it's 



THE WAN WHO FORGOT 



61 



so — that I've been doing anything 
since I went under hypnosis. How long 
ago was it?" 

"Two months," the General said. 
"Your hypnosis went in two separate 
stages. One hypnotic focus acted during the trip from the Earth to Mars. 
It was conditioned to cease operation 
the moment you shed your emergency 
landing suit so that if you were captured you would be unable to tell 
anyone how you arrived. The second 
came into operation with the cessation of the first. It operated under 
certain subconscious directives — not 
too well, we find. That phase ended 
just a moment ago after you gave us 
your report. Now if you were to be 
captured you would be unable to recall any of your activity. We have all 
that on the tape recorder. We had to 
get it before returning you to your 
normal memory circuits." 

The General stood up. 

"We have one more test," he said. 
"Follow me." 

X/ffAJOR CLAUDE WINTHROP 
stood up and followed the General, glancing curiously at his surroundings. 

They left the room and passed 
through a corridor into an office. 
Claude looked about him. If he had 
passed this way before he couldn't 
remember. 

He followed the major into a carpeted hall. They came to a door. The 
General opened it and stepped aside 
for Claude to enter. 

There were two people in the room. 
Claude glanced curiously at them; but 
the General was crossing the room 
to another door without doing more 
than nod curtly at the young lady 
and the gray haired man. 

Claude gave them a smile and followed the General, thinking, "Must 
be a waiting room." 



General Archer opened another 
door. Claude followed him. into another hallway. 

"Where are we going, sir?" he 
asked as they continued along this 
hall. 

"To a room that's been assigned as 
your sleeping quarters until we ship 
you back to Earth," the General 
said calmly. 

"Who were those people in that 
waiting room we just passed through?" 
Claude asked. 

"Why," the General said, "I believe 
the man is a Mr. Valkor, and the 
young lady is his daughter, Clara 
Valkor. Know them?" 

"No," Claude said. 

They continued on until they came to the doors of an elevator. The General pressed the button to summon it. 

"Sir," Claude said. 

"Yes?" the General said frowning. 

"I wonder," Claude said. "This is 
highly irregular, but — would it be 
possible for me to meet the young 
lady?" 

The General looked at him with 
what appeared to be amusement. 

"Why?" he said. "Don't tell me 
that you're romantically interested in 
a strange young lady you've never 
metl" He studied the expression on 
Claude's face keenly. "I believe you 
are!" he said softly. "Well, all right. 
Come on. I'll introduce you." 

"Thank you, sir," Claude said. 

"Wait here for a minute, Claude," 
the General said gruffly as they 
reached the door. "I want a few words 
with Miss Valkor first. About business." 

General Archer pushed open the 
door and stepped through, closing it 
firmly behind him. Clara rose to her 
feet, her eyes filled with a mixture 
of agony and hope. 

He shook his head sadly at her, 
"Sorry," he said. "Operation Amne


62 



 



sia has been a most dismal failure. 
The one weakness is that human emotions rise from too deep in the subconscious to be controlled by directives. We'll have to take that into 
account in future operations of this 



sort. You see, my dear, Claude Winthrop wants to meet you. In fact — 
he's standing just outside the door, 
waiting to come in." 

THE END 