r 




JUST WHAT YOU WERE WISHING FORI 

An original, never-before-published science-fantasy novel of 
the calibre of the great classics of Merritt, Taine, Wells. . . • 
A book of satisfying length (116,000 words!) available nowhere else, told with the gripping realism and brilliance of 
another Poe! A literary "nova" in the science fiction heavens. 

The Most Exciting Book Since Merritfs "MOON POOL" 

A few of the book's chapter headings will give you some idea of the tremendous 
scope of the story: Trail Of The Wizard; Votaries Of Vs; Darla Of The Sea-Green 
Eyes; City Of The Sorcerers; Captives Of The Great Dimension; The Seven Sisters 
Of Light; I he Morning After Eternity; The White Archdruid; In The Grotto Of 
The Lizard; Vor And The Onyx Key; The Place Of Thunders; The Black Tower 
. . . twenty-six great chapters in all! 

Price $3.50 — 352 Pages; Cloth Bound; Jacket by Hannes Bok 

KINSMEN OF THE DRAGON 

By STANLEY MULLEN 



IMAGINATION, p. o. Box 230, Evanston, Illinois 

Gentlemen: I enclose $3.50 check money order cash 

Send KINSMEN OF THE DRAGON by return mail, prepaid, to: 

NAME 

ADDRESS 

CITY ZONE STATE .. 



TABLE OF CONTENTS 





WJLLIAM L, HAMLING 
Editor 



by Geoff St. Reynard 6 



BEYOND THE FEARFUL FOREST 

(Short Novel — 25,000 words) , 

No Hunter flared to venture past the Fearful Forest Into the land of— The Nameless... 

"IN THIS SIGN ..." 

(Short— 6,500 words) by Ray Bradbury 56 

The Fathers had come to convert the Martians. The question was: did they really exist? 

THE LONGSNOZZLE EVENT 

(Short — 6,500 words) by Hal Annas... 



detective be like? Meet Len Zitts, Galactic Shamus! 



What will the future 
"DRINK MY RfD BLOOD ..." 

(Short — 2,500 words) by Richard Matheson 88 

Jules was a strange little boy with a peculiar ambition: he wanted to be a vampire . . . 

AFTERNOON OF A f'AHN 

(Short — 6,000 words) by Eric Frank Russell 96 

Here was the planet of a spaceman's dreams — it made every one of them come true. . . 

THE HUNGRY HOUSE 

(Novelette — 7,200 words) by Robert Bloch 114 

Were they afraid of the House, or the tiling that lived there — waiting for tenants . . . 

NOT IN THE RULES 

(Short— 5,200 words) by Mack Reynolds 132 

Earth's warrior faced death in the Martian Arena with an untested weapon — strategy! 

AN EEL BY THE TAIL 

(Short — 4,800 words) by Allen K. Lang 146 

A physics class was - no place for this strip teaser— nor was the Earth for that matter! 



THE EDITORIAL 4 

EGYPTIAN CHARNEL 55 

THE LAW OF MALI HUS 86 

FORECASTS 95 & 156 

HOLLYWOOD WAKES UPI 113 



THE TALONED SUBMARINE 131 

SECRET SCIENCE _ 144 

THE TV AMATEUR 14S 

PANDORA'S BOX 157 

LETTERS FROM THE READERS 160 



Front cover photo dyed print by Malcolm Smith, illustrating 
"Beyond The Fearful Forest" 

Published bi-monthly by Greenleaf Publishing Company, 1426 Fowler Avenue, Evanston, Illinois. Entered as second-class matter at the post office at Evans ton, Illinois. 
Additional entry at Sandusky, Ohio. Address all manuscripts, subscriptions, and correspondence to Editorial Office: P.O. Box 230, Evanston, 111. We do not accept responsibility for the return of unsolicited manuscripts, photographs, or artwork. 
The names of all characters nsed In stories are fictitious. 
Copyright 1951, Greenleaf Publishing Company 



3 



WE'D like to breathe a big 
sigh of relief this month 
and at the same time tender an apology to any of out readers who may not have been quite 
satisfied -with the appearance of the 
last issue. 

THE sigh of relief is for overcoming the obstacles of a fire at the 
printing plant, managing to get the 
magazine produced under adverse conditions — and at the same time having 
a railroad strike to contend with in 
shipping the issue to your respective 
cities. We accomplished the difficult 
operation and IMAGINATION appeared on the stands in due course — 
a little late, and in some cases copies 
were not up to the high production 
standard we have come to expect. 
But you did receive the magazine! 

THE apology is for those of you 
who received an occasional copy 
that was not in perfect condition. 
We're sorry for that, but it won't 
happen again. As our printer told 
us: "We shall always remember this 
issue of IMAGINATION." 

ASIDE from this, we are quite 
pleased with the response you 
gave that issue. You liked the cover, 
and what's more important, you liked 
the stories. And of course in the 



final analysis it's the stories that 
make a science-fiction magazine good 
or bad. 

SPEAKING of stories, we think 
you'll really enjoy this issue. It's 
got quite a bit of variety in it, with 
a number of the top names in the 
field, and a few very talented newcomers. We'd like to get your reaction to a number of them in particular. First of all there's, BEYOND 
THE FEARFUL FOREST, by Geoff 
St. Reynard. For want of a better 
description you might call this short 
novel a really "slick" yarn. To put it 
in Geoff's own words: "In BTFF I 
returned to a style of writing I've 
long wanted to do. I like to think 
it has something of the flavor of 
the old masters of fantasy, such as 
the early H. G. Wells. The one thing 
that bucked me up as I was writing 
it was the stated policy of IMAGINATION, to wit: 'We intend that 
this magazine shall have but one 
guiding policy: quality . . . (not) formula space operas . . . Stories where 
some care has been taken with the 
writing', where the love of creation 
is evident in the author's work.' I took 
a lot of time and care with this 
story. And if the readers like it, 
what more can a writer ask for?" 
From an editorial standpoint, nothing more, Geoff. And incidentally, for 



4 



THE EDITORIAL 



5 



those of you who are not aware of 
it, Geoff St. Reynard is a pen-name 
for serious novelist, Robert W. 
Krepps. Bob also informed us that 
he's busily at work on his new novel 
for Rinehart. We don't mind Bob 
turning out serious tomes as long 
as he manages to keep Madge well 
supplied at the same time! At any 
rate, let us know how you like 
Geoff's novel in this issue. 

THEN there's Richard Matheson 
who created quite a stir in Tony 
Boucher's book, The Magazine of Fantasy and Science Fiction. You'll find 
a little shocker by Matheson in this 
issue. It's a bit on the grim side, 
and we think it's a story you won't 
easily forget. If you like this type 
of tale, let us know. It's not really 
science fiction— or fantasy either. It's 
— off-trail. But whatever you choose 
to call it, we thought it was quite 
good. Care for more? 

HAL Annas makes his third 
straight appearance in Madge 
this issue. And we mention his story, 
THE LONGSNOZZLE EVENT only because we want to know how you 
like Len Zitts— and if you'd like to 
see more stories featuring him in 
much the same style as this first. 
We wouldn't say the story was heavy 
on the plot side, but it has a satirical humor that may give you a few 
laughs. Be sure and let us know how 
you liked it
BRADBURY of course needs no introduction. We'd just like to say 
that his story In this issue is being 
included in a new book published by 
Doubleday entitled, THE ILLUSTRATED MAN. It should be on sale 
at your bookstore soon. Eric Frank 
Russell presents his AFTERNOON 
OF A FAHN with all due respects 
to Debussey, whose music we love 



very deeply. And in this particular 
case, Mr. Russell's title is a prelude 
to a neat little yarn. We hope you 
like t. 

AS you will note, we've started a 
new feature this month, FANDORA'S BOX. This will be a regular department in which fans, fan 
clubs, and the various fanzines published all over the country will be 
reviewed, and discussed, along with 
interesting bits of information relative to the fan world. We thought 
you'd like to have a fan department, 
so we arranged with Mari Wolf to 
do it. (Mari is the wife of Rog Phillips, well known stf author) . So any 
of you fans who would like to have 
your fanzine reviewed, or if you have 
something you think all science-fantasy fans would like to know, send 
the information to Mari Wolf, FANDORA'S BOX, c/o IMAGINATION, 
P.O. Box 230, Evanston, 111. Or if 
you prefer, you can write to Mari 
direct: Mari Wolf Graham, 41-59, 
Bowne St., Flushing, Long Island, 
N.Y. (Just so you don't get confused 
with the last name, Rog Phillips is 
really Roger P. Graham in disguise. 
It seems that every author's penname is better known than his own!) 

DID you like the cover this issue? 
It's not a painting. It's a photo 
print colored with dyes. Something a 
bit unusual and we hope it meets 
with your approval. Along these lines 
you'll find many more new and interesting type covers on future issues. 
Next issue, for example, we're presenting a new Bok cover. It's a beautiful job, and Robert Bloch liked it 
so much he wrote the cover story. 
Following that issue will be a new 
and authentic interplanetary cover by 
Walter H. Hinton. And after that? 
Well, we'll talk about that later. Let 
us hear from you. . . . wlh 



BEYOND THE FEARFUL FOREST 




BEYOND THE FEARFUL FOREST 



unard 

No hunter had ever dared to follow the great 
Knifetooth Bear into his Fearful Forest. For beyond 
it lay a greater peril — the land of The Nameless • . • 




ft iHE bones lie light in the ferI tile soil of Sunset Fields. You 
can prod them out with a 
few thrusts of your bare toes. The 
roots of the big luxurious tree ferns 
carry skulls and shins and backbones up to the frond-filtered shin


ing of day, and even the delicately 
questing purple tendrils of the burrowflower may drag an occasional 
finger or toe bone from its uneasy 
rest, so light they lie. 

The bones do not decay. Nobody 
knows % '',y. Animal bones decay. 



7 



ft iHE bones lie light in the ferI tile soil of Sunset Fields. You 
can prod them out with a 
few thrusts of your bare toes. The 
roots of the big luxurious tree ferns 
carry skulls and shins and backbones up to the frond-filtered shin


ing of day, and even the delicately 
questing purple tendrils of the burrowflower may drag an occasional 
finger or toe bone from its uneasy 
rest, so light they lie. 

The bones do not decay. Nobody 
knows % '',y. Animal bones decay. 



7 



8 



IMAGINATION 



The skeletons of our own revered 
dead fall away to powder in a generation or two. But the bones of 
Sunset Fields are like the unchanging granite of the jagged cliffs, and 
of them we make our arrow points 
and lance heads, our hammers and 
our needles. It is more difficult to 
work the bones, to chip and flake 
them into form, than it is to shape 
our tools of metal; for we have 
ways of heating and molding these, 
subtle methods handed down from 
the far olden times of our fathers' 
fathers. There is no way to heat 
and mold a bone. 

Our singers tell a legend that — 
oh, many years ago! — a man went 
by stealth and slew another man 
with his lance. Not many of us believed the legend even when we 
were children. To kill a man! Our 
singers say that he possessed a 
beautiful woman whom the slayer 
desired. Who would desire the worn* 
an of another man? Such a thing 
seems incredible and childish, even 
to a child. There are women for all 
men, men for all women, and do we 
not each love all others equally, reserving a special love only for our 
own mate? But the legend is sung 
that after this bloody deed was 
done, many men fought because of 
it, and their curst bones lie in the 
earth of Sunset Fields forever, a 
memorial to their fantastic stupidity. 

It is a legend of the singers. Nobody really knows why the bones 
do not decay. 



Beyond Sunset Fields run the 
three brooks: the Gray, the Blue t 
and the Crimson. Far to the south 
they meet, and there become the 
Wide River that flows turbulently 
on until it reaches the silver dusk 
that encircles the world. There was 
a man of our people who once set 
out to find the end of the Wide 
River, but he never came back. 

Beyond the trio of brooks there 
rise the first grim ranks of the 
Fearful Forest, line after line of 
tall broad-leafed trees so evenly 
spaced you would think they had 
been planted by design. Pass the 
palisades of this forest and brave 
its terrors, its darkness and great 
angry beasts, and you will come 
after a time to the other side; and 
there, beyond a black plain where 
nothing grows save crawling vines 
and nauseous weed patches, you 
may see the towering cliffs of the 
country of The Nameless . . . 
# * # 

T am a hunter. My father was a 
singer, and his mate also; but 
I have a poor voice, good for little 
except to shout across the valleys to 
my friends, so my father, affectionately calling me Bear-throat, 
counseled me to become a hunter; 
and this I did. 

I am strong, of course. My arms 
are brown as a deer's hide and 
they swell with muscle. My legs are 
sturdy and, though not thickset, can 
carry me at a run for the space of 
a day without tiring. I do not boast 
when I say this, for after all I am 



BEYOND THE FEARFUL FOREST 



9 



a hunter and my arms and legs 
are my tools as much as my lances 
and arrows and metal knife. My 
name is Ahmusk, though I am more 
generally hailed as Bear-throat, the 
nickname my father gave to me. 
I have eyes the color of Blue Brook 
where it runs into a deep pool. My 
hair, the pale golden hue of the 
earliest corn of autumn, is cut short 
in the fashion of hunters, falling 
scarcely to my shoulders in back, 
in front sliced off evenly just above 
my eyes. And I think this is all 
that need be said concerning the 
person of Ahmusk the hunter. 

The day of which I would speak 
first was a day of cheerful sun and 
small breezes, with that crispness 
in the air that makes a man stand 
tall and blink once or twice, and 
perhaps shout for joy. I did just 
that, after I had wakened, and then 
I sat on the edge of my platform 
and looking down the tree's trunk 
at the grass below I was astonished 
at its bright new-seeming greenness. 
I sucked in a great chestful of air 
and shouted again. In the tree nearest mine there were two platforms, 
and now somone sat up on the higher and rubbed her eyes and grumbled. "What is it, Bear-throat?" 

"The morning, girl, the morning," 
I said heartily. 

"Need you be a herald of the 
dawn every day?" she asked, mockpetulantly. And I laughed. 

"Throw off your furs and smell 
the wind, Lora," I told her. "In the 
changing of the moon to nothing 



and back to fulness, the snow will 
fly. Today is the best day of the 
year." 

"To you, every day is the best 
of the year, or at least you say so 
each morning." She put back her 
sleeping furs and stood up, naked 
and young and beautiful. "When we 
are mated," she said, "I will see 
that you wake silently, and slide 
down the tree to find my breakfast 
while I sleep as long as I wish!" 

"What a shrew," I said happily. 
"What a ruler of men." 

"You will see." She slipped her 
light garment over her head. "I 
will quiet you down, young Bearthroat!" 

"I hope the day is soon, then, 
for your mating," growled her father from the lower platform of their 
family's tree. "Perhaps good folk 
will then be allowed to rest." 

GRINNING, I hung by my hands 
from the edge of my platform and dropped to the ground. 
Fifteen feet from toe to turf 
is no drop at all to a skilled hunter. 
The watchers were coming down the 
glen from their posts of the night, 
yawning and rubbing their eyes. I 
hailed them and they answered with 
waves of their arms. 
"Any disturbances?" 
"You would have heard, Ahmusk 
of the keen ears," said their leader. 
"No, we glimpsed a knifetooth bear 
traveling his solitary way to the 
Gray Brook, but if he killed thereafter we were too distant to hear it. 



10 



IMAGINATION 



No noises save the small animals 
going and coming, going and coming all night long." 

"It is nearly a moon's change 
since old Halfspoor ranged near the 
valley," I said. "He will be coming 
back soon, if I know his ways; and 
then there will be disturbances in 
the night." 

The leader of the watchers shivered. As far apart as we stood, I 
saw him shudder. "But do not lose 
your day's sleep over him," I shouted reassuringly. "This very moment 
I go to look for his track. If he 
■ranges within our lands I shall 
know, and a pair of hunters will 
watch with you." 

"Watching is our duty, not yours," 
he answered a little sullenly. "Beware of Halfspoor, or he will be 
using your pelt for a sleeping fur, 
Ahmusk." 

I was angered, I suppose. A 
hunter's pride is a powerful thing. 
"Halfspoor is only a knifetooth 
bear," I told him. "He is not, after 
all, one of The Nameless." 

They looked at me in horror; and 
then they turned and. went to their 
trees without a word. I felt ashamed 
of myself. It was an evil thing to 
use that terrible name so lightly. 
Then Lora had clambered down her 
tree and was standing near me, 
looking up into my face, so that 
I forgot all that I had been saying 
and knew only that every day this 
girl became more lovely. 

"Good morning, Lora," I said. 

"Are you really going to look for 



Halfspoor?" she asked me, her eyes, 
that were like the purple bells of the 
iburrowflower, all wide and wondering. 

"I am." 

"Perhaps he has left our lands." 

"I have known Halfspoor for five 
years, Lora, or it may be six. I 
know his rangings and his times 
for killing; I recognize his track 
though it be on the hardest ground, 
and I could tell you which snuffling 
grunt was his if a full score of 
knifetooth bears were all talking at 
once. He is due to come back today, or tomorrow or the next day. 
He is old and wily, but set in his 
ways." 

"I hope he has died on the banks 
of the Wide River," she said, brushing a strand of her onyx-black hair 
away from her face. "I hope his 
(bones are gnawed by jackal-rats." 

"And I hope your wish does not 
come true," I said lightly. "Because I have chosen his hide for 
our mating rug, young Lora." 

"Oh! " she exclaimed suddenly, 
her great eyes going wide again. "I 
had forgotten to tell you. I was 
asleep when you returned last 
night." 

" I trailed a wounded deer far 
down the Blue Brook, and caught 
him late. What had you forgotten, 
sleek Lora?" 

"The guardian Laq asked me to 
be his mate. It was in the afternoon, and he asked me in the presence of my father. When I reminded him that you were to be 



BEYOND THE FEARFUL FOREST 



ii 



my mate, he asked my father for 
me." 

T was shocked, then angered above 
any anger I had ever known. 
"He asked you," and then your 
father!" I roared, "What had your 
father to do with it?" 

"Laq says that in the far olden 
times it was the custom to ask a 
woman's parents. My father was 
enraged and told him that we were 
not living in the far olden times. 
Laq said it was a pity we were not, 
as then the people had respect for 
their guardians. And my father, 
fuming and rumbling until I thought 
he would begin to give off sparks 
like Ruddy Mountain, told Laq that 
even a guardian had no right to 
ask for the promised mate of another man. Laq then departed, saying he would ask me again after 
Halfspoor had killed you. dear Bearthroat. Half spoor again! His cruel 
words had slipped my mind until 
I spoke them now. Must you go 
looking for Halfspoor?" 

"I must." Taking my bow from 
my shoulder, I tested it from habit, and counted the arrows in 
my quiver to ascertain that there 
were fourteen of them, for fourteen 
arrows are accounted lucky for a 
day's hunt. "I do not understand 
Laq," I told her. "He has broken 
two of the strongest customs. To 
ask you when you are promised . . . 
and then to ask your father for 
you, as though you were a bone 
hammer or a sleeping fur! Laq must 



be losing his wits." 

"Perhaps he was drunk on tree 
fern juice." She dismissed Laq and 
all his works with a shrug. "The 
sun has lifted over the hills, Bearthroat. If Halfspoor is so much 
more ai tractive than I am, why then 
go to him, j'oung hunter with blind 
eyes." 

I patted her smooth cheek. 
"Young, but not blind. Did I not 
choose the prettiest girl of all our 
folk, when we two were scarcely 
older than sucklings?" And with 
this compliment, which made her 
preen, I left her and walked swiftly 
down the glen toward Sunset Fields. 

T>Y the time I had crossed Sunset Fields and come to the 
Gray Brook, I had forgotten Laq 
and pushed Lora to the back of 
my mind. The day was perfect. 
Every bird in the world was making merry on his twig, every small 
animal had left his burrow to romp 
drunkenly through the underbrush, 
intoxicated with the bright keen air 
of morning. I passed a doe with 
her fawn, trotting happily toward the 
water; and I did not bring her 
down, though she would have been 
easy prey and good eating, for we 
shared a joy that made us sib to 
one another. 

Still, for me the pleasure of autumn was now only a background 
against which my thoughts of Halfspoor the bear marched in orderly 
fashion while I reviewed them one 
by one. I recalled his slaying* of 



IMAGINATION 



men, his occasional and very skillful stalking of the night-watchers in 
their trees at either end of our 
valley. I remembered how on this 
morning he would be found asleep 
in his old lair under the two fallen 
petrified tree ferns downstream near 
the Blue Brook, while on that morning he would be gnawing the bones 
of bison or cave oat or perhaps even 
of jackal-rat (for he was a dirty 
feeder, was Halfspoor), far up the 
Crimson. I visualized his footprint, 
unique among knifetooth bears } 
measuring as long as my arm from 
wrist to shoulder, and with three 
outer toes gone from the right hind 
pug. As I waded through the Gray 
Brook's chilled waters I could almost imagine that I saw the maimed sign of his pad on the silver 
strand before me. "How well I 
know that track!" I exclaimed to 
myself, with an egotistic pride in 
my craft; and then I came out of 
the waters to find that, far from 
so clearly imagining it in all its 
enormous crippled particulars, I had 
actually been looking at the veritable track of Halfspoor himself. I 
was exultant and humiliated at the 
same time. 

Halting * above it, I tested my 
•bow once more, and counted the 
fourteen bone-pointed arrows in 
their quiver that I had made from 
the paw and forearm pelt of another knifetooth bear, my lucky 
quiver with the claws still hanging 
from its tip. The metal knife was 
in its sheath at my hip, the bone 



hatchet dangled from a sling handy 
to my left hand. I took a deep 
breath and began to follow the great 
mutilated prints overland toward the 
second of the three streams. 

Soon I had crossed the Blue and 
was approaching the Crimson Brook. 
Halfspoor was perhaps two hours 
ahead of me. Where he had trodden 
in sand, the water had filled his 
track, and where he had ambled 
heavily across grassy spaces, the 
blades had sprung nearly to uprightness again. He was traveling 
slowly, inspecting logs and coverts, 
probably talking to himself in the 
gruff complaining whine of his 
breed. Here and. there he had lingered a moment or two, and in these 
places I could often catch a whiff 
of his rank ursine odor. 

A T first I had no desire to catch 
up with Halfspoor. Almost 
would I rather have come face to 
face with one of The Nameless! 
No hunter is a match for a fullgrown knifetooth bear, standing as 
he does more than twice as tall as 
a man, with an unbelievable bulk 
that must outweigh twenty-five humans, every ounce of which is full 
of fight and choler and wickedness. 
His twin saber-tusks jut down in 
great deadly arcs, yellow and sharp 
and long as a hunting arrow. His 
head is larger than that of any 
animal, even than that of the cave 
cat who lives to the north and can 
be heard yowling a full day's journey away. When a knifetooth bear 



BEYOND THE FEARFUL FOREST 



opens his maw it is like staring into 
a huge fang-rimmed scarlet well. His 
paws are swift gargantuan weapons 
that can enfold and crush the largest stag. Oh, a terrible beast is old 
knifetooth! And Half spoor was the 
biggest, the angriest, the wisest and 
most hateful of his tribe. 

I tracked him but did not hurry 
overmuch ; when I had decided 
where he would spend the night, I 
would return to the glen, and persuade a dozen of our hunters to 
accompany me to find him. If he 
lay over a kill, stupid and drowsy 
with eating, we would attack him. 
Some of us might die, but Halfspoor also would die . . . if we 
were lucky. By right of my trailing I would then lay claim to his 
pelt, and from it make a mating 
fur for Lora . And the watchers 
would feel happier as they sat the 
nights through in their trees at the 
ends of the valley, because Halfspoor would never trouble them 
again. 

On this I thought as I crossed 
the Crimson Brook, and saw the 
first line of trees rising from gray 
tangled thickets that marked the 
beginning of the Fearful Forest. 
Halfspoor's pugmarks went straight 
toward them. And it was then that 
I began to form my daring plan. 
The bear was obviously going to 
go to ground somewhere in the 
woodland, and no hunter would 
follow me into that dreadful place 
after sundown. 

Why not follow him and kill him 



myself? 

Of all the folk, I alone had killed 
a knifetooth bear. Truly he had 
been but partially grown, and I had 
not deliberately stalked him to kill; 
no, I had blundered on him and it 
had been slay or be slain. But in 
that fight I had learnt much of a 
knifetooth's tactics, blind spots and 
weaknesses. His arm was now my 
quiver, his hide my sleeping rug. 
Halfspoor was only twice his size, 
at most, and surely the best hunter 
of the glen was a match for him? 
I who could loose four arrows and 
notch a fifth before the first struck 
its mark a hundred paces off — why 
should old tribal fears and the experiences of lesser men keep me 
from trying my hand at conquering this maimed brute? 

I went into the dank dimness of 
the Fearful Forest. 

'HpHERE is something I. do not 
* like about a deep tangled forest, and that is the lack of sunshine. The light is green and cool, 
and at intervals you will see a thin 
beautiful shaft of yellow spearing 
down from an opening far above; 
but unless you come to a glade 
there is no chance of catching a 
glimpse of the sun in its glory riding the blue fleece-clouded sky, 
and without the sun I feel lonely 
and somehow half-lost. It is why I 
would make an indifferent watcher, 
for they must wake by night and 
sleep by day. I am a sun-worshipper of the first order. I need its 



i 4 



IMAGINATION 



blazing all about me in order to 
be wholly myself. 

Of all woodlands, the least lovely 
is the Fearful Forest. As I have 
said, its trees are spaced evenly as 
though they had been planted by 
someone in the far olden times. 
Their wide leaves are dark bluegreen with emerald veins running 
beneath the surface. Their boles 
are thick and have rough hard bark, 
unlike the smooth-skinned tree ferns 
of Sunset Fields. Between their 
roots orange and black mushrooms 
and strange pale sick-looking fungi 
lurk, and crawling upward toward 
the invisible sun go lichens of every 
hue from mauve to sanguine. Where 
the branches begin there is a riot 
of parasitical growths, thick vines 
and murderous mistletoe, climbing 
plants that bear huge trumpets of 
orchids, every sort of disagreeable 
creeper that lives on the energy of 
its stronger brethren. All this vile 
vegetation makes an almost impenetrable roof over the whole 
Fearful Forest. On the ground between the trees lie heaps of longdecayed touchwood, squat thickets 
of brier, lightning-blasted limbs only beginning to crumble, and a deep 
soft carpet of dead things, from 
the half-dissolved flora of which 
peer white rib cases and gleaming, 
grinning skulls. The Fearful Forest 
reeks of death, of murdered animals and plants, of life that is not 
healthy nor productive of anything 
save more death. 

There are trails through the 



depths of this dismal woodland, 
paths made by bears or stags or 
the giant dogwolves that range in 
packs of a hundred. Smaller aisles 
are made by jackal-rats and the 
other lesser animals. Halfspoor was 
following a deep trench of a trail 
that ran almost straight toward the 
opposite side of the forest. 

T^OR a long while I followed this 
pathway, glancing at the ground 
now and again to be sure the knifetooth bear had not turned off; and 
my mind was oppressed against my 
will by thoughts of horror, generated, doubtless, in the dreary sunless vistas about me. Indeed, I 
would have gone back had it not 
been for the bold and idiotic plan 
I had conceived, of slaying Halfspoor single-handed. Several times 
a jackal-rat crossed my road, snarling at me, its scurfy brown hackles 
lifted. The third such loathsome 
beast I skewered with an arrow out 
of sheer dislike, retrieving my shaft 
before I passed on. 

Suddenly I halted. Before me on . 
a patch of mold lay the print of 
the bear, and within its great outline was a second track, that of a 
man. Another human was following 
Halfspoor! I was astonished. I knew 
where every hunter of the glen-folk 
ranged today, and none should be 
near the Fearful Forest. Kneeling, 
I stared closely at the footmark. I 
knew it well, as I knew the spoor 
of every man in this region. Laq 
the guardian was before me in the 



BEYOND THE FEARFUL FOREST 



woodland. 

Laq! He who had so oddly broken two of the oldest customs — say 
rather immutable laws — of humanity. We are supposed to love one 
another equally, and for the most 
part we do; reserving, as I have 
said, a special love for our mates 
and a heightened reverence for our 
guardians. But I could not feel any 
very powerful affection for the 
guardian Laq that day. I was disgruntled and wrathful to find that 
he was somewhere ahead. 

Certainly he had a perfect right 
to be in the Fearful Forest. The 
guardians passed this way with some 
frequency, and no hunter or singer 
or watcher of the night envied them 
their solitary journeys . . . nor 
their mysterious and appalling duties at their destination! 

For the guardians were the only 
barrier, as we all had been told 
from childhood, that stood between 
mankind and The Nameless. The 
calling was hereditary, limited to 
certain families. Dedicated at birth 
to their lifelong task, the guardians 
learned their secrets from their 
fathers, and imparted not a syllable of them to anyone outside the 
craft so long as they lived. It was 
thought that perhaps only those of 
select blood lines had minds capable of holding these secrets without going insane; it was thought — 
oh, many many things were thought 
of the guardians! Generally aloof, 
wrapped in the cloak of esoteric 
knowledge, they lived among us as 



superior beings, complex where we 
were simple, sober where we were 
light-hearted, supremely important 
where any one of us could be replaced by a score of others. 

Over The Nameless the guardians 
had power, and kept them confined 
to their stark and blighted-seeming country beyond the Fearful 
Forest. I never knew a man so daring or so rash as to ask any sort 
of impertinent question of a guardian, whether about his work or 
his cabalistic secrets or his terrible 
charges. The less said or even 
thought of The Nameless, the better. 

So the guardians moved between 
the glens and the jagged cliffs, revered by men and shunned by beasts 
of prey, accepting food and comforts and at times a mate from 
our ranks; the sole protection of 
humanity from their age-old enemies . . . 

The Nameless! 

SUDDENLY I realized I was approaching the limits of the 
Fearful Forest. I peered keenly at 
the great mutilated tracks in the 
mold. Yes, it was still Halfspoor I 
followed, and here was Laq's mark 
too. 

I think it was then that I began 
to feel fear, when I knew that I 
should have to skirt the country 
of The Nameless. It never entered 
my head that Halfspoor would go 
straight on across the blackened 
plain; surely not even a bear would 



IMAGINATION 



pass too near the forbidden lands. 
But he was evidently going to have 
a distant look at them, and so perforce I must have one likewise. 

Soon the trees thinned a little, 
and daylight crept toward me from 
between their boles. Then in a few 
moments I stood on the edge of 
the woodland. I began to sing to 
myself in a tuneless mumble. There 
was very little joy in me, and I 
felt I would be happier with some 
man-made noise, even such noises 
as came from my unskilled throat. 

One sweeping glance I gave the 
plain before me. There were the 
slimy pools with their odious tufts 
of weeds and strings of water vines 
emerging like sentient things of evil. 
There were the undulating bare 
stretches of black dead soil from 
which nothing sprouted. And beyond, strange cragged rocks and 
cairns upreared haphazardly in profusion for many thousands of paces, 
until at last the raw red cliffs leaped up to cry a halt to them and 
all this barren, frightful country 
. . . beyond the cliffs, what man 
knew what might be? 

One glance, and then I flung myself into a pile of touchwood, scattering the punk in blinding, billowing clouds and bruising my shoulder on a hidden stump. As I had 
heard the thin twang of a bowstring, I now heard the quick heavy 
crump of an arrow striking a tree, 
just before my face was buried in 
the crumbling tinder. I rolled over 
behind a log, eyes full of the dry 



powdery stuff and nostrils twitching 
against the longing to sneeze. My 
own bow was in my hand and an 
arrow nocked before I rubbed my 
vision clear; then I peered cautiously over the log in the direction 
whence the shaft had come. 

■^TOTHING moved, so presently 
■* ~ I bounced to my feet and 
went over to the right to inspect the 
arrow, which had buried itself two 
finger-lengths in the bark. I broke 
it off and stared at the feathers 
and green-dyed butt. It was one 
I had made myself. 

Standing without movement, I 
listened hard, and at last heard 
someone's careless foot crack a twig 
in the distance. Then I allowed myself the luxury of an ear-shattering 
sneeze. 

One of our own glen-folk had 
shot at me. There was no escaping 
that fact. It might have been anyone save a hunter, for all of us 
made our own weapons, giving the 
surplus to be divided among the 
less adroit men of the other callings. 

In the split second between the 
string's song and the thunk of the 
arrow, it had flashed into my mind 
that one of The Nameless was 
shooting at me. For of course no 
one knew exactly what they did, 
just how they injured men, or even 
what they looked like; they might 
be ogres with twelve arms and seven 
heads, carrying half-a-dozen bows 

But this was an arrow of my 



BEYOND THE FEARFUL FOREST 



making. That meant that the shot 
had been a warning to return to 
a safer place, an admonition that 
I was wandering too far, sent dramatically by one of the patrolling 
guardians. 

Yet why had he not merely stepped up and warned me? All the 
guardians knew me well. They 
knew I would be tractable to any 
suggestion. Why had he shot and 
fled? 

So conditioned is our race to 
amity and all-embracing brotherly 
love, so incredible is the thought 
of violence between men, that it 
took quite five minutes of cogitation before the terrible idea occurred 
•to me: that it might have been Laq, 
a jealous and hate-filled Laq, shooting not to warn, but to murder. 

I remembered the legend of the 
■bones of Sunset Fields, and a sickness took me in the pit of the stomach for a while. Then I put the 
grotesque thought from me, and 
went to look for Halfspoor's trail 
once more. 

TT ran clear and straight out 
•* across the black plain; I rubbed my chin and hesitated briefly. 
Then, nocking an arrow, I strode 
out and away from the edge of the 
Fearful Forest. My skin began to 
crawl, crawl with dread, but with 
scowling eyes I traced the prints 
before me, and there was no possibility in my mind of turning back 
now. Remembrance of the shaft in 
the tree was angering me more with 



17 

every step. Warning or murder weapon, its insolent caveat was the final 
stimulation I had needed to force 
my frightened body onward. 

If you are not a hunter, perhaps 
you will not understand the intense and passionate ascendancy 
that a stalk may gain over a man's 
will. He begins in a spirit of sport, 
it may be, thinking, "I shall pit 
my wits against this stag — or bison, 
or cave cat — and see if I can outthink him." Then after so long he 
begins to feel feverish about the 
temples, his hands sweat, his breath 
comes shorter; and suddenly it is 
not an idle hour's sport, but a whole 
life he is living in these moments, 
a veritable microcosm of existence, 
and the quarry is not simply a 
great dangerous animal, but all foemen, all desirable goals, everything 
he wants for himself and in the 
same moment everything he has 
fought and will fight forever. I cannot make it plainer. It is just this: 
the longer the hunting, the more 
acute grows the urgency to come 
up with and slay this fleeing creature, whether it be jackal-rat or 
eagle or two-ton knifetooth bear. If 
the hunter be a real man, he will 
■not cease from pursuit while there 
is wind in his lungs and a modicum 
of strength in his hands. 

Even though the game lead him 
into such a place as the country 
of The Nameless, from which, as 
we all have been told from infancy, 
there is no escape, your true hunter 
cannot stand and let it go. I had 



i8 



IMAGINATION 



been making pictures in my head 
for half a day's spooring, of what 
I should do to this great ursine 
brute when I caught him; I was 
entirely incapable of returning empty-handed. I think that even without the impetus of that furtive 
skulker with the arrow, I would 
have gpne on. As it was ... I 
quickened my pace. 

The blackened plain was broader 
than it had seemed from the forest. 
I trotted briskly over it, avoiding 
the stinking pools, and on all its 
grim surface nothing moved except 
myself. The pugmarks of Halfspoor 
went straight as an owl's deathstrike toward the broken cairns and 
ragged rocks. Biting my lips with 
determination, I followed them. I 
was in a strange state of singlemindedness, like a man drunken on 
fermented tree fern sap who knows 
only that he wants to do one thing 
and that, no matter how ridiculous 
it may be, nothing will stop him 
from doing it. 

A LREADY I had gone a thousand paces farther than any 
man of my race — save the guardians 
— had ever gone before. The earth 
beneath my bare toes was gritty, 
almost like powdered stone, and I 
did not wonder that nothing grew 
here except in the scummy pools 
of stagnant rainwater. 

Now the first of the queer cairns 
■was before me. Halfspoor had gone 
around it. So did I. 

A shadow moved in the far cor


ner of my left eye. I gazed swiftly 
toward it, but it was gone. 

A shudder ran up the back of 
my legs and quivered across my 
shoulders till my hands shook. Yet 
my stalking-madness would not let 
me be long afraid. 

Here was a plot of ground between two walls of unevenly-piled 
rocks. Trails of jackal-rats threaded its smooth surface, and across 
Halfspoor's prints ran those of a 
big lone dogwolf. I was bewildered. 
Could this be the country of The 
Nameless, over which even the 
eagles feared to soar? Or did it lie, 
perhaps, beyond those bleak cliffs 



Here Halfspoor had caught himself a jackal-rat. Said I not that he 
was a foul feeder? He had torn the 
scavenger in two and spent five or 
ten minutes in wolfing down the 



Where was he heading, this temerarious bear? What curious siren 
call was luring him (and quite possibly me) to destruction? 

I paused by a wall, to pick out 
with the point of my knife a thorn 
that had been working its way into 
my heel. This wall, now: it appeared to have been built a-purpose. 
The base was straight and made of 
thick square blocks, the upper rows 
knocked a little out of line but still 
fairly even. Between the stones was 
a crumbly, grainy material, and in 
places it still adhered to the rock 
in lumps and patches. I scratched 
my head over it, forgetting Half


BEYOND THE FEARFUL FOREST 



19 



spoor. Suppose, now, a man wanted 
to build a wall of such huge stones 
— provided he found a way to move 
them in the first place, for they 
were enormously heavy— would he 
not concoct some gummy or cohesive substance with which to hold 
them together? And in the course 
of time, of many moons and years, 
would this substance not possibly 
harden and then decay, leaving 
traces such as I now pried away 
with my thumbnail? 

But what would a man want with 
a wall like this? 

A light shone in my mind. Why, 
if he had such a wall erected 
across one end of a glen, it might 
keep the carnivores from his tribe's 
trees, and there would be no need 
for more than one or two night 
watchers! 

If I lived to return to our valley, 
I would lay this idea before my 
people. It was amazingly simple, 
and yet new. Surely no one had 
ever thought of it before. 

Well, I went on through the 
rocky ruins. 

Halfspoor was heading for the 
cliffs. In this bad unfamiliar soil 
it was hard to judge the age of his 
traces, but I thought he could not 
be more than half an hour ahead 
of me now. 

Again a shadow moved just beyond the range of my vision, and 
again when I looked around it had 
gone. 

I thought of Laq. I should have 



traced his footprints at the edge 
of the wood and discovered the 
truth concerning that arrow. 
Shadows . . . 

I was not exactly happy. But I 
traveled on over Halfspoor's trail, 
committed to the rash impulsive 
adventure beyond recall. At one 
point I passed a lair, dug out beneath one of the shapeless cairns 
and lined with torn fur, which stunk 
of dogwolf; the bones of many big 
hares littered the ground before its 
mouth, but there were none of the 
fierce occupants at home just then, 
and I passed on. There were more 
signs of beasts hereabouts than one 
could find in all the valleys back 
beyond Sunset Fields, and my 
amazement grew within me. This 
was not what the guardians had 
told us concerning the country of 
The Nameless, they who were doom 
and destruction to everything that 
drew breath. 

Here was a place where Halfspoor had seated himself to rest, 
in a corner of the ancient walls. 
Tiny tufts of grizzled fur were left 
sticking to the rough surface, where 
the bear had rubbed his back contentedly over the stones. I inhaled 
deeply of his scent. He was not 
far ahead now! 

TNDEED he was not; less than 
two hundred cautious paces had 
I gone when his mighty frame rose 
before me, towering up beyond a 
rock so abruptly that I thought he 
must have heard me and lain in 



20 



IMAGINATION 



wait. Then I realized, even as my 
fingers flew in a panic to my quiver, 
that his back was toward me and 
he was staring forward and up, 
making a guttural pleading sort of 
noise in his chest. I could scarcely 
shoot him in the back (it would 
only have enraged him anyway), 
so I slipped off to the left and crept 
along behind a low broken wall 
until I judged I was opposite him. 
Carefully I raised my head. There 
lie was, all fourteen feet of him, 
his monstrous head tipped back and 
his mouth open, so that his twin 
fangs in profile seemed but a single 
terrible yellow tusk. I might have 
lanced an arrow through his cranium then, but . . . well, Ahmusk 
the hunter is no assassin. When the 
day comes on which I dare not 
fight fairly, even with a knifetooth 
bear, then I shall break my bow 
and take to garland-weaving. 

I stared up to see what he was 
moaning at. Before him at a little 
distance rose a thing like a flatfaced precipice, which I had been 
watching and wondering about for 
some minutes. It appeared to have 
been constructed, like the low walls 
I had examined; but its stones were 
even larger than theirs, and its overall surface much smoother. At regular intervals, and in series of 
evenly spaced lines, across this uncanny cliff, there ran large square 
openings, like many blind eyes in 
an ogre. There were five of these 
horizontal lines of holes, rising up 
until the top of the cliff all shat


tered and craggy put an end to 
them. I would say this strange erection was more than seventy feet 
high. 

Framed in one of the holes on 
the second level sat another knifetooth bear, deep brown where Halfspoor was grizzled, smaller than the 
old scoundrel by a third of his bulk, 
and — my word on it! — an expression of coyness about her shaggy 
face that nearly made me burst out 
laughing. This was the lodestone 
which had dragged him inexorably 
over the brooks and through the 
Fearful Forest, even into the land 
of The Nameless. A female! A bearwench! 

She glared at him sidelong, her 
black nose pointed down and her 
comparatively short two-foot fangs 
digging into her shoulder; while 
Halfspoor, giddy and fatuous with 
love, made his drooling noises of 
courtship. 

T sat down with a bump — he was 
*• oblivious to me and to everything but his light-o'-love — and 
chuckled helplessly. Then I frowned. What should I do? Leap up and 
dance to attract his attention? Or 
leave him to his wooing and trust 
to run across his trail another day? 
You will understand that my stalking-fever, which even the country 
of The Nameless had not been able 
to dispel, was misted away by this 
development as though it had never 
been. Poor old Halfspoor! It would 
be a scurvy trick to interrupt him 



BEYOND THE FEARFUL FOREST 



31 



now with death. 

And even as I thought these comradely thoughts, the whine of an 
arrow came from nowhere and on 
its heels -the angry squall of the 
giant bear. I twisted round and 
looked over the wall. There was a 
shaft, fleshed in his furry thigh; 
and Halfspoor was gazing at me 
with no friendliness whatever. 

It was no time for idle wondering as to the source of that arrow. 
Indeed, I think I knew instinctively 
who had sent it over my head into 
tne courting bruin. But as I leaped 
the scattered rocks and dodged 
the higher walls of that ruinous 
place, I was seeking only an advantageous battleground, not the 
stealthy prowler with the bow. At 
my back I could hear the wrathful 
snorting of the knifetooth bear, the 
swift thud-thud of his enormous 
paws, and the rattle of stones dislodged by his whirlwind passage. 

My bow was in my hand, a lean 
arrow nocked on the cord. Hastily 
as I ran I gripped two others between the fingers of my left hand. 
Skirting a heap of gray lichengrown rubble, I whirled on my toes 
and sent the first missile back at 
him. When I could risk a glance 
again, he had fallen a little behind, 
being some forty long paces in the 
rear, and was swatting impatiently at 
the broken shaft protruding from 
his thigh. I think my own shot had 
missed him, and considering my 
haste, I was not surprised. 

I halted and taking a decent aim 



I loosed one at his head. At the 
same moment he roared loudly, opening his immense mouth to its full 
extent. Luck not being with me, 
the arrow glanced off one of his 
overgrown fangs with a sharp click, 
which appeared to startle Halfspoor 
considerably, because he stopped 
dead and blinked down his muzzle 
in a quaint way. I Shot the third 
of my arrows and tore a long red furrow up one gray-sprinkled cheek. 
Then, as he was nearly atop me in 
four sudden raging bounds, I fled 
like a hare amongst the ruins. His 
coughing and bellowing echoed like 
implacable thunder in my ears. 

npHERE was a deep and narrow 
gut of a trench that ran between two high stone walls. In 
jumping it I had an idea; doubled 
back, narrowly missed being decapitated by a swipe of one savage 
paw, and dived over the rocks into 
this curious thoroughfare. Scuttling 
like a jackal-rat, I went on toes 
and fingers off to the right, with 
Halfspoor's vociferance threatening 
to crack my eardrums. Two or three 
times he reached down for a blow 
at my back, and I actually felt the 
wind of his pad's thrust on my nape. 
Then he darted ahead, if such a 
titanic monster may be said to dart, 
and leaning over one wall he waited for me. Clever brute! He would 
scoop me out of my ditch like a 
fish from a runlet, would he ? I 
vaulted the wall opposite to his 
side and after one hasty shot flew 



22 



IMAGINATION 



into a crazy labyrinth of ancient 
ramparts and disintegrating incisures. An insane bawling told me 
I had probably hit him again. I 
had ten arrows left. My confidence 
was growing. Only let me find a 
tall cairn to scale, and I would 
make Halfspoor into a positive porcupine with those ten missiles. 

A sun-blind owl sat in a filthy 
nest among fallen blocks of stone. 
As I dashed past, it blundered out 
and flew into my face, beating its 
heavy wings and jabbing furiously 
at my eyes with its little hooked 
bill, I fended it off with the bow, 
gripped my bone-headed hatchet 
and with a long-armed glancing 
swing hit it under one of the big 
dazzled eyes. It fell away, screeching, and I ran on. Halfspoor's grunt 
was close behind. 

Then, some distance off, I caught 
the sound of howling, and knew 
that a pack of fierce dogwolves 
were running on a scent. I hoped 
they would not come here to complicate matters. 

npHERE was a place where broken walls flanked a row of stones 
which rose gradually upward, somewhat like a ladder placed halfway 
between horizontal and vertical ; 
that is, _ a man could step on one 
stone, then up on the next, then 
the next, and so on, until he found 
himself quite high in the air. The 
row ended on a flat floor open to 
the winds of heaven, some twentyodd feet from the ground; and here 



and there around this flat place irregular rocky projections rose. I 
had seen enough of this country by 
now to know that the projections 
must once have been another wall, 
rising to enclose this flat floor. Why 
someone, or something, had gone to 
so much trouble to make these ancient walls, I could not imagine, At 
first I had thought it must have 
been a truly gigantic being, to lift 
the huge stones. Now I had seen so 
many inclosures roofed over (as we 
roof over our platforms with thick 
fronds during the brief weeks of 
the winter) at a height of no more 
than nine or ten feet, that I could 
not believe a giant had made them. 
Why should he make a place in 
which he would have to lie down, 
never standing? But on the other 
hand, that may have been the case. 
It was hardly the time for philosophical speculations. I trotted up the 
stone ramp briskly and cast my 
eyes about for a good shootingnook. 

Halfspoor was hot after me. He 
dropped to all fours and came up 
the graduated stones as though he 
had been using such conveniences 
all his life — and it was not truly so 
different from climbing a rocky 
hill, except that this was smoother 
going. I dashed for a heap of rubble at one corner. Leaping this, I 
crouched down as Halfspoor hit the 
top at a run. I shot at him and 
my ill luck was still with me, for 
again my shaft glanced off one of 
his frightful tusks. Surely an evil 



BEYOND THE FEARFUL FOREST 



3 3 



fog lay over my eyes that day! He 
charged in my direction and I had 
time for but one more swift arrow, 
which I had the good sense not to 
aim at his head. It buried half its 
length rather low in his shoulder 
and he squalled resentfully. Then 
I slipped over the edge and dropped 
to the ground. 

T had calculated the drop well. It 
was too much for his bulk. He 
loomed above me, raging. I put an 
arrow in his cheek, and he bit 
down hard and spat out the head 
and part of the shaft. I drew a 
good bead on his eye but he turned 
much more quickly than I had anticipated and the missile whined 
away in the sky. He headed back 
for the climbing stones. I looked 
about me. There was a broken inclosure nearby in one wall of which 
was an entrance like a cave mouth, 
perhaps seven feet high by two 
broad; it seemed as good a place 
as any to dodge into, and I did. 
There I awaited his coming, controlling my breathing as best I 
could in order that my next shots 
would not be so shamefully wasted. 

Then I heard the dogwolf pack 
much closer. They yapped and 
yowled, and mingled with their excited noise was the petulant grunt 
of Halfspoor. Still I waited, but he 
did not come. Then I knew by the 
sounds that the dogwolves had surrounded him. Here was an odd happening! Certainly no dogwolf would 
attack a knifetooth bear, even 



though he ran with five score other 
canines. Only a very silly human 
hunter would pit himself against old 
Halfspoor. 

But, by my love for Lora, they 
were shepherding him across the 
ruins! I caught a glimpse of the 
old devil backing reluctantly up a 
mound, and then as I gaped he 
turned and shambled off down a 
black ravine, complaining and waving his forepaws angrily. In a great 
circle they followed him, nipping at 
his heels, leaping out of range, and 
keeping up an incessant clamor that 
sounded like boys teasing a captured cave cat kitten. 

I counted the arrows in my quiver. There were six now. Ill luck 
rode my shoulders that day. Halfspoor should be bleeding to death 
with eight shafts in his chest and 
head; instead he had four or five 
inconsiderable wounds, one of which 
I had not even given him. 

I spat on the ground, wishing I 
had a drink of water. Ahmusk, 
mighty stalker of knifetooth bears! 
I laughed without mirth. Ahmusk, 
desperate invader of the land of 
The Nameless. There, now, was a 
title for a brave man; but I had 
come here in the grip of huntingfever, and so little credit attached 
to me for the deed. I was in a mood 
to revile myself aloud. I smote my 
bare thigh and swore heartily. What 
should I do now about Halfspoor? 
There was no profit in advertising 
my presence to the dogwolf pack. 
They had been known to pull down 



24 



IMAGINATION 



men if they were hungry. 

I put my hands to my ears and 
rubbed them roughly, for of a 
sudden they were tingling and prickling. It was as though I had heard 
a high unpleasant sound; but except for the distant uproar of Halfspoor and his annoyers. there was 
nothing. The country was bewitched, that was it. There was a pause, 
and then my eardrums thrilled 
briefly again to something I could 
not locate or analyze. 

I glanced behind me at the inclosure. Roofless, I had the feeling 
that it must once have been roofed; 
there were low piles of rock trash 
all about, as there would have been 
had the roof — fallen now — been 
somehow impossibly made of stone. 
What prodigies of strength and skill 
had wrought these incredible walls? 
I shook my head, and turned back 
to the entrance. 

There was something approaching slowly over the ruined structures to my right. I looked at it 
with widening eyes. It was about 
a hundred paces off. For one sickendng moment I believed it to be 
some horrid kind of ogre, made of 
muck or rotted flesh or some such 
grisly matter; it seemed slimy and 
dead . . . 

Then the sun struck it, and I 
decided that it was simply covered 
with long trailing dark hair, which 
glistened wetly in the rays of the 
dying sun. 

It came on, and my knees smote 



together while my tongue stuck to 
the roof of my sudden-dried moudi. 

In form it was like a man. Indeed, had a man been smeared with 
black mud, and then been given a 
coat of heavy hair, oily or permanently damp hair, he might well have 
resembled this creature. I judged 
it to be about six feet or a little 
over, my own height; and so later 
it proved to be. It moved oddly, 
with a sort of halting gait, weaving 
its arms to keep its balance on the 
jagged rocks. I could see two deep 
blackish pits in its head where its 
eyes would be, and matted straggly 
hair fell lifelessly from its crown. 
It was naked, like an animal. 

I thought of my mother's old 
songs of the ogre-breed, which can 
take all manner of shapes, but often 
emulate mankind, building their 
frames magically from dead beasts 
or from the masses of decomposing 
vegetable matter in the forests. 
Maybe my first idea had been right, 
and this was an ogre of mire and 
pelts, all wickedness. 

At any rate, it was coming at 
me, if rather slowly; and so I put 
an arrow to the string, being minded to die bravely as becomes a 
hunter of the glen-folk. 

Seeing me raise the bow, it waved 
at me in protest, and with so human a gesture that I could not 
shoot it, but only held my weapon 
ready. It then raised one hand to 
its face, with something bright in 
its fingers (it had fingers, I could 
see, like a man's), and my ears 



BEYOND THE FEARFUL FOREST 25 



tingled again to the unheard sound 
or vibration which had bothered me 
previously. 

T7R0M the ruins behind it rose 
" the noise of dogwolves barking. It nodded, like a man who 
would say to himself, That is good. 
Then it came on with its slow, almost apologetic pace. I lowered my 
bow. Somehow I felt that it meant 
me no injury. 

When it was no more than halfa-dozen feet off, it halted; and we 
stared at each other curiously. 

It was a hairy brute, to be sure, 
but evidently no ogre. Its thatch 
glistened darkly, and seemed of the 
consistency of a cave cat's mane, 
but without curls; lank, long, and 
thick. In the places where this mantle did not grow, as on the cheeks 
and forehead and on the rounded 
portions of the limbs, there was a 
short dusky sihag, a nap like that 
on a knifetooth bear's muzzle. The 
effect was startling, but on close 
inspection not really ugly, and 
wholly without the impression of 
.terror which my first sight of it 
had brought. It appeared to be 
watching me steadily, though its 
eyes were entirely hidden in their 
sunken shadowed wells. Finally it 
put up its right hand to the level 
of its waist and held it there. I 
could not see the significance of the 
i gesture. After a moment it thrust 
the open hand out to me in several 
short jabs. The motion was entirely 
without menace. I could make noth


ing of it. 

It clasped its hands together and 
shook them. Then it stuck the right 
one. toward me again. I realized 
that it wished to touch my own 
hand ! 

I Shifted my bow to my left 
hand — so sure had I grown in these 
few brief seconds that it meant no 
harm — and touched its hairy fingertips. Instantly my hand was enfolded in a firm hearty grip, and 
moved rapidly up and down. I cannot explain how or why the emotion swept over me, but immediately 
I felt a warm friendship for this 
shaggy being, such a feeling as I 
had never held before for anything save my fellow men and 
women of the valleys. 

And there was something else. 
The gesture felt . . . felt natural, 
and proper, and almost familiar, as 
though I had done it many times 
before! 

Mystified, I drew back my hand 
as he released it; and once more 
we stood staring at each other without sound. 

A movement at last caught my 
eye, and staring over his 
shoulder I saw two great dogwolves 
breast a wall and come loping toward us. With a warning cry I 
threw up my bow. In the time it 
took me to change hands on it, he 
had peered back; then he gave a 
cry, remarkably manlike in tone, 
and waved urgently at my face. 
Scowling, I dodged back to get a 



26 



IMAGINATION 



;shot at the foremost brute. At once 
ithe hairy thing knelt, as if pleading, and the pair of dogwolves, 
coming up. fawned on him with 
ilolling scarlet tongues. 

My jaw dropped and I gasped, 
;dumbfounded. 

The fierce beasts were his 
.friends! 

I slung my bow over my shoulder, 
but took the precaution of grasping my bone hatchet. The dogwolves stared at me, their hot eyes 
as puzzled as no doubt my own 
were; but they made no move toward me. 

The hairy being stood up and 
came forward to touch me lightly 
on the chest. Then he shook my 
right hand up and down again. The 
dogwolves crept on their bellies to 
our shadows, and one of them, a 
giant of a fellow, touched my foot 
with his wet nose, whining a little. 

If .there has ever been a more 
astonished person than I was at that, 
second, he must have fainted away 
with his wonder. I know I grew 
quite giddy. Now, I said to myself, if Halfspoor were to amble 
up to me and ask for the loan of 
my knife, I think he would get it 
without a question or a raised eyebrow! 

The big carnivores lay panting 
beside us, and the dark rough-coated manlike creature rubbed his 
chin and stared at me from those 
deepset eyes; which I could make 
out now, as they were glittering in 
a stray beam of sunlight that fell 



across his strange face. 

He said something to me. It was 
not an animal's noise, but a reasonable imitation, of human speech, 
except that none of the words were 
familiar. 

At once I remembered the young 
hunter who had come to our glen 
several years before, from a country 
far to the north. His language, while 
much the same as ours, had words 
in it which we had never heard; 
and the elders of the tribe said that 
probably other folk, living in other 
isolated places, must have developed words of their own too. 

HPHIS being, of course, seemed to 
me at first no more a man 
than were the dogwolves at his 
feet. He had the same general form, 
yes, and perhaps even the exact 
conformation of features under that 
mat of hair; but what human by 
any stretch of the imagination could 
ever grow such a pelt? 

Nonetheless, his voice was pleasing enough to the ear, and his 
speech seemed separated into distinct words, though as I have said, 
none of them were familiar to me. 

I said, "Friend what-is-it, you 
undoubtedly know what you're 
talking about, but I do not. I 
would give a new set of hunting 
arrows to be able to understand 
you." 

He uttered more words, pointing 
off to the west where the tall raw 
cliffs were even now shutting off 
the lower half of the sun. 



BEYOND THE FEARFUL FOREST 



"Yes," I said, "evening comes 
on, and you're afraid I'll wonder 
over into the country of The 
Nameless. Is that it? Never you 
fear, my friend, I'll not go a step 
farther in that direction." 

But he took my hand, hesitantly 
and as though afraid that I might 
be offended; and he tried to lead 
me westward. 

I hung back, and the dogwolves 
growled a little, but desisted when 
he spoke to them. Then he signed 
to me, as plainly as one could 
imagine, that there was food where 
he was taking me; and so because 
of my grumbling belly I suffered 
him to lead me off among the ruins 
of this fabulous place. 

As we walked I thought of Lora, 
and iher distress . in the morning 
when she would find me still away; 
■but not for anything would I tread 
the paths of the Fearful Forest at 
night. I must find a sleeping place 
nearby. 

We passed the flat-faced precipice with the five lines of square 
openings, where Halfspoor's brown 
lady had been sitting. I pointed 
up and said, "Knifetooth bear!" He 
cocked his head at me. I hunched 
my shoulders, put two fingers 
athwart my lips for fangs, roared 
like a bear and said, "Knifetooth! " 
again. 

The hairy one stopped, opened 
his mouth — he had teeth as even 
and white as my own — and out of 
his throat came the exact duplicate of old Halfspoor's battle cry. 



The dogwolves leaped and barked 
excitedly. I nodded agreement and 
said, ''Bear!" 

He said something guttural that 
sounded like oorsa. I made him repeat it several times. It occurred 
to me that ursus is another of our 
names for old knifetooth; and my 
wonder grew apace. 

Pointing to myself, I then exclaimed, "Ahmusk!" 

He said my name with no difficulty, and then seemed rather confused; for he tapped his own black 
chest and said, "Ahmusk?" 

I tried again. I touched the bigger of the two canines and said, 
"Dogwolf." 

He mastered that more or less, 
and in return gave me his name for 
the brute, which was poort or spoort, 
I could not tell Which. His sibilants were tongued so lightly that 
they were difficult to hear. 

T indicated myself and said, "Man." 
- 1 I prodded him and repeated it. 
Then I realized consciously for the 
first time that I was now regarding him as a species of human. He 
had taken me for kin before, as 
his former use of my name as a 
generic term plainly proved. 

"Ahmusk," said I once more, 
beating my bosom. 

"Ahmusk," said he, pointing; and 
then, laying a shining-haired paw on 
his own breast, "Dy-lee!" 

"Dy-lee," I said, charming him 
no end, for he capered grotesquely 
and nodded his head till the lank 



28 



IMAGINATION 



thatch flew. 

Well, now we were acquainted. 
My pleasure at finding this strange 
brute-man was out of all proportion to its apparent importance. I 
suppose it was reaction to my 
hours-Jong suspicion that I had 
played the complete fool in coming 
into this country, in following the 
terrible Halfspoor, in ignoring the 
age-old forbiddance against crossing 
into the land of The Nameless . . . 
Now all seemed to have come out 
well. Halfspoor, who had been proving more than a match for me, had 
been harried off, evidently on orders 
from this Dy-lee creature, by a 
pack of dogwolves. The Nameless 
were nowhere in evidence. Food and 
possibly a tree for the night were 
in the offing. And I had made a 
wonderful discovery, a brain-shaking find; for if I was right, I had 
chanced upon a new branch of the 
family of men. 

Through the ruins we went, the 
dogwolves at our heels; and we were 
as delighted with one another as 
two boys who have been given their 
father's old bone hatchet to play 
with. 

r T*HE silver dusk came up from 
*■ the earth, spawned from the 
shadows of the many ruinous walls 
and ramparts; and far ahead I saw 
a scarlet eye wink out at us from 
the darkening cliff. I clutched Dyiee's shaggy arm involuntarily, and 
hissed at him, as though he understood the words, "The Nameless!" 



He understood, at any rate, that 
I was frightened; for he patted me 
awkwardly on the back two or three 
times, and said something in his 
language meant, by the tone, to be 
■reassuring. 

A hunter could not hang back 
where a brute-man like this went 
on. He obviously knew what the 
scarlet eye was, and seemed utterly 
without fear. And so after a time 
we had come near enough to it for 
me to see that it was no ghastly 
orb of a Nameless ogre, but the 
mouth of a cave, fairly high up the 
raw cliff, shining with the reflection 
of a fire deep within it. 

Evidently Dy-lee meant to go 
into the cave, for soon we had 
struck a well-worn path and were 
traveling upward. I imagined that 
there were friends of his there, 
with whom he would eat before 
seeking his tree for the night. Overcoming my dislike of caves with a 
wrenching effort, I followed him up 
the path and stood on the threshold of the grotto, having a last 
look about me. From this vantage 
point I could see the glimmering 
of fires from several other great 
holes which had been hidden from 
the plain. 

Then I went into the cave of 
Dy-lee the hairy man. 

'T , HE fire, leaping merrily within 
a ring of stones, heated the 
long tunnel-like cavern for many 
paces on all sides; and about it, 
some cooking meat, some engaged 



BEYOND THE FEARFUL FOREST 



29 



in low-voiced conversation, and 
some making or repairing noosetraps, snares for rabbits and birds 
such as our children often play 
with, were a score or so of the 
long-maned people. My last doubt 
as to their humanity vanished at 
sight of the flames, for no animal 
can control fire. Except for their 
pelts, these folks might have been 
my own. 

Some of them sprang to their 
feet as we entered, waving their 
arms and shouting. Dy-lee quieted 
them with a crisp word, and putting 
his hand on my shoulder he made 
a speech at which they all came 
crowding around, each one want-' 
ing to shake my hand up and down. 
It was all wonderfully friendly and 
heart- warm ing. Instinctively I loved 
these people, and pitied them a little, too, for that they must live so 
close to the terrible country of The 
Nameless. 

At thought of those malignant beings, I remembered Laq the guardian, whose arrow (I felt sure) had 
goaded the bear Halfspoor into attacking me; but at once I put the 
bitter thought from me, and shaking the hand of one dark fellow 
while gi'inning amiably into the 
almost featureless face of another, 
I moved to the fire and was given 
a haunch of hare, all smoking and 
hot from the spits above the flames. 
After I had wolfed this, while the 
whole company stared at me and 
chattered among themselves. Dylee handed me some meat off the 



brisket of a doe, I wondered how 
they managed to catch deer, for the 
only traps in evidence were the 
small rabbit-snares, while none of 
them carried lances or bows or even 
metal knives, but had some crude 
flint daggers with which they made 
shift to cut up their meat. Then 
my eye fell on several of the tame 
poorts, or dogwolves, lounging insolently about among the hairy 
folk ; and I recalled their pack 
chivvying Halfspoor over the ruins. 
There was the answer! Incredible 
though it was, these men must 
have trained their four-footed companions to pull down deer — even 
stag and bison for all I knew — for 
the masters' larder. 

T sat down on the floor by the ring 
of firestones, weary with tracking and fighting and surprises. At 
Once all of them came close to me 
and seated themselves too, clamoring good-humoredly for their dinner. They still peered curiously at 
me, but with such a friendly air 
that no offense could be taken. As 
we ate, Dy-lee pointed to various 
members of the group, or family, 
as it possibly was, and told me 
their names, which I did my best 
to master. The oldest of them, a 
seven-foot giant of a man with very 
long grizzled-silver hair falling in 
cascades all over his body, was 
called Dy-vee, or Dy-veece, I could 
not be sure which. He seemed to 
be the chief, or the grandfather, for 
when a bevy of young females be


£ IMAUli 

gan to giggle loudly together, he 
spoke to them with authority and 
they were hushed. 

The woman whom I took to be 
Dy-lee's mate was a slim, highbreasted she, whose hair was sleeker and finer than his, and on whose 
face the shag was lighter and not 
of so matted a nature. It was on 
this shy creature that I first perceived the color of the cave-folk's 
skin; when I was told her name 
(which was Zheena), she put back 
the long hair of her forehead with 
a very feminine gesture, and I saw 
that just around her eyes, less 
deepsunk than the males', there 
was no fur at all. The skin was 
white, like a winter's baby before 
it is tanned by the sun, and seemed 
smooth and firm. I resolved, when 
I should know Dy-lee better, to 
have a try at burrowing in the nap 
of his face to see if he too were 
white beneath it. 

So we got through the meal somehow, between introductions and polite gestures and much high laughter at our mispronunciations and 
general inability to understand each 
other. When I had eaten all I could 
hold, I leaned back against a wall 
of this cheerful cavern, with my 
hands pillowing my head, and because my stomach was full and my 
heart light, I began to sing. 

The effect was that of a lightning bolt striking among them. They 
stood petrified for long seconds, and 
then came swarming from everywhere to hear me; and I, whose 



i ATION 

voice is admittedly like that of a 
wounded bison bellowing to its 
herd, stopped my song with a grunt 
and stared openmouthed at the 
shaggy people. Dy-lee made quick 
eager motions to me, opening his 
mouth time after time, and presently it was borne in upon me that 
they wanted me to sing again. They 
wanted Bear-throat to sing! 

QO I sang. I caroled a love ditty, 
^ which made all the females roll 
their eyes and sigh; and I chanted 
a song of the hunt, which set all 
the bare hairy toes to beating on 
the rock floor. I sang all the songs 
I could recollect of my mother's 
repertory, the rollicking ones and 
the sad ones, the lullaby tunes and 
the haunting melodies that told our 
legends of the far olden times. For 
the space of at least two hours I 
sang to them, and when at last I 
stopped, for lack of breath and 
rawness of throat, and because I 
could not remember another song 
to save me, you would have thought 
the cave was falling in, such a 
noise they made. I saw then that 
many, many more had pressed into 
the place, until it was packed with 
scores of the hairy folk, and there 
was no vacant space anywhere in 
the grotto except for the little 
cleared place on which I sat. Even 
their great dogwolves were lying 
about watching me with quizzically 
cocked heads, and looking as though 
they enjoyed it. 
They liked my singing! The all


BEYOND THE FEARFUL FOREST 31 



but-tuneless caterwauling of Bearthroat the hunter enchanted them 
to immobility! I could scarcely believe it, even though they had listened to me for so long. 

I pointed at Dy-lee and by gestures, asked him to sing. He shook 
his head and shrugged, an especially 
human movement; as plain as if he 
had said it in words, I knew that 
neither he nor any of the others had 
ever known what it was to lift the 
voice in song. They were a people 
wholly without music. No wonder 
my bawling had enthralled them! 

Gradually, the cavern cleared; although they obviously wanted to 
stay and listen to me, and gaze 
wide-eyed on my bronze hairless 
skin, old grizzled Dy-veece shepherded them out into the night with 
gruff barks of command. When 
only the family, or whatever this 
group might be, was left, he came 
to me and after patting me a few 
times and shaking my hand up and 
down, handed me a sleeping fur. 
It was cave cat, and very like my 
own blankets at home. I looked to 
foe led out to a tree then, but saw 
that the folk, were one by one lying 
down near the fire, wrapped in their 
furs and evidently intent on sleeping in the cave. I think this astonished me as much as anything 
I had seen in all that strange 
day, for who ever heard of sleeping anywhere but on a tree platform? Nevertheless, I could scarcely 
wound the feelings of my hosts by 
going out alone and thus refusing 



their hospitality ; so with a weak 
smile at Dy-lee and his mate, who 
were watching me anxiously, I 
spread the great yellow pelt on 
the bare rock, laid myself down on 
it, flipped the edges over me, and 
closed my eyes with the certainty 
that I would not get a blink of 
sleep all that night, 

npHE next thing I knew was that 
I was very warm and drowsy, 
and that something was pressing 
cozily against me from both right 
and left. I opened my eyes, yawned, 
and found that I was flanked by a 
pair of the tame dogwolves, who 
were snoring gently into my ears. 
The fire was crackling under halfa-dozen spits loaded with meat, a 
number of the dark-haired people 
were moving about quietly, and the 
sun was beating straight in the door 
of the cavern with a cheerful orange 
light. 

Dy-lee, seeing that I was awake, 
brought me water in half the shell 
of some great nut which I did not 
recognize; and Zheena, his mate, 
presented me with a choice of fruits 
set on a wooden slab that had been 
rounded and cleverly decorated 
with bright dyes. 

After rinsing my mouth and eating an apple, I rose and stepped 
over a dogwolf to go to the opening 
and look out on a beautiful autumn 
day, crisp and clear as the one before had been. Then, after a few 
deep satisfying breaths, I returned 
and made a hearty breakfast of 



3 2 



IMAGINATION 



meat in company with all the cave 
folk. 

When we had finished, Dy-lee led 
me down the path to the place of 
ruins. By the vivid sunlight I could 
see that the walls at the base of 
the cliff were somewhat less shattered than the first ones I had come 
upon; and also that they were definitely no accidents of nature, but 
constructed. I asked by gesture if 
his race had built these walls, and 
he signed to me, No. 

Shortly we came to an enclosure 
that still bore its roof. I went and 
peered into this strange square 
place, and Dy-lee kindly handed me 
a long torch of bound reeds soaked 
in black oily matter and lighted, 
the purpose of his carrying which 
on this bright morning I had not 
hitherto understood. Now I realized that he meant me to see everything there was to be seen, whether 
open or hidden from the light; and 
I smiled my thanks as I took the 
brand. Dy-lee and his two dogwolves followed me into the place. 

The roof was of stone, or perhaps of a stone, for I could detect 
no crack or joined place in all its 
surface. It was shored up by lesser 
stones, long and thick and ornamented with carvings that resembled the tendrils of the burrowflower. These must have been 
scratched into the rock with a metal tool, I think; though it certainly 
would have taken the whole lifetime of a man to accomplish all the 
carving I saw there. I had never 



seen or heard of anyone carving 
deliberate designs in anything before. The effect was lovely, albeit 
startling. Our glen-folk decorated 
many things with dyes made of 
vegetables and roots and minerals; 
but none had ever thought to adorn 
wood or stone with carvings. And 
here again I was astonished, for 
after the first moment or two, it 
seemed a natural and beautiful 
thing to do. It was like the shaking 
of the hands, something that was 
surprising only at the first acquaintance. 

-IT7-HILE I stared about me, Dy" * lee passed into a far corner 
and began to clear away a great 
heap of trash, broken wood, old 
discarded sleeping furs, and other 
useless articles, which had been 
piled in a haphazard fashion there. 
I followed him across the floor and 
saw that he had cleared a space in 
the center of which was a square 
slab of stone set into the floor, 
with a huge ring embedded in one 
side of it. This ring he now grasped, 
and began to tug and haul at it, 
grunting with the strain. The block 
of stone moved upward, fell, moved 
and fell again, and it seemed it 
would take him an age to lift it 
free. So I put my hand on the ring 
beside his. He relinquished it to 
me, I think out of curiosity to see 
how powerful I was; and it was 
then I discovered that I was much 
the stronger, for the slab came up 
out of its hole smoothly and easily 



BEYOND THE FEARFUL FOREST 



33 



to my tug. Dy-lee straightened and 
said something in an awe-struck 
voice. 

"That is the result of a hunter's 
life, friend Dy-lee," I said, grinning. "If you stalked with a bow 
and a hatchet, rather than a pack 
of dogwolves, you would be as 
strong as V 

Pointing down into the black well 
' exposed by the raising of the stone, 
he indicated the torch in my hand. 
I thrust it down into the mouth of 
the well. There was a kind of sputtering sound from the brand, which 
I could not attribute to anything in 
particular, except perhaps that the 
fire was afraid to go down into that 
jetty darkness. Peering past it, I 
saw a line of the graduated stones 
that abounded in these ruined places, going down like a curious tilted 
rock ladder into the depths of the 
earth. Dy-lee made urgent motions 
to me, that I should go down. I 
shook my head. "Not for an extra 
year of life, friend," I said. 
- He took the torch from me and 
before I could stop him he had 
dropped into the pit. The two dogwolves brushed by me and followed 
him down. 

Well, it ill became a hunter of 
the glen-folk to sit here gnawing 
his knuckles when even the brute 
(beasts showed no fear of this terrible hole; so with many misgivings 
I took my first hesitant steps down 
the underground passage. 

It was almost pleasant in the 
tunnel. I had expected chill and 



dampness, but the walls were dry 
and quite warm to the touch, rather 
like the rocks on the sides of Ruddy Mountain, which is the coneshaped hill that gives off sparks 
and smoke, far to the north of our 
land. As we progressed downward, 
the flambeau lighting our way, I 
seemed to notice even more heat; 
there may be a great fire somewhere beneath the earth of the 
ruined country — who can tell? 

CHORTLY we came to a level 
^ stretch of tunnel, and some 
few score paces thereafter, to a 
widening portion which shortly became about as broad as the inclosure with the stone roof. Here 
it was like an ordinary cave, except that the floor and walls and ceiling were flat, with sharp angles at 
the jointures, The thought was inescapable: the giants or whoever had 
made all the walls and Inclosures 
above had hollowed out the earth 
and made this place likewise. I examined the wall in one place (it 
was all alike, as much as I saw of 
it that day). Small smooth stones 
of agreeably differing colors were 
set in rows to form the surface, and 
their substance was such as I had 
never found before, being sleek and 
■wonderfully glossy, as lustrous as 
Ithe hair of my Lora in the morning sunlight. 

Dy-lee now seemed excited, and 
urged me to follow him swiftly 
through the shining grotto. 'Hie 
dogwolves' claws clicked along the 



IMAGINATION 



34 

level floor, and they constantly 
sniffed the air, which was musty 
and made our breathing rather labored. The big torch crackled and 
blazed brightly. 

At last we turned a corner — as 
sharply angled as those at the base 
of the walls — and after one look I 
gave a cry of fear, of brain-breaking wonder. 

How can I explain what I first 
thought I saw? It was . . . it was 
as if in this gallery there were many 
many square holes in the walls, and 
each of these holes gave on a vista of 
vivid color and much apparent 
movement; as though by some inconceivable magic there were different worlds beyond each hole! 

I covered my eyes with an arm 
and moaned with terror. My knees 
smote together, my teeth chattered. 
And when Dy-lee laid a reassuring 
hand on my shoulder, I leaped as 
though Halfspoor himself had snorted in my ear. 

With murmurs, meant to restore 
my confidence, he led me to one 
wall and waited patiently until I 
found the courage to uncover my 
eyes. Then he pointed to the first 
of the large square openings. See


sprung out of it yet, and that the 
dogwolves had casually Iain down 
in the light dust of the floor, I 
gripped my nerves with the teeth 
of my mind and peered closely. 

A GAIN I am at a loss for words 
to tell of this marvel. It was 



not a hole or opening, it was but 
an enclosed place on the wall, overlaid with a sheet of something so 
shiny and transparent that it must 
have been water frozen there forever by unthinkable sorcery. Beneath this motionless water, the figure of a woman looked out at us 
with calm unwinking gaze. She was 
dressed in fantastic furs, blue and 
emerald and gold, wrought in patterns that surely no one had ever 
seen before; her face, crowned by 
the gaudy feathers of a bird, was 
like those of my own people, being without hair and gentle-looking. 
After a long time of staring, I 
reached out to touch this wonder, 
and the still water over it felt cool 
and slick to my fingertips. The 
woman made no move as my hand 
passed before her. I was thunderstruck. 

Dy-lee led me to the next enclosed place, and there was a man, 
clad as fabulously as the woman, 
with a stern look of resolution on 
his features. He seemed a curious 
hybrid, for while most of his face 
was as smooth as mine, on his chin 
was a fringe of dark hair such as 
covered By-lee's folk. Him I did 
not try to touch, for fear he should 
burst out of the frozen water at me. 

With the third of these strange 
things I began to notice something 
else: namely, that the people — 
there were two behind this water — 
seemed very flat and completely 
without true substance. It is difficult 
to explain. It was as though a man 



BEYOND THE FEARFUL FOREST 

incredible, 



could be pressed flat as a leaf, and 
still hoM his form, his color, even 
his life (though this was in abeyance, suspended as it were, yet waiting to break into movement at any 
second). 

CO we went down the long gallery, 
^ and I saw more multitudes of 
wonders than ever I can tell. There 
were many sorts of folk in even 
more awesome furs and pelts than 
the first; men clad entirely in what 
appeared to be metal, and women 
in garments that surely never came 
from the cave cat or doe or anything that walks our world today. 
There were scenes I could not comprehend, enclosed flat places on the 
wall which I could not make myself 
believe were flat places at all, but 
rather must be the holes on vistas 
I had first thought them. These 
showed tiny trees and brooks, figures of people smaller than my 
thumb, even portions of the sky 
with infinitesimal clouds hanging 
motionless therein. And it was after 
I had looked on two or three of 
these that the truth began to come 
to me, like a fiery jewel of knowledge shining murkily up through 
the black waters of my ignorance. 
For these were not real people at 
all, nor real vistas, nor was there 
anything real or magical about 
them at all; they were flat places 
on the walls, whereon some clever 
man had laid multihued dyes, so 
that when all were applied this representation of reality sprang to its 



35 

unmoving 



mysterious, 
lifel 

I longed to ask Dy-lee if this was 
the true nature of the things, but 
could not think how to do it by 
signs. I therefore simply pointed at 
one of them and raised my brows 
question ingly. 

"Peesha!" said he. "Peeskaf" 

It was, I gathered, a peesha. 
Whatever that might be. 

He put a finger on a certain part 
of this peesha, and said, "Tree!" 

I reeled. Literally I reeled, staggering back and dropping my jaw 
like a fool. "Tree?" I gasped. "Yes, 
yes, a tree!" 

He made polite motions, asking 
me my word for it. 

"Tree!" I shouted. I pointed to 
the beasts at our feet. "Dogwolves," 
I said, with one hand on my breast; 
then, aiming a finger at him and 
still indicating the two animals, 
"poort," I said. He understood that, 
for he nodded. I pointed to the 
wall. "Peesha," I cried, nodding to 
him, and then, "flat place with many 
dyes," I said in my own tongue. 
Finally, I waved at him and then 
at myself, and said, "Tree, tree. 
Tree, tree/" 

TIE grasped it then. He was as 
* amazed as I had been. We 
had at least one word in common. 
It suggested astonishing possibilities to me. Eagerly I touched the 
sky in the representation before us, 
the clouds, the earth, a small hillock; 
naming them and getting his names 



IMAGINATION 



56 

in return. Not until we came to a 
brook did our languages coincide 
again. Then I said, "Stream," and 
he said, as clearly as any man could, 
"River." "Yes, yes!" I shouted. 
"River, riverl" 

Babbling with excitement, he 
grasped my wrist and dragged me 
past several of the dye-images to 
a large one that was without the 
protecting rigid water, and which 
showed many men and women walking about between stone inclosures 
such as littered the ground above 
us. These inclosures, however, were 
not broken, but seemed whole and 
strangely beautiful, being decorated 
lavishly with carving and dyes. 
Some of them went up for hundreds 
of feet, as I could see by comparing 
them with the size of the people. 
Before this peesha he halted and 
proceeded to point out many things, 
naming them eagerly; but here we 
could not find anything for which we 
ihad a mutual name. Indeed, it was 
not remarkable, for most of the objects I had never seen until the 
day before, and then only in a 
mined state. 

And so we passed down the cavern until we came to the end, and 
crossed its narrow width to go 
back along the other side, looking 
at Dy-lee's uncanny "peeshas;" and 
at last we had seen them all, and 
I was too shattered for speech. 
Nothing like it had ever been 
thought of, had ever been dreamt 
of, had ever been seen by anyone 
ia all my world, before today. That 



one could do this with dyesl Some 
of them had bad no water — he 
called it glaa — over them, and these 
I had touched cautiously, finding 
their surfaces raised slightly here 
and there; and had come to the 
conclusion that the dyes had been 
mixed cleverly with harder substances, so that when they were put 
on the wall, they stiffened there 
and would not blur nor run together. 

And nearly as wonderful as these 
things was the fact that there were 
points of contact in our languages, 
words which were the same in both 
tongues. "Hand" was and to him, 
or it may have been hand also, as 
his aspirates were breathed as lightly as his sibilants were tongued. 
Tree, river, and oivl were the same. 
I grew quite wrought-up with the 
fascination of the game, and could 
scarcely wait to tell Lora all about 
it. 

We went up the slanted stones 
to the surface, and after he had 
carefully hidden the entrance slab 
with the rubble again (I could not 
guess from what or whom), he led 
ine across the ruins to another 
whole roofed inclosure. This one 
we entered by a hole far up in one 
wall, raising two logs for a kind 
of bridge from the ground. Into this 
place the dogwolves did not follow, but lay down outside to await 
us. 

DY-LEE's torch was burning low. 
When we had dropped into 



BEYOND THE FEARFUL FOREST 



37 



the inclosure, he chose two more 
from a pile of them stacked neatly 
in a corner, and lit one from the 
first. It flared up redly, and again 
we raised a ringed slab and descended into another warm dry place of 
peeshas. By then, I may say, I had 
identified this with our own word 
"picture," which we use to describe 
several things, such as the images 
our minds form occasionally which 
seem to us very real, and also a 
distant view of a beautiful countryside, as perhaps from a hill; I felt 
certain that peesha was picture, and 
dimly I was wondering if our own 
race had once known this strange 
art of arranging dyes on walls. Certainly the similarity of the two 
words would indicate something of 
the sort. 

He led me to one of the pictures 
—I will use this other word from 
now on — and held up the torch so 
that I could see it well. There was 
none of the frozen water at all in 
this place. The things were done 
in large squares on the rock wall, 
just as in the first underground 
grotto, but there was no glaa, nor 
was airy of the slippery curious 
stone set around them. These walls 
were rougher and less shining. 

The first one was very old, faded, 
flaked here and there so that the 
barren rock showed through. It 
portrayed a scene in just such a 
place as the plain above had once 
been, and as I had seen in a number of the other pictures. Tall inclosures rose into the air, with more 



lines of openings across them than 
I could count. Strange birds flew 
above them, looking stiff and featherless and glittery. If there were 
people on the ground, they were too 
small to be seen. 

Gently he urged me to the next. 
Here was a scene among the walls, 
with people moving about. They 
looked very like my glen-folk, excepting always for the odd garments they wore, which covered all 
of their persons but the faces and 
hands. Even upon their feet they 
seemed to have garments. 

The third picture was terrible. Ia 
its ancient much-faded colors it 
showed many men fighting. Not 
fighting bears, or cave cats, but 
other men. Yes, here were dead 
men, with blood upon their breasts, 
and others were locked in fierce 
combat. I turned from this view 
with a sickness pulling at my belly, 
and By-lee felt much the same, for 
he threw a hairy arm over my 
shoulders and bent his head sorrowfully even as I. 

npHE next few pictures were all 
the same, men slaying one another, often with strange stick-like 
things, the nature of which I could 
not imagine. From the attitudes it 
was plain that when one was pointed at a man, the man died. It was 
some form of magic, such as an 
ogre might dream of. 

Then we came to a picture which 
defied my comprehension for many 
minutes. It was a place ef high 



38 



IMAGINATION 



walls and inclosures, over which 
(flocks of the curious stiff-winged 
(birds flew; and many of the tallest 
inclosures were toppling, while fire 
raged in among them (I knew it 
was fire by the marvelous crimson 
and scarlet of the colors, dimmed 
though they were), and great clouds 
of smoke rolled out. 

There were others. I disliked 
them, I loathed them, but I could 
not keep myself from looking intently at each one. It was impressed 
on me that this was no legend, but 
a true thing that had happened in 
the far olden times. These were 
my people dying, at the hands of 
others of my people. I could not 
understand, but I could feel the 
truth of this thing. 

Men slaying men! The_ legend of 
Sunset Fields had not lied! 

On the second wall there was an 
enormous picture, full seven paces 
long and as high as the roof, and 
this one I could not grasp though 
I studied it for a long time. It was 
a place such as this plain— once 
there must have been many such, 
in the far olden times — from the 
center of which there sprouted up 
a great mushroom, like those in the 
Fearful Forest, but all creamywhite and so big as to shatter the 
imagination. I cannot say how huge 
it was. All our glens and valleys 
would be hidden in the shadow of 
such a mushroom. Though I looked 
at it until my eyes watered, and 
Dy-lee had to light his third flambeau, still I could not understand 



how such a thing could grow in 
the midst of the tall inclosures. 

The next picture I could grasp, 
however. They were of ruins, like 
those below which we stood, and 
all among the ramparts and 
broken walls were the bodies of 
men. Some calamity had laid its 
dreadful hand on the place. I wondered if the giant mushroom had 
been to blame, wreaking this havoc 
as it grew. 

And now the pictures were different. No more men slaying men, 
or tall majestic structures spearing 
the very sky with their tops, but 
only ruins and blackened plains, 
raw cliffs and far-flung wastes, the 
wreckage of great metal things I 
did not recognize, and among them 
a few, a very few human figures, 
prowling like jackal-rats furtively 
in the chaos. These pictures were 
all very ancient, with their dyestuffs flaked and marred by time. 

HpHERE was a view of a prairie, 
waving with orange grass, on 
which moved men who might have 
been my own tribe. Naked, with 
bows and hatchets, they stalked an 
animal something like a cave cat, 
which had a great mane of hair 
all down its back. I touched this 
picture and nodded to Dy-lee. He 
pointed to me. He knew that these 
were my kindred. And this picture 
too was older than the oldest man 
of the glen-folk, for it was much 
dimmed and discolored. 

Down the walls I went, and now 



BEYOND THE FEARFUL FOREST 



39 



the pictures seemed to be less ancient, and in them I saw a weird 
change coming over the race of 
men, for they grew more hairy, and 
leaving the fields and pleasant glens 
(why, I wonder?) they appeared to 
take up their homes in the blighted 
places and in the caves of the raw 
red cliffs. Time passed, the pictures 
were brighter and less flaked, and 
mankind was furred as a beast, 
growing little by little to look like 
my friend, Dy-Iee. 

This series of pictures I pored 
over for a long time, going back 
and forth along the wall, judging 
the age of each in relation to the 
others; and I could not apprehend 
why, but it was true— these men 
were the same race, but growing 
shaggier in every succeeding picture. How long was the time gap 
between the pictures? A generation, a hundred years, a thousand? 
I could not tell. I went back across 
the floor to look at the earliest pictures, those in which men fought 
together. They exuded the aura of 
an incredible antiquity. And what 
of those in the other cavern? Their 
dyes were more brilliant, newer 
looking; yet the people were dressed 
in the queer garments that I saw 
in the oldest portrayals here. Did 
it mean that there were folk existing even now like them — folk 
impossible to believe in ! — or simply that the dyes in their pictures 
were better and lasted longer than 
these? There were many things here 
that I could not understand, and 



I felt small and stupid and as young 
as the youngest pink rabbit with 
still-blind eyes. 

Dy-lee made a speech then, indicating that I should look at the 
final pictures; so I left my speculation and came to him and gazed. 

TTERE, immediately after the 
A series in which mankind grew 
hairy, was a large square with dyes 
that were still vivid and clear, 
though it still seemed quite an ancient picture. It portrayed a number of Dy-lee's folk crouching amid 
the ruins, perhaps of this very plain 
above our heads. Their attitudes 
showed perfectly that they were * 
afraid, for they drew back, with 
arms about their females and young 
ones. Then, in a cleared space, there 
stood a man of my own race, 
smooth-skinned and wearing the 
raiment of a guardian, the long 
fringed black fox pelts hanging 
from his waist and the short mantle of white hares' skins about his 
shoulders. He faced away from the 
cave folk, with his arms lifted in 
just such a mystical gesture as 
I had often seen the guardians 
making; and beyond him, from the 
edge of an especially well-limned 
forest, there arose a being whose 
every line suggested evil — evil beyond the power of words. There 
was no definite outline to the thing. 
It appeared to change slightly even 
while I stared at it, as though the 
dyes had been mixed with smoke 
or mist. It seemed to have horns, 



IMAGINATION 



40 

and then when I looked again, the 
horns had vanished. There were 
great columns of legs, and arms 
that hung loosely before its chest 
with an indescribable air of menace. 
Perhaps there were two sets of 
arms. I could not tell. It is strange 
to speak of a picture this way, for 
after all it was but dyes of many 
shades laid upon rock; but all I 
could recall definitely about the 
evil being, when I had turned away, 
was that its color was that of a 
dead fish's belly, and that from its 
amorphous head there blazed out 
two terrible eyes of purest lambent 
flame. 

The import of this whole picture 
was inescapable. Here were the 
shaggy folk, here was a guardian 
of my own people, and here was a 
representation of one of . . . 

The Nameless! 

T?OR long minutes I stared at my 
new friend Dy-lee, while the 
thoughts churned in my brain. At 
last I shook myself, as a bear does 
on coming out of a cold stream, 
and I began to try him with questions, partly in gestures and partly 
in words which I hoped he might 
understand. First I pointed to the 
shaggy folk. Yes, they were his 
people, he signed. Then I indicated 
the guardian. He pointed at me. I 
shook my head. Indicating my rough 
loincloth of cave cat fur, I showed 
him the rich black and white apparel of the little figure, and then 
touched my bow and quiver, my 



hatchet, my knife. No guardian carries a weapon of any sort, as the 
ibeasts will never molest one of 
their craft. Dy-lee seemed to know 
this, for he nodded vigorously, but 
then showed me where we were 
similar — the brown furless face and 
body. I said, Yes, that this man was 
of my people, but differing from me 
in profession. He understood this. 
I asked him, after several tries, 
whether he had often seen such 
men as this; and he signed to me, 
Yes, that there was a place of meeting on the plain. I then asked if 
he had thought I was a guardian 
when he first found me the afternoon before, and he answered, No, 
pointing to my bow and hatchet. m 
These folk having no weapons, I 
was at a loss to know how he had 
recognized what mine were for; because the instant I had thrown up 
my bow he had seen I meant to 
shoot, first him and then his tame 
dogwolves. But after a moment's 
thought I remembered that in two 
or three of the old pictures there 
were depictions of the bow and 
arrow. I went back down the wall 
and found them. Evidently these 
people had once known the use of 
such things, for here they were, 
rather hairy but not yet covered 
with the thick shag, stalking a deer 
with bows. Somewhere in their 
evolving they had either lost the 
art or found a better. Here, in a 
later picture, they were hunting a 
great knifetooth bear. Ah, that was 
it; they had domesticated the dog


BEYOND THE FEARFUL FOREST 



4i 



wolves, and given up the bow. I 
imagined that it might have come 
in handy to protect themselves, for 
surely they could not always travel 
amongst a howling pack of their 
canine friends; but obviously they 
had discarded it entirely. 

I returned to the startling picture of the guardian, and pointing 
to the horrid figure of The Nameless, I bent my head in pantomime 
and gave an exaggerated shudder. 

Dy-lee repeated my motions exactly, and pointed away to where 
I imagined they dwelt. He said 
something, apparently his name for 
the beings. I said, "The Nameless." 
Again he shivered — it was a real 
reaction this time — ami pointed 
east. 

T^AST? But that was the direction in which lay the Fearful 
Forest, the three brooks, Sunset 
Fields, and my own glen. I had 
not realized this at his first motion, 
being somewhat confused by the 
underground cavern. I shook my 
head, pointing west. There dwelt 
The Nameless. 

He would have none of that. No, 
they lived to the east. I pointed 
west, he pointed stubbornly west. 

But / came from the east! If 
there were such beings in that direction, would I not know it? I 
tried. to tell him this, showing that 
I came from there; very well, said 
he in signs, so did the guardians, 
and I was obviously a relative, a 
son perhaps, or at least a member 



of the tribe of the guardians. Yes, 
I agreed, but . . . 

I gave it up. Could I still be 
confused by this roof that shut 
out the sun? Hastily I looked at 
the last of the pictures, which were 
scenes of hunting and domesticity, 
with one more guardian at the end, 
though not with one of The Nameless; then I signed to him that we 
should leave the place. He scrambled 
up to the opening and I followed, 
the daylight from the high entrance 
hole of the inclosure above striking 
my eyes sharply after the torch's 
flickering gleam. The dogwolves 
roused themselves and nosed our 
hands as we came out among the 
broken stones. 

"There!" I said, showing him the 
west; and, "There!" said he, in his 
own language, thrusting a dark furry finger eastward. Could we be 
talking of different things? No, 
there had been the guardian and 
the changing figure of horror. 

The guardian? 

What had a guardian been doing 
here? And the one picture had 
been old, but the other fairly recent, or I knew nothing of the manner in. which dyes fade with age! 

These hairy folk had seen guardians, not once in the dim past, 
but evidently often, and recently; 
had not my friend signed to me 
that there was a place of meeting, 
out on the blackened plain? No 
wonder that Dy-lee and his folk, 
while charmed with my singing and 
interested in me, had shown no 



42 



IMAGINATION 



overwhelming wonder. So the guardians knew, had perhaps always 
known, that here in the ruins and 
the raw red cliffs there lived another race of men! 

T sat down on a flat rock and 
* puzzled the matter over, beginning with what I conceived the 
early history of these people — of 
both our peoples — to have been. A 
terrible killing among men, with 
many strange weapons that spread 
slaughter wholesale, resulting in a 
leveling of their huge structures and 
a splitting of the race into two 
parts, one remaining in places like 
this, the other going into the distant glens and plains. The folk of 
the ruins gradually becoming hairy — 
could it be because nature saw they 
needed protection for their tender 
flesh, living as they did in caves? 
the thought made me open my eyes 
with my own cleverness! Then the 
discarding of weapons and the taming of the dogwolves. I wondered if 
they had thrown away all weapons, 
or whether they had some secret 
slaying tool for their defense? Or 
a magic ointment to rub on their 
bodies? Or what? 

To this point it all seemed clear, 
and while it was a thing to churn 
the imagination, still it was a plain 
and possible happening, not destroying any concepts or deepsunk 
training of my youth; because no 
man of my folk knew whence we 
had come, or anything of our history save that it had always been, 



so far as our elders knew, the same 
as it is now: easy and pleasant, 
with no enemies save the beasts of 
prey, and a mate for every man 
and woman. 

But then came the problem of 
the guardians. These folk knew 
them too. They passed between us, 
it was clear, living with us of the 
glens but visiting these of the caverns. I tried Dy-lee with a question: did he know there were many, 
many more like me, living beyond 
the Fearful Forest? I made a mark 
in the gritty dirt with my knife 
point, showed him that it stood for 
myself, then made a great number 
of similar marks beside it and pointed east. He understood. He could 
scarcely believe at first, but after 
a period of astonished grunts and 
reassurances, he believed. There 
were many like me, over yonder ] 
to the east. j 

Then something took him with ] 
eagerness, so that he nearly burst ) 
with what he could not tell me; 
and at last he ran furiously away j 
to his cave, leaving me to sit with \ 
eyes popping till he returned with i 
a bag made of hide. From this he 1 
took -a number of little bones, hoi- j 
lowed and corked with plugs of 
wood, and some sticks tipped with 
carefully - trimmed stiff feathers. 
Sensing that I would be curious, he 
handed me one of the bones. I 
pried out the plug and saw that 
the hollow was full of a green-blue 
dye, mixed, as I had suspected, 
with something to make it stiff 



BEYOND THE FEARFUL FOREST 



43 



and thick. As I sniffed at it and 
touched my fingertip to it gingerly, 
he set to work on the flat stone beside me, dipping his feathered stick 
into first this bone and then that 
one, making marks upon the cold 
rock. I watched the dyes spread 
and grow into the shape of a man. 

Dy-lee, my friend, was a maker 
of pictures! 

I embraced him. I was overcome 
with his genius. That this animallooking fellow could himself make 
the wondrous peeshas! 

TMPATIENTLY he motioned to 
me to be seated while he worked. 
I sat down and ; hoping to repay 
him for the pleasure I took in his 
craft, I began to sing. He nodded 
vigorously and chuckled. We were 
enchanted with each other's accomplishm en ts . 

Watching him, I saw the roughly 
outlined form of a man grow into 
a tiny likeness of myself, with hunter's loincloth and bow. He prodded 
me with the stick, quite unnecessarily. I could see that it was Ahmusk there on the flat stone. 

Then hastily he made pictures of 
two others, one of which seemed to 
be his conception of a female of 
my race. Hestitantly then, he pointed east. 

I told him, Yes, and flickered my 
fingers to show that there were 
many of us there. His thatch-shaded eyes blinked with amazement. 

The next picture was that of a 



guardian, with black and white furs 
and stern mien. I said the name 
aloud, and he said something like 
"rees," which I took to be "guardian" in his tongue. 

With this series of 'pictures to 
aid us, we could make our queries 
clear to one another. I asked how 
many of these guardians he had seen 
or knew; and he answered, Fifteen 
or twenty. There being twenty-four 
guardians living in our glen, I knew 
that all of them, or nearly all, must 
at one time or another come here 
to commune with the hairy folk. 

I asked whether they ever lived 
with his people, and he said, No, 
that they lived beyond the woods 
somewhere, he thought perhaps in 
the sky. I managed to make him 
understand that they lived among 
my people, and he seemed surprised 
that they had never told his folk 
of us. 

Then he made a curious little 
vague shape beyond his row of pictures, which I could not fathom 
until he had dyed in two glowing 
fiery eyes; when I knew that this 
was meant for one of The Nameless. I asked if he had seen such 
an ogre, and he signed, No, that 
no man ever had except the guardians; and that to see them was 
death. 

Then as well as I could I showed 
him that we knew of these things 
too, calling them The Nameless. 
His word for them I could not 
dominate, though he said it several 
times. 



44 



IMAGINATION 



T wondered how he knew what 
they looked like, having never 
seen one; but remembered the picture in the second underground inclosure. Then I thought of the shadowy outlines of that thing, and it 
occurred to me that this was possibly but a common symbol for the 
beings, as no man knew their exact 
form. It was such a picture as a 
man might make, who knew only 
that The Nameless were terrible, 
evil, beyond all thought malignant. 

I then asked him whether the 
guardians protected his people from 
The Nameless, and he said that they 
did. I told him by signs that this 
was their function among us. He 
did not seem surprised, but again 
signaled that they had never spoken 
of me and my tribe, and over this 
omission he shook his head till the 
lank hair nearly stood on end. 

I told him that we, too, had not 
known of them. He sat with his 
chin in his palm, biting his lips 
over this. 

I stared at the lightly-dyed portrayal of The Nameless. I pointed 
to it and to the west. 

He laid a hand on my shoulder, 
as one might to a child when it is 
making up a wild tale, and pointed 
eastward. 

We sat looking at each other and 
making these silly gestures back 
and forth, until in one fearful flash 
of knowledge it came to me what 
the truth was. 

The taste of this knowledge was 
at once bitter and sweet to me: 



sweet, because it blotted out in an 
instant the only great fear of all 
my race; bitter, because it showed 
me that for many generations both 
this man's people and my own had 
been hoodwinked, shamed and overlorded by the members of a single 
useless profession. For it had come 
to me that now I knew who The 
Nameless truly were. 

Dy-lee was one of The Nameless, and so was Zheena his mate, 
and great grizzled Dy-veece, and 
every member of that merry clan 
with whom I had eaten and slept 
the night before . . . 

Dy-lee was one of The Nameless, 
and so was — Ahmusk the hunter, 

TT must have taken me an hour 
* to tell my friend this terrible, 
wonderful truth which I had discovered. But finally he realized it, 
and at first his wrath was dreadful 
to behold, and then he saw the happiness in it and he danced for joy ' 
among his dogwolves. 

The simple fact was that for noone-knew-how-long, the guild of 
guardians had kept our two races 
apart and in horror of the things 
they called The Nameless, for reasons I could not then even begin 
to guess; had kept us apart by 
tales of monsters which existed only 
in their own minds. For the first 
time in my life I knew pure black 
hatred of fellow humans. Had I had 
the guardians there at that moment,. 
I would have slain them all. 

Yes, Dy-lee's people were The 



BEYOND THE FEARFUL FOREST 



45 



Nameless; and my glen-folk were 
The Nameless to him, under whatever exotic name he called us. Nothing could be plainer, for why else 
would he think The Nameless lived 
to the east, while I had been taught 
they lived in the west? 

Now in my rage it came to me 
why Laq had shot at me in the 
Fearful Forest, and later had pinked 
Halfspoor with an arrow to make 
the bear attack me. He did not 
dare allow me to make friends here 
with the hairy folik. It would topple 
him and his entire crew of liars and 
rascals. He might have halted me 
yesterday afternoon with a word, 
but there was Lora, whom he coveted. He had had a bow, a thing no 
guardian ever owned — he must long 
ago have stolen it and some arrows, 
to practice until he thought himself skilled enough to slay me. It 
did not seem incredible now that 
he would plan to kill me for her. 
Nothing seemed strange in the light 
of my new discovery. The world 
was topsy-turvy, and surely all 
things must be possible to one of his 
loathsome breed. 

After we had stamped about for 
a while, talking furiously and incomprehensibly to each other and 
shaking hands with fervor and 
startling the dogwolves into howling 
many times, we went up to Dyke's cave, where he called in all 
those of his folk who were nearby, 
and laying his hand on my chest, he 
solemnly told them that I was one 
of those creatures whom they had 



all feared for so many years. The 
turmoil was frightful. Then, before 
they could flee, he shouted to them 
what he had discovered. Of course 
•it took much less time than it had 
when I explained it to him, for he 
shared his language with them and 
needed no elaborate signals. You 
never heard such a roar as went 
up when he had finished. 

It was decided, to be brief, that 
Dy-lee should accompany me back 
through the Fearful Forest to the 
glens, and there we two would 
confront the guardians and fling 
their lifetime of lies into their teeth. 
I gathered also that he would protect me on the journey from wild 
beasts, though how without weapons 
he could do this, I did not see. 
At any rate, he bade farewell to 
Zheena and I shook hands all round 
and we started out across the ruins, 
with Dy-lee's two poorts, the tame 
dogwolves, running before us with 
their scarlet tongues lolling out and 
their noses in the air. 

As we went toward the Fearful 
Forest, I struck up a song; and 
to its rhythm we marched bravely 
and in high genial comradeship. 

'T'HE oppressive woodland closing 
■ in upon us, at about the first 
hour after the zenith of the sun, 
my song died away on my lips; and 
we began to converse together, partly in signs and partly in words. Besides those our languages shared, 
we had learned a number of one 
another's common words, and now 



46 IMAGIN 

questions and answers were more 
readily understood. 

I asked him if the guardians had 
ever seen the pictures which he had 
shown me. He said that he was not 
sure, but that he believed not, at 
any rate not in his lifetime. They 
never seemed interested in anything 
except being fed and catered to, 
and did not spend their nights in 
the caves as I had done, nor had 
they ever sung to the hairy folk. I 
gathered that Dy-lee had shown me 
the pictures out of gratitude for the 
delight he had taken in my songs. 
It was the first time I had ever gotten anything for my voice except 
a kick in the rump. I was exceedingly pleased. 

Then he put to me a number of 
questions about my people, and as 
well as I could I answered them. 
We discovered another mutual 
word, which was "thorn," When I 
pried one from his foot with my 
knife. 

Then I thought of weapons, and 
showing him my metal blade, I 
asked if he had not seen such things 
before. He examined it — I think he 
had wanted to for hours, but was 
too polite to ask for it — and said 
that such a knife was unheard of. 
I had already noticed the flint daggers his people used, which were 
flaked to make a cutting edge of a 
sort, but were really sharp only at 
the tip. My bow and arrows and 
my hatchet he had seen in his ancient" pictures, but mine were the 
first he had ever handled. His hands 



were clumsy on them, and I should 
have hated to let him loose a shaft 
anywhere in my vicinity. 

By signs and a few phrases I told 
him how we heat and mold the metal for our few needs, and he was 
intrigued but a little skeptical. Did 
he never hear of heating metal to 
make anything? No, he said, never. 

"OUT surely he knew of metal? 

Yes, he said, there were metal 
instruments in use among his folk, 
but these had always been in existence, and no man living knew the 
trick of making them. Then he 
brought out from some hidden pouch 
or repository under the long hair 
on his side a tiling like a bright 
bronze bone, a small tube of metal 
with a hole at each end, curiously 
shaped and carved with tiny marks 
that made no sense, for they did 
not seem to be pictures or designs 
of anything at all. With this, he 
told me, as I examined it, he would 
protect me if animals should attack us; but when I asked him, 
How, he only smiled and laughed 
to himself. I presumed he meant to 
surprise me, and did not press him 
for details; which must have made 
him feel rather disappointed, for he 
put away the tube with a snort. 

And these, I asked then, were the 
only weapons his folk had? Yes, 
he said, they needed no others. But 
if he should lose his? There were 
others, many others, hidden in the 
caves. But in time, I said, surely 
all of the mysterious instruments 



BEYOND THE FEARFUL FOREST 



47 



would be gone, some lost, others 
destroyed by accident; and then 
what would his people do? For they 
could not make others, that was 
obvious. 

Well, I could not make him understand this query. He did not 
seem to be able to visualize the 
distant future in the slightest degree. There had always been the 
tubes, and so far as he knew, there 
always would be the tubes. 

I gave it up, and privately decided that I would make him and 
Dy-veese, and some of the other 
males, learn the rudiments of archery, whether they liked it or not. 

We tramped on, and the Fearful Forest depressed us with its 
grim dark trees and lack of sunlight, until at last we spoke no more 
to each other, but traveled as silently as the two great dogwolves. 
And so it was that we came upon 
Halfspoor where he sat in a glade 
feeding on the body of a jackal-rat, 
and did not warn him of our coming until we stood face to face with 
him across some twenty paces of 
the rotting carpet of vegetation. 

Halfspoor gazed at us, and we, 
paralyzed, gazed upon Halfspoor; 
and he gave a grunt and a bellow, 
and leaping to his hind feet he came 
charging down at us. 

I sent one arrow into his chest 
before I turned to dash back down 
the trail. I had it in mind to get 
amongst the trees before I fought, 
for here there was nowhere to dodge, 
and dodging was my only defense 



against the giant brute. Dy-lee was 
fumbling at his side, and the dogwolves were leaping toward the 
knifetooth bear. I shouted to Dylee to seek cover, though I knew 
he would not understand the words. 
I saw a man in pelts of black and 
white moving furtively from the 
path some hundred feet behind us, 
and I knew that a guardian had 
been following us eastward. Then 
something took me across the shoulder blades with a slap like a tree 
falling, and I was hurled six times 
my own length into a patch of 
stabbing briers. 

"TTVEN as I lit I was scrambling 
sideways, intent on reaching 
the other side of the nearest tree; 
a hundred thorns were ripping my 
flesh, and my back felt as though 
it were half broken. My ears were 
throbbing, I supposed from the jolt 
of Halfspoor's blow. I tore myself 
out of the briers, leaped with a 
pounce like a cave cat's across atl 
open space and took up a position 
of belligerent waiting behind a lichen-wrapped trunk. 

Halfspoor, had he followed me up 
at once, could have slashed me 
apart before ever I got out of the 
clutch of the thorn bushes. He had 
stopped, however, on the spot 
where he had slapped me, and was 
hovering over Dy-lee making angry 
swipes at him. I thought for a moment that Dy-lee was dead or unconscious, for he was huddled down 
in a dark mass at the bear's feet. 



4 8 



IMAGINATION 



The dogwolves were harrying Halfspoor, one snapping at his legs, the 
other leaping to get at his throat. 
I made a grab over my shoulder 
and discovered that the quiver was 
empty. My arrows had been scattered on the ground when I flew 
into the briers. 

As the bear was not even looking 
my way, I ran into the open to get 
a shaft or two. I would have attacked him with my hatchet, but 
since the vital spots of his skull and 
neck were a good twelve feet off 
the ground, it would have been a 
futile and stupid gesture. 

An arrow discovered, I drew back 
the cord and sank another shaft in 
■the bear's massive chest. Even as 
I shot I realized that something was 
singular indeed. Although Halfspoor 
towered over Dy-lee, who crouched 
unprotected on the earth, and 
though the bruin was cuffing in his 
direction, yet the blows were missing Dy-lee by several feet at the 
least. All that the bear need do 
was take one step forward on those 
gigantic pads and bend his back a 
trifle . . . and there would be no 
more Dy-lee. But that step and 
that bend he did not seem able to 
accomplish! Like a fox caught in 
a trap, he swayed and screamed his 
fury, but did not touch my friend 
Dy-lee. 

When my arrow struck, he turned toward me and gave a bawl of 
horrible anger. Even as I snatched 
up the only other arrow I could see 
and darted for my tree, I caught 



a glimpse of Dy-lee jumping to his 
feet, evidently unhurt. The dogwolves hampered Halfspoor, and I 
made the tree a second before the 
old devil reached it. 

T TE came round it after me, and 
A A I dodged about to keep it between us, taunting him loudly. This 
was a game at which I was past 
master. I could dive and scuttle all 
afternoon, if need be. 

Then with horror I saw that Dylee was coming toward us. I bawled 
at him to go back — he would not 
know the words, but surely my 
frantic motions could not be misunderstood — and then in desperation stood my ground and shot my 
bolt at Halfspoor at a range of about 
five feet. It was the third one to 
flesh itself in the barrel of his chest, 
but I doubted that any of the three 
would prove mortal. Ribs and ironhard muscles would stop them from 
penetrating too deeply. 

Dropping like a stone, I then 
bounded straight between his charging legs; was struck glancingly by 
one hind paw and whirled over and 
over in the rotten humus. My hatchet found its way by old instinct 
into my hand as I rolled. Then I 
leaped to my toes and — collided 
with Dy-lee I 

Memory of that instant is muddled. I know that I almost struck 
my friend down before I realized 
who he was. I saw Halfspoor in a 
kind of bloody haze, seeming to 
fill the world above us. Then Dy


BEYOND THE FEARFUL FOREST 



49 



lee put a hand to his mouth and 
the great bear fell back a pace, 
snarling and swatting the air. My 
head rang and I realized that there 
was blood in my eyes. I wiped them 
clear and lifted the hatchet as I 
backed away. The hairy man gripped my wrist and would not let me 
leave his side. I thought that he 
■had gone mad, and tugged at him 
frantically. But he stood rook-firm, 
with one hand holding me steady 
and the other at his mouth. 

All this took but a second or two, 
and then I ceased to struggle and 
only stared at our terrible ursine 
foe. Halfspoor stood just out of 
reach, and his actions were brainless, idiotic. He would slash at us 
viciously, missing us by a foot or 
so; slap at the side of his head 
with blows that would have split 
open a less solid skull; then back 
up a little, moan, bellow, gnash his 
tusks, make as if to charge at us 
— and beat his head again! 

I glanced at Dy-lee, who seemed 
calm and detached. The glint of 
the bronze tube caught my eye. It 
was in his mouth and he was blowing into it. I thought of the wooden whistles we make for our children; but there came no noise out 
of this instrument. My head was, 
indeed, ringing and pounding from 
the fight; yet I knew I was not 
deaf, for Halfspoor was raising the 
dead with his uproar and I could 
hear that very well. 

It was hardly the time for investigation of mysteries, however. 



Impatiently I pulled at Dy-lee's 
arm. The bear would charge. Dy-lee 
grinned (at least the hair , on his 
cheeks moved as though he had 
grinned), and throwing back his 
shoulders and inflating his lungs, 
appeared to blow a tremendous gust 
of wind through the metal tube. 
The dogwolves, who had been snapping at Halfspoor's toes, writhed on 
their bellies and screeched piteously 
together, as if they had been disembowled. Magic! The poor brutes 
seemed in their last agony. 

'npHE knifetooth bear gave one 
frightful, indignant, stentorian 
yell, which echoed weirdly from every tree around the glade. He administered a final pummeling to the 
sides of his tormented head. And 
he turned and made off into the 
forest as if all the cave cats in 
the world were nipping at his tail! 

At the same time my eardrums 
were assailed by the most piercing 
feel of noise that they had ever experienced. And yet there was no 
sound from the tube in Dy-lee's 
mouth. 

Now he removed it, stowed it in 
his secret pouch, laughed quietly to 
himself, and walking across the 
mold, bent down and began to gentle the groveling dogwolves. Slowly 
they responded, sitting up, nuzzling 
his hands, and whining as if ashamed of their recent performance. 

Listening with one ear while rubbing the other, I heard old Halfspoor smashing his way through 



5" 



IMAGINATION 



the woodland, complaining bitterly 
to himself in a loud voice. I could 
not blame him. If the stalwart dogwolves were reduced to impotence 
by the sorcery of Dy-lee's tube, 
even bruin must be pardoned for 
running from it. 

And then I heard a cry of pain 
and terror, a human sound that rose 
and wailed and died to a hideous 
moaning; and without hesitation I 
ran off on the bear's trail. He had 
found someone else in his mad career, and that one had not escaped 
by magic! 

It was easy to see where he had 
passed. Thickets were crushed, even 
small trees shattered off, and the 
bark of the giants shredded by angry 
clawings. Perhaps I went two hundred yards. Then I found the man, 
where Halfspoor had found him and 
snatched him up and flung him 
aside, broken and dying, into a 
■heap of touchwood. 

It was the guardian Laq, and he 
was dying if ever I saw a man die, 
with a broken back and a leg that 
bent sideways in a way no leg was 
ever meant to bend. I knelt beside 
him and he opened his eyes and 
rcognized me, and he spat feebly, 
for there was still hate in the man. 
I could do nothing for him, could 
not even straighten his lirribs or 
ease his head, for motion would 
have slain him. 

"Lie easy, Laq," I said. "You 
must rest a while, and then I will 
help you home." 

"When I have rested, I will slay 



you, Ahmusk the hunter," said he 
with a curse. His hand moved feebly, and I saw he wished to pull 
the bow closer, the bow that he had 
stolen and practiced with until he 
thought be was skilled enough to 
murder me. I put it into his fingers, 
noticing without much surprise that 
it was one which I had made and 
believed I had lost somewhere. I 
gave him one of the arrows from 
his quiver, too, and that was a mistake, for he stared sharply at me 
with his filming dark eyes. "You 
think I am crippled," he said huskily, "but I will show you when I 
have rested, Ahmusk. Lora will 
never come to your platform and 
your mating furs." 

T said nothing, for one cannot 
* grow angry with a dying man, 
and there was no kind word that 
my tongue could lay hold on; and 
so presently he began to talk in a 
quiet, sane voice. 

"Of course I cannot let you live. 
You braved the land of the shaggy 
people, and made friends with them; 
and you have a knowledge which 
must never be given to our tribes. 
Men must have something to fear. 
It keeps them decent." 

I do not know, even yet, whether 
he believed what he said; and I 
have often pondered on it. Perhaps 
he had made himself believe it, 
for the peace of his soul. 

"The legend of The Nameless 
goes on," he said, the bright froth 
dripping from his lips. "Ahmusk 



BEYOND THE FEARFUL FOREST 



dies ... My father was a guardian. 
He preached to me that some dreadful calamity would occur if we allowed the two races to come together. All the guardians were taught 
that. It was dinned into them from 
their birth. Only the intelligent ones 
saw what that calamity would be. 
Our craft would lose its privilege, 
its honor, its reason for being." 

It was the same thought I had 
held. The guardians fattened on adulation, and if that was taken from 
them, there would be nothing left, 
for they were so accustomed to it 
that they could not conceive becoming as other men, 

"It does no harm to tell you 
these things, Ahmusk, for you will 
shortly die. Yes . . . you understand, I saw very early that the 
basic ideas of my craft were wrong, 
all wrong. There was no harm in 
letting you know of the shaggy 
people, for they are as innocent 
and affectionate as you; the harm 
lay in the breaking-up of our guild, 
and the . . . " He was silent for 
so long that I thought he had lapsed 
into insensibility, but after a while 
he repeated what he had said about 
mankind needing something to fear. 
He used the same words, as though 
it were an excuse he had learnt 
by rote long ago. 

"That is an untruth," I said. 
"Fear is evil, fear of anything is 
all wrong. It is wickedness, Laq." 

HE looked up at me, and I think 
the naked truth came to his 



lips then, and would not be denied; 
for he said, with a horrid gasp, 
"Ah, but the reverence given us, 
Bear-throat! This is not lightly to 
be lost. Think of it! In all the 
world we alone are above mankind. 
A hunter is the same as a singer, 
the night watcher gains no more 
thanks, no more prerogatives than 
the weaver of garlands. Only the 
guardian walks clothed in honor and 
mystic glory! Do you think I can 
let you smash us to the level of 
common day, after so many generations of being exalted?" 

He stopped again, and I thought 
of the first of his breed, those early 
guardians who must have arisen after the terrible slaughters, when all 
was hatred and terror and confusion. Did they then invent the legend of The Nameless, to capitalize on the mutual fear of the two 
peoples? Did they, perhaps, force 
the hairy folk into the wastes and 
caves, looking ahead to a reign of 
vicious knowledge over ignorance? 
And were all their descendants as 
cynical and utterly selfish as this 
Laq? 

"What of your brothers?" I asked 
him. "Do they know that no true 
harm would come if the people 
knew the truth of The Nameless?" 

He laughed, horribly. "My fellow guardians are in the main sublimely unaware of their futility," 
he said. "The dogmatic teachings of 
bigoted fathers have made unthinking sons . . . You understand, Ahmusk, that I will slay you when 



IMAGINATION 



I have rested." 

"Yes, Laq," I said, as he lay 
dying. 

"Ah, but how I would love to 
see their bubble of self-importance 
pricked!" he muttered. Evidently he 
felt no kinship with them, but 
sneered at them and us alike. "How 
they would flounder if the facts 
were forced upon them!" 

I heard Dy-lee come up behind 
us, and the dogwolves snuffled at 
my shoulders. Laq raised himself 
with a superhuman effort and cried, 
"The bear! The knifetooth bear! 
Ahmusk, the bear comes! My whistle .. . my whistle! I cannot find 
my whistle ..." and so died, his 
fingers clutching weakly at the 
(broken bow that he had stolen so 
long ago, when he first plotted to 
kill me for the sake of Lora. 

T took the arrows from his quiver, 
and covered Laq with branches 
and dead leaves, for I had no 
strength to bury him. Returning to 
the glade, we managed to find the 
three arrows I had lost in the fight; 
then we turned our faces eastward 
once more. 

f We crossed the Crimson Brook 
and the Blue, and then at last we 
■began to talk with our signs and 
our halting phrases. 

"What is the tube?" I asked Dylee. "How did it drive off Half
i spoor?" 

As well as he could, he showed 
me. It was a whistle, of a sort, and 

, though we men could not ,hear its 



note, he explained that the animals 
could. A low sound, made by barely breathing into it, brought the 
dogwolves barking happily to our 
sides; but a stronger puff caused 
them to howl dolefully. I had seen 
what a really powerful blast on it 
could do to even a knifetooth bear. 

"And the guardians have these 
whistles?" I asked him, and he 
answered, Yes, they did, though Laq 
must have lost his. That was why 
they needed no weapons when they 
strode the Fearful Forest. A man 
would not have to slay a carnivore 
when he could chase it away in 
fright, with its ears splitting. 

And yet, all I sensed when Dylee blew the thing was a tingling 
of the eardrums. Strange and new! 
That an animal could hear a sound 
which a man could not! 

But still I thought a bow and a 
few good arrows were not to be 
sneered at, and resolved again to 
teach my friends their use, in preparation for the time, even though 
it be hundreds of years hence, when 
all the whistles shall be lost. 

I pictured Halfspoor in my mind, 
and how he had stood off from Dylee and swung blows at the air 
when the whistle blew. I saw him 
run again, cuffing his own ears to 
beat away the tearing, bone-rending 
sound of the to-me-silent tube. What 
a host of miracles I had to tell to 
Lora! 

We crossed the Gray Brook and 
came to Sunset Fields, and the sun 
was less than an hour from its 



BEYOND THE FEARFUL FOREST 



53 



setting in the west. There was a 
figure running toward us, now in 
the waning sunlight, now in the 
dappling shade of the tree ferns. I 
cried out joyfully, for it was my 
Lora. 

She neared us, and seeing Dy-lee 
and the dogwolves, cried out with 
horror. "Ahmusk! Fly, or they will 
slay you!" 

"Come here, little fearful one," 
I said, "and I will open your mind 
to a thousand new things!" 

QHE stood there, regarding me, 
find the fear went out of her 
eyes, to be replaced by a vast relief. "Then this creature will not 
harm you?" 

"Nor you either. This is my 
friend Dy-lee," I told her, and taking her hand, put it into his. He 
shook it, and she smiled uncertainly. 
"Ahmusk — the dogwolves?" 

I patted the biggest on the head, 
Oh, but that was my hour! "I have 
made them gentle as fawns," I said, 
stretching the facts somewhat. 

Then she knew that all was well, 
and she leaped into my arms and 
kissed me until I thought she would 
never be done; and yet truly I was 
sorry when she stopped. "What has 
happened, Bear-throat? Where have 
you been for two days, and who is 
this, and how does it come that the 
dogwolves do not bite, and why 
are you all blood-smeared, and — " 

"Lora, Lora," I said, "I have a 
thousand things to tell you, but 



we can never begin on them if you 
must chatter endlessly — " 

"And Halfspoor, did you find his 
track, and where will he spend the 
night, and — " 

"Lora!"' I shouted, enfolding her 
in a fierce embrace. '^Listen to me, 
and I shall tell you! Great Halfspoor ranges the Fearful Forest, 
where I will meet him again one 
day. This is Dy-lee — " 

"And what is Dy-lee?" she asked, 
her voice rather muffled against my 
chest. 

I gave up. "I will tell you one 
thing," I said, "and then I will let 
you babble until you run out of 
queries. I am like a man who has 
feared lightning all his life, and 
■has now been struck; and I not 
only survive, but have found it a 
pleasant experience — " . 

"Where were you hit by lightning? 
Where did you get all the thorn 
scratches?" she asked. 

Dy-lee put his hand on my shoulder and said, pointing to Lora, 
"Zheena! Zheena!" 

By which I think he meant to 
say that females are all alike, and 
so, patting my girl on her shining 
head, I grinned across at him and 
replied, "How right you are, Dylee, how very right you are!" 

"What did he say?" asked Lora. 

"He said that there is nothing in 
all the fine green world like a woman." 

"Well!" said she, "you've learnt 



54 



IMAGINATION 



a little wisdom in your traveling, 
I must say! " 

"A little," said I, "a little." 

And so we journeyed homeward 
to the glen and our people, we three 
good new companions, and the dogwolves went before us and gamboled 
with pleasure in the soft grass of 
the fields. 

THAT night Dy-lee and I sat 
together on my platform, in 
the tawny-cream light of a full autumn moon. Much had been told 
that evening, at a council of all our 
glen-folk; much had been speculated, much had been argued over. 
Some men had been shocked, some 
elated, some hurt — those last were 
the guardians, most of whom could 
not believe my tale until I showed 
them Dy-lee and repeated what Laq 
had said as he lay dying. My shaggy comrade had dyed a picture for 
the folk on a big rock, and astonished them all beyond measure. Our finest singers had performed for him, 
and now he knew that Bear-throat 
was not such a marvelous being 
after all. 

Lora and I had announced our 
mating time. I had three days in 
which to find a cave cat and make 
our rug. Yes, a cave cat; I had decided to give Halfspoor a rest for 
a while . . . 

After the initial surprise of Dylee's appearance, our people had all 
become very much interested in him. 
He was laden with gifts to take home 
to the caves: bone tools and hat- ' 



chets, metal knives, fine arrows and 
bows, skins of white deer and sleek 
owl feathers, everything they could 
think of which he might like. 

So now we sat together on the 
platform of my tree, our legs covered 
with rugs against the chill of the 
night, and our eyelids drooping with 
fatigue. Yet must I chatter a while 
longer, being reluctant to see this 
glorious day end. 

"Dy-lee," I said, "many wanings 
of the moon will pass before we 
see an end to the changes that are 
going to happen among our folk, 
yours and mine. We will all be one 
folk soon." He nodded and smiled, 
just as though he could understand 
me. "We have been kept a simple 
people, naive and guileless; and that 
may be good. I think it is, and I 
think we will not change our simplicity. We will only see things more 
plainly. And there will be less fear." 

"Ahmusk," said Dy-lee. "Friend 
Ahmusk!" 

I gripped his hand in the gesture I found so satisfying. "And 
with time, Dy-lee, we will find the 
answers to all sorts of questions, 
questions that intrigue me so that 
I can scarcely wait till morning to 
begin searching for the answers! 
Those whistles of yours, for instance — who made them, and how, 
and is the secret of them truly 
that their noise pierces the ears 
and maddens an animal with fear, 
or what? 

"And your pictures, Dy-lee, and 
our music: we will trade these to 



BEYOND THE FEARFUL FOREST 



55 



each other and spend a thousand 
thousand contented hours with 

He yawned, and lying down, 
pulled the furs up to his chin. Still 
would I talk a few moments longer. 

"And some day, Dy-lee, we will 
know what caused your folk to 
grow all shaggy, while we remained 
smooth-skinned. Maybe we will find 
out how the men of the far olden 
times moved their great stones, and 
why they made the tall inclosures. 

"First of all, of course, we must 
learn to speak to one another. I 
shall learn your language, and you 
shall learn mine ..." 

"But," put in a grumbling voice 
from the next tree, "if you do not 
close your mouth and go to sleep, 

A short while ago, readers were 
smothered in an avalanche of 
historical novels ahout ancient Egypt, 
but none is more graphic and entertaining than Waltaari's The Egyptian. This absorbing novel, tracing 
the career of a royal Egyptian surgeon, brings to life a period almost 
more unbelievable than the most extravagant fantasy or science-fiction. 

In particular, the section of the 
novel which discusses the extra-ordinary Egyptian "Houses of the 
Dead," is extremely fascinating. You 
are taken into one of these buildings in magnificent Thebes and you 
are given a striking picture of the 
Egyptian care of the dead, a matter 
of more importance to them than 
the care of the living. The amazing 
embalming techniques and annointments are perfectly pictured. 

But a sense of horror seizes you 
when the stench of the place infests your nostrils and when you 



Bear- throat, I fear you will not 
live to see tomorrow's sun, and so 
will miss all the fun. Go to sleep!" 

I chuckled. It was Lora's father. 
"Good-night, then," I said. "I shall 
wake you early in the morning." 

"I'm sure you will. Good-night!" 

I rolled over beside Dy-lee and 
composed myself in my furs for the 
night. At once a vast comfortable 
weariness came over me. 

"Perhaps," I murmured, "perhaps 
we shall even discover some day 
why it is that the bones of Sunset 
Fields do not decay!" 

Dy-lee answered me with a soft 
grunt and then a snore. I laughed 
to myself with happiness, and fell 
asleep in the light of the full tawny 
moon. 



arnel 

realize that^the embalmers were frequently criminals and worse. An 
Egyptian Charnel House would make 
an abattoir seems like a rose garden. 

The rich color of ancient Egypt 
and its customs is ever freshly fascinating. The Egyptian gods were 
chosen with imagination, imagination exceeding in fertility of invention and device, the early Greeks. 
The very names, Horus, Ka, Thothmes, Set, Atem, and Osiris conjure 
up in the mind a lavish picture of 
opulent worship. Anyone who has 
seen photographs of the Egyptian 
temples at Karnak can get a picture 
of the impressive and forbidding 
grandeur of the Egyptian religion. 

Fantasists who have laid their 
scenes in ancient Egypt knew what 
they were doing. There is a readymade atmosphere of utterly weird 
culture as far from us as we are 
from Mars. Peer into Egypt if you 
would se f another world! 



Ck 



"IN THIS SIGN ..." 

Bradbury. 

The Fathers had come to Mars to cleanse it 
of sin. But where were the Martians? And what 
were these strange globes of pale blue fire? . . . 



FIRE exploded over summer 
night lawns. You saw sparkling faces of uncles and aunts. 
Skyrockets fell up'' in the brown 
shining eyes of cousins on the porch, 
and the cold Charred sticks thumped down in dry meadows far away. 

The Most Reverend Father Joseph 
Daniel Peregrine opened his eyes. 
What a dream; he and his cousins 
with their fiery play at his grandfather's ancient Ohio home so many 
years ago! 

He lay listening to the great hollow of the church, the other cells 
where other Fathers lay. Had they, 



too, on the eve of the flight of the 
rocket Crucifix, lain with memories 
of the Fourth of July? Yes. This 
was like those breathless Independence dawns when you waited for 
the first concussion and rushed out 
on the dewy sidewalks, your hands 
full of loud miracles. 

So here they were, the Episcopal 
Fathers, in the breathing dawn before they pinwheeled off to Mars, 
leaving their incense through the 
velvet cathedral of space. 

"Should we go at all?" whispered 
Father Peregrine. "Shouldn't we 
solve our own sins on Earth? Are


Copyr'tght 1951 by Ray Bradbury 
56 



"IN THIS SIGN ..." 

The Fathers had come to Mars to cleanse it 
of sin. But where were the Martians? And what 
were these strange globes of pale blue fire? . . . 



FIRE exploded over summer 
night lawns. You saw sparkling faces of uncles and aunts. 
Skyrockets fell up'' in the brown 
shining eyes of cousins on the porch, 
and the cold charred sticks thumped down in dry meadows far away. 

The Most Reverend Father Joseph 
Daniel Peregrine opened his eyes. 
What a dream; he and his cousins 
with their fiery play at his grandfather's ancient Ohio home so many 
years ago! 

He lay listening to the great hollow of the church, the other cells 
where other Fathers lay. Had they, 



too, on the eve of the flight of the 
rocket Crucifix, lain with memories 
of the Fourth of July? Yes. This 
was like those breathless Independence dawns when you waited for 
the first concussion and rushed out 
on the dewy sidewalks, your hands 
full of loud miracles. 

So here they were, the Episcopal 
Fathers, in the breathing dawn before they pinwheeled off to Mars, 
leaving their incense through the 
velvet cathedral of space. 

"Should we go at all?" whispered 
Father Peregrine. "Shouldn't we 
solve our own sins on Earth? Are


Cofyright 1951 by Ray Bradbury 
56 




5« 



IMAGINATION 



ing old sins here. And on to Mars 
to find new sins?'' A delightful 
thought, almost. Sins no one had 
ever thought of. Oh, he himself had 
written a little book: THE PROBLEM OF SIN ON OTHER 



serious enough by his Episc 
brethren. 

Only last night, over a final cigar, 
he and Father Stone had talked 
of it. 

"On Mars, sin might appear as 
virtue. We must guard against virtuous acts there that, later, might 
be found "to be sins!" said Father 
Peregrine, beaming. "How exciting. 
It's been centuries since so much 
adventure has accompanied the 
prospect of being a missionary!" 

"/ will recognize sin," said Father Stone, bluntly, "even on Mars." 

"Oh, we priests pride ourselves 
on being litmus paper, changing color in sin's presence," retorted Father Peregrine, "but what if Martian 
chemistry is such we do not color 
at all! If there are new senses on 
Mars, you must admit the possibility of unrecognizable sin." 

"If there is no malice aforethought, there is no sin or punishment for same, the Lord assures us 
that," Father Stone replied. 

"On Earth, yes. But perhaps a 
Martian sin might inform the subconscious of its evil, telepathically, 
leaving the conscious mind of man 
free to act, seemingly without malice! What then?" 

"What could there be in the way 



of new sins?" 

T7*ATHER Peregrine leaned heavily forward. "Adam alone did 
not sin. Add Eve and you add temptation. Add a second man and you 
make adultery possible. With the 
addition of sex or people, you add 
sin. If men were armless they could 
not strangle with their hands. You 
would not have that particular sin 
of murder. Add arms, and you add 
the possibility of a new violence. 



reproduce by fission. They do not 
covet wives or murder each other. 
Add sex to amoebas, and arms and 
legs, and you would have murder 
and adultery. Add an arm or leg 
or person, or take away each, and 
you add or subtract possible evil. On 
Mars, what if there are five new 
senses, organs, invisible limbs we 
can't conceive of, then mightn't 
there be five new sins!" 

Father Stone gasped. "I think 
you enjoy this sort of thing!" 

"I keep my mind alive, Father, 
just alive, is all." 

"Your mind's always juggling, 
isn't it; mirrors, torches, plates?" 

"Yes. Because sometimes the 
Churdh seems like those posed circus tableaux where the curtain lifts 
and men, white, zinc-oxide, talcumpower statues, freeze to represent 
abstract Beauty. Very wonderful. 
But I hope there will always be 
room for me to dart about between 
the statues, don't you, Father 
Stone?" 



'IN THIS SIGN 



59 



Father Stone had moved away. 
"I think we'd better go to bed. In 
a few hours we'll be jumping up to 
see your new sins, Father Peregrine." 

HpHE rocket stood ready for the 
firing. 

The Fathers walked from their 
devotions in the chilly morning, 
many a fine priest from New York 
or Chicago or Los Angeles — the 
Church was sending its best — 
walking across town to the frosty 
field. Walking, Father Peregrine remembered the Bishop's words: 

"Father Peregrine, you will captain the missionaries, with Father 
Stone at your side. Having chosen 
you for this serious task, I find my 
reasons deplorably obscure, Father, 
but your pamphlet on planetary sin 
did not go unread. You are a flexible man. And Mars is like that uncleaned closet we have neglected for 
milleniums. Sin has collected there 
like bric-a-brac. Mars is twice 
Earth's age and has had double the 
number of Saturday nights, liquor 
baths, and eye-poppings at women 
as naked as white seals. When we 
open that closet door, things will 
fall on us. We need a quick, flexible man, one whose mind can dodge. 
Anyone a little too dogmatic might 
break in two. I feel you'll be resilient. Father, the job is yours." 

The Bishop and the Fathers 
knelt. 

The blessing was said and the 
rocket given a little shower of holy 
water. Arising, the bishop addressed 



them: 

"I know you will go with God, 
to prepare the Martians for the reception of His Truth. I wish you 
all a thoughtful journey." 

They filed past the Bishop, twenty men, robes whispering, to deliver 
their hands into his kind hands before passing into the cleansed projectile. 

"I wonder," said Father Peregrine, at the last moment, "if Mars 
is hell? Only waiting for our arrival 
before it bursts into brimstone and 
fire." 

"Lord, be with us," said Father 
Stone. 

The rocket moved. 

/DOMING out of space was like 
^— ' coming out of the most beautiful cathedral they had ever seen. 
Touching Mars was like touching 
the ordinary pavement outside the 
church five minutes after having 
really known your love for God. 

The Fathers stepped gingerly from 
the steaming rocket and knelt upon 
Martian sand while Father Peregrine gave thanks. 

"Lord, we thank Thee for the 
journey through Thy 'rooms. And 
Lord, we have reached a new land, 
so we must have new eyes. We 
shall hear new sounds and must 
needs have new ears. And there will 
be new sins, for which we ask the 
gift of better and firmer and purer 
hearts. Amen." 

They arose. 

And here was Mars like a sea 



6o 



IMAGINATION 



under which they trudged in the 
guise of submarine biologists, seeking life. Here the territory of hidden sin. Oh, how carefully they 
must all balance, like grey feathers, 
in this new element, afraid that 
walking itself might be sinful; or 
breathing, or simple fasting! 

And here was the Mayor of First 
Town come to meet them with outstretched hand. "What can I do fo» 
you, Father Peregrine?" 

"We'd like to know about the 
Martians. For only if we know 
about them, can we plan our church 
intelligently. Are they ten feet tall? 
We will build large doors. Are their 
skins blue or red or green? We 
must know when we put human 
figures in the stained glass, so we 
may use the right skin color. Are 
they heavy? We will build sturdy 
seats for them." 

"Father," said the Mayor, "I 
don't think you should worry about 
the Martians. There are two races. 
One of them is pretty well dead. A 
few are in hiding. And the second 
race, well, they're not quite human." 

"Oh?" Father Peregrine's heart 
quickened. 

"They're round luminous globes 
of light, Father, living in those hills. 
Man or beast, who can say, but 
they act intelligently, I hear." The 
Mayor shrugged. "Of course, they're 
not men, so I don't think you'll 
care — " 

"On the contrary," said Father 
Pieregrine swiftly. "Intelligent, you 
say?" 



ttnpHERE'S a story. A prosA pector broke his leg in those 
hills, and would have died there. 
The blue spheres of light came at 
him. When he woke, he was down 
on a highway, and didn't know how 
he got there." 

"Drunk," said Father Stone. 

"''That's the story," said the Mayor. "Father Peregrine, with most of 
the Martians dead, and only these 
Blue Spheres, I frankly think you'd 
be better off in First City. Mars is 
opening up. It's a frontier now, like 
in the old days on Earth, out west, 
and in Alaska. Men are pouring up 
here. There are a couple thousand 
black Irish mechanics and miners 
and day-laborers in First City who 
need saving, because there are too 
many wicked women who came with 
them, and too much ten century old 
Martian wine — " 

Father Peregrine was gazing into 
the soft blue hills. 

Father Stone cleared his throat. 
"Well, Father?" 

Father Peregrine did not hear. 
"Spheres of blue fire?" 

"Yes, Father." 

"Ah." Father Peregrine sighed. 

"Blue balloons." Father Stone 
shook his head. "A circus!" 

Father Peregrine felt his wrists 
pounding. He saw the little frontier town with raw, fresh-built sin, 
and he saw the hills, old with the 
oldest and yet perhaps an even newer, to him, sin. 

"Mayor . . . could your black 
Irish laborers cook one more day 



"IN THIS SIGN . 



61 



in hellfke?" 

"I'd turn and baste them for 
you, Father." 

Father Peregrine nodded to the 
hills, "Then, that's where we'll go." 

There was a murmur from everyone. 

"It would be so simple," explained Father Peregrine, "to go into 
town. I prefer to think that if the 
Lord walked here and people said, 
'Here is the beaten path.' He would 
reply, 'Show me the weeds. I will 
make a path.' " 

"But—" 

"Father Stone, think how it 
would weigh upon us if we passed 
sinners by and did not extend our 
hands." 

"But globes of fire!" 

"I imagine man looked funny to 
other animals when he first appeared. Yet he has a soul, for all 
his homeliness. Until we prove otherwise, let us assume that these fiery 
spheres have souls." 

"All right," agreed the Mayor, 
"but you'll be back to town." 

"We'll see. First, some breakfast. 
Then you and I, Father Stone, will 
walk alone into the hills. I don't 
want to frighten those fiery Martians with machines or crowds. Shall 
we have breakfast?" 

The Fathers ate in silence. 

A T nightfall, Father Peregrine and 
Father Stone were high in the 
hills. They stopped and sat upon a 
rock to enjoy a moment of relaxation and waiting. The Martians had 



not as yet appeared and they both 
felt vaguely disappointed. 

"I wonder — " Father Peregrine 
mopped his face. "Do you think if 
we called 'Hello!' they might answer?" 

"Father Peregrine, won't you ever be serious?" 

"Not until the good Lord is. Oh, 
don't look so terribly shocked, 
please. The Lord is not serious. In 
fact, it is a little hard to know just 
what else He is except loving. And 
love has to do with humor, doesn't 
it? For you cannot love someone 
unless you put up with him, can 
you? And you cannot put up with 
someone constantly unless you can 
laugh at him, isn't that true? And 
certainly we are ridiculous little animals wallowing in the fudge^bowl, 
and God must love us all the more 
because we appeal to his humor." 

"I never thought of God as humorous," said Father Stone, coldly. 

"The Creator of the platypus, the 
camel, the ostrich, and Man? Oh, 
come now! " Father Peregrine laughed. 

But at this instant, from among 
the twilight hills, like a series of 
blue lamps lit to guide their way, 
came the Martians. 

Father Stone saw them first. 
"Look!" 

Father Peregrine turned and the 
laughter stopped in his mouth. 

The round blue globes of fire hovered among the twinkling stars, distantly trembling. 

"Monsters!" Father Stone leaped 



IMAGINATION 



up. But Father Peregrine caught 
him. "Wait!" 

"We should've gone to town I" 
"No, listen, look!" pleaded Father Peregrine. 
"I'm afraid!" 

"Don't be, this is God's workl" 
"The devil's!" 

"No, now, quiet!" Father Peregrine gentled him and they crouched with the soft blue light on their 
upturned faces as the fiery orbs 
drew near. 

AND again, Independence Night, 
thought Father Peregrine, tremoring. He felt like a child back in 
those July Fourth evenings, the sky 
blowing apart, breaking into powdery stars and burning sound, the concussions jingling house windows like 
the ice on a thousand thin ponds. 
The aunts, uncles, cousins crying 
Ah! as to some celestial physician. 
The summer sky colors. And the 
Fire Balloons, lit by an indulgent 
Grandfather, steadied in his massively tender hands. Oh, the memory 
of those lovely Fire Balloons, softly 
lighted, warmly billowed bits of tissue, like insect wings, lying like 
folded wasps in boxes and, last of 
all, after the day of riot and fury, 
at long last from their boxes, delicately unfolded, blue, red, white, 
patriotic, the Fire Balloonsl 

He saw the dim faces of dear 
relatives long dead and mantled 
with moss as Grandfather lit the 
tiny candle and let the warm air 
breathe up to form the balloon 



plumply luminous in his hands, a 
shining vision which they held, reluctant to let it go, for once released it was yet another year gone 
from life, another Fourth, another 
bit of Beauty vanished. And then 
up, up, still up through the warm 
summer night constellations, the Fire 
Balloons had drifted, while redwhite-and-blue eyes followed them, 
wordless, from family porches. 
Away into deep Illinois country, 
over night rivers and sleeping mansions the Fire Balloons dwindled, 
forever gone . . . 

Father Peregrine felt tears in his 
eyes. Above him, the Martians, not 
one but a thousand whispering Fire 
Balloons it seemed. Any moment, 
he might find his long dead and 
blessed Grandfather at his elbow, 
staring up at Beauty. 

But it was Father Stone. 

"Let's go, please, Father!" 

"I must speak to, them." Father 
Peregrine rustled forward, not knowing what to say, for what had he 
ever said to the Fire Balloons of 
time past, except with his mind: 
you are beautiful, you are beautijul, 
and that was not enough now. He 
could only lift his heavy arms and 
call upward, as he had often wished 
to call after the enchanted Fire 
Balloons, "Hello!" 

But the fiery spheres only burnt 
like images in a dark mirror. They 
seemed fixed, gaseous, miraculous, 
forever. 

"We come with God," said Father Peregrine to the sky. 



"IN THIS SIGN 



"Silly, silly, silly." Father Stone 
chewed the back of his hand. "In 
the name of God, Father Peregrine, 
stop!" 

But now the phosphorescent 
spheres blew away into the hills. 
In a moment, they were gone. 

T7ATHER Peregrine called again, 
and the echo of his last cry 
shook the hills above. Turning, he 
saw an avalanche shake out dust, 
pause, and then with a thunder of 
stone wheels, crash down the mountain upon them. 

"Look what you've done!" cried 
Father Stone. 

Father Peregrine was almost fascinated, then horrified. He turned, 
knowing they could run only a few 
feet before the rocks crushed them 
into ruins. He had time to whisper, 
Oh, Lord! and the rocks fell! 

"Father!" 

They were separated like chaff 
from wheat. There was a blue shimmering of globes, a shift of cold 
stars, a roar, and then they stood 
upon a ledge two hundred feet 
away watching the spot where their 
(bodies should have been buried under tons of stone. 

The blue light evaporated. 

The two Fathers clutched each 
other. "What happened?" 

"The blue fires lifted us!" 

"We ran, that was it!" 

"No, the globes saved us." 

"They couldn't!" 

"They did." 

The sky was empty. There was 



a feel as if a great bell had just 
stopped tolling. Reverberations lingered in their teeth and marrows. 

"Let's get away from here. You'll 
have us killed." 

"I haven't feared death for a 
good many years, Father Stone." 

"We've proved nothing. Those 
blue lights ran off at the first cry. 
It's useless." 

"No." Father Peregrine was suffused with a stub-born wonder. 
"Somehow, they saved us. That 
proves they have souls." 

"It proves only that they might 
have saved us. Everything was confused. We might have escaped, ourselves." 

"They are not animals, Father 
Stone. Animals do not save lives; 
especially of strangers. There is 
mercy and compassion here. Perhaps, tomorrow, we may prove 
more," 

"Prove what? How?" Father 
Stone was immensely tired now, the 
outrage to his mind and body showed on his stiff face. "Follow them 
in helicopters, reading chapter and 
verse? They're not human. They 
haven't eyes or ears or bodies like 
ours." 

"But I feel something about 
them," replied Father Peregrine. 
"I know a great revelation is at 
hand. They saved us. They think. 
They had a choice, let us live or 
die. That proves free will!" • 

FATHER Stone set to work 
building a fire, glaring at the 



64 



IMAGINATION 



sticks in his hands, choking on the 
grey smoke. "I myself, will open a 
convent for nursing geese, a monastery for sainted swine, and I shall 
build a miniature apse in a microscope so that Paramecium can attend services and tell their beads 
with their flagella." 

"Oh, Father Stone." 

"I'm sorry." Father Stone blinked redly across the fire. "But this 
is like blessing a crocodile before 
he chews you up. You're risking the 
entire missionary expedition. We 
belong in First Town, washing liquor from men's throats and perfume off their hands!" 

"Can't you recognize the human 
in the inhuman?" 

"I'd much rather recognize the 
inhuman in the human." 

"But if I prove these things sin, 
know sin, know a moral life, have 
free will and intellect, Father 
Stone?" 

"That will take much convincing." 

The night grew rapidly cold and 
they peered into the fire to find 
their wildest thoughts, while eating 
biscuits and berries, and soon they 
were bundled for sleep under the 
chiming stars. And just before turning over one last time, Father Stone, 
who had been thinking for many 
minutes to find something to bother 
Father Peregrine about, stared into 
the soft pink charcoal bed and said, 
"No Adam and Eve on Mars. No 
original sin. Maybe the Martians 
live in a state of God's grace. Then 



we can go back down to town and 
start work on the Earth men." 

Father Peregrine reminded himself to say a little prayer for Father Stone. "Yes, Father Stone, but 
there've been an Original Sin and 
a Martian Adam and Eve. We'll 
find them. Men are men, unfortunately, no matter what their shape, 
and inclined to sin." 

But Father Stone was pretending sleep. 

Father Peregrine did not shut his 
eyes. 

Of course they couldn't let these 
Martians go to hell, could they? 
With a compromise to their consciences, could they go back to the 
new colonial towns, those towns so 
full of sinful gullets and women 
-with scintilla eyes and white oyster 
bodies rollicking in beds with lonely 
laborers? Wasn't that the place for 
the Fathers? Wasn't this trek into 
the hills merely a personal whim? 
Was he really thinking of God's 
Church, or was he quenching the 
thirst of a sponge-like curiosity? 
Those blue round globes of St. Anthony's fire. How they burned in 
his mind! What a challenge, to find 
the man behind the mask, the human behind the inhuman. Wouldn't he be proud if he could say, 
even to his secret self, that he had 
converted a rolling huge pool table 
full of fiery spheres! What a sin 
of pride! Worth doing penance for! 
But then one did many prideful 
things out of Love, and he loved 
the Lord so much and was so hap


"IN THIS SIGN ..." 



j>y at it that he wanted every one 
else t& be happy, too. 

The last thing he saw before 
sleep was the return of the blue 
fires, like a flight of burning angels 
silently singing him to his worried 
rest. 

npHE blue round dreams were 
■** still there in the sky when 
Father Peregrine awoke in the early 
morning. 

Father Stone slept like a stiff 
bundle, quietly. Father Peregrine 
watched the Martians floating and 
watching him. They were human, 
he knew it. But he must prove it 
or face a dryMmouthed, dry-eyed 
Bishop telling him kindly to step 
aside. 

But how to prove humanity if 
they hid in the high vaults of the 
sky? How to bring them nearer and 
provide answers to the .many questions? 

"They saved us from the avalanche." 

Father Peregrine arose, moved 
off among the rocks, and began to 
climb the nearest hill, until he came 
to a place where a cliff dropped 
sheerly to a floor two hundred feet 
below. He was choking from the 
vigorous climb in the frosty air. He 
stood, getting his breath. 

"If I fell from here, it would 
surely kill me." 

He let a pebble drop. Moments 
later, it clicked on the rocks, below. 

"The Lord would never forgive 



me ... " 

He tossed another pebble. 

"It wouldn't be suicide, would it, 
if I did it out of Love ... ?" 

He lifted his gaze to the blue 
spheres. "But first, another try." 
He called to them. "Hello, hello!" 

The echoes tumbled upon each 
other, but the blue fires did not 
blink or move. 

He talked to them for five minutes. When he stopped, he peered 
and saw Father Stone, still indignantly asleep, below in the little 
camp. 

"I must prove everything." Father 
Peregrine stepped to the cliff rim. "I 
am an old man. I am not afraid. 
Surely the Lord will understand that 
I am doing this for Him?" ^ 

He drew a deep breath. All his 
life swam through his eyes and he 
thought, in a moment, shall I die? 
I am afraid that I love living much 
too much. But I love other things 
more. 

And thinking thus, he stepped off 
the cliff. 
He fell. 

"Fool!" he cried. He tumbled end 
over end. "You were wrong!" The 
rocks rushed up at him and he saw 
himself dashed on them and sent to 
glory. "Why did I do this thing?" 
But he knew the answer and an 
instant later was calm as he fell. The 
wind roared around him and the 
rocks hurtled to meet him. 

AND then there was a shift of 
•** stars, a glimmering of blue light 



66 



IMAGINATION 



and he felt himself surrounded by 
blueness and suspended. A moment 
later he was deposited, with a gentle 
ibump, upon the rocks, where he sat 
a full moment, alive, and touching 
himself and looking up at those blue 
lights that had withdrawn instantly. 

"You saved mel" he whispered. 
"You wouldn't let me die. You knew 
it was wrong." 

He rushed over to Father Stone 
who still lay quietly asleep. "Father, 
Father, wake up!" He shook at him 
and brought him around. "Father, 
they saved me!" 

"Who saved you?" Father Stone 
blinked and sat up. 

Father Peregrine related his experience. , 

"A dream, a nightmare, go back 
to sleep," said Father Stone, irritably. "You and your circus balloons." 
i "But I was awake!" 

"Now, now, Father, calm yourself, there now." 

"You don't believe me? Have you 
a gun, yes, there, let me have it." 

"What are you going to do?" 
Father Stone handed over the small 
pistol they had brought along for 
protection against snakes or other 
similar and unpredictable animals. 

Father Peregrine seized the pistol. 
"I'll prove it!" 

He pointed the pistol at his own 
hand and fired. 

"Stop!" 

There was a shimmer of light and 
before their eyes, the <bullet stood 
upon the air, poised an inch from his 
I open palm. It hung for a moment, 



surrounded by a blue phosphorescence. Then it fell, hissing, into the 
dust. 

Father Peregrine fired the gun 
three times, at his hand, at his leg, 
at his 'body. The three bullets hovered, glittering, and like dead insects, fell at their feet. 

"You see?" said Father Peregrine, 
letting his arm fall, and allowing the 
pistol to drop after the bullets. 
'They know. They understand. 
They are not animals. They think 
and judge and live in a moral climate. What animal would save me 
from myself like this? There is no 
animal would do that. Only another 
man, Father. Now, do you believe?" 

Father Stone was watching the 
sky and the blue lights, and now, 
silently, he dropped to one knee and 
picked up the warm bullets and cupped them in his hand. He closed his 
hand tight. 

The sun was rising behind them. 

"I think we had 'better go down 
to the others and tell them of this 
and bring them back up here," said 
Father Peregrine. 

By the time the sun was up, they 
were well on their way back to the 
rocket. 

TpATHER Peregrine drew the 
" round circle in the center of the 
blackboard. 

"This is Christ, the son of the 
Father." 

He pretended not to hear the 
other Fathers' sharp intake of 
breath. 



"IN THIS SIGN 



"This is Christ, in all his Glory," 
he continued. 

"It looks like a geometry problem" 
observed Father Stone. 

"A fortunate comparison, for we 
deal with symbols here. Christ is no 
less Christ, you must admit, in being represented by a circle or a 
square. For centuries the cross has 
symbolized his love and agony. So, 
this circle will be the Martian 
Christ. This is how we shall bring 
Him to Mars." 

The fathers stirred fretfully and 
looked at each other. 

"You, brother Mathias, will create, in glass, a replica of this circle, 
a globe, filled with bright fire. It 
will stand upon the altar." 

U A cheap magic trick," muttered 
Father Stone. 

Father Peregrine went on patiently. "On the contrary. We are giving 
them God in an understandable image. If Christ had come to us on 
Earth as an octopus, would we have 
accepted him readily?" He spread 
his hands. "Was it then a cheap 
magic tdck of the Lord's to bring us 
Christ through Jesus in man's 
shape? After we bless the church 
we build here and sanctify its altar 
and this symbol, do you think Christ 
would refuse to inhabit the shape 
before us? You know in your hearts 
he would not refuse." 

"But the body of a soulless animal!" said Brother Mathias. 

"We've already gone over that, 
many times since we returned this 
morning, Brother Mathias. These 



67 

creatures saved us from the avalanche. They realized that self-destruction was sinful, and prevented 
% time after time. Therefore we 
must build a church in the hills, 
live with them, to find their own 
special ways of sinning, the alien 
ways, and help them." 

The Fathers did not seem cheered 
at the prospect. 

"Is it because they are so odd to 
the eye?" wondered Father Peregrine. "But what is a shape? Only 
a cup for the blazing soul that God 
provides us all. If tomorrow I found 
that sea-lions suddenly possessed 
free will, intellect, knew when not 
to sin, knew what life was and 
tempered justice with mercy and life 
with love, then I would build an 
undersea cathedral. And if the sparrows should miraculously, with God's 
will, gain everlasting souls tomorrow, I would freight a church with 
helium and take after them, for all 
souls, in the shape, if they have 
free will and are aware of their sins, 
will burn in hell unless given their 
rightful communions. I would not 
let a Martian sphere burn in hell, 
either, for it is a sphere only in 
mine eyes. When I close my eyes 
it stands before me, an intelligence, 
a love, a soul, and I must not deny 
it." 

"But that glass globe you wish 
placed on the altar," protested Father Stone. 

CC^ONSIDER the Chinese," re^ plied Father Peregrine, im


68 



IMAGINATION 



perturbably. "What sort of Christ do 
Christian Chinese worship? An Oriental Christ, naturally. You've all 
seen Oriental Nativity scenes. How 
is Christ dressed? In Eastern robes. 
Where does he walk? In Chinese settings of bamboo and misty mountain and crooked tree. His eyelids 
taper, his cheekbones rise. Each 
country, each race adds something 
to our Lord. I am reminded of the 
Virgin of Guadalupe, to whom all 
Mexico pays its love. Her skin? 
Have you noticed the paintings of 
her? A dark skin, like that of her 
worshippers. Is this blasphemy? Not 
at all. It is not logical that men 
should accept a God, no matter how 
real, of another color. I often wonder why our missionaries do well in 
Africa, with a snow-white Christ. 
Perhaps because white is a sacred 
color, in albino, or any other form, 
to the African tribes. Given time, 
mightn't Christ darken there, too? 
The form does not matter. Content 
is everything. We cannot expect 
these Martians to accept an alien 
form. We shall give them Christ in 
their own image." 

"There's a flaw in your reasoning, 
Father," said Father Stone. "Won't 
the Martians suspect us of hypocrisy? They will realize that we 
don't worship a round, globular 
Christ, but a man with limbs and 
a head. How do we explain the difference?" 

"By showing there is none. Christ 
will fill any vessel that is offered. 
Bodies or globes, he is there, and 



each will worship the same thing in 
a different guise. What is more, we 
must believe in this globe we give 
the Martians. We must believe in a 
shape which is meaningless to us as 
to form. This spheroid will be Christ.^ 
And we must remember that we ourselves, and the shape of our Earth 
Christ, would be meaningless, ridiculous, a squander of material to 
these Martians." 

Father Peregrine laid aside his 
chalk. "Now, let us go into the hills 
and build our church." 

The Fathers began to pack their 
equipment. 

r "pHE church was not a church 
but an area cleared of rocks, a 
plateau on one of the low mountains, its soil smoothed and brushed, 
and an altar established whereon 
Brother Mathias placed the fiery 
globe he had constructed. 

At the end of six days of work, I 
the "church" was ready. 

"What shall we do with this?" 
Father Stone tapped an iron bell 
they had brought along. "What does 
a bell mean to them." 

"I imagine I brought it for our 
own comfort," admitted Father Peregrine. "We need a few familiairties. This church seems so little like 
a church. And we feel somewhat absurd here, even I, for it is something new, this business of converting the creatures of another world. 
I feel like a ridiculous play-actor 
at times. And then I pray to God 
to lend me strength." 



"IN THIS SIGN . . . 



"Many of the Fathers are unhappy. Some of them joke about 
all this Father Peregrine." 

"I know. We'll put this bell in a 
small tower for their comfort, anyway." 

"What about the organ?" 

"We'll play it at the first service, tomorrow." 

"But, the Martians — " 

"I know. But again, I suppose, 
for our own comfort, our own music. Later, we may discover theirs." 

They arose very early on Sunday morning and moved through the 
coldness like pale phantoms, rime 
tinkling on their habits; covered 
with chimes they were, shaking down 
showers of silver water. 

"I wonder if it is Sunday here on 
Mars?" mused Father Peregrine, but 
seeing Father Stone wince, hastened 
on, "It might be Tuesday or 
Thursday, who knows? But no 
matter. My idle fancy. Its Sunday 
to us. Come." 

The Fathers walked into the flat 
wide area of the "church" and 
knelt, shivering, and blue-lipped. 

T^ATHER Peregrine said a little 
* prayer and put his cold fingers 
to the organ keys. The music went 
up like a flight of pretty birds. 
He touched the keys like a man 
moving his hands among the weeds 
of a wild garden, startling up great 
soarings of beauty into the hills. 

The music calmed the air. It 
smelled the fresh smell of morning. The music drifted into the 



69 

mountains and shook down mineral powders in a dusty rain. 

The Fathers waited. 

"Well, Father Peregrine." Father 
Stone eyed the empty sky where 
the sun was rising, furnace-red. 
"I don't see our friends." 

"Let me try again." Father Peregrine was perspiring. 

He built an architecture of Bach, 
stone by exquisite stone, raising 
a music cathedral so vast that its 
furthest chancels were in Ninevah, 
its furthest dome at St. Peter's left 
hand. The music stayed and did 
not crash in ruin when it was over, 
but partook of a series of white 
clouds and was carried away among 
other lands. 

The sky was still empty. 

"They'll come!" But Father Peregrine felt the panic in his chest, 
very small, growing. "Let us pray. 
Let us ask them to come. They 
read minds; they know" 

The Fathers lowered themselves 
yet again, in rustlings and whispers. 
They prayed. 

And to the East, out of the icy 
mountains of seven o'clock on Sunday morning or perhaps Thursday 
morning or maybe Monday morning on Mars, came the soft fiery 
globes. 

They hovered and sank and filled 
the area around the shivering priests. 
"Thank you, oh thank you, Lord." 
Father Peregrine shut his eyes tight 
and played the music and when it 
was done he turned and gazed upon 
his wondrous congregation. 



70 



IMAGINATION 



And a voice touched his mind, 
and the voice said: 

"We have come for a little 
while." 

"You may stay," said Father 
Peregrine. 

"For a little while only," said 
the voice, quietly. "We have come 
to tell you certain things. We 
should have spoken sooner. But we 
had hoped that you might go on 
your way if left alone." 

Father Peregrine started to speak, 
ibut the voice hushed him. 

"We are the Old Ones," the voice 
said, and it entered him like a 
(blue, gaseous flare and burned in 
the chambers of his head. "We are 
the old Martians, who left our 
marble cities and went into the 
hills, forsaking the material life we 
had lived. So very long ago we became these things that we now are. 
Once, we were men, with bodies 
and legs and arms such as yours. 
The legend has it that one of us, 
a good man, discovered a way to 
free man's soul and intellect, to 
cholies, of deaths and transfigurations, of ill humors and senilities, 
and so we took on the look of lightfree him of bodily ills and melanning and blue fire and have lived 
in the winds and skies and hills 
forever after that, neither prideful 
nor arrogant, neither rich nor poor, 
passionate or cold. We have lived 
apart from those we left behind, 
those other men of this world, and 
how we came to be has been forgotten, the process lost, but we 



shall never die, nor do harm. We 
have put away the sins of the 
■body and live in God's grace. We 
covet no other property, we have 
no property, we do not steal, nor 
kill, nor lust, nor hate. We live 
in happiness. We cannot reproduce, 
we do not eat or drink or make 
war. All the sensualities and childishnesses and sins of the body were 
stripped away when our bodies were 
put aside. We have left sin behind, 
Father Peregrine, and it is burned 
like the leaves in the autumn wicker and it is gone like the soiled 
snow of an evil winter, and it is 
gone like the sexual flowers of a 
red and yellow spring, and it is 
gone like the panting nights of hottest summer, and our season is 
temperate and our clime is rich 
in thought.." 

T^ATHER Peregrine was standing 
A now, for the voice touched him 
at such a pitch that it almost shook 
him from his senses. It was an ecstasy and a fire washing through 
him. 

"We wish to tell you that we appreciate your building this place 
for us, but we have no need for 
it, for each of us is a temple unto 
himself, and needs no place wherein to cleanse ourselves. Forgive us 
for not coming to you sooner, but 
we are separate and apart and have 
talked to no one for ten thousand 
years, nor have we interfered in any 
way with the life of this planet. It 
has come into your mind now that 



"IN THIS SIGN 



we are the lillfes of the field, we toil 
not, neither do we spin. You are 
right. And so we suggest that you 
take the parts of this temple into 
your own new cities and there 
cleanse them. For, rest assured, we 
are happy and at peace." 

The Fathers were on their knees 
in the vast blue light, and Father 
Peregrine was down, too, and they 
were weeping, and it did not matter 
that their time had been wasted, 
it did not matter to them at all. 

The blue spheres murmured and 
began to rise once more, on a 
breath of cool air. 

"May I — " cried Father Peregrine, not daring to ask, eyes closed. 
"May I come again, some day, that 
I may learn from you?" 

The blue fires blazed. The air 
trembled. 

Yes. Some day he might come 
again. Some day. 

And then the Fire Balloons blew 
away and were gone, and he was 
like a child, on his knees, tears 
streaming from his eyes, crying to 
himself, Come back! Come back! 
and at any moment Grandfather 
might lift him and carry him upstairs to his bedroom in a longgone Ohio town . . . 

'-pHEY filed down out of the hills 
at sunset. Looking back, Father 
Peregrine saw the blue fires burning. No, he thought, we couldn't 
build a church for the likes of 
you. You're Beauty itself. What 
church could compete with the fireworks of the pure soul? 



7i 

Father Stone moved in silence 
beside him. And at last he spoke: 

"The way I see it is there's a 
Truth on every planet. All parts 
of the Big Truth. On a certain day 
they'll all fit together like the 
pieces of a jigsaw. This has been 
a shaking experience. I'll never 
doubt again, Father Peregrine. For 
this Truth here is as true as Earth's 
Truth, and they lie side by side. 
And we'll go on to other worlds, 
adding the sum of the parts of the 
Truth until one day the whole 
Total will stand before us like the 
light of a new day." 

"That's a lot, coming from you, 
Father Stone." 

"I'm sorry now, in a way, we're 
going down to the town to handle 
our own kind. Those blue lights 
now, when they settled about us, 
and that voice." Father Stone shivered. 

Father Peregrine reached out to 
take the other's arm. They walked 
together. 

"And you know," said Father 
Stone, finally, fixing his eyes on 
Brother Mathias who strode ahead 
with the glass sphere tenderly carried in his arms, that glass sphere 
with the blue phosphorous light 
glowing forever inside it, "you know, 
Father Peregrine, that globe there 

3) 

"Yes?" 

"It's Him! It is Him, after all." 

Father Peregrine smiled and they 
walked down out of the hills toward the new town. 

THE END 



THE LONGSNOZZLE EVENT 

~J4ai -Minnas 

As the greatest detective in the galaxy, 
Le« Zitts could easily arrest the murderer. His 
main interest was in analyzing the weapon usedl 

72 



LEN Zitts wiggled his big toe 
and gently pressed it against 
the velvet-covered button, and 
the couch on which he was lying began easing from beneath the desk 
to shape itself into a lounging chair. 
In the process, a pair of mechanical 
arms slipped a pair of flexible plastic moccasins on his feet and another pair of arms buttoned his shirt 
collar and straightened his maroon 
cravat. At the same time a mechanical comb and brush straightened the part in his thick chestnut 
hair and smoothed it neatly. 

Rising from behind the desk to 
(a sitting position, without any ef


fort on his part, Len Zitts blinked 
brown eyes and looked again at the 
vision of blonde loveliness which 
stood with full mouth agape just 
inside the doorway. 

"Oh!" The slender woman drew 
a deep breath, causing her bosom 
to swell alluringly. "You scared 
me. Popping up like a jack-in-thebox!" 

Moving his little finger an eighth 
of an inch, Zitts touched a button 
on the arm of the chair and a mechanical hand put a cigaret in his 
mouth and another tubelike arm 
moved beneath the cigaret and 
squirted flame against its tip. "Sit 



74 



IMAGINATION 



down," Zitts invited. ''Have a cigaret," He pressed another button 
and an arm on the far side of the 
desk extended a tray of assorted cigarets toward the woman. 

A little breathless, she sat down 
and smoothed her diaphanous cerise 
skirt along her thighs. "I— I'm still 
a little scared," she said tremulously. 

Zitts arched a chestnut brown 
eyebrow, significantly glanced at 
the desk and the mechanical equipment, and said, "Don't be alarmed. 
Just a few little inventions of my 
own. Desks were originally intended as a resting place for the feet. 
I've merely modernized the idea. 
Slip under the desk to relax. People can't spill drinks and ashes 
down your collar while you sleep." 

The woman nodded, smiled, revealing even teeth and a wide mouth 
with upturned corners. "I suppose 
you want me to tell you why I 
came?" 

Zitts shook his head almost imperceptibly. "I know why you 
came," he said. "You want to offer 
tne a ton of gold to investigate your 
husband's death. Sorryf Afraid we 
can't do business." 

"B-but — but — how did you 
know?" The woman leaned forward 
and lifted a slender hand and looked 
at it as though to test her eyes. 

^ITTS eyed the round arm with 
interest. "Elementary," he 
said. "People are always wanting 
me to investigate something, and 



they always try to palm off that 
trasii called gold. They never offer 
anything worthwhile, such as a dozen genuine bacteria for my collection, or a scuttle of coal— that almost priceless black stuff from 
which so many things are made. 
Ever seen any coal?" 

The woman shook her head, 
swinging the shoulder-length blonde 
hair from side to side, and her deep 
blue eyes opened wide in wonder. 
"Heard of it. Glossy ebon substance 
of Which ornaments are made. A 
princess on Mars is said to own a 
chunk of it as big as my thumb, set 
in a pendant. It was captured in 
the Martian war with Saturn." 

"It's probably a phony," Zitts 
pointed out. "The Martians are too 
smart to - let a woman wear that 
precious stuff. A piece that big could 
be made into the nucleus of a webbing which would trap enough sunlight and moisture from the orbit 
of Mars to turn every sandy plain 
on that planet into fertile land." 

The subject seemed beyond the 
grasp of the woman. "But you 
haven't told me," she said softly, 
"how you knew it was my husband's death, not something else." 

Zitts turned slightly in his chair. 
The turning itself seemed to serve 
as a signal. The door on his right 
opened noiselessly and a dusky Venusian female glided into the room, 
came and sat down on a seat which 
was remarkably like a man's knee. 

"My confidential secretary," Zitts 
said by way of introduction. "Miss 



THE LQNGSXOZZLE EVENT 



75 



Xuren Claustinkelwickwellopiandusselkuck. I streamline that a bit and 
call her Zoo. Zoo, this is Mrs. Elmer-Brown Jake-Smith." 

''What?" The blonde woman's 
eyes snapped from Zoo to Zitts. 
"How did you know my name? And 
how did j'ou know I had two husbands?" 

"One husband," Zitts corrected. 
"Mr. Jake Smith was done to death 
in some mysterious manner yesterday morning at daylight just as he 
was going to bed for the day. But 
you're still entitled to both names, 
having been legally wed to both 
men. The beyondlaws, I believe, are 
h iding Elmer Brown." 

"Beyondlaws? Isn't that an outmoded term? Its meaning has slipped me." 

"Outmoded, yes, but still appropriate. Coined to replace the 
term congressmen. They once made 
the laws, I believe, but they were 
beyond the laws themselves. Then 
the people got stirred up and demoted them to ratcatchers and put 
responsible men in their places. 
They worked up from ratcatchers to 
jobs then known as policemen. The 
term ratcatchers stuck, but it seems 
more dignified to call them beyondlaws. These people are holding your 
other husband, leaving you husbandless. But that shouldn't be so bad. 
With your shape you ought to be 
able to snare a hundred husbands." 

THE woman dropped her eyes 
and blushed. "You shouldn't 



flatter a poor widow at a time like 
this," she said coyly. "But how do 
you know all these things about 
me?" 

Zitts turned to the Venusian. 
"Show her, Zoo," he said. 

Zoo uncrossed her graceful legs 
and leaned forward on the mechanical knee. 

"Why," the blonde woman broke 
in, "does she sit on a thing like 
that? It— it's so suggestive of sitting on a man's lap." 

Zitts smiled indulgently. "Miss 
Claustrinkelwickwellpiandusselkuck," 
he said, "attended an oldfashioned 
secretarial school. The reason for 
their training to sit on a man's lap 
is lost in antiquity. But I have a 
feeling there was a good reason for 
it. In the twentieth century when 
bandits stalked the cities, when detectives were popping in and out 
of every second doorway in pursuit 
of murderers, and wiping off fingerprints in their wake, it is to be 
presumed that a man and his secretary undertook many things of 
a confidential nature. As a preliminary to sudh confidential things, a 
session of lap-sitting might've been 
just the thing. Of course we'll never 
know for certain. But it is an honored custom in the old schools, and, 
of course, we cannot go against the 
dignity of the past. 

"Now, with your permission, 111 
have Zoo go ahead." 

The woman nodded assent and 
the Venusian girl touched a lever 
on the side of the desk which Zitts 



7 6 



IMAGINATION 



could not reach without stretching. 
Instantly a round white globe, lighted by a faint yellow glow at its 
•center, rose out of an opening in 
the desk. The blonde woman, sitting close, drew back with a gasp. 

"That's me," she said. "Inside 
the globe." 

"Of course. 5 ' Zitts cocked an eyebrow at Zoo who pointed at the 
vision. "Notice closely," Zitts went 
on. "Right there at the tip of Zoo's 
claws. You are standing on the moving carpet in a lower corridor of this 
building. As I lay beneath this desk 
I was looking into that globe which 
was then visible below. It is now 
reproducing exactly what I saw." 

r T^HE woman had somewhat recovered, her poise and now 
leaned close and watched herself 
glide along the corridor on the moving carpet. "But I still don't see 
— " sine began. 

"You will when I explain," Zitts 
informed her. "Look closely at your 
features. They are beautiful!" 

"Yes. But—" 

"It has been known for centuries," 
Zitts declared, "that every thought 
has a physical reaction. Sometimes 
it is only glandular. But it is a 
short step from observing the reactions to reading the thoughts. The 
reactions, of course, differ in different people. It would be necessary 
to catalogue your reactions before 
I could specifically read your every 
thought. But certain key reactions 
are fairly Common, such as grief, 



fear, love, hate. In a glance you 
can tell whether a person is grieving, 
fearing, loving, hating. A study of 
reactions advances this talent remarkably. A little intelligent deduction, judgment, putting of twoand-two together, and it is possible 
to come fairly close to what anyone 
is thinking without knowing the 
catalogued reactions. Am I making 
myself clear?" 

"Go on," the woman urged with 
interest. "But don't read my exact 
thoughts. I wouldn't want anyone 
to do that." 

"I probably haven't the language 
to read your exact thoughts," Zitts 
assured her. "Shall I tell you how 
I knew your purpose in coming 
here?" 

"By all means." 

"Look closely at the vision. It 
is smiling serenely to itself. That's 
you a few minutes before you entered this office. That pleased expression means you have just conceived 
a bright idea, probably thinking 
you could palm off a ton of gold 
on me." 

"But I never — " 

"Observe there where Zoo's claws 
are pointing. A man approaches. 
Now look at your own face. You 
have suddenly remembered that one 
of your husbands is dead and the 
other is in the hands of the ratcatchers, and you are supposed to 
register sorrow. You do but it's 
feigned. Your thoughts are more on 
the way the man is staring at your 
figure. Watch! Now you're sway


THE LONGSNOZZLE EVENT 



ing your hips gracefully. Very nice! 
Now look! The man has passed you, 
glanced back once to see if you are 
still waving your hips, and gone on. 
You are no longer waving your 
shape. You're thoughtful again. Oh, 
oh! You've turned on the waves 
again. Another man must be approaching. There he is, sure enough. 
That's why you're blinking your 
eyes now, to call attention to your 
long lashes. That will stop as soon 
as he passes, but your hips will wave 
a trifle more until you're certain 
he's out of range." 

"Stop! Stop this minute," the 
blonde cried. "You're just making 
up all that." 

yiTTS shrugged. "My dear Mrs. 
-^- / Brown and Smith, if you do 
not care to know how I learned 
of the purpose of your visit here, 
it is quite all right with me. No 
charge whatever for this interview. 
Zoo will show you to the corridor." 

"B-but— but I do. But you don't 
have to go into all of a woman's 
secrets." 

"Secrets?" Zitts lifted his hand 
a trifle, then let it fall, which inadvertently plunged the room into 
darkness and caused a grim voice 
to growl, "Don't move! I'll burn 
you in your tracks!" He corrected 
this at once, reassured the woman 
and briefly explained: "I often interview desperate characters in this 
room, Martians, Saturnians and even politicians. Have to protect myself." 



77 

"What were you saying about 
secrets?" the woman prodded with 
curiosity which had not evolved 
very much in ten thousand years. 

"Secrets?" Zitts repeated. "I wonder! Most actions and reactions are 
as obvious as the thoughts behind 
them. Secrets? I sometimes doubt 
there is such a thing. Shall I tell 
you what you are thinking now?" 

The woman blushed, shook her 
head. "Please don't. I'll try not to 
wish I could claw your eyes out 
anymore. Just go ahead and investigate my husband's death." 

Zitts rolled his eyes and looked 
at Zoo without moving. Zoo put her 
arms around the back of her seat, 
which slightly resembled a man, 
kissed it lightly and leaped nimbly 
to her feet. She glided smoothly to 
a corner, her figure undulating gracefully, and set in motion a fourwheeled machine which rolled to 
the center of the room and paused. 
Panels began to slide back from 
the machine, revealing its insides. 
Meanwhile Zitts explained: 

"The news of your second best 
husband's death was on teleview," 
he said. "I was interested in the 
case purely from an academic standpoint. With the machine you see on 
your left I watched the ratcatchers tearing up your apartment. The 
machine is called a key-skeleton. 
There isn't another like it in our 
solar system. With this key-skeleton I can enter any apartment or 
domicile no matter how well it is 
locked. Not in the flesh, no. That 



78 



IMAGINATION 



would be far too much trouble. I 
simply bring your apartment into 
this room. Not materially, but 
three-dimensionally to all effect. I 
have already gone over your apartment thoroughly and can describe 
the man who killed your husband." 

'TpHE woman's curving mouth 
popped open. "Why don't you 
tell the ratcatchers?" she wanted to 
know. 

Zitts shrugged. "I haven't the 
evidence to prove my theory. Besides, there is another phase of the 
case in which I am interested. The 
weapon which killed your husband 
was a strange, unearthly thing. 
Nothing like it is known to modern 
science. It is a hand weapon with 
a tube about six inches in length. 
Behind this tube is a six-chambered 
cylinder which appears to revolve 
when certain mechanisms are set in 
motion. Inscribed on it in ancient 
lettering is this legend: Colt. It is 
not known how this weapon works 
nor which end of it destroys. But 
the ratcatchers are going to experiment with it, and when they asked 
my advice I suggested that they 
hold the tube end of it toward 
their bodies. That seems the most 
harmless part of it. I also suggested 
that they line up behind one another when they do this, and stay 
away from the butt end of it. I expect to learn the results soon. Zoo! 
Turn on the machine." 

Just as the machine was turned 
on a loud bang sounded in the room. 



and the woman gasped as the view 
lit up and showed four uniformed 
ratcatchers sprawled on the floor of 
what was obviously the ratcatchers' 
lair. Zitts snorted in disgust. 

"Zoo!" he called. "Get in touch 
with the chief rat of the ratcatchers and tell him I said those men 
have clearly ignored my advice. 
Tell him I said to caution the next 
men who experiment with that weapon. Tell him to see that they hold 
the tube next to their bodies, and 
tell him for the sake of safety to 
have six men line up behind one 
another. Better yet, he had better 
undertake the experiment himself. 
His men are careless. Like idiots 
they have been pointing the tube 
away from themselves and holding 
the butt near theiT bodies. Turn 
off the machine. The sight of those 
dead men and the smell of blood 
is offensive." 

Zitts sat in gloomy silence until 
the woman spoke again. "Then 
you'll bring the murderer to justice?" she ventured quietly. 

Zitts shook his head. "I'm interested in the weapon, not the murderer. Such a weapon is far beyond 
our science. We have only rays 
which kill without noise. That 
weapon makes a terrific bang. 
Seems far more fitting than silence, 
especially in murders resulting from 
hate. We might in another hundred 
years be able to duplicate it and 
put them on the market and sell 
them literally to millions who have 
a right to expect some entertain


THE LONGSNOZZLE EVENT 



79 



ment as well as wind from their 
politicians. When a fellow felt in an 
ill humor he could destroy a politician with that weapon. The bang 
of it would immediately cheer him 
up." 

npHE woman leaned across the 
* desk and tears came into her 
eyes. "If you don't catch the man 
who killed my almost best husband," she sobbed brokenly, "I 
won't be able to get married more 
than a couple more times. Suspicion 
would fall on me and I don't know 
but two men who would marry a 
murderess." 

Zitts softened somewhat. "And if 
I do catch the murderer?" he said. 

The woman brightened, blew her 
nose and brushed away the tears. 
"Ill be the happiest person in our 
galaxy," she said, smiling. "I can 
marry six men tomorrow and probably twelve or fourteen the next 
day. You don't know how wonderful it will be to have so many husbands that the loss of a few now 
and then won't matter." 

Zitts nodded sympathetically. "I 
can well understand," he said. "'But 
you shouldn't expect me to use my 
training and intelligence for nothing. After all, I have ninety-six wives 
to support — partially— that is. Their 
other husbands contribute a bit now 
and then." 

"I could give you a uranium 
mine," the woman offered. 

"Uranium ? Nonsense. It's used 
only to flush sewers when they get 



gummed up. Haven't you anything 
valuable?" 
"Platinum." 

Zitts shook his head. "Used for 
ballast in deep-sea diving and then 
dumped in the ocean. Have you 
any humorous writings, such as an 
ancient Congressional Record?" 

"Never, heard of anything like 
that," the woman replied. "Heard 
once there was some sort of record 
of congress which was destroyed because so many people died laughing 
over it." 

"Exactly! Very dangerous," Zitts 
went on. "But I could trade it to 
the Martians to use in their war 
against Jupiter. Even a Jovian, who 
can endure so many more gravities 
than we, couldn't endure the weight 
of a Congressional Record. And if 
he could, he would either die laughing or become an epileptic. Have 
you got one?" 

"No!" The woman shook her 
head sadly. "I have a private atmosphere- runabout, a house with 
seventeen rooms in Florida, a ranch 
in California with ten thousand domesticated descendants of movie 
stars grazing on it, a plantation on 
Venus where I keep a herd of poets, 
a million acres of arable land on 
Uranus, a crater on the moon, and 
a chunk of what's left of the i C e 
at the North Pole. But I have nothing whatever valuable." 
"No property on Mars?" 

"A single canal, but it's worthless. It's filled with billions and 
billions of barrels of oil. Have tried 



8o 



IMAGINATION 



to give it away, but no one is fool 
enough to take it." 

t4 U — m." Zitts studied the wom* *■ an with pity and understanding. "There should be some 
sort of charity to aid people in your 
poverty-ridden condition. I suppose 
I'll have to handle the case for 
nothing. I wouldn't do it for anybody else for less than a star of the 
sixth magnitude, but I do not believe in imposing on the poor." 

"I have a nickel in ancient money," the woman said softly. 

"What? A nickel? Good God, 
woman! For half of that I would 
solve every murder since the beginning of time and commit some 
of my own. Give me that nickel. 
Where did you get it? Don't you 
know there are people who would 
cut ten thousand throats for a sum 
like that?" 

"I — I didn't know it was valuable." 

"It's priceless! People will sell 
their souls, commit perjury, betray 
their friends, cheat their neighbors, 
buy and sell votes, and even do 
some good things for money." 
"But such a little piece—" 
"Woman, you have no idea of 
values. Since money has become 
replaced by credit and barter, such 
pieces as this have become invaluable collectors' items. Even before 
that it was valuable. You could buy 
a lead dime with it. And if you were 
clever enough you could use the 
lead dime to buy a tin half-dollar. 



Then you could change the halfdollar into wooden quarters and begin all over again. A shrewd man 
could amass a fortune in counterfeit dollars by such trading. Of 
course, he couldn't buy anything 
with the counterfeit dollars, but reflection on the trading would 
strengthen his mind while he rested 
'behind bars. At least that's the way 
history relates it. Zoo! Take this 
precious nickel, handle it carefully 
and with due reverence, seal it in a 
tube, send it through the pneumatic 
to the armored transport, have them 
place a hundred men armed to the 
teeth about it, and escort it solemnly and without undue ostentation to 
the Universal Bank, that institution 
which covers eight square miles and 
towers ten thousand feet into the 
air, and deposit it with proper ceremony to my account. I shall be the 
wealthiest man on this planet and 
the envy of every creature in the 
galaxy. But don't worry, Mrs. Brown 
and Smith.! I shall not overcharge 
you. You have two cents change 
coming, a tidy sum— nay a fortune 
— and your case is as good as solved. Zoo! Sound the alarm. We go 
into action at once." 

T)ELLS clanged, a siren screamed, 
a series of red lights flashed 
on and off and on and off, and a 
distant rumble shook the building. 
The blonde woman caught her 
breath, gripped the arms of her 
chair to steady herself, waited until 
the noise and the shaking had sub


THE LONGSNOZZLE EVENT 



sided, then asked, "Do you always 
go into action like that?" 

"Invariably," Zitts affirmed serenely. "Seismographs all over the 
world register when Len Zitts 
launches himself in pursuit of a 
criminal, and the underworld trembles in despair, But," he added a 
trifle wistfully, "it doesn't register 
on Mars and Venus and they never 
send reporters and photographers. 
I'm thinking of installing a heavier 
vibrator. Zoo! You may inform the 
inquirers who will be hounding you 
in a moment that the nemesis of 
crime has plunged forth to strike 
death and terror to the heart of 
criminals. You may elaborate that 
a bit. Mention my. towering figure, 
nearly five feet tall, and the bulging 
muscles which back up my eightysix pounds of weight. You may also 
speak of my handsome features, but 
not in a manner to attract more 
than a few thousand women. I have 
enough wives already. Now! Clear 
the deck! Here we go." 

The blonde woman gathered her 
small feet under her, preparing to 
leap out of the way, and she took a 
deep breath for fear all of the air 
would be sucked out of the room 
in the wake of his rush; but to her 
astonishment he merely slumped 
down in the chair and, to all appearance, went to sleep. 

"He's in action now," Zoo explained softly and musically. "Concentrating. He'll come up with a 
plan in ten seconds." 



'npHE prophecy proved true. Zitts 
opened his eyes with a start, 
rose an inch in the chair and winked three times at the Venusian girl. 
Instantly the girl sprang to the door 
on the right and swung it open, 
and a four-legged creature, with its 
tongue lolling out, waddled into the 
room and squatted on its haunches. 

"See!" Zoo cried in delight. "His 
plans always begin with Pupsie. The 
ancients called him a bloodhound. 
His species is almost extinct, but 
he's smart and he claims his ancestors pursued criminals thousands 
of years ago." 

"Claims?" the blonde woman exclaimed, aghast. "You mean, that 
four-legged creature can talk?" 

"Whaddya think?" said Pupsie. 
"Living generation after generation 
around windbags who did nothing 
but talk, wasn't it to be expected 
that dogs would eventually evolve 
to that stage themselves? Not that 
it is an improvement, mind you. 
Dogs had to learn in self-defense. 
Even back in the twentieth century 
hundreds of people everyday were 
asking questions of animals. 'Ain't 
oo the pretty little thing?' 'Does oo 
want a tiss, oo lovey dovey?' The 
first words my ancestors learned to 
speak in answer to such questions 
were 'Go to hell!' The meaning of 
the phrase is lost in our modern 
language, possibly because my ancestors overworked it, using it every 
time a human opened his mouth to 
ask a question of an animal, until 
at length it had no meaning what


IMAGINATION 



ever." 

"And you catch criminals?" 

"Catch anything," said Pupsie, 
"that I can smell, if it deserves 
catching." 

"Quiet!" Zitts roared, displaying 
his customary impatience when another usurped the floor. "Zoo! Fetch 
forth the Longsnozzle. And while 
you're at it you can bracket this 
case as 'The Longsnozzle Event.' 
Mark that word 'Event!' I have a 
suspicion this is an insignificant 
case with not more than eight or 
ten murders involved." 

"Eight or ten murders ! " The 
blonde woman became deathly pale. 
"You mean, there is more than one 
murder?" 

T'lTTS looked at the woman with 
*—* pity in his brown eyes. "Woman, you evidently do not understand the psychology of murder. 
One always leads to another. It's 
always been that way. Look at the 
murder stories of even the blind age 
of the twentieth century! Thirteen 
murders, ordinarily, on the first 
page. Seven on the second, and the 
balance strung out through the book. 
It is the aspiration of every collector to find a book with only one 
murder in it. Personally, for such 
a wort I would offer seventy-five 
interstellar giant transports each 
loaded to bursting with ton upon 
ton of diamonds, emeralds, pearls, 
sapphires, oyster shells, and even 
those rare gems called kidney stones 
that come from the galaxies of in


nerspace— -and, yes, even those magnificent broke-stones found only in 
a single planetary system in a galaxy 
on the very rim of outer space. 
These latter are practically untouchable, and the more you try to touch 
them the more broke-stone they 
become." 

Zitts drew a deep breath and 
went on: "If a solitary genius of 
the latter half of the twentieth century had had the godlike stature 
to create a work with only one murder in it, instead of dozens, he 
would be immortal and today worshipped by the protagonists of moderation and hated by the antagonists who maintain, and not without reason, that all of the characters in such stories, and especially 
the detective, should come to a violent and horrible end on page 
three." 

The blonde woman wiped her 
eyes, glanced into a small mirror 
and tried to compose herself. "Very 
well," she murmured half to herself. "I shall prepare myself to endure whatever I must and view as 
many murders as necessary." 

"It won't be bad at all," Zitts . 
assured her with feeling. "May even 
be boring, with so few murders. 
Personally, I rarely take a case 
which doesn't offer the prospect of 
at least a hundred. They generally 
murder my suspects one after another, and for that reason I try to 
suspect as many as possible to keep 
the case interesting. 

"Now, if you are prepared — " 



THE LONGSNOZZLE EVENT 



S3 



The woman, fearful but dry-eyed, 
nodded in response, 

"Pupsie! On your mark! Zoo! 
Switch on the machine." 

In fear and wonderment the woman watched Pupsie don the longsnozzle which appeared to be a mechanical nose two-feet in length with 
its other measurements in proportion. This extra nose did not appear heavy or to handicap Pupsie 
in any way. Its nostrils flared and 
the Venusian girl produced some 
six square yards of white linen, 
held it significantly at the proper 
place, and the beast blew Its extra 
nose, making a honking sound which 
made the windows rattle. 

"That clears the way for smelling 
action," Zoo said in explanation. 

JUST then the view lit up and 
the bristles along Pupsie's back 
suddenly stood on end. The scene 
in the viewplate was familiar. Six 
ratcatchers were lined up, one behind another, with the foremost 
pointing the Colt at his own midriff. Through the adjoining wall, 
which was transparent on the viewplate } a man in the uniform of the 
chief rat of the ratcatchers, was 
visible holding his fingers in his 
ears and with a terrified and painful expresson on his face. 

The blonde woman jumped when 
the bang sounded and the six ratcatchers reeled and then collapsed. 
The chief beyond the wall looked 
a trifle relieved to find himself still 
alive, but Zitts snorted with aud


ible disgust. 

"Bunglers!" Zitts growled, then 
looked at Pupsie. "That weapon, 
Pupsie," he said. "Get a good whiff 
of it." 

The huge nostrils flared and 
sniffed in a way that stirred a strong 
breeze in the room and sent prickles along the blonde woman's spine. 
Then Pupsie looked up and winked. 

"Now trace it to the murderer," 
Zitts ordered. 

Pupsie gathered himself for a 
leap at the chief rat, but Zoo sprang 
between him and the viewplate and 
shut off the machine. 

"No, no," Zitts cautioned. "His 
smell is on the weapon, of course. 
But he merely examined it. Use 
your head now and tune in the machine yourself and find the murderer." 

Nodding, Pupsie moved close to 
the machine, switched it on and began tuning radarlike by sniffing and 
twisting the dials. Almost at once 
his eyes lighted and his tongue 
lolled out and his muscles stiffened 
for action. The blonde woman held 
her breath, expecting to view the 
murderer. 

The view lit up faintly, became 
brighter, became a dark alley with 
a cat inspecting a garbage pail. 

"No, no!" Zitts cautioned. "This 
is no time for sport. Get down to 
business." 

Pupsie continued tuning and suddenly began panting and gasping 
and twitching in every muscle. 

Recognizing the emergency, Zitts 



IMAGINATION 



84 

thundered "The treadmill, Zoo!" 

^00 stamped on the floor and 
started an endless carpet moving under Pupsie's feet. It was just 
in time, for Pupsie was running like 
the very devil in order to remain 
in the same place. He was in pursuit of a female dog which appeared on the viewplate. 

Features darkening and eyes blazing, Zitts waited for Zoo to turn 
off the machine. Then in a thunderously quiet voice he called Pupsie 
to book. 

"I warned you this is no time 
for sport!" Zitts glanced at Zoo 
w-ho produced a dogcatcher's net 
and held it threateningly above 
Pupsie. The poor dog shuddered. 
"For the last time," Zitts said ominously, "I'm warning you." 

The blonde woman felt so sorry 
for the creature she turned tearful 
eyes to Zitts in mute appeal. Zitts 
appeared to relent. 

"When you find that murderer," 
he said, temporizing, "I shall order 
you a special nine-foot bone from 
one of those Martian tyrannasauraplexus creatures. Now, keep your 
mind on your work!" 

At the mention of a tyrannasauraplexus bone Pupsie's jaws slavered 
and a look of rapture came over 
his ungainly features. Clearly he 
had been reformed. 

Setting to work immediately, 
Pupsie sniffed and tuned by twisting the dials, and suddenly the 
blonde woman gasped and almost 



fainted. 

"That's my lover's apartment," 
she said in horror. "I recognize the 
bed. Surely he can't be the murderer." 

"Your ex-lover," Zitts pointed 
out. "That's a corpse in the bed." 

The blonde woman fainted, for 
it was true. The man was dead, or 
should have been, for he neither 
breathed nor gave any sign of heartbeat. 

"Examine that room," Zitts ordered Pupsie, "until you get a whiff 
of the second murderer." 

Soon Pupsie was off again, sniffing 
and tuning, and just as another 
scene came in the blonde woman 
opened her eyes, gasped, "Another 
of my lovers," and fainted again. 

"Ex-lover," Zitts corrected and 
directed Pupsie -to pursue this murderer also. 

They ran through three more 
murders before the woman recovered, and Zitts deducted, which subsequently proved correct, that these 
were also ex-lovers. Then, as the 
woman recovered and was composing herself and straightening her 
mouth and re-making her face, they 
came upon a scene with a live person in it. 

"No, no! No!" the blonde cried. 
"He's my next to the best lover. 
He wouldn't murder anybody." 

''"pHE man, about ninety years old, 
*~ gray and stooped, sat placidly 
on what appeared to be the railing 
of a balcony and contemplated the 



THE LONGSNOZZLE EVENT 



85 



rolling countryside a hundred stories 
below. At a signal from Zitts, Zoo 
switched the machine to two-directional view. 

"All right, murderer," Zitts 
snarled. "Confess!" 

The man looked up, started, then 
almost fell over the rail as he caught 
sight of Mrs. Brown and Smith. 

"No, no! I don't want him 
brought to justice," the blonde woman cried. "If he loved me enough to 
commit all those murders I want 
to marry him." 

Zitts pondered this briefly, then 
said, "That ought to be punishment 
enough. What have you got to say, 
murderer?" 

The man cowered back, trembled. "Ill confess," he said quaveringly. "But I ask for a reasonably humane punishment like being 
boiled in oil Marrying that woman 
would be more than I can bear." 

Zitts nodded understanding^/. 
After all, he was humane even with 
criminals. And although he was not 
a man to compromise with crime he 
could not bear the light of horror 
in the man's eyes. "IH take the 
matter under consideration," he 
said. "But I promise nothing. If 
you confess promptly and clear up 
■the mystery, your chance of .being 
boiled in oil will be somewhat improved. I'm waiting." 

"It's like this," the man began, 
wiping perspiration from his brow. 
"On my ninetieth birth anniversary 
I decided to have one more fling 
and retire until I had reached my 



second youth-hood at the age of 
a hundred. I visited seventeen of 
my best sweethearts that day and 
night, and twelve of my wives. It 
was rather exhausting." 

"I can imagine," Zitts said encouragingly. "Go on." 

"Mrs. Brown and Smith was 
among those I visited," the man 
went on tiredly. "She was the most 
exhausting of all, actually insisting 
that I kiss her hand before I left. 
It took a lot out of me." 

"Go on," Zitts urged impatiently. 

"I swore off then and there," said 
the nonagenarian with a sigh, "and 
that left Mrs. Brown and Smith 
with only five lovers and two husbands. That increased the load on 
these remaining seven and they began to urge me to come back and 
do my duty. I refused. 

"That," the man went on, 
"brought things to a crisis. In desperation Smith made another appeal to me. Again I refused, but 
I gave him some sound advice, to 
wit: that he should make the other 
lovers carry a little more of the 
burden. This he tried without success, and again I advised him, this 
time arming him with an ancient 
weapon. In turn he went to each 
of tie other lovers and offered them 
their choice, and each chose suicide 
in preference to fulfilling more than 
their normal obligations. When he 
realized what he had done, and 
what a tremendous burden would 
now fall on him, he turned the 
weapon on himself." 



86 



IMAGINATION 



THE man paused, wiped away 
the tears and added, "I am 
guilty of six murders," he said dolefully. "And Brown, who is being 
held by the ratcatchers, will naturally make a false confession and 
ask to be put to death at once — 
when he realizes that his wife has 
neither lovers nor another husband. 
It is sad, and if you'll just boil me 
in oil as quickly as possible — " 

"No, no!" the blonde woman 
screamed. "I want to marry you." 

Startled, the man whipped out a 
strange, unearthly weapon, on which 
was inscribed, it was learned on later 
investigation, this legend: S&W. He 
placed the weapon against his temple and a bang resulted. Then he 
toppled over the rail and disappeared. 

"Which end of that weapon did 
he place nearest him?" Zitts demanded as Zoo switched off the machine and the view faded. 

"The tube end," Zoo replied. 

"I knew I was right," Zitt exulted. "Get in touch with the chief 
rat and tell him the case is solved, 
wrapped up. He can release Brown 
and forget it. Also tell him I have 
learned the secret of that weapon. 



I was right all along. Tell him personally to place the muzzle of it 
against his temple and finger that 
little lever underneath. I am sure 
that is the way it is done. Tell him 
to try it at once and let me know 
the results." 

Zitts sighed in satisfaction, 
glanced once more at the lovely 
curves of the blonde woman, and 
pressed the button which set in motion the machinery to ease the 
lounging chair beneath the desk and 
shape it into a couch. 

"Ssh — h!" The Venusian girl 
signaled silence. "After he's been 
in action for a few seconds," she 
whispered, "he always rests for a 
week or so." 

The blonde woman rose quietly 
and marched wavily to the door, 
opened it. Then, with tears of 
thankfulness in her limpid blue eyes, 
and a last worshipping glance at the 
place where Zitts had disappeared, 
she stepped into the corridor and 
went in search of replacements for 
her used up husbands and lovers. 

Pupsie waddled over to a corner 
and curled up to dream of a tyrannasauraplexus bone. 

THE END 



5L Jau, Of WIJtL* 

Tt's been a long, long time since the trial Revolution, they've fallen rather 
* philosopher-economist Malthus pro- into disfavor. But recent events, notpounded his fascinating ideas, and ably the amazing growth of the birthsince the years following the Indus- rate since the end of the Second 



THE LAW OF MALTHUS 



S7 



World War, have again brought him 
into the scientific and popular eye. 

Malthus reasoned originally this 
way: there- is a certain amount of 
food producing capability in the 
world; land, climate and so on governs this. But the population of the 
world {even as it was in his time) is 
steadily increasing. Therefore the 
world can support only a limited number of people. Nature (he said) has 
provided a check on the indiscriminate 
growth of human population. This 
check consists of famine, disease, and 
war! 

You can imagine what a hornet's 
nest was stirred up with this thesis. 
People, religious and lay, flew into a 
rage at the mention of his name. But 
there was a group who agreed with 
him. Regardless of the theory, the 
world kept growing enormously and 
the food supply continued to be 
enough. 

Apparently Malthus was all wrong. 

Well, in light of his limited knowledge, he certainly was. He hadn't envisioned the Industrial Age which 
provided Man with tools and techniques for completely changing his 
agricultural methods, making it possible for a farmer to produce an incredible amount of food. Then transportation changed the face of the 
Earth. All these things combined 
seemed to make a monkey of Malthus. 

And to top it off, it was found that 
as nations became more industrialized, 
they wanted more material things — 
and less children. In Western countries the birth rates dropped or at 
least became static. 

Only India, China, Japan, the Soviet Union seemed to have expanding 
birth rates and in the first two countries famine, and disease seemed to 
take care of that problem. In the latter two, war seemed to help. 



But these were the only places 
where Malthus' ideas seemed to have 
any validity at all and it was expected that as soon as all four countries would become industrialized, 
they too would follow the popular 
trend. 

Science prior to the Second World 
War said that mankind was limiting 
the growth of itself and we need never 
worry about over-populating the 
Earth. In fact, we were approaching 
a static condition. 

But then something went haywire, 
and the statistical observations of recent years seemed to throw things out 
of gear. As the most industrialized 
nation on Earth the U.S. is a good 
place to examine events which to a 
lesser extent are occurring elsewhere. 

Instead of a population which is decreasing, the U.S. is growing with 
fantastic leaps and bounds. Already 
science is wondering whether or not 
Malthusianism may not have had 
something. We have a high birth rate, 
we are a wealthy people, we have limited resources, and above all, we seem 
to have acquired an amazing desire 
to reproduce ourselves. Where will it 
end? 

This time there are no ready explanations. The trends have reversed 
themselves and we are faced with a 
Malthusian situation. How will we 
react to it? For one thing, science is 
keeping mum. It is obvious that the 
Malthusian solution of war, diseaseand famine is out. On the other hand 
we do not have unlimited resources. 
But no one is sticking out his neck to 
make any weird predictions. Errors 
are too common. 

Our own personal opinion, which 
will only be shown by future events, 
is that we'll once again reach a stabilization period and that this momentary flare in rates is just that— temporary. 



DRINK MY RED BLOOD..." 

eion 

people in the neighborhood avoided Jules. 
For he was not like other children; his one fond 
wish in life was to become an immortal— vampire! 



THE people on the block decided definitely that Jules 
was crazy when they heard 
about his composition. 

There had been suspicions for a 
long time. 

He made people shiver with his 
blank stare. His coarse gutteral 
tongue sounded unnatural in his 
frail body. The paleness of his skin 
upset many children. It seemed to 
hang loose around his flesh. He 
hated sunlight. 

And his ideas were a little out 
of place for the people who lived 
on the block. 
Jules wanted to be a vampire. 
People declared it common knowledge that he was born on a night 



when winds uprooted trees. They 
said he was born with three teeth. 
They said he'd used them to fasten 
himself on his mother's breast drawing blood with the milk. 

They said he used to cackle and 
bark in his crib after dark. They 
said he walked at two months and 
sat staring at the moon whenever 
it shone. 

Those were things that people 
said. 

His parents were always worried 
about him. An only child, they noticed his flaws quickly. 

They thought he was blind until 
the doctor told them it was 
just a vacuous stare. He told them 
that Jules, with his large head, 



88 



Illustrated by Raman Raymond 

s 9 



90 



might be a genius or an idiot, 
turned out he was an idiot. 

He never spoke a word until he 
was five. Then, one night coming 
up to supper, he sat down at the 
table and said "Death." 

His parents were torn between 
delight and disgust. They finally 
settled for a place in between the 
two feelings. They decided that 
Jules couldn't have realized what the 
word meant. 

But Jules did. 

From that night on, he built up 
such a large vocabulary that everyone who knew him was astounded. 
<He not only acquired every word 
spoken to him, words from signs, 
magazines, books; he made up his 
own words. 

Like — nightouch. Or — killove. 
They were really several words that 
melted into each other. They said 
things Jules felt but couldn't explain with other words. 

He used to sit on the porch while 
the other children played hopscotch, 
stickball and other games. He sat 
there and stared at the sidewalk 
and made up words. 

Until he was twelve Jules kept 
pretty much out of trouble. 

Of course there was the time 
they found him undressing Olive 
Jones in an alley. And another 
time he was discovered dissecting 
a kitten on his bed. 

But there were many years in 
between. Those scandals were forgotten. 

In general he went through child


IM AGINATION 
It 



hood merely disgusting people. 

He went to school but never 
studied. He spent about two or 
three terms in each grade. The 
•teachers all knew him by his first 
name. In some subjects like reading and writing he was almost brilliant. 

In others he was hopeless. 

/~vNE Saturday when he was 
twelve, Jules went to the movies. He saw "Dracula." 

When the show was over he 
walked, a throbbing nerve mass, 
through the little girl and boy 



He went home and locked himself in the bathroom for two hours. 

His parents pounded on the door 
and threatened but he wouldn't 
come out. 

Finally he unlocked the door and 
sat down at the supper table. He 
had a bandage on his thumb and 
a satisfied look on his face. 

The morning after he went to 
the library. It was Sunday. He sat 
on the steps all day waiting for it 
to open. Finally, he went home. 

The next morning he came back 
instead of going to school. 

He found Dracula on the shelves. 
He couldn't borrow it because he 
wasn't a member and to be a member he had to bring in one of his 
parents. 

So he stuck the book down his 
pants and left the library and never 
brought it back. 

He went to the park and sat down 



' DRINK MY RED BLOOD 

and read the book through. It was 
late evening before he finished. 

He started at the beginning again, 
reading as he ran from street light 
to street light, all the way home. 

He didn't hear a word of the 



and supper. He ate, went in his 
room and read the book to the 
finish. They asked him where he 
got the book. He said he found it. 

As the days passed Jules read 
the story over and over. He never 
went to school. 

Late at night, when he had fallen 
into an exhausted slumber, his 
mother used to take the book into 
the living room and show it to her 
husband. 

One night they noticed that Jules 
had underlined certain sentences 
with dark shaky pencil lines. 

Like: "The lips were crimson 
with fresh blood and the stream 
had trickled over her chin and 
stained the purity of her lawn 
death robe." 

Or: "When the blood began to 
spurt out, he took my hands in one 
of his, holding them tight and, with 
the other seized my neck and 
pressed my mouth to the wound 

When his mother saw this, she 
threw the book down the garbage 
chute. 

In the next morning when Jules 
found the book missing he screamed 
and twisted his mother's arm until 
she told him where the book was. 

Then he ran down to the cellar 



9i 

and dug in the piles of garbage until he found the book. 

Coffee grounds and egg yolk on 
his han-ds and wrists, he went to 
the park and read it again. 

For a month he read the book 
avidly. Then he knew it so well he 
threw it away and just thought 
about it. 

Absence notes were coming from 
school. His mother yelled. Jules decided to go back for a while. 

He wanted to write a composition. 

/~\NE day he wrote it in class. 

When everyone was finished writing, the teacher asked if 
anyone wanted to read their composition to the class. 

Jules raised his hand. 

The teacher was surprised. But 
she felt charity. She wanted to encourage him. She drew in her tiny 
jab of a chin and smiled. 

"All right," she said, "Pay attention children. Jules is going to 
read us his composition. 

Jules stood up. He was excited. 
The paper shook in his hands. 

"My Ambition by .... " 

"Come to the front of the class, 
Jules, dear." 

Jules went to the front of the 
class. The teacher smiled lovingly. 
Jules started again. 

"My Ambition by Jules DracuIa." 

The smile sagged. 
"When I grow up I want to be 
a vampire." 



9 2 



IMAGINATION 



The teacher's smiling lips jerked 
down and out. Her eyes popped 
wide. 

*'I want to live forever and get 
even with everybody and make all 
the girls vampires. I want to smell 
of death." 

"Jules!" 

"I want to have a foul breath 
that stinks of dead earth and 
crypts and sweet coffins." 

The teacher shuddered. Her hands 
twitched on her green blotter. She 
couldn't believe her ears. She looked 
at the children. They were gaping. 
Some of them were giggling. But 
not the girls. 

"I want to be all cold and have 
rotten flesh with stolen blood in 
the veins." 

"That will . . . hrrumph!" 

The teacher cleared her throat 
mightily. 

"That will be all Jules/' she said. 

Jules talked louder and desperately. 

"I want to sink my terrible white 
teeth in my victims' necks. I want 
them to ... " 

"Jules! Go to your seat this 
instant!" 

"I want them to slide like razors 
in the flesh and into the veins," 
read Jules ferociously. 

The teacher jolted to her feet. 
Children were shivering. None of 
them were giggling. 

"Then I want to draw my teeth 
out and let the blood flow easy in 
my mouth and run hot in my throat 
and ..." 



The teacher grabbed his arm. 
Jules tore away and ran to a corner. Barricaded behind a stool he 
yelled: 

"And drip off my tongue and 
run out my lips down my victims' 
throats! I want to drink girls' 
blood!" 

The teacher lunged for him. She 
dragged him out of the corner* 
He clawed at her and screamed all 
the way to the door and the principal's office. 

"That is my ambition! That is 
my ambition! That is my ambition!" 

IT was grim. 
Jules was locked in his room. 
The teacher and the principal sat 
with Jules' parents. They were talking in sepulchral voices. 

They were recounting the scene. 
All along the block parents were 
discussing it. Most of them didn't 
believe it first. They thought their 
children made it up. 

Then they thought what horrible 
children they'd raised if the children 
could make up such things. 
So they believed, it. 
After that everyone watched 
Jules like a hawk. People avoided 
his touch and look. Parents pulled 
their children off the street when 
he approached. Everyone whispered 
tales of him. 

There were more absence notes. 
Jules told his mother he wasn't 
going to school anymore. Nothing 
would change his mind. He never 



"DRINK MY RED BLOOD 



93 



went 

When a truant officer came to 
tie apartment Jules would run over 
the roofs until he was far away 
from there. 

A year wasted by. 

Jules wandered the streets searching for something; he didn't know 
what. He looked in alleys. He looked in garbage cans. He looked in 
lots. He looked on the east side and 
the west side and in the middle. 

He couldn't find what he wanted. 

He rarely slept. He never spoke. 
He stared down all the time. He 
forgot his special words. 

Then. 

/"~\NE day in tie park, Jules 
strolled through the zoo. 

An electric shock passed through 
him when he saw the vampire bat. 

His eyes grew wide and his discolored teeth shone dully in a wide 
smile. 

From that day on, Jules went 
daily to the zoo and looked at the 
bat. He spoke to it and called it 
the Count. He felt in his heart it 
was really a man who had changed. 

A rebirth of culture struck him. 

He stole another book from the 
library. It told all about wild life. 

He found the page on the vampire bat. He tore it out and threw 
the book away. 

He learned the selection by heart. 

He knew how the bat made its 
wound. How it lapped up the blood 
like a kitten drinking cream. How 
it walked on folded wing stalks and 



hind legs like a black furry spider. 
Why it took no nourishment but 
blood. 

Month after month Jules stared 
at the bat and talked to it. It became the one comfort in his life. 
The one symbol of dreams come 
true. 

* * * 

One day Jules noticed that the 
bottom of the wire covering the 
cage had come loose. 

He looked around, his black eyes 
shifting. He didn't see anyone looking. It was a cloudy day. Not many 
people were there. 

Jules tugged at the wire. 

It moved a little. 

Then he saw a man come out of 
the monkey house. So he pulled 
back his hand and strolled away 
whistling a song he had just made 
up. 

Late at night, when he was supposed to be asleep he would walk 
barefoot past his parents' room. He 
would hear his father and mother 
snoring. He would hurry out, put 
on his shoes and run to the zoo. 

Everytime the watchman was not 
around, Jules would tug at the wiring. 

He kept on pulling it loose. 

When he was finished and had to 
run home, he pushed the wire in 
again. Then no one could tell. 

All day Jules would stand in 
front of the cage and look at the 
Count and chuckle and tell him 
he'd soon be free again. 

He told the Count all the things 



94 IMAGINATION 

he knew. He told the Count he was 
going to practice climbing down 
walls head first. 

He told the Count not to worry. 
He'd soon be out. Then, together, 
they could go all around and drink 
girls' blood. 



ONE night Jules pulled the wire 
out and crawled under it into 
the cage. 

It was very dark. 
He crept on his knees to the 
little wooden house. He listened to 
see if he could hear the Count 
squeaking. 

He stuck his arm in the black 
doorway. He kept whispering. 

He jumped when he felt a needle 
jab in his finger. 

With a look of great pleasure on 
his thin face, Jules drew the fluttering hairy bat to him. ' 

He climbed down from the cage 
with it and ran out of the zoo ; 
out of the park. He ran down the 
silent streets. 

It was getting late in the morning. Light touched the dark skies 
with grey. He couldn't go home. 
He had to have a place. 

He went down an alley and climbed over a fence. He held tight to 
the bat. It lapped at the dribble 
of blood from his finger. 

He went across a yard and into 
a little deserted shack. 

It was dark inside and damp. It 
was full of rubble and tin cans and 
soggy cardboard and excrement. 
Jules made sure there was no 



way the bat could escape. 

Then he pulled the door tight 
and put a stick through the metal 
loop. 

He felt his heart beating hard and 
his limbs trembling. He let go of 
the bat. It flew to a dark corner and 
hung on the wood. 

Jules feverishly tore off his shirt. 
His lips shook. He smiled a crazy 
smile. 

He reached down into his pants 
pocket and took out a little pen 
knife he had stolen from his mother. 

He opened it and ran a finger 
over the blade. It sliced through 
the flesh. 

With shaking fingers he jabbed 
at his throat. He hacked. The blood 
ran through his fingers. 

"Count! Count!" he cried in 
frenzied joy, "Drink my red blood! 
Drink me! Drink me!" 

He stumbled over the tin cans 
and slipped and felt for the bat. It 
sprang from the wood and soared 
across the shack and fastened itself 
on the other side. 

Tears ran down Jules' cheeks. 

He gritted his teeth. The blood 
ran across his shoulders and across 
his thin hairless chest. 

TTIS body shook in fever. He 
staggered back toward the 
other side. He tripped and felt his 
side torn open on the sharp edge 
of a tin can. 

His hands went out. They clutched the bat. He placed it against 
his. throat. He sank on his back on 



DRINK MY RED BLOOD . . ." 



the cool wet earth. He sighed. 

He started to moan and clutch 
at his chest. His stomach heaved. 
The black bat on his neck silently 
lapped his blood. 

Jules felt his life seeping away. 

He thought of all the years past. 
The waiting. His parents. School. 
Dracula. Dreams. For this. This 
sudden glory. 

Jules' eyes flickered open. 

The inside of the reeking shack 
swam about him. 

It was hard to breathe. He opened his mouth to gasp in the air. 
He sucked it in. It was foul. It 
made him cough. His skinny body 
lurched on the cold ground. 

Mists crept away in his brain. 

One by one like drawn veils. 

Suddenly his mind was filled with 
terrible clarity. 

He felt the aching pain in his 
side. 

He knew he was lying half naked 
on garbage and letting a flying rat 



drink his blood. 

With a strangled cry, he reached 
up and tore away the furry throbbing bat. He flung it away from 
him. It came back, fanning his face 
with its vibrating wings. 

Jules staggered to his feet. 

He felt for the door. He could 
hardly see. He tried to stop his 
throat from bleeding so. 

He managed to get the door open. 

Then, lurching into the dark 
yard, he fell on his face in the long 
grass blades. 

He tried to call out for help. 

But no sounds save a bubbling 
mockery of words came from his 
lips. 

He heard the fluttering wings. 

Then, suddenly they were gone. 

Strong fingers lifted him gently. 
Through dying eyes Jules saw the 
tall dark man whose eyes shone 
like rubies. 

"My son," the man said. 
. . THE END . . 



WATCH FOR: 

THE MARTIANS AM* THE COYS 

By MACK REYNOLDS 

* * ★ 

MASTER RACE by richard ashby 

* * * 

THEY REACHED EOR THE MOON 

By WILLIAM OBERFTELD 

* * * 

Plus many other great stories ol science & fantasy by top name 
writers— and talented new authors. You'll find them all in me 
pages oi IMAGINATION. Watch for the June issue, on sale May 1st 



9 8 



IMAGINATION 



swooped in their golden vessel with 
a crimson trim along its sides and 
its number writ large upon its pointed prow. Thunder poured from its 
tail in rhythmic bursts of sound so 
violent that leaves quivered on trees 
for miles around and birds were 
shocked to silence. 

With aggressive self-assurance 
they dumped the ship on a grassy 
flat and scrambled out while yet 
the noise of their arrival continued 
to echo and re-echo over hills and 
dales. They made a tough, spacehardened group outside the main 
port, greeting fresh air and solid 
earth with the grim satisfaction of 
those who have been without either 
for far too long. 

Reed Wingrove, the astrogator, 
said gleefully, "Gee whiz! What a 
sweet little lump of plasma. They 
should make us space-commodores 
for discovering this one." He was 
young, tall, fresh-featured and nursed the hope that he might be suitable material for big brass. 

"More likely they'll toss us in 
the clink," thought Jacques Drouillard, his black eyes taking in the 
surrounding scene. "We've overshot 
official limits by a slice of a lifetime. We had no right to come so 
far. They'll have written us off for 
dead by the time we get back." 

"Or as deserters," suggested Bill 
Maguire. 

"I take all responsibility for 
where we go or do not go," reminded Captain Walter Searle. A big, 



time with his thoughts. 

"Jacques can hear the awful 
sound of the years rushing past/' 
Bill Maguire explained. There was 
a good-natured grin on his freckled 
Irish pan as he eyed the contrastingly swarthy Drouillard. "He never forgets that time and fair ladies 
wait for no doddering space-jerk." 

"Maybe he's got something there," 
put in Reed Wingrove sobering a 
lot. He pointed southward. "There's 
uranium under those hills. The 
frenzied way the counters clicked 
as we shot over them suggests that 
they're solid with the stuff. It might 
'be the strike of the century, right 
where it's most needed, just beyond the exploratory rim. It's to be 
had for the taking, no price asked." 
He looked them over, added, "That 
is to say, no price other than the 
best years of our lives." 

TV TAGUIRE met him eye for eye 
and said, "We've been shaken up together in a hot and noisy 
bottle for months and months and 
months. We're due for an equally 
long dose of the same medicine before we get back. Isn't that all the 
more reason for being happy now?" 
Smoothing his red hair, he sniffed 
appreciatively at the atmosphere, 
worked his boots around in the long, 
soft grass. "C'mon, let's get rid of 
the space-heebies and enjoy life between the spells of misery." 

"What makes you think you suffer?" asked Captain Searle, look


slow-speaking man, he spent much ing at each in turn. "You signed on 



AFTERNOON OF A FAHN 



99 



for ten years, with your eyes wide 
open." 

"I got kidded by all that stuff 
about celestial Callisto," grumbled 
Drouillard. "Thought I'd get about 
twenty jaunts there and back. I 
didn't 'bargain for spending most 
of my term on one long trip. Sixty 
months to get here, sixty to return, 
plus the twelve we'll have to stay 
put while waiting for favorable planetary setups. That makes six years 
at one go. Six years is a heck of a 
long time." He rubbed his blue 
chin, making rasping sounds. "Too 
much to give for a hunk of uranium, large or small." 

"// we can give it," said Maguire. "It may belong to somebody 
else who doesn't want to sell." He 
gestured to one side, added, "I'm 
inclined to think so because here 
comes somebody else!" 

Leaning against the rim of a warm 
propulsion tube, he eased his gun 
in its holster, chewed a juicy stem 
of grass, and watched the newcomer's approach. 

The others reacted similarly, 
holding themselves prepared, but 
not alarmed. There was nothing 
frightening about the appearance of 
this world's highest life-form. Besides, they had complete confidence 
in their own power, an assurance 
born of human settlement of many 
scores of worlds, some hostile, some 
merely eerie. And, of course, they 
were blissfully unaware of the trap. 

'T'HE arrival was a half-pint hu* manoid, a fact that surprised 



them not at all. Grabbing the cosmos brings a sudden surfeit of surprises, after which one loses the 
capacity for amazement. One learns 
to expect anything, even a midget 
mock-up of oneself, and remains 
phlegmatic. So no eyebrows were 
lifted as this world's first representative came near. 

He got right up to them, displaying no fear, but examining them 
with a certain childish naivete. 
Small, no more than three feet in 
height, he had perky, birdlike features and sharp, quickly darting 
eyes. A cone-shaped felt hat of vivid crimson sat on his head and was 
pulled so far down that it made 
his pointed ears stick out. His 
clothes were an equally vivid green 
with silver trimmings. His long, narrow, green shoes bore silver buttons. 
His only weapon was a gnarly stick 
upon which he leaned while he 
surveyed them with brilliant and 
beady optics. 

"They're tiny," murmured Wingrove to the others. "We could have 
guessed it from that toy-town we 
spotted just before we dived." Offering the dwarf an ingratiating 
smile, he pointed to himself and 
said, "Reed Wingrove." 

Giving him a quick, piercing 
glance, the other made no response. 
They broke the embarrassing silence by introducing themselves one 
by one. Motionless except for his 
continually shifting orbs, the dwarf 
leaned on his stick and ruminated. 

After a while he said, "Rifkin," 



IOO 



IMAGINATION 



in a small, reedy voice. 

"He can speak, anyway/' commented Drouillard. "That is something! We won't have to go double-jointed trying to make signtalk. It's mighty tiring playing 
snake-arms. Now we can learn his 
language or teach him ours." 

"I fail to see," said Rifkin, in 
perfect English, "why that should 
be necessary." 

The effect was electric. Spaceborn phlegmaticism got thrown to 
the winds. Drouillard jumped a 
foot. Captain Searle pulled his gun, 
shoved it back, scowled around in 
search of the suspected ventriloquist. Maguire hastily unleaned 
from the propulsion tube, carelessly 
braced himself on the hotter part, 
farther back, burned his hand and 
yelped with pain. 

Taking a firm grip on himself, 
Wingrove asked, "You understand 
our mode of talk?" 

"Of course," said Rifkin, with 
disarming casualness. He used his 
gnarly stick to behead something 
like a daisy, 

"Plow the deuce — ?" began Captain Searle, still watching the others for suspicious mouth-movements.
TGNORING his commander, Win-* grove went determinedly on. "Is 
English spoken here?" 

"How silly!" remarked Rifkin. 

There didn't seem to be a satisfactory retort to that one. It was 
too obvious for adverse comment. 
In fact "silly" was an understate


ment—it was downright ridiculous. 

Wingrove sought around for another angle, said, "Then how do 
you know it?" 

"I can fahn it," informed Rifkin, 
much as one would mention the 
obvious to a child. "Surely you 
know that? How can people communicate if they cannot fahn one 
another's speech-patterns?" 

"Morbleauf" Drouillard ejaculated. He stared around suspiciously, 
in unconscious imitation of Searle. 
"A chaque saint sa chandelle!" 

"Si chacun tire de son cote!" 
agreed Rifkin with devastating impartiality. 

Drouillard pulled out lumps of 
hair, then squatted on his heels and 
began to eat grass. He appeared to 
be working off something in the 
way of feelings. With mounting irritation, Captain Searle watched him 
for a while, then couldn't stand it 
any longer. 

"Stop . . . doing . . . THAT!" he 
bawled, with pauses for emphasis. 
He nudged the other with a heavy 
boot. As Drouillard came erect, 
Searle demanded, "Now, what was 
all that double-talk you just pulled?" 

"French," said Drouillard dreamily. "They speak it where I come 
from, in Canada." He bleared at 
the dwarf. "And he knows it!" 

"How can I possibly know it?" 
Rifkin contradicted. One cannot 
know what has never been learned!" 
He made a sniff of disgust. "I fahned it." 



AFTERNOON OF A FAHN 



IOI 



"111 take you up on that," Searle 
snapped back at him. Ci How do you 
jakn it?" 

"There is a prize question," decided Rifkin, twitching his pointed 
ears. "A veritable conundrum because if you do not know the answer, it is evident that you cannot fahn a speech-pattern yourselves." 

"Would I ask, if I could?" inquired Searle. 

"And if you cannot do it yourself," Rifkin went on, "there is no 
way in which I can explain it to 
you." His piercing little eyes met 
Searle's. "Could you make an earless stone appreciate your playing 
on a flute?" 

"No," "Searle admitted. 

"Well, then, there you are!" Rifkin leaned his slight weight on his 
crooked stick. "I doubt whether 
Mab herself could explain it. Or 
Morgaine either, for that matter. 
You have asked me the impossible." 

"Let's leave it at that and consider ourselves lucky," Wingrove 
suggested to the dissatisfied Searle. 
"Here we are, landed undamaged, 
and in communication with the inhabitants, all within one hour. I bet 
we've busted a record." 

"Leave this to me/' Searle ordered. He turned to Rifkin. "We are 
anxious to learn as much as possible 
about this world of yours and — " 

"Why?" asked Rifkin. 

Was there shrewd understanding 
in those sharp little eyes? A sparkle 
of cynicism, a depth of guile? No 



way of telling. 

OEARLE went patiently on, "Mut^ ual understanding is the basis of friendship which is essential 
if we are to maintain contact to 
our common profit." He waited for 
an effect that did not prove visible. ■"Now if one of my men could 
pay a courtesy call to your nearest town — " 

"He will be quite welcome," assured Rifkin. As an afterthought, 
he added, "In Ballygullion." 

"Where?" screamed Maguire, his 
red hair standing up like a brush. 

"Ballygullion," repeated Rifkin. 

"What's wrong with that?" demanded Searle, staring hard at Maguire. 

Pop-eyed, Maguire said, "Jeepers, that's where I was born!" 

"Natch!" observed Rifkin, airily 
treating the incomprehensible as obvious. 

Bunching his hands until the 
knuckles were white, Searle said to 
Rifkin, "Why the natch? How 
can he have been born here? This 
planet was completely unknown to 
us before our arrival." He let a 
puzzled and wary gaze run over 
the general scene. "There is something decidedly off-the-orbit about 
this place." 

"The town has any name one 
cares to give it," Rifkin explained, 
again in the manner of tutoring a 
kindergarten. "Some call it this, 
some call it that. It can have one 
name today, another name tomor


102 



IMAGINATION 



row. I can recall a rare occasion 
when three persons referred to it 
by the same name for a whole week, 
they being lazy-minded." 

"Pinch me awake," Drouillard requested, offering an arm to Wingrove. 

"What does it matter?" Rifkin 
asked. "One can easily jahn the 
name given to it by any person at 
any moment." 

"So now, being Wednesday, it is 
Ballygullion?" Maguire asked weakly
"If you like the name. You ought 
to like it. I jahned it when I looked 
at you and knew it should please 
you." 

"That settles it," snapped Searle. 
He gave Maguire the cold, authoritative eye. "Somebody's got to stick 
out his neck and get us the dirt. 
Who could be better than a native 
by birth? I accept your offer to 
go." 

"Who?" said Maguire, dazed. 
"Me?" 

They all chorused, "You!" 
Rifkin's eyes glittered as he took 
him away. 

TT was ten days before Bill Ma* guire returned to find the crew 
preparing themselves for action. 
Struggling in through the main port, 
he breathed heavily, stared down at 
the ladder up which he had climbed. 

"Who's been stretching the 
stairs?" 

Putting down the gun which he 
had just oiled, Captain Searle glow


ered at him. "You're in tie nick 
of time. We were about to set out 
and pull that midget burg apart until we found either you or your 
body." 

"Didn't know I was so much 
appreciated," said Maguire. 

"One man is a quarter of my 
crew," Searle went on, remaining 
severe. "I don't lose a man without making someone pay. What 
the heck detained you?" 

"Wine, women and song," informed Maguire, blissfully. 

"Huh?" Reed Wingrove dropped 
what he was doing. 

"Eh?' Drouillard stood up, snapped his fingers. He had the expression of one who wasn't there when 
the manna fell. 

"Sit down!" rapped Searle. He 
returned his attention to the impenitent prodigal. His voice was 
slightly acid. "I don't suppose the 
real purpose of our mission ever 
crossed your mind?" 

"Not while I could help it," Maguire agreed, displaying complete 
lack of shame. "Who'd bother about 
new frontiers, territorial developments or mineral deposits while 
roaming around with Mab?" Pursing his lips, he gave a low, ecstatic whistle. "She is tall, dark-eyed, 
sylphlike and gives me fizzy feelings all over. She makes me want 
to bury myself here for keeps." 

"What have they been pouring 
down your neck?" inquired Captain 
Searle, studying him closely. 

"Stuff called mead. It's made 



AFTERNOON OF A FAHN 



with honey, herbs and dew fresh off 
the grass. It's the most wonderful 

"There can't be honey without 
bees," Wingrove chipped in. "Are 
you trying to kid us there are bees 
here too, same as on Earth?" 

"Millions of them," declared Maguire. "Herds and herds of them. 
Big, fat, busy ones, all as tame as 
farmhouse cats. The local folk talk 
to them and the bees talk back. 
They can jahn each other, see?" 

<4T don't see," said Searle, mo* tioning Wingrove into silence, 
"Neither do I care." His gaze was 
still penetrating as he kept it on 
Maguire. "Who is this Mab who 
has watered down the goo you use 
for brains?" 

"One of Rifkin's twin daughters." 
Plainly, Maguire was too bemused 
to take umbrage. "The best of two 
pips. The other one is Peg, and 
she's something too! If it weren't 
for my civilized upbringing I 
could—" 

"Oh, no, you couldn't. One is 
too much for you, let alone two." 
Searle scowled at the metal bulkhead and muttered to nobody in 
particular. "Looks like we blundered 
when we picked this red-headed romantic. Now what?" 

"Let me go," suggested Drouillard, eagerly. His dark eyes were 
aflame with the zeal of a man offered a grab at lost opportunities. 

Maguire bridled at him. "Lay off, 
Casanova. You're not taking the 



girls back home." Defiantly, he 
leaned on the rim of a desk, then 
frowned in puzzlement and bent over 
to scan the floor. "Who's been raising the furniture? Couldn't you find 
anything better to do?" 

"Nobody's touched that desk," 
Wingrove told him. "It seems bigger because you are shorter. I noticed you looked slightly trimmeddown the moment you came back. 
Reckon you've worn two inches off 
your heels in hot pursuit of everything but what you came here for." 

"Nothing wrong with my heels," 
denied Maguire, raising a leg to 
examine his boot. "This desk has 
been upped an inch or two." 

"Sober yourself," Wingrove retorted. "You overdid the mead-stuff. 
You didn't have to be greedy." 

Searle chipped in with impatience. 
"Quit arguing." He regarded Maguire with authoritative disapproval. 
"What was that you said about taking these females back?" 

"They came along with me, just 
for the jaunt. I left them outside. 
Told them I wouldn't be long." 

"Holy smoke!" Drouillard made 
for the lock, moving fast to beat 
the others and get out before Searle 
could think up a contrary command. 

They heard him scramble hurriedly down the ladder. There came 
a brief chatter during which his 
deep tones underlay a pair of tinkling voices like little bells. More 
ladder noises. Drouillard reappeared, conducting his visitors with un


104 



IMAGINATION 



warranted proprietorship. 

"Here they are, Cap." He had 
the excitement of one suddenly endowed with a new interest in life. 

QEARLE looked them over slow^ ly, methodically and with much 

of the suspicion of an elephant testing a pitfall. They were a pair of 
ash-blondes, curvaceous, tiny, and 
as alike as mirror-images of each 
other. He estimated their height as 
no more than thirty inches. Both 
wore crimson caps and bright green 
clothes trimmed with silver. Holding hands as they posed side by 
side, they regarded him with tiptilted eyes, large, blue and guileless. There was a peculiar quality 
about those eyes and he had to 
think a while before* he found a 
word to describe it: elfin. 

"Which is Mab?" he inquired. 

"Me." The one on the left dimpled at him. 

Leaning back in his chair, Scarle 
sighed and said to Maguire, "So 
she is tall and dark-eyed?" 

"Well, isn't she?" Maguire pointed at the evidence, indicating the 
incontrovertible. 

They all had another look at 
Mab, a long, careful look. Manifestly she was blue-eyed and very 
small. Her dimples deepened. 

After a while, Searle uttered an 
emphatic, "No!" 

"All right," said Maguire. "Either you're blind or I'm nuts." 

Mab laughed in tiny tinkling 
tones. 



. "He's nuts," opined Drouillard. 
"Space-happy and gone to seed." 
His own gaze nailed itself firmly on 
Peg. "But I don't blame him. I 
could go a bit nuts myself for that 
green-eyed one with the long chestnut locks." His gaze grew bold and 
ardent. "She resembles my dream 
girl." 

Nudging him, Reed Wingrove 
asked, "Which one with the long 
chestnut locks?" 

"Use your peepers," invited 
Drouillard, continuing to devour the 
object of hie attention. 

"I'm using mine," interjected Maguire. "Peg is a blue-eyed blonde.' 1 

"G ; wan," Drouillard scoffed. ''You 
can't look straight even at your 
own choice." 

pAFTAIN Searle breathed deeply. reclaimed his gun, hefted 
it in his hand to feel its weight and 
balance. When he spoke it was with 
the ponderous deliberation of one 
whose mind is made up. 

"Reed, show those two girls the 
way out. Close the lock behind them 
and keep it closed." The gun came 
up as Maguire and Drouillard tensed. "Not you two goofies. Neither 
of you. You're staying put. That's 
an order!". As Maguire backed 
away from him and got nearer to 
the lock, he added in tight tones, 
"Be careful, Bill. So help me, if you 
don't obey I'll let you have it!" 

"But you cannot," contradicted 
Mab in her small, chiming voice. 
"I have jahned that in the last re


AFTERNOON OF A FAHN 



jort you could not bring yourself 
to do it." 

Still holding Peg's midget hand, 
s he exited through the lock, drifting out light-footed, with short, 
dainty steps. Maguire followed, like 
a sleepwalker. So did Drouillard. 

Silently, introspectively, Reed 
Wingrove closed the lock behind 
them. He returned to his place, his 
tread clanging loudly through the 
ship's plates. There was a faint, 
sweet scent in the air, an odor of 
femininity, beckoning, inviting. Captain Searle had not moved. He was 
sitting at the table, his unused weapon still in his grip, while his eyes 
stared bleakly at the wall. 

The minutes crawled by until 
Wingrove said, "Did you notice that 
curious design upon their silver buttons? It was on Rifkin's, too. Like 
four hearts arranged in a circle with 
their points brought together. It 
looked sort of familiar to me, but 
I'm darned if I can place it." 

Searle made no reply. He continued to look blankly at the wall 
while his mind mulled over the situation. 

npHREE weeks crawled by with 
**- no sign of the absentees. Wingrove returned from one of the short 
walks which had become his habit 
of late, sat himself on the grass beside the grimly brooding Searle, and 
enjoyed the cool of the ship's shadow. 

"How about letting me visit the 
town, Captain? I might find some


thing." 
"No." 

"Why not go yourself, then?" 
"No." 

"Oh, well." Wingrove lay back, 
shaded his eyes as he studied the 
bright sky. "Still stewing the problem?" 

"Yes." Searle chewed at his bottom lip. "I have examined it from 
every conceivable angle and it always gets me the same place — here, 
for keeps. We can handle the ship 
with its official minimum of four 
men, at a pinch, we might be able to 
manage with three. We can't take it 
home with two — it's impossible." 

"Yes, I know," 

"So we're stuck with this planet 
until one or both of those moonstruck loons sees fit to return." 

"We could be pinned down someplace worse," ventured Wingrove, 
indicating the azure sky, the lush 
landscape. "The longer I'm here the 
more homey it looks." Twisting on 
one side, he plucked a flower, held 
it out for tie other's inspection. 
"Look — a bluebonnet." 

"What of it?" Searle gave it no 
more than a cursory glance. 

"There are bluebonnets way back 
on Earth." 

"Don't remind me," said Searle, 
ruefully. 

"And there are daisies and buttercups and wild mint. I found them 
all while mooching around the 
hills." He gave a short, peculiar 
laugh. "Fancy a hardened spacejerk taking an interest in daisies 



06 



IMAGINATION 



and (buttercups. Shows how you get 
after too much of it." 

"Too much of what?" asked 
Searle, frowning at him. 

"There was a bird trilling at me 
by the waterfall," mused Wingrove, 
ignoring the question. "It had a 
wonderful song. I found it after a 
while. It was a bulbul, a thing like 
a thrush. They're on Earth too, in 
Persia, I think. Queer, isn't it?" 

"Similar conditions might produce similar effects, similar results." 

"Maybe," Wingrove conceded. 
"But I've a feeling that's not the 
whole story. The similarities are too 
numerous. Somewhere there's another and better explanation of so 
many coincidences." He pondered 
awhile, gnawing a grass-stem, then 
went on, "I noticed that four-heart 
sign again today, inscribed in various places, on walls and trees and 
rocks. Reckon it's some sort of tribal totem. Every time I see it I 
know it's familiar — but can't place 
it. Wish I could remember." 

"You didn't go anywhere near 
the town?" 

"No, Cap. I kept away, like you 
said." 

"Didn't meet anyone, either?" 

"That four-heart thing is a puzzle," said Wingrove, biting the 
stem. "It's got me worried." 

"You didn't meet anyone?" Searle 
persisted. 

"Dozens of times I've seen those 
four hearts on Earth, but can't pull 
•ut of my mind exactly—" 



QEARLE stood up, legs braced 
" apart, and looked at him from 
beneath heavy brows. "Come on, out 
with it! Let's have no more evasions. You've loped off morning and 
afternoon for more than a week. 
You've gone with a gleam in your 
eyes and come back like a zombie. 
Who are you meeting?" 

"Melusine," Wingrove said reluctantly. He sat up, threw away the 
grass stalk. 

"Ah!" Searle screwed his right 
fist into the palm of his left hand. 
"Another of these midget charmers?" 

"She's charming, but no midget." 

"That's what you think!" said 
Searle, bitterly. He paced to and 
fro. "All this, after I'd warned you. 
I've told you time and time again 
of the powers they possess, powers 
we haven't got and don't properly 
understand." 

Wingrove said nothing. 

Ceasing his restless parading, 
Searle faced him and went on, "You 
know quite well what this Melusine 
is doing to you. She is extracting 
a pictured ideal from your innermost 
mind, focussing it upon herself, fooling your senses, making herself appear the solid, fleshy creation of 
your own dreams and desires. It's a 
combination of telepathy and hypnotism, or something akin to both. 
It's a psychological weapon, a redoubtable one, a formidable one, because it exploits the weakest chiDk 
in anyone's armor. It persuades a 
man to make a fool of himself for 



AFTERNOON 

the only reason he is willing to become a fool. It is damnable!" 

"It is wonderful," said Wingrove, 
eyeing the sky. 

"Are you going to desert me, like 
the others?" 

"Not yet." Wingrove came erect. 
He picked up the bluebonnet, twiddled it idly between his fingers. "I'm 
■being pulled two ways. Maybe I'm 
more stubborn than Bill and Jacques, 
or better disciplined, or less susceptible. Or maybe Melusine is slower, 
more gentle, and in no hurry to 
take me." His eyes met Searle's for 
the briefest moment. "I don't think 
she would like you to be left all 
alone." 

"That's mighty white of her," 
said Searle sarcastically. "Especially since she's no guarantee that 
sooner or later I might not devise 
a way of boosting off by myself." 

"You could never do that." 

"I know it, and so do you. But 
she doesn't. These folk want to let 
their world travel incognito by shutting the traps of everyone who finds 
it. They've a neat play. No bombs, 
no bullets, no bloodshed. All they 
need do is offer a guy his heart's 
desire — and shut him up by pressure of a woman's lips." 

"Ah!" sighed Wingrove. "What a 
beautiful fate." 

<tTT'S not funny," snapped 
Searle, openly irritated. "It's 
serious. It's effective sabotage of 
Earth's plans. You know what is 
happening and why it is happening. 



OF A FAHN 107 

You know you are being grossly 
deceived — and yet this Melusine still 
appeals to you?" 
"And how!" 

"Knowing all the time that she 
is not exactly as you see her? That 
what you do see is reflected cunningly from the depths of your own 
mind?" 

"It makes no difference, i can 
only go by how she looks. There's 
no other basis for judgment. She 
looks to me like the epitome of all 
I've ever wanted, even in her most 
insignificant habits, her smallest 
gestures and mannerisms. She couldn't suit me better if specially made 
to my specification." 

"You dumb monkey!" said Searle. 
"She is specially made to your specification." 

"I know." Unexpectedly, Wingrove hit back. "Could you want 
anything better than what you want 
the most?" 

''Leave me out of this," Searle 
countered. "You're the lovesick 
gump, not me." He resumed his pacing. "By hokey, they are even 
stronger than I'd thought, cleverer, 
more cunning, more expert." 

"You don't know the half of it," 
Wingrove assured. "You should try 
a taste for yourself. Melusine has a 
friend named Nivetta whom she 
could bring along to meet you 
and — " 

"So that's why she's been slow 
and gentle," rasped Searle. "That's 
why she's let you stick around a 
bit. She wants both birds! Not just 



ioS 



IMAGINATION 



you, but you and me! She'll be 
content when there's nothing here 
but an empty ship, rotting like a 
skeleton under the sun." 

'■'Oh, I don't know, Cap. We're 
planted for twelve months anyway. 
After a while, persuasion might work 
the other way and we can take 
them—" 

"You'll never get them back to 
Earth," declared Searle, positively. , 
"Nor see it yourself, either. Not 
ever again." He went closer, speaking earnestly. "Look, Reed, we've 
found a bonanza loaded with uranium. Discovering such items is our 
job for which we are equipped and 
paid. Reporting such a discovery 
to Earth is our bounden duty. If 
we fail, if we lose ourselves and 
never turn up, it may be anything 
from fifty to five hundred years 
before another Earth ship rediscovers the place-. You realize all 
that?" 

"You bet I do." 

"Then you will also realize that 
since these half-pints can jahn our 
speech-patterns — whatever that may 
mean — and discern our mind-pictures, they can also detect our purposes, our motives. If they don't 
approve of them, as well they may 
not, their best move is to destroy 
us or, at least, prevent our return. 
A ship is of no use without its 
crew. They have only to take away 
the crew — and the ship becomes a 
lump of junk corroding somewhere 
in the cosmos. It rots away and 
Earth's schemes go with it." 



"Better for the ship to rot rather 
than its crew," contributed a voice. 

Searle whirled around on one heel. 

It was Maguire, red - capped, 
green-clothed and slightly over four 
feet high. 

THERE were a dozen shorties 
with Maguire, some male, some 



female. Searle recognized Rifkin 
standing at one side of the group, 
also Mab clinging possessively to 
Maguire's arm. The entire bunch 
now came almost up to Maguire's 
shoulders instead of a little above 
his waist as formerly. 

Two liquid-eyed creatures on the ] 
left went toward Wingrove, moving ! 
with the sprightly grace of ballet 
dancers. One put her tiny hand in • 
his huge paw. 

"Melusine," said Wingrove, looking at Searle. 

Searle took no notice. Edging 
closer to the ship's airlock, he spoke 
to Maguire. "You've shrunk. You're 
still shrinking. You're going down 
into your boots." 

"I know it," said Maguire. "This : 
world does things to you if you 
aren't shielded by metal most of 
the time." He shrugged his indifference. "Do I care? I do not! I'm 
being reduced to proper size instead 
of staying big and ugly. So is Jacques. 
So is Reed, So are you as long as 
you hang around outside the ship." 

Putting a careful foot on the bottom rung of the ladder, Searle readied himself for a quick move. 
"I'm having fun while I'm young 



AFTERNOON OF A FAHN 



109 



enough to enjoy it," Maguire went 
on. "It's doing me good and it's 
doing nobody else any harm, so I'm 
going to keep on having it. Just 
for a start I've become engaged to 
Mab." 

"Congratulations," said Searle, 
sardonically. His mind busied itself 
with the question of whether he 
could take Maguire in one swift 
snatch, toss him headlong through 
the lock and into the ship. Also 
whether be could trust Wingrove 
to follow of his own accord. Three 
would be enough to get the boat 
home. The missing Drouillard could 
e dug up by some later vessel and 
rogmarched out of the mess. His 
big hand tightened on an upper 
rung. 

"He schemes to grab you!" warned Rifkin. 

Maguire grinned and asked Searle, 
"What's the use of plotting when 
they can fakn you all the time?" 

Relaxing his grip, Searle growled, 
"What have you come for?" He 
kept his attention on Maguire, 
avoided looking at the others. 

"Jacques has got engaged too. 
So we're having a celebration. Having celebrations is a frequent amusement here. We want you along." 

"Why?" 

"Why not? No sense in you 
squatting in the ship holding communion with yourself while everyone else is swimming in joy. What 
good will that do you? Come on, 
Cap, we want you along, so how 
about—?" 



*'I want you two along," Searle 
interjected. "And you'd better come 
fast. I can still be persuaded not 
to make entries in the log that'll 
cause both of you to be shot out 
of the service— 4)ut my patience is 
running dry." 

"Now there's a real threat," Maguire scoffed. "I can be drummed 
out of the ranks. The mere thought 
of it grieves me. It will grieve 
Jacques as much — or as little. He's 
planning to marry Peg and run a 
little joint called Cookery Nook. 
We're going to eat fresh food instead of powdered proteins and vitamin pills. We're going to drink 
mead instead of distilled water. 
We're going to sing songs and forget all about scout vessel 87D." 
His eyes slid sidewise at Wingrove. 
"So will Reed before long, if he 
knows what's good for him." The 
eyes returned to Searle. "Give up 
the fight, Cap, and be a willing 
loser." 

"You can go to blue blazes!" declared Searle. 

A dozen pair of sharp, shiny little eyes went over him before they 
took him at his word and went 
away. Sitting on the bottom rung 
of the ladder, elbows on knees, his 
head between his hands, he stared 
fixedly at the grass between his feet 
and the fading bluebonnet to one 
side. 

Maguire went, and Mab, and Rifkin and the rest. He knew that 
Wingrove also had gone, with Melusine and her companion. He was 



no 



IMAGINATION 



alone, terribly alone. With the useless bulk of 87D behind him, he 
sat there brooding, unmoving, a 
long, long time. 

TIE spent the next twenty-two 
*■ A days in his own company with 
his dessicated foods, his distilled water and utter silence. He spent most 
of this time entering the ship's log, 
mooching around a small radius, 
meditating bitterly, and playing with 
a friendly bronze beetle that could 
neither hear nor speak. 

By the twenty-second day he was 
fed up. He sat in precisely the same 
position as they had left him many 
days before, on the bottom rung 
of the ladder, elbows on knees, head 
between hands. Even the beetle had 
gone on some mysterious errand of 
its own. 

A slight rustling in the grass. His 
eyes raised a fraction, saw pointed 
green shoes with silver buttons. 
They were tiny and dainty. 

"Beat it!" His voice was hoarse. 

"Look at me." 

"Go away!" 

"Look at me." Her tones did not 
have the 'bell-like tinkling quality 
of the other's voices. She spoke 
softly and tenderly, in a way he 
had heard before. 

"Go away, I tell you." 

"You are not afraid of me . . . 
Walter?" 

He shivered as memories flooded 
upon him. Unwillingly, reluctantly, 
his eyes came up. His vision became 
fixed on her tiny figure, her tiny, 



bright-eyed face, and saw neither 
as they really were. He saw a honeyblonde, brown-eyed, with full, generous lips. He arose slowly, his gaze 
still locked upon hers. Perspiration 
was shining on his forehead. His 
hands were bunched as he held 
them close at his sides. 

"Betty died in a Moon-ship crash. 
I knew you would look like her 
. . . exactly like her . . . you witch!" 
He swallowed hard, trying to let 
his brain retain command over his 
eyes. It was not easy. "But I know 
you are not Betty. You cannot be." 

"Of course you know." She moved nearer, slim-thighed, slim-hippe 
even her walk characteristic of tk: 
walk he once had known. "I am, 
Nivetta — today. But tomorrow my 
name can be another." Her hand 
went up to tuck a dark gold curl 
behind her ear, an old familiar gesture that did, things to him "If I am 
the picture you retain, the memory 
you treasure, am I not indeed both 
the memory and the picture? For always? Am I not . . . Betty?" 

TTE put his hand over his eyes to 
*~ shut out the sight of her. But j 
then her scent reached him, thei 
scent he knew. His words came out ] 
in a flood. 

"I did not tell Wingrove. I hoped \ 
he would discover it for himself and j 
thus confirm my own ideas. I wan- \ 
dered around a little while he was ! 
going on his own walks, and one day } 
I found a dolmen, a great stone \ 
fairy-table. The four hearts en- \ 

\ 



AFTERNOON OF A FAHN 



graved upon it still showed a stalk 
from their center. I could see at a 
glance that it was a four-leafed 
clover." 

Her odor was strong now, and 
close to him. He was talking like 
a man fighting for time. 

"Then I remembered that Malb 
and Peg are favored names among 
your kind, and that Morgaine was 
better known as Morgan le Fay. I 
remembered it is legendary among 
us that in the far-off, almost forgotten times your people went away 
because they were resented, not 
wanted. They went away, taking 
with them the seeds of their herbs, 
fruits and flowers, their incomprehensible arts, their misunderstood 
sciences which many still call magic. They went in some strange 
manner of their own, looking for 
another friendlier world resembling 
the one they knew of old, seeking 
the rainbow's end." 

She did not speak as he finished, 
but there was a butterfly touch upon 
his hairy hand. Her forefinger linked with his thumb. It was an entirely personal gesture which only 
he and she had known. It was, it 
must be — Betty! 

A rush of nostalgic feeling overcame him. He gave himself up to it 
because surrender was easier than 
resistance and more satisfying. His 
loneliness finished, his solitude ended, he looked straight into her eyes 
and saw only the eyes so well remembered. 

Together they walked through the 



III 

fields and the flowers, away from 
the ship, away from that far distant world of forgotten things. 

* * * 

'ABOUT the self-confidence and 
** bumptiousness of the four-man 
crew of scout vessel 114K there 
could be no doubt at all. Tumbling 
hurriedly out of the lock, they sniffed the fresh air, patted the good 
earth, celebrated their successful 
landing with raucous shouts and 
some horseplay. 

Two of them found a crumbling 
pile of metal, vaguely cylindrical in 
outline, a few hundred yards to the 
north. They investigated it with no 
more than perfunctory interest, 
kicked some of its shapeless, powdery pieces, went leap-frogging back 
to their ship. 

"Man, are we lucky!" exulted 
Gustav Berners, a big Swede, speaking to Captain James Hayward. He 
chuckled deep down in his chest as 
he watched the other two members of 
the crew indulging in an impromptu 
wrestling match. "When that space 
storm tossed us umpteen months beyond the limits of exploration, I 
thought we were goners. Who'd have 
guessed we'd fall right into the lap 
of a world like this? Just like home. 
I feel at home already." 

"Home," echoed Hayward. "The 
sweetest word in any space-jerk's 
life." 

"Enough uranium to last a million years," Berners went on. "Com


112 



IMAGINATION 



ing over that hill the counters jiggled like we were already worth a 
million credits apiece. And it's to 
be had for the taking. No "bullheaded aborigines to fight for it." 

Hay ward said, "Don't go by first 
appearances." 

"Here's a first appearance," announced one of the wrestling pair, 
ceasing to maul his buddy. 

Excitedly they clustered around 
the gnome-like figure which had 
come upon the scene, taking in his 
human shape, tiny stature, crimson 
cap, green clothes and silver trimmings. 

"They're small," commented Hayward. "Semi-civilized pygmies. I 
guessed as much from that toytown we glimpsed just before we 
made our bump.'' Offering the gnome 
a cordial smile, he pointed to himself and said, "James Hayward." 

(~i IVING him a quick, darting 
glance, the other made no 
reply. They filled in the silence by 
introducing themselves one by one. 
Motionless except for his bright, 
agile optics, the other leaned upon 
his gnarly stick, eyeing them sharply and. ruminating. 

After a while, he said, "Waltskin,", in a thin, reedy voice. 

'■'Hah!" said one of the crew. 
"Let's call him Walter." With humor unconsciously prophetic, he 
sang, "Walter, Walter, lead me to 
the altar." 

"He can talk, at any rate," observed Hayward. "Now we won't 



have to play snake-arms trying to 
make him understand. We can learn ' 
his language or teach him ours." 

"Neither will be necessary," as-' 
sured the newcomer, with perfect . 
diction. 

They were mutually dumbfounded. 

After they had got over it, Berners whispered to Hayward, "This 
is going to make things dead easy. 
It will be like taking candy from a 
kitten." 

"You're getting mixed," said 
Hayward. "You mean like taking 
bad fish from a child." He grinned 
and turned his attention to the 
dwarf. ''How come you know our 
language 5 " | 

"I do not know it. I can jahn it. 
How can people communicate if they \ 
cannot jahn each other's speech-pat- 1 
terns?" 

That was too tough for Hayward. 
He shrugged it off, saying, "I don't 
get it. I've been around plenty, but 
this is a new one on me." He looked 
hopefully toward the distant town, i 
pondering the chances of a little re- ; 
laxalion. "Well, we'll have a tale ! 
to tell when we get back." ) 

"When you get where?" asked ; 
Waltskin. The sun glowed on the 
peculiar four-heart sign ornamenting his silver buttons. 

"When we get back" Hayward : 
repeated 

"'Oh, yes," said the other, with 
subtle change of emphasis. "When 
you get back." 

He used his gnarly stick to de


AFTERNOON OF A FAHN 



"3 



capitate something resembling a inevitable end. And in due time 

daisy and waited for the next con- his eyes glittered as he conducted 

versational move leading toward the the first victim away. 

THE END 



J4oliy.wood ( \AJalteS Up! 



EVERY professional and amateur 
science - fictionist chewed his 
nails to the elbows waiting for the 
release of Destination Moon, Hollywood's magnum opus in the fantasy 
field. And in turn Hollywood is 
jumping around like a cat on a hot 
stove waiting to see what sort of a 
reception the film achieved. 

If publicity is any guide to coming events, science-fiction is due for 
a long awaited acceptance at Hollywood's hands. After ignoring the 
field for so long, the movie colony 
is at last realizing that there are 
plenty of intelligent people in the 
world who want to see some of the 
magic and artistry the movie capitol is capable of if used sensibly for a 
change. 

Fan and professional magazines 
are alert to the science-fiction boom 
and have in some respects guided 
the selection of the major studios 
which all seem to have numerous 
"properties" awaiting the "go" signal. 

Hollywood has done some fantasy 
and some science-fiction in the past. 
None of it however is particularly 
outstanding. A few foreign films, 
notably German and French have 
been produced soundly. But it can 
be truthfully said that Destination 
Moon will be the first real challenge 
to the science-fictionist. Hitherto the 
movie idea of science-fiction has been 
strictly space opera with ray guns 
all over the place and scantily clad 



girls being attacked by brutal, forty 
armed Mercurian monsters. 

Destination Moon however is a 
ealm, scientific treatment of a journey to the Moon, and just as things 
really are, because of that fact, it 
has a subtle thrilling effect far exceeding anything the bug-eyed monster crowd could do. Supervised by 
trained engineers, advised by Heinlein, carefully shot with thoroughly 
sound technological treatment, the 
film can't help but be good. After 
all we regard certain phases of science-fiction {the realistic school) 
merely as extrapolations into the future through the use of present-day 
knowledge. Adhering to this idea, 
projecting scientific advances which 
are bound to come within our lifetime, will make this film outstanding. 

While we waited hopefully for the 
release of Destination Moon, we didn't 
expect it to be a miracle, but compared with anything so far done it 
was extraordinary. Better films 
will follow, but this is a precourser, 
a glimpse into the very near future, 
with solid concrete knowledge backing it up all the way. Before we 
take the final trip, you can bet your 
bottom dollar that we're going to 
see the first rocket flight to Luna 
—and maybe we'll follow the inevitable secondary flights which will 
follow it. Luna, here we come — 
vicariously, if necessary. . . . 



THE HUNGRY HOUSE 



If was silly to be afraid of the house. 
And yet it wasn't really the house - it was the 
evil thing living there - hungry for tenants . . . 




114 



THE HUNGRY HOUSE 

It was silly to be afraid of the house. 
And yet it wasn't really the house - it was the 
evil thing living there - hungry for tenants . . 




I 



AT first there were just the two 
of them — he and she, together. 
That's the way it was when 
they bought the house. 

Then it came. Perhaps it was 
there all the time; waiting for them 
in the house. At any rate, it was 
there now. And there was nothing 
they could do. 

Moving was out of the question. 
They'd taken a five-year lease, secretly congratulating themselves on 

i 



the low rental. It would be absurd 
to complain to the agent about it, 
and impossible to explain to their 
friends. For that matter, they had 
nowhere else to go; they had searched for months to find a home. 

Besides, at first neither he nor 
she cared to admit that they were 
aware of its presence. But both af 
them knew it was there. 

She felt it the very first evening, 
in the bedroom. She was sitting in 



AT first there were just the two 
of them — he and she, together. 
That's the way it was when 
they bought the house. 

Then it came. Perhaps it was 
there all the time; waiting for them 
in the house. At any rate, it was 
there now. And there was nothing 
they could do. 

Moving was out of the question. 
They'd taken a five-year lease, secretly congratulating themselves on 



the low rental. It would be absurd 
to complain to the agent about it, 
and impossible to explain to their 
friends. For that matter, they had 
nowhere else to go; they had searched for months to find a home. 

Besides, at first neither he nor 
she cared to admit that they were 
aware of its presence. But both »f 
them knew it was there. 

She felt it the very first evening, 
in the bedroom. She was sitting in 



ii5 



u6 



IMAGINATION 



front of the high, oldfashioned boudoir mirror, combing her hair. They 
hadn't settled all their things yet, 
and she didn't trouble to dust the 
place very thoroughly. In consequence the mirror was cloudy. And 
the light above it flickered. 

So at first she thought it was just 
a trick of shadows. Some flaw in 
the glass perhaps. The wavering outline behind her seemed to blur the 
reflection oddly, and she frowned 
In distaste. Then she began to experience what she often called her 
"married feeling" — the peculiar 
awareness which usually denoted her 
husband's entrance to a room she 
occupied. 

He must be standing behind her 
now. He must have come in quietly, 
without saying anything. Perhaps 
he was going to put his arms around 
her, surprise her, startle her. Hence 
the shadow on the mirror. 

She turned, ready to greet hini. 

The room was empty. And still 
the odd reflection persisted, together w r ith the sensation of a presence 
at her back. 

She shrugged, moved her head, 
and made a little face at herself, 
in the mirror. As a smile it was a 
failure, because the warped glass 
and the poor light seemed to distort 
her grin into something alien — 
into a smile that was not altogether a composition of her own 
face and features. 

Well, it had been a fatiguing ordeal, this moving business. She 
flicked a brush through her hair 



and tried to dismiss the problem. 

NEVERTHELESS she felt a 
surge of relief when he suddenly entered the bedroom. For a 
moment she thought of telling him, 
then decided not to worry him over 
her "nerves." 

He was more outspoken. It was 
the following morning that the incident occurred. He came rushing 
out of the bathroom, his face bleeding from a razor-cut on the left 
cheek. 

"Is that your idea of being funny?" he demanded, in the petulant, 
little-boy fashion she found so engaging. "Sneaking in behind me and 
making faces in the mirror? Gave 
me an awful start — -look at this 
nick I sliced on myself." 

She sat up in bed. 

"But darling, I haven't been making faces at you. I didn't stir from 
this bed since you got up." 

"Oh." He shook his head, his 
frown fading into a second set of 
wrinkles expressing bewilderment. 
"Oh, I see." 

"What is it?" She suddenly threw 
off the covers and sat on the edge 
of the bed, wriggling her toes and 
peering at him earnestly. 

"Nothing," he murmured. "Nothing at all. Just thought I saw you, 
or somebody, looking over my shoulder in the mirror. All of a sudden, 
you know. It must be those damned 
lights. Got to get some bulbs in 
town today." 

He patted his cheek with a towel 



THE HUNGRY HOUSE 



117 



and turned away. She took a deep 
breath. 

"I had the same feeling last night," 
she confessed, then bit her lip. 
"You did?" 

"It's probably just the lights, as 

you said, darling." 

"Uh huh." He was suddenly preoccupied. "That must be it. I'll 
make sure and bring those new 
bulbs." 

"You'd better. Don't forget, the 
gang is coming down for the housewarming on Saturday." 

Saturday proved to be a long 
time in coming. In the Interim both 
of them had several experiences 
which served to upset their minds 
much more than they cared to admit. 

The second morning, after he had 
left for work, she went out in back 
and looked at the garden. The place 
was a mess — half an acre of land, 
all those trees, the weeds everywhere, and the dead leaves of autumn dancing slowly around the old 
house. She stood off on a little knoll 
and contemplated the grave gray 
gables of another century. Suddenly 
she felt lonely here. It wasn't only 
the isolation, the feeling of being 
half a mile from the nearest neighbor, down a deserted dirt road. It 
was more as though she were an 
intruder here — an intruder upon the 
past. The cold breeze, the dying 
trees, the sullen sky were welcome; 
they belonged to the house. She was 
the outsider, because she was young, 
because she was alive. 



She felt it all, but did not think 
it. To acknowledge her sensations 
would be to acknowledge fear. Fear 
of being alone. Or, worse still, fear 
of not being alone. 

Because, as she stood there, the 
back door closed. 

Oh, it was the autumn wind, all 
right. Even though the door didn't 
bang, or slam shut. It merely closed. 
But that was the wind's work, it 
had to be. There was nobody in 
the house, nobody to close the door. 

SHE felt in her housedress pocket for the door key, then shrugged as she remembered leaving it 
on the kitchen sink. Well, she hadn't planned to go inside yet anyway. She wanted to look over the 
yard, look over the spot where the 
garden had been and where she 
fully intended a garden to bloom 
next spring. She had measurements 
to make, and estimates to take, and 
a hundred things to do here outside. 

And yet, when the door closed, 
she knew she had to go in. Something was trying to shut her out, 
shut her out of her own house, and 
that would never do. Something was 
fighting against her, fighting against 
all idea of change. She had to fight 
back. 

So she marched up to the door, 
rattled the knob, found herself locked out as she expected. The first 
round was lost. But there was always the window. 

The kitchen window was eye-level 



n8 



IMAGINATION 



in height, and a small crate served 
to bring it within easy reach. The 
window was open a good four inches and she had no trouble inserting 
her hands to raise it further. 
She tugged. 

Nothing happened. The window 
must be stuck. But it wasn't stuck; 
she'd just opened it before going 
outside and it opened quite easily; 
besides, they'd tried all the windows 
and found them in good operating 
condition. 

She tugged again. This time the 
window raised a good six inches 
and then — something slipped. The 
window came down like the blade 
of a guillotine, and she got her 
hands out just in time. She bit her 
lip, sent strength through her shoulders, raised the window once more. 

And this time she stared into the 
pane. The glass was transparent, 
ordinary window glass. She'd washed 
it just yesterday and she knew it 
was clean. There had been no blur, 
no shadow, and certainly no movement. 

But there was movement now. 
Something cloudy, something obscenely opaque, peered out of the 
window, peered out of itself and 
pressed the window down against 
her. Something matched her strength 
to shut her out. 

Suddenly, hysterically, she realized that she was staring at her 
own reflection through the shadows 
of the trees. Of course, it had to be 
her own reflection. And there was no 
' reason for her to close her eyes 



and sob as she tugged the window 
up and half-tumbled her way into 
the kitchen. 

She was inside, and alone. Quite 
alone. Nothing to worry about. 
Nothing to worry him about. She 
wouldn't tell him. 

He wouldn't tell her, either. Friday afternoon, when she took the 
car and went into town for groceries and liquor in preparation for 
tomorrow's party, he stayed home 
from the office and arranged the 
final details of settling down. 

That's why he carried up all the 
garment bags to the attic — to store 
the summer clothes, get them out of 
the way. And that's how he happened to open the little cubicle 
under the front gable. He was looking for the attic closet; he'd put 
down the bags and started to work 
along the wall with a flashlight. 
Then he noticed the door and the 
padlock. 

r-vUST and rust told their own 
story; nobody had come this 
way for a long, long time, He 
thought again of Hacker, the glib 
real-estate agent who'd handled the 
rental of the place. "Been vacant 
several years and needs a little 
fixing up," Hacker had said. From 
the looks of it, nobody had lived here 
for a coon's age. All the better; he 
could force the lock with a common 
file. 

He went downstairs for the file 
and returned quickly, noting as he 
did so the heavy attic dust. Appar


THE HUNGRY HOUSE 



ently the former occupants had left 
in something of a hurry — debris was 
scattered everywhere, and swaths 
and swirls scored the dust to indicate that belongings had been dragged and hauled and swept along in 
a haphazard fashion. 

Well, he had all winter to straighten things out, and right now he'd 
settle for storing the garment bags. 
Clipping the flashlight to his belt, 
he bent over the lock, file in hand, 
and tried his skill at breaking and 
entering. 

The lock sprung. He tugged at 
the door, opened it, inhaled a gust 
of mouldy dampness, then raised 
the flash and directed the beam into 
the long, narrow closet. 

A thousand silver slivers stabbed 
at his eyeballs. Golden, gleaming 
fire seared his pupils. He jerked the 
flashlight back, sent the beam upwards. Again, lances of light entered 
his eyes. 

Suddenly he adjusted his vision 
and comprehension. He stood peering into a room full of mirrors. 
They hung from cords, lay in corners, stood along the walls in rows. 

There was a tall, stately fulllength mirror, set in a door; a pair 
of plate-glass ovals, inset in oldfashioned dresser-tops; a panel 
glass, and even a complete, dismantled bathroom medicine cabinet 
similar to the one they had just 
installed. And the floor was lined 
with hand-mirrors of all sizes and 
shapes. He noted an ornate silverhandled mirror straight from a wom


an's dressing table; behind it stood 
the vanity-mirror removed from the 
table itself. And there were pocket 
mirrors, mirrors from purse-compacts, mirrors of every size and 
shape. Against the far wall stood 
a whole series of looking-glass slabs 
that appeared to have been mounted at one time in a bedroom wall. 

He gazed at half a hundred silvered surfaces, gazed at a half a 
hundred reflections of his own bewildered face. 

*ND he thought again of Hacker, of their inspection of the 
house. He had noted the absence 
of a medicine cabinet at the time, 
but Hacker had glossed over it. 
Somehow he hadn't realized that 
there were no mirrors of any sort 
in the house- — of course, there was 
no furniture, but still one might 
expect a door panel in a place this 
old. 

No mirrors? Why? And why 
were they all stacked away up here, 
under lock and key? 

It was interesting. His wife might 
like some of these — that silverhandled beauty mirror, for example. 
He'd have to tell her about this. 

He stepped cautiously into the 
closet, dragging the garment bags 
after him. There didn't seem to be 
any clothes^pole here, or any hooks. 
He could put some up in a jiffy, 
though. He piled the bags in a heap, 
stooping, and the flashlight glittered 
on a thousand surfaces, sent facets 
of fire into his face. 



120 



IMAGINATION 



Then the fire faded. The silver 
surfaces darkened oddly. Of course, 
his reflection covered them now. 
His reflection, and something darker. Something smoky and swirling, 
something that was a part of the 
mouldy dampness, something that 
choked the closet with its presence. 
It was behind him — no, at one side 
—no, in front of him— all around 
him — it was growing and growing 
and blotting him out — it was making him sweat and tremble and now 
it was making him gasp and scuttle 
out of the closet and slam the door 
and press against it with all his 
waning strength, and its name 
was — 

Claustrophobia. That was it. Just 
claustrophobia, a fancy name for 
nerves. A man gets nervous when 
he's cooped up in a small space. 
For that matter, a man gets nervous when he looks at himself too 
long in a mirror. Let alone fifty 
mirrors! 

He stood there, shaking, and to 
keep his mind occupied, keep his 
mind off what he had just half-seen, 
half-felt, half-known, he thought 
about mirrors for a moment. About 
looking into mirrors. Women did it 
all the time. Men were different. 

Men, himself included, seemed to 
be self-conscious about mirrors. He 
could remember going into a clothing-store and seeing himself in one 
of the complicated arrangements 
that afforded a side and rear view. 
What a shock that had been, the 
first time — and every time, for that 



matter! A man looks different in a 
mirror. Not the way he imagines 
himself to be, knows himself to be. 
A mirror distorts. That's why men 
hum and sing and whistle while 
they shave. To keep their minds off 
Their reflections. Otherwise they'd 
go crazy. What was the name of 
that Greek mythological character 
who was in love with his own 
image? Narcissus, that was it. Staring into a pool for hours. 

Women could do it, though. Because women never saw themselves, 
actually. They saw an idealization, 
a vision. Powder, rouge, lipstick, 
mascara, eye-shadow, brilliantine,or 
merely an emptiness to which these 
elements must be applied. Women 
were a little crazy to begin with, 
anyway. Hadn't she said something 
the other night about seeing him 
in her mirror when he .wasn't there? 

pERHAPS he'd better not tell her, 
■* after all. At least, not until he 
checked with the real-estate agent, 
Hacker. He wanted to find out 
about this business, anyway. Something was wrong, somewhere. Why 
had the previous owners stored all 
the mirrors up here? 

He began to walk back through 
the, attic, forcing himself to go 
slowly, forcing himself to think of 
something, anything, except the 
fright he'd had in the room of reflections. 

Reflect on something. Reflections. 
Who's afraid of the big bad reflection? Another myth, wasn't it? 



THE HUNGRY HOUSE 



121 



Vampires. They had no reflections, ''Tell me the truth now, 
Hacker. The people who built this 
house — were they vampires?" 

That was a pleasant thought. 
That was a pleasant thought to carry downstairs in the afternoon twilight, to hug to your bosom in the 
gloom while the floors creaked and 
the shutters banged and the night 
came down in the house of shadows 
where something peered around the 
corners and grinned at you in the 
mirrors on the walls. 

He sat there waiting for her to 
come home, and he switched on all 
the lights, and he put the radio on 
too and thanked God he didn't have 
a television set because there was 
a screen and the screen made a reflection and the reflection might be 
something he didn't want to see. 

But there was no more trouble 
that evening, and by the time she 
came home with her packages he 
had himself under control. So they 
ate and talked quite naturally — oh, 
quite naturally, and if it was listening it wouldn't know they were both 
afraid. 

They made their preparations for 
the party, and called up a few people on the phone, and just on the 
spur of the moment he suggested 
inviting Hacker, too. So that was 
done and they went to bed. The 
lights were all out and that meant 
the mirrors were dark, and he could 
sleep. 

Only in the morning it was difficult to shave. And he caught her, 



yes he caught her, putting on her 
makeup in the kitchen, using the 
little compact from her purse and 
carefully cupping her hands against 
reflections. 

But he didn't tell her and she 
didn't tell him, and if it guessed 
their secrets, it kept silent. 

He drove off to work and she 
made canapes, and if at times during the long, dark, dreary Saturday the house groaned and creaked 
and whispered, that was only to be 
expected. 

npHE house was quiet enough by 
the time he came home again, 
and somehow, that was worse. It 
was as though something were waiting for night to fall. That's why she 
dressed early, humming all the 
while she powdered and primped, 
swirling around in front of the mirror (you couldn't see too clearly if 
you swirled). That's why he mixed 
drinks before their hasty meal and 
saw to it that they both had several 
stiff ones (you couldn't see too 
clearly if you drank). 

And then the guests tumbled in. 
The Teters, complaining about the 
winding back road through the hills. 
The Valliants, exclaiming over the 
antique panelling and the high ceilings. The Ehrs, whooping and laughing, with Vic remarking that the 
place looked like something designed 
by Charles Addams. That was a signal for a drink, and by the time 
Hacker and his wife arrived the 
blaring radio found ample compe


122 



IMAGINATION 



tition from the voices of the guests. 

He drank, and she drank, but 
they couldn't shut it out altogether. 
That remark about Charles Addaras 
was bad, and there were other 
things. Little things. The Talmadges 
had brought flowers, and she went 
out to the kitchen to arrange them 
in a cut-glass vase. There were facets in the glass, and as she stood 
in the kitchen, momentarily alone, 
and filled the vase with water from 
the tap, the crystal darkened beneath her fingers, and something 
peered, reflected from the facets. She 
turned quickly, and she was all alone. 
All alone, holding a hundred naked 
eyes in her hands. 

So she dropped the vase, and the 
Ehrs and Talmadges and Hackers 
and Valliants trooped out to the 
kitchen, and he came too. Talmadge 
accused her of drinking and that 
was reason enough for another 
round. He said nothing, but got 
another vase for the flowers. And 
yet he must have known, because 
when somebody suggested a tour 
of the house, he put them off: 

"We haven't straightened things 
eut upstairs yet," he said. "It's a 
mess, and you'd be knocking into 
crates and stuff." 

"Who's up there now?" asked 
Mrs. Teters, coming into the kitchen with her husband. "We just 
heard an awful crash." 

"Something must have fallen 
ever," tie host suggested. But he 
didn't look at his wife as he spoke, 
and she didn't look at him. 



"How about another drink?" she 
asked. She mixed and poured hurriedly, and before the glasses were 
half empty, he took over and fixed 
another round. Liquor helped to 
keep people talking and if they 
talked it would drown out other 
sounds. 

The strategem worked. Gradually 
the group trickled back into the living room in twos and threes, and 
the radio blared and the laughter 
rose and the voices babbled to blot 
out the noises of the night. 

He poured and she served, and 
both of them drank, but the alcohol 
had no effect. They moved carefully, 
as though their bodies were brittle 
glasses — glasses without bottom — 
waiting to be shattered by some 
sudden strident sound. Glasses hold 
liquor, but they never get drunk. 

Their guests were not glasses, 
they drank and feared nothing, and 
the drinks took hold. People moved 
about, and in and out, and pretty 
soon Mr. Valliant and Mrs. Talmadge embarked on their own private tour of the house upstairs. It 
was irregular and unescorted, but 
fortunately nobody noticed either 
their departure or their absence. At 
least, not until Mrs. Talmadge 
came running downstairs and locked herself in the bathroom. 

TTER hostess saw her pass the 
* * doorway and followed her. She 
rapped on the bathroom door, gained admittance, and prepared to 
make discreet inquiries. None was 



THE HUNGRY HOUSE 



123 



necessary. Mrs. Talmadge, weeping 
and wringing her hands, fell upon 
her. 

j "That was a filthy trick!" she 
sobbed. "Coming up and sneaking 
in on us. The dirty louse — I admit 
we were doing a little smooching, 
but that's all there was to it. And 
it isn't as though he didn't make 
enough passes at Gwen Hacker himself. What I want to know is, where 
did he get the beard? It frightened 
me out of my wits." 

"What's all this?" she asked — 
knowing all the while what it was, 
and dreading the words to come. 

"Jeff and I were in the bedroom, 
just standing there in the dark, I 
swear it, and all at once I looked 
up over my shoulder at the mirror 
because light began streaming in 
from the hall. Somebody had opened the door, and I could see the 
glass and this face. Oh, it was my 
husband all right, but he had a 
beard on and the way he came 
slinking in, glaring at us—" 

Sobs choked off the rest. Mrs. 
Talmadge trembled so that she 
wasn't aware of the tremors which 
racked the frame of her hostess. 
She, for her part, strained to hear 
the rest. " — sneaked right out 
again before we could do anything, 
but wait till I get him home— scaring the life out of me and all because he's so crazy jealous — the 
look on his face in the mirror — " 

She soothed Mrs. Talmadge. She 
comforted Mrs. Talmadge. She placated Mrs. Talmadge. And all the 



while there was nothing to soothe 
or calm or placate her own agitation. 

Still, both of them had restored 
a semblance of sanity by the time 
they ventured out into the hall to 
join the party — just in time to hear 
Mr. Talmadge's agitated voice 
booming out over the excited responses of the rest. 

"So I'm standing there in the 
'bathroom and this old witch comes 
up and starts making faces over 
my shoulder in the mirror. What 
gives here, anyway? What kind of 
a house you running here?" 

He thought it was funny. So did 
the others. Most of the others. The 
host and hostess stood there, not 
daring to look at each other. Their 
smiles were cracking. Glass is brittle. 

"I don't believe you" Gwen 
Hacker's voice. She'd had one, or 
perhaps three, too many. "I'm going up right now and see for myself." She winked at her host and 
moved towards the stairs. 

"Hey, hold on!" He was too late. 
She swept, or wobbled, past him. 

"Halloween pranks," said Talmadge, nudging him. "Old babe in 
a fancy hairdo. Saw her plain as 
day. What you cook up for us 
here, anyhow?" 

He began to stammer something, 
anything, to halt the flood of foolish babt51ing. She moved close to 
him, wanting to listen, wanting to 
believe, wanting to do anything but 
think of Gwen Hacker upstairs, all 



"t 



IMAGINATION 



124 

alone upstairs looking into a mirror 
and waiting to see — 

qpHE screams came then. Not 
sobs, not laughter, but screams. 
He took the stairs two at a time. 
Fat Mr. Hacker was right behind 
him, and the others straggled along, 
suddenly silent. There was the 
sound of feet clubbing the staircase, the sound of heavy breathing, 
and over everything the continuing 
high-pitched shriek of a woman confronted with terror too great to 
contain. 

It oozed out of Gwen Hacker's 
voice,, oozed out of her body as she 
staggered and half-fell into her husband's arms in the hall. The light 
was streaming out of the bathroom, 
and it fell upon the mirror that 
was empty of all reflection, fell 
upon her face that was empty of 
all expression. 

They crowded around the Hackers — he and she were on either side 
and the others clustered in front — 
and they moved along the hall to 
her bedroom and helped Mr. Hacker stretch his wife out on the bed. 
She had passed out, and somebody 
mumbled something about a doctor, and somebody else said no, never 
mind, she'll be all right in a minute, and somebody else said well. I 
think we'd better be getting alnng. 

For the first time everybody 
seemed to be aware of the old 
house and the darkness, and the way 
the floors creaked and the windows 
rattled and the shutters banged. Ev


eryone was suddenly sober, solicitous, and extremely anxious to leave. 

Hacker bent over his wife, chafing her wrists, forcing her to swallow water, watching her whimper 
her way out of emptiness. The host 
and hostess silently procured hats 
and coats and listened to expressions of polite regret, hasty farewells, and poorly formulated pretenses of, "Had a marvelous time, 
darling," 

Teters, Valliants, Talmadges were 
swallowed up in the night. He and 
she went back upstairs, back to the 
bedroom and the Hackers. It was 
too dark in the hall, and too light 
in the bedroom. But there they 
were, waiting. And they didn't wait 
long. 

Mrs. Hacker sat up suddenly and 
began to talk. To her husband, to 
them. 

'T saw her," she said. "Don't 
tell me I'm crazy, I saw her! Standing on tiptoe behind me, looking 
right into the mirror. With the same 
blue ribbon En her hair, the one she 
wore the day she—" 

"Please, dear," said Mr. Hacker. 

She didn't please. "But I saw 
her. Mary Lou! She made a face 
at me in the mirror, and she's dead, 
you kn ow she's dead , she disappeared t hree years ago and they 
never did find the body — " 

"Mary Lou Dempster." Hacker 
was a fat man. He had two chins. 
Both of them wobbled. 

i; She played around here, you 
know she did, and Wilma Dempster 



THE HUNGRY HOUSE 



told her to stay away, she knew 
all about this house, but she wouldn't and now— oh, her face!" 

TV/TORE sobs. Hacker patted her 
on the shoulder. He looked as 
though he could stand a little shoulder-patting himself, But nobody 
obliged. He stood there, she stood 
there, still waiting. Waiting for the 
rest. 

"Tell them/' said Airs. Hacker. 
"Tell them the truth." 

"All right, but I'd better get you 

home." 

'•'I'll wait. I want you to tell 
them. You must, now." 

Hacker sat down heavily. His 
wife leaned against his shoulder. 
The two waited another moment. 
Then it came. 

'T don't know how to begin, how 
to explain/' said fat Air. Hacker. 
"It's probably my fault, of course, 
but I didn't know. All this foolishness about haunted houses— nobody 
believes that stuff any more, and 
all it does is push property values 
down, so I didn't say anything. Can 
you blame me?" 

"I saw her face," whispered Mrs. 
Hacker. 

"I know, And I should have told 
you. About the house, I mean. Why 
it hasn't rented for twenty years. 
Old story in the neighborhood, and 
you'd have heard it sooner or later 
anyway, I guess." 

"Get on with it," said Mrs. 
Hacker. She was suddenly strong 
again and he, with his wobbling 



chins, was weak. 

Host and hostess stood before 
them, brittle as glass, as the words 
poured out; poured out and filled 
them to. overflowing. He and she, 
watching and listening, filling up 
with the realization, with the knowledge, with that for which they had 
waited. 

It was the Bellman house they 

were living in, the house Job Bellman built for his bride back in the 
sixties; the house where his bride 
had given birth to Laura and taken 
death in exchange. And Job Bellman had toiled through the seventies as his daughter grew to girlhood, rested in complacent retirement during the eighties as Laura 
Bellman blossomed into the reigning beauty of the county— some said 
the state, but then flattery came 
quickly to mcn'5 lips in those days. 

There were men aplenty, coming 
and going through that decade; 
passing through the hall in polished 
boots, bowing and stroking brilliantined mustachios, smirking at old 
Job. grinning at the servants, and 
gazing in moonstruck adoration at 
Laura. 

Laura took it all as her rightful due, but land's sakes. she'd never think of it, no. not while Papa 
was still alive, and no, she couldn't, 
she was much too young to marry, 
and why, she'd never heard of such 
a thing, she'd always thought it 
was so much nicer just being 
friends — 

Moonlight, dances, parties, hay


IMAGINATION 



rides, sleighrides, candy, flowers, 
gifts, tokens, cotillion balls, punch, 
fans, beauty spots, dressmakers, 
curlers, mandolins, cycling, and the 
years that whirled away. And then, 
one day, old Job dead in the fourposter bed upstairs, and the Doctor 
came and the Minister, and then 
the Lawyer, hack-hack-hacking away 
with his dry, precise little cough, 
and his talk of inheritance and estate and annual income. 

nr«EN she was all alone, just 
she and the servants and the 
mirrors. Laura and her mirrors. Mirrors is the morning, and the careful inspection, the scutiny that began the day. Mirrors at night before the caller arrived, before the 
carriage came, before she whirled 
away to another triumphal entry, 
another fan-fluttering, pirouetting 
descent of the staircase. Mirrors at 
dawn, absorbing the smiles, listening to the secrets, the tale of the 
evening's triumph. 

"Mirror, mirror on the wall, who 
is the fairest of them all?" 

Mirrors told her the truth, mirrors did not lie, mirrors did not 
paw or clutch or whisper or demand in return for acknowledgement of beauty. 

Years passed, but mirrors did 
not age, did not change. And Laura 
did not age. The callers were fewer 
and some of them were oddly altered. They seemed older, somehow. 
And yet how could that be? For 
Laura Bellman was still young. The 



mirrors said so, and they always 
told the truth. Laura spent more and 
more time with the mirrors. Powdering, searching for wrinkles, tinting and curling her long hair. Smiling, fluttering eyelashes, making deliriously delicate little mattes. Swirling daintily, posturing before her 
own perfection. 

Sometimes, when the callers came, 
she sent word that she was not at 
home. It seemed silly, somehow, to 
leave the mirrors. And after a while, 
there weren't many callers to worry 
about. Servants came and went, 
some of them died, but there were 
always new ones. Lanra and the 
mirrors remained. The nineties were 
truly gay, but in a way other people wouldn't understand. How Laura 
laughed, rocking back and forth on 
the bed, sharing her giddy secrets 
with the glass! 

The years fairly flew by, but 
Laura merely laughed. She giggled 
and tittered when the servants spoke 
to her, and it was easier now to 
take her meals on a tray in her 
room. Because there was something 
wrong with the servants, and with 
Doctor Turner who came to visit 
her and who was always being tiresome about going away for a rest 
to a lovely home. 

They thought she was getting old, 
but she wasn't — the mirrors didn't 
lie. She wore the false teeth and 
the wig to please the others, the 
outsideirs, but she didn't really need 
them. The mirrors told her she was 
unchanged. They talked to her now, 



THE HUNi 

the mirrors did, and she never said 
a word. Just sat nodding and swaying before them in the room reeking of powder and patchouli, stroking her throat and listening to the 
mirrors telling her how beautiful 
she was and what a belle she would 
be if she would only waste . her 
beauty on the world. But she'd never leave here, never; she and the 
mirrors would always be together, 

A ND then came the day they tried 
** to take her away, and they 
actually laid hands upon her — upon 
her, Laura Bellman, the most exquisitely beautiful woman in the 
worMl Was it any wonder that she 
fought, clawed and kicked and whined, and struck out so that one of 
the servants crashed headlong into 
the beautiful glass and struck his 
foolish head and died, his nasty 
blood staining the image of her perfection? 

Of course it was all a stupid mistake and it wasn't her fault, and 
Doctor Turner told the magistrate 
so when he came to call. Laura 
didn't have to see him, and she 
didn't have to leave the house. But 
they always locked the door to her 
room now, and they took away all 
her mirrors. 

They took away all her mirrors! 

They left her alone, caged up, a 
scrawny, wizened, wrinkled old 
woman with no reflection. They took 
the mirrors away and made her old; 
old, and ugly, and afraid. 

The night they did it, she cried. 



;ry house u 7 

She cried and hobbled around the 
room, stumbling blindly in a tearsome tour of nothingness. 

That's when she realized she was 
old, and nothing could save ier. 
Because she came up against the 
window and leaned her wrinkled 
forehead against the cold, cold glass. 
The light came from behind her and 
as she drew away she could see her 
reflection in the window. 

The window — it was a mirror, 
too! She gazed into it, gazed long 
and lovingly at the tear-streaked 
face of the fantastically rouged and 
painted old harridan, gazed at the 
corpse-countenance readied for the 
grave by a mad embalmer. 

Everything whirled. It was her 
house, she knew every inch of it, 
from the day of her birth onwards 
the house was a part of her. It was 
her room, she had lived here for 
ever and ever. But this — this obscenity — was not her face. Only a 
mirror could show her that, and 
there would never be a mirror for 
her again. For an instant she gazed 
at the truth and then, mercifully, 
the gleaming glass of the windowpane altered and once again she 
gazed at Laura Bellman, the proudest beauty of them all. She drew 
herself erect, stepped back, and 
whirled into a dance. She danced 
forward, a prim self-conscious smile' 
on her lips. Danced into the window-pane, half-through it, until razored splinters of glass tore her 
scrawny throat. 

That's how she died and that's 



128 



IMAGINATION 



how they found her. The Doctor 
came, and the servants and the lawyer did what must be done. The 
house was sold, then sold again. 
It fell into the hands of a rental 
agency. There were tenants, but not 
for long. They had trouble with 
mirrors. 

A man died — of a heart attack, 
they said — while adjusting his necktie before the bureau one evening. 
Grotesque enough, but he had complained to people in the town about 
strange happenings, and his wife 
babbled to everyone. 

A school-teacher who rented the 
place in the twenties "passed away" 
in circumstances which Doctor Turner had never seen fit to relate. He 
had gone to the rental agency and 
begged them to take the place off 
the market ; that was almost unnecessary, for the Bellman home 
had its reputation firmly established 
by now. 

Whether or not Mary Lou Dempster had disappeared here would 
never be known. But the little girl 
had last been seen a year ago on 
the road leading to the house and 
although a search had been made 
and nothing discovered, there was 
talk aplenty. 

Then the new heirs had stepped 
in, briskly, with their pooh-poohs 
and their harsh dismissals of advice, and the house had been cleaned and put up for rental. 

So he and she had come to live 
here — with it. And that was the 
story, all of the story. 



TV/TR- Hacker put his arm around 
■J-'-*- Gwen, harrumphed, and helped her rise. He was apologetic, he 
was shame-faced, he was deferential. His eyes never met those of 
his tenant. 

He barred the doorway. "We're 
getting out of here, right now," he 
said. '"'Lease or no lease." 

"That can be arranged. But — 
I can't find you -another place tonight, and tomorrow's Sunday — " 

"We'll pack and get out of here 
tomorrow," she spoke up. "Go to 
a hotel, anywhere. But we're leaving." 

"I'll call you tomorrow," said 
Hacker. "I'm sure everything will 
be all right. After all, you've stayed 
here through the week and nothing, 
I mean nobody has — " 

His words trailed off. There was , 
no point in saying any more. The 
Hackers left and they were all 
alone. Just the two of them. 

Just the three of them, that is. ! 

But now they — he and she — were 
too tired to care. The inevitable 
letdown, product of overindulgence 
and over-excitement was at hand. 

They said nothing, for there was 
nothing to say. They heard nothing, 
for the house — and it — maintained 
a sombre silence. 

She went to her room and undressed. He began to walk around 
the house. First he went to the 
kitchen and opened a drawer next 
to the sink. He took a hammer and 
smashed the^ kitchen mirror. 

Tinkle-tinkle! And then a crash! 



i 



THE HUNGRY HOUSE 



That was the mirror in the "hall. 
Then upstairs, to the bathroom. 
Crash and clink of broken glass in 
the medicine cabinet. Then a smash 
as he shattered the panel in his 
room. And now he came to her bedroom and swung the hammer against 
the huge oval of the vanity, shattering it to bits. 

He wasn't cut, wasn't excited, 
wasn't upset. And the mirrors were 
gone. Every last one of them was 
gone. 

They looked at each other for a 
moment. Then he switched off the 
lights, tumbled into bed beside her, 
and sought sleep. 

The night wore on. 

TT was all a little silly in the day*■ light. But she looked at him 
again in the morning, and he went 
into his room and hauled out the 
suitcases. By the time she had 
breakfast ready he was already laying his clothes out on the bed. She 
got up after eating and took her 
own clothing from the drawers and 
hangers and racks and hooks. Soon 
he'd go up to the attic and get the 
garment bags. The movers could be 
called tomorrow, or as soon as they 
had a destination in mind. 

The house was quiet. If it knew 
their plans, it wasn't acting. The 
day was gloomy and they kept the 
lights off without speaking — although both of them knew it was 
because of the window-panes and 
the story of the reflection. He could 
have smashed the window glass of 



course, but it was all a little silly. 
And they'd be out of here shortly. 

Then they heard the noise. Trickling, burbling. A splashing sound. 
It came from beneath their feet. 
She gasped. 

"Water-pipe — in the basement," 
he said, smiling and taking her by 
the shoulders. 

"Better take a look." She moved 
towards the stairs. 

"Why should you go down there? 
I'll tend to it." 

But she shook her head and pulled 
away. It was her penance for gasping. She had to show she wasn't 
afraid. She had to show him — and 
it, too. 

"Wait a minute," he said. "I'll 
get the pipe-wrench. It's in the trunk 
in the car." He went out the back 
door. She stood irresolute, then 
headed for the cellar stairs. The 
splashing was getting louder. The 
burst pipe was flooding the basement. It made a funny noise, like 
laughter. 

He could hear it even when he 
walked up the driveway and opened 
the trunk of the car. These old 
houses always had something wrong 
with them; he might have known 
it. Burst pipes and — 

Yes. He found the wrench. He 
walked back to the door, listening 
to the water gurgle, listening to his 
wife scream. 

She was screaming! Screaming 
down in the basement, screaming 
down in the dark. 

He ran, swinging the heavy 



IMAGINATION 



wrench. He clumped down the 
stairs, down into the darkness, the 
screams tearing up at him. She was 
caught, it had her, she was struggling with it but it was strong, too 
strong, and the light came streaming in on the pool of water beside 
the shattered pipe and in the reflection he saw her face and the 
blackness of other faces swirling 
around her and holding her. 

He brought the wrench up, 
brought it down on the black blur, 
hammering and hammering and 
hammering until the screaming died 
away. And then he stopped and 
looked down at her. The dark blur 
had faded away into the reflection 
of the water — the reflection that had 
evoked it. But she was still there, 
and she was still, and she would be 
still forever now. Only the water 
was getting red, where her head 
rested in it. And the end of the 
wrench was red, too. 

For a moment he started to tell 
her about it, and then he realized 
she was gone. Now there were only 
the two of them left. He and it. 

And he was going upstairs. He 
was walking upstairs, still carrying 
the bloody wrench, and he was going over to the phone to call the 
police and explain. 

TTE sat down in a chair before 
ix the phone, thinking about 
what he'd tell them, how he'd explain. It wouldn't be easy. There 
was this madwoman, see, and she 
looked into mirrors until there was 



more of her alive in her reflectura 
than there was in her own body. So 
when she committed suicide she 
lived on, somehow, and came alive 
in mirrors or glass or anything that 
reflected. And she killed others or 
drove them to death and their reflections were somehow joined with 
hers so that this thing kept getting 
stronger and stronger, sucking away 
at life with that awful core of pride 
that could live beyond death. Woman, thy name is vanity! And that, 
gentlemen, is why I killed my 
wife . . . 

Yes, it was a fine explanation, 
but it wouldn't hold water. Water 
— the pool in the basement had 
evoked it. He might have known it 
if only he'd stopped to think, to 
reflect. Reflect. That was the wrong 
word, now. Reflect. The way the 
window pane before him was reflecting. 

He stared into the glass now, 
saw it behind him, surging up from 
the shadows. He saw the bearded 
man's face, the peering, pathetic, 
empty eyes of a little girl, the goggling grimacing stare of an old 
woman. It wasn't there, behind him, 
but it was alive in the reflection, 
and as he rose he gripped the 
wrench tightly. It wasn't there, but 
he'd strike at it, fight at it, come 
to grips with it somehow. 

He turned, moving back, the ring 
of shadow-faces pressing. He swung 
the wrench. Then he saw her face 
coming up through all the rest. Her 
face, with shining splinters where 



THE HUNGRY HOUSE 



the eyes should be. He couldn't 
smash it down, he couldn't hit her 
again. 

It moved forward. He moved 
back. His arm went out to one side. 
He heard the tinkle of windowglass behind him and vaguely remembered that this was how the 
old woman had died. The way he 
was dying now — falling through the 
window, and cutting his throat, and 
the pain lanced up and in, tearing 
at his brain as he hung there on the 
jagged spikes of glass, bleeding bis 
life away. 

Then he was gone. 

His body hung there, but he was 
gone. 

There was a little puddle on the 



floor, moving and growing. The 
light from outside shone on it, and 
there was a reflection. 

Something emerged fully from 
the shadows now, emerged and capered demurely in the darkness. 

It had the face of an old woman 
and the face of a child, the face of 
a bearded man, and his face, and 
her face, changing and blending. 

It capered and postured, and then 
it squatted, dabbling. Finally, all 
alone in the empty house, it just 
sat there and waited. There was 
nothing to do now but wait for the 
next to come. And meanwhile, it 
could always admire itself in that 
growing, growing red reflection on 
the floor ... 



THE END 



^Jli e ^Ja ioneJ, Sub 



AIRMEN, jetmen, and rocketeers 
are inclined to look down on the 
submarine — and that's no joke. They 
feel as if the wallowing helpless 
submarine is easy prey for their 
striking missiles. What can a sub 
do against a jet or rocket? 

Well the answer now is — a lot. 
Lots of times we've predicted that 
submarines would carry guided missiles of their own. This has at last 
been done. A number of United 
States Navy pigboats have been 
equipped with containers mounted on 
the deck and carrying within their 
bellies grim weapons such as modifications of the famous "buzz-bomb". 

While the primary purpose of such 
weapons is for attack against shipping — preferably helpless shipping 



1 marine 

at that — the subs can also carry 
anti-aircraft rocket projectors and 
regular anti-aircraft guided missiles. 

This means that the airmen of the 
future must think twice before they 
launch their attacks on the "helpless" wallowing submarine beneath 
them. The sub might come back with 
a mighty stinger. So far it's still 
experimental but it is believed that 
a properly equipped sub could fight 
off a surprisingly strong group of 
attackers. 

The future offers considerable 
changes. A submarine has effectively become a fanged snake which can 
strike back successfully against the 
clawed eagles overhead. 

The pigboat men needn't be sitting 
ducks any longer. 



NOT IN THE RULES 

Wad ftynotJ, 
A planet's strength was determined in the 
Arena where brute force emerged victorious. But 
the Earthman chose a forgotten weapon-strategy! 



I got the bad news as soon as we 
landed on Mars. The minute 
I got off the spacer, the little 
yellow Martie was standing there 
with a yellow envelope. He said, 
"Gladiator Jak Demsi?" 

I admitted it and he handed me 
the envelope. Made me feel kind 
of good, as though I was somebody 
important, which I'm not. I'd been 
taking plenty of guff on the trip. 




The Earlhma 



Not only from Suzi, but from Alger 
Wilde, who was also along. Yeah, 
between them they'd ridden me as 
well as the liner, all the way from 
Terra. 

I handed the Martie a kopek and 
put the yellow envelope in my 
pocket, as though I was used to 
getting spacegrams. 

I said to Suzi, "Let's hit the ohow 



line." I don't usually talk that 
fancy, but I was trying to impress 
her with my knowledge of antique 
phrases. Both Suzi and Alger 
Wilde are students of ancient times 
and love to lard their conversation 
with such stuff. 

Suzi said, "Sure, Jak. Come on 
Alger," which wasn't what I'd meant 
at all. And then she said, "Aren't 




IMAGINATION 



i34 

you going to open that spacegram, 
Jak? It might be important." 

"Probably is," I said carelessly. 
"But it can wait, whatever it is." 

And it did. I opened it after we'd 
ordered at the spaceport restaurant. 
I should have waited until after I'd 
eaten, but I couldn't know that until I read: 

SPACER TRANSPORTING 
GLADIATOR EARTH-MARS 
FOR INTER - PLANETARY 
GAMES LOST. YOU HAVE 
BEEN APPOINTED EMERG EN C Y REPLACEMENT 
REPRESENTING EARTH. 
GOOD LUCK. 

I gulped. If you don't know all 
about the Interplanetary Meet which 
is held every decade, then maybe 
you don't know why I gulped. If 
you do. you do. It's tough enough 
being a gladiator on Terra but at 
least you have a chance of coming 
out alive; you've even got a chance 
of winning. But at the Interplanetary Meet! Who ever heard of a 
Terran coming out in one piece? 
Not to speak of winning. 

Sure, I'm a gladiator, but I've always been strictly a second rater; 
in fact, some of the sports writers 
call me a third rater. Anyway, 
I've always worked in the smaller 
meets where the gladiators, even 
when they lose, usually get off with 
their lives. In the small town stuff, 
they don't kill expensive gladiators, 
if they can help it. 

My head was doing double flips 
trying to figure out some way of 



making myself scarce, when Suzi 
said, "What is it, Jak?" 

Like a fool, I handed the message to her and she and Alger read 
it together. 

Suzi's eyes widened and she started to say something, worriedly, but 
Alger stuck out his hand and said, 
"Congratulations, Jak. I knew you 
had great things in you. Now they'll 
be coming out . . ■ Er . , . That is, 
just think, one of the three gladiators representing Terra. What an 
honor!" 

I was sunk. 

The Interplanetary Meet was just 
three days off and I had three days 
to live. 

T wouldn't have been on Mars in 
* the first place if it hadn't been 
for an argument I had with Suzi 
back on Terra just before she was 
scheduled to blast off for Mars to 
cover the Interplanetary Games. Suzi is a sports reporter, see. She 
covers the meets from the woman's 
angle. What she really wanted to 
do was write books about primitive 
culture; and what I wanted her to 
do was spend the rest of her life 
being my wife. Neither of us seemed to have much of a chance of 
making good. 

As usual, Suzi was giving me 
kert. If you'll pardon my language. 
"I don't know why I bother with 
you, Jak." she said scowling. 
''You've had the book a week and 
don't know a thing about it. You're 
nothing but a drip, a square." 



NOT IN THE RULES 



"Listen," I said resentfully. 
"Don't use those mythological terms 
on me. Last time it took me all 
day to look them up. Besides, I 
try don't I? My manager's going 
crazy because I've been spending so 
much time reading instead of training for my next meet.'' 

You get the idea. The girl was 
just gone on the ancients. She 
wouldn't have tolerated me for an 
hour if I hadn't been willing to let 
her cram her nonsense into me at 
every opportunity. 

"How long do you expect to be 
on Mars?" I asked her
She shrugged. "Perhaps three 
months, Terra time." 

"Three months!" 

She patted my hand. "Don't 
worry about me, Jak. I'm taking 
along an extensive micro-film library dealing with the literature and 
drama of Twentieth Century North 
America. As you undoubtedly 
know, it reached its height in the 
comic books and cartoon movies of 
the time. Besides," she went on, 
"Alger Wilde will be there, covering the meet from the society angle. He'll be good company. Alger 
is quite an authority on prehistoric 
literature." 

"And also on today's women," I 
yelped- "You didn't tell me that 
makron was going to be on Mars 
with you." 

She held her hands over her ears 
and said indignantly, "Please, Jak, 
save your vulgarities for the games." 

"I'm going with you," I grated. 



"I don't trust that guy with my 
woman." 

She flared up at that. "Your 
woman! Let me tell you, Jak 
Demsi, when you begin to display 
the cultural achievements of Alger 
Wilde, you may begin, just begin, 
mind you, to think of me as your 
woman, as you so crudely put it. 
Meanwhile, I have no desire to link 
myself with an ignoramus. Besides, I'm beginning to believe that 
you have no interest in cultural 
pursuits. You've merely deceived 
me these past months with pretended . . 

"Aw, Suzi," I began. 

T had trouble enough raising cre■* dits for my fare, but more still 
getting last minute reservations on 
the crowded excursion liner to Mars. 
It took some string pulling on my 
manager's part to get me the tickets. Nobody who can raise the 
credits would dream of missing the 
Interplanetary Meet, and every 
spacer to Mars was packed. 

Suzi was surprised when I stepped up to her table in the spacer's 
lounge. At least, her eyebrows 
raised. The little minx was as 
pretty as a Venusian rose-orchid. 
She was sitting with Alger Wilde, 
a makron from the word glorm, 

"Hi," I said, using a prehistoric 
formal salutation in hopes of pleasing her with my knowledge of olden times. 

"By Jove," Alger Wilde exclaimed. "If i; isn't Jak Demsi." He add


136 



IMAGINATION 



ed, smirking, "Pardon the expression. Jove was an ancient deity. 
I sometimes slip and use such 
terms." 

Did he think I was stupid? Hadn't I been reading up on all that 
stuff for months? I sat down casually in an empty acceleration 
chair
(I 0f course," I said." An Egyptian 
God; also known as Jupiter by 
their neighbors, the Aztecs, and by 
the name of Zeus, by the Chinese." 

And that's the way it was all the 
way to Mars. I tried to hang on 
and stick it out with them, but I 
came in a bad third. I was fighting out of my class. In fact, just 
before we arrived on Mars, Suzi 
made it plain that she thought I 
might as well give up my attempts 
to become cultured. She said I 
just didn't assimilate the stuff, that 
it didn't come off on me. I could 
read whole libraries of the ancient 
classics and recall none of the significance of what I'd read. In 
short, I wasn't doing so good with 
Suzi. 

* * * 

Well, three days after getting the 
telegram, I met the other two 
gladiators from Terra in our dressing room at the arena. They weren't much happier about the meet 
than I was- 
It's one of the occupational hazards of our trade. If you get too 
good, you'll probably be chosen as 
Terra representative to the Interplanetary Meet and your chances 



of surviving are almost nil. Of 
course, the pay is high and your 
survivors get a big chunk of credits 
but it's a chilly prospect at best. 

The other two were pretty well 
armored and had chosen spears as 
weapons, but I left off all armor 
and took a short sword. I planned 
on moving fast and the less weight 
I carried the better. 

When the various preliminaries 
were over and the crowd shouting 
for the main event, we trotted out 
to the field, joined the gladiators 
from the other planets and paraded 
toward the stand at which the judges and diplomats were seated. 
There was a mob of these, each 
with his assistants and secretaries. 
You could bet that little that happened would miss them. After all, 
on this meet hung the destinies of 
planets. 

Thousands of spectators from 
every planet and every principal 
satellite in the system stared down 
from their arena seats. I knew that 
the majority of them had expended 
a fortune in transport from their 
homes and for tickets to the meet. 
But why not! It was the equivalent 
of having a box seat at a full scale 
war of the type held in legendary 
times. Certainly, the ultimate effect 
was as great or greater. Each spectator knew that upon the manner in 
which their planet's representatives 
■fought this day, their fates depended. 

'HpHE planets have long since abo* lished war, but they put great 



NOT IN THE RULES 



store by these Interplanetary Meets. 
The theory is: Why fight a war and 
kill off billions of population when 
you can figure out before the fighting ever takes place who'd win? It's 
the natural ultimate development of 
diplomacy. Everything is settled by 
the diplomats without resorting to 
armed conflict. 

Suppose, for instance, that Mars 
decided to assume domination of 
Terra. She notes, as do the Terran 
diplomats, that, - at the Interplanetary Meet, the Martian gladiators 
wiped up on those from Terra. Obviously, if the same fighting would 
take place on a gigantic scale the 
same thing would result. So why 
fight the war? Terra simply accepts the domination. Of course, 
it's all done in very diplomatic language so that nobody loses face, 
but the results are the same. 

As a matter of fact, I'm surprised that one of the other planets 
hasn't already taken over Terra. 
The most recent addition to the 
League of Solar System Planets, 
we're by far the weakest. Probably 
our strongest defense has been the 
fact that several different League 
members have had their eyes upon 
us and each has counteracted the 
other. It's certain that Venus, Saturn, and even Pluto would like to 
assimilate Terra. Actually, any one 
of them could do it. 

As is customary, a beauty from 
the planet upon which the meet is 
being held, a Martian Princess in 
this case, opened the main event by 



throwing out the prize. It was a 
tremendous Venusian emerald, the 
largest ever discovered and the size 
of a man's hand. It doesn't really 
make much difference who catches 
the prize, except that it's considered 
to be a lucky sign; the gladiator 
who survives the contest is the one 
who finally takes it. 

I could see Suzi in the press box, 
sitting next to Alger. She seemed 
pale. I thought I might as well 
show her that some of the stuff 
she'd given me to read had been 
remembered. So just before the 
Princess tossed out the emerald and 
while the others stood about nervously and impatient, I drew my 
sword, flourished it, and called out, 
"We who are about to die, salute 
you!" 

The Martian Princess smiled 
down at me. "Good fortune to you, 
gladiator from Terra," she said, 
and deliberately threw the stone. 

I'd just as well she hadn't. The 
man with the prize is always the 
center of conflict and to have a 
hundred or so of the most efficient 
killers in the system out after you 
is no way to live to a ripe old age. 

But I caught the emerald and the 
battle was on. I'd hardly got it 
into my belt before I heard a swish 
and a Mercurian Bouncer, the steel 
knives on his heels flashing, missed 
me by a fraction of an inch. Before it could jump again, a four 
armed Martian pierced it with a 
javelin. The Martian went down 
in his turn under a crushing blow 



IMAGINATION 



138 

from a Slaber. 

I ran backward quickly, knowing that where there's one Bouncer 
there's another. They fight in a 
group of twenty or thirty. 

COMETIMES I wonder about 
^ that rule. Each planet is represented in the final free-for-all, 
the climax of the In terpla netar y 
Meet, by weight. The Mercurians, 
who are about the size of Terran 
chickens, have thirty gladiators in 
the battle. The group from Calypso numbers eight, and looks like a 
gang of human dwarfs. Jupiter and 
Saturn have only one representative 
each because of their gigantic size. 
"Mars has four, Terra three. The 
others have varying numbers, 

The other two gladiators from 
Terra tried to cover me, but went 
down in the rush. The first fell 
victim to the heavy, ponderous and 
nearly weapon proof gladiator from 
Saturn, victor of the last Interplanetary Meet. The Terran tried to 
run in close, beneath the other's 
guard, but was smashed with a 
sweeping blow that broke half the 
bones in his body. The crowd 
cheered for the nice try, and the 
Saturnian brandished his half ton 
club again and peered about nearsightedly for another enemy. 

My second companion in arms 
had an arm severed near the shoulder by a fast moving Plutonian 
Gadaboot. He fell to the ground 
bleeding profusely. At least, he'd 
probabty survive and get back to 



Terra. 

I had seconds to live. As I said, 
we Terrans don't show up so well 
in the games. The gladiators from 
any planet can take us. Oh, I don't 
mean that a Terran couldn't defeat 
one Mercurian Bouncer, or one Calypso Dwoorf, but face our three 
Terrans with the whole Calypso, or 
the whole Mercurian delegation and 
we don't last very long. 

I had seconds to live. They were 
all centering toward me, taking side 
swipes at one another if the opportunity allowed, but heading for me. 

Ordinarily, before a contest, my 
manager fills trie full of last minute 
aidvice and intructions; ut I'd 
hardly seen him in the past few 
months. I'd been too busy reading 
Suzi's books about the ancients. I 
was on my own. 

I didn't have time to figure it out. 
It just happened automatically. I 
remembered something and before 
I had time to place the memory, 
I had taken the emerald from my 
belt, held it up momentarily so 
they could all see it, and yelled, 
"For the greatest fighter of all," 
and threw it into the midst of them. 

Later, I recalled a guy in one of 
Suzi's books having done something 
similar, except I believe he yelled, 
"For the fairest," and threw a golden apple. At any rate, the result 
seemed to be about the same. That 
guy started the Trojan War. 

It gave me a breathing spell. 
They piled on one another until I 
thought that the meet would end 



NOT IN THE RULES 



139 



then and there. A Venusian spiderman bent to pick up the emerald 
and had five of his limbs and his 
head cut off before he could straighten again. A Gadaboot grabbed it 
and tried to dart out of the crush 
but ran into the darting rapier of 
a Uranian. Rising dust swirled up 
and enveloped the rest. 

In moments, the fight had settled down into a series of individual combats all over the field. 

I could see the slow moving Slaber from Jupiter stalking about 
weaponless, seizing and crushing all 
with whom, he came in contact. I 
could see the Mercurian Bouncers 
dying like flies, but killing their 
share and more of opponents with 
the razor sharp spurs attached to 
their feet. They would fling themselves high into the air and come 
down from above, heels slashing 
death. 

T had no more time to observe. 
Five remaining Calypso Dwoorjs 
disengaged themselves from a fight 
centering about two Venusians, 
spied me, and dashed in my direction. 

ORDINARILY, the Calypso gladiators would be even weaker 
than we Terrans, but they have the 
advantage of a universal mind. That 
is, they think together. Each knows 
what every other Dwoorf is thinking; it goes beyond mere mental 
telepathy. They act as though they 
were a single individual. Talk about 
team work! You get three or four 



of them about you, all working in 
complete and perfect harmony, and 
you're sunk. 

I groaned for my manager's advice again and resigned myself. 
When they got within fifteen feet 
of me they opened their mouths and 
cried in unison. "Prepare to die, 
Terran makron." 

For a second that did it. I raised 
my short sword and started toward 
them. They spread out like a fan 
to encircle me. Once again I didn't 
consciously figure it out. The idea 
came spontaneously with my acting 
upon it. I just suddenly turned on 
my heel and started to run. They 
followed me like a pack. 

I'd gotten halfway across the 
arena and could hear the thousands 
in the arena seats booing me like 
thunder, before it came back to me 
what I'd read. It was a trick some 
gladiator from Rome or Greece had 
pulled once. I looked over my 
shoulder. Sure enough, they were 
still coming, but now they were 
strung out in a line. The fastest 
runner of them all was only a short 
distance behind me, the slowest, 
quite a ways back. The other three 
were in between at varying distances. 

This next is going to sound like 
it took some time but actually it 
was all over in split seconds. 

I stopped, whirled, and said tightly to the one pressing me, "Who's 
calling who a makron now?" At 
the same time my sword parried his 
and ripped into his unprotected bel


IMAGINATION 



Iy. He died, his eyes wide with 
surprise and pain. 

I hardly had time to disengage 
my sword before the second Dwoorf 
was upon me. I dropped to one 
knee and slashed upward cutting 
completely through his right arm. 
The arm fell to the ground, his 
hand still clutching the three pronged javelin with which he'd expected 
to spit me. He screamed in agony 
and stumbled away hopelessly trying to staunch the flow of blood 
with his left hand. 

The third came running up, both 
hands high over his head, ready to 
bring down his battle ax. I kicked 
him savagely with a spiked shoe, 
cracking a knee and bringing him 
to the ground. I could have finished him then and there but didn't 
have the time. The fourth, yelling 
like a maniac, slashed into me, his 
blade ripping my right arm from 
elbow to shoulder. He brought up 
his sword for another stroke. 

I was short winded from the 
long run across the arena and from 
the fast action of the past few moments. I drew all my strength together and lunged desperately forward. My sword pierced his throat. 
He fell, writhing, taking my blade 
with him. 

I stood up wearily to confront the 
fifth one. My arm was bleeding 
freely and I had no weapon nor 
time to get one. 

He came shouting, raging with 
bloodlust and desire for revenge. 
His arm flew back for the javelin 



cast when a Plutonian Gadaboot 
shot out from a nearby melee and 
struck him from the rear. The 
Dwoorf collapsed, bleeding his life 
away in moments. The Gadaboot 
straightened up, shrilling its death 
whistle, preparatory to darting at 
me, but a Mercurian Bouncer, 
wounded and fluttering, came down 
from above and made a last desperate stroke. They died together. 

T shook my head to clear it, and 
reached down to disengage my 
sword from the neck of the fallen 
Dwoorf I'd killed last. I looked 
about. There were no others near 
me. 

For a moment there was a breathing spell. In the past ten minutes, 
two thirds of the contestants had 
either died or had been carried off 
the field incapacitated. Those of 
us that remained were wounded but 
still in the fight. As I stood there 
staggering, panting, aching, it occurred to me that never before had 
a Terran lasted so long in an Interplanetary Meet. 

As though by common consent, 
we all gravitated toward the center of the arena. This was it. In 
the next few moments the contest 
would be over. 

And so would I. 

As I stumbled forward, a wounded Martian staggered to his feet 
and made a half-hearted stab at 
me. I bypassed him. He was too 
far gone to fight. Shortly, the 
judges' assistants would get to him * 



NOT IN THE RULES 



141 



and take him from the field; possibly he'd have a chance to survive. I had no desire to finish him 
off. In fact, I envied him. 

We were quiet momentarily; and 
so was the crowd. A hush hung 
over the whole arena. I noted in 
seconds that among the survivors 
were two of the four limbed Martians, half a dozen Bouncers, the 
gigantic Slaber from Jupiter, one of 
the Calypso Dwoorjs almost helpless now that his fellows were all 
gone, three or four Gadaboots, and 
a Venusian spiderman. 

I wondered vaguely if my namesake, that gladiator of the fabulous days of the legendary United 
States, the original Jak Demsi, had 
ever found himself in a spot like 
this. I suppose that he had, possibly worse. Suzi, who gave me 
the name, saying that it would be 
good for publicity, claimed he was 
one of the greatest of all. I shook 
my head again, trying to clear it, 
my loss of blood making me faint. 

And then it broke. The dust 
swirled high as we rushed together. 
I felt a crushing blow, tried .to deal 
one back, was struck again by the 
ponderous gladiator from Jupiter 
and was thrown heavily to the 
ground. 

I tried to" push myself to my 
knees, my already bloody sword 
still in hand, still at the ready. I 
was in the center of the crush. This 
was the end. Suzi flashed before 
my mind. 

Well, there was a tremendous 



controversy afterward and I was 
brought before the judges and the 
diplomats more like a prisoner than 
the victor of the Interplanetary 
Meet. I was laden down with 
bandages and weak from loss of 
blood but they didn't look in the 
least- sympathetic, not even the 
judge and diplomats from Terra. 

They got right to the point. 

The Martian judge, as senior, 
since the meet was taking place on 
his planet, acted as spokesman. He 
was excited and indignant and 
would wave three or four of his 
arms at a time to emphasize his 
point. I thought vaguely of one 
of the olden time windmills I'd 
seen pictured in one of Suzi's books. 

"Gladiator Jak Demsi," he rapped, "Our tendency is to rule your 
conduct in the affray so unbecoming that not only will the prize 
not be awarded you, as last standing contestant on the field, but we 
are considering . . ." 

I wasn't having any. After coming through that scrap, I wasn't 
ever figuring on taking a back seat 
again. I interrupted him, growling, "I'm willing to stand behind 
anything I did in the arena on the 
grounds that It was compatible 
with Terran custom and therefore 
allowable on the part of a Terran 
gladiator." 

The Venusian judge sneered, 
without bothering to say anything; 
the Plutonian tittered his disbelief; 
the Terran judge blinked at me, 
shocked by my words. 



142 



IMAGINATION 



I was getting mad. "In the press 
box, you'll find two reporters 
from Terra. Bring them here. They 
are both students of Terran history 
and ancient custom and will support what I say." 

Suzi and Alger Wilde were located and brought before us after 
a brief debate between the judges. 
By their appearance, it was obvious 
that the press box boys had similar 
ideas to those of the judges. Suzi 
showed signs of concern about my 
wounds but she also half indicated 
that 1 was a leper. There was no 
half about it as far as Alger Wilde 
was concerned. 

"You might have died like a man, 
Demsi," he said sharply, "instead 
of bringing disgrace to Terra." 

The Martian judge said coldly, 
"This gladiator claims that his astounding actions in the arena were 
excusable on the grounds that everything he did is in accord with 
Terran customs and, consequently, 
permissible by the rules of the Interplanetary Meet." 

Suzi's eyes widened. Alger Wilde 
began to protest. 

I didn't give them a chance to 
deny anything. "Just what are the 
complaints?" I asked the judge. 

"As though they weren't obvious," he snorted, beginning to 
wave his arms again. "First, your 
trick of throwing the emerald, the 
Princess was so kind to honor you 
with, into the midst of the others 
and thus diverting the strife from 
yourself. This was an act of " 



"Strategy," I interrupted him. 
"The custom is to be found in Terran history. An old maxim of the 
Sioux Indians was 'Divide and Conquer.' That's what I did. I got 
my opponents to fighting among 
themselves so that I could defeat 
them easier." 

"The Romans, not the Sioux Indians/' Alger muttered. 

"Then you mean that this was 
actually a maxim of Terra?" the 
judge said in surprise. I could see 
the other judges and diplomats, including those from earth, were as 
shocked as the Martian. 

"Well, yes," Suzi told him. "Of 
course, they usually didn't use quite 
the method that Jak did. . . ." 

The judge snorted again. "Be that 
as it may, I don't see how Demsi 
can justify his fleeing before the 
Calypso gladiators like a common 
coward. Meet rules are that each 
gladiator must fight any who oppose him." 

Suzi shot a worried look at me. 

"Right in accord with Terran 
history and custom," I said decisively. "For one thing, it was always a 
basic rule with a Terran general to 
choose the battlefield where the 
fight was to be joined. It was 
considered a major advantage. Another maxim was, 'Git there fustest, 
with the mostest.' I merely ran to 
the ground that best suited me, and 
then, when the Calypso Dwoorjs 
were no longer the mostest, I fought 
them one at a time." 

The judge raised his eyes ques


NOT IN THE RULES 



1 43 



tioningly at Alger and was rewarded 
with a gruding nod. 

>~pHE Martian shook his head as 
though in disbelief but went 
on. "Those two matters you have 
explained, surprisingly, but acceptably. But to this last charge there 
can be no possible honorable background in Terran custom. I refer 
to the fact that in the final conflict you fell as though dead and 
remained on the ground until the 
other contestants had all but eliminated each other. When only the 
badly wounded Slaber and the half 
dead Venusian gladiator remained, 
you got up again and, reentering 
the fight, finished off these opponents." 

The judge threw up his four 
hand in horror. "Certainly, you 
can't claim justification for that! 
Not on any grounds, not by and. . ." 

I stood up as straight and defiantly as my heavy bandages would 
allow. ''Listen," I growled. "It's 
one of the oldest traditions of Terra. It's called PLAYING POSSUM." 

For a full minute silence fell on 
the whole group. Then I could 
hear one diplomat whisper questioningly to another. "Playing possum? What does that mean?" 

And then with one of the most 
outstanding bits of pure statesmanship the system has even seen, Suzi 
took up the cue and spoke in collaboration. 

"He ; s quite right. Playing pos


sum is in full accord with Terran 
custom. Why," she added innocently, "earth always acts in that manner. She pretends she's weak, helpless, someone to be ignored; and, 
then, suddenly, and without warning, she shows her full strength." 

The various judges and diplomats shot glances at each other 
from the sides of their eyes, especially those from Venus, Saturn, and 
Pluto. 

The Terran judge was no makron. 
When somebody yelled glorm he 
knew enough to grab the gaboot 
and run with it. He looked at Suzi 
and I severely. "Say no more, 
either of you. You are not here 
to reveal Terran secrets." 

The other diplomats eyed each 
other again, nervously. 

The Martian judge, more genial 
now, said, "Undoubtedly, a mistake 
has been made due to our lack of 
knowledge of Terran customs and 
practices. The emerald shall be 
awarded the Terran gladiator, Jak 
Demsi, as soon as it is found. It 
is undoubtedly still in the arena 
in the possession of some slain contestant." 

I took it from my belt. "As a 
matter of fact, I have it here. I 
picked it up while playing possum 
under that heap of corpses. It's an 
old custom handed down from a 
Terran city named Brooklyn. 'When 
you see something that ain't nailed 
down, latch onto it.' " 

Alger Wilde left the room hur


144 



IMAGINATION 



riedly, followed band in hand by 
Suzi and I. It was time for the 
diplomats to begin their wrangling, 
the wrangling that would settle the 
fate of worlds. As we passed 
through the door, I could see the 



anticipation on the faces of the diplomats from Terra. 

From what I heard later, they 
must have given the other diplomats kert. If you'll pardon my 
language. 



THE END 




A few months ago, a prominent 
national magazine requested an 
interestingly written popular article 
on atomic energy from an internationally famous American scientist. 
It got the article and went to work 
preparing it for publication. After 
editorial work and makeup the magazine went to press and in a short 
time thousands of copies had been 
printed preparatory to going to subscribers and the news stands. 

But then the Atomic Energy Commission got hold of a copy of the 
magazine. Moving like lightning, the 
A.E.C. clamped a confiscatory order 
on the printed magazines and stopped the presses. It ordered all copies of the article destroyed. There 
was nothing to do but comply. 

Then the repercussions began. The 
article was rewritten, the material 
which offended the A.E.C. removed, 
and the magazine went to press 
without further interruption. But 
the howl against censorship began. 
The scientist who had written the 
article painstakingly pointed out to 
the members of the Commission that 
nothing he had written the first 
time could not be found anywhere 



Science 



else. It was common knowledge, he 
claimed. 

The Atomic Energy Commission 
answered its attackers with a reasonable reply. They said that if they 
were sure war was coming soon, 
they'd clamp absolute secrecy on everything. But they admitted that if 
they knew war wasn't coming within thirty years, they'd abandon see-' 
crecy entirely! 

Its hard for us on the sidelines 
to judge whether this type of censorship is right or not, but we've 
got a feeling that it's unnecessary 
and harmful to our real efforts. In 
spite of all, the hedges and guards 
erected during wartime, it seems 
that the major combatants, industrially of the same caliber, generally produce weapons and counterweapons one right after the other. 

Meanwhile during peactime, any 
secrecy efforts at all seem to hurt the 
country's own scientists more than 
anyone. Right now, there are hundreds of atomic energy projects in the 
U.S., many of which do not know 
what is going on in their own field 
at some other institution. A scientist working on atomic energy at 



SECRET SCIENCE 



Cal Tech, can't know what his colleagues are doing 1 at the U. of C. 
unless he goes through "channels." 
And then by the time he learns 
something, the work has been duplicated or he's failed to make one of 
those simple little applications which 



often make the difference between 
failure and success. 

We say this ; you can't advance 
scientifically, if your left hand doesn't know what your right hand is 
doing. 



THE ( 'ham" radio operator and 
builder is now a well known 
fixture of the American scene, particularly since the advent of TV 
when he became the cause of all 
the interference with TV receivers 
of the neighbors. The minute something goes wrong with the TV receiver, Joe Blow says "It's that jerk 
radioman down the street,'' not realizing that the chances are a thousand to one that it isn't at all. Hams 
are watched too closely by the FCC 
for that. 

Radio amateurs are entering the 
field of television — as would be expected — by another entry. The technical problems associated with this 
new form of entertainment and the 
fascinating scientific capabilities of 
this new medium act as an irresistible lure for the amateur who can't 
resist a scientific gadget. As a result 
a number of amateurs have built 
their own TV stations, transmitter 
included. When one realizes the complexity of the instrument, one is 
forced to admire the ingenuity of 
people who can do something like 
that. 

Regardless of the obstacles, the 
amateurs have gone ahead compounding their magnificent stations 
from war-surplus materials, a little 
money, plenty of skill, and access to 



numerous~"junkboxes. 

The point of all this activity is 
very sharp and clear. The last war 
proved the importance of their role. 
Hams were everywhere with their 
highly specialized knowledge. In no 
small measure did they contribute 
to eventual victory. The U.S. always 
had on hand a backlog of highly 
skilled technicians from whom it 
could draw lavishly — and did. 

Any future war, almost certain 
to use radio, radar, and television 
communications in enormous quantities, particularly for the skilled art 
of guided missiles, will find the U.S. 
filled with large numbers of men 
to whom TV is as familiar as radio, 
to whom a guided missile is nothing 
more than a flying TV set, and to 
whom a radar beam is no different 
than the transmitting antenna atop 
their houses! 

This tremendous nucleus of talent 
is being encouraged to enter the new 
field of radar and TV even though 
the technical problems of correlating the activities of so many transmitters seem insurmountable. The 
reasons are clear. 

And one thing must certainly be 
kept in mind: it is almost a dead 
certainty that the communications 
officer aboard the Moon-rocket will 
be an ex-ham! 




Mr. Tedder was quite sure that a strip tease 
dancer had no place in his physics classroom. But 
what bothered him more was how she got therel 




Mr. Tedder was quite sure that a strip tease 
dancer had no place in his physics classroom. But 
what bothered him more was how she got there! 

THE strip teaser materialized Tedder was freslf out of college, 
in the first period physics and anxious to make good in his 
class at Terre Haute's Tech- first teaching job. He'd been given 
nical High School. Physics II, a tough class for a newIt all happened just because Mr. teacher. His pupils, a set of hard



147 



148 



-IMAGINATION 



ened n-A boys, were sure of themselves and so were the few girls in 
the class. It was with hopes 
of shaking that assurance that Mr. 
Tedder had spei.t a month of afterschool hours studying an article on 
■ Ziegler's effect. He also hoped, but 
With, less faith than wistfulness, 
that a demonstration of Ziegler's 
effect might shock his class into 
staying awake. Above all, Mr. Tedder felt that his Junior boys might 
be considerably edified by an electrical phenomenon that was not yet 
understood by the best physical 
theorists of three planets. 

Mr. Tedder wanted to give his 
class a good show. So, with more 
feeling for dramatic effect than for 
scientific good sense, he'd wound the 
three solenoids with heavy insulated silver wire rather than with the 
light copper wire Ziegler had reported using. On the theory that, 
if he were to demonstrate the Ziegler effect it would be best to demonstrate a whole lot of it, Mr. Tedder contrived a battery of the new 
lithium-reaction cells. The direct 
current from this powerful battery 
was transformed by an antique, but 
workable, automotive spark coil. 

The bell rang as usual that morning, marking the beginning of the 
first class. Twenty pupils filed into 
the physics classroom and took their 
seats. Eighteen of them slumped 
down in an attitude which suggested that, although they were prepared to accept stoically the hour's 
ordeal, they weren't going to allow 
themselves to be taught anything. 



After all, Tech had lost last night's 
game to Walbash: what physical 
phenomenon could hope to shake 
off that grim memory? There was a 
shuffling of papers as the boys in 
the back seats pulled comic books 
from their notebooks. Guenther and 
Stetzel, sitting up front, pulled 
sheets of paper from notepads and 
headed them, "The Ziegler Effect." 

The classroom settled into an uneasy silence. Mr. Tedder waved an 
instructive hand toward the apparatus set up on the marble top of 
the demonstration bench. "As you 
can see, I have a set of three solenoids, or coils of insulated wire, 
connected to a source of alternating current. A sudden surge of this 
current through the outermost solenoid will give an iron-cerium alloy 
bar placed at the center of the apparatus an impetus toward horizontal motion." Stetzel and Guenther, who were conscientious, took rapid notes. The rest of the class 
was divided between those students 
who were surreptitiously catching 
up on the adventures of "The Rocket Patrol" and those who were 
quietly sinking into sleep. 

1VTR. Tedder continued. "The alloy bar's initial movement will 
be frustrated, as it were, by the 
action of a second solenoid placed 
within and at right angles to the 
first. A third coil, within and at 
right angles to each of the outer 
two, completes the process. The 
winding ratios of the three solenoids 
are 476:9:34." Stetzel and Guen- * 



AN EEL BY THE TAIL 



149 



ther scribbled the numbers rapidly; 
Ned Norcross, in the back row, 
stirred in his sleep, and two members of the Class of 'g$ who shared 
a volume of the Rocket Patrol's exploits agreed to turn the page. 

"What happens to the bar of 
iron-cerium at this point is a matter of conjecture. AH observers are 
agreed only in that it disappears. 
Perhaps it leaves the coils so rapidly that it neither injures the wires 
nor can it be seen. Perhaps the bar 
passes through a temporary fissure 
in the three-dimensional system we 
perceive, falling into some yet-unconceivable other dimension. Doctor 
Ziegler, who first observed this effect, inclines to this latter belief." 
Mr, Tedder placed his fingers on 
the telegraph key he'd rigged up 
to close the circuit through his apparatus. "Watch closely," he cautioned, tapping down on the key. 

* * * 

On the twenty-third planet at a 
distant sun-~a planet called by Us 
inhabitants a name for which there 
are no equivalents in human phonetics — a Young Being in the early 
stages of pre-maturity tangled the 
minds of his elders with feelings 
of anguish. His teacher had disappeared! 

* * * 

Ned Norcross, who was taking 
Junior Physics II for the third 
time, had his mind on neither the 
Ziegler Effect nor the tragic results 
of last night's basketball game. He 



was slumped at his desk, dreamily 
rehearsing the topography of one 
Honey LaRue, a strip teaser who 
nightly practiced her art at the 
Club Innuendo. Norcross pried himself up on one elbow to glance toward the clock above the demonstration bench, then slumped forward, on his desk in a faint. Up on 
the marble top of the demonstration bench, pulling off a right silk 
glove in time to the lazy ripple of 
a snare-drum, danced Honey LaRue. 

Mr. Tedder yelped, and immediately regretted it. He'd had two 
beers three days before; could that 
bring on hallucination at this late 
date? But Honey had gone, taking 
the Ziegler coils with her. One terminal of the telegraph key was still 
connected to the plate on the spark 
coil, the other wire ended in a 
little knot of fused silver. No, this 
wasn't the effect that Doctor Ziegler had reported, not at all! 

^0 cover his confusion Mr. Ted* "der began to talk. "There, 
you've just seen the Ziegler effect 
in action. Explain what you've just 
seen and you H be famous among 
men." Indeed, the cerium-iron alloy 
bar had disappeared; but so had 
20,000 cm. of No. 40 silver wire, 
silk-insulated. But the boys — except, of course, Stetzel and Guenther — hadn't noticed. Mr. Tedder 
glanced over his shoulder to the 
clock, saw that it would be fifteen 
minutes before the class would end, 



1 5 o mm 

and made a quick decision in the 
interest of his sanity. ''Class dismissed! " he said. 

There was a stupefied second 
while the news soaked into dormant 
nervous systems. Then the boys 
were shouting across the room, 
grabbing up books, and hurrying 
out into the hall to take noisy advantage of their moment of freedom. Stetzel and Guenther, as behooved the top pupils of the Class 
of '95, hurried up to Mr. Tedder 
to check their notes. 

"The symbol for cerium is £ Ce, 5 
isn't it?" Stetzel asked. 

"Yes. But now ..." 

"How did you do that, Mr. Tedder?" Guenther interrupted. 

"Do what?" Mr. Tedder glanced 
suspiciously at Guenther. Perhaps 
it hadn't been those two beers. 

''You had a woman dancing, right 
up where those solenoids were," 
Guenther said. 

"That's what I saw," Stetzel substantiated. "What a movie! She sure 
looked three-dimensional to me. 
Wow! " 

"Yes," Mr. Tedder said, canceling his decision of a moment before, to lay off beer. "That was just 
a little stunt I thought up to see 
how many of you were paying attention. New optical principle, you 
know. Now if you'll excuse me, I've 
got to get things ready for the next 
class. And wake up Norcross on 
your way out, will you?" 

Stetzel jarred Norcross from unconsciousness and walked out into 



the hall, talking and gesturing significantly with Guenther. Norcross 
unfolded himself slowly, glanced 
with a furtive eye toward Mr. Tedder and the empty bench-top, and 
walked rapidly out of the room, 
down the stairs, and into the school 
physician's office. 

Alone, Mr. Tedder frowned at 
the bereft lithium battery and telegraph key. He had pressed the key, 
closing the circuit, and there'd been 
a spurt of flame. A strange girl had 
appeared, dancing on the marble top 
of the demonstration bench. He'd 
never seen the woman before; a tall 
blonde wearing very little . . . 
What the devil! There she was 
again. 

Mr. Coar, principal of Tech, 
walked toward the door to the physics classroom, rehearsing the speech 
he was going to deliver upon Tedder. "Young man, Tech does not 
approve of the practice of letting 
students out into the halls before 
the end of the period. Their racket 
has shaken the walls of classrooms 
on three floors. What have you to 
say for yourself, Mr. Tedder?" Yes, 
that would do nicely. Mr. Coar opened the door. 

MR. Tedder was leaning against 
a front-row desk, nodding appreciatively as a sketchily-clad 
young lady danced for him. "TEDDER!" the principal bellowed. 
"Stop that!" 

Honey LaRue faded, and the 
space between telegraph key and 
lithium battery was empty again. 



AN EEL BY THE TAIL 



"Stop what?" Mr. Tedder inquired, wide-eyed with innocence. 

"Stop letting your classes out 
early so that you can spend your 
time gloating over your . . . your 
..." Mr. Coar groped for a stinging adjective, drew a blank, and 
concluded weakly, "... your movies!" 

"Did you see her, too?" 

"I did, indeed. You came here 
highly recommended by Indiana 
University, Tedder; and, frankly, I 
didn't expect this sort of thing from 
you." 

"Mr. Coar, I believe that I've 
stumbled across a novel physical 
phenomenon." 

"Anatomy was being studied in 
1600 A.D., young man," Mr. Coar 
observed, his voice dripping sarcasm, "and is scarcely any longer 
a 'novel physical phenomenon'." 

"Sit down, sir." Mr. Tedder offered the principal the top of a 
desk in the front row. "Now, what 
did you expect to see when you 
came in here?" 

"The apparatus of a physics laboratory — all those gears and coils 
and tubes and . . . things," Mr. 
Coar vaguely enumerated. "Certainly not a . . . " The principal sat 
heavily on the desk top, bulge-eyed. 
On the marble top of the demonstration bench was a Goldberg-esque 
network of machinery, a perfect reproduction of the principal's uncertain notions concerning scientific 
gadgetry. 

"How the devil did you do that, 



151 

Tedder?" 

"People have been asking me all 
morning. I don't know. I don't think 
that I did do it." 

"Has that girl ..." Honey LaRue reappeared on the bench, and 
the air vibrated with the drums' 
seductive roll "... been here before?" 

"Yes, sir. Couple of boys in my 
class saw her, too." 

"Where are they now?" 

Mr. Tedder glanced up at the 
clock. "It's second period by now. 
Stetzel is in Latin III, I believe; 
and Guenther's in Microbiology II." 

Mr. Coar went over to the loudspeaker in the corner of the room, 
pressed a button, and spoke to his 
secretary, up in the school office. 
"Ann, send me students Guenther 
and Stetzel. Rooms 103 and 309." 
He switched the blat-box off. He 
turned toward the empty demonstration bench, wrinkled his forehead in concentration, and looked 
up. A pot of geraniums was standing on the marble bench-top. 

"Whew! It knows what I'm 
thinking aboutl" 

"Looks that way, doesn't it." 

"But nothing can do that. Not 
electricity, nor electronics, nor even 
cybernetics." 

"Nothing that we know about 
could, sir. What would you suggest 
that I do with the screwy thing?" 

TV TR. Coar, caught off guard, 
made a suggestion which was 



IMAGINATION 



more witty than helpful. The classroom door swung open, and Stetzel 
and Guenther hurried in together, 
vocally wondering at their release 
from schedule. "Good morning, Mr. 
Coar; Mr. Tedder. Did you want 
us?" Stetzel asked. 

"Did you see a woman in here?" 
the principal demanded. 

"Yes, sir," Guenther said. "The 
movie, you mean." 

"So you saw her, too. That rules 
mass hypnosis out," Mr. Coar illogically decided, glancing suspiciously toward the young physics instructor. 

The classroom door swung open 
again, admitting two teachers. Mr. 
Percy N. Formeller, known to two 
generations of biology students as 
Old Preserved - In - Formaldehyde, 
was full of indignation at the preemption of Guenther from his microbiology class. Miss Maclntire, 
Latin I-V, followed, equally indignant over Stetzel's defection from 
Marcus Porcius Cato. 

"Mr. Coar," Mr. Formeller demanded, "what is the meaning of 
this? Guenther left in the middle 
of a movie on Trypanosoma gambiense, disturbing my entire class. 
In Technicolor, too," the biology 
instructor finished, accusingly. 

"And how about calling Stetzel 
out of my class during the Third 
Punic War!" Miss Maclntire said. 

Mr. Coar defended himself. "We 
have something here which is unique, 
possibly of great value to science." 
Miss Maclntire sniffed. Science was 
something that students elected to 



take instead of Latin. "I'm happy 
that you two teachers came in. You 
may be able to help us throw some 
light on our problem. You took the 
precaution of placing your classes 
in the hands of responsible monitors, I hope?" 

"Of course! " Miss Maclntire 
snapped. 

"What is the nature of this 
'unique something' that our Mr. 
Coar mentioned, Mr. Tedder?" Old 
Preserved - In - Formaldehyde spoke 
as one who seeks to calm troubled 
waters. 

"I frankly believe it to be an 
unearthly life-form," Mr. Tedder 
said. "Telepathic and hallucinative, 
by my guess, and definitely not from 
this earth." 

Mr. Formeller, who kept his threeyear subscription to Improbable 
Stories a closely-guarded secret, 
glanced about him for the extraterrestrial life-form. He shouted. 
There on the demonstration bench 
was a green-skinned monster, an 
eight-foot tall caricature of a Tyrantosaurus Rex. holding a nubile 
and light-clad young lady under its 
right foreleg. There was a "thump" 
beside the biology teacher as Miss 
Maclntire fainted to the floor. 
Stooping gallantly to pull his colleague back to her feet, Mr. Formeller stopped thinking of the telepathic, hallucinative, and green Tyrantosaurux Rex, which, grinning, 
disappeared. 

ly/TR. Coar stared toward the 
-L"- empty demonstration beech, 



AN EEL BV THE TAIL 



*S3 



wrinkled his forehead in concentration, and was again rewarded by 
the pot-of-ge rani urns - made-manifest. "See?" he asked rhetorically. 
"It becomes anything you want it 
to." 

"Curious." Mr. Formeller glared 
toward the table. A small, orange 
insect appeared. The biology teacher bent over it and counted the spots 
on the orange anterior wings. "Six 
spots. A real bipunctata, of a common local variety, or I don't know 
my Coleoptera." An idea struck him, 
and he backed rapidly away from 
the bench. He turned to Mr. Tedder. "I wouldn't go too close to 
the thing, if I were you. It creates 
these things for a purpose. I believe that this hallucinative power, 
as you call it, is the logical development of protective coloration, mimicry, and similar devices used by 
earthly creatures to elude their enemies and to lure their prey." 

"You mean, this beast on the 
table top mimics what we're thinking about in hopes of- drawing us 
close enough to seize us and eat 
us?" asked Miss Maclntire. 

"Roughly, yes." Mr. Formeller 
nodded. "We've no way of knowing the metabolic processes, the 
thought patterns, or even the true 
form of the creature. Its action in 
creating a pleasant picture may be 
as automatic as the Starrkrampj reflex, or playing 'possum, is to foxes 
and oppossums and Leptinotarsum 
decemiineatae." Mr. Formeller paused, hoping that his erudition was 



showing. 

Miss Maclntire, who had seated 
herself back at a third-row desk, 
remarked, "I do wish that the beast 
were a rational creature." 

There was a flurry in the air 
above the demonstration bench as 
a togaed Greek gentleman came into being. He raised a portentious 
index finger, exclaimed an involved 
Greek observation and disappeared. 

"It can talk!" Mr. Coar marveled. 

"It said, 'You've got an eel by 
the tail'." Miss Maclntire translated. "Greek." 

"Like having a bull by the horns, 
or an armful of greased pig," Stetzel commented. 

"If you'll excuse me," Guenther 
said, : 'it seems to me that the thing 
has some will of its own. For one 
thing, whatever form it takes, that 
form is not ambiguous or wavering, 
as an image in the mind's eye must 
be." 

"What's more," Stetze! continued 
his friend's argument, "it can say 
things that are presumably not in 
the mind which called it into being. 
For example, using Greek to explain itself — I hope that I'm being 
clear — shows that the creature has 
imaginative power, as weU as the 
ability to read our minds." 

Percy N. Formeller hadn't been 
listening. Psychological investigations could wait until there was a 
good, solid foundation of physical 
fact on which to build. "I wonder 
H it's carnivorous?" be murmured. 



IMAGINATION 



i54 

MR. Tedder nodded. He approved of Mr. Formeller's method. 
Strictly scientific. "I have some 
meat in my lunch," Mr. Tedder said. 
He walked carefully around the 
demonstration bench, staying a good 
five meters away from the potential 
carnivore. If the creature were a 
meat-eater, Mr. Tedder had no desire to have its feeding-habits demonstrated upon the person of a 
young physics instructor. Back in 
the stockroom Mr. Tedder opened 
his brown paper lunch bag, unfolded the wax paper from the top 
sandwich, and shook out a slice of 
pimento-loaf. He wished that he'd 
brought a less plebian lunch. Pork 
chops, perhaps. Oh, well. Mr. Tedder walked out into the classroom 
holding the slice of meat by one 
ketchup-moist corner. a 

Mr. Formeller impaled the slice 
of pimento-loaf on a length of No. 
8 galvanized wire the physics teacher provided. Like a keeper shoving 
a flank of horse meat into a cageful of Hons, the biology teacher 
thrust the baited wire into the empty air above the demonstration 
bench. 

The pimento-loaf slice disappeared. 

"Carnivorous," Mr. Formeller 
noted with satisfaction. 

"Do you suppose that the creature could get off the table and . . . 
walk around?" Miss Maclntire hoped that her maidenly caution wouldn't be thought an old maid's foible. 

"If it were readily mobile, it 
wouldn't have developed so com


plex a mechanism to lure its prey," 
Mr. Formeller said. "Its various . . . 
what's the classical word, Miss Maclntire?" 
"Protean." 

"Yes. Its protean manifestations 
are a clue to its habits. It is rooted 
to the spot, like a plant." 

"Like Venus' flytrap?" Guenther 
suggested. 

"Yes," the biology teacher approved. "Dionaea muscipula is a 
cogent example of the sort of plant 
I'm talking about. By the way, 
don't you think we ought to name 
this thing? We've been calling it 
'creature' and 'monster' and all 
sorts of things. Most unscientific." 

"We might call it Rete proteanus," Miss Maclntire suggested from 
her third-row seat. "A 'many-formed trap', you know." 

"No, we want a name which suggests its origin as well as its habits." 

"It's not of this world, nor of 
the known solar system," Mr. Tedder commented. 

"That's it. It's an extra-solar; 
no, an extra-galactic being-of-manyforms." 

"Polymorph metagalacticus," Miss 
Maclntire said. "Not an inspired 
name, but it will do, it will suffice." 

Mr. Coar stared at the empty 
space between the telegraph key 
and the bank of lithium-reaction 
cells. His pot of geraniums appeared 
again, then the scarlet flowers wavered, faded, and became gold-andpurple pansies. "Polymorph it is," 
the principal said. His air was that 



AN EEL BY THE TAIL 



155 



of a bishop conferring imprimatur 
upon a lay brother's interpretation 
of a Gospel passage. 

'TPHE pot of pansies disappeared, 
giving way to Honey LaRue. 
The snare-drums swished and chattered, and Honey, who'd rid herself 
of a good deal more than her gloves, 
winked knowingly at Miss Maclntire. Spotting Stetzel, Honey propelled her pelvis several centimeters 
in a horizontal direction, a movement known to the trade as the 
"bump." The Latin teacher uttered 
an unclassical yelp of outraged modesty and averted her head. Stetzel 
grew pink to his ear-tips. This extra-galactic polymorph had no tact 
at all! Honey disappeared with a 
regretful shrug, and the lascivious 
drum-rolls ceased. 

"This sort of thing could become 
dangerous," -Mr. Tedder commented. 

"What can we do with it?" Mr. 
Coar asked. "It wouldn't do to put 
a cage around it. It can't move 
any more than a . . ."geranium plant 
can. And what will we feed it?" 

"Pimento-loaf," the physics instructor suggested. 

"Think of the value this thing 
can have!" Stetzel enthused. "Psychiatrists can see the morbid mindimages of their disturbed patients, 
the paranoics and the like, and devise techniques of cure." 

"By studying the metabolism of 
this polymorph, we can deduce the 
physical conditions of the world it 
came from," Mr. Formeller observ


ed, a glint of the hunter-instinct in 
his eyes. 

"We might even ask it questions 
about the world it came from! " 
Guenther said. "Maybe it would 
show its real form to us, and talk 
or think to us. It's already shown 
a lot of initiative, you know." 

Miss Maclntire, who'd recovered 
from the shock of Honey LaRue, 
spoke up. "We've got an eel by the 
tail, as it said. We can't handle it, 
and we can't let it go. We'll have 
to call in experts in zoology and 
physics ..." Mr. Formeller exchanged outraged glances with Mr. 
Tedder "... and have them study 
the polymorph with the best instruments available." 

"All this is very well," Mr. Formeller said, "but what I'd like 
to know is how this Polymorph 
got into your classroom, Tedder." 

Mr. Tedder cautiously stepped up 
to the demonstration bench and 
took the knob of the telegraph key 
in his fingers. "This was the switch 
in a Ziegler's effect apparatus I'd 
set up for demonstration. I just 
tapped it, like this ..." Mr. Tedder slapped the key down. 

There was a glare of sudden 
greenness, and the air popped like 
a broken vacuum tube as it rushed 
in to occupy space suddenly vacated. 

The Extra-Galactic Polymorph 
was gone. Mr. Coar wrinkled his 
brow and thought furiously of geranium-plants-in-pots, to no avail. 
Miss Maclntire thought wistfully 
of the handsome Greek gentleman 



156 



IMAGINATION 



who'd addressed her with an obscure quotation. Mr. Tedder, Stetzel, and Guenther bent their combined brains to steady consideration of Miss Honey LaRue, and 
for a moment they thought they 
heard the lustful bellow of a supernal saxaphone. But Honey stayed 
away. 

"If we'd only taken photographs!" 
Mr. Formeller wailed. "Maybe the 
things we saw, we saw only in our 
minds. The polymorph's real form 
would have registered on film." 

"Maybe if Mr. Tedder would 
duplicate that apparatus of his, 
and ..." Miss Maclntire paused 
uncertainly. The arcana of physics 
were as unknown to her as was 
the Greek ablative to Mr. Tedder. 
"Well, do the same thing that you 
did before. Maybe he'll come back." 

"No." Mr. Tedder was glum. "It 
won't be back. When you think 
that all objects are constantly 



changing in space and time, you 
see how wonderful it is that anything ever gets anywhere. The Extra-Galactic Polymorph won't be 
back. Its appearance was an accident; a huge, incredible, once-inall-history coincidence." * * * 

On the twenty-third planet of a 
sun of a galaxy that lay beyond 
the ken of even the two-hundredinch mirror of Palomar and the 
giant refractors of Luna; a planet the name of which cannot be 
expressed in human phonetics, a 
Young Being in the early stages of 
pre-maturity chortled with its Id. 
Its teacher was back! Swiftly, the 
youngster threw aside the messy 
slice of pimento-loaf that was draped across the silver cube and commanded, "Zzzrf me a Klompjr!" 
A Klompfr appeared, and the Young 
Being spilled its delight out into the 
minds of its elders. 



THE END 



Featured Next Issue:— 

HELL'S ANGEL 

By ROBERT BLOCH 

Maybe you've wondered what Heaven is like? Paul Hastings found 
out when he stole an Angel right in the shadow of the Pearly 
Gates. Why? It seemed that His Satanic Majesty had a use for 
her — a most diabolical use — one that Hastings, a mere mortal, 
seemed helpless to thwart. ( Yet he had to or the world was doomed! 
RESERVE THE JUNE ISSUE AT YOUR NEWSSTAND NOW. On Sale May l«l 



(Conducted Lu Wuri WJf 



BILL Hamling has asked me, as 
a fan, to write this department 
reviewing fandom and its activities. But first of all I want to answer 
a question that people are always 
asking" me, "Just what is a fan?" 

If you're one of the new readers of 
Imagination and of the science fiction-fantasy field in general, you're 
probably wondering that too. I remember how curious I was about fandom when I first began reading about 
it. I finally decided that I just had 
to meet some fans and find out what 
they were like. 

What are fans? In the first place, 
they're people who love science fiction and fantasy so much that they're 
not content with just reading it. It's 
a major part of their lives. If they 
live within a reasonable distance of 
each other — say up to a hundred 
miles apart—they get together whenever possible. In the big cities this 
is relatively easy. The Los Angeles 
Science-Fantasy Society, for example, 



holds weekly meetings which are usually attended by thirty or forty fans 
from the Los Angeles area. But in 
the smaller towns it's harder to get 
a group of fans together. Some fans 
live so far from their nearest fan 
neighbors that they can't possibly 
visit each other often. But that doesn't stop them from writing to each 
other. Pan letters also appear regularly in the letter columns of the various magazines, and they're seriously 
Written, believe me. 

Most fans get into print eventually, 
in one or another of the amateur publications, called fanzines. If you've 
never seen a fanzine, you've really 
missed something. There are quite a 
few of these magazines, and they vary 
greatly, but they all have one thing 
in common. They're put out, not for 
profit, but because their editors are 
interested enough in fandom to give 
up the hours and hours it takes to assemble and mimeograph and distribute them. Their subscription price. 



157 



IMAGINATION 



covers no more than the cost of the 
materials, and usually not even that. 
The stories and articles and illustrations are all donated, also, and the 
only reward that a fan author or 
artist gets is the pride of seeing his 
work in print. 

It's a lot of work putting out a 
fanzine, and usually it has to be 
done in whatever spare time the editors have. But it's a lot of fun, too. 
Everyone sits around cutting stencils 
and drinking coffee and wondering 
what to nse to fill in that half page 
at the end of the book review column. 
There's an old mimeograph set up in 
one corner alongside the shelves of 
science fiction magazines that the 
group has collected across the years. 
Maybe there's an original cover painting from one of the magazines hanging on the wall. It gives you a very 
fannish feeling, just to be there 
working, and when the issue is finally put together and run off on the 
mimeo and put into the mail, you 
really feel you have accomplished 
something. 

AMONG them, the fanzines cover 
**just about everything connected 
with fantasy and science fiction. 
Some of them are very serious, dealing mainly with new trends in the 
sciences. Others are mainly fiction 
magazines. I've shown fan magazines 
to non-fan readers and had them express amazement over the quality of 
some of these amateur stories. Lots 
of them are different and quite offtrail. 

There is something refreshing in 
a fan's attitude toward life that is 
reflected in the stories and articles 
he writes. Almost all fans are individualists who feel a humorous disrespect for authority in any form. 
Rick Sneary, one of the most prominent of all fans, expressed this atti


tude very well when he said, "The 
trouble with fans is that all of us 
are leaders and none of us are followers, and so we're always running 
in all directions at the same time." 

If you read fanzines you'll see what 
Rick means. Nothing is sacred, not 
even fandom itself. You're quite likely to find an article parodying the 
latest concepts of sociology right 
next to a story where the villains 
are human beings and the heroes are 
kind-hearted vampires who after all 
can make much better use of that 
blood than its original owners could. 
It's all just a matter of viewpoint. 
In fandom you'll find viewpoints by 
the dozen — all different and all stimulating. 

Perhaps you'll disagree violently 
with some of the articles, but that's 
stimulating too. Fans spend a lot of 
time and paper disagreeing with each 
other. Sometimes I think that the real 
reason fans become interested in science fiction in the first place is that 
it's a field where there are so many 
opportunities for a good argument. 
Nothing is set. If you don't like one 
future, you can always pick another. 
Fandom isn't for those who see nothing except a nice, safe grindstone in 
front of their noses. Fans choose 
their own horizons. If I want to state 
that the inhabitants of Galaxy K 
can behave only thus and so, because 
of certain properties peculiar to that 
portion of the universe, I'll say it. 
On paper. And I'll know that at least 
half of my fan friends will be ready 
and eager to tell me enthusiastically 
that I'm crazy. That's what makes 
being a fan so much fun. 

One of the best things about fandom is the number of friends you 
make. Some of them you'll write to. 
Probably there are some youll never 
meet, but youll be friends just the 
same. It's amazing how well you can 



FANDORA'S BOX 



159 



get to know a person just by exchanging letters with him. Then 
sometime when you're traveling 
through his part of the country you 
can stop off and pay him a visit. 
There's always a feeling of suspense 
about such a meeting. You can't help 
wondering if the person you're going 
to see will be the same friend you 
know from his letters, or a stranger. 
You go over to his house and he 
comes to the door and you look at 
each other for a moment. Then he 
invites you to come in and takes 
you up to see his science fiction and 
fantasy collection. You go into his 
room, and it's like being at home 
again, because there are the same 
stacks of magazines in the corner 
and illustrations on the wall. It's a 
fan's room. You don't have to bother 
getting acquainted because you already know each other. It's a wonderful feeling. 

Fans will travel almost any distance to get together with other fans. 
You should witness a World Science 
Fiction Convention. Every fan who 
can possibly make it starts out for 
the Convention City. The 1950 gettogether was held in Portland, Oregon, over the Labor Day weekend, 
and fans came to it from all parts 
of the country. A lot of them drove 
out from the East, picking up other 
fans on the way. 

Many fanzine editors were present, talking over the future of their 
magazines and saying hello to old 
friends and new ones. Some of the 
professional writers and editors were 
there also, and fans found themselves rubbing shoulders and chatting with their favorite authors. 

Perhaps the high point at any Convention is the auction. Every year 
the publishing houses donate original 
cover paintings and interior artwork 
from their magazines to be auctioned 



off to the highest bidders. It's a 
very good way for fans to increase 
their collections, because they can obtain really top work that they couldn't otherwise get. Lots of times also 
a fan who is breaking up his own 
collection will offer it for auction. 
By the time a Convention is over, 
you'll see dozens of tired-looking fans 
starting homeward, clutching their 
precious covers and new books and 
maybe an old first edition that somebody had sold. 

NEXT summer the Ninth World 
Science Fiction Convention will 
be held in New Orleans. All of fandom is looking forward to being 
there. It should be one of the best 
yet. 

It's really amazing how much time 
and effort fans put into fandom. 
They collect science fiction and fantasy magazines, books, and artwork. 
Some of them have huge collections. 
I thought I had seen some big ones, 
but not long ago I saw what is perhaps the ultimate in magazine collecting. I was in Cincinnati and went 
over to meet Darrell Richardson. I 
knew he was one of fandom's leading 
collectors, but I wasn't prepared for 
what he actually has. Throughout 
his house, piled shelf on shelf, is 
every issue of every science fiction 
and fantasy magazine ever published. He also has files of other magazines that aren't in the fantasy field 
but that sometimes print science fiction stories. And he has Canadian 
and English and foreign language 
editions as well. 

Many of his magazines and books 
are extremely rare. Quite a few of 
them are pre-1900. He has complete 
files of Edgar Rice Burroughs — 
every edition of every story he wrote. 
I saw Portuguese Tarzans, Czechoslovakian Tarzans, even Chinese Tar


i6o 



IMAGINATION 



zans. Richardson also owns the complete works of Frederick Faust, better known to the general reader as 
Max Brand. As far as I know, this 
is the only complete Faust collection 
in existence. 

Darrell Richardson edits a fanzine 
called THE FABULOUS FAUST 
FANZINE which no Faust fan 
should be without. It's an exceptionally well done publication, containing material either by or about Faust. 
The current issue, number 3, contains five stories, three of them under the Max Brand name, one under Faust, and one under Nicholas 
Silver. The story "Humming Birds 
and Honeysuckle" has never before 
been published in this version, although another version once appeared in ESQUIRE. The issue also contains a number of Faust's poems. 
But perhaps the best feature in it 
is Faust's own autobiographical ''A 
Sketch of My Life," a vividly touching account of the author's early 
life and hardships. 

If any of you Faust readers would 



like a copy of this fanzine, send fifty 
cents to THE FABULOUS FAUST 
FANZINE, 6 Silver Ave., South Fort 
Mitchell, Covington, Kentucky. Darrell C. Richardson, Editor. You'll be 
glad you did. 

As I said at the beginning of this 
column, this department is to be a 
review of fandom and its activities. 
There are a lot of really good fanzines I know you would be interested 
in, and I want to tell you about all 
of them. So all of you fan editors 
who have a fanzine you'd like reviewed in this department, just mail 
me a copy and I'll write it up and 
give it a good send-off. Send it to 
FANDORA'S BOX, c/o IMAGINATION, P.O. Box 230, Evanston, Illinois. 

And before somebody beats me to 
it I'd like to say that if you open up 
FANDORA'S BOX you won't find 
"The Thing." I had to evict it. Non 
payment of rent. After all, what can 
I buy with Martian kails? 

See you next issue! 

* * * 




Bsar Editor: magazines, but in all my three years 

I've never before written to an of reading I have never read two 

eiit*r nor any magazine, but I felt stories that I liked better than Hal 

tb*t this time I just had te. Annas' "Maid — To Order" or Charles 

I read most of the science-fiction F. Myers' "Vengeance of Toffee" in 



LETTERS FROM THE READERS 



the February issue of IMAGINATION. 

I have never in all my life laughed 
as much as when I was reading 
these two stories. "Toffee" is a delightful character, and I certainly 
urge Mr. Myers to write more about 
her. Hal Annas too has a great talent 
for entertaining. More power to both 
of them! 

Julia Gravenhorst 
156 East 21st St. 
Brooklyn, N.Y. 
We're always pleased— and proud 
—to receive a "first" letter from a 
reader. When we were editing FANTASTIC ADVBNTUBES we used to 
say '."Welcome into the fold!" Well, 
we say the same thing now with our 
own magazine, only more so. As to 
"Toffee" Charlie Myers informs us 
that we can expect a new "Toffee" 
yarn any day now. Rest assured that 
as soon as we get it the story will 
be scheduled for the next possible 
issue. 

As to Hal Annas, we're very glad 
you like his style. He's just one more 
discovery in the writing field that 
We're proud to present to you. And 
while we're talking about Hal, we'd 
like to know from you — and the rest 
of the readers — how you liked his 
Story in this issue. THE LONGSNOZZLE EVENT features hen 
Zitts, Galactic Shamus of the future. He could very well turn out 
to be a series character, much like 
"Toffee" has. But your response will 
determine that. If you like Len Zitts 
and his hilarious crime deduction 
techniques, by all means let us 
know. We'll see that Hal Annas keeps 
writing them. Fair enough? . . . wlh 

AN EDITOR APPROVES 
Dear Bill: 

You may not know it, but enclosed in this letter is a scream of 



rfii 

sheer delight. The February issue of 
IMAGINATION came in this morning, and since its arrival I've been 
reading it avidly. I read the Ted 
Sturgeon story, SHADOW, SHADOW 
ON THE WALL ... and the Hal 
Annas yarn, MAID— TO ORDER! 
right away. And I've started reading 
the new "Toffee" story. However, I 
just couldn't refrain from dropping 
you a note before reading further. 

"Madge" is a beautiful little magazine, Bill — I'm delighted with it. 
And considering that you faced a 
fire at your printing plant and a 
l-ailroad strike at shipping time, I'd 
say that you came through with flying colors. 

Oh, yes, Ted Sturgeon just called 
me and he tells me that he's got a 
TV tieup for SHADOW, SHADOW. 
It will be done over CBS fairly soon. 
That's a fine tribute to a first-rate 
story. 

All the luck in the world. 

Lila Shaffer 
Managing Editor 
Fiction Group 
Ziff-Davis Pub. Co. 
366 Madison Ave. 
New York 17, N.Y. 
Your letter inakes us more than a 
little bit nostalgic, Lila. An editor 
always likes to hear from his readers. But when a friend and former 
associate takes time out to sit down 
and write a letter, it really warms 
the heart. 

We won't say thanks for the nice 
words you had to say about "Madge." 
That would be too inadequate a 
means of telling you how much your 
interest is appreciated. 

But we would like to say here, for 
the benefit of all our readers, that 
FANTASTIC ADVENTURES & 
 are lucky indeed in Having a Managing Editor 
with the keen editorial insight that 



IMAGINATION 



you have. And vjc don't mean that 
idly. In all the years we worked together you showed time and time 
again, that you've got that rare quality that any successful editor must 
have — being able to pick a dam good 
story. We're glad you think we can 
still pick them. And we hope you'll 
continue to read future issues. All 
the best to you and the gang at 
Z-D . . . wlh 

COMMENTS SUPERFLUOUS 

Dear Bill: 

Congratulations on the first issue 
of "Madge" under your guidance. 

I received my copy of the February issue today and I stopped work 
in the middle of a story to read 
everything in it. Further comment 
would be superfluous. 

I'm sure the magazine will prove 
very popular in this — and succeeding 
years. 

Hal Annas 
Suffolk, Va. 
Thanks for the letter, Hal. And 
we're sure, from the popular response 
to your stories already, that you'll be 
right there on the contents page 
helping make "Madge" the excellent 
magazine all of our readers have come 
to expect. Now get back to work on 
that story — and send it in pronto I 
. . . wlh 

MORE BE SIGN 
Dear Ed: 

In the first two issues of Madge 
suggestions for improvement were requested. I have a few points that I 
feel are worth consideration. 

Compare the department headings 
in the first issue with those of the 
second, including the contents page. 
Those little spots seem to cheapen 
the magazine. I have some small 
knowledge of design, and I feel that 
the first issue was superior from that 



aspect. Of course, I would like to 
see even better design in the future. 
Along these lines, the illos seem to 
suffer. The layouts are nice and in 
some cases the drawings themselves 
are pretty fair — such as Bok. But 
your artists could give far more attention to expressing their work more 
adequately. One thing I would like 
to see is a few illos playing up design rather than repeating some incident in the story. For design I 
think of Bok and Calle. The same of 
course holds true for the department 
headings. The present illos on the 
departments are more pulpy. Drop 
them or try to get more design element into them. Perhaps something 
on the abstract side, such as Paul 
Calle does. But abstract, or modern, 
as you may call it, design is what 
is needed to pep Madge up. 

Perhaps I am being too harsh, for 
your artists do have to work under 
no small number of limitations. But 
I want to see Madge assume leadership in its field, and I feel that practicing original approaches is one step 
toward this goal. 

Jack Gaughan 
417 N. Jackson St. 
Springfield, Ohio 
Your suggestions are interesting, 
Jack. We'd like to ask other readers 
to comment. Just what sort of artwork should IMAGINATION feature? And as to original approaches, 
what about the cover on this issue? 
The points about design that you 
raise are certainly worth discussing. 
We'd like to get a lot of viewpoints 
on this subject. And don't forget — 
all of you fans — get your letters in 
promptly for the reader's section. And 
remember the address : IMAGINATION, P.O. Box 230, Evanston, III. 
. . . See you next issue, the first 
week in May . . . wlh 

PRINTED IN U.S.A. 



DON'T MISS YOUR NEXT COPY! 



Due to the unexpected demand for IMAGINATION at the newsstands, and its instantaneous popularity, we are unable to anticipate 
local needs, and therefore many stands receive insufficient copies. You 
may not get future issues if you get there too late. And we will be 
unable to get enough returns to supply mail orders for back issues. 
To avoid such disappointment, why not take advantage of the special 
subscription rates offered 'below. Simply fill out the coupon below and 
send it with your remittance to us. We will take care of the rest. 
And remember, as a subscriber you will be receiving IMAGINATION 
promptly, and at a great saving— you actually will save ten cents a 
copy. 

MAIL YOUR REMITTANCE TO: 
IMAGINATION, P.O. Box 230, EVANSTON, ILLINOIS 



NAME 



ADDRESS 



CITY 



ZONE 



STATE 



I wish to subscribe to IMAGINATION for (check square): 



I I 12 issues 



I I 24 issues 



$3.00 



$6.00 



Enclosed is 



□ cosh 



□ check 



] money order for $ 



Begin my subscription with the 



issue. 



HAVE YOU EVER SEEN 
A FLYING DISK ? 




Do you wonder if there is life on Mars? 
What is the truth about Spiritualism? Is there 
really a life after death? What new discoveries are being made by scientists about 
mental telepathy — ghosts — other planets — • 
insanity — extra-sensory-perception — forecasting the future ? What do people really believe 
in, but are afraid to admit because of fear of 
ridicule or even worse? Do the stars really 
determine your future? What is a mystic? 
What secrets lie in Tibet — in Big Business — j 
in Russia? Where did Man really come 
from? Have you ever attended a seance? Do 
dreams really mean something? 



ANSWER IN 



MAGAZINE 



DEVOTED TO THE MYSTERIOUS, 
THE UNUSUAL, THE STRANGE, THE UNKNOWN 



Here is the most fascinating, most entertaining, most sensational little magazine ever to 
appear on the newsstands of America. Noth-i 
ing is sacred to it. Nothing is suppressed or 
distorted. It is exciting, weird, unusual, 
thought-provoking, stimulating. And most 
important of all, it gives you the right to do 
your own thinking, and provides you with 
all the factors, both true and untrue, for you 
to sift for yourself. Nowhere else can you 
find such a treasure-house of the unusual, 
the strange, the unknown. 



GET YOUR COPY NOW ! 



BUY IT AT YOUR NEWSSTAND, OR ORDER FROM 

CLARK PUBLISHING COMPANY 

1144 ASHLAND AVENUE, EVANSTON, IUINOIS 



