FANTASTIC 

UNIVERSE 

ISCIENCE FICTION 



JO 



JUNE-JIM 

50c • 




TIME IN THY FLIGHT**" LITTLE^N OF SPACE*^, 

- At R,7)' Bradbury by Frank Belknap 

: THE OTHER TIGER THE FIRE AND THE FLESH 

by Arthur C. Clarke by 11 Hoffmann Price 

ALL STORIES IN THIS ISSUE BRAND NEW 



THE BROAD HORIZON 



There has been a growing tendency in recent years to specialize within the 
already heavily specialized twin-fields of science fiction and fantasy. As in 
medicine, engineering and the other sciences, such specialization seems to 
have become the order of the day. 

Thus we have magazines that deal only with the weird or occult, magazines 
limited to interplanetary fiction, magazines devoted to "heavy" science, to 
the sensational or to the earthier aspects of the field. The results of such 
self-limited appeal to splinter audiences have been thoroughly unhealthy. 

All too often a fine story may get kicked around for years without finding 
a niche. Some in-betweeners may never be published at all or worse yet 
may never be written. 

It is our purpose to plug these gaps with the finest off-trail fantasy and 
science fiction we can find. Our aim is synthesis rather than specialization, 
reader entertainment on the most catholic poisible scale rather than rigid 
"policy." j s 

In this issue, for instance, you'll find an out-and-out fantasy, THE FIRJZAND THE FLESH by E. Hoffmann Price, sharing lead-story honors with 
a tale of the distant time -traveling future, TIME IN THY FLIGHT by 
Kay Bradbury and an intensely human story of the day just after tomorrow, NIGHTMARE TOWER by Jacques Jean Ferret, an author new to 
the field. 

You'll find by-lines of well-earned familiarity also upon display — A. 
Bertram Chandler, Eric Frank Russell, Arthur C. Clarke, Frank Belknap 
Long, August Derleth and Fletcher Pratt among them. 

It is our intention to give you the greatest possible variety within the 
entire range of fantasy and science fiction. With this issue we believe we 
have come very close to our goal. 

•Now get in there and read it and we hope you have fun. 



—The Editor 



FANTASTIC 

UNIV ERSE 
Nightmare Tower • • 2 

by Jacques Jean Ferrat 

Viacoua Circle JO 

by A. Bertram Cbatuller 

Little Men of Space <7 

by Frank Belhttaft Long 

The Fiw .iml the. Flesh "l 

by E. Hoffmann Price 

The Maugham Obsession ...... 107 

£y August Derlcth 

ww . u i The Other Tieer 116 

H. L. Herbert , , ., s*t t. 

by Arthur C. Clarke 
President ' 

The Small Bears 119 

by Gene L. Henderson 

Leo Margulies Martians Come in Clouds 129 

Publisher by Philip K. Dick 
The Minister Had to Wait 138 

m Mcrwin, Jr. ^ *°^'* r ® ee 

[ijj IOf Finders Keepers 149 

by Milton Lesser 

War in Heaven 159 

by Fletcher Pratt 
Time in Thy Flight ....... 167 

by Ray Bradbury 

It's in the Blood 171 

by Eric Frank Ritssrll 

Of Those Who Came 17S 

by George Longdvn 

Ale* Schrnibttrs Univcrsc b j^, 1W 

Cover Deii R n by /hf E j ifor 

FANTASTIC UTs'lVERSB.VoJ. I. No. l.ntHtltrdb I -monthly byKINO^B* FUBt.lCATlONS.lNC. 

I L. HERBERT, Prvukl.i.t. «i fhitHtto. Ill Editor:*! anil o.uiii'^ ofiw II WcM 42nd St., N, Y. 

*. N. V. hint-July, |JJ3 SiibMiiMiun ( Umiu S2.50, uliwlc corim 50c. Canadian and [oitfcn roMe earn. Th* chamclcra in Ihia tnaiuHini- art- cnii»i-J* ruiiuin* .TtJ h;i*i no trial inn lo nay nnoni 
ins or dead. COprnsfat. IW3, ny klNOMZE 1'UBLR'A f IONS, INC. " 



nightmare 
tower 

by . . . Jacques Jean Ferrat 



Lynne d!stfl;cd the man from Mars 
on sight. Vet drawn by forces 
beyond her control she let him 
cany her oil to the Red Planet. 



LvNNH Ff.NI.AY HAD HAD 3 ft'W 

headaches in the course of her 
twenty-four years. But she had 
never had a headache like this. 

There had been one as a result of 
her first field-hockey practice at 
the seminar, when she was twelve 
and the hard rubber ball caught 
her squarely above the left eye. 
There had been another, five yean 
later, when she had used a guided 
trip to Manhattan during the 
Christmas holidays to experiment 
with a bottle of crcme de menthe 
in the unaccustomed solitude of a 
hotel room. There had been a third 
as the result of overwork, while she 
was adjusting to her job with die 
group-machine. 

Each of them had been the result 
of an easily discovered cause. This 
headache had come out of nowhere, 
for no perceptible reason. It showed 
no signs of going away. Lynne had 
visited a health-check booth as soon 
as she could find the time after the 
discomfort became noticeable. The 
stamped response on the card had 
been as disconcerting as it was 
vague — Piychosotnaiic, 

Lynne looked across the ncoplast 
tablctop at Ray Cornell and wondered with mild malevolence if hez 
fianci could be responsible for hei 
discomfort. His spoonful of Hcl 
plankton halfway to his mou 



nei 

£ 

ith, 



A NV magjnne ibonU bring * new nsme to tciente fiction — end in thit rery novel end 
moving ttory we believe we ere launching e career ihes will help moke 1951 memorable. 



TMARE TOWER 



Ray was smiling at something Janet 
Downes had said. In her selfabsorption Lynne had not heard 
Janet's remark. Knowing Janet as 
she did, however, she was certain it 
had undertones of sex. 

With his fair height and breadth 
of shoulder, his tanned good-looking features beneath short-cropped 
light hair, Ray wore all the outward trademarks of a twelfthcentury Viking chief or a twentiethcentury football hero. But inside, 
Lynne thought, he was a Mickey 
Mouse. His very gentleness, his 
willingness to adjust, made him 
easily led. 

Lynne forced herself to down 
another spoonful of Helthplankton 
and thought it tasted exactly like 
what it was — an artificial compound composed of sea-creatures, 
doctored up to taste like cereal. 

Mother Wecdon looked down at 
her from the head of the table and 
said, "What's the matter, Lynne — 
don't you fee! well?" 

"I'm all right, Mother Wcedon," 
she said. She felt a pang of fear that 
stirred the discomfort between her 
temples. If she were really sick, 
mentally or physically, Mother 
Wecdon might recommend that she 
be dropped from the team. After 
therapy she would lie reassigned to 
some other group — and the thought 
was insupportable. 

"Don't worry about our Lynne." 
Janet's tone bore a basis of mockery. 
"She has the stamina of a Messalina." 

Damn Janet! Lynne regarded the 



3 

other third of the team with resentment. Trust her to bring a 
name like Messalina into it. Even 
Ray caught the implied meaning 
and blushed beneath hi» tan. Mother 
Wecdon looked at Lynne suspiciously. 

"Better take- things a bit easier," 
Mother Weedon suggested tolerantly. "After all, the team comes 
first." 

"I know," Lynne said listlessly. 
She pushed her i oorl a w a y f rom 
her and waited sullenly while the 
others fumlied theirs. Unable to 
face the possibility of mental illness, she concentrated on Janet* 
wondered what the girl was trying 
to do. 

There was always danger of conflict, she supposed, when two young 
women and a young man were set 
up as a team. Usually the members 
were balanced the other way or 
were all of one sex. But mentally 
at any rate Lynne and Janet 
meshed perfectly with Ray. So they 
had been aligned to live and work 
together on the group-machine 
under Mother Wecdon's watchful 
eye. They had been together now 
for eleven months. 

The trouble with Janet, Lynne 
thought, was that she wasn't the 
sort of girl who registered on men 
at first sight. She was tall, her lack 
of curves concealed by astute willowiness of movement, her halfhomely face given second -glance 
allure by a deliberately and suggestively functional use of Hps and 
eyes. Janet was competitively sexy. 



4 FANTASTIC UNIVERSE 



Lynne, who was as casually aware 
of her own blond loveliness as any 
welt-conditioned and comely young 
woman, hud not considered Janet 
seriously as a rival when she had 
fallen in love with Ray Cornell. 
Now, rubbed almost raw by the 
discomfort of her headache, Lynne 
decided she had underrated Janet. 
She was either going to have to get 
Ray back in line or turn him over 
to the other third of their team. 
Hither way promised complications 
for the future . . . 

The three of them walked the 
thousand meters to the brain-stat ion, a voi d i fig the moving sidewalk strips that would have sped 
them there in three minutes instead 
of fifteen. Lynne, wlio usually enjoyed the stroll through the carefully landscaped urban scenery, 
found herself resenting its familiarity. Besides, her head still ached. 

As they moved past the bazaarblock, halfway to their destination, 
Lynne found herself wincing at the 
brightness of the window-displays. 
Usually she found the fluorescent 
tri-di shows stimulating — but not 
today. Nor was her mood helped 
when Janet, nodding toward the 
plasti-fur coats in one of them said, 
"I wish I'd lived a century ago, 
when a girl really had to work to 
win herself a mink coat." 

And Ray repticd with a smile 
she could only Interpret as a leer, 
"You'd have been a right busy 
Attle mink yourself, Jan." 

Janet gurgled and hugged his 
other arm and Lynne barely re


pressed an anti-social impulse to 
mmm, "Shut up!" at both of them. 

Lynne wondered what was wrong 
with her. Surely by this time she 
ought to be used to Janet's continuous and generally good-humored 
use of the sex challenge on any 
male in the vicinity. It hadn't bothered her much until the headache 
began two days ago- Nor had Ray'i 
good-nature seemed such a weakness. Hitherto she had found it 
sweet. 

On impulse she said, "You two 
go ahead. I'm going to have a 
colafizz. Maybe it will knock some 
of the beast out of me." 

"You could stand having a little 
more of it knocked into you, darling," said Janet. This time Ray 
said nothing. 

Lynne entered a pharmabar and 
pressed the proper buttons, sipped 
the stinging-sweet retort-shaped 
plasti tumbler slowly. The mild 
stimulant relaxed her a little, caused 
the ache in her head to subside to a 
dull discomfort. She felt almost 
human as she took one of the 
moving strips the rest of the way 
so as not to be late to work. 

Their studioff was situated halfway up the massive four-hundred 
meter tower of the brain-station. It 
was shaped like a cylinder cut in 
half vertically and contained a 
semicircular table with banks of 
bullous in front of each sc.it-niche. 
The walls were luminous in whatever color or series of colors was 
keyed to the problem faced by the 
team. At the moment it was blank. 



WARE TOWER 



a sort of alabaster-ivory in tone. 

Ray and Janet were already in 
their places. Their conversation 
CCMed abruptly as Lynne entered 
and slid into her lounger and slipped 
on the collar that keyed her to the 
machine. She wondered what Janet 
had been saying about her, what 
Kay had been replying. 

I'm turning into a paranoiac, 
she thought, managed a smile of 
sorts and said aloud, "What's today's problem?" 

"Feel better, honey?" Ray asked 
her. Lynne nodded. 

Janet, obviously uninterested, 
said, "Disposal of waste-foods so 
as to be useful to highway construction in Assam — without disruption of trafiic-loads in Patai gonia." 

"Another of those 1 ." said Lynne 
with a sigh. But she got to work 
almost automatically, keying her 
impulses to fit those of Ray and 
Janet, For the time being personal 
and emotional problems were laid 
aside. They were a single unit — a 
machine that was part of the 
greater machine — that was in turn 
part of the administration of Earth. 
For this work they had been trained 
and conditioned all their lives. 

Early in the century — some fifty 
years back — when the cybernetic 
machine had been regulated to their 
oper functions of recording and 
ssemblage only, of non-mathenatical factors, the use of human 
'ams, working as supplements to 
machines themselves, had been 



conceived and formulated by the 
Earth Government. 

No machine, however complex 
and accurate, could reflect truly 
the human factors in a problem of 
social import. For such functions it 
possessed the fatal weakness of 
being non-human. Hence the in 
tegration of people and atomo-elec 
trical brains. Thanks to their Collars 
the human factors received the replies of the machine-brains through 
mental impulses instead of on 
plasti-tape. 

By means of the buttons befote 
them they could key their questions 
to the portion of the machine desired. For specific requests and intcrkeying with one another they 
used, respectively, a small throat 
microphone attached to their collars and direct oral communication. 

Janet was the analyst of the team 
— it was a detail job, a memory job. 
one which usually went .to a 
woman. And she was good. Slit 
culled from the messages given her 
by the machine those which bore 
most directly upon the problem. 

Assam — vegetarian culture — 
grain busks unused for plastics be 
cause of blight -weakness following 
second A-uar — could serve as fifthdepth foundation for second~run 
non-moving byways . . . Patagonia 
first-lint producer of twn-ivcakcnal 
grain husks — transportation limited 
by seasonal deep-frost — atomic heat 
considered uneconomical for this 
problem — transportation limited to 
third-class surface vehicles — 




fee 



STIC 

checked the stream of information selected by Janet. Seek 
possibility of using synthetic mesh 
on temporary laydown basis . , . 
Ray was team coordinator, who 
assembled the facts selected by. 
Janet, put. them in shape toward 
solution of the problem. 

Then it was Lynne's turn. In a 
way, save that all three of them 
were vital to team-success, she was 
top-dog. It was up to her to listen 
to Janet's stream of information, to 
follow Ray's assembly job, to say, 
"This will work," or, "This will 
not work," or perhaps, "This will 
work if wc do such-and-such, 
rather than thus-and-so." 

There weren't many who could 
fill this job of synthesizer without 
too-wide variance from the judgments of the machine itself. Consequently there weren't very many 
teams actually at work — perhaps a 
score, give or take a few, at any 
one time. Such synthesization demanded a quality almost akin to 
intuition — but intuition disciplined 
and controlled to give results as 
often as needed. 

She concentrated now, though 
her head was troubling her again, 
keying her whole being to Janet, 
then to Ray. And to her horror 
she began to get a picture — not of 
the problem of using waste matter 
to abet highway construction in 
Assam without disrupting the 
climate-limited transportation of 
Patagonia, but of the thought) and 
eclings of Janet Downes. 
It was frightening to realize that 



she was reading every thin 
kept carefully concealed behind the 
sardonic mask of her personality. 
It was disturbing to discover how 
much she herself was resented and 
hated and feared by Janet. It was 
horrifying to learn how hungry was 
Janet, how she thirsted to smash 
Lynne's attachment to Ray, how 
she planned to use the problem of 
the headache to discredit Lynne, not 
only with Mother Weedon and the 
Mind-Authority but with Ray himself. 

/ must be going crazy, Lynne 
thought and became sickeningly aware that she had missed a query 
from Ray. She turned her attention 
toward him, found herself enmeshed 
in a confused jumble of thoughts in 
which Janet figured with shocking 
carnality, while she herself was 
fully clothed and placed on a pedestal resembling a huge and grotesquely ugly frog. Why, she 
thought, Kay fears me — almost 
hates me! 

Once again she had lost the 
thread. Desperately she strove to 
catch up, found herself issuing an 
answer. Suggest em ployment of 
sea-transport to solve problem. 

Where had that one come from? 
Lynne wondered. The ocean lanes 
had not been used for two-thirds of 
a century, save for fishing and 
excursions. But hundreds of the old 
double-hulled cataliners of the prcatomic air-age were still in their 
huge cocoon-capsules in various 
nautical undertakers' parlors. 

She watched the large indicate* 



NIGHTMARE TOWER 



breathlessly, wondering what the 
machine would answer. Almost certainly a 1.3 variation — which 
would mean the problem would be 
(hunted to another team. An 0.2 
variation was considered normal. 
Ly line's decisions, over the eleven 
months of her assignment, had 
averaged 0.13. Her best mark had 
been an 0.08. 

She caught a flash of Janet's 
thoughts . . . lucky SSG so-and-so! 
She wasn't even paying, attention! 

Rigorously Lynne forced herself to 
concentrate on the large indicator. 
It flashed a warning blue, then 
yellow, then red — and then showed 
a round single 0! 

It was, Lynne thought, impossible. No team had ever, in the 
entire history of human-cybernetic 
integration, produced an answer 
without a single variance with the 
machine. The best on record was an 
0.016 by Yunakazi in East- Asia 
Center. And he had never come 
close to it again. 

Lynne nodded to the rest of them 
and unfastened her collar. She felt 
a little sick to her stomach. An 
0-variant answer was supposed to 
be impossible. But she had attained 
one, and at a time when her mind 
had been wandering, thanks not 
only to her malaise but because of 
her shocking telepathic experience. 
She wondered dully if the two factors were integrated in her incredible result. 

. . like the monkeys with 
6fty million typewriters composing 
a Shakespearean sonnet, probability 



ultimately favors it," Ray was saying. "Lynne, let's try another. 
What's the next problem, Jan?" 

"Poor reaction of ufth age-group 
children in Honduras to gnomics 
during the months of July and 
August," Janet said promptly 
"Wanted — its .auses and cure." 

Lynn listened in a sort of stupor 
When she felt telepathic messages 
impinging upon her mind she forced 
them out. She only half-heard 
Janet's smooth assemblage of facts 
Ray's coordination and selection of 
those most relevant. And then she 
thought quickly, Climate change to 
42 per-cent lower humidity, exr 
pense contained by use in schools 
only and segregation of children 
during crucial months. 

Again the flashes from the indicator — again the zero. 

Janet regarded Lynne with odd 
speculation in her hazel eyes, Ray 
looked a little frightened. Lynne 
said, "I don't know what's going 
on but my head is killing me. I'm 
going home and rest." 

"What about our date tonight?" 
Ray asked quickly — too quickly. 

She studied him a long moment. 
She did love him, she did want to 
marry him, she did want to bear 
his children — or did she? She was 
going to have to face the problem 
squarely and do it soon. She said, "I 
guess you'd better give me a raincheck, honey." 

She walked out the door with a 
vivid picture of what Janet was 
thinking. Janet was going to do her 
damnedest to take Ray away from 



ANTASTIC UNIVERSE 



her that night by the oldest and 
stil! the most effective weapon a 
woman could use. And if Lynne 
tried to make trouble about it she 
intended to make trouble for 
Lynne. 

As for Ray — he didn't seem to 
have any thoughts at all. He was a 
sort of Thurber male, cowering in 
his corner while the dominant females fought over him. The only 
hitch, Lynne decided, was that 
there wasn't going to be any fight. 
Janet could have him ... in spades'. 



She took the moving sidewalk 
back to Mother Weedon's. For almost a year the trim white dome 
Willi its curved polarized picture 
window, and pink Martian vines 
had represented home and shelter 
and a prized individuality after the 
group-existence of school dormitories. 

Now it looked like half an egg 
of some menacing unearthly bird, 
half an egg into which she must 
crawl and hide, unsure of how long 
it would afford her shelter. Even 
Mother Weedon, a shrewd and 
kindly widow of sixty whose 
strength and good-humor made her 
the ideal team-matron, looked alien 
and oddly menacing. 

She caught the older woman's 
thoughts as she entered the house. 
Whaf'i happened to Lynne? Always 
tkdUght thai girl was too bottled 
up. She should have married Ray 
six months ago. He's not the sort 
of male even a girl as pretty as 
.ynnc can keep on a string in


definitely — not with a harpy like 
Janet in the picture . . . 

Mechanically Lynne ran her 
fingers down the magnezipper of her 
blue plastifleece jacket, deposited it 
carefully against the magnetic hook 
on the wall of the entry. She felt 
a renewed weakness, a sickness that 
made her head throb more severely 
than ever. All the way back fi 
the brain-station she had bci 
seeking reassurance in the proha 
bility that her sudden telepathic 
ability was caused by some stimulation of the machine, would vanish 
when she broke contact with it. 

Now she knew better — and her 
panic increased. She almost ran to 
the escalator so she wouldn't have 
to exchange chatter with Mother 
Weedon. She literally had to be 
alone. 

II 

Lynne stirred uneasily on her 
plastomat. She knew she was there, 
felt sure she was not asleep. Yet 
the dream persisted, holding her in 
a grip that was tighter than reality. 

She was alone in a strange 
crystalinc chamber, high, high up 
in a strange crystatine tower. 
Thanks to the fact there was no 
metal in its construction, nowhere 
was there rust. Yet her chamber, 
like the tower itself, showed definite 
signs of age and ruin. 

An irregular segment of one wall 
had been penetrated by a missile of 
some sort and patched with plastic 
spray to keep out the thin, chill, 
unending wind- On lower levels, 



tnat 
irely 
rom 
been 



N TG HTM ARE TOWER 



9 



she knew, were larger scars of longforgotten destruction. Just above 
the transparent arched ceiling what 
nad been an elaborate tracery of 
gleaming flying buttresses, their 
functional purpose long since lost, 
stood precariously in a pattern of 
ruin. 

Here and there about her, other 
surviving towers of the city rose 
in more serious stages of decay. 
And far below, on the windswept 
square, huddled the gleaming eggshaped shelters of the Earthfolk, 
Beyond the city area the red desert 
and green oases stippled off to the 
dark horizon or advanced to invade 
the steep scarp of the far bank of 
the great canal. 

Lynne was alone in a tower on 
Mars. Instruments, strange to her 
eyes but stamped with the familiar 
patterns of Earthly design and 
manufacture, lined three walls of 
the chamber. She knew she should 
take the downlift and return to 
the tiny cluster of Earth-dwellings 
in the court below, that her tour of 
duty was ended. 

Yet she could not leave. Voices 
whispered within her head and 
tugged at her emotions, voices 
whose owners she could not see, 
whose embodiment lurked ever just 
beyond the range of her eyes, no 
matter how quickly she rolled them. 
Voices that begged for her assistance, offering unheard-of pleasures 
as a reward, unthought-of torments 
as punishment for her refusal to 
cooperate. 

They were strange voices, whose 



message bore the corrupt cynicism 
of the very old, coupled with the 
naive enjoyments of long deferred 
second childhood — alien voices. Or 
were they alien? Wasn't it rather 
that she was the alien, like those 
other Earthfolk who lived in the 
cluster of pathetic little huts below, 
who strove to reclaim the too-lean 
atmosphere of a planet, most of 
which had long-since escaped into 
the star-studded black-velvet backdrop of space. 

Yes, it was she who was alien. 
And with the thought came 
another, a human picture, so horrible, so gruesome, that her mind 
refused to accept it. Yet she knew 
it was vitally important she sec it 
clearly. But the others, the invisibles, kept derailing her concentration with their whispers of 
joys unknown before to mortal man 
or woman, their soft threats of 
torments beyond those conceived 
by Dante himself. 

"Let us in," they offered softly, 
with the mischief of the very old. 
"Let us in and we shall romp and 
travel and find new uses for your 
bodies. We shall live side by side 
within you and lead you to pleasures 
no souls contained by bodies can 
ever know. We shall . . ." 

There was something Lynne 
should ask them, an answer to their 
Saturnalian bribery — but like their 
visibility it refused to rise to the 
upper level of her consciousness. 
She felt sudden shame at not being 
able to speak, fear at her inability 
to marshal needed thoughts, fear 



FANTASTIC UNIVERSE 



%0 

that grew quickly into terror while 
the all-important question struggled 
vainly to make Itself uttered. 

Laughing like rollicking imps, 
the whisperers closed in a hemisphere 
about and above her, dancing in 
weird joyous malicious rhythm and 
bottling up reason as effectively as 
a pkstivial. All at once she found 
herself holding her head and screaming at them to go away . . . 

Lynne woke up. She discovered 
herself already sitting erect on the 
plastomat, supported by hands that 
dug into its pneumatic surface. She 
looked wildly around her, noted the 
familiar tri-di picture of Victoria 
Falls on the wall, the blank vidarscreen on its stand beside the magnicloset entry, the picwindow with 
its familiar vista of morning sunlight and greenery outside Mother 
Weedon's. 

Only then did she become aware 
that her headache was worse. It 
seemed to grow with each successive morning. During the day it 
lapsed at times to mere vague discomfort, and with the aid of a 
couple of syntholaud pills she was 
able to sleep. But when she awoke 
each following morning it seemed 
a trifle worse. 

She stepped into the bathostall, 
which performed all functions of 
cleansing and elimination simultaneously, felt briefly better and 
got into sandals, clout and bolero, 
polarizing them to a gaudy scarlet, 
which clashed with her fair coloring 
but expressed her mood of defiance, 
not only at her own ailments but 



the personal treachery of Janet and 
the waverability of Ray Cornell. 

Mother Weedon smiled approval 
of this gay gesture when Lynne 
took her place at the breakfast 
table. "I'm glad you're feeling 
better, Lynne," she said. "I've been 
worried about you lately." 

"Really putting it on, aren't you, 
honey?" Janet asked with a trace of 
resentment. She had polarized her 
own costume to a soft pink, which 
was washed out by Lynne's bold 
color-scheme. Nor could she change 
it during the day without revealing 
her defeat. 

"Delicious!" exclaimed Ray, ogling her with delight and pouring 
paprisal instead of sucral on his 
Helthplankton. 

Lynne laughed as she hadn't 
laughed in days. She wondered why 
she felt so suddenly light-hearted 
and happy, especially after her 
waking nightmare. Then, suddenly, 
she realised she was utterly unaware 
of what the others were thinking. 
She was no longer telepathic. She 
was normal once more! 

However, it required no telepathic 
powers to sense that Ray was in a 
sadly shattered state over whatever 
had happened between Janet and 
himself on their date the night before. Lynne surmised that her rival 
had enticed Ray into full courtship, 
that he was now suffering from 
remorse, revulsion and a resurgence 
of desire for herself. 

She wondered why she didn't 
care, then realised that Janet was no 
longer her rival. Ray was a nice 



NIGHTMARE TOWER. 



It 



boy, a highly trained and talented 
boy — but she wasn't in love with 
him any more. There were, she 
thought, probably half a billion unattached males in the world at any 
given moment, many of them far 
more interesting and attractive than 
Ray Cornell. All she had to do was 
look for them . . . 

Headache and nightmare receded 
further with each mouthful of 
breakfast she ate. Her appetite was 
back and she kidded brightly with 
a miserable Ray and a rather sullen 
and suspicious Janet all the way to 
the brain-station. And then things 
began to happen that shattered her 
new-found adjustment. 

She was barred from entry to 
the studioff. The electroscreen admitted Ray and Janet as usual but 
remained an invisible wall that refused her admittance. She was no 
longer keyed to the group-machine. 
Before she could try again a magnovox said, "Please report to Integration Chief on Floor Eighty. Please 
report to Integration Chief on . . ." 

Ray looked scared. Disruption of 
a team during working hours was 
an emotional shock. Even Janet 
showed traces of fright. But she 
managed a grin and said, "Give him 
the old treatment, Lynne, and you 
can't lose." She accompanied the 
remark with a thoroughly carnal 
bump. 

Lynne said nothing, being incapable of speech. She turned and 
made her way to the mobilramp, 
had a sudden vivid recollection of 
the older but far more efficient 



lift on the Martian tower In her 
dream. She felt sick to her stomach 
and Iier headache was thumping 
again. 

She had never been on the 
eightieth floor before — it was reserved for guiding geniuses, who 
had no time for mere groupmachine members except in case of 
trouble. Lynne wondered what she 
had done as she entered a room 
with walls of soft rolling colors. 

The man on the couch, a tall lean 
saturnine man with dark eyes that 
seemed to read right through her 
from out of a long lined white face, 
didn't leave her long in doubt. He 
said, "Miss Fenlay, I'm afraid I have 
bad news for you. As a result of 
your amazing performance yesterday your usefulness as a groupmachine worker is ended," 

"But I was right," she protested. 
"I had the first zero- variation in 
integration history." 

"You needn't be so frightened," 
he said more gently. "I know this 
must be a severe emotional shock. 
You were right — by the machine. 
We need human factors in cybernetics to show us where the 
machines are wrong, not where they 
are right. To come up with two 
successive zero-variant answers implies some sort of rapport with the 
machine itself. We can't afford to 
take further chances." 

Lynne sat down abruptly on an 
empty couch. She felt empty inside, 
said, "What am I to do?" 

The tall dark man's smile was a 
trifle frosty. He said, "We've been 



watching you, of course. About alt 
I can teli you, Miss Fenlay, is that 
your — cr — aberration is not exactly 
a surprise." 

"You mean you've been spying 
on nic?" Even though Lynne was 
thoroughly conditioned to accept 
her life as part of a complex mechano-social integration, she found 
the idea of being spied upon unpleasant. 

"Not really," he told her. "And 
don't worry. We have no intention 
of letting your remarkable Rifts go 
to waste." He paused, added, "I 
nope your headache is better soon." 

"Thank you," she said. She was 
outside before the t nil implications 
of his parting shot sank home. How 
had he or anyone known .she was 
suffering from headache? She had 
reported it to no one — and the 
helth-check booth machine was not 
geared to give confidential evidence 
or to retain personality keys for 
checking. 

It was a puzzle. She worked on it 
until she was almost back at Mother 
Weedon's, then realised the Integration Chief had given her no hint of 
a new assignment — had only suggested she was to be used. She began 
to wonder if laboratory test-animals 
suffered from headaches like the one 
which seemed to have led to her 
undoing. 

There was no escaping Mother 
Weedon, who was enjoying a tridi vidarcast in full view of the 
front door as Lynne came in. Well, 
the girl thought, she was going to 
have to be told anyway — if she 



hadn't already got the news fro 
the brain -stationEvidently Mother Weedon had 
heard. She motioned the girl to sit 
beside her on her couch and said, 
"Don't worry, Lynne. You're going 
to be fine. The trouble with you is 
you've outgrown your job — yes, 
and Janet and Ray and mc too. You 
can't help it. You're too good for 
us and that's that. They'll be moving you on." ■ 

"But I like it here," cried Lynne. 
"I like you and Jan and Ray and 
our work with the group-machine. 
I don't want it to change." 

"But it will — everything 
changes," said Mother Weedon 
gently. "I'm glad you've been happy 
here. But your happiness has meant 
Janet's unhappiness and, more lately, 
Ray's." 

*T — see," Lynne said slowly. She 
hadn't thought of things in that 
light before. But of course it was 
true. The first real home she had 
ever known was about to be taken 
from her and the experience was too 
personal to allow much detached 
thinking. 

Like most genetically-controlled 
children whose double-birth had 
been successful, she had been 
brought up with functional rather 
than sentimental care. Not having 
known her parents, not having 
known her twin brother on Mars, 
she had never missed them. The 
teachers and matrons at the seminary had been carefully selected 
for their warmth and competence. 
There had always been plenty of 



NIGHTMARE TOWER 



playmates, plenty of interesting 
tilings to learn. 

Living at Mother Weedon's had 
been a new and emotionally opening 
experience, as had the blossoming 
of her romance with Ray Cornell, 
her now-fractured friendship with 
Janet Downes. It was not going to 
be easy to leave, to tear up only 
recently established roots, to set 
down new ones which might in 
rime be as ruthlessly sundered. 

She felt frightened and very 
much alone, as if she were again in 
the Martian tower of her nightmare with only alien and disembodied voices speaking to her. Mars 
—she wondered A little about it. 
Somewhere on Mars was her twin, 
Revere Fenlay, the brother she 
could not remember. She wondered 
if he too were having troubles. 
There were stories floating about of 
twins whose rapport spanned lifetimes separated by the distance between the planets. But she knew 
nothing of Mars. 

She watched a vidarcast with 
Mother Weedon, an unreal historical 
romance of love and adventure in 
one of the vast sprawling industrial 
empires of the mid-twentieth century. There was, for twenty-secondcentury folk, a vast emotional appeal in the job-competition, the 
hard compulsory physical toil, the 
dangers of that exciting era. But 
Lynne was too wrapped up in her 
own problem to react as usual. 

While she and Mother Weedon 
were lunching on pineapple soup 
and Bermudasteak with shadbacon 



and lacticola, Ray and Janet came 
in. They pretended concern at what 
had happened to Lynne and the 
team but were obviously excited 
with one another and the prospect 
of integrating a new member of 
the team in Lynne's place. 

After the meal Janet and Lynne 
were briefly alone in the vida-room. 
Janet eyed Lynne covertly and 
Lynne said, "It's all right, Jan. I'm 
not going to put up a fight for Ray. 
Under the circumstances it's only 
fair. I don't know what's going to 
happen to me and you and him — " 

"Damn you, Lynne Fenlay!" 
Janet's sudden flare of hot emotion 
was almost frightening. "You would 
be like this. Don't you realise that 
by being noble you'll leave both of 
us with a guilt complex we'll never 
be able to shake?" 

"Sorry," said Lynne sincerely. "I 
can't help it." 

Janet regarded her narrowly, 
shook her head. "Hasn't anything 
ever touched you, Lynne?" she 
asked. "Haven't you ever wanted 
Ray or anyone as I want him? 
Haven't you ever hated anyone as 
I'm beginning to hate you? Haven't 
you ever been human?" 

"Jan!" Lynne was shocked, then 
vaguely frightened. "I don't know 
— I guess maybe not," she said. "But 
Jan, I can't help it. That's the way 
I am." 

Janet sighed and said, "In that 
case I'm sorry for you." She 
changed the subject quickly as Ray 
came wandering in, gave Lynne an 
unhappy look, then crossed the 



FANTASTIC UNIVERSE 



room and turned on the vidarscreen. Peace of an uneasy sort 
reigned for the next hour, 

"When are they assigning your 
new member?" Lynne asked a* the 
picture, a documentary about solar 
heat, came to an end. 

"Not for a day or so," said Ray. 
He looked at her piteously. **We — 
we're going to miss you, Lynne. I 
wish I understood . . .** 

"You're going to be too busy,** 
Lynn told him. "And don't worry 
about me, Ray. I've already talked 
to Jan." 

"You mean you're not angry 
about m?" 

Lynne shook her head, glanced at 
Janet, was again startled by the 
blazing hatred that was beamed her 
way. She wondered what it must 
feel like to hate in such thorough 
fashion. She was relieved when she 
heard Mother Weedon talking to 
someone at the door. 

A moment later the widow 
entered and said, "This is Rolf Marcein, kids. He's going to be staying 
with us a little while." She introduced the three of them to the 
newcomer. 

Lynne barely acknowledged the 
greeting. She was too startled. The 
most recent addition to Mother 
Weedon's charmed circle appeared, 
in the semi-dark room, to be the 
man who had given her her walking 
papers that morning on the 
eightieth floor of the brain-station 
tower. 

He was tall, dark, lanky, saturnine. His name was Marcein. At 



least that w«s something Lynne 
hadn't known before. And then she 
noticed that tfois Marcein's face was 
not so pale, that his eyes were 
brighter, his manner and movements more athletically poised than 
the man on the eightieth floor. 
Mother Weedon pressed the polarizer 
to let more light into the room, 
since the vidarbox was not on. The 
stranger's tan, seen in the light, was 
startling, especially to Lynne, who 
had seen hft pale double so recently. 

His double — that meant his twin, 
she thought. And if his twin worked 
in the brain-station, then this man 
must be a Martian. Certainly that 
Would account for his tan, caused 
by living under the thin atmosphere 
of the red planet — as it would account for an athletic poise acquired 
during the hardships of Martian 
existence. 

You're right, of course. 1 ant 
Dolf's twin and I am from Mars. 

It took her almost a full second 
to realise the thoughts had not been 
spoken. She was telepathic again, 
aware not only of the newcomer's 
thoughts but of those of the others 
in the room— though not as much 
aware of theirs as of Rolf Marcein's. 

She looked at him with something like panic, saw his brilliant 
dark eyes upon her, noted that he 
wore his clothes well, that there 
was something almost lupine in his 
grace, something almost overpowering .. . 

You must know you're beautiful 
yourself, Lynne Fenlay — // soft and 



NIGHTMARE TOWER 



»5 



unawakened. I have an idea 1 could 
turn the trick . . . 

It was like a blow. Not only 
could she read his thoughts, Lynne 
realised — but he could read hers. 
She felt her face flame and a sudden surge of resentment toward his 
arrogance that forced her to leave 
the room lest she reveal the weakness it caused. And as she left his 
soft laughter rang like hailstones 
in her ears. 

in 

The days that followed Rolf 
Marcein's arrival at Mother 
Wcedon's became, to Lynne, a 
period of waiting. It was a period 
of waiting games as well. No summons came from the eightieth floor 
of the brain-station to give her a 
clue as to the nature of her next 
assignment. For the first time in 
her life she found herself hung in a 
vacuum with nothing definite to do 
or to look forward to. 

Naturally she wondered whether 
Rolf Marcein might not be the 
answer to this facet of her problem. 
But not even her growing telepathic abilities could pry a response 
out of his mind. He seemed to be 
visiting the home planet on the 
vaguest sort of business — something 
to do with development and transport of specially-bred plant and 
animal stock for the red planet. 

It seemed absurd on the face of 
it that such an obviously able 
adjustee should be returned to Earth 
on such a mission, especially with 
every gram of interplanetary ship


Space at a premium. Yet either it 
was truth or Rolf had developed 
some method of screening his 
thoughts against telepathic probing — a frightening idea in itself. 

He hung around Mother Weedon's 
most of the time. As a result Lynne 
saw a lot of him throughout the 
days and evenings, a fact which 
both pleased and alarmed her unreasonably. It was during the third 
night of his stay that he invaded, 
or tried to invade, her nights as 
well. 

Before drifting off to sleep she 
found herself dwelling on him with 
relaxed reverie. Ray and Janet had 
had some sort of quarrel and the 
atmosphere that evening had been 
far from pleasant. It was a relief to 
lie alone, to let her thoughts roam 
and quest as they would. 

Rolf had talked of Mars during 
a stroll to the bazaar-mart during 
the afternoon. He had described a 
boar-hunt on Earth's sister -planet 
during a night when both Deimos 
and Phobos were describing their 
rapid orbits across the cloudless sky. 

The pig, as man's most adaptable 
food-animal, had been the first livestock imported to Mars less than 
three decades earlier. Now, according to Rolf, the animals had in 
large measure reverted to their feral 
state and constituted a menace to 
man and his works alike. 

"We used flashlights and smallarms paralysers on that hunt," Rolf 
said. "We flushed a whole herd of 
them in an erosion-gully along the 
border of the Great Southern Canal 



FANTASTIC UNIVERSE 



16 

— didn't get so much as a smell of 
the brutes until we were right on 
top of them. 

"At that we managed to nab a 
baker's dozen for de-tusking and 
redomestication. Ferkab, it was 
touch and go for a bit! One big 
brute slipped under my ray and if 
I hadn't been lucky enough to jam 
my flashlight tube into his mouth 
he'd have taken my leg off." 

"What does jerkab mean?" Lynne 
asked, a little annoyed at feeling 
an atavistic thrill from the account 
of rhc primitive hunt. 

To her delight Rolf actually 
blushed beneath his tan. He began 
with, "I don't think you'd appreciate its meaning," then recalled 
her telepathic powers and shut up 
and blushed more deeply. 

At which it had been I.ynnc's 
turn to feel her face grow hot. The 
meaning of fcrkab, an approximate 
translation 01 certain graphically 
illustrated ancient Martian runes, 
was explicit to the point of hawdincss. Yet on Mars, apparently, it 
was used in mixed company. 

So, lying half asleep, Lynne not 
surprisingly visualised the boar hunt 
as Rolf had described it. She oould 
see his weatherproof aluminum 
clothing gleaming in the pale light 
of the swift tiny moons, shining in 
the occasional ray of a flashlight as 
he and his shadowy companions 
worked their way along the eroded 
bank of the canal. 

Then the sudden rustle and 
thump and grunting of the beasts 
as they came charging out of their 



threatened shelter, their vast menacing shapes with huge tusks and 
little red eyes glittering in the confused crisscross of flashlight rays. 
She saw the paralysers* brief glow, 
heard the thud of falling animal 
bodies, saw the sudden rush of one 
furious beast inside the protective 
sweep of Rolf's hand-weapon, saw 
his quick graceful evasive movement, heard the champ of savage 
tusks crushing the hard alloy of 
the metal tube. 

Once, on the vidarscreen, she had 
watched a toreador do his dance of 
death with a furious bull, in an 
historical show. Rolf, she thought, 
was slim as a toreador, slim and 
graceful and equally accustomed to 
facing danger and death as an ac«. 
cepted part of life. 

Then, she told herself scornfully, 
she was reverting to the primitive 
as if she were a Martian sow herself. She thought of the word 
jerkab and what it meant and felt 
her face grow hot in the darkness. 
For she could visualise Rolf and— 
herself — in a way she had never 
been able to think of herself with 
Ray Cornell. 

It's not confined to Mars, darling, 
came the sudden probe of Rolf's 
thought over hers. But it takes 4 
Martian to be the best. 

Reverie was obliterated by rage. 
She sent back a string of thoughts 
that should have blistered Rolf's 
brains — if he had any decency. He 
withdrew before her counterattack 
and she wondered if he really did 



NIGHTMARE TOWER 



have any decency — or if her rage 
were all she had pretended. 

She was cool to him the next 
day — and the arrival of the new 
member of the group-machine gave 
her opportunity to avoid him. Her 
replacement was a dark stocky quiet 
young man named Alan Waters 
and he seemed quite smitten with 
her — a fact which made Janet 
visibly jealous. I.ynne found herself quite enjoying her triumph. 

But the day after, when the other 
three reported for work at the 
brain-station and Mother Weedon 
visited the bazaar-mart for some 
needed household supplies, Lynne 
found herself looking at a mischievously contrite Rolf across the breakfast table. 

- He said, "I'm sorry if I've offended you, Lynne. Apparently I 
made the mistake of thinking you 
had blood in your veins." 

Lynne acted without volition for 
the first time since early babyhood. 
She picked up the plastisaucer in 
front of her and flung it across the 
neoplast tabletop at him. He ducked 
and for a moment his dark eyes 
blazed with laughter and then he 
sensed her distress and helped her 
wiih the atoclcaner. 

She tried to apologize but the 
words refused to come. And he 
never mentioned the incident afterward. Instead he took her for a 
walk through the park and talked 
to her of the more feral beauties 
of his own planet. "It's far wilder 
than this," he told her, gesturing :ir 
the neat clusters of trees and 



»7 

flowers, the perfectly clipped hedges 
about them. "Wilder and deadlier 
and far more beautiful." 

"This is perfection," she told 
him. 

"And perfection is death," was 
his reply. 

"I thought Mars pretty much a 
dead planet," she said. 

"It's a vast mausoleum," he said, 
his eyes lighting. "A mausoleum 
visited by new life, a mausoleum in 
which the very souls of the dead 
themselves seem beginning to stir. 
It's raw new life burgeoning on the 
old." 

He talked on and she felt the beginnings of small responses stir 
within her and frighten her. For 
she had been conditioned to Earth 
and to wish for Mars was wrong, 
finally he s topped and fa ced her 
and captured both her hands in his 
incredibly strong ones. 

"Lynne," he said, "I haven't 
much longer here. I want to take 
you back home with me. Will you 
come?" 

"Home — cn Mars?" she countered. The Idea was impossible. Yet, 
somewhere within herself, she 
wanted to go. Then the reasons, the 
millions of reasons why she couldn't 
say yes, came flooding up within 
her. Surely Rolf knew them — or 
did he? 

"You know the system and the 
reasons behind it,** she reminded 
him. "You have a twin right here in 
the city. I've talked to him — it was 
he who gave me my walking papers 
from the group -machine." 



FANTASTIC UNIVERSE 



"He told me," said Rolf quietly. 
"He told me a lot about you. 
Enough so I wanted to sec you and 
get to know you. Now that 1 do 
know you I want you to go back 
with me. Can't you see, darling? 
There's little use for telepaths on 
Earth. On Mars we need them desperately. I think I can arrange a 
transfer." 

"But my brother is already 
there," she told him a little desperately. "I — we — they can't leave 
two of us on one planet. And what 
right have I to ask him to come to 
Earth? He's not conditioned." 

"But maybe he'd like to come 
back," Rolf suggested. "Maybe he's 
not happy on Mars." 

"It's not just that," she said 
miserably. Nor was it. For the first 
time the entire system by which the 
Mars project was functioning 
seemed to her vastly unfair. Until 
that moment she had accepted it, 
considered it as immutable as the 
need for the sun itself. 

The Earth Government, which 
was what the U.N. had evolved 
into after its first tortured halfcentury of birth, was determined 
not to repeat upon alien planets the 
mistakes of imperialism and colonization that had caused the home 
planet all but to tear itself to pieces 
during the twentieth century. 

No convicts, no misfits, no 
refugee cultists were to be sent out 
to settle the newly-opened red 
planet — instead, the cream of 
Earth's best trained, most gifted 
and strongest young men and 




women were to do the preliminary 
settling. For it would still be 
nuny years before the arid world 
would be able to support much 
humanity. 

There had been protests— chief 
among them a group of eugenicists 
who felt that loss of such a large 
group of qualified young folk would 
cost the home planet more genetically and socially than it could 
afford. The answer had been genetically-induced twim on the part of 
parents qualified to pass a wide 
variety of mental, physical and 
psychiatric tests, open to all who 
wished to join the project. 

One of each set of such induced 
identical twins was early selected to 
go to Mars, the other to remain on 
Earth. Thus Earth lost nothing, yet 
had its potential Martians, ready for 
conditioning and training in special 
seminaries for lifetime work on the 
red planet. When one of a pair of 
twins was a girl, the other a boy, 
the boy was the one sent out — 
since life on Mars was still a rugged 
affair. Thus it was that Lynne had 
been reared for an Earth-career 
while her brother, Revere, had been 
educated and coached for a Marslife. 

Lynne 's entire twenty-four years 
had been passed for the purpose of 
integration into and work for the 
improvement of humanity on her 
native planet. The very idea of 
Mars was terrifying, as was the idea 
of traveling there through space. 
She simply couldn't endure the 



NIGHTMARE TOWER 



19 



wrench of the trip, the separation 
from all that mattered. 

Rolf stood there quietly, letting 
her thoughts flow without interruption. Then he said, "I see — but 
it's not as bad as all that, darling. 
After all, I made the trip in reverse." 

"But that's different— you're a 
man!" she protested. 

"Nor is being a man as bad as 
you seem to think," he said and she 
sensed that he was teasing her and 
was grateful for the change in 
mood. Before she realized what she 
was doing she called him mentally 
a thoroughly bawdy Martian word. 

"Where did you learn that?" he 
asked, startled. 

"Where do you think?" she 
Countered — and enjoyed seeing him 
blush again. They had a pleasantly 
innocuous time together the remainder of that day and evening. 

The following morning Lynne 
awoke from another horrible nightmare of alien worlds to find her 
headache back in full force. So bad 
was it, in fact, that after making a 
half-hearted effort to get up she 
fell back on her plastomat, actually 
moaning a little. She felt as if she 
were undergoing some long-forgotten sort of Inquisition torture. 

Rolf walked into her room within the hour and so sick was Lynne 
that she didn't even protest his 
presence. He said, "Lynne, darling, 
you've got to get over this. Believe 
it or not you're killing me." 

"Then stay in your own mind." 
She managed a whisper of a smile. 



"You're like a bad tooth," he 
said inelegantly. "You know it's 
going to hurt if you touch it but 
you can't stop running your tongue 
over it." 

"Oh, shut up," she said rudely. 
"So now I'm an ulcerated tooth. 
I've never had one so I wouldn't 
know." 

"Nor have I," he replied promptly. "But I've read about them. 
Come on. I'm going to take you to 
Ccntromed and get you fixed up." 

"I'm too ill to move," she 
quavered, alarmed at the prospect. 

But he simply moved in and took 
over, virtually forcing Lynne firmly 
but gently into her clothes, getting 
her downstairs and onto a moving 
strip, escorting her through the 
prophylactic entrance of the huge 
vertical cross of the Centromed, 
giving her in charge of a sternfaced but kindly physician in white, 
who put her in turn in the hands 
of a giant red-headed nurse in 
stcropants and white cap. 

Lynne never did find out what 
they did with her. She recalled lying 
down and looking up at a hypnotic 
ceiling, drifting quickly into merciful unconsciousness. When she recovered her headache was gone and 
she had a sense of having undergone an important experience. 

"Miss Fenlay," the doctor said, 
"you're undergoing a period of 
mental growth and change that in 
your case seems to make such suffering periodic." 

"What can I do about it?" she 
asked in panic. 



FANTASTIC UNIVERSE 



"I believe your trouble is one of 
environment," he replied. "During 
tlus period of readjustment you find 
familiar surroundings unsurferable. 
In plain English, you need a 
change." 

"But how am I to get it?" she 
asked. 

"That is hardly our department," 
he told her. "You'll have to take it 
up with your Integration Chief, I'm 
afraid. Naturally we'll be glad to 
make a recommendation for transfer on medical grounds." 

"Thanks — thanks a lot," she said 
uncertainly. She walked out of the 
building and discovered it was 
already late afternoon. Unsureness 
chewed at her for the first time in 
her well-ordered life. The headache 
was gone but it might return if she 
didn't make a change — and she 
didn't want to leave the only home 
she'd ever known. 

Rolf rose from an alloybanc on 
which he had been sitting and said, 
"Headache gone, Lynne? You look 
upset." 

"Headache's gone," she replied. 
"But it may come back." 

"Not if I can help it," he told 
her and she took his arm in hers 
and squeezed it to show her appreciation. Rolf might be a barbarian, she thought, but he had 
been kind and helpful. 

"Thanks for the crumb anyway," 
he told her and her confusion grew 
almost to tears. They rode back to 
Mother Weedon's in silence. 

Because of her fear at finding 
herself becoming so dependent on 



Rolf she flirted outrageously with 
Alan Waters, the team replacement, 
after dinner. When he followed her 
out into the garden and told her he 
was madly in love with her she 
didn't exactly discourage him. Just 
then her soul and body alike craved 
appreciation. 

A furious Ray Cornell interrupted their third kiss. He strode 
through a gap in the hedge-wall 
and pulled Waters from her roughly 
and said, "They told me I'd find 
you two out here." 

"What right have you to interfere?" countered Waters. 

"Thhl" snapped Ray, throwing 
a clumsy punch at his rival, who 
threw one back in return. 

Lynne let out a gasp of alarm 
and tried to move between them 
but was brushed rudely to the 
ground. So hard did she land that 
for a moment the world seemed to 
swim. 

She shook her head to clear it, 
felt the alarm gongs she had come 
to know preceded a return of her 
headache. Then she saw a third 
taller male figure take Ray in one 
hand, Alan in the other and pull 
them apart by the collars of their 
bolo packets as if they were a 
couple of dogs squabbling over a 
bone. 

"You men are supposed to work 
together," he said quietly. Then, his 
voice rising a half-tone and increasing in force, "Why in farb 
don't you?" With which he cracked 
their heads together with stunning 
force, tossed them to the turf like 



a pair of sacks and came over to 
help I.ynne gently to her feet. She 
collapsed into Ins arms, for the 
first time let his lips seek hers, responded to them. 

Later — how much later she didn't 
know, for during that d.iy and 
evening she seemed destined to lose 
large chunks of time — she looked 
up at him, reveling in his controlled 
strength and leanness. 

"Rolf," she said, "I'm sorry — 
that was my fault." 

"You'd have been less than a 
woman if you hadn't done something like it to put me in my 
place," he whispered. 

"But it seems so cheap now," she 
said. "And my head . . ." 

"It wasn't cheap because you 
didn't know," he_ told her. "As for 
your head, you need a change. 
You're going to get one. You're 
leaving with me for Mars tonight." 

"But, Rolf — " she began. 

"Come on, honey," he told Her. 
"It's all arranged. We've only got 
a couple of hours to make the ship." 

She walked back to Mother 
Wccdon's with his arm around her, 
stumbling a little from time to time 
like a blind woman. She was going 
to Mars and the mere idea scared 
her almost to death. 

IV 

Lynne, who had been largely 
brought up on stories of pioneer 
space- flights in which the passengers had to endure tremendous 
initial acceleration, was pleasantly 
surprised by the takeoff. She prob


ably would have known better had 
her conditioning and training not 
geared her to such complete uninterest in anything beyond the atmosphere that she seldom thought 
of the stars except as pretty lights 
in the sky. 

She did have to strap herself to 
her bunk before the immense silver 
teardrop rose slowly upward toward 
space — hut as the stewardess explained in rntitine toties the strap 
was a mere precaution against a possible lurch caused by brief failure 
of one of the launching jets. And 
within five minutes after takeoff a 
tiny sign lit up over the cabin di>or 
that read UNFASTEN BELTS— 
SMOKING PERMITTED. 

She sat up and loosened the strap 
and swung her feet to the deck] 
noted her roommate was doing 
likewise. In the turmoil of catching 
the Mars-ship Lynne had had little 
time to notice her. She managed to 
recall that her name was Joannasomething and that she was an expert in animal husbandry. She was a 
handsome immense South African 
girl whose dark complexion wore 
traces of both Caucasian and Oriental, as well as Hamitic ancestry. 
She offered Lynne one of the new 
skinless cigarettes. 

"You on Integration business?" 
she asked. 

Lynne, who knew nothing of affairs on Mars, probed quickly and 
discovered what the girl had in 
mind was a coordination trip by an 
Earth Government executive. She 
shook her head, said, "No, I'm 




FANTASTIC 



going for good. I understand thcrc'i 
a job there for me." 

The African girl regarded her 
curiously, then said, "I don't want 
Co sound rude but aren't you a bit 
old to be going home?" 

"I guess maybe I am." Looking 
more closely at her cellmate Lynne 
saw that for all her evident maturity 
she was still a girl in her latetnidJle teens. "They came after 
me." 

As the girl nodded uncomprchcndingly Lynne wondered if what 
she had uttered as a polite brush-off 
lie might not be the truth. There 
was a definite pattern of continuity to events following her first 
headache and her non- variant 
answers at the brain-station. 

"Let's go to the saloon and see 
the stars," Joanna suggested. 

It seemed like a good idea — besides, Lynne wanted to talk to Rolf, 
to discover if there actually was 
considered motive behind her apparently aimless emigration to the 
rod planet. 

She said, "How long docs this 
trip take anyway?" 

Joanna's jaw dropped and her 
black-satin hair gleamed with liquid 
highlights as she shook her head. 
"Crtbut, you are green!" she exclaimed. Then, assuming sociability 
with an effort, "You're mighty 
pretty though. The trip takes a 
little more than one Earth-day." 

"Thanks— I sec," replied Lynne. 
She felt she was beginning to see a 
lot of things. Along with her 
archaic ideas about lite rigors of a 



UNIVERSE 




space-ship takeoff, she had apparently retained some mighty obsolete theories about the speed of 
space-travel, at least on the EarthMars run. In her mind it was a 
matter of weeks if not months, depending upon the relative positions 
of the two planets. 

A little over one Earth-day — if 
her growing feeling that she wis 
the victim or core of some vast unseen conspiracy were correct, then 
there would have been plenty of 
time for Rolf to be summoned from 
Mars after her non-variant answers 
had given the brain-station bosses 
the clue to her newly-developed 
telepathic powers. 

But why all the secrecy? It didn't 
take her long to find an answer. 
Had she been asked immediately to 
come to Mars she would have refused point-blank to make the trip. 
Her conditioning, her whole life 
would have forced her to reply in 
the negative. 

So Rolf Marcein had been sent 
for with orders to make her want 
to leave Earth with him, by fair 
means or foul. And he had not 
hesitated to employ the foul. She 
felt her whole body blush as she 
recalled some of the bra7cn suggestions he had made, some of her 
responses, especially to his embraces 
earlier that evening. 

It was going to be a very interesting session, she decided, as she 
followed the girl into ttic single 
small but beautifully compact central lounge or saloon that space 
requirements permitted on tlw 



NIGHTMARE TOW Ml 



Man-ship. Stic looked around but 
failed to see his tall figure and 
Saturnine face — treacherous face, 
she thought — among the half-dozen 
passengers already reclining in plastolounges, watching the amazing 
panorama projected on the ceiling 
from the vicwplatc recorders In the 
prow and stern of the huge SpaceVessel. 

She followed Joanna to a chair, 
tried to share the girl's tremulous 
excitement. After all, she thought, 
she had felt much the same on 
emerging from the seminary to take 
her first position as a data-recording 
supplement for the biggest of all 
Cybernetics machines, the "brain" 
that occupied six thousand acres of 
the Sahara Desert. 

"Look!" the girl whispered enthusiastically. "There's X-Thrce, 
the last of the derelict space-stations." 

Lynne watched the oddly complex structure, that resembled a 
pair of unrooted pyramids fastened 
point to point, as it revolved slowly 
across and out of the plane of 
vision. 

"Wh.»! do they use it for now, 
Joanna?" she murmured. 

"Nothing," the girl said with a 
trace of scorn. 

Lynne knew she should have 
known about that. She recalled now 
a vidar newscast in which the abandonment of the last of the spacestations had been mentioned. In the 
years before A-cngincs were finally 
perfected space-stations were vitally 
necessary as change-over stops for 



Interplanetary rocket flights, 
once fuel ceased to be a proble 

they had been used merely 
meteor- warning points and weather 
stations. 

In the fi rst fund ion they had 
proved useless — in fact one of them 
had been destroyed by a large space* 
missile — and weather forecasting 
and control were practised far more 
efficiently by electronic mastery of 
thel Icaviside Layer. Lynne shouldn't 
have forgotten — but when she 
heard it the matter of space stations 
had been utterly unimportant in 
her life. 

A steward in space-black bolo 
and clout offered them van-flavored 
colafiz/.es from a rack strapped 
about his waist. Lynne wondered at 
this mode of serving the drinks 
while she sipped hers but decided 
not to ask Joanna. She didn't want 
to appear a total numb%kull to a 
girl whose whole life had consisted 
of conditioning for Mars. 

She found out soon enough when 
Rolf Marccin walked into the 
saloon before she had finished sipping her drink. She rose to greet 
him, to haul him off somewhere so 
they could talk alone — and as she 
did so she automatically dropped 
her colafizz in the receptacle ready 
to receive it in one arm of her 
plastolounge. 

Joanna made a grab for it as it 
bounced off and rose lazily in the 
air and turned slowly over. The 
African girl caught it before it 
released any of the liquid remaining 
in it. pushed it firmly down into 



FANTASTIC UNIVILI 



hollow space reserved for it, 
it was magnetically held. 
But Lynne was not paying much 
tttention. She was having enough 
vuble holding herself upright as 
r feet displayed an astonishing rectance to keep on the floor while 
rest of her wanted to describe 
lazy parabola across the saloon. 
She did an off- to-Buff alo and wound 
up against Rolf's chest with his 
arms about her. 

Embarrafsed she whispered 
fiercely, "Put me down, you mar
utr 

Me grinned at her infuriatingly, 
replied, "I'm no marlcf — that's a 
very na-.ty word on Mars and most 
of these people understand it. Don't 
you know you're in space?" 

He set her gently back on her 
feet, holding her steady with one 
hand gripping an upper arm. She 
knew she looked like an idiot, left 
certain everyone in the saloon was 
laughing at her. "I thought they 
had artificial gravity on these 
ships," she said. 

"They do," he told her. "But it's 
nothing like F.arth-gravity. It would 
use up all power if it were. 
You'll learn to navigate. Come on, 
I'll show you how." He led her 
unprotcsting into one of the corridors outside the saloon. 

Slie pulled herself free, promptly 
amacked her head none loo gently 
against the corridor watl. "I don't 
want a lesson now," she told him 
angrily. "Besides, why aren't I 
jick?" 

"You would be," he informed 



her with what she interpreted as a 
smug expression, "if you hadn't 
been given your full quota of shots 
in the Centromcd this afternoon. 
You don't think they'd have allowed you aboard otherwise, do 
you?" 

"You had it all figured OUtj 
didn't you?" she snapped at him 
angrily. "I'll give odds you even 
said something to Alan and Ray tonight that got them involved in 
that horrible brawl!" 

"It was nothing," he said with 
false modesty, flicking a nonexistent speck of dust from a bare 
forearm. "Just a bit of premeditated Machiavelli. Anyone could 
have managed it." 

"What are you trying to do to 
me?" she asked him desperately. 
"I'll even bet my headaches were 
induced. NChy pick on mf? I don't 
want to go to Mars — I never 
wanted to go there." 

"Maybe because I'm in love with 
you," he said simply. 

She ignored the intensity of his 
dark eyes, said, "You're not in love 
with me. You didn't conic to F.arth 
until that twin of yours at the 
brain-station sent you a message I 
was telepathic. You've only made 
love to me to get me to Mars — for 
some selfish purpose of your own. 
Try and deny it." 

"In view of your current mood," 
he replied quietly, "I'd be seven 
kinds of a sand-hrr/onA to try. You 
seem to have things all figured out 
yourself. Very well, it's your privilege to look at my actions anj 



IITMAILE TOWER 



you choose. But my purpose is not 
selfish!" 

Something in the ring of his 
voice, in the determined set of his 
lower face, told her he was speaking 
the truth. She said, "All right, what 
purpose gives you the right to come 
to Earth, to violate everything I 
cherish, to make nie a voluntary 
kidnapee, to wreck my life and 
drag me off to a planet I haven't 
even been trained for? What's to 
prevent me from reporting it and 
having you arrested?" 

"Nothing," he replied, "except 
that I'd probably be released as soon 
as we reached Mars. If you still 
feel like this when we get there 
tomorrow I shan't stand in the way 
of your returning." There was a 
new sag in his shoulders, a weariness 
to the lines about his mouth. 

"Oh. great!" she retorted. "Smash 
my job, my personal life, then say 
you won't try to stop me from 
going back to it. How can you go 
around with so few ethics? What 
sort of person ire you anyway?" 

"A very serious one — a very 
worried one," he told her quietly 
and her quick probe of Ins thoughts 
revealed him again to be speaking 
the truth. lie captured both her 
arms again, held her gently against 
the wall, and so great was the hypnotic force of his personality that 
despite her anger toward him she 
made no move to break away. 

"You have a right to know — 
now," he told her. "I'm a Martian, 
a third generation one, even though 
I was bom and trained on Earth, 



Conditions out thcr; are only just 

beginning to be fit for human infants. We're building the biggest 
thing Man has ever accomplished 
on Mars — making a barren ruined 
planet live again, making it fit for 
men and women and babies to inhabit. 

"Right now we're up against the 
greatest danger we've faced since 
the first few desperate years — 
maybe an even greater threat. We 
can't sec it, we don't even know 
what it is. But men and women 
on Mars are going mad. Only a 
few of us can reach them — and 
thanks to a condition of the planet 
we're all too overloaded to do the 
psychiatric work we should do. We 
need telepaths." 

A flash of something she had 
heard or read somewhere about the 
red planet occurred to her. She 
said, "But doesn't the atmosphere or 
something of Mars encourage telepaths? You're one. Why come to 
Farth for them? Why pick on mc?" 

"Because," he told her with the 
patience of exasperation, "we need 
at least to maintain those telepaths we have — which aren't nearly 
enough. You don't seem to realise 
that a genuine two-way telepathy 
even among fourth generation Martians, occurs only about once in 
eleven thousand six hundred births. 
And we need more than the few we 
have for communications alone.** 

"Communications!" Lynnc was 
honestly shocked. "Do you mean to 
tell mc that Mars has no—" 

"No form of lateral electronic 



FANTASTIC UNIVERSE 



communications functions reliably 
on Mars," he told her bluntly as if 
admitting a fact he hated to mention about the planet he loved. 
""Don't ask me why — it's just so, 
that's all. Crebut, do you think our 
best scientific brains haven't tried? 
They believe the thinness of the atmosphere and the resulting weakness of the Martian Heaviside Layer 
has something to do with it. We 
get messages from Earth and the 
other planet-stations clearly and, 
with the ato-reduccd time lag, in a 
matter of seconds." 

"And you have to use telepaths 
to transmit and receive?" She was 
almost incredulous but her mind 
informed her he was telling the 
truth without reserve. 

"Whatever we can't heliograph 
or send over wire cables," he said 
unhappily. "And the climate of 
Mars is rough on cables. Above the 
ground the winds snap 'em. Underground they rot or the czanwormi 
eat through them. Now do you 
begin to understand?" 

"A — little," she replied hesitantly, unable to maintain her entirely justified anger against his 
■incere appeal. "But what about 
this threat — this madness? What is 
it?" 

"We don't know." His face was 
shadowed. "There may still be lifeforms on Mars of which wc know 
nothing — or perhaps manifestations 
of those we thought safe that are 
dangerous. But something apart 
from atmosphere or weather or diet 
or drink is creating insanity. And it 



seems to be affecting our telepaths 
rather than others. Maybe our 
telepathic minds are more open to 
whatever the influence is. I don't 
know." His expression turned grim. 
"I've never allowed them — it — to 
affect me'* 

All at once she remembered the 
nightmare, the being alone in the 
crysial tower, the crowding in upon* 
her of unseen things that whispered 
dreadful alluring suggestions, the 
sense of panic. She began to understand it with growing certainty. 

Lynne said, "My brother — Revere 
— he's one of those who's been affected, isn't he?" 

He hesitated, evidently felt the 
probe of her questing brain, nodded 
reluctantly. He said, "Your brother 
is one of them. The purt of it is we 
don't dare send him back to Earth." 

"I understand." She shuddered, 
felt a reassuring hand on her 
shoulder, added, "He's mad, isn't 
he." It was statement, not query. 

"I'm afraid so — at least part of 
the time," he replied. "But don't 
worry. We have marvelous clinics 
on Mars. Once we get him to one of 
them there's a good chance of a 
cure." 

"You mean he isn't getting care 
now?" she asked, shocked. 

Rolf shook his head, replied, his 
voice low, "Not yet — not until you 
replace him. That's how shorthanded we arc. We've lost too many 
the last few months. And there 
simply aren't any replacements. 
That's why 1 rushed to Earth when 
I heard about you, why perhaps I 



NIGHTMARE TOVER 



used unscrupulous methods to get 
you to come. There arc less than a 
million people on :ill of Mars." 

She understood his unspoken 
analogy. Less than a million people 
— less than a hundred telepaths, to 
maintain communications over the 
entire planet. Then she thought of 
something else, said, "My headaches 
— they're telepathic, aren't they? 
Caused when my brother has one of 
his attacks?" 

"That's right as nearly as we 
can judge," he told her. "You seem 
to have an intense sympathetic af6nity. It's not unusual between 
identical telcpaths." 

"And there aren't many of 
those," she said idly. She looked at 
mm. "How about your brother, 
Rolf. Isn't he . . . ?" 

"Unfortunately not," he replied. 
*'He has some tendency toward 
E.S-P. but insufficiently strong to 
be reliable." 

Lynne sensed his thoughts shifting to his brother, then to hers — 
and was astounded by the depth of 
dislike he suddenly projected. It 
came as another shock and she said, 
"You hate my brother, don't you, 
Rolf? If you didn't you'd have 
managed to get him the care he 
must have to survive." 

"I don't hate your brother," he 
said wearily and she realised he 
spoke the truth. What he felt for 
Revere Fenley was the rather arrogant dislike and distrust toward a 
weaker man that is so frequent 
among the strong. Lynne resented 
it, resented him, bitterly. 



She said, "Then why haven't you 
replaced him? You're a telepath- — 
why haven't you given him relief?" 

Again he looked defeated and, 
with feminine illogic, her heart 
went out to him. He said, "I wish 
I could — unfortunately I'm not 
permitted to go o>it in the field 
alone." 

Annoyed by her heart's betrayal 
she let herself think, Ah, an armlovn^c admiral, a user of men who 
saves his own skin! She watched 
anger wash defeat from his face, 
for a moment felt fear at its intensity. Then, without a word, he 
turned and left her alone in the 
corridor. 

She felt a cheap victor as with 
difficulty she made her way back to 
her cabin. Nor was her self-esteem 
lifted when Joanna, sitting up in 
her bunk, said, "You must be real 
zwirch, Fenlay, if Marcein came 
for you. He's Communications Integrator for the whole ruddy planet 
— a real big bomb. How about introducing me before we land?" 

V 

To her considerable surprise in 
view of her emotionally upset condition, Lynne slept like the proverbial top. It took the combined 
efforts of Joanna and the stewardess 
to get her awake and up and dressed 
in time for the landing outside of 
New Samarkand. After a momentary breathless hovering pause the 
big ship set itself down so gently 
there was a hardly perceptible jar 
as it touched ground. 



FANTASTIC UNIVERSE 



Feeling cumbrous in cold-resistent parkaed coverall and curiously alone despite the cluster of 
passengers that waited with her in 
the airlock foyer, Lynne looked 
about her for Rolf Marcein. She 
felt a certain residue of guilt for 
her treatment of him during their 
last session, despite the justification 
of her anger. Here, on the threshold 
of an alien planet — bis planet — she 
needed him. 

He might have betrayed her and 
her brother, kidnapped her, all but 
seduced her — yet he was the sole 
human being she knew here. Her 
eyes sought him desperately, finally 
saw him working his way through 
the waiting passengers toward her. 

He thrust an oddly-shaped little 
packet toward her, said, "Here — 
fasten it on. It's an oxyrespirator — 
you'll need it. Use it whenever you 
feel faint." > 

His manner was gravely polite 
and his thoughts were carefully 
masked. He hadn't, she decided, forgiven her for that armlounge admiral insult of the night before, She 
sent her apologies mentally, received 
only a curt acknowledgement. She 
began to feel miserable. 

Then, abruptly, the port was 
opened. With his arm steadying her 
Lynne stepped out onto the escaramp 
platform, a couple of hundred 
meters above the flat blast-scarred 
surface of the field. A thin chill 
wind cut her face, a wind from out 
of a sky darker than that of Earth. 

Her first reaction was of gauntness, of barrenness beyond anything 



she had known on her home planet. 
The grounds around the Sahara 
brain-center in which she had 
served her apprenticeship had been 
lush with tropical growths — and 
even the desert around them had 
been warm. But the vast reddish 
expense of the spaceport looked cold 
and uninviting — even the row of 
oddly shaped metal buildings at its 
edge had a shabby eroded untended 
appearance. 

Her second reaction, as she rode 
the ramp down was of breathlessness. The icy air stung the insides 
of her nostrils, as it did her face, 
but failed to fil] her lungs. Panic 
swept over her and she clutched at 
her breast. Then Rolf's arms were 
around her from behind, his long 
strong fingers were adjusting the 
oxyrespirator. 

Lynne breathed deeply and felt 
a sudden surge of exhilaration. No 
wonder, she thought irrelevantly, 
the Martians were more volatile 
than Earthfolk. They must be constantly high on oxygen. She suppressed an impulse to giggle as she 
reached the bottom of the moving 
ramp. 

Her third reaction, as she took 
her first step on Mars, was of 
weightlessness. Not the unhealthy 
weightlessness of the space-ship but 
a buoyancy comparable to that of 
swimming in the Great Salt Lake or 
the Dead Sea. Lynne sat rigidly on 
an urge to discover how high and 
far she could jump, even encumbered by the aluminum coverall. 
She realised her hair was blowing in 



NIGHTMARE TO' 



the wind, pulled the parka over it. 

"You'll do." Rolf looked hex 
over disinterestedly, added, "Unless 
you still want to go back to Earth." 

It must have been the oxygen 
that made her reply, "What for? 
Now that I'm here I might as well 
give it a run." Irresponsible or not, 
it was worth it to see the softness 
that came into his dark eyes. 

He took her arm and said gruffly, 
"Come on. We've got things to do. 
I'm turning you over to Tony 
Willis. He'll brief you. He promised 
to be here . . . There he is, by the 
Administration Building." 

There was no doubt about the 
warmth of Tony Willis' greeting — 
outwardly or tclepathically. He 
gave Rolf a bearhug, then turned 
quickly to Lynnc, pumped her right 
hand, said, ''Crehitt, Tin glad you 
got here! But Rolf didn't warn us 
he was bringing a tearing beauty." 

"Tearing mad most of the way," 
she said, unable to remain unresponsive to Willis' warmth. He was 
a tubby bespectacled young man 
with an irresistible grin. From him 
she felt no probe of her thoughts, 
knew sudden overwhelming relief. 
Despite Rolf's assurance that there 
were fewer than a hundred telepaths 
on Mars, subconsciously she had 
been expecting to land on a planet 
where her innermost thoughts were 
open to everyone. Slie was almost 
pathetically grateful that it was not 
so. 

"Old Rolf must be losing his 
touch," said Willis, grinning. "He's 
our ace-in-the-hole when it comes 



to — personal management. Has a 
thousand lovely ladies eating right 
out of his hand." 

"Shut up, you czanworm!" Rolf's 
thoughts revealed acute distress and 
Lynne fclc a little glow of triumph. 

She said, "Well, one way or 
another he got me here." 

"And do we need you!" Willis 
led the way toward a pharmabar. 

"Thank you, sir." Lynne turned 
on the charm, enjoying the inner 
growls of resentment from Roll. 
Well, he'd played a game with her, 
she thought. He had no right to 
resent her pliying a few herself. 

But I wasn't playing for fun! 
The message was sharp and resentful. / was playing for the safely of 
my planet. 

You mean one little girl like me 
ran save a great big world like thn? 
It must be the oxygen, she decided, 
that was making her behave so giddily. Or perhaps she couldn't help 
tormenting him a little — a very 
little. 

"Hey, cut it out!" Tony Willis 
looked aggrieved. "It's bad enough 
having one of you telepaths around 
— but with two of you together 
anyone else is out in the cold. What 
do you want for breakfast?" 

They apologized and kept their 
special talents under wraps. Lynne 
felt a certain disappointment at the 
prosaic familiarity of the food and 
drink they were served. She didn't 
know exactly what she had been 
expecting but there was no trace of 
the exotic. 

Nor was the aircar in which 



UNIVERSE 



froi 
men 

3 

and 



Willis drove them from the spaceport to New Samarkand any different from similar vehicles on 
Earth — save that it seemed somewhat battered and in need of a 
refinish. She and Rolf rode in 
silence, letting Tony do the talking. 

They traveled at about five 
hundred meters altitude toward a 
low range of reddish hills, sprinkled 
here and there with green. The sky 
was cloudless, the ground beneath 
them innocent of roads, of cultivation, of homes. For the first time 
Lynne began to appreciate the immensity of the task these emigrees 
from Earth had undertaken, the rehabilitation of a near-dead planet. 

And then, when they crested the 
hill, there were rectangular patches 
of vegetation on its lee side. But 
she gave this man-made miracle 
only the briefest of glances — for 
beyond lay the vast bank of the 
canal, stretching as far as the eye 
could sec, in a straight line from 
horizon to horizon. And beyond 
the canal lay the city. 

Here, on the far bank of the 
incredible dry ditch, men had built 
well. Plastic half-domes and metallic 
towers, spare and functional, rose 
from the ntwly-buttrcsscd escarpment for a j;ood two kilometres, 
leath the buildings, on the bank 
lelf, were broad terraces upon 
hich passenger and freight-craft 
id landing engines made a busy 
and familiar pattern, kaleidoscopic 



III 



with movement. 

And behind the man-made city, 
incredible soaring half-ruined 



spires and obelisks cutting a jagged 
rampart across half the sky, lay the 
once-vast Martian metropolis. Crystal ine minarets, revealing materials 
and a beauty of design unknown as 
yet to Earthmen, reflected the rays 
of the distant sun in prismatic 
showers of color, coruscating, almost blinding, yet so weird and 
beautiful that they brought tears 
to Lynnc's eyes. 

Vm glad you can capture their 
beauty. Rolf's thought shared the 
excitement of her own. So many of 
us see nothing hut ruin. 

"Quite a sight, isn't it?" said 
Tony Willis complacently. "We get 
a farhish howl from the acheological boys whenever we have to 
clear any of it away." 

"It seems a shame," said Lynne 
with feeling. 

Willis shrugged. "Can't be helped. 
We haven't the time or resources to 
build from scratch in the sand. 
Besides, there's oceans of ruins left 
for them to poke around in." 

He brought them in with practised skill to a landing on one of the 
terraces, where Rolf was quickly 
gobbled up by a waiting group of 
men and women. Before they led 
him off he said to Lynne, "I'm sorry 
if I've seemed unfair, Lynne. But 
I think you'll understand in time. 
This is a frontier world and we 
can't always take time out to observe the niceties." 

Some inner emotion she refused 
to recognize caused her to ask, 
"When will I see you again, Rolf? 
You aren't leaving me . . ." 



NIGHTMARE TOWEIi 



"Tony can take care of you as 
well as I," he informed her. "I'd 
like to get you started myself but 
I'm way behind in my work. I'll be 
paying you a visit at the post — 
perhaps sooner than you expect." 

"I see." She felt frozen. Now that 
he had her here he was discarding 
her like an old clout. She recalled 
what Tony Willis had said at the 
spaceport about his having a 
thousand women eating out of his 
hand, how eagerly Joanna had expressed a desire to meet him the 
night before. She was glad there 
had been no opportunity to perform that introduction. Why make 
it a thousand-and-two? 

As he walked slowly away, with 
the reception committee dancing 
attendance about him, she received 
a faintly mocking thought projection from him, became aware that 
he was enjoying her jealousy. She 
felt her face flame again, said, 
tr Ferkab!" — all but stamped her 
foot. 

"What was that?" Tony Willis 
asked politely. 

"Nothing — my clout slipped," 
she replied, embarrassed. 

Lynne was taken to a gaunt office 
whose chief piece of furniture was 
an immense Martian globe, upon 
which all the chief Martian cities, 
all the human settlements, all the 
communications posts were marked. 
She began to understand, from looking at it, how very different conditions upon the red planet were 
from the Earth norm. 

The home planet, heavily over


populated, was skilfully disguised to 
appear roomy. Virtually every inch 
of its land surface was devoted to 
giving crowded humanity the illusion of privacy. Aloneness was 
one of its most prized cultural 
assets. 

On Mars, with its scant million 
humans and solitude ever-present, 
all cultural efforts were bent the 
other way — to create the illusion 
of a large number of people that 
did not exist. Instead of seeking 
privacy the inhabitants gratefully 
crowded close together in their 
small communities, seeking strength 
through numbers. 

"We're making progress — tremendous progress," Tony told her 
seriously, tapping a point on the 
globe. "The more ground we get 
under cultivation the more atmosphere we reclaim through the plantbreathing process. What we actually 
need is a few hundred million more 
people — but the planet will barely 
support those we have. It's a slow 
and laborious process." 

"Operation bootstrap," said 
Lynne, wondering how she could 
even briefly have found this dedicated young man ridiculous. 

"Exactly," he told her. "I take 
it Rolf has briefed you a little 
about your job here." 

"A little," she said. "I'm to relieve my brother — right?" 

"Right." He nodded. "We can 
short-cut your training because you 
are his twin. Ordinarily we take a 
couple of weeks fitting each communications worker to his or her 



FANTASTIC UNIVERSE 



pest — finding in just which their 
telepathic sensitivity will work the 
best. Hut since, in a way, we know 
about you through Revere, we can 
save time." 

"Revere," she said, "what about 
him? Is he very sick?" 

Tony Willis shrugged. "It's periodic," he told her. "This whole 
business is so new and so sudden 
tt hit most of them without warning. Since you know the score you 
ought to be able to fight it." 

"But mightn't I have my 
brother's weaknesses?" I.ynne asked. 

"We're hoping not," was the 
reply. "In most cases women resist 
better than men. The suggestions 
these creatures make are so swackably lewd they clash with the 
feminine propriety- barrier." 

"While men, being Casa novas, 
give in," she said, thinking again of 
Rolf and his thousand-and-two 
women. 

"Something like that," he replied, 
went on to tell her how telepathic 
messages were keyed and directed 
and addressed to reach the proper 
destinations. "You'll be here" — 
tapping a spot on the globe, a third 
of a world away from New Samarkand — "at Barkuiburg, within 
menrarange of Zuleika, New Walla 
Walla and Carhayvillc. So here will 
be the code-keys for you to remember . . ." 

Tlte final briefing took sixteen 
hours. If Lynne, through her years 
of coaching for and year of work 
on the in teg ration -team, had not 
been trained to complete concentra


tion over long periods, she would 
never have been able to absorb all 
the new knowledge Tony Willis 
and other communications experts 
pumped into her. 

Ac the end of that time he looked 
at her with red-rimmed but admiring eyes, shook his head and said, 
"My hat is off to you, Lynne. 
You're the quickest study I've ever 
met." 

"Thanks — most of it's a matter 
of training," she replied modestly. 
She was glad he was not telepathic 
or he would have read the bright 
glow of far-from-modest pride that 
ran through her. Wait /ill Rolf 
hears about it, she thought. Maybe 
he won't think I'm such a marlet 
after all. With this went added 
pride in that she was obviously less 
exhausted than her mentor. 

When it was over she was fed 
real meat for the fourth or fifth 
time in her life — ham from lean 
Martian-bred hog, basted in some 
curious alien sauce. With it went 
real potatoes and non- processed 
vegetables, raised on the red planet. 
Rugged or not, Lynne decided as 
she was bundled into a planetcar, 
life on Mars had its compensations. 

When the ship landed at Barkutburg a tcarose-pale Martian dawn 
was lighting the dark eastern sky. 
Lynne felt a tingle of anticipation, 
mixed with dread, a stir of tli'ja vu 
— the I've-been-here-before feeling 
—as she alighted with her strangely 
light bag in hand and paused to sip 
sparingly of her ox y respirator. 

for here was her nightmare city, 



NIGHTMARE TOWER 



35 



though seen from the ground. Here 
were the widely- spaced transparent 
lowers, similar to yet oddly unlike 
those of New Samarkand. I Iere 
were the scant human dwellings, 
clustered like alien mushroom 
growths amid the towering demiluins. 

Two aluminum-coveralled figures 
were awaiting her at the rim of the 
airport. One was tiny, feminine, 
despite the bulk of her costume, her 
exotically delicate Eurasian features 
roughened by wind and sunburn. 
She was Lao Mci-O'Conncll, qualified and elected leader of the pioneer 
settlement. The other was — Revere 
Fenlay. 

It was odd to see oneself mirrored 
in the features of another human 
for the first time in one's life, 
Lynne decided. She noted her 
brother looked unexpectedly 
healthy, that his handclasp was 
*irm, his eyes probably clearer than 
her own sleep-puffed ones. 

His thought was warningly clear. 
Don'/ be fooled by externals, Lynne, 
These creatures can move in on me 
every iime I open up my mind to 
receive a ■message. They're murder! 
Aloud he said, ''Lord, I had no idea 
my counterpart was a beauty." 

Quite naturally she linked arms 
With Revere as they walked toward 
the cluster of Earth-dwellings. It 
was, she thought, a rare event for 
twins, separated by the gulf between planets, ever to meet after 
incubation — except of course on 
such rarified levels as those trod 
by Rolf Marcein and his brother. 



She sensed a discomfort, a reserve, 
behind the routine welcome of Lao 

Mei-O'Connell, decided swiftly there 
was some sort of guilt feeling there. 

As swiftly her twin replied tclepathically, Of course she has feelings of guilt. Thanks to her 1 was 
given the cold wrap treatments — 
even when 1 was not under Their 
control. There was no need for 
them and they made me feel my 
head would burst. Thank farb 
you're herd 

When did you receive these 
treatments? she thought sharply. 
And the answering thought confirmed her sudden suspicion. Revere 
had been placed in coldwrap restraint each time a headache had 
assailed her on Earth. He had been 
deliberately tortured as part of the 
campaign to get her to come to 
Mars and replace him. 

That Rdf — that marlet! Fury 
assailed her, fury and frustration. 
But Revere's grip tightened on her 
forearm. 

/ don't wind — now, he informed 
her. We need you here. 

It was pathetic but she managed 
to still the thought aborning. With 
Revere, as never before in her life, 
she felt as if she belonged to someone, as if someone belonged to her. 
But she had not been with him an 
hour when he said good-bye. He 
was returning to New Samarkand 
on the planet-ship for treatment, 
perhaps ultimately to Earth to replace her. 

"Don't worry," he told her. 
"You'll do great, Lynne. Wring 



[C UNIVERSE 



tbclr farbrsh invisible necks." 

She checked the thrill of panic 
that caused her, managed a Look 
■up Ray Cornell when yon hit 
Earth. And ruin Janet just for me. 

Don't he too rough on Rolf was 
his farewell thought. You'll understand him better — later on. 

She watched the takeoff, walked 
back with Lao Mei-O'Connell in 
silence. And, twenty minutes later, 
she stepped off the uplift platform 
and found herself alone in the 
patched tower-room of her nightmare. 

VI 

Sitting there alone, waiting for 
something to happen, Lynne for the 
first time since becoming aware of 
her telepathic powers began to get a 
sense of direction along with the 
thoughts that came to her from 
outside. Heretofore she had only 
been conscious of the thoughts 
themselves, varying in power according to the strength of the 
thinker. 

Perhaps because of the altitude 
of the tower-room, perhaps because 
her own power was increasing with 
practise, perhaps because telepathy 
was easier in the thinner Martian 
atmosphere than on Earth — perhaps 
through a combination of all these 
factors, Lynne was aware of tremendous mental strength. 

Her on-duty periods consisted of 
two daily shifts, each of alxuit two 
Earth-hours. In case of an emergency message reaching her during 
lay other time, she was to report 



at once to her tower-post and remain on duty for the duration. And 
this was her first shift. 

She wondered how long it would 
take the Martians that had possessed 
Revere to seek her out and test her 
defenses. Apparently these invisible 
creatures operated upon a timescale of their own, making themselves felt without semblance of 
rhythm or regular schedule. 

Shutting out the meaningless 
scramble of thoughts that reached 
her from the Earth-village below, 
Lynne considered Revere and the 
odd constraint that had prevailed 
between them during their brief 
single meeting. Somewhere beyond 
the gaunt reddish Martian hills to 
the southeast, the planet-ship was 
carrying him swiftly toward New 
Samarkand — and, she hoped, toward 
rehabilitation. 

Revere had had a rough deal on 
this outpost world. Although he 
seemed not to resent it Lynne found 
herself trembling with indignation 
at thought of the needless torture he 
had undergone — merely to give 
Lynne the induced headaches that 
had undermined her Earth-conditioning. She thought of Rolf and 
his tlmusand-and-two women. 

And from somewhere, half a 
planet away, came a quick mocking 
thought from the Svengali who had 
led her to a planet she had never 
had the slightest desire to visit. It 
said, Don't bother me now, Lynne 
— can't you see I'm busier than 
farb? 

So thrilling was the experience, 




NIGHTMARE TOWER. 



35 



so magnificent the surge of power 
which swept through her, that 
Lynne actually forgot to be angry 
at receiving such a quick brush-off. 
Even a half-world away, she 
thought, she could key in on Rolf, 
learn what he was doing. 

A thousand-and-one other women? Sh« sipped sparingly at her 
oxyrespirator, felt reinforced exhilaration. With her new-found 
ability she was going to be able to 
check up on his alleged love-life. 
She actually gloated as she sac 
there alone amid the spare Martian 
landscape. 

Then, feeling.somewhat ashamed, 
she thought of her twin again. 
Evidently he was keeping his mind 
closed for she could not reach him. 
She wondered what he was really 
like, what — say — Lao Mei-O'Connell feit about him. And all at once 
she knew, for the Eurasian woman's 
mind was an open book. 

The Barkutburg leader was almost physically sick at Revcrc's departure. Her thoughts of love, of 
desolation, were so strong that 
Lynne found herself sharing them, 
even though she had seen her twin 
but a scant few minutes since attaining an age of reason. 

Yet there were strength and determination and a strong sense of 
duty holding Lao Mei-O'Connell to 
her important tasks of seeing that 
her share of reclaiming a planet 
continued. The frail-looking Martian woman was, Lynne realised, a 
person of vast character. 

She thought of her having de


liberately to torture the man she 
loved, through drugs that opened 
his already sick mind to the invaders, and wondered if she herself 
would be capable of such behavior, 
no matter how urgent the circumstance, to — say — Rolf Marcein. 

It was then that her first messagecame through — so unused was she 
to receiving telepathically impersonal thoughts that she all but 
missed her code signal. The Zuleika 
operator had to repeat it three times 
before Lynne came to with a start 
and keyed her own thoughts properly — Ess-two. Barkutburg. Esstwo, Barkutburg. Come in. 

The message itself concerned a 
supply of chemilamps, which had 
arrived at Zuleika from Cathayville 
and was ready for transhipment, if 
they were needed at Barkutburg. 
Lynne repeated the message, pressed 
the hand-buzzer for ground-communication, relayed the news to 
Lao Mei-0 1 Connell in her office below. She was told to notify Zuleika 
to send the chemilamps on at once, 
as they were sorely needed. 

Lynne got the message through, 
after which the Zuleika telepath 
flashed, You're new on the job. 
How is Fitiiay? 

This is Fcnlay here, she replied. 
Revere's twin, Lynne. He's been 
sent to New Samarkand for treatment. 

Welcome, Lynne Ferilay — and 
good Inch, came the answer. Met 
any of our unseen friends yet? 

Not yet, thought Lynnd when 
are they apt to hit me? 



FANTASTIC UNIVERSE 



There's no felling, Lynne received a definite impression of a 
shnig. The Zuleika operator gave 
his name, which was Zachary 
Ramirez, then signed off for the 
time being. Thanks to chis brief 
personal conversation Lynne no 
longer felt so alone. At least, when 
the invaders attacked her, she'd 
have someone to reach for — or 
would she? 

There was a message from New 
Walla Walla direct, about an hour 
later, concerning some point of 
bookkeeping. Lynne handled it, 
then sat out the rest of her first 
tour of duty alone. The Martian 
sun was high in the sky when at 
last she took the downlift to the 
ground. 

She found herself ravenously 
hungry. Either through some effect 
of llie alien atmosphere and climate 
or the knowledge the food she 
would get was real rather than 
fabricated, Lynne found herself 
thinking about dining in an almost 
animal fashion. 

Nor was the mess disappointing. 
All residents of Barkutburg shared 
a single dining hall, since such a 
method represented great economy 
of time, tabor and food supplies. 
It was, to Lynne, rather like a 
greatly enlarged and much more 
volatile Mother Weedon's. The other 
residents of the settlement wore the 
uniform ruddiness of unmistakable 
good health. To Lynne, accustomed 
to the more pallid countenances of 
Earth, they seemed almost vulgar. 

Yet the good humor, the ca


maraderie, were unmistakable— as 
were the animal spirits. Lynne, as 
a pretty girl and new arrival, got 

more masculine attention than ever 
before in her life. She was plied 
with offers to see the Martian ruins, 
to visit the nearby mountain tops* 
to take long excursions through 
the vast dry canal-beds. 

To Her relief the other girls and 
women, unless their thoughts lied, 
showed very little resentment at her 
presence. In fact most of them were 
as eager as the men to question her 
about the home planet — though 
their questions were cast in more 
feminine mould. Yet Lynne played 
her welcome cautiously, accepting 
no dates for the present on the plea 
that mastery of her new job demanded all her time and strength. 

A few days later Lao MeiO'Connell Suggested the two of 
them go for a walk. When they 
were well out of earshot of the 
others she said, "You're handling 
yourself very well, Lynne. So far 
so good." 

Lynne eyed her, carefully avoiding a probe of her mind — she had 
no wish to make an enemy of this 
woman and the basic situation was 
emotionally delicate to begin with. 
She said, "Then you anticipate 
trouble, Miss O'Connell?" 

"Lao, please," she said. "There's 
scant room for social formality in 
a settlement like Barkutburg. You'll 
have some trouble, of course — 
you're bound to on an alien planet. 
I hate to think of what I'd have to 
go through to adjust to Earth." 



NIGHTMARE TOWER 



37 



"Fair enough," Lynne said gratefully. She wanted to ask Lao about 
Revere, what sort tf man he was. 
some of his little habits. She also 
began to understand better why 
Earth-Mars twins were kept so 
rigorously apart as a rule. The relationship was a complex and deep 
one and she found herself almost as 
homesick for her twin as was Lao. 

"Life is hard here." Lao said, 
"but not unhappy. It isn't even 
particularly earnest, save for necessary jobs. Work hard, play hard, 
rest hard — that's the rule of Mars." 

"It sounds good," said Lynne 
sincerely. "Tell me, Lao, just what 
is the status of electricity on Mars? 
I was a little worried when you 
wanted the chemilamps so urgently. 
But we have the communicator 
phones and electric cooking . . 

"It's a strange problem," said the 
other woman. "Everything works 
as long as we can use a closed 
circuit on this planet. But the 
minute we open one up — for lateral 
broadcasting, say — it is dissipated 
- — like that!" She snapped thin 
fingers sharply. 

Then she added, "But nature 
seemed to have compensated in our 
favor when we were able to develop telepaths." She eyed Lynne 
speculatively, added, "You must 
have tremendous powers. No other 
Earth-person has ever been able to 
make the grade. From what Rolf 
Marcein told me you were outstanding the moment Revere 
reached you." 

"I don't pretend to understand 



it," said Lynne. "As far as my first 
few sessions on duty, it seemed to 
be all right." 

"You weren't bothered?" The 
question was softly urgent. 

"No." Lynne shook her head. 
"But I'm expecting to be." 

"You will be, I'm afraid. Ever\ 
telepath up Mars has been at least 
once. Revere had the bad luck tc 
be the first — before the presence 
of these beings was even suspected 
Hence he was surprised and his resistance was unprepared. Once 
they've gained possession it becomes 
progressively more difficult to keep 
them out." 

"I suppose," said Lynne, "the\ 
pick on telepaths because they can 
only enter minds opened for message-reception." 

"Probably," Lao informed her 
"We can't be certain of anything 
until we know more about them 
and their motives. But you can see 
what a threat it has become 
Thanks to the paralysis of lateral 
electronic communication, the survival of humanity on Mars depend? 
almost entirely on telepaths. When 
these zombies or whatever they are 
take possession no telepath is worth 
a damn. Nor can any of them receive messages while the aliens are 
threatening them. If they do . . ." 

Lao's silence was eloquent. Lynne 
took a sip of oxygen as her breathing became difficult. They were approaching one of the semi-mined 
structures, a vast edifice, squattct 
and broader than the slim pinnacle 
which contained the broadcasting 



room, whose lower facade was a 
mass of friezes in high-relief. 

Lynnc, as part of Her cultural 
training on Earth, had been taken 
on tours of the vast temples of 
India, Pakistan and Malaya — including Ankhor Vat. Yet not even 
the incredible and bizarre reliefs of 
those fabulous temples, with all of 
their grotcsqueries and solemnly religious obscenities, prepared her for 
what she now saw. 

The pantlieocratic creatures of 
ancient Mars were far more diverse 
than their counterparts on Earth 
— and of course utterly exotic. 
Here were creatures with two, three 
and four heads, with innumerable 
appendages, with reproductive organs so weird as to defy comment 
or moral reaction. 

One feature Lynnc noted at once. 
Like their Asiatic counterparts on 
Earth, they seemed to belong to a 
theocratic rather than a scientific 
culture — yet the buildings themselves were utterly beyond the 
creative techniques of even an interplanetary human culture. 

She said, "Are the other towers 
of Mars like ihis?" 

"In general," replied the Eurasian 
girl. "The aborigines seem to have 
been mostly a philosophic sort. 
Perhaps they became so when their 
planet began to die. All that have 
survived arc such low life-orders 
as the czanworm and sand-lttrtonlc 
Unless, of course, the invisible ones 
are natives. I for one am inclined to 
believe they are," 



"So does Rolf Marcein, 
Lynne. 

"You love him, don't you?" L 
asked matter-of-factly. 

"I'm beginning to be afraid so*' 
said Lynne as frankly. 

"It's nothing to be ashamed of, 
replied the other. "I love Revere, 
you know — and I don't expect to 
see him ever again." 

"I know," said Lynne, feeling 
her companion's unhappiness like a 
knife. She pulled the parka over her 
head although it was not the cool 
Martian afternoon breeze that was 
making her cold. She said, "It must 
have been very difficult for you— 
what you had to do to help get me 
here. I don't wonder if you hate 
me." 

"I don't hate you, Lynne," said 
Lao. "But if you fail on this job I 
shall. I should not enjoy sacrificing 
Revere for nothing." 

"I won't fail," Lynne told her 
with more assurance than she felt. 
"After all, I have Revere to think 
of — and you — and Rolf." 

"I encourage myself with similar 
thoughts," said Lao. "Come — let 
us go on inside." 

It was like entering a pagan 
cathedral. The tower in which 
Lynnc's post was bore heavy overmarks of human habitation. Probably, she thought, it had long since 
been stripped by the archcologisti 
of any objects of historical or cultural value. Save for its crystaline 
flying buttresses it might almost 
have been an Earth skyscraper. 

But, outside of a few pieces of 



said 

... 



NIGHTMARE TOWER 



59 



scaffolding, where restoration work 
or '.imly was evidently in progress, 
this immense building had been left 
untouched by the new inhabitants 
of the red planet. Thanks probably 
to the thinness and dryness of the 
atmosphere, brilliant murals had 
retained their coloring intact. Yet 
in numerous patches the colors 
seemed to fade into neutral tints at 
■variant." with the brightness of the 
rest. 

"Here." Lao took from a table, 
on which tools and other instruments had been laid, an odd-looking 
stcreoptical device, handed it to 
Lynne, adding, "Adjust it and 
you'll get the full effect. A lot of 
their work was done below the 
Human color-scale, in the infrared." 

Lynne gasped when she studied 
the hitherto drab patches in the 
murals through the double-eyepiece of the viewer. She saw strange 
beings, hauntingly near-human, engaged in fantastic gambols. Multifaceted eyes leered out at her from 
the Capuchin heads of twin-bodied 
smaller creatures of a boldness 
that almost made her flinch. And 
there were endlessly varied poses of 
both sorts of beings , . . 

"Rather disturbing, isn't it?" 
said Lao. "I didn't bring you out 
here just to see the sights, Lynne. 
From what little your brothct was 
able to tell me, the odd little games 
those creatures are playing are very 
like those his invaders hinted at." 

"You mean," said Lynne with a 
shudder, "that the zombies or what


ever they are looked like that before they lost their bodies?** 

"Or before they became invisible," said Lao quietly. "The 
near-humans seem to have been the 
dominant species. These others— 
the twin-bodied monkeylike things 
— seem to have been their pcts.*' 

"What disgusting games they 
played!" said Lynne. "They sound 
a lot like . . ." She hesitated, realising she was about to repeat Lao's 
remark. 

"Exactly," said Lao. 

They walked back to the settlement in silence. Both girls had a 
great deal to ponder over. When 
they got there Lynne settled down 
to listen to some musicrolls in the 
recreation building and Lao left to 
tend to her various executive functions. 

Lynne's new life on Mars passed 
without notable incident for 
another week, Earth-time. She was 
beginning to adjust to days and 
nights almost twice as long as those 
of her home planet, to the small 
cool sun, tn the use of her oxyrespirator whenever her lungs felt 
empty. 

She was even beginning to enjoy 
the give-and-take of the nco- pioneer 
society of Barkutsburg. Yet loneliness continued to gnaw at her, 
loneli ncss for the twin she had 
known such a short time, loneliness 
for Rolf, at whose activities she 
could only guess. And some of her 
guesses were in lurid vidarcolor. 

Late one afternoon, in the recre: 
tion building, the musicroll w: 



er 



4 o 



FANTASTIC UNIVERSE 



playing a fine concerto for theraharp by Liston-Lutz, the most important human composer yet to 
emerge on Mars. Back on Earth his 
music had seemed to Lynne to be 
both glaringly dissonant and a 
trifle decadent. Here on Mars she 
understood it. He was writing of 
the red planet itself, of a world 
that had all but died and was now 
having its life renewed through 
lusty Earth- pioneers. 

"Like it?" one of the engineers 
enjoying an off-shift rest asked 
Lynne over a colafizz globe. 

"Very much. It — fits," said 
Lynne. She was still smiling at him 
when the headache came back — 
with a sharpness and depth of discomfort she had never felt on 
Earth. For a full minute or two she 
thought she was going to be physically sick from the pain. 

She managed to get up and move 
toward her quarters before anyone 
noticed she was feeling badly. It 
would never do to have them worried about her — after all, they had 
enough to worry about. Besides, 
she knew what was the matter. 
Revere was in New Samarkand 
and they were doing something to 
him, something that might easily 
either kill him or drive him permanently insane. 

VII 

Lynne Uy down on her simple 
cot and tried to flash a personal 
message through to Revere. But all 
she got was an increase of agony 
that almost blacked her out. 



Then she tried to reach Rolf 
Marccin. Although she lacked the 
advantage of being high in her 
tower-post, the emotional urgency 
of the moment more than compensated for this adverse factor. She 
got through to him quickly, discovered his mind was open. So 
intense was his concentration that 
he seemed momentarily unaware of 
her probing. 

He was sitting in a hospital 
room, an operating room, and 
Revere lay in front of him, stretched 
out on a surgical table. Sight of 
him made Lynne feel another wave 
of nausea, An anestherator had 
been attached to his nose and mouth 
and an alert nurse stood by the 
regulator. Revere's temples had been 
slit by twin incisions, from which 
tubes were attached to an odd and 
complex piece of machinery that 
seemed to support a visual-grid. 

Rolf Marcein was digging at her 
twin mentally, at the same time 
seeking to receive whatever messages came from his tortured brain. 
Lynne could read Rolf's thoughts 
clearly as he waved to her twin, 
Their shape — *you of all of us must 
have received some vision of their 
appearance. Crehut, Fenlay, we've 
got to know how they think of 
them selves! 

Then came a chaotic jumble of 
answering thoughts from Revere's 
damaged brain. And even as she 
suffered sympathetic anguish Lynne 
understood that with full anesthesia 
the mind itself would be dulled so 



NIGHTMARE 



that no messages would be possible. 
It was a hideous moment. 

I'm trying, Rolf — I'm trying . . . 
In spite of the agony he was undergoing Lynne's brother was beginning to formulate his thoughts. 
Little by little a picture was building itself on the screen. It was a 
wispy fragmentary picture, like 
a vidarscreen suffering from oldfashioned television "ghosts." The 
figures he projected looked wispy, 
blurred, repeated side by side in 
overlapping focus. 

Lynne noted that Rolf and the 
alert attendants present were 
using stereoscopic devices, forced 
herself to sec through the mind of 
one of them, to learn the impressions they were getting of the 
infra-red portions of the picture. 

It was like some of the images 
Lynne had seen earlier on the 
Martian mural — but all balled up. 
It looked like one of the near-human dominant species, yet had the 
multiple body of one of their disgusting pets. Its antics were even 
more suggestive than the mural. 

Lynne quickly re-transferred herself. She remembered all at once 
what Tony Willis had told her 
about women being better able to 
resist the aliens than men. They 
were incredible, impossible, she 
thought, yet there was a hint of 
intense pleasure in their . . . 

All at once she lost the entire 
image in a flash of worry, confusion and finally frustration. Yet 
her headache persisted, grew worse, 
ind she got a definite impression 



that Revere was dying, that Roll 

was mercilessly goading him on to 
destruction. Outraged, she tried to 
key furious thoughts in Rolf's 
direction — but so greatly was she 
herself suffering that she was unable 
to focus her powers. 

Then, abruptly, the agony was 
oyer. Whatever had happened was 
finished, done with. Lynne sat up 
on her bed, feeling limp and sore 
alt over, as if she had taken a 
physical beating. She ran an acticomb through her blond hair, 
freshened up her looks generally, 
though she felt like the proverbial 
wrath of Satan, went out to the 
recreation room. At the moment 
she needed human company. 

Through a window she saw that 
the sun was low in the west, looked 
in awe at the brilliant colors of the 
Martian sunset. Thanks to the 
thinner atmosphere and its high 
impregnation of dust, the brilliance 
far exceeded anything on Earth, 
even though the sun looked faraway and cold. 

Someone offered her a colafizz, 
which she accepted gratefully. She 
tried to reach Revere but got only 
a wall of blankness. He was either 
unconscious — or dead, she decided. 
She didn't know whether to be relieved or grief-stricken at the prospect. True, Revere was her identical 
twin — yet she barely knew him, 
had no real close ties. 

Then Lao appeared and under the 
artificial lighting of the chemilamps, Lynne was surprised to note 
how tired the Eurasio- Martian girl 



-I 2 



FANTA5TK UNIVERSE 



looked. She appeared thin enough to 
be blown away by the first breeze 
and there were deep purple circles 
under her slightly tilted black 
almond-eyes — yet the fingers that 
gripped her skinless cigarette were 
rock- steady. 

She said, "They've done something to Revere, haven't they?" 

"I think so," Lynne replied. 
"How did you know?" 

"I felt it — until just lately," gaid 
Lao. "Most of us are somewhat telepathic on Mars. In moments of 
emotional stress especially." 

"I'm not sure what's happened," 
Lynne told her. "They were trying 
to get him to record the shape of 
the invaders on a grid." 

Lao's already pale face turned 
ashy-white. She whispered, "I knew 
it! They've used the necro-recorder 
on him." 

"What is it?" Lynne inquired. 

"It's a Martian device — -supposed 
to get impressions from the minds 
of dying men. It was used in the 
early days when we had more 
crime." There was sudden listlessncss in her manner. 

Lynne read her thoughts all too 
plainly. Lao Mei-O'Connell was 
stunned with grief. No one, it 
seemed, had ever survived treatment with this machine — survived 
to sanity at any rate. So Revere 
was dead — or as good as dead. 

Lynne looked blankly at the 
Eurasian woman, utterly unable to 
think under the sudden shock of 
her words. And then, out of nowwhere, came the fragment of a 



thought. Don't give up the spaceship, Lynne — tell Lao I'm not completely batty yet. 

It was Revere — unquestionably. 
Lynne tried to get him again but 
the blank wall was back. Only now, 
for some reason, it didn't seem so 
terrifying. She looked at Lao, who 
said, "You got something just now, 
Lynne. Was it . . . ?" 

Lynne nodded. "It was Revere. 
He — he asked me to tell you he's 
okay — not completely batty yet 
was the way he put it." 

For a moment doubt blanked 
Lao's face. Then she smiled and 
looked on the verge of passing out 
herself. She said, "I might not have 
believed you, Lynne. But that 
phrase — it's — well, it's the way he 
would have said it." 

"It was Revere," Lynne repeated. She looked at the chronometer above the door of the room, 
realized it was getting late. "I've 
barely got time to eat dinner," she 
said. "I don't want to miss my 
shift." 

"No, you don't," the other told 
her. "There might be a message." 

"Why not share it with me?" 
Lynne offered. "I could use some 
company." 

Lao shook her head regretfully. 
"I've got a million things to do 
here," she said. Then, with the 
ghost of a smile lighting her exotic 
features, "Besides, I'd be afraid it 
might be bad news." 

"I'll send you a message via the 
ground -communicator the second I 
learn anything," Lynne told her. 



NIGHTMARE TOWER 



43 



Then the two women went in to 
dine at the head table. They were 
two islands of preoccupation amid 
the rough good-humored gaiety of 
the room. It was Saturday night at 
Burkurburg and there wit going to 
be a dance. 

Lynne found herself wondering 
it the morals of her new companions. They certainly didn't seem 
backward about sex — and the 
planet-wide dislike of privacy 
teemed to extend into even their 
most intimate personal relationships. 
Yet when Lynnc thought about 
Janet Downcs and certain other 
young men and women of the supposedly more civilized home planet, 
ihe decided the Martians were probably the nicer. At any rate they 
lived their emotional lives right out 
in the open. 

Tor the first time since her first 
few days on the red planet she felt 
alone as she stepped off the uplift 
and entered her listening and message-post, high in the crystal tower. 
There was something frightening 
about sitting alone in this ruined 
building with the wind making its 
night sounds through the flying 
buttresses about her and what appeared like the whole of Mars 
stretched out in panorama before 
her. 

It had looked desolate enough In 
the daylight. Now, with the stars 
blazing an enigmatic backdrop, it 
looked dark — and twice as desolate. 
Lynne found herself wondering 
what strange and fearsome caravans, what hideous battles and 



frightful plagues, had passed within 
view of her post. She seemed to see 
again the strange capering figures 
of the murals and bas-reliefs, and of 
the vision-grid she had viewed teleparhically that afternoon in the 
distant hospital room at New 
Samarkand. 

She told herself she was getting 
the jams, sent a tune-up message 
through to Cathayville. Through 
the telepathic operator should have 
been on duty there was no response. 
She reached out further to locate 
Revere, could not get to him, found 
Rolf. He told her, Lay off, you 
marlet. Lynne. Yon nearly jammed 
the uvrks this afternoon. 

How is Revere? She was insistent. 

In coma — and hereafter use the 
proper channels, Lynne. You're 
supposed to key all messages for 
New Samarkand through Cathay' 
ville. 

Cathayville fails to answer, she 
informed him. 

Cease sending at once! Cease 
sending at once, Lynne. If Cathayville is out it means . . . Ctma 
sending at once! 

What Joes it mean? Lynne was 
unused to Martian directness, unused to taking peremptory orders, 
especially from a man. She had no 
intention of obeying before she was 
good and ready and . . * 

Suddenly they were there, all 
around her. Ttunks to having 
viewed the murals and the scene on 
the visual grid that afternoon she 
was able to get some idea of their 
nature — or what had been their 



-H 



FANTASTIC UNIVERSE 



nature before a dying globe had 
driven them to seek the refuge of 
pure thought and feeling-forms. 

First one of them came fluttering 
into the room, like some giant invisible moth, then came another and 
another and another until she lost 
count. They were ga/ for some reason and nibbled at her mind like 
moths nibbling at wool in a closet. 

Worse, now that she had allowed 
them into her brain she was unable 
to drive them out. They darted 
away, amused, just beyond the 
reach of her questing probe. Then 
they came back, doing their strange 
dances and whispering outrageous 
suggestions. Alien or not they had 
definite erotic appeal, that awakened 
in Lynnc responses she had never 
before suspected she possessed. 

What kind of creature am J? she 
thought hysterically after a particularly ingenious lascivious mental 
embrace. A nd then, from some 
hidden source, she drew the strength 
to tight. She concentrated as never 
before in her life — even while working with the group-machine — and 
little by little began to win the 
battle with the aliens. 

You'll regret it — jmt let us have 
the loan of your body and we'll 
show you joys you have never 
dreamt of. The thoughts pounded 
at her head with frail persistent 
powdery punches, that promised to 
win through sheer weight of numbers what they lacked in power. 

But Lynne *orced herself to think 
of kindly prosaic Mother V/eedon. 
At once, seizing upon her thought, 



the invaders suggested all sorts of 
indecent sports for that mature 
lady. And the very idea of Mother 
Wcedon indulging in such pursuits 
was so absurd that Lynne was unable to resist laughing out loud. 

At once the creatures were gone. 
They were unable to stand the 
brain waves of ridicule. Lynne wondered about it. For the moment she 
felt carried aloft on a wave of high 
excitement at her victory. Sh* 
tried to code through a message to 
Rolf Marccin through the proper 
Cathayville channel. 

Cathayville had been attacked 
earlier in the evening and for 
awhile the telepath on duty had 
been forced to keep his mind resolutely shut, lest he fall prey to the 
enemy. Repulsed, they had moved 
on to Barkutburg and Lynne. She 
gave the message for relay, received 
information to the effect that Rolf 
Marccin's current whereabouts were 
unknown and that he was maintaining a closed mind to all messages and was therefore not to be 
reached. 

Lynne felt terribly .done at this 
message and the h.vaders chose that 
moment, while her mind was still 
open, to return in greater force. 
This time Lynne- found herself in 
actual pain. Their promise was no 
longer mere physical pleasure — • 
although their abandonment of 
bodies had unquestionably led them 
to overstrcss the joys of the flesh. 
Now they promised pain unless 
Lynnc were to give way to them, 
the sort of pain, a thousand times 



NIGHTMARE TOWER 



magnified, that she had felt sympathetically while Revere was enduring similar attack. 

She tried to concentrate on 
Mother Weedon but the creatures 
were not to be fooled twice by the 
same ruse. This time it was their 
laughter that hurt. Lynne cast 
about wildly for help from any 
telepath within mental reach, lest 
she actually surrender body and 
moid to their control. She even 
tried to leach Lao Mei-O'Coanell 
but the Eurasian woman was not 
telepathic enough to respond to the 
appeal. 

Then, as she was about to give 
up, support reached her. Revere was 
sending to her, helping her to steady 
herself. She could sense His complete 
exhaustion, felt concern for him 
even while she accepted gratefully 
his mental powers of assistance. 
Only such a relationship as theirs, 
she realised, could cope with the 
blanketing torment of the invaders. 

He was telling her something, 
that Rolf and the others had compiled some sort of error that afternoon from the vision-grid. The 
thought ran, They think they know 
what the creatures are now hut 
they don't. Even I don't. My images 
were mixed. They are not the dominant near-human species we thought 
but u/mcthing else . . . 

Slowly his thoughts faded once 
more, unable to hold out against the 
fatigue that was plaguing him. But 
his hopeless message of defeat had 
sprung a fresh thought-train in 
Lynne's mind, one that so occupied 



her attention she was able to hold 
the invaders at bay almost without 
effort. 

She recalled the murals — the 
near-human looking dominants and 
their pets with the disgusting dual 
bodies and vile games and manyfaceted eyes. She thought back to 
what Revere had just said via 
thought-waves — They are not tht 
dominant near-lntman species we 
thought hut something else . . . 

She saw once more, in clear 
memory-vision, the telepathic picture that had come to her of Rolf 
and Revere and the visual-grid. No 
wonder the pictures had looked 
foggy and full of "ghosts." In his 
mind's eye, limited by the fixed 
belief of Mars that only the 
dominant species could have survived in invisible form, Revere had 
tried to project these near-humans 
onto the screen. 

Inwardly, subconsciously, he had 
known better. The dominant species 
had not survived — on Mars at any 
rate. It was the horrid little creatures 
with the multi-faceted eyes and the 
capuchin-like heads and the dual 
bodies that had managed to shed 
their corporate existence and still 
maintain life of a sort. The masters 
had gone — the beasts remained . . . 

Lynnc felt a wave <»f delight at 
her discovery, realised it was more 
a result of her not having been inhibited by the traditions of Martian 
conditioning than through any 
genius of her own. For an instant 
she let down the bars of her mind— 
and the invaders, hovering unseen 



FANTASTIC UNIVERSE 



about her In the tower-room, came 
Iwarming in for their third and 
fiercest attack. They knew she had 
I'ltcsscd their nature, were determined to prevent Lynne from 
making the discovery clear to other 
humans. For they too were telepathic. 

VIII 

This time they actually knocked 
Lynne to the floor of the towerroom. It was greater torment than 
she had ever endured in her life. 
Somehow she could sense the pattern behind its intensity, even while 
she was in the grip of a mental confusion that seemed to be burning 
out the very fibers of her brain. 

This was the showdown, the decisive battle. Her being imported to 
Mars had been a step in the dual 
between the invisible aliens and the 
Communications Integration of the 
red planet, headed by Rolf Marcein 
MM his telepaths and other department workers. 

Unless the aliens were stopped 
and stopped now there would be no 
holding them. Earthfolk on Mars' 
were becoming increasingly telepathic and telepaths were the prey 
of the invisible foes. Lynne knew 
somehow, from the thoughts of the 
aliens, that they had been growing 
Steadily in strength since the arrival 
i>f tlie Tnrtlimen on their planet, 
that after a creepingly slow revival 
for decades they had finally snowballed to sufficient power to make 
open attacks upon human brains 
laid bare for telepathic communica


tion. They longed to renew the lost 
pleasures of the flesh through possession of human bodies. 

Rolf and the scientists had 
learned something that afternoon 
from Lynne's twin, something about 
the nature and life-form of the attackers that had hitherto been concealed from them. They were moving to the attack themselves — and 
it was of vital import to them 
that Lynne should now get through 
with the message that would reveal 
this true nature. 

She tried desperately to reach 
Rolf — and when this effort failed 
to think of Mother Weedon or even 
plump Tony Willis engaged in 
amorous sports — but the keynote of 
the alien attack had been altered 
from suggestion of sensation to 
outright mental attack. Instead of 
bribery or blackmail through pain, 
she was being given sledgehammer 
treatment. 

But she had to get her message 
through. Without her knowledge of 
the nature of the aliens Rolf would 
use faulty weapons against them, 
would lose precious time, time that 
might prove decisive for the survival 
of Earthmcn on Mars. 

Despairing, knowing she could 
not hold out much longer against 
the attack with her mind open, 
Lynne summoned reserve powers 
she did not know she possessed and 
swept the planet's surface with her 
thoughts, seeking Rolf. Her love 
for him, her fear for Revcre's ultimate fate, her affection for her new 
comrades — all combined to help her 



NIGHTMARE TOWER 



47 



make a final superhuman effort. 

Yet for awhile it seemed that 
even this despairing try was 
destined to defeat. The floor was 
beginning to swim before her eyes 
when at last she reached Rolf, got 
him, lost him, got him again. With 
darkness closing about her she 
poured out her information, her 
theory, her surmises. 

Faintly at last she felt Rolf's 
Crehut! The multiple bodies on the 
visual screen we thought were 
ghosts — of course they're the survivors, rather than the near-humans! Thanks a million, honey, 
we'll know what to do now. Hold 
on out there — help h on its way. 

But Lynne could hold out no 
longer. She felt the invisible attackers come pouring through her 
weakened mental barriers — her last 
remembered vision was of the floor 
rising rapidly to strike her. She 
turned her face away just before it 
hit. 

Lynne became aware of a lifting 
from her brain, of a cessation of 
pain that she had never actually 
felt. She opened her eyes, discovered 
she wjj still lying on the floor of 
the towcr-room. But she was no 
longer surrounded by terror. 

The patched portion of the wall 
had been smashed through and 
beyond it hovered the well-lighted 
outlines of a small aircraft. With 
her in the room was Rolf Marcein 
— and he was sweeping the apparently empty air about him with 
an odd-looking weapon. No flash or 
beam came from its squat muzzle 



but briefly, all around her, Lynne 
was aware of alien anguish, alien 
drainage, alien flight. 

"That should do it for awhile, 
honey," he told her, helping her to 
her unsteady feet. "Crehut! What a 
show those blasted marie Is put on 
this time. They tried to knock out 
the whole system simultaneously. 
Check the other stations, will you, 
honey?" 

Automatically she did it. Cathayville came in clearly, as did New 
Walla Walla and Zoleika. Save for 
a few stations on the other side of 
the planet the communications network was clear once again. Lynne 
informed Rolf of the fact. 

"Good," he said, pulling a skinless cigarette from his pocket and 
letting it ignite itself. "I guess 
we're solid now. The purt of it is 
they almost got us, before you 
could find out enough about them 
to knock them out for awhile." 

"What sort of gun is that?" 
Lynne asked him. He had called her 
honey, he had saved her life, but 
so casually had he done it that she 
still felt definite constraint between 
them. 

"We had to put it together in a 
hurry, once we got your message," 
he told her, patting it fondly. He 
held it up so that she could examine 
it better, added, "It isn't really a 
gun at all. We've been using the 
damned things for space and planetslup external repairs for years now 
— you know how their outer skins 
pile up positive electricity . . ." 

"I don't," she said. "Tell me." 



.,8 



FANTASTIC UNIVERSE 



He shook his head, put an arm 
around her, scowled at her fiercely. 
"How come I managed to acquire 
such an ignoramus?" he asked 
rhetorically. "I'm not going to explain it all now but space-ships do 
pick up positive charges on their 
outer hulls and this thing is an 
anion gun that attracts and discharges negative juice. 

"Our unseen visitors with the 
gone bodies are mostly positive 
electricity in their present form, 
honey," he went on. "This blaster 
of ours gives them a negative charge 
that wipes them right out." Rolf 
put an arm about her, led her unprotesting to the hovering vehicle 
outside. "I imagine they're beginning to wonder what in part's 
been going on, down below." 

But before he pressed the buttons 
that lowered the hovering pinnace 
to the planet's surface he drew her 
into the circle of bis arms, kissed 
her, then said, "If you hadn't given 
us the clue to what these horrors 
were we'd never have had sense 
enough to know what to do. We 
couldn't conceive of the dominant 
species turning into this kind of 
force, But their pets, with the 
multiple bodies . . ." 

Lynne and Lao Mei-O'Connell 
and most of the rest of the citizens 
of Barkutburg listened attentively 
while Rolf told them the full story. 
The trouble, it seemed, was caused 
by the fact that the Earthmen had 
brought electricity back to Mars. 

"These creatures were forced to 
discard their corporeal bodies to 



survive on a planet as dead as this 
one," he went on. "Their food is 
electricity and they'd been existing 
on a starvation diet for thousands 
of years, until we got here." 

"It's strange they never tried 
space-travel," said Lynne. 

"I don't believe their philosophy 
admitted to such a materialistic 
solution," Rolf replied. "They must 
have progressed like farb in the 
spiritual direction to be able to discard their bodies at all. Probably 
couldn't manage it both ways." 

"That makes sense, Rolf." Lao 
nodded, looked at Rolf with an 
appeal she could not put into words. 

He understood, told her, "Your 
Revere is going to be right as part. 
I know what you must have 
thought when Lynne gave you the 
message she got about what we 
were doing to him. I tried to conceal it for that reason but this 
young lady is too farbly strong 
telepathic ally to shut her out. I'm 
sorry I had to make him suffer but 
he understood. And I wasn't going 
to damage him permanently. 

"We — that is, some of Tony 
Willis' bright young men, have 
managed to improve the necro-recorder so that it is no longer destructive of the mind of the usee. 
They'd been working on it against 
time — and against just such a situation as arose recently, when we 
were finally able to get Revere off 
duty for a bit." 

"Thanks." Lao Mei-O'Connell 
said the word gratef ully. 

"It's been rough on you," Rolf 



NIGHTMARE TOWER 



told her, "but nothing like as rough 
as if our little friends got control 
of ail the telepaths." 

"What did they feed on that 
made them strong?" Lynne asked. 

"Electricity," said Rolf. "Just 
because we couldn't make it work 
in open circuits doesn't mean we 
haven't tried. They got enough 
from our efforts partly to restore 
themselves — from such efforts and 
the leakage of our closed circuits. 
They were always sopping it up. 

"But we didn't even know what 
they looked like, though we had our 
suspicions. They figured to be 
survivors of the dominant species 
on the planet before it dried up — 
but Revere's test this afternoon 
gave us our first doubts. We were 
still up a tree when Lynne got her 
message through. That did it! 

"But it was touch and go. I 
grabbed a space-ship to get to 
Lynne, then took a pinnace. If 
we hadn't managed to get the anion 
guns ready tonight I think we'd 
have been licked for all our knowledge. Now we've got them licked. 
They can still raid our electricity 
once in awhile, but it's going to 
cost them." 

That was about it. Lynne got up 
and went outside in the chill Martian night to smoke a skinless 
cigarette. A little while later Rolf 
came out and joined her. He slipped 
an arm around her again, hugged 
her, said, "Putt, isn't it?" 

"I guess so." The constraint she 
felt in his presence was strong upon 
her. And she had been through a 



little too much too quickly. She 
said, "What about Revere?" 

"He'll he back on the job in a 
little while," he said. "From what 
he told me before he went under 
this afternoon he wants to mate up 
with l,ao Mei-O'Connell." 

"That'll be fine," said Lynne, 
feeling suddenly very lonely. "But 
what happens to me?" 

"One zwirchy guess!" he said, 
bringing his other arm into play. 

"But if you drive off the aliens, 
why are you going to need telepaths?" She felt robbed of a 
fascinating new career before it was 
even begun. 

"Don't you believe it," he told 
her. "Telepathy is going to be the 
keystone of the entire Martian culture. Now that we shan't have to 
confine people like you and Revere 
and me to communications we can 
use them a thousand other ways. 
Think of what telepathy will mean 
in education, in therapy, in sheer 
honesty and understanding! 

"Besides . . ." He looked thoughtfully at the star-studded sky. "Man 
isn't always going to be limited to 
two puny planets. We've still to 
get a settlement working on Venus. 
And out there somewhere are the 
moons of Saturn and Jupiter. Think 
of how easy it will make the task 
if we have telepaths ready-made!" 

He paused, forced her to look at 
him, said, "How about it, honey?" 

She said, "You must be in love 
with your own voice— you didn't 
really have to say any of that. But 
watch what you think!" 



VISCOUS 



circle 



y . . . A. Bertram Chandler 



t's bad to be trapped in a time 
warp with anyone. And when anyone is Malaprop Jenkins it can 
adder a man's wits pepperiuintly. 



FOREWORD 

"This is up your alley," he said. 
"You might be able to do something with it. If I stilt had the 
bottle, the original paper, I'd chance 
sending it in to the Air Ministry or 
the Royal Society or somebod y . 
But it's out of the question now. 
You know what happens to people 
who see sea-serpents! 

"We were having boat drill off 
Fremantle, in Gage Roads. We were 
pulling back for the ship when I 
spotted this bottle. It was very 
bright in the sunlight, unlike any 
glass I've ever seen anywhere. It was 
a good shape too — lovely lines to it, 
graceful. So I leaned out of the 
bofti and picked it up. 

"It was on my desk all that day. 
People came in and admired it. It 
never occurred to any of us that 
there might be anything inside itit was an opaque sort of glass but 
glittery, like an opal. 

"The Second Mate came in just 
before dinner — he wanted to know 
if I had an empty gin bottle he 
could use for gasoline to clean his 
gyro compass. I had a gin bottle — 
but it wasn't empty and I wasn't 
going to give him the bottle. So we 
had a gin each and I started to 
pour what was left of it into the 
bottle I'd picked up. 



Although Mr. Chandler, aver t.'.'e years, has been a valued contributor to secret of STP 
magazines, bis pmuifett distinction lie: in being the only member of bit profession 
who it alio a First Mate in the Australian Merchant Marine. Which makts him unique. 



"It had a funny cork by the way 
— sort of plastic It was then we 
found there was a roll of paper 
imide. It was rum sort of stuff 
and covered with queer type-script, 
more like the markings you get on 
the toilet roll of a depth recorder. 
It was readable. 

"The Second Mate was very excited — we both were. We thought 
it*d be as well to make a copy, 
which we did that night. 

"\And now comes the really funny 
part. We'd sweated and slaved over 
that beastly manuscript, taking 
turns at the typewriter. Then we'd 
rolled it up again and put it back 
in the bottle and then we'd settled 
down to finish the gin. Suddenly, 
without any warning whatsoever, 
the bottle just took off like a shooting star in reverse. It went rig^rt 
through the deckliead of my cabin 
— if you care to come aboard you 
can see the patch in the bridge 
planking. 

"But this is the funny "thing. It 
may have been the gin, yet I'll 
swear that the hole through which 
the bottle went was there a fraction 
of a second bclore the bottle got to 
it. The moon was shining through 
it quite brightly. 

"And we hnd a hcllqva job explaining that hole to the Old Man." 

I took the papers he gave me. As 
he said — it would have been absurd 
to have passed them in to the 
Meteorological Office of the Air 
Ministry or any of the other 
scientific bodies with which the 
sailor has occa'.ional dealings. 



VISCOUS CIRCLE 5 1 

But it's only right that somebody 

should sec them. 

—A. BhRTTUM Chandler. 



It was a mistake teaming up 
with Malaprop Jenkins. The fact 
the man's a killer is bad enough — 
especially now I know that sooner 
or later it'll be either him or roe 
for the high jump. And I'd sooner 
it was him . . . But it's his murder 
of words that's worst of all. 

The first time that he uses the 
right word in the wrong place it's 
funny. The fourteenth time it's 
just a little boring. By the fortieth 
time — and situated as we are there 
must be repetition — it's grounds fof 
justifiable homicide. 

But Jenkins knows where the 
weapons are in the cargo and he's 
helped himself to a point-five 
service blaster, complete with belt, 
holster and charges, and I can't find 
the pillaged case anywhere. I've 
found paper and a typewriter and 
they're helping to pass the incredible amount of time we have 
on our hands. 

Jenkins, as befits a common thief, 
just rummages through the cargo. 
One day — do we still have days?— 
he got drunk and tried on the most 
flamboyant creations from out of a 
case of ladies' dresses. When I told 
him how childish it was he muttered that satin soon finds mischief 
for idle hands to do! 

He's not the type I'd associate 
with ordinnnly. I had no idea, when 
I first started faking my books, 



I. nHi.; myself in for. 
wji jusi hard luck. Silver 
tik vy a dead ctft for the 
id-lhe-Moon Stakes — and how 
1 to know she'd blow a tube 
ire she was clc.tr of the stratorc? 

it hadn't been for that the 
would have got all its money 
ftnd nobody would have been 
the wiser when the annual 
checking came round. As it 
i I h.id to get out fast. I helped 
ysclf to another ten thousand 
i while I was about it. I knew 
the Feds would run mc down 
Ik-jo on I\arth ami my only 
was to get out and make a 
sh start somewhere with no extradition. , 

Yet, the Federal Agents are smart 
—but there're people who arc 
smarter. There's that old man in 
Sydney, for example. I'll not tell 
you his name — T had to swear a 
most blood-curdling oath that I'd 
never in any circumstances divulge 
it. And there's always the slim 
chance this story will be picked up 
somewhere, sometime, and an even 
slimmer chance that I come out of 
this mess in one piece. 

And if I do and have let too 
many cats out of the bag there's 
any amount of people both on 
F.arth and on Ccntaurus V who'd 
take a keen delight in having me 
liquidated, even though my brain 
might be wiped clean as a baby's 
by the penal psychologists and 
niirly lined out with a set of 
•riaU memories. Mind you — I'd as 



soon be liquidated as have tb*t 

happen to me but I certainly don't 
want to get in the bad books of 
both the Law and the Underground. 

There was a man used to come 
into the bank now and again. I 
knew him to talk to and, of course, 
his address. He was respectable 
enough — on the surface — but it 
was common knowledge that he 
was some kind of punk, just too 
smart to be caught out in anything 
illegal. When I heard that the 
examiners were paying a visit the 
next day I thought of him at once. 

As soon as I'd helped myself to 
the extra folding money I left the 
Bank, telling old Carmichael, the 
head cashier, that I wasn't well. He 
didn't try to stop me going — I 
suppose I looked pale enougli for 
anything. 

When I got to the roof there was 
a down-town 'copter just dropping 
in to the Stop. I got aboard and 
sat and fidgeted in the minute or so 
before it lifted and droned its 
leisurely way over the city, following the course of the Thames to 
the sea. 

At every stop — Tower Bridge, 
Woolwich, Barking Creek — I was 
afraid a policeman would board and 
drag mc from my seat. But it was 
far too early for anything of the 
kind to happen. The short journey 
was without incident. The 'copter 
went as far as Southend, the very 
edge of the city limits. 

The man I was goin£ to sec lived 
at Southend. I found him in his 
apartment a little more than raid


VISCOUS CIRCLE 



way along the Pier. Whatever it 

was ho did it must have paid — you 
don't get that kind of place for ten 
credits a week. 

I saw his face in the hall telepanel as he answered my ring. 1 
could see that he recognised me 
and that he was puzzled at my 
calling. I told him it was urgent. 
He looked thoughtful, then told me 
to come right up. The elevator that 
took me to the fi'th floor let me out 
into the passageway not far from 
his door. 

I couldn't help peering out 
cautiously, first one way, then the 
oilier, before I left the cage. While 
I was doing this a door opened and 
the man I had come to see looked 
out. He told me irrit.ibly to come in 
and wanted to know what 1 was 
playing at. 

When I did tell him, inside his 
apartment, he was amused. I didn't 
see anything funny In it myself. 
But I suppose that the shady ways 
in which he made his living gave 
him a queer sense of humor. When 
he had finished laughing he said. 
"Well, what am I supposed to do 
about it?" 

I didn't know quite what to say. 
I stammered something about thinking that he might be able to tell 
mc — I forget what now. But I 
had a dreadful feeling that my one 
faint hope was going to prove a 
false one. 

He laughed again and looked out 
of his window to the sunlit Thames 
Estuary, to a passing cruise liner 
bedecked with bright flags, appeared 



to be listening to the faint strains 

of music drifting from her crowded 
decks. Then, without turning to 
face me, he told me to make out an 
I.O.U. for two thousand credits. 

"But I don't ..." I began. TTc 
said he knew I didn't, but that 1 
would by the time he was through 
with me. He didn't think he'd be 
caught with any of the notes I was 
going to give him, but just in 
case ... He asked too if I had any 
preference. 

"There's Mars," he told me, "and 
Venus. But they have been known 
to extradite criminals in exchange 
for their own bad baskets. There's 
the Jovian System and Pluto — but 
all I'd be fit for there would be 
unskilled manual labor. He turned 
round and looked at» me and said 
rather insultingly that he didn't 
think I was cut out for that kind 
of thing, that in any case 1 wouldn't 
like the climate. 

I was thinking, I told him, of 
Ccntaurus V. 

He went to his desk and scribbled 
something on a sheet of paper. 
Then, "Give mc that I.O.U.!" he 
said. "And the two thousand." 

"But what guarantee . . . ?" I 
began. 

"My word — my spoken word. 
More than that T can't give you. 
And remember — they catch you, 
you've a lot to lose. All the 
memories, alt the habits, all the personal idiosyncracies that make you 
you. And you wouldn't want that, 
would you? Exile to Ccntaurus Fifth 
is better than Earth as a synthetic 



54 



FANTASTIC UNIVERSE 



personality manufactured by the 
pen-psychs." 

He was right. I gave him the two 
thousand — I gave him the LO.U. 
He scrawled Paid across it, initialed 
it. He said, "Take it back. Get your 
fingerprints over it. Twist it up — 
that's right. Now drop it carelessly. 
You owed me that money over the 
Round-the-Moon Stakes — remember? 

"Now — go first of all to Hornchurch — the top address on this 
piece of paper. There's a man there, 
keeps an antique shop. Ask him if 
he has any early twentieth-century 
poker-work pipe-racks with matching pipes. 

"He won't have but he'll ask you 
into the back room. It'll probably 
cost you another five hundred at 
least. Go to Heston, next. Take 
the next stratoliner to Sydney — and 
that's the second address . . ." 

It didn't seem much for two 
thousand. I told htm so and he said 
if I wasn't satisfied he'd put through 
ft call to the police. So there wasn't 
much that I could do about it. 

I found the shop at Hornchurch. 
It occupied, fittingly, the lower 
floor of an old-fashioned concrete 
building that looked startlingly out 
of place among its plastic and 
aluminum neighbors. The owner of 
the shop was a little rat of a man, 
dirty and untidy and generally unprepossessing, but he asked no questions. 'When I put my query to 
him he just said I might find what 
I wanted in the back room, called 
an assistant to take charge of the 



shop and accompanied me to the 
rear of the premises. 

He didn't do much for his five 
hundred. All he gave me was a 
change of clothing, two contact 
lenses that turned my eyes from 
blue to a sort of brown, a pair of 
shoes that added another two inches 
to ray height. 

Oh — and there was the matter of 
the hair-dye and the wallet stuffed 
with all kinds of papers that made 
me out to be a wool merchant 
making a business trip to Westralia. 
Luckily I have a brother in that 
trade and from him, thanks to a 
retentive memory, enough knowledge of textiles to deceive anybody 
not an expert. 

When I got to Heston there were 
police around the ticket offices, 
police watching the embarkation of 
passengers aboard each outwardbound stratoliner. In spite of my 
disguise I felt utterly naked and 
helpless. 

And then, while I was still 
hanging indecisively around the 
waiting room, pretending an interest in the books and magazines 
on display on the newsstand, there 
was a scuffle at the window of the 
Far East booking -office. It was a 
woman they caught — a big brassy 
blonde. 

I never found out what they 
wanted her for. But on top of my 
relief rny commonsense told me that 
they wouldn't be after me until 
the examiners went through my 
books. I still had a few hours of 
grace. 



VISCOUS CIRCLE 



55 



I was lucky. There was one berth 
unreserved in the Sydney stratoliner. 
The next ship would not leave until 
the following morning — and that 
would have been cutting things a 
little too fine. One berth and the 
liner was lifting in ten minutes. I 
had my foot on the bottom step 
of the gangway when I realised 
that I had no baggage. The man in 
the antique shop should have 
thought of that. 

Anyhow I had time to nip back 
to the waiting room, to dive into 
the shop that catered to the needs 
of absent-minded or badly-rushed 
travelers. I bought myself a cheap 
compressed pulp suitcase, pajamas, 
toothbrush, toothpaste, a tube of 
Smoothes and a change of shirts. 
The Smoothes was really the most 
important. A blond beard with dark 
hair would have looked odd — not 
unnatural but odd enough to arouse 
the interest of the steward. 

When I jumped aboard the ship 
little whisps of blue smoke were 
already trickling from the Venturis. 
As I settled into my seat 1 heard 
the wheeled gangway being pulled 
away from the entrance port, heard 
the door slammed and dogged tight 
shut. 

As I lit a cigarette the ship 
started to move and the tilt of the 
deck, forcing me back into the 
padded seat, told me that she was 
lifting into the London sky. 

I looked through the port at my 
side. The city was sliding past below, the buildings gleaming pallidly 
among the dark green of the parks, 



the first lights already twinkling 
along the broad avenues and on 
the Thames Embankment, Like a 
great wave the dusk was washing 
in from the east. Then, as we 
gained altitude, I saw the last tip 
of the sun's upper limb climb 
briefly above the long low line of 
the hills to the westward — climb, 
then vanish as our brief respite from 
the onrushing darkness was ended. 

It all looked too good to leave. 
What if the penal psychologists did 
give me a fresh personality? What 
did it matter? Some part of the 
essential / would surely remain* 
would survive to appreciate and 
enjoy the familiar scenes among 
which I had been reared. Centaurus 
V could offer nothing like this. 

Its cities, set among the wild 
rugged mountains of Van Huyten's 
Land, along the steamy beaches of 
the MacLean Coast, were too new, 
without history, lacking the smooth 
warm comfort that comes with 
maturity. There and then I decided 
to take the next ship back from 
Australia. I would give myself up 
and take whatever was coming to 
me. 

But London was gone, England 
was gone, below us was one vast 
sheet of uniform cloud, above us 
the stars, bright, unwinking, set in 
the black sky. I reminded myself 
there was the little matter of twoand-a-half thousand credits already 
expended, to say nothing ot the outlay on suitcase and traveling gear. 
I like to get value for my money. 




FANTASTIC 



If I didn't like Centaurus V — well, 
die ships ran both ways. 

The dinner gong was sounded 
then and we all got up from our 
seats and filed down to the dining 
saloon. They put me at a table 
with a middle-aged man and two 
rather charming girls. At any other 
time I should have liked to have 
got to know those girls better. As 
it was I couldn't risk it. They must 
have thought me an unsociable 
type, hurrying through my meal 
with my nose buried in one of the 
magazines I had picked up at the 
airport. 

After coffee I went up to the 
next deck again. The stewards had 
not yet finished the minor magic 
by which they transformed rows of 
cushioned seats into curtained 
bunks. So I went to the bar and 
treated myself to a double whisky. 
The barman was inclined to be 
talkative but I feigned a slight airsickness. When I left at last 1 had 
told him nothing but he had told 
mc at least seven different ways of 
dealing with that malady. 

And then, behind the curtains of 
my bunk, snug and secure under 
the electrically warmed blanket, I 
felt really safe at last. It would be 
evening again when we arrived at 
Sydney— evening in New South 
Wales but only early morning in 
England. I would still have a few 
hours grace before the examiners 
Varied to find the discrepancies In 
my books, before the hunt was up. 

And in that time . . . 

And in that time I found the 



UNIVPRSE 




second address die man in Southend 
had given me. It was another 

antique shop. Its windows were 
filled with a display of boomerangs, 
woonicrahs and other aboriginal 
weapons. There were one or two 
ship's bells— ORION was the name 
on one of them and it struck me 
as being rather apt — that had presumably belonged to long-since 
broken-up surface liners on the 
Australian trade. 

There were opals, alive with 
shifting polychromatic light, in 
ancient gold and silver settings. 
There were weapons I thought at 
first were heavy blasters but which 
I identified after a few moments' 
inspection as twentieth century revolvers and automatic pistols. 

But what was I to do? Who was 
I to ask for? My friend in London 
hadn't told me. But — it was an 
antique shop of sorts. So I went 
inside, walked to the tall stooped 
old man behind the counter and 
asked him if he had any early 
twentieth-century poker-work piperacks. 

He made a pretence of rummaging in a showcase on the counter 
and asked in a low voice if I was 
the young man from the bank. I 
hesitated — then told him that I 
was. While I was speaking the door 
opened again and somebody else, 
another man, came in. The shopkeeper, still fumbling in his showcase, said that if I cared to wait a 
few minutes he had some fifthcentury work that might interest 
me. 



VISCOUS 

I looked at the new customer. I 
was afraid lie might be an agent. 
But he didn't look like one. His 
jacket was stained and threadbare, 
his linen was filthy. He had a shifty 
hangdog air even the finest actor 
would find it next to impossible to 
reproduce faithfully. 

And his eyes, glaring beneath the 
shaggy brows, were the eyes of a 
wild animal. He looked at me and 
appeared to ignore me — although 
his right hand strayed down to his 
pocket in a suggestive manner. And 
he asked the shopkeeper if he had 
any twentieth-century poker-work 
pipe- racks. 

"And who sent you?" asked the 
man behind the counter. 

"Roscommon. He told me you 
was ingenuous enough to . . 
Then, "Who's this?" 

"Another customer after the 
same as yourself. Mr. . . ." 

"Calthorpe," I told him. 

**. . . meet Mr. Jenkins. I've been 
expecting Mr. Jenkins along for 
many a month." 

"That'll do," growled Jenkins. 
"There's no need to go all hysterical 
On us." 

All this had me more than a 
little puzzled. The shopkeeper, so 
far as I could judge, seemed prone 
to neither ingenuousness nor hysteria. But I didn't know Jenkins 
then. 

Outside it was now quite dark 
and the light of a street lamp shone 
through the shop windows, gleaming on the ancient weapons, striking 
glimmering uncanny fire from the 



cm CLE 57 

Opals. And the three of us stood 
there in the darkness, distrusting 

one mother tike three strange dogs 
undecided whether or not to fight. 

The shopkeeper's hand strayed 
along his counter and from somewhere in the rear of the shop we 
heard the ringing of a bell. Jenkins 
swore and his right hand came out 
of his pocket. It held a knife. From 
the shadows behind the counter two 
forms silently materialised. Each 
held a shining object in his right 
hand that could have been an illegal 
blaster. 

"I'm sorry, gentlemen," said the 
shopkeeper. "I hadn't bargained on 
two of you at once, one of you Mr. 
Jenkins. I have to take my precautions." 

Jenkins muttered something 
about eternal viridescence being the 
price of safety. 

"Quite so. And now if you will 
both step round to my office we 
will discuss the matter of fifthcentury work that I have already 
referred to . . ." 

"Lead on, Macduff," said Jenkins. 

It seems to me now that the 
cleverest part of the organisation in 
which we had become entangled 
was that its customers took most of 
the risks. There was, I suppose, a 
certain amount of bribery involved, 
a certain familiarity with the workings of airports and spaceports. 

We, Jenkins and I, paid the 
antique dealer not so much for 
what he did as for what he knew. 
We also paid him — or a friend of 
his — for a Spurling Three that 



5> 



FANTASTIC UNIVERSE 



should have been on display in his 
window, a refugee from the junk 
pile if ever there was one. 

The money wc had to fork out 
would h.ivc purchased one of the 
very latest Spurling Sevens with h. 
and c. and every modern convenience. Luckily I can pilot a 
Spurling — and it was a good job 
that the antique man in Hornchurch had included a private 
pilot's license among the papers in 
the wallet he sold me. 

Then we had to pay — but heavily 
— for the timetable and the map he 
sold us. It gave us the route to 
follow to Port Kingsford in Westralia, the location of the unmarked 
patch of desert where we were to 
land and destroy the Spurling, the 
trail to take to the spaceport. 

There was the exact time that 
we were to stroll on to the landing 
field, the compartment aboard the 
ship, STARMAIDEN, in which we 
were to hide ourselves. There was, 
I suppose, some first-class staffwork there — but five thousand 
credits was a lot to pay for it, to 
say nothing of another thousand for 
the flying garbage can. 

Oh, well — give the devil his due. 
He threw in some advice and information free, gratis and for 
damn-all. "You're going to see a lot 
of Malaprop Jenkins," he told me. 
"Yes — and hear a lot. It's a long 
w.iy to Centaurus Fifth, Mannschen Drive notwithstanding. 

"There'll be the two of you in 
the ship and after you give yourselves up to the Captain — who'll 



be expecting you — he'll almost certainly berth you together. The 
cargo liners don't have much in the 
way of spare accommodation. You'll 
find friend Jenkins' misuse of words 
a bit boring after a while. Or you 
might even find it funny. 

"Whichever way it is — don't let 
him sec it. He's very sensitive. The 
Feds are after him for two crimes 
— robbery with violence and carving his girlfriend because she 
laughed when he told her — she was 
all dressed up to kill — that fine 
feathers make fine brides." 

"She should have cut him dead 
after that effort," I told him. 

"Now don't you start. I've no 
responsibility for you whatsoeverall that I've done is sell you a 
secondliand Spurling through my 
cousin. But [ don't like to see people 
remade by the pen-psychs — to my 
way of thinking it's worse than the 
death penalty. It happened to a 
friend of mine — if you mu$t know, 
a girl I was rather fond of. They 
reckoned she was anti-social. And I 
don't want to see you murdered by 
Jenkins. 

"It's a pity that you'll be in the 
same ship but it couldn't be avoided. 
Frankly I'd have let him take what 
was coming to him — but once 
you're mixed up in this racket 
there's no backing out. Well, you 
have your charts and your timetable. Don't drop me a line from 
Centaurus Five — the fewer clues 
the better — but if you like you 
can call in and see" — he gave 
me a scrap of paper — "this friend 



VISCOUS CIRCLE 



9) 



of mine in Port Phillips, Memorize 
the address and destroy the paper." 

That was that. Jenkins was waiting in the Spurling when I got to 
the municipal airfield. I climbed 
carefully into the cockpit, more 
than half afraid that the crazy 
crate would collapse around my 
ears. But except for some ominous 
creakings all seemed to be well. 

I waited until the traffic controller gave me the green light, then 
lifted her on her turret-drive. The 
jets fired sweetly and cleanly and 
in next to no time we had reached 
the thousand-foot level. I set the 
course as per instructions for Auckland. " 

Fifty miles out over the Tasman 
Sea I brought her round, swung her 
in a great arc so as to pass well to 
the north of Sydney. Something 
big passed overhead, well above the 
clouds, and we heard the noise of 
its jets. We didn't see it and it 
probably didn't see us — except as 
an insignificant not -to- be -bother cdwith luminous speck on its radar 
icreen. 

The night came sweeping down 
ilmost before we made the land and 
the greater part of our flight was 
made over featureless darkness. The 
antique dealer had routed us well, 
clear of every town and village. 
The actual steering of the Spurling 
I left to the automatic pilot, busying myself with radio cross-bearings. 

Jenkins, except for the time that 
tic said that he was interested in 
astrology and asked me to identify 



the constellation of O'Brien, was 
silent. At last, according to my 
tatelt fix, we had a sc.i nt thirty 
miles to go to the place where we 
were to land. According to my 
watch, we were running on time. 

I felt very pleased with myself 
and thought of sending my log in 
to Headquarters — then remembered 
with a shock that whatever 
happened I had forfeited my commisMon in the Federal Air Force 
Reserve. 

Rather glumly I cut the drive to 
a mere trickle of power, cased the 
old Spurling down on her turretdrive. I couldn't use landing lights 
or flares — all that I had to work on 
was the dial of the radio altimeter. 
At five hundred feet I was apprehensive. At three hundred I was in 
a cold sweat. 

At one hundred there was a 
splintering crash as the ancient 
u'i.k-rcarriage met the hard sand 
tint, according to the lying altimeter, was all of thirty-thrce-anda-third yards below. The poor old 
Spurling sat down hard, fell over 
on her side, collapsed. She would 
never fly again. 

That didn't worry me. What did 
worry me — after the misbehavior 
of one important instrument — was 
the possibility of considerable error 
in my last radio bearings. But I 
needn't have worried. 1 needn't have 
troubled to get out the little magnetic compass with which we had 
been supplied. 

The lights of Port Kingsford 
glowed like a pale impossible dawn 



60 ' FANTASTIC 

over the desert rim, a glow that 
seemed to be creeping up to engulf 
the stars of the Cross and Alpha 
and Beta Centauri, riding low in 
the black sky over the pallid 
radiance from the spaceport. 

"Well," I said, "we're here." 

Jenkins clambered out of the 
wreckage. He reminded me that it 
was many a step 'twixt the cup 
and the Hp. And it did look like a 
long walk. But before we started 
out there was one thing left to do. 
There was an innocent- looking little 
switch on the dashboard. I pressed 
it down. After a certain interval 
— long or short I didn't know — the 
time fuse would do its work and 
the poor old Spurling would be no 
more than a puddle of fused metal 
on the sand. My companion said 
that he'd often wondered how 
Caesar's army managed to march 
after they'd burned their boots. 

It was cold and we could have 
done with a light to help us over 
the rough terrain but we made good 
time. We circled the port so as to 
approach from the south. When the 
thermite bomb went we could see 
the point of this. Tt made quite a 
racket and a ruddy flare that must 
have been visible for miles. 

We saw a certain flashing of 
lights around the administration 
buildings and heard a steady 
diminishing drone as a helicopter 
took off to investigate. It was then 
that I started to have misgivings. 
If Port Kingsford carried any aboriginal trackers on its payroll the 
game would be up. But Port Cap


UNIVF.RSE 

tains aren't policemen and presumably the organization knew 
what it was doing. 

Nobody stopped us when we 
walked onto the landing Seld. There 
was some activity on its northern 
edge — the conveyor belts were 
steadily pouring freight into a big 
cargo liner. That would be STARMAIDEN. Loading was scheduled 
to be completed at 0600. At 0630 
there would be nobody aboard but 
the officer of the watch. 

At 064 S he would come ashore 
and walk across to the administration buildings to get the figures 
from the stevedore. At 0730, approximately, he and the other 
officers and crew would return on 
board and prepare for blasting off. 
And by this time Jenkins and I 
would be snugly hidden in the 
control-room spares -locker. 

We had half an hour or so to 
waste. We kept as much as possible 
to the shadows thrown by the buildings by the tall monolithic ships. 
We watched the passengers filing 
up the gangway of a huge Venusbound transport. Government-assisted emigrants they must have 
been and they were burdened with 
all kinds of incongruous junk in 
addition to their cheap and battered 
baggage. 

One woman, I remember, was 
clutching to her bosom what looked 
like a potted aspidistra. I was 
tempted to join them — then saw 
that there were far too many uniformed officials at both ends of the 
long gangway. 



VISCOUS CIRCLE 



Si 



Jenkins went all philosophical 
and whispered in a hoarse voice, 
"There they go with all their goods 
and shackles . . ." In a way he was 
right. People do chain themselves 
to useless inanimate objects. 

All the time we were working 
ourselves closer to STARMA1DEN. 
She had finished loading now and 
we saw the big cargo ports being 
shut and sealed, the spidery conveyor belts being dismantled. We 
saw the stevedores pouring ashore 
from her main airlock. 

Then a single uniformed figure 
came out after them, turned to look 
briefly up at his ship, strode briskly 
across the fused sand to the administration buildings. We started 
forward — then held back. There 
was one man still by the gangway 
— evidently some kind of a watchman. 

He stamped about as if to drive 
the cold from his feet. He looked 
guiltily around, then pulled a pack 
of cigarettes from his pocket. But 
there was too much wind where 
he was standing for him to get a 
light. He slid swiftly round to the 
lee of the ship to light up in comfort. 

We didn't wait for the flare of 
his match. We ran across the 
stretch of illuminated ground, feeling terribly naked and conspicuous 
in the glare of STARMAIDEN's 
floodlights. We clambered up the 
gangway into the airlock, into the 
ship. Now Jenkins was on strange 
territory — but I found my Air 




Force Reserve training stood me in 
good stead. 

It's only Air Force training — but 
officers are expected to have some 
slight smattering of space ma nship. 
During one annual drill I rode the 
Earth-Moon ferry in the controlroom of a Lunar Meials freighter — 
as a very supernumerary officer. But 
it was all coining in useful now. 

With Jenkins following I made 
straight for the control-room, The 
locker was there, as we had been 
told, hard by the hatch through 
which we had come from the body 
of the ship. It didn't look too big. 
It didn't look any bigger than a 
coffin — and it was much the same 
shape. But it was almost empty. 

It held the two of us easily and 
not too uncomfortably. I could see 
that once acceleration started our 
hip-bones were going to dig holes 
for themselves in the hard plastic 
of the locker bottom — but we 
shouldn't have to put up with that 
for long. Once the Martcllis were 
cut and the ship switched over to 
the Mannschcn Drive there would 
be no turning back. We could come 
out then. 

We got into the box. 

"Snug as bugs in a jug," commented Jenkins. He put another 
syllabic on the end of "bugs." But 
that kind of thing didn't matternot then. Wc lay there for eternities, 
wanting to smoke, wanting to 
sneeze, straining our ears for the 
sound of feet on the ladder which 
would mean that Captain, Chief 
Pilot and Navigator were coming 



62 FANTASTIC UNIVERSE 



to their stations. At last, by means 
of a fine piece of contortionism, I 
managed to look at my watch. It 
was 071S, Westralian Time. 

"They won't be long," I whispered. 

Then at last there was a sound. 
It wasn't the friendly clatter of feet 
on ladders. It was eerie, spine-chilling, washing through the control 
room in waves of pure terror. It 
was the Port Kingsford alarm siren. 
Jenkins cursed, threw back the lid 
of the locker, jumped out. His 
knife glimmered in his hand. 

I followed him. It was almos t 
day now and the pallid grey light 
of dawn streamed in through the 
control room viewports. From our 
vantage point we could see figures 
running towards the ship from all 
sides. We looked up— and there was 
a big police ship just coming in for 
a landing. 

There was only one thing to do. 
I did it. I ran to the control -panel, 
threw the switch that would close 
our airlock doors. I started our own 
siren— and if people didn't keep 
clear of backblast that'd be their 
funeral. I looked at the other controls, trying hard to remember. I 
did remember. 

The roar of the MarttUis as they 
Opened up was frightening, deafening. I almost cut the drive — then 
realised that this wasn't one of the 
toy rockets of the Lunar Ferry. 
We lifted. Jenkins screamed and 
pointed. I looked up — and it seemed 
that we were flying into a stream, 
of flame. There was a vast black 



shape, looming closer and closer. 
It was right on top of us. 
Then . . . 

Then there was only the sky 
ahead, black, sprinkled with blazing 
stars. 

"My God," said Jenkins., "The 
police-ship!" 

"I'm afraid so," I said. "But 
there was no shock . . ." 

"We was going too fast." 

He walked to the nearest viewport, looked out. He walked back 
again hastily to the center of the 
control room. I piled on another 
two G's acceleration. He sat down 
- — hard. Then, "Can you take us to 
Cent au rus?" 

"I don't know. I'm not a Master 
Astronaut." 

"But the Spurling. And this . . 

"I was qualified to fly the Spurling. This is just luck. If my 
memory holds out I can manage 
planetary takeoffs and landings. But 
navigation is beyond me. And I 
know nothing of the Interstellar 
Drive." 

"There're books." He grabbed 
three in one huge paw from the 
Nagivator's book rack. "You don't 
have to be a Master Astrologer to 
read, do you?" 

"What do you want me to do? 
Cast a horoscope?" 

"What was that?" He played 
with his knife, looked as though he 
might turn nasty. 

"Oh, nothing. I'll give it a go." 

So I gave it a go. I let her run 
until we had reached escape velocity, 
then cut the Martellis. I went down 



VISCOUS CIRCLE 



to look at the Mannschen Drive. 
There didn't seem to be much to 
it — just a mess of wheels at all 
kinds of odd angles. But it wasn't 
working then . . , 

I ploughed through all the textbooks and such that I could lay my 
hands on. I may have been wrong 
but it seemed to me that the best 
policy was to swing her on her 
gyroscopes until her nose was pointing straight for Alpha Centauri. A 
ticklish job — but accomplished at 
last. 1 didn't know if there was 
anything in front- of us but the 
way we were going took us well 
clear of the Plane of the Ecliptic. 

Well, I got her lined up and then 
switched over to the Mannschen. 
I don't know what I expected — 
but the only immediate result was 
a deep drone, sliding rapidly up the 
octaves to a shrill whine as all 
those blasted wheels started spinning. 

We didn't feel anything or see 
anything. Jenkins, I know, had the 
idea that Alpha Centauri was going 
to expand at once from a pinpoint 
of light to a visible disc. He was 
very disappointed. He asked me 
how it worked. 

I told him I didn't know. I told 
him I tfxmght we were going astern 
in Time as we went ahead in Space, 
that the actual math of it all was 
way beyond me. 

"Oh," he grunted. "Sort of a step 
in Time saves nine in Space?" 

"Sort of ..." I admitted 

"Can't we — go faster?" 

"I suppose we might. But it 



would mean switching off the Mannschen, working up more speed 
with the Mantcllis, falling free 
again, then cutting in the 
Mannschen with the rockets off. 
As far as I can gather any change 
of mass with the Mannschen Drive 
running leads to disastrous results." 

"I see," He didn't. "But we'/e 
eating, drinking, breathing and so 
on . . 

"All changes on the molecular 
level. And the ship is a closed 
economy. Nothing is being lost. If 
I switch on the Martellis mass 
would be changed into energy and 
some balance, somewhere, would be 
upset." 

"I see," he said. 
' Well, for about ten days we fell 
silently through Space. It seemed to 
us that there was some slight shift 
in the configuration of the constellations and certainly our own Sun 
was no more than another star 
among the countless stars astern of 
us. 

Alpha Centauri may have been 
expanding ever so slightly — but I 
could never find out how to use the 
instruments in the control-room. I 
had, as I said before, a rough 
grounding in interplanetary navigation but this interstellar stuff was 
black magic. 

And the Mannschen Drive was 
black magic too. I went down quite 
often to look at it, although I 
knew that it wasn't — healthy. All 
those spinning wheels, with the 
biggest one of all that was all the 
time precessing, tilting, tilting, 



dragging the eye with it, dragging 
the mind with it, back, back . . . 

It was all wrong, somehow. It 
wasn't natural. For two pins I'd 
have stopped it there and then, even 
though it meant dying of senile 
decay a bare decimal of the distance 
from Earth to Centaurus V. 

On the eleventh thy it happened. 
I was sleeping, and Jenkins came 
and called me. He was in a panic. 
There was a ship, he said, astern, 
overhauling us fast. So I got out of 
the Captain's bunk and, still feeling 
vague and dim, followed him up to 
Control. He was right. The screens 
showed a ship. She was, according 
to our radar, only fifty miles 
distant. liven as we watched, that 
distance was decreased by a mile, 
two miles, three . . . 

Of course, extradition or no extradition, they were bound to be 
after us. Piracy is recognized as a 
crime by all worlds, by all nations. 
And the hunk of property to which 
we had helped ourselves was big 
enough to leave an appreciable gap 
in the economics of both the Solar 
and Centaurian Unions. 

SliK — I didn't share Jenkins' apprehension. A little knowledge may 
have been a dangerous thing — but 
I couldn't see how our pursuers, 
short of opening fire with everything they had and blasting us into 
eternity, could do anything about 
catching us. True, they could 
grapple and board — if the rates of 
temporal precession of the two 
ships matched to a split micro


second. And that was a million-toone chance. 

I strapped myself into the Pilot's 
cihair, looked at the instruments in 
front of me, drove my sleep-befoggi'd brain to formulate some 
plan of action. Something had to be 
done about it. The pursuing ship, 
even though she might be reluctant 
to destroy several million credits 
worthy of property, would be an 
uncomfortable sort of traveling 
companion. 

// / ttop //>(.' Manttschen, I remember thinking, and then cut 
loose with the Martellis, John Willy 
mil have his work cut out to locate 
us a&ain. 

"Forty miles!" screamed Jenkins. 
He reached across me, threw the 
switch of the rocket motors. The 
sudden acceleration slammed him 
down on the deck. The radar screen 
came alive with rippling spirals of 
livid flame. The stars, the cold fixed 
stars shining through our viewports, 
wheeled and coruscated crazily. 

"You fool!" I shouted. 

It was hard to raise my hand 
against the weight of our acceleration. But I managed it. My fingers 
closed over the switch. There was a 
brief sputtering arc as I opened it. 
Then silence, ominous and deathly 
after the short-lived thunder of the 
Martellis, fell like a thick, muffling 
blanket. Silence? Not quite. 

As our cars recovered from their 
shock we heard the shrill almost 
supersonic whine of the Mannschcn 
Drive. I thought I'd better cut it, 
try to get some kind of bearings 



VISCOUS CHICLE 



«5 



and start again from scratch. I cut 
it. It would take time, I told myself, 
for all those spinning wheels to 
come to rest. I was still telling myself that half an hour later. 

1 went down to the Mannschen 
Drive room then. I pulled fuses, I 
cut cables. I even, at the finish, 
tried to poke a steel bar into that 
whirling complexity but there 
seems to be some kind of field 
around it and nothing can be done 
to it. It goes on, whining away to 
itself with a complete disregard for 
anything 1 may do. 

But for awhile we still thought 
we were heading for Centaurus V. 
The queer behavior of the Drive 
would make landing rather a 
problem — when we came to it. But 
we hadn't yet come to it. There 
should be time — there must be time 
— between Position X and the Centaurian System to get things under 
control. I spent most of my time 
working on the Drive, leaving 
Jenkins to keep a lookout of sorts 
in Control. 

I must have ripped out every 
inch of wiring between the control 
room and the Drive unit. I soon 
had the interior of the ship looking 
as though some demented spider 
with a lead -and -copper metabolism 
had been running wild. There had 
to be some power lead that 1 hadn't 
found . . . But there wasn't. 

And then Jenkins came scrambling down. Wc were there, he 
cried. We'd made it. I didn't see 
how this could be — the last time 
that Fd been up to the greenhouse 



the stars ahead had still been mere 

points of light and Alpha Centaur 
no closer to showing as a disc than 
ever ic had. 

But we were coming in stern 
first, said Jenkins. Stern first? Had 
he managed to swing her? Sure)) 
I'd have known — and in any case 
I didn't think that the gyroscopo 
could possibly work after the tOm 
into which I'd reduced the wiriog. 

But there was a planet, bawled 
Jenkins. A whacking great planet, 
showing up on the screens as large 
a* life and twice as mutual. 

So I put down my tools and followed him back to Control. There, 
right ahead — fixed, steady — were 
the stars of Cross and Centaur, just 
as you can see them on any clear 
night from Earth's Southern Hemisphere. And there — a black-andwhite picture on the screen — right 
astern was a great globe. It was expanding fast. Its pattern of cloud 
and sea and land swelled as though 
painted on the surface of a child's 
toy balloon. 

I didn't forget that the Drive was 
still running. I just didn't care. I 
got the Martellis going — thanking 
my lucky stars I hadn't succeeded 
in severing their control cables. 
But although acceleration pressed 
us down, although the whole ship 
vibrated to their thunder," they 
seemed utterly powerless to check 
our headlong plunge. What mass 
could this strange, impossible world 
have — what gravity? 

And what was it like? What did 
it remind me of? What was it? 



The roughly rectangular island 
continent to which we were falling 
expanded until it filled the screen. 
Details were becoming visible now 
— a stretch of arid desolation, a 
huddle of buildings, the tall shapes 
of ships . . . 

And there was a ship blasting off, 
ruing, rising, right into the torrent 
of atomic flame from our jets. 
Closer it came, and closer. Its dark 
onrushing mass filled the screen. Wc 
braced ourselves for the shock . . . 

Then the screen was blank — no 
world, no landing-field, no ship. 

Nothing. 

"I tell you what," Jenkins says 
to me every so often, "It's one of 
them paradises." 

If one insists on semantic accuracy It's not — it'i getting too 
close to the very reverse for comfort. But it could be worse. On the 
homeward semicircle we don't experience any horrors such as regurgitation, talking backwards, 
falling up and getting down and all 
the rest of it. Life to us is — normal. 

I\nd I'm not sure that living 
backwards is such a drawback — it 
meant our food supply is inexhaustible. Air and water — thanks to the 
closed economy of a space-ship — arc 
practically inexhaustible. And 1 
suppose that we shall be able to use 
our hydroponics tanks for something else besides air conditioning. 

Still — we have our freedom, such 
as it is. Nothing we do on the 
molecular level can possibly have 
.my effect — we can eat, drink, kill 



each other — and the total mass of 
the ship remains unchanged. And 
on the atomic level all wc are able 
to do is accelerate the cycle. There 
we have both loss of mass and increase of energy. 

I'm more than half afraid to fire 
the Martellis any more — I can't 
help remembering the absurd story 
about the bird that Hew in ever 
decreasing circles until it vanished. 
It all links up with what Jenkins insists on calling the Lorenz-Fitzgerald Contradiction. But I'll give 
it a go some time — if there is such 
a thing as Time any longer . . . 

There's something else to try 
first. A little thing, easily done, that 
could perhaps just throw the infernal cycle out of gear — a change 
of mass with no increase of energy, 
a killing of two birds with one 
stone as it were. I'm going to put 
this message into a bottle — we have 
any amount of empties now. 

When next we approach Port 
Kingsford I'm going out into the 
airlock and I'm going to throw the 
bottle out as hard as I can. It may 
stay in the same field as the ship. 
It may not. It may tell the Feds 
and the Centurian Corporation 
what's happened to STARMAIDEN 
— or it may intrigue some archaeologist of the remote future. It may 
even startle our ancestors! 

But all that's of minor importance. 

What is important is anything, 
anything, that could conceivably 
get us out of this sticky web of 
paradoxes, this viscous circle. 



little 
men 
of 

space 

by . . . Frank Belknap Long 

The children were very young — ■ 
and the crisis they were called 
upon to face would have driven 
most adults into a straitjacket. 



Tun rim rot wfre coming 

home. El wood coulil sec them from 
the cottage doorway, shouting and 
rejoicing in the bright October 
sunlight. They carried lunch 
baskets and — as ihcy came tripping 
toward him across the lawn — he 
was ready to believe that nothing in 
life could be quite as enchanting as 
the simple wonder of childhood 
itself wiih its li^ht-hcartcd merriment and freedom from care. 

Me was ready to forget the 
laundry bills and the scuffed shoes, 
the father-and-son problems, all the 
tormenting lesser difficulties which 
could demolish parenthood as an 
exact science and turn it into a 
madcap adventure without rhyme 
or reason. 

Mary Anne was in the lead. She 
squealed with delight when she 
caught sight of her father's entranced face, as if by some miracle 
he had become all at once a giftbesrowing snowman quite as remarkable as the hollow dolls, one 
within the other, which she had received from him as a goodwill offering on her last birthday. 

Eleven-year-old Melvin was more 
circumspect. In his son's eyes John 
El wood represented all the real 
values of life in so far as they 



As befits a former protege* of the Use great Howard Phillips Lovecraft, Mr. tone, is a 
master of the horror story. More, he is well were that the deepeu terror may not atmays sum from the infiniuiy large. Sometimes the infinitely small can be even worte. 



6 7 



could be translated into model locomotives and bridge-building sets. 
But he knew his father to be a man 
of dignity who could not be easily 
cajoled. It was best to let his sister 
try first and when she failed . . . 

For an instant as he stared Elwood found himself secretly envying his son. At a quarter past eleven 
Melvin had a firm grasp of elementary physics. His feet were 
firmly planted on the ground and 
he wasn't serious-minded enough 
yet to make the tragic mistakes that 
come with adult unsureness. 

Not the kind of mistakes which 
he, James Scaton Elwood, had made 
nth the moon rocket, for instance. 
Or the mistake which he was making now hy whimsically comparing 
the ages of his son and daughter to 
the moving hands of a clock. 

How absurd it was to think of 
Mary Anne as a quarter-past seven 
when her budding feminine intuition made her as ageless as the 
Sphinx. All children were ageless 
really and it was absurd to imagine 
that they could be made lo conform 
to any logical frame of reference, 
scientific or otherwise. 

Children were illogically imaginative, with a timclessness which gave 
them an edge on adults when it 
came to solving problems that required a fresh approach to reality. 
What was it Wordsworth had said? 

Tr«Hin$ clomds of &lory . . . 

"Daddy, Mr. Rayburn let us out 
early — so we could have a picnic. 
It would have been fun if Melvin 
hadn't spoiled everything. He ate 



up all of the peanut butter sandwiches himself." 
"Tattle talc!" 

"He got in a fight too. Freddy 
Mi son iliiln'c want to fight but 
Melvin started itl" 

"I Mn'tl" 

"You fliJ! You know you did!" 
"That's a lie!" 

Elwood lowered his eyes and 
saw that both of his children were 
now as close to him as they could 
ever be. Mary Anne was tugging at 
his sleeve, begging him to take 
her part, and Melvin was appealing 
to him in man-to-man fashion, his 
contemptuous masculinity acting as 
a foil to his sister's feminine wiles. 

It was a grave crisis and Elwood 
recognized it as such. Ordinarily 
he would have shunned a cut-anddricd solution hut for once he had 
no choice. 

When children fall out, when 
you are backed into a corner and 
your authority totters, there is only 
one sure way to save yourself — 
Occupy their minJs u itb lotncthing 
else. 

"You're spoiling the surprise, 
kiddies," Elwood said, striving to 
sound embittered. "It's been a lonesome hard day for me but I kept 
telling myself you'd soon be home 
to share my triumph. I suppose I 
shouldn't say this — but your mother 
just doesn't understand me the way 
you do." 

"What is it, daddy?" Mary Anne 
asked, a sudden warm solicitude in 
her gaze. 




LITTLE HEN OF SPACE 



*9 



"Yeah, Pop, tell us!" Mclvin 
chimed in. 

"The rocket is just about completed," Elwood said. 

He felt Mary Anne's hand tighten 
on his sleeve and realised with elation that she was a scientist's 
daughter ro her fingertips. He was 
gratified quite as much by the sudden hiss of Mclvin's indrawn 

(tfcath. 

"Come along — I'll show you!" he 
said. 

Elwood derived the most intense 
pleasure from showing groups of 
visiting dignitaries — scientific big 
shots for the most part — through 
his basement laboratory. But when 
the dignitaries happened to be his 
own children his elation knew no 
bounds. 

Down the basement stairs they 
trooped, Melvin to the right of him. 
Mary Anne to the left. A door 
opened with a gentle click, I UgBt 
came on and Mclvin let out a yell 
which rrsounded through the house. 

"You've got the blast reflector 
set up. Pof>!" 

The rocket stood out, silver on 
black at its base, with a dull shine 
where it tapered to catch and hold 
the light. 

It was not large as rockets go. 
It was barely five feet in height, a 
miracle of technical craftsmanship 
wrought by the unerring skill and 
scientific knowhow of a very practical man with a family to support. 
But it had been built with an eye to 
beauty as well and as the light 
glimmered and danced on its slop


ing vanes it seemed as gracefully 
poised for flight as some halfmythical bird cast ui metal by a 

long-vanished elfin race. 

As gracefully poised and as 
shiningly beautiful . . . 

It was Marv Anne Who broke the 
spell. "Daddy, will it really go to 
the moon?" 

Elwood looked down at his 
daughter and patted her tousled 
red-gold hair. "How many times 
must I tell you it isn't an experimental model?" he chided. "It was 
designed for actual space flight." 

"But daddy — " 

"If you've any more silly notions 
you'd better get rid of them right 
now. You may never get another 
chance. Yesterday Mclvin and I discussed the details as fellowscientists. SuppoiC you tell her just 
how much the Government is contributing, son," 

"Forty thousand dollars!" Mclvin 
said promptly, rolling the figure 
over his tongue as though it had 
some mysterious magic of it* own 
which could elevate him to man': 
estate— if he repeated it nftcn 
enough. 

"A research gram," Elwood 
added as if thinking aloud for his 
own benefit. "I had a tough time 
persuading them to let me do all 
the construction work right here in 
my own laboratory. I've probably 
cut more yards of official red tape 
than any odd duck since Achimedc.v " 

He smiled a little ruefully. "In 
case you're interested — I've had to 



FANTASTIC UNIVERSE 



through the nose for the 
■clinical assistance I've been get* 
ng. Those owl-fated characters 
ou've seen drifting in and out 
n't work for peanuts." 
"But all of the rockets in the 
*reo-cineramas are much bigger!** 
iary Anne protested- "Why it 
at, daddy?" 

"We've just about seen the end 
'. the huge outmoded, stratosphere 
uervation-typc rockets." Til wood 
plied, including both children in 
i glance. "In the future obscrvaion rockets will be much smaller 
nd there is little to be gained by 
attempting to send a large rocket 
i the moon. The cost would be a 
ousand times as great." 
"But daddy, how could such a 
: rocket ever get as far as the 
1.** 

"Perhaps the worst mistake an 
ndivtdual or a society can make is 
confuse size with power," Elwood said. "There is a tiny bee 
ch, in proportion to its size, 
an travel faster than our cleverest 
light specialists in their jet planes." 
"But daddy — " 

"Don't look so incrcJulous, 
oncy bunch. You remind me of 
our mother. Mclvin knows just 
much progress we've made in 
nic research since Eniwetok. 
her, son." 
"The primitive hydrogen bomb 
rsted at Eaiwetok laid the groundwork for the storage of vast 
nounts of nuclear power in blast 
compartments a few inches square," 
Mclvin said pridefully. "We can 



now power a very small rocket 

designed for space flight with the 
equivalent of fifty million tons of 

TNT." 

"You left out one vital consideration, Mclvin," Elwood said. "The 
automatic-control factor." 

"Pop's right," Melvin said, confronting his sister almost accusingly. "The power won't be released 
all at once." 

"It will be released in 'successive 
stages," Elwood corroborated. "We 
hope eventually to regulate the 
stages — or steps, as they are called 
— in such a way that other rockets, 
identical in design, will build up 
velocities approaching the speed of 
light." 

Elwood picked up an odd-looking 
instrument from the work-bench 
against which he had been leaning. 
As he fingered it idly he enjoyed his 
daughter's stunned acceptance of 
his accomplishment, realising more 
thin ever what an important contribution he had made to man'i 
eventual conquest of the stars. 

That conquest would come in 
good time. Even now enough atomic 
potential had been scored in tlie 
rocket to carry it to Alpha Centauri — and back. The blast mechanism had to have an overload to 
function at all. But only a tiny 
fraction of the potential would be 
needed to make the moon flight art 
accomplished fact. 

The rocket wouldn't be traveling 
at anything like tlie speed of light. 
But just as soon as a few m< 



UTTLE MEN OF SPACE 



complicated technical details had 
been worked out . . . 

Elwood felt suddenly very tired. 
His back ached with stiffness and 
his eyelids throbbed. Fortunately 
he knew the reason for his weariness 
and refused to become alarmed. He 
had simply been driving himself too 
hard. But with the rocket so near 
completion he couldn't afford to let 
even a draft of cold wind blow 
upon him and increase his chances 
of becoming really ill. 

"If it's all right with you, kiddies," he said, "I'm going upstairs 
to bed. I'm practically out on roy 
feet." 

"Aw, Pop, it isn't six o'clock 
yet!" Melvin protested. 

Instantly Mary Anne came to his 
rescue. "Daddy, you're not getting 
enough rest!" she said, her eyes 
darting to the rocket and then to 
her brother in fierce reproach. 

"I ought to turn in early when I 
can," Elwood said. "If your mother 
wasn't at Aunt Martha's I'd have 
to sit up half the night convincing 
her I've got enough practical sense 
left to shave and bathe myself and 
take in the mail." 

"Goodnight, daddy!" Mary Anne 
said. 

"Goodnight, kids. Thanks for 
being patient and giving me a 
break." 

"Pop, can I stay down here and 
look it over?" 

"Sure, Melvin, stay as long as 
you like. I don't mind your puttering around a bit with the tools 
to long as you don't touch the 



rocket." F.lwood's face grew suddenly strained. "Promise me y 
won't." 

"He won't!" Mary An 
promised. 

She waited for her father's foo" 
steps to echo hollowly on the floor 
above before she turned her ire full 
upon Melvin. "If I was a boy I'd 
be more considerate of daddy than 
you are!" she exclaimed, accusingly. 
"You don't care how tired he gets." 

"You're not a boy," Melvin retorted. "You never could be. What's 
the sense in fooling yourself?" 

"You just repeat everything 
tells vou," Mary Anne flare 
"You're not so smart!" 

"I'm smart enough to know that 
rocket could be sent further than 
the moon — right now." 

Mary Anne gasped. "You'i 
crazy. Daddy knows what he' 
doing." 

"Sure he does. If he sent it as 
far as it could go it would disappear in space. He couldn't prove 
anything and he'd be in real trouble. 
They'd say he got rid of it becaus 
it wouldn't work and kept the forty 
thousand dollars for himself." 

"The F,arth-child is right!" a 
tiny voice said. "That rocket can 
and must carry us to our horn 
planet. It is our last remaininhope." 

For an instant Melvin felt as i 
he had swallowed a goldfish. Sonrr 
thing flopped in his throat, coldl 
and horribly, and though the voi~ 
rang clear in his ears it seemed to 
come from deep inside his head. 



FANTASTIC UNIVERSE 



*'He hears us!" the voice said. 
"Before he sees us we'd better train 
the beam on him. All Earth-children 
are emotional but the males are the 
hardest to control." 

It was Mary Anne who screamed 
in protest. She stood as if frozen, 
staring down with swiftly widening 
eyes at the three tiny men who had 
come striding into the room through 
the wall. They had come in with a 
biaze of light behind them, a shimmering of the wall itself that 
seemed to go right through to the 
other side. 

Mary Anne could have crushed 
them simply by raising her foot 
and bringing it down dead center 
above them. But their eyes warned 
her to be still. 

Do not scream again, Earth-child, 
the eyes warned. We are not as ugly 
0S we seem to you and your fright 
is very distasteful to us. 

Horribly ugly they seemed to 
Mary Anne. They were no larger 
than the white ivory pawns on the 
chessboard in her father's library 
but they did not resemble pawns in 
the least. They were wrinkled and 
old-looking and the cheapest doll 
she had would have cried with 
shame to be dressed as they were. 

She could have made out of an 
old handkerchief a better dress, 
with more tucks and seams to it— 
and no Jack -in-the -Box could have 
popped up to shiver and sway with 
such toothless, evil-eyed malice. 

A child can escape from a 
monster of the toymakcr's craft 
simply by drawing a line between 



the real and the imaginary. But 
Mary Anne could not escape from 
the little men facing {ki. There 
was no line to be drawn and she 
knew it. 

The little men were alive, and 
they were staring at her now as 
she had never been stared at before. 
As if she were a stick of wood 
about to be thrown into a blazing 
fire which had been kindled for 
Melvin as well. 

Totally bald they were, with 
skins so shriveled that their small, 
slitted eyes were buried in a maze 
of wrinkles. Most pitiful of all was 
the fact that their skins were 
mottled brown and green — colors 
so enchanting when associated with 
budding leaves or the russct-andgold splendors of an autumn landscape. 

The little men were alive and 
they were warning her to be quiet. 
Just to make sure that she would 
not move or attempt to scream 
again they spoke to her again inside 
her head. 

"We're going to use the beam on 
you too. But you won't be hurt if 
you don't try to wake up your 
father." 

She could hardly keep from 
screaming when she saw what they 
were doing to her brother. The 
tallest of the three — they were not 
all of the same height — was turning 
Melvin slowly about in a blaze of 
light. 

He was the thinnest of the three 
too — so thin and tall that she automatically found herself thinking of 



LITTLE MEN OF SPACE 



71 



him as Tall-Thin. The light came 
from a tiny glowing tube which 
Tall-Thin was clasping in hands as 
small and brightly shining as the 
pen points in her school stationery 
set. 

She knew by the way she felt 
that Melvin wanted to scream too 
— to scream and struggle and fight 
back. But he couldn't even move 
EuA head and shoulders. He was all 
ftt&ffeaed up and he turned as she'd 
seen him do in dreama when they'd 
been quarreling and she had wanted 
to punith him for making faces at 
her — to punish him by skipping 
away across the room and laughing 
because he couldn't follow her. 

She was sorry now she'd ever 
dreamed of Melvin in that way 
even when he was mean to her. She 
felt even sorrier when she heard her 
brother shriek. It wasn't much of a 
shriek — just a thin little cry that 
came out muffled. 

Melvin had almost lost the power 
of speech and it was awful to 
watch him trying to move his lips. 
He was completely turned now, 
staring down at the little men, and 
his eyes were shrieking for him. 

"Don't make them mad, Melvin!" 
Mary Anne pleaded. "They'll kill 

you." 

Instantly Tall-Thin turned and 
trained his gaze on Miry Anne, his 
face twitching with impatience. 
"Dealing with the immature is a 
nuisance," he complained and Mary 
Anne heard the words clearly even 
though she knew they were not 
meant for her. Deep inside her head 



she could hear Tall-Thin speaking 
to his companions. 

As if sensing something disturbing in that the second-tallest of the 
three spoke in reply — spoke for the 
first time. "They'll hear everything 
we say. It would be so much more 
convenient if we could talk to 
them without giving them the 
power to hear in return every word 
wc utter." 

"That cannot be avoided, Rujit," 
replied Tall-Thin. "When we read 
their minds we awaken extra-sensory faculties which would ordinarily remain dormant in them." 

"And rudimentary." 

"And rudimentary." Tall-Thin 
agreed. "It's like stimulating a lowgrade energy circuit with a highgrade charge. The low-grade circuit 
will remain supercharged for a brief 
period." 

"Would it not be safer to kill 
them at once?" 

"Unnecessary killing is always 
unpleasant," Tall-Thin said. 

"Wc should be emotionally prepared for it," Rujit countered. "We 
would not have survived and become great as a race if we had not 
conquered all such squeamishness in 
ourselves. We must he prepared- to 
nullify all opposition by instant 
drastic action — the mc*t drastic 
action available to us at any given 
time." 

Rujit paused for an instant to 
transfix Tall-Tlnn with an accusing 
stare. Then he went on quickly. 
"In an emergency it is often very 
difficult to decide instantly how 



74 



FANTASTIC UNIVERSE 



necessary an action may be. To 
take pleasure in killing unnecessarily 
is therefore a survival attribute of 
a very high order." 

"I would as soon kill the Earthchildren as not." Tall-Thin said. 
"But the slightest emotional unpleasantness militates against survival. Every act we perform must 
be dictated by reason. Our moral 
grandeur as a race is based on 
absolute logic — not on blind instinct. Even in an emergency we 
are wise enough to determine how 
necessary an action may be. So your 
argument falls to pieces." 

Tall-Thin straightened, his parchment-dry face crinkling with rage, 
"This isn't the first time you've 
questioned my wisdom and authority, Rujit!" he said and his 
voice was like the hiss of a snake 
uncoiling in the long grass of a 
jungle clearing. 

Rujit stiffened as if invisible 
fangs had buried themselves in his 
flesh. His cheeks could hardly have 
been called ruddy to begin with 
but their pallor suddenly became 
extreme. He took a quick step 
backward, a look of horror coming 
into his eyes. 

"You wouldn't! No, no, Hilili!" 

"The choice is no longer mine 
alone." 

"But I was just thinking out 
loud!" 

Tall-Tliin clicked off the beam, 
leaving Melvin still standing largeeyed and motionless against the 
wall. He raised the tube which had 



projected the beam until it was 
pointing directly at Rujit. 

"I'm going to step up the beam," 
he said. 

"But why? Why, Hilili? For the 
love you bear me — ** 

"I bear you no love." 

"But you are my biogenetic twin, 
Hilili. We have been closer than 
ordinary brothers from birth." 

"It does not matter. It does not 
concern me. Family relationships 
militate against survival when reason falters in a single member of a 
family group." 

Tall-Thin's voice hardened. "We 
came to this planet for one purpose 
— to colonize it for the good of all. 
We numbered thousands and now 
we are reduced to a pitiful remnant 
— just ourselves. Thanks to the 
stupidity of a few." 

*T was never one of the stupid 
ones!" Rujit protested. "I advised 
our immediate return. The unknown and hideous diseases which 
decimated us like migs, the atmospheric gases which rotted our ships 
so insidiously that we were not 
aware of the damage until they 
exploded in flight — remember, I 
kept insisting that we could not 
survive such hazards for long!" 

"Your sound judgment in that 
respect was more than offset by 
your wilful insistence we explore 
the entire planet," Tall-Thin countered. "Our ships were so numerous 
that they were observed in flight 
and we might have been destroyed 
completely when death and disaster 
struck. 



LITTLE MEN OF SPACE 



75 



"As might liave been expected 
t!ie very shape of our ships made 
tlicm conspicuous. l ; icry disks they 
mutt have seemed to the Earth 
dwellers, so terrifying that they 
would have eventually found a way 
to fathom the mystery, and strike 
back. A perishing remnant of an 
advanced race has never yet succeeded in killing two billion primitives armed with Class C-type 
weapons." 

"But how could I have known 
it then?" 

"Ignorance is never an excuse!" 
Tall-Thin's voice was a merciless 
rasp. "A well-organized logical 
mind does not make such mistakes. 
Now we arc facing utter disaster 
unless we can get back to our home 
planet and warn The Twenty that 
it would be sheer madness to attempt to colonize this planet again 
without better disease-preventing 
safeguards and atmosphere- resisting 
metals. Such safeguards can and 
must be worked out." 

Tatl-Thin paused, watching MelYin as if apprehensive that the 
praise h ; was about to bestow would 
be held against him to the detriment of his vanity. 

"Unfortunately only two of us 
can go in this rocket, which has 
miraculously come into our possession. The primitive who constructed It, this Ear th- child's progenitor, must have an almost Class 
B-typc mind. Only two of US, 
understand?" 

"But—" 

"The survival of the wisest. I'm 



afraid I shall have to extinguish 
you, Rujit." 

The tube lit up again, so brightly 
that Tatl-Thin'a hand was blotted 
out by the glare. Equally blotted 
out was Rujifs face but the rest 
of him did not vanish immediately. 
One arm disappeared but not the 
other — and there was a yawning 
dark gap between his knees and his 
waist. 

It might not have seemed so horrible if Rujit had not shrieked first. 
The shriek had an outward-inward 
quality, echoing both inside the 
heads of the children and in the 
room as actual sound. 

Even Tall-Thin seemed shaken by 
it, as if in a race that had outgrown 
the need for physical speech there 
could be nothing more unnerving 
than anguish so expressed. 

Yet both the shriek and the 
almost instant blotting out of 
Rujit's face were eclipsed in point 
of horror by the fading of the little 
man's legs. They faded, kicking and 
protesting and spasmodically convulsed, faded in a ruby red glow 
that lingered for an instant in the 
still air like a slowly dissolving 
blood clot, then as slowly vanished. 

It was at that moment Mary 
Anne ceased to think as a child. 
She dug her knuckles into her 
mouth to keep from screaming but 
the undaunted way in which het 
mind worked was a tribute to her 
forgctf ulncss of self. If he should Jo 
thai to Melv'mt 

Tatl-Thin must have sensed the 
loathing in her mind, for he turned 



7 6 



FANTASTIC UNIVERSE 



witli .i grimace of rage and trained 
the beam full upon her, taking care 
however to alter the tube's destructive potential with a quick twist of 
his thumb. 

"A primitive would have been 
solely tempted to kill you, Earthchild," lie said. "Fortunately for 
you we have a high and undeviating 
code of ethics." 

Back and forth over the children 
Tall- Thin played the beam, as if 
to make sure there would be no 
further unpleasantness from that 
source. 

Then he clicked off the tube 
again, and turned to his remaining 
companion — a little man who apparently believed that silence and 
good order were the foundation of 
all thing;. 

In a more primitive society he 
would have been considered a stooge 
but there appeared to be no such 
cultural concept in Tall-Thin's 
scale of values, He spoke with the 
utmost respect, as if anyone who 
agreed with him automatically became as exalted .ts himself. 

"The primitive who constructed 
this rocket had a remarkable mind," 
he said. "We could not have constructed it for every culture, no 
matter how primitive, has resources 
peculiar to itself." 

"That is very true, Hilili!" 

Mary Anne tried to turn her head 
to look at Melvin but her neck 
felt as stiff as when she'd had the 
mumps and everyone had felt sorry 
for her. She was sure that the little 
men did not feel in the least sorry 



and all she could do was stare in 

helpless anger as they turned and 
scrambled into the rocket. 

Finally she did manage to turn 
her head, just far enough to see 
what Melvin was doing. 

Melvin wasn't moving at all. His 
head was lowered and he was thinking. She knew that he was thinking 
by the look in his eyes. Melvin was 
silently thinking and as she stared 
she ceased to be afraid. 

She sat very still, waiting for 
Melvin to speak to her. Suddenly 
he did, deep inside her head. 

The little men had come from 
far, far away. They had come from 
a big cloud of stars in the sky 
called the Great Nebula in Andromeda. Nearly everything in the universe curved and they had come 
spinning along the biggest curve 
of all in hundreds and hundreds of 
punched-out disks that glowed in 
the dark like Roman candles, 

The cow pasture Melvin and she 
played in was — she knew what it 
was but she waited for Melvin to 
say it — rocket proving -ground, It 
was their own secret playing place 
but daddy called it a rocket proving -ground. 

Daddy wouldn't send the rocket 
to the moon from his laboratory in 
the cellar. He'd take it out to the 
proving-ground and ask even the 
President of the United States to 
watch it start out for the Moon. 

The President would come because her daddy was a very important and wonderful man. He 
didn't have much money but he'd 



LITTLE MEN OF SPACE 7? 



be rich ind famous if the rocket 
reached the moon. 

Most men as wonderful as her 
daddy were poor until they did 
something to make people stand up 
and shout. The little men didn't 
want her daddy to become rich so 
that he could send Mclvin through 
college and she could go to college 
too. The little men didn't want her 
to learn domestic housekeeping and 
make the handsomest man in all 
the world happy. 

The little men wouldn't — 
couldn't — take the rocket out to 
the proving -ground. It would start 
off blazing and go straight up 
through the roof into the sky. It 
would blow the cellar apart and 
the cottage would come tumbling 
down in ruins. Mclvin would be 
killed and her daddy . . . 

She had never been so terrified 
in all her life and if Melvin hadn't 
started thinking she would have 
burst out crying. 

Mclvin was thinking something 
now about the cottage. Water came 
tn from the sea. It did too — she remembered daddy complaining about 
it when he went down to stoke the 
furnace. Water in the cellar and 
the ground underneath all soft and 

soggy
Sait-marsh seepage. Why, it was 
like quicksand down below the solid 
strata. The words came quick and 
clear from Melvin thinking. Solid 
strait. Even the solid strata wasn't 
all solid. There were porosities in 
it — like a sponge. If something very 
heavy went down through the cellar 



floor it would go right on sinking. 

Auxiliary fuels, came from Melvin thinking. They're in the 
auxiliary fuel-chamber now. Hot 
steam in tlte turbines, pushed right 
through the heat exchanger. The 
atomic charge won't go off at all 
if the heat exchanger works fast 
enough. 

They don't know 01 much about 
the rocket as Pop does, came frorrt 
Melvin. The atomic part is the big 
important part. They came at night 
and studied that. But the heat exchanger — they didn't take the 
trouble to study it. Now they're 
worried about it. Why should an 
atomic rocket have auxiliary fuels? 

Daddy could have told them. 
You had to have auxiliary fuels in 
a rocket if you were going to send 
it to the moon. The rocket's trajectory would have to be modified 
by small readjustments that could 
only be made by auxiliary fuels. 

Mclvin, think hard! Think hard 
and fast, and in the right way! 

They're stopping now to puzzU 
it out, came from Melvin. Then 
minds work differently from ours. 
They fasten on the big important 
things first. The small things they 
sometimes overlook. Tfjey can't 
help it. Their minds are constructed 
that way. 

Mustn't let trivialities distract 
us. That's what they were thinking. 
That's what they were thinking, 
and they were going to make a 
mistake. 

They're going to move the wrong 
dial. I'm gohts to help them move 



7* 



FANTASTIC UNIVERSE 



the wrong dial, 1 want them to 
move the wrong dial. They must 
move the tvrong dial . . . 

It began with a faint humming 
sound — nothing more. But something that couldn't have come from 
Merlin at all showered Mary Anne's 
mind with thoughts and emotions 
that were like a screaming inside 
her head. 

A continuous terrified screaming 
that made her want to slap her 
hands to her ears to shut out the 
sound. 

The screaming stopped the instant the rocket began to vibrate. 
It stopped as abruptly as a jet of 
steam issuing from a suddenly 
clogged pipe. 

The humming changed to a droning and the rocket vibrated so 
furiously that Mary Anne grew 
dizzy just watching it. With the 
dizziness came a terrible fear that 
the rocket would explode. It was 
like being bound to a chair, helpless, and knowing you couldn't 
possibly escape. She saw herself 
being blown up with the cottage, 
with Melvin screaming for her to 
save him. 

But nothing like that happened. 
The cottage shook a little. She was 
hurled forward, then to her knees. 
But the blast of heat which fanned 
her face was no worse than the 
blast from a furnace door swinging 
quickly open and shut. 

Straight down through the floor 
the rocket sank with its base glowing white hot. There were a sizzling 
Mid a hissing and she could see 



flames dancing through the steam 
which kept rising in clouds until 
water gushed up in torrents and 
put the fire out. 

She shut her eyes then and 
clenched her hands tight. 

She sat very still, waiting for 
Melvin to come to her. She felt a 
great and overwhelming need to 
lean on someone, to be consoled by 
a firm masculine voice speaking 
out bold and clear. 

The bursting strangeness was 
gone from inside her head. She 
could move again. She refused to 
try but she knew that she could 
whenever she wanted to. Her 
thoughts were her own now — not 
Melvin's or Tall-Thin's. 

She started to cry, very softly, 
and she was still crying when Melvin reached her side, helped her to 
her feet. 

"Mary Anne, I could see them 
moving around inside the rocket. I 
could even make them do what I 
wanted them to do. It happened as 
soon as they turned that ray on me, 
I couldn't move but I knew what 
they were thinking." 

"So did I, Melvin," Mary Anne 
sobbed. "I knew what you were 
thinking too." 

"Yeah. We seemed to be talking 
together there for a minute. But 
not the way we're talking now." 

Mary Anne nodded. "I knew 
what you were thinking and they 
knew what we . . ." Mary Anne 
stopped. "Melvin! You fooled them! 
Inside the ship they didn't hear us 
talking together. If they had heard 



LITTLE MEN OF SPACE 



79 



us they would not have made a 
mistake and turned the wrong dial." 

"Yeah, I know. I tried to throw 
up a mental block when we talked 
about the auxiliary fuel chamber 
and what would happen if the heat 
exchanger worked fast enough. I 
guess it worked. The mental block, 
I mean . . ." 

"You bet it worked, Melvin. 
You're wonderful, Melvin." 

"You didn't think so when you 
told Pop about the sandwiches." 

"I didn't mean to be a nasty, 
Melvin." 

"All right — skip it. Funny thing 
— I could never read anybody's 
thoughts before. It only lasted for 
a few minutes. I couldn't do it 
now." 

"They must have done something 
to us, Melvin." 

"I'll say they did. What's Pop 
going to think when he comes 
down here tomorrow and sees the 
rocket gone?" 

"I'm afraid he's going to be 
awfully mad, Melvin." 

There is perhaps no more striking 
illustration of the prophetic faculty 
at work in the world than when it 
appears full-blown in the occasional 
understatements of children. 

The next morning, Elwood didn't 
merely hurl the magazine at his son. 
He pointed first to the article, 
tapping furiously with his forefinger at Melvin's photograph while 
his breakfast grew cold at his elbow. 

"Melvin, I warned you to keep 
your hands off that rocket. I 
warned you not to touch it or jar 



it in any way. But you had to 

putter around until you did something to the heat exchanger dial. 
It's conduct like that which mikes 
me realize how mistaken these 
journalist monkeys can be. A genius! 
You're no more of a genius — " 

"Pop, you've got to believe me!" 
Melvin protested. "The little men 
are — " 

"Little went My son is not only 
a genius" — Elwood stressed the 
word with a biting sarcasm which 
was not lost on Melvin — "but a 
first-class liarl Here, read this 
article again. It was published two 
months ago — but I guess you didn't 
read it over often enough. It may 
shame you into going into a corner 
and giving yourself a thorough 
mental overhauling." 

Elwood tossed the magazine then 
— straight across the table at the 
disturbed Melvin. 

"If he's a liar so am I!" Mary 
Anne gasped in angry protest. 

"For a dozen years now flying 
saucer rumors have been all over the 
place," Elwood said, glaring at both 
of his chUdren. "I suppose it's only 
natural you should chatter occasionally about little men. All 
children do. But to use such imaginary companions as an excuse for an 
act of wanton destructiveness . . ." 

Melvin picked up the magazine 
almost automatically. Solely to 
bolster his sagging self-esteem — even the innocent and falsely accused can feel guilty at times — he 
stared at his own photograph and 



the somewhat baroque caption 
which surmounted it. 

YOUNG SCIENTIIIC AMERICA 
Can genius be inherited? The 
distinguished accomplishments in 
nuclear physic; and space-flight 
theory by the father of the boy who 
has won the most coveted annual 
award available to American youth 
for all-around scientific achievement 
Strengthens the arguments of those 
who believe that die bright mysterious torch of genius can be 
passed on from father to son. But 
when interviewed the youthful winner of the Scabury Medal modestly 
disclaimed . . . 

"If I saw a little man do you 
know what I'd do?" came in bittet 
reproach from the original holder 
of Melvin's inherited torch. 

And then, in rhetorical response, 
"I'd make it my fight — a fight 
forced upon me against my will. I'd 
consult a good psychiatrist immediately." 

"I throw myself on your mercy!" 
a tiny voice said. "I am unarmed, I 
am alone — and l am the last of my 
kind remaining alive on your 
planet." 

Melvin stopped reading abruptly, 
flushing guiltily to the roots of his 
hair. He had been wishing that his 
father could sec a little man and 
now he was being punished for his 
thoughts in the crudest possible 
way. 

The winner of the Seabury 
Medal knew that insanity was rare 



in childhood but to hear imaginary 
voices . . . 

"I lil in thought he had extinguished me," the voice went on, 
"but by exerting my will to the 
utmost I managed to waver back. 
I beg you to be merciful!" 

The voice became almost pathetic 
in its tragic pleading. "You need no 
longer fear me for I will soon die. 
Injured and weakened as I am the 
disease organisms so fatal to my 
race are certain to kill me very 
quickly now." 

Melvin looked up then — and so 
did Mary Anne. 

The little man stood on a bright 
mahogany sideboard, gleaming with 
all the primitive appurtenances of 
a Class C-type breakfast. A tray of 
buttered toast, crisply brown, rose 
like the Great Pyramid of Cheops 
at his back, and he was leaning for 
support against the coffee percolatot 
that mirrored his wan and tormented face in wavy and distorted 
lines. 

It was easy to see that death was 
already beckoning to Rujit with a 
solemn and pontificial bow. 

"Pop!" Melvin gasped, leaping to 
his feet. 

John Elwood did not answer his 
son. However much he may have 
wanted to communicate there are 
few satisfactory avenues of communication that remain open to l 
man lying flat On his stomach on 
the floor in a dead faint. 



the 
fire 
and 
the 
flesh 

by ... E. Hoffmann Price 

Was Agni Deva flame? Or was she 
flesh? In either case ihe woman 
©f the volcano was irresistible. 



Damn it, woman!" Har 
thrust his chair back from 
breakfast tabic. "Java and Bali will 
keep, and so will the Hindu ruins. 
They've been at Borobudur, for 
untold centuries, and they'll be just 
as romantic and glamorous next 
month or next year. Be rtmoneblt 
— haven't I got enough on ray 
mind, without sightseeing, here and 
now?" 

Half-whimsical ly half -querulously Lorclla Harmon complained, 
"It's my fault that blight or smut 
or whatever it is has struck the 
crop? Good Lord, Wade! You 
worked on this dry rice for a couple 
of years before the war. 

"Won't it keep till next year? 
Haven't you all the time in the 
world? They haven't starved in 
Java or anywhere else so far for 
lack of this miracle super-rice 
that'll grow without irrigation on 
the rockiest mountainside!" 

The new strain of "dry" rice, 
which Wade Harmon had developed 
after long experimentation, was 
doing worse than fall away from its 
early promise. And Lorella, just 
come to Tanah Mcrah from the 
States, seemed to feel badly let 



Biologically man may be a far cry from the moth. Yet, perhaps as with the rnotb, in 
each of us lurks a fascination for fire tlxat dales hart to the daun of human emergent* 
from animal prhnitivism. Fiery meteor, suifl lightning, blazing forest or prairie, 
terrifying volcano — each is fire end each attracts strangely even while it fills m 
with fear. Or is fire, in its essence, something more — an entity, perhaps? One of America's able author-craftsmen brilliantly explores this possibility upon these pages, 

" 1 ii 



8. 



TANTASTIC UNIVERSE 



down — not because the crop had 
taken a setback but because he refused to leave the plantation and 
go on the promised sightseeing tour 
until he learned what had caused 
the trouble. 

Though slender, Lorella had no 
need at all for any artifices to round 
out her pale-blue lounging robe. 
Her hair had ruddy glints and an 
almost-nacreous sheen. Her skin 
was fine and smooth. Good nose and 
long lovely hands — all in all Lorella 
Harmon was an uncommonly attractive armful but for the petulance that lurked about her mouth. 

"I might as well have stayed in 
the States! You're not a bit glad to 
see me!" 

But Harmon had beaten her to 
the punch in quitting the table so 
Lorella did not leave. Instead she 
sat there to weep with heroic restraint until the door slammed. 
Then she bounced to her feet and 
pressed her face against the panes 
of the solarium to see how f.ir lie 
would go before coming back to 
apologize. 

Wade was a wiry quick-stepping 
man, perhaps too impatient for the 
tropics. She tried to make allowances for that and for the 
lingering effects of war injuries, 
though there was scarcely a trace 
of a limp. 

Active as he was in body, his 
mind left it lagging behind. That 
expression of farsccing-ncss in the 
deep-set dark eyes had attracted her 
from the start — from their very 
first meeting after the war, while 




he was still scrambling for funds to 
return to Tanah Merah to resume 
his experiments with dry rice. 

And now, she told herself bitterly, he saw so far that his opposite 
number at breakfast was too near 
to be in focus! 

Harmon had no intention of 
coming back to apologize. Once 
well away from the bungalow, 
which had for so many weeks 
awaited LorcMa's arrival, he divided 
his bitter gaze between the volcano. 
Merah, and the crop which would 
surely fail. Sniffing the air he caught 
a barely perceptible taint of sulphur. 

Harmon began to blame Merah, 
the Red One, for the unfilled heads 
of rice, the stunted growths that 
had sprouted with such promise. 
Merah had always been an overshadowing beauty — the ever-changing hues as the sun shifted, at times 
ash-rose, and again a luminous purple during the brief dusk. Merah 
was red only when the towering 
cone of lavender-j;ray pumice was 
tinged by the slanting rays of early 
morning and late evening. 

Harmon frowned at the failing 
crop. His plantation was on the 
highest of the succession of terraces from which the cone rose. 
Except for the ground he had 
cleared the entire shelf was overgrown by jungle, tliough there had 
always been a small area cultivated 
by the natives of the village. These 
people now worked for Wade I larmoo. 

Ahmat, the Javanese labor fore



man, appeared at his side. Though 
his hair had whitened and his eyes 
were ancient, his delicately modeled 
face was smooth albeit sharp of 
line. 

"Than, she is angry," he said. 
"I have tried to make pence with 
her but the will not li nn to the 
servant when the master should 
speak." 

"She, Ahmat?" 

"You know us of old. I have 
watched you looking at her long 
and often." Ahmat gestured. "The 
Red Mountain is only the house of 
One who lives there. She who lives 
in the house, her one does not sec. 
Do you go and talk to her." 

"How docs a man talk to a 
mountain? What did you do, 
Ahmat, when you — talked to her?" 

"I set fruit and flowers on the 
rim of the crater. As if at a shrine 
or image. The Presence is everywhere. Go, place your gift and 
perhaps she will be pleased." 

"That smell in the air is what's 
poisoning the rice." 

"No, tuan. It comes and it goes, 
it has always been so. Rice has a 
soul. It is frightened when Merah 
is angry. So it dies." 

Many of the islanders believed 
that rice had a spirit. They believed 
that only a certain sort of blade 
was fit for cutting the stalks, else 
the spirit of the cereal would be 
angry. 

"Each living thing," Ahmat had 
once explained, "dies in its time to 
nourish another living thing. That 
U the Excellent Law. But lie who 



eats without giving thanks for the 
sacrifice of the eaten, he is cursed 
for his pride and it is not well with 

him** 

This had set Harmon thinking 
during pre-war years in Tanah 
Merah when he lived in his bungalow, alone with the problem of 
crossing one plant strain with 
another to accentuate desirable 
traits. 

"But what starts the original 
mutation?" Harmon had once asked 
a lecturer at school. The man had 
given him a look, half of pity, half 
of resentment. Later there had been 
talk of cosmic rays, radioactivity — 
explanations which explained nothing. 

When Ahmat had seen that under 
Harmon's care, the dry rice was 
actually changing as to the size 
and number of grains in each head 
he had offered an explanation no 
worse than that of the scientists 
and a good deal more picturesque. 

"It is this way — the plant 
guardians, the dnas who make 
things grow, they amuse themselves" 
sometimes by making a single grain 
sprout a stalk that is not like any of 
the other stalks." 

"That makes as much sense as 
what they told me at school." 

Later, pleased by Harmon's openmi ndedness, Ahmat had added, 
"The dtVM make changes when 
there is a man who sees and understands. There has always been dry 
r ; ce — uu t the changes did not start 
until you came." 

This queer primitive reasoning 



STIC UNIVERSE 



bad finally warped Harmon into 
line. But he could not tell Lorella 
that until the rice dews felt like 
dispensing with his presence he 
could not take her to see Bali and 
Borobudur and the rest of the 
tourist bait. 

What sustained Ahmat's contention wis that growing things did 
respond to Harmon's touch. But 
I tarmon felt foolish about offering 
gifts to a volcano. 

II 

When Ahmat handed him the 
small basket Harmon skirted the 
base of the cone, wanting to be out 
of sight of the bungalow when he 
be-gan the ascent. He went cold at 
the thought of Lorella spotting 
himi insisting on going along. 

There were lava beds between 
the plantation's edge and the foot 
of the cone. For perhaps a mile, he 
picked his way among windrows of 
black fragments, which looked as 
though a giant had picked up uncounted gondola- loads of coal to 
dump them in heaps. Between these 
bunkers was a fairly level floor, 
seamed and slashed by crevasses. 

Finally he began a slantwise 
ascent of the cone. At each step he 
sank ankle deep, and started small 
slides of cinder. Before long he 
was exhausted and sat down on 
the steep slope. A feeling that he 
had been cut off from humanity, 
from all animate creatures, became 
stronger. Then, as his gaze shifted, 
he saw that Ahmat had well and 
rightly referred to Merali as (be. 



; which 

:nded, a 



There were cinder dunes 
began where the lava flow ended, a 
succession of mounds, whose curvature the somewhat overrated ladies 
of Bali might have envied. Each 
was banded and mottled, white and 
tawny, coral and buff, scarlet, ochre, 
and ash-roses. Mottled and banded 
like the Primordial Serpent in the 
shadow of whose hooded heads 
Brahman the Creator sleeps, waiting 
for the Destroyer to finish bis work, 
resting until the time for new 
creation. 

Harmon remembered the museum 
where he had seen the manybreasted statue unearthed at 
Ephesus. The linkage of association 
was so strong that he said aloud, 
"Diana of the Ephesians mated with 
the Great Serpent — Merah, the 
great grandaughter of all of the 
Nagas . . ." 

And then the scientist in Harmon rebelled. He told himself, 
"Those color bands are caused by 
chemical changes in the cinder 
when anhydride vapors from below 
encounter atmospheric moisture 
and become acids." 

Having built up a good case 
against intuition he resumed the 
ascent until at last he could look 
back and see, far below, the red 
tiles of the bungalow roof. It was 
like looking into another world. 

On reaching the crater lip, he 
looked down into a bowl whose flat 
floor was broken by crevasses. It 
supported a confusion of towering 
lava bulwarks and pinnacles. Wisps 
of steam curled from several floor 



THE FIRE AND THE FLUSH 



and wall crevasses. A light snow* 
pack clung to the slope. 

He made his way down into the 
shadow of the turrets and spires. 
Tbere were passages almost arched 
over into arcades with only a thin 
thread of sky showing through. 
More and more, he got the feeling 
that all this had been erected by 
gods or demons — and for no good 
purpose. 

Then, disconcertingly, mist gathered. It thickened. It plumed and 
•pirated. Murky twilight became 
darkness at noon.' Sudden panic 
made him turn and run until he 
emerged from the passage. There he 
stopped, for he could neither see 
the crater wall no anything that 
was more than a yard from him. 

Whichever way he went, he 
should soon reach the side of the 
bowl and come up into the light 
again. But to do so he would have 
to move in a straight line — and this 
was impossible. Gaping crevasses 
and towering pillars kept him from 
holding a straight course. Every 
few paces demanded a detour. 

He cursed the volcano and his 
own folly and Ahmat's as well 
Then a detached segment of consciousness warned him and he sat 
down. He closed his eyes, and drew 
a deep breath — a second — a third. 

A moment later he perceived that 
he was not alone. There was a 
blurred something coming toward 
him. Though it took shape before 
tension could again mount he got 
to his feet, all a-quiver. 

Of a sudden, the form blossomed 



85 

into color. It was as if a spotlight 
had been turned on the girl. Her 

garments were not of the island 
pattern. If her skirt was actually 
wound sarong-wise, then she had 
her own trick of arranging it. 
Instead of blouse or short jacket, 
she wore her breasts bound with a 
scarf, leaving her midriff bare. 

Over this foundation she wore a 
long garment that put him in mind 
of the sari of Hindustan, a tunic 
which after enveloping her body, 
left a fold sufficient to conceal all 
but a glimpse of black hair and of 
ear lobes from which hung ornately 
worked golden pendants. 

In one hand she carried a tiny 
basket, much like the one Harmon 
had abandoned in panic. The other, 
peeping from the garment, gathered 
the folds. They were exquisite 
hands, cream colored, with fingertips henna-dyed. She wore neither 
bracelets nor anklets. There was no 
caste mark to brand her smooth 
forehead — no jewelled stud defaced 
her nose. 

Her grave loveliness, at first finding expression in eyes which were 
dark and longisfl, now spread into 
life with her smile. Her glance took 
in the abandoned basket. Understanding at once she said, "You 
don't know where to put it? I'll 
show you." 

"Ahmat told me," Harmon began, gropingly. "He didn't want to 
offer these things to — ah — Mcrah. 
He thought . . ." 

"I'm Agni Deva," she said 
though to explain why her featui 



ASTIC UNIVERSE 



were not Malayan — wliy, without 
seeming in any wise foreign, she 
was in so many small ways unlike 
other island women. Then, "Don't 
worry about the fog. I shall guide 
you." 

He followed her into another of 
the labyrinth*! entrances. Surely 
some conscious and designing one 
had modeled the oncc-phistic lava 
as a baker might garnish a cake. 
The shrine at which Agni Deva 
stopped was not human handiwork 
nor could it have been made by 
nature. He sensed that Agni Deva 
herself was an ambiguity in flesh 
and blood. 

After a genuflection she set her 
basket on the altar and pronounced 
words he could not understand. 
Stepping back she said, "I'll say it 
for you if you've forgotten what 
Ahm.it told you." 

"Will it be just as good?" 

"Oh, of course!" 

Harmon recited, "I bring the 
Red One an offering of good will 
and ask for the sweetness of her 
breath to be good for my rice. I 
ask for good will toward the rice I 
plant in the courtyard of her 
house." 

Agni Deva was pleased. "That 
was just right. But you were angry 
at her awhile ago, and frightened, 
and you cursed her in your heart. 
Sit down while you wait for the 
fog to lift. Sit here. Throw your 
thoughts toward the attar." Her 
voice dimmed a little as she repeated, "Toward it — toward her — 
in front of you — always in front. 



Away from you — out from yourself . . ." 

When, with a start, he realized 
that he was alone and that brilliant 
sunlight reached down just behind 
him, he knew that for a measurable 
time his thought and more than 
any mere thoughts had been "out in 
front." 

Harmon picked his way from the 
crater rim to go clown the slope. 
He looked back but saw no trace of 
Agni Deva nor of the way she had 



Harmon was not surprised by 
the quick recovery of the rice from 
its setback, though alt he did was 
observe and record. He set down 
the readings of instruments which 
measured temperature, humidity, 
air density. He set forth his findings 
on soil analysis, and on all the 
insect pests and plagues. He entered 
everything except his visits to the 
volcano. 

Every so often he met Agni 
Deva. He did not mention her to 
Ahmat. Natives would gossip and 
sooner or later the story would 
work its way to the bungalow staff. 
Lorella had her ways of learning 
things. 

That she quit nagging about the 
postponed cruise was a relief until 
her flattering interest in his work 
became overdone. This hampered 
Harmon. Getting to the crater was 
impossible without being observed. 
He racked his brain for an excuse 
to get away from I.orella long 



THE FIRE AND THE FLESH 



enough to make the climb — but in 
vain. 

The rice continued thriving, yet 
Ahmat looked worried — for there 
were now earth tremors. Gentle 
nudges rattled dishes in the chinacloset, the glassware on the buffet. 
Sulphur fumes became strong. 

Lorella became alarmed. "We'll 
be burned alive or buried without 
warning!" she cried, one morning 
when fumes entirely concealed the 
black bulwarks of the lava beds. 
"And that everlasting hissing!" 

"It's no more dangerous than 
geysers back home." 

"Good Lord! Why did you have 
to pick a volcano!" 

"There isn't any other sort of 
mountain in the archipelago." 

"Well, but most of them are 
extinct." 

"Merah is practically so." 

"Practically so!" Lorella echoed, 
her voice rising. "If we don't leave 
here soon, I'll get out and you can 
have your volcano!" 

In fairness, Harmon didn't blame 
her. 

He said, "Let's wait a few more 
days, darling. These things aren't 
touched off with a fuse. They give 
plenty of warning." 

He told Ahmat to prepare a 
basket. That night, when moonlight 
reached into the bungalow, Harmon 
tiptoed to the verandah, carrying 
his boots. The crater would be safe 
enough. The subterranean forces 
were finding escape at the base of 
the cone, in the lava beds, as they 
had done before. 



He had barely set out when 
Lorella's voice checked him. She 
wore slacks and sneakers. Even by 
moonlight he read the anger in her 
face. "Let me go and see how she 
likes orchids! Oh, don't give me 
that I -don't -know -wbai-you-mean 
look. I was awake when Ahmat set 
the basket on the porch. I've 
noticed how you two always change 
the subject the minute I come 
near." 

"Orchids . . ." Harmon began, 
gropingly. 

"Yes, orchids! I got a peep. Whoever she is, she must be quite a girl. 
My coming to join you must have 
been quite an upset. Is she pre-war 
or someone new?" 

"This is not what you think." 

"Purely platonic!" Lorella 
mocked. "Merely interested in her 
beautiful soul! Is she almost white?" 

"Go back to bed!" he answered. 
"She's neither white nor brown nor 
any other color. Go back where you 
belong." 

She recoiled as though he had 
struck her. In his mind he had done 
just that. Then she renewed the 
attack. "I'm going to see this lady 
of yours." 

"You're going back," he said, 
with a coldness which surprised 
him. "Back to the States. You can 
have your sightseeing tour on the 
way. I'm not going to meet a 
woman. Though I probably will 
soon enough at the rate you're cutting up." 

"Wade, what is this? Don't 
quarrel with me. What is this? 1 



"Come and see," he challenged 
and turned toward the lava beds. 
"But if you're wrong, you're 
through, as far as I'm concerned. 
This is T.inah Merah. You're not in 
the States, where your tiniest whim 
was law!" 

"I'll risk that," she decided and 
went with him. 

But when they came to the edge 
of the lava beds and the swirling 
girdle of low-hanging vapor she 
caught his arm. "You can't lead 
me on any wild-goose chase!" 

He tried to brush her aside. She 
got in front of him. She struck the 
basket from his hand, spilling the 
flowers and cakes. 

"No chewing gum? No beads or 
mirrors?" 

Harmon picked up the offering 
and put it back in the basket. 
Lorclla's belittlcmcnt and contempt 
prodded him to recklessness and 
revolt. 

"I'm taking this to Merah. Not a 
woman hut a volcano. To itop this 
eruption. I've tried for days to get 
rid of you long enough to come 
out here but since you have to 
know you've found out. We have 
to make friends with Merah or get 
out Is that clear?" 

It was not. Her eyes became 
saucer wide. He had not moved, 
though he may have swayed a little 
on his feet. Perhaps the mist-filtered 
moonlight played an eerie trick 
with his expression. Lorclla's mouth 
moved soundlessly and then she 
screamed. Then she ran. 

Harmon drew a breath of pure 



relief and picked his way among 
the traps of the lava field until he 
came to the now well-defined path 
he had cut in the cinder slopes. 

In the morning, hours after his 
return from the silence and peace of 
the crater, Harmon sat in the breakfast alcove. Brilliant sunlight made 
the slopes of the cone gleam and 
shimmer. He thrust aside the papaya 
and limes. And as though there had 
been no clash the previous night, he 
called. 

I.orella stepped lightly from then 
on. She was not in the least interested when, the following day, 
he went to make his next offering. 
This time he had a few words with 
Agni Dcva in the crater, and while 
he did not mention that strange 
woman, her words gave force to 
wh.u he said to Lorelli on his return. 

"Whether or not it makes any 
sense I'm keeping her happy. And 
you should see that rice! It's more 
than made up for the setback." 

Nevertheless he had the feeling 
that Tx>rella was laying it on heavily 
in her effort to convince him that 
she was, convinced. 

IV 

Not until Ahmat handed him a 
blotter some days later did Harmon 
realize his troubles were only beginning. 

"What's this for?" he asked. 

"Tuan, it lay in the compound. 
Doubtless the wind blew it from a 
window. It is in writing, which 1 
do not read." 



This was delivered just a shade 
too suavely. Natives, most of tlicm 
wholly illiterate, did have a respect 
for anything written. Yet Harmon 
was certain Ahmat knew more than 
he would admit— that the man had 
in fact taken it from the writing 
desk in the bungalow or had got 
it from a servant he had set spying 
on Lorclla. 

Harmon held the blotter to a 
mirror. Lorclla had penned a note to 
the American consul in Batavia, 
asking his advice — 

. . . cracking under strain . . , 
cannot persuade him to take time 
out . . , hallucinations , . , not believe . . . him violent, but . , . 
aside from . . . what authorities 
a* 1 consult . . . send him . . . 
Stales . , . guardian appoint . . . 

First tiling he knew, he'd be 
hustled liome under guard. They'd 
blame it all on his wartime hardships and he'd wind up as a guest 
of the Veterans Administration, at 
least for awhile. By the time he got 
himself into the clear his work 
would hive been so long neglected 
he'd have to start all over. 

The tension between him and 
Lorclla became so unbearable that 
he spent more and more time in the 
crater — it became a refuge from 
the artificial amiability of the 
bungalow. 

At times he siw Agni Deva leaving the shrine just as he was approaching. He tried vainly to overtake her but she knew the labyrinth 



far more intimately than he did. 
Once he looked up and saw her on 
the crater lip, dwarfed by distance 
and foreshortening, yet splendid of 
color and shape against the stark 
blue of the sky. She wived before 
she stepped out of his sight to go 
her way. 

When he described her to Ahmat 
the old man declared he had never 
seen any such person. Nevertheless, 
Ahmat's address thereafter became 
respectful in a new way. 

Then, one afternoon as he approached the bungalow, he spotted 
visitors on the verandah — Kirby 
and Voerhaven, the copra plan ten 
he had not seen since Lorella's arrival. She had set out a stone \<\-\ 
of Bols, tumblers and tonic on the 
table. 

Kirby was broad and deepchested, a thick-necked muscular 
man, ruddy and square-faced. Voerhaven, though large, .was lean and 
rangy with a long, angular face and 
a long inquisitive nose. Both were 
hearty fellows and gave Harmon no 
chance to apologize for his apparent 
unsociability in not having joined 
them from time to time for rijsljfet 
or a few rounds of gin. After 
several Holland-sized drinks they 
insisted on having a look at the 
crop. 

"It's true," Voerhaven rumbled. 
"It's better than they said." 

Kirby wagged his head, saying, 
"Takes an American, every time. 
Dirk!" 

Harmon protested, "That kind 
of talk never made Americ 



90 



FANTASTIC UNIVERSE 



popular anywhere else in the world 
except in the States." 

"Oh, all right! Dirk and I have 
a chap down at his kampong who's 
interested. Traveling for a foundation. They seem to have foundations 
for everything but copra. This one's 
for the better understanding of 
someone by someone else and rice 
seems to enter." 

"Hmmm . . . Wants to buy in? 
1 have all the backing I need — 
trust fund from an uncle's estate. 
And when the strain's really 
established half the seed goes to the 
Indonesian government. The other 
half is mine to exploit." 

Voerhaven shrugged and made a 
gesture to acknowledge defeat. 
"Oh, very well, Wade! We've tried 
to fix up a little surprise for you. 
The man's name is Forest Millington. You've been favorably considered for an award by the Foundation for Fostering Far Eastern 
Amity." 

"A surprise but you're such a 
damn skeptic — " said Kirby. 

"Way you keep yourself buried," 
Voerhaven carried on, "we might 
have known — " 

When they got back to the 
house, Lorella, all aglow, added her 
enthusiasm. "Oh, I'm so thrilled! 
Do hurry and take your shower." 

"Let's have another noggin," said 
kirby. 

I.orella splashed the oily gin into 
a tumbler with one hand, the tonic 
with the other. Harmon matched 
the glass, raised it, and said, "How!" 
He waggled his free hand and with 



fingers wrapped about the tumbler 
hustled for the bedroom with its 
adjoining shower. 

Intentionally he knocked a chair 
over, made a point of cursing 
luridly. He took another wary taste 
of the drink. The glass contained 
too much gin, not enough tonic. 

Harmon remained dressed while 
dipping into the big earthenware 
jar and splashing water on the floor 
of the stall. Next he turned on the 
shower, which was fed from a small 
tank on the roof. Under cover of 
the sound he tiptoed to the rear and 
skirted the building. 

There were no voices to overhear. 
That was the payoff. 

He retraced his course. He reentered from the rear in time to see 
Voerhaven, Kirby and Lorella huddled at the bedroom door, heads 
cocked close to the panel. 

Kirby had some luggage straps. 
Voerhaven had a length of clothesline. They were waiting for him to 
pass out. 

Then they became aware of him. 
On both sides there was an unmasking. 

"You go with us," Kirby said 
commandingly. 

Lorella's face was hard and tense. 
The Dutchman needed a moment 
to nerve himself to tackle a man 
who was sober and alert. Harmon 
recoiled, not so much from the 
physical threat as from the actual 
sight of what he had for some 
moments suspected. 

Lorella had taken her problem to 
the only other white men on the 



THE FtRfi AND THE FLESH 



island — evidently these two former 
good friends had been convinced by 
her story. The yarn about the 
"foundation" must have been to 
get Harmon as far as the waterfront. There, plied with gin, he 
was to have been dumped into a 
prahu and taken to Batavia. 

Straps and cords to tie a madman — that wis what prodded Harmoa to wildness exceeding their expectations. His momentary recoil 
had thrown them off guard. As 
they gathered themselves to close 
in, Harmon charged. He upset 
Kirby, knocking him into Lorella. 
Flung against the door she tumbled 
over the threshold. Voerhaven tried 
to tackle him and missed. 

Harmon yelled, "You're crazicr'n 
you think 7 am!" 

He smashed the tall man with a 
driving wallop, knocking him athwart Kirby. 

"Get him!" Lorella screamed. 
"He'll go for the car!" 

Harmon, clear of the three, 
raced for the front, not to take the 
jeep but to get his shotgun from 
the rack in the living room. It was 
not there. Lorella must have seen to 
that. 

He had missed his chance to kick 
and slug the two men helpless. 
They were on their feet and Lorella 
was at their heels. 

"Don't let him get away!" she 
screamed. "He'll kill us all!" 

V 

There was nowhere to go with a 
car except to the waterfront vil


lage. From there the only refuge 
was an open boat to Java. By then 
Harmon would be established as a 
madman who had heaien up his 
guests and his wife. Having taken 
a stand the three could not afford 
to retreat. 

All Harmon wanted was to get 
away. He wanted escape from white 
faces and English speech. He wanted 
neither sight nor sound of his own 
kind. He had but one refuge — 
Mcrah, the Red One. 

He had wrenched his ankle in the 
scuffle. His old wound betrayed 
him. Yet for a moment desperation 
made him gain on his pursuers. 

"Wade, do come hack!'* Lorella 
cried. 

Wearing slacks and flat heels she 
kept up with the men. She knew 
the ground as they did not. 

Once in the lava beds Harmon 
hoped to trick them into a pocket. 
But they stayed too close on his 
heels. Desperate, winded, his leg 
threatening to let him down, Harmon gambled on his final resource. 
He bolted for the foot of the cone. 
His pursuers* advantage was set off 
to a degree by Harmon's experience 
as they zigzagged up the slope. 
Drawn by the contest Lorella kept 
up. 

They shouted. Though they were 
too winded to shape their words 
Harmon guessed their meaning. 
They were trying to dissuade him 
from what they considered the 
futility of his going ever upward to 
the apex, the end of flight. Or perhaps they feared he would plunge 



FANTASTIC UNIVERSE 



headlong into the depths of the 
crater. 

Mists gathered about the rim. He 
had only a little way to go. Behind 
him he heard the rustle and rattle 
of cinders dislodged by the three on 
his heels. 

"Come back!" Kirby shouted. 

Voerhaven burst out with a 
gasping, "we won't hurt you!" 

Fatigue had turned Harmon's 
legs to wood. He stumbled, he 
rolled, he clawed the slope. He 
checked himself. During his tumble, 
he saw that the three had halted. 
Their faces were distorted from 
breathlessncss and from strain. And 
there was fear. This last puzzled 
Harmon. But he surprised them and 
himself by regaining his feet. 

"I'm staying up here! I won't be 
locked up. Get out or you'll wish 
you had!" His wrath checked them. 

Refreshed he fairly bounded up 
the grade. There, on the lava rim, 
stood Agni Dcva, her arms extended 
in welcome. Her flame-colored sari 
wavered, rippled and seemed to 
transmit light. And her body was 
more than half translucent. 

Looking back he saw through 
many veils of mist that his pursuers 
stood open mouthed, their faces still 
shaped by the cries which they 
could not repeat. Kirby took 
Lorella by one arm, Voerhaven by 
the other. They half-dragged, halfcarried her. 

Agni Dcva nudged Harmon. 
"When they've taken care of her 
they'll stay away." She smiled cryptically. "The elevation is bad for 



people who aren't accustomed to 
it," she said as he went with her 

into the crater's bowl. 

"They looked scared," Harmon 
observed thoughtfully. "As though 
they'd seen a ghost." 

Agni Deva's soft little laugh had 
an indulgent, almost maternal note. 
"That would be hard to explain. 
But once you have seen enough of 
my home, you will realise that 
nothing worth knowing can be put 
into words anyway." 

"Your home, here?" 

"Oh, I didn't ever tell you, did 
I?" 

Presently, he realised she did live 
in the crater. He followed Agni 
Deva into a tunnel which had walls 
glass-smooth and perfectly circular 
except for the flattening of the 
bottom. There were cross- passages 
and crypts, most of them softly 
lighted by rays which reached down 
through rifts and the tubular opening. In one passageway she picked 
up a brazen pot which she filled 
from a natural basin in which water 
accumulated. 

This she balanced on her head 
and went on until she showed him 
the blue flames issuing from crevices 
in a hearth. Very much in the way 
of a housewife rightly proud of her 
home she said, "Alv. ays fire. It 
comes from below, so I never have 
to gather wood. The four elements 
are always right at hand. Fire, 
water, earth and air. Oh yes, earth, 
of course — I'll show you my garden 
later. 

"You've done so well with earth. 



All your life you*ve loved earth; so 
the rice followed your coaxing. 
Earth was your way to wisdom. 
But you can learn the way of lire 
also. It's so much faster for those 
who can take that way." 

Harmon didn't even try to keep 
up with Ucr cozy patter as he 
looked about at the carved teak 
chest, the mats, the scarves and 
sarongs. There were wall niches 
where sii vcr betel n u t boxes and 
ear-pendants and cosmetic jars 
mingled in comfortable confusion. 
A low archway opened into an 
adjoining crypt. 

Seeing his glance wander, Agni 
Deva ceased speaking of the way 
of fire and said, "My friends often 
bring me presents. But they'll not 
disturb you- Do sit down— you're 
awfully tired." 

Harmon sat on the teak chest. 
Agni Deva spread a mat at his feet 
and seated herself crosslegged in the 
"lotus posture" so that the hennastained soles of her tiny feet were 
upturned. The hierophantic posture 
reminded him of the figures sculptured at Borobudor and Ankor Vat. 

But when she flung aside the head 
covering, exposing her sleek black 
hair, and leaned back to pillow her 
head against his knee, he could 
hardly associate her with sculptured 
images. He got off the chest and 
seated himself beside her. 

"This seems more a pagoda than 
a home. What are you, the priestess 
of Mcrah?" 

"You mean the temple slave?" 
She reflected for a moment. "Words 



can't express anything that's really 
important. The only things you can 
itnow are those you experience 
directly. The Gods don't talk. If 
you really want to know what I am 
the knowledge is here and waiting. 

"After all, the way of earth is 
familiar to you, so why can't the 
way of fire be your next step? You 
needn't pass through air and water. 
The truth is, you probably 
couldn't." 

Harmon smiled at her baffling 
whimsies, smiled to conceal his perplexity and relish the touch of her 
body against him. This strange 
woman was warm and solid and 
definite witliout any suggestion of 
vagueness. 

"Agni Deva," he said, speaking 
the words with the slowness of 
entire relish. "Deva . . . Deva . . 

"My parents named me to honor 
the fire spirits," she explained. "We 
name children after gods and devai 
the way your people name them 
after saints. If you knew the old, 
old language that was brought over 
from Hindustan, you'd understand. 
But you needn't bother with 
language. There arc better ways — | 

"By becoming one with that 
which is to be known," Harmon said 
and took her in his arms ami bent 
down to her upturned mouth. 

To make the most of the embrace 
she uncoiled herself from the lotus 
posture. And Harmon knew that 
she had been well named for 
meant fire . . . 

Since dense mist obscured the 
crater and blotted out the sun Har


mon wondered at the permanent 
twilight of Agni Deva's home. His 
watch had stopped for he knew not 
Jiow long — though time did not 
concern him any too much. 

He was engrossed with a thought 
which ho finally put into words. 
"Ahmat and some of the others 
spoke of a deva of the volcano but 
never a* though they'd seen her," 
he said. "Well now I have and 
you're she. To every one of the 
senses, you're a flesh-and-blood 
woman — still, all that must be 
illusion and you're not only the 
way of fire but you are fire. Not in 
the form we know it on the outside, something which is set or 
built or made or lighted, but firethat-always-was." 

She nodded, smiled contentedly. 
"And always will be, Wade," she 
laid. "Elemental fire — all of me 
you've seen and heard and touched 
and smcllcd and tasted is maya, the 
unreal. The only reality of me is 
what you have not yet known and 
cannot know through any of your 
senses." 

"But I just said I knew and you 
agreed," he objected. 

"Oh, that was only a necessary 
handy way of speaking. What you 
meant was that you had begun to 
have a knowledge that there was 
actually something to be known. 
Don't you see the difference?" 

With a chuckle he answered, 
"Sure T dot It's the sort of jargon 
my philosophy professor used to 
spout by the hour — except that you 
give sense to it and he didn't." 



"Of course he didn't — he couldn't. 
He was talking about something far 
too far from him. You, who 
listened, knew he didn't know and 
so you were smarter.** 

"If he could only hear this!" 
Harmon exclaimed delightedly. "It's 
funny, though, but I begin to see 
the sense of what he was trying to 
say when he spoke of the essence of 
the thing-in-itsclf , the reality apart 
from the weight or size or bulk or 
any quality at all. All right, you're 
the essence of fire, and just for 
convenience or necessity or because 
you want it that way you're tricked 
out as a woman. In which you 
couldn't have made a neater choicel 

"But if I, the so-called T that 
my friends were chasing tip the 
cone to catch and lock up, am 
maya, what is the actual me, where 
is It?** 

She looked at him a long time, 
steadily but with mysteriously 
changing eyes and a smile that was 
entirely inward. She closed her eyes 
as though to blot out illusion and 
when she opened them she said, 
"Let that answer itself when the 
times comes. Now cease trying to 
get ahead of yourself. I'm going to 
make a rijstafcl." 

The dish which Agni Deva prepared exceeded the fieriness that 
Harmon had so extravagantly described. It was an initiation. 

"This is the way of 6re!" 

She laughed at his grimace, said 
he'd soon get used to it and added, 
very soberly, "Wade, one day you 



THE P1RE AND THE PUBS', 



9S 



in iv learn that 6re is not hot. If 
ever the test comes accept it — 
don't be afraid." 

"Accept it? Suppose I have no 
choice?" 

"All the more, do not be afraid. 
It is not as you think." 

So he ate a slice of fresh mango 
to extinguish the flame. Then he 
laid, "Kiss me and see if a bite of 
mango will be cooling." 

***** 

But at last there came into those 
timeless hours the recollection of 
the rice crop. Harvest time was 
near. Whenever Harmon spoke of it 
to Agni Dcva she assured liim he 
had nothing at all to worry about. 

Eventually, however, he declared, 
"I should gc back. They must by 
now have cooled down enough to 
get rid of their notion of locking 
me up. If they haven't I'll know 
where to go and what to do. Probably I'll surprise them when [ show 
up just as though nothing had 
happened." 

She smiled cryptically. "You 
will. Oh, you surely will." 

"If there's any trouble I'll be 
back and in a hurry." 

"Must you go?" 

"It's my work. All this has been 
beautiful. I've never before known 
beauty. What I took for beauty 
was always muya. Lorclla's face — 
the unmasking — it's not on her 
account I'm going back. You know 
that." 

"That much I can count on! But 
the rice is thriving. I've made it 
thrive. After all, f am Mrrab. You 



know this but you're impatient, 

restless." 

"Because I'm human." With one 
hand lie gripped his other, kneading 
and twisting it. "All this is maya. 
But whatever the real /, it has to 
do and act. Sitting here and being 
is not enough. You're different 
Your doing is only a sideline. Maybe 
if I knew more about being I'd see 
less importance in doing.** 

Site drew a deep breath. Her 
smile became a glowing loveliness. 
"Go then and don't think of me as 
neglected or deserted. Co, do your 
work and come back when it's done. 
Maybe then you'll be ready to walk 
the way of fire, to become fire 
with me, like me." 

"We'll be the volcano, you and 
I?" he said in affectionate whimsy. 
He kissed her. 



VI 

Taking no chances of another 
encounter with Lorclla's allies, one 
or both of whom might still be at 
the house, Harmon made a wide 
circuit and headed for the native 
kampong, to see Ahmat. 

Instead of greeting him the men 
and women who had worked in the 
fields regarded him with consternation. They looked as though they 
wanted to run but could not. The 
laughter of women and the speech 
of the groups of men who sat 
gossipping stopped at the sight of 
him. The silence that followed 
made Harmon feel life had suddenly left the Malays, that the 



06 FANTASTIC UNIVERSE 



houses of thatch and rattan were 
homes of the dead. 

He saw Ahmat and called him by 
name. "Tell these people I am not 
crazv. You know why those two 
fellows tried to take me away." 

"They told us yon were dead — 
fallen into the fires of Merah. You 
were on the rim and fire came up to 
pull you down. We believed but 
plainly it is not true." He addressed 
the others. "Merah let him come 
back. Merah docs what pleases her. 
Do you believe what is before you, 
or believe what they told us?" 

Harmon asked, "Ahmat, what's 
been happening?" 

"Come, sit with us, we aren't 
afraid." 

Tl.irmon accepted the invitation. 
Ahmat's face was troubled but 
from natural reasons. The others 
had a similar expression. Disturbed, 
they exchanged glances. It was as 
though his being alive had raised 
a new problem. 

"What's wrong?" 

"Your wife, the lady who calls 
herself your widow, she went last 
week to Batavia with Kirby to be 
married. We expect them back in 
a few days." 

"See here! I can understand her 
marrying Kirby or Voci haven or 
anyone else, and I'm all in favor of 
it. But what do you mean, last 
weckr> 

"You have been gone many 
weeks, tuan." 
"What?" 

"Be pleased to come with me and 
sec the new rice crop." When Har


mon had followed, with most of 
the kam[>ong at his heels, Ahmat 
gestured at the expanse of sprouting 
blades. "You had too much on your 
mind to notice this when you 
came," the old man said. "But surely 
you remember that when you went 
a crop awaited harvest. Could it 
become young again or is this a new 
one?" 

The field spoke for itself. Dazed, 
Harmon asked, "Tell me more of 
what they said? What happened to 
me that day?" 

"You ran. They chased. They 
said fire came to pull you into the 
crater. When they looked back 
there was no more fire — only 
steam. When they tried to look heat 
drove them and fumes choked them 
before they could get to the rim. 
They knew that nothing could live 
through that fire." 

Harmon said, "AH I saw was 
mist and a young woman reaching 
to give me a hand if I stumbled. 
Her name is Agni Deva. She lives 
up there. When it seemed time to 
return to my work I left. How is 
it at my bungalow?" 

"There is no enemy. There is only 
a young woman there, Kirby *s 
sister. She came by air when they 
told her of his plans to marry. 
What you do or what you do not 
do, that is for you to decide. Haste 
is evil. Talk to her and think and 
when you know what is to be done, 
then we will do it with you and 
for you. And that is on our head 
and on our eyes!" 

And so, presently, Harmon met 



THE Finn AND THE FLESH 



97 



lleen Kirby, who was not in the 
ist disconcerted at the sight of 
n, since they had never until that 
oment met. 

Eileen was just short of being 
ump and like so many solidly 
lilt women she had unusually 
all feet and dainty ankles and 
arried herself straight Up. He had 
arcely seen her move more than a 
r steps when he realized that this 
was one of the only two or three 
nen he had ever seen who could 
ar high heels without seeming to 
itilt along, ever on the verge of 
ailing on her chin. 

Her tawny golden hair waved 
laturally. The curl was particularly 
noticeable in the strands on either 
side of the part, at the center. Her 
cheekbones were sufficiently prominent to give a piquant touch, 
which kept her features from being 
too regular, though her nose added 
zest, being neither tiptilted nor yet 
quite straight. The nostrils had an 
eager ffare and the friendly eyes, 
dark and warm, made him welcome 
at once. Harmon knew that she 
would be easy to talk to and she 
was. 

She listened to his story without 
revealing any doubts as to his sanity. She finally said, "You've described Lorella and my brother 
Dave, and you've told me where 
to find your picture anj other 
tilings in the house. Oh, don't try 
to explain or prove anything! 

"However it happened, whatever 
did happen, you're Wade Harmon. 
Oh, it's awful — what an embar


rassing fix I i and Dave are in. 
They did believe you dead." 

Harmon shrugged. While her 
sympathy did her credit he saw no 
good cause for being concerned. 

"Suppose we take it easy till they 
get back from their honeymoon," 
he said. "There must be some way 
out of all this without hurting 

anyone." 

"You're not at all resentful?" 

"The more I think about it the 
less 1 can hold it against her or 
them for thinking I was balmy. 
She couldn't really think otherwise. 
And we couldn't have got along 
again afterward. We'd not been 
doing any too well before it happened. It's simply a matter of getting the property and the business 
unscrambled. What possessed you 
to take over the place by yourself?" 

"I could hardly tag along on 
their honeymoon, could I?" 

"No, I suppose not. So you just 
stayed here to carry on with your 
sketching and painting?" he asked. 

**After all, that's what I came 
over for. I'd wanted to for a long 
time but Dave discouraged me. The 
political mess. But that's quieted 
down now," 

The more Eileen told him the 
more complex 1 larmon's problem 
became. He sat up with her until 
some hours past midnight, testing 
one suggestion after another. But 
there was no way in which he 
could straighten out such material 
essentials as the trust fund without 
making Lorella's unintentional big' 
amy conspicuously public. 



98 



FA N T AS TIC UNIVERSE 



The following day he and Eileen 
resumed the discussion. She devoted herself to the human side of 
the problem as though it involved 
far more than merely her brother, 
who certainly knew his way around 
and had little need for her solicitous pondering. She ended by going 
with Harmon to look at the new 
nop, then to the granaries where 
the first crop of the improved strain 
was stored. 

"All this," he said, as they regarded the warehouses of woven 
rattan, "is left after sowing every 
bit of cleared ground on the shelf, 
It's a growing business your brother 
married into." 

He told her how his success 
would help the ever-increasing population of Java to feed itself without imports from other countries 
equally short of grain. Dry rice had 
always grown after a fashion but 
not in a way to be relied upon. The 
crop which fed the Indies required 
terraced and dyked fields, which had 
to be flooded. Thus land above the 
irrigation level could not be cultivated, since pumping sufficient 
water was out of the question. 
Wi'h dry rice, it would be otherwise. 

it never occurred to Harmon 
that all this might be an otd story 
to Eileen — and each day, he showed 
her how the new growth was developing, true to type. 

"It can probably be improved — 
anything can. But this is success, 
no doubt about it." He glanced up 
at the volcano, during a long mo


ment crowded with memories. "My 
work is done. There's no reason 
why I should be a nuisance or 
obstacle." 

Eileen's eyes became wide and 
r.rouhWf. She did not speak until 
they were back on the verandah, 
"Wade, you sounded so solemn and 
out-of -this- world back there. Not 
depressed but — well, you've got me 
feeling low. What was on your 
mind?" 

"Oh? Rack there?" 

Again Agni Deva loomed up in 
his mind. The recollection of her 
loveliness was so keen as to be painful. Yet he could not go back. 
Not even a deva could be a twentyfour-hour-a-day interest for one 
who, as she herself had so often 
phrased it, was "bound to the 
wheel" of action and doing. Agni 
Deva had understood. She had been 
too wise to keep him imprisoned. 
Each succeeding day Harmon spent 
with Eileen convinced him of Agni 
Deva's wisdom. 

"What was it, Wade?" she persisted. 

Regarding her intently he saw 
not the serene omniscience of the 
timeless but the troubled spirit of 
a warm and human woman, one 
who like himself was bound to the 
wheel. 

"I was thinking," Harmon said, 
"how easy it would be to end this 
muddle. Just make it so." 

"Oh, no!" 

The cry was low-voiced but stabbing, shocking in its intensity. 
"Darling!" he exclaimed. "I 



THE FIRE AND THE FLESH 



didn't mean it thai way. Good 
>rJ, I meant just that there are 
ther things to do, other work to 
*. other experiments to carry on. 
hat's what I meant when I 
thought of making it so. The notion that I was finished suggested 
going somewhere else to carry on, 
where I'd bother no one." 

Reaction unstrung her. With a 
cry of relief she caught him in 
both arms. She kissed him time and 
again — her tears trickled down his 
checks. But though all this was 
purely human sympathy the fact 
remained that Eileen was a woman 
and wholly desirable. Her distress 
on his behalf, her solicitude, went 
beyond the friendliness they had set 
out to express. 

Before the two had relaxed from 
the first tension of contact Harmon 
was saying, "We can leave together. 
You're so very much like me. Your 
work brought you out here. Wherever we go you can carry on. We 
shan't hamper each other — for all 
I know we can be mutually helpful." 

She drew back a little and looked 
up at him with gleaming eyes. 
"Wade, do you mean that? We've 
been thrown together so closely 
from the moment we met. . . . Are 
you sure this isn't just an impulse?" 

"If you're wondering whether it's 
not a case of your being too exciting an armful of woman for me 
to stay cool and aloof around you, 
you're right. But it's more than 
that. What counts is that you had 
a thought for mc and weren't do


ing any figuring for yourself. 
You've been groping and grappling 
with this problem from the stare, 
not for your brother's sake but for 
mine. Now do you see what I 
mean ? ** 

"I do and I love it. And some 
day you might tell me what really 
happened up there in the crater. 
I won't think you're crazy." Eileen 
laughed softly. "Maybe that's the 
artist in me. And you with your 
plant biology — you're an artist in 
a more important way." 

Harmon glanced at the volcano. 
He knew now that Agni Deva was 
surely a goddess. The contrast between her and a human woman 
gave him the knowledge directly. 

"Someday I may find the words 
to tell you. Right now there's so 
much I can't understand. The only 
certainty is that Merah did stop 
erupting when I took an offering 
to the crater." 

"They admitted that themselves." 

Harmon chuckled. "But since 
they could not understand or explain why, they insisted the fact 
proved I was crazy. Do you know, 
a lot of scientists are just that 
way?" He stretched in a yawn of 
contentment, slumped comfortably, 
drew Eileen closer. 

"I've half a notion not to wait 
for Dave and Lorclla to come back 
from that king-sized honeymoon of 
theirs. Though I guess we should 
wait so they won't be worried about 
you or by yarns the natives tell 



106 



FANTASTIC UNIVERSE 



about my ghost coming down from 
the mountain." 

"I'd like to leave now," she murmured. "I have a feeling that we 
should while we can. But — well, 
you're right." 

"What are you afraid of, fussbudget? Brother raise cain at the 
thought of your taking charge of 
a lunatic?" 

"Oh, I don*t know. It's just — 
but we'll wait." 

Several days later there was an 
earthquake. Fumes issued from the 
crevices at the foot of the cone. 
Ahm.it came to say, "Tuan, you are 
our father and our grandfather. 
You have increased our rice. But 
Merah is jealous. She is displeased 
because of the yellow-haired lady. 
Send her away or it will not be 
well with any of us." 

"Is danger close at hand or is 
this a first warning?" 

"That we do not know. But all 
the sccd-ricc may be destroyed if 
Merah sends lava over the kampong." 

"Hut how can I send this woman away? Where would she go? 
Have you ever sent your guest away 
or anyone who had your protection?" 

"I have never been put lo that 
test," Ahmat admitted. "But with 
your permission we will pack up 
our goods, carry seed-rice on our 
heads and save what wc can. If 
Merah is angry . . ." 

"What makes you think it's on 
her account?" 

"Because Merah saved you from 



your enemies, so now you belong 
to her. You cannot belong to this 
strange woman." 

"Do what seems good, Ahmat," 
was all that Harmon could answer. 
There was even less that he could 
say to Eileen when, that ntght, they 
noted the dull glow which indicated lava was flowing into the 
debris of the previous upsurge. 

"Maybe we'd better not wait for 
Dave and Lord la," she finally suggested. "If this keeps up I'd better 
start packing." 

"We'd better," he amended and, 
thinking back to Ahmat's words, 
he wondered if it would be as simple as all that. 

VII 

The following afternoon, Dave 
and Lorclla arrived with Voerhaven 
in his jeep. Harmon found and 
pocketed his pistol. "Go and break 
the news," he told Eileen. "Tell 
them I'll not be chased around 
again. Til nor put up with any 
attempts at manhandling. I don't 
want trouble but they'll get it if 
they force my hand." 

"Darling, I don't want trouble 
either. But I'm all for you, and with 
you. I don't care who's hurt, not 
if it has to be." 

That morning the subterranean 
muttering had subsided. The earthtremors had ceased. Harmon, 
watching from a window, noted 
that the hiss of escaping vapors was 
not as loud. Then he dismissed 
Ahmat's fears, for the meeting of 
Eileen with the three who had come 



THE P1RF AND THE FLESH 



101 



into the compound held all his attention. 

He heard their voices crack with 
shock and incredulity. He saw them 
recoil and regain their ground. They 
made false starts for the bungalow, 
then checked themselves. The three 
closed in on Eileen as though to 
force her to deny the whole staty 
U i hoax. It was as if they counted 
her mad and felt that she could 
become sane again by admitting she 
was crazy. 

Harmon strolled into view. "Let 
her alone," he said easily. "I sent 
her to break the news but since you 
can't take it that way, have a look. 
Who am I? You know now. Come 
on in — and congratulations. Sure I 
mean it — no double talk." 

Once in the house he said, "Sit 
down — Eileen, tell them about us. 
They'll believe "it sooner, coming 
from you. The servants arc our and 
they'll stay away until this is settled. They want no part of it. 
Tell them while I round up a 
drink." 

When he returned Eileen had 
done with reciting what she and 
Harmon proposed. 

"In the first place, Dave," she 
summed up, "it's none of your business what 1 do or who wiih. In the 
second place, even if Wade and I 
were planning, as you put it, bigamy, it's no worse than what you 
two have already done. 

"It will simply put us all on a 
par, so you'll never have any cause 
to doubt our good faith. You'll 
know wc don't mean to embarrass 



you, much less blackmail you. 

"And finally, Wade and I will 
clear this up legally. In Paris or 
Manila, I don't know where, but 

some where." 

"Drink to it,*' Harmon proposed 

cheerily. 

Vocrluvcn readied for a glass. 
Kirby snatched Lorella's wrist when 
she would have followed suit. 

"Don't be silly!" Harmon said. 
"We'll take the two left after 
you've had your choice. It all came 
from the same bottle." 

Kirby gulped and grim. iced. 
"This has shaken us." 

"What do you suppose," Harmon said, "your doings, weeks ago, 
did to me? But I told you I'm not 
griped and I mean it. No unkindness meant, Lorella, hut all I can 
say is I'm just lucky. You and I 
could never have picked up where 
wc left off, not even if we'd wanted 
to. Not after that straitjacket 
proposition. 

"Eileen's right. We'll disappear, 
she and I, take new names if it'll 
make you feci better. You can 
stake us to my half of the property 
and income and rights and the like 
she's inherited from me. I'm making myself so much a party to fraud 
and all the other legal violation! 
that I'd not dare do other than shoot 
square. Wake up, Dave! Can't you 
see I'm not resentful, that you've 
given me a big break?" 

Dave Kirby got up. He thrust 
out his hand. "We'll meet you all 
the way. It took us awhile to believe you'd trust us or leave your 



FANTASTIC ImrVERSB 



work in our hands. Now that there's 
so little to do but routine." 

Voerhaven said, "Harmon, you 
and Eileen come to my house. Mr. 
and Mrs. Kirby — ,ih — they're bound 
to be embarrassed otherwise. Let 
me help you with your luggage." 

"Come on, Lorella," Eileen said, 
"help me finish packing. I'd already 
started. Dave, round up the servants. Now that all's under control 
they'll come back. We might as 
well have dinner together before 
Wade and I move on to our next 
station." 

Excising had scarcely reached the 
halfway stage when Dave Kirby 
came back from the kampott^. "The 
natives," he said, "are hauling out, 
bag and baggage. And with baskets 
of seed-rice. The volcano has them 
worried silly. And we'd better follow their example. They've got an 
instinct for such things." 

His voice had a note in it which 
brought the entire group together 
in the living room. They followed 
him to the verandah. There, thanks 
to the several bays of copper screening, they got a true picture of how 
much the situation hid changed 
during the short time since the arrival of Voerhaven and the honeymoon ers. 

The fumes were more dense and 
acrid than any Wade Harmon had 
ever before observed. The wind 
was hot and charged with fine particles of pumice. The hissing had 
become ominous — the underground 
muttering and mumbling had increased in volume. 



There came a tremor that made 
the ground of the garden surge and 
billow. The bungalow creaked and 
groaned and rattled for what seemed 
an endless period. A table skated 
on its casters, smashing against the 
buffet. When rhe shock tapered 
off there persisted an unbroken 
vibration as though, far beneath 
the plantation shelf, jolt after jolc 
kept the foundations of the island 
in motion. 

Smoke rose from the jungle beyond the rice-fields. The luxuriant 
growth had caught fire from the 
lava-flow. Clouds of steam rose 
from the bed of a small stream. 
Deer came racing into the open. 

"Getting bad," Harmon said. 
"The less dallying, the better." 

"Lava over that way," Voerhaven pointed out. "Judging from 
the steam there must be a big surge 
from a fresh crack." 

"If the road's blocked," Kirby 
said, "we're in a pretty mess." 

After loading their goods in the 
jeep Voerhaven drove, with the 
others plodding after the vehicle. 
They had not gone far when he 
pulled up. The road was blocked 
by lava. In the shadow of the trees 
it had a dull red glow. The second 
wave, flowing over the first, was 
not cooling as rapidly. It glowed 
a much brighter red. 

"She's slopping over," Voerhaven 
said. "We'll get out with nothing 
except what we can carry. I'M run 
the jeep up on high ground, where 
it'll have a better chanoe of not 
being swamped." 



THE FIRE AND THE FLESH 



Kirby'i voice cracked a little 
when he said, "Lucky if we get out 
with our hides." 

Harmon turned on him angrily. 
"Shut up! Pull yourself together. 
I'll go up to high ground, where I 
can sec far enough to pick a way 
and keep us from wasting any more 
time barging into dead ends." 

His confidence quieted incipient 
panic. Eileen took his hand. 

"Come on, Wade," she said, "let's 
go. You know every inch of 
ground around here." 

"No, darling — you stay here. It's 
going to be pretty rough where 
I'm heading." He grinned. "Be 
nice if you twisted an ankle and I 
had to carry you.** 

He could not tell Eileen that he 
was now certain Agni was bent on 
destroying her — that she, of all the 
party, should come no nearer the 
cone than absolutely necessary. On 
the heels of this dreadful knowledge 
came that which told him why these 
people hemmed him in. They'knew 
by instinct that he had reason for 
not fearing as they feared. He was 
not surprised when they refused 10 
wait for him to reconnoitcr. 

"Don't try to get shed of us," 
Kirby cried and Vberhaven said, 
"We're going to be right on hand 
so we can go through the minute 
you pick a clear way." 

Though the sun was now low it 
did not even make a red blob. The 
cui'uin of steam and dust was 
quite too dense and then WW ** 
ever- thickening pal! of smoke from 



trees that burned as lava girdled 

them. 

"One puff of hot gas and you're 
knocked out for keeps," be warned 
them. "For one to risk it is enough." 

Nevertheless they persisted in following him. When he came to the 
edge of the old lava flow he repeated his warning. I.orclla cried 
hysterically, "Don't let him get 
away! He wouldn't be here now if 
he didn't have some trick with that 
volcano. He must have a power!" 

Her panic infected the men. They 
seized him by the arms before he 
could resist. During the futile attempt to shake them off the pistol 
in Harmon's pocket jammed against 
Kirby, who cried. "Don't you try 
to use that gun!" and dipped in, 
taking it. "Twist his wrist!" 

"Oh, take it, you damned fool!" 
Harmon said quietly and relaxed. 
"I don't mind. You'd not use it 

on me regardless." 

They released him. Kirby let the 
weapon slide hack into Harmon's 
pocket. He looked shamefaced and 
embarrassed. 

"Listen, you!" Harmon said. 
"The both of you. And you, Lorella. Why would I run out on you?" 

"Because — because of what we 
did." 

"Would I leave Eileen here?" He 
stepped to the girl's side. She had 
stood apart, the calmest by far of 
the four who had come with Harmon. "There is a way out, my 
dear," he said to her. "But I have 
to pick it myself. I have to get 
close to the flow before I can climb 



FANTASTIC UNIVERSE 



104 

up to where I can see the way and 
give you all the direction. 

"It'll be tough going. I can't 
have you all milling around. It may 
be touch-and-go. I've been over the 
ground so often I know every inch 
of it — but you, any or all of you, 
might kill yourselves in one flash 
of panic." 

"I understand," Eileen said 
quietly. 

She thought she understood, 
though he knew she actually was 
far indeed from understanding. And 
to him the knowledge was very 
good. 

"Try to keep those fools off my 
heels!" he said. 

He went to a vantage point much 
nearer than the one to which he 
had told them he must go. Actually 
that spot, just within sight of the 
dunes, was high enough for his 
purpose, high enough for him to 
see that there was but one way out. 
Yet that one way was something he 
could not possibly explain to them. 

On the face of it there seemed 
to them no good reason why they 
could not all climb up the cone 
until they were far above the vents 
at the base, from which the fumes 
and lava came, and then circle until 
they could descend to that portion 
of the shelf which, as far as he could 
tell, was not lava-floaded. 

As far as he could tell — by his 
five senses, that was, or by anyone 
else's — yet he was sure that the logical route was no longer open. Even 
if it were a single upsurge could 
and surely would block it. The 



ever-widening reach of the viscous 
red flow he did see told him of all 
the unseen possibilities. 

Only by the grace of Agtii Deva 
could any of his companions escape. 
The lady of fire was stalking them. 
She had weapons other than mere 
lava. A blast of gas, hot as the 
earth's very heart, could accomplish 
her will. Any attempt to outwit 
her would fail from the very start. 
But she would meet fair dealing 
with a fair answer, 

VIII 

Harmon retraced his steps. "Wait 
right here," he said easily. *T have 
a hunch but before I play it I have 
to go pretty high up on the cone 
to make sure I'm not leading you 
into a pocket." 

"You think we're crazy?" Kirby 
shouted. "Wasting all that time 
while you come back to tell us?" 

"I'll wave — I'll beckon you up." 

"Well, why wait? We're taking 
no chances." 

Lorella cried, "You're trying to 
get even with us! You're going to 
talk to Merah and have us all killed. 
You do have a power! You quieted 
her before — why don't you do it 
again? You're working against us. 
We're staying so close to you that 
whatever happens to us will happen to you." 

She caught him with both hands, 
clawing him by the shirt, digging 
her fingers into his shoulders. She 
went on, "Take Eileen with us, grab 
her! He won't let her get hurt." 

Tainted by Lorella's frenzy, Kir


THE FIRE AND THE FLESH 



by and Voerhaven snatched Eileen 
by the arms. She did not resist. 
Harmon sat down, taking Lorella 
with him. 

"Then you'll have to carry jwe," 
lie said. "You don't have the manpower for that." Shaking himself 
loose from Lorella he got out a 
cigarette and with steady hand 
touched light to it. "You're all in 
more of a hurry than I am. Do as 
I say or take your chances." 

They released Eileen and stepped 
well away from her. Harmon went 
to her, caught her hand, drew her 
close. He lowered his voice, though 
there was hardly any need of this 
because of the incessant hiss and 
rumble. Great lumps of incandescent lava, blown up from the 
spreading pools by surges of gas, 
rocketed up, and dropped back, 
splashing fiery liquid. 

"Don't follow me," he said. 
"Whatever else you do, don't follow. You'll be awfully scared when 
they all flock after me but trust 
me. I know what I'm doing. Stay 
right where you are. You'll come 
out of it — I promise you that." 

"You arc going to talk to Merah," 
Eileen said. "You're going to bring 
her a gift. Offer her one from me. 
Tell her that if she spares you Til 
go away. You and I will never see 
each other again. We'll always have 
our beautiful few days and nights 
to remember. But you forget them 
if Mcrah wants you to. She can't 
care at all what / remember." 

Eileen pressed close. Her kiss was 
unlike any of all the lovers' kisses 



they bad exchanged. Harmon st 
back, his hands lying for a momcn 
on her shoulders. "Just wait an 
don't worry. And stand fast.* 

Harmon turned to climb. As ! 
expected Lorella and the two m 
crowded on his heels. He bent in 
the zigzagging course, following t' 
tracks he had made in the pas 
Finally, stopping for breath, 
looked back to wave to Eileen. S 
returned the gesture but kept h: 
place. 

He said to the others, "We're ge" 
ting close, too close. Stay here 
With my game leg ready to let i 
down, how the hell can I get awa 
from you?" 

He looked back again. Eileen ha 
left her place. Explosions shower 
a fiery rain about her, driving h" 
from what had been a safe spo 
She stumbled and lurched to h 
knees. 

"Fumes arc getting her," Harmt 
said. "But she'll be all right wrr 
the wind changes." 

Kirby let out a strangled c 
"You told her — come on, Dir 
We've got to give her a hand!" 

Harmon knew that his mome had come. He looked up towa" 
the crater's rim. "Agni Dcva!" 
called. "I'm coming back to tthe way of fire — the way of no 
turning!" 

As if to challenge him, the 
came from the thus-far quiet crat" 
great plumes of flame, which rose 
and then bowed their crests. They 
lapped over the rim and down, 
reaching like many eager arms. The 



FANTASTIC UNIVERSE 



heat was such as Harmon had never 
imagined. The colors covered the 
entire range of the spectrum. There 
were bands of blankness, as though 
composed of colors that passed beyond what the human eye could 
perceive. 

He stretched out both arms. He 
took another step and despite the 
blasting breath which reached far 
beyond the tips of a million wavering fingers he found the breath to 
call, "Agni Deva! I come to take 
the way of fire — the way of no 
returning!" 

He fancied he could smell the 
scorching of his hair and his garments though he was not sure of 
this. But there was flame on his 
head. He took another step with 
legs fresh and strong and unwearied. 
"Agni Dcva — I come to take . . ." 

Then there was coolness and 
flame lapped him like rippling of 
water. Where there had been voids 
in the bands of color he now perceived the octaves beyond violet 
and the octaves below red — zone 
after zone, color af ter color for 
which he had no name, of which 
no human had ever had experience, 
even in dreams. 

In that vortex of fire stood Agni 
Deva, all splendid and smiling. The 
first touch of her fingers, as he took 
her outstretched hand, was intolerably painful. He experienced at 
once heat and cold and shock of 
lightning. Then he was beside her 
and at case. 

"There is no returning," Agni 
Deva said. "And you will never 



wish to return for now you see me 
without veils. You know what fire 
is by direct knowledge." 

Harmon said out of his contentment, "And know how being goes 
far beyond doing." 

What he had done, he now knew, 
was trifling compared to what he 
had become. Being so nearly one 
with Agni Deva he could not be 
sure whether it was her thought or 
his own that next came to him— 
that there was no separatcness between them at all. 

Agni Deva said, "Look back, look 
down, and see that I did not hurt 
her nor the rice either." 

He saw Eileen plainly. He did 
not ask what had happened to Lorclla and Kirby. Voerhaven was safe 
and Harmon was glad for this, glad 
also that Eileen's lurking surmises 
had blossomed into knowledge during their final moment together, so 
that while she could never know 
all, she knew enough, 

"She knows," Agni Deva said, 
"and she has accepted. She will remember but she cannot mourn for 
she knows — as much as she need." 
And then, as they made for the 
dark bulwarks of the crater, she 
added, "This will be good. Wade, 
and better than you think. There'll 
be the rice to watch and ever so 
much more. Because being isn't a 
matter of standing still at all, it's 
an everlasting becoming." 

Harmon smiled reminiscently and 
said, "The Gods were once what 
man now it and man one day will 
be what Gods now are." 



the 

maugham 
obsession 

by , . . August Derleth 



All inventors seek success. Some 
few achieve it. And now and then 
a Quintus Maugham is a bit too 
successful for his own health. 



It's always been a moot point 
with me," said Harrigan one evening over a glass of sherry at the 
ClifTdwellers* Club, "whether or not 
there is such a thing as a man's 
being too successful. I always think 
of Quintus Maugham." 

"You have the advantage of me," 
I said. 

"By rights he should have been 
famous," Harrigan went on, wanning to his subject, "but things don't 
always work out that way. 1 )e was 
a plodding inventor obsessed by an 
idea. \t'hat inventor isn't, given a 
modicum of success? Perhaps he 
was a product of his time for 
Maugham's obsession was robots." 

"The principle's sound enough." 

"Oh, yes. It could be practical, 
to. After all, machines have been 
operated by mechanical men or 
mechanic.il brains for years. So 
Maugham's idea wasn't out of 
line. The operation didn't work 
out according to Hoyle, however. 
Maugham was one of those gaunt 
earnest men, a tall fellow with 
deep-set eyes and an habitually 
grim mouth. He took himself very 
seriously and you were always just 
a little embarrassed when he tried 



What is a Derhlh? The question pops up frequently in fantasy circles. The general 
consensus seems to be that a Derleth is a sort of human windmill that plucks finished 
manuscripts from the breeze while uating its arms in circlet, printing ami publishing 
same with its own machinery. In truth the Derleth output is prod'tgiout, as it has 
been for many a year . . . enough to keep rolling the presses of his own publishing firm 
(Arkbam) as well as to keep other pulliihers ueil supplied. Here is lop- flight Dericlh. 



to; 



FANTASTIC UNIVERSE 



to explain something to you — you 
felt that he so badly wanted your 
understanding." 

He paused and sipped his sherry, 
looking reflectively out over the 
silvery lake. 

"Where'd you meet him?** X 
asked. "On assignment?" 

"Oh, he'd invented a little gadget 
connected with the recoil mechanism for the military so I was sent 
over to his place for an interview 
— the usual thing. He lived in a 
nice old house in Oak Park, left 
him by his mother and he lived 
pretty well, if a little on the frugal 
side. He was considerate and courteous, which is a damned sight more 
than you can say for most of the 
people a reporter gets to see. 

"He gave me everything I wanted 
to know and a good deal more 
besides. He wound up with a half 
apologetic question about his newest invention — would I like to see 
it? I said I would so he took me 
down into one of the most elaborate 
private 1-iboratories I've ever seen 
and introduced me to Herman.** 

"Ah, another character," I said, 
pouring more sherry into liis glass. 

"Herman was his robot. A neat 
well-oiled scrupulously-clean mechanical man in the process of being 
born. He was run by electrical impulses and was a good deal more 
self -sufficient than the traditional 
pushbutton robot of an earlier day. 
Even though he wasn't quite 'born' 
yet Herman did i turn or two for 
us, up and down the laboratory, 



with a precision that was almost 

military. 

"Unlike most robots of that day 
Herman had a physiognomy carefully moulded after a human face. 

1 Ee looked damnably real. He could 
blink his glass eyes, he could shake 
hands, he could nod and, because of 
the mobility of his plastic rubber 
face, he could even smile after a 
fashion, though I always thought 
his smile a little grim. 

" 'The next step is to make him 
talk,' Maugham said. 'I believe it 
can be done' 

"'Can he hear?' I asked. 

"'That will come,* he said. 

"He seemed so sure of himself 
that I was almost inclined to believe 
him until of course I remembered 
all the others who had been so sure 
of themselves. That seems to be a 
characteristic of my queer peopleeach one has an unlimited belief in 
his own particular delusion. 

"Well, Maugham put Herman 
through his paces and it was certainly novel to watch. He asked me 
not to write anything about Herman for publication and I didn't. I 
figured I owed him that courtesy, 
lie had great plans for Herman, he 
explained — he meant Herman to be 
his general factotum and planned 
to perfect the robot as the housewife's dream. If I'd had to guess I'd 
have said he might accomplish aa 
much. 

"Well, 1 examined Herman inside 
and out. It was uncanny, the resemblance fie bore to a human being. 
It was Maugham's conceit to dupU


THE MAUGHAM OBSESSION 



109 



catc as nearly as possible the organs 
and characteristics of the human 
body. That still left room for the 
complicated machinery necessary. 
The skeleton was of steel with a 
plastic overlay carefully moulded 
into the shape of a man approximately six feet high and weighing 
about two hundred pounds. 

"Over the entire structure he had 
stretched a kind of plastic-rubber 
made to resemble human skin in 
color and texture. There were doors 
in both front and back of course — to allow Maugham to service his 
robot, inspect the machinery, charge 
and replace the batteries, oil the 
parts and so forth." 

"He could almost have patented 
that as a bachelor's companion," I 
suggested. 

Harrigan took another draught 
of sherry and smiled reminisccntly. 
"His enthusiasm was infectious 
until I got out into the open air 
and started thinking about Herman's practicability. Then of course 
Herman slid hack to his proper 
plane and I saw Maugham in a more 
balanced perspective. He struck me 
then as another little man with 
ideas just a trifle too big for them. 

"In the ordinary course of events 
I wouldn't have seen Maugham 
again but about a month later he 
came up with another of those 
milirary valuable gadgets and I 
went out to get a propaganda story 
for Army Intelligence. I thought 
at the time that Maugham looked a 
little harassed but he was as cooperative as before when he knew 



what I wanted and he came through 
with just the right stuff for Army 

Intelligence. 

"After we had finished I naturally asked, 'And how's Herman?' 

"He brightened a little and said 
that Herman was coming along 
fine. Forthwith he left the room 
and came back with his robot. He 
had put clothes on him and for a 
minute, candidly, I didn't know it 
was Herman. 

"Maugham came up behind him 
and Herman said, 'Good day, 
Master.' 

"Of course, his voice had a flat 
sort of scratchy sound, like a phonograph, and there was no inflection 
of any kind but it was undeniably 

speech. 

" 'Can he hear?* I asked. 

"Maugham nodded. 'He responds 
to an auditory mechanism very 
similar in principle to an electric 
eye. But he's far from perfect, Mr. 
Harrigan, very far.' 

" 'I'd say he was pretty good myself,' I said. 

"But Maugham only shook his 
head. 

'"What's the trouble?' I asked. 

" 'He's too mechanical,' sai 
Maugham. 

" 'You couldn't expect him to b 
human.* 

"'No, but a b'ttle more human 
than he is,' Maugham answered. 

"I had my doubts but I kept 
them to myself. After all I'm just 
a reporter. I've seen a lot of things 
I never dreamed were possible but 
none of them has warped my ob


FANTASTIC UNIVERSE 



jcctivity. Maybe Ke could make 
Herman more human but I doubted 
that he could. 

"Herman looked as human as a 
typical product of the Prussian 
military machine. If he'd come in 
saluting and laying *Hcil, Hitler!' 
you could almost have believed in 
his humanity — if you'd call it that, 
all tilings considered. So I held my 
tongue and watched Herman. 

"That robot coulj move around 
and get things for Maugham — an 
ashtray, his bedroom slippers, a tray 
with a decanter and glasses on it. 
He could dust things but he was 
pretty awkward at that and now 
and then knocked something over. 
Maugham hid removed all the 
breakables, I noticed, so no harm 
was done. I saw Maugham watching 
Herman with undeniable triumph 
and self-satisfaction but nevertheless there was an undercurrent of 
doubt in his eyes. 

"He never said a thing, however, 
to follow through. It was just in 
the way I felt, as if this triumph 
and self-satisfaction were somehow 
watered by some question he did 
not care to voice. 1 knew intuitively 
too that whatever it was could not 
readily be drawn from him. But I 
felt it like something tangible and, 
curiously — which is a testimony to 
his inventive skill — I felt it to be 
some thing personal between him 
and his robot. 

"Just what was going on in his 
mind it was impossible for me to 
find out, of course." 



Maugham congratulated himself 
on his ability to maintain his composure in the face of the reporter's 
interest. He was definitely uneasy 
about Herman and it was only now, 
after Hirrigin had gone, that he 
relaxed a Uttle. For one thing Herman's responses were not quite 
what they should be — not so much 
on the negative side as on the positive. After Harrigan had gone he 
eyed Herman for some time in profound perturbation. If Maughiltt 
had to put his finger on the trouble 
he would be compelled to say that 
Herman was becoming somewhat 
too human for his own good. 

His own attitude toward Herman was considerably more that of 
one man to another than of inventor to invention. It was not, 
thought Maugham, a good thingit meant that I Icrman was in the 
process of becoming no longer just 
an invention but an obsession. Herman, meanwhile, stood immobile, 
waiting upon his command. 

"Herman, go to the laboratory," 
said Maugham, enunciating each 
syllabic with the clarity necessary 
to the precision machinery which 
was Herman's ear. 

Was there hesitation in Herman's 
obedience? Maugham could not be 
sure and this very uncertainty 
troubled him all the more. But once 
moving Herman went forward with 
his customary smoothness, marching straight down to the laboratory 
and waiting there for Maugham, in 
whose breast pride was once more 
swelling at this concrete evident 



hi? inventive ingenuity. He 
recognized that 1 lenmn was indeed 
almost as perfect a machine as it 
was possible for man to conceive 
and bring into being. 

Me had some question now at to 
whether he could improve on Herman or not. Or whether indeed it 
would be wise. But his ambition 
overcome his qualms and, marshalling Merman, he went to work. 

"The nest time I ran into 
Maugham, I saw a badly jangled 
man," said Harrigan. "For one 
thing he looked as harassed as any 
man who was ever nagged by his 
ball -and- chain. For another he 
found it seemingly impossible to 
talk freely. 

'"You're not looking so well,' I 
said to him. 

" 'No,* he agreed, Tve been 
working.' 

" 'On Herman?* 

"'I've worked on him enough,' 
he said ominously. 

"I confess I wasn't particularly 
observant th.it morning. I knew 
something was bothering him but 
I knew too, as if by instinct, that 
he wasn't saying anything about it. 
I couldn't resist having a little fun 
with him. 

"'Look,' [ said, "if you scientists 
get around to inventing life would 
it be necessary to rewrite the Bible?' 

"He blinked at me, a little 
startled. 'Why, no,' he said, 'we're 
not in conflict with the Bible. It's 
organized religion that's in conflict 
with uj.' 



" 'And the creation of 
nothing to do with it? I alw 
thought that all conflicts and ar 
meats came back to that b 
point. Who was responsible — a 
prcmc Being or a process of ev 
tion from dead matter?' 

"'Listen,' he said, 'why are 
asking me all this?' 

"I noticed then how cxtrem 
nervous he was. He had taken h 
of my arm and I could feci 
hand trembling. 

" Td like to know,' I answe" 
'but it's not that important, For 
it. I'm a little dubious about the 
scientists anyway. Whether you 
worship Science or God sometimes 
gets to seem like six of one and a 
half-dozen of the other. Or do you 
think it's possible to create life, 
Maugham? 1 

*"I wonder,' he said. And nothing else. 

"All this time we had been 
walking along toward his place. I 
noticed that his steps bc^an to lag a 
trifle and the closer we got to his 
home the slower he walked. I gathered finally that for some reason he 
was reluctant about my Cuming but 
was much too courteous to say so. 

'"As long as we're so close to 
your place,' I said at last, 'I might 
as well stop in and take another 
look at Herman.' 

"He stopped short at that and 
showed his distress pretty plainly. A 
newspaperman has to be impervious 
to most emotion and I guess I was. 
I didn't bat an eyelash and let on I 
never saw a thing. 



** 'I don't know in what shape 
the house is in,' he said then. 'I've 
forgotten just what I set Herman 
to doing.' 

" 'Well, we'll see,' I said. 

"We went in. Maugham led the 
way, jittery as a confirmed tosspot 
too long gone without a drink." 

"Which reminds nie," I put in. 
"Will you have another, Harrigan?" 

"Sure. But find something 
stronger," he said. "Well, we went 
in, as I said. I don't know what I 
had expected to sec but there was 
nothing unusual about the place. It 
was spic and span. You'd think he'd 
had a housemaid working on it all 
day. And as for Herman — he was 
sitting in the living room in an easy 
chair that was clearly enough 
Maugham's own favorite. 

"Maugham stared at his creation, 
as if he hadn't expected to sec him 
there. 'Herman,' he said, 'go to the 
laboratory.' 

"The robot got up without a 
sound — I had expected to hear 
CKaks, the meshim; of gears or 
something — and walked out of the 
room. Maugham sat down. 1 could 
ice that he was sweating but he 
seemed relieved about something. 

"'He looks perfcciej,* I said. 

""'He's a very serviceable robot,' 
Maugham agreed. 'He certainly did 
himself proud on this room.* 

""You mean he cleaned It?* I 
asked. 

" 'Every foot of it,' he answered. 
1 gave him his orders before I left 
the house.' 

" 'But I thought you didn't know 



what you'd find, what you'd set 

him to doing?' 

" *Oh, I knew, all right. What I 
didn't know was what Herman 
might get to do. He's not quite 
perfect yet, you see, Mr. Harrigan.* 

"I saw, all right. I saw that Herman had become his inventor's obsession in a very real sense. I felt 
sorry for him but I had known 
enough inventors to understand 
what had happened. They work so 
much alone they're apt to overemphasize the importance of their 
work. The same thing holds true 
for authors and composers, I suppose. They lose perspective — it** 
little more than that. 

"And my friend Maugham 
seemed to have lost his.** 

Maugham was relieved at Harrigan's going. He sat for a few 
moments after the door had closed 
behind the reporter. But in a 
moment his relief gave way before 
an attitude of listening. Was there 
movement? Did he hear shuffling 
footsteps? Or was it again his 
imagination? 

He walked across to the door 
through which Herman had disappeared. There he stood for a moment 
more, listening. He was undeniably 
nervous. He wondered whether 
Harrigan had seen or not. In final 
analysis perhaps tt made no difference. He opened the door. 

Herman stood there, immobile. 
For a ludicrous moment Maugham 
thought that his robot .had been 
listening at the door even as he 



THE MAUGHAM OBSESSION II' 



himself had been. But of course that 
was impossible. It only he could 
remember what he had done to 
I [erman the last time he had worked 
on the complicated and delicate 
mechanism of the robot! He was 
convinced that something had happened, something which had given 
Herman considerably more animation than had been either pl.inn.cd 
or foreseen. 

There was of course one solution, 
though he hesitated to resort to it 
since it involved undoing everything he had done. He could take 
Herman apart again and find out 
just how he functioned so well. He 
would have been ashamed to confess 
to Harrigan or anyone else that he 
was candidly perplexed at Herman's abilities. 

He stepped across the threshold, 
brushing past the motionless robot, 
and turned at the door to the 
laboratory stairs. "Come, Herman," 
he satd. 

The robot did not move. 

"Herman, go to the laboratory,** 
said Maugham in a firm clear voice. 

Still no move. 

He remembered abruptly that he 
had given Herman this order before when Harrigan was still in 
the house. Apparently then Herman 
had not obeyed the order at that 
time. Something was wrong with 
the auditory mechanism. 

He came back to the robot's side 
and tried once more. I lerman's 
mechanical arms came up, his fingers 
Opened and closed on Maugham's 
arm. He held him immobile. 



"Stop!" commanded Maugham 

angrily. 

Merman held on. 

"Put me down," said Maugham. 

Herman released him. His arms 
once again fell laxly to his sides. 
He stood there, unblinking, apparently waiting upon bis next 
command. 

"Go to the laboratory," said 
Maugham again. 

Slowly, almost imperceptibly at 
first, the robot's head turned and 
shook his refusal. 

Maugham stared, aghast. He was 
at a loss for word or deed. 

"I never saw Maugham around 
again after that," continued Harrigan. "He virtually went into seclusion and no one saw him at his 
old haunts. Not that he'd been in 
the habit of moving around a good 
deal — he hadn't. But now, abruptly, 
he appeared to give up all his 
customary walks and visits and to 
retire into his house. 

"You get used to situations like 
that involving inventive or creative 
people of course. You think nothing 
of it. I didn't, I know, though I 
was possessed of some curiusity 
about Herman. But out in his 
neighborhood, where people knew 
nothing about Herman, certain 
rumors began to circulate — that 
Maugham had hired an assistant, 
and tli.it the assistant now did all 
Maugham's errands for him. And so 
on . . . 

"I happened on a description of 
his assistant one afternoon and it 




FANTASTIC UNIVERSE 



Bounded pretty much like Herman, 
I was amused at the way in which 
people can get things balled up. 
They do, you know. Take any 
court, any trial — the so-called 'circumstantial evidence,' correctly interpreted, is the most effectively 
damning. Eyewitness accounts vary 
as much as the weather and are as 
unreliable actually. 

"So that too passed over me. 

"I think it was about two 
months after I had last seen 
Mjtugham that I learned of his plans 
to move west. It was entirely an 
accident. I happened to be in the 
circulation department one morning when the circulation manager 
of the paper got a letter from 
Maugham asking him to change his 
address. 

M 'You know that fellow 
Maugham, don't you, Harrigan?' 
asked 1 lowells. 

" 'Sure,' I said. 'What's he been 
up to now?' 

"Don't know. He's moving 
away.' 

*'He gave me the change of address as of the first of the coming 
month. I looked at his crisp letter 
and saw thnt Maugham was planning to pull up stakes for the west. 
It had the look of pretty isolated 
country in Nevada. It was only a 
week until the first and I thought 
that if I had time I'd look in on 
Maugham before he went. 

"So next morning, being in the 
neighborhood, I went out of my 
way a little to call on him. I rang 
bil bell several times before I got an 



answer. Then it was only the tentative opening of the door on .1 chain. 
Maugham's head appeared in the 
opening. 

" 'Good morning,' I said. 'How's 
the inventing business?' 

"'You'll have to ask Mr. 
Maugham,' he said. 

"'That's just what I'm doing,' 
I said. 

" 'Oh, yes. Well, I'm busy now,' 
he answered. 

"I could see that he was. He was 
wearing some sort of cap as if to 
keep his hair dust-free — he was 
carrying a broom — and he had an 
apron tied round his middle. Dainty 
he was getting ready to take his 
leave. Remembering his agitation 
at our last meeting I looked for 
more of the same. But instead there 
was only a kind of weary apathy. 
If he was nervous at sight of me he 
didn't show it. I could see that he 
didn't intend to let me in if he 
could help it and this time the 
chain across the door was an argument I couldn't very well get 
around. 

" 'How's Herman?' I asked. 

" 'I'm fine,* he said in a flat voice. 

"'Herman,' I said, 'your robot!' 

" 'Oh, yes,' he answered. 'Herman's fine. He can do just about 
everything now.' 

" 'Well in that case it's up to you 
to invent a mate for him,' I said. 

"He grinned in a sickly way and 
started to back into the house. 

" 'Hold on,' I cried. 'What's all 
this about your going to Nevada?' 



THE MAUGHAM OBSKSSION 



US 



'"We're leaving next week,' he 
said. 'Change of air — change of 
scene. 1 

"'Are you taking Herman?' I 
asked. 

"'Certainly. It's for his benefit.' 
'"Oh, I see. He's still not quite 
perfect?* 

"He shook his head and echoed, 
'Not quite perfect!' in a voice as 
fiat as that of his robot. 

"'Are you going to perfect him?' 

1 asked. 

"'Would you?' he asked. 

'"Sure,* I said. 'I'd make him 
better and better.' 

"'Beyond one point you couldn't 
go,' he said. 

" 'And what's that?' 

'"You couldn't give him a soul 
— unless you could slip him your 
own,* he said. 

"This time he did back well into 
the house. I stuck my foot into the 
doorway so that he couldn't close 
the door. At the same time I got 

2 glimpse past him. His front door 
opened directly into his main room, 
his living room, and I could see 
that someone was standing there 
waiting for him — a taliish fellow 
with one arm folded across his 
chest and supporting his elbow, one 
hand cupping his chin. He seemed 
impatient but of course I couldn't 
sec that clearly, 

"If it hadn't been so absurdly impossible I'd have sworn the fellow 
was Herman. But of course it was 
undoubtedly Maugham's new as


sistant. For once the local gadabouts 
had the story straight." 

"And did he move?" I asked. 

"Oh yes. He went on schedule— 
with his assistant. I don't know 
what became of Herman in the 
exodus. Presumably he moved with 
them because he turned up in 
Nevada with Maugham. But I saw 
no sign of him when I watched 
Maugham from a distance boarding 
the train. I suppose Herman could 
have been taken apart and shipped 
on ahead. Then he could have been 
reassembled and set to working 
again." 

"But how do you know Herman 
went along to Nevada?" I asked, 
pouring Harrigan yet another 
drink. 

"By one of those ridiculous 
mistakes the newspapers sometimes 
make. Maugham hadn't been out 
west two months before a flash 
flood tore through the village in 
which he'd set up housekeeping and 
inventing. Maugham was one of the 
victims. The paper nearest there 
carried a picture of Maugham and 
his robot, which by that time was 
public property out there. 

"But by one of those odd accidents of the press the names under 
the pictures had been transposed — 
under Herman's picture appeared 
Maugham's name, and under 
Maugham's Herman's. And to carry 
the mistake to the epitome of the 
ludicrous I'm damned if Maugham 
didn't look exactly like a robot and 
Herman just like a man!" 



the 
other 
tiger 

by . . . Arthur C. Clarke 



When a pair of strollers begin 
to ponder parallel worlds just 
about anything can happen. And 
this time about anything does. 



It's an INTERESTING theory, 
said Arnold, "but I don't see how 
you can ever prove it." They had 
come to the steepest part of the hill 
and for a moment Webb was too 
breathless to reply. 

"I'm not trying to." he said 
when he had gained his second wind. 
"I'm only exploring its consequences." 

"Such as?" 

"Well, let's be perfectly logical 
and sec where it gets us. Our only 
assumption, remember, is that the 
universe is infinite." 

"Right. Personally I don't see 
what else it can be." 

"Very well. That means there 
must be an infinite number of stars 
and planets. Therefore, by the laws 
of chance, every possible event must 
occur not merely once but an infinite number of times. Correct?" 

"1 suppose so." 

*'Then there mus{ be an infinite 
number of worlds exactly like 
liar lb, each with an Arnold and 
Webb on it, walking up this hill 
just as we arc doing now, saying 
these same words." 

"That's pretty hard to swallow." 

"I know it's a staggering thought 
— but so is infinity. The thing that 
interests me, though, is the idea of 
all those other Earths that aren't 



The current bead-man of the ought! British Interplanetary Society hat recently been 
devoting bimtelf $c taenttfti writing. But once in a ubile be can still cut loose. 




Tin 



exactly the fame as this one. The 
Earths where Hitler won the War 
and the Swastika flics over Buckingham Palace — the Earths where 
Columbu; never discovered America 
—the Earths where the Roman 
Empire has lasted to this day. In 
fact the Earths where all the great 
if's of history had different answers." 

"Going right back to the beginning, I suppose, to the one in 
which the apeman who would have 
been the daddy of us all, broke his 
neck before he could have any 
children?" 

"That's the idea. But let's stick 
to the worlds we know — the worlds 
containing us climbing this hill on 
this spring afternoon. Think of ill 
our reflections on those millions of 
other planets. Some of them are 
exactly the same but every possible 
variation that doesn't violate the 
laws of logic must also exist. 

"We could— we must — be wearing every conceivable sort of clothes 
— and no clothes at all. The Sun's 
shining here but on countless billions of those other Earths it's not. 
On many it's winter or summer 
here instead of spring. But let's 
consider more fundamental changes 
too. 

"We intend to walk up this hill 
and down the other side. Yet think 
of all the things that might possibly happen to us in the next few 
minutes. However improbable they 
may be, as long as they are possible, then somewhere they've got 
to happen.** 



TIGER 




"I see," said Arnold slowly, absorbing the idea with obvious reluctance. An expression of mild 
discomfort crossed his features. 
"Then somewhere, I suppose, you 
will fall dead with heart failure 
when you've taken your next step." 

"Not in this world." Webb 
laughed. "I've already refused it. 
Perhaps you're going to be the unlucky one." 

"Or perhaps," said Arnold, "I'll 
get fed up with the whole conversation, pull out a gun and shoot 
you." 

"Quite possibly," admitted Webb, 
"except that Em pretty sure you, 
on this Earth, haven't got one. 
Don't forget, thoui;li, that in millions of those alternative worlds I'll 
beat you on the draw".'* 

The path was now winding up a 
Wooded slope, the trees thick on 
either side. The air was fresh and 
sweet. It was very quiet as though 
all Nature's energies were concentrated, with silent intcntness, on 
rebuilding the world after the ruin 
of winter. 

"I wonder," continued Webb, 
"How improbable a thing can get 
before it becomes impossible. We've 
mentioned some unlikely events but 
they're not completely fantastic. 
Here we are in an English country 
lane, walking along a path we know 
perfectly well. 

"Yet in some universe those — 
what shall I call them? — twins of 
ours will walk around that corner 
and meet anything, absolutely any


thing that Imagination can conceive. 
For as I said at the beginning, if the 
cosmos is infinite, then all possibilil ics must arise," 

"So it's possible," said Arnold, 
with a laugh that was not quite as 
light as he had intended, "that we 
may walk into a tiger or something 
equally unpleasant." 

"Of course," replied Webb cheerfully, warming to his subject. "If 
it's possible, then it's got to happen 
to someone, somewhere in the universe. So why not to us?" 

Arnold gave a snort of disgust. 
"This is getting quite futile," he 
protested. "Let's talk about something sensible. If we don't meet a 
tiger round this corner I'll regard 
your theory as refuted and change 
the subject." 

"Don't be silly," said Webb gleefully. "That won't refute anything. 
There's no way you can — " 

They were the last words he ever 
spoke. On an infinite number of 
Earths an infinite number of Webbs 



and Arnolds met tigers friendly, 
hostile or indifferent. But this was 
not one of those Earths — it lay far 
closer to the point where improbability urged on the impossible. 

Yet of course it was not totally 
inconceivable that during the night 
the rain-sodden hillside had caved 
inward to reveal an ominous cleft 
leading down into the subterranean 
world. As for what had laboriously 
climbed up that cleft, drawn 
towards the unknown light of day 
— well, it was really no more unlikely than the giant squid, the boaconstrictor or the feral lizards of 
the Jurassic jungle. It had strained 
the laws of zoological probability 
but not to the breaking-point. 

Webb had spoken the truth. Tn 
an infinite cosmos everything must 
happen somewhere — including their 
singularly bad luck. For '/ was 
hungry — very hungry — and a tiger 
or a man would have been a small 
yet acceptable morsel to any one of 
its half dozen gaping mouths. 



The theory of multiple worlds, with which Mr. Clarke has toyed so 
effectively and terrif yingly in the just -finished story above, is one of the 
most fascinating in the entire realm of speculative thought upon which 
science fiction is based. It goes by many names — among them parallel 
worlds, parallel time-tracks and even the broomstick theorem of spacetime. The whole idea is based upon a morc-rtr-U'ss reasonable supposition 
that everything which happens in our world and universe could w can 
happen in several ways — and does so in an infinity of ever-bram king 
cosmoses. Hence the unpleasantly hungry "tiger?' in Mr. Clarke's hillside 
becomes quite unpleasantly reasonable. And while the whole idea of 
multiple worlds may seem absurdly and abstractively impractical to literal 
minds it might be well to remember that the A and H-bombs were mere 
metaphysical speculations until not so many years ago. Practical- minded 
folk would be wise to stay on guard. 



the 
small 
bears 

by , . . Gene L. Henderson 

The aliens looked cute as Koalas. 
But there was a little matter of 
a graveyard of dead space-ships. 



Billowy white clouds hid the 
entile surface of the mystery planet 
and the space-cruiser cautiously 
searched, seeking an opening. A 
wind disturbance momentarily split 
the misty blanket and like an arrow 
the ship darted through. 

The sudden movement had 
Caught some of the men unprepared 
and Dr. Dick Boyette hurried past 
fully-manned battle stations to answer a call from the control-room. 
It required but a couple of minutes 
to revive a technician who had 
stumbled into a panel and afterward Boyette stood in the background, watching. 

Everywhere, as far as the eye 
could see, the terrain was dotted 
by patches of woods and green 
meadows. The perpetual cloud 
blanket was two miles high, thin 
enough so "that it barely diffused 
the sunlight. Enough, Boyette 
thought, so that the planet would 
have been a mystery even without 
the disappearance of all ships that 
had visited it, 

"No sign of life," growled Commander Kellews, breaking the silence. 

"I don't like it," the gunnery 
officer added uneasily. "There must 
be life or what could have happened 
to all the other ships that vanished 
here?" 



A STORY THAT SHOWS WHAT PERIL MAY LIE UNDER A EUR COAT. 



120 



FANTASTIC UNIVERSE 



"That's what we're here to find 
out," said Commander Kellews. He 
gazed around with a fighting man's 
pride in the finest weapons that 
Earth science had been able to devise. This one ship itself could destroy the entire planet that lay so 
peacefully beneath them. 

As Boyette knew, the mystery 
planet was necessary for further 
expansion from the solar system, 
lying as it did between their system and the nearest one. Yet, it 
had swallowed all ships that had 
landed. 

"Look!" shouted the lookout, 
"that plateau's covered with ships." 

Brisk instructions were relayed 
throughout the craft. The crew 
readied for any possible emergency. 
The Assault cruised forward, turrets bearing on the targets now dead 
ahead. 

"Why, those are Earth-ships!" 
Commander Kellows exclaimed. 

"And that's the Conquest!" Boyette blurted, forgetting himself. 

All eyes centered on the sleek 
heavy cruiser squatting on the 
ground. She was a sister ship of the 
Assault and the first Patrol craft 
sent to investigate the planet. Practically every man aboard the Assault had personally known someone on her crew. 

Smoke trailing from the center 
of the plateau caused brief excitement among the watchers. Their 
hopes fell when it was seen to eraamM from a small lake of boiling 
l.i v a- The molten rock seethed and 



bubbled, an indication of the fiery 
core that lay beneath. 

The Assault landed and search 
parties were immediately organized. 
There were only enough men left 
behind to adequately man the ship's 
defenses. Boyette was assigned to 
the main party after convincing 
the reluctant Commander that he 
might be needed. 

All of the ships were empty. 
There was no sign of disorder or 
confusion. Tools and equipment 
had been left lying when their owners had quietly left. Not one clue 
could be found to account for the 
disappearance of their crews, A 
feeling of awe began to temper the 
initial exuberance of the crewmen. 

, The main party was almost ready 
to return to its ship when a movement at the edge of the plateau 
caught the attention of the men. 
They froze in their tracks, weapons 
ready, then a small animal crawled 
into sight. It stood only about a 
foot high and to Boyette resembled 
a small Teddy Bear. 

Relieved the men relaxed and one 
laughed. At this the creature stood 
vp even higher and barked softly, 
bringing others into sight. Squad 
leaders half-heartedly endeavored to 
keep their men together but the 
temptation was too great to resist. 
Each man wheedled and coaxed until the Teddy Bears had allowed 
themselves to be brought within 
reach. 

Boyette alone stood aloof and one 
of the animals made its way towards him. It even avoided at


THE SMALL BEARS 



lit 



tempts by the crew members to 
catch it. In fact, Boyette noted, 
nowhere did he see more than one 
of the Bears to any one man. He 
frowned thoughtfully, remembering that there "was no sign of any 
other form of life. 

The animal stopped in front of 
him and waited expectantly. A desire to pet it crept over Boyette, one 
so strong that his hands tingled. 
He almost gave in to the impulse 
when a dark suspicion made him 
draw back. Why hadn't he felt the 
same emotion before the Bear had 
reached him? 

One of the men noted his backward motion and yelled, "V/hat's 
the matter, Doc, afraid that it'll 
bite you?" 

' Boyette only smiled by way of 
reply. The brief moment of introspection had served to strengthen 
his willpower. He determined from 
now on to look before leaping. 
Nothing was above suspicion until 
the mystery of the deserted spaceships had been solved. 

Loud laughter caught his attention and brought a brief smile to 
his normally serious face. One of 
the men had been smoking and 
dropped some tobacco on an animal. It dug at its hide frantically 
in an effort to dislodge the particles. 
Once freed of the irritant it 
promptly made its way back to the 
same crew-member. 

Boyette pondered the act. All of 
the Bears seemed to have a purpose 
in mind and the intelligence to direct it. There wasn't any biological 



reason a thinking and intelligent 
creature should have a human form. 
Perhaps ... at least it was worth 
considering, Boyette mused. 

He now became interested in a 
faint path leading towards the lake 
of molten rock. It appeared too 
large for the Bears and not too old. 
Besides, he reasoned, what would 
any living creature want at the 
lake? He followed the path to a 
high promontory overlooking the 
lake. He stood there, fascinated by 
the thought of the terrific energy 
necessary to melt the planet's substance itself. 

There was a movement against 
his legs and he looked down. There 
was the same Teddy Bear that had 
followed him, rather than stay with 
its fellow creatures. The display of 
affection almost led him to lean 
over and stroke the beast. However 
he remembered his resolve barely in 
time and snapped erect. The desire 
disappeared immediately and he 
glared down at the Bear. 

It appeared saddened and sat back 
on its haunches, searching his face 
with button-like black eyes. Again 
Boyette turned to the lake, reminded of the old swimming hole 
back home. Many a time he'd stood 
on its high bank, similar to this, 
then leaped far out to join the rest 
of the gang. 

It looked so peaceful below, he 
thought. If one were to leap or fall, 
there'd be no pain. And to be released from the worries of life in 
such beautiful surroundings, who 
knew what wonderful existence 



might lie in store for him? He 
moved closer to the edge and tensed, 
ready to leap. 

A lingering doubt crept into his 
mind, struggling to overcome the 
urge to jump. Would the others 
follow him? He forced liis head 
around and saw them cavorting 
with the Teddy Bears on the grass 
below. The one that had followed 
him was standing erect, eagerly 
watching his every move. 

His resolve to consider every action was smothered under. Once 
again he teetered on the lip of the 
rock, trying to edge back but finding that his muscles refused to 
obey. Fragments of thought flitted 
through his mind, each being erased 
after a brief flash. 

All at once he remembered the 
Teddy Bear that had become so 
frantic at the tobacco that had 
fallen on it. Accustomed to analytical approaches to problems in 
the lab he suddenly wondered if 
the creatures were capable of implanting suggestions in human 
minds? 

The mental struggle caused perspiration to break out in beads over 
his forehead. He slowly dug a heel 
into the dirt, then straining, scattered soil into the face of the animal behind him. Instantly it seemed 
as if bonds had been cut from his 
limbs and he recoiled in horror from 
the bubbling rock below. 

Boyctte shoved by the animal, 
frantically brushing dirt from its 
face and hide. It was now quite 
evident that the creatures needed 



full concentration to work their 
will. He also determined not to let 
himself fall under their power 

again. 

At least he was convinced where 
the expedition's peril lay. He headed for the ship, determined to act 
now. Intent on his own thoughts 
he didn't see the figure that loomed 
up before him, 

A hearty voice roared, "Well, 
Doctor, why the gloomy look on 
such a fine day?" 

He looked up in surprise. The 
voice had come from Old Man 
Snead, Exec of the Patrol-ship. Not 
only was he astonished at being addressed by the dour old man but 
was almost made speechless by the 
sight of the Exec fondling one of 
the Teddy Bears. 

"You won't find anyone there," 
Snead said. "Everything was so 
peaceful that the Skipper gave permission to all hands to alight." He 
stared at the Teddy Bear which refused to leave Boyette. "Nice looking pet you have there. Sure tame, 
aren't they?" 

Boyctte looked down and saw the 
Bear gazing up at him reproachfully. Again he felt an inclination 
to lean over and stroke the beast. 
He resisted with no difficulty as the 
Exec strolled off. With him went 
Boyette *s last hope. The Exec's 
noted aversion to pets of any type 
had made him the man most likely 
to resist what appeared to be a suggestive hypnosis being applied by the 
alien beasts. 

The subtle delving at his mind 



THE SMALL BEARS »*3 



wns still apparent but easier now to 
resist than at first. The capture of 
the Exec's will left no one to turn 
to, so a plan began to form in Boyctte's mind — one which he must 
Carry to completion all c*n his own. 

He pretended to fall under the 
power of the Teddy Bear and leaned 
over, picking it up. To all outward 
appearances he was just as absorbed 
with it as the rest of the crew were 
with theirs. The only difference 
was that lie promptly headed for 
the ship rather than out on the 
meadow with the others. 

The ship did prove to be empty 
and lie placed the Bear on a workbench in his lab. It sat watching 
intently, a gleam of intelligence 
every so often breaking through 
the innocent mask of blank innocence. Boyette moved around aimlessly, aware of the scrutiny and 
trying to appear busy. However 
the ruse was giving him an opportunity to think over his plan. 

His main problem right now was 
to verify his suspicions. And the 
only way to do that would be 
through one of the animals itself. 
Then would follow the disclosure 
to the skipper and crew. First, 
though, they'd have to be released 
from their hypnosis. 

A Brain Emanation Recorder 
would be just the thing of course, 
h wit used to transmit the thought 
pictures of one mind to another. 
Its primary function was to detect 
brain deterioration caused by radiation in space but other experiments 
had been made. Pure thought knew 




no language barriers, so the difficulty 
didn't lie there. It was getting the 
Bear to cooperate. He could overpower it but its evident mental control would enable it to blank off 
its thoughts. 

The crew would be returning before long and Boyette was becoming desperate. His gaze fell on a 
vial of the new Martian truth scrum and the solution fell into place 
like tumblers in a lock. Still he 
had to be careful. Some Earth animals no larger than the Bears 
packed a pretty mean wallop when 
aroused or cornered. 

A tray Wal blocking the cabinet 
so Boyette shoved it to one side. 
Immediately a shrill raw sound cut 
across his nerves like a hot knife. 
He saw where a protruding piece of 
the tray had scraped along the metallic table top. A low moan froze 
him and he saw that the Teddy 
Bear had squeezed against a wall 
and lay there quivering. The animal was seemingly in agony for a 
short while but quickly recovered 
and sat up. 

Boyette frowned thoughtfully. 
Even though the aliens strongly resembled small bears, their characteristics were proving to be more 
like those of canines. At least he 
was learning more about them and 
might be able to put it to good use 
in the future. 

He fillet! a hypodermic needle 
with the truth serum, not even so 
much as looking at the Bear down 
the work bench. Then, casually 
walking by the animal, he suddenly 



FANTASTIC UNIVERSE 



turned and grasped it by one hand. 

The creature exploded into action, 
almost knocking tlic needle from his 
hand. Boyette shifted his left hand 
to the loose skin around the neck 
of the animal. The needle was then 
efficiently planted at the base of the 
skull. There was a brief struggle, 
then the Bear slowly lay down, a 
glaze coming over its eyes. The 
effect would list for an hour, long 
enough for his purpose. 

Boyette next obtained a magnetic 
recorder from the electronics lab. 
Speed was essential and he was 
thankful that the ship was empty. 
The recorder would enable him to 
save the innermost thoughts of the 
telepathic beasts. This would be 
necessary, he well knew, to convince a skeptical Commander Kellews of his suspicions. 

His own lab contained the Brain 
Emanation Indicators. One cap was 
fitted over the erstwhile pet, the 
other over his own head. The recorder would transcribe the electrical waves so that they could be 
played back through the Analyzer 
at a later date. 

The apparatus was still a recent 
enough invention to give Boyette 
a thrill whenever he used it. There 
was no actual exchange of words 
but the illusion made it seem that 
there had been. Neither had he 
ever seen a picture of what was being thought in another brain. 
Rather he sensed what the other 
would have said if he'd spoken in 
an understandable language. This 
would be very valuable in the com


munication between the alien's and 

his bniins. 

"What happened to crew-members of all the other Earth-ships on 
your planet?" was the first question 
Boyette put to the drugged creature. 

"They alt jumped into the lake 
of fire," came the reply. 

"Why?" asked Boyette. 

There was no hesitation in the 
Bear's return thought. "Because It 
wis suggested by us and their minds 
were unable to resist. Our Council 
decided that it was the only way 
to save our planet from being overrun by the peoples of Earth." 

"Then why haven't the members 
of this last Expedition suffered the 
same fate?" Boyette inquired. 

"The Council has come to realise 
that the people of Earth will keep 
returning as long as they are able. 
Since we have developed a high 
mental science rather than the 
physical ones, sooner or later our 
secret would be discovered." 

"What do you plan on doing?" 

"The minds of Earthmen indicate 
a fondness for what they call pets. 
We have used that weak emotion 
as a means for their destruction. 
We'll be carried back to Earth 
where, by careful infiltration, we 
can cause destructive wars. Eventually it is planned that everyone 
on Earth will be destroyed, thus removing our danger at its source." 

"What will — " At that moment 
he was interrupted by a clamor at 
the outer space-lock. A quick check 
disclosed an angry group of men 



THE SMALL IHARS 



la; 



led by Commander Kellews and the 
Exec. 

Boyette cursed his stupidity in 
overlooking what should have been 
3 glaring fact. The alien creatures 
had such a high degree of telepathic 
development that his had called for 
help when threatened. Ooly the 
quick action of the truth scrum had 
prevented its fellow creatures from 
locating him instantly. Their control over the rest of the crew could 
even lead to his death if he were 
careless. 

Quickly hiding the recorder Boyette went to the lock and opened 
it. The entire crew came pouring 
in, each man accompanied by one 
of the aliens. 

"What have you been up to. 
Doctor?" demanded Commander 
Kellews belligerantly. 

Boyette glanced around at the 
ring of hostile faces and replied, 
"Just some work in the lab, sir." 

"Where's the animal you had?" 
asked Snead. 

Boyette pretended surprise. 
"Why, in my lab." 

"Bring him along," instructed 
the Skipper and Boyette was hustled into the lab with as many men 
as could squeeze their way in. The 
drugged alien was beginning to stir 
feebly and the others showed their 
agiration with short barks as they 
swarmed around him. Boyette 
tensed. He'd have to make a break 
for it against impossible odds, if 
they discovered that he possessed 
their secret plans. 

He concealed a sigh of relief 



when the investigation again was 
applied through the Commander 
and the Exec. "What were you 
doing, Doctor?" Kellews asked. 

"Just examining the animal, sir." 
Suddenly he felt inspired, "I 
thought what nice pets they'd make 
back on Earth and wanted to find 
out if their physical structure 
would permit space-travel." 

The men's faces relaxed. Boyette 
knew his answer couldn't have been 
more satisfactory in view of the 
alien Council's plans. Still, he'd 
have to find some way of releasing 
the crew from its hypnosis before 
he dared reveal his discovery. He 
knew that the beasts' power over 
men depended upon full concentration. The aliens were meticulously 
clean and at the same time very 
similar to Earth canines in physical 
structure. 

The Skipper — under compulsion 
from the alien attached to him — 
still seemed dissatisfied. "What's 
wrong with the creature now?" 
Kellews persisted. 

"I injected a mild sedative to 
quiet it for examination." 

"Wasn't that a little highhanded?" inquired the Exec testily. 

Boyette carefully considered the 
question, realising it might be a 
trap. "Why, sir?" he asked. "Eve 
examined the lower animals on 
other planets, even dissected them. 
Why should those on this planet 
be any different?" 

Again the answer was correct. 
However the restless movements of 
the aliens indicated that his refer


i z6 



FANTASTIC UNIVERSE 



ence to them as lower animals must 
have rankled their high intelligence, 

"Well," growled the Exec, "Why 
don't you bring him out of it? 
And then forget about further experiments." 

There was a possibility the alien 
might remember something damaging when it regained its full senses. 
But there was an immediate danger 
in not complying so Boyette made 
a great show of cooperation. His 
mind darted about, trying to figure 
a solution for his present dilemma. 
He could stall only for so long — 
then the aliens, by their use of suggestion, might resort to direct action. He shivered, thinking of the 
disappearance of all the crews of 
the ships lying outside. 

Several of the aliens again moved 
restlessly and he hastened the revival of the one now on its feet. 
He felt more and more the despair 
of working all alone. He accidentally brushed against one of the trays 
and stopped. What had happened 
the last time he moved one of 
them? The scraping noise had hurt 
the alien, of course! There, then, 
lay the solution to his problem in 
releasing the crew. 

Boyette almost groaned aloud, 
How could he ever be able to produce the shrill noise continuously 
enough to do any good? Even one 
of the supersonic dog-whistles 
would work — if he only had one. 
The distraction afforded by such a 
noise would bring about the crew's 
release. Or would the aliens' superior mentality enable them to 



overcome their aversion to highpitched sounds? If they could and 
his purpose were diagnosed . . . 
Boyette preferred not to dwell on 
the possibility. 

"What's the hold-up?" growled 
the Exec. 

"I can't find my bottle of stimulant," Boyette replied. 

His glance fell on the intercom 
microphone. He was desperate by 
now and his mind ran rapidly over 
the possibilities the mike opened. 
Every crewman was familiar with 
the fact that when one was opened 
in front of a speaker a shrill howl 
would result. 

It was due to a feed-back of 
course but the Important part was 
that the sound did result. The only 
drawback was that the position 
must be just right or he'd get nothing but a low growl. The mike was 
within reach so he casually moved 
it closer to the wall -mounted 
speaker. 

He picked up the bottle he'd purposely overlooked until now and 
was reaching for the mike-button 
when a command was growled. 

"Wait 3 minute!" 

Boyette turned slowly and carefully to see the burly Exec bearing 
down on him. He considered staking everything on a quick movement but gave up the idea. If the 
mike wasn't in the proper position 
it would avail nothing. 

"Yes?" he answered. 

"What's in that bottle?" the 
Exec asked. 

Boyette felt his pulse slow down 



T11F. SMALL BEARS 



to normal. "J ust tne Stimulant I 
was looking for," he explained. 

"Let's see it." The bottle changed 
hands and the Exec examined it 
carefully, finally returning it with 
a short, "All right." 

Boyette moved the still groggy 
and doped alien closer to the microphone, then shot the stimulant 
into him. The reaction was quick 
in coming, the animal arose to its 
feet with a dazed look. The rest 
of the aliens clustered around, silent 
but obviously questioning by telepathy. 

For the moment Boyette was unnoticed and with no sign of haste 
he depressed the mike-button. 
There was a low hum over the intercom system, almost inaudible. 
Evidently it was much louder to 
the ears of the aliens since several 
peered around uneasily for the 
source. 

He moved the mike slightly and 
immediately a high-pitched wail 
broke out. Even Boyette flinched 
as it grated across his nerves but to 
the aliens it must have represented 
pure physical torture. 

Those still being held by crewmembers tore frantically to be free, 
some even biting in their frantic 
haste. There was a confused milling 
about the room, then a mass exodus 
through the door and out the airlock. 

The men inside were almost as 
rattled by the time Boyette had 
shut off the mike. He rushed to 
close the outer lock with every 
alien now outside the ship. 



He returned to the lab and 
laughed at the bewildered expressions on rough-.ind-rt.uly crewmen. 
Even the normally bclligerant Exec 
meekly looked to him for an explanation. Boyette explained the 
train of events since the alien animals hid been contacted and what 
had happened to the crews they 
had come seeking. 

Only Commander Kilhws questioned his explanation, sharply inquiring, "Just a moment. How 
could you discover all this?" 

"I'll show you," Boyette said. 
Before long the amazed Commander 
was receiving the much amplified 
telepathic confession of the alien 

At the end he grimly took off 
the helmet and announced, "Mr. 
Snead, have all hands go to their 
battle stations and stand by for 
takeoff. As soon as we're ready systematic destruction of every living 
thing on this planet will commence. 
Their invasion of Earth is going to 
backfire." 

"Arc you sure that such a policy 
of destruction would be wise, sir?" 
Boyette asked quietly. 

The Exec's mouth dropped open 
in horrified astonishmen t at this 
questioning of a military order. The 
Commander raised a hand to forestall what he knew would be an 
outburst. 

"That's all right, Mr. Snead. 
Since the Doctor was instrumental 
in saving all of us I believe he has 
a perfect right to raise an objection." He turned to Boyette, "Now 



FANTASTIC UNIVERSE 



then, why shouldn't we destroy 
them? After all they did their 
damndest to destroy us." 

"Well, sir," began Boyette confidently. "This Is the first alien intelligent life we've run across in 
our space expansion. What happens now could very well determine 
our relations with other forms of 
life contacted later on. 

He paused, then added, "Actually 
they were just defending themselves 
against what they considered an 
invasion." 

"But their superior mental powers could still be dangerous to any 
future colonization," argued the 
Commander. "How do we know 
they won't try it again?" 

"We don't," Boyette said. "Unless we convince them that we 
intend no harm either to them or 
their planet." 

Commander Kellews seized this 
eagerly. "But how could we ever 
believe them if they did agree? And 
what assurance have we that they'll 
even consider cooperating? They're 
tricky little devils." 

"I've thought that out too," 
Boyette said. "It all came about as 
a result of my examination of the 
one I had in here. The animals are 
scrupulously clean — perhaps you 
noticed that?" 

The Commander frowned briefly, 
then nodded in assent. 

"Also," Boyette continued, "to 



control effectively a human's mind 
they require full concentration on 
the task. What I propose it the importation of common fleas from 
Earth. Judging by the complete 
absence of other forms of life I believe the lowly and ever-busy flea 
will be something entirely new in 
their life." 

He grinned. "Gentlemen, have 
you ever watched a mongrel dog 
industriously rooting a flea from 
his hide? I believe you'll agree an 
alien would require quite a bit 
of willpower for these friendly 
little fellows to forget all about 
them." 

"Well, it might just conceivably 
work," the Commander reluctantly 
agreed. 

"I'd be willing to wager it 
would," insisted Boyette. "In addition it would leave our reputation 
intact. For full cooperation we 
could even distribute limited 
amounts of flea-powder. Enough so 
that they could remain comfortable 
but not enough that- — in the event 
it should be cut off — their lives 
would become one long itching 
misery." 

The old Exec chuckled. "Boy!" 
he roared, "You've got something. 
I've won a lot of battles in my life 
but this tops them all. This is the 
first time my side ever managed 
to win i major victory because 
the enemy went to the dogs!" 



martians 
come 
in 

clouds 

by . . . Philip K. Dick 

Among Man's noblest dreams is 
that of making friendly contact 
with other world creatures. But 
dreams may become nightmares. . . 



T o B MINKS CAME in all grimfaced and trembling. He threw his 
coat and newspaper over the chair. 
"Another cloud," lie muttered. "A 
whole cloud of them! One was up 
on Johnson's roof. They were 
getting it down with a long pole 
of some kind." 

Lena came and took his coat to 
the closet. "I'm certainly glad you 
hurried right on home." 

"I get the shakes when I see one 
of them." Ted threw himself down 
on the couch, groping in his pockets 
for cigarettes. "Honest to God it 
really gets me." 

He lit up, blowing smoke around 
him in a gray mist. His hands were 
beginning to quiet down. He wiped 
sweat from his upper lip and 
loosened his necktie. "What's for 
dinner?" 

"Ham." Lena bent over to kiss 
him. 

"How come? Some sort of occasion?" 

"No." Lena moved back toward 
the kitchen door. "It's that canned 
Dutch ham your mother gave us. I 
thought it was about time we 
opened it." 

Ted watched her disappear into 
the kitchen, slim and attractive in 
her bright print apron. He sighed, 
relaxing and leaning back. The 
quiet living room, Lena in the 
kitchen, the television set playing 



WOULD YOU LIKE ONE OF THESE MARTIANS ABOUT THE HOUSE? 



lag 



i jo 



FANTASTIC UNIVERSE 



to itself in the corner, made him 
feel a little better. 

He unlaced his shoes and kicked 
them off. The whole incident had 
taken only a few minutes but it had 
seemed much longer. An eternity — 
Standing rooted to the sidewalk, 
Staring up at Johnson's roof. The 
crowd of shouting men. The long 
pole. And . . . 

. . . and it, draped over the peak 
of the roof, the shapeless gray 
bundle evading the end of the pole. 
Creeping this way and that, trying 
to keep from being dislodged. 

Ted shuddered. His stomach 
turned over. He had stood fixed to 
the spot, gazing up, unable to look 
away. Finally some fellow running 
past had stepped on his foot, breaking the spell and freeing him. He 
had hurried on, getting away as 
fast as he could, relieved and 
shaken. Lord. . . I 

The back door shimmed. Jimmy 
wandered into the living room, his 
hands in his pockets. "Hi, Dad." 
He stopped by the bathroom door, 
looking across at his father. "What's 
the matter? You're all funny looking." 

"Jimmy, come over here." Ted 
■tubbed out his cigarette. "I want 
to talk to you." 

"I have to go wash for dinner." 

"Come here and sit down. Dinner 
can wait.** 

Jimmy came over and slid up 
onto the couch. "What's the matter? What is it?" 

Ted studied his son. Round little 
face, tOUSled hait hanging down in 



his eyes. Smudge of dirt on one 
cheek. Jimmy was eleven. Was this 
a good time to tell him? Ted set his 
jaw grimly. Now was as good a 
time as any — while it was strong 
in his mind. 

"Jimmy, there was a Martian up 
on Johnson's roof. I saw it on the 
way home from the bus depot." 

Jimmy's eyes grew round. "A 
buggie?" 

"They were getting it with a 
pole. A cloud of them's around. 
They come in clouds every few 
years." His hands were beginning to 
shake again. He lit another cigarette. "Every two or three years. 
Not as often as they used to. They 
drift down from Mars in clouds, 
hundreds of them. All over the 
world — like leaves." He shuddered. 
"Like a lot of dry leaves blowing 
down." 

"Gosh!" Jimmy said. He got off 
the couch onto his feet. "Is it still 
there?" 

"No, they were getting it down. 
Listen.** Ted leaned toward the boy. 
"Listen to me — I'm telling you this 
so you'll stay away from them. If 
you see one of them you turn 
around and run as fast as you can. 
You hear? Don't go near it — stay 
away. Don't . . " 

He hesitated. "Don't pay any 
attention to it. You just turn 
around and run. Get somebody, stop 
the first man you see and tell him, 
then come on home. Do you understand?" 

Jimmy nodded. 

"You know what they look like. 



MARTIANS COME IN CLOUDS 



They showed you pictures at school. 
You must have — *' 

Lena came to the kitchen door. 
"Dinner's ready. Jimmy, aren't you 
washed?" 

"I stopped him," Ted said, 
getting up from the couch. "I 
wanted to have a talk with him." 

"You mind what your father 
tells you," Lena said. "About the 
buggies — remember what he says or 
he'll give you the biggest whipping 
you ever heard of." 

Jimmy ran to the bathroom. "I'll 
get washed." He disappeared, slamming the door behind him. 

Ted caught Lena's ga/c. "1 hope 
they get them taken care of soon. 
I hate even to be outside." 

"They should. I heard on television they're more organized than 
last time." Lena counted mentally. 
"This is the fifth time they've come. 
The fifth cloud. It seems to be 
tapering off. Not as often, any 
more. The first was in nineteen 
hundred and fifth-eight. The next 
in fifty-nine. I wonder where it'll 
end." 

Jimmy hurried out of the bathroom. "Let's eatl" 

"Okay," Ted said. "Let's eat." 

It was a bright afternoon with 
the sun shining down everywhere. 
Jimmy Barnes rushed out of the 
schoolyard, through the gate and 
onto the sidewalk. His heart was 
hammering excitedly. He crossed 
over to Maple Street and then onto 
Cedar, running the whole way. 

A couple of people were still 



poking around on Johnson's lawn— 
a policeman and a few curious men. 
There was a big ruined place in the 
center of the lawn, a sort of tear 
where the grass had been ripped 
back. The flowers all around the 
house had been trampled flat. But 
there was no sign whatsoever of the 
buggie. 

While he was watching Mike 
Fdwards came over and punched 
him on the arm. "What »ay, 
Barnes." 

*TH. Did you see it?" 

"The buggie? No." 

"My Dad saw it, coming home 
from work." 

"Bull!" 

"No, he really did. He said they 
were getting it down with a pole." 

Ralf Drake rode up on his bike. 
"Where is it? Is it gone?" 

"They already tore it up," Mike 
said. "Barnes says his old man saw 
it, coming home last night." 

"He said they were poking it 
down with a pole. It was trying 
to hang onto the roof." 

"They're ill dried-up and withered," Mike said, "like something 
that's been hanging out in the 
garage." 

"How do you know?" Ralf said. 

"I saw one once." 

"Yeah. (II bet." 

They walked along the sidewalk, 
Ralf wheeling his bike, discussing 
the matter loudly. They turned 
down Vermont Street and crossed 
the big vacant lot. 

"The TV announcer said most of 
them are already rounded up," Ralf 



FANTASTIC UNIVERSE 



"There weren't very many 

time." 

immy kicked a rock. "I'd sure 
to cc one before they get them 

"I'd sure like to grt one," Mike 

sneered. "If you ever saw 
; you'd run so fast you wouldn't 
■ until the sun set." 
"Oh, yeah?" 
"You'd run like a fool.** 
"The heck I would. I'd knock 
ol' buggic down with a rock." 
"Ami carry him home in a tin 
?" . 

Mike chased Ralf around, out 
to the street and up to the 
corner. The argument continued 
endlessly all the way across town 
and over to the other side of the 
railroad tracks. They walked past 
the ink works and the Western 
Lumber Company loading platforms. 
The sun sank low in the sky. It 
was getting to be evening. A cold 
wind came up, blowing through 
the palm trees at the end of the 
Hartly Construction Company lot. 

"See you," Ralf said. He hopped 
on his bike, riding off. Mike and 
Jimmy walked back toward town 
together. At Cedar Street they 
lepa rated. 

"If you sec a buggic give me a 
call," Mike said. 

"Sure thing." Jimmy walked on 
up Cedar Street, his hands in his 
pockets. The sun hid set. The 
evening air was chill. Darkness 
was descending. 

He walked slowly, his eyes on 



the ground. The streetlights came 
on. A few cars moved along the 
street. Behind curtained windows 
he saw bright flashes of yellow, 
warm kitchens and living rooms. A 
television set brayed out, rumbling 
into the gloom. He passed along 
the brick wall of the Pomcroy 
Estate. The wall turned into an 
iron fence. Above the fence great 
silent evergreens rose dark and unmoving in the evening twilight. 

For a moment Jimmy stopped, 
kneeling down to tie his shoe. A 
cold wind blew around him, making 
the evergreens sway slightly. Far 
off a train sounded, a dismal wail 
echoing through the gloom. He 
thought about dinner, Dad with 
his shoes off, reading the newspaper. His mother in the kitchen — 
the TV set murmuring to itself in 
the corner — the warm, bright living room. 

Jimmy stood up. Above him in 
the evergreens something moved. 
He glanced up, suddenly rigid. 
Among the dark branches something rested, swaying with the 
wind. He gaped, rooted to the spot. 

A bttggie. Wailing and watching, 
crouched silently up in the tree. 

It was old. He knew that at once. 
There was a dryness about it, an 
odor of age and dust. An ancient 
gray shape, silent and unmoving, 
wrapped around the trunk and 
branches of the evergreen. A mass 
of cobwebs, dusty strands and webs 
of gray wrapped and trailing across 
the tree. A nebulous wispy pn 



presence 




MARTIANS COME IN CLOUDS 

that made the hackles of h'u neck 
rise. 

The shape began to move but 10 
slowly he might not have noticed. 
It was sliding around the trunk, 
feeling its way carefully, a little at 
a time. As if it were sightless, blind. 
Feeling its way inch by inch, an 
unseeing gray ball of cobwebs and 
dust. 

Jimmy moved back from the 
fence. It was completely dark. The 
sky was black above him. A few 
stars glittered distantly, bits of remote fire. Far down the street a 
bus rumbled, turning a corner. 

A buggie — clinging to the tree 
above him. Jimmy struggled, pulling himself away. His heart was 
thumping painfully, choking him. 
He could hardly breathe. His vision 
blurred, fading and receding. The 
buggie was only a little way from 
him, only a few yards above his 
head. 

Help — he had to get help. Men 
with poles to push the buggie down 
— people— right away. He closed 
his eyes and pushed away from the 
fence. He seemed to be in a vast 
tide, a rushing ocean dragging at 
him, surging over his 1x>dy, holding 
him where he was. He could not 
break away. He was Caught He 
strained, pushing against it. One 
step . . . another step ... a third — 
And then he heard it. 
Or rather felt it. There was no 
sound. It was a drumming, a kind 
01 murmuring like the sea, inside 
his head. The drumming tapped 
;ainst his mind, beating gently 



"53 

around him. He halted. The murmuring wis soft, rhythmic. But 
insistent — urgent. It began to separate, gaining form — form and substance. It llowed, breaking up in' 
distinct sensations, images, scen Scenes — of another world, i 
world. The buggie was talking 
him, telling him about its wor 
spinning out scene after scene wi 
anxious haste. 

"Get away," Jimmy multe~ 
thickly. 

But the scenes still came, urgen 
ly, insistently, lapping at bis mi" 

Plains — a vast desert withou 
limit or end. Dark red, cracked a 
scored with ravines. A far line 
blunted hills, dust-covered, 
roded. A great basin off to t* 
right, an endless empty picpan wi 
white-crusted salt rimming it, 
bitter ash where water had on 
lapped. 

"Get away!" Jimmy mutter 
again, moving a step back. 

The scenes grew. Dead sky, pa 
tides of sand, whipped alo carried endlessly. Sheets of san 
vast billowing clouds of sand a~ 
dust, blowing endlessly across 
cracked surface of the planet, 
few scrawny plants growing 
rocks. In the shadows of the mou~ 
tains great spiders with old we'~ 
dust-covered, spun centuries a~ 
Dead spiders, lodged in cracks. 

A scene expanded. Some sort 
artificial pipe, jutting up from the 
nd-baked ground. A vent — underground quit ters. The view changed. 
He was seeing below, down into the 




FANTASTIC UNTVr.RSE 



ore of the planet — layer after layer 
of crumpled rock. A withered 
wrinkled planet without fire or life 
or moisture of any kind. Its skin 
cracking, its pulp drying out and 
blowing up in clouds of dust. Far 
down in the core a tank of some 
sort — a chamber sunk in the heart 
of the planet. 

He was inside the tank. Buggies 
were everywhere, sliding and moving around. Machines, construction 
€»t iliflcrent kinds, buildings, plants 
in rows, generators, homes, rooms 
of complex equipment. 

Sections of the tank were closed 
off — bolted shut. Rusty, metal 
doors — machinery sinking into deCay — valves closed, pipes rusting 
away — dials cracked and broken. 
Lines clogged — teeth missing from 
gears — more and more sections 
closed. Fewer buggies — fewer and 
fewer . . . 

The scene changed. Earth, seen 
from a long way off — a distant 
green sphere, turning slowly, cloudcovcred. Broad oceans, blue water 
miles deep — moist atmosphere. The 
buggies drifting through empty 
reaches of space, drifting slowly 
toward Earth, year af tcr year. 
Drifting endlessly in the dark wastes 
with agonizing slowness. 

Now Earth expanded. The scene 
was almost familiar. An ocean surface, miles of foaming water, a few 
gulls above, a distant shore line. 
The ocean, Earth's ocean. Clouds 
wandering above in the sky. 

On the surface of the water flat 
spheres drifted, huge metal discs. 



Floating units, artificially built, 
several hundred feet around. Buggies rested silently on the discs, absorbing water and minerals from 
the ocean under them. 

The buggie was trying to tell 
him something, something about itself. Discs on the water — the buggies wanted to use the water, to 
live on the water, on the surface 
of the ocean. Big surface discs, 
covered with buggies — it wanted 
him to know that, to see the discs, 
the water discs. 

The buggies would live on the 
water, not on the land. Only the 
water — they wanted his permission. 
They wanted to use the water. That 
was what it was trying to tell him 
— that they wanted to use the surface of the water between the 
continents. Now the buggie was asking, imploring. It wanted to know. 
It wanted him to say, to answer, 
to give his permission. It was waiting to hear, waiting and hoping— 
imploring . . . 

The scenes faded, winking out of 
his mind. Jimmy stumbled back, 
falling against the curb. He leaped 
up again, wiping damp grass from 
his hands. He was standing in the 
gutter. He could still see the buggie renting among the branches of 
the evergeen. It was almost invisible. He could scarcely make it 
out. 

The drumming had receded, left 
his mind. The buggie had withdrawn. 

jimmy turned and fled. He ran 
across the street and dowi: the other 



MARTIANS COME tN CLOUDS 



side, sobbing for breath. He came 
Co the comer and turned up 
Douglas Street. At the bus-stop 
stood a heavy-set man with a 
lunchbucket under liis arm. 

Jimmy ran up to the man. "A 
buggie. In the tree." He gasped for 
breath. "In the big tree." 

The man grunted. "Run along, 
kid." 

"A buggie!" Jimmy's voice rose 
in panic, shrill and insistent. "A 
buggie up in the tree!'* 

Two men loomed up out of the 
darkness. "What? A buggie?" 

"Where?" 

More people appeared. "Where is 

it?" 

Jimmy pointed, gesturing. "Pomcroy Estate. The tree. By the fence." 
He waved, gasping. 

A cop appeared. "What's going 
on?" 

"The kid's found a buggie. Somebody get a pole." 

"Show me where it is," the cop 
said, grabbing hold of Jimmy's arm. 
"Come on." 

Jimmy led them back down the 
street, to the brick wall. He hum* 
back, away from the fence. "Up 
there." 

"Which tree?" 

"That one — I think." 

A flashlight flicked on, picking 
its way among the evergreens. In 
the Pomeroy house lights came on. 
The front door opened. 

"What's going on there?" Mr. 
Pomeroy's voice echoed angrily, 

"Got a buggie. Kscd back." 



Mr. Pomeroy's doors ilammft) 
quickly shut. 

"There it is!" Jimmy pointed up. 
"Thai tree." His heart almos 
stopped beating. "There. Up tbert 

"Where?" 

"I see it." The cop moved back, 
his pistol out. 

"You can't shoot it. Bullets 
right through." 

"Somebody get a pole.*" 

"Too high for a pole.** 

"Get x torch." 

"Somebody bring a torch!** 

Two men ran off. Cars were 
stopping. A police car slid to a halt, 
its siren whirring into silence. Doors 
opened, men came running over. A 
searchlight flashed on, dazzling 
them. It found the buggies and 
locked into place. 

The buggie rested unmoving, 
hugging the branch of the evergreen. In the blinding light it 
looked like some giant cocoon 
clinging uncertainly to its place 
The buggie began to move hesitantly, creeping around the trunk. It* 
wisps reached out, feeling for su[ 
port. 

"A torch, damn it! Get a to"' 
here!" 

A man came with a blazing 
board ripped from a fence. They 
poured gasoline over newspapers 
heaped in a ring around the base of 
the tree. The bottom branches began to burn, feebly at first, then 
more brightly. 

"Get more gas!** 

A man in white uniform came 
lugging a tank of gasoline. He 



FANTASTIC UNIVERSE 



rcw the tankful of gas onto the 
Flames blazed up, rising 
pidly. The branches charred and 
tickled, burning furiously. 
Far above them the buggie began 
stir. It climbed uncertainly to a 
"gher branch, pulling itself up. 
I flames licked closer. The buggie 
rcased its pace. It undulated, 
gging itself onto the next branch 
vc. I [igher and higher it climbed. 
"Look at it go." 
"It won't get away. It*s almost 
the top." 

More gasoline was brought. The 
mes leaped higher. A crowd had 
llected around the fence. The 
lice kept them back. 
"There it goes." The light moved 
keep the buggie visible. 
"It's at the top." 
The buggie had reached the top 
the tree. It rested, holding onto 
e branch, swaying back and 
orth. Flames leaped from branch 
branch, closer and closer to it. 
c buggie felt hesitantly around, 
lindly, seeking support. It reached, 
eeling with its wisps. A spurt of 
re touched it. 
The buggie crackled, smoke risg from it. 
"It's burning!" An excited murur swept through the crowd. "It's 
nished." 

The buggie was on fire. It moved 
luinsily, trying to get away. Sud"cnly it dropped, falling to the 
ranch below. For a second it hung 
ri the branch, crackling and 
smoking. Then the branch gave 
way with a rending crackle. 



The buggie fell to the ground, 
among the newspapers and gasoline. 

The crowd roared. They seethed 
toward the tree, flowing and milling 
forward. 

"Step on it!" 

"Get it!" 

"Step on the damn thing!" 

Boots stamped again and again, 
feet rising and falling, grinding the 
buggie into the ground. A man 
fell, pulling himself away, his 
glasses hanging from one car. Knots 
of struggling people fought with 
each other, pressing inward, trying 
to reach the tree. A flaming branch 
fell. Some of the crowd retreated. 

"I got it!" 

"Get bark!" 

More branches fell, crashing 
down. The crowd broke up, streaming back, laughing and pushing. 

Jimmy felt the cop's hand on his 
arm, big fingers digging in. "That's 
the end, boy. It's all over.** 

"They get it?" 

"They sure did. What's your 
name?" 

"My name?" Jimmy started to 
tell the cop his name but just then 
some scuffling broke out between 
two men and the cop hurried over. 

Jimmy stood for a moment, 
watching. The night was cold. A 
frigid wind blew around him, 
chilling him through his clothing, 
lie thought suddenly of dinner and 
his father stretched out on the 
couch, reading the newspaper. His 
mother in the kitchen fixing dinner. 
The warmth, the friendly yellow 
homely warmth. 



MARTIANS COME IN CLOUDS 



He turned and made his way 
through the people to the edge of 
the street. Behind him the charred 
stalk of the tree rose black and 
smoking into the night. A few 
glowing remains were being stamped 
out around its base. The buggie was 
gone, it was over, there was nothing more to see. 

Jimmy hurried home as if the 
buggie were chasing him. 

"What do you say to that?" Ted 
Barnes demanded, sitting with his 
legs crossed, his chair back from 
the table. The cafeteria was full of 
noise and the smell of food. People 
pushed their trays along on the 
racks in front of them, gathering 
dishes from the dispensers. 

"Your kid really did that?" Bob 
Walters said, across from him, with 
open curiosity. 

"You sure you're not stringing 
us along?" Frank Hendricks said, 
lowering his newspaper for a 
moment. 

"It's the truth. The one they got 
over at the Pomeroy Estate — I'm 
talking about that one. It was a 
real son-of-a-gun." 

"That's right," Jack Green admitted. "The paper says some kid 
spotted it first and brought the 
police." 

"That was my kid," Ted said, his 
chest swelling. "What do you guys 
think about that?" 



"37 

"Was he scared?" Bob Walters 
wanted to know. 

"Hell no!" Ted Barnes replied 

strongly. 

"I'll bet he was," Frank Hendricks was from Missouri". 

"He sure wasn't. He got the 
cops and brought them to the place 
— last night. We were sitting around 
the dinner table, wondering where 
the hell he was. I was getting a 
little worried." Ted Barnes was still 
the proud parent. 

Jack Green got to his feet, looking at his watch, "Time to get back 
to the office." 

Frank and Bob got up also. "See 
you later, Ted." 

Green thumped Ted on the back. 
"Some kid you got, Barnes — chip 
off the old block. 

Ted grinned. "He wasn't a bit 
afraid." He watched them go out 
of the cafeteria onto the busy 
noonday street. After a moment he 
gulped down the rest of his coffee 
and wiped bis chin, standing slowly 
up. "Not a damn bit afraid — not 
one damn bit." 

He paid for his lunch and pushed 
his way out-;idc onto the street, his 
chest still swelled up. He grinned 
at people passing by as he walked 
hack to the office, all aglow with 
reflected glory. 

"Not a hit afraid," he murmured, 
full of pride, a deep glowing pride. 
"Not one damn bitl" 



the 
minister 
had 
to 
wait 

by . . . Roger Dee 

e Brass said, "Turn it on!" So 
c Maxey could but obey — which 
atcd one hell of a big mess. 



Doc Maxey didnV Bun.D the 
Di-tube as a weapon. Furthermore, 
he swore, he would be damned if 
he'd stand by and see ic turned into 
one. 

Dora and I — Dora is Doc's 
daughter and I'm Jerry Bivins, his 
assistant — were helping him with 
the working model of the Di-tube 
generator in his Connecticut laboratory when he made that plain to 
the brass and brains of Allied Military, a delegation headed by two 
full generals and guarded by a hardjawed squad of MP's. 

But for once the Doc was on the 
wrong end of a browbeating. The 
generals knew their ground and 
they shut the Doc up like a thirtydollar shoe clerk. 

"Since a state of global emergency 
has been declared," Three-star 
Corbin said icily, "the military has 
full authority to commandeer the 
fruits of any independent research. 
Eastern and Western forces arc at 
the ultimate in cold-war deadlock, a 
stalemate which must soon cripple 
the economy of the world unless it 
is broken. Your Dimension-tube offers an ideal weapon for ending it." 

He was right about the deadlock 
if QOt about the Di-tube. Every 
strategically important center in 
the Eastern Hemisphere had been 
imprcgnably roofed since the early 
l?70's with the transmuscrccn, a 



THE MONSTERS HAD NO EVES BUT THEY WERE BEMS FOR A' THAT. 



THE MINISTER HAD TO WAIT 



shield that inertcd atomic 
warheads to harmless isotopic lead. 
We Westerners had the same protection, of course, which brought 
on tlte stalemate. The catch was 
that neither side could afford to 
relax its screens for an instant, and 
the power required to sustain those 
f giant force-shells was rapidly exhausting the resources of both 
hemispheres. 

Two-star Dcmarcst was more 
diplomatic than Corbin but twice 
as pompous. 

"As We understand it, Dr. Maxey, 
this Dimension- tunnel effect of 
yours will permit us to dispatch 
robojet warheads through an — ah, a 
cylindrical rift in the continuum of 
space to any desired part of the 
globe. A rift large enough would 
enable us to reach through the 
enemy's defense screens, short-cutting normal space in much the same 
manner as a two-dimensional ant, 
which was crawling upon a flat 
sheet of paper — " 

"Could reach the opposite side 
instantaneously by piercing the 
paper," Doc finished for him, 
fuzzing out his scrubby beard like 
a baited goat, "The two of you 
sound like sub- juvenile idiots, 
mouthing moronic oversimplifications lifted straight from the Sunday comic-tapes. You disgust me 
with the human species!" 

With that he whipped off his bifocals and stalked out. Ten seconds 
later he stalked back, prodded by 
the business end of a neuroblast 



rifle in the hands of i cold-eyed 

MP. 

"Refusal to aid your country at 
such a time," Three-star Corbin 
pointed out, "is a treasonable action, 
punishable by indefinite imprisonment." 

Two-star Dcmarcst gave him the 
other barrel. "Stubbornness will 
gain you nothing, Doctor. Have 
you considered that our scrum-andpsycho corps can easily extract the 
necessary information from you?" 

Hard-headed as he was, the Doc 
read the handwriting on the wall 
without even adjusting his bifocals. 

"You may change your minds 
after seeing the Subspace Twisters," 
he said. "Activate the model, 
Gerald." 

I flipped the switch on the threefoot bakelite cabinet that housed 
our little Di-tube generator. It 
sizzled for a moment with a sound 
like frying bacon and shot out a 
two- inch beam from the copper 
helix at the bottom — a beam as 
clearly outlined as a water pipe but 
which couldn't really be seen because there was nothing there. 

Don't let that throw you. Just 
take my word for it — it was a twoinch cylinder of nothing at all, a 
clean-cut shaft of absolute vacancy. 

Until you looked into the twinprism eyepiece we had rigecd up, 
that is. You couldn't sight directly 
down the lube itself because the 
generator's energy feedback raised 
a glowing force-bubble that hung 
above the cabinet like a basketballsized neon bulb. That bubble repre


i 4 o 

tented a spherical strain against 
supertpace, so Doc said, in compensation for the forced passage 
of the Di-tjbe through the continuum of subspace. A demonstration of the first law of physics, to 
every action an equal and opposite 
reaction. 

Three-star Corbin looked first, 
pulling his rink. One glimpse of the 
Twisters was enough — he jumped a 
foot and turned the color of a dead 
flounder. 

"In God's name," he choked 
when he got his breath back, "what 
are they?" 

"We don't know," I told him. 
"But I'll give you odds that they 
wouldn't he chummy if they ever 
got up here." 

I knew how he felt. My first 
sight of the Twisters had given me 
nightmares for a week. I won't try 
to describe them because they never 
looked alike to any two people. Doc 
said that a description didn't matter because what we thought we 
saw were only multidimensional 
cross-sections a n y w a y — b u t I 
wouldn't know about that. To me 
they looked like inside-out octopuses. 

"You sec?** Doc snapped, bristling his beard triumphantly. "The 
cross-sections we sec of these inhabitants of subspace give no clue 
whatever as to their true nature. 
Even you should realise that opening a larger rift into their domain 
would be an extremely dangerous 
undertaking." 

"Allied Military,* 4 said Three-star 



FANTASTIC UNiVHRSE 



Corbtn, who had got some of his 
color back, "is quite capable of 
dealing with these brutes if necessary. Dr. Maxey, you will proceed 
with the construction of a fullscale Dimension-tunnel.** 

The doc made some sulphuroua 
remarks that were lost in his beard. 

"I'd rot in prison first," He 
growled finally, "but for the fact 
that it would be suicidal to trust 
such equipment in the hands of 
morons. A larger generator could 
extend a Dimension -rift clean to 
infinity and sooner or later some 
incompetent fool would swing the 
beam in operation and slice the 
universe in half!" 

And that was how the brass and 
brains of Allied Military got their 
big Di-tubc generator built. It took 
three weeks, with Doc superintending and Dora and me doing the 
work, to set it up and tunc it for 
the test. 

Doc, being a hard loser, made one 
last-ditch attempt to argue them 
out of using the Di-tube. 

"The mathematical concepts involved in this operation," he told 
the generals and their whitesmocked technical staff, "are 
obviously beyond the grasp of your 
stunted intellects. Therefore I shall 
make shift with your adolescent 
analogy of the two-dimensional ant, 
which improbable brute in boring 
through his sheet of paper would 
find himself for the duration f>f bit 
passage in a plane totally alien and 
untranslatable to terms of his own 
experience. 




THE MINISTER HAD TO WAIT 



"Like the ant we are dealing with 
a wholly new concept — subspace. 
My calculations show that other 
dimensions — there is no way of determining how many — lie above and 
below our own. In short-cutting 
cither adjoining dimension we shall 
be as utterly out of our accustomed 
element as the ant in the paper. 
Moreover the continuum we call 
subspace is inhabited. Surely even 
you can see the danger involved?" 

He was right, of course, but it 
didn't buy him anything. Nobody 
ever convinced a full gener.il with 
that kind of argument. 

"Proceed with the test," ordered 
Three-star Corbin. 

There was nothing eb.c for it. 
Dora clung to my arm, pressing 
close enough to make me almost 
glad of (he risk we ran, while Doc 
obeyed orders. 

Doc, muttering minor blasphemies into his beard, punched the 
button that activated the big generator — and loosed catastroplw, is 
the telepapers later said, on an 
unsuspecting world. 

The big Di-tube machine didn't 
sizzle like the model — it roared. 
The glowing strain -bubble over the 
generator built up slowly to a bumming orange sphere ten feet across. 
The cylindrical shaft of nothingness th;it speared out of the under 
side helix punched a hole like a 
mine shaft in the laboratory floor, 
a vertical tunnel of absolute vacancy that twisted the eyes half out 
of our heads with its brain-wrenching alien ness. 



The Twisters were out io forte, 
swarming around in the big beam 
and looking more than ever like 

inside-out octopuses. They didn't 
have any eyes, as far as I could 
but I could feel them staring upward, studying us. 

"Now will you listen to reason?" 
Doc demanded, and reached for the 
switch. "I'm going to turn off the 
beam, before — " 

Catastrophe stopped him. 

The big orange strain-bubble 
over the Di-tube generator exploded 
like an A-bomb. Concussion rocked 
the room, shattering windows and 
piling brasshats and technicians together in aimless heaps. Dora and 
I landed together in a corner, 
knocking over the little cabinet 
that housed our first model Di-tube 
generator. 

The big generator overloaded, 
pouring out black smoke. Relays 
slammed like triphammers, (hutting 
off current. The Di-tube shaft in 
the floor blinked out, taking the 
Twisters with it. 

But another Dimension-tunnel 
speared downward through the 
roof, ending at the spot where th« 
exploded strain-bubble had been. 
And it wasn't ours. 

It was packed solid with what 
looked like bedsprings, coiled and 
conical, eight feet long and blazing 
with a crackling bluish light that 
hurt the eyes. They slid down the 
beam and popped out into the lab 
with a swift precision that meant 
tbey knew exactly what they were 
doing, to cluster like sizzling blue 



1<2 FANTASTIC 

glow-worms about the smoking 
nerator. 

Half-dazed as I was, the truth 
lit me with a shock that curled my 
like an Angora rug. Those 

guttering fire-worms were not 
;anging around the dead generator 
ist to get warm. 
They were studying it. 
I got up somehow and headed for 
he laboratory exit, carrying Dora's 
np form in my arms. The military 
me to it. The generals and 
icir staffs were already there, jamung the doorway like a herd of 
stampeded sheep. I was the last 
nan out, leaving the fire-worms 
it ill circling about the smoking 
;enerator. 

Doc Maxey had stopped on the 
[raveled gyro court halfway between the lab and his house on the 
liill above but he wasn't waiting for 
. He was staring back toward the 
lab with his scrubby beard flutterng in the night wind and his eyes 
lining like wet marbles. 

I looked back to see smoke pourng out of the laboratory windows. 
5reat sparks of light shot out 
through it but it wasn't until I understood Doc's yammering that I 
new what they were. 
"They've left the rift!" he was 
tiling. "They're free — we've let 
ose monsters loose on the world!" 
The fire- worms scattered systematically, taking off in every direction like snaky skyrockets. One 
minute the air was full of them — 
the next they were gone. 

"This new Di-tube came through 



UNIVERSE 

when our strain-bubble burst," I 
said, looking up at tlic shaft of 
vacancy dwindling away into the 
sky. Dora came out of her faint 
then but I didn't put her down — I 
liked holding her too well. "Bui 
how, Doc, and from wlicre?" 

"From superspace, the plane of 
existence immediately above ours," 
Doc said, wringing his hands. "The 
energy backlash from our generator 
must have weakened the spatial barrier between dimensions, enabling 
them to break through at the point 
of stress." 

Even I could understand rut. 
Dora got it too and hid her face 
against my chest. "We've got to 
stop them somehow," she said. 
"Jerry don't just stand here — Jo 
something!" 

At another time it would have 
been funny — she was asking »w to 
stop this catastrophe when the best 
brains in the Western Hemisphere 
were legging it up the hill with 
nothing on their rhinds but mileage. 

"This is no time for jokes," I 
told her. "Let's get up to the house 
and call Washington, Doc." 

There were two phones in the 
house but we couldn't get within 
yelling distance of either of them. 
Both generals were on the wire, 
countermanding each other's orders 
right and left and screaming for 
the Air Marines. The living-room 
t-v was blaring full blast at a circle 
of both Eastern and Westenr hemispheres and they were hitting us 
right where we lived. 

In the space of i few minu' 



THE MINISTER HAD TO WAIT 



M3 



those speeding fire- worms had 
spread over the entire globe. They 
had penetrated the defense screens 
of both Eastern and Western hemispheres and they were hitting us 
right where we lived. 

"The invaders do not seem to be 
conscious of us as entities," the 
newscaster gabbled. "But they arc 
attracted to concentrations of 
nuclear materials as flies are drawn 
to honey and for the same reason. 
Every atomic pile on Earth has 
been besieged by these alien monsters, who are draining away our 
nuclear energy like leeches. At the 
present rate all smaller piles will 
soon be Inerted and larger ones — ■ 
wait, a special bulletin. . . . 

"Latest information sheds some 
light upon the sudden onslaught of 
the Blazers, as the invaders are being 
called by a public still largely unaware of its danger. They first appeared some twenty minutes ago 
during a top-secret military experiment at the Connecticut laboratory 
of Dr. Marvin Maxcy, well-known 
scienti6c — " 

Somebody shut off the set and 
we stared at each other in blank 
silence. Nobody even tried to pass 
the buck — fixing the blame wasn't 
important now. All that mattered 
was that unless the Blazers were 
stopped immediately our world was 
finished. Those fission-hungry fiends 
would strip us to the last erg of 
our nuclear energy — and to a world 
geared to atomic power that meant 
the end. 

We had forgotten the coming 



war completely. There was no point 
in worrying now about being 
blasted out of our beds. In a few 
days most of us would be starving 
to death in them. 

The brasshats camped on the 
telephones until daylight before 
they gave it up. Dora was dishing 
up scrambled eggs and coffee to 
Doc and me in the kitchen when 
Three-star Corbin stumbled in, out 
on Ins feet. 

"You were right, Dr. Maxey," 
he groaned. "Using your Dimensiontube as a weapon was a mistake, a 
cosmic and irremediable 1'ror. These 
invaders are indestructible — the 
concerted might of Allied Military 
has failed to repel them. The doom 
of Earth is .sealed. " 

Doc plucked unhappily at his 
beard. 

"Surely we can retool our industries to electric power in time," 
he said. But he didn't sound sure. 
He sounded beaten. 

Corbin shook his head grayly. 
"You don't understand the psychology of panic, Doctor. Law is 
dependent upon power. When power 
fails the mob rules. By this time 
tomorrow government will have 
begun to break down. Civilization 
as we know it will disintegrate 
within a matter of days." 

I had known that all along, 
of course, but all of a sudden 
the real enormity of what was 
happening hit me like a boot in 
the stomach. There sat Doc Maxcy, 
one of the most brilliant physicists 
in the world — stumped. Beside him 



1 14 



FANTASTIC UNlVt-RSB 



drooped Three-star General Corbin, 
high commander of Allied Military, 
and he was as helpless as a corner 
newsboy. A top-flight crew of research technicians stood around in 
the living room like so many cigarstore dummies, looking at each 
Other blankly while the world 
skidded to ruin on a slippery cosmic 
banana peel. 

Dorj came over and put an arm 
across my shoulders. As suddenly as 
I had got scared I got mad. 

It wasn't just the idea of the 
world going bust that burned me. 
This was a personal business that 
threatened Dora and me and our 
friends and all the millions and 
millions of people wc had never 
even seen. Here was the lot of us 
headed A-ovcr-T straight back to 
the itonc ages. A few days more 
and people we had known and loved 
would be hunting each oilier 
through the streets with clubs, 
driven to murder and worse because 
ft crew of greedy alien fire-worms 
had t taste for atomic fission. 

It was a hopeless affair and I 
knew it. But down inside me a 
nagging little ghost of an idea kept 
whispering that wc must have overlooked something, that somewhere 
there must be a loophole these highvoltage intellects had missed. Sometimes, I told myself, theorists can 
be as dumb as ord i na r y pcop le. 
Sometimes they just can't sec the 
trees for the woods. 

"Look," I said. "We're missing a 
bet somewhere. Wc built the Ditubc in the beginning to . . ." 



Doc gave me « pitying look. 
"Will you keep your infantile inspirations to yourself, Gerald? I'm 
trying 'to think." 

I turned to Three-star Corbin, 
getting eager because the idea had 
just nudged me again. It wasn't 
clear yet — but it was there, begging 
to be recognized like a half-remcmbered name that trembles on the tip 
of your tongue, 

"Will you listen, General? There'* 
a chance that . . .** 

The general 'gave mc a poisonous 
glare. "Can't you see that I'm 
planning a course of action? Shut 
up or I'll have you thrown out!" 

I jumped up, knocking over my 
coffee, and walked out. Dora came 
outside after me and caught my 
arm. "Jerry! What are you going 
to do?" 

"I'm going down to the lab," I 
said. "Maybe I'm nuts but I think 
we've still got a chance to beat this 
infernal thing." 

The sun came up round and rosy 
while we walked down to the lab 
and I felt my scalp prickle when I 
saw the no-colored shaft of the 
Blazers' Di-tube rising against it 
like a black finger of doom. 

**Therc used to be an early mail 
rocket out of Waterbury at sunrise," Dora said softly, "and a passenger flight just afterward. Remember how we used to complain 
because they woke us up, Jerry? 
And now — " 

"Now there won't be any more 
rockets," I said. "There won't be 
any more movie dates or drive-i 



or corny floor shows, no more football games or Sunday afternoon 
Spins in the country. There won't 
be any more people after awhile, 
except a scattering of gee-strung 
lavages running wild in packs and 
maybe eating each other. Go back 
and look after Doc, will you? He 
needs you." 

But she wouldn't go. 

The original Di-tube model was 
still in its corner, undamaged. 1 had 
done a solid job of wiring and testing that rig and it had stood the 
blast without even so much as a 
bent helix. 

I checked it over, working fast, 
and bolted on a power feed rectifier 
mat would adapt it to a mobile a.c. 
input. The little cabinet was too 
heavy to lift, so I edged it onto a 
hand-truck and trundled it out of 
the lab and across the graveled 
landing court to the shed where 
Doc's gyro stood. 

Don helped me hoist it inside 
and bolt it down. Ten minutes 
later, when it was all set to go, f 
tried again to talk her into going 
back. There wasn't more than a 
chance in ten thousand that my 
idea would work and if it did I'd 
be left stranded in an alien dimension. And besides that . . . 

I should have saved my breath. 
*1 don't know what you're planning," Dora said, squeezing into the 
teat beside me. "But it doesn't matter. I'm going with you, Jerry." 

I looked out at the Blazers' Ditube, standing black against the 
sunrise, and I didn't argue. Maybe 



she was right. Why not go now, 

together, and get it over with? 

"AH right," I said, and sent the 
gyro whirring out of the shed. 
"Hang on tight. Kid — here goes 
nothing!" 

The MP's poured out of the 
house just as we took the air. 1 
could sec tlicm yelling and waving 
their neuroblast guns but there was 
no point in waiting. They wouldn't 
have listened anyway. 

The lab slid under us and we shot 
straight for the big Di-tube looming up ahead. Breaking into it made 
me feel the way the Twisters looked 
— inside out, upside down, impossibly extended and at the same time 
compressed to microscopic smallness in a vast titleless infinity that 
lasted for I don't know how long. 

It turned out that there really 
was no such thing as time— or distance either for that matter — between dimensions. The Di-tube 
itself was a sort of sensory compromise, an illusion created by the 
mind's effort to visualize a crosssection of a continuum that can't 
be visualized. 

Our transit made mc think of 
the two-dimensional ant. One instant we were over tlw lab — the 
next we were out of this world, in 
superspace. 

The Blazers' dimension was worse 
than the Di-tube. 

Looking through the gyro's 
window made mc feci like a 
schizophrenic drunkard with a set 
of mirror-image scrcamics, watching impossibly clastic nightmare 



1^6 FANTASTIC 

shadows flickering across a crazyhouse looking-glass. There was an 
upside-down horizon that heaved 
like a bowl of phosphorescent jelly, 
a scattering of what might have 
been animated buildings and, close 
at band, a great flurry of helical 
Blazers, circling like mad about 
something I did recognize. 

It was a huge orange strainbubble, a space-warp set up by 
whatever sort of generator that 
Blazers had made to pierce our 
dimension. 

There wasn't a chance of making 
any real sense of what I saw. It 
would have been easier for a flea on 
a camel's back to describe what 
went on in a three-ring circus. 

But the strain-bubble was what 
1 had come to see. The rest didn't 
natter too much. 

"Warm up the model," I said. 
My voice had a thin, windy sound 
and I couldn't keep it steady. 
"From the way they're flitting 
around that bubble they've got 
troubles of their own — and they're 
»oing to have more!" 

Dora understood then what I 
had in mind. "Their generator is 
weakening the barrier to the dimension above this one!'" she said. 
"Jerry, something is trying to break 
through, isn't it?" 

Our little Di-tube model gave a 
tentative sizzle, and it sounded 
pitifully weak. Using it was like 
tackling a grizzly with a hatpin — 
but there was no help for that now. 

"They aren't zipping around that 
space-blister for exercise," I said. 



UNIVERSE 

"Maybe they don't know exactly 
what is on the other side, but 
they're worried." 

That was the whole era/ y railftori* 
to-one chance that had brought me 
there. It stood to reason that the 
Blazers' Di-tube generator would 
create a strain-warp similar to ours 
in their own dimension. If wc could 
puncture their weak spot as they 
had punctured ours . . . 

The two-inch beam of our little 
Di-tube shot out, boring wide of 
the outlandish blob that was the 
Blazers' generator. I swung it back, 
correcting my aim, and the heat 
went on. 

The Blazers dropped their work 
instantly and whirled up toward us. 
But for once they were slow — our 
little Di-shaft sliced through and 
beyond them. And touched the 
strain-bubble. 

There was a searing flash and a 
soundless jarring concussion, and 
the thing went up in a blinding 
shower of orange sparks. 

It was over as quickly as that. The 
Blazers swarming toward us 
whipped back to man the breach 
we had made and they had unexpected reenforcements — they must 
have alerted their party on Earth 
already because the wavering Ditube was suddenly crowded with 
returning fire-worms, zipping back 
home to superspace. 

I swung our gyro toward the 
fading Di-shaft, gave it full throttle 
and prayed. Dora was gripping my 
arm and crying something in my 



THE MINISTER 

ear but I didn't understand a word 
of k. 

I looked back once, just before 
we hie the crumbling column. Tbe 
shower of sparks had died out, and 
in its place stood a familiar shaft 
of vacancy, boring outward into 
the upside-down sky. Something 
squeezed through tbe break while I 
watched, beating back the Blazers 
who fought to stop it. 

I got only a glimpse but I'll never 
be the same again. 

It was a Twister but it didn't 
look like tbe ones we had seen 
through our Di-tube. "What we had 
seen then were only reversed projections, Doc Maxey said later, 
transposed cross-sections altered to 
something we could partially visualize with our limited senses. 

But this Twister wasn't transposed and it didn't look like an 
inside-out octopus. It writhed and 
swelled and radiated a dark devouring coldness that snuffed out 
Blazers like sparks against an ice 
cake. 

Other Twisters may have followed it — I wouldn't know. We bit 
the Di-tube then and at the same 
moment the Blazers' generator blew 
up with an appalling blast . . . 

Tbe next instant we were sailing 
over a parched and blazing desert, 
a glaring waste of jagged lava that 
stretched a way on every side 
through a shimmering haze of heat. 
Black basalt cliffs jutted up here 
and there, warped and eroded by 
scorching winds. 



HAD TO WAIT 147 

Dora and I looked at each other 
dumbly. 

"We got away," Dora said. "But 
what sort of dimension is this? 
Where are we, Jerry?" 

It was a good question. Judging 
from the landscape the collapsing 
Di-tube could have shunted us 
straight into the ash-bin of hell. 
There wasn't a twinkle of water 
anywhere, not a wisp of cloud nor 
a flutter of bird in the sky. Just 
a vast wind-swept desolation, 
parching to a sandy crisp under a 
flaming sun. 

I was fumbling for an answer 
when Dora caught my arm. "Look, 
Jerry — there, over the horizon. 
Isn't that smoke?" 

I looked and it was — a thin white 
streamer of smoke rising across the 
badlands, wavering at the top like 
the crooking of an enigmatic finger. 

"We may as well investigate," I 
said, heeling the gyro toward it. 
"If it means another danger we 
might as well face it now as later." 

But it wasn't another alien 
menace. 

It was a sheep camp at the edge 
of the lava beds not far from San 
Rafael, New Mexico. The Mexican 
herder ran like a jackrabbit when 
we swooped down, never having 
seen a gyro before, but at Acomita 
— over on tbe Pueblo Indian reservation — we found a government 
agent who gave us our bearings and 
brougbt us up to date. 

After what we had been through, 
k was only a minor shock to learn 
that it wasn't 1982 any longer. It 



FANTASTIC UNIVERSE 



was 1985 and the Blazers had been 
gone for so long that they were 
practically forgotten. Doc Maxey 
explained later, when we showed up 
with a small army of telepapcr reporters at his Connecticut home, 
that our being caught in the 
collapsing Di-ficld had somehow 
distorted the time values involved 
and had shunted us three years into 
the future. 

Wc took his word for it. 
"The proponents of the circularit ii t v ersc theory were more right 
than they knew," Doc said, beaming and waggling his beard. "There 
would seem to be only three major 
planes of existence, each existing 
in a state of reciprocal contiguity 
to the other two. 

"I suspect also that spherical 
space is actually a unilateral continuum of three layers, restricting 
lateral transit to one direction in 
much the same fashion as a rectifying crystal governs the flow of 
electrons. That would explain why 
the Twisters could force entrance 
to the Blazers' dimension, once you 
destroyed the strain-bubble in su


perspace, but could not enter our 
plane from their own subspatial 

continuum." 

"It's all physics to me," I said, 
holding Dora's band and feeling 
almost safe again. "Only one thing 
worries me — did the Blazers lose the 
rhubarb we ran out on or will we 
have them back in our hair again 
some day?" 

Doc gave me a startled squint 
and fuzzed his beard goat is My. 
"Get that model generator out of 
the gyro," he ordered, sounding like 
his old self. "We'll never know 
what the situation really is unless 
we reactivate the Di-tube and — " 

"And start that ratrace again?" 
I yelled I could see the whole crazy 
business happening over and over in 
a sort of vicious cosmic circle, and 
the thought made my scalp crawl. 
"Over my dead body you will!" 

Dora and I had planned to find a 
minister next but the big moment 
had to wait. 1 had one final adjustment to make on that infernal Ditubc model first. 

I made it on the spot — with a 
large sledgehammer. 



Dr. Einstein has received a multitude of tuell-deserved honors but as far 
as we know science fiction has yet to do hint direct homage. And surely 
he rates it — for had he not, some sixty years ago, come up with his 
full-bom theory of the fourth dimension (and won world-wide publicity 
for said dimension) STF would have been deprived of one of its basic 
stajdes. Without the fourth (and fifth, sixth, seventh and so on) 
dimension, authors of speculative fantasy would have been left stumbling 
amid the distorted metaphysics of their Gothic forerunners — and would 
thereby have been constantly at war with the clergy. Thanks to Dr. 
Einstein they can roam the dimensions at will, threatened by no purgatory 
except that of creative writing itself or of tlx possibility of a repecthn slip. 



finders 



keep 



ers 



by . . . Milton Lesser 



Amhurst wanted to get married. 
But then an invisible ingenue 
moved in on his wedding day . . . 



Enore Amhurst watched the 
■cissors get up from the dresser and 
march across the room. If they had 
marched on the floor it would have 
been bad enough — but not thus bad. 
They marched across the air of the 
bedroom, one thin metal leg after 
the other, to where Eddie was sitting on the edge of the bed in his 
underwear. 

They went snip, snip — once, 
twice, rapidly. Then they marched 
again across the air of the room and 
plunked down on the dresser. 

In his right hand Eddie held a 
silky piece of black cloth. In his 
left hand he held a similar item. 
On the floor at his feet were two 
other pieces of black cloth. If you 
glued the sections together you'd 
hive a pair of black silk socks, size 
twelve. They were so new that you 
could still sec where the paper 
telling the brand-name and the size 
clung to one of them. 

But they weren't much good as 
socks anymore. In his hands Eddie 
held what coulJ have been a pair 
of black-silk spats except that no 
one wore black-silk spats. On the 
floor at his feet were two black silk 
lingeries* gloves. 

"Hey, George!" Eddie called. 
"George, come here quick." 

George ran in from the bathroom, shaving-soap still on one side 



A TIME-TRAVEL TALE THAT TAKES TIME-OUT FOR LAUGHTER. 



i 5 o 



FANTASTIC UNIVERSE 



of his face. He looked at Eddie and 
the two pieces of black silk in 
Eddie's hands. He said, "What the 
liell did you do that for?" 

"Me? I didn't do anything." 

"Anyone can see that you went 
to the dresser, got the scissors, cut 
your socks in half, then put the 
scissors back on the dresser. What I 
want to know is why. Why?" 

"I didn't," Eddie said lamely. 
Then he told George how the 
scissors had got up, marched across 
the room, and cut his socks. 

"Yeah," said George. "Right away. 
Take it easy, kid. I know you're 
about to be married. I know you're 
nervous. But relax. Just take it 
easy — calm down." 

"Hah!" said Eddie. "HabP* 

"What's so funny?" 

"I can prove to you that I didn't 
get up, take the scissors and cut 
my socks. I can prove it, that's 
what." 

George told him to go ahead. 
"1 just took a shower, right?" 
"Right." 

"I always powder my feet after 
a shower, right?" 

"ITowinhell should I know?" 

Eddie sat back on the bed and 
stuck his feet out. "Look." 

There was white powder all over 
the bottoms of his feet, a lot more 
of it in between his toes. 

"Okay," George said. "I see it. 
What does that prove?" 

"You go ahead and find the 
powder on the rug. If I walked 
from here to the dresser and back 



there'd be powder all over the rug 
where I walked. Find it." 

George looked but the rug was 
solid blue without any white marks 
on it. "So you crawled on your 
hands and knees, so you walked on 
your hands. Just don't tell mc the 
scissors did that themselves. They 
couldn't." 

"1 didn't say ihey did it by themselves. Something made them do it. 
Something doesn't want me to get 
married, George. Take last night. 
Someone put pineapple in my fruit 
cup. You know I'm allergic to pineapple. It makes me itch all over for 
two days but luckily I found it. 
When I came back from the florist 
the bridge was out. I could have 
been killed if I hadn't noticed it." 

George shook his head. "The 
bridge was not out. I went back 
and looked for myself later. You 
went the long way for nothing 
because the bridge is standing as it 
always stood. Did you hear anything over the radic about the 
bridge being out?" 

"No-o-o . . r 

"There wasn't even any rain. 
Eddie-boy, you're just nervous. 
You're imagining things. Judy will 
have a nervous wreck on her hands 
if you keep this up. Look — you 
just sit here and wait for me while 
I run down t own and get you 
another pair of black socks." 

"Uh-unh. It's Sunday and the 
stores are closed." 

"Okay, I'll let you wear mine. 
I'm only the best man and I'll wear 
navy blue and no one will know the 



FINDERS KEEPERS 



difference.** George jat on the edge 

of the bed next to Eddie and took 
off his shoes and socks. He gave the 
socks — just a half-size too big — to 
Eddie, then padded across the room 
to the chest of drawers to find a 
pair of navy socks for himself. 

The scissors got up off the dresser 
again while George's back was 
turned and Eddie wanted to yell, 
only no sound came out. He just 
sat there watching while the scissors cut this new pair of black 
socks neatly in half. Then George 
began to turn around and the 
scissors dropped quickly at Eddie's 
feet. 

George held up a pair of navy 
socks. "I got 'em . . ." he began. 
"Eddie, what the hell did you do 
that again for?" 

"Honest . . .** 

"Never mind, Well both wear 
navy." Plainly he thought his cousin 
Judy was marrying a lunatic. 

The thing that surprised Eddie 
most was the fact nothing happened 
during the first part of the ceremony. It was an outdoor wedding 
and he stood with George at the 
makeshift altar in the garden while 
Judy came down the aisle with her 
entourage. 

Judy was lovely in her getup, all 
right, only Eddie could have done 
without all the pomp and ceremony. And lately there had been 
something about Judy — little meannesses, some annoying petulances — 
which had left Eddie on the irritable side. 



It was her mother as much as 

anything, a fat overbearing dominating windbag . . . Eddie boy, stop 
talking to yourself that way about 
your future mother- in -law . . . 

Why should you? Go ahead, keep 
thinking like that if it's what you 
feel. Assert yourself. 
"Who said that?" 
"Said what?" George wanted to 
know. "I didn't hear anyone. And 
be quiet, Eddie — people are looking 
at you." 

You don't have to be quiet unless you really want to. Don't let 
them rope you into anything, Eddie 
— it still isn't too late. 

Eddie looked in vain for the 
source of the voice but everyone 
around him seemed so utterly unperturbed that he could only conclude that he was hearing things. 
Could this have been the voice of 
his conscience, telling him to get 
out while the getting was good? 

Com cienct, smons cience. No 
such thing, Eddie. IPs me. 
"Well, who are yoa?'* 
George said, "Will you shut up, 
Eddie? Everyone's staring." 

After that it wasn't easy. Judy 
joined him at the altar but he 
listened to the ceremony with only 
one ear. With the other he tried to 
pay attention to the voice which he 
alone heard. Since it continued and 
since he was the only one who heard 
it, he concluded quite logically that 
he was going off his rocker. Then 
maybe he was being roped into 
something — beciuse if the prospect 
of marriage to Judy made him feci 



FANTASTIC UNIVERSE 



tills way, then maybe he'd better 
call the whole thing off before it 
was too late. 

Or had the strange voice put that 
idea into his head? Come to think 
of it, here was a nice pleasant 
female voice. It didn't ra*p like 
Mrs. Wiikins" voice and it didn't 
hold the slight suggestion of a 
whine dormant in her daughter 
Judy's. 

"Do you, Edward, take this girl 
Judy, to be your lawfully wedded 
wife?" 

Silence, except for a few sobs 
and whimpers in the sea of faces 
around them. 

"Do you, Edward . , 

Don't do it, FJdie. Do it and 
that'll be the end for you. You'd 
regret it something awful. 

"You think so, Miss, ah — " 

I'll tell yon my name after you 
refuse. You'll find out a lot of 
things after. 

George wailed in Eddie's ear, 
"For gosh sakes, boy — you're holding up the worksl And quit that 
mumbling to yourself. Just say 
yes." 

"thnmm," said Eddie, cogitating. 

". . . And do you, Judy, take 
this man Edward — " 

Apparently his hmmm had been 
taken as an affirmative if nervous 
response. 

You're right, Eddie — that's just 
whet happened. Only don't let 
them go on. In a moment it will be 
too late, and you'll be stuck. 

"You think so, eh?" 



"Shut up!" George hissed in his 
ear. 

. . To have and to hold through 
sickness and in health, till — " 

The wind came up so suddenly, 
and with it the clouds, that one 
moment they stood in a bright 
sunshiny garden, the next it was 
dark and somber and overhead 
lightning flashed and thunder 
rolled sullenly. 

The rain came down in thick 
sheets from what had been a 
moment before a wonderfully clear 
blue sky. Even George's composure 
received a serious dent, "It just 
can't happen that fast!" he cried. 

Judy sobbed, "My gown. Oh, my 
precious gown!" 

"I said, do you, Judy . . .** 

Don't let htm go on, Eddie. The 
rain will add to the confusion. Tell 
him you never said yes — you never 
did, yon know. 

"That's true. I didn't." 

"Didn't what?" George demanded as several men ran out to 
them with umbrellas. 

"I never said yes," Eddie told 
Kim, but the thunder all but 
drowned him out. "I never said 
yes!" he fairly screamed. 

Since everyone had heard him 
that time, the ceremony had to 
begin anew. "Do you, Edward . . .** 

Better, better that you don't, 
Eddie. 

"Will you please be quiet and let 
mc make up my own mind?" 

"Eddie!" This was George. 

. . to have and to hold, 
through . . ,** 



FTNDF.RS KEEPERS 



•51 



Judy vu trying vainly to pull 
the entire length of her gown 
under the umbrella and the fact 
that she couldn't made her pout. 
Her makeup was running in the 
rain too — and quite suddenly she 
looked rather unpretty. Definitely 
positively irrevocably unpretty — a 
younger thinner somewhat more 
attractive image of her mother. A 
thoroughly revolting thought. 

"Uh-unh," said Eddie. 

You tell 'em, Eddie-lmy. 

"Vb-unh:' 

George whispered, "What does 
that mean? Say yes so everyone can 
hear you, especially with this 
thunder." 

"That doesn't mean yes," Eddie 
explained patiently. But then, because the thunder roared still louder, 
he shouted, "In fact, it means the 
opposite of yes." 

YOU tell 'em, Eddie. 

"It means that this Is all a 
mistake. I will not marry Judy. 
The answer to the question is no, 
no, NO!" 

No one did anything. They all 
just stood there, looking at him, 
and Judy even forgot to see how 
the rain was ruining her gown, 
Eddie became embarassed — they all 
just stared. Presently he kissed 
Judy's cheek politely, said he was 
sorry, turned on his heel and strode 
down the muddy aisle. 

Everyone looked but no one tried 
to stop him. 

The voice said, You told 'em, 
Eddie. You sure told 'em! 

He took a hot shower and it 



made him feel much better. When 
he finished and got into a pair of 
dungarees and a tee-shirt and lit a 
cigarette, the bell rang. It was 
George. 

"I ought to punch your nose, 
Eddie Amhurst." 

Don't let him talk that way, 
Eddie. Until now the voice had 
been silent since the ruined ceremony. 

"Don't talk to me that way. Just 
because she was your cousin and 
just because you introduced us on a 
blind date — " 

Splat! Something hit Eddie's 
nose, just as had been predicted 
and he sat down on the floor. 

He hit ymil Gel up ami knock 
the stuffing out of him, Eddie. 

Eddie's nose bled easily. It was 
bleeding now. He stood up and 
George hit him again and then his 
nose was bleeding more than ever. 

This time Eddie sat there and did 
not try to get up. He knew there 
were about nine quarts of blood in 
his body and he must have lost at 
least a quart by now. 

George readjusted his high hat. 
He took a step towards the door 
but never reached it. A big redwood bookend took off from an 
end-table and thudded against the 
side of his head. His high hat fell 
off and he sat down next to Eddie, 
muttering something about hitting 
him from behind. 

The voice said, 1 couldn't bear 
to let you take a beating. If you 
can't defend yourself, then Yve got 
to do it for you. 



FANTASTIC UNIVERSE 



For the first tlm< a concrete 
thought on ill this came to Eddie — 
perhaps it was a girl, just an 
ordinary girl, only she was invisible. 
He had seen a movie once and while 
the invisible man in it had remained 
invisible, if you put some clothing 
on him you could see his shape. 

Eddie ran around the room with 
George's high hat, trying to find 
an invisible head. But after a time 
he felt silly. The hat kept falling 
to the floor every time he tried to 
put it on something. 

The voice giggled. You're wasting your time, Eddie. I'm not invisible, not in the way you mean. 
Now that you didn't marry that 
Judy-thing, you have no ties. 
Right? 

"Umm." 

No parents? 

"Nope." 

No close relatives of any type? 

"A bunch of third cousins in 
Chicago I think." 

They don't matter. Any cloie 
friends? 

Eddie looked down at the floor, 
where George was trying to get up. 
"I used to have one," he said. 

Bvt not now — not any longer. 
Good! Then you can come with me, 
Eddie. J bad to make sure of that 
first. You ready? 

"Where are we going?" 

Just have some patience and 
you'll see for yourself. 

"Maybe I won't like It." 

"He's talking to himself again," 
George said. "Am I glad my cousin 
didn't marry him! Lucky Judy." 



Ready, Eddie? Hah! A poet and 

don't know itl 
"Umm." 

Eddie began to feel dizzy but he 
reasoned that was because George 
had punched him in the nose not 
once but twice. Soon the floor came 
up to meet him because he no longer 
could keep his balance and then, as 
he sat there, everything began to 
grow hazy, foggy, unreal. Soon the 
room was only a shadow of a room 
and he could not even tell that the 
rug was blue. Less than a shadow, 
it seemed to dissolve in water — in 
very hot water, because it dissolved quickly. 

This Eddie did not know — but 
he dissolved with it . . . 

* * » # * 

"Edam Hurst! Wake up!" 

Eddie sat up groggily. He was on 
a big comfortable couch and the 
voice came out of a loudspeaker on 
the wall. There were the couch and 
the loudspeaker, a closed door and 
Eddie — and outside of that the 
room, a small one, was empty. 

"You got it wrong," Eddie said. 
"Just a matter of pronouncing. Not 
Edam Hurst. Ed Amhurst. Get the 
difference?" 

"Subtle," the voice said. "It 
doesn't matter. There isn't another 
Edam Hurst or Ed Amhurst here. 
No confusion." 

"Well, where's the other voice? 
The woman." 

"Early cultural trait," the voice 
mused. "High sex-identification. 
Eeb< did nothing to assert her 
feminity, yet he knew the voice 



FINDERS KEEPERS 



'55 



for a woman's. Interesting, extremely interesting." 

"Of course she's a woman." 

"The timbre isn't that much 
different for you to know it as a 
certainty ever. High sex- identification in your time, young man. If 
I simply beard Eeb'a voice I'd never 
know her sex — not just from her 
voice." 

"Well, she is a woman." 

"Certainly, certainly — and a 
mighty troublesome one. First time 
something like this has happened 
in nearly a thousand years. What 
do you think we ought to do?" 

"How the heck should T know? I 
don't even know what happened." 

"True, true. I'd forgotten you're 
no telepath. I wonder if telepathy 
came in when high sex-identification began to wane. Umm, no — 
hardly possible. Eeb is obviously a 
throwback and she has both. Intriguing." 

The door opened and a woman 
entered the room. She was dressed 
in shorts and some sort of negligible 
baiter. She walked across the room 
to the loudspeaker and Eddie, who 
had, armed with tjipemeasure, once 
judged a local beauty contest, was 
sure she was the most beautiful 
woman he had ever seen. 

She said, "I'd better shut that 
thing off before Rajuz lulls you to 
sleep with all his scientific talk." 
She flicked a switch on the loudspeaker. "Of course he can stall 
speak through telepathy but your 
mind won't get the impulses without that loudspeaker, Eddie. See? I 



can hear him now but you can't.** 

Eddie had to take her word for 
it because be couldn't hear a thing. 
He hardly cared. Of paramount importance was this fact — here was 
the voice. Not any voice but the 
one that had brought him here, 
wherever hers was. 

Eddie vied to be patient. "You're 
Eeb," h* said. "That much I know. 
But where the hell arc we?" 

"You mean, in space?" 

"Uh-huh." 

"We're exactly where your room 
was. We haven't moved an inch." 

"So where's my room? Where is 
it then?" 

"It isn't. It was. Fifty thousand 
years ago it was, Eddie. Not now. 
Now it's gone, with the building, 
with the city, with your whole 
civilization. We've left your time 
and entered mine." 

"Yeah," said Eddie. His voice 
sounded lame. 

"You don't believe me.** 

"Nope, sorry — I don't." In truth 
Eddie was glad he hadn't married 
Judy but as for the rest of this, 
well — he was from Missouri. 

"It's simple. I'm a professor of 
history and my period of study 
was yours, the second millenium of 
the Christian Era." 

"Do you — all — teach history in 
that outfit?" He pointed to the enticing lines of her halter and shorts. 

"Certainly. It's comfortable. 
Anyway we use no guesswork in 
history. We use a time-scanner. 
That, of course, makes history the 
most accurate of all the sciences. 



FANTASTIC UNIVERSE 



It's mental travel through lime — 
not physical unless you will it. 

"Elementary stuff, Eddie. Just at 
they learned teleportation through 
space ten thousand years ago. so 
they learned you can do the same 
thing through time. Mental effort, 
applied properly, can move physical 
objects. It was always latent in 
human beings through some unknown ancestor — they just had 
to learn how to control the power." 

Eddie was still skeptical. "So you 
studied history by actually going 
back there?" 

"Something like that. Then I 
found you, Edam Hurst." 

"Ed Amhurst." 

"What's the difference? I found 
you and once I did, purely by 
chance, of course — that was the 
end of history. No more studying. 
They tell me I'm a throwback — 
less psi-quotient, more sex identification than anyone here. Maybe 
that explains it. 

"Anyway I had to bring you 
back. People constantly telcport 
trophies through time — but not in 
a thousand years has anyone brought 
back a human being. I saw that you 
had no ties and I brought you. Unfortunately there'* a law against 
it, I think." 

Eddie asked her why. 

"It can cause a lot of trouble. 
You can change history by bringing someone where he doesn't belong. But I had to. I'm a throwback. I couldn't be satisfied . . " 

Slowly, almost imperceptibly, she 
bad been walking closer and closer 



to Eddie, ever since she had turned 
off the loudspeaker. Now, abruptly, 

she was standing next to him — and 
then she was sitting on his lap. She 
snuggled in close and then she began to ktss him and Eddie knew at 
once that kissing had come a long 
way In fifty thousand years, even 
if the psi quotient was greater and 
sex identification had diminished. 

Three minutes later Eeb got up 
and Eddie knew quite suddenly that 
while he had always known love at 
first sight to be ridiculous and impossible, love at first kiss was a very 
different matter. 

"Damn that Rajuz! He's the 
Dean, and he wants us in his office. 
So it goes, Eddie — if it's not one 
thing it's another. We have no 
choice, of course. We'll have to go." 

They left the room and stood 
on a moving sidewalk with a tot 
of other people and this first fiveminute glimpse of the place was 
enough to convince him that he had 
indeed been teleported through 
time. A lot of what he saw could 
not even register in his brain simply 
because he had no standards for 
comparison. But he did notice almost at the outset that everything 
seemed simplified — possibly because 
telepathy and teleportation were the 
reigning king and queen. 

"You've seen enough of the city 
for now," Eeb told him. "All these 
people are out walking for the exercise. Let's lake the shorter way 
to Rajuz's office." 

One moment they stood there on 



FINDERS KEEPI'RS 



'57 



the moving sidewalk, the next they 
were in the presence of Rajuz. 

'R.i j iiz sat at what must have 
been a desk, a spherical desk, but he 
did not look much like a dean. He 
could have been a technician or 
even a truck-driver. 

Eeb explained, "The trend has 
been away from differentiation since 
the sex-identification patterns were 
decreased. But I'm fed up with it. 
They all look the same, like that. 
You know something, Eddie? I 
like you better." 

Rajuz tuned in another of the 
loudspeakers on his desk, and Eeb 
explained that it was necessary because the psi-quotient varied in 
everyone. 

"Eeb Lym, Edam Hurst, you 
have committed a mi t demeanor." 

"Not him," Eeb said. "It was all 
my fault." 

"Motivation is above suspicion 
here, you know that. It is the law 
—if someone does something it is 
because he wants to. Edam Hurst 
is as guilty as you are." 

He scowled at them for a time 
and then continued. "Frankly, I 
don't know what to do. This is the 
first crime of this nature in a thousand years and while it's merely a 
misdemeanor it will have to go 
punished." 

"Yes," Eeb agreed. "I guess so. 
You name it and we'll oblige." 

"You won't like it." 

"Name it anyway." 

"The punishment simply is this 
—you are to take Edam Hurst back 
where he belongs." 



"Oh, no! Not after I found 
him — " 

"Tim is the punishment. Throwback or no you must learn that sex 

identification is decidedly secondary 
to psi quotient. When can you take 
him?" 

"Well, I— ** 

"Don't 1 have anything to say 
about this?" Eddie demanded. 

"A feeble bit at best. Just sit 
still and listen, young man." 

" — I suppose I can take him this 
afternoon if the scanner room is 
vacant." 

"It will be vacant, we'll see to 
that. I'm glad you're being sensible 
about this whole unhappy affair, 
Eeb Lym." 

"What are you so cheerful 
about?" Eddie said. 

They stood in the scanner room 
and the girl was humming a little 
tune. "Don't worry, Edam Hurst. 
Relax, Eddie. I'm cheerful because 
I know what I'm doing, that's why. 
Just bear with me." 

He had no choice. But now that 
suddenly, devastatingly, he felt 
about Eeb the way she felt about 
him, he did not want to lose her. 
It was as simple as that. 

"Time is huge," Eeb told him. 
"You didn't think that once I 
found you I'd let you go? Oh no, 
I found you and you're mine — 
that's all there is to it. Even Jeeva, 
Lord of the City, couldn't do a 
thing about it. Nossir, Time is big 
and while 1 said . . ." 

She /licked a switch and kicked 



>;8 



FANTASTIC UNIVERSE 



nonchalantly at a pedal with !ier 
foot. "That ought to do it. Just 
don't be frightened, Eddie. The 
important thing — " 

"The Important thing," he finished for her, "is that we want to 
be together, right?" 

"Right," she said, kissed him 
soundly and turned a little knoh 
on the wait. "Now we're ready." 

As before Eddie became di?zy 
and soon he was sitting on the floor 
watching t he room spin and fade■spin and fade. 

By the time it dissolved, Eddie 
was whirling away into a giddy 
iimbo . . . 

He stood up and heard the wild 
nature sounds all around them. The 
hulk of the time-machine was big 
at his side in a green wooded glen. 
Eeb came dancing up to him with 
an armful of fruit. "Here, it's delicious. Taste it — " 

She held out her hand and he 



took a bite, then looked up sharply. 

With a whining sound, the machine faded, disappeared. 

"I sent it back," the girl said. 
"I wanted to make it permanent) 
just you and I. Time is big and 
they'll never find us. Besides, they'll 
think this is punishment enough. 
We're exiled back here." 

"Well, where is here}" 

"Oh, I'm not exactly sure. Right 
around the time the human species 
emerged. Should be a wonderful 
life, Eddie—" 

Eddie began to sing a popular 
song. Popular? It had been popular 
— when? This all was very confusing. 

"Edam Hurst, you have positively the worst singing voice I've 
ever heard." 

He smiled and told her to be 
quiet, kissing her to put more force 
behind the command. Then, band 
in hand, Edam and Ecb walked 
through their glen. 



The names of those congenital skeptics who insist that time-travel is impossible, evert in theory, are Legion. Nor is their stand difficult to comprehend. They say that no man or woman has yet traveled backward to 
meet a younger him or herself face to face. They say this is immutable 
paroifox. And by way of clincher they add a query as to why, if timetravel is to come, has it never happened? Why haven't we recorded 
instances of visitations from the future. 

However, those in favor of time-travel have answers ready and waiting. 
These Optimists (?) use the parallel universe theory to meet the first 
question. Such return, they claim, would immediately cause a forking of 
the Farthways, leaving our version of the world untrodden by timetraveling feet, As to the clincher, they counter -question with a How do 
we know we haven't had such visitors? Time-travel, when it comes, will 
come in a far-distant future. At such a distance the mere fix thousand 
years of recorded human history is a mere fly-speck on the annals of 
Earth. So why should this tiny dot in the continuum have been favored? 



war 
in 

heaven 

by . . . Fletcher Pratt 



Who is going to use death-rays 
when solid-shot and space-mines 
will bring far cheaper ■victory? 
An article about space-warfare. 



The mighty ship released * flash' 
irtg iheet of energy but the Vrantan 

tpace-vetsel't beams were met by a 
counter -energy screen that earned 
its blinding bent to ricochet in 
flashing showers from a barrier invisible against the star-studded 
black wall of space . . . 

On, yeah? It reads fin — or 
has a few thousand fictional times 
— but it doesn't make sense in a 
too-real future. 

Look chum, a se .1 tin g bo 1 1 of 
fhimc has to have something that 
will support combustion or it will 
gt> out. And what do you mean 
"sheet of energy }** How do you 
generate it? Mow do you expect to 
keep radiation in a ti;^ht beam 
across a couple of thousand miles 
of space when you can't even prevent a beam of light from spreading after a couple of thousand feet? 

The tractor and repulsor beams, 
screens of force and death-rays of 
high-power interplanetary stories 
simply aren't going to work. At 
least not according to any science 
we know now. About the only 
kind of "ray" that might be 
dangerous would be ultra-violet. 



Virtually all science fiction authors and most of those who read the stuff have 
tpeeuiated at one time or another upon space warfare. How will it he waged? What 
uill the ships he like, the weapons, the tactics? Fletcher Pratt, even more renowned as a military and naval historian and student than as a science fiction 
mthor here lake a peek into art all-loo probable future and comes up with some 
well-thought-out ansteerj that are guaranteed to surprise ail would-be spacemen. 

159 



FANTASTIC UNIVERSE 



But the Sun itself produce* ultraviolet faster and in greater quantity 
tlian any generator man could build 
and unless the crews of spacc-siiips 
are very thoroughly protected 
against it there won't be any spaceship. 

Maybe the BEMS from Arcturus 
will conic around with something 
more serious but it is a bctter-thancven-moncy bet that they can't do 
any more about the laws governing 
radiation than we can. And if they 
can't- space war will have to be 
fought with far more mundane 
weapons. 

Wcl 1 , wh a t ki nd of wca pons ? 
That depends upon the kind of 
ships. You don't expect an earthly 
battleship to carry torpedoes because she will never get close 
:nough to the enemy to fire them 
— or a destroyer to mount 16-inch 
guns because she can't carry them. 
So the problem of space war begins 
with that of designing a spacewarship. And that brings up some 
interesting questions. 

The first of them is the shape of 
the ship. The torpedo shape with 
brief wings, the type usually pictured, is very attractive. It is the 
only shape that could take off from 
earth and go out through the atmosphere. It keeps the machinery 
welt away from the living spaces. 
For landing on the moon or an 
asteroid it is quite all right because 
it can be turned over and set down 
on its tail jets. 

But when space warfare really 
gets going the torpedo shape will 



take a back space before a vessel 
built in space (probably at a satellite station) to operate and fight in 
space. And the shape of that ship 
will be a sphere. It is the strongest, 
the most economical for the use of 
the contained cubic capacity, but 
these arc not the main reasons for 
building space-warships round. The 
reasons are those of military efficiency, which take precedence 
over all others when it comes to 
designing fighting equipment. 

In the first place a sphere can 
be given more than one rocket 
exhaust. With more than one tl»c 
spherical ship would have a maneuvering ability making immeasurably 
superior to the long, graceful torpedo. The latter would have to 
sweep around in curves of hundreds 
or thousands of miles, or change its 
course on gyros, which would take 
nearly as long. But the sphere, with 
a simple opposite-direction blast 
from its rockets, could halt, change 
course and be off. 

Probably only two exhausts are 
necessary, but those we have to 
have. I am aware that the engineering problems of building a spaceship that way are very severe but 
so are the engineering problems of 
building an atomic submarine or a 
carrier to carry jet planes. However, when there is urgent military 
necessity for somerhlng, neither expense nor the difficulty of the 
problem is ever really allowed to 
stand in the way. 

In the second place a sphere can 
be built with no blind angl 




approach. The fighter airplane of 
today, with an enemy on his tail, 
is in trouble — and so will be a 
space-ship with an enemy on its 
exhaust. Of course, turrets can be 
mounted above or below the exhaust on a torpedo-shaped ship but 
they will never give quite the same 
protection as not having any blind 
angles at all. 

In the third place the sphere is 
the most convenient shape for landing on the Moon or asteroids and 
they are going to be important as 
bases. And in the fourth place the 
armor of the sphere can carry the 
main structural stresses, making the 
interior structure light. 

Using a spherical shape means 
size, of course, but so do several 
other necessary factors and it is 
impossible to avoid them all. This 
means that the warships of space 
will not be divided into classes of 
battleships, cruisers and destroyers 
like warships of the ocean. With an 
exception to be noted later all will 
be battleships. There is no reason for 
making them anything else. 

Oceanic destroyers gain speed by 
sacrificing armor but there is no 
comparable gain in a space-ship. 
Once the jets arc started and the 
Original inertia overcome the heavy 
ship will travel as fast as the light 
one because the limiting fjctor is 
how much acceleration the crew 
can stand physically — and it's the 
same for both. 

On earth the design of a ship is 
a compromise between the demands 
of armament, protection, speed and 



cruising radius, with the last the 
least important. For the space-ship 
speed will make its demands but 
they will not have to be satisfied at 
the expense of the other characteristics. However, cruising radius is 
something else. 

The ruling consideration in the 
radius of action of an earth-ship is 
the ability to carry fuel. Stores for 
the crew were seldom a problem 
during the war, even though the 
food did sometimes run down to 
Spam and those incredible dehydrated potatoes. Ammunition became a problem in only a few cases. 
But in the space-navy all this will 
be changed. 

Fuel docs not look like a particularly serious problem. A given 
space-ship will be burning lots 
while she is using it but most of 
the time she'll be coasting on 
gained acceleration and will need 
fuel only for short bursts of 
maneuver during action. The true 
limiting factor in the radius of 
action of a space-warship is the 
stores for the crew — not food or 
water but most specifically air. 

The problem with water is not 
supplying it but getting rid of it. 
For every five pounds of food you 
cat two pounds of water is the 
minimum result, exuded in various 
ways. And water is ridiculously 
easy to purify by distillation. Food 
itself can be carried in various 
concentrated forms but it is impossible to carry reserve air except 
in oxygen bottles under compression and it is very difficult to get 



FANTASTIC UNIVI-RSE 



of surplus unwanted car km 
oxide. ( 
Fot stations in space air-purifiers 
! been suggested, consisting of 
gae operating in a churned waterank. This would be all right for a 
ation which has a steady motion 
. determined orbit. But the 
^-battleship in action will be 
ubject to violent gyrations which 
ould do no good to the airurifying system even if consideraons of weight and space made it 
practical to install such a system 
in the first place. 

Then there is the added danger 
that a single hit in so vital an 
installation would put the ship out 
of action for keeps while a few 
oxygen bottles blown up would not 
matter. So the space-battleship will 
probably have to depend on bottled 
air, like a pre-snorkcl submarine, 
and the quantity she can carry will 
determine her radius of action. 

This docs not mean that she cannot make quite long voyages, since 
a ship of the dimensions we are 
contemplating could store quite a 
lot of air. But it does help to 
determine the strategy of spacewarfare. It will be fundamentally 
a struggle for bases where more 
oxygen can be obtained. Not 
■ through going down into the atmosphere of Karth or the thin 
atmosphere of Mars or the questionable one of Venus. It means 
basts on the Moon and the asteroids. 

The Moon and atteriods are made 
of rocks, on the surface at least, and 
practically all rocks are loaded with 



oxygen — 47% in the crust of the 
Earth for example. With the kind 
of power that will be available by 
time we get space-ships, it will be 
a comparatively simple matter to 
separate these rock materials from 
their oxygen electrolytic ally. Carbon dioxide is partly oxygen, of 
course, but so stubbornly bonded 
that no ordinary electrolytic process 
will break it and it has the unpleasant quality of being a gal 
under electrolytic conditions. 

Since the oxygen-producing machinery will be too heavy and bulky 
to carry aboard the space-ship the 
job will have to be done at airrcf tiding stations and these advanced bases will be the key of 
space-campaigns. Naturally, they 
will be powerfully fortified against 
attack from the enemy's spacefleet. Equally naturally they will 
be logical points of attack in the 
hope of limiting the enemy's operations by cutting his bases from 
under him. 

Thus the overall strategy of a 
space-campaign will somewhat resemble that of the Pacific War, 
with each party trying to destroy 
or neutralize the enemy's bases 
while extending his own. If 
both have bases on the Moon or 
Mars there may even be ground 
campaigns in support of those in 
the skies. And getting control of 
one of those erratic asteroids that 
come within the orbit of Mars will 
Count for ten. 

What about armament? In stories 
of space warfare that get away 



WAR TN HEAVEN 



from those improbable rays there Is 
usually some kind of hyper-superduper torpedo, rocket -propelled. 
But this only demonstrates that the 
authors of the stories are thinking 
in Earth- terms instead of spaceterms. 

It is perfectly plausible to include 
some torpedoes, probably with 
atomic warheads, in the armament 
of a space-ship — something that 
would knock out an enemy base ot 
destroy a space-battleship at a single 
blow. But the torpedo will always 
be what military men call a weapon 
of opportunity. 

They can't be used at all angles 
— it would be fatally easy for one 
of them to make a near-miss on the 
enemy craft and atom-bomb your 
own Moon base or some part of the 
Earth you didn't want atombombed. E*rth*l gravitational attraction would pull such a torpedo 
in from quite a distance out. 

There is also the point that on 
Earth the torpedo is a comparatively short-range weapon, fired 
from concealment or under conditions where the torpedo- carrier 
approaches so rapidly it cannot be 
stopped — by a submarine underwater, by surface ships at night or 
from bclund smoke-screens, by torpedo-planes that attack at ten times 
the speed of the target-ship. 

None of these conditions can be 
realized in space-warfare. Even if 
the space-ship were painted black 
and operating in a planetary shadow 
(as in some stories) radar would 
pick it up at a distance at least 



equaling that from the Earth to 

the Moon. 

And even black coloring would 
make the space-ship visible as it 
occluded the practically continuous 
blanket of stars visible in open 
space. You can't make a smokescreen in space — you can make it, 
but it wouldn't hang and wouldn't 
be any use against radar if it did. 
Comparative speeds that would] 
permit the torpedo-plane type of 
attack are simply unattainable. 

Finally naval experience shows 
that fire is always opened at the 
greatest possible range where there 
is any chance of duingdamage — and 
that range is usually maintained in 
the hope of avoiding hits. Only 
when one party has been so badly 
pounded that defeat seems inevitable 
is there an effort to close the range 
for torpedo or gunfire. 

In space-war, given high visibility and the fact that there will 
be neither gravity nor air resistance 
to slow up shells, fire will be opened 
at extremely long ranges — hundreds 
of miles. At this distance, a rockettorpedo, clearly indicating its presence by its trail of fire, will be 
quite easy to intercept — by shooting 
smaller rockets or shells with 
proximity fuses at it. 

The time it will take the torpedo to cover the distance is the 
major factor. And running in to 
Launch a torpedo from close range 
will be very difficult because of the 
low speed differential between tlie 
two parties and again because of 
the distance. So it is probable that 



FANTASTIC UNIVERSE 



most space-actions will be fought 

out with guns. 

I said guns. But a very different 
type of gun from those most of us 
are familiar with, because this is. 
another point where Earth- thinking 
must give way to space-thinking. 
When the breech-block of a gun 
aboard one of our cruisers is swung 
open to receive a new shell there is 
a brief moment when the gun 
forms an open connecting tube 
from the inside of the turret to the 
outside air. 

This will never do aboard a spaceship — there is no air outside and the 
air from all over the vessel would 
rush in a tornado to escape into 
outer space. There will have to be 
some device for loading the gun in 
a vacuum or, since this might give 
trouble in case of a breakdown or a 
misfire, more likely an automatic 
tompion to close the mouth of the 
gun Until there is another charge in 
the breech. This would have the 
advantage that the rush of air into 
the gun, evacuated by the previous 
firing, would automatically clean 
it of residual explosion products. 

But this is not all. Since there is 
no air to set up resistances to take 
a projectile out of its proper path, 
there is no particular reason for 
rifling the gun. In fact it would 
be rather better not to. And while 
shells were mentioned, in connection with beating off rocket-torpedoes and would be very useful for 
that purpose, there is no reason 
whatever for employing them 



against another space-ship or the 
dome of an enemy base. 

The reason for using a shell 
against an Earthbound ship is that 
after it gets through the side it 
explodes there and messes things 
up for a considerable radius. But a 
space-ship is vulnerable in a way 
that no Earth-ship ever is. If it 
loses its air it's the finish for everybody aboard. 

A high-velocity solid shot, penetrating the side of a space-ship, 
could tear holes in several compartments and connect them all 
with the outside, causing disastrously rapid exhaustion of the air. It 
would be much more damaging 
than any shell, which would only 
ruin one or two compartments. For 
that matter it was discovered during the last war that a solid projectile which penetrated a tank and 
ricocheted around inside was quite 
as effective as a shell-burst. 

A solid shot would have more 
penetrating power because of its 
greater mass and unwillingness to 
break up against armor. And there 
is also the law of military economics 
that requires you do everything 
with the least expensive weapon 
that will accomplish the purpose. 
A cast-steel bullet with a soft iron 
head to "grease" its way through 
armor will be both cheaper and 
more effective than any type of 
shell. 

As an alternate type of ammunition for use against ships with exceptionally heavy armor, there 
might be some projectile using the 



WAR IN HEAVEN 



shaped-charge principle. There's 
nothing wrong with carrying several different types of projectile for 
the same guns — both sliip and Held 
artillery do it right now. 

The type and purpose of the projectiles also determine the size of 
the guns. The reason for using 
large-caliber guns on Eartli are two 
—to get a bigger bursting charge 
at the receiving end and to obtain 
greater range by a larger dirving 
charge in the breech. 

But in space a projectile would 
have infinite range, unless it fell 
into the gravitational attraction of 
some body, and the big bursting 
charge is not required. So the gun 
need be only just big enough to 
make the driving charge give it a 
very high muzzle-velocity. 

Considering the question of ammunition stowage and supply, probably the best caliber would be between J.5 and 6 inches, 90 and 15 5 
millimeters. Liquid propellants give 
higher muzzle velocities than solid 
and would have the advantage of 
making a better seal around the 
projectile in the breech. They could 
be pumped in from metered tubes. 

After the air-tight doors have 
been closed the men who serve these 
guns will go into action in spacesuits, breathing the air around them 
but having the suits fitted with 
automatic valves that will close 
down the moment the compartment begins to lose air. Damagecontrol parties will have special apparatus for patching holes — probably quick-drying viscous plastics 



.6 5 

with a silicone base, because of their 
impcrviousness to temperature 

changes. 

What about fire controls? The 
calculations for them will be 
arduous because of the distance* 
and speeds involved. But Dr. John 
D. Clark has pointed out that two 
space-ships engaged in a fight, no 
matter what courses they are 
traveling with relation to the Sun 
or the planets, are in a single plane 
with relation to each other and so 
are all the projectiles fired by both 
of them. 

This plane may tilt violently as 
they maneuver but at the moment 
of firing the line from gun to 
target, or predicted position of 
target, is a perfectly flat and 
straight line. This is a much easier 
ballistic problem than in any Earthly firing, where gravity, air resistance and for long ranges even 
the curvature and rotation of the 
Earth must be considered. 

The guns wilt certainly have 
automatic radar controls and a high 
rate of fire. The only trouble is 
that the calculations fed into the 
controls will have to be made at 
lightning speeds, in micro-seconds 
■ — which means electronic computers. And this brings up another 
diffctence between space-warfare 
and the kind we know, though it 
may extend to war on Earth. 

It is possible to make an electronic computer non- functional by 
overloading it with data or to drive 
it electronically insane by feeding 
it undesirable data. Space-warfare is 



therefore bound to include all sorts 
of decoy devices — small metal balloons hive been suggested — that 
will register on the enemy's radar as 
space-ships and set his guns swinging mildly or firing at phantoms. 

The only type of ship to which 
all that has been said docs not apply 
is the space-minelayer. These can be 
quite small as compared with the 
battleships, need carry no armor 
and can use the torpedo-shape for 
operating from an earth base. Some 
years ago Malcolm Jameson suggested small iron spheres as mines, 
strewn along the enemy's path 
where he would run into them — 
but the matter U not quite that 
simple. 

If the space-minelayer merely 
dumped the spheres overboard as an 
Earthly minelayer docs they would 
become part of a new small gravitational system around the minelayer, 
and would follow her around like 
Marys little lamb. 

The mines of space-warfare will 
have to be provided with some kind 
of power that will take them into a 
predetermined orbit around Earth, 
the Moon or an asteroid after the 
minelayer has dropped them. Only 
enough to set up the orbit, mind — 
after that they could take care of 
themselves. 

Also it is doubtful whether a 
mere ball of solid iron would smash 
up the works of an armored spaceship unless ' -k' met it at high speed 
on an absolute collision course. The 
more normal event would be for 
the mine to be picked up by the 



small but perceptible gravitational 
attraction of the space-ship and 
travel with it as a satellite. So the 
mines of space will probably have 
to be fairly large and contain heavy 
explosive charges, probably with 
proximity fuses. 

Still the advantages of mining 
are so great that they will undoubtedly play a large part in 
space-warfare. Asteroid or Moon 
bases can be defended by minefields, which would keep an enemy 
at a distance until he had painstakingly located the pesky objects 
and shot them up, during which 
time the ship would be an ideal 
target for guns on the ground. 

And one striking feature about 
this space minefield must always be 
remembered, a feature that makes 
it different from anything encountered on the ocean. The fields 
will be constantly moving. Fixed 
in an orbit 2S.000 miles above the 
Earth a space-mine would always 
remain over the same Earthly spot 
and there is a similar critical distance for the Moon, Mars and the 
asteroids. 

But few of the mines will he at 
exactly that distance. Unless they 
arc they will be tiny satellites, revolving around their primaries at 
greater or less speeds, constantly on 
the go. A space-ship won't have to 
hit them. They will hunt it up. 

There is also the fact that mining 
in war is not merely a defensive 
tactic. In World War I the German 
Please turn to page 115 



time 
in 
thy 
flight 

by . , . Ray Bradbury 



„e circus, Hallowe'en, the GlorFourth may go— yet eternal 
their pull on a child's heart 



A wind bi.vw the long years 
away past their hot faces. 

The Time Midline stopped. 

**Ninetecn hundred and twentyeight," said Janet. The two boy 
looked past her. 

Mr. Fields stirred. "Remember, 
you're here to observe the behavior 
of these ancient people. Be inquisitive, be intelligent, observe." 

"Yes," said the girl and the two 
boys in crisp khaki uniforms. The, 
wore identical haircuts, had identical wrist-watches, sandals and 
coloring of hair, eyes, teeth and 
skin, though they were not related. 

"Shh!" said Mr. Fields. 

They looked out at a little 
Illinois town in the spring of tlr 
year. A cool mist lay on the early 
morning streets. 

Far down the street a small boy 
came* running in the last light of 
the marble-cream moon. Somewhere 
a great clock struck five a.m. far 
away. Leaving tennis-shoe prints 
•oftly in the quiet lawns the boy 
stepped near the invisible Time 
Machine and cried up to a high 
dark house window. 

The house window opened. 
Another boy crept down the 



/ !t,iy Wrudbury waders seem M tbmk of bim as a sort of Charles Addams char' tprun% to life. Actually hi it a handsome, cheerful and enthusiastic transplanted California* with wife (I) and children (2), who looks far more at horn* 
<vcr a broiled stenk than a dish of pUklad ou/t'i eyes. Yet few living authors have 
wt sweep of fantasy or chill brush of horror. We're proud to offer bis nested SfQflb 



167 



FANTASTIC UNIVERSE 



the ground. The two boys ran 
off with banana-filled mouths into 
the dark cold morning. 

"Follow them," whi.spcrcd Mr. 
Fields. "Study their life patterns. 
Quick!" 

Janet and William and Robert 
ran on the cold pavements of 
spring, visible now, through the 
slumbering town, through a park. 
AH about lights flickered, doors 
clicked and other children rushed 
alone or in gasping pairs down a 
hiil to some gleaming blue tracks. 

"Here it comes!" The children 
milled about before dawn. Far down 
the shining tracks a small light 
grew seconds later into steaming 
thunder. 

"What is it!" screamed Janet. 

"A train, silly, you've seen 
pictures of theml" shouted Robert. 

And as the Time Children 
watched from the train stepped 
gigantic grey elephants, steaming 
the pavements with their mighty 
Waters, lifting question-mark 
nozzles to the cold morning sky. 
Cumbrous wagons rolled from the 
long freight flats, red and gold. 
Lions roared and paced in boxed 
dark ness. 

"Why — this must be a — circus!" 
Janet trembled. 

"You think so? Whatever 
happened to them?" 

"Like Christmas, I guess. Just 
vanished, long ago." 

Janet looked around. "Oh, it'f 
awful, isn't it." 

The boys stood numbed. "It sure 



Men shouted in the first faint 
gleam of dawn. Sleeping cars drew 
up, dazed faces blinked out at the 
children. Horses clattered like a 
great fall of stones on the pavement, 

Mr. Fields was suddenly behind 
the children. "Disgusting, barbaric, 
keeping animals in cages. If I'd 
known this was here I'd never let 
you come see. This is a terrible 
ritual." 

"Oh, yes." But Janet's eyes were 
puzzled. "And yet, you know, it's 
like a nest of maggots. I want to 
study it." 

"I don't know," said Robert, his 
eyes darting, his fingers trembling. 
"It's pretty crazy. V/e might try 
writing a thesis on it if Mr. Fields 
says it's all right . . ." 

Mr. Fields nodded. "I'm glad 
you're digging in here, finding 
motives, studying this I lorror. All 
right — we'll see the circus this 
afternoon." 

"I think I'm going to be sick," 
said Janet. 

The Time Machine hummed. 

"So that was a circus," said 
Janet, solemnly. 

The Trombone ci reus died in 
their ears. The last thing they saw 
was candy-pink trapeze people 
whirling while baking powder 
clowns shrieked and bounded. 

"You must admit psycho-vision's 
better," said Robert, slowly. 

"All those nasty animal smells, 
the excitement." Janet blinked. 
"Thct'c bsd £s# children, isn't it? 



TIME IN THY FLIGHT 



Anil those older people seated with 
the children. Mothers, fathers, they 
called them. Oh, tint was strange." 

Mr. Fields put some marks in his 
class grading book. 

Janet shook her head numbly. 
"I want to see it all again, I've 
missed the motives somewhere. I 
want to make that run across town 
again in the early morning. The 
Cold air on my face — the sidewalk 
muter my feet — the circus train 
coming in. Was it the air and the 
early hour that made the children 
get up and run to see the train 
come in? I want to retrace the 
entire pattern. Why should they do 
it, why should they be excited? I 
feci I've missed out on the answer." 

"They all smiled so much," said 
William. 

"Manic-depressives," said Robert. 

"What are summer vacations? I 
heard them talk about it." Janet 
looked at Mr. Fields. 

"They spent their summers racing about like idiots, beating each 
other up," replied Mr. Fields 
seriously. 

"I'll take our State Engineered 
summers of work for children anytime," said Robert, looking at 
nothing, his voice faint. 

The Time Machine stopped again. 

"The Fourth of July," announced 
Mr. Fields. "Nineteen hundred and 
twenty-eight. An ancient holiday 
when people blew each other's 
fingers off." 

They stood before the same house 
on the same street but on a soft 
summer evening. Fire wheeli hissed. 



•69 

on front porches laughing 
children tossed things out that went 

bang! 

"Don't run!" cried Mr. Fields. 
"It's not war, don't be afraid!" 

But Janet's and Robert's and 
William's faces were pink, now 
blue, now white with fountains of 
soft fire. 

"We're all right," said Janet, 
standing very still. 

"Happily," announced Mr. Fields, 
"they prohibited fireworks a century 
ago, did away with the whole messy 
explosion." 

Children did fairy dances, weaving their names and destinies on the 
dark summer air with white sparklers. 

"I'd like to do that," said Janet, 
softly. "Write my name on the air. 
Sec? I'd like that." 

"What?" Mr. Fields hadn't been 
listening. 

"Nothing," said Janet. 

"Bang!" whispered William and 
Robert, standing under the soft 
summer trees, in shadow, watching, 
watching the red, white, and green 
fires on the beautiful summer night 
lawns. "Ban 

October. 

The Time Machine paused for 
the last time, an hour later in the 
month of burning leaves. People 
bustled into dim houses carrying 
pumpkins and corn shocks. Skeletons danced, bats flew, candles 
flamed, apples swung in empty 
doorways. 

"Hallowe'en," said Mr. Fields. 



FANTASTIC UNIVERSE 



lie acme of horror. This was the 
age of superstition, you know. 
Later they banned the Grimm 
Brothers, ghosts, skeletons and all 
that claptrap. You children, thank 
God, were raised in an antiseptic 
world of no shadows or ghosts. You 
had decent holidays like William C. 
Chatterton's Birthday, Work Day 
and Machine Day." 

They walked by the same house 
in the empty October night, peering in at the triangle-eyed pumpkins, the masks leering in black 
attics and clamp cellars. Now, inside the house, some party children 
squatted telling stories, laughing! 

"I want to be inside with them," 
said Janet at last, 

"Sociologically, of course," said 
the boys. 

"No," she said. 
"What?" asked Mr. Fields. 
"No, I jusc want to be inside, I 
just want to stay here, I want to 
see it all and be here and never be 
anywhere else, I want firecrackers 
and pumpkins and circusses, I want 
Christmassos and Valentines and 
Fourths, like we've seen." 

"This is getting out of hand . . , N 
Mr. Fields started to say. 

But suddenly Janet was gone. 
"Robert, William, come on!" She 
ran. The boys leaped after her. 

"Hold on!" shouted Mr. Fields. 
"Robert! William, I've got you!" 
He seized the last boy but the other 
escaped. "Janet, Robert — come 
back here! You'll never pats into 
the seventh grade! You'll fail, 
Janet. Bob— Bob!" 



An October wind Hew wildly 
down the street, vanishing with the 
children off among moaning trees. 

William twisted and kicked. 

"No, not you, too, William, 
you're coming home with me. We'll 
teach those other two a lesson they 
won't forget. So they want to stay 
in the Past, do they?" Mr. Fields 
shouted so everyone could hear. 
"All right, Janet, Bob, stay in this 
horror, in this chaos! In a few 
weeks you'll come sniveling back 
here to me and my Time Machine. 
But go on, anyway! I'm leaving 
you here to go mad in this world!" 

lie hurried William to the Time 
Machine. The boy was sobbing. 
"Don't make me come back here on 
any more Field Excursions ever 
again, please, Mr. Fields, please . . 

"Shut up!" 

Almost instantly the Time 
Machine whisked away toward the 
Future, toward the underground 
hive cities, the metal buildings, the 
metal flowers, the metal lawns. 

"Goodbye, Janet, Bob!" 

A great cold October wind blew 
through the town like water. And 
when it had ceased blowing it had 
blown all the children, whether invited or uninvited, masked or unmasked, to the doors of houses 
which closed upon them. There was 
not a running child anywhere in the 
night. The wind whined away in 
the bare tree tops. 

And inside the big house, in the 
candlelight, someone was pouring 
cold apple cider all around, to 
everyone, no matter, who they were. 



it's 
in 
the 
blood 

by . . . Eric Frank Russell 

Space may flow in a young man's 
■veins. But at times the laws of 
heredity can take tragic twists. 



He posto four-square In the 
driving seat and threaded a way 
through thick traffic of which ht 
was no more than subconsciously 
aware. It was as if the big automobile were part of him, a 
mechanical extension of his brain 
and limbs, making of him a sort of 
machine-age centaur. 

"It was the most wonderful day 
of my life— and I'm living it again 
through you," he said, 'with difficulty holding his voice steady. 

The car glided smoothly around 
a parked truck, straightened out. 
He shot a swift glance at his quiet 
passenger, absorbing in a split 
second the gray uniform with silver 
buttons, the fresh young face so 
closely resembling his own in day* 
gone by. Then his attention cam* 
back to the road. 

"You're not jumpy, son?" he 
asked gently. 

"No, Dad." The reply was automatic. 

"You have every tight to be. I 
was — a little jumpy when my turn 
came. Sort of all bunched up inside." 

A black cigar arrowed across the 



Eric Frank Russell, one of the eminent members of the modern Engtitb school of 
science fiction writing, is best known for two of his novels — Sinister Btrrisr 
and Dreadful Sanctuary. In both of these Mr. Ruui-U's incredible extraflal, litis 
abilities and ingenious plotting have been italicized by bit very spotiid talent 
for treating, an atmosphere cf sheer horror without resort to clanking, and 
noisome Cot hie stage-settings. In this short story, necessarily uncluttered by 
structural intricacies, we see how he does it. for horror is very much 'here. 



l 7 l 



FANTASTIC UNIVI USE 



horizon, left: a widening vapor- trail 
behind it. 

"There she goes — o u t w a r d 
bound." He licked his lips nervously. "When your mother was alive 
she used to look for the ship and 
wave. Of course I couldn't sec her 
and she couldn't see me. But I knew 
she was there." 

His son did not answer. He 
hadn't looked at the departing 
space-ship. His gaze was on the 
shops lining the street. 

"Maybe someday a girl will wave 
for you." The father gave a little 
chuckle of satisfaction. "You will 
return from Mars or Ceres and 
walk up the graveled path and hear 
her singing in the kitchen just like 
your mother did." 

His strong hands twisted the 
wheel, took the car around a corner. 
He talked on. 

"She was always singing. Ob, 
Star of Eve and stuff like thit. She 
had a pretty voice. It never got her 
anywhere. No concert halts. She 
sang just for me." 

"Yes, Dad." 

They stopped for a traffic light. 
The younger man stared at a shop. 
Its window was filled with musical 
instruments — banjos, mandolins, 
guitars, aecofdeons, violins, trurn■ pets. A baby-grand piano stood in 
the middle of the display, lid open, 
keys exposed, a sheet of music on 
.its stand. I lis blue eyes devoured it 
is if it were a tender girl in a 
clinging transparent summer frock. 

The light changed to green. The 
car moved on. 



"Yes, your mother always was 
inclined that way. A songbird with 
raven hair. When you were four 
she bought you that toy piano, remember?" 

"I remember." 

"You hammered it for hours." 
He clicked his teeth deprecatingly. 
"Almost drove me out of my mind. 
You went on and on until you 
could pick out a tune. Three Blind 
Mice, Pretty good for a child of 
four." A pause, then, "But you're 
grown up now, aren't you, son?" 

"At twenty I ought to be." 

"That's the way to look at it. 
Your mother was a fine woman, a 
wonderful woman. All the same I 
can tell you something you ought 
to have learned by the time you're 
my age." 

"What's that, Dad?" 

"A mother is all right for bringing up daughters but it takes a 
father to raise a son. Yes, sir! 
What's more a man need'; .1 nun's 
job. A space-pilot is every inch a 
man and none come better. A 
spaceman is a hell of a lot more 
man than any soft-handed musician. 
I once saw a fellow thumping a 
piano in a saloon. He was nothing 
but a no-good bum." 

"I didn't want to play in 
saloons. Dad." 

"Of course not, Tom. Perhaps he 
didn't cither. Perhaps he'd had 
drea;ns that never came true. So he 
sat in a saloon with butts on the 
floor aroUnd him and played for 
beer. Supposing you'd gone to that 



it's in the blood 



175 



foreign college your mother talked 
about, the . . . the — " 

"Brussels Conservatoire of 
Music." 

"Yes, that dump, What would 
it have got you?" 

"A degree." 

"And then what?" 

"Docs it matter now?" 

"In a way. I was thinking of 
when you retire. If you pass your 
solo test today you'll be a fullyqu.ilified space-pilot." 

"And so . . . ?" 

"It won't last forever, Tom. A 
pilot is too old at forty. Ultimately 
they'll offer you a ground post or 
release you on pension. And you'll 
still be young." He gave a jovial 
laugh. "Plenty of time for piano 
playing then, eh?" 

"I suppose so." The words were 
flat. 

"You bet there will. You'll be 
able to go in for it in a big way, 
foreign college and all, with money 
behind you. No half -starving in an 
attic for you — no hammering the 
notes in a cheap dance hall. A 
musician ami a gentleman." 

Silence piled deep while they accelerated, shot ahead of a lumbering 
bus, left it behind them. 

"But above all a spaceman, Pilot 
Fansbaw Number Six, Just like 
your father, your grandfather and 
three more ahead of him. We've 
been pari of the space-service since 
the first ships landed on llie Moon. 
The family name is a byword in 
space. There has always been a 
Fanshaw flying the space-lanes." 



"I know, Dad." Again that 
curious flatness. 

"The reason is easy to understand. We're natural-born pilots. 
We're made that way. It's in the 
blood. It's part of us." 

He studied himself in the rearview mirror. Baggy jowls, grey 
hair of course — but the eyes remained clear and steady. 

"That's important, Tom. Five 
thousand candidates go through the 
college every year and never more 
than hfty reach their solo flight. 
One in a hundred — and many of 
those fail on the last lap solely because they aren't naturals. It isn't 
enough for a man to be physically 
fit, highly intelligent and top of 
the class in all his exams. He has 
also to be a natural. Pilots are born, 
not made." 

A traflic block held them. Nearby a loudspeaker in a radio store 
trilled Mendelssohn's Spring Song. 
Tom hummed it silently, so that 
his father could not hear. The block 
untangled itself. The car surged 
forward once again. 

"A man who's a natural becomes 
part of his .ship, a veritable living 
part of it. Injury to the vessel is 
injury to himself. He is horn that 
way. All the Fanshaws were born 
that way. Know what they will do 
when you land her unaided and 
without a scratch?" 

"No, Dad. What do you think?" 
The question was mechanical, unbacked by curiosity. 

"They won't cheer you and clap 



*7t 



FANTASTIC UNIVERSE 



your back like they would with 
anyone else. They'll shrug and walk 
away, saying, 'He's a Fanshaw — 
what else can you expect?' See what 
I mean? You're a foregone conclusion." 

"I hope so. I really hope so." The 
flatness became uneven. 

Tne car swung off the road, 
stopped between a pair of huge 
gates. Customs sheds stood near, a 
tall control-tower rose farther back. 
Several great metal cylinders 
gleamed in the distance, their tails 
down, their noses pointing to the 
sky. 

A uniformed attendant came 
forward, sal u t e d respectfully. 
"Morning, Mr. Fanshaw." 

"Morning, Harry. This is the 
day my boy shows them how." 

Tom said with faint s tl rpri sc, 
"You're not coming inside to watch, 
Dad?" 

"No, son." He grinned, reached 
across, opened the door. "When my 
old man brought me here he said, 
*You go take it all on your own. 
The boy who is brought along by 
his father is a sissy.' Then he went 
home, waited for me to turn up by 
mid-afternoon with a gold cord 
around my left shoulder." I [is grin 
widened. "1 got it. I was as big a 
man as he. I knew it then for the 
first time." 

"All right." Tom got out, hesitated, looked at his right hand, 
shoved it into his pocket. 

"That's the spirit," approved his 
father. "No shaking lands. No 
wishing luck. Fansluws don't need 



it." Leaning sidewise, he lowered 
his voice, bestowed a significant 
wink. "I'll tell you something in 
strict confidence — it's dead easy!" 

Then he backed up, turned the 
car toward town, drove in at fast 
pace. Tom would make it all right. 
Twenty take-offs and landings with 
skilled instructors aboard is one 
thing. Doing it all on one's ownsome is something else— but Tom 
would make it. The son of his 
father. The Famhaws had it bred 
into their bones. 

They would give Tom a sevenhundred-ton test-boat — they would 
watch him boost it beyond the 
atmosphere, land it, step out. They 
would hand him his gold cord, tell 
him when to report for his first 
pukka space trip and send him 
home. 

Almost every week a test-boat 
was badly dented and once a month 
some ambitious youngster broke his 
neck because he could not make 
himself an integral part of his vessel. Tom wasn't like that. He'd land 
her astride a handkerchief without 
a scratch. What is in the bood must 
come out when called by circumstance. 

He tooled the car into an underground garage three blocks from 
home, spent five minutes jockeying 
it into parking position, came out 
just too late to hear the moan of 
Tom's ship going up. 

It was one minute past ten. Tom 
would have blown his tubes precisely at ten because time was a 



it's in the blood 



»75 



most important factor. One second 
too early, one second too late, 
would cost him a mark. Five 
seconds either way would cost him 
five marks. The little ship was up 
and away beyond the clouds by 
now. Involuntarily lie searched the 
sky, could see nothing of it. 

He strode along the sidewalk, 
ignoring the shops, not heeding the 
passers-by, thinking. A pity mother 
would not be there to sing Ob, Slar 
of Et c when Tom came back. She 
would be mighty proud of her boy, 
spruce in his uniform with its 
gleaming gold cord. She would be 
so happy and proud at having 
given the space-lines another Fan$haw. 

Chewing his nether lip he crossed 
a street, reached the middle of the 
second block. The ground perked. 
Store windows quivered. A nujment 
or two later a roar came down 
from the sky and ended in a crack 
like the snapping of a gigantic 
stick. 

Facing him was a fat man, gap


ing fascinatedly at something far 
behind his back, something he refused to turn to sec. The fat man 
said, "My God!" and ran past hint 
Others ran. Workingmcn, busines 

men, housewives, stenographer 

children, all ran the same way. 
toward something behind him. 

He walked straight ahead, .low!; 
— very slowly — beating against 1 
mainstream of running people 
They brushed past him, pushed : 
him, buffeted him, shouldered 1 
aside. 

Moving like one in a dream I 
crossed another street, his legs slug 
glsh, his eyes level, looking ste: 
fastly straight ahead. In the midd 
of the third block he entered 
building, took the elevator to 
top floor. With intense delibcratioi 
he fitted his key into a lock, wei 
into his own apartment, closed 1 
door gently and did not hear th 
click of its catch. 

Still slowly he crossed the i 
to his bed, lowered himself and ! 
there, facing his own private hell. 



ContittnrJ from page 166 
subs weft pretty thoroughly mined 
in by the barrages across the North 
Sea and English Channel. In World 
War II what was left of the 
Japanese fleet was immobilized in 
its harbors by mines. Space-mines 
would serve a similar purpose of 
closing a planetoid or an area to all 
access, 

They could serve a tactical purpose as well by limiting avenues of 



approach. Not that they couldn 
be eliminated — rocket torpedo : 
would be something quite differci 
and more effective than the sarr 
kind of fire against a spacc-battl 
ship capable of striking back. 

But this would take lime 
time is the one thing no 
can afford to waste in a kind of l 
where everything will move 
speeds exceeding those of the planets. 



of 

those 
who 
came 

by . . , George Longdon 

The alien scheme was perfect — a 
night landing, infiltration, human disguises. Fortunately for us 
the Policeman was awaiting them. 



Evening sun touched the top 
of the blue hills. The lonely slopes 
lay in shadow, grey and dim, and I 
stopped the saloon half way along 
the road that wound down into 
the valley. Below was a single house, 
seen among trees, and above it 
oscillated a faint yellow radiance, 
coming from an indistinguishable 
source. 

I sat motionless, gloved hands on 
the wheel, feeling no surprise. The 
yellow halo slowly shrink, dropping 
down towards the rooftop, and coalescing into a spheroid which gradually sank from view behind the 
house. A dim reflection on the trees 
showed it was still there, concealed 
by the building. I started the saloon 
and began to wind down into the 
valley. 

The sky was growing dark. Seen 
across the valley the house had only 
been a dim outline and it passed 
from view as the saloon sped into 
the valley bottom, where a river 
ran between wooded banks. I drove 
to the bridge. The saloon murmured across and began to climb 
the winding road towards the house. 
Fifty yards away I parked the vehicle under trees and got out. 



While the birth and development of the so-called "modern" science fiction story has 
been almost an exclusively an American process, the root of the matter lies definitely on the eastern shores of the Atlantic — in the works of Cyrano, of Voltaire, of 
Verne, Conan Doyle and Dunsany. Of recent years, we are glad to report, an increasing 
number of British authors have been reasserting their place in Sol, men like Temple, 
Clarke, M'lniosb and Russell. Note, in Mr. Longdon, another English star, rises. 



« 7 6 



OF THOSE WHO CAME 



•77 



The night was very still, and the 
yellow reflections that had illuminated the rear of the house were 
gone. Moving silently I crept near, 
parting bushes to look into the 
garden. 

The spherical vessel rested on 
turf behind the house but the power that sustained it had been turned 
off, leaving it a fragile tracery of 
spidery girders almost as thin as 
wire, vulnerable now that the lines 
of force forming the hull had been 
collapsed. Two green vaporous 
shapes moved inside the vessel, visible through the tracery of its sides. 
I grew completely still, watching. 

Two, I thought. Only two. I 
had expected that there would be 
three forms in the vessel. 

After a long time the vaporous 
shapes slowly left the machine and 
crossed the turf towards the house. 
They were of diffused outline, 
slightly luminous in the gathering 
dark, tall as a man. Only when 
they were gone from view round 
the corner of the house did I step 
out from the bushes towards the 
ship that had come so far. 

Its tracery of fragile members 
buckled under the blows of the 
spanner brought from the car, 
bending and folding into a tangle 
of jointed wire. Within moments 
it was destroyed beyond even the 
skill of its owners to repair. Silence 
returned. A few stars, immeasurably remote worlds, had begun to 
show in the heavens. I looked up, 
searching for bright Sirius from 
where I knew the vessel had come. 



But drifting cloud obscured that 
section of the night sky. 

A green shape came round the 
corner of the house and stopped. 
I sensed its surprise, quickly followed by antagonism and fury. 
Glowing it came across the turf, 
its speed increasing to catch me. 

I turned on my heels and ran, 
slipping through the bushes to the 
road. The saloon was not far. I 
dragged open the door, jumped in 
. . . and not until half the valley 
lay behind did I stop, looking back. 

The two jreen shapes were 
searching round the house. For a 
long time they passed in and out 
among the bushes like mysterious 
pillars of green light, then they returned to the house, were lost from 
view. My agitation began to subside. I told myself that things had 
worked out well on the whole, that 
as much had been accomplished as 
could be expected. Obviously they 
had not believed their coming was 
anticipated, must now be regretting 
having left their vessel unguarded. 

I drove slowly back towards the 
house. It was unfortunate that there 
had been no time to bring a weapon 
—or at least one of such a type 
as would be effective against the 
beings from the spheroid. There 
was every reason why their physical 
make-up should be familiar to me. 
They could control matter, but 
were not matter themselves. A lifeform totally dissimilar to any 
known on Earth, they were sentient, 
highly intelligent, yet composed of 
molecules as insubstantial as those 



of the air. My sworn duty was to 
destroy them. Theirs was to eliminate me. 

An opening in the bushes permitted a view of the rear of the 
house. The broken vessel was Rone, 
but whether hidden away with the 
hope of repair or concealed because 
its presence would arouse suspicion. 
Could not be decided. The house 
was silent and I crept round it. 

Two men had just emerged and 
were walking quickly away down 
the road. One was a trifle more than 
average height, the other an inch or 
two below. They were of avenge 
build, quite undistinguished. To my 
trained eye they appeared not as 
individuals, but as types. 

A Rood disgviit, I thought. They 
had speedily adopted the appearance 
of average types of the life-forms 
among which they would now 
move. That offered concealment, 
yet opportunity for unlimited activity. There was not a man on 
Earth who would not swear each 
was a human, just like himself. 

I went round the house quickly, 
looking inside through each window. No light showed, nor was 
there any movement. Satisfied, I 
went back to the car, Apparently 
the vessel had brought two only, 
despite supposition to the contrary. 

The brilliant headlights soon 
picked out the two figures walking 
quickly down towards the bottom 
of the valley. I slowed, reaching 
back to lock the saloon doors on 
the inside, and stopped near them, 
my face in shadow. The slightly 



taller figure came to my windo 
and 1 put it down an inch. 

"We'd like a lift on into town, 
he said. 

They did it well, I thought. V 
well — had studied everything dow 
to the slight local accent, and 
adopted it automatically. Everyone 
would swear the two were exactly 
what they appeared to be. 

I don't recognise you," I said."You strangers hereabouts?" 

The figure hesitated, nodding, 
one hand already on the doorhandle, 
trying to open it. 

"We're salesmen for a big business concern," he srid. "A cab was 
to pick us up, but must have mistaken our instructions. So we 
thought we'd walk on as it's only 
a mile or so. But we'd appreciate 
that lift . . 

"Sorry — got four friends to pick 
up just down the road." I said and 
accelerated and let in the clutch. 
The little man had remained in 
front of me, and he did not move. 
They were like that, I thought — 
they knew there was no danger, and 
sometimes forgot, especially at the 
beginning . . , 

1 he wing of the saloon passed 
through him. When I looked back 
both were walking quickly on after 
me. 

I sped for town. They had not 
suspected and I had learned enough 
to feel safe in going on. Eliminating them was now the problem. No 
form of physical violence could 
succeed. Poison was out — they 
would not eat. Gassing was im


OP THOSE VHO CAMS 



*79 



ssible — they did not breathe 
ugh they could simulate cheit 
vements when necessary to comte their disguise. They were virslly ageless, and did not reckon 
time by any standard used on Earth. 
By conscious will they could form 
the molecules making up their substance into any shape they wished, 
simulating an outline which would 
provide protection in the environment they inhabited. 

The proprietor of the next town's 
only hotel greeted me with smiles, 
and I saw that he remembered my 
week's stay and large tips. 

"I'm expecting a couple of 
friends," I told him. "Commercial 
travelers here for a deal. You might 
give me a ring when they come in." 

He beamed. "I will see to it 
personally." 

"Good," I said. 

I went towards the stairs, and 
paused, looking back. "Oh, don't 
say I asked after them. I want to 
look in on them as a surprise — get 
it?" 

"Certainly, Mr. Smith, certainly," he said. 

Smith, I thought. But it was as 
good a name as any . . . In my job 
one seldom used one's own name. 

Alone in my room, I reviewed the 
situation. The newcomers had arrived as expected and I had traced 
them. That there were only two, 
instead of the three anticipated, was 
the only error but it simplified nutters. Two would be easier to deal 
with and my knowledge of them 
was complete. They must not be 



allowed to become lost amid Earth** 
teeming millions or they would become a secret, ever-present and certainly-active menace. My job was 
to follow and eliminate them at the 
earliest possible moment. 

Presently the bell rang on my 
door. I got up, crossed to it and 
then remembered I had not 
switched on the light. It would 
look odd to be seen there without 
it. 

I depressed the switch and opened 
the door. "Yes?" 

"Your friends are just in," the 
manager said. "They've booked until midday tomorrow." 

"You're sure it's them?" I asked. 

"A think so, sir — a Mr. Dulice, 
a bit above average height, booked 
for himself and his friend . . 

"That'll be them," I agreed. 
Dulicr, I thought. It was as good 
a name as Dicsnar and the latter 
sounded odd by Earth standards. 
I wondered if the manager had 
noticed the light come on under the 
crack of the door. "I was dozing," 
I said. Best to make sure. "Thanks. 
Needn't mention me to them. Maybe I'll leave it until tomorrow." 

"Their room is No. Thirteen, end 
of the corridor," he said. 

"Thanks. Good night." 

He left and I wondered what he 
would do if he knew what the occupants of Room 1 J were. Not respectable Mr. Dulice and companion but Diesnar and lago, nonphysical entities playing their usual 
game of imitation — a game that 
had been perfected by millions of 



FANTASTIC VN1VIHSE 



generations of evolutionary selection. 

The room clock showed two 
hours until midnight. That gave 
about seven hours in all, until 
dawn. I had known that my visit 
to Room 13 would certainly not be 
delayed until then despite my assurance to the contrary. Instead the 
hours of darkness would see much 
activity. 

I unlocked a trunk and took out 
a light metal box, which a second 
key fitted. The weapon inside was 
not recognisable as such by Earth 
standards but might have pissed for 
an antique pedestal of bronze, ending in a cup in which a carved crystal rested. But it was not a pedestal 
and not bronze — was instead the 
product of much scientific research 
and inestimably valuable. I doubted 
whether half a dozen such instruments existed in the cosmos. Those 
that did were in safe keeping. 

With it in a pocket I went out 
and walked silently to Room 13. 
A faint light burned in the hall 
stairway below but the hotel was 
quiet. I recalled that the manager 
had said something about being 
short-staffed. The brorizen object 
fitted snugly in one hand and my 
Ii tigers came upon a lever which 
could be depressed. Holding it 1 
tapped. Silence followed. I tapped 
again. The knob turned and the 
door opened. 

"I have a message," I said evenly. 

The door opened fully and I went 
in, moving quickly to the right 



along the wall, my left ha 
tended back towards the door and 
on the lighting switch. 

"You've forgotten the light," I 
said. 

The switch clicked under my 
pressure. A glance showed me Dulice, alias Diesnar, was gone. The 
other — the smaller and weaker — 
stared at me. 

"I was not expecting anyone," he 
murmured. "You've made some 
error ..." 

I examined him without speaking. His features were so near average, his dress and appearance so 
near the normal, that no person in 
all the world would have given him 
a second glance. 

"You do it very well," J said. 

His astonishment, dismay and 
terror could be sensed. He did not 
show it — an appearance of terror 
would have to be simulated consciously and would serve no useful 
purpose. Hence it was absent. But 
his bland expression was not all 1 
had to go by. 

"Surely — you think me someone 
else?" he said softly. 

He was moving slowly back. I 
quickly closed the door and stood 
with my back to it. 

"No," I said. "No, not someone 
else — lago." 

It took him a moment to integrate and recognise the Earth oral 
vibrations forming his true name. 
But 1 saw that he had done so and 
knew me now and why I had come. 

"Better keep still," I said. 
"Where's — Mr. Dulice?" 



OF THOSE WHO CAME 



The silence wis so long I thought 
he was not going to speak. His face 
shone in the light. His lips almost 
seemed to smile, 

"Gone," Ik said at last. 

"Obviously. And where?" 

"That you can find out," 

"It would save trouble if you— 
told me," I murmured. I took the 
bronzen pedestal from my pocket. 
He saw it. His eyes fixed on the 
carved crystal, and I sensed his terror 
anew. It was stronger, this time — 
the terror of a being faced with 
death. 

"Why should I tell you?" he 
asked evenly. 

"Because, if you do not I shall 
kill you." 

He shrugged. It was well done. 
"I do not fear death," 

"Odd," I said. "I do." 

My fingers tightened slightly on 
the level which controlled the compact, immeasurably complicated apparatus inside the hollow plinth. 

"You came far enough," I said, 
"to this planet. You might have 
escaped more easily if you'd landed 
near a large city, though I can guess 
you wanted to avoid observation. 
This time your effort to appear 
quite average was a mistake. However, where is Diesnar?" 

The eyes looking back at me were 
cool, but I sensed and knew the 
terror and decision in the other's 
heart. 

"That's for you — to find," he 
breathed. 

I pressed the lever. It was no 
use waiting. The crystal hummed 



and sang, ringing tike rant wires 
in. the wind, and I closed my eyes, 
not wanting to see Iago. I wished 
him no harm, personally. Might 
even have liked him in some ways, 
despite his weakness. He was different from Diesnar, the leader, 
who was strong enough for both. 

. I opened my eyes in time to see 
the last wisps of green mist shred 
away into nothing and dissipate on 
the air. A few moments passed 
and a knock came on the door. I 
Opened it. 
"Yes?" 

The manager appeared apologetic. 
"I was just retiring, sir — did you 
ring? I was passing . . ." 

"No," I said. "We don't want 
anything." I put the pedestal in my 
pocket — the crystal had cooled 
quickly. "Thanks all the same, Oh 
— do you know where Mr, Dulice 
went?" 

The manager shook his head. "I 
haven't seen him come down, sir. 
I've been at the reception desk — 
we're shortstaffed, though I've got 
a new man to take over." 

I went back to my room. The 
annihilation of Iago gave mc no 
elation. I had not supposed him 
difficult to deal with but his companion would be very different. 
Diesnar was clever and a foe anyone might justly fear. 

I locked the piezo-electric crystal 
and waveform generator away in its 
metal case and stood by the window, the light out so that no revealing shadow fell upon the glass. 
Wind-driven clouds were passing a 



FANTASTIC UNIVERSE 



■ 



weak moon anil the little town was 
asleep. I knew Mr. Dulice would 
not be asleep but watching somewhere , . . 

\Pith infinite caution I opened 
the window and went out upon the 
iron fire-escape, listening. An alley 
lay below, lit by a single lamp 
■where it met an adjoining street. 
At the dim end of the alley, scarcely discernible from the shadows, 
stood a man. I withdrew and went 
down into the hall, where a youth 
dozed behind a lit desk. I did not 
give him a second glance. 

"Just going out to get some 
books from my car," I said. 

The streets were as near deserted 
as did not matter. The alley was 
like a well, stretching way into 
complete blackness. I followed the 
one wall, knowing risks were 
greatest in the section under the 
lamp. But risks had to be taken. 
Agents who uphold law and order 
are not chosen from the timid. 

The lamp behind, the gloom 
ahead was complete. Clouds had 
banked against the moon so that 
even the high rooftops flanking the 
alley could not be seen against the 
sky. A car pissed along the road, 
sending down after me a brief humming. I sensed that my enemy was 
very near, hating me and probably 
already aware that Iago was dead. 
There could be no half-measures in 
this hunt. My instructions were to 
annihilate them. Guessing that, Mr. 
Dulicc's reactions were readily predictable. 

The wall at my back, the bricks 



rough under my hands, I edged on 

into the blackness, listening often, 
and with every sense strung to its 
highest point of receptivity. I 
sensed that the figure anyone would 
take for an ordinary commercial 
traveller, Mr. Dulice, was nearer. 
If the moon came up it was as Mr. 
Dulice that he would be visible. 

That was how the imitative 
adaptibility of my quarry worked— 
he had become an average reptesentativc of the creatures among 
whom he sought to hide. That 
process was largely instinctive, the 
outcome of an ancestry where survival had depended upon the perfect imitation of other life-forms. 
Those whose imitative processes had 
been less than perfect had on the 
whole survived less well. That was 
how evolution worked and Mr. 
Dulice was at the tail end of a long 
evolutionary period and his imitation of an average human life-form 
was excellent. 

The tiny sound of something 
brushing stones froze me against 
the wall. I realised that I should 
have brought the resonant disintegrator. The knowledge of my error ran through me like a cold fear. 
In this job those who made errors 
seldom had the opportunity to repeat them — instead they died . . . 
But that little pedestal -shaped 
weapon was special. I had adopted 
the habit of locking it away to 
guard against its loss. Accidents 
could happen — and that pedestal 
had to be checked in when my task 



OF THOSE WHO CAM« 



was finished. Better that I never 
return, at all than return without 
ic 

Diesnar would deduce that I carried it, I decided. By playing on 
that belief I could keep my advantage. 

"Mr. Dulice," I whispered. 

Neither of us would want anyone else in the town to know wc 
were other than wc appeared. lie 
would not want a howling niDO 
chasing him, even though they 
could not harm him. As for myself I preferred secrecy. 

No reply came. A gap in the 
moving cloud let a weak moonray 
glow momentarily into the alley. 
Directly opposite me, his back to 
the wall, was Dulice. We could have 
touched hands by reaching out. 

The moonlight went. Somewhere 
in the distance a whistle sounded 
and wheels on rails. That would be 
the 2 a.m. electric-train passing 
south, I thought. I had not known* 
it was already quite so late. 

"Mr. Dulice," I said quietly, "I 
have killed your companion . . ." 

His terror could be sensed, so 
ftrong was the emotion. Had he 
been a real man his breathing would 
have sounded heavily. 

"There have been times when we 
allowed one of you to live," I said 
evenly. That was true — but only 
a long time ago when new arrivals 
such as Diesnar had been less welt 
equipped. "Would you guarantee to 
put in our hands all the information you possess of your companions, their names and plans?" 



Came a scarcely audible rustic, 
then silence. It seemed apparent 
that Mr. Dulice expected immediate 
anniliilation. I guessed that his terror was so extreme he had for the 
moment lost the power to use 
the pseudo-larynx which W3* now 
part of his make-up. 

"Come," I said. "I expect an 
answer — in the circumstances." 

"You underestimate me . . 

The words were a whisper — and 
from high up on my left. I moved 
out into the alley and saw his 
shadow on the iron fire-escape, ascending rapidly. I ran to the ladder, climbing. He went through 
the window into my room. Wiien 
I reached the window the door had 
just closed. The metal box containing the pedestal was gone. 

We only made mistakes like that 
once, I thought, running for the 
door. The corridor was empty — so 

were the stairs and hall. The youth 

was frankly asleep now, snoring. I 
passed him and emerged into the 
street. 

Diesnar would be waiting somewhere. He would prefer I did not 
live for while I lived he was listed 
among the hunted. 

A clock struck loudly. I crossed 
the street and watched the hotel for 
a moment. The building was dark 
except for the glass above the entrance door. Mr. Dulice might not 
try to open the metal box but 
merely hide it. Either way, he now 
had a ponderous advantage — that 
of knowing the apparatus was not 
in my possession. 



184 



FANTASTIC UNIVERSE 



A man ws i long way down the 
street at a corner, watching, and 
U-y.ui walking towards me. He 
was very slightly over average 
height — just such a man as one 
might meet a thousand times in a 
thousand cities of the Earth. 

I withdrew round the nearest 
corner and looked back. The man 
was following — the distance between us had decreased. Our roles 
had changed, I thought. Mr. Dulice 
had become the hunter, I the 
hunted. It was a role he would 
adopt readily, one well suited to his 
character. 

The buildings thinned a little as 
I went eastwards through the town. 
Every time I looked back my follower was there. He wanted secrecy 
as much as I — would play the 
game the way I led until very near 
the end. 

Waste lots slipped behind and a 
viaduct bridge. I went off it onto 
turf. At my back was a high wire 
fence — below it a bank sloping 
down to the railway. No one would 
disturb us here at this hour. The 
nearest lamp was far away, the 
moonlight intermittent, the nearest 
buildings away down the line. 

Mr. Dulice stopped a few paces 
away. "I didn't come across lightyears of space to have my plans interrupted by meddlers," he said. 

I wondered whether he held the 
resonator. Turned on me it could 
prove equally fatal. 

"You cannot be allowed to settle 
on this planet,** I pointed out, 



watching h;m keenly. "Succinctly 
you're a bad lot, Mr. Dulice." 

"I make my way," he said. 

1 knew then that he had not got 
the resonator — probably had been 
unable to open the box. Had he, 
he would not have talked but acted 
and his action would have ended my 
part of the case. Now he came 
forward so that we were two paces 
apart. 

"You know I shall have to kill 

you," he said. 

"Of course — provided you have 
the chance." 

He inclined his head. "I make 
my own chances." 

We watched each other. In a 
way, we were evenly matched— 
now. Possibly his strength exceeded 
mine. From experience I knew that 
one of them could summon up 
great physical power when survival 
depended on it. Not the power of 
nerves and muscles of ordinary 
flesh but that of the interaction 
orbits of the molecules making up 
his form, that strength could be 
none the less nearly irresistible. 

"You've often hunted us," he 
said. "It's a habit which should 
scop . . ." 

"I'm paid for my work," I said, 
never looking from him. 

He was watching for an opening. 
Suddenly — abruptly — it would be 
over, for one of m. 

Then he moved — so did I. My 
hands clasped round one arm above 
the elbow and one leg by the knee, 
gripping with all my strength. He 
came up in my grasp like an empty, 



OF THOSE WHO CAME 



hollow dummy, struggling. He 
realised at that moment too that 
I had not fled this way without 
purpose. 

I It- screamed u I flung him down 
towards the electrified rails. The cry 
echoed to the sky even as he descended. It was not a cry of terror 
but triumph. 

"We were three! There's Piert!" 

Then he touched the electrified 
rails. A flash glowed abruptly between earth and sky. He was almost as conductive as solid metal, 
I thought. Nothing of Mr. Dulice 
remained— only a wisp of thin 
green vapor drifting up on the 
night air and dispersing. 

Fieri, I thought. Piert, the leader—I should have known! But he 
had not been seen nor visible to 
follow. I had traced the two only. 
Such a plan was like Piert. He 
would go off alone — might now be 
lost in some populous city. Or 
again he might be near. Piert was 
the kind who stuck around to see 
things out — in bis own way . . . 

I turned from the fence quickly, 
eyes searching the road below and 
the expanse of turf, half expecting 
Piert to be there, waiting for me. 
Were he it would end bis way. 
Piert was more than the equal of 
the two disposed of . . . worse, 
could have followed me wh;Ie I 
had not suspected his presence . . . 

A group of men was coming towards me, shouting. Those in the 
lead began to run, waving their 
arms. 

"It was murder!" one cried. 



They had seen me throw Dulice 
down and I ran. This was not the 
time for difficult explanations. As 
an agent one has to make one's own 
way out of difficulties. When the 
difficulties were of this type, an 
avoiding action was called for. 
Furthermore, while I argued Piert 
would act. 

The hotel was quiet, the youth 
gone, possibly to get tea or coffee. I 
hurried to the room Mr. Dulice had 
hired and searched quickly. The 
metal box was not there. I went to 
my own room and traced back the 
way he must have gone, watching 
for likely hiding-places. There 
seemed to be none — or those 1 saw 
were too obvious for a mind of Mr. 
Dulice's calibre to adopt. 

I went out of the hotel. Dulice 
had appeared to go left and the 
road was almost bare of hidingplaces until the next corner. Beyond 
the corner was a railed garden, small 
and sunk below street level. At the 
bottom of steps was a metal box, 
shiny and new. I descended, brought 
it up, and unlocked it. The resonator safe in my pocket, I hesitated, 
then locked the box and returned 
tt to its previous position. Piert 
was the type who would be aware 
of developments. He might know it 
was there, return to reassure himself or carry it off. 

With everything I possessed on 
Earth stowed in my case I hurried 
out of the hotel, wondering if already too much time had been 
wasted. It would be wise to move 



FANTASTIC UNIVERSE 



on. VoitSat wcmded along the street 
and three workmen came into view. 

"That's htm!" one shouted, pointing at me. 

They had been quick in tracing 
me — almost too quick. The other 
way along the street others were 
coming, a torch bobbing in their 
leader's hands. Behind in the alley 
would be others. I wondered whether 
it was luck or whether Piert was 
present and had already acted. 

I put down my case, waiting. The 
railwaymcn were confident because 
of their numbers, yet hesitated to 
lay hands on me. 

"We saw him throw the man 
down the embankment/' one said to 
another. "It was attempted murder, 
clear as daylight." 

I tensed my skin against their 
grasp but they only surrounded me, 
increasingly hesitant. 

"Look," I said, "I'm an ordinary 
man. I ran — who wouldn't with a 
pack like you after him? If you 
think there's been murder done, 
then go back and look for the 
bodyt" 

"It's a plan to get rid of us," 
one said. 

I laughed. "If you think so, some 
go back and some stay." 

"You're trying to leave town," 
another pointed out. 

"So what? Who wouldn't, after 
being chased like a thief?" 

They were silent, looking at each 
other. The enthusiasm of the first 
rush that had carried them after 
me was subsiding — some were be


ginning to doubt the truth of what 
they had seen. 

"Perhaps we made a mistake . . .** 
one said. 

"No. He threw him down, clear 
as daylight." 

"It's a job for the authorities to 
look into,*" a third suggested. 

I did not want that. The wheels 
of authority turn slowly and Piert 
would be hundreds of miles away 
by the time it was decided there 
was indeed no body. 

"He's an ordinary looking kind 
of cove," the first man said. "Maybe 
it was alt an — an illusion — " 

Another man had come down 
the street behind them, and stood 
on the perimeter of the circle in 
shadow. 

"That's your saloon in the openair park down the road," he shot at 
me over their heads. 

It was. I had bought it as the 
world could prove. I nodded. Something in the timber of the voicesomething tacking — chilled me but 
I could not see him clearly over the 
surrounding heads. 

The newcomer gave an exclamation. "He admits it! That's why 
you'll not find a body! I stayed 
behind, going down to see if the 
man was alive. He was dead. There's 
no body now." He pointed at me 
accusingly. "He came back, threw 
the body in his car and took it 
away. I didn't try to stop him — he 
had a gun. He's dumped both in the 
river in my opinion. It was quick 
work — but he had time to do it." 

The workmen looked at the 



OP THOSE WHO CAME 



speaker. "Yrs, T did notice tHas chap 
stay behind," one said. 

Another nodded. "Therc'd be 
time to nip down to the bridge — " 

I was afraid, then. Terribly 
afraid. They had lost an exact sense 
of the time that had passed. Worse, 
it might have been possible for me 
to have taken a body down to the 
river. Time had flown while I had 
been searching for the pedestal. 

"It's all lies," I said. "I never 
had a gun." 

"That's for a judge and jury to 
decide," they said, and pressed 
closely round me. 

We walked noisily through the 
town. 1 was surrounded, and shaken. 
This was the kind of thing no agent 
likes to happen. We like secrecy. 
We expect no outside aid — know 
indeed, that there will be none 
forthcoming' — and the situation was 
ugly. There was enough proof 
against me to keep me tied up so 
long that Piert could be ten thousand miles away and then it would 
take half a lifetime to Bnd him. 

The workmen told each other 
they had seen me do it, gaining confidence. "I still think there's been 
some mistake," one objected. 

They silenced him. The mistake 
had been mine, coupled with bad 
luck that sent the late gang off 
work at that very moment when 
Dulice had pitched down on to the 
live rails. 

They pressed closer as wc Reared 
the police station. "Where's that 
man who saw him take the body?" 



one asked. They needtd to reassure 
themselves now. 

"I'm here," the voice said. 

It was slightly flat, yet somehow 
absolutely normal. 

"Ah, you saw him," the man 
said, satisfied. "You'll have to tell 
the police. You're new here, eh?" 

"I was going to the station to see 
if there were any late trains 
stopping." The newcomer was behind me, beyond the fringe of the 
crowd. 

"No expresses stop here all night," 
'someone said. 

There was silence, then one said, 
"You'll need to give evidence. We 
didn't sec him come back. What 
you saw is important. What's your 
name?" 

"Peart," the man said. "Samuel 
Peart. I was at the hotel." 

1 knew then that Piert had engineered it and lied to convict me 
and wanted me to know. That was 
like him. He must have the satisfaction of knowing that 1 knew, 
thus doubling his own triumph, fn 
that was his revenge for lago and 
Diesnar and for all the others of his 
type I liad hunted down. 

"You're a stranger here?" one 
asked again. 

"Yes." 

He put the human sound of 
triumph into his voice, knowing I 
should hear it and understand and 
thus hate tenfold my defeat. 

It was awkward. We agents like 
things to be kept quiet. We do not 
like a town stirred to awareness of 
our presence and actions. But things 



FANTASTIC UNIVERSE 



kid gone coo far. At that moment 
onV a dozen workmen possessed 
the fringe of this knowledge, excluding Piert and myself. Of their 
number one doubted. The others 
were still so surprised they needed 
to reassure each other. 

I halted and turned around. The 
newcomer was the youth of the 
hotel. "I didn't have time to take 
the body away, Mr. Peart," I said 
evenly. "But I did have time to 
find — and open — the box Mr. Dulice 
fook." 

It meant nothing to the workmen. For a second I savored the 
terror which instantly replaced 
Piert's satisfaction and which could 
be sensed with a feeling of almost 
physical impact. He had been clever, 
getting a job at the hotel. Then I 
pressed the lever of the pedestal. 

Piert's outline wobbled, shrank 



inwards, and he dissipated away 
into faint green vapor which drifted 
and vanished like cigarette smoke 
on the evening air. 

"Strewth!" a workman breathed. 

I walked through them and ran. 
My feet made no sound. I heard 
their shouts as I reached my saloon 
but lost them as I drove for the 
valley. It had been an untidy case, 
I thought, but the workmen would 
end up doubting their own eyes. 

I lifted my vessel, a mere lattice 
structure of girders thin as wire, 
from the water, set it on the bank 
and put up the force screens. My 
human shape, replica of the lifeforms amid which I had moved, 
began to vanish. I glided into the 
vessel, set now for the Dog Star. 

We police from Sirius do not like 
outlaws to prey upon unsuspecting 
worlds, however remote. 



Currenl science fiction anthology editors, desperately scrambling to cull 
tin already much-plucked field, are seeking to avoid the twin pitfalls in 
front of them — using stories already repeatedly reprinted in previous 
anthologies and using stories so recently published in magazines that they 
are fresh in the minds of the STF public — by asking "name'" authors to 
write new stories for them. In some cases they are running new work by 
authors no one has ever heard of. 

The inevitable results of this desperation policy are inferior quality and reduced sales, with the ultimate effect of doing some damage to the evergrowing field of science fiction itself. Few authors can afford to release 
new stories for the minescular royalties publishers of anthologies can afford 
to pay them as individuals — at least before such stories have been given an 
opportunity to earn ■magazine payment. In a number of instances— though 
not all by any means — what such authors have offered the anthologists are 
stories that have taken a bouncing around all over the magazine portion of 
the field. 

Although what we are offering in FANTASTIC UNIVERSE is technically 
a periodical — magazine if you will — it is also an effort to give our readers 
an anthology of top-level stories by the best authors available. And every 
it&ry is brand new! 



universe 
in 
books 

by . . . the Editor 

A critical study of new science 
fiction hard-cover publication. 



BFYOND HUMAN KEN, editw 
by Judith Mcrril, Random House, 
New York (J2.9S). 

This is a good anthology. In fact, 
if it weren't for the great spate 01 
similar collections that have pourca 
from the nation's presses during the 
past two-three years, it would be a 
standout. Subtitled — presumably by 
the cditrix {nasty word that) — 21 
Startling Stories of Science fiction 
am! fantasy, tlus new volume oilers 
a non-stenographer's spread of 
stories ranging in authorship all the 
way from Larry Manning's Good? 
bye, llha! to Stephen Vincent Bcnet's 
The Angel Was a Yankee, and in 
time from 1938 (Lester del Key's 
marvelous Helen O'Loy) to five offerings that first found their way 
into the public prints as recently as 
last year. 

Outside of the above-mentioned 
Helen O'Loy, with which or perhaps whom we fell completely in 
love during a previous anthologization, our favorites among a fat field 
include Bob Hcinlein's gorgeous 
satire. Our Fair City, William 
Tenn's The Fittest, Padgett's A 
Gnome There Was and Idris Sea


Booki — novels, collections of short stories, anthologies, documentaries — in hard 
{overs and packet-sized reprints have become a major factor in science fantasy 
since 1946. Libraries and bookstores today have regular STF department!, crammed 
with books of all types and calibers. For the sake of reader and collector alike, 
this motley massing of material rates critical attention. Hence, Universe in Books. 
Whits you may not agree with our judgments it is our hope that from these reviews 
you will at least learn something about the nature and content of these offerings. 



189 



FANTASTIC UNIVERSE 



bright's h/hrious The Man Who 
Sold Rope to the Gnotes. 

Preface and introduction are by 
Judith Mcrril and Fletcher Pratt 
respectively and if there is little 
left for anyone to say in the way 
of leading off for an stf anthology, 
these two manage it as expertly and 
charmingly as possible. For the 
rest, you'll have to pick your own 
favorites from a lush field that includes such solid and unstolid 
senders as Katherine MacLean, Malcolm Jameson, Roger Dee, Eric 
Frank Russell, Kris Neville, James 
Blish, Arthur Porges, Horace Fyfe, 
Tony Boucher, Murray Lcinster, 
Mark Clifton, John Christopher, 
Fritz Leiber, Ted Sturgeon and an 
anonymous but far from uninteresting end-piece entitled simply 
Bibliography. 

All in all, a hell of a lot of good 
reading! 

THE CURRENTS OF SPACE by 
Isaac Asimov, Doubleday 6c Co., 
Garden City. New York ((2.7J). 

Mr. Asimov once again delves 
into large-scale social injustice (interplanetary in this instance), its 
causes and cures, once again manages to erect a morc-than-rcasonably 
dramatic edifice of intrigue, murder, 
with ncar-Spillane tnsistance although with the Spillanc sadism at 
least motivated where not amputated entirely — and manages this 
despite the essential dismalness of 
his topic. 

Essentially his problem is that of 
the planet Fiorina, which is held 



in merciless thrall by mon 
from the neighboring planet of 
Sark, who use its unique textile 
grow ths to promote their own 
wealth and self indulgence. Then, 
of course, there is a far from benevolent galactic empire watching 
the proceedings with interest, and a 
little group of Spatio-analysts from 
nearly- forgot ten Earth, who have 
discovered a still-more gigantic 
threat to this portion of the universe than even the porcine Sarkitcs 
represent. 

Hero (you'll pardon the expression, we hope) of this charivari is 
a Spatio-analyst whose findings 
prove so incidentally dangerous to 
the Sark monopolists that he is 
"probed" — in other words rendered 
temporarily mindless and deprived 
of his memories to boot — and deposited on Fiorina, where he becomes a plant raiser for the textile 
monopoly. A babe named Valona — 
kinda stupid, this one — takes him 
under one of her — er— rather large 
wings and tries to shield him from 
harm, which of course he gets into 
as soon as possible. 

The only basic flaw we found in 
an otherwise entertaining job is the 
author's supposition that the 
worker-natives of Fiorina are badly 
off. In view of the debilitating 
effect of being rich on the Sarkitcs, 
it appeared to us they'd have been 
far better off had they switched 
places with their exploited neighbors. But then, it has always been 
an absurdly difficult job to convince 
the poor they ire happier in their 



UNIVERSE IN BOOKS 



1Q1 



poverty than the rich in their 
ulcers. Which is a pity. 

JUDGMENT NIGHT, a Selection 
of Science Fiction by C. L. Moore, 
Gnome Press, New York ($3.50). 

Miss Moore (and if any readers 
don't know that this very attractive 
and very gifted lady is the wife of 
Henry Kutter-Lcwis Padgett-Laurence O'Donnell etc. they should 
don their stf -dunce caps) has 
atmosphere. Along with Esther 
Carlsen, Margaret St. Clair and a 
handful of others she treads the 
feminine side of what has been perhaps too masculine a street — namely 
•if. Leigh Brackctt, E. Mayne Hull, 
Idris Seabright and other gifted sheauthors in the field tend to walk 
botli sides or right down i he middle. 

In this collection she offers one 
novel (the title story), two short 
novels (Paradise Street and The 
Code) and a pair of novelets 
(Promised Land and Heir Apparent), and while they deal in part 
with every stf-subject from intragalactic war to personal murder 
with handblastcrs, somehow the 
delicacy, the impervious crystal 
femininity remains. 

We hope this view, thusly expressed, 6ocs not in any way injure 
the sale of this volume with the immediate post- beanie masculine set 
of potential readers. They'll find it 
as exciting and imaginatively intriguing a volume as anything by 
A. E. van Vogt or Dr. E. E. Smith 
- — and besides, if they're old enough 
to read, it's time they began to 



derive at least a smidgin of vicarious 
entertainment from the in this case 
comely sex. 

THE LEGION OF TIME by Jack 
Williamson, Fantasy Press, Reading, 
Pennsylvania ($3.00). 

This is the noted space operateur 
at his Will Stcwart-SeWee Shock 
best, in a modernization and blowup of a serial first published back 
in 1938. The noted dillciante of 
collapsing universes and superBEMs opens this job prosaically 
enough on the campus (pardon, in 
the Yard) of Harvard College, 
back in the boom time twenties. 

He seems to have gone in heavily 
for the letters a-n in his character 
names, for they include Dennis 
Lannlng, Wilmott McLan and 
Lao Mcng Sh<m, to say nothing of 
Lanning's closest friend, Barry HallorjM. More intriguing are a couple 
of dames named Lcthon«c and 
Sorainya, who come popping out of 
probable futures to woo the surfaces of these four Browns — pardon, Ans — of Harvard, Lcthonce 
to win their services in the battle 
for her as yet non-existent future, 
Sorainya to prevent that future 
from becoming fact. 

If this sounds complicated, it is. 
But things happen at such a pace, 
from the time Denny Lnnning is 
plucked from death while airfichttng the Japanese over Chapti 
by an also-dead Wilmot McLan, 
who has emerged from the future 
in a swift-flying time-ship to pick 
up a sort of Foreign Legion of pro


FANTASTIC IWIVERSB 



fcssional adventurers— from then 
until Bari dies again, this goes 
buckety-buck so fast t he reader has 
tC accept the plot and its complexities without quibble or else. 

If you go for Williamson in this 
vein (we prefer him in his werewolf or Darker Than Yon Think 
mood), you're in for a ride on a 
real roller-coaster. 

THE NEXT MILLION YEARS 
by Charles Galton Darwin, Doubleday & Co., Inc., New York City 
($275). 

Sir Charles Darwin, grandson of 
the author of The Origin of Species, 
which of course set off the whole 
evolution thing, here indulges in a 
little truly long-range prophecy. 
Ilinm-ll a nuclear phycisist of note, 
Sir Charles takes the view that 
mankind can expect no evolutionary 
improvement for at least the term 
of his title, that people will continue to do much the same old 
things for die same old reasons 
during that period. 

Regarding the species with almost 
terrifying detachment, he has 
reached the conclusion that most of 
what we consider virtues — morality, 
self-sacrifice etc. — arc actually 
luxuries that can be indulged in 
only when the matter of survival is 
easy. For, in Sir Charles* view, 
survival is everything. And who is 
to say him nay? Certainly no 
species that has failed to survive. 

Incidentally he takes no account 
of tl»e possibility of space-flight 
or the spread of Earthmcn and 



women to other planets in the next 
million years. Probably, if he had* 
he'd have stated that the same old 
hunger cycle would merely have 
been extended through the universe. 
Sir Charles' prophecy is a strangely 
fascinating one for all of its grimness — and, we fear, soundly based. 

FUTURE TENSE, edited by Kendell Foster Crossen, Greenberg, 
New York City ($J.J0). 

Another anthology which features so-called "new" stories (50%) 
as well as a number culled from 
the oft-culled fields of the stf pulp 
magazines. The "used-car" section 
includes Tony Boucher's The Am~ 
baaadors, Hank Kuttner's Dream's 
EnJ, his wife's Scarlet Dream 
(dreamy pair, these Kuttners) and 
solidly excellent talcs by Peter 
Phillips; Ward Moore, Miriam Allen 
deFord and Mr. Crossen. As the 
title reveals, all of them arc concerned with things to come. 

The "new" section is more uneven — which is probably not to be 
helped. Cyclops by H. F. Heard is 
perhaps the most powerful tale in 
the entire anthology and the other 
authors are Bruce Elliott, Rose 
Bedrick Elliott, Martin Gardner, 
James Blish, John D. MacDonald 
and Christopher Monig. As we have 
stated, their quality is uneven. One, 
which shall he nameless, we bounced 
years ago while sitting in another 
editorial chair. 

However, future Tense is well 
worth the price on its jacket flap. 



THE PAST. THE PRESENT, AND THE FUTURE 



Science fantasy — science fiction if you prefer — like Caesar's Gaul, or the 
visions conjured up for Scrooge by Marley's ghost, can be divided into 
three parrs — Past, Present, Future. 

Although specialized magazine publication of what passes today for 
science fantasy has existed for less than thirty years, the pre-World-WarTwo era has already receded into the mrsts of legend. Indeed the gulf 
between Science Fantasy Past and Science Fantasy Present widens with 
each passing month. 

In its prehistoric or sub-Jurassic period science fantasy was a fabric of 
wondrous gadgets and appalling BEMs (bug-eyed monsters), peopled by 
* the palest shadows of cardboard "human" characters. Its flesh wore 
*• gleaming metallic or plastic surfaces, its only blood flowed from gaping 
wounds ray-blasted in scaly alien hides. 

Today the robot and cybernetic machines, along with the nuclear physics 
and rocketcraft that were sheer fantasy but a few years back, have in 
many instances become realities. With the vast snowballing of all the 
sciences, mere gadgctry has worn thin. 

But the people have donned three dimensions. It is human action and 
reaction to the alien, to the speculative unexpected, that is the meat of 
Science Fantasy Present. Emotion, in many instances beautifully expressed, 
has replaced routine awe of the machine per se. 

We are all for the change and are proud to have an opportunity, in this 
magazine, perhaps to bring the spectacle of Man against the cosmos closer 
to truth, even while widening the fantastic elements of that spectacle. 
Paradox? You are tree to make the most of it. 

As for Science Fantasy Future — we're on the lookout for it with eager 
anticipation. So if you happen to stumble across any good stf tales not 
yet written, please let the authors know about us. We'd like a look at 
their work. 



— The Publisher. 



Austin announces a new convertible 




. This new AUSTIN A-40 "Coupe de Ville" Convertible has a 

( • 3-position top that's truly continental. It cruises along at 
65, cuts your operating expenses up to 50%, and delivers 
a good 35 miles per gallon ! Underneath its smart exterior, 
you'll find a steel body that's extra tough. The price is the 
"pay ofl"! Only $1945 f.o.b. coastal port of entry including $250 worth of "free" extras and all Federal taxes. 



AUSTIN or England 



For more information write : 
27-29 West 57th Street 
New York, New York or 
600 Gough Street 
San Francisco, California 



