
i 

Saw Sty %We? X™s S 



AMAZING NYLONS 

RUNS and SNAGS 



The world's ONLY complete, nationally advertised nylon hosiery 
line actually guaranteed against runs, snags or excessive wear. REGARDLESS OF CAUSE! It's amazing, hut true! No matter what the 
cause — hard use or deliberate abuse — Kendex nylons are replaced 
FREE if they run, snag or become unlit for wear within eutire^uarantee period! Every weight from sheerest 15 denier to hea^ 70 
denier— all gauges up to luxury 60 gauge— all sizes, lengths, popular 
shades, fancy heels, black seams— full fashioned and seamless. Nothing is missing to make sure every woman is pleased. In spite of the 
amazing guarantee, retail postage prepaid prices are no higher than 
comparable quality national brands. Should free replacement be 
necessary, actual cost is cut in half! How could any woman possibly 
resist saving money and solving her hosiery problems? NOT SOLD 
IN STORES. Men and women wanted NOW, spare or full time, to 
write orders and earn big money. You can get orders even if you 
never sold a thing in your life! 



FREE SAMPLE STOCKING 



Man or woman — young or old, YOU can easily earn steady income, spare or full lime. No money or 
experience needed. We supply EVERYTHING free and set you up in business at OCR expense. Nothing lo buy or deliver. Write orders. We deliver and collect. Big advance pay plus huge cash bonus 
that increases your earnings up to i0% ! Your name and address on postcard will bring you sample 
stocking; self-selling sales books with FULL COLOR illustrations; 32-page sales manual showing you 
easy steps to success; color cards, free "door openers" worth SI each but which you give away free; 
special plan to have others sell for you, etc., etc. You can start making money the minute you receive 
[he complete FREE outfits! 



YOUR COST ONE CENT! 



SEND NO MONEY. Pay nothing now or later. No obligation. Not 
even a promise to return outfits. Simply write your came and address 
on a penny postcard and mail to ue. We'll immediately rush you 
everything you need FREE and postage prepaid. WRITE TODAY! 

KENDEX CORPORATION • BABYLON 29, N. Y. 





STORIES m 

READ IT TODAY-LIVE IT TOMORROW! ^ 

VOL. 8 APRIL, 1951 NO. 1 



TWO NOVELETTES 

THE DEATH STAR Fox B. Holden 14 

* At Ust he found it. this lost little Eirthman doomed by the stars — i world 

that fulfilled all man's dreams — save the one without which he must-die! 

DANGER DIMENSION Stanley Mullen 38 

Through that black portal they went— the advance guard of Earth's last 
chaol. . . . 

STORIES OF TOMORROW 

THE LAST DARK la Selle Oilman 28 

Only flaming destruction remained for Earth, the day the final struggle began 
between the men who thought they were the planet's elite — and the tiny 
group who could prove they were! 

HIGH FLIGHT Kafherlne MacLean 60 

Alone he braved the terrors of the unknown, planted the first human foot' 
print on the ageless surface of the moon . . . came back to tell the waiting 
Earth about it — and no one believed him! 

ETERNAL EARTHLING Walter Kubifius 69 

No man could cross that sinister barrier without meeting the brain that had 
conceived it— a solid wall, made out of time itself! 

THE UNFINISHED Frank Belknap Long 79 

Star-roving conqueror of the universe — and slave of the little green hell wrested from a galaxy that cursed his birth . . . they battled to death over one 
little quettion: Who is Man? 

CHILD OF THE GREEN LIGHT Leigh Bracket* 86 

Between sun and space, a gallant little band fought to pisree the dread secret 
of Mercury's orbit — that the human race might endure! 

Copyright, 1941, by Ficlioneer*, Inc., a tubixduiry of Popular Publico; lorn. Inc. 

DEPARTMENTS AND FEATURES 

FAN DOM'S CORNER Conducted by James V. Taurus) & 

THE SCIENCE FICTIONEER Conducted by Frederlk Po/il 36 

MISSIVES AND MISSILES The Readers 59 

Cover by Lawrence « 
Inside Illustrations by Savage, Finlay, Van Oongan, Bok and Lawrence 

Any resemblance between any character appearing in fictional matter, and any person, 
living or dead, is entirely coincidental and unintentional. 

SUPER SCIENCE BTOTUEB IB published bi-monlolv by Fk'Uoneers, Ine.. a nlbntfiiiry of Popular rublloalloni. Inc.. at 12S 
lSih Street, Sew Toionto. Canada. Henry Stee*er. President. John I. MoVarL'h, Trow hit. *mlioriwi by tb« PoB 
Office ri*pmiJiii-H!. 'tt taw*, i:ana.<la is leu-i'tid-dans matter. Copyrlaht under intfrnntlonal Copyright CVmventii.n and PanAfliericoa CWIWt ton vent Ions. All rlghti reierwd. Including toe rtfhi of reproduction. In whole or In part. In any 
rorm. Annual subscript ton, 11.50. When sutjnilttina roiuiuBcrlpts, enclov stamped, self -add re "wed envelope for their r*tura 
if found Lnartllable. The publlahers will exerciae care In the handling of unsolicited manuscripts, but assume no responsibility for their return. Printed In Canada. 



I 



Our family Lives 
in Lee Work Clones 

say the Ervin Engelbachs of Pevely, Mo. 



Vad in bis n&w 
lee overalls 






WILL YOU BE I OUT OF 9? 

According to American Medical Association "Journal" one 
in every nine persons became a hospital patient last yejr. 

HOSPITALIZATION 

SICKNESS or ACCIDENT 

Every speeding ambulance calls attention to 
sudden accident or sickness. Can you listen to 
the screech of a siren 
with a satisfied feeling 
that you and your family 
have insurance to help 
pay Hospital and Surgical 
bills? If not, you should 
investigate our new Provider Hospital-Surgical 
Plan that is issued to both 
individuals and family 
groups at a very small 
cost that everyone can 
afford. We think it is the 
newest, most modern and 
up-to-date Hospital Protection plan on the market today. It covers you 
in any hospital. It also 
pays benefits when not 
hospitalized as a bed patient for emergency hospital treatments. At no 
extra cost the policy also 
pays for accidental loss of 
life and for loss of wages 
when in hospital for injury. 

ACT NOW . . . SEND IN THIS COUPON 
On A PENNY POSTCARD TODAY . . . 
BEFORE IT IS TOO LATE. 

(Thk offer may 6e withdrawn without notice.) 

THERE IS NO OBLIGATION — NO SALESMAN 
WILL CALL. 




OPERATIONS 



AMERICAN LIFE & ACCIDENT INS. CO. 
2J1-D American Life Bldg.. St Louis 8, Mo. 



Noma , 

StrMt or Sox No. . 



Mod Coupon *7odcuf 




LFANLDOM'S 
CORNER 

Conducted by James V. Taurasi 

THE 8th World Science Fiction Convention was held over the Labor 
Day holiday at Portland, Oregon, 
and all reports show that it was the best 
yet. Most reports state that about 375 persons visited the convention. Among those 
present were such well-known personalities 
as E, E. (Skylark) Smith, Anthony 
Boucher, Bea Mahaffey, Rog Phillips, Poul 
Anderson, Bob Tucker, Forrest J. Ackerman, and Howard Browne. As usual, most 
of the expenses were paid by the auction. 
Many stf magazines and book editors and 
publishers donated their original covera 
and interior illustrations to do their part in, 
aiding the convention. Super Scienci 
Stories as well as it's sister magazines, 
famous Fantastic Mysteries and Fantastic 
Novels, were well represented by cover and 
numerous interior illustrations. Sciencefiction books, magazines, fan-mags, movies 
and radio were discussed, and one of the 
year's finest stf movies, "Destination 
Moon," was seen as part of the program. 
One of the unusual features of the program 
(Continued on page S) 




PROMOTIONS COME FASTER 



. . . For the Well Trained Man in . . . 



TELEVISION SSSUm 



Her*') YOUR big chance! See how w* can 
help yow get started toward a thrilling [ob or 
year own business in one of America's most 
Interesting, promising and fast-growing opportunity fields— TELEVISION, RADIO and ELECTRONICS. Yov need no previous experience 
whatsoever to take advantage of this 
unusual opportunity, D.T.I.'s amazingly effective method- enables you to train either at 
home in spare time— or full time in our modern 
Chicago laboratories — followed by Employment 
Service to help you actually get started m this 
exciting field. 

ARMED FORCES 
Should you later enter the Armed Forces, 
you'll find this training a grand help lor 
gelling info the interesting and desirable 
Radio -Electron ics branch of the Service, with 
its opportunities for higher pay and better 
rating. 

GET COMPLETE FACTS 

Mail coupon today for D.T.I.'s exciting newOPPORTUNITY NEWS BULLETIN, "89 Ways 
to Earn Money In Television -Radio-EIectr on ics," 
It's packed with suggestions for making money 
in this fast-moving new field. 



De FOREST'S TRAINING, INC. 

CHICAGO 14, ILLINOIS 

/ DeVRY INSTITUTION 



You'll also get D.TJ.'s colorful "ALL (f folder, revealing 
on* of today's most complete combinations of home training 
advantages. 

EMPLOYMENT SERVICE 

Upon graduation, D.T.I.'s 
efficient Employment Service 
will help you get started in 
a good /ob in America's thrill' 
fng, newer opportunity fields 
of Television, Radio and 
Electronics. Or If you prefer, 
we'll help you start a business of your 




DE FORESTS TRAINING, INC, Depfc PF-3-H 

2533 N. Ashland Am, Chicago 14, 10. 

Without obligation, I would tike your Opportunity News 
Bulletin showing "89 Ways to Earn Money 1st TelevisionRadio- Electronics**i also, the folder showing how I may 
prepare to get started in this thrilling field. 

Hrr-r A g


Clty_ 



0BIG BUILDING BOOKS 




12th EDITION FOR 
EXAMINATION 
SEND NO MONEY 



Utio to draw plana. Mttmate, he a lire-wire builder, do remodelliu, rontriuuuv. The** [radical, profutalr Illustrated books cover 
subject* that will help you to get more work and make rtore mono]'. 
Masonry, concrete forma, oarpentrj. itMl square, roof framine, oonBniotion, plumbing, heating, painting, decorating and auuiy o'Jiei 
fubjaots. (fare than 4000 oages — 2750 UluatraUiHui. 

BETTER JOBS — BETTER PAY it!^: I D *Tf 

A nationwide building boom U In run iwing EDITION 

and trained men a:e neprlorJ. Rig opportunities Ar*** hooka ar* 

are always for MEN WHO KNOW HOW- These £?. ™* :*9" 

books supply quick. easily understood (raining »e haw "ever 'p31E 

and handy, permanent ralerauca informal Ion that iiihed on thus* 

helpt solve building problems, mini subject*. 
Coupon Brlngi Nine Dig Books far Examination 



. will _ ftya I will Mud 
nin th 



TICHUICAL SOCIETY-Put 



ST" 



lima 1S9B 

Chiaaai 



" without any obligation 
', and II fully tatisaed In t< 
>«r thai only aa.oo ■ mont 
la paid. I am unl obligated 



■ latter atating your aga, 
nd name and addresa at si jubi an, 
, I n servic e, also pUase giva br. m 





and turn 
"worthless objects into 
Gold and .SWfWTreasures 

$ 522 AN HOUR PROFIT I 

in New Home Business 

Think of turning 66c worth of materials 
profit of 15. (Hj and mom lot just a few m _ 
of ecflily learned handiwork. South!.- fantusuuyet, Il'ttruu-a i Vl„. «n uul 

with kr<— -' 

FREE 

tatulnau thoy «n thlni of. It . 

R.E.Brandelf. WARNER ELECTRIC 

1512 JARVI5. DEPT. 1053, CHICAGO 36, Ills' R. E. Brand ell. Warn er Electric 

| 1512 JarvU, Dept. I0B3, Chicago 26, Illinois 

j Etoah "in ~ ' ■ 

I 

I NAilH
I ADDRESS.
I CITY 



PAY ME NOTHING FOR 



ootiarge. No oLli^auun. A11FELE. 



SUPER SCIENCE STORIES 

(Continued from page 6) 
was a set of records made by the stf fans 
of Australia and sent to the convention a* 
their greetings. This is a "first" for thd 
Norwescon, as this 8th Convention is generally known. New Orleans copped the bid 
for 1951. 

Speaking of World Conventions, a report has come in that the New York boys 
and gals are going to make a strong bid for 
the 1954 World Convention. It's the 15th 
Anniversary of the 1st World Convention, 
held in New York in 1939. 

Though still organizing and recruiting 
members, "The Fantasy Veteran's AHO* 
ciation" went on active duty with the outbreak of the Korean war and aims to see to 
it that all fans in the Armed Forces get 
their favorite literature— science-fiction — 
no matter in what part of the world they 
are stationed in. They have already been 
asked by a number of fans to get the stf 
mags for them that they themselves cannot obtain because the Pacific Ocean 
doesn't maintain newsstands. The organisation needs your help. They want the 
name and address of all now in the Armed 
Forces so that they can keep in touch with 
them and aid them. They are also seeking 
members ; ex-GIs who are fans and present 
GIs with more than 90 day service. But, 
they tell us, you don't have to be a GI (ex 
or present) to help. If you're interested, 
write to Secretary Ray Van Houten, 127 ' 
Spring Street, Paterson 3, New Jersey, 
enclose a 2$ stamp and he'll send you th# 
current issue of the FVA's official organ, 
"The Fan Vet", which gives complete details. 

In the stf club news, this issue, we have 
a notice that "The United Scientific And 
Cultural Organization" (not a stf club) 
has organized "The Science-Fiction Division", which, ihey state, operates just as 
any independent fan club. The official organ of this club is "Bizarre" and the only 

(Continued on page 10) 



mm 




CASH IN en your HIDDEN TALENTS 

Locked in your mind may be the germ of a valuable idea 
... an undeveloped aptitude ... a hidden talent. And the 
key that can help unlock those capabilities ol yours is 
training-sound, practical, down-to-earth training! 

Helping men and women bring out the best that's in 
them has been the job of I. C. S. for more than 58 years. 
In every field of industry, you'll find leaders whose skills 
were developed through study with I. C. S. 

They are the ones who sensed a latent ability within 
themselves — and who proceeded to do something about it. 
While others (equally gifted, perhaps) plodded along in 
routine jobs, they mastered I. C. S. Courses . . . qualified 
themselves for rich rewards, j 

You can develop your hidden talents the same way they 
did. Start today and be ready for tomorrow's opportunities. 
Here's the coupon to mail: 



INTERNATIONAL CORRESPONDENCE SCHOOLS 



□ French 
n High School 
□ Illustration 



Without cost or obligation, piitii ignd mi 
BualnaManrJ 
Academic Course) 

□ Acrountlnf □ Advertising 

□ Bookkeeping" 

□ Business Administration 
O Bus. Cortes poftdortcfl ' □ Bus. Liw 

□ Certified Public Accounting 
C Commercial □ Commercial Art 

□ Co; I Accounting 
Federal Tai 
D fir it T«< Col I on 
O Fofamanshtp 

□ Good Englifti 
;■ h, ,■!><•[ Mithematit 

□ Motor Traffic □ Postal Civil Seme* 

□ Retailing □ RetMl Bus. Manasinwnt 

□ Salesmanship □ Secretarial 

C Sip Littering C StE-nograpriy 

G Spanish □ Traffic Macag anient 

□ Typing 
Air Condition I no and 
Piumblnn Conn*. 

□ Air Conditioning 1 

□ Hartng □ Plumbing 
C Refrigeration □ Stum f ,:t*t 



Pre tan! Position — 



BOX 3278-E, 5CRANTON 9. PENNA. 

lull pirtJcutiti about tht count BEFORE whicrr 1 hni nurkad X; 
Chamleat Court** Elaotrloat Counaa 

□ Cha micil(En|intwin| □ ElKtrieel Drtfbnt 

□ Chemistry, Analytical □ Electrical Engineering 
O Chemistry. Industrial □ Elactric Uiht and Powtt 

□ Chemistry, Mil. Iron S Steel O Lighting Technician 
a Palfolfum Retains O Plutlci □ Practical Electrician 

□ Pulp and Paper Makin£ □ Power House Electric 
Civil Enainaarlntj, Archltoe- □ Ship Electrician 



□ Highway Engine . . . 

□ Lumber Dealer 

□ Reading Structural Blueprints 

□ Sanitary Enenaeriflg 

□ Structural Drafting 

□ Structural Engineering 

□ Surveying and Mapping 
Communication! Court at 

□ Electronic; 

□ Prae.FM and Telavijion 



1 □ Dttjat-Elttlfn; 

□ Diesel Engina □ Gas Engim 
Mtohanioal Courses 

□ Aeronautical Engineer's, ti, 

O Aircraft Drafting Q/hgtit tngin 



□ Fnu 



C Htai Treatment of Metals 

□ Industrial En [mean fig 
O Industrial Instrumentation 

□ Industrial Metallurgy 

□ Machine Shop 

□ Prac Telephony Radio Operating □ Machine Shop Inspection 

□ Radio, General D (t*di» Servicing □ Mechanical Drafting 

□ Tdegreph Engfihttriai 



□ Mold- Loft Work 
O Pattern ma king— Woofl. Metal 
D Reading Shop Blueprint! 

□ Sheet- Metal Drafting 

□ Sntet-Metal Worker □ Ship Drattjag 

□ Ship Biting □ Tool nasiimoj 

□ Toolmeklng 

□ Walding-Gat and Electric 
Railroad Courts* 

□ Air Brakt □ Car Insptclot 

□ Dititi locomotive 

□ Locomolivt Enginaat 

□ Locariiolm Fireman 
1 □ locom'*ii'e Machinist 

□ Railroad Section Foreman 

□ Steam and Diesel Loco. Eng. 

r Stationary Engineering 

□ Bsiiar making 

O Combus. Engrg. □ Engins Running 

□ Marma Ensineerlng 

□ Power Plant Engr. □ Sttam Engineer 
Tentile Couraaa 

□ Cotton Msnulec tilling □ Loom Filing 

□ Rayon Weaving □ Taxtilt Designing 

□ Woo ltd Man ulax [Wing 



Enrollment urdtf G.I. Bill tppro.ed lot Wort:) War II Veterans Special tuition rate* In members of th* Ar meT Fotrrn^ _ 
Canadian resident! sand coupon b International Coritspondanca Schools Canadian, Ltd. Montreal. Canada. 



.. BOOKKEEPER.. C.P.A. 

The demand for skilled accountants— m$n and women who 
rtallt knew tbtirbusinm — it increasing. National and trace 
legislation it requiring of business much more in (he 
way of Auditing, Cose Accounting, Business Law, Organization, Management, Finance. Men who prove their 
qualifications in tins important field are promoted to 
responsible executive positions. 

Knowledge of bookkeeping unnecessary. We train 
you from ground up, or according to your individual 
needs. Low cost; eaay terms. 
Send fot fru 4H-papc book describing the LaSallo 



accountancy training 
profitable field— 
a book which hi 



A the opportunities in this 
I'cn Years' Promotion 
d many men. 

LASAUE EXTENSION UNIVERSITY 

A CORRESPONDENCE INSTITUTION 
— — — — — — — 417 6. Dearborn Street- — — 

Dept. 3354-HR, Chicago 5, ill, 

Please send me "Accountancy, 
the Profession that Pays' — plui 
'Ten Yeats' Promotion id One" 
—without obligation. 
LI Higher Accountancy 

□ CP. A. CnachttiR 

□ Itnolt tee ping 

□ Law: 1. 1.. It. Decree 

□ tii. -ii.- M ami cement 
G Salesmanship 

□ Traffic Management 

□ Foremanahip O i . f...i , , , v 

□ Industrial Monagemont (MachincShortbaod) 

Ntmt. — » — = , Att 

XaVfttf,. .,...„.«,....„.„ 

City, Ztni, „„,... „..„.,„,.„ , 




No Shop 
Needed 




Operate 

YOUR OWN 

Business 



Clean and Mothproof 
Rugs and Upholstery 



. _. _wing tni-inp'i i.r \ruir run. You'll . 
provnn sueo.-siful methnds <u" >--\ nlii!-l,<'i I li! [iirl.kW rVnlirs. 
Sarvlee rendered "In the home," unices .ni'! nulil" 1 liuililings. Easy 
W learn. 

OURACLEAN claim py absorption! No scrubbing. No aoakina ar 
shrinkage. FabriM dry In lu»t a lew hour*. Dirt, arease and many 
unsightly spot* vanish as if by matle • ■ ■ colon revive. Upholstery 
and floor oovarlng last lonier. 

DIRAPHOOI'" kill; moilu and eamet hectics. Make* material resistant, to both! Ajifillier year 'round *er\n-p. JM liAPHOOF In our 
knowledge, is thi? nnl>' iii"tti p:nn< sprvii-r bai kiT| hv a National 
Money Bar a. ( TEA It WAtlltANTY for jour cmtfmier '» protection. 
These aervices are Nationally Atlvortitfrt ! Lnadini furniture and 
department stores recommend DURACLEAN Dealer's snrvloe. A|. 
mo*t anery building in your territory houses a potential customer. 
Evan auto dealers buy your aarviea to rovlv* upholstery in used aara. 
Homo dealers establish a shop or an offici 1 after btislnes.-! h»R Brown. 
Others continue to operate from thi-tr own home. I'rt's no to 116 
and J 20 for a day's service on EACH or your ae trice men. 
Tarrilarlat ar* limited! Write immediately for FREE Booklet and 
Easy Terms. No obligation. 

DURACLEAN CO., 1-673 Duraclean Bldg., Deerfield, Illinois 
10 



SUPER SCIENCE STORIES 

(Cont'mutd from f>apc 8) 
"dues" is a subscription to "Bizarre" 
which is 50{* a year (75(* to non-members) 
For more details write to Tom Covington, 
315 Dawson Street, Wilmington, North 
Carolina. Tom, by the way, needs materia! 
for "Bizarre", so if you can draw or write,, 
check with him. 

Super Science Sfnrics, now lias two British editions coming out in England. Another British firm has decided to publish it 
there and their issue No. .1 reprints the 
cover and some of the stories from the 
April 1949 American edition. It is the 
same size as the US edition, bqt only (54 
pages, good paper and trimmed edges. A 
real neat job. 

Now for this month's fan magazines: 

CURRENT SCIENCE FICTION, No. 1, 
published 60 times a year by New Enterprise Publications. P. O. Box 83, Gravesend Station, Brooklyn. New York, 5(S a 
copy. This is a fevival of the short-lived 
"Science Fiction Weekly", and is edited 
by Ron Lyons, 4 pages, poorly mimeographed, mostly fan news. Our suggestions 
are that they do a little better with the 
minieoiug and format, and shorter editorials, please! By the way this amateui 
publishing company plans to issue 17 different fan magazines! That'.s a lot of mags 
from one outfit. We wish them luck. 

FANTASY ADVERTISER, November 
1950, published bi-monthly at 1745 Kenneth Road, Glendale 1, California. 15^ a 
copy. Still the lop-notch advertising fan 
mag, neatly photo-offset, interesting book 
reviews, articles, illustrations and, most 
important, the ads. Try a copy. 

ST ETC A RD, No. 9, published weekly by 
Walter A. Coslet, Box 6, Helena, Montana. 20 for 5(V. This is a fan mag on the 
back of a post-card. Every week it brings 
you headline news on the fan and pro field. 
(Continued oh page 12) 



Let Me Set You Up For BIG PROFITS In '51! 
RUN THE BEST 



"$#0£$T08£ 

saswess 

m YOUR TOWN! 



You Don't Invest a Cent! 
Everything Furnished riser 1 




Consolidated Shoe System 

Dept S- 1 16 Chippewa Folk, Wisconsin 



says Leonidas Burgoyne 

of Chicago, Illinois, "Eiptrt Individual 
Instruction in the fully equipped shops 
d( Greer Shop Training gave mo the right 
atari to get my good paying job." 

GREER SHOP TRAINING. . 
established 1902, la one of America's 
largest trade schools. Over 40,000 successful gradualea. You learn by tearing 
down, repairing and rebuilding. Day and 
t evening classes. Mall this coupon todayl 




GREER SHOP TRAINING, Desk 8, 460 S. Stole St., Chicago, III. 
Gentlemen* Pleoie tend me information about trade 1 have 
checked below. (Specify If you ore VET □ or NON-VET Qj. 
IN OUR CHICAGO SHOPS □ BODY, FENDER REPAIR 

□ AUTO MECHANICS □ WELDING— ARC, GAS 

□ DIESEL O MACHINIST 

□ REFRIGERATION □ PIANO TUNING 
Above courses approved for Veil and Civilians, 

ALSO THE FOLLOWING KOMI STUDY COURSES 

□ tENIGERATlON Q DIESEL □ PLASTICS 
Nome 



- Age


■ Add/eii. 



GREER SHOP TRAINING 



LIGHTER 



Tiniest I 






SMALLER 




THAN A 




POSTAGE 




STAMP 



World's Tiniest Lighter! 

Only V Tall, V Wide, V Thick! 

PRECISION -MODE LIKE FINE WATCH! 

Ideal Gift for Men and Women f 

You'll be thrilled... your frlendswlll be amazedwben 
you uj.j the WORLD'S SMALLEST LIGHTER! 
Never before a lighter bo Email . . . yet so ically perfect. Gives a sure light every time you 
use it. Perfect for women because it has a built-in 
eyelet for nee on charm bracelet or aeabrooch. Wear 
(t at a novel scatter pin. Men go for this tiny lighter 
because it takea a minimum of pockut rnorn. Hides 
away in vest pocket. Creates a sensation wherever 
It'sused. NOT A TOY I A stnrdy. PRECISIONBUILT LIGHTER that will give years of service. 
Designed and built like a fine watch, handsomely 
plated in fine chrome. Uses regular fuel and flints. 

Unconditionally Guaranteed! 

BEND NO MONEY I Pay postman only $1.00 each 
plus 95c postage on delivery. Or send cash with order and save 35c postage chsrges. Order 6 right now 
for only $5.00 ... a 20% savin «u for youl Use lighter 
10 days. If not delighted, return for immediate refund. 

MODERN MERCHANDISE, Dept. 350 
169 W. Madison Strati. Chicago 2, Illinois 



SUPER SCIENCE STORIES 

(Continued from page 10) 

Hectographed, but neat. The editor does 
an excellent job. We suggest you write 
to him for a sample copy. 

1950 FAN DIRECTORY, Edited b> 
Leonard Moffatt and published jointly bj 
The Fantasy Foundation and The National 
Fantasy Fan Federation. A neatly printed 
booklet listing by states and country 404 
names and address of fans ; cross indexed ; 
and also list what organization they belong 
to. A fine looking job and well worth the 
25£ asked for a copy. Write to Roy Lavender, Sec. NFFF, Box 132, Delaware, 
Ohio. 

FAN-FARE, November 1950, published 
bi-monthly by W. Paul Ganley, 119 WardRd., N. Tonawanda, New York. 15^ a 
copy. The leading fan-fiction magazine 
that has been improving right along from 
the first issue. Now its including illustrations for the stories, a needed improvement. This fan mag contains mostly fiction, 
a few poems and features, neatly mimeographed. Cover this time is not bad. By 
all means try a copy. 

FANTASY-TIMES, No. 119, published 
semi-monthly by Fandom House, c/c 
James V. Taurasi, 137-03 32nd Avenue 
Flushing, New York, 10<* a copy. The oldest fan mag still being published ; now in iti 
10th year. News on the pros all over thi 
world. This issue announces that Famom 
Fantastic Mysteries will include interioi 
illustrations with its May 1951 issue. 

Fan mags to be reviewed, club news, request for material for your fan mag and any 
news of interest to the fan, author and 
stf reader should be sent to Fandom's Corner, c/o Super Science Stories, Popular 
Publications, Inc., 205 E. 42nd Street, New York 17, New York. This is your column, 
keep us informed. 



12 



Train at Home DflQl A 

in SpareTimefor I W 

TELEVISION 




My Famous Training System Prepare* You 
Double Quick For a Good Job er Your Own 
Profitable Radio -Television Business 

Radio -Television is now America's greatest opportunity 
Held! Trained men are needed to fill good Jobe and 
handle profitable Ttadin-Telpvision Service wort. I hart* 
trained hundreds of men for success in Radio -Television — and I stand ready to Train you too, even If you 
have no previous experience. My training Is 10P% 
nrae'lcal — assigned to eI" you the knowledge and 
nrp'-ifnc? vou need to make mtiney in Kadio-Telerision in thd shortest possible time. 1 Train you with 
■lu-to-tlv-wnnd rrvi-rr) ies=nn.s— PUTS many big kits 
of Radio-Television equipment. You actually do oyer 
.100 n>morwt rut inns, experiments and con'trnrticn projects. In addition, you build a Powerful fi-tube-2-band 
radio, n multi-rung? tf.'t m«fr ard » com piffle Tele 
rision receiver! All ennlpment Is YOT7RS TO KEEP. 

Easy to Make Extra Money While You Learn 

You do all your training with me AT HOMK In spare houn. Keep 
right on wills vnur present job and income while learning — and earn 
extra cash besides! Tri" ditv vou enrnll I begin sending you plan* 
and Ideas for dt>5n< profllalile syare [iin- Radio-TV work. Many of 
mv Spravhorrv stude-nrs par for their entire trnlning this way! You 
get priceless experience and rnnnv plans for making eitra. money. 
You build all vour own Radio-TV Tent Equipment from parta I 
send vou— nothinr else to huv. just, one more reason why I believe 
[ offer the ambitious men the higaesf value in top notch Radio-TV 
Training available anywhere in America today. 

Be Ready for Top Paying Radio-Television Jobs 

R*dlo-TelBvipian is growing with amazing speed. More than 2000 
Radio broadcasting stations PJXJS an additional 1 02 Television 
stations are now on the air. Radio sets and TV receivers are 
being made and sold in record breaking numbers. If you enjoy 
working with your hands ... if you like to do interest lni and 
varied work ... if you really 



make good money and work 
YOU BELONG IN RADIO■ vou MUST have good Training to "cash in" 
, „. training that starts you out with basin fundamental!: and carries you right through every circuit and problem 
of Radio-Television Servicing and Repair. 



TELEVISION. 



with the nartin-Te: 



, word . . . that's 
hacked hr mors than 20 years 

industry] 



FDFC 3 BIG RADIO AND 
■ TELEVISION BOOKS 



VETERANS: My Radio li 
Train lag is Approved 



0U 
Coupon 

Today
NO OBLIGATION 
No Salesman 
Will Call 



Sprayberry Academy of 
Radio, Dept. 53-U 

11 N. Canal St., Chicago 6, 111. 

SPRAYBERRY ACADEMY OF RADIO. Deot.53-U | 
III North Canal St.. Chicago 6. III. 
Pleaa* rush to me all information on your Radio- . 
Television Trainee p!jn. I understand thi. dosa I 
not obligate rae and that no salesman wiil call j 

Name Ac*. . . . | 

AddTVM .................... I 

City Mite [ 

Flense Chef* Below A>out Yonr Experience I 
D Am Ton Experienced? □ No Escnerlenoa j 



The DEATH STAR 



Alone he conquered his ultimate 
world, this lost little Earthman 
doomed by the stars — a world that 
fulfilled all man's dreams — save 
the one without which he must die! 

By FOX B. HOLDEN 

14 



CHAPTER ONE 
Lost in the Void 

DON'T call it perspiration— the word 
is sweat. 

If you've got some on your forehead, okay. If you haven't, maybe this is 
for you more than the other guy— at leasl 
that's how I feel about it. Just my opinion 



I snapped over the biggest lever on the 
panel. . , . 



I'm nobody important; I'm not the type. 
If you want my star-map to Qyylao when 
I'm finished, you can have it. But the pink 
tea will have to be on you. 

My name is Joe Kosta, and I'm a Deep 
Space prospector. I'm no deadbeat — I've 
got enough nioney to pay my own freight, 
and I've earned it all myself. The hard way. 
I never hit a big strike in my life — not until 
Qyylao. 

It's true, what some of my fancy-pants 
friends in Venus City will tell you — I 



could've quit Deep Space ten years ago and 
taken things easy on a Martian orchidranch for the rest of my life. Swimming 
pools, lawn chairs, and all that jetwash. 
You know. 

But even when the power-pack on my 
suit quit halfway back to where my orelugger was circling in its orbit around the 
planetoid I'd just surveyed, I don't think 
I could've been sold on the idea that I was 
in the habit of biting off more Deep Space 
than I could chew. Sure, Deep Space makes 

15 



16 



SUPER SCIENCE STORIES 



oceans look like spilled tea in a saucer. But 
you don't just tiptoe into the edge of it. 
You grab it with both fists and kick like 
hell all the way out and all the way back 
again. 

I had found an uncharted planetoid belt 
out there, and had singled out one big hunk 
in particular that looked good — gold, 
uranium, deutronium— but I hadn't even 
seen Qyylao until after I got in trouble. 
Like you do if you know your business, I 
figured out an orbit for the lugger, put on 
a suit equipped with an Omicron drive 
unit, and jumped out after my find. 

It was a good find, all right. A heavy 
chunk of rock, loaded to its 'top strata with 
ore that was plenty rich in the kind of stuff 
I liked to trade in. The spectronoscope in 
the observation bubble of my lugger hadn't 
lied to me. I figured from the preliminary 
survey I made, just walking around the 
thing and chipping off ore samples, here and 
there, that I could fill my hull in maybe 
two months' time, and take back home 
about a half-million in gold and three times 
that in deutronium. Good find. Worth two 
cold months on canned air on a lonesome 
little chunk of rock in the middle of the 
biggest nowhere the Lord ever made, 

Satisfied, I picked up the radar signal 
from the ship and computed a quick trajectory to it, and started driving back for 
the portable equipment. T was still' accelerating when the Omicron and the radar 
quit. 

If I'd've been a little closer, I could've 
met the ship on its way around just by 
drifting. Had that happen once before. 
But this time I was caught too far out, and 
I knew I stood to miss the ship, as it 
came around, by a good twenty miles. It 
might as well have been twenty million. I'd 
had enough acceleration to carry me out 
beyond the little planetoid's gravity field — 
if I hadn't, I'd've fallen back and broken 
my thick neck. The thing had no atmosphere envelope, so the chute'pack I carried 
for planets that did have would' ve been as 



much use as an ice-cube in hell. I always 
pack a chute, though, because when you can 
use one, it saves the drive-unit on your suit 
a lot of wear and. tear. 

So, once beyond the grav-field, I just 
kept drifting, and when the ship came 
around again about an hour later, I guess 
I was a good seven or eight hundred miles 
away from it. 

I had air for about twenty hours and 
good insulation in the suit. I wouldn't 
freeze. 

Just suffocate after a while. 
Well, as the old saying has it, there I 
was, a thousand miles up and flat on my 

back. 

. . . The only thing bad about any spacesuit 
you buy is that in order to make any 
kind of repairs on the things— especially on 
the drive-units — you have to take 'em off, 
and then get going with your emergency 
repair kit. So I was stuck there, too. 

I had a lot of time to Lry to think of 
some way out, and not much time to live if 
I didn't. And like those pals of mine who 
go vacationing on Venus all the time will 
tell you, I get a little far off the beaten path 
in my job. Far enough so that the nearest 
transport or freighter mute was a good half 
light-year away. The only answer I got to 
the whole thing was that I was drifting at 
about eight hundred miles an hour straight 
out into noplace. 

At a slow speed like that you hardly 
know you're moving. You wouldn't, if you 
didn't keep a close eye on familiar constellations, and even then it's damned near 
impossible to tell unless you're a pretty old 
hand at navigation in Deep Space. You 
get a little panicky, too — there's no bottom 
or top to anything — no real direction at all. 
Just you and a lot of stars, only you need 
to keep on breathing. It's sort of funny, 
too, and you get to laughing a little. There 
you are. trapped as neatly as a squirrel in a 
cage — without a thing holding you. And 
you have nothing to hold on it — except the 
emptiness of space. 



THE DEATH STAR 



17 



I ADMIT it began to get me. Not just 
became I was going to die, but because there was nothing I could do. A 
man has to do something, even when he's 
on the way out. I was getting so bothered 
about it that I forgot to think about the 
possibilities in a planetoid belt. The little 
hunks of rock are usually separated only 
bv a few thousand miles — not hundreds of 
thousands or millions as between planets 
in a regular system. I'd drifted maybe ten 
hours and never thought of it. 

So I was surprised and even a little 
panickv when I felt my feet suddenly 
pressed against the soles of my boots. They 
say you can always tell when you're falling, 
and I could. Falling feet first, but I couldn't 
see toward what. 

With the Omicron shot, I had no power 
to break the fall, so instead of having about 
ten more hours to live, it looked as though 
I'd be cashing in in a matter of seconds. 
I even resented having that much time 
taken away from me — but again, there was 
nothing to do. Just hit and splatter. 

I didn't catch on until the shrill whistle 
around my heavy lead-lined helmet began 
to deepen to a soft roar. What I was able 
to see below me by that time was nothing 
but a barren, jagged gray wasteland like 
any other planetoid — who'd think it still 
had an atmosphere? 

It wasn't a big hunk— maybe a thousand 
miles in diameter at most. But it had a 
gravity like Earth's, so I knew it was another of the "heavy" planetoids like the one 
I'd surveyed, and probably loaded with all 
the uranium and deutronium a man could 
ask for. Heavy, so it had kept an atmosphere long after it had become too barren to 
support even a scrubby vegetation. 

But I didn't have much time, because the 
envelope was probably less than fifty miles 
thick. T Waited until the dull roar around 
me subsided to a low moan, then I hauled 
with everything I had on the rip-cord of my 
chute. 

And I got down in one piece without so 



much as a stubbed toe to show for it. 

I was still alive — to suffocate in ten 
hours. Unless, of course, that junk I'd 
chuted down through was breathable — and 
the chances, as always when you're in a 
jam with no way out, were plenty to one 
against that. 

I laid flat on my back a while, just resting, figuring, and trying to get up the nerve 
to try an atmosphere test. 

The planetoid was a barren mess ; even 
the Pluto stonemotes wouldn't have had 
anything to do with it. There was a little 
light as there always is on these wanderers 
of Deep Space — light from countless thousands of far-off suns. A twilight, sort of, 
that makes you think you see what you 
don't, and doesn't show you the things you 
should. 

But I know the outlines of a city when 
I see them. 

If your granddad ever told you ghost 
stories when you were a kid, and described 
how haunted houses look in the light of 
the full moon, vou'll have an idea of how 
the city looked. Dead — eerie, shadowed so 
you couldn't be sure how high the highest 
spire stood, or how far away the first building was. You just knew it was empty and 
hadn't echoed to voices or footsteps in a 
million years. 

I thought about it, all the while trying 
to get up the nerve to open the testvalve 
in my helmet and sniff the stuff that this 
rock used for air. 

I felt like a kid trying to muster enough 
guts to take his first jump from a high 
diving board. 

At that point, you either do it or you 
don't. I opened the valve a quarter-turn, 
held my breath, and let some of the stuff 
mix with the canned air in my helmet. I 
turned it off. and then I took a breath. 

The first whiff made me sneeze. 

And the second and the third and so on 
from there — well, it smelted like an old 
basement that had been without plumbing 
for too long, but after I fooled with it foi 



IS 



SUPER SCIENCE STORIES 



half an hour, I knew I could brcuthe it and 
not even need smelling salts. And even 
better — it was warm ! 

Sometimes you get the breaks when you 
need 'em most. That thousaud-to-one shot. 

Why the stuff was warm — by that I 
mean about plus forty degrees Fahrenheit, 
which certainly is warm compared to what 
I expected — I don't know. 

I didn't get the sleepy feeling until I was 
out of the suit and opening up the emergency tool kit. I was just getting the Oinicron ready for a look at its trunk circuits 
when the Sand- Man clubbed me good. 

For no good reason under any sun there 
is, I was out like a busted jet before I could 
even start swinging. 

WHEN I woke up they were all 
around me, quiet-like, and the 
place was as bright and warm as if 
it were swinging in the orbit of good old 
Earth herself. There was lush, lavender 
grass beneath me, and the landscape all 
around the spot on which I lay was thick 
with foliage in pastels more varied than 
even a Martian artist had ever caught on 
canvas. The sky ended in a pale green 
haze, and the low swell of a mountain chain 
on the horizon reflected a deep, burnished 
gold. 

A warm breeze rippled the grass around 
me and caressed me as though I were its 
lover. It was an intoxicating breath, no 
more like the dank, stale stuff I'd breathed 
a while back than Yenusian perfume is like 
the stink-weed of Uranus. 

They were watching me, so I stood up. I 
had the curved butt of my ray-pistol caressing the palm of my hand just in case, my 
forefinger relaxed on its trigger. 

The first thing they did when I sioud up 
was laugh a little, and I though it was at 
me and I wasn't in the mood for it. I drew 
the pistol just to let them know I meant 
business. The musical sound of their laughter stopped as though it has been on a 
transcriptograph and somebody pulled the 



plug out. It was as sudden as that 
We exchanged stares. I was sure the 
laughter was still in their wide, goldflecked eyes, but you can't shoot a woman 
for just laughing with her eyes. Not any 
woman as beautiful as they were. 

I guess there were about a dozen of them 
ringed around me, all dressed in the same 
kind of shimniery, gauze-like stuff that they 
still won't let a gal wear back in Boston, on 
Earth. 

Their voices were as beautiful and graceful as they were; I couldn't tell you the 
story without admitting that for a while, 
anyway, they had me believing in Utopia. 
They tried talking to me and when that 
didn't work out, I guess they telepathed. 
Whatever they did it worked, and when I 
talked back they seemed to understand all 

right. 

I stuck the pistol back in its holster. 

"What is this place?" 

"Qyyko/" came the soft, gently whispering thought in reply. 

"All right. What was that lousy grayplace I lit on first?" 

"Qyylao," the reply came again. 

I got a funny feeling up the back of my 
spine and caressed the pistol butt again. 
Because, in the distance, I could- see the 
same outline of a city that I had seen before, and that it was the same city there 
couldn't have been a doubt. The sameonly different, now. You could feel the 
life that was in it, just as you could see 
the beauty of its many-faceted alabaster 
columns, glittering like a huge polished 
diamond in sunlight that came out of nowhere. 

"Things look different in daylight," I 
said. "Does the stone turu to grass every 
morning?" 

The laughter again, but I didn't draw 
the pistol. I didn't think I'd need to, unless 
they began not answering questions. 

"We will take you to our city, calloused 
one. And to the Garden of Dreams, and tin 
Lake of Forgetfulness — " 



THE DEATH STAR 



19 



"What's this calloused business? And 
how about explaining how you change 
scenes around here so fast? If I don't know 
where I am, dammit, I won't be able to 
find out where I've — uh, been. , ." 

For two cents, I thought, I'd jorget these 
Red Riding Hoods and go to zvork on my 
suit. But then they came a little closer, 
and the price went up two bits. It occurred 
to me that things weren't bad around here 
at that— maybe it wouldn't hurt to let the 
Omicron wait a while. . . . 

"Calloused?" the thought came in 
answer to my question. "The mark of a 
lesser being, who works to live ! But we 
meant no offense, strong one. It is only 
that you — appealed to us, and so we let you 
see Qyylao as it actually exists. It is perhaps no fault of your own that you have 
been a worker." 

I didn't get sore, but maybe if I had right 
then both gides could have saved each 
other a lot of trouble. Instead, I tried to 
get a line on Qyylao, both versions. 

The tallest of the women stepped forward, and the fragrance of her mingled 
with that of the air I was breathing was 
almost enough to make me stop asking 
practical questions right there. If I'd've 
been built like anybody else, and if my pop 
hadn't been a pick-swinger from the old 
country, maybe I would've stopped. The 
look she had in her eyes was the real 
McCoy, not the jazzed-up version you get 
from the country-club set back home. 

"Qyylao," she told me slowly, "is bleak 
and dead to strangers, whom we do not 
wish to trespass. It is an illusion fostered 
by a device created by the last of our 
scientists, who lived uncountable eons ago, 
in a truly forgotten past. But even so far 
back, when our race was still chained by 
the fetters of daily toil, we had solved the 
many riddles of the mind. We wished, 
even then, no trespassing on our lovely 
sphere by — the wrong sort of people. . . ." 

Don't ask me why I swallowed that one. 
I guess that's when I really started slip


ping. She kept explaining, and I kept trying to understand while sizing up the rest 
of. the surroundings as matter-of-factly as 
possible. I slipped some more. 

"The device our men of science perfected is merely a creator of illusions ; an 
amplifier of thought-impulses electronically 
recorded on a series of vacuum grids, which 
functions perpetually to effect an instantaneous hypnosis for any intruder." 

I could tell the way she said it that she 
didn't know a word of what she was talking 
about. It was as though the explanation, 
itself, had been recorded, ready for parroting when necessary. 

"So your gadget makes chance intruders 
think they're busted in on a dead hunk of 
rock, not even worth a second look, is that 
it? They just get disgusted, and take right 
off again." 

"Fundamentally, that is correct. And for 
many ages, it has not failed us." 

"I can see how it wouldn't. But what I 
want to know is how come you let me in on 
your nice layout? How do I rate?" 

She just laughed again. 

And we started walking toward the 
beautiful city. 

CHAPTER TWO 

The City of Dreams 

THE city wasn't half as far away as 
it looked. Or maybe the walk seemed 
short because of the company I was 
keeping, I knew they were communicating 
among themselves, but the only remarks 
addressed to me were from the blue-haired 
beauty that had spoken to me first. She 
seemed to have taken on the self-appointed 
job of guide, and I can't say that I minded." 
I suppose I was beginning to get ideas 
when a rather practical thought crossed my 
mind. 

"Where," I asked as we entered the 
city's gold-laced gates, "are the men of this 
planet?" 



20 



SUPER SCIENCE STORIES 



"In the city," she said. "At sport, or in 
the garden or the lake, or perhaps in the 
Valley of Melody. They are very kind — 
they have always left to us the privilege of 
greeting acceptable strangers. Which is, 
after all, only just, because our lives were 
the more — that is, because — " 

She didn't have that explanation down so 
pat, and I waited for her to get it ironed 
out. She didn't. She changed the subject. 
"First," she said, "we will show you our 
city. And then — " 

"Just show me to a restaurant," I said. 
"I'd appreciate some solid chow. I've been 
on concentrates for Lord knows how long." 

"You have not dined?" 

"Not like the Romans used to, anyway. 
Pills." I showed her my half-filled tube of 
concentrates. 

"Then, first, a banquet! Straightaway, 
in the Hall of Suns, there shall be a feast 
in honor of your presence on Qyylao'" 

It was like so much magic. For all I 
knew, it could've been just that, but I had 
a hunch there was a lot fliore to it than 
skilled practice of the black arts. 

The Hall of Suns was an open amphitheater, nestled in the heart of the glittering 
city. Perhaps three hundred yards in length 
and a third that in width, it reminded me 
of the old football bowls we used to have 
back on Earth, except that it would have 
made any old Grecian architect turn greener than a mildewed penny. The slender 
pillars that tapered upward to perfect 
points from their elliptical bases about the 
circumference of the ovular "hall" must 
have given the place its name, for hanging 
in mid-air about a foot above their tips 
were, so help me, actual miniature suns. 
They coruscated with the blue-while beauty 
of a nova, and T reasoned that here was the 
first example I had even seen of the science 
of atomics turnd to decorative use. But I 
was corrected. 

"Decorative, of course," the tall woman 
at my shoulder said, "but without them, 
Qyylao would have neither, heat nor light. 



Their energy is so distributed that no one 
part of the entire planet receives a concentration of either in greater quantity than 
another." 

"You mean your scientists just did away 
with the law of inverse squares? Those — ' 
and I pointed to the six-foot diameter, twe 
hundred foot high balls of fire which Hung 
unmoving above the pillar tips — "heat anc 
light the whole planet? Both hemisphere: 
at onec? Equally?" 

"Of course. We have reached pertectior 
in all ways. It is why the Machine of Illusion is so necessary. Our world must nevei 
suffer contamination. . . ." 

"You let me in, and I'm an old con 
taminator from way back," I reminded hei 
again. "How come?" 

And again, she onlv laughed. 

The banquet appeared. 

It wasn't served bv magnificently-muscled slaves — it wasn't brought in by a 
noiseless procession ot robots. It wasn't as 
far as I know prepared by anybody and it 
wasn't brought in to the fanfare of 'golden 
trumpets. It just appeared, that's all. 

And one by one, the inhabitants of this 
perfect world began filling the Hall o' 
Suns. They were young-looking, tall, handsome men with bronze-colored flesh, anr 
scores more of women eacli as dazzling ir 
their beauty as the ones who had escortec 
me to this fantastic place. None of then: 
were old, none were malformed ; none less 
god-like in appearance than his fellow. 

They had this perfection business dowrto a T. 

White I ate the strange but superbly 
delicious foods that from time to time appeared before me, I kept asking questions, 
jjora, for such was the tall girl's name, sat 
— or rather reclined — beside me at what 
was obviously the place of honor at my 
long, low, gently curving table. 

"This isn't," I asked her, "just a dream, 
is it? I'm not laying out on a gray, stony 
plain, someplace, getting ready to die, art 
I ?" I said it with a smile, so she'd know 



THE DEATH STAR 



21 



I intended, no offense with any of my 
questions, but as soon as I had said the 
words, a shadow of consternation danced 
across her eyes, but was gone almost before I had recognized it for what it was. 

"Do you think you are sleeping?" was 
all she said. Not that it proved anything, 
but I gave myself a pinch. It hurt, and I 
was as satisfied as I was able to be. 

"No," I said. "I couldn't dream up stuff 
this good anyway. When I dream, it's 
about finding a big strike and hauling it 
home with a whole fleet of luggers — " 

"It is always of work that you think, 
isn't it?" she broke in. 

"Work, and making a reasonably honest 
buck, sure. Why? Is work passe with your 
-crowd ? Don't those fellows — " and I 
getsured toward the scores of other tables 
at which the Apollo-like men were enjoying the feast with their women — "do anything to earn a living, or to keep a layout 
like this from getting mortgaged ?" 



"Our forebears made certain of all this 
for us," she said, with the faintest hint of 
surprise in her reply. "And now it is ours 
to use as we wish ! Qyylao is too beautiful 
to be marred by toil, Joe." 

I didn't remember telling her my first 
name, but she had it. I wondered what else 
she could pluck from my mind without my 
knowledge. 

The men, I learned, spent their time at 
various kinds of sports, or just taking it 
easy, when, as, and how they wanted to. 
The women spent most of their time with 
the men. I could sec the logic there. 

But, just the same, the civilizations of 
yore had apparently done their work so 
well that their posterity not only had lived 
to reach an ultimate state of perfection, 
but once they got there, didn't even have 
to lift a finger to keep things that way. 

Not bad, when I stopped to think about 
it. Not bad at all. Maybe if I played things 
smart, I could get these kids to take a real 



A DIME BUYS A DOLLAR'S WORTH 
OF SHAVING PLEASURE! 

BLUE STAR Blades are Sharper, 
Longer-Lasting because they are 
ground and honed in oil 

No other blade gives you so much 
for so little! Try a Blue Star Blade 
on hard-to-shave spots. See how 
smoothly, easily it takes off the 
toughest whiskers. For better 
shaving at a real saving, get Blue 
Star Blades today. 





ALSO IN 
HANDY 
DISPENSER 
10 for 30c 

fBECISION hill FBODUCIS 



muej STAR



SINGLE EDGE 



AMERICAN SAFETY RAZOR CORP., BROOKLYN 1, N.Y. 



22 



SUPER SCIENCE STORIES 



shine to me. ... I thought about it. 

Something gave a tug at the back of my 
mind, but I didn't get a good look at what 
it was because Jjora was thinking at me 
again. 

"Now, if you are finished," she said, 
"you will be furnished with suitable attire. 
And then as you wish, you may sport with 
the others, or visit the Garden of Dreams, 
or swim with Jjora in the Lake of Forgetfulness." 

I hadn't thought about being finished 
with the meal. I guess I must've eaten 
tons of stuff, because although I had a 
curious still-hungry feeling, at the same 
time I felt content and satisfied. I thought 
then that it was more habit than anything 
else that made me slip a couple of concentrate pills in my mouth. Perhaps it was. 
Or maybe it was because you can fool a 
man, but not his stomach. 

HAND in hand, Jjora and I, followed 
leisurely by a few of the other 
women, wended our way through 
the fantastic blooms of the Garden of 
Dreams. Here, all consciousness was lost 
save for an awareness of the sheer joy of 
living with the fulfillment of all human 
desires at one's fingertips. Before this, my 
five senses had been buried somewhere 
deep in a black mire, never coming within 
light-years of the true wonderment that 
they reveled in here in the Garden. And 
the further we walked, the more I was sure 
I would never leave Qyylao. 

I knew without question that Jjora could 
be mine, and would be, if I did but ask. And 
somehow I knew, too, that on Qyylao there 
was no such thing as death — only life; life, 
as a man should live it. Qyylao was forever. A forever of idleness, beauty, and 
fulfilled desire. 

As was the Garden of Dreams, so was 
the Valley of Melody, which took a man's 
soul and flung it free to the stars on the 
strains of music which came from nowhere, 
yet was a part of the very air he breathed. 



And when we had finished swimming 
beneath the waters of the Lake of Forgetfulness, which I knew must stretch into infinity, for it could have neither beginning 
nor end in time, but was indeed as timeless 
as man's desire to shrug from his shoulders 
the burdens of care, worry, and responsibility, Jjora and I once again stood at the 
fringes of the great city, myself seeing as 
though for the first time the incomparablf 
fantasy of its exquisite beauty. 

"You will never leave Qyylao, never 
leave Jjora. ..." 

It was more like a statement than 2 
question. 

"No," I said. "No." 

Something was needling a part of mj 
mind on which I had locked the door and 
thrown away the key. Jjora sensed it. Suddenly, I felt a vague nervousness, as though 
death itself were beside me disguised in 
some little thing. But I did not want tc 
leave Qyylao. 

I saw the men playing at their sports; 
watched them dart about on a lush carpet 
of grass that had been sown by someone 
else. 

I saw the women with their lovers in 
the shadowed alcoves of the towering, 
magnificent buildings, over which other 
men had labored. 

I saw the men and the women, immortal, 
and increasing in their beauty and grace by 
the hour as they wallowed in the riches 
striven for by an aspiration and genius 
not their own. 

And the tugging at my mind became a 
gnawing pain until I knew, somehow, what 
it was I wanted, although I did not know 
why. 

"My spacesuit, Jjora," I heard myself 
saying. "My ray-pistol — " 

"Why, after all the beautiful things I 
have shown you, must you think of such 
as those?" she asked gently. 

"What's wrong with thinking of them?" 
I asked back. 

"Surely you must know by now that they 



THE DEATH STAR 



23 



arc only reminders of the — the other life 
from which you came. They serve only as 
bonds with the colorless existence which 
was yours before," 

"Are you trying to tell- me you've 
destroyed my gun? My suit?" 

"No, but—" 

"But what?" I felt an old, familiar 
strength slipping back into my veins and 
my muscles, and all at once the air seemed 
a little too sweet. 

"But perhaps your things are just being 
examined by some of the men resting from 
their games. We like new things, especially 
when they intrigue our fancies. When the 
men tire of examining your properties, they 
will be put aside, and — " 

"My stuff is like a new toy to them, is 
that it?" I wasn't mad. After you've been 
through the Garden of Dreams, the Valley 
of Melody, and the Lake of Forgetfulness 
— after you've dined in the. Hall of Suns 
and walked among the wonders of a city 
built by the architects of paradise, it's not 
easy to get sore at anything, and I wasn't 
quite able to. But quite suddenly there was 
a storm of feeling welling up from somewhere inside me that didn't fit in with the 
perfection of Qyylao, and which no Lake of 
Forgetfulness could make me deny. 

"Maybe I'm a toy," I said. "Maybe 
that's why I was let in here — let to see your 
beautiful, perfect planet — your royal purple 
society — because I was something that 'intrigues your fancy'!" 

"Joe — " She came close to me, but 
women have come close to me before. 

"And what happens when you tire — am 
I to be put aside like my suit and my gun ? 
Maybe I'll contaminate your pretty place, 
baby! Get me my suit and my gun. Or I'll 
break your lovely neck." 

Oh, I made it all right. I got good and 
sore once I really started trying. 

And don't think she took long about 
getting the suit and hardware. It was like 
all of a sudden saying the wrong thing to 
the wrong person at a fancy party. 



She j ust stood there while I looked 
things over to see if anything had been 
tampered with. Maybe I'd been a heel, at 
that. For the first time since I'd been with 
her, there ' was a look that could've been 
unhappiness in her eyes. 

"Don't, Joe," she said. I had the helmet 
in my hands, ready to put it on and test 
the mixing valves. 

The helmet was an ugly thing, and Jjora 
and her city, her garden, her friends, were 
beautiful things, beyond the imaginings of 
a man from a' bawdy civilization such as the 
one from which I had come. Something 
was holding me, and I knew I was in 
another one of those spots where you either 
jump off the diving board on the next 
spring or you don't jump at all. 

I had the helmet in my hands. For some 
reason, Jjora wanted me to drop it. Without taking time to think, I thrust it over 
my head. 

Maybe you've guessed already what happened then. 

Qyylao was the same bleak, gray, wasted 
place that it had been when I had first set 
foot upon it, and the city in the distance 
was hollow, empty, and dead with the 
death of a million years. 

HOW long I stood that way, with the 
helmet on, the suit a heap at my 
feet, the ray-pistol holstered beside 
it, I don't know. I stood there long enough 
to think the thing through as far as I could, 
I know that. 

The first thing I reasoned was that something was going on that the lead lining in 
my helmet had a hell of a lot to do with. // 
had no power to show uie things that didn't 
exist. But with the lead lining, put there 
for protection against harmful space radiations, it did have a damn good stopping 
power. 

The second thing I reasoned was that 
you don't build cities of precious metals 
unless your planet abounds in them — and 
your planet isn't heavy unless it packs some 



24 



SUPER SCIENCE STORIES 



pretty solid ore-lodes, even if they're only 
lead. 

And the city hadn't been built of lead, 
transmuted or otherwise. 

The third thing I reasoned Was that if 
there were ore here it should mean dough 
in my pocket, so I had to repair my Omicron and get back to the lugger so I could 
set up things on Qyylao for some extensive 
operating. 

Which I should've done right then. 

I'm practical enough when I don't get 
het up— especially when it means money. 
But when I'm curious, or when I'm a little 
riled — or when I'm both, I can get some 
screwy ideas. And like the poet once said, 
"a man's a man for a' that an' a' that. ..." 

The fourth thing I reasoned was that in 
addition to the ore, I might still have 
Jjora. 

If, of course, she were real. 

So instead of admitting to a bellyful, I 
stuck out my neck for more. Literally. I 
took the helmet off again. 

Jjora was gone. 

But Qyylao was once more in all its 
glory. I figured there were two things to 
do; first, I had to find the girl, and second, 
if I were going to entertain any ideas about 
her, I had to find out if she w ere real, or 
if she and the paradise in which she lived 
were nothing more than a bunch of radiations that could be stopped by the lining in 
a space-helmet. 

The solution of that problem, I was 
pretty certain, would clear up in no time 
flat if I could find the Machine of Illusion. 
Jjora had said that the bleak, dead Qyylao 
was the illusion. And I had a hunch that 
she believed it — for some reason, had to 
believe it. But even counterfeit money has 
two sides. 

I found her, watching the men at their 
games. And while I had been locating a 
good hiding place for the suit — you bet the 
pistol was strapped to my thigh — and had 
been walking back to the city, I worked out 
what I thought was a pretty decent 



strategy. The only thing that bothered me 
was remembering how she'd dug my first 
name out of my brain without my even 

knowing. 

She was standing with a large group o' 
women near one of the smaller sport; 
arenas, and believe me, I had no trouble ir 
picking her out from among all the othei 
yqung goddesses. 

There was only one girl like Jjora, everon Qyylao. 
She turned even before I called hei 
name. She smiled, but it was not the same 
kind of smile as before, and I should've 
known I was being like a kid in school. But 
those tilings don't make much difference I 
when a creature like Jjora has gotten in 
your blood. 

"I've been let back in again," I said 
"Maybe that means you and your people 
will forgive me for — for the things I said. [ 
I'm sorry." 

"Of course you arc forgiven, Joe," she 
said. "Unhappiness would mar our world. 
There is no room here lor any hut the most 
graceful thing. And unhappiness is not a 
graceful thing. And you have shared our 
life; what other is there that you could I 
wish?" 

She came close to me again, and ex- J 
tended her arms. "There are precious 
metals in the very ground over which you 
walk," she murmured, "but to what ad- ' 
vantage is the lowly toil of their acquisition i 
with your machines — the baseness of the 
scheming for their barter, when the perfect 
life of our planet is yours merely for the 
asking? Let us return to the Garden o( 
Dreams together, Joe. . 1 ." 

The men continued at their gaming, the 
women watched. Jjora clung to me, kissed 
me, openly and with no shame. 

So I played my little trick. 

"What do you see in my mind, Jjora?' 1 
I asked. I tried to fill my mind with the 
idea. Had she been looking for anything but 
sincerity , she probably would have fount 
me out. 



THE DEATH STAR 



But I gambled that she'd be satisfied with 
what she saw first. 

"I see that you are still sorrowful, still 
wish in some way to make amends for the 
guilt you feel, Joe. And I see promises of — 
of — " I concentrated hard. I knew that my 
mind was up against something much 
stronger than hers alone. I could feel it. 
" — Of many great delights, Joe!" she 
was saying. "You wish the peace and 
beauty, wonderful idleness and ease of 
Qyylao for your own people. And in return, 
there would be promise of many gifts for 
my people — intriguing gifts, that would 
forever please our fancies." 

"Anything you wanted," I Hed, "to play 
with. New pleasures, new indulgences, 
new joys for your planet, Jjora." I hoped 
she missed the overtone of irony that I 
could not keep from my voice. "But to do 
this," I said slowly, "I must have knowledge of the Machine of Illusion. It is the 
greatest accomplishment of your forebears, 
for it has kept their posterity from — contamination. For my people to live as yours, 
they, too, would need the secret of your 
device. Would you take me to it, so that 
I might study its working, and learn how 
to reproduce it for my people?" 

I knew if I slipped just one jot from the 
light angle of approach to the problem I 
would miss the boat. Something just hanging on the fringe of my subconscious told 
me that I had two birds to kill with my 
stone. 

I had to convince Jjora. 

And something else. 

I think it was the promise of "new 
pleasures, new indulgences, new joys," that 
hit both targets for me. Because that idea 
was the keystone of the half-witted philosophy behind this whole business, and I was 
sure of it. 

"I will show you the Machine of Illusion," she said at last. 

And I knew I was about to discover 
whether I would be able to have Jjora, or 
not. 



How to buy 

better, work clothes 




Get long wear from the tough materials and 
rugged sewing that go into Blue Bell work 
clothes. Blue Bell dungarees are cut full so 
they don't bind. They're Sanforized, and 
keep their roomy, comfortable fit as long as 
you wear them. Reinforced with no-scratch 
copper rivets. Plenty of pockets. 

Blue Bell Sanforized chambray shirts are 
cut to body contour for comfort, and topped 
by a dress-type collar for good looks. For outstanding value in all kinds of work clothe*, 
look for the Blue Bell Qualitag, which 
guarantees you the best made, best fitting work 
clothes you can buy — or your money back! 
BLUE Bill,, Inc., 93 Worth St., Mew York 13 
WORLD'S LARGiST PRODUCER OF WORK CLOTHES 



26 



SUPER SCIENCE STORIES 



CHAPTER THREE 

Into the Crypt 

1 COULD tell that what Jjora was doing 
was not to her liking ; the caverns beneath the shining city were distasteful 
enough to me. They, I knew, like the 
empty city of Qyylao as I had first seen it, 
had not echoed a human voice or to the 
sound of footsteps in untold centuries. 
They were neither dark nor light, but 
simply shadow, and somewhere in them 
was the thing I wanted. 

Jjaro's hand was in mine as we descended, picked our way over the uneven, broken tile-work that must once have been 
the floor of a utility tunnel. The air was 
stale and dank, and I could hear Jjaro 
choke on it. But she kept leading me, yard 
by yard, turn by turn. I could feel her 
tremble, and I knew she was afraid, revolted. For the tunnels, even had they 
once been appealing to the eye, had long 
since begun this disintegration into mouldering ruin. 

Jjora picked her way as though uncertain, yet as though knowing where she 
must lead. 

"You've never been down here before, 
have you?" I asked. My voice echoed 
flatly from the slime-smooth walls and 
sounded like the voice of a dead man. 
"No," she said. 
"Yet, you know where — " 
"I — am — learning as we go," she said. 
"Do the others know?" 
"Of the Machine, they have always 
known; knowledge of it is deep within 
their brains. It is protection, and the life 
of Qyylao. '. . ." 
You bet it was. 

"But I mean," I said, "do they know 
where it is ?" 

"No more than do I," she said, "yet {he 
way is within my mind." 

And it was, because at length, we came to 
a series of corroding panels, once set flush 



with the sides of the tunnel. It was in 
front of perhaps the twentieth — the widest 
and stoutest of them — that we stopped. 

And Jjora's slender fingers groped in the' 
slime of the tunnel wall. It was as though 
she were in a deep trance, not quite alive, 
not quite dead. 

At length the panel slid back, hesitatingly, noisily, but it moved. And it opened 
upon a subterranean amphitheater ten 
times the size of the Hall of Suns ! 

Despite its size and the half-light of the 
shadows that engulfed us, I should have* 
been able to see at least to both sides of this 
Gargantuan pocket, but I could not. That 
they were not empty, and that housed here 
was more than the colossus of engineering 
which sprawled before us, I was certain. 
But despite all my efforts, I could not see 
what I knew to be there — lining the curving sides of the amphitheater for its entire 
circumference and towering above our 
heads to the full height of the vaulted roof. 
But I think Jjora saw. 

The machine hung in silence scant feet 
above the smooth, steel-hard floor, just as 
the miniature suns hung above the pillars 
in the great hall at which I had banqueted. 
In size it was perhaps a third the length 
and half the width of my space-lugger; in 
shape it resembled an old-fashioned electro- . 
calculator. There were rows upon rows of 
grids and relays. 

"The vacuum grids, upon which the 
thought-impulses are recorded, and the relays, which control their direction, selection, and intensity," Jjora read my mind. 

I stared at transformers and condensers, 
intricate rectifiers and trunk-circuits of a 
complexity far beyond my understanding. 

'"With this great mechanism," Jjora was 
saying, "do we of Q} ? yIao maintain the illusion of a bleak, dead planet to all would-be 
intruders ... it governs the admittance of 
those we might wish among us.* the exclusion of those who would pollute our 
civilization." Again, she spoke as though 
parroting her explanation. 



THE DEATH STAR 



27 



"The recorded thought-impulses, I suppose, are of a specific pattern which establish a mental set of depression, insecurity 
and impotence," I said. "Is that what you 
would tell me, Jjora?" 

"Yes," she answered as though in a 
hypnotic trance. "A mental set, established 
through telebypuosis, carried to — " 

"Jetwash!" I snapped at her. "Come 
out of it baby, and show me the master 
switch on this pile of junk. Six to five you 
aren't even real ! Want me to tell you 
what's recorded on those grids ? Dreams, 
baby, just dreams!" 

She didn't have to show me the master 
switch, because I was at least smart enough 
to have picked out the control panel on the 
thing, Faster than I could think what I 
was doing, because I knew I'd be sunk if I 
let the thought even form completely in my 
brain, I snapped over the biggest lever on 
the panel, and knew I had broken the main 
drive-circuits. 

JJORA was gone, all right. And I was 
able to see to the sides and almost to 
the end of the huge place. I knew 
without thinking about it how the city 
above me looked. 

I knew everything on Qyylao was just as 
it had been when I put on my helmet a 
couple of hours before. 

Because lining the sides of the great 
amphitheater were oblong coffins of stilluncorroded metal, stacked to the roof, 
packed end-to-end in endless tiers easily 
fifty deep. 

There were probably half a million. 
I blew one open with a cut-back blast of 
my ray-pistol. And in it was a man who 
could have been any one of the men I had 
seen in the sporting arenas, or at the banquet table, or with the women in the shaded 
alcoves. 

I didn't need to open any more. 

And when the low, ghostly moaning 
began to fill the great place, I knew I was 
right. 



Once, the people of Qyyalo had attained 
the height of their civilization — had attained perfection, if you want to call it that. 
They had reached the point where you 
either appreciate what you've got and do 
something with it, or take a free ride on 
what those who have gone before you have 
provided. 

Tliey were taking the ride. 

They had made their machine for effortless dreaming— for dreaming through untold millennia of every lust, every physical 
com fort, every desi re thei r minds could 
imagine — and then had settled on their 
backs for a million-year snooze while the 
machine gave out with what they wanted. 
Dreams. 

The waste of Qyylao was the thing that 
was reality. 

WMle my lead-lined helmet had been off, 
the amplified thought-recordings had taken 
mc over as it had those in the coffins. Part 
of my mind had been made to dream, and I 
had been drawn into their dreams — and, 
not denied, because I was something new — 
a new dream-thing for them to play with. 

I guess Jjora had been in the greatest 
need for something to "intrigue her fancy," 
although I can't figure why, 

To keep their slumberland convincing, of 
course, they had had to kid themselves into 
believing that the machine worked the opposite way from which it actually did. It's 
no fun having a dream if you know that 
that's all it really is. 

And there they were, a bunch of the 
laziest zombies I ever came across — dreaming their fun because it had been just too 
much work to go out and keep their perfection alive and useful. The great-grandpa 
of all lawn-chair colonies. . . . 

But don't contaminate us, Mr, Kosta! 

Well, I knew there wouldn't be any Jjora 
for me, but everything else I wanted was 
hardly inches beneath the ground I walked 
on. 

I could still hear them moaning their 
(Continued on page ICS) 



The LAST DARK 



By La SELLE GILMAN 

Only flaming destruction remained for Earth, the day 
the final struggle began between the men who thought 
they were the planet 9 9 elite— and the tiny group who 
could prove they were! 



TTT WAS an elderly* yak-herder who 
1 found the thing. He was tranquilly 
tending his hairy oxen on the bleak, 
storm-swept plateau when an airplane 
plunged screaming out of the sky where 
black winds raged. It crashed into the ice 
of a frozen lake, scattering wreckage and 
debris in all directions. 

The herdsman, a solitary and melancholy 
greybeard with skin like dried orange peel, 
considered this occurrence with calm detachment for a week or so, and then picked 
up some of the pieces, saving what he considered of value and not bothering with 
stray arms and legs. Among the salvage 
was a small metal box, labeled : This Side 
Up, Handle With Care and Fragile. Another stencil explained : Made in US— but 
the rest of the lettering had been scraped 
off in the crackup. 

When he opened the box, he immediately 
recognized the contents as an atomic bomb. 
Studying it through slitted eyes, he saw 
that it was a simple weapon, poorly constructed by amateurish armorers, but he 



noted with some amusement that, crude as 
it was, it might be fairly effective if its 
awkward mechanism would release the 
elusive chain reaction. The yak-herder at 
the time happened to be meditating on the 
second of the four sublinle verities — -Trshna, 
that the cause of all pain is but desire, and 
was engaged in a study of the chain-ofcausation, the Pratityasamutpada. This coincidence led him to contemplate the device 
itself, a cumbersome, thirty-pound ball 
about the size of his own head. 

So he set it aside as a doorflap-s topper 
for his woolly yurt and it served him as an 
object of revery until spring winds melted 
the snows and opened the high passes of 
the Kunluns and the Himalayas.' 

When, finally, the ragged old man moved 
his herd out past the salt flats and across 
the lonely, barren tablelands to the great 
monastery at Tashi-lunpo, he took the battered metal box along. He had concluded 
that the learned Keeper of the Archives, or 
perhaps even the honored Custodian of the 
Museum of Primitive Cultures, might deign 

29 



30 



SUPER SCIENCE STORIES 



to add this ugly object to the great collection of oddities and curiosities from the 
Outside. When he had crawled into the 
presence, fur cap in hand, and humbly submitted it, the yellow-robed official in charge 
accepted it with reluctant indifference, 
pointing out that the museum was already 
overstocked with exhibits of ancient war 
implements such as the spear, the matchlock and the spacerocket. 

But after the Custodian was respectfully 
informed of the circumstances by which 
this unworthy relic had arrived on the Roof 
of the World he was mildly interested. He 
rewarded the herder, a celibate philosopher 
until then, with a plump middle-aged 
widow, a gallon of hundred-proof koumiss 
and a fourth-hand copy of the sacred sutras, 
hand- illumined by an ancient holy man. 

The Custodian then carried the box to 
the Department of Antiquities at Shigatse, 
where he delivered it to the Research 
Bureau. 

Dr. Sbrong-tsan, the Director of the 
bureau, examined the queer inscriptions on 
the box but made very little of them except, 
of course, for their general significance. He 
pointed out to his bowing assistant that 
while the lettering was in English that 
meant nothing since none of the Outside 
tribes wished to admit ownership of such a 
thing and would attempt to conceal the 
origin by various childish subterfuges ; 
hence the printing might just as well be in 
Sanskrit, or Russian — or Icelandic. 

"However," the Director said thoughtfully, swinging a silver earring against his 
high cheekbone, "though these silly warnings may be extraneous — I doubt very 
much if this quaint cracker would go off 
with all that unwieldy mass of U-235 
jammed into a mould — I think the matter 
should be brought to the attention of the 
Minister of Security. It's the first tangible 
evidence we've received that the barbarians 
have actually reached some understanding 
of atomic energy and its more basic uses, 
and His Excellency needs a jolt. He's 



become much too complacent of late." 

The kowtowing assistant dared to lift his 
eyebrows. "Surely," he muttered, "you've 
seen our extensive field reports on the last 
interclan disturbances. Hiroshima and 
Bikini and all that — " 

"I know," Dr. Sbrong-tsan said testily. 
"Our observers at Los Alamos and Omsk 
have kept us well-informed, but it's really 
been largely hearsay. Mere speculation on 
their groping advances through nuclear 
fission, the mass production of their uninspired discoveries, and so on. This is 
something we can put our finger on." 

He put his smooth, yellow ringer on the 
bomb. "Here is an example of what all 
their hysterical and supposedly secret bustle 
is about — a stupid little explosive charge 
that probably didn't cost more than a million and a half paper dollars. They boast of 
it, on their blatting radios, as, 'the world's 
most potent destructive force!' There's a 
belly-laugh for you. Even if some cunning 
clan could produce them like barleycakes 
and set them off all at once they wouldn't 
make a half-respectable earthquake. I believe they're trying these out in their antique submarines and guided missies, but 
they haven't even learned how to detonate 
all the plutonium yet; it's effective only to 
the extent of about one-tenth of one per 
cent, and the rest goes to waste. Imagine! 
And their knowledge in this field, as in most 
fields, is still most elementary." 

The assistant discreetly withdrew and 
hurried off to the Street of Ten Million 
Manuscripts to bone up on atomic versus 
metaphysical power. 

WHEN midsummer opened the caravan trails, Dr. Sbrong-tsan made a 
business trip to the capital at 
Lhassa, and carried the heavy box in his 
baggage though it was nearly a full load for 
one of the camels. After he had arrived in 
the Forbidden City he took it to the Security Orfice in the Potala. 
He was conducted by a hooded guar* 



THE LAST DARK 



31 



down a long, dim corridor, up several 
flights of narrow stone steps, and through 
a series of galleries to a brass-bound door, 
and was received with utmost ceremony. He 
always disliked the atmosphere of the Office, 
a chilly hole lit by soft, green lantern-glow 
and hung with rustling lamaistic banners of 
faded silk ; it stank of incense rising from 
burners by an altar to the Four Kings. But 
the Minister, loafing in a plain red sportsrobe beside a tea-table, greeted him casually. 

"Hmm," His Excellency said, having 
glanced at the strange object and read the 
Director's report, "what in the devils d'you 
make of it, eh?" 

The Director shrugged. "I've consulted 
with a number of our technicians and the 
experts at the Tibetan Science Institute. 
The ethnologists are rather impressed. 
They re-emphasize that these Outside tribes 
have certain peculiar instincts and tendencies toward self-destruction. Seems to be 
part of their biological equipment. While 
they've made practically no progress in 
recent centuries from a truly cultural or 
intellectual standpoint, they apparently have 
reached a definite milestone with this lethal 
little gadget." 

"Have you been to see the Dalai about 
it?" 

"I haven't even seen the Bogdo-Lama 
yet. He's busy experimenting with improving the climate in the Sanpo valley." 

The Minister reflectively trickled bis jade 
prayer beads through his hands, and his 
veiled eyes were dreamy. "Yes," he said, 
"he's been getting in the last shipments of 
grain and fruit seeds from the Southern 
Hemisphere, and is anxious to start the new 
nurseries. Claims we're now practically 
self-sufficient. . . Just what would this 
bomb do if it were to burst?" 

"Not much," Dr. Sbrong-tsan smiled. 
"Wipe out a city or two, perhaps. Create 
an amount of radioactive spray in a strategic harbor, but that would affect only a 
limited area. And if it were smuggled into 
a town and exploded in a cellar it probably 



wouldn't damage more than a few blocks." 

"How about dust?" 

"It couldn't be effectively dispersed except in vcrv large amounts, deposited accurately. Their poorly stockpiled dust decays, you know, which is a disadvantage — 
to them." 

"What I'm getting at," the Minister said 
with patience, "is, what damage could thi3 
contraption do, say, to Lhassa?" 

"Ah," the Director murmured. "There's 
a point. While this is little better than a 
toy, it could do terrific harm to our sacred 
Potala, inside which we are now seated, 
and knock out all the lamaseries and temples in town. There might be a death toll 
of around ten thousand among the monks, 
and thousands more among the traders of 
sheep and carpets in the bazaars. Deform 
and stunt the children, and make our 
women more loathsomely ugly than they 
are — " 

"Siva forbid V 

"There'd be a bit of radioactivity to cope 
with. ..." 

"That's all I wanted to know!" the 
Minister said decisively, sitting up straight. 
"This thing has gone too far! Who do 
those upstart savages out there in the 
hinterlands think they are, anyway? One 
of their bungling airplanes-drivers could 
accidentally drop a load here as easily as 
in a remote salt lake, and the center of 
our civilization would be endangered. Despite our intricate and extensive system of 
underground lead-lined suburbs we're vulnerable, and I'm damned to the hundredand-eigbth Hell it we're going to redesign 
Lhassa and the whole cradle of mankind to 
guard against such stupidity 1" 

"What do you propose?" Dr. Sbrongtsan asked with caution. 

"We'll put Plan Nirvana into effect immediately, that's what! I've already got 
the supreme go-ahead from the Sovereign 
Pontiff and the Council to act whenever I 
deem it necessary for reasons of security." 

"I don't think I'm entirely familiar — " 



32 



SUPER SCIENCE STORIES 



"Plan Nirvana," His Excellency repeated shortly. "Extinction. Blow 'em 
out!" 

"Yes, yes, but bv what means? Do you 
plan to use the global virulent bacteriological spray'?" 

The Minister snorted. "You know, doctor, your conservatism makes you a touch 
old-fashioned. Of course not the spray. 
Their medicine men just might have something cooking *up their sleeves to combat 
that ; it's too uncertain. Sprays against 
pests aren't always completely effective, 
remember. " 

"There's the rockets," the Director said, 
hesitating. "And of course the resettlement project on the moon." 

"Not too feasible either. I've talked it 
over with our lunar authorities. They say 
our new colony there isn't ready quite yet 
to handle a sudden influx of two million 
Tibetans. Besides, that's negative, a defeatist way of dealing with this annoying 
problem. Tantamount to a retreat before 
the barbaric hordes. Xo, we'll simply annihilate 'em. They've been getting far too 
cocky for the last half millennium and we 
should have taken action long ago, when 
they first discovered firearms, or America, 
or thereabouts. You can't confine 'em on 
reservations, you know — they're too unruly 
and haven't the faintest notion of obeying 
international law. One world, they yap! 
We'll shew 'em one world !" 

DR. SBRONG-TSAX walked slowly 
back through the twisting, narrow streets to his caravanserai, 
thoughtfully observing the great city in its 
bowl of crystal mountains, peering up at 
the houses set like nests on the crests of 
wide terraces. He strolled along the granite 
flagstones between high buildings with leaning white walls ; the way respectfully opened for him through crowds of hawkers 
and horsemen, lamas and soldiers, dogs 
and donkeys. The mammoth 1'otala rose 
above it all, chalky .white as if sculptured 



in alabaster, and set sharply against a 

turquoise sky. 

A breeze blew over the ancient plane 
trees in the inn courtyard, their moving 
tops like green enamel. The Director soughl 
his apartment and climbed into an ass' 
milk bath. He lay back in the obsidian 
tub, eating a bowl of curds and tsamba, and 
considered Plan Nirvana. He had only a 
superficial knowledge of modern weapons 
and methods of wiping out populations. In 
a vague way he was in favor of it. As long 
as the Outsiders brawled and spawned 
emong themselves and kept strictly away 
from the frontiers he didn't care what mad 
follies they indulged, and if thev decimated 
eath other, so much the better. But when 
they began encroaching on his native fastness on the Roof of the World and carelessly scattered these absurd but alarming 
jimcracks about, it was time to take positive steps. 

"After all," the Director said aloud, as 
though to reassure himself, "we've got 
along perfectly well without 'em for several 
thousand years. They're just a nuisance." 

A shaven-polled attendant had entered 
with a jar of hot milk to warm his bath, 
and said, "Huh ?" 

"Have you ever seen an Outsider?" Dr. 
Sbrong-tsan a>ked him. 

"Sure, "' the muscular youth replied, rubbing goat-gland oil into the Director's wiry 
hair. "T seen a coupla explorers they had in 
a cage in a sideshow down by the Karma 
Temple about fifty years ago. Pale-lookin' 
jerks. They had another one, too ; he was a 
missionary, though, so the guards took him 
up to work in ttie uranium mines." 

"I can't see what possible advantage 
there would be to us to permit them to 
continue to go on," the Director said absently. "They'll only get themselves into a 
worse mess than they're in now, and eventually involve us. We've got to protect our 
own interests when we're threatened. Uncivilized races just shouldn't play with fire." 

"I'll tell you," the attendant confided, 



THE LAST DARK 



I "I wouldn't give you a plugged amulet for 
a whole reincarnation of 'em. Conduct 'em 
to the other shore — that's my motto !" 

The motto which was spread far and 
wide throughout the land by the evening's 
telepathy broadcast was not exactly that, 
though it bore the same connotation. Dr. 
Sbrong-tsan was resting in his luxurious 
quarters when he received the Minister's 
public announcement launching Plan Nirvana, and the word that was passed was : 
"Obliterate the Habitat!" 

This, the Minister explained to the fascinated populace, was to be accomplished by 
the Nirvana Bomb, Everyone knew about 
it, of course, so he didn't go into detail. 
It was the most refined distillate of atomic 
energy ever produced, and was enclosed in 
a platinum casing the size of a melon-seed. 
It would be removed from the vaults of the 
national laboratories deep beneath the city 
the following morning, and a staff of competent armorers would carefully lower it 
into the yawning mouth of the awesome 
Blow-Hole in the Ramo-Chhe courtyard. 
When it had reached the core of the earth, 
about noon, it would be touched off. The 
occasion, the Minister added benignly, 
would he a general holiday. 

"You all recognize the necessity for this 
defensive action," he said, "and I'm sure 
you all know that it's the only humane and 
civilized course to take. An ounce of prevention, so to speak. We have stocked the 
country with every known species of useful 
birds, beasts and fishes, in pairs, and with 
all the seeds of all desirable vegetation. 
We've never had much need for the Outside, of course, beyond a trivial token trade 
in block-tea and gewgaws. All they've ever 
wanted from us, in their ignorance, were 
yak-tails and gold. What they use the tails 
for I'm _ blasted if I know, unless it's to 
attach them to their savage costumes for 
war dances. As for the gold, we dug it up 
from the earth and sent it to them and they 
put it back in a hole in the ground again, 
which is just another example of their I.Q." 



The telepathic screens throughout the 
country rocked with laughter. 

"Now don't be alarmed when the signa' 
is given," His Excellency added. "Th< 
explosion will cause you no inconvenience 
There will be sixteen thousand yellow 
gowned lamas stationed at key points alonj 
all the borders, concentrating intensely 01 
their vast spiritual powers of levitation tc 
lift our realm bodily and absorb the shock 
You'll hardly feel a thing, and it won't 
hurt a hit. Just relax and repeat the ritualistic formulas. Thus we shall attain true 
liberation. . . . There will be dancing in 
the streets starting immediately afterward, 
and refreshments will be served by the 
Council until midnight. Now, are there 
any questions?" 

There was a moment of silence and then 
came the mutter of an aged hermit from 
an ice-cave in the distant peaks of the 
Karakorum. "Yes," he said in a hollow 
voice, "how is this act to be reconciled with 
my teachings of benevolence to all living 
things, even the fleas that infest my rags 
and the most noxious vermin that plague 
me?" Two million telepathies breathlessly 
waited. 

"Quite simply," the Minister replied in 
a cheerful and reasonable shade of thought. 
"They won't be living things any longer. 
They'll be nothing. Now then, do you 
approve?" 

"We do!" the screens roared the collective answer with enthusiasm. 

"So be it," His Excellency murmured, 
and signed off. 

The Director sat up quite late that night, 
smoking several pipes of opium and twisting the knobs and dials of his powerful 
radio. He tuned in everything he could find 
in the ether : soap operas and quiz shows, 
comedians and commentators, mystery 
dramas, town meetings, swing bands, newscasts, farm bulletins, the team of Crosby 
and Godfrey, and listened intently even to 
the commercials. Then he switched it all 
off for the last time and went to bed. He 



34 



SUPER SCIENCE STORIES 



slept badly and had dreams, but blamed it 
on the poor quality of the domestic poppy. 

HE STOOD, drawn and haggard, the 
next day on the balcony of the inn 
listening to the deep vibrations of 
the noonday gongs from the temples. There 
were immense crowds in the streets and 
courtyards, still and expectant. The people, 
with faces the color of mud, stood waiting 
calm and powerful in their rough red 
jackets and their black pantaloons tacked 
into long hoots with turned-up toes; some 
carried the short, double-curved yataghans 
and among them moved cowled lamas 
chanting over their revolving prayer wheels. 
The city swarmed with beasts and peoples, 
and above it the banners whipped in the 
wind. 

They all knew that the boundaries and" 
everything heneath them had been completely insulated and the air purifiers were 
working, but they were a little uneasy. 
They need not have been. When the Nirvana Bomb was exploded, it was a disappointment to the sensation-seekers, though 
a surprising relief for most. They expelled 
a mass sigh. 

The shock was so gentle that it did not 
even stir the leaves of the Bo-trees. There 
were no terrifying gales or shattering 
quakes or vomiting walls of volcanic flame, 
as the rumormongers had predicted. Dr. 
Sbrong-tsan himself felt a slight jar, and 
heard the faintest of subterranean rumbles. 
A large puff of black, greasy smoke rose 
majestically from the courtyard of the 
Ramo-Chhe Temple into the heavens, 
belched up from the mouth of the fearful 
Blow-Hole, and the howling upper winds 
sweeping above the encircling mountain 
barrier snatched it away. The Director 
experienced a slight uneasiness in the pit 
of his stomach and a moment of indefinable 
uneasiness in his mind. That was all. Then 
the cymbals clashed, the gongs roared, 
trumpets brayed and flutes twittered and 
the deep and resonant bellow of the great 



lama-horns began. The monks raised up 
their arms, standing in their brick-red vestments, and the tension broke. The people 
shouted, and began to dance and feast. 

The Director returned uncertainly to hi; 
apartment and sank down on a silken couch, 
waiting for the Minister of Security to 
appear on the telepathic screen. He did not 
wait long. His Excellency was suddenly 
there, full of news and self-satisfaction. 

"The obliteration of the habitat has been 
accomplished," he announced. "All is well. 
Our levitators did a splendid job. Splendid ! They raised up our land by all the 
corners and held us suspended so neatly 
that I doubt if one dish has been broken, 01 
a single rock rolled down the mighty slope* 
of Everest." He chuckled. "You'll not* 
I've used the Outside designation for our 
holy mountain. Just a bad habit — these 
things are forgotten slowly, Now, if youT 
be patient and stay tuned to me, I'll havf 
further flash reports as they come in frorr 
the outposts. . . ." 

Dr. Sbrong-tsan mixed himself a stifl 
bhang-and-soda and tried to be patient 
Presently the Minister was back. 

"Everything has gone off as scheduled 
just as our scientists worked it out severa 
hundred years ago," he said blandly. "Thi 
border patrols say that beyond the frontier 
as far as super-radar can reach, every living 
thing has vanished completely, all in th* 
flick of an eyelash. It was there, and ther 
it was not. No leaf, no green blade o; 
grass, no fruit or flower survives. Th( ; 
streams and lakes have disappeared ir 
steam. No animal or fish of fowl move; 
in the gray, empty and barren desert beyond our mountain walls. And, of course 
no man— there are no more Outsiders." 

The Director stirred restless and gulped 
his drink. 

"I might say," the Minister added, "thai 
it will be unnecessary to send out expeditions to verify the forecasts. It is safe tc 
say that the entire earth is exactly like 
that part of it which we can observe. The 



THE LAST DARK 



35 



oceans are gone, making the continents indistinguishable. My friends, we have at 
last attained the true liberation!" 

There was a great deal of confused cheering on the screen, and the sound of swelling 
music, with the big horns groaning. Dr. 
Sbrong-tsan shut off his screen. 

Through the sunny afternoon he sat in 
his room, moodily drinking bhang-and-soda. 
It occurred to him that the Minister had 
overlooked one thing — by obliterating the 
habitat he had eliminated all future threat 
to the security of the land had thereby inadvertently obliterated his own job. He 
would probably have to retire to one of the 
isolated lamaseries to earn his living. This 
reflection only faintly revived the Director's 
spirits. 

He sat by the window in the dusk, watching the celebrations in the streets and the 
last rays of the sun as they set the sparkling 
eternal snows all afire in the towering 
ranges and tumbled, jagged peaks. There 
were no clouds in the sky and he remembered that the Science Institute had previously announced that this condition 
would have no appreciable effect on the 
weather, since the Roof of the World was 
too high to be seriously whipped by the 



wild, dry hurricanes that now scourged the 
ravished earth beneath. Counter-storm 
measures had been taken. 

AFTER a time the stars came out and 
the red moon rose, round and full. He 
stared at the chilly orb for a long- while 
and then on impulse switched on his screen 
again and called the manager of the colony 
there. It took some moments to make the 
contact, and when he did the manager 
sounded distraught. But the men on the 
moon were usually that way, under the 
stress and strain of new conditions, and 
Dr. Sbrong-tsan, who had considerable influence, managed to hold the fellow's distracted attention. 

"Look here," the Director said, "how do 
things appear down here from your point 
of view?" 

"Like bloody hell!" the manager said 
bitterly. "Worse than this place, if that's 
possible. What a mess!" 

"D'you mean everything?" 

" Everything but where you are, of 
course. You look like a nice, cozy, green 
spot of fungus on the yellow dome of a 
skull!" 

(Continued on page 109) 



ON THE NEWSSTANDS 

THE TOUCH 

By Jack Bechdolt 



From the Earth's dead yesterdays it shone, its flame a treason, its message hope 
— while its last embattled champion fought the strange inhuman civilization that 
had spawned him — for his birthright in 
the stars! 



Don't miss this great novel, by a master of Fantasy, and other top-ranking 
stories in the April issue, on sale now 
at all newsstands. 



FANTASTIC 






"I, ROBOT" by Isaac Asimov, Ph.D. 
Gnome Press; $2.50. 

For more than a decade, Isaac Asimov's 
positronic robots have been familiar figures 
in the pages of science -fiction magazines, 
and in more than one anthology. Now, for 
the first time, Dr. Asimov has selected' his 
nine favorites from the series, wrapped 
them up in an ingenious framework and* 
offers them as a new and exciting novel of 
science fiction. The time of "/, Robot" is 
Anno Domini 2057; a reporter for Interplanetary Presses interviewing Dr. Susan, 
Calvin, staff robopsychologist for U.S. 
Robot Corporation. And the nine stories in 
"/, Robot" are nine incidents in her life. 

First comes the story of "Robbie", the 
nursemaid-robot whom readers of Super 
Science Stories as far back as 1940 will 
remember as the hero of "Strange Playfellow". Then come " Rintaround", "Reason", 
"Catch Thai Rabbit", "Liar!", "Little Lost 
Robot", "Escape!", "Evidence" and "-The 
Evitable Conflict". It's as fine a collection 
of Asimov stories as you'll ever see, and a 
book that has been over-due for years. 

"FURY" by Henry Kutiner. Grossel & 
Dunlap; $1.00. 

This is the story of the New Earth — the 
home humanity has .made for itself, after 
blasting the mother planet to sterile dust 
36 



Conducted by Frederik Pohl 

in an atomic war, at the bottom of the seai 
of Venus. Great pressure domes called tht 
Keeps house the strange cities of this farfuture civilization, and in the cities live 
roistering adventurers, "flabby esthetes 
criminals and, over all, the grim, omnipoteni 
Immortals. "Fury" is the story of an Immortal whose heritage had been stolen frorr. 
him at birth and his struggle, at the cost 
of his whole civilization, to win back his 
birthright. 

The big hews about "Fury" (which was 
originally : published under the name o) 
Laurence O'Donnell ) is that it is undoubtedly the first time a major sciencefiction novel has been published as a hardcover hook "original" at so low a price as 
a "dollar — or anything close to it. But this 
flamboyant and convincing yarn called . 
"Fury" would be a bargain at almost any^ 
price — don't miss it! 

"THE ISLAND OF CAPTAIN SPAR. 
ROW" bv S. Fowler Wright. Grossel & 
Dunlap; 81.00. 

As big a bargain as "Fury", and in s 
different way just as important a book, is 
this famous science-adventure story of a 
ship-wrecked traveler on a lost island inhabited by satyrs, man-eating birds, a lost 
tribe — and a girl. S. Fowler Wright is fat 
more of an artisan in wordcraft than anj 



THE SCIENCE FICTIONEER 



37 



but a handful of practising science-fiction 
writers in these days ; his brilliant translation of Dante, his critical and historical 
novels have given him a world reputation 
entirely apart from his science fiction. But, 
immaculate though his prose may be, he has 
never let it get in the way of the story he 
had to tell; and "The Island oj Captain 
Sparrow" will hold your interest for every 
last page. 

"CONAN THE CONQUEROR" by 
Robert E. Howard. Gnome Press ; 
$2.75. 

The jacket of "Conan the Conqueror'" 
calls the book a work of "science fantasy", 
but you'll search a long time through its 
256 pages before you discover any science 
at all. Pure fantastic action-adventure 
describes its contents far better, for 
Conan's mighty thews (he stands seven 
feet tall, and lightnings crash about his 
head) strive against the most imposing succession of warlocks, sorcerers and mastermagicians risen from the dead found anywhere outside the mythical pages of the 
Xekronomikoti. 

The Jacket is by John Forte, and a fine 
job it is. There is a persuasive and enlightening introduction by John D. Clark, 
Ph.D., and a map of Conan's world, drawn 
by David Kyle, to illuminate the endpapers. 

"THE GREEN MAN OF GRAY PEC" by 
Festus Pragnell. Greenberg: Publisher; 
$2.50. 

The trouble with "The Green Man oj 
Graypec" is the trouble with a good half 
of all science-fiction published before World 
War II — first, its "science"' is dated-; 
second, it flouts the honored and useful law 
of the "single great lie" (which simply 
states that the most a science- fiction writer 
can reliably expect his readers to follow is 
a single assumption ; and everything else 
should follow logically from it.) Here, for 
instance, we not only have a single unknown, solitary scientist in the possession 



of Imth a super-electron microscope capable of viewing the surface of an electron 
as easily as you view the ground at your 
feet and a "memory transferer," but you 
have a whole system of new laws of science, 
weapons and strange alien races. 

However, if you can manage to swallow 
the first few chapters without bad results, 
you'll find what comes after as rewarding 
a science -fiction adventure yarn as you'll 
want to come across — as did, among others, 
no less a personage than H. G. Wells. 
Moreover, you're sure to like the brilliant, 
full-color jacket design by Ilannes Bok. 

"COSMIC ENGINEERS" by Clifford D. 
Simak. Gnome Press; $2.50. 

Here is one of the most famous sciencefiction novels of the '30s, revised, expanded 
and brought to you as a decorative and delightful new book. "Cosmic Engineers" is 
epic science fiction in the' universe-shaking 
trend of E. E. Smith and the earliest stories 
of John Campbell ; there are few subtleties 
in tin's saga of alien universes, but there is 
plenty of thrilling action, dramatic clashes 
with strange races and more super-scientific 
imagination than you'll find in a dozen 
average science-fiction hovels. Edd Cartier 
did the decorative jacket, and the binding 
of the book itself is about the nicest job 
you'll come across in the field. 

"A GNOME THERE WAS" by Levis 
Padgett. Simon & Schuster; $2.50. 

Here's Henry Kuttner again, this time 
under still another of his pen names. This 
is no novel, but a compendium of eleven 
stories, eight of them science fiction and the 
remainder fantasies. Kuttner is about as 
agile a man with a typewriter as sciencefiction possesses, and it is no secret that in 
these and practically all of his other stories 
of the last decade he has had the expert 
help of his wife, otherwise known as C. 
(for Catherine) L. Moore. When this impressive duo sets out to construct a story 

(Continued m pOQt 113) 




i8 



In another place, where 
darkness thickened. the 
shadows stood upright like 
solid bodies . . . 



DANGER 
DIMENSION 

Through the black portal they went — the advance 
guard of Earth's last chaos — into a universe that did 
not exist, filled with the spawning shadow life of a 
dimension gone mad — which slithered ceaselessly^ 
ever closet to the world of men! 

CHAPTER ONE 



Haunted 

THE emergency faculty meeting was 
already in progress. One hand on 
the doorknob, John Storm hesitated, 
dreading to go inside and face the battery 
of coldly alien and unfriendly eyes. Eyes 
which would be wary, suspicious, and full 
of that uneasy resentment which age and 
experience feels for youth. It was hard 
for Storm to realize that he was a full


Cyclotron 

fledged faculty member, and not an erring 
student called before the hoary tribunal 
for judgment. 

There would be questions inside, and 
Storm had given his fill of unsatisfactory 
answers in the last three days. He could 
offer no easy solution to the mystery, and 
some questions would suggest complicity 
in — or at least a subtle foreknowledge 



By STANLEY MULLEN 

39 



40 



SUPER SCIENCE STORIES 



of — that event which first set all tongues 
-wagging, then clamped frosty censorship 
on all concerned. The campus had become 
a madhouse the past three days since Morlake had disappeared ; and Storm was the 
last person known to have seen and talked 
with him. 

Storm hesitated, shuddering. Before, 
he had evaded questions, but now there 
would be no further dodging. Questions 
would be asked and must be answered. 
Trustees and faculty were gathered in 
grim thirst for the kill ; the pack was in 
full cry ; they wanted blood and anybody's — especially Storm's — would do. 
He opened the door and plunged into the 
sea of eyes. Blurred murmur of voices 
swirled about him ; he was aware of pallid faces dancing like masks dangled on 
strings, of turbulent movement as if 
soberly clad bodies rose and fell in waves. 
The voices thrust shrill questions at him 
and eyes hemmed Storm in like a frieze 
of naked rapiers. 

Not immediately conscious of what was 
said, Storm knew already what the general trend would be. One voice, snarling 
and fretful, emerged from general tumult 
and became a symbol of it. 

". . . Last person to talk with him. 
Surely you must know something." 

It was Old Frudey, the dean, who 
could have posed for a bust of Schopenhauer. There was a foxlike something 
about him, with his thin features, shrewd 
eyes, the ruff of untidy gray fur that curled 
over a dirt}- collar, even the quick, darting, 
vulpine movement of his balding head 
upon its scrawny neck. Fox, he was, and 
a mangy, ill-tempered one. Nobody liked 
Old Frudey — no one could — and for the 
first time, Storm realized the tragedy of 
being a Frudey — the ultimate tragedy of 
being so nasty-minded, bitter, proud and 
envious — of being so personally repulsive 
and being unaware of it. 

Storm found himself talking, wearily 
repeating things said before. "I've told 



you everything I know. Simon Morlake 
came to my class room after the faculty 
meeting three days ago. We talked, 
but about nothing in particular. I haven't 
seen him since." 

Frudey's voice darted in again, a series 
of short, sharp barks. 

President Arnold hushed him with a 
gesture. Arnold cleared his throat pompously ; with him, every speech was an 
oration. 

"And, apparently, no one has seen him 
since. No one has come forward with any 
information. Are you certain you have 
nothing to add to what has been said, 
Storm ? Surely — " 

"Nothing. Nothing important. He has 
said the same things many times before. 
To the rest of you, as well as to me. His 
ideas and speculations were always the 
core of his conversation. It was not new, 
nothing in any way different from his 
usual wild . jumping-about, his mental 
gymnastics, deriving fantastic conclusions 
from distorted facts.. You heard it longer 
than I have. I'm new — " 

Storm's angry flash burned itself out. 

Arnold shrugged and continued. "I 
won't hide the facts. The situation is serious. This is our last chance for discussion. If it fails to disclose any new facts 
about this . . . mysterious disappearance, 
I will have no choice but to call in the 
police." 

If threat was implied, it backfired. 
Storm glared at the University president, 
at the assemblage. "That should have 
been done at once," he said savagely. 

President Arnold wavered, made aimless, unnecessary gestures. "Let's not be 
hasty about this. I'm sure we have the 
good of the college at heart. . . 

"And our fat jobs," Storm finished. "I 
know I'm going to get the axe when the 
term's finished. If you want my opinion, 
Morlake was tired of faculty meetings. 
He was tired of your small-town minds, 
small-town interference. None of you 



DANGER DIMENSION 



41 



liked him. Nor me, either. He clung to 
me because I listened. If I thought he was 
crazy, I had better manners than to say 
so. If the police ask me, I'll tell them 
plenty." 

FRUDEY snapped at the opening. 
"Then he was unhappy here? If so, he may 
simply have locked his door and left. He 
was very strange in his behavior lately. 
I think he disliked us and the college. 
It would be like him to lock his door 
and — " 

"Yes," Storm sneered. "Lock it and 
bolt it on the inside. The window, too. 
He liked mystery, so he created one for 
you. I remember now something he said 
Friday. He talked of ghosts and Modern 
Art, something about Frank Lloyd Wright 
not providing any space for ghosts, and 
said that a modern ghost would look like 
a semigeometric figure from a painting 
by Picasso." 

Frudey nodded sagely, as if something 
in his thoughts gave exquisite pleasure. 
Next, he would be tapping his temple 
in the universal symbol indicating insanity. 

Storm raced on angrily: "He said that 
i£ he were designing a castle suitable for 
old-fashioned haunting and wanted a 
chamber of horrors for it, he'd pick Frudey 
above Frankenstein's monster anytime. 
I said that he was giving the building a 
bad name with his ghost hunting — that's 
what he called parapsychology — and he 



laughed about it. He said if Frudey did 
not approve, Frudey could crawl back in 
the woodwork. But he agreed that parapsychology was childish, a bunch of kids 
freightening themselves by climbing a 
dark stairway to experiment with their 
own sensations. He said he was through 
with parapsychology, because he had outgrown it, had exhausted its possibilities. 
It was a blind alley." 

President Arnold's head jerked through 
a series of motions suggestive of a doll's 
head, rocking to the' swing of a concealed 
pendulum. "That's very interesting," he 
said gravely, "but it does not help much. 
There was nothing in your discussion to 
indicate that Morlake was planning to 
leave Northside ?" 

"Not a thing," Storm stated definitely. 
"Quite the contrary. I know he would 
not have considered leaving at this time. 
He was finishing a paper to be published at 
his own expense. There were five notebookj of figures, and a desktop covered, 
with loose sheaves of notes, the last time 
I was in his room. He had Dr. Adrian's 
permission to use the cyclotron during 
Adrian's absence ; so his experiments 
probably had more to do with practical 
physics than with psychology. He was 
very excited about the latest experiments 
and tied them in with his own advanced 
speculations, leaving his usual wide gaps 
in logic. But he said true science was always intuition, later supported by observed facts. He was about to go into de


RELIEVES • HEADACHE 
•NEURALGIA ~ A 
• NEURITIS PAIN 



Here's Why... 
Anacirt® is like a doctor's prescription. That is, Anacin con* 
tains not one but a combination of medically proved 



active ingredients. Anacin is 
specially compounded to give 
FAST, LONG LASTING relief. 
Don't wait. Buy Anacin today. 




42 



SUPER SCIENCE STORIES 



tails on the theories in his new paper — ' 
which he said would blast the reactionary 
deadheads off their collective chairs — 
when he noticed the time. He jumped 
up and left. But I know from things he 
said that he could never consider leaving 
until he had observed first-hand your reactions to his latest brain-child." , 

Stephen Blount, one of the trustees, 
broke in with comment. 

"I was always dubious about Simon 
Morlake's being appointed to our chair 
of psychology. He seemed too excitable. 
Has anyone looked over those papers to 
see if they will throw any light on his . . . 
disappearance?" 

"I was about to suggest that Dr. 
Storm — " began President Arnold. A 
voice shouted him down. Frudey's. 

"Not Storm. He's a troublemaker, 
too." 

The meeting slid out of focus. Blount's 
voice was but one element of confusion. 
It overwhelmed the others by sheer 
weight. 

"It would be folly to delay any longer 
in calling the police. I agree with Dr. 
Storm — it should have been done before. 
There is no reason to suspect foul play, 
but something must be done. It will look 
worse for the school if any cover-up is 
attempted. The man is missing, may be 
dead. Police investigation is the only answer." 

Storm faced the imposing bulk of President Arnold, ignoring the frantic attempts 
of Frudey to waylay him. "If you don't 
call the authorities, I will," he said deliberately. 

Then he was outside, in the echoing 
hallway. Descending the stairs, he felt odd 
holtowness, remembering that he had 
done the same thing before, with Si Morlake at his side. It was like a trick of 
double memory. Time seemed to have 
telescoped, which was a thought that 
would have interested Morlake. It was 
incredible that only three days had 



elapsed since he had last spoken to Simon 
Morlake. . . . 

MORLAKE had stopped by, at 
Storm's request. It was on his 
way, anyhow, since the psychology rooms occupied the second floor, 
while the mathematics department occupied the ground lloor, with chemical labs 
in the basement, alouy with heavy experimental equipment like the giant cyclotron — the school's pride and joy. Dr, 
Adrian, nominal head of the department! 
housed in the Physics building, was ouf 
of town, taking his dead wife's body east 
Absently, Storm had gotten a whiskej 
bottle and two glasses from his desk. 

"Here's to school spirit," Morlake had 
grunted, raising the glass to peer through 
the amber liquor. "Don't know why 1 
drink the stuff. Don't like it. Lik« 
Frudey, the first taste is not too bad, sharp, 
a little bitter: It goes down and your 
stomach heaves to meet it. Reminds me oi 
a faculty meeting, with Frudey in the saddle. You've 'something on your mind. 
What is it?" 

Storm swallowed his whiskey, made a 
grimace of distaste to hide sudden embarrassment. "You're right. Something on 
my mind. Not school spirit, not even the 
alcoholic variety. The Physics Building ii 
haunted. Especially the basement labs 
and the room with the cyclotron. You'vt 
been hanging around the cyclotron a lot, 
mulling over your weird theories. I wondered if you'd noticed anything." 

"Haunted?" Morlake glanced arounc 
at the glittering, well-equipped classroom 
His gesture took in all parts of a building 
as modern as the day after tomorrow. I) 
was not the kind of structure to house a 
ghost. "You're joking, of course?*' 

"It's no joke," Storm went on seriously. 
He hesitated. "It's haunted, all right. U 
not by ghosts, by something else. . . /' 

Perhaps Storm had imagined tht 
shadow crossing Morlake's face. The 



DANGER DIMENSION 



4? 



psychologist had tried a laugh which did 
not come off. "It's the ghosts of dead 
ideas," he suggested cynically. "Northside should be full of them, but why here 
only? It won't do. Storm. It won't do 
at all. No self-respecting ghost would take 
up residence in a dump like this. It 
wouldn't be comfortable — all glass and 
chromium, raw stone and stainless steel, 
weird angles and flat roofs, furniture that 
looks like plumbing, functional simplicity. 
Ghosts know better. They demand 
sprawling old mansions, Gothic, Tudor, 
Jacobean, sliding panels and smoking fireplaces, no plumbing at all, horsehair sofas, 
dusty wall-tapestries that hands can reach 
out of to light a cigarette for you. No 
nonsense. They want comfort." 

Storm was stubborn. "You should 
know more about such things than I do. 
Spooks are in your line, not mine. This is 
the real thing — " 

Morlake laughed. "That does it," he 
countered. "Ghosts are in the mind. They 
don't exist anywhere else. As you say, it's 
in my department. Psychology. You can 
stop worrying. When you get a real 
ghost, it stops being a ghost. Take a pill. 
Are you really serious about this?" 

"Dead serious. It's not just me. The 
students are talking — it's becoming a 
campus scandal. I ridiculed the rumor 
when I first heard of it. Suggested to a 
couple of them that they transfer to your 
classes in parapsychology and study 
psychic phenomena. I thought then that a 
session of your card tricks would cure 
them. But I hadn't seen it myself then. 
Carl Redfield is a camera-bug; he got 
permission to stay late one night and work. 
I was impressed by his zeal for study until 
I found out he was taking pictures and 
developing them in the chem-sinks downstairs. He'd got some dillies by using 
infrared light and sensitive film. I 
wouldn't like to say what he'd aimed the 
camera at. Not then. Last night was 
Thursday, so I stayed late myself sweat


ing over exam papers. I was too tired to 
go home by the time I finished, so decided to bunk in the supply room. Turned 
off the lights downstairs and was groping 
blind to the cot there. Wham! I saw 
something!" 

Morlake glanced crookedly at Storm. 
"Bears out my theory," he murmured. 
"Eyestrain, fatigue, afterimage — the three 
musketeers of ghostland. Add general 
chuckle-headedness, careless observation, 
emotional hysteria. You probably bumped 
your head on something in the dark and 
saw stars." He stopped, squinted at 
Storm's pale face, and grew suddenly 
concerned. "Well, let's have it. What did 
you imagine you saw ?" 

Storm's forehead wrinkled with concentration. "It can't be described. It was 
dark, remember. The thing was faintly 
luminous, as if it fluoresced at some barely 
visible wavelength, just inside or outside 
the range of human vision. There was. 
outline, enclosing a dark something. Not 
solid, exactly. Curiously geometric, like 
an arrangement of interlocking puzzle 
boxes. You got the feeling that it was 
not an object you saw, but a kind of 
three-dimensional shadow, vaguely luminous. What could cast such a weird 
shadow?" 

Morlake was sober now, pale. "Language is a feeble thing to describe the inhabitants of the mental borderlands. You 
say Redfield took a picture ?" 

"I confiscated it." Storm extended a 
5" x 7" enlargement, and Morlake 
studied the glossy print with growing interest. 

"It looks just like those optical illusion diagrams," he remarked in a strained 
voice. "The kind of thing which reverses as you stare at it ; first off, it looks 
like a solid seen from the outside, then 
like a hollow, reverse-block of the same 
shape. Your ghost has got himself in a 
box, Storm. I'm laughing at him, not you. 
He's in a blind alley. I think I can rout 



44 



SUPER SCIENCE STORIES 



him out for you. But not now. I have to 
finish a couple of experiments first. And 
I want to put my notes in order for that 
paper. There's someone waiting for me. 
I'll see you tomorrow and explain your 
ghost for you. . . ." 

Morlake had gone then, with a few 
cryptic comments on the nature of his 
coming paper, the lateness of the hour, 
and the futility of studies in parapsychology. For the life of him, Storm could not 
remember an exact word said. There was 
a caustic hint that Frudey might be a 
mere figment of somebody's unpleasant 
imagination. 

Half an hour later, when the watchman 
knocked at the door of the physics laboratory because the lights were on, there had 
been no answer. The classroom should 
have been empty, although Morlake had 
been working there sometimes until near 
dawn. A strange sound inside alarmed the 
watchman. The door was bolted on the 
inside and the passkey seemed no longer 
to fit theJock. Help was summoned when 
repeated knocks brought no answer, and 
the door was chopped down with a fireaxe. 

There was the cyclotron, like a fat 
metallic monster. There was the empty 
room, the benches, shelves, sinks. The 
table with the spectrograph, and a battery 
of powerful microscopes. There were the 
closets of laboratory glassware, and a 
small electric furnace, with retorts and 
shapeless blobs of metal. There were the 
racks of specimens gathered by geology 
students. There was a moth-eaten felt 
banner with the legend "Northsidc." The 
door to the target chamber of the cyclor 
tron hung open. 

Inside was a bottle of whiskey and a 
pack of cards. 

There was no sign of Dr. Simon Morlake, and no one had seen him since. Prolonged search proved fruitless, and the 
incident of the bolted door made explanation difficult. . 



CHAPTER TWO 
World of the Unreal 

THE AIR was charged, oppressive, 
and behind piled clondbanks of 
sinister purple flickered invisible 
lightning. The building showed a clifTface of glass and aluminum, catching and 
reflecting the ugly flare of sunset. Tense, 
uneasy, troubled, Storm headed for the 
Physics building. He was not certain what 
he would do when he reached the place, 
but instinct urged him toward , the basement workshops Perhaps contact with the 
apparatus with which Morlake had been 
working might stimulate thought, or 
memory. 

If only he could recall something significant that Morlake had said that last 
afternoon. Memory nagged at him. . . . 

T,wo bulky figures fell into step beside 
him. Irritabjy^ he was aware of Frazier 
and Redficld> Storm would have avoided 
the meeting, had choice been given him; 
he v, a= in natnood/dr utidergrad chitchat. 

"Grapevine ha's it -that you're investigating for the faculty.. -Investigating MorIake's disappearance.'. Right, Prof?" 

"No," Storm answered. Frazier had 
the gift for causing annoyance to the 
younger faculty members, by calling attention to their lack of pedagogical dignity. 
"I*m not. Not that it makes any difference. 
There's nothing to investigate." 

"Not supposed to talk, huh?" guessed 
Redfield. "That's silly. Everybody knows 
he did a bunk. Old Frudey finally got his 
goat." 

Frazier grunted. "I don't believe that. 
Any leads, Prof ?" 

Storm stopped and confronted the pair, 
Frazier and Redfield were two of nature's 
noblest extroverts; no hint would penetrate their rhino-hide protective shells, 
nor have any effect on their juvenile sensibilities. Direct action was indicated. 

"For your information, I'm not investi


DANGER DIMENSION 



4 r > 



gating anything. If Dr. Morlake has disappeared, there is probably a good reason 
for it. I don't know anything about it. I 
teach mathematics, not amateur detection. 
Haven't you anything better to do than 
hang around and dig up possible gossip?" 

"Not a thing better, at the moment," 
Redfield responded with amiable blankness. "If you're not investigating, you 
won't mind if we come along with you. 
I'd like to pick up those pix of mine you 
went south with. Mind?'' 

Storm minded definitely. But it was 
useless to argue. He shrunk aw-ay from 
any further jousting with the inevitable. 
The faculty and Frudey had been enough 
for one day. 

Frazier's shock of strawlike hair stood 
up, glinting in the sunlight, like some impossible crested helmet. "Be a sport, Prof. 
Maybe if we no.^e around, we might get 
some ideas. Si Morlake was>a good guy. 
I was working with him, assisting.. I might 
know more than most people." T do know 
what he was doing, or trying to do." 

Storm shrugged ; 'the ■ presence of 
Frazie-r and Rednefd would' be no aid to 
concentration, but .he resigned himself. 
In silence, they ascended the geometric, 
semicircular steps to the building's main 
floor. Through angled doors they entered 
a corridor tiled in red-marbled, soundless 
rubber. A flight of curving stairs, railed 
in a swooping unfinished curve of aluminum, led downward. In a soft flush of 
concealed lighting, the basement hallway 
split the lower floor in half. 

The fourth doorway on the left gave 
entrance to a modern chamber of horrors. It was the room housing the cyclotron, the micro -spectrograph, directional 
Geiger counters, a cloud-chamber, a battery of ordinary high-power microscopes, 
and a fabulous electron -micro scope. For 
a small college, Northside was unusually 
well-endowed, especially in curious Twentieth Century instruments for delving into 
the Unknowable. 



Still blocking the entrance, its blank face 
of polished mahogany split and shattered, 
was the door which had been bolted on 
the inside. Wrenched awry, it hung 
crookedly on tortured hinges. 

Stratified silence hung in the basement 
corridor like layers of invisible smoke. 
Storm tugged at the door. It moved, 
lower edge squealing viciously on the tiling. They entered. 

Nothing in the room had been touched, 
nothing moved, in ease later developments 
would prove need for fingerprints. In the 
open chamber of the cyclotron were still 
the bottle of whiskey and the pack of cards. 

"Don't tell me Morlake was trying to 
activate good Bourbon!" said Redfield in 
mock horror. 

"Xo. that wasn't it," explained Frazier 
aimlessly. "He had a lot of things he was 
trying out. I worked with him at first, 
but I was getting behind in other studies. 
Frudey put the heat on and I had to give 
up wacky non-essentials . . . like atoms 
and ESP— you know, extra-sensory perception. Morlake was bugs about it and 
said I was an ideal subject for him. Two 
reasons. The dice, first. I could shoot 
ten sevens in a row. He was as excited as 
a puppv over that, and as eager to believe 
as a kid asking about Superman or Santa 
Clans. I hadn't the heart to enlighten him. 
The dice were mine — loaded. He'd have 
seen it in a fluoroscope, but it didn't occur 
to him to check. The other reason was. 
I'm a blond." 

Storm's interest picked up, but he was 
relieved of asking the obvious question by 
Redfield's suddenly coy nonsense: "He 
liked blonds ?" 

Blushing, Frazier stammered. "Not 
that at all. Blonds have funny vision. A 
blond's eyes are sometimes sensitive to 
ultraviolet light in wavelengths invisible 
to other people. I was. Morlake said the 
range of my vision into ultraviolet was 
extraordinary. Si Morlake had a lot of 
wacky ideas, but some were interesting. 



46 



SUPER SCIENCE STORIES 



I got involved in ESP, because I was wondering about applying telekinesis to football. What I could do with a ball that 
would come when I whistled, even if it 
were already in flight. . . ." 

Frazier's words ran out, his eyes glazed, 
grew distant, as the possibility of using 
teleportation or telepathy in sports lured 
his thoughts out of continuity. 

"You say you knew what he was trying 
to do?" Storm broke in sharply. "Surely 
it was not . . . football?" 

Frazier grinned. "No, hardly that. 
Something about co-existing atoms. I 
didn't get all of it, naturally. He was 
trying things out on me, like trying them 
on a dog. Called me by a Latin name, a 
dog's name, I think— Fidus Achates. But 
he didn't expect me to respond or pay 
any more attention than a dog would, if 
you talked to it. He talked as if the world 
were a tangle of extended dimensions, 
a kind of interlocking puzzle box, with 
other planes of space and matter co-existing with ours, kind of parallel. Not a new 
idea in theory. Morlake's approach was 
different. Original and ingenious. Nothing like analogy or pure speculative mathematics. He wanted to see and feel these 
other worlds. Said it was quite possible." 

"Go on," urged Storm, intrigued. 

i i T T WAS Dr - Adria " ,s experiments 
I with the cyclotron that put Mojrlake on the track of what he 
wanted. Morlake was helping when 
Adrian bombarded carbon with threehundred-cighty million volt particles of 
helium, trying to produce mesons, the 
secondary cosmic ray particles. It was 
not the experiment, itself, that interested Morlake, but some unexpected 
side results. There was talk that the use 
of the cyclotron 'was affecting people's 
vision in the region. If you'll remember, 
there were a lot of complaints. Arnold 
got upset, you know Prexy, and worried 
for fear public opinion might force the 



college to suspend operating the cyclotron. 
It didn't. Whatever effect the experiments had was short-lived, and furor 
died down. Prexy forgot about it, and 
when Adrian got a lot of publicity for 
his photographed results, Prexy was there 
as usual to elbow his way in and grab the 
bows. 

"Everybody forgot about the complaints, even-body — except Morlake. He 
seemed as fascinated about 'em as he was 
about my dice throwing sevens in a row. 
He went and talked to people, by pretending he was a reporter or adjuster for the 
insurance people. There had been tall* 
of lawsuits, remember. The people were 
eager to talk. Said their e\es blurred, 
half-seeing things that weren't there. 

"Well, that was it. Morlake claimed 
that the cyclotron had affected vision, 
temporarily. He said our cyclotron was a 
freak, a one in a thousand chance. That 
it extended. the range of vision both ways, 
into the ultraviolet and the infrared, and 
that people could see things which weren't 
normally visible. -That the things they 
thought they saw were there all the time, 
but invisible to -normal eyesight. Then 
Morlake thought that other senses might 
be affected equally. Vision first since it 
was more sensitive, and something you'd 
notice quicker. Hearing, smell, touch — 
then he said a crazy thing. He wondered 
what our first taste of the New World 
would be like. He called the* invisible 
worlds around us his New World, the 
final frontier of mystery. He said someday we'd see and hear and smell and 
feel it, maybe even taste it. Forbidden 
fruit, he said, might be bitter to the taste. 
After Adrian left, Morlake kept toying 
with the cyclotron, to see if he could enhance its effects on people in range. That's 
all I know." 

Darkness grew swiftly in the basement 
room. Outside, the threatening storm 
broke. There was wind, with rain anc 
hail in it ; wind that shrieked and howlec 



DANGER DIMENSION 



47 



and drummed phantom fingers on the 
slanted window-panes. Near trees and 
bushes, visible above the window wells, 
threshed wildly as if angry monsters rent 
a way through them. 

Storm was thoughtful as he moved toward the light-switch. When the time 
came, Frazicr would have to repeat his 
story to the police. In the meantime, 
Storm tried to organize his thoughts. 
Absently, he flipped the switch. Fiuorescents blinked, flickered and flared blindingly, then exploded. Burst tubes fell in 
jingling shower to the floor. In the darkness, Storm groped to a bench and sat 
down. He swore briefly. 

A shadow moved against the lighter 
shadow-pool of fragmentary glass. Redfield was stooping over. 

"Don't touch it," Storm warned. ''You 
can get a nasty poisoning frpm the tubecoating if you cut yourself." He came to 
a sudden decision. "Redfield, you go call 
the police. I'll take responsibility. Tell 
them to send a couple, of detectives, intelligent ones if they have any. Too much 
time has gone by now. Someone should 
have called in the authorities before this. 
The police won't like it, but there has 
to be an investigation. The sooner the 
better. We'll wait for you here. On your 
way back, stop by the supply room and 
bring in replacement tubes for the lights. 
Get going." 
.Astonished, Redfield grunted, but he 



complied without comment. The sound of 
his departure dimished with distance. 

In the darkness, with the froth of wind 
outside, and the restless seething toss of 
branches making an uproar of confused 
sound, Storm felt growing uneasiness. It 
increased by leaps and bounds. 

Storm spoke to Frazier, raising his 
voice to battle the cry of turbulent elements. "You say Morlake chose you to 
assist him . . . because your vision extended into the ultraviolet ranges. Did 
you ever see anything?" 

The reply was an embarrased chuckle. 
"Did I? I think I was to blame for the 
rumor this place is haunted. I mentioned 
it to Redfield. He hung around one night, 
to take pictures. You know what he got — " 

"I saw them," Storm corrected grimly. 
"I don't know what they were. Morlake 
seemed to know. I showed the prints to 
him. . . ." 

There was a burst of sound. The hall 
door moved suddenly on its wrenched 
hinges. Moved as if a blast of compressed 
air struck it, hurling the door shut with 
extreme violence. Probably an outer door 
had been opened, causing a draft. Outside, 
wind raved and moaned. 

Storm thought it might be Redfield returning. He strode to the door, tried 
the knob. The slamming had jammed it 
tightly, the frame creaked under pressure, but the door resisted movement. 
Storm braced himself, got a shoulder 



YOUR BEST READING BUY! 

Wherever good fiction is read ond sold, wherever good stories 
are sought by a discriminating reading public, you'll find a 
J|Oi) Popular Publications magazine that will be your guide to the 
best in reading value anywhere! 

POPULAR PUBLICATIONS, INC. 
123 18th Street 
New Toronto, Ontario 



48 



SUPER SCIENCE STORIES 



against the wood, and shoved with all his 
strength. 

"Give me a hand," Storm called to 
Frazier. There was odd, sharp, gasping 
cry in the darkness. It sounded as if 
someone were strangling. The cry came 
again, muffled. 

Storm turned. Something was happen- . 
ing to the room. It should have heen dark, 
illuminated sharply at irregular intervals 
by the flash of lightning. Instead, it 
glowed. 

It glowed in patterns, geometric patterns which shifted and swirled, as if objects melted and flowed like the figures 
in a Dali painting, becoming something 
quite different from whatever they at 
first seemed. Curious movement pulsed 
through the arrangement of forms, as if 
numerous panes of transparent glass bore 
luminous designs, and the panes were 
shifted in a regular order of motion. 
Shadowy relationships changed constantly. 

While Storm's brain tried to adjust itself to this illusion, his body continued its 
effort to force open the door to the hall. 
Something yielded with a sensation that 
the world was breaking apart. The door 
gave way. 
His body careened through the opening. 
He tripped and fell, flinging his arms forward to break the fall. 

As if from a tremendous distance, he 
heard voices. Frazier and Redfield. . . . 

His ears clung to the sound, as one 
clings desperately to the symbols of familiar things in a dream world. 

Gray darkness swallowed him. For immeasurable intervals of time, he floated, 
bodiless, with no sensation of falling, or of 
being supported. Then, without warning, 
he sprawled headlong. 

OUTFLUNG hands encountered an 
unfamiliar, jagged surface. He 
struck hard, rolling. Dazed, he 
sat up, conscious of bruised and abraded 
skin. Clothing felt damp, sticky, cling


ing. He raised one injured hand to evaluate its damage. 

The hand was part of nightmare^ ft 
was a hideous thing of jumbled angles anc" 
curving planes. Its color was wrong 
dreadfully wrong. His brain refused t( 
translate the vibrations into familiar color 
ideas. 

He was in a strange place, part of a 
dream world, but not a pleasant part. 
It was someone else's dream world, nol 
his. Storm scrambled to his feet anc 
looked about. Vision was limited. The 
glaring light poured from unseen sources, 
illuminating little and distorting whal 
it revealed. He stood on a bare, rocky 
slope and the surface ahout him was 
textured with minute pitting effects. A 
swirl of luminous fog drifted everywhere 
and seemed to cling loosely to the nearer 
shadows. 

There was no other way to describe 
the bulky forms obscured by the mist. 
Even those close at hand resembled nothing previously known. Outlines wavered, 
one could not be sure of solidity. 

Storm dared not look too closely at 
his own body. Patches of it which thrust 
into his line of vision were utterly wrong; 
disturbingly wrong. Storm tried to concentrate, and found that even thought 
was difficult, distorted. He must have 
struck his head in falling. That was a possible solution, but too easy. Unconvincing. 
This was unreal. He should pinch himself 
and wake up. But he was not sleeping. 
Moments ago — 

But was he sure of that? Time seemed 
to have telescoped, as it sometimes does in 
dreams. Recent events were blurred, confused, unreal. Sometime, in another 
world, something had happened. Storm 
was no longer sure what had even happened, when, or where. He was here. 
The surroundings were new, strange, different. 

He heard voices. Familiar voices. One 
was calling his name, repeating the sound 



DANGER DIMENSION 



45 



over and over. Storm had difficulty recognizing the alien syllables as a symbol pertaining to him. 

Two shadows detached themselves from 
the indefinite background. They moved 
toward him in an odd drifting motion, 
completely unlike walking. They glided 
in a series of jerks and swoops. After 
an interval, they were close. But everything; about them was strange. The form 
was human, but blurred, shadowy, and 
there were ugly hints of luminous geometric outlines of something else. What he 
saw seemed only a shadow cast into solids. 
Two shadows. 

It was like that thing he had seen before 
in the Physics Building and mentioned to 
Morlake. Everything came rushing hack 
upon him. Memory and identity fused into a whole. He was John Storm. lie 
remembered the school and Morlake, the 
faculty and the students, sudden flashing 
details about himself. The rush of memory 
should have changed the world back into 
familiar pattern, but it remained as before. 

He staggered and felt ill, weak, more 
confused by the recalled knowledge than 
he had been before. 

Again the voices. They sounded like 
Redfield's and Frazier's. But they seemed 
hardly voices at all. He could see them. 
Like weaves expanding in a pool from a 
dropped stone, the voices were shimmering, expanding globes of transparent luminosity. He was aware of direction in the 
effect, as if the globes distorted in his 
direction in the effect, as if the globes distorted in his direction, bent and converged 
toward him. 

"It is always like this at first," said 
Frazier. "Don't strain too hard. You 
will adjust to it. I've come so far before. . . ." 

What did it mean? Had Morlake 
opened a gateway in the Known and 
stumbled into the nightmare world of the 
Unknown ? 



CHAPTER THREE 

The Shadow Beings 

STORM stared at the shadows. His 
eyes screamed with pain ; glaring 
light probed his eyeballs, got inside 
his skull, twisting his brain. Waves of 
nausea paralyzed all perception of distance, of relation, of reality. . . . 

He spoke, the words reaching out like 
undulating ribbons of light. "You — have 
— been — here — before ?" 

Again, spheres of rippling color expanded. Ears and brain tingled. 

"Not exactly. A glimpse or two. Morlake was afraid to expose me to unknown 
danger. I said he was a good guy. He 
took the risk himself. He came exploring 
twice. Told me about it. This time he 
did not return. Something must have 
happened." 

Resentment and anger made Storm 
momentarily speechless. It was cruel and 
unfair. He had been trapped by a stupid 
plot. But was it intentional ? Had. 
Frazier known, or suspected, what might 
happen ? What had happened ? 

Anger burned itself out suddenly. What 
had happened? He put the question in 
words, amazed by the visible phenomena 
which accompanied sound. 

The reply was ironic, bitterly humorous. 
"Nothing — really. You just think so." 
Storm started a savage protest. 
Frazier went calnilv on. "The doos 
gave way before you, and you fell into 
the hall. Tf you hadn't turned around to 
see what was happening, you would still 
be there. But you were convinced that 
you were somewhere else. So you are. 
The mind creates some force which translates even your physical body to a different plane. You haven't gone anywdiere, 
in terms of time and space. These other, 
unknown worlds co-exist with 'ours, 
parallel, perhaps on a different vibration 
level. I don't pretend to understand all 



50 



SUPER SCIENCE STORIES 



of it. I'm just guessing. Morlake rarely 
explained ; he dropped a few hints, and 
I'm trying to make sense of them, 

"He said our eyes catch a lot of things 
that our hrains don't believe. The brain 
is a strainer, filtering out the parts of any 
sensations relayed to it which are not 
pertinent to our accepted existence. Lots 
of people see these related worlds. Some 
of them are very close, really visible to us. 
People see ghosts only if they are 'in 
tune* — which means tired, or in a trancelike state with conscious judgment set 
aside for the moment. The ghosts are 
always there to see, if our minds let us 
see them. 

"The cyclotron lias a leak somewhere. 
It's a freak. Morlake says. Some energyform released or generated -by it can he 
stored in the air or 'the ether' — and, given 
certain conditions, will heighten normal 
perceptions. It may affect the organs of 
tight, smell and taste directly, or the 
nerves relaying perception, or even the 
brain itself. Touch and hearing are not so 
easily hurt or stimulated. Maybe they 
function according to a different vibration pattern, coarser ; or maybe the brain 
has to be convinced first, and win ttitp 
translate sensations of touch and hearing 
into new terms. I don't know. But something would happen to anyone if he were 
around that particular cyclotron for any 
length of time. 

"Whatever the energy is, it diminishes 
in time, but gradually. It functions chiefly 
in the dark. Ordinary octaves of visible 
light seem to cancel out its effect. You 
know how some odors will blanket ultraviolet light. There is a clash — I know because the fluoresceins burst like that several times while Dr. Adrian was operating 
the cyclotron. Probably it works like 
sounding a note in music that is exactly 
tuned to the critical vibration level of a 
glass or mirror. It shatters." 

Storm saw an objection, made it. "But 
Dr. Adrian was working with the cyclo


tron more than anyone else. He sawnothing." 

Frazier laughed harshly. "Do you knott 
that? His wife died very suddenly. But 
did he have to take her body east? I 
think he was scared, running away. Probably thought his mind was cracking." 

A thought occurred to Storm. "Did 
you plan all this? Was I deliberately 
trapped into coming with you?" 

"No," came the reply. "Remember, 
you were coming here yourself. Wc 
merely came along. We intended to anyhow. You made it easy for us. Besides, I 
wasn't sure anything would happen this 
time." 

"You should have warned me," Storm 
rebuked angrily. 

"Would you have listened ? Would you 
have believed me ? You'd have demanded 
facts, explanations, proofs. I had nothing 
but wild guesses." 

"I'll believe you. now. The question is, 
how do we get out of here ?" 

Frazier 's voice was stubborn, brutally 
matter of fact, blunt. "We don't," he said. 
"Not till we find Morlake. Someone has 
to look for him. He's in trouble — or he'd 
have returned. We can't get out unless 
he shows us a way. 1 don"t know of 
any. . . ." 

In silence, Storm digested the grim 
facts of the situation. Finally, he said, 
"Huw do we go about finding him? Any 
ideas ?" 

The shadows moved, drifting closer in 
that stiff, staggering glide. 

"Stand right where you are," warned 
Frazier. "Don't move. We need a base 
of operation." 

Storm held himself rigidly immovable. 
I le glanced about, trying to force his mind 
to relax, to accept the rules and standards 
of unreality. It was like a curiously solid, 
inescapable dream. He was in a world 
without perspective, visual or mental. 
There was no horizon, only limiting, obscuring fog. Within range of sight w« 



DANGER DIMENSION 



51 



no familiar outline, no bulk of recognizable form, no object which could he exactly labelled. 

Redfield spoke: "I was just outside 
the door, waiting to see what happened. 
I did not go for the police. As you fell, 
you vanished. We had trouble getting 
through, finding the right plane. There 
are a lot of them. We might never have 
found you. It was just luck. Even then, 
we couldn't be sure. You were hard to — 
to identify." 

The shadows ranged themselves beside Storm. One of them touched him. 
The sensation was oddly normal, reassuring. 

"Stop fighting it, Prof." said Frazier. 
"It's not so bad. But you still don't quite 
believe it. So you aren't completely 
through. The worst part is being caught 
between two dimensions. You've got to 
accept it. One illusion is very like another. 
Accept it, and it works ... at least as far 
as you are concerned." 

"Sure, Prof," amended Red field. "Establishing a beachhead is never fun. I 
know. But it's better to hit the sand and 
dig yourself a hole in it than to stand 
outside, getting your feet wet." 

It was Roman counsel ; strong, toughminded, but good if you could take it. 
Storm remembered that both Frazier and 
Redfield were G.I. students. They knew 
something about beachheads After all, 
this was one, really, a beachhead into the 
unknown. 

The same rules might apply. 

The thought was comforting. Storm 
had been unaware of his own strangling 
suspicion that no rules would apply. He 
relaxed and the light grew stronger, more 
compelling. Some of the blurring mists 
cleared. Objects stood out more sharply. 
The two near shadows were more obviously human, but with disturbing overtones of color and a wavering luminosity 
of outline. 

They were men. 



£>l LOWLY at first, then with a rush, 
^% surroundings changed. He stood on 
a steep slope of bare, jagged rock. 
There was no sign of weathering, nothing 
but a blank surface of grainy -textured 
gray, incredibly rough and pointed like a 
vastly magnified picture of some abrasive 
compound. Frazier and Redfield solidified, 
like a motion picture coming into focus. 

"That's better," approved Frazier. He 
fished a coil of fine, tough nylon cord 
from his pocket and bent to attach it 
firmly to a projection of rock. "I hope 
this serves us better than it did Dr. Morlake. He used it the first two times, and 
came back. I found this on a bench in the 
shop. Maybe be forgot it, unless he had 
another like it. This is the starting point; 
ue'll have to find our way back to it. 
Or—" 

1 1c shrugged. It was necessary to 
complete the thought. 

Paying out the cord, Frazier cautiously 
descended the slope. Storm followed, and 
Redfield brought up the hear. Time lost 
all substance. They seemed hours going 
dowtjj a bug. slanting shelf of featureless 
gray rr/cks. Light waxed and waned. At 
times, the gray surface lost appearance of 
solidity, became crystalline, transparent, 
and they seemed to hang suspended in a 
titanic abyss of empty space. Again the 
footing cloud*ed, resumed its original appearance. 

Despite the intensity of light, it was 
like walking in thick darkness. Storm collided with things which were not there, 
bulks too diffuse to refuse his passage, 
but which yielded reluctantly under pressure. Invisible semi-solids, which seemed 
alive, or at least capable of movement, 
clung abuut him, resisting, like blobs of 
very dense gas. It required definite exertion to move against the vague pressure. 

He was breathing heavily, and became 
slowly aware of alien tastes and smells in 
the atmosphere. Vague whisperings came 
and went about him. He grew confused. 



52 



SUPER SCIENCE STORIES 



It seemed they had changed directions, 
hut the slope still angled steeply downward. Surrounding pressures eased 
slightly, and they went more swiftly. 

Abruptly the slope broke into a steep 
and dangerous descent. Loose rock rolled 
beneath his groping foot, rolled and fell 
and rattled, then dropped into the silence 
of free fall. For a full minute it fell, then 
came an echoing crash far below. Straining his eyes until corkscrews seemed to 
revolve in his brain, Storm made out details of a cliff face which plunged almost 
sheer to a dark valley. 

There were shadows below, many 
shadows. Dark shadows that moved restlessly like the patterns wind draws on a 
field of dry, waving grain. They moved in 
heaving billows, in irregular tossing 
swirls. But like the grain, they moved as 
if somehow attached at one end to a 
solid, unmoving surface. 

Of that fearful descent, Storm could 
remember little. Down they went, and 
down, clawing for handholds, reaching 
blindly below for crevice or cranny in 
which to wedge feet aching with fatigue. 
At one place they locked hands to each 
other's ankles and lowered themselves as 
on a living rope. None too scion, they 
reached the valley floor. 

Here, the light was very bad. Even 
objects near at hand were so flistorted and 
so difficult to see clearly that Storm 
doubted the sureness of his footing. Progress became a groping for solidity across 
treacherous, uneasy ground. Had it not 
been for a constant flicker of vague lights 
and shadows, they would have moved like 
blind men, tapping the surface each time 
before putting a foot down. Near the 
ground were curious currents, almost like 
invisible running water, which tugged at 
feet and legs. 

Still paying out the nylon cord, Frazier 
thrust his way ahead. 

"That must be a long cord," Storm 
jrowled. 



"Not so long," came the sharp answer 
"Distance is different here. Either spaa 
itself, or onr perception of it, is warped 
I remember Morlake saying something 
about that after his first trip. You'll fine 
how far it seems when we try to g< 
back." 

If we ever go back," muttered Storm. 

Redfield pressed forward to Storm's 
side, thrusting a solid small bulk toward 
him. 

"I brought my sen-ice revolver," Redfield said. "If it will make you feel better, 
Prof, you carry it." 

Storm rejected the offer. "Keep it. I 
wouldn't know how to use it." 

"What do they teach people in schools ?" 

Frazier laughed. The sound was hideously distorted, like a caricature of laughter. They plodded on in silence. 

In the valley shadows were denser, 
more substantial. Even the atmosphere 
hung heavy, and there was sharp tang in 
the nostrils and tingling in the lungs as 
one breathed. It was stimulating but 
nerve-wracking. Smell identified it as 
ozone, or something similar ; and ozone 
in sufficient concentration can he toxic. 
The thought was not pleasant to Storm, 
but mired in a mixture of embarrassment and hot resentment, he did not mention it to the others. 

They trod aisles in a forest of crystal 
shafts where odd lights moved and beckoned, and soft colors glowed. On the 
ground were the moving patterns of light 
and dark, like shadows of invisible living forms. Storm did not like to think 
about what beings might cast such shadows. In another place, where darkness 
thickened and sound grew into a vast outpouring of wierd harmonies, the shadow! 
stirred and some stood upright like solid 
bodies. Bodies which moved in response 
to what might have been fluctuations ir 
the music, bobbing, nodding, swaying 
sometimes in unison, sometimes singly 
again the whole mass spinning in the mad 



DANGER DIMENSION 



53 



gyrations of a group dance. Always there 
was an appearance of intelligent violation, 
a hideous lifelike quality of controlled 
movement. 

The shadows were three dimensional, 
but utterly unhuman. It was a mathematical nightmare, with every form known to 
geometric science. Cubes, cylinders, cones, 
pyramids, irregular many-faceted blocks. 
If solids they were immeasurably elastic, 
expanding into grotesque elongations, foreshortening into dwarfed, bulging blobs, always transparent, or at least translucent, 
but distorting light strangely as it flowed 
through them. 

Utter weariness weighed down Storm. 
Movement became almost mechanical. lie 
trudged as one does in endless nightmare, 
and there was an illusion of repetition in 
everything he did. 

Mind and muscles revolted at once. 
From sheer exhaustion he stopped and 
refused to continue the hopeless task. 

"This nonsense has. gone far enough," 
he said defiantly. "We don't stand a 
chance to find Morlake. If there are 
infinite planes, as you say, he may be on 
any one of them. We don't know that 
he's on this one. I must have been crazy 
to come this far." 

Frazier and Redfield stared at him. 
They looked like badly photographed motion pictures. 

"I guess you're right," admitted Frazier 
hopelessly. "The line has run out anyhow. We can find where we were all 
right. But what then? It's not like opening a door. We don't know how to get 
out." 

Following the cord, reeling it up as 
they went, Frazier led the way back toward the cliff. He stopped, so suddenly 
that Storm, following close* behind, 
bumped into him. Frazier held up the 
end of the cord. It seemed to have been 
burned in two. In widening circles, panic 
mounting, they searched for the opposite 
end. A few oddly scorched and raveling 



fragments were found. Redfield touched 
one and screamed. It had burned like 
a hot wire. There was no sign of a continuing cord. 

THE THREE stood and looked at one 
another. Catastrophe was beyond comment. Redfield shrugged, rubbed injured fingers on his coat. 

"We can't stay here," he said dismally. 

Selecting a direction at random, he 
started walking. The others followed. 

Fear strained itself through Storm's 
consciousness. Loss of the guiding cord 
seemed to cut him adrift. The nodding 
and waving shadows had disturbed, but 
without frightening him. They seemed 
too evanescent, too insubstantial, unreal. 
But being lost in this utter strangeness was 
terrifying. Panic rang in his brain like 
the muted vibrations of a cracked bell. 
He felt compelling urge to run, but there 
was no place to run. In all the pervading 
grayness, there was no hiding place. 

Redfield strode swiftly, as if he sought 
escape from the terror which dogged all 
of them. 

Xight shifted rapidly, sliding up and 
down scaled octaves of illumination. It 
kept pace (with their racing emotions, was 
keyed to the rising crescendo of stark 
fear. Surroundings also were altered subtly, becoming* harsher, more stark and 
bleak of outline. Objects assumed tantalizing suggestion of familiar forms, but the 
illusion vanished quickly upon closer approach. 

Shadows seemed to draw together behind them. The huddled things made gestures, dimly perceived, vaguely menacing. From all sides came a suggestion of 
whispering, of furtive, haunted urging. A 
feeling of deadly pursuit increased from 
an ugly suspicion into hideous certainty. 
Bodiless entities, seen only by the shadows 
they cast, were herding the three fugitives toward some unseen goal. 

A defile opened ahead, revealing the 



54 



SUPER SCIENCE STORIES 



place to which the three were being driven. 
4 city! 

CHAPTER FOUR 

Dark Doorway 

DESOLATE as the moon, a great 
plain stretched beyond visible distance. In a near wedge of it, 
thrusting like a salient into a jumbled 
mass of broken rock, was a cluster of 
huge, obviously artificial structures. It 
must be a city. There were ruins of towering semisolid walls, a tangle of twisted 
buildings, a maze of threading streets, 
some partially blocked with curious rubble. In the center, overpowering the disorderly mass of the city, rose gigantic 
cones, taller by far than the highest surrounding piles. 

Light played over the cones, weaving 
webs of lightnings from apex to apex. 
The cones themselves were glowing cores 
of vivid white, but color crawled upon the 
surfaces. Color, which broke and flowed 
in constantly changing patterns, melting, 
resolving, running through complete spec,trums and suggesting invisible spectrtims 
beyond. There was sound, sound w hich 
seemed integral with the color, sound 
which flowed with it in audible patterns, 
which ranged its own spectrums and vanished into contorted and nerve-straining 
vibrations beyond hearing. It was as i£ 
one had struck an accidental chord upon 
some great color organ, blending harmonies and dissonance into a cluster of 
tones at once beautiful and maddening to 
hear. 

Like a sheet of glimmering water, lightmoved outward from the city, enveloped 
the men who stood too stunned to move 
—and drew them swiftly into the very 
confines of mystery. 

Things moved about the city, things 
which cast multiform and monstrous shadows of their being. . . . 



In that intolerable light and sound, 
planes shifted oddly, readjusted. It was 
like a book of colored pictures, flipped 
through so rapidly that impressions 
flowed, fused, became moving patterns in 
a new and startlingly different order of 
reality. It was like blindness resolving 
into the world of light, vision so stark 
and painful, so hideous that Storm cringed, 
writhing in instinctive denial. 

It was then that he first saw the . . . 
inhabitants. 

If the shadows had suggested nightmare, the reality was beyond nightmare. 
It was sheer horror, mathematical in form, 
luminous, living — intelligent. 

The frightening part was the perception, instantaneous and complete, of alien 
intelligence. Had they been mindless beings, creatures of mere existence, he could 
have stood the utter -loathing which rocked 
his being. But these . . . these had mind 
and will, strong, alert, contemptuous, interested. Not cruel ; emotionless, but with 
unbounded curiosity. . . . 

Storm felt like an impaled insect, being 
examined. For a timeless interval, he felt 
the idle probing of alien intelligence, he 
fell the searching thrust of curious thought 
against his ; it was like the touch of sharp 
hut delicate instruments. He was held 
high, wriggling, poked and jabbed by 
thin beams of light, while he strove to 
blank out his mind against the cold insolence of examination. 

There was a moment of baffled indecision, followed by curious emotions which 
he sensed indistinctly, too unfamiliar to 
identify. 

Then he was being flung carelessly 
aside. 

There was a familiar sensation, recognized instantly. He was grateful for the 
familiarity. Rut it was pain, sheer outrage of physical pain. Mercifully, he lost 
consciousness. . . , 

Awakening brought further doubt oi 
sanity. He was lying on a hard surface 



DANGER DIMENSION 



55 



in comparative darkness. He was bound 
by invisible but solid lines of force. Someone bent over him, fumbling at tbe network which secured him. It was Morlake. 

"Quiet," said Morlake. "They threw 
us together to see what reactions we 
would have. Don't five anything away." 

"You — saw — them ?" 

"Oh, yes. A good deal more of them 
than you did. They're not what you 
think. Or maybe they are, I don't know. 
I believe each one of us sees them differently; each brain translates their appearance into something related to itself, its training. The real appearance may 
be something else again." 

"I saw cubes and pyramids and cylinders and gemlike figures with facets reflecting light." 

"Then I was right. They are too alien 
even for perception in the ordinary sense. 
You imagined mathematical figures. It 
was an escape for your hrain into terms 
of familiar reality. We strain vision 
through preconceived ideas, as a, protection to sanity. Here there is no sanity — 
but theirs. They're sane enough, intelligent, even wildly curious about us. 
They've tried to learn from me about 
our world, where we came from, what 
it's like, what people are like — above all, 
how we got here. They're too damn' 
curious about that. The possibilities 
frighten me — " 

"You should have thought of that before," Storm reproved. 

"Good Lord, man! I didn't create this 
place. It was here before I stumbled on 



it. With the cyclotron operating, anyone 
could have blundered here, anytime. Such 
things are bound to happen. With all the 
gadgets we've dreamed up, most of them 
imperfectly understood, mankind is asking for trouble. We don't know what 
happens when we start cooking with 
atoms; it's highly probable that we'll unlock a lot of doors, doors that open blindly into the unknown. This is one. The 
cyclotron is a freak, but there may be 
others like it. Who knows? Blindness 
first — the groping and blundering — then 
the terrible vision. If it's only a vision, 
we're lucky. ..." 

Morlake stopped, his voice strange with 
passion. 

"I'm no better than the rest," he went 
on. "I looked into the darker mental 
closets behind our ghosts and found ugly 
reality. But you can't shut all the closet 
doors. Man is too curious. But other 
things— these or others — may be equally 
curious. The harriers of mind are too 
thin. The barriers of matter scarcely exist. We are only pioneers in a new field 
of exploration. Others will follow, very 
soon, one way or another. Even if we 
get' back and try to warn them of what 
we have found — " 

Storm remembered saying something, 
but bis mind was not working clearly. 
Shock of his experience had been too 
great. 

Then Morlake was talking again, swiftly, as if time ran through his fingers. 

"Getting out is fairly simple. I'm surprised you didn't think of it. Go back 
to your point of initial contact. I'm sure 



STATEMENT OF THK OWNERSHIP. MANAGEMENT. AND ( HUT l.ATION HNUCli'.KIl BY THE Ai'T OF CONClltESS OF Af«;r«T 24. 1913. AS AJIKXDKP BY THK ACTS OK -\! ATli'H .;, ifCM. AM. Jl I,Y 2. l't« (Title 39. 
Onltnd Btntee Cnde. Section 333t. of suwr Si-iencc Sturii-;, iiiihli.'dii'd hi monthly ut Kokrmui. Indiana, (or October 
1, 1950. 1. The names *nd addreise* of ihe publisher. *Utati ruuiiDiilug editor, anil business nianuiiers art: Publisher. 
Harold S. Goldsmith, 205 East 42mi St.. Ntw York 17, New York. Editor. Ncnrj BMmf. 2iij t'jt-t -J 2nd St.. New York 
17. New York. Managing editor. Now, Business manager. None. 2. Tbe owner is: Klrtioneerv Inc. 2<15 East 4 2nd St.. 
New Tork 17. York, roimlnr IMMiealinns, In,.. 2U.'. K.vl 42ml Ht., New York IT. New York; llmry Bteegrr, »1S 

East 42nd St.. New York 17, New York: Hir'.it! s. liuhlamith. 20.1 ):« 42nd St.. New York IT, New York; Shirley 
M. Steejer, S»S Kan 48nd St.. New York IT. Hp York. 3. The known landholders. mniiMiiceJ, and other security holders owning or holding 1 percent or more of total amount of hoods. inorlitagrs. or other securities are: None, 4. Paratraphs 1 and 3 include, in case' where tne stoeKliolder or security holder appears uuon the hooks of the company ■» 
trustee or In ativ other fiduciary irlatirn. the name of the petMiri oj- cm \>ih :ii ir.ii I'm wlm'u Mrh trustee Is actinc UlaO tfce 
Kate men is In the two paragrapHi hhow tbe affiant's full knowledge and toller as to the circumstances and conditions under 
whleh stockholder- and HalUlfll holders who do not appear upon the hooks or the comi-anv as trustees, hold slack and 
aecuriiles in a capacity other than that of a bona fide ownei. Signed, Harold S. OoMainltt. Publisher. Sworn to too] 
■ithecrlhed before ma thla 2nd dav of October. 1B"0. Kia M. Walker, Notary public. Stale of New York. Qualified In 
New York Count*. No. U-KOMM, Cerijfloal* filed wita; City Beglsler N. T. County, CommmsiTi CxpirM Marc* »>. 
lUt (SmU— T«n> Slits- Res 9-W 



16 



SUPER SCIENCE STORTES 



Frazier can find the way. He's good at 
orientation. You'll have to find the two 
of them. They were brought here, as 
you were. I don't know where, and 
haven't time to look. They'll come for me 
soon. It's a matter of mental adjustment, 
helped by the li — " 

Words faded into curious rustling hiss. 
Fainter and fainter as if distance separated 
him from the source of the sound. Then 
Storm was conscious of supreme mental 
effort by Morlake. Sound came again, 
revolving into speech; but the syllables 
were flat and metallic, run together. 

"Don't think about me. Escape . . . 
if you can. Smash the cyclotron ... as if 
accident. I stayed to learn something which 
may help out . . . if. . . ." 

That was all. Morlake was gone. 

THE cell was small, like the hollow 
interior of a cone. It had never 
been intended for human occupancy. Weak and shaken, Storm-moved 
about, exploring. He seemed free. In the 
dimness he reached out and felt a tangle 
of something like invisible cords. 

Above the floor, on one slanting *.ide 
of the cone, was a spot of lighter darkness. 
As Storm investigated, he found -it" to be 
an oval aperture which expanded as he 
moved toward it, shrank as he backed 
away, operating according to his proximity in a manner that suggested a door 
opening and closing to the control of an 
electric eye. With an animal's fear of a 
trap, Storm eyed the oval dubiously. It 
seemed the only possible exit. He would 
have to risk it. 

Outside was a constantly curv ing hallway, which wandered up and down and 
sidewisc, with no apparent direction or 
intention. He followed it cautiously. Off 
the hallway, opened many cells similar 
to the one he had vacated. They were all 
alike, all empty. In any man-made structure, the waste of space would have been 
criminal — unless here there were more 



dimensions than three, with consequen 
variant ideas about space. 

It was a vast hive of cone-like cells ; tin 
passageways endless complicated warren: 
which roved aimlessly at the whims ot 
alien designers. Some ended abruptly at 
blank walls that might be no barriers tc 
the inhabitants. There was the intricate 
and meaningless unreality of dreams. Il 
was a maze without pattern or conceivable 
plan. 

Hosts of faint, floorbound shadows 
swayed and gestured about him. But now 
their urging whispers and rustlings 
seemed friendly, worried, warning. . . , 

They, were as frightened as he. 

Storm stopped and tried to grasp at 
meaning in the half-sounds. But the 
sound itself was illusory; as fragmentary 
and unrelated as~fhe mindless patter of 
wind-stirred Jeaves. 

He went on. 
In another cell, tround by the invisible 
cords, were Frtayer and Redfield. Both 
seemed dazed or 'asleep.. They roused, reluctantly, as he worked .over them. They 
stared at him with dazed, uncomprehending eyes. , 

■Words came unsteadily, vaguely, as if 
minds worked sluggishly and resisted 
stimulus. At his insistence, the men stood 
up and followed him, moving as if drugged 
or in hypnotic 'trance. 

Tn an immense, soaring room, built on * 
the lines of an ellipsoid, hollow and filled 
with brilliance of flaky light and chiming 
sound, they found Morlake. 

lie still lived, after a dreadful fashion 
Mounted on a frame of luminous solidity 
he had apparently been the object of extreme curiosity. The body was turned 
inside out, and things hideous to see hat: 
been done with dispassionate skill at vivisection. Beings, whatever they were, stir 
milled about and hovered over the glowing framework in attitudes of detached 
impersonal interest. Figures like in vol vet 
intricacies of intersecting planes; othe? 



DANGER DIMENSION 



57 



figures like solids composed of jumbled 
assemblies of angles difficult to resolve 
into individual entities ; figures that were 
the mathematics of nightmare — all 
whirled about in the eery gyrations of a 
dance of death. 

In the madness that followed, clear impressions were impossible. 

Redfield came suddenly alive. He fired 
bullet after bullet into the writhing obscenity which was Morlake — with no apparent effect, for the inhuman writhing 
continued. 

There was a fearful outburst of sound, 
a blinding violence of light, exploding intolerably into brilliance beyond that of 
fissioning atoms. Cones shattered, and 
the showering uproar of their fragments 
was like a deluge of fragile glass. 

As they fled through it; the city was 
crumbling in swift decay, building toppling, the walls shuddering, collapsing 
into oozing mass, the plain rocked and 
heaved, while lightnings raved overhead. 
In the narrow dark valley, the earthbound 
shadows danced and flapped and crackled 
like wind-whipped flames. Then they were 
climbing the precipice, scrambling endlessly upward, while loose rocks' rolled and 
fell and clattered around them. The long 
slope upward was now ablaze with quivering livid flames, which licked at the fugitives, and strong, invisible currents flowed 
over their numbed feet, clinging, impeding, attempting to drag down and destroy 
them. 

There was a cord at last, still attached 
to the projecting rock, its loose end 
smoldering as the hungry flames licked at 

Gasping, the three flung themselves on 
the ground, hugging the "hard-bought advantage, as condemned prisoners chng to 
a dwindling hope. 

Fog swirled down and enveloped the 
exposed barren height. The harshly 
metallic sky leaned close, while rivers 
of lightning poured from it. After th* 



dazzling flashes of lightning came flowing 

soft darkness. Darkness, filled with a 
rustling and crackling and whispering, as 
if legions of ghosts beseiged the mistwreathed slopes. Groping blindly. Storm 
found his way to Frazier and Redfield, 
seized and held them firmly. 

"The light," he whispered hoarsely. 
"That's the secret. If only there were 
some way to reach it — " 

"The light! Of course," mumbled 
Frazier. 

Temperature dropped rapidly. In a 
black, seething ocean of darkness, they 
huddled together. The ground stirred, 
heaved, moved uneasily beneath their feet. 

"I remember now," Frazier cried wildly. "He always tied the cord first. Near 
the switch, so he'd know where to reach. 
If we had done that — " 

Redfield groaned. "I'd got the replacement tubes, but I did not have time to 
fit them in. They're still out in the corri



# We would like to introduce another Carhartt innovation — Pants and 
Shirts-to-Match for warm weather 
wear. Attractively tailored. Natty in 
appearance, sanforized pre-shrunk 
and available in a choice selection of 
Chino Cloth, Sun Tan. Spruce Green 
Herringbone and Silver — all fast 
colors. You 'II like 'em.. .just as millions 
of other men have enjoyed the quality 
fit, roominess, long wear and genuine 
economy built into Carhartt's champion line of work clothes and overalls. 
Ask for Carhartt's — and be comfortable on the job. 

CARHARTT OVERALL CO. 
Establhhed I8S9 
Detroit, Mich. Dallas, Tex. 

Atlanta, Ga. Irvine, Ky. 




58 



SUPER SCIENCE STORIES 



dor. leaning against the wall. What's the 
use ?" 

Horror became tangible. The mists 
thinned, and something like an army of 
shadows moved steadily, stealthily up the 
lower slopes. 

Suddenly the darkness was riven. It 
split wide open as walls of brilliant light 
became a solid, expanding cube. Magically, the gray bleakness of pitted rock was 
erased. The advancing armies of shadows 
faltered, vanished. 

There was a moment of awful suspension. Then falling. In a heap, the three 
tumbled into the corridor of the Physics 
building. The splintered door crashed 
heavily against the wall. Hinges gave 
way; unsupported, the door tottered and 
fell with shattering noise. 

Silence hung in the corridor like layers of invisible smoke. 

Light streamed from the doorway of 
the room housing the haunted cyclotron. 
It was blocked by a dark, solid silhouette. 
The watchman stood and blinked solemnly 
at the tangle of oddly disarrayed bodies 
on the floor. One stirred and sat up. It 
was Storm. He gasped, his face was red 
and swollen with exertion. The savage 
ferocity of his glance startled the watchman. The others were disentangling 
themselves noisily. 

"That door will have to be replaced," 
said the watchman. "I must have missed 
you before. The lights were out for a 
while. I've replaced the tubes in here. I 
found them in the hall." He was crackling the corrugated boxes which had held 
fluorescent tubing ; his thin hands were 
nervous and wrenched at the paper viciously as he went on. 

"I came down to check. Thought maybe you'd be here. The police are upstairs. 
Want to talk to you. They've found Morlake." 

"Morlake !" Storm's voice was completely dazed. 

The watchman nodded. "Yes. Over 



at the power plant. Nobody knows why 
he went there or when. Or how he got in 
The body was across some exposed terminals. It was burned, . . almost beyond . . ." the man gulped, ". . . almost 
beyond recognition." 

Now on their feet, Frazier and Redfielc 
exchanged glances with Storm — glance.' 
which bound all three to an unspoken conspiracy of silence. Someday — soonsomething would happen to a cyclotron 
an accident, unavoidable. He nodded 
binding himself to the pact. 

Foot on the first step. Storm hesitated 
nerved himself to look back. They were 
slill standing as he left them, a tableau oi 
suddenly frozen figures. The watchman 
crumpled the elongated hollow tubing oi 
corrugated paper. Redfield had nervously 
put the revolver back in his pocket. Frazier looked as .if he had been about tc 
say something and then had thought better of it." 

From above cameihe sound of Frudey's 
voice, shrill, angry,' demanding. It would 
be like the faculty meeting, but worse. 
There would he more questions, still unanswerable, and he could never offer the 
truth — which* was perhaps the worst possible solution of the mystery. Hand on 
the aluminum rail, Storm hesitated, dreading to go up and face the battery of alien 
and unfriendly eyes. 

From the basement corridor, and from 
the vaultlike room beyond, opening off it 
through a wrenched and splintered frame 
doorway, came a faint sound. 

It was a series of faint popping noises, 
followed by a jingling rain of fine particles of glass. 

The doorway became a rectangle of 
darkness. Even before the luminous, geometric figures came swirling into the corridor, Storm knew that he would never 
again have to ascend into the world of 
reality. 

At the bottom of the curving stairway, 
he waited. . . . 




MISSIVES 

AND 

MISSILES 



FOR some time now, many of you 
guys and gals have been sticking 
your necks out, making guesses about 
our identity — though a few have had the 
foresight to worry. The question most 
frequently asked of us is: "Are you a 
BEM?" 

Now, how are you going to answer that? 
If we say yes, it's bound to lower the tone 
of the magazine — besides getting all our 
old cover artists hot on our trail again, just 
as we got 'em looking' the other way. If 
we say no — who'll believe us? 

Another question often asked us is : ''Are 
you a BUM!" Is that a question? 

But BEM or BUM, wc love you. 
Whether this is wise, you will no doubt let 
us know. Just for now let us say that we 
have kicked around the field, often on the 
outsUirts, some fifteen years. For much 
of this time it seemed wisest to hide our 
often inconsiderable glimmer under a 
bushel— now light dazzles us. 

We've read, we've written, we've edited. 
We've got a calling name, but is it important? You might call us Jake — and we 
hope everything is with you, too — but keep 
in mind that it we took credit for the 
Triple S, it'd be grossly unfair to all of 
you who've written in to discuss stories, 
filled our Opinion Tallies and generally 
made yourselves, not useful — but invaluable. 

Why don't we just say that it takes a 
whale of a lot of people to put out a maga



zine — and you're it? There're a couple of 
guys helping us here, too. And if Triple S 
gives you one half the kick your letters 
give us — why, your two bits is well spent. 

If not — well, you may have heard the 
one about the guy who had both legs 
amputated. 

He couldn't kick, either. 

All of which brings us here and there. 
And now for your letters — 



Dear Editor: 

As a new-comer to the field of Science 
Fiction, I'd like to stick my two-bits' worth 
in and air my gripes and display my admiration for tin's science stuff. 

T" start off with, here's an excerpt from 
a news item in the November 11, '50 issue 
of The Army 'limes, a nationwide — yea, 
worldwide newspaper for servicemen. Caption: '**5"L1)IKHS' READIN'G TASTES 
CHANGE: TURN TO SCIENCE. FORT 
MONMOUTH, N. J. — But the reading habits of the men have changed, according to Miss Margaretta Harr, chief post 
librarian. Mystery fiction and Western thrillers havt been supplanted in favor by the 
science fiction story. 

"In fact, this type of reading has become 
so popular at the installation, where some 
years ago Signal Corps scientists made contact with the moon by radar, that a separate 
science book section has been set up. and 
according to the librarians, probably is the 
first of its kind in the armed forces . . ." 

Which only goes to prove that the Army 
isn't being missed by the current trend away 
from comix and shoot-em's publications. 

But to get back to your mag, I'd like to 
say something on the November '50 issue. 

First place for all-around reading goes to 
Anderson's "Flight to Forever". There is 
a story really worth reading. 

The story I read first, however, was "The 
Soul Makers", because of its catchy title. 
(Continued on pagt 99) 

59 




60 



Alone, he braved the terrors of the unknown, planted 
the first hitman footprint on the ageless surface of the 
moon . . . came back to tell the waiting Earth about it 
— and no one believed him! 

HIGH 
FLIGHT 



By KATHERINE Mac LEAN 



AT SIX years old Mike Berganholm 
wanted the moon. People say you 
L get over things like that. 
When Mike was in college he was a 
pretty bright student, but he graduated into 
a war. For six years he saw nothing much 
but shells, pontoon bridges, the entrails of 
stalled graders and the hind end of his 
monkey wrench. 

There was a business slump going on 
when he came out of the Army. Jobs were 
scarce. Instead of waiting he took a high 
pay job as a mechanic and married on it. 
Then the slump passed and fresh green 
batches of students began graduating from 
colleges and getting first crack at the jobs. 
By that time Mike couldn't remember much 
engineering, and who would trust an engineer whose last job was as a mechanic? 

He couldn't get anywhere that way, so 
he scraped up a loan and opened up a small 
machine shop. There he settled down, enjoying a reasonably happy life with a pretty 
wife, two young kids, and not much money. 

NAVY MEN FREPARE TO REACH MOON 

"aren't you going to eat, Mike?" 

Her voice seemed to come from a great 

The moon came at him with 
incredible speed. . . , 



distance. The last Mike had noticed, the 
kids had finished breakfast and Sally was 
shooing them off to school. They seemed 
to be gone now. It was time for Mike to 
be finishing breakfast. He glanced at an 
untouched platter of scrambled eggs and 
shoveled a few savory forkfuls into his 
mouth. His eyes wandered back to the 
newspaper item and he began reading it 
again. 

NAVY MEN PREPARE TO 
REACH MOON 

Tonight Navy officials declared that — 

It was a Navy release on Project Moon 
Rocket and, like most Navy releases, was a 
mixture' of glamor and secretiveness, but 
this much fact came through — the rocket 
was ready at last, and would go at the next 
favorable opportunity. 

The rocket was ready. The next favorable time? Mike usually kept vague track 
of the relative positions of moon and earth. 
The next favorable time would be tonight 
at five-forty-five — he could calculate that 
much from the almanac item in a box on 
the same page. The rest of the week would 
be cloudy. This would be the only oppor
61 



62 



SUPER SCIENCE STORIES 



luniry. This was the night of the take-off. 

The rocket flight. Suddenly Mike 
wanted to see it, and the wish drowned 
common sense. One hundred miles up the 
ship would shed its step rockets. That 
sudden strange splitting into two parts ; the 
last spurt of strength to hurtle the ship 
upward at escape velocity and then the dying and detaching of that huge belt of jets 
would be the most awesome sight, and the 
most delicate technical feat of the climb. 
Mike wanted pictures of that. No one was 
supposed to be able to take them, but he 
wanted them. He had a movie camera and 
an old Army surplus jet fighter plane. If 
he could make them do, the pictures might 
sell to a newsreel company. Could he make 
them do it? 

"Aren't you going to work, Mike?" 
Sally's voice again. 

He had the breakfast plates shoved aside 
and five hasty sketches roughed out along 
the edges of the newspaper. The old jet 
job, the Army F-180 war surplus, had 
come with auxiliary jets thrown in for a 
few dollars extra, boosters for high climbing. They were down in the cellar. He 
had the slide rule out of his pocket and was 
working the fuel weight-height formula. 
According to the computations he might be 
able to do it if he lightened ship, dropped 
his auxiliaries two thirds of the way up, 
used up all fuel on the climb and come 
down from the stratosphere dead stick. 

It was almost suicide. JiiSt barely possible by the slide rule. . . . 

"Better hurry Mike, you'll be late." 
Sallv standing beside the tabic, looking 
very pretty, very curious about what he was 
planning, pretending not to be interested. 
"Better hurry." 

"Not going." He stood and stretched, 
"Call Jack for me, and tell bun I won't be 
in today, will you, baby?" He headed for 
the back door, beginning the race against 
time. 

In the back yard the old F-180 pointed 
its long shiny nose at the sky. Wheel


marked grass grew lushly around it, testifying that {he plane was not used very 
often. Mike circled it. plans taking shape 
and solidity in his mind. There were things 
to buy and things to rent, and a pressure 
suit would he lighter than the air pressure 
and heat controls of the cabin. He could 
rip them out. There was emergency wiring 
already built in to take care of heating the 
control panel. 

THE MAN who rented him the suit was 
friendly and conversational, and overly interested in what Mike wanted it for. 

"Going up to take pictures," Mike said. 
"What's the suit's pressure range? How 
much can it take?" 

"Eight pounds to the square inch, I calculate. Enough for vacuum if you want. 
Want me to look up the safety factor?" 
The man's eyes glittered. "No chance of 
you wearing it near vacuum is there?" If 
he found out Mike's plans, he would 
probably not rent the suit. 

"Not much," Mike said laconically, 
stowing it hastily in the back of his car 
and climbing into the creaking front seat. 
"Thanks anyhow." 

He drove away hurriedly to pick up 
oxygen and helium breathing cylinders and 
fuel. He would have to test the suit himself. Tiie soap-bubble test was old and 
simple. When he arrived home he took 
down Jimmy's bubble pipe solution froir 
the kitchen shelf and diluted it with twe 
quarts of water. Upstairs he could heat 
the sound of the vacuum cleaner. 

Sally came down stairs and looked intc 
the kitchen when he was half through testing the suit. "You're dripping water or 
the floor," she said. Her voice soundec 
,distant and tinny through the earphones 
and again he saw that she was restraining 
her curiosity from questions, not wanting 
to butt in, and he was grateful. 
^ He smiled at her through the narrow fac 
plate. "Pour some on my back and watel 
for bubbles." Slowly he ran the pressur 



HIGH FLIGHT 



6^ 



up to seven pounds relative. His eardrums 
tautened and he swallowed steadily to keep 
his eustachion tubes open and pressurefree. As the pressure climbed, the sound 
of his breathing and moving grew abnormally loud within the helmet, while the 
joints in his arms and legs tended to 
stiffen out, all except the left knee, which 
perversely showed a tendency to bend. The 
suit's joints were accordion pleated evenly 
on both sides to balance pressure push, but 
no pleating ever balanced perfectly. Mike 
walked up and down a little, getting used 
to the oddity. Sally sloshed water on the 
outside and watched carefully. 

"No bubbles," she reported. 

He released a valve, and pressure began 
to fall slowly. 

"Anything else I can do, Mike?" Her 
curiosity surged up. "Where are you going in that thing?" 

"Up to get some pictures of the space 
ship take-off." He smiled cheerfully, listening to his voice — too loud and close inside the helmet — and hearing the sudden 
irregular catch in the regular hiss of the 
filter bellows as they registered the telltale 
catch and shift in the regular rhythm of 
breathing which instinctively accompanies a 
lie, or a fear of the results of one's words. 
"I want some shots of the ship dropping 
its step rocket." 

She knew more than he had expected. 
"That's pretty high, Mike, past the bottom 
of the ionosphere. It's hot up there, isn't 
it?" 

"Not very," Mike mumbled, hoping she 
wouldn't remember radiation and ionization. "Atmosphere's pretty thin up there. 
Not much gas around to get hot." 

She smiled. "Well look out for that first 
molecule — it's a scorcher!" 

He saw with relief that she was kidding ; 
she didn't think that there was anything to 
be afraid of. 

As the pressure dropped the last fevv» 
ounces to normal he felt a slight dizziness. 
Then the suit collapsed, deflated and 



draped in baggy folds around his wrists 
and ankles, and Sally helped him take il 
off. Mike knew how a pressure suit would 
feel now. He set to work on the F-180 
w ith a slight queaainess in his stomach. 

The ionosphere would be hot. Not just 
temperature but ionization to build up unpredictable electrical charges within the instruments and upset their readings, and 
not just ionization, but hard radiation from 
the sun and space, cosmic rays to pierce 
his ship and generate secondary and dangerous radiation in the metals of the motor 
— and all he wanted was a few measily 
pictures just up a hundred miles. The guys 
he wanted to take pictures of were trying 
to go all the way. He would be a fine yellow-livered explorer if he couldn't even 
get high enough to watch. 

He was working hard, loosening holts 
and stripping off superfluous parts, removing unnecessary weight, trying to save 
every ounce of fuel. As he worked he 
weighed what he look off and entered it 
carefully in a notebook. The morning 
passed swiftly. 

Sally came out and sat on the back steps 
watching his hair. When Mike leaned on 
the ship his hair rose abruptly and stood 
stiffly on end. When he stepjied back it 
subsided. 

After a while she spoke. "Lunch is out. 
Don't look now but your hair is standing 

on end." 

"If it were dark I'd have a halo," Mike 
told her. "Honest Injun." He climbed 
meekly down, switched off the high voltage 
surface film that was playing tricks with 
his hair and went in to eat. 

He ale hurriedly, avoiding Sally's eye, 
and went back to work without lingering. 

The kids came home for lunch and hung 
around the ship chanting. "Take us for a 
ride, huh pop. take us for a ride." 

"Go to school," he answered absently 
without looking up, "Go to school." They 
chanted into the house to tease Sally for 
something and left him alone. He wa» 



64 



SUPER SCIENCE STORIES 



working faster. The deadline grew closer, 
but the work was almost finished. 

In late afternoon, a few minutes before 
deadline, it was finished. He rolled the 
plane to the midblock runway, and Sally 
helped him into his pressure suit and gave 
him a boost as he climbed at last into the 
cabin of the curiously bare and changed 
plane. 

He waved Sally to stand clear, and she 
moved back calling, "Good luck Mike! Get 
some good — " 

The jets caught and the hissing rumble 
drowned the rest of what she said, though 
he could see her Hps still moving as she 
waved. He threw her a kiss and then concentrated on the plane as it began to roll. 
He needed a good smooth take oft. Every 
drop of fuel would count. 

THE long line of familiar landmarks 
flashed by, gaining speed, then 
dropped out of sight as the F-1S0 
lifted. Houses ahead and below dwindled 
to toy houses, brown and green fields 
shrank away below him. Far below and 
small he saw route thirty-six, a long highway of cars crawling in a glinting beaded 
chain towards the city. Farther away the 
city, its toy buildings sharp-etched in sunlight and late afternoon shadows, and all 
around him. swinging to gigantic distance, 
the wide curve of the blue and green 
clouded earth. 

The naval station was to his right and 
below, crisscrossed runways of white concrete showing up dimly, like chalk marks 
on slate. The plane passed up through a 
thin layer of fog marking a temperature 
edge, and the landscape was obscured from 
sight. 

Mike pressed the stud that fired the 
auxiliary rockets. There was a moment's 
lag, time enough to remember that they 
had been growing dusty in his cellar for 
eight years, and then the rockets coughed 
into action with a welcome roar, and the 
plane surged forward, climbing faster, ac


celeration pressing him against the back ol 
the seat. The air grew colder and thinnet 
in the cabin, and he clamped the air helmet 
over his head and turned on the wiring ol 
his suit. It answered with a wave o) 
warmth. 

Time passed. 

The shutter of the movie camera clicked 
mechanically, taking a frame of Earth below every second. The normal speed playback would exaggerate his speed of clime 
to an incredibly swift upward rush, giving 
a feeling of having been taken from th* 
moon rocket itself. 

Air thinned to a curve of faint blue 
arched across the nearing blackness oi 
space. Somewhere in the clouded vast 
curve of the planet below was the naval 
station where the men who were to reach 
the moon said their farewells and wenl 
aboard lo their stations. 

Mil(e checked his height and position 
again agamst the local radio directional 
signals and satisfied himself that he was on 
coursei The great rocket ship would pass 
within a mile ,of him. It would make a 
good movie — the swift upward rush of the 
camera eye from earth, the sudden sight of 
the moon rocket climbing, gaining, rushing 
closer, looming hugely and suddenly separating into two parts, the great belt of 
booster rockets falling and the slim rocket 
remaining, darting onward and dwindling 
out of sight. 

Carefully he set the movie camera to a 
whir of normal speed, shifted the angle of 
the camera lens and sighted it along the 
way the great rocket would come. He had 
mounted the camera in an old universal 
'gun mount. Its automatic controls would 
do the rest, and the corrected radar gunsight would swing the camera eye to follow as the ship rushed by. 

The instruments were beginning to 
waver and the color of the sky began te 
shimmer slightly. This was the ionosphere 
a place of charged, stripped, fast moving 
atoms *nder bombardment from the hard 



HIGH FLIGHT 



65 



radiation of space. Mike picked up an improvised switch at the end of an extension 
cord and turned on a generator transformer 
which would create — he hopetf— a skin of 
high voltage electricity over the surface of 
the ship, to fend off outside electrical distrubance. It was a, homemade gimmick, 
and he switched it on with a small prayer 
and a kick in the shins for himself, for he 
had included some extra coils on a half 
worked out idea of polarizing the ion flow, 
and he realized now that the coils ,could 
work backward and polarize or disturb the 
ship instead. He had chosen a poor time 
to experiment. It could bollix everything 
up. 

A miniature gasoline motor began a 
steady pjut pfitt behind him as it began to 
spin the generator wheel. Above and almost ahead, shining through the cowling, 
was the half moon, growing brighter and 
clearer as the air thinned and the sky darkened. For a moment Mike's heart leaped, 
and then he made himself remember that 
if he were one of the crew, piloting the 
navy rocket to the moon, he would not aim 
towards the moon, but point farther east 
to a blank space in the sky where the moon 
would be in three and a half more days. 

The gasoline motor pfut-pfittted steadily 
and its heavy generator wheel spun faster, 
accelerating slowly upward from a hum to 
a shrilling whine. As he noticed it, the 
whine separated slowly from the background noise of the rocket jets and sounded 
its smooth high note as if it were right 
inside his helmet. The note climbed, hung 
for an instant at the limit of audibility in a 
thin note that vibrated his skull and then 
passed upward out of hearing range leaving 
his ears buzzing. 

MIKE shook his head uneasily as if a 
bee had been flying inside his helmet and 
glanced at the instrument panel. 

It was all wrong. 

For an instant he studied it, trying to 
make sense and pattern out of the changed 



readings. The sky seemed to have darkened, suddenly. A harsh lance of sunlight 
struck through the canopy and splashed 
across the panel. He blinked, dazzled, and 




66 



SUPER SCIENCE STORIES 



adjusted the rotation of his polaroid face 
plate to see clearly dials whose pointers 
still swung slowly at insane readings. From 
the corners of his eyes he noticed that some 
large object seemed to be approaching. 

Something approaching? 

Mike glanced up at jet black nothingness studded with blazing stars. Black! To 
one side hung a huge sunlit object. He 
was passing it. 

It was hanging in space, white and sunlit 
and very jagged and beautiful, like the enlarged photograph on Mike's study wall at 
home. 

The moon. 

While Mike looked he passed the moon 
on the left. 

AUTOMATICALLY he pushed left 
rudder. Rudders don't work in 
space. He groped and grabbed a 
handle that was the unused jet deflector. 
It was stuck. He yanked again. It wouldn't 
budge. Mike remembered theoretical space 
technique. He cut the left auxiliary. 

Without any feeling of the ship turning, 
the vista of stars began to turn, slowly, 
spinning around him until the bright moon 
came into view again on his left — until it 
was almost directly before him. The sun 
came into sight again from below the edge 
of the cockpit and shone blindingly into his 
eyes, so that he shut them for the moment. 
The sun wiped a burning hand across his 
face. Eyes closed, Mike counterspun the 
double layeied polaroids of the face plate 
to where they cross-filtered out almost all 
light. When it clicked into the setting he 
opened his eyes again. Everything was 
deep purple through the face plate and a 
deep purple moon expanded directly before 
him, growing tremendous. His turn seemed 
to have straightened out. 

Mike made no estimate of his speed. 
That way lay insanity. He mused. If the 
main jet were cut. the right auxiliary could 
have a chance to swing the ship in a tighter 
curve that might miss the moon. Mike cut 



the main jet. The right auxiliary was lefi 
operating alone. It chose that moment tc 
cough and then catch on again, threateningly. 

Like an expanding picture on a screen 
the moon exploded, coming at him with incredible speed. He was sweeping in at an 
angle now, passing mountains, craters, 
cliffs, closer and larger, a great bright 
plain sweeping by dizzyingly, crevices, 
boulders, juts of rock. He was going tc 
crash. The ground blurred and Mike 
closed his eyes. One second left. 

Now he'd never find out what the hell 
was going on. 

The auxiliary coughed again and 
stopped. Nothing else seemed to happen. 
He should be dead now. Mike opened his 
eyes, and understood the odd sensation 
around his, waist, he was hanging forward 
by his^beU strap. The ship was stopped 
almost vertically, nose down on the moon. 
It didn't look especially dented. Something 
small was swinging in front of Mike's face, 
hard to identify in the deep purple light. 
He grabbed and captured it. It was the 
generator "switch, swinging at the end of 
its extension cord. The pjJlt-pfut-pj^t^ng 
still sounded in his ears. 

"Drink me," Mike said. He switched it 
off. 

The F-180 began to shift balance, and 
slowly, gracefully toppled onto its back and 
lay upside down with the canopy denting 
slightly. 

"One-sixth gravity," said Mike, upside 
down, though he knew he shouldn't talk 
to himself. 

He extricated* himself, his air hose, and 
its gas cylinders and climhed out. He stood 
on rocky ground. There was a whitish film 
of dust over the rocks and the film rose in a 
slight cloud when he moved his feet and 
then settled, sifting down into crevice: 
among the broken rocks. He looked up 
Before him, cold lava plains rippled into i 
distance, where, starkly black and white 
upthni»t the cliffs of a erat«r. 



HIGH FLIGHT 



67 



"Moon," said Mike inside his helmet. 

Outside he knew there was no sound — 
could be no sound. He kicked a stone. It 
felt heavy and solid, but it flew away in 
slow rising curve as if he had thrown it, 
and landed without sound. 

"One-sixth gravity," Mike said. The 
sun was burning into his back through the 
padded suit. 

He stepped back into the shadow of the 
F-180 and began working to take off the 
detachable auxiliaries. In a few moments 
he had them free and was using them to 
batter and free the fused jet deflection 
vanes. He didn't believe he could do the 
next thing, but it was easy — he heaved the 
plane right side up and pointed it towards 
a small slice of earth that showed in the 
western sky between two monstrous spires 
of moon mountains. 

He tossed his .air cylinders into the cabin, 
climbed in after them fast, and turned the 
switch on the extension cord before settling 
into the pilot's seat. Ahead was the Earth, 
hard to miss because of its snaring gravitational field. In the tanks, according to the 
gauges, were twelve minutes worth of fuel. 

Ridiculous 1 

MIKE was late to dinner. The kids 
were upstairs watching television 
and Sally had switched on the 
landing lights and was washing the dishes 
when she heard the F-180 whistle in gently. 

She had his place laid at the kitchen 
table when he came in and kissed her. 

"Evening Mike, what's wrong with your 
face ?" * 

He realized it was throbbing. "Sunburn." He thought and modified that. 
"Hard sunburn, radiation burn." 

"I'll take care of that after you have 
supper. Any pictures of the rocket, Mike?" 

"Not a one." He sat down and began to 
eat slowly, thinking. 

He visualized himself reporting what had 
happened. Disbelief, laughter, experts dismissing his movie film as a fake, patent 



engineers asking him how and why, and 
himself, unable to answer, standing tonguetied and baffled before the assembled cameras of the world. Not on his life ! 

Mike finished dinner and went to bed 
with an electronics text, while Sally rubbed 
ointments on his throbbing skin and made 
soothing noises. 

After work the next day he took photographs and measurements of his coils and 
that night went to the library and attacked 
the latest reports on atomic structure and 
field theory. His mathematics was rusty 
and the books were baffling at first, but he 
came back the next night and the next, and 
gradually, with the books and reports 
stacked around him, the rusty theoretical 
training began creakingly to come alive 
again, and a theory began to grpw. Inertia 
had something to do with the swirl of motion within the atom. Gyroscope effect was 
more basic than had been known. 

He was writing down ideas and tentative 
formulas. It was the fourth day and his 
face still throbbed with sunburn. 

A stir, and whisper was running through 
the reading room of the library, in covert 
defiance of the silence signs. The man 
reading next to him leaned over and whispered : ' 

"Radio report. The Navy rocket 
crashed on the moon." 

Mike leaned closer. "Anything else 
known?" 

"Four survivors. Not enough intact air 
tanks. Six hours to live." 

There was nothing else to the report. 
Mike sat still for a minute, then gathered 
up his books, deposited them at the return 
window and left. In a drug store he looked 
up the phone number of the chief physicist 
on the Navy project and dialed. Someone 
answered. 

"Yes?" 

"Doctor Fishberg?" 
"Yes." 

"Sorry to disturb you, but it's important. 
Life or death. What would you say if I 



68 



SUPER SCIENCE STORIES 



told you that I have a way of reaching the 
moon in time to save those men?" 

He was answered by the click of the 
connection being cut. 

"That's what T thought you'd say," Mike 
said gently, hanging up. 

He stepped out in the street again and 
looked up. It was nine p.m. and dark on 
the east coast of the North American continent of the Earth upon which he stood, 
hut out there in space the bright glare of 
daylight bathed three quarters of the near 
side of the round moon, and in that bright 
daylight four men waited to be rescued, listening hopefully to the dim, wavering radio 
voices of Earth. 

He liked those guys. . . . He should have 
been up there with them, or part of their 
team on Earth, kidding with them over the 
radio. That reminded him of his own team, 
the mechanics who worked with him in the 
machine shop, and of the small amount of^ 
time he had left, so he stepped back into 
the drug store and phoned them, Jim first, 
then Smokey, then Jack. 

"I've got a way to save those Navy guys 
on the moon," he said each time. -They believed him. He gave them a list of things 
to get for the F-180, some of them impossible to get at that hour of the night without theft, and he gave them a list of things 
to do. Then he called Sally and told her 
what he had done four days ago. She was 
silent a moment. 

"So that's it. I was wondering when 
you'd tell me, Mike." 

She, too, believed him. 

When he got home she had the sunfiltering salve ready, and Jim, Smokey and 
Jack were installing a triple row of auxiliaries with great banging and grinding. 

Then it was eleven-ten, and everything 
was ready. 

Sally kissed him and put his helmet over 
his head. He was boosted into the plane 
and settled himself at the controls while 
the whole bunch wheeled it to the runway. 
He flipped the switch, the generator began 



to pfut-pfnt-pjnt in his ears. The floodlights went on, showing the long white 
concrete runway. Mike pressed all studs 
and the thunder of all the rocket jets blared 
out at once deafeninglv. A wrenching acceleration shoved him into the back of the 
seat. The long line of lighted houses 
whipped by, dropped below in an instant. 
He was airborne. Mike didn't need to check 
any dials this time. He swung the ship, 
pointed it west, straight at the moon. 

The transformer hum came into his helmet again the same odd sourceless sound to 
it, moved slowly up through the high 
reaches of pitch, growing thinner and thinner, and then suddenly passed beyond 
hearing, like a bubble blown up to ultimate 
tension, scattering to invisibility. 

HE DIDN'T have his new technique 
perfect as yet. He landed a little 
distance away, out of sight of the 
wreck, and walked over, carrying his air 
tanks under his arm. 

He walked around an upthrust of rock 
and stood for a while watching them. They 
sat in the shadow of the huge, wrecked 
spaceship. One was reading a comic magazine that was yellowing and curling as he 
turned the pages. Mike liked that. Another 
was using up his small store of oxygen idly 
chipping "Kilroy" onto a rock, and a third 
probably the skipper, was entering observations neatly in a log book. 
They saw him. 

"Hello boys." he said and walked forward. He could say anything he liked, they 
couldn't hear him. They had helmet radios 
and he didn't. "I'm glad to see you." 

When he had landed at LaGuardia Field 
the reporters were flashing bright bulbs in 
his face and shouting questions. "Name? 
What happened? How did you do it?" 

"Berganholm," he answered slowly, beginning the long session of bright lights and 
attention, and then the changed and new 
life as an engineer. "Michael Claud Berganholm." 



Who wai Jim Carrington that they should exert «o maeh effort to keep 
him in ignorance? 



ETERNAL E4RTHLINC 



No man could cross that sinister barrier without meeting 
the brain that had conceived 
it — a solid wall, made out of 
time itself! 



JIM CARRINGTON splashed in the 
waters of Hillsboro's only river, 
only a few feet away from the 
Wall, and taunted his playmates. None of 
them could swim, and once when he tried 
to push Jack Baker into the river his only 
response was violent fear. 



WALTER KUBILIUS 

69 



70 



SUPER SCIENCE STORIES 



"Fraidy cats!" Jim yelled. He saw a 
speckled trout swim by and then dove down 
for it. He bruised himself on the rocks in 
the river and as he scrambled upward the 
palm of his hand struck the bottom of the 
Wall. The palm oj Iris hand struck the 
bottom oj the Wall! It was no more than 
an inch thick and if he had wanted to he 
could have swum right under it, and into 
the forbidden Outside. 

"You know we're not supposed to be 
near the Wall," Baker said, "the radiation 
is liable to kill us." 

"Nuts," Jim said, scrambling up the 
grassy bank, "If there was any radiation. . . 
oh, forget it." He was about to say that 
if there was any actual atomic radiation 
outside the water would be poisonous and 
the fish would be contaminated and deadly. 
Yet he had been drinking that water and 
eating the fish as long as he could remember. There was no poison, even though 
they came from the forbidden Outside. 
Ergo, the schoolbooks were all wrong. 

He dressed quickly, picked up his textbooks and raced the boys back to Hillsboro. 
Pop was at the tractor wheel as usual, his 
farmer's eye upon that Sun which looked 
like a burning piece of paper plastered 
against the Wall. The Sun was 9^,000,000 
miles away, so the books said, but to Jim it 
still looked as if it were a part of the Wall. 

"Have a good time?" Pop asked. He always asked the same question in the same 
way, just as Mom always had their meals 
ready in the same way. "Oh, it was all 
right," Jim said, "but I sure hope that 
Baker would break his neck. He gives me 
a pain." 

He put his books in the barn and then 
did some of the farm chores, feeding the 
pigs, chickens, cows, and horses. "Pop," 
he asked when his father came back from 
the field, "why do you keep the horses 
since you never use them? You might as 
well sell them." 

Pop thought for a moment. "Don't 
rightly know," he said, "We farmers al


ways have horses. Do they bother you?*' 
"No, pop." 

OLD Doc Barnes, Hillsboro's one 
and only practitioner, visited the 
farm on the following night and 
put Jim through another one of his rigorous 
examinations. He listened to Jim's heart, 
took samples of his blood and sweat and 
examined them under a portable microscope and then made notations in a large 
black book that had Jim's name on the 
front cover. 

"Perfect health," Doc Barnes said as he 
unstrapped the pressure belt and started 
packing his instruments back into the three 
bags he brought with him. "As sound as 
Robinson's election program, and nothing 
wrong with you that fried steak and 
mashed potatoes can't cure." 

Jim dressed. "Why do you examine me 
so often?" he asked. 

Doc Barnes looked surprised. "Why, 
son, we've got socialized medicine now that 
Robinson's elected. It's the law, you know. 
Didn't you learn it in school?" 

"Yes, I know," Jim said, "but why is it 
you never examine Pop? He's a citizen, 
too. Yet you only worry about me." 

There was a flicker of doubt in the 
doctor's eyes and then the same, kind, 
cheerful voice. "Why, of course I do! 
You're simply not around when I examine 
your father and mother. In fact, I'm glad 
you reminded me so I can give them a good 
physical check-up. We nded it every month, 
you know." 

"Sure," Jim said. When the Doc went to 
Pop's bedroom an idea flashed through the 
boy's mind. In a sense it was spying, but 
the suspicion that something was wrong in 
Doc Barnes' hearty friendliness had long 
bothered Jim. It was nothing that he could 
identify. Was there something wrong with 
Jim that made the doctor so concerned with 
him? He spent two or three hours on 
Jim's monthly examination. At most he 
could examine five people a day, or a hun


ETERNAL EARTHLING 



71 



dred and fifty a month. A hundred and 
fifty a month! There were about 10,000 
people in Hillsboro and Doc Barnes was 
the only doctor he had ever heard of. 

He went quietly upstairs to the attic and 
pushed back a bookcase covering a wide 
crack in the floor. By bending down he 
could see through to the floor beneath and 
hear the conversation. 

"The boy has asked why I do not examine you," Doc Barnes was saying, his voice 
flat and monotonous, "We will stay here 
for a while to satisfy him." 

Then they remained sitting like stone 
statues in immovable chairs — Mom, Pop, 
and Doc Barnes. 

Jim crept silently down the stairs to the 
porch and waited patiently until Doc 
Barnes left the house. 

"Did you examine the folks?" Jim asked. 

"I sure did,*' Doc Barnes said, "Gave 
'em the most thorough examination I ever 
gave anybody. You can rest assured, son, 
there's not a thing wrong with them." He 
patted Jim on the shoulders and then went 
back to his car and rode in to town. Jim 
watched him go before going into the 
parlor. Doc Barnes did not stop at a single 
other farmhouse on the road. 

£ £ ~Y TERE'S today's paper, son," 
I 1 Pop said, giving him the copy 
of the Hillsboro Daily Chronicle. There was no world news on this 
January 15, 1993, and President Robinson 
and Vice-President Koshbino spent the day 
giving tedious reports on the economic recover)- program. It was the local news 
which hit Jim like a brick thrown into his 
face. Jack Baker was dead. He had fallen 
from a tree and broken his neck. Jim felt 
sick. 

"Sold the horses today," Pop said, 
"Made a good profit on them." 

"That's swell," Jim said, the words like 
sawdust in his mouth. His head was 
whirling. His eyes could no longer focus 
on the words of the newspaper and the 



vague suspicion he had long been feeling 

approached one more step towards final 
understanding. He knew Jack Baker who 
never swam and, what was much more 
important, never climbed trees, and the 
knowledge that he had wished for his death 
made him feel like a murderer. Like some 
rumbling out of a whirling void, he heard 
his father's voice, "How are you getting on 
at school?" 

"I hate it," Jim said, the tension in him 
breaking out and the accumulation of many 
doubts making themselves heard, "It's the 
other boys. I — I can't explain it. They 
either know too much, or not enough. 1 
think I could learn more by myself in th« 
library/' 

As soon as the anger broke, it flurried 
and died and soon the incident was forgotten. He did the chores around the farm 
and spent his free time swimming in the 
River at a spot where the banks widened 
near the Wall. He did not dive near the 
Wall, nor attempt to pass under it to the 
Outside where poisoned fumes and deadly 
gases scorched the ground and made one 
breath of air a sentence of death. Yet the 
water was clear and good. 

A few da}'s later Pop gave him a letter 
from the Board of Education for Hillsboro, 
It was a brief announcement declaring that 
because of increased tax contributions to 
the nation's 1 recovery program, Hillsboro 
had to reduce its appropriations for education. The school was hereby closed, and 
those students who wished could secure 
adult privileges at the Public Library where 
Miss Wilson would be glad to confer with 
them. 

It was the sort of privilege that Jim had 
long dreamed of. His hungry eyes had 
often feasted upon the long galleries of 
book shelves, all lined with thick layers of 
dust as if the knowledge of all the Earth 
had been stored here and forgotten. In 
their pages he would find the answers to 
Baker's death, the dishonesty of Doc 
Barnes, and perhaps even the mystery of 



72 



SUPER SCIENCE STORIES 



the Wall and what was really outside. 

Miss Wilson, head librarian for the 
adult division, was a thin, white-faced 
woman with the same kind of blank smile 
that Doc Barnes wore. She perched on 
ft high stool beside her desk at the entrance. 
"What would you like to read?" she asked, 
"I have here a very good book on natural 
history which you might like, or would 
you prefer some adult fiction? Here is a 
splendid — *' 

"If it's all right, I'd like to just look 
around for myself." 

" — -novel about farm life and how a 
young man developed a process that doubled 
his agricultural yield." 

"May I go in?" Jim asked, exasperated 
by the long lecture which droned from Miss 
Wilson's lips. She stopped suddenly, looked 
blankly at him as if listening to someone, 
and then smiled. 

"Of course. You can take out any books 
that you like. Do you know how to use 
the catalogue?" 

"Yes, yes." Jim said, hurriedly moving 
into the deserted library. The long rows 
of book stacks stretched almost endlessly 
through the huge vaulted chamber, J-im's 
nose twitched at the pleasant musty odor 
of age that clung about the cloth and 
leather-bound volumes. He studied some 
of the titles, pulled the books from the 
shelves and with a gusty breath blew off 
the layer of dust upon the fore-edge and 
flicked through the pages. The books of 
fiction, which occupied more than half the 
shelves, did not interest him. He wandered through the sections on science and 
particularly through the 900's where the 
history books were. Unlike the fiction 
books that were practically untouched, 
there were huge empty spaces in the 
shelves, bright exposed metal gleaming 
where numbers of books had been suddenly 
removed. 

On some of the books there were curious 
scratches upon the dusty covers, as if 
oddly shaped hands had picked them up 



and then decided to put them back upon 
the shelves. 

"Perhaps," Jim said, "the books about 
the Wall are classified separately." 

He went to the rows of catalogue 
drawers in the center of the library and 
pulled out the one labelled Wa-Wun. There 
were no books on the subject of the Wall 
or any little carrying information about it. 
There were several that carried the word 
"Outside" in them, but none of the books 
dealt with what Hillsboro meant when 
"Outside" was mentioned. He thought there 
might be some other term for "Wall" that 
he had not heard, and he began to look 
through the listings of "Screen," "Ceiling," "Barrier," "Barricade," and everything he could think of or find in the 
dictionaries. The catalogue seemed to be 
thorough, even though quite a number of 
the index cards had been ripped out, as 
he could tell by the scraps of paper remaining, but there was nothing about 
the Wall in any of them. 

Dismayed, he tried to be satisfied with 
a few history books and brought them to 
Miss Wilson for recording. 

She glanced at the titles, smiled brightly, 
and stamped the due dates on his card. 
"Find everything you want?" she asked. 

"No," he said, somewhat angry as he 
slipped the books under his arm, "I couldn't 
find anything about the Wall." 

Her smile faded. "The Wall?" 

"Yes," he exclaimed, irritated at what 
was clearly some sort of effort to hide the 
truth from him, "The Wall, Ceiling, 
Dome, whatever you want to call it, that's 
all around Hillsboro. Why doesn't anyone 
ever mention it? I wouldn't have even 
known it was there if I didn't go swimming near it. There's not a single book 
about it in the whole library." 

Miss Wilson regained her compusure. 
"Of course there is," she said very sweetly 
as if talking to an unreasonable child, 
"Have you tried the catalogue?" 

"Yes, and there's no card for it." 



ETERNAL EARTHLING 



7$ 



"You must be mistaken," she said. "I'll 
help you look for it when you return next 
week." 

"Sure," Jim said, certain that some sort 
of excuse would be found. He sensed the 
existence of a strange conspiracy. What 
was there to hide? 

46 S "5 OP," he asked after the evening 
chores were done and they -were 

* seated on the porch, listening to 
the crickets and watching the clouds roll 
by the face of the moon, "Just what is 
the Wall?" 

Pop put down his paper and looked 
speculatively off toward the horizon were 
the translucent Wall dug- into the earth 
just beyond that line of hills. "It's been 
there long before you was born," he said, 
"Sort of a defense against the Outside, 
if I remember rightly." 

"What's Outside?" Jim asked quietly. 

Pop picked up his paper and started 
reading to show that he didn't feel like 
talking much. "Heck, everybody knows 
that. Poison gas and gamma radiations 
and stuff like that. It'd kill everybody 
if it got in." 

Jim thought of the clean fresh water 
and the healthy fish thai flowed from under 
the Wall. He wanted to ask Pop but the 
newspaper was now a barrier between 
them. 

There was not enough light to read by 
so Jim looked out across the fields and 
up to the inverted Dome through which 
the stars could be seen. There seemed to 
be peace and contentment outside and 
not the death and horror his father hinted 
at. When Pop left the porch Jim took 
his place under the lamp and read through 
the history books. Most of them were very 
old, dating back to 1970. Since there was 
no mention of the Wall in them or the 
atomic wars which made the Wall necessary, Jim concluded that the Wall was 
built between 1970 and '75, when he was 
bora. 



■ Jim picked up the next book, "History 
of the United Nations," published in 1992. 
It was only one year old yet had the 
strange appearance of great age, the pages 
stained and crinkly. He looked closely at 
the title page and read the small print 
that made his heart pound. "Ninth edition," the tiny letters said, "Revised and 
corrected by the author, January 2039." 

It's a misprint, Jim reasoned, for this 
is only 1993. Nevertheless he turned hastily towards the back pages and began 
reading : 

F. T. Robinson, during whose presidential 
administration the United Nations secured a 
lasting peace, died in a rocket crash in 
2001. Koshbino served as president until 
the expiration of his term in 2002, and the 
election of Gliafa Benjamin occurred the 
following year. 

During Ghafa's administration the Planet 
Commission continued its efforts to build a 
successful extra-galactic vessel but these 
were without success until 2038. 

The gradual elimination of farming communities, begun during Robinson's term as 
president, continued under the new administration. The artificial manufacture of food 
by reprocessing industrial waste had revolutionized social customs, particularly in 
the frequent distressing economic dislocations — 

J«n Carrington put the book aside, 
bewildered by the massive history of great 
events which were yet to occur. President 
Robinson was alive, for he had seen his 
calm, dignified face on the television screen 
many times. As for the artificial manufacture of food supposedly convulsing the 
nation's economy, there was not the 
slightest evidence of it in Hillsboro. Pop 
plowed the field with his tractor and the 
wheat, oats, and rye were delivered to 
town where they were stored in warehouses, presumably for shipment to other 
Wall-surrounded cities. If food could be 
manufactured, there was no point in growing it here. If it could not be manufactured 
then the history book was some sort of 
fraud. 

He hurriedly skimmed through the pages 
searching for some reasonable explanation. 
The more he read, the more confused he 



74 



SUPER SCIENCE STORIES 



became. There was no mention of any 
world-wide atomic conflagration in 1970 
and not the slightest indication anywhere 
that Wall-enclosed cities existed or were 
ever considered. « 

There were creaking sounds in the driveway and Jim looked up to see Doc Barnes' 
battered car come to a stop. The medic 
waved to him, and then came puffing up the 
porch steps. "Evenin*, Jim," he said, 
"Thought I'd drop by and say hello." 

"Pop and Mom are in the parlor if you 
want to see them." 

Doc Barnes eased himself with a grunt 
in the porch rocking chair and wiped his 
sweating forehead with a rumpled handkerchief. "Nothing important," he said, 
"just returning from a call and thought 
I'd drop by and rest a while." He glanced 
around him and saw the books on the 
floor beside Jim. "Been reading a lot, 
son ?" 

"Yes," Jim said cautiously, "a couple 
of history books." 

"Never could see anything interesting 
in history," Doc Barnes said, "I always 
felt the physical sciences had more challenge in them. There's nothing more 
thrilling than examining a bug under a 
microscope. Come down to my lab sometime and I'll show you some fascinating 
aspects of scientific research." 




OC BARNES talked on and the 
guarded suspicion which Jim felt 
gradually faded away. He scarcely 



understood half the words the doctor used 
in explaining the anatomy of atoms and 
how molecular velocities could be measured. 

"History has no meaning," Doc Barnes 
said, "and you'll never find truth there. 
Study the sciences where all evidence can 
be weighed and measured. It's the only 
road to truth." 

"What is the Wall?" Jim asked suddenly. 

"Crushed matter," Doc Barnes said unhesitatingly, "It's a mixture of bare nuclei 



and free, unattached electrons. Ordinarilj 
such an electronic gas would expand and 
dissipate but for layers of transparent 
matter which keep it within set confines 
The wall is then completely inpenetrablt 
to everything but harmless sun and starlight, and yet it can be touched withou' 
danger. It was built in 1975, during th< 
planet-wide war which rendered so mucr 
land radioactively dangerous." 

"If that's true," Jim said, knowing tha; 
the moment of decision had come, "whj 
is it there's no mention of the Wall oi 
even the war in this history book?" 

He opened the book triumphantly anc 
passed it over to the Doctor. He did nol 
know the elements of the conspiracy, bui 
he was sure that Doc Barnes was part ol 
it. The Wall was an important elemenl 
of their lives yet there was never any 
mention of it in the Library which was 
supposed to hold the sum of human knowledge. Doc Barnes' face was set and hard 
as he read the pages that Jim opened before him. He flipped the leaves, glancing 
at the years marked at 'the head of each 
page— 1970— 1980— 1990— 1995— 20002035. It was not only a history of the 
past, it was a history of the future as 
well, and nowhere was there any mention 
of the Wall. 

"What year is this?" Jim demanded 
Here at last was his chance to grope with 
the mystery of his life. Who was he? Whal 
was he? As a boy he remembered nothing 
but Pop and Mom in the Hillsboro farm 
but as he grew older he began to realize 
certain inconsistencies. His slightest wishes 
seemed to become automatic law. He recalled how Doc Barnes seemed to live only 
to look after Jim, and how the whole towr 
of Hillsboro was joined in a conspiracy 
to keep him in ignorance of certain things 
Perhaps he was imagining these things — 
but they had become too frequent. Thi! 
book was the first proof he had found foi 
his suspicions. It clearly proved that no 
only was there no Atomic War and n< 



ETERNAL EARTHLING 



75 



need for a Wall, but that even the date was 
a lie. 

"What year is this?" he demanded again. 
"1993, of course," Doc Barnes said, uneasily. 

"Then what is this book?" Jim asked, 
almost violently, "Is it possible to foretell 
the future?" 

"Of course not," Doc Barnes said, "the 
future is closed to us. As for this book, 
I'm sorry that it disturbed you for it is 
obviously a hoax. It was probably published 
as some sort of college thesis in speculative 
history. That is frequently done in some 
of the universities, the idea being to test 
the applicant and see whether he has 
mastered the various thories of social history. Economic and anthropologic factors 
as determinants in history are considered 
quite valid in some colleges. Incidentally, 
Jim, would you like to go to college a year 
or so from now ? I have some friends at 
Harvard and they might accept you." 

Jim tore the book from Doc Barnes' 
hands. "You're not telling me the truth!" 
he said hotly. "This is no Ph. D. thesis 
or even any attempt at hoaxing somebody. 
It's a textbook, pure and simple, only it's 
a textbook from the future that does not 
mention any Atomic War or any Wall 
around Hillsboro or any other place. Why 
isn't the Wall mentioned anywhere else? 
I've looked through all the history books 
in the library and nowhere is the Wall even 
hinted at. Why?" 

"Oh come now," Doc Barnes said, 
reaching into his medical kit and fumbling 
for some instrument. I'm sure you're mistaken. When you visit the library again, 
ask one of the attendants to help you." 

Jim watched Doc Barnes' hand come 
out of the black bag. Between fore and 
index fingers was the transparent body 
of a hypodermic, with thumb securely 
placed against the plunger. 

"What are you going to do?" Jim asked, 
becoming afraid. 

"Nothing important," Doc Barnes said, 



"These are some vitamins. They will help 
improve your appetite." 

"My appetite is all right," Jim said, 
slowly standing up and stepping back to 
the porch wall. Doc Barnes also arose and 
stepped near him. 

"Don't be afraid," Doc Barnes said, 
"This won't hurt at all." 

Jim ducked beneath the upraised arm, 
kicking aside the books that littered the 
porch. He was not fast enough and Doc's 
arm plunged down and the needle jabbed 
into his shoulder. "Pop ! Mom !" he 
screamed, and then tumbled into darkness. 

IN THE morning Jim arose and had 
breakfast with Pop, wondering if the 
events of last night were only a dream. 
"Doc Barnes was here last night," he said 
to his father. 

"Yeah?" Pop said, "I didn't hear him." 
"We had a long talk," Jim said doubtfully, "I— I think I fainted." 

"Maybe you been reading too much," 
Pop said, "You looked all right when I 
saw you go to bed." 

Jim finished the rest of his meal in 
silence. On the porch he picked up four 
library books, the fifth being missing, and 
returned them to the Library. 

Instead of Miss Wilson there was a 
young, round-faced man in steel gray suit 
at the recording desk. He took Jim's books 
and stamped his library card. 

"She's no longer here," he said in answer to Jim's question, "The Board transferred her to another library. Inefficient, 
I understand, for many of the books were 
misplaced on the shelves and entered incorrectly in the catalogue." 

Jim took his card and looked on the 
"due" list. "I still have one book home," 
he said. 

The librarian shook his head. "You must 
be mistaken. You've returned all the books 
listed on your card. What is the title?" 

"History of the United Nations." 

The librarian studied a list before him. 



:-6 



SUPER SCIENCE STORIES 



"I'm sorry, but there's no such book listed. 
Do you know when it was published?" 

Jim bit his lip. "2038." 

The librarian smiled, "You are joking, 
of course." 

Knowing further talk would be useless, 
Jim went into the library. That book would 
never be found, he knew, for Doc Barnes 
had taken it. The "vitamin" injection 
was only a sedative to enable the doctor 
ro steal the book and make Jim think the 
whole incident a dream. The new librarian 
was also part of the conspiracy around 
him, just as Miss Wilson had been. He 
had learned one thing in his talk with Doc 
Barnes, and that was not to trust anyone. 
For all he knew every man and woman 
in Hillsboro, not excepting his own father 
and mother, was part of that mysterious 
alliance to keep him from learning the 
truth — whatever that truth might be. 

He went to the catalogue drawers, determined to make one final search for some 
book that might have a passing reference 
to the Wall or the Atomic War that necessitated its construction. The chance 
remark of the new librarian that Miss 
Wilson was inefficient had prepared him 
for the shock. One-third of the Wa-Wun 
catalogue, drawer was filled with index 
cards listing various books about the Wall. 

He . went to the shelves in the History 
Department and the formerly empty spaces 
were now filled with brightly bound new 
books printed on clean, glossy paper. Their 
title pages were all stamped, "Copyright, 
1993." 

There was no dust on any of them. Before he opened any of the pages he knew 
these books would contain only the sort 
of information "they" wanted him to be- • 
lieve. He read : 

In 1970. after the outbreak of the disastrous Inter-continental Atomic War which 
depopulated the world, construction of Wallenclosed cities began. Thanks to the Wall, 
which is impervious to atomic attack or 
radiation, civilization has been permitted to 
rarvfve. Today, in 1993, only a handful of 



Valt-enclosed cities remain to carry on 
jian's struggle for self-preservation on a 
planet continually swept by atomic storms 
whose deadly fumes are held back only by 
the Wall— 

Jim thought of the clean, fresh watei 
that flowed from under the Wall, and pul 
the book back on the shelf. Only the first 
book had told the truth. There had been 
no Atomic War and the Wall was nrjl 
designed to keep poison fumes out, but tc 
keep htm »i Hillsboro. 

Why? There was no one that Jim coulc 
ask, for everyone was part of that in 
definable, mysterious group which he coulc 
only call they. What was their purpose! 
Who was Jim Carrington that they shoulc 
exert so much effort to keep him in igno 
ranee ? He thought he had enough evidena 
in the history hook with which to confrnn 
them and demand an explanation, but Do< 
Barnes had taken it away from him. Verj 
well, then, he would find additional proo 
and when he confronted them with then 
lies, they would be forced to tell the truth 

THAT evening Doc Barnes carm 
again to visit him. "J ust though 
I'd pass by," the doctor said as he 
sat down upon the porch rocking chair 
"Hadn't see you for some time. Been feel 
ing all right ':" 

Jim nodded. "Funny thing," he said 
"I had a queer dream about you last night.' 

Doc Barnes fanned himself. "Dream: 
have very little significance. I would jus 
forget about it." 

"Doc," Jim said slowly, "if I askec 
you an important question, would you give 
me an honest answer ? You know thai 
last night was no dream, and I know it 
Would you answer just one question 
honestly ?" 

The doctor kept on fanning himself as 
he looked out across the field to where the 
stars could be seen through the invisible 
Wall. 

"What's your question, Jim?" he asked 
not turning to look into Jim's eyes. 



ETERNAL EARTHLING 



77 



"Tell me," Jim said, "am I— am I different from everybody else?" 

The aurora borealis could be seen, its 
brilliant colors like some curtain hanging 
over Hillsboro. Both Doctor and boy 
stared at it. 

"Why do you ask?" 

" 'Cause T feel it." 

Doc Barnes considered this and asked, 
with a strange note of regret in his voice, 
"You're not happy here?" 

Jim shook his head, not daring to speak. 

"Then what do you want?" 

Jim pointed to the aurora whose vivid 
colors seemed to be draped somewhere 
halfway between the horizon and the dome 
of the never seen but always-sensed Wall. 

"I want to go Outside," Jim said, knowing now what it was that had rankled 
within him for so many years. "I want to 
see what is on the other side of the Wall." 

There was a sad expression on Doc 
Barnes face, as if he knew what was there 
but could not voice his knowledge. It was 
not a thing that inspired fear or horror — 
as a world, wracked with atomic poisons 
might — but something which was sad and 
lonely. 

"I'm sorry-," Doc Barnes said. There 
was nothing more to add, for in the doctor's inflection Jim could hear the refusal 
which they gave to his request for permission to leave Hillsboro. 

"A41 right," Jim said, pretending to 
resign himself to the doctor's unwillingness 
to tell him the nature of the truth. He 
knew that if he were ever to learn the 
reason for the secrecy and deception he 
would find it only Outside — on the other 
side of the Wall. 

When Doc Rarnes had left and Jim was 
in bed, the plan slowly formed in his mind. 
The Carrington house was located on the 
outskirts of Hillsboro, only a few miles 
from the Wall itself. The aurora had died 
and there was no moon that night. He 
could reach the Wall within a few hours. 

Jim crawled out of bed and dressed 



quickly and then climbed out of his window 
to step gingerly upon the porch. He jumped 
to the soft ground and then headed for the 
river. Despite the darkness he walked 
rapidly and after three hours reached the 
point where the river flowed from underneath the Wall. 

Jim stood on the brink for a moment, 
calculating the risks he took, and then 
plunged downward. He held his breath 
as he slid down against the glass-like 
substance of the Wall, his fingers clutching 
for the edge. He found it, gripped tight 
and pulled himself through against the 
rapid river current. Something slapped 
in his face, he kicked at the vague shadow 
in horror and then remembered that it 
might be a fish. His lungs now starved 
for precious air, he started to rise. If Doe 
Barnes and the history books were correct, 
he would die with the first breath when he 
reached the surface, and eventually they 
would find his corrupted body in the bed 
of the stream. 

He kept on rising, and when his head 
broke the surface his lungs breathed in 
fresh, cool air. Pantingly he rested against 
the Wall, fighting the down-current that 
threatened to pull him back into Hillsboro. 
In the pitch darkness he could see nothing. 
After catching breath he pushed himself 
away from the Wall and swam towards 
where the river bank might be. His tired 
hands clutched at the shore and he dragged 
himself upward and then rested upon the 
grassy bank. 

While be lay there, breathing and waiting for the pounding of his heart to subside, 
he knew that the first step in his effort to 
find out the truth was successful. The 
Outside was not deadly. The air was 
fresh and clean, and nowhere around him 
could he see the atomic volcanos that were 
said to throw their deadly missiles against 
the Wall. He had no equipment to measure 
radiation, but if there were no deadly fumes 
and he was still alive, lie had a right to 
assume that the w'hole story was fictitioui 



SUPER SCIENCE STORIES 



78 

and there was no deadly radiation whatever. 

It was too dark for Jim to see any part 
of the horizon. A glimmer of moonlight 
shot through the clouds and for a moment 
Jim thought he saw a series of immense 
domes in the distance. The moon hid once 
more and again he was in total darkness. 
Placing his fingertips upon the wall he 
cautiously walked forward and found himself upon some curving embankment that 
rurkd upward around the Wall. In place 
of steps there were a series of deep indentations which made it difficult for him 
to secure good footing. He found at eye 
level against the Wall a rail which served 
as a sort of guide. Using this he drew 
himself along. 

WHEN the moon broke through 
again he was astonished to see the 
entire town of Hillsboro stretched 
before him as a sort of huge diorama. He 
could see clearly every single house and 
street and the familiar woodlands where 
he had played as a boy. 

The road on which Jim walked rose 
higher, still hugging the Wall and he knew 
that while he could see through the Wall 
into Hillsboro, vision was possible only in 
this one direction. He had often stared 
through this same section of Wall and seen 
only a vague haze which everyone assured 
him was only mist or fog. 

Hillsboro, from the height where he 
stood, did not look like New York or 
Moscow, or any of the other really big 
cities of the Earth which he had seen 
pictured in some of the older history books. 
Rather it had a bit of all of them, and 
he now understood who he was and why 
he was so important. 

The truth became evident when he 
reached up about one fourth of the height 
of the ramp, and touched the first of three 
small projections beneath the rail. 

As he did so a clear, sharp thought 
formed itself in his mind. 



Species: Man. 

He looked about him, thinking someon< 
had spoken. He touched the first level 
again. Once more the thought rang in hi: 
mind. 

Species: Man. 

This was some sort of telepathic communication, lie realized, and then touched 
the second lever. 

Habitat: Third Planet, Sun, Farm aret 
in temperate zone of northern hemisphere 

Third lever. 

Special note: A remarkable feature o] 
this unique exhibit is the actual presence 
of a living, warm-blooded, oxygen-breathing Man among the Robot-Duplicate 
models. For many centuries the Museum 
had attempted to maintain living colonies 
but all experiments had failed. As the 
Third Planet became settled by colonists 
from . . . , Man specimens became increasingly difficult to obtain. It is believed that 
Jim Carrington, as the Man Specimen 
contained in this exhibit is named, is the 
last of his species, his small tribe having 
annihilated itself rather than submit to 
taming by . . . scientists. Jim Carrington 
u>as brought to . . . and this model constructed by the Museum directors. It is 
complete ivith Robot-Duplicate Models of 
all knenvn types of Man Specimens. The 
extraordinary skill uith which the exhibit 
zvas prepared is attested to by the fact that 
even at this moment the last living Man 
Specimen, Jim Carrington, is not mivre of 
the true situation. The model you see is a 
typical Earth community as it existed two 
hundred years ago. 

Jim Carrington knew who he was at 
last. There was a slithering motion on 
the ramp and he turned to face the Keeper 
of the Natural Habitat Zoo. 

Before he saw the alien, a last furtive 
thought-message thrust itself upon his 
mind : 

Caution! Do not feed or harbor escaped 
specimens. Deliver them immediately to 
the dissection chambers. 



THE 

UNFINISHED 

Star-roving conqueror of the universe — and slave of the little 
green hell wrested from a galaxy 
that cursed his birth . . . they 
battled to death over one little 
question: Who is Man? 

By FRANK BELKNAP 
LONG 



Down we swooped between towering walls 
of foliage. . . . 

THIS was the time we were exploring for the Larkin Museum, half 
across the Milky Way. We had 
rocket tube trouble, and had to land for 
repairs on a little green world a thousand light years from home. 

"We'll have to bring her down, son !" 
the old one said, glancing up sharply 
from the navigation dial. "Too bad, but 
there's no help for it!" 

I gave a booming laugh of disgust, 
thinking of the steamy jungles which 
were pretty much the rule on the inner 
planets of Class G Stars. Tall, gloomy old 

79 



80 



SUPER SCIENCE STORIES 



forests filled with rotting vegetation and 
vast swarms of stinging, blood-sucking 
insects. 

The old one was secretly happy about 
it. He liked to tramp the wild and feel 
the wind and rain on his face. Slowly as 
I stared at him he took on the unmistakable glow of a lad whose idea of paradise 
was to sit on a sun-dappled bank in the 
russet autumn, watching bait drift downstream and a beauty rising to his lure. 

He liked to explore, but was satisfied 
just to fish and hunt He could take root 
anywhere, like a hungry mass of leaven 
cheated of its birthright. He was happy 
enough in space, but he could never quite 
reconcile himself to the absence of growing things in the bridge room of a rocket 
ship. 

"It's been ages since I've lain on my 
back in a spruce forest, staring straight 
up at the stars." 

He grinned, a fleck of chew staining his 
jagged teeth. "Ages — and I'll trade you 
all the shining metal of the finest rocket 
ship ever built for one sniff of the good 
sweet earth. It's the same everywhere, 
on all the planets. The sea and the jungle!" 

"Sure, sure/' I said, to pacify him and 
keep him from bursting into song. "Paradise in the palm of your hand. Now if 
you'll just brace yourself and grab hold 
of that safety rail I'll try to bring her 
down without shaking you loose from 
your pipe dreams!" 

It was a smooth landing as landings go. 
Down we swooped between towering walls 
of foliage, golden yellow and burning 
emerald green, the viewscreen at my elbow coruscating in a dazzling burst of 
sunlight. 

My hands were steady on the controls, 
but for a moment I felt like a badly scared 
giant killer swinging down from a beanstalk that would have spanned the gulfs 
between the stars. I really did. Star 
rovers are linked to the world of child


hood in a great variety of ways, for they 
see the same strange hues everywhere 
they turn. 

The light that never was shines only 
for them, and even an old man married 
fifty years could put his arm around his 
wife and say, "Tomorrow I'll be in deep 
space, and your eyes will be as pretty as 
misty moons swimming in a sea of gold." 

He could mean every word of it, too, 
because in space time seems to fall away, 
and your memories become the memories 
of youth, and you see everything as if for 
the first time through absolutely unspoiled 
eyes. 

I shook the feeling off with a gesture. 
"You can let go now!" I said. "We're 
resting at a tangent, but we couldn't be 
more firmly grounded if we were pushing 
-up daisies." 

He unhooked his arm from the rail 
and swabbed a perspiring brow. "You're 
a good pilot, son!" he said. "They don't 
come any steadier." 

I looked at him. "Well — we'd better 
go outside and check on the damage." I 
spoke gruffly, nodding toward- the vacuum 
port. "We won't need our oxygen masks. 
The atmosphere reading is a bit high, 
but we can take that in our stride." 

I was not unmindful of his compliment, 
hut it confused and embarrassed me to 
have him turn the searchlight on my competence. Sure I was a good pilot. Hadn't 
I crossed the galaxy twenty times, without losing a ship ? I was as proud of my 
record as the next man, but I saw no reason for shoulder thumping. 

A man needs all bis self-esteem in 
space, but it should be accepted as something to be put on like a shining garment 
and worn in silence. 

"Well, let's get going!" I said. 

We emerged from the vacuum port 
completely unarmed, carrying only a few 
necessary tools and expecting to b< 
greeted by a howling wind in an empty 
forest clearing. 



THE UNFINISHED 



81 



WE WERE greeted by a howling, 
all right. But it came from a 
familiar throat, and the wind that 
swept strong across the clearing made a 
moaning sound which was almost as painful to listen to. 

The man was down on his knees on the 
forest floor, howling in either rage or 
pain. There was a great red gash in his 
shoulder, and he was rolling his eyes 
about and slapping at the wound with his 
palms. 

I don't scare easily, but the sight was 
so unexpected that it jolted me back on 
my heels. 

I can't speak for the old one. He seemed 
calm enough as he stood staring at my 
side, a look of serene wonder in his eyes. 
Serene wonder ! Yes, that just about 
sums it up. There was an eternal childlike quality about him I've never seen 
equaled in man or intelligent beast. 

Nothing under the wheeling stars could 
really scare him, for he'd mastered the 
knack of accepting nature in all of her 
moods, the worst along with the best. 
Even atrocious pain and death he could 
accept as the dark side of a very bright 
and wonderful coin. 

The wounded man was plainly a savage. 
He wore no clothes, and there was a 
metal bracelet on his right ankle which 
jangled as he thrashed. He was tall and 
sturdily built, a powerful brute of an 
aborigine with a look of native intelligence 
about him which boded ill for his enemies. 

"Stay where you are, son ! I'll be right 
back!" 

The old one ducked quickly back into 
the vacuum port, leaving me alone with 
the brute. I looked down at the heavy 
magnetic wrench in my hand, my mouth 
as dry as death. I had a vision of myself 
under savage attack, bringing the blunt 
weapon down on the skull of one of my 
fellows. 

The vision sickened me. The poor devil 
was half-maddened by pain, and in my 



book a savage had a moral right to strike 
out blindly at anything that menaced his 
security. In his book I was a hostile 
stfanger from the sky. 

Why, I'd be a kind of murderer, even 
if he attacked me ! Oh, sure, I'm thinskinned and proud of it. The Larkin 
Museum didn't expect me to be a colonizing brute. All they wanted were records, 
archaeological, anthropological, semantic, 
for the greater glory of science. 

When T was a kid, knee-high to a grasshopper, my dad used to say that a soldier 
of science takes twenty steps back down 
the ladder when he sheds blood, and I've 
never gotten over being the son of my 
father. 

"Has he spoken at all?" The old one 
asked, popping out of the port with the 
incredible eagerness of a yearling colt, a 
semantic recorder and a long roll of translating tape under his arm. 

He started threading the tape into the 
recorder without waiting for my reply, his 
face mirroring about seventeen levels of 
delight. 

"We'll get him to talk ! He'll say something and then we'll play the tape back!" 

The old one isn't often wrong. But he 
was for once. Apparently the wounded 
aborigine just didn't want his thoughts 
translated by a mechanical metal box into 
the speech of the strangers from the sky. 

He stood up and glared at us for a 
second or two, his eyes smouldering with 
emotions as old as man. 

Sure, boy, I thought. We've caught 
you at a bad moment, with your hair 
down. You have your pride. 

I must have guessed what he was 
thinking, for he suddenly drew himself up 
as though in fierce pride, and stood at his 
full height, the wound gleaming in his 
flesh like some great crimson medal won 
for valor beyond the call of duty on a 
battlefield the jungle could never claim. 

The man-spirit can be a pretty fine and 
plucky thing when it doesn't try to con


82 



SUPER SCIENCE STORIES 



ceal the grievousness of its wounds, and I 
admired that savage for all the things we 
had in common — and the milestones we 
still must pass. 

"He'll say something now !" The old 
one whispered, with a swift intake of his 
breath. "He's going to speak !" 

I never saw man or beast turn quite as 
fast as that savage. One minute he was 
facing us in the sunlight, as still as a subcritical mass getting set for an atomic 
explosion. The next he was plunging 
furiously away from us through the underbrush, a cloud of buzzing insects in his 
wake. 

The old one had a shining gift for 
understatement when frustration gnawed 
at him. 

"Well, now- — " was all he said. 

The magnificent savage was gone, and 
we were alone again, in a clearing so still 
you could have heard a gnat pullulating. 
But I didn't let it throw me. Getting the 
ship repaired came first — was the big, 
important job, anyway. 

I took the old one by the arm and hurried him toward the stern rocket tubes. 

"We've got to work fast!" I warned. 
"If he comes back with his tribe they'll 
take it for granted that we wounded him." 

"Why do savages shift guilt around 
that way?" The old one complained. 
"Seems like most savages simply work off 
their rage on the first stranger they meet, 
innocent or guilty." 

"It works for a rough kind of justice in 
the long run," I assured him. "At some 
time in their lives most of us arc guilty. 
If they become careless too they deserve 
what they get." 

The damage wasn't too bad. 

"It's an hour's job if we work our heads 
off!" I said. "Maybe I'm an alarmist, but 
I think we should try to whittle that 
estimate down a bit." 

"Just as you say, son!" The old one 
grinned, stripping oil his weather jacket. 

That was the best thing about him. He 



could talk himself into a blue funk, but 
when a job looked really tough he became as solid and laconic as a square of 
granite. 

WE FINISHED the repair job in 
exactly twenty-eight minutes, and 
were heading back toward the 
vacuum port when the old one grabbed 
my arm. 
"Look!" 

The alien beasts were standing at the 
edge of the clearing in a blaze of reddening 
sunlight. They had emerged from the 
underbrush in utter silence, appearing so 
suddenly out of the shadows it seemed 
almost like a conjuring trick. 

In all my experience I had never seen 
creatures so repulsive. For the first time 
in my life that I could remember I was 
afraid, hut I just couldn't fit them into 
any sane pattern of fear, couldn't explain 
exactly why they made my blood run cold. 

The creatures walked upright and were 
vaguely lizardlike, but with a raw-skinned 
aspect of face and limb that made me repudiate the idea that they could be true 
reptiles. Embrj'onic! It's tricky, but 
there's a certain flabby pinkness, a blubbermoutli kind of pinkness which suggets the unformed, the monstrous. 

The creatures must have possessed a 
fair degree of intelligence, for they wore 
fantastic garments and carried metal 
weapons. But the embryonic impression 
wouldn't down. You know the shiver you, 
gpt when you see something soft and pink 
and mottled with tadpole arms breaking 
water, making blubbery noises at the edge 
of a stagnant pool. These creatures were 
on dry land, were almost as large as we. 
But the blubbermouth feeling stayed with 
me. 

There were just two of the beasts and 
they seemed to be discussing us. They 
made harsh, revolting noises which 
sounded to the old one like intclligenl 
•peech. In ten seconds flat he'd forgotter 



THE UNFINISHED 



83 



his surprise and disgust and was busy with 
the semantic recorder, his eyes shining 
as he edged toward them across the clearing. 

I moved forward to warn him, but he 
was deaf to all caution. He waved me 
back, bis eyes hard with high, scientific 
purpose. The clearing seemed suddenly 
bleak and lonely. We were alone with 
strange beasts, with dangerous beasts, a 
thousand light years from green lawns 
and the laughter of children, from smoky 
fireplaces, book-lined studies and the 
bright rite of friendship. 

One segment of my mind was alert to 
our danger, but the other was back in a 
little country town, and I was walking 
arm in arm with the prettiest miss ever 
to wed a star-roving explorer and live to 
rue the day. 

The old one was twenty feet from the 
nearest of the beasts when their metal 
weapons roared. It was a brutal attack, as 
unexpected as it was senseless. He hadn't 
made a single menacing gesture. He had 
simply advanced across the clearing clasping an instrument of science, his clear 
blue eyes wide with the innocence of his 
breed. 

In sick horror I saw him stagger back, 
and sink to his knees. For an instant stark 
incredulity looked out of his eyes. Then 
he swayed and cried out to me. 

"Don't let 'em fire again ! Watch out — H 

I can get mad fast. 

I went after the beasts in blind fury, 
not caring a hoot if I caught a weapon 
blast full in the face. I'd have crushed 
under foot a poisonous snake that struck 
without warning, and I had less compunction about doing the same to creatures 
intelligent enough to forge metal weapons. 

When they saw me charging at them 
they dropped their weapons and went 
plunging into the forest. I kept right on 
after them, ignoring the interlacing tendrils and prickly vines which lashed and 
tore at my fieah. 



I overtook one of them a hundred feet 
from the clearing. I had a curious feeling of excitement as I closed in on it 
my arms spread wide. Would it attempl 
to fight back? The eyes that bored intc 
mine were unmistakably intelligent. Surely it knew fear, for it was trembling convulsively, and it kept backing away from 
me as if it could not accept the reality of 
my nearness, and the fact that it had no 
chance at all. 

Behind it the vegetation was so densely 
corded that a beast^ twice its girth could 
not have broken through. It was still 
recoiling when my arms went about it, 
and I crushed it to me in a tight, unyielding embrace. 

Had it a spine that I could crack, lungs 
which would collapse in a frothy bubbling? I was sure of nothing. I only knew 
that I was about to crush the life from a 
creature whose flesh was cold, soggy, like 
the flesh of a scavenger bird. Just being 
so close to it made me physically sick. 

As its repulsive cries whimpered into 
silence it bobbed its head about and I 
could have sworn it hissed at me. But I 
may have been mistaken about that. 

Suddenly all my anger left me. 

What's the use, I thought. Let it crawl 
away into its lair, let it live out its hateful life in the deep jungle, as scorpions 
did, or lizards with green and vermillion 
poison pouches protruding from their 
throats. 

Trouble was, such lizards were beautiful to look at. This creature was as ugly 
as an eyeless slug. The fact that it had 
eyes and wore clothes, and possessed intelligence of a sort didn't make it one 
whit less ugly. 

I felt disgusted. Hating an animal because nature had made it the way it was 
was just as stupid as hating a wormgnawn apple or a leech-covered stone at 
the edge of a pond. 

I opened my arms wide and let the 
loathsome beast ftttp to the ground. 



84 



SUPER SCIENCE STORIES 



Beasts who developed intelligence without shedding their jungle instincts had. a 
long and unpleasant history behind them. 
I'd encountered such beasts before, on 
more worlds than I cared to remember . 
but never in such an evolved stage of culture. I thought of the rock-splitting birds 
of Spagoon, with their rude flint weapons 
and elaborate burial customs, and the fire 
lizards of Galniar, not so named because 
they could pass through fire like salamanders, but because they had actually mastered the use of fire, and knew how to 
forge iron arrowheads* 

Beasts scaly, leathery, warm-blooded, a 
few within the weight range of man. 

This creature was well within the weight, 
range of man, but I was pretty sure it 
had a life span as brief as the skunk 
weeds of our suburban gardens, which 
bloom in the late autumn and die at the 
first touch of frost. That would mean it 
could never learn very much. Natural ; 
selection would eventually finish what I'd 
started out to do. 

"You can thank Dame Nature for your 
good luck, Air. Scorpion Eyes," I said. 

The beast seemed to know that it had 
been granted a reprieve, for it started to 
whimper again, and suddenly it was 
dragging itself away from me over the 
forest floor. 

Fighting down my revulsion, I swung 
about and went striding back to the clearing. 

£ { OU'YE got to let me play the 
M record through, son!" The old 
one said, hours later. "I tell you, 
I feel all right now. I'm okay. It was . 
just a flesh wound. What if I did lose a 
little blood?" 

We were almost in deep space, a good 
five billion miles from the Class G Star . 
sun which wanned a worm-riddled little 
green butternut of a world I hoped never 
to see again. Worm-riddled because those 
creatures were on it. 



I thought . of the savage, standing 
straight and proud in the sunlight, 
claiming his birthright despite his pain, 
A great, throbbing wound in his side and 
yet he could still draw himself up and 
defy us. 

Well-^some day that little green butternut of a world would belong to a magnificent savage with a civilizing gleam in 
his eyes. And he wouldn't be wearing a 
primitive chain bracelet on his ankle then. 
He'd be on his way to the stars! 

So the old one wanted to play the recording .through, did he? He'd failed to 
get a semantic recording of the magnificent savage's, speech. AM he . had was 
worm speech from the throat of creatures 
who had tried to kill him. 

Why did he wish to inflict further torment on himself? . . . 

I had -no moral right to oppose him. He 
was an able, scientist and he had the fine, 
childlike curiosity of his breed, and if he 
felt strong enough to listen to a recording 
of , first-rate scientific importance I had 
no call to. put my oar in. 

"Go ahead!" I grunted. "Who's stopping you?" 

He seemed a little apologetic as he 
turned the recorder on. "Uh— you made a 
fine jol) of bandaging up my arm, son," he 
said. "Don't think I'm not grateful for 
what you did." 

"Go ahead, play it!" I said. "If it will 
give you any fun play it twenty times. 
Get up and dance to it." 

"Don't forget — they were intelligent 
beasts. Their speech will translate. We'll 
get something more than the gibberish we 
heard." 

"Sure we will/' I said. "A long string 
of obscenities, most likely." 

He gripped my arm. "Listen!" 

"Eddy, Eddy — " a voice spoke out of 
the recorder. "Eddy — Oh, no!" 

"Hey, don't start thinking things. I 
see them too, and I'm not excited." 

"But they're wearing clothes, Eddy I" 



THE UNFINISHED 



85 



"Sure they are. Carny clothes ! What 
the dickens ! Can't you see it's some dumb 
bally talker's idea of a joke?" 

"But-but we haven't got three bears, 
Eddy! Just the bear that broke away. 
Just Mike Bruin who turned ugly on us!" 

"They're from some other circus then !" 

"That won't wash, Eddy. There ain't 
another circus within a hundred miles of 
here. Nobody could have dressed up 
bears like that anyway. They're not 
wearing carny duds — naw ! Just funny 
looking jumper suits!" 

"Now take it easy, will you ! Don't get 
thinking things — " 

"Who would want to get two more 
bears and play a joke like that on us? Be 
sensible, Eddy !" 

"Well—" 

"How would anybody know Mike 
Bruin would break his chain and we'd 
have to go hunting him with shotguns?" 
"I'll bet you twenty bucks — * ■ 
"Now look, Eddy! We go after an 
escaped bear on a rampage. Otherwise, 
he'll kill somebody and the circus will get 
blamed. All right. We take a pot shot 
at him, lose sight of him and run smack 
into . . . what? Two polar hears. And be


hind them is a twenty-ton cigar wrapped 
up in silver foil, and they're dressed up for 
a fancy costume ball or something." 

"If you're going to start imagining 
things — " 

"A twenty-ton silver cigar. An allmetal cigar, and the end of it looks exactly like the end of a double-barreled 
shotgun when you break it open. Only 
there are more rocket tubes than that!" 

"Rocket tubes? Now I know you're 
ticky in the coco!" 

"If that's not a spaceship! — " 

"Yeah, but they wouldn't be bears!" 

"How do you know what Martians 
would look like? Did you ever see a 
Martian?" 

"But bears — " 

"Look at it this way. Maybe there are 
no real bears on Mars, or wherever they 
come from. If that was so they wouldn't 
picture themselves as bears. They'd picture themselves as men. I mean — they 
wouldn't look like bears to themselves." 

"Uh! Then how would they picture 
us?" 

"That's what I'm worried about. How 
would we look to a bear? How would 

(Continued oh page 111) 



They played for keeps in . . . 

"The Deadliest Game" 

John D. MacDonald's 

Gripping Murder Story 

Plu>: "The Murderer Type" by P. B. Bishop, 
"Borrowed Lightning" by Dan Gordon, and 
murder puzzlers by many other famous authors. 

Don't miss the April issue. You'll 
enjoy its quality npw-gtrle. appearance, with better- than-ever fiction. 



OaStUNmi 




86 





He plunged downward, 
toward the light. - . 


CHILE) Of The 
GREEN LIGHT 



By LEIGH BRACKETT 



SON felt the distant, ringing shiver of 
the metal under him. The whole 
close-packed mass of broken hulks 
shifted slightly with the impact, turning 
wheel-like around the shining Light. 

Son half rose. He'd been sprawled full 
length on the crest of the wheel, trying to 
make the Veil get thin enough to see 
through. They had both seen that it was 
thinner than ever, and Aona, on the other 
side of it, had danced for him, a misty shifting light beyond the queer darkness. 
Several times lie thought he had almost 



seen her outlines through the thinning veil. 

He could hear her mind now, tickling his 
brain with impish thought-fingers. 

She must have heard his own thought 
change, because she asked, "What is it, 
Son? What's happened?" 

"Another ship, I think." Son rose lazily, the green Light from below rippling 
around him like clear water. 

He looked out over his domain, feeling 
the savage sun-fire and the spatial cold of 
the shadows touch his naked body with 
little whips of ecstasy. His face was a boy's 



Between sun and space, a 
to pierce the dread secret 
the human race 



gallant little band fought 
of Mercury's orbit — that 
might endure! 



Copyright, 1941, by Fictioneers, Inc., a subsidiary of Popular Publications, Inc. 

87, 



88 



SUPER SCIENCE STORIES 



face, handsome and bright -eyed. His fair 
head burned like a torch in the blinding 
glare. 

The sun made a blazing canopy across 
half the sky. The rest was open space, velvet dark and boundless, flecked with the 
little fires of the stars. 

Between sun and space lay the wheel, 
built of space ships that lay side by side, 
over and under and sometimes through, 
broken and bent and dead, bound close by 
the power of the Light. 

The Light, lying below Son's naked feet, 
at the very heart of the wheel, burning 
green through the packed hulks — the Light 
that was his bridge to Aona. 

Son's blue eyes, unshaded, looked for 
the wreck. He knew it would be a wreck. 
Only one ship in the wheel, the one in which 
his memories began, was whole. 

Then he stood quite still, staring, feeling 
every muscle tense and tighten. 

He saw the ship, lying high on the outer 
rim of the wheel. It was not broken. Tubes 
burned red at the front end. There was a 
door opening in the side. Things began to 
come out of it. 

Things shaped like Son, only thick and 
clumsy, with queer bulbs on their heads. 

A strange contracting shiver ran through 
Son. Since sound and breath had gone, and 
the effigies that lay in his ship had ceased 
to move, nothing had stirred on the wheel 
but Son himself. 

In the broken ships there was never anything but scraps of odd substance, scattered 
as though by some bursting inner force. 
Son and Aona had talked idly of living beings, but Son hadn't bothered his head 
about them much. 

He was Himself. He had the sun, and 
space, and Aona. It was sufficient. 

Aona said impatiently. "Well, Son?" 

"It's a ship," he answered, with his mind. 
"Only it isn't wrecked. Aona, there are 
living things coming out of it." 

He stood staring at the Veil, and the misty light beyond. 



"Aona," his mind whispered. "In mj 
head I'm cold and hot all at once. I wani 
to go and do, but I don't know where ot 
what. What's the matter with me, Anna?' 

"It's fear," she told him softly. "I have 
it, too." 

Son could feel it, pulsing from her mind. 
In all the years of life he had never felt it 

before. 

Now it had him by the throat. 

Aona cried. "What if these creatures 
should harm you, or the Light?" 

"You have said that nothing in this universe could harm me now. And — " Son 
shivered — "no one would do what has to be 
done to destroy the Light." 

"But these creatures — we don't know 
what knowledge they may have. Son, if 
anything should happen — " 

Son raised his arms to the darkness. . 

"I don't want you to be afraid, Aona. 
Tear away the Veil!" 

"I can't, darling. You know neither of us 
can, until the Veil of itself passes behind 
you." 

"How long, Aona?" 

She laughed, with an attempt at her old 
sweet teasing. "How long is 'long' in your 
world, Son ? How long have you lived ? 
How long have we talked ? No one knows. 
Only, the Veil grows thinner every time we 
meet, every time we talk like this. 

"Stay by the Light, Son. Don't let anyone harm it !" 

Son's blue eyes narrowed. "I love you," 
he said quiedy. "No one shall harm the 
Light." 

"I'll stay with you," she said. "They 
won't be able to see — yet." 

Son turned and went, across the tumbled plain of dead ships, with Aona's misty 
light following beyond the blurred and pulsing dark. 

THERE were seven of the invaders. 
They stood in a close knot beside 
their ship, staring at the green fire 
of the Light. Three of them began to dance 



TIP 

CHILD OF THE GREEN LIGHT 



clumsily. The others placed shapeless hands 
on each other's shapeless shoulders and 
shook and pounded. 

Son's eyes were as sharp as the spearpoints of the stars. He lay behind a steering-jet housing, watching, and he saw with 
shock that there were faces under the glittering helmets. 

Faces very like his own. 

There were three round, smooth faces. 
They belonged to the ones who danced. 
There was one deeply lined face with bushy 
eyebrows and a framing straggle of white 
hair. Then there were two others, which 
Son sensed to be of different races. 

One was round and green and small, with 
shining eyes the color of space, and a mouth 
like a thin w'ound. The other differed from 
the first three only in subtle points of line 
and shape, but its face was like a mask beaten out of dark iron, with deep-set, sullen 
eyes. 

The seventh face drove all the others out 
of Son's mind. It was bronzed and grim 
and strong, with some driving inner force 
about it that was like the pulse Son felt 
beating in space, when he lay on the crest 
of the wheel watching the sun and the burning stars. 

This last man seemed to be the leader. 
He turned to the others, his mouth moving. 
Then the mouths of the others moved also. 
Presently five of the invaders turned. Son 
thought they were going away again. 

But two of them — the white-haired one 
and the one with the dark, vital face — started together, out across the broken plain of 
ships. And Son tensed where he lay. 

They were heading toward the heart of 
the wheel, where the glow of the Light 
danced like the fire-veils of the sun. 

Who knew what knowledge, what powers 
they might have ? Son called to Aona, and 
followed, keeping out of sight, his blue eyes 
thinned and hard. 

They were almost over the Light when 
Son heard the first human thought-voice, as 
though the power of the Light brought it 



a 

out. It was faint and indistinct, He could 
catch only fragments. 

". . . here, inside Mercury's orbit . . . 
heat! . . . found it, after five years . . 

That was the bronzed man speaking. 
Then — 

"Yes, thank God! Now if we can — " 
Sou wished the voices were clearer. There 

was a terrible, disturbing urgency about 

them. 

The invaders paused where the green 
light was strongest, at the heart of the 
wheel. 

The mind of the grim, Hark man said, 
"Down there." 

He started to lower himself into a crevice 
between two hulls. And Son, driven by a 
sudden stab of anger, leaped up. 

He came striding across the searing 
metal, naked and erect and beautiful, his 
fair head burning in the sunlight. 

He flung up one corded arm, and his 
mind cried out, "No! You can't go down." 

The invaders straightened, staring. The 
face of the bronzed, strong man went white, 
the lines of it blurring into slackness. The 
white-haired man swayed on his feet. 

"The radiation's getting me, Randsome," 
he whispered. "I'm having hallucinations." 

"No. No 3 I see it, too." The eyes of the 
bronzed man burned into Son's. "A man, 
naked in open space." 

He stumbled forward, his gaze fixed on 
the powerful body outlined against the 
stars. 

Son watched him come, conscious of a 
curious pulsing excitement. Anger, resentment, fear for the Light, and something 
else. Something like the first time he had 
spoken to Aona through the Veil. 

The bronzed man stopped before him. 
His lips moved in that queer way they had. 
Son heard his mind speaking, faintly. 

"What are you?" 

"I am Son," he answered simply. "What 
do you want with the Light?" 

Again he heard the faint mind-voice. 
"You can't understand me, of course. I 



90 



SUPER SCIENCE STORIES 



don't know what you are, god or demon, 
but don't try to stop us !" 

"But I do understand. You can't go 
down there." 

Ransome turned. "Dick." he said, "Lord 
only knows what this — this creature is, or 
what it will do. But we've got to get down 
there and study this thing. If it tries to 
stop us, I'll kill it." 

Dick nodded his white head. His face 
was lined and very tired. "Surely nothing 
will stop us now," he said. "Not now." 

"I'll cover you," safd Ransome. Dick slid 
down into the crevice. The bronzed man 
drew something from his belt and waited. 

Son stepped forward, anger and fear 
cording his muscles. 

The dark man said, "I don't want to kill 
you. I have no right to kill you, hecause 
of what you are. But the thing down there 
is going to be destroyed." 

Son stopped, quite still. A great flaming 
pulse shot through him. And then he gathered himself. 

The spring of his corded thighs carried 
him full over the crack down which the 
white-haired man had gone. One long arm 
reached down. The hand closed angrily on 
smooth glass. 

The helmet shattered. Son had a momentary glimpse of a lined, weary face upturned, faded eyes staring in unbelieving 
horror. Then the flesh of the face split into 
crimson ribbons, and the body under the 
space suit altered strangely. 

SON got up slowly, feeling strange and 
unsteady in his thoughts. He hadn't 
wanted to destroy the man, only to 
make him come back. 

He became aware, then, of Ransome, 
standing with a metal thing in his hand 
staring at him with eyes like the savage 
dying red stars. 

"It didn't touch him," Ransome's mind 
was saying. "A heat ray strong enough to 
fuse steel, and it didn't touch him. And 
Dick's dead." 



Ransome hurled the gun suddenly into 
Son's face. 

"Do you know what you've done?" his 
mind shouted. "Dick was a physicist — 
about the only one with any knowledge 
that hasn't died of old age. He might have 
found ^he way to destroy that thing. Now, 
if our weapons don't work on it — ■ 

"The effect is accelerating. Every child 
born since the Cloud is horribly susceptible. 
There isn't any time any more for anything. 
There won't be anyone to follow us, because 
now there's no time to learn." 

Ransome stepped close to Son. His head 
was thrown back, his face a grim hard 
mask, streaked suddenly by little shining 
things that ran from those savage eyes. 

"You don't know what that means, do 
you ? You don't know how old Dick was 
with his white hair and his wrinkles. Thirty-six! Or me. I'm nineteen — nineteen. 
And my life is already half gone. 

"All over the Solar System it's like that, 
because of this hellish thing that came in 
the Cloud. We've hunted the System over 
for five years, all of us that could, for a 
thing that wouldn't react to any test or show 
on any instrument. And when we found 
it—" 

He stopped, the veins knotted across his 
forehead, a little muscle twitching in one 
lean cheek. 

Then, very calmly, he said, "Get him, 
boys," 

Son jerked around, but it was too late. 
The five who had stayed in the ship were all 
around him. For a long time Son had been 
conscious only of these two men, and the 
strange confusion in his mind — a confusion 
made worse, somehow, by those mysterious 
crystal drops running from Ransome's eyes. 
They caught him, somewhere, deep. 

Ropes of light metal fell around him. He 
fought like a Titan in the naked blaze of 
the sun. But they were experts with their 
ropes. They caught his wrists and ankles, 
dividing his power, baffling him with tenuous cords of elastic strength. 



CHILD OF THE GREEN LIGHT 



91 



Son knew that his mass was still sufficiently in phase to be subject to such laws 
as gravity and tension. He fought. But 
presently he was spread-eagled on the 
burning metal, helpless. 

The man with the face like beaten metal 
and the sullen eyes said, "We were watching from the ship. We thought we must 
be crazy when we saw this — man standing 
out here. Then we thought you might need 
help.*' 

He stopped, staring at Son. "The heat 
ray didn't touch him." 

"No," said Ransome quietly. "That's 
how he got Dickson." 

The one with the queer green face 
snapped, "Dickson's dead?" 

Ransome nodded. "Down in the crack 
there. We were trying to get down to 
study the light. He — it didn't want us to 
go-" 

The green-faced one said, "My God!" 

"Quite. Arun, you and one of the boys 
guard the ship. Teck, you mount guard 
here with the other. Greenough, come with 
me." 

One of the round-faced ones stepped forward. His eyes were light blue, oddly empty in spite of their brightness. He looked 
down at the crevice where Dickson's body 
was, and his mind said, "I'm afraid. I 
don't want to go down there. I'm afraid." 

"Come on, Greenough," Ransome 
snapped. His lips started to move again, 
and stopped abruptly. 

Son caught the thought, "Got to hurry. 
God knows what this radiation will do to 
us, right on top of it." 

"Sir," said Greenough jerkily, "what if 
there are more like him down there?" 

Ransome turned his grim, hard face on 
the boy. Son felt again that force, the 
strength that pulses between the stars. 

"Well," said Ransome, "what if there 
are?'' 

He turned and slid down into the crevice. 
Greenough closed his pale, scared eyes, 
licked his lips, and followed. 



TECK, the man with the sullen eyes, 
laughed, a biting mind-sound as hard 
as his jaw-line. "Hell of a gunnery 
officer." 

Arun said absently, "He's only eleven." 
His eyes, purple-black and opaque as a dark 
nebula, swung jerkily from Son to the 
crevice where Dickson lay, and then back 
again. 

Teck was a big man, as big as Son, but 
Arun topped him by a foot. He was very 
slender, moving with a queer rubbery grace. 

"What if we can't do it?" he said suddenly. "What if our weapons won't work 
on it any more than they did on him?" 

"Then," answered Teck evenly, "the last 
generation of mankind will die of old age 
within fifty years." His sullen gaze roved 
over Son, over and over, and his mind was 
whispering to itself. 

"Mutation," he said abruptly. "That's 
it. Complete change of cellular structure, 
metabolism, brain tissue, everything. Mutation in the living individual. I wonder 
how long — " 

"Look at that green light," whispered 
Arun. "Remember how it filled the whole 
sky when we came into the Cloud? Cosmic dust, the scientist said. Temporary effect. But it stayed, when the Cloud went 
away." 

His long thin arms came up in a blind 
sort of gesture. "We were millions of miles 
away, then. What will it do to us now?" 

Teck studied his hands. "We're not aging, anyway. Concentrated effect is probably different. Feel anything?" 

"Deep. Deep inside me. I — " 

"Your cellular structure is different from 
ours, anyway." 

Arun swayed slightly, watching the green 
light pulse up from below. Beads of sweat 
ran down his face. 

"Yes," he whispered. "Different. You 
know how the Cloud affected us on Tethys. 
If our life-span were not almost three 
times as long as your — " 

He bent suddenly over Son, and more 



92 



SUPER SCIENCE STORIES 



of the queer shining things were trickling 
out of his eyes. 

"For five years we've watched our people die, hunting for this tiling. Dickson 
was our only chance. And you, you damned 
freak — " 

He lifted his long arms again, as though 
to cover his head. "I'll get back to the 
ship now," he said abruptly, and turned. 

Tcck hesitated for a heartbeat, scowling 
at A run. Then lie stepped in front of him, 
the thing they called a heat gun in his 
hand. 

"Sit down, Arun." 

"You heard Ransome's orders." The 
Tethysman was trembling. 

"In the Martian Drylands, where I come 
from," murmured Teck, "men sometimes 
get what we call esht — desert-fear. They 
take other men's water and vaards, and run 
away. You're the engineer, Arun, and even 
without me to do the navigating . , ..Sit 
down, Arun." 

The Tethysman sat, a fluid folding of thin 
length. The two round-faced boys stood by, 
not moving nor speaking, the fear so strong 
in their minds that Son could hear it. 

He saw and heard all this with a small 
part of his brain. Most of it was thinking 
of the Light and the men working their 
way down to the queer hole where it lay 
among the tangled ships. 

This talk of age and years and dying 
and humanity meant nothing to him. In 
all his universe there was only himself, 
the wheel, the sun, the distant stars, and 
Aona. There was no day or night, no time. 

He was angry and afraid, full of hatred 
and resentment and a queer tearing at his 
throat, as though he had lost some vital 
part of him — the Light. Were they going 
to take the horrible way of destruction that 
Aona had tnld him of? Or did they know 
another way ? 

He tensed his corded body against the 
metal ropes, and his mind cried out 
"Aona !" as though he were seeing her vanish forever beyond the Veil. 



THE Martian said, softly, "He usee 
to be human. I wonder — " He 
leaned forward suddenly. "Can you 
hear me?" 

Son answered, "Yes." He was beginning 
to realize something. The mouth movements of these men had something to dc 
with speaking, and their clearest, loudest 
thoughts came with thein. 

Teck must have caught the motion of his 
eyes, for he cried out. 

"Yes! But you can't speak, because you 
don't breathe air. Probably lost both lungs 
and vocal cords. You must be a telepath. 
I'll bet that's what you are!" 

The Martian's dark-iron mask of a face 
was eager his sullen eyes full of little 
sparks. 

"You hear me think, is that it? Nod your 
head once, if you do." 

Son hesitated, studying the men with narrow eyes. If he talked with them, he might 
find, out just how much- they knew. He 
nodded. 

Teck was quite still for a moment. Arun 

sat rigid, staring with eerie, purple eyes 
at the Light. 

"How long have you been here?" asked 
Teck. 

Son shook his head. 

"Where did you come from?" Again Son 
shook his head, and Teck asked, "You 
know no other place than this?" 

Again the negative. 

Teck drew a long breath. 

"You must have been born here, then 
In one of the first ships swept up by the 
magnetic force of this thing as it passed 
through the Solar System. Then your 
ship cannot have been wrecked. Probably 
the counter-pull of some planet saved it. 
as our new Elker drive saved us from 
perishing.** 

His deep eyes blazed. "Your body was 
the same as mine, once. How long would 
it take to change me to a being like you?" 

Arun got up suddenly. "I've got to ge 
back to the ship." 



CHILD OF THE GREEN LIGHT 



93 



Teck's gun hand was steady. "Sit 

down !" 

Arun's thought rose tightly. "But I've 
got to! Something's wrong — " 

Teck's gun thrust forward menacingly. 
Arun sat down again, slowly. The green 
light wavered around him, making his face 
curiously indistinct. 

Teck's thought hammered at Son. 

"You know what the light is?" 

Son hesitated, sending Aona a rapid 
question. 

Her mind said, "No ! Don't tell, Son. 
It might help them destroy it." 

He shook his head. "No." 

Teck's lips drew back. "You're lying," 
he said, and then whirled around, his 
dark hard face taut. 

Arun had risen, and the single wild 
shriek in his mind stabbed Son's brain 
so that he writhed in his shackles. 

The two hoys backed off, their faces 
white and staring. Even Teck drew back 
a bit, and his gun hand trembled. 

Arun was changing. Son watched tensely, forgetting for a moment even his agony 
of fear for the Light. 

The lines of the green, smooth face of 
the Tethysman blurred and shifted in the 
green light, like something seen under 
water. 

Strange writhing tremors shook his 
whole body. 

His mind cried out with his moving 
Hps: "Something's happening to me. Oh, 
God! And all for nothing — " 

He staggered forward. His eyes were 
night-black and luminous, horribly steady 
in that blurred face, fixed on Son. 

Son knew, lying there chained, that he 
was in deadly peril. Because Arun was 
on his own plane, though a little past him. 

"All for nothing — mankind lost," wailed 
the thought-voice. "I'm going blind. No. 
No! I'm seeing — through — " 

His scream shivered cold as space along 
Son's nerve-channels. The tall rubbery 
form loomed over him, bending closer . . . 



ONE of the boys fainted guietly, rolling like an ungainly bundle into 
a deep shaft between two wrecks. 
Teck caught his breath. 

"I'm not through with him yet," he muttered, and raised his gun. 

The glassite helmet melted and ran. The 
head and the glowing purple eyes beneath 
it were untouched. 

And then no one moved, nor spoke, 
Arun's head and face quivered, merging 
imperceptibly into the blurred darkness of 
the Veil. 

Aona cried out suddenly, "He's coming 
through!" And then, "No! The change 
was too swift. Too many atoms in transition. He's caught — " 

Shivering against Son's mind, like the 
single wild shaft of a distant comet, came 
Arun's thought. 

"No, not here! Not here — between!" 

And then he was gone. His space suit 
crumpled down, quite empty. 

Teck swayed, the dark hardness of his 
face bleached and rigid. "What did Arun 
mean — 'between?' " 

Son lay quite still, hearing Aona sob 
beyond the Veil. He knew. Aona told him. 
Between universes — the darkness, the nothingness, the nowhere. He felt the cold dark 
crawling in his mind. 

Teck laughed suddenly, biting and defiant. His deep eyes were fixed on Son, 
sprawled like a young god in the raw blaze 
of the sun. 

"By the gods," he whispered, "it's worth 
the risk!" 

Greenough came stumbling up out of the 
crevice. 

He looked more like a child than ever. 
His round face was dazed and bewildered, 
screwed up strangely. Even to Son, there 
was something terrible and unholy in that 
child's shallow-eyed face on a man's strong 
body. 

Teck drew a slow breath. Son felt a 
dark, iron strength in him, different from 
the strength of the bronzed Ran some, that 



94 



SUPER SCIENCE STORIES 



was like the beat of space itself, but great, 
too. 

Great — and dangerous. 

"What did you find out?" asked Teck. 
"Where's Ransome?" 

Son's brain burned within him with fear, 
though he saw that the green Light was 
still unchanged. 

"Down there," said Greenough, and 
whimpered. He blinked his eyes, moving 
his head and pawing at his helmet as though 
to clear it. 

"I only looked at it a minute. It was 
too little and too big all at once, and I was 
frightened." 

Teck caught him by the shoulders and 
shook him roughly. "Look at what?" he 
demanded. "What's happened?" 

"At the light." said Greenough, in a faraway voice. "We found it inside a ship. 
We could look right through the metal. I 
only looked a minute because I was frightened. I was frightened, I was — " 

Teck's strong hands snapped his teeth 
together. "What was it?" 

Greenough's shallow eyes wandered to 
his. "Ransome says it's part of another 
universe. He's still there, looking. Only — " 

Greenough's voice broke in a little hiccough. "Only he can't see any more." 

Son felt a great surge of relief. The 
Light was safe, so far. 

Greenough slipped suddenly from Teck's 
hands, sitting wide-legged on the hull. 

"I'm scared," he said. "I want Mama." 
Big slow drops ran down his cheeks, and 
again Son was stirred by something deep 
and strange. 

Teck turned slowly to Son. "He was six 
years old when the Cloud came. You can 
build a man's body in eleven years, hut not 
his brain." He was silent, looking down 
with deep, intense eyes. 

HE SPOKE, after a bit, slowly and 
deliberately. 
"So it's part of another universe. 
Diluted by distance, its radiation speeds 



human metabolism, causing swift age. Con 
centrated. it changes the human organisn 
into an alien metabolism, alien flesh. 

"Slim almost made it through, but hi 
peculiar chemical balance destroyed hiir 
You must be in the same transition stage 
but much slower, being passed by the chang 
ing of your basic vibratory rate into an 
other space-time continuum." 

Son couldn't hide the sudden flicker it 
his eyes. He hated this dark Martian sud 
denly, this man who guessed so much. 

"So it's true," said Teck. "Confirmatior 
of the old conception of coexisting universe; 
on different vibratory planes. But how 
would you know, unless — unless you car 
talk to that other universe?" 

He laughed at the bitter look in Son's 
blue eyes. 

"Afraid, aren't you? That means you 
have something to hide, or protect." He 
dropped suddenly to one knee, catching his 
fingers in Son's fair hair. 

"Look at me. I want to watch your 
eyes. You do know what that light is, and 
how it can be destroyed. If I could get a 
body like yours, and still not cross over. 
Do you feed on the green light, or on the 
sun?" 

The question came so quickly that Son'i 
eyes flicked to the canopy of fire overhead 
before he could stop them. Teck sat bacfc 
on his heels with a long, slow sigh. 

"That's all I needed," he murmured 
"Your friends on the other side evidentlj 
can't help you, or you'd be free now." H< 
rose abruptly. "Greenough! You, there 
sailor ! Help me get this loose hull-sectior, 
over here." 

The two pale, empty-eyed boys rosi 
obediently and helped. The heavy metal 
plates, uptilted by the force of the original 
crash, were not far from Son. They hac 
only to heat the bottom with cutting torchei 
and bend it. 

Son lay, then, in black, utter dark. 

"Now then," said Teck. "Back to th 
ship, both of you." 



CHILD OF THE GREEN LIGHT 



95 



The boys stumbled off across the broken 
ships. Son could see them, out in the glare 
beyond his prison shadow. Teck waited 
until their backs were well turned. 

The beam of his heat gun flickered briefly, twice. Two crumpled shapes fell and 
were still. 

Teck turned, smiling tightly. 

"No need to have a whole race of supermen." He inspected the spiderweb of metal 
ropes that bound Son, and nodded, satisfied. 

"When you get hungry enough for energy, you'll tell me how to destroy the light. 
And then — " His hard dark face was cut 
deep with triumph, his eyes fierce with 
dreams. 

"After I destroy the light, the aging 
process will stop. People will start to live 
again. And I'll be virtually a god, untouchable, impervious." 

He laughed, softly and deep within him, 
rolling Son's head with his foot. 

"You wouldn't know what that means, 
would you? Think it over while I'm down 
taking care of Ransome!" 

He turned and slid down into the crevice. 

Son cried out in anguish, "Aona!" 

THE Veil, the darkness that was 
everywhere and nowhere, that was 
all through the wheel and yet not of 
it, shimmered and swirled. 

"Son! Son, what has happened?" 
His mind had been too busy to tell her 
before. Now he hesitated, thinking of Teck 
clambering down to kill the man with the 
strength of the stars in him; thinking of 
Arun's agony and Greenough's fear and 
the tired face of the man he had killed; 
thinking most of all of the strange shining 
drops that ran from their eyes. 
"Aona, what is age?" 
"We had it, long ago. The legends hardly remember, except that it was ugly and 
sad." 

"What are years?" He tried to give her 
the thought as he had taken it from their 
minds. But the idea was so alien to him, 



the time-concept so vague in itself, that he 
couldn't make himself clear. 

She said, "I don't know, Son." 

"And Aona — what is death?" 

"No one knows that, Son. It's like 
sleep, only one never wakens. But we live 
so long before is comes, there's time for 
even-thing. And even in the little part of 
our universe that's left, there are so many 
worlds to see." 

Already, there in the shadow, he was 
hungry for the sun. He would starve for 
energy if he couldn't get free. He gathered 
himself to try. . , . 

And then, quite suddenly, it happened 
The thing he'd waited all his life for. He 
looked into the shimmering blur of the 
Veil and cried, "Aona! Aona! I can see 
you!" 

He surged against his ropes, aflame 
inside him with a joy like the fire of the 
sun itself. 

The Veil was still there, hiding most of 
Beyond. But it was closer and thinner. He 
could see the slim silver shaft of her standing against soft blurred colors, could almost see the luminous brightness of her 
eyes. 

"Oh darling," she cried. "Almost!" 

Everything, all memory of the invaders 
and their alien troubles, left Son's mind. 
He stared hungrily into the Veil, watching 
the pale blur of her face steady, become 
clear. 

"You're beautiful," he whispered. 
"Beautiful as a blue star." 

"And you. . . . Oh, Son, go down to the 
Light. The force is strongest there. The 
Veil will pass more quickly." 

"But I can't. I'm tied." He told her 
briefly what had happened. 

She laughed. "You've changed since 
then. The ratio has changed. More of 
your atoms are vibrating in phase with my 
universe than with yours. From now on 
the change will be very swift. Try again !" 

He tried, pitting his strength against the 
ropes. Slowly their resistance slackened. 



96 



SUPER SCIENCE STORIES 



His wrists and ankles slid through .them, 
as though they were heavy smoke. 

He rose and shook himself, and looked 
once more at the wheel and the stars and 
the blazing sun. Then he turned to Aona, 
and a pulse of joy rose in him until he 
thought surely his head would burst. 

He plunged downward, toward the Light. 

He found that he had no need to clamber 
through the broken ships. The matter of 
their metal walls resisted him as water resists a swimmer, no more. He went downward through the green light that grew 
stronger as he went, until it was like the 
water at the bottom of a green lake. 

Aona followed, running on little white 
feet across, pale blue grass, with a great 
sweep of sky growing clearer behind her. 
Her silver draperies whipped in something 
she had called a wind. Her eyes were 
silvery, too, tilted with impish piquancy, 
and there was a crest of some feathery ..stuffon her head, burning red-gold like his own 
tun. v 

His mind shouted to hers and hers 
laughed back, and the barrier between their 
universes was growing thin. 

It was almost a shock to Son to see 
Teck crawling through a doorway in the 
wrecked saloon of a liner, just above the 
Light itself. 

Ransome crouched on the deck before 
him, his back turned, quite still. , 

The Martian's hard lips smiled. He drew 
his heat gun. 

Son stopped, the sheer happiness of the 
moment shattered. His dark hatred for 
this man came back, his instinctive loathing 
of what the fingers of his mind had brushed 
against in Teck's brain. Also, dimly, it 
had to do with Ransome. 

Hardly realizing what he was doing, he 
sprang at Teck. 

His arm sheared harmlessly through the 
matter of Teck's helmet and head. Sonrealized then that he had no more power 
over the stuff of his universe. 

But Teck started and cried out, and his 



aim was spoiled. The heat beam flicked 
across Ransome's shoulder, melting a little 
hole in the fabric of his space suit. 

The Martian's sullen, fiery eyes were 
wide. 

"You've changed," he whispered. "Like 
Arun. I can see through you." 

Then furiously he shouted, "Damn you! 
Look out!" 

He lurched sideways, but he was just too 
late. A searching tongue of heat ranged 
across him, across Son and the metal wall 
behind him, leaving a little molten trail. It 
rose and fell methodically, weaving a net 
of death across that whole space. 

Teck's space suit collapsed. Son witnessed again, this time with a curious satisfaction, the disruption of an alien organism. 

Alien. Yes. And yet. . . . 

He turned to see Ransome crouched on 
one knee, holding the shoulder of his suit 
with one hand and the heat gun — not firing 
now — in the other. 

His eyes were open, but they didn't 
see. Son knew what had happened. Ransome had looked too long at the Light, and 
the distances, the planes and angles and 
curves of it had pulled his sight too far. 

Son said, "He's dead." 

Ransome nodded. "I heard his mind die. 
This thing down here — I can hear you, 
too. I couldn't, up there." 

A strange, subtle thrill crept along Son's 
consciousness. Something in him reached 
out to that mind. Strong even now, strong 
as the pulse-beat of space. 

"You're not bad," said Ransome. "You 
just don't understand. I don't suppose you 
could, although you were human once." 

He dropped the gun, as though it didn't 
matter any more. "I'm going to die, you 
know. There's a hole in my suit. In a 
few minutes the air will leak out. But 
there's no time, is there? And you've forgotten what air is, or why I need it." 

The bronzed, grim face smiled, but it 
was .not humorous. "So humanity dies, be


CHILD OF THE GREEN LIGHT 



97 



cause one of its sons has no conception of 
time." 




ON!" It was Aona calling, peering 
through the thinning Veil. Ranso 
lifted his head. "Who's that?" 



Son said, "It's Aona. She's waiting for 
me." His surroundings were getting indistinct. 

The Veil was passing. 

"Aona. Someone you love. Son — that's 
what she called you, isn't it? Son, what is 
this light? Where did it come from?". 

The strength of Ransome's mind was 
bright and terrible. It was like the fire of 
a dying star. 

"It's— Aona, you tell him." Son's 
thoughts were strangely chaotic. 

"It's a part of my universe," she said 
slowly. There was a quality- of stillness in 
her thought, a subtle forerunner of fear. 
"Something happened, in one small corner 
of space, to the electrical tension that 
holds the fabric of the universe together. 
There was a release of energy so unthinkably vast — " 

Her burning crest drooped as she shivered. "Scraps of our universe were hurled 
right through the walls of vibration that 
separate us from other space-time continua. 
Only a very little bit of ours survived. 

"The bit of our universe in yours, vibrating at a different basic rate, makes a sort 
of bridge between us, by altering atomic 
speeds. Son has changed almost completely. 
Only a few of his atoms now vibrate in 
phase with your universe." 

Ransome nodded. "And that alien vibration is destroying us. Can't you take it 
back?" 

Aona shook her glowing head. "We could 
not possibly generate enough energy to 
draw it back." Her silvery, tilted eyes went 
to Son, and the terror in them stabbed him. 

"I hear you," said Ransome softly. 
"Then there is a way." 

Aona. whispered, "Yes." 

All Son's being went out to her. And 



yet, some tiny scrap of his mind clung to 
Ransome's, as though to something he must 
not lose. 

"I don't understand," he said slowly. 
"Years, age, time — they mean nothing." 

"No." Ransome's grim dark head 
strained back in his helmet. His face was 
veined and glistening with sweat. 

"Think of it this way. You love Aona. 
She's beautiful — I can hear that in your 
mind. Suppose that now, while you looked 
at her, she were to wither and crumple 
and die — " 

He broke off, as though fighting for 
strength. Not the pulsing strength of his 
mind, but the power of his body. When 
his thought came again, it was a whole lot 
weaker. 

"Look at your own body, Son. Think of 
it, now, growing weak and ugly and bent — " 

He staggered up suddenly, his eyes like 
the last embers of a djing sun, fixed oti 
nothingness. 

"You're mankind's only hope, Son. Son. 
Remember the people who called you that. 
They were human. Remember. Son — of 
humanity." 

Ransome's suit collapsed with a rush. 
Son shut his eyes. 

"Son," he whispered. "His thought said 
I — " He couldn't phrase it clearly, but 
it meant coming from something, being a 
part of it, as he, already, was part of Aona. 

And Aona whispered, "I feel it growing 
in your mind. Oh, Son — " 

He could see the flowers around her feet 
now, the distant fires of some great iuri. 
A strange tremor shook his body, a shifting 
and changing. 

The Veil was thinner. 

"Son, they're not your people any longer. 
You couldn't even understand." 

"No. No, but I could feel." He turned 
abruptly. "There's something I have to 
do. Quickly." 

He plunged off, rushing through the dissolving matter of his universe. Up, and into 
the ship he thought of as his, though h* 



98 



SUPER SCIENCE STORIES 



had left it long ago. He hated it, down here 
away from the sun. 

Aona followed him, her feet like little 
white stars in the grass. 

THINGS grew dimmer, more vague. 
Son had only to wait, to put off 
thinking until it was too late. But 
something drove him on. 

Presently he stood in the cabin of his 
ship, looking down at the still effigies. The 
people who had called him Son not so long 
ago. 

He shivered with something more than 
the shock of change. These still faces — 
Dickson's face and Arun's, and Ransome's 
face. 

These still shapes, that had touched him 
and called him Son and shed queer shining 
drops from their eyes. 

Something caught at him, wrung him so 
that he cried out. 

"I don't, want to. Aona, I don't want to. 
But I must!" 

Her thought was a mere tremor across 
his mind. "I think I knew, when he spoke 
to you. I try to think, if they were my 
people, suffering and dying — " 

"I don't want to, Aona. But he said — 
Son of humanity." 

Only to postpone, to wait until it was 
too late. The Veil was so thin. Son beat 
his hands together, very softly. 

Then blindly, lie rushed back toward the 
Light. 

Something had got hold of him, was 
driving him. He knew it was right. But 
he wanted to fight it, to hold it otf until it 
couldn't hurt him. 

And he was afraid. 

He stopped in the ship above the Light 
where Ransome lay dead. He raised his 
corded arms and cried, "No! I can't. I 
don't understand!" 

He saw Aona watching him on her sinning hilltop, not moving or speaking. And 
slow silver drops rolled from her tilted eyes 
And down her cheeks. 



Then he knew. Then he was calm and 
steady, and not very much afraid. Because 
he understood why the bright drops had 
rolled from the unhappy eyes of the Strang' 
men. 

He smiled at Aona. He took a long 
sweeping look at the sun and sky and tin 
blowing grass, and the silver shaft of he: 
standing in the midst of it. 

Then he went slowly down toward thLight. 

He knew what would happen. Aona hn 
told him. Most of his substance was in he 
universe now. Part of it was still in hi 
own. But there were atoms in him jus 
changing. 

Atoms that were — Between. 

Because of the atoms that matched it 
own, he could penetrate the Light. Th 
atoms in transition would set up a vibra 
tion in the Light that had not been in Son 
because of the balancing pull of two uni 
verses. 

The vibratory balance of the Light wouh 
be destroyed, because Son's universe hat 
no hold on it. It would he pushed bacl 
through the wall of that universe, but no 
back to its own. 

A little green roundness that could b» 
held in his hand, that yet was not round a 
all and that stretched into soaring distance 
Color and line and form that melted and 
flowed and were not. 

Son went without stopping, straight intc 
the heart of the Light. 

For an instant, or an eternity, he was 
lost in chaos. He knew nothing — whether 
he moved or was still, whether he saw 
the black-green rushing darkness or whether it was only the picture of his own fear. 

He didn't fight. He caught only two 
things to him in his mind — Ransome's 
strength and Aona, standing on her shining 
hilltop. 

An instant, or an eternity. And then 
there was stillness, a cessation. Son opened 
his eyes and looked about-^-at the space 
Between. 



MISSIVES AND MISSILES 



(Continued from f a 9* $9) 
The illustration accompanying 'Tlie Land 
of Lost Content" sold that story. And that's 
the kind of pix I like — different, The story 
was top reading as far as I am concerned. 

But the outstanding story to me was the 
one I didn't like at all. I started reading it 
several times and each time quit in disgust. 
Finally, to he fair to the author. I read it 
completely through and it still stinks! That 
story was "Sunken Universe" and that is 
just where it should have went. It was hardly readable. 

Well, that's all I have to say on the subject, 
except to add, by the way, that I'll keep on 
reading your mag even with stories like 
"Stunken Universe" ( ugh !) in it. 

Cpl. O. Kegin 
U. S. Army Hospital 
Fort Leonard Wood, Mo. 

Dear Editor : 

Your Novemmber mag was good (as SS 
usually is), especially the lung Missives and 
Missiles section. Keep it up, but try to leave 
room for the Ed's comments. 

I've been reading stf for a little over two 
years and rate SS at the top of the heap. 
I'd say your top story was FLIGHT TO 
FOREVER followed by THE LANIi OF 
LOST CONTENT. SUNKEN UNIVERSE, THE SOLI. MAKERS, DOOM 
SHIP, and STAR TAMER in that order. 

The cover was good and the inside iltas 
were fair. 

Can you tell me how I can find out about 
any fan clubs which might be in Eastern 
Mass.? 

- Futurilly vours. 

'Ted Seager. 
Marshficld, Mass. 



Well, speak up, Massachusetts. 



Dear Sir, 

I have just received the September 1950 
issue of SSS, and note that in your reply to 
Roger Dard's letter, you raised the optimistic 
question "Any other countries still to be heard 
from?" Here is another to add to the list of 
Australia, England, Holland, Germany, and 
the rest. 

There arc only a few s. f. tans here in 
South Africa, but we are every bit as enthusiastic as the more numerous readers in 
other parts of the world. The situation here 
is a difficult one as far as s. f. is concerned, 
and we enthusiasts have to resort to devious 
means in order to obtain the mags we want, 
as it is impossible to obtain them through 
normal channels. Ever since the end of 1948. 
in order to save dollars, many goods, including all pulp magazines, have been banned 
from import, and ever since then, s. f. mags, 
have been practically non-existent. Occasionally one or two get into the shops as back 
numbers, but these are rare, and for the most 
part we have to rely on the generosity of 
U. S. A. and Canadian fans, several of whom 



send us magazines regularly, as they are still 
permitted to enter if they are free gifts, 
and so do not use up any dollars. There is 
a hint contained in that last sentence— if any 
of your readers could spare the time and 
trouble to send off any mags, that they do 
not want, they would be doing a really good 
turn, and earn the grateful thanks of S. A. 
fans. 

Now for a few critical comments on 
SSS (if you can take it?) One of the 
first s. f. mags. I ever read was the January 
1941 issue of SSS which I still have in 
my possession, though somewhat battered 
with age. I was glad to see its revival, but 
there are still a few things to be improved 
upon. I will not say much about your covers 
because at least they are better than Bergey's 
efforts, though there is still too much of the 
eternal triangle and bems as yet. But your 
headings to the stories ay awful — they bear 
no resemblance to the stories they are supposed to describe, and are couched in far too 
sensational language, which makes them 
rather obscure. And, in my opinion, "The 
Big Book of Science- fiction" is far more 
acceptable than "Read it today, live it tomorrowK 1 I should hate to live some of the 
things I read about in s. f. magazines I Now 
having had the customary gripe, I hasten to 
add bow much 1 enjoy everything else about 
SSS, Your stories reach a happy medium 
between melodramatic space opera and heavy 
psychological or atom doom themes, and the 
bunk reviews and readers' column are also 
line. So keep up the good work! 

Yours sincerly, 
(Miss> Pearle Appleford 
75 Kensington Drive, 
Durban North, 
Durban, 
Natal, 
South Africa. 

To the Editor: 

A new light— in the glimmering, glittering person of Chad Oliver — lias appeared on 
the stfautasy horizon ! 

Without the least hesitation I must say 
that Oliver's story. "The Land of Lost 
Content," in the October SUPER SCIENCE 
was (and is) dne of the best I've ever read. 
While I'm still uplifted I might add that 
"The Soul Makers" by Robert Moore Williams was definitely topnolch too. Though 
I've only dabbled in science-fiction and 
fantasy reading and just have a general idea 
of what it's all about, mure stories like the 
ones mentioned might turn me into a fullfledged fan. 

Knowing Oliver personally, I feel responsible for telling your readers something about 
him. seeing that "The Land" is his first, but 
not last, published story on a professional 
leveL 

How well I reniemher the first day I saw 
Chad walking across -the campus of the 
L'niversity of Texas hack in 1946. How neat 
he looked in his space suit ! He pushed a 
wheelbarrow full of faded pulp magazines 
and was selling them to wide-eyed student* 



100 



SUPER SCIENCE STORIES 



who couldn't resist those girlie-girlie covers. 
Those who didn't make purchases or who 
sneered at stf — all of them mysteriously disappeared during the next few days. 

But let's get back to Chad's writing! I 
could write pages and pages on the beauty 
of his style, how it moves one. I jotted down 
a few comments heard about "The Land" 
on the campus when the October SUPER 
SCIENCE hit the newsstands. (You couldn't 
buy a copy now.) Here's what they said: 

Engineering student: "Gad, what a viscosity index." 

English professor: "Hmmmm. Fine style; 
but is there a message?" 

Western Union boy: "Yes, there is." 

L. Sprague de Camp : "Ye gods, Atlantis 
again !" 

Co-ed: "What does it mean? Do you 
know what it means? I don't know what 
it means?" 

Dean of Women : "That man and woman 
. . . they weren't married! I'm sure of it." 

These are only a few of thousands of ecstatic expostulations which I've heen hearing 
all month. "The Land" is probably the best 
story ever written, with apologies to the 
author of the Bible (Henry Kuttner?). Again 
I must thank SUPER SCIENCE for giving 
us such a wonderful story — and magazine. 

With best wishes 

Tom Toney, 
U. of Texas. 

P. S. 

And I want you to know that I'd still 
feel the same way about Chad Oliver's story 
even if he wasn't my roommate and even if 
he didn't have a gun in my back. 
P. S. No. 2 

All joking aside, ed., just how did that 
thing .... 

Dear Editor: 

WOW! What a story was Poul Anderson's FLIGHT TO FOREVER. It had 
everything I wanted in a story plus some. 
It was my idea of an almost ideal story; 
mind you I said almost. In a couple of places 
he could've used a little more explanation. 
But on the whole it was a great story. 

The short stories I rate thus: Merlvn's 
SUNKEN UNIVERSE— verv good; next 
Williams' THE SOUL MAKERS— pretty 
fair; almost even with that is Girth's DOOM 
SHIP; Coppers STAR TAMER was not 
exciting enough for me; THE LAND OF 
LOST CONTENT was very dry. 
Here is my Want list ; 

Triplanetary: E. E. Smith 
First Lcnsman : E. E. Smith 
Ralph 124 C 41: Hugo Gernsback 

It's small and I hope sometime in the near 
future you can fill at least part of it. 

Yours faithfully, 

Gary Clifton, 
Orchard, Nebr. 

Dear Editor: 

SSS gets such poor circulation up here in 
the Bronx that it's really an occasion to get 



two issues in a row, and this letter is being 
written in commemoration of that unprecedented feat. 

Your old logo an' "big book" blurb had 
long been a source of irritation to me, and I 
was glad to see both replaced by the new 
ones. However, the September issues did not 
meet up to expectations. The Poul Anderson 
story was, as has been mentioned, a combination of two almost disconnected ideas, and 
was only fair-to-middling. The other stories 
were uniformly poor, save for Coppel's excellent "Half -Life." The reprint, "Beyond 
Space and Time" was actually laughable. 

The November issue, however, was of a 
much higher quality. Anderson's novel was 
good, though nowhere near that excellent 
writer's best. Here are my ratings: 

1 — "Star Tamer" — Terrific! I don't like most 
of Coppel's work, but this was superb. 

2 — "Sunken Universe" — Very good. It reminds me of an early Lcinster story, reprinted in FN several years ago. 

3 — "Flight to Forever" 

4 — "The Land of Lost Content" — Many current s-f stories seem to concern themselves 
with history running in cycles. This was a 
good one, tho, and I'd like to see more yarns 
by Oliver. 

5 — "The Soul Makers" — This rather smacked 
of "The Humanoids," don't you think? 

6 — "Doom Ship" — A horror in every issue, I 
guess. This story was actually low enough 
to deserve the Paul illustration. 

I definitely approve of your policy of not 
sticking to one type of story, but don't like 
the reprints, even though the current one 
happened to be good. 

Oh yes . . . No more Zoromes — please? 
Pretty please? 

Scientifantastically. 
Morton D. Paley 
1455 Townsend Ave. 
New York 52, N. Y. 

Dear Ed: 

The only reason I'm writing this letter at 
all is Poul Anderson's story FLIGHT TO 
FOREVER in the November issue of SS. 
This story, in my opinion (who else's?), is 
the best time travel story I have ever read 
wherein a time machine was used. The fact 
that it was well-written isn't what caused me 
to like it. It was the planning and construction that got me, the smooth flow of history 
from century to century, the grandeur of Anderson's portrayal of the Galactic Empire, its 
rise, decline, and resurrection, and the way 
he worked on the emotions concerning that 
Empire. The solution, both to the battle for 
the rule of the Galaxy and for the end of the 
story, was excellent. Finlay's illo was perfect, or as near to it as possible. 

So Chad Oliver is now an author. Well, 
well ! His style seerns a lot like Bradbury's. 
Even so, he is pretty good. His writing and 
general plot, that is. There was a story, a 
novel, in a '42 or '43 issue of a mag which 
in those days had the back cover also illustrated entitled THE HOLLOW WORLD 
by Don Wilcox. It had practically the same 



MISSIVES AND MISSILES 



101 



theme. Oliver's story seemed to be merely 
a modernized and cut down version. I have 
an idea he can do better than this and I sincerely hope he will. 

Van Dongen on the cover was very good. 
Very good indeed. As long as we can't have 
Lawrence keep Van Dongen for your cover 
artist. 

The reprint story this issue, SUNKEN 
UNIVERSE, was a lot better than the last 
one but I would much prefer all new material 
in SS. Popular has three repriDt mags. If 
this isn't enough bring out another one, but 
keep 55 clean. 

The new heading on the cover and contents page is nice and looks much better. The 
old one was too comic bookish. 

My gosh, get rid of Stuart, please. That 
mess illustrating Oliver's story was just that, 
a mess. And if you won't fire Calle at least 
don't use him so much. I want Lawrence. 
Or Finlay more often. 

The shorts this issue were rather mediocre. 
Here's a listing in case anyone is interested. 

DOOM SHIP. First place. Nice gimmick. 

SUNKEN UNIVERSE. Second. Too bad 
they never translated that history. 

STAR TAMER. Third. Coppel slipped 
on this one. 

LAND OF LOST CONTENT. Fourth. 
Already commented on this. 

THE SOUL MAKERS. Fifth. Oh, NO! 

How about enlarging the Science FictioneerT Add another page. 

Sincerely (no kidding), 
Fred Stuckey 
118 No. Richard St 
Bedford, Pa. 

Dear Editor: 

Although I am a comparatively new devotee to the field of Science Fiction I can, in 



a sense, consider myself a veteran, since I've 
already read many of the most important 
anthologies in addition to being, for the past 
year, a consistent reader of the better SF 
publications now on the market. 

I find Super Science Stories up there 
among the top three SF magazines and improving all the time. If the current rate of 
improvement can be maintained this coming 
year, SS eventually stands a good chance of 
becoming the top one. There is just one thing 
I would like to ask of you. Please stay away 
from the lurid covers. That has always been 
a pet peeve of mine with any SF publication. 
I feel that these "revealing" covers give 
many intelligent pople the wrong impression 
of Science Fiction, so please do your part 
and give your magazine the dignity it deserves. 

Since I have read every one of the 1950 
issues of SS, I would like to take this opportunity to rate and discuss some of the better stories. First of all. the March issue, in 
my opinion, was undeniably the finest of the 
year. It contained what to my mind was the 
outsanding SS yarn of 1950", Raymond Z. 
Gallun's beautifully written "A Step Farther 
Out" Here is sure-fire anthology material, 
if I'm any judge of good writing. Neil Jones' 
"World Without Darkness", in the same issue, was not too far behind and the March 
publication also contained two other mighty 
fine tales, namely; Van Vogt's "Rogue Ship" 
and Arthur C. Clarke's "Exile Of The Eons." 

In the January issue I particularly liked 
Raymond Jones' "Outpost Infinity" and Noel 
Loomis* "The Long Dawn." The latter, incidentally, has already been anthologized in 
GrofF Conklin's "Big Book of Science Fiction." 

CHfF Simak's "Call From Beyond" rang 
the bell in the May issue and William Bade's 
"King Of The Stars" drew high honors in 




OPINIONS, PLEASE 

When you've finished this issue of Sopor Science Stories, 
won't you let us know what you thought of each story in it? 
Please number the items in the order of your preference. Use 
this coupon, or, if you prefer, write us 3 post card or a letter. 




The Death Star 

The Last Dark 

Danger Dimension 

High Flight 

Eternal Earthling 

The Unfinished 

Child of the Green Light. . 



The Address: 
Super Science Stories 
205 East 42nd St. 
New York 17, N. Y. 



102 



SUPER SCIENCE STORIES 



July. Also ranking high in the July issue of 
SS were MacDonald's "Half Past Eternity" 
and Sheldon's "A Bit Of Forever." The 
banner yarns of the September issue were 
Neil Jones' "The Mind Masters" (incidentally, I'm really sold on these Zorome tales and 
would like to see an aspiring SF editor put 
them together in one hound hook) and Poul 
Anderson's "The Star Beast." The moral of 
the latter story could easily be "never trust 
a tiger even when he is an ex-human being." 
I liked the reprint too, and I'm in favor of 
continuation of these relics of the past since 
I've undoubtedly missed many of the good 
ones. But when you do come up with one 
of the oldies, make sure it's a worthy one 
and not just any old yarn you happen to discover lying around in the files. 

The November issue, which I've just 
finished, was one of the better ones of the 
year. While it didn't contain an outstanding classic like "A Step Farther Out," the 
November copy of SS did harbor a bevy of 
interesting tales such as Anderson's "Flight 
To Forever" which somehow reminded me 
of Wells' "The Time Machine", and Williams' "The Soul Makers." Oliver's "Land 
Of Lost Content" and Guth's "Doom Ship" 
also were worthy reading material. I did not 
care for the reprint in this issue. 

Well, after all these roses and felicitations, 
I imagine you now expect me to come up 
with something like, "Why don't you go on 
a monthly basis?" But I'm not going to. I'm 
afraid if that happens, SS - would lose some 
of its freshness and stellar quality. . . . and 
I certainly wouldn't want that to occur. Of 
course, if you could maintain your present 
high workmanship on a monthly basis, well 
then. . . . 

Yours truly. 
Irving Slavin 
79 Columbia St. 
Bridgeport, Conn. 

Dear F.ditor : 

I have completed reading the November 
issue and would like to compliment Poul 
Anderson on his superb novel, "Flight to 
Forever." In my estimation, it was by all 
odds the best story you have printed since 
you resumed publication last year. Time 
travel stories With their eternal paradoxes 
have always been among my favorites and 
this one was a classic. I believe this is the 
first story I have - read in which the fourth 
dinientional time stream curved back on itself in such a matter that by going far enough 
into the future, a person would eventually 
return to his original starting time. 

According to Einstein, space is finite and 
curved back on itself because of the gravitational bending of light. Therefore, if time 
and space are inseparable, this theory seems 
somewhat plausihlc. Being only an amateur 
astronomer, I'll leave it to the physicists to 
pick this idea apart. 

Enough to say I did enjoy the story and 
would like to see a lot more of Anderson's 
worki aoon. 



The short stories were not particularly 
outstanding this time. I would rate them 
in about this order : 

"The Soul Makers" 

"The Land of Lost Content" 

"Doom Ship" 

"Star Tamer" 

"Sunken Universe" 

As to the question of reprints, my opinion 
is divided. A story like "Beyond Space and 
Time" is acceptable, but "Sunken Universe" 
was terrible. Why you ever chose to reprint 
this one I'll never know. Surely, you must 
have something better than this in your back 
files. 

The illustrations in Safer Science are 
usually well done and the stories have been 
improving steadily. Your letter section is 
among the best, and I always turn to it before I read any of the stories. In summing 
things up, I would rank your magazine 
among the top three published today. 

Sincerely yours, 
Curtis E. Anderson 
lOOO-.Ird Avenue Northeast 
Minneapolis U, Minnesota 



Dear Sirs ; 

Just a very short letter to tell you howmuch I en j oyed reading your story, "The 
Sunken Universe." I completed a laboratory 
course in Marine Zoology this summer and 
naturally this made the story very interesting. 

When are you going to have some more 
stories that deal in the field of biology? 
Surely not all your readers are majoring in 
physics and astronomy ! Arthur Merlyn 
must be a biologist. Am I right? 

Yours truly, 
Tarver Butler 
419 West 4th Street 
Hattiesburg, Miss. 

No, but you're close ! 



Dear Editor: 

It was interesting to sec Swikm Universe 
again, after eight years, surrounded by new 
stories more or less modern in approach. 
There are some things about it that I'm 
sure the author wouldn't want repeated, were 
he writing the story anew now; the most 
noticeable of these is the "Greetings, O Earthman" tone of much of the dialogue, a tone 
which has since disappeared from all but the 
worst science-fiction (and for good, I trust.) 
On the whole, however, the yarn struck me 
as holding its own among its 1°50 competitors 
—partly because the stories you're using in 
Super Science are essentially old-fashioned 
in type, and partly, perhaps, because no 
writer since Merlyn, for some reason, has attempted to use the specialized science of 
limnology as the background for a story. 

Physically, the new presentation left something to be desired. I suppose it is too much 
to expect a pulp illustrator to illustrate 



MISSIVES AND MISSILES 



exactly a scene in a story; but Merlyn went 
out of hit way to be specific about bis critters, so there isn't much excuse for Calle. 
If that overlength skull-headed fish in the 
picture is a caddis -worm, then I am a beagle. 
Why didn't Calle look up the caddis-worm 
in his encyclopedia, or in an elementary text 
on biology? 

Also, what are the sea-anemone and the 
jelly-fish doing in the picture? The story 
takes place in a puddle of fresh water, not 
in an ocean. And since Lavon is not much 
bigger than the rotifers and protozoa in the 
story, either of the above-mentioned sea 
animals could have devoured him without 
even noticing him passing through their gullets. All in all, I think it would have been 
better had yon used the Hannes Bok picture 
which illustrated the story when it was first 
published. It did Hot attempt to .show any of 
the animals of the Sunken Universe, but it 
did show the corolla of a rotifer, accurately 
drawn, and Lavon in proper size -relationship 
to it 

Finally; part of the effect of the story, I 
believe, depends upon the opening and the 
closing paragraphs in italics. The doubletruck, however, makes the opening paragraph 
look like a second blurb for the yarn, and 
what reader in his right mind bothers with 
a blurb? 

However, I forgive you everything. Why? 
Because of the magnificent typographical 
error on page 126, where Lavon is described 
as methodically spearing "listers." That 
must have been one of those Russian Easters 
Rimsky-Korsakov was talking about in the 
overture of the same name. 

Regards, 
James Blish 
New York, N. Y. 

Dear Editor: 

I have just finished reading my first issue 
of SSS. It happens to be the September 
issue and was purchased by my husband. 
The only reason I read it was because I 
was cooped up at home with a cold and was 
completely out of other reading material. 
Not that I have anything against science 
fiction. I like it in book form, but it seems 
that every time I pick up a science fiction 
magazine I put it down again with a groan. 

This time, however, I had no time to 
groan. I was too busy reading. This wasn't 
ordinary pulp paper fiction. This was good 
stuff. And, of course, what makes it seem 
good to me is its reasonableness. I *don't 
know whether they are the usual thing but 
I particularly liked the up-in-the-air type of 
endings I found in "The Star Beast," "T!ie 
First," "The Word from the Void,"— but I 
get awfully bored reading stories like "The 
Mind Masters." Know why? Because I 
don't like all the numbers to designate the 
machine men. I don't know how else you 
could distinguish them from one another, 
f but I always feel I either have to skip the 




SHOP-METHOD HOME TRAINING 

By an Established Resident School Prepares You 
for Many Good Jobs 

Opportunity Is everywhere for the trained Diesel-Auto 
Mechanic. Highways throng with can, busses, trucks, 
tractors. Garages and Service Stations are buar. Factories, 
ships, farms, railroads, general industry, are dependent 
upon engine power. Here's a dynamic, f a Bt- growing field 
that needs trained men who know ALL phases: Installation, operntion, maintenance and repair. Now — National 
Schools offers you a practical, ull-cm bracing- Diesel-Auto 
Mechanic's Course, including: 

Complete training in Diesels, High Speed and Heavy Duty; 
Semi-Diesels, Gasoline end Special Fuel Engines AND 
Allied Mechanics. 



TOOLS AND EQUIPMENT 

To mnk« your training corn* 
p]et«, we give you selected 
mechanics' tools and equip* 
ment, illustrated at left, including all-metal toolbox — as 
a regular 
part cf your 
instruction. 



EARN WHILE YOU LEARN 

With our practical Master Shop
Mothud Home Trnininpr, you stud/ 
at home in your ■Baft time. You receive Si-ire Time Work Lessons, 
which show you how to earn while 
yon Le»rn . . . for extra money and 
experience. You Learn, by DOING. 





NATIONAlVSCHOOLS 



FIND OUT NOW. .MAIL COUPON TODAY 



National Schools, Dept. 3-PFCD ffnitif m*Sm 1 

LmAmSSS 3», U C?«fornTI* ~> Po«tc«rd) I 

Mull n» fp.ee me hoot "Your Future in Dmsel" and sample | 



□ eittt Mr* If Veteran or V 



IOJ 



UNBLOCK 

^DIGESTIVE TRACT 

And Stop Dosing Your Stomach 
With Soda and Alkalizers 

Don't expect to get relief from headache, sour stomach, gas and had breath by taking soda and other alkaliisers if the truo eauao of your trouble ia constipation. 

In this case, your real trouble is not [n the stomach 
st all. But in the intestinal tract where 80% of your 
food is digested. And when the lower part gets blocked 
food may [ail to digest properly. 

What you want for real relief is something to "unblock" your lower intestinal tract. Something to clean 
it out effectively— help Nature get back on her feet. 

Get mild, gentle Carter's Pills right now. They 
gently and effectively "unblock" your digestive tract. 
This permits all 5 of Nature's own digestive juices to 
mix better with your food. You get genuine relief 
from indigestion so you can feel really good again. 

Buy mild, gentle Carter's Pills at any drugstore 
today. "Unblock" your intestinal tract for real relief 
tram indignation. 



LEARN 
TO 




MINT BIRDS 



ANIMALS, FISH, PETS 

EeaTaxiriermist. Save your hunting TRO.PHIES.HaveafineBome-museum. Hunters. 

kin;. FURS. Grftftt Fun. 8du« -time PROFITS. 

... J rprr DAAU Tells ALL about it. 100 one wildmEX DUUH game pictures. 4g Daces. SEND 
TODAY, don't delay. Get this WONDESFUL FREE 



OIL BURNER 

SWEEPING THE COUNTRY! 



INTO JlN Y CDAl 

Change, stove oh furnace 

CAtnanmg quick, intense 
p *beat. By fingtr-tlp con. . trol Cheaper than coal. No 
, more slioseling coal or ashet. SENT 

' ON TRIAL. Prove it pays for Itsel! Quickly 
'<s what it saves. SI bonus for lestine. We'll 
.our oivn home for one month. Write for 
. NORTHWEST MFG. CO.. 140 Mitchell. S. Dak. 

Advertising BOOK MATCHES 

SPOT CASH PROFITS . . . REPEATS 




Get started right away— WRITE TODAY! 

MATCH CORPORATION OF AMERICA 

3433-43 W. 48th PI. Dept. PG-31, CHICAGO 32, ILL 



IMPORTED BINOCULARS 

MILE 
RANGE 




o-ui r-v a- strength. Thirty-Millimeter objective. INTRODUCTORY 
OFFFR. ONLY (Sold for much higher). 10 day money
I..,-, l ,-,,.„-.. I it^,v -:-sr> CfTKOK or MONEY ORDER fft AO 
FOR S2.B3 end we prepay ^Postage. Or send $2.98 

(De Luxe Mode!, 38mm' Objective, 12% mile range. 
DORAM SALES CO. Only 93.98) 

4S0 LEXINGTON AVE., DEPT. B-801, NEW YORK, N. Y, 



SUPER SCIENCE STORIES 

numbers or otherwise read them out in my 
mind the long way — i. e., six double U-four 
hundred and thirty-eight. Either way I forget which number is which before I get to 
the second page, so it doesn't serve to distinguish them from one another. 

I'm glad I found 5"5"S. I'll probably read 
it .again. 

Mrs. Edith Garey 
K 2 L Custerdale 
Manitowoc, Wis. 



Dear Editor: 

It has come to my attention that I have 
never favored your fine publication with a 
letter. Therefore I am correcting that condition immediately. Here's it. 

I'll start off with a hymn of praise to 
Poul Anderson, who hit me right between 
the eves with "Flight to Forever." This had 
all the impact of MacDonald's "Half Past 
Eternity," plus the scope of Wells's "The 
Time Machine," and — dare I say it ? — and 
was better written than either. What's more, 
wonder of wonders, it was long enough to be 
called a novel. Suffice it to say that Anderson or any one else will have a tough job 
topping "Flight to Forever." 

The fact that "Sunken Universe" is the 
best short story embarrasses me. I was going 
to add ray voice to the others who are 
clamoring "Drop the, reprint !" But, quality 
notwithstanding, there's a place for reprints, 
several, in fact, and the pages of SSS is not 
one of them. 

Here's a brief tally, to save us both paper, 
on SSS. I LIKE: 

... practically all the stories. 

. . . Fandom's Corner and The Science 
Fictioneer. 

. . . Missives and Missiles. 

... the cuts for -these departments. 

. . . illustrations by Finlay, Calle, Lawrence, and Bok. 

. . . the opinion tally. 
I DISLIKE: 

. . . the blurbs, and in some cases, the 
titles. Too grandiosely irrelevant ! 

. . . the reprint, as stated before. 

. . . the covers, and their complete lack 
of identification with any story. 

. . . illustrations by Paul. I realize I have 
no more chance than a Bradbury-hater, but 
I just don't care for him. 

That about wraps it up, except that your 
novel is almost always a solid hit. Offhand 
1 can recall the last four: "Flight to Forever," "The Star Beast," "Half Past Eternity," and "The Death Crystal." All fine. 
And R. F, Jones's "Outpost Infinity" was 
on a par with "Flight to Forever." 

Enough. The Great One must sleep. 

Sincerely, 

Dick Ryan 
224 Broad St 
Newark, Ohio 



104 



MISSIVES AND MISSILES 



Dear Editor: 

Well, here I am again. Wait a minute I 
What do 1 mean by again? This is the tint 

time I've written. Well, I've thought about 
writing so many times and didn't get around 
to it, that it seems like I'm an old hand. 
Actually, this is the first of my missives (?) 
to ice print, (foolish boy that I am.) 

0' course, -M&M is the first thing that I 
read, so I'll start out with it. Here goes. 

The first line, and I quote it, states ". , . . 
we modestly declaimed perfection." Well, you 
aren't perfect by a long shot. The way I 
vision a perfect SSS would be about 250 
pages long, a full novel, well stapled (some 
copies I get aren't stapled with good enough 
staples and they (the mags) fall apart)— to 
continue, more Calle-Bok-and Fin lay illo's, 
an opinion tally that checks with miile, (of 
course, blurbs to fit the stories would be impossible) and, of course, a monthly mag. 
While I'm on the subject of changes, let me 
offer my Congrats on the new front cover — 
WONDERFUL— give the designer a raise. 

I suppose that I'm too early to comment on 
the Nov. ish, (I always get caught thataway) 
but I'm going to anyway. But, first tiie Sept. 
ratings ; 
1. The Mind Masters— another Prof. 
Jamesnn story, there'? nothing better. 

2. Beyond Space and Time— good enuf. 

3. The Star Beast — not really too good, but 
it had its saving points. 

4. Ultimate Quest— Hey, this one's ok it 
came close to taking 3rd if you ask me. 

5. Half-Life — Coppel always writes a good 
story, but was outclassed this time. 

6. The Undying Ones — 

7. The First— . 

8. Final Enemy— and, last AND least, 

9. The Word From the VoidNow, comes the November ish, . . . J . . 

1. Flight to Forever — excellent — r e a 1 1 y 
thrilling all the way through, (guessed 
the end tho.) 

2. The Soul Makers— I always did like 
robot stories. 

3. Sunken Universe — something new from 
the rocketslup craze. 

4. The Land of Lost Continent — This was 
different, too. 

5. Star Tamer — whoops, Coppel slipped 
this time. 

6. Doom Ship — not too good, but still readable. 

Naturally, these ratings won't compare 
with anybody else's. I guess I'm just different. 

Hey, I almost forgot— I DIDN'T like 
"Titans Goblet" — seemed amateurish to me. 

Well, it's about time for me to close my big 
mouth before you put my foot in it . . . out, in 
my poor, misguided way, I must revert to the 
Nov. M&M again. 

You say — "Seriously, people. . ." Well now, 
lad, the only things that are really interested 
in this mag are we Martians. And, every bit 
of my fifteen-legged, eight-eyed body quivers 
with protest every time you call us "people" — 
By the way, are you for real? I mean, are 




, I Aiti<" l " 9 1 .- 1) ,|-' 



IMMEDIATE OPENING 

i or 3 reliable nun with ear to call o" 
•Mary. Steady work, S1G to I 
McMSSS COMPANY 




. Sturdily 

Tf, Weigh! Only 11 NBOM. 

oally -ground, powerful lens that eiTej 
R «w field of Tijlan of 110 yards at loon 
*kU30 >w]Hr rsrds dl«*nw. Adjustable all distances. 

*~ "'■•■'■»*•»' eye width*. 15 Day MONEY SACK 

GUARANTEE. Case and straw Included- SEND NO MONEY. Pay 
poMman $4.85 plus postal chaises on delirery. Cash orders orepsld. 
Add Federal Tax. UNITED PRODUCTS CO. 
1043 S. Western Ave. Dept. KS-476 ChUw 2ft 



Hi2h School Course 

at Home 



Many Finish in 2 Years 

Go as rapidly as your time mod abilities) permit. Comm 
equivalent ta resirlE-nt school work — prepares for Mllef* 
entrance ex am s. Standard H. S. teita soppried. Diploma, 
Credittor S.^MbJacU ■Irmdr me g»ta>sl - ^ ^ B^l^i»ni*=t« tf 
in ba»ioe«» *na Indnntrr •«! iori»]!r. D™?ti« In mil iip sad all 
Soar Ufa. Ba s Hieri School mduU. 3nut Ttmr tratnlos HI. 
Frss Bolletin nnggnl, No obligation. 

i AmBrlcanSchoo1.DtptH-349.0f«elrt8ath,TOMIo3T 



Lcaru Profitable IVoft'ssion 
in QO days at Home 



MEN AND WOMEN, 18 to 60. Many Swedish 
\ Mas'a^n graduates make big money! Lane fall time 
- ' im doctors, hospitals. smaWrlvuns. elubs or 
ite nractlce. Others make aood money la 
i spare time. Prepare for future security by traln1 ins at home and qualifying; for Diploma. Anatomy 
^Jf charts and 32-page Illustrated Book FREE! 
,i The College of Swedish Masses* 
: ? Dept. 19S-C, 41 nt. Pesfton, ChleaaD II 



INVENTORS 

Learn how to protect your Intention. Specially prepared 
"Patent Guide" containing detailed Information eoneemlnr 
patent protection and procedure with "Becoid of Intention" 
form will be forwarded to you upon requeit — without oh ligation. 
CLARENCE A. O'BBJBi A HARVEY JACOBSON 

Registered Poferif Attorneys •> 
US-A DiiMd National Bldg. Washington S f D. C 




„ Quick relief with Dent's. Use Dent's Tooth 
V*\ fjm, J Cum or Dent's Tooth Drops for cavity tooth- J ^. aches. Use Dent's Dental Poultice for pain or 
, soreness in gums or teeth. At all drug stores. 



DENT'S 



SUPER SCIENCE STORIES 

you really a BEM? My best friends are I'll 
have you know. And please, mystery boy, let's 
have some comments on the letters — ok? 
Well, g'by now, 

Just one oi those BEM's 

Gregg Calkins 
% C. A. A. 
Panguitch, Utah 
P. S. I wrote a poem— wanta hear it?— 
(don't answer that) 

I've two bits in my jeans, 
But, my oh my, 
SSS just came out. 
Now I'm two bits shy. 

I've two bits in my cords, 
But, my oh my, 
FN just came out. 
Now I'm four bits shy. 

I've two bits in my dress pants, 
But, my oh my, 
FFM just came out, 
Now I'm six bits shy. 

I've two bits in my jeans. 
But, my oh my, 
AMP just came out, 
Now I'm-ONE BUCK shy. 

Every other month 

This happens, my friends. 

Where, oh where, 

Can these trends end? 

Moral; I wish they were monthly III 

You're not perfect, either, Gregg. The 
word was "disclaimed." 



Dear Editor: 

An ardent Science and Fantasy reader, 
I came across your Super Science for the 
first time this week; and it has my enthusiastic support from now on, you can be sure. 

I enclose my opinion of your stories, and 
should like to add that if Mgt. St. Clair 
would adopt a more literary style she'll be 
a very effective writer. 1 appreciate that 
"Child of Void" is supposedly narrated by 
a child — but still . . . 

Now for a grouch ! ! 

In the copy I bought on the index-page 
is noted a story "Impossible", by Ray Bradbury. This story is not in the Book! It Now, 
I was very disappointed, as Ray is one of 
my favorite science-fiction authors, and I 
should like to know why the story is claimed 
in the index, but does not appear. 

Whatever the reason, you have gained another reader, anyway. 

Yours sincerely 

Robert G. Lauder, 
148 Burmullocb Road, 
Balornock, Glasgow, N. 
Scotland. 



106 



MISSIVES AND MISSILES 



Dear Editor: 

This morning your November issue arrived, for the first time you sent it to me, 
before I saw a copy on the newsstands. 
Congratulations I In this regard you have 
been getting progressively better every month, 
until now you are perfect ! However I am 
not renewing my subscription for the reason that the magazine comes rolled up, and I 
have a hard job flattening them for my s.f. 
library. But I will continue to support your 
magazine with newsstand purchases. 

T. Engel 
149-20tli Avenue 
Whitestone, N. Y. 

Dear Editors : 

Just want to send my thanks for publishing a great magazine like Super Science 
Stories. Without a doubt it is one of the top 
Science Fiction magazines on the market today. I've read a few others and I can tell 
you that the difference between them and Si".? 
is startling. 

So I want to say thanks for being editors 
after my own heart and your magazine is 
unsurpassable as it is now. So please, please 
don't ever change it. 

Sincerely, 
S. S. 

Boston, Mass. 

Dear Editor: 

"Flight To Forever" was a natural. "The 
Soul Makers" and "Sunken Universe" — Hot 
Dan ! "The Land of Lost Content" and 
"Doom Ship" were also very good. To the 
"Star Tamer" goes the booby prize as its 
casualness and nonchalance contradicts the 
responsibility, mathematics and vigilance necessary for interstellar travel. All in all, a 
most satisfactory November issue. Salute! 

Bill Vissaris 

133 W. 84th Street 

New York 24, N. Y. 

Thank you one and all. See you in two 
months. 





OPINION TALLY 






November, 1950 




1. 




1.4 


2. 




3.5 


3. 




3.6 


4. 


Land of Lost Content 


3.7 


5. 




3.8 


6. 




, 4.3 



#2 HAWAIIAN WIGGLE* 



The old favorite— a world-beater when Large-Month Bass 
and other yame fish seek shelter in pads, snags and brush. 
Casting size (5/8 02.) or light tackle and spinning size 
(1/4 oz.) $1.15 ea. Casting size with double spinner $1.25. 
SHALLOW RUNNER y/ WON'T HAN© UP 




MORE FLASH 
MORE ACTION 
—.MORE fISHf 

\ Choice 4 colon 

FRED AR80GAST t CO.. inc.. 2123 w. north si., irroks. orio 



l CATALOG — FULL OF PICTURES OF CATCHES 



fw~ MAKE EXTRA MONEY 



. EVERY BUSINESS EVERYWHERE 
USES UNION LABEL BOOK MATCHES 

No experience needed to earn bis dsfly eominiutoa*. 
U* ■ *tir*.-t tmrtnry r^prpspnfative of the world'* lRr?Mt 
exrioilTt UNION LABEL Book Mitch manaf»rtnr*T 
Pros pert 9 ever/ where. Feature 
Glamour Girls. Hillbillies, 
seen lea and dozens of other 
strlcs— ■ Rouble Book) — Jumbo 
Books— n earl jr 100 color combination*. New. bidder portfolimakee thl* fsiteac selling lin 
a real profit maker for jau. 
Write TODAY for full details. 





TRAVEL for 
* UNCLE SAM 



i^M^^^SM^ START 
^^aBySSS?'^ as high as 
$3,450.00 Year 

Prepare NOW for 
next Eliminations 
Emergency Program 
VETERANS CET SPECIAL Creating Thousands 

PREFERENCE New Job! 

Manv examinations — """"""" "".T" 71 71 

.xp.et.j».n / FRANKLIN 

City Mail Carrier. / INSTITUTE 

City Pojtaffke Clerk* / ,--„. r . mrrnmrIIC ronirollerti 

StenoRraphen-Typisti / lNo - Go " rnm "' x Controlled. 

Messengers, / Dept. N-89 

Liquor Inspector*— ' Rochester 4, N. Y. 

uiiSlftZ* & <° "** of 

40-P3ge Book 40 -pace book wllh: (1) A full de»
on Civil Service O n-.i-ii™ of C. S *.<i*«mrt.<-.it Inhsi III 

FREE y A list nf t'. 8- GnTernmBnl Jnbjj (3) 

/ Tell me bo* to qusllfr for ■. lob. 

Mail Coupon / 

today— / 

SURE / «*&■" 

"I< / Clt, Vt*T 

107 



Borrow $50 to $300 

Need money? No matter where yon j*' ^i^aBa^BBBk. 
Bye ...you an borrow BV mail, L^atff^T^B 

unM to tm.m thu easy, quick, WTTTV ' 111 I 

confidential w B y Noondorsera 4 ■ i ifJIV 
needed. Fmpiov'^ mrn& womenof ^L^J-^dBBP*^"^^^ 

good character eligible. Solve yoar^ 
money problems quickly and in complete privacy with ■ iMf 
made fay mall, Employer, relatives and friends willnot know 
you are applying for a loan. Convenient monthly payments. 
Rash coupon— giving occupation— for Application Blank sen! 
FREE in plain envelope. No obligation. Slate FlnancaCo., 
210 State Finance Bids;., Dapt. T-7 1 , De» Moines 8, 

"""STATE FINANCE CO., Dopl.T-71, 

210 Stat* Finance Bklg.. Des Moln« B. Iowa 

Please roah FREE Application Blank. 

NAME ■ — j 

ADDRESS | 

CITY.. 
| Occupei 



STATE™. 




SEND NO MONEY ?f" d . n « n "^ w !L»i f w » rth 



FREE 

rO SADDLE 

HORSE 
OWNERS 



. Write for FREE 
Catalog that has saved real 
money for thousand* nf 
horsemen. Describe, _ 
400 popular itemsofEngl: 
and American "tack." I ship 
saddlery on approval. Write 
today. 

"litde ioe" TIESErVPELD 
Dept. 14 shm> Baltimore L, Md. 





JARTOONISTS' EXCHANGI 

Dept. 483, Pleasant Hill, Ohio 



CRIME 



YOUR 
BUSINESS 



ON THE SIDE OF THE LAW.' 

Help fight prime! . . . Earn steady good pay 
as a Finger Print Expert or Investigator. 

I. A .S. trains you — by easy, low-oast homo 
study lessons. Learn this exciting work: in 
spare time. Write for full details nowl 

OVER 800 POLICE BUREAUS... 

Employ I. A.S. -trained men . . . proof of what 
I.A.S. can do. Write today (state age) for 
details. No obligation. No salesmen will call. 

INSTITUTE OF APPLIED SCIENCE 

Dept. 2243, 1920 Sunnytids Avenue 
Chicago 40, Illinois 



SUPER SCIENCE STORIES 



(Continued from page 27) 
wail of the damned when I left the caverns 
and headed for the place I'd left my suit. 
Qyylao was different now ; Qyylao was in 
its death-throes. 

I found the hiding place that I had 
located in juxtaposition to the city, which I 
had known would at least uot change 
location, and in an hour I had the Omicron 
and the radar-unit ready to take me back to 
the lugger. 

I had almost ten hours of air left, and in 
less than half of that time I was back within 
the familiar confines of the lugger's smelly 
control-cabin. 

I don't know how long I worked Qyylao. 
A month, maybe two, I don't know. Long 
enough to fill my hull with ore until the 
seams strained at their welds, anyway. I 
loaded up good because I knew I wouldn't 
be coming back. 

And then — well, I'm Joe Kosta, not the 
Great Judge. And there, could no longer 
be danger for me. So, if it was dreams they 
wanted. . . . 

I made sure my helmet was dogged on 
tight, and then I went back and threw the 
master switch, and I could sense that all at 
once, the moaning had ceased, and the 
people of Qyylao were once again at peace 
with their universe. 

And I blasted for home. For Earth. 

You can have your Utopia, your 
Shangri-La, your never-never land of idleness if that's what you want. 

Earth stinks with sweat and cries in the 
night with pain and sorrow, and works 
until it drops, exhausted, with each new 
day of half-seen hopes and broken plans 
suddenly gone its way, like the thousand' 
before it, into eternity. 

Earth is heartbreak, sometimes it's 
laughter, but always it's the struggle of life 
and death every second you move on it* 
great wide face. 

But it's no illusion. 

At least, not for Joe Kosta. 



108 



THE LAST DARK 



(Continued from page 35) 

"What an indelicate simile," Dr. Sbrongtsan said sharply. "You mean an island 
paradise, perhaps, or a Garden of Eden. 
Or possibly the crest of Ararat." 

"Call yourselves what you like; I wish 
that I were only there. I haven't time for 
figures of speech right now." The manager 
sounded very agitated. "I'm awfully busy. 
They're nere, you know ! " 

"They're here? Who's there?" 

"Nobody bothered to consult me about 
this damned Nirvana Bomb, of course," 
the manager wailed. "No! I'm just exiled 
up here to take the brunt of the invasion. 
But I could have warned you if I'd been 
given a chance." 

"Invasion? Warned? Whatever are you 
babbling about?" But the Director had a 
sensation of dropping into a deep, dark pit, 
for he thought he knew all too well. He 
had been expecting and dreading this. 

"The invaders are here, you dimwit! 
They've already landed on the dark side, 
and are setting up their launching gear for 
the final lap to Earth. There's nothing we 
can do about it except sit and twiddle our 
thumbs now. But you'll be catching it soon 
as they arrive there, because the radiations 
don't faze them a bit." 

"Who, dammit?" Dr. Sbrong-tsan yelled 
furiously. 

"How should I know who? Never saw 
any of this kind before. A great mass of 
Outsiders that's come sailing in from the 
general direction of the nearer planets, 
though I can't easily describe 'em. I can't 
even make any sense out of them except 
they've been waiting for this chance and 
now you've given it to them. When they 
saw what had happened the}' came right on 
over. And, my friend, if you think your 
local Outsiders were barbarians, wait until 
you get a load of these babies!" 

The Director was trembling so violently 
he could not lift his hand to turn off the 
screen. "Good Lord !" he mumbled. "Won't 



FREE! 

ROOSEVELT 

STAMP 

This beautiful postage 
stamp. Issued by the 
Republic of Cuba, in 
memory of President 
Franklin Delano Roosevelt, sent absolutely 
free together with a 
copy of our informative 
booklet "How to Collect Stamp*" 
and our illustrated price lists. 
Supply limited — please do not 
request more than one. 
Mall coupon today] 



ALSO FREE B O-O K 



LITTLETON STAMP CO. f 
Sox 803, Littleton, N. H. 




| LITTLETON STAMP CO., 

■ Box 803, Littleton, N. H. 

I Please rush items described. (Print Plainly)! 



I Addri 
I 



City , Stats. 




This is your opportunity to 
get into an ESSENTIAL, exciting, fast-moving job. Be a 
licensed Radio-TV Broadcast Operator. 
Be the man in the studio control room 
. . . meet famous people . , . earn BIG 
MONEY for interesting work. 
No need to quit your job! You can qualify for your First Class FCC License at 
home . . . learning in your spare time. 
BIG HOME LABORATORY EQUIPMENT KITS! Clear modern instructions. 
FREE placement to help you secure a top 
pay job. Get full information today. 



CENTRAL RADIO AND TELEVISION SCHOOLS, INC. 

Dept. Z, 1644 Wyandotte, Kansas City 8, Ms. 

Tell rne how 1 can qualify at home, for a big pay 

job in Radio & TV. This does not obligate me. 

NAME AGE 

ADDRESS 

CITY ZONE.... STATE 



10S 



SPORT SHIRTS-50 ( Each 



Brand-New, Rayon Gabardine Shirts 
in the Latest Styles and Shades! 

LEARN HOW yon con bay finest -quality. Buperbrj 
tailored BRAND-NEW Snort Khirta for yourself, for 
vour family and friends AT LESS THAN MANUFACTURER'S COST1 Jnat show the magnificent 
TOPP'S Line of work clothes, uniforms, shirts, jackets, raincoats to friends, neigh bore, business acauaintances. EARN BIG PROFITS in Spare Tim* and net 
brand new rayon gabardine sport shirts at BOc each I 
Rash name, address at once for full details -FREE ! 
TOPPS, Dept. 731, Rochester, India 




lc from W^^.p^'PBlBtti fru^Swllnci* w'lnSJw 
& Taki ardtrifremf) imJi/ Earn Mwyl Act now I 

SAMPLES FOR T»IAiai.r.« 



. 1447. AMBON S, 



e in your favorite style, *iie i 

you for sending orders for only 3 
- ;t >■■>.] i «i jrariimilT. Writ* far 
■dnR^gj|rei of l.ir-t tuhlon* oiih 



AND EARN CASH TOO - 6q to 

In roar (wanuM- bSTI Writ* TODJ. . . 

HARFORD FROCKS, Dent. D-3II8, Cln. 25. 





Buy Direct From Factory 
Write for free booklet 
end price list 
INDEPENDENT IRON WORKS 
2416 E. 23rd St. Dept. PP-3 
Los Angeles 58, California 



$095 

S VHP 




INVENTORS 



■/"patent B k* f rrE[blefe * 1 ^■■tent Attorney*, Send for copy of 

McMORROW, BERMAn'sT dTvTdSON™' 

Registered Patent Attorneys 

WashlnBl on ' * 



ISO-V Victor Bui 



World's Smallest Radio $4.99! 




■ _ I*. VKK • ". t 


Tl'liEr. HAITVTi7t:s HB F.l.l i TRIC POWER 
■ I-I.I G JNS 1 NSKQttH Hm redur <TT>r cry<ul 
end nerEonai phr.no, smq hund dial— Beauti11I Red-Sllver pla5l.tr eili*. GUARANTEED TO 



WORK if Initrvic 



are followed or money 
1 rnr rtin! tTSK IT MOST 

s'*o ONLT si.oo una pay w, i_mi nr-taRe on »rriT»l ir «fvl 

- . 1 - ' ' D '25S™S JJJJjj ttrn 



- MPTANTE AFRMT, KIT, LIMITED NUM£-^>RDER NOW TO_ASSURE EKES? 1 



' KEARNCT.* NHRAIKA 



SUPER SCIENCE STORIES 

we ever get a little peace in this world?' 

"Hell, no !" the manager snapped, and 
then he shrieked and the screen was abruptly empty. 

After some minutes Dr. Sbrong-tsar 
rose, but he was shaking so badly he hac 
a difficult job getting his glass to his lips, 
Then he stood swaying, his eyes glazed, 
and stared up at the moon. Finally he tore 
his gaze away from that still, hypnotic 
sphere and shuffled aimlessly about the 
apartment. In the shadows he stumbled 
over an obstruction, and peering down at it 
he saw that it was the metal box he had 
showed to the Minister. The box the old 
yak-herder had found. 

He looked at it for a time, and his trembling gradually left him. He glanced out of 
the window and saw gayly-colored lights 
in the offices of His Excellency the Minister 
in the upper reaches of the looming Potala 
across the courtyard. He heard music and 
laughter. 

The Director picked up the box and 
went out on his balcony into the moonlight. 
He was quite familiar with the simple 
mechanism that exploded this rude bomb, 
it was no more mysterious to him than a 
bow and arrow. He thought, Better an 
archaic atom blast than starting all over 
again with a, new set of Outsiders. 

Suddenly he went at it with a silent, 
efficient ferocity, working with great haste. 
When he had done the job of arming it, he 
set it again on the stone floor and picked 
up his half-empty glass. He looked once 
more at the moon, but saw nothing unusual 
there. A spasm of doubt and fear crossed 
his mind, and he firmly banished it. 

"You can't win," he told himself calmly. 
"There'll always be more of 'em, somewhere. Stars and lice. ... So what the 
forty-ninth Hell!" He bared his teeth, 
gathering his sweeping robe about him, 
and squinted his almond eyes toward the 
sky. 

The bomb went off. 



110 



THE UNFINISHED 



(Continued from page 85) 
we look to Mike Falstaff Bruin — if Mike 
had brains?" 

"Well, a bear has real strength. A 
bear — " 
■ "Flabby." 

"What do you mean, flabby?" 

"The way a frog would look to us, 
maybe. A frog just asking to be .skinned 
alive. I've a hunch we'd grate on a bear 
in more ways than a bear would grate 
on us. I've — Eddy, look! 

"He's holding a metal cylinder, Eddy. 
He's coming toward us with a metal 
cylinder in his paw!" 

"It must be a ray-gun. If we don't get 
them first — " 

A dull roar rang out in the bridge room. 
The clicking stopped. 

The old one looked at me. 

"Lad," he said, "what's a bear?" 

"You've got me!" I said. 

"That's what those beasts called us — 
bears. They said we just looked like men 
to ourselves !" 

I laughed. "If we just look like men 
we've got a lot of company. There are 
men like ourselves on every planet capable 
of supporting life in the Galactic Universe. Any school kid knows that parallel 
evolution holds good everywhere in space. 
Why, it's as universal as the second law 
of thermodynamics." 

"You're right. But, just supposing — " 

"It admits of no argument. Everywhere in space biological evolution follows 
the same pattern — unicellular organisms, 
spiny invertebrates, amphibians, reptiles, 
primitive Arctoid camivora distinguished 
by their massive bodies, short limbs and 
rudimentary tails, and. finally, man. 

"Sure I know, but — " 

"Did you ever see a bear ? You've done 
a lot of star-hopping in your time." 

"You're right, of course. It's plumb 
crazy. Maybe we better break up that recording." 




Full Details SEND TODAY 



• a sm Boswtst m riWWitl 




TANNERS SHOE CO., 762 Boston 10, Mass. 



I CHRONOGRAPH WRIST WATCH I 




$7.50 



Lifetime Guarantee 'oV^S™ 
" DIALS— 5 HANDS— 2 BUTTONS 



I nr 'HmpnlH-c. Ha* fiwwp-SPi-ind Huti 

II ou .s,.,-.,„i1 count. .Sn-'mrt Diol rarr.rt 
1 4B mlnuUa. Third Dial Wan rtcM-t 

IODIMNDENT MOVIMCNT* 

rkcaiwr work! vrifii mlior hand* an 

dual u *^.. a t^»ante_lIn]«I__ 

•latanl faaof thla 
• IT.no. 

11 rn.-p it onTir |7.5f> plua 
ffl.IS > Sana check or mon*r 
Or miiI c.o 11. pint 

V. 



".14™ 



nhnnr* Ut 



MARDO SALES CORP., 480 Uxh 8 to«Av»., 



ARTIST 



Draw for Money -Learn in Spare Time 

Connnarclil Art, Deilinint, Carlamlsi — all !■ 
an* ciiinpltiii oourm Trained Arum art up tela 
of enuring IBS, SKO ind roar* a week. No ein»rl(-ii-a necesj»r:r. We teioh lUp-by-ttep. Our 
Fam qui met bod hu trained UuniMnOh turn 
1914. TWO ART OUTFITS iiirniibao. tew 
I tutllna, saw term*. Cwiru St. 1. ApfmMl. 



M AIL COUPON FOR FREE BOOK », f 



Street , 

citr .. 



111 



NO Selling ... NO Demonstrating . . . 
. , , NO Collecting ... NO Investment 

And jot, our mon um mi to 1200 ror week listing put due 
accounts of retailers, doctors, schools and merchants of all 

tmm 

Our oollectloc sat-rloe is wsleonied and needed by every 
business ert ending consumer credit. 

Tour only duty la to lis 1 the name, ad drees, amount and 
date of charge of debtor* an anion your clients are ready 
to give up. The rest is up to QS. 

You will be dealing •xclasltely with the root* substantial 
dtlrens of each community. 

If you can make, an lmprearlon sufflclently dignified to 
can prospective clients to permit your inspection and discussion of their accounts, this Is your opportunity to earn 
some or the biggest money of your Ufa. Wo experience necessary. Work full or part time . 

Men from ages 30-70 preferred. Must be free to trareL 
Writ* or wire today 

Prtnittent. METROPOLITAN FINANCE CORPORATION 

Temple Building. Dept. P-31, Kansas City, MIikuM 




_. Know how. to break and 

___ horsen. WrilA trniav fnf thtx kenl 
FREE, together wltn special offer of 
a course In Animal Breeding. If you 
.vetted In CaJrlog and Elding the saddle 
check here < i Do U loday — tune. 



I STUDY AT HOME for Business Success 
and LARGER PERSONAL EARNINGS. 40 years expert instruction — over 
114,000 students enrolled. LL.6. Degree 
awarded. All text material furnished. 
Easy payment plan. Send for FREE 
BOOK — "Law and Executive Guidance" — NOW 1 
AMERICAN EXTENSION SCHOOL OF LAW 

Dept. B-36, 646 N. Michigan Ave., Chicago 11, Illinois 



git A rmt sun 



AND START IN BUSINESS C 

0*4 your made-t 

ooet, taking ordei 




! DO 1 YOU NEED JONET? $40, 00 IS YOUBS 



'CHEERFUL CARD CO., Dept. BC-1. WhitiPTa' 



START YOUR OWN BUSINESS 



DEPT. CU-PBL. Fre 



Bating U one of America's bleh Industries lr n-ogca. 
Nearly depression-proof. Thorough basic home eoura 
lays sound foundation. If ynu hive aptitude, write fo. . , 
FRFEBWKLET/'Opportunitteeln Commercial Baking 
National Batons School,835D>verMyPkwy,Di>L1413,Ci!ica — • '■' ^ 




-so™!* Pho^"»phy'.*eSS 



SUPER SCIENCE STORmS 

"Why should we do that?" 

"I don't know. Just having it around 

gives me the jitters." 

"We're keeping it," I said. 

It was utter nonsense any way you 
looked at it. 

On one little planet in the mighty sweep 
of star fields stretching out in blazing 
splendor for a million light years a loathsome little biped, fleshy pink, with no fur 
on its face, had said we just looked like 
men to ourselves. 

"I've been thinking," the old one said. 
"I've been thinking how a single grain of 
sand, dropped into a big, intricate machine, can clog the works and send flywheels spinning off in all directions. If 
that grain is hard and bright enough — " 

"You've got to master atomic theory 
before you can have space flight," I said. 
"You saw those beasts. Did they look like 
they had that kind of brightness inside of 
them?" 

I laughed again, because the old one 
had looked for a minute like the wilted 
edge of a great rug. 

Suddenly he was joining me in my merriment, his rich baritone booming out in 
the bridge room. 

Highest among the virtues of man is 
that supreme confidence in himself and 
his destiny which can brook no rival, 

I stood up in majestic confidence, 
watching my image rise with me on th« 
polished metal surface of the naiqgatior 
dial. 

But it was not myself as an individual 
I saw. In the sturdy chest, covered with 
a rich matting of white fur,, in the long 
tapering face and deepset eyes that 
smouldered with undying fires, I saw myself as the apex of a pyramid, the culmination of five million years of evolutionary striving. 

How had the poet phrased it? 

Eternal man, whose name is blazoned 
large on all the starry void . . . 



THE SCIENCE FICTIONEER 

(Continued from pnge 37) 
that is funny (as in the title yarn), you 
are going to find yourself laughing out 
loud ; when they want to throw a scare 
into you (witness "The Twonky" and 
"Mt'jnsy Were the Borogoves"), you will 
- not escape the sensation of teetering at the' 
edge of a dangerous height. The world the 
Kuttners create is a nightmare world — 
nightmare fear, and even nightmare humor 
— but it is a nightmare you'll want to explore, at a safe distance. 

Besides the three stories mentioned, the 
book contains "What You Need'*, "The 
Cure", "Exit the Professor", "See You 
Later", "Jesting Pilot", "This Is the 
House". "Rain Cheek" and "Compliments 
of the Author", of which all are marvelously competent and "Rain Check" and "Jesting Pilot" are superb. The jacket design, 
by K. Chester, contains a drawing by Edd 
Carticr. 

"THE HOUSE THAT STOOD STILL" 

by A. E, van Vogt. Greenberg: Publishers; $2.50. 

This is the story of a man named Allison 
Stephens, investigating a mysterious house 
and its spectacular occupants. The house 
turns out to be a space-ship; the occupants 
to be weird, inimical immortals. There is 
also a great deal of additional material 
which comes in between, but it is not likely 
to mean much in synopsis to anyone who 
has not^read the took. For van Vogt's 
talent for red herrings, false clues and plot 
threads that lead nowhere shows as clearly here as in any of his better work. The 
present volume is cast in much the form 
of a mystery thriller, but with a significant difference: The conventional mystery 
is a puzzle in which the reader attempts 
to guess which of a thousand possible happenings the author will use to end the 
story. Whereas in this, as in other van 
Vogt, the puzzle is to guess which, if any, 
the author will leave out. 




113 



MEN! WOMEN! 

New Car 9 lve jL^^^ 
as Bonus! <f*!^ 

mm 



TAKE ORDERS fur 

Kalloiullg MetrtUtt 

NYIONS 

GUARANTEED NINE MONTHS 

Sensations! Guarantee crest


RUED 

TWO NEW CARS 

... and as much as 
$120.00 In one week 

;. \::.—;-;. ' ~: 

f P Ti" i< w init S«i«r lino. 



wear oat or even snag from any ii 

range whatever... within NINE MONTHS. . .tjependlna 
...theyarerepla^FKEEOFCHARGE. Now 
uidr.lyhii 1 ' 



ildup fine, steady, year-' i 



quantity 

der it's easy tc 

eome. Es ml nps start immediately. Lot 

na*ure»— Ralph Shearer made (67.11, first wak— Mrs. Paul 
fc»t*s,|42.i>S— Mrs. IveyGentry, J43.ST. Doris Jensen In addi tion to m»lrinnas much aa $17.00 in ■ efnsle day. earned two 
ears ai EXTRA BONUSES. Learn how you can make money 
In your foil or spare timo without a bit of proviooB experience. 

SEND NO MONEY. ..Just Hose Size 

When yon send for Selling; Outfit. I also send your ehoica of 
Nylons or Socks for your personal use. Don't loss a minute. 
Rush name on pennypostrard for full money -makinc fseta 
on Sensational Sales git. Send hose sisc, too. Lowall Wilkin, 
WILKNlTHOSIERYC0., B 795Midwey.Breenfia)d,Ohla 



EASY NEW METHOD 

SHOWS HOW TO 




TRY IT ON 

MONEY-BACK OFFER 

I Now let Bab Wet!, tidio'l fivsrile lulUf 
I ptayai, show you he* I Moit "Coumi" hiva 
I only 6 at I pleturas-bul Bob's new msiiiod 
tl ptiotoirtphs' II oelonty Isichti 
otihewi ■■-■".»-.'-■-'(■■.■*":'■••-< 
1 linitn. elc. Moil oirisrt eftst ■ few ieir|»— 
1 Bob provldst 101!-eho»en lot Ihsli ladla 
I popularity <o you timing tnd play right ilont 
1 wllh yaw fsvotil* radio program or tacordil 

I SEND NO MONEY: mmt 

sima and addtati IS Bab W*tl tnd pay poilntn tl 69 ptui COO and 
postage SUrt plsylni beautiful chordt the rety firit day. Bi playmt 
beautiful musir In two weeki Of let your money back. 

BOB-WEST ».%i»SSS iTSE 



yout flngeti 

101 SONGS 



You Practice COMMUNICATIONS 

I send you parts to build- m ^,?i"L c r; 

* r . i ' s3 \ou build this low 

this transmitter ^ & * m,3LMK 

I, |*-- sS' « ™ tors, make many 


You Practice Radio SERVICING 

on this modern radio you WSS 8 
build with parts 1 send hshffSffiS 

r _ ^ „ Radio Receiver! I also send 
iSS'iSsSJfe^j®^ pa'ls to build many other Radio 
rf&i^^^g^^^^^^A circuirs. You uae equipment 

Jk '^^S^ffiZirKT*^- - ' to earn EXTRA 





J TRAINED 
THESE MEN 



^Wkui( |l 'ti "wARD. 
Rifecfitk! Ftrk. New Jersey. 



u;::.-; -L J STREJT


i ■ far » hrPy-..- '■-rn'inri- Sen-* 



Veterans 

Get this training 
under G. I. Bill. 
MAIL COUPON 



Have YourOwn Business 

3 



Learn Servicing or Communications 
Practice at Home in Spare Time 




Broadcasting Siaiions, expanding i 
of Aviation and Police Radio. Micro-wsve Relay, Two-w__ 
Radio for buses, taxis, etc, are making epportuntiea for 
i Servicing and Communications Technicians and FCC; : : Licensed Operators, 

.-ff Television is TODAY'S Good Job Maker 

™ In 1950. over 3.000,000 TV tela Mid. By 19S«, 2G.O0O.0O0> 
"™* TV acta estimated. Over 100 TV Stations now operating, 
ies predict 1,000 TV Stations. This means more jobs, good pay 
ilied men all over the United States and*Csnada. 

Many Make $10 Extra a Week in Spare Time 

Kicp your jot. whilt training _HundifJ' -i ::,*.::■[ !■ 



experience, aome 
principles from 



VISION TECHXICIANS i trained hi 
only a grammar school education. Lean. 

illustrated lessons, Get PRACTICAL E V.TL" lENCt] — build" valuable 
multiteater — experiment with circuits common to Radio and Television. 
Keep all equipment, Many stjdcmi make t5, 810 extra a week flxiaf 
neighbors' Radios in spare time. SPECIAL BOOKLETS start leacaiBX 



you the day you enroll. 

Send Now For 2 Books FREE— Mail Coupon 

Send now for my FREE DOUBLE OFFER You — •> — ' 

show yon how you lea] L * 
In Radio-Television.
j"e. lM U IT P ™Vr"lder 
Injtirate. Washington 



°™CR1 rational' Radio 
C. Our SBth Y< 



Many N R.I. trained men start their own RadifvTt-ievisian sales and service buiiMM wrtfcoat 
capital. Let »• shew you how job. too, em be 
your own boss, have a food tocora* from yuur 
" " .- F.EE Or-:.. 



1 «fl. f. «, SMITH. FrHldex 

I NaB^lTa*tehMlrbit». W»«*ragtona, O.C. 

t Mail In* Sample Lesson and tW-puje Took 

a about Hcnr to Win Success in Sadio-trie
l vision. Both FREE. (No Salesman arlfl 

■ «!L Pleas* write plaiidy.> 



Nanou. 





BULOVA 

Self-winding 
"WATERTIU" 

• SFl f ■ WINDING 
» WAUH- RtSISTAN? 

• i . J E W f I 5 



J 



SEND FOR 
FREE CATALOG 



Simply Indicate your selection on the coupon below 
and forward it with $1 and a brief note giving 
your age, occupation, and a few other facts about 
yourself. We will open on account for you and., 
send your selection to you under our Money Back 
Guarantee. Pay the postman the required Down 
Payment and the balance in easy monlhy payments, 
if you are not satisfied, we wilt refund all payments mode — upon return of the merchandise. 




ister En


A158/C61 

7 Diamond 
gagement Ring, 3 Diomond Wedding Bond. I4K 
yellow or white Gold. 
Send $1, pay 7.75 upon 
delivery, $8 a month. 



87.50 A207/C204 



$f25 



7 Diamond Engagement 
Ring, 12 Diamond Wedding Band. 14K yellower 
white Gold. Send $1, pay 
1 1 .50 upon delivery, 
1 1.25 a month. 




D151 



49.50 



SEND $1 WITH COUPON— PAT DOWN PAYMENT 
UPON DELIVERY— EASY MONTHLY PAYMENT5 

L. W. Sweet, 25 West 14th St. (Dept. P-26) 
New y e rk 11, N. V. 

Enclosed find Jl deposit. Send me No. 

Upon 



Man's Ring. 2 Diamonds, 
tenter, simulated Ruby.; 
I4K yellow Gold. Send 
$1 , pay 3.95 upon delivery, 4.50 o month. 



2 Carat genuine Zinon of 
diamond-like brilliance. 
14K yellow Gold. Send 
(1, pay $1 upon delivery, 1 .50 a month. 



All Prices Include Federal Tax 




MAIL ORDER DIVISION FiNLAY 5TRAUS, INC. 
. .25 W. 14th St., NEW YORK 1 1, N. Y. Dfpt P-26 



