MARS CHILD BY CYRIL JUDD 



CHAPTER ONE 

JIM KANDRO couldn't pace 
the corridors, because there 
weren't any. The Colony's 
hospital was simply an extra room 
built onto the doctor's rammedeafth house. They still called it 
"earth,'' though it was the rust-reddened soil of Mars. 

The narrow space between bed 
and wall cramped his restless legs; 
the monotonous motion weaiicd his 
arm. But Jim stayed on, doggedly 
determined to see the thing through, 
rubbing his wife's back and whispering reassurances, as much to 
himself as to her. 

"Why don't you let me take over 
for a while?" the doctor suggested. 
Jim's usefulness was over now; the 
man was only communicating his 
own panic to his wife. "Go in the 
other room and lie down, or take a 
walk outside if you want to. Nothing's going to happen for a while 
yet." 



19 



"Doc . . ." The man's voice was 
rough with anxiety, but he held 
back the frantic questions. "Please, 
Tony," he said simply, "I'd rather 
stick around." He fixed a smile to 
his face as he bent over Polly again. 

Anna came in before Tony had 
quite decided to call her. It was a 
talent she seemed to have, one of 
the reasons why he had chosen her 
for his assistant. 

"I think Jim needs a cup of coffee," he told her firmly. 

Kandro straightened up awkwardly. "All right, Doc." He was 
trying hard to be matter-of-fact. 
"You'll call me if anything — when 
there's news?" 

"Of course he will." Anna's 
quick assurance forestalled Tony's 
exasperated retort. She put her hand 
on Kandro's arm, and smiled down 
at the woman on the bed. "Not 
much longer now, Polly," she said 
with quiet certainty. "Come on, 
Jim." 

As the door closed behind them, 
Tonyiturned to his patient, and surprised a brief smile on her lips. 
"You mustn't mind," she explained, 
almost apologetically. "He's so worried." 

She had no breath for more. She 
twisted suddenly on the narrow bed 
and clutched at the air tilL Tony 
gave her his hand to squeeze on. 
Every other form of physical labor, 
he reflected unhappily, was made 
easier by the light gravity of Mars; 
but the labor of childbirth was 
eternally the same. And there was 



nothing he could do right now, except to offer her the reassurance ot 
his presence. He stood and waited, 
gooseScsh cascading from the nape 
of his neck down his spine as she 
ground her teeth against the pain. 

When it was gone and she released his hand, he turned to the 
sterilizer for a fresh glove. One 
more examination, he decided. 
Something should be happening by 
now. 

He heard her deep inhalation behind him. 

'"Anna's so nice," she sighed. 

HE HEARD the difference before he turned and saw it. 
Polly was lying back, completely relaxed, making the most of the time 
before the pain returned. 

"Yes, she is," Tony said. Hidropped the glove on the table; another examination wasn't going to 
do any good, for her or for him. 
Quit the damned fiddling, he told 
himself. Sit and wait. You let th.it 
poor son-of-a-gun get you down. It 
she can wait, you can too. Be the 
doctor you would have been in 
Pittsburgh or Springfield — any 
Springfield on Earth. So you're on 
Mars. So what? Sit and wait. 

He got a chair and put it next to 
the high bed, dropped his hand 
casually on the sheet where Polly 
could see it, where she could grab 
it again when she wanted to. He 
■leaned back and forced himself, 
muscle by unwilling muscle, to 
relax. 



20 




 



ON THE other side of the door, 
Jim raised his "coffee" cup 
for the fourth time to his lips, and 
for the fourth time put it down 
again untasted. 

"But what do you think, Anna?" 
he burst out. "How does it look to 
you ? You*d know if there was anything . . . wrong" 

"It looks all right to me," she 
said again, gently. "It looks like a 
normal delivery." 

"But she's been — she started at 
six o'clock this morning! Why 
should it take so long?" 

"Sometimes it does. That doesn't 
mean there's anything wrong. It's 
hard work, that's all. It takes time." 
It was useless to tell him not to 
worry. She went over to the work 
counter that ran the length of the 
rectangular room. "I don't think 
it'll be much longer now, Jim. Do 
you want to try and get some sleep 
while you wait? Or if you're going 
to stay up, could you give mc a 
hind here?" She pulled out materials quickly. 

"Sure." He got up, still holding 
the cup as though he didn't even 
know it was in his hand. "I mean, 
I'll be gUd to help." He let Anna 
relieve him of the cup, and accepted 
an alky torch, never wondering why 
she should choose to start a job at 
half-past midnight. 

"Look," he said desperately, "you 
would tell me, wouldn't you, if it 
wasn't going right ? He — Tony 



wouldn't want to keep me from 
knowing, would he? She never got 
this far before, you know." 

"Believe me, Jim, if there were 
anything wrong, Tony would tell 
you. And I don't know any more 
than you do. You were in there 
longer than I was. Here, hold die 
flame down this way, will you?" 

For just a minute, he turned bis 
attention to the work. "But why 
wouldn't he tell me anything?" 

"Because there was nothing to 
tell, I imagine." Even Anna's patience could wear thin. Deftly, she 
removed the torch from his hand 
before the down-turned flame could 
do any damage. 

Kandro wanted to yell: you don't 
know, none of you know, twelve 
years we've been married and a man 
and a woman want kids, and none 
of you know bow we want kids and 
all she does is gel so sick you think 
she's dying and she never gat this 
far before and yon just don't 
know . . . 

He saw in Anna's eyes that he 
didn't have to say it, that she did 
understand. Her arms went out a 
little, and the big, rawboned man 
flopped on his knees before the 
plain little woman and sobbed with 
his head awkwardly pillowed against 
her. 

ill 

AT 3:37 A. M., Dr. Tony Hell-, 
man adjusted a tiny oxygen 
mask over the red button nose of a 



MARS CHILD 



21 



newborn infant, wiped it and 
wrapped it, and returned his attention to the mother. He reached for 
the buzzer that would summon 
Anna from the other room to help; 
but he didn't push it. Kandro was 
sure to come storming in with her, 
and Polly was too wakeful and excited as it was. Then, too, there was 
a certain perverse satisfaction in 
doing the whole job himself, even 
the messy wiping up operations that 
would be left to a student nurseback on Earth. 

WHEN he had finished, he 
overrode Polly's plan to stay 
awake and stare at her baby. He 
gave her a stiff shot of sedative to 
make certain, then decided to give 
her her OxEn pill for the next day 
as well, hoping she would sleep 
through till late morning. 

Only since the development of 
the magic pink pellets, containing 
the so-called "oxygen enzyme," had 
it been possible for most human 
beings to live a normal life on 
Mars. Before that, anyone who did 
not have the rare good luck to possess naturally Marsworthy lungs 
lived permanently in an oxygen 
mask. Now masks were needed only 
for babies too small to tolerate the 

P aj. 

The miracle enzyme made the air 
of Mars as useful to human lungs 
as the native atmosphere of Earth 
. . . always provided the human 
in question took his pill religiously 
every day. Let thirty hours go by 



without renewing the treatment, 
and he would be dying, within minutes, of anoxemia. 

Tony took a last look at the baby, 
made sure the tiny mask was properly adjusted, and checked the oxy 
tank for proper flow. Polly was already half-asleep. He went quietly 
past her bed, and opened the door 
to his living room. 

"Sh ! *" Anna turned f rom her 
workbench, her face warm and 
cheerful. She pointed to the bunk 
where Jim, fully dressed in tunic 
and sandboots, lay fast asleep. 
"Everything all right?" 
Tony nodded. "Damn sight better than I expected . ' * After the 
glaring light of the hospital room, 
the quiet dark in here was good. 
More than that, Anna's untroubled 
presence served to dissolve all the 
nervous tension of the hours before. 
Suddenly too fatigued even to talk, 
he finished briefly, "Boy — live 
pounds two ounces, Earth weight — 
good color — st rong too." 

"Good." Anna returned her attention to the work. "I'll finish this 
up and then go sit with her. I'll call 
you if she needs anything." 
"What about him?" 
Anna glanced at Jim's sprawled 
figure. "He'll be all right." She 
smiled. "He can wait a few hours 
to meet his son." 

For just a moment more the 
doctor stood there, watching her, 
fascinated as always by her delicate 
art. A puff on the tube, a twist as it 
reddened in the flame, a spin against 



22 




 



an iron tool, another puff. All of it 
casual, seemingly random, and then, 
somehow, there was a finished piece 
of work part of the intricate glass 
tubing always needed at the Lab, 
a fragile-looking 1 piece of stemware 
for some new colonist's household, 
a precise hypodermic syri nge for 
himself. 

He watched till his weary eyes refused the bright spot of light where 
the pale flame washed over the 
glowing glass. Then he stumbled 
into the ad j oin ing bed room and 
slept. 

CHAPTER TWO 

THE Lab was the cash drop of 
Sun Lake. Ma rs had a si ight 
case of radioactivity, nothing you 
couldn't live with, but enough to 
enable Sun Lake City Colony to concentrate and isolate radioisotopes 
■and radioactive organics for sale on 
Earth at better than competitive 
prices, even after the stiff tariff for 
transport. 

The materials handled were only 
mildly dangerous, but it was the 
doctor's job to render them effectively not dangerous at all. Twice a 
day, before work started in the 
morning and again before quitting 
time, Tony geigered the whole 
place. On this precaution the whole 
community depended, not only for 
safeguarding their sole source of income, but for their very lives. Every 
adult member of the Colony did 
work at least indirectly connected 



with the Lab; all of them spent 
some time there. 

Among other things, it was the 
only building with a large enough 
room to serve for social functions. 
And it offered the only possible 
change from mud-colored walls, 
f rom isomorphic rooms, all jusi 
15x13; from cement floors and wa! 
bunks. The Lab had everything th : 
other buildings lacked — steel framework and alumalloy wall sheathing; 
copper tubing and running hot 
water; built-in power outlets, Earthmade furniture; even the blessings 
of an Earth-import air 6Itering system. 

The one kilometer walk out to 
the Lab in the early morning always infused the doctor with a 
glowing sense of confidence and 
well-being. In a year on Mars, he 
had lost little of his first pleasure in 
the buoyancy afforded by the low 
gravity. Walking was effortless; 
and, in the thin air, an hour's sunlight was enough to clear the 
night's chill from the open spaces. 
At noon, the sun would be too 
bright; in the evening, the cold 
would return as suddenly as it had 
departed. Now, in the first part of 
the morning, it was like a perfect 
autumn day on Earth. 

Behind him, in the houses that 
lined both sides of the colony's single curved street, people were dressing hurriedly, eating, making plans, 
getting ready for the day's work. 
Ahead, the shining blue walls of 
the Lab were set off against the 



MARS CHILD 



23 



magnificent backdrop of Lacus Solis 
itself. The ancient sea bed was alive 
again with color as the early sun's 
rays glinted off millions of tiny 
particles, the salts and minerals of 
Mars deposited by long-dried waters 
in millenia past. Hie clean lines of 
the new building against that sparkling expanse constituted at once a 
challenge and a reassurance — this is 
what man can do; here is everything 
he needs to do it with. 

// we can . . . a second chance for 
man, jf we can learn how to use 
it. ... 

Tony unlocked the storage cabinet 
built into the massive lead-lined 
door of the Lab. He took out his 
suit of protective armor — probably 
the only Earth-import wearing apparel ever bought and paid for by 
.lie Colony — but before he got into 
it, he turned to look back just once 
at the little huddle of houses where, 
a few hours ago, Polly Kandro had 
affirmed her faith in Sun Lake's future in the most emphatic personal 
manner. 

THE solidity of the Lab was a 
di sagreeable symbol of the 
Colony's present status; it was still 
the only decent structure Sun Lake 
had to show. Halfway up the almost imperceptible three kilometer 
slope from "canal" bed at his left to 
"sea" level at his right sat the 
Colony, lumpishly. Every building, 
like Tony's own home-and-hospital, 
was tamped native dirt. The arc of 
dull rust-brown huts squatting close 



to the ground and close to each 
other presented to Tony a monotonous row of identical plastic-windowed backsides. 

Behind -them, fields A, B, C, and 
D showed, even from the Lab, the 
work of Sun Lake's "mudkickers** 
— the agronomists who, using tools 
as ancient as the harrow and as 
modern as the mutation-creating 
particles that stream from a cy* 
clotron, were changing Mars plants 
into things that could nourish an 
Earth animal, and changing Earth 
plants into things that could draw 
nour ishmcnt f rom the grudg i ng 
Martian soil. 

Mutated bean plants whose ancestors had been a button-bearing 
Mars cactus dotted field A. Mutated 
cauliflowers — the size of apples, 
dark brown and still manufacturing 
in themselves too much potassium 
cyanide to be edible— darkened 
field B; another few plant-generations and they would be food for 
the Colony tabic, though tasting 
somewhat of the neutralized cyanide 
bitter almonds. 

Ten kilometers beyond the fields 
of bastard Earth-Mars vegetation, 
there had been beauty only recently 
— the fantastically eroded Rimrock 
Hills. Five months ago, however, 
the first pre-fab shacks had gone up 
in the camp on the other side of the 
hills. Three months ago the first 
furnace had been fired at Pittco 
Three: Pittsburgh Coal, Coke and 
Iron Company's Mars Metal Refining Plant Number Three. Now a 



2-1 




 



dirty shroud of yellow- stained 
smoke draped the peaks from dawn 
to dark. 

With a feeling of intense distaste, 
Tony started climbing into his suit 
of armor. A second chance jor 
man . . . 

His own high-flown thoughts 
mocked him. Another chance to do 
exactly as they had done on Earth. 
Already the clean air of Mars was 
thickening 'with the eructations of 
Earth's commerce. Nor was the 
camp beyond the hill a lone offender. Even Sun Lake, to survive 
at all, had to maintain a cash crop 
economy— and the Lab was the 
potentially deadly crop. 

Tony made sure that every flap 
on his suit was zippered and closed, 
and the last adjustments made on 
the helmet. He picked up the hand 
counter frorrt the bottom of the 
compartment and worked the screw 
around to calibrate out Mars' naturally heavy background "noise." 
The needle eased to zero on the 
dial. Only then did he open the 
heavy door of the Lab itself and 
begin hts slow trip of inspection 
through the building. 

ALL areas were well under the 
threshold of danger, as usual, 
except for a hot patch in the isotope 
room. Tony chalked a yellow line 
around the spot and marked the 
floor of the room with a bright yellow cross. Finished, he headed 
straight for the clean-up room and 
checked the condition of the ex


terior of his suit against the bigger 
stationary radiation counter that 
was kept there. 

Not until he was sure he hadn't 
picked up anything on gloves or 
boots did he remove his suit and 
dump it down the chute for routine 
de-radiation. He hated to take time 
for the rest of the procedure today: 
■he had to Check with the men who 
were working in the hot spot; he 
had to get back to the hospital to 
see Polly; he had a patient, Joan 
Radcliff, who worried him badly. 
What was more, he'd slept too late 
to eat breakfast at the communal 
table shared by most unmarried* 
Colony members; he hadn't even 
had "coffee"—- and he missed it. Bui 
after the number of times he'd 
nagged the others about skimping 
on safety precautions, he couldn't 
pass up any of them himself. 

He stripped and dumped h i s 
clothes down another chute, sandscrubbed himself, and' holding his 
breath, walked through the stinking 
alcohol spray. Methyl alcohol, 
cheaper and easier to produce in the 
Lab than water, and sand for soap 
made bathing an ordeal instead ot 
the pleasant ritual it had been on 
Earth. 

Tony moved fast, but by the time 
he had put on a fresh tunic and 
boots and emerged into the central 
hall, the Lab was already full of 
people getting set for the day's 
work.. He edged past a knot of busy 
conversationalists in the corridor. 

"Hey, Doc ..." 



MARS CHILD 



25 



He paused, and that was his undoing. 

"How's Polly? Tony, hold on — 
how's the baby? Are they all right? 
— Doc, wait a minute. Did everything go all right ? — Where are 
they? — What is it . . .?" 




E ANSWERED the same questions a dozen times. It seemed 



that half the population of Sun 
Lake was in the corridor with him, 
and they all wanted to know the 
same thing. Finally, despairing of 
getting through until he had satisfied them all, Tony climbed up on a 
chair and addressed the crowd. 

"Five pounds, two ounces, Earth 
weight — a boy — wrigglingcst baby 
I ever saw. Plenty lively, and he 
looks just like his old man. What 
else do you want to know?" 

"How's Polly?" 

"Fine. So's Jim." The hoary joke 
got its inevitable laugh. 

Then one of the chemists said, 
"I make a motion for a birthday 
present. Let's build that other 
room onto the Kandro house right 
now." 

It was an offer that had been 
made months before, and that 
Polly, hesitant and slightly superstitious, had refused. "There'll be 
time enough after the baby's 
born," she had told them, and 
stuck to it. 

Tony knew why; knew about the 
first time, eleven years before, when 
she had carried a child for seven 
months, and then had to pack away 



all the things she had lovingly collected for its birth. They had stayed 
in their cartons for four more years, 
and two more miscarriages, before 
she gave them tearfully to a luckier 
woman. 

"When is she going home, Doc?" 
one of the electronics men asked. 
"How much time have we got?" 

"I don't know. Maybe tomorrow 
morning," Tony told them. "She's 
in pretty good shape. It's just a 
matter of where she'll be most comfortable. I don't imagine she'll want 
to stay in the hospital very 
long . . . After all, it's not exactly 
designed for luxurious convalescence." They were all familiar with 
the crowded little room; he waited 
for a dutiful laugh to die down, 
and added, "I think tomorrow will 
be about right . . . not later than 
the day after." 

' 'We better get started then," 
Mimi Jonathan, the pert blackhaired Lab administrator, spoke up. 
"Suppose I make up some work 
parties, and we get things going?" 

She produced a pencil and paper 
and began taking down the names 
and abilities of everyone whose Lab 
work was not too pressing. Two 
groups of volunteers left promptly, 
to collect soil from the old "canal" 
bottom, and to set up the frames 
for ramming. Others would have to 
stay in the Lab to set up the machinery for work on the synthetics 
that would paint the new room, 
build the new furniture, and clothe 
the new baby. While Mimi plunged 



26 




 



into the complexities of reassigning work spate and job time, the 
doctor managed to get away from 
the enthusiastic crowd. 

He made his way to the isotopes 
room, and was happy to find Sam 
Flexner, the chemist in charge, 
waiting for him at the yellowchalked door, Apparently his harping on safety rules had penetrated 
in at least one case; Sam knew 
enough to stay on the spot even in 
the midst of the sudden excitement 
over the, baby. 

TONY opened the door and 
pointed out the ragged chalked 
circle on the floor. "Any idea what 
it is ?" 

"We were running some radiophosphorus," Sam said doubtfully. 
"But there was no trouble on the 
run. Must be spillage." The chemist 
had a young open face, and Tony 
liked him. He began to fill in the 
necessary report. 

"What reason?" Spillage was 
unusual. 

"It's a bigger order than we 
usually handle— must have been a 
hundred kilograms." Sam looked 
up sharply. "It was all right yesterday, wasn't it? The afternoon 
checkup ?" 

Tony nodded. 

"Then it must have been at closing. I . . . well, I left a few minutes 
early yesterday. Figured the boys 
could close up all right, but I guess 
one of them took a lazy man's load 
in his tote box . . . filled it up too 



high to save himself a trip. I'll 
check on Lt and tell them in a nice 
way, all right?" 

"That should do it. But I better 
have a look at the checkout tubes." 

Sam brought over a tray of tubes 
resting in numbered grooves. He 
was wearing one like them pinned 
to his own lapel. The contents of 
the tubes was its normal dirty 
white. Purple would have meant 
"too close to hot stuff too long." 

"Okay," said Tony, checking his 
form. "That hot spot there, I think 
you'd better -chisel it out and get 
one of the suppliers to take it way 
out and dump it." 

"Old Learoyd was here with a 
load of vanadium dirt. He'll do it 
when he leaves for Pittco." 

"Fine. Get it done. And tell Learoyd to put the stuff in the back of 
his rig. I don't think you could kill 
any of those old boys with anything 
subtler than a meat ax, but I 
wouldn't want him to sit next to it 
for a ten-hour trip." He dated and 
timed off the form. "That's that. 
Only you better stick around till 
close-up after this." He smiled and 
put a stop to the young chemist's 
attempt at explanation. "How's 
Verna, anyhow? Something better 
happen soon, if it's going to make 
all tills trouble." 

SAM grinned back. "You mayhear something soon," he admitted. "But please don't — uih — " 

"Doctors don't gossip," Tony 
said. "One thing about this place," 



MARS CHILD 



27 




he added, "we can't lielp making 
history every time we turn around. 
Have a baby, and it's the first baby; 
have another baby, and it's the first 
girl born; slice out an appendix, 
and it's the first abdominal surgery. 
Let's see — you and Verna will be 
:he first marriage -between a drop-in 
chemical engineer and a share-holding agronomist — if she'll have you." 

"Sounds like one of those 
weather records," complained Sam. 
"The coldest 3.00 P.M. reading at 
the corner of Spruce and Juice on a 
January 1 6th since 2107." 

"It's your place in history," 
Tony assured him. "We'll all be 
footnotes. I'll see you this afternoon." 



CHAPTER THREE 

TONY stepped out with springs 
Ul his knees, and, feeling the 
waxing heat of the morning, threw 
back the hood of his parka. The 
marvelous clear air of an hour 
earlier was fast disappearing, as the 
mineral trash that covered Mars' 
surface began to heat and roil the 
atmosphere. He looked off toward 
the Rimrock Hills, mourning their 
vanished beauty; then he stopped 
in surprise, scjuinting at the enigmatic black bugs crawling back and 
forth within the shadow of the 
hills. 

He stood there, watching, as the 
seemingly random pattern of mo


28 




 



tion trended gradually in the direction of the Colony. 

Who would be out on the desert 
afoot? He stopped and shielded his 
eyes. There were about twenty of 
them, and they were humped with 
— carbines and oxy masks. 

The military ! 

But why? Thcrc'd never been a 
visit from Commissioner Bell's little 
antercolony police force before; 
never been any occasion for it. Each 
colony handled its own internal 
policing. 

It was a year now since Bell's 
boys had been out for anything except routine administrative work, 
such as guard mount over the 
rocket; the last time was when an 



ace foundryman for Mars Machine 
Tool was rightly suspected of committing mayhem on a Marsport 
shopkeeper. Mars Machine Tool's 
colony administration insisted on 
being unimpressed by the evidence 
and refused to surrender him to 
Marsport. Bell's boys had simplywalked, in and taken him away for 
his trial and conviction. 

But Sun Lakers weren't given to 
mayhem. 

Tony headed back for the Lab as 
the crooked trail of the soldiers 
straightened out into a bcelinc for 
the same place. He had his patients, 
but he was also a member of the 
Colony Council and this looked likeCouncil business. 



MARS CHILD 



2? 



In the Lab he went straight to 
the front office and asked Mimi: 
"Did Harve ever get that recorder 
put together?" 

"Last week," she said. "It's been 
a blessing too. Why?" 

"I think Bell s boys are paying us 
a call." He told her what he'd seen 
outside. "It might be useful to have 
a record of it." 

Mimi nodded thoughtfully, and 
flipped a lever at the side of her 
desk. "That'll register anywhere in 
the office,*' she explained. "I'm a 
pacer — Harve set it up so I could 
walk all over the office while I 
talk, and still have it record." 

Sam Flexner was also there. He 
put down a completed report form 
on the spillage in his department to 
ask: "What do they want?" 

"I don't know," Tony told him. 
"But I think we'd better put in an 
intercom call for Joe Gracey to 
come on out here. He ought to be 
tending his seedling in C Area. 
Phone the South End to send a 
runner and get him out here on the 
double." 

Gracey was the senior agronomist, and, like Mimi and Tony, a 
member of the Colony Council. The 
fourth member, and most recent 
addition, was Nick Cantrclla; in 
only six months' time since his arrival at Sun Lake, Nick had risen 
from junior setup man to bossing 
all maintenance and procurement 
for the Lab. At the moment he 
was home with a nasty chemical 
burn on his arm. It wasn't really 



so bad that he couldn't be called in 
for an emergency, but Tony hesitated to do so, and he noticed that 
Mimi didn't suggest it either. Nick 
had a red-hot temper and practically 
no inhibitions. 

"No," the doctor said to the 
questioners that began to press 
around him, "1 don't think we 
ought to go out and meet them. 
Better just go ahead and work and 
get the new room for the Kandros 
put together. Flexner, will you stick 
around? It may be some damn 
thing or other about our atomics — 
some technical precaution we may 
have missed." 

"No, sir," said another man emphatically. It was O'Donnell, who 
had ditched a law career to become 
a sweeper and then a maintenance 
man and_ then a good jury-rig 
physicist. It was his job to see that 
no daylight showed between the 
Colony's atomics practice and the 
law. 

"Hmp," said the doctor. "You 
stick around too." 

THERE was a thudding on the 
door and a self-conscious calling of an archaic formula: "Open 
in the name of the law !" 

The delegation was a halfplatoon of soldiers with their 
carbines and cumbersome oxygen 
masks and tanks — a choice bit of 
military conservatism, since a 
pocketful of OxEn pills weighed a 
hundredth as much and would keep 
them alive a hundred times longer. 



30 




 



There were two civilians and an 
officer — Lieutenant Ed Nealey. 

Tony was relieved to see him; 
they were fellow-members of a subscription club that split the heavy 
postage on Earthside scientific periodicals, and Tony knew Nealey to 
be a conscientious and level-headed 
young career officer. 

The doctor was extending his 
hand to Nealey when he remembered his protocol. One of the 
civilians was unknown to him, but 
the other was Hamilton Bell, Commissioner of Interplanetary Affairs. 

"I'm Tony Helhnan, Commissioner," he said. "I don't know if 
you remember me. I'm the doctor 
here and a member of our Colony's 
Council." 

The commissioner was a small 
man, tending somewhat to pompous 
frailty. He looked like the kind of 
person rumor made him out to be: 
a never very important functionary 
who got the dreary Mars post when 
a very ordinary graft ring of which 
he was a prominent member was 
"exposed." The exposure followed 
only reasonably cjuickly on the heels 
of his bolt from the Insurantist 
Senate minority in the Panamerican World Federation. In the interval between the news accounts of 
Bell's political switch, and the 
spectacular news stories of graft 
corruption in which he was involved, there had been jtist time for 
the minority to become a majority . . . 

"Can you speak for the Colony?" 



he asked abruptly, ignoring Tony's 
hand. 

THE doctor cast a bewildered 
look at Lt. Nealey, whose eyes 
were front and whose face was set. 
Tony noticed- he carried in a canvas 
scabbard the disassembled dipole 
and handle of an electronic "Bloodhound." 

"I'm a council member," Tony 
said. "So is Miss Jonathan here. 
Another council member's ill and 
the third is on his way. The two of 
us can speak for the Colony. Now, 
what can we do for you?" 

"It's a police matter. Do you 
care to make a statement before I 
have to drag the situation out into 
the open?" 

"Let roc take it," muttered 
O'Donnell. Tony nodded. The 
lawyer-turned-physicist firmly told 
the commissioner: "I want to remind you that we are a chartered 
colony, and, under the charter, arc 
entitled to police ourselves. And I 
also want to say that we are not 
going to respond to any fishing expeditions until we hear what the 
complaint is." 

"Suit yourself," grunted the commissioner. "But you're not selfpolicing when you steal from another colony, Mr. Brenner, tell your 
story." 

Eyes swiveled to the other 
civilian, Brenner of Brenner Pharmaceuticals. So th.it, thought Tony, 
/; what a triUiotia'ire looks like. 
Younger than anyone could reason


MARS CHILD 



31 



ably expect, and somehow looking 
comfortably conservative even in a 
narka of orange-red mutation mink. 
The best of food, plenty of rest, 
and the most careful attention to his 
bodily needs were combining to 
cover the prominent bones of his 
face with deceptive pads of soft 
flesh; but he still wore the countenance of a lean and questing man: 
a perplexing expression of bland 
good humor 01 of permanent inner 
amusement. 

Brenner shrugged and smiled a 
little uncomfortably. "I had no 
choice. Doctor," he said. "A hundred kilos of my marcaine — bulk 
micron dust, you understand — was 
stolen yesterday." 

SOMEBODY gasped. A hundred 
kilograms of marcaine, principal product of Brenner's works, 
■was a small fortune on Mars — and 
a large fortune on Earth, if it could 
be diverted from medical use and 
channeled into one of the innumerable pipelines to addicts. 

"Naturally I reported it," Brenner explained. "And of course 
Commissioner Bell had to order a 
Bloodhound search. It brought us 
here." 

"Ed," 'Tony appealed to the 
grim-faced lieutenant, "did you operate the Bloodhound? Will you 
give me your personal word that 
it led to the Colony?" 

"Answer him, Lieutenant," Bell 
ordered. 

"I'm sorry to . . . Dr. Hellman," 



Ncalcy said stiffly. "1 checked the 
machine three times, myself. Strong 
scent from Brenner's storeroom to 
the Rimrocks, then some confusion 
in the Rimrock caves, and a weakening scent from the Rimrocks to here. 
It doesn't actually stand up all the 
way here, but it doesn't go anywhere else. That's definite." 

"Please, Dr. Hellman," said 
Brenner kindly. "You needn't look 
so stricken. All it means is that 
there's a rotten apple in your barrel. 
That happens." 

Gracey hurried in, a spindleshanked ex-professor of low-tcmpcrature agronomy from Nome 
University. He addressed himself 
directly to Brenner: "What are yok 
doing here?" 

"Mr. Brenner has sworn out an 
intercolony complaint of grand 
theft," said the commissioner. 
"You're Gracey? You needn't waste 
your breath trying to blacken Mr. 
Brenner's character. He's already 
informed me that there was a disagreement between you which 
you've taken to heart." His meager 
smile showed chat what he meant 
was "become a little cracked over." 

"He hasn't got any character to 
blacken," growled the agronomist. 
"He tried to get me to breed marcaine weeds for higher production 
of his hell-dust and I wanted to 
know why. Wasn't that naive of 
mc? I checked on Earth ajid I found 
out that maybe ten per cent of his 
marcaine goes into medical hands 
and the rest — " 



32 




 



The commissioner shut him up 
with a decisive: "That's enough. I 
will not listen to random accusations 
based, on newspaper gossip. I don't 
doubt that after marcaine arrives 
on Earth some of it is diverted. The 
world has its weak-willed people. 
But Mr. Brenner is a responsible 
manufacturer and you people . . . 
I respect your ideals but I'm afraid 
I can't say much for your performance. The business of Mars is 
business. And a major theft from 
one of our leading industrial 
colonies is very serious indeed." 

"Gentlemen," said Brenner, "I 
can't ignore it. I'd like to, simply to 
spare the unpleasantness, but the 
amount involved is too important 
financially. And there's always the 
danger that some quantity might get 
into illegal channels." 

GRACEY snarled, looked as 
though he wanted to spit on 
the immaculate floor of the Lab. 

"What exactly do you intend to 
do?" Tony asked hastily, anxious 
to forestall an eruption from the 
irritable agronomist. 

"It should be cjuite clear by now," 
Bell replied, "that it is my duty to 
conduct a search of these premises." 

"You'll keep your grabbing little 
hands off our equipment!" Unexpectedly, it was Flexner who exploded. "It's all nonsense, and you 
know it, What would we steal from 
that drag peddler?" 

Brenner's quiet laugh rasped 
into the appalled silence that fol


lowed. Hexner, enraged, ^ook just 
one belligerent step toward the trillionaire and the commissioner. 

"Sergeant!" barked Lieutenant 
Ncaley, and a noncom, unslinging 
his carbine like an automaton, 
aimed from the hip at the chemist. 
Flexner stopped in his tracks, redfaced with anger, and said bitterly: 
"So he can make the damned stuff 
and welcome, but all hdl breaks 
loose if somebody hooks it." 

"For the last time — " began Bell, 
cxaspcratedly, and then interrupted 
himself. He drew a paper from his 
parka and handed it to Tony. "The 
warrant," he said shortly. 

Tony passed it to O'DonncH and 
there was a long, foot-tapping 
minute while the ex-lawycr studied 
the document. 

At last O'Donnell said, "According to this, you plan to open 
our shipping crates and break into 
our process ovens. Is that correct?" 
He was pale with anger and worry. 

"Correct," said the commissioner, 
while Brenner shrugged helplessly. 
"Marcaine could, of course, be 
concealed from the Bloodhound in 
lead-insulated containers." 

"Then you are aware," said Tony, 
"that we manufacture radioactive 
materials?" 

"I am." 

"And you realize that there arc 
certain procedures required by law 
for the handling of such materials?" 

"Doctor Hcllman! Has k slipped 
your mind that I represent the law 
you're speaking of?" 



MARS CHILD 



33 



"Not at all." Tony was determined not to lose his temper. 
"But I could hardly expect you to 
carry in your mind all the time the 
innumerable petty details that must 
come under your administration. 
And it happens that J represent, 
here in the Colony, the observance 
of the laws under which our radioactives license was granted. I think 
that as chief radiological monitor 
for the Colony, I should be permitted to accompany your men in any 
search. 

"That's out of die question." The 
commissioner dismissed the request 
impatiently. "The license you spoke 
of is, as we both know, a grade-Bat omics license, permitting you to 
handle only materials well below 
the safety level, so I see no 
reason for any unnecessary fuss. 
Lieutenant . . * 

"Just a minute, please, Commissioner," Tony interrupted frantically. It was perfectly true that as 
the direct representative on Mars 
of the Panamcrican World Federation, Bell was judge, jury, and corner cop, all xo-led into one. Redress 
was as far away as Earth, and the 
road to Earth was the rocket from 
which Bell had the power to bar 
them. 

"Don*t you realize," Tony pleaded, "that our materials stay below 
the safety level only because wc 
have a well -established monitoring 
procedure? If you insist on breaking into process ovens and opening 
crates without my supervision, Sun 



Lake cannot assume responsibility 
for any dangerous radioactivity." 

"I understand that, Doctor," 
Bell answered crisply. "Any handling of radioactives in my presence 
is obviously done on my responsibility, not yours. The commission, 
oddly enough, is supplied with its 
own monitors. I do not believe we 
will require your assistance. Carry 
on, Lieutenant." 

NEALEY took a reluctant step 
forward. Chok i ng back his 
anger, Tony said flatly: "In my 
opinion you are exceeding your authority. Your men will interfere 
with our processing and break open 
our shipment crates. Our machinery 
is so delicately adjusted Uiat any 
kind of handling by untrained people could easily destroy it. And 
we've spent the last month packing 
our outgoing shipments for the next 
rocket. You know what the law is 
for packing radioactives. If you 
broke open our shipments, the 
rocket would be here and gone before we had the stuff decontaminated and repacked. It would be 
ruinous for the Colony." 

He saw out of the corner of his 
eye that O'Donnell was unwillingly shaking his head. Bell was the 
law on Mars. And Bell wasn't even 
bothering to answer. 

"At least give us a chance to look 
into it," urged the doctor. "Maybe 
we have got a bad apple. We'll find 
him if we do. You can't wreck us 
just on suspicion!" 




 



"More than suspicion is involved 
here," said Bell. "The findings of 
the Ground Tracing Device, M-27, 
known as the Bloodhound, when 
operated by a qualified commissioned ofiicer, are accepted as completely legal evidence in all authorized world courts." 

They watched bleakly as the lieutenant began to assemble the dipole, 
handle, power pack and meters of 
the Bloodhound. 

"I have a suggestion," said Brenner. "Under Title Fifteen of the Interplanetary Affairs Act — " 

"No," said O'Donncll. "We 
don't want it." 

Brenner said persuasively, "If 
you ' re clean, there's nothing to 
worry about." 

"Title Fifteen was never meant 
to be applicable to a case like this," 
O'Donnell crossfired. "It's one of 
those shotgun laws, like a conspiracy count — " 

"That's enough," said the commissioner. "You can't have it both 
ways. As long as Mr. Brenner's 
willing, this is your notice; I'll confirm it in writing. Under Title Fifteen of the Interplanetary Affairs 
Aft, I advise the Sun Lake Colony 
that you have until the next Shipment Day to produce the marcaine 
Chief and the stolen marcaine or 
evidence of its disposal. If you fail 
to do so, I will instruct the military 
to seal off Sun Lake Colony and 
a suitable surrounding area for a period of six months so that a 
thorough search can be conducted. 



Lieutenant, move your men out of 
here." 

NEALEY snapped the halfplatoon to attention and 
marched them through the Lab 
door. The unniilitary figures of the 
commissioner and the tall, angular 
drug makes followed them. 

O'Donnell's face was grim. "It 
was written in the old days of one 
ship a year and never revised," he 
said. " 'Sealed off' means just that 
— nothing and nobody in, nothing 
and nobody out." 

"But we're geared for four ships 
a year," said Flexner cumplainingly. 
"Shipment Day's only three weeks 
off. Rocket's due in ten days, two 
days unloading, one week overhaul 
and off she goes. We'd miss the 
next two rockets !" 

''II 5 ' e d miss the next two 
rockets!" Tony repeated, dazed. 

"Half a year without shipments 
coming in, half a year without 
goods going out!" 

"He's trying to strangle ns." 
"It can't be legal," objected 
Flexner. 

"It is. By the time it could be 
changed, the Colony'd be dead anyway." 

"Even if we pulled through, 
we'd be poison to Earthside buyers — shipments arriving there half 
a vcir late;'" 

"He's trying to strangle us," 
O'Donnell insisted doggedly. 

"How many OxEn pills have we 

gotr 



MARS CHILD 



"What's Bells angle? What's 
Brenner out for?" 

"Bell's crooked. Everybody 
know's that." 

"That's why they sent him to 
Mais." 

"But what's his angle?" 

Tony was still a doctor. To no 
one in particular he muttered, "I've 
pot to check on the 'baby," and 
started out again on the road from 
the Lab to the huts with the spring 
gone from his knees. 

CHAPTER FOUR 

THE living room was empty. 
Someone had tidied it. straightened the wall bunk where Jim had 
slept, and cleaned up the dirty 
dishes. Anna's long work-counter 
was bare, all the tools and materials 
stored away now in cup-boards underneath. That alone made the room 
look deserted. 

Tony wouldn't talk to the women 
about the commissioner and his 
trap. He'd try not to think about it; 
he'd tell himself it would work out 
somehow in the three weeks of 
grace they had — 

The door to the hospital was 
open, bur no sounds came from the 
other side. Polly was asleep then, 
and Anna had gone out. 

Tony drew a cup of water from 
the tap on the plastic keg, and set 
it to boil on the stove with a pinch 
of "coffee" makings— the ground, 
dried husks of a cactuslike plant 
that grew in some abundance on the 



desert. At its best the stuff had approximately the flavor of a five-dayold brew of Earth-import brick 
coffee, made double strength to start 
with and many times reheated. It 
did contain a substance resembling 
caffein, but to Tony it often seemed 
the greatest single drawback to human life on Mars. 

Automatically he checked the 
time; the- stuff was completely undrinkable if it brewed even a fraction of a minute too long. Before he 
put any food on to cook, he stepped 
into the hospital half of his hut for 
a look at Polly. 

"Well!" 

"Hello, Tony." Anna barely 
looked up to acknowledge his presence. She had moved the baby's 
basket next to Polly's bed and was 
bending over, peering into it. 

"We were watching the baby," 
she unnecessarily told him, and 
promptly returned to that fascinating occupation. 

"Just what is there to watch so 
hard?" the doctor demanded. 

"He's . . ." Anna finally transferred her attention; she made a 
helpless little gesture and smiled 
with an irritating air of mystery. 
"He's very interesting," she said 
finally. 

"Women!" Tony exploded. "Sit 
for hours watching a baby sleep!" 

"But he's not sleeping," Anna 
protested. 

"He's hardly slept all morning," 
Polly added proudly. "I've never 
seen such a lively baby!" 




 



"And how would you know what 
he was doing 'all morning"? When 
1 left here you were asleep yourself, 
and Anna was all ready to go home 
and do likewise. Where's Jim?" 

'"He wanted to go to work," 
Anna explained. "He was — embarrassed, I guess, about staying out. I 
told him I'd stay. 1 wasn't really 
sleepy anyhow." 

""WXXJ weren't sleepy? After 
1 twenty-six hours awake?" He 
tried hard to be stern. "So you sent 
Jim off to work to give him a 
chance to brag about his baby. You 
weren't sleepy, and neither was 
Polly, and strangely enough, neither 
was the newcomer here! Well, as of 
now, all three of you are just too 
sleepy to stay awake, you understand?" 

Purposefully, he moved the basket to the far side of the room. 
What they said was true, he noticed; young Kandro was wide 
awake and kicking, apparently perfectly content. Not even crying. 
Strange behavior for a newborn. 

"Come on, Anna, clear out." He 
put the baby down, and turned to 
Polly. "I ll give you ten minutes to 
get to sleep before I stuff some 
more sedative into you," he informed her. "Didn't anybody ever 
tell you you're supposed to be tired 
now ?" 

"All right." Polly refused to be 
ruffled. "He's an awfully nice baby, 
Tony." She settled herself more 
comfortably under the thin cover, 



and was asleep almost before they 
left the room. 

"Now go on home," Tony told 
Anna. "I'm going to make myself 
some breakfast. Wait a minute. Did 
you cat anything?" 

"I did, thanks." Abruptly she 
turned toward him, and made a 
conscious effort at concentration. 
The abstracted look left her eyes 
and she was brisk and alert as 
usual. "What about Polly? Don't 
you have to go out again? Somebody should be herc." 

"I'll get hold of Gladys when I 
leave. Don't worry about it." 

"All right." She smiled at his 
impatient tone. "Yon don't have to 
push me. I'll go." She picked up the 
heavy parka she had worn on her 
way over there, in the early morning hours the day before. At the 
door, she turned back. "You're still 
coming over for dinner tomorrow 
night?" 

"You couldn't keep me away," he 
assured her. 

She came back into the room, 
and took a ration slip from the 
drawer where Tony kept them. 
"You pay in advance, you see," she 
added, smiling. 

"And well worth it." Tony held 
the door for her, a habit he never 
quite lost even in the atmosphere of 
determined sexual equality that pervaded the Colony. Not until she 
was gone did he remember the 
coffee he'd started. 

It was ruined, of course, and now 
he'd have to do without it. Water 



MARS CHILD 



37 



was too scarce, still, to waste because of carelessness. But coffee or 
no, he was hungry. He found a dish 
of barley gruel, left over from a 
lunch he'd cooked for himself two 
days ago, heated it, and spooned it 
down hastily. Then, with a final 
check to make sure Polly was really 
asleep, he set out for the Poroskys" 
house to find Gladys. 

At fourteen, Gladys was the oldest child in the Colony — none of 
the adult members were over thirtyfive years — and her status was 
halfway between that of a full 
working member and the errand girl position her younger sister occupied. She was old enough to asssist 
almost anybody at anything, still 
too young to take full responsibility for a job. Now, Tony found, she 
was over at the Radcliff's, sitting 
with Joan. It was his next stop anyhow. 

ii 

IF THEY did have to leave Mars, 
it would have at least one good 
effect: the life of Joan Radcliff 
would be saved. But, the doctor reflected, she'd die of a broken heart 
as surely as she was dying on Mars 
of . . . whatever it was. His star 
patient, the thin, intense girl lived 
only for the success of the colony 
on Mars. And life on Mars was killing iher. 

When he knew what she had, 
maybe, Tony would know how to 
cure it. Meanwhile, all he could 



do was make a faithful record of 
its symptoms and try out treatments 
till he found one that would work. 
Or until he was sure none of them 
worked. 

It was like an allergy and it was 
like heart disease and it was like 
fungus infection where you couldn't 
put your finger on the parasite. The 
biochem boys back on Earth would 
lick It some day as they had licked 
dozens of others, but right now 
Tony didn't even have a name to 
tag it by. 

Joan came down with it two days 
after she and her husband, Hank, 
arrived on the shuttle rocket. If the 
doctor didn't find some relief for 
her soon, it looked as though she 
would have to go back on the next 
one. 

Tony bit hard on the stem of 
his empty pipe, slipped -it into a 
pocket, and walked into the bedroom of the Radcliff house. 

"How's it going?" He put his 
bag on the table and sat down on 
the edge of Joan's bunk. 

"Not so good." She had to work 
for a smile; a good colonist is always cheerful. "I Just can't seem 
to get settled. It's as if the bed 
was full of stale cracker crumbs 
and broken shells . . ." 

She began to cough, short dry 
barks that rattled her thin body, 
feather-light on Mars, against the 
bed. 

Cracker crutnbs mid sea shells! 
Sometimes it seemed that the 
damned condition reached her 



38 




 



mind too. It was hard to distinguish 
between the delirium of fever, the 
depression of fatigue and confinement, the distortions of mental 
disease. 

The spasm had passed. She battled the itch to cough again and 
counter-irritate her raw, constricted 
throat. Tony, watching, knew the 
guts it took. He had told her that 
a. cough can be controlled, that she 
should control it because the spasms 
endangered her already overtaxed 
heart. But even before he warned 
her, she was fighting: a good colonist guarded her health; it was a 
colony asset. 

Everything for the Colony. And 
for Henry, her husband. Joan was 
one of those thin, intense young 
people who give their lunch money 
to Causes. It had taken a lot of 
skipped lunches to get her and 
Henry to Mars as shareholders, 
Tony realized. But she could never 
have been satisfied with less — the 
non-voting position of "drop-in," 
for -instance. She had to identify 
herself with a heroic unpopular abstraction, or life wasn't worth living. 

Tony had more than a touch of 
it himself. All of them in the Colony did. But the doctor doubted 
that he had enough of it to fight 
against the brief, delusive rclid ul 
a coughing fit in order to get well 
imperceptibly sooner and go back 
to work for the Colony. 

// she got well. 

Tony opened his little black bag 



ritually, his mind flashing back to 
the intern days when he had perfected the gesture: the grave and 
kindly set of face, die brooding 
moment of introspection over the 
open mouth Of the learned tool 
chest. Too bad; too bad you 
couldn't cut whatever it was Out of 
her suffering body and hury it; or 
bore a hole in her and let the poison 
run down a drain. There was no 
tool waiting for him in the open 
bag with which to stop the girl's 
own chemistry from fighting against 
her flesh. 

JOAN whispered, "Got some 
magic in there for nie?" A 
good colonist is always cheerful; the 
great days are ahead. 

"Middling magic, anyhow." He 
put the thermometer in her dry 
mouth, and peeled back the blanket. 
There were new red bumps on her 
arms and legs; that was one phase 
of it he could treat. He smoothed 
on ointment, and changed the dressings on the old puffy sore spots. 

"That's good," she whispered 
gratefully as he took the thermometer from her mouth. "So cool!" 
Her temperature was up another 
two-tenths over yesterday's 101.3 
And the thermometer was not even 
moist. 

Another injection, then. He 
hated to use them, as long as he 
wasn't sure of the nature of the 
disease, but one of his precious store 
of antihistamines seemed to give a 
little relief. It was temporary, of 



MARS CHILD 



course, and he ardently hoped it 
was doing no permanent damage 
. . . but it did shrink the inflamed 
watery bladder that her throat lining had become under the action of 
killcr-cnzymcs. She would be able 
to breathe more easily now, and to 
sleep. It might last as long as 
twenty-four hours. 

One more day, and by that time 
Hank would be back with a little of 
the latest Earth-developed hormone 
fraction. 

Tony had heard that Bcnoway, 
over at Mars Machine Tool, was 
using it with startlingly good results 
for serious burns and infections. It 
just might turn the trick; there was 
no way 'to know till they tried. 

Joans eyes closed and the doctor 
sat there staring at the parchmentlike lids, her chapped and wrinkled 
lips. Tony grimaced; she was obviously being u fool. 

He rose noiselessly and crossed 
the room to the water jug. When he 
came back he spoke her name softly: "Joan?" 

Her eyes opened and he held out 
the glass. 

"Here's some water." 

"Oh, thank you!" She sighed 
dreamily, reaching out — but she 
snatched her hand back. "No, I 
don't need any." She was wide 
awake now and she looked frightened. "I don't really want it," she 
pleaded, but her eyes never left the 
glass. 

"Take it, drink it and don't be 
silly!" he snapped at her. Then. 



gently, he propped up her shoulders with his arm and held the glass 
to her lips. She sipped hesitantly at 
6rst, then drank with noisy gulps. 

"What are you trying to do lo 
yourself? Didn't I order extra water 
rations for you?" 

She nodded, shamefaced. 

"I'm going to have some words 
with Hank when he comes back, to 
make sure you drink enough." 

"It's not his fault," she said 
quickly. "I didn't tell him. Water's 
so precious and the rest of you are 
working and I'm just lying here. I 
don't dt'ierve any extra water." 

He handed her the glass, refilled, 
and propped her up again. 

"Shut up and drink this." 

She did, with a combination of 
guilt and delight plain on her face. 

"That's better. Hank ought to be 
back tomorrow with the medication 
from Mars Machine Tool. I'll tell 
him about the water myself this 
time, and I don t want any nonsense 
from you about not drinking it. 
You're a lot more valuable to the 
Colony than a few quarts of water." 

A LL right. Doctor." Her voice 
.Xi was very small. "Do you 
really think he'll be back tomorrow ?" 

Tony shrugged with calculated 
indecision. Mars Machine Tool was 
almost a thousand miles away, and 
allowing time for food and rest, 
Radcliff should be back before midday tomorrow. But Joan's question 
was so pathetically eager, he didn't 



40 




 



dare sound too sure. It was even 
harder when she opened her eyes 
again, while he was closing his bag, 
to ask: "Doctor, will it do any 
good, do you think? You never told 
me the name of it." 

"Oh," he answered vaguely, "it's 
just something new." Just as he 
knew about Hank, he knew perfectly well the sixteen-syllable name 
of the hormone fraction. But he was 
afraid that Joan would know it, too, 
from sensational press stories, and 
that she would expect a miracle. 
The doctor was expecting only 
another disappointment, another 
possibility ruled out, another step 
toward the day when he'd have to 
break the girl's heart by ordering 
her back to Earth. 

"I won't be able to leave anyone 
with you for a while," he told her 
as he left. "I need Gladys to stay 
with Polly Kandro. But remember, 
if you need anything, or want anything, use the intercom. Call somebody to do it for you. Your heart 
isn't in any shape for exercise." 

■ She nodded without lifting her 
head from the pillow, and smiled 
gratefully. Things would he better, 
Tony thought, when Hank was 
back. 

The sun was beating down more 
strongly when he stepped outside. It 
was past mid-morning already, and 
he had to get over to Nick Cantrella's: give him official clearance 
on the burned arm, and talk to 
him "about Bell's threat. But there 
were other patients, and they 



needed treatment more urgently 
than Nick. Better to get through 
with them first. Then when he got 
to Cantrella, they'd be able to 
buckle down to the quarantine 
problem.. 

CHAPTER FIVE 

A YOUNG, girl's head was splitting with the agony of her infected supraorbital sinus, but she 
was no whiner and even managed 
a smile. 

"I've got a present for you, Dorothy," he said. "It's from a girl who 
was your age a couple of centuries 
ago. Her name was Tracy. I don't 
know whether it was her last or first 
name, but she gave it to this stuff." 
He held up a hypo filled with 
golden fluid. "It's called bacitracin. 
They found out that this Tracy's 
body fought off some infections, so 
they discovered how it did the trick 
and wrapped it up in this stuff — a 
good, effective antibiotic." 

She hardly noticed the needle. 
Misdirection is as useful to a doctor 
as it is to a stage magician, he 
thought wryly. 

A middle-aged man who should 
have known better was recovering 
nicely from his hernia operation. 

"I still say, Oscar, that you 
shouldn't have let me fix it up. 
You would have been a medical 
marvel- — -The Man Who Got Ruptured on Mars. I could have had 
you stuffed, got you a grand glass 
case right next to the door at some 



MARS CHILD 



41 



medical museum on Earth. Maybe a 
neon sign! You got a nice repair 
job, though I say it myself, but 
you're throwing away -worldwide 
medical fame. The M;in Who Tried 
to Lift a Lead Shipping Crate Bare


Poker-faced, the doctor told her: 
"Mrs. Beyles, you're the most 
dilViLtilt medical problem — a maladjusted person. I wouldn't be that direct if we were on Earth, hut this 
is Sun Lake. We can't have you 




handed! I can sec it now in all the 
textbooks. You sure you don't want 
mc to undo you again ?" 

"All right, Doc," grinned Oscar, 
rcd-faccd. "You made your point. 
If I sec anybody even looking as 
though he's going to lift a gutbuster, I'll throw him down and sit 
on bun until the crane arrives. Satisfy you?" 

A not-quite-young woman suffered from headaches, lower back 
pains, sleeplessness and depression. 



drinking our water and eating our 
food if you don't pay for it in 
work. What you want, whether or 
not you admit it to yourself, is to 
get off Mars, and I'm going to 
oblige you. If you knew what Joan 
RaddifT is going through to stay — 
Never mind. No, I will not give 
you any sleeping pills. If you. want 
to sleep, go out and work until 
you 're -too t i red to do an ydii Qfl 
else." 

Was he rijjlit? he wondered. He 



A 2 




 



knew the woman would never believe him and would hate him forever, but it was another kind of 
surgery that had to be done — fortunately, not often. The woman 
would either change her attitude, 
thereby losing her ills and becoming the asset to the Colony that her 
strapping frame and muscles should 
make her, or out she would go. It 
was brutal, it was profit-and-loss, 
it was utterly necessary. 

AND so to Nick Cantrella at last, 
thank Heaven. Heaven had 
often been thanked in the colony 
for Nick's arrival. He was the born 
leader, the inspired and unorthodox 
electronics man who hadn't garnered the sheaf of degrees needed 
for a halfway decent job on an 
Earth cluttered with bargain countcT 
Ph.D.S. 

In the Colony he had signed up 
as a maintenance and setup man, 
but spent so much of his time troubleshooting that he was finally relieved of the routine part of his 
work. Just recently he had been 
promoted to chief of maintenance, 
purchasing and repairs of all Lab 
equipment. His new dignity hadn't 
kept htm out of trouble. He was 
home with a nasty chemical burn in 
his arm acquired far outside the 
line of duty. 

Tony didn't know whether he 
was glad or sorry Nick had missed 
the session with Bell and Brenner. 
Nick could think on his feet, but it 
was an even chance that Brenner's 



oily sympathy and Bell's open contempt of the Colony would have 
goaded him into thinking with his 
lists. 

"Tony!" Nick yelled as he came 
in the door. "Gracc-y was here with 
the news. It's the biggest thing that 
ever hit Sun Lake! It'll be the making of us!" 

"Let's see the arm, Combustible," 
said Tony dryly. "Medicine first, 
politics later." 

Nick fumed as the doctor removed the dressing and examined 
the site of the burn — now just a 
good scar, painless, non-disabling 
and uncomplicated, due to quick 
poulticing and a, heavy coat of 
eschar. 

Tony slapped Nick on the back. 
"Okay, Fearless," he said. "You can 
go pack to work. Inhale chlorine. 
Drop pigs of osmium on your toes. 
Sit on a crateful of radiophosphorus 
and get a butiful of geigtrs. Stir 
nitric acid with your forefinger. 
There's lots of things you haven't 
tried yet; maybe you'll like them — 
who knows?" 

"So it splashed," Nick grinned, 
flexing his arm. "Damn good 
thifig I wasn't there this morning. I 
would' ve thrown those bums out. 
Do you realize that this is the biggest break we've ever had? Why, 
man, we should have been praying 
for something just like this to happen. We never would have cut the 
Earth tie on our own and given up 
luxuries like Earthsiclc medicine. 
I'm glad Bell's kicking us into it. 



MARS CHILD 



43 



All we have to do is retool for 
OxEn." His face glowed. "What 
a beautiful job that's going to be! 
Those boys in the Lab can do 
anything — with my machinery, of 
course," he added. 

"You can't do it, Nick." Tony 
shook his head ruefully. "Ask any 
of the biochem boys. I went on the 
guided tour through the Kelsey 
plant in Louisville while I was 
thinking over joining the Colony. 
It left me footsore and limping 
because that plant is ten stories high 
and covers four city blocks. They 
operate more than 500 stages of 
concentration and refinement to roll 
those little pink .pills out of protoculture. And the first couple of 
hundred stages have to be remotecontrol sterile. There isn't as 
much glass on all of Mars as the 
Kelsey people had just in their 
protoculture tanks. It's out, boy. 

om:' 

"Hell, we'll rig up something. 
With all the crooks on Mars, we 
can make something they want and 
swap h for OxEn across Bell's 
search cordon. Don't worry about 
it, Tony. This should have happened a long time ago. On our 
own !" 

"You're missing something. 
What if we do catch a marcaine 
thief and the hoard and turn them 
over to Bell?" 

NICK was thunderstruck. "You 
mean you think it wasn't a 
frameup? One of our guys?" 



"We can't rule it out until we've' 
looked.'* 

"Yeah, it could happen. Well, if 
you'll kindly write out my medical 
discharge, I'll get a majority together and put -it in the form of a 
motion that wc hold a shakedown 
inspection of the Colony." 

"There's an easier way, maybe," 
Tony said. "Anybody who toted that 
much marcaine got gowed up on 
the stuff, whether he knows it or 
not. It's micron dust — fused ampoules are about the only thing 
that hold it without leakage, and 
this was in bulk. Also, the thief 
might be a regular marcaine addict 
as well as wanting the stuff to sell." 

"So," Nick grinned, "wc line 
everybody up and just sec which 
one docs this." He went into a 
comedy routine of tics and twitches 
and strange yapping noises. "You 
know that won't work," he wound 
up soberly. "There isn't any way to 
smell out a markic." 

"Practically no way," Tony corrected him. "That's why Brenner's 
a trillionaire and that's why marcaine gives stiff competition to 
Earthside narcotics in spite of the 
extra cost. The damned stuff doesn't 
affect you so people notice. You become an addict, you take your belt 
as often as you please, and you can 
live in your own private sweet dre;im world without anybody the 
wiser until — blooie!— you drop 
dead from failure of the cardiac 
node to keep your heart pumping." 
"You said practically no way," 



44 




 



Nick reminded him. "What's the 
catch? Have you got an angle?" 

"I get my electroencephalograph 
out and read up on the characteristic 
brainwave patterns of marcaine 
users. Then I run the e. e. g. over 
everybody who couid possibly have 
carried the stuff from Brenner to 
here. You want to line that up for 
me?" 

Nick nodded glumly. "Sure," he 
said, ' 'but you won 't find any 
markies here. It's a frameup, I tell 
you . . , Hello, honey! What are 
you doing home at this hour of the 
day? What's all that junk for?" 

TONY turned to see'Marian Cantrella, Nick's blonde and beautiful wife, pushing her way fhrough 
the door, her arms full of soft 
white cloth, scissors, heat-scalcr, 
and paper patterns. 

"You'll be witness, won't you, 
Tony, when I testify that I only 
left home because he didn't want 
me here?" Marian turned large 
violet eyes from the doctor to her 
husband and back again. "On second thought," she concluded, 
"you're no better than he is. Could 
cither one of you big, strong men 
stop gaping and give me a hand 
with this stuff?" 

Nick jumped up and relieved her 
of some of her bundles. "What's it 
all about?" He fingered the fine 
cloth curiously, 

"Baby shirts, nightgowns, and 
diapers," Marian said composedly. 
"Arc you all through pawing it?" 



"Oh, for the Kandro kid." But 
he didn't relinquish the material. 
"Wherc'd the cloth come from?" 

"I think they just ran it off." 
Marian took the heat-sealer from 
him and plugged it in to the house 
battery to warm up. She cleared a 
space on the table and laid out the 
patterns to study. "What's the matter?" she asked. "Something wrong 
with it?" 

"No, it's a nice job."" He 
brought the bolt of cloth over to 
the table and spread it out, then 
carefully pulled a thread loose. "But 
they should have replaced the extrusion nozzle. See that line there— there on the side — where it looks 
irregular?" 

Tony went over to look at the 
thread Nick was holding up to the 
light. He couldn't sec anything 
wrong with it, and Marian, confessed she couldn't, either. 

"It's there," Nick told them. "It 
means a worn nozzle. But it's not .1 
bad job. Who did the setup?" 

"For heaven's sake!" Marian exploded. "/ don't know who did it ! 
They handed tt to me and said go 
home and make tiny garments, so I 
went !" 

"Okay, baby," Nick soothed her. 
"I just thought you might know." 
He turned to Tony as Marian began cutting off squares from the 
bolt for diapers. "I don't see how 
they had a machine free for it," he 
fretted. "Every piece of equipment 
in the shop was scheduled for full 
time until Shipment — Well," he 



MARS CHILD 



45 



stopped himself, "I guess it doesn't 
matter anyhow. From here on out 
we can pretty much stop worrying 
every time we need to use a piece 
of the Lab for Colony goods. The 
days of plenty have arrived — extra 
underwear and new dinner plates 
all around." 

"Sure," the doctor agreed sourly. 
"All the pajamas you want — and 
no OxEn. Tell me, Marian, what 
are the women saying about this 
marcaine business?" 

"Same as the men, T guess." She 
tested the heat-sealer on a corner of 
the furst diaper, and turned the dial 
for more heat. "It'll blow over. 
Even if this shipment docs get 
held up, it'll straighten out. Kind of 
a shame if we're cordoned while the 
rocket's in, though." 

SHE tried the sealer again, gave 
a small, satisfied grunt, then 
began running it deftly along the 
cut edges, leaving a smooth perfect selvedge behind. 

"I was hoping we'd get a look 
at Douglas Graham," she added. 
"I think he's wonderful V 

"Hah?" demanded Nick, starting. "Oh, the This Is nun. My rival. 
He should be honored to be my 
rival." 

"What's going on?" asked Tony. 
"Is lit a family joke?" 

"Douglas Graham's a national 
joke," said Nick. "Now that 'he's 
going lo gunth Mars, that makes 
him an interplanetary joke." 

"Oh, the writer," Tony remem


bered. The rocket doctor had told 
him last trip that Graham would 
be aboard the next. 

"He's wonderful," said Marian. 
"I just loved This Is Eurasia. All 
those dictators, and the Cham of 
Tartary and the history, he made it 
sound so exciting — just like a 
story." 

"This Is Mars." said Nick sonorously. "Chapter One, Page One, 
The Story of the Sun Lake Colony, 
or, A Milestone in the History of 
Mankind."' 

"Do you think he really will write 
us up?" asked Marian. "I mean if 
that silly inarcaine business doesn't 
keep him away?" 

"No, pet. We'll be ignored or 
maybe he'll take a few digs at us. 
His books run first as serials in 
World Welfare, and World Weifare isn't interested in co-op colonists. It is interested in Pittco #3 
over the bill, I'll bet you, by the 
way Pittco advertises. He'll probably play up all the industrial 
colonies as big smash-hits for free 
enterprises and not mention things 
like the Pittco red-light bouse." j 

MARIAN'S lips tightened. "I 
don't think it's decent" she 

said. 

"Right," agreed Nick soberly. 
"I'll tell Madame Rose tonight. 
Haven't been over for days. I'll tell 
her my wife doesn't understand me 
and doesn't think her ginls are decent. Want to come along and make 
a night of it, Tony?" 



46 




 



"Ump," said Tony. If he was 
any judge, Marian's sense of humor 
didn't go that far. 

"That's not wha>t I meant!" she 
cried indignantly. "I meant it wasn't 
decent for him to hide things like 
that and — oh, you're joking ! Well, 
1 don't believe he would -do it! I've 
read his books and they're good." 

"Have you got any of Graham's 
stuff around?" Tony asked hastily. 
"I don't think I ever read any." 

"I shouldn't take time out," said 
Marian, a little sulkily, "but — ■'* 

SHE put down the scaler and 
shooed Tony off the trunk he'd 
been sitting on. A considerable 
quantity of wool socks and underwear turned up before she hit the 
right level. She handed over a conventional onionskin export edition. 
Tony read at random: 

The Cham's black eyes met 
mine with a gaze hypnotic in 
its intensity. The corners of his 
mouth drew up in a smile. The 
Cham spoke, and the front of 
his plum-colored silk robe embroidered with three-toed dragons in gold and silver thread 
rose and fell as he gestured 
for emphasis. 

These are the words of the 
man who rules over the twentyfive million tools that hold the 
lifeline between America's 
frontier on the Yang-Tse Kian 
River and her allies in the 
Middle East: "Please convey 



to the people of your country 
my highest esteem and warmest assurances that the long 
peace between our nations shall 
never be broken without cause 
by me." 

The significance of this — 

Tony handed the book back. "I 
don't think I've been missing 
much," he said. 

"When you've read one, you've 
read 'em all," Nick agreed. "All 
those gunthers arc the same." 

Marian was still digging through 
the trunk, fascinated at the forgotten things she was turning up. It 
was surprising how little used were 
most of the items they had found 
essential to include in their limited 
baggage when they left Earth. 

"Here's something," she laughed. 
"I used to read it back on Earth, 
and I thought it would be so useful 
here ..." 

She held out an onionskin 
pamphlet titled in red: The Wonders of Mars, by Red Sand Jim 
Grauata, Interplanetary Pioneer. 

"I remember standing for the 
longest time with an extra lipstick 
in one hand and this in the other, 
and they both weighed exactly the 
same, and I decided . . ." She 
broke out in another peal of laughter. "I decided to be practical and 
take this. "What I wouldn't give 
for that lipstick now!" 

Nick took the book from her and 
riffled through the pages with a 
reminiscent smile. "It's terrible. 



MARS CHILD 



47 



Tony," he said. "Get these chapter 
headings: 'Mining for Emeralds," 
"Trapped in a Sandstorm* — Red 
Sand Jim should wish the air on 
Earth was as clear as the heart of a 
Martian sandstorm — 'Besieged by 
Brownies tin the Rimrock Hills.' " 

"What?" demanded the doctor, 
incredulously. 

" 'Besieged by Brownies in the 
Rimrock Hills.' If you don't believe me, look. The Brownies, it 
says heie, were a constant menace to 
intrepid interplanetary pioneers like 
Red Sand Jim because they killed 
people and stole their babies and 
things like that. They didn't often 
see one — " 

"Naturally." 

* t XT ATUR ALL Y, Doctor, natu1\ rally. But they were little 
people who didn't wear shoes or 
clothes, it says here; — which reminds 
me." He closed the book. "I was 
out at the caves yesterday — took a 
ride with one of the prospectors. 
We've never really looked into the 
caves, and I had nothing better to 
do while you were teaching me 
safety precautions, so I wandered 
around some, and found kids' footprints tin the entrance to one of 
them." 

"They take the goats out there to 
graze sometimes," Tony said. 

"Thait's not it. Looks like they've 
been going barefoot, and I don't 
think they ought to be allowed — " 

"They certainly shouldn't!" Matun was indignant. "Why, they 



could hart themselves. And they 
shouldn't be allowed in those caves 
either." 

"They're not," Tony said grimly. 
"They have strict orders to stay 
away from the caves. But I never 
thought they'd be screwy enough to 
try going barefoot. I'll have to tell 
them about it." 

"Tell them good," Nick urged 
him. "There's a lot of rock out 
there, and a lot of dangerous surface salts." 

"[ wish I knew some way to 
make it stick," the doctor said, worriedly. "Once those kids get a notion in their heads — if they still 
hang around the caves after listening to old man Lcaroyd's horror 
stories — I don't know." 

"Don't take it so hard." Nick 
couldn't stay serious long. "Maybe 
it wasn't the kids. Could be it's 
Brownies." 

"Ve-ry funny. I'll pass the word 
to the mothers that there shouldn't 
be any barefoot boy stuff on Mars. 
I've got enough trouble without 
frostbitten toes, lacerations and -mineral poisoning." 

"You better hope they're Brownieprints, Tony. That'd be easier to 
handle than teaching our pack of 

kids." 

"Look who's talking! I'll thank 
you to line up that vote on an 
e.e.g. test for marcaine now while 
I dig up my medical references. 
Also — " he got up briskly — "if 
there's more trouble coming, I better take care of myself while I can. 



J8 




 



Lunch'll be all gone if I don't get 
there soon." 

Tony had small zest for the communal meals shared by most of the 
unmarried members of the settlement. Pooling rations and taking 
turns at the work did make it easier 
to get decent meals; but the atmosphere was, inevitably, one of noisy 
good.- fellowship. The doctor would 
have preferred a quieter and more 
restful arrangement. He thought 
wistfully for a moment of the comradeship that existed between Nick 
and his wife. On second thought, 
it would hardly be worth it, having 
to get married in order to have his 
meals at home. 

CHAPTER SIX 

FORTY years in the life of a 
planet is nothing at all, especially when the planet is ancient 
Mars. It had been that long since 
the first Earth rocket had crashed 
at the southern apex of Synis Major 
— and remained there, a shining, 
rustless memorial with only the 
broad fractures in its fuel tanks to 
tell its story to those who came 
after. 

Forty years, almost, since the first 
too-hopeful colonists followed, 
three thousand doomed souls. Their 
Earth-bred bodies, less durable than 
the flimsiest of their constructions, 
were already rotted to the skeletons 
when a belated relief ship came 
with the supplies without wliidh 
they had starved to death. 



Forty years, now, of slow growth 
but rapid change, during which a 
barren world had played hos* to, 
successively, a handful of explorers; 
a few score prospectors and wanderers-at-large; a thousand or so 
latter-day homesteaders, with their 
lean, silent women; and finally — 
after OxEn — the new industrial colonies, none of them more than five 
years old. 

The explorers had disappeared: 
gone back to Earth to lecture and 
write, or blended completely into 
the Martian scene; the prospectors 
and frontiersmen, most of them, 
had died; but the colonists, determined to stay on, drew fresh blood 
continually from the lifeline at 
Marsport — the quarterly rockets 
from Earth. 

Sun Lake City Colony, alone 
among those who had come to 
Mars, wanted nothing more than to 
cut, once and for ever, that vital tie 
with Earth. But it was too soon, still 
too soon; the Colony was not yet 
strong enough to live, if the umbilical cord were severed. 

And the colonists knew it. After 
lunch they gathered in the Lab, 
every last man, woman, and child. 
Tony rose from the black box of the 
electroencephalograph to count 
heads. 

"We're one over," he told Nick. 
"Polly's in die hospital, Joan's 
home. Hank's at Mars Machine 
Tool or on his way back. Tad's on 
radio shack. Who's the spare?" 

"Learoyd," said Nick. "And I've 



MARS CHILD 



■19 



got Tad messaging Machine Tool to 
confirm Hank's whereabouts for the 
last four days." 

"Okay. I'll get Tad later." 

A whiskery man who looked as 
though he was pushing 90 stormed 
up to the doctor. 

"It ain't your business whether I 
take a sniff of marcaine now and 
again and it ain't for you. to say I 
stole any hundred kilos if you do 
find I use it once in a way. Bunch 
of greeners!" 

"Calm down, Lcaroyd," sighed 

the doctor. 

"Greener!" taunted the old-timer. 
"Call yourself Marsmen!" 

"You can call us anything you 
want, Learoyd," said the doctor. 
"Only we've got to straighten this 
thing out. When did you last take 
marcaine? It won't — " 

"You don't even know where 
you are!" quavered the old man. 
"Lake -us Sole- us, my eye! You're 
right on the edge of Ryan's Plain 
and you don't even know it. He 
was here first and he had a right to 
name it! Old Jim Ryan . . ." 

PATIENTLY Tony tried to explain; "Brenner says somebody 
Stole the hundred kilos of marcaine 
two days ago. It could have been 
any of us. You were around, so 
we've got to be able to tell Commissioner Bell — " 

"Another greener — a politician 
greener. The Law on Mars P Learoyd's voice was heavily satirical. 
"When there was twenty, thirty of 



us, we didn't need no law; we 
didn't go around thieving! We got 
here ahead of you all, you and the 
farmers, too. What for did you 
have to come crowding in?" 

"Wben did you take that last belt 
of marcaine?" 

The old pork -and- beancr sighed 
brokenly. "It was more'n two years 
ago. I ain't got money for marcaine. 
I ain't a panhandler and I do a 
good job hauling for you, don't I?" 

"Sure, Lcaroyd." 

"Then why do you have to come 
bothering me? We was here first! 
He collapsed into the chair by the 
black box, grieving for the past of 
the red planet, before this damn 
OxEn, when Marsworthy lungs 
were a -man's passport to adventure 
where no man had ever been before, where a mountain range was 
your mountain range and nobody 
else's, where Jim Ryan died in the 
middle of great, flat, spreading 
Ryan's Plain, starved to death out 
there when his halftrack broke 
down. 

Learoyd chuckled, not feeling the 
electrodes they were putting to his 
head. He'd got off a good one — 
five years on Mars and these ten 
greeners landed. They wanted to be 
heroes, the little greeners, but he 
told them. He sure told them. 

"Call yourselves Marsmen? In 
six months half of you'll be dead. 
And the other half "11 wish they 
was." 

Jim Granata was in that bunch — 
a sly one, pumping him, making 




 



notes, making sketches, but he 
wasn't a Mars man. He went back to 
Earth and made him a pot full of 
money with books and — what did 
they call it? — Granata's Combined 
Interplanetary Shows. Little Jim, he 
called himself Red Sand Jim Granata, but he was never a Marsman. 

The Marsmen came first. Sam 
Welch surveyed Royal Range, the 
Palisades. Amby McCoy — he got 
killed by eating Mars plants; they 
found him with his food run out, 
curled up with the agony of poisoning. A thousand dollars a day they 
got then, when a thousand dollars 
was a thousand. 

It was in "07 he told off those 
greeners twenty-eight years ago. 
Only one rocket every couple years 
then, and sometimes they didn't get 
through. Jim Grinata, he never set 
foot on Mars after "18 with his 
money and all; he wasn't a Marsman. They were here first. Nobody 
could take that away from them. 

Sam Welch, Amby McCoy, Jim 
Ryan. Why not die too? Learoyd 
wondered bitterly. A thousand dollars a day they paid him when a 
thousand dollars was a thousand, 
and look at him now. Where had 
it gone? Why was he living by 
hauling dirt for Hie greeners when 
he had been here first ? His lip 
trembled and he wiped his mouth. 

SOMEBODY was shaking his 
shoulder and saying: "That's 
all. Learoyd. You're in die clear. 
Nothing to worry about." 




The old man slouched through 
the crowd and out of the tab, shaking his head and muttering what 
sounded like curses. 

Tony hadn't been very far from 
hoping that Learoyd would turn out 
to be the thief. The law would have 
to go easy on him and it would 
clean up the Colony's problem. 

Colonist after colonist seated 
himself in the chair and cleared 
himself by revealing marcaine-ncgative brainwaves to the e.c.g. Tony 
didn't dare to think of what it 
meant. The last of them, the boy 
from the radio shack, was relieved 
to take his turn. 

"That's die lot," Tony reported 
lo Nick when young Tad, too, was 
cleared by the machine, and had 
gone back to his job. 

Cantrella refused to share the 
doctor's gloom. "It's just what we 
needed," he insisted, smacking his 
fist into his palm. "Face it. man. 
There isn't any marcaine thief. Bell 
thinks he can run us off Mars by 
cutting off our import-export. Lei 
them cut us off! We'll barter for 
OxEn. We'll damn well do without 
the Earthside enzymes and Immunizers. We'll get tough with Mars, 
lick it on its own ground! We'll 
have to eventually; why not right 
now?" 

"I don't know, Nick. I think 
you're going too fast," Tony dem ur red . ' 'Look at old Learoyd he's t/s, only a little worse." 

"The pork-and-beaners imported 
their food, clothes, fuel, and look 



MARS CHILD 



51 



at them !"* Nick insisted. "They 
failed. They didn't strike roots. 
They didn't adapt!" 

"I don't know, Nick," the doctor 
repeated unhappily. "I've got to go 
see Polly and the baby now." 

ii 

TONY lugged the e.e.g. back to 
■his hospital -shack and found 
Anna holding the hand of a white, 
trembling, terrified Polly. Polly's 
other arm was around the baby, 
clutching the rcd-faccd little thing 
as if it were on the edge of a 
precipice. 

Without a word he took the 
child, snapped on his stethoscope 
and sounded its heart, which was 
normal. In spite of the red-faced 
creature's squirming, the minute 
oxygen mask was in place. 

Baffled, he replaced the baby and 
demanded of the women: "What's 
wrong?" 

"I have to work," said Anna abruptly. She patted Polly's hand and 
slipped out. 

*T saw something," Polly whispered. Her eyes were crazy. 

Tony sat on the side of the bed 
and picked up the hand Anna had 
been holding. It was cold. 

"What did you see, Polly?" he 
asked kindly. "Spots on the baby? 
A xash ?" 

She disengaged her hand and 
and pointed at the window in line 
with the bed and two meters from 
its foot. 



"I saw a brownie. It wanted to 
steal my baby." She clutched the 
child again, not taking her eyes off 
the window. 

Normally Tony would have been 
amused and not shown it. Under 
the strain of the day, he fought 
down a violent anger, line little 
idiot! At a time when the whole 
Colony was in real and deadly peril, 
she was making no effort to distinguish between a dream and reality. 

"You must have drowsed off," he 
said, not as harshly as he felt. "It 
was just a nightmare. With your 
history, of course you're afraid that 
somehow you'll lose this baby too. 
You've heard all this pork-andbeaner and homesteader nonsense 
about brownies, so in your dream 
your fear took that form. That's all 
there is to it." 

Polly shook her head. "Gladys 
was staying with me," she recited 
monotonously, "and she had to go 
to that test in the Lab and she said 
she'd send somebody who'd been 
tested as soon as she got there. Just 
when I heard the door close, this 
face came up outside the window. 
It was a brownie face. It had big 
thin ears and big eyes, with thin 
eyebrows, and it was bald and 
leathery. 

"It looked at me and then it 
looked at my baby. I screamed and 
screamed but it just looked at my 
baby. It wanted to steal my baby. 
And then it got down below the 
window sill just before Anna came 



5Z 




 



in. Even after she put my baby 
here with me, I couldn't stop shaking." 

Anger was getting the better of 
him. "Do you realize that your story 
is perfectly ridiculous if you insist 
on claiming it really happened, but 
perfectly logical if you admit it was 
a dream?" 

SHE began to cry and hug the 
baby. "I saw it! I saw it! I'm 
afraid !" 

Tony relaxed; tears were -the best 
medicine for her tension. To help 
t-hem along, he rose and got her a 
sedative and a glass of water. 

"Take this," he said, putting the 
capsule to her mouth. 

"I don't want to go to sleep !" 
she sniffled. But she swallowed it 
and in a minute or two felt under 
her pillow for a handkerchief. 

When she had wiped her eyes 
and blown her nose, the doctor said 
cjuietly: "I can prove it was a 
dream. The brownies are just the 
kind of rhing the pork-and-beaners 
and the homesteaders would invent 
to scare themselves with. And the 
myth got exploited in the Sunday 
supplements and on TV, of course. 
But there can't be any brownies because there isn't any animal life on 
Mars. 

"We've been exploring this 
planet up, down and sideways for 
40 years now. We found a weed 
you can make dope out of; we 
found you can make liquor out of 
Mats plants; we found a lot of ores 



and minerals. But not one trace of 
animal life. Think of it, Polly — 40 
years and nobody has found any 
animal life on Alan." 

She reasoned, a little fuzzy with 
the sedative: "Maybe brownies 
could stay out of people's way. If 
they're smart they could.!* 

"That's right. But what did the 
brownies evolve from in that case? 
You know that if you have a higher 
form of life, it evolved from a 
lower form. Where arc all the 
lower forms of life that evolved 
into brownies? There aren't any. 
Not so much as one puny little 
amoeba. So if there's no place the 
brownies could have come from, 
there are no brownies." 

Her face relaxed a little, and 
Tony talked on doggedly. "You got 
a bad scare and no mistake. But you 
scared yourself, like the homesteaders that started this nonsense." A 
sudden notion struck him. He put 
it in the urgent file, and went on. 
"You were afraid your bad luck 
would catch up with you and take 
your baby away. This is Mars, so 
you symbolized it as a brownie. The 
vividness doesn't mean anything — 
you probably saw a scary picture in 
the papers of a baby-stealing Martian brownie and stored it in your 
memory, and out it popped at the 
right time." 

Polly cracked a sleepy smile and 
said, "I'm sorry," and closed her 
eyes. 

She'll be all right, thought Tony. 
and it's a good thing it turned up to 



MARS CHILD 



S3 



remind me of the homesteaders — 
Thaler? Toller? 

Whoever they were, the old couple on the wretched "farm" to the 
South. Toller, that was , right. He 
hadn't seen them for a year, but he 
was going to see them today. 

Anna was in the other, residential, half of the shack. "I think I 
talked her out of it," he said. 
"You'll slay here?" 

"Yes. Where are you off for?" ■ 
He was lugging chee.c.g. out again. 

"That old couple, the Tollers. I 
wouldn't put the ma rcaine theft past 
them and they're close enough to 
our general area. Before the last 
dozen Sun Lakers arrived, I had 
enough time on my hands to run 
out and sec how they were coming 
along. Tf I just tell them it's time 
for another checkup, I'm pretty sure 
I can persuade them to give me a 
brainwave reading. That may break 
the case." 

He strapped the black box to his 
bicycle and set off. 

iii * 

THE Tollers were a different type 
from old Learoyd, and driven 
to Mars by a different urge. Learoyd 
had fancied himself an explorer and 
adventurer who would make a sudden strike and, after a suitably romanric life of adventure, retire to 
his wealth. 

The Tollers laid the longer, 
slower -maturing plans of peasants: 
In two years, when I have saved up 



seven schilling three groscben, I 
will buy Batter's hull calf, which 
will service the cows of the village; 
Fritz by then will be big enough to 
tdke care of the work. Zimmerman, 
the drunkard, will go into debt to 
me for service of his cows and 
pledge hit south strip, so Fritz need 
not marry his Eva. Schumacher's 
Gretel has a. harelip but there's no 
escaping it — his west patture adjoins mine . . . 

It hadn't worked out for the 
Tollers — the steady, upward trend 
of land values, the slow improvement of the soil, the dozen sons and 
daughters to work it, the growing 
village, town, city — 

All that happened was they had 
scratched out a living, had one SOD 
and gone a little dotty from hardship. Both -had Marsworthy lungs. 
If she had not,' Mrs. Toller would, 
like hundreds of other wives, have 
lived as matter-of-factly in an oxygen mask as her many- times-removed great -gran dmothcr had lived 
in a sunbuimet. 

The husband, by now, was stoneblind. Data from him and hundreds 
of udiers had helped lo work out 
the protective shots against ultraviolet damage to the eyes, a tiny 
piece in the mosaic of research that 
had made real colonization at all 
possible. 

Still, Tony dreaded visiting them. 
He didn't see their mangy goat, last 
of a herd, that had been browsing 
wircgrass on his last trip. They 
must have slaughtered it to aug


54 




 



ment the scanty produce of their 
heavily manured kitchen garden. 

He knocked on the door of the 
hut and went in, carrying the black 
box. Mrs. Toller was sitting in the 
dark, crammed little room's only 
chair. Toller was in bed. » 

"Why, it's Doctor Tony, Theion!" the old lady explained to her 
husband. Not bad, thought Tony, 
since he hadn't been able to remember their names in a flash. 



■ "Say hello to Doctor Tony, Thcron. He brought us the mail!" 

Mail? "No, Mrs. Toller—" fee 
began. 

The old man started out of a . 
light doze and demanded: "Did the 
boy write? Read mc what he 
wrote." 

"I didn't bring any mail," said 
Tony. "The rocket isn't due for two 
weeks." 

"Junior will write in two weeks, 




MARS CHILD 



55 



Theron," she told her husband. 
"These are our letters to him," she 
said, producing three spacemailers 
from her bodice. 

Tony started to protest, thought 
. better of i t, and glanced at them. 
All three were identical. 

Our Dear Son, 

How are you getting 
along? We are all well and 
hope you are well. We miss 
you here on the farm and hope 
that some Hay you will come 
back with a nice girl because 
one day it will alt be yours 
when we are gone and it is a 
nice property in a growing section. Some day it will be all 
built up. Please write and tell 
us how you are getting along. 
We hope you are well and miss 
VOU. 

Your Loving Parents 

ON THE other side, the envelope 
side of spacemail blanks, Tony 
saw canceled fifty-dollar stamps and 
the address to "Theron Pogue Toller, Junior, R. F. D. Six, Texarkana, 
Texas, U. S. A., Earth." The return 
address was; "Mr. and Mrs. T. P. 
Toller, c/O Sun Lake City Colony, 
Mars." Stamped heavily on each 
was a large, red notice: "DIRECTORY SEARCHED, ADDRESSEE 
UNKNOWN, RETURNED TO 
SENDER." 

The old man croaked, "Did the 
boy 'write?" 

"I've come to give you a physical 



checkup," said Tony loudly, oppressed by the squalid walls and the 
senile dementia they housed. 

"Isn't that nice of Doctor Tony, 
Theron?" asked Mrs. Toller, tucking the letters back into her dress. 
But the old man had fallen asleep 
again. 

Tony clipped the electrodes on 
and joggled Toller awake- for a 
reading. Marcaine-negative. 

"We came in such a beautiful 
rocket ship," rambled Mrs. Toller 
as he put the e.e.g. on her. "It was 
quite an adventure, wasn't it, Theron? We were so young, only 23 
and 24, and we sold our place in 
Missouri. It was such a lovely rocket 
we came in, a little one, not like the 
ones today, but this was before 
Mars got built up. We had quite a 
fright when one of ihe steering jets 
went bad while Mars was ahead, 
just like a big moon, and the poor 
crewmen had to go outside in their 
suits. It was quite an adventure, 
wasn't it, Theron? 

"I often wonder, Doctor Tony, 
whether Junior has ever been back 
to the old place in Missouri. We 
had him our first year here, you 
know; he's 19. He wanted to see 
the Earth, didn't he, Theron? So 
when he was 17 we went all the 
way to Marsport to see him off. It 
was quite an adventure, wasn't it, 
Theron ? And he sent us his address 
right away — " 

Marcaine-negative brainwave. 

He was too sickened to stay, and 
the birdlike chatter of Mrs. Toller 



56 




 



never stopped as he -said good -by 
and wheeled off to Sun Lake. 

Their horrible deterioration during the past year to senility in the 
mid-forties answered Nick Canirclla's plan to establish the colony 
immediately as self-sustaining. 

It simply couldn't be done. It was 
bad enough now — the damn dull, 
monot onous, primi t i ve, regu latcd 
existence of the colony. How long 
was it now since he'd eaten an egg? 
How long since he'd drunk a cup 
of coffee, real coffee, with cream 
and sugar? How long since he had 
worn underclothes or had a real 
bath ? How long since he'd had a 
highball after a good day's work? 
Or smoktd his pipe without frantic 
puffing to keep it lit in the thin, 
cold, oxygen-poor air? 

But life on Mars without even 
the minimum of supplies, immuntzarion and adaptation shots was out 
of the question. If they asked his 
medical advice, his answer would 
have to be: 

"If we are forbidden Earth supplies we must go back to Earth." 

rpONY groped in his pocket for 
-1- his pipe, and clenched it between his teeth. All right then, he 
thought, go back to Earth — go back 
and get yourself a decent cup of 
coffee in the morning. Go back — 

Back to what? To a clinic in an 
industrial town where he could give 
slapdash time clocked attention to 
the most obvious ills of men, 
women, and children whose fears 



and deprivations began in the womb 
and ended only in the grave? Cure 
a kid's pneumonia, then send him 
back to the drafty apartment again ? 
Fix up an alcoholic factory-worker, 
and return him to the ugliness that 
will put him on dope or in the 
schizo ward next year? No, he'd 
tried the clinics already, and they 
wouldn't do. 

Back to the office, maybe? An 
office like the one he'd had, briefly, 
in the penthouse of a New York 
apartment building. Take your patients one at a time, give them 
plenty of attention, they're easy to 
cure if you understand them — the 
ulcers and piles and false pregnancies, the thousand-and-one dis 
cases of the body that grew out of 
the prevailing disease of the mind 
— fear. 

Go back? He bit hard on his 
empty pipe. It would be consoling 
to stand again on Earth, and fill hi* 
pipe and light it, puff clouds of 
smoker — while he waited for the 
crowded, psychotic planet to blow 
itself up and put an end to man 
once and for all. 

CHAPTER SEVEN 

HANK RADCLIFF shook 
Tony awake a little before 

daiwn. 

"I got the stuff, Doc," he 
grinned. "Just came in on foot from 
Pittco. The half-track broke down 
twenty miles out of Mars Machine 
on the way back, and I bummed a 



MARS CHILO 



57 



iide on a Pitko plane headed this 
way. The half-track's still at Rolling 
Mills and — " 

The doctor shook hts head groggily and thought of giving Hank 
hell for the abrupt awakening. But 
it was hard to stay mad at him, and 
Tony would have been roused by 
his alarm clock for the Lab check 
in a quarter-hour anyway. Did die 
Lab check matter? Did the medication for Joan matter? No. They 
were all heading back for Earth before long. 

"Make mc some coffee," he 
growled. "One minute by the 
dock." 

HE stretched, rolled out, shucked 
his pajama tops and gave 
himself a sponge bath with a cup of 
water that would mean one less cup 
of coffee for him today. Some 
mornings he just couldn't stand the 
feel or stink of methyl alcohol. 

Shivering, he gulped the coffee 
and pulled on pants, parka and 
sand boots. "Let's sec the stuff," he 
said. "Did Benoway give you a letter or note for mc?" 

"Oh, sure. I almost forgot." 
Hank handed over an ampoule and 
an onionskin. The note from the 
Mars Machine Tool physician said: 

Dear Hcllman: 

Here is the T7-43 Kelsey 
you requested by radio message. Re your note by messenger, sorry to tell you symptoms 
completely unfamiliar to me. 



Sounds like one of the cases 
any company doc would ship 
back to Earth as soon as possible, The T7-43 has worked 
wonders in heat burns here 
and have seen no side reactions. Please let me know how 
it comes out. 

In haste, 

A. Benow ay, M. D. 

Tony grunted and beckoned 
Hank after him as he picked up his 
physician's bag and went out into 
the bitter morning cold. 

"Did you say you walked from 
Pittco?" he asked Hank, suddenly 
waking up. 

"Sure," said the youngster genially. "It's good exercise. Look, Doc, 
I don't want to get out of line, but 
I couldn't help noticing that you're 
building up kind of a bay window 
yourself. Now it's my experience 
that those things are easier not to 
put on than to take off — " 

"Shh," said Tony as they stopped 
at the Radcliff shack. They slipped 
in and Tony filled a needle with the 
new Kelsey drug. "Stay in the background until I get this over with 
and motion you in, Hank." 
He awakened the girl. 
"Here's the new stuff, Joan," he 
said. "Ready?" . ' 

She smiled weakly and nodded. 
He shot the stuff into her arm and 
said: "Here's your reward for not 
yelling." Hank duly stepped forward, switching on a light in her 
tyes that did Tony's heart good. 



58 




 



ii 

BREAKFAST was fried green 
Mars beans and "coffee" — 
bearable, perhaps, under ideaj conditions, but completely inedible in 
the gloomy atmosphere around the 
big table this morning. Tony gulped 
down the hot liquid, and determinedly pushed away his beans, ignoring the pointed looks of more 
righteous colonists, who cleaned 
their plates stubbornly under any 
circumstances. 

The Lab radiation checked out 
okay; no trouble there at least this 
morning. After a meticulous cleanup, he visited Nick Cantrella in the 
hole-in-the-wall office at the back of 
the Lab. 

"How's it look, now you've had 
a nighfs sJcep on it?" Nick demanded. "You still want to throw 
in the sponge? Or are you beginning to see that we can lick this 
damn planet if we only try?" 

"1 can't see it," Tony admitted. 
Soberly he told the other nun about 
his visit to die Tollers. "And look 
at Old Man Learoyd," the doctor 
added. "He can't be much past 60 
and that's stretching it. I know he 
came here when he was twenty-one; 
at least, that's what he says — so how 
old can he be ? But I gave that man 
a physical checkup a few months 
back, and, Nick, he not only looks 
like an ill-preserved octogenarian, 
but if I didn't know otherwise, I'd 
stake my medical reputation on his 
being close to ninety." 



Nick whistled. "As bad as that?" 

"What do you expect? Chronic 
vitamin deficiencies, mineral deficiencies, not enough water, neverending fatigue from never-ending 
work — you pay high for trying to 
live off the country. More than it's 
worth." 

Half to himself, Nick said: "Six 
months. Wc lose our commercial 
contacts, we pay forfeits that cat up 
our cash reserve — what if we just 
go to the buyers and tell them what 
happened?" 

Tony started to answer, but Nick 
answered himself: "It won't work. 
They won't dare place another order 
with us because they'd be afraid it'd 
just happen all over again. And we 
haven't got the funds to sweat it out 
until they forget. Tony, we're 
wtis%ed up!" 

"'There's still a search." 

"Hell, you know none of our 
people took the stuff." 

"Let's have a council meeting. I 
want a search." 

Nick, Tony, Gracey and Mimi 
Jonathan held one of their irregular 
conclaves in the doctor's hut. Gracey 
was fiercely opposed to a shakedown check of the homes and belongings of the colonists, swearing 
that it was a frameup by Brenner 
and Bell. The other three outvoted 
him, loathing to invade the pitifully 
small area of privacy left to Sun 
Lake people, but not daring to 
leave a possibility uninvestigated. 

"I suppose," grunted Gracey, 
"that when you find there isn't any 



MARS CHILD 



59 



marcaine in our trunks, you'll tear 
the Lab apart looking for it." 

"If wc have to, we may," said 
Tony, poker-faced, but sickened at 
the memory of what isolation from 
the life-giving flow of materials 
from Earth had done to the Tollers. 
"I've had some nasty jobs before 
this." He thought of how he had 
lanced the swollen ego of Mrs. Bayles, the neurotic, and how she must 
hate him for it — an ugly thought. 

By. mid-morning, Mimi had the 
shakedown under way. Tony settled 
himself in the radio shack, firing 
message after message to Commission headquarters at Marsport, trying to get through to Lt. Ncaley. 
The operator at Pittco who relayed 
from Marsport telefaxed the same 
reply to the first four mesaees: 
"UNAVAILABLE WILL RELAY 
MESSAGE END CORPORAL 
MORRISON COMMISSION MESSAGE CENTER." 

On the fifth try, Nealey still had 
not been reached — but Bell had. 

This time the reply was: "LIEUTENANT NEALEY UNAVAILABLE MY ORDERS. UNDER NO 
CIRCUMSTANCES GROUND 
TRACING DEVICE M-27 LENT 
FOR PRIVATE USE. REMINDER 
LIMITED MARS MESSAGE FACILITIES TAXED YOUR FRIVOLOUS REQUESTS. REQUIRE 
CEASE IMMEDIATELY END 
HAMILTON BELL, COMMISSIONER P. A. C." 

Gladys Porosky, the operator on 
duty, piped indignantly: "He can't 



do that, can he, Doctor Tony? The 
relay league's a private arrangement 
between the colonies, isn't it?" 

Tony shrugged helplessly, knowing that Gladys was right and that 
Bell's petulant arrogance was a long 
stretch of his administrative powers — but due process was far away 
on Earth, for those who had the 
time and taste for litigation and the 
cash reserves to stick it out. 

Gracey joined him in the hut 
long enough to say bitterly, "Come 
and see the loot we accumulated." 

Tony went out to stare unhappily 
at the petty contraband turned up 
by the humiliating search: some 
comic books smuggled in from 
Marsport, heaven knew how, by a 
couple of the youngsters; some dirty 
pictures in the trunk of a young, 
unmarried chemist; an unauthorized 
32 pistol in the mattress of a notably nervous woman colonist; a 
few bottles and boxes of patent 
medicine on which the doctor 
frowned; a minute quantity of real 
Earthside coffee kept to be brewed 
and drunk in selfish solitude. 

By mid-af tcrnoon this much was 
certain — any marcaine hidden in the 
Colony was not in a private home. 

The Lab would have to be 
searched next. 

iii 

IT WAS like going into a new 
world, to escape f rom the 
doomed, determined optimism of 
the search squad and council mem


60 




 



bers, back to the cheerful radiance 
that inhabited the hospital. Tony 
stood in the doorway, studying the 
family group across the room — 
father and mother thoroughly absorbed in each other and in the tiny 
occupant of . the white-painted 
wicker basket that served as hospital 
bassinet. 

It was still hard to believe the 
delivery had gone so well. Tony 
wondered again, as he had so often 
in the preceding months, what 
could possibly have gone wrong 
with all the previous attempts, before they came to Mars, 

There had been frequent conceptions: six known miscarriages, and 
an unknown number of first-month 
failures. A series of experts back on 
.Earth had searched for the reason, 
and confessed failure. There was 
nothing wrong with Polly organically, and microscopic examinations 
failed to show any deficiency in her 
or in Jim. With that history, Tony 
had been prepared, right up to the 
last minute, for trouble that never 
materialized. It was still hard to believe that their success, his and 
Polly's, could -have been so easily 
achieved. 

"He's awake again !" Polly hadn't 
quite made up her mind whether to 
be proud or worried. "He slept for 
a little while after you left," she explained, "but then he started crying 
and woke himself up. You should 
have se?n how mad he was — his 
face was so red !" 

"He's quiet enough now." Tony 



went over and stared down thoughtfully at the small circle of face, 
half-obscured by the oxygen mask. 
Certainly there was no sign of ill 
health. The baby was a glowing 
pink color, and his still-wrinkled 
limbs were flailing the air with 
astonishing energy. But a newborn 
baby should sleep; this one shouldn't 
be awake so much. 

"It's possible he's hungry," the 
doctor decided. "Hasn't he cried at 
all since he woke up ?" 

"Oh, a little, every now and then, 
but if you turn him over, he stops." 

Tony went over and scrubbed his 
hands in the alcohol basin, then 
came back and surveyed the baby 
again. "I think we'll try a feeding," 
he decided. "I've been waiting for 
him to yell for it, but let's sec. Maybe that's what he wants." 

"But — " Jim flushed and stopped. 

HIS wife broke into delighted 
laughter. "He means my 
milk isn't in yet," Polly said to the 
doctor; and then to Jim, "Silly! He 
has to learn liow to nurse first. He 
doesn't need any food yet. And the 
other stuff is there — what do you 
call it?" 

"Colostrum," Tony told her. He 
removed the baby from the crib, 
checked the mask to make sure it 
was firmly in place, then lowered 
the infant to his mother's waiting 
arms. 

"Just be sure," he warned her, 
"that the mask doesn't slip off his 
nose. There's enough area around 



MARS CHILD 



6) 



his moulh exposed so he can feed 
and breathe at the same time." 

THE baby nuzzled against ther for 
a moment, then spluttered furiously, turned a rich crimson and 
spewed back a mouthful of thin 
fluid. Hastily Dr. Tony removed 
the infant, patted and held him 
until the choking fit stopped and 
restored him to his basket. 

Polly and Jim were both talking 
at once, 

"Hold on!" said the doctor. "It's 
not the end of the world. Lots of 
babies don't know how to feed 
properly at first. He'll probably 
learn by the time your milk comes. 
Anyhow, he'll learn when he needs 
it. Babies don't stay hungry. It's 
like the oxy mask — he breathes 
through his nose instead of his 
mouth because the air is better. We 
don't have to cover up his mouth 
to make him do it. When he needs 
some 'food he'll learn what his 
mouth is for — fast." 

"But, Doc, are you sure there's 
nothing wrong with him? Arc- you 
sure?" 

"Jim, an my business, I'm never 
sure of anything," Tony said mildly. 
"Only I've never yet seen a baby 
that didn't find some way to eat 
when it wanted food. If your pride 
and joy won't take the breast, we'll 
get Anna to whip up some bottles 
for him. It's as simple as that." 

Or not so simple — 

George and Harriet Bergen's 
eight-roonth-old Loretta, conceived 



on Earth but born at Sun Lake, was 
still feeding from the breast. Loretta would be weaned not to milk 
but to the standard Colony diet plus 
vitamin concentrates when the time 
came. It was what the older children 
ate; they had forgotten what mrlk 
tasted like. 

There were milch-goats, of 
course, and some day there would 
be milk for everybody in the Colony to drink. But to make that possible, it was necessary now to alio 
catc all the milk produced by the 
herd to the nourishment of more 
goats, to build up the stock. 

It was hard enough to keep the 
herd growing even with best of 
care. Yaks, at first, had seemed like 
a better bet for acclimatization to 
the Martian atmosphere, but they 
were too big to ship full-grown, and 
so far no young animals had survived the trip. So the Colony had 
brought over three pairs of tough 
kids, and bred them as rapidly as 
possible. Half the newborn kids 
still died, but the surviving half 
needed every bit of milk there was. 
Still, if necessary, a kid would have 
to be sacrificed, and the milk diverted to the baby. 

Tony pulled himself out of the 
useless speculation with a start of 
dismay. There was no sense planning too far ahead now; Bell might 
solve this problem for them, too. 

"Anything else you want to know 
before you go home?" he asked. 
"Have any trouble with the mask?" 

"Anna checked us out on that," 



62 




 



Jim told him. w It seems to be simple enough." 

"Where is she? In the living 
room?" Tony started toward the 
door. 

"She went home," Polly put in. 
"She said she had a headache, and 
when Jim came in she showed us 
about the mask again, and then 
went . . ." 

"Hi, Tony. Can I see you a minute?" Marian Cantrella stuck her 
head through the outside door to 
the hospital. Tony turned and went 
out with her. 

*<TS SHE ready to go?" Marian 

X wanted to know. 

"Since this morning, really. But 
the damn search — how's their 
place? Did anybody get it back in 
order?'* 

"I just came from there," Marian 
nodded. "We've got it all fixed up 
and the new room's all done. The 
walls are still a little damp. Docs 
that matter?" 

"It'll dry overnight," Tony reflected. "They can keep the baby in 
the room with them till then . . ." 

"Polly must be dying to get 
home," Marian broke in. 

"I guess she is. Okay," he decided, "but it'll have to foe right 
away. In another hour, it'll be too 
rold for the baby to go out." 

"Right." She started away, and 
Tony was about to open the door 
when she turned back. "Oh, I almost forgot. Is it all right for Hank 
to take Joan out to watch? I was 



talking to her before, and she felt 
so left out of everything . . ." 

"I guess so." He thought it over 
and added, "Only if she's carried, 
though. Maybe Hank can fix up a 
tote truck from the Lab for her to 
ride on. I don't want her to use up 
what strength she has." 

"I'll fix it," Marian promised. 
"I think it would mean a lot to 
her." Her golden curls shook 
brightly around her head as she 
ran off down the street. 

Tony went back into the hospital. 
"Guess it's time to get you folks 
out of here," he told the Kandros. 
"Place is too cluttered up. I might 
need this space for someone who's 
sick," 

Polly smiled up at him from the 
chair where she had been sitting for 
the last hour. "I don't know -what 
I can wear," she worried happily. 
"The things I came in would fall 
right off me, and I can't very well 
go out this way. Jim, you better .. 

"Jim," Tony interrupted, "You 
better get some sense into that wife 
of yours. You'll go jusi the way 
you arc," he told Polly, "and you'll 
get right into bed when you get 
there, too. You've been up long 
enough for one day." 

"fust the way I am?" Polly 
laughed, poking her bare toes out 
from under her bathrobe. 

WHILE Jim helped her with 
her sandboots and parka, 
Tony wrapped the baby for his first 



MARS CHILD 



t rip outdoors. They were ready 
quickly, but Marian 'had been even 
quicker. When they opened the 
front door, they were confronted by 
a crowd of familiar faces. It seemed 
as if ail of Sun Lake Gty Colony's 
eleven dozen residents had crowded 
into the street in front of the doctor's house. They were determined, 
apparently, that whatever happened 
next week, the ICandros' homecoming would not be spoiled today. 

"I suppose you all want to see the 
baby? All right," Tony told them, 
"but remember, he's still too young 
for much social life. I don't want 
you to crowd around. If you'll all 
spread out down the street from 
here to the Kandros' place, everybody can get a look." 

Together, Tony and Jim eased 
Polly into the rubber tired handtruck that did double duty as a hospital stretcher. They placed the 
baby in her arms, and adjusted the 
small portable tank for the oxy 
mask at her feet. Then they started 
slowly down the long curved street. 
Stopping every few yards along the 
way for someone who wanted to 
shake Jim's hand, pat Polly on the 
shoulder, and peer curiously at the 
few square inches of 'the baby's face 
that were exposed to the weather. 

The doctor fretted at the continual delays; he didn't want Polly 
or the baby to stay out too long. 
But after the first few times, he 
found he could speed things up by 
saying meaningfully, "Let's let 
them get borne now." As the small 



party progressed down the street, 
they collected a trailing crowd. 
Everyone was determined to be in 
on the big surprise. 

Polly and Jim didn't let diem 
down either. The moment of dazed 
surprise when they saw the still-wc-l 
walls of the new room jutting out 
from their house was all that could 
be asked. Equally satisfying were 
the expressions on their faces when 
they opened their door and looked 
in at the array of gifts. 

Some of the new plastic furniture was not in evidence — it was 
still curing in the electronic furnace. 
But the crib was finished, and 
it stood in the center of the 
room, its gleaming transparent sides 
proudly displaying the blankets and 
baby-clothes, diapers, sheets, and 
towels piled up inside. On the table, 
jars and dishes stood side by side 
with new plastic safety pins and an 
assortment — somewhat premature — 
of baby toys. 

Tony gave them time to take it 
all in, then insisted that die door 
be closed and Polly and the baby be 
allowed to settle down. While he 
was unwrapping the baby, he heard 
them in whispered consultation, and 
a moment later the door opened 
again. Jim left it very slightly ajar 
behind him as he stepped out, so 
they could hear what went on. 

«TTTA1T a minute, folks," Tony 
VV heard him call. A slight 
hesitation, and then Jim's voice 
again. "Polly and I — well, we want 



61 




 



to. thank you, and I don't know just 
how to go about it. I can't really 
say I'm surprised, because it's exactly the kind of tiling a man might 
know you folks would do. Polly and 
I, when we came here — well, we'd 
never had 'much to do with politics 
or anything like that. We joined 
up because we wanted to get away, 
mostly, 

"We— I guess you all know how 
long we've been waiting for this 
kid. When he didn't come, back 
there on Earth, we felt like we had 
no roots anywheres, and we justwanted to get away, that's all. When 
we signed up we figured it sounded 
good. A bunch of people all out 
to help each other and work together, and the way the Statute 
says, extend the frontiers of man by 
mutual endeavor. It made us feel 
more like we belonged, more like 
a family, than just working for 
some Mars Company would have 
been. 

"It wasn't until after we got 
here that we began to find out 
what it was all about, and I guess 
you know we liked it. Building up 
tliis place, everybody working together— it just couldn't ever get 
done that way back on Earth. 

"And then this other thing happened, and ihc- doc baid it looked 
like it was going to work out all 
right this time. 

"We started thinking then, and 
this is what I've been working up 
to. Maybe it's silly, but we figure 
it's something about Mars that made 



it work, or something about the 
Colony. And now the baby's here, 
I hope none of you will mind, but 
we'd like to name him Sua Lake 
City Colony Kandro . . ," 

Jim stopped abruptly, and for a 
Loo- long moment there was only the 
grim silence of the crowd, die same 
bitter thought in every mind. 

Then he went on: "Maybe you 
folks think that's not a very good 
idea right now. T don't know. If you 
don't like it, we won't do it. But 
the way we feel, Polly and me — 
well, we know things look bad now, 
but they're going to have an awful 
hard time, the Planetary Affairs 
Commission or anybody else, getting us off Mars." 

"You're damned well right, 
Jim!" shouted Nick Cantrella. He 
faced the crowd with this fists hanging alertly. "Anybody think the kid 
shouldn't be called Sun Lake City 
Colony Kandro?" 

The harsh silence broke in a roar 
of confidence that lifted Tony's 
chin, even though he knew there 
was no justification for it. 

CHAPTER EIGHT 

INSIDE, the baby was wailing 
lustily again. From her .position 
on the couch, Polly raised a commanding arm. 

"Turn him over, Jim. He'll probably stop crying if you put him on^ 
his tummy." 

Tony watched while the new father slid this hand under his son's 



MARS CHILD 



back with an exquisite caution that 
belied his proud air of assurance. 
Turning to hide his smile, the 
doctor began piling hospital equipment on the hand-truck, to take 
back with him when he went. 

"Look ! Tony, look ! Look at 
Sunny!" 

"Sunny, is it?" The doctor turned 
around slowly. "So he's lost all his 
dignity already. I was wondering 
how you were going to get around 
that tongue-twister of a name . . . 
Well, what do you know?" 

HE WATCHED the baby stnuggle briefly, then rear back and 
lift his head upright. He had to admit there was cause for the pride in 
Polly's voice when a baby not yet 
two days old could do that. 

"Well," the doctor teased, "he's 
Sun Lake City Colony Kandro, after 
all. You ask anybody in town if that 
doesn't make a difference. 1 won't 
be surprised if he walks next week, 
and starts doing long division the 
first of the month. Who knows, he 
might learn how to eat pretty soon !" 

He realized abruptly he'd made a 
mistake. Neither parent was ready 
to joke about that. 

"■Doc, " Jim asked hes i tan tl y, 
"you're pretty sure there's nothing 
wrong?" 

told you before," Tony said 
shortly, "I'm not sure of a blessed 
thing. If you can see any single reason to believe there's anything 
wrong with that baby, I wish 
you'd tell me, because I can't, but — 



this is Mars. I can't make promises, and I'll make damned few flat 
statements. You can go along with 
me and trust me, or — " There was 
no alternative, and his brief irritation was already worn out. "You 
can not trust me and go along with 
me. We have to feel our way, that's 
all. Now." he said briskly, "you're 
all checked out on the mask? No 
trouble with it ?" 

"No, it's all right. I'm sorry, 
Doc — " 

"Got enough tanks?" Tony interrupted. 

"You gave us enough to go from 
here to Jupiter," Polly put in. "Listen, Tony, please don't think we — " 

"What I think," Tony told her, 
"is that you're good parents, naturally concerned about your child, 
and that I had no business blowing 
off. Now let's forget it." 

"No," Jim said firmly. "I think 
you ought to know how we — I 
mean there's no question in anyone's mind about trusting you. Hell, 
how do I go about saying tins? 
What I want to tell you is — " 

"He wants to say," said Polly 
from the bed, "that we're both very 
grateful for what you've done. It's a 
happiness we thought we'd never 
know." 

"That's it," said Jim. 
"He's your baby," said Dr. Tony, 
"Do a good job with him." He 
pushed the hand-truck to the door, 
and waited for Jim to come and 
help him ease it through. "Oh, by 
the way," he added, smiling, "I'll 



66 




 



hll out the birth certificate tonight, 
now th.it I know the name, if you'll 
come over and . . ." 
"Doc!" 

IT WAS Hank RadclifT, running 
down the street breathless and 
distraught. 

"Doc, come quick — Joan's dying!" 

Tony grabbed his black bag and 
raced down the street with Hank 
plowing along beside him. 

"What happened?" 

"When I took her out in the tote 
truck," Hank panted, "before she 
could walk to the street, she toppled 
right over — " 

"Walk? You let her tralk?" 

"But she told me you said it was 
all right!" The youngster seemed 
close to tears. 

"Joan told you that?" They 
slowed in front of the Radcliff hut. 
Tony wiped the anger off his face 
and went in. 

Joan was on the bunk in a parka; 
the doctor stripped it off and applied his stethoscope. He had adrenalin into her heart in thirty seconds 
and then sat, grim-faced, at the 
edge of the bunk, not taking the 
black disk from her chest. 

"Get that coffee," he snapped at 
Hank without turning. "The stuff 
they found in the shakedown." 

Hank raced out. 

After long minutes, Tony exhaled heavily and put away the 
stethoscope. She'd pulled through 
once more. 



The girl lifted her parchmcntlikc 
eyelids and looked at him dully. "I 
feel better now," she whispered, "I 
guess I fainted." 

"You don't have to talk." Tony 
sat again on the edge of the bed. 

She was silent for a minute, lying 
back with her eyes closed. He 
picked up her bird's claw of a hand; 
the pulse was racing now. 

"Doctor Tony?" she asked. 

"I'm right he re . D on ' t try to 
talk. Go to sleep." 

"Is Hank here?" 

"He'll be back in a minute. 

"I want to tell you something, 
Doctor Tony. It wasn't his fault. I 
didn't tell him the truth. I told him 
you said it was all right for me to 
walk." 

"You knew better than that." 

"Yes. Yes, I did. I know you'll 
have to send me back to Earth — " 

"Never mind about that, Joan." 

"I do, Doctor Tony. Not for mc; 
for Hank. That's why I did it. I'd 
go back for the Colony because it 
isn't fair of me to take up all your 
time, but what about Hank? If I 
went back, he'd have to go back, 
too. He couldn't stay here in the 
Colony if 1 were on Earth — alive." 

"What arc you talking about ?" 
demanded the doctor, though he 
knew with terrible certainty what 
she meant — what she had tried to 
do. "Of course he's going back 
with you. He loves you. Don't you 
love him ?" 

She smiled a little and said softly, 
without urgency, "Yes, I love him." 




 



And then, again hysterically: "But 
this is what he's wanted all his life. 
He doesn't feel the way I do about 
the Colony, the wonderful way 
we're all working together for 
everybody. With him it's Mars, ever 
since he was a little boy. He's in the 
Colony and he works hard and 
everybody likes him, but it would 
be enough for him to be a prospector like old Learoyd. Ever since he 
was a little boy he used to dream 
about it. You know how he's always 
going out into the desert — 

"Tell him he doesn't have to go 
back with mc! Tell him I'll be all 
right. Talk to the shareholders. 
Make them let him stay. It would 
break his heart to send him back." 

rpONY didn't dare excite her by 
X telling her that they might all 
be sent back, that the Colony was a 
failure. Even if they pulled through 
by a miracle, Hank couldn't stay. 

They called it the "M or M" 
rule — "married or marriageable." 
Far from the lunacies of the jampacked Earth, they had meant to 
build with children and allowed no 
place for new immigrant women 
past childbearing — or for Hank in 
love with a woman returned to 
Earth. It didn't matter now, he 
thought. 

Wearily, he lied, "They wouldn't 
make him go back if he didn't want 
to. But he'd want to go himself." 

She sighed and closed her eyes. 
It seemed a long time before he was 
sure she was asleep. 



Hank was waiting in the living 
room with the coffee. 

"She'll be all right for a while," 
Tony told him. "She's asleep now, 
I think." He looked at the open 
doorway and added, "Come outside 
a minute." 

Sitting on the tote truck, he said, 
"Give her one cup of coffee each 
day as long as it lasts. After any 
meal. It'll make her feel better. 
God, I wish I knew what else wc 
could do. That stuff from Benoway 
didn't have any effect. I'm sorry I 
sent you all the way out there." 

"That's all right, Doc. There was 
a chance. And I like seeing the 
country." 

• "You certainly do. You should 
have been one of the pork-andbeaners." 

"Hell, Doc, I like it fine here in 
the Colony!" 

Liked it, yes. It was on Mars. 
Tell bim or not? wondered Tony. 
Young man, your wife tried to commit suicide so you would be free to 
stay on this planet. And what do 
you think of that? 

The hell with it. What he didn't 
know wouldn't hurt him, upset him, 
make him feel guilty — 

"Doc, do you think we u/ll have 
to go back?" Hank's voice was 
more than strained, it was desperate. 

Tony stared. "It looks that way 
right now, Hank. But we have three 
weeks. Something — anything — may 
happen. I'm not giving up hope." 

But the young man's face was 
tortured as Tony left him. 



MARS CHILD 



u 

JOAN RADCLIFF had wanted 
death and been cheated of it by 
a d rcnali n . Sn n n y K an d ro wan ted 
life, which meant his mother's 
breast, but some savage irony was 
cheating him, too. Newly born, five 
pounds of reflexes depending on 
the key suckling reflex that somehow- was scrambled. 

Sunny lay awake without crying, 
didn't seem to need sleep, could 
lift his head — all right, put that 
down to lighter gravity, even 
though the Bcrgens" little Loretta 
hadn't done it. Sunny had a wonderful color, a powerful nursing instinct — but he choked and gagged 
at the breast. Without fuel the machine of reflexes would run down 
and stop . . . 

It didn't make sense to Tony. He 
had guiltily half-lied to the Kandros 
when he lold them many babies 
didn'r know how to nurse at first. 
That was the truth; the lie was that 
this baby knew bow, but choked all 
the same. A feeding problem, they 
would have blandly called it on 
Earth, where there still were millions of cows, sterile hospitals, relays of trained nurses for intravenous nourishment regimes. Here 
a feeding problem was a feeding 
problem. 

Anyone of the wealthier industrial colonies would automatically 
have taken Earth-import powdered 
milk from its stores, but Sun Lake 
couldn't afford it, didn't have any. 



And what was more, Sun Lake 
wouldn't get powdered milk if 
Commissioner Bell made good on 
his threat ... 

If Sunny died, it would he worse 
than the unnamed little boy the 
Connollys had lost, and he had 
left a scar on the doctor's mind 
that time would never heal. Tony 
could still see the agonized blue 
face and the butterfly gasping for 
air — a preemie, but he never should 
have cleared Mrs. Connolly, seven 
months gone, until they'd had oxygen cylinders and masks and a tent 
for emergencies. 

The Connollys had shipped back 
to Earth on the nex't rocket after 
the tragedy. 

The father had cursed him insanely, damned him for a killer 
because he hadn't foreseen the need 
of oxy gear for their baby two 
months before it was due. OxEn 
they had, but Ox En made no 
change in the lungs of a baby. He'd 
given it intravenously, orally, in 
every solvent he could lay his 
hands on during the desperate 
hours before the improvised mask 
fed the last trickle of oxygen from 
their single tank into the lungs of 
the infant. 

Tony forced his face into a smile 
as he passed a couple — Flexncr and 
his girl Verna. Behind the smile he 
was thinking that it would be 
harder to bear a muter reproach 
from the patient Kandros than 
Connolly raging curses. 

Tony dragged the loaded hand


70 




 



truck into the middle of his living 
room, and left it there. He could 
put the stuff away later; it was 
getting late now, and lie had yet 
to make his afternoon radiation inspection at the Lab. There was a 
package on the table; he took time 
to pick it up and read: "For Doctor Tony from Jim and Polly 
Kandro — with much thanks." 

For a moment he held it, weighing it in his hand. No, he decided, 
he'd open it later, when there was 
time to relax and appreciate the 
sentiment that lay behind it. The 
gift itself would be — would have 
to be — meaningless. 

There was no way for any colonist to purchase or procure anything at all from the outside. Except for the very few personal 
treasures that were somehow 
squeezed into the rigid weight limit 
on baggage when they came out, 
all plastic chairs and sinks, blankets, and windows were uniformly 
functional and durable. But they 
were uniform, and they were also 
scarce. Each household contained 
the same irreducible minimum; 
Lab space and work hours weie 
too precious to be used for the 
production of local consumption 
items. 

TONY closed his door behind 
him, and set out for the Lab 
once more. Dull, monotonous, 
primitive, uncomfortable, he raged 
inwardly. Every home, inside and 
pat, just the same.' 



Why had they come to Mars? 
For a better, saner way of life, to 
retrieve some of the dignity of 
men, to escape from the complexities and inequities and fear pressures .of Earth. And what were they 
doing? Building a new life, with 
hard work and suffering, on the 
precise pattern of the old. There 
wasn't a person in the Colony who 
wouldn't do better back on Earth. 

He found ihc Lab in an uproar. 
All work had stopped, so the grim 
hunt for the marcaine could go on. 
Nick had already begun an inventory. 

"Make this an extra-good check, 
Doc," Tony was told in the office 
before he started out. "We'll be 
handling a lot of stuff that hasn't 
been used in a long time. And getting into all the corners too." 

"Are the checkout tubes racked 
yet?" Tony asked. 

"Right. We issued new ones to 
the men on the inspection squad." 

"I'll do them first," the doctor 
decided, and went into the cleanup 
room where the wall racks were 
already lined with the tubes for that 
day. Usually they were checked in 
the following morning's inspection; 
but today the plant had closed 
down early for all practical purposes. 

The tubes checked clean all down 
the line. 

Tony selected a fresh tube from 
■the opposite wall and went on out 
through the shipping room to the' 
workrooms. He didn't need armor 



MARS CHILD 



71 



for the afternoon inspection. The 
technicians had been «n there working, and if their tubes were all 
clean there couldn't be any deadly 
hot stuff. The purpose of the lateday check was to catch reactions 
that were just starting up, and 
that might make trouble overnight. 
In the morning it was different. 
Anything that had been chaining 
for twelve or more hours could be 
vicious. 

Back in the office, when he was 
finished, Tony reported a clean 
check through. "What," he asked, 
"are you' going to do about (he 
shipment crates?" 

"Leave them till last," Mimi 
Jonathan told him. "If anything 
turns up in the workrooms or storage bins, we'll have to open up 
the shipment crates one at a time. 
Doc, do you think . . . ?" 

She slopped, looked down a moment and then back at Tony, with 
a wry smile. "That's silly, isn't it? 
I don't know why I expect you to 
know more about it than I do. Oh, 
listen — they want you to stick 
around and monitor if they do have 
to open the crates. I'll let you know 
when it gets that far." 

"Okay." Tony smiled back at 
her. "Try to give me more than 
five minutes notice, will you? I 
wish wc had cither a full-time 
radiological man or another doctor.'* 

"How about Harvc?" she suggested. "Could he fill in for you? 
We didn't want to assign him with


out your okay — he hasn't done any 
monitoring on his own yet, has 
he?" 

"No," Tony said thoughtfully. 
"Not yet. But this won't be anything more than standing by with 
a counter and keeping his eyes 
open. I don't see why not; he 
knows the routine as well as 1 do 
by now. I'd leave it up to him," 
the doctor decided. "If he feels 
ready to take it on, it'll be a big 
help to me." 

"I'll ask him," Mimi promised. 

iii 

THIS afternoon the familiar 
splendors of the Martian scene 
evoked no glowing certainties in 
Tony's mind. He walked back from 
the Lab in the early twilight, his 
eyes fixed on the far hills, his 
thought roaming bitterly beyond, to 
the other side of the range. 

Tony had been to the new town, 
just once, to help out when a too 
hastily built furnace exploded, The 
injuries had been more than 
Pittco's green young doctor could 
handle all at once. The doctor's 
inexperience, like the faulty furnace, was typical. The whole place 
was temporary, until it showed a 
profit for Pittco. When- it did, solid 
structures would replace the jerrybuilt shacks; an efficient company 
administration would put an end to 
(lie anarchic social organization. 

But for now the town was just 
a sprawling collection of rani


72 




 



shackle buildings, constructed of a 
dozen different inadequate materials, whatever was available in 
Marsport when a new house was 
needed. There was no thought of 
the future on the other side of the 
hill, no worry about permanence, 
no eye to consequence. 

If the camp went bust, the population would move on to one of the 
newer locations — and move again 
when that collapsed. If, on the 
other hand, the town survived, the 
population would move on anyhow. A new crop of workers would 
be imported from Earth, a tamer, 
quieter crew, to do routine work in 
an organized company town, at 
considerably lower pay. And the 
boom-town adventurers would go, 
to find higher wages and a freer 
life somewhere else. 

They struck no roots there, and 
they wanted none. Of all the widely 
scattered human settlements on 
Mars, the Sun Lake Colony alone 
believed that man could and would 
some day flourish naturally on the 
alien soil. 

Tony Hellman had a religion: it 
was the earnest hope that that day 
would come before he died, that 
he would live to see them cut the 
cord with Earth. Training and instinct both cried out against the 
new danger of abortion to the 
embryo civilization. 

Tony was a good doctor; in 
Springfield or Jackson City or Hartford — anywhere on Earth — he could 
have written his own ticket. In


stead, he had chosen to throw in 
his lot with a batch of wide-eyed 
idealists; had, indeed, jumped at 
the chance. 

TT WAS largely Tony's eagerness 
X to emigrate that was responsible 
for the Colony's "M-or-M" ruling. 
The Sun Lake Society couldn't afford to turn Dr. Hellman down; 
they knew just how slim was the 
possibility of getting another doctor as good. So, after much deliberation, the by-laws were carefully 
revised, and the words "or marriageable" inserted after the word 
"married" in the list of qualifications. 

The modification had resulted 
in a flood of new and highly desirable members. Skilled workers 
were inclined to be more footloose 
and adventurous before they were 
married, before they had settled into responsible, well-paid jobs on 
Earth. Bca Juarez, pilot of the 
Colony's ship, Lazy Girl, was one 
of the new acquisitions; so was 
Harvey Stillman, the chief radioman. 

Anna Willendorf was another 
member who had come in after the 
revised "M-or-M" ruling, one 
whose skill was almost as much 
appreciated as Tony's, for a different reason. Plastics, produced in the 
Lab, could be, and were, used for 
almost every item of furniture or 
furnishings in the Colony; but for 
some chemical processes, glassware 
was still a must. And now that giant 



MARS CHILD 



73 



machines existed on Earth to turn 
out almost every conceivable glass 
utensil, glass-blowers were far between, good ones almost nonexistent. Without Anna's highly 
specialized talent, the Colony would 
have had to pay fabulous prices for 
the transport of bulkily packaged 
glassware from Earth. 

Anna was one of the very few 
unmarried members of the Colony 
who refused 'to participate in the 
communal meals. Laziness, or embarrassment, or both, served to 
drag in the others, like Tony, who 
might have preferred to remain 
aloof. Anna simply ignored die 
questions and remarks. 

ON RARE occasions, however, 
she relented to the extent of 
"inviting" the doctor to dine with 
her — combining their rations, and 
preparing a meal for him in hec 
own one-room hut. Then, for an 
hour, she would play hostess to 
him, an hour that restored, for 
both of them, the longed-for feeling of gracious, civilized living. 

"One for all and all for one." 
"Mutual endeavor." "Collective 
self-sufficiency." The whole thing, 
Tony thought angrily, was an 
anachronism; more than that, an 
impossibility. No sane iman could 
believe in it — unless he came from 
Earth and had nothing to see to 
believe in. 

For tonight, at least, he was free 
of it. Anna was at the door when 
he readied it, holding it open for 

74 



him. She watched him set down his 
bag as though he were unloading 
the troubles of the Uni% - erse. 

"You need a drink," she decided. 

"Who's kidding whom?" He 
grinned sourly at her. "Some nice, 
refreshing, vitamin-packed. Grade* 
A, synthesized orange juice, maybe?" 

"I sec you haven't been home 
yet." 

She disappeared behind the drape 
that hid her kitchen section. Not 
many of them bothered to separate 
the kitchen from the living room; 
perhaps, Tony thought, that was 
what gave her room such a special 
look. A moment later, she was out 
again, with two long-stemmed 
fragile glasses in her hands. 

SHE handed one to Tony, and 
awe and wonder crossed his 
face as he sipped. He looked his 
question at her over the rim of 
the glass. 

"1 shouldn't have spoiled your 
surprise, really." She smiled at him. 
"The Kandros. They wouldn't prepare anything for the haby, but 
they must have ordered these from 
Earth when Polly was just — let's 
see — three months along, to have 
had them here in time." 

"Real wine," Tony marveled, and 
sipped again. ll Aged wine. How did 
they get it? How could they afford—?"' 

"They couldn't, of course," she 
reminded him, "but they have rela
C A LAX Y SCIENCE FICTION 



tives on Earth. You know they're 
not the only ones who left some 
cash behind, 'just in case" ?" 

The doctor looked up sharply, 
and found a faint smile flickering 
on her lips. "How did you know?" 
he demanded. "Where do you find 
out these things?" 

"What do they call it — feminine 
intuition?" She shrugged and 
moved toward the kitchen again. 
"Which also tells -me that supper 
will be a desiccated mess if I don't 
serve it right now." 

She had set the table as usual in 
front of the big window. Tony 
took his place and looked out 
through the eerie twilight across 
the endless expanse of Lacns Solis, 
The ocean bed was like a vast black 
velvet now, studded with a million 
tiny, glinting jewels. 

The doctor stared out until Anna 
returned with a steaming dish. He 
regarded her soberly and was planning a dutiful compliment when 
she burst into laughter and set the 
dish down. "Jim's face," she explained hastily. "It just crossed my 
mind. He's so proud of the wife 
and child — " 

He was irked by a note of insincerity and supposed for a moment — neurotically, he knew; commonest thing in the world — that 
she had been laughing at him. 

"Nothing so funny," he said 
stiffly. 

"I'm sorry. Serve the greens?" 
Dinner performed its usual 
magic. Tony bad been really hun


gry. Tilting his chair against the 
wall, with his empty pipe in his 
mouth, he found that things were 
getting back into proportion. 

"Anyhow," he said, "wc still 
have time." They had been talking 
about Bell's threat of quarantine. 
Through the daylight hours it had 
seemed at least the end of the 
world. Now, with a pleasantly noticeable buzz from the wine in his 
head and a palatable meal digesting, above all, with some privacy 
and clear space and time around, 
him, Tony couldn't recapture the 
sharp alarm of the threat. 

ANNA, very seriously, demanded, "Do you think Bell 
can run us out?" 

He waved a little too expansively. "Prob'ly not. Any number of 
other possibilities. Somebody at 
Pibtco might have taken the stuff; 
they're close enough. Nope — " He 
hauled up. "Ed Nealey wouldn't 
make a mistake like that. He was 
working the Bloodhound and 
there's a boy who'll do any job the 
right way. Don't worry about it, 
though. It's two weeks to rocket 
landing, another week to Shipment 
Day — something'll turn up. We'll 
send O'Donnell to Marsport. If 
there's a legal angle he'll find it. 
Maybe he can scare Bell into backing down. Bell's supposed to be a 
small-timer. He wouldn't want any 
real trouble." 

Anna got up abruptly and filled 
his empty glass. 



MARS CHILD 



75 



"Hey, you take some too!" Tony 
insisted. 

She made a show of draining the 
last few drops into her own glass; 
the rims touched and they drank. 

"You're a strange girl, Anna," 
said Tony. "Hell, I didn't mean exactly that — I mean you're not like 
the other women here. Joan. Bea. 
Polly. Verna." 

"No," she said. "Not very much 
like Bea." 

Tony didn't know whether she 
was angry or amused and decided 
he didn't caie. "I don't know why 
I don't marry you." 

"Two reasons," Anna smiled. 
"One, you're not sure you want to. 
Two, you're not at all sure I do." 

The sudden banging on the door 
was like an explosion in the quiet 
room. Harve Stillman didn't wait 
for anyone to answer; he burst in. 



He was white-faced and shaken. 
"Doc!" 

Tony jumped up and reached for 
his bag. "What is it? Joan? The 
baby? An accident at the Lab?" 

"Flash from Marsport. The rocket's coming in." The radio man 
stopped to catch his breath. 
"They're inside radio range now. 
Estimated time of arrival, 4:00 
A.M." 

"Tomorrow?" Anna gasped. 

Harve nodded and Tony put 
down his bag with mechanical precision in the tenter of the table. 

Tomorrow! Three weeks had 
been little enough time to find the 
nurcaine and the thief and get rid 
of Bell's strangling cordon. Now, 
with the rocket in ahead of schedule, two of those weeks were 
yanked out from under them! 