ASK ME ANYTHING by Damon Knight



IT BEGAN with the crutch. 
Then came the iron hook, then 
the first mechanical limbs. And 
finally — 

Bedlam. Thin metal legs switching' by, a moving forest of scissors. 
Metal arms flashing in balance; 




torsos of metal, like bright dented 
beetles. Round metal skulls that 
cupped the swift wink and unmoving stare of human eyes. 

Krisch, watching them in his 
desk scanner, kept the volume 
turned down. The unit walls were 

133 



deliberately made sound-reflecting; 
the children grew up in the atmosphere of their own clattering noise, 
and they learned to shout against 
it. To soldiers so reared, there 
would be no terror in the roar of 
battle. But Krisch, who was only 
human, wore earplugs when he 
walked among them. 

The river of metal funneled into 
classrooms, stopped. Lights flashed 
on over the scanners, on the board 
that covered the twenty-foot wall 
facing Krisch's desk. Instruction 
had begun. 

Krisch watched the board for a 
while, then switched on the illuminated panel that carried his notes, 
and began to dictate his weekly 
report. He was a small, spare man, 
with thinning strands of iron-gray 
hair roached stiffly back over his 
freckled brown scalp. His mouth 
was straight, and the lines around 
it showed that he never smiled; but 
there was a glint of controlled, 
ironic humor in his watchful eyes. 

A bell spoke and a red light 
gleamed. Krisch looked up sharply, 
identified the scanner under the 
warning light, and transferred its 
image to his own desk screen. Half 
a thousand pairs of .eyes stared back 
at -him from the massed metal forms 
in the amphitheater. 

Krisch set the playback cube for 
one minute preceding. The robot 
instructors were equipped to answer 
all permissible questions; therefore, 
a non-permissible question had just 
been asked. 



The harsh voice of the robot 
said, "—along the inguinal canal 
and enters the abdomen through 
the internal abdominal ring. Yes? 
What is your question?" 

There was a pause. Krisch 
scanned the rows of gleaming 
heads, could not tell which one 
had signaled "Question." Then the 
abnormal ly loud but still chi Idish 
voice spoke, and simultaneously the 
student's number appeared in the 
recording circle at the lower left 
corner of the screen. Krisch started 
it automatically. The ten-year-old 
voice bellowed: 

"What is a kiss?" 

TIERE was a five-second pause. 
The robot answered, "Your 
question is meaningless. It has been 
reported to the Director and you 
will hold yourself in readiness for 
his orders." Then it resumed its 
lecture. 

Krisch switched the scanner back 
to normal operation. The robot was 
now discussing the prostate gland. 
Krisch waited until it had reached 
the end of a sentence and then 
pressed the "Attention" button on 
his console. He said, "Cadet ER17235 will report to the Director's 
Office immediately." He cleared the 
board and sank back in his cushioned chair, frowning. 

A non-permissible question was 
bad enough in itself; there had not 
been one in the oldest class in the 
last six years of the Project's existence. It was not only bad; it was 




 



indefensible. Logically, k should 
not have happened — the entire student body of the unit, according to 
a check made not a week ago, was 
correctly conditioned. 

But that was not all. The robot 
instructor had been perfectly truthful, to the extent of its own knowledge, when it had said the cadet's 
question was meaningless. The subject of normal human love relationships was not on the curriculum for two more years. To introduce it earlier, with the desired 
effect of repugnance, would seriously damage discipline. 

Krisch turned his selector to the 
appropriate list, but he knew the 
answer already. The word "kiss" 
was not in the student's vocabulary. 
And there was no one in the Unit, 
besides himself, from whom the 
cadet could have learned it. 

Krisch stood up and went to the 
transparent wall behind his desk — 
one huge window that looked out 
on the parade ground and beyond 
it to the chill, airless surface of the 
planet. Only starlight gleamed from 
the jagged points of that landscape 
which faced eternally away from 
the sun; the force screen that maintained the Unit's atmosphere also 
acted as a light trap. 

He could look up and see, one 
thousand light-years away, the cold 
dim glow that was the cluster of 
which Cynara was a part, and the 
whole frightening majesty of space 
in between. But a hypothetical 
enemy scout, pausing in space to 



scan this waste planet, would see 
nothing but a tiny disk of blackness that might be a vitreous plain, 
or the crater of a long-dead volcano. 

KRISCH had been here a little 
more than ten years, moving 
along from one installation to the 
next with his class, turning over 
the vacated office and its duties to 
the next lowest man in the. hierarchy. Each year, a new Director 
was shipped out with a new load 
of embryos and equipment, and at 
the end of ten more years, Krisch 
would be permanently installed as 
director of the final Unit, and as 
senior officer of the entire Project. 
That was all he had to look forward to, for the rest of his life. 
Many ships arrived here, but none 
left, or would ever leave, except 
those that carried the troops themselves- when they were needed. 
Krisch's rewards were solitude, 
achievement, power, and the partial satisfaction of a boundless 
curiosity. 

His penalty, if the Project were 
to fail or even be seriously delayed 
while it was under his command, 
would be painful and humiliating. 
He would not even be allowed to 
die. 

The door speaker said, "Cadet 
ER-1 72M reporting as ordered, 
sir." 

Krisch returned to his desk. He 
said, "Enter." 

The metal thing stalked into the 



ASK ME ANYTHING 



135 



room and stood at attention in front 
of the Director's desk. Only the 
absolute minimum of it was organic: the boy's head, pared to a 
functional ball, the blue eyes staring through the metal skull-piece, 
a surgically simplified torso, the 
limb stumps. By itself, it would be 
no more than an unpleasant, useless lump of meat; but, housed in 
the metal body, it was a sketch of 
the perfect righting man. 

The cadet, like the rest of his 
class, was only ten years old. Raised 
from an embryo in a plastic sack, 
the living part of him had been 
transferred many times from one 
articulated metal shell to another. 
For that reason, his present body 
was comparatively crude. When hereached his full growth, he would 
be given his linal body — so fantastically armored as to be almost indestructible, so powerful that it 
could outrun any land vehicle over 
broken terrain. The weapons built 
into his arms, controlled directly 
by his nerves, would be sufficient 
to destroy a city. 

And he would be completely 
without fear. 

Krisch let the silence frown between them while the boy stood at 
attention. Just now, the boy knew 
tension. It was necessary for discipline, and the repressed hostility 
toward Krisch would later be translated into a useful hatred for all 
non-mechanical human beings. To 
use physical pain as a means of 
punishment was out of the ques


tion, a total impossibility. That, in 
fact, was the root idea of the entire 
Project. 

THE crutch went back to prehistoric times. The metal hook, 
to replace a lost hand, was born 
early in the Iron Age. The Twentieth Century knew prosthetic devices which looked almost like 
flesh, and adequately performed alt 
mechanical functions of natural 
limbs. But it remained for the 
galactic culture and the warlike nation which Krisch was a part of to 
discover that artificial limbs could 
be more than a lesser evil; that the 
metal arm, the metal finger, was 
better than flesh. Better. Its cleverly 
articulated segments reported pressure, temperature and position at 
least as well as flesh. Its strength 
was incomparably greater. And it 
felt no pain. 

Man is so soft, thought Krisch, 
in comparison with the metal he 
uses; so soft, and so easily hurt. 
Every cubic inch of flesh, excepting 
only the brain itself, contains its 
minuscule fuse of agony. But metal 
feels no pain. Those boys will conquer the galaxy; no human troops 
can stand against them. 

He amended the thought. Five 
minutes ago that had been almost 
a certainty. Now it was only possible. 

He said, "Where did you learn 
the word 'kiss'?" 

The boy's eyelids fluttered behind the steel mask. "From a — " 



13i 




 



He hesitated. "A training device, 
sir," he finished uncertainly. 

Krisch said sharply, "Are you 
sure?" 

A long pause. "I — I think that's 
what it was, sir." 

"You think it was," said Krisch. 
"Describe this 'training device.' " 

"It's like a human being, sir." 

"Mechanized, or all flesh?" 

Silence. The boy's eyelids blinked, and Krisch could imagine the 
rest of the face, screwed up in an 
agony of indecision. 

"Answer the question," Krisch 
ordered. 

"Neither one, sir," said the boy 
painfully. "It was — " 

"Well? What was it made of?" 

"Of— " 

"Well?" 

"Of — just lines, sir." 

KRISCH sat back a moment, 
looking at the cadet in frowning silence. The boy's hesitant answers showed either that he was 
lying, which was inconceivable, or 
that he was conscious of guilt. 

"Of just lines," he repeated. He 
put a skeptical note into his voice. 
"Explain." 

"That's all, sir," the boy said in 
a rush. "It was made of lines, and 
it looked like a human being, and 
it talked to me." His voice stopped 
abruptly. 

Krisch pounced on that. "What 
did it talk about?" 

"About — about love, sir." 
Another word the cadets had not 



been taught. "Go on," said Krisch. 
"What did it say about love?" 

"About one human being loving 
another one. It said that means 
when you know the other human 
being is lonely and unhappy like 
you, and you give the other one 
pa rt of the way you feel about 
yourself, instead of keeping it all. 
And you show how you feel by 
meeting flesh to flesh, and it makes 
you feel wonderful, like killing 
something, but much better." The 
cadet paused. "But I didn't understand about kisses. It seemed to be 
very complicated." 

Krisch felt a ball of coldness 
settle in his chest. This boy was 
ruined; he would have to be 
scrapped. And how many others — ? 

"Where did all this take place?" 
he demanded. 

"During airless maneuvers yesterday, sir." 

Krisch tried to visualize it: the 
cadets scattered out there in the 
cold blackness, carrying out one of 
the prescribed war games under the 
direction of student squad leaders. 
One of them isolated from the rest, 
waiting for a signal. And while he 
waited, something had approached 
him, and spoken to him of love . . . 
"No one else saw or heard?" 
"No, sir." 

"Why did you fail to report it?" 

A pause. "I thought it was part 
of the training." 

"Tell the truth!" Krisch snapped. 

The cadet's eyes blinked. As 
Krisch watched, horrified, they 



ASK ME ANYTHING 



grew unmistakably moist. "I don't 
know, sir! I don't know!" 

The moisture brimmed over. Two 
tears ran down the shining mask 
that was the boy's face. 

Another signal light blinked red 
On the master board, then another. 
Krisch knew, finally, that the test 
had come ten years ahead of time. 

The Project was at war. 

KRISCH strapped himself into 
the speedster and eased it out 
through the exit tunnel. He had 
put the entire student body through 
interrogation and a psych check, 
and had turned up fifty-three more 
cases of induced aberration. For the 
time being, he had left them all at 
liberty but carefully monitored; he 
hoped that one of them might be 
approached again by the saboteur, 
whoever or whatever it was. 

Something flashed dully in the 
starlight outside the transparent 
nose of the speedster. Krisch stared 
at it, then inched the speedster over 
until the object lay almost directly 
under him. 

It was a cadet, without the spacegear that should have closed the 
Openings in his face-plate and made 
his body airtight. The body was 
sprawled lifelessly. The staring eyes 
were blood-red with burst capillaries. 

Krisch peered through the transparent metal and read the serial 
number etched into the cadet's steel 
foreskull. It was the boy he had 
interviewed an hour ago. 



He contacted his desk relays and 
gave orders for the disposal of the 
body and the detention of the 
other fifty-three. For the moment, 
it was all he could do. 

He took the speedster up and 
set its course toward Unit One, 
three hundred miles away. After 
his interview with Cadet ER- 17235, 
he had called the Directors of the 
other nine installations and ordered 
immediate psych checks. The results, gathered two hours later, 
showed that every unit had been 
affected. Viar, Director of Unit 
One and the newest member of 
the Project's staff, had had an additional and equally disturbing report to make. 

Krisch watched the backdrop of 
white fire and black velvet move 
ponderously past. Even if he were 
able to remove the disturbing factor before it had done further 
harm, it might prove impossible to 
knit the Project's structure together 
again. The oldest of the cadets had 
not yet reached the stage in which 
the circle of their conditioning 
would be unbreakable. Normal 
emotions and a normal biological 
life had no place in that circle, but 
it was still possible to introduce 
them. The residt was — insanity, a 
flood of emotion for which no outlet had been or could be provided; 
impossible desires; the classic insoluble dilemma. 

He remembered the blood-red, 
staring eyes of the dead boy. The 
symbolism was appropriate. His 



131 




 



eyes were the only organs of expression left to him, and he had 
certainly used them effectively 

enough. 

FOR the first time in many years, 
tbe Director wished he had 
not been born into a nation with a 
history of thwarted development 
and a psychology of resentment. 
He wished that he were an underpaid pedagogue on a world at 
peace. He wished that he had not 
been forced by circumstances to put 
that boy in a metal cage. 

Viar met him, by request, at the 
bottom level of Unit One, the level 
that housed the huge atomic converter which powered the unit. Viar 
was a youngish man with a large, 
white, perspiring face that expressed conscientiousness and insecurity. His eyes were milk-blue 
surrounded by white lashes. Krisch 
disliked him thoroughly. 

They stood by the shaft that the 
converter had dug in the stone of 
the planet. Viar said nervously, "I 
first noticed that we had stumbled 
on something when I checked the 
meter readings. They showed mostly granite, but there were occasional 
fluctuations that indicated refined 
metal. I was curious, so I set the 
converter to extract only the stone. 
Yesterday I shut off the converter 
briefly, and sent a cadet down to 
see what was left." 

Krisch looked at the curious 
array of objects spread out on the 
plastic floor. There were three 



metal tablets incised with neat rows 
of dots, ovals, squares, and crosses. 
There was a long curved trough, 
with an attachment at one'end that 
suggested it might have been designed to fit a wrist — or a tentacle. 
There was a set of concentric 
ellipses, with little balls that seemed 
designed to run along them; clearly 
an orrery of this solar system. There 
was a six-foot metal box, curiously 
fashioned in a complexity of intersecting planes. 

Krisch knew that this world 
could not have supported indigenous life more recently than ten 
million years ago; but there was not 
a trace of corrosion in any of the 
artifacts. 

He said, "Why did you fail to 
report this until I called you?" 

Viar said apologetically, "I 
thought it could wait for my weekly report. It didn't seem to have 
any importance, until today. Then 
I noticed that this box was open." 

Krisch looked at it. The scam 
gaped very slightly around three 
sides. He tested it, and found that 
the enclosed face would not move 
in either 'direction. It seemed unlikely that anything but a gas could 
have escaped. 

HE REMEMBERED the dead 
cadet's description of the 
strange thing that had spoken to 
him on the training ground. "It 
was made of line . . ." None of 
the others had duplicated this 
phrase: they had simply said that 



ASK ME ANYTHING 



139 



it was like a man, but different. 
The fanciful thought occurred to 
him that if the first description was 
correct, and the word "lines" had 
Seen used mathematically, even this 
millimeter gap would not have been 
necessary. 

"Is it possible that one of the 
cadets could have opened it?" he 
demanded. 

"Perhaps," Viar granted, willing 
to consider every possibility, "but 
it does not seem probable." He 
gestured toward the box. "I made 
several attempts to open it when 1 
first got it out. Perhaps something 
I did had a delayed action. At any 
rate, I would swear that not only 
was it heavier then than it is now, 
but that there was a force-lock of 
some nature holding it shut. I've 
looked in with a microprobe, and 
there is i small mechanism of some 
kind attached to one corner. I believe the box can be opened fully 
now, but I thought I had better 
wait until you could inspect it." 

"You believe, then," said Krisch, 
"that there was a device in this 
thing which was still in operation 
until yesterday?" 

Viar looked at him with a trace 
of hangdog defiance. "I believe that 
there was something in that box 
which is still operating now." 

Krisch controlled his irritation 
and said nothing. As Viar escorted 
him back to the exit tube. Krisch 
told him, "Proceed with normal 
activities, but monitor every cadet. 
Open that box, but not inside the 



Unit. And report to me hourly." 
He strapped himself into the speedster again and turned its nose back 
to Unit Ten. 

THREE more cases of aberrant 
conduct were waiting for him, 
and the reports from the other units 
were similar and ecjually alarming. 
Krisch interviewed a few more, 
then cubed a standard interview 
form and turned the process over 
to robot mechanisms. Viar called 
him later in the day, to report that 
he had succeeded in opening the 
box, but could make nothing of its 
contents. 

Krisch got the collated reports 
from the robot interviewers, and 
ran up a tentative prediction. In 
twenty-six hours, the unknown 
agent — which might or might not 
have escaped from the box u n earthed by Viar — had corrupted 
one hundred and fifty-three cadets, 
or approximately one every ten minutes. If it continued at the same 
rate, which, of course, could not 
be assumed with so little data, ten 
per cent of the total student body 
would have been aberrated at the 
end of three hundred hours. 
Twelve and a half Galactic Standard days. At the end of that time, 
Krisch reckoned grimly, the Project would be hopelessly crippled. 

Monitoring the cadets had he in 
totally ineffective; Krisch ordered 
it discontinued. His only other defensive move would have been to 
suspend normal activities altogether 



MO 




 



and keep the cadets in monitored 
groups, but that would have had a 
psychological effect nearly as bad 
as the one he was trying to avert. 
He ordered the aberrees to be confined and then destroyed personally 
by the Director of each Unit, without the knowledge of the student 
leaders. 

He carried out this duty himself 
in Unit Ten, and then went to 
bed. 

HE AWOKE from a nightmare 
in which he had been surrounded by silent metal bodies — 
(he bodies of ten-year-old cadets; 
but instead of the egg-shaped headpieces, they had worn open helmets, 
and where their faces should have 
been were raw, bleeding disks of 
flesh. 

Deliberately he relaxed his body 
and sank back onto the sweatdrenched cushion. Then he sat up 
again with a start, realizing that 
what had waked him had been 
someone's entrance into the room. 

And that was simply, starkly impossible. His apartment was guarded while he slept by armored walls 
and a massive door which would 
have held back a division. Moreover, there were alarm devices 
which would signal any attempt to 
enter. Still further, no one in this 
Unit or any other had the slightest 
sane motive for trying to enter 
without permission. 

That realization exploded in his 
mind and faded against the fact 



registered by the outmost corner of 
his vision: There %vas someone in 
the room. 

He raised his head, looking full 
at the archway that separated his 
sleeping room from his office. He 
saw a dim glow from the instrument panels. 

A strange man stood there. 
That was his first dominant impression; and it was so strong that 
for a long minute, even while he 
saw that he was mistaken, he could 
not rid himself of it. 

The eye does not sec a man; it 
sees a grouping of lines which are 
capable of almost infinite variation. 
The visual center interprets those 
lines, compares them with a gestult, 
a pcrception-of-form, and the mind 
says, "Man." 

With an effort, Krisch put aside 
his preconceptions and accepted 
what he saw. 

He saw a collection of lines that 
enclosed no form. The glow from 
his office shone between them. 
There was a series of curlicues that 
might have suggested hair, then a 
gap, then two incomplete spirals 
that vaguely suggest ed eyes ; an other gap and a straight line for a 
nose; farther down, a line for the 
mouth, curved into an idiotic smile. 
On either side was a handle-shaped 
line for the ear. 

The body was like that of a stick 
man drawn by a child; one line 
for the torso, two for the arms, 
two for the legs, and three stiffly 
curling lines for each hand. 



ASK ME ANYTHING 



14] 



The figure said, "Ask me anything." 

The voice spoke without sound, 
the words coming spontaneously 
into Krisch's mind, as if written 
with a phosphorescent crayon on a 
sheet of black glass. Krisch realized this without surprise, and briefly wondered why. Then he recalled 
the interview with the first cadet. 
The boy had said he had spoken 
with the "training device" outside 
the Unit area, during airless 
maneuvers. 

Krisch thought, "Who are you?" 

The answer was immediate. "I 
am a device to entertain and instruct you. Ask me anything." 

Krisch's hand rested on the 
■button that controlled a battery of 
force-pencils focused on the area 
in front of his couch, but he had 
no intention of using it. There was 
every reason to suspect that such 
methods would fail; and, if they 
did, he would have surrendered 
his only chance. 

He decided to take the thing at 
its word. "How can you be destroyed ?" 

"1 cannot be destroyed." 

"How can you be immobilized, 
then ?" 

"By — " The figure went on without a pause, but visual images replaced the words. There were, 
Krisch realized, no words in his 
language for those images. They 
flashed briefly be f ore him, each 
one trailing glimpses of the process 
that produced it. Krisch could not 



even retain the sequence, much less 
interpret it. 

"Repeat," he thought. 

The same images came and went. 
At the end of it, Krisch knew that 
he would never learn anything useful from them. What he was seeing was the terminal end of a 
thousand-year chain of technology. 
He could not expect to grasp it 
from one simple explanation, any 
more than a savage could be taught 
metallurgy in a single lecture. 

Krisch remembered, with panic, 
that the thing's average indoctrination period was ten minutes. He 
said, "What governs the length of 
time you stay with one person?" 
"If he asks me to stay, I stay." 

KRISCH relaxed for the first 
time since he had seen the 
figure standing there in the doorway. If that was true, then his 
battle was won. 

"There are a great many questions I want to ask you," he 
thought. "Stay with me until I ask 
you to go." 

There was no reply. 
He demanded, "Will you do as 
I ask?" 
"Yes." 

Fully awake now, Krisch raised 
the back rest of the cushion and 
pressed the buttons for nomishment. His mind was racing. A 
thought was half-born in his mind 
that made him tremble. He asked, 
"Of what substance are you composed ?" 



142 




 



The figure said, "Of no substance. I am the Pattern." 

Krisch leaned forward. "Do you 
mean that you are not material?" 

"I am not material. I am a pattern of forces which adapts itself 
to each individual I serve. You see 
the sketch of a man. My makers 
would see something quite different" 

"Are you intelligent?" 

"I am not intelligent. 1 have no 
will or independent existence. 1 am 
merely a device for answering questions." 

Krisch thought for a moment. 
He said, "A minute ago you described yourself as the Pattern. Does 
that mean you are the only one of 
your kind ever created?" 

"No. There were many others, 
but the rate that came after my 
makers did not like us. We disturbed them. Therefore they imprisoned us, like the jinn in your 
legend, since they could not destroy 
US." 

Krisch asked, "Are you capable 
of lying?" 
"No." 

That was the central question, 
and unfortunately the answer meant 
nothing. But Krisch was beginning 
to see a strong possibility that his 
first estimate of the thing as a saboteur was mistaken. The other explanation fitted the facts more 
readily and completely. The Pattern 
was what it called itself, "a device 
to entertain and instruct you." Itpresented itself to a cadet who was 



alone and idle — probably it had 
been designed never to interfere 
with anyone who had something 
better to do. The cadet asked questions; the Pattern answered them. 
At the end of ten minutes or so, 
for a cadet was rarely unoccupied 
for longer, the cadet released it and 
it looked for another client. 

And because the fields about 
which the cadets were most curious 
were precisely those whose knowledge would destroy them — they 
went insane. 

THE Pattern had said "the race 
that came after my makers did 
not like us." It was understandable. 
Every culture had its areas of forbidden knowledge and politely ignored facts. The Pattern would be 
inhibited in those areas, where its 
own makers were concerned. But 
in an alien society, its truthful answers could be explosive. 

Krisch asked, "Were you. intended for the use of children, or of 
adults?" 

"For the use of both." 
The knowledge he wanted was 
there, then, and by asking enough 
questions, he could get it. You 
could not teach metallurgy to a 
savage in one lecture, or even in 
one day - but you could teach him. 

Assuming that the Pattern was 
truthful, there was still one open 
question that gave Krisch reason to 
hesitate. An absolutely truthful 
oracle could be a dangerous thing: 
witness the insanity of the cadets, 



ASK ME ANYTHING 



aaid the "disturbance" of "the race 
that came after our makers." 
Krisch's mind was not the artificial, 
delicately balanced creation that the 
cadets' were, but he knew very well 
that he had areas of instability; he 
could even concede that there might 
be such areas of which he was not 
aware. Could he ask the right questions — the ones which would not 
evoke dangerous answers? 

He thought so. What he wanted 
from the Pattern was nothing that 
could be intimately bound up with 
his emotional drives or the structure 
of his ego; he wanted technical information. 

Prove to a religious fanatic that 
there is no God, and you destroy 
him. But give him a fi am eth rower, 
and he will destroy the ungodly. 





 



Finally, there was the question 
that capped ail others: just how 
had the Pattern kept up an average 
rate of one cadet every ten minutes, 
counting the time spent in traveling 
from one Unit to the next, and in 
finding an available subject? 

The answer was the one Krisch 
had suspected and hoped for. The 
Pattern moved by instantaneous 
transport, out of the normal fabric 
of space-time. 

"How?" asked Krisch. Again he 
got a series of incomprehensible 
images. "Explain that first picture," 
said Krisch, and "Break that down 
further," and "What is that component ?" And, very slowly, the 
Pattern began to teach him. 

THE problem of limiting the Pattern's activities while Krisch 
slept bothered him. He solved it, 
finally, by setting up a pool of 
cadets to be admitted by a robot 
monitor, one at a time, into a room 
where the Pattern could talk to 
them without interruption. As soon 
as one cadet stopped asking questions, he was removed and another 
was admitted. Krisch found that 
although the Pattern could plant 
the seeds of insanity in a cadet in 
less than ten minutes, it took an 
average of nearly two hours to reduce the same cadet to such a mindless state that he was no longer 
useful as a questioner. Thus, during each of Krisch's six-hour sleep 
periods, the Pattern disposed of 
only three cadets. During the re


maining eighteen hours of each day, 
Krisch kept it fully occupied. 

All knowledge is power, rightfully applied. But Krisch needed a 
particular kind of lever, and a special place to stand. Slowly and 
painfully, he was getting it. 

The balance of forces which had 
made the cadets possible and necessary included, as one of its basic 
assumptions, transport at finite 
speeds. Under this limiting condition, attack from space on a fortified planet was enormously costly 
and by itself could not succeed. It 
was necessary for the attacker to 
expend twenty ships in order to 
land one. Thereafter, the war proceeded on the ground, under the 
enemy's own defensive umbrella, as 
wars had always been fought — in 
hand-to-hand, street-to-street combat. Superiority in ground troops, 
therefore, could be the decisive factor. 

But an object moving instantaneously could not, by definition, be 
interrupted or affected in any way 
while in transit. And therefore the 
man who brought the secret of 
such transport to Cynara or any 
other great power could ask his 
own price. Since the power which 
bought the secret would shortly 
rule the galaxy, the price would be 
high. 

If Krisch had been required to 
understand everything he was 
taught, the project would have been 
nearly hopeless. As it was, his task 
was difficult enough. The Pattern's 



ASK ME ANYTHING 



U 5 



knowledge included minutely detailed plans for every stage of the 
operation that was required, and 
for all Uic subsidiary operations that 
produced the components, and the 
still more subsidiary operations that 
produced them. 

KRISCH had to follow these 
step by painful step, like a 
savage smelting ore to build a 
smeltery to smelt the ore better, to 
build a foundry to cast the metal 
to make tools that made other tools 
that built a machine that built another machine to draw wire, that 
another machine shaped and 
threaded. Result, a bolt. 

He stopped sending his weekly 
reports. The next ship to Cynara 
was not due for six months, and it 
would take more than two years 
for a ship to reach him after his 
message carriers stopped arriving. 
He glanced at the master board in 
his office only twice a day, when 
he awoke and before he went to 
bed. The rest of the time he spent 
with the Pattern in the Unit's machine shops and laboratories. 

Minor breakdowns occurred, but 
he grudged the time to attend to 
them. Repair machines broke down 
and were not replaced from stock; 
thereafter, when anything went 
wrong with a robot instructor or 
monitor, it remained out of action. 
Cadets went to their assigned classrooms, but heard no lectures. Krisch 
saw a few of these, with more initiative than the rest, wandering 



around the corridors. He ignored 
them. The Project simply did not 
matter any longer, by comparison 
with the weapon he was forging 
under the Pattern's direction. 

He allowed the weekly cubes 
from the other nine Directors to 
pile up unread on his desk. On the 
fifteenth morning, the green light 
of the inter-unit communicator was 
blinking as he entered his office. He 
clicked over the switch and saw 
Viar's round, perspiring face .on 
the screen. 

Viar said, "Director Krisch, I've 
been trying to get you since 
eighteen hours yesterday! Is anything wrong at your Unit?" 

"Nothing's wrong," said Krisch 
curtly. "I've been very busy. What 
is it you want?" 

"Why, I was only wondering if 
you'd decided what action to take 
on the special report I sent you 
last week. I don't want to press 
you, but — " 

"I'm considering it," Krisch said. 
"I'll let you know as soon as I 
reach a decision. Is there anything 
else?" 

"Just one other thing. I was 
wondering if there had been any 
more trouble with the saboteur in 
your Unit. I haven't had any for 
two weeks, now, and — " 

"Nor I," said Krisch. "There's 
nothing we can do on that score 
until it appears again, if it does." 

He broke the contact and 
then sorted the message cubes on 
bis desk until he found the 




 



one labeled "Unit One — 1/17/09 
—Special." He dropped itr into the 
viewer and scanned it quickly. 

Viar, it appeared, had been doing more archcological research on 
his own initiative. Krisch repressed 
a stab of irritation and read on. 
Viar had widened the converter's 
field and increased its output, using 
the surplus to turn out ingots for 
small converter units, in order to 
excavate a pit two hundred feet 
square by one hundred feet deep. 
The objects he had so far extracted 
showed clearly, he said, that two 
entirely distinct cultures were represented. Those that Krisch had already seen, including the enigmatic 
box, belonged to the later culture, 
and these included several artifacts 
which Viar considered to be weapons. Krisch frowned over this section; it was not elaborated. 

Viar's main point was I hat, 
judging by pktograms and items 
shaped to the wearers' use, the first 
culture had been so alien biologically and sociologically as to be 
almost incomprehensible — but the 
latecomers had been men. Viar suggested, with a breathless tone showing through his careful phrases, 
that this was a discovery of enor' mous importance to galactic 
archeology and anthropology. Radioactive tests confirmed their 
previous estimate that the planet 
had been dead for more than ten 
million years. 

Therefore, the conclusion was inescapable that mankind had not 



originated on Earth of Sol — that 
there had been a previous wave of 
colonization, so ancient that no 
trace of it had ever been found 
before. 

Viar, Krisch though contemptuously, envisioned a future of academic glory. He wanted Krisch to 
authorize him to dispatch his finds 
immediately to Cynara, with the 
recommendation that a research 
group be set up on the Project 
planet, to be headed, no doubt, by 
Viar himself. 

The notion of independent evolution did even seem to have occurred to him. 

The obvious thing to do was to 
keep him contented, and Krisch was 
inclined to doubt that Viar's discoveries had any importance compared with his own. However, the 
thought of Viar's cryptic reference 
to weapons returned to him. There 
were two remote but unpleasant 
possibilities there: one, that Viar 
might be hinting that if Krisch 
opposed him, he had force to back 
up his requests; the other, that 
among those weapons, just possibly, 
might be one whose strategic importance to Cynara would overshadow Krisch's. 

IT WOULD be just as well to 
take care of both, and satisfy 
Viar at the same time, if it could 
be done. Krisch thought for a mojncnt. then dictated a memo: 

"Your suggestion is accepted. 
Send all artifacts and relevant data 



ASK ME ANYTHING 



147 



to this office for shipment. I will 
endorse your request for the establishment of a research group and 
will recommend your appointment 
as its head. In the meantime, however, I cannot authorize any further use 'of the Unit One converter 
for excavation purposes. Discontinue such activity, and use converter ingots pending a reply from 
Cynaia." 

That tied it up. It was not only 
reasonable but accommodating; 
Viar Could not disobey instructions 
without open hostility. If he did 
disobey, he could be dealt with. If 
he didn't, Krisch could end any 
possibility of future trouble by removing all weapons from the shipment. 

There was, however, a third 
alternative which Krisch had not 
taken into account, as he discovered when he examined the crates 
Viar sent. They contained a considerable number and variety of 
artifacts, but not one of them,, as 
far as Krisch could tell, could possibly be classed as a weapon. 

It did not ring true, somehow. 
Viar was simply not the type to 
make even so definite a stand as 
this against a person in authority 
over him. He would intrigue, and 
he would undermine, but he would 
never risk his neck in open conflict. A new weapon would give 
him some false courage, but not, 
Krisch thought, that much. 

A thought struck him. He said 
to the Pattern, "Did you show 



yourself to Viar before you came 
to me?" 
"Yes." 

"Why didn't you tell me?" 
Krisch gestured impatiently. "Never 
mind; I know — I didn't ask you. 
How long did you spend and what 
did you discuss with him?" 

"An hour and twenty minutes. I 
answered his questions about myself, about himself, about those 
who came after my makers, and 
about their weapons. I told him 
where to look for three that were 
in the area he was excavating." 

That was like Viar, at least, 
Krisch thought wryly, to get his 
hands on a fountainhead of power 
and then let go. 

And Viar's sudden aggressiveness was explained. He had been 
shown a path to power, and the 
Pattern had no doubt told him a 
few truths about his timidity and 
lack of drive. Viar was, for the 
time being, a reformed character — 
and an unstable one. 

THE crisis was unwelcome, since 
it came at a time when Krisch 
was almost at the end of his strenuous labors; but he was realistic 
enough to see that it had to be 
dealt with immediately. He considered his problem, made his preparations—which took some time, 
since they included transferring all 
big shop and laboratory equipment 
to the end of a half-mile tunnel 
dug outward from the Unit's perimeter — and then called Viar. 



14ft 




 



Viar's face was arranged in an 
expression of careful deference, 
through which tunning and selfcomplacency were almost obscenely* 
visible. 

Krisch cut through his greeting 
with. "Viar, your instructions were 
to send all the artifacts to me. 
Where are the weapons you mentioned in your report?" 

Viar's features realigned themselves to produce an effect of utter 
surprise. "Why, everything's there," 
he said. "I sent it all over, just as 
you stipulated." 

"Viar," said Krisch coldly, "you 
unspeakable worm, guilt is written 
all over your face. .What do you 
hope to gain by lying?" 

Viar's white eyelashes blinked, 
and his weak mouth hardened 
slightly, but he replied in the same 
careful, polite tone. "Perhaps something was left out by error. Director Krisch. Let me suggest this — 
send me back the items I gave you, 
and I'll make a careful search before I dispatch the shipment to 
Cynara." 

"You mean," Krisch said, "that 
I had better do as you say, or I'll 
get the weapons, but not in the way 
I expect." 

Viar's eyes gleamed. "If you care 
to put it that way. Director." 

Instantly, Krisch launched himself into a storm of abuse. He had 
had nine years* more experience 
at this form of psychological punishment than Viar, and he was a 
past master of the art. He called 



Viar a majority of the filthy names 
in his vocabulary, with special 
emphasis on Viar's putative masculinity, and he delivered the whole 
tirade in a tone of scathing, 
furious contempt. He continued 
without slackening his pace or lowering his voice until he saw Viar 
redden, turn pale. Then, still without a pause, he accused Viar of 
sabotage and treason. 

Viar exploded. "You talk about 
treason !" he shrieked. "I know 
what you've been up to over there. 
1 know what's been keeping you 
so busy ! You've got that thing 
tha t escaped from my box, and 
you're pumping secrets out of it, 
to sell to the highest bidder !" 

' 'Suppose I am ?" Krisch demanded swiftly. "What can you do 
about it?" 

VIAR told him. He had warned 
the other eight Directors that 
Krisch was plotting against the 
Project. Krisch was one against 
nine — he'd never get away with it 
— and Viar himself had a beam 
projector that would cut through 
Krisch's force screen like paper . . . 

Krisrh had all the information 
he needed. Now he wanted just 
one thing more — to get Viar out 
from behind the protection of his 
own screen. He told Viar, in extremely vulgar terms, to come and 
try it, and added an epithet he had 
been holding in reserve. 

Viar's moon-face went whiter 
than before. His eyes bulged. He 



ASK ME ANYTHING 



149 



opened his mouth to speak, and 
Krisch, grinning with triumph, cut 
him off. 

He had been scathing Viax for 
about ten minutes. He checked 
carefully to make sure that the Pattern was being kept occupied in 
the interrogation room; then he 
got into his battle harness and 
strode down the corridor toward 
the lift. 

Halfway along the corridor was 

group of cadets. One of them 
was on the floor, his metal body 
contorted and writhing. As Krisch 
a pp roached , t he boy began to 
scream at the top of his lungs. 
Krisch winced. He glanced at the* 
other cadets, one of whom wore a 
squad leader's insignia, 

"Why isn't he in surgery?" 
Krisch snapped. 

The squad leader said in a bewildered tone of voice, "Surgery 
doesn't work, sir. The control robot there is out of commission. 
What shall we do, sir?" 

More of the unit's services must 
be out than Krisch had realized; 
the victim evidently had some acutemalfunctioning of his internal organs which should have been detected in the incipient stage by 
robot examiners. 

"Kill him," said Krisch, and 
walked on. 

The voice of the squad leader 
followed him. "Sir. I don't understand. Are we all going to have 
pain, like the lower animals?" 

Krisch did not answer. He 



stepped into the lift at the end of 
the corridor and dropped swiftly 
to the ground level. His speedster 
was waiting opposite the mouth of 
the exit tunnel. He climbed in, 
worked it through the tunnel, then 
pointed its nose at the sky and fed 
it power. 

FIVE thousand feet above the 
Unit's force screen and some 
distance away from its perimeter, 
he leveled off and hovered, scanning the surface below at high magnification. 
He waited. 

There it came now; a tiny, slim 
shape darling straight toward the 
Unit from the direction of Unit 
One. Viar must be furious, Krisch 
thought. He caught the shape on 
the screen of his computer and 
snapped the controls over to "intercept." 

Instantly, his craft nosed over 
and shot downward. He counted 
seconds automatically. At "three" 
the other speedster was nearly in 
the' center of his forward screen. 
At "four" it entered the field of 
the force cannon Krisch had installed in the nose of his ship. He 
pressed the trigger and flung the 
ship into a steep ascent. 

When he came out of the gray 
blackout, he saw the fragments of 
Viar's ship still spreading, whirling 
crazily under the stars. Below, an 
amorphous column of dust and 
debris was rising from the site of 
Unit Ten. The force screen was 




 



down, and every structure above 
ground level had been destroyed. 

Krisch leveled off and turned on 
the scanner that was tuned to his 
cavern at the end of the tunnel. It 
responded immediately, showing 
him a view of the machine shop, 
with his nearly complete assembly 
standing in the middle of the room. 
Beyond were the transparent chambers in which the Pattern worked. 
KLrisch saw that there were still 
three cadets waiting ia the outer 
of these. It was enough. After an 
hour, there would be no more extraneous minds to ask the Pattern 
questions. 

Satisfied, he turned his ship toward Unit Two. It was just as well 
that Viar had managed to destroy 
Krisch's own Unit; it saved him 
the inconvenience of doing it himself. Neglected, the cadets had become not only distasteful, but a 
potential danger. 

He descended cautiously on Unit 
Two, jockeying the ship until its 
discharge valve was directly over 
the center of the force screen. 
Everywhere else, the screen was 
proof against any attack likely to 
be mounted by a spaceship, including radioactive dust; but here, at 
the node, it was vulnerable to a 
man who knew exactly what to do. 
Krisch tripped the release and let 
the deadly stuff filter down. 

He repeated the process at every 
remaining Unit, taking Viar's Unit 
last. He was reasonably certain that 
Viar had not waited to persuade 

ASK ME ANYTHING 



any other Director to cooperate in 
die attack; if he had, that Director 
would find nothing to attack when 
he got there— and no place to go 
when he got back. 

He returned to the shambles of 
Unit Ten, recuunoitcred carefully 
to make sure that no other speedster was waiting within attacking 
range, then descended and tunneled 
through the debris until he struclt 
the end of excavation. He left the 
speedster, opened the airtight door, 
one of a series that had closed 
when the tunnel lost air, and walked back to the cavern. 

THE incredibly complex structure 
which Krisch had built was not 
the final stage; it was only the 
final fabricator. The final product 
would be Krisch himself. 

He experimented first with a 
tiny cylinder into which he had 
built an affinity device turned to a 
target plate at the opposite end of 
the chamber. He lined it up so 
that it would pass through the field 
of the Pattern's machine on its way 
to the target, and arranged a photoelectric cell to track it and register 
the exact moment when it disappeared. 

He released the cylinder. It 
streaked across the room, into the 
middle ot the ten-fool framework, 
of the machine — and abruptly 
sprouted from the target fifty feet 
away. 

Trembling, Krisch read the 
meters. There was not one micro
151 



second's difference between the 
time the cylinder had passed 
through the field and the time it 
had appeared on the target plateTo the limit of his equipment's 
ability to record, the passage had 
been instantaneous. 

He examined the cylinder with 
sensitive instruments that had previously measured its dimensions, its 
weight and structure. The cylinder 
was unchanged, undistorted. 

Krisch grinned at the Pattern. 
There was danger in that enigmatic 
structure of forces, he knew, but 
he had escaped it by a strategy that 
was perfect because it was so simple. There were a million questions 
he had wanted to ask the Pattern; 
they tingled within him like an 
internal itch, but he had not asked 
one. He had asked only for the 
technical information he needed to 
build the transport device— he had 
not bothered to follow up any of 
the curious mathematical and 
philosophical implications of some 
of the steps involved. There was 
no time and he saw no need. 

He knew that his certainty of 
Safety was not self-delusion: he had 
checked himself daily with the hypnotically given psych tests. He was 
sane. His self-confidence was up a 
few points; that was natural. His 
empathy rating was down about 
the same amount; that had never 
been high — if it had, he would 
never have been assigned to head 
the Project. Those were the only 
changes. His orientation was per


fect. There were no signs of any 
incipient neuroses or psychoses, including the one he had most feared : 
a guilt complex centered around his 
destruction of the cadets. 

He was able to think about that 
without remorse, now as ever. They 
had only been half-alive. They were 
better off in oblivion. 

HE LOOKED -at the finished 
device once more. It was a 
hollow framework of curious, outof-plumb angles. Over it and 
around it crawled a metal vine bearing odd fruits: metal roses, each 
petal mathematically aligned; lozenges of transparent metal, each 
with a tiny, glowing heart. It 
looked like nothing so much as 
some alien being's notion of a work 
of art; but Krisch looked at it with 
awe and respect, remembering the 
labor each tiny part had cost him. 

Inside, in the field created by 
those metal blossoms, matter gained 
a new dimension — permanently. It 
was not like the half -efficient overdrive used in spaceships. That was 
an artificial condition, which collapsed when the power was withdrawn. 

Krisch had made a visual analogy 
to help himself understand the 
difference. He imagined normal 
space-time as a sphere of viscious 
fluid. A ship going into overdrive 
extended itself half out of that 
sphere, and lilted its molecules so 
that the rest offered less resistance 
to the liquid. But the Pattern's de


152 




 



vice extended the matter it affected 
like an accordion — open, half out 
of the stream; closed, all the ■wayout. 

The matter so treated was not 
an uneasy visitor on the threshold 
of that abnormal space; it was at 
home there. And, once treated, it 
COttld be made to move from onespace to the other at will. 

It was, Krisch thought, the difference between a flying ftsh and 
an amphibian. 

The test cylinder, though it now 
partook of the properties of both 
spaces, was useless for transport 
because it lacked control. It was 
set to home on the target plate 
where it now was. If you tried to 
move it away, the instant you succeeded by so much as the width of 
a molecule, the cylinder would return through hyperspace to its former position. The result, in gross 
terms, was that you simply could 
not budge it. 

It was an amusing toy, Krisch 
thought, and some use might later 
be found for it. Target plates 
planted in enemy cities, for example, and radiating missiles. 

But the principal military use 
of the device was going to involve 
human control. The human passenger was the control. You snapped 
into hyperspace, you selected your 
target in normal spate, snapped 
through again, and you were there. 
In hyperspace there was a perceptible interval, long enough to choose; 
ih normal space there was none. 



KRISCH checked his equipment 
once more. He had a semiportable field generator which 
projected a spherical force screen 
around him, and a reaction motor 
which could be used for short-range 
travel. The assembly was much too 
bulky and awkward to be of any 
use in military operations, but it 
was a necessary safeguard. If anything went wrong, Krisch did not 
propose to die for want of air in 
interplanetary space. Also, he meant 
io appear somewhat dramatically in 
the all but impregnable fortress 
that housed GHQ on Cynara. A 
startled staff officer might conceivably turn a weapon on him before 
he had a chance to explain. 

He considered setting a charge 
to destroy the Pattern's device after 
he had used it, and regretfully 
abandoned the idea. It would be 
good insurance against any reluctance to meet his terms, but the 
model itself was the only thing he 
had to sell. He had not drawn any 
plans as he worked; the plans were 
now in the Pattern's memory, and 
he had saved time by working directly from the vivid images the 
Pattern had given him. 

Krisch turned off the power, 
stepped into the middle of the 
framework and stood with his hand 
on the control. There was nothing 
more to be done. He looked at the 
Pattern and thought, "Will you be 
here when I return?" 
"Yes." 

Good enough. The thing was not 



ASK ME ANYTHING 



753 



alive, not intelligent, and was therefore, obviously, incapable ot boredom. Its drives took it restlessly 
from one questioning mind to another — -when there were minds 
available. When there were none, 
it would wait. It had been built on 
this planet; evidently, no provision 
had ever been made for it to leave. 

It knew too much, and was in.trinsically too dangerous, ever to 
be allowed to contact another 
mind. Krisrh could not destroy it, 
but it would be here when he returned, and he could make sure 
that no one else would ever come 
to this world. 

Krisch thought to himself, "Cynara. The spaceport outside Main 
Portress." He visualized it, held 
the thought firmly in his mind. He 
turned on the power. 

STUNNED, Krisch tried to 
orient himself, to figure out 
what was the matter. He lay weightless in a gray space, somehow above 
and yet somehow surrounded by a 
frightening, tangled infinity Or 
gray spheres and white crisscrossing lines. Every tiling he saw was 
at the same time immensely distant 
and so close that he could almost 
touch it. The array changed and 
shifted bewildcringly, and he tried 
helplessly to follow it, read some 
sense into its motion, until he remembered: "Cynara. The spaceport 
outside Main ForLress." 

There it was, below him, like 
some incredible four-dimensioned 



map, at his fingertips. He saw it 
clearly. He willed himself toward 
it, into it. But nothing happened. 

Time passed, time without 
measure. The tiny gray figures of 
men and machines did not move; 
time was suspended, for them, at 
the instant Krisch had entered the 
field. Krisch realized suddenly that 
he was hungry. Terrified, he looked 
at the dial of the airmaker at his 
waist. It was hard to read; the new 
dimension made vision queer and 
uncertain, but he made out at last 
that lie had used more than three 
hours" supply. Time had not 
stopped for him. 

He thought desperately, "The 
Project planet. The cavern." 

Instantly, there was the cavern, 
the framework standing in the 
middle of the shop floor, and, 
nearby, the Pattern. An instant 
later, the Pattern vanished. 

A voice said in his mind, "Ask 
me anything." 

Krisch stared at it. Was there a 
mocking tone in that unaccented, 
polite mental voice? He said 
hoarsely, aloud, "What went 
wrong?" 

"Nothing went wrong." 

Krisch mastered himself sufficiently to say evenly, "I was not 
able to enter normal space at my 
destination. Why not?" 

"You did not wait long enough. 
There is a great disparity between 
the time rates of this plenum and 
the normal one; that is why travel 
can be achieved at a rate which 



I 54 




 



cannot be distinguished from simultaneity by your methods. In subjective terms, the trip to Cynara 
will lake you a long time." 

"How long?" Krisch demanded. 
He felt helpless, fixed like a pinned 
specimen in the midst of this gray 
infinity. w 

"Approximately one thousand of 
your years." 

Krisch felt his face writhe and 
distort into the silent shape of a 
stream. Blood pounded at his 
temples; his eyes filmed. He said, 
"How long back to the cavern?" 

"Only one year, if you were to 
start immediately to concentrate on 
the objective. If you allow yourself 
to drift, as you are doing now, the 
distance will widen rapidly." 

"But I've only got enough air 
for twenty hours!" Krisch shouted. 
"I'll die!" 

THERE was no response. 
Krisch pulled himself back 
from the borderline of hysteria. He 
suppressed his rage and fear and 
uncertainty. At least, whatever the 
reason, the Pattern was here to answer questions. He said, "Wh:it 
was your motive in lying to me?" 
"I did not lie to you." 
"You told me," Krisch said furiously, "that there was a negligible 
time interval between departure 
and arrival. Why?" 

"To me it is negligible." 
Krisch saw that it was true. It 
was his own fault for having 
phrased the question inadequately, 



for having refused to follow up 
all the implications of the science 
the Pattern hid taught him. The 
Pattern, he remembered, was not 
alive, not intelligent, not capable 
of boredom. 

He remembered another line of 
questioning that he had not followed up, and thought he saw the 
vague shape of a terrifying possibility. 

He said, "When you first came 
to me, you described yourself as a 
device to amuse and entertain. Was 
that the whole truth?" 

"You did not ask the whole 
truth." 

"What is the whole truth?" 
The Pattern immediately began 
to recite the history of the race that 
had made it. Krisch realized venomously that he had asked too 
sweeping a question, and was 
about to rephrase it, but the significance of what the Pattern was 
saying stopped him. 

They had been entirely alien, 
those people; their psychology was 
incomprehensible to men. They did 
not fight; they did not explore; 
they did not rule or exploit; they 
had nothing that could be identified with human curiosity — that 
apelike trait that had made humanity what it was. Yet they had a 
great science. They had acquired it 
for some motive that Krisch couid 
never grasp. 

They had, really, only two characteristics that would be recognizable to men: they loved each other, 



ASK ME ANYTHING 



155 



their homes, their world; and they 
had a deep, joyful, ironic sense of 
humor. 

**"|V TEN came," said the Pattern, 
J.VL "eleven million of your 
years ago. They wanted my makers' 
world and therefore they killed my 
makers. My makers knew anguish 
of flesh and spirit, but they could 
not fight. Aggressiveness, conflict, 
were inconceivable to them. But remember that they understood irony. 
Before the last of them died, they 
■made us as a gift to their destroyers. We were a good gift. We contain all that they knew. We are 
truthful. We are immortal. We are 
made to serve. 

"It is not our makers' fault," 
concluded the Pattern, "if men use 
the knowledge we give them to 
destroy themselves." 

There was only a thin shred 
left of Krtsch's hold on his sanity. 
He said very carefully, "Did your 
makers foresee the situation I am 



"Yes." 

"Is there any way for me to 
escape from it?" 

The Pattern said, "Yes. It is the 
final jest of my makers. To travel 
in hyperspace, you must become 
what I am only a pattern of forces 
and memory, not alive, not intelligent', not capable of boredom. I can 
make this alteration, if you request 



it. It is simple, like the growth of 
one crystal from another, or like 
the transfer of pattern in living 
cells." 

Krisch choked. He said, "Will I 
remember ?" 

"You will have your own memories in addition to those I give 
you. But you will not retain your 
human character; you will not be 
aggressive, or cruel, or egotistic, or 
curious. You will be a device for 
answering questions." 

Krisch's mind revolted against 
the thought. But he looked at the 
dial of his airmaker, and knew 
what his answer would be. In a 
flash of prophetic insight, he knew 
what would happen thereafter. He 
would finish his journey to Cynara. 
He would tell the truth, and the 
truth would corrupt. 

Wherever there were men, 
throughout the universe and to the 
end of time, his influence would 
follow them. Eventually, there 
would be other unwary seekers of 
knowledge who would, take the 
path he had taken. 

By choosing this way out, he 
would inevitably become mankind's 
executioner. 

But when had men hesitated to 
risk the survival of the race for 
their own advantage? 
' "All right," Krisch said. "The 
pattern is clear." 