HOSTESS BY ISAAC ASIMOV 



ROSE SMOLLETT' was She said, "Drake, we're going 

happy about it; almost to have him here." 
triumphant. She peeled off Drake looked at her with annoyance, 

her gloves, put her hat away, and ance. "You've missed supper. I 

turned her brightening eyes upon thought you were going to be back 

her husband. by seven." 





"Oh, that doesn't matter. I ate 
something on the- way home. But, 
Drake, we're going to have him 
here!" 

"Who here? What are you talking about?" 




"The doctor from Hawkins 
Planet! Didn't you realize that was 
what today's conference was about? 
We spent all day talking about it. 
It's die must exciting thing that 
could possibly have happened !" 

Drake Smollett removed the pipe 
from the vicinity of <his face. He 
stared first at it and then at his 
wife. "Let me get this straight. 
When you say the doctor from 
Hawkin s Planet, do you mean the 
Hawkinsitc you've got at the Institute?" 

"Well, of course. Who else 
could I possibly mean ?" 

"And may I ask what the devil 
you mean by saying we'll have him 
here?" 

"Drake, don't you understand?" 

"What is there to understand ? 
Your Institute may be interested in 
the thing, but I'm not. What have 
we to do with it personally? It's 
Institute business, isn't it?" 

"But, darling," Rose said, patiently, "the Hawkinsite would like 
to stay at a private house somewhere, where he won't be bothered 
with official ceremony, and where 
he'U be able to proceed more according to his own likes and 
dislikes. I find it quite understandable." 

"Why at our house?" 

"Because our place is convenient 
for the purpose, I suppose. They 
asked if I would allow it. and 
frankly." she added with some 
stiffness, "I consider it a privilege." 

"Look!" Drake put his fingers 



through Jiis brown hair and succeeded in rumpling it. "We've got 
a convenient little place here — 
granted! It's not the most elegant 
place in the world, but it does well 
enough for us. However, I don't see 
where we've got room for extraterrestrial visitors." 

ROSE began to look worried. 
She removed her glasses and 
put them away in their case. "He 
can stay in the spare room. He'll 
take care of it himself. I've spoken 
to him and he's very pleasant. Honestly, all we have to do is show a 
certain amount of adaptability." 

Drake said, "Sure, just a little 
adaptabil ity ! The Hawkinsttes 
breathe cyanide. We'll just adapt 
ourselves to that, I suppose!" 

"He carries the cyanide in a little 
cylinder. You won't even notice it." 

"And what else about them that 
I won't notice?" 

"Nothing else. They're perfectly ' 
harmless. Goodness, they're even 
vegetarians." 

"And what does that mean? Do 
we feed him a bale of hay for 
dinner ?" 

Rose's lower Hp trembled. 
"Drake, you're being deliberately 
hateful. There are many vegetarians 
on Earth; they don't eat hay." 

"And what about us? Do we eat 
meat ourselves or will that make us 
look like cannibals to him? I won't 
live on salads to suit him; I warn 
you." 

"You're being quite ridiculous." 




 



Rose felt helpless. She had 
married late in life, comparatively. 
Her career had been chosen; she 
herself had seemed well settled in 
it. She was a fellow in biology at 
the Jenkins Institute for the Natural Sciences, with over twenty 
publications to her credit. In a 
word, the line was hewed, the path 
cleared; she had been set for a 
career and spinsterhood. And now, 
at 3% she was still a little amazed 
to find herself a bride of less than 
a year. 

Occasionally, it embarrassed her, 
too, since she sometimes found that 
she had not the slightest idea of 
how to handle her husband. What 
did one -do when the man of the 
family became mulish? That was 
not included in any of her courses. 
As a woman of independent mind 
and career, she couldn't bring herself to cajolery. 

So she looked at him steadily 
and said simply, "It means very 
much to me." 

"Why?" 

"Because, Drake, if he stays here 
for any length of time, I can study 
him really closely. Very little wurk 
has been done on the biology and 
psychology of the individual Hawkinsite or of any of the extraterrestrial intelligences. We have some 
on their sociology and history, of 
course, but that's all. Surely, you 
must see the opportunity. He stays 
here; we watch him, speak to him, 
observe his habits — " 

"Not interested." 

HOSTESS 



"Oh, Drake, I don't understand 
you." 

"You're going to say I'm not 
usually like this, I suppose." 
"Well, you're not." 

DRAKE was silent for a while. 
He seemed withdrawn and his 
high cheekbones and large chin 
were twisted and frozen into a 
brooding position. 

He said, finally, "Look, I've 
heard a bit about the Hawkinsites 
in the way of my own business. You 
say there have been investigations 
of their sociology, but not of their 
biology. Sure. It's because the 
Hawkinsites don't like to be studied 
as specimens any more than we 
would. I've spoken to men who 
were in charge of security groups 
watching various Hawkinsite missions on Earth. The missions stay 
in the rooms assigned to them and 
don't leave for anything but the 
most important official business. 
They have nothing to do with 
Earthmen. It's quite obvious that 
they are as revolted by us as I personally am by them. 

"In fact, I just don't understand 
why this Hawkinsite at the Institute should be any different. It 
seems to me to be against all the 
rules to have him come here by 
himself, anyway — and to have him 
want to stay in an Earthman's home 
. just puts the maraschino cherry on 
top." 

Rose said, wearily, "This is different. I'm surprised you can't 

89 



understand it, Drake. He's a doctor. He's coming here in the way 
of medical research, and I'll grant 
you that he probably doesn't enjoy 
staying with human beings and will 
find us perfectly horrible. But he 
must stay just the same! Do you 
suppose human doctors enjoy going into the tropics, or that they 
are particularly fond of letting 
themselves be bitten by infected 
mosquitoes ?" 

•Drake said sharply, "What's this 
about mosquitoes? What have they 
to do with it?" 

"Why, nothing," Eose answered, 
surprised. "It just came to my 
mind, that's all. I was thinking of 
Reed and his yellow fever experiments." 

Drake shrugged. "Well, have it 
your own way." 

For a moment, Rose hesitated. 
"You're not angry about this, are 
you?" To her own cars she sounded 
unpleasantly girlish. 

"No." 

And that, Rose knew, meant that 
he was. 

ROSE surveyed herself doubtfully in the full-length mirror. 
She had never been beautiful and was quite reconciled to the 
fact; so much so that it no longer 
mattered. Certainly, it would not 
matter to a being from 1 Iawkin's 
Planet- What did bother her was 
this matter of being a hostess under 
the very queer circumstances of 
having to be tactful to an extra


terrestrial creature and, at the same 
time, to her husband as well. She 
wondered which would prove the 
more difficult. 

Drake was coming home late that 
day; he was not due for half an 
hour. Rose found herself inclined 
to believe that he had arranged that 
purposely in a sullen desire to leave 
her alone with her problem. She 
found herself in a state of mild 
resentment. 

He had called her just before 
noon at the Institute and had asked 
abruptly, "When are you taking 
him home?" 

She answered, curtly, "In about 
three hours." 

"All right. What's ihis name? 
His Hawkinsite name?" 

"Why do you want to know?" 
She could not keep the chill from 
her words. 

"Let's call it a small investigation 
of my own. After all, the thing 
will be in my house.'-' 

"Oh, for heaven's sake, Drake, 
don't bring your job home with 
you!" 

Drake's voice sounded tinny and 
nasty in her ears. "Why not, Rose? 
Isn't that exactly what you're doing?" 

It was, of course, so she gave 
him the information he wanted. 

This was the first time in their 
married life that they had had even 
the semblance of a quarrel, and, as 
she sat there before the full-length 
mirror, she began to wonder if perhaps she ought not make an at


90 




 



tempt to see his side of it. In 
essence, she had married a policeman. Of course he was more than 
simply a policeman; he was a member of the World Security Board. 

It had been a surprise to her 
friends. The fact of the marriage 
itself had been the biggest surprise, 
but if she had decided on marriage, 
the attitude was, why not with another biologist? Or, if she had 
wanted to go afield, an anthropologist, perhaps; even a chemist; but 
why, of all people, a policeman ? 
Nobody had exactly said those 
tilings, naturally, but it had been 
in the very atmosphere at the time 
of her marriage. 

She had resented it then, and 
ever since. A man could marry 
whom he chose, but if a doctor of 
philosophy, female variety, chose to 
marry a man who never went past 
the bachelor's degree, there was 
shock. Why should there be? What 
business was it of theirs? He was 
handsome, in a way, intelligent, in 
another way, and she was perfectly 
satisfied with her choice. 

Yet how much of this same 
snobbishness did she bring home 
with her? Didn't she always have 
the attitude that her own work, 
her biological investigations, were 
important, while his job was merely something to be kept within the 
four walls of his little office in the 
old U. N. buildings on the East 
River ? 

She jumped up from her seat 
in agitation and, with a deep breath. 



decided to leave such thoughts behind her. She desperately did not 
want to quarrel with him. And she 
just wasn't going to interfere with 
him. She was committed to accepting the Hawkinsite as guest, but 
otherwise she would let Drake have 
his own way. He was making 
enough of a concession as it was. 

HARG THOLAN was standing 
quietly in the middle of the 
living room when she came down 
the stairs. He was not sitting, 
since he was not anatomically constructed to sit. He stood on two sets 
of limbs placed close together, 
while a third pair entirely different 
in construction were suspended 
from a region that would have 
been the upper chest in a human 
being. The skin of his body was 
hard, glistening and ridged, while 
his face bore a distant resemblance 
to something alienly bovine. Yet hewas not completely repulsive, and 
he wore clothes of a sort over the 
lower portion of his body in order 
to avoid offending the sensibilities 
of his human hosts. 

He said, "Mrs. Smollett, I appreciate your hospitality beyond my 
ability to express it in your language," and he drooped so that his 
forelimbs touched the ground for 
a moment. 

Rose knew this to be a gesture 
signifying gratitude among the beings of Hawkin's Planet. She was 
grateful that he spoke English as 
well as he did. The construction of 



HOSTESS 



91 



his mouth, combined with an absence of incisors, gave a. whistling 
sound to the sibilants. Aside from 
that, he might have been born on 
Earth for all the accent his speech 
showed. 

She said, "My husband will be 
home soon, and then we will eat." 

"Your husband?" For a moment, 
he said nothing more, and then 
added, "Yes, of course." 

She let it go. If there was one 
source of. infinite confusion among 
the five intelligent races of the 
known Galaxy, it lay in the differ* 
ences among them with regard to 
their sex Jife and the social institutions thai grew around it. The concept of husband and wife, for 
instance, existed only on Earth. The 
other races could achieve a sort of 
intellectual understanding of what 
it mean*, hut never an emotional 
one. 

She said, "I have consulted the 
Institute in preparing your menu. 
I trust you will find nothing in it 
that will upset you."
The Hawkinsite blinked its eyes 
rapidly. Rose recalled this to be a 
gesture of amusement. 

He said, "Proteins arc proteins, 
my dear Mrs. Smollett. For those 
trace factors which I need but are 
not supplied in your food, I have 
brought concentrates that will be 
most adequate." 

And proteins were proteins. Rose 
knew this to be true. Her concern 
for the creature's diet had been 
largely one of formal politeness. 



In the discovery of life on the 
planets of the outer stars, one of 
the most interesting generalizations 
that had developed was the fact 
that, although life could be formed 
on the basis of substances other 
than proteins — even on elements 
other than carbon — it remained true 
that the only known intelligences 
were proteinaceous in nature. This 
meant that each of the live forms 
of intelligent life could maintain 
themselves over prolonged periods 
on the food of any of the other 
four. 

SHE heard Drake's key in the 
door and went stiff with apprehension. 

She had to admit he did well. 
He strode in, and, without hesitation, thrust his hand out at the 
Hawkinsite, saying firmly, "Good 
evening, Dr. Tholan." 

The Hawkinsite put out his large 
and rather clumsy forclirnb and the 
two, so to speak, shook hands. Rose 
had already gone through that procedure and knew the queer feeling 
of a Hawkinsite hand in her own. 
It had felt rough and hot and dry. 
She imagined that, to the Hawkinsite, her own and Drake's fell 
cold and slimy. 

At the time of the formal greeting, she had taken the opportunity 
to observe the alien hand. It was 
an excellent case of converging evolution. Its morphological development was entirely different from 
that of the human hand, yet it had 



92 




 



brought itself into a fairly approximate similarity. There were four 
fingers but no thumb. Each finger 
had five independent ball-andsocket joints. In this way, the flexibility lost with the absence of the 
thumb was made up fur by the almost tentacular properties of the 
fingers. What was even more interesting to her biologist's eyes was 
the fact that each Hawkinsite finger 
ended in a, vestigial hoof, very small 
and, to the layman, unidentifiable 
as such, but clearly adapted at one 
time to running, just as man's had 
been to climbing. 

Drake said, in friendly enough 
fashion, "Are you quite comfortable, sir?" 

The Hawkinsite answered, 
"Quite. Your wife has been most 
thoughtful in all her arrangements." 

"Would you care for a drink?" 

The Hawkinsite did not answer 
but looked at Rose with a slight 
facial contortion that indicated some 
emotion which, unfortunately, Rose 
could not interpret. She said, nervously, "On Earth there is the custom of drinking liquids which have 
been fortified with ethyl alcohol. 
We find it stimulating." 

"Oh, yes. I am afraid, then, that 
I must decline. Ethyl alcohol would 
interfere most unpleasantly with my 
metabolism." 

"Why, so it does to Earthmen, 
too, but I understand, Dr. Tholan," 
Drake replied. "Would you object 
to my drinking?" 



"Of course not." 

Drake passed close to Rose on 
his way to the sideboard and she 
caught only one word. He said, 
"God!" in a tightly controlled 
whisper, yet he managed to put 
seventeen exclamation points after 
it. 

THE Hawkinsite stood at the 
table. His fingers were models 
of dexterity as they wove their way 
around the tullery, Rose tried not 
to look at him as he ate. His wide 
lipless mouth split his face alarmingly as he ingested food, and, in 
chewing, his large jaws moved disconcertingly from side to side. It 
was another evidence of his ungulate ancestry. Rose found herself 
wondering if, in the quiet of his 
own room, he would later chew his 
cud, and was then panic-stricken 
lest Drake get the same idea and 
leave the table in disgust. But 
Drake was taking everything quite 
calmly. 

He said, "I imagine, Dr. Tholan, 
that the cylinder at your side holds 
cyanide?" 

Rose started. She had actually 
not noticed it. It was a curved 
metal object, something like a 
water canteen, that fitted flatly 
against the creature's skin, halfhidden behind its clothing. But, 
then, Drake had a policeman's eyes. 

The Hawkinsite was not in the 
least disconcerted. "Qukc so," he 
said, and his hoofed fingers held 
out a thin, flexible hose that ran 



HOSTESS 



up his body, its tint blending into 
that of his yellowish skin, and entered the corner of his wide mouth. 
Rose felt slightly embarrassed, as 
though at the display of intimate 
articles of clothing. 

Drake said, "And does it contain pure cyanide?" 

Hie Hawkinsite humorously 
blinked his eyes. "I hope you are 
not considering possible danger to 
Earthites. I know the gas is highly 
poisonous to you and I do not need 
a great deal. The gas contained in 
the cylinder is five per cent hydrogen cyanide, the remainder oxygen. 
None of it emerges except when I 
actually suck at the tube, and that 
need not be done frequently." 

"I see. And you really must have 
the gas' to live?" 

Rose was slightly appalled. One 
simply did not ask such questions 
without careful preparation. It was 
impossible to foresee where the 
sensitive points of an alien psychology might be. And Drake must 
be doing this deliberately, since he 
could not help realizing that he 
could get answers to such questions 
as easily from herself. Or was it 
that he preferred not to ask her? 

The Hawkinsite remained apparently unperturbed, "Are you not a 
biologist, Mr. Smollett?" 

"No, Dr. Tholan." 

"But you arc in close association 
with Mrs. Dr. Smollett." 

Drake smiled a bit. "Yes, 1 am 
married to a Mrs. doctor, but just 
the same I am not a biologist; mere


ly a minor government official. My 
wife's friends," he added, "'call me 
a policeman." 

ROSE bit the inside of her cheek. 
In this case it was the .Hawkinsite who had impinged upon the 
sensitive point of an alien psychology. On Hawkin's Planet, there was 
a tight caste system and intercaste 
associations were limited. But 
Drake wouldn't realize that. 

The Hawkinsite turned to her. 
"May I have your permission, Mrs. 
Smollett, to explain a little of our 
biochemistry to your husband? It 
will be dull for you, since I am 
sure you must understand it quite 
well already." 

She said, "By all means do, Dr. 
Tholan." 

He said, "You sec, Mr. Smollett, 
the respiratory system in your body 
and in the bodies of all air-breathing creatures on Earth is controlled by certain metal-containing 
enzymes, I am taught. The metal is 
usually iron, though sometimes it 
is copper. In either case, small 
traces of cyanide would combine 
with these metals and immobilize 
the respirator)' system of the terrestrial living cell. They would be prevented from using oxygen and 
killed in a few minutes. 

"The life on my own planet is 
not quite so constituted. The key 
respiratory compounds contain 
neither iron nor copper; no metal 
at all, in fact. It is for this reason 
that my bl ood is colorl ess. Our 



GALAXY 5CIENCE FICTION 



compounds contain certain organic 
groupings which arc essential to 
life, and these groupings can only 
be maintained intact in the presence 
of a small concentration of cyanide. 
Undoubtedly, this type of protein 
has developed through millions of 
years of evolution on a world which 
has a few tenths of a per cent of 
hydrogen cyanide occurring naturally in the atmosphere. Its presence 
is maintained by a biological cycle. 
Various of our native micro-organisms liberate the free gas." 

"You make it extremely clear, 
Dr. Tliolan, and very interesting," 
Drake said. "What happens if you 
don't breathe it? Do you just go, 
like that?" He snapped his fingers. 

"Not quite. It isn't equivalent to 
the presence of cyanide for you. In 
my case, the absence of cyanide 
would be equivalent to slow strangulation. It happens sometimes, in 
ill -ventilated rooms on my world, 
that the cyanide is gradually consumed and falls below die minimum necessary concentration. The 
results are very painful and difficult to treat." 

Rose had to give Drake credit; 
he really sounded interested. And 
the alien, thank heaven, did not 
mind the catechism. 

The rest of the dinner passed 
without incident. It was almost 
pleasant. 

Throughout the evening. Drake 
remained that way; interested. Even 
more than that — absorbed. He 
drowned her out, and she was glad 

HOSTESS 



of it. He was the one who was 
really colorful and it was only her 
job, her specialized training, that 
stole the color from 'him. She 
looked at him gloomily and 
thought. Why did be marry me? 

DRAKE sat, one leg crossed over 
the other, hands clasped and 
tapping his chin gently, watching 
the Hawkinsite intently. The Hawkinsite faced him, standing in his 
quadruped fashion. 

Drake said, "I find it difficult to 
keep thinking of you as a doctor." 

The Hawkinsite laughingly 
blinked his eyes. "I understand 
what you mean," he said. "I find 
it difficult to think of you as a 
policeman. On my world, policemen arc very specialized and distinctive people." 

"Are they?" said Drake, somewhat drily, and then changed the 
subject. "I gather that you are not 
here on a pleasure trip." 
- "No, I am here very much on 
business. I intend to study this 
queer planet you call Earth, as it 
has never been studied before by 
any of my people." 

"Queer?" asked Drake. "In 
what way?" 

The Hawkinsite looked at Rose. 
"Docs he know of the Inhibition 
Death?" 

Rose felt embarrassed. "His 
work is important," she said. "I am 
afraid that my husband has little 
time to listen to the details of my 
work." She knew that this was not 

95 



really adequate and she felt herself 
to be -the recipient, yet again, of 
one of the Hawkinsite's unreadable 
emotions. 

The extraterrestrial creature 
turned back to Drake. "It is always 
amazing to me to find how little 
you Earthmen understand your own 
unusual characteristics. Look, there 
are five intelligent races in the 
Galaxy. These have all developed 
independently, yet have managed 
to converge in remarkable fashion. 
It is as though, in the long run, 
intelligence requires a certain 
physical makeup to flourish. I leave 
that question for philosophers. But 
t need not belabor the point, since 
it must be a familiar one to you. 

."Now when the differences 
among the intelligences are closely 
investigated, it is found over and 
over again that it is you Earthmen, 
more than any of the others, who 
are unique. For instance, it is only 
on Earth that life depends upon 
metal enzymes for respiration. 
Your people are the -only ones 
which find hydrogen cyanide poisonous. Yours is the only form of 
intelligent life which is carnivorous. Yours is the only form of life 
which has not developed from a 
grazing animal. And, most interesting of all, yours is the only form 
of intelligent life known which 
stops growing upon reaching maturity." 

Drake grinned at him. Rose felt 
her heart suddenly race. It was 
the nicest thing about him, that 

96 



grin, and he was using it perfectly 
naturally. It wasn't forced or false. 
He was adjusting to the presence 
of this alien creature. He was being pleasant — and he must be doing 
it for her. She loved that thought 
and repeated it to herself. He was 
doing it for her; he was being nice 
to the Hawkinsite for her sake. 

DRAKE was saying with his grin, 
"You don't look very large. 
Dr. Tholan. I should say that you 
arc an inch taller than I am, which 
would make you six feet two inches 
tall. Is it that you are young, or is 
it that the others on your world 
are generally small ?" 

"Neither," said the Hawkinsite, 
"We grow at a diminishing rate 
with the years, so that at my age it 
would take fifteen , years to grow 
an additional inch, but — and this is 
the important point — we never 
entirely stop. And, of course, as a 
consequence, wc never entirely 
die." 

Drake gasped and even Rose felt 
herself sitting stiffly upright. This 
was something new. This was 
something which, to her knowledge, 
the few expeditions to Hawkin's 
Planet had never brought back. She 
was torn with excitement but held 
an exclamation back and let Drake 
speak for her. • 

He said, "They don't entirely 
die? You're not trying to say, sir, 
that the people on Hawkin's Planet 
are immortal?" 

"No people are truly immortal. 


 



If there were no other way to die, 
there would always be accident, and 
if that fails, there is boredom. Few 
of us live more than several centuries of your time. Still, it is unpleasant to think that death may 
come involuntarily. It is something 
which, to us, is extremely horrible. 
It bothers me even as I think of it 
now, this (bought that against my 
will and despite dl care, death may 
come." 

"We," said Drake, grimly, "arc 
quite used to it." 

"You Earthmen live with the 
thought; we do not. And this is 
why we are disturbed to find that 
the incidence of Inhibition Death 
has been increasing in recent years." 

"You have not yet explained," 
said Drake, "just what the Inhibition Death is, but let me guess. Is 
the Inhibition Death a pathological 
cessation of growth?" 

"Exactly." 

"And how long after growth's 
cessation docs death follow?" 

"Within the year. It is a wasting 
disease, a tragic one, and absolutely 
incurable." 

"What causes it?" 

THE Hawkinsite paused a long 
time before answering, and 
even then there was something 
strained and uneasy about the way 
he spoke. "Mr. Smollett, we know 
nothing about the cause of the disease." 

Drake nodded thoughtfully. 
Rose was following the conversa
HOSTESS 



tion as though she were a spectator 
at a tennis match. 

Drake said, "And why do you 
come to Earth to study this disease?" 

"Because again Earthmen are 
unique. Tliey arc the only intelligent beings who are immune. The 
Inhibition Death affects all the 
other races. Do your biologists 
know that, Mrs. Smollett?" 

He had addressed her suddenly, 
so that she jumped slightly. She 
said, "No, they don't." 

"I am not surprised. That piece 
of information is the result of very 
recent research. The Inhibition 
Death is easily diagnosed incorrectly and the incidence is much 
lower on the other planets, la fact, 
it is a strange thing, something to 
philosophize over, that the incidence of the Death is highest on 
my world, which is closest to Earth, 
and lower on each more distant 
planet — so that it is lowest on the 
world of the star Tempora, which 
is farthest from Earth, while Earth 
itself is immune. Somewhere In the 
biochemistry of the Earthite, there 
is the secret of that immunity. How 
interesting it would be to find it." 

Drake said, "But look here, you 
can't say Earth is immune. From 
where I sit, it looks as if the incidence is a hundred per cent. All 
Earthmen stop growing and all 
Earthmen die. We've all got the 
Inhibition Death." 

"Not at all. Earthmen live up 
to seventy years after the cessation 

97 



of growth. That is not the Death 
as we know it. Your equivalent disease is rather one of unrestrained 
growth. Cancer, you call it. — But 
come, I bore you." 

Rose protested instantly. Drake 
did likewise with even more vehemence, but the Hawkins itc determinedly changed the subject. It 
was then that Rose had her first 
pang of suspicion, for Drake circled 
Harg Tholan warily with Jus words, 
worrying him, jabbing at him, attempting always to pet the information back to the point where the 
Hawkinsicc had left off. Not baldly, not unskillfully, but Rose knew 
him, and could tell what he was 
after. And what could he be after 
but that which was demanded by 
his profession? And, as though in 
response to her thoughts, the Hawkinsitc took up the phrase which 
had begun careening in her mind 
like a broken record on a perpetual 
turntable. 




E ASKED, "Did you not say 
. you were a policeman?" 



Drake said, curtly, "Yes." 

"Then there is something I 
would like to request you to do for 
me. I have been wanting to all this 
evening, since I discovered your 
profession, and yet I hesitate. I do 
not wish to be troublesome to my 
host and hostess." 

"We'll do what we can." 

"I have a profound curiosity as 
to how Earthmen live; a curiosity 
which is not perhaps shared by the 




generality of my countrymen. So I 
wonder, could you show mc through 
one of the police departments on 
your planet?" 

' "I do not belong to a police depa rt men t i n exact 1 y the way yoi 1 
imagine," said Drake, cautiously. 
"However, I am known to the New 
York police department. I can manage it without trouble. Tomorrow?" 

"That would be most convenient 
for me. Would I be able to visit the 
Missing Persons Bureau?" 

"The what?" 

The Hawkinsite drew his four 
standing legs closer together, as if 
he were becoming more intense. "It 
is a hobby of mine, a little queer 
corner of interest I have always had. 
I understand you have a group of 
police officers whose sole duty it is 
to search for men who are missing." 

"And women and children," 
added Drake. "But why should 
that interest you so particularly?" 

"Because there again you are 
unique. There is no such thing as 
a missing person on our planet. I 



can't explain the mechanism to you, 
of course, hut among the people of 
the other worlds, there is always 
an awareness of one another's presence, especially if there is a strong, 
affectionate tie. We are alwav* 
aware of each other's exact location, 
no matter where on the planet we 
might be." 

Rose grew excited again. The 
scientific expeditions to Hawkin's 
Planet had always had the greatest 
difficulty in penetrating the internal 
emotional mechanisms of the natives, and here was one who talked 
freely, who would explain! She forgot to worry about Drake and intruded into the conversations. "Can 
you feel such awareness even now? 
On Earth?" 

The Hawkinsite said, "You mean 
across space? No, I'm afraid not. 
But you see the importance of the 
matter. All the uniquenesses of 
Earth should be linked. If the lack 
of this sense can be explained, perhaps the immunity to Inhibition 
Death can be, also. Besides, it 
strikes me as very curious that any 



HOSTESS 



form of intelligent community life 
can be built up among people who 
lade this community awareness. 
How can an Earthman tell, for instance, when he has formed a congenial sub-group, a family? How 
can you two, for instance, know 
that there is a " true tie between 
you?" 

Rose found herself nodding. 
How strongly she missed such a 
sense! 

But Drake only smiled. "We 
have our ways. It is as difficult to 
explain what we call 'love' to you 
as it is for you to explain your sense 
to us," 

"I suppose so. Yet tell mc truthfully, Mr. Smollett — if Mrs. Smollett were to leave this room and 
enter another without your having 
seen her do so, would you really 
not be aware of her location?" 

"[ really would not." 

The Hawkinsitc said, "Amazing." He hesitated, then added, 
"Please do not be offended .at the 
fact that I find it revolting as well." 

AFTER the light in the bedroom 
had been put out, Rose went 
to the door three times, opening it 
a crack and peering out. She could 
feel Drake watching her. There was 
a hard kind of amusement in his 
voice as he asked, finally, "What's 
the matter?" 

She said, "I want to talk to you." 
"Are you afraid our friend can 
hear?" 

Rose was whispering. She got 



jnto bed and put her head on his 
pillow so that she could whisper 
better. She said, "Why were you 
talking about the Inhibition Death 
to Dr. Tholan?" 

"I am taking an interest in your 
work. Rose. You've always wanted 
me to take an interest." 

"Td rather you weren't sarcastic." 
She was almost violent, as nearly 
violent as she could be in a whisper. "I know that there's something of your own interest in this — 
of police interest, probably. What 
is it?" 

He said, "I'll talk to you tomorrow." 

"No, right now." 

He put his hand under her head, 
lifting it. For a wild moment she 
thought he was going to kiss her — 
just Iciss her on impulse the way 
husbands sometimes did, or as she 
imagined they sometimes did. 
Drake never did, and be didn't 
now. 

He merely held her close and 
whispered, "Why are you so interested?'' 

His hand was almost brutally 
hard upon the nape of her neck, so 
that she stiffened and tried to draw 
back. Her voice was more than a 
whisper now. "Stop it, Drake." 

He said, "I want no questions 
from you and no interference. Yoir 
do your job, and I'll do mine." 

"The nature of my job is open 
and known." 

"The nature of my job," he retorted, "isn't, by definition. But I'll 




 



tell you this. Our six-legged friend 
is here in this house for some definite reason. You weren't picked as 
biologist in charge for any random 
reason. Do you know that two days 
ago, he'd been inquiring about me 
at the Commission?" 

"You're joking." 

"Don't believe that for a minute. 
There are depths to this that you 
know nothing about. But that's my 
job and I won't discuss it with you 
any further. Do you understand?" 

"No, but I won't question you 
if you don't want me to." 

"Then go to sleep." 

She lay stiffly on her back and 
the minutes passed, and then the 
quarter-hours. She was trying to fit 
the pieces together. Even with 
what Drake had told her, the curves 
and colors refused to blend. She 
wondered whit Drake would say if 
he knew she had a recording of 
that night's conversation! 

One picture remained clear in 
her mind at that moment. It hovered over her mockingly. The 
Hawkinsite, at the end of the long 
evening, had turned to her and said 
gravely, "Good night, Mrs. Smollett. You are a most charming hostess." 

She had desperately wanted to 
giggle at .the time. How could he 
call her a charming hostess? To 
him. she could only be a horror, a 
monstrosity with too few limbs and 
a too-narrow face. 
• And then, as the Hawkinsite delivered himself of this completely 



m ean ingless p i ece of pol iten es s , 
Drake had turned white ! Fox one 
instant, his eyes had burned with 
something that looked like terror. 

She had never before known 
Drake to show fear of anything, 
and the picture of that instant of 
pure panic remained with her until 
all her thoughts finally sagged into 
the oblivion of sleep. 

IT WAS noon before Rose was 
at her desk the next day. She 
had deliberately waited until Drake 
and the Hawkinsite had left, since 
only then was she able to remove 
the small recorder that had been 
behind Drake's armchair the previous evening. She had had no 
original intention of keeping its 
presence secret from him. It was 
just -that he had come home so 
late, and she couldn't say anything 
about it with the Hawkinsite present. Later on, of course, things had 
changed — 

The placing of the recorder had 
been only a routine maneuver. The 
Hawkinsite's statements and intonations needed to be preserved 
for future intensive studies by 
various specialists at the Institute. 
It had been hidden in order to 
avoid the distortions of self-consciousness that the visibility of such 
a device would bring, and now it 
couldn't be shown to the members 
of the Institute at all. It would 
have to serve a different function 
altogether. A rather nasty function. 
She was going to spy on Drake. 



HOSTESS 



She touched the little box with 
her fingers and wondered, irrelevantly, how Drake was going to 
manage, that day. Social intercourse 
between inhabited worlds was, even 
now, not so commonplace that the 
sight of a Hawkinsite on the city 
streets would not succeed in drawing crowds. But Drake would manage, she knew. Drake always 
managed. 

She listened once again to the 
sounds of last evening, repeating 
the interesting moments. She was 
dissatisfied with what Drake had 
toLd her. Why should the Hawkinsite have been interested in the two 
of them particularly ? Yet Drake 
wouldn't lie. She would have liked 
to check at the Security Commission, but she knew she could not 
do that. Besides, the thought made 
her feel disloyal; Drake would 
definitely not lie. 

But, then again, why should 
Harg Tholan not have investigated 
them? He might have inquired 
similarly about the families of all 
the biologists at the Institute. It 
would be no more than natural to 
attempt to choose the home he 
would find most pleasant by his 
own standards, whatever they were. 

And if he had — even if he had 
investigated only the Smollctts — 
why should that create the great 
change in Drake from intense hostility to intense interest-' Drake undoubtedly had knowledge he was 
keeping to himself. Only heaven 
knew how much. 



Her thoughts churned slowly 
through the possibilities of interstellar intrigue. So far, to be sure, 
there were no signs of hostility or 
ill-feeling among any of the five 
intelligent races known to inhabit 
the Galaxy. As yet they were spaced 
at intervals too wide for enmity. 
Even the barest contact among them 
was all but impossible. Economic 
and political interests just had no 
points at which to conflict. 

BUT that was only her idea and 
she was not a member of the 
Security Commission. If there were 
conflict, if there were danger, if 
there were any reason to suspect 
that the mission of a Hawkinsite 
might be other than peaceful — 
Drake would know. 

Yet was Drake sufficiently high 
in the councils of the Security Commission to know, off-hand, the 
dangers involved in the visit of a 
Hawkinsite physician? She had 
never thought of his position as 
more than that of a very m inor 
functionary in the Commission; he 
had never presented himself as 
more. And yet — 
Might he be more? 
She shrugged at the thought. It 
was reminiscent of Twentieth Century spy novels and of costume 
dramas of the days when there existed such things as itom bomb 
secrets. 

The thought of costume dramas 
decided her. Unlike Drake, she 
wasn't a real policeman, and she 



102 




 



didn't know how a real policeman 
would go aboul it. But she knew 
how such things were done in the 
old dramas. 

She drew a piece of paper toward her and, with a quick motion, 
slashed a vertical pencil mark 
down its center. She headed one 
column "Harg Tholan," the other 
"Drake." Under "Harg Tholin" 
she wrote "bonafide" and thoughtfully put three question marks alter 
it. After all. was he a doctor at all, 
or was he what .could only be described as an interstellar agent? 
What proof had even the Institute 
of his profession except his own 
statements ? Was that why Drake 
had quizzed him so relentlessly concerning the Inhibition Death? Had 
he boned up in advance and tried 
to catch the Hawkinsite in an error? 

For a moment, she was irresolute; 
then, springing to her feet, she 
folded the paper, put it in the 
pocket of her short jacket, and 
swept out of her office. She said 
nothing to any of those she passed 
as she left the Institute. She left no 
word at the reception desk as to 
where she was going, or when she 
would be back. 

Once outside, she hurried into 
the third level tube and waked for 
an empty compartment to pass. The 
two minutes that elapsed seemed 
unbearably long. It was all she 
could do to say, "New York 
Academy of Medicine," into the 
mouthpiece just above the seat. 

The door of the little cubicle 



closed, and the sound of the air 
flowing past the compartment hissed 
upward in pitch. 

THE New York Academy of 
Medicine had been enlarged 
both vertically and horizontally in 
the past two decades. The library, 
alone, occupied one entire wing of 
the third floor. Undoubtedly, if all 
the books, pamphlets and periodicals it contained were in their original printed form, rather than in 
microfilm, the entire building, huge 
chough it was, would not have been 
sufficiently vast to hold them. As it 
was. Rose knew there was already 
talk of limiting printed works to 
the last five years, rather than to 
the last ten, as was now the case. 

Rose, as a member of the 
Academy, had free entry to the 
library. She hurried toward the 
alcoves devoted to extraterrestrial 
medicine and was relieved to find 
them unoccupied. 

It might have been wiser to have 
enlisted the aid of a librarian, but 
she chose not to. The thinner and 
smaller the trail she left, the less 
likely it was that Drake might pick 
it up. 

And so, without guidance, she 
was satisfied to travel along the 
shelves, following the titles anxiously with her fingers. The books 
were almost all in English, though 
some were in German or Russian. 
None, ironically enough, were in 
extra-terrestrial symbolisms. There 
was a room somewhere for such 



HOSTESS 



103 



originals, but they were available 
only to official translators. 

Her traveling eye and finger 
stopped. She had found what she 
was looking for. 

She dragged half a dozen volumes from the shelf and spread 
them out upon the small dark 
table. She fumbled for the light 
switch and opened the first of the 
volumes, It was entitled Studies on 
Inhibition. She leafed through it 
and then turned to the author index. The name of Harg Tholan 
was there. 

One by one, she looked up the 
references indicated, then returned 
to the shelves for translations of 
such original papers as she could 
find. 

She spent more than two hours 
in the Academy. When she was 
finished, she knew this much — 
there was a Hawkinsite doctor 
named Harg Tholan, who was an 
expert on the Inhibition Death. lie 
was connected with the Hawkinsite 
research organization with which 
the Institute had been in correspondence. Of course, the Harg 
Tholan she knew might simply be 
impersonating an actual doctor to 
make the role more realistic, but 
why should that be necessary? 

SHE took the paper out of her 
pocket and, where she had 
written "bonafide" with three tjuestion marks, she now wrote a YES 
in capitals. She went back to the 
Institute and at four P.M. was 



once again at her desk. She called 
the switchboard to say that she 
would not answer any phone calls 
and then she locked her door. 

Underneath the col umn headed 
"Harg Tholan" she now wrote two 
questions: "Why did Harg Tholan 
come to Earth alone?" She left considerable space. Then, "What is his 
interest in the Missing Persons Bureau ?" 

Certainly, the Inhibition Death 
was all the Hawkinsite said it was,. 
From her reading at the Academy, 
it was obvious that it occupied the 
major share of medical effort on 
Hawkin 's Plan et. 1 1 was more 
feared there than cancer was on 
Earth . If they h ad thought t h e 
answer to it lay on Earth, the Hawkinsites would have sent a full-scale 
expedition. Was it distrust and suspicion on their part that made them 
send only one investigator? 

What was it Harg Tholan had 
said the night before ? The incidence of the Death was highest 
upon his own world , which was 
closest to Earth, lowest upon the 
world farthest from Earth. Add to 
that the fact implied by the Hawkinsite, and verified by her own 
readings at the Academy, that the 
incidence had expanded enormously 
since interstellar contact had been 
made with Earth . . . 

Slowly and reluctantly she came 
to one conclusion. The inhabitants 
of Hawkin 's Planet might have decided that somehow Earth had discovered the cause of the Inhibition 




 



Death, and was deliberately fostering it among the alien peoples of 
the Galaxy, with the intention, perhaps, of becoming supreme among 
the stars. 

She rejected this conclusion with 
what was almost panic. It could not 
be; it was impossible. In the fust 
place, Earth worddn't do such a 
horrible thing. Secondly, it 
couldn't. 

As far as scientific advance was 
concerned, the beings of Hawkin's 
Planet were certainly the ecjuals of 
Earthmen. The Death had occurred 
there for thousands of years and 
their medical record was one of 
total failure. Surely, Earth, in its 
long-distance investigations into 
alien biochemistry, could not have 
succeeded so quickly. In fact, as far 
as she knew, there were no investigations to speak of into Hawkinsitc 
pathology on the part of Earth 
biologists and physicians. 

Yet all the evidence indicated 
that Harg Tholan had come in suspicion and had been received in 
suspicion. Carefully, she wrote 
down under the question, "Why did 
Harg Tholan come to Earth 
alone?" the answer, "Hawkin's 
Planet belt eves Earth is causing the 
Inhibition Death." 

But, then, what was this business about the Bureau of Missing 
Persons? As a scientist, she was 
rigorous about the theories she developed. All the facts had to fit in, 
not merely some of them. 

Missing Persons Bureau ! If it 



was a false trail, deliberately intended to deceive Drake, it had 
been done clumsily, since it came 
only after an hour of discussion of 
the Inhibition Death. 

Was it intended as an opportunity to study Drake? If so, why? 
Was this perhaps the major point? 
The Hawkinsite had investigated 
Drake before coming to them. Had 
he come because Drake was a policeman with entry to Bureaus of 
Missing Persons? 

But why? Why? 

SHE gave it up and turned to 
the column headed "Drake." 
And there a question wrote itself, not in pen and ink upon the 
paper, but in the much more visible 
letters of thought on mind. W'Jjy 
did he marry me? thought Rose, 
and she covered her eyes with her 
hands so that the unfriendly light 
was LXtluded. 

They had met quite by accident 
somewhat more than a year before, 
when he had moved into the apartment house in which she then lived. 
Polite greetings had somehow become friendly conversation and 
this, in turn, had led to occasional 
dinners in a neighborhood restaurant. It -had been very friendly and 
normal and an excitingly new experience, and she had fallen in 
love. 

When he asked her to marry him, 
she was pleased — and overwhelmed. 
At the time, she had many explanations for it. He appreciated 



HOSTESS 



105 



her intelligence and friendliness. 
She was a nice girl. She would 
make a good wife, a splendid companion. 

She had tried all those explanations and had half-believed every 
one of ■them. But half-belief was 
not enough. 

It was not that she had any definite fault to find in Drake as a 
husband. He was always thoughtful, kind and a gentleman. "Their 
married life was not one of passion, 
and yet it suited the paler emotional surges of the late thirties. 
She wasn't nineteen. What did she 
expect ? 

That was it; she wasn't nineteen. 
She wasn't beautiful, or charming, 
or glamorous. What did she expect? 
Could she have expected Drake — 
handsome and rugged, whose interest in intellectual pursuits was 
quite minor, who neither asked 
about her work in all the months 
of their marriage, nor offered to 
discuss his own with her ? Why, 
then, did he marry -her? 

But there was no answer to that 
question, and it had nothing to do 
with what Rose was trying to do 
now. It was extraneous, she told 
herself fiercely; it was a childish 
distraction from the task she had 
set herself. She was acting like a 
girl of nineteen, after all, with no 
chronological excuse for it. 

She found that the point of her 
pencil had somehow broken, and 
took a new one. In the column 
headed "Drake" she wrote, "Why 

106 



is he suspicious of Harg Tholan?" 
and under it she put an arrow 
pointing to the other column. 

What she had already written 
there was sufficient explanation. If 
Earth were spreading the Inhibition Death, or if Earth knew it was 
suspected of such a deed, then, 
obviously, it would be preparing 
for eventual retaliation on the part 
of the aliens. In fact, the setting 
would actually be one of preliminary maneuvering for the first interstellar war of history. It was an 
adequate but horrible explanation. 

Now there was left the second 
question, the one she could not 
answer. She wrote *t slowly, "Why 
Drake's reaction to Tholan's words, 
'You are a most charming hostess." V 

SHE tried to bring back the exact setting. The Hawkinsitc had 
said it innocuously, matter -of- factly, politely, and Drake had frozen 
at the sound of it. Over and over, 
she had listened to that particular 
passage in the recording. An Earthman might have said it in just such 
an inconsequential tone on leaving 
a routine cocktail party. The recording did not carry the sight of 
Drake's face; she had only her 
memory for that. Drake's eyes had 
become ahve with fear and hate, 
and Drake was one who feared 
practically nothing. What was there 
to fear in the phrase, "You are a 
most charming hostess," that could 
upset him so? Jealousy? Absurd. 


 



The feeling that Tholan had been 
sarcastic? Maybe, though unlikely. 
She was sure Tholan was sincere. 

She gave it up and put a large 
question mark under that second 
question. There were two ot them 
now, one under "Harg Tholan" 
and one under "Drake." Could 
there be a connection between 
Tholan's interest in missing persons and Drake's reaction to a polite party phrase? She could think 
of none. 

She put her head down upon her 
amis. It was getting dark in the 
office and she was very tired. For 
a while, she must have hovered in* 
that queer land between waking 
and sleeping, when thoughts and 
phrases lose the control of the conscious and disport themselves erratically and surrealistically through 
one's head. But, no matter where 
they danced and leaped, they always returned to 'that one phrase, 
"You are a most charming hostess." 
Sometimes she heard it in Harg 
Tholan's cultured, lifeless voice, 
and sometimes in Drake's vibrant 
one. When Drake said it, it was 
full of love, full of a love she 
never heard from him. She liked 
to hear him say it. 

She startled herself to wakefulness. It was quite dark in the office 
now, and she put on the desk light. 
She blinked, then frowned a little. 
Another thought must have come 
to her in that fitful half-sleep. There 
had been another phrase which had 
upset Drake. What was it? Her 



forehead furrowed with mental 
effort. It had not been last evening. 
It was not anything in the recorded 
conversation, so it must have been 
before that. Nothing came and she 
grew restless. 

Looking at her watch, she gasped. 
It was almost eight. They would 
be at home waiting for her. 

But she did not want to go home. 
She did not want to face them. 
Slowly, she took up the paper upon 
which she had scrawled her 
thoughts of the afternoon, tore it 
into little pieces and let them flutter into the little atomic-flash ashtray upon her desk. They were gone 
in a little flare and nothing was left 
of them. 

If only nothing were left of the 
thoughts they represented as well. 

It was no use. She would have 
to go home. 

THEY were not there waiting 
for her, after all. She came 
upon them getting out of a gyrocab just as she emerged from the 
tubes on to street level. The gyrocabbie, wide-eyed, gazed after his 
fares for a moment, then hovered 
upward and away. By unspoken 
m u tual con sen t , the t h ree wa i ted 
until they had entered the apartment before speaking. 

Rose said disinterestedly, "I hope 
you have had a pleasant day, Dr. 
Tholan." 

"Quite. And a fascinating and 
profitable one as well, I think." 
"Have you had a chance to eat?" 



HOSTESS 



107 



though Rose had not herself eaten, 
she was anything but hungry. 

"Yes, indeed." . 

Drake interrupted, "We had 
lunch and supper sent up to us. 
Sandwiches." He sounded tired. 

Rose said, "Hello, Drake." It 
was the first time she had addressed 
him. 

Drake scarcely looked at her. 
"Hello." 

The Hawkinsite said, "Your tomatoes are remarkable vegetables. 
We have nothing to compare with 
them in taste on our own planet. I 
believe I ate two dozen, as well as 
an entire bottle of tomato derivative." 

' 'Ketchup, " explained Drake, 
briefly. 

Rose said, "And your visit at the 
Missing Persons Bureau, Dr. Tholan ? You say you found it profitable?" 

"I should say so. Yes." 

Rose kept her back to him. She 
plumped up sofa cushions as she 
said, "In what way?" 

"I find it most interesting that 
the large majority of missing persons are males. Wives frequently 
report missing husbands, while the 
reverse is practically never the 
case." 

Rose said, "Oh, that's not mysterious, Dr. Tholan, You simply 
don't realize -the economic setup we 
have on Earth. On this planet, you 
see, it is the male who is usually 
the member of the family that 
maintains it as an economic unit. 



He is the one whose labor is repaid 
in units of currency. Hie wife's 
function is generally that of taking 
care of home and children." 

"Surely this is not universal!" 

Drake put in, "More or less. If 
you are thinking of niy wife, she 
is an example of the minority of 
women who are capable of making 
their own way in the world." 

Rose looked at him swiftly. Was 
he being sarcastic? 

THE Hawkinsite said, "Your implication, Mrs. Smollett, is that 
women, being economically dependent upon their male companions, 
find it less feasible to disappear?" 

"That's a gentle way of putting 
it," said Rose, "but that's about 
it." 

"And would you call the Missing Persons Bureau of New York 
a fair sampling of such cases in the 
planet at large?" 

"Why, I should think so." 

The Hawkinsite said, abruptly, 
"And is there, then, an economic 
explanation for the fact that since 
interstellar travel has been developed, the percentage of young 
males among the missing is more 
pronounced than ever?" 

It was Drake who answered, 
with a verbal snap. "Good lord, 
that's even less of a mystery than 
the other. Nowadays, the runaway 
has all space to disappear into. Anyone who wants to get away from 
trouble need only hop the nearest 
space freighter. They're always 



108 




 



looking for crewmen, no questions 
asked, and it would be almost impossible to locate the runaway after 
that, if he really wanted to stay out 
of circulation." 

"And almost always young men 
in their first year of marriage." 

Rose laughed suddenly. She said, 
"Why, that's just the time a man's 
troubles seem the greatest. If he 
survives the first year, there is usually no nted to disappear at ail." 

Drake was obviously not amused. 
Rose thought again that he looked 
tired and unhappy. Why did he insist on bearing the load alone? 
And then she thought that perhaps he had to. 

The Hawkinsite said, suddenly, 
"Would it offend you if I disconnected for a period of time?" 

Rose said, "Not at all. I hope 
you haven't had too exhausting a 
day. Since you come from a planet 
whose gravity is greater than that 
of Earth's, I'm afraid we too easily 
presume that you would show 
greater endurance than we do." 

"Oh, I am not tired in a physical 
sense." He looked for a moment at 
her legs and blinked very rapidly, 
indicating amusement. "You know, 
I keep expecting Earthmen to fall 
either forward or backward in view 
of their meager equipment of 
standing limbs. You must pardon 
me if my comment is overfamiliar, 
but your mention of the lesser 
gravity of Earth brought it to my 
mind. On my planet, two legs 
would simply not be enough. But 



this is all beside the point at the 
moment. It is just that I have been 
absorbing so many new and unusual concepts that I feel the desire 
for a little disconnection." 

Rose shrugged inwardly. Well, 
that was as close as one rate tould 
get to another, anyway. As nearly 
as the expeditions to Hawkin's 
Planet could make out, Hawkinsites had the faculty for disconnecting their conscious mind from 
all its bodily functions and allowing it to sink into an undisturbed 
meditative process for periods of 
time lasting up to terrestrial days. 
Hawkinsitcs found the process 
pleasant, even necessary sometimes, 
though no Earthman could truly 
say what function it served. 

Conversely, it had never been 
entirely possible for Earthmen to 
explain the concept of "sleep" to 
a Hawkinsite, or to any extraterrestrial. What an EarHiman would 
call sleep or a dream, a Hawkinsite 
would view as an alarming sign of 
mental disintegration. Rose thought 
uneasily, Here is another way Earthmen are unique. 

The Hawkinsite was backing 
away, drooping so that his forelimbs swept the floor in polite farewell. Drake nodded curtly at him 
as he disappeared behind the bend 
in the corridor. They heard his 
door open, close, then silence. 

AFTER minutes in which the 
silence was thick between 
them, Drake's chair creaked as he 



HOSTESS 



10? 



shifted restlessly. With a mild 
horror, Rose noticed blood upon 
his lips. She thought to herself, 
He's hi some kind of trouble. I've 
got to talk to him. I can't let it go 
on like this. 

She said, "Drake!" 

Drake seemed to look at her 
from a far, far distance. Slowly, his 
eyes focused closer at hand and he 
said, "What is it? Are you through 
for the day, "too?" 

"No, I'm ready to begin. It's the 
tomorrow you spoke of. Aren't you 
going to speak to me?" 

"Pardon me?" 

"Last night, you said you would 
speak to me tomorrow. I am ready 
now." 

DRAKE frowned. His eyes withdrew beneath a lowered brow 
and Rose felt some of her resolution begin to leave her. He said, "I 
thought k was agreed that you 
would not question me about my 
business in this matter." 

"I think it's too late for that. I 
know too much about your business 
by now." 

"What do you mean?" he 
shouted, jumping to his feet. Recollecting himself, he approached, 
laid his hands upon her shoulders 
and repeated in a lower voice, 
"What do you mean?" 

Rose kept her eyes upon her 
hands, which rested limply in her 
lap. She bore the painfully gripping 
fingers patiently, and said slowly, 
"Dr. Tholan thinks that Earth is 



spreading the Inhibition Death 
purposely. That's it, isn't it?" 

She waited. Slowly, the grip relaxed and he was standing there, 
hands at his side, face baffled and 
unhappy. He said, "Where did you 
get that notion ?" 
"It's true, isn't it?" 
He said breathlessly, unnaturally, 
"I want to know exactly why you 
say that. Don't play foolish games 
with me. Rose. This is for keeps." 

"If I tell you, will you answer 
one question ?" 

"What question?" 
"Is Earth spreading the disease 
deliberately, Drake?" 

Drake flung his hands upward. 
"Oh, for Heaven's sake!" 

He knelt before her. He took 
both her -hands in his and she could 
feel their trembling. He was forcing his voice into soothing, loving 
syllables. 

He was saying, "Rose dear, look, 
you've got something red-hot by 
the tail and you think you can use 
it to tease me in a little husbandwife repartee. Now, I'm not asking 
much. Just tell me exactly what 
causes you to say what — what you 
have just said." He was terribly 
earnest about it. 

"I was at the New York 
Academy of Medicine this afternoon. I did some reading there." 

"But why? What made you do 
it?" 

"You seemed so interested in the 
Inhibition Death, for one thing. 
And Dr. Tholan made those state


110 




 



merits about the incidence increasing since interstellar travel, and 
being the highest on the planet 
nearest Earth." She paused. 

"And your reading?" he prompted. "What about your reading, 
Rose?" 

SHE said, "It backs him up. All 
I could do was to skim hastily 
into the direction of their research 
in recent decades. It seems obvious 
to me, though, that at least some 
of the Hawkinsites are considering 
the possibility the Inhibition Death 
originates on Earth." 

"Do they say so outright?" 
"No. Or, if they have, I haven't 
seen it." She gazed at him in surprise. In a matter like this, certainly 
the government would have investigated Hawkinsitc research on 
the matter. She said, gently, "Don't 
you know about Hawkinsitc research in the matter, Drake? The 
government — " 

"Never mind about that." Drake 
had moved away frum her and now 
he turned again. His eyes were 
bright. He said, as though making 
a wonderful discovery, "Why, 
you're an expert in this!" 

Was she? Did he find that out 
only now that he needed her? Her 
nostrils flared and she said flatly, 
"I am a biologist." 

He said, "Yes, I know that, but 
I mean your particular specialty is 
growth. Didn't you once tell me 
you had done work on growth?" 
"You might call it that. I've had 

HOSTESS 



twenty papers published on the relationship of nucleic acid 'tine 
structure' and embryonic development on my Cancer Society grant." 

"Good. I should have thought 
of that." He was choked with a 
new excitement. "Tell me, Rose — 
Look, I'm sorry if 1 lost my temper 
with you a moment ago. You'd be 
as competent as anyone to understand the direction of their researches if you read about it, 
wouldn't you?" 

"Fairly competent, yes." 

"Then tell me how they think 
the disease is spread. The details, 
I mean." 

"Oh, now look, that's asking a 
little too much. I spent a few hours 
in the Academy, that's all. I'd need 
much more time tihan that to be 
able to answer your question. " 

"An intelligent guess, at least. 
You can't imagine how important 
it is." 

She said, doubtfully, "Of course, 
'Studies on Inhibition' is a major 
treatise in the field. It would summarize all of the available research 
data." 

"Yes? And how recent is it?" 

"It's one of those periodic things. 
The last volume is about a year 
old." 

"Does it have any account of bis 
work in it?" His finger jabbed in 
the direction of Harg Tholan's bedroom. 

"More than anyone else's. He's 
an outstanding worker in the field. 
I looked over his papers especially." 

Ill 



She ran after him. "What are 
you going to do?" 

"Ask him a few questions." He 
was rummaging through die drawers of his desk and now his right 
hand withdrew. It held a nccdlegun. 

She cried, "No, Drake!" 

He shook her off roughly, and 
turned down the corridor toward 
the Hawkinsite's bedroom. 

DRAKE threw the dopr open 
and entered. Rose was at his 
heels, still trying to grasp his arm, 
but now she stopped and looked 
at Harg Tholan. 

The Hawkinsitc was standing 
there motionless, eyes unfocused, 
his four standing limbs sprawled 
our in four directions as far as they 
would go. Rose felt ashamed of 
intruding, as though she were violating an intimate rite. But Drake, 
apparently unconcerned, walked to 
within four feet of the creature and 
stood there. They were face to face, 
Drake holding the needle-gun easily 
at a level of about the center of the 
Hawkinsite's torso. 

Drake said, "Now keep quiet. 
He'll gradually become aware of 
me." 

"How do you know?" 

The answer was flat. "I know. 
Now get out of here." 

But she did not move and Drake 
was too absorbed to pay her further 
attention. 

Portions of the skin on the 
Hawkinsite's face were beginning 



to quiver slightly. It was rather repulsive and Rose found herself preferring not to watch. 

Drake said suddenly, "That's 
about all, Dr. Tholan. Don't throw 
in connection with any of the limbs. 
Your sense organs and voice box 
will be quite enough." 

The Hawkinsite's voice was dim. 
"Why do you invade my disconnection chamber?" Then, more 
strongly, "And why are you 
armed ?" 

His head wobbled slightly atop 
a still frozen torso. He had, apparently, followed Drake's suggestion 
against limb connection. Rose wondered how Drake knew such partial 
reconnection to be possible. She 
herself had not known of it. 

The Hawkinsite spoke again. 
"What do you want?" 

And this time Drake answered. 
He said, "The answer to certain 
questions." 

"With a gun in your hand? I 
would not humor your discourtesy 
so far." 

"You would not merely be humoring me. You might be saving 
your own life." 

"That would be a matter of considerable indifference to me, under 
the circumstances. I am sorry, Mr. 
Smollett, that the duties toward a 
guest are so badly understood on 
Earth." 

"You are no guest of mine, Dr. 
Tholan," sa'id Drake. "You entered 
my house on false pretenses. You 
had some reason for it, some way 



, HOSTESS 



113 



you had planned of using me to 
further your own purposes. I have 
no compunction in reversing the 
process." 

''You 'had better shoot. It will 
save time." 

"You are convinced that you will 
answer no questions? That, in itself, is suspicious. It seems 'that 
you consider certain answers to be 
more important than your life." 

"I consdier the principles of 
courtesy to be very important. You, 
as an Earthman, may not understand." 

"Perhaps not. But I, as an Earlhman, understand, one thing." Drake 
had jumped forward, faster than 
Rose could cry out, faster than the 
Hawkinsite could connect his 
limbs. When he sprang backward, 
the flexible hose of Harg Tholan's 
cyanide cylinder was in his hand. 
At die corner of the Hawkinsite's 
wide mouth, where the hose had 
once been affixed, a droplet of 
colorless liquid oozed sluggishly 
from a break in die rough skin, and 
slowly solidified into a brown 
jellylike globule, as it oxidized. 

T"\RAKE yanked at the hose and 
A-J the cylinder jerked free. He 
plunged home the knob that controlled the needle valve at the head 
of the cylinder and the small hissing ceased. 

"I doubt," said Drake, "that 
enough will have escaped to endanger us. I hope, however, that 
you realize what will happen to 



you now, if you do not answer the 
questions I am going to ask you — 
and answer them in such a way 
that I am convinced you are being 
truthful." 

"Give me back my cylinder," said 
the Hawkinsite, slowly. "If not, it 
will be necessary for me to attack 
you and then it will be necessary 
for you to kill me." 

Drake stepped back. "Not at all. 
Attack me and I shoot your legs 
from under you. You will lose 
them; all four, if necessary, but 
you will still live, in a horrible 
way. You will live to die of cyanide 
lack. It would be a most uncomfortable death. I am only an Earthman and I can't appreciate its true 
horrors, but you can, can't you?" 

The Hawkinsite's mouth was 
open and something within quivered yellow-green. Rose wanted to 
throw up. She wanted to scream, 
Give him back the cylinder, Drake/ 
But nothing would come. She 
couldn't even turn her head. 

Drake said, "You have about an 
hour, I think, before the effects are 
irreversible. Talk quickly. Dr. ThoJan, and you will, have your cylinder back." 

"And after that — " said the 
Hawkinsite. 

"After thai, what does it matter 
to you? Even if I kill you then, it 
will be a clean death; not cyanide 
lack." 

Something seemed to pass out of 
the Hawkinsite. His voice grew guttural and hi 5 words blurred as 



114 




 



though he no longer had the energy 
to keep his English perfect. He 
said, "What are your questions?" 
and as he spoke, his eyes followed 
the cylinder in Drake's hand. 

Drake swung it deliberately, tantalizingly, and the creature's eyes 
followed — -followed — 

Drake said, "What are your 
theories concerning the Inhibition 
Death? Why did you really come 
to Earth? What is your interest in 
the Missing Persons Bureau?" 

Rose found herself waiting in 
breathless anxiety. These were the 
questions she would like to have 
asked, too. Not in this manner, perhaps, but in Drake's job, kindness 
and humanity had to take second 
place to necessity. 

She repeated that to herself several times in an effort to counteract 
the fact that she found herself 
loathing Drake for what he was 
doing to Dr. Tholan. 

THE Hawkinsite said, "The 
proper answer would take more 
than the hour I have left me. You 
have bitterly shamed me by forcing 
me to talk under duress. On my 
own planet, you could not have 
done so under any circumstances. It 
is only here, on this revolting 
planet, that I can be deprived of 
cyanide." 

"You are wasting your hour, Dr. 
Tholan." 

"I would have told you this eventually, Mr. Smollett. I needed your 
help. It is why I tame here." 



"You are still not answering my 
questions." 

"I will answer them now. For 
years, in addition to my regular 
scientific work, I have been privately investigating the cells of my 
patients suffering from Inhibition 
Death. I have been forced to use 
the utmost secrecy and to work 
without assistance, since the methods I used to investigate the bodies 
of my patients were frowned upon 
by my people. Your society would 
have similar feelings against human vivisection, for instance. For 
this reason, I could not present the 
results I obtained to my fellow 
physicians until I had verified my 
theories here on Earth." 

"What were your theories?" demanded Drake. The feverishness. 
had returned to his eyes. 

"It became more and more obvious to me as I proceeded with my 
studies that the entire direction of 
research into the Inhibition Death 
was wrong. The answer was neither 
bacterial nor viral." 

Rose interrupted, "Surely. Dr. 
Tholan, it isn't psychosomatic." 

A thin, gray, translucent film 
had passed over the Hawkinsite's 
eyes. He no longer looked at them. 
He said, "No, Mrs. Smollett, it is 
not psychosomatic. It is a true infection, but more subtle than could 
be expected of either bacteria or 
viruses. I worked with Inhibition 
Death patients of other races than 
my own, and the conclusion was 
eventually forced upon me. There 



HOSTESS 



115 



is a whole variety of infection never 
yet suspected by the medical science 
of any of the planets." 

Rose said, faintly, "This is wild, 
impossible. You must be mistaken, 
Dr. Xholan." 

"I ain not mistaken. Until I 
came to Earth, I thought I might 
be. But my stay at the Institute, 
my researches at the Missing Persons Bureau have convinced me 
that this is not so. What is so impossible about the concept of a 
supremely subtle, yet unsuspected 
class of infections? The very 
subtlety would militate against their 
discovery. In your history and in 
ours, there were thousands of years 
in which the causes of bacterial infections were unknown, And when 
tools were developed capable of 
studying bacteria, viruses remained 
unknown for generations. 

"Is it impossible to proceed a 
step further? Bacteria, by and large, 
are extracellular creatures. They 
compete with the cells of the body 
for foodstuffs, sometimes too successfully, and they release their 
waste products, or toxins, into the 
bloodstream. The virus goes a step 
further. It lives within the cell, 
utilizing cellular machinery for its 
own purposes. You know all this. 
Mrs. Smollett, so I need not elaborate. Perhaps your husband knows 
it as well." 

«pO ON," said Drake. 

Vj "Proceed one more stage, 

then. Imagine a parasite that lives 



not only inside the cell, but inside 
die chromosomes of the cell. In 
other words, a parasite that takes 
its place along with the genes, so 
that it is something we might call 
a pseudo-gene. It would (have a 
hand in the manufacture of 
enzymes, which is the primary function of genes, and in that way a 
very firm finger in the biochemistry 
of the terrestrial organism." 

Rose said, "Why particularly the 
terrestrial?" 

"Have you not surmised that the 
pseudo-gene I speak of is a native 
of Earth. Terrestrial beings from 
the beginning have lived with it, 
have adapted to it, are unconscious 
of it. These pseudo-genes feed on 
the organization of the body. Bacteria feed on the foodstuffs, viruses 
on the cells, pseudo-genes on the 
economy of the cellular macrostructure as a whole through their 
control of the body's biochemistry. 
It is why the higher species of terrestrial animals, including man, do 
not grow after maturity, and, eventually, die what is called natural 
death. It is the inevitable end result 
of this universal parastic infestation." 

"A disease of the soul—" Rose 
said, wistfully. 

The Hawkinsite said, "What is 
the soul?" 

"For heaven's sake," said Drake, 
abruptly, "do not get mystical, 
Rose !" 

She flushed. "I'm sorry- Go on, 
Dr. Tholan." 



116 




 



"As a pseudo-gene, it is perfectly obvious how the universal disease 
is transmitted. It is placed along 
with the true genes in every ovum 
or spermatazoon formed by the infected organism. Every organism is 
already infected at the moment of 
conception. But there is Another 
form of transmission — there must 
he to account for all the facts. 
Chemically, genes and viruses are 
similar, since both are nuclear proteins. A pseudo-gene can, therefore, exist independently of the 
chromosomes. 

"-"Perhaps it infects a virus, or 
perhaps it forms a viruslike body 
itself at some stage of its development. As such, it can be transmitted in the ordinary fashion of other 
viral infections — -by contact, by air, 
through waste mate-rials and so on. 
Naturally, liarthmcn have nothing 
to fear from such contact; they are 
already infected. On Earth, such a 
process is purely vestigial, dating 
back to the days when infections 
could yet be made. It is different 
on the extraterrestrial worlds, however." 

"I see," said Rose. 

"I don't," objected Drake, 
bluntly. 

THE Hawkinsite sighed. "We of 
the other worlds have not lived 
with these parasites for millions of 
years, as man and his ancestors had. 
We have not adapted ourselves to 
it. Our weak strains have not been 
killed off gradually through hun


dreds of generations until only the 
resistants were left. So, where 
Earthmen could survive (he infection decades with little harm, we 
others, once (infected by the viral 
stage of the disease, die a quick 
death within a year." 

Rose said, "And is that why the 
incidence has increased since interstellar travel between Earth and the 
other planets began ?" 

"Yes. There were infections previously. It has long been suspected 
that bacterial spores and virus 
molecules can drift off into space 
and through it. Absolute zero will 
not kill them, but rather keep them 
alive indefinitely. Statistically, a 
certain percentage of them will 
reach other planets. Before space 
travel there were cases which could 
be accounted for, perhaps, by such 
a median ism. Since then, it has increased ten thousand times and 
more." 

For a moment there was silence, 
and then the Hawkinsite said with 
a sudden access of energy, "Give 
me back my cylinder. You have your 
answer." 

Drake said, coolly, "What about 
the Missing Persons Bureau?" He 
was swinging the cylinder again; 
but now the Hawkinsite did not 
follow its movements. The gray 
translucent film on his eyes had 
deepened and Rose wondered 
whether that was simply an expression of weariness or an example of 
the changes induced by cyanide 
lack. 



HOSTESS 



in 



The Hawkrnsitc said, "As we ;ire 
not well adapted to the pseudogenes that infest man, neither are 
they well adapted to us. It can live 
on us, but it cannot reproduce with 
ourselves alone as the source of its 
life. Infections of Inhibition Death 
before the advent of space travel 
set off tiny epidemics that would 
last through ten or twenty transfers, 
growing gradually milder, until it 
died out altogether. Now, the disease transfers indefinitely, getting 
milder where thorough quarantines 
are imposed and then, suddenly 
and erratically, growing completely 
virulent again." 

Rose looked at him with a growing horror. "What are you implying, Dr. Tholan?" 

He said, "The Earthman remains 
the prime host for the parasite. An 
Earthman may infect one of us if 
he remains among us. But the 
pseudo-gene, once located within 
our cells, cannot maintain its vigor 
indefinitely. Sooner or later, within 
twenty infections, perhaps, it must 
somehow return to an Earthman, if 
it expects to continue reproduction. 
Before interstellar travel this was 
possible only by returning through 
space, which was so unlikely as to 
be considered zero. Now — " 

ROSE said faintly, "The missing 
persons." 
"Yes. They are the intermediate 
hosts. Almost all the young men 
who disappeared in the last decade 
were space-travelers. They had been 



on other inhahited planets at least 
once in their lives. Once the period 
of incubation within the human 
being has transpired, they return 
to an outer planet. He disappears, 
as far as Earth is concerned." 

"But this is impossible," insisted 
Rose. "What you say implies that 
the pseudo-gene can control the actions of its host! This cannot be!" 

"Why not? They control the biochemistry, at least in part, by their 
very role as pseudo-genes. There is 
no intelligence, or even instinct, 
behind their control. It is purely 
chemical. If adrenalin is injected 
into your bloodstream, there is no 
imposition of a superior intelligence 
that makes your heart double its 
rate, your breathing cjuicken, your 
clotting time decrease, your blood 
vessels dilate — purely chemical. | 

** — But I am quite ill now and 
cannot speak much longer. 1 have 
only this to say. In this pseudo-gene, 
your people and mind have a common enemy. Earthmcn, too, need 
not die involuntarily. 1 thought that 
perhaps if I found myself unable to 
return to my own world with my 
information, due to my own infection, perhaps, I might bring it to 
the authorities on Earth, and ask 
their help in stamping out this 
menace. Imagine my pleasure when 
I found that the husband of one of 
the biologists at the Institute was 
a member of one of Earth's most 
important investigating bodies. Naturally, I did what I could to be a 
guest at his home in order that I 



118 




 



might deal with him privately; convince him of the terri ble truth ; 
utilize his position to help in the 
attack on the parasites. 

"This is, of course, now impossible. I cannot blame you too 
far. As Eaxthmen, you cannot be 
expected to understand thoroughly 
the psychology of my people. 
Nevertheless, you must understand 
this. I can have no further dealing 
with either of you. I could not even 
bear to remain any longer on 
Earth." 

Dralcc said, "Then you, alone, of 
all your people have any knowledge oi this theory of yours." 

"I alone." 

Drake held out the cylinder. 
"Your cyanide. Dr. Tholan." 

The Hawkinsite groped for it 
eagerly. His supple fingers manipulated the hose and the needle valve 
with the utmost delicacy. In the 
space of ten seconds, he had it in 
place and was inhaling the gas in 
huge breaths. His eyes were growing clear and transparent. 

DRAKE waited until the Hawkinsite breathings had subsided to normal, and then, without 
expression, he raised his needlegun and fired. 

Rose screamed. The Hawkinsite 
remained standing. His four lower 
limbs were incapable of buckling, 
but his head lolled and, from his 
suddenly flaccid mouth, the cyanide 
hose fell, disregarded. 

Once again, Drake closed the 



needle valve and now he tossed the 
cylinder aside and stood there somberly, looking at the dead creature. 

There was no external mark to 
show that Tholan had been killed. 
The needle-gun's pellet, thinner 
than the needle which gave the 
gun its name, entered the body 
noiselessly and easily, and exploded 
with devastating effect only within 
the abdominal cavity. 

Rose ran from the room, still 
screaming. 

Drake pursued her, seized her 
arm. She heard the hard, brisk 
sounds of his palms upon her face 
without feeling them and subsided 
into little bubbling sobs. 

Drake said, "T told you to have 
nothing to do with this. Now, 
what do you think you're going to 
do?" 

She said, "Let me go. I want to 
leave. I want to go away." 

"Because of something it was my 
job to do? You heard what the 
creature was saying. Do you suppose 
I could allow him to return to his 
world and spread those lies? They 
would believe him. And what do 
you think would happen then? Can 
you guess what an interstellar war 
might be like? They would imagine 
they would have to kill us all to 
Stop the disease." 

With an effort that seemed to 
turn her inside out. Rose steadied. 
She looked firmly into Drake's eyes 
and said, "What Dr. Tholan said 
were no lies and no mistakes, 
Drake." 



HOSTESS 



119 



"Oh, come now, you're hysterical. You need sleep." 

"No, Drake. I know what he said 
is so because the Security Commission knows all about that same 
theory, and knows it to be true." 

"Why do you say such a preposterous thing?" 

"Because you let that slip yourself twice." 

Drake said, "Sit down." 

She did so, and he stood there, 
looking curiously at her. 

He said, "So I have given myself away twice, have I ? You've 
had a busy day of detection, my 
dear. You have facets you keep 
well hidden." He sat down and 
crossed his legs. 

ROSE thought, Yes, I've had a 
busy day. She could sec the 
electric clock on the kitchen wall 
from where she sat and it was 
more than .two hours past midnight. 
Harg Tholan had entered their 
house thirty-rive hours before; and 
now he lay murdered in the spare 
bedroom. 

Drake said, "Well, aren't you 
going to tell me where T pulled my 
two boners?" . 

"You turned .white when Harg 
Tholan referred to me as a charming hostess. Hostess has a double 
meaning, you know, Drake. A host 
is one who harbors a parasite." 

"Number one," said Drake. 
"What's number two?" 

"That's something you did before Harg Tholan entered the 



house. I've been trying to remember it for hours. Do you remember, 
Drake? You spoke about how unpleasant it was for Hawkinsites to 
associate with Earthmcn, and I said 
Harg Tholan was a doctor and had 
to. J asked you if you thought that 
human doctors particularly enjoyed 
going to the tropics, or letting infected mosquitoes bite them. Do 
you remember how upset you became?" 

Drake laughed shortly. "I had 
no idea I was so transparent. Mosquitoes are hosts for the malaria 
and yellow fever parasites." He 
sighed. "I've done my best to keep 
you out of this, Rose. I tried to 
keep the Hawkinsite away. I tried 
threatening you. Now, there's nothing left but to tell you the truth. I 
must, because only the truth — or 
death— will keep you quiet. And I 
don't want to kill you." 

Rose shrank back in her chair, 
eyes wide. 

Drake said, "The Commission 
knows the truth, yes. It does us 
no good. We can only do all in our 
power to prevent the other worlds 
from finding out." 

"But that is impossible! The 
truth can't be held down forever. 
Harg Tholan found out. You've 
killed him, but another extraterrestrial will repeat the same discovery 
— over and over again. You can't 
kill them all." 

"We know that, too." agreed 
Drake. "But we have no choice." 
• "Why?" cried Rose. "Harg Tho 



120 




 



l.in gave you the solution. He made 
no suggestions or threats regarding 
enmity and war between worlds. 
He said something, instead, for 
which I admired him. He suggested 
that we combine with the other intelligences and help to wipe out the 
parasite. And we can — we can! If 
we, in common with all the others, 
put every scrap of effort into it — " 

"You mean we can trust him? 
Does he speak for his government? Or for the other races?" 

"Can we dare 'to refuse the 
risk?" 

Drake said, "No, Rose, you don't 
understand." He reached toward 
her and took one of her cold, unresisting .hands between both of 
his. He went on, "I may seem silly 
trying to teach you anything about 
your specialty, but I want you to 
hear me out. Harg Tholan was 
right. Man and his prehistoric ancestors have heen living with this 
pseudo-gene for uncounted ages; 
certainly for a much longer period 
than we have been truly Homo 
sapiens. In that interval, we have 
not only become adapted to it, we 
have become dependent upon it. It 
is no longer a case of parasitism. 
It is a case of jnutual cooperation." 

SHE tore her hand away, "What 
are you talking about?" 
"We have a disease of our own, 
remember. It is a reverse disease; 
one of unrestrained growth. We've 
mentioned it already as a contrast 
to the Inhibition Death. Well, what 



is the cause of cancer? How long 
have biologists, physiologists, biochemists and all the others been 
working on it? How much success 
have they had with it? Why? Can't 
you answer that for yourself now?" 

Rose frowned at him. She said, 
slowly, "No, I can't. What are you 
talking about?" 

"It's all very well to say that if 
we could remove the parasite, we 
would once again have the privilege 
of eternal growth and life if we 
wanted it; or least until we got tired 
of being too big or of living too 
long, and did away with ourselves 
neatly. But how many millions of 
years has it been since the human 
body has had occasion to grow in 
such an unrestrained fashion? Can 
it do so any longer? Is the chemistry 
of the body adjusted to that? Has 
it got the proper whatchamacallits ?" 

"Enzymes," prompted Rose in a 
whisper. 

"Yes, enzymes. It's impossible 
for us. If, for any reason, the 
pseudo-gene, as Harg Tholan calls 
it, docs leave the human body, or 
i f its rcl at i on sh ip to the human 
mind is in any way impaired, 
growth docs take place, but not in 
any orderly fashion. We call the 
growth cancer. 

"And there you have it. Rose. 
There's no way of getting rid of 
the parasite. We're together for all 
eternity. So that to get rid of their 
Inhibition Death, extraterrestrials 
must first wipe out all vertebrate 
life on Earth. There is no other 



HOSTESS 



721 



solution for them, and so we must 
keep knowledge of it from diem. 
Do you understand ?" 

She rose from her chair. Her 
mouth was dry and it was difficult 
to talk. "I understand, Drake." 

She noticed that his forehead was 
damp and that there was a line of 
perspiration down each cheek. 

She said, tightly, "And now 
you'll have to get it out of the 
apartment." 

"I know. I've made arrangements. It's late a* night and I'll 
be able to get the body out of the 
building. From there on — '* he 
turned to her — "I don't know 
when I'll be back." 

R*ose said again, "I understand, 
Drake." 

Harg Tholan was heavy. Drake 
had to drag him through the apartment. Rose -turned away, retching. 
She hid her eyes until she heard 
the front door close. She whispered 
again <to herself, "I understand, 
Drake." 

IT WAS 3 A. M. Nearly an hour 
had passed since she had heard 
the front door click gently into 
place behind Drake and his burden. 
She didn't know where he was go. ing, what he intended doing — 
She sat there numbly. There was 
no desire to sleep; no desire to 
move. She kept her mind traveling 
in tight circles, away from die 
thing she knew and which she 
wanted not to know. 
Pseudo-genes ! 



Was it only a coincidence or was 
it some queer racial memory, some 
tenuous long- sustained wisp of 
tradition or insight, stretching back 
through incredible millennia, that 
kept current the odd myths of human beginnings? The stories of the 
golden ages, the Gardens of Eden 
in which Man had eternal life, until he lost it. 

She had called the pseudo-genes 
a disease of the soul. Was that the 
memory again ? The memory of the 
world in which sin entered, in 
which the soul grew diseased, and 
into which, as a consequence, death 
entered ? 

Yet despite her efforts, the circle 
of her thoughts expanded, and returned to Drake. She shoved and 
it returned; she counted to herself, 
she recited the names of the objects 
in her field of vision, she cried. 
No, no, no, and it returned. It kept 
returning. 

Drake had lied to her. It had 
been a plausible story. It would 
have held good under most circumstances; but Drake was not a biologist. 

Cancer could not be, as Drake 
had said, a disease that was an expression of a lost ability for any 
normal growth. 

Cancer attacked children while 
they were still growing; it could 
even attack embryonic tissue. It attacked fish, which, Like extraterrestrials, never stopped growing while 
they lived, and died only by disease 
or accident. It attacked plants," for 




 



many of which the same could be 
said. 

Cancer had nothing to do with 
the presence or absence of normal 
growth. It was the general disease 
of life, to which no tissues of any 
multicellular organism were completely immune. 

He should not have bothered 
lying. He should not have allowed 
some obscure sentimental weakness 
to persuade 'him to avoid the necessity of killing her in that manner. 
She would tell them at the Institute. 
The parasite could be beaten ! Its 
absence would not cause cancer. 
But who would believe her? 

She put her hands over her eyes 
and rocked gently to and fro. The 
young tmen who disappeared were 
usually in the first year of their 
marriage. Whatever the process of 
rejuvenation among the strains of 
the pseudo-genes, it must involve 
close association with another strain 
— as in the case of conjugation 
among the protozoa. That was how 
the pseudo-genes had to spread infection; through the formation of 
the gametes and their subsequent 
fertilization, a mixing of strains. 

Drake had been on Hawkin's 
Planet. He knew too much about 



Hawkinsites not to have been there 
at least once. 

She could feel her thoughts slowly disconnect. They would be coming to her. They would be saying. 
Where is Harg Tholatt? And she 
would answer, With my husband. 
Only they would say, Where is 
your husband? because he would 
be gone, too. 

She knew that, anyway. He needed her no longer. He would never 
return. They would never find him, 
because he would be out in space. 
She would report them both, 
Drake Smollett and Harg Tholan, 
to the Missing Persons Bureau. 

She wanted to weep, but couldn't. She was dry-eyed and it was 
very painful. 

And then she began to giggle. 
She couldn't stop; it just went on. 

After all, it was very funny. She 
had looked for the answers to so 
many questions and had found them 
all. She had even found the answer 
to the question she thought had no 
bearing on the subject. 

She had finally learned why 
Drake had married her. 

Not a conjugal relationship — 

Conjugation. 
