Four in One By DAMON KNIGHT 


I sue and replacing it by clear 

plastic. A marvelous job; that 

GEORGE Meister had once fellow on Torkas III had done 
seen the nervous system it. What was his name? ... At 
of a man — a display any rate, having seen the specispecimen, achieved by coating the men, Meister knew what he himsmaller fibers until they were self must look like at the present 
coarse enough to be seen, then moment. 

dissolving all the unwanted tis- Of course, there were distortions. For example, he was almost certain that the distance 
between his visual center and his 
eyes was now at least thirty centimeters. Also, no doubt, the system as a whole was curled up and 
spread out rather oddly, since the 
musculature it had originally 
controlled was gone; and he had 
noticed certain other changes 
which might or might not be reflected by gross structural differences. The fact remained that he 
— all that he could still call himself — was nothing more than a 
brain, a pair of eyes, a spinal 
cord, and a spray of neurons. 

George closed his eyes for a 
second. It was a feat he had 
learned to do only recently and 
he was proud of it. That first 
long period, when he had had no 
control whatever, had been very 
bad. He had decided later that 
the paralysis had been due to 
the lingering effects of some anesthetic — the agent, whatever it 
was, that had kept him unconscious while his body was — 

Well. 

Either that or the neuron 
branches had simply not yet knitted firmly in their new positions. 
Perhaps he could verify one or 
the other supposition at some 
future time. But at first, when he 
had only been able to see and not 
to move, knowing nothing beyond the moment when he had 
fallen face-first into that mottled 



green and brown puddle of gelatin . . . that had been upsetting. 

TIE wondered how the others 
XX W ere taking it. There were 
others, he knew, because occasionally he would feel a sudden 
acute pain down where his legs 
used to be, and at the same 
instant the motion of the landscape would stop with a jerk. 
That could only be some other 
brain, trapped like his, trying to 
move their common body in another direction. 

Usually the pain stopped immediately, and George could go 
on sending messages down to the 
nerve-endings which had formerly belonged to his fingers and 
toes, and the gelatinous body 
would go on creeping slowly forward. When the, pains continued, 
there was nothing to do but stop 
moving until the other brain quit 
— in which case George would 
feel like an unwilling passenger in 
a very slow vehicle — or try to 
alter his own movements to coincide, or at least produce a 
vector with the other brain's. 

He wondered who else had 
fallen in. Vivian Bellis? Major 
Gumbs? Miss McCarty? All 
three of them? There ought to 
be some way of finding out. 

He tried looking down once 
more and was rewarded with a 
blurry view of a long, narrow 
strip of mottled green and brown, 



6 




 



moving sluggishly along the dry 
stream bed they had been crossing for the last hour or more. 
Twigs and shreds of dry vegetable matter were stuck to the 
dusty, translucent surface. 

He was improving ; the last 
time, he had only been able to 
see the thinnest possible edge of 
his new body. 

When he looked up again, the 
far side of the stream bed was 
perceptibly closer. There was a 
cluster of stiff -looking, darkbrown vegetable shoots just beyond, on the rocky shoulder; 
George was aiming slightly to the 
left of it. It had been a plant 
very much like that one that he'd 
been reaching for when he lost 
his balance and got himself into 
this situation. 

He might as well have a good 
look at it, anyhow. 

The plant would probably turn 
out to be of little Interest. It 
would be out of all reasfcm to 
expect every new life-form to be 
a startling novelty; and George 
Meister was convinced that he 
had already stumbled into the 
most interesting organism on this 
planet. Something-or-other meisrer/7, he thought, named after 
him, of course. He had not settled on a generic term — he would 
have to learn more about it before he decided — but meisterii 
certainly. It was his discovery 
and nobody could take it away 



from him. Or, unhappily, him 
away from it. Ah, well! 

TT was a really lovely organism, 
though. Primitive- — less structure of its own than a jellyfish, 
and only on a planet with light 
surface gravity like this one could 
it ever have hauled itself up out 
of the sea. No brain, no nervous 
system at all, apparently. But it 
had the perfect survival mechanism. It simply let its rivals 
develop highly organized nervous tissue, sat in one place 
(looking exactly like a deposit 
of leaves and other clutter) until 
one of them fell into it, and then 
took all the benefit. 

It wasn't parasitism, either. It 
was a true symbiosis, on a higher 
level than any other planet, so 
far as George knew, had ever 
developed. The captive brain was 
nourished by the captor; wherefore it served the captive's interest to move the captor toward 
food and away from danger. 
You steer me, / feed you. It was 
fair. 

They were close to the plant, 
almost touching it. George inspected it. As he had thought, it 
was a common grass type. 

Now his body was tilting itself 
up a ridge he knew to be low, 
although from his eye-level it 
looked tremendous. He climbed 
it laboriously and found himself 
looking down into still another 



FOUR IN ONE 



7 



gully. This could probably go on 
indefinitely. The question was — 
did he have any choice? 

He looked at the shadows cast 
by the low-hanging sun. He was 
heading approximately northwest, directly away from the encampment. He was only a few 
hundred meters away; even at a 
crawl, he could make the distance easily enough ... if he 
turned back. 

He felt uneasy at the thought 
and didn't know why. Then it 
struck him that his appearance 
was not obviously that of a human being in distress. The 
chances were that he looked like 
a monster which had eaten and 
partially digested one or more 
people. 

If he crawled into camp in his 
present condition, it was a certainty that he would be shot at 
before any questions were asked, 
and only a minor possibility that 
narcotic gas would be used instead of a machine rifle. 

No, he decided, he was on the 
right course. The idea was to get 
away from camp, so that he 
wouldn't be found by the relief 
party which was probably searching for him now. Get away, bury 
himself in the forest, and study 
his new body : find out how it 
worked and what he could do 
with it, whether there actually 
were others in it with him, and if 
so, whether there was any way 



of communicating with them. 

It would take a long time, he 
realized, but he could do it. 

Limply, like a puddle of mush 
oozing over the edge of a tablecloth, George started down into 
the gully. 

¥>RIEFLY, the circumstances 
leading up to George's fall 
into the Sornething-or-other me/sterii were as follows: 

Until as late as the mid-twenty-first century, a game invented 
by the ancient Japanese was still 
played by millions in the eastern 
hemisphere of earth. The game 
was called go. Although its rules 
were almost childishly simple, its 
strategy included more permutations and was more difficult to 
master than chess. 

Go was played at the height of 
development — just before the 
geological catastrophe that wiped 
out most of its devotees— on a 
board with nine hundred shallow 
holes, using small pill-shaped 
counters. At each turn, one of 
the two players placed a counter on the board, wherever he 
chose, the object being to capture as much territory as possible 
by surrounding it completely. 

There were no other rules; and 
yet it had taken the Japanese 
almost a thousand years to work 
up to that thirty-by-thirty board, 
adding perhaps one rank and file 
per century. A hundred years 



8 




 



was not too long to explore all 
the possibilities of that additional 
rank and file. 

At the time George Meister 
fell into the gelatinous green-andbrown monster, toward the end 
of the twenty-third century 
A. D., a kind of go was being 
played in a three - dimensional 
field which contained more than 
ten billion positions. The Galaxy 
was the board, the positions were 
star-systems, men were the counters. The loser's penalty was annihilation. 

The Galaxy was in the process 
of being colonized by two opposing federations, both with the 
highest aims and principles. In 
the early stages of this conflict, 
planets had been raided, bombs 
dropped, and a few battles had 
even been fought by fleets of 
spaceships. Later, that haphazard 
sort of warfare became impossible. Robot fighters, carrying 
enough armament to blow each 
other into dust, were produced 
by the trillion. In the space 
around the outer stars of a cluster belonging to one side or the 
other, they swarmed like minnows. 

Within such a screen, planets 
were safe from attack and from 
any interference with their commerce . . , unless the enemy succeeded in colonizing enough of 
the surrounding star-systems to 
set up and maintain a second 



screen outside the first. It was go, 
played for desperate stakes and 
under impossible conditions. 

Everyone was in a hurry; everyone's ancestors for seven generations had been in a hurry. 
You got your education in a 
speeded-up, capsulized form. You 
mated early and bred frantically. 
And if you were assigned to an 
advance ecological team, as 
George was, you had to work 
without proper preparation. 

The sensible, the obvious thing 
to do in opening up a new planet 
with unknown life-forms would 
have been to begin with at least 
ten years of immunological study 
conducted from the inside of a 
sealed station. After the worst 
bacteria and viruses had been 
conquered, you might proceed to 
a little cautious held work and 
exploration. Finally — total 
elapsed time fifty years, say — 
the colonists would be shipped in. 

There simply wasn't that much 
time. 

FIVE hours after the landing, 
Meister's team had unloaded 
fabricators and set up barracks 
enough to house its 2,628 members. 

An hour after that, Meister, 
Gumbs, Bellis and McCarty had 
started out across the level cinder and ash left by the transport's tail jets to the nearest 
living vegetation, six hundred 



FOUR IN ONE 



9 



meters away. They were to trace 
a spiral path outward from the 
camp site to a distance of a thousand meters, and then return 
with their specimens — providing 
nothing too large and hungry to 
be stopped by machine rifle had 
previously eaten them. 

Meister, the biologist, was so 
hung down with collecting boxes 
that his slender torso was totally 
invisible. Major Gumbs had a 
survival kit, binoculars and a 
machine rifle. Vivian Bellis, who 
knew exactly as much mineralogy as had been contained in the 
three-month course prescribed 
for her rating, and no more, carried a light rifle, a hammer and a 
specimen sack. Miss McCarty — 
no one knew her first name — had 
no scientific function. She s was 
the group's Loyalty Monitor. She 
wore two squat pistols and a 
bandolier bristling with cartridges. Her only job was to blow 
the cranium off any team member caught using an unauthorized communicator, or in any 
other way behaving oddly. 

All of them were heavily 
gloved and booted, and their 
heads were covered by globular 
helmets, sealed to their tunic 
collars. They breathed through 
filtered respirators, so finely 
meshed that — in theory — nothing 
larger than an oxygen mdlecule 
could get through. 

On their second circuit of the 



camp, they had struck a low 
ridge and a series of short, steep 
gullies, most of them choked with 
the dusty-brown stalks of dead 
vegetation. As they started down 
into one of these, George, who 
was third in line — Gumbs leading, then Bellis, and McCarty 
behind George — stepped out onto 
a protruding slab of stone to examine a cluster of plant stalks 
rooted on its far side. 

His weight was only a little 
more than twenty kilograms on 
this planet, and the slab looked 
as if it were firmly cemented 
into the wall of the gully. Just 
the same, he felt it shift under 
him as soon as his weight was 
fully on it. He found himself 
falling, shouted, and caught a 
flashing glimpse of Gumbs and 
Bellis, standing as if caught by a 
high-speed camera. He heard a 
rattling of stones as he went by. 
Then he saw what looked like a 
shabby blanket of leaves and dirt 
floating toward him, and he remembered thinking, It looks like 
a soft landing, anyhow. . . . 

That was all, until he woke up 
feeling as if he had been prematurely buried, with no part of him 
alive but his eyes. 

MUCH later, his frantic efforts to move had resulted in 
the first fractional success. From 
then on, his field of vision had 
advanced fairly steadily, per


10 




 



haps a meter every fifty minutes, 
not counting the times when 
someone else's efforts had interfered with his own. 

His conviction that nothing 
remained of the old George Meister except a nervous system was 
not supported by observation, 
but the evidence was regrettably 
strong. To begin with, the anesthesia of the first hours had worn 
off, but his body was not reporting the position of the torso, 
head and four limbs he had formerly owned. He had, instead, a 
vague impression of being flattened and spread out over an 
enormous area. When he tried 
to move his fingers and toes, 
the response he got was so multiplied that he felt like a centipede. 

He had no sense of cramped 
muscles, such as would normally 
be expected after a long period of 
paralysis — and he was not 
breathing. Yet his brain was evidently being well supplied with 
food and oxygen; he felt clearheaded, at ease and healthy. 

He wasn't hungry, either, although he had been using energy 
steadily for a long time. There 
were, he thought, two possible 
reasons for that, depending on 
how you looked at it. One, that 
he wasn't hungry because he no 
longer had any stomach lining to 
contract ; two, that he wasn't 
hungry because the organism he 



was riding in had been well nourished by the superfluous tissues 
George had contributed. 

Two hours later, when the sun 
was setting, it began to rain. 
George saw the big, slow-falling 
drops and felt their dull impacts 
on his "skin." He didn't know 
whether rain would do him any 
damage or not, but crawled under a bush with large, fringed 
leaves just to be on the safe side. 
When the rain stopped, it was 
night and he decided he might 
as well stay where he was until 
morning. He did not feel tired, 
and it occurred to him to wonder 
whether he still needed to sleep. 
He composed himself as well as 
he could to wait for the answer. 

He was still wakeful after a 
long time had passed, but had 
made no progress toward deciding whether this answered the 
question or prevented it from 
being answered, when he saw a 
pair of dim lights coming slowly 
and erratically toward him. 

GEORGE watched them with 
an attentiveness compounded 
of professional interest and apprehension. Gradually, as they 
came closer, he made out that 
the lights were attached to long, 
thin stalks which grew from an 
ambiguous shape below — either 
light organs, like those of some 
deep-sea fish, or simply luminescent eyes. 



FOUR IN ONE 



1 1 



George noted a feeling of tension in himself which seemed to 
suggest that adrenalin or an 
equivalent was being released 
somewhere in his system. He 
promised himself to follow this 
lead at the first possible moment; 
meanwhile, he had a more urgent 
problem to consider. Was this 
approaching organism the kind 
which the Something meisterii 
ate, or the kind which devoured 
the Something meisterii? If the 
latter, what could he do about it? 

For the present, at any rate, 
sitting where he was seemed to 
be indicated. The body he inhabited made use of camouflage 
in its normal, or untenanted 
state, and was not equipped for 
speed. So George held still and 
watched, keeping his eyes halfclosed, while he considered the 
possible nature of the approaching animal. 

The fact that it was nocturnal, 
he told himself, meant nothing. 
Moths were nocturnal; so were 
bats — no, the devil with bats, 
they were carnivores. 

The light-bearing creature 
came nearer, and George saw the 
faint gleam of a pair of long, 
narrow eyes below the two stalks. 

Then the creature opened its 
mouth. 

It had a great many teeth. 

George found himself crammed 
into some kind of crevice in a 
wall of rock, without any clear 



recollection of how he had got 
there. He remembered a flurry of 
branches as the creature sprang 
at him, and a moment's furious 
pain, and nothing but vague, starlit glimpses of leaves and soil. 

How had he got away? 

He puzzled over it until dawn 
came, and then, looking down 
at himself, he saw something 
that had not been there before. 
Under the smooth edge of gelatinous flesh, three or four projections of some kind were visible. 
It struck George that his sensation of contact with the stone 
underneath him had changed, 
too. He seemed to be standing 
on a number of tiny points instead of lying flat. 

He flexed one of the projections experimentally, then thrust 
it out straight ahead of him. It 
was a lumpy, single-jointed caricature of a finger or a leg. 

II 

T YING still for a long time, 
George Meister thought about 
it with as much coherence as he 
could muster. Then he waggled 
the limb again. It was there, and 
so were all the others, as solid 
and real as the rest of him. 

He moved forward experimentally, sending the same messages 
down to his finger-and-toe nerveends as before. His body lurched 
out of the cranny with a swift


12 




 



ness that very nearly tumbled 
him down over the edge of a 
minor precipice. 

Where he had crawled like a 
snail before, he now scuttled like 
an insect. 

But how? No doubt, in his 
terror when the thing with the 
teeth attacked, he had unconsciously tried to run as if he still 
had legs. Was that all there was 
to it? 

George thought of the carnivore 
again, and of the stalks supporting the organs which he had 
thought might be eyes. That 
would do as an experiment. He 
closed his eyes and imagined 
them rising outward, imagined 
the mobile stalks, growing, growing . . . He tried to convince 
himself that he had eyes like 
that, had always had them, that 
everyone who was anyone had 
eyes on stalks. 

Surely, something was happening. 

George opened his eyes again 
and found himself looking 
straight down at the ground, getting a view so close that it was 
blurred, out of focus. Impatiently, he tried to look up. All that 
happened was that his field of 
vision moved forward a matter 
of ten or twelve centimeters. 

It was at this point that a 
voice shattered the stillness. It 
sounded like someone trying to 
shout through half a meter of 



lard. "Urghh! Lluhh! Eeraghhf" 

George leaped convulsively, 
executed a neat turn and swept 
his eyes around a good two hundred and forty degrees of arc. He 
saw nothing but rocks and lichens. On a closer inspection, it appeared that a small green and 
orange larva or grub of some 
kind was moving past him. 
George regarded it with suspicion 
for a long moment, until the 
voice broke out again: 

"Ellfff! Elffneee!" 

The voice, somewhat higher 
this time, came from behind. 
George whirled again, swept his 
eyes around — 

Around an impossibly wide circuit. His eyes were on stalks, 
and they were mobile whereas a 
moment ago he had been staring 
at the ground, unable to look 
up. George's brain clattered into 
high gear. He had grown stalks 
for his eyes, all right, but they'd 
been limp, just extensions of the 
jellylike mass of his body, without a stiffening cell -structure or 
muscular tissue to move them. 
Then, when the voice had startled 
him, he'd got the stiffening and 
the muscles in a hurry. 

That must have been what had 
happened the previous night. 
Probably the process would have 
been completed, but much more 
slowly, if he hadn't been frightened. A protective mechanism, 
obviously. As for the voice — 



FOUR IN ONE 



13 



GEORGE rotated once more, 
slowly, looking all around 
him. There was no question about 
it: he was alone. The voice, which 
had seemed to come from someone or something standing just 
behind him, must in fact have 
issued from his own body. 

The voice started again, at a 
less frantic volume. It burbled 
a few times, then said quite clearly in a high tenor, "Whass happen'? Wheh am I?" 

George was floundering in 
enough bewilderment. He was in 
no condition to adapt quickly to 
more new circumstances, and 
when a large, dessicated lump fell 
from a nearby bush and bounced 
soundlessly to within a meter of 
him, he simply stared at it. 

He looked at the hard-shelled 
object and then at the laden bush 
from which it had dropped. Slowly, painfully, he worked his way 
through to a logical conclusion. 
The dried fruit had fallen without a sound. This was natural, 
because he had been totally deaf 
ever since his metamorphosis. 
But he had heard a voice! 

Ergo, hallucination or telepathy. 

The voice began again. "Help! 
Oh, dear, I wish someone would 
answer!" 

Vivian Bellis. Gumbs, even if he 
affected that tenor voice, wouldn't 
say, "Oh, dear." Neither would 
Miss McCarty. 



George's shaken nerves were 
returning to normal. He thought 
intently, / get scared, grow legs. . 
Bellis gets scared, grows a telepathic voice. That's reasonable, 
1 guess — her first and only impulse would be to yell. 

George tried to put himself into 
a yelling mood. He shut his eyes 
and imagined himself cooped up 
in a terrifyingly alien medium, 
without any control or knowledge 
of his predicament. He tried to 
shout: "Vivian!" 

He went on trying, while the 
girl's voice continued at intervals. 
Finally she stopped abruptly in 
the middle of a sentence. 

George said, "Can you hear 
me?" 

"Who's that? What do you 
want?" 

"This is George Meister, Vivian. Can you understand what 
I'm saying?" 

"What—" 

George kept at it. His pseudovoice, he judged, was a little garbled, just as Bellis's had been 
at first. At last the girl said, "Oh, 
George — I mean Mr. Meister! 
Oh, I've been so frightened. 
Where are you?" 

George explained , apparently 
not very tactfully, because Bellis 
shrieked when he was through 
and then went back to burbling. 

George sighed, and said, "Is 
there anyone else on the premises? Major Gumbs? Miss Mc


14 




 



Carty? Can you hear me?" 

A few minutes later two sets 
of weird sounds began almost simultaneously. When they became coherent, it was no trouble 
to identify the voices. 

Gumbs, the big, red-faced professional soldier, shouted, "Why 
the hell don't you watch where 
you're going, Meister? If you 
hadn't started that rock-slide, 
we wouldn't be in this mess!" 

Miss McCarty, who had a grim 
white face, a jutting jaw, and eyes 
the color of mud, said coldly, 
"Meister, all of this will be reported. AH of it." 

IT appeared that only Meister 
and Gumbs had kept the 
use of their eyes. All four of them 
had some muscular control, 
though Gumbs was the only one 
who had made any serious attempt to interfere with George's 
locomotion. Miss McCarty, not 
to George's surprise, had managed to retain a pair of functioning ears. 

But Bellis had been blind, deaf 
and dumb all through the afternoon and night. The only terminal sense-organs she had been 
able to use had been those of 
the skin — the perceptors of touch, 
heat and cold, and pain. She had 
heard nothing, seen nothing, but 
she had felt every leaf and stalk 
they had brushed against, the 
cold impact of every rain drop. 



and the pain of the toothy monster's bite. George's opinion of 
her went up several notches when 
he learned this. She had been 
terrified, but she hadn't been 
driven into hysteria or insanity. 

It further appeared that nobody was doing any breathing 
and nobody was aware of a 
heartbeat. 

George would have liked nothing better than to continue this 
discussion, but the other three 
were united in believing that 
what had happened to them after 
they got in was of less importance than how they were going 
to get out. 

"We can't get our," said 
George. "At least, I don't see any 
possibility of it in the present 
state of our knowledge. If we — " 

"But we've got to get out!" 
Vivian cried. 

"We'll go back to camp," said 
McCarty coldly. "Immediately. 
And you'll explain to the Loyalty 
Committee why you didn't return as soon as you regained consciousness." 

"That's right," Gumbs put in 
self-consciously. "If you can't do 
anything, Meister, maybe the 
other technical fellows can." 

George patiently explained his 
theory of their probable reception by the guards at the camp. 
McCarty's keen mind detected a 
flaw. "You grew legs, and stalks 
for your eyes, according to your 



FOUR IN ONE 



15 



own testimony. If you aren't lying, you can also grow a mouth. 
We'll announce ourselves as we 
approach." 

"That may not be easy," 
George told her. "We couldn't 
get along with just a mouth. We'd 
need teeth, tongue, hard and soft 
palates, lungs or the equivalent, 
vocal cords, and some kind of 
substitute for a diaphragm to 
power the whole business. I 'm 
wondering if it's possible at all, 
because when Miss Bellis finally 
succeeded in making herself 
heard, it was by the method we're 
using now. She didn't — " 

"You talk too much," McCarty interrupted. "Major Gumbs, 
Miss Bellis, you and I will try to 
form a speaking apparatus. The 
first to succeed will receive a 
credit mark on his record. Commence." 

GEORGE, being left out of the 
contest by implication, used 
his time trying to restore his 
hearing. It seemed to him likely 
that the Whatever-it-was meistetii had some sort of division of 
labor built into it, since Gumbs 
and he — -the first two to fall in — 
had kept their sight without making any special effort, while matters like hearing and touch had 
been left for the latecomers. This 
was fine in principle, and George 
approved of it, but he didn't like 
the idea of Miss McCarty's being 



the sole custodian of any part of 
the apparatus whatever. 

Even if he were able to persuade the other two to follow his 
lead — and at the moment this 
prospect seemed dim — McCarty 
was certain to be a holdout. And 
it might easily be vital to all of 
them, at some time in the near 
future, to have their hearing 
hooked into the circuit. 

He was distracted at first 
by muttered comments between 
Gumbs and Vivian — "Getting 
anywhere?" "I don't think so. 
Are you?" — interspersed between 
yawps, humming sounds and 
other irritating noises as they 
tried unsuccessfully to switch 
over from mental to vocal communication. Finally McCarty 
snapped, "Concentrate on forming the necessary organs instead 
of braying like jackasses." 

George settled down to work, 
using the same technique he had 
found effective before. With his 
eyes shut, he imagined that the 
thing with all the teeth was approaching in darkness — rap; 
slither; tap; click. He wished valiantly for ears to catch those 
faint approaching sounds. After 
a long time he thought he was 
beginning to succeed — or were 
those mental sounds, unconsciously emitted by one of the 
other three? Click. Slither. Swish. 
Scrape. 

George opened his eyes, gen


16 




 



uinely alarmed. A hundred meters away, facing him across the 
shallow slope of rocky ground, 
was a uniformed man just emerging from a stand of black vegetation spears. As George raised his 
eye-stalks, the man paused, 
stared back at him, then shouted 
and raised his rifle. 

George ran. Instantly there 
was a babble of voices inside him. 
and the muscles of his "legs" 
went into wild spasms. 

"Run, dammit!" he said frantically. "There's a trooper 
with — " 

The rifle went off with a 
deafening roar and George felt a 
sudden hideous pain aft of his 
spine. Vivian Bellis screamed. 
The struggle for possession of 
their common legs stopped and 
they scuttled full speed ahead 
for the cover of a nearby boulder. 

The rifle roared again. George 
heard rock splinters screeching 
through the foliage overhead. 
Then they were plunging down 
the side of a gully, up the other 
slope, over a low hummock and 
into a forest of tall, bare-limbed 
trees. 

George spotted a leaf-filled 
hollow and headed for it, fighting somebody else's desire to keep 
on running in a straight line. 
They plopped into the hollow 
and crouched there while three 
running men went past them. 



VIVIAN was moaning steadily. 
Raising his eye-stalks cautiously, George was able to see 
that several jagged splinters of 
stone had penetrated the monster's gelatinous flesh near the 
far rim. They had been very 
lucky. The shot had apparently 
been a near miss — accountable 
only on the grounds that the 
trooper had been shooting downhill at a moving target — and had 
shattered the boulder behind 
them. 

Looking more closely, George 
observed something which excited his professional interest. 
The whole surface of the monster 
appeared to be in constant slow 
ferment, tiny pits opening and 
closing as if the flesh were boiling . . . except that here the bubbles of air were not forcing their 
way outward, but were being engulfed at the surface and pressed 
down into the interior. 

He could also see, deep under 
the mottled surface of the huge 
lens-shaped body, four vague 
clots of darkness which must be 
the living brains of Gumbs, Bellis, McCarty — and Meister. 

Yes, there was one which was 
radially opposite his own eyestalks. It was an odd thing, 
George reflected, to be looking 
at your own brain. He hoped he 
could get used to it in time. 

,The four dark spots were arranged close together in an al


FOUR IN ONE 



17 




most perfect square at the center of the lens. The spinal cords, 
barely visible, crossed between 
them and rayed outward from 
the center. 

Pattern, George thought. The 
thing was designed to make use 
of more than one nervous system. 
It arranged them in an orderly 
fashion, with the brains inward 
for greater protection — and perhaps for another reason. Maybe 
there was even a provision for 
conscious cooperation among the 
passengers: a matrix that somehow promoted the growth of com


munication cells between the 
separate brains. If that were so, 
it would account for their ready 
success with telepathy. George 
wished acutely that he could 
get inside and find out. 

Vivian's pain was diminishing. 
Hers was the brain opposite 
George's and she had taken most 
of the effect of the rock splinters. But the fragments were 
sinking now, slowly, through the 
gelid substance of the monster's 
tissues. Watching carefully, 
George could see them move. 
When they got to the bottom. 



18 




 



they would be excreted, no doubt, 
just as the indigestible parts of 
their clothing and equipment had 

been. 

George wondered idly which 
of the remaining two brains 
was McCarty's and which was 
Gumb's. The answer proved easy 
to find. To George's left, as he 
looked back toward the center of 
the mound, was a pair of blue 
eyes set flush with the surface. 
They had lids apparently grown 
from the monster's substance, 
but thickened and opaque. 

To his right, George could 



make out two tiny openings, extending a few centimeters into the 
body, which could only be Miss 
McCarty's ears. George had an 
impulse to see if he could devise a method of dropping dirt 
into them. 

Anyhow, the question of returning to camp had been settled, at least for the moment. 
McCarty said nothing more 
about growing a set of speech 
organs, although George was sure 
she was determined to keep on 
trying. 

He didn't think she would suc


FOUR IN ONE 



19 



ceed. Whatever the mechanism 
was by which these changes in 
bodily structure were accomplished, amateurs .like themselves 
probably could succeed only under the pressure of considerable 
emotional strain, and then just 
with comparatively simple tasks 
which involved one new structure at a time. And as he had already told McCarty, the speech 
organs in Man were extraordinarily diverse and complicated. 

IT occurred to George that 
speech might be achieved by 
creating a thin membrane to 
serve as a diaphragm, and an 
air chamber behind it, with a 
set of muscles to produce the 
necessary vibrations and modulate them. He kept the notion to 
himself, though, because he didn't 
want to go back. 

George was a rare bird: a scientist who was actually fitted for 
his work and loved it for its own 
sake. And right now he was sitting squarely in the middle of 
the most powerful research tool 
that had ever existed in his field: 
a protean organism, with the 
observer inside it, able to order 
its structure and watch the results; able to devise theories of 
function and test them on the 
tissues of what was effectively his 
own body — able to construct new 
organs, new adaptations to environment! 



George saw himself at the point 
of an enormous cone of new 
knowledge and some of the possibilities he glimpsed humbled 
and awed him. 

He couldn't go back, even if 
it were possible to do it without 
getting killed. If only he alone 
had fallen in — No, then the 
others would have pulled him 
out and killed the monster. 

There were, he felt, too many 
problems demanding solutions all 
at once. It was hard to concentrate: his mind kept slipping 
maddeningly out of focus. 

Vivian, whose pain had stopped 
some time ago, began to wail 
again. Gumbs snapped at her. 
McCarty cursed both of them. 
George himself felt that he had 
had very nearly all he could 
take, cooped up with three idiots 
who had no more sense than to 
squabble among themselves. 

"Wait a minute," he said. "Do 
you all feel the same way? Irritable? Jumpy? As if you'd been 
working for sixty hours straight 
and were too tired to sleep?" 

"Stop talking like a video ad," 
Vivian said angrily. "Haven't we 
got enough trouble without — *' 

"We're hungry," George interrupted. "We didn't realize it, because we haven't got the organs 
that usually signal hunger. But 
the last thing this body ate was 
us, and that was a whole day 
ago. We've got to find something 



20 




 



to ingest. And soon, I'd say." 

"Good Lord, you're right," 
said Gumbs. "But if this thing 
only eats people — I mean to 
say — " 

"It never met people until we 
landed," George replied curtly. 
"Any protein should do." < 

He started off in what he hoped 
was the direction they had been 
following all along — directly 
away from camp. At least, he 
thought, if they put enough distance behind them, they might 
get thoroughly lost. 

Ill 

rriHEY moved out of the trees 
and down the long slope of 
a valley, over a wiry carpet of 
dead grasses, until they reached 
a watercourse in which a thin 
trickle was still flowing. Far 
down the bank, partly screened 
by clumps of skeletal shrubbery, 
George saw a group of animals 
that looked vaguely like miniature pigs. He told the others about 
it, and started cautiously in that 
direction. 

"Which way is the wind blowing, Vivian?" he asked. "Can you 
feel it?" 

She said, "No. I could before, 
when we were going downhill, 
but now I think we're facing into 
it." 

"Good. We may be able to 
sneak up on them." 



"But we're not going to eat 
animals, are we?" 

"Yes, how about it, Meister?" 
Gumbs put in. "I don't say I'm 
a squeamish fellow, but after 
all—" 

George, who felt a little 
squeamish himself — like all the 
others, he had been brought up 
on a diet of yeasts and synthetic 
protein — said testily, "What else 
can we do? You've got eyes; you 
can see that it's autumn here. 
Autumn after a hot summer, at 
that. Trees bare, streams dried 
up. We eat meat or go without — 
or would you rather hunt for 
insects?" 

Gumbs, shocked to the core, 
muttered for a while and then 
gave up. 

Seen at closer range, the animals looked less porcine and even 
more unappetizing than before. 
They had lean, segmented, pinkish-gray bodies, four short legs, 
flaring ears, and blunt scimitarlike snouts with which they were 
rooting in the ground, occasionally turning up something which 
they gulped, ears flapping. 

George counted thirty of them, 
grouped fairly closely in a little 
space of clear ground between 
the bushes and the river. They 
moved slowly, but their short 
legs looked powerful; he guessed 
that they could run fast- enough 
when they had to. 

He inched forward, keeping his 



FOUR IN ONE 



21 



eye-stalks low, stopping instantly 
whenever one of the beasts looked up. Moving with increasing 
caution, he had approached to 
within ten meters of the nearest 
when McCarty said abruptly: 

"Meister, has it occurred to 
you to wonder just how we are 
going to eat these animals?" 

"Don't be foolish," he said irritably. "We'll just — " He stopped, baffled. 

TA1D the thing's normal method 
of assimiliation stop as soon 
as it got a tenant? Were they 
supposed to grow fangs and a 
gullet and all the rest of the 
apparatus? Impossible; they'd 
starve to death first. But on the 
other hand — damn this fuzzyheaded feeling — wouldn't it have 
to stop, to prevent the tenant 
from being digested with his first 
meal? 

"Well?" McCarty demanded. 

That guess was wrong, George 
knew, but he couldn't say why; 
and it was a distinctly unpleasant , thought. Or, even worse, 
suppose the meal became the 
tenant, and the tenant the meal? 

The nearest animal's head 
went up, and four tiny red eyes 
stared directly at George. The 
floppy ears snapped to attention. 
It was no time for speculation. 

"He's seen us!" George shouted mentally. "Run!" 

One instant they were lying 



still in the prickly dry grass ; 
the next they were skimming 
across the ground, with the herd 
galloping away straight ahead of 
them. The hams of the nearest 
beast loomed up closer and closer, bounding furiously; then they 
had run it down and vaulted 
over it. 

Casting an eye backward, 
George saw that it was lying 
motionless in the grass — unconscious or dead. 

They ran down another one. 
The anesthetic, George thought 
lucidly. One touch does it. And 
another, and another. Of course 
we can digest them, he thought, 
with relief. It has to be selective 
to begin with or it couldn't have 
separated out our nervous tissue. 

Four down. Six down. Three 
more together as the herd bunched between the last arm of the 
thicket and the steep river-bank; 
then two that tried to double 
back ; then four stragglers, one 
after the other. 

The rest of the herd disappeared into the tall grass up the 
slope, but fifteen bodies were 
strewn behind them. 

^T^AKING ho chances, George 
went back to the beginning 
of the line and edged the monster's body under the first carcass. 

"Crouch down, Gumbs," he 
said. "We have to slide under it 



22 




 



. . . that's far enough. Leave the 
head hanging over." 

"What for?" barked the soldier. 

"You don't want his brain in 
here with us, do you? We don't 
know how many this thing is 
equipped to take. It might even 
like this one better than any of 
ours. But I can't see it bothering 
to keep the rest of the nervous 
system, if we make sure not to 
eat the head." 

"Oh!" said Vivian. 

"I beg your pardon. Miss Bellis," George said contritely. "It 
shouldn't be too unpleasant, 
though, if we don't let it bother 
us. It isn't as if we had taste buds 
or — " 

"It's all right," she said. "Just 
please let's not talk about it." 

*'I should think not," Gumbs 
put in. "A little more tact, don't 
you think, Meister?" 

Accepting this reproof, George 
turned his attention to the corpse 
that lay on the monster's glabrous surface, between his section and Gumbs's. It was sinking, 
just visibly, into the flesh. A 
cloud of opacity was spreading 
around it. 

When it was almost gone and 
the neck had been severed, they 
moved on to the next. This time," 
at George's suggestion, they took 
aboard two at once. Gradually 
their irritable mood faded; they 
began to feel at ease and cheerful. 



and George found it possible to 
think consecutively without having vital points slip out of his 
reach. 

They were on their eighth and 
ninth courses, and George was 
happily engaged in an intricate 
chain of speculation as to the 
monster's circulatory system, 
when Miss McCarty broke a long 
silence to announce: 

"I have now perfected a method by which we can return to 
camp safely. We will begin at 
once." 

OTARTLED and dismayed, 
k ~' George turned his eyes toward 
McCarty's quadrant of the monster. Protruding from the rim 
was a stringy, jointed something 
that looked like — yes, it was! — 
a grotesque but recognizable arm 
and hand. As he watched, the 
lumpy fingers fumbled with a 
blade of grass, tugged, uprooted 
it. 

"Major Gumbs!" said McCarty. "It will be your task to locate 
the following articles as quickly 
as possible. One, a surface suitable for writing. I suggest a large 
leaf, light in color, dry but not 
brittle, or a tree from which a 
large section of bark can be easily 
peeled. Two, a pigment. No 
doubt you will be able to discover berries yielding suitable 
juice. If not, mud will do. Three, 
a twig or reed for use as a pen. 



FOUR IN ONE 



23 



When you have directed me to 
all these essential items. I will 
employ them to write a message 
outlining our predicament. You 
will read the result and point out 
any errors, which I will then correct. When the message is completed, we will return with it to 
the camp, approaching at night, 
and deposit it in a conspicuous 
place. We will retire until daybreak, and when the message has 
been read, we will approach 
again. Begin, Major." 

"Well, yes," said Gumbs, "that 
ought to work, except — I suppose 
you've figured out some system 
for holding the pen, Miss McCarty?" 

"Fool !" she replied. "I have 
made a hand, of course." 

"Well, in that case, by all 
means. Let's see, I believe we 
might try this thicket first — " 
Their common body gave a lurch 
in that direction. 

George held back. "Wait a 
minute," he said desperately. 
"Let's at least have the common 
sense to finish this meal before 
we go. There's no telling when 
we'll get another." 

McCarty demanded, "How 
large are these creatures. Major?" 

"About sixty centimeters long, 
I should say." 

"And we have consumed nine 
of them, is that correct?" 

"Nearer eight," George cor


rected. "These two are only half 
gone." 

"In other words," McCarty 
said, "we have had two apiece. 
That should be ample. Don't you 
agree, Major?" 

George said i earnestly, "Miss 
McCarty, you're thinking in 
terms of human food requirements, whereas this organism has 
a different metabolic rate and at 
least three times the mass of four 
human beings. Look at it this 
way — the four of us together had 
a mass of about three hundred 
kilos, and yet twenty hours after 
this thing absorbed us, it was 
hungry again. Well, these animals wouldn't weigh much more 
than twenty kilos apiece at one G 
— and according to your scheme, 
we've got to hold out until after 
daybreak tomorrow." 

' 'Something in that," Gumbs 
agreed. "Yes, on the whole. Miss 
McCarty, I think we had better 
forage while we can. It won't take 
us more than half an hour longer, 
at this rate." 

"Very well. Be as quick as you 
can, though." 

rpHEY moved on to the next 
pair of victims. George's 
brain was working furiously. It 
was no good arguing with McCarty. If he could only convince 
Gumbs, then Bellis would fall 
in with the majority — maybe. It 
was the only hope he had. 



24 




 



"Gumbs," he said, "have you 
given any thought to what's going to happen to us when we get 
back?" 

"Not my line, you know. I 
leave that to the technical fellows like yourself." 

"No, that isn't what I mean. 
Suppose you were the C. O. of 
this team, and four other people 
had fallen into this organism instead of us — " 

"What? What? I don't follow." 

George patiently repeated it. 

"Yes, I see what you mean. 
So?" 

"What orders would you give?" 

Gumbs thought a moment. 
"Turn the thing over to the bio 
section, I suppose." 

"You don't think you might 
specimen and so on. Handle with 
order it destroyed as a possible 
menace?" 

"Good Lord, I suppose I might. 
No, but you see, we'll be careful 
what we say in the note. We'll 
point out that we're a valuable 
care." 

"All right," George said, "suppose that works, then what? Since 
it's out of your line, I'll tell you. 
Nine chances out of ten, bio section will classify us as a possible 
biological enemy weapon. That 
means, first of all, that we'll go 
through a full-dress interrogation and I don't have to tell you 
what that can be like — " 

"Major Gumbs," said McCar


ty stridently, "Mei^ter will be 
executed for disloyalty at the 
first opportunity. You are forbidden to talk to him, under the 
same penalty." 

"But she can't stop you' from 
listening to me," George said 
tensely. "In the second place, 
Gumbs, they'll take samples. 
Without anesthesia. Finally, 
they'll either destroy us just the 
same, or they'll send us back to 
the nearest strong point for more 
study. We will then be Federation property, Gumbs, in a topsecret category, and since nobody 
in Intelligence will ever dare to 
take the responsibility of clearing 
us, we'll sray there. 

"Gumbs, this is a valuable 
specimen, but it will never do 
anybody any good if we go back 
to camp. Whatever we discover 
about it, even if it's knowledge 
that could save billions of lives, 
that will be top-secret, too, and 
it'll never get past the walls of 
Intelligence. ... If you're still 
hoping that they can get you 
out of this, you're wrong. This 
isn't like limb grafts. Four whole 
body has been destroyed, Gumbs, 
everything but your nervous system and your eyes. The only new 
body we'll get is the one we make 
ourselves. We've got to stay here 
and — and work this out ourselves." 

"Major Gumbs," said McCarty, "I think we have wasted quite 



FOUR IN ONE 



25 



enough time. Begin your search 
for the materials I need." 

WT^OR a moment. Gumbs was 
silent and their collective body 
did not move. 

Then he said: "Miss McCarty 
— unofficially, of course — there's 
one point I'd like your opinion 
on. Before we begin. That is to 
say, they'll be able to patch together some sort of bodies for 
us, don't you think? I mean one 
technical fellow says one thing, 
another says the opposite. Do 
you see what I'm driving at?" 

George had been watching McCarty's new limb uneasily. It was 
flexing rhythmically and, he was 
almost certain, gradually growing larger. The fingers groped in 
the dry grass, plucking first a 
single blade, then two together, 
finally a whole tuft. Now she 
said : "I have no opinion, Major. 
The question is irrelevant. Our 
duty is to return to camp. That 
is all we need to know." 

"Oh, I quite agree with you 
there," said Gumbs. "And besides, "he added, "there really 
isn't any alternative, is there?" 

George, staring down at one 
of the fingerlike projections visible below the rim of the monster, 
was passionately willing it to 
turn into an arm. He had, he 
suspected, started much too late. 

"The alternative," he said, "is 
simply to keep on going as we 



are. Even if the Federation holds 
this planet for a century, there'll 
be places on it that will never be 
explored. We'll be safe." 

"I mean to say," Gumbs went 
on as if he had only paused for 
thought, "a fellow can't very well 
cut himself off from civilization, 
can he?" There was a thoughtful 
tone to his voice. 

Again George felt a movement 
toward the thicket; again he resisted it. Then he found himself 
overpowered as another set of 
muscles joined themselves to 
Gumbs's. Quivering, crabwise, 
the Something-or-other meisterii 
moved half a meter. Then it 
stopped, straining. 

"I believe you, Mr. Meister — 
George," Vivian Bellis said. "I 
don't want to go back. Tell me 
what you want me to do." 

"You're doing beautifully right 
now," George assured her after 
a speechless instant. "Except if 
you can grow an arm, I imagine 
that will be useful." 

"Now we know where we 
stand," said McCarty to Gumbs. 

"Yes. Quite right." 

"Major Gumbs," she said 
crisply, "you are opposite me, I 
believe?" 

"Am I?" asked Gumbs doubtfully. 

"Never mind. I believe you are. 
Now is Meister to your right or 
left?" 

"Left. I know that, anyhow. 



26 




 



Can see his eye-stalks out of the 
corner of my eye." 

"Very well." McCarty's arm 
rose, with a sharp-pointed fragment of rock clutched in the 
blobby fingers. 

HORRIFIED, George watched 
it bend backward across the 
curve of the monster's body. The 
long, knife-sharp point probed 
tentatively at the surface three 
centimeters short of the area over 
his brain. Then the fist made an 
abrupt up-and-down movement 
and a fierce stab of pain shot 
through him. 

"Not quite long enough, I 
think," McCarty said. She flexed 
the arm, then brought it back. 
"Major Gumbs, after my next 
attempt, you will tell me if you 
notice any reaction in Meister's 
eye-stalks." 

The pain was still throbbing 
along George's nerves. With one 
half-blinded eye, he watched the 
embryonic arm that was growing, too slowly, under the rim; 
with the other, fascinated, he 
watched McCarty's arm lengthen 
slowly toward him. 

It was growing visibly, he suddenly realized, but it wasn't getting any nearer. In fact, incredibly 
enough, it seemed to be losing 
ground. 

The monster's flesh was flowing away under it, expanding in 
both directions. 



McCarty stabbed again, with 
vicious strength. This time the 
pain was less acute. 

"Major?" she asked. "Any result?" 

"No," said Gumbs, "no, I think 
not. We seem to be moving forward a bit, though. Miss McCarty." 

"A ridiculous error," she replied. "We are being forced back. 
Pay attention, Major." 

"No, really," he protested. 
"That is to say, we're moving 
toward the thicket. Forward to 
me, backward to you." 

"Major Gumbs, / am moving 
forward, you are moving back." 

They were both right, George 
discovered. The monster's body 
was no longer circular ; it was 
extending itself along the axis. A 
suggestion of concavity was becoming visible in the center. Below the surface, too, there was 
motion. 

The four brains now formed 
an oblong, not a square. 

The positions of the spinal 
cords had shifted. His own and 
Vivian's seemed to be about 
where they were, But Gumbs's 
now passed under McCarty's 
brain, and vice versa. 

Having increased its mass by 
some two hundred kilos, the 
Something -or- other meisterii was 
fissioning into two individuals — 
and tidily separating its tenants, 
two to each. Gumbs and Meister 



FOUR IN ONE 



in one, McCarty and Bellis in 
the other. 

NEXT time it happened, he 
realized, each product of the 
fission would be reduced to one 
brain — and the time after that, 
one of the new individuals out 
of each pair would be a monster 
in the primary state, quiescent, 
camouflaged, waiting to be stumbled over. 

But that meant that, like the 
common ameba. this fascinating 
organism was immortal, barring 
accidents. It simply grew and 
divided. 

Not the tenants, though, unfortunately. Their tissues would 
wear out and die. 

Or would they? Human nervous tissue didn't regenerate, but 
neither did it proliferate as 
George's and Miss McCarty's had 
done ; neither did any human 
tissue build new cells fast enough 
to account for George's eyestalks or Miss McCarty's arm. 

There was no question about 
it: none of that new tissue could 
possibly be human ; it was all 
counterfeit, produced by the 
monster from its own substance 
according to the structural "blueprints" in the nearest genuine 
cells. And it was a perfect counterfeit : the new tissues knit with 
the old, axones coupled with 
dendrites, muscles contracted or 
expanded on command. 



And therefore, when nerve cells 
wore out, they could be replaced. 
Eventually the last human cell 
would go, the human tenant 
would have become totally monster — but "a difference that makes 
no difference is no difference." 
Effectively, the tenant would still 
be human and he would be immortal. 

Barring accidents. 

Or murder. 

Miss McCarty was saying. 
"Major Gumbs, you are being 
ridiculous. The explanation is 
quite obvious. Unless you are deliberately deceiving me. for what 
reason I cannot imagine, then 
our efforts to move in opposing 
directions must be pulling this 
creature apart." 

McCarty was evidently confused in her geometry. Let her 
stay that way — it would keep her 
off balance until the fission was 
complete. No, that was no good. 
George himself was out of her 
reach already and getting farther 
away, but how about Bellis? Her 
brain and McCarty's were, if 
anything, closer together . . . 

WHAT was he to do? If he 
warned the girl, that would 
only draw McCarty's attention 
to her sooner. 

There wasn't much time left, 
he realized abruptly. If some 
physical linkage between the 
brains actually had occurred to 



28 




 



make communication possible, 
those cells couldn't hold out 
much longer; the gap between 
the two pairs of brains was widening steadily. He had to keep 
McCarty from discovering how 
the four of them would be paired. 

"Vivian!" he said. 

"Yes, George?" 

"Listen, we're not pulling this 
body apart. It's splitting. That's 
the way it reproduces. You and 
I will be in one half, Gumbs and 
McCarty in the other," he lied 
convincingly. "If they don't give 
us any trouble, we can all go 
where we please." 

"Oh, I'm so glad!" What a 
warm voice she had . . . 

"Yes." said George nervously, 
"but we may have to fight them; 
it's up to them. So grow an arm, 
Vivian." 

"I'll try," she said uncertainly. 

McCarty's voice cut across 
hers. "Major Gumbs, since you 
have eyes, it will be your task to 
see to it that those two do not 
escape. Meanwhile. I suggest that 
you also grow an arm." 

"Doing my best," said Gumbs. 

Puzzled, George glanced downward, past his own half-formed 
arm. There, almost out of sight, 
a fleshy bulge appeared under 
Gumbs's section of the rim! The 
Major had been working on it in 
secret, keeping it hidden . . . and 
it was already better-developed 
than George's. 



"Oh-oh," said Gumbs abruptly. "Look here, Miss McCarty, 
Meister's been leading you up 
the garden path. Deceiving you, 
you understand. Clever, I must 
say. I mean you and I aren't 
going to be in the same half. 
How could we be? We're on opposite sides of the blasted thing. 
It's going to be you and Miss 
Bellis, me and Meister." 

The monster was developing 
a definite waistline. The spinal 
cords had rotated now, so that 
there was clear space between 
them in the center. 

"Yes," said McCarty faintly. 
"Thank you. Major Gumbs." 

"George!" came Vivian's frightened voice, distant and weak. 
"What shall I do?" 

"Grow an arm!" he shouted. . 

There was no reply. 

IV 

FROZEN, George watched McCarty's arm, the rock-fragment still clutched at the end of 
it, rise into view and swing leftward at full stretch over the bubbling surface of the monster. He 
had time to see it bob up and 
viciously down again; time to 
think. Still short, thank God — 
that's McCarty's right arm, it's 
farther from Vivian's brain than 
it was from mine; time, finally, 
to realize that he could not possibly help Vivian before McCarty 



30 




 



lengthened the arm the few centimeters more that were necessary. The fission was only half 
complete, yet he could no more 
move to where he wanted to be 
than a Siamese twin could walk 
around his brother. 

Then his time was up. A flicker 
of motion warned him, and he 
looked back to see a lumpy, distorted pseudo-hand clutching for 
his eye-stalks. 

Instinctively he brought his 
own up, grasped the other's wrist 
and hung on desperately. It was 
half again the size of his, and so 
strongly muscled that although his 
leverage was better, he couldn't 
force it back or hold it away. 
He could only keep the system 
oscillating up and down, adding 
his strength to Gumbs's so that 
the mark was # overshot. 

Gumbs began to vary the force 
and rhythm of his movements, 
trying to catch him off guard. 
A thick finger brushed the base 
of one eye-stalk. 

"Sorry about this, Meister," 
said Gumbs. "No hard feelings, 
you understand. Between us 
(oof) I don't fancy that McCarty woman much — but (ugh! 
almost had you that time) way 
I see it, I've got to look after 
myself. Mean to say (ugh) if I 
don't, who will? See what I 
mean?" 

George did not reply. Astonishingly enough, he was no longer 



afraid, either for himself or for 
Vivian; he was simply overpoweringly, ecstatically, monomaniacally angry. Power from somewhere was surging into his 
arm. Fiercely concentrating, he 
thought Bigger! Stronger! Longer! More arm! 

The arm grew. Visibly, it added substance to itself, it lengthened, thickened, bulked with 
muscle. So did Gumbs's, however. 

He began another arm. So did 
Gumbs. 

All around him the surface of 
the monster was bubbling violently. 'And, George realized, the 
lenticular bulk of it was perceptibly shrinking. Its curious breathing system was inadequate; the 
thing was cannibalizing itself, 
destroying its own tissues to make 
up the difference. 

How small could it get and 
still support two human tenants? 

And which brain would it dispense with first? 

He had no leisure to think 
about it. Scrabbling in the grass 
with his second hand, Gumbs 
had failed to find anything that 
would serve as a weapon. Now, 
with a sudden lurch, he swung 
their entire body around. 

The fission was complete. 

That thought reminded George 
of Vivian and McCarty. He 
risked a split-second's glance behind him, saw nothing but a 



FOUR IN ONE 



31 



featureless ovoid mound, and 
looked back in time to see 
Gumbs's half-grown right fist 
pluck up a long, sharp-pointed 
dead branch and drive it murderously at his eyes. 

THE lip of the river-bank was 
a meter away to the left. 
George made it in one abrupt 
surge. Their common body slipped, tottered, hesitated, hands 
clutching wildly — and toppled, 
end over end, hurtling in a cloud 
of dust and pebbles down the 
breakneck slope to a meaty 
smash at the bottom. 

The universe made one more 
giant turn around them and came 
to rest. Half-blinded, George 
groped for the hold he had lost, 
found the wrist and seized it. 

"Oh, Lord!" said Gumbs. "I'm 
hurt, Meister. Go on, man, finish 
it, will you? Don't waste time." 

George stared at him suspiciously, without relaxing his grip. 
"What's the matter with you?" 
"Paralyzed. I can't move." 
They had fallen onto a small 
boulder, George saw, one of 
many with which the river-bed 
was strewn. This one was roughly 
conical; they were draped over it, 
and the blunt point was directly 
under Gumbs's spinal cord, a few 
centimeters from the brain. 

"Gumbs, that may not be as 
bad as you think. If I can show 
you it isn't, will you give up and 



put yourself under my orders?" 

"How do you mean? My 
spine's crushed." 

"Never mind that now. Will 
you or won't you?" 

"Why, yes," agreed Gumbs. 
"That's very decent of you, Meister, matter of fact. You have my 
word, for what it's worth." 

"All right," said George. Straining hard, he managed to get their 
body off the boulder. Then he 
stared up at the slope down which 
they had tumbled. Too steep; 
he'd have to find an easier way 
back. He turned and started off 
to eastward, paralleling the thin 
stream that flowed in the center 
of the watercourse. 

"What's up now?" Gumbs 
asked after a moment. 

"We've got to find a way up 
to the top," George said impatiently. "I may still be able to 
help Vivian." 

"Ah, yes. Afraid I was thinking about myself, Meister. If you 
don't mind telling me, what's the 
damage?" 

SHE couldn't still be alive, 
George was thinking despondently, but if there were any 
small chance — 

"You'll be all right," he said. 
"If you were still in your old 
body, that would be a fatal injury, or permanently disabling, 
anyhow, but not in this thing. 
You can repair yourself as easily 



32 




 



as you can grow a new limb." 

"Stupid of me not to think of 
that," said Gumbs. "But does 
that mean we were simply wasting our time trying to kill one 
another?" 

"No. If you'd crushed my 
brain, I think the organism 
would have digested it and that 
would be the end of me. But 
short of anything" that drastic, I 
believe we're immortal." 

"Immortal? That does rather 
put another face on it, doesn't 
it?" 

The bank was becoming a little 
lower, and at one point, where 
the raw ground was thickly seeded with boulders, there was a 
talus slope that looked as if it 
could be climbed. George started 
up it. 

"Meister," said Gumbs after a 
moment. 

"What do you want?" 

"You're right, you know — I'm 
getting some feeling back already. Look here, is there anything this beast can't do? I mean, 
for instance, do you suppose we 
could put ourselves back together 
the way we were, with all the — 
appendages, and so on?" 

"It's possible," George said 
curtly. It was a thought that had 
been in the back of his mind, but 
he didn't feel like discussing it 
with Gumbs just now. 

They were halfway up the 
slope. 



"Well, in that case," said 
Gumbs meditatively, "the thing 
has military possibilities, you 
know. Man who brought a thing 
like that direct to the War Department could write his own 
ticket, more or less." 

"After we split up," George 
offered, "you can do whatever 
you please." 

"But dammit," said Gumbs in 
an irritated tone, "that won't do." 

"Why not?" 

"Because," said Gumbs, "they 
might find you." His hands 
reached up abruptly, pried out a 
small boulder before George could 
stop him. 

The large boulder above it 
trembled, dipped and leaned ponderously outward. George, directly underneath, found that he 
could move neither forward nor 
back. 

"Sorry again," he heard Gumbs 
saying, with what sounded like 
genuine regret. "But you know 
the Loyalty Committee. I simply 
can't take the chance." 

THE boulder seemed to take 
forever to fall. George tried 
twice more, with all his strength, 
to move out of its path. Then, 
instinctively, he put his arms up 
straight under it. 
It struck. 

George felt his arms breaking 
like twigs, and saw a looming 
grayness that blotted out the sky; 



FOUR IN ONE 



33 



he felt a sledge impact that made 
the ground shudder beneath him. 

He heard a splattering sound. 

And he was still alive. That 
astonishing fact kept him fully 
occupied for a long time after the 
boulder had clattered its way 
down the slope into silence. Then, 
at last, he looked down to his 
right. 

The resistance of his stiffened 
arms, even while they broke, had 
been enough to lever the falling 
boulder over, a distance of some 
thirty centimeters. The right half 
of the monster was a flattened, 
shattered ruin. He could see a 
few flecks of pasty gray matter, 
melting now into green -brown 
translucence as the mass flowed 
slowly together again. 

In twenty minutes, the last 
remnants of a superfluous spinal 
cord had been absorbed, the 
monster had collected itself back 
into its normal lens shape, and 
George's pain was diminishing. 
In five minutes more, his mended 
arms were strong enough to use. 

They were also more convincingly shaped and colored than 
before — the tendons, the fingernails, even the wrinkles of the 
skin were in good order. In ordinary circumstances this discovery would have left George 
happily bemused for hours. Now, 
in his impatience, he barely noticed it. He climbed to the top 
of the bank. 



Thirty meters away, a humped 
green -brown body like his own 
lay motionless on the dry grass. 

It contained, of course, only 
one brain. Whose? 

McCarty's, almost certainly; 
Vivian hadn't had a chance. But 
then how did it happen that there 
was no visible trace of McCarty's 
arm? 

Unnerved, George walked around the creature for a closer 
inspection. 

ON the far side, he encountered 
two dark-brown eyes, with 
an oddly unfinished appearance. 
They focused on him after an instant and the whole body quivered slightly, moving toward him. 

Vivian's eyes had been brown; 
George remembered them distinctly. Brown eyes with heavy 
dark lashes in a tapering slender 
face. But did that prove anything? What color had McCarty's eyes been? He couldn't remember. 

George moved closer, hoping 
fervently that the Something-orother meisterii was at least 
advanced enough to conjugate, 
instead of trying to devour members of its own species . . . 

The two bodies touched, clung 
and began to flow together. 
Watching, George saw the fissioning process reverse itself. From 
paired lenses, the alien flesh 
melted into a slipper-shape, to an 



34 




 



ovoid, to a lens-shape again. His 
brain and the other drifted closer 
together, the spinal cords crossing 
at right angles. 

And it was only then that he 
noticed an oddity -about the other 
brain. It seemed to be more solid 
and compact than his, the outline 
sharper. 

"ViviariV* he said worriedly. 
"Is that you?" 

No answer. He tried again; 
and again. 

Finally: 

"George! Oh dear — I want to 
cry, but I don't seem able to do 
it." 

"No lachrymal glands," George 
said automatically. "Uh, Vivian?" 

"Yes, George?" That warm 
voice again . . . 

"What happened to Miss McCarty? How did you — " 

"I don't know. She's gone, 
isn't she? I haven't heard her for 
a long time." 

"Yes," said George, "she's 
gone. You mean you don't know? 
Tell me what you did." 

"Well, I wanted to make an 
arm, because you told me to, but 
I didn't think I had time enough. 
So I made a skull instead. And 
those things to cover my spine — " 

"Vertebrae." Now why, he 
thought discontentedly, didn't I 
think of that? "And then?" 

"I think I'm crying now," she 
said. "Yes, I am. It's such a relief 



— And then, after that, nothing. 
She was still hurting me, and I 
just lay still and thought how 
wonderful it would be if she 
weren't in here with me. After a 
while, she wasn't. And then I 
grew eyes to look for you." 

The explanation, it seemed to 
George, was more perplexing than 
the enigma. Staring around in a 
vague search for enlightenment, 
he caught sight of something he 
hadn't noticed before. Two meters to his left, just visible in 
the grass, was a damp-looking 
grayish lump, with a suggestion 
of a stringy extension trailing off 
from it. 

There must, he decided suddenly, be some mechanism in 
the Something-or-other meisterii 
for disposing of tenants who 
failed to adapt themselves — 
brains that went into catatonia, 
or hysteria, or suicidal frenzy. 
An eviction clause in the lease. 

Somehow, Vivian had managed 
to stimulate that mechanism — to 
convince the organism that McCarty's brain was not only superfluous but dangerous — "Toxic" 
was the word. 

It was the ultimate ignominy. 
Miss McCarty had not been digested. She'd been excreted. 

T>Y sunset, twelve hours later, 
they had made a good deal of 
progress. They had reached ' an 
understanding very agreeable to 



FOUR IN ONE 



35 



them both. They had hunted 
down another herd of the pseudopigs for their noon meal. They 
had not once quarreled or even 
irritated each other. And for divergent reasons — on George's side 
because the monster's normal 
metabolism was unsatisfactory 
when it had to move quickly, 
and on Vivian's because she refused to believe that any man 
could be attracted to her in her 
present condition — they had begun a serious attempt to reshape 
themselves. 

The first trials were extraordinarily difficult, the rest surprisingly easy. Again and again, they 
had to let themselves collapse 
back into an ameboid shape, victims of some omitted or malfunctioning organ, but each failure smoothed the road. They 
were at last able to stand breathless but breathing, swaying but 
stable, face to face — two preliminary sketches of self-made 
Man. 

They had also put thirty kilometers between themselves and 
the Federation camp. Standing on 
the crest of a rise and looking 
southward across the shallow 
valley, George could see a faint 
funereal glow : the mining machines, chewing out metals to 



feed the fabricators that would 
spawn lethal spaceships. 

"We'll never go back there, 
will we?" begged Vivian. 

"No," said George confidently. 
"We'll let them find us. When 
they do, they'll be a lot more 
disconcerted than we will. We can 
make ourselves anything we want 
to be, remember." 

"I want you to want me, so 
I'm going to be beautiful." 

"More beautiful than any woman ever was," he agreed, "and 
both of us will have super-intelligence. I don't see why not. We 
can direct our growth in any way 
we choose. We'll be more than 
human." 

"I'd like that," said Vivian. 

"They won't. The McCartys 
and the Gumbs and all the rest 
would never have a chance 
against us. We're the future." 

There was one thing more, a 
small matter, but important to 
George, because it marked his 
sense of accomplishment, of one 
phase ended and a new one begun. He had finally completed 
the name of his discovery. 

It wasn't Something-or-other 
meisterii at all. 

It was Spes hominis — Man's 
hope. 