THE CITY IN THE SEA 

By Wilson Tucker 



The Next Full Length Galaxy Science 
Fiction Novel at Your News Stand Soon 
• 

Who knows whether the strange events of this story might 
not one day occur? 

This is the story of an expedition — a strange and exciting 
expedition of one man and an army of women. 

He had come into the land of the women suddenly — and 
without warning. Tall, bronzed, muscular, he stood out 
among their pale skins and meek spirits. And when they 
learned of the land from which he had come — the land 
they hadn't even known existed — they had to follow him 
to it. 

One man and an army of women crossing the remnants of 
a post-atomic United States in search of the Unknown; it was 
an amazing trek. Miraculous things happened to the women. 
New emotions rose up to plague them. Once there was a 
near mutiny. Another time, seven of their number were killed. 
But it was when they reached the city in the sea that the 
strangest thing of all happened. . . . 

Exciting, imaginative, prophetic, THE CITY IN THE SEA is 
also something rare in science f iction — a compeilingly 
human story. 

a 

Watch For It 
On Sale In August 



galaxy 

SCIENCE FICTION 



ALL ORIGINAL STORIES 
NO REPRINTS! 



AUGUST, 1952 



Vol. 4, No. 5 



An ilia nt Editor 

CVEIYN PAIGE 

Art Director 

W. I. VAN DER POEl 
Production Manager 

J. De MARIO 
Advertising Mgnoger 

JOHN ANDERSON 



Cover by 

EMSH 
Illustrating 
THE 40 CREDIT TOUR 
OF EARTH 



GALAXY Scitne Fittiom 
■■ published, monthly by 
Galaxy Publishing Corporation. Main offices: 421 
HuJ-.cn Street, New York 
14. N. Y. 35c per copy. 
Subscriptions: (12 copies) 13.50 per year in the 
United States, Canada, 
Mexico, Soutb and Central America and U.S. 
Possessions. Elsewhere 
$4.50. Entered as secondrlas* maitcr at the Post 
Office, New York. N. Y. 
Copyright, 1952, by Galaxy Publishing Corporalion. Hohcrt M. Guitin, 
president. All rights, including translation, it 
served. All material submitted rmm be accompanied 
by self -addressed stamped 
envelopes. The publisher 
assumes no responsibility 
for unsolicited material. 
All stories printed in ibis 
(Magazine are fiction, and 
any similarity between character* and actual person* 
»t coincidental. 



CONTENTS 

NOVELETS 

SURFACE TENSION 

by James 8/ish 4 

YESTERDAY HOUSE 

by Fritz Lerber 60 

SHORT STORIES 

PROOF OF THE PUDDING 

by Robert Sheckley 41 

EDUCATION OF A MARTIAN 

by Joseph ShalM 87 

BOOK-LENGTH SERIAL— Conclusion 

GRAVY PLANET .... 

by Frederik Pohl & 
C. M. Kornblulh 104 

SCIENCE DEPARTMENT 

FOR YOUR. INFORMATION 

by Willy Ley 49 

FEATURES 

EDITOR'S PAGE 

by H. L. Gold 2 

GALAXY'S FIVE STAR SHELF 

by Groff Conklin 99 

B.g U. S. P«4. OK. 



ACTION & REACTION 



AMONG other topics discussed on this page last 
month, I picked an argument with the "linear" theory of 
historical development. This concept supposes that history advances in. a more or less straight 
ascending line. To extrapolate 
the possible future, therefore, all 
we have to do is extend the 
present upward on a graph. 

Actually, /'history is a constant 
process of abrupt and dramatic 
reversals — revolutions ore followed by intense conservatism; periods of lax morality lead directly 
to puritanism; war eventually 
brings peace; peace, at least thus 
far, always produces war. 

The transitions are nor gradual. 
They may not happen overnight, 
though sometimes they do, but 
they invariably gather as much 
momentum and are as hard to 
head off as a road-roller coasting 
downhill. 

This discussion is not academic nor was the reasoning that led 
to the observation. Both are intimately connected with the function and writing of science fiction. 

We are, of course, concerned 
with the future. We want to 
know, first, whether there is likely to be a future; second, what 
it may look like. 

Extrapolation is impossible 



without the correct tools. The 
linear theory of history is provably incorrect. Using it must 
result in the sort of sterile "prophecy" that made 19th centuiy 
views of the present so naive. 

The 20th century is not an extension of the 19th. In just about 
every way, it is as opposite as it 
can get. On the same basis, the 
21st should be as dissimilar to 
this one. 

Even the idea of a "higher" 
level is unjustifiable. We have, 
coexisting today, societal orientat i o n s ranging from, extreme 
introversion to equally extreme 
extroversion. Our increasing 
accumulation of objective knowledge and comfort may be considered undesirable if our society 
turns introvert, as it has been in 
the past, and could be again in 
the future. 

Historical momentum is an other factor that may or may not 
apply. The first half of this century saw more change than most 
millenia. Will that momentum 
increase or decrease? 

Whether they come quickly or 
slowly, myriad reversals in all 
spheres of civilization will distinguish the 21st century from 
the 20th. Since each social action 
causes an equal and opposite reaction, there should be many re



 



versals. We can't know their 
exact nature beforehand. All we 
can do is guess at them. It seems 
to me that those guesses would 
be more accurate if they are 
based on historical action-reaction than linearity. 

Now here's another point, just 
as important, in guessing at the 
future : 

In any society, there are opposing tendencies at work at the 
same time. They are often so contradictory that they amount to 
paradox. Here are some broad examples: 

• This country is defending freedom — yet it is adopting some of 
the legal principles of dictatorship. 

• At the very same time that 
civil rights are in jeopardy, there 
is, according to a recent survey, 
less intergroup friction than in 
the past ten years. (Paradoxically, Hollywood, which traditionally shies away from such issues, 
helped bring this about.) 

• The economic interests of the 
anti-Communist bloc are savagely competitive — and the extent of 
cooperation against the common 
danger is seemingly limitless. 

• The prestige of Communism is 
at its lowest in decades — fear of 
it, at its highest. 

• The Communist countries arc 
supposedly immune to the conflicts that divide Capitalist nations — yet Titoism is on the rise, 



over half the prisoners captured 
in Korea refuse to go hoine. and 
the underground railroad runs 
one way : out. 

These arc the biggest visible 
paradoxes. Used sparingly, they 
have freshness and even novelty 
in science fiction. But most writers and would-be writers keep 
working them over ceaselessly. 
The really bright themes, of 
course, are the less apparent 
ones: 

* TV is killing the reading habits of millions — and yet more 
books and magazines are being 
sold in the TV areas than ever 
before. 

* Only one out of five is Milemployed now, as against four 
out of five in 1900 — and never 
has there been so much employment and prosperity, taxes or no 
taxes. 

■ Security regulations are hampering physical sciences — Which 
are being supported by more 
money and facilities than at any 
time. 

The opposing tendencies can 
be found everywhere. The job of 
the writer is to find those that are 
least exploited, then give them 
their head — see how far they will 
go. 

And here's the final paradox: 
No matter how far he makes 

them go, he'll still probably be 

underestimating. 

— H. i_ <;oi.d 



ACTION A REACTION 



3 



SURFACE 

TENSION 



DR. CHATVIEUX took a 
long time over the microscope, leaving la Ventura 
with nothing to do but look out 
at the dead landscape of Hydrot. 
Waterscape, he thought, would 
be a better word. The new world 
had shown only one small, triangular continent, set amid end


less ocean; and even the continent 
was mostly swamp. 

The wreck of the seed -ship lay 
broken squarely across the one 
real spur of rock Hydrot seemed 
to possess, which reared a magnificent twenty -one feet above 
sea-level. From this eminence, la 
Ventura could see forty miles to 




• AlAXY SCIINCE FICTION 



By JAMES BUSH 

Only an aquatic animal could exist on that 
world and so Man became just that — nor did 
reduction in size cause a loss of stature! 



the horizon across a flat bed of 
mud. The red light of the star 
Tau Ceti, glinting upon thousands of small hikes, pools, ponds, 
and puddles, made the watery 
plain look like a mosaic of onyx 
and ruby. 

"If I were a religious man," the 
pilot said suddenly, "I'd call this 



a plain case of divine vengeance.** 
Chatvieux said: "Hmn?" 
"It's as if we've been struck 

down for — is it hubris, arrogant 

pride?" 

"Well, is it?" Chatvieux said, 
looking up at last. "I don't feel 
exactly swollen with pride at the 
moment. Do you?" 



Illustrated by WILIER 




"I'm not exactly proud of my 
piloting," la Ventura admitted. 
"But that isn't quite what I 
meant. I was thinking about why 
we came here in the first place. 
It takes arrogant pride to think 
that you can scatter men, or at 
least things like men, all over the 
face of the Galaxy. It takes even 
more pride to do the job — to pack 
.up all the equipment and move 
from planet to planet and actually make men suitable for every 
place you touch." 

**I suppose it does," Chatvieux 
said. "But we're only one of several hundred seed-ships in this 
limb of the Galaxy, so I doubt 
that the gods picked us out as 
special sinners." He smiled drily. 
"If they had, maybe they'd have 
left us our ultraphone, so the 
Colonization Council could hear 
about our cropper. Besides, Paul, 
we try to produce men adapted 
to Earthlike planets, nothing 
more. We've sense enough — humility enough, if you like — to 
know that we can't adapt men to 
Jupiter or to Tau Ceti." 

"Anyhow, we're here." la Ventura said grimly. "And we aren't 
going to get off. Phil tells me that 
we don't even have our germ-cell 
bank any more, so we can't seed 
this place in the usual way. We've 
been thrown onto a dead world 
and dared to adapt to it. What 
are the panatropes going to do — 
provide built-in waterwings?" 



"No," Chatvieux said calmly. 
"You and I and the rest of us 
are going to die. Paul. Panatropic 
techniques don't work on the 
body, only on the inheritancecarrying factors. We can't give 
you built-in water-wings, any 
more than we can give you a new 
set of brains. I think we'll be able 
to populate this world with men, 
but we won't live to see it." 

The pilot thought about it, a 
lump of cold collecting gradually 
in his stomach. "How long do you 
give us?" he said at last. 

"Who knows? A month, perhaps." 

npHE bulkhead leading to the 
wrecked section of the ship 
was pushed back, admitting 
salty, muggy air, heavy with carbon dioxide. Philip Strasvogel, 
the communications officer, came 
in, tracking mud. Like la Ventura, he was now a man without 
a function, but it did not appear 
to bother him. He unbuckled 
from around his waist a canvas 
belt into which plastic vials were 
stuffed like cartridges. 

"More samples. Doc," he said. 
"All alike — water, very wet. I 
have some quicksand in one boot, 
too. Find anything?" 

"A good deal, Phil. Thanks. 
Are the others around?" 

Strasvogel poked his head out 
and hallooed. Other voices rang 
out over the mudflats. Minutes 




 



later, the rest of the survivors 

were crowding into the panatrope 
deck : Saltonstall, Chatvieux's 
senior assistant; Eunice Wagner, 
the only remaining ccologist; E1eftherios Venezuelos, the delegate 
from the Colonization Council; 
and Joan Heath, a midshipman 
whose duties, like la Ventura's 
and Strasvogel's, were now without meaning. 

Five men and two women — to 
colonize a planet on which standing room meant treading water. 

They came in quietly and 
found seats or resting places on 
the deck, on the edges of tables, 
in corners. 

Venezuelos said: "What's the 
verdict, Dr. Chatvieux?" 

"This place isn't dead," Chatvieux said. "There's life in the 
sea and in the fresh water, both. 
On the. animal side of the ledger, 
evolution seems to have stopped 
with the Crustacea; the most advanced form I've found is a tiny 
crayfish, from one of the local 
rivulets. The ponds and puddles 
are well-stocked with protozoa 
and small metazoans, right up to 
a wonderfully variegated rotifer 
population — including a castlebuilding rotifer like Earth's Floscularidae. The plants run from 
simple algae to the thalluslike 
species." 

"The sea is about the same,'* 
Eunice said, "I've found some of 
the larger simple metazoans — ■ 



jellyfish and so on — and some 

crayfish almost as big as lobsters. 
But it's normal to find salt-water 
species running larger than freshwater." 

"In short," Chatvieux said, 
"We'll survive here — if we fight." 

"Wait a minute," la Ventura 
said. "You've just finished telling 
me that we wouldn't survive. And 
you were talking about us, not 
about the species, because we 
don't have our germ-cell banks 
any more. What's — " 

"I'll get to that again in a 
moment," Chatvieux said. "Saltonstall, what would you think 
of taking to the sea? We came out 
of it once; maybe we could come 
out of it Igain." 

"No good," Saltonstall said immediately. "/ like the idea, but 
I don't think this planet ever 
heard of Swinburne, or Homer, 
either. Looking at it as a colonization problem, as if we weren't 
involved ourselves, I wouldn't 
give you a credit for epi oinopa 
ponton. The evolutionary pressure there is too high, the competition from other species is 
prohibitive; seeding the sea 
should be the last thing we attempt. The colonists wouldn't 
have a chance to learn a thing 
before they were destroyed." 

"Why?" la Ventura said. The 
death in his stomach was becoming hard to placate. 

"Eunice, do your sea-going 



SURFACE TENSION 



Coelc literates include anything 
like tlu Portuguese man-of-war?" 

The ecologist nodded. 

"There's your answer, Paul," 
Saltonstall said. "The sea is out. 
It's got to be fresh water, where 
the competing creatures are less 
formidable and there are more 
places to hide." 

"We can't compete with a jellyfish?" la Ventura asked, swallowing. 

"No, Paul," Chatvteux said. 
"The panatropes make adaptations, not gods. They take human 
germ-cells — in this case, our own, 
since our bank was wiped out in 
the crash — and modify them 
toward creatures who can live in 
any reasonable environment. The 
result will be manlike and intelligent. It usually shows the donor's 
personality pattern, too. 

"But we can't transmit memory. The adapted man is worse 
than a child in his new environment. He has no history, no techniques, no precedents, not even a 
language. Ordinarily the seeding 
teams more or less take him 
through elementary school before 
they leave the planet, but we 
won't survive long enough for 
that. We'll have to design our 
colonists with plenty of built-in 
protections and locate them in 
the most favorable environment 
possible, so that at least some of 
them will survive the learning 
process." 



The pilot thought about it, but 
nothing occurred to him which 
did not make the disaster seem 
realer and more intimate with 
each passing second. "One of the 
new creatures can have my personality pattern, but it won't be 
able to remember being me. Is 
that right?" 

"That's it. There may be just 
the faintest of residuums — panatropy's given us some data which 
seem to support the old Jungian 
notion of ancestral memory. But 
we're all going to die on Hydrot, 
Paul. There's no avoiding that. 
Somewhere we'll leave behind 
people who behave as we would, 
think and feel as we would, but 
who won't remember la Ventura, 
or Chatvieux, or Jor.n Heath — or 
Earth." 

The pilot said nothing more. 
There was a gray taste in his 
mouth. 

"Saltonstall. what do you recommend as a form?" 

The panatropist pulled reflectively at his nose. "Webbed extremities, of course, with thumbs 
and big toes heavy and thornlike 
for defense until the creature has 
had a chance to learn. Booklungs, like the arachnids, working 
out of intercostal spiracles- — they 
are gradually adaptable to atmosphere-breathing, if it ever decides to come out of the water. 
Also I'd suggest sporulation. As 
an aquatic animal, our colonist is 




 



going to have an indefinite lifespan, but we'll have to give it a 
breeding cycle of about six weeks 
to keep its numbers up during the 
learning period ; so there'll have 
to be a definite break of some 
duration in its active year. Otherwise it'll hit the population problem before it's learned enough to 
cope with it." 

"Also, it'll be better if our colonists could winter inside a good 
hard shell," Eunice Wagner 
added in agreement. "So spoliation's the obvious answer. Most 
microscopic creatures have it." 

"Microscopic?" Phil said incredulously. 

"Certainly," Chatvieux said, 
amused. "We can't very well 
crowd a six-foot man into a twofoot puddle. But that raises a 
question. We'll have tough competition from the rotifers, and 
some of them aren't strictly microscopic. I don't think your average colonist should run under 
25 microns, Saltonstall. Give 
them a chance to slug it out." 

"I was thinking of making them 
twice that big." 

"Then they'd be the biggest 
things in their environment," 
Eunice Wagner pointed out, "and 
won't ever develop any skills. Besides, if you make them about 
rotifer size, I'lCgivc them an incentive for pushing out the castlebuilding rotifers. 

"They'll be able to take over 



the castles as dwellings." 

Chatvieux nodded. "All right, 
let's get started. While the panatropes are being calibrated, the 
rest of us can put our heads together on leaving a record for 
these people. We'll micro-engrave 
the record on a set of corrosionproof metal leaves, of a size our 
colonists can handle conveniently. 
Some day they may puzzle it 
out." 

"Question," Eunice Wagner 
said. "Are we going to tell them 
they're microscopic? I'm opposed 
to it. It'll saddle their entire early 
history with a gods-and-demons 
mythology they'd be better off 
without." 

"Yes, we are," Chatvieux said; 
and la Ventura could tell by the 
change in the tone of his voice 
that he was speaking now as their 
senior. "These people will be of 
the race of men, Eunice. We want 
them to win their way back to 
the community of men. They are 
not toys, to be protected from the 
truth forever in a fresh-water 
womb." 

"I'll inake that official," Venezuelos said, and that was that. 

And then, essentially, it was all 
over. They went through the 
motions. Already they were beginning to be hungry. After la Ventura had had his personality 
pattern recorded, he was out of it. 
He sat by himself at the far end 
of the ledge, watching Tau Ceti 



SURFACE TENSION 



go redly down, chucking pebbles 
intu the nearest pond, wondering 
morosely which nameless puddle 
was to be his Lethe. 

He never found out. of course. 
None of them did. 

I 

OLD Shar set down the heavy 
metal plate at last, and gazed 
instead out the window of the castle, apparently resting his eyes 
on the glowing green-gold obscurity of the summer waters. In 
the soft fluoresence which played 
down upon him, from the Noc 
dozing impassively in the groined 
vault of the chamber, Lavon 
could see that he was in fact a 
young man. His face was so delicately formed as to. suggest that 
it had not been many seasons 
since lie had first emerged from 
liis spore. 

But of course there had been 
no real reason to expect an old 
man. All the Shars had been referred to traditionally as "old" 
Shar. The reason, like the reasons 
for everything else, had been forgotten, but the custom had persisted: the adjective at least gave 
weight and dignity to the office. 

The present Shar belonged to 
the generation XVI, and hence 
would have to be at least two 
seasons younger than Lavon himself. If he was old. it was only in 
knowledge. 



"Lavon, I'm going to have to 
be honest with you," Shar said at 
last, still looking out of the tall, 
irregular window. "You've come 
to me for the secrets on the metal 
plates, just as your predecessors 
did to mine. I can give some of 
them to you — but for the most 
part, 1 don't know what they 
mean." 

"After so many generations.''' 
Lavon asked, surprised. "Wasn't 
it Shar III who first found out 
how to read them? That was a 
long time ago." 

The young man turned and 
looked at Lavon with eyes made 
dark and wide by the depths into 
which they had been staring. "1 
can read what's on the plates, 
but most of it seems to make no 
sense. Worst of all, the plates are 
incomplete. You didn't know 
that? They are. One of them was 
lost in a battle during the fti.al 
war with the Eaters, while these 
castles were still in their hands." 

"What am I here for, then?" 
Lavon said. "Isn't there anything 
of value on the remaining plates? 
Do they really contain 'the wisdom of the Creators' or is that 
another myth?" 

"No. No, that's true." Shar said 
slowly, "as far as it goes." 

HE paused, and both men 
turned and gazed at the 
ghostly creature which had appeared suddenly outside the win


10 




 



dow. Then Shar said gravely, 
"Come in, Para." 

The slipper-shaped organism, 
nearly transparent except for the 
thousands of black-and-silver 
granules and frothy bubbles 
which packed its interior, glided 
into the chamber and hovered, 
with a muted whirring of cilia. 
For a moment it remained silent, 
probably speaking telepathically 
to the Noc floating in the vault, 
after the ceremonious fashion of 
all the protos. No human had 
ever intercepted one of these colloquies, but there was no doubt 
about their reality: humans had 
used them for long-range communication for generations. 

Then the Para's cilia buzzed 
once more. Each separate hairlike process vibrated at an independent, ch anging rate ; the 
resulting sound waves spread 
through the water, intermodulating, reinforcing or canceling each 
other. The aggregate wave-front, 
by the time it reached human 
ears, was recognizable human 
speech. 

"We are arrived, Shar and 
Lavon, according to the custom." 

"And welcome," said Shar. 
"Lavon, let's leave this matter of 
the plates for a while, until you 
hear what Para has to say; that's 
a part of the knowledge Lavons 
must have as they come of age, 
and it comes before the plates. I 
can give you some hints of what 



we are. First Para has to tell you 
something about what we aren't." 

T AVON NODDED, willingly 
enough, and watched the proto as it settled gently to the surface of the hewn table at which 
Shar had been sitting. There was 
in the entity such a perfection 
and economy of organization, 
such a grace and surety of movement, that he could hardly 
believe in his own new-won maturity. Para, like all -the protos, 
made him feel not, perhaps, poorly thought-out, but at least unfinished. 

"We know that in this universe 
there is logically no place for 
man," the gleaming, now immobile cylinder upon the table 
droned abruptly. "Our memory 
is the common property to 
all our races. It reaches back to 
a time when there were no such 
creatures as men here. It remembers also that once upon a day 
there were men here, suddenly, 
and in some numbers. Thf ir 
spores littered the bottom : we 
found the spores only a short 
time after our season's Awakening, and in them we saw the 
forms of men slumbering. 

"Then men shattered their 
spores and emerged. They were 
intelligent, active. And they were 
gifted with a trait, a character, 
possessed by no other creature in 
this world. Not even the savage 



SURFACE TENSION 



It 



Eaters had it. Men organized us 
to exterminate the Eaters and 
therein lay the difference. Men 
had initiative. We have the word 
now, which you gave us, and we 
apply it, but we still do not know 
what the thing is that it labels." 

"You fought beside us," Lavon 
said. 

"Gladly. We would never have 
thought of that war by ourselves, 
but it was good and brought good. 
Vet we wondered. We saw that 
men were poor swimmers, poor 
walkers, poor crawlers, poor 
climbers. We saw that men were 
formed to make and use tools, a 
concept we stilt do not understand, for so wonderful a gift is 
largely wasted in this universe, 
and there is no other. What good 
are tool-useful members such as 
the hands of men? We do not 
know. It seems plain that so 
radical a thing should lead to a 
much greater rulership over the 
world than has, in fact, proven 
to be possible for men." 

Lavon's head was spinning. 
"Para, I had no notion that you 
people were philosophers.'* 

"The protos are old,** Shar 
said. He had again turned to look 
out the window, his hands locked 
behind his back. "They aren't 
philosophers, Lavon, but they are 
remorseless logicians. Listen t» 
Para." 

"To this reasoning there could 
be but one outcome,** the Para 



said. "Our strange ally, Man, was 
like nothing else in this universe, 
He was and is ill-fitted for it. He 
does not belong here; he has been 
—adopted. This drives us to think 
that there are other universes besides this one, but where these 
universes might lie, and what 
their properties might be, it is 
impossible to imagine. We have 
no imagination, as men know." 

Was the creature being ironic? 
Lavon could not tell. He said 
slowly: "Other universes? How 
could that be true?** 

"We do not know,** the Para't 
uninflected voice hummed. Lavon 
waited, but obviously the proto 
had nothing more to say. 

CHAR had resumed sitting on 
*^ the window silL clasping his 
knees, watching the come and go 
of dim shapes in the lighted gulf. 
"It is quite true," he said. "What 
is written on the remaining plate* 
makes it plain. Let me tell yoa 
now what they say. 

"We were made, Lavon. We 
were made by men who are not 
as we are, but men who were our 
ancestors all the same. They were 
caught in some disaster, and they 
made us, and put us here in our 
universe — so that, even though 
they had to die, the race of men 
would live." 

Lavon surged up from the 
woven spyrogrya mat upon which 
he had been sitting. **Yon mueft 



It 



OALAKT ICIIMCI FICTION 



think I'm a fool!" he said sharp
"No. You're our Lavon; you 
have a right to know the facts. 
Make what you like of them.'" 
Shar swung his webbed toes back 
into the chamber. "What I've 
told you may be hard to believe, 
but it seems to be so; what Para 
says backs it up. Our unfitness 
to live here is self-evident. I'll 
five you some examples: 

"The past four Shars discovered that we won't get any further 
in our studies until we learn how 
to control heat. We've produced 
tnough heat chemically to show 
that even the water around us 
changes when the temperature 
gets high enough. But there we're 
stopped.** 

"Why?" 

"Because heat produced in 
•pen water is carried off as rapidly as it's produced. Once we tried 
to enclose that heat, and we blew 
up a whole tube of the castle and 
killed everyth ing in range ; the 
shock was terrible. We measured 
the pressures that were involved 
sb that explosion, and we discovered that no substance wc 
know could have resisted them. 
Theory suggests some stronger 
substances — bur w« need head 
so form tlwtnf 

"Take our chemistry. We Ev« 
fta water. Everything seems to dissolve in water, to some extentHow do we confine a chemical 



test to the crucible we put it in? 
How do we maintain a solution at 
one dilution? I don't know. Every 
avenue leads me to the same 
stone door. We're thinking creatures, Lavon, but there's something drastically wrong in the 
way we think about this universe 
we live in. It just doesn't seem to 
lead to results." 

Lavon pushed back his floating 
hair futilely. "Maybe you're 
thinking about the wrong results. 
We've had no trouble with warfare, or crops, or practical tilings 
like that. If we can't create much 
heat, well, most of us won't miss 
it: we don't need any. What's the 
other universe supposed to be 
like, the one our ancestors lived 
in? Is it any better than this 
one?" 

"I don't know," Shar admitted. 
"It was so different that it's hard 
to compare the two. The metal 
plates tell a story about men who 
were traveling from one place to 
another in a container that moved 
by itself. The only analogy I can 
think of is the shallops of diatom, 
shells that our youngsters use to 
sled along the thermocline ; but 
evidently what's meant is something much bigger. 

"I picture a huge shallop, 
closed on all sides, big enough to 
hold many people — maybe 
twenty or thirty. It had to travel 
for generations through some 
kind of space where there wasn't 



SURFACE TENSION 



1* 



any water to breathe, so that the 
people had to carry their own 
water and renew it constantly. 
There were no seasons; no yearly 
turnover: no ice forming on the 
sky, because there wasn't any 
sky in a closed shallop; no spore 
formation. 

"Then the shallop was wrecked 
somehow. The people in it knew 
they were going to die. They 
made us, and put us here, as if 
we were their children. Because 
they had to die, they wrote their 
story on the plates, to tell us 
what had happened. I suppose 
we'd understand it better if we 
had the plate Shar III lost during the war, but we don't." 

"The whole thing sounds like 
a parable," La von said, shrugging. "Or a song. I can see why 
you don't understand it. What 
I can't sec is why you bother to 
try." 

"Because of the plates," Shar 
said. "You've handled them yourself, so you know that we've 
nothing like them. We have 
crude, impure metals we've hammered out, metals that last for 
a while and then decay. But the 
plates shine on and on, generation 
after generation. They don't 
change; our hammers and graving tools break against them; the 
little heat we can generate leaves 
them unharmed. Those plates 
weren't formed in our universe — 
and that one fact makes every 



word on them important to me. 
Someone went to a great deal of 
trouble to make those plates indestructible to give them to us. 
Someone to whom the word 
'stars' was important enough to 
be worth fourteen repetitions, 
despite the fact that the word 
doesn't seem to mean anything. 
I'm ready to think that if our 
makers repeated the word even 
twice on a record that seems likely to last forever, it's important 
for us to know what it means.™ 
"All these extra universes and 
huge shallops and meaningless 
words — I can't say that they 
don't exist, but I don't see what 
difference it makes. The Shara 
of a few generations ago spent 
their whole lives breeding bettec 
algae crops for us, and showing 
us how to cultivate them instead 
of living haphazardly off bacteria. That was work worth doing. The Lavons of those days 
evidently got along without the 
metal plates, and saw to it that 
the Shars did, too: Well, as far 
as I'm concerned, you're welcome 
to the plates, if you like them better than crop improvement — but 
I think they ought to be thrown 
away." 

"AH right," Shar said, shrugging. "If you don't want them, 
that ends the traditional interview. We'll go our — " 

There was a rising drone from 
the table-top. The Para was lift— 



14 




 



ing itself, waves of motion passing over its cilia, like the waves 
which went across the fruiting 
stalks of the fields of delicate 
fungi with which the bottom was 
planted. It had been so silent 
that Lavon had forgotten it; he 
could tell from Shar's startlement 
that Shar had. too. 

"This is a great decision." the 
waves of sound washing from the 
creature throbbed. "Every proto 
has heard it and agrees with it. 
We have been afraid of these 
metal plates for a long time, 
afraid that men would learn to 
understand them and to follow 
what they say to some secret 
place, leaving the protos behind. 
Now we are not afraid." 

"There wasn't anything to be 
afraid of," Lavon said indulgently. 

"No Lavon before you had 
said so," Para said. "We are glad. 
We will throw the plates away." 

With that, the shining creature 
swooped toward the embrasure. 
With it, it bore away the remaining plates, which had been resting under it on the table -top, 
suspended delicately in the 
curved tips of its supple cilia. 
With a cry, Shar plunged through 
the water toward the opening. 

"Stop. Para!" 

But Para was already gone, so 
swiftly that he had not even 
heard the call. Shar twisted his 
body and brought up oil one 



er wall. 

ice was 



shoulder against the tower 
He said nothing. His face 
enough. Lavon could not look 3t 
it for more than an instant. 

The shadows of the two men 
moved slowly along the uneven 
cobbled floor. The Noc descended 
toward them from the vault, its 
single thick tentacle stirring the 
water, its internal light flaring 
and fading irregularly. It. too, 
drifted through the window after 
its cousin, and sank slowly away 
toward the bottom. Gently its 
living glow dimmed, flickered, 
winked out. 

FOR many days, Lavon was 
able to avoid thinking much 
about the loss. There was always 
a great deal of work to be done. 
Maintenance of the castles, which 
had been built by the now -extinct Eaters rather than by human hands, was a never-ending 
task. The thousand dichotomously branching wings tended to 
crumble, especially at their bases 
where they sprouted from each 
other, and no Shar had yet come 
forward with a mortar as good 
as the rotifer-spittle which bad 
once held them together, In addition, the breaking through of 
windows and the construction of 
chambers in the early days had 
been haphazard and often unsound. The instinctive architee


SURFACE TENSION 



ture of the rotifers, after all. had 
not been meant to meet the needs 
of human occupants. 

And then there were the crops. 
Men no longer fed precariously 
upon passing bacteria; now there 
were the drifting mats of specific 
water-fungi, rich and nourishing, 
which had been bred by five generations of Shars. These had to 
be tended constantly to keep the 
strains pure, and to keep the older and less intelligent species of 
the protos from grazing on them. 
In this latter task, to be sure, the 
more intricate and far-seeing 
proto types cooperated, but men 
were needed to supervise. 

There had been a time, after 
the war with the Eaters, when 
it had been customary to prey 
upon the slow-moving and stupid 
diatoms, whose exquisite and 
fragile glass shells were so easily 
burst, and who were unable to 
learn that a f riendly voice did 
not necessarily mean a friend. 
There were still people who 
would crack open a diatom when 
no one else was looking, but they 
were regarded as barbarians, to 
the puzzlement of the protos,, The 
blurred and simple-minded 
speech of the gorgeously engraved 
plants had brought them into the 
category of pets - — a concept 
which the protos were utterly unable to grasp, especially since 
men admitted that diatoms on 
the half-frustrule were delicious. 



Lavon had had to agree, very 
early, that the distinction was 
tiny. After all, humans did eat 
the desmids, which differed from 
the diatoms only in three particulars : their shells were flexible, 
they could not move, and they 
did not speak. Yet to Lavon, as 
to most men, there did seem to 
be some kind of distinction, 
whether the protos could see it 
or not, and that was that. Under 
the circumstance he felt that it 
was a part of his duty, as a leader of men, to protect the diatoms 
from the occasional poachers who 
browsed upon them, in defiance 
of custom, in the high levels of 
the sunlit sky. 

Yet Lavon found it impossible 
to keep himself busy enough to 
forget that moment when the last 
clues to Man's origin and destination had been seized and borne 
away into dim space. 

It might be possible to ask 
Para for the return of the plates, 
explain that a mistake had been 
made. The protos were creatures 
of implacable logic, but they respected Man. were used to illogic 
in Man, and might reverse their 
decision if pressed — 

We are sorry. The plates were 
carried over the bar and released 
in the gulf. We will have the bottom there searched, but . . . 

With a sick feeling he could 
not repress, Lavon knew that 
when the protos decided some


\6 




 



thing was worthless, they did not 
hide it in some chamber like old 
women. They threw it away — 
efficiently. 

Yet despite the tormenting of 
his conscience, Lavon was convinced that the plates were well 
lost. What had they ever done for 
man, except to provide Shars 
with useless things to think about 
In the late seasons of their lives? 
What the Shars themselves had 
done to benefit Man, here, in the 
Water, in the world, in the universe, had been done by direct 
experimentation. No bit of useful 
knowledge ever had come from 
the plates. There had never been 
anything in the plates but things 
best left unthought. The protos 
were right. 

T AVON shifted his position on 
the plant frond, where he had 
been sitting in order to overlook 
the harvesting of an experimental 
crop of blue-green, oil-rich algae 
drifting in a clotted mass close 
to the top of the sky, and scratched his back gently against the 
coarse bole. The protos were seldom wrong, after all. Their lack 
of creativity, their inability to 
think an original thought, was a 
gift as well as a limitation. It allowed them to see and feel things 
at alt times as they were — not as 
they hoped they might be, for 
they had no ability to hope, either. 



"La-von! Laq-vah-on!" 

The long halloo came floating 
up from the sleepy depths. Propping one hand against the top of 
the frond, Lavon bent and looked 
down. One of the harvesters was 
looking up at him, holding loosely the adze with which he had 
been splitting free the glutinous 
tetrads of the algae. 

"Up here. Whit's the matter?" 

"We have the ripened quadrant 
cut free. Shall we tow it nway?" 

"Tow it away," L3von said, 
with a lazy gesture. He leaned 
back again. At th? came uutaf\t, 
a brilliant reddish glory burst 
into being above him, and cast 
itself down toward the depths 
like mesh after mc-.h of the finestdrawn gold. The ■jrcit light which 
lived above the sky duritis the 
day, brightening or dimmine. according to some pnttcrn no Shar 
ever had fathomed, was blooming again. 

Few men, caught in th< warm 
glow of tint Light, could resist 
looking up at it — especially when 
the top of the sV.y itself wrinkled 
and smiled just a moment's 
climb or swim away. Yet, as always, Lavon's bemur-cd upward 
look gave him back nothing but 
his own distorted, bobbling reflection, and a reflection of the 
plant on which he rested. 

Here was the upper limit, the 
third of the three surfaces of the 
universe. 



SURFACE TENSION 



The first surface was the bottom, where the water ended. 

The second surface was the 
thermoclinc, the invisible division 
between the colder waters of the 
bottom and the warm, light 
waters of the sky. During the 
height of the warm weather, the 
thermocline was so definite a 
division as to make for good sledding and for chilly passage. A 
real interface formed between the 
cold, denser bottom waters and 
the warm reaches above, and 
maintained itself almost for the 
whole of the warm season. 

The third surface was the sky. 
One could no more pass through 
that surface than one could penetrate the bottom, nor was there 
any better reason to try. There 
the universe ended. The light 
which played over it daily, waxing and waning as it chose, 
seemed to be one of its properties. 

Toward the end of the season, 
the water gradually grew colder 
and more difficult to breathe, 
while at the same time the light 
became duller and stayed for 
shorter periods between darknesses. Slow currents started to move. 
The high waters turned chill and 
began to fall. The bottom mud 
stirred and smoked away, carrying with it the spores of the fields 
of fungi. The thermocline tossed, 
became choppy, and melted 
away. The sky began to fog with 
particles of soft silt carried up 



from the bottom, the walls, the 
corners of the universe. Before 
very long, the whole world was 
cold, inhospitable, flocculcnt with 
yellowing, dying creatures. 

Then the protos encysted; the 
bacteria, even most of the plants 
and, not long afterward, men, too, 
curled up in their oil-filled amber 
shells. The world died until the 
first tentative current of warm* 
water broke the winter silence. 

"La- von!" 

JUST after the long call, a shining bubble rose past Lavon. 
He reached out and -poked it, but 
it bounded away from his sharp 
thumb. The gas-bubbles which 
rose from the bottom in late summer were almost invulnerable-rand when some especially hard 
blow or edge did penetrate them, 
they broke into smaller bubbles 
which nothing could touch, end 
Red toward the sky, leaving behind a remarkably bad smell. 

Gas. There was no water inside 
a bubble. A man who got inside 
a bubble would have nothing to ' 
breathe. 

But, of course, it was impossible to penetrate a bubble. The 
surface tension was too strong. 
As strong as Shar's metal plates. 
As strong as the top of the sky. 

As strong as the top of the sky. 
And above that — once the bubble was broken — a world of gat 
instead of water? Were all worlds 



18 



GALAXY SCIfNCE FICTION 



bubbles of water drifting in gas? 

If it were so, travel between 
them would be out of the question, since it would be impossible 
to pierce the sky to begin with. 
Nor did the infant cosmology include any provisions for bottoms 
for the worlds. 

And yet some of the local 
creatures did burrow into the bottom, quite deeply, seeking something in those depths which was 
beyond the reach of Man. Even 
the surface of the ooze, in high 
summer, crawled with tiny creatures for which mud was a natural medium. Man, too, passed 
freely between the two countries 
of water which were divided by 
the thermocline, though many of 
the creatures with which he 
lived could not pass that line at 
all. once it had established itself. 

And if the new universe of 
which Shar had spoken existed 
at all, it had to exist beyond the 
sky, where the light was. Why 
could not the sky be passed, after 
all? The fact that bubbles could 
be broken showed that the surface skin that formed between 
water and gas wasn't completely 
invulnerable. Had it ever been 
tried? 

Lavon did not suppose that 
one man could butt his way 
through the top of the sky, any 
more than he could burrow into 
the bottom, but there might be 
ways around the difficulty. Here 

SURFACE TENSION 



at his back, for instance, was a 
plant which gave every appearance of continuing beyond th.e 
sky : its uppermost fronds broke 
off and were bent back only by 
a trick of reflection, 

It had always been assumed that the plants died where they 
touched the sky. For the most 
part, they did, for frequently the 
dead extension could be seen, 
leached and yellow, the boxes of 
its component cells empty, floating imbedded in the perfect mirror. But some were simply 
chopped off, like the one which 
sheltered him now. Perhaps that 
was only an illusion, and instead 
it soared indefinitely into some 
other place — some place where 
men might once have been born, 
and might still live . . . 

The plates' were gone. There 
was only one other way to find 
out. 

TAETERMINEDLY. Lavon began to climb toward the 
wavering mirror of the sky. His 
thorn-thumbed feet trampled obliviously upon the clustered 
sheaves of fragile stippled diatoms. The tulip-heads of Vortae, 
placid and murmurous cousins of 
Para, retracted startledly out of 
his way upon coiling stalks, to 
make silly gossip behind him. 

Lavon did not hear them. He 
continued to climb doggedly toward the light, his fingers and 



toes gripping the plant-bole. 

"Lavon! Where are you going? 
La von!" 

He leaned out and looked 
down. The man with the adze, a 
doll-like figure, was beckoning to 
him from a patch of blue-green 
retreating over a violet abyss. 
Dizzily he looked away, clinging 
to the bole; he had never been so 
high before. Then he began to 
climb again. 

After a while, he touched the 
sky with one hand. He stopped 
to breathe. Curious bacteria gathered about the base of his thumb 
where blood from a small cut 
was fogging away, scattered at 
his gesture, and wriggled mindlessly back toward the dull red 
lure. 

He waited until he no longer 
felt winded, and resumed climbing. The sky pressed down against 
the top of his head, against the 
back of his neck, against his 
shoulders. It seemed to give 
slightly, with a tough, frictionless elasticity. The water here 
was intensely bright, and quite 
colorless. He climbed another 
step, driving bis shoulders 
against that enormous weight. 

It was fruitless. He might as 
well have tried to penetrate a 
cliff. 

Again he had to rest. While he 
panted, he made a curious discovery. All around the bole of 
the water plant, the steel surface 




20 




 



of the sky curved upward, making a kind of sheath. He found 
that he could insert his hand into 
it — there was almost enough 
space to admit his head as well. 
Clinging closely to the bole, he 
looked up into the inside of the 
sheath, probing with his injured 
hand. The glare was blinding. 

There was a kind of soundless 
explosion. His whole wrist was 
suddenly encircled in an intense, 
impersonal grip, as if it were being cut in two. In blind astonish- ment, he lunged upward. 

The ring of pain traveled 
smoothly down his upfiung arm 
as he rose, was suddenly around 
his shoulders and chest. Another 
lunge and his knees were being 
squeezed in the circular vise. 
Another — 

Something was horribly wrong. 
He clung to the bole and tried to 
gasp, but there was — nothing to 
breathe. 

The water came streaming out 
of his body, from his mouth, his 
nostrils, the spiracles in his sides, 
spurting in tangible jets. An intense and fiery itching crawled 
over the entire surface of his 
body. At each spasm, long knives 
ran into him, and from a great 
distance he heard more water being expelled from his book-lungs 
in an obscene, frothy sputtering. 

Lavon was drowning. 

With a final convulsion, he 
kicked himself away from the 



splintery bole, and fell. A hard 

impact shook him; and then the 
water, which had clung to him 
so tightly when he had first attempted to leave it, took him 
back with cold violence. 

Sprawling and tumbling grotesquely, he drifted, down and 
down and down, toward the bottom. 

Ill 

FOR many days, Lavon lay 
curled insensibly in his spore, 
as if in the winter sleep. The 
shock of cold which he had felt 
on re-entering his native universe 
had been taken by his body as a 
sign of coming winter, as it had 
taken the oxygen -starvation of 
his brief sojourn above the sky, 
The spore-forming glands had at 
once begun to function. 

Had it not been for ttiis, Lavon 
would surely have died. The 
danger of drowning disappeared 
even as he fell, as the air bubbled out of his lungs and readmitted the life-giving water. 
But for acute dessication and 
third degree sunburn, the sunken 
universe knew no remedy. The 
healing amnionic fluid generated 
by the spore-forming glands, 
after the transparent amber 
sphere had enclosed him, offered 
Lavon his only chance. 

The brown sphere was spotted 
after some days by a prowling 



SURFACE TINSION 



amtba, quiescent in the eternal 
winter of the bottom. Down there 
the temperature was always an 
even 4°, no matter what the season, but it was unheard of that a 
spore should be found there while 
the high epilimnion was still 
warm and rich in oxygen. 

Within an hour, the spore was 
surrounded by scores of astonished protos, jostling each other 
to bump their blunt eyeless prows 
against the shell. Another hour 
later, a squad of worried men 
came plunging from the castles 
far above to press their own noses 
against the transparent wall. 
Then swift orders were given. 

Four Para grouped themselves 
about the amber sphere, and there 
was a subdued explosion as the 
trichocysts which lay embedded 
01 tin bases of their cilia, just 
under the pellicle, burst and cast 
fine lines df a quickly solidifying 
liquid into the water. The four 
Paras thrummed and lifted, tugging. 

Lavon's spore swayed gently in 
the mud and then rose slowly, 
entangled in the web. Nearby, a 
Noc cast a cold pulsating glow 
oyer the operation — not for the 
Paras, who did not need the light, 
but for the baffled knot of men. 
The sleeping figure of Lavon, 
head bowed, knees drawn up to 
its chest, revolved with an absurd 
solemnity inside the shell as it 
was moved. 



"Take him to Shar. Para.** 

*X*HE young Shar justified, by 
* minding his own business, the 
traditional wisdom with which 
his hereditary office had invested 
him. He observed at once that 
there was nothing he could do 
for the encysted Lavon which 
would not be classifiable as simple meddling. 

He had the sphere deposited in 
a high tower room of his castle, 
where there was plenty of light 
and the water was warm, which 
should suggest to the hibernating 
form thiit spring was again on 
the way. Beyond that, he simply 
sat and watched, and kept hii 
speculations to himself. 

Inside the spore, Lavon's body 
seemed rapidly to be shedding its 
skin, in long strips and patches. 
Gradually, his curious shrunken* 
ness disappeared. His withered 
arms and legs and sunken abdomen filled out again. 

The days went by while Shar 
watched. Finally he could discern no more changes, and. on a 
hunch, had the spore taken up to 
the topmost battlements of the 
tower, into the direct daylight. 

An hour later, Lavon moved in 
his amber prison. 

He uncurled and stretched, 
turned blank eyes up toward the 
light. His expression was that of 
a man who had not yet awakened 
from a ferocious nightmare. His 




 



whole body shone with a strange 
pink newness. 

Shar knocked gently on the 
wall of the spore. Lavon turned 
his blind face toward the sound, 
life coming into his eyes. He 
smiled tentatively and braced his 
hands and feet against the inner 
wall of the shell. 

The whole sphere fell abruptly 
to pieces with a sharp crackling. 
The amnionic fluid dissipated 
around him and Shar, carrying 
away with it the suggestive odor 
of a bitter struggle against death. 

Lavon stood among the bits of 
shell and looked at Shar silently. 
At last he said : 

"Shar — I've been beyond the 
sky." » 

"I know," Shar said gently. 

Again Lavon was silent. Shar 
said. "Don't be humble, Lavon. 
You've done an epoch-making 
thing. It nearly cost you your 
life. You must tell me the rest — 
all of it." 

"The rest?" 

"You taught me a lot while 
you slept. Or are you still opposed to useless knowledge?" 

Lavon could say nothing. He 
no longer could tell what he 
knew from what he wanted to 
know. He had only one question 
left, but he could not utter it. He 
could only look dumbly into 
Shar's delicate .face. 

"You have answered me," Shar 
said, even more gently. "Come, 



my friend; join me at my table. 
We will plan our journey to the 
stars," 

¥T was two winter sleeps after 
Lavon's disastrous climb beyond the sky that all work on the 
spaceship stopped. By then, Lavon knew that he had hardened 
and weathered into that temporarily ageless state a man enters after he has just reached his 
prime; and he knew also that 
there were wrinkles engraved 
upon his brow, to stay and to 
deepen. 

"Old" Shar, too, had changed, 
his features losing some of their 
delicacy as he came into his maturity. Though the wedge-shaped 
bony structure of his face would 
give him a withdrawn and poetic 
look for as long as he lived, participation in the plan had given 
his expression a kind of executive 
overlay, which at best gave it a 
masklike rigidity, and at worst 
coarsened it somehow. 

Yet despite the bleeding away 
of the years, the spaceship was 
still only a hulk. It lay upon a 
platform built above the tumbled 
boulders of the sandbar which 
stretched out from one wall of 
the world. It was an. immense hull 
of pegged wood, broken by regularly spaced gaps through which 
the raw beams of the skeleton 
could be seen. 

Work upon it had progressed 



SURFACE TENSION 



fairly rapidly at first, for it was 
not hard to visualize what kind of 
v< hide would he needed to crawl 
through empty space without 
losing its water. It had been recognized that the sheer size of the 
machine would enforce a long 
period of construction, perhaps 
two full seasons; but neither Shar 
nor Lavon had anticipated any 
serious snag. 

For that matter, part of the 
v< hide's apparent incompkw ness was an illusion. About a 
third of its fittings were to consist of living creatures, which 
could not be expected to install 
themselves in the vessel much 
before the actual takeoff. 

Yet time and time again, work 
on the ship had had to be halted 
for long periods. Several timts 
whole sections needed to be ripped out, as it became more and 
more evident that hardly a single 
normal, understandable concept 
could be applied to the problem 
of space travel. 

The lack of the history plates. 
Which the Para steadfastly refused to deliver up, was a double 
handicap. Immediately upon 
their loss, Shar had set himself 
to reproduce them from memory; 
but unlike the more religious of 
his people, he had never regarded 
them as holy writ, and hence had 
never set himself to memorizing 
them word by word. Even before 
the theft, he had accumulated a 



set of variant translations of passages presenting specific experimental problems, which were 
stored in his library, carved in 
wood. But most of these translations tended to contradict each 
other, and none of them related 
to spaceship construction, upon 
which the original had been vague 
in any case. 

No duplicates of the cryptic 
characters of the original had 
ever been made, for the simple 
reason that there was nothing in 
the sunken universe capable of 
destroying the originals, nor of 
duplicating their apparently 
changeless permanence. Shar remarked too late that through simple caution they should have 
made a number of verbatim temporary records but after generations of green-gold peace, 
simple caution no longer covers 
preparation against catastrophe. 
(Nor. for that matter, did a culture which had to dig each letter 
of its simple alphabet into pulpy 
waterlogged wood with a flake 
of stonewort, encourage the keeping of records in triplicate.) 

As a result, Shar's imperfect 
memory of the contents of the 
history plates, plus the constant 
and millcnial doubt as to the accuracy of the various translations, 
proved finally to be the worst 
obstacle to progress on the spaceship itself. 

"Men must paddle before they 



24 




 



can swim," Lavon observed belatedly, and Shar was forced to 
agree with him. 

Obviously, whatever the ancients had known about spaceship construction, very little of 
that knowledge was usable to a 
people still trying to build its 
first spaceship from scratch. In 
retrospect, it was not surprising 
that the great hulk still rested 
incomplete upon its platform 
above the sand boulders, exuding 
a musty odor of wood steadily 
losing its strength, two generations after its flat bottom had 
been laid down. 

'T^HE fat-faced young man who 
-■- headed the strike delegation 
was Phil XX, a man two generations younger than Lavon, four 
younger than Shar. There were 
crow's-feet at the corners of his 
eyes, which made him look both 
like a querulous old man and 
like an infant spoiled in the 
spore. 

"We're calling a halt to this 
crazy project." he said bluntly. 
"We've slaved our youth away 
on it, but now that we're our own 
masters, it's over, that's all. 
Over." 

"Nobody's compelled you," 
Lavon said angrily. 

"Society does; our parents do," 
a gaunt member of the delegation said. "But now we're going 
to start living in the real world. 



Everybody these days knows that 
there's no other world but this 
one. You oldsters can hang on 
to your superstitions if you like. 
We don't intend to." 

Baffled, Lavon looked over at 
Shar. The scientist smiled and 
said, "Let them go, Lavon. We 
have no use for the faint-hearted." 

The fat-faced young man 
flushed. "You can't insult us into 
going back to work. Wt 're 
through. Build your own ship to 
no place!" 

"All right," Lavon said evenly. 
"Go on, beat it. Don't stand 
around here orating about it. 
You've made your decision and 
we're not interested in your s< Ifjustifications. Good-by." 

The fat-faced young man evidently still had quite a bit of 
heroism to dramatize which 
Lavon's dismissal had shortcircuited. An examination of 
Lavon's stony face, however, convinced him that he had to take 
his victory as he found it. He and 
the delegation trailed ingloriously 
out the archway. 

"Now wh at ?" L a von a sked 
when they had gone. "I must admit, Shar, that I would have tried 
to persuade them. We do need 
the workers, after all." 

"Not as much as they need us," 
Shar said tranquilly. "How many 
volunteers have you got for The 
crew of the ship?" 



SURFACE TENSION 



as 



"Hundreds. Every young man 
of the generation after Phil's 
wants to go along. Phil's wrong 
about that segment of the population, at least, The project 
catches the imagination of the 
very young." 

''Did you give them any encouragement?" 

"Sure," i,avon said. "I told 
them we'd call on them if they 
were chosen. But you can't take 
that seriously! We'd do badly to 
displace our picked group of 
specialists with youths who have 
enthusiasm and nothing else." 

"That's not what I had in 
mind, Lavon. Didn't I see a Noc 
in your chambers somewhere? 
Oh, there he is, asleep in the 
dome. Noct" 

The creature stirred its tentacles lazily. 



"Noc, I've a message," Shar 
called. "The protos are to tell all 
men that those who wish to go to 
the next world with the spaceship 
must come to the staging area 
right away. Say that we can't 
promise to take everyone, but 
that only those who help us 
build the ship will be considered 
at all." 

The Noc curled its tentacles 
again and appeared to go back 
to sleep. Actually, of course, it 
was sending its message through 
the water in all directions. 

IV 

LAVON turned from the arrangement of speaking-tube 
megaphones which was his control board and looked at the 
Para. "One : last try," he said. 



GALAXY SCIENCE F I C T S O N 



"Will you give us hack the 
plates?" 

"No. Lavon. We have never 
denied you anything before, but 
this we must." 

"You're going with us though. 
Para. Unless you give us the 
knowledge we need, you'll lose 
your life if we lose ours." 

"What is one Para?" the creature said. "We are all alike. This 
cell will die; but the protos need 
to know how you fare on this 
journey. We believe you should 
make it without the plates.*' 

"Why?" 

The proto whs silent. Lavon 
stared at it a moment, then 
turned deliberately back to the 
speaking tubes. "Everyone hang 
on," he said. He felt shaky. 
"We're about to start. Tol, is the 
ship sealed?" 



"As far as I can tell, Lavon." 

Lavon shifted to another megaphone. He took a deep breath. 
Already the water seemed stifling, though the ship hr-rtr, \ 
moved. 

"Ready with one-quarter power. One, two, three, go" 

The whole ship jerked and settled bock into place again. The 
raphe diatoms along the under 
hull settled into their niches, their 
jelly treads turning against broad 
endless belts of crude leather. 
Wooden gears creaked, stepping 
up the slow power of the creatures, transmitting it to the sixteen axles of the ship's wheels. 

The ship rocked and began to 
roll slowly along the sandbar. 
Lavon looked tensely through the 
mica port. The world flowed 
painfully past him. The ship 



SURFACE TENS I O .. 



27 



canted and began to climb the 
slope. Behind him, he could feel 
the electric silence of Shar, Para, 
the two alternate pilots, as if 
their gaze were stabbing directly 
through his body and on out the 
port. The world looked different, 
now that he was leaving it. How 
had he missed all this beauty before? 

The slapping of the endless 
belts and the squeaking and 
groaning of the gears and axles 
grew louder as the slope steepened. The ship continued to climb, 
lurching. Around it, squadrons of 
men and protos dipped and 
wheeled, escorting it toward the 
sky. 

Gradually the sky lowered and 
pressed down toward the top of 
the ship. 

"A little more work from your 
diatoms, Tanol." Lavon said. 
"Boulder ahead." The ship swung 
ponderously. "All right, slow 
them, up again. Give us a shove 
from your side, Than — no, that's 
too much — there, that's it. Back 
to normal: you're still turning us! 
Tanol, give us one burst to line 
Us up again. Good. All right, 
steady drive on all sides. Won't 
be long now." 

"How can you think in webs 
like that?" the Para wondered behind him. 

"I just do, that's all. It's the 
Way men think. Overseers, a little 
more thrust now; the grade's get


ting steeper." 

The gears groaned. The ship 
nosed up. The sky brightened in 
Lavon's face. Despite himself, he 
began to be frightened. His lungs 
seemed to burn, and in his mind 
he felt his long fall through nothingness toward the chill slap of 
water as if he were experiencing 
it for the first time. His skin 
itched and burned. Could he go 
up there again? Up there into the 
burning void, the great gasping 
agony where no life should go? 

rTiHE sandbar began to level out 
and the going became a little 
easier. Up here, the sky was so 
close that the lumbering motion 
of the huge ship disturbed it. 
Shadows of wavelets ran across 
the sand. Silently, the thick-barreled bands of blue-green algae 
drank in the light and converted 
it to oxygen, writhing in their 
slow mindless dance* just under 
the long mica skylight which ran 
along the spine of the ship. In 
the hold, beneath the latticed corridor and cabin floors, whirring 
Vortae kept the ship's water in 
motion, fueling themselves upon 
drifting organic particles. 

One by one, the figures wheeling about the ship outside waved 
arms or cilia and fell back, coasting down the slope of the sandbar toward the familiar world, 
dwindling and disappearing. 
There was at last only one single 



28 




 



Euglena. half-plant cousin of the 
protos, forging along beside the 
spaceship into the marches of 
the shallows. It loved the light, 
but finally it, too, was driven 
away into cooler, deeper waters, 
its single whiplike tentacle undulating placidly as it went. It 
was not very bright, but Lavon 
felt deserted when it left. 

Where they were going, though, 
none could follow. 

'Now the sky was nothing but a 
thin, resistant skin of water coating the top of the ship. The vessel slowed, and when Lavon 
called for more power, it began to 
dig itself in among the sandgrains. 

"That's not going to work," 
Shar said tensely. "I think we'd 
better step down the gear ratio, 
Lavon, so you can apply stress 
more slowly." 

"All right," Lavon agreed. 
"Full stop, everybody. Shar, will 
you supervise gear-changing, 
please?" 

TNSANE brilliance of empty 
space looked Lavon full in the 
face just beyond his big mica 
bull's eye. It was maddening to 
be forced to stop here upon the 
threshold of infinity; and it was 
dangerous, too. Lavon could feel 
building in him the old fear of 
the outside. A few moments more 
of inaction, he knew with a gathering coldness at the pit of his 



stomach, and he would b* unable to go through with it. 

Surely, he thought, there must 
be a better way to change gcarratios than the traditional one, 
which involved dismantling almost the entire gear-box. Why 
couldn't a number of gears of 
different sizes be carried on the 
same shaft, not necessarily all 
in action all at once, but awaiting use simply by shoving the 
axle back and forth longitudinally in its sockets? It would still 
be clumsy, but it could be worked 
on orders from tHe bridge and 
would not involve shutting down 
the entire machine — and throwing the new pilot into a bluegreen funk. 

Shar came lunging up through 
the trap and swam himself a 
stop. 

"All set," he said. "The big reduction gears aren't taking- the 
strain too well, though." 

"Splintering?" 

"Yes. I'd go it slow at first." 

Lavon nodded mutely. Without 
allowing himself to stop, even 
for a moment, to consider the 
consequences of his words, he 
called: "Half power." 

The ship hunched itself down 
again and began to move, very 
slowly indeed, but more smoothly 
than before. Overhead, the sky 
thinned to complete transparency- The great light came bL-v-ting 
in. Behind Lavon there was an 



SURFACE TENSION 



• » 

i«k*easy stir. The whiteness grew 
at the front ports. 

Again the ship slowed, straining against the blinding barrier. 
Lavon swallowed and called for 
more power. The ship groaned 
like something about to die. It 
was now almost at a standstill. 

"More power," Lavon ground 
out. 

ONCE more, with infinite slowness, the ship began to move. 
Gently, it tilted upward. 

Then it lunged forward and 
every board and beam in it began to squall. 
"Lavon! Lavon!" 
Lavon started sharply at the 
shout. The voice was coming at 
him from one of the megaphones, 
the one marked for the port at 
the rear of the ship. 
"Lavon!" 

"What is it? Stop your damn 
yelling." 

"I can see the top of the sky ! 
From the other side, from the top 
side! It's like a big flat sheet of 
metal. We're going away from it. 
We're above the sky, Lavon, 
we're above the sky!" 

Another violent start swung 
Lavon around toward the forward port. On the outside of the 
mica, the water was evaporating 
with shocking swiftness, taking 
with it strange distortions and 
patterns made of rainbows. 

Lavon saw Space. 



¥T was at first like a deserted 
* and cruelly dry version of the 
bottom. There were enormous 
boulders, great cliffs, tumbled, 
split, riven, jagged rocks going 
up and away in all directions. 

But it had a sky of its own — a 
deep blue dome so far away that 
he could not believe in. let-alone 
compute, what its distance might 
be. And in this dome was a ball 
of white fire that seared his eyeballs. 

The wilderness of rock was 
stilt a long way away from the 
ship, which now seemed to be 
resting upon a level, glistening 
plain. Beneath the surface shine, 
the plain seemed to be made of 
sand, nothing but familiar sand, 
the same substance which had 
heaped up to form a bar in Lavon's own universe, the bar along 
which the ship had climbed. But 
the glassy, colorful skin over it — 
Suddenly Lavon became conscious of another shout from the 
megaphone banks. He shook his 
head savagely and asked, "What 
is it now?" 

"Lavon, this is Than. What 
have you gotten us into? The 
belts are locked. The diatoms 
can't move them. They aren't 
faking, either; we've rapped them 
hard enough to make them think 
we were trying to break their 
shells, but they still can't give 
us more power." 

"Leave them alone," Lavon 



30 




 



snapped. "They can't fake; they 
haven't enough intelligence. If 
they say they can't give you more 
power, they can't." 

"Well, then, you get us out of 
it," Than's voice said frightened
iy
Shar came forward to Lavon's 
elbow. "We're on a space-water 
interface, where the surface tension is very high," he said softly. 
"This is why I insisted on our 
building the ship so that we 
could lift the wheels off the 
ground whenever necessary. For 
a long while I couldn't understand the reference of the history 
plates to 'retractable landing 
gear,' but it finally occurred to 
me that the tension along a spacewater interface — or, to be more 
exact, a space- mud interface — 
would hold any large object pretty tightly. If you order the wheels 
pulled up now, I think we'll make 
better progress for a while on the 
belly-treads." 

"Good enough," Lavon said. 
"Hello below — up landing gear. 
Evidently the ancients knew their 
business after all, Shar." 

QUITE a few minutes later, for 
shifting power to the belly 
treads involved another setting of 
the gear box, the ship was crawling along the shore toward the 
tumbled rock. Anxiously, Lavon 
scanned the jagged, threatening 
wall for a break. There was a 



sort of rivulet off toward the left 

which might offer a route, though 
a dubious one, to the next world. 
After some thought, Lavon ordered his ship turned toward it. 

"Do you suppose that thing in 
the sky is a 'star'?" he asked. 
"But there were supposed to be 
lots of them. Only one is up 
there — and one's plenty for my 
taste." 

"I don't know," Shar admitted. 
"But I'm beginning to get a picture of the way the universe is 
made, I think. Evidently our 
world is a sort of cup in the bottom of this huge one. This one 
has a sky of its own; perhaps it, 
too, is only a cup in the bottom 
of a still huger world, and so on 
and on without end. It's a hard 
concept to grasp, I'll admit. Maybe it would be more sensible to 
assume that all the worlds are 
cups in this one common surface, 
and that the great light shines 
on them all impartially." 

"Then what makes it seem to 
go out every night, and dim even 
in the day during winter?" Lavon 
demanded. 

"Perhaps it travels in circles, 
over first one world, then another. 
How could I know yet?" 

"Well, if you're right, it means 
that all we have to do is crawl 
along here for a while, until we 
hit the top of the sky of another 
world," Lavon said. "Then we 
dive in. Somehow it seems too 



SURFACE TENSION 



simple, after all our preparations." 

Shar chuckled, but the sound 
did not suggest that he had discovered anything funny. "Simple? Have you noticed the 
temperature yet?" 

Lavon had noticed it, just beneath the surface of awareness, 
but at Shar's remark he realized 
that he was gradually being 
Stifled. The oxygen content of the 
water, luckily, had not dropped, 
but the temperature suggested 
the shallows in the last and 
worst part of the autumn. It was 
like trying to breathe soup. 

"Than, give us more action 
from the Vortae," Lavon called. 
"This is going to be unbearable 
unless we get more circulation." 

It was all he could do now to 
keep his attention on the business of steering the ship. * 

The cut or defile in the scattered razor-edged rocks was a little 
closer, but there still seemed to be 
many miles of rough desert to 
cross. After a while, the ship 
settled into a steady, painfully 
slow crawling, with less pitching 
and jerking than before, but also 
with less progress. Under it, there 
was now a sliding, grinding sound, 
rasping against the hull of the 
ship itself, as if it were treadmilling over some coarse lubricant whose particles were each 
as big as a man's head. 

Finally Shar said, "Lavon, 



we'll have to stop again. The 
sand this far up is dry, and we're 
wasting energy using the treads." 

"Are you sure we can take it?" 
Lavon asked, gasping for breath. 
"At least we are moving. If we 
stop to lower the wheels and 
change gears again, we'll boil." 

"We'll boil if we don't," Shar 
said calmly. "Some of our algae 
are already dead and the rest are 
withering. That's a pretty good 
sign that we can't take much 
more. I don't think we'll make it 
into the shadows, unless we do 
change over and put on some 
speed." 

There was a gulping sound 
from one of the mechanics. "We 
ought to turn back," he said raggedly. "We were never meant to 
be out here in the first place. We 
were made for the water, not this 
hell." 

"We'll stop," Lavon said, "but 
we're not turning back. That's 
final." 

The words made a brave 
sound, but the man had upset 
Lavon more than he dared to 
admit, even to himself. "Shar." 
he said, "make it fast, will you?" 

The scientist nodded and dived 
below. 

THE minutes stretched out. 
The great white globe in the 
sky blazed and blazed. It had 
moved down the sky, far down, 
so that the light was pouring into 



12 




 



the ship directly in Lavon's face, 
illuminating every floating particle, its rays like long milky 
streamers. The currents of water 
passing Lavon's cheek were almost hot. 

How could they dare go directly forward into that inferno? 
The land directly under the 
"star" must be even hotter than 
it was here! 

"Lavon! Look at Para!" 

Lavon forced himself to turn 
and look at his proto ally. The 
great slipper had settled to the 
deck, where it was lying with 
only a feeble pulsation of its 
cilia. Inside, its vacuoles were beginning to swell, to become bloated, pear-shaped bubbles, 
crowding the granulated protoplasm, pressing upon the dark 
nuclei. 

"This cell is dying," Para said, 
as coldly as always. "But go on — 
go on. There is much to learn, 
and you may live, even though 
we do not. Go on." 

"You're . . . for us now?" Lavon whispered. 

"We have always been for you. 
Push your folly to its uttermost. 
We will benefit in the end, and 
so will Man." 

The whisper died away. Lavon 
called the creature again, but it 
did not respond. 

There was a wooden clashing 
from below, and then Shar's 
voice came tinnily fiom one of 



the megaphones. "Lavon, go 
ahead! The diatoms are dying, 
too, and then we'll be without 
power. Make it as quickly and 
directly as you can." 

Grimly, Lavon leaned forward. 
"The 'star* is directly over the 
land we're approaching." 

"It is? It may go lower still 
and the shadows will get longer. 
That's our only hope." 

Lavon had not thought of that. 
He rasped into the banked megaphones. Once more, the ship began to move. 

It got hotter. 

Steadily, with a perceptible 
motion, the "star" sank in Lavon's face. Suddenly a new terror struck him. Suppose it 
should continue to go down until 
it was gone entirely? Blasting 
though it was now, it was the 
only source of heat. Would not 
space become bitter cold on the 
instant — and the ship an expanding, bursty block of ice? 

The shadows lengthened menacingly, stretched across the desert toward the forward-rolling 
vessel. There was no talking in 
the cabin, just the round of ragged breathing and the creaking 
of the machinery. 

Then the jagged horizon 
seemed to rush upon them. Stony 
teeth cut into the lower rim of 
the ball of fire, devoured it 
swiftly. It was gone. 

They were in the lee of the 



SURFACE TENSION 



cliffs. Lavon ordered the ship 
turned to parallel the rock -line; 
it responded heavily, sluggishly. 
Far above, the sky deepened 
steadily, from blue to indigo. 

SHAR came silently up through 
the trap and stood beside Lavon, studying that deepening color and the lengthening of the 
shadows down the beach toward 
their world. He said nothing, but 
Lavon knew that the same chilling thought was in his mind. 
"Lavon." 

La von j umped . S ha r 's voice 
had iron in it. "'Yes?" 

"We'll have to keep moving. 
We must make the next world, 
wherever it is, very shortly." 

"How can we dare move when 
we can't see where we're going? 
Why not sleep it over — if the 
cold will let us?" 

"It will let us." Shar said. "It . 
can't get dangerously cold up 
here. If it did, the sky — or what 
we used to think of as the sky — 
would have frozen over every 
night, even in summer. But what 
I'm thinking about is the water. 
The plants will go to sleep now. 
In our world that wouldn't matter; the supply of oxygen is 
enough to last through the night. 
But in this confined space, with 
so many creatures in it and no 
source of fresh water, we will 
probably smother," 

Staar seemed hardly to be in


volved at all , but spoke rather 
with the voice of implacable 
physical laws. 

"Furthermore." he said, staring unseeingly out at the raw 
landscape, "the diatoms are 
plants, too. In other words, we 
must stay on the move for as long 
as we have oxygen and power — 
and pray that we make it." 

"Shar. we had quite a few pro* 
tos on board this ship once. And 
Para there isn't quite dead yet. It 
he were, the cabin would be intolerable. The ship is nearly 
sterile of bacteria, because all the 
protos have been eating them as 
a matter of course and there's 
no outside supply of them, any 
more than there is for oxygen. 
But still and all there would have 
been some decay." 

Shar bent and tested the pellicle of the motionless Para with 
a probing finger. "You're right, 
he's still alive. What does that 
prove?" 

"The Vortae are also alive; I 
can feel the water circulating. 
Which proves it wasn't the heat 
that hurt Para. It was the light. 
Remember how badly my skin 
was affected after I climbed beyond the sky? Undiluted starlight 
is deadly. We should add that to 
the information on the plates." 

"I still don't see the point." 

"It's this. We've got three or 
four Noc down below. They were 
shielded from the light, and so 




 



must be alive. If we concentrate 
them in the diatom galleys, the 
dumb diatoms will think it's still 
daylight and will go on working. 
Or we can concentrate them up 
along the spine of the ship, and 
keep the algae putting out oxygen. So the question is: which do 
we need more, oxygen or power? 
Or can we split the difference?" 

Shar actually grinned. "A brilliant piece of thinking. We'll 
make a Shar of you yet, Lavon. 
No, Td say that we can't split 
the difference. There's something 
about daylight, some quality, 
that the light Noc emits doesn't 
have. You and I can't detect it, 
but the green plants can, and 
without it they don't make oxygen. So we'll have to settle for 
the diatoms — for power." 

Lavon brought the vessel away 
from the rocky lee of the cliff, 
out onto the smoother sand. All 
trace of direct light was gone 
now, although there was still a 
soft, general glow on. the sky. 

"Now, then," Shar said 
thoughtfully, "I would guess that 
there's water over there in the 
canyon, if we can reach it. 1*11 go 
below and arrange — " 

Lavon gasped, '"What's the 
matter?" 

Silently, Lavon pointed, his 
heart pounding. 

The entire dome of indigo 
above them was spangled with 
tiny, incredibly brilliant lights. 



There were hundreds of them, 
and more and more were becoming visible as the darkness deept nod. And far away, over the 
ultimate edge of the rocks, was a 
dim red globe, crescented with 
ghostly silver. Near the zenith 
was another such body, much 
smaller, and silvered all over . . . 

Under the two moons of Hydro t, and under the eternal stars, 
the two-inch- wooden spaceship 
andr its microscopic cargo toiled 
down the slope toward the drying 
little rivulet. 

npHE ship rested on the bottom 
of the canyon for the rest of 
the night. The great square doors 
were thrown open to admit the 
raw, irradiated, life-giving water 
from outside — and the wriggling 
bacteria which were fresh food. 

No other creatures approached 
them, either with curiosity or 
with predatory intent, while they 
slept, though Lavon had posted 
■ guards at the doors. Evidently, 
even up here on the very floor of 
space, highly organized creatures 
were quiescent at night. 

But when the first flush of 
light filtered through the water, 
trouble threatened. 

First of all, there was the bugeyed monster. The thing was 
green and had two snapping 
claws, either one of which could 



SURFACE TENSION 



3S 




have broken the ship in two like 
a spyrogyra straw. Its eyes were 
black and globular, on the ends 
of short columns, and its long 
feelers were as thick as a plantbole. It passed in a kicking fury 
of motion, however, never noticing the ship at all. 

*'Is that — a sample of the 
kind of life we can expect in the 
next world?" Lavon whispered. 
Nobody answered, for the very 
good reason that nobody knew. 

After a while, Lavon risked 
moving the ship forward against 
the current, which was slow but 
heavy. Enormous writhing worms 
whipped past them. One struck 



the huTl a heavy blow, then 
thrashed on obliviously. 

"They don't notice us," Shar 
said. "We're too small. Lavon, 
the ancients warned us of the immensity of space, but even when 
you see it, it's impossible t» 
grasp. And all those stars — can 
they mean what I think they 
mean? It's beyond thought, beyond belief I" 

"The bottom's sloping," Lavoa 
said, looking ahead intently, 
"The walls of the canyon are retreating, and the water's becoroing rather silty. Let the start 
wait, Shar; we're coming toward 
the entrance of our new world."" 

Shar subsided moodily. His vi« 
sion of space had disturbed hha, 
perhaps seriously. He took littlt 
notice of the great thing that was 
happening, but instead huddled 
worriedly over his own expanding 
speculations. Lavon felt the old 
gap between their two mindi 
widening once more. 

Now the bottom was tilting 
upward again. Lavon had no e»perience with delta -formation, foe 
no rivulets left him own world, 
and the phenomenon worried him. 
But his worries were swept away; 
in wonder as the ship topped ton 
rise and nosed over. 

Ahead, the bottom sloped away 
again, indefinitely, into glimmering depths. A proper sky warn 
over them once more, and Lavon 
could see small rafts of plankton 



OAIAXY SCIENCI FICT10B 



floating placidly beneath it. Almost at once, too, he saw several 
of the smaller kinds of protos, a 
few of which were already approaching the ship— 

rriHEN the girl came darting out 
-■■ of the depths, her features 
distorted with terror. At first she 
did not see the ship at all. She 
came twisting and turning lithely 
through the water, obviously hoping only to throw herself over the 
ridge of the delta and into the 
lavage streamlet beyond. 

Lavon was stunned. Not that 
there were men here — he had 
hoped for that — but at the girl's 



single-minded flight toward suicide. 

"What—" 

Then a dim buzzing began to 
grow in his ears, and he understood. 

"Shar! Thanl Tanol I" he 
bawled. "Break out crossbows 
and spears! Knock out all the 
windows!" He lifted a foot and 
kicked through the big port in 
front of him. Someone thrust a 
crossbow into his hand. 

"Eh? What's happening?" Shar 
blurted. 

"Rotifers!" 

The cry went through the ship 
like a galvanic shock. The rotifers 



SURFACE TENSION 



37 



back in Lavon's own world were 
virtually extinct, but everyone 
knew thoroughly the grim history 
of the long battle man and proto 
had waged against them. 

The girl spotted the ship suddenly and paused, stricken by 
despair at the sight of the new 
monster. She drifted with her own 
momentum, her eyes alternately 
fixed hypnotically upon the ship 
and glancing back over her shoulder, toward where the buzzing 
snarled louder and louder in the 
dimness. 

"Don't stop!" Li vnii shouted. 
"This way, this way! We're 
friends! We'll help!" 

Three great semi-transparent 
trumpets of smooth flesh bored 
over the rise, the many thick cilia 
of their coronas whirring greedily. 
Dicrans — the most predacious of 
the entire tribe of Eaters. They 
were quarreling thickly among 
themselves as they moved, with 
the few blurred, pre -symbolic 
noises which made up their "language." 

C'AREFULLY, Lavon wound 
1 the crossbow, brought it to his 
shoulder, and fired. The bolt sang 
away through the water. It lost 
momentum rapidly, and was 
caught by a stray current which 
brought it closer to the girl than 
to the Eater at which Lavon had 
aimed. 

He bit his lip, lowered the 



weapon, wound it up again. It 
did not pay to underestimate the 
range; he would have to wait until 
he could fire with effect. Another 
bolt, cutting through the water 
from a side port, made him issue 
orders to cease firing. 

The sudden irruption of the 
rotifers decided the girl. The motionless wooden monster was 
strange to her and had not yet 
menaced her — but she must have 
known what it would be like to 
have three Dicrans over her, each 
trying to grab away from the 
other the biggest share. She threw 
herself toward the big port. The 
Eaters screamed with fury and 
greed and bored after her. 

She probably would not have 
made it, had not the dull vision 
of the lead Dicran made out the 
wooden shape of the ship at the 
last instant. It backed off, buzzing, and the other two sheered 
away to avoid colliding with it. 
Atter that they had another argument, though they could hardly 
have formulated what it was that 
they were fighting about. They 
were incapable of saying anything 
much more complicated than the 
equivalent of "Yaah," "Drop 
dead," and "You're another." 

While they were still snarling 
at each other, Lavon pierced the 
nearest one all the way through 
with an arablast bolt. It disintegrated promptly — rotifers are 
delicately organized creatures 



38 




 



despite their ferocity — and the remaining two were at once involved in a lethal battle over the 
remains. 

"Than, take a party out and 
spear me those two Eaters while 
they're still fighting," Lavon ordered. "Don't forget to destroy 
their eggs, too. I can see that this 
world needs a little taming." 

The girl shot through the port 
and brought up against the far 
wall of the cabin, flailing in terror. Lavon tried to approach her, 
but from somewhere she produced a flake of stonewort 
chipped to a nasty point. He sat 
down on the stool before his control board and waited while she 
took in the cabin, Lavon, Shar, 
the pilot, the senescent Para. 

At last she said: "Are — you — 
the gods from beyond the sky?" 

"We're from beyond the sky, 
all right," Lavon said. "But we're 
not gods. We're human beings, 
like yourself. Are there many 
humans here?" 

The girl seemed to assess the 
situation very rapidly, savage 
though she was. Lavon had the 
odd and impossible impression 
that he should recognize her. She 
tucked the knife back into her 
matted hair — ah, Lavon thought, 
that's a trick I may need to remember — and shook her head. 

"We are few. The Eaters are 
everywhere. Soon they will have 
the last of us." 



Her fatalism was so complete 
that she actually did not seem l» 
care. 

"And you've never cooperated 
against them? Or asked the protos 
to help?" 

"The protos?" She shrugged. 
"They are as helpless as we are 
against the Eaters. We have no 
weapons which kill at a distance, 
like yours. And it is too late now 
for such weapons to do any good. 
We a re too few . th e Ea ters too 
many." 

T AVON shook his head emphatically. "You've had one 
weapon that counts, all along. 
Against it, numbers mean nothing. We'll show you how we've 
used it. You may be able to use 
it even better than we did. once 
you've given it a try." 

The girl shrugged again. "We 
have dreamed of such a weapon 
now and then, but never found 
it. I do not think that what you 
say is true. What is this weapon?" 

"Brains," Lavon said. "Not just 
one brain, but brains. Working 
together. Cooperation." 

"Lavon speaks the truth,'* a 
weak voice said from the deck. 

The Para stirred feebly. The 
girl watched it with wide eyes. 
The sound of the Para using 
human speech seemed to impress 
her more than the ship or anything else it contained. 

"The Eaters can be conquered." 



SURFACE TENSION 



3* 



The Besl Woy to Gel Started 

WRITING FOR 
MAGAZINES 

Develop the uoihiug habit MBdtr the personal direction of 
an experienced writer or editor. 

THE MAGAZINE INSTITUTE, ■ priIval* school completely owned and operated by Miccm^ftil editors and writers, 
offer* a wries of fascinating assignments 
dexixned to net you started and keep yon 
wrilinK. Tbey are sent regularly to your 
home, where you work on them in spare 
time. They give you a chance to polish 
your ulyle the way professional writers 
Doliuhcd Quirt — by writing ismi-inut^ly. 

Yon may concentrate on either short 
story or article work, advancing a* rnpldly ax your ability warrants. 

Every assignment you submit is r«turned with detailed criticism. 

v 

FREE CATALOG 

Writer* themselves active in the magazine laid help you find your beat outlet*, 
often mi guest markets you might never 
have h>>tird of. Send the eoopon today 
for the ttOt raising which tells you how 
you may gut started toward a writing 

Th« 

MAGAZINE INSTITUTE. Inc. 
SO Rockefeller Plaia 
Rockefeller Center. New York 20. N. Y. 



The MftfMfM Institute. Inc. 

Bsfi 14S-D, SO Rockefeller Plaza 

l(!..k.r..|l. r t enter. New York 20. N. Y. 

MaMM send your free catalog, withJUn>e„._. , . 

Add re*' ., — — , — — — 



(liUfniur* congenial. NosaltfHUH u/lt Mai) 



the thin, buzzing voice said. "The 
protos will help, as they helped 
in the world from which we came. 
They fought this flight through 
space, and deprived Man of his 
records: but Man made the trip 
without the records. The protos 
will never oppose men again. I 
have already spolten to the protos 
of this world and have told them 
what Man can dream, Man can 
do, whether ttie protos wish it or 
not. 

"CJHAR, your metal records are 
^ with you. They were hidden 
in the ship. My brothers will lead 
you to them. 

"This organism dies now. It 
dies in confidence of knowledge, 
as an intelligent creature dies. 
Man has taught us this. There is 
nothing that knowledge . . . cannot do. With it, men . . . have 
crossed . . . have crossed space 

The voice whispered away. The 
shining slipper did not change, 
but something about it was gone. 
Lavon looked at the girl; their 
eyes met. 

"We have crossed space," 
Lavon repeated softly. 

Shar's voice came to him across 
a great distance. 'Jhe young-old 
man was whispering: "But have 
we?" 

"As far as I'm concerned, yes," 
said Lavon. 

— JAMES BUSH 



40 




 



proof of the pudding 



Bv ROBERT SHECKLEY 

One man's fact is fantasy for 
another— except the man whose 
fantasias become solid facts! 



HIS arms were very tired, 
but he lifted the chisel 
and mallet again. He 
was almost through; only a few 
more letters and the inscription, 
cut deeply into the tough gran


ite, would be finished. He rounded out the last period and 
straightened up, dropping his 
tools carelessly to the floor of the 
cave. Proudly he wiped the perspiration from his dirty stubbled 



Illustrated by WIUER 



flOOF Of THE PUCniNG 



41 



face and read what he had written. 

1 rose from the slime of 
The planet, 'naked and defenseless, I FASHIONED 
TOOLS. I BUtLT AND DEMOLISH ED, CREATED AND DESTROYED. I CREATED A THING 
GREATER THAN MYSELF THAT 
DESTROYED ME. 

MY NAME IS MAN AND THIS 
IS MY LAST WORK. 

He smiled. What he had written was good. Not literary 
enough, perhaps, but a fitting 
tribute to the human race, written by the last man. He glanced 
at the tools at his feet. Having no 
further use for them, he dissolved 
thorn, and, hungry from his long 
work, squatted in the rubble of 
the cave and created a dinner. He 
stared at the food for a moment, 
wondering what was lacking; 
then, sheepishly, created a table 
and chair, utensils and plates. 
He was embarrassed. He had forgotten them again. 

Although there was no need 
to rush, he ate hurriedly, noting 
the odd fact that when he didn't 
think of anything specific, he 
always created hamburger, 
mashed potatoes, peas, bread and 
ice cream. Habit, he decided. 
Finished, he made the remnants 
of the meal disappear, and with 
them the plates, utensils and 
fable. The chair he retained. Sit


ting on it. he stared thoughtfully 

at the inscription. It's fine, he 
thought, but no human other than 
myself will ever read it. 

It was fairly certain that he 
was the last man alive on the 
Earth. The war had been thorough. Thorough as only man, a 
meticulous animal, could make 
it. There had been no neutrals 
in this war, no middle-of-theroad policy. You were on one 
side or the other. Bacteria, gas 
and radiations had covered the 
Earth like a vast cloud. In the 
first days of that war, invincible 
secret weapon had succeeded 
secret weapon with almost monotonous regularity. And after the 
last hand had pushed the last 
button, the bombs, automatic; !ly 
guided and impelled, had continued to rain down. The unhappy Earth was a huge junkyard, 
without a living thing, plant or 
animal, from pole to pole. 

He had watched a good part 
of it. He had waited until he was 
fairly sure the last bomb had 
been dropped; then he had come 
down. 

Very clever of you, he thought 
bitterly, looking out the mouth 
of the cave at the lava plain his 
ship rested on, and at the twisted 
mountains behind it. 

You're a traitor — bur who 
cares? 

He had been a captain in the 
Western Hemisphere Defense. 



42 




 



Within two days of warfare, he 
had known what the end would 
be. Filling a cruiser with canned 
air, food and water, he had fled. 
In the confusion and destruction, 
he knew that he would never be 
missed; after a few days there 
was no one left to miss him. He 
had raced the big ship to the 
dark side of the Moon, and waited. It was a twelve-day war — he 
had guessed it would last fourteen — but he had to wait nearly 
six months before the automatic 
missiles stopped falling. Then he 
had come down. 

To find himself the only survivor . . . 

TTE had expected others to recognizc the futility of it, load 
ships and flock to the dark side 
of the Moon also. Evidently there 
had been no time, even if there 
had been the desire. He had 
thought that there would be scattered groups of survivors, but he 
hadn't found any. The war had 
been too thorough. 

Landing on the Earth should 
have killed him, for the air itself 
was poisoned. He hadn't cared — 
and he had lived. He seemed to 
be immune to the various kinds 
of germs and radiations, or perhaps that was part of his new 
power. He certainly had encountered enough of both, skipping 
around the world in his ship, 
from the ruins of one city to an


other, across blasted valleys and 
plains, scorched mountains. He 
had found no life, but he did discover something. 

He could create. He realized 
the power on his third day on 
Earth. Wistfully, he had wished 
for a tree in the midst of the 
melted rock and metal; a tree 
had appeared. The rest of the 
day he experimented, and found 
that he could create anything 
that he had ever seen or heard 
about. 

Things he knew best, he could 
create best. Things he knew just 
from books or conversation — 
palaces, for example — tended 
to be lopsided and uncertain, although he could make them nearly perfect by laboring mentally 
over the details. Everything he 
created was three-dimensional. 
Even food tasted like food and 
seemed to nourish him. He could 
forget all about one of his creations, go to sleep, and it would 
still be there when he awakened. 
He could also uncreate. A single 
concentrated thought and the 
thing he had made would vanish. 
The larger the tiling, the longer 
it took to uncreate. 

Things he hadn't made — valleys and mountains — he could 
uncreate, too, but it took longer. 
It seemed as though matter was 
easier to handle once he had 
shaped it. He could make birds 
and small animals, or things that 



PROOF OF THE PUDDING 



43 



looked like birds and small animals. 

He had never tried to make a 
human being. 

He wasn't a scientist; he had 
been a space-pilot. He had a 
vague concept of atomic theory 
and practically no idea of genetics. He thought that some 
change must have taken place in 
his germ-plasm, or in his brain, 
or perhaps in the Earth. The 
"why" of it all didn't especially 
bother him. It was a fact and he 
accepted it. 

He stared at the monument 
again. Something about it bothered him. 

Of course, he could have created it, but he didn't know if the 
things he made would endure 
after his death. They seemed 
stable enough . but they might 
dissolve with his own dissolution. 
Therefore he compromised. He 
created a chisel and mallet, but 
selected a granite wall that he 
hadn't made. He cut the letters 
into the inside of the wall of the 
cave so they would be safe from 
the elements, working many 
hours at a stretch, sleeping and 
eating beside the wall. 

From the mouth of the cave, 
he could see his ship, perched on 
a level plain of scorched ground. 
He was in no rush to get back to 
it. In six days the inscription 
was done, cut deeply and eternally into the rock. 



The thought that had been 
bothering him as he stared at 
the gray granite finally came to 
the surface. The only people who 
would come to read it would be 
visitors from the stars. How 
would they decipher it? He stared 
at the inscription angrily. He 
should have written it in symbols. 
But what kind of symbols? 
Mathematics? Of course, but 
what would that tell them about 
Man? And what made him think 
they would discover the cave anyway? There was no use for an 
inscription when Man's entire history was written over the face of 
the planet, scorched into the 
crust for anyone to sec. He cursed 
his stupidity for wasting six days 
working at the useless inscription. He was about to uncreate it 
when he turned his head, hearing 
footsteps at the mouth of the 
cave. 

He almost fell off the chair getting to his feet. 

A GIRL was standing there. He 
blinked rapidly, and she was 
still there, a tall, dark-haired girl 
dressed in a torn, dirty one-piece 
coverall. 

"Hi," she said, and walked into 
the cave. "I heard your hammer 
from the valley." 

Automatically, he offered her 
his chair and created another for 
himself. She tested it gingerly before she sat down. 



44 




 



"I saw you do it," she said, 
"but I still don't believe it. Mirrors?" 

"No," he muttered uncertainly. "I create. That is, I have the 
power to — wait a minute! How 
did you get here?" While he was 
demanding to know, he was considering and rejecting possibilities. Hidden in a cave? On a 
mountain top? No, there would 
be only one possible way .... 

*'I was in your ship, pal." She 
leaned back in the chair and 
clasped her hands around one 
knee. "When you loaded up that 
cruiser, I figured you were going 
to beat it. I was getting tired of 
setting fuses eighteen hours a 
day. so I stowed away. Anybody 
else alive?" 

"No. Why didn't I see you, 
then?" He stared at the ragged, 
beautiful girl, and a vague 
thought crossed his mind. He 
reached out and touched her arm. 
She didn't draw back, but her 
pretty face grew annoyed. 

"I'm real," she said bluntly. 
•*You must have seen me at the 
base. Remember?" 

He tried to think back to the 
time when there had been a base 
— centuries ago, it seemed. There 
had been a dark -haired girl there, 
one who had never given him a 
tumble. 

"I think I froze to death," she 
was saying. "Or into coma, anyhow, a few hours after your ship 



took off. Lousy heating system 
you have in that crate !" She 
shivered reminiscently. 

"Would have used up too much 
oxygen," he explained. "Just kept 
the pilot's compartment heated 
and aired. Used a suit to drag 
.supplies forward when I needed 
them." 

"I'm glad you didn't see me," 
she laughed. "I must have looked 
like the devil, all covered with 
frost and killed, I bet. Some 
sleeping beauty I probably made! 
Well, I froze. When you opened 
all the compartments, I revived. 
That's the whole story. Guess it 
took a few days. How come you 
didn't see me?" 

"I suppose I never looked back 
there," he admitted. "Quick 
enough, I found I didn't need 
supplies. Funny, I thought I 
opened all the compartments, but 
I don't really remember — " 

She looked at the inscription 
on the wall. "What's that?" 

"I thought I'd leave a sort of 
monument — ** 

"Who's going to read it?" she 
asked practically. 

"No one, probably. It was just 
a foolish idea." He concentrated 
on it. In a few moments the 
granite wall was bare. "I still 
don't understand how you could 
be alive now." he said puzzled. 

'TBut I am. I don't see how you 
do that — " she gestured at the 
chair and wall — "But I'll accept 



PROOF OF THE PUDDING 



45 



the fact that you can. Why don't 
you accept the fact that I m 
•live?'* 

"Don't get me wrong," the man 
•aid. "I want company very 
much, especially female company. It's just — Turn your back." 

She complied, with a questioning look. Quickly he destroyed 
the stubble on his face and created a clean pair of pressed pants 
and a shirt. Stepping out of his 
tattered uniform, he put on the 
new clothes, destroyed the rags, 
aYid, on an afterthought, created 
a comb and straightened his 
tangled brown hair. 

"All right," he said. "You can 
turn back now." 

"Not bad," she smiled, looking 
him over. "Let me use that comb 
— and would you please make 
me a dress? Size twelve, but see 
that the weight goes in the right 
places." 

ON the third attempt he had 
the thing right — he had never 
realized how deceptive the shapes 
of women could be — - and then 
he made a pair of gold sandals 
with high heels for her. 

"A little tight," she said, putting them on, "and not too practiral without sidewalks. But thanks 
rrmch. This trick of yours really 
solves the Christmas present 
problem, doesn't it?" Her dark 
hair was shiny in the noon Sun. 
and she looked very lovely and 



warm and human. 

"See if you can create," he 
urged, anxious to share his startling new ability with her. 

"I've already tried," she said. 
"No go. Still a man's world." 

He frowned. "How can I be absolutely sure you're real?" 

"That again? Do you remember creating me, Master?" she 
asked mockingly, bending to loosen the strap on one shoe. 

"I had been thinking — about 
women," he said grimly. "I might 
have created you while I was 
asleep. Why shouldn't my subconscious mind have as much 
power as my conscious mind? I 
would have equipped you with 
a memory, given you a background. You would have been 
extremely plausible. And if my 
subconscious mind did create 
you. then it would make certain 
that my conscious mind would 
never know." 

"You're ridiculous !'* 

"Because if my conscious mind 
knew," he went on relentlessly, 
"it would reject your existence. 
Your entire function, as a creation of my subconscious, would 
be to keep me from knowing. To 
prove, by any means in your 
power, by any logic, that you 
were — " 

"Let's see you make a woman, 
then, if your mind is so good!" 
She crossed her arms and leaned 
back in the chair, giving a single 




 




sharp nod. 

"All right." He stared at the 
cave wall and a woman started to 
appear. It took- shape sloppily, 
one arm too short, legs too long. 
Concentrating harder, he was 
able to make its proportions fairly true. But its eyes were set at 
an odd angle; its shoulders and 
back were sloped and twisted. He 
had created a shell without brains 
or internal organs, an automaton. 
He commanded it to speak, but 
only gulps came from the shapeless mouth ; he hadn't given it 
any vocal apparatus. Shudder


ing, he destroyed the nightmare 
figure. 

"I'm not a sculptor," he said. 
"Nor am I God." 

"I'm glad you finally realize 
that." 

"That still doesn't prove." he 
continued stubbornly, "t h a t 
you're real. I don't know what 
my subconscious mind is capable 
of." 

"Make something for me," she 
said abruptly. "I'm tired of listening to this nonsense." 

I've hurt her feelings, he 
thought. The only other human 
on Earth and I've hurt her. He 
nodded, took her by the hand and 
led her out of the cave. On the 
flat plain below he created a city. 
He had experimented with it a 
few days back, and it was much 
easier this time. Patterned after 
pictures and childhood dreams of 
the Thousand and One Nights, 
it towered black and white and 
rose. The walls were gleaming 
ruby, and the gates were of silverstained ebony. The towers were 
red gold, and sapphires glittered 
in them. A great staircase of 
milky ivory climbed to the highest opal spire, set with thousands 
of steps of veined marble. There 
were lagoons of blue water, and 
little birds fluttered above them, 
and silver and gold fish darted 
through the still depths. 

They walked through the city, 
and he created roses for her, 



PROOF OF THE PUDDING 



47 



white and ytllow and red, and 
gardens of strange blossoms. Between two domed and spired 
buildings he created a vast pool 
of water; on it he put a purplecanopied pleasure barge, loading 
it with every kind of food and 
drink he could remember. 

rpHEY floated across the lagoon, fanned by the soft 
breeze he had created. 

"And all this is false," he reminded her after a little while. 

She smiled. "No it's not. You 
can touch, it. It's real.'* 

"Will it be here after I die?" 

"Who cares? Besides, if you 
can do all this, you can cure any 
sickness. Perhaps you can even 
cure old age and death." She 
plucked a blossom from an overhanging bough and sniffed its 
fragrance. "You could keep this 
from fading and dying. You could 
prabably do the same for us, so 
Where's the problem?" 

"Would you like to go away?" 
he said, puffing on a newly created cigarette. "Would you like 
to find a new planet, untouched 
by war? Would you like to start 
over?" 

''Start over? You mean . . . 
Later perhaps. Now I don't even 
want to go near the ship. It reminds me of the war." 

They floated on a little way. 

"Are you sure now that I'm 
■eal?" she asked. 



"If you want me to be honest, 
no," he replied. "But I want very 
much to believe it." 

"Then listen to me," she said, 
leaning toward him. "I'm real." 
She slipped her arms around his 
neck. "I've always been real. I 
always will be real. You want 
proof? Well, I know I'm real. So 
do you. What more can you ask?" 

He stared at her for a long 
moment, felt her warm arms 
around his neck, listened to her 
breathing. He could smell the 
fragrance of her skin and hair, the" 
unique essence of an individual. 

Slowly he said, "I believe you. 
I love you. What — what is your 
name?" 

She thought for a moment. 
"Joan." 

"Strange," he said. "I always 
dreamed of a girl named Joan. 
What's your last name?" 

She kissed him. 

Overhead, the swallows he had 
created — his swallows — win ( led 
in wide circles above the lagoon, 
his fish darted aimlessly to and 
fro, and his city stretched, proud 
and beautiful, to the edge of the 
twisted lava mountains. 

"You didn't tell me your last 
name," he said. 

"Oh, that. A girl's maiden 
name never matters — she always 
takes her husband's." 

"That's an evasion!" 

She smiled. "It is, isn't it?" 

— ROBERT SHECKI.EY 



4£ 




 




FOR YOUR 



INFORMATION 



41 



read, either, it is unaware of that 
fact and goes on flying. 

THIS story originated in the 
1930s with the thesis of a 
German student. It bore a title 
something like (I'm quoting from 
memory) Aerodynamic Forces on 
small, plane, vibrating surfaces of 
the Order of Magnitude on Insect's Wings. All the thesis intended to prove was that it would 
not work if the small vibrating 
surfaces were rigid planes. There 
are some additional complications in the development of that 
legend — including some mere typographical errors in several of 
the equations — but I don't want 
to go into that now, because the 
misinterpretation should be clear 
enough, and I'm more concerned 
with that other story; the supersonic bot fly. 

LET'S nail this at the outset 
with name, place and sex. The 
speed champion of this planet is 
allegedly the male of the deer bot 
fly Cephenomyia pratti which occurs in the valleys of the Sierra 
Madre. The first man to report 
the incredible feats of Cephenomyia was Dr. Charles H. T. Townsend, who wrote in the Journal of 
the TV. Y. Entomological Society 
(1937): 

Regarding the speeds of Cephenomyia, the idea of a fly overtaking a 
bullet is a painful mental pill to swal


low-. . . yet these flies can probably do 
that to an old-fashioned musket ball. 
They could probably have kept up 
with the shells that the German Big 
Bertha shot into Paris during World 
War I. The males are faster than the 
females ... at 7000-foot levels in the 
Sierra Madre valleys of western Chihauhua I have seen the gravid females 
pass ... at a velocity of well over 300 
yards a second ... on 12,000-foot summits in New Mexico I have seen pass 
me at an incredible velocity what were 
quite certainly the males of Cephenomyia. I could barely distinguish that 
something had passed — only a brownish blur in the air of'about the right 
size for these flies and without sense 
of form. As closely as I can estimate, 
their speed must have approximated 
400 yards per second. 

Of course, this was interesting, 
to put it mildly. Apparently Dr. 
Roy Chapman Andrews, then the 
director of the American Museum 
of Natural History, inquired 
about detail, for he received this 
letter from Dr. Townsend. 

They are no sooner detected as a 
passing streak than they, are entirely 
out of sight on a straightaway course. 
They pass at a speed that is next to 
invisible — like a flash of light almost — 
not over half a second — just a blurred 
streak in the air but never visible and 
giving no sense of color. The time was 
checked repeatedly with the shutter of 
a camera. The data are practically accurate and as close as will ever be 
possible to measure. 

Roy Chapman Andrews quoted 
this excerpt in Natural History 
Magazine (Oct. 1937), adding 
that he'd feel more comfortable 
if it were possible to test this in 
a wind tunnel. 



50 




 



rwiHAT the story made such a 
splash and is still reverberating in some popular books can 
only be due to the fact that 
people don't read critically what 
they see in print. For, as a scientific report. Dr. Townsend's article is less than ideal. He "could 
barely distinguish that something 
had passed," yet he knows that 
what had passed were "quite certainly the males of Cephenomyia." In the entomological journal, it was "a brownish blur;" in 
the letter to Dr. Andrews, the 
blurred streak gave no sense of 
color. The timing device was a 
camera shutter, which isn 't reliable for small fractions of a 
second immediately after an overhaul, yet "the data arc practically 
accurate." 

All of his comparisons were 
put into print without any checking whatever. Estimated speed of 
the brownish (or colorless) blurs 
was 400 yards per second, or 1200 
feet per second, at an elevation 
above sea level of 12.000 feet. 
(Speed of sound at that altitude 
is 1070 feet per second.) At that 
speed the fly can "probably" 
overtake a musket ball. Now I 
don't know whether the muzzle 
velocity of an old musket has 
actually been measured, but the 
muzzle velocity of an old-fashioned six-shooter is 450 feet per 
second. A .45 cal. slug is hardly 
smaller than Cephenomyia; as a 



rule, people don't see them. It 
would be a most interesting experiment to time the bullets from 
.45 cal. gats with a camera 
shutter! 

On the other hand, the muzzle velocity of the German Paris Gun 
of 1918 with which the flies 
"could probably have kept up" 
was around 5300 feet per second, 
or about times the alleged 

maximum speed of the fabulous 
bot fly males. 

It so happened that I saw galley proofs of Roy Chapman 
Andrews's article before it was 
published. My next action was to 
get myself a picture of such a 
bot fly and its dimensions, and 
then invite an aerodynamicist for 
beer with discussion. We did not 
ask such irrelevant questions as 
the acceleration period required 
to get up to 400 yards per second 
or 818 miles per hour. We simply 
assumed that the fly did travel 
at such speed and calculated its 
air resistance. In round figures, it 
was 80 grams, a little short of 
three ounces. Now it needs power 
to maintain speed against that 
much drag. The calculation was 
simple and ended up with the 
figure of 0.45 horsepower! These 
calculations were made as if the 
thing were an airplane model the 
size of a bot fly. Then we repeated the calculations for the 
same size bullet. Same results, 

A year later, Dr. Irving Lang


FOR YOUR INFORMATION 



31 



muir of General Electric published an article in Science (vol. 
87, No. 2254. March 11, 1938), 
with results even more devastating. Wind pressure against the 
• head of the fly at 818 mph turned 
out to be eight lbs. per square 
inch, which should be enough to 
crush it. Power to maintain speed 
against such wind pressure: 370 
watts or about y 2 horsepower, requiring a food intake of 0.31 
grams per second, which is roughly 1 ' ) times the weight of the 
insect. 

OUCH statistics disposed of Dr. 
^ Townsend's supersonic speeds 
neatly and simply. 

Then Dr. Langmuir tried to 
establish how fast they do fly. He 
took a piece of solder of the right 
size and spun it on a thin silk 
thread, timing it with a telechron 
clock, and using the brightly illuminated white ceiling of the 
laboratory as a background. 

When the solder fly moved at 
13 mph, its shape could no longer 
be seen, but its size could be 
estimated correctly. At. 26 mph, 
it was just visible as a moving 
object. At 43 mph, it appeared as 
a faint line (direction of movement could no longer be seen) 
and at 64 mph it was simply invisible. 

The conclusion was that the 
speed of 26 mph best agreed with 
Dr. Townsend's description. Pow



er requirement for 25 mph would 
be 0.0034 watts, corresponding to 
a food intake of five per cent of 
the body weight per hour. 

However, Dr. Langmuir went 
back to the 818 mph speed originally alleged. The flies had always missed Dr. Townsend, but 
obviously their maneuverability 
at supersonic speed cannot be too 
accurate. Now if one had hit — ■ 
well, there would have been an 
impact force of 140 kilograms or 
310 pounds. Penetration would 
depend largely on where it happened to hit, but a blow in the 
eye or even on the chest would 
be likely to be fatal. 

It is just barely possible that 



53 




 



the inhabitants of the Sierra 
Madre are in a dark conspiracy to 
bury their victims of such accidents without informing the 
sheriff or Dr. Townsend, thereby 
eliminating all traces of Cephenomyia's deadliness. I rather 
doubt it. 

Legs and Wings 

WHY do insects have six legs, 
but less than six wings? At 
first glance this may look like an 
exceedingly idle question, yet it 
can be answered and the answer 
involves both evolutionary history and engineering principles. 
1 admit that a bookkeeper and a 
general can do their jobs without 
this information, but when it 
comes to science fiction authors 
and readers, such a discussion 
may prove helpful. 

Let's begin at the beginning, 
with the ancestors of the insects. 
Thty were creatures which anybody but a professional zoologist 
would take to be centipedes. 
There were quite a number of legs 
to begin with, thirty pairs or 
more. In the course of insect 
evolution, this number was uniformly reduced to three pairs. 
Apparently everything beyond 
that number constituted dead 
weight. But why did the insects 
stop the reduction at that point? 
Why didn't they go below that? 
(Only some parasitic insects 



have less than three pairs of legs 
— none at all.) 

The answer has been pointed 
out by Prof. U. N. Lanhnm of the 
University of Michigan. When an 
insect walks, it lifts the front and 
hind legs on one side and the 
middle leg on the other. This 
forms a tripod, something an 
engineer recognizes at once as a 
stable support. Then the other 
*set becomes a tripod. Anything 
less than a tripod would be unstable and require a balancing 
act. 

Reptiles and mammals do this 
beautifully all the time, but insects can't follow their example 
for two reasons. One is that they 
are encased in armor and too 
stiff. Reptiles and mammals can 
shift their flexible bodies subtly 
for balance and many of them 
also have a tail to help, The 
other reason ia that insects are 
too small; if they should fall, 
they do so too f;ir.t for a correction to be made. Try balancing 
first a pencil and then a broomstick on your finger and you'll 
find out what size has to do with 
balance. 

It is interesting in this connection to note thnt the pr.sying 
mantis, which habitually walks 
on four legs (although it has six), 
is rather large and unusually 
flexible. And in climbing, the 
front pair, which has evolv< d into 
a set of insect traps, usually has 



FOR YOUR INFORMATION 



53 



to help out. 

But how about the wings? 

The multiple pairs of legs of 
the insect ancestors were not accompanied by a corresponding 
number of appendages which 
could become wings. Insects did 
not try to sprout wings until after 
the number of their legs had been 
reduced to three pairs. But the 
first winged insects apparently 
had three pairs of wings, too. In 
the oldest example we know (see 
illustration) the first pair is already considerably reduced, but 
it is still there. Our contemporary 
insects either have the original 
second and third pair left — for 
example, dragonfiies and butterflies — or the original middle pair. 
There is just one small and unimportant group, also tiny in 
size, which retained the original 
third pair, the Strcpsiptera. 

If the picture of Stenodictya 
reminds you of early designs of 
"flying machines" with lots of 
wing?, you are right and you also 
know the reason. You can have 
a pair of wings which serve more 
or less in the fashion of the rotor 
of a helicopter. Or you can have 
one pair which serves as wings, 
airplane -style, with another pair 
serving as propellers (beetles do 
just about that). But anything 
beyond that causes interference, 
ruins the aerodynamics of the 
design and grounds the experimenter. 




So if you invent some interesting insect forms for the planet 
Bombastus, see to it that they 
have more than four legs. And 
avoid flying centipedes with 60 
legs and 48 wings. 

The Diameter of Pluto 

PLUTO, as you know, is the 
outermost of the known planets of our solar system, discovered in 1930. But ever since its 
discovery, Pluto has managed to 
pose riddles. At the time when it 
was still listed as "suspected to 
exist," astronomers who had given 
the matter some thought would 
have expected it to be a rather 
large planet — about the size of 
Neptune, which has a diameter of 
31,000 miles — and they would 
have expected it to be rather far 
out. The average distance of Neptune is 2,800 million miles, so the 
next planet outside of Neptune 
should have been around 4,000 
million miles. 

But Pluto proved to be much 



54 




 



closer than expected, with part of 
its orbit inside the orbit of Neptune, thus having a much more 
eccentric path than any other 
planet, even worse than Mercury. 
And it was found to be much 
smaller than expected. It seemed 
to have about the same size as 
Earth and the diameter guessed 
at was put down at 7,700 miles, 
with a question mark attached. 
Since its gravitational influence 
appears to be about that of Earth, 
this would have led to about the 
same density, which in the case 
of Earth is 5.5 times that of water. 

Then, in 1950, twenty years 
after its original discovery. Dr. 
Gerard P. Kuiper succeeded in 
actually measuring its diameter 
with the aid of the 200-inch telescope on Palomar Mountain. The 
apparent diameter turned out to 
be 0.22 seconds of arc, which, for 
the known distance, gave a "real" 
diameter of 3,550 miles, the same 
as that of Saturn's largest moon, 
Titan. 

The joy over this accomplishment, however, practically vanished when one started to 
calculate a little. The gravitational influence was still about 
that of Earth, but with such a 
small diameter, the average density of Pluto would have to be 
about 55! 

There is no element with such 
a density. Iron has a density of 
7.8, uranium 18.7, gold 19.3, 



platinum 21.4 and osmium 22.5. 

Astrophysicists know that the 
crushed matter of stellar cores 
must be denser by far than 55, 
but Pluto is not heavy enough to 
crush matter. 

Something had to be wrong 
and the latest guess at what it 
might be is that our measurement 
of Pluto suffers from "specular 
reflection." The term is derived 
from the Latin speculum tor 
"mirror" and simply means that 
a sufficiently smooth planet might 
reflect light in the manner of a 
polished ball. 




/ E 



The diagram shows what 
would happen in such a case. If 
such a (more or less) polished 
ball could be seen against a light 
background (insert) it could still 
be measured accurately. Pluto is 
seen against a black background, 
though, and in that case we would 
measure not the planet, but the 
reflection. 

This suggestion, first offered by 
Sir James Jeans, would resolve 
that impossible density of 55 for 
a rather small planet. But it does 



FOR TOUR INFORMATION 



35 



nothing to answer what we really 
want to know — the true diameter 
of Pluto. 

Science fiction authors would 
probably be more interested in 
the seeming smoothness of the 
planet's surface. Ice or frozen 
gases might explain it, for Pluto 
is an extremely frigid world. But 
we won't know, of course, until 
we get there and see for ourselves. 

More on Moons 

THE date of September 29, 
1951, marks the discovery of 
the twelfth satellite of Jupiter, or 
J -XII. The discovery was made 
photographically with the 100inch telescope on Mt. Wilson and 
the discoverer was Dr. Seth B. 
Nicholson, who is the only living 



man to have discovered four \ 
satellites of Jupiter— J-IX, J-X, 
J-XI and now J-XII. 

But there was quite some confusion connected with that discovery. Dr. Nicholson, naturally, 
did not take his plates for the 
purpose of looking for another 
satellite of Jupiter. He wanted to 
check the movement of the faint 
Jovian satellites, specifically his 
own earlier discoveries. 

To understand what follows, 
look at the diagram (adapted 
from a Mount Wilson and Palomar Observatories d i a g r a m) 
which shows how the sky near 
Jupitor would have looked that 
night to a sensitive instrument of 
a sufficiently wide angle. 

J-IX and J-XI were easily accounted for. So were J-VI and 



j-M. 



NORTH 

I*; PREDICTED POSITION OF J-X 
S FOR SEPTEMBER 29, 1951. 



J-X d — WEST 



EAST J-VT J-YT 

ONE 

J-TX OEOREE 




 



J-VII, which are much brighter 
and could not be mistaken for 
any of the high-numbered satellites. And on a plate far to the 
east there was J-X, right in the 
position for which it had been 
predicted for September 29. But 
to the west of J-X. there was a 
new faint body. Most likely it 
was another Jovian satellite and, 
since they are numbered in the 
order of discovery, it was clearly 
J XII. 

Then followed a frantic series 
of HACs (Harvard Announcement Cards), the first giving the 
position of the "western object." 
Some two weeks later, there came 
another, stating that Dr. P. 
Musen of Cincinnati Observatory 
had identified the object as J-X. 
Doctor Musen realized that the 
prediction for J-X had been mistaken: J-X was in its orbit, all 
right, but had not yet reached 
the position predicted for September 29. (In fact, it did not get 
there until 20 days later.) Hence 
Dr. Nicholson's "western object" 
was merely J-X. three woeks behind schedule. 

The next HAC told that story 
and pointed out that the object 



in the place where J-X should 
have been must be a new satellite. 

A week later, there came another HAC, giving more precise 
positions and warning that Minor 
Planet No. 1003 — Lilofee— was 
also nearby. 

Meanwhile, Dr. Nicholson had 
found that his new object, suspected to be J-XII and originally 
taken to be J-X, was traveling 
relative to Jupiter in the opposite 
direction of J-X's well-established movement. 

By the end of November, it was 
all straightened out. J-XII is a 
member of the outer group of 
Jovian satellites; it is retrograde 
and some 14 to 15 million miles 
from Jupiter. Its orbital period 
must be more than 600 and might 
be closer to 700 days. And since 
it could be mistaken for J-X. it 
has about the same brightness, 
which indicates that its diameter 
must be about the same, less 
than 20 miles. 

[f J-X had not been predicted 
wrong. J-XI I might have been 
overlooked. 

I wonder how J-XI 1 1 will be 
discovered. 

— WILLI i.ky 



ANY QUESTIONS? 



How can a rocketship turn in 
space? 

Robert Stewart 
330 West Monroe Sr. 
Greenwood, Mass. 



There are three method* for 
turning a rocketship i» span 1 , 
The simplest in a short Mu*t 
front the rorkrl motor vt ilh full 
■ 1 1 • i] i - 1 l i i > ii »u |li4» -i.t.-mii: viinr* 



FOR YOUR INFORMATION 



i7 



which are in the exhaust blast. 
These steering vanes are typical for the V-2's steering system. The second method is to 
have the whole rochet motor 
swivel mounted and to blast 
with lilted motor. This is typical for the Navy's Viking rocket. 

A third method, not yet actually used, would he to have a 
wheel spin inside the rocket, 
while no propulsion is applied. 
If you have a wheel spinning 
in one direction, the rocket will 
have to turn in the opposite direction. If you have three 
wheels mounted at right angles 
to each other inside, the roeketship can he turned into any 
direction by spinning the appropriate wheels. 

Of course, turning by spinning wheels does not change 
direction of flight, hut merely 
the direction in which the nose 
is pointing. To move in that 
new direction, you need rocket 
motors. 

Which subjects should I study 
for later work in rockets and in 
astronautics? 

Neil Stutz 
85-48, 212th Street 
Queens Village, N. Y. 
This question, which comes 
to me in my mail at least once 
a week, is hard to answer generally, for much depends on 



what the student intends to do 
later. Theoretical astronautics 
is the child of astronomy and 
theoretical physics. A man who 
wants to contribute to space 
travel theory and solve some of 
its problems (which are distinct from strict engineering 
problems) would be essentially 
a theoretical physicist with a 
thorough grounding in astronomy, especially "astronomy of 
position,' 1 that branch dealing 
with the movements of bodies 
in space. 

As for rocket engineering, 
there are now three major 
branches. One group of "rocket engineers'* specializes in telemetering and guidance systems; 
these are originally electronics 
engineers. Another group specializes in the building of the 
rocket proper; these are essentially aeronautical engineers. 
The third group, the "rocket 
engineers" proper, are the men 
who design, build and test 
rocket motors; they are specialized mechanical engineers. 

In short, if you want to work 
in rocket engineering, you have 
to be an engineer first, because 
rocket work is a spec ializal ion 
of various branches of engineering. Of course chcmirts, 
metallurgists and medical men 
have also contributed to astronautics. Again, however, I hey 
were chemists, metallurgists 



SI 




 



ami doctors before they specialized. 

A number of colleges ant) 
engineering colleges give special courses. I know thai there 
are such courses at the University of California (Los Angeles), at California Institute of 
Technology, at Ohio Slate University, at Massachusetts Institute of Technology and at 
Princeton University. There 
are prohahly still others of 
which I haven't heard yel. 

An analogy is often drawn between the atom and the Solar 
System, wherein the Sun represents the nucleus. But now the 
nucleus is known to be a multiplicity of parts, and electrons are 
unknown to possess satellites. 
Therefore: to what phenomenon 
of the astronomer can the atoms 
of the physicist be made analogous? 

Royal! T. Moore 
C325 Hillcrest 
Iowa City, Iowa 
None. That analogy dates 
hack to the days when nothing 
was known ahotit the atom 
except that it had lo have a 
nucleus and something around 
the nucleus. To draw such an 
analogy nowadays makes even 
less sense than the assertion that 
Mr, X resembles an elephant 
because both have one head, 
four limbs, two eyes in the 



bead, one mouth with teeth and 
a stomach thai demands fcwl. 
Such an analogy completely 
disregards all dissimilarities for 
the sake of a few similarities. 

In a solar system, you have 
one planet per orbit, all orhila 
in about the same plane and all 
planets of different sizes. In an 
atom, you have several electrons per orbit, all of the same 
size and (except in the case of 
the hydrogen and the helium 
atoms) more than one orbital 
plane. 



Send your science questions to Willy Ley c/o 
GALAXY. - He'll answer 
them all by mall or in this 
department. Keep them 
short, a few at a time, and 
print or type them. Olease! 



Citnrent /Vete Books; 

Science & fenfosy 
Ficiicn 

■ We carry a full line of all 
current American science fiction, as well as a large stock 
of Scarce out-of-print books in 
this field. Back issues of science fiction magazines 

available. 
Ope. Monday Thru -Saturday i 
9:30 A.M. to 6iitO P.M. Op™ 
Wednesday Evening" «n«1 8:00 P.M. 

STEPHEN'S BOOK SERVICE 

45 FOURTH AVENUE {Cor. 9th St.) 
New York 3, New York 
(Phone GKamercy 3-4194) 



FOR YOUR INFORMATION 



59 



yesterday house 



Meeting someone who's been dead for twenty 
years is shocking enough for anyone with a 
belief in ghosts —worse for one with none! 

Illustrated by ASHMAN 



I 

f | THE narrow cove was quiet as 
the face of an expectant 
child, yet so near the ruffled Atlantic that the last push of wind 1 
carried the Anftie O. its full 
length. The man in gray flannels 
and sweatshirt let the sail come 
crumpling down and hurried past 
its white folds at a gait made 
comically awkward by his cramped muscles. Slowly the rocky 



ledge came nearer. Slowly the 
blue V inscribed on the cove's 
surface by the sloop's prow died. 
Sloop and'ledge kissed so gently 
that he hardly had to reach out 
his hand. 

He scrambled ashore, dipping 
a sneaker in the icy water, and 
threw the line around a boulder. 
Unkinking himself, he looked 
back through the cove's high and 
rocky mouth at the gray-green 




GAIAXY SCIENCE FICTION 



scattering of islands and the 
faint dark line that was the 
coast of Maine. He almost laughed in satisfaction at having disregarded vague warnings and 
done the thing every man yearns 
to do once in his lifetime — gone 
to the farthest island out. 

He must have looked longer 
than he realized, because by the 
time he dropped his gaze the cove 
was again as glassy as if the 
Annie 0. had always been there. 
And the splotches made by his 
sneaker on the rock had faded 
in the hot Sun. There was something very unusual about the 
quietness of this place. As if 
time, elsewhere hurrying frantically, paused here to rest. As 
if all changes were erased on this 
one bit of Earth. 

The man's . lean, melancholy 
face crinkled into a grin at the 
banal fancy. He turned his back 
on his new friend, the little green 
sloop, without one thought for his 
nets and specimen bottles, and 
set out to explore. The ground 
rose steeply at first and the oaks 
were close, but after a little way 
things went downhill and the 
leaves thinned and he came out 
on more rocks — and realized that 
he hadn't quite gone to the farthest one out. 

JOINED to this island by a 
rocky spine, which at the 
present low tide would have been 



dry but for the spray, was another green, high island that the 
first had masked from him all the 
while he had been sailing. He felt 
a thrill of discovery, just as he'd 
wondered back in the woods 
whether his might not be the 
first human feet to kick through 
the underbrush. After all, there 
were thousands of these islands. 

Then he was dropping down 
the rocks, his lanky limbs now 
moving smoothly enough. 

To the landward_ side of the 
spine, the water was fairly still. 
It even began with another deep 
cove, in which he glimpsed the 
spiny spheres of sea urchins. But 
from seaward the waves chopped 
in, sprinkling his trousers to the 
knees and making him wince 
pleasurably at the thought of 
what vast wings of spray and 
towers of solid water must crash 
up from here in a storm. 

*He crossed the rocks at a trot, 
ran up a short grassy slope, raced 
through a fringe of trees — and 
came straight up against an eightfoot fence of heavy mesh topped 
with barbed wire and backed at 
a short distance with high, heavy 
shrubbery. 

Without pausing for surprise — ■ 
in fact, in his holiday mood, using 
surprise as a goad — he jumped 
for the branch of a» oak whose 
trunk touched the fence, scorning 
the easier lower branch on the 
other side of the tree. Then he 



62 



GAIAXY SCIENCE FICTION 



drew himself up. worked his way 
to some higher branches that 
crossed the fence, and dropped 
down inside. 

Suddenly cautious, he gently 
parted the shrubbery and, before 
the first surprise could really sink 
in, had another. 

A closely mown lawn dotted 
with more shrubbery ran up to 
a snug white Cape Cod cottage. 
The single strand of a radio 
aerial stretched the length of the 
roof. Parked on a neat gravel 
driveway that crossed just in 
front of the cottage was a short, 
square-lined touring car that he 
recognized from remembered pictures as an ancient Essex. The 
whole scene had about it the same 
odd quietness as the cove. 

Then, with the air of a clockwork toy coming to life, the white 
door opened and an elderly woman came out, dressed in a long, 
lace-edged dress and wide, lacy 
hat. She climbed into the driver's 
seat of the Essex, sitting there 
very stiff and tall. The motor began to chug bravely, gravel skittered, and the car rolled off 
between the trees. 

The door of the house opened 
again and a slim girl emerged. 
She wore a white silk dress that 
fell straight from square neckline to hip-height waistline, making the skirt seem very short. Her 
dark hair was bound with a white 
bandeau so that it curved close 



to her cheeks. A dark necklace 
dangled against the white of the 
dress. A newspaper was tucked 
under her arm. 

She crossed the driveway and 
tossed the pape'r down on a rattan table between three rattan 
chairs and stood watching a 
squirrel zigzag across the lawn. 

npHE man stepped through the 
wall of shrubbery, called, 
"hello!" and walked toward her. 

She whirled around and stared 
at him as still as if her heart had 
stopped beating. Then she darted behind the table and waited 
for him there. Granting the surprise of his appearance, her alarm 
seemed not so much excessive as 
eerie. As if, the man thought, he 
were not an ordinary stranger, 
but a visitor from another planet. 

Approaching closer, he saw 
that she was trembling and that 
her breath was coming in rapid, 
irregular gasps. Yet the slim, 
sweet, patrician face that stared 
into his had an underlying expression of expectancy that reminded 
him of the cove. She couldn't 
have been more than eighteen. 

He stopped short of the table. 
Before he could speak, she stammered out, "Are you he?" 

"What do you mean?" he asked, smiling puzzledly. 

"The one who sends me the 
little boxes." 

"I was out sailing and I hap


YESTERDAY HOUSE 



43 



pence! to land in the far cove. 
1 didn't dream that anyone lived 
on this island, or even came here." 

"No one ever does come here." 
she re plied. Her manner had 
changed, becoming at once more 
wary and less agitated, though 
still eerily curious. 

"It startled me tremendously 
to find this place," he blundered 
on. "Especially the road and the 
car. Why. this island can't be 
more than a quarter of a mile 
wid< ." 

"The road goes down to the 
wharf," she explained, "and up 
to the top of the island, where my 
aunts have a tree-house." 

He tore his mind away from the 
picture of a woman dressed like 
Queen Mary clambering up a 
tree. "Was that your aunt I saw 
driving off?" 

"One of them. The other's 
taken the motorboat in for supplies." She looked at him doubtfully. "I'm not sure they'll like 
it if they find someone here." 

"There are just the three of 
you?" he cut in quickly, looking 
down the empty road that vanished among the oaks. 

She nodded. 

"I su ppose you go in to the 
mainland with your aunts quite 

She shook her head. 
"It must go t | retty dull for 
you." 

"Not very," she said, smiling. 



"My aunts bring me the pupers 
and other things. Even movies. 
We've got a projector. My favorite stars are Antonio Morino 
and Alice Terry. I like her bettef 
even than Clara Bow." 

He looked at her hard for a 
moment. "I suppose you read a 
lot?" 

She nodded. "Fitzgerald's my 
favorite author." She started 
around the tabic, hesitated, suddenly grew shy. "Would you like 
some lemonade ?" 

HE'D noticed the dewed silver 
pitcher, but only now realized his thirst. Yet when she handed him a glass, he held it untested 
and said awkwardly, "1 haven't 
introduced myself. I'm Jack 
Barry." 

She stared at his outstretched 
right hand, slowly extendi d her 
own toward it. shook it Up and 
down exactly once, then quickly 
dropped it. 

He chuckled and gulped some 
lemonade. "I'm a biology student. Been working at Wood's 
Hole the first part of the summer. 
But now I'm here to do research 
in marine ecology — that's sort 
of sea-life patterns — of the inshore islands. Under the direction of Professor Kesscrich. You 
know about him. of course?" 

She shook her head. 

"Probably the greatest living 
biologist," he was proud to in



 



form her. "Human physiology as 
well. Tremendous geneticist. In 
a class with Carlson and Jacques 
Loeb. Martin Kesserich — he lives 
over there at town. I'm staying 
with him. You ought to have 
heard of him." He grinned. "Matter of fact, I'd never have met you 
if it hadn't been for Mrs. Kesserich." 

The girl looked puzzled. 

Jack explained, "The old boy's 
been off to Europe on some conferences, won't be back for a 
couple days more. But I was to 
get started anyhow. When I went 
out this morning Mrs. Kesserich — she's a drab sort of person — 
said to me. 'Don't try to sail to 
the farther islands.' So, of course, 
I had to. By the way. you still 
haven't told me your name." 

"Mary Alice Pope," she said, 
speaking slowly and with an odd 
wonder, as if she were saying it 
for the first time. 

"You're pretty shy, aren't 
you?" 

"How would I know?" 

The question stopped Jack. He 
couldn't think of anything to say 
to this strangely attractive girl 
dressed almost like a "flapper." 

"Will you sit down?" she asto <1 
him gravely. 

The rattan chair siglr-rd under 
his weight. He made another effort to talk. "I'll bet you'll be 
glad when summer's over." 

"Why?" 



"So you'll be able to go bark to 
the mainland." 

"But I never go to the mainland." 

"You mean you stay out here 
all winter?" h< «sk<-d incredulously, his mind filled with a vision of snow and frozen spray 
and great gray waves. 

"Oh, yes. We get all cut Mipplies on hand before winter. My 
aunts are very capable. They 
don't always wear long laee dresses. And now I help them." 

"But that's impossible!" he 
said with sudden sympathetic 
anger. "You can't be shut off 
this way from people your own 
age !" 

"You're the first one I ever 
met." She hesitated. "I never saw 
a boy or a man before, exctpt in 
movies." 

"You're joking!" 

"No, it's true." 

"But why are they doing it to 
you?" he demanded, leaning forward. "Why are they inflicting 
this loneliness on you. Mary?*' 

OHE seemed to have gained 
k — ' poise from his loss of it. "I 
don't know why. I'm to find out 
soon. But actually I'm not ion. ly. 
May I tell you a secret?" She 
touched his hand, this time with 
only -the faintest trembling. 
"Every night the loneliness gathers in around me — you're right 
about that. But lhcn every rhorn


YESTERDAY HOUSE 



ing new life comes to me in a 
little box." 

"What's that?" he said sharply. 

"Sometimes there's a poem in 
the box, sometimes a book, or 
pictures, or flowers, or a ring, 
but always a note. Next to the 
notes I like the poems best. My 
favorite is the one by Matthew 
Arnold that ends, 

*Ah, love, let us be true 
To one another! for the world, 

which seems 
To lie before like a land of 

So various, so beautiful, so new, 
Heth really ' neither joy, nor love, 

nor light, 
Nor certitude — ' " 

"Wait a minute," he interrupted. "Who sends you these 
boxes?" 

"I don't know." 

"Cut how are the notes signed?" 

"They're wonderful notes," she 
said. "So wise, so gay, so tender, 
you'd imagine them being written 
by John Barry more or Lindbergh." 

"Yes, but how are they signed?" 

She hesitated. "Never anything but 'Your Lover.' " 

"And so when you first saw me, 
you thought — " He began, then 
stopped because she was blushing. 

"How long have you been getting them?" 

"Ever since I can remember. 
I have two closets of the boxes. 
The new ones arc either by my 
bed when I wo!;? or at my place 

66 



at breakfast." 

"But how does this — person 
get these boxes to you out here? 
Does he give them to your aunts 
and do they put them there?" 
"I'm not sure." 

"But how cam they get them 
in\vinter?" 

"I don't know." 
"Look here," he said, pouring 
himself more lemonade, "how 
long is it since you've been to 
the mainland?" 

"Almost eighteen years. My 
aunts tell me I was born there 
in the middle of the war." 

"What war?" he asked startledly, spilling some lemonade. 

"The World War, of course. 
What's the matter?" 

Jack Barr was staring down at 
the spilled lemonade and feeling 
a kind of terror he'd never experienced in his waking life. 
Nothing around him had changed. He could still feel the same 
hot Sun on his shoulders, the 
same icy glass in his hand, scent 
the same lemon-acid odor in his 
nostrils. He could still hear the 
faint chop-chop of the waves. 

And yet everything had changed, gone dark and dizzy as a 
landscape glimpsed just before a 
faint. All the little false notes had 
come to a sudden focus. For 
the lemonade had spilled on the 
headline of the newspaper the 
girl had tossed down, and 
the headline read : 


 



HITLER IN NEW DEFIANCE 

Under the big black banner 
of that head swam smaller ones: 

Foes of Machado Rio! in Havana 
Big NRA Parade Planned 
Balbo Spe«V> in New York 

SUDDENLY he felt a surge of 
relief. He had noticed that 
the paper was yellow and brittleedged. 

"Why are you so interested in 
old newspapers?" he asked. 

"I wouldn't call day-beforeyesterday's paper old," the girl 
objected, pointins at the dateline: 
July 20, 1933. 

"You're trying to joke," Jack 
fold her. 

"No, I'm not.'* 

"But it's 1953." 

"Now it's you who are joking," 

"But the paper's yellow." 

"The paper's always yellow." 

He laughed uneasily. "Well, 
if you actually think it's 1933, 
perhaps you're to be envied," he 
said, with a sardonic humor he 
didn't quite feel. "Then you can't 
know anything about the Second 
World War, or television, or the 
V-2s, or Bikini bathing suits, or 
the atomic bomb, or — '* 

"Stop!" She had sprung up 
and retreated around her chair, 
white-faced. "I don*t like what 
you're saying." 



"But—" 

"No, please! Jokes that may 

be quite harmless on the mainland sound different here." 

"I'm really not joking," he 
said after a moment. 

She grew quitfe frantic at that. 
"I can show you all last week's 
papers! I can show you magazines and other things. I can 
prove it!" 

She started toward the house. 
He followed. He felt his heart begin to pound. 

At the white door she paused, 
looking worriedly down the road. 
Jack thought he could hear the 
faint chug of a motorboat. She 
pushed open the door and he 
followed her inside. The smallwindowed room was dark after 
the sunlight. Jack got an impression of solid old furniture, a fireplace with brass andirons. 

"Flash!" croaked a gritty voice. 
"After their disastrous break day 
before yesterday, stocks are recovering. Leading issues. . ." 

Jack realized that he had started and had involuntarily put his 
arm around the girl's shoulders. 
At the same time he noticed that 
the voice was coming from the 
curved brown trumpet of an oldfashioned radio loudspeaker. 

The girl didn't pull away from 
him. He turned toward her. Although her gray eyes were on 
him, her attention had gone elsewhere. 



YESTERDAY HOUSE 



67 



"I can hear the car. They're 
coming back. They won't like it 
that you're here." 

"All right they won't like it/' 

Her agitation grew. "No. you 
must go." 

"I'll come back tomorrow," he 
heard himself saying. 

"Flash! It looks as if the World 
Economic Conference may soon 
adjourn, mouthing jeers at old 
Uncle Sam who is generally referred to as Uncle Shylock." 

Jack felt a numbness on his 
neck. The room seemed to be 
darkening, the girl growing stranger still. 

"You must go before they see 
you." 

"Flash! Wiley Post has just 
completed his solo circuit of the 
Globe, after a record-breaking 
flight of 7 days, 18 hours and 45 
minutes. Asked how he felt after 
the energy-draining feat, Post 
quipped. . ." 

TTF- was halfway across the 
lawn before he realized the 
terror into which the grating 
radio voice had thrown him. 

He leaped for the branch overhanging the fence, vaulted up 
with the risky help of a foot on 
the barbed top. A surprised squirrel, lacking time to make its 
escape up the trunk, sprang to 
the ground ahead of him. With 
terrible suddenness, two steeljawed semicircles clanked togeth


er just over the squirrel's head. 
Jack landed with one foot to 
either side of the sprung trap, 
while the squirrel darted off with 
a squeak. 

Jack plunged down the slope to 
the rocky spine and ran across 
it, spray from the rising waves 
spattering him to the waist. Panting now, he stumbled up into the 
oaks and undergrowth of the first 
island, fought his way through tt, 
finally reached the silent cove. He 
loosed the line of the Annie O., 
dragged it as near to the cove's 
mouth as he could, plunged kneedeep in freezing water to give it 
a final shove, scrambled aboard, 
snatched up the boathook and 
punched at the rocks. 

As soon as the Annie O. was 
nosing out of the cove into the 
cross waves, he yanked up the 
sail. The freshening wind filled 
it and sent the sloop heeling over, 
with inches of white water over 
the lee rail, and plunging ahead. 

For a long while, Jack was satisfied to think of nothing but the 
wind and the waves and the sail 
and speed and danger, to have 
all his attention taken up balancing one against the other, so that, 
he wouldn't have to ask himself 
what year it was and whether 
time was an illusion, and wonder 
about flappers and hidden traps. 

When he finally looked back 
at the island, he was amazed to 
see how tiny it had grown, as 



4* 



GALAXY SCIENCE FtCTfON 



distant as the mainland. 

Then he saw a gray motorboat 
astern. He watched it as it slowly overtook him. It was built like 
a lifeboat, with a sturdy low cabin in the bow and wheel amidship. 
Whoever was at the wheel had 
long gray hair that whipped in 
the wind. The longer he looked, 
the surer he was that it was a 
woman wearing ■ a lace dress. 
Something that stuck up inches 
over the cabin flashed darkly beside her. Only when she lifted it 
to the roof of the cabin did it 
occur to him that it might be a 
rifle. 

But just then the motorboat 
swung around in a turn that sent 
waves drenching over it, and 
headed back toward the island. 
He watched it for a minute in 
wonder, then his attention was 
jolted by an angry hail. 

Three fishing smacks, also 
headed toward town, were about 
to cross his bow. He came around 
into the wind and waited with 
shaking sail, watching a man in 
a lumpy sweater shake a fist at 
him. Then he turned and gratefully followed the dark, wide, 
fanlike sterns and age- yellowed 
sails. 

II 

riTHE exterior of Martin Kesserich's home — a weathered 
white cube with narrow, sharp


paned windows, topped by a cupola — was nothing like its lavish 
interior. 

In much the same way, Mrs. 
Kesserich clashed with the darkly gleaming furniture, persian 
rugs and bronze vases around 
her. Her shapeless black form, 
poised awkwardly on the edge of 
a huge sofa, made Jack think of 
a cow that had strayed into the 
drawing room. He wondered 
again how a man like Kesserich 
had come to marry such a creature. 

Yet when she lifted up her little 
eyes from the shadows, he had 
the uneasy feeling that she knew 
a great deal about him. The eyes 
were still those of a domestic 
animal, but of a wise one that 
has been watching the house a 
long, long while from the barnyard. 

He asked abruptly, "Do you 
know anything of a girl around 
here named Mary Alice Pope?" 

The silence lasted so long that 
he began to think she'd gone into 
some bovine trance. Then, without a word, she got up and went' 
over to a tall cabinet. Feeling on 
a«ledge behind it for a key, she 
opened a panel, opened a cardboard box inside it, took somethink from the box and handed 
him a photograph. He held it up 
to the failing light and sucked in 
his breath with surprise. 

It was a picture of the girl he'd 



YESTERDAY HOUSE 



met that afternoon. Same flatbosomed dress — flowered rather 
than white — no bandeau, same 
beads. Same proud, demure expression, perhaps a bit happier. 

"That is Mary Alice Pope," 
Mis. Kesserich said in a strangely flat voice. "She was Martin's 
fiancee. She was killed in a railway accident in 1933." 

The small sound of the cabinet 
door closing brought Jack back 
to reality. He realized that he no 
longer had the photograph. 
Against the gloom by the cabinet, 
Mrs. Kesserich's white face 
looked at him with what seemed 
a malicious eagerness. 

"Sit down," she said, "and I'll 
tell you about it." 

V/ithout a thought as to why 
she hadn't asked him a single 
question — he was much too dazed 
for that — he obeyed. Mrs. Kesserich resumed her position on 
the ed^e of the sofa. 

"You must understand, Mr. 
Barr. that Mary Alice Pope was 
the one love of Martin's life. He 
is a man of very deep and strong 
feelings, yet as you probably 
know, anything but kindly or 
demonstrative. Even when he 
first came here from Hungary 
with his older sisters Hani and 
Hilda, there was a cloak of loneliness about him — or rather about 
the three of them. 

"Hani and Hilda were athletic 
outdoor women, yet fiercely 

TO 
 





YESTERDAY HOUSE 



proud— I don't imagine they ever 
spoke to anyone in America except as to a servant — and with a 
seething distaste for all men except Martin. They showered all 
their devotion on him. So of 
course, though Martin didn't 
realize it, they were consumed 
with jealousy when he fell in 
love with Mary Alice Pope. 
They'd thought that since he'd 
reached forty without marrying, 
he was safe. 

"Mary Alice came from a purebred, or as a biologist would say, 
inbred British stock. She was 
very young, but very sweet, and 
up to a point very wise. She 
sensed Hani and Hilda's feelings 
right away and did 'everything 
she could to win them over. For 
instance, though she was afraid 
of horses, she took up horseback 
riding, because that was Hani 
and Hilda's favorite pastime. 
Naturally, Mnrtin knew nothing 
of her fear, and naturally his sisters knew about it from the first. 
But — and here is where Mary's 
wisdom fell short — her brave 
gesture did not pneify them: it 
only increased their hatred. 

"Except for his research, Martin was blind to everything but 
his love. It was a beautiful and 
yet frightening passion. e*n insane cherishing as narrow and 
intense as his sisters' hatred.*' 



7t 



1W7TTH a start. Jack remembered that it was Mrs. Kesserich tilling him all this. 

She went on, "Martin's love 
directed his every move. He was 
building a home for himself and 
Mary, and in his mind he was 
building; a wonderful future for 
them as well — not vaguely, if you 
know Martin, but year by year, 
month by month. This winter, 
he'd plan, they would visit 
Buenos Aires, next summer they 
would sail down the inland passage and he would teach Mary 
Hungarian for their trip to BudaPesth the year after, where he 
would occupy a chair at the 
university for a few months . . . 
and so on. Finally the time for 
their marriage drew near. Martin had been away. His research 
was keeping him very busy — " 

Jack broke in with, "Wasn't 
that about the time he did his 
definitive work on growth and 
fertilization?" 

Mrs. Kesserich nodded with 
Solemn appreciation in the gathering darkness. "But now he was 
coming home, his work done. It 
was early evening, very chilly, 
but Hani and Hilda felt they had 
to ride down to the station to 
meet their brother. And although 
she dreaded it. Mafy rode with 
them, for she knew how delighted 
he would be at her cantering to 
the puffing train Rnd his running 
up to lift hor down from the 



saddle to welcome him home. 

"Of course there was Martin** 
luggage to be considered, so the 
station wagon had to be sent 
down for that." She looked 
defiantly at Jack. "I drove the 
station wagon. I was Martin's 
laboratory assistant." 

She paused. "It was almost 
dark, but there was still a white 
cold line of sky to the west. Hani 
and Hilda, with Mary between 
them, were waiting on their 
horses at the top of the hill that 
led down to the station. The 
train had whistled and its headlight was graying the gravel of 
the crossing. 

"Suddenly Mary's horse 
squealed and plunged down the 
hill. Hani and Hilda followed — 
to try to catch her, they "said, but 
they didn't manage that, only 
kept her horse from veering off. 
Mary never screamed, but as 
her horse reared on the tracks. I 
saw her face in the headlight's 
glare. 

"Martin must have guessed, or 
at least feared what had happened, for he was out of the 
train and running along the 
track before it stopped. -In fact, 
he was the first to kneel down 
beside Mary — I mean, what had 
been Mary — and was holding 
her all bloody and shattered in 
his arms." 

A door slammed. There were 
steps in the hall. Mrs. Kesserich 



71 




 



stiffened and was silent. Jack 
tamed. 

The blur of a face hung in the 
doorway to the hall — a seemingly young, sensitive, suavely handsome face with aristocratic jaw. 
Then there was a click and the 
lights flared up and Jack saw 
the close-cropped gray hair and 
the lines around the eyes and 
nostrils, while the sensitive 
mouth grew sardonic. Yet the 
handsomeness stayed, and somehow the youth, too, or at least 
a tremendous inner vibrancy. 

"Hello, Barr," Martin Kesserich said, ignoring his wife. 

The great biologist had come 
home. 

Ill 

"AH, yes, and Jamieson had a 
feeble paper on what he 
called individualization in marine 
worms. Barr. have you ever 
thought much about the larger 
aspects of the problem of individuality?" 

Jack jumped slightly. He had 
let his thoughts wander very far. 

"Not especially, sir," he mumbled. 

The house was still. A few 
minutes after the professor's arrival, Mrs. Kesserich had gone off 
with an anxious glance at Jack. 
He knew why and wished he 
could reassure her that he would 
not mention their conversation to 



the professoi 

Kesserich had spexit perhaps a 
half hour briefing him on th 
more important papers delivere 
at the conferences. Then, aimer 
as if it were a teacher's trick t 
show up a pupil's inattention, he 
had suddenly posed this question about individuality. 

"You know what I mean, of 
course," Kesserich pressed. "Th" 
factors that make you you. and 
me me." 

"Heredity and environment." 
Jack parroted like a freshman. 

Kesserich nodded. "Suppose — ■ 
this is just speculation — that we 
could control heredity and environment. Then we could recreate the same individual at 
will." 

Jack felt a shiver go througl 
him. "To get exactly the same 
pattern of hereditary traits. 
That'd be far beyond us." 

"What about identical twins?" 
Kesserich pointed out. "And 
then there's parthenogenesis to 
be considered. One might produce 
a duplicate of the mother without the intervention of the male." 
Although his voice had grown 
more idly speculative, Kesserich 
seemed to Jack to be smiling 
secretly. "There are many ex 
amples in the lower animal forms, 
to say nothing of the technique 
by which Loeb caused a sea 
urchin to reproduce with no mor 
stimulus than a salt solution." 



YESTERDAY HOUSE 



Jack felt the hair rising on his 
neck. "Even then you wouldn't 
get exactly the same pattern of 
hereditary traits." 

"Not if the parent were of 
very pure stock ? Not i f there 
wt r< Morne special technique for 
selecting ova that would reproduce all the mother's traits?" 

"But environment would 
change things," Jack objected. 
"The duplicate would be bound 
to develop differently." 

"Is environment so important? 
Newman tells about a pair of 
identical twins separated from 
birth, unaware of each other's 
existence. They met by accident when they were twenty-one. 
Each was a telephone repairman. Each had a wife the same 
age. Each had a baby son. And 
each had a fox terrier called 
'Trixie.' That's without trying to 
make environments simitar. But 
suppose you did try. Suppose you 
saw to it that each of them had 
exactly the same experiences at 
the same times . . .'* 

For a moment it seemed to 
Jack that the room was dimming 
and wavering, becoming a dark 
pool in which the only motionless thing was Kesserich's sphinxlike face. 

"Well, we've escaped quite far 
enough from Jamieson's marine 
worms," the biologist said, all 
brisk again. He said it as if Jack 
were the one who had led the 



conversation down wild and unprofitable channels. "Let's get on 
to your project. I want to talk it 
over now, because I won't have 
any tiVne for it tomorrow." 

Jack looked at him blankly. 

"Tomorrow I must attend to a 
very important matter," the biologist explained. 

IV 

Tt/T©RNING sunlight brighten J-™* ed the colors of the wax 
flowers under glass on the high 
bureau that always seemed to 
emit the faint odor of old hair 
combings. Jack pulled back the 
diamond-patterned quilt and 
blinked the sleep from his eyes. 
He expected his mind to be busy 
wondering about Kesserich and 
his wife — things said and half 
said last night — but found instead 
that his thoughts swung instantly 
to Mary Alice Pope, as if to a 
farthest islanfl in a world of 
people. 

Downstairs, the house was 
empty. After a long look at the 
cabinet — he felt behind it, but 
the key was gone — he hurried 
down to the waterfront. He 
stopped only for a bowl of chowder and. as an afterthought, to 
buy half a dozen newspapers. 

The sea was bright, the brisk 
wind just right for the Annie O. 
There was eagerness in the way 
it smacked the sail and in the 



74 




 



creak of the mast. And when he 
reached the cove, it was no longer 
still, but nervous with faint ripples, as if time had finally begun 
to stir. 

After the same struggle with 
the underbrush, he came out on 
the rocky spine and passed the 
cove of the sea urchins. The 
spiny creatures struck an uncomfortable chord in his memory. 

This time he climbed the second island cautiously, scraping 
the innocent -seeming ground 
ahead of him intently with a 
boathook he'd brought along for 
the purpose. He was only a few 
yards from the fence when he 
saw Mary Alice Pope standing 
behind it. 

He hadn't realized that his 
heart would begin to pound or 
that, at the same time, a shiver 
of almost supernatural dixad 
would go through him. 

The girl eyed him with an uneasy hostility and immediately 
began to speak in a hushed, hurried voice. "You muit go away 
at once and never come back. 
You're a wicked man, but I 
don't want you to be hurt. I've 
been watching for you all morning." 

He tossed the newspapers over 
the fence. "You don't have to 
read them now." he told her. 
"Just look at the datelines and 
a few of the headlines." 

When she finally lifted her 



eyes to his again, she was trembling. She tried unsuccessfully to 
speak. 

"Li&ten to me," he said. 
"You've been the victim of a 
scheme to make you believe you 
were born around 1916 instead of 
1933, and that it's 1933 now instead of 1951. I'm not sure why 
it's been done, though I think I 
know who you really are." 

"But," the girl faltered, "my 
aunts tell me it's 1933." 

"They would." 

"And there are the papers . . . 
the magazines . . . the radio." 

"The papers are old ones. The 
radio's faked — some sort of recording. I could show you if I 
could get at it." 

"These papers might be faked,'* 
she said, pointing to where she'd 
let them drop on the ground. 

"They're new," he said. "Only 
old papers get yellow." 

"But why would they do it to 
me? Why? 1 ' 

"Come with me to the mainland, Mary. That'll set you 
straight quicker than anything." 

"I couldn't," she said, drawing back. "He's coming tonight." 

"He?" 

"The man who sends me the 
boxes . . . and my life." 

Jack shivered. When he spoke, 
his voice was rough and quick. 
"A life that's completely a lie, 
that's cut you off from the world. 
C(Jme with me, Mary." 



YESTERDAY HOUSE 



75 



CHE looked up at him wonderingly. For perhaps ten seconds the silence held and the 
spell of her eerie sweetness deepened. 

"I love you. Mary," Jack said 
sof Jy. 

She took a step back. 

"Really, Mary, I do.* 

She shook her head. "I don't 
know what's true. Go away." 

"Mary," he pleaded, "read the 
papers I've given you. Think 
things through. I'll wait for you 
here." 

"Vou can't. My aunts would 
find you." 

"Then I'll go away and come 
back. About sunset. Will you 
give me an answer?" 

She looked at him. Suddenly 
she whirled around. He. too, 
fceard the chuff of the Essex. 
"They'll find us," she said. "And 
if they find you. I don't know 
what they'll do. Quick, run!" 
And she darted off herself, only 
to turn back to scramble for the 
papers. 

"But will you give me an answer?" lie pressed. 

She looked frantically up from 
the papers. "I don't know. You 
i*ustn't risk coming back." 

"I will, no matter what you 
say." 

"I can't promise. Please go." 
"Just one question," he begged. 
"What are your aunts' names?" 
"Wtni and Hilda," she told 



him, and then she was gone. The 
hedge shook where she'd darted 
through. 

Jack hesitated, then started for 
the cove. He thought for a moment of staying on the island, but 
decided against it. He could probably conceal himself successfully, 
but whoever found his boat 
would have him at a disadvantage. Besides, there were things 
he must try to find out on the 
mainland. 

As he entered the oaks, his 
spine tightened for a moment, as 
if someone were Watching him. 
He hurried to the rippling cove, 
wasted no time getting the Annie 
O. underway. With the wind still 
in the west, he knew it would be 
a hard sail . He'd need half a 
dozen tucks to reach the mainland. 

When he was about a quarter 
of a mile out from the cove, there 
was a sharp smack beside him. 
He jerked around, heard a distant crack and saw a foot-long 
splinter of fresh wood dangling 
from the edge of the sloop's cockpit, about a foot from his head. 

He felt his skin tighten. He 
was the bull's-eye of a great 
watery target. All the air between 
him and the island was tainted 
with menace. 

Water splashed a yard from 
the side. There was another distant crack. He lay on his back 
in the cockpit, steering by the 



76 




 



sail, taking advantage of what 
little cover there was. 

There were several more cracks. 
After the second, there was a hole 
in the sail. 

Finally Jack looked back. The 
island was more than a mile 
astern. He anxiously scanned the 
sea ahead for craft. There were 
none. Then he settled down to 
nurse more speed from the sloop 
and wait for the motorboat. 

But it didn't come out to follow him. 

V 

CAME as yesterday. Mrs. Kesserich was sitting on the edge 
of the couch in the living room, 
yet from the first Jack was aware 
of a great change. Something had 
filled the domestic animal witli 
grief and fury. 

"Where's Dr. Kesserich?" he 
asked. 

"Not here!" 

"Mrs. Kesserich." he said, 
dropping down beside her, "you 
were telling me something yesterday when we were interrupted." 

She looked at him. "You have 
found the girl?" she almost 
shouted. 

"Yes," Jack was surprised into 
answering. 

A look of slyness t*ame into 
Mrs. Kesserich's bovine face. 
"Then I'll tell you everything, I 
can now. 

"When Marfin found Mary 



dying, he didn't go to pieces. You 
know how controlled he can be 
when he chooses. He lifted 
Mary's body as if the crowd and 
the railway men weren't there, 
and carried it to the station wagon. Hani and Hilda were sitting 
on their horses nearby. He gave 
them one look. It was as if he had 
said, 'Murderers!' 

"He told me to drive home as 
fast as I dared, but when I got 
there, he stayed sitting by Mary 
in the back. I knew he must have 
given up what hope he had for 
her life, or else she was dead already. I looked at him. In the 
domelight. his face had the most 
deadly and proud expression I've 
ever seen on a man. I worshiped 
him, you know, though he had 
never shown me one ounce of 
feeling. So I was completely unprepared for the naked appeal in 
his voice. 

"Yet all he said at First was, 
'Will you do something for me?* 
I told him, 'Surely,' and as we 
carried Mary in, he told me the 
rest. He wanted me to be the " 
mother of Mary's child." 

Jack stared at her blankly. 

Mrs. Kesserich nodded. "He 
wanted to remove an ovum from 
Mary's 1 body and nurture it in 
mine, so that Mary, in a way, 
could live on." 

"But that's impossible!" Jack 
objected. "The technique is being tried now on cattle, I know. 



YESTERDAY HOUSE 



77 



so that a prize heifer can have 
several calves a year, all nurtured 
in 'scrub heifers,' as they're 
called. But no one's ever dreamed 
of trying it on human beings!'* 

Tlfl'RS. Kesserich looked at him 
■J-™*- contemptously. "Martin had 
mastered the technique twenty 
years ago. He was willing to take 
the chance. And so was I — partly 
because he fired my scientific 
imagination and reverence, but 
mostly because he said he would 
marry me. He barred the doors. 
We worked swiftly. As far as 
anyone was concerned, Martin, 
in a wild fit of grief, had locked 
himself up for several hours to 
mourn over the body of his 
fiancee. 

"Within a month we were married, and I finally gave birth to 
the child." 

Jack shook his head. "You gave 
birth to your own child." 

She smiled bitterly. "No, it was 
Mary's. Martin did not keep his 
tthole bargain with me — I was 
nothing more than his 'scrub wife' 
in every way." 

"You think you gave birth to 
Mary's child." 

Mrs. Kesserich turned on Jack 
in anger. "I've been wounded by 
him, day in and day out, for 
years, but I've never failed to 
recognize his genius. Besides, 
you've seen the girl, haven't 
you?" 



Jack had to nod. What confounded him most was that, 
granting the near-impossible 
physiological feat Mrs. Kesserich 
had described, the girl should 
look so much like the mother. 
Mothers and daughters don't 
look that much alike; only identical twins did. With a thrill of 
fear, he remembered Kesserich's 
casual words: "... parthenogenesis . . . pure stock . . . special 
techniques . . ." 

"Very well," he forced himself 
to say, "granting that the child 
was Mary's and Martin's — " 

"No? Mary's alone!" 

Jack suppressed a shudder. He 
continued quickly, "What became of the child?" 

Mrs. Kesserich lowered her 
head. "The day it was born, it 
was taken away from me. After 
that, I never saw Hilda and 
Hani, either." 

"You mean." Jack asked, "that 
Martin sent them away to bring 
up the child?" 

Mrs. Kesserich turned away. 
"Yes." 

Jack asked incredulously, "He 
trusted the child with the two 
people he suspected of having 
caused the mother's death?" 

"Once when I was his assistant," Mrs. Kesserich said softly, 
"I carelessly broke some laboratory glassware. He kept me up all 
night building a new setup, 
though I'm rather poor at work



 



ing with glass and usually get 
burned. Bringing up the child 
was his sisters' punishment." 

"And they went to that house 
on the farthest island? I suppose 
it was the house he'd been building for Mary and himself.'* 

"Yes." 

"And they were to bring up 
the child as his daughter?" 

Mrs. Kesserich started up, but 
when she spoke it was as if she 
had to force out each word. "As 
his wife — as soon as she was 
grown." 

"How can you know that?" 
Jack asked shakily. 

The rising wind rattled the 
windowpane. 

"Because today — eighteen years 
after — Martin broke all of his 
promise to me. He told me he 
was leaving me/' 

VI 

VJT/HITE waves shooting up 
™* like dancing ghosts in the 
Moon -sketched, spray-swept dark 
were Jack's first beacon of the 
island and brought a sense of 
physical danger, breaking the 
trancelike yet frantic mood he 
had felt ever since he had spoken 
with Mrs. Kesserich. 

Coming around farther into the 
wind, he scudded past the end of 
the island into the choppy sea on 
the landward side. A little later 
he let down the reefed sail in the 



cove of the sea urchins, where the 
water was barely moving, although the air was shaken by the 
pounding of the surf on the spine 
between the two islands. 

After making fast, he paused 
a moment for a scrap of cloud to 
pass the moon. The thought of 
the spiny creatures in the black 
fathoms under the Annie O. sent 
an odd quiver of terror through 
him. 

The Moon came out and he 
started across the glistening rocks 
of the spine. But he had forgotten 
the rising tide. Midway, a wave 
clamped around his ankles, tried 
to carry him off, almost made 
him drop the heavy object he 
was carrying. Sprawling and 
drenched, he clung to the rough 
rock until the surge was past. 

Making it finally up to the 
fence, he snipped a wide gate 
with the wire-cutters. 

The windows of the house were 
alight. Hardly aware of his 
shivering, he crossed the lawn, 
slipping from one clump of shrubbery to another, until he reached 
one just across the drive from the 
doorway. At that moment he 
heard the approaching chuff of 
the Essex, the door of the cottage 
opened, and Mary Alice Pope 
stepped out, closely followed by 
Hani or Hilda. 

Jack shrank close to the shrubbery. Mary looked pale and 
blank-faced, as if she had re


YESTERDAY HOUSE 



79 



treated within herself. He was 
acutely conscious of the inadequacy of his screen as the ghostly 
headlights of the Essex began to 
probe through the leaves. 

But then he sensed that something more was about to happen 
than just the car arriving. It was 
a change in the expression of the 
face behind Mary that gave him 
the cue — a widening and sidewise flickering of the cold eyes, 
the puckered lips thinning into a 
cruel smile. 

The Essex shifted into second 
and. without any warning, accelerated. Simultaneously, the woman behind Mary gave her a 
violent shove. But at almost exactly the same instant, Jack ran. 
lU caught Mary as she sprawled 
toward the gravel, and lunged 



ahead without checking. The 
Essex bore down upon them, a 
square-snouted, roaring monster. 
It swerved viciously, missed 
them by inches, threw up gravel 
in a skid, and rocked to a stop, 
stalled. 

THE first, incredulous voice 
that broke the pulsing silence. 
Jack recognized as Martin Kesserich's. It came from the car, 
which was slewed around so that 
it almost faced Jack and Mary. 

"Hani, you tried to kill her! 
You and Hilda tried to kill her 
again!" 

The woman slumped over the 
wheel slowly lifted her head. In 
th< indistinct light, she looked 
the twin of the woman behind 
Jack and Mary. 




"Did you really think we 
wouldn't?" she asked in a voice 
that spat with passion. "Did you 
actually believe that Hilda and I 
would serve this eighteen years' 
penance just to watch you go off 
with her?" She began to laugh 
wildly. "You've never understood 
your sisters at all!" 

Suddenly she broke off. stiffly 
stepped down from the car. Lifting her skirts a little, she strode 
past Jack and Mary. 

Martin Kesserich followed her. 
In passing, he said. "Thanks, 
Barr." It occurred to Jack that 
Kesserich made no more question 
of his appearance on the island 
than of his presence in the laboratory. Like Mrs. Kesserich, the 
great biologist took him for 
granted. 



Kesserich stopped a few feet 
short of Hani and Hilda. Without shrinking from him. the sisters drew closer together. They 
looked like two gaunt hawks. 

"But you waited eighteen 
years," he said. "You could have 
killed her at any time, yet you 
chose to throw away so much of 
your lives just to have this moment." 

"How do you know we didn't 
like waiting eighteen years?" 
Hani answered him. "Why 
shouldn't we Want to make as 
strong an impression on you as 
anyone? And as for throwing our 
lives away, that was your doing. 
Oh, Martin, you'll never know 
anything about how your sisters 
feel!" 

He raised his hands baffU-dty. 




YESTERDAY HOUSE 



M 



"Even assuming that you hate 
me — " at the word "hate" both 
Hani and Hilda laughed softly— 
"and that you were prepared to 
strike at both my love and my 
work, still, that you should have 
Waited . . ." 

Hnni and Hilda said nothing. 

Kesserich shrugged. "Very 
well." he said in a voice that had 
lost all its tension. "You've 
wasted a third of a lifetime looking forward to an irrational revenge. And you've failed. That 
should be sufficient punishment." 

Very slowly, he turned around 
and for the first time looked at 
Mary. His face was clearly revealed by the twin beams from 
the stalled car. 

Jack grew cold. He fought 
against accepting the feelings of 
wonder, of poignant triumph, of 
love, of renewed youth he saw entering the face in the headlights. 
But most of all he fought against 
the sense that Martin Kesserich 
was successfully drawing them all 
back into the past, to 1933 and 
another accident. There was a 
distant hoot and Jack shook. For 
a moment he had thought it a 
railway whistle and not a ship's 
horn. 

The biologist said tenderly, 
"Come, Mary." 

JACK'S trembling arm Tightened a trifle on Mary's waist. 
He could feel her trembling. 



"Come, Mary." Kesserich repeated. 

Stilt she didn't reply. 

Jack wet his lips. "Mary isn't 
going with you, Professor," he 
said. 

"Quiet, Barr," Kesserich ordered absently. "Mary, it is necessary that you and I leave the 
island at once. Please come." 

"But Mary isn't coming," Jack 
repeated. 

Kesserich looked at him for the 
first time. "I'm grateful to you for 
the unusual sense of loyalty — 
or whatever motive it may have 
been — that led you to follow me 
out here tonight. And of course 
I'm profoundly grateful to you 
for saving Mary's life. But I 
must ask you not to interfere 
further in a matter which you 
can't possibly understand." 

He turned to Mary. "I know 
how shocked and frightened you 
must feel. Living two lives and 
then having to face two deaths- — 
it must be more terrible than anyone can realize. I expected this 
meeting to take place under very 
different circumstances. I wanted 
to explain everything to you very 
naturally and gently, like the 
messages I've sent you every day 
of your second life. Unfortunately, that can't be. 

You and I must leave the 
island fight now.'* 

Mary stared at him, then 
turned wonderingly toward Jack, 



82 




 



who felt his heart begin to pound 
warmly. 

"You still don't understand 
what I'm trying to tell you, 
Professor," he said, boldly now. 
"Mary is not going with you. 
You've deceived her all her life. 
You've taken a fantastic amount 
of pains to bring her up under 
the delusion that she is Mary 
Alice Pope, who died in — " 

"She is Mary Alice Pope," 
Kesserich thundered at him. He 
advanced toward them swiftly. 
"Mary darling, you're confused, 
but you must realize who you are 
and who I am and the relationship between us." 

"Keep away," Jack warned, 
swinging Mary half behind him. 
"Mary doesn't love you. She 
can't marry you, at any rate. 
How could she, when you're her 
father?" 

"Barr!" 

"Keep off!" Jack shot out the 
flat of his hand and Kesserich 
went staggering backward. "I've 
talked with your wife — your wife 
on the mainland. She told me 
the whole thing." 

T/"ESSERICH seemed about to 
rush forward again, then controlled himself. "You've got 
everything wrong. You hardly deserve to be told, but under the 
circumstances I have no choice. 
Mary is not my daughter. To be 
precise, she has no father at all. 



Do you remember the work that 
Jacques Loeb did with sea urchins?" 

Jack frowned angrily. "You 
mean what we were talking about 
last night?" 

"Exactly. Loeb was able to 
cause the egg of a sea urchin to 
develop normally without union 
with a male germ cell. I have 
done the same thing with a human being. This girl is Mary 
Alice Pope. She has exactly the 
same heredity. She has had exactly the same life, so far as it 
could be reconstructed. She's 
heard and read the same things 
at exactly the same times. There 
have been the old newspapers, 
the books, even the old recorded 
radio programs. Hani and Hilda 
have had their daily instructions, 
to the letter. She's retraced the 
same time-trail." 

"Rot !" Jack interrupted. "I 
"don't for a moment believe what 
you say about her birth. She's 
Mary's daughter — or the daughter of your wife on the mainland. 
And as for retracing the same 
time-trail, that's senile self-delusion. Mary Alice Pope had a 
normal life. This girl has been 
brought up in cruel imprisonment 
by two insane, vindictive old 
women. In your own frustrated 
desire, you've pretended to yourself that you've recreated the girl 
you lost. You haven't. You 
couldn't. Nobody could — the 



YESTERDAY HOUSE 



83 



great Martin Kesscrich or anyone 
else I" 

Kesserich, his features working, shifted his point of attack. 
"Who are you, Mary?" 

"Don't answer him," Jack said. 
"He's trying to confuse you." 

"Who are you?" Kesserich insisted. 

"Mary Alice Pope," she said 
rapidly in a breathy whisper before Jack could speak again. 

"And when were you born?" 
Kesserich pressed on. 

"You've been tricked all your 
life about that," Jack warned. 

But already the girl was saying, 
"In 1916." 

"And who am I then?" Kesserich demanded eagerly. "Who 
am I?" 




'HE girl swayed. She brushed 
her head with her hand. 



"It's so strange," she said, 
with a dreamy, almost laughing 
throb in her voice that turned 
Jack's heart cold. "I'm sure I've 
never seen you before in my life, 
and yet it's as if I'd known you 
forever. As if you were closer to 
me than — " 

"Stop it!" Jack shouted at Kesserich. "Mary loves me. She loves 
me because I've shown her the 
lie her life has been, and because 
she's coupling away with me now. 
Aren't you, Mary?" 

He swung her around so that 
her blank face was inches from 



his own. "It's me you love, isn't 
it, Mary?" 

She blinked doubtfully. 

At that moment Kesserich 
charged at them, went sprawling 
as Jack's fist shot out. Jack 
swept up Mary and ran with her 
across the lawn. Behind him he 
heard an agonized cry — Kesserich's — and cruel, mounting 
laughter from Hani and Hilda. 

Once through the ragged doorway in the fence, he made his 
way more slowly, gasping. Out 
of the shelter of the trees, the 
wind tore at them and the ocean 
roared. Moonlight glistened, now 
on the spine of black wet rocks, 
now on the foaming surf. 

Jack realized that the girl in 
his arms was speaking rapidly, 
disjointedly, but he couldn't 
quite make out the sense of the 
words and then they were lost in 
the crash of the surf. She struggled, but he told himself that it 
was only because she was afraid 
of the menacing waters^ 

He pushed recklessly into the 
breaking surf T raced gasping 
across the middle of the spine as 
the rocks uncovered, sprang to 
the higher ones as the next wave 
crashed behind, showering them 
with spray. His chest burning 
with exertion, he carried the girl 
the few remaining yards to where 
the Annie O. was tossing. A sudden great gust of wind almost did 
what the waves had failed to do, 



M 




 



but he kept his footing and lowered the girl into the boat, then 
jumped in after. 

She stared at him wildly. 
"What's that?" 

He, too, had caught the faint 
shout. Looking back along the 
spine just as the Moon came clear 
again, he saw white spray rise 
and fall — and then the figure of 
Kesserich stumbling through it. 

"Mary, wait for me!" 

The figure was halfway across 
win 11 it lurched, started forward 
again, then was jerked back as 
if something had caught its 
ankle. Out of the darkness, the 
next wave sent a line of white at 
it neck-high, crashed. 

Jack hesitated, but another 
great gust of wind tore at the 
half-raised sail, and it was all 
he could do to keep the sloop 
from capsizing and head her into 
the wind again. 

Mary was tugging at his shoulder. "You mmrt help him," she 
was saying. "He's caught in the 
rocks." 

H,e heard a voice crying. 
Screaming crazily above the surf: 
"Ah, love, let us be true 
To one another! for the world — " 

The sloop rocked. Jack had it 
finally headed into the wind. He 
looked around for Mary. 

She had jumped out and was 
hurrying back, scrambling across 
the rocks toward the dark, strug


gling figure that even as he 
watched was once more engulfed 
in the surf. 

Letting go the lines. Jack 
sprang toward the stern of the 
sloop. 

But just then another giant 
blow came, struck the sail like 
a great fist of air, and sent the 
boom slashing at the back of his 
head. 

His last recollection was being 
toppled out onto the rocks and 
wondering how he could cling to 
them while unconscious. 

VII 

T^HE little cove was once again 
as quiet as time's heart. Once 
again the Annie O. was a sloop 
embedded in a min or. Once again 
the rocks were warm underfoot. 

Jack Barr lifted his fiercely 
aching head and looked at the 
distant line of the mainland, as 
tiny and yet as clear as something viewed through the wrong 
end of a telescope. He was very 
tired. Searching the island, in 
his present shaky condition, had 
taken all the strength out of him. 

He looked at the peacefully 
rippling sea outside the cove and 
thought of what a churning pot 
it had been during the storm. He 
thought wonderingly of his rescue — a man wedged unconscious 
between two rock teeth, kept 
somehow from being washed 



YESTERDAY HOUSE 



85 



away by the merest chance. 

He thought of Mrs. Kesserich 
sitting alone in her house, scanning the newspapers that had 
nothing to tell. 

He thought of the empty 
island behind him and the vanished motorboat. 

He wondered if the sea had 
pulled down Martin Kesserich 
and Mary Alice Pope. He wondered if only Hani and Hilda had 
sailed away. 

He winced, remembering what 



he hr.d done to Martin and Mary 
by his blundering infatuation. In 
his way, he told himself, he had 
been as bad as the two old 
women. 

He thought of death, and of 
time, and of love that defies 
them. 

He stepped lhvpingly into the 
Annie O. to set sail — and realized 
that philosophy is only for the 
unhappy. 

Mary was asleep in the stern. 

— FRITZ LEIBER 



Winner of the Boys' Clubs of America 
1952 Science-Fiction Award 



B. 



>ULLARD of 
THE SPACE PATROL 

by MALCOLM JAMESON 

edited, with an Introduction and Notes, by Amlrc Norton 

Ihe story of Commander John Bullard— 

tradition-breaker and tradition-maker- whose armadas 

waged the grimmest of all wars in the black night 

of outer space-where the slightest miscalculation 

meant death in an interstellar vacuum. 

The dean of science-fiction writers, Malcolm Jameson, 

writes of the future with precision and imagination. 

Bullard is a very human hero whose advenjures 

will fascinate all readers. $2.50 at all bookstores 

THE WORLD PUBLISHING COMPANY 

Cleveland and New York 




 



EDUCATION 

OF A MARTIAN 



It was for his ideals Joyce 
loved the alien. But ideals 
are conditioned reflexes... 

By JOSEPH SHALLIT 

Illustrated by EMSK 



WALTER HARLEY 
glowered across the 
room at his daughter. 
He didn't like the willful tone 
that crept into her voice these 
days; he didn't like the way her 
gray eyes spread wide at him, 
the way her lips tensed, the way 
she drew herself up, tall and slim, 
an arch of determination. The 



darned girl had grown up too 
fast, that was the trouble. 

Joyce faced up to his scowl, 
shaky as she was. She knew what 
he was thinking, because he had 
told her enough times — she was 
a headstrong girl without a brain 
cell to her name; her college education had been a waste; worse 
than that, it had pumped her 



EDUCATION OF A MARTIAN 



a? 



full of crazy ideas, had knocked 
her sense of values upside down. 

"How anybody in their right 
mind ..." he growled at her. 
"Listen, you've already been to 
Mars. You've seen it. What do 
you want to go to that miserable, 
dried-up hole again for?" 

"Because . . . because I was 
happy there," she said tremulously. 

"What? With those miserable 
savages?" He slapped his euphoria pipe down on the table. 
"Ethel, will you listen to that?" 

Joyce's mother, plump and 
round-shouldered and vaguet yed, was deep in her reclining 
chair, the miniature trans viewer 
on her lap, watching a garden 
party in Rome. 

"What is it, dear?" she asked 
unhappily. 

"This crazy girl wants to take 
her vacation on Mars again." 

"Well ... it is educational," 
Ethel said. 

Harley made a wild, exasperated sound. "What do you know 
about it? You've never been there. 
It's a dried-up hole, I tell you. 
It's a slum — it's one great big 
slum. Just one decent hotel in 
the whole place, and that's only 
because some of our boys went 
out there and put it up for them." 

"That awful hotel — " Joyce 
caught herself. Not an argument 
about this, please! There was 
trouble enough waiting for her. 



"I wouldn't stay at the hotel," 
she said quietly. 

"What do you mean? Where 
would you stay?" 

"With some people I know 
there." 

She saw his heavy eyebrows 
clench, saw his eyes search her 
suspiciously. She heard her mother's uneasy movements. She sat 
tautly, her hands in her lap. 

"Who," Harley said finally, 
"are these people?" 

"Just . . . some friends," Joyce 
said. Now it was coming, now, 
now. 

"What friends?" H*r father's 
voice was lower, harsher. 

"Just some people I met when 
I was there last time." 

"Just some .... Say! Is this 
why we've been running up these 
solarphone bills? What've you 
been doing — talking to these people every week?" 

"Only a few times." 

"Look here. Look at me. Joyce, 
answer me. Have you been talking to that fellow you told us 
about — the one you met on your 
other trip?" 

She let it out, a tiny, miserable, "Yes." 

Harley's hand slammed down 
on the table. He wrestled his 
heavy body up out of his chair, 
stamped halfway across the room 
toward her and stopped. 

"Young lady, I'm not going to 
have this. I'm not going to have 




 



anything like this! You hear? 
You want to get tangled up with 
him? My God, you've been communicating with him for a year?" 

"Whenever I was able to," 
Joyce said hoarsely, looking at 
the floor. 

"Joyce!" He came to her, 
reached down and lifted her chin. 
"Joyce, you're not — you're not in 
love with this — this creature!" 

She nodded, suddenly angered 
at her weakness, angered at the 
wetness in her eyes. 

"Oh, my God!" Harley raised 
his arms, brought them down 
with a slap against his thighs. 
He turned away from her. He 
glared at his wife, who was drifting nervously up out of her chair. 
He turned back to Joyce. "You're 
not serious. You can't be. This 
can't — this just can't happen to 
us. You'll have to get this foolishness out of your head right 
now. Right this minute. My God, 
the next thing you know, you'll 
be wanting to marry one of those 
things." 

"I do ... " The sound barely 
came out. She swallowed, forced 
her voice up. "I am going to 
marry him." 

A BLAST of silence swept the 
room, but, strangely, the 
shock of it didn't touch her. All 
at once, she was calm, quiet. She 
had said it, and now she was 
armored against everything. 



"No," her father was saying 
dully. "No, Joyce. No." 

"I'm sorry. Dad," she said all 
in a rush. "I've thought about it 
a long time. I thought I'd forget 
him after a little while. I wasn't 
able to. I'm in love with him — 
I'll always be in love with him. 
When I come back, I'm bringing 
him with me. We're going to be 
married here." 

Now, finally, the storm bi okr 
out of him. He yelled at her, he 
stamped around, his fists pounded the air — it was just as she had 
pictured it, dreaded it. Yet she 
was 'unshaken now, detachedly 
able to watch him as if he were 
some unruly, unintelligent child. 
I am going to marry him, she 
had said, and once the words 
were out, everything else was 
easy. There were no problems. 
There was nothing to be afraid 
of. 

"His name is Gregrill," she said. 
"They don't haw last names. 
We'll have to make one up or 
perhaps use mine." 

"I'll see my daughter deacl before I let her marry a Martian!" 
Harley roared. 

"But if she really loves him — ? 
Ethel intruded timorously. 

"Loves him? Love that miserable scum?" 

"Dad, please," Joyce said quietly. "You're condemning somebody you've never seen." 

"I don't have to see him! He's 



EDUCATION OF A MARTIAN 



a Martian, isn't he? He has horns, 
doesn't he?" 

"They're not horns. They're 
antennae." 

"Call them what you like, 
they're horns!" 

"They're antennae, Dad," 
Joyce repeated firmly. "They're 
proof of advanced development. 
They can communicate with each 
other hundreds of miles. They 
can sense instantly — " 

"I don't want to hear about it!" 

"But, dear," Ethel tried again, 
"sometimes, when they marry an 
Earthling girl, they cut those 
horns off, and then they look 
just tike us." 

"I wouldn't let him — " Joyce 
bit off each word — "do any such 
thing. I'd be utterly ashamed of 
him. I wouldn't marry him if 
he knuckled under to our prejudices like that. What does he 
have to be apologetic about? He's 
a superior being — " 

"Superior?" her father howled 
at her, but his voice was losing 
its power. 

"IN spite of our buildings and 
machines and things, they're 
far richer than we are, really. 
They have such a richness of 
feeling, such warmth, such sensitivity. They understand and feet 
so much more than we do. It's 
— it's fantastic. It's just something we can't comprehend." 
"I see," he said bitterly. "And 



how are you going to comprehend 

them?" 

"Gregiill can speak Earthling 
as well as I can." Joyce said. 
"He's a graduate of the university 
there in Memnonia. Maybe, with 
his guidance, I'll eventually get 
some insight into — " 

"My God," Harley said dully. 
He walked unsteadily away from 
her and fell into his chair. "A 
daughter of mine ..." He looked 
at her again. "Joyce, can't you 
see it's impossible? It couldn't 
work. These mixed marriages 
have never worked out. Never! 
Don't you see how it would be? 
You'd be an outcast. None of 
your friends would ever want to 
see you again." 

"Well, if they should happen 
to be stupid and prejudiced — " 

"I'm that stupid and prejudiced! I wouldn't let a Martian in 
my house! They're the scum of 
the Solar System!" 

"Dad, I won't listen to you 
talk like that." 

"What do you want to do— 
be the wife of a janitor?" he 
went on relentlessly. "Porters and 
janitors, that's all they're fit for." 

"If they were ever given a 
chance — " 

"A chance? What would they 
do with it? Loaf around dreamily, 
get nowhere. Nowhere at all! And 
pull us down to their level while 
they're fouling up our civilization!" 



90 



GA1AXY SCIENCE FICTION 



Joyce stood up, her hands 

trembling. 

"You're not going to Mars!" 
Harley shouted. "You're not going, you hear? You're staying 
right here on earth!" ■ 

"I'm afraid," she said unsteadily, "that you're too late. I already have my ticket. I expected 
you'd make a fuss. My — my 
trunk is at the spaceport. Nothing 
can stop mc now, Dad." 

"I'll stop you. You'll never 
marry that scum. By God, if I 
have to take it to the Panterrestrial Court — " 

"Good-by, Dad. I'm not booked to sail till Thursday, but I 
think it's better if I spend the 
remaining days in a hotel. It'll 
be more comfortable for all of 
us." 

"Joyce, come back here!" 

"Good-by, Dad." She waved a 
shaky hand at her mother. 
"Good-by, Mom. See you soon." 

"Joyce! Come back!" 

She went out, quietly closing 
the door behind her. 

rpHE huge 1 200-passenger 
-■■ spaceship settled down slowly 
toward the landing field, its braking jets making a queer whistling 
sound in the thin Martian air. 
The passengers crowded to the 
windows. Most of them were already in their thermosuits, 
though the daylight temperature 
was close to fifty degrees. Some 



were even adjusting their oxygen 
packs. These weren't necessary at 
all, except for long hikes or intense exertion, which few of the 
visitors would indulge in. But 
they'd bought the things and they 
were going to use them — it was 
part of the adventure. 

Most of the passengers were 
working people on vacation, taking advantage of the special twoin-a-room rate. There were a few 
salesmen, nervous but hopeful 
about the possibilities of opening 
up the hinterlands; so far, only 
Memnonia, the Martian capital, 
had provided Earthlings with any 
business. 

In the bow of the spaceship 
was a crowd of girls, a college 
graduating class. Some of them 
were dressed in the new skin-tight 
thermosuits which were stirring 
up so much fuss in the fashion 
magazines. Listening to their ecstatic, senseless chatter, Joyce 
suddenly felt immensely older. 
The day, thirteen months ago, 
when she first sighted the Memnonian landscape with her own 
class, seemed impossibly long 
ago . . . 

The ship nestled in against the 
vast loading ramp. A whistle 
sounded. The doors slid open. 
Husky, bare - chested Martian 
porters crowded aboard, began 
wheeling out the luggage. Joyce 
stepped out into the pale sunlight. The clear, thin air tingled 

91 



EDUCATION OF A MARTIAN 




 



at her nostrils, dizzied her, as 
she'd known it would till she got 
used to it. She followed her porter 
down the ramp. It seemed to her, 
in her giddiness, that Gregrill 
himself was down there, down at 
the end of the ramp, bronzed, 
bare - armed, coming toward 
her — 

It was he! 

He had made the two-hundredmile trip to meet her! 

She began to run. She stumbled, caught herself on some\ 
body's arm, ran again, plunged 
against him, lost herself against 
his big, powerful chest. 

"Oh, Greg! Greg, you're here!" 

It was a long while before she 
could pull herself away to look 
at him. She had forgotten his 
strength, the magnificent arch of 
his chest. He was wearing a white 
fiber vest in the traditional style, 
sleeveless, cut low in front. His 
sun-washed skin glowed like polished bronze. The highlights 
shone on the strong, high arc 
of his nose, the ridge of his cheekbones. His fragile russet antennae 
swayed like wheat stalks in the 
wind. 

There were muttered complaints around her. She was 
being shoved, prodded. She'd 
hardly realized they were standing in the midst of the swarming 
passengers. 

"Oh," she laughed tremulously, 
"let's move. My luggage. Where 



— oh, there it is, that man over 
there with the cart." 

"I will get it," Gregrill said. 

"Oh, no, please." 

But he was already striding 
away, big and powerful, towering 
over most of the Earthlings who 
were scurrying past. She saw him 
give, something to the Martian 
porter, watched him swing the 
trunk up on his shoulder. It 
writhed in her, it devastated her, 
her father's contemptuous dismissal — "porters and janitors, 
that's all they're fit for." 

"Greg, put it down," she said 
frantically. "I won't have you 
carrying it!" 

He smiled at her indulgently. 
"It is not heavy." 

"I don't want you to," she 
pleaded. 

"Why do you not want me to?" 
he asked puzzledly. "Somebody 
must." 

But how could she say it? How 
could she discuss it at all? She 
walked beside him, dumbly. They 
went down the ramp to where 
the aircabs were loading. An 
Earthling company had put in 
all the air transport here ; the 
Martians themselves had never 
bothered to develop anything 
more advanced than the eshbrug, 
a lumbering, three-wheeled, sunpowered- vehicle. 

"We shall take the airbus," 
Gregrill said. 

"Oh, do we have to?" she asked. 



EDUCATION OF A MARTIAN 



93. 



"How else can we go?" 

"Can't we get an eshbrug?" 

He looked at her wonderingly. 
"To travel three times as long? 
I am aware that you are tired — " 

"I'm tired of a lot of things," 
she blurted. "I'm tired of all the 
smooth, cynical, streamlined — 
Right now, I'd rather walk the 
whole way than step into an 
Earthling airbus." 

He gave an uncertain laugh. "I 
am not sure that I understand 
your meaning." 

"I'll explain it some time." 

But how could she ever? He 
thought Earthlings were all such 
noble, shining, gifted creatures. 
How could she tell him of the 
rot at the heart of so many of 
them? 

"Come on," she insisted desperately. "Let's find an eshbrug." 

THE driver let them out at 
Gregrill's road. Gregrill shouldered the trunk, and they walked 
down past the irregular row of 
red, sunbaked, dome - shaped 
houses, each with its big tank in 
the rear for catching Mars' meager rainfall. Joyce felt a quickening, a surge of warmth, when 
she saw them and the quiet, openfaced people in their doorways, 
smiling their shy welcomes. She 
was coming home. 

She was coming home . . . 
Gregrill's mother and father 
were waiting just inside their 



door. They opened their arms; 
they hardly said a word. Joyce 
ran to them, folded them against 
her. She didn't mind the tears. 

She let them lead her into the 
main room, let them seat her, 
put pillows around her. She sat 
there bathing in their tenderness, 
their simple good-heartedness. 

Couldn't everybody see it? 
Why couldn't her father know it? 
These were the best people in the 
Universe! 

Dinner was an Earthling meal. 
Joyce had been looking forward 
to a dish of mrila, the Martian 
rice, and krulevak, the white fruit 
that tasted like luscious chicken 
meat. But Gregrill's parents had 
obviously felt that their humble 
foods were too mean for her exalted taste and they had gone to 
the expense of bringing in vegetables and meats from the Earthling import shop in Memnonia. 

Joyce hid her disappointment. 
She had an impulse to say, 
"Please, please don't mimic our 
Earthling ways. Stay the way 
you are. Don't spoil anything. 
Don't lose what you have." 

After dinner, Gregrill took her 
for a walk. Joyce had her thermosuit on now. The Sun was setting, and the startling cold of 
the Martian night was coming 
in fast. Gregrill changed his fiber 
vest for a sleeved jacket, though 
of the same light material. It was 
incredible how little protection 



94 




 



these people needed against the 
cold. But, of course, they'd 
adapted to it. 

They walked along the edge of 
the gorge that cut through the 
stunted forest half a mile from 
Gregrill's home. The rough sides 
of the gorge rose sheer and splendid, a marvel of glittering color — ■ 
red, orange, yellow, brown. Far 
down on the rocky bed, a shallow stream flowed sluggishly to 
the south. 

Soon, as summer came on, the 
stream would quickly deepen. 
From the northern ice fields, a 
toircnt of blue water would come 
rushing down the gorges, and the 
heavy rains would come, and the 
red ground underfoot would turn 
to a miraculous green, and the 
mrila would sprout up like a rug 
of green velvet across the wide 
fields and the terraced hills. 

If she could only stay here, if 
tiny could only build their lives 
here with these simple, goodhearted people . . . 

But she knew it couldn't be. 
Gregrill would be wasted here. 
Earth, despite all its hatefulness 
for her. was the only place where 
his gcrrius would have a chance 
to unfold and display its potentialities. 

"It is time that we go back?" 
Gregrill asked. "You are cold?" 

Suddenly, helplessly, Joyce began to laugh. 

"What is it?" Gregrill said. 



confused by the sudden laughter. 

"The funny stiff way you 
talk!" She laughed on and on. 
She couldn't stop. 

"I am sorry," he said, turning 
aside, his face full of hurt. 

"Oh, no!" She caught his arm. 
"Don't misunderstand. I love the 
way you talk. I want you always 
to talk the way you do now. 
Don't change — please don't ever 
change. I love you just as you 
are." 

|^REGR1LL got his visa five 
days later. It was a complicated affair. Joyce had to sign 
half a dozen affidavits at the 
Earthling consulate, all certifying in one way or another that 
she intended to marry Gregrill as 
soon as they reached Earth, and 
that she guaranteed he wouldn't 
become a public charge. It was 
practically the only way a Martian had of getting to Earth. 

It infuriated her, this stupid 
legislation by which Earth denied 
itself everything these people 
could contribute to its culture. A 
few years ago, the Earthling government had admitted several 
thousand Martians to fill the 
pressing shortage of menial labor, 
and had permitted Venusians to 
take jobs as room stewards and 
waiters on the spaceships; and by 
that trivial concession, it had felt 
it was fulfilling its obligations to 
the Interplanetary Union.* 



EDUCATION OF A MARTIAN 



95 



When would it learn what its 
narrow prejudices were costing? 
Would it have to wait till someone like Gregrill stepped forward 
and demonstrated all the richness it was missing? 

The formal good-bys had been 
said. The neighbors had held a 
party for them. It had been in a 
clearing behind the houses, out in 
tt'.: clean, lemon-yellow sunlight. 
They had eaten roasted trork, the 
crustacean delicacy from the 
northern gorges, and mrila made 
into candied patties. Gregrill's 
mother and father had danced 
the grave, stately farewell dance. 
And now. on their final evening 
on Mars, Joyce and Gregrill were 
taking their last walk along the 
deep, echoing gorge. 

She had just been watching 
him finish his packing, and the 
pain of it still sat in her throat. 
He had included his college books 
— every one of his texts and notebooks — packing them in so reverently, so pathetically confident 
that all he had to do was follow 
his. classroom precepts, and recognition and success would come 
tumbling into his hands . . . 

"I hope that your parents will 
like me as well as my parents 
like you." Gregrill said. 

"Oh, yes," Joyce assured him 
hoarsely. 

"Perhaps they will not be 
pleased that you marry a Martian ." 



"No. Greg, no. They'll—" But 
she couldn't carry it on. 

He turned to face her; he 
looked at her hard. He was starting to speak, to ask the obvious 
questions, but she Hung herself 
against him. 

"Greg! Let's get married here! 
Let's get married before we 
leave." 

He held her away from him so 
he could look at her. "But you 
had wished to be married oa 
Earth," he said bewilderedly. 

"I know, but I've changed my 
mind. I want it here, now. Oil, 
Greg. I'm afraid . . ." 

His big russet eyes narrowed, 
his high-winged nostrils flared, 
scenting danger. "You are afraid 
of what?" he asked quietly. 

"I don't know, Greg. I — I'm 
just afraid something will happen, something will go wrong, I 
don't know what." She couldn't 
look him in the eyes. "Let's get 
married here, in the morning, 
before we leave. Then we'll be 
married. 

"Nothing can go wrong." 

"Will not your parents be angered that you — " 

"No, no,. Greg. It'll be all right. 
This is the best way, believe me." 

"I believe you," he said grave
ly
And it caught her again, his 
small-boy solemnity. She was 
caught in a burst of helpless 
laughter. "Oh, Greg, I love you!" 



GAIAXY SCIENCE FICTION 



THEY were married by a Martian priest in a small reddraped temple in Memnonia, not 
far from the spaceport. The ceremony was without words, like all 
religious rites on Mars. The tall, 
round-bodied priest, a huge cylinder of a man in heavy ritual 
fiber robes, stood facing them, his 
hands stiff against his sides, his 
eyes closed, his heavy features 
motionless. 

Joyce closed her eyes, too. She 
strained to hear, feel, sense something of what was passing between the priest and Gregrill, 
Surely, if she strained hard 
enough, she would catch some 
echo, some aura. But the air defied her; she was deaf, blind, insensate ; she was cut off irrevocably from this higher level of 
communication. Perhaps their 
children . . . 

"He is saying the words now," 
Gregrill whispered in her ear. 
"You two together . . . comfort 
each other . . . against the darkness and the drought . . . through 
the long dry misery of winter . . . 
when the water is locked and 
nothing, grows . . . till the glad 
day of rain and running streams 
. . . you two together . . , comfort 
each other . . ." 

"Say yes, my darling," Gregrill 
told her. 

"Yes, yes! Oh, yes!" 
They were outside, striding exultantly through the sunshine, the 



light wind tossing their hair, and 

the woi'dri kept sinking to tier.: 
"Through the long dry misery of 
winter . . . till the glad day of 
rain . . ." 

Oh, yes, Greg! Yes! 

When they reached the spaceship, their bags had already been 
taken to their stateroom, unpacked, the clothing arranged in 
the dressers — the meticulous work 
of the |Venusian stewards. Even 
the bedcovers were turned down, 
her nightgown laid out. 

"Greg," she said in a rush of 
embarrassment, "let's go out and 
watch the . . . watch how we 
take off." 

"You go, and I shall join you 
soon," he said. "I must wash and 
anoint myself as a bridegroom." 

Joyce went down the corridor 
into the observation rotunda. The 
huge semicircular window was 
cluttered with jabbering passengers. She squeezed in among 
them, but she stayed only a moment. She pushed her way back 
out and went to a table near the 
head of the corridor, and waited 
restlessly for him. Midway down 
the corridor, a Venusian steward, 
a scrawny little gray-skinned, 
long-beaked fellow, was running 
a cleaning machine over the floor. 
She smiled at him, but he turned 
his face shyly away. 

And then Gregrill came, moving up the corridor with his lithe, 
magnificent grace. 



EDUCATION OF A MARTIAN 



His wet h;iir glistened. 

"Greg, you look wonderful!" 
she cried, instantly aware of how 
foolish she sounded. 

He speeded his steps. He didn't 
see the cleaning hose in his path. 
The Venu:;ian moved quickly to 
pull it aside, but it caught Gregrill's foot. He stumbled, caught 
himself on the . corridor rail. 
Swiftly he turned, his arm swung 
out, his forearm slammed against 
the jaw (if the Httle Venusian, 
sending him crashing down 
against his cleaning machine. 
Gregrill looked down at him a 
moment. Then he turned, gave 
Joyce a broad smile and walked 
to her table. 

"Greg." Her throat was dry. 
"Why did you do that? He didn't 
mean it." 

"It is his duty to avoid such 
accidents," Gregrill said. 

"But look, he's still lying there. 
Let's go help him." 

"Leave him there," he said. "He 
is only a Venusian." 

"Only a—?" 

"Venusian." His lips curled. 
"They are the scum of the Solar 
System." 

The tremor that went through 



her was lost in the thrust of the 
jets as the ship took off. 

"They are not even fit for 
cleaning floors," Gregrill said. He 
suddenly smiled. "Do you not see 
the change I have made?" He 
gestured at his head. 

Through tear-blinded eyes, she 
saw his glossy waves of hair. The 
antennae were gone! 

"It hurt only a little," he said. 
"I could not wait until I had 
them off. I have been ashamed of 
them for so long." 

Lord, who was this person she 
had married? She didn't know 
him! 

"I see that you arc still upset," 
he said. "Please understand that 
these Venusians must be kept in 
their place." 

It was some stranger. She 
couldn't be married to him. She 
couldn't! 

"I wonder if I look like an 
Earthling now." he said. "Tell 
me, do you think that I look a 
little like your father and his 
friends?" 

She answered him wearily, defcatedly : "Yes, Greg. You do. 
Exactly." 

— josepii Sballit 



The 10th anniversary World Science Fiction Convention will be held at 
the Hotel Morrison in Chicago on August 30, 31 and Sc- aier.iber 1, 1952. 
You'll meet your favorite editors, wtiiei* and iiluslrut jts. 5 -nd $1 f*jr membership to Box 1422, Chicago 90, Illinois. You'll get a piece of the Mion 
and full information in return! 




 




998 by Edward Hyams. Pan theon Books, Inc., New York, 
1952. 208 pages, $2.75 

T PROBABLY have no business 
bringing Up this book in these 
hallowed pages, but I can't help 
it. It is the best satire the English language has produced in 
decades. It is also science fiction 
— of a sort. It tells of the "creation" of a fantastic super-superradar, out of parts of a baby's 
pram and pawnbroker's globes, 
fastened to the mast of a small 
naval vessel belonging to an 
imaginary small neutral nation. 
Small but very ingenious! 



The tale takes place slightly in 
the future; a brand-new and better world comes out of it — temporarily, at least — and it's full 
of gadgetry and derring-do, like 
any regular science fiction. The 
only thing is, nothing superscientific is developed, with the 
possible exception of super-psychology of crowd behavior that 
is the only really fantastic thing 
about the whole hilarious, bitter, 
brilliant book. 

Despite its heavy load of Britishisms, and the indubitable fact 
that it is highly unkind to established orders such as the Press, 
the Military, Diplomacy, and — 


* * * * * SHELF 



9-9 



most of all, perhaps — the Russians and the Americans (it's 
rather a neutralist book, I suppose), it is unreservedly wonderful. To say that it is in the same 
class as "Mr. Adam" by Pat 
Frank is to give Frank's pleasant 
little book unmerited praise. 
Nevertheless, the two have much 
in common. If you liked "Mr. 
Adam" you certainly will like 
this. 

THE IRON STAR by John 
Tut ne. Fantasy Publishing Co., 
Inc., Los Angeles, 1951. 312 
pages, $3.00 

FIRST published by E. P. Dutton & Co. back in 1930, this 
relatively minor item in the 
Taine catalog of weird science 
fantasy is now reprinted in an attractive period format. Persons 
interested in the "pre-science fiction" period of American fantastic writing will do well to pick 
it up. It is what H. L. Gold calls 
"bridge" science fiction — a link 
between mundane literature and 
the highly advanced science fiction of today. 

It tells of a meteor in darkest 
Africa containing an unknown 
new element which has a ghastly 
effect on human beings. Emitting 
vapors that are as habit-forming 
as opium, it makes addicts retrogress toward the ape. The story 
is woven around the melodrama 



of a "missionary" whose mission 
in life is to kill all apes and thus 
destroy the idea of evolution. In 
Africa, he becomes an addict of 
the malign emanations and gradually rots away, dragging down 
his daughter and wife, and becoming involved in an astonishing battle which ends with the 
destruction of the meteor. 

There is much excellent descriptive material on Africa — 
whether real or not, I'm unable 
to say — and many of those horrible pen-pictures of catastrophe 
and corny yet masterful observations on the human scene, made 
from a cynic's perch, that light 
up even the poorest and sociologically most immature of Taine's 
novels. 

The Iron Star is not one of his 
naive pre-Hitler race prejudices, 
which is in the book's favor. 

As a piece of fiction, it holds 
the attention, despite its inadequate literary technique, and that 
is probably more to the point. 

FIVE SCIENCE FICTION 
NOVELS Compiled by Martin 
Greenberg. Gnome Press, Inc. 
New York, 1952. 382 pages, $3.50 

THHREE good, two not so good 
— that is the mark for this 
new collection from Gnome. 

Why Mr. Greenberg felt he 
had to commit Jack Williamson's 
"Crucible of Power" and Norvell 



100 




 



W. Page's "But Without Horns'* 
to the permanence of a hardhound book is more than I can 
figure out. Both are 13-year old 
potboilers, far better left to obscurity. 

Of the other three, two deal 
with parallel worlds and one with 
the world of tomorrow. Fritz Leiber's "Destiny Times Three" 
( 1945) is faintly overpowering 
and largely fantasy, but even so 
extremely persuasive. It deals 
with three parallel worlds, all 
very nearly alike, but only one 
really viable. 

A. E. van Vogt's 1946 "The 
Chroniclers" deals with two rather than three worlds. This is the 
one about the Earth -citizen who 
has a third eye, by means of 
which he enters the parallel 
world of the three-eyed. There, 
through typically van Vogtian 
plot complexities, the Earthian 
saves the advanced civilization 
from destruction. Intellectually 
enthralling, but slightly frapped. 

Norman L. Knight's "Crisis in 
Utopia" (1940) is a rich and very 
pleasant tale of our own middle 
future. A new genetic pattern has 
been developed to breed a truly 
amphibious men, and the ocean 
floor is about to become Man's 
habitation as well as the dry 
land. The concept and its fascinating machinery occupies most 
of the tale; there fc-a Mad Scientist thrown in for melodrama, but 



he doesn't do too much damage. 
Delightful, and pointed, too. 

ROBUR THE CONQUEROR, 
by Jules Verne. Didier, Publishers, New York, 1952. 261 pages, 
$2.95 

TTERE is one of the real archeological finds of the year, if 
you can call so well-known a 
classic a find. 

Robur, whose adventures are 
told in the two novels included in 
this book (the sequel is called 
The Master of the World) , is a 
truly original character. Verne's 
ideas about him, about society, 
and in particular about the art of 
heavier-than-air flight, are fascinating and strangely modern. 
There is sharp satire in much of 
the writing about Americans ; 
some astonishingly accurate data 
on airplanes (written years before the Wright's first flight) ; 
and, toward the end, a memorable attack on the misuses of power. 

The firm of Didier is to be 
commended for reissuing this 
volume, the seventh in its uniform edition of Verne's works. 
The others already available at 
the same price are The Adventures of Captain Hatteras, Eight 
Hundred Leagues on the Amazon, Five Weeks in a Balloon, 
Round the World in Eighty 
Days, A Trip to the Center of 



* ★ * * * SH ELf 



101 



the Earth, and From the Earth 
to the Moon. All are handsome 
volumes and all have special introductions. The one accompanying Robur the Conqueror is by 
Major Alexander P. de Seversky, 
and a pleasant appreciation it is. 

MURDER IN MILLENIUM 
VI. By Curme Gray. Shasta PubUshers, Chicago, 1952. 249 pages, 
$3.00 

I AM sure that this must be, as 
it says on the jacket, "the intense realization of an original 
literary form," but neither I, nor 
Mac, my bookie friend down the 
street, can figure out what that 
form is. 

For my puny intellect, this 
book has nothing to offer. Theoretically, it deals with a matriarchy 6,000 years from now, but 
it does so in such a fashion that 
people, plot, place or purpose do 
not come through in any intelligible way. One gathers that 
some murders are committed; 
that this has not happened for 
hundreds of years; and that the 
motive is a desire for power. But 
that is the one really understandable thing in the book. 

The style is opaque, the characters wooden, posturing empty 
and unreal as the Egyptian figures that decorate the very handsome jacket of the novel. The 
"science" is a gibberish of names 



- — "Hi vvy -dizzies," "telement," 
"levelators," "contrapellers," "remitters," not one of which has 
any lucid meaning. 

When I finally laid the book 
down, I had a dissociated feeling 
as if I had spent consider c.w*e 
time in the company of a person 
who had something to say and 
couldn't express it. It was an uncomfortable feeling. 

y\EPARTMENT for Keeping 
the Record Straight. Some 
unscrupulous bem, in a mood of 
sheer malicious rage, whispered 
that boner in my ear about Robert Heinlein's getting the phrase 
"the Green Hills of Earth" from 
Fredric Brown's fine short story, 
"Something Green." Actually, 
"Something Green" was first published in Space on My Hands 
(reviewed May 1952 GALAXY). 
"The Green Hills of Earth" 
first published by Heinlein in the 
Saturday Evening Post in 1947. 
Actually the phrase comes from 
a story by C. L. Moore (Mrs. 
Henry Kuttner), and credit is 
given her in the book by Heinlein which used the phrase as a 
title. 

I hope everybody feels better 
now that I have walloped my 
buzzum in public. I still feel like 
a dope. (Memo from the Editor: 
Who are you not to make an occasional mistake?) 

— GROFF CONKUfN 



102 




 



SAVE YOUR GALAXY'S IN A DELUXE BINDER! 



We've had the tops of the binder manufacturers, make up a 
limited quantity of sturdy, mechanical hard covers made to 
hold and protect six issues of Galaxy for your permanent 
pleasure. Binders are gold stamped with the Galaxy trade 
mark and are made of a moroccan grain cloth, over-board 
to last a lifetime. 

Send $1.50 to 
Binders Galaxy Publishing Co., Inc. 

421 HUDSON STREET 
NEW YORK 14, N. Y. 
We will send postpaid. 




(One of the tit Space Mm] 



FROM THE FUTURE! 

AT LAST! SPACE MEN AND MACHINES OF 
THE FUTURE EVERYONE CAN OWN, NOW! 

The perfect decorotion anywhere in the home— deik, 
bookcase, shelf or cabinet. The ideal gift for all age*. 

Robot and Space Men over 4 inches lull, in assorted 



Rocket Space Ship over 14 inches high, in 3 color*. 

Robot and 6 completely different Spore 

Men with removable space helmets. NET — $1.50 

Racket Space Ship. NET -J 100 

Ship and Crew Set—Rocket Space Ship 

and 5 Space Men, as described above. NET— $2.00 

SATISFACTION GUARANTEED 

Save postage charges by remitting with order. 

TERRA IMPORTS 

893A MORRIS AVENUE, NEW YORK 56. N. T. 



103 



GRAVY PLANET 

By FREDERIK POKL and C. M. KORNBLUTH 

There's no awakening as disconcerting as the disillusionment 
of a man under the delusion that he has no illusions of all! 

Conclusion of a 3- Part Serial 



SYNOPSIS 

Mitchell Courtenay, the narrator of this story, had three 
grave problems — his wife Kathy, 
who refused to finalize their conditional marriage; the planet Venus; and the Conservatioivsrs, 
commonly known as "Connies," 
an outlawed organization. 

Kathy, a brilliant surgeon, disliked Courtenay' s ideals. As a 
young star class copysmith in 



Fowler Svhocken Associates, the 
largest advertising agency on 
Earth, Courtenay was dedicated 
to the highest principle of this 
completely free enterprise society: Sales. Only through sales, he 
held, could the economy expand 
indefinitely. Kathy bitterly wanted to know why it had to, a question that, to Courtenay, was little 
short of commercial heresy- Added to this marital strain was his 




 



the Company, to be angry and 
jealous, for Runstead had higher 
seniority and should logically 
have been chosen to handle the 
account. But Runstead evidently 
was going further than the usual 
routine attempts to discredit 
Courtenay by lying, cajoling, 
bribing his staff, spying on his 
plans — Runstead seemed to be 
actively sabotaging the project! 

That, however, could have 
been the work of the Connies, 
who fought savagely lor the conservation of natural resources, 
and might be expected to combat 
the use of enormous amounts of 
metals and fuels needed to colonize and exploit Venus. 

As proof of that, there were the 
two attempts on Courtenay's fife 
—once when he was in Washington to interview O'Shea, the tiny 
space pilot, and a 'copter cargo 
nacelle almost killed him; another when a gunman in a passenger 'copter tried to shoot him 
through the window of his apartment. The possibility of a commercial feud was ruled out by 
Fowler Schocken when Courtenay questioned him about it; 
there would have been court 
hearings, counter-claims, perhaps 
even injunctions, before they 
were notified of a feud. Obviously, no enttepeneur would be guilty of the high commercial crime 
of < murder without notification, 
so it must have been the Connies. 



But then something even more 
disturbing occurred. Testing consumer reaction had always been 
the basis of successful advertis 
ing, and Courtenay had picked 
Cal-Mex to sample attitudes toward colonizing, supporting the 
gigantic project, buying Venusian 
products, and other such essentials . . . but Runstead' s staff 
sent in faked information! 

Enraged, Courtenay fired the 
entire staff there and went to the 
South Pole, where Runstead was 
"on vacation/' to confront him 
v/ith his treachery. 

Courtenay found him on the 
slope of Starrzelius Glacier. But 
Runstead was ready . . . he cut 
Courtenay down with a slash of 
skis across the Polar helmet, left 
him dazed, freezing, beyond hope 
of rescue. As the fierce cold reached into Courtenay's unheated 
suit, he had only two thoughts. 
One was of Kathy. The other 
was of death. 

When Courtenay awoke, he 
was in the steerage of a laborfreighter rocketing through the 
sky . . . bound to a long contract 
in the Chlorella plantations, imprisoned in a false identity that 
someone had contrived for him. 
There was no way of buying his 
freedom. 

As far as the world was concerned, he had died in an accident in Antarctica. 

Approached by the Connies to 



106 




 



join their detested organization, 
Courtenay (a/ias "Croby") used 
them to get back to New York 
and Schocken Tower. With the 
help of hts loyal secretary, he 
managed to get to the Moon, 
where he made contact with a 
Connie cell. It was not easy — it 
cost him the life of his secretary, 
poisoned mysteriously on the 
Earth-Moon ship— but there was 
no other method of reaching 
Fowler Schocken, who was on 
the Moon to push the Venus 
Project. 

To escape detection by the police guards, Courtenay had to 
take refuge with a Connie, who 
called in the leader of the group. 
The leader turned out to be 
Courtenay's own wife, Kathy! 

XIII 




ITCH!" Kathy said 
dazedly. "My God, 
Mitch!" She laughed. 



with a note of hysteria. "You 
wouldn't wait, would you?" 

The astrologer took the gun 
out of his pocket. '*Is there — " 

"No, Warren. It's all right. 
Y v ou can leave us alone. Please." 

He left. Kathy dropped into a 
chair, trembling. I couldn't move. 
My wife — a king-pin Connie! I 
had thought I'd known her; I'd 
been wrong. She had lied to me 
continuously and I had never 
known it. 



1 had loved a lie and not a 
woman at all. 

"Shocked?" she asked. "You, 
a star class copysmith, consorting with a Connie? Afraid it'll get 
out and do you no good businesswise?" She forced a mocking 
smile that broke down as I looked 
at her. "Damn it," she flared, "all 
I ever asked from you after I 
came to my senses was to get 
out of my life and stay out. The 
biggest mistake I ever made was 
keeping Taunton from killing 
you." 

"You had Runstead shanghai 
me?" 

"Like a fool. What in God's 
name are you doing here? Why 
can't you leave me alone?" 

Kathy a Connie. Runstead a 
Connie. Deciding what was best 
for poor Mitch and doing it. 
Taunton deciding what was best 
for poor Mitch and doing it. 
Moving me this way and that. 

I picked her up and slapped 
her. The staring intensity left her 
eyes and she looked merely- surprised. 

"Get what's-his-name in here," 
I said. 

"You can't order me — " 

"You!" I yelled. "The witchdoctor!" 

He came running, right into my 
fist. Kathy was on my back, a 
clawing wildcat, as I went 
through his pockets. I found the 
gun — a wicked .25 UHV machine 



GRAVY PLANET 



107 



pistol — and shoved her to the 
floor. She looked up at me, 
mechanically rubbing a bruised 
hip. "You're a mean idiot," she 
said wonderingly. 

"Not idiot," I said. "Does 
Fowler Schocken know you're 
on the Moon?" 

"No," she said, rubbing her 
thumb and forefinger together. 

"You're lying. I told you that 
gesture gives you away." 

"My little iic-dctector," she 
said jccringly. "My little fireeating copysmith — " 

"Level with me or you get this 
thing across the face." 

"You mean it!" She put her 
hand to her face slowly, looking 
at the gun. 

"I'm glad that's settled. Does 
Fowler Schocken know you're 
on the Moon?" 

"Not exactly." She was still 
watching the gun. "He did advise 
me to make the trip — to help me 
get over my bereavement." 

"Call him. Get him here." 

She didn't say anything or 
move to the phone. _ 

"Listen." I said. "This is Groby 
talking. Groby's been slugged, 
knifed, robbed and kidnapqd. He 
saw the only friend he had poisoned a few hours ago. He's been 
played with by a lady sadist who 
knew her anatomy lessons. He 
killed her for it and he was glad 
of it. He's so deep in hock to 
Chtoretla that he'll never get out. 



He's wanted for femicide and 
breach of contract. The woman 
he thought he was in love with 
turned out to be a lying fanatic, 
a Connie bitch. Groby has nothing to lose. I can put a burst 
through the dome up there and 
we'll all suck space. I can walk 
out into the street, give myself 
up and tell exactly what I know. 
They won't believe me, but they'll 
investigate to make sure, and 
sooner or later they'll get corroboration — after I've been brainburned, which doesn't matter. 
I've got nothing to lose." 

"And," she asked flatly, "what 
have you got to gain?" 

"Stop stalling. Call Schocken." 

"Not without another try, 
Mitch. One word hurt — 'fanatic* 
There were two reasons why I 
begged Runstead to shanghai 
you: I wanted you out of the 
way of Taunton's killers, and I 
wanted you to get a taste of the 
consumer's life. I thought I'd be 
able to talk sense to you after we 
brought you back to life, and 
we'd be able to work together on 
the only job worth /doing. So it 
didn't work. That damned brain 
of yours — so good and so warjK-d. 
All you want is to be star class 
again and eat and drink and 
sleep a little better than anybody 
else. Well. I tried. 

"Go ahead and do whatever 
you think you have to do. It's 
not going to hurt worse than the 



GALAXY 5CIENCE FICTION 



nights we used to spend screaming at each other. Or the times I 
was out on Connie business and 
couldn't tell you and had to 
watch you being jealous. Or shipping you to Chlorella to try to 
'make you a whole sane man in 
spite of what copysmithing's done 
to you. Or never being able to 
love you all the way, never being 
able to give myself to you entirely, mind or body, because 
there was this secret. Pistol-whipping's a joke compared to the 
way I've been hurt." 

There was a pause that seemed 
to go on forever. 

"Call Schocken," I said unsteadily. "Tell him to come here. 
Then get out and take the stargazer with you. I — I don't know 
what I'm going to tell Schocken. 
But I'm going to give you and 
your friends time to change headquarters and hailing signs and 
the rest of your insane rigmarole. 
Call Schocken and get out of 
here. I don't want to see you 
again." 

I couldn't read the look on her 
face as she picked up the phone 
and punched a number. 

"Mr. Schocken's sec 3 , please," 
she said. "This is Dr. Nevin — 
widow of Mr. Courtenay. You'll 
find me. on the through list. Mr. 
Schocken's sec 2 , please. . . . This 
is Dr. Nevin, Mr. Courtenay's 
widow. May I speak to Mr. 
Schocken's secretary? I'm listed 



. . . Hello, Miss Grice; this is 
Dr. Nevin. May I speak to Mr. 
Schocken?" She turned to me. 
"I'll have to wait a few moments." 
They passed in silence. "Hello, 
Mr. Schocken. I wonder if you 
could come and see me about a 
matter of importance, business 
and personal . . . The sooner the 
better, I'm afraid . . . Shopping 
One, off Receiving — Dr. Astron's 
. . . No, nothing like that. It's just 
a convenient meeting place. 
Thank you very much, Mr. 
Schocken." 

I wrenched the phone from her 
and heard Fowler Schocken's 
voice say: "Quite all right, my 
dear. The mystery is intriguing. 
Good-by." Click. The voice was 
unmistakable. It brought back 
memories of Board mornings with 
their brilliance of ingenuity, hard 
and satisfying hours of work climaxed with a "Well done!" 1 was 
almost home. 

Silently and efficiently, Kathy 
was shouldering the stargazer's 
limp body. Without a word, she 
walked from the observatory. A 
door opened and closed. 

The hell with her . . . 

TT was minutes before there was 
a jovial halloo from Fowler 

Schocken: "Kathy! Anybody 

home?" 

"In here," I called. 

Two of our Brinks men and 

Fowler Schocken came in. His 



GRAVY PLANET 



109 



face turned a mottled purple. 
"Where's — " he began. And then: 
"You looked like — you are! 
Mitch!" He grabbed me and 
waltzed me hilariously around 
the circular room while the 
guards dropped their jaws. "What 
kind of trick was that to play on 
an old man? What's the story, 
boy? Where's Kathy?" He stopped, puffing even under Moonweight. 

"I've been doing some undercover work," I said. "I'm afraid 
I've got myself into some trouble. 
Would you call for more guards? 
We may have to stand off Luna 
City Inc.'s protection men." Our 
Brinks guards grinned happily 
at the thought. 

"Sure, Mitch. Get it done," he 
said to the sergeant, who went 
eagerly to the phone. "Now 
what's all this about?" 

"For the present," I said, "let's 
say it's been a field trip that went 
sour. Let's say I downgraded myself temporarily and voluntarily 
to assess the Venus project sentiment among the consumers — and 
I got stuck. Fowler, please don't 
push me for any more details. 
I'm in a bad way. Hungry, tired, 
scared, dirty." 

"All right, Mitch. You know 
my policy — find a good horse, 
give him his head and back him 
to the limit. You've never let me 
down, and God knows I'm glad 
to see you around again. Venus 



Section can use you. Nothing's 
going right. The indices are down 
to 3.7 7 composite for North 
America when they should be 4.0 
and rising. And turnover? Enormous! I'm here recruiting, you 
know: a little raid on Luna City 
Inc., Moon Mines and the other 
outfits for some space -seasoned 
executives." 

It was good to be home. "Who's 
heading it up?" I asked. 

"I am. We rotated a few Board 
men through the spot and there 
wasn't any pickup. In spite of my 
other jobs, I had to take over 
Venus Section direct. Am I glad 
to see you!" 

"Runstead?" 

"He's vice-ing for me, poor 
man. What's this jam you're in 
with the guards? Where's 
Kathy?" 

"I'm wanted for femicide and 
contract breach on Earth. Here 
I'm a suspicious character without clearance. Also I resisted 
arrest, clouted a guard and damaged Luna City property." 

He looked grave. "You know, 
I don't like the sound of CB," 
he said. "I assume there was a 
flaw in the contract?" 

"Several," I assured him. 

He brightened. "Then we'll pay 
off the fines on the rest- of the 
stuff and fight the CB clear up 
to the Chamber of Commerce 
if we have to. What firm?" 

"Chlorella Costa Rica." 



no 




 



"Hmm. Middling - sized, but 
solid. Excellent people, all of 
them. A pleasure to do business 
with." 

Not from the bottom, I 
thought, but said nothing. 

"I'm sure they'll be reasonable. 
If they aren't, I have a majority 
of the C of C in my pocket anyway. I ought to get something 
for my retainers, eh?" He dug me 
slyly in the ribs. His relief at getting Venus Section off his neck 
was overwhelming. 

A dozen of our Brinks boys 
churned in. 

"That should do it," Fowler 
Schocken beamed. "Lieutenant, 
the Luna City Inc. protection 
people may try to take Mr. Courtenay here away from us. We 
don't want that to happen, do 
we?" 

"No, sir," said the lieutenant, 
dead-pan. 

"Then let's go." 

"TTEY, you !" a stray Burns 
patrol man bawled. We 
were in somewhat open order. 
Evidently he didn't realize that 
the Brinks men were my escort. 

"Go play with your marbles, 
punchy," a sergeant told him. 

He went pale, but beeped his 
alarm and went down in a tangle 
of fists and boots. 

Burns patrolmen came bounding along the tunnel-like street 
in low-gravity strides. Faces ap


peared in doorways. Our detail's 
weapons - squad leader said, 
"Hup!" and his boys began to 
produce barrels, legs, belts of 
ammo and actions from their uniforms. Snap-snap-snap-snapsnap, and there were two machine 
guns mounted on the high tripod 
ready to rake both ends of the 
street. The Burns men braked 
grotesquely yards from us and 
stood unhappily swinging their 
nightsticks. 

Our lieutenant called out: 
"What seems to be the trouble, 
gentlemen?" 

A Burns man called back: "Is 
that man 'George Groby?'' 

"Are you George Groby?" the 
lieutenant asked me. 

"No. I'm Mitchell Courtenay." 

The weapons men full -cocked 
their guns at a signal from the 
squad leader. The two clicks 
echoed from the vaulting and the 
few last-ditch rubbernecks hanging from the doors vanished. 

"Oh," said the Burns man. 
"That's all right, then. You can 
go ahead." He turned on the rest 
of the patrolmen. "What the hell 
are you dummies waiting for? 
Didn't you hear me?'* 

They beat it, and we moved on 
down Commercial One, with the 
weapons men cradling their guns. 
The Fowler Schocken Associates 
Luna City Branch was 75 Commercial One. and we went in 
whistling. The weapons men 



GRAVY PLANET 



til 




 




mounted their guns in the lobby. 

It was a fantastic performance., 
I had never seen its like. Fowler 
Schocken explained it as he led 
me down into the heart of the 
agency. "It's frontier stuff, Mitch. 
Something you've got to get into 
your copy. 'The Equalizer' is 
what they call it. A man's rank 
doesn't mean much up here. A 
well-drilled weapons squad is the 
law topside of the stratosphere. 
It's getting back to the elemental 
things of life, where a man's a 
man no matter how high his 
Social Security number." 

We passed a door. "O'Shea's 
room," he said. "He isn't in yet, 
of course. The little man's out 
gathering rosebuds while he may 



— and the time isn't going to be 
long. The only Venus roundtripper. We'll lick that, won't we, 
Mitch?" 

He showed me into a cubicle 
and lowered the bed with his own 
hands. "Cork off with these," he 
ssfid, producing a sheaf of notes 
from his breast pocket. "Just 
some rough jottings for you to go 
over. I'll send in a guard with 
food and CofHest. A good hour 
or two t of work and then the 
sound sleep of the just, eh?" 

"Yes, Mr. Schocken." 

He beamed at me and left, 
drawing the curtain. I stared 
glazedly at the rough jottings. 
"Six-color doubletrux. Downhold 
unsuccessful previous flights. Cite 
Learoyd 1959, Holden 1961 (?), 
McGill 2002 et al heroic pioneers 
supreme sacrfce etc etc. No mention Myers- White flopperoo 2010 
acct visibly exploded bfr passng 
Moon orbit. Try get M-W taken 
out of newssheet files & history 
bks? Get cost estimate. Search 
archives for pix L H & McG. 
Shd be blond brunet & redhead. 
Ships in bacgrnd. Looming. Panting woman, but heroic pioneers 
dedicated look in eye not inter estd. Piquant bcs unavlbl . . ." 

There was a pencil and copypaper in the cubicle. I began to 
write painfully: "We were ordinary guys. We liked the Earth 
and the good things it gave us. 
The morning tang of Coffiest . . , 



GRAVY PLANET 



11} 



the first drag on a Starr . . . the 
good feel of a sharp new Verily 
pinstripe suit . . . s warm smile 
from a girl" in a bright spring 
dress — but they weren't enough. 
There were far places we had to 
see, things we had to know. 

"The little guy's Learoyd, 19^9. 
I'm Holden, 1961. The redhead 
with the shoulders is McGill, 
2002. Yes, we're dead. But we 
saw the far places and we learned 
what we had to learn before we 
died. The longhair astronomers 
could only guess about Venus. 
Poison gas, they said. Winds so 
hot and so strong they'd pick you 
up and throw you away in cinders. But they weren't sure. What 
do you do when you aren't sure? 
.You go and see." 

A guard came in with sandwiches and Comest. I munched 
and gulped ,and wrote with the 
other hand. 

"We had good ships for those 
days. They packed us and enough 
fuel to get us there. What they 
didn't have was enough fuel to 
get us back. But don't pity us; 
we had to know. There was always the chance that the longhairs were wrong, that we'd be 
able to get out, breathe clean 
air, swim in cool water — and then 
somehow make enough fuel to 
bring the good news back. No, 
it didn't work out that way. It 
proved that the longhairs knew 
their stuff. 

114 



"Learoyd didn't wait to starve 
in his crate; he opened the hatch 
and breathed poison after writing up his log. My crate was 
lighter. The ^wind picked it up 
and broke it — and me with it. 
McGill had extra Tations and a 
heavier ship. He sat and wrote 
for a week and then — well, it 
was pretty certain after two noreturns. He'd taken cyanide with 
him. But don't pity us. We went 
there and we saw it and, in a 
way, we sent back the news by 
not coming back ourselves. 

"Now you folks know what to 
do and how to do it. You know 
the longhairs weren't guessing. 
Venus is a mean lady and you've 
got to take the stuff and the 
know-how to tame her. She'll 
treat you right when you do. 
■ When you find us and our crates, 
don't pity us. We did it for you. 
We knew you wouldn't let us 
down." 

I was home again. 

XIV 

PLEASE, Fowler," I said. 
"Tomorrow. Not today." 
He gave me a steady look. "I'll 
go along, Mitch. I've never been 
a back-seat driver yet." He displayed one of the abilities that 
made him boss-man by wiping 
clean out of his mind the burning curiosity about where I had 
been and what I had been doing. 


 



i 



"That's good copy," he said, 
slapping my work of the previous 
night on his desk. "Clear it with 
O'Shea, won't you? He can give 
it some extra see-taste -smelt hear-feel if anybody can. And 
pack for return aboard the Vilfredo Pareto — I forgot, you 
haven't got anything to pack. 
Here's some scratch ; shop when 
you get a chance. Take a few of 
the boys with you, of course. The 
Equalizer, remember?" He twinkled at me. 

I went to find O'Shea curled 
up like a cat in the middle of his 
full -sized bunk in the cubicle next 
to mine. The little man looked 
ravaged when he rolled over and 
stared blearily at me. 

"Mitch," he said thickly. 
" 'Nother goddam nightmare." 
He closed his bloodshot eyes. A 
thread of saliva lay along his 
miniature chin — puffy now, no 
longer perfectly chiseled. 

"Wake up, Jack." 

He jerked upright and held his 
smalt head. "I'm dying," he said 
faintly. "My deathbed advice is 
this: don't ever be a hero. Get 
me something, will you?" 

I went to the kitchen and 
punched Coffiest, Thiamax and a 
slice of Bredd. Halfway out, I 
returned, went to the bar and 
punched two ounces of bourbon. 

O'Shea looked at the tray and 
hiccoughed. "What the hell's that 
stuft 7" he asked, referring to the 



Coffiest. Thiamax and Bredd. He 
shot down the bourbon and shuddered. 

"Long time no see. Jack," I 
said. 

He groaned. "Why do cliches 
add that extra something to a 
hangover?" He tried to stand up 
to his full height of thirty-five 
inches and collapsed back onto 
the cot, his legs dangling. "I'm 
living up to my reputation and 
it's killing me. Ooh, that tourist 
gal from Nova Scotia! It's springtime, isn't it? Do you think that 
explains anything?" 

"It** late fall." 

"Maybe she doesn't have a 
calendar. Pass me that Coffiest." 
No "please" and no "thank you." 
Just a cool assumption that the 
world was his for the asking. He 
had changed. 

"Think you can do some work 
this morning?" I asked, my voice 
stiff. 

"I might," he said indifferently. 
"This is Schocken's party, after 
all. Say, what the hell ever became of you?" 

"I've been investigating." 

"Seen Kathy? That's a wonderful girl you have there, 
Mitch." His smile might have 
been reminiscent. AH I was sure 
of was that I didn't like it. 

He choked down his Coffiest 
and said, carefully setting it 
down : "What's that work you 
mentioned?" 



OIAVY PLANET 



T showed him my copy. He 
gulped the Thiamax and began 
to steady on his course as he 
read. 

"You got it all effed up," he 
said at last, scornfully. "I don't 
know Lcaroyd, Holden and McGill from so many holes in the 
ground, but like hell they were 
selfless explorers. You don't get 
pulled to Venus. You get pushed." 

"We're trying to convince people that they got pulled. What 
we want from you is sense-impressions to sprinkle the copy 
with. Just talking off the front of 
your face, how do you resonate 
to it?" 

"With nausea," he said, bored. 
"Would you reserve me a shower, 
Mitch? Ten minutes fresh, 100 
degrees. Damn the cost. You. too, 
can be a celebrity. All you have 
to do is be as lucky as I am." He 
swung his short legs over the 
edge of the cot and contemplated 
his toes, six inches clear of the 
floor. "I'm getting it while the 
getting's good. And am I getting 
it good. She must have been part 
Eskimo." 

"What about my copy?" 
-"See my reports. What about 
my shower?" ^ 

"See your valet," I said, and 
went out, boiling. In my own 
cubicle I sweated sense-impressions into the copy for a couple 
of hours and then picked up a 
guard squad to go shopping. 

116 



There were no brushes with the 
Burns patrolmen. I noticed that 
Warren Astron's shopfront now 
sported a chaste sign: 

Dr. Astron Regrets That 
Urgent Business 
Has Recalled Him to Earth on 

Short Notice 

I asked one of our boys: "Has 
the Ricardo left?" 

"Couple hours ago, Mr. Courtenay. Next departure's the Pareto, tomorrow." 
I could talk. 

OO I told Fowler Schocken the 
whole story. 
And Fowler Schocken didn't 
believe a word of it. 

He was nice enough and he 
tried not to hurt my feelings. 
"Nobody's blaming you. Mitch," 
he said kindly. "You've been 
through a great strain. It happens to us all, this struggle with 
reality. Don't feel you're alone, 
my boy. We'll see this thing 
through. There are times when 
anybody needs help. M y 
analyst — " 

I'm afraid I yelled at him. 
"Now, now," he said, still kind 
and understanding. "Laymen 
shouldn't dabble in these things, 
but I think I know a thing or 
two about it and can discuss it 
objectively. .Let me try to explain — " 

"Explain tfiis!" I yelled* at him, 


 



/ 



thrusting my altered Social Security tattoo under his nose. 

"If you wish," he said calmly. 
"Call it a holiday from reality. 
You've been on a psychological 
bender. You assumed a new identity, and you chose one as 
far-removed from your normal 
hard-working, immensely able self 
as possible. You chose the lazy, 
easy-going life of a scunvskimmcr. drowsing in the tropic 
Sun—" 

I knew then who was out of 
touch with reality. 

"Your slanders against Taunton's are crystal-clear to a person with some grasp of our 
unconscious drives. I was pleased 
to hear you voice them. They 
meant that you're getting back 
to your real self. What is our 
problem — the central problem of 
the real Mitchell Courtenay, star 
class copysmith? Lick the opposition ! Crush the competing 
firms! Destroy them! Veiled in 
symbols; obscured by ambivalent attitudes, the Taunton fantasy is nevertheless clear. Your 
imagined encounter with the girl 
'Hedy' might be a textbook example !" 

"Look at my jaw! See that 
hole? It still hurts!" 

He just smiled and said: "Let's 
be glad you did nothing worse to 
yourself, Mitch. The id, you 
see — " v 

"What about Kathy? What 



about the complete data on the 
Connies I gave you? Grips, hailing signs, passwords, meeting 

places?" 

"Mitch," he said earnestly, "as 
I say. I shouldn't be meddling, 
but they aren't real. Through 
sexual hostility, 'Groby' identified 
your wife with a hate-and-fear 
object, the Connies. And 'Groby' 
carefully arranged things so that 
your Connie data is uncheckable 
and therefore unassailable. 'Groby' arranged for you — the real 
you — to withhold the imaginary 
'data' until the Connies would 
have had*a chance to change all 
that. 'Groby' was acting in selfdefense. Courtenay was coming 
back and 'Groby' felt himself 
being squeezed out. Very well, he 
arranged things so that he can 
make a comeback — " 

"I'm not insane!" 

"My analyst — " 

"You've got to believe me!" 

"These unconscious conflicts — ** 

"I tell you Taunton has killers!" 

"Do you know what convinced 
me, Mitch?" 

"What?" I asked bitterly. 

"The fantasy of a Connie celt 
embedded in Chicken Little. The 
symbolism — well, it's quite unmistakable." 

I gave up except on one point: 
"Do people still humor the insane, Mr. Schocken?" 

"You're not insane, my boy. 



GRAVY PLANET 



You need help. You'll get it." 

"Will you humor me in one 
respect?" 

"Of course." 

"Guard yourself and me, too. 
Taunton has killers. All right, 
I think, or Groby thinks, or some 
damn body thinks that Taunton 
has killers. If you humor me to 
the extent of guarding yourself 
and me, I promise not to start 
swinging from the ceiling. I'll 
even go to your analyst." 

"Fine," he smiled, humoring 
me. 

Who could blame him? His own 
dreamworld was under attack by 
every word I had to* say. He 
couldn't believe that Mitchell 
Courtenay, copy smith, was sitting there and telling him such 
frightful things. 

They were hammer blows at 
him, but Fowler Schocken was 
nothing if not resilient. There was 
an explanation for everything 
and Sales could do no wrong. 
Therefore, Mitchell Courtenay, 
copysmith, was not sitting there 
telling him these things. It was 
Mitchell Courtenay's untamed id. 
1 suppose I was lucky, at that. He 
could have decided I was an impostor trying to subvert him and 
handed me over to the Burns 
Detective Agency. 

Some prehistoric research of 
my apprentice days recurred to 
me. I had found that, contrary to 
popular opinion, there had been 



no martyrs to science, ever. Roger 
Bacon had been comfortably imprisoned not because he had a 
fumbling, intuitive, mixed - up with-mysticism ne>tion of the scientific method, but because he 
had, from an incurably bad 
temper, violated a kind of nonaggression pact between the 
Dominicans and Franciscans. 
People hadn't cared about his 
truths. Copernicus hadn't been 
hailed before the Inquisition because he said the Earth moved 
around the Sun: it was because 
he had arrogantly and brutally 
denounced earlier astronomers 
who had done a good job with 
their limited instruments and 
math. People hadn't cared about 
his truths. 

If I persisted, Fowler Shocken 
might regretfully put me away 
as a psychotic, but he- didn't care 
about my truths. 

Truths? Truths? What truths?. 

The interests of producers and 
consumers are not always identical. 

Most of the world is not always 
happy. 

Workmen don't always automatically find the jobs they do 
best. 

Entrepreneurs don't always 
play a hard, fair game by the 
rules. 

The Connies are sane, intelligent and well-organized. 

In a free association fashion 




 



that would have delighted Fowler 
Shocken and his analyst, I said 
to myself: "You know, Mitch, 
you're talking like a Connie." 

I answered: "Why, so I am. 
That's terrible." 

"Well," I replied, "I don't know 
about that. Maybe . . .** 

"Yeah," I said thoughtfully. 
"Maybe . . ." 

It's an axiom of my trade that 
things are invisible except against 
a contrasting background. Like, 
for instance, the opinions and attitudes of Fowler Schocken, 

Humor me, Fowler, I thought. 
Keep me guarded. I don't want 
to run into an ambivalent fantasy 
like Hedy again. The symbolism 
may have been obvious, but she 
hurt me bad with her symbolic 
little needle. 

XV 

RUNSTEAD wasn't there when 
our little procession arrived 
in executives' country of the 
Schocken Tower. There were 
Fowler, me. Jack O'Shea, secretaries — and the weapons squads 
I had demanded. 

Runstead's secretary said he 
was down the hall, and we 
waited. I suggested that he 
wasn't coming back. After an 
hour, word got to us that a body 
had been found smashed flat on 
the first setback of the Tower, 
hundreds of feet below. It was 



very difficult to identify. 

The secretary wept hysterically 
and opened Runstead's desk and 
safe. Eventually we found a 
diary covering the past few 
months of Runstead's life. Interspersed with details of his work, 
his amours, memos for future 
campaigns, notes on good out-ofthe-way restaurants and the like 
were entries that said: 

"He was here again last night. 
He told me to try to hit harder 
on the shock-appeal, says the 
Starrzelius campaign needed 
guts. He scares hell out of mcUnderstand he used to scare 
everybody in the old days when 
he was alive . . . GWH again last 
night . . . Saw him by daylight 
for first time! Jumped and yelled, 
but nobody noticed. Wish he'd 
go away . . . He said I'm no good, 
disgrace to profession . . ." 

After a while we realized that 
"he" was the ghost of George 
Washington Hill, father of our 
profession, founder of the singing 
commercial, shock-value, irritation campaigns. 

"Poor fellow," said Schocken, 
white-faced. "Poor, poor fellow. 
If only I'd known. If only he'd 
come to me in time." 

The last entry said raggedly: 
"I know I'm no good. Unworthy 
of the profession. They all know 
it. Can see it in their faces. 
Everybody knows it. He told 
them. Damn him\" 



GRAVY PLANET 



119 



"Poor, poor fellow," said 
Schocken, almost sobbing. He 
turned to me and said: "You see? 
The strains of our profession . . 

Sure I saw. A prefabricated 
diary and an unidentifiable splash 
of protoplasm. It might have been 
180 pounds of Chicken Little 
down there on the first setback. 
But I would have been wasting 
my breath. I nodded soberly, 
humoring him. 

I was restored to my job at 
the top of the Venus Section. I 
saw Fowler's analyst daily. And 
I kept my armed guard. In tearful sessions. Fowler would say: 
"You must relinquish this symbol. It's all that stands between 
you and reality now, Mitch. Dr. 
Lawder tells me — " 

Dr. Lawder told Fowler 
Schocken what I told Dr. Lawder. And that was the slow progress of my "integration." I hired 
a medical student to work out 
traumas for me backward from 
the assumption that my time as a 
consumer had been a psychotic 
fugue, and he came up with some 
honeys. A few I had to veto as 
not quite consistent with my dignity, but there were enough left 
to make Dr. Lawder drop his 
pencil every once in a while. One 
by one we dug them up, and I 
have never been so bored in my 
life. 

But I would not surrender my 
insistence that my life and Fowl


er Schocken's were in danger. 

Fowler and I got closer and 
closer — he thought he had made 
a convert. I was ashamed to 
string him along. He was being 
very good to me. But it was a 
matter of life or death. The rest 
was sideshow. 

The day came when Fowler 
Schocken said gently: "Mitch, 
I'm afraid heroic measures are in 
order. I don't ask you to dispense with this barrier of yours 
against reality. But / am going 
to dismiss my guards." 

"You'll be killed. Fowler!" 

"I'm not afraid." Argument 
was useless. After a bit of it, acting on sound psychological principles, he told the lieutenant of 
his office squad: "I won't be 
needing you any more. Please report with your men to Plant Security Pool for reassignment. 
Thank you for your loyalty and 
attention to detail during these 
weeks." 

The lieutenant saluted, but he 
and his men looked sick. They 
were going from an easy job in 
executives' country to lobby patrol or night detail or mail guard 
or messenger service at ungodly 
hours. 

That night Fowler Schocken 
was garrotted on his way home 
by somebody who had slugged his 
chauffeur and substituted himself at the bicycle pedals of the 
custom-built Cadillac. The killer, 



120 




 



apparently a near-moron, resisted arrest and was clubbed to 
death, giggling. His tattoo had 
been burned off. He was unidentifiable. 

YOU can imagine how much 
work was done in the office 
the next day. There was a memorial Board meeting held and resolutions passed saying a great 
profession never would forget 
and so on. Messages of condolence were sent by other agencies, 
including Taunton's. I got some 
odd looks when I crumpled the 
Taunton message in my fist and 
used some very bad language. 
Commercial rivalry, after all, 
goes just so far. We're all gentlemen; a hard, clean fight and may 
the best agency win. 

But no Board member paid it 
much mind. They were all thinking of one thing: the Schockcn 
block of voting shares. 

Fowler Schocken Associates 
was capitalized at 7 x 10 12 megabux. voting shares par at Ml 
0.1, giving us 7 x 10 13 shares. Of 
these, 3.5 x 10 13 -{- 1 shares were 
purchasable only by employees 
holding AAAA labor contracts or 
better — roughly speaking, star 
class. The remaining shares by 
SEC order had been sold on the 
open market. As customary, 
Fowler Schocken himself had, 
through dummies, snapped these 
up at the obscure stock ex


changes where they had been put 
on sale. 

In his own name he held a 
modest .75 x 10 13 shares and distributed the rest with a lavish 
hand. I myself, relatively junior 
in spite of holding perhaps the 
number-two job in the organization, had accumulated via bonuses and incentive pay only 
about .7 x 10 12 shares. 

Top man around the Board 
table probably was Harvey Bruner. He was Schocken's oldest 
associate and had corralled .83 
x 1 1 3 shares over the years. 
(Nominally this gave him the 
bulge on Fowler — but he knew, 
of course, that in a challenge 
those other 3.5 x 10 13 -f-1 shares 
would come rolling in on carloads 
of proxies, all backing Fowler 
with mysterious unanimity. Besides, he was loyal.) He seemed 
to think he was heir- apparent, 
and some of the more naive Research and Development people 
were already sucking up to him. 
He was an utterly uncreative, 
utterly honest whcelhorse. Under 
his heavy hand, the delicate 
mechanism that was Fowler 
Schocken Associates would disintegrate in a year. 

If I were gambling, I would 
have given odds on Sillery, the 
Media chief, for copping the 
Schocken bloc, and on down in 
descending order to myself, on 
whom I would have taken odds— 



GRAVY PLANET 



long, long odds. That obviously 
was the way most of them felt, 
except the infatuated Bruner and 
a f< w dopes. You could tell. Sillery was surrounded by a respectful little court that doubtless 
remembered such remarks from 
Fowler as: "Media, gentlemen, 
is basic-basic!" and: "Media for 
brains, copysmiths for talent!" I 
was practically a leper at the end 
of the table, with my guards 
silently eying the polite battle. 
Sillery glanced at them once, and 
I could read him like a book; 
"That's been going on long 
enough; we'll knock off that eccentric first thing.*' 

What we had been waiting for 
came about at last. "The gentlemen from the American Arbitration Association. Probate Section, 
are here, gentlemen." 

They were of the funeral type, 
according to tradition. Through 
case -hardening or deficient sense 
of humor, they refrained from 
laughing while Sillery gave them 
a measured little speech of welcome about their sad duty and 
how we wished we could meet 
them under happier circumstances and so on. 

They read the will in a rapid 
mumble and parsed copies 
around. The part 1 read first 
said : "To my dear friend and 
associate Mitchell Courtenay, I 
bequeath and devise my ivory-inlaid oak finger- ring (inventory 

nx 



number 56.987) and my seventyfive shares of Sponsors' Stock in 
the Institute for the Diffusion of 
Psychoanalytic Knowledge, a 
New York non-profit corporation, 
with the injunction that he devote his leisure hours to active 
participation in this organization 
and the furtherance of its noble 
aim." 

Well, Afjfch, T told myself, 
you're through. I tossed the copy 
on the table and leaned back to 
take a swift inventory of my 
liquid assets. 

"Hard lines. Mr. Courtenay," 
a brave and sympathetic Research man I hardly knew told 
me. "Mr. Sillery seems pleased 
with himself." 

I glanced at the bequest to Sillery — paragraph one. Sure 
enough, he got Fowler's personal 
shares and huge chunks of stock 
in Managerial Investment Syndicate, Underwriters Holding Corporation and a couple of others. 

The Research man studied my 
copy of the will. "If you don't 
mind my saying so, Mr. Courtenay," he told me, "the old man 
could have treated you belter." 

I seemed to hear Fowler chuckling nearby, and sat bolt erect. 
"Why, the old so-and-so!" I 
gasped. It fitted like lock and 
key, with his bizarre sense of 
humor to oil the movement. 

Sillery was clearing his throat 
and an instant of silence de

 



scended on the Board room. "It's 
a trifle crowded here, gentlemen. 
I move that all persons other 
than Board members be asked to 
leave — " 

I got up and said: "I'll save 
you the trouble. Come on, boys. 
Sillery, I may be back." , 

npHE Institute for the Diffusion 
of Psychoanalytic Knowledge, 
a New York non-profit corporation, turned out to be a shabby 
three-room suite downtown in 
Yonkers. It was like something 
out of Dickens. Tnere was a 
weird old gal in the outer office 
pecking away at a typewriter. A 
sagging rack held printed pamphlets with fly-specks on them. 

"I'm from Fowler Schocken 
Associates," I told her. 

She jumped. "Excuse me, sir! 
I didn't notice you. How is Mr. 
Schocken? 1 * 

I told her how he was, and she 
began to blubber. He had been 
such a good man, giving so generously for the Cause. What on 
Earth would she and her poor 
brother ever do now? 
, "All may not be lost," I told 
her. "Who's in charge here?" 

She sniffled that her brother 
was in the inner office. "Please 
break it to him gently, Mr. 
Courtenay. He's so delicate and 
sensitive — " 

I said I would, and walked in. 
Brother was snoring-drunk. flop


ped over his desk. I joggled him 
awake and he looked at me with 
a bleary and cynical eye. "Washawan?" 

"I'm from Fowler Schocken 
Associates. I want to look at your 
books." 

He shook his head emphatically. "Nossir. Only the old man 
himself gets to see the books." 

"He's dead." I told him. 
"Here's the will." I showed him 
the paragraph and my identification. 

"Well," he said, sobering fast, 
"the joy-ride's over. Or do you 
keep us going? You see what it 
says there, Mr. Courtenay? He 
enjoins on you — " 

"I see it," I told him. "The 
books, please." 

He got them out of a surprising 
vault behind a plain door. 

Three hours of labor over 
them showed me that the Institute was in existence solely for 
holding and voting 56 per cent 
of the stock of an outfit called 
General Phosphate Reduction 
Corporation of Newark according to the whims of Fowler 
Schocken. 

I went "out into the corridor and 
said to my guards : "Come on, 
boys. Newark next." 

I won't bore you with the details. It was single-track for 
three stages and then it split. 
One of the tracks ended two 
stages later in the Frankfort Used 



GRAVY PLANET 



Machine Tool Brokerage Company, which voted 32 per cent of 
the Fowler Schocken Associates 
"public sale" stock. The other 
track forked again one stage later 
and wound up eventually in 
United Concessions Corp. and 
Waukegan College of Dentistry 
and Orthodontia, which voted the 
remainder. 

Two weeks later, on Board 
morning, I walked into the Board 
room with my guards. 

Sillery was presiding. He looked haggard and worn, as though 
he'd been up all night every night 
for the past couple of weeks looking for something. 

"Courtenay!" he snarled. "I 
thought you understood that you 
were to leave your regiment outside!" 

I nodded to honest, dumb old 
Harvey Bruner, whom I'd let in 
on it. Loyal to Schocken, loyal 
to me, he bleated: "Mr. Chairman, I move that members be 
permitted to admit company 
plant-protection personnel assigned to them in such number 
as they think necessary for their 
bodily protection." 

"Second the motion, Mr. Chairman," I said. "Bring them in, 
boys, will you?" My guards, 
grinning, began to lug in transfer 
cases full of proxies to me. 

Eyes popped and jaws dropped 
as the pile mounted. It took a 
long time for them to be counted 



and authenticated. The final vote 
stood: For, 5.73 x 10 ,;t ; Against, 
1.27 x 10 n . All the Against votes 
were Sillery's and Sillery's alone. 
There were no abstentions. The 
others jumped to my side like 
cats on a griddle. 

Loyal old Harve moved that 
chairmanship of the meeting be 
transferred to me, and it was carried unanimously. He then moved 
that Sillery be pensioned off, his 
shares of voting stock to be purchased at par by the firm and deposited in the bonus fund. 
Carried unanimously. 

Then— ja slash of the whip, just 
to remind them — he moved that 
one Thomas Heatherby, a junior 
Art man who had sucked up outrageously to Siljery, be downgraded from Board level and 
deprived without compensation of 
his small bloc of voting shares. 
Carried unanimously. Heatherby 
didn't even dare scream about it. 
Half a loaf is better than none, 
he may have said to himself, 
choking down his anger. 

It was done. I was master of 
Fowler Schocken Associates. And 
I had learned to despise everything for which it stood. 

XVI 

""I^LASH, Mr. Courtenay," said 
my secretary's voice. I hit the 
GA button. 

"Connie arrested in Albany on 



124 




 



neighbor's denunciation. ShaTI I 
line it up?" 

"How many times do I have to 
give you standing orders? Of 
course you line it up!" 

She quavered: "I'm sorry, Mr. 
Courtenay. I thought it was kind 
of far out — * 

"Stop thinking, then. Arrange 
the transportation." 

An hour later I was in the Upstate Mutual Protective Association's HQ. They were a local 
outfit that had a lot of contracts 
in the area, including Albany. 
Their board chairman himself 
met me and my guards at the elevator. "An honor," he burbled. 
"A great, great honor, Mr. 
Courtenay, and what may I do 
for you?" 

"My secretary asked you not 
to get to work on your Connie 
suspect until I arrived. Did you?" 

"Some of the employees may 
have roughed him up a little, informally, but he's in quite good 
shape." 

"I want to see him." 

He led the way, anxiously. He 
was hoping to get in a word that 
might grow into a cliency with 
Fowler Schocken Associates, but 
was afraid to speak up. 

The suspect was sitting on a 
stool under the usual dazzler. He 
was a middle-aged white-collar 
consumer of thirty or so. He had 
a couple of bruises on his face. 

"Turn that off," I ordered. 



A square-faced foreman s:»d: 
"But we always — " One of my 
guards, without wasting words, 
shoved him aside and switched 
off the dazzler. 

"It's all right, Lombardo," the 
board chairman said hastily. 
"You're to cooperate with these 
gentlemen/' 

I sat down facing the suspect. 
"My name's Courtenay. What's 
yours?" 

• He looked at me with pupils 
that were beginning to expand 
again. "Fillmore," he said, precisely. "Alonzo Fillmore. Can you 
tell me what all this is about?" 

"You're suspected of being a 
Connie." 

There was a gasp from all the 
UMPA people in the room. I was 
violating jurisprudence by informing the accused of the nature 
of his crime. 

I knew all about that and 
didn't give a damn. 

"Completely ridiculous," Fillmore spat. "I'm a respectable 
married man with eight children 
and another coming along. Who 
on Earth told you people such 
nonsense?" 

"Tell him who," I said to the 
board chairman. 

He stared at me, goggle-eyed, 
unable to believe what he had 
heard. "Mr. Courtenay, with all 
respect, the entire body of law 
respecting the rights of informers—** 



GRAVY PLANET 



125 



"I'll take the responsibility. Do 
you want me to put it in writing?" 

"No, no ! Nothing like that ! 
Please, Mr. Courtenay, suppose 
I tell the informer's name to you, 
understanding that you know the 
law and are a responsible person 
—and then I leave the room?" 

"Any way you want to do it is 
all right with me." 

He grinned placatingly, and 
Whispered in my ear: "A Mrs. 
Worley. The two families share 
a room. Please be careful, Mr. 
Courtenay — " 

"Thanks," I said. He gathered 
eyes like a hostess and nervously 
retreated with his employees. 

"Well, Fillmore," I told the 
suspect, "he says it's Mrs. Worley." He began to swear, and I 
cut him off. "You know your 
goose is cooked, of course. Remember what William Vogt says 
on the subject?" 

"Who?" he asked distractedly, 
z "Never mind. I have a lot of 
money. I can set up a generous 
pension for your family if you 
cooperate and admit you're a 
Connie." 

He thought hard for a few moments and then said: "Sure I'm a 
Connie. What of it? I'm sunk, so 
why not say so?" 

"If you're such a red-hot Connie, suppose you quote me some 
passages from Osborne." 

He had obviously never heard 
of Fairfield Osborne,' and slowly 



began to fake: "Well, there's the 
one that starts: 'A Connie's first 
duty, uh, is to, to prepare for a 
general uprising — ' I .don't remember the rest, but that's how 
it starts." 

"Now how about your cell 
meetings? Who comes there?" 

"I don't know them by name," 
he said more glibly. "We go by 
numbers. There's a dark-haired, 
fellow, he's the boss — " 

"Skip it," I told him. "You're 
no Connie. Don't worry about the 
pension. It goes through anyway." 

"Thanks, mister," he said in a 
small, dry voice. "I'm not begging. But can you make it big 
enough so they can move out of 
the room with the Worleys? He's 
a wolf. His wife's jealous and 
sore about him. I guess that's 
why' this happened. My wife told 
me and told me to inform on 
them before they informed on me, 
but I didn't listen. I didn't want 
to do anything like that. You 
shouldn't have to do anything 
like that just to get along — " 

He was crying when we left. 

I told the board chairman, 
hovering anxiously outside in the 
corridor: "I don't think he's a 
Connie." 

I was president of Fowler 
Schocken Associates and he was 
only the board chairman of a 
jerkwater local police outfit, but 
that was too much 1 . He drew himself up and said with dignity: 



GAIAXY SCIENCE FICTION 



**We administer justice, Mr. 
Courtenay. And a basic tenet of 
justice is: 'Better that one thousand innocents suffer unjustly 
than one guilty person be permitted to escape.' " 

"I am aware of the maxim." 
I said. "Good day." I made a note 
to have the pension taken care 
of and left. 

MY instrument corporal went 
boing as the crash-crash priority signal sounded in ^his ear. 
and handed me the phone. It was 
my secretary back in Schocken 
Tower, reporting another arrest, 
this one in Pile City Three, off 
Cape Cod. 

We flew out to Pile City Three, 
which was rippling that day over 
a long, swelling sea. I hate the 
Pile Cities — as I've said, I suffer 
from motion sickness. 

This Connie suspect had tried 
a smash-and-grab raid on a jewelry store, intending to snatch a 
trayf ul of oak and mahogany 
pins, leaving behind a lurid note 
about Connie vengeance and beware of the coming storm when 
the Connies take over and kill all 
the rich guys. It was intended to 
throw off suspicion. 
He was very stupid. 
It was a Burns-protected city, 
and I had a careful chat with 
their resident manager. He admitted first that most of their 
Connie arrests during the past 



month or so had been like tha 
and then admitted that a// thei 
Connie arrests for the past month 
or so had been like that. Formerly they had broken up authentic 
Connie cells at the rate of maybe 
one a week. He thought maybe it 
was a seasonal phenomenon. 

From there I went back to New 
York, where another Connie had 
been picked up. I saw him and 
listened to him rant for a few 
minutes. He was posted on Connie theory and could quote Vogt 
and Osborne by the page. He 
also asserted that God had chosen 
him to wipe the wastrels from the 
face of Mother Earth" He said of 
course he was in the regular Connie organization, but he would 
die before he gave up any of its 
secrets. And I knew he certainly 
would, because he didn't know 
any. The Connies wouldn't have 
accepted anybody that unstable 
if they were down to three members with one sinking fast. 

We went back to Schocken 
Tower at sunset and my guard 
changed. It had been a lousy day. 
As far as results were concerned, 
it was a carbon copy of all the 
days I had spent since I inherited 
the agency. 

There was a meeting scheduled. 
I didn't want to go, but my conscience troubled me when I 
thought of the pride and confidence Fowler Schocken must 
have felt in me when he made me 



GRAVY PLANET 



191 



his heir. Before I dragged myself 
to the Board room, I checked 
with a special detail I had set up 
in the company's Business Espionage section. 

"Nothing, sir," my man said. 
"No leads whatsoever on your — 
on Dr. Nevih. The tracer we had 
on the Chlorella personnel man 
petered out." 

"Keep trying," I said. "If you 
need a bigger appropriation or 
more investigators, don't hesitate. Do me a real job.** 

He swore loyalty and hung up* 



probably thinking that the boss 
was a fool, mooning over a wife 
that was not even permanently 
married to him. What he made 
out of the others I had asked him 
to trace, I didn't know. They had 
vanished, each of my few contacts with the Connies in Costa 
Rica, the sewers of New York and 
on the Moon. Kathy had never 
come back to. her apartment or 
the hospital; Warren Astron had 
never returned to his sucker-trap 
on Shopping One; my Chlorella 
cellmates had vanished into the 



I?3 




 



jungle — and so it went, all down 
the line. 

l>OARD meeting. "Sorry to be 
late, gentlemen. I'll dispense 
with opening remarks. Charlie, 
how's Research and Development 
doing on the Venus question?** 

He got up. "Mr. Courtenay, 
gentlemen, in my humble way I 
think I can say that R. and D. is 
in there punching. Specifically, 
we've licked the greenhouse effect 
—-quantitatively. Experiments in 
vitro have confirmed the pre


dictions of our able Physical 
Chemistry and Thermodynamics 
section based on theory and math. 
A CO^ blanket around Venus at 
40,000 feet, approximately .05 
feet thick, will be self-sustaining 
and self-regulating, and will 
moderate surface temperatures 
some five degrees a year, steadying at 80 to 85 degrees. We're exploring now the various ways 
this enormous volume of gas can 
be obtained and hurled at high 
velocity into the stratosphere. 
"Considered broadly, we can 



GRAVY PLANET 



find the CO*, or manufacture it, 
or both. I say we should find it. 
Volcanic activity is present, but 
your typical superficial Venus 
eruption would seem to be liquid 
NH| compressed by gravity in 
crevices until it seeps to a weaker 
formation through faults and 
porous rock and then blows its 
top. We are certain, however, 
that deep drilling would tap considerable reservoirs of liquid 
CO,-" 

"How certain?" I asked. 

"Quite certain, Mr. Courtenay. 
Phase-rule analysis of the O'Shea 
reports — " 

I interrupted again. "Would 
you go to Venus on the strength 
of that certainty, other things 
being equal?" 

"Absolutely." he said, a little 
offended. "Shall I go into the 
technical details?" 

"No, thanks. Charlie. Continue 
as before." 

"At present, we are wrapping 
up the greenhouse effect in two 
respects. We are preparing a 
maximum probability map of 
drilling sites and we are designing a standard machine for unattended drilling. My policy on the 
design is cheapness, self-power, 
and remote control. I trust this is 
satisfactory?" 

"Very much so. Thank you , 
Charlie. One point, though. If 
the stuff is there and if it's abundant, we have a prospect of 



trouble. If it's too abundant and 
easy to get at, it might become 
feasible for Venus to export 
liquid CO* to Earth, which we 
definitely do not want. CO- is in 
good supply here, and no purpose 
would be served by underselling 
Earthside producers. Let's bear 
in mind always that Venus is 
going to pay its way with raw 
materials in short supply on 
Earth, and is not going to compete 
pricewise with the mother planet. 
Iron, yes. Nitrates, emphatically 
yes. We'll pay them a good 
enough price for such things to 
keep them buying Earthside products and enable them to give 
Earthside bankers, insurance 
companies and carrying trade 
their business. 

"But never forget that Venus 
is there for us to exploit, and 
don't ever get it turned around. 
This is the time to head such 
mistakes off. I want you, Charlie, 
to get together with Auditing and 
determine whether tapping underground CO s pools will ever make 
it possible for Venus to deliver 
C0 2 F. O. B. New York at a competitive price. If it does, your 
present plans are our. You'll 
have to get your greenhouse effect 
blanketing gas by manufacturing 
it in a more expensive way." 

"Right, Mr. Courtenay," Charlie said, scribbling busily. 

"Does anybody else have anything special on the Venus pro


1*0 




 



gram before we go on?** 

Bernhard, our comptroller, 
stuck his hand up and I nodded. 

"Question about Mr. O'Shea,** 
he rumbled. "We're carrying him 
as a consultant at a very considerable fee. I've been asking 
around — I hope I haven't been 
going off-side, Mr. Courtenay, 
but it's my job— and I find that 
we've been getting no consultation whatever from him. Also, I 
should mention that he's drawn 
heavily in recent weeks on retainers not yet due. If we severed our connection with him at 
this time, he'd be owing us money. Also — well, this is trivial, but 
it gives you an idea. The girls in 
my department are complaining 
about him annoying them." 

My eyebrows went up. "I think 
we should hang onto him for 
whatever prestige rubs off. Ben. 
though his vogue does seem to 
be passing. Give him an argument 
about further advances. And as 
for the girls, I thought they 
didn't complain when he made 
passes at them." 

"Seen him lately?" 

I realized I hadn't. 

T>ACK in my office, I askul my 
night-shift secretary whether 
O'Shea was in the building and, 
if so, to send for him. 

He came in smelling of liquor 
and complaining loudly. "Damn 
it, Mitch, enough is enough! I 



just stepped in to pick up one of 
the babes for the night and you 
grab me. Aren't you taking this 
consultation thing too seriously? 
You've got my name to ust ; what 
more do you want?" 

He looked like a miniature of 
the fat, petulant, shabby Napoleon at Elba. But a moment after 
he -had come in, I suddenly 
couldn't think of anything but 
Kathy. It took me a moment to 
figure it out. 

"Well?" he demanded. "What 
are you staring at?" 

The liquor covered it up some, 
but a little came through : M enag* 
a Deux, the perfume I'd had 
created for Kathy and Kathy 
alone when we were in Paris, the 
stuff she loved and sometimes 
used too much of. I could hear 
her saying: "I can't help it, darling; it's so much nicer than formalin, and that's what I usually 
smell of after a day at the hospital . . ." 

"Sorry, Jack," I said evenly. 
"I didn't know it was your howling night. It'll keep. Have fun." 

He grimaced and left, almost 
waddling on his short legs. 

I grabbed my phone and slammed a connection through to my 
special squad in Business Espionage. "Put tails on Jack O'Shea. 
He's leaving the building soon. 
Tail him and everybody he contacts. Night and day. If I hit 
paydirt on this, you and your 



GRAVY PLANET 



>31 



men get upgraded and bonused. 
But God help you if you pull a 
butch!" 

XVII 

I GOT so nobody dared to come 
near me. I was living for 1 one 
thing only — the daily reports 
from the tails on O'Shea. Anything else I tried to handle bored 
and irritated me. 

After a week, there were twenty-four tails working at a time on 
O'Shea and people with whom he 
had talked. They were headwaiters, his lecture agent, girls, 
an old test-pilot friend of his 
stationed at Astoria, a cop he got 
into a drunken argument with 
one night — but was he really 
drunk and was it really an argument? — and other unsurprising 
folk. 

One night, quietly added to the 
list was: "Consumer, female, 
about 30, 5' 4", 120 lbs., redhead, 
eyes not seen, cheaply dressed. 
Subject entered Hash Heaven 
(restaurant) 1837 after waiting 
14 minutes outside and went immediately to table waited on by 
new contact, which table just 
vacated by party. Conjecture: 
subject primarily interested in 
waitress. Ordered hash, ate very 
lightly, exchanged few words 
with contact. Papers may have 
been passed, but impossible to 
observe at tailing distance. Fe


male operative has picked up contact." 

About thirty, five-foUr, onetwenty. It could be Kathy. I 
phoned to say : "Bear down on 
that one. Rush me everything 
new that you get. How about 
finding out more from the restaurant?" 

Business Espionage began to 
explain, with embarrassment, 
that they'd do it if I insisted, but 
that it wasn't approved technique. Usually the news got to 
the person being tailed and — 

"Okay," I said. "Do it your 
way." 

"Hold tt a minute, Mr. Courtenay. please. Our girl just checked 
in. The new contact went home to 
the Taunton Building. She has 
Stairs 17-18 on the thirty-fifth 
floor." 

"What's the thirty -fifth?" I 
asked, heavy-hearted. 
"For couples." 
"Is she — ?" 

"Unattached, Mr. Courtenay. 
Our girl pretended to apply for 
the vacancy. They told her Mrs. 
17 is holding 18 for the arrival of 
her husband. He's upstate harvesting" 

"What time do the stairs close 
at Taunton's?" 

"2200, Mr. Courtenay." 

I glanced at my desk clock. 
"Call your tail off her," I said. 
"That's all for now." 

I got up and told my guards: 




 



"I'm going out without you, 
gentlemen. Please wait here. 
Lieutenant, can I borrow your 
gun?" 

"Of course, Mr. Courtenay." 
He passed over a .25 UHV. I 
checked the magazine and went 
out on foot, alone. 

As I left the lobby of Schocken 
Tower, a shadowy young man 
detached himself from the wall 
and drifted after me. I crossed 
him by walking in the deserted 
street, a dark, narrow slit between the mighty midtown buildings. Monoxide and smog hung 
heavily in the unconditioned air, 
but I had antisoot plugs and he 
did not. I heard him wheeze behind me. An occasional closed 
cab whizzed past us, the driver 
puffing as he pumped the pedals. 

Without looking back, I turned 
the corner of Schocken Tower 
and instantly flattened against 
the wall. My shadow drifted past 
and stopped in consternation, 
peering into the gloom. 

I slammed the long barrel of 
the pistol against the back of his 
neck in a murderous rabbit punch 
and walked on. He was probably 
one of my own men, but I didn't 
want anybody's men along. 

I deliberately got to the Taunton Building's nightdweller entrance at 2159. Behind me the 
time-lock slammed the door. 
There was an undersized pay 
elevator. I dropped in a quarter, 



punched 35 and read notices 
while the elevator creaked upward : 

N IG HTDWEI.LERS ARE RESPONSIBLE FOR THEIR OWN POLICING. 
MANAGEMENT ASSUMES NO RESPONSIBILITY FOR THEFTS, ASSAULTS OR RAPES. 

NIGHTDWELLERS NOTE THAT 
BARRIERS ARE UPPED AT 2210 
NIGHTLY AND ARRANGE THEIR 
CALLS OF NATURE ACCORDINGLY. 

RENT IS DUE AND PAYABLE 
NIGHTLY IN ADVANCE AT THE 
AUTOCLERK. 

MANAGEMENT RESERVES THE 
RIGHT TO REFUSE RENTAL TO PATRONS OF COMPETITIVE PRODUCTS. 

The door opened on the stairwell of the 35th floor. Men and 
women were squirming uneasily, 
trying to find some comfort before the barriers upped. I looked 
at my watch and saw 2208. 

I picked my way carefully in 
the dim light over and around 
limbs and torsos, with many apologies, counting. At the seventeenth step, I stopped at a 
huddled figure as my watch said 
2210. 

With a rusty clank, the barriers upped, cutting off step 17 
and 18, containing me and — 

She sat up, looking scared and 
angry, with a small pistol in her 
hand. 

"Kathy," I said. 



GRAVY PLANET 



She dropped the pistol. "Mitch? 
You fool!" Her voice was low 
and urgent. "What are you doing 
here? They haven't given up. 
They're still out to murder 
you — " 

"I'm putting my head into the 
lion's mouth to show I mean it 
when I say that you were right 
and I was wrong." 

"How did you find me?" she 
asked suspiciously. 

"Some of your perfume came 
oft' on O'Shea. Afena^e a Deux." 

She looked around at the 
cramped quarters and giggled. 
"It certainly is. isn't it?" 

"Cm not here to paw you, 
with or without your consent. 
I'm here to tell you that I'm on 
your side. Name it and you can 
have it." 

She looked at me narrowly and 
asked: "Venus?" 

"It's yours." 

'"Mitch," she said, "if you're 
lying—" 

"You'll know by tomorrow if 
we get out of here alive. Until 
then, there's nothing more to be 
said about it, is there? We're in 
for the night." 

"Yes," she said. And then, suddenly, passionately: "God, how 
I've missed you!" 

WAKEUP whistles screamed 
at 0600. They were loaded 
with skull-rattling subsonics, just 
to make sure that no slugabeds 



would impede the morning turnover. 

Kathy began briskly to stow 
away the bedding in the stairs. 
"Barriers down in five minutes." 
She lifted Stair 17's lid and fished 
around in it for a flat box that 
opened into a makeup kit. I 
yelped as a razor raked across 
the top of my right eyebrow. 
"Hold still!" It cut a swathe 
across my left eyebrow. Briskly 
she touched my face here and 
there with mysterious brushes. 

She turned up my upper lip 
and tucked a pledger of plastic 
under it. Two flesh -tinted tapes 
pasted my ears against my head 
and she said, "There." and showed me the mirror. 

"Good," I approved. 

"There go the barriers." she 
said tensely, hearing some preliminary noise that was lost on 
my inexperienced ear. 

The barriers clanged down. We 
were the only nightdwellers left 
on the 35th floor. But we were 
not alone. B. J. Taunton and two 
of his boys stood there. Taunton 
was swaying a little drunkenly, 
red-faced and grinning. Each of 
his boys had a machine pistol 
trained on me. 

Taunton hiccoughed and said: 

"This was a hell of an unfortunate place for you to go chippy-chasing, Courtenay ol' man. 
We have a photo-register for 
crashers like you. Girlie, if you 



194 



OALAXr SCIENCE FICTION 



will kindly step aside — " 

She didn't step aside. She 
stepped right into Taunton's 
arms, jamming her gun against 
his navel. His red face went the 
color of putty. 

"You know what to do," she 
said. 

"Boys," he said faintly, "drop 
the guns. For God's sake, drop 
them!" 

They did. T a un ton be ga n to 
sob. 

"Turn your backs," I told 
them, "and lie down." I had my 
borrowed UHV out. It felt wonderful. 

The elevator could easily have 
been flooded with gas, so we 
walked down the stairs. It was a 
long, wearying business, though 
all nightdwellers had been cleared hours ago for B. J.'s coup. He 
sobbed and babbled all the way. 

At the tenth floor landing, he 
wailed: "I've got to have a drink, 
Courtenay. I'm dying. There's a 
bar right here. You can keep that 
gun on me — " 

Kathy laughed humorlessly at 
the idea and we continued climbing down. 

k T the nightdweller exit. I 
draped my coat over Kathy's 
gun hand in spite of the winter 
outside. 

"It's all right!" B. J. called 
quavcringly to an astounded lobby guard who started our way. 



"These people are friends of mine. 
It's quite all right!" 

We walked with him to the 
shuUlemouth and dived in, leaving him, gray-faced and sweating, in the street. The only way 
he could get at us was by blowing up the entire shuttle, and even 
he wouldn't dare. 

We zigzagged for an hour and 
I called my office from a station 
phone. A plant protection detail 
rendezvoused with us at another 
station and . we were in the 
Schocken Tower fifteen minutes 
later. 

A morning paper gave us our 
only laugh so far that day. It 
<aid, among other things, that a 
coolant leak had been detected 
at 0545 today in the stairwell of 
the Taunton Building. B. J. 
Taunton himself, at the risk of 
his life, had supervised the evacuation of the nightdwellers in 
record time and without casualties. 

Over a breakfast tray on my 
desk, I told Kathy: "Your h.nr 
looks like hell. Does that stuff 
wash out?" 

"Enough of this love-making," 
she said. "You told me I could 
have Venus. Mitch, I meant it. 
Did you?" 

"I did then." 

"And now?" 

"All my life I've wanted the 
position I have now, Kathy. It 
was in every dream, something 



GRAVY PLANET 



is; 



so far off and desirable that I 
honestly never believed I'd reach 
it. But I did." 

"And now?" she repeated insistently. 

"If I hadn't found out what 
life is like on the consumer level, 
I think I'd be completely happy 
— assuming, of course, I could 
also have you." 

She shook her head with grim 
emphasis. "You couldn't." 

"That's not all it is, though — 
chucking the dream of a lifetime for a woman. I couldn't do 
it if the dream hadn't soured." I 
grabbed her hand, hung onto it 
as if I'd sink without it. "Kathy, 
I was brought up to think the 
Connies — the World Conservation Association — were crackpots. 
Look, I can't even say 'Connies' 
without flinching. And now I 
know the Conservationist viewpoint is profoundly intelligent. 
Don't you see what that does? It 
leaves me with nothing to believe 
in!" 

, Her hand tightened around 
mine. "There's Conservationism." 

"It wouldn't work. Kathy. I've 
thought about it and thought 
about it ever since I found out 
you were in the organization. I 
knew you'd never get mixed up 
in anything that didn't make 
sense; you're not the fanatic type. 
But let's suppose we could institute Conservationism right now. 
We'd have to cut back popula


tion, cut back production, cut 
back just about everything so we 
could conserve our natural resources. The economic dislocation would be tremendous. It 
would lead to wars, anarchy, 
starvation." 

"Do you think things can go 
on indefinitely as they are, 
Mitch?" she asked gently. 

"I don't know," I admitted. 
"Every time we've run out of 
something — coal, oil, various metals, whatever it was — we always 
came up with a substitute. Maybe not as good, maybe, in lots of 
cases, better than the original. 
The point is that the world is 
geared to increasing production, 
increasing population, synthetics, 
substitutes — Sales! You can't 
knock that over without knocking the world to pieces, Kathy!" 

"This world," she said. 

I looked at her vacantly. 

"We know it's too late to do 
anything about Earth, Mitch. 
We've known it for some time. 
That's why we want Venus — a 
young, unspoiled, unplundered 
planet, where we can start right 
and continue right. A Conserve* 
tionist world. Mitch!" 

"It's a broiling inferno of poison hurricanes, a dumping ground 
for our surpluses and that's all." 

"Not- to us, Mitch. We're the 
only people who know what to do 
with it. We landed tiie first man 
there !" My face must have gone 



136 




 



blank, for she said: "O'Shea is 
one of us." 

"Since when?" 

"Since his mother and father 
realized he wasn't growing. They 
knew we'd need space pilots soon 
—and the smaller the better. 
Earth didn't discover Venus. The 
W. C. A. did. We had to write 
this world off. To do that, we had 
to have another one." 

"But not that one!" I argued. 
"It's not fit for human life!" 

"We have our own research 
men, Mitch. We aren't fooling 
ourselves; you understand us well 
enough to know we're not myopic 
idealists. Venus can be turned 
into a good, healthy, habitable, 
prosperous planet. It won't be 
easy, but it can be done. And 
once it's done, it won't ever be 
undone the way Earth was." 

I sat there trying to eat breakfast and digest the ideas that had 
been hurled at me, both at the 
same time. I couldn't. I got up 
and began walking the office; the 
walls kept stopping me short 
every few paces. 

"Room, Mitch," she said. "Not 
these cramped little cubicles. Rail 
room where you can see the horizon and the sky. where you can 
build as small or as large as you 
please, where furniture doesn't 
have to be folded away so you 
can find enough space to turn in." 

"But I'm used to this. We all 
are." 



"We won't be when we get out 
of confinement. That's not the 
point, though. Venus belongs to 
us, Mitch. We demand the right 
to settle it." 

"God, it's going to be a headache!" I groaned. "We have our 
rosters filled with eager consumer* 
itching to get to Venus. Well, 
I'll backtrack." I punched the 
intercom to R. & D. "Charlie, 
about the COj competition with 
Earth producers. Forget it. I 
found that Taunton's bills most 
of the makers." 

"Fine. Mr. Courtenay," Charlie said happily. "The preliminary work looks as if w< *11 give 
them a real solid kick in the 
pants." 

I dropped the intercom key 
and said to Kathy: "Can you dig 
up Runstead for me? This is going to be a job. A copysmith's 
highest art is to convince people 
without letting them know they're 
being convinced. What I've got 
to do is unconvince people without letting either the copysmiths 
or the people know what's happening. I need Runstead for that." 

Kathy smiled. "Runstead committed suicide. Remember?" 

"Sure. We'll have to work out 
a cover-up story for that, I suppose. Next Conservationist meeting I go to, I'm going to suggest 
we use some less flamboyant way 
of getting people out when the 
heat's on." 



GIAVY PIANIT 



"It can be arranged," she said, 
kissing me. "That's for saying 
'we.* ** 

"What else can I say? Look, 
darling, I've got a dandy executive's living suite, a full twelve 
by twelve, upstairs. Suppose you 
go up and cork off for a while; 
you've had a hard night and I've 
got a lot of work to do." 

She kissed me energetically and 
said : "Don't work too hard, 
Mitch. I'll see you tonight." 

I COULDN'T have done it 
without Runstead — not in 
time. He came whistling back 
from retirement in response to 
some underground message from 
Kathy. 1 had broken it to the 
Board ahead of time — "Unusual 
tasks, gentlemen, demand unusual methods. We owe Matt an 
enormous debt of gratitude, every 
one of us, for having altered the 
whole structure of his personal 
life to free himself for certain research problems which even yet 
must remain confidential.*' 

The Board took the hint By 
ii cc la mat ion. they gave him half 
of Sillery's confiscated stork as a 
bonus. 

Matt arrived in the middle of 
a meeting. We shook hands for 
public consumption, and there 
never was any private discussion 
afterward. He kntw what the job 
was. 

I still thought Runstead was a 



rat. But I had to admit things 

were leaping. 

On the surface level. Fowler 
Schocken Associates had launched a giant all-client slogan contest, with fifteen hundred first 
prizes, all of them a berth on the 
Venus rocket. There were < it;ht 
hundred thousand prizes in all, 
but the others didn't matter. 
Judging was turned over to an 
impartial firm of contest analyzers, which happened to be headed 
by the brother-in-law of a protege of Runstead's. Only fourteen 
hundred of the prize-winners. 




13* 




 



Matt told me, were actually 
members of the Connie underground. The other hundred were 
dummy names entirely, to take 
care of last minute emergencies. 

I took Kathy with mr to Washington to spark the final clearance 
of the rocket for flight, while 
Runstead minded the baby back 
in New York. I'd been in Washington often enough for a lunch' 
eon or an afternoon, but this was 
going to be a two-day job: I 
looked forward to it like a kid. 
I parked Kathy at the hotel and 
made her promise not to do any 



solo sightseeing, then caught a 
cab to the State Department. A 
morose little man in a bowler hat 
was waiting in the anteroom. 
When he heard my name, he got 
up h astily and offered mc his 
seat. Quite a change from the 
Chlorella days, Mitch, old boy. I 
told myself. Abels, our attache, 
came flustering out to greet me: 
1 calmed him and explained what 
I wanted. 

"Easiest thing in the world. Mr. 
Courtenay," he promised. "1*11 
get the enabling bill put through 
committee this afternoon, and 




IW 



with any luck at all it'll clear 
both houses before noon tomorrow." 

I said expansively, "Need any 
backing?" 

"Might be nice for you to address the House in the morning, 
if you can find the time. They'd 
love to hear from you, and it 
would smooth things over a little 
for a quick passage." 

"Glad to," I said, reaching 
down for my bag. The man in the 
bowler hat beat me to it and 
handed it to me with a little bow. 
"Just set your time, Abels," I 
told the legate. "1*11 be there." 

"Thank you very much, Mr. 
Courtenay!" He opened the door 
for me. 

The little man said tentatively: 
"Mr. Abels?" 

The legate shook his head. 
"You can see how busy I am," 
he said, not unkindly. "Come 
back tomorrow." 

The little man smiled gratefully and followed me out the door. 
We both hailed a cab. He opened 
the door for me. 

"Can I drop you anywhere?" 
I asked. 

"It's very good of you," he 
said. 

The driver leaned back on his 
pedals and looked in at us. 

I told him: "The Park Starr 
for me. But drop this other gentleman off first." 

The driver nod ded . *' White 



House, Mr. President?** 

"Yes, please. I can't tell you 
how happy I am to meet you, 
Mr. Courtenay," the little man 
told me. "I overheard your conversation with Mr. Abels, I'm 
afraid. It was very interesting to 
hear that the Venus rocket is so 
near completion. Congress/' he 
said wistfully, "has got out of the 
habit of keeping me posted on 
what's going on. Of course, I 
know they're busy with their investigations and all, but — " Mischievously, he said : "1 entered 
your contest, Mr. Courtenay. My 
slogan was, 'I'm starry-eyed 
over Starrs, verily I am.' I don't 
suppose I could go along, though, 
even if I win." 

"I can't see how it would be 
possible. They must keep you 
pretty busy right here." 

"Oh, not particularly. JanUs 
ary's heavy; I convene Congress* 
you see, and they read me the 
State of the Union message. But 
the rest of the year passes slowly. 
Will you really address Congress 
tomorrow, Mr. Courtenay ? It 
would mean a joint session, and 
they usually let me come for 
that." 

"Be delighted to have you," I 
said cordially. 

The cab stopped and the President shook my hand warmly and 
got out. He poked his head in the 
door. "Uh," he said, looking apprehensively at the driver, 



140 




 



''you've been very good to me. I 
may be stepping out of line in 
saying this, but if I might make 
a suggestion — I understand something about astronomy, it's a 
kind of hobby, and I hope you 
won't delay the ship's takeoff 
past the present conjunction." 

I stared. Venus was within ten 
degrees of opposition and getting 
farther away — not that it mattered, since most of the trip 
would be coasting anyhow. 

He held a finger to his lips. 
"Good-by, sir," he said. I spent 
the rest of the trip staring at the 
backs of the driver's hairy ears, 
and wondering what the little 
man had been getting at. 

WE took the evening off, 
Kathy and I, to see the 
sights. The famous cherry blossoms were beautiful, all right, 
but. with my newfound Conservationist sentiments, I found 
them ostentatious. "A dozen 
would have been plenty," I objected. "Scattering them around 
in vase after vase this way is 
plain waste. You know what 
they'd cost in Tiffany's?" 

Kathy giggled. "Wait till we 
take over Venus. Did you ever 
think what it's going to be like 
to have a whole planet to grow 
things in? Acres and acres of 
flowers, trees, everything!" 

A plump schoolteacher - type 
leaning on the railing beside us 



straightened up, glared, sniffed 
and walked away. 

"Before you get us in trouble," 
I told Kathy, "let's go to — let's 
go back to the hotel." 

I woke up to an excited squeal 
from Kathy. "Mitch," she was 
saying from the bathroom, two 
round eyes peering wonderingly 
over the towel that was draped 
around her, "they've got a tub 
here! I opened the door to the 
shower stall, and it wasn't a stall 
at all! Can I, Mitch? Please?" 

There are times when even an 
h o n e s-t Conservationist rinds 
pleasure in being the acting head 
of Fowler Schocken Associates. I 
yawned and blew her a kiss and 
said, "Sure. And make it all fresh 
water, hear?" 

While the tub was filling, I 
punched the communicator and 
got the morning summary relayed from Schocken Tower. Miss 
Hinkle's flat tones held nothing 
of interest that morning. I sighed 
briefly for Hester, who always 
managed to find something worth 
mentioning. It was hard to believe that Hester had been dead 
less than a month. 

And, I remembered, I still 
hadn't found out who had killed 
her with the poison meant for 
me. Taunton was out; they hadn't 
known I was on the ship. Connies? Not with Kathy directing 
them, not after she'd gone to such 
pains to save my life before. 



GRAVY PLANET 



Ml 



Not unless there was something 
] hadn't quite got clear. 
For instance: 

Kathy and Matt Runstead and 
Jack O'Shea had plotted together 
to put me on ice — literally. All 
right, that accounted for most of 
the things that had puzzled me. 
But it didn't account for Hester. 
And. when you stopped to think 
of it, it didn't account for all of 
Runstead's work, either. 

The Connies were in favor of 
space travel. But Runstead had 
sabotaged the Venus test in CalMex. There was no doubt of 
that: I had as good as a confession from his fall-guy. Could 
it have been a doublecross? Runstead posing as a Connie who 
was posing as a copysmith, and 
in reality — what? 

It took half a minute to get 
through to New York. Hinklt's 
flat voice went up an octave when 
she heard me again., "Why, Mr. 
Courtenay !" 

"Get me Runstead." 

"He phoned in this morning to 
say he had an appointment out 
of town, Mr. Courtenay. He 
didn't say where." 

I deliberately controlled my 
voice. "And just why the hell 
wasn't that in the morning summary?" I demanded, and slapped 
down the off key before she could 
answer. 

I flung open the door to the 
bath. Kathy's face smiled star


tledly at me from the bath alcove, and then the smile flickered 
out. "Mitch," she whispt red. 
"What's the matter?" 

"I've got questions." I sat 
grimly on the edge of the tub, 
for once immune to the slim fair 
thighs and the firm breasts, and 
ticked the questions off on my 
fingers: "One, who tried to kill 
me on the Moon rocket? Two, 
what did Runstead have, to do 
Willi it? Three, what kind of fool 
do you think I am? Four, how 
fast can you think up Iks to 
answer me with?" 

The storm of weeping was 
answer enough. I didn't wait for 
any more. 

T HADN'T even rinsed the 
* morning beard off my face; I 
had stomped out of the hotel in 
too much of a rage to notice 
whether I was as tastefully dressed to speak before Congress as 
they might legitimately havi expected. And I didn't care. 

Just before I was scheduled to 
speak, our Washington lobby 
chief pushed through the crowd 
to me. He handed me a strip of 
facsimile paper. "It's all here, 
Mr. Courtenay," he said unhappily. "Uh, is everything all right?" 

"Everything's just fine," I told 
him, which was a lie. I waved him 
off and looked at the facsimile. 
It was from Dicken, on the scene 
at the rocket: 



142 



GAIAXY SCIENCE FICTION 



Passengers and crew alerted and on 
standby. First movement into ship begins at 1145 EST, loading completed 
by 1645 EST. Ship fully fueled, supplied and provisioned since 0915. Security invoiced, but MIA, CIC and 
Time-Lifa known to have filed coded 
dispatches through dummies. Chart 
room asks please remind you: Takeoff 
possible only in AM hours. 

I rubbed the tape between my 
palms; it disintegrated into ash. 
As I climbed to the podium, 
someone tugged at my elbow. It 
was the President, leaning out of 
his ceremonial box. 

"Mr. Courtenay," he whispered, "I guess you understood 
what I was trying to tell you 
yesterday in the cab. I'm glad 
the rocket's ready." He widened 
his grin. "You probably know 
this, but he's here." 

I had no chance to find out 
who "he" was. As the Speaker 
of the House came toward me, 
hand outstretched, and the applause started from the floor, I 
forced a smile. But it was a trick 
of the rictus muscles entirely. I 
had little to smile about. If the 
news about the Venus rocket had 
trickled down to the President, 
there wasn't a chance that I could 
pull a surprise on anyone — even 
if I could figure out whom I 
wanted to surprise. 

Fowler Schocken was a pious 
old hypocrite and a fraud, but if 
it hadn't been for Fowler Schocken I could never have got 
through that speech. I could hear 



his voice in my ears. "Sell 'em, 
Mitch; you can sell them if you'll 
keep in mind that they want to 
buy." And I sold the assembled 
legislators precisely what they 
wanted to own. The applause 
was fantastic. 

There were a dozen standing 
figures in the hall, clapping their 
hands and begging the Chair for 
recognition, including white-haired old Colbee, lean and dignified 
with his four deqades of service. 

"The Chair recognizes the gentleman from Coca-Cola." 

"Thank you very much, Mr. 
Speakuh." Colbcc's face wore a 
courtly smile. Coca -Cola was 
nominally one of the few big 
independents; but I remembered 
that Fowler had commented once 
on their captive agency's surprising closeness to Taunton. "If I 
may ventuah to speak for the 
Upper Chamber, I should like to 
thank ouah distinguished guest 
for his very well-chosen remarks 
heah. I am certain that we all 
have enjoyed listening to a man 
of his calibeh and standing." Go 
back to the Berlitz school, you 
Westchester phony, I thought 
bitterly. I could feel the weenie 
coming as Colbee rumbled on. 
"With the permission of the 
Chair, I should like to ask ouah 
guest a number of questions involving the legislation we have 
been asked to consider heah today." 



GRAVY PLANET 



143 



By now even the galleries had 

caught on to what was happening. 
I hardly needed to hear the disastrous rest: 

"It may have escaped youah 
attention, but we are fortunate in 
having with us another guest. I 
refer, of coarse, to Mr. Taunton." 
He waved gracefully to the visitor's gallery, where B. J.'s red 
face appeared between two stolid 
figures that I should have recognized at the first moment as his 
bodyguards. "In a brief discussion before ouah meeting heah, 
Mr. Taunton was good enough 
to give me some information 
which I would like Mr. Co'tenay 
to comment upon. First, I would 
ask Mr. Co'tenay if the name of 
George Groby, wanted for Contract Breach and Femicide, is 
familiar to him. Second, I would 
like to ask if Mr. Co'tenay is 
Mr. Groby. Third, I would like 
to ask Mr. Co'tenay if there is 
any truth to the repo't, given 
me in confidence by someone in 
whom Mr. Taunton assures me 
I can repose absolute trust, that 
Mr. Co'tenay is a membah in 
good standing of the World Conservation Association, known to 
most of us who are loyal consumers as — " 

Even Colbee himself could not 
have heard the last words of his 
sentence. 

The uproar was like a physical 
blast. 



XIX 

SEEN in retrospect, everything 
that happened in the next wild 
quarter of an hour blurs and disappears. But I remember frozen 
moments of time that seem almost to have no relation to each 
other : 

The waves of hatred that 
flowed around me, the contorted 
face of the President below me, 
screaming something unheard to 
the sound engineer in his cubicle, 
the wrathful eyes of the Speaker 
as he reached out for me. 

Then the wild motion halted 
as the President's voice roared 
through the chamber at maximum amplification, "I declare 
this meeting adjourned!" and the 
stunned expressions of the legislators at his unbelievable temerity. There was greatness in that 
little man. Before anyone could 
move or think, he clapped his 
hands — the magnified report was 
like atomic fission — and a smartly uniformed squad moved in on 
us. 

"Take him away," the President declaimed, with a magnificent gesture, and at doubletime 
the squad surrounded me and 
hustled me off the podium. 

The President convoyed us as 
far as the door while the Assembly gathered its wits. His face 
was white with fear, but he whispered: "I can't make it stick, but 




 



it'll take them all afternoon to 
get a ruling from the Chamber 
of Commerce. God bless you, 
Mr. Courtenay." 

And he turned back to face 
them. I do not think Caligula's 
Christians walked more courageously into the arena. 

The guards were the President's 
own, honor men from Brink's 
leadership academy. The lieutenant said never a word to me, 
but I could read the controlled 
disgust on his face as he read the 
slip of paper the President had 
handed him. I knew he didn't 
like what he was ordered to do, 
and I knew he would do it. 

They got me to Anacosta and 
put me on the President's own 
transport. They stayed with me 
and fed me, and one of them 
played cards with me, as the jets 
flared outside the ports and we 
covered territory. All they would 
not do was talk to me. 

It was a long flight, in that 
clumsy old luxury liner that 
•"tradition" gave the President. 
Time had been wasted at the airport, and below us I could see 
the fuzzy band of the terminator 
creeping past. As we came down 
for a landing, it was full dark. 
And the waiting was not yet 
over. The lieutenant left the ship 
alone; he was gone for a long, 
long time. 

When he came back, it was 
midnight. "All right," he said to 

GRAVY PLANET 



me. "A cab's waiting for you 
outside. The driver knows where 

to go." 

I climbed out and stretched. 
"Thanks," I said awkwardly. 

The lieutenant spat neatly on 
the ground between my feet. I 
scrambled out of the way of the 
takeoff. 

THE driver was Mex. I tried 
him on a question and he 
gaped at me; no English. There 
were fifty good reasons why I 
didn't want to go along with him 
without a much better idea of 
what was up. But when I stopped to think of it, I had no 
choice. The lieutenant had followed his orders. I could see his 
active little military mind framing the report that would tip 
someone off to where they could 
find the notorious Connie, Mitchell Courtenay. 

I would be a sitting duck; it 
would depend on whether Taunton or the police got to me first. 

You'd think that the fact that 
the driver was a Mexican would 
have tipped me off. It didn't, 
though. Not until I saw the glimmer of starlight on the massive 
erectile before me did I know I 
was in Arizona, and realize what 
the President had done for me. 

A mixed squad of Pinkertons 
and our own plant protection 
men closed in on me and hustled 
me past the sentry boxes, across 

145 



the cleared land, up "to the rocket 
itself. 

The OIC showed me the Connie crescent he could make with 
thumb and forefinger and said : 
"You're safe now." 

"But I don't want to go to 
Venus!" 

He laughed out loud. 

Hurry up and wait, hurry up 
and wait. The long, dreary flight 
had been a stasis; everything at 
both ends of it had been too frantic with motion over which I had 
no control to permit thought. 
They gave me no chance to think 
here, either. I felt someone grabbing the seat of my pants and 
I was hoisted inside. There I was 
dragged more than led to an 
acceleration hammock, strapped 
in and kft. 

The hammock swung and 
jolted, and twelve titans squatted 
on my chest. Good-by, Kathy; 
good-by, Schocken Tower, Like 
it or not, I was on my way to 
Venus. 

BUT it wasn't really good-by 
to Kathy. It was she herself 
who came to unstrap me when 
the first blast was over. 

I have never seen an expression quite like the one on Kathy 's 
face. It was part darling-I-didthe- most -extravagant - thing - today, and a little bit I'm-notangry- just- terribly -disappointed, 
»nd the corners of her mouth were 



pure you-lousy-son-of-a-bitch. 

She said: "If you'll apologize, 
I'll explain." 

I got out of the hammock and. 
tottered weightlessly, rubbing my 
back. I opened my mouth to 
make a cynical reply. What came 
out was a squeaky, '"Oh, God, 
Kathy!" 

It wasn't a brilliant speech, but 
I didn't have time. Kathy's lips 
and mine were occupied. 

When we stopped for breath, I 
said, "What alkaloids do you put 
i n to the product ? " but it was 
wasted. She wanted to be kissed 
again. I kissed her. 

It was hard work, standing up. 
Every time she moved, we lurched against the wall or drifted off 
the floor entirely. Only a standby 
jet was operating and we wtn 
otherwise beyond the limit of 
weight. 

We sat down. 

"I'm sorry if I guessed wrong," 
I said. "All of a sudden it looked 
as if you and Runstead were 
doublecrossing everybody. Especially me." 

It was only a little kiss this 
time. Just to show. 

I stretched and looked around 
me. "Lovely place you have here. 
The thing was, you see, all at 
once I wanted out. I wanted you 
to have Venus — I'd promised it 
to you — but I wanted out for 
myself. So I ordered the ship 
loaded up, to get it on the way. 



\4t 




 



You were going to be on it, but 
I wasn't." 

"I can't spend my life blaming 
you for jumping to conclusions, 
Mitch," she said gently. "But 
you could tell me what touched 
you off." 

I explained about Runstead's 
lousing up San Diego and Venus 
Project. And about Hester's murder. . 

"Oh, Mitch," she said. "Where 
do I begin? How'd you ever get 
to be star class?" 

"Went to night school," I said. 
"I'm still listening." 

"Well, you should be able to 
figure it out. Sure, we wanted 
space travel. The human race 
needs Venus. But we didn't want 
Fowler S choc ken on Venus. Or 
Mitchell Courtenay, either. Not 
as long as Mitchell Courtenay 
would loot Venus for an extra 
megabuck's billing. There aren't 
too many planets around that 
the race can expand into, Mitch. 
We couldn't have Fowler Schocken's Venus Project succeed." 

"Urn," I said, digesting. "And 
Hester?" 

Kathy shook her head. "You 
figure that one out." 

"You don't know the answer?" 

"I do. It isn't hard." 

I coaxed, but she wouldn't 
play. So I kissed her for a while 
again, until some interfering character with a ship's- officer rosette 
on his shoulder came grinning in. 



"Care to look at the stars, folks?" 
he asked, in a tourist-guide way 
that I detested. It didn't pay to 
pull rank on him, of course; ship's 
officers always act a cut above 
their class and it would have been 
ungraceful, at least, to brace him 
for it. Besides — 

The thought stopped me for a 
moment. I was used to being star 
class by now. It wasn't going to 
be fun, being one of the boys. 
I gave my Conservationist theory 
a quick mental runthrough. No, 
there was nothing in it that indicated that I would have a showdog's chance of being sirred and 
catered to any more. 

Hello, Kathy. Good-by, Schocken Tower. 

WE went up to the forward 
observation port. All the 
faces were strange to me. 

There isn't a window to be 
found on the Moon ships; radareyed, GCA-tentacled, they sacrifice the esthetic but useless 
spectacle of the stars for the 
greater strength of steel. I had 
never seen the stars in space before. 

Outside the port was white 
night. Brilliant stars shining 
against a background of star particles scattered over a dust of 
stars. There wasn't a breadth of 
space the size of my thumbnail 
where there was blackness: it wa3 
all light, all fiery pastels. A rim 



GRAVY PLANET 



147 



of fire around the side of the 
port showed the direction of the 
Sun. 

Kathy introduced me around. 
The captain of the ship turned 
out to have a voice I knew; he'd 
spoken to me on the longlines 
phone, and I recalled with no 
pleasure the particular nastiness 
with which I'd reamed him out 
for some small delay. However, 
he showed no rancor. He treated 
me — in fact, all of them treated 
me — like some grand hero of the 
republic from whom nothing 
more could be expected, a pensioned Caesar or Napoleon in 
retirement. 

All at once I realized how 
Jack O'Shca had felt. It was 
great to be great. To have been 
great was something else again. 

Kathy's arm went around me. 
Kathy always reads my mind. 

We turned away from the port. 
"Where's Matt Runstead?" I 
asked. 

"Back in Schockcn Tower, living on wakeup pills, trying to 
untangle the mess. Somebody had 
to stay behind, Mitch. Fortunately, Matt can vote your proxies. 
We didn't, have much time to talk 
i n Washington ; he's going to 
have a lot of questions to ask, 
and nobody around with the answers." 

I stared. "What in the world 
was Runstead doing in Washington?" 



"Getting you off the spot, 
Mitch. After Jack O'Shea 
broke — " 

"After what?" 

"Look, let's take it in order. 
O'Shea broke. He got drunk one 
night too often, and he couldn't 
find a clear spot in his arm for 
the needle, and he picked out the 
wrong girl to break apart in front 
of. They had him sewed up tight. 
All about you, all about me, the 
rocket, everything." 

"Who did?" 

"Your great and good friend, 
B. J. Taunton." Kathy struck a 
cigarette viciously. 

I could read her mind a bit, 
too. Little Jack O'Shea, 60 
pounds of jellied porcelain and 
melted wax, thirty-five inches of 
twisted guts and blubber. There 
had been times in the past weeks 
when I had not liked Jack. I canceled them all, paid in full, when 
I thought of that destructible 
tiny man in the hands of Taunton's anthropoids. 

"Taunton got it all, Mitch," 
Kathy said. "All that mattered, 
anyhow. If Runstead hadn't had 
a tap on Taunton's interrogation 
room, we would have had it right 
then. But he had time to get 
down to Washington and warn 
me and the President — the President is no Conservationist, but 
he's a good man; he can't help 
being born into office — and here 
we are." 



148 




 



The captain interrupted us. 
"Five minutes till we correct. 
Better get back to your hammocks. The correction blasts may 
not be much, but you never 
know." 

Kathy nodded and led me 
away. I plucked the cigarette 
from her lips, took a puff and 
gave it back. "Why, Mitch!" she 
said. 

"I'm reformed," I told her. 
"Kathy, one more question. It 
isn't a nice question." 

She sighed. "The same as between you and Hester." 

I asked, "What was between 
Jack — uh?" 

"You heard me. What was between Jack and me was the same 
as what was between you and 
Hester. All one way. Jack was in 
love with me, maybe. I was too 
damn crazy mad in love with 
you!" 

It seemed like the moment to 
reach out and kiss her again, but 
it must not have been because 
she pushed me away. 

"That's what you're so stupid 
about!" she was saying. "Jack 
wanted me. I didn't want anyone 
but you, not ever. And you never 
troubled to figure it out — never 
knew how much I cared about 
you any more than you knew 
Iidw much Hester cared about 
you. Good Lord, Mitch, how 
blind can you be?" 

"Hester in love with me?" 



"Why else would she commit 
suicide?" Kathy actually stamped her foot, and floated an inch 
above the floor as a result. 

"Well," I said dazedly. 

The sixty-second beeper went 
off. "Hammocks," said Kathy, 
and the tears in her eyes flooded 
out. I put my arm around her. 

"This is a rotten undignified 
busisness," she said. "I have exactly one minute to kiss and 
make up, let you get over your 
question-and- answer period, tell 
you I have a private cabin and 
there're two hammocks in it, and 
get us both fastened in." 

I straightened up fast. "A minute is a long time." 

It didn't take that long. 

XX 

SO we landed. After the wild 
excitement wore off, I felt like 
sitting down and writing a postcard to the little man back in 
Washington: 

"Dear Mr. President, now I 
know what you mean. On special 
occasions they sometimes let me 
in, too. Sincerely, Mitchell (Superfluous) Courtenay." 

We torpedoed the billowy cloud 
layer, roared incandescently down 
in the tangential orbiting approach, minced the final few hundred meters to the landing — and 
I was a bum. 

They were nice enough about 



GRAVY PLANET 



it. They said things like: "No, 
thanks, I can handle it myself," 
and, "Would you mind stepping 
back, Mr. Courtenay?" when 
what they should have said was: 
"Get the hell out of the way." 
And I wondered how long it 
would take before they began to 
put it that way. 

You know what it's like being 
a lost soul? 

It's wandering through a spaceship with busy people rushing 
here and there carrying incomprehensible things. It's people 
talking urgently and efficiently tp 
each other and you understand 
maybe one word in three. It's 
offering a suggestion or trying to 
help and getting a blank stare 
and polite refusal. 

It's Kathy : "Not right now, 
Mitch darling. Why don't you — " 
And her voice trailed off. The 
only appropriate, constructive, 
positive thing I could do was 
drop dead. But nobody said so. 
They would carry me on the 
books, a hero whose brief hour 
of service rendered, when balanced against the long years that 
followed, might or might not 
show a tiny net profit. You never 
could tell with ex-heroes, but you 
can't just gas them . . . 

They were nice about letting 
me come along when fourteen of 
the really important people 
donned spacesuits and set foot 
on Venus. (Note for historians: it 



was completely unceremonious. 
We just went out the lock into 
the lee of the ship, anchored by 
cables. Nobody noticed who of 
the fifteen was first to step out — 
and be yanked by the burning 
wind as far as the cable slack 
would let him, or her.) 

I reached for my wife and the 
wind sent her bobbing on the end 
of her cable out of my grasp. 
Nor did she notice me, a hulking 
and brutish figure in an oversized 
suit, trying to claw my way to 
her along the grab-irons welded 
to the hull. She had eyes only for 
the planet I had given her, the 
orange-lit, sandstorming inferno. 

When they reeled us in and we 
took off our armor, I felt as 
though I had been flailed with 
anchor chains from Easter to 
Christmas. Aching, I turned to 
Kathy. 

She was briskly rubbing her 
surgeon's fingers and conferring 
with somebody named Bartlow in 
words that sounded like these: 
" — then we'll clam the ortnick 
for seven frames and woutch 
green until sembril gills?" 

"Yes," Bartlow said, nodding. 

"Splendid. When the grimps 
quorn with the fibers, Bronson 
can Mine dimethyloxypropyloluene with the waterspouts — " 

I hung around and Kathy finally noticed me with a "Hello, 
dear" and plunged back into the 
important stuff. After a while I 



ISO 




 



wandered off. I got in the way 
of the crews dismantling the 
ship's internal bulkheads. Then 
I got in th( w;sy of the commissary women, then in the way of 
the engineers who were already 
modifying our drive reactor to an 
AC electric pile. When I got in 
the way of the medics who were 
patching up passengers banged 
around in the landing, I took a 
sleepy-pill. My dreams were not 
pleasant. 

"■^"ATHY was crouched over the 
**■ desk when I woke up, pawing 
through stacks of green, pink and 
magenta-covered folders. I yawned. "You been up all night?" 

She said absently, "Yes." 

"Anything I can do to help?" 

"No." 

I rescued one of the folders 
from the floor. Medical Supplies 
Flow Chart, 3d to 5th Colony 
Year, No Local Provisioning Assumed was the heading. The one 
under it covered : Permissible Reproductive Rate, 10th Colony 
Year. 

"That's real planning,'' ] said. 
"Got one covering forecasted lifeexpectancy of third - generation 
colonists born of blue-eyed mothers and left-handed fathers?" 

"Please, Mitch." she said impatiently. "I've got to find tin 
planning schedules for the first 
two months. Naturally wt planned far ahead." 



I dressed and wandered out to 
the chowline. The man ahead of 
me, still wearing the soft padded 
undershoes that went with donning a heat suit, was telling his 
friends about Venus. Not more 
than a tenth of the colonists had 
seen their new planet close up as 
yet: he had a large and fascinated audience. 

"So we located the spot for the 
drilling unit," he said. "We 
moored it to a rock taller than 
me. We started bracing the unit. 
What happens? Plop. The damn 
rock explodes. The wind catche-s 
the drill and you should've seen 
that thing take off. Lucky we 
hadn't cast off the cables to the 
ship yet; it'd still been going. As 
it is, back to the shop. A whole 
day's work shot." 

I listened through the story and 
the questions. 

When he was hurrying off to 
another incomprehensible job. I 
said to him: "WaiC a minute. I 
want to talk to you." 

"Sure, Mr. Courtenay. What 
can I do for you?" 

"Most of this stuff I don't get. 
but I understand a rock drill. 
You're a foreman. Can you put 
me on your crew?" 

"You sure you understand a 
rock drill. Mr. Courtenay? It 
ain't easy to change a carbide tip 
out there in the wind. You got to 
unscrew the camber-flamber and 
wuldge it to the imbrie before 



GRAVY PLANET 



the wind gets it, and that 
takes — " 

There we were again. But this 
time I said: "I can handle it." 

"That's great, Mr. Courtenay. 
I can use another man. Weiss, I 
guess you don't know him, he got 
smacked by a piece of flying 
Something or other, so I'm one 
short." He measured me with his 
eye. "You can use his suit. It 
Wasn't hurt a bit." 

An ugty little chill went 
through me, "What about 
Weiss?" 



A I A X Y SCIENCE FICTION 



"The work-suits are too rigid. 
Something hits you hard, it goes 
clang hard enough to bust your 
eardrums, drive your eyes into 
your head and rupture membranes all through your body. 
But the suit lives through it. 
Well, we go out with a replacement drill at 1730, Port Fourteen 
aft. I'll see you there, Mr. Courtenay." 

I was there and proud of it. 

The drilling crew was big and 
tough — shock troops. They knew 
my name and face, of course, and 
were reserved. As we got into the 
armored work-suits, one of them 
asked apologetically: "Sure you 
can handle this detail, Mr. Courtenay? It's rough out there — " 

I felt my blood pounding with 
anger I shouldn't put into words. 
He was only trying to be helpful. 
There was no use yelling at him 



that I was a man and could 
swing my weight with men, that 
I wasn't just a copysmith and as 
obsolete as the dinosaur. I nodded 
and we stepped out. 

Whoosh! The wind hurled us 
five yards. 

Crack! The cables held. 

Three seconds outside and I 
was fighting for breath. 

"Goddam it!" I gasped, hating my weakness. 

I had forgotten that work -suits 
were wired for sound. The foreman's voice said inside my helmet: "Mr. Courtenay, please keep 
the circuit clear for orders. Guire! 
Slack off! More— hold it! Winters, haul your cable — hold it. 
Mr. Courtenay, work your way 
over to Winters and lay hold." 

Clawing along the storm-swept 
rocks, I reached Winters and 
grabbed the cable. I wondered 



GRAVY PLANET 



153 



dimly if the suit's oxygen supply 
was functioning, if the dryer was 
working. It didn't feel as if they 
were. I could hardly breathe and 
I was soaked with sweat. 

I made a feeble pretense of 
helping Winters, who had the 
build of a granite crag, jockey 
the drill. 

It was like flying a kite — if 
it took five men to fly a kite, and 
if the kite had to be kept at 
ground level, and if the kite perpetually threatened to fly you instead of vice versa. 

After two minutes outside, my 
leg and arm muscles were quivering uncontrollably from the mere 
effort of standing up and keeping 
balanced. It was the tremor of 
flexor pulling against extensor, 
the final fatigue that comes just 
before you let go, forgetting 
everything except that you can't 
keep it up any longer, that you'll 
die if you keep it up for another 
split -second. 

But I hung on for one minute 
more, streaming sweat, sobbing 
air into my lungs and maybe — maybe — helping a little with a 
few extra foot-pounds of heaveho on the cable when it was 
ordered. 

And then I let go, a little less 
than half -conscious, and the wind 
got me. My cable streamed and 
I dangled at the end of it, unable to do anything but listen to 
the voices in my helmet. 

154 I 



"Mr. Courtenay, can you make 
it back to the ship?" 

"He don't answer. He must 
have blacked out." 

"Stinking luck! Almost get the 
drill positioned and then — damn 
the stinking luck! Winters, work 
your way to him and see if he's 
all right." 

"Hell, what can I see? Phone 
them to reel him in is all we can 
d<t" 

"Winchman! Reel in Number 
Five. He's blacked out." 

The cable thrummed and I 
began to scrape along the ground 
to the port. 

And still they talked. "We can 
do it with four if it kills us, men. 
You all game?" 

I heard the ragged chorus of 
yesses as I scraped helplessly over 
the rocks, like a fish on a hook. 

"Shouldn't have let him come 
out at all," one of the crew said. 

SHAME was crowded 'out by 
terror. My suit clanged against 
something and motion stopped. A 
rock, I saw dazedly. A big rock. 
The six ring-bolts to which my 
cable was lashed began to creak 
and strain. 

The fools at the winch, I realized with clear, pure horror, had 
not noticed I was snagged. 

"Stop!" I screamed into the 
helmet. But I did not have a 
phone line through my cable to 
the ship. 

ALAXY SCIENCE FICTION 



> 



The "foreman understood instantly. ' ' Winchman! Ease off.' 
He's snagged!" The ring - bolts 
ceased to strain. "Mr. Courtenay, 
can you clear yourself or — or 
should we come to help you?" He 
was only human. There was bitterness in his voice. 

I said rustily: "I can clear 
myself. Thanks." 

But I didn't have to. The big, 
solid rock I had snagged on began to disappear. I don't mean it 
vanished, either with or without 
a thunderclap. Nor did it grow 
transparent and finally become 
invisible. But it began to melt 
from the top, like a ball of string 
unraveling or like an apple being 
peeled for a banquet before it's 
divided into servings — and yet it 
was something like gradually 
turning into powder and blowing 
away. Naturally, it isn't easy to 
describe. 

It was the first Venusian anybody had ever seen. 

XXI 

THEY got me into the ship 
and patched me up. Kathy 
didn't tend me in the hospital — 
she was a surgeon and administrator, and all I had was R.N. 
stuff like bruises and scrapes, but 
plenty of them. 

In three days I was discharged 
with the entire hospital staff suspecting I was psychotic. I could 

GRAVY PLANET 



go them one better. I knew I was. 

Item: I would wash and wash, 
but I never felt clean. 

Item : Suicidal tendencirs. . I 
wanted to go into the nuclear 
reactor room so bad I could taste 
it — and the reactor room was sudden death. 

Item: Claustrophobia. The giant ship wasn't big enough for 
me. I wanted to go outside, into 
that flailing inferno. 

The first night out of the hospital. I sat up in bed waiting and 
waiting for Kathy to come back 
from a staff meeting. I was dogtired, but I didn't dare sleep. I 
had once found myself halfway 
to the reactor room befon 1 
stubbed my toe and woke up. 

She came in, blinking and redeyed at 0245. "Still awake?" she 
yawned at me. plumping onto 
her hammock. 

"Kathy," I said hoarsely. "I'm 
cracking up." 

She looked at me without much 
interest. "Did I ever tell you I 
read a paper on malingering to 
the New York Academy of Medicine?" 

I got up mechanically and 
started for the reactor room, 
grabbed hold of myself, turned 
around and sat down. I told her 
where I had been going. 

She turned nasty. "Not you. I 
know you better than most doctors get to know their patients. I 
also know the exact science of 

15S 



psychiatry and T know that a 
person with your mental configuration could not possibly 
have the symptoms you describe. 
No more than two plus two can 
equal five. I presume you feel 
rejected — which, God knows, you 
have every right to — and are 
consciously trying to hoodwink 
me into thinking you're an interesting case that needs my personal attention." 

''Bitch" I said. 

She was too tired to be angry. 
"If I thought there were the 
smallest possible chance that your 
alleged symptoms are real and 
do spring from your unconscious, 
I'd treat you. But there isn't any 
such chance. I have to conclude 
that you're consciously trying to 
divert "my energy from the job 
I have to do. And under the circumstances that is a despicable 
thing." 

"Bitch," I said again, and got 
up and went out to go to the reactor room. 

My feet moved as though they 
didn't belong to me, and I still 
felt the dirt on me that no soap 
and water or alcohol had been 
able to remove. 

She had meant every word of 
it. She knew" her trade, And it was 
an exact science. She thoroughly 
believed that I couldn't have the 
symptoms I had. If she'd said it 
about somebody else, I would 
have taken her word for it un 


questloningly. Only I had the 
symptoms — 

Or were they symptoms? 

T stopped in »the corridor, 
though my legs wanted to 
go on carrying me into the reactor room. 

AGRONOMY section, a sign over 
a door said. I went in. There was 
no microscope. I looked through 
three more rooms before I found 
one — and a knife that would do 
as a scalpel. 

I meant only to flick a pinpoint 
specimen off the base of my 
thumb, but in my dull intoxication I gashed a minor blood vessel. I found some reasonably 
sterile-looking gauze and wound 
it around my hand. 

I dropped the ragged little 
crumb of meat into the oil-lens 
objective, tapped it to shake free 
the bubbles, levered it into a 
turret chosen at random. There 
was some difficulty in getting the 
light source to function — I 
couldn't make out what I was 
supposed to do with the knob 
marked "polarizer" — but finally 
the stage appeared through the 
eyepiece, bathed in a greenish 
glow. 

I saw : 

Life. 

Clustered around the fabric of 
epidermis that loomed in the eyepiece like a decayed glacier were 
massive chunks of rock, the ran


156 




 



dom dust particles of any atmosphere, the faint accretion 
that no washing will completely 
remove from the human skin. 
They were featureless, irregular 
blobs, most of them. 
But not all. 

Among the dust fragments were 
a dozen or so living things, seaurchin-shaped. Under the flaring 
light of the microscope, they 
seemed spurred to action. The 
spines of one touched the spines 
of another; they flexed and locked. A third blundered into the 
linked pair, and they became a 
Laocoon trio. 

They were no protozoans or 
bacilli of Earth. They glowed ; 
they were utterly alien. And as I 
watched, the trio became six, then 
ten globes locked together. And 
at once the character of the action 
changed: The clustered spheroids 
seemed to beat their flagella in 
unison, driving the mass, like 
eggs trailing from a spawning 
trout, about the field of vision. 
Purposefully, the massed ten ran 
down the other globes and absorbed them, till all were joined. 

That was the second time anyone had seen a Venusian. 

This time, though, it was with 
awareness. 

/ didn't want to go into the 
u n til] room. / didn't want to go 
outside. The Venusian did and 
somehow we had become . . . 
tangled. 



T7"ATHY, with the reflexes of 
a doctor, woke easily when 
I shook her shoulder. She stared 
fixedly at me. 

"Come along," I said. "I want 
to show you something under a 
microscope. And I can't begin to 
tell you what it is because you 
won't believe me until you see 
it." 

"You, with a microscope," she 
said scornfully. 
But she came. 

She looked, blinked, looked 
again. At last, not moving from 
the eyepiece, she said softly : 
"Good God! What in the world 
are they?" 

"Now you prepare a slide from 
my skin," I told her. 

She did, in seconds, and stared 
at it through the microscope. I 
knew the — cells? — were going 
through their outlandish linkup 
behavior. 

"I'm sorry, Mitch," she said 
doubtfully. "Some sort of 
pathogenic organism, causing a 
paranoid configuration — " She 
swallowed. "I didn't mean to be 
unfair." 

"It's all right," Forgiven, she 
was in my arms. "But they're — 
it's not a pathogenic organism. 
It's a Venusian." I told her about 
the rock that vanished. "Some of 
it got carried in with me on the 
suit, I suppose, and got on me, 
or into me — I don't know. Bur / 
teel intelligence. I can sort of 



GRAVY PLANET 



137 



isolate it. now that I can tell 
which is it and which is me. I 
can think of the reactor room in 
two ways. When it's me thinking. 
I know it's deadly. When it's if 
thinking, there's — hunger? Yes, I 
think hunger." 

"It lives on plutonium? No. 
there isn't any on Venus. It has 
to be manufactured." 

I was exploring, thinking of the 
reactor room, what was in it, 
what it looked like, what happened there, and noting my — 
no, its — no, call them the reactions that followed. 

"Energy." I said softly. "Not 
material. It wants to he irradiated." 

And I thought of the outside. 
The wind meant nothing to it. 
The iieat meant mild comfort, 
like air to me or water to a minnow. 

But lightning, free electrons 
and cosmic rays — ah, that was 
reatty living! 

"Energy." I whispered. 

And I thought of the rocks of 
Venus, the rocks that sometimes 
exploded and sometimes unwound 
like baits of string. 

"Love," I said almost inaudibly. "Community. The whole that 
i* greater than the sum of its 
parts. Without hate, without 
fear — " 

Kathy told me later that I 
pitched forward onto my face in 
an old-fashioned faint. 



XXII 

WELL, the grass is still not 
green. But Kathy and I 
walked the hundred yards from 
the ship's skeleton to our hut this 
morning with only oxygen masks 
on. The wind was no more than 
gale force, and it keeps dropping 
in velocity every week. 

Once we found that the Venusians, those incongruous flurries 
of silicate life, were capable of 
something resembling thought, we 
learned what they needed and 
what they could do. 

They needed energy. We gave 
them energy, from the hot -gas 
ends of our giant Hilsch Tubes, 
Maxwell's mythical demon picked 
the hottest molecules from Venus's air and flung them at the 
Venusians. who rejoicingly sucked them dry of high-level heat 
and used the energy so they could 
reproduce even more prolifically 
to absorb still more energy. 

The water roared down from 
the upper atmosphere like an 
ocean falling out of the sky. Now 
we have seas, and the poisoned 
atmosphere is being locked in 
chemical bonds with the soil and 
the rocks. 

We've saved a decade at least, 
the planners say. And the Venusians are doing it for us. They're 
feasting themselves into famine 
on the energy we ripped out of 
the air for them. They'll never 



9ALAXY SCIENCI FICTION 



vanish completely, of course; as 
the amount of available energy 
grows less and less, they'll reduce 
their numbers and we'll have 
more and more of the planet for 
our use, but we'll keep some of 
them alive out of sheer gratitude. 

We cannibalized the ship for 
our huts and shops, leaving only 
the giant structural members that 
we'll be able to work with later — 
melt them down, I suppose, or cut 
them up into useful shapes. It's a 
tidy little community, each couple with a plot of ground and 
furniture that doesn't have to be 
rolled or folded out of the way. 
We're scouting the terrain for 
sources of metals and minerals, 
which won't be senselessly scooped out of the ground, manufactured, used and thrown away; 
they'll be restored to the soil or 
scrupulously collected and reworked. We can't grow anything 
yet, but already we have plans 



for the protection of the rich loam 
we'll create. 

It's a Conservationist world, 
all right, and it makes sense . . . 
you take what you need from the 
planet and put it back when 
you're through. On Earth, that's 
the worst kind of radicalism, of 
course. Being a copysmith, trained in semantics, I keep wondering 
how I could get my concepts so 
tangled that I mistook the epitome of conservatism for wildeyed sabotage, when I know now 
that any kind of purposeless destruction is almost physical anguish for a Conservationist. 

You don't have to be a prophet 
to see how Venus is developing 
into a self-sustaining economy. 
Kathy figured it out: By the time 
our first-born is of age, Fowler 
Schocken's commercials will have 
come true. 

— FREDERIK POBL & 
C. M. KORMll.l'TII 



FORECAST 

F. L. Wallace made a great hit with our readers with his exciting ACCIDENTAL FLIGHT . . . buf could he do it again? The glad answer is that he can. 

DELAY IN TRANSIT, his. novella in the next issue, builds shattering suspense on a situation of pure paradox: Equipped with the most powerful 
psychological advantage in frht Galaxy, Denton Cassal is stranded on a 
friendly planet— and finds himself the helpless victim of philanthropy) 

Two novelets, short stories, features moke up this between-serial* issue. 
Featured is a discussion by Willy Ley on a subject of importance to every 
science fiction reader and one: that this, famous rcckm expert is particularly 
qualified to explore— How close are we to space travel? 



GRAVY PLANET 



T59 



Exciting, Stimulating Full-Length 
Science Fiction Novels 



Tlic Editors of ( 


.■law have 




b is icd 


Wjlcctcd only 9 Scr 




h t il' 1 ' ' 1 ' 




Novels in the past 


year and a 


3. r >f eaeh. 




li>l{ that they : 


were good 






enough lo ..... . (i, 




of ill., back titles sin... n 


at $.ofi 


Calaxy. T] sands 


1 . • ..r 


or any 6 For 12.00. And > 


uu can 


these novels have b 


-en enjoyed 


subscribe lo additional n 


vela at 


by Galaxy readers. 




$2.00 tor a Bttbecriptloi 


of 6 


t> h Calaxy novel 




novels. (Foreign subaoi 


prions, 


ud unabridged. 


imb novel 


a.ld $50.) 




•ttmld «ell r™ $2.50 


or 13X0 if 


Naturally all orders are 


subject 


bought a> a hard bat 


k book. But 


to the prior pale oi back 


copies. 


because we want to 


bring these 


So onler today while slo 


ks are 



vital important novels to all out complete. 

GALAXY NOVELS 

15ini,ter Barrier a The Amphibian* -j Empire 

by Erie Frank Rusted ** by S. Fowler Wright / by Clifford D. Simak 

2 The Legion ot Space r The World Balow 

by Jack Williarmon J by S. Fowler Wright 

^ by Will 
M U I . TIMS COUPON TODAY 



Please send me Gjlany Novels checked below: 

□ S.ni.ter Barrier The Legion of Spar. 

□ The World Below □ The Amphibian* 
n Empire Q The Alien 

□ Four Sided Triangle □ Odd John 

Pleate enter my tubicrjption for Mure Galasy novels — 

□ i year— $2.00 □ 2 yeart-^.OO 

Add i » it _ _ 

City and Stat« _ , _.,„ ,..„ 

We pay postage on all order*. Sorry no COD'i. 



Sorry, Prelude io Space is out of print. 



140 



A FULL LENGTH SCIENCE FICTION NOVEL 



"THE RAT RACE 

By Jay Franklin 



When an atomic explosion destroys the battleship 
Alaska, Lt. Commander Frank Jacklin returns to consciousness in New York and is shocked to find himself 
in the body of Winnie Tomkins, a dissolute stockbroker. Unable to explain his real identity, Jacklin 
attempts to fit into Tomkin's way of life. Complications 
develop when Jacklin gets involved with Tomkin's 
wife, his red-haired mistress and his luscious secretary. 
Three too many women for Jacklin to handle. 

His foreknowledge of the Alaska sinking and other 
top secret matters plunges him into a mad world of 
intrigue and excitement in Washington — that place 
where anything can happen and does! Where is the 
real Tomkins is a mystery explained in the smashing 
climax. 

Completely delightful, wholly provocative, the Rat 
Race is a striking novel of the American Scene. 



AT YOUR NEWS STAND NOW ! 



