SURFACE TENSION By JAMES BUSH 

DR. CHATVIEUX took a 
long time over the microscope, leaving la Ventura 
with nothing to do but look out 
at the dead landscape of Hydrot. 
Waterscape, he thought, would 
be a better word. The new world 
had shown only one small, triangular continent, set amid end


less ocean; and even the continent 
was mostly swamp. 

The wreck of the seed -ship lay 
broken squarely across the one 
real spur of rock Hydrot seemed 
to possess, which reared a magnificent twenty -one feet above 
sea-level. From this eminence, la 
Ventura could see forty miles to 

Only an aquatic animal could exist on that 
world and so Man became just that — nor did 
reduction in size cause a loss of stature! 



the horizon across a flat bed of 
mud. The red light of the star 
Tau Ceti, glinting upon thousands of small hikes, pools, ponds, 
and puddles, made the watery 
plain look like a mosaic of onyx 
and ruby. 

"If I were a religious man," the 
pilot said suddenly, "I'd call this 



a plain case of divine vengeance.** 
Chatvieux said: "Hmn?" 
"It's as if we've been struck 

down for — is it hubris, arrogant 

pride?" 

"Well, is it?" Chatvieux said, 
looking up at last. "I don't feel 
exactly swollen with pride at the 
moment. Do you?" 

"I'm not exactly proud of my 
piloting," la Ventura admitted. 
"But that isn't quite what I 
meant. I was thinking about why 
we came here in the first place. 
It takes arrogant pride to think 
that you can scatter men, or at 
least things like men, all over the 
face of the Galaxy. It takes even 
more pride to do the job — to pack 
.up all the equipment and move 
from planet to planet and actually make men suitable for every 
place you touch." 

**I suppose it does," Chatvieux 
said. "But we're only one of several hundred seed-ships in this 
limb of the Galaxy, so I doubt 
that the gods picked us out as 
special sinners." He smiled drily. 
"If they had, maybe they'd have 
left us our ultraphone, so the 
Colonization Council could hear 
about our cropper. Besides, Paul, 
we try to produce men adapted 
to Earthlike planets, nothing 
more. We've sense enough — humility enough, if you like — to 
know that we can't adapt men to 
Jupiter or to Tau Ceti." 

"Anyhow, we're here." la Ventura said grimly. "And we aren't 
going to get off. Phil tells me that 
we don't even have our germ-cell 
bank any more, so we can't seed 
this place in the usual way. We've 
been thrown onto a dead world 
and dared to adapt to it. What 
are the panatropes going to do — 
provide built-in waterwings?" 



"No," Chatvieux said calmly. 
"You and I and the rest of us 
are going to die. Paul. Panatropic 
techniques don't work on the 
body, only on the inheritancecarrying factors. We can't give 
you built-in water-wings, any 
more than we can give you a new 
set of brains. I think we'll be able 
to populate this world with men, 
but we won't live to see it." 

The pilot thought about it, a 
lump of cold collecting gradually 
in his stomach. "How long do you 
give us?" he said at last. 

"Who knows? A month, perhaps." 

npHE bulkhead leading to the 
wrecked section of the ship 
was pushed back, admitting 
salty, muggy air, heavy with carbon dioxide. Philip Strasvogel, 
the communications officer, came 
in, tracking mud. Like la Ventura, he was now a man without 
a function, but it did not appear 
to bother him. He unbuckled 
from around his waist a canvas 
belt into which plastic vials were 
stuffed like cartridges. 

"More samples. Doc," he said. 
"All alike — water, very wet. I 
have some quicksand in one boot, 
too. Find anything?" 

"A good deal, Phil. Thanks. 
Are the others around?" 

Strasvogel poked his head out 
and hallooed. Other voices rang 
out over the mudflats. Minutes 




 



later, the rest of the survivors 

were crowding into the panatrope 
deck : Saltonstall, Chatvieux's 
senior assistant; Eunice Wagner, 
the only remaining ccologist; E1eftherios Venezuelos, the delegate 
from the Colonization Council; 
and Joan Heath, a midshipman 
whose duties, like la Ventura's 
and Strasvogel's, were now without meaning. 

Five men and two women — to 
colonize a planet on which standing room meant treading water. 

They came in quietly and 
found seats or resting places on 
the deck, on the edges of tables, 
in corners. 

Venezuelos said: "What's the 
verdict, Dr. Chatvieux?" 

"This place isn't dead," Chatvieux said. "There's life in the 
sea and in the fresh water, both. 
On the. animal side of the ledger, 
evolution seems to have stopped 
with the Crustacea; the most advanced form I've found is a tiny 
crayfish, from one of the local 
rivulets. The ponds and puddles 
are well-stocked with protozoa 
and small metazoans, right up to 
a wonderfully variegated rotifer 
population — including a castlebuilding rotifer like Earth's Floscularidae. The plants run from 
simple algae to the thalluslike 
species." 

"The sea is about the same,'* 
Eunice said, "I've found some of 
the larger simple metazoans — ■ 



jellyfish and so on — and some 

crayfish almost as big as lobsters. 
But it's normal to find salt-water 
species running larger than freshwater." 

"In short," Chatvieux said, 
"We'll survive here — if we fight." 

"Wait a minute," la Ventura 
said. "You've just finished telling 
me that we wouldn't survive. And 
you were talking about us, not 
about the species, because we 
don't have our germ-cell banks 
any more. What's — " 

"I'll get to that again in a 
moment," Chatvieux said. "Saltonstall, what would you think 
of taking to the sea? We came out 
of it once; maybe we could come 
out of it Igain." 

"No good," Saltonstall said immediately. "/ like the idea, but 
I don't think this planet ever 
heard of Swinburne, or Homer, 
either. Looking at it as a colonization problem, as if we weren't 
involved ourselves, I wouldn't 
give you a credit for epi oinopa 
ponton. The evolutionary pressure there is too high, the competition from other species is 
prohibitive; seeding the sea 
should be the last thing we attempt. The colonists wouldn't 
have a chance to learn a thing 
before they were destroyed." 

"Why?" la Ventura said. The 
death in his stomach was becoming hard to placate. 

"Eunice, do your sea-going 



SURFACE TENSION 



Coelc literates include anything 
like tlu Portuguese man-of-war?" 

The ecologist nodded. 

"There's your answer, Paul," 
Saltonstall said. "The sea is out. 
It's got to be fresh water, where 
the competing creatures are less 
formidable and there are more 
places to hide." 

"We can't compete with a jellyfish?" la Ventura asked, swallowing. 

"No, Paul," Chatvteux said. 
"The panatropes make adaptations, not gods. They take human 
germ-cells — in this case, our own, 
since our bank was wiped out in 
the crash — and modify them 
toward creatures who can live in 
any reasonable environment. The 
result will be manlike and intelligent. It usually shows the donor's 
personality pattern, too. 

"But we can't transmit memory. The adapted man is worse 
than a child in his new environment. He has no history, no techniques, no precedents, not even a 
language. Ordinarily the seeding 
teams more or less take him 
through elementary school before 
they leave the planet, but we 
won't survive long enough for 
that. We'll have to design our 
colonists with plenty of built-in 
protections and locate them in 
the most favorable environment 
possible, so that at least some of 
them will survive the learning 
process." 



The pilot thought about it, but 
nothing occurred to him which 
did not make the disaster seem 
realer and more intimate with 
each passing second. "One of the 
new creatures can have my personality pattern, but it won't be 
able to remember being me. Is 
that right?" 

"That's it. There may be just 
the faintest of residuums — panatropy's given us some data which 
seem to support the old Jungian 
notion of ancestral memory. But 
we're all going to die on Hydrot, 
Paul. There's no avoiding that. 
Somewhere we'll leave behind 
people who behave as we would, 
think and feel as we would, but 
who won't remember la Ventura, 
or Chatvieux, or Jor.n Heath — or 
Earth." 

The pilot said nothing more. 
There was a gray taste in his 
mouth. 

"Saltonstall. what do you recommend as a form?" 

The panatropist pulled reflectively at his nose. "Webbed extremities, of course, with thumbs 
and big toes heavy and thornlike 
for defense until the creature has 
had a chance to learn. Booklungs, like the arachnids, working 
out of intercostal spiracles- — they 
are gradually adaptable to atmosphere-breathing, if it ever decides to come out of the water. 
Also I'd suggest sporulation. As 
an aquatic animal, our colonist is 




 



going to have an indefinite lifespan, but we'll have to give it a 
breeding cycle of about six weeks 
to keep its numbers up during the 
learning period ; so there'll have 
to be a definite break of some 
duration in its active year. Otherwise it'll hit the population problem before it's learned enough to 
cope with it." 

"Also, it'll be better if our colonists could winter inside a good 
hard shell," Eunice Wagner 
added in agreement. "So spoliation's the obvious answer. Most 
microscopic creatures have it." 

"Microscopic?" Phil said incredulously. 

"Certainly," Chatvieux said, 
amused. "We can't very well 
crowd a six-foot man into a twofoot puddle. But that raises a 
question. We'll have tough competition from the rotifers, and 
some of them aren't strictly microscopic. I don't think your average colonist should run under 
25 microns, Saltonstall. Give 
them a chance to slug it out." 

"I was thinking of making them 
twice that big." 

"Then they'd be the biggest 
things in their environment," 
Eunice Wagner pointed out, "and 
won't ever develop any skills. Besides, if you make them about 
rotifer size, I'lCgivc them an incentive for pushing out the castlebuilding rotifers. 

"They'll be able to take over 



the castles as dwellings." 

Chatvieux nodded. "All right, 
let's get started. While the panatropes are being calibrated, the 
rest of us can put our heads together on leaving a record for 
these people. We'll micro-engrave 
the record on a set of corrosionproof metal leaves, of a size our 
colonists can handle conveniently. 
Some day they may puzzle it 
out." 

"Question," Eunice Wagner 
said. "Are we going to tell them 
they're microscopic? I'm opposed 
to it. It'll saddle their entire early 
history with a gods-and-demons 
mythology they'd be better off 
without." 

"Yes, we are," Chatvieux said; 
and la Ventura could tell by the 
change in the tone of his voice 
that he was speaking now as their 
senior. "These people will be of 
the race of men, Eunice. We want 
them to win their way back to 
the community of men. They are 
not toys, to be protected from the 
truth forever in a fresh-water 
womb." 

"I'll inake that official," Venezuelos said, and that was that. 

And then, essentially, it was all 
over. They went through the 
motions. Already they were beginning to be hungry. After la Ventura had had his personality 
pattern recorded, he was out of it. 
He sat by himself at the far end 
of the ledge, watching Tau Ceti 



SURFACE TENSION 



go redly down, chucking pebbles 
intu the nearest pond, wondering 
morosely which nameless puddle 
was to be his Lethe. 

He never found out. of course. 
None of them did. 

I 

OLD Shar set down the heavy 
metal plate at last, and gazed 
instead out the window of the castle, apparently resting his eyes 
on the glowing green-gold obscurity of the summer waters. In 
the soft fluoresence which played 
down upon him, from the Noc 
dozing impassively in the groined 
vault of the chamber, Lavon 
could see that he was in fact a 
young man. His face was so delicately formed as to. suggest that 
it had not been many seasons 
since lie had first emerged from 
liis spore. 

But of course there had been 
no real reason to expect an old 
man. All the Shars had been referred to traditionally as "old" 
Shar. The reason, like the reasons 
for everything else, had been forgotten, but the custom had persisted: the adjective at least gave 
weight and dignity to the office. 

The present Shar belonged to 
the generation XVI, and hence 
would have to be at least two 
seasons younger than Lavon himself. If he was old. it was only in 
knowledge. 



"Lavon, I'm going to have to 
be honest with you," Shar said at 
last, still looking out of the tall, 
irregular window. "You've come 
to me for the secrets on the metal 
plates, just as your predecessors 
did to mine. I can give some of 
them to you — but for the most 
part, 1 don't know what they 
mean." 

"After so many generations.''' 
Lavon asked, surprised. "Wasn't 
it Shar III who first found out 
how to read them? That was a 
long time ago." 

The young man turned and 
looked at Lavon with eyes made 
dark and wide by the depths into 
which they had been staring. "1 
can read what's on the plates, 
but most of it seems to make no 
sense. Worst of all, the plates are 
incomplete. You didn't know 
that? They are. One of them was 
lost in a battle during the fti.al 
war with the Eaters, while these 
castles were still in their hands." 

"What am I here for, then?" 
Lavon said. "Isn't there anything 
of value on the remaining plates? 
Do they really contain 'the wisdom of the Creators' or is that 
another myth?" 

"No. No, that's true." Shar said 
slowly, "as far as it goes." 

HE paused, and both men 
turned and gazed at the 
ghostly creature which had appeared suddenly outside the win


10 




 



dow. Then Shar said gravely, 
"Come in, Para." 

The slipper-shaped organism, 
nearly transparent except for the 
thousands of black-and-silver 
granules and frothy bubbles 
which packed its interior, glided 
into the chamber and hovered, 
with a muted whirring of cilia. 
For a moment it remained silent, 
probably speaking telepathically 
to the Noc floating in the vault, 
after the ceremonious fashion of 
all the protos. No human had 
ever intercepted one of these colloquies, but there was no doubt 
about their reality: humans had 
used them for long-range communication for generations. 

Then the Para's cilia buzzed 
once more. Each separate hairlike process vibrated at an independent, ch anging rate ; the 
resulting sound waves spread 
through the water, intermodulating, reinforcing or canceling each 
other. The aggregate wave-front, 
by the time it reached human 
ears, was recognizable human 
speech. 

"We are arrived, Shar and 
Lavon, according to the custom." 

"And welcome," said Shar. 
"Lavon, let's leave this matter of 
the plates for a while, until you 
hear what Para has to say; that's 
a part of the knowledge Lavons 
must have as they come of age, 
and it comes before the plates. I 
can give you some hints of what 



we are. First Para has to tell you 
something about what we aren't." 

T AVON NODDED, willingly 
enough, and watched the proto as it settled gently to the surface of the hewn table at which 
Shar had been sitting. There was 
in the entity such a perfection 
and economy of organization, 
such a grace and surety of movement, that he could hardly 
believe in his own new-won maturity. Para, like all -the protos, 
made him feel not, perhaps, poorly thought-out, but at least unfinished. 

"We know that in this universe 
there is logically no place for 
man," the gleaming, now immobile cylinder upon the table 
droned abruptly. "Our memory 
is the common property to 
all our races. It reaches back to 
a time when there were no such 
creatures as men here. It remembers also that once upon a day 
there were men here, suddenly, 
and in some numbers. Thf ir 
spores littered the bottom : we 
found the spores only a short 
time after our season's Awakening, and in them we saw the 
forms of men slumbering. 

"Then men shattered their 
spores and emerged. They were 
intelligent, active. And they were 
gifted with a trait, a character, 
possessed by no other creature in 
this world. Not even the savage 



SURFACE TENSION 



It 



Eaters had it. Men organized us 
to exterminate the Eaters and 
therein lay the difference. Men 
had initiative. We have the word 
now, which you gave us, and we 
apply it, but we still do not know 
what the thing is that it labels." 

"You fought beside us," Lavon 
said. 

"Gladly. We would never have 
thought of that war by ourselves, 
but it was good and brought good. 
Vet we wondered. We saw that 
men were poor swimmers, poor 
walkers, poor crawlers, poor 
climbers. We saw that men were 
formed to make and use tools, a 
concept we stilt do not understand, for so wonderful a gift is 
largely wasted in this universe, 
and there is no other. What good 
are tool-useful members such as 
the hands of men? We do not 
know. It seems plain that so 
radical a thing should lead to a 
much greater rulership over the 
world than has, in fact, proven 
to be possible for men." 

Lavon's head was spinning. 
"Para, I had no notion that you 
people were philosophers.'* 

"The protos are old,** Shar 
said. He had again turned to look 
out the window, his hands locked 
behind his back. "They aren't 
philosophers, Lavon, but they are 
remorseless logicians. Listen t» 
Para." 

"To this reasoning there could 
be but one outcome,** the Para 



said. "Our strange ally, Man, was 
like nothing else in this universe, 
He was and is ill-fitted for it. He 
does not belong here; he has been 
—adopted. This drives us to think 
that there are other universes besides this one, but where these 
universes might lie, and what 
their properties might be, it is 
impossible to imagine. We have 
no imagination, as men know." 

Was the creature being ironic? 
Lavon could not tell. He said 
slowly: "Other universes? How 
could that be true?** 

"We do not know,** the Para't 
uninflected voice hummed. Lavon 
waited, but obviously the proto 
had nothing more to say. 

CHAR had resumed sitting on 
*^ the window silL clasping his 
knees, watching the come and go 
of dim shapes in the lighted gulf. 
"It is quite true," he said. "What 
is written on the remaining plate* 
makes it plain. Let me tell yoa 
now what they say. 

"We were made, Lavon. We 
were made by men who are not 
as we are, but men who were our 
ancestors all the same. They were 
caught in some disaster, and they 
made us, and put us here in our 
universe — so that, even though 
they had to die, the race of men 
would live." 

Lavon surged up from the 
woven spyrogrya mat upon which 
he had been sitting. **Yon mueft 



It 



OALAKT ICIIMCI FICTION 



think I'm a fool!" he said sharp
"No. You're our Lavon; you 
have a right to know the facts. 
Make what you like of them.'" 
Shar swung his webbed toes back 
into the chamber. "What I've 
told you may be hard to believe, 
but it seems to be so; what Para 
says backs it up. Our unfitness 
to live here is self-evident. I'll 
five you some examples: 

"The past four Shars discovered that we won't get any further 
in our studies until we learn how 
to control heat. We've produced 
tnough heat chemically to show 
that even the water around us 
changes when the temperature 
gets high enough. But there we're 
stopped.** 

"Why?" 

"Because heat produced in 
•pen water is carried off as rapidly as it's produced. Once we tried 
to enclose that heat, and we blew 
up a whole tube of the castle and 
killed everyth ing in range ; the 
shock was terrible. We measured 
the pressures that were involved 
sb that explosion, and we discovered that no substance wc 
know could have resisted them. 
Theory suggests some stronger 
substances — bur w« need head 
so form tlwtnf 

"Take our chemistry. We Ev« 
fta water. Everything seems to dissolve in water, to some extentHow do we confine a chemical 



test to the crucible we put it in? 
How do we maintain a solution at 
one dilution? I don't know. Every 
avenue leads me to the same 
stone door. We're thinking creatures, Lavon, but there's something drastically wrong in the 
way we think about this universe 
we live in. It just doesn't seem to 
lead to results." 

Lavon pushed back his floating 
hair futilely. "Maybe you're 
thinking about the wrong results. 
We've had no trouble with warfare, or crops, or practical tilings 
like that. If we can't create much 
heat, well, most of us won't miss 
it: we don't need any. What's the 
other universe supposed to be 
like, the one our ancestors lived 
in? Is it any better than this 
one?" 

"I don't know," Shar admitted. 
"It was so different that it's hard 
to compare the two. The metal 
plates tell a story about men who 
were traveling from one place to 
another in a container that moved 
by itself. The only analogy I can 
think of is the shallops of diatom, 
shells that our youngsters use to 
sled along the thermocline ; but 
evidently what's meant is something much bigger. 

"I picture a huge shallop, 
closed on all sides, big enough to 
hold many people — maybe 
twenty or thirty. It had to travel 
for generations through some 
kind of space where there wasn't 



SURFACE TENSION 



1* 



any water to breathe, so that the 
people had to carry their own 
water and renew it constantly. 
There were no seasons; no yearly 
turnover: no ice forming on the 
sky, because there wasn't any 
sky in a closed shallop; no spore 
formation. 

"Then the shallop was wrecked 
somehow. The people in it knew 
they were going to die. They 
made us, and put us here, as if 
we were their children. Because 
they had to die, they wrote their 
story on the plates, to tell us 
what had happened. I suppose 
we'd understand it better if we 
had the plate Shar III lost during the war, but we don't." 

"The whole thing sounds like 
a parable," La von said, shrugging. "Or a song. I can see why 
you don't understand it. What 
I can't sec is why you bother to 
try." 

"Because of the plates," Shar 
said. "You've handled them yourself, so you know that we've 
nothing like them. We have 
crude, impure metals we've hammered out, metals that last for 
a while and then decay. But the 
plates shine on and on, generation 
after generation. They don't 
change; our hammers and graving tools break against them; the 
little heat we can generate leaves 
them unharmed. Those plates 
weren't formed in our universe — 
and that one fact makes every 



word on them important to me. 
Someone went to a great deal of 
trouble to make those plates indestructible to give them to us. 
Someone to whom the word 
'stars' was important enough to 
be worth fourteen repetitions, 
despite the fact that the word 
doesn't seem to mean anything. 
I'm ready to think that if our 
makers repeated the word even 
twice on a record that seems likely to last forever, it's important 
for us to know what it means.™ 
"All these extra universes and 
huge shallops and meaningless 
words — I can't say that they 
don't exist, but I don't see what 
difference it makes. The Shara 
of a few generations ago spent 
their whole lives breeding bettec 
algae crops for us, and showing 
us how to cultivate them instead 
of living haphazardly off bacteria. That was work worth doing. The Lavons of those days 
evidently got along without the 
metal plates, and saw to it that 
the Shars did, too: Well, as far 
as I'm concerned, you're welcome 
to the plates, if you like them better than crop improvement — but 
I think they ought to be thrown 
away." 

"AH right," Shar said, shrugging. "If you don't want them, 
that ends the traditional interview. We'll go our — " 

There was a rising drone from 
the table-top. The Para was lift— 



14 




 



ing itself, waves of motion passing over its cilia, like the waves 
which went across the fruiting 
stalks of the fields of delicate 
fungi with which the bottom was 
planted. It had been so silent 
that Lavon had forgotten it; he 
could tell from Shar's startlement 
that Shar had. too. 

"This is a great decision." the 
waves of sound washing from the 
creature throbbed. "Every proto 
has heard it and agrees with it. 
We have been afraid of these 
metal plates for a long time, 
afraid that men would learn to 
understand them and to follow 
what they say to some secret 
place, leaving the protos behind. 
Now we are not afraid." 

"There wasn't anything to be 
afraid of," Lavon said indulgently. 

"No Lavon before you had 
said so," Para said. "We are glad. 
We will throw the plates away." 

With that, the shining creature 
swooped toward the embrasure. 
With it, it bore away the remaining plates, which had been resting under it on the table -top, 
suspended delicately in the 
curved tips of its supple cilia. 
With a cry, Shar plunged through 
the water toward the opening. 

"Stop. Para!" 

But Para was already gone, so 
swiftly that he had not even 
heard the call. Shar twisted his 
body and brought up oil one 



er wall. 

ice was 



shoulder against the tower 
He said nothing. His face 
enough. Lavon could not look 3t 
it for more than an instant. 

The shadows of the two men 
moved slowly along the uneven 
cobbled floor. The Noc descended 
toward them from the vault, its 
single thick tentacle stirring the 
water, its internal light flaring 
and fading irregularly. It. too, 
drifted through the window after 
its cousin, and sank slowly away 
toward the bottom. Gently its 
living glow dimmed, flickered, 
winked out. 

FOR many days, Lavon was 
able to avoid thinking much 
about the loss. There was always 
a great deal of work to be done. 
Maintenance of the castles, which 
had been built by the now -extinct Eaters rather than by human hands, was a never-ending 
task. The thousand dichotomously branching wings tended to 
crumble, especially at their bases 
where they sprouted from each 
other, and no Shar had yet come 
forward with a mortar as good 
as the rotifer-spittle which bad 
once held them together, In addition, the breaking through of 
windows and the construction of 
chambers in the early days had 
been haphazard and often unsound. The instinctive architee


SURFACE TENSION 



ture of the rotifers, after all. had 
not been meant to meet the needs 
of human occupants. 

And then there were the crops. 
Men no longer fed precariously 
upon passing bacteria; now there 
were the drifting mats of specific 
water-fungi, rich and nourishing, 
which had been bred by five generations of Shars. These had to 
be tended constantly to keep the 
strains pure, and to keep the older and less intelligent species of 
the protos from grazing on them. 
In this latter task, to be sure, the 
more intricate and far-seeing 
proto types cooperated, but men 
were needed to supervise. 

There had been a time, after 
the war with the Eaters, when 
it had been customary to prey 
upon the slow-moving and stupid 
diatoms, whose exquisite and 
fragile glass shells were so easily 
burst, and who were unable to 
learn that a f riendly voice did 
not necessarily mean a friend. 
There were still people who 
would crack open a diatom when 
no one else was looking, but they 
were regarded as barbarians, to 
the puzzlement of the protos,, The 
blurred and simple-minded 
speech of the gorgeously engraved 
plants had brought them into the 
category of pets - — a concept 
which the protos were utterly unable to grasp, especially since 
men admitted that diatoms on 
the half-frustrule were delicious. 



Lavon had had to agree, very 
early, that the distinction was 
tiny. After all, humans did eat 
the desmids, which differed from 
the diatoms only in three particulars : their shells were flexible, 
they could not move, and they 
did not speak. Yet to Lavon, as 
to most men, there did seem to 
be some kind of distinction, 
whether the protos could see it 
or not, and that was that. Under 
the circumstance he felt that it 
was a part of his duty, as a leader of men, to protect the diatoms 
from the occasional poachers who 
browsed upon them, in defiance 
of custom, in the high levels of 
the sunlit sky. 

Yet Lavon found it impossible 
to keep himself busy enough to 
forget that moment when the last 
clues to Man's origin and destination had been seized and borne 
away into dim space. 

It might be possible to ask 
Para for the return of the plates, 
explain that a mistake had been 
made. The protos were creatures 
of implacable logic, but they respected Man. were used to illogic 
in Man, and might reverse their 
decision if pressed — 

We are sorry. The plates were 
carried over the bar and released 
in the gulf. We will have the bottom there searched, but . . . 

With a sick feeling he could 
not repress, Lavon knew that 
when the protos decided some


\6 




 



thing was worthless, they did not 
hide it in some chamber like old 
women. They threw it away — 
efficiently. 

Yet despite the tormenting of 
his conscience, Lavon was convinced that the plates were well 
lost. What had they ever done for 
man, except to provide Shars 
with useless things to think about 
In the late seasons of their lives? 
What the Shars themselves had 
done to benefit Man, here, in the 
Water, in the world, in the universe, had been done by direct 
experimentation. No bit of useful 
knowledge ever had come from 
the plates. There had never been 
anything in the plates but things 
best left unthought. The protos 
were right. 

T AVON shifted his position on 
the plant frond, where he had 
been sitting in order to overlook 
the harvesting of an experimental 
crop of blue-green, oil-rich algae 
drifting in a clotted mass close 
to the top of the sky, and scratched his back gently against the 
coarse bole. The protos were seldom wrong, after all. Their lack 
of creativity, their inability to 
think an original thought, was a 
gift as well as a limitation. It allowed them to see and feel things 
at alt times as they were — not as 
they hoped they might be, for 
they had no ability to hope, either. 



"La-von! Laq-vah-on!" 

The long halloo came floating 
up from the sleepy depths. Propping one hand against the top of 
the frond, Lavon bent and looked 
down. One of the harvesters was 
looking up at him, holding loosely the adze with which he had 
been splitting free the glutinous 
tetrads of the algae. 

"Up here. Whit's the matter?" 

"We have the ripened quadrant 
cut free. Shall we tow it nway?" 

"Tow it away," L3von said, 
with a lazy gesture. He leaned 
back again. At th? came uutaf\t, 
a brilliant reddish glory burst 
into being above him, and cast 
itself down toward the depths 
like mesh after mc-.h of the finestdrawn gold. The ■jrcit light which 
lived above the sky duritis the 
day, brightening or dimmine. according to some pnttcrn no Shar 
ever had fathomed, was blooming again. 

Few men, caught in th< warm 
glow of tint Light, could resist 
looking up at it — especially when 
the top of the sV.y itself wrinkled 
and smiled just a moment's 
climb or swim away. Yet, as always, Lavon's bemur-cd upward 
look gave him back nothing but 
his own distorted, bobbling reflection, and a reflection of the 
plant on which he rested. 

Here was the upper limit, the 
third of the three surfaces of the 
universe. 



SURFACE TENSION 



The first surface was the bottom, where the water ended. 

The second surface was the 
thermoclinc, the invisible division 
between the colder waters of the 
bottom and the warm, light 
waters of the sky. During the 
height of the warm weather, the 
thermocline was so definite a 
division as to make for good sledding and for chilly passage. A 
real interface formed between the 
cold, denser bottom waters and 
the warm reaches above, and 
maintained itself almost for the 
whole of the warm season. 

The third surface was the sky. 
One could no more pass through 
that surface than one could penetrate the bottom, nor was there 
any better reason to try. There 
the universe ended. The light 
which played over it daily, waxing and waning as it chose, 
seemed to be one of its properties. 

Toward the end of the season, 
the water gradually grew colder 
and more difficult to breathe, 
while at the same time the light 
became duller and stayed for 
shorter periods between darknesses. Slow currents started to move. 
The high waters turned chill and 
began to fall. The bottom mud 
stirred and smoked away, carrying with it the spores of the fields 
of fungi. The thermocline tossed, 
became choppy, and melted 
away. The sky began to fog with 
particles of soft silt carried up 



from the bottom, the walls, the 
corners of the universe. Before 
very long, the whole world was 
cold, inhospitable, flocculcnt with 
yellowing, dying creatures. 

Then the protos encysted; the 
bacteria, even most of the plants 
and, not long afterward, men, too, 
curled up in their oil-filled amber 
shells. The world died until the 
first tentative current of warm* 
water broke the winter silence. 

"La- von!" 

JUST after the long call, a shining bubble rose past Lavon. 
He reached out and -poked it, but 
it bounded away from his sharp 
thumb. The gas-bubbles which 
rose from the bottom in late summer were almost invulnerable-rand when some especially hard 
blow or edge did penetrate them, 
they broke into smaller bubbles 
which nothing could touch, end 
Red toward the sky, leaving behind a remarkably bad smell. 

Gas. There was no water inside 
a bubble. A man who got inside 
a bubble would have nothing to ' 
breathe. 

But, of course, it was impossible to penetrate a bubble. The 
surface tension was too strong. 
As strong as Shar's metal plates. 
As strong as the top of the sky. 

As strong as the top of the sky. 
And above that — once the bubble was broken — a world of gat 
instead of water? Were all worlds 



18 



GALAXY SCIfNCE FICTION 



bubbles of water drifting in gas? 

If it were so, travel between 
them would be out of the question, since it would be impossible 
to pierce the sky to begin with. 
Nor did the infant cosmology include any provisions for bottoms 
for the worlds. 

And yet some of the local 
creatures did burrow into the bottom, quite deeply, seeking something in those depths which was 
beyond the reach of Man. Even 
the surface of the ooze, in high 
summer, crawled with tiny creatures for which mud was a natural medium. Man, too, passed 
freely between the two countries 
of water which were divided by 
the thermocline, though many of 
the creatures with which he 
lived could not pass that line at 
all. once it had established itself. 

And if the new universe of 
which Shar had spoken existed 
at all, it had to exist beyond the 
sky, where the light was. Why 
could not the sky be passed, after 
all? The fact that bubbles could 
be broken showed that the surface skin that formed between 
water and gas wasn't completely 
invulnerable. Had it ever been 
tried? 

Lavon did not suppose that 
one man could butt his way 
through the top of the sky, any 
more than he could burrow into 
the bottom, but there might be 
ways around the difficulty. Here 

SURFACE TENSION 



at his back, for instance, was a 
plant which gave every appearance of continuing beyond th.e 
sky : its uppermost fronds broke 
off and were bent back only by 
a trick of reflection, 

It had always been assumed that the plants died where they 
touched the sky. For the most 
part, they did, for frequently the 
dead extension could be seen, 
leached and yellow, the boxes of 
its component cells empty, floating imbedded in the perfect mirror. But some were simply 
chopped off, like the one which 
sheltered him now. Perhaps that 
was only an illusion, and instead 
it soared indefinitely into some 
other place — some place where 
men might once have been born, 
and might still live . . . 

The plates' were gone. There 
was only one other way to find 
out. 

TAETERMINEDLY. Lavon began to climb toward the 
wavering mirror of the sky. His 
thorn-thumbed feet trampled obliviously upon the clustered 
sheaves of fragile stippled diatoms. The tulip-heads of Vortae, 
placid and murmurous cousins of 
Para, retracted startledly out of 
his way upon coiling stalks, to 
make silly gossip behind him. 

Lavon did not hear them. He 
continued to climb doggedly toward the light, his fingers and 



toes gripping the plant-bole. 

"Lavon! Where are you going? 
La von!" 

He leaned out and looked 
down. The man with the adze, a 
doll-like figure, was beckoning to 
him from a patch of blue-green 
retreating over a violet abyss. 
Dizzily he looked away, clinging 
to the bole; he had never been so 
high before. Then he began to 
climb again. 

After a while, he touched the 
sky with one hand. He stopped 
to breathe. Curious bacteria gathered about the base of his thumb 
where blood from a small cut 
was fogging away, scattered at 
his gesture, and wriggled mindlessly back toward the dull red 
lure. 

He waited until he no longer 
felt winded, and resumed climbing. The sky pressed down against 
the top of his head, against the 
back of his neck, against his 
shoulders. It seemed to give 
slightly, with a tough, frictionless elasticity. The water here 
was intensely bright, and quite 
colorless. He climbed another 
step, driving bis shoulders 
against that enormous weight. 

It was fruitless. He might as 
well have tried to penetrate a 
cliff. 

Again he had to rest. While he 
panted, he made a curious discovery. All around the bole of 
the water plant, the steel surface 




20 




 



of the sky curved upward, making a kind of sheath. He found 
that he could insert his hand into 
it — there was almost enough 
space to admit his head as well. 
Clinging closely to the bole, he 
looked up into the inside of the 
sheath, probing with his injured 
hand. The glare was blinding. 

There was a kind of soundless 
explosion. His whole wrist was 
suddenly encircled in an intense, 
impersonal grip, as if it were being cut in two. In blind astonish- ment, he lunged upward. 

The ring of pain traveled 
smoothly down his upfiung arm 
as he rose, was suddenly around 
his shoulders and chest. Another 
lunge and his knees were being 
squeezed in the circular vise. 
Another — 

Something was horribly wrong. 
He clung to the bole and tried to 
gasp, but there was — nothing to 
breathe. 

The water came streaming out 
of his body, from his mouth, his 
nostrils, the spiracles in his sides, 
spurting in tangible jets. An intense and fiery itching crawled 
over the entire surface of his 
body. At each spasm, long knives 
ran into him, and from a great 
distance he heard more water being expelled from his book-lungs 
in an obscene, frothy sputtering. 

Lavon was drowning. 

With a final convulsion, he 
kicked himself away from the 



splintery bole, and fell. A hard 

impact shook him; and then the 
water, which had clung to him 
so tightly when he had first attempted to leave it, took him 
back with cold violence. 

Sprawling and tumbling grotesquely, he drifted, down and 
down and down, toward the bottom. 

Ill 

FOR many days, Lavon lay 
curled insensibly in his spore, 
as if in the winter sleep. The 
shock of cold which he had felt 
on re-entering his native universe 
had been taken by his body as a 
sign of coming winter, as it had 
taken the oxygen -starvation of 
his brief sojourn above the sky, 
The spore-forming glands had at 
once begun to function. 

Had it not been for ttiis, Lavon 
would surely have died. The 
danger of drowning disappeared 
even as he fell, as the air bubbled out of his lungs and readmitted the life-giving water. 
But for acute dessication and 
third degree sunburn, the sunken 
universe knew no remedy. The 
healing amnionic fluid generated 
by the spore-forming glands, 
after the transparent amber 
sphere had enclosed him, offered 
Lavon his only chance. 

The brown sphere was spotted 
after some days by a prowling 



SURFACE TINSION 



amtba, quiescent in the eternal 
winter of the bottom. Down there 
the temperature was always an 
even 4°, no matter what the season, but it was unheard of that a 
spore should be found there while 
the high epilimnion was still 
warm and rich in oxygen. 

Within an hour, the spore was 
surrounded by scores of astonished protos, jostling each other 
to bump their blunt eyeless prows 
against the shell. Another hour 
later, a squad of worried men 
came plunging from the castles 
far above to press their own noses 
against the transparent wall. 
Then swift orders were given. 

Four Para grouped themselves 
about the amber sphere, and there 
was a subdued explosion as the 
trichocysts which lay embedded 
01 tin bases of their cilia, just 
under the pellicle, burst and cast 
fine lines df a quickly solidifying 
liquid into the water. The four 
Paras thrummed and lifted, tugging. 

Lavon's spore swayed gently in 
the mud and then rose slowly, 
entangled in the web. Nearby, a 
Noc cast a cold pulsating glow 
oyer the operation — not for the 
Paras, who did not need the light, 
but for the baffled knot of men. 
The sleeping figure of Lavon, 
head bowed, knees drawn up to 
its chest, revolved with an absurd 
solemnity inside the shell as it 
was moved. 



"Take him to Shar. Para.** 

*X*HE young Shar justified, by 
* minding his own business, the 
traditional wisdom with which 
his hereditary office had invested 
him. He observed at once that 
there was nothing he could do 
for the encysted Lavon which 
would not be classifiable as simple meddling. 

He had the sphere deposited in 
a high tower room of his castle, 
where there was plenty of light 
and the water was warm, which 
should suggest to the hibernating 
form thiit spring was again on 
the way. Beyond that, he simply 
sat and watched, and kept hii 
speculations to himself. 

Inside the spore, Lavon's body 
seemed rapidly to be shedding its 
skin, in long strips and patches. 
Gradually, his curious shrunken* 
ness disappeared. His withered 
arms and legs and sunken abdomen filled out again. 

The days went by while Shar 
watched. Finally he could discern no more changes, and. on a 
hunch, had the spore taken up to 
the topmost battlements of the 
tower, into the direct daylight. 

An hour later, Lavon moved in 
his amber prison. 

He uncurled and stretched, 
turned blank eyes up toward the 
light. His expression was that of 
a man who had not yet awakened 
from a ferocious nightmare. His 




 



whole body shone with a strange 
pink newness. 

Shar knocked gently on the 
wall of the spore. Lavon turned 
his blind face toward the sound, 
life coming into his eyes. He 
smiled tentatively and braced his 
hands and feet against the inner 
wall of the shell. 

The whole sphere fell abruptly 
to pieces with a sharp crackling. 
The amnionic fluid dissipated 
around him and Shar, carrying 
away with it the suggestive odor 
of a bitter struggle against death. 

Lavon stood among the bits of 
shell and looked at Shar silently. 
At last he said : 

"Shar — I've been beyond the 
sky." » 

"I know," Shar said gently. 

Again Lavon was silent. Shar 
said. "Don't be humble, Lavon. 
You've done an epoch-making 
thing. It nearly cost you your 
life. You must tell me the rest — 
all of it." 

"The rest?" 

"You taught me a lot while 
you slept. Or are you still opposed to useless knowledge?" 

Lavon could say nothing. He 
no longer could tell what he 
knew from what he wanted to 
know. He had only one question 
left, but he could not utter it. He 
could only look dumbly into 
Shar's delicate .face. 

"You have answered me," Shar 
said, even more gently. "Come, 



my friend; join me at my table. 
We will plan our journey to the 
stars," 

¥T was two winter sleeps after 
Lavon's disastrous climb beyond the sky that all work on the 
spaceship stopped. By then, Lavon knew that he had hardened 
and weathered into that temporarily ageless state a man enters after he has just reached his 
prime; and he knew also that 
there were wrinkles engraved 
upon his brow, to stay and to 
deepen. 

"Old" Shar, too, had changed, 
his features losing some of their 
delicacy as he came into his maturity. Though the wedge-shaped 
bony structure of his face would 
give him a withdrawn and poetic 
look for as long as he lived, participation in the plan had given 
his expression a kind of executive 
overlay, which at best gave it a 
masklike rigidity, and at worst 
coarsened it somehow. 

Yet despite the bleeding away 
of the years, the spaceship was 
still only a hulk. It lay upon a 
platform built above the tumbled 
boulders of the sandbar which 
stretched out from one wall of 
the world. It was an. immense hull 
of pegged wood, broken by regularly spaced gaps through which 
the raw beams of the skeleton 
could be seen. 

Work upon it had progressed 



SURFACE TENSION 



fairly rapidly at first, for it was 
not hard to visualize what kind of 
v< hide would he needed to crawl 
through empty space without 
losing its water. It had been recognized that the sheer size of the 
machine would enforce a long 
period of construction, perhaps 
two full seasons; but neither Shar 
nor Lavon had anticipated any 
serious snag. 

For that matter, part of the 
v< hide's apparent incompkw ness was an illusion. About a 
third of its fittings were to consist of living creatures, which 
could not be expected to install 
themselves in the vessel much 
before the actual takeoff. 

Yet time and time again, work 
on the ship had had to be halted 
for long periods. Several timts 
whole sections needed to be ripped out, as it became more and 
more evident that hardly a single 
normal, understandable concept 
could be applied to the problem 
of space travel. 

The lack of the history plates. 
Which the Para steadfastly refused to deliver up, was a double 
handicap. Immediately upon 
their loss, Shar had set himself 
to reproduce them from memory; 
but unlike the more religious of 
his people, he had never regarded 
them as holy writ, and hence had 
never set himself to memorizing 
them word by word. Even before 
the theft, he had accumulated a 



set of variant translations of passages presenting specific experimental problems, which were 
stored in his library, carved in 
wood. But most of these translations tended to contradict each 
other, and none of them related 
to spaceship construction, upon 
which the original had been vague 
in any case. 

No duplicates of the cryptic 
characters of the original had 
ever been made, for the simple 
reason that there was nothing in 
the sunken universe capable of 
destroying the originals, nor of 
duplicating their apparently 
changeless permanence. Shar remarked too late that through simple caution they should have 
made a number of verbatim temporary records but after generations of green-gold peace, 
simple caution no longer covers 
preparation against catastrophe. 
(Nor. for that matter, did a culture which had to dig each letter 
of its simple alphabet into pulpy 
waterlogged wood with a flake 
of stonewort, encourage the keeping of records in triplicate.) 

As a result, Shar's imperfect 
memory of the contents of the 
history plates, plus the constant 
and millcnial doubt as to the accuracy of the various translations, 
proved finally to be the worst 
obstacle to progress on the spaceship itself. 

"Men must paddle before they 



24 




 



can swim," Lavon observed belatedly, and Shar was forced to 
agree with him. 

Obviously, whatever the ancients had known about spaceship construction, very little of 
that knowledge was usable to a 
people still trying to build its 
first spaceship from scratch. In 
retrospect, it was not surprising 
that the great hulk still rested 
incomplete upon its platform 
above the sand boulders, exuding 
a musty odor of wood steadily 
losing its strength, two generations after its flat bottom had 
been laid down. 

'T^HE fat-faced young man who 
-■- headed the strike delegation 
was Phil XX, a man two generations younger than Lavon, four 
younger than Shar. There were 
crow's-feet at the corners of his 
eyes, which made him look both 
like a querulous old man and 
like an infant spoiled in the 
spore. 

"We're calling a halt to this 
crazy project." he said bluntly. 
"We've slaved our youth away 
on it, but now that we're our own 
masters, it's over, that's all. 
Over." 

"Nobody's compelled you," 
Lavon said angrily. 

"Society does; our parents do," 
a gaunt member of the delegation said. "But now we're going 
to start living in the real world. 



Everybody these days knows that 
there's no other world but this 
one. You oldsters can hang on 
to your superstitions if you like. 
We don't intend to." 

Baffled, Lavon looked over at 
Shar. The scientist smiled and 
said, "Let them go, Lavon. We 
have no use for the faint-hearted." 

The fat-faced young man 
flushed. "You can't insult us into 
going back to work. Wt 're 
through. Build your own ship to 
no place!" 

"All right," Lavon said evenly. 
"Go on, beat it. Don't stand 
around here orating about it. 
You've made your decision and 
we're not interested in your s< Ifjustifications. Good-by." 

The fat-faced young man evidently still had quite a bit of 
heroism to dramatize which 
Lavon's dismissal had shortcircuited. An examination of 
Lavon's stony face, however, convinced him that he had to take 
his victory as he found it. He and 
the delegation trailed ingloriously 
out the archway. 

"Now wh at ?" L a von a sked 
when they had gone. "I must admit, Shar, that I would have tried 
to persuade them. We do need 
the workers, after all." 

"Not as much as they need us," 
Shar said tranquilly. "How many 
volunteers have you got for The 
crew of the ship?" 



SURFACE TENSION 



as 



"Hundreds. Every young man 
of the generation after Phil's 
wants to go along. Phil's wrong 
about that segment of the population, at least, The project 
catches the imagination of the 
very young." 

''Did you give them any encouragement?" 

"Sure," i,avon said. "I told 
them we'd call on them if they 
were chosen. But you can't take 
that seriously! We'd do badly to 
displace our picked group of 
specialists with youths who have 
enthusiasm and nothing else." 

"That's not what I had in 
mind, Lavon. Didn't I see a Noc 
in your chambers somewhere? 
Oh, there he is, asleep in the 
dome. Noct" 

The creature stirred its tentacles lazily. 



"Noc, I've a message," Shar 
called. "The protos are to tell all 
men that those who wish to go to 
the next world with the spaceship 
must come to the staging area 
right away. Say that we can't 
promise to take everyone, but 
that only those who help us 
build the ship will be considered 
at all." 

The Noc curled its tentacles 
again and appeared to go back 
to sleep. Actually, of course, it 
was sending its message through 
the water in all directions. 

IV 

LAVON turned from the arrangement of speaking-tube 
megaphones which was his control board and looked at the 
Para. "One : last try," he said. 



GALAXY SCIENCE F I C T S O N 



"Will you give us hack the 
plates?" 

"No. Lavon. We have never 
denied you anything before, but 
this we must." 

"You're going with us though. 
Para. Unless you give us the 
knowledge we need, you'll lose 
your life if we lose ours." 

"What is one Para?" the creature said. "We are all alike. This 
cell will die; but the protos need 
to know how you fare on this 
journey. We believe you should 
make it without the plates.*' 

"Why?" 

The proto whs silent. Lavon 
stared at it a moment, then 
turned deliberately back to the 
speaking tubes. "Everyone hang 
on," he said. He felt shaky. 
"We're about to start. Tol, is the 
ship sealed?" 



"As far as I can tell, Lavon." 

Lavon shifted to another megaphone. He took a deep breath. 
Already the water seemed stifling, though the ship hr-rtr, \ 
moved. 

"Ready with one-quarter power. One, two, three, go" 

The whole ship jerked and settled bock into place again. The 
raphe diatoms along the under 
hull settled into their niches, their 
jelly treads turning against broad 
endless belts of crude leather. 
Wooden gears creaked, stepping 
up the slow power of the creatures, transmitting it to the sixteen axles of the ship's wheels. 

The ship rocked and began to 
roll slowly along the sandbar. 
Lavon looked tensely through the 
mica port. The world flowed 
painfully past him. The ship 



SURFACE TENS I O .. 



27 



canted and began to climb the 
slope. Behind him, he could feel 
the electric silence of Shar, Para, 
the two alternate pilots, as if 
their gaze were stabbing directly 
through his body and on out the 
port. The world looked different, 
now that he was leaving it. How 
had he missed all this beauty before? 

The slapping of the endless 
belts and the squeaking and 
groaning of the gears and axles 
grew louder as the slope steepened. The ship continued to climb, 
lurching. Around it, squadrons of 
men and protos dipped and 
wheeled, escorting it toward the 
sky. 

Gradually the sky lowered and 
pressed down toward the top of 
the ship. 

"A little more work from your 
diatoms, Tanol." Lavon said. 
"Boulder ahead." The ship swung 
ponderously. "All right, slow 
them, up again. Give us a shove 
from your side, Than — no, that's 
too much — there, that's it. Back 
to normal: you're still turning us! 
Tanol, give us one burst to line 
Us up again. Good. All right, 
steady drive on all sides. Won't 
be long now." 

"How can you think in webs 
like that?" the Para wondered behind him. 

"I just do, that's all. It's the 
Way men think. Overseers, a little 
more thrust now; the grade's get


ting steeper." 

The gears groaned. The ship 
nosed up. The sky brightened in 
Lavon's face. Despite himself, he 
began to be frightened. His lungs 
seemed to burn, and in his mind 
he felt his long fall through nothingness toward the chill slap of 
water as if he were experiencing 
it for the first time. His skin 
itched and burned. Could he go 
up there again? Up there into the 
burning void, the great gasping 
agony where no life should go? 

rTiHE sandbar began to level out 
and the going became a little 
easier. Up here, the sky was so 
close that the lumbering motion 
of the huge ship disturbed it. 
Shadows of wavelets ran across 
the sand. Silently, the thick-barreled bands of blue-green algae 
drank in the light and converted 
it to oxygen, writhing in their 
slow mindless dance* just under 
the long mica skylight which ran 
along the spine of the ship. In 
the hold, beneath the latticed corridor and cabin floors, whirring 
Vortae kept the ship's water in 
motion, fueling themselves upon 
drifting organic particles. 

One by one, the figures wheeling about the ship outside waved 
arms or cilia and fell back, coasting down the slope of the sandbar toward the familiar world, 
dwindling and disappearing. 
There was at last only one single 



28 




 



Euglena. half-plant cousin of the 
protos, forging along beside the 
spaceship into the marches of 
the shallows. It loved the light, 
but finally it, too, was driven 
away into cooler, deeper waters, 
its single whiplike tentacle undulating placidly as it went. It 
was not very bright, but Lavon 
felt deserted when it left. 

Where they were going, though, 
none could follow. 

'Now the sky was nothing but a 
thin, resistant skin of water coating the top of the ship. The vessel slowed, and when Lavon 
called for more power, it began to 
dig itself in among the sandgrains. 

"That's not going to work," 
Shar said tensely. "I think we'd 
better step down the gear ratio, 
Lavon, so you can apply stress 
more slowly." 

"All right," Lavon agreed. 
"Full stop, everybody. Shar, will 
you supervise gear-changing, 
please?" 

TNSANE brilliance of empty 
space looked Lavon full in the 
face just beyond his big mica 
bull's eye. It was maddening to 
be forced to stop here upon the 
threshold of infinity; and it was 
dangerous, too. Lavon could feel 
building in him the old fear of 
the outside. A few moments more 
of inaction, he knew with a gathering coldness at the pit of his 



stomach, and he would b* unable to go through with it. 

Surely, he thought, there must 
be a better way to change gcarratios than the traditional one, 
which involved dismantling almost the entire gear-box. Why 
couldn't a number of gears of 
different sizes be carried on the 
same shaft, not necessarily all 
in action all at once, but awaiting use simply by shoving the 
axle back and forth longitudinally in its sockets? It would still 
be clumsy, but it could be worked 
on orders from tHe bridge and 
would not involve shutting down 
the entire machine — and throwing the new pilot into a bluegreen funk. 

Shar came lunging up through 
the trap and swam himself a 
stop. 

"All set," he said. "The big reduction gears aren't taking- the 
strain too well, though." 

"Splintering?" 

"Yes. I'd go it slow at first." 

Lavon nodded mutely. Without 
allowing himself to stop, even 
for a moment, to consider the 
consequences of his words, he 
called: "Half power." 

The ship hunched itself down 
again and began to move, very 
slowly indeed, but more smoothly 
than before. Overhead, the sky 
thinned to complete transparency- The great light came bL-v-ting 
in. Behind Lavon there was an 



SURFACE TENSION 



• » 

i«k*easy stir. The whiteness grew 
at the front ports. 

Again the ship slowed, straining against the blinding barrier. 
Lavon swallowed and called for 
more power. The ship groaned 
like something about to die. It 
was now almost at a standstill. 

"More power," Lavon ground 
out. 

ONCE more, with infinite slowness, the ship began to move. 
Gently, it tilted upward. 

Then it lunged forward and 
every board and beam in it began to squall. 
"Lavon! Lavon!" 
Lavon started sharply at the 
shout. The voice was coming at 
him from one of the megaphones, 
the one marked for the port at 
the rear of the ship. 
"Lavon!" 

"What is it? Stop your damn 
yelling." 

"I can see the top of the sky ! 
From the other side, from the top 
side! It's like a big flat sheet of 
metal. We're going away from it. 
We're above the sky, Lavon, 
we're above the sky!" 

Another violent start swung 
Lavon around toward the forward port. On the outside of the 
mica, the water was evaporating 
with shocking swiftness, taking 
with it strange distortions and 
patterns made of rainbows. 

Lavon saw Space. 



¥T was at first like a deserted 
* and cruelly dry version of the 
bottom. There were enormous 
boulders, great cliffs, tumbled, 
split, riven, jagged rocks going 
up and away in all directions. 

But it had a sky of its own — a 
deep blue dome so far away that 
he could not believe in. let-alone 
compute, what its distance might 
be. And in this dome was a ball 
of white fire that seared his eyeballs. 

The wilderness of rock was 
stilt a long way away from the 
ship, which now seemed to be 
resting upon a level, glistening 
plain. Beneath the surface shine, 
the plain seemed to be made of 
sand, nothing but familiar sand, 
the same substance which had 
heaped up to form a bar in Lavon's own universe, the bar along 
which the ship had climbed. But 
the glassy, colorful skin over it — 
Suddenly Lavon became conscious of another shout from the 
megaphone banks. He shook his 
head savagely and asked, "What 
is it now?" 

"Lavon, this is Than. What 
have you gotten us into? The 
belts are locked. The diatoms 
can't move them. They aren't 
faking, either; we've rapped them 
hard enough to make them think 
we were trying to break their 
shells, but they still can't give 
us more power." 

"Leave them alone," Lavon 



30 




 



snapped. "They can't fake; they 
haven't enough intelligence. If 
they say they can't give you more 
power, they can't." 

"Well, then, you get us out of 
it," Than's voice said frightened
iy
Shar came forward to Lavon's 
elbow. "We're on a space-water 
interface, where the surface tension is very high," he said softly. 
"This is why I insisted on our 
building the ship so that we 
could lift the wheels off the 
ground whenever necessary. For 
a long while I couldn't understand the reference of the history 
plates to 'retractable landing 
gear,' but it finally occurred to 
me that the tension along a spacewater interface — or, to be more 
exact, a space- mud interface — 
would hold any large object pretty tightly. If you order the wheels 
pulled up now, I think we'll make 
better progress for a while on the 
belly-treads." 

"Good enough," Lavon said. 
"Hello below — up landing gear. 
Evidently the ancients knew their 
business after all, Shar." 

QUITE a few minutes later, for 
shifting power to the belly 
treads involved another setting of 
the gear box, the ship was crawling along the shore toward the 
tumbled rock. Anxiously, Lavon 
scanned the jagged, threatening 
wall for a break. There was a 



sort of rivulet off toward the left 

which might offer a route, though 
a dubious one, to the next world. 
After some thought, Lavon ordered his ship turned toward it. 

"Do you suppose that thing in 
the sky is a 'star'?" he asked. 
"But there were supposed to be 
lots of them. Only one is up 
there — and one's plenty for my 
taste." 

"I don't know," Shar admitted. 
"But I'm beginning to get a picture of the way the universe is 
made, I think. Evidently our 
world is a sort of cup in the bottom of this huge one. This one 
has a sky of its own; perhaps it, 
too, is only a cup in the bottom 
of a still huger world, and so on 
and on without end. It's a hard 
concept to grasp, I'll admit. Maybe it would be more sensible to 
assume that all the worlds are 
cups in this one common surface, 
and that the great light shines 
on them all impartially." 

"Then what makes it seem to 
go out every night, and dim even 
in the day during winter?" Lavon 
demanded. 

"Perhaps it travels in circles, 
over first one world, then another. 
How could I know yet?" 

"Well, if you're right, it means 
that all we have to do is crawl 
along here for a while, until we 
hit the top of the sky of another 
world," Lavon said. "Then we 
dive in. Somehow it seems too 



SURFACE TENSION 



simple, after all our preparations." 

Shar chuckled, but the sound 
did not suggest that he had discovered anything funny. "Simple? Have you noticed the 
temperature yet?" 

Lavon had noticed it, just beneath the surface of awareness, 
but at Shar's remark he realized 
that he was gradually being 
Stifled. The oxygen content of the 
water, luckily, had not dropped, 
but the temperature suggested 
the shallows in the last and 
worst part of the autumn. It was 
like trying to breathe soup. 

"Than, give us more action 
from the Vortae," Lavon called. 
"This is going to be unbearable 
unless we get more circulation." 

It was all he could do now to 
keep his attention on the business of steering the ship. * 

The cut or defile in the scattered razor-edged rocks was a little 
closer, but there still seemed to be 
many miles of rough desert to 
cross. After a while, the ship 
settled into a steady, painfully 
slow crawling, with less pitching 
and jerking than before, but also 
with less progress. Under it, there 
was now a sliding, grinding sound, 
rasping against the hull of the 
ship itself, as if it were treadmilling over some coarse lubricant whose particles were each 
as big as a man's head. 

Finally Shar said, "Lavon, 



we'll have to stop again. The 
sand this far up is dry, and we're 
wasting energy using the treads." 

"Are you sure we can take it?" 
Lavon asked, gasping for breath. 
"At least we are moving. If we 
stop to lower the wheels and 
change gears again, we'll boil." 

"We'll boil if we don't," Shar 
said calmly. "Some of our algae 
are already dead and the rest are 
withering. That's a pretty good 
sign that we can't take much 
more. I don't think we'll make it 
into the shadows, unless we do 
change over and put on some 
speed." 

There was a gulping sound 
from one of the mechanics. "We 
ought to turn back," he said raggedly. "We were never meant to 
be out here in the first place. We 
were made for the water, not this 
hell." 

"We'll stop," Lavon said, "but 
we're not turning back. That's 
final." 

The words made a brave 
sound, but the man had upset 
Lavon more than he dared to 
admit, even to himself. "Shar." 
he said, "make it fast, will you?" 

The scientist nodded and dived 
below. 

THE minutes stretched out. 
The great white globe in the 
sky blazed and blazed. It had 
moved down the sky, far down, 
so that the light was pouring into 



12 




 



the ship directly in Lavon's face, 
illuminating every floating particle, its rays like long milky 
streamers. The currents of water 
passing Lavon's cheek were almost hot. 

How could they dare go directly forward into that inferno? 
The land directly under the 
"star" must be even hotter than 
it was here! 

"Lavon! Look at Para!" 

Lavon forced himself to turn 
and look at his proto ally. The 
great slipper had settled to the 
deck, where it was lying with 
only a feeble pulsation of its 
cilia. Inside, its vacuoles were beginning to swell, to become bloated, pear-shaped bubbles, 
crowding the granulated protoplasm, pressing upon the dark 
nuclei. 

"This cell is dying," Para said, 
as coldly as always. "But go on — 
go on. There is much to learn, 
and you may live, even though 
we do not. Go on." 

"You're . . . for us now?" Lavon whispered. 

"We have always been for you. 
Push your folly to its uttermost. 
We will benefit in the end, and 
so will Man." 

The whisper died away. Lavon 
called the creature again, but it 
did not respond. 

There was a wooden clashing 
from below, and then Shar's 
voice came tinnily fiom one of 



the megaphones. "Lavon, go 
ahead! The diatoms are dying, 
too, and then we'll be without 
power. Make it as quickly and 
directly as you can." 

Grimly, Lavon leaned forward. 
"The 'star* is directly over the 
land we're approaching." 

"It is? It may go lower still 
and the shadows will get longer. 
That's our only hope." 

Lavon had not thought of that. 
He rasped into the banked megaphones. Once more, the ship began to move. 

It got hotter. 

Steadily, with a perceptible 
motion, the "star" sank in Lavon's face. Suddenly a new terror struck him. Suppose it 
should continue to go down until 
it was gone entirely? Blasting 
though it was now, it was the 
only source of heat. Would not 
space become bitter cold on the 
instant — and the ship an expanding, bursty block of ice? 

The shadows lengthened menacingly, stretched across the desert toward the forward-rolling 
vessel. There was no talking in 
the cabin, just the round of ragged breathing and the creaking 
of the machinery. 

Then the jagged horizon 
seemed to rush upon them. Stony 
teeth cut into the lower rim of 
the ball of fire, devoured it 
swiftly. It was gone. 

They were in the lee of the 



SURFACE TENSION 



cliffs. Lavon ordered the ship 
turned to parallel the rock -line; 
it responded heavily, sluggishly. 
Far above, the sky deepened 
steadily, from blue to indigo. 

SHAR came silently up through 
the trap and stood beside Lavon, studying that deepening color and the lengthening of the 
shadows down the beach toward 
their world. He said nothing, but 
Lavon knew that the same chilling thought was in his mind. 
"Lavon." 

La von j umped . S ha r 's voice 
had iron in it. "'Yes?" 

"We'll have to keep moving. 
We must make the next world, 
wherever it is, very shortly." 

"How can we dare move when 
we can't see where we're going? 
Why not sleep it over — if the 
cold will let us?" 

"It will let us." Shar said. "It . 
can't get dangerously cold up 
here. If it did, the sky — or what 
we used to think of as the sky — 
would have frozen over every 
night, even in summer. But what 
I'm thinking about is the water. 
The plants will go to sleep now. 
In our world that wouldn't matter; the supply of oxygen is 
enough to last through the night. 
But in this confined space, with 
so many creatures in it and no 
source of fresh water, we will 
probably smother," 

Staar seemed hardly to be in


volved at all , but spoke rather 
with the voice of implacable 
physical laws. 

"Furthermore." he said, staring unseeingly out at the raw 
landscape, "the diatoms are 
plants, too. In other words, we 
must stay on the move for as long 
as we have oxygen and power — 
and pray that we make it." 

"Shar. we had quite a few pro* 
tos on board this ship once. And 
Para there isn't quite dead yet. It 
he were, the cabin would be intolerable. The ship is nearly 
sterile of bacteria, because all the 
protos have been eating them as 
a matter of course and there's 
no outside supply of them, any 
more than there is for oxygen. 
But still and all there would have 
been some decay." 

Shar bent and tested the pellicle of the motionless Para with 
a probing finger. "You're right, 
he's still alive. What does that 
prove?" 

"The Vortae are also alive; I 
can feel the water circulating. 
Which proves it wasn't the heat 
that hurt Para. It was the light. 
Remember how badly my skin 
was affected after I climbed beyond the sky? Undiluted starlight 
is deadly. We should add that to 
the information on the plates." 

"I still don't see the point." 

"It's this. We've got three or 
four Noc down below. They were 
shielded from the light, and so 




 



must be alive. If we concentrate 
them in the diatom galleys, the 
dumb diatoms will think it's still 
daylight and will go on working. 
Or we can concentrate them up 
along the spine of the ship, and 
keep the algae putting out oxygen. So the question is: which do 
we need more, oxygen or power? 
Or can we split the difference?" 

Shar actually grinned. "A brilliant piece of thinking. We'll 
make a Shar of you yet, Lavon. 
No, Td say that we can't split 
the difference. There's something 
about daylight, some quality, 
that the light Noc emits doesn't 
have. You and I can't detect it, 
but the green plants can, and 
without it they don't make oxygen. So we'll have to settle for 
the diatoms — for power." 

Lavon brought the vessel away 
from the rocky lee of the cliff, 
out onto the smoother sand. All 
trace of direct light was gone 
now, although there was still a 
soft, general glow on. the sky. 

"Now, then," Shar said 
thoughtfully, "I would guess that 
there's water over there in the 
canyon, if we can reach it. 1*11 go 
below and arrange — " 

Lavon gasped, '"What's the 
matter?" 

Silently, Lavon pointed, his 
heart pounding. 

The entire dome of indigo 
above them was spangled with 
tiny, incredibly brilliant lights. 



There were hundreds of them, 
and more and more were becoming visible as the darkness deept nod. And far away, over the 
ultimate edge of the rocks, was a 
dim red globe, crescented with 
ghostly silver. Near the zenith 
was another such body, much 
smaller, and silvered all over . . . 

Under the two moons of Hydro t, and under the eternal stars, 
the two-inch- wooden spaceship 
andr its microscopic cargo toiled 
down the slope toward the drying 
little rivulet. 

npHE ship rested on the bottom 
of the canyon for the rest of 
the night. The great square doors 
were thrown open to admit the 
raw, irradiated, life-giving water 
from outside — and the wriggling 
bacteria which were fresh food. 

No other creatures approached 
them, either with curiosity or 
with predatory intent, while they 
slept, though Lavon had posted 
■ guards at the doors. Evidently, 
even up here on the very floor of 
space, highly organized creatures 
were quiescent at night. 

But when the first flush of 
light filtered through the water, 
trouble threatened. 

First of all, there was the bugeyed monster. The thing was 
green and had two snapping 
claws, either one of which could 



SURFACE TENSION 



3S 




have broken the ship in two like 
a spyrogyra straw. Its eyes were 
black and globular, on the ends 
of short columns, and its long 
feelers were as thick as a plantbole. It passed in a kicking fury 
of motion, however, never noticing the ship at all. 

*'Is that — a sample of the 
kind of life we can expect in the 
next world?" Lavon whispered. 
Nobody answered, for the very 
good reason that nobody knew. 

After a while, Lavon risked 
moving the ship forward against 
the current, which was slow but 
heavy. Enormous writhing worms 
whipped past them. One struck 



the huTl a heavy blow, then 
thrashed on obliviously. 

"They don't notice us," Shar 
said. "We're too small. Lavon, 
the ancients warned us of the immensity of space, but even when 
you see it, it's impossible t» 
grasp. And all those stars — can 
they mean what I think they 
mean? It's beyond thought, beyond belief I" 

"The bottom's sloping," Lavoa 
said, looking ahead intently, 
"The walls of the canyon are retreating, and the water's becoroing rather silty. Let the start 
wait, Shar; we're coming toward 
the entrance of our new world."" 

Shar subsided moodily. His vi« 
sion of space had disturbed hha, 
perhaps seriously. He took littlt 
notice of the great thing that was 
happening, but instead huddled 
worriedly over his own expanding 
speculations. Lavon felt the old 
gap between their two mindi 
widening once more. 

Now the bottom was tilting 
upward again. Lavon had no e»perience with delta -formation, foe 
no rivulets left him own world, 
and the phenomenon worried him. 
But his worries were swept away; 
in wonder as the ship topped ton 
rise and nosed over. 

Ahead, the bottom sloped away 
again, indefinitely, into glimmering depths. A proper sky warn 
over them once more, and Lavon 
could see small rafts of plankton 



OAIAXY SCIENCI FICT10B 



floating placidly beneath it. Almost at once, too, he saw several 
of the smaller kinds of protos, a 
few of which were already approaching the ship— 

rriHEN the girl came darting out 
-■■ of the depths, her features 
distorted with terror. At first she 
did not see the ship at all. She 
came twisting and turning lithely 
through the water, obviously hoping only to throw herself over the 
ridge of the delta and into the 
lavage streamlet beyond. 

Lavon was stunned. Not that 
there were men here — he had 
hoped for that — but at the girl's 



single-minded flight toward suicide. 

"What—" 

Then a dim buzzing began to 
grow in his ears, and he understood. 

"Shar! Thanl Tanol I" he 
bawled. "Break out crossbows 
and spears! Knock out all the 
windows!" He lifted a foot and 
kicked through the big port in 
front of him. Someone thrust a 
crossbow into his hand. 

"Eh? What's happening?" Shar 
blurted. 

"Rotifers!" 

The cry went through the ship 
like a galvanic shock. The rotifers 



SURFACE TENSION 



37 



back in Lavon's own world were 
virtually extinct, but everyone 
knew thoroughly the grim history 
of the long battle man and proto 
had waged against them. 

The girl spotted the ship suddenly and paused, stricken by 
despair at the sight of the new 
monster. She drifted with her own 
momentum, her eyes alternately 
fixed hypnotically upon the ship 
and glancing back over her shoulder, toward where the buzzing 
snarled louder and louder in the 
dimness. 

"Don't stop!" Li vnii shouted. 
"This way, this way! We're 
friends! We'll help!" 

Three great semi-transparent 
trumpets of smooth flesh bored 
over the rise, the many thick cilia 
of their coronas whirring greedily. 
Dicrans — the most predacious of 
the entire tribe of Eaters. They 
were quarreling thickly among 
themselves as they moved, with 
the few blurred, pre -symbolic 
noises which made up their "language." 

C'AREFULLY, Lavon wound 
1 the crossbow, brought it to his 
shoulder, and fired. The bolt sang 
away through the water. It lost 
momentum rapidly, and was 
caught by a stray current which 
brought it closer to the girl than 
to the Eater at which Lavon had 
aimed. 

He bit his lip, lowered the 



weapon, wound it up again. It 
did not pay to underestimate the 
range; he would have to wait until 
he could fire with effect. Another 
bolt, cutting through the water 
from a side port, made him issue 
orders to cease firing. 

The sudden irruption of the 
rotifers decided the girl. The motionless wooden monster was 
strange to her and had not yet 
menaced her — but she must have 
known what it would be like to 
have three Dicrans over her, each 
trying to grab away from the 
other the biggest share. She threw 
herself toward the big port. The 
Eaters screamed with fury and 
greed and bored after her. 

She probably would not have 
made it, had not the dull vision 
of the lead Dicran made out the 
wooden shape of the ship at the 
last instant. It backed off, buzzing, and the other two sheered 
away to avoid colliding with it. 
Atter that they had another argument, though they could hardly 
have formulated what it was that 
they were fighting about. They 
were incapable of saying anything 
much more complicated than the 
equivalent of "Yaah," "Drop 
dead," and "You're another." 

While they were still snarling 
at each other, Lavon pierced the 
nearest one all the way through 
with an arablast bolt. It disintegrated promptly — rotifers are 
delicately organized creatures 



38 




 



despite their ferocity — and the remaining two were at once involved in a lethal battle over the 
remains. 

"Than, take a party out and 
spear me those two Eaters while 
they're still fighting," Lavon ordered. "Don't forget to destroy 
their eggs, too. I can see that this 
world needs a little taming." 

The girl shot through the port 
and brought up against the far 
wall of the cabin, flailing in terror. Lavon tried to approach her, 
but from somewhere she produced a flake of stonewort 
chipped to a nasty point. He sat 
down on the stool before his control board and waited while she 
took in the cabin, Lavon, Shar, 
the pilot, the senescent Para. 

At last she said: "Are — you — 
the gods from beyond the sky?" 

"We're from beyond the sky, 
all right," Lavon said. "But we're 
not gods. We're human beings, 
like yourself. Are there many 
humans here?" 

The girl seemed to assess the 
situation very rapidly, savage 
though she was. Lavon had the 
odd and impossible impression 
that he should recognize her. She 
tucked the knife back into her 
matted hair — ah, Lavon thought, 
that's a trick I may need to remember — and shook her head. 

"We are few. The Eaters are 
everywhere. Soon they will have 
the last of us." 



Her fatalism was so complete 
that she actually did not seem l» 
care. 

"And you've never cooperated 
against them? Or asked the protos 
to help?" 

"The protos?" 

the thin, buzzing voice said. "The 
protos will help, as they helped 
in the world from which we came. 
They fought this flight through 
space, and deprived Man of his 
records: but Man made the trip 
without the records. The protos 
will never oppose men again. I 
have already spolten to the protos 
of this world and have told them 
what Man can dream, Man can 
do, whether ttie protos wish it or 
not. 

"CJHAR, your metal records are 
with you. They were hidden 
in the ship. My brothers will lead 
you to them. 

"This organism dies now. It 
dies in confidence of knowledge, 
as an intelligent creature dies. 
Man has taught us this. There is 
nothing that knowledge . . . cannot do. With it, men . . . have 
crossed . . . have crossed space 

The voice whispered away. The 
shining slipper did not change, 
but something about it was gone. 
Lavon looked at the girl; their 
eyes met. 

"We have crossed space," 
Lavon repeated softly. 

Shar's voice came to him across 
a great distance. 'Jhe young-old 
man was whispering: "But have 
we?" 

"As far as I'm concerned, yes," 
said Lavon. She shrugged. 
"They are as helpless as we are 
against the Eaters. We have no 
weapons which kill at a distance, 
like yours. And it is too late now 
for such weapons to do any good. 
We a re too few . th e Ea ters too 
many." 

T AVON shook his head emphatically. "You've had one 
weapon that counts, all along. 
Against it, numbers mean nothing. We'll show you how we've 
used it. You may be able to use 
it even better than we did. once 
you've given it a try." 

The girl shrugged again. "We 
have dreamed of such a weapon 
now and then, but never found 
it. I do not think that what you 
say is true. What is this weapon?" 

"Brains," Lavon said. "Not just 
one brain, but brains. Working 
together. Cooperation." 

"Lavon speaks the truth,'* a 
weak voice said from the deck. 

The Para stirred feebly. The 
girl watched it with wide eyes. 
The sound of the Para using 
human speech seemed to impress 
her more than the ship or anything else it contained. 

"The Eaters can be conquered." 

