

THE PLASTIC PERIL 



By Roy Sheldon 

CHAPTER ONE 

A Job At Last 

T^HE big ship moved through deep space without a 
shudder or tremor in her whole great bulk. Smoothly 
and silently she pushed her way farther into the uncharted 
regions of the Star System Perseus. 

In all her eight storeys, and throughout her half-mile 
length, men were at work or play. Toiling or resting; talking, sleeping, eating, reading, thinking — they passed the 
time that was neither day nor night; leading their artificial 
lives in the manner of ants in a gigantic anthill. 

On the third storey from the bottom, that is, from where 
the hatches opened, and about three hundred yards from 
the rear, where the jets purred quietly, was the Space Crew 
Bar. It was a blaze of light that was as near to daylight 
as modern science could make it. It hummed with the conversation of the dozens of space men seated at its cosy 
tables, and with the shrill giggles of waitresses. A speaker 
on the wall suddenly crackled into life. 

"Marshal Spear and Major Manners report to C.O.'s 
office immediately, please. Repeat. Marshal Spear . . ," 

Shiny Spear tipped his mug and stared its length at Dirk 
Manners. Manners raised his eyebrows and pursed his lips. 

"Well, well," he said. "So the Old Man wants us." 

Spear set the mug down squarely. His sharp, solid 
features relaxed into a grin. The dark, sleek hair glistened 
under the lights, fell across one corner of his forehead and 
hid a tiny scar that had come Shiny's way in one of his 
numerous space battles. Automatically, the Marshal began 
to button the top of his tunic. 

"Smarten up a bit, Dirk," Spear called. "Must show 
some respect for the Old Man!" 

Major Manners, veteran naviga.tor-cum-biologist-cum


6 



THE PLASTIC PERIL 



philosopher, companion to Spear in all his tribulations and 
successes, straightened the majorial tie with its bright crown 
insignia. He ran limp and gentle hands over his golden 
hair, glanced at his finger nails. 

Spear regarded him with a wry smile. The Marshal never 
ceased to be amused at Manners' titivating rituals, which 
were apt to give the impression that the major was a bit of a 
softy Strangers noting his preoccupation with his appearance would never suspect that Manners had of necessity 
killed dozens of aliens in cold-blooded self-defence— and that 
he once sent a whole planet into fragmentary oblivion in 
order to protect his native Earth. Spear knew that when 
trouble threatened Manners contemplated other things than 
his finger-nails— while outwardly appearing, as he usually 
did, slightly bored with the whole thing. 

"Smart enough?" Manners queried, casting a searching 
glance at Spear's crumpled uniform and dulled insignia. 

Spear laughed. "An aide to be proud of, Dirk. And 
here am I making you ashamed of my dowdy looks!" 

Manners lifted his eyes from the uniform and let them 
rove over Spear's face. The firm chin was stubbly with 
yesterday's growth of beard. There was a smear or two of 
oil on the forehead— signs that Spear had recently been 
tinkering about in the power room, as no Marshal should. 
Only the black hair was tidy— and that only because Spear 
found it less troublesome if he stuck it down firmly with a 
good strong hair cream. " 

But Manners, the philosopher at heart, looked beyond the 
dirt and untidiness. He saw Spear, as he had looked when 
the two of them were threatened by gigantic cacti at the 
Universe's hub; saw him dealing with swollen crustaceans on 
Themis, Saturn's phantom moon; saw him again in the quiet 
of his untidy home, his wife Gwynne forming a pleasant 
part of the background playing with their son. Manners 
remembered Shiny's rise to his present rank— and his insistence on Manners being raised with him so that they 
could be together. 

The major pulled a face. "I don't know why I let 
myself be seen around with you, Shiny. I'm only thankful 
my mother doesn't know about this. Well, are we going 
to keep the Old Man waiting?" 



THE PLASTIC PERIL 



7 



He stood up, smiling. Spear also got to his feet, stretched 
like a panther waking from a snooze, and dropped a ticket 
on the table for the drinks. The amount would be deducted 
from his pay. 

"These are on me, Dirk," Spear said. Manners didn't 
argue. Both of them knew that Manners couldn't have paid 
for the drinks if he had wanted to; his pay was overdrawn 
already through taking the girls out so much. 

They moved across to the exit, Manners stopping on the 
way to have a laughing word with some of the waitresses. 
Shiny grimaced when they giggled. He moved off and 
waited for Dirk at the door. When the navigator finally 
arrived Spear said: 

"There must be something wrong with your glands, Dirk. 
How you can stand those giggling idiots, I don't know. 
They'd make me sick!" 

Manners grinned. "They make me sick, too, but I like 
it! Girls are the only creatures who can make me see the 
best in all classes of people." 

"That's because you've got a prejudiced eye!" Shiny 
claimed as they stepped out into the corridor. "Try using 
it on the CO." 

They crossed the corridor and stepped through the alcove 
that led to the Rail. Right down the length of the ship the 
Rail ran, with little side loops at intervals where cars could 
pull in to let another by. 

Spear and Manners walked to the nearest, loop and found 
an empty car. Climbing in, they set it going by pushbutton. The rubber-tyred car roiled along smoothly past 
other alcoves leading off to games rooms, cinemas, theatres, 
swimming pools, restaurants and all the amenities of a small 
town. Once or twice they pulled in to a loop while a car 
from the opposite direction passed them. There were no 
rules of the Rail. Traffic managed quite happily by 
common sense and unselfishness. 

When the car reached the centre of the ship, Spear ran it 
into a loop. The two men climbed out and made their 
way to the lifts through an alcove. 

"Third storey," Spear said into the grid beside a lift that 
was not being used. The green light on the panel to one 
side went out and a red one came on — other people would 



8 



THE PLASTIC PERIL 



know the lift was engaged. Within seconds the lift stopped 
in front of them. 

Once inside the automatic doors. Spear waited for them 
to close and then said "Eighth storey" into the grid on the 
wall. The mechanism was set at non-emergency level, so 
the cage rose slowly and smoothly. In emergencies it could 
cover the distance in a couple of seconds — the occupants 
being suitably prepared. 

"What d'you suppose the Old Man wants?" Manners 
queried as he lolled against the padded back of the cage. 

Spear was stamping up and down impatiently, irked at the 
slowness of the lift. "I hope to God it's a job at last!" he 
clipped. "You may be happy with anthropology, but I'm 
plain bored with it. The sooner we get off into space the 
better. What's the good of being in Research Group if we 
don't do any researching?" 

Manners smiled lazily. "You were the one who agitated 
to leave the Patrol," he reminded Spear. "All the time you 
were on at them to shift you into this mob; now you're here, 
you don't like." 

"I do like it!" Spear snapped. "At least I like it when 
there's something to be done. I don't like Just cruising 
around like a millionaire idling on his yacht." 

Manners grinned. "If you were Mohammed it might be 
different. I know a Marshal is an exalted rank, but you 
still can't have the mountain br_ought to you, you know." 

"What the blazes are you blathering about mountains 
for?" Spear demanded. "Who's talking about mountains?" 

"A classical allusion," Manners explained. "Never mind 
about it. Point is, if you want to do research, you have to 
go where there's research to be done. And that's a good 
many light years away from Earth. And that takes time." 

The lift came to a stop. As Spear passed through the 
the door he looked over his shoulder at Manners. "I know 
all about that, navigator man. But why can't we be given 
something interesting to do meanwhile? — instead of this 
damned anthropology!" 

The nicknamed 'Heads' on the eighth storey had assigned 
Spear and Manners and a few others to attend classes in 
comparative anthropology during the outward trip to Perseus. The idea, apparently, was to prevent the officers suc


THE PLASTIC PERIL 



9 



cumbing to boredom and to advance their education at the 
same time. In Spear's case they had succeeded only in 
increasing his boredom, without adding one jot to his education — the lectures passed completely over his head, whether 
he was awake or asleep during them — and the practical 
work left him completely unimpressed. 

Manners laughed heartily at Spear's outburst. The major 
followed Spear through into the plushly appointed corridor 
used by the Heads talking all the while.. 

"Anthropology is a very interesting subject — to anyone 
who has a mind capable of assimilating logical facts in a 
logical pattern. The elementary stages, I agree, are not 
too alluring — dealing as they do with Terrestrial races only. 
But once you start the comparative anthropology of the 
planetary systems, the whole thing becomes like magic . . ." 

Spear had stopped. He now stood facing Manners, legs 
astride, arms folded on his chest. Manners ignored the 
defiant stance, and continued. 

"... It was a stroke of genius to broaden the scope 
of conventional anthropology so as to include beings that 
are anatomically dissimilar to man, but psychologically his 
equal or near-equal. Of course, it's rather murdering etymology to go on calling it anthropology, but that's only a 
matter for pedants. Weren't you absolutely carried away 
when we were doing comparative chemical anthropology 
and found that a basic living and thinking pattern could be 
found among widely differing chemical groups of beings?" 

Spear answered shortly. "No, I was not." 

"Then you should have been," Manners admonished. 
"These things may come in very useful one day when we're 
out on an unknown planet and come across something that 
isn't a bit like man to look at, but which thinks the way 
he does — dangerous thoughts, too, sometimes." 

Spear smiled sarcastically. "Just so long as I have you 
with me, Professor, to hobnob with these precocious blobs of 
chemicals, I shan't worry. In the meantime, I'm more interested in engines that'll get us off such a planet before 
your intelligent jellyfish can turn their dangerous thoughts 
into more dangerous actions." 

Manners suddenly relaxed his pedantic pose and clapped 
Spear on the shoulder. "Okay," he grinned. "While we're 



10 



THE PLASTIC PERIL 



together we'll be all right." He wagged a reproving finger 
at his Chief. "But if ever we're separated, you've got an 
awful lot of mugging up to do on anthropology, botany, zoology, physiology, entomology — " 

"My dear old lad," Spear broke in. "If ever we're separated, I shall retire to my little Love Nest and spend the rest 
of my life contemplating the follies of mechanically-minded 
Marshals! Now, let's not keep the Old Man waiting any 
longer. The poor fellow is probably biting his nails down 
to the elbows waiting for us." 

They strode smartly down the corridor. The door of the 
Old Man's office carried a tablet announcing: Commander 
Kreg Kalep, Director of Research, Commanding Officer 
Military Attachments. Spear pressed the call button and 
spoke his name and Manners' into the grid. 

A reedy voice came over the speaker. "Come in, come 
in. Come in!" 

Responding to the instruction, both men passed inside 
the Director's office. There was no ante-room and no 
secretary. Kreg Kalep was one of the old-fashioned school 
of individualists. Also, being a biologist who didn't believe 
in the use of drugs, he was almost completely bald. 

A ring of greying hair ran from temple to temple round 
the back of his head. The face was shiny-skinned and 
small, with a tiny nose and a tiny mouth. Only the eyebrows were large and bushy, meeting across the nose as 
though trying to make up for the lack of other hair. 

Commander Kalep's hands rested on his desk, the fingers 
trembling slightly, the veins standing out blue and strong on 
the backs. One hand lifted, pointing to chairs. 

Spear and Manners pulled them down from the walls and 
seated themselves before the Old Man's desk. For some 
seconds he stared at them without speaking, without answering their formal greeting. Then he seemed to wake from a 
trance. 

"Oh, yes, yes. I am well, gentlemen. Very well, thank 
you. And you?" 

He didn't wait for. their reply, but darted off on another 
subject. Manners glanced at the veins and wondered if the 
Old Man were really as well as he claimed. The poor 
fellow knew that there was a junior on board all trained 



THE PLASTIC PERIL 



11 



to step into his place should anything happen to him. Not 
a comforting thought to a man whose lifetime had been 
spent in research; to a man whose hands trembled and 
whose veins stood out blue and strong . . . 

"Ah, yes," Kalep said. "Umm. Now I expect you two 
are champing at the bit a little, eh? Heh, hen!" His reedy 
voice cackled in a travesty of mirth. "Well now, you'll be 
pleased to know I've got a job for you! No, no, don't 
thank me — let's not waste time. Time's precious you 
know," he told them, peering at them sharply through his 
pale-grey eyes. "Yes, indeed. Precious. Now then, this 
job I've got for you. I want you to prepare for a trip in 
the scooter. Er — mineral research this time. Take all 
the gear you can and let me have a report on the suitability 
of the planet for mining. All right? Good. No, don't 
thank me. That's all right. Just let me have that report." 

The Commander turned away as if the whole thing was 
over, and began rummaging among some papers piled on 
his desk. Spear glanced sideways at Manners, raised his 
eyebrows. Manners coughed and crossed his legs the other 
way. 

Kalep looked up, blinked and wrinkled his brow as though 
puzzled as to the purpose of their presence. Manners took 
the initiative. 

"Could we know a little about this planet we're to visit, 
Commander? It's nice to have some idea of what it's like. 
Also, what are we to call it in our report — has it been 
named yet?" 

Kalep tapped his forehead repeatedly with a bony finger. 
"Planet, planet, planet," he said, with each tap. "Ah, yes. 
The one you're looking into for mineral resources. Yes, 
well, the exploration group marked it as being similar in 
size and mass to Earth, a little larger, perhaps, but nothing 
to speak of. Of course, Ex-G doesn't give us any data on 
atmosphere and so on — you'll have to discover that for 
yourself." He gave them another sharp glance. "Take 
your respirators in case it's poisonous. Can't afford to lose 
good men through carelessness. No, indeed." 

Again Spear glanced at Manners. This was the first time 
they'd seen the Commander at work. Previously they'd only 
met him at dinners and other social occasions — at which he 



12 



THE PLASTIC PERIL 



had seemed a little at sea. They had put it down to his 
academic mind. But here he was instructing them in the 
most elementary precautions that everyone learned in his 
first year at Spacetech. 

. Manners ignored Spear's glance, kept his gaze on the 
Commander and plied more questions. 

"It's part of a large planetary system, is it?" he asked. 

Kalep shrugged. "Not very large, as such systems go. 
It's the smaller of two planets circling Algol — they're not at 
the same orbital distance, of course — That would be unstable. You have to have at least three bodies in a — " 

Manners risked an interruption to avoid another lecture 
on elementary astronomy. "And its name?" he queried. 
"For the report, you know." 

"It's name, ah, yes. We've called it Grisette, because it's 
the smaller of two planets circling Algol, and they're both 
grey in appearance. Grisette. Rather pretty, I think. Do 
you agree?" He fixed Manners with a piercing look that 
was a little unshaking. 

"Yes, oh, yes," Manners replied. "Very pretty indeed. 
Isn't it, Marshal?" 

The whole conversation had been given up by Spear 
long since as the unintelligible ravings of two academicians. 
The sudden question unnerved him, and he could only 
mumble a reply. As it happened, no one noticed. 

"Could we take a look at Grisette in the visi-screen?" 
Manners asked. "It's nice to see it at a distance first." 

"Er — well, I'd rather you didn't, Major," the Commander 
surprised him by answering. "I don't want you to have any 
prejudices when you land." 



CHAPTER TWO 

Sealed Orders 

T^HIS time, the Commander was very definite about closing 
the interview. Before Manners could comment on the 
surprising decision not to let them look through the visiscreen at Grisette, Kalep nodded a sharp dismissal and rose 
from his desk. He walked across to the other side of the 
room and ignored the two spacemen, busying himself with a 
filing cabinet. 

Once again Spear shrugged. He got to his feet and cast 
a short glance at the Commander. Then he turned away 
and moved towards the door. 

"That seems to be that, Dirk," he said. "Let's go set up 
the scooter." 

Manners was still staring at the Commander's back, a 
puzzled wrinkle on his forehead. He turned sharply as 
though dragging his thoughts from far away, and followed 
Spear out of the office. 

In the corridor, he hesitated, made as if to turn back to 
the Commander's office, then seemed to change his mind. 
He hurried after Spear, who was now striding purposefully 
towards the lifts. 

"A slightly rum do," Spear commented, as they stepped 
into the cage. "What's up with the Commander? D'you 
suppose he's gone down with space senility? Or do elderly 
biologists always carry on like that?" 

Manners shook his head, while Spear called instructions 
to the audiosensory mechanism of the lift. "No," Manners 
replied. "No to the last two questions. As to the first one 
— what's wrong with Kalep — I don't know. A man in his 
position isn't usually the kind of man who cracks up suddenly. And yet . . . Oh, I don't know ! The whole thing's 
so odd. I don't feel too happy about it, I can tell you." 



13 



14 



THE PLASTIC PERIL 



Spear laughed. "You biologists never trust each other," 
he accused. "Always thinking the other one's got something 
up his sleeve." 

Manners spoke firmly, not in his usual laconic tone. "I'm 
pretty darned sure Kalep's got something up his sleeve. 
Why wouldn't he let us use the visi-screen?" 

The cage stopped. Struck by Manners' change of tone, 
Spear let the doors remain open while he turned to the 
navigator. "You really think there's something fishy about 
Grisette? Umm. Oh, well, I guess we'll be able to take a 
look at her on the scooter's screen. Let's go order mineral 
stuff." 

The cage, as pet instructions, had stopped at the second 
storey where all the storerooms were housed. On this storey 
there were two Rails — one for passengers, one for goods. 
Spear found a car on the passenger . rail and the two men 
drove towards the rear of the ship, coming to a halt before 
the arched doorway of the rninerology storeroom. 

Leaving the car, they went inside the vast hall of a room, 
with its row upon row of specimen cases, each neatly 
docketed with the name, source and discoverer of the 
mineral. Specimens came from the planetary systems of 
half a dozen major stars — every kind of rock imaginable; 
and several that were beyond imagination. ■> 

Down the centre of the room ran the equipment stores. 
Portable mining outfits, compact analytical sets, U-V examination instruments and a host of other materials required 
for extensive study of rock specimens. 

No one was in sight, so Spear gave a shout of enquiry. 
He was a little startled when a head popped out from 
between two specimen cases right next to him. 

It belonged to a cheery-faced man with ruddy cheeks and 
twinkling eyes. "Hullo, there. Marshal!" he called, edging 
himself right out into the open. "This is a rare pleasure. 
Have you come to look over the specimens? I've got something here that'll interest you now. Come and see the — " 

"Er — not now, Pelsen," Spear said, apologetically. "Not 
just now, if you wouldn't mind." 

He knew that Pelsen was immensely proud of his charges 
— the 'Universal Mineral Museum, as he often called it — and 
that the keeper would cheerfully spend hours explaining the 



THE PLASTIC PERIL 



15 



origin and properties of the rocks. 

Now, hearing Spear's apologetic note, Pelsen's face fell. 
His expression seemed to say that no one of any importance 
ever came to see his rocks. Then he visibly thrust the 
thought aside and his face brightened again. 

"Oh, well, as you say, some other time, perhaps. But 
what can I do for you now, Marshal? — and Major?" he 
added, smiling at Manners. 

"We're going out," Spear explained. "Got to do a mineral 
reconnaissance. Will you send the stuff down to the scooter 
soon as possible?" 

Pelsen's expression became even more cheerful. "Some 
more specimens, eh? Yes, yes, I'll get the equipment loaded 
right away." He hesitated, then: "I suppose there's no 
chance of my coming with you, is there? I've never actually seen any minerals in their native state — only these little 
pieces." He waved his hand round at the cases. "It would 
be nice to — " 

"I'm sorry," Spear broke in as kindly as he could. "It's 
against the rules, and I'm rather fond of my ra nk." 

Pelsen sighed. "Yes, of course. I should have known 
better than to ask. -Still, perhaps one day I'll land on a 
new planet and see rocks as nature made them. Very well, 
Marshal, I'll get that matter attended to right away. Be 
seeing you when you bring the specimens!" 

The two spacemen took their leave of the keeper, made 
their way to the first storey. They remained silent until 
they were emerging from the lift, when Manners said: 

"He's the chap who should grumble, you know, not you. 
Imagine what it must be like to travel these colossal distances and yet not set foot on alien soil. Those rocks he's 
mad about — they're just pieces of planets he'd give his 
eye-teeth to see in the raw." 

Spear pulled a face filled with recollection. "His imagination probably paints a better picture than reality," he commented. "He keeps his illusions." 

"Yes, but — he's so very decent, so very wrapped up in his 
work. I suppose, Shiny, we couldn't — couldn't wangle him 
in?" 

Spear didn't even shorten his stride. He merely turned 



16 



THE PLASTIC PERIL 



his head to Manners and said: "Pull yourself together, 
Dirk." 

A short distance from the lift they turned into the 
provision shed. The first storey differed from the rest in 
that it had no central Rail and was built on a different plan. 
At the fat rear was the power room and beyond it the fuel 
bunkers from which mercury was pumped up to the ionisation chambers that sent a continuous stream of charged 
particles out into space, delivering a constant low thrust to 
the ship. 

Higher up, on the mezzanine storey between the fourth 
and fifth storeys, were the fuel chambers and rocket motor 
that was used when the ship needed to travel fast. The 
rocket was now silent. 

In front of the power room on the first storey was a 
repair shed, large as a hangar, for work on the scooter. 
Next to it came the launching bay, with the scooter itself 
held in massive clamps. This side of the bay stood the 
provision shed, into which Spear and Manners went, calling 
out to the storekeeper as they did so. 

Ranged along the walls were the refrigerator chests, 
powered by the energy that ran the ion-discharger itself. 
In the chests was enough food and drink to last the ship's 
complement eight to ten years — all of it previously sterilised 
by electron bombardment. Two chests were empty, the 
' food having been used during the ship's three-year absence 
from Earth. 

Farther towards the front of the ship was the clothing 
store, in which was kept the bulk of clothing — a small 
amount being always on sale in the shops up on the third 
storey. 

Spear told the storekeeper about the proposed trip to 
Grisette and asked that the scooter be stocked with sufficient food for two men for several weeks. The storekeeper 
looked puzzled. 

"Already been done, Marshal," he explained. "Orders 
came down from the Old Man — I beg your pardon — from 
the Commander, a day or two ago. Just after the maintenance men had finished." 

The spacemen looked at each other. "Maintenance men?" 
Spear repeated. "What were they doing to the scooter?" 



THE PLASTIC PERIL 



17 



The storeman shook his head. "I don't know, Marshal. 
Don't understand these things. Guess they'd tell you if you 
went along to see them. Anyway, the scooter's all ready 
stocked with food to last you three months." 

The spacemen started in surprise. "How long?" Manners asked, incredulously. 

"Three months. That was the Commander's orders." 

"But — " Manners began. 

Spear touched his arm. "Good," he said,, closing the 
subject. "Thanks, Bruno. Now we'll go have a chat with 
maintenance." 

Manners waited until they were outside the shed and 
then turned to Spear. "What the blazes is all this about, 
Shiny? Why'd the Commander have the scooter stocked 
up for three months? Mineral surveys don't take more 
than a couple of weeks — and the return journey should be 
done in a day or two." 

Spear's lips were in a straight line. His jaws hardly 
opened as he spoke. "I don't know, Dirk. You were right 
about there being something fishy connected with this trip. 
And I don't like the Commander giving my orders for me!" 

"Here's Maintenance," Manners announced as they drew 
level with the shed. "Let's see if they can throw a light on 
the business." 

But the men inside the maintenance shed appeared to have 
received "no talk" orders. Try as he would, Spear could 
get nothing definite from them. All they would admit was 
that they had carried out a routine check on the scooter's 
space-worthiness. Their manner indicated that they had 
done other things, but they weren't talking. 

"We just did a few odd jobs ordered by the Commander," 
the foreman explained. "Nothing much, just odd jobs." 

Spear knew better than to press the matter. Even he 
was aware that Space Marshals didn't cross-question foremen about the Commander's orders. 

He left instructions for the scooter to be made ready for 
take-off in three hours' time. He then rang through to the 
astrogators' room to ask if data were available on Grisette's 
position. The disturbing reply was that all navigating data 
was already lodged in the usual place on board the scooter, 



18 



THE PLASTIC PERIL 



sealed and to be broken open only when the scootet was 
under way. 

Once again the two men looked at each other. This time 
they shrugged and went off to have a meal— the last one 
before their long trip into the void. 

Fed and rested, they came down to the launching bay three 
hours later and had a word with the launching technician. 
It had to be done right. The scooter was a comparatively 
large ship, over a hundred yards in length and forty yards 
across. Launching it was a tricky manoeuvre that needed 
precise timing to get the scooter off in the right direction 
without its crashing into the bigger ship. 

But Spear and the technician had the matter at their 
finger tips, and a few words together, with an exchange of 
technical data, settled the question. 

"I've tested your, radio and radar," the technician claimed. 
"All okay. Just give me the pips when you're ready and 
stand by. When you're clear of the ship, you'll get three 
pips from me. Then you can open her up. Good grounding!" 

Spear and Manners returned the greeting and climbed 
into the scooter. Skilfully designed, it was surprisingly 
roomy inside, in spite of the massed equipment it contained 
— equipment that gave a constant feed-back of information 
to the big ship's statisticians during the whole of a trip. 

Spear settled himself in the pilot's seat as Manners closed 
the air-lock and bolted the door. Crossing to his compact 
bench, Manners reached up and took an envelope from a 
pigeon-hole. 

"Here's the sealed orders," he said, grimly. "Ever had 
this sort of thing happen before, Shiny?" 

"Never," Spear answered shortly, buckling his safety belt. 
"Strapped down yet?" 

"Just a second," Manners replied. Then, "Okay. All 
set. D'you want me to open up the packet yet?" 

"Let's get away first," Spear said. "I'm giving him the 
pips now." He depressed a key three times. 

He could imagine everyone on the big ship cursing as 
the gravity alarm went. They would all be hurriedly 
taking up positions that would leave them stable when the 



THE PLASTIC PERIL 19 

big ship stopped revolving and the artificially produced 
gravity vanished. But it would only last a few seconds, 
while the clamps pushed the scooter out of the big ship 
and the hammer-arm gave it a little tap. Then the scooter 
would move slowly away from the big ship, which would 
almost immediately start revolving again. 

The scooter shuddered slightly and the men knew they 
had been tapped away. Shortly afterwards, Spear: called 
out: 

"There're the pips. Now we can get going. Open up 
that cloak-and-dagger packet and give me the figures soon 
as you can." 

A few seconds later. Manners reeled off the figures. Spear 
cut in the fuel supply to the rockets and pressed the 
ignition switch. The scooter bucked, the chairbacks came 
hard against them. The thrust was just enough not to be 
too uncomfortable. Spear, was able to watch the swinging 
needles on the dials in front of him, firing one tube, then 
another, then back to the first one and so on until the dials 
showed that the scooter was aligned for dropping along an 
ellipse towards the unknown Grisette. 

"That's that," he announced. "Now we can take a rest 
for a bit." He had shut off the motors, on which the 
scooter had gone into free-orbit and all sensation of gravity 
had disappeared. Spear, began unbuckling his belt." "Get 
through to the ship and pip them we're okay, will you, 
Dirk?" 

There was no reply. Spear looked up from the belt and 
slewed round to stare at Manners. The navigator was staring at some papers in his hand. Suddenly the words Spear 
had spoken seemed to penetrate. The major started and 
looked up. 

"Sorry, Shiny. Pip the ship? Sure, sure. Yes." 
"What the blazes is up with you?" Spear clipped. "Something wrong?" 

Manners looked a little vacant. "I don't know," he said. 
"I'm not sure." He spoke slowly and carefully. "But I 
don't like it a bit. Look at this, Shiny." 

He held out an envelope that had obviously been inside 
the larger one containing the astrogation data. Across the 
top of the smaller envelope the Commander had written in 



20 



THE PLASTIC PERIL 



his jerky script: Open only after leaving the ship on 
Grisette. Just that, nothing more. 

Spear held the envelope up to the light, noted its complete opacity, then tossed it on Manners' bench. He looked 
hard at the dulled insignia on his tie, scrutinising it carefully. Manners asked him what he was doing. 

"Just making sure they didn't transfer me to the Secret 
Service in my sleep," Spear answered, wryly. "God 
Almighty, what is all this!" 

"You know as much as I do," Manners said, automatically. "What say we take a look at this Grisette, where 
things are only to be opened on." 

"Your grammar is appalling, Dirk, but your idea is 
good," Spear commented. "Let's do that." 

They both moved carefully across to the screen that stood 
against one wall, leaving the queer envelope floating just 
above Manners' bench, where it had drifted after, striking 
the wall. 

Spear reached out and set the aerial-control to the reading 
that corresponded to the astrogation data. Then he cut in 
the power, transferring his hand to the focusing knob ready 
to sharpen the expected hazy image. 

Nothing happened. The screen remained blank. 

Puzzled, Spear turned his attention again to the power 
knob. It seemed all right. 

"Try the supply cable," Manners suggested. "Maybe it's 
come loose." 

Spear leaned round the back of the screen assembly — and 
as he did so, the cabinet rocked. He straightened up and 
looked at Manners. The navigator returned his stare. The 
cabinet should have had too much inertia to rock like that. 

Suddenly, Spear snatched a screwdriver from the rack of 
tools on the wall and began attacking the retaining screws 
on the cabinet's front. At length the front came away. 

There was nothing inside the set. Just the cathode tube. 

Spear looked at Manners again. "One of maintenance's 
odd jobs," he said. 

"So we don't get a visual picture of Grisette until we 
land. Shiny, I'm beginning to get a little concerned." 



CHAPTER THREE 



Radar Landing 

4 6T'M with you there," said Shiny Spear. "Although 'concerned' hardly fits my feelings." He pulled himself 
over to the pilot's seat and pulled himself down onto it — 
just for the feel of it. Manners came and relaxed in front 
of him — sitting on air. The navigator's face still wore its 
usual far-away look. 

"How many years have we been space-pushing, Dirk?" 
Spear queried. 

"Fifteen, sixteen," Manners answered, casually. 

"Say fifteen. And in all those years — even when I was a 
cadet — I've never been treated like this. Now that I'm a 
Marshal, they seem to think I'll stand anything. Me and the 
Commander are going to have a heart-to-heart talk when we 
get back to the ship!" He brought his fist down and 
smacked it on the arm of his seat. Promptly he rose into 
the air and sailed up against the roof of the cabin. 

Manners reached out a lazy arm, grabbed Spear's ankle 
and pulled him down. "// we get back to the ship," he 
commented. "Seems to me there must be something about 
this planet that we're not supposed to know until we get 
there. And the only reason for holding back the information is that it's not nice." 

"Not nice, my foot!" Spear exploded. "Was it nice at 
the Hub? And was Themis a picnic? And what about 
Japetus — where all the mad people were? Why should the 
Commander act like a confounded spy just because there's 
something about Grisette that isn't nice?" 

"I don't know why," Manners put in, softly. "It just 
looks as though he is." 

"Well, it's a darned insult!" Spear stormed. "And I'll 
pretty soon tell him when we get back — and none of that 

2i; 



22 



THE PLASTIC PERIL 



'if stuff, either, Major Manners. We'll get back. This can 
hardly be worse than what we've been through before. 

"Yes sir," Manners replied, with a slow smile, used to ■ 
Spear's tantrums. "All the same, there's got to be a last 
time— and this may well be it." , 

"Oh, hell— philosophy again!" Spear grinned. All right. 
You go on pontificating, O Seer. I'm getting some sleep! 

With which he calmly stretched out his legs, pushed himself a few inches away from the chair, and closed his eyes, 
arms determinedly folded across his chest. 

Manners watched him for a few moments, his grin widening, then he turned away, caught sight of the visi-screen 
cabinet and became serious once more. 

It was true what Shiny had said. This kind of thing had 
never happened before. They had always had the full confidence of their superiors. If the job had been a sticky one, 
they were told so from the start. Never, once had they demurred at a dangerous trip. They became renowned for 
their work, respected for their courage and promoted for 
their exploits. 

And now, Commander Kalep was treating them like 
youngsters who might pale at the mention of danger. 

Manners mused for some time, staring at the empty 
screen. Finally he decided that either there was something 
wrong with the Commander's brain or the assignment to 
Grisette was very, very dangerous. On the whole, he preferred the alternative, there was nothing in the first to stir 
his excitement. Whereas in the second . . . 

He forcibly quelled his thoughts, stretched out like Spear 
and was very soon asleep. 

The hours went by and the scooter continued its elliptical 
flight down towards Grisette. The men,, poised in the 
gravity-less air, breathed fresh oxygen that was wafted to 
them by a slowly-turning electric fan; and drifted gently 
towards the walls under the minute gravitational forces of 
the stacked equipment. 

As the distance between the scooter and Grisette decreased, so a pointer moved round a dial on the instrument 
panel, towards a red line. 

An instant before the pointer reached the red mark the 



THE PLASTIC PERIL 



23 



men were deeply asleep. An instant afterwards they were 
wide awake, teaching frantically for the stop button to the 
alarm the pointer had set in action. Spear's groping finger 
found the button, pressed it, and plunged the cabin into 
silence once more. 

Automatically, he turned and swept his eyes over the 
other dials, instinctively amassing the information they presented and quickly reaching a picture of the scooter's circumstances. 

"Plenty safe," was his verdict. "These alarms certainly 
give us a wide margin." 

Manners had roused himself and gone over to the navigator's bench. He hovered there now, slightly bleary-eyed, 
but with a calculator ready in his hand, waiting for Spear's 
landing queries. 

Spear glanced at him. "Okay? Good. I'm starting the 
braking jets in ten seconds. We'll have to land on radar 
alone. Keep your ringers crossed — it's a long time since I 
did that. Just shout the data as it comes up on the screen." 

He turned back to his instruments, while Manners cut in 
the radar echo gear and studied the blips on the screen. 

"Right!" Spear said, suddenly. Simultaneously, his hand 
wrenched over a lever. The roar of the jets came through 
to them as a muffled, sustained cough. Gravity instantly 
returned and they were pressed against their seats, finding 
the familiar sensation strangely comforting. 

Every few seconds, Manners called out data he had calculated from the blips on the screen. Each time, Spear repeated the data and made adjustments to the strength and 
direction of the jets, his eyes darting frequently to a chronometer, his mind devoid of all thought except the careful 
interweaving of all the factors necessary for a safe landing. 

Manners broke into Spear's concentration by sandwiching 
a piece of gossip in between the data readings. 

"Flat as a pancake," he said. "No mountains, hills, or 
rivers. Odd. Twenty-seven thousand, theta-o-eight." 

"Twenty-seven thousand. Theta-o-eight. Flat, eh?" 
Spear drawled. "Never had that before. Hope they haven't 
been up to tricks With the radar." 

"Twenty thousand. Theta-o-nine. Don't think so. Seems 
to be working well enough." 



24 



THE PLASTIC PERIL 



"Twenty thousand. Theta-o-nine. We'll know soon 
enough if we crack up," Spear replied. "No more gossip 
now. We're coming in close. Double your reading frequency." 

"Okay. Fifteen thousand. Theta-one-five." 

The thrust increased as Spear opened out the jets. Soon 
the force became uncomfortable. After that it came very 
close to agony as the scooter strove against the downward 
pull of Grisette. The planet's atmosphere was playing a 
part in slowing the ship down, but not a very big part. 
Only if they had come in in braking ellipses would the air 
have been a major factor; but there wasn't time for such 
refinements. The rockets alone had to bring the ship to 
zero velocity at the precise moment that its tail touched 
Grisette's surface. 

Manners' readings came fast and clipped. Spear ceased 
to repeat them, giving his whole attention to the manipulations of his instruments, countering side-spins, tilts and unaccountable disturbances that always occur in rocketry. 

The atmosphere in the cabin became tensed and charged 
with suppressed excitement as the scooter came closer and 
closer to Grisette's surface. Manners kept his eyes fixed 
on the screen watching, in effect, the ground rise up towards 
the ship. Spear could see the same thing inside his mind, 
as the figures came to him and he placed them in their 
proper relation to each other. 

The critical stage was approaching, came nearer, nearer 
still — and then was passed. 

The cabin remained silent for several seconds, the jets 
having given a last despairing cough and petered out under 
Spear's expert control. For a split instant the scooter shuddered. Came a grating sound in the tail region. Then the 
deep, almost unreal silence took over. 

Several seconds later, Manners realised the cabin was not 
really silent at all. The radar set was still humming. He 
reached out and switched it off, then turned to regard Spear. 

The Marshal was still staring at his instrument panel, but 
this time his eyes did not register their data. He was resting, turning over at the back of his mind the soft, comforting thought that he could still make a perfect landing on 
radar alone. Then he remembered that all the pioneer 



THE PLASTIC PERIL 



25 



astronauts had been forced to do that, anyway, and his ego 
deflated a little. Even so, it was pretty good going — like a 
surgeon suddenly having to carry out an operation with 
the old-style scalpels and forceps, the patient being unconscious all the time in the grip of a dangerous anaesthetic. 

He came out of his reverie and slewed round to meet 
Manners' eyes. "We made it," he said. "And won't the 
Commander be pleased!" 

Manners grinned. "Still sore?" he queried. "I've got 
over it by now." He rose and stood impatiently before the 
still-seated Spear. "Let's go out, eh? See what all the 
mystery's about." 

Spear regarded him solemnly. "I'm surprised," he said. 
"Surprised and a little dismayed. Here I am set down on 
an unknown planet, with Lord knows what waiting for me 
outside, and my only companion is a man who wants to go 
out. — before he's done the testing!" 

"Oh — Pleiades to you ! " Manners laughed. "I wasn't suggesting we turn out before I've run the tape over things. 
It's just that you look as though you're going to sit there for 
the next three days congratulating yourself on a trick bit of 
landing. Age, I suppose!" 

Spear sprang to his feet. "I'll show you whether it's age 
or not," he said. "lust you get those tests done, while I 
fill out the log. Then we'll see who's the adventurous 
pioneer among this ship's complement!" 

Still smiling, he turned away to the compact writing desk 
in one corner and busied himself with a record of the 
landing— just in case anything happened to them and the big 
ship had to send down a search party. 

While Spear worked at the log. Manners sucked in a 
sample of air, analysed it chemically, physically and biologically. He found it free from noxious gases and harmful 
bacteria, and at a pressure that was very similar to Earth's 
atmosphere a little above sea-level. 

Next he pushed out the differential Geiger counter and 
plugged it in to the monitoring cabinet. Spear looked up 
from the last word of his log as the first clicks came through. 

"What d'you make of it?" he asked. 

"Gases okay," Manners replied. "So too with pressure 
and bugs. I guess it'll be all right— wait a minute, though," 



26 



THE PLASTIC PERIL 



He sat silently while the clicks continued. Spear watched 
with an expression that explained quite clearly that he left 
the world of radiation detectors to men with a mind for it. 
Idly, his glance moved to the air-lock, waiting for Manners' 
release so as to be the first to open it. 

"Hmm," Manners murmured after a bit. "There's certainly a queer bit of radiation here. Nothing that we know 
is harmful and only in dilute concentration at that. Still — 
we don't want to take chances." 

Spear cursed. "You mean we can't go out?" he said, 
irritably. 

"Oh, no, not that. But I think we ought not to stay 
out too long before we stick ourselves in the monitor." 

Spear brightened visibly. "Oh, well, that's all right, then. 
We'll go straight out." He moved over to the air-lock. 

Manners" smiled as he watched him. Spear had the layman's half disbelief in radiations, as though they were something that scientists played about with in their laboratories. 
Even the tremendous evidence of the atomic explosions 
hadn't convinced him that gamma rays and other radiations 
were real and tangible things. 

By this time, Spear: had got the air-lock open. He stood 
back to let Manners into the chamber, then came in after 
him. He carefully shut the inner door before he started 
to open the outer one. 

"Why'd you do that?" Manners asked. "Grisette's air is 
more or less the same as ours." 

"Very likely," Spear agreed, swinging back the outer door. 
"But I like to keep just a little of the familiar around me on 
trips like this — even if it is invisible!" 

Natural light streamed into the air-lock chamber as the 
outer door opened. It was a little brighter than the artificial 
light from the ceiling, but not much. 

Spear stepped through the gap and dropped the foot or 
two to the ground. Manners came close behind him. They 
stood side by side, letting human eyes gaze for the first time, 
as far as they knew, at the alien landscape. 

As a landscape it wasn't much of a picture. Indeed, the 
painters of long ago would never have wasted a tube of 
oil colour on it — not even the man who found beauty in 
dead sunflowers. 



THE PLASTIC PERIL 



27 



The ground they stood on was flat. Perfectly flat and 
even and made of grey stone. Dull, uninteresting, flat, grey 
stone. And the ground they stood on ran unchanged tight 
to the horizon, except for — monoliths. 

Both men uttered sharp exclamations as their eyes fell on 
the gigantic columns of stone, spaced at hundred-yard distances in a uniform pattern that, too, stretched to the horizon. 

If the painters of long ago would not have looked twice at 
Grisette's landscape, the surrealists of the day would have 
swooned over it. The sharp cleat sunlight, streaming from a 
cloudless sky, sent long dramatic shadows along the flat 
ground where it was obscured by the monoliths. And the 
monoliths were e/verywhere— spaced exactly, uniform in 
lieight and contour; stark, silent sentinels, featureless, yet 
awesome with potent as a Henry Moore statue. 

The men looked on the scene in silence that matched the 
planet's, then, with what to their knowledge might have been 
the first sound ever to be made on Grisette, Manners said 
softly : 

"Surely they were made by intelligent beings ! " 

Spear stirred, slipped his hands in his pockets. "Surely 
anyone who'd make those," he commented, "couldn't have 
a spark of intelligence in them!" 

Manners lost some of his wraptness and came back to 
reality. He sent Spear a contemptuous look. "Just because your mind is unable to encompass anything that isn't 
made of wheels, pulleys, levers and power packs, it doesn't 
mean that all other creations are the work of cretins!" 

They both laughed. And their laughter seemed to run 
in and out of the stone columns, spreading like an invisible 
sea over the face of Grisette, until it faded out and the 
ripples died in the far distance. Their laughter ceased as 
they listened to it dying among the tombstones. 

Spear coughed. "Er — well," he began, breaking the 
silence that became a little unnerving. "Let's get the jeep 
out and see if we can find the cromlech." 

Manners looked up in surprise. He'd no idea that Spear 
was so erudite as to know the name of the horizontal stone 
slab found among primitive collections of monoliths. Spear 
caught his glance and grimaced. Such jocularity as this and 



28 



THE PLASTIC PERIL 



that which had preceded it seemed silly in cold analysis on a 
warm friendly planet like Earth, but were utterly essential to 
maintain morale on bleak and potentially dangerous places 
like Grisette. 

Chuckling at his use of the word cromlech, Spear, opened 
a small panel set on the outside of the scooter. He pressed 
a button inside it. Above his head, about halfway up the 
scooter, a door opened and a mechanical arm came out, 
holding a diminutive vehicle. Spear pressed another button 
and the jeep dropped gradually down on the end of a 
hawser until it came to the ground. There it settled firmly 
on its skids-cum-tracks-cum wheels. 

Manners came hurrying over with armfuls of materials. 
Spear saw that he had slipped inside the scooter and brought 
out a supply of weapons and iron rations. 

"No chances, eh?" Spear grinned. 

Manners grinned back. "No chances," he agreed. 

But there was a vein of utmost seriousness beneath their 
light-heartedness. It wouldn't be the first time that a party 
made its first preliminary survey and perished because of 
unforeseen factors preventing its return to base, or because 
of a sudden need for weapons which had been carelessly 
left on the ship. 

"We'll make it a short trip," Spear announced, as he 
climbed into the driving seat and Manners clambered up 
beside him. "Then we'll come back, eat, sleep and then 
do the survey for Old Man Kalep. It shouldn't take too 
long." 

"No," Manners agreed. "We ought to be through by this 
time tomorrow — Earth time." 

It was good to sound confident about things like that. 
Especially when they had no idea what they might meet 
behind one of those monoliths. 

Spear let in the clutch and the jeep moved off. 



CHAPTER FOUR 



Preliminary Survey 

after centuries of artificial living, Man still retained the capacity for finding pleasure in the natural 
scheme of things. Doubts and suspicions in the minds of 
the spacemen were practically crowded out as the jeep 
chugged its way along in the bright sunlight. 

Overhead, the sky was a vast sheet of unrelieved blue, 
except where it paled and grew brilliant in the region of the 
planet's sun— Algol. Around them, a cooling breeze seemed 
strangely unfamiliar after the static air of the big ship. The 
warm, somnolent environment was entrancing enough indeed 
to make Shiny Spear burst forth into a caroling spaceman's 
song. 

Manners turned slightly on his seat and spoke into Spear's 
ear, loudly above the singing. "Have you forgotten the rule 
which says we musn't do anything that might antagonise the 
natives?" 

Spear refrained from replying to the sally, merely ceasing 
to sing at the same time as he rammed his foot down on 
the accelerator, making the jeep leap forward across the 
smooth stone. 

Manners held his breath as Spear expertly guided the 
speeding car around the monoliths, missing some of them 
by the thickness of the bumper paintwork. 

"All right," Dirk ceded at last, "I'll take it back. It 
was a fine song and yours is a fine voice. Any natives who 
might hear it would know without question that we are 
descended from the gods. Does that satisfy you?" 

Spear put his answer into words by taking his foot off the 
accelerator and letting the car slow almost to a halt 

Throughout the whole mock quarrel, the two men had 
kept a good three-quarters of their attention on the terrain 
around them. Years of exploratory work on alien planets 
had taught a number of automatic responses, and one of 



29 



30 THE PLASTIC PERIL 

them was constant vigilance when outside their ship. Long 
experience enabled them to maintain that vigilance without 
unduly interfering with their survey methods. 

"See anything?" Spear asked, letting the jeep come to a 
stop between two monoliths. 

"Not a thing," Manners answered. "That is, nothing that 
I hadn't seen before— stone, monoliths, sky." 

They had travelled some two thousand yards from the 
scooter, yet the terrain had retained its pattern all the way. 
The landscape looked no different from here than it did 
from the ship. 

"You're a bit of a biologist," Spear said, "so I don't 
have to tell you the oddest thing about this planet, I 
suppose?" 

Manners didn't rise to the bait. He remained staring into 
the distance, thinking. "No," he said at last. "I've noticed 
it all right. No animal life, no vegetation. Not even a plot 
of soil. This is certainly the most barren land I've ever 
seen — and yet . . ." 

His voice died away, as though he were a little ashamed 
to say what was in his mind. Spear didn't go in for shyness. 

"And yet what?" he prompted. "D'you think you've seen 
something after all?" 

"Nothing you haven't seen," Manners replied. "Just 
these monoliths. I'm convinced they were erected by intelligent beings. I don't see how any natural process could 
produce such a regular pattern as this on such a vast scale." 

Spear considered that statement for a while, then conceded : "Well, I'll not agree about the intelligent part of it, 
but I reckon you're right about their being made by beings 
— and that's all that matters at the moment." 

"True. Though the intelligence part that you dismiss so 
casually may be very important later on." 

"Let's wait till later on and see," Spear proposed. "We'll 
probably find the monoliths are stuck up by a bunch of 
termites or something that don't really know what they're 
doing anyway." 

"Maybe," Manners said, shortly. "Anyway, what about 
taking a closer look at one of the monoliths?" 



THE PLASTIC PERIL 



31 



"Good idea," Spear returned. "Which one? They all 
look alike to me." 

"Then it had best be the nearest one," Manners suggested. 

Spear put the jeep in gear and let it roll slowly towards 
the nearest monolith. He was using the wheel part of the 
drive mechanism; the skids, suckers and tracks were raised 
from the ground, but ready for instant use should the 
terrain suddenly change its character. 

While he drove towards the stone monument, Spear 
noticed that Manners was adjusting the weapons so that 
they would be ready for immediate firing if necessary. He 
didn't comment. It was part of the automatic routine. 

Spear brought the jeep to a halt a few yards from the 
monolith and the two men sat staring at it at close quarters. It was smooth and featureless, rising to a height 
of about fifty feet, in diameter fat enough to hold a dozen 
men. 

Without speaking they got out of the jeep and approached 
the stone. Spear, a side-arm within finger reach, stepped 
right up to the monolith and kicked it. A dull, empty thud 
sounded. 

"Seems solid," Spear diagnosed. 

"Must weigh hundreds of tons," Manners added. "How 
the blazes did they lift them?" 

"Maybe they're giants," Spear laughed. "And this is a 
sort of causeway. You still think they were brainy boys, 
eh?" 

"At least they knew how to hew stone and raise it— the 
Egyptians didn't do much more." 

"They carved out pictures, though," Spear objected. 
"These things are bare completely. Not even a few digs on 
the surface. And are you sure they were lifted? I can't 
see any joins anywhere." 

The two men came very close to the stone, ran their 
hands over it and peered at it intently. There was not one 
crack in its whole height as far as they could see. It 
appeared to be a solid piece of stone. 

Manners knelt beside it. "Look here, Shiny," he called. 
"There isn't even a crack at the bottom where it meets the 
ground." 



32 



THE PLASTIC PERIL 



Spear bent down and confirmed Manners' statement. 
The monolith's base curved outwards slightly and made a 
smooth jointless union with the surrounding flat stone. 
The men straightened up, 

"Another thing that strikes me," Manners said, "is where 
did they get the stone to make these monoliths? As far as 
we can see there aren't any quarries, no dug-out regions, 
where the stone could have come from. And this flatness 
is almost unbelievable." 

"True," Spear ruminated. "Of course, they could have 
brought the stone from miles and miles away, laid it down 
flat and then brought more for the monoliths." 

"Why?" Manners demanded. 

"Don't ask me — you're the one who says they're intelligent," Spear clipped. "I think they're pretty dumb — 
why, they haven't even got a cromlech!" 

They both laughed at his use of the technical term. 
Still chuckling, they climbed back into the jeep with the 
intention of returning to the scooter. Spear's mirth ceased 
suddenly as he started the engine. 

"Oh, heck," he said. 

Manners was watching him, still grinning. "What's the 
matter, pioneer of the planets?" he asked. 

"Dirk, for Pete's sake, this is serious," Spear said, concernedly. "I'm lost! All that driving in and, out of the 
monoliths has made me lose my direction." He stared 
round at the forest of stone slabs, each direction looking no 
different from the others. Somewhere among those stone 
trees was the scooter; but he had no idea where. 

Manners came to his rescue with a chuckle. "Good job 
I'm around," he laughed, pulling a compass from his pocket. 
"You didn't bring yours, I suppose?" 

Spear admitted that he hadn't. The compass, specially 
designed to point only in the direction of the ship, was a 
standard piece of equipment for researchers. Its main use 
was on thickly vegetated planets, where the surveyor was 
liable to lose direction in the jungles. Absence of a conventional jungle on Grisette had caused Spear to leave his 
instrument in the scooter.. 

Spear looked visibly relieved when he saw Manners' compass. "Good job, indeed," he agreed whole-heartedly, 



THE PLASTIC PERIL 33 

thrusting away thoughts of trying to find his way back 
to the ship through that maze of masonry. "I take back 
everything I said about you. And as a slight reward, you 
may prepare our supper to-night!" 

That last remark was deliberate in order to wipe away 
any hint of sentimentality that might have crept into his voice. 

Mention of supper made them glance at the sky. The 
sun was lowering and deep blue hues were rolling up from 
the opposite horizon. Grisette's night was approaching. 

Spear started up the jeep as Manners placed the compass 
in front of him. He let the car move forward, half an eye 
on the compass needle, the other half on the monoliths. 
Progress was a zigzag. 

Occupied with their own thoughts, the men remained 
silent while the jeep purred over the flat stone. Manners' 
mind was turning over the riddle of the monoliths, their 
origin and purpose, the whereabouts of their erectors. That 
part of Spear's mind that was not concerned with driving, 
was going over the contents of the scooter's larder in an 
effort to select something decidedly succulent for supper. 

It was only when they had been travelling for about 
half an hour that Manners began to stir uncomfortably and 
glance at Spear. From the corner of his eye, Spear noted 
the glance. 

"What's up?" he queried. 

"Shouldn't we have got there by now?" Manners said. 
They both looked at the compass. The jeep was dead 
on line. 

"No telling, since we didn't clock ourselves on the outward journey. We're on the beam and I imagine we'll be 
there very shortly," Spear said, lightly. 

He resumed his driving — but his eyes lost a little of their 
brightness as they strayed up to the sky again. Night was 
not only on its way; it was practically there. Algol was a 
blood red orange fast disappearing behind the tops of 
distant monoliths. On the opposite side, the monoliths 
were hardly visible among the night shades. Spear pressed 
the accelerator a little harder. 

Fifteen minutes later, he stopped the car. They had 
been travelling for three-quarters of an hour, dead on the 
compass line all the while and yet no scooter had looked 



34 



THE PLASTIC PERIL 



up from the dusk in front of them. 

"At a rough guess, I'd say we've done fifteen miles 
since we left that monolith," Spear said. "And I'd swear 
we only went out about a mile. D'you feel like sleeping in 
the jeep, Dirk?" 

Manners' face was serious. "Not a bit. Nor do I fancy 
leaving the ship alone all that time. What the heck's wrong 
with the compass?" 

The homing compass was supposed to be foolproof since 
it didn't depend on any magnetic effects. In effect it was 
really a radio monitor, tuned to a frequency constantly 
emitted by the ship. Where the ship was, there it would 
point. If there was no ship within its range, then it didn't 
function at all. 

The one on the dashboard was functioning. Therefore, 
there ought to be a ship in the vicinity. 

"Let's work it out," Spear said. "The compass is working. Therefore, unless there's some entirely new principle 
at work, the scooter lies in that direction." He pointed 
along the needle's length. "But we've travelled fifteen miles 
in line with the needle and not come across the scooter. 
The landscape is such that we can't tell whether we're travelling in a straight line or not. Therefore — " 

"What about the sun?" Manners broke in, excitedly. 

Spear blinked. "The sun? What— oh, holy Saturn!" 

He glanced out at the sinking orb, then back at Manners. 
"Am I a fool, or am I not? You don't need to answer; 
you probably feel the same as I do." 

"I expect so," Manners agreed. "You're dead right if 
what you're thinking is that a while back the sun was over 
there, whereas its now there." He pointed in two directions, forty-five degrees apart. 

"That's "it," Spear confirmed. "That's the trouble with 
spending three years inside a hulking great space ship — 
you lose touch with simple things like finding direction 
by the sun. Still, we ought to have known." 

"Before we castigate ourselves any further," Manners 
put in, "has it struck you what all this means? — why the 
sun has changed direction relative to the compass needle?" 

Spear stood and thought for a minute, less than a minute. 
It came on him in a flash. "Hell's bells and buckets of 
spaceman's blood!" he exclaimed. "The scooter's been 



THE PLASTIC PERIL 35 

moved ! " 

"That would appear to be it," Manners said, calmly. 
His features were in soft repose — an expression Spear had 
seen too often to be beguiled by it. Beneath the calm 
exterior, Spear knew, Manners was all keyed up for action. 

"I see! I see!" Spear cried. "All the time we've been 
moving towards it, someone's been shifting the scooter from 
place to place. We've probably been travelling in a drunken 
spiral." 

"Unless, of course, there's this business of an entirely 
new principle," Manners suggested. 

"New principle my foot!" Spear bellowed, jumping to 
his feet. "It's those darn precocious termites of yours. 
By Perseus, I'm going to have a fine old chat with them 
when we meet up!" 

"Good for you. But, meantime, shall we keep our minds 
on how we're going to get back to the scooter? If these 
termites, as you call them, carry on moving it about, I 
don't see how we'll ever catch up with it." 

"The blisters!" Spear exclaimed. He sat down sharply 
and stared at the ground, jaws clenched, knuckles whitened. 
He looked up once to say despairingly: ''Suppose they 
encase the thing in one of those darned stalagmites!" and 
then relapsed into silence again. 

As he sat, the shades of night grew deeper. All shadow 
had long since departed. Only the dusky blue-darkness of 
the sky turned slowly black. Very soon it became almost 
impossible for him to see Manners beside him. He twisted 
round to him and said irritably: 

"Can't you think of anything, man? We can't sit out 
here all night with Lord knows what happening to the 
scooter! " 

Manners was staring straight ahead. He stretched his 
legs and yawned. "Oh, I don't know. It's nice and peaceful." 

"Nice and — !" Spear began, but Manners cut in on him 
with a laugh. 

"Sorry to goad you! Point is, I've already thought of 
something. All we have to do is wait for it to get really 
dark. Then the automatic beacon will come on. Strange 
as it seems and defiattering as it might be to our egos, 
we don't have to do anything brave or ingenious." 



36 



THE PLASTIC PERIL 



Spear didn't answer for some seconds. Then his body 
relaxed its tightness and he chuckled. "A fine blow to our 
conceit" he laughed. "Here am I scheming all sorts of 
ways to outwit the termites, and the whole thing is taken 
out of my hands. Praise be to the beacon!" 

Attached at the three points of a triangle near the nose 
of the research scooters were powerful lamps that were 
controlled automatically by photosensitive plates set in the 
hull of the ship. As soon as the ambient luminosity fell 
below a certain figure, the lamps would come on and continue to burn, unless extinguished, until a sufficient strength 
of daylight returned to activate the photocells. 

Almost as soon as Spear had finished his eulogy to the 
beacon, its piercing rays shot out into the night away ahead 
of them. The actual lamps were hidden by the monoliths, 
but the glare could be seen distinctly. It was quite 
stationary. 

"Home we go to supper," Spear announced, cheerfully, 
letting in the clutch and allowing the jeep to move forward. 

The car's own headlights picked out the impeding monoliths without greatly cancelling the guiding glare from the 
beacon. Taking his eyes from the compass, Spear simply 
watched the glare ahead and drove towards it. Manners 
kept up a continuous survey of their surroundings, a rifle 
across his knees. 

Fifteen minutes later they were close enough to the 
scooter to feel they had won the first battle against the 
'termites' — unconventional as that battle had been. 

Spear drove the jeep right up to the ship and brought it 
to a halt. The two men piled out and, leaving the jeep 
standing, hurried towards the air-lock, their intention to see 
if anything had been stolen, wrecked or tampered with during their absence. 

Although night was now at its deepest hue, the light from 
the beacon lit up the immediate surroundings quite strongly. 
The men could make out every detail of the ship's structure and the fiat stone around it, and the monoliths beyond. 
A quick glance round showed that nothing was in sight 
that hadn't been there when they landed. 

Yet as they were about to enter the air-lock, a thin fluted 
voice bade them "Welcome." 



CHAPTER FIVE 

A New Life-form 

THE two men stood quite still. Only silence met their 
ears. Then, Spear suddenly lunged forward, hoisted 
himself up into the air-lock chamber and scrambled into the 
ship. Manners was fast behind him. 

A cursory glance showed nothing out of place and no 1 
alien visitor waiting for them. A deeper, more searching 
examination did nothing to better explain the disembodied 
voice. 

A little shaken, the two men closed the exit door and 
set about preparing their supper, discussing the voice while 
they did so. 

"I'm only thankful you heard it, too, Dirk," Spear said. 
"But for that I'd have thought I was going crazy." 

"Oh, the sound was real enough," Manners replied, neatly 
laying out the eating equipment on the collapsible table. 
"We'll get the explanation sometime, I guess. It was at 
least greetings and not anything hostile." 

"True." Spear ladled out steaming soup. "And I suppose they could have kept moving the ship around all night. 
Considerate of them not to." 

The men fell to with an appetite undimmed by alien 
idiosyncrasies and worked their way rapidly through soup, 
frozen turbot, and a choice veal cutlet, accompanied by 
peas, potatoes and the succulent Martian lichen astera. 
Afterwards they cleared away and sat back with coffee and 
cigarettes. The spaceman's life was not entirely a bed of 
nails. 

"The time has come," Spear said, ponderously, "to read 



37 



38 



THE PLASTIC PERIL 



the secret instructions. Break the sacred seal, Dirk, old 
boy." 

Manners reached out for the envelope he had left on the 
navigation bench. He turned it over in his hands. 

"The answer to it all, d'you suppose?" he queried. 

"Maybe, maybe not. I don't know— and after a meal 
like that, I don't really care. Read it aloud." * 

Manners slit the envelope open, took out a page or two of 
paper covered with the Old Man's spidery, jerky handwriting. 

"Didn't even trust a stenog," Manners commented. 
"Either that or he forgot there were such things as stenogs." 

"Which, to a man of your predilections, is one of the 
greatest sins!" Spear laughed. "Read it, man, read it! 
I'm all on edge." 

"Gentlemen," Manners began, reading from the script. 
"/ ask your forgiveness for this unusual mode of conducting a mineral survey. Perhaps you will he more willing 
to forgive me when you have read this note and understand 
my actions. Let me begin by saying that this journey of 
yours is not a mineral survey." 

"There!" Spear broke in. "I knew that the Old Man 
was crazy!" 

Manners looked up from the script. "Not so crazy, 
Shiny. At our interview with him, I got the impression 
that he was tremendously sane — I got the feeling that there 
was something more than eccentricity behind his remarkable 
behaviour — especially with regard to this trip." 

"Wise man," Spear grimaced. "After the event." 

Manners ignored the attack. He continued to read from 
the script: "/ must tell you that we made certain observations from the big ship which indicate that Grisette is 
possessed of an entirely new life form. I will not bother*, 
you with the details, partly not to waste your time and 
partly not to give you preconceived notions. Suffice it, 
then, to say that I felt you two gentlemen were the ideal 
choice for the job — your tremendous experience in space and 



THE PLASTIC PERIL 



39 



your vast knowledge of anthropology make you perfect types 
for this kind of research." 

"Soft, oh, very soft," Spear snarled. "And very, very 
soapy. Something nasty's coming!" 

Manners continued: "You will understand, I am sure, 
why I have adopted these methods when I tell you that our 
observations indicate that this new form of life may well be 
hostile to humanity, and that if this is so your chances of 
survival are, shall we say, a little remote." 

"Yes, let's say that," Spear commented. "Let's keep on 
saying it. As many times as the perishing Commander 
wants ! " 

"Take it easy, Shiny," Manners said. "The poor fellow's 
doing his best to break it gently." 

"Oh, go on, go on!" Spear, urged. "Read the thing 
through and let's get it all over." 

Manners read quickly. The Commander's note went on 
to point out the heroism of their task, all the more heroic 
because no one would ever know the true story if they 
perished. Headquarters on Earth would take a poor view 
of such dangerous research. But science had to progress 
and it was the Commander's great sorrow that he could not 
accompany them in person. 

Anyway, they were to make exhaustive studies of the 
new form of life and enter up everything in the log. The 
ship was to be primed for immediate take-off, and if they 
ever got into a position that seemed hopeless, they were to 
fire the ship by remote control. The Commander would 
arrange for it to be picked up by the big ship. They could 
die with the satisfaction of knowing that they had contributed to a most worthy cause. They need not bother with 
too much mining — in fact, so the note said, cryptically, it 
might be better if they didn't mine at all. 

Manners laid the note down. Spear gave it a contemptuous glance. "Good cause. What good cause? The Commander's own academic curiosity!" 

Manners watched him crush out a cigarette with more 



40 ' 



THE PLASTIC PERIL 



energy than was really required. "I see you don't understand," he accused. "We're not here as guinea pigs in an 
experiment of the Commander's. If there's a new life form 
here, the people of Earth must know about it. It's a longterm policy — like the whole of our research," 

"Then why would Headquarters take a poor view of it?" 
Spear demanded. 

"Because they cannot see quite so far ahead as the 
scientists," Manners explained. "This may not be practically important lor. centuries. It has only a theoretical importance at the present time." 

"So we die and science gets a new theory," Spear rejoined, irritably. 

"No. We die — and Earth gets a new lease of life if the 
new form attacks it in the future." 

Spear considered for a moment, began to see it in a 
broader light, modified his idea. His frown went and the 
tenseness left his body. 

"Ah, well, we're not dead yet!" he exclaimed. "How 
about some sleep?" 

"Sleep it is," Manners agreed, knowing that now Spear 
had had his initial grumble at the Big White Chiefs, he 
would throw himself whole-heartedly into the task before 
them. 

The night was silent and uneventful. The men slept 
dreamlessly and well — a habit they had contracted over the 
years of sleeping in odd places. An alarm bell roused them 
eight hours after they had gone to rest on the folding 
hammocks. Spear left the control cabin and took a shower 
in the tiny bathroom aft, while Manners began the breakfast 
preparations. Then U was Manners' turn, and he showered 
while Spear put the finishing touches to the meal. 

Over breakfast they discussed the day's work. 

"I suppose our first task is to make contact with the 
new life form," Spear said. "Though I can't see why ter


THE PLASTIC PERIL 



41 



mites should be classified as something new. Still, I'm no 
biologist." 

"Whatever the Commander had in mind was not termites," Manners asserted. "God knows what else, mind 
you, but definitely not termites." 

"Well, anyway, how are we going tc ^et in touch with 
them — with the owner of that voice we neard last night?" 

"I don't see any way other than going out and mooching 
around, hoping they come to us," Manners said. "The 
whole landscape looks the same, so there's no point in 
going anywhere." 

Spear agreed. Yesterday they had travelled a good 
twenty miles with no sign of the aliens — except that the 
ship had been moved while they were away. Maybe today, if they stayed near the ship they would come in contact 
with the aliens. 

Breakfast was a short meal. The usual coffee and cigarettes — the spaceman's ritual — they decided to have in the 
bright clean air of Grisette. Spear passed the coffee mugs 
down to Manners and climbed down after them. They sat 
with their backs to the ship, legs stretched out on the flat 
stone ground. For some minutes they sipped and smoked 
in silence. Then Spear stirred. 

"You know," he said. "I'd swear that monolith wasn't 
as near as that last night." He indicated a column in front 
of them. "It seemed at least twice that distance." 

Manners stared at the column and then cast a glance 
over the rest of the terrain. "The pattern doesn't seem to 
have been disturbed," he said. "If this one had moved 
alone the whole pattern would have been thrown out of 
alignment." 

"Maybe they all moved," Spear suggested. Manners 
didn't answer. Spear asked him why not. 

"I'm just figuring roughly the amount of energy needed to 
shift every one of those things a few inches. I should think 
it would just about be enough to push the Moon out of its 
orbit." 



42 



THE PLASTIC PERIL 



"Mmm. As heavy as that?" Spear mused. "Well, well. 
Perjiaps it hasn't moved. I think I'll do a bit of drilling. 
See how tough they are." 

Manners stayed on the ground sipping his coffee. Spear 
climbed back into the ship, reappearing a few moments later 
with a portable drill on the end of a long snaking cable. 

Manners watched idly as Spear walked up to the nearest 
monolith, selected a bit, placed it in the drill and switched 
on the power. The drill hummed quietly. Spear placed 
the whirling bit against the stone monolith. 

Immediately, the whole peace of the morning was shattered. Where there had been nothing but the quiet hum of 
the drill under the blue sky and among the tall silent stones, 
there was now such a caterwauling cacophony of shrieking 
agony that the adrenalin poured into Manners' blood stream, 
sending him scrambling to his feet. 

Spear seemed to have been paralysed by the high-pitched 
screams that came from nowhere and everywhere. He stood 
there beside the monolith, the drill in his drooping hand, its 
hum drowned by the harsh, strident wail. 

Suddenly something flashed towards Spear, and Manners 
saw the drill fall from his hand to the stone, where it rocked 
and gyrated under the power within itself. Spear seemed to 
have been brought back to life. He was holding his hand in 
pain, and Manners could see a red trickle spreading over the 
wrist. 

Hurrying across to Spear, Manners bombarded him with 
questions. Spear turned on him irritably. 

"How the heck do I know! For Pete's sake! I'm just 
standing here — and suddenly there's that darned shrieking 
and then something or someone hurls a rock at me. Look 
at that!" 

He held up a badly cut hand. The rock Spear had mentioned must have struck the back of the metacarpus, biting 
deeply down between the bones, leaving a red and gory 
wound. 

Suddenly Manners risked another question. By now the 



THE PLASTIC PERIL 



43 



wailing had died to a low whistling moan. "Where's the 
rock that did it, Shiny?" 

The first sharp jagged pain had gone, leaving just a dull 
ache. With it had gone Spear's unreasoned irritability. He 
looked at Manners and then at the ground. He turned 
right round. And still saw nothing. 

The ground was as flat and even as it had always been. 
Nothing interrupted its flatness anywhere except the tall 
monoliths. 

"I suppose it was a stone?" Manners meditated. 

"Sure of it," Spear asserted. "I saw it drop at my feet." 

"Well, it certainly isn't there now. D'you suppose we're 
dealing with a being that's invisible to our eyes — you know, 
something that only sets up reflections in some other spectrum than the electro-magnetic one?" 

"Could be," Spear agreed. "And maybe these monoliths 
are some part of their sacred edifices — I don't see why else 
they should be so touchy about them. After all, I was only 
going to drill a small — " 

"It's because they're alive." 

Spear, broke off in mid-sentence and stared at Manners. 
"What did you say?" 

Manners didn't move. His eyes were on the monolith. 

"I didn't say anything, Shiny," he said, slowly. "This 
said it. It must have been that which spoke last night." 

Spear glanced from the monolith to Manners and back at 
the monolith. Then back to Manners again. "Er— Dirk," 
he said, "shal we call it a day for now and — and have a lie 
down or— or something?" 

"There's nothing wrong with me," Shiny," Manners responded. "Neither with my brain nor my body. I'm perfectly all right and I'm telling you that these things are 
alive. This is the new life-form the Commander was talking 
about." 

Spear was having difficulty in finding the right words. 
"It's cock-eyed madness, that's what it is ! Stone — alive and 
talking! If these things are alive I'll eat my — " 



44 



THE PLASTIC PERIL 



"Careful," said a voice that was not Manners'. "You 
would live to regret such a claim." 

Spear watched Manners' lips carefully. "Say that again," 
he said. 

Obligingly, the voice came again. This time, Spear was 
sure that Manners wasn't doing a ventriloquist stunt. Besides, the voice was distinctly unhuman. He sat on the 
ground and ran wiry fingers through his sleek hair, unconcernedly disarranging it. 

"Now look, monolith," he said. "I've been around. I've 
seen things no Earth-lubber would believe. My mind is 
wide open for instruction. Tell me, please, what is all this!" 

Came a sound that could have been interpreted as a 
stony chuckle. It was strange how the sound was so intimately connected with one's idea of stone and rock The 
two men listened. At first they had to force themselves 
to believe, then as the story unfolded, they began to accept 
everything that was told them. At the end, they were convinced. Still amazed, but convinced. 

Grisette, the monolith explained, did indeed contain a 
new life form. But it was new only in fact— not in fiction 
or in theory. Many centuries before, men on Earth had 
written and talked about a hypothetical life-form based on 
silicon instead of carbon. This was it. Though not exactly. 
Grisette's life-form was based on its own mineral equivalent 
to Earth's silicon. 

"We can, if you wish, invent a name for it," the monolith 
went on. "Or we can call it silicon, whichever you prefer 
It doesn't really matter. The important point is that even 
according to many Earth standards, we are alive— I say we 
because you obviously look upon these columns as separate 
individuals; just as I gather you are two separate organisms 
On Grisette, however, the silicon life-form is one. All 
these columns, all the ground you walk upon are part of one 
creature." 

Here, the two men looked around them, awed now at the 
thought of such a completely alien alien. To think that all 



THE PLASTIC PERIL 



45 



those thousands of monoliths, all that great expanse of even 
stone, was one vast animal . , . 

"Just as your own terrestrial silicon forms short chains," 
the monolith went on, "so our main element forms even 
greater chains. And every chain is interlinked. We are, 
in fact, mainly what you would call a nervous system — 
that is why your drill hurt so much and set up such a 
universal cry of pain. We have no organs of locomotion, 
reproduction or respiration. Unlike your own life-forms, 
we do not respire. Nothing is taken in or given out. We 
talk and think by sliding 'silicon' chains against each other. 
The stimuli set up can travel over the whole creature." 

"The energy," Manners queried. "Where does the energy 
come from to do all this?" 

"There is a stock of potential energy that was here in 
the beginning," the monolith replied. "It is simply moved 
from place to place." 

Manners remembered that once an Earth scientist had 
dissected out the nerve ring of a jellyfish and stimulated it. 
The impulse had travelled round and round the ring for 
eleven days covering 457 miles, before enough muscular 
tissue had been regenerated to absorb the impulse. Obviously, the nerve net of the monoliths was like that. Once 
an impulse had been started, it could move from place to 
place without any extra energy being needed. But Manners 
was still unsatisfied about respiration. He queried the 
monolith on it. 

"Think of your own complex machines — the electron 
brains," the monolith directed. "They do not respire. If 
they could maintain their energy content, they would 'live' 
for ever without any kind of gaseous interchange or any 
other form of respiration. We are like that. Like your 
machines. Only, we have intrinsic life." 

"And our language — how come you are able to speak 
it as well as we do?" 

A sound something like a sigh came from the monolith. 
"That, of course, is a long story. Roughly it is a question 



46 



THE PLASTIC PERIL 



of building up a wide scheme from a few examplesmuch as your aicheologists developed a good idea of ancient 
Egyptian language. But you will not want too much lecturing all at once. We can have many talks on these things 
later. For the moment, I merely wish you to promise me 
that no more drillings will be made." 

Both Spear and Manners agreed whole-heartedly. In both 
their minds they could see how awful the first touch of that 
spinning bit must have been to the creature. Manners stared 
at it, still feeling a little queer talking to a stone. 

"You— you aren't hostile towards us? I mean, you don't 
terribly resent our coming?" 

Manners felt that if the column could have shrugged it 
would have done so. "You are intelligent," it said. "You 
are open to reason— as you have shown by promising not 
to drill any more. While you do not harm me, why should 
I be hostile?" 

"There are other planets," Manners said, "where ideas 
like those are at a premium." 

"I can well imagine," the monolith answered. "The 
wave-like emanations from you are blurred and indistinct, 
but I get impressions of strange and murderous creatures. 
Alas, Grisette is not alone in possessing them." 

For a moment the spacemen didn't catch on to what the 
monolith had said. Then: 

"You mean— you mean there are hostile creatures on 
Grisette?" Manners demanded. "How—?" 

Spear rested his head in his hands. The whole thing 
was beginning to get too much for him. 

"There are indeed," the monolith explained. "I was hoping that you might be of help to us in that direction. You 
see, our structure and organisation make us an easy prey 
to parasites. Once, long ago, Grisette was free from them. 
But then they came from the skies, as you came, and we 
were not prepared for them in any way. For years now 
they have been eating us— us or me, whichever you prefer." 

Manners tried to adjust his mind to the situation. It 



THE PLASTIC PERIL 



47 



was difficult enough believing in the reality of such a vast 
stone being. To conceive of creatures which ate it was 
almost too much. Spear got up and strolled away towards 
the ship. He busied himself with some adjustment on the 
air-lock door, and then attended to his wound. 

"These parasites," Manners said, slowly. "What are they 
like?" 

Only then did he remember that the monolith hadn't explained how it knew of things around it — sight, sound or 
touch. He resolved to ask it when an opportunity presented itself. 

"*t might be better that you see them for yourselves," 
the monolith said. "If you would follow me . . ," 

Manners was at a loss. He couldn't see for the moment 
how on Grisette he was to follow a stone column that 
couldn't move. Then he realised that the voice was moving 
away from him, other columns farther away were "speaking." He called out to Spear. 

"Hey, Shiny! Snap out of it and bring some weapons. 
We're going on safari!" 

The gloomy expression of Spear's face disappeared. This 
was something like! He jumped into the jeep, still containing its weapons, and drove it over to Manners. The 
navigator climbed aboard and they set the car to follow 
the monolith's voice. 

"I envy you your motility," it said. "Not only can you 
move at will, but you have machines to carry you. A 
great advantage under adverse conditions. It could almost 
be a mutation for your survival. Now, about these parasites. They occupy practically the whole of the other hemisphere of Grisette. As I told you, once there was nothing 
on Grisette but myself — these monoliths and this flat stone. 
Then the invaders came from the skies and began to eat me 
away. Year by year they encroach still more on me. T 
fear that in a very few centuries I may all be gone." 

The voice had gathered speed and Spear needed all his 
driving skill to keep up with it, zig-zagging among the 



48 



THE PLASTIC PERIL 



monoliths. Very soon the ship was left far behind. Still 
the voice went on, explaining how the parasites made 
periodic raids, gobbled a few monoliths and an acre or two 
of^stone, and then lay quiescent for a time. 

"The pain is tremendous," it said. "Though lately I have 
been able to restrict it a little around the area of attack; 
In the beginning it spread over the whole bulk of me. I 
spent many nights screaming in agony to the unheeding 
sky. If you could help— in any way— my gratitude would 
surely match my size." 

Even Spear felt touched by the appeal. Then he told 
himself that it was only a column of stone talking. Strangely 
enough, even that didn't make a lot of difference. Looking 
sideways, he could see that Manners was quite sold on the 
idea of helping the monolith. Spear sighed and cut sharply 
round a monolith. The next second his foot rammed down 
on the brake. 

The voice had stopped its progress suddenly and for a 
good reason— there were no more monoliths to carry it 
The flat stone came to a sudden, raw corroded end. Beyond 
was a surface that looked like plastic; shiny, smooth, even 
where it rose up in folds making little foothills and higher 
ones behind. 



chapter six 



Parasites 

4 4 HP HIS," said the monolith, gravely, "is my farthest limit 
at the present time. At any moment the creatures 
may come and attack me again with their corroding juices. 
There will be another night of pain; another loss of what 
you might call limbs. And I am powerless to prevent it." 

A slight pain in Spear's wrist reminded him of something. 
"See here," he said. "You hurled a rock at me. Why 
don't you do the same to them?" 

"That is exactly what they would like me to do. It 
would be as if you tried to fight off your Earth lions by 
throwing your arms and legs to them. Only, these creatures 
would eat everything I threw to them — and everything I 
throw costs me a quantity of pain. I thiew at you because the pain of parting with a small amount of my substance was smaller than the pain of your drill. Do you see, 
Earthman?" 

Spear agreed that there seemed to be something in what 
the monolith said. Manners nodded sagely, then looked up 
suddenly. 

"By the way," he said, "how do you manage to keep in 
touch with your environment?" 

"Electromagnetic waves create disturbances in the 'nerve 
net' that mainly constitutes me," the monolith replied. "Of 
course, each monolith has only a vague 'vision,' but when 
you take into account that all the monoliths and the flat 
stone have the 'vision'— on all sides, too — then you may 
begin to se that I have a pretty clear idea of what is around 
me. I never sleep, by the way, this vision I speak of is 
constant." 

49 



50 



THE PLASTIC PERIL 



"Hmai," Manners responded. "That's all right for electro-magnetic phenomena, but what about sound?" 

"Oh, well, I thought you would take it for granted that I 
am sensitive to vibrations in the atmosphere. Just as all 
of me is a brain and all of me is an eye, so all of me is an 
ear." 

"And yet you don't feel pain when we walk on you and 
drive around in the jeep?" 

"Oh, no. That is a question of maximum stimulation. 
Beyond a certain strength of stimuli, I do not feel anything. 
In the same way if someone should bring an axe down 
forcefully and sharply on your leg, you would not feel it — 
not until some time later." 

Spear coughed. The discussion was getting a little too 
academic for him. 

"These parasites," he put in, quickly. "Have you any 
idea how we could deal with them?" 

The two men stared out over the smooth plastic towards 
the undulating shiny folds beyond. There was not a movement, not a sign of hostility anywhere. They turned and 
listened to the monolith. 

"No, I'm afraid I haven't," it replied. "They are tricky 
things to deal with and, I should think, quite dangerous. I 
beseech you not to place yourselves in jeopardy on my 
account. There is little of you, but much of me." 

The men stirred uncomfortably, then Spear had a sudden 
thought. 

"Look here," he said to Manners. "I think we'd better 
do what the Commander says about priming the ship. 
I'll slip back in the jeep if you like. You can stay here 
and watch out for the heeby-jeebies — only, watch your step, 
won't you?" 

Manners ignored the admonition. "How are you going 
to find your way back? Remember last night?" 

That brought up another matter that Manners wanted to 
settle with the monolith. But that could wait. 

"Why, I imagine our friend here will guide me back just 



THE PLASTIC PERIL , 51 

as — as — well, as he guided us out here. I imagine, too, 
that he can talk all over the place." 

Manners chuckled at Spear's attack on his comparative 
anthropology. He turned to the monolith, which had remained silent during the exchange. 

"I can do that quite easily, of course. When are you 
ready to go?" 

"Now," Spear said, shortly. 

"Very well, if you will follow me . . ." 

Manners and Spear exchanged a nod and Spear climbed 
into the jeep. It was odd, Manners thought, to hear the 
same voice moving away from him with the jeep as kept 
on talking beside him. Evidently the monolith was able 
to split its attention quite successfully. 

He wondered why it hadn't enquired what 'priming the 
ship' had meant. He felt the monolith had its share of 
curiosity — and that might explain last night's business. 

Spear's jeep was disappearing behind a distant monolith 
as Manners turned back to the one beside him and asked: 

"Tell me, it was you who moved our ship about yesterday, wasn't it?" 

The monolith sounded apologetic. "It was indeed. I 
am sorry if it inconvenienced you. But you see, I had no 
idea when you landed what you were or what your ship 
was. Those parasites landed in something quite different. 
I saw you and your friend come out and heard your strange 
language, but I didn't know whether you were simply small 
parts of a whole— whether the ship was really the principle 
organism. So I moved it about and tried to get in contact 
with it. I was just giving it up when you and your friend 
returned. I called out 'Greetings' but. you didn't reply and 
I supposed I had made a mistake in constructing your language from the words I could hear you saying as you 
drove around. I spent all night going over my process of 
construction and made another approach this morning." 

"Well, that clears that up," Manners said. "It didn't 
really bother us, just made us a little nervous. We thought 



52 



THE PLASTIC PERIL 



you were probably termites of some sort!" 

"Termites," repeated the monolith. "Termites. I'm 
afraid I'm not able to construct a meaning for that word. 
Could you help me to understand you better?" 

Manners proceeded to give the monolith a lecture in the 
elementary biology of the termite, describing the way they 
build great towers without having the faintest idea of what 
they are doing. 

"Not a very flattering picture," the monolith said, when 
Manners was finished. "But I suppose you have changed 
your mind about me now?" 

"Oh, yes, of course. But I'm still puzzled as to how you 
managed to move the ship. You say you have no organs 
of locomotion. I take it then that you have no organs of 
touch and grasping?" 

"That is so," the monolith began, "you see I am constructed in such a way that — turn around, please!" 

Instinctively obeying instantly. Manners realised suddenly 
that he wouldn't be having that explanation just yet. 

He was now facing the plastic surface — or what had 
once been a plastic surface. Now it was covered with what 
looked like an army of people from the future trying to be 
knights of the past. They stretched from the foothills in 
the background right up to within a few hundred yards of 
him and the monolith. 

Swarms of them swept forward like locusts on Earth, 
patching the plastic surface with dark blobs of swaying 
brilliance. For the morning sun shone down on them and 
glinted brightly from the plastic suits of armour they were 
wearing. 

Manners, rooted in amazement, could make out the shape 
of a plastic head-covering and extensions for a couple of 
arms and what appeared to be four legs. They stood about 
five feet high, but their features were indistinguishable behind the dazzling plastic. They seemed to move on their 
four lower limbs, using the upper ones for waving. 

Manners suddenly realised that the only sound he could 



THE PLASTIC PERIL 



53 



heat was the apprehensive moaning of the monolith, which 
obviously knew what was in store for it. And yet the parasites seemed to be getting some sort of orders. They were 
deploying. Again Manners came to with a start and realised 
that the dark mass of invaders was fanning out so as to 
sweep by on either side of him and the nearest monolith. 

Then he saw the atypical thing among the parasites. It 
was a taller armour suit, with only two legs and two arms. 
Again the features were indistinguishable behind the reflected sunlight. 

Still with no sound, the invaders suddenly picked up 
speed and moved forward at a terrific pace. Manners 
snapped out of it, turned and ran. But the parasites were 
now moving too fast for him. In the corners of his eyes 
he could see them swarm past him on either side. 

Strangely enough, they seemed to be keeping parallel with 
him rather than trying to close in on him. Nevertheless he 
forced his legs to pound down on the stone and ran between 
the monoliths in the direction that didn't have to lead anywhere but away from the parasites. 

Then something touched one of his feet and he went 
down. The stone came up at him with tremendous force 
and nearly knocked the breath from him. At the back of 
his mind a picture was forming of what these creatures 
could do to him if they could eat stone. He tried to sit 
up, but found a heavy weight on his back. 

Two plastic-encased arms came round him and lifted. 
He felt the whole of his body leave the ground. And then 
he was being borne away at a jerking, jolting pace. He was 
facing away from the direction in which he was being 
carried, and could see that the jeep had suddenly appeared 
among the monoliths. 

All around, the four-footed parasites were at work on 
the stone. An arm of them sWept across in front of the 
jeep and a mass of rising steam blotted the vehicle from 
view. Silently Manners breathed a prayer for Spear, then 
breathed several for himself. The screen of steam was ad


54 



THE PLASTIC PERIL 



vancing on his bearer. It was as though the four-footers 
had been ordered to leave a path for them and had now 
been told to close it by attacking the stone. In the air was 
the piercing collective scream of a thousand monoliths. 

Manners spared a glance for the two arms that were enfolding him. The plastic was near now and there was no 
blinding reflection. Through he looked — and almost stopped 
breathing. The stuff inside was as near human flesh as 
human flesh could be. 

Jerking himself in the grip, he forced his head round to 
see the rest of the creature that was carrying him. It was 
difficult to hold on to his reason — that is, if he hadn't 
already lost it. 

Inside the plastic armour was — something that looked 
like a very beautiful and very human girl. 

To Spear, as he climbed into the jeep and turned its 
bonnet in the direction of the scooter, he was living in a 
dream world that would sometime explode into reality. 
Until then, he had to accept the observable fact that he was 
being spoken to by a column of stone. Several stone 
columns, in fact. For the voice moved forward, keeping 
just in front of him all the while. In the early stages he 
could also hear the other voice talking to Manners, then it 
faded out and there was only one. 

"I'm sorry if I distracted you from your duty," the monolith said. "It was selfish of me to drag you off like that 
and plunge you into my troubles." 

"Don't think about it any more," Spear replied genuinely. 
"Only too pleased to be of help. It won't take me long to 
do what I have to do, then we'll go back and you can 
tell us more about the parasites." 

The monoliths thanked him for his sympathy. "If ever 
I can help you, just let me know. Though," it finished 
lamely, "I can't see how I could help you." 

"You never know," said Spear, expertly steerjng round 
the last monolith that had spoken and heading towards the 



THE PLASTIC PERIL 



55 



next. "By the way, how come you managed to move the 
ship around last night? I don't know a lot of biology, 
but you don't seem to have the necessary apparatus to do it. 
It was you, I suppose?" 

"Oh, yes, it was," the monolith replied. It made the 
same explanation to him as it was going to make to Manners. 
"The mechanism is one of energy transference. You see, 
these columns are only kept up by a heavy charge of 
neuronal impulses to counteract gravitational forces. If I 
let the impulse pass out of a column, it sinks back to level 
ground again. Of course, to maintain the status quo I have 
to raise another column somewhere else." 

Spear frowned. He could never understand why these 
brainy people couldn't answer a question directly, but had 
to go into a lot of theory. Then he brightened up as the 
monolith continued. 

"That's how I moved your ship. By raising a column 
under it, then another one very near the first and so on. 
The ship passed from the top of one column to the top 
of another. Of course, the columns were not as high as 
these — I wouldn't have had enough available energy to 
make them if they were." 

In spite of himself, Spear found himself getting interested. 
"Why do you keep all these columns in this particular 
pattern and at this particular height?" he asked. 

"Well, you see, I have an innate conception of — aaaaiieeee!" 

Spear's nerves seemed to shudder in resonance with the 
monolith's wailing cry. He brought his foot down on the 
brake, turned the jeep round and started her up again. 
He had a rough idea what had caused that wail. 

"Quickly!" the monolith screamed. "The parasites are 
coming. Follow me quickly, I cannot talk coherently much 
more and you will be lost. Hurry, hurry!" 

Spear needed no urging. His foot went down on the 
accelerator. The jeep leaped forward, careening past the 
monoliths with a scraping of paint, its tyres growling angrily 



56 THE PLASTIC PERIL 

as they skidded on the stone. Spear's ringers were clamped 
tight over the steering wheel, jerking it back and forth as he 
followed the crazy zigzag path laid out by the monoliths. 

All the while, the stone screamed. "There are hordes of 
them! More than ever before. And the strange one is 
among them ! " 

Momentarily Spear wondered what the thing was drivelling about. What was this strange one? Then he cast the 
thought away. It didn't matter. The important thing was 
to get to Manners. Sudenly he cursed the monolith's habit 
of stopping with a jerk. Coming quickly from behind a 
monolith, he saw the parasites, Manners and the str_ange one. 

The parasites shone under the sunlight, casting spears of 
light into his eyes. He brought the jeep to an abrupt halt, 
but remained seated in it. Protecting his eyes from the 
brilliant sparkle of the parasites, he couid see that Manners 
had already been carried off by the strange one — the one 
that looked different from the rest in that it had only two 
legs. 

On either side of the retreating figures, the parasites were 
swarming over the stone, raising steam as they went. Then, 
a second or two after the jeep stopped, the two opposite 
arms of the attacking force swept together and met in front 
of him. A hissing wall of steam rose up, blotting out 
the figure of Manners and his bearer, and effectively cutting 
off any hope of rescuing him. 

The parasites rolled over the stone like a tide of molten 
plastic. Spear watched the edge of the tide. It came within twenty yards of him and then stopped. He watched it 
still, trying to get some idea of how the parasites worked. 
He knew the attack would come to an end sometime, and 
that would be the time to start looking for Manners. Until 
then he could best serve the cause by studying the creatures. 

He could see them among the steam clouds. At first 
they appeared to be chaotic, but as he watched Spear, could 
see that they were, in fact, orderly. Each one moved in a 
straight line on its four legs and seemed to be doing some


THE PLASTIC PERIL 



57 



thing to the ground with its arms. 

Spear reached out a pair of binoculars and studied the 
beasts more closely. He could see now that within the 
plastic suits, they were mainly a mass of dark fluid, with 
darker spots that perhaps were organs. One darkish spot 
lay at the top of each arm. Moving the field of view 
downwards, Spear saw that little pools of the dark liquid 
were ejected from the ends of the arms — much as a fly 
ejects juices. As soon as the fluid touched the stone great 
clouds of steam rose. At the same time, the creatures' 
heads lowered and sucked at the broiling liquid on the 
ground. 

The stone was corroded away to a depth of about a 
foot. Whether there was stone below that, Spear could not 
see, for as soon as -that level was reached, the parasites 
exuded a glairy colourless fluid that seemed to set at once 
into the plastic surface that extended to the hills. Then 
they moved on to the next area of stone. 

When they came to a monolith, the sight was aweinspiring. Several of them would attack a column, slavering their juices over its apex. The whole thing would turn 
into a steaming mass, and the parasites would gradually 
work their way down the column until they had eaten it 
away to a foot below ground level. 

Chemistry, to Spear, was something that rather queer 
people went in for. All the same, he had had to learn a 
little elementary chemistry hi his student days. Most of it 
was gone now, and what little remained was decidedly 
rusty. Nevertheless, he thought it might be useful if he 
had some idea how these creatures did what they did. 

Sitting in the jeep watching them, oblivious to the moaning and wailing of the stone, Spear searched the dark recesses of his memory for facts that would explain the 
present situation. 

Stone, he thought, was silicaceous — at least, terrestrial 
stone was, and the monolith had said this was very similar. 
Now what could turn silicaceous material into steam? 



58 



THE PLASTIC PERIL 



Fluorine. Fluorine would react with silica— silicon dioxide 
—to give— to give— heck, what did it give? Ah, yes, silicon 
fluoride. No, that wouldn't work. It would have to be 
hydrofluoric acid. That would give silicon fluoride and 
water. The reaction would be fast enough to cause the 
water to be vaporised. But wait a minute. Silicon fluoride was decomposed by water — 

Spear's chemical cogitations were cut short before he was 
able to settle the question finally. For the ground suddenly 
gave way beneath the jeep and he sank down with it far 
beneath the ground level. 



CHAPTER SEVEN 

Attack in the Hills 

T? OR some seconds Manners figured he must be having 
hallucinations. The presence of a girl on Grisette 
didn't tally at all with the barren terrain of the place, with 
the great stone creature, with the swarming parasites. Nor 
did her enormous strength add credulity to the situation. 
She carried him fast and effortlessly, high from the ground. 

He turned his attention once again to the body within 
the plastic suit. The skin of the girl's arm was as white as 
his own, and he could make out a very fine fair down 
on its surface. He felt a thrill run through him, which 
was odd, because the hard plastic suit, gave him no indication of the softness or warmth of her body. Maybe his 
imagination was supplying those details. 

On and on she ran, towards the hills. Very soon, the 
swarming hordes of parasites were left far behind them. 
Still the girl did not slow her pace, nor transfer him to 
the ground, where he would have been infinitely more comfortable. She kept him tight against her, the joints of her 
suit cutting into him and rubbing sorely with the constant 
jerking. 

He tried to get a better view of her, but the jolting motion 
made her image blurred. All he could tell was that she 
was very lovely and very determined. She never looked 
down at him once. 

Then he felt her slowing. Twisting his head, Manners 
saw that they had reached the hills and Were passing 
through a narrow defile between high gleaming walls of 
plastic. The defile followed a tortuous route into the deeps 



59 



60 



THE PLASTIC PERIL 



of the hills. Then, suddenly rounding a bend, he saw the 
house. 

At first, he didn't realise it was a house. It looked 
more like a palace from one of the ancient fairy tales he 
had learned in mythology. High, shining in the sun and 
strangely transparent all over, it stood on a little rise from 
the defile — like the barons' castles of Jong ago. He almost 
expected to see a moat and drawbridge. 

The girl carried him straight to the house, and only 
when she had passed through the entrance into the transparent hallway did she set him on his feet. 

Manners stretched himself, as much to give himself a 
chance to think as to get the blood circulating properly. 
This was a situation without parallel in his experience. 
He was a little at a loss how to deal with it. The girl, 
however, took the initiative. She ignored him and stripped 
off her plastic suit. 

The helmet came off first, revealing a sun- tanned skin, 
bright blue-green eyes and a mass of long, fair hair, that 
disappeared into the neck of the suit. 

Then off came the tunic and the rest of the hair was 
exposed, running down to beyond her waist. Followed the 
armlets and the pieces that fitted over legs and feet. Tossing the plastic aside, the girl stood erect in her bright 
crimson two-piece sunsuit. Her bare feet made a little 
cloud of condensation on the plastic floor. 

Manners smiled. His best smile. The smile he always 
used when things were just a little beyond his reach. The 
smile that usually brought them within his reach. 

The girl smiled. Her smile was as full and friendly as 
Manners' and it showed that her dentition was based on 
the terrestrial mammalian plan. 

She held out her hand. Manners took it eagerly. It was 
small, smooth-skinned and delightfully dusky from sunlight. 
Just the diminutive, soothing kind of hand one needs to 
find on a girl from the south sea islands. The next second 
Manners' smile vanished. He was quite unable to main


THE PLASTIC PERIL 



61 



tain it at the same time as he strove not to show the pain 
running up his arm from her grip. He managed to free his 
hand, glanced at her biceps with admiration, and put his 
smile on again. Apparently, they were friends. 

Manners pointed to himself. "Dirk," he said, a little 
loudly, the way Englishmen always speak to foreigners. 
"Dirk Manners." He then pointed at the girl, raised his 
eyebr.ows inquisitively. 

"I am called Aylees," the girl said. "And you are Dirk 
Manners." 

The consternation on his face must have shown plainly, 
for Aylees suddenly burst into hearty mocking laugher, letting her head fall back so that he could see the throbbing 
muscles in her neck. Through all the consternation, he 
thought she looked very beautiful. 

"You — you speak English, then?" he said. 

"If that is the name of your language, then I speak it," 
Aylees admitted, still laughing. "You want to know how. 
I will tell you. You call yourself and your kind human. 
Well, I am not human" — Manners caught himself thinking 
that she was human enough for him — "and I do not think 
quite as you do — but, won't you come and eat with me?" ' 

Her eyes and hands expressed the invitation more pleasantly than her lips. He nodded. She turned and he 
followed her through a doorway into an inner room. There 
he saw plastic tables and chairs of unusual design and, in 
one corner of the room, a stack of plastic containers, apparently of food. 

She set a chair at the table for him and gestured him 
to be seated. Then she went over to the stack of food 
and began sorting through the containers. Manners saw 
her pick up a jar that contained something bright and pink, 
look at it for a few seconds then put it down again. She 
turned her attention to other jars. 

She came half-way across to the table with an armful 
of containers, and then, as if abruptly changing her. mind, 
went back and brought the pink one, too. 



62 



THE PLASTIC PERIL 



"I'd been saving this," she said, candidly, "but this is a 
special occasion, so we'll take the plunge." 

Manners eyed the container warily. Not that he suspected her of any ulterior motive — if she had wanted to, 
she could have crushed the life out of him some time back. 
But she had said herself that she wasn't human — and nonhuman foods might not agree with Manners' system of 
assimilation. 

"It's all right," Aylees said, smiling at him. "You'll love 
it. It's really delicious. That's why I've been saving it, 
but that part of the story comes later on. 'Dive in' is the 
term you normally use, I think?" 

So saying, she drew up her own chair and began to 
ply Manners with food. The containers opened at the flick 
of a lever, and the food was eaten from them with built-in 
implements. While he ate, Aylees explained. 

"As I was saying, I do not think as you do, not really. 
I have — my whole race has — what you call telepathy. A 
very extended and efficient telepathy. While I carried you 
here, I was able to search your mind and read things there." 

Manners coloured slightly. As he remembered it, he had 
thought one or two things that might cause an Earth girl to 
be embarrassed. But Aylees only smiled more broadly. 

"Then your Earth girls must be very unrealistic," she 
commented. "I found your thoughts most natural, very 
similar to those of the young men of my race." 

With a start, Manners realised that all his mental workings must be open to her. She knew what he was thinking 
as he sat there. 

"Of course I do," Aylees laughed. "You will get used 
to it. I may even be able to teach you to do the same. 
Anyway, while I carried you here, I managed to form a 
clear knowledge of your language — you think in words 
mainly; just a few pictures here and there where the words 
might shame you! I already know quite a bit about you. 
since you were so similar to me, I ordered those — those 
things to give you a miss. Otherwise you would have been 



THE PLASTIC PERIL 



63 



corroded pretty nastily." 

"I must thank you for saving my life," Manners said, a 
little ponderously because of the horrible picture that arose 
in his mind. 

Aylees laughed her brilliant laugh. "It was selfish of me 
really. You see, I have been very lonely here with only 
those things foe company. I wanted you alive as a companion." 

Her words set up a train of thought in Manners' mind 
that he hastily tried to shut off by thinking hard about other 
things. The slow smile on Aylees' face and the dark 
twinkle in her eyes showed him that he hadn't succeeded. 

He coughed. "Er — where did you come from?" he asked. 
"I take it you're not a native of Grisette?" 

Aylees shuddered. "Oh, no! My planet is beautiful. 
It has flowers and trees and real people with minds. It 
isn't barren and devoid of intelligent life as this place is!" 

The warmth of her tone told Manners that she could 
probably be something of a demon if roused. There was 
a kind of fire behind her irises that brought a thrilling 
tension into him. Hastily he pressed on with neutral 
things. 

"This planet of yours, how come you left it?" 

Aylees finished the food from her container, turned half 
away from the table and stretched out her long, smooth legs. 
Manners looked her full in the eyes. 

"We were out in space — a bunch of us on a joyride. It 
was a regular thing. Only, we went too far, got lost. 
"Oh, we'd have found our way back in the end, but these 
things got us first." 

"You mean the parasites?" Manners queried. 

"Yes. They came at us in swarms — much as you saw 
them go for the stone out there. Point is, they can also 
eat metal. They ate our ship." 

There was a moment's silence while Aylees stared down 
at the floor. Then she continued. "They ate the ship and 
everybody on it— including my parents and my fiance. I 



64 



THE PLASTIC PERIL 



was lucky. I was outside at the time, taking a look at the 
stars, and I was wearing a plastic spacesuit. Their juices 
don't attack plastic. But they got me all the same. Sometimes I wonder if it would have been better to have died 
back there with the others. But I'm glad now that I didn't— 
since you came." 

She lifted her face and gave him a long, cool stare. He 
coughed again and spoke rapidly. "They brought you down 
here, I suppose? Made you prisoner?" 

"That's it. This was the planet my swarm settled on. 
There are many others with other swarms. The parasites 
are spreading all through the galaxy, corroding, killing, 
laying waste. And yet — they replace the stone, the trees, 
the flowers with this beautiful plastic. It's part of their 
metabolism — a sort of waste product." 

Manners stared around at the smooth, shiny walls. Some 
waste product. It would be worth a considerable sum on 
Earth. 

"So I became their queen," Aylees laughed cynically. 
"I could have committed suicide, I suppose, but even a 
living death is better than no life at all — once you've experienced it. I knew I had to die soon, anyway — my food 
stores are getting low." 

She glanced across at the stack of containers. Manners 
followed her glance, surmised that she must have rescued 
the food from the ship. 

"That's right," Aylees agreed. "These parasites, although 
not intelligent, have a certain amount of sentience. They 
allowed me to bring the food. In fact, they brought it for 
me. In return, I taught them a few things; how to make 
their suits, for example. I was able to reach their minds 
— such as they are." 

"A while back," Manners said, "you remarked that there 
was no intelligent life on Grisette. What about the stone?" 

Aylees raised her eyebrows in a puzzled expression. "The 
stone?" she repeated. "How do you mean?" 

"The stone is intelligent. It talked to me and my friend, 



THE PLASTIC PERIL 



65 



explained how these parasites attack it periodically and that 
they came from the skies. Didn't mention you, though." 

"How odd," Aylees commented. "It must have a mind 
of a different form from the kind available to mine. And 
you say you have a friend. I didn't detect another mind 
when we attacked. Where was he?" 

"He had gone back to our ship," Manners explained. 
"Some distance behind those monoliths." 

"That is it, then. My searching powers are limited by 
distance. Obviously I couldn't reach him." Her eyes lit 
up again. "Is he like you? Can we go and fetch him?" 

An' unreasoned jealousy sprang uncalled into Manners' 
mind. The thought of Spear, being brought here by the 
girl was distasteful to him — although he knew he had nothing to fear from happily married, slightly misogynistic, 
Spear. 

"I wouldn't be too sure of that," Aylees laughed. "You 
must never underestimate the power of a woman's charms ! " 

Manners inwardly cursed her powers of mind reading. 
This was going to be difficult. 

"If it annoys you, I will turn it off," Aylees smiled. "I 
know your language well enough now not to need it. Shall 
I do that?" 

Manners had the ungallant thought that he wouldn't know 
whether she had it on or not — in which case he would have 
to be watchful all the time. 

"You malign me," Aylees admonished him. "If I say I 
will turn it off, then I will. Now, don't be a jealous idiot. 
We've got to rescue your friend." 

"From what?" Manners asked, surprised. "I should have 
thought the main task was to rescue you." 

"Ideally, we would do the two jobs at the same time," 
Aylees said. "Anyway, we've got to get to your friend 
before the parasites take it into their fluid heads to attack 
him." 

Manners jumped to his feet. He had never given the 



66 



THE PLASTIC PERIL 



matter any thought; Ay lees had rather taken his mind off 
Spear. 

"How do we know they haven't already done so?" he 
said. "Maybe they are attacking him even now 1 " He 
moved towards the door. 

Aylees called him to halt. She looked a little distracted, 
as though thinking of something else. "No, they haven't 
attacked him yet, I am sure. Knowing them so long my 
mind can reach theirs over long distances. But—" She 
hesitated. 

"But what?" Manners asked, coming close to her. "There's 
something else worrying you?" 

"Yes," Aylees admitted. "It's so difficult — their minds are 
so hazy. They seem to be thinking — thinking that something has gone wrong; that an external force is acting against 
them — they have had complete freedom for so long." 

She rounded on Manners suddenly. "D'you suppose your 
friend has done something to them?" 

It was a new idea, but not a strange one, knowing Spear. 
"It wouldn't surprise me" he answered. "Would that worry 
you?" 

"Not in itself," Aylees replied. "But — yes, I knew it! 
The parasites are thinking that I am responsible for this. 
Whatever your friend has done to them they are blaming 
on me. Oh, they're turning back. They are going to 
attack me!" 

Manners had never seen anything quite like it before. 
Aylees' voice was fraught with concern, yet there was no 
fear there. Nor did her face or stance suggest that she was 
afraid for herself. Rather, her whole being indicated that 
she was merely considering it a blot on the even tenor, of 
life that an angry swarm of stone-corroding parasites should 
attack her. Then he found the answer in her next remark. 

"That means an end to my plans for rescuing your friend 
and the bunch of us escaping. Oh, well, it could be worse." 

"Could it?" Manners asked. "In what way, for Pete's 
sake!" 



THE PLASTIC PERIL 



67 



Aylees looked at him strangely. "Why, they might have 
been able to get at us for one thing. Inside this plastic 
house we're quite safe from them. It just means we shan't 
be able to get out. Food will run out in time and we shall 
starve, but we will at least have each other for company 
until we do." 

Manners stared at her in amazement. He would never 
have thought that such a strong, healthy minded woman 
would take such a situation so calmly and so helplessly. 

"That may be all right for you," he said, firmly. "But 
I've got a job to do and a friend to find. I'm not staying 
here to rot." 

"But, Dirk, there's nothing you can do! The parasites 
will surround the place. There'll be no way out — and even 
if there were, what could you do to fight them?" 

Manners had been staring at the door. He now turned 
back to Aylees. 

"I don't kn ow," he said. "But we'd better do some 
thinking pretty quick. Intelligent or not, the parasites have 
brought a chunk of rock and are drilling away at your front 
door. 



CHAPTER EIGHT 

Ditched 

T T was one of the most peculiar sensations Spear had 
ever experienced. One moment lie was sitting in the jeep 
on firm stone ground, watching the corroding parasites. The 
next moment the ground seemed to have turned to some kind 
of rubber. Soft rubber, because he sank, jeep and all, far 
down below the surrounding level. Looking up, he could 
see the sky as a roughly rectangular shape high above him. 

Down there in the pit, the groans and wails of the stone 
sounded hollowly eerie. A sharp twinge of fear came to 
him as he thought that the parasites might come tumbling 
down the pit after him. Then he realised that their tidefront was too far away for that, and was probably ebbing 
now, anyway. 

As the fear died, so indignation took its place. He had 
a sudden humiliating vision of himself sitting passively in 
the jeep inside a great big hole. That was enough. Rapidly 
he turned the jeep's wheels into sucking tracks and started 
the motor. Letting in the clutch he inched towards the 
side of the pit. 

The bonnet of the jeep touched the wall — and stopped. 

Spear backed an inch or two and tried again. The jeep 
refused to climb. Leaning over the side, Spear could see 
that the curving sucker tracks just couldn't get a purchase 
on the wall. Unlike the monoliths, it had no gentle curve 
at its base. 

Irritably, Spear clambered over to the rear of the jeep and 
jumped up and down on it, trying to tip the vehicle up so 
that the tracts would engage with the wall. But the car 



68 



THE PLASTIC PERIL 



69 



simply shuddered and complained metallically without doing 
as he wished. 

Spear became aware of a voice above and among the 
groaning and wailing. The monolith was talking again, its 
voice strained as though forced out by an effort against the 
pressing need to scream. 

"Why are you trying to get out?" it groaned. "You are 
safe there. That's why I made the pit for you. If the 
parasites see you they will attack you and kill you. Just 
sit there in your vehicle until they have gone — ooooh!" 

The voice tailed off into a particularly nasty groan. Spear 
wrinkled his brow. So the monolith had done it to protect 
him from the parasites? Very kind of it, although a little 
late in the day, seeing that Spear had watched the swarms 
for some seconds before the pit had appeared. 

Then Spear's original thought returned to him, but this 
time there was no fear with it. 

"Hey, monolith!" he called. "Hey, there, Stone!" 

He waited while the groaning gradually turned itself into 
coherent talk. "What — what is it, Earthman?" 

"Say, if you can make pits like these without any trouble, 
why don't you make a long one — right round the edge of 
the attackers? Maybe it wouldn't really stop them corroding you, but it'd certainly disorganise them a bit if they 
found themselves all pouring into a vast drain." 

Suddenly the moaning stopped. It was as if Spear's remark had provoked a thought that required all the stone's 
nervous responses, leaving none over to react to the pain 
of corrosion. That in itself, Spear thought, was a respite 
after all, even if nothing more came of his idea. 

But the stone decided more would come of it. "You 
know," it said, "I'd never thought of that — as I told you, I 
was completely unprepared for them when they landed; and 
centuries of peaceful contemplation cannot be swept aside in 
a year or two." 

"You don't have to excuse yourself," Spear laughed. "Not 



70 



THE PLASTIC PERIL 



just now, anyway. Main point is, are you going to form a 
ditch?" 

"Yes, yes," the monolith replied. "I am indeed. I'm 
gathering the energy potentials now. Very soon they'll be 
tumbling into the drain like ninepins. That was a marvellous idea of yours!" 

Spear smiled grimly. Centuries of peaceful contemplation 
hadn't altered what was probably a fundamental characteristic of all living things, terrestrial or alien— the joy of 
successful battle again other living things. The monolith 
was positively taking pleasure in the prospect of ditching 
a few of the parasites. Quite a contrast to its usual tranquil, 
slightly pacifistic attitude. Spear hoped he hadn't sown the 
seed of belligerency. 

The monolith had relapsed into silence. Or, at least, it 
wasn't talking any more. There were still odd groans and 
wails — as particularly painful shards ran through the creature's nerve net, Spear supposed. 

Then, quite abruptly, it said: "Now! The energy's there. 
Now for. the ditch!" 

Spear, expecting something at least a little dramatic, was 
sorely disappointed when nothing obvious happened. The 
groaning had ceased, but all he could hear was the faraway 
faint hiss of steam as the hordes continued their decomposition of the mineral. The seconds ticked by as Spear sat 
there waiting. Then suddenly the monolith spoke again. 
Its voice was high-filled with exultance, infectious in its 
eagerness. 

"Aha! They're routed! In complete confusion. Do 
you hear me, Earthman? I've triumphed over them! Hundreds of them have fallen into the ditch. The test are 
panicking. They don't know what's happened to them. 
This is the first time they've met with an obstacle — and 
they're completely disorganised! I've beaten them!" 

Spear pulled a wry face, even though there was no one 
there to see it. "Don't get carried away," he warned. 
"You haven't done quite as much as that. They can still 
attack you, you know. You haven't injured them at all." 



THE PLASTIC PERIL 



71 



"You're wrong, you're wrong!" the monolith crowed. 
"They are breaking up their lines. Retreating! The whole 
swarm has turned on its heel. Even the ones that fell in the 
ditch are climbing out and running away. They've stopped 
corroding me. This is my hour of triumph!" 

Spear, down in his little pit, was getting a little tired of 
the boasting commentary. "Well, if you can spare a 
moment from these thoughts, perhaps you could arrange for 
me to be transported back to the surface!" 

At once the monolith was all apology. "Of course, of 
course, my dear Earthman. How selfish of me! In my 
joy at routing these hideous parasites, I forgot about your 
location. Forgive me — I will raise you at once. You, too, 
shall see the glorious spectacle of the parasites in full 
flight!" 

It was almost like a mania, Spear thought, Very soon 
the monolith would have a depressive phase and slobber 
out its hardships. However, in the meantime, it was as 
good as its word. 

" The stone beneath the jeep gradually rose. It was uncanny—rather like being at the base of a serpent's tongue 
as it slowly opened outwards. Smoothly and gently Spear 
rose up until he could see above the top of the pit. Then 
a second or so later, there was no pit or sign of a pit. 
The ground was perfectly level and even. 

Looking forward, Spear could see that the monolith had 
good reason for its joy. The flashing swarms of plasticsuited parasites were streaming away towards the hill, a 
few stragglers from the ditch frantically trying to make up 
the distance between themselves and the main swarm. 

Spear drove the jeep forward and took a look at the 
ditch. The monolith had certainly made a good job of it. 
It was wide and deep, and Spear was at a loss to explain 
how the parasites had managed to get out of it. Then he 
saw that they had corroded away the sides into steps. He 
envied them their fluids. He, a mere human, had had to 
stay in his pit. 



72 



THE PLASTIC PERIL 



By now the hordes of parasites was nearing the hills. 
Over there, Spear remembered was where he had seen the 
strange one carry Manners. It was time he did something 
about that. 

"I must go to find my friend," he told the monolith. 
"Will you close the ditch for me to cross?" 

"And leave me alone?" the monolith wailed. Spear knew 
it was not fear that prompted the remark, but sadness at 
not having anyone to tell its prowess to. 

"I'm afraid so. But I'll be back. With my friend. 
Until then, you can look after our ship for us." 

"Very well," the monolith said, sadly. "I will guard it 
carefully. But I am afraid for you, travelling out there 
among the parasites." 

"I've been among worse things," Spear said, grimly. 
"Besides, it's a job that has to be done." 

EVen as they spoke, Spear could see that a part of the 
ditch was closing up. Soon there was a perfect bridge 
across it. Calling a parting word to the monolith, Spear 
let the clutch in and drove the jeep forward over the 
bridge. 

Then he was on the plastic surface, heading toward the 
hills — and what lay among them. 

Manners saw the first twinge of fear come into Aylees' 
eyes - as she stared at the front door. Through it could 
be seen the plastic-clad parasites, with their swirling dark 
fluids. Two of them were close against the door, holding a 
piece of pointed stone, twisting it against the plastic door 
with their front limbs. 

Already there was an area of semi-opacity where the 
improvised drill had scraped off the polish from the door. 

But even through her fear, Aylees retained her attitude 
of efficiency. 

"How long will it take them to get through, d'you suppose?" she queried. "Not long enough, anyway, I reckon." 
"No," Manners replied, pleased that he wouldn't have a 



THE PLASTIC. PERIL 



73 



hysterical female to deal with on top of the parasites. 
Hysterical females were all right under some circumstances, 
but not when there were things to be thought out and things 
to do. "No, not long enough. I reckon an hour or two 
will see them through. D'you know what an hour; is?" 

Ayles smiled. "Already your mind is telling, me that 
it is sixty minutes, each of which is sixty seconds. And 
you have formed a pretty clear impression of that length 
of time. So I think I know what an hour is." 

"Umm," said Manners. "I thought you said you'd turn 
off the black magic side of things." 

"I did turn it off," she said. She shrugged. "I just 
turned it on for a second to get an idea of what an hour 
was." 

"Umm," Manners said again. "Oh well, there are more 
important things to talk about at the moment. Have you 
any idea what makes these things tick?" 

"The parasites? Well, of course, they are mainly fluid 
— a fluid that attacks and corrodes stone and practically 
everything else." 

"They actually live on the stone, do they? I mean, they 
really do eat it?" 

"Yes — modified, of course, by their juices. It seems that 
attacked stone disappears entirely and becomes parasite 
food and water. What you call steam." 

"Then I should think they are mainly composed of what 
we call hydrofluoric acid. That reacts with silica— stone — 
to form water and hydrofluosilicic acid. There are several 
intermediate products, of course. Point is, what happens 
to the hydrofluosilicic acid?" 

"Oh, I expect they turn it into this plastic they secrete," 
Aylees suggested. "They produce masses of it, you know." 

"Maybe we'll think of something connected with that," 
Manners suggested, turning away. "Now perhaps I'd better 
see the rest of the house. You don't seem to have any other 
doors." 

"That's right, only the front one. There's no need, is 



74 



THE PLASTIC PERIL 



there?— ot there wasn't, with just me living here." 

"Pity," Manners said. "More doors would have held 
them up a bit longer. However . . ." He turned away 
and walked across the room, ignoring the drilling parasites. 

A doorway without a door led from the first room into 
a second. One or two pieces of plastic furniture were 
dotted about, very rough in construction and badly finished. 
In one corner a flight of crude steps led upwards. Manners 
went towards them. 

"How did you manage to build this place without any 
tools?" he asked. 

"It wasn't too difficult," Aylees replied, following him to 
the stairs. "The parasites regarded me as their queen and 
were prepared to do almost anything I asked of them. They 
made the place in sheets to my specification and then 
cemented them together with their juices. That's why things 
don't look factory finished." 

"I think you did extremely well under the circumstances," 
Manners commented, mounting the stairs. "It's not a job 
I'd like to tackle." 

At the top of the stairs there was what appeared to be a 
landing. On second look, Manners realised it was a room. 
It appeared to be the room in which Aylees slept; it could 
hardly be called a bedroom, for there was no bed. There 
was the remains of her plastic spacesuit, a few empty food 
containers and — strangest of all— a wilted flower. 

Manners forgot the urgency of the moment and went 
across to it. He picked it up and stared at it, then turned 
enquiring eyes to Aylees. 

"It was caught in my space suit," she explained. "We 
had lots of flower boxes on the ship. I preserved it as 
best. I could with water condensed from the parasite's steam, 
but it wilted just the same." 

Manners returned his stare to the flower. On the whole 
of Grisette there was but this one flower, this one piece of 
vegetation. Aylees had nurtured it as a treasure. And it 
had wilted. He turned to her suddenly. 



THE PLASTIC PERIL 



75 



"When we're out of this," he said, eagerly, "I'll give you a 
whole garden of flowers! You can have — " His enthusiasm was cut short by the realisation that he hadn't the 
faintest idea what was going to happen to Aylees when 
they were 'out of this.' Maybe she wouldn't want to leave 
Grisette. Maybe the Commander wouldn't allow her aboard 
the big ship in case of infection. Maybe — maybe they 
wouldn't be able to get to the big ship anyway. 

Aylees was watching him. "Thank you for those thoughts, 
Dirk, and all that they mean," she said. "Even if we don't 
get out of this, they'll still mean the same thing." 

Manners looked across at her. She stood there in a shaft 
of sunlight-fair hair, blue eyes, svelte body white in contrast 
to the scarlet sunsuit. He had to look away again quickly; 
to turn his mind—force his mind back to the matter in 
hand. The important matter of getting away from the 
parasites. All else — and there was a lot else — depended on 
that. 

"I— er— is there a way out onto the roof of this place?" 
he asked. 

Aylees smiled and nodded. He felt pretty sure she hadn't 
turned off the black magic that time! 

She led him across the sleeping room and into another. 
Manners could see that one of the transparent walls looked 
out through a gap in the hills towards where the stone was. 
He could see a monolith or two; wondered what Spear was 
doing over there. Then he looked up to where Aylees 
was pointing. There was a square hole in the ceiling. 

"This is a sort of observation room," she laughed. "I 
used to come up here and look out across the hills contemplating things— wishing, wanting, waiting. I don't do 
that any more." 

Again Manners looked at her, felt a wrench inside him 
and looked away again. 

"And you went up there when you wanted some air, I 
suppose?" 

"That's right. It used to get very hot in here. I would 



76 



THE PLASTIC PERIL 



swing myself up and sit on the flat roof. Sometimes I'd 
lie on my back and stare up at the sky, wondering if there 
could be such a coincidence as to bring a space ship to 
this barren planet — and if so, whether it would land near 
me." 

Manners was standing neat her, his arm brushing hers. 
He felt annoyed that the thick tunic stopped him feeling the 
softness of her skin. 

"It must have been very lonely," he said. 

Then, he stepped sharply aside, thrust his hands into the 
air and grabbed the edge of the hole in the ceiling. With 
a quick hoist he was up and through the hole, scrambling 
out onto the flat room. He glimpsed a large, plastic, raincollecting tank. A second later, Aylees drew up beside him. 

Creeping carefully towards the front edge of the roof, 
Manners could look down and see the parasites at their 
drilling operations. If only he had a spray gun . . . 

Still, even a spit-pistol might cause a bit of a disturbance. He pulled the weapon from its holster, levelled it 
at the parasite holding the drill tight against the door 
and pulled the trigger — 



CHAPTER NINE 

Acid Bath 

GRISETTE'S afternoon was coming down as Spear raced 
the jeep across the smooth plastic surface. The whole 
landscape looked like a piece of table-top photography— unreal and possessing a shine that seemed to come from 
varnish. The plastic stretched away into the distance like a 
sheet of glass, then rose up unnaturally into the folds of the 
foothills. Behind them, the hills themselves soared up in a 
blaze of Reaming semi-transparency, some of them with flat 
tops, others sweeping up gracefully in smooth curves such 
as nature never produces. 

At least, that's what Spear was thinking as he moved 
towards them. He was pretty sure those hills had never 
'happened' the way hills on Earth happened. They had 
been made, he felt certain. In which case, they must have 
been made by the parasites; he had already seen them 
pouring out the fluid plastic that immediately set into the 
solid sheet. 

The hills, Spear imagined, must be the living space of the 
parasites, their hideout, so to speak. Though what they had 
to hide from, he couldn't think. 

The foothills came nearer. Still there was no sign of the 
parasites, which had moved even faster than the jeep. 
Spear edged the jeep up to the foothills, then stopped. He 
suddenly realised that he hadn't any j>lan of action. 

Somewhere in there was Manners, the parasites and whatever it had been that had carried Manners there— the thing 



77 



78 



THE PLASTIC PERIL 



the stone called 'the strange one.' Spear's job, as he saw it, 
was simply to get Manners out again. All else followed 
upon that. Until that was done there was no question 
of carrying out anything that the Old Man might construe 
as duty. Spear and Manners had been together on too 
many jaunts for altruistic ideals about duty to bother him. 
Life came first, after that — duty. 

At the back of his mind, Spear also was aware that he 
and Manners were far too valuable to be thrown away on a 
sterile planet of stone and hydofluoric acid, unless it was 
unavoidable. "Those who search and fight away, live to 
search another day." 

That was all very well, but how to do it? Spear was 
optimistic enough to assume that Manners was still in a 
state that could be rescued and not distributed in small 
pieces among whatever passed as stomachs on the parasites. Even so, there would probably be trouble getting 
him out. The idea was to keep that trouble to a minimum. 

Staying where he was, Spear thought, would be of no 
use whatever. There simply wasn't enough data to work 
on. He let the jeep creep forward again, this time heading 
for the nearest defile among the foothills. 

The defile led curvaceously into the interior. Spear 
followed its curves cautiously. At last he turned a bend 
and saw them. 

Thousands of them were milling about, blocking his 
further progress, the falling sun glinting on their plastic 
carapaces. They appeared to be dancing, yet the whole 
thing looked sinister— like the exorcising dances of ancient 
Africa. 

Spear, edged forward an inch or two at a time, waiting 
for them to spot him, ready to beat an immediate retreat. 
He could see above them that the defile led still further 
away from him, bending again quite near. 

The parasites continued their dance— ignoring him completely. 

Spear stopped the jeep about two inches from the nearest 



THE PLASTIC PERIL 



79 



dancing parasite and sat back with a puzzled expression. 
Then it came to him. The things were blind! They had 
no idea he was there! 

But wait a minute— how had they known where to go 
after leaving the stone? How had they found the defile? 
A few moments' reflection and Spear came to the conclusion that the parasites were blind, but had a highly 
developed sense of direction-finding. Just so long as a 
thinf didn't move without their knowledge, they knew where 
it was— as surely as a blind man walks safely from room 
to room, provided the doors are not left open. 
That, he thought, was very advantageous. 
Slipping in the clutch, gritting his teeth against the 
slaughter that was going to occur, he drove the jeep forward into the seething masses. 

On occasions like these', Spear's ideas were quite clear. 
The parasites had brought destruction upon themselves. 
True the Earthmen need not have landed on Gnsette, but 
a race that was entitled to be spared such destruction 
would be one that did no hostile thing towards peaceful 
Earthmen. If their intelligence, their socio-cultural level 
was so low as to make them fight all comers, then they 
must accept the consequences of the fight. 

Which was what thev were not doing now as Spears 
jeep lunged among them. Parasites were scattered right 
and left along the narrow defile as the whining jet-propelled 
vehicle ploughed into them. Those that were not scattered 
by the jeep, stood and hopped madly and helplessly; unable 
—as Spear had imagined— to see what was hitting them. 
The long undisturbed peace of the defile had been burst 
asunder by something they could not see and could only 
feel when it hit them. 

Beneath the tracks of the vehicle the plastic carapaces 
cracked and crunched. ' 

Spear didn't like it. There was no element of sadism 
in his make-up. It was just a necessary evil, one of many 
he had come across during a lifetime of space work; the 



80 



THE PLASTIC PERIL 



kind of evil that Earth-lubbers would raise their arms at in 
protest— while they remained in their, soft jobs on Earth. 
In space, on strange planets, one's ideas were adapted to the 
situation, without any grandiose nonsense about rights and 
privileges and moral obligations. If survival meant killing, 
then you killed. That way, man had reached out to the 
stars, just as centuries ago he had used the same tactics 
to reach unexplored, unexploited lands on Earth. In the 
rude, crude, basic stratagems of nature, there was no room 
, for arbitration. 

So the plastic carapaces crunched and cracked. And the 
jeep moved forward. And the parasites danced helplessly. 
And Spear's jaw was set in a firm, forcibly firm, thin line. 

Suddenly, rounding a bend in the defile, Spear saw a 
house. But he no sooner saw it and glimpsed two figures 
— one a great, deal like Manners — on the roof, than there 
was a terrific explosion and the whole place became utter 
chaos. Through it all he instinctively put the brake on. 
Then waited for it to clear. 

Manners levelled the pistol at the parasite holding the 
drill and pulled the trigger — immediately there was a shattering explosion and a gush of wind that blew him off his 
feet. 

Hastily scrambling up again, he saw that Aylees, too, had 
suffered from the blast. She was lying on the flat roof a 
few feet from him, covered in splashes of fluid. Suddenly, 
looking down at himself, Manners realised that he, too, was 
covered with fluid. What fluid? The thought raced through 
his mind at instinctive speed — and brought its answer almost 
as quickly. Obviously the parasites had been shattered 
by the explosion. Their carapaces had been broken and 
the hydrofluoric acid had shot out. 

He didn't wait to ruminate on the chemical effects that 
that would produce on his skin. He picked up Aylees, who 
was beginning to stir sleepily, earned her across to the 
large plastic water tank and threw her in unceremoniously. 



THE PLASTIC PERIL 



81 



A second later he was in the tank himself, floundering about, 
rubbing his limbs and face to remove the corrosive acid. 

A glance at Aylees showed him that the sudden immersion in cold water had brought back all her faculties. She 
had realised what had happened and was now busily rubbing herself down. Due to her. scanty clothing, she had 
caught even more of the acid than Manners had. But then, 
the disadvantage was off-set by Manners' uniform being 
soaked with the stuff. 

Under the water he peeled it off quickly, leaving just the 
shirt and shorts that were standard equipment for hot climes. 

After one or two complete duckings to remove the acid 
from their hair, they climbed from the tank and stood looking at each other. For a moment, Manners forgot Aylees' 
telepathic gift and let his thoughts wander unchecked; she 
looked so beautiful in the afternoon sunlight, the drops of 
water running down her bare limbs. Then he noticed a 
faint, very faint, flush spreading over Aylees' features. Instantly he switched his thoughts to a somewhat less personal theme. 

"We don't seem to have suffered too much, do we?" he 
commented, having noticed with relief that Aylees showed 
no horrible corroded patches on her skin. He looked down 
at himself and knew that he had had just as fortunate an 
escape. 

"We were lucky," Aylees said. "First in not getting the 
acid in our eyes, and secondly in having that rain tank 
handy." She pursed her lips. "Now I shan't have anything to drink until we get another downpour!" 

"Oh, well," Manners returned a trifle irritably, "there are 
worse problems than that. "Let's go see what happened 
when Vesuvius blew up." 

As they eased themselves towards the edge of the roof on 
their stomachs, Aylees commented on there being no acid 
on the plastic. 

"Well," Manners explained, "HF boils at 19 degrees Centigrade and this roof is pretty near that, I should think. It 
must have evaporated in a very few minutes. Of course, 



82 



THE PLASTIC PERIL 



for the same reason it wouldn't have done us any really 
serious damage, but it would have been darned uncomfortable until it had evaporated — and would have disfigured us 
a little, too." 

When they peered over the roof down towards the front 
door of the house, Aylees gave a little squeal of delight. 

"They aren't drilling any more!" she cried. "You've got 
rid of them!" 

She was right. The parasites weren't drilling any more. 
In fact, the parasites had all disappeared. Strewn around 
the doorway were many pieces of shattered carapaces, and 
here and there was a puddle of hydrofluoric acid that had 
not yet evaporated. But of parasites there was no sign. 

Manners looked around with satisfaction. Suddenly he 
stiffened. Then let out a terrific whoop that made Aylees 
jump startledly. 

"There he is!" Manners shouted. "Good old Shiny to 
the rescue! He's rescued us, instead of us rescuing him!" 

Aylees followed Manners pointing hand and saw the tiny 
vehicle with the man seated in it. "Is that your friend?" 
she asked. 

But Manners was too much engrossed in shouting greetings to Shiny Spear to heed her question. Philosophically, 
she sat down on the roof, letting her legs dangle and remained silent while Manners and Spear exchanged whoops, 
catcalls and ribaldry. The men on her own planet, it would 
seem, were much like Earthmen. 

At length Manners turned his smiling face down to her. 
"Isn't that just wonderful?" he asked. "Farjcy old Shiny 
turning up like this ! And I was getting scared about him ! " 

Aylees looked up and forced a smile. "Wonderful," she 
said, "but why doesn't he come here?" 

The smile left Manners' face slowly, as if the idea had 
never entered his head. "Eh?" he said. 

Aylees scrambled impatiently to her feet, trying hard to 
keep down the irritation that was rising in her breast. "I 
mean, why does he stay out there? He's got a vehicle, 



THE PLASTIC PERIL 



83 



hasn't he? Why doesn't he drive it over here? If it didn't 
do anything else it would do away with the need for shouting!" 

"I — er — yes, of course, you're right," Manners agreed. 
"Yes, of course. Slipped my mind, you know. I — er — " 

He ended lamely, broke it off quickly and turned again 
towards Spear. "Hey, Shiny!" he called. "Come on over 
here, there's a lady I want you to meet!" 

The answer, faint and laconic, came back instantly: 

"My respects to the lady (lucky dog), and my apologies. 
The darned jeep's been busted by these parasites!" 



CHAPTER TEN 



The Parasites Awake 

TIJANNERS instantly realised what had happened. Even 
with the naked eye he could see that a large pool of 
fluid remained around the base of the jeep. Evidently it 
had corroded the driving tracks until they were no longer 
fit for locomotion. 

He turned to Aylees and sighed. "You see? He had a 
good reason for not coming over here sooner. The darned 
jeep's busted!" 

Aylees, the universal femininity personified, looked hardly 
mollified at that. "Well, we'd better do something about 
it hadn't we?" she said, with obvious restraint. "I see no 
future in remaining up here on the roof." 

Manners began to revise some of his ideas about the 
manning Aylees. Under duress, it seemed, she reacted 
much like the Earth women he knew — and they had been 
acting in the same way for centuries. 

"It isn't true!" Aylees suddenly cried, betraying her use 
of telepathy. "It's not duress that's done it — it's — oh, perhaps I'm not so different after all — it's because I was proved 
wrong about your friend not coming here sooner. There, at 
least I have the grace to admit it!" 

Manners smiled. "Yes, indeed. And for that, one can 
forgive a lot. Now then. Let's be friends again and start 
demolishing your house." 

Aylees stared at him, uncertain whether to smile or to 
take him seriously. "Demolish the house? Why d'you 
want to do that?" 

"You won't be needing it any more, if all goes well — or 
even if all doesn't go well. And we can make a few plastic 
stepping stones to get away from this darned fluid." He 
spat the last words out as a kind of sop to his ego for 



84 



THE PLASTIC PERIL 



85 



having to resort to such primitive methods as stepping 
stones. "If only we had a few machines!" he burst out. 

Aylees had grasped his earlier meaning immediately. 
She was now swinging herself down through the hole in 
the roof. "Never mind," she comforted. "We'll make do. 
There's a crowbar gun in my space suit. Unfortunately the 
power's run out, so you'll have to work it by hand. Feel 
up to it?" 

Manners followed her through the hole and dropped down 
into the room beneath. "Just show me the crow-bar," he 
replied. "I'll supply the power ! " 

Aylees led him into the next room and removed the crowbar from the belt of her space suit. Manners took it, felt 
its weight in his hand, nodded satisfaction and went down 
the stairs. 

"Anything I can do?" Aylees called, following him. 

"Sure. Stand by for when I've broken the pieces off and 
then lay them down outside. Make a straight line towards 
the jeep and then farther on if there's any fluid about. 
The first thing we must do after getting old Shiny out of his 
fix is to get across to the stone before those darned parasites wake themselves up again." 

He set to with the crow-bar on the front door. Aylees 
stood by and steadied the structure as he loosened it. "You 
think they will wake themselves up again, then?" she asked. 

"Oh, yes. D'you have snails or hedgehogs or such like 
on your home planet? Sort of, eh? Well, don't they draw 
themselves up and seem to die when attacked? Then when 
things quieten down again, out they come, large as life." 

Aylees glanced away towards the open spaces among the 
hills. She seemed a little apprehensive. "Of course, they 
often disappear like this," she said. "I've no idea where 
they go. Never had the desire to find out. I imagine they 
find themselves little niches among the 'rocks' and sleep off 
the meal of stone they've just had." 

Manners looked up from his levering for a moment and 
stared at the broken carapaces that littered the ground in 



86 



THE PLASTIC PERIL 



front of the house. "I shouldn't think they're sleeping at 
the moment," he suggested. 

Aylees followed his glance. "Oh, I don't know. They're 
not very intelligent, you know." 

Manners didn't answer. He prised the front door loose 
and let Aylees take it away. It was quite light, but very 
strong. He began to attack the nearby segment of the 
house wall, watching Aylees as she laid the flat sheet down 
over the pools of corrosive fluid. He realised suddenly that 
the presence of the pools had been worrying him in a 
nagging sort of way ever since he'd seen them from the 
roof. Now he knew why — and knew the answer at once, 
too. He had been worried why the pools hadn't evaporated like those which had formed on the roof. Now he saw 
the reason — the house threw a great shadow in front of it, 
keeping the direct rays of the sun from the pools. On 
the roof, the direct sunlight had soon raised the fluid's 
temperature enough to affect the vaporisation rate. 

Manners' own temperature began to rise as his muscles 
forced the sharp point of the crow-bar into the narrow 
crevices between the sheets. He began to wonder whether 
Aylees was right about their intelligence— 4he parasites. 
They seemed to have made a very good job of building the 
house. Still, that might be some sort of instinct, such as 
the termites had, guided by Aylees' prompting. 

Another and another sheet came down. As they came, 
so Aylees took them and laid them one after the other in 
a straight line towards the jeep, in which she could see 
Spear sitting in what looked like a patient pose. Each 
time she straightened up from her task, she waved to him, 
received a wave back, and picked the little jealous twinge 
that passed through Manners' mind as he noticed the exchange of greetings. 

At length, half the distance to the jeep had been covered. 
Manners dropped the crow-bar and straightened up, rubbing his back. "I don't think we'll dig out any more," he 
said. "If we pick up the first sheet as we step on to the 



THE PLASTIC PE RIL 



87 



second and so on, we can use the ones we've already got 
for laying down beyond the jeep." 

Aylees thought that was a good idea. They stepped on to 
the first sheet, then to the second. Manners picked up the 
first sheet and began to walk towards the other end of the 
line. He hadn't taken more than three steps, with Aylees 
bending to pick up the second sheet, when a whirlwind of 
glistening plastic surrounded him, knocking him to the 
ground and forced the breath from his body. What happened to the sheet he was carrying he never knew. 

Almost as soon as he touched the ground, he was lifted 
from it again by several hard, plastic covered arms. Borne 
aloft, he could see that the parasites had indeed woken 
themselves up. Thousands of them had suddenly appeared, 
moving with tremendous speed. Over his shoulder and 
through a dozen or two flailing arms, he could see that 
Aylees, too, had been captured and was being carried after 
him. Stretching his neck, he saw that another mob _ of 
parasites was milling around the jeep. Spear was standing 
up in the driving seat, ponding at the creatures with his 
fists. 

Just before Manners was dragged out of line ot sight, he 
saw Spear lose his balance and topple over among the 
eagerly waiting parasites. 

Then his mind was filled with his own affairs. The parasites were carrying him and Aylees through a hole in the 
plastic hills— a sort of cave. The light faded, but it was 
still a long way from, total darkness. The transparent plastic allowed a fair quantity of sunlight to streak through it, 
creating a murky atmosphere that was in some ways worse 
than darkness. 

Deeper and deeper into the hills they went, a nulling, 
jostling mob of scurrying parasites, with their two victims 
held triumphantly aloft. 

Suddenly they broke upon a wide, hollow cavern and 
were hurried across to the other side. There, on what 
seemed a specially prepared platform, sat a massive para


88 THE PLASTIC PERIL 

site, fully ten times the size of the others. The mob came 
to a halt in front of the great beast, holding out Manners 
and Aylees as though they were sacrificial offerings. 

Manners knew too much to try to escape from the 
clutches of his bearers. He saw Aylees struggling frantically 
beside him, and called out to her to stop. 

"Save your strength," he said. "You're only wasting it 
now. What would you do if you got free? You'd never 
get away from these thousands." 

Aylees went limp at his words. Manners could see that 
she was badly frightened. He wondered why. Spacemen 
tend to lose the faculty of fear and replace it with a 
constant alertness that is comforting even in moments of 
dire peril; .watchful always for the chance of escape. That 
was how he felt now. Not afraid of the parasites. Just 
filled with disgust at letting himself be caught like that, 
and turning over in his mind all the possible avenues of 
escape. He wondered why Aylees wasn't the same — she had 
been in space a good deal— 

And then he knew why: she had probably seen what 
these creatures had done to her family on the space ship. 
And it had probably been a sobering sight. 

He tried to comfort her, found the words difficult to 
come by. Mostly, in these sorts, of circumstances there was 
just him and Spear. There was no need to comfort each 
other. Aylees must have picked up his thoughts. 

"Don't try, then," she said. "So long as I know that you 
want to, that's good enough. I feel better already!" 

Manners looked back at the great hulking parasite and 
wished that he did. "Any idea where we are?" he asked 
her. 

"None whatever," she answered. "I never knew this 
place existed — and as for that monstrosity, it's like something out of a bad dream." 

"'Tis, too," Manners agreed. "What d'you suppose it 
is?" 

"Perhaps I can help," Aylees replied. "I can pick up 
their thought processes quite well. It's a sort of queen. 



THE PLASTIC PERIL 89 

You know those things you have on Earth, what are they 
called— ants?— yes, ants. Well, this is like their queen. 
All she does is sit there and bud. That way they get their 
youngsters. Of, course, they feed her well, and venerate 
her a great deal. That's why we've been brought to her. 
They're asking her what they should do with us." 

"Asking her?" Manners repeated. "How do they manage 
that?" 

"It's their front legs, or arms, if you like. They wave 
them in patterns a sort of semaphore." 

Manners nodded. He had come across similar modes of 
communication on other planets. 

"Have you— er — have you any idea what her highness's suggestions are with regard to our fate?" he asked. 

Even as he asked the question, he could see that Aylees' 
face had whitened considerably, and one hand was reaching out to him automatically as she stared at the 'queen.* 
He leaned over and took the hand. Its fingers were 
clammy with sweat. 

"She says — she says we may prove a valuable source of 
food. She says we must be — must be embedded in plastic 
and preserved for future need!" 

Manners shivered slightly. Into his mind came a picture of the biological museum on board the big ship. Rows 
and rows of cases holding plastic cubes, spheres and rectangles, in each of which was embedded a specimen of 
some rare plant or small animal picked up on the big ship's 
travels — a perfect method of preservation: the specimens 
looked just as they did on the day they were caught, only 
they were dead. 

He got a grip on himself. "Oh* well, we'll have to see 
if we can stop them doing that," he said, lightly. "When 
do they propose to start the process?" 

But there was no need for her answer. Just as Aylees 
said "immediately," so the bearers began to move towards 
a dark spot on the wall of the cavern. 

In no time at all, the dark spot was reached, and turned 
put to be a doorway. Even as they were bundled through 



90 THE PLASTIC PERIL i 

the hole, Manners could* see that several parasites were 
at work making a door to fit. Maybe they weren't intelligent, but they certainly knew how to get things done! 

Both lie and Aylees were thrown roughly to the ground 
inside the cavern. Scrambling to their feet, they saw that 
the doorway was crowded with the creatures, massed to 
bar their escape. Manners began to wish he had brought 
the spit-pistol with him; he had left it on the roof in the 
hurry of getting to Spear. Definitely the presence of Aylees 
was robbing him of his spaceman's training. 

Things looked pretty hopeless when a few momwits later, 
the parasites withdrew, while others placed the newly made 
door in position and sealed it. 

Things looked absolutely hopeless when, a few moments 
later still, a thin trickle of plastic began to ooze beneath the 
door. 

With his foot hard down on the brake, Spear waited for 
the chaos about him to clear a little. One moment there 
had been the milling, but orderly, mob of parasites, next 
there had been the explosion. 

Now he could see that the parasites were in full retreat, 
scattering to the right and left, leaving what looked very 
much like a pile of wrecked bodies in front of the house. 
And along the previously plain plastic surface, swept a 
small tide of the glairy black fluid that Spear associated 
with the parasites' internal anatomy. 

Lifting his eyes once more to the house, he saw that the 
figures had disappeared — or had they not been there at all? 
Still he sat there, trying to make some sense of it, not 
wanting to go farther* towards the house in case another 
explosion occurred. 

Then a movement caught his eye. The figures were back 
again. He could see them plainly, peering over the edge 
of the roof. Reaching for his tiny telescope, Spear trained 
it on the figures, sat up with a jerk. It was Manners all 
right. 

But the man was dressed in soaking wet shirt and shorts 



THE PLASTIC PERIL 



91 



and beside him was — Spear focused desperately — a soaking 
girl in a two-piece sun suit! Even from that distance and 
with a certain amount of spherical aberration in the telescope, Spear could tell that the girl was worth looking at. 
In fact, after the first hasty glance, Spear didn't look at 
Manners any more. 

Then he pulled himself together and set his mind working 
on a different track. He saw the pair, staring down at the 
front of the house, pointing and talking. He dropped the 
telescope back into its place and reached out for the starter 
knob. The jets purred softly into life. Letting in the 
clutch, Spear expected the jeep to move forward. Instead 
there was a little grunting noise from down below, but no 
forward movement at all. 

He leaned over the side and stared at the tracks. His 
heart sank as he saw that the fluids had reached him, were 
swirling lazily round what was left of the tracks. The whole 
thing had been eaten away, suckers, wheels, tracks and all. 

Then he raised his head as he heard a shout. Manners 
had seen him. He switched off the engine and stood up, 
suddenly forgetting the ruined drive. He answered Manners' shouts with louder shouts of his own, grinning and 
hurling friendly abuse, completely forgetful of the girl, who, 
he noticed idly, was now sitting on the roof and dangling 
her legs. 

Maners turned away suddenly and looked down at the 
girl. She said something to him. After a moment's hesitation, Manners looked up again and called out: 

"Hey, Shiny! Come on over here, there's a lady I want 
you to meet ! " 

Instantly, Spear answered him with a laconic drawl : "My 
respects to the lady (lucky dog), and my apologies. The 
darned jeep's been busted by these parasites!" 

He saw Manners turn back to the girl, obviously explaining. They talked a short while and then disappeared. 
Minutes later they turned up at the door of the house, 
Manners seemed to be attacking the door with some sort 
of crow-bar. Spear sat back and waited for something 



92 



THE PLASTIC PERIL 



to happen. He wasn't going to step out into that fluid, 
even if his boots were thick. He only hoped something 
would happen before the fluid had eaten into the driving 
compartment. 

He sat there watching the pair working, began to get 
the drift of what they were doing, saw the girl bring the 
door out and lay it down on the ground. He wondered 
where the blazes she had come from. It was just like 
Manners to be carried off into a parasites' nest and then 
find a lively, lovely girl waiting for him! 

The minutes passed by. Sheet after sheet was laid. Each 
time the girl laid one down, she looked up and waved to 
him. Feeling a little silly, he waved back. He couldn't, 
after all, be unsociable! 

He saw Manners down tools and straighten up. A little 
later, the pair of them started out across the stepping sheets 
they had made. 

A little later still, chaos returned — in the form of a flaying mob of parasites. He saw them surround Manners and 
pick him up, then they did the same to the girl. Not three 
seconds later, they were all around the jeep, flailing their 
arms at him. 

The sight of Manners being carried away helplessly by 
the mob had aroused a fierce anger within him. He stood 
up in the jeep and pounded at the parasites with his fists, 
knocking them away left and right. He ignored the pain 
in his knuckles where they came sharply against the hard 
plastic, concentrating only on lashing out at the grasping 
claws that stuck out from the ends of the arms. 

One creature came very near, its claws snapping at 
Spear's legs. He bent down and aimed a vicious swipe at 
the creature and had the satisfaction of seeing it reeling 
back among its fellows before he lost his balance and toppled down off the jeep among them. 

He had expected to be immediately torn to pieces by 
the claws, or dowsed from head to foot in corrosive fluid. 
Instead, the creatures merely grasped him firmly and started 
to carry him away as they had done with Manners and the 



THE PLASTIC PERIL 93 

girl. At the same time, another group of them surrounded 
the jeep, hooked their claws on it and with a combined 
effort, lifted it off the ground. The jeep-bearers fell in behind the main patty. 

Spear, though held so firmly that he could hardly move, 
could see that he was being carried towards a dark spot 
in the hills, which very soon turned out to be an entrance 
into the place. He was borne through among crowds of 
jostling parasites, who milled around his bearers in the 
attitudes of supporters. 

The light began to fade and grow murky as he was moved 
deeper into the hills. All around him were the parasites, 
the narrow path into the hills chock full of the creatures. 

Then the path opened out into a wide cavern, dark and 
gloomy. At the opposite side of it, in the direction he 
was being carried, was a high plastic platform. Spear 
caught a glimpse of Manners being carried through a doorday. Then he saw the creature on the platform. He swallowed twice and wondered if it were real. In form it resembled the parasites all around him, but it was huge— ten 
times the size of his bearers. 

The creatures dragged him across to the great beast 
and came to a halt in front of it. The jeep was brought in, 
too, and placed to one side. 

Then nothing seemed to happen. All Spear could see 
was the parasites around him, waving their front arms, 
the creature on the platform doing the same. Not a sound 
was to be heard. 

Spear, in spite of the drama of the situation, was beginning to get bored, when suddenly a whole bunch of 
parasites moved over to the platform and surrounded the 
huge creature. Gently, they placed their claws around it, 
strained and lifted. The massive beast was passed gingerly 
down from group to group until it reached the level of the 
ground. Then, it slowly moved towards Spear. 



CHAPTER ELEVEN 



Joy Ride in Reverse 

"C 1 EELING his nerve beginning to give way, Manners 
A wrenched his gaze away from the trickle under the 
door and glanced round the chamber. Aylees was close 
against him, his arm round her waist, one of her hands 
clutching his shirt. 

The chamber was small and murky. The walls were 
sheer transparent plastic, getting darker towards the sides, 
lighter towards the roof. But even up there, where freedom obviously lay nearest, he could see the roof was thick 
and would yield only to such a tool as a crow-bar, which 
he hadn't, got. He consoled himself by thinking that it 
would have taken hours anyway. 

He felt Aylees shiver. The trickle under the door was 
growing to a sizable stream. Evidently the parasites had 
some method of stopping their secretions solidifying before 
they wanted it to. 

"I was wrong," Aylees said, in a low voice. "They are 
intelligent, Dirk. I— I underestimated them and— and got 
you into this mess." 

Manners laughed, sincerely. "Don't worry yourself about 
that," he replied. "The only person who got me into this 
mess was me. I'm the one who volunteered for space research, not you. This is just a part of the job I chose. I 
made the choice, I have to put up with it. I can't blame 
anybody else." 

Aylees moved her large eyes round to him. "You are 
very brave," she said, almost with fervour. 



94 



THE PLASTIC PERIL 



95 



At that, Manners laughed aloud. "Brave! My, oh my, 
if the Old Man heard that! And Shiny! You must tell 
that to Shiny — if we ever meet up with that crazy guy 
again," he added, remembering the way Spear had fought 
off the parasites and then tumbled down among them. 

"Look," he went on. "There's nothing brave about me. 
Bravery is where a man feels scared, real scared, and goes 
on doing his job in spite of it. Me, I just don't scare, that's 
all. I do my job because I like it. Situations like this 
present a challenge. If I lose, well I lose. It just happens 
that I can only lose once." 

He was smiling at her, his lips drawn back over even 
teeth, one eyebrow slightly raised, the picture of a Don 
Juan who has just landed safely on his senorita's balcony. 

Aylees returned his smile. "Yes, Dirk," she said. "I 
see what you mean. I see it quite clearly." 

The last word had a certain emphasis that made him 
wonder whether she was at work with her telepathy again, 
whether he hadn't convinced her after all, whether she knew 
that he was, in fact, very scared. But Aylees merely went 
on smiling and said nothing. 

Manners turned back to the door. The viscid plastic was 
now moving towards them in a wide sheet across the floor 
of the chamber. Pretty soon it would reach their feet, then 
it would crawl up to their ankles, their knees, their — 

Manners halted his train of thought suddenly. Then he 
broke into a wide smile, wider than his Gay Lothario one. 
Swiftly and impulsively he twirled Aylees round and kissed 
her. It took her by surprise, mainly because it wasn't a 
lovers' kiss, but an expression of sheer joy translated into 
physical terms. 

"Aylees, my darling," Manners cried, "we've nothing to 
worry about — at least, only our. feet!" 
Aylees stared at him in mute enquiry. 
"Don't you see?" Manners went on. "These things are 
not intelligent. You were right. You can't fill a room 
with fluid by running it in at the bottom— not unless you've 



96 



THE PLASTIC PERIL 



got a source of terrific pressure down at one end and a 
vent up top. It's physically impossible. What have we 
been scared about?" 

Aylees took time off to say: "You told me you weren't 
scared." 

Manners ignored the remark. "Now, it's just a question 
of keeping our feet out of the darned stuff until they stop 
trying to pump it in. They'll probably pump for a while 
and then go away, thinking they've done the job. Then 
we just wait a while and force our way out of here." 

"How?" Aylees wanted to know. 

Manners, who was a little hazy on details at the moment, 
sheered off that topic and went back to the question of 
feet. 

"Lucky they put us in such a small room," he said. 
"Come over here." He led her, very much the strong man 
of action, to one side of the chamber. "Now lean your 
back against the wall and brace youc feet against the other 
about three feet off the ground. That way we'll be quite 
safe." 

Aylees could see that he was right. She did as he said, 
and they were very soon perched up beside each other 
between walls. Quietly discussing what they would do to 
get out of the place once the parasites had gone away. 

As they talked, so the plastic sheet crept across the floor 
until it touched the wall opposite the door. 

Manners noticed it. "Pretty soon we'll know if they 
tumble to their mistake," he said, nodding towards the 
sheet. "About this point, the plastic should start to run out 
the other, side of the door as fast as they pump it in." 

They went back to their plans. Aylees was pretty certain 
that the main chamber would never be left without some 
few parasites to watch over the 'queen.' Manners thought 
the great beast would want privacy sometimes. "She won't 
want her offspring to watch her budding all the time, surely. 
She must send them all off at times, so that she can—" 

He broke off suddenly and frowned at the door, twisted his 



THE PLASTIC PERIL 



'head and appeared to be listening. Aylees asked him what 
•was bothering him. 

"Could have sworn I heard the purring of jeep-jets," he 
replied. "Oh, well, maybe I— there it is again! I'm sure 
that's the jets of our jeep!" 

He had to force himself to remain wedged up on the 
wall. Every instinct bade him get down and investigate the 
sound. Then he blinked twice and pointed. 

He had been staring at the door without seeing it. Now 
it had come into focus. And the smooth plastic sheet was 
budding. 

"Looks as though mother's little darlings have seen the 
error of their ways," he said, more lightly than he felt. 
•"Here they come." 

Spear felt himself shiver a little as the great beast 
aproached him. It came lumbering over towsrds him like 
some mis-designed hippopotamus, huge, hostile and dumb. 

As the creature approached, so Spear's bearers lowered 
him to the ground and moved back. He glanced round, 
saw that a solid wall of the creatures lay behind him, equally 
solid walls on either side. Aid dead ahead was the solidest 
of them all, moving up on him. 

There was a weapon in his belt. Up till now he had 
been too firmly held to be able to use it. Now it lay 
•within finger reach. His hand moved towards it slowly, 
reached the butt just as the massive parasite drew level with 
him. Then it stayed that way as Spear stared in astonishment while the giant creature moved on past him towards 
the jeep. 

With a strong feeling of anti-climax, Spear let his hand 
fall away from the pistol and stared at the giant parasite. 
Suddenly Spear realised that these things probably talked 
with their, arms, and that the large beast was following 
directions given it by the others. 

That didn't seem to tie up with his previous ideas about 
the parasites being blind. Maybe they had some kind of 



98 



THE PLASTIC PERIL 



differential vision that let them see some things like their 
own waving limbs, but not others. For the Big Black Beast, 
as Spear mentally christened the large parasite, obviously 
couldn't see the jeep, yet it was big enough. 

The lumbering animal moved in a series of short zigzags 
towards the jeep, bumped into it and came to a halt. Its 
forelimbs came up and moved all over the jeep. Then, to 
Spear's marked surprise, the creature climbed into the driving seat, although most of its body hung over the sides 
and back. 

Spear stood there staring. This was something like a 
three-dim cartoon, and was almost as funny. He waited to 
see if the Big Black Beast would start to fiddle with the 
controls. 

But it didn't. It just sat there and waited, waving its. 
forelegs slowly in the air. 

As soon as it was settled, other parasites moved up on 
Spear and began nudging him with their forelegs, pushing 
him nearer to the jeep. 

At first, Spear couldn't see what they were getting at. 
Then it dawned on him. They wanted him to give th& 
Big Black Beast a ride in the jeep! 

Although the situation had its funny side, there were 
also its serious aspects, not least of which was Spear's inability to comply with their wishes. And even if he could 
drive the jeep, the heat from the jets would carve out a 
great slice from — 

He brought the train of thought to a halt, switched it toanother, closely allied. Then, with a slow, grim smile on 
his face, he stepped towards the jeep. 

Spear glanced once towards the door, through which he ! 
had seen Manners taken, noted that a sheet of plastic ha. 
been sealed up against the doorway and that a group of th. 
smaller parasites was secreting plastic and forcing it under , 
the door. The sight told him more or less what was ire. 
the minds of the parasites with respect to Manners and the 



THE PLASTIC PERIL 



99 



:gifl. And that was enough to quash any sentimental ideas 
he might have been entertaining. 

As soon as he began to move towards the jeep, the 
nudging parasites desisted, leaving him free to make his 
own progress, being content to fall back into a barricade 
behind him. Somehow they must have acquired the power 
of seeing him, however vaguely they did it. 

Coming up close to the jeep, Spear grabbed a fender and 
tried to move the vehicle. It wouldn't budge. He looked 
around helplessly. If only these things could talk. He 
decided he'd have to show them what he wanted. He 
moved away from the jeep. 

Instantly, four parasites scuttled up to him and tried 
to force him back, childishly irritated at his refusal to 
comply with their wishes. Spear reached out both hands 
and grabbed a fore-leg each of two parasites and started to 
move back towards the jeep again. This time, after a short 
hesitation, the parasites were willing to be led. 

Spear forced their fore-legs against the jeep and made a 
lifting movement. The parasites just stood there. The big 
one just sat there, waiting. 

Again and again Spear tried. At length he succeeded 
inasmuch as the parasites began to lift the jeep on their own 
volition. Spear realised it would have been easier mechanically to have got the Big Black Beast out of the car first, 
but he hesitated at the diplomatic issues involved. 

Anyway, the job was nearjy done now. As soon as the 
jeep was clear of the floor, Spear nudged the parasites to 
move in a circle. After a while they caught on again and 
did as he indicated. The jeep was slewed round until the 
jets faced the door through which Manners had been carried. 
Then Spear made the parasites bring the car down to ground 
level again. With an eye to the future, he dismissed his 
helpers by giving them a push back towards their barricade. 

Then he took in a deep breath, stole one quick glance at 
the parasites secreting their plastic under the door, and 
leaned inside the jeep. His fingers touched the starter knob. 



100 



THE PLASTIC PERIL 



twisted it, pulled it out to full power. 

Instantly there was a subdued roar, soft and deceivingly 
gentle to the uninitiated ear. At the same moment a gush 
of searing hot gas spurted forth from the jets, licked at the 
barricading parasites, grew in volume and intensity and 
shrivelled the creatures where they stood. 

Pandemonium broke loose as the parasites realised what 
had happened. But it was too late. Once the starter knob 
reached full power, so the gases from the jets leapt out in a 
blazing fury, roaring devouringly towards the parasites whostill secreted their plastic. Then they too went down into 
shrivelled, twisted plastic under the impact of the scorching 
flames. 

Beyond them, the newly made door buckled, bent and 
began to droop. Spear had one look at his accomplishment 
before clawing hands once more scraped his flesh and hauled 
him into the air. This time he was not kept there, but 
dashed viciously to the ground, his shoulder jarring pain' 
fully against the hard plastic. 



CHAPTER TWELVE 

The Beacon 

TPHE shock of the impact travelled through Spear's body 
■■■ in a great wave of excruciating pain. He struggled to 
his feet, managed only to regain a stooping position under 
the hail of blows that came from the enraged parasites. 
Uppermost in his mind was the fact that the jeep's motor 
was still running. 

In the open, he knew, the jets would not be terribly harmful, except to someone standing directly in their line and 
close to them. The hot gases would rapidly become dispersed in the air. But in that confined chamber, large as' it 
was, the roaring gases spelt death to everyone if allowed 
to continue. More important, from Spear's point of view, 
the jets were aimed straight at the door of the chamber 
which held Manners and the girl. The job was done, the 
door was melted, but the jets would kill them if they weren't 
turned off pretty quick. 

Fighting his way among the parasites, Spear moved up on 
the jeep. The parasites rained blow after blow on him, 
their hard plastic shells making cuts and bruises in the 
skin of his arms, face and back. He hunched his head down 
between his shoulders and forced himself right up to the 
jeep. 

He reached out a hand and grabbed the starter lever. 
Instantly the roaring stopped. There was only the dull 
thuds as the blows continued to rain down. But at least 
the jets were off. 

The strain of the unequal combat was beginning to tire 
Spear. His shoulders ached with the punishment they had 



101 



102 



THE PLASTIC PERIL 



received from the parasites and from the efforts he had put 
behind his own blows. He kept his back to the jeep, flailing 
out with arms and legs, pulling the parasites down as they 
climbed the jeep behind him, hurling them out among their 
fellows, increasing their rage still more. 

Suddenly he remembered the spit-pistol at his belt. 
Quickly removing a hand from the conflict he dropped it 
down and found that the weapon was still there. He closed 
his fingers round the butt, jerked it from its holster, his lips 
set firm in a grim straight line. 

He had just raised the barrel and pointed it at the nearest 
parasite when a voice called out urgently: 

"Don't, Shiny! For. Pete's sake, don't!" 

Spear reacted instantly, without question — the usual 
spaceman's reaction when in an emergency. Time to find 
out why later. 

He used the pistol as a club and lashed out at his assailants, at the same time twisting his head in the direction 
of the voice. He was pust in time to see Manners lowering the girl to the floor just outside the chamber with the 
ruined door. Then tbe parasites were on to them and 
they were lost from Spear's sight. 

Now there was some definite line of action to take, Spear 
forced his muscles to superhuman efforts, battling his way 
across to where he had seen Manners and the girl. Right 
and left the parasites fell aside as he struck them, only to 
have their places taken by others. 

They trampled on each other in their eagerness to get at 
him. 

Bit by bit, Spear forced his way over. Three-quarters of 
the way he came across Manners suddenly. They must 
have been working towards each other. Both Manners and 
the girl were putting up a stiff fight against the creatures; 
and both of them bore the cruel marks of scraping claws. 
Spear, came near to Manners. Without relaxing his efforts, 
he said: 

"This can't last, Dirk. We're outnumbered by the thous


THE PLASTIC PERIL 



103 



and. Why not the pistol?" 

Manners sent a parasite sprawling with a vicious kick 
of his heavy boot. "No," he gasped. "Cause an explosion. Shower us. with their damned fluid." He despatched 
two more parasites with his fists. Blood was running freely 
from a wound on his face. "There are three of us," he went 
on. "And they are half blind. Make for the door." 

Spear grunted, lashed out at a parasite that was closing 
its claws on Aylees. "How?" he said. "There's millions 
of 'em!" 

"Back to the jeep. Start her up again. Carve out a 
slice towards the door, swivel the jeep and then run!" 

Spear grunted agreement. He didn't think much of the 
idea, but it was about all they could do. He groaned as 
he thought of having to make his way back to the jeep 
again. 

But he did it. By dint of tremendous effort, backed up 
by Maimers' rearguard action, he reached the jeep. The 
Big Black Beast was no longer in position. 

He threw himself against the vehicle and got it turned 
to face opposite the door. Then, with blows raining down 
on his back that Manners couldn't stop, he leaned inside 
the vehicle and started the motor, pulled the knob to full 
power. 

Speed was of the essence, he knew. He snatched a quick 
glance at the door, saw that a wide swathe had been cut 
through the ranks of parasites, and immediately threw himself against the jeep again. This time the searing jets curved 
round in a graceful arc, cutting down the parasites as they 
milled about. Almost the full circle Spear pushed the jeep, 
until only those parasites in the immediate vicinity survived. 
Then he left the motor running and joined Manners and 
Aylees in their flight to the door. 

The heat of the jets had raised the temperature of the 
chamber considerably; there was no fluid on the floor to bar 
their progress. They hurtled forward, pursued by the remaining parasites, some three or four dozen. 



104 



THE PLASTIC PERIL 



Out through the doorway they streaked and along the 
defile between the hills. The afternoon sun was low and 
the light was fading, but even so their vision was better 
than that of the parasites, who raced about like blind things. 
Manners, watching thern over his shoulder, could see how 
the increase in illumination from the dark chamber had 
ruined practically all the vision they had got. But they 
were still a foe to be reckoned with — as he realised when 
one of them stumbled into Aylees and brought her toppling 
to the ground. 

He kicked at it savagely, sent it flying, and helped Aylees 
to her feet, then ran on, dragging the girl behind him. 
Every now and then, he or Spear stopped, turned and delivered a vicious blow at a parasite that had caught them 
up. Still the creatures pursued — it seemed almost to have 
become an instinctive part of their behaviour pattern. 

They reached the end of the hills, hurried through the 
foothills and out on to the plain plastic surface that led 
to the rocks beyond. Here they were at an advantage, 
because the parasites had no means of telling where they 
were. Back in the defile there had been only a limited 
field to forage, now there was the whole surface spread 
out before them. 

Glancing back, Spear saw that they were dealing with 
the problem by spreading out fanwise and advancing in a 
line, running backwards and forwards to meet each other 
as they did so, their motion being a curious combination 
of forward and sideways movement. 

It was pretty effective, and if only they could have done it 
faster, they would have been sure to catch up. But Spear 
saw that they were lagging behind bit by bit. 

By the time the two men and Aylees reached the edge 
of the stone, there was a fairly large distance between them 
and the pursuing parasites. They pulled up, panting, and, 
at the point of exhaustion, they flopped down on to the 
smooth stone. 

No one spoke for some seconds. They simply listened to 



THE PLASTIC PERIL 



105 



each other's harsh breathing, felt clearly for the first time 
the numerous cuts and bruises they had acquired in the 
fight. All three of them were covered with tiny rivulets of 
blood, in places drying, in other places mingling with the 
sweat that streamed from them. All three kept their eyes 
on the advancing parasites, trying to judge how long they 
could rest before beginning their flight again. 

"Jeepers!" said Spear, "what a planet!" 

"What a narrow escape is more like it," Manners puffed. 
He stole a glance at Aylees. The girl was obviously hurt 
more by the appearance of her cuts than by the pain they 
caused. He tried to make light of it. "Aylees has come 
out of it pretty well, hasn't she!" he laughed. 

Spear slewed his head round, stared at the bloody, sweaty 
image that a while back was a beautiful girl and was about 
to answer when he caught on to Manners' intention. 

"Sure thing," he said, quickly. "You'd think she'd come 
straight from a beauty parlour!" 

Strangely enough, Aylees immediately burst into tears, to 
the consternation of the Earthmen. Then Manners realised 
she was probably using her telepathy again and finding out 
what Spear really thought. He was about to try some 
soothing remark when a loud wail sounded. The stone 
had sensed the approaching parasites. 

All three jumped to their feet instantly, Aylees trying 
to stem her flow of tears, the men staring out across the 
plastic to where the parasites were indeed getting near. 

"Better get moving again," Spear said. "All set?" He 
stared up at the nearest monolith and shouted irritably. 
"Oh, for Jupiter's sake, stop that hollering! They're after 
us, not you!" 

"Oh, oh!" the monolith wailed babyishly. "You've 
brought them back to me! You've set them on to me! 
Oh, oh!" 

The three humans moved off away from the plastic surface. They had no idea where they were going; the ship 
was out of sight behind the distant monoliths. As they 



106 



THE PLASTIC PERIL 



went, Spear remonstrated with the stone. 

"Look, here," he said, "we didn't bring them. They 
followed us. Here we ate practically in ribbons from their 
darned claws and you start saying we set them on to you. 
Now pull yourself together and show us where the ship is. 
We've wiped out practically the whole colony of parasites 
for you, what else can you expect?" 

"You have betrayed my trust," the nearest monolith 
answered unreasonably. "You have brought them to me 
again, just when I thought that — aieeeee!" 

It ended with a great, long drawn out wail. Evidently 
the parasites had arrived at the stone. Spear called a halt, 

"We may as well wait a bit," he said to Manners, "The 
parasites are a long way off, and we can't find our way to the 
ship without the stone's help — and I reckon we won't be 
getting that for a while." 

They all three flopped down on the stone again. The 
stone's wails sounded loud in their ears, but the sheer joy of 
remaining motionless was enough for them. Night was 
coming down once more and apart from the wailings, things 
were reasonably peaceful. 

"What would I do for a can of iced beer!" Spear said, 
suddenly, moving his parched tongue inside his parched 
mouth. "Oh, well, that comes later. Suppose you tell me 
what's been happening, and where this delightful young 
lady comes from." 

Manners laughed and formally introduced Aylees as a 
visitor from a foreign planet, name and location unknown. 
Then he unfolded the story of what had happened in the 
house and up until they had heard the jets and seen the 
door buckling. 

"It got pretty hot, I can tell you," he went on. "I was 
beginning to wonder whether you'd ever turn the darned 
things off! Then you did, and I decided to risk having my 
boots clogged with plastic. I picked up Aylees and carried 
her out. What happened after that you must be fairly 
familiar with!" 



THE PLASTIC PERIL 



107 



Spear was about to answer when the ground gave way 
beneath them and they all sank below the surface. 

"Scramble out, quick!" Spear shouted. "Quick, I say!" 

They didn't hesitate to follow his instructions. Spear was 
up and out first, pulling at Aylees, while Manners dragged 
himself over the edge. The stone's voice gloated over 
them. 

"So, Earthmen, I use the trick you taught me on you! 
The parasites are gone. I ditched them again. I, the great 
stone creature, wonder of the universe! And now I ditch 
you ! " 

But its geometry had got a little mixed, for instead of 
creating another pit, it sent up a column of stone with 
the three humans on top of it. 

"Down," Spear shouted. 

But his directions were not needed. As soon as the 
stone began to rise, so Manners and Aylees rolled themselves over the edge and back on to level ground. No 
sooner had Spear landed beside them than another pit 
appeared and they had to scramble out again. 

By now the stone was shrieking with insensate laughter, a 
horrible sound, quite unlike human mirth. Pits and mounds 
appeared everywhere. The humans had to scramble up 
and roll down at lightning speed to avoid being carried far 
below the crust or pushed high above the surface. 

They dodged about erratically, with no set purpose, no setdirection, simply and instinctively keeping on the move. 

Movement became agony. Every bending of the arm, 
every flexing of the leg sent shivers of pain through them. 
Their movements became slower and slower, until they could 
hardly reach the edge of the pits before the bottom had sunk 
too far. 

In between whiles they lay prostrate on the ground, simply 
waiting in grinding agony for the next pit or the next column. 
And as they lay and scrambled and rolled, so night fell in 
upon them. 

Suddenly, Manners raised himself on one arm and shouted 



108 



THE PLASTIC PERIL 



hoarsely. "The beacon! Shiny, the beacon!" 

Spear slewed his head round painfully, stared in the direction Manners was pointing. His response was an incoherent 
gurgle of appreciation. 

The ship's automatic beacon was shining out just a little 
way from them, behind some monoliths. 

Manners haltingly and hoarsely explained its meaning to 
Aylees. The sight of it seemed to endow them with new 
strength. They raised themselves and made their painful 
way towards the shining light, scrambling from pits and 
rolling from columns almost blindly, their eyes fixed on the 
beacon ahead. 

At length they came round a monolith and faced their 
ship. It was tilted at a crazy angle by one of the stone's 
crazy columns. But it was still standing, and still a welcome sight. 

They groped their way towards it, high excitement coursing through their, veins, reached it and lay there on the 
ground stating up at the still-open outer hatchway, their 
eyes glazed with thanksgiving. 

Then came the agonising process of climbing up into the 
hatchway. Manners tried it first, but fell back to the 
ground, unable to make the effort of raising himself a few 
feet. Spear tried, and succeeded. He leaned down and 
pulled up Aylees, whom Manners had pushed forward, 
pulled her up and let her fall sideways into the air-lock. 
Then he reached down again and gave a hand to Manners. 

Spear seemed to have got some kind of third wind. He 
dragged the other two into the interior of the ship, sealed 
the outer door, and then dragged them into the control room. 
It was built for two. That meant someone had to go without a mattress for the take-off. Silently, Spear strapped 
Aylees down in one, motioned Manners to get on to the 
other. 

The navigator demurred, but Spear insisted, tying the 
man down himself to make sure. Then he went over to the 



THE PLASTIC PERIL 



109 



control set, sat himself in the chair and took a deep breath. 
He looked over his shoulder, forced a smile. 

"Soon, Aylees," he said, "you can use your telepathic 
gift on the Old Man— for the exclusive benefit of Manners 
and me! And if he's thinking of sending us to another 
sterile planet with a new form of life, just let us know. 
We'll do the rest!" 

He winked at Manners, turned his back and shouted to 
them to take the strain. Then he reached out and pulled 
the firing pin. The ship shook, rocked and lifted. 

As Spear gritted his teeth against the agony of the 
acceleration, a part of his mind was thinking just how awkward unintelligent creatures could be." 



THE END 


