Contributors . . . 



Jack Vance's reply to our request for personal information had 
not arrived by press time. Our loss is perceptible but not permanent; 
Vance has another story tentatively scheduled for our March issue. 

Lester del Rey, like Sir Francis Bacon, has taken all knowledge 
for his province, and will cheerfully argue with anyone on any sub- 
ject, quoting an overpowering number of authorities. He has been a 
sign painter, a counterman, an office manager and an itinerant 
evangelist, among other things. He has written a book on atomic 
energy which is to be published shortly. 

H. B. Hickey writes, "I was thrown into the water and learned 
to swim. This is the true story of how I became a writer, back in 
1945. Until then I had been in turn an infant, a child, a schoolboy, 
an amateur cowpoke, a semipro card player, a salesman and a hus- 
band. Rather than argue with my wife — who is too small for me to 
beat — I agreed to give up selling. 

"Had I owned an automobile at the lime I might have become a 
taxi driver. But as luck had it my sole mechanical possession was a 
typewriter. I wrote two detective shorts and sent them out. When 
they sold quickly I nailed up a shingle with my pseudonym on it 
and was in business. Since then I've written and sold a considerable 
amount of fiction of divers kinds, including a Western novel which 
has seen five editions. 

"Now, at 34, I find myself in California, possessed of a large 
house, a wife (the same still), a small boy, a small dog and an auto- 
mobile. Should literary disaster strike, I'm now equipped to be a 
taxi driver. 

"I'm of average height, weight and appearance, undistinguishable 
from any other writer using the pseudonym of H. B. Hickey." 

Poul Anderson is another writer whose self-description failed 
to arrive in time for this issue. Here again nothing is permanently 
lost — we have on hand a sequel to his The Acolytes. 

Continued on inside back cover 



FEBRUARY, 1951 

BEYOND - " 



NOVELETTES 

BRAIN OF THE ©ALAXY by Jack Vance 2 

VALLEY OF DOOM by Holiday Sutherland . 107 

SHORT STORKS 

THE DEADLIEST FEMALE by Lester del Rey 27 

UKE A BIRD, LIKE A FISH by H. B. Hickey 40 

THE OLD BROWN COAT by Lord Dunsany 52 

THE ACOLYTES by Poul Anderson . 56 

FORGOTTEN TONGUE by Walter C. Davies 74 

CLOTHES MAKE THE MAN by Richard Matheson ... 83 

THE ROCKET OF 1955 by C. M. Kornbluth 88 

ROCK DIVER by Harry Harrison 96 

DEPARTMENT 

THE DISSECTING TABLE 90 



Cover by Von Dongen; illustrations by Harrison, Jannace and Napoli 
DAMON KNIGHT, Editor 



WORLDS 



WORLDS BEYOND is published monthly by Hillman Periodicals, Inc., at 4600 
Diversey Ave., Chicago, Hi. Editorial office, 535 Fifth Avenue, New York 17, 
N. Y. Application for entry as second-class matter is pending at the post office 
at Chicago, 111. Price, 25c a copy; subscriptions $3.00 a year m the United States 
and Canada. Copyright 1951 by Hillman Periodicals, Inc. The publishers assume 
no responsibility for unsolicited manuscripts, which should be accompanied by 
stamped self-addressed envelopes. All characters in stories are fictional, and any re- 
semblance to a real person is coincidental. Printed in the United States of America, 




by Jack Vance 



Brain of the Galaxy 

It was the most brutal examination system ever 
devised — a system in which one wrong answer 
meant insanity, and another might mean death! 

There was music, carnival lights, the slide of feet on waxed oak, 
perfume, muffled talk and laughter. 

Arthur Caversham of 22nd-century Boston felt air along his skin, 
and discovered himself to be stark naked. 

It was at Janice Paget's coming out party: three hundred guests 
in formal evening wear surrounded him. 

For a moment he felt no emotion beyond vague bewilderment. 
His presence seemed the outcome of logical events, but his memory 
was fogged and he could find no definite anchor of certainty. 

He stood a little apart from the rest of the stag line, facing the 
red and gold calliope where the orchestra sat. The buffet, the punch- 
bowl, the champagne wagons, tended by clowns, were to his right; to 
ihe left, through the open flap of the circus tent, lay the garden, now 



2 



BRAIN OF THE GALAXY 



lit by strings of colored lights, red, green, yellow, blue, and he caught 
a glimpse of a merry-go-round across the lawn. 

Why was he here? There was no recollection, no sense of pur- 
pose. . . . The night was warm; he was not at all uncomfortable. 
The other young men in the full dress suits must feel rather sticky, 
he thought. ... An idea tugged at a corner of his mind, nagged, 
teased. There was a significant aspect to the affair which he was 
overlooking. Refusing to surface, the idea lay like an irritant just 
below the level of his conscious mind. 

He noticed that the young men nearby had moved away from him. 
He heard raucous chortles of amusement, astonished exclamations. 
A girl dancing past him saw him over the arm of her escort; she gave 
a startled squeak, jerked her eyes away, giggling and blushing. 

Something was wrong. These young men and women were startled 
and amazed by his naked skin to the point of embarrassment. The 
submerged gnaw of urgency came closer to the surface. He must do 
something. Taboos felt with such intensity might not be violated 
without unpleasant consequences; such was his understanding. He 
was lacking garments; these he must obtain. 

He looked about him, inspecting the young men who watched him 
with ribald delight, disgust or curiosity. To one of these latter he 
addressed himself. 

"Where can I get some clothing?" 

The young man shrugged. "Where did you leave it?" 

Two heavy-set men in dark blue uniforms entered the tent; Arthur 
Caversham saw them from the corner of his eye, and his mind 
worked with desperate intensity. 

This young man seemed typical of those around him. What sort 
of appeal would have meaning for him? Like any other human 
being, he could be moved to action if the right chord were struck. 

By what method could he be moved? 

Sympathy? 

Threats? 

The prospect of advantage or profit? 

Caversham rejected all of these. By violating the taboo he had 
forfeited his claim to sympathy, a threat would excite derision, and 
he had no profit or advantage to offer. The stimulus must be more 



4 



WORLDS BEYOND 



devious. ... He reflected that young men customarily banded to- 
gether in secret societies. In the thousand cultures he had studied 
this was almost infallibly true. Long-houses, drug-cults, tongs, in- 
struments of sexual initiation — whatever the name, the external as- 
pects were near-identical: painful initiation, secret signs and pass- 
words, uniformity of group conduct, obligation to service. If this 
young man were a member of such an association, he might react to 
an appeal to this group-spirit. 

Arthur Caversham said, "I've been put in this taboo situation by 
the brotherhood; in the name of the brotherhood, find me some suit- 
able garments." 

The young man stared, taken aback. "Brotherhood? . . . You 
mean fraternity?" Enlightenment spread over his face. "Is this some 
kind of hell-week stunt?" He laughed. "If it is, they sure go all the 
way." 

"Yes," said Arthur Caversham. "My fraternity." 

The young man said, "This way then — and hurry, here comes the 
law. We'll take off under the tent. I'll lend you my topcoat till you 
make it back to your house." 

The two uniformed men, pushing quietly through the dancers, 
were almost upon them. The young man lifted the flap of the tent, 
Arthur Caversham ducked under, his friend followed. Together they 
ran through the many-colored shadows to a little booth painted with 
gay red and white stripes near the entrance to the tent. 

"You stay back, out of sight," said the young man. "I'll check out 
my coat." 

"Fine," said Arthur Caversham. 

The young man hesitated. "What's your house? Where do you 
go to school?" 

Arthur Caversham desperately searched his mind for answer. A 
single fact reached the surface. 
"I'm from Boston." 
"Boston U.? Or M.I.T.? Or Harvard?" 
"Harvard." 

• "Ah." The young man nodded. "I'm Washington and Lee my- 
self. What's your house?" 
"I'm not supposed to say." 



BRAIN OF THE GALAXY 



5 



"Oh," said the young man, puzzled but satisfied. "Well — just a 
minute. ..." 

Bearwald the Halforn halted, numb with despair and exhaustion. 
The remnants of his platoon sank to the ground around him, and 
they stared back to where the rim of the night flickered and glowed 
with fire. Many villages, many wood-gabled farmhouses had been 
given the torch, and the Brands from Mount Medallion reveled in 
human blood. 

The pulse of a distant drum touched Bearwald's skin, a deep 
thrumm-thrumm-thrumm, almost inaudible. Much closer he heard 
a hoarse human cry of fright, then exultant killing-calls, not human. 
The Brands were talk black, man-shaped but not men. They had 
eyes like lamps of red glass, bright white teeth, and tonight they 
seemed bent on slaughtering all the men of the world. 

"Down," hissed Kanaw, his right arm-guard, and Bearwald 
crouched. Across the flaring sky marched a column of tall Brand 
warriors, rocking jauntily, without fear. 

Bearwald said suddenly, "Men — we are thirteen. Fighting arm to 
arm with these monsters we are helpless. Tonight their total force 
is down from the mountain; the hive must be near^deserted. What 
can we lose if we undertake to burn the home-hive of the Brands? 
Only our lives, and what are these now?" 

Kanaw said, "Our lives are nothing; let us be off at once." 

"May our vengeance be great," said Broctan the left arm-guard. 



the home-hive of the Brands be white ashes this coming 



Mount Medallion loomed overhead; the oval hive lay in Pangboru 
Valley. At the mouth of the valley, Bearwald divided the platoon 
into two halves, and placed Kanaw in the van of the second. "We 
move silently twenty yards apart; thus if either party rouses a Brand, 
the other may attack from the rear and so kill the monster before 
the vale is roused. Do all understand?" 

"We understand." 

"Forward then, to the hive." 

The valley reeked with an odor like sour leather. From the di- 
rection of the hive came a muffled clanging. The ground was soft, 




6 



WORLDS BEYOND 



covered with runner moss; careful feet made no sound. Crouching 
low, Bearwald could see the shapes of his men against the sky — 
here indigo with a violet rim. The angry glare of burning Echevasa 
lay down the slope to the south. 

A sound. Bearwald hissed, and the columns froze. They waited. 
Thud thud thud thud came the steps — then a hoarse cry of rage and 
alarm. 

"Kill, kUl the beast!" yelled Bearwald. 

The Brand swung his club like a scythe, lifting one man, carrying 
the body around with the after-swing. Bearwald leapt close, struck 
with his blade, slicing as he hewed; he felt the tendons part, smelted 
the hot gush of Brand blood. 

The clanging had stopped now, and Brand cries carried across 
the night. 

"Forward," panted Bearwald. "Out with your tinder, strike fire 
to the hive. Burn, burn, burn — " 

Abandoning stealth he ran forward; ahead loomed the dark dome. 
Immature Brands came surging forth, squeaking and squalling, and 
with them came the genetrices — twenty-foot monsters crawling on 
hands and feet, grunting and snapping as they moved. 

"Kill!" yelled Bearwald the Halforn. "Kill! Fire, fire, fire!" 



He dashed to the hive, crouched, struck spark to tinder, puffed. 
The rag, soaked with saltpeter, flared; Bearwald fed it straw, thrust 
it against the hive. The reed-pulp and withe crackled. 

He leapt up as a horde of young Brands darted at him. His 
blade rose and fell; they were cleft, no match for his frenzy. Creep- 
ing close came the great Brand genetrices, three of them, swollen of 
abdomen, exuding an odor vile to his nostrils. 

"Out with the fire!" yelled the first. "Fire, out. The Great Mother 
is tombed within, she lies too fecund to move. . . . Fire, woe, de- 
struction!" And they wailed, "Where are the mighty? Where are 
our warriors?" 

Thrumm-thrumm-thrumm came the sound of skin-drums. Up the 
valley rolled the echo of hoarse Brand voices. 

Bearwald stood back to the blaze. He darted forward, severed 
the head of a creeping genetrix, jumped back Where were his 



BRAIN OF THE GALAXY 



7 



men? "Kanawl" he called. "Laida! Theyat! Gyorg! Broctan!" 

He craned his neck, saw the flicker of fires. "Men! Kill the creep- 
ing mothers!" And leaping forward once more, he hacked and 
hewed, and another genetrix sighed and groaned and rolled flat. 

The Brand voices changed to alarm; the triumphant drumming 
halted; the thud of footsteps came loud. 

At Bearwald's back the hive burnt with a pleasant heat. Within 
came a shrill keening, a cry of vast pain. 

In the leaping blaze he saw the charging Brand warriors. Their 
eyes glared like embers, their teeth shone like white sparks. They 
came forward, swinging their clubs, and Bearwald gripped his sword, 
too proud to flee. 

After grounding his air-sled Ceistan sat a few minutes inspecting 
the dead city Therlatch: a wall of earthen brick a hundred feet high, 
a dusty portal, and a few crumbled roofs lifting above the battle- 
ments. Behind the city the desert spread across the near, middle and 
far distance to the hazy shapes of the Altilune Mountains at the 
horizon, pink in the light of the twin suns Mig and Pag. 

Scouting from above he had seen no sign of life, nor had he ex- 
pected any, after a thousand years of abandonment. Perhaps a few 
sand-crawlers wallowed in the heat of the ancient bazaar, perhaps 
a few leobars inhabited the crumbled masonry. Otherwise the streets 
would feel his presence with great surprise. 

Jumping from the air-sled, Ceistan advanced toward the portal. 
He passed under, stood looking right and left with interest. In the 
parched air the brick buildings stood almost eternal. The wind 
smoothed and rounded all harsh angles; the glass had been cracked 
by the heat of day and chill of night; heaps of sand clogged the 
passageways. 

Three streets led away from the portal and Ceistan could find 
nothing to choose between them. Each was dusty, narrow, and each 
twisted out of his line of vision after a hundred yards. 

Ceistan rubbed his chin thoughtfully. Somewhere in the city lay 
a brass-bound coffer, containing the Crown and Shield Parchment. 
This, according to tradition, set a precedent for the fief-holder's im- 
munity from energy-tax. Glay, who was Ceistan's liege-lord, having 



8 



WORLDS BEYOND 



cited the parchment as justification for his delinquency, had been 
challenged to show validity. Now' he lay in prison on charge of re- 
bellion, and in the morning he would be nailed to the bottom of an 
air-sled and sent drifting into the west, unless Ceistan returned with 
the Parchment. 

After a thousand years, there was small cause for optimism, 
thought Ceistan. However, the lord Glay was a fair man and he 
would leave no stone unturned. ... If it existed, the chest presum- 
ably would he in state, in the town's Legalic, or the Mosque, or in 
the Hall of Relicts, or possibly in the Sumptuar. He would search 
all of these, allowing two hours per building; the eight hours so used 
would see the end to the pink daylight. 

At random he entered the street in the center and shortly came 
to a plaza at whose far end rose the Legalic, the Hall of Records and 
Decisions. At the facade Ceistan paused, for the interior was dim 
and gloomy. No sound came from the dusty void save the sigh and 
whisper of the dry wind. He entered. 

The great hall was empty. The walls were illuminated with fres- 
coes of red and blue, as bright as if painted yesterday. There were 
six to each wall, the top half displaying a criminal act and the bot- 
tom half the penalty. 

Ceistan passed through the hall, into the chambers behind. He 
found but dust and the smell of dust. Into the crypts he ventured, 
and these were lit by oubliettes. There was much litter and rubble, 
but no brass coffer. 

Up and out into the clean air he wenf, and strode across the plaza 
to the Mosque, where he entered under the massive architrave. 

The Nunciator's Confirmatory lay wide and bare and clean, for the 
tesselated floor was swept by a powerful draft. A thousand apertures 
opened from the low ceiling, each communicating with a cell over- 
head; thus arranged so that the devout might seek counsel with the 
Nunciator as he passed below without disturbing their attitudes of 
supplication. In the center of the pavilion a disk of glass roofed a 
recess. Below was a coffer and in the coffer rested a brass.-bound 
chest. Ceistan sprang down the steps in high hopes. 

But the chest contained jewels — the tiara of the Old Queen, the 
chest vellopes of the Gonwand Corps, the great ball, half emerald, 



BRAIN OF THE GALAXY 



9 



half ruby, which in the ancient ages was rolled across the plaza to 
signify the passage of the old year. 

Ceistan tumbled them all back in the coffer. Relicts on this planet 
of dead cities had no value, and synthetic gems were infinitely su- 
perior in luminosity and water. 

Leaving the Mosque, he studied the height of the suns. The zenith 
was past, the moving balls of pink fire leaned to the west. He hesi- 
tated, frowning and blinking at the hot earthen walls, considering 
that not impossibly both coffer and parchment were unfounded ru- 
mor, like so many other tales regarding dead Therlatch. 

A gust of wind swirled across the plaza and Ceistan choked on a 
dry throat. He spat and an acrid taste bit his tongue. An old foun- 
tain opened in the wall nearby; he examined it wistfully, but water 
was not even a memory along these dead streets. 

Once again he cleared his throat, spat, turned across the city to- 
ward the Hall of Relicts. 

He entered the great nave, past square pillars built of earthen 
brick. Pink shafts of light struck down from the cracks and gaps in 
the roof, and he was like a midge in the vast space. To all sides 
were niches cased in glass, and each held an object of ancient rever- 
ence: the Armor in which Plange the Forewarned led the Blue Flags; 
the coronet of the First Serpent; an array of antique Padang skulls; 
Princess Thefmosteraliam's bridal gown of woven cobweb palladium, 
as fresh as the day she wore it; the original Tablets of Legality; the 
great conch throne of an early dynasty; a dozen other objects. But 
the coffer was not among them. 

Ceistan sought for entrance to a possible crypt, but except where 
the currents of dusty air had channeled grooves in the porphyry, 
the floor was smooth. 

Out once more into the dead streets, and now the suns had passed 
behind the crumbled roofs, leaving the streets in magenta shadow. 

With leaden feet, burning throat and a sense of defeat, Ceistan 
turned to the Sumptuar, on the citadel. Up the wide steps, under 
the verdigris-fronted portico into a lobby painted with vivid frescoes. 
These depicted the maidens of ancient Therlatch at work, at play, 
amid sorrow and joy: slim creatures with short black hair and 
glowing ivory skin, as graceful as water-vanes, as round and delec- 



10 



WORLDS BEYOND 



table as chermoyan plums. Ceistan passed through the lobby with 
many side-glances, thinking sadly that these ancient creatures of de- 
light were now the dust he trod under his feet. 

He walked down a corridor which made a circuit of the building, 
and from which the chambers and apartments of the Sumptuar might 
be entered. The wisps of a wonderful rug crunched under his feet, 
and the walls displayed moldy tatters, once tapestries of the finest 
weave. At the entrance to each chamber a fresco pictured the Sump- 
tuar maiden and the sign she served; at each of these chambers Ceis- 
tan paused, made a quick investigation, and so passed on to the next. 
The beams slanting in through the cracks served him as a gauge of 
time, and they flattened ever more toward the horizontal. 

Chamber after chamber after chamber. There were chests in some, 
altars in others, cases of manifestos, triptychs, and fonts in others. 
But never the chest he sought. 

And ahead was the lobby where he had entered the building. 
Three more chambers were to be searched, then the light would be 
gone. 

He came to the first of these, and this was hung with a new cur- 
tain. Pushing it aside, he found himself looking into an outside court, 
full in the long light of the twin suns. A fountain of water trickled 
down across steps of apple-green jade into a garden as soft and fresh 
and green as any in the north. And rising in alarm from a couch 
was a maiden, as vivid and delightful as any in the frescoes. She 
had short dark hair, a face as pure and delicate as the great white 
frangipani she wore oyer her ear. 

For an instant Ceistan and the maiden stared eye to eye; then 
her alarm faded and she smiled shyly. 

"Who are you?" Ceistan asked in wonder. "Are you a ghost or 
do you live here in the dust?" 

"I am real," she said. "My home is to the south, at the Palram 
Oasis, and this is the period of solitude to which all maidens of the 
race submit when aspiring for Upper Instruction. ... So without 
fear may you come beside me, and rest, and drink of fruit wine and 
be my companion through the lonely night, for this is my last week of 
solitude and I am weary of my own aloneness." 

Ceistan took a step forward, then hesitated. "I must fulfill my 



BRAIN OF THE GALAXY 



11 



mission. I seek the brass coffer containing the Crown and Shield 
Parchment. Do you know of this?" 

She «shook her head. "It is nowhere in the Sumptuar." She rose 
to her feet, stretching her ivory arms as a kitten stretches. "Abandon 
your search, and come let me refresh you." 

Ceistan looked at her, looked up at the fading light, looked down 
the corridor to the two doors yet remaining. "First I must complete 
my search; I owe duty to my lord Glay, who will be nailed under an 
air-sled and sped west unless I bring him aid." 

The maiden said with a pout, "Go then to your dusty chamber; 
and go with a dry throat. You will find nothing, and if you persist 
so stubbornly, I will be gone when you return." 

"So let it be," said Ceistan. 

He turned away, marched down the corridor. The first chamber 
was bare and dry as a bone. In the second and last, a man's skele- 
ton lay tumbled in a corner; this Ceistan saw in the last rosy light 
of the twin suns. 

There was no brass coffer, no parchment. So Glay must die, and 
Ceistan's heart hung heavy. 

He returned to the chamber where he had found the maiden, but 
she had departed. The fountain had been stopped, and moisture 
only filmed the stones. 

Ceistan called, "Maiden, where are you? Return, my obligation 
is at an end. . . ." 

There was no response. 

Ceistan shrugged, turned to the lobby and so outdoors, to grope 
his way through the deserted twilight street to the portal and his 
air-sled. 

Dobnor Daksat became aware that the big man in the embroid- 
ered black cloak was speaking to him. 

Orienting himself to his surroundings, which were at once familiar 
and strange, he also became aware that the man's voice was - con- 
descending, supercilious. 

"You are competing in a highly advanced classification," he said. 
"I marvel at your — ah, confidence." And he eyed Daksat with a 
gleaming and speculative eye. 



12 



WORLDS BEYOND 



Daksat looked down at the floor, frowned at the sight of his 
clothes. He wore a long cloak of black-purple velvet, swinging like 
a bell around his ankles. His trousers were of scarlet corduroy, 
tight at the waist, thigh and calf, with a loose puff of green cloth 
between calf and ankle. The clothes were his own, obviously: they 
looked Wrong and right at once, as did the carved gold knuckle- 
guards he wore on his hands. 

The big man in the dark cloak continued speaking, looking at a 
point over Daksat's head, as if Daksat were nonexistent. 

"Clauktaba has won Imagist honors over the years. Bel-Washab 
was the Korsi Victor last month; Tol Morabait is an acknowledged 
master of the technique. And then there is Ghisel Ghang of West 
Ind, who knows no peer in the creation of fire-stars, and Pulakt 
Havjorska, the Champion of the Island Realm. So it becomes a mat- 
ter of skepticism whether you, new, inexperienced, without a fund 
of images, can do more than embarrass us all with your mental 
poverty." 

Daksat's brain was yet wrestling with his bewilderment, and he 
could feel no strong resentment at the big man's evident contempt 
He said, "Just what is all this? I'm not sure that I understand my 
position." 

The man in the black cloak inspected him quizzically. "So, now 
you commence to experience trepidation? Justly, I assure you." He 
sighed, waved his hands. "Well, well — young men will be impetu- 
ous, and perhaps you have formed images you considered not dis- 
creditable. In any event, the public eye will ignore you for the glories 
of Clauktaba's geometries and Ghisel Ghang's star-bursts. Indeed, I 
counsel you, keep your images small, drab and confined; you wiH 
so avoid the faults of bombast and discord. . . . Now, it is time to go 
to your imagicon. This way, then. Remember, greys, browns, lav- 
enders, perhaps a few tones of ocher and rust; then the spectators 
will understand that you compete for the schooling alone, and do 
not actively challenge the masters. This way then — " 

He opened a door and led Dobnor Daksat up a stair and so out 
into the night. 

They stood in a great stadium, facing six great screens forty feet 
high. Behind them in the dark sat tier upon tier of spectators — 



BRAIN OF THE GALAXY 



13 



thousands and thousands, and their sounds came as a soft crush. 
Daksat turned to see them, but all their faces and their individuals 
ties had melted into the entity as a whole. 

"Here," said the big man, "this is your apparatus. Seat yourself 
and I will adjust the ceretemps." 

Daksat suffered himself to be placed in a heavy chair, so soft and 
deep that he felt himself to be floating. Adjustments were made at 
his head and neck and the bridge of his nose. He felt a sharp prick, 
a pressure, a throb, and then a soothing warmth. From the distance, 
a voice called out over the crowd: 

"Two minutes to grey mist! Two minutes to grey mist! Attend, 
imagists, two minutes to grey mist!" 

The big man stooped over him. "Can you see well?" 

Daksat raised himself a trifle. "Yes. . . . AH is clear." 

"Very well. At 'grey mist', this little filament will glow. When it 
dies, then it is your screen, and you must imagine your best." 

The far voice said, "One minute to grey mist! The order is Pulakt 
Havjorska, Tol Morabait, Ghisel Ghang, Dobnor Daksat, Clauktaba 
and Bel-Washab. There are no handicaps; all colors and shapes are 
permitted. Relax then, ready your lobes, and now — grey mist!" 

The light glowed on the panel of Daksat's chair, and he saw five of 
the six screens light to a pleasant pearl-grey, swirling a trifle as if 
agitated, excited. Only the screen before him remained dull. The 
big man who stood behind him reached down, prodded. "Grey mist.. 
Daksat; are you deaf and blind?" 

Daksat thought grey mist, and instantly his screen sprang to life, 
displaying a cloud of silver grey, clean and clear. 

"Humph," he heard the big man snort. "Somewhat dull and with- 
out interest — but I suppose good enough. . . . See how Clauktaba's 
rings with hints of passion already, quivers with emotion." 

And Daksat, noting the screen to his right, saw this to be true. 
The grey, without actually displaying color, flowed and filmed as 
if suppressing a vast flood of light. 

Now to the far left, on Pulakt Havjorska's screen, color glowed. 
It was a gambit image, modest and restrained — a green jewel drip- 
ping a rain of blue and silver drops which struck a black ground 
and disappeared in little orange explosions. 



14 



WORLDS BEYOND 



Then Tol Morabaft's screen glowed: a black and white checker- 
board with certain of the squares flashing suddenly green, red, blue 
and yellow — warm searching colors, pure as shafts from a rainbow. 
The image disappeared in a flush mingled of rose and blue. 

Ghisel Ghang wrought a circle of yellow which quivered, brought 
forth a green halo, which in turn bulging, gave rise to a larger band 
of brilliant black and white. In the center formed a complex kaleido- 
scopic pattern. The pattern suddenly vanished in a brilliant flash 
of light; on the screen for an instant or two appeared the identical 
pattern in a complete new suit of colors. A ripple of sound from 
the spectators greeted this tour de force. 

The light on Daksat's panel died. Behind him he felt a prod. 
"Now." 

Daksat eyed the screen and his mind was blank of ideas. He 
ground his teeth. Anything. Anything. A picture. ... He imagined 
a view across the meadowlands beside the river Melramy. 

"Hm," said the big man behind him. "Pleasant. A pleasant 
fantasy, and rather original." 

Puzzled, Daksat examined the picture on the screen. So far as he 
could distinguish, it was an uninspired reproduction of a scene he 
knew well. Fantasy? Was that what was expected? Very well, he'd 
produce fantasy. He imagined the meadows glowing, molten, white- 
hot. The vegetation, the old cairns slumped into a viscous seethe. 
The surface smoothed, became a mirror which reflected the Copper 
Crags. 

Behind him the big man grunted. "A little heavy-handed, that 
last, and thereby you destroyed the charming effect of those un- 
earthly colors and shapes. . . ." 

Daksat slumped back in his chair, frowning, eager for his turn 
to come again. 

Meanwhile Clauktaba created a dainty white blossom with purple 
stamens on a green stalk. The petals wilted, the stamens discharged 
a cloud of swirling yellow pollen. 

Then Bel Washab, at the end of the line, painted his screen a 
luminous underwater green. It rippled, bulged, and a black irregular 
blot marred the surface. From the center of the blot seeped a trickle 
of hot gold which quickly meshed and veined the black blot. 



BRAIN OF THE GALAXY 



15 



Such was the first passage. 

There was a pause of several seconds. "Now," breathed the voice 
behind 'Daksat, "now the competition begins." 

On Pulakt Havjorska's screen appeared an angry sea of color: 
waves of red, green, blue, an ugly mottling. Dramatically a yellow 
shape appeared at the lower right, vanquished the chaos. It spread 
over the screen, the center went lime-green. A black shape appeared, 
split, bowed softly and easily to both sides. Then turning, the two 
shapes wandered into the background, twisting, bending with supple 
grace. Far dov/n a perspective they merged, darted forward like a 
lance, spread out into a series of lances, formed a slanting pattern 
of slim black bars. 

"Superb!" hissed the big man. "The timing, so just, so exact!" 

Tol Morabait replied with a fuscous brown field threaded with 
crimson lines' and blots. Vertical green hatching formed at the lef t, 
strode across the screen to the right. The brown field pressed for- 
ward, bulged through the green bars, pressed hard, broke, and seg- 
ments flitted forward to leave the screen. On the black background 
behind the green hatching, which now faded, lay a human brain, 
pink, pulsing. The brain sprouted six insect-like legs, scuttled crab- 
svise back into the distance. 

Ghisel Ghang brought forth one of his fire-bursts — a small pellet 
of bright blue exploding in all directions, the tips working and writh- 
ing through wonderful patterns in the five colors, blue, violet, white, 
purple and light green. 

Dobnor Daksat, rigid as a bar, sat with hands clenched and teeth 
grinding into teeth. Now! Was not his brain as excellent as those 
of the far lands? Now! 

On the screen appeared a tree, conventionalized in greens and 
blues, and each leaf was a tongue of fire. From these fires wisps of 
smoke arose on high to form a cloud which worked and swirled, 
then emptied a cone of rain about the tree. The flames vanished and 
in their places appeared star-shaped white flowers. From the cloud 
came a bolt of lightning, shattering the tree to agonized fragments 
of glass. Another bolt into the brittle heap and the screen exploded 
in a great gout of white, orange and black. 

The voice of the big man said doubtfully, "On the whole well 



16 



WORLDS BEYOND 



done, but mind my warning, and create more modest images, 
since — " 

"Silence!" said Dobnor Daksat in a harsh voice. 

So the competition went, round after round of spectacles, some 
sweet as canmel honey, others as violent as the storms which circle 
the poles. Color strove with color, patterns evolved and changed, 
sometimes in glorious cadence, sometimes in the bitter discord neces- 
sary to the strength of the image. 

And Daksat built dream after dream, while his tension vanished, 
and he forgot all save the racing pictures in his mind and on the 
screen, and his images became as complex and subtle as those of the 
masters. 

"One more passage," said the big man behind Daksat, and now 
the imagists brought forth the master-dreams: Pulakt Havjorska, the 
growth and decay of a beautiful city; Tol Morabait, a quiet compo- 
sition of green and white interrupted by a marching army of insects 
who left a dirty wake, and who were joined in battle by men in 
painted leather armor and tall hats, armed with short swords and 
flails. The insects were destroyed and chased off the screen; the 
corpses became bones and faded to twinkling blue dust. Ghisel 
Ghang created three fire-bursts simultaneously, each different, a gor- 
geous display. 

Daksat imagined a smooth pebble, magnified it to a block of 
marble, chipped it away to create the head of a beautiful maiden. 
For a moment she stared forth and varying emotions crossed her 
face — joy at her sudden existence, pensive thought, and at last fright. 
Her eyes turned milky opaque blue, the face changed to a laughing 
sardonic mask, black-cheeked with a fleering mouth. The head tilt- 
ed, the mouth spat into the air. The head flattened into a black back- 
ground, the drops of spittle shone like fire, became stars, constella- 
tions, and one of these expanded, became a planet with configurations 
dear to Daksat's heart. The planet hurtled off into darkness, the 
constellations faded. Dobnor Daksat relaxed. His last image. He 
sighed, exhausted. 

The big man in the black cloak removed the harness in brittle si- 
lence. At last he asked, 'The planet you imagined in that last screen- 
ing, was that a creation or a remembrance of actuality? It was none 



BRAIN OF THE GALAXY 



17 



of our system here, and it rang with the clarity of truth." 

Dobnor Daksat stared at him puzzled, and the words faltered in 
his tfiroat. "But it is — home! This world! Was it not this world?" 

The big man looked at him strangely, shrugged, turned away. "In 
a moment now the winner of the contest will be made known and 
the jeweled brevet awarded." 

The day was gusty and overcast, the galley was low and black, 
manned by the oarsmen of Belaclaw. Ergan stood on the poop, star- 
ing across the two miles of bitter sea to the coast of Racland, where 
he knew the sharp-faced Racs stood watching from the headlands. 

A gout of water erupted a few hundred yards astern. 

Ergan spoke to the helmsman. "Their guns have better range than 
we bargained for. Better stand offshore another mile and we'll take 
our chances with the current." 

Even as he spoke, there came a great whistle and he glimpsed a 
black pointed projectile slanting down at him. It struck the waist 
of the galley, exploded. Timber, bodies, metal, flew everywhere, and 
the galley laid its broken back into the water, doubled up and sank. 

Ergan, jumping clear, discarded his sword, casque and greaves 
almost as he hit the chill grey water. Gasping from the shock, he 
swam in circles, bobbing up and down in the chop; then, finding a 
length of timber, he clung to it for support. 

From the shores of Racland a longboat put forth and approached, 
bow churning white foam as it rose and fell across the waves. Ergan 
turned loose the timber and swam as rapidly as possible from the 
wreck. Better drowning than capture; there would be more mercy 
from the famine-fish which swarmed the waters than from the piti- 
less Racs. 

So he swam, but the current took him to the shore, and at last, 
struggling feebly, he was cast upon a pebbly beach. 

Here he was discovered by a gang of Rac youths and marched 
to a nearby command post. He was tied and flung into a cart and 
so conveyed to the city Korsapan. 

In a grey room he was seated facing an intelligence officer of the 
Rac secret police, a man with the grey skin of a toad, a moist grey 
mouth, eager, searching eyes. 



18 



WORLDS BEYOND 



"You are Ergan," said the officer. "Emissary to the Bargee of 
Salomdek. What was your mission?" 

Ergan stared back eye to eye, hoping that a happy and convincing 
response would find his lips. None came, and the truth would incite 
an immediate invasion of both Belaclaw and Salomdek by the tall 
thin-headed Rac soldiers, who wore black uniforms and black boots. 

Ergan said nothing. The officer leaned forward. "I ask you once 
more; then you will be taken to the room below." He said "Room 
Below" as if the words were capitalized, and he said it with soft 
relish. 

Ergan, in a cold sweat, for he knew of the Rac torturers, said, 
"I am not Ergan; my name is Ervard; I am an honest trader in 
pearls." 

"This is untrue," said the Rac. "Your aide was captured and 
under the compression pump he blurted up your name with his 
lungs." 

"I am Ervard," said Ergan, his bowels quaking. 

The Rac signaled. "Take him to the Room Below." 

A man's body, which has developed nerves as outposts against 
danger, seems especially intended for pain, and cooperates wonder- 
fully with the craft of the torturer. These characteristics of the body 
had been studied by the Rac specialists, and other capabilities of the 
human nervous system had been blundered upon by accident. It 
has been found that certain programs of pressure, heat, strain, fric- 
tion, torque, surge, jerk, sonic and visual shock, vermin, stench and 
vileness created cumulative effects, whereas a single method, used 
to excess, lost its stimulation thereby. 

All this lore and cleverness *was lavished upon Ergan's citadel of 
nerves, and they inflicted upon him the entire gamut of pain: the 
sharp twinges, the dull lasting joint-aches which groaned by night, 
the fiery flashes, the assaults of filth and lechery, together with shocks 
of occasional tenderness when he would be allowed to glimpse the 
world he had left. 

Then back to the Room Below. 

But always: "I am Ervard the trader." And always he tried to 
goad his mind over the tissue barrier to death, but always the mind 
hesitated at the last toppling step, and Ergan lived. 



BRAIN OF THE GALAXY 



19 



The Racs tortured by routine, so that the expectation, the ap- 
proach of the hour, brought with it as much torment as the act itself. 
Arvd then the heavy unhurried steps outside the cell, the feeble 
thrashing around to evade, the harsh laughs when they cornered him 
and carried him forth, and the harsh laughs when three hours later 
they threw him sobbing and whimpering back to the pile of straw 
that was his bed. 

"I am Ervard," he said, and trained his mind to believe that this 
was the truth, so that never would they catch him unaware. "I am 
Ervard! I am Ervard, I trade in pearls!" 

He tried to strangle himself on straw, but a slave watched always, 
and this was not permitted. 

He attempted to die by self-suffocation, and would have been glad 
to succeed, but always as he sank into blessed numbness, so did his 
mind relax and his motor nerves take up the mindless business of 
breathing once more. 

He ate nothing, but this meant little to the Racs, as they injected 
him full of tonics, sustaining drugs and stimulants, so that he might 
always be keyed to the height of his awareness. 

"I am Ervard," said Ergan, and the Racs gritted their teeth an- 
grily. The case was now a challenge; he defied their ingenuity, and 
they puzzled long and carefully upon refinements and delicacies, new- 
shapes to the iron tools, new types of jerk ropes, new directions for 
the strains and pressures. Even when it was no longer important 
whether he was Ergan or Ervard, since war now raged, he was kept 
and maintained as a problem, an ideal case; so he was guarded and 
cosseted with even more than usual care, and the Rac torturers 
mulled over their techniques, . making changes here, improvements 
there. 

Then one day the Belaclaw galleys landed and the feather-crested 
soldiers fought past the walls of Korsapan. 

The Racs surveyed Ergan with regret. "Now we must go, and still 
you will not submit to us." 

"I am Ervard," croaked that which lay on the table. "Ervard the 
trader." 

A splintering crash sounded overhead. 

"We must go," said the Racs. "Your people have stormed the 



20 



WORLDS BEYOND 



city. If you tell the truth, you may live. If you lie, we kill you. So 
there is your choice. Your life for the truth." 

"The truth?" muttered Ergan. "It is a trick — " And then he 
caught the victory chant of the Belaclaw soldiery. "The truth? Why 
not? . . . Very well." And he said, "I am Ervard," for now he be- 
lieved this to be the truth. 

Galactic Prime was a lean man with reddish-brown hair sparse 
across a fine arch of skull. His face, undistinguished otherwise, was 
given power by great dark eyes flickering with a light like fire be- 
hind smoke. Physically he had passed the peak of his youth; his 
arms and legs were thin and loose-jointed; his head inclined forward 
as if weighted by the intricate machinery of his brain. 

Arising from the couch, smiling faintly, he looked across the ar- 
cade to the eleven Elders. They sat at a table of polished wood, 
backs to a wall festooned with vines. They were grave men, slow 
in their motions, and their faces were lined with wisdom and insight. 
By the ordained system, Prime was the executive of the universe, 
the Elders the deliberative body, invested with certain restrictive 
powers. 

"Well?" 

The Chief Elder without haste raised his eyes from the computer. 
"You are the first to arise from the couch." 

Prime turned a glance up the arcade, still smiling faintly. The 
others lay variously: some with arms clenched, rigid as bars; others 
huddled in foetal postures. One had slumped from the couch half 
to the floor; his eyes were open, staring at remoteness. 

Prime returned to the Chief Elder, who watched him with de- 
tached curiosity. "Has the optimum been established?" 

The Chief Elder consulted the computer. "Twenty-six thirty- 
seven is the optimum score." 

Prime waited, but the Chief Elder said no more. Prime stepped to 
the alabaster balustrade beyond the couches. He leaned forward, 
looked out across the vista — miles and miles of sunny haze, with a 
twinkling sea in the distance. A breeze blew past his face, ruffling 
the scant russet strands of his hair. He took a deep breath, flexed his 
fingers and hands, for the memory of the Rac torturers was still 



BRAIN OF THE GALAXY 



21 



heavy on his mind. After a moment he swung around, leaned back, 
resting his elbows upon the balustrade. He glanced once more down 
the line of couches; there were still no signs of vitality from the 
candidates. 

"Twenty-six thirty-seven," he muttered. "I venture to estimate 
my own score at twenty-five ninety. In the last episode I recall an 
incomplete retention of personality." 

"Twenty-five seventy-four," said the Chief Elder. "The compu- 
ter judged Bearwald the Halforn's final defiance of the Brand war- 
riors unprofitable." 

Prime considered. "The point is well made. Obstinacy serves no 
purpose unless it advances a predetermined end. It is a flaw I must 
seek to temper." He looked along the line of Elders, from face to 
face. "You make no enunciations, you are curiously mute." 

He waited; the Chief Elder made no response. 

"May I inquire the high score?" 

"Twenty-five seventy-four." 

Prime nodded. "Mine." 

"Yours is the high score," said the Chief Elder. 

Prime's smile disappeared; a puzzled line appeared across his 
brow. "In spite of this, you are still reluctant to confirm my second 
span of authority; there are still doubts among you." 

"Doubts and misgivings," replied the Chief Elder. 

Prime's mouth pulled in at the corners, although his brows were 
still raised in polite inquiry. "Your attitude puzzles me. My record 
is one of selfless service. My intelligence is phenomenal, and in this 
final test, which I designed to dispel your last doubts, I attained the 
highest score. I have proved my social intuition and flexibility, my 
leadership, devotion to duty, imagination and resolution. In every 
commensurable aspect, I fulfill best the qualifications for the office 
I hold." 

The Chief Elder looked up and down the line of his fellows. There 
were none who wished to speak. The Chief Elder squared himself in 
his chair, sat back. 

"Our attitude is difficult to represent. Everything is as you say. 
Your intelligence is beyond dispute, your character is exemplary, 
you have served your term with honor and devotion. You have 



22 



WORLDS BEYOND 



earned our respect, admiration and gratitude. We realize also that 
you seek this second term from praiseworthy motives: you regard 
yourself as the man best able to coordinate the complex business of 
the galaxy." 

Prime nodded grimly. "But you think otherwise." 

"Our position is perhaps not quite so blunt." 

"Precisely what is your position?" Prime gestured along the 
couches. "Look at these men. They are the finest of the galaxy. 
One man is dead. That one stirring on the third couch has lost his 
mind; he is a lunatic. The others are sorely shaken. And never 
forget that this test has been expressly designed to measure the 
qualities essential to the Galactic Prime." 

"This test has been of great interest to us," said the Chief Elder 
mildly. "It has considerably affected our thinking." 

Prime hesitated, plumbing the unspoken overtones of the words. 
He came forward, seated himself across from the line of Elders. With 
a narrow glance he searched the faces of the eleven men, tapped 
once, twice, three times with his fingertips on the polished wood, 
leaned back in the chair. 

"As I have pointed out, the test has gauged each candidate for 
the exact qualities essential to the optimum conduct of office, in this 
fashion: Earth of the twentieth century is a planet of intricate con- 
ventions; on Earth the candidate, as Arthur Caversham, is required 
to use his social intuition — a quality highly important in this galaxy 
of two billion suns. On Belotsi, Bearwald the Halforn is tested for 
courage and the ability to conduct positive action. At the dead city 
Therlatch on Praesepe Three, the candidate, as Ceistan, is rated for 
devotion to duty, and as Dobnor Daksat at the Imagicon on Staff, 
bis creative conceptions are rated against the most fertile imagina- 
tions alive. Finally as Ergan, on Chankozar, his will, persistence 
and ultimate fiber are explored to their extreme limits. 

"Each candidate is placed in the identical set of circumstances 
by a trick of temporal, dimensional and cerebro-neural meshing 
which is rather complicated for the present discussion. Sufficient 
that each candidate is objectively rated by his achievements, and 
that the results are commensurable." 

He paused, looked shrewdly along the line of grave faces. "I must 



BRAIN OF THE GALAXY 



emphasize that although I myself designed and arranged the test, I 
thereby gained no advantage. The mnemonic synapses are entirely 
disengaged from incident to incident, and only the candidate's basic 
personality acts. All were tested under precisely the same condi- 
tions. In my opinion the scores registered by the computer indicate 
an objective and reliable index of the candidate's ability for the 
highly responsible office of Galactic Executive." 

The Chief Elder said, "The scores are indeed significant." 

"Then — you approve my candidacy?" 

The Chief Elder smiled. "Not so fast. Admittedly you are intel- 
ligent, admittedly you have accomplished much during your term 
as Prime. But much remains to be done." 

"Do you suggest that another man would have achieved more?" 

The Chief Elder shrugged. "I have no conceivable way of know- 
ing. I point out your achievements, such as the Glenart civilization, 
the Dawn Time on Masilis, the reign of King Karal on Aevir, the 
suppression of the Arkid Revolt. There are many such examples. 
But there are also shortcomings: the wars and detestable totalitarian 
governments on Earth, the savagery on Belotsi and Chankozar, so 
pointedly emphasized in your test. Then there is the decadence of 
the planets in the Eleven Hundred Ninth Cluster, the rise of the 
Priest-kings on Fiir, and much else." 

Prime clenched his mouth and the fires behind his eyes burnt 
more brightly. 

The Chief Elder continued. "One of the most remarkable phen- 
omena of the galaxy is the tendency of humanity to absorb and 
manifest the personality of the Prime. There seems to be a tremen- 
dous resonance which vibrates from the brain of the Prime through 
the minds of man from Center to the outer fringes. It is a matter 
which should be studied, analyzed and subjected to control. The 
effect is as if every thought of the Prime is magnified a billion-fold, 
as if every mood sets the tone for a thousand civilizations, every 
facet of his personality reflects in the ethics of a thousand cultures." 

Prime said tonelessly, "I have remarked this phenomenon and 
have thought much on it. Prime's commands are promulgated in 
such a way as to exert subtle rather than overt influence; perhaps 
here is the background of the matter. In any event, the fact of this 



24 



WORLDS BEYOND 



influence is even more reason to select for the oflice a man of demon- 
strated virtue." 

"Well put," said the Chief Elder. "Your character is indeed be- 
yond reproach. However, we of the Elders are concerned by the 
rising tide of authoritarianism among the planets of the galaxy. We 
suspect that this principle of resonance is at work. You are a man 
of intense and indomitable will, and we feel that your influence has 
unwittingly prompted an irruption of aristocracies." 

Prime was silent a moment. He looked down the line of couches 
where the other candidates were recovering awareness. They were 
men of various races: a pale Northkin of Palast, a Negro of Earth, 
a stocky red Hawolo, a grey-haired grey-eyed Islander from the Sea 
Planet — each the outstanding man of the planet of his birth. Those 
who had returned to consciousness sat quietly, collecting their wits, 
or lay back on the couch, trying to expunge the test from their minds. 
There had been a toll taken: one lay dead, another bereft of his 
wits crouched whimpering beside his couch. 

The Chief Elder said, "The objectionable aspects of your charac- 
ter are perhaps best exemplified by the test itself." 

Prime opened his mouth; the Chief Elder held up his hand. "Let 
me speak; I will try to deal fairly with you. When I am done, you 
may say your say. 

"I repeat that your basic direction is displayed by the details of 
the test that you devised. The qualities you measured were those 
which you considered the most important: that is, those ideals by 
which you guide your own life. This arrangement I am sure was 
completely unconscious, and hence completely revealing. You con- 
ceive the essential characteristics of the Prime to be social intui- 
tion, aggressiveness, loyalty, imagination and dogged persistence. As a 
man of strong character you seek to exemplify these ideals in your 
own conduct; therefore it is not at all surprising that in this test, 
designed by you, with a scoring system calibrated by you, your score 
should be highest. 

"Let me clarify the idea by an analogy. If the Eagle were con- 
ducting a test to determine the King of Beasts, he would rate all the 
candidates on their ability to fly; necessarily he would win. In this 
fashion the Mole would consider ability to dig important; by his 



BRAIN OF THE GALAXY 



25 



system of testing he would inevitably emerge King of Beasts." 

Prime laughed sharply, ran a hand through his sparse red-brown 
locks. "I am neither Eagle nor Mole." 

The Chief Elder shook his head. "No. You are zealous, dutiful, 
imaginative, indefatigable — so you have demonstrated, as much by 
specifying tests for these characteristics as by scoring high in these 
same tests. But conversely, by the very absence of other tests you 
demonstrate deficiencies in your character." 

"And these are?" 

"Sympathy. Compassion. Kindness." The Chief Elder settled 
back in his chair. "Strange. Your predecessor two times removed 
was rich in these qualities. During his term, the great religious and 
humanitarian systems based on the idea of human brotherhood 
sprang up across the universe. Another example of resonance — 
but I digress." 

Prime said with a sardonic twitch of his mouth, "May I ask this: 
have you selected the next Galactic Prime?" 

The Chief Elder nodded. "A definite choice has been made." 
"What was his score in the test?" 

"By your scoring system — seventeen eighty. He did poorly as 
Arthur Caversham; he tried to explain the advantages of nudity to 
the policeman. He lacked the ability to concoct an instant subter- 
fuge; he has little of your quick craft. As Arthur Caversham he 
found himself naked. He is sincere and straightforward, hence tried 
to expound the positive motivations for his state, rather than dis- 
cover the means to evade the penalties." 

"Tell me more about this man," said Prime shortly. 

"As Bearwald the Halforn, he led his band to the hive of the 
Brands on Mount Medallion, but instead of burning the hive, he 
called forth to the queen, begging her to end the useless slaughter. 
She reached out from the doorway, drew him within and killed him. 
He failed — but the computer still rated him highly on his forthright 
approach. 

"At Therlatch, his conduct was as irreproachable as yours, and 
at the Imagicon his performance was adequate. Yours approached 
the brilliance of the Master Imagists, which is high achievement in- 
deed. 



26 



WORLDS BEYOND 



"The Rac tortures are the most trying element of the test You 
knew well you could resist limitless pain; therefore you ordained 
that all other candidates must likewise possess this attribute. The 
new Prime is sadly deficient here. He is sensitive, and the idea of 
one man intentionally inflicting pain upon another sickens him. I 
may add that none of the candidates achieved a perfect count in the 
last episode. Two others equaled your score — " 

Prime evinced interest. "Which are they?" 

The Chief Elder pointed them out — a tall hard-muscled man with 
rock-hewn face standing by the alabaster balustrade gazing moodily 



out across the sunny distance, and a man of middle age who sat with 
his legs folded under him, watching a point three feet before him 
with an expression of imperturbable placidity. 

"One is utterly obstinate and hard," said the Chief Elder. "He re- 
fused to say a single word. The other assumes an outer objectivity 
when unpleasantness overtakes him. Others among the candidates 
fared not so well; mental readjustments and therapy will be neces- 
sary in almost all cases." 

Their eyes went to the witless creature with vacant eyes who 
padded up and down the aisle, humming and muttering quietly to 
himself. 

"The tests were by no means valueless," said the Chief Elder. 
"We learned a great deal. By your system of scoring, the competi- 
tion rated you most high. By other standards which we Elders pos- 
tulated, your place was lower." 

With a tight mouth Prime inquired, "Who is this paragon of al- 
truism, kindliness, sympathy and generosity?" 

The lunatic wandered close, fell on his hands and knees, crawled 
whimpering to the wall. He pressed his face to the cool stone, stared 
blankly up at Prime. His mouth hung loose, his chin was wet, his 
eyes rolled apparently free of each other. 

The Chief Elder smiled in great compassion. Sadly he stroked 
the mad creature's head. "This is he. Here is the man we select." 

The old Galactic Prime sat silent, mouth compressed, eyes burn- 
ing like far volcanoes. 

At his feet the new Prime, Lord of Two Billion Suns, found a dead 
leaf, put it into his mouth, and began to chew. 



by Lester del Rey 



THE 

DEADLIEST 
FEMALE 

Angered or thwarted, the normal female of the species can 
be deadly enough, Lord knows . . . and Lee was no ordinary 
female — in fact, she belonged to no ordinary species! 

Mark Tayowa groaned as the jeep went over a bump in the road 
across the spaceport, and his eyes lanced upward to the lanky bulk 
of the driver. The man chuckled, and Mark turned away, nursing 
his aching head in silence. Damn the smugness of these Normals! 

All right, so he was a freak. He'd come into the world without 
tonsils, adenoids, sinuses or appendix; he weighed a hundred pounds 
even, and barely topped four feet of stocky, heavy-boned height. He 
had a nerve current speed of thirty-two hundred feet a second in- 
stead of eleven hundred, and he could take eight gravities of pres- 
sure, upright. But none of that made his hangover more pleasant. 

"Wipe it off!" he told the driver, infuriated by the man's grin. 

The grin widened. "You're cute!" the driver said, in a reedy fal- 
setto. "I know Maisie! Some mouse. And that's some mouse you 
got on the eye." 

For a second, Mark's arm tautened with sheer hunger to drive a 
fist into the other's soft-muscled belly. Then he collapsed into a sick 
slump on the seat. Yeah, Maisie. He'd picked her up somewhere 




27 



28 



WORLDS BEYOND 



along the line, celebrating his graduation from Spaceman special 
flight training and his simultaneous assignment to his first ship — in 
only nine months out from the creche, too. She'd gotten him drunk, 
calmly picked his pocket, and then yelled for help. Naturally, the 
Normals stuck together against a freak. He fingered his blackened 
eye, then cupped his thin, strong hands around his head and groaned. 

Women! It was bad enough to be brought up in the hothouse at- 
mosphere of a creche, raised with a few other Spacemen by Normals 
who were entirely too blasted "understanding", without even seeing 
a girl; but theri to get out into the world and find the females of your 
own species were as flat-chested as men, and the Normal girls either 
wanted to pet you like a dog or roll you! 

The driver nudged him. "We're here, Peewee. All out. End of 
the line." 

Mark climbed out, lifting his thin bag of possessions. The Venture 
was an old ship, he saw, but a sound one. And it was obviously 
near blast-off. He should have been there an hour before, but he'd 
slept through the alarm. Then he saw the big Normal on the ramp, 
carrying triple stars on his shoulder, and snapped into salute. "Mark 
Tayowa, lieutenant assigned to Venture, sir." 

The man turned and shouted inside. "Hey, Lee — it's here. Blast 
at three-oh-seven." Then he nodded toward Mark, and jerked a 
thumb inward. "Okay, you and Lee Tanming have it. And you'd 



better report in — you're graduated now; you don't have to stand 
here saluting all day." 

Mark went up the little ramp, and a muffled voice came down 
the tiny communication shaft from control. "Seal up, Tayowa. We 
blast in one minute!" 

He triggered the seals, watched the ramp come up and sink into 
place, and went through the inner lock, checking to make sure it 
also sealed properly. Then he hesitated, while a rumbling came 
from below, and the sudden punch of acceleration hit him. ihey 
were lifting at five gravities, headed out for nine months to Pluto, 
and he was on his first actual trip into space — the work for which 
he'd been destined through eight generations. He sampled it, while 
he began climbing up to the control room, and even the hangover 
was no longer important. 



THE DEADLIEST FEMALE 



Starting now, he was free of the Normals, oat where he belonged 
— where his body was no freak, but something tailored ideally for 
its purpose. 

Then he stopped. The figure stooped over the controls was un- 
mistakable. Stringy hair was caught back in double braids, and the 
shoulders had a female slope to them, while the rest of the three- 
foot-eight figure showed the stringy, neuter angularity of the females 
of his race. As he looked, Lee Tanming turned, her narrow body 
jerking about with a total lack of grace. For nine months he had 
to be cooped up with a female! 

She gave him one disgusted glance before she swung back to reset 
the controls. "My last trip before they ground me for good," she 
said bitterly, "and they give me a green kid who hasn't got the brains 
to stay away from those grinning spaceport tramps. Where's your 
luggage, Romeo?" 

He doubled his fists, then shrugged wearily. "Okay. Okay, I guess 
the whole field knew about it. Maisie got my supply money. Go 
ahead, laugh." 

"You'll have to get funnier than that, Bobo. I don't give a damn 
how dumb you are ashore. But since you have one suit to your 
name, you'll wash it every night, or I'll throw it in the incinerator." 
She turned for another quick glance at him. "We'll have to live to- 
gether, sonny — and I don't like it any better than you. Get some 
aspirin from the galley stock, toss your duffle in cabin two — mine's 
number one, with the lock — and then get below. Takes someone in 
the engine-room eventually." 

He looked at her insignia, knowing Spacewomen were never pro- 
moted higher than lieutenants — his own rank — since they were auto- 
matically retired at thirty-five. That was about to happen to Tan- 
ming, evidently, and she was sore about it, "Yessir, Captain!" 

"Seniority, sonny," she said. "I've been running the Pluto jump 
eleven years. And the fact 1 can stand three more gravs than you 
can, from practice. Get below!" 

To demonstrate, she began jockeying the controls, increasing and 
decreasing the acceleration pressure. He stood it a few seconds, until 
his stomach gave in. Then he lurched away, hunting for the latrine- 
He found it barely in time. 



30 



WORLDS BEYOND 



It was going to be a great trip. 

There was the smell of coffee when he came to, and he was sur- 
prised to find himself in a hammock. Some of the ache was gone, 
and his stomach felt better. He eased to the deck, dreading what 
he'd see when he picked up his suit; but it had been cleaned. Then 
Lee's fist banged on the door, and her voice reached him. "Come 
and get it, sonny. And better grab that aspirin on the way." 

Mark shook his head, and regretted it. But maybe he'd misjudged 
her. He owed her an apology for not tending ship, at least; he knew 
she must have had hell until speed built up, running both control 
and engines. He'd been cross-grained from the Normals, and it 
must have been tough on her, nearing thirty-five and about to be 
grounded . . . whereas he was good for fifty years' service, and they 
both knew it. 

He climbed to the galley, where a plastube of coffee waited, and 
headed for the medicine kit on the wall, his hands shaking. From 
above, an alarm sounded, and then there was a muttered damn from 
Lee. The ship leaped suddenly — and the medicine chest came down 
under his clutching fingers, bottles and supplies breaking under heavy 
acceleration as they hit the floor. 



Moments later, she was at the door. "Nice work, sonny. Well, 
no medical supplies, not even a fever thermometer now. If you get 
space chills, all I can do for you is stuff you out the airlock. We're 
running a library and supplies to Pluto, not a nursery, but I guess 
the brass on Earth can't tell the difference. Normal administrators!" 

"There must be medical supplies in the cargo — " he began. 

Her laughter cut him off. "When Pluto's supercold hi-vac labs 



He knew what she meant. With plutonium in its insulating wraps 
as cargo, they'd need just one good pea-sized meteorite through the 
hull to blast them into nothingness. But he shook his head. 



"Liar," she remarked coldly. "Incidentally, I cleaned up this time 
for you. Don't mention it. From now on, you do all the cooking 
and washing aboard. I'm turning in. Take over, sonny. And when 
you get me up, I'll expect these clothes clean, my eggs scrambled 




THE DEADLIEST FEMALE 



31 



lightly, and no damn-fool nonsense with the controls." 

She swung down to Cabin 1, and the lock clicked. Mark picked 
up his coffee — which was lousy, saccharine-sweet — and apologized 
to himself for any good ideas of her he'd had. It looked as if she'd 
spent her life building up resentment at being female and not a Nor- 
mal, and now meant to take it all out on him. She'd probably get 
worse. 

She did. Lee had imagination enough to vary the beat; she went 
from synthetic sympathy to biting arrogance, and followed it by long 
lectures. on what would happen if she wrote up his default on takeoff. 
She told him the rumors about him and Maisie among the port at- 
tendants before takeoff. And she refused to lend him even one of 
her books. 

That was the worst of all. Once blast-off is made, most of the 
trip is pure monotony, and the microcard books are almost a psy- 
chological necessity. He should have brought his own — but Maisie's 
theft had ruled that out. Mark fought it out past Mars and well 
towards Jupiter, and at times even welcomed the menial duties of 
cooking and cleaning. But there was still too much time left over. 

He broke half a day's silence, finally. "What sort of a library do 
we ship, and where's it stowed?" 

Lee looked up from a book she was too obviously enjoying and 
shook her hair, filling the air with the perfume she'd found he 
couldn't stand. "Technical. The hold marked with the big 'Entry 
Illegal' sign. And that sign means you." 

He'd already noticed it and wondered. Well, technical books 
were better than nothing, and nobody needed to know he'd borrowed 
them. Of course, the hold was sealed with the official tape and slug, 
but he knew how to work them well enough to stand all but the most 
careful inspection. He'd learned that trick in flight training, where 
the older boys passed the trick down to the younger. 

For the next few watches, he noticed her frequent sudden ap- 
pearance when he was near the hold. He grinned, carefully avoiding 
any further examination of the seal, until it seemed finally that she'd 
given up and decided he wasn't going to try it. He waited out two 
more watches, and then moved suddenly, hastily stripping away the 
seal and throwing the hatch back. 



32 



WORLDS BEYOND 



"I could shoot you, you know." 

He jerked around to find her standing casually on the landing 
above him, with a gun in one thin hand. "You know the rule against 
breaking into the room of a suspended Normal; this is worse." 

He'd already seen the gelatin with which the room was filled, and 
guessed the answer. Apparently, it took less room to ship out a full 
Eidetic who could remember everything on a page forever from a 
single tenth-of-a-second glance. Eidetics were rarer than Spacemen, 
and breaking one out of suspended animation, where he could stand 
the acceleration, would more than justify shooting. 

Mark began resealing with hands that were sweating. "You could 
have told me," he muttered. 

"More fun this way, sonny. If I enter this on the log — along with 
the picture I just took — well, you figure what happens when we land! 
Better think it over." 

She bent over, running her hand around the rim of the landing. 
"Fildiy. See that it's clean when I wake up." 

Mark tried unsuccessfully to retain some dignity as he climbed 
down to the engine room, but his hands were shaking. Blackmail 
now — and she could make it stick, apparently. He brooded over a 
picture in his mind of her neck between his hands, mentally listen- 
ing to the snap of her vertebrae. Then he got out his chem-cleaning 
set and began scrubbing the shaft walls and landings. 

But there's a limit to anything. He reached it just beyond Jupiter, 
when Lee objected to lack of seasoning in the soup. He took the 
bulb silently back to the galley, located the red pepper and used it 
generously, together with a bit of mustard and some dehydrated 
horseradish to make sure. Maybe she'd grown too confident; she 
squeezed the bulb for a generous sip. 

When she came up, yelling, her gun was still clipped to the back 
of the chair, and Mark was on it in a single pounce. He tossed it 
into the shaft, put a hand on her shoulder and shoved her down 
again. "Eat it, you witch. I want to see you eat every damned drop 
of it. After that, you do the cooking and cleaning around here — 
and while I'm at it, I'll take that camera of yours." 

"Sure of yourself, sonny?" 



THE DEADLIEST FEMALE 



33 



"Dead sure. Start eating!" 

"You wouldn't strike a woman," she suggested, but she was be- 
ginning to glance about, and a worried line appeared on her fore- 
head. 

"No," he agreed. "Not a woman. But if you don't eat every drop 
of that soup, I'll shove your nose through the — " 

Something that might have been a eross between lightning and a 
battering ram came up from the chair and knocked him crossways. 
And then she was free of the little table-shelf, and moving in, a sud- 
den grin on her face. 

"Big mistake, sonny." A fist came out, changed to a hard-edged 
palm, and chopped down on the bridge of his nose. "Never hit a 
woman — " She was lifting him then, over one shoulder, and in a 
twist that brought him slamming down against the deck. " — who 
has lived in hi-grav acceleration fourteen years." One foot was on 
the small of his back, and her arms were dragging his arms back- 
wards, until he could feel the vertebrae begin to snap. "Better 
scream." * 

He held out for a moment longer, and she upped the pull. "I can 
hold it for an hour," she mentioned, hardly breathing harder. "It's 
worse than space chills. Better scream." 

But the advice was needless. She'd increased the tension again, 
and the scream ripped out of his throat. She kicked him with casual 
efficiency, hoisted him over her shoulder, and carried him down to 
his cabin. 

"You'll be all right in an hour, sonny. Only, when you come out, 
stick a sir after anything you say to me — or madam, I'm not particu- 
lar. And smile, damn you . . . um-hmm. I think I'm going to like 
this trip!" 

Then she located a slip of cloth in a pocket and held it out. " 'S 
all right, sonny. Go right ahead and cry it out. A good cry is good 
for you. Here." 

Maybe it was the power of suggestion; Mark felt tears running 
hotly into his eyes, and all his determination couldn't hold them 
back. 



He had stopped feeling sorry for himself a few minutes later, and 



34 



WORLDS BEYOND 



something in the back of his mind had recognized that things could 
get no worse. With that decision, even the pain couldn't keep his 
thoughts back. He was remembering everything he knew of space 
chills, and grimly checking over the details of the ship in his head. 
The fever thermometer was broken, and the only other temperature 
gauge was on the thermostat. 

His head reeled as he slipped out of the room and down to the 
engine room. There he worked quickly and surely, assembling what 
he needed. And he was back in the cabin when she knocked. 

"Your watch. Hit the deck." 

He plastered a smile on his face, and came out. "Yes, ma'am. 
I relieve you, ma'am." 

After her door clicked, he lost no time. It was easy to clip the 
bearing on the thermometer needle, and to solder it onto the figure 
72°. His watch gave him a timer, and the other little contacts went 
into place, one by one. Finally, he nodded in satisfaction. He'd have 
to readjust it every so often, beginning gently and working up. But 
it was a good job. 

And the sleeping tablets hadn't been among the bottles broken, 
fortunately. He'd slipped them out and had been using them to help 
sleep away what time he could, but there were still almost a thousand 
in the bottle. 

It should be plenty. 

At that, she held out better than he expected. It was two weeks 
before she mentioned it, though that might have been because the 
beginning was so gradual. But space chills, a violent reaction of the 
body to radiation that couldn't all be shielded out from space, were 
the worst thing that could happen to any space-voyager — even a 
Spaceman, 

They were near Saturn when it finally happened, the final stage 
he'd been waiting for. He'd left her coffee half an hour before, 
spiked with a sleeping pill, and the temperature cycle had gone into 
high. Now he stopped to wipe his face and hands carefully with 
astringent, and stepped into the control room. 

She shook her head groggily, and ran sweating fingers over her 
forehead. And this time, finally, she got up from the chair and 



THE DEADLIEST FEMALE 



35 



motioned him down. "Mark — I got 'em again. The fever, this time. 
Here, feel." 

She'd dropped the feud a week before, and he'd let it seem to die. 
Now he put his hand — still cool from astringent — to her head, and 
shook his own. "If we only had some medicine. . . . How long since 
you thought you were freezing? Two hours, wasn't it?" 

She nodded unhappily. She'd stopped studying the thermometer, 
convinced that the fault was her own, since he seemed to feel no 
change in the temperature. 

"Mark, I'm scared. We can't go on — I can't. There's medicine 
for it down there — down on Titan. Mark, you've got to set down at 
Gilead!" 

He debated it, his face carefully showing doubt — some of which 
was real. Making a landing on a crude port without two fully com- 
petent Spacemen was tricky. But her hand clutched at his arm. 
"Mark, I'll help all I can. And — I'll do all the cooking, every bit of 
washing. I'll say sir all the way to Pluto and back. I've got to finish 
this trip — it's my last. And I need the medicine." 

Finally he nodded, and reached out for the controls, refiguring 
the course. She looked her gratitude, and was gone, wiping perspira- 
tion from her forehead. He pulled out his astringent, and made sure 
his face still seemed cool, in spite of the heat of the air. He was 
fresh again when she came back, bringing him coffee and a bottle ol 
cognac — the only liquor aboard the ship. 

It was a long, weary business, fighting down the velocity they'd 
built up all the way from Earth and jockeying the ship down to 
Titan; but he was proud of his landing, and she was full of praise. 
It hadn't been bad for a first major landing, at that. He accepted 



the double slug of cognac she poured, and let her refill the glass 
before he got up. 

"The doctor's house is up there, just over the hill," she said. He 
nodded, buckled on a jacket, and headed out. 

Sure, he'd get the doctor. He grinned as he saw the distant figures 
of two Spacemen coming across the field toward the ship. She could 
take care of explanations, until he got back with the doc. And while 
they had the right to go aboard, he knew the Spacemen here wouldn't 



36 WORLDS BEYOND 

— there was still enough fear that space chills were contagious. When 
the doctor was working on her, he could remove the tricks on the 
thermostat. 

And then let her yelp when the medico said she had nothing but 
blue funk from plain fear of carrying plutonium to Pluto. They'd 
pull her back Earthside, and he'd get someone else to carry on the 
rest of the trip with him — someone junior to him! 

Then, as he crossed to the other side of the hill, it hit him: 
drowsiness, like a numbing drug poured into his veins. ... He was 
getting groggier by the minute as he fought down toward the doctor's 
little dome. He felt someone helping him inside the dome, and then 

"Drunk," he heard a man's heavy voice say. But he couldn't pro- 
test. 

It seemed only moments later when the voice came again, repeat- 
ing, "Drunk." 

"Yeah." It was a woman's voice. "Yeah, scared of the Pluto 
hop. Lee had a lot of trouble with him. How's he now?" 

"About ready to come to. I shot enough stimulant into him." 

A door opened and shut then, and Mark opened his eyes, with an 
effort. But his head was clearing rapidly now. And it was a Space- 
woman who stood there. 

She looked at him in disgusted silence as he staggered to a wash 
basin and began ducking his head. When he was finished and fully 
clothed, he started out the nearest door, but she motioned to an- 
other. It was a back exit, and he noticed that she stuck to dimly 
lighted ways, still moving in silence. Finally she swung around. 

"All right, I suppose I'll have to get used to you. I'm Pat Run- 
yon. I run the satellite freight here — and from now on, brother, 
you're my helper. It's tough — you'll wish you were back on the 
Pluto hop — but you'll run it with me. And you won't go running to 
a doctor before I can open the port whenever we land, either. Give 
me those lieutenant bars!" 

"Eh?" 

"You heard me. Message from Earth to demote you when Lee 
got authority to replace you with my helper — a nice guy, he was, too. 



THE DEADLIEST FEMALE 37 

Then they stick me with you for the rest of his contract. Well, stop 
staring at me, you'll get to know me in three years. But, brother, 
don't get cold feet on me. I'm not soft-hearted like Lee. I can't 
stand a yellow Spaceman! Here, she told me to give you this." 

It was a little bundle of wires and relays, with his watch in the 
middle of it. He looked at it slowly. Then he looked up at the sky 
where Pluto should be, thinking of three long, back-breaking years 
ahead of him . . . three years, to give Lee Tanming plenty of time 
to laugh about the way she'd ground a raw kid's face into the dust — 
time to tell the story of that kid's clumsy trick with a thermostat, 
and her own cleverness with the cognac, until it grew state — time 
enough even to forget the thing had ever happened. 

But Mark knew that he wouldn't forget. 

The same slow, bitter surge of hatred was in Mark Tayowa three 
years later as he dropped the freighter down, unconscious of the 
dozen gravities that were hitting her deck. It burned in his eyes as 
he passed from Spaceman's bar to hotel and on to another city. No- 
body laughed at him now — long. He had chain-lightning reactions 
now, and muscle sheaths that almost rang when hit; he also had his 
lieutenant's bars back and the right to name his own next job, but 
those were unimportant. What counted was that he had three months' 
free time coming. 

It took him just three weeks to track her down. She wasn't Lee 
Tanming, any more; she was Mrs. Ivan Aiello. Interestingly enough, 
Aiello was the man she'd picked up from Titan to replace him — 
and he was currently off to Mercury, which left things nicely un- 
complicated. Mark smiled thinly and ran his tongue over his lips. 

He was vaguely grateful to the builders of his race, who'd put no 
nonsense about chivalry into his makeup. As it was, he could beat 
hell out of her and enjoy every minute, of it. 

He punched the bell, noting that this community system for the 
Spacemen beat the old creche and community halls in every way. 
The houses were neat, the yards attractive, and here and there the 
skinny, big-eyed children seemed happier and healthier. 

Then someone threw open the door, and he looked up to see a 
Spacewoman standing mere. He blinked, and changed the words in 



38 



WORLDS BEYOND 



his head. Not a Spacewoman ... a Space angel. She was unmis- 
takably of his race — her height, just under his own; the hint of the 
Oriental in her black eyes and ivory skin; her slender frame. But 
there was nothing angular about her. She glowed. She was utterly, 
disarmingly beautiful. 

She frowned at his stare, and then suddenly laughed. "Mark!" 
she said. "Mark Tayowa. And how wonderful you're looking! Pat 
must have done you good. Come in, let me get you some coffee." 
She paused, stricken by a sudden thought. "You're not mad any 
more, are you? Here, Herbie, get that top out of your mouth. And 
you, Hank, stop pulling Fido's tail. Meet the twin brats, Mark." 

Mark followed her in, still dazed. It couldn't be Lee. He remem- 
bered the scrawny, neuter figure as well as if he'd had her picture 
pasted into his helmet these long three years. He started forward, 
then stopped as she came out of the kitchen, carrying cups and a pot 
of coffee, and looking completely domestic. 

For want of anything else to do, he sat down and tried awkward- 
ly to look interested in the twins. But they were normal enough 
Spaceman children. And she still had that glow that drew his eyes 
to her. 

"You're beautiful," he said finally, and his voice was harsh. "I 
didn't recognize you." 

"Oh, that!" She laughed at him. "You, Herbie. Stop it! Just 
wait'll your father comes back from Mercury. He'll give it to you. 
Mark — you didn't expect me to stay neuter after the change, did 
you? Silly kid! I'H bet you never saw a Spacewoman over thirty- 
five before, did you? Though Pat Runyon must be about thirty-four, 
come to think of it. We — well, we develop." 

It was too magnificent an understatement; Mark couldn't think of 
any way to handle it. He stood up slowly, awkwardly, feeling like a 
fool. 

"Oh, come on, you're not mad? I've thought about it lots of 
times. (Her-bie!) I was so damn mad at having to quit space to 
be some Spaceman's wife. I used to have the craziest ideas — I actu- 
ally hated the idea of going through puberty, at my age. . . . And you 
were an awful infant. I've often wondered what happened to you, 
you know. Ivan and I've had more fun guessing about that." 



THE DEADLIEST FEMALE 



39 



He nodded. "Yeah. I had fun, too. I guess maybe I'm still a 
little green around the ears." 

"No-o." She considered him, smiling. "No, Mark. You've grown 
up. Mm-hmm. (Hank, let the dog alone!) But sit down, Mark, 
have some coffee. For old time's sake. We've got a lot to talk over, 
haven't we? (Herbie!) And I'm awfully lonesome — Ivan won't be 
home for another week." 

Mark put his hands in his pockets slowly, and turned to the door. 
He took them out again, looked at Lee thoughtfully. Then he stared 
down at the two children. His shoulders drooped as he thrust his 
fists deep into his pockets. 

She could never stand three gravities now, judging by the soft 
femininity of her. 

"Sorry," he mumbled. "Like to, but I've got to report back. Just 
thought I'd drop in, say hello." 

"Oh, but Mark . . . (Hank, if you don't stop that!) Mark . . ." 

But he was already down the steps, moving toward the waiting 
cab, letting her voice die out behind him. 

Three years of sweating, driving his body until it ached every 
night, goading Pat Runyon to throw the book at him, picking a fight 
with every Spaceman he ran into . . . and now a soft, female form 
and a couple of kids had made it all useless. He doubled up a fist, 
trying to imagine Lee's neck inside his grasp. But it wouldn't come 
as a picture now — the old straight neck with its boyish tendons was 
gone, and the softly rounded throat he'd seen wouldn't replace it. 

He cursed. "Take me to the nearest bar," he ordered the driver 
curtly. 

Then slowly he reconsidered. "Make it the spaceport. And step 
on it." 

He saw the driver throw him an odd look, but he didn't care what 
Normals thought now. There was still time to ask for his old job 
back, out on Titan, freighting around the satellites. He took a deep, 
slow breath and leaned back against the cushions. 

In another year, Pat Runyon would be thirty-five — and the change 
would begin. Pat wasn't a bad person, come to think of it. Not 
bad at all. A good person to know. . . . 



by H. B. Hickey 

LIKE A BIRD, 
LIKE A FISH 

Against the incredible complexity of the alien ship 
from yesterday, Earth had only the faith of Father 
Vincent — and the devious simplicity of Pablo. . . . 

When the priest came over the brow of the hill and looked down 
into the hollow and saw the great machine and the things that 
swarmed around it, his stomach lurched and he fell down on his 
knees and crossed himself. The villagers did the same. 

"In nomine patris, et filii, et spiritus sancti," the priest murmured. 

"Father," the villagers said. "Do not go down there." 

"Who then will go?" he asked, lifting his skirts and preparing to 
descend. 

"But they are plainly of the Devil! We will bring guns and send 
to the city for cannon, and — " 

The priest smiled. "If they are truly of Satan, what good are 
guns and cannon?" 

Very gently he removed their restraining hands. Clutching his 
cross before him, he half clambered, half slid down into the hollow. 
The things around the machine stopped what they were doing and 
he could tell they were watching him. 

There was a great fear in the heart of the priest, but with the 
help of the cross and his faith he fought it down. 

"In the name of our Lord, what are you?" he demanded. 

There was no reply. 

40 




LIKE A BIRD, LIKE A FISH 



41 



"From where do you come?" he asked. 

He could feel something probing at his mind, feeling around his 
question. Where are you from? In his mind were all the possibili- 
ties, all the seas and the continents and the planets. And beyond 
those the galaxies and the universes. 

The thing that probed his mind rejected all the possibilities there. 

"Not where," came the thought. "When." 

"When?" 

"Yesterday." 

"I do not understand," the priest said. 

"This is the world of space," the thought came. "You live in the 
world of space, of places. In moving across space, you create time. 

"We live in the world of time. We move across time to create 
space." 

"I do not understand." 

"No matter. Your yesterday and our now lie across each other. 
The machine brought us through the wall." 

There is no end to God's wonders, the priest thought. "Welcome," 
he said aloud. 

"At what point in space are we?" came the question. "Where?" 

"In our world? In Mexico. In a far corner of Guadalajara. It is 
a simple village, and I am Father Vincent, the priest." 

They saw Guadalajara and Mexico and the village and the people, 
everything that was in the priest's mind. There was nothing capable 
of harming them, nothing to fear. 

Only one concept in the priest's mind was not tangible. They 
tried to see it but it remained nebulous. 

"Our machine does not move through your space," the thought 
came. "According to our theory it should function, but it does not. 
We entered space and found ourselves here. Now we cannot move." 

"Obviously something is broken, or not working properly," the 
priest said. He knew Latin and several other languages and a good- 
ly amount of astronomy, but mechanical things were a mystery to 
him. 

"Pablo could probably fix it," he said. Pablo can fix anything." 
"Who is Pablo?" 

"A farmer. But God has given him this gift of mechanics." 



42 



WORLDS BEYOND 



Again God. This was the thing they could not see in the priest's 
mind, the nebulous concept 

"Perhaps God will come himself to fix it." 

Father Vincent was shocked. And then he realized that these 
things were ignorant of the Lord. And he realized that into his 
hands had children of darkness come, and that through him salva- 
tion might be brought to them. 

It was an honor and an opportunity so great that he almost fell 
to his knees again in thankfulness. 

"Do not fear," he said. "Pablo will fix your machine." 

And he told them about Pablo. How since Pablo was a boy he 
had this wonderful gift; how he had been able to repair the first 
automobile he had ever seen; how without training he had been 
able to take a fine watch apart, fashion replacement parts and make 
it work better than new. In short, how Pablo could make anything 
work, no matter how simple or complex. 

"It is as if his untrained mind sees into the very soul of mechani- 
cal things. No, never fear. Simply tell Pablo how it is supposed to 
work, and he will make it do so." 

He felt their rejection of this statement. 

"If we ourselves, who devised and constructed the machine, can- 
not make it function, how can this Pablo?" 

The priest shrugged. "Does a flower know the Divine laws by 
which it grows? But it grows. So with Pablo." 

"Then bring him." 

There was a tone of command in the thought which struck a warn- 
ing note in Father Vincent's mind. But he tucked up his skirts and 
climbed out of the hollow and asked one of the villagers to run and 
fetch Pablo. "Tell him it is urgent." 

"Listen, Father," they begged. "These things are evil. Let us 
get guns. The brush here is dry. We can set fire to it." 

"How can you have such terrible thoughts? They are different 
from us, but still children of God. Now go." 

While the villager ran to get Pablo, the priest stayed down in the 
hollow, alone with the things from the machine. The rest of the vil- 
agers hovered about the rim. 



LIKE A BIRD, LIKE A FISH 



43 



"They are simple people," Father Vincent explained. "When they 
saw this machine materialize out of nothingness here, they thought 
you were devils, and they ran for me." 

Devils. This too was a concept that was not tangible. 

"Are you at war with these devils?" came the thought. 

"Always. Always," the priest sighed. 

He told them something about the world in which they found 
themselves. In turn they told him a few things about the stratum 
of time in which they lived, which he found wondrous. 

"And tell me," he said, "do you have not God? To whom do 
you pray? Who is the ruler of your world?" 

"We are the rulers of our world." 

The answer struck him like a cold wind. "Are there many of 
you?" 

They saw in his mind the number of the people on Earth. "Your 
space could not hold all of us." 

And then, because they could see in his mind that there were no 
weapons Earth could use against them, they told him how they had 
conquered their stratum of time, and let him see the manner in 
which they had done it. 

And finally, with nothing left to conquer, they had turned their 
minds outside their own world. One of them, such as would be 
called a scientist, had theorized that a spatial world must exist, and 
that it would be a coefficient of their time world. So the machine 
had been built. 

Now that the experiment had proved successful, and as soon as 
they could move through space also, they would go back and build 
machines. 

Father Vincent was sorry that the villagers had called him. They 
should have set the fire. But it was too late. / 

"You will come in peace?" he asked, his voice beginning to 
tremble. "You will do no harm?" 

But he knew the question was futile. They would come to Earth 
as they had come to all of their own world. 

He clutched the cross tightly and prayed the Lord to have mercy 
on the children of the spatial world. 

It would not even take a major miracle. Suppose Pablo were not 



44 



WORLDS BEYOND 



found? Not too much to hope. Then this machine would not be 
repaired and there would be no more of them. 

But that hope was dashed. Manuel Ortiz stuck his head over the 
rim and called down: "Father! I have talked with Pablo. He will 
come. Manana." 

"Tomorrow?" the thought came. The priest nodded. 

At least one day of grace. Not much, but something. A runner 
could be dispatched and within a single day help might be on its 
way. Guns, soldiers, planes, bombs. 

Why, he wondered, could not these abominations have material- 
ized near a village with telephone or telegraph? But even so, a day. 
In the meantime he might temporize, soothe. 

"Perhaps you are in need of food, water — " he said. 

"Food," came the thought. "Yes, food." 

Some of the things started up the slope; moving jerkily and un- 
surely. In a panic, the villagers scattered in all directions. But an 
invisible wall seemed to rise in their paths and they stopped short. 
They were trapped, as though in a cage of clear glass. 

Manuel Ortiz screamed as the things pressed around him. He 
fought, still screaming, as they lifted him and bore him down the 
slope. 

"In the name of Heaven!" Father Vincent shouted, and flung 
himself forward gravely. "Stop!" 

Slimy things pressed him back. His struggles,. his calls on Divine 
help, were of no use. Manuel Ortiz vanished into the great machine. 

"Now go!" the thought came. There was nothing for the priest 
to do but obey. 

All that night the candles burned in the church in the village. 
Father Vincent prayed for the soul of Manuel Ortiz and for all the 
souls in the village, and beyond that for all humanity. 

For there was apparently no hope. 

He had sent men, the fleetest and the strongest, by every possible 
road to get help, to warn the world of this incarnate evil. But 
around the village had sprung up a great invisible wall, and no man 
could penetrate it 

In the morning the priest was still in the church, sleepless, when 



LIKE A BIRD, LIKE A FISH 



45 



he heard shouts in the street. He ran out, his old eyes blinking at 
the strong sunlight, and saw some of the things approaching. Other- 
wise the street was clear. 

"Where is Pablo?" the question came. 

Closing the doors of the church before he answered, so that not 
even the awful odor of these abominations could enter the sacred 
precincts, he said, "I suppose he will come. Too soon, alas." 

"Send another to get him." 

There was nothing he could do. Going to the house of Avilla, 
the shoemaker, he found them aH all cowering in corners. After 
much persuasion Avilla's oldest boy agreed to go. 

In an hour the boy returned. He stood several hundred feet away 
and shouted: 

"Pablo will come!" 

"When?" was the thought. 

"When?" the priest shouted. 

"Mariana!" the boy yelled, and scampered away out of sight. 
Again tomorrow. 

"You do not understand," Father Vincent said. "Pablo is a man 
who will not be hurried." 

One of the abominations pointed an instrument at the adobe 
shack of Gomez, the leather worker, and it was as if an earthquake 
had struck the house. It quivered, it shook, it tottered and fell. 
There were screams from inside and then silence and only a pile 
of grey dust where the house had stood. 

"I will go myself to bring Pablo," the priest said. 

He went down the dusty road, reciting the litany for the dead, 
tears streaming from his eyes. 

Pablo lay under a tree. He was a tall young man, wide in the 
shoulders and with incredible hands. When he saw the priest com- 
ing he rose up on his elbows and smiled at him. 

Many times Father Vincent had urge* x him to go away to the 
big cities where his great gift could be enhanced. He could have 
become world-renowned, a famous man. 

"Bah," Pablo has snorted. "Who can stand the filthy cities? Lis- 
ten, Padre, I can drink a gallon of wine without getting drunk, I 



46 



WORLDS BEYOND 



can eat a dead horse without sickening. I have my Carla. I am 
happy. Had God wanted me to be a city man he would have ar- 
ranged me to be born there, would he not?" 

It was really too bad that Pablo had not gone away to the city. 

"Pablo — " the priest began. 

Pablo cut him off before he could say anything further. 
"Padre, rest yourself and hear the thing I have been thinking." 
"Pablo—" 

"No, listen. Last night, you see, I was lying under this very 
tree and watching the heavens. And it came to me that all of this 
above me was like a great machine, moving through the sky. And 
then it came to me, watching how the various stars were arranged, 
that they were not in good balance. And I thought that God was not 
much of a mechanic." 

"Do not blaspheme, Pablo," the priest begged. 

"No. Wait," Pablo said. "And then it came to me that all this 
I could see might be only a small part of a much larger machine, 
and that if only I knew how it was supposed to work I would see 
that other and further stars all moved in perfect harmony with these." 

He stirred, sighing deeply. "And it came to me what a truly di- 
vine mechanic our Lord really is." 

"We cannot fathom His designs," he priest murmured. 

Pablo nodded and his eyes grew brighter. "But do you know, 
Padre, that it is when I look at my Carla that I see most clearly 
how perfectly the Lord fashions." 

"Pablo!" 

"No, listen." He twisted around. 

"When Carla moves her arm, her whole body balances with the 
motion. When she moves her lovely throat, so, there is a counter- 
balance, so." 

Pablo rose to his feet, quite excited now. "At first I thought, as 
with the heavens, that / could have fashioned better. For instance, 
Carta's arm. I would have put the fulcrum closer, for better lifting 
power." 

He laughed aloud. "But then from shoulder to elbow she would 
have been too long! I tell you, Padre, the Lord is the only perfect 
mechanic. And my Carla is his noblest work." 



LIKE A BIRD, LIKE A FISH 



•47 



Getting up on his feet and stretching languidly, Pablo smiled at 
the priest. 

"And now, I suppose it is about the strange machine and the 
strange visitors, eh? Well, I will fix whatever is necessary." 

"No," Father Vincent quavered. "No, you must not!" 

He was too late. Pablo looked past him and said suddenly, 
"Mother of God!" 

On the inside it was truly wonderful, the machine. Pablo stared 
at the maze of equipment, unbelievably polished and shining and 
beautiful. 

"Ah," he sighed, and ran his hand over the metal surfaces. He 
stuck his head out and called, "Padre! Come see this marvelous 
thing!" 

"Pablo!" the priest called. 

"Can you make it work?" came the query. 

"I can make anything work," Pablo snorted. 

"Pablo!" the priest begged. 

The things came at the old man and he defied them, his cross 
held before him, shouting at Pablo to come out. There was angry 
intent in the air as the things came close to Father Vincent. 

"Hey!" Pablo shouted. "Let him alone! Touch one hair and I 
refuse to fix this machine!" 

There was no doubt at all that Pablo meant what he said. The 
things retreated, leaving Father Vincent unharmed. 

"Tell me," Pablo said, "what all this is supposed to do." 

They told hi mabout the strata of time and space, like streams 
flowing in layers, and how this machine was to go from one stream 
to another. They explained fully the theory. 

And then they explained the intended functions of the various 
parts. 

Pablo listened closely. With abstract concepts he was lost, but 
with operational concepts he was truly a genius. Everything became 
related and clear as crystal. 

"Ah," he said. "So. The power comes from here along here, and 
this moves you along the surface of the stream. And then you go 
down into the stream." 



48 



WORLDS BEYOND 



His hand described a dive. "So! Yes. But now you are within 
the stream you cannot move, the power does not drive through. Eh?" 

It seemed so. Theoretically, the machine should work. Practical- 
ly, it did not. Why it should work in one way and not in another, 
they didn't know. 

"Plainly," Pablo grunted. "Or you would not need me. You are 
like men who catch fish with their net, but wonder why it will not 
hold water to drink." 

"You can fix it so it will move through your space?" 

"Naturally. I will take these parts here, and these, to the black- 
smith's shop and alter them." He moved off to join the priest. 
"Mariana. I will do it tomorrow." 

"You will fix it now. And we will watch you closely while you do." 

"Pablo," the priest said, "we have been granted these few min- 
utes. I beg you not to repair this evil machine." 

"The machine is beautiful," Pablo demurred. "Those who built 
it may be evil, but the machine, no." 

"You must refuse!" 

"If I refuse, they will kill you, Padre." 

"I am not afraid to die, my son." 

"Nor I. But further than that, what they have done to the house 
of Gomez they will do to the whole village." 

"Even so," the priest agreed. "The village, and perhaps all the 
surrounding countryside. But if they cannot move from here they 
will eventually be detroyed." 

He put his hand on Pablo's arm. "Innocent people will die, true, 
but the Lord will forgive us. What is one village against the whole 
world?" 

"Nothing, were my Carla not in the village. She would die too." 

Pablo scratched his head and thought awhile. 

"No, to me it is equal, Padre. You have told me a sparrow is as 
much in the Lord's eyes as a thousand men. And to me there is as 
much perfection in my Carla as in all the universe." 

"Please do not say such things, Pablo." 

"I can't help it," Pablo told him. "I am a mechanic, not a priest. 
I see things as God gave me to see them." 



LIKE A BIRD, LIKE A FISH 



49 



"But later they will come back and Carla will die anyway. Don't 
you see that?" 

Pablo shrugged. "Later. Who knows what will happen later? 
Meanwhile, we shall have kissed a good many times more." 

He patted the priest's shoulder and said, "Come now, Padre. Give 
me your blessing." 

Then he strode back to the great machine and looked full at the 
abominations before it. 

"Understand, now," he said. "If I fix it the village must remain 
unharmed." 

"Understood. Agreed." 

But before he entered the great machine again there came the 
thought, heavy with menace: "We will test it, however." 

"Naturally," Pablo said. "Have no fear. When it is done you will 
fly like birds." 

In his wonderful hands tools and metals came to life, seeming to 
have minds of their own, so fast did they move, so unerringly. With 
not an excess stroke they were hammered, beaten, forged, bent, 
shaped, chiseled. 

The sweat ran down Pablo's chest and his back and his arms. He 
shook the drops time and again from his face. But he did not take 
his eyes from what he was doing. 

And finally, when everything was done, he carried it all back to 
the great machine. And when the last queerly-shaped part was back 
in place as he wanted it he straightened up, sighing. 

"There," he said. 

"It will work now?" 

"Of course." And he went out to join the priest. 

The things were all inside the machine now. There was a faint 
hum. Slowly it lifted from the hollow. It swung left, then right. 
It moved swiftly now, smoothly. 

"It is a beautiful machine," Pablo sighed. "Look at it, Padre!" 

Father Vincent closed his eyes. "I had hoped that somehow you 
had fixed it so it would explode." 

"Explode?" Pablo snorted. "They are no fools, Padre. They could 
never understand exactly how I fixed it, but they knew it was so." 



50 



WORLDS BEYOND 



The priest opened his eyes again. He and Pablo watched the 
machine spiral upward. 

And then suddenly it was gone. It had vanished. 

"Pray, Pablo," the priest said. "Pray that you may be forgiven." 

"For what?" Pablo said absently. He was still watching the place 
in the sky where the machine had been. 

"They are gone. Back to their own. And when they return it 
will be the end." 

"Bah," Pablo said. "They will not return." He shook his head. 
"But really, Padre, it was a beautiful machine." 

"Not return? You mean you did not really fix it?" Father Vin- 
cent clutched at Pablo, shaking him. 

"Certainly I fixed it," Pablo said. "You saw it fly, didn't you?" 

"Then what?" 

"Then nothing. It is a wonderful machine, but not a perfect ma- 
chine. Only God could make a perfect machine." 

And then, seeing that the priest did not understand, Pablo put his 
strong young arm around the old man's shoulders and spoke to him 
kindly. 

"Their trouble, Padre, is that they do not know that God is a 
mechanic." 

"Please, Pablo." 

"I do not blaspheme, Padre. Listen, it is like I said about my 
Carla. If the Lord had made the leverages of her back so that she 
could move more strongly in one direction, then she could not move 
so gracefully in the other. This would be poor mechanics, of which 
He is not capable." 

The priest groaned. "Please, stop with the leverages. Speak so I 
can understand." 

"I am speaking so you can understand!" Pablo shouted, growing 
excited. With an effort he calmed himself. "Forgive me, Padre." 

He tried again. "Look, Padre, it is like a bird. A bird is made 
by God to fly swiftly through the air. A bird skims swiftly over the 
surface of the water. You see this?" 

"Yes." 

"Very well. Now, the bird sees a fish deep down in the water. 
The fish moves very slowly compared to the bird. So the bird thinks 



LIKE A BIRD, LIKE A FISH 



51 



that surely it can seize this slow little fish. And it dives down into 
the water, very deep. Can it seize the fish?" 
"No." 

"Of course not. Because the very thing which makes the bird 
able to fly swiftly through the air, that very construction also makes 
it impossible for the bird to swim deep in water. God has fashioned 
things so that each works in its own way only." 

He sighed. "So. Thus with the machine. Before, it could fly 
through their Time, but not through our Space. Now it is fixed so 
it flies through Space." 

"But still through Time also!" the priest said. "It vanished!" 

"A bird dives into the water, too," Pablo reminded him. "But 
that does not mean it will swim." 

He sighed again. "What part of Time were they from, Padre?" 

"Yesterday," Father Vincent said. 

"I do not think they will reach yesterday. Maybe tomorrow, but 
not yesterday." Pablo laughed. "Yes, maybe manana, Padre." 

They walked back toward town together, each lost in his own 
thoughts. After a while, just before they reached the village, Pablo 
halted. "1 have been thinking, Padre," he said. 

"Of what, my son?" 

"Of Carta and myself. But especially of Carta." 
"So?" 

"So I think Carta and I should be married. At once." 
"I have been hoping for this a long time," the priest said, smiling. 
"We will arrange it." He laughed aloud. "Manana." 
"Not manana," Pablo said. "Not this. Today, Padre." 



Tilt/ 

Two University of Washington professors have come forward 
with a solemn warning that pinball playing — like alcohol, nem- 
butal and biting the fingernails — can be habit-forming. The 
professors were unanimous up to this point, but differed when 
it came to recommending that the nickel machines be banned. 
One for, one against. Neither thought there is need yet for a 
"Pinballers Anonymous" — though both recommended psycho- 
therapy in extreme cases. Anybody got a nickel? 




I THE OLD 
BROWN COAT 



by 

Lord Dunsany 



The thing was immensely valuable; but why — and how? 

My friend, Mr. Douglas Ainslie, tells me that Sir James Barrie once 
told him this story. The story, or rather the fragment, was as follows. 

A man strolling into an auction somewhere abroad, I think it 
must have been France, for they bid in francs, found they were 
selling old clothes. And following some idle whim he soon found 
himself bidding for an old coat. A man bid against him, he bid 
against the man. Up and up went the price till the old coat was 
knocked down to him for twenty pounds. As he went away with 
the coat he saw the other bidder looking at him with an expression 
of fury. 

That's as far as the story goes. But how, Mr. Ainslie asked me, 
did the matter develop, and why that furious look? I at once made 
enquiries at a reliable source and have ascertained that the man's 
name was Peters, who thus oddly purchased the coat, and that he 
took it to the Rue de Rivoli, to a hotel where he lodged, from the 
little low, dark auction room by the Seine in which he concluded the 
bargain. There he examined it, off and on, all day and much of the 
next morning, a light brown overcoat with tails, without discovering 
any excuse, far less a reason, for having spent twenty pounds on so 



Copyright 1919 by John R. Luce & Co. 



THE OLD BROWN COAT 



53 



worn a thing. And late next morning to his sitting room looking 
out on the Gardens of the Tuileries the man with the furious look 
was ushered in. 

Grim he stood, silent and angry, till the guiding waiter went. Not 
till then did he speak, and his words came clear and brief, welling 
up from deep emotions: 

"How did you dare to bid against me?" 

His name was Santiago. And for many moments Peters found no 
excuse to offer, no apology, nothing in extenuation. Lamely at last, 
weakly, knowing his argument to be of no avail, he muttered some- 
thing to the intent that Mr. Santiago could have outbid him. 

"No," said the stranger. "We don't want all the town in this. 
This is a matter between you and me." He paused, then added in 
his fierce, curt way: "A thousand pounds, no more." 

Almost dumbly Peters accepted the offer and, pocketing the thous- 
and pounds that was paid him, and apologizing for the inconvenience 
he had unwittingly caused, tried to show the stranger out. But 
Santiago strode swiftly on before him, taking the coat, and was gone. 

There followed between Peters and his second thoughts another 
long afternoon of bitter reproaches. Why ever had he let go so 
thoughtlessly a garment that so easily fetched a thousand pounds? 
And the more he brooded on this the more clearly did he perceive 
that he had lost an unusual opportunity of a first class investment 
of a speculative kind. He knew men perhaps better than he knew 
materials; and, though he could not see in that old brown coat the 
value of so much as a thousand pounds, he saw far more than that 
in the man's eager need for it. An afternoon of brooding over lost 
opportunities led to a night of remorse, and scarcely had day dawned 
when he ran to his sitting-room to see if he still had safe the card 
of Santiago. And there was the neat and perfumed carte de visile 
with Santiago's Parisian address in the corner. 

That morning he sought him out, and found Santiago seated at a 
table with chemicals and magnifying glasses beside him examining, 
as it lay spread wide before him, the old brown coat. And Peters 
fancied he wore a puzzled air. 

They came at once to business. Peters was rich and asked San- 
tiago to name his price, and that small dark man admitted financial 



54 



WORLDS BEYOND 



straits, and so was willing to sell for thirty thousand pounds. A 
little bargaining followed, the price came down and the old brown 
coat changed hands once more, for twenty thousand pounds. 

Let any who may be inclined to doubt my story understand that in 
the City, as any respectable company promoter will tell them, twenty 
thousand pounds is invested almost daily with less return for it than 
an old tail coat. And, whatever doubts Mr. Peters felt that day 
about the wisdom of his investment, there before him lay that tan- 
gible return, that something that may be actually fingered and seen, 
which is so often denied to the investor in gold mines and other Se- 
lected Investments. Yet as the days wore on and the old coat grew 
no younger, nor any more wonderful, nor the least useful, Peters 
began once more to doubt his astuteness. Before the week was out 
his doubts had grown acute. And then one morning, Santiago re- 
turned. A man, he said, had just arrived from Spain, a friend un- 
expected all of a sudden in Paris, from whom he might borrow 
money: and would Peters resell the coat for thirty thousand pounds? 

It was then that Peters, seeing his opportunity, cast aside the pre- 
tense that he had maintained for so long of knowing something about 
the mysterious coat, and demanded to know its properties. Santiago 
swore that he knew not, and repeatedly swore the same by many 
sacred names; but when Peters as often threatened not to sell San- 
tiago at last drew out a thin cigar and, lighting it and settling him- 
self in a chair, told all he knew of the coat. 

He had been on its tracks for weeks with his suspicions growing 
all the time that it was no ordinary coat, and at last he had run it to 
earth in that auction room but would not bid for it more than twenty 
pounds for fear of letting everyone into the secret. What the secret 
was he swore he did not know, but this much he knew all along, that 
the weight of the coat was absolutely nothing; and he had discovered 
by testing it with acids that the brown stuff of which the coat was 
made was neither cloth nor silk nor any known material, and would 
neither burn nor tear. He believed it to be some undiscovered 
element. And the properties of the coat which he was convinced 
were .marvelous he felt sure of discovering within another week by 
means of experiments with his chemicals. Again he offered thirty 
thousand pounds, to be paid within two or three days if all went 



THE OLD BROWN COAT 



55 



well. And then they started haggling together as business men will. 

And all the morning went by over the gardens of the Tuileries and 
the afternoon came on, and only by two o'clock they arrived at an 
understanding, on a basis, as they called it, of thirty thousand guineas. 
And the old tail coat was brought out and spread on the table, and 
they examined it together and chatted about its properties, all the 
more friendly for their strenuous argument. And Santiago was ris- 
ing up to go, and Peters pleasantly holding out his hand, when a step 
was heard on the stair. It echoed up to the room, the door opened. 
And an elderly laboring man came stumping in. He walked with 
difficulty, almost like a bather who has been swimming and floating 
all the morning and misses the buoyancy of the water when he has 
come to land. He stumped up to the table without speaking and 
there at once caught sight of the old brown coat. 

"Why," he said, "that be my old coat." 

And without another word he put it on. In the fierce glare of his 
eyes as he fitted on that coat, carefully fastening the buttons, button- 
ing up the flap of a pocket here, unbuttoning one there, neither 
Peters nor Santiago found a word to say. They sat there wondering 
how they had dared to bid for that brown tail coat, how they had 
dared to buy it, even to touch it, they sat there silent without a single 
excuse. And with no word more the old laborer stumped across the 
room, opened wide the double window that looked on the Tuileries 
gardens and, flashing back over his shoulder one look that was full 
of scorn, stumped away up through the air at an angle of forty de- 
grees. 

Peters* and Santiago saw him bear to his left from the window; 
passing diagonally over the Rue de Rivoli and over a corner of the 
Tuileries gardens; they saw him clear the Louvre, and thence they 
dumbly watched him still slanting upwards, stepping out with a 
firmer and more confident stride as he dwindled and dwindled away 
with his old brown coat. 

Neither spoke till he was no more than a speck in the sky far 
away over Paris going South Eastwards. 

"Well I am blowed," said Peters. 

But Santiago sadly shook his head. "I knew it was a good coat," 
he said. "I knew it was a good coat." 




ACDLYTES 

Beyond the green, smiling face that Nerthus showed to men 
was the dark other — the alien face that is death to see! 

The very first day he was there, Aunt Edith said to him, "Now, 
Peter, be sure not to leave the grounds alone." 

"Why not?" he asked, suddenly wondering if this was going to be 
as much fun as he had thought. It had been a sort of disappointing 
trip from Sol, days and days locked inside the metal walls of the 
spaceship. And the steward had taken his mother seriously and 
watched him so carefully that it had been just like being back in 
school. And now this — 

"It's just a matter of common sense, Pete," said Uncle Gunnar. 
"We don't know enough about this planet yet. You could get into 
trouble. Sure, we'll go everywhere you want, but not alone. To- 
gether. No space explorer who rushes off by himself on a new world 
and gets in a scrape that his friends have to pull him out of, is a hero. 
He's just a bloody fool. You've got more brains than that. First 



56 



THE ACOLYTES 



57 



chance I get, I'll show you through the woods — and I'll take my gun 
along." 

That made it different. Wilson Pete was suddenly glad all over 
to be here — here, on a frontier planet, on his uncle's farm. And 
Uncle Gunnar was an old explorer himself, he'd been all over the 
Galaxy before he settled down on Nerthus. He was a huge man, 
with bright blue eyes in a tanned strong face. His hair and beard 
were red as fire. And he knew enough to call a fellow "Pete" instead 
of that sissy "Peter." When you're going on eleven, you like to be 
talked to man to man. 

"Sure," said Pete. "Sure, I'm old enough to know that." 
- "Fine," said Uncle Gunnar. "After all, this is a pretty big place 
we've got. You'll have quite a bit to see before you want to explore 
the woods or the hills. How about a look around now?" 

"Oh, that can wait," said Aunt Edith. "You must be tired from 
your trip, Peter. Don't you want to take a nap first?" 

"I'm not tired," said Pete. "It was an easy trip." 

He had been a little tired when the spaceship landed at Stellamont, 
the only city on Nerthus. It was a small place too, just a cluster of 
buildings stuck on a broad green plain, not much to look at. But 
Uncle Gunnar had been there to meet him. They'd gone into the 
noisy dimness of the Spaceman's Haven, where he'd had a glass of 
ambrosite while Uncle Gunnar had a beer, and he'd met a dozen 
men he only remembered dimly, the men who were pioneering out 
among the stars. Then they'd gone to "the aircar and flown to the 
farm. 

It had been a long ride through a lonely sky, hundreds of kilo- 
meters of emptiness rolling beneath them. Not really emptiness — 
there were the hills and forests and lakes, a seacoast glimpsed from 
afar, broad valleys with long shadows sliding across them. But no 
men. Wind and sunlight and murmuring rivers, but no men. 

Nerthus was almost disappointingly Earthlike, no moving moun- 
tains or columns of fire or glittering alien cities, just the wild green 
land slipping away beneath a humming aircar. But Uncle Gun- 
nar made it sound interesting enough as he talked. 

"There's tomorrow in this world, it belongs to the future," he said. 
"Man has only been here a few years, there aren't many of us yet. 



58 



WORLDS BEYOND 



but more are coming in every month. It's going to be one of the 
great planets of the Galaxy, and we're in on the beginning." 
"Aren't there any natives?" asked Pete. 

"Not a one. Nerthus is one of the few planets where a man can 
live without artificial help and have the place all to himself to boot." 
Uncle Gunnar sighed. "But sometimes I wish there were natives. It'd 
make matters a lot easier for us." 

"How so?" asked Pete. "They couldn't work any better'n your 
machines, could they?" 

"No, though Cosmos knows I could do with a little extra help. 
Edith and Tobur and I have all we can do to manage a farm the 
size of ours. But it's a question mainly of ecology. Nerthus may be 
like Earth basically, and even in rather fine details of biology and 
chemistry, but still there are some two billion years of independent 
evolution on the two worlds. Naturally there are differences — and 
as yet we don't know just what all those differences are. 

"Well, just take the obvious examples. How do we know what 
native foods we can eat and what is poisonous to us? We just have 
to try everything out first, by chemical analysis or by using Terrestrial 
animals. Then there are the native animals — which of them can we 
tame and use, and which are hopeless? The natives could tell us a 
lot of things we need to know. 

"And eventually we have to understand the way the whole planet 
works, and fit ourselves into it. Little things like the exact compo- 
sition of the soil, the bacteria in it, the insects that fertilize some 
plants, the spectral distribution of sunlight — all that will make a big 
difference in the success of agriculture. We haven't had too much 
success so far in growing Terrestrial plants on Nerthus, for precisely 
that reason. They're working in the labs at Stellamont, developing 
new varieties of staple plants like corn and potatoes — Nerthusian 
varieties, that will fit in here. It'll be done, too, but it's a big job 
and it'll take time. Meanwhile, we colonists have to make out the 
best we can." 

Pete nodded. Uncle Gunnar was fun to talk to, though it was 
hard to follow him sometimes. 

Anyway, the trip from Stellamont had been so interesting that 
Pete wasn't tired any more. He was all on fire to see the place. 



THE ACOLYTES 



59 



"Well, it isn't long till supper," said Aunt Edith. "I suppose you 
menfolk might as well loaf around for a while." 

"Come on, then," said Uncle Gunnar, and he and Pete went out- 
side. 

The house was low and white, with a high, peaked roof — on Earth 
it would have been funny, it looked so ancient, but here it blended 
with the trees and the sky and the big open fields. As you came out 
on the front' porch, you saw a broad space of turf and wooded 
clumps, flowers nodding in the breeze, the tall forest beyond. On 
one side the fields began, rolling away toward far blue hills, on the 
other side and toward the rear the lawn sloped off to the farm 
buildings. 

As they walked toward the barn, someone stepped out of it and 
approached them. Someone — no, something. Pete caught his breath 
as he saw that it was an alien. 

He looked like a short, squat man with very wide shoulders and 
long arms, but he was completely hairless and his skin was blue. A 
round, flat-nosed, earless, wide-mouthed head sat on a short thick 
neck. He wore the usual pouched belt, as well as baggy pants around 
his bowed legs, and nothing else. Huge eyes that were pools of black- 
ness gleamed at them as he came up and smiled. 

"Hello," he said. His voice was deep and heavy, with a funny 
sort of accent that no human throat could have had. 

"Hello, Tobur," said Uncle Gunnar. "This is my nephew, Wilson 
Pete, who's going to stay with us awhile. You remember I told you 
about him. His father is an engineer on Earth who's been assigned 
to a project on Sol VIII. The planet not being fit to Jive on, Pete's 
folks have sent him here for the time being. Pete, this is Tobur of 
Javartenan, my old batman and now the hired man." 

"P-pleased to meet you," said Pete uncertainly. 

"Likewise, I say," grinned Tobur with an alarming flash of teeth. 
"How you like here, huh?" 

"I — all right, I guess," answered Pete. 

"Can you do this?" asked Tobur. He jumped up into the air — 
way into the air — clicked his heels and turned a somersault on the 
way down, and landed on his hands. 



60 



WORLDS BEYOND 



"N-no. Goshell, no." 

"Then I winner," said Tobur. "Is custom on Javartenan for win- 
ner give prize to loser. Winner pay for glory, you see. So I give 
you prize. Here, take." He pulled a small knife out of one pouch. 
"Knife belong Queen of Astafogartistan once, I take after hard battle. 
Brings luck. Worshiped by natives as god. Keep for souvenir, Pete." 

"Thanks! Thanks a googol!" Pete held the knife close. "Thanks, 
Tobur!" 

The alien clapped him on the back. "Is nothing. Friends give 
presents, no? I have many other souvenirs of battles, sure." 

Presently the three of them went on toward the barn. Uncle Gun- 
nar explained to Pete: "Tobur and I were together for many years. 
When I finally decided to settle down, he still followed me. We can 
at least gas over old times." 

"But Cosmos, Uncle Gunnar, why did you stop exploring?" 

"Oh — a man gets older, Pete. He's not quite up to it any more. 
And then I met your aunt and decided it was time I got a home of 
my own. Nerthus was wide open, it offered enough of a challenge 
for anyone. So we came here, and I've never regretted it." 

They came into the cool dusk of the barn, where cows from Earth 
stood beside native bufoids. Going out the other door they emerged 
into a big corral where some of the six-legged, greenish-furred na- 
tive "ponies" were kept. 

"We've had pretty good luck taming those," said Uncle Gunnar. 
"It's handy. There isn't as much machinery available yet as we need, 
and they can substitute. Also, they can go places and do things that 
a car or tractor can't — into the woods, for instance." 

He reached out and snagged the halter of one. "Here, Pete. I've 
been saving this one for you. He's yours." 

A six-legged pony on an alien planet, an alien ex-spaceman and 
adventurer for a friend, a whole new world — Cosmos googolplex! 

Pete rode around for a while, getting the feel of the animal. The 
middle pair of legs gave it a funny humping motion that was a little 
hard to get used to. They went down to look at the orchard and 
some of the pens, and glanced across the fence at the waving fields 
of avertigonite. From that plant came avertigon, the anti-space sick- 
ness drug, and it was Uncle Gunnar's chief money crop. 



THE ACOLYTES 



61 



"But I'll be pretty busy when the harvest comes in," he said. "The 
neighbors — " he meant everyone within several hundred kilometers — 
"pool what machinery and labor they have to reap and thresh it, so 
I'll have to be away quite a bit. You and Tobur will have to look 
after Aunt Edith and the farm, Pete." 

"We'll do that," promised Pete, swapping a glance with Tobur. 
The Javartenanian grinned back at him. 

The sun was low in the west, filling die air with shining gold and 
slipping long blue shadows over the ground, when they heard Aunt 
Edith calling them to supper. "Let's go," said Tobur, smacking his 
lips, and waddling quickly ahead. 

Something tinkled in the high grass, a ripple of littie glass bells, 
sweet and laughing in the gentle sunset air. Pete had a glimpse of 
a green-furred small thing that skittered away from them, chiming 
and singing as it danced. 

"What's that?" he asked, very softly. 

Uncle Gunnar shrugged. "We call 'em tinklers," he said. "They're 
found everywhere hereabouts, making that noise. Don't ask me what 
they do for a living. Damn nuisance, I think." 

Pete stared after the retreating tinkler. It gamboled off, stopping 
now and then to look after them, and the laughter of bells filled the 
quiet evening. 

They had given him a room to himself, a big cool chamber at the 
rear of the house, and sent him to bed there not long after supper. 
He lay for a while thinking of all that there would be to do, thinking 
about his luck in having Thorleifsson Gunnar for an uncle, thinking 
about the way he would tell of all this when he got back to Earth. 
Pretty soon he dropped into a light doze, but it wasn't long before 
he woke up again and was thirsty. 

For a little while he just lay there, feeling too lazy to get up for a 
drink. But that only made him more wide awake than before. He 
looked around the room; it was all black and white with moonglow, 
the ghostly curtains fluttered in the breeze, and he could hear the 
faint noises of the night murmuring out there. 

Well, sunspots! He wanted some water bad. So he got up and 
walked across to the door. The floor was cool and hard under his 



WORLDS BEYOND 



bare feet, and shadows slid around behind and in front of him, and 
the wind biew in a faint tingle of unearthly smells. Another world! 
You couldn't even see the sun of Nerthus from Sol's planets — and 
here he was! 

He went quietly down the corridor toward the bathroom and got 
his drink. As he came out again, he noticed light coming from around 
the bend in the hall, from the living room, and he heard a low mutter 
of voices. His aunt and uncle must still be sitting up, talking. 

It Would be fun to sneak up and listen in, the way the Patrolman 
had listened in on the Scordians in that stereo. It'd be good practice 
for the time when he would be having adventures, and shoot, it 
wouldn't do any harm — He went very softly down the hall and 
stood just beyond the open living-room door. 

"—I still don't think they should have done it," said Aunt Edith. 

"Why not?" rumbled Uncle Gunnar's deep voice. "Cathy would 
naturally want to be with her husband, and you can't have kids along 
on that devil's planet. They had to send him somewhere, and this is 
a healthy sort of place for a youngster." 

"Oh, Peter is a sweet boy — " Pete's ears burned — "and I'm glad 
to see him. But this planet healthy? I wonder!" 

"What in the Galaxy could be dangerous here?" 

"I don't know. That's just the trouble, I don't know. If we did, 
we could guard against it. But Nerthus is still too much a mystery, 
Gunnar. Diseases, maybe — " 

"Edith, I've told you a million times that the probability of any 
local germ finding a congenial host in man is vanishingly small. Sure, 
they did have one epidemic here, of native origin, but that particular 
thing was soon licked. The chance that another organism can survive 
a metabolism as alien as ours is so shght that we've got a consider- 
ably better prospect of being hit by a meteorite." 

"Well— wild animals— " 

"Come now, sweetheart, you also know that potentially dangerous 
life forms have been eliminated around all our settlements. I haven't 
seen a large carnivore in the woods here for at least two years now." 
Uncle Gunnar got up and came across to where she sat; Pete could 
hear his slow heavy footsteps and feel the floor quivering ever so 
faintly under them. "Besides, Pete's under orders to stay on the farm 



THE ACOLYTES 



63 



grounds, where even you will agree there's no danger. And Tobur 
will keep an eye on him too." 

"Oh, I know it, Gunnar, I know it all. But why have all those 
other children vanished off farms? What became of them?" 

"I don't know. I wish 1 did. Perhaps there are dangers in the 
woods that we don't know about. My guess is, their parents got care- 
less and let them go off alone. That's not going to happen with Pete. 
Now for Cosmos' sake, honey, stop worrying — " 

Pete stole back toward his room, not caring to listen any more. 
He felt a little mad about it — as if he couldn't take care of himself! 
But he'd obey orders like a good spaceman, if only to save the folks 
from worry and himself from a licking. 

As he got back into the room, he heard a noise from outside. He 
went to the window and leaned out. 

It was a strange, magic scene, a fairyland of streaming moonlight 
and whispering trees and unknown constellations. There were two 
moons in the sky, pouring their cold silver light down over the grass 
to glitter in the dew, throwing weird double shadows of trees. One 
moon was so close you could almost see it move, could almost see 
its shadows crawling like live things, as if the world stirred restlessly 
in its sleep. The stars flashed and gleamed high overhead, sprawl- 
ing in new figures. Only the pale flood of the Milky Way looked the 
same. 

The night murmured. Pete knew the nights of Earth and their 
noises, out in the silence far from man — buzz of insects, chirp of 
crickets, hoarse croaking of frogs, a million little sounds all blending 
into one great quiet voice. Nerthus had its language too, but it wasn't 
Earth's; all the tiny parts of it were different and they added up to a 
strange whisper, the voice of an alien world. 

Insects were there, thrumming and humming. Something was 
singing, a sweet liquid trill running up and down the scale, and some- 
thing else screamed harshly, far away in the woods and swamps. 
There was a far-off pattering like the rapid thunder of a small drum, 
there was a shrill scrape as of metal, there was brief maniac laugh- 
ter, there was hooting and hissing and chuckling and bubbling, all 
at the very edge of hearing. And — something else — 

Yes, there it came again. Pete remembered now, harked back to 



64 



WORLDS BEYOND 



the thing which had chimed and laughed at him in the sunset. 

It came bobbing and dancing out of the shadows and the forest, 
jumping, bouncing, swatting after the elfin lamps of night-glowing 
insects, and a million little bells came with it. Pete listened, strain- 
ing out the window, enchanted by the night and the music. 

He 'couldn't see the tinkler very well. It was a dim whiteness in 
the shifting, tricky moonlight, a small thing that danced under his 
window and called to him to come out and play. But he could hear 
it, the bells came high and sweet now. 

They were like silver sleigh-bells on a frosty night, like a sunlit 
rain-shower, like the laughter of young girls. It was a rush of chim- 
ing, a pizzicato on a string of glass, gay and joyous and drunken with 
life. Come out, come out, come out — come out and run in the moon- 
light with me! 

"No," said Pete all at on«e, and yawned. He was sleepy. Some 
other time, maybe. Perhaps Tobur would come along — somehow, he 
didn't think the bells of Faerie would chime for Uncle Gunnar, but 
Tobur might understand. 

After all, grownups thought the tinklers were just a nuisance. They 
catne dancing around the house of nights and spoiled your sleep with 
their wistful laughter. You had to listen to them— 

Tobur leaned back more comfortably against the wall of the shed. 
" — and there was I," he went on. "Spacesuit leaking, poison air and 
minus two hundred degrees all around, natives after me — " 

"Gollikers!" whispered Pete. 

They sat in the shade, letting dinner settle inside them while a hot 
early-afternoon sun danced and flimmered beyond and the air was 
drowsy with humming bugs. Tobur had another story to tell. 

The being from Javartenan was always ready to drop what he was 
doing and talk to a fellow, always glad to make some little thing for 
you or show you how to do a job in the best and easiest way, letting 
you help him so you could learn. And he was even more fun to lis- 
ten to than Uncle Gunnar, with his odd accent and his exciting 
stories. He'd told Pete a lot in the last few days. 

Of course, when you considered how Uncle Gunnar had taken 
him from Javartenan as a servant to begin with, and how they'd 



THE ACOLYTES 



65 



been together ever since, it was funny how many adventures he'd 
had all by himself, how many planets he'd been on that Uncle Gun- 
nar never mentioned — but Cosmos, he was sure a fine story-teller 
and he wouldn't lie to a fellow. 

"Well, what I do?" said Tobur now. "There I was, trapped 'gainst 
cliff of frozen nitrogen, spacesuit leaking, powerpack near gone, 
blaster 'most empty, and all those hundreds of natives coming up at 
me. What I do? I give up Sacred Jewel of Pashtu? Save my life 
that way?" He looked hard at Pete. 

"Cosmos, what else could you do but surrender?" asked Pete, since 
that was the answer Tobur seemed to expect. 

"And betray trust in me? Go back on oath? Not Tobur! Die is 
little thing, small Pete, but honor much. Also, I began to have idea. 
I began thinking mighty hard there, you bet. I had Jewel to defend, 
near out of blaster charges, but still plenty brains, yes. I — " 

"Tobur!" . 

The Javartenanian started guiltily as Uncle Gunnar's voice bel- 
lowed through the still air. 

"Tobur! Where in the name of Valdaoth are you — Oh, there!" 
Uncle Gunnar came around the corner of the shed and saw them. 
His cold blue eyes flashed under his bristling red eyebrows. 

"Loafing again, huh? I told you we had to get that bottom land 
fenced in before the harvest starts. Which means today. Where's the 
truck? What've you been doing besides sitting on your fat tail?" 

"Been watching small Pete like you told me," said Tobur sulkily. 

"Nothing to stop you working while you did, was there? Now 
get up and help me, or before Cosmos I'll bounce you out of here. 
Up!" 

Tobur rose, scowling, and slouched into the shed. Uncle Gunnar 
lingered behind with Pete to whisper with a twinkle: "He's a good 
old cuss, but if I didn't blow my top once in a while and yell at him 
he'd never get anything done." He added, "You might as well come 
with us and watch." 

"All right," said Pete, though he was a little mad himself at being 
pulled out of the shade and having the story broken off that way. 
Now Tobur would be too grouchy to finish it for the rest of the day. 

They went into the shadowy cavern of the shed after the truck. 



66 



WORLDS BEYOND 



Machinery filled it, the semirobot machinery that made it possible 
for three beings to run this enormous place alone. But most of the 
things still needed intelligent beings at the controls; Uncle Gun- 
nar couldn't afford too many automatics yet. 

The truck had a small plastic cab and a long flat back. Tobur had 
the sides off by now, and he and Uncle Gunnar grunted as they lifted 
the fencing machine up and bolted it in place. They racked as many 
of the metal posts as they thought they'd need on it, added three big 
rolls of wire, and got into the cab. Pete said he'd rather ride in back. 

So they bounced off over the fields, around trees and low hillocks, 
till the house was out of sight and they reached the bottom land. 
This was a forty-hectare patch of low-lying meadow on the edge of 
the great forest, covered with high lush grass that rippled in a faint 
wind. Uncle Gunnar wanted to make a pasture of it. 

"I'll drive for a while and you guide the machine, Tobur," he said. 
"Pete, keep in sight of us." 

It was fun to watch at first. The truck went slowly along the 
boundary, while the machine rammed down a long spike to make a 
hole, drove in the post, tamped down the earth around it, and strung 
three taut lines of wire, all in one dazzle of metal arms. Tobur had 
to walk alongside the truck, guiding the rammer and the post-setter. 
Pete brought up the rear. 

But it got tiresome after a while, the same thing over and over 
again, and the day was warm and quiet, not meant for working. Pete 
yawned and lagged. 

"I'll spell you there," said Uncle Gunnar presently. 

"No need. Not tired," said Tobur, still sulky. Uncle Gunnar 
shrugged and drove on. 

Pete sat down on a hummock and looked around him. From here 
you couldn't see the house. There was just the meadowland, slop- 
ing upward toward the cultivated fields on one side. On the other 
side was the forest. It was very still and lonely. 

He lay down, feeling the soft turf give under his weight like a 
mattress. He crossed his hands under his head and looked upward. 
Tall white clouds walked through a sky of far clear blue, the sun 
wheeled on its slow horizon ward way, the grass whispered and rustled 
around him, there was a drowsy murmur and buzz in the air. For a 



THE ACOLYTES 



67 



while he picked shapes out of the clouds, a spaceship, a horse, a 
robot, Uncle Gunnar with his nose getting longer — He giggled and 
looked around him. 

Only- the grass waving above his head, its smell rich and green and 
not quite like the smell of grass on Earth. There was a little patch 
of wild flowers too, blue as if they were fallen pieces of sky, sweet 
and nose-tickling in their scent. An insect flew past his face with 
its wings a million colored shards of broken sunlight. Somewhere a 
bird was singing. 

Pete wriggled deeper down into the grass and the earth and the 
summer warmth. 

All of a sudden he heard the bells again, very near, high and thin 
and sweet. He sat up and looked wildly around. 

The truck was far down the line, almost out of sight behind a 
jutting neck of trees. Otherwise he couldn't see anything — no, wait — 

Pete sat very still, hardly breathing, and in a moment the tinkler 
came into view. It was no bigger than a rabbit, fat and pale-green 
and fuzzy, with little black eyes that twinkled merrily. It, skipped 
around him, twitching its nose and going ding-ding-ding and then 
breaking into a rain of crystal chiming. 

Pete thought back to what he'd asked Uncle Gunnar about the 
tinklers, the first morning after he'd seen one. What were they, 
where did they come from, why did they make that noise and how? 

"Nobody knows, or cares very much either, Pete," Uncle Gunnar 
had said. "There are a lot of them, running around all over this part 
of the continent. I shot and dissected one once, to find how its vocal 
organs work — a matter of tympani and vibrating strings — but it 
wasn't very good eating and its hide was too thin to be useful either. 
So now I just let them alone." 

"You shouldn't 'a killed it, Uncle Gunnar," said Pete, shocked. 
"That's like shooting a— an elf." 

"Sure, an elf," put in Tobur. "And there a big old troll in the 
woods too, and fairy castles. I know." 

"You know too damn many things, Tobur," said Uncle Gunnar. 
"No, this is just another little animal." 

"But what do the tinklers do?" Pete asked. 

"I don't know," said Uncle Gunnar. "They have the teeth and 



68 



WORLDS BEYOND 



digestive system of meat-eaters, but they're too small and weak to 
kill anything for themselves, and in fact I should think a fat juicy 
tinkler would be in some danger from carnivores itself. Especially 
with that silly music it makes — you can hear it half a kilometer away. 
Offhand, I should think they eat carrion, and reproduce like fury to 
keep up their numbers and keep their natural enemies fed." 

That was all, except that Pete had seen them often, and heard 
them still more often, and never had a close look at one — till now. 

He sat still, not daring to move, and pretty soon the tinkler quieted 
down and crouched less than a meter from him, wiggled its impu- 
dent nose and twinkled with its eyes. 

"Hello," whispered Pete. "Hello, there." 

The tinkler skipped to its feet and let go a happy carillon. 

"Come here," said Pete. "Come here, fella. I won't hurt you." 

The tinkler danced closer. Almost, Pete's outstretched hand 
touched it, the whiskers brushed his fingers, and then it was away 
and laughing at him. 

Pete had to laugh too. He got up, very softly and slowly so as not 
to scare it. The tinkler waited for him and then skipped another 
meter away. 

He walked slowly toward it. The tinkler v/riggled with delight and 
jumped over the wild hedge at the boundary of the woods. 

Without thinking, Pete followed it in under the trees. It danced 
close to him, brushed its soft nose against his leg, and then before 
he could grab it was off again, deeper into the forest. 

Pete hesitated, looking around him. He wasn't supposed to go in 
here — 

The trees stood tall* around him, their trunks reaching up and up 
to a whispering vaulted roof of green and gold. It was cool and 
shadowy under them, speckled with sunlight and small bright flowers. 
A bird was trilling its gladness, and only the faint rustle of leaves 
answered it through the quiet — that, and the happy peal of elfin 
bells as the tinkler came back to Pete. 

It circled around him, chiming and dancing, a little figure of 
laughter. It wanted him to follow it — yes, there it went, off again, 
stopping to look back over its shoulder at him. 

Well, gollikers, it wouldn't hurt to go just a ways onward. Maybe 



THE ACOLYTES 



69 



it wanted to show him something. And it was nice here in the woods. 

The bells chimed eagerly as Pete started off. The tinkler came 
back, nudged him, bounded in a gleeful circle around his feet, and 
shot away into the farther shadows. 

He trudged on for a while under the trees. It was like an enchant- 
ed forest, cool and dim and green, little spots and shafts of sunlight 
streaming down to pick out mossy rocks and colored fungi, and 
flowers hiding under fallen logs. Once in a while a strange thing 
would streak off from his path, and there was a sudden rush of bird- 
song as he approached a gnarled old tree. Cosmos, what could go 
wrong in here, what were the grownups afraid of? 

The tinkler bounded eagerly ahead, shaking sound out of its throat 
like a snowstorm turned to music, stopping now and then to look 
after him and wait for him with a shivering impatience. Come on, 
Pete, come on, come on! 

But where was it going, anyway, what was it leading him to? 

The notion came suddenly to Pete, so suddenly that he stopped in 
his tracks with the awe and amazement of it. Why, sure — sure — 
that could be it — what else could it be? 

Nerthus wasn't uninhabited, and man wasn't alone on it. There 
was a native race, a race of little furry elves who spoke in silver 
chimes, only the humans who roared out of the sky in their great steel 
ships frightened them. They hid away, deep in the shadowy quiet of 
their forests, they waited and watched — 

Intelligent life! 

And he had discovered it! 

He hurried after his guide now, running, scrambling over logs and 
dodging past thickets. The tinkler darted ahead, a white streak in 
the shades; you'd never have thought the fat little fellow could move 
that quick. But when it saw he couldn't keep up, it stopped and 
waited. 

Pete had to slow down after a while. He was panting and his 
heartbeat was loud in his ears. But he still shivered with the excite- 
ment of his tremendous discovery. 



Sure, the tinklers were intelligent. Why else would this one be so 
plainly guiding him on? Intelligent, with a dancing, joyous, fairy 
mind that sang like its voice, a mind of moonlight and magic remote 



70 



WORLDS BEYOND 



from the slow ponderous brain of man. They had been frightened, 
they had hidden away, but had spied out the newcomers simply by 
pretending to be animals. And now they had decided the time was 
ripe to reveal themselves. 

Only they wouldn't approach just anybody. It had to be someone 
they could trust, someone who would understand. A human who 
could tell them about his race with an insider's viewpoint, and who 
could still feel the way they did, keep their secrets, act as a go-be- 
tween — a kid. Sure! 

Wilson Pete, first ambassador of man to the tinklers of Nerthus! 

He went on, deeper and deeper into the woods, and the tinkler 
rang and pealed and leaped before him. And what was it saying in 
its own strange language? 

Welcome, Pete, welcome to Nerthus and the Old Dwellers, wel- 
come to the realms of Faerie. 

Another tinkler popped out of the dripping underbrush. The two 
of them gamboled together, darted back toward Pete, and ran on, 
tinkling furiously. Two of them — ! Why, that must mean he was 
approaching their village. 

It couldn't be far now. They'd lead him into the ring of little 
thatch houses; the whole population would swarm out in joy, torches 
and fireflies would bob and flare in the dark. They'd dance around 
him, singing their songs of welcome to the stranger from the stars, 
they'd bring him food in a golden dish and put him to bed on sweet- 
smelling moss. And when he came back next day with his tremen- 
dous news, the folks would forget they were mad at him. 

The ground squished under his feet. Shadows were rising out of 
the earth, shadows and a thin steaming mist. He stumbled over logs 
and splashed into pools. Two more tinklers came out of the deeper 
darkness and frolicked around him. 

They sure picked a nasty swamp to live in. Only maybe they had 
to do that, for protection from their enemies. Pete groped his way 
on, too weary to think straight any more. He only wanted sleep. 

The sun was down now, darkness was whelming the world, but a 
last sullen ember glowed red between the trees. As he came out on 
the bank of the lake, it gleamed like a pool of blood. 

He couldn't see far over it. The water was thick and scummy, 



THE ACOLYTES 



71 



and trees and hummocks grew out of it. He plodded squashily along 
the muck of the bank, feeling a little ill from the dank smell of 
swamp and rot. The fog was thickening, swirling its tendrils around 
him. Here and there, phosphorescent fungi glowed blue in the murky 
twilight. The tinklers led the way, dancing and skipping over the 
dreary mudbanks — there was a whole crowd of them, pushing and 
jostling, swarming about him. Their belling filled the heavy air with 
a harsher note than he had heard before. 

Something stirred, out there in the crimson water. Pete couldn't 
see very well what it was. But after a moment he made out a vague 
bulk by the shore, something looming and dark and misshapen. A 
dead stump? A small hummock? A — 

The tinklers darted all around, shoving, crowding, pushing him 
now, and their eager noise drowned his thoughts. Only — they were 
urging him toward that thing — 

Suddenly, Pete didn't want to go any farther. He stopped, and his 
heart was like a lump in him. "No," he gulped. "No." 

The tinklers swarmed around, thrusting him on by their weight, 
and the last red light glistened on their eyes and their little sharp 
fangs. 

Something closed around Pete's ankle, cold and hard and rubbery. 
He screamed. The tinklers danced with glee, ting-ting-ting-a-ting- 
ting! 

The monster's tentacle dragged Pete through the mud, up toward 
the beak that snapped and grinned in its black lump of a body. He 
screamed and screamed. Help, help, help, Uncle Gunnar, Mother, 
help, help, wake me up — 

It slid from the bank and pulled him under water. He drew a 
breath to howl and the rotten water rushed in, filled his lungs, his 
head roared and swam and whirled down into darkness, down and 
down and down. 

Something else, a hand closing around his arm, a wild moment of 
struggle — Pete kicked out, lashing in a crazy howling darkness of 
thunder and horror, and then he was gulping air into his lungs, 
coughing and choking with fire in his chest. 



He came to himself on the bank, and Uncle Gunnar's shape, 



72 



WORLDS BEYOND 



and dark in the gloom, was holding him. He screamed and shud- 
dered himself against the man's breast. 

"There, Pete." The deep voice sobbed, vibrating through his shiv- 
ering body. "AH right, fella, it's all right now — " 

Something of his training in self-integration came back, psycho- 
physiological habits, a shaking sort of calm. He huddled in his uncle's 
arms and watched where the lake roiled and bubbled. 

"Why did you do it?" groaned the man. "Why did you do it? 
We trailed you as soon as we saw you were gone, Tobur and I, we 
followed you and guessed our way and came here in time to see that 
thing dragging you under water — but why?" 

"The— t-t-t-tinkler — " 

"What?" 

"The-the t-t-t-tinkler — it led me — I th-thought it w-w-was intel — " 
Pete began crying. 

"So — " Uncle Gunnar's voice was soft and cold and terrible. "So 
that's it. That's how they live. When we arrived, a whole pack of 
the little fiends was crouched on the bank, watching — 

'They lure animals out here, carnivores, curious ones, and then 
that thing in the water kills the prey and shares with them — Maybe 
that's where some of those other kids went, to that devil's symbiosis 
— Tobur!" The last word was wrenched out of him. 

"T-tobur?" whispered Pete. 

The lake seethed and churned with struggle. "He's down there, 
fighting it," said Uncle Gunnar. "He leaped after you, got you free 
— passed you over to me, and then the monster dragged him under — 
He's fighting for his life down there, and I can't go help him. If 
the thing got both of us, there'd be no one to take you home. I can't 
help him, oh Cosmos, I can't help him!" 

They sat waiting for a long time as night closed in on the swamp. 
Once a little bell tinkled in the dark. Pete screamed and huddled 
against Uncle Gunnar. 

The man swore sofdy, brokenly. 

The lake quieted. In the last gleam of light, Pete thought he could 
see blood on its surface. 
Nothing came out of it. 



THE ACOLYTES 



73 



Uncle Gunnar stood up. "I'm going down," he said in a harsh, 
strange voice. "Wait here. I'll be right back." 

He stepped into the lake and his head went under. Pete shivered 
on the bank and tried not to scream. Another little chime pealed, he 
clutched the muddy ground with his hands and held his jaws shut 
with all the strength that was in him. 

Uncle Gunnar came up again and waded back to shore. He moved 
slowly and wearily, like an old man, and flopped down as if all the 
strength had gone from him. 

"They're both dead," he whispered. "I felt them down there. 
Tobur knifed it to death, but it broke his neck in the last struggle. 
They're both dead." Suddenly he rolled over and buried his face in 
his hands. 

"Oh, Tobur, Tobur, you old windbag, it's going to be an empty 
world without you!" 

Pete sat very quiet, for he had never seen a man cry before. 



Wanted - an Unknown Writer 



Sometime during the next twelve months, a man or woman 
who has never before written science-fantasy is going to begin 
his first story. That story will be among the best of the year, 
and readers will remember it as they remember Heinlein's 
"Lifeline", or de Camp's "The Isolinguals". 

For the great names in science-fantasy seldom rise slowly from 
reader to fan, from fan to second-rate writer, from second-rate 
to first-rate. The field does not produce its own blood. 

This magazine pays a minimum of $100 for a new story; for 
manuscripts longer than 5,000 words, the rate is 2# a word. 
Payment is made on acceptance, and all submissions are read 
within a week. 

Nineteen-fifty-one's best science-fantasy writer may be read- 
ing these lines. Perhaps he or she has only been waiting for a 
final push, an additional incentive. 

We're waiting to see. 




by Walter C. Davies 



FORGOTTEN TONGUE 

A brief, apparently meaningless message — but 
once you'd read it, your mind wasn't your own! 

"Hands up, scum," grated a voice. "You're going for a jump." 

Pepper raised his hands and coughed drily. "Forget it," he said. 
"You can't get away with this." He felt a knee jolt the small of his 
back in answer. 

"Walk," said the voice. 

The street was narrow, and the buildings flanking it had no lights. 
This was the Industrial, one of the three great divisions of New York 
Sector. Plants were resting their machinery for two hours out of 
the twenty-four, Pepper realized. As he walked along, as slowly as 
he dared, the clopping of metal soles against the pavement sounding 
behind him, he cursed himself for an imbecile, coming alone and 
unarmed through this bleak part of town. 

"How long," he asked tentatively, "have you been gunning for 
me?" He wanted to find out how many of them there were. 

"Keep moving," said the voice. "You don't get news out of us, 
scum." 

He kept moving. They were headed in the direction of the Indus- 
trial Airport. That meant, probably, that he'd be crated like a gross 
of drills and accidentally dropped from a mile or so in the air. There 

Copyright, 1941, by Albing Publications. 



74 



FORGOTTEN TONGUE 



75 



would be protests; threats, recriminations. Then the customary 
jeering retort from the Optimus Press: "If a Lower wishes to dis- 
guise himself for purposes of his own and is damaged in the process 
we fail to see how this is any reflection on the present able adminis- 
tration. Honi soit — " 

Not daring to give way to panic, knowing that it would mean an 
immediate and ugly death, Pepper walked on and tried to keep his 
knees from buckling. 

"Look," he began again. "We can make a deal — " 

"Shut up!" snarled someone. "And stay shut. I'd like to — " 

"Let him talk, captain," said another voice. Pepper stiffened as 
he heard it, for the dialect was unmistakably the throaty whine af- 
fected by the Optimus as the "pure" speech. 

"Never mind," Pepper said. The sound of that voice was his 
death-warrant, he knew. Loyalists had been known to take bribes 
and deliver, their masters never. "How do you like this part of town, 
Cedric?" he demanded. "How does it strike you?" 

"Why Cedric?" the voice of the Optimus asked one of the Loyal- 
ists, ignoring Pepper. 

"Supposed to be funny, Mr. Fersen," said the Loyalist. Then Pep- 
per heard a blow and cry. "I'm sorry, Mr. — sir — please — " 

"Let that be a lesson," said Pepper. "Never tell the name. But 
don't worry, Mr. Fersen — I never heard of you." 

"I'm just in," said the voice of the Optimus with a note of strain 
and disgust. "I'm just in from Scandinavia." 

"In that case," said Pepper, "you'd do well to get back there. Be- 
cause here comes a gang of Lowers that mean you ill." 

Approaching them were people he knew. There was Marty, who 
worked in a glass plant, Pedro who managed an autokafe; hard faces 
gleaming under the wide-spread street lights. 

Bats and clubs appeared in their hands. "Hello!" yelled Marty. 
The distance was about twice the width of the street. 

"Dash it!" whined the voice of the Optimus. "Dash the luck! 
You'll have to fire into the thick of them." 

The next thing Pepper knew was that he was dashing for the knot 
of Lowers down the street, zig-zagging wildly as projectiles buzzed 
about his ears. Even then he did not forget the rules he had been 



76 



WORLDS BEYOND 



taught in Training School; he ran with a calculated, staggering gait 
that would — at least in theory — unsettle any marksman. 

His friends met him halfway; he was taken into their midst, lost 
in the little group of a dozen or so. 

"They won't attack," he gasped. "It's too near the shift. They'd 
be mobbed — torn to pieces." 

"Easy," soothed Marty. "Take it easy. They're breaking — going 
back. Jupiier — if I only had a camera to get those faces! Who are 
they?" 

Pepper grinned feebly. "I never got a look at one of them," he 
said. "There was an Optimus with them by the name of Fersen. Do 
you know him?" 

"Yes," said Marty. "I know him. He's a scientist. He's so thor- 
oughly damned brilliant that even the Lowers' technical journals re- 
print his articles. He's a psychologist — experimental." 

"Let it go," said Pepper. He shook his head. "What happened? 
How come you came to meet me — armed?" 

"Something new of mine," said Marty. "We were trying it out. 
you can call it a psychological eavesdropper. We call it a modified 
Geiger-Muller counter reset for cerebrum-surface potential composi- 
tion. It's thoroughly impractical, but we were waiting for you and I 
turned it on you for a demonstration. Before it blew out the thing 
showed that something had upset you terribly. 

"Pedro thought it must have been a babe walking down the street. 
That's the Latin mind. When you didn't come we put two and two 
together and found a slight case of Optimus." 

"Yes," said Pepper absently. "It's usually that." 

It usually was. The Fusionists were nominally in power through- 
out the whole hemisphere, but the hand of the Optimus tended to 
grow clumsier and clumsier, showing through the thin veil of the 
Continental Congress. The Fusionists had been elected generally on 
the most immense wave of enthusiasm ever to sweep a new party into 
office. Their appeal had been almost irresistible — to combine the 
best features of both classes and work for harmony. 

The Old Malarky, it soon developed. The Fusion officials — 
"Fightin' Bob" Howard, Oscar Stoop, "Iron Man" Morris — had been 
bought and paid for. Things were growing bad, worse than they had 



FORGOTTEN TONGUE 



77 



ever been before. The Lowers were arming. Every issue of their 
newspapers contained inflammatory statements, direct slurs against 
the government and the Optimus Party. 

Money was being spent like water by the Optimus; whole factories 
had been turned "Loyalist" by promises of tripled wages and security. 
The Loyal Lowers League was growing slowly, very slowly. There 
was a basically prejudiced attitude among the factory workers against 
turncoats of that stamp. This, of course, only widened the gulf be- 
tween authentic Lowers and those who had joined the League. Things 
were in a very bad way indeed. Everybody on the continent was 
waiting for the next election. There was much wild talk about revo- 
lution and gutters running with blood. 

Pepper was examining the psychological eavesdropper that had 
saved him some unpleasantness a while ago, tinkering with it and at- 
tempting to set it right. 

"Well?" grunted Marty. 

"Can't be done," said Pepper. "Let's turn to more constructive 
lines of thought. What did you say Fersen did?" 

"Psychology, like us. He experiments. Last thing he did was a 
study of engramatic impulses." 

"Do tell. What are they?'-' 

"It's really the old 'group unconscious' idea in false face. Engrams 
are memories of previous lives stamped into the chromosomes. They 
carry compulsive force sometimes. If you hear a low-pitched, growl- 
ing musical note your tendency is to shudder and draw away. If 
you're drunk you'll try to run like hell, because that note, if rightly 
delivered, means feline carnivores in misty Tertiary jungle." 

"I see," mumbled Pepper. "When did Fersen publish this, and 
from where?" 

"Oslo, eight years ago," said Marty. 

"And .what I've done then and up to now would sorely tax your 
limited understanding," said a full-throated whine. 

Pepper slowly swiveled his chair around. The face that he saw 
was thin and keen, the hair an ashy blonde. But more to the point 
than hair and face was the blued steel tube that was in the speaker's 
hands. 



78 



WORLDS BEYOND 



"If I read your gaze aright," said t .e aristocrat, "you're wonder- 
ing about this thing. Wonder no more, for it is a new development 
on the old-style chiller. It will congeal the blood of a turtle. What's 
more it is absolutely noiseless. I could kill you two where you sit and 
walk out and away to my very comfortable flat in Residential. 
My name is Fersen and I got here by bribing your janitor. Does 
that answer all your questions?" 

"Doesn't even begin to," grunted Pepper sourly. "What now?" 

"Now you are coming with me." He herded them from the room 
at the point of his weapon. As they came out into the open he hid 
it under his cloak. 

"Stroll casually," said Fersen. "Be gay and lightsome. You're 
going to Residential to watch the beautiful women walk down the 
beautiful streets. Sorry I bungled that attempt last night, Pepper. 
It must have been irritating to both of us. You weren't going to be 
killed at all." 

Nervously, Fersen went on talking. "You'll be interested to know 
that I was summoned to this continent by a grand conclave of Opti- 
mus. They propose to settle the unhappy question of the coming 
election once and for all time." 

"By committing mass suicide?" suggested Marty. 

Fersen was pleased to laugh briefly, like the snapping of a lock 
in a death-cell's door. "By no means," he chuckled. "By that gentlest 
of all arts, psychology. Whereat, enter Fersen. Get in, please." He 
gestured at the open door of a car that had pulled up beside them, 
silent and grim. 

"C'est bon, children," smiled Fersen. "Romp if you wish." The 
two Lowers were staring in awe at the incredible battery of instru- 
ments racked on the walls, piled on the floors, hanging from the 



"For a lab, not bad," finally admitted Pepper. "All psychological?" 
He stared hard at some electronic equipment — ikonoscopes, tubes 
and coils — that was sparking quietly away in a corner. 



"All," said Fersen proudly. "Now be seated, please." 
The two were shoved into chairs by bruisers, then buckled in se- 
curely with plastic straps. The bruisers saluted Fersen and left. 




FORGOTTEN TONGUE 



79 



"Now," said the psychologist, carefully locking the door, "you 
poor scum think you know things about the human brain?" He paced 
to their chairs and stared contemptuously into their faces. 

"You think," he spat, "that the incredible, contorted caverns of the 
mind can be unraveled by base-born apes of your caliber? Forget it. 
I'm going to show you things about behavior you won't believe even 
after you see them. I'm going to make you say that you love the Op- 
timus Party and that you'll fight to the death anybody who doesn't. 

"I'm going to leave you in such a state of cringing, gibbering bes- 
tiality that you're going to betray your friends and cut your children's 
throats and know that you're doing a noble thing." 

"Hypnotism won't work that far," said Pepper matter-of-factly! 

"I don't use hypnotism," grunted Fersen. "I'm turning to the 
classics. What good would an isolated case or so be? We've got to 
have a mass movement, a movement that will spread like wildfire. 
Look at that!" He held up a book. 

"Odes of Anacreon," read Pepper from the title-page. "So what?" 

Fersen grinned slowly. "I know," he said irrelevantly, "an ar- 
rangement of lines that would make you beat your brains out in 
despair. I know a sound that will make you so angry that you'll tear 
your own flesh if there's nobody else around. I know a certain juxta- 
position of colored masses that would turn you into a satyr — drive 
you mad with insatiable lust." 

"I see," said Marty slowly. "I see that you weren't quite finished 
with the engram in Oslo." 

"I had barely begun. I am now able — once I've sized up the psyche 
of the subject — to deliver complex commands in a compulsion-lan- 
guage that cannot possibly be disobeyed." 

"Go on," snapped Pepper, catching Fersen's eye. He had seen 
something at the edge of his vision that made his heart pound. He 
relaxed deliberately. "Go on!" 

"This book," said Fersen, smiling again, "will be released to the 
general public very shortly — as soon as I've completed copy for a 
definitive edition. Picture this scene: 

"A bookseller receives a shipment of the Odes. 'How now!' says 
bookseller. He is amazed. He is distressed. He did not order the 
Odes. He does not want to pay for them; they look like a slow- 



80 



WORLDS BEYOND 



moving item. He picks up a copy from the crate so as to get a better 
idea of what they are. 'What's this?' demands bookseller excitedly. 
For it seems to be a foreign tongue which he does not understand. 
Printed plainly on every page in large type is a brief message. Al- 
ways the same, always legible. 

"Bookseller than scans one page, very briefly. Some strange com- 
pulsion holds him; he reads further and the mysterious language is 
as plain as day. The message says: 'You are loyal to the Optimus 
Party. You will always be loyal to the Optimus Party. You will 
show the Odes to everybody you see. Everybody must read the Odes. 
You will always be loyal to the Optimus Party.' 

" 'How now!' says bookseller again. 'Uncanny!' And he sees a 
woman on the street. He seizes her. She screams. He twists her arm 
and shoves her into his shop. She sits quietly while the Odes are 
shoved under her nose. She reads, lest this madman damage her. 
They then join forces and distribute copies of the book far and wide. 
It's like a prairie fire — people read and make others read. 

"Pepper, there are twelve thousand booksellers in New York Sec- 
tor. As soon as I've probed somewhat into your minds to determine 
whether a vowel or a diphthong would serve better to break down the 
resistance of a determined spirit opposed to the Optimus, I shall give 
orders to the printers, who've been immunized by a temporary hyp- 
nosis. 

"Pepper, two hours after I have sent in copy the crates of books 
will arrive simultaneously in every one of the twelve thousand shops. 
Now relax. You're going to be investigated." 

He turned to select instruments from a cluttered board. With a 
faint intake of breath Marty slid from the chair in which he had 
been strapped, from which he had been working himself free with 
desperate speed while Pepper held the psychologist's gaze. 

Marty launched himself at Fersen's back, snapping an arm about his 
throat. The psychologist snatched a scalpel from the board before 
the two reeled away into the center of the cluttered room. With his 
other hand Marty grabbed frantically at the wrist that held the blade, 
closed with crushing force about it. The knife dropped, tinkling, to 
the floor. The two of them fell; Marty, shoving a knee into the small 
of Fersen's back, wrenched at his arm. 



FORGOTTEN TONGUE 



81 



The psychologist collapsed shuddering in a heap. Marty warily 
broke away from him and picked up a casting, then clubbed Fersten 
carefully on the side of the head. 

As he unbuckled Pepper he snapped: "Thank God that door's 
locked. Thank God he didn't make enough noise to get the guard. 
Thank God for so damned many things, Pepper. This is the chance 
of a lifetime!" 

"I don't understand," said Pepper. 

"You will," smiled Marty airily. "You probably will. Now where 
in the bloody dithering hell does he keep his notes — ?" 

Jay Morningside, bookseller, wearily said: "I'm sorry, ma'am; 
I'm in trade. I can't afford to have any political opinions." 

"Please," said the girl appealingly. "This election petition will 
help turn out the Fusionist gang and put in Lowers who know how 
people like us feel and think — " 



Watch for These Names 

in coming issues of WORLDS BEYOND . . . 

• POUL ANDERSON 

• JAMES BUSH 

• JOHN CHRISTOPHER 

• LESTER DEL REY 

• C. M. KORNBLUTH 

• HENRY KUTTNER 

. . . on your newsstands about the 10th of each month. 



82 



WORLDS BEYOND 



"I'm sorry," said Morningside. He turned her out of his shop and 
closed the door. The nerve of that babe! Coming right into his shop 
in the middle of a high-class Optimus neighborhood! Ruin his trade, 
he thought darkly. He could sue. 

"Books!" yelled a hoarse voice at his delivery entrance. "Optimus 
Press delivery!" 

"Thanks," he said, taking the crate. He broke off the plastic top 
and stared in amazement. "Two gross," he whispered. "And who 
the hell wants to buy the Odes of Anacreon?" He opened a copy and 
squinted at the weird words on the pages. 

"How now!" said Morningside. He started at the words, and sud- 
denly their meaning became plain as day. 

"YOU WILL BE LOYAL TO THE LOWERS," it said. He 
smacked a fist on his plump knee. "So I shall!" 

"YOU WILL TURN THE FUSIONIST PAWNS OUT OF OF- 
FICE." Bravo! 

"YOU WILL SAFEGUARD YOUR LIBERTIES AGAINST 
THE CONSPIRACIES OF THE OPTIMUS PARTY AND THEIR 
TOOLS." About time somebody spoke out like this! 

"YOU WILL SHOW THE ODES TO EVERYBODY YOU 
SEE." No time like the present, he decided. Passing his shopwindow 
was a- stately, plump dowager, aglitter with diamonds. 

"Hey, babe!" he yelled. 

She turned aghast as he came through the door. "Got something 
to show you," he explained, taking her by the arm. 

"Unhand me!" she shrilled. "You scum! You vermin!" 

"Don't get tough, lady," he pleaded. Finally he had to carry her 
over his shoulder into the shop and shove the book under her nose. 
She read and looked again. 

"Great stuff," she said. "What everybody ought to know. It's 
about time those bloodsuckers got fired. Come on!" She took up 
an armful of the Odes. 

"Come on!" she called gaily to Mr. Morningside. "We'll tell the 
world!" 

They went together rollicking down the street, stopping passersby, 
handing out copies of the Odes. 

They were telling the world, and the world was listening. 



by 

Richard 
Matheson 




CLOTHES 

MAKE THE MAN 



Which is really the stronger — yourself, or the 
carefully-composed image you present to the world? 

I went out on the terrace to get away from the gabbing cocktailers. 

I sat down in a dark corner, stretched out my legs and sighed in 
complete boredom. 

The terrace door opened again and a man reeled out of the 
noisome gaiety. He staggered to the railing and looked out over the 
city. 

"Oh, my God," he said, running a palsied hand through his thin 
hair. He shook his head wearily and gazed at the light on top of the 
Empire State Building. 

Then he turned with a groan and stumbled toward me. He tripped 
on my shoes and almost fell on his face. 



83 



84 



WORLDS BEYOND 



"Uh-oh," he muttered, flopping into another chair. "You must ex- 
cuse me, sir." 

"Nothing," I said. 

"May I beg your indulgence, sir?" he inquired. 

I started to speak but he set out begging it immediately. 

"Listen," he said, waving a fat finger. "Listen, I'm telling you a 
story that's impossible." 

He bent forward in the dark and stared at me as best he could 
through martini-clouded eyes. Then he fell back on the chair 
breathing steam whistles. He belched once. 

"Listen now," he said. "Make no mistake. There are stranger 
things in heaven and earth and so on. You think I'm drunk. You're 
absolutely right. But why? You could never tell. 

"My brother," he said, despairingly, "is no longer a man." 

"End of story," 1 suggested. 

"It all began a couple of months ago. He's publicity head for the 
Jenkins ad agency. Topnotch man. 

"That is," he sobbed, "I mean to say ... he was." 
He mused quietly, "Topnotch man." 

Out of his breast pocket he dragged a handkerchief and blew a 
trumpet call which made me writhe. 

"They used to come to him," he recalled, "all of them. There he'd 
sit in his office with his hat on his head, his shiny shoes on the desk. 
Charlie! they'd scream, give us an idea. He'd turn his hat once 
around (called it his thinking cap) and say, Boys! Cut it this way. 
And out of his lips would pour the damnedest ideas you ever heard. 
What a man!" 

At this point he goggled at the moon and blew his nose again. 
"So?" 

"What a man," he repeated. "Best in the business. Give him his 
hat — that was a gag, of course. We thought." 
I sighed and closed my eyes. 

"He was a funny guy," said my narrator. '"A funny guy." 
"Ha," I said. 

"He was a fashion plate. That's what he was. Suits had to be just 
right. Hats just right. Shoes, socks, everything custom made. 

"Why, I remember once Charlie and his wife Miranda, the missus 



CLOTHES MAKE THE MAN 



85 



and me — we all drove out to the country. It was hot. I took ofi my 

suit coat. 

"But would he? No sir! Man isn't a man without his coat, says he. 

"We went to this nice place with a stream and a grassy plot for 
sitting. It was awful hot. Miranda and my wife took off their shoes 
and waded in the water. I even joined them. But him! Ha!" 

"Ha!" 

"Not him," he said. "There I was, no shoes and socks, pants and 
shirt sleeves rolled up, wading like a kid. And up there, watching 
amused, was Charlie, still dressed to kill. We called him. Come on 
Charlie, off with the shoes! 

"Oh, no. A man isn't a man without his shoes, he said. I couldn't 
even walk without them. This burned Miranda up. Half the time, 
she says, 1 don't know whether I'm married to a man or a wardrobe. 

"That's the way he was," he sighed, "that's the way." 

"End of story," I said. 

"No," he said, his voice tingling; with horror I suppose. 

"Now comes the terrible part," he said. "You know what I said 
about his clothes. Terrible fussy. Even his underwear had to be 
fitted." 

"Mmm," I said. 

"One day," he went on, his voice sinking to an awed murmur, 
"someone at the office took his hat for a gag. 

"Charlie seemed to pretend he couldn't think. Hardly said a word. 
Just fumbled. Kept saying, hat, hat and staring out the window. I 
took him home. 

"Miranda and I put him on the bed and while I was talking to her 
in the living room, we heard an awful thump. We ran in the bed- 
room. 

"Charlie was crumpled up on the floor. We helped him up. His 
legs buckled under. What's wrong we asked him. Shoes, shoes, he 
said. We sat him on the bed. He picked up his shoes. They fell out 
of his hands. 

"Gloves, gloves, he said. We stared at him. Gloves! he shrieked. 
Miranda was scared. She got him a pair and dropped them on his 
lap. He drew them on slowly and painfully. Then he bent over and 
put his shoes on. 



86 



WORLDS BEYOND 



"He got up and walked around the room as if he were testing his 
feet. 

"Hat, he said and went to the closet. He stuck a hat on his head. 
And then — would you believe it? — he said, What the hell's the idea 
of taking me home? I've got work to do and I've got to fire the 
bastard who stole my hat. Back to the office he goes. 

"You believe that?" he asked. 

"Why not?" I answered, wearily. 

"Well," he said, "I guess you can figure the rest. Miranda tells me 
that day before I left: Is that why the bum is so quiet in bed? I have 
to stick a hat on him every night? 

"I was embarrassed." 

He paused and sighed. 

"Things got bad after that," he went on. "Without a hat Charlie 
couldn't think. Without shoes he couldn't walk. Without gloves he 
couldn't move his fingers. Even in summer he wore gloves. Doctors 
gave up. A psychiatrist went on a vacation after Charlie visited him." 

"Finish it up," I said. "I have to leave soon." 

"There isn't much more," he said. "Things got worse and worse. 
Charlie had to hire a man to dress him. Miranda got sick of him and 
moved into the guest room. My brother was losing everything. 

"Then came that morning ..." 

He shuddered. 

"I went to see how he was. The door to his apartment was wide 
open. I went in fast. The place was like a tomb. 

"I called for Charlie's valet. Not a sound. I went in the bedroom. 

"There was Charlie lying on his bed still as a corpse, mumbling to 
himself. Without a word, I got a hat and stuck it on his head. 
Where's your man? I asked. Where's Miranda? 

"He stared at me with trembling hps. Charlie, what is it? I asked. 

"My suit, he said. 

"What suit? I asked him. What are you talking about? 
"My suit, he whimpered, it went to work this morning. 
"I figured he was out of his mind. 

"My grey pin-stripe, he said hysterically. The one I wore yester- 
day. My valet screamed and I woke up. He was looking at the 
closet. I looked. My God! 



CLOTHES MAKE THE MAN 



87 



"Right in front of the mirror, my underwear was assembling itself. 
One of my white shirts fluttered over the undershirt, the pants pulled 
up into a figure, a coat was thrown over the shirt, a tie was knotted. 
Socks and shoes went under the trousers. The coat arm reached up, 
took a hat off the closet shelf and stuck it in the air where the head 
would be if it had a head. Then the hat doffed itself once. 

"Cut it this way, Charlie, a voice said and laughed like hell. The 
suit walked off. My valet ran off. Miranda's out. 

"Charlie finished his story and I took his hat off so he could faint. 
I phoned for an ambulance." 

The man shifted in his chair. 

"That was last week," he said. "I've still got the shakes." 
"That it?" I asked. 

"About it," he said. "They tell me Charlie is getting weaker. 
Still in the hospital. Sits there on his bed with his grey hat sagging 
over his ears mumbling to himself. Can't talk, even with his hat on." 

He mopped some perspiration off his face. 

"That's not the worst part," he said, sobbing. "They tell me that 
Miranda is . . ." 

He gulped. 

"Is going steady with the suit. Telling all her friends the damn 
thing has more sex appeal than Charlie ever had." 
"No," I said. 

"Yes," he said. "She's in there now. Came in a little while ago." 
He sank back in silent meditation. 

I got up and stretched. We exchanged a glance and he fainted 
dead away. 

I paid no attention. I went in and got Miranda and we left. 



Our Diminishing Knowledge 

The myth that animals and children automatically choose 
the foods they need has been exploded in experiments at the 
University of Pittsburgh. Only a few animals had the faculty, 
others failed to select such vital elements as proteins and mag- 
nesium salts. Several died of malnutrition while surrounded by 
plenty. 




by C. M. Kornbluth 

THE ROCKET 



OF 1955 

The scheme was all Fein's, but the trimmings that made it more 
than a pipe-dream, and its actual operation depended on me. How 
long the plan had been in incubation I do not know, but Fein, one 
day in the spring of 1954, broke it to me in a rather crude form. 
I pointed out some errors, corrected and amplified on the thing in 
general, and told him that I'd have no part of it — and changed my 
mind when he threatened to reveal certain indiscretions committed 
by me some years ago. 

It was necessary that I spend some months in Europe, conduct- 
ing research work incidental to the scheme. I returned with re- 
corded statements, old newspapers, and photostatic copies of cer- 
tain documents. There was a brief, quiet interview with that old, 
bushy-haired Viennese worshiped incontinently by the mob; he was 
convinced by the evidence I had compiled that it would be wise to 
assist us. 

You all know what happened next — it was the professor's his- 
toric radio broadcast. Fein had drafted the thing, I had rewritten 
it, and told the astronomer to assume a German accent while read- 
ing. Some of the phrases were beautiful: "American dominion over 
the very planets! — veil at last ripped- aside — man defies gravity — 

Copyright, 1941, by Albing Publications. 



88 



THE ROCKET OF 1955 



89 



travel through limitless space — plant the glorious red-white-and-blue 
banner in the soil of Mars!" 

The requested contributions poured in. Newspapers and maga- 
zines ostentatiously donated yard-long checks of a few thousand dol- 
lars; the government gave a welcome half -million; heavy sugar 
came from the "Rocket Contribution Week" held in the nation's 
public schools; but independent contributions were the largest. We 
cleared seven million dollars, and then started to build the spaceship. 

The virginium that took up most of the money was tin-plate; the 
monoatomic fluorine that gave us our terrific speed was hydrogen. 
The take-off was a party for the newsreels: the big, gleaming bullet 
extravagant with vanes and projections; speeches by the professor; 
Farley, who was to fly it to Mars, grinning into the cameras. He 
climbed an outside ladder to the nose of the thing, then dropped 
into the steering compartment. I screwed down the sound-proof 
door, smiling as he hammered to be let out. Rather to his surprise, 
there was no duplicate of the elaborate dummy controls he had 
been practicing on for the past few weeks. 

I cautioned the pressmen to stand back under the shelter, and 
gave the professor the knife-switch that would send the rocket on 
its way. He hesitated too long — Fein hissed into his ear: "Anna 
Pareloff of Cracow, Herr Professor . . ." 

The triple blade clicked into the sockets. The vaned projectile 
roared a hundred yards into the air with a wabbling curve — then 
exploded. 

A photographer, eager for an angle-shot, was killed; so were some 
boys of the neighborhood. The steel roof protected the rest of us. 
Fein and I shook hands, while the pressmen screamed into the tele- 
phones which we had provided. 

But the professor got drunk, and, disgusted with the part he had 
played in the affair, told all and poisoned himself. Fein and I left 
the cash behind and hopped a freight. We were picked off it by a 
vigilance committee (headed by a man who had lost fifty cents in 
our rocket) . Fein was too frightened to talk or write so they hanged 
him first, and gave me a paper and pencil to tell the story as best 
I could. 

Here they come, with an insulting thick rope. 



THE DISSECTING TABLE 

Criticism of recent science-fantasy books 

SEVEN SCIENCE FICTION NOVELS OF H. G. WELLS; 
Dover Publications, $3.95. 

It would be hard to think of any project which could be of greater 
service to science-fantasy readers, than the reissuing of these seven 
novels in omnibus form. Here are The First Men in the Moon, The 
Island of Dr. Moreau, The War of the Worlds, The Invisible Man, 
The Time Machine, The Food of the Gods, and In the Days of the 
Comet — all beautifully realized treatments of themes which have 
become basic in science-fantasy — and all, except the first, the 
original conceptions of that tremendous, teeming, prophetic brain 
that was H. G. Wells. 

Herbert F. West, reviewing Antonina Vallentin's recent biography 
of Wells in the New York Times, remarked, "As time has gone on 
and our problems have changed it becomes exceedingly difficult to 
take Wells seriously as an artist who finds expression in the novel. 
It has been rightly said, I think, that he sold his birthright for a mess 
of propaganda. . . . Nor is his style conducive to lasting fame. He 
was unwilling, or could not, take the time necessary to develop a 
literary style. He said once, 'I write, like I walk, because I want to 
get somewhere.' ... He never became a writer of genuine distinc- 
tion.*' 

From this judgment I most heartily dissent. Wells' claim to im- 
mortality is rejected on two counts: that the people in his novels 
are mere vehicles for his ideas and his imaginative conceptions of 
the future; and that his style is always subservient to what he has to 
say. Both statements are unarguably true; but neither is damning 
unless we accept the notion that the novel of ideas cannot be art, 
or that style should never be secondary to content. 

Wells' characters are no waxen puppets; they are living, breathing, 
entirely believable human beings; but it is perfectly true that they 
are little figures in the foreground, dwarfed by the overwhelming 



90 



THE DISSECTING TABLE 



91 



hugeness of the events which loom behind them. So they should be; 
a human character drawn large enough to compete with those events 
would be utterly and ludicrously out of proportion. 

Wells' style is fluent, lucid, and instantly recognizable as his own. 
Above all, it does not get in the way of his story; his reader is never 
halted in the midst of a cosmic cataclysm to appreciate the exquisite 
perfection of a participle. 

A true prophet is an uncomfortable sort of thing for common 
minds; he is a freak, not quite respectable; he is an odd-shaped ob- 
ject, with sharp corners and angles, hard to classify; therefore best 
forget him. But I think posterity can safely be expected to see that 
prophecy in literature is no wild and unearned talent; that it is, on 
the contrary, a deliberate and supremely difficult act of literary 
creation. 

THE HVMATSOIDS, hy Jack Williamson; Grosset & Dun- 
lap, $1.00. 

It is no pleasure to me to make the admission, but this novel, 
which in its brief career has so far seen four separate editions (the 
magazine version, Simon & Schuster's, the present one, and a French 
translation published by Editions Stock), is without doubt one of the 
most important science-fantasy books of the last five years. 

The story deals with a basic, immediate, and very probably in- 
soluble philosophical problem. A human scientist, embittered by 
mankind's ceaseless attempts to destroy itself, perfects and sets in 
operation the humanoids — a horde of efficient, respectful robot ser- 
vants, all controlled by a single cybernetic brain, whose prime di- 
rective is, "To serve and obey, and guard men from harm." But 
the first two fractions of this commandment are slighted by the hu- 
manoids' built-in interpretive mechanism; it is the third with which 
they are concerned, and they execute it to the last humorless inch. 
Wherever their expanding power touches, they guard men from any 
conceivable harm, whether the men want to be guarded or not — 
even to the extent of depriving pathologically unhappy people of their 
identities. 

The rest of the story is occupied by the frantic attempts of the 
inventor and others to halt this monster, and change its interpreta- 



92 



WORLDS BEYOND 



tion of the prime directive so that the robots will actually serve and 
not rule ... up until the final episode, wherein the book's unhappy 
protagonist learns that among a small group of renegades who are 
cooperating with the humanoids is the inventor himself, now a con- 
vert to the robots' present methods. The story ends on a completely 
ambiguous note, the question unresolved — are the humanoids, in the 
last analysis, humanity's salvation or destruction? And very properly 
so; as I said above, the problem is probably insoluble. 

The book is important, then, because its theme is important, and 
because Williamson's treatment is both honest and dramatically ef- 
fective. It is also a most painstaking and conscientious job of writ- 
ing, in everything from the plot-structure to the pseudo-scientific 

It pains me to admit all this, simply because the writing itself 
is so thoroughly, unremittingly and excruciatingly bad. 

Williamson has the misfortune to be an exceptionally careful 
craftsman who grew up in one of the crudest eras of pulp fiction. 
The usual technique in those days was to grab the reader by his nose 
at the earliest possible moment in a story and never let go: thus, the 
hero invariably started out in a tough situation, which got pro- 
gressively worse until the last scene, when, plausibly or not, the 
problem was solved. 

Williamson, as a struggling young author, earned an impressive 
success simply by applying this system more thoroughly than any of 
bis rivals. Williamson began each story by putting his hero in ap- 
proximately the position of a seventy-year-old paralytic in a plaster 
cast who is required to do battle with a saber-tooth tiger — and, there 
being no place to go from there, kept him in the same predicament 
throughout the story, only adding an extra fang from time to time. 

The years have polished this technique but have not altered it; 
and the effect of it upon an even moderately sensitive ear is like that 
of an irritating sound repeated over and over and over and endlessly 
over. Dr. Clay Forester, this novel's central character, is the victim 
of every torment Williamson could devise for him: he is fatigued to 
the limit of his endurance, sick with fear, frustrated by his work and 
his personal relationships, injured in his ego by everyone around 
him, confronted by insoluble and vitally important problems — and 



THE DISSECTING TABLE 



93 



his knee hurts; and all this, very nearly without a letup, goes on 
throughout the story. 

I read this book through to the end for professional reasons, and 
came to the conclusion given above. But if I had been reading 
purely for pleasure, I would have breathed a prayer for Dr. Forester 
to break his neck somewhere during the second chapter, and turned 
to Dr. Dooliftle. 

FARMER IN THE SKY, by Robert A. Heinlein; Scribner's, 
$2.50. 

Like this writer's three previous science-fiction books for boys 
(Rocket Ship Galileo, Space Cadet and The Red Planet), Farmer In 
the Sky might easily serve as a primer for science-fiction writers. 
For in order to understand what is meant by the word "juvenile" as 
applied to this work, you must remember that Alice In Wonderland 
and Treasure Island were also written for children. The book is not 
in any sense written down. It is a typical Heinlein story — that is to 
say, typically brilliant, thorough, and readable. Here, for the first 
time, is a completely detailed projection of the life that may be led 
by your grandchildren and mine as colonists of the moons of Jupiter. 
Heinlein, like Wells, is a true prophet; when you have read this book, 
you will find it almost impossible to doubt that future events will 
take the exact course he describes. This is his peculiar strength, that 
the forces at work in his novels are not the forces of auctorial whim 
but those of history; they are not merely possible in theory but in- 
evitable in fact. 

Like Wells, Heinlein has a clean but undistinguished style; his 
choice of words is never so conspicuously good or bad as to interfere 
with the picture he is showing you. And like Wells' characters, Hein- 
lein's are less important than the backdrop against which they move. 
But this comparison goes no further, for Wells was a romantic 
dabbler in science; Heinlein is an engineer by training and a human- 
ist by temperament. Heinlein's people are objects in the plenum, to 
be accurately and soberly described, not to be commented upon. 
If there is emotion in the picture, it is the emotion of the protagon- 
ist, not Heinlein's. Most striking of all, these people are not pre- 
selected for their gigantic intelligence or their colorful personalities; 



94 



WORLDS BEYOND 



they are simply a random sample of genus homo. So far as I can 
recall, there is not a character in any one of Heinlein's stories who is 
not essentially ordinary. Some of them have eccentricities : some are 
long-lived, one has an eidetic memory, another has two heads; but 
in every other respect, they are triumphantly commonplace. And 
this again is a singular strength of Heinlein's, for only that rare, un- 
colored vision of the engineer, driven by a humanist's sympathy, 
could make the commonplace an adventure. 

Buy this book. Use your son as an excuse if you have to, but buy 
it. It is guaranteed to keep you up until four if you make the mis- 
take of beginning it at midnight, and it will stick in your memory 
for a long time to come. 

THE WORLD OF A, by A. E. van Vogt; Grosset & Dunlap, 
$1.00. 

This widely-read novel began its career as a pretentious, foolish, 
wildly complicated and self-contradictory magazine serial. In the 
hard-cover version, a ruthless pruning and trimming job is evident: 
whole sections of irrelevant material have been lifted out in toto, 
motivations and relationships have been patched into some kind of 
coherent shape, and many of the objectionable features of van 
Vogt's magazine style — the inversions, repetitions, overemphasis and 
mangled grammar — have been smoothed out. All of these were en- 
cumbrances to the story's one virtue, its powerful, exciting move- 
ment. 

What emerges, then, is a fairly straightforward adventure story in 
a pseudoscientific background. There is excitement in it, and if you 
do not examine the plot too carefully (a disadvantage of the present 
version is that this is now easier to do) you won't miss the vacant 
stages in its scaffolding. 

FURY, by Henry Kiittner; Grosset & Dunlap, $1.00. 

Here is another magazine serial, and one which has never before 
been published in hard covers. It is not Kuttner's best work, but it 
suffers only in comparison to his best; compared to The World of A , 
it is a miracle of lucidity, sound construction and good writing. 

The background is that of the undersea cities of Venus, some cen- 



THE DISSECTING TABLE 



95 



turies after the destruction of Earth in atomic war. No foothold has 
ever been established on the land surface of Venus, which is an in- 
credibly voracious jungle; and now the undersea culture has reached 
a crisis-point. The Keep dwellers have become too stable, too self- 
satisfied; if they don't attack the surface now — thus transforming 
their dying civilization to a vigorous pioneer culture — they never 
will; they'll stay under their domes till their technology drops too low 
to maintain them, and then die. 

The instrument of this struggle against decadence is a singular 
product of that decadence — a member of the ruling Immortals of the 
Keeps who was deformed at birth by his psychotic father (who hated 
him as the symbol and instrument of his wife's death) and denied 
knowledge of his abnormal life-span. Thus cramped into an en- 
vironment too narrow for his intelligence, he becomes a completely 
amoral criminal — and labors, as it turns out, to save the race from 
destruction purely because it satisfies his own will to power. The 
background is colorful and convincing, the narrative both logical and 
exciting. Recommended. 

CON AN THE CONQUEROR, by Robert E. Howard; Gnome 
Press, $2.75. 

There is a Howard cult, less numerous, apparently, and certainly 
less vociferous than the .Lovecraft cult — perhaps because Howard's 
fantasy is of a quiet and unassuming kind, and therefore doesn't 
make his followers quite so defensive. 

The reader new to Howard's work, in fact, will find little out of 
the ordinary in the opening chapters of this story, set in a prehistoric 
civilization of Howard's imagination — or in the chief character, 
Conan himself, the much-vaunted fabulous barbarian. Conan is, to 
be frank, a big lump: not bright, of undistinguished character, and 
not even especially agile. (His defeats in personal combat through- 
out the story invariably take place when he trips over something.) 
But the story has an adventurous sweep; it never slows down for a 
moment; and in the end, the reader may find himself with a curious, 
apparently causeless affection for Conan and his world. Should this 
occur, there is more pleasure of the same kind in store for him; 
this book is the first of a series to be issued by Gnome Press. 



by Harry Harrison 




ROCK DIVER 

// an undersea diver's equipment jailed, he still had a 
slim chance to live. But between Pete and the surface 
was the crushing weight of a half-mile of stone. . . . 

The wind hurtled over the crest of the ridge and rushed down the 
slope in an icy torrent. It tore at Pete's canvas suit, pelting him 
with steel-hard particles of ice. Head down, he fought against it 
as he worked his way uphill towards the granite outcropping. 

He was freezing to -death. A man can't wear enough clothes to 
stay alive in fifty degrees below zero. Pete could feel the numbness 
creeping up his arms. When he wiped his frozen breath from his 
whiskers there was no sensation. His skin was white and shiny wher- 
ever it was exposed to the Alaskan air. 

"All in a day's work." His cracked lips painfully shaped them- 
selves into the ghost of a smile. "If any of those claim-jumping scis- 
sorbills followed me this far they're gonna be awful cold before they 
get back." 

96 



ROCK DIVER 



97 



The outcropping sheltered him as he fumbled for the switch at 
his side. A shrill whine built up in the steel box slung at his belt. 
The sudden hiss of released oxygen was cut off as he snapped shut 
the faceplate of his helmet. Pete clambered onto the granite ridge 
that pushed up through the frozen ground. 

He stood straight against the wind now, not feeling its pressure, 
the phantom snowflakes swirling through his body. Following the 
outcropping, he slowly walked into the ground. The top of his hel- 
met bobbed for a second like a bottle in water, then sank below the 
surface of the snow. 

Underground it was warmer, the wind and cold left far behind; 
Pete stopped and shook the snow from his suit. He carefully un- 
hooked the ultra-light from his pack and switched it on. The light 
beam, polarized to his own mass-penetrating frequency, reached out 
through the layers of surrounding earth as if they were cloudy gela- 
tine. 

Pete had been a rock diver for eleven years, but the sight of this 
incredible environment never ceased to amaze him. He took the 
miracle of his vibratory penetrator, the rock diver's "walk-through", 
for granted. It was just a gadget, a good gadget, but something he 
could take apart and fix if he had to. The important thing was what 
it did to the world around him. 

The hogback of granite started at his feet and sank down into a 
murky sea of red fog. It was a fog composed of the lighter limestone 
and other rock, sweeping away in frozen layers. Seemingly suspended 
in mid-air were granite boulders and rocks of all sizes, caught in the 
strata of lighter materials. He ducked his head carefully to avoid 
these. 

If his preliminary survey was right, this rocky ridge should lead 
him to the site of the missing lode. He had been following leads and 
drifts for over a year now, closing in on what he hoped was the 
source of the smaller veins. 

He trudged downward, leaning forward as he pushed his way 
through the soupy limestone. It rushed through and around him 
like a strong current of water. It was getting harder every day to 
push through the stuff. The piezo crystal of his walk-through was 
getting further away from the optimum frequency every day. It took 



98 



WORLDS BEYOND 



a hard push to get the atoms of his body between those of the sur- 
rounding matter. He twisted his head around and blinked to focus 
his eyes on the two-inch oscilloscope screen set inside his helmet. 
The little green face smiled at him — the jagged wave-pattern gleam- 
ing like a row of broken teeth. His jaw clenched at the variations 
between the reading and the true pattern etched onto the surface of 
the tube. If the crystal failed, the entire circuit was inoperative, and 
frozen death waited quietly in the air far above him for the day he 
couldn't go under. Or he might be underground when the crystal 
collapsed. Death was here, too, a quicker and much more spectacu- 
lar death that would leave him stuck forever like a fly in amber. A 
fly that is part of the amber. He thought about the way Soft-Head 
had got his and shuddered slightly. 

Soft-Head Samuels had been one of the old gang, the hard-bitten 
rock divers who had been the first to uncover the mineral wealth 
under the eternal Alaskan snows. Soft-Head had slipped off a hog- 
back two hundred meters down, and literally fallen face first into 
the fabulous White Owl mother lode. That was the strike that started 
the rush of '63. As the money-hungry hordes rushed north to Daw- 
son he had strolled south with a fortune. He came back in three 
years with no more than his plane fare and a measureless distrust of 
humanity. 

He rejoined the little group around the pot-bellied stove, content 
just to sit among his old cronies. He didn't talk about his trip to the 
outside and no one asked any questions. The only sign that he 
had been away was the way he clamped down on his cigar whenever a 
stranger came into the room. North American Mining grubstaked 
him to a new outfit and he went back to tramping the underground 
wastes. 

One day he walked into the ground and never came up again. 
"Got stuck," they muttered, but they didn't know just where until 
Pete walked through him in 71. 

Pete remembered it, too well. He had been dog-tired and sleepy 
when he had walked through that hunk of rock that hadn't been all 
rock. Soft-Head was standing there — trapped for eternity in the 
stone. His face was horror-stricken as he stood half bent over, grab- 
bing at his switch box. For one horrible instant Soft-Head must 



ROCK DIVER 



99 



have known that something was wrong with his walk-through — 
then the rock had closed in. He had been been standing there for 
seven years in the same position he would occupy for all eternity, 
the atoms of his body mixed inextricably with the atoms of the sur- 
rounding rock. 

Pete cursed under his breath. If he didn't get enough of a strike 
pretty soon to buy a new crystal, he would become part of that time- 
less gallery of lost prospectors. His power pack was shot and his 
oxygen tank leaked. His beat-up Miller sub-suit belonged in a mu- 
seum, not on active duty. It was. patched like an inner tube and 
still wouldn't hold air the way it should. All he needed was one 
strike, one little strike. 

His helmet light picked a blue glint from some crystals in the 
-gulley wall. It might be Ytt. He leaped off the granite spine he had 
been following and sank slowly through the lighter rock. Plugging 
his hand neutralizer into the socket in his belt, he lifted out a foot- 
thick section of rock. The shining rod of the neutralizer adjusted 
the vibration plane of the sample to the same frequency as his own. 
Pete pressed the mouth-shaped opening of the spectro-analyzer to 
the boulder and pressed the trigger. The brief, intensely hot atomic 
flame blazed against the hard surface, vaporizing it instantly. 

The film transparency popped out of the analyzer and Pete studied 
the spectrographic lines intently. Wrong again; no trace of the fa- 
miliar Yttrotantalite lines. With an angry motion he stowed the test 
equipment in his pack and ploughed on through the gummy rock. 

Yttrotantalite was the ore and tantalum was the metal extracted 
from it. This rare metal was the main ingredient of the delicate 
piezoelectric crystals that made the vibratory mass penetrator pos- 
sible. Ytt made tantalum, tantalum made crystals, crystals operated 
the walk-through that he used to find more Ytt to make. ... It was 
just like a squirrel cage, and Pete was the squirrel, a very unhappy 
animal at the present moment. 

Pete carefully turned the rheostat knob on the walk-through, feed- 
ing a trifle more power into the circuit. It would be hard on the 
crystal, but he needed it to enable him to push through the jelly-like 
earth. 

His thoughts kept returning to that little crystal that meant his life. 



100 



WORLDS BEYOND 



It was a thin wafer of what looked like dirty glass, ground and pol- 
ished to the most exacting tolerances. When subjected to an almost 
microscopic current, it vibrated at exactly the correct frequency that 
allowed one mass to slide between the molecules of another. This 
weak signal in turn controlled the much more powerful circuit that 
enabled himself and all his equipment to move through the earth. 
If the crystal failed, the atoms of his body would return to the vibra- 
tory plane of the normal world and alloy themselves with the earth 
atoms through which he was moving. , . . Pete shook his head as if 
to clear away the offending thoughts and quickened his pace down 
the slope. 

He had been pushing against the resisting rock for three hours 
now and his leg-muscles felt like hot pokers. In a few minutes he 
would have to turn back, if he wanted to leave himself a margin 
of safety. But he had been getting Ytt traces for an hour now, and 
they seemed to be getting stronger as he followed the probable course 
of the drift. The mother lode had to be a rich one — if he could only 
find it! 

It was time to start the long uphill return. Pete jerked a rock for 
a iast test. He'd mark the spot and take up the search tomorrow. 
The test bulb flashed and he held the transparency against it. 

His body tensed and his heart began to thud heavily. He blinked 
and looked again — it was there! The tantalum lines burned through 
the weaker traces with a harsh brilliance. His hand was shaking as 
he jerked open his knee pocket. He had a comparison film from the 
White Owl claim, the richest in the territory. There wasn't the 
slightest doubt — his was the richer ore! 

He took the half-crystals out of their cushioned pouch and gently 
placed the B crystal in the hole he had made when he removed the 
sample rock. No one else could ever find this spot without the other 
half of the same crystal, ground accurately to a single ultra-shortwave 
frequency. If half A were used to key the frequency of a signal 
generator, side B would bounce back an echo of the same wave- 
length; that would be picked up by a delicate receiver. In this way 
the crystal both marked the claim and enabled Pete to find his way 
back to it. 

He carefully stowed the A crystal in its cushioned compartment 



ROCK DIVER 



101 



and started the long trek back to the surface. Walking was almost 
impossible; the old crystal in his walk-through was deviating so far 
that he could scarcely push through the gluey earth. He could feel 
the imponderable mass of the half-mile of rock over his head, wait- 
ing to imprison him in its eternal grip. The only way to the surface 
was to follow the long hogback of granite until it finally cleared the 
surface. 

The crystal had been in continuous use now for over five hours. 
If he could only turn it off for a while, the whole unit would have 
a chance to cool down. His hand shook as he fumbled with his pack 
straps — he forced himself to slow down and do the job properly. 

He turned the hand neutralizer to full power and held the glow- 
ing rod at arm's length before him. Out of the haze there suddenly 
materialized an eighteen-foot boulder of limestone, adjusted now to 
his own penetrating frequency. Gravity gripped the gigantic rock 
and it slowly sank. When it had cleared the level of the granite 
ledge, he turned off the neutralizer. There was a heavy crunch as the 
molecules of the boulder welded themselves firmly to those of the 
surrounding rock. Pete stepped into the artificial bubble he had 
formed in the rock and turned off his walk-through. 

With a suddenness that never ceased to amaze him, his hazy sur- 
roundings became solid walls of rock. His helmet light splashed off 
the sides of the little chamber, a bubble with no exit, one-half mile 
below the freezing Alaskan wastes. 

With a grunt of relief, Pete slipped out of his heavy pack and 
stretched his aching muscles. He had to conserve oxygen; that was 
the reason he had picked this particular spot. His artificial cave cut 
through a vein of RbO, rubidium oxide. It was a cheap and plentiful 
mineral, not worth mining this far north, but still the rock diver's 
best friend. 

Pete rummaged in the pack for the airmaker and fastened its power 
pack to his belt. He thumbed the unit on and plunged the contact 
points into the RbO vein. The silent flash illuminating the chamber 
glinted on the white snow that was beginning to fall! The flakes of 
oxygen released by the airmaker melted before they touched the 
floor. The underground room was getting a lifegiving atmosphere 



102 WORLDS BEYOND 

of its own. With air around him, he could open his faceplate and 
get some chow out of his pack. 

He cautiously cracked the helmet valve and sniffed. The air was 
good, although pressure was low — around twelve pounds. The oxy- 
gen concentration was a little too high; he giggled happily with a 
mild oxygen jag. Pete hummed tunelessly as he tore the cardboard 
wrapper from a ration pack. 

Cool water from the canteen washed down the tasteless hard tack, 
but he smiled, thinking of thick, juicy steaks. The claim would be 
assayed and mine owners' eyes would bulge when they read the re- 
port. Then they would come to him. Dignified, sincere men clutch- 
ing contracts in their well-manicured hands. He would sell to the 
highest bidder, the entire claim; let someone else do all the work 
for a change. They would level and surface this granite ridge and 
big pressure trucks would plow through the earth, bringing miners 
to and from the underground diggings. He relaxed against the curved 
wall of the bubble, smiling. He could see himself, bathed, shaven 
and manicured, walking into the Miners' Rest. . . . 

The day-dream vanished as two men in bulging subsuits stepped 
through the rock wall. Their figures were transparent; their feet 
sank into the ground with each step. Both men suddenly jumped 
into the air; at mid-arc they switched off their walk-throughs. The 
figures gained solidity and landed heavily on the floor. They opened 
their face-plates and sniffed the air. 

The shorter man smiled. "It sure smells nice in here, right, Mo?" 

Mo was having trouble getting his helmet off; his voice rumbled 
out through the folds of cloth. "Right, Algie." The helmet came 
free with a snap. 

Pete's eyes widened at the sight, and Algie smiled a humorless 
grin. "Mo ain't much to look at, but you could learn to like him." 

Mo was a giant, seven feet from his boots to the crown of his 
bullet-shaped head, shaved smooth and glistening with sweat. He 
must have been born ugly, and Time had not improved him. His 
nose was flattened, one ear was little more than a rag, and a thick 
mass of white scar-tissue drew up his upper lip. Two yellow teeth 
gleamed through the opening. 

Pete slowly closed his canteen and stowed it in the pack. They 



ROCK DIVER 



103 



might be honest rock divers, but they didn't look it. "Anything I 
can do for you guys?" he asked. 

"No thanks, pal," said the short one, "we was just going by and 
saw the flash of your airmaker. We thought maybe it was one of 
our pals, so we come over to see. Rock diving sure is a lousy racket 
these days, ain't it?" As he talked, the little man's eyes flicked 
casually around the room, taking in everything. With a wheeze, Mo 
sat down against the wall. 

"You're right," said Pete carefully. "I haven't had a strike in 
months. You guys newcomers? I don't think I've seen you around 
the camp." 

Algie did not reply. He was staring intently at Pete's bulging 
sample case. 

He snapped open a huge clasp knife. "What you got in the sample 
case, Mac?" 

"Just some low-grade ore I picked up. Going to have it assayed, 
but I doubt if it's even worth carrying. I'll show you." 

Pete stood up and walked toward the case. As he passed in front 
of Algie, he bent swiftly, grabbed the knife hand and jabbed his knee 
viciously into the short man's stomach. Algie jackknifed and Pete 
chopped his neck sharply with the edge of his palm. He didn't wait 
to see him fall but dived towards the pack. 

He pulled his Army .45 with one hand and scooped out the signal 
crystal with the other, raising his steel-shod boot to stamp the crystal 
to powder. 

His heel never came down. A gigantic fist gripped his ankle, stop- 
ping Pete's whole bulk in midair. He tried to bring the gun around, 
but a hand as large as a ham clutched his wrist. He screamed as 
the bones grated together. The automatic dropped from his nerve- 
less fingers. 

He hung head down for five minutes while Mo pleaded with the 
unconscious Algie to tell him what to do. Algie regained conscious- 
ness and sat up cursing and rubbing his neck. He told Mo what to 
do and sat there smiling until Pete lost consciousness. 

Slap-slap, slap-slap; his head rocked back and forth in time to the 
blows. He couldn't stop them, they jarred his head, shook his en- 
tire body. From very far away he heard Algie's voice. 



104 



WORLDS BEYOND 



"That's enough. Mo, that's enough. He's coming around now." 

Pete braced himself painfully against the wall and wiped the blood 
out of his eyes. The short man's face swam into his vision. 

"Mac, you're giving too much trouble. We're going to take your 
crystal and find your strike, and if it's as good as the samples you 
got there, I'm going to be very happy and celebrate by killing you 
real slow. If we don't find it, you get killed slower. You get yours 
either way. Nobody ever hits Algie, don't you know that?" 

They turned on Pete's walk-through and half carried, half dragged 
him through the wall. About twenty feet away they emerged in an- 
other artificial bubble, much larger than his own. It was almost 
filled by the metallic bulk of an atomic tractor. 

Mo pushed him to the floor and kicked his walk-through into a 
useless ruin. The giant stepped over Pete's body and lumbered across 
the room. As he swung himself aboard the tractor, Algie switched on 
the large walk-through unit. Pete saw Algie's mouth open with 
silent laughter as the ghostly machine lurched forward and drove 
into the wall. 

Pete turned and pawed through the crushed remains of his walk- 
through. Completely useless. They had done a thorough job, and 
there was nothing else in this globular tomb that could help him 
out. His sub-rock radio was in his own bubble; with that he could 
call the Army base and have a patrol here in twenty minutes. But 
there was a little matter of twenty feet of rock between the radio 
and himself. 

His light swung up and down the wall. That three-foot vein of 
RbO must be the same one that ran through his own chamber. 

He grabbed his belt. The airmaker was still there! He pressed 
the points to the wall and watched the silver snow spring out. Pieces 
of rock fell loose as he worked in a circle. If the power pack held 
out — and if they didn't come back too soon — 

With each flash of the airmaker an inch-thick slab of rock 
crumbled away. The accumulators took 3.7 seconds to recharge; 
then the white flash would leap out and blast loose another mass of 
rubble. He worked furiously with his left hand to clear away the 
shattered rock. 

Blast with the right arm — push with the left — blast and push — 



ROCK DIVER 



105 



blast and push. He laughed and sobbed at the same time, warm 
tears running down his cheeks. He had forgotten the tremendous 
amounts of oxygen he was releasing. The walls reeled drunkenly 
around him. 

Stopping just long enough to seal his helmet, Pete turned back to 
the wall of his makeshift tunnel. He blasted and struggled with the 
resisting rock, trying to ignore his throbbing head. He lay on his 
side, pushing the broken stones behind him, packing them solid with 
his feet. 

He had left the large bubble behind and was sealed into his own 
tiny chamber far under the earth. He could feel the weight of a half- 
mile of solid rock pushing down on him, crushing the breath from 
his lungs. If the airmaker died now, he would lie there and rot in 
this hand-hewn tomb! Pete tried to push the thought from his mind 
— to concentrate only on blasting his way through the earth. 

Time seemed to stand still as he struggled on through an eternity 
of effort. His arms worked like pistons while his bloody fingers 
scrabbled at the corroded rock. 

He dropped his arms for a few precious moments while his burn- 
ing lungs pumped air. The weakened rock before him crumbled and 
blew away with an explosive sound. The air whistled through the 
ragged opening. The pressure in the two chambers was equalizing — 
he had holed through! 

He was blasting at the edges of the hole with the weakened air- 
maker when the legs walked up next to him. Algie's face pushed 
through the low rock ceiling, a ferocious scowl on its features. There 
was no room to materialize; all the impotent Algie could do was to 
shake his fist at — and through — Pete's face. 

A monstrous crunching came from the loose rubble behind him; 
the rock fell away and Mo pushed through. Pete couldn't turn to 
fight, but he landed one shoe on the giant's shapeless nose before 
monster hands clutched his ankles. 

He was dragged through the rocky tube like a child, hauled back 
to the bigger cavern. When Mo dropped him he just slid to the floor 
and lay there gasping. ... He had been so close. 

Algie bent over him. "You're too smart, Mac. I'm going to shoot 
you now, so you don't give me no more trouble." 



106 



WORLDS BEYOND 



He pulled Pete's .45 out of his pocket, grabbed it by the slide and 
charged it. "By the way, we found your strike. It's going to make 
me richer'n hell. Glad, Mac?" 

Algie squeezed the trigger and a hammer-blow struck Pete's thigh. 
The little man stood over Pete, grinning. 

"I'm going to give you all these slugs where they won't kill you 
— not right away. Ready for the next one, Mac?" 

Pete pushed up onto one elbow and pressed his hand against the 
muzzle of the gun. Algie's grin widened. "Fine, stop the bullet with 
your hand!" 

He squeezed the trigger; the gun clicked sharply. A ludicrous ex- 
pression of amazement came over his face. Pete rose up and pressed 
the airmaker against Algie's face-plate. The expression was still there 
when his head exploded into frosty ribbons. 

Pete dived on the gun, charged it out of the half-cocked position 
and swung around. Algie had been smart, but not smart enough to 
know that the muzzle of a regulation .45 acts as a safety. When you 
press against it the barrel is pushed back into half-cock position and 
can't be fired until the slide is worked to recharge it. 

Mo came stumbling across the room, his jaw gaping in amazement. 
Swinging around on his good leg, Pete waved the gun at him. "Hold 
it right there, Mo. You're going to help me get back to town." 

The giant didn't hear him; there was room in his mind for only 
one thought. 

"You killed Algie— you killed Algie!" 

Pete fired half the clip before the big man dropped. 

He turned from the dying man with a shudder. It had been self- 
defense, but that thought didn't help the sick feeling in his stomach. 
Ke twisted his belt around his leg to stop the blood and applied a 
sterile bandage from the tractor's first-aid kit. 

The tractor would get him back; he would let the Army take care 
of the mess here. He pushed into the driver's seat and kicked the 
engine into life. The cat's walk-through operated perfectly; the ma- 
chine crawled steadily toward the surface. Pete rested his wounded 
leg on the cowling and let the earth flow smoothly past and through 
him. 

It was still snowing when the tractor broke through to the surface. 




VALLEY DF DDDM 

The calculations of the Total State included 
everything — even a measured dose of beauty. 

I 

Mr. Smith, better known in State records as H/99 Hampstead — 
this being also the address of the house in which he lived— entered 
the breakfast-room at 4 a.m., punctual to a second. 

With its white-painted walls, rounded cornices, tiled floor, and 
windows wide open to the fresh but cold morning breeze, the room 
was in perfect taste hygienically. It was furnished with a table and 
four chairs, fashioned out of angle-iron enameled white, and the only 
attempt at mural decorative art was a genuine photogravure of Karl 
Marx. 

On the wall beside the door was a time-recorder, and as Smith 



107 



108 



WORLDS BEYOND 



pressed the button bearing his number a bell rang and a red light, 
then a white light, appeared for a second. By these signs Smith knew 
that the time of his arrival was duly recorded at the Bureau of In- 
dustry. His comrade, on festive occasions called Mrs. Smith, and 
their two children — Henry, aged 21, and Jane, aged 17 — were al- 
ready standing round the table. Without more ado Smith took his 
place at the end of the table and in a 4oud, clear voice read the Act 
of Parliament for the day. 

As it happened to be Chromosome, the 73rd day of the month 
Electron, the appropriate Act had reference to the necessity for, and 
value of, deep breathing exercises, in which the whole family after- 
wards engaged. 

Refreshed by these gymnastics, they sat down to eat. No meat 
was on the glass-topped table, but there was a liberal supply of con- 
gealed carbohydrate and a large flagon of sterile distilled water. The 
dress of the household was uniform in type, no distinction being 
made between the sexes, but the married were to be distinguished 
from the unmarried by means of a yellow patch stamped with the 
Government arms, two broad arrows rampant. 

Glancing round the healthy table, Smith inquired with a smile, 
"All well?" and to this salutation each in turn replied, "All correct." 

"I know someone who isn't well," said Henry. 

"Indeed?" asked his father. 

"Yes, 58 Pancras — old Jones, you know — was taken off yester- 
day; his family haven't had a report yet." 

For a moment there was silence. "Come, come," said Smith, hur- 
riedly, "we must keep cheerful"; and he hastened to open a Govern- 
ment envelope. 

Having read the contents, he turned to his son in righteous in- 
dignation — "Henry, 1 am pained to learn from this letter, sent by 
the Ministry of Eugenics, that you have been holding conversations 
with a girl in the next street without sanction of the Ministry; and, 
worse than that, there's a statement from the Secret Search Com- 
mission that a copy of Shakespeare's Sonnets was found hidden un- 
der your bed. You know very well, sir, that all poetry is on the 
State Index Expurgatorius, and that possession of any love poetry 
is a felony." 



VALLEY OF DOOM 



109 



"Poetry!" exclaimed Mrs. Smith, shuddering. 

"The whole thing is a very grave and serious reflection on me," 
added his father. 

"Well, that's got nothing to do with me as a Unit," replied Henry. 

"It has, indeed, sir, as you'll soon find out. My defense is clear. 
Only last Rest Day I read aloud the Laws and Appendices of the 
Ministry of Eugenics, whereby such actions are proscribed." 
, "I'm very sorry, Smith," said his son, "but I wanted to know how 
they managed in ancient days when a Unit chose his own comrade 
— sweethearts I think they called them." 

"Great State!" moaned Mrs. Smith. 

"Well, well, Mrs. Smith," said Smith wearily, "boys will be boys." 

"Cease," shouted Mrs. Smith, "don't 'Mrs. Smith' me. I'm H/99a 
Hampstead, and boys are not boys, nor are girls. They're undevel- 
oped Units with insane delusions — the vestigial taint of Christian 
times. My poor dear mother at least taught me the Acts of Parlia- 
ment," and she sobbed bitterly. 

"But," protested Smith, "both our children were at the State 
Asylum and released cured. Surely this conversation is treason?" 

"Both these children were let out of the Asylum too soon, and if 
they follow H/99 they'll end in the Lethal Institute before their 
time." 

"The State forbid," murmured Smith. 

At that moment the door opened and a keen hatchet-faced man 
entered: "Act 43, Section XI. Right of Entry at all hours to In- 
spector of Cheerfulness. All cheerful, I hope?" 

"Yes, sir," said Smith, rising with the others; "all cheerful; very 
cheerful, indeed, sir," 

As he produced his red notebook the Inspector rapidly scrutinized 
each member of the family in turn. 

"No, not all cheerful," he said. "You, for one, are not cheerful, 
H/99 Hampstead; but that's now beyond my Department. And 
what's the name of this Unit? He's got a curious expression on his 
face." 

"That's Henry, sir." 

"How long has he been looking like that?" 
"Looking like what, sir?" 



WORLDS BEYOND 



"Looking like that." 
"I don't know, sir." 

"You don't know!" said the Inspector, and he crossed the room 
to the telephone. "Hullo! I want Mental Emergencies. . . . Is that 
you, Mental. . . . This is Inspector Weevil. I'm speaking from H/99 
Hampstead. There's a case of Suppressed Complex here. . . . No, it's 
hot been notified. . . . Very good, send out a Psycho-Analyst at once. 
Right you are." 

"Now, then," said the Inspector, more cheerfully, turning to the 
family, "what's the name and number of this girl?" 

"Jane, sir," answered Smith, "born 17 years ago, vaccinated five 
f imes, inoculated thrice, hypnotized once, State Asylum ... all the 
papers are in order. H/99/a/Vi is her number." 

"She will be in this house at 23 o'clock, when the Special Woman 
Inspector for young Female Units will call." 

"Very good, sir," said Smith. . 

"I won't," exclaimed Jane, looking at her brother. 

"Oh," sobbed Mrs, Smith, "this is awful! . . . 'won't.' " 

"Keep silent," said the Inspector. "That child is a Christian." 
• "No, no, she's not, sir," groaned Smith. 

"She is. And instead of contradicting, let's see your dictaphone 
records. That'll show how you've been getting along in this happy 
home." 

Smith dragged ouf a large cabinet from beneath the table, and this 
the Inspector unlocked with his key. 

"What's this here?" he exclaimed. "There's been a quarrel in this 
house. That's what it is. The record shows high voices, and curious 
expressions, eh? How about it?" 

"We all deplore it, sir; we all deplore it," said Smith earnestly. 

"I dare say you do," replied the Inspector, "and I'll tell you what 
it is, H/99. It's a good thing for you that you didn't five at a time 
when what they called money was used; because, what with fines 
for one thing and another, you'd have had nothing left. That's to 
say, if we inspectors were to do our duty. . . . Well, now, I must be 
getting along." 

Amongst his far-off ancestors were some who had followed the 
calling of a policeman, and as he left the house a small packet of 



VALLEY OF DOOM 



111 



carbohydrate was pressed into his hand by Smith. But, so preoc- 
cupied was the Inspector, he made no outward acknowledgment of 
the gift. 

The hours passed and various officials called. An Investigator of 



Chimney-piece Ornaments and the Agent for the Society of Hygienic 

Wallpapers (with Powers under the Act) were early arrivals. The 
Special Woman Inspector insisted on cropping Jane's hair, and Henry 
had a long and painful interview with the Psycho-Analyst. One 
Searcher found a blanket that was not all wool, whilst another de- 
tected a couple of weeds in the little six-foot garden; but as these 
were minor offenses it was not altogether a bad morning for H/99. 
Moreover, it was nearing noon, when Smith would be free to go to 
his four hours' work a day, and during these hours he bred ferrets 
for the experiments of professors at the State Pandemonium. 

As Smith was about to leave the house a closed motor-car stopped 
at the gate and a large fat man stepped out. This personage came 
up the steps and, taking Smith's arm, led him in a friendly fashion 
into the breakfast-room. The fat man then closed the door and 
smiled. 

"All correct," said Smith, feeling somewhat uneasy; "perhaps you 
are the Inspector of — of Inspectors?" 

"No, no, not so bad as that. I'm a Commissioner. We don't leave 
everything to the inspectors, you know. Now Smith, my friend, 
you're not happy." 

"Oh, yes, indeed I am, sir, very happy." 

"Well, well; we can have a chat about that on the way. I'm going 
to take you for a little drive." 

The Commissioner opened the door and led Smith towards the 
closed car. As they went down the steps Smith's heart was thumping 
against his ribs. This physical emotion was utterly unreasonable, 
because the big man had been quite civil, and was neither pulling 
nor pushing him. Indeed, it seemed to Smith as if the Commissioner 
was merely pawing him gently; and yet in his cerebral cortex, owing 
doubtless to some vestigial taint from primordial times, the molecules 
were in a state of senseless panic. 

Once seated in the well-cushioned car gliding out of Hampstead, 




112 



WORLDS BEYOND 



Smith swallowed a lump that was rising in his throat, and turned 
to the Commissioner sitting beside him. "I just wish to say, sir, that 
I'm very sorry indeed if I've been unhappy." 

"No need to apologize, my dear fellow; in any case it wasn't your 
fault." 

"Thank you very much, sir." 

"Not at all. As you know, or ought to know, a Unit is never re- 
sponsible for anything, and there's no need for you to blame your- 
self over this or over anything else. If there's any question of laxity 
the State alone is responsible. Possibly in the past our inspection has 
been less efficient than it might have been. At any rate, things are 
now being improved; as the State itself is threatened." 

"I'm sorry to hear that, sir," remarked Smith more cheerfully. 
"I mean I'm glad we'll be better inspected, but I'm sorry the 
State's in danger." 

"That's just it," said the Commissioner; "the State is in great 
danger. This is not known to the Units, and the information I give 
you is secret." 

"Thank you, sir, you may rely on my . . ." 

"Of course I can. If there had been the slightest risk of your pass- 
ing the news on, I wouldn't have told you. The danger is from Ire- 
land. That island remained Christian, and is still inhabited by mad- 
men obsessed with a delusion, in itself a fable borrowed from pagan 
mythology. For a hundred years we've forbidden any communica- 
tion with these people, but from secret sources we know what they're 
doing. At present there's a Unit in the island who calls himself 
King George XX. He and his people have now decided that it's their 
duty to destroy this great State of which you and I are humble Units." 

"But surely it's none of their business, sir," asked Smith, a trifle 
eagerly. 

"Of course it's not their business, but they threaten a crusade, and 
that's where you come in, Smith — or, rather, that's where you go 
out." 

"I beg your pardon, sir, but I'm afraid that I don't quite follow 
your meaning, sir." 

The Commissioner proceeded to explain. 

"Well, my dear fellow, if these madmen make a war, don't you 



VALLEY OF DOOM 



see that it would be dangerous if we had within the State emotional 
Units who might sympathize with the enemy? Now you, Smith, are 
undoubtedly an emotional Unit." 

"I'd never sympathize with the enemy, sir." 

"Ah, one never knows, although it passes comprehension why 
anyone should sympathize with these madmen. If the Christians con- 
quer, there will be a terrible upheaval and relapse. We'll no longer 
be housed, clothed, and fed by the State. Our hours of work won't 
be limited to four a day. Make no mistake about that. You wouldn't 
be told what you must do, but merely what you must not do. A most 
pernicious philosophy. And, worse than that, they'd restore tears 
and laughter to the world. Do you know, Smith, I often think that 
whenever a Unit feels inclined to belittle the work of our excellent 
inspectorate he should quietly recollect how fortunate we really are 
and how very different things might be. We might have been a tax- 
ridden people, harried and hounded by tax-collectors." 

"The State forbid," said Smith, piously raising his hat. "I swear 
it." 

"No need to swear," corrected the Commissioner gently. "In any 
case there's nothing to swear by, and no fear of treason on your part. 
But apart from these polemics, you're not really happy, Smith." 

"Indeed I am, sir, very happy. I'm well inspected, and then I've 
got my ferrets. They're very fond of me, sir." 

"Nonsense, my friend. In the first place, they're not your ferrets, 
because they belong to the State, and secondly, although they enjoy 
their food, I am quite sure that they are not so lacking in intelligence 
as to harbor any emotion towards the Unit whose duty it is to look 
after them. No, no, Smith, your face betrays you. You're not happy. 
Too much emotion. And your children prove it. The State per- 
mitted you to have two children. Well? Have you bred Samurai? 
I think not. The fact is you're degenerate, and we cannot encourage 
this to go on. Your own common sense must tell you that we can't 
afford to keep you. The Happier Homes idea has been given up. 
Too expensive and sentimental — almost Christian, in fact. Efficiency, 
H/99, efficiency, and all for the State. That's the motto of every 
loyal Unit." 

"Where are we going, sir?" asked Smith, white in the face. 



114 



WORLDS BEYOND 



"To the Lethal Institute, my friend." 

"No, no, I'm not," muttered Smith. "What Act of Parliament 
lets you do this? I've a right to know that. I'm a free Unit." 

"The State has gone into your case. The Inspectors and the Secret 
Service have worked conscientiously over you. We have all the 
documents. Everything is in perfect order." 

Smith glanced wildly round the car until his gaze was fixed on a 
long aluminum box placed across the front seats. "What's that 
thing?" he whispered hoarsely. 

"Steady, my friend, you really must pull yourself together. That 
is . . . ahem . . . well . . . shall we say? ... the hearse portion. Quite 
new, a labor-saving device." 

"So I'm driving with my own coffin?" 

"Well, in a sense I suppose you are, if you wish to put it that way. 
Personally I dislike the use of the word 'coffin,' on account of its 
ancient associations, and I usually refer to the thing as the 'con- 
tainer.' " 

"Driving like a criminal to Tyburn!" 

"Now, there you are quite wrong," replied the Commissioner 
gently. "There is no parallel. In the old days to which you refer the 
criminal was chained. There are no criminals now. You're not a 
criminal and you're not in chains. You are a free Unit who is about 
to submit to the requirements of the State." 

"That's a lie," sobbed Smith. "The criminal was chained because 
he had a chance to escape, one in a million though it was. I've no 
chance at all. That's why you don't chain me!" 

"Come, come, H/99, no temper, if you please. Be reasonable. 
Your own common sense must tell you that you're a greater danger 
than many criminals. But why all this fuss? There's nothing to hurt 
you. We have the highest medical opinion that it is quite painless. 
1 can assure you as to that. And what is the whole affair, after all? A 
mere rearrangement of the molecules. . . . Ah, these molecules, Smith 
— if we could only get down to them we should move much more 
quickly. . . . That's all there is to it. 

"And if you fear anything else, this in itself is further proof that 
you're not fit to live. Now, as an old hand at the business, my ad- 
vice to vou, Smith, is this — don't worry. No one is going to hurt 



VALLEY CM? DOOM 



115 



you. In a few minutes we shall be at the Institute; afterwards I shall 
take you on to the Crematorium, and within an hour at most your 
molecules will be floating in the blue Empyrean — back with the 
nitrogen from whence they came. A beau.tiful thought, my friend. 
. . . What! the man has fainted. ... I must speak to that Inspector. 
We ought to have taken this Unit away twenty years ago. . . . Perhaps 
the whole family would be better away. I really must press the 
Board for a decision." 
Suddenly Smith groaned. 

"Ah, that's right," said the Commissioner. "Coming to, I see. 
You'll soon be all right." 

"I don't want to be all right," moaned Smith. 

"Nonsense, man. Nothing will happen to you without your full 
consent. Wait until you've seen the Sympathizers." 

II 

The car stopped at the door of the Institute. The Commissioner 
got out, and Smith followed. As they went up the steps their bodies 
broke an invisible ray, and two great doors slid open, revealing a 
gilded hall, lit by fairy-lights, and in the center a splashing fountain 
in which the falling water was colored like a rainbow. Behind the 
open doors stood a flunky dressed in cloth of gold and silver. He 
bowed low to Smith and said, "Welcome." 

"In you go," said the Commissioner. "I'll see you later." 

As in a dream, Smith entered, and the great doors closed behind 
him with a faint click. The flunky was smiling, and Smith, who had 
never before seen anyone except in rational dress, asked nervously, 
"Are you the Sympathizer, sir?" 

"No, no, sir," said the flunky, "I'm only the doorkeeper. The 
Sympathizers are all in the salon, and you may choose any of the lot, 
male or female. This way, sir," and he led Smith to the curtained 
entrance of the salon, which opened out of the hall on the right as 
you entered. 

Drawing aside the curtain so that Smith might enter, he announced 
at the top of his voice: "My lords, ladies, and gentlemen, pray silence 
for the entry of your guest, Mr. Smith, of Hampstead." 



116 



WORLDS BEYOND 



As he entered all the Sympathizers gave him a friendly smile, and 
Smith gasped for breath. He would have fainted again had not a 
middle-aged man, with large blue eyes that beamed through gold- 
rimmed spectacles, sprung forward and led him to an easy chair. 

"Sit down, my friend," he greeted him, "I know it must seem 
rather strange to you. Now you have a good look round, take your 
time, and choose whom you will." 

His new friend was dressed in a well-cut blue lounge suit. He was 
a trifle stout, and had the kindliest, jolliest face that Smith had ever 
seen. 

"Sympathizer Kind is my name," he said, "if you should decide 
eventually to trust yourself to me; but take your time. Each to his 
taste," and, with another smile, he returned to the center of the room. 

Smith leaned back in the well-upholstered chair, and stared at the 



and undressed in such a variety of fashions. 

What these fashions were Smith for the most part did not know, 
and yet each had its own appeal. Among the men, had he only 
known, he could have recognized a footballer, a cricketer, a boxer, a 
golfer in plus fours, a naval officer, a guardsman, a priest, and a 
gigolo. One man was naked, as also was one woman, a very beauti- 
ful woman with long golden hair hanging down to her waist. Another 
woman was half-undressed, and at the sight of these last two Smith 
blushed, for he was wholly degenerate, and did not understand sex 
appeal in its scientific aspects. 

Other women he might have recognized were the ballet dancer, 
the principal boy and &xh the belle of the ball, the nurse, the tennis 
girl with racket complete, the yachting girl and a nun. Each in turn 
smiled at Smith, but being of a retiring disposition, he just sat and 
stared, until by a lull in their conversation he realized they were be- 
ginning to be bored by his presence. 

So he beckoned to Sympathizer Kind, who at once joined him 
with the remark: "You have chosen well, my friend." 

The others clapped their hands in a well-bred manner and said: 
"See you later, Mr. Smith." 

Sympathizer Kind led Mr. Smith across the gaily-lighted hall. 




VALLEY OF DOOM 



117 



"Can't very well have a heart-to-heart chat in there, old man," he 
smiled. 

Across the hall, they entered another room through a door which 
closed behind them with a click. In the center of the room was a 
circular steel table and two hygienic chairs of glass and chromium, 
one on either side of the table. The walls were white, devoid of pic- 
tures, and against one wall were two steel cupboards painted white. 
It was a square room measuring twenty feet, and in the center of 
the roof was the gauze of a loudspeaker. 

"Makes you feel quite at home," his new friend said with a smile, 
as he beckoned Smith to take the chair farthest from the door. 

"Yes, sir," said Smith, with a gulp in his throat. 

"Now," said the Sympathizer, "just you tell me all about it, and 
we'll see what can be done." 

At that Smith poured out his troubles. The Sympathizer listened 
attentively, only occasionally asking a question to clear up some 



point about which he was not quite certain. When Smith's story 
came to an end, the Sympathizer looked grave, and Smith's heart 
sank. 

"This looks very serious," said the Sympathizer thoughtfully, and 
then added, "I think the Commissioner has made a most serious 
error in judgment." 

"Oh, thank you, thank you, sir. Then you will help me to escape?" 

"Of course I'll help you, but we must consider ways and means. 
Now let me think for a minute or two." 

The Sympathizer bent across the table and covered his face with 
his hand for a couple of minutes before he spoke. 

"Do you realize, Smith, that to save you I must tell you everything 
about this place?" he said at last. 

"Yes, sir," said Smith eagerly. 

"Well, now, do you know that no male or female Unit who enters 
the front door of this Institute ever leaves by the way they entered?" 
"Yes, sir." 

"Good. They all leave by the back doors — dead. Except one or 
two, of whom you'll be one, who reach the back door at the end of 
the Lethal Tunnel — alive. Naturally, you want to know how the 
one or two escape?" 



118 



WORLDS BEYOND 



"Yes, sir." 

"Well, I'll tell you," said the Sympathizer and pulled open a steel 
drawer in the table in front of his chair, from which he produced a 
gas-mask. This he patted gently. 

"That's my own special gas-mask," he explained. "Now, when I 
don't want a Unit to escape I put it on, and tell the Unit that I'm 
going to give him or her — because, curiously enough, some female 
units select me — ha, ha! — a duplicate mask. Then I open that steel 
cupboard nearest to you and take out a mask the very duplicate of my 
own. Of course it's a dud, and when we reach the gas it doesn't 
work. Understand?" 

"Yes, sir," said Smith dubiously, because the problem was com- 
plicated. 

"Don't pretend, Smith! You still have doubts. Ha, ha! Well, any 
mistrust may be set at rest, because I am going to give you my own 
special gas-mask." And with that the Sympathizer placed his gas- 
mask by Smith's right hand on the table. 

"Thank you, sir, but — are you not coming down the — the — Tun- 
nel with me?" 

"Of course I am, but I'm going to have a gas-mask like you. Only 
I don't take my mask from the first cupboard — no fear — but from 
the second, where the masks are as genuine as the one I gave you." 
The Sympathizer opened the cupboard nearest the door, removed 
a mask and placed it on the table near his chair. "Now I must tell 
you about the Tunnel, and what to expect at the other — " 

A gong sounded, and from the loudspeaker in the ceiling came 
the words, "Sympathizer Kind, if he can spare a moment, is urgently 
wanted in Antechamber Five." 

The Sympathizer frowned the first frown Smith had seen on his 
face. "Excuse me a moment, Friend Smith, I won't be long. I 
wonder what it is?" 

He gave a low whistle, the door opened, and closed behind him. 

Left alone in the soundproof room, Smith smiled. What a really 
decent fellow the Sympathizer was. To give his own gas-mask to a 
total stranger and choose a new one for himself. No, he had better 
change the masks. At the Pandemonium, Smith had learnt all the 



VALLEY OF DOOM 



119 



dangers of respiratory infections. Perhaps Sympathizer Kind liked 
his mask so much that he never troubled to have it sterilized. Germs 
innocuous to Kind might not be so innocuous to Smith. That much 
of bacteriology he had learnt at the Pandemonium. 

He changed the masks, but decided it would never do to tell Sym- 
pathizer Kind of his views about sterilizing gas-masks. 

Suddenly the door opened, and Sympathizer Kind, looking a little 
flushed, entered, glanced anxiously at the table, smiled and said, 
"Well, here we are again. You'll wonder why I was called away? In 
the salon, did you notice Sympathizer Eve — the female in the al- 
together, I mean without any clothes?" 

"Yes, sir," said Smith eagerly. 

"Well, I was just called to Antechamber Five to explain to a Unit 
that his attempted love-making was a little premature, although at 
the end of the Tunnel he may do what he likes with Sympathizer 
Eve. But — let me see — I was telling you about the Tunnel. Yet why 
waste time? On with our masks! The sooner we're in, the sooner 
we're out. Ask me any questions on the way, Friend Smith." 

"Yes, sir," said Smith, as each adjusted his gas-mask, "but where's 
the Tunnel?" 

"There," answered the Sympathizer, and, as he pressed a button, 
the whole of the back steel wall of the room rose, revealing a square 
tunnel with beautiful scenery painted on either wall and a skyscape 
on the roof, all brilliantly lit by artificial daylight. On the floor of 
the square tunnel was a low-placed trolley, running, as the Sympa- 
thizer explained, not on wheels but on long interrupted plates of 
magnetic steel. Two large hygienic chairs were screwed to the trolley. 

"Take your pew, Smith; they're both the same," and so Smith sat 
in one and Sympathizer Kind in the other. 

"Just put your arms along the arms of the chair, and legs against 
the front legs, and I'll do the same." 

Smith followed the Sympathizer's instructions. 

"Now," said the Sympathizer, "I'm going to press a button with 
my left foot." 

Smith watched, and in a moment he was pinioned to the chair by 
semicircular steel clamps round his arms and legs. 
Smith shrieked. 



120 



WORLDS BEYOND 



"Don't be a fool," shouted the Sympathizer. "Can't you see I'm 
clamped as much as you?" 

Smith looked, and saw his Sympathizer was also clamped by steel 
bands. 

"I'm very sorry, sir." 

"That's all right. Now start her off. Under your right foot you'll 
feel a knob — unless you've got an extra thick sole on your boot, 
which no ordinary Unit is supposed to have." 

"No, sir, I haven't, and I can feel the knob." 

"Then press it." 

"What happens then, sir?" 

"The steel wall is lowered behind us and off we go." 
"No, sir, I don't like to do it." 

"Then I must push the control myself, but I'm bound to say, 
Smith, you don't seem to have much confidence in your Sympathizer." 

Smith felt the knob beneath his right foot sink. The steel wall 
was slowly lowered behind them, and the trolley was moving along 
the Tunnel at the rate of three miles an hour. 

"I'm sorry I mistrusted you, sir." 

"That's all right, Smith. Perhaps I was a bit rattled by the scene 
in Antechamber Five. Never mind about that. Look at the scenery 
you're seeing." 

Smith looked on the painted panoramas to right and left. 
"Oh, Kind, I've never seen anything so beautiful as that," he ex- 
claimed. 

"Dare say you haven't. I've never seen the reality, nor am I likely 
to see it." 
"What is it?" 

"It's Loch Awe, where Our Totality lives." 

"What's Our Totality, Sympathizer Kind?" 

"Oh, of course, you've never heard of Our Totality. Mind you, 
I've never seen him, but I know what he is. How shall I put it to a 
Unit like you? You know your Commissioner? Yes. Well, he's got 
more brains than you or me." 

"Of course, Sympathizer." 

"Well, Our Totality has exactly one thousand times more brains 
than any commissioner. That's why he and he alone lives there, on 



VALLEY OF DOOM 



121 



that island we're passing now. Now do you understand?" 
"No, not quite, Sympathizer." 

"Well, all I can say is that you really make me tired. Anyway, 
I'm a bit rattled about what happened in Antechamber Five, and I 
put it all on you." 

"Please don't, Sympathizer. Whatever happened had nothing to 
do with me, and you promised to tell me what happens when we 
both arrive at the end of the Tunnel." 

"What are you afraid of?" 

"That you're angry, Sympathizer, and what the Commissioner will 
do when he sees me alive at the end of the Tunnel." 

"The Commissioner will never see you alive at the end of the 
Tunnel — don't shriek, you fool — it's not the time for shrieking. At 
the end of the Tunnel are only four deaf-mutes ready to put you into 
.your Container." 

"The Container," shouted Smith, "you promised to tell me about 
the Container." 

"So 1 did, and I will, if you'll only keep calm. Should have told 
you before, but the disgraceful scene in Antechamber Five ruffled me. 
Perhaps you'll have a little sympathy for me when I tell you that 
Sympathizer Eve is my comrade." 

"Oh, yes, I have, sir, but about the Container?" 

"What about it! No one's going to put you in a Container. Didn't 
I give you my own gas-mask? Of course I did. Well — oh, damn Eve 
— when our trolley hits the buffers in the open ah; at the other end, 
the clamps are automatically released, and you and I walk away. 
Where do we walk? You've as many questions to ask as a child, 
and I've had plenty of experience of them. Why, you fool, we just 
walk out through a little steel gate in the fifty-foot wall on our left. 
It opens from the inside only. There's no handle on the outside. 
Now are you satisfied?" 

"What about the deaf-mutes, sir? Won't they be a little surprised?" 

"They'll just think you're a new Sympathizer having a trial trip 
with me." 

"But what about the Commissioner?" 

"Oh, damn the Commissioner! What about him?" 

"Be careful, Sympathizer!" 



122 



WORLDS BEYOND 



"That's all right. In the Tunnel no one can overhear what we're 
saying. It's the only place where they can't — but what about the 
Commissioner?" 

"Well, won't he be angry when he finds I'm — I'm — still here?" 

"Look here, Smith, you make me really tired with your chatter. 
Plaguing the man who's saving your life. I'll tell, the Commissioner 
you are a superman who held his breath for seven minutes in the 
gaseous zones and escaped. Now are you happy?" 

"Yes, sir, but where am I going after we get out through the little 
steel gate in the high wall?" 

"Hell, you're coming to live with me and Sympathizer Eve, be- 
cause we both like you. Now are you content?" 

"Most content, sir." 

"Good — because in a minute or so we go uphill into the forest 
of larches — the sweet gas zone through which we pass for two min- 
utes. Then downhill for five minutes into the valley of grey gas. 
Some units when they enter the sweet gas try to hold their breath. 
No one can hold his breath for more than two minutes. All the worse 
if they do, because then they are conscious when they breathe the 
grey gas, which sears eyes, nostrils, mouth, and lungs for about 
thirty seconds before it finally stops the clock. Not scared yet, 
Smith?" 

"Just a little, sir." 

"Why only a little?" 

"Because we've both got real gas-masks." 

"You fool! If ever a Unit deserved the blue Empyrean, as that 
accursed Commissioner calls it — you're the man. Why should I risk 
my life to help a useless Unit like you to escape? The mask I gave 
you was a dud. Mine's the only real gas protector in this tunnel!" 

Ill 

Smith screamed, and then was silent in thought. 

What had he said to the Commissioner? — one chance in a million 
at Tyburn. It was now an even chance, and perhaps, his heart beat 
wildly, a certainty. If not, he would be glad to die and to get away 
from people like Sympathizer Kind. 



VALLEY OF DOOM 



123 



"Have you fainted, Smith?" asked Kind. 

"No, I've not," was the unexpectedly calm reply. 

"What do you mean? I begin to admire you. Well, now we're 
going uphill. Take deep breaths, Smith. It's all for the — Hell, you 
fiend, you've changed the masks — oh! I'll hold my breath, I. . . ." 

Smith sat shivering as the trolley rose through a mound of painted 
larches in the Tunnel. He was breathing quietly, and smelled nothing. 
Such was his degeneration that he felt pity for Sympathizer Kind. 
The trolley began to go downhill into a grey mist. Then came the 
sound of forced expiration, followed by an inspiratory shriek, and the 
trolley shook with convulsive movements for a second or so. Smith 
looked at his companion. Sympathizer Kind was limp, and the en- 
gorged veins on his bald head were black. 

Slowly — or, to be precise, at the rate of three miles per hour — the 
trolley ascended out of the Valley of Grey Gas and continued on the 
level. At the end of a long vista Smith saw a small square of day- 
light, and gradually this square of daylight became larger and larger. 
As the trolley approached the exit Smith's heart was once more 
thumping. Would the Commissioner be there? 

The Commissioner was not there. Twenty yards beyond the end 
of the Tunnel the interrupted plates of magnetic steel stopped at a 
buffer. Behind the buffer stood four little men, and by their side 
lay the Container. The trolley met the buffer, the clamps sprang 
apart, the body of Sympathizer Kind fell sideways on the asphalt, 
and Smith stepped out of his hygienic chair. 

Without a glance at Smith, the four deaf-mutes placed the body of 
the late Sympathizer Kind in the Container, clamped on the lid, and 
carried it round a corner of the Institute. To his left Smith saw the 
great wall with the little steel door. He tore off his gas-mask, put it 
in his pocket, and next moment was walking like a free Unit in the 
street. 

Within an hour Smith had re-entered the breakfast-room at H/99 
Hampstead, where Mrs. Smith was solemnly reading aloud to Jane 
and Henry the Act of Parliament concerning those who die for the 
State. 

As soon as she saw her comrade Mrs. Smith screamed. 



124 



WORLDS BEYOND 



"Oh, I thought you were dead!" she gasped. "We had the official 
news on the radio an hour ago. The Commissioner himself spoke 
to all Hampstead: 'Comrade Smith, H/99 Hampstead, has left the 
Lethal Institute, where his last words were, "I hail the blue Empy- 
rean, and may less worthy Units follow my lead." ' It sounded love- 
ly. And now, in spite of everything, you're back." 

"So that's what he said, is it? Well, Mrs. Smith, I can tell you it 
was a lie." 

"Oh, you'll be the death of me, and the death of us all." 

"Not glad to see me back — is that what it is?" 

"No, it isn't," sobbed Mrs. Smith, "but I did think you were dead. 
My poor mother, whom you always despised, told me how to respect 
the dead. I don't need to know — know — know — Acts of Parliament 
to do — do — do — that," and with this final outburst Smith's comrade 
wept bitter tears and became hysterical. 

Scenes such as these are not good for children. Henry sat, his 
elbow on the table, his cheek resting on his hand, and a frown on 
his face. To do the lad justice, he was thinking of his Shakespeare's 
Sonnets (confiscated under Secret Search Commission Index Expur- 
gatorius, Article V, Section One, Clause A). Jane had no such 
thoughts. She rushed to Smith, threw her arms round his neck, and 
shouted, "Daddy, I'm glad you're back, and your ferrets will be 
glad, too." 

The sound of a Chinese gong on the loudspeaker put an end to a 
scene which was likely to degenerate into sheer bathos. 

"Commissioner speaking to H/99 Hampstead," came a voice. 
"Most Secret and Confidential. Under pain of instant death, no mem- 
ber of Smith family to leave their home tonight. No communion 
with neighbors. Your house now surrounded by members of the 
Poisoned Darts Deaf-Mute Brigade. Anyone who attempts to leave 
dies instanter, without benefit of Act of Parliament. Entire family to 
parade in breakfast-room at 4 a.m. tomorrow, without carbohydrates 
or water. At that hour, I, the Commissioner for all Hampstead, act- 
ing by and/or through the authority of Our Totality, will decide 
whether the sentence on all now present will be death or exile. Now 
each and all to his or her bed. There shall be no talking in bed. 
Every pillow is overheard. Tomorrow, all depends on Smith speaking 



VALLEY OF DOOM 



125 



the truth. Now, to your beds without a word, or at your peril. Amen." 

At 4 a.m. next day the family of H/99 Hampstead stood at atten- 
tion round their breakfast-table, having eaten no breakfast. At one 
minute past four, because even Commissioners may be late, a great 
car slowed down and stopped outside their gate. Within a minute, 
the Commissioner was in the breakfast-room, where they stood wait- 
ing. 

"Sit down, everyone," he ordered, and all the Smiths sat down. 

"Now find a chair for me," said the Commissioner. 

Smith sprang to his feet — "Please take mine, sir. There's not an- 
other in the house." 

"Sit down, Smith. No other chair! That's to your credit. You 
obey the Law of No Hospitality. Some don't. Sit down, I will stand. 
All your lives are in my hand, or rather in the hand of Smith, the 
head of this benighted family. He shall answer one question. Stop! 
Is that radio on or off?" 

"I don't know, sir. We're not allowed to interfere with it." 

"Quite right, my friend. Stand up." 

The Commissioner seized the empty chair and smashed the wire- 
less. 

"Now, Smith, I can ask, and you can answer in the presence of 
your family, a simple question on which, because I'm always fair, 
your life and the lives of those about you depend. The question is— 
Did Sympathizer Kind make a mistake, or did you change the gas- 
masks? Answer within four seconds, please, the psychological limit." 

"I changed the masks, sir." 

"Good! You said it within two seconds and therefore it's true. 
Now, Smith, you and yours are to be exiled." 
"No, sir, we'd rather not." 

"You fool, you don't know what you're talking about. When we 
find that a Unit, his comrade, and offspring are unfit, we destroy 
them. Yet when, as in your case, unfitness is allied to cunning, we 
deport or exile them to Ireland, in the hope that they and their pro- 
geny may flourish in Ireland, and so breed degeneracy among our 
enemies. Now, all of you get into the charabanc that's to take us 
to the aerodrome." 



126 



WORLDS BEYOND 



"Now, Smith, as we're on the way to the aerodrome you may tell 
me a thing or two. No physical force used at the Lethal? No. That's 
good. Any, any — well, shall we say mental torture applied in the 
Tunnel, so far as your experience goes?" 

"Yes, sir, he was a fiend, although I was sorry for him there at 
the end." 

"Never mind about your being sorry for him. The less you say 
about that sort of thing the better— until you and yours are safe in 
Ireland. Only a degenerate would waste sympathy — a forbidden 
emotion- — on Sympathizer Kind. He was guilty of grave dereliction 
of duty. What do you think all that beautiful scenery is for?" 

"I don't know, sir." 

"To interest the Units on their way along the Tunnel. For the 
first and last time in his life the condemned Unit sees beauty. He 
thinks he's got a real gas-mask, and is interested all the way. In the 
Larch Forest he breathes the sweet gas, goes to sleep, and never 
wakes up. Could anything be more humane than that?" 

"No, sir." 

"Seems to me the Lethal needs a comb out. I'll send some of my 
best Agents-Provocateurs down this afternoon." 
"They may get killed, sir." 

"Not they. They never get hurt. When they go down the Tunnel 
with the Sympathizers there will be no gas on. I'll see to that. But 
I shall await the trolleys at the end of the tunnel, and if any mental 
cruelty be reported — what do you think I'll do?" 

"I don't know, sir." 

"Why, I'll stop the release of the clamps. Take the real gas-mask 
off the face of the Sympathizer in question, stick it on the face of the 
Agent-Provocateur, switch on the grey gas, and send the trolley 
backwards through the Tunnel. Well, here we are at the aerodrome 
It's a fine day." 

At the aerodrome an aeroplane was waiting on the center of the 
ground, and the car drove alongside. The pilot saluted the Commis- 



sioner, who showed him a card, which he read carefully and nodded. 

"Deaf-mute," explained the Commissioner to Smith. "No temp- 
tations to lead him away from home." 

Four groundsmen, also deaf-mutes, strapped parachutes on each 



VALLEY OF DOOM 



127 



of the Smiths and then placed four ladders against the side of the 
'plane. 

"Up you go," said the Commissioner to Smith, "into Barrel No. 1, 
your comrade into Barrel 2, and the children into 3 and 4." 

All obeyed, and Smith found himself standing in a large barrel 
with smooth sides, over the top of which he could not see. 

"No," explained the Commissioner, before the groundsmen fitted 
on the lids, "there's no risk of suffocation. The lids are perforated 
with small holes, enough to let air in and out, but not large enough 
for fingers to get through for holding on. At a given destination the 
pilot will pull a lever, and one by one the bottoms will drop out of 
the barrels. After that each of you should say 'Twenty-one, twenty- 
two, twenty-three,' which takes three seconds, before pulling the rip- 
cord. That means you're clear of the machine before the parachute 
opens. And by the way, Smith, these parachutes work all right. Not 
like certain dud masks of which you had a little experience yester- 
day." 

The lids were fitted. Smith heard the ladders being removed, the 
engine splutter, then roar. In his closed barrel he felt the 'plane 
jolting, then the steadiness of the air. A great fear possessed him. 
What did the Commissioner mean by saying the parachutes were not 
like the dud masks? He said the parachutes worked. Did that mean 
they killed you? Were the parachutes real? 

On these doubts his mind worked incessantly, until suddenly he 
and the bottom fell out of the barrel. A gale of wind struck his 
body and blew him backwards in the air. He forgot to count until 
he saw Mrs. Smith drop out of the 'plane, in front and some distance 
above him. Then, without counting, he pulled the cord. 

In the corner of his left eye something white fluttered, and he 
closed his eyes. He was falling. Then came a wrench under his 
armpits, and he was swung vertically in the air. He looked up, and 
the great parachute was open. So also were three other parachutes. 
Soon he was steady in the air, for the day was calm. He looked 
down. The kindly earth was rising slowly to meet him. It was a 
country of lakes, green fields and hills — and oh, how green was the 
grass on those hills coming nearer and nearer! 



■ THE : 
I NOT : 
ISSUE : 

I..... ; * The ,^? rc L h ! * sue op*™ wi t h tl a }% n 2 

novelette by Henry Kuttner: THE EGO 
MACHINE. This ingenious bit of nonsense concerns the pecu- 
liar doings of a spineless writer, a tyrannical Balkan film director, 
and an amiable robot named ENIAC. The robot, who comes 
from the far future, has only the best motives: he wants to help 
the aforesaid writer adapt to his environment by giving him the 
dominant personality-matrix of his type, which happens to be 
Disraeli's. But the best motives, applied in this situation, turn 
out to be very much like the best butter, applied in the Mad 
Hatter's watch. ... 

* Lester del Rey contributes FAREWELL TO EARTH— a study 
in the emotions of a man who stows away on the first space- 
ship, confidently expecting to arrive on Mars — and finds himself 
headed out to the chilling immensities of interstellar space. 

* Peter Phillips, a welcome addition to our growing roster of 
British writers, is present with C/O MR. MAKEPEACE: a rather 
horrid litHe tale about a gentleman who is quietly driven to 
madness by a lodger who isn't there. ... 

* We can't promise what the rest of the lineup will be, since 
the Kuttner story takes up more room than usual; but there are 
stories on hand by Jack Vance, Arthur C. Clarke, E. R. Mor- 
rough, John Keir Cross, John Christopher and Richard Mathe- 
son. 

* The April issue, by the way, features a highly unusual story 
by James Blish. Just for a beginning, it involves a wooden 
spaceship, filled with water, moved by muscle-power, and travel- 
ing on dry land! 

—THE EDITOR 



128 



Continued from inside front cover 

Walter C. Da vies wrote Forgotten Tongue in 1941, just nine 
years before Dianetics introduced engrams to an astonished world. 
The story is republished in these pages only partly because it is 
amusing and witty; the other reason is to add another proof that 
there is nothing new under the sun. 

Richard Matheson tells us, "I was born of man and woman in 
the month February of 1926. In New Jersey. In a house. My par- 
ents were exiled to Brooklyn when I had just begun to acquire the 
knack of dripping green. In this happy environment I spent my 
youth attending many public schools and one technical high school 
where I learned to hate science. This later proved helpful in writing 
science-fiction. 

"After working in a defense plant for a time, I enlisted in' the 
Army hoping to become a second lieutenant. Later I found out what 
I had missed by not becoming a second lieutenant. I am still very 
grateful. 

"My hobbies are song writing, swimming, reading rejection slips 
and sending unpublished letters to editors. I am not and never have 
been a member of the Communist Party. I vote the straight Vege- 
tarian ticket and love small dogs and cats. And my seven nieces 
and one nephew. 

"I wrote my first story when I was seven. Anti-war legislation 
willing, I shall write my last at about ninety-six." 

Harry Harrison is a commercial artist whose interest in science- 
fantasy has until recently been entirely unselfish. He speaks fluent 
Esperanto and fair English, and is a mainstay of the Hydra Club in 
New York. 

Halliday Sutherland, born 24th June 1882, studied medicine 
at Edinburgh University, and graduated M.D., with honors, in 
1908. He is a past president of the Tuberculosis Society of Great 
Britain. 

His autobiography, "Arches of the Years," published in 1932, is 
now in its 35th English edition, and has been translated into seven 
European languages. 



AT YOUR NEWSSTAND SOON.. 



STORY OF A RUSSIAN SPY 

By ALEXANDER FOOTE 

"I was for three vital years of the war a member 
and, to a large extent, controller of the Russian spy net 
in Switzerland which was working against Germany . . . 
I was a key link in a network whose lines reached into 
the heart of the German high command itself . . ." 

With these words Alexander Foote opens his amazing but 
factual story of Soviet espionage. He describes his initia- 
tion into Russian secret service, his first missions inside 
Germany just before the war, and his work in Switzerland 
as assistant resident director of the Swiss Soviet spy ring. 

Since severing his connections with the Russian espionage 
net, Alexander Foote has worked in a British Government 
office in London, and his vivid memoirs are unmarred by 
political preaching. Story of a Russian Spy is at the same 
time a social document of great importance, and an un- 
matched adventure story. 



OTHER BOOKS NOW AVAILABLE IN 254 EDITION 
AT YOUR NEWSSTAND 



MEET MR. MULLINER, by P. G. Wodehouse 
NOTHING MORE THAN MURDER, by Jim Thompson 

And the amazing fantasy novel — 

THE DYING EARTH, by Jack Vance 



