HALO by Hal Clement

"YOU disappoint me," 
the class superintendent said with some 
feeling. "I have a personal as well 
as a professional dislike of wastefully run farms, and you seem to 



have furnished a prime example.* 
He paused briefly, Watching in 
silence as the spheroidal forcing; 
beds drifted smoothly about their 
central radiator. "Of course, I 
would be much more sympathetic with you If your own ill-advised actions were not so largely 
responsible for this situation." He 
checked his young listener's halfuttered protest. "Oh, I realize 
that youngsters have to learn, 
and experiment is the only source 
of knowledge; but why not use 
the results of other people's experiments? This sort of thing has 
happened before, I think you'U 
find." 

"I didn't know." The answer 
was sullen despite the grudging 
respect. "How was I supposed 
to?" 

"Did you get an education or 
not?" There was some heat in the 
query. "I can't imagine what the 
primary teachers do these days. 
Even though you are so young, 
I understood that you had some 
qualifications and even a bit of 
promise in agriculture. That's 
why I thought you could be 
trusted without supervision for a 
few years. Am I to assume that 
you became dissatisfied with the 
yield of this farm?" 
" "Of course. Why else study 
agriculture?" 

"Until you can answer that for 
yourself, I won't try to. Tell me 
in detail what you did. Did you 
try to step up the output of the 
central radiator?" 

"What do you think I am?" 
The younger being's indignation 
flared abruptly. 

The other remained calm and 



exhibited faint traces of amusement, permitting the feeling to 
show in his answer rather more 
plainly than was stricly tactful. 

"Don't boil your crust off. You 
might not be able to spare it 
next time you go in to harvest. 
People still do try the stunt I 
mentioned, you know. Every now 
and then it works for someone 
after a fashion, so the rest feel it's 
still worth trying. If it wasn't 
that, just what did you do? 
You're missing a culture unit, if 
I remember this solar system correctly." 

THE student took a moment to 
find just the right words. "One 
of the lots seemed to be practically ideal. When it first solidified, it was just far enough from 
the radiator and just large 
enough to retain a thin surface 
film of light elements; and it 
responded beautifully to culturing with water-base growths. On 
the colder ones, by the way, I had 
good luck with ammonia cultures." 

"Quite possible, in that sort of 
bed. I noticed a couple of Jthem 
were bare, though. Was that another result of this experiment 
of yours?" 

"Indirectly, yes." The young 
farmer looked a trifle apprehensive. "There was another plot, a 
good deal farther out and colder 
than my ideal one. But it was too 




 



I 

t for ammonia growths and too 
.all to furnish the pressure they 
Iseem to need — at least the ones 
I'm familiar with." The addition 
'' was made hastily. 
> "I judged that it should have 
, a good supply of food elements, 
cooling where it did; and since 
f it wasn't doing well where it was, 
i I thought it would be a good idea 
i to move it farther in." 
'•■ The listener's manner lost some 
I of its amused aspect. 

"Just how did you decide to go 
| about that? The energy involved 
r would have demanded several 
I times the mass of your own body, 
i even with total conversion — 
i which I can't believe you've mastered." 

t "I don't suppose I have. It 
t seemed to me that the unit it'f self could furnish the mass without serious loss, though." 
• "I see." The comment was 
; grim. "Go on." 

| "Well, I went in and set up 
a conversion reaction, I touched 

' it off as well as I could on the 

i; forward side of the unit, though 
that was a little hard to arrange 

——the thing was spinning like 
1 mad, as most of them do. Maybe 
K that was the reason I let a little 
B;*too much mass get involved, or 
ft maybe the globe wasn't as mastt sive as I had thought." 
k - "You mean you were uncerR-tain of its mass? Is something 
R wrong with your perceptive fac


ulties as well as your judgment? 
Just how old are you, anyway?" 

"Fifteen." The sullenness, 
which had began to depart from 
the youngster's tone as he warmed to his narrative, returned in 
full strength. The questioner 
noted it and realized that he was 
not being as tactfut as he might 
be; but under the circumstances 
he felt entitled to a little emotion. 

"Fifteen years on what scale?" 

"Local — this furnace, around 
the mass-center of- the system." 

"Hmph. Continue." 

"Most of the sphere was volatilized, and most of what wasn't 
was blown completely out of the 
system's gravitational influence. 
The rest — well, it's still circling 
the furnace in quite a wide variety of orbits but it's not much 
good to anyone." 

THERE was a pause while the 
nearly useless outermost unit 
swung beneath the two speakers, 
then on to the far side of the 
glowing sphere of gas that held it 
with unbreakable fingers of gravity. The supervisor was not actually boiling — that would be 
difficult even for a body composed largely of methane, oxygen, 
and similar solids when it is at 
a temperaturf of about half a 
degree absolute — but his temper 
was simmering. After a moment 
he spoke again. 

"Let me get this straight. You 



AlO 



went a slave with a message that 
your farm had gotten out of hand 
and that you would like advice. 
Am I to understand that you 
spent so much time ruining one 
of your units that some of the 
others developed culture variations whose taste didn't appeal 
to you? I'm afraid my sympathy 
grows rapidly less." 

"It's not that I don't like the 
Stuff; it's that I can't eat it." The 
youngster must have been angry, 
too; there was no other imaginable reason why he should have 
made a statement at once so true 
in fact and so misleading in implication. The superintendent, 
swallowing the implication whole, 
permitted the remains of his temper to evaporate completely. 

"You can't eat it? That is 
really too bad. Pardon me while I 
go to sample some of this repulsive chemical — or perhaps you 
would like to come along and 
show me what you have been 
eating. There is hardly enough 
drift in this area to support you, 
particularly with a decent-sized 
crew of slaves. What have you 
been feeding them? Perhaps you 
ought to let someone else take 
..over this farm and get yourself a 
research job out in one of the 
drift clouds, soaking up your 
nourishment from a haze of free 
atoms ten parsecs across for a few 
years. You youngsters!" 

"I've been eating -from the am


monia units. So have the slaves." 

"Very; well, then I shall look 
over your water culture, which by 
elimination must be the one that's 
been giving trouble. On second 
thought, you needn't come along. 
It's the third plot from the furnace. I can find my way." He 
moved off abruptly, not even 
waiting for an answer. 

And the student, with no slightest shadow of an excuse, simply 
because of his own childish loss 
of temper, let him go without a 
word of warning. 

It might, of course, have made 
no difference if he had spoken. 
The superintendent was annoyed, 
too, and might understandably 
have chosen to ignore his junior. 
His attention, as he permitted 
himself to fall toward the central 
radiator, was divided between his 
own irritation and the condition 
of the various plots. Only gradually did the latter feeling predominate. * 

HE had to admit the outermost was too cold for much 
chemical action except actual life 
processes which were too slow to 
be useful. The fact that the 
youngster he had left above had ' 
induced anything at all to grow 
there was at least one point to 
his credit. It swung past only 
once while he was falling by its 
orbit. Though his gravity- given 
speed was slow, its • speed was 




 



lower— and it had farther to go. 
The next ' two _ he had noted 
^earlier were bare of useful 
K growths. He remembered now 
| ; .that the student had admitted 
I this fact to be an indirect result 
C, Of his experiment. The superinf tendent could not see the con| riection. The plots themselves, on 
I closer inspection, seemed phystr , cally undamaged, and the student 
himself could not possibly have 
jh eaten them both clean, no matter 
|- what his hunger. Of course, a 
| crowd of slaves might — but he 
'4 was not going to accuse anybody 
\ yet of letting slaves get that far 
'* out from under control. They 
• were not even allowed to ap|> proach a culture plot in person, 
. being fed from its produce by 
I their master. 

The plots themselves were 
. large bodies, though not the larg, est in the system, with their solid 
{ bulks veiled under mile after 
fatnile of hydrogen compounds. The 
| superintendent's senses probed in 
I' vain for the enormously complex 
| compounds that were the preIferred food of his kind. Several 
much smaller bodies ware gravii-tating about each of these plots, 
hbut none was large enough to 
phold the light elements in the 
Illiquid or gaseous form 'necessary 
Efor food culture. 
L The next unit had. the merit of 
^interesting appearance, if nothprig else. In addition to the more 



or less standard quota of bodies 
circling it, it possessed a regular 
halo of minute particles traveling 
in a solidly interwoven maze of 
orbits just outside the atmosphere. On the surface, and even 
in the atmosphere itself, its cultures were flourishing. The superintendent paused to take a 
sample, and had to admit that 
once again the youngster had not 
done too badly. 

His temper cooling, he rode the 
farm plot most of the way around 
its orbit, taking an occasional 
taste and growing calmer by the 
moment. By the time he left the 
limits of his atmosphere, he was 
almost his normal self. 

This, however, did not last 
long enough even for him to get 
rid of the globe's orbital speed, 
to 'say nothing of resuming his 
drop toward the Sun. He had 
slanted some distance inward and 
fallen well behind the ringed 
sphere when his attention was 
drawn to another, much smaller 
object well to one side of his line 
of flight. 

Physically, there was little remarkable about it. It was le"ss 
massive even than his own body,, * 
though a short period of observation disclosed that it was in 
an orbit about the central furnace, just as the farm plots were. 
Sometimes its outline was clear, 
at others it blurred oddly. Its 
brightness flickered in an appar


! A L O 



99 




ently meaningless pattern. Merely on its physical description, 
there was nothing remarkable 
about it, but it seized and held 
the superintendent's puzzled attention. Off his planned course 
though it was, he swung toward 
it, wondering. The student had 
mentioned no friends or coworkers — 

Gradually, details grew clearer 
and the superintendent's feelings 
grew grimmer. He did not like to 
believe what he saw, but the evidence was crowding in. 

"Help! Please help! Master!" 

THE bubble of horror burst, 
and one of anger grew in its 
place. Not one of his own kind, 
injured or dying and an object 
of terror and revulsion thereby; 



this thing was a slave. A slave, 
moreover, well within the limits 
of the farm, where it had no 
business to be without supervision; a slave who dared call on 
him for help! 

"What are you doing here?" 
The superintendent sent the question crackling along a tight beam 
toward the apparently helpless 
creature. "Did you enter this region without orders?" 

"No, Master. I was . . . ordered." 

"By whom? What happened to 
you? Speak more clearly!" 

"By — I cannot, Master. Help 
me!" The irregular flickering of 
the slave's auroral halo brightened fitfully with the effort of 
radiating speech. 

Unsympathetic as the superintendent normally was to such be



AlAXY SCIENCE FICTION 



Ings, he realized that help must 
be given if he were to learn anything. Conquering a distinct feeling of repugnance, he moved up'< 
beside the slave to investigate its 
injuries. He expected, naturally, 
to find the visible results of a 
thorough ion-lashing, that being 
the principal occupational hazard 
faced by the slaves; but what he 
actually saw almost made him 
forget his anger. 

The unfortunate creature's 
outer crust was pitted — dotted 
and cratered with a pattern of 
circular holes which resembled 
nothing the superintendent had 
ever encountered, lie knew the 
long, shallow scars of an ionlashing and the broad, smoothed 
areas which showed on the crust 
of one of his people when close 
exposure to a sun had boiled away 
portions of his mass. These 
marks, however, looked almost 
as though the slave had been exposed to a pelting by granules of 
Solid matter! 

A ridiculous thought, of course. 
The stupidest slave could detect 
and avoid the occasional bits of 
rock and metal which were encountered in the interstellar void. 
After all, they had the same sensory equipment and physical 
powers as the masters. An unprejudiced judge might even have 
said they were of the same species as the masters. 

Whatever had caused the crea
H AlO 



ture's injury, there was little that 
could be done for it. Grudgingly, 
inspired far more by curiosity 
than by sympathy, the superintendent did that little, supplying 
hydrocarbons and other organic 
matter lately skimmed from the 
ringed planet. 

Food, however, was not enough. 
Bits of extraneous metal were 
imbedded in its body, altering 
the precise pattern of charged 
metal nodes that spelled life to 
these beings. Some of its own 
field nodes had apparently been 
chipped or blown away, and others were discharged. The creature's body was only a fraction 
of its normal size — the regular 
reserve of "food" compounds that 
ordinarily made up so much of 
even a slave's bulk had long since 
been consumed or had evaporated. 

There was no doubt that it 
was dying. But there was some 
chance that it might gain strength 
enough to impart information if 
it were fed. It was — sparingly, of 
course. 

"No sense wasting food on a 
slave that's about to die," the 
superintendent explained without 
brutality. 

"Certainly not, Master," the 
slave agreed without resentment. 

"TjPTHAT happened to you?** 
™ the superintendent repeated. The slave was in no condition 

101 



to' be coherent; but a lifetime of 
conditioning, brought some order 
> to its agony-dazed mind, and it 
answered. 

"I was ordered to the inner 
plots — to harvest." The wordsymbols came haltingly, but with 
sufficient clarity to be unmistakable, shocking as their implication was. 

So the student had trusted 
slaves near a food supply! Perhaps that accounted for the two 
stripped planets. 

"You went to harvest when a 
young fool like this orders it?" 

"He was a master, and he gave 
the order. Many of us went; many 
of us have been going for years — 
and seldom returning. We did not 
wish it, Master, but he ordered it. 
What could we do?" 

"You could have asked the first 
superintendent who came here 
whether it was better to disobey 
a Prime Order or a young master." 

"You are the first to come, 
Master, as far as I know. And 
the young master said we were 
not to speak of this order to any% one. It is only because you command me to speak that I do so 
now — that and the fact that there 
is little more that he could do 
to me, anyway." 

The overseer ignored the pointed closing sentence. "You say 
many of you have been ordered 
to do this, but few have returned 



from the errand? What happened 
to them? What happened to 
you?" 

"They die. I did not know 
how; now I suppose it must be — 
this way." 

There was a pause, and the 
supervisor was moved to sarcasm. 
"I suppose they are struck by 
meteoric particles, as you seem 
to have been. Do slaves absorb 
personal characteristics such as 
stupidity from their masters? 
Could you not dodge the meteors?" 

"No, not all of them. The region near the central furnace has 
more of such matter than any 
other place I have ever seen. 
Some pieces are iron, some are of 
other matter; but they cannot be 
avoided. They strike too hard. 
They cannot- be absorbed in normal fashion, but simply boil off 
one's body material into space. 
The shock is so tremendous that 
I, at least, could do nothing toward recovering the material until it had dissipated beyond hope 
of salvage. That is the reason so 
much of my mass is gone; it was 
not merely starvation. 

"Some of the other slaves did 
better than I — as I said, some of 
them have survived — but others 
did much worse. They would dive 
in toward the furnace, and their 
bodies would come falling back 
out in just about the shape I am." 

"And still he sends his slaves 



102 




 



in to harvest?" 
i, "Yes.' We did not do too badly, 
p actually, on the largest plots; but 
I' then he got interested in the others farther in. After all, they're 
; hotter. He ventured in himself 
! almost to the orbit of the plot 
* that was destroyed — did you 
I know that? — but came out very 
quickly and sent us on all such 
p journeys thereafter. 

"We — or, rather, those who pre; ceded me — cleaned off the next 
; inner plot, the fourth from the 
central furnace, fairly well, 
though the loss of slaves was high. 
Then he wanted to start on the 
third. I was one of the first to 
work on this project. 

"I did not expect to live, of 
course, after what I had heard 
I from the others; but the order 
■ came, and I let myself fall toward 
I the sun. My orbit passed close to 
jj. the greatest of the plots, which 
| the master has been harvesting 
himself, and I hoped to strengthen 
myself with a little food from it 
|as I passed." 

i 

rriHAT confession showed how 
J -■- certain the slave felt of his 
' own imminent death, as well as 
jjthe state of demoralization into 
I which the student's activities had 
[permitted his servitors to fall. 
I "But I did not dare take any 
pood when the time came," the 
ttlave went on feebly. "As I passed 

through the region where the de


stroyed plot had been, drifting 
particles began to grow more numerous. At first there would be 
an occasional bit of stone or iron, 
which I could dodge easily. Then 
they came in twos and threes, 
and sometimes I would have to 
change an escape curve in midmaneuver. Then they came in 
dozens and clusters, and at last 
I could avoid them no longer. I 
was struck several times in rapid 
succession. 

"For a moment I almost turned 
back — I had never dreamed that 
anything could feel like that — 
and then I remembered the order 
and went on. And I was struck 
again, and again, and each time 
the order faded in my mind. I 
reached the orbit of the fourth 
planet, crossed it — and turned 
out again. It didn't seem to help; 
I W,as still being pelted. For a 
time I must have almost lost orientation; but at last I won out 
to a place near the orbit of the 
giant planet. That was where I 
remembered the order again. 

"I had never disobeyed a master before, and I didn't know what 
to do, or say, or think. I'd start 
back toward the Sun, and remember what had happened, and 
come back out. Then I'd remember the master, and head in again. 
I didn't dare go out in the cold 
where he would be waiting. I 
didn't dare dive back into that 
storm of rock and metal from 



HALO 



108 



the old fifth planet. But I had to 
do something. I couldn't float by 
the orbit of the Giant Planet forever. He would find me there 
sooner or later, and that would be 
worse than if I had come out to 
him. I had to think." 
That word struck the superintendent like a shock. The very 
idea of a slave's thinking — making a decision for himself concerning an action he was to 
perform — was repugnant to a 
member of the dominant race. 
They preferred to think of their 
slaves as mindless creatures relying on their masters for the 
necessities of existence — a comforting fiction that had been 
maintained for so many rotations of the Galaxy that its originators had come to believe it 
themselves. He had suspected 
that this particular slave must be 
an unusual specimen in many 
ways; now he was sure of it. 

It was this that kept him silent 
while the creature paused, visibly collected its waning energies, 
and resumed the tale. 

"I found what I thought was 
the answer at last. Since the tremendous number of particles 
must have come from the farm 
that had been blown up, it 
seemed likely that their orbits 
would be more or less controlled 
by that and would have at least 
a slight family resemblance. If I 
were to take up a powered, nearly 



elliptical path through that region, matching velocities wit! 
most of them instead of fall int. 
in a practically parabolic ©rbr 
across their path, I should liable to avoid the worst of tbt 
blows." 

WEAKLY, the shattered creature shuddered and paused 
mustering strength to continue. 

"I had about made up my muv' 
to try this when I detected ar< 
other slave inbound," it went or 
"and it occurred to me that tw« 
would be better than one. If or. 
died, at least the other coul 
learn from what had happened, 
caught' him easily since he w** 
in free fall and explained the 
idea. He seemed willing to fo 
low any suggestion, not thinkim 
for himself at all, so he we 
with me. 

"For a while it worked. We gt t 
inside the orbit of the fourth 
planet without being hit mor* 
than a few times each — that w^» 
harder on me than on him, because I'd already been hurt quhe 
a lot on the first trip. Into thsi 
level, a great deal of the wreckage is formed of quite large particles, anyway; it's easy to see 
and avoid. Farther in, though, 
where most of the heavy stuff 
either never went or was cleared 
out by collision with the inner 
planets in a few million of their 
revolutions, there was much more 



104 




 



extremely fine stuff. It actually 
seems to increase in concentration near the sun. Maybe radiation pressure has something to 
do with it. 

"Anyway, we began to take a 
bad beating again. It was a little 
better than before. My idea must 
have had something to it, but it 
still wasn't good. The other slave 
wasn't used to it, but it 
still wasn't good. The other slave 
wasn't used to it, either, and lost 
control of himself just as I had. 
We were almost to the third farm 
plot then, but he must have gone 
completely blind from pain. He 
apparently never sensed the food 
so near by — that plot is incredibly ric%. 

"He went blundering squarely 
into another, useless plot that accompanies the third one in its 
orbit; an object too small to hold 
culture material in that temperature range, though still several 
hundred times the diameter of 
my body or his. He rammed it 
hard, and- the energy involved in 
matching velocities was more 
than enough to volatilize his mass 
completely. The object was pretty well scarred with impact craters, but he made one of the 
neatest. 

"I was close enough then to 
the third planet to start harvesting — at least, I would have been 
under normal circumstances. I 
tried, but couldn't concentrate on 

H Aid 




one course- of action long enough. 
The bombardment was endless. 
There are simply no words to 
describe what it was like. I was 
not twenty of its own diameters 
"from, the most amazingly rich 
farm plot I have ever seen, and 
was not able to touch a bit of it! 

"It had been so long since it 
was harvested that substances 
completely strange to me had developed in its surface layers. 
There were carbohydrates, of 
course, and light-element oxides 
and carbonates which anyone 
would expect; but there were 
proteins more fantastically complex than anyone could well imagine. Their emanations nearly 
drove me wild. They must have 
been building up and breaking 
down at incredible speed at that 
temperature — I had quite an atmosphere out, as a result of boiling off surface matter to use up 
incoming radiant energy — and 
they had evolved t-o an unheardof degree, And I couldn't get a 
taste! 

"I could sense them, though, 
and in spite of the pain of the 
meteor bombardment, I stayed 
near the planet, vacillating as I 
had done before, for a couple of 
hundred of its trips around the 
Sun. That may seem like a short 
time, but it was long enough to 
ruin my body past saving. It was 
only when my senses began to 
fail that I was able to turn away 



from it and fight my way out 
this far. I just managed to get 
into a stable orbit that would 
keep me clear of that hellish halo 
of planet fragments, and every 
now and then I succeeded inmustering enough energy to call 
for help, but I knew it was useless. Even had you come much 
sooner, it would still have been 
too late for me. 

"I live to warn you, however. 
Do not go within the orbit of the 
old fifth planet! Do not even 
look within it, for if you sense 
what lies on that unharvested 
third world, you will be drawn 
to your doom as surely as I was 
ordered to mine!" 

THE slave fell silent, and the 
superintendent pondered its 
tale as they drifted on about the 
Sun. He could not, offhand, think 
of any adequate punishment for 
the student whose recklessness 
had brought about this state of 
affairs. The mere cruelty of ordering endless crowds of slaves 
to nearly certain death did not 
affect him particularly; but the 
waste of it did, very much. To 
him the thought of hundreds of 
lifeless bodies drifting endlessly 
about the Sun, boiling off a little 
more of their masses with each 
perihelion passage until nothing 
was left but a loose collection of 
high melting-point pebbles, was 
a painful picture of economic loss. 



106 




 



phe fact that the best farm- plot 
In the system had apparently beteome unattainable was also to be 
Considered, and the driving of at 
least one slave to the extreme of 
thinking for himself was not to 
be gnored. 

; Of course, everything should be 
(checked before confronting the 
|student with such charges. Only 
the last, after all, could be considered as yet a matter of objective knowledge, 
(-■ The overseer moved abruptly 
S*W8y from the slave — Sunward. 
phe dying creature, seeing him 
'depart, called once more for aid, 
and was silenced instantly and 
permanently by a slashing beam 
•Of ions. For an instant the overseer regretted the impulsive actmot from gratitude for the warnng, to which he attached little 
height and which was part of a 
slave's duty, but simply because 
it was impulsive rather than reaoned. But theq he reflected that 
lie creature could probably not 
Save told much more anyway, 
ven if it had survived until his 
feturn. 

; He was in no hurry. He let the 
ravity of the central furnace 
taw him in to the orbit of the 
iant Planet, his senses covering 
»e half-billion-mile sphere of 
Jace ahead where death was rented to lurk. 

5 At this range, all seemed infcuous. He watched the inner 

•r'"' 'V 

AlO 



planets circling rapidly in their 
paths— even the giant one made 
most of a revolution during his 
fall — and noted that the slave had 
spoken the truth about a companion body to the third- planet. 
But space seemed otherwise 
empty. 

He did not completely abandon 
caution, however. What had 
proven fatal to slaves might be 
inconvenient or even dangerous to 
a master. ' 
TTE stopped at the fifth planet's 
■■"'■orbit and began a more minute examination of that suspicious volume of space. 

The small bodies were there, all right. Thousands of them, 
even though he was not trying to 
detect anything less than a twentieth of his own diameter. They 
did show a rather vague preference for the orbit of the old fifth 
planet, as the slave had said. The 
greater number circled between 
the present fourth and fifth orbits, at any rate. There seemed 
no reason why he could not match 
velocities well enough to keep out 
of trouble. Why, chance alone 
could be trusted to protect him 
from collision with a few thousand asteroids, when they were 
scattered through something like 
ten- to - the - twenty - fourth - power 
cubic miles of space! 

Still, there was little wisdom in 
going into possible danger with
107 



out a very sound reason. It would 
be well to judge from his present 
position if such reason existed. 
His finer senses could easily operate at the half billion miles that 
separated him from the farthest 
point of the third planet's orbit. 
So, holding his position, he focused his attention on the elusive 
farm plot in question. 

Being so close to the central 
furnace, it revolved rapidly. He 
faced somewhat the same problem in examining it that a man 
would have trying to recognize a 
friend on a merry-go-round— assuming that the friend were spinning in his seat like a top at the 
same time. 

It took the superintendent only 
a few revolutions of the body to 
adjust to this situation, however, 
and as details registered more 
and more clearly on his consciousness, he began to admit 
grudgingly that the slave had not 
exaggerated. 

The plot was fabulous! 

Substances for which he had 
no name abounded, impressing 
themselves on the analytical sense 
that was his equivalent of both 
taste and smell. Strange as they 
were, he could tell easily that; 
they were foods — packed with 
available energy and carrying 
fascinating taste potentialities, 
organized to a completely unheard-of j degree, They were 
growths of a ;type and iComplexity 



which simply never had a chance 
to evolve on the regularly harvested worlds of the Galaxy. 

The overseer wondered whether 
it might not be worth while to let 
other plots run wild for a few 
years. His principal vice, by the 
standards of his people, was gluttony; but the most ascetic of his 
species would have been tempted 
uncontrollably by that planet. 

He almost regretted the few 
tons of food he %iad taken on 
from the ringed planet — though 
he had, he told himself quickly, 
sacrificed much of that in helping the slave and would lose still 
more if he decided actually to 
penetrate into the high-temperature zones near the Sun. 

Huge as his mass was, his 
normal temperature was so low 
that life processes went on at an 
incredibly slow pace. To him, 'a 
chemical reaction requiring only 
a few millennia to go to completion was like a dynamite explosion. A few pounds of organic 
compounds would feed his milesthick bulk . for many human 
lifetimes of high activity. 

In short, the slave had been 
quite right. 

ALMOST involuntarily, rationalizing his appetite as he 
went, the superintendent permitted himself to drift into the 
asteroid zone. With only the 
smallest part of his attention, he 




 



assumed a parabolic, free-fall orbit in the general plane of the system, witlr its perihelion point 
approximately tangent to the orbit of the third planet. At this 
distance from the Sun, the difference between parabolic and 
circular velocities was not too 
great to permit him to detect 
even the tiniest particles in time 
: to avoid them. That fact, of 
^course, changed as he fell sun; ward. 

Perhaps he had been counting 
on a will power naturally superior to that of the slave who had 
; warned him. If so, he had forgotten the effects of an equally 
superior imagination. The pull 
of the third planet was correspondingly stronger and, watching the 
spinning globe, he was jarred out 
of almost hypnotic trance by 
the first collision. It awakened 
him to the fact that his natural 
superiority to the slave race 
night not be sufficient to keep 
lim out of serious trouble. 

The space around him — he was 
low well inside the orbit of the 
iburth planet — was literally 
arowded with grain-of-dust meteors, each, as he had seen on the 
Slave's crust, able to blast out a 
:rater many times its own volume 
n a living body. Individually, 
hey were insignificant; collectively, they were deadly. 

His attention abruptly wrenchd back to immediate problems 



of existence, the superintendent 
started to check his fall and veeronce more toward the safe, frozea 
emptiness of interstellar space. 
But the spell of the gourmet's' 
paradise he had been watching 
was not that easily thrown off. 
For long moments, while thei 
planet circled its primary once 
and again, he hung poised, with 
gluttony and physical anguish alternately gaining the upper handin a struggle for possession of his 
will. Probably he would have lost, 
alone; but his student did have a 
conscience. 

"Sir!" The voice came faintly 
but clearly to his mind. "Don't 
stay! You mustn't! I should 
never have let you come — but I 
was angry! I know I was a fool; 
I should have told you everything!" 

"I learned. It was my own 
fault." The superintendent found 
it curiously difficult to speak. 
"I came of my own free will and 
I still think that plot is worth 
investigation." 

"No! It's not your own free 
will — no will could remain free 
after seeing what that planet has 
to offer, I knew it and expected 
you to die — but I couldn't go 
through with it. Come, and 
quickly. I will help." 

*T*HE student was in an orbit 
■■•almost identical with that of 
the superintendent, though still 



SALO 



109 



a good deal farther out. Perhaps 
it was the act of looking at him, 
which took his attention momentarily from the alluring object 
below, that made the older being 
waver. Whatever it was, the student perceived the bfeak and 
profited by it. 

"Don't even look at it again, 
sir. Look at me, and follow — or if 
you'd rather not look at me, look 
at that!" 

He indicated the direction 
plainly, and the dazed listener 
looked almost involuntarily. 

The thing he saw was recognizable enough. It consisted of 
a small nucleus which his senses 
automatically' analyzed. It consisted of methane and other hydrocarbons, some free oxygen, a 
few other light-element com




mm 




110 




 



pounds, and had nuggets of 
heavier elements scattered 
through it like raisins in a plum 
pudding. Around it for thousands 
of miles there extended a tenuous 
halo of the more volatile of its 
constituent compounds. The 
thing was moving away from the 
Sun in an elliptical orbit, showing 
no sign of intelligent control. A 
portion of its gaseous envelope 
was driven on ahead by the pressure of sunlight from below. 

It was a dead slave, but it 
could as easily have been a dead 
master. 

A' dead slave was nothing; but 
the thing that had killed it could 
do the fame to him. 

It was the first time, in his 
incredibly long life that the personal possibility of death had 
struck home to him; and probably nothing less than that fear 
could have saved his life. 

With the student close beside, 
he followed the weirdly glowing 
corpse out to the farthest point 
of its orbit; and as it started to 
fall back into the halo of death 
girdling that harmless-looking 
star, he pressed on out into the 
friendly darkness. 

Perhaps some day that third 
planet would be harvested; but 
it would not be by one of his 
kind — not, at least, until that 
guarding haze had been swept up 
by the planets that drifted 
through its protecting veil. 



IT was not a very good groups 
Wright reflected. That always 
seemed to be the ease. When he 
had luck with observing weather, 
he had no one around to appreciate the things that could be seen. 
He cast a regretful glance toward 
the dome of the sixty-inch telescope, where a fellow candidate 
was taking another plate of his 
series, and wondered whether 
there were not some better way 
than part-time instructing to pay 
the expenses of a doctorate program. 

Still, the night was good. Most 
of the time in the latitude — 

"Mr. Wright! Is that a cloud 
or the Aurora?" 

"If you will stop to consider 
the present position of the Sun 
below the horizon," he answered 
indirectly, "you will discover that 
the patch of light you are indicating is directly opposite that 
point. It lies along the path of 
the Earth's shadow, though, of 
course, well beyond it. It is called 
the Gegenschein and, like the 
Zodiacal Light, is not too commonly visible at this latitudes 
We did see the Light some time 
ago, if you remember, ori an evening when we started observing 
earlier. Actually, the Gegenschein is a continuation of the 
luminous band we call the Zodiacal Light. The latter can sometimes be traced all the way 
around the sky to the point we 



•HALO 



111 



are now watching.** 

"What .causes them?" 

"The most reasonable assumption is that they are light reflected from small, solid particles — meteors. Apparently a eloud of 
such matter extends outward for 
some distance past the Earth's 
orbit, though just how far, it is 
hard to say. It grows fainter with 
distance from the Sun, as would 
be expected, except for the patch 
we call the Gegenschein." 

"Why the exception?" 

"I think one of you can answer 
that." 

"Would it be for the same reason that the full Moon is so much 
more than twice as bright as 
either quarter? Simply because 
the particles are rough, and 
appear dark in most positions 
because of the shadows of irregularities on their own surfaces 
— shadows which disappear when 
the light is behind the observer?" 

"I think you will agree that 
that would account for it,** 
Wright said. "Evidently the meteors are there, are large compared to wavelengths of visible 
light, and form a definite part of 
the Solar System, I believe it 
was once estimated that if the 
space inside the Earth's orbit 
contained particles one millimeter in diameter and five miles 
apart, they would reflect enough 
light to account for what we are 
observing. They might, of course, 



be smaller and more numerous. 
Only that amount of reflecting 
surface is necessary." 

"You had me worried," 'another voice broke in. "I'd been 
hearing for years that there 
would be little reason to fear 
collision with meteors when we 
finally get a rocket out of the 
atmosphere. For a moment, I 
thought a cloud such as you were 
working up to would riddle anything that got into space. One 
pinhead every five miles isn't 
so bad, though." 

"There is a fairly good chance 
of collision, I would say," returned Wright, "but just what 
damage particles of that size 
would do, I am not sure. It seems 
rather likely that they would be 
volatilized by impact. How the 
hull of a rocket would react, we 
will have to find out by experience. I wouldn't mind taking the 
risk myself. I think we can sum 
up the greatest possibilities by 
saying that the meteoric content 
of the Solar System has and will 
have nothing but nuisance value 
to the human race, whether or 
not we ever leave our own planet." 

A streak of white fire arced 
silently across the sky, putting 
a fitting period to the subject. 

Wright wondered whether it 
would appear on his friend's photographic plate. 