Secret of the House By H. H. HOLMES 

OF course no one realized 
in advance what would 
be, ounce for ounce, the 
most valuable return cargo of the 
Earth-Venus * spaceships, 1 even 
though the answer should have 
been obvious to anyone with the 
faintest knowledge of historical 
patterns. 

Rare metals? With the cost of 
fuel to lift them out of Venus's 
almost-Earth gravity making 



them even costlier than on Earth 
itself? No, the answer was the obvious but overlooked one: What 
did Marco Polo bring back from 
China and Vasco da Gama from 
India? Why was Columbus seeking a new route to the Indies? 

In one word: spices. 

Man's palate needs occasional 
rejuvenation. One of the main 
purposes of exploration, intercontinental or interplanetary, is the 



100 




 



restimulation of jaded taste buds. 
And in addition to the new spices 
there were new methods of cooking, such as that wonderful native 
Venusian quick passing through 
live steam, which gave the startling effect of sizzling hot crisp 
rawness; or balj, that strange native dish which was a little like a 
curry and a little like a bouillabaisse, but richer and more subtle 
than either. There was sokalj, or 
Venusian swamphog, the most 
delicately delicious meat on three 
planets — not that anything Martian would ever be considered by 
the true gourmet. 

HPHIS was the speech that 
Kathy listened to regularly 
once a week for the first year of 
her marriage. For she had married not only a prominent and 
successful man, she soon realized, 
but one who had been bitten at a 
susceptible age by the word gourmet. 

It was fun while they were 
courting. It was fun, anyway, for 
a video network receptionist to 
be taken to good restaurants by 
the top interplanetary commentator. It was especially fun 
to watch him go through the 
masculine production number of 
conferring with the headwaiter, 
sending his compliments (and 
instructions) to the chef, and 
exchanging views with the sommelier, as Kathy quickly learned 



to call the-man-with-the-wine. 
Wine did not ship well interplanetarily ; acceleration over one 
g, in the term of the cognoscenti, 
"bruised" it. In this domain, the 
French still reigned supreme, and 
stressed their superiority to mask 
their natural jealousy of the upstart Venusian colonists. 

In every American city — with a 
few exceptions in New Orleans 
and San Francisco — former 
"French" restaurants had become 
"Venusian" and even in Paris 
cuisine venerienne marked some 
of the most highly esteemed establishments. 

But the entertainment value 
of a gourmet exhibitionist decreased as courtship progressed 
logically into marriage, and being 
wined and dined gave place to 
the daily problem of feeding the 
man. Quick freezing had, of 
course, made the bride's problems simple compared to those 
of earlier centuries. But George, 
completely in character, insisted 
on a high percentage of personally prepared meals — and was 
shrewd enough to spot any substitute makeshifts via the deep 
freeze and the electronic oven. 

Not even the apartment on 
the very top level of Manhattan, 
where you could still see the 
Hudson, not even the charge accounts at shops she'd never dared 
enter, not even the wondrous fact 
that she loved George with an 



SECRET OF THE HOUSE 



101 



intensity which she had always 
considered just an unlikely convention of the women's minimags — none of these could quite 
reconcile Kathy to life with a 
man who could down three bowls 
of your best hand-made oyster 
stew without interrupting his 
speech on the glories of authentic 
balj a la Venusberg, who could 
devour enough of a prime rib 
roast to throw the whole week's 
budget out of joint while expatiating on the absurdity of the 
legend that Earth, cooks in general, and the Anglo-Saxons in 
particular, did at least understand beef. 

TT^ATHY toyed with the idea 
of hiring a cook, not so much 
to satisfy George as to divert his 
inevitable reproaches to someone 
else. But aside from the fact 
that a cook's salary would turn 
her charge accounts anemic, Kathy knew that her mother, 
both her grandmothers, and undoubtedly all four of her greatand all eight of her great-greatgrandmothers had fed their men 
and kept them happy. This was 
a matter of family pride. 

Then came the awful day when 
George brought Jose Lermontov 
home to dinner. Kathy's younger 
sister was also dining with them 
that night, and wrinkled her nose 
after George's face faded from 
the visiphone. 



"These revolting Venus-colonial diplomats," said Linda. "He'll 
have a swamp-beard and a 
paunch and a wife and six children at home. Kathy, why 
doesn't George ever meet anybody newsworthy who's — well, 
worthy?" 

"He's a very fine young man, 
I hear," Kathy muttered distractedly. "Guerilla leader against 
the dictatorship, wrote a fine 
book about its overthrow. What 
worries me is the paunch — and 
what I'm going to put into it." 

Five minutes after meeting the 
Venusian, Linda slipped into the 
kitchen to whisper, "Sister . . . 
please . . . can I have that in my 
stocking for Christmas?" But 
even this pleasing reversal did not 
divert Kathy from the task of 
preparing to fill the, as it turned 
out, non-existent paunch. 

Dinner, she thought a little 
later, was going surprisingly well, 
especially between Jose - and 
Linda. But then George, having 
speared and destroyed the last 
pork chop, cleared his throat. 

"You must make allowances, 
Lermontov. Mere pork to a man 
accustomed to sokatj . . ." 

"Mean swamphog?" Jose asked 
politely, with the usual clipped 
Venusian avoidance of pronouns 
and articles. 

"And," George added commiseratingly, "this so-called 'country 
gravy' — rather a shock to a man 



SECRET OF THE HOUSE 



103 



from a planet where they think, 
thank God, not in terms of gravies, but of sauces." 

"Very good gravy," said Jose, 
mopping up the last of his with a 
slice of Kathy's own bread. "Imagine 'so-called' because first made 
by those who live in country?" 

"Even granting that," George 
persisted, "can't you picture what 
just a pinch of faa/;'-powder 
would have done for it? Or perhaps a hint of tinilj?" 

"Myself," Jose 1 replied gravely, 
"prefer one of your Earth herbs 
—dash of oregano, bit of savory. 
Summer savory, of course." 

George gave the matter serious 
thought. "Possibly. Very possibly. But in either case it 
demonstrates the pitiful lack of 
imagination of the average Earth 
housewife." 

It is conceivable that Kathy 
made too obvious a clatter in 
stacking and removing the dinner dishes. In any event, Linda 
followed her hastily into the 
kitchen. 

"Please, Kathy angel, don't explode, not just yet. I know George 
is asking for it, but he's probably 
been told already that all Earthwomen are shrews and I don't 
want . . ." 

Kathy controlled herself until 
the one agreeable result of the 
evening was reached when Jose' 
asked if he might see Linda home. 
To her surprise, she went right on 



controlling herself even after they 
had left, because by then she 
had thought of The Plan. 




'HE very next morning, The 
Plan was well under way. 



A: Kathy invaded her favorite bookshop and bought every 
book in stock on Venusian spices 
and cooking, and even added 
such pre-Venusian classics of culinary perception as BrillatSavarin, Escoffier, and M. F. K. 
Fisher. 

B: She enrolled herself for 
daily lessons at the Uya Rulj 
School of Venusian Cookery (formerly the Ecole de Cuisine Cordon Bleu). 

C: Knowing that George had 
a luncheon date in Chicago with 
his sponsor, she visited the restaurant where her husband 
normally lunched. It was an unobtrusive chop house in the thirties, far down on Manhattan's 
base-level, and the excellent 
lunch she enjoyed there confirmed her darkest suspicions. 

For two weeks she read her 
books and took her lessons without trying out what she learned 
except for lunches by herself. 
And she did learn things. George's 
school of thought had its points. 
For Kathy's cooking, like that of 
her eight great-great-grandmothers, had been not only Earthly 
but plain American. 

There was a fresh delight in 



104 




 



learning that the Architect of all 
things had established on this 
planet a certain inevitable relationship between tomatoes and 
sweet basil, and had ordained 
that caraway seeds should fulfill the destiny of red cabbage — 
even as on another planet He had 
sown tinilj so that the flesh of the 
swamphog might be even sweeter. 
And who was to anticipate the 
masterfully predestined interplanetary blends? The inescapable kinship of garlic and lamb. 
Kathy had long known, but her 
eyes opened wide on discovering 
how a pinch of oa//-powder completed the trinity. 

But these discoveries did not 
weaken The Plan. And that same 
Architect smiled upon The Plan 
by allowing the network's robowaxer to deposit a minutely oversufficient flow upon the floor of 
the corridor in front of George's 
office. On that wax, George slipped and broke his leg. 

George probably never admitted, even to himself, that he 
enjoyed being bedridden: the 
visiphone calls, the mini-script 
couriers from the network, the 
bedside microphone and cameras. 
But he did begin to admit that he 
was enjoying Kathy's cooking. 

Where once she might have 
served steak, she now brought 
forth grenadine de boeuf & la 
venerienne. Where once she might 
have served her asparagus with 



melted butter, she now ventured 
on a hollandaise (with five grains 
of ba/y-powder replacing the cayenne of ancient recipes). Where 
once she might have served leftover simply reheated, she now 
masked them with a sauce which 
would cause the recumbent 
George to smack his lips, roll his 
eyes, and murmur, "Silj, of 
course, and chives . . . and a hint 
of tinilj . . . possibly a whisper of 
pnulj, probably Earth-grown? 
Yes, I thought so .. . . and . . . 
what is that?" 

"Chevil, darling," Kathy would 
say, and he'd answer, "Of course, 
of course. I would have had it in 
a minute. You know, Katherine 
my dear, you are developing an 
imagination!" 

WHEN it was announced that 
George's plasticast was to 
come off that Thursday, Kathy 
decided it was time for the denouement of The Plan. As she 
was painstakingly making up her 
shopping list on Thursday morning, the visiphone rang and it 
was, miraculously, not the network for George. 

"Oh, Kathy!" Linda burbled. 
"I've got one of those nice let'ssee- what -happens dates with him 
tonight and could you possibly 
ask us both to dinner? Because 
he likes you and he's really just 
about almost rhere and if we were 
. . . you know, all in the family 



SECRET OF THE HOUSE 



105 



and everything, I think it might 
just— " 

"Jose"?" Kathy asked, knowing 
the answer. She grinned and doubled the quantities on the list. 

The worst of the preparations 
for dinner were over when Linda 
arrived, carrying, to Kathy's surprise, a weekend case. The girl 
devoted only the necessary minimum of time to admiring 
George's knitted leg, then dragged her sister into the bedroom. 

"Kathy, I've got such a problem. He's known so many women 
... all over two planets and at 
embassies and maybe even spies. 
I told you tonight I think he 
will; only I don't know what 
lipstick to use, what perfume, 
anything. I've got to make myself interesting; but I don't want 
to overdo it. So I just brought 
everything I have. You tell me." 

Kathy looked at the array. She 
thought of her dinner and The 
Plan and she began giving Linda 
her advice. 

IT was the same cast that had 
attended the awful dinner 
which inspired The Plan, but 
they were different people. Jose, 
no longer the visiting colonial, 
was a gentleman at home among 
friends; Linda was radiant in the 
glow of simplicity and a wellscrubbed face; and George was 
praising the food. 

He praised the green peas. He 

106 



praised the mashed potatoes. And 
above all he praised the fried 
chicken. 

"I can't quite analyze it," he 
kept saying. "There's a touch 
there I can't quite get. You've 
brought out the flavor miraculously. It wouldn't," he demanded suspiciously, "be that new 
powder Koenigsberg claims he 
found among the natives at the 
tip of the southern continent? I 
thought they hadn't shipped any 
of that in yet." 

"They haven't, darling," said 
Kathy. 

"Perhaps the tiniest pinch of 
balj with a little freshly ground 
celery seed?" 

"No." 

"Then what in two planets — " 

"A woman must have some secrets, George. Let's just say this 
is ... a secret of the house." 

At this point Kathy happened 
to catch Josh's eye and hastily 
looked away. It was impossible ; 
that a Venusian diplomat would ) 
be winking at his hostess! 

George was still pursuing his 
questions over brandy in the living room. Jose\ also possibly ' 
(Kathy prayed) in a questionasking mood, had led Linda out 
onto what the architect called the 
sun-area, though Kathy persisted in thinking of it, more romantically, as the balcony. As 
she saw the two turn to come 
back in, Kathy headed for the 

ALAXY SCIENCE FICTION 



kitchen, an immemorial spot for 
sisterly confidences. 

But it was not Linda who followed her in. It was Jose\ He 
leaned casually against the door 
jamb and told her, "Know secret of house." 

"Yes?" said Kathy casually. 
"Oh, I mean — you do? Sometimes I have to stop and reread 
you, like a telegram. Well?" 

"Bought food of highest quality, cooked it extremely well, relied on nothing but natural flavor, 
probably little salt. Good old 
George always wanted so much 
seasoning, this strikes him as new 
and revolutionary taste sensation. Right?" 

KATHY grinned. "I'll go quietly," she said. "I thought it 
would work and I was sure of 
it when I ate at his regular lunch 
place. That's just what they do; 
but because it's a chop house 
with a reputation, he thinks it's 
magic. Except I've learned things 
his way, too. From now on, 
George- gets variety at home — 
and I think he'll like all of it 
without ever knowing why he 
likes which." 

"Simplicity also magic," Jos6 
observed. "Your idea — clean, 
fresh simplicity of Linda that 
accounts for fact am going to be 



your brother-in-law. Correct?" 

"Correct? It's perfect!" Impulsively, Kathy kissed him. "Oh, 
my!" she said as she drew back. 
"Now you've got lipstick after 
coming off the balcony spotless!" 

"Variety," said Jos6 approvingly. "Still wonder one thing, 
Kathy. Those mashed potatoes — 
extraordinary. If secret of house, 
there's where. Confide in me?" 

"Now that you're part of the 
family, sure." 

"Yes?" 

"The secret is this: I take lots 
of butter and cream — real cowstuff, no syntho — and I beat the 
living bejeepers out of 'em." 

When they returned to the living room, it was obvious that 
Linda had told George the news. 
Using his newly recovered leg 
with as ostentatious pride as a 
year-old toddler, George advanced paternally upon Jose' Lermontov. 

"Let tonight's dinner be a marital lesson to you, my boy. Remember the last time you ate 
here, and realize that there's no 
fault in a wife that a little husbandly persistence can't cure." 

This time there was no doubt 
whatsoever that the gentlemanly 
Venusian diplomat was winking 
at his hostess. 