Horse Trader By POUL ANDERSON 

B. C. 250: The aeolipile of 
Hero spun in the temple at Alexandria, hissing softly to itself and 
blowing jets of steam into the firelit dimness. It was only for display, an embryonic turbine which 
would develop no further for lack 
of the knowledge that it could be 
put to work. Fifty light-years 
away, on the planet he called 
Ruhannoc, Zerwil the Wise had 
made an ingenious contraption 
which could have evolved into a 
pump or a locomotive engine; 
but it never did, because it had 
not occurred to anyone that there 
was any other source of energy 
than living muscles. 

A. D. 1495: Leonardo da Vinci 
regarded his airplane model wistfully, and then laid it aside. It 
could have flown; Man could 
have risen even as the birds, save 
that there was no power plant 
available. He did not know that 
there was a planet less than nine 
light-years away on which they 
were building efficient internalcombustion engines, and that for 
several reasons — among them the 
fact that aerial life had never 
evolved there — they did not think 
of using this power to give themselves wings. 

A. D. 1942: The Allied nations 
were searching with an intensity 
approaching desperation for a 
means of detecting the enemy 
submarines whose wolf packs 
were harrying_ their convovs and 



threatening to snap the thin Atlantic lifeline. Supersonics looked 
promising, but that was a littleknown Geld in which researchers 
had to start from the very bottom. 
Not far away, as Galactic distances go, the people of Sumanor 
on the planet they called Urish 
could have told the Allied councillors everything about supersonics. It would have been a fair 
exchange, for on Urish they had 
never heard of submarines. 

AD. 2275: The rangy blond 
man with the somewhat 
improbable name of Auchinleck Welcome stepped off the 
sidewalk and strode across the 
springy, semi-living warmth of 
the floor toward the arched gateway. Suitably dignified flame-letters danced above it to spell out: 

BUREAU OF mTERCULTURAL EXCHANGE 

Technical Division 

But some light-hearted soul 
had painted a horse on the door 
and Welcome, not one to stand 
on dignity, had allowed it to remain; His office was known from 
Mercury to Minerva as the Horse 
Traders. He was willing to agree 
that the description was apt. 

The door opened for him and 
he walked through the_ outer office, nodding to the clerks and 
secretaries at the computers, tapefiles, dictoscribes, and the rest of 



the complex office paraphernalia. 
A few bars of Waltzing Matilda 
whistled between his teeth as he 
entered the inner suite. The receptionist smiled at his greeting 
and he went by her and through 
the office of his private secretary, 
Christine Ernenek. 

" 'Morning," he said, pausing. 
Despite all the years he had spent 
in space, there was still a hint ofAustralian twang in his speech. 
"How's life?" 

"Just fine, Auch," the Greenlander answered. "I think you 
have a busy day lined up." 

"Who's first?" 

She glanced at her memotab. 
"The little duck from Arcturus. 
Robotics, you know. Have you 
seen him yet?" 

"No, too busy. He'll have been 
going through the usual processing first, anyway." Welcome sighed. "When will Health get it 
through their heads that Man 
hasn't caught an extraterrestrial 
disease yet?" 

"There's always the first time, 
Auch. And then the diplomats 
and so on have to see him. He is 
a sort of ambassador, after all." 

"I know, 1 know." Welcome 
nodded impatiently and fumbled 
out a battered corncob pipe and 
began stuffing it. Christine had 
been in the office longer than he; 
he'd only been given the job a 
month ago, because of his engineering work on Freyja. A flicker 



132 




 



of eagerness kindled in him. "This 
robotics stuff may turn out to be 
one of our biggest hauls." 

"Maybe so." Christine giggled. 
"He's cute, that duck." Glancing 
at the tab again : "Then, of course, 
you're still negotiating with Vega, 
Sirius and Procyon. Oh, yes, and 
a Centaurian." 

"What?" Welcome almost 
dropped his pipe. 

"A Centaurian. Alpha A III, 
from the clan of Brogu, continent 
of Almerik, name of Helmung. 
He wants spaceships and atomic 
energy in exchange for witchcraft." 

"Oh, no!" 

"The main office said for you 
to see him, anyway. He seems to 
have special abilities — Well, 
you'll find out." Christine grinned 
with friendly malice. "Good 
luck." 

WELCOME shrugged and 
went on into his own office. 
You had to take the bad with the 
good, he supposed. There had, 
been the tentacled monster from 
Van Maanen's Star who had 
grown very indignant on learning 
that Earth didn't care to trade 
the null-null drive for a system 
of astrology which, taking Galactic drift into account, was guaranteed infallible. But attainst that 
you had to balance the Zarbadian 
selective-killing process; witn a 
little more work, that device 



should be able to annihilate any 
disease germ just by putting the 
patient under a force generator. 
And at the present moment, the 
envoys from Procyon and Vega — 
possibly the one from Arcturus, 
too— were carrying portfolios 
which meant revolutionary technological advances for Earth. 

When it took more than four 
years objective time to reach even 
the nearest star — however short 
the interval was subjectively for 
those on board the spaceship — 
the traditional cargoes became 
valueless. No mineral, no material treasure whatever, was worth 
the cost of such hauling. Nor was 
there any special reason these 
days for humans to emigrate. 
But the intangibles of knowledge 
— that was another matter. You 
could well afford to spend a few 
megacredits and decades, if it 
meant learning a technology your 
race might not otherwise master 
for a thousand years. 

And Earth had the only intercultural clearing house in the Galaxy. They still have to come to 
us, even if we are the ones who 
haul them here and back. I just 
park myself and wait. 

Welcome sat down, feeling the 
sensuous flow of the chair as it 
modeled itself to his angular contours, and let his eyes rove the 
office. It was a big room, tastefully decorated in the Neoflamboyant style, a broad window 



HORSE TRADER 



133 



opening on the jagged view of 
Luna beyond the dome. It was 
near dawn, there was a glare on 
the highest peaks shouldering 
above the horizon, but Earth still 
dominated a heaven full of stars. 
He glanced at the planet, thinking of his family in Sydney. They 
were visiting there. It wasn't fair * 
to children, keeping them on 
Luna all the time; they ought to 
have some sea and open sky. 
Well, work to do. 

ARCTURUS — Two planets 
with intelligent natives, of 
which only one group had more 
than a primitive technology, 
Welcome recalled. Those were a 
friendly race, anxious to please, 
and the three expeditions there 
had all returned quite excited 
about the cybernetic advances of 
the leading nation. So now the 
Arcturian ducks had come to 
swap horses. Welcome decided 
that he would get some rather 
low-pressure salesmanship; after 
all, the Arcturians couldn't be 
sure how much humanity already 
knew, and they were not an agressive breed. 

Still, when you met a people 
who weren't human to begin 
with, and had a different cultural 
pattern to boot, you never knew 
what to expect. That was the 
reason for the informal basis on 
which the Horse Traders were 
allowed to operate, and their 



chief's nearly absolute power to 
drive bargains. But God help 
him if he made a mistake! 

Christine's voice came over the 
intercom, jarring him to full 
awareness: "The envoy Rappapa 
of Kwillitch, planet Arcturus V, 
to see you, Freeman Welcome." 
There was a confused noise in 
the background, and he thought 
her voice held an uncontrollable 
laughter. 

"Send him in, please." 

Welcome stood up as the door 
opened. Since notions of courtesy 
varied fantastically from world 
to world, he had decided to stick 
by Terrestrial conventions. 

"HUP-two-three-four! HUPtwo-three-four! HUP-two-three-> 
four!" 

Welcome thought briefly and 
wildly that he must be dreaming. 
A small regiment of dolls was entering his office. 

No, not dolls — robots, shiny 
humanoid robots five inches high. 
They goosestepped in perfect 
marching order, swinging their 
arms in unison, accompanied by 
tanks and helicopters built to 
scale. Behind them, quacking his 
shrill commands, was the Arcturian. He was of ostrichlike shape, 
some four feet tall, blue-feathered arid crested; instead of wings, 
he had skinny four-fingered arms 
carrying a large box, and his 
head was big and round, popeyed, with a flexible bill. 



134 




 



"HUP-two-three-four! HUPJ:wo-three-four! Com-pan-ee — 
HALT! Ri-i-ight— FACE! Present— ARMS!" 

THE toy soldiers halted, wheeled, and snapped to attention. 
A helicopter buzzed watchfully 
over Welcome's head. It was 
about the size of a pigeon. 

"How do you do, how do you 
do, noble sir?" The Arcturian 
bowed, touching the floor with 
his beak. "I trust that you in 
splendid health find yourself?" 

"Yes," said Welcome faintly. 
"Excuse me while I pick up my 
jaw." 

"If I your excellency's magnificent jaw have caused to fall, it is 
to be of the most apologetic," 
said the Arcturian unhappily. 

"Never mind," said Welcome. 
"Please sit down, Freeman Rappapa. If you wish to," he added 
hastily; he couldn't remember 
whether this particular species 
sat or not. 

"If you will it of indifference 
find, I will stand in the luminous 
presence of your excellency," said 
Rappapa. "Among my greetingsto-you-conveying folk, only nesting females sit." 

"I — well, do you .. smoke?" 
Welcome extended a box of cigars. 

"You are to be magnificently 
thanked," said Rappapa, accepting one. "Whichuwaki!" One of 



the helicopters swooped down 
and shot out a flame to light it 
for him. 

Welcome seated himself. "I 
take it those are robots." 

"Of a most humble sort, for 
demonstration purposes alone," 
said Rappapa. "They are powered by radiation from this control 
box here, as your excellency is 
undoubtedly aware. The brain 
circuits are also herein contained. 
Each machine has its individual 
brain, controlling the external 
body, or any number of brains 
can be joined in series to produce 
higher effectiveness." 

WELCOME forced himself to 
be impassive. Inwardly, his 
heart leaped. If the Arcturians 
could make a cybernetic setup 
that compact, what couldn't they 
do? 

"May I a^d they can act at 
individual discretion, within the 
limits of their basic directives?" 
said Rappapa eagerly. "Possibly 
toys or household servants for 
your superb people?" 

"It seems to me that a house 
could be built to do everything 
itself, without needing a special 
robot," said Welcome. 

"Of a most suredly! These, as 
I say, are illustrative only. It has 
insignificantly occurred to me 
that your splendid spaceships 
could be given brains of their 
own, eliminating Jiecessity for 



136 




 



• crews on those so-long voyages." 

"To be sure, Freeman Rappapa. And control and communications in general — you can doubtless show us a great deal we don't 
know." 

"It is of a strangeness that you, 
who so daringly bridged the stars, 
have not surpassed us in this 
humble endeavor." 

"Well, it's not so odd, really." 
Welcome rekindled his pipe. 
"Many things determine the 
technological progress of a cul* 
ture: social need and demand, 
the general background of knowledge and tradition, the ability of 
individual researchers within a 
given field — sheer accident, tod, 
I suppose. My race has gone 
furthest in developing transportation and energy sources. Your 
people stayed on their planet, but 
instead have gone in primarily 
for robots, automata, computers 
— cybernetics. On Procyon A III, 
they're super -biologists, especially in the line of controlled genetics, but lack atomic energy. And 
so on throughout the Galaxy. It 
would be strange if the history of 
any one race had caused it to excel in everything." 

"I am blinded by the clarity 
of your explanation. Sir, dare I 
hope that you will find our little 
skill worthy of consideration?" 

"Indeed you may," said Welcome. "Was there anything in 
particular you would like to have 



from us, or do you first want to 
see what we can offer?" 

"Your incredible process for 
obtaining atomic energy from the 
disintegration of any matter 
whatsoever would prostrate us of 
Kwillitch with joy." 

'■''HE human rubbed his chin. 
-■- That was certainly a reasonable enough asking price. In fact, 
his conscience hurt him a bit. 

"I think that can be agreed on," 
he said blandly. "You have, of 
course, brought specialized assistants, and plans and textbooks 
and so on, from which our people 
can learn what you have to teach 
them? Good. Then you should 
designate some of your people to 
study our energy -conversion techniques. The new hypnopedic 
system will make it possible for 
both sides to learn these things 
rather fast. Of course, it isn't 
quite that simple. One can't introduce a new science into a vacuum. For example, being told all 
about nuclear disintegration isn't 
going to help you unless you already know something about 
magnetronics. I'll give you a general outline of the course, and 
would like you to prepare a similar outline dealing with cybernetics, just so each side can know 
exactly what it is the other has 
to offer. Then the final agreement 
can be made and we can proceed 
to teach each other." 



HORSE TRADER 



137 



"That is a scheme of the slyest 
magnanimity," said Rappapa 
with innocent enthusiasm. 

"Excellent." Welcome slouched 
farther back in his chair and went 
on to social matters. How did the 
Arcturian party like the quarters 
which had been prepared for 
them here in the dome? The food 
and gravity and air-conditioning 
were satisfactory? They were enjoying themselves? Tours of 
Earth would be arranged for 
them — everything to make the 
guests from afar feel at home. 

And to disarm them, make 
them more receptive to our suggestions. Well, why not? When 
the future of entire planets is involved, naivete would be criminal. 

Rappapa was charmed and 
quacked eloquent praises. His 
party had already seen a good 
deal of the dome, met the other 
extraterrestrials currently there, 
been lavishly entertained. 

Welcome nodded. There was 
certainly no rule against the different embassies having contact 
and perhaps driving their own 
bargains independently of Earth. 

As a matter of fact, such a deal 
was going on right now. The Sirian knowledge of nucleonics had 
turned out to be inferior to 
Earth's, but the Vegan representative — who had come alone^— 
was willing to trade- some of his 
high -pressure chemistry for it. 

Welcome didn't care very 
much, since he could always get 



the chemistry from Vega in exchange for something else — or 
even from Sirius, perhaps. Once 
a planet — or nation, tribe, clan, 
individual— had bought a technology, it was their own business 
what they did with it. A Horse 
Trader operated between all parties, playing both ends against 
the middle. 

"/"\N a lower plane than your 
^-^ excellency, I think — " 

Rappapa was interrupted by 
the buzzing of the intercom. Welcome flipped the switch and 
Christine shouted half hysterically: "No, you can't go in there. 
He's busy — Auch, look out! The 
Sirian — " 

There was a thunderous crash 
on the door. Rappapa squawked 
and made a Lunar-gravity leap 
to cower behind his regiment. 
The door flew open and Thevorakz of Dzuga, Dominator from 
Sirius A IV, stalked in, waving 
his arms and roaring. 

He was a centauroid, with a 
quadrupedal gray body and a 
lashing tail. The upper torso, 
swathed in a black robe and 
cowl, was almost human; a bristling white walrus mustache concealed the fact that he had no 
chin. Under a forest of brow, his 
ruby eyes glared fire, and his ears 
twitched and his hoofs stamped 
ominously. 

"You!" he bellowed. "You low 
thiefing monthter! You thcum! 



138 




 



You dominated! I do not like 
you!" 

Welcome got up, grateful for 
the expanse of desk between him 
and the newcomer. "What's the 
matter, Dominator Thevorakz?" 
He tried hard to keep his voice 
level. 

"I thpit my cud on you!" roared Thevorakz. "I foul your floor! 
I go home to Thiriuth and come 
back with an army!" 

Christine squeaked in the doorway and sprang aside for the 
envoy from Vega VII. The 
gleaming six-foot sphere rolled 
slowly in on its wheels, laying a 
mechanical hand on Thevorakz's 
rump, and the viewer swiveled 
toward Welcome. It looked uncomfortably like a gun. 

Inside, breathing hydrogen and 
ammonia at a pressure of incalculable atmospheres, the monster 
known only as George was staring 
at the human. His force-filled 
generator hummed in a sudden 
crackling silence; if it ever quit, 
the vehicle would blow up like 
a gigantic bomb and scatter the 
dome from here to Copernicus. 

It had been a long, difficult, 
and expensive proposition to contact the natives of New Jupiter 
and get one of them to make the 
trip, but living under such conditions, they had learned things 
about high-pressure chemistry 
which men had never imagined. 
They wanted atomic energy and 



control circuits in exchange. The 
first they had gotten from Sirius, 
the second they had intended to 
get from Earth. 
Only — 

WELCOME swallowed uneasily and put indignation into 
his voice. "May I ask the meaning of this intrusion? You know 
very well that I am in conference 
with the freeman from Arcturus." 

"That amorakz!" shouted the 
Sirian. "Dithmith him!" 

"Help!" wailed Rappapa. His 
robots formed a hollow square 
about him. 

"Calmness, please." George's 
Voder voice was flat. "I think, 
Freeman Welcome, you know 
very well why we have come." 
"No, I don't." 

"You do tho!" roared Thevorakz. 

"I shall detail the matter," 
said George. "The Sirian group 
and I reached a bargain, and I 
educated them as agreed. Naturally, there were many technical 
data which it would be pointless 
to memorize, formulas and constants and the like, and I gave 
them a book of tables. Those 
tables are the main thing of value 
which I had to offer, since the 
basic theory of high-pressure 
chemistry is already known to 
you and to Sirius. Dominator 
Thevorakz put this book in his 
strongbox last night. This morn


HORSE TRADER 



139 



ing the box was open and the 
book was gone." 

"You don't ■ — no!" gasped 
Christine. 

"I'm sorry to hear of this." 
Welcome forced calmness on 
himself. "The matter will be investigated at once." 

"By you!" bellowed Thevorakz. "And you are the mithbegotten dominated who thtole it!" 

Welcome lbosed a calculated 
anger. "You're insulting not only 
my personal integrity, but the 
honor of Earth. You have violated the sacred obligation of a 
guest to his host. I demand an 
immediate apology." He stalked 
forward, swinging his clenched 
fists at his sides. 

"I will help your excellency," 
quacked Rappapa. "Company 
forward! On the double! Huphup-hup-hup-hup!" The robots 
goosestepped after the man. 

Thevorakz suddenly looked 
worried. "If I am mithtaken, I 
will apologize," he mumbled sul'lenly. "But the book had better 
be found, and you had better 
prove you did not take it." 

Welcome turned to George, 
preferring the chill sanity of the 
monster. "Do you really think 
we'd stoop to theft?" 

"I have no opinion in the matter," said the toneless voice. "It 
would be to your advantage to 
steal Vega's knowledge and buy 
something else that we know; 

140 



thus you would have two technologies in exchange for one. 
However, the possibility remains 
that some .other of the parties 
rifled the box. Everyone knew j 
about it." 

"Or that the Sirians.did it. to i 
blackmail us," said Welcome 
gauntly. "Or that you did it yourself, George." < 

HE took an uneasy turn about 
the room, the tiny robots 
scampering to avoid his feet. J 
"I'm terribly sorry this has , 
happened," he said. "I'll get the i 
dome police on the case immediately. Meanwhile, I wish you 
would just return to your quar- 1 
ters. I'll notify you as soon as ; 
anything happens." 

"I will be waiting," said George, '•■ 
and rolled ponderously out of 
the office. Thevorakz snorted and 
stalked after him. Rappapa 
crawled out from under the desk. 

"A pretty mess!" Welcome realized that he was shaking. "Just 
what I need to start my job off 
right!" 

"I am with humble, firmness 
assured that your excellency will j 
on the instant penetrate the j 
depths of all dastardliness," said ' 
Rappapa. 

"Um, yes, thanks." Welcome 
looked sharply at the Arcturian. 
At least, I suppose I mean 
thanks. "Sorry you were bothered I 
this way, Freeman Rappapa. If j 

ALAXY SCIENCE FICTION j 



you don't mind, I'll be rather 
busy now — " 

"Of course. I shall not 
obtrude." Rappapa lifted his 
voice. "Compan-ee, ten-SHUN! 
Form ranks! Right face! Forwaard — MARCH! Hup-two-threefour, /iup-two-three-four, huptwo-three-four — " He marched 
out of the office trailing his army 
behind him. 

Christine leaned against the 
door and looked helplessly at 
Welcome. 

"Now what?" 

"Now we get to work. Get me 
Captain M'Gamba." 

WHEN the police chief's dark 
face was on the screen, Welcome explained the situation. 

M'Gamba frowned. "Bad business, huh?" 

"This is not a Good Thing," 
quoted Welcome. "You can see 
the spot we're in. If that book 
isn't recovered fast, we're going 
to lose face everywhere in the 
whole Galaxy. Earth will be 
branded as a planet of thieves 
and nobody will care to come 
here to do his Horse Trading. 
Sirius could take the lead away 
from us on that, and you know 
what an arrogant, opinionated lot 
they are. Nice people to have as 
the leading race of our new interstellar culture!" 

"Maybe they did this job 
themselves, just to discredit us?" 



"I wouldn't put it past 'em. 
But get busy, will you? You 
know the line- — be tactful, but 
just as firm as you dare. And, 
Captain M'Bamba, if we don't 
settle this affair quick, you and 
I are both going to be looking for 
new jobs." 

"And good jobs aren't easy to 
find these days. All right, Freeman Welcome, we'll blast off on 
it right away. I'll call you as soon 
as I have a report." 

Welcome gave Christine a haggard look. She ran a hand 
through her blue-black hair and 
regarded him sympathetically. 
"Tough luck, Auch." 

"For me or for Earth?" he 
asked bitterly. 

"You, mostly." Her eyes widened. "You don't think this could 
— lead to war, do you?" 

"Oh, no. The logistics of interstellar warfare and conquest are 
ridiculous. But it could lead to 
bad relations with our Galactic 
neighbors." Welcome knocked 
the dottle from his pipe and began recharging it. "And you 
know, Chris, this new culture developing with the null-null drive 
is an abstract thing, an exchange 
of information and sympathy, 
ideas, philosophies — abstracts, 
not tangibles. Ill feeling now 
could poison it at the source. I 
don't know. I just don't know." 

He stared moodily out at 
Earth. 



HORSE TRADER 



141 



M'GAMBA'S report came in a 
couple of hours later, and 
Welcome frowned as he fitted it 
into the pattern of knowledge he 
already had. 

There were a dozen adjoining 
suites on the fourth sub-level of 
the dome, adjustable ^to the conditions of other planets, and the 
same level held three large club= 
rooms for the use of guests. Currently, the apartments housed the 
envoys of five stars: Sirius, Vega, 
Arcturus, Procyon, and Alpha 
Centauri. All these groups had 
been on Luna for periods ranging 
from several days to three weeks, 
and had mingled freely in mutual 
curiosity. Last night the dome's 
chief, Carlos Petersen, had 
thrown one of his periodic parties for the guests, and all had 
attended. The Sirians had come 
home late and gone directly to 
sleep, not noticing that their, 
place was robbed until they woke 
up the next "morning." 

Whoever did the burglary had 
been confoundedly clever. There 
was an electronic lock, supposedly burglar-proof, on the outer 
door of the suite, wired to sound 
an alarm if anyone tried to break 
it. It had been opened with no 
trouble at all. The thief had entered, cut into the strongbox with 
an energy torch, taken the book, 
and walked out again, locking the 
door behind him. 

Welcome scowled. The tech


nique of fooling an electronic lock 
was something beyond the science 
of Earth. 

Of course, Thevorakz himself, 
or one of his underlings, might 
have raided the box and hidden 
tflfe book. 

"The torch could have been 
taken from any of the workshops 
on the fifth sub-level," said 
M'Gamba over the screen. 
"They're open all the time, you 
know, for the use of anyone who 
has to build a model or something. 
The thief need only have taken 
the torch, used it, and returned 
it when nobody was around. But 
what gadget did he have to unlock that door?" 

"A key, maybe," suggested 
Welcome. 

"But Thevorakz has the only 
key to it, except for Petersen's." 

"I know. How about the suspects?" 

"Well, the company was wandering in; and out of the clubrooms all the while the party 
went on; and everybody was 
pretty looped, too, except that 
George creature. In short, nobody 
we've talked to can swear that 
any other being was there all 
evening." 

"Hm-hm. Have you searched 
for the book?" 

"We're still looking. We've requested permission to search all 
the apartments of our guests. So 
far, only the Arcturians have 



142 




 



waived diplomatic immunity and 
invited us to do so." 

"Weli, keep plugging, Captain, 
and let me know what turns up." 

"Will do." 

A FEW minutes later, Carlos 
Petersen was on the screen, 
demanding to know what the 
trouble was. Welcome sighed and 
broke the news as gently as possible. 

"Oh, Lord!" said Petersen. 

"And little blue devils," agreed 
the Australian. 

"I'd have your seat in a sling 
this moment, Welcome, if it 
weren't that I have to go to Earth 
immediately," said Petersen. "I'll 
be gone a couple of days. When 
I come back, I'll expect to see 
this mess straightened out." 

"We'll try." Welcome was feeling too harried by now to care 
for manners. But the fact that he 
wouldn't have Petersen breathing 
down his neck was a minor mercy. "M'Gamba's a good man." 

"He'd better be. I like you, 
Welcome, and think you were 
the right choice for your job. But 
this can develop into something 
too big and nasty for ethics to 
count. If it shows signs of doing 
so, Earth is going to need a 
scapegoat and you may very 
well be it." Petersen grimaced. 
"If they don't pick me, instead — 
or both of us." He glanced at his 
wrist chrono. "Got to run now. 



Earth rocket leaves in ten minutes." 

"Have fun," said Welcome 
moodily. 

He paced once around the office, and threw himself into his 
chair. For a minute he exercised 
the more picturesque parts of his 
vocabulary. 

The intercom interrupted him: 
"The envoy Orazuni of Inyahuna, planet Procyon A III, to 
see you, Freeman Welcome." 

The man blinked. "Oh, yes. He 
did have an appointment, didn't 
he? Send him in, please." 

He stood up, composing himself as the Procyonite entered. 

ORAZUNI looked rather like 
someone's idea of a medieval 
demon. His slim graceful body 
sloped forward, stalking on clawed feet and counterbalanced by 
the long thick tail. The six-fingered hands were also clawed, and 
the pointed ears were almost 
winglike in their size. But the 
head, though bald, was handsome 
by human standards, in a highcheeked, sharp-chinned, flatnosed way, and the golden eyes 
were large and luminous and 
beautiful. He wore a light tunic 
and a brilliant scarlet cloak, and 
carried a portfolio under one arm. 

"Good day, Freeman Welcome," -he said, bowing. He had 
taken better to the hypnopedic 
teaching of English than most 



HORSE TRADER 



143 



non-humans, his accent being a 
nearly perfect Bostonian. "I trust 
you are in good health and 
spirits?" 

"More or less," said Welcome 
wryly. He liked the Procyonite, 
despite the sharp battle of wits 
which had been going on between 
them for days now. "And yourself?" 

"Quite well, thank you." Orazuni sat down on his tail, bracing 
himself with his rigidly straight 
legs, and accepted the proffered 
cigar. "There seems to have been 
an unfortunate incident last 
night." 

"Yes, rather. Have you any 
notion — ?" 

Orazuni shrugged delicately. 
"One prefers not to become involved in such matters. I would 
not throw baseless accusations 
about. My group has, however, 
decided to show good faith by 
permitting the searching of our 
quarters. I shall so notify the police." 

"Thank you. The more cooperation we get, the sooner we'll be 
able to clear this up." Welcome 
grinned. "I wish you were as easy 
to deal with in the line of business, Freeman Orazuni." 

"I regret the impression," 
smiled Orazuni, "but I have my 
own planet to think of." He opened the portfolio and took out a 
sheet covered with an elaborate 
diagram. "Here, sir, is the struc


tural formula — on a genetic rather than a chemical basis — of the 
human X chromosome, as determined by our technicians since we 
arrived on Luna. We have found 
conclusively that the tendency to 
certain types of cancer in your 
race — mammary, for instance — 
is linked here and here." He indicated a point where several 
lines diverged. That was a cluster 
of formulas in the alphabet of 
Inyahuna. "By proper treatment, 
it should be possible to modify 
the linkage without otherwise altering heredity in the zygote. The 
long-range prospect is the total 
elimination of any possibility of 
cancer from the heredity of your 
race." 

WELCOME nodded, unsurprised. What he wanted was 
the knowledge of theoretical and 
applied genetics which made such 
studies possible in the first place. 

Biological engineering — designing any life-form whatsoever, and 
creating it by controlled mutation! Perhaps Man himself becoming superman — at the very 
least, losing the inherited weaknesses which dragged him down 
and shadowed his life and ultimately killed him. This could 
mean more than the scientific 
revolution that began with Galileo had yet offered. 

Only it hardly seemed fair of 
the Inyahunans to demand every 


144 




 



thing Earth knew in exchange. 
They were welcome to the nullnull drive, the energy converter, 
and the magnetronic tube. When 
they also asked for instruction in 
such things as mathematical sociology, supercomputer theory 
and practice and industrial catalysis, it was going too far. Their 
culture didn't need all that information. They could only want 
it for purposes of selling to someone else — underselling Earth, 
maybe. Welcome and Orazuni 
had been bargaining for a whole 
week now. 

"We'd have to send a goodsized technical mission to Procyon to teach you all this," said the 
Australian. "It would be hard to 
find enough top-rank men in all 
those fields who'd want to be 
gone so many years on an alien 
planet; we'd have to pay them 
fantastic salaries. And the equipment they'd need! Really, Freeman Orazuni, you must be reasonable. I think I could add a 
course in advanced metal crystallography to what I've already offered you. That would help you 
with a good many construction 
problems. But then, naturally, 
we'd want you to give us your 
chemical-probe technique in return." 

"In addition to the genetic 
theory and the tables of constants?" protested Orazuni. "Do 
you wish to ruin us, Freeman 



Welcome? What will our poor 
race be able to trade for further 
information?" 

"Your own biological technology. You can't have worked out 
genetics as thoroughly as you 
have without a good background 
in biochemistry, histology, and 
I don't know what else." The human put the tips of his' fingers 
together and peered over the 
bridge they formed. "After all, 
we do have some good biologists 
on Earth, too, you know. We 
could work all this out for ourselves in time. The very knowledge that such things are possible is a long step forward." 

"As for that," shrugged Orazuni gracefully, "we could send 
students to Earth who could consult your books and journals — " 

"It would be of limited value 
without the help of men who've 
had practical experience," said 
Welcome. "I'm afraid your people wouldn't even know what to 
look for." 

TTE left the rest of it unspoken, 
though it was plain to both 
of them: Now that the civilized 
planets had gotten on to the idea 
of Horse Trading, they weren't 
going to be particularly cooperative toward casual students from 
outside. It wasn't a question of 
censorship; an effective barrier 
was imposed by the fact that 
there was no material trade to 



HORSE TRADER 



145 



speak of between the stars. How 
could a visitor pay for his stay 
and education? He had to be 
financed by his hosts. And he 
could only earn such a scholarship' as a reward for his planet's 
having offered a similar one to 
the other world. 

They bargained in a gentlemanly fashion for a while longer, 
Orazuni dipping into his portfolio from time to time — he never 
released it, and there were rumors 
that he slept with it — for some 
tantalizing sample of information. 
Welcome in turn threw out remarks concerning „the value of 
nuclear energy and high-strength 
alloys. The human found himself 
wishing that he knew more about 
Inyahuna's culture. They were 
a polite but reserved people — one 
might almost say secretive. 

It went well today, though. 
Orazuni seemed much more amenable than he had been yesterday, and at the close of the 
discussion there was almost complete agreement. 

"I think we can wind this up 
tomorrow," said Welcome. "I repeat my offer of throwing in a 
course in quantum theory of resonance bonds as applied to alloys. Think it over." 

"I must discuss it with my 
group," replied Orazuni, "but I 
think they will consider the terms 
fair. Frankly, I would like to return soon with my wives. Our 



children will be nearly grown by 
the time we get home. If you 
would make arrangements to 
have the Messenger depart in a 
week or so — " 

"Well, all right." Welcome balanced the factors in his mind. 
He'd have to round up all the instructors and other experts he 
had on tap to go to Procyon, 
alert the ship's people, arrange 
clearance. But a week should be 
enough. The other Inyahunans 
would remain to take posts at one 
of Earth's universities. "Wouldn't 
you like to visit around in the 
Solar System for a few months 
first, though? It seems a shame 
for you to come all this way 
without seeing much more than 
Luna." 

"No, thank you. My people are 
not given to tourism." Orazuni 
got up to go. "Oh, by the way, if 
you will pardon my returning to 
a painful subject — I am curious. 
What is so unusual about this 
robbery, apart from the circumstances?" 

"Well, the fact that an electronic lock was opened. It's not 
supposed to be possible without a 
key." As Orazuni arched his hairless brows, Welcome explained: 
"The lock has no keyhole. It's 
held by a magnetronic field 
clamping two plates together 
with a force of several thousand 
tons, the field being generated by 
the circulation of an electronic 



146 




 



current in several Cheval tubes. 
The whole thing is also wired in 
to an alarm circuit which goes 
off at any attempt to tamper. 
The key is actually a self -powered tube creating a heterodyning 
field. Since a literal infinity of 
wave-combinations is possible, 
there should be no chance of 
anyone's Using a variable key to 
fumble the lock open." 

"I see. I thought it was something on that order." Orazuni 
nodded and stroked his chin. "Do 
you know, if the crime was not 
committed by the Sirians themselves — or, if you will pardon me, 
by a human — then it seems logical that the guilty party should 
have a very advanced knowledge 
of electronics." 

"I'd say so." 

"Cybernetics?" murmured Orazuni. He bowed. "Well, I will not 
intrude further on your time. 
Good day, Freeman Welcome." 

He left. 

When he was gone, the human 
stood thinking for a long while. 
Small complicated circuits — Arcturus? Rappapa seemed like a 
pleasant little chap, but you never knew. 

He sighed and looked out the 
window. The slow Lunar dawn 
was breaking incandescently over 
the jagged airless horizon and 
blazing into his eyes. 

"Nice day," he muttered bitterly. 



M'GAMBA called up a few 
minutes later. "We found 
the book," he said. 

"Eh?" Welcome's long body 
jerked forward. 

"Lying in a corner of Shop 
Number Seven. Anybody could 
have left it there. We gave it 
back to the Sirians, but they 
weren't very polite about it." 

Welcome shrugged. "I don't 
blame them. Obviously the thief 
took photomicrographs of the 
book and got rid of the thing itself away after he was done with 
it. Now all we have to find is a 
packet consisting of a few oneinch-square films. Hell, he could 
have swallowed 'em." 

"And grabbed himself a whole 
technology without paying Vega 
for it. 4 guess George is hopping 
mad too, though you can't tell. 
He gives me the crawlies." 

"The devil with that. We've got 
to find the burglar to clear ourselves. Been through the apartments?" 

"All but the Sirians and George. 
The Sirians wouldn't hear of it, 
and it'd be impossible to make a 
decent search in a place "conditioned to New Jupiter. Nothing. 
Not a thing." 

Welcome bit his lip, then blurted out his suspicions of Arcturus. 

The police captain nodded. 
"Sounds pretty reasonable." 
„ "I took Rappapa for 3 dinkum 
cobber, but — well, we can't trust 



HORSE TRADER 



147 



anybody, can we? Rig some 
traps. Try to fluoro him and his 
bunch without their knowing it. 
Go through their suite again with 
an electronic probe. Try anything." 

"All jets," said M'Gamba 
glumly, and clicked off. 

The intercom buzzed. "The envoy Helmung dur Brogu-Almerik, planet Alpha Centauri A III, 
to see you, Freeman Welcome," 
said Christine in a mechanical 
voice. 

"On top of everything else," 
groaned the Australian. "All 
right, send him in." 

THE door flew open. A ninefoot giant stamped in, thumping the butt of his spear on the 
floor, his chain mail jangling and 
his sword clanking. He was fairly 
humanoid, except for a blue skin, 
a tail, and antennae above his 
small slant eyes, but the battered 
face was tattooed in a ferocious 
pattern of red and yellow. If it 
hadn't been for several exploration parties from Earth, which 
had maintained a more or less 
permanent liaison with the clan 
chief of Brogu, this visit — or visitation — would never have happened. But the barbarians had 
heard news of the Horse Traders 
and insisted on getting into the 
game, and in the interests of 
peace the last expedition had 
brought this delegate back. And 



sloughed him off on me! thought 
Welcome with resentment. 

"How do you do, Freeman Helmung?" The Earthman said very 
softly. The Centaurian's head 
looked immensely high above 
him. 

"Quiet, I will speak!" The 
walls rattled. 

"Just as you wish." Welcome 
extended the customary box of 
cigars. Health hadn't reported 
this race as allergic to tobacco, 
but he hoped maliciously that 
Helmung would be. 

The giant grabbed a handful, 
popped them into his mouth, and 
chewed noisily. "Not bad," he 
said, sprawling into a chair. He 
swallowed, spat on the floor, and 
cocked his spurred feet up on the 
desk. "I am Helmung dur BroguAlmerik. Look on me and be 
afraid." It seemed a ritual greeting, for he added in a more 
friendly tone: "You may call me 
Skull-smasher." 

"Ah, yes, to be sure." Welcome sat down on the other side 
of the desk. "I trust you have 
been enjoying your stay?" 

"Not enough fights. No females 
big enough. That Orazuni, he is 
good sort and gives me much 
drink, otherwise you can hialamar 
them all." Welcome did not inquire what it was to hialamar, 
though he could make a shrewd 
guess. "I am great sorcerer. I 
have much vingutyr." 



148 




 



"You have much everything," 
agreed Welcome hastily. 

"Vingutyr is — is what I have 
much of. That is why I am great 
sorcerer." The gravelly bass 
paused for a thunderous belch. 
"I shall show you how to wish 
your enemies dead. You shall 
show me how make ships-thatfly. Then we shall sack many 
worlds." 

"Well, really, I say now — " 
Welcome had a sudden sense of 
futility. "There just isn't much 
witchcraft on Earth these days." 

"I k new you was backward 
peoples!" cried Helmung triumphantly. "Look, dance of death, 
begins this way." He jumped tip, 
waving his spear, and began to 
prance around, chanting. 

"Isn't there something about 
making a doll and sticking pins 
in it?" asked Welcome weakly. 

"Old-fashioned. Brogu is modern peoples. My father, top witch 
in Almerik, study from Earthmen. Learn about laws of science. 
He go on to figure laws of witchcraft." Helmung ticked off the 
points on his fingers, and Welcome realized that he must, after 
all, be his race's equivalent of an 
intellectual. "Law of likes-makelikes. Law of luck. Law of — " 

"Now hold on, please do." 

WELCOME riffled through 
his papers till he found the 
memo on Alpha Centauri sub


mitted by the preliminary investigators, which, in the 
madhouse today, he hadn't had 
time to read. Confound it, the 
barbarian must have something 
worth the time of a division chief! 
He skimmed rapidly down the 
sheet and stopped at a paragraph 
referring to a limited degree of 
telekinesis as a congenital talent. 
The. phenomenon was almost nonexistent among humans, and the 
parapsychology boys wanted 
Helmung humored so they could 
study him in detail. 

Welcome thought of the Centaurian tossing boulders through 
the air by pure will-power, and 
shuddered. j 

"I understand," he began cautiously, "that you can move 
things merely by wishing them 
to move." 

"Well, little things," said Helmung deprecatingly. "Not very 
big. Powerful wish-mover back 
home was showed game called 
dice by Earthmen. He won much 
treasure from them. But he had 
be much powerful to move dice." 

"I see." 

Welcome suppressed an impulse to mop his brow. He wasn't 
very well briefed on modern parapsych theory, but he remembered vaguely that telekinesis 
was attributed to a linkage between the neural field and the 
local sub-electronic fluxes. If that 
was so, you wouldn't expect the 



HORSE TRADER 



149 



nervous system to have enough 
energy output to lift anything 
massive. Still, it would be interesting to watch. 

"Do you mind if I try you?" 
he asked. "I've never seen this 
before." 

"Is little thing," said Helmung 
scornfully. "Why not ask me 
wish-kill somebody for you?" 

"Some other time," said Welcome. He went over to a cabinet 
in which he kept testing equipment and took out an ,oscilloscope. When he had a steady sine 
wave on it, he gestured with one 
hand. "Can you change that wiggly shape there?" he asked. 

"Easy," grunted Helmung. 
"Orazuni told me about little 
things, too small to see." 

"Yes. As a biologist, he'd naturally be interested in TK, too. 
Never mind, go ahead, if you 
please." 

HELMUNG scowled in concentration. The electron trace 
jerked wildly, slithered across the 
screen, and began shaping itself 
into obscene drawings. Welcome 
i hastily shut off the scope. 

"That's fine," he said. "That's 
just beautiful." 

Helmung rubbed his hands 
with a businesslike air. "Now 
how you build ships-that-fly?" 

"I don't think you would be 
really interested in that," said 
Welcome as tactfully as possible. 



Helmung's tail lashed against 
his ankles. He leaned across the 
desk, grabbed the human by the 
scruff of the neck, lifted him up, 
and shook him. 

"So Brogu witchcraft not good 
enough for you, hah?" 

"Yowp!" Welcome was near 
choking when Helmung set him 
down. 

"I am patient man," rumbled 
the barbarian, "but you show me 
how build ships, or — " 

"Now look, Skull-smasher," 
said Welcome shakily. "Really, 
I'd like to, you know, but I'm not 
the boss here. I can't tell. you myself. You see — uh — well, on Earth 
our witches still believe in the 
dolls- ahd-pins theory. Also, to 
build spaceships you'd need tools 
you don't have, even if you knew 
how. Why don't you think it 
over for a while? We could show 
you lots of other things. For instance, you know what an alloy 
is? Well, we can tell you how to 
make better alloys than you now 
have. Unbreakable swords and 
so on. Why not start with that 
and work up?" 

"Might be," grumbled Helmung, taking a thoughtful bite 
off another cigar. 

"Oh, and ways to brew firewater, perhaps," added Welcome. 

He winked, and Helmung guffawed, and presently the interview ended in a spirit of good 
fellowship. When the broad mail


150 




 



ed back had gone out the door, 
Welcome made a dash for a 
three-starred bottle. 

He thumbed the intercom 
switch. 

"Come on in Chris," he said. "I 
think we both need a drink." 

TWO hours later, Welcome was 
pretty sure he had tracked 
down the thief. 

The time had been "devoted to 
hard thinking and to study of the 
files on the four possible planets, 
sent up from the Division of Biopoliticology. Four planets, because you could eliminate Helmung immediately, and Welcome 
was sure enough of his own staff 
to feel certain that no human, 
even in a fit of greed or planetarism, had snaffled the book. Furthermore, you had to bear in mind 
that none of the delegates could 
have known in advance that a 
theft would be possible. They 
could not have made elaborate 
preparations beforehand for the 
job, but must have used whatever 
means were available to them, 
more or less on impulse. That 
argued for the burglar's having 
the technology to pick an electronic lock even if he had never 
seen one before. 

That also ruled out Procyon at 
once. Enough was known of their 
science to make it quite certain 
that they lagged behind Earth in 
such matters as control circuits. 



Vega — you couldn't be sure just 
what George ,did or did not have 
at his disposal, but the fact that 
he had come here in the first place 
to get some of mankind's electronic and magnetronic knowledge pretty well proved that he 
couldn't have done the crime. 
Why should he steal his own 
book, anyway? New Jupiter 
wasn't much interested in interstellar intercourse or in setting 
up its own Horse Traders. 

It was also a safe bet that Sirius 
did not know how to open the 
lock without a key. To be sure, 
Thevorakz did have such an instrument, and he might well have 
faked the crime to discredit Earth 
in the eyes of other races. But 
the psychology reports, while not 
conclusive, did make that line of 
thought seem improbable. The 
Dominators weren't that subtle. 

By elimination — Arcturus. 

Welcome sighed and called 
M'Gamba's office. "Anything 
new?" 

"We're working along," said 
the policeman. "We've had every 
human who was on the fourth 
sub-level last night, at the party 
or on duty elsewhere, under deep 
hypnosis — total recall. By piecing 
together all their accounts, we've 
shown that every member of the 
Procyonite and the Arcturian delegations was seen by somebody 
all the time until the party broke 
up and the Sirians went home. 



HORSE TRADER 



151 



In other words, there's not a 
chance that any of them could 
have done it. There are blank 
spots as far as the rest are concerned, though." 

"Arcturus, eh?" Welcome 
frowned. "Do you have anything 
else on them?" 

"Well, we have been snapping 
fluoros at the Arcturian ducks on 
the sly, as you suggested. You 
know those little pouches they 
wear around their necks, to carry 
things in? One of their party — 
Srnapopoi, the name is — is carrying around a packet of microfilms. But it can't be the film, 
can it?" 

"Can't it?" Welcome showed 
his teeth in a humorless grin. 
"Look, Captain, a circuit technology as highly developed as 
theirs should be able to crack the 
electronic lock." 

"I tell you, they were under 
observation all evening!" 

"But were their robots?" 

M'Gamba paused. "Never 
thought of that." 

"Well, it seems plausible, 
doesn't it? Trouble is, this is a 
delicate matter. We can't just 
arrest them on suspicion; we'll 
need mighty good proof." 

M'GAMBA rubbed his chin. 
"I think a look at this Arcturian's neck pouch could be arranged. He's down in the shop 
now, working up a demonstra


tion model. I'll have one of my 
skilled operators go down and 
talk to him and — ah — accidentally cut the thongs of the pouch 
with a beam-slicer. Cut the pouch 
itself open, too. The contents will 
spill out and-^" 

"It's your problem. Just make 
sure you have a cover-up in case 
he turns out not to be carrying 
the stuff, after all. Call me as 
soon as you know, will you?" 
Welcome clicked off and sat for 
a moody while, considering his 
own next move. Finally he sighed 
and called Christine. "Get hold 
of Rappapa and have him come 
here, please. Diplomatically, of 
course." 

"Auch, you don't think — " 

"I'm afraid I do." 

Welcome stuffed his pipe and 
looked out at the savage dawnglare. Damn and blast, how did 
you accuse an accredited envoy 
of theft, especially when you 
liked him? 

Rappapa came bustling in accompanied by no more than a 
midget helicopter. 

"Twice in one arbitrary diurnal 
period?" he quacked. "Believe 
me, your excellency, I am flattered by such hyper-attention on 
the part of your doubtless busywith - vast - problems - of - interstel lar-negotiations self." 

"I need your help," said the 
human awkwardly. "Would you 
like a cigar?" 



152 




 



"Gratitude erupts from me," 
said Rappapa. "If there is even 
of-the-most-micrometric way I 
can assist in — " 

"It's this business of the theft." 
Welcome drew heavily on his 
pipe. "It puts my whole planet 
in a deucedly bad light. We have 
to catch the burglar to save our 
own reputation. At the same time, 
he is somebody's diplomat, which 
could lead to an unholy row if 
we arrested him." 

"Anyone who would ponder the 
violation of your excellency's so 
lavish hospitality should be dedignified," said Rappapa indignantly. 

IT'S not that simple, I'm 
afraid," Welcome explained. 
"His planet would react with a 
great show of injury, one harsh 
word would lead to another, the 
seeds of mutual suspicion would 
be sown. Don't you think, Freeman Rappapa, it would be best 
for the thief's own planet, too, if 
he merely surrendered his loot? 
Then no one need ever know what 
has happened. The whole thing 
could be discreetly hushed up 
and forgotten." 

"First the much -to -be -pondered question of locating the 
pilferish ambassador arises," said 
Rappapa. "Does your excellency 
the assistance of my abject self 
in such detection work desire?" 
So he's going to stall, after all. 



"If the thief confessed," said 
Welcome desperately, "I would 
understand that he committed 
the act only from the highest 
motives of planetarism. I would 
not look down on him for it, or 
discriminate against him in any 
way." 

Rappapa waved his cigar reverently. "Behold the magnanimity of the magnanimous!" 

"If he doesn't confess, though, 
if we have to find him for ourselves, we may have to be rather 
stern about it afterward." 

"Of course. Your excellency 
burrows to the very foundation 
of justice." 

The visor buzzed. Here goes, 
thought Welcome. He clicked it 
on, and M'Gamba's features 
looked bleakly out at him. 

"Well?" 

"It worked," said the captain. 
"My agent got his hands on the 
films, shoved them under the 
nearest reader. They're the ones, 
sure enough." 

"And how about the — one who 
carried them?" 

"He insists he didn't know he 
had them. Says someone must 
have planted them on him. That 
wouldn't be hard to do, of course, 
so I haven't put him under formal arrest yet. What do you 
suggest?" 

"I'll call you back." Welcome 
clicked off and turned to Rappapa. "Well, we've located our 



HORSE TRADER - 153 



thief. Finally," he said. 

"So I g-gathered." The Arcturian jittered about on the floor, 
stuttering in his excitement. "Who 
is it? Who is the low, vile, not-tobe-mentioned- without-expectoration creature?" 

"His name," said Welcome 
heavily, "is Srnapopoi." 

"Srna— " 

"Yes." 

"B-but — donnabi whichu krx 
killuwi — it is not of the possible! 
Believe me, excellent excellency, 
w-we are p-pure as distilled 
water!" Rappapa began trembling. 

"Your people should be able 
to figure out an electronic lock 
and have your robots pick it," 
said Welcome tonelessly. "And 
Srnapopoi was carrying the 
films." 

"Copies? Copies m-made by 
the th-thief to divert suspicion!" 

WELCOME came around 
from behind the desk. 
"Don't take it so hard," he said 
kindly. "If you like, we'll claim 
that Srnapopoi did it on his own 
initiative, without your knowledge. We'll hush it all up." 

"But he couldn't have !" wailed 
Rappapa. "The robots can only 
my orders obey!" 

Welcome leaned back against 
the desk, scowling. His pipe had 
gone out and he made an elaborate ritual of relighting it to hide 



his uneasiness. He had given 
Rappapa an out and the duck 
hadn't taken it. Nor would, you 
expect anyone cool enough to 
pull that job to blow his jets 
this way when discovered— or, for 
that matter, to hide his loot so 
clumsily, though of course there 
was no accounting for non-human 
psychology. 

Rappapa began to cry. "W«" 
are besmirched with accusations 
and have lost confidence. You 
think I am a not-fit-to-wipe-thefeet-on-egg-eater. What will my 
nestmates say?" 

"Now, after all—" 

"They will say, 'Twiutiuk poipoi tu spung Rappapa.' " 

Welcome scratched his head 
helplessly. "All right, all right, 
you didn't do it. You've been the 
victim of a fraud. But then who 
is guilty?" 

Rappapa rubbed the tears from 
his bulging eyes. "It is necessary 
to protect the Kwillitchian self 
by the true monster finding," he 
said with some return of his old 
perkiness. "Will you give me out 
of your polychromatic mercy a 
chance?" 

"Certainly. Because if you're 
not guilty, then we've still got to 
find the one who is." Welcome 
sat down on a corner of the desk. 
Inwardly, he groaned at the 
thought of starting over again, 
just when he had thought the 
business was settled — but, damn 




 



it, you couldn't simply call an 
official delegate a liar, however 
much you might want- to. "Let 
us assume that you did not do it. 
That leaves two possibilities, 
Sirius and Vega." 

"Would you from the scintillant heights of intellect descend 
to explain the omission of Procyon and Alpha Centauri?" 

"Well, the Centaurian is obvious. He's too stupid even to 
think of such a job. And Orazuni 
and his people were never out of 
sight of a human last night." 
Fairness forced Welcome to admit: "Neither were you Arcturians, for that matter. But you had 
the robots." 

"Could not Orazuni have had 
hidden-away robots?" 

"Not with his technical background. They're biologists, biochemists, not electronicians, except on an elementary level. 
Unless Orazuni stole the key, 
which he did not, he just had no 
means of opening that lock." 

"That leaves only some elaborate and improbable-on-the-faceof-it plot by Sirius or Vega." 

"And I don't think it could 
have been Vega. They're backward in electronics. With the 
atmospheric pressure of New 
Jupiter, they never even developed a vacuum tube. And as for 
Sirius — " 

"No, wait! Robot delegate sent 
to do foul deeds while the weaver 



of intricate plots sits at his ease 
in public view." Rappapa's eyes 
bulged until they seemed in danger of falling out. 

Welcome looked at him, and 
he looked at Welcome. 

"Killuweetchungu!" squawked 
Rappapa. "Let us go!" 

"Hold on. We have to think 
this out." 

"No time to think! Come!" 

RAPPAPA bounded from the 
office. Welcome cursed and 
charged after him. If that impulsive featherhead accused the 
wrong being — 

Christine saw four feet of 
squawking Arcturian, followed by 
six feet of cursing human, followed by seven inches of valiantly laboring helicopter, shoot 
through her office. She got up and 
raced after them. The receptionist 
saw the parade go by and excitedly joined it. A passing janitor 
saw them streaking through the 
hall and took out after the receptionist. 

Rappapa went down the ramp 
to the fourth sub-level, screeching and whistling. Thevorakz 
came out of his quarters to see 
what the fuss was about, just in 
time for Rappapa to unbalance 
him by darting under his legs, 
Welcome to bowl him over, and 
Christine, the receptionist, the 
janitor, and a few odd specimens 
picked up along the way to 



HORSE TRADER 



155 



trample across him. As he rose, 
howling his fury, the helicopter 
collided with his head. He snarled 
and galloped after the rest. 

"Where is the Centaurian?" 
clacked Rappapa at George, who 
was rolling down the corridor. 
"Where is he lurking?" 

"In the clubroom," said the 
Vegan, pointing. 

Rappapa vaulted the metal 
shell. Welcome and Christine 
leapfrogged over him. The others 
drew up, until Thevorakz took a 
flying broad jump above the 



whole group. George stared after 
them, shrugged, and rolled imperturbably on his way. 

The clubroom was almost deserted: a stray Arcturian was 
reading a murder mystery, Helmung was draped over the bar 
clutching a bottle, and Orazuni 
sat chatting with the warrior. 

"There they are!" yammered 
Rappapa. "There abide the overly diabolical thieves!" 

"Shut up, you bloody fool — " 
Welcome tripped on a chair and 
went flat on the floor. When he 



crawled up, Rappapa was grabbing Helmung by the baldric and 
chattering a stream of questions. 

"What is, little one?" rumbled 
the barbarian. "And why?" 

"We want to know how much 
Orazuni offered you to turn 
thief!" 

"I?" Orazuni smiled tolerantly. 
"Our colleague seems a trifle excited, Freeman Welcome." 

THEVORAKZ clumped up to 
the bar, brushing assorted 
humans aside. 



"I demand an apology!" he 
roared. "I did not come nine 
light-yearth to be walked on!" 

"Let me go," growled Helmung 
uneasily. He batted Rappapa 
away. 

"Help!" squealed the Arcturian. 
"Com-pan-ee — HELP !" 

"Really, now," said Orazuni 
reproachfully, "I must say this 
is a most undignified scene." _ 

"Will you apologize to me?" 
bellowed Thevorakz. 

"I go my place," said Helmung. 
"Do not follow." He shoved his 



way through the crowd. 

"Stop, thief!"- yelled Rappapa. 
His robots marched in the door. 
"The Centaurian!" he added. 

"Now, see here — " began Orazuni. 

"Stop him, too!" cried Rappapa. "He the films has!" 

"I shall also demand an apology," said the Procyonite with 
stiff dignity. 

Thevorakz reached out and 
gathered in a handful of his cloak. 
"Maybe you better wait a little," 
he said. 

Helmung had just noticed the 
robots deploying before him. 

"I see little men!" he gasped. 
He waved his arms and started an 
incantation. 

A detachment of robots 
swarmed up some curtains, took 
them down, and began to hobble 
the Centaurian with them. Helmung looked suddenly crushed. 

"My witchcraft not works here 
on Luna," he mumbled. "I want 
go home." 

Welcome decided it was time 
for him to do something. 

"Helmung," he asked, "did you 
open the door to the Sirian quarters for Orazuni?" 

"I promise him I not tell anyone that," said Helmung in a 
self-righteous voice. "You torture 
me, do anything, I not confess I 
was one who open door." 

Suddenly Orazuni broke into a 
laugh. 



"Never mind," he said. "Here 
is the other copy of the book." 
He fished in his portfolio and 
tossed a packet over to Welcome. 
"And now, freemen, if you will 
excuse me — " 

Thevorakz's bellow cut through 
a sudden quiet. "When do 1 get 
my apology?" 

"TT should have been obvious, 
-■- I suppose," said Welcome to 
Christine and M'Gamba. "That 
attempt to frame the Afcturians 
by making an extra copy of the 
book and planting it on one of 
them couldn't have thrown us off 
very long. But Orazuni only 
needed to have us baying along 
his false trail for a few days; then 
he'd be safely on his way home, 
bearing the films. We did know, 
though, that he had been cultivating Helmung's friendship ever 
since he learned that the Centaurians are telekinetic. His interest was scientific to start with, 
but it soon occurred to him that 
if Helmung could control electron 
streams easily enough to make 
pictures on an oscilloscope, he 
could surely open an electronic 
lock. And the Vegan data is valuable." 

"Did he hope to get more out 
of it than just the tables themselves?" asked M'Gamba. 

"Yes. I was talking to him just 
now, and he was quite frank and 
cheerful. Procyon has entertained 



158 




 



notions of taking the job of Horse 
Trading — ultimately the scientific leadership in all respects — away from Earth. This theft 
would not only have discredited 
us, but given them a nice chunk 
of # knowledge to trade with, besides what they learned from us 
through legitimate channels. Orazuni got Helmung to steal the 
book from him by the bribe of a 
love potion-#A hormone mixture 
adapted to Centaurian biochemistry. Helmung's received that 
payment, by the way, and is 
eager to get home and try it out; 
so that's one more nuisance off 
our necks." 

"And what are we going to do 
about Orazuni?" asked Christine 
worriedly. 

Welcome shrugged. "Keep an 
eye on him. What else can we do? 
We need the knowledge and the 
good will of his planet. We'll go 



on just as if nothing had happened. Horse Traders can't be 
very prim, you know." 

HE looked out the office window. The Sun was visible 
now, its blinding glare filtered to 
a soft radiance, and the sterile 
land of crags and craters had an 
eerie beauty over it. 

"Hard to believe this affair 
only took one working day," he 
said. "And what a day! Can we 
have some nice peaceful routine 
for a while, Chris?" 

"Not for long," she told him. 
"The Quest is due in from Tau 
Ceti soon. The previous expedition there reported the natives 
were quite anxious to learn from 
us and readying a delegation. I 
think their proudest achievement 
to date is an ingenious method of 
chipping flint." 