REBULRt 

science fictioii s 

Hi 





FOR READING THAT'S DIFFERENT 



THE BARRED SPIRAL ENIGMA 




Barred Spiral Nebula in Pegasus 



KENNETH JOHNS 

Our photograph this month of a barred spiral galaxy, NGC 7741 in ihe 
constellation of Pegasus, shows another of the mysterious objects that blaze 
with enigmatic fire in the deeps of intergalactic space. Looking down on 
the disc of the galaxy, the 200 inch Hate telescope brings out finely the 
central straight bar and the two trailing spiral arras, both thick with hot 
blue stars newly born from the interstellar hydrogen f these confused regions. 

This interstellar space is not nur interstellar space; we must cross a 
true " outer space " to reach this galaxy, and the minute voyage to the Moon, 
so ludicrously dubbed "outer space", dwindles to insignificance in face of 
'the journeys man will one day venture upon— journeys for which the routes 
are already charted. 

Galaxies come in many shapes and sizes, from featureless globes and 
ellipses to the swirling beauty of randomly moving star clouds of the irregular 
galaxies. Each one contains anywhere between 100 million and 100,000 
million stars, and there are 100 million such galaxies within range of the 
200 inch telescope. 

Hubble classified galaxies according to their shapes. Beginning with 
structureless globular galaxies, his classification went through the more and 
more elliptical examples and then split into- two paths, one showing normal 
spirals as their arms became further and further unwound. The other path 
traced out the barred spirals as their arms unwound from the nucleus. 

This sequence, beginning with a sphere of stars rotating and throwing 
out spiral arms which in time become dissipated in space leaving only an 
irregular cloud of gas, was taken by some astronomers to be the actual 
sequence in the life of galaxies. 

Continued on inside hack cover 



I1EBULR 

science FicTion 



UM tf PETER HAMILTON Muflltar Tkjrtf-lliH 



- ALL NEW STORIES NO REPRINTS 

Novelette : 

SUICIDE SQUAD Robert Pre$sl|e 74 

■" It ttw an ugly and hostik pfaxet promised wily 
■ ■ -X.?' - death to pmt—or * a life fuller and more JrwXful .■ 

Short Stories ,: 

INFECTION Philip E. High 3 

SURVE1 CORPSE Kenneth Bulmer 24 

THE WORLD HE LEFT BEHIND HIM Robert SUverberg 39 

THE RETURN Mark Patrick 57 

; THE LIEUTENANT Brian W. Aldiss 62 



Regular featufei;.; ^ 
Look Here 

Something To Read ... 

Bob Madle's American Letter 

; PwEW>rairfla'. -.. 
Guided Missives 



Peter Hamilton 2 

Kenneth Slater- 102 

Robert A. Madle 105 

, Walter Willis 107 

The Readers 109 



. ) * „* tl i McKsown Bade Caw by Arthur Thomson 

Blaek Utf Whits Hlustrttfsns by Arthur Thomson, John J. StMrim* anil EMU Jo«i 



NEBp^. Saen^S^jtion is publish^ iiioto^ HAMILTON 159 

.■'■;-'. : v''; : Editorial Afj^pss!'' 101 Gree^siad Str^t, : C3a^Off; S.E, "' 

is Maue»,.. (4,150, 1 j|8 ratm^tfree. Sola pstjffljotifjii rejfe &e , 'jtfjs»iiMaiaaNe*f Sesteid 

.. 'V:V '' : .<>%fo ■ 

. JHtofe mH^itUd fei C«WU :9* Co. Ltd, in the R^fwWie Irekmj & Piwk^ Prtofat ffbrfci Ktrigshridgi, 



Look Here 



1958; was a good year for science fiction. This statement may come as , 
something of **«Or§Base ?m ^-^*tte.f3m forebodings m mempsg^v j 
-articles, .and.seaHetiises siadee«&i& meilfcfeaaais ^ jsdeaee ^feaon magazines, 
that "space fiction " was outdated and would decidedly be out of the running : . 
before very long. ] 
a great deal of propcllant has flowed throuih the racket venturii ! 
since this melancholy outlook was in vogue, and it would seem that a little 1 
practical scientific achievement has shaken many of the doubting Thomases ; 
out of their former state of mind, and restored the sense of wonder of those v. 
who make their livelihood from the genre and who, incidentally, should : 
have known better than to doubt its ultimate correctness at all. 

In retrospect it is quite amusing to examine one or two of the " pronouncements " on scientific progress made prior to the advances of the last .] 
few months. Pronouncements, which if I am not very much mistaken, will J 
prove even funnier as time goes on. 

Before getting down to mote important matters, I must deal briefly ■ 
with the attitude of the "old guard " of British astronomers, and in particular | 
with that of our much quoted Astronomer Royal, At every opportunity |j 
these gentlemen have attempted to refute the possibility of space travel and ; 
the Existence of alien life forms. Indeed, so passionate has been their : 
refusal to permit even a modicum of progress or freedom of thought in 
their own special field, that their outlook, backed as it is by the hallmark of 
"knowledge" and officialdom, seems dangerously similar to that of those . 
other professors in a bygone age who announced with all the ponderous i 
logic of complete ignorance that man was never " meant " to fly. ") 

Many of the science fiction personalities to whom we have turned hopefully for solace, appear to have been but little more enlightened in their j 
outlook. In one newspaper article which was particularly brought to my j 
attention, a group of experts, interviewed in suitably demoralising surroundings, appeared literally to fall over one another in their eagerness to dis- < ; 
claim the legitimacy of the term "science fiction" when applied to their 
own personal efforts. This kind of thing may be all very amusing for the 
average reader of the Sunday newspaper in which it appeared, but can hardly : 
be said to do our form of literature (call it what you may) very much good. 

The atmosphere of defeatism which has been so very apparent in the 
writings of some of our most prominent science fiction editors and column- .' 
ists has also had an extremely depressing effect on the enthusiasm and fanspirit which so many readers feel towards 1 this type of writing, Not, let 
it be said, that this kind of pessimism has always been occasioned by a : 
marked failure on the part of the .writer involved to maintain his position t 
In the science fiction world. Quite often it seems merely to have been due" 
to the purely negative effect of his disappointment at the absence of any 
marked improvement in the popularity of his publication! 

It is my experience that an increase in the circulation of a magazine" 
is attained by positive action in the form of constantly attempting to publish 
better-stories, better covers and better features, to say nothing of occasionally introducing a fresher and more up-to-date editorial policy. Certainly, , 
popularity can never be brought about by a series of editorial complaints, 
which merely serve to discourage and alienate the average reader still 
further. ■■>_- * 

Continued on page 112 



PHILIP E. HIGH 



Infection 



What was the tunpus parall&l between life on Venus and 
a strange new illness which had come to plague it ? 



Illustrations by Arthur Thomson 



The three men walked unhurriedly down the lighted corridor, 
passed through a door marked Authorised Personnel Only and 
entered the launching shed. Their footsteps echoed hollowly on the 
floor and the whispering melancholy sound of the rain was clearly 
audible as it fell on roofs and walls. 

Looks like being a wet ride." Tacklin always made the same 
joke with almost reflex monotony as soon as he heard the rain. He 
didn't expect anyone to laugh and no one did. 

" Yeah, yeah." Marty was squinting at the borer as if seeing it 
for the first time. Somehow it never failed to impress him, the 
immense rounded shoulders of the thing, the blunt bronze-coloured 
nose unit. . . . With the four broad treads running over and round 
the vehicle, each flange scooped and gleaming, it made one think of 
a prehistoric monster with four wide collars of armoured spines. 

O'Brien, as usual, walked with his head down, hands thrust deep 
in his pockets, showing 'the bald patch on the top of his head. He 

3 



NEBULA 



was chewing steadily and, at the same time, trying to whistle through 
'his teeth. - / ; : . 

He paused at the entrance of the borer and said: " You feel 
something?" He staggered a little. "-.Could have sworn the ground 
moved— quake?" He clutched at the metal door, shook his head 
worriedly like a dog shaking off water,' and held his stotnaeh. " I 
don't feel so good, Marty, I don't feel so good." 

Marty aught him as the legs buckled and, the weakening fingers 
slipped from the door. 

Tacklin pressed the " Sick Alarm " and ran over. " He alright?" 

"I'm damned if he is. Completely out." 

" Sudden, wasn't it?" 

"Too sudden, looks like Venderin- to me." He pulled back the 
unconscious man's eyelids, frowning. 

Tacklin, peering over his shoulder, nodded quickly and Said: 
" Have to call the top, aU cases of Venderin are reported to the top 
now, especially when they're S.B.E's." He crossed to the wall and 
pressed a black button. " Suspected Venderin case, priority call to 
Director Rhinehart." 

Rhinehart was a big aloof man with a hard mouth and' mane of 
prematurely white' hair. "Yes?" 

" O'Brien's collapsed, Mr. Rhinehart We think it's Venderih 
fever." 

Rhinehart said: " Damn, got a substitute?" 
" Not on this field, sir." 

"Right, Fll call Eastern field and have one sent over/' He 
stretched out his hand to break contact and changed his mind. 
" Ambulance arrived?" , 

"Just here, sir." 
" Tell them not to ship him out to a sanatorium but to hold 
him at Medics; I'm going to call the Institute." He cut contact stnd 
called the operator. " Get me , the Venderin Pathological Institute," 

A tired looking, white haired Woman answered the call. "Yes?" 

" This is Marcus Rhinehart, General Sector Mining Company. 
I have one of my key men down with suspected Venderin. I want 
him transferred to -you for special treatment" . 
' The woman stared at him. " I'm afraid that is impossible, sir." 

" impossible] " It was a bark. " A man is sick. Am I to understand ym are refusing treatment?" 

She said i " Oh^God," tiredly then stjai^tenoi. " Mr. Rhinehart, cases of Venderih are occurring at the rate of four hundred a 



INFECTION 



5 




jay. Secondly, we are not a hospital, we ate an institute devoted to 

the biological side of the disease, further " ( 

■! , Rhinehart brushed her words aside with a gesture of impatience. 
" Put me through h> Doctor Fielding." 

"Doctor Fielding is in the laboratories and cannot be disturbed," she said, coldly. 

He said, in a harsh voice : " Must I repeat my request? I am 
Marcus Rbirijefcart', tjbe Marcus .Rhinehart. Inform Doctor Fielding 
of my call immediately, please." 

She wasj&ightened now, frightened by bis tone and by his reputation. She made helpless meffectual gestures with her hands. " Please, 
Mr. Rhinehar^ it's more than my job's worth— I'll do my best." 

He saw her make connections, saw her head bow towards the 
vocal panel and the message, stumblingly, repeated. 

" Tell him to go to iieU!" said a voice and the connection 
broke abruptly. 

Rrdnehaii selected a cigar from a box on Ms desk, placed, it 
carefully between his lips and dialled again; "Get me the Area 
•Governor . . 1 



6 



NEBULA 



Fielding paced angrily up and down, hands clasped behind his 
back. He was a small grey haired man with a pink face, tired blue 
eyes and an abrupt bird-like way of moving. 

Pressure, pressure, nothing changed, nothing, particularly human 
nature. Big men with whips, dictating their terms, imposing their 
claims at the expense of the community, at the expense of the individual. The Migration should have wiped them out, the sacrifice, the 
labour, the inspiration, but it hadn't, they'd sprung up again like 
weeds, perhaps worse than before. 

He stared angrily through the window at the everlasting rain. 
It was always raining, day after day, year after year. Yet the sickly 
mango-like vegetation drank it Up thirstily, thrived on it like a 
disease! Here, always, everything was a disease, everything preyed 
on everything else with unrelenting savagery. Parasite preyed Upon 
parasite, plant upon plant, fungus upon fungus. The ecologists had 
been pressed to find some form of life which was even as independent 
of another as the Earthly types and had failed. 

He stared up at the low cloud as if seeing it for the first time 
and a pea-snake came sliding over the glass, nriduhtung from side 
to side like a slowly nianinulated yellow rope. 

He rapped the window angrily, watching the creature break 
apart, a hundred scurrying discs running madly for safety. In a few 
minutes their panic would cease; they, would creep back, one by one, 
and re-form to become a snake again. Thousands of discs, 
joined together by hair-like tentacles— a yellow rope sliding over a 
curved, rain-washed window. He hated them without reason — they 
were almost harmless — but some were miles long and went on and 
on until you wanted to scream because they never seemed to end. 

He looked at the clouds again. Above, it was said, was the 
sun, but he had never seen the sun, nor, for that matter, had his 
father or even his father's father. No one, save the flyers, or space 
ship personnel, ever saw. the sun. Yet, history said, it had been a 
cornrnon sight on Earth — when there had been an Earth. _ 

The chimer on his desk brought an. abrupt end to his train of 
thought. " Yes?" 

"Marcus Fhinehart" announced me chimer. 

"Have him shown in" said Fielding, coldly. . 

"Good day, Doctor Fielding." Rhinehart bowed. He preferred to be correct rather than overbearing. Power, after all, was 
demonstrable and did not require' ;a prelude of bluster. 
Fielding nodded curtly. . u Gopd day, Mr. Rhinehart." His i 



INFECTION 



7 



own voice was equally controlled, "Please sit down. Drinks, 
cigarettes?" 

I have my owa brand of eigars> thank you " Rhinehart ;sat 
downs crossing-, his legs. " I must apologise' for myratner peremptory methods* but this particular case is one . of considerable 
urgency." 

"So," said Fielding, -coldly, " are the three and a half million 
patients depending on the efforts of this institute to produce an 
antidote." , 

Rhinehart flushed, angrily, but his voice when he spoke was still 
controlled and courteous. " I have taken the liberty of having my 
engineer moved here so that treatment may begin at once." 

" You also took the liberty of using political pressure to gain 
your ends, thus jeopardising the recovery of every patient on the 
planet" 

Rhinehart raised a deprecating hand. "Am I to understand 
that this Institute, and the hundreds of bio-technicians it employs, 
cannot function without you, Doctor Fielding?" 

It was Fielding's turn to flush angrily, realising that Rhinehart 
had beaten him in the first verbal skirmish. To say "yes" was 
not only - untrue but would brand him as a braggart. On the other 
hand, a denial Mt-him defenceless and, after this, the o&er, would 
probably have him replaced anyway. He sighed inwardly, suddenly 
weary and resigned. You worked, sweated, dedicated your life to an 
end, yet a man with power had only to snap his fingers! ... 

Rhinehart, conscious of his victory, smiled thinly but did not 
exploit his success. . " We are wasting time in petty bkkering j- my 
employee a very ill." . 

" Yes, I will see him at once. I am afraid we shall have to use 
one of the staff rooms as a sick ward; this is an institute not a 
hospital." 

He made a rapid examination of the sick man. Temperature 
was sub-normal, the pulse fast: and respiration light and rapid. Bloodtests confirmed' 'the, symptoms; there -vcas the characteristic cellular 
deterioration of Venderin infection. 

" A primary case — bad." 

" He'll live?" Rhinehart's face was expressionless. 

*' We'll do the best we can." Fielding turned abruptly to his 
assistants. -' O^rygehicubiele, type D interna* feeding, «utortranstoKffls^,asd^Ei^e-'-andr: bincie^ Jsjraak^ tix. be? givens- alternately i 
every three hours.'* He turned back to Rhmeharji his voice controlled. ^ Some close friend or relative?" 



8 



NEBULA 



:*">I know hirnby sight?' Rfainefaart. staled at hirh, challenging 
him to Comment ' . 
Fiekiing shrugged almost imperceptibly, led the way into the ' ; 
adjoinmg room bat did not commit himself. . 

Rhinehatt extracted a cigar from his case, Ht it unhurriedly, and 
looked at the other through the smoke. "O'Brien is a Specialist 
Borer Engineer.?' The magnate's voice mm detached. " He's as 
valuable as a Pilot AMrogator and rarer. S.B.Es are bom not 
made, and he is one of my best." He paused, absently studying the 
tip of his cigar. " In case you're unfamHiar with deep-strata milling 
techniques, ' borer vehkles are employed and borers mustbe discern" 
For the moment Rhioehart had forgotten his dislike- of the doctor 
and their earlier clash of opinions. Rhinehart was unscrupulous, a 
tycoon* but -mining was also his. business arid ihis. life. "Instruments: 
can detect mineral deposits but cannot accurately -assess their extent 
or quality. We have to send a borer to do the job properly and no 
amount of electronic gadgets seem to make the vehicle function as it 
should. Only an expert, an artist^ can handle those things and bring 
them tack m «^ : pece^hly « 

/ Marty emerged slowly from the orders office. "No change in 
plans." 

" Who's replacing O'Brien?" 

* Tyson." , 

"Tyson!" Tacklin lit a nervous cigarette. "Isn't he the man 
who took that tumble out East?" 

Marty said, expressionlessly: "He's the only spare to hind." 

"God." Tacklin exhaled smoke. "Not many get over a 
tumble; they say he's a shaker below fourteen." 

f< So are we aH inwardly," said Marty, harshly, "only we 
don't He stopped abruptly. " Here he comes." 

Tyson was a tall sallow man with a long horse^lifce face and a 
thin moustache streaked like, .» pencil mark across his upper lip. 
There was sweat, Marty noticed, on the high forehead already, w*k-y ' 
ing it shiny in the light and heightening the suggestion of nervousness. He was a shaker alright, thought Marty. The- rumours were 
true: Tyson's hysteria index would climb as -the borer went down. : ( 

" The borer's in the shed," volunteered Taekhn. " She's a new 
job with special atolite jacking between the shock walls, take anything in the way of heat or pressure:" ; 

Matty realised that Tacklin trying to be helpful, trying to .j 
make Tyson feel at home and among friends. He admired the j 



INFECTION 9 

I 

attempt but held little hope f« it j shakers- respomM to nothing until 
mey changed meir occupation, 

Tyson aoo&ed abruptly and nervously. "Good, good. Is sue 
rationed up and everything?" 

" Enough for ten days if we need it." . 

Again tie jerky nod. " Fine, fine." A glance at bis wrist watch. 
" Better get -sealed in. hadn't we? Don't Want to waste time, level 
eighteen is a long bore." 
A hell of a long bore thought Marty wearily, as he sealed the 
door of the borer. Too long, there ought to be a law against it or 
something. He shook himself inwardly; no use thinking about it; 
you could crack that way. Shut up tight in a til can with thirtyssven miles of earth and rock between you and the surface. Thirtyseven wiles, maybe mere;' he turned his thoughts abruptly to other 
matters before the sweat could begin to prickle the surface of his 
skin . . . 

"I should like to see your laboratories." Rhinehart's voice was 
still formal, still correct, yet with an inference of authority which 
was unmistakable. 

"Certainly, Mr. Rhinehart" Fielding's tone was polite but 
without servility. If the man thought he was going to crawl, beg for 
his job, he could think again. " Where would you like to begat?" 

" I would like to see how much you have learned about the 
complaint and, the progress you have made against it," 

Fielding nodded. "This way, please." He held open a sliding 
door. "This is the projection room; all we, have learned Can be fully 
demonstrated here." He snapped switches. " The two projections 
you are now seeing, show a comparison between a healthy cell and 
one infected by the virus. We assume it is a virus; it is Bon-filterable 
and sub-microscopic. Note the collapse of the infected cell, the 
shrunken appearance,' as if something bad eaten it from within." 

- "And the measures?" 

" We've had fair success with two types of inMiting serums, 
which slow the rate of cellular deterioration and permit the patient's 
body- to deve&p its own defences. In the last year, using these 
methods, we've cut the- mortality rate from 93 to 75." 

- *No direct cure-as yet?" - . , : > 

"We have an antibiotic which looks promising; tests on an 
infected cultare were quite stafdnjgi'' ■ . ,. ' 

" Yoa have produced this^i-^^substence?" 



10 



NEBULA 



"In small quantities bnly.,_. Tests take time and the remedy 
might be worse than the disease." 

Rhinehart nodded. "It might, but 'have you tried it to see, 
injected it into a patient?" 

" Good God, no." Fielding's voice was shocked. " It could be 
fatal without preliminary tests." : 

.Rhinehart stared me^ightrully at the proifc^d pictures. " In life 
one takes chances; it is the road to success." : . . 

" Are you presurrung to teach me . my .business?'' Fielding's 
voice was brittle with anger; 

"No." The. other's tone. was unexpectecUy mild. "Merely 
expressing a philosophy." He sighed. " Look, Fielding, you inject 
and a man lives or dies; if he lives, thousands live with him. If he 
dies — is the sacrifice of one life so damned important, Fielding?" 
He made an abrupt gesture, cutting short the other's angry retort. 
"You can't. I appreciate that. You take "oaths, make promises 
and your ideals prevent expediency] I, cn my part, make ho promises; 1 see the objective clearly and I act" jAImost, the heavy face 
smiled. " It is ruthless, unprincipled, savagevbut it gets results. If 
I were in your position, Doctor. I would inject and to hell with the 
risk." 

Fading 1 staled at him. He was still angry and resentful but at 
least Rhinehart had the saving grace of honesty. He saw his goal 
and went straight for it without self-justification or moral deceit. If 
one could not admire one could at least respect and understand. 
The wall speaker crackled suddenly. " Calling Doctor Fielding, 

emergency pulse fluctuation, call " 

- " Sorry to break this up." Fielding strode for the door; " Your 
man O'Brien has" gone into stage four." Then, over his shoulder: 
" If you wish to watch, turn on number three screen by the chair 
and switch to channel five." . ... 

RhinehaK frowned, made as if to foBow, then changed his mind. 
He sat down, lit a cigar and flicked on the screen. Much of whafehe 
saw and heard wast beyond him but the drama was inescapable. A 
man was dying, slipping over the abyss; and a team of experts were 
lahorrring to hold him back' It became almost a - personal struggle. 
An unseen, undetectable 'disease trying to. thrusti'a man from life, 
and the doctor, countering each physical deterioration with, some 
fresh application of experience. 

Rhinehart .watched with growrag respect. The doctor might 
cling, grimly and stupidly to outdated oaths..and modes of cor.duc: 



INFECTION 




but he had determination, skill and guts, qualities which could be 
praised and understood. 

Rhinehart saw the artificial lungs wheeled in and applied with 
almost unbelievable speed and skill. He saw the delicate surgery 
and the maze of nerve connections as the mechanical cardiac machine 
took over from the painfully labouring heart. 

" He's holding his own." Fielding leaned tiredly against the 
door. After ten hours 1 ceaseless and delicate work, there were lines 
about his mouth and dark smudges of weariness- beneath his eyes. 
" It*s too early to say more." 

Rhinehart nodded. " You worked damned hard. 1 admire your 
industry but deplore your, ethics; you could have used 1 the antibiotic.' 1 

"I could, but it might have killed hiro," 

"Yes." Rhinehart reached for the edge of the door which 
seemed suddenly a world away. " Yes, that's your barrier to greatness, ..Fielding; ethics have no place in modern- society." He tried 
for the door again, missed it, and pitched helplessly sideways before 
the other could catch him. 

"God!'* Fielding pressed- the alarm buzzer and bent over the 
unconscious man, turning back his eyelids. 



H NEtUVA 

" Another?" It was Rawlins, his chief assistant "Oh, 
Rhinehart hanself . Shall we try die new antibiotic?" 
Fielding had time only to scowl, realising that Rawhns must 
have been eavesdropping, then he was busy flaUi% i'SSKck tests. 
Perhaps they had caught this one in rime, , . 

The borer slid down the ramp, biunt nose first, like a newly 
launched sea-going ship and made a squelching sound as it hit the 
mud. Broad tracks spun noisily, spraying muck, then found purchase and dragged the machine forward uncertainly. At a snail's 
pace the thing growled through the rain, leaving behind it a tangle 
of flattened yellow trees and slimy vine. Within seconds the broad 
tracks left by the metal treads were filled with rain and were lost to 
sight as if they had never been. ' 

- Inside, Tyjpn, hunched Over the control, p^nel, was now sweating visibly and profusely. 

" I : shaker, alright," thought Marty, tiredly. It was going to 
be a rough trip. He. glanced across" at Tacklin who was gazing with 
apparent concehtration at 8 cluster >of dials and* at the same time, 
adjusting his safety belt. 

Movement, as yet, was almost imperceptible. The control 
chamber was a carefully sprung sphere within the vehicle, the angle 
of which remained constant, regardless of externals. But there was 
noise, the treads thundered, mumed, but noisily about, rock and stone 
screeched when they scraped them and, as always; there were 
stressed-metal groans which nothing could stop. 1 

Tyson glanced at the " Site Indicator " and flicked a red switch, 
shifting the centre of gravity to the blunt nose of the vehicle. " Site 
one, stand by." 

' Tacklin ran his hand down the sub-surface switches and watched 
a bank of dials "brighten to luminous visibility, waiting. 

The tracks clattered to a halt, the vehicle slid a 1 few inches in 
the mud, then stopped. Then, very slowly, it began to leah forward, 
nose down to the muck, like a squat beetle rising on its hind legs. A 
haze formed about the bronze coloured nose, a haze in which a 
myriad of blue-green sparks danced and swirled tike fire-flies. Before 
the haze, water turned to steam, rushing upwards and away, the. 
muck boiled, blackened, and flaked to dust. ' 

Marty, watching me green finger of the Descent Dial creep 
slowly up, thought: " This is if, down under the surface."; A borer 
going down like a submarine submerging, or as" O'Brien often used 
to say: "Like a damned maggot eating its way into ah apple." ; 

"It's a spaceship in reverse," thought Marty, "with a grav 



INFECTION 



13 



motor forward which slowly increases our immense weight to an 
insupportable degree. The borer slowly sinks because the surface of 
the earth can no longer bear its weight, the treads help it down 
while heat-girflmick? in the nose unit reduce the density of the 
matter through which it is boring." . ' 

Marty made a mental note that this was his hundred and fiftieth 
descent, adjusted his. earrcomm and began his radar survey. 

Tackliri was already calling his geological figures in the customary, ' almost traditional, sing-song and Tyson, still ' sweating, 
watched the thin, green descent line, his hands tight — too tight — 
on the control stick. 

Marty frowned at the radar screen, his trained eyes interpreting 
the shifting wavy lines into a comprehensible picture. They bored 
blind, Blinder than moles. There was ho super vision screen to tell 
them what lay. ahead. The probes sounded the rock around and 
ahead and flung their findings back into the screen, not as a picture 
but in wavy green lines which could only be interpreted by an 
expert. 

Other instruments checked and interpreted, within limits, the 
type of rock formation through which they were passing. Dials told 
of pressures, external heat, angle of descent. ... 

He glanced at the descent dial again. At least Tyson was keeping to the regulation thirty degrees. Speed— twelve feet a minute — 
a metal bug— a damned maggot- — eating its way into an apple. 

Marty felt a sudden inexplicable sense of guilt. History said 
that man had done this on Earth, eaten into the planet like a blight. 
They'd drained the surface reservoirs of oil and mineral wealth and 
had been compelled to go deeper. From surface borings of three or 
four miles, they had finally reached fantastic depths probing almost 
to the limits of the planet's crust. Unfortunately there were repercussion, the causes of which had never been rightly determined. 
Some said they were caused by the pressure techniques used to hold 
open the borings for the robotic miners, others that man had eaten 
too much of the Earth's crust. Regardless of which school of 
thought was correct, there were still repercussions. A series of 
unprecedented subsidences and earth tremors began to occur all 
over the world which were tat preludes to the titanic subterranean 
explosions which followed. Explosions which changed the face of 
continents and lifted mountains from the beds of oceans. Volcanoes 
spewed purhice and lava while new craters opened all over the world 
adding their quota of dust and sulphur to . an already thickening 
atmosphere. Science was not slow to realise that withjo a few years 



14 



NEBULA 



it would be a question of " get out or suffocate ". 
. " We did it," thought Marty, bitterly. " We eat the guts out 
of the planet like a crowd of maggots eating the inside of an apple. 
We had to get out before it crumpled up beneath our feet." 

The great Migration was Exodus of a race, the story of which 
was preserved in the archives of the cities as a tribute to the ingenuity 
and indomitable courage of man. Was it so praiseworthy to devour 
your home and be forced to leave it and find another? Now they 
were doing it again, metal maggots, burrowing into the flesh of a 
planet in search of ores and mineral deposits, only this time they 
were doing it efficiently. With the improved techniques and new 
methods of pressure mining, Venus, their new home, would probably blow her top in less than a thousand years. Maybe Mars too — 
part of the Migration had gone to Mars — and then where would 
they go? Unless, of course, the whispers about a stellar flight 
device were true. 

His thoughts and feelings drifted away from Earth and the 
accompanying sense of guilt and he began to think about Mars. He 
remembered a space pilot telling him that it was dry on Mars, just 
miles and miles of dust and it never rained. Funny that, never rainingi you couldn't imagine it somehow. Maybe the fellow exaggerated; it was fabulousj unbelievable, like those exotic looking pic
. tures of Earth showing the sun blazing down on cities without roofs — 
wonderful but somehow impossible. 

The borer shivered suddenly, vibrated, bouncing him in the 

' sprung seat 

"Sorry." Tyson's voice was calm but a litde high pitched. 
" I wasn't ready for that one." 

"A shaker," thought Marty again. O'Brien would have ridden 
that one like a wave. O'Brien was good and, like all good S.B.E.S, 
rode the vehicle as if it were part of him. He would have felt the 
change in strata, been prepared for it, geared down for the sudden 
change in density. But Tyson— *well,. that's the way it was with a 
shaker. Over-concentration, uncertain reflexes, failing nerves— they 
gave you a rough ride. 

Marty continued to let his mind wander. It was a trick he had 
learned a long time ago and it was a useful one. It was almost as if 
he were two men, one of which watched the screen with hawk-like 
but automatic attention, while the other mused and day-dreamed on 
a hundred subjects. The ability enabled him to relax for long 
periods and store up nervous energy for real emergencies. He had 
learned long ago to divert Jiis thoughts from his position and his sur


INFECTION IS 

\ 

Foundings — a miner had to. The dials might say that 1 pressure within 
the vehicle was .normal, the air pure, the temperature a. comfortable 
sixty-five, but when you looked at the dials giving external readings 
you began to doubt. Only a few inches of steel and insulation between 
you. and a pressure and heat like that. The dials might say that 
everything inside was normal, but you worried until you began to 
feel the heat and the pressure. You thought of the miles, and the 
millions of tons of xoek between you and the surface and, unless you 
adjusted your mind fastj you went quickly and noisily insane. 

-Marty leaned forward suddenly and punched a button. A red 
light' appeared on Tyson's control panel and his foot came down 
hard on the " stop " stud. 

" What's up?" His voice in the ear-comm sounded high-pitched 
and reedy. 

Marty, scowling at the screen, said: "I don't know, could be 
one of two things, a gas pocket or a river." 

Tyson sweated, not bothering if it showed. H it was a gas 
pocket, the pressure might be prodigious. Blundering into it accidentally might blow them, or what was left of them, clean back to 
the surface. A river, this far down, might be worse; besides it was 
new. He had never heard of anyone boring accidentally into an 
underground river and it might be worse than anything he had ever 
heard about, He was unashamedly frightened and wished he could 
find some excuse to return but could think of none. God, the time 
he'd come through the roof of that , underground cavern had been 
sheer hell, the sensation of falling, of helplessness, the heart-jolting 
impact 

Tacklin was poring over the interpreter, clicking switches and 
reading dials. After a time he said: "Steam, probably leads to a 
geyser." 

" We'll have to go rounp! it" Marty was interpreting rock 
strata with the skill of long experience. " Level off, red bearing, 
nine." 

"Red nine, level," said Tyson, automatically; He pulled back 
the control stick, geared-in the tracks and took his foot oif the 
clutch too fast. The vehicle lurched, bucked, sharp rock screaming against her sides and, but for the safety harness, he would have 
smashed his face into the control panel. Somehow, he didn't know 
just how, they began to move forward almost steadily, " God," he 
thought, " I'm a shaker, a damn shaker, I ought to have quit months 
ago. I know it and they know it. They? know I'm scared; they know 
my nerve has gone and I shouldn't be here— why am I?" 



14 



NEBULA 



He gritted his teeth, trying to force .himself to concentrate. 
"What had Marty said— nine? Yes, red nine." His thoughts wanteed again, helplessly. " I'm here because I want the pay," he told 
himself. " The money is good and I've got to live. ' Ho* long will 
I live in this racket? Maybe this is my last trip. God, if I get out 
of this one alive, it will be, I sweat it." 

He turned his head suddenly and said : " Eh?" 

"Angle negative," Matty was shouting. "Negative, what are 
you trying to do — blast off or something?" . 

" Sorry, sorry." He made corrections hastily. Did the man 
hive to shout like that) Hell, it was only a little error and the 
shouting in his ear-comm made his head ache even worse than 

before Yes! His head ached, throbbed; it was an excuse to go 

back up. He was sick, really sick; he shouldn't have come. Got to 
get up and breathe again. Never take another bore, never ; finish 
with it forever. Would he get there? Now that he'd made the vow, 
something might try to stop him, fate, luck.' Something might try 
and trap him down here, buried, sealed up in a can. God, to get 
up, get up fast before it happened, before fate reached out and 
thwarted him— Oh God, all that rock, all those miles
Something seemed suddenly to break loose inside him. He 
whimpered, not even understanding the voice shouting in the earcomm. 

" Ascend — up — you damn fooL You're going down." 

Down? What did the man mean? He Was going up— up to 
the surface and the dean fresh air. It would be too late. He 
couldn't breathe in this heat and he could hear the borer groaning 
under the stress, sagging — crumpling- — -He screamed. 

Marty gave up shouting, realising" its uselessness. The borer 
was going down, almost straight down and there was nothing he 
could do about it. The safety harness holding him in place had a 
. locking device which automatically triggered itself loose when the 
motor stopped and not, before. There were reasons for this. At 
full power a borer rocked, rolled and shuddered with incredible 
violence. A man who could free himself might do so and menace 
lite safety of the whole vehicle. He might be hurled across the 
control room, not only destroying 'himself but, in crashing into vital 
instruments, render the borer completely inoperable-. 

Marty gripped the chair and fought the shaking, feeling that 
he was being beaten up and slowly becoming punch drunk. They 
Were going down, if they kept going down they'd reach a joint 
where the planet's crust was no longer solid but molten an^jjyett" 



INFECTION 



the borer coiildn't take that. She'd fold up like a crashed tin with, 
them inside. 

Suddenly the shaking stopped and the sadden silence was almost 
frightening. 

Tyson was still, very still) slouched in the safety straps- like a 
dead fish in a net. 

* I found a wrench and threw it at him." Tacklin's voice was 
shakyand hoarse. "I had to do something; had to make him let 
go of the handle. It was a damn lucky shot." 
' . Marty did not answer. He was listening, and listening, began 
to sweat. The borer was moving, lurching and sliding almost 
unnoticeably, but moving nonetheless. 

A glance at the screen confirmed it. They were half way into 
a hole, an underground cavern formed when the placet Was still 
■ molten. The nose and shoulders of the borer were through the 
cavern's roof and God knew what lay below. They might fall ten 
: feet; they might fall a hundred, you couldn't tell. 

The borer lurched, hard rock screeching against the sides.. 
Marty had time to shout: "race for a tumble." And then they 
werefalling 

"I owe you a great debt, a very great debt," Rhinehart was 
quite lucid but very weak. He smiled faintly. "In your position 
rf should have made some blunder, some minor error inhibiting 
recovery and thus ensuring ray own safety. I don't suppose such an 
idea even occurred to you," ' 

Fielding said brusquely: " You are still a very sick man and, 
I fear, the sickness is liable to be recurrent." 

"Recurrent?" 

"Like certain Earth fevers, malaria for example, you'll have 
•periodic, unpredictable attacks." _ 

XhineWt's mouth tightened. "Bluntly, I am a permanent 
invalid?" 

" Well " • i 

" No -comforting words, please. I'll just tell you this, nothing 
beats me, nothing." 

Fielding kept silent, conscious of a sudden pity. Not even 
Rhinehart's indomitable will could lift the weakened body to its 
feet and back to its original strength. 

Rhinehart tried to raise himself oh his elbow and failed. " You 
have att antibiotic^use it Do you hear me? ~ Use it I'd rather 



la 



NE BULA 



die than — I give you complete authority. I'll sign any . paper you 
wish." 

"Impossible." Fielding's voice was brittle.- "Absolutely out 
of the question. 1 ' 

" Your damned ethics again, I suppose?" 
.."I'm sorry— you must rest now. I'll see you have sedatives 
and, remember, you must not excite yourself." He left, the room. 

Five hours later he was called on the emergency , line. 
Rhinehart was suffering convulsions and running a high temperature. 

, Fjeldiag checked him, almost with disbelief. There must be 
some other condition besides Venderin but what, for God ? s sake? 
Hasty laboratory tests revealed a culture which shouldn't have 
been — and hadn't been— present at all. 

Very quietly Fielding left the room, his face a rigid mask; and 
passed into the staff quarters. 

He caught Rawlins, his chief assistant, packing. 

" Going away?" 

Rawlins looked up. "Yes, just getting ready, vacation in a 
week you know." He had one of those frank friendly faces and the 
wide set eyes which the ignorant call honest, but which quite often 
hides a lack of scruple and weakness of will which is visible only to the 
discerning. 

Fielding closed the door and leaned, against it. "How much 
did he give you?" 

Rawlins straightened and said convincingly: "Who? What*' 
are you talking about?" 

" Rhinehart," said Fielding, " has a C4 type culture in his blood 
stream." His voice, even to himself, sounded rasping and toneless. 
" A C4 type culture is only present in the experimental antibiotic. 
How did it get there?" 

" How the hell should I know?" 

" You should know because you gave it to him." Fielding took 
a step forward. "He offered you money and you gave him a two 
cc shot of the stuff." 1 

" Did I, now?" Rawlins' voice was sneering. " Prove it." 

Fielding stiffened inwardly. Rawlins was clever and unscrupulous but, to give him credit, he knew his job. It was unlikely that 
he would leave loose ends around which could be traced to himself. 

" You were the only one besides myself who knew where it was 
and how to administer it." . ■ . 

Rawlins' frank open face had a long almost feline smile. " That 
may have been true five hours ago; since then we've been doing 



INFECTION 



!9 



intensive micro-tests. At least twenty lab assistants and three 
bacteria-biotics people watched its effect in a culture tray." 

Fielding said, bitterly : " You stinking unprincipled louse." 

The frank smile vanished briefly, then returned. "It's your 
word against mine, Fielding." He walked round the pile of cases. 
"So for your ears alone and stricdy off the record, it's all tied up 
legally: If Rhinehart dies I'm still covered, four witnesses, his own 
top lawyer on the soli-trans and the whole episode ratified by a 
Robotic justice." He laughed at Fielding's expression. " In the 
eyes of the law, it's a gift." He made an abrupt gesture of contempt 
and turned his back. " Get lost, Fielding, there's nothing you can 
do about it. Any one of over twenty assistants could have been 
bribed to give Rhinehart that shot" 

"Yes." Fielding's voice Was vague. He removed his white 
laboratory coat and folded it carefully, laying it on the nearest chair. 
" How much did you get?" 

Rawlins turned, walked round the cases. " What^s that to you? 
Sorry you didn't cash in first?" He laughed. For your personal 
envy, Dr. Fielding, half a million, weep at nights about that" 

Fielding edged imperceptibly closer, he w^s smiling 'thinly. 
" Now let me tell you something, Rawlins, even you can't get away 
with it completely." 

"What are you going to do — —shoot me?" Rawlins was 
sneering again. 

" Not quite. Back on Earth there used to be an historic sport 
called boxing. A few groups here still practise it as a keep-fit art 
and I've been told I was rather good." 

" Yeah!?" Rawlins topped Fielding by nearly a foot. 

" Yes." Fielding hit him as hard as he -could in the face. 
Rawlins went backwards over the cases, lay there, then climbed to 
Jhis feet, fists clenched. Then he kicked the cases aside and rushed. 

Fielding chopped him twice as he went past and jolted his head 
back with a right to the mouth as he turned. He waited until 
Rawlins was panting from several of his bull-like rushes, then closed 
in. Deliberately, with almost clinical detachment, he began to chop 
him to pieces. 

He left Rawlins whimpering and broken among his cases, his 
face a bloody mask, and closed the door carefully behind him. Now 
that it was done there seemed very little satisfaction, save that he 
had meted out a rough justice. Rawlins had betrayed his oath for 
money. In Fielding's opinion he should have been executed. 
" He returned Slowly to the sick man's room and the physician-in


a 



NEBULA 



charge looked up, frowning. " This is damn funny, Doctor. Thi: 
muscular contractions are lessening and the Veoderra cellular breakdown seems to have been halted." He held up a slide. " Look, you 
can see the effects clearly. Whatever other disease he contracted 
seems to have cured the infection. Can't say I understand it — it's a 
miracle." ; . , 

Fielding shook his head slowly. " Not a miracle, Stapleton, a 
colossal gamble and Rhinehart won it." 

Marty regained consciousness slowly, finding himself in com- ' 
ptae darkness with an acrid smell of burning insulation in his nostrils. ; 
With a hand which didn't seem to be his own he felt for, and found, 
the heavy emergency torch which was clamped beneath the seat. 

The beam cut. a blue-white swath through the darkness, reveal; 
ing oily tendrils of smoke creeping apparently from' nowhere. 
> Tyson had his head on one side at a curious angle as if his neck ' 
was broken and TackHn lay in his chair making strange gurgling ' 
noise* '■*' 

Somehow Marty got the straps undone, somehow he lurched 
across the floor, fumbled for the main fuse and. almost whimpered 
with relief. It was gone. It was designed to blow in an emergency ; 
to save die subsidiaries. The torch revealed the silvery dust and 
bright Shards of the miniature explosion beneath the primary circuit % 
panel. Fumbling and swearing with the dreary monotony of $ 
shaken man, he fitted another and re-activated the circuit. 

Shutters tumbled, a multitude of micro-relays began to tick like, 
beetles, and, very softly, the air purifier chuckled-to itself and purred; 
to life. After a series of uncertain nickers, the lights came on. 

Marty leaned against the wall, put his hands over his face and: 
sobbed with relief. If the main circuit functioned they stood a chance. The temperature dial which had risen to 110 degrees, 
internal heat, began to creep slowly backwards. .. "■ 

Tacklij coughed throatily, called three , times for help, then 
straightened and said, in a normal voice : " I feel like .hell. I suppose,, 
we are alive?" ' j 

" So far." Marty ran bis fingers down a row of switches and 
studied (he check lights-^one was ominously dead^ " We've lost i], 
track." | 

Tacklin, nnmnagkg in the medical cabinet for soothene tablets,! 
said: " That's bright, let's hope it's just out and not buckled." Ufa 
swallowed noisily and began to fumble with the safety straps, " f 

1 



INFECTION 



21 



4on't think I've broken any bones but my spine feels as if it's coming 
ota through the top of my head." 

" Tyson is dead" Marty's voice was coldly factual. 

"Did I kill him?" 

"No,. his neck is broken. Come over and help me shift him. 
jFU nave to take oyer, try and get her up." 

They moved the dead man, strapped the- body in Marty's chair 
«Bd turned back to the controls. 

Marty had taken an S.B.E's course as a compulsory part of his 
Banting but it wasn't his forte and he knew it Getting her up was 
going to be like riding a ram-jet with erratic and unpredictable timing. 

He bent down and slid 'back No. 3 inspection panel, revealing 
tta complicated wiring of the gravity circuits and switched the 
transitter valves as he had been taught. He had always frankly 
admitted that he didn't understand how the field worked and was 
Sever likely to. You had a borer which weighed five thousand tons. 
You switched on the grav" field and me weight doubled, trebled, 
multiplied as the field increased and finally the false gravity pulled 
you down. When you wanted to come up, you switched the transSter valves, fed in power and the field was reversed but you didn't 
get lighter like a space ship, you got heavier in reverse. 

An instructor had once said: "You merely reverse the traction 
field, Mr. Marty, the immense artificial weight which pulled you 
down, now pushes you up." 

Marty scowled at the closed panel. He knew it worked but it 
sjiU made no sense. 

"All set?" He climbed into the control chair and began to 
buckle the safety straps. This was going to be tricky, very, very 
tricky. According to the instruments the borer had fallen twelve feet 
which was the hell of a fall for five thousand tons with a plus field. 
When, he switched on, the. bottom was going to be the 'top' and, 
unless he was very, careful and got the field properly balanced, they'd 
crash into the roof with perhaps greater force than they'd hit the 
floor. 

He ran his hand along the bank of switches, trying to remember 
everything he had been taught. " Ready?" 

" Ready." Tacklin sounded resigned. 
'<■■.. Red, white, click, ofefc— -Cratch it ! Two parallel lines, red and 
gteen, in the central indicator dial, bring them together slowly for 

balance. Stick forward easy — —easy up the stick a bit more, 

a fraction. Red line must move very slowly across the green


22 



NEBULA 



Here we go— —ah! Were they moving? They must be, must 

be. 

A sudden heavy but bearable impact. The lights flickered 
uncertainly then returned to their normal brilliance.
On blue, off white, click, click made it 1 

He turned in bis chair and grinned twistedly. " Alright?" 

"Alright!" Tacklin raised a greasy thumb. "Nice going, 
Marty, well make it now." 

Back on stick, build up field, click, click, feed in power- — — 
new. And she's making it, making it, she's boring, boring, going 
up. . . . 

A metal bug, a beetle upside down on the roof of a cavern, 
pushing its nose at the surface — a maggot eating its way out of an 
apple. ... 

Rhinehart said; " We shall never understand one another, shall 
we?" He was recovering rapidly and already sitting up. 

"You took the hell of a chance." Fielding shook his head, 
sweating at the thought. " But I'll grant you gave us the answer. 
We know how to use it npw, can eradicate the factors which might, 
have made it.lethal. Further, we can draw, and duplicate, a serum 
from your body which means that a programme of immunisation can 
begin almost at once." He smiled a little twistedly. " We have no 
choice but to call it the Rhinehart Treatment." 

The Magnate shook his head. "The Fielding Treatment, 

please -I insist." He looked at the other thoughtfully and said, 

again: "No, we cannot understand one another but we can respect." 
He Held but his hand. 

Fielding took it without reservation. Rhinehart was ruthless, 
overbearing and without scruple but he had intellectual self -honesty 
and courage. The latter qualities Fielding could not fail to respect. , 

An orderly came-in. " Mr. O'Brien is showing marked improve^', 
ment, sir.* He hesitated. " These photographs were'found in the 
asepsis room, sir. I think they must be his." ' 

Fielding glanced at them and frowned. Then he fumbled in his 
pockets and produced another. 
. " Something wrong?" Rhinehart was looking at him curiously. 

Fielding laid the photographs on the bed. " O'Brien's photographs show a picture of Earth before our grandfathers left it." He 
paused. " The second is recent, probably taken in the last few years 
by a spacer." 

"So?" ' ■• v 



INFECTION 



Fielding leaned forward, "This is my own photograph, taken 
with a micro-camera— a Venderin infected life cell., Compare it with 
the recent photograph of Earth.". 

Rhinehart nodded. " There is, certainly, a startling similarity, 
both shrunken, drivelled, looking as if they had been eaten from 
within— — What are you implying?" 

Fielding shook his head. " I guess I've been working too hard 
recently, imagining things." He laughed uneasily. " I was just 
thinking, wc>e 'desosrad » Eanh^ we're -'doing • the • same to^Venus and 
Mars. If reports arc true, soon; we'll gain the stars and perhaps do 
the same there- He stopped. 

"Go on, you interest me." Rhinehart was leaning forward. 

Fielding made a helpless gesture. " It occurred to- me, maybe 
we aren't quite so big as we think we are. Perhaps in the body of ,the 
Universe we have no standing- at all until we begin to hurt. Just an 
unfilterable, sub-microscopic virus, a bUght-^n infection. Maybe, 
if we aren't careful they'll send a cosmic doctor to cure ms. 

PHILIP E. HIGH 



A SOCIETY FOR YOU... . 

Says Peter Hamilton: "The Fan World has long needed an organization to interest outsiders in becoming fans, as without this Science-. 
Fiction . Fandom would soon die an introverted and unlamented 
death." 

THE BRITISH SCIENCE FICTIOn'aSSOCIATION has recently 
been formed to "forestall tbis'prcphecy, and to cater to the needs and 
pleasures of Scienee-Ficrion Fans. 

JOIN NOW! Send YOUR subscription (Members, £1 per annum" 
Associates — under 18 — 10/-; Overseas mcmbersh.p 
10/- or equivalent in local' currency) to The Treasurer 
B.S.F.A., A« H. Mercer, 434/4 'Newark.Rd.; North 
Hykeham, Lincoln. . . 

Enquiries to Sec. B.S.F.A, E, Bentdiffe, 47, Alldis 
St., Gt. Mocr, S-.ockport, Cheshire. 

&T LENDING LIBRARY — QUARTERLY JOURNAL — INFORMATION" BUREAU. 



KENNETH BULMER 



Survey Corpse 



Another plxnet to survey, another challenge otitf 
to be met by men united and with' courage 



IttustMion ty Arthur Thomson 



Never mind wliat star k was— that isn't important Don't 
bother to seek a name for the planet— (hat doesn't matter. Admit? 
te the planet was Earth sized, with safe terrestrial type air and 
continents and seas and a Go type star shining happily down; bat 
this pleasing catalogue doesn't signify. The world was about as 
like Earth as you'd expect to find in a parsec's flight among the, 
sifting dust of the galaxy; abdut how a wooden leg resembles and 
does duty for a man's own flesh and sinew and bone and muscle. 
But none of that's important. 

A spaceship, dropped on force stilts to the surface. That was 
about as important as a tin can landing on a rubbish dump. Six 
men descended: from the airlock and stood on .'spaceweary legs and 
Surveyed the landscape. 

They were important 

Six men, who had lived, eaten, slept, breathed, worked together. Six human beings who had beeri cooped up in a metal 

24." 



SURVEY CORPSE 



25 



Shell skyrocketing across nothingness from one lamp of mud to 
another. 

Metafand plastic and glass and earth and trees and all the 
clever-clever tricks of science, meeting for the one and only end 
Of putting six very ordinary but very important men upon the 
surface of a world different from that of their birth. 

Not because they had crossed the millions of miles of duststrewn emptiness were they important; they were important because 
they were men. 

The first of these men to set foot upon the alien planet was 
the captain. He stood there quite still, quite silently, breathing 
long , and slow, looking, about, the erases beside his eyes puckered 
against the alien sun. 

Silently, the other five men dropped down the ladder to stand 
beside him. Away off to the north the hills rose, slumbrous, 
purple, hazy across, the great plain. Dust puffed across the. plain, 
sere brown whirlpools rising and falling; a breeze tufted the men's 
hair and rustled past them to stir and set talking the myriad leaves 
of the forests at their backs: 
' " Well, skip, we made it," said McGanity the engineer, uglyfaced, carroty-haired and smiling.' " But 'twill be a miracle if we 
see old Earth again." 

The captain did not reply. Lenson the geologist, taut and 
pimply and soured by too much space, did that for him. 

" Why keep yapping about Earth, . McGarrity? We've three 
more planets to survey yet. If you can't keep your stinking engines 
running we'll all— -" 

"Sure ye willl And even when you're screaming your guts 
out in the wreck you'll all still be blaming MsGarrity." 

The other crewmen were spreading out, going about their 
prepared tasks on this alien world. The three 'men were left 
standing beneath the rocket. The captain stood between the other 
two, dark, unsmiling, feeling the Sow Of strength from his body 
into the needs and weaknesses of the five men he commanded 
and for whom he was responsible. 

Lenson said savagely: "Wejshould have been given a first 
rate engineer." , 

... ** And whore ye to pick on me?" demanded McGarriry. " I'm 
a first class engineer and you darn well know it." 

"This crate's been shaking like a child with Venusian rotfever." 



26 



NEBULA 



The captain let them spew it out, allowed each to lance the 
other's boil of frustration and fear and pent up fury. 

" L tell you this, Lenson, so help me. The engines'll take 
five more periods of maximum thrust. I'll not guarantee one more." 

"And," said the captain, moving forward. " We'd all like one 
of those periods to be during our planetfall on Earth." He motioned 
with his hand, "There's all this world to be looked at. You're 
part of the team to do that, Lenson. And you, McGarrity, have 
your engines to look at. Suppose we all think about our jobs, huh?" 

"Sure, skip," said Lenson at once. He collected his gear 
from the stack at the foot of the ladder. 

" Work," McGarrity said, both hands on his hips. " Always 
work. It's just a job, sure it is. Hopping from one planet to the 
next, measuring, ruling, collecting, writing reports. This job is 
one for the suckers, all right." 

"I wouldn't say that," remarked the. captain, easily. 

McGarrity swung towards the ladder. "I'll get even with 
that bog-cur Lenson," he said darkly as he went up the rungs. 

On their second morning the doctor cornered the captain 
under one of the branching fins of the rocket. The metal gouged 
the red dust that had sifted over the calcined areas. The sun 
threw strong shadows. Dust blew finely. 

"Results show .promise, skip?" The, doctor had. the professional slickness of his tribe; but underneath there smouldered a 
fierce resentment against, undead. tribal gods that had survived ten 
years of Terran Survey Corps service. 

" Sure." The captain described small circles, with-. his toe in 
the dust. " Sure. Those forests back there are full of wild life 
and timber. The plains ahead are full of minerals and with a Little 
landscaping can fill , with com. Oh, sure, this is a number one 
planet, fair enough." 

, " I just gave Lenson 3. checkup," said , the donor, not inconsequentially. " Physically, he's sound' as a venturi." ... 
" But . . . ?" 

"Bee. in his bonnet about our assignment. Wants to fight 
McGarrity, personally, bo's we carry on." 
"I see." 

"Can we, skip? I mean, is McGarrity right?. Musi .we 
return to Earth prematurely?" 

"Sam's taking his Bier eastwards- today, doc. I'd rather like 
you to go along with hint." The captain pushed himself upright 



SURVEY CORPSE 



27 



from the rocket's fin. He allowed a small friendly., smile to . form 
on his face. " Trip out in the fresh air do you good." 

"WilcOj skip," said the doctor. He walked away. Watching 
him go, the captain allowed his little smile to fall to pieces. 

When Sam's flier, bearing the doctor, had vanished high in 
the serene blue, the captain went looking for the biophysicist. This 
was om man who did not ask questions that had no answers this 
side of sanity. 

"Hi, Shep," he said, walking up and squatting on an upturned sample case. " How's it coming?" 

"Figure we ought to set down somewhere in that forest Find 
us a nice clearing." 

"Tricky, Shep. Landing into a forest--you never know 
what's underneath you till you touch down. Then it might not 
b* what you expect." 

" The ground car ventilation blew out yesterday. I got 
roasted coming back." Shepkin stretched,, leaning Up, revealing 
the^ small naked body upon which he had been working. " Still— I 
found this'n." 

The captain looked with compassion at the tiny body. " I 
know you always like to dissect one specimen right down to check 
oa anything unusual right away," he said. "But I always prefer it 
when you just slip 'em into bottles." 

Shepkin shook bis overlarge head, bending back to continue 
his deft butchery. " Gotta find out just what we might be up 
against right away. Nothing particularly odd about this little fellow 
— four legs, a head, two eyes and a mouth- and breathing slits. 
Except this. Here, look." ~ 

Taking the aniraalY tail, he started at Shepkin's quick : 
"Steady! That's as sharp as my scalpel." - He -held the object 
gingerly. The tail was flat and long, a central bony ridge flattening 
out to a double-bladed knife of bone. 

Shepkin took it back, produced a paper handkerchief, sliced 
the tissue with the taiL "See; skip? Razor sharp." --r 
"Why?" ' ■ , 

The biophysicist blew out bis cheeks. "Don't know. Yet. 
Weapon, of course. Look at the feet — curved claws with nails like 
grappling hooks." 
"Tree climber?" 

"Looks like it." 

" Well, when you have, a few more specimens you'll probably 
have the bug this tail is meant ,to decapitate." 



NE B ULA 



Shepian hughed shortly. "Decapitate. Sure. Why don't 
Lenson belt up? He's souring the whole mob." 

"He believes in the job, Sbep. • He really lives it. Every 
minute of every day he's carving out new frontiers for Earth. He'3 
the rugged frontiersman. He never lets up." 

"Well, if McGanity don't push his face in soon, I'll line up 
for that assignment." 

"Take it easy." The captain rose. "Lenson knows his job. 
We're all touched a little, in some way. Wouldn't be here if we 
weren't" 

"Yeah. The job goes oa Sick your insides up* lose your 
arms and Jegs, go blind, deaf, dumb— crawl on stumps and drink 
dust; but the job must, be done. Hurrah for the Terran Survey 
Corps." He thrust a scalpel with vicious humour into his workbench, "Hell! /And that's all the emotion and glory ever do 
get you— just more work, re-sharpening scalpels. What a life." 

" We've another three planets after this one, Shep " the 
captain said, and left the lab quickly. He climbed up to the control 
room. 'These- was an odd air of pathetic loss about the empty 
control positions. - He checked the clock and switched on the 
planetary radio. Sam's voice came in strongly and he exchanged a 
ten-minute check with him and the doctor. As he spoke into the 
microphone his eyes looked steadily through the control ports off 
towards the forests beckoning along the edge of the plain. 

Lenson entered the control room. The captain cut the radio 
connection and said: "Hullo, Lenson. How's it coming?" 

" Fine. Just fine. Enough ores out there to last a new colony 
for centuries. We ought to be able to build up this planet into 
a really big thing; an important unit in the Terran Commonwealth." 

■■ the captain looked at the geologist, masking the .intensity of 
his scrutiny. "Ever think of settling down on one of the new 
worlds you open np, Lenson?" . - . 

Lenson laughed. " Settle down? Me? With all the Galaxy 
waiting to be opened up?" 

"Over a hundred thousand habitable planets, at least," the 
captain said as though musing. "No man has that many lifetimes, Lenson." 

" I'll get by, 111 get by," Lenson said quickly. He hadn't 
even understood the captain's remark, "Wanted you to take a 
look at this sample; I figure if we moved off a little and set down 
nearer those mountains we could — — " . 



SURVEY CORPSE 



;' "Always tricky setting down near mountains. Never know 
what's under you." 

"I suppose you're going to set down in that damned forest? 
You and Shepkin always — -" 

" Think 111 take a shower" the captain said, rising and turning to face Lenson squarely. "Get's kinda'hot in this tin can."" 

He showered and shaved and changed. His mind was fixed 
upon the problem of Lenson. The geologist's frame of mind was 
not unknown and probably had been labelled by a polysyallabk 
extravaganza that the doctor had been too wise to parade before 
his skipper. The men of the Terran Survey Corps were all volunteers; they were where they were and doing the job they had to 
do because they believed that this was the best way a man could 
live. There was none of the nauseating falsity of the comic-strip 
space explorer, forever moaning about what he was going to do 
when he got back to Earth and could bit the bright lights down 
Hccadilly. These men expected to get back to Earth in due course 
—when that happened they would then give to life the same 
intensity as they gave it here, on an alien planet under an alien 
star. , • „ 

Always providing, that is, that McGarrity got them back 
safely. 

The captain allowed four or five days to pass before he 
suggested a new site. Both Lenson and Shepkin were at once in 
favour, pressing for the merits of their own sites. McGarrity 
frowned and warned about what he could and couldn't guarantee. 
Sam and the doctor listened with varying degrees of patience. 

Finally the captain said: "We will move to the other side 
of the forests, past that second range, of mountains you found, 
Sam. That way we can set down on that tongue ,of land between 
mountain and forest. We can collar the best of both worlds, then. 
After that we'll move once more to a seaboard location." 

"And after that?" asked McGarrity. 

"We'll have three guaranteed^periods of maximum thrust kft, 
which will give us one in hand for emergencies," 

Lenson stood up awkwardly. His face was pale. " You mean 
we're going home?" 

"I think," the captain said carefully. "It would be wise." 

"Hear, hear," said McGarrity. 

The others sat around the wardroom in sflence. 

" But we've the job to do!" Lenson put out a hand as though 
- to appeal. He changed his mind, and, turning on his heel, scuttled 



30 NEBULA 

from the- room. The others breathed out; their pent up breaths a 
sigh of compassion. 

The captain quirked an eyebrow at the doctor. 

" When he's convinced, he'll be all right again. But just at 
the moment we might — that is — well, it might be best if we 
refrained from- menticroing going home to him." 

"Humour him, you mean?" demanded McGarrity. 

"Is he bats?" asked Sara, as though the idea were fresh and 
startlingly original. 

Shepkin did not say anything. , He toyed with a scalpel, flicking it about in his fingers. Everyone always expected a few odd 
fingers to drop onto the floor whenever Shepkin sat in thought. 

The ship rose complainingly when McGarrity gave his permission. The captain tossed her as lightly as a leaf into her new 
position and set her down as though landing on eggs. McGarrity 
put his carroty head in through the hatch and said : " Four to go." 

"Yah! Elijah!" said Sam pleasandy. He was a joung, 
feckless airman, and was said by the others to believe that bis 
flier could take them anywhere in the Galaxy- He was also ship's 
meteorologist. 

"As a prophet," said McGarrity insultingly, u you'd rain us 
out every time the sun shone." 

The two indulged in a friendly scrimmage^. The captain 
smiled. Morale was perking up. 

The biophysicist and the geologist wasted no time in survey- , 
ing their new areas. Pressing on one side the forest brooded, dark 
green sea shot through with the vivid orange of exotic bloom, on 
the other the mountains scaled the sky, slaty, grey, pinnacling 
the horizon and casting long shadows across the alien land. r ' 

Hitherto the problem of who was to use the ground car and 
who the flier had been setded by geography; now the decision 
would have to be artificial— and imposed by the captain. 

" You'd better take Lenson today, Sam,'* he said with just 
enough firmness in his voice to ward off any humorously insubordinate remarks. "Take the ground car. Your flier's useless — if 
youll pardon the notion— around those peaks and gulleys." 

Shepkin— thankfully— waited until he was alone with the ' 
captain before he spoke. Then, his big head and dark, heavy 
features set in what would, in anyone else, have been sullenness, 
he said: " Lenspn's got the transport. I walk?" 

" You walk, Shep." 

At that moment a crackling barrage, of profanity burst up from 



SURVEY CORPSE 31 

the open airlock. Men were shouting and struggling; there rang 
the sound of metallic blows on metal. 

The captain and Shepkin dead heated for the airlock. Shepkin 
stopped to glance down. The, captain went straight on, shinning 
down the ladder in a slither of speed. 

Lenson and McGarrity were struggling and sprawling on the 
ground, their clothes dust streaked, their arms and legs awkwardly 
moving, like water-trapped insects. Sam and the doctor .stood 
around, hesitant. 

" Grab McGarrity," the captain said briefly. He took Lenson's 
collar in both hands, felt a red fist connect on his Cheek, and 
heaved "back. As he fell, he twisted and humped around, so that 
Lenson was between him and the ground. Then, breathing hard, 
he stood up and gave Lenson one or two experimental shakes. 
M Nothing broken," he said. , 

" IH murther the 

" Shut up, McGarrity." The captain was blazing with anger. 
"I don't want to know what happened. Both of you could be 
shot for this, on my order. Don't be so smug that you think I 
wouldn't give that order." He brushed dust from his face and 
winced as his fingers touched the sore spot. " Now shake hands. 
Then we can get on with the job." 

Lenson and McGarrity shook.- Their hands clung for the 
time a molecule of salt remains dry dropped in water. 

, " Get on with the job," McGarrity said, slouching away. 
"Always the*, misbegotten job." 

\ '-' Come on, Lenson," said Sam. " We're taking the ground 
car." He began to walk away and then turned, saw Lenson's 
burning face and twitching lips. "Come on, man!" 

',' Watching them walk towards the parked ground car, the 
captain felt bis age. He squared his shoulder feeling an idiot to 
believe that he could find strength , in himself, and said to 
McGarrity: "You'd better bike off with Shep today. You'll have 
a chance to walk it off. I hope you enjoy it." 

" My feet," moaned McGarrity, and began whistling as he 
loaded himself with the. sample containers pointed out by Shepkin. 

The doctor walked through into the laboratory after the 
captain had not gone in to dinner, to find him working with a 
plate of forgotten sandwiches at his elbow. The sun was sliding, 
in its twenty-seven hour day towards the horizon. 

" Hullo, doc," said the captain. " Don't bother me. I'm 
busy." 



n' 



NEBULA 




"You'd better eat, skip. _Take ten. And I thought you'd' 
better know that McGarrity was fighting Shep's battles for him." 

"" I'd guessed that. But I don't want to hear. If Lenson is 
to last this trip out we've all — including McGarrity — got to learn , 
to Jive with him. Shep can fight his own wars,. McGarrity knows 
that. The ground car was an infantile excuse for a brawl." 

" McCarthy's a red-headed- " 

"He's one of the best. So's Lenson. One wants to go oh 
striding through the starfields, conquering more and more worlds 
for Earth. The other's worried about nursing his failing engines 
and getting us all home safely. You' light the fuse— the tinder's 
knee high." ' 

tie snarling grumble of the car caught their attention. Sam 
ducked in through the hatch, blowing and licking his lips. 

" Ground cars," he said. " Pre spat 'em. Fm bushed." 

Lenson followed. " Can yea help me with these specimens?" 
he said to me company at large. "Vetp successful day. Thesi 
mountains are older extrusions — entirely different from the others. 
.We're on to a gold mine here." He laughed. 

The captain laughed. Presently, catching on, Sam and the 



SURVEY CORPSE 



31 



doctor altered. "Right, Lanes," the captain said,, rising from his 
jab bench. " I'll give you a hand. Sam, go gad get washed. We'll 
eat as soon as the others get back." 

By the time the specimens were neatly boxed in the geologist's 
flat and the dinner had been automatically heated from its precooked, containers, the sun had been jagged into glowing splinters 
by the forest treetops. The captain looked at the clock. 

, " Why can't Shep -and McGarrity get a move on?" asked Sam. 
" I'm starving." 

" You'd better go ahead and eat." The captain rose from the 
table and moved to the port. " Think IH take a little mosey " 

His words were shattered by the stumbling footfalls. Everyone 
rushed forthe airlock and McGarrity fell into their waiting arms. 
His clothes were ripped and caked in mud, and Mood shone evilly 
in the last rays of the sun. 

"Shep!" McGarrity choked out. "Damn great spider's got 
Mm.*. . McGarrity, all his strength goat, collapsed. 

Sam had the ground car growling away . in minutes. 'The 
captain and the doctor crouched in the rear, peering over the driving seat, following their crazy progress in the flaring light of the 
floods. The captain put one hand up and touched the cold oiled 
slkkhess of the express rifle in its beckets against the car's roof. 
Shep— he thought— and stopped that line of thinking at once. 

McGarrity's last words as they had left danced in the captain's 
brain. " Can't miss him. Blazed the tree." 1 

', The ear ate up the distance. The wall of forest reared higher 
against the first faint stats. 

"Lenson — and McGarrity." The doctor's voice was a low 
blur. " We've left them together^-alone." 

" They'll make out," the captain said, tonelessly. " They'll 
have to." 

Now the forest was extending welcoming arms— entrapping 
arms. The headlights grooved the darkness. The captain swivelled 
the searchlight. Tree trunks span in silver lines past, leaves and 
blooms glowed into fiery colour and then died into ashes as the 
beam passed. 

"There!" .Sain took one hand off the wheel sind pointed. 
: A tree trunk shewed in the questing light, a great rigged tear 
showing oozing gum where' the bark had been roughly stripped 
away. Silver threads glinted. The captain had fhe impression of 
hundreds of little glittermg: eyes all staring at him unwinkingly 
from the forest gloom. 



34 



NEBULA 



They, leaped from the car and ran forward, flashing torches 
up into the branches, along the ground, into the thickets. The 
captain tucked, the, rifle. under his arm. 
. Gaa^yeu-see, Aim?" 
: "No sign!" 
" Ncthmg." 

" Spread out." The captain swung his arm. The men's boots 
crackled on fallen twigs. About them the silence of the forest was 
uncanny; here they expected the never-ending night cluttering of 
wild-life and the pulsing throb of a twice-alien world. 

The minutes passed. Each tree was carefully examined. -They 
passed the blazed trunk, penetrating deeper into the forest glades. 
Above their heads the branches came together, shutting out the 
stars, To a spaceman no sight of the stars was like being buried 
alive. 

A frantic panic communicated itself to the three men. Their . 
breathing gasped loud and ragged from their chests. A simultaneous 
passion shook them, so that they raged against the trees and the 
night and against this alien planet. 

"I'm going up!" the captain shouted, beside himself with 
fury and fear and expectant terror. He began to climb awkwardly 
up the tree, the express rifle slung over his shoulder thumping him 
painfully in the kidneys at each upward lunge. The doctor's 
upflung torch beam fluttered against the tree trunk and his eyelids. 
The bark was hard and sandpapery, tearing at his flesh. 

Fifteen feet up he paused for a breather and looked about. 
Darkness encompassed everything above. Below, the two torch 
beams sprang up, half-blinding him, throwing silver splotches of 
colour onto branches and leaves. On either hand the forest 
stretched away, enigmatic, waiting, gleeing in his helplessness. 

Then he saw the first web. 

"My God!" he shouted, appalled. 

The torch beams wavered, seeming to ding together for comfort, then swerved wildly apart to focus upon the centre of the 
web. It was like looking into the spinning heart of a whirlpool. 
The web, shimmering, vibrating, immense, . seemed to suck the 
breath from his body and the sense from his mind. 

He clung to a branch, feeling dizzy and sick, and forcing 
himself to study the web and its surroundings in the flickering erratic light of the torches. . There was still nOjsign of Shepkia; / 
McGarrity . hatf blazed the tree.' Wildly, the captain mu»eurtj£ 
his body against the Jrunk,-. looking , backwards, shining hit 0f| 



SURVEY CORPSE 



35 



torch. Yes. The tree was there, the dark Scar of the shredded 
bark like a prehensile nose. Something like thirty feet separated 
the blazed tree and the tree up which the captain had climbed. 
The web filled the entire space. 

"Keep away from it!" he shouted at the doctor. The man's 
figure straightened. The torch beam made a wide drunken movement. 

"Incredible — little-finger thickness, tacky, tough; springy — -" 

"We'll see to that later. Where's Shep?" 

He was overcoming the. shock of the web now. The fantastic 
was run-of-the-mill for explorers and surveyors of the Terran 
Survey Corps. He carved the darkness with his torch, cursing the 
night. Sam's torch jumped. " Hey— McGarrity — what d'you think 
you're doing here?" 

Other torches were flickering now. Lenson and McGarrity. 
Running all the way from the spaceship to join in the rescue of 
one of their comrades. 

"Watch it, skip!" That was McGarrity, hoarse voiced, nearly 
throttled with 1 panting exertion. " There's webs all around." 

- The five men slashed their torches about in the stultifying darkness, seeking, searching, prying. McGarrity scrambled up the tree 
he had blazed. Torch between his teeth he elbowed up until 
he was ten. feet above his skipper on the other tree. Between 
them the great web pulsated. 

" Any signs?" That was Lenson, on the ground, frantic. 

" Not a one." 

Time rolled over the captain in shattering waves. Whatever 
had taken the biophysicist— spider, McGarrity had called it — might 
be doing anything now. Bilious rage spilled into the captain's 
throat. His teeth were chattering. He shone the torch carefully 
into every shadowed cranny along the periphery of the web. Ths 
silken strands jumped into and out of his line of vision like crazily 
spinning railroad tracks. 

Lenson was up the tree after McGarrity now. Sam had run 
across to th« other side; was shining his torch up. 

" There he is!" screamed the doctor. 

His torcfrpieked out the bundle, wrapped and lashed like a 
sailor's hammock, captain's teeth stopped chattering: He put 
one hand on the nearesV strand of the web. 

"Let me, skip!" McGarrity was wholly on the web now. 
His squat ugly body edged out, his carroty hair the colour of dried 
blood in the flashing torchlight The web before the captain's face 



36 



'NEBULA 



.hummed. He stared up. The bundle that was Shep swayed from 
side to side, revolving slowlyon a single suspending strand. Was 
thefe. movement above it? Were there— aire there two gleaming 
eyes? The captain peered closer. 

- "Look out, McGarrity!" He seized the web before him and 
began to shake it violently. McGarrity's body pendulumed, and 
.the lines of strain met in the web, chanelied out, flowed and sent 
confusing messages to the thing- creeping out from a dark split in 
the higher branches. 

Spider? Spider', No spider of Earth would bear the insult. 
Then— horror— spiders. 

The captain dragged his tacky fingers from the web, unslung 
his rifle, slammed the butt to his shoulder. He was over the 
shakes now. Now, he knew what had to be done. 

Lenson had seen, too. He uttered one horrified squeal and 
cowered back into the tree. Above him, above McGarrity crucified 
on the web, above the mummified form of Shepkin, the owners •of 
the web were creeping forth to collect and bundle up more victims 
entrapped by their alien witchery. McGarrity, looking up, saw what 
was descending upon him. He was now bare feet from Shepkin. 

"Come back, McGarrity I 1 " howled the doctor and Sam, dancing insanely below. Torchlight, darkness, horror, springs of primeval 
evU combining and sweltering over these men trapped in an alien 
dream on an alien planet. McGarrity forced his way higher. 3%e 
captain, saw the flash of light from the knife m hps hand. 

Shepkin fell. Both Sam and the doctor rushed together, anas 
outstretched, like comic firemen without a jumping blanket: Shepkin 
struck them and the three collapsed onto the soft moss-covered 
ground. 

The captain took a careful bead over McGarrity's shoulder 
and gently pressed the trigger. The leading— spider?— shuddered 
. under the impact. Its soft bloated body sloughed, together like a 
punctured sack. It fell, and hung suspended from the silvery 
strand spinning from its spinneret. Things were difficult to see and 
discern clearly in the livid gloom of the torch-shot forest. How 
many of these things were there, stalking forth, from their dark 
hides? 

McGarrity couldn't get down. The captain could see htm 
struggling to free himself from the web. Twice more a rifle shot 
picked off encroaching death. "Keep it up* skip!" yelled the 
doctor from below. Sam echoed:' "Keep 'em. off till we can get 
McGarrity." 


SURVEY CORPSE 



37 



The captain didn't date look down. . He . sighted again and 
*hor coolly. This was work he understood. He was doing a job 
iof work protecting his men. Lenson had moved forward in his 
tree— the whole thing had suddenly gone statuesque. 

Then Lenson saw what the captain saw too late.- The spider, 
crawling from the shadow of the trunk, .paralysing stinger putstretched, jerking forward one leg at a time; delicate, twitching, 
feeling . . . Lenson jumped. 

The captain saw McGarrity's body plastered against the 
sticky web; saw the spider enormous above him; saw Lenson's 
outward plunge that smashed his own body into the spider: 

The three 'bodies fell. Flung front the strands by the violent 
reciprocal shuddering of the web— the whole network was shimmering and humming and vibrating — the three bodies plummeted down. 
The spider flung out a foaming mass of web-material, drawn so fast 
from its body that it vomited out organs and blood and all. 

The captain slung his rifle and fell scrabbling from the tree, 
tearing strips of skin away, feeling finger nails rip and yet not 
feeling pain at all. He hit the ground and started running. 

The doctor and Sam were bending over Lenson ' and 
McGarrity. 

, Torchlight pooled under the trees. The web sang high and 
keen to itself. A tiny breeze rustled leaves furtively. 

" They're dead," the doctor said. " Both of them." 

The captain straightened up. Sam shone his torch beam 
upwards, into the web. Beyond this there were others, spreadeagled among the trees. Flying things had been trapped here and 
there and dotted the shining circles like flicked mud. The spiders 
were cat-walking back to their crannies of darkness. 

The captain lifted his rifle, sighted upwards — and then 
slackened his whitened forefinger, lowered the rifle. 

" It's their world," he said. " Killing one or two in revenge *s 
meaningless.'' 

" Shep's okay," the doctor said softly. " Drugged by the 
venom. But hell five." He had peeled back the wrappiigs from 
Shepkin's face. " The bindings broke his fall." 

Sam was shaking all. Over now; the captain could hear his 
teeth ^rattle. *'Da^cd ttptiks" Sam said., "Not real spiders; 
couldn't exist that size. Damned toads. Now we ^ know what that 
litiifc feeastie of Shep's tail was for," 



33 



NEBULA 



" Sam," said the captain sharply; " Carry Lenson down to 
the car. Doc — take McGarrity. I'll bring Shep." 

The three men from Earth carried their dead and their 
wounded back to the car and then, silently, to the spaceship. 

Behind them the forest slumbered on in its murderous sleep. 

Spades made loudi cheerful, full throated sounds. The ring 
of steel against alien rock was indecently jocular. 

" Dip deep," said the captain. " They should rest undisturbed.* 

Presently the three men — the captain, the doctor and the airman—stood, caps in hand, around the two piles of rocks. Spot 
welded duralumin crosses caught the first flush of dawn light and 
glowed milky and green before the rose tint reached down to the 
earth from the remote sky. Only— it wasn't earth. 

The captain said what it was necessary to say. They put 
their caps back on. 

" We blast off now." The captain looked slowly around on the 
alien landscape under the rising alien sun. " This is a good world. 
Men will come here and live in peace and plenty." 

" Will they ever think of these two men of the Terran Survey 
Corps who by their blood made this planet their own?" asked the 
doctor. He didn't expect an answer. 

The captain did not try to reply. He said: "Life goes on 
in a rushing helter-skelter, and there is no time to look back, in 
sorrow or in anger, when you live among the stars." He sifted 
the regulation bottle — full of dust, putting it safely in his pocket. 
"Like McGarrity always said: 'Always the misbegotten job.' 
And, like Lenson was a little steamed up about: 'We must push 
the Terran frontiers ever outwards'." The captain turned away to 
their spaceship. " Let's go." 

Sam put one foot on the bottom rung of the ladder. 
Deliberately, he spat upon the ground. ,. 

" Lousy, stinking planer," he said. 
• But they all knew who was right. 

KENNETH BULMER 



ROBERT SILVERBERG 



The World He Left 
Behind Him 

He had known deep contentment on this world 0/ idylUc 
happiness but runt), a/us, the time had come \or him to go 



Illustration by Kenneth Barr 



They had certainly gon? eat of their way to be very kind to 
him, here in this other world of warmth and lazy content. But 
Jeff Matthews was beginning to sense that perhaps he had overstayed his welcome. 
Perhaps, he thought, the time had come for him to seek the 
Gateway, if he could find it again, and at last return to the New 
York of 1963— jf indeed the. Gateway could restore him to his own 
world. i 'k 

. Matthews lay .sprawled but, near-naked, on the golden-yellow 
sands of MutriwiU Beach^ vscaJoiig. up the warm staj^goti Me .#as 
giving careful thought, to-an-unpleasant -idea: -the 4d»- ttafche. Bright 
not be wanted here. 
, .-' , '' / :''-\^v'::'-.-:_-'.v.'.. ; : ;; ; .V; 3? 



NEBULA 



It was a painful thing to have. to admit to one's self. But 
undeniably it -was so. There was no specific instance of hostility 
Matthews could point to, but in his three weeks in this other world 
he had become sensitive to subtle shades of meaning that once 
would have passed him by, and he could detect the veiled implications in the words of his new friends. 

They seemed to be telling him, Go back home. You've been 
here long enough. , 

Matthews drowsed, on a limb of a sandy, angular peninsula 
that jutted out into the sparkling sea: A cool breeze rippled down 
out of the northwest, picking up a bit of chill salt spray and hurling 
it over him/ Matthews grinned and sat up, and there was Corilee 
standing ten feet away, a grinning imp with arms akimbo, head 
thrown back, laughing at him. 

"What's the joke?" he asked her. 

"It was the way you looked when the water hit you!" she 
crkd impulsively. " You were so funny! " i: 

Matthews smiled and flicked- the sea water fromhis chin. He was 
arming rapidly in the world he still thought of as World X, and 
he felt healthier than he had ever been in his life. He was twentynine, a shade, over medium in height and just a bit on the spindly 
side, and in the world on the other focus of the Gateway he had 
been — the concept was dimming already — an electronics engineer. 
Here no electronics existed, nor any engineers; neither was needed. 
The giant thermonuclear coil at Darien Bridge provided perpetual 
power for all the world. The heritage of their past kept these people 
happy. They were utterly liberated from the toils of routine life. 

Matthews said to the girl, " Where are the others?" 

"Coming soon. ' They've caught some sort of big fish, and 
we're going to have a splendid feast Where were you all day?" 

Matthews self-consciously kicked up a sriimrnering tuft of sand 
with his bare foot 

" Alone," he said. 

"(Si)" -said the girl quietly. She smiled, the quiet gleaming 
smile that served as Matthews' mental tag for Corilee's entire 
personality, and said no more. No more was necessary. Matthews 
had invoked the code of privacy; on Murrival Beach, it was assuraed 
that a man spent time alone only when he : had some important 
matter to settle within himself that did not .concern, others. 

The sound of gay singing drifted over the dunes towards them'. 
The others were corning, now — th$ seven closest' friends Matthews 
had ever had, in all his life. " 



THE WORLD HE LEFT BEHIND HIM 



41 



- ' He had separated himself from them at dawnbreak, in order 
to be able to think through this thing in complete solitude. But 
the sacrifice of their company had turned out to be fruitless. He 
still had no answer, no way' to guide his actions. And now the 
others were coming, to invite hirrrto join their fun. 

But how sincere was their invitation, he wondered? If. he could 
read their minds, would he find lurking in them a fretful impatience, 
as if they were merely tolerating him politely until he decided, to 
plunge back through the Gateway into the madness of his own 

.world? 

The thought of that world was like a discordant shriek. He 
brushed it away and stretched out his arms towards Corilee. 
"Kiss. Before they come." 

She looked at him strangely, and he knew she was wondering 
why he had bothered to add ^hat second sentence. A kiss was a 
kiss, and what did it matter if the others were there? The people 
of Murrival Beach knew how to respect privacy, after all. 

Matthews held her tight against him for a moment, this girl of 
a world that was not Earth nor any p'art of Earth's universe, and 
felt the warmth of her sun-darkened skid against his own. But there 
was a stiffness to her response. She was holding back. Matthews 
felt more deeply troubled than he had been before. Three weeks agq, 
when he had been fresh and newly minted into this world, she had 
held back nothing; But that had been while he was still a stranger 
here, and therefore welcome. 

j. , Overhead hung the lemon-yellow sun that looked like Earth's 
sun, in the blue, cloud-flecked sky that might have been Earth's sky 
on a perfect day. But here the Weather Control station in Port 
Farragut, somewhere to the north, ensured that every day would 
be a perfect day. And this world was not Earth. 

Matthews saw the others coming over the dune now; Dawl 
and Glair were in the forefront, carrying slung between them an 
enormous glassy-eyed green fish. The rest trailed along behind, 
dancing and skipping through the sand. " 

Dawl shouted out in his booming basso, " We'll eat well tonight! Look, Jeff — it was a barehand catch!" . 

" Mirlin and Rodric hypnotized' the beast as it swam," Glair 
added in confirmation. " Then Dawl and I plunged in and hauled 
it out. You should have been there, Jeff Matthews!" 

" He was alone to-day," Corilee said. 
■ The merriment stopped abruptly. 



42 



N E BU LA 



■The seven of them stared at Matthews for a long embarrassed 
moment, as the deeper implications of Corilee's four words 
registered on them. 

Matthews warned to tell them, Okay, you've won. 1 can take 
a hint. I'll go back to the place 1 came from. I mon't impose my 
presence on you arty more,pkay? That was what they wanted him 
to say, no doubt. 

Instead; by way of breaking the sudden awkward silence, he 
said, " That's a lovely fish you've got there. What's its name?" 

"Rainbow fish," Rodric said. At his gesture Dawl and Glair 
swung the heavy creature over, to show Matthews the delicate hues 
of the spectrum along the fish's underbelly. " See?" 

"Lovely," Matthews said again. 

" We'll eat well to-day j" Dawl gloated. " Let's build the fire." 

Like parts of a single machine, the seven of them fanned out 
over the beach area to find driftwood for the cooking fire. Though 
no one had directly asked him, Matthews too began to search for 
wood, head down and eyes studying the sand. Corilee trailed along 
behind him. 

After a few paces Matthews found a gnarled brown branch 
protruding from , the sand. He wrenched it free and showed it 
triumphantly to the girl, but she shook her head sadly. 

" This is the wrong kind of wood, Jeff . It does not burn well." 

Matthews took the branch from her and savagely jammed it 
back into the ground, kicking sand over it. He had tried to 'be 
helpful, and he had failed. His lips were tightly compressed, and ._ 
he kept, his face turned away from her so she would not see his 
pained expression. At that moment he was closer to hurling himself 
through the Gateway which hung, gray and opalescent, in the air 
somewhere along this beach, than he had been at any time in all his 
stay in World X up to now. 

World X was what they had called it in those New York days 
so dimly remote, when Matthews had been an electronics engineer, 
in that other world where such words- had any meaning. 

The Gateway had had its own special name, too. Johnny 
Price, who had been the first person to test its strange properties, 
had dubbed it the Intercontinual Flux-Field Disrupter. Its invention, 
of course, had been, strictly an accident. 

The United States Air Force contract that their laboratory held 
bad commissioned them to devise a- generator for creating highgauss magnetic fields; What the Air Force • wanted high-gauss 



THE WORLD HE LfPT BEHIND HIM 43 



magnetic fields for, Jeff Matthews did not know or; care. The reason 
why was one item of data that the Air Force did not usually supply. 

The specifications called for them to design an electronic field 
generator capable of operating in a field of .ten. million gaussj what 
Matthews and: his fellow engineers, built was a force-free toroidal 
magnet producing a self-balancing three-dimensional magnetic field 
— a field in the multi-millian gauss range that had once been only 
a physicist's pipedream. 

At least, they thought they had built a magnet. It took them a 
full year from the day the first sketches went down on paper, in the 
spring of 1962, to the day when the lab. technicians tightened the 
last bolt on the finished model. 

On paper, the magnet worked. 

No one in the laboratory was quite sure what would happen 
once current was sent pulsing through it, though. A magnetic field 
of such intensity had never been artificially generated before. 

Matthews was one of eleven engineers who were allowed to be 
present at.the first tests of the new magnet. His own part in creating 
the device had been a small one. He hadn't come up with any of 
the major suggestions or made any of the important breakthroughs. 
He was simply just another engineer in the lab group. He was far 
from being the high-powered Edison or Steinmetz he had once 
pictured himself as growing up to become. 

He had grown up to become a scientist, at any rate: But either 
the time for Edisons and Steinmetzes had passed, or, what was more 
likely, he simply didn't have what it took. 

At 29, Jeff Matthews was a mediumly successful engineer who 
got his semi-annual raises when the time came for them, but who 
was invariably passed over when the laboratory director released 
the promotion lists. He was just another engineer, uncolourful and 
unspectacular. He did his job and collected his reasonably adequate 
salary, and lived by himself in a reasonably adequate three-room 
flat not far from the laboratory's Manhattan home. 

Once, he had shared the apartment with a gray cat, but the 
animal had died of natural causes after a few years, and the emotional' 
wrench of losing him had been so severe that Matthews had 
deliberately refrained from acquiring another pet and facing the 
possibility of loss again. 

: He' had once had a fiancee, too, but for some reason he had 
never quite managed to agree with her on a number of the. allegedly 
important matters of life. She had drifted out of his ken not long 



N El U LA 



after the death of me cat, and; sine* Aea Matthews' had grown 
accustomed to solitude, and almost found himself liking it. 

He had, in truth, no particular reason for staying alive. This 
fact had never occurred to him until two seconds before the hand 
of Jimmy Ludwig, the lab supervisor, closed on the toggle switch 
that controlled the new magnet. 

')rn that mornent Matthews realized mat he scarcely cared at aH 
whether or not the device exploded and blew them all to their 
constituent molecules, as it might very well do. It was curious to 
discover that he had no fear of death. But Matthews did not enjoy 
making the discovery, because it also showed him that he had no 
great need Of life. 

Jimmy Ludwig's wiry hand jerked the switch down. 

There was no explosion after all. 

Meter needles surged upwards in a frenzy of little pulsations, 
and for an instant the lights in the big, bare, windowless laboratory 
room dimmed. . Matthews watched with keen interest as a vaguely 
circular cloud issued from the magnet's core and billowed up until 
it formed an oval the height of a man, gray in colour and flecked 
with oddly undehnable splashes of other tones. 

For a long moment no one in the room spoke. 

Then Jimmy Ludwig's hoarse, puzzled voice was heard. "Damn 
— what do we have here?" 

It was a good question. Magnetic fields^ even fields of millions 
of gauss, are not supposed to be visible. The device had produced 
a result. But not, it appeared, the rigfrf result. 

At that instant, a chain of events was forged that led Jeff 
Matthews from his first startled instant of surprise to the day when 
he sent himself plunging through the Gateway. 

It began when Johnny Price, the short, husky engineer standing to the- left of Matthews, stared for a moment at the^ gray oval 
that had been formed, dug a .burned-out vacuum tube from a 
waste basket, and flipped it on a rising curve towards the field. 

The tube did not fall to the other side. Nor was the tube 
consumed in a burst of flame. The tube simply vanished. 

The next few days Were days of furious activity for the 
engineers who worked in Laboratory 9. The whole wing of the 
building was immediately cordoned off and placed under top classification while they set about figuring out just what is was they had 
produced.' ' ■■ : »■■■.• 

On the third day, someone tad the happy idea -of constructing 



THE WORLD ME LEFT BEHIND HIM 



45 



a periscope ithat could be: pushed through the field. This suggest 
lion came after someone else had already thrust . a wooden yardrule through up CO the fifteen-inch mark, and had withdrawn it 
apparently unharmed, 

The periscope was duly constructed— it was a lengthy aluminium tube with the proper arrangement of mirrors— and two gloved 
Jechnicians, eyeing tie gray oval field uneasily, propped the tube 
up in a sling harness that allowed one end to project some three 
feet into the field. That way, an observer would be able to peer 
through the eyepiece without actually coming into possibly 
dangerous physical, contact with the tube. 

It happened that Jeff Matthews Was in the laboratory, standing near the eyepiece when the periscope was installed, and so he 
was the first to look into the tube — not out of any consuming 
curiosity, but simply because he was closest and felt someone ought 
to take a look. 

He stared for a long minute. When he finally drew his head 
away from the tube, he was pale and puzzled-looking and unsettled. 

He said in a quiet yoke, "Hell, there's a, whole world in 
there!" 

There was. His single long glimpse had revealed to his 
bewildered eye a broad curving golden beach lapped by foamy 
blue-green waves. 

- : There were people on the beach, not alien monsters, but 
ordinary human beings, happy-looking, tanned men and . women 
wearing the barest minimum of clothing. 

They were gathered together, pointing towards the periscope 
with some interest, and evidently they were discussing the strange 
intrusion. 

At first Matthews thought that he must be having delusions. 
But then he called someone else over, and the other man also 
sawthe elysian scene. 

" I don't believe it," he muttered. 

" It doesn't matter whether you believe it or not," Matthews 
said. "It's there. We both saw it. Either you're having my_ 
delusions and I'm having yours, or else that place is really there." 

It could not be argued away. The scene on the other side of 
the Gateway was no mere South Seas fantasy produced by Matthews! 
imagination. There was a beach on the other side of the strange 
field. There was a whole world there. As they watched, the 
bathers vanished rapidly from sight and night seemed to fall— but, 



46 



NEBULA 



before long* the sun was rising again! in that other world. This 
time, however, there were no- bathers 1 to be seen. 

It was not long before the laboratory workers were terming 
it World X and they had constructed half a dozen various hypotheses 
to explain its presence. 

The notion that Matthews liked best suggested that the sudden 
concentration Of intense magnetic force had in some way ruptured 
the boundaries of the space-time continuum and had opened a gateway into some parallel world. 

According to that theory, , World X was nowhere in the real 
universe, but off in some cloudy pocket of might-have-been. The 
idea was an appealing one. It was tentatively adopted as the most 
reasonable explanation, in the absence of any less far-fetched theory. 

The discovery raised certain problems. The Air Force had 
asked for a supermagnet, not for a parallel world. It was going to 
prove difficult to explain to the pennywise contract supervisors that 
the results that had been attained, while highly interesting in themselves, were not precisely the ones that had been ordered. 

For that reason a tight security blanket was clamped around 
the discovery. No word of it was allowed to pass the confines of 
Laboratory 9. Not until every implication had been explored would 
any sort of report on the finding be issued. 

And so, in the three days between the creation of the Gateway 
and the time when Jeff Matthews reached his decision and resigned 
from the human race of A.D. 1963, almost continuous study of the 
strange phenomenon went on. Steady observation of the Gateway 
showed that the people on the other side were staying away from it; 
occasionally a tanned form ran fieetingly past, but was lost from 
sight almost at once. .-■■ -».. 

The idea, at first not even consciously recognized, grew in 
Matthews during the next two days. A periscope and various other 
things had gone through and had returned with no apparent harm. 
Why not a human being? 

There was a' world Waiting on the other side of the Gateway. 
And he, Jeff Matthews, was-^-ft was a depressing admission to make 
— so Utile bound to the world he inhabited that it wouldn't matter 
greatly to himself,: or: to anybody else, if he were to vanish permanently through the yawning Gateway. 

Naturally he made -no attempt to broach this suggestion 
officially^ There were limits tor the sort of experimentation a rather 



THE WORLD HE LEFT BEHIND HIM 



47 



conservative laboratory would or could condone, and beyond question his idea definitely passed any reasonable limits. 

Besides, any request to the effect that a volunteer be allowed to 
go through the Gateway would, if it were, taken at all seriously, 
have to work its way up the channels to Washington and back— 
and the answer, when it finally came, would almost certainly be No. 
lives, particularly the lives of trained engineers, are not risked 
casually for experimental purposes in democratic societies, no matter 
how willing the volunteer may be. 

So Matthews volunteered more privately. He simply fixed his 
resolve in his own mind, and stayed late at the laboratory on the 
third night. 

After the others had left, and before the watchman had begun 
his rounds, Matthews let himself into. Laboratory 9, where, the gray 
oval field still hovered in the air as it had ever since the moment, a 
few days earlier in the week, when the field had first been switched 
on. Matthews brought with him a small tape recorder that he had 
borrowed from another lab section. 

He set the reels going and dictated a brief last statement. He 
explained that he was*going through the Gateway in the interests of 
science, and politely requested that the field be left on until he had 
a chance to return. 

He intended only a short stay on the other side— a few hours, 
at the most. Just in case he never did come back, he cautiously 
added a word or two about the disposition of his few personal possessions, which he wanted sent to a married brother living in 
Louisiana. 

. When he had said all he cared to say, he switched the recorder 
off, reeled the tape back to the beginning, and attached a signed 
note to it asking that one of the laboratory officials should play the 
tape. ' 

Then he took a deep breath and a final look around, climbed 
on a chair, and leapfrogged through the Gateway and into what he 
and the other engineers jokingly called World X. 

There was no sensation of transition. It was a clean, even 
plunge that brought him down, not on the bare laboratory floor on 
the far side of the apparatus, but on soft warm sand. 

Getting to his feet, .Matthew& looked back quickly and saw the 
Gateway still hovering behind him. 

A soft deep voice said, " Hello. I'm Glair.". 
■ Matthews did not stop to wonder why he understfiod the 



N EB U I A 



other's language. .This was. a world very much like Earth in many 
respects, and if it contained human beings it was reasonable, he' 
thought, to find oneself understanding their language. 

Matthews saw a man who seemed to be in his middle twenties, 
tall, sun-bronzed,, with the long, flat, rippling muscles of a fiat 
switomer. He wore only a kind of twisted bright-coloured loincloth*. 

" 1 saw you come through the Gateway," the man who called 
himself Glair went on. "Are you all right, or do you want to-be 
left alone?" 

Dizzy, Matthews shook his head slowly from side to side. " No 
—stay here— — " 

" Very well. Will you mind if the others come over to have a 
look at you?" 

" Of course not. I mean " 

But the others were coming anyway. They were big, handsome 
men and finely formed women, who were making their way over the 
shifting dunes to the place on the beach where Matthews had, 
appeared. Superficially they all resembled each other. The .other 
three men were each cleanly and powerfully built and tanned like 
Glair; the four women were only a trifle smaller, looking like suadarkened sprites. . 

They formed a loose circle around Matthews, curious, responsive, unafraid. He found his own nameless fears of a moment before 
melting away. 

He said boldly, " I'm Jeff Matthews— I'm from New York City, 
Earth, the year 1963. Tell me: do these things mean anything to 
you?" 

A girl stepped forward, and a smile danced in her golden eyes. 
"This is Murrival Beach," she said. "The year is 761. Did you 
come through the Gateway?" 

"Yes." 

" We've watched the Gateway all day," the girl said. " First 
this thing came through"— she produced the blackened vacuum 
tube from a pouch at her hip — " and then a few minutes later that 
long metal' tube, and then after that there were other things— and 
now you!" She smiled and added irrelevantly, " My name is 
Corilee." 

Matthews nodded. She was a beautiful girl, reminding him in 
some ways of the half-forgotten girl he had once called his fiancee, 
reminding him in other ways of me sleek, graceful cat he had once 
loved. Any thought of an immediate return through the Gateway 



THE WORLD; ME LEFT BEHIND HIM « 




died instantly. This new world held too much that he had to savour 
and experience; first. 

Corilee mtroduced him to the others. The men, besides Glair, 
were named Dawl, Mirlin, and Rodric; the other three womengirls, really, or else ageless witches— called themselves Jirath, 
Torilid, Hastur. Odd names, oddly pronounced, but they clung 
in his memory. 

The eight of them formed a sort of group, living together on 
the beach, fishing and playing and singing. In those first few hours 
in the other world it seemed- to Matthews that there was little else 
in life for these people but singing and playing' and fishing; later; 
he was to learn of the subtle texture of their emotional relationships, 
that gave depth 'and meaning to what otherwise would be idle and 
parasitic lives. 

But that knowledge was to come later. Now, they surrounded 
him,, giggling, and stripped away his clumsy 1963-clothes, -leaving 
them strewn on the* sand. : ' 

They half-dragged him down to the edge of the sea. For more 
man an hour they frolicked wildly in the water 5 and when that sport 



50 



N E B U LA 



palled the man named Rodric produced a loincloth for Matthews 
similar to the ones the others wore. It was an important symbolic 
act. In a sUenvunsrK)ken 3 .un^ realized, they 

had accepted him. The stranger from nowhere had become one of 
the Group. 

He tried to ask questions about the world he had entered, but 
either his playmates knew surprisingly little or else they were 
choosing to conceal things from him. 

They told him that the year was 761, -but no one seemed to 
know or care what event it was from which the numbering stemmed. 
No mention was made of any part of the world but Murrival Beach, 
which apparently extended for hundreds of miles. It was as if the 
beach were the entire world — or, at least, the only part of the world 
that mattered to the Group. 

The Group lived in a rambling, strangely-designed mushroomshaped house several miles from the sea, and Rodric told him once 
that all the power that was needed to run the house came from a 
perpetual setf-replenishing power coil located at a place called 
Darien Bridge— a coil which, Matthews learned, by skilful questioning, provided thermonuclear power. It had been built " long ago," 
when the world had been much different. But these people went 
close-mouthed when Matthews tried to elicit points of history from 
them. . . * ' ' 

Before long he, realized that they simply did not know. Life 
for them began and ended on Murrival Beach in the year 761. 
Matthews stopped asking questions, about other places and times. 

And as he entered further into the life of the Groups during 
the next few weeks, he began to see why their thoughts were ,■ 
anchored so firmly in the present, The past, now. deep in enfplding 
shadow, had been a time of troubles as well as of scientific development; the future, pegged on the achievements of the . past, was 
changeless and serene, so why worry about it? . AH that remained, 
was the present, eternally golden. 

Matthews swam and fished and sang. His ciry-atrpphied 
muscles swelled and hardened. His soot-clogged lungs drank in the 
winelike air. His skm blistered at first, reddened, then began to 
turn to bronze. 

Corilee came to him as a lover. Not exclusively, of course— 
an exclusive monopoly of any person's emotions would be both 
obscene and unthinkable in such a society— but his emotional bond 



THE WORLD HE LEFT BEHIND HIM 



51 



with her was deeper than any he felt with any of the other members 
of the Group. 

In the second week they migrated, leaving their home on the 
beach - and heading southward a distance of some twenty miles. 
There, a new home waited unoccupied for them. 

Matthews realized vaguely that in migrating he was leaving the 
Gateway somewhere behind him, but that mattered very little to 
him. When the time came for him to go back to his own world,, 
he would- probably be. able to find it again. And if he failed— well, 
no loss. He was a member of the Group. New York, the lab, the 
so-called real world, all such" things were faded and false, memories 
beside the warm and undeniable reality of Corilee and the Group. 

His perceptions heightened; his mind was keen, his eyes clear 
and sharp. He realized that for twenty-nine years he had been only 
half alive. 

Gradually he resolved never to go back. He would remain 
here on the beach forever. 

And simultaneously it became clear to him that staying here 
forever would be impossible. The Group did not really want him, 
not even Corilee. Small things told him that— a guarded halfrebuke, a hooded chill. They, were merely being polite to him. 
Their code evidently dictated that strangers were to be accepted 
into the Group. 

But they were waiting, however patiently, for him to go home. 

The night they feasted on the rainbow-fish, Matthews decided 
to have it out with them. They sat, the eight of them and he, 
round a smouldering fire Mirlin and Jirain had built from the wood 
gathered by the others. The bony remnants of the great fish swung 
from the spit, and the smell of the succulent white meat still lingered 
in the air. Dawl was strumming a musical instrument of some 
strange kind, a contorted elbow-bent thing that seemed like a sort 
of diswrted guitar, and he was singing a wordless harmonic melody 
to, his own- accompaniment Matthews nestled next to Corilee, but 
to-night he took no comfort from her nearness. 

In the silence that followed Dawl's intricate improvisation," 
Matthews looked up and said loudly, " I would like to speak." 

Eight heads inclined interestedly towards min. Matthews felt 
his stomach churning tensely. These people were. so polite, so 
good, and yet what he had to say amounted virtually to an accusation of rudeness veiled by outward civility. 



51 



NEBULA 



He lefdly knew how to begin. 

The silence grew and became almost embarrassing. At length 
Matthews burst but with : " You've all been very "good to me. I 
came t you as a stranger, from another place, with different ways— '• 
and you've taken me right into your midst." 

" We believe in kindness to strangers," Rodric said agreeably. 
" When you appeared on the beach, What else could we have done 
but ofter you friendship ?" 

" But you havetit, really !" Matthews blurted but. He sensed 
disturbjed uneasiness growing among them. " You've let me join the 
Group, sure, and you treat me as an equal. But — I'm going to speak 
bluntly now— I've gotten to fee! that you're all marking time with 
me. Waiting for me to go back where I came from. You're all too 
damned polite to come out and say, it, but you're hinting at it. You 
don't want me here !" 

" We are very fond of you," Glair said madly. 

" We all love you deeply," Torilid added in a soft tone. 

" But you all want me to go home. Why don't you say it out 
loud? Say that you just don't want me around?" 

■ As he spoke, Matthews realised bleakly that if he were wrong, if 
the symptoms he had thought he detected had all been imaginary, 
then he had just destroyed his place in the Group anyway. He had 
externalised an unpleasant emotion — and, in this placid society, one 
was supposed to refrain from making disturbing outbursts of the 
sort he was indulging in now. 

' But it was too late to take back the words. He could only 
forge ahead now. 

He stared at eight darkened unhappy -faces and said, " I liked 
it here. But I don't want to impose myself on you. I'll take the 
hint and go back through the Gateway to the place where I belong. 
I'll leave tonight. The Gateway is north of here, isn't it ?" 

Quietly Dawl said, "You misunderstand, Jeff. -Our friendship 
for you is real. But there is danger for us in letting you stay here." 

Hastur took up the explanation. " Others might come through 
the Gateway in search of you," she said. " And we might not like 
the oHiers as well as you. Or perhaps we would find ourselves 
exposed to regular visitations— tourists, or even an army of 
conquejst." 

" So you see,? Mirlin went, on evenly, "we've been quietly 
hoping that you would decide to go back of your own free will, as 



THE WORLBAHEAEFT BEHIND HIM S3 



a kind -of sacrifice for the good of the Group, and — and close the 
Gateway so no others can come through!" 
• A lump formed in Matthews' throat as he saw fully what an 
egocentric idiot he had been. The subtle ostracism had existed, all 
right. But it had not been aimed at him personally. They sincerely 
liked him, even wanted him as a member of the Group. But so long 
as the Gateway remained open, the entire beach way of life was in 
danger. He was the logical person to end that danger. By returning to his own world and shutting off, the Gateway field, he could 
repay them for, the three weeks of happiness he had shared with 
them. 

His voice was husky as he said, " Now I understand. I'm— 

I'm sorry. I didn't realise that — that " He moistened his 

lips . ■ "I'll start north tonight. Back to the Gateway." 

The eight of them insisted on accompanying him on the northward journey, despite his protests. It took them four days and four 
nights to make the short trip, and on the fifth morning Matthews 
found himself once again facing the vague purplish hole in the 
air through which he had made his entrance to Murrival Beach. 

They embraced him, one at a time, Glair first and Corilee last. 
Gorilee's embrace was warmer than the . rest, and longer-lasting, and 
it seemed to be as painful for her to let go as it was for him. But 
her eyes were dry as she smiled goodbye to him. 

Matthews looked at them all, at Dawl and Glair and Mirlin 
and Rodric, Jirain and Torilid and Hastur and especially Corilee. 
Then he turned to face the Gateway. 

It hung a foot above the surface of the sand. Matthews did 
not want to linger now that the time of departure had come. He 
took a last single breath of sea-salted air and hopped through. 

He expewed^M^feid himself returned to the lab. He was 
anticipating the possible knee-jarring drop to the hard floor. He 
was also ready to accept, the possHfty of simply being dissolved 
and scattered into the void. 

The one eventuality 1 he was not prepared for was going 
through the Gateway and emerging, on the other side, still on 
Murrival Beach. ' I 

He had definitely remained on the beach. He had hopped 
forward some three fee/' on the sand, through and beyond the 
Gateway, but otherwise he did not appear to have travelled. Irrational joy welled up/m him. He turned to offer his apologies, to 
say to them, Sartyf 1 tried, but I guess I s<ay here after .all I 



54 



NEBULA 



He was alone. . 

The wind blew scattering gusts, of sand over the surface of 
the beaeby and cream-white seabirds wheeled and shrieked 
raucously overhead. The Group had vanished. And so . had the 
Gateway. 

Matthews remained quite still for one numb moment, then 
knelt and picked up a handful of the warm sand and tossed it 
about in perplexity. The weather now seemed a trifle cooler, and 
it was undoubtedly later in the day than it had been before his leap: 
The sun was lower in the sky, and he could clearly see the- rising 
crescent of the moon against the backdrop of darkening blue. He 
had begun his leap in mid-morning and now it was late afternoon. 

Someone was coming towards him from below, from the edge 
of the sea. Matthews narrowed his eyes and saw that it was Glair. 
Glair was dressed now not in the purple loincloth he had worn 
that morning, but in a red one. 

Matthews trotted forward to meet him. 

He said to Glair, " Well, it didn't work. I'm still here. Where 
did everyone go?" 

Glair's normal amiability seemed shaken for a moment. He 
frowned in blank surprise. Then he managed his old smile and 
said, "Hello. I'm afraid I don't know you." 

"Don't know me?" Matthews repeated. "Glair, is this a 
joke?" ' 

"You know my name!" Glair cried. "How is that?" 

" Of course I know your name I I'm Jeff— don't tell me you've 
forgotten me?" 

"Jeff}" Glair pronounced the word as if it were utterly alien 
to his tongue. 

"Of course," Matthews persisted. "I went through the 
Gateway just now, but nothing seemed to happen. I'm still here 
on Murrival Beach in the year 761." 

The polite smile slowly left Glair's face. He ran' his tongue 
speculatively round the edges of his lips and inally said, " You 
are mistaken. This year is 758." 

"But— — " 

Matthews stopped. A rush of confusing ideas burst upward 
through his brain. If this were really 758, then he could see why 
Glair didn't know him. But how could he have stepped through 
the Gateway and remained in World X, three years earlier than 
his point of departure, instead of returning to his own world and 
time? And why 'had the- Gateway vanished?


The world he left behind him 



55 



He recalled words Corilee had spoken. 

We've watched the Gatetitay dl day. First this thing came 
through, and then a few minutes later that- long meted tube, and 
'thens&fter-- Ikat'^there were other things — and now you!. 

He hadn't paid close attention to her words. She had said, 
the, Group had watched these things happen all in the sanies- day, 
within the span of an hour or two. But, thought Matthews with 
growing wonder, it had been three whole days between the time 
Johnny Price had flipped the vacuum tube through the Gateway 
and the moment Matthews himself had taken the plunge. 

Three days— in an hour or two ! 
• " You look troubled," Glair said. " Do you want to be alone?" 

Matthews nodded. " Yes, yes, please. I— have to work out a 
few things for myself." 

Glair trotted away. Matthews shut his eyes for a moment and 
tried to reason it out, wrestling with the strange concepts. 

Three days Had taken just an hour or so here. 

Suppose, he asked himself, suppose World X really is a parallel 
world? Just like Earth in every respect, except that its time flows 
faster. What was 1963 in my world was perhaps 2500 in World X 
when I crossed the Gateway. 

But time moves faster in World X than on Earth, and so I've 
returned to my own world at a much later point than when I left 
it. This isn't World X now — this is Earth, my own Earth! I've 
returned to my own world at roughly the place along its timestream that World X had reached when my world was at the 1963 
point 

His head began to ache. He saw that he had made a zigzag 
round trip.: from 1963 in his own world to 2500 or so of the 
parallel world, and then back again across the Gateway, landing 
this time in A.D. 2500 or so of his own world. In a sense he had 
leaped across time and, instead of 'making a complete return, had 
gone only a fraction of the distance back to his own time. 

And now that he had made the circuit across the gap and 
back, the Gateway was gone. In this world, it had long since 
been shut off. 

. In World X, now irretrievable on the other side of the timer 
flow, the year 761 was-long gone, the strange yjsitor , long forgotten; 
But here the time had not yet come. He -was new . here. Perhaps' 
his explanation was all wrong. It did not; matter. 



NEBULA 



Only one thing mattered. He was. back in his omn, world but 
not in his own time. He was in the era when happy beings lived 
on Murrival Beach, somewhere in his own future. 



Matthews jogged oyer to where Glair was standing . and saidi 
**I think I owe you an apology. I assumed you knew me. Bat 
yen, really don't know me, Glair. Not yet, anyway." MattheWls 
chuckled. ... " 

Confusion darkened Glair's face. "I'm .afraid I don't follow 
what you mean." 

"Of course you don't. Brit TO explain everything, I promise." 

Matthews took a deep breath of the tangy, exhilarating air. He 
stopped worrying about the true nature of the complex criss-cross 
in time and space be had executed. It would take a first-rate thinker 
to unravel the skein, and he had never been a first-rate thinker. 411 
that counted was that he had looped outward in time and now the 
Gateway no longer existed as a threat to the beach people, fie 
could win their friendship a second time. Now they would not 
subtly force him to leave* 

" The others in the Group," Matthews said to Glair. " Whew 
are they?" 

"At the edge of the sea, where the waves' break. Some are 
swirnming:'' 

" And is Gorilee there?" 

Glair looked more puzzled than ever. "Yes." 

" And Dawl, and Mirlih, and Rodric? Jirain, Torilid, 
Hastur?" 

" You know all our names. I wish " 

, "TO explain later," Matthews promised. He grinned cheerfully at Glair, feeHng an upsweflMg happiness that was impossible 
to express. He had been reprieved, He had been given a second 
chance. He had returned to the world he left l>«Kad him, and it 
had become the world he wanted" 

He started to sprint over the dunes down to, the sea,, to the 
plsce where the waves broke, where the Group swam. To Cerilee. 
She~did not know him yet But now there was plenty of time for 
them to get acquainted ail ever again * 



ROBERT S1LVERBERG 



MARK PATRICK 



The Return 



The little creatures on the nearby planet made good 
hunting— but closer contact had been strictly forbidden 



Illustration by John J. Greengrass 



". i l . you ham committed the unforgivable sin . . . 
regrets . . . licence revoked . . . unforgivable sin , . . 
- unforgivable sin . . .** 

He came out of the blackness after what had seemed millennia 
. . , and the voice was still there I Not so shrill perhaps, not even 
so loud, but still hammering at his brain with the solid persistence 
of a pile-driver; still rilling his head with a fury of sound. A 
sentence of death . . . a living .death ... or something that was 
worse than dcathf 

He groatied'and opened his eyes slowly. When they had 
adjusted themselves to his surroundings he. had some initial difficulty 
in recognising the room in which he lay— he was, indeed, surprised 
that he should be in a room. He had to smile when he realised 
that he was home — and then everything was all right. 
' ••• "Hello therel" 

57 



NEBULA 



"Hi!" ' 

He. lifted a tired limb and immediately felt her touch. She 
was there, of course ... she would always be there, whenever she 
was most needed. A comfort without equal. Already the other 
voice was beginning to recede; the trip-hammers had slowed down 
in his head and he was rapidly regaining possession of all his 
faculties. Some time would have to pass, he knew, befor«£he would 
be himself again but at least the process of returning to normal 
had begun to take its course. 

" He're, drink this." A container was pushed into his hand. He 
grimaced, knowing what was in it. It wasn't the first time he had 
had a hangover. "Go on ! " she ordered. He could smell the nearness of her, her perfume, that he had learned to recognise and love 
so well. He drank down the concoction without a word and made 
another face as it seemed to eat its way down his throat. It was 
quite another two minutes before he could be sure he would not 
be sick. 

" Home is the hunter," she said in a tight little voice that: had 
obviously been meant to convey some degree of cheerfulness to the 
proceedings and had not succeeded. 

" How long was it this time?" he asked. 

" Five days." 

"Hell!" He sat -up in bed, surprised that he could still balance 
his head on his shoulders and, in spite of the ache and the stillclinging nausea, finally swung round until his feet were on the 
floor. " Were you at the spaceport to meet me when we landed?" 

" I got there a little late. They told me you'd gone up to 
headquarters. I waited for you but when you didn't show up 1 
came home. I've been here ever since." 

" You — you know about it?" 

She nodded. There was a suspicion of tears in her green eyes. 
" Some. But I can't say I'm sorry." 

" But you know how I— I " He could not finish. How 

many times in the past had he tried to explain the feelings of a 
man on the Hunt. It wasn't only the bounty paid 1 by the company 
... it was ... it was ., . Well, how did one explain it? 

"I understand." She gave his hand a squeeze and took the 
glass from him. He stared as she did it He had forgotten all 
about it. 

" Who found me?" 

"You found yourself apparently." She stood up and walked 
across the room to the dresser. -He watched with admiring eyes. 



THE RETURN 



59 




She had a way of walking that was all her own; as though the air was 
composed of cotton wool and she had to push against it to get 
along. This was his wife. The most beautiful woman on the 
planet — in the whole darn solar system. 

"What a fool I am," he said, speaking mostly to himself. 
" I spend more than a year away from home and then, when I 
finally do make planetfall, it takes me five days to get around to 
coming home to a woman like you." 

She seemed to sway and the glass fell from her hands to the 
floor. It smashed to a hundred little pieces on the hard plastic. 

" You all right?" he queried. v 

"Don't get up." She restrained him with a wave of the hand. 
" I guess you could say that. I'm happy. I'll have you with me for 
always now." 

He swore. "You know what this means to me?" 

" It isn't entirely on your account that I'm happy," she went 
on. " Do we have to go on hunting those poor creatures as though 
they were wild, animals?" 

He sighed. They had been through it all before. A question 


60 



NEBULA 



of economics in the first place he had told her. This planet was. 
about played out; it would be time to move house soon, probably 
within the next two hundred years. In the meantime ... 

"... we've always been a race of hunters. And who'd have 
thought that such game could exist in the same system? Only 
fifty million miles away ... killing two birds with one stone . . . 
mixing business- with pleasure. And with a bounty on each 
head . . ." 

" Poor savages!" she would say. 

" They may be savages now," he had told her. " But believe 
me there's plenty of evidence on that little ball to indicate that theirs 
was once a flourishing civilisation. Why, they look so much like 
us they might be our ancestors — or our descendants, in spite of 
their funny shaped heads and their physique and the fact that they 
don't have as many fingers as we have . . ." 

"Isn't there room for both races?" 

"We could never live together. It's the survival of the fittest" 

" And how long ..." ' 

" They'll last another hundred and fifty years. We'll have 

plenty of sport before they are exterminated and we can really 

take over." 

" How long have I been home?" he asked presently. 

" About ten hours. You've been practically dead since then — 
except for an occasional groan and some delirium concerning — a 
voice." 

" The voice of doom. I'm all washed up. Do you know what 
I did?" 

She nodded, " What they call the unforgivable sin?" 

" Yes." He rubbed his eyes. " Do you want to hear about it?" 

"Not particularly. Was — was she beautiful?" 

"I don't know. I was drunk — and a long way from home. 
I thought you didn't want to hear about it?" 

" They, aren't so different, are they?" The expression on her 
face was almost a sneer. "They' don't take any chances, do they? 
Don't mix the blood. Kill them, kill as mafly as you can, but 
for pity's sake don't make love to them . . .'\ 
... "Look ..." he 'began. ... ; .. "'" 

" Don't worry." She bent down and started to retrieve the 
scattered shards. ..." I'm not going to cry. At least it has brought 
you home for good. I never thought you would break that tule 
bn*o4Sur gfad yon did." ., . £ 


THE RETURN 



61 



He looked around turn. " This is going to take some getting 
usee to." ' 

"So I can' imagine. What are you going to do?" 

" I don't really know." He .brightened perceptibly and could 
only put it down to the fact that he was relieved at the way she 
had taken it. "Maybe I can get a job with the Canal Board." He 
stretched his arms. " We won't live to see it, but, you know, when 
the move does take place, there's, going to be considerable joy at 
not having to build canals ..." 

She suddenly cried out with pain and he was- at her side in an 
instant. , 

" What is it?" 

-" I've cut myself on the glass." 

She held up a six-fingered hand and he could see the bright 
green blood dripping to the floor. A sudden wave of tenderness 
came over him and he took her, in his arms. They kissed and then, 
within seconds, were laughing ... 

Outside, the twin moons of Mars looked down on a dying 
world of hunters. 

MARK PATRICK 



BRIAN W. ALDISS 



The Lieutenant 



This vile and evil life-form which would Conquer 
Earth was capable of actions unthinkable to man 



Illustration by John J. Greengrass 



The lieutenant enjoyed commanding. Without any hesitation, 
he gathered up the fifteen men who were left into a squad, saw that 
they were armed with the nuclear weapons lying scattered in -the 
area, and then addressed them. 

" As you men must realise, the general situation is desperate. Our 
particular situation, however, can be improved. This part of England 
must now be regarded as enemy territory, and it is up to us to get 
out of it as soon as possible. We shall take two abandoned trucks 
and move roughly West, towards Stow-on-the-Wold and the 
Cotswold defences. The sooner we start the better ; I want us to be 
well on our way before dark. Rations will be eaten on the move. 
I shall ride in the, front truck, Corporal Bow will ride in the other." 
; Corporal Bow was a stocky man with spectacles and a Geordie 
accent. He looked hard and resourceful. Although no more than 
twenty-three, his rare smile revealed two rows of almost whimsically 
62 



THE LIEUTENANT 



63 



false teeth. Apart from him and the lieutenant, all the other men 
were infantry privates, most of them very young. 

Without fuss, the squad divided into two and climbed up into 
the 3-tonners. The lieutenant watched them professionally, judging 
their morale. Some of these men had actually faced the enemy. 
They spoke little now, but gave no sign of apprehension. One of 
them called out " Tickets please " as his mates climbed aboard. 

Love and pride rose in the lieutenant. He did not analyse these 
emotions, beyond knowing that they made him happy by rendering 
him beyond fear — or at least beyond cowardice. Still in his late 
twenties, he was full of that idealism which the Army either fosters 
strongly or stamps out entirely. Glancing at his watch, he saw it 
was 5.30. The month was September; in an hour it would be growing' dark. He allowed himself to dwell briefly on -the coming 
midnight, when he would halt the trucks; in his mind's eye he saw 
himself directing the men to comfortable houses to sleep, while he 
sat studying a map by torchlight, finally rolling himself in a blanket 
to sleep on the floor of one of the trucks. 

Putting thjs sentimental vision of service away, clapping his map 
case cheerfully against his leg, the lieutenant walked round to speak 
to the driver of the rear truck. 

" Keep us always in sight," he ordered. " If you wish to attract 
our attention, use your horn. Remember, at any sign of the enemy 
we shall stop at once; so don't run into us." 

As he went round to the front of his own truck, he called into 
the back of it, " Everyone comfortable in there ?" and received cries 
of assent. 

" Alright !" he said, swinging himself up beside his driver, " let 
her roll !" The phrase was — inwardly he admitted it — a concession 
to the drama of the situation. 

The driver, a dark, gipsyish little fellow with a wreath tattooed 
on his wrist, kept his eyes on the road ahead and did not speak for 
half an hour. The two trucks moved down the deserted highroads 
steadily, reassuringly, the rear one always keeping the other's tailboard in sight. Soothed by their progress; the lieutenant relaxed a 
little. As his mind shifted from the clear path of duty, he began to 
worry over small things he could less easily dear with. Even the 
driver's silence began to trouble him; he liked to feel in rapport 
with his men. 

Beyond: the. window, evidences of the enemy's depredations 
accumulated. Sometimes their guide lines lay coiled by the side of 



64 



NEBULA 



the road, or entangled in trees, or stretched for miles acrqss the 
dulling countryside. As they turned onto the A41, a village confronted them which had been almost consumed by fire. Parts of it 
«rjll smouldered; a small band of men ran behind a smoking wall as 
the.Iorries appeared. Presumably the place had begun to burn in 
a panic caused by the invaders. 

'■ Nice smell- here— suppet cooking, I wouldn't wonder," the 
driver grunted to the lieutenant a little later when .they passed a 
small hamlet. This was his oblique way of referring to the stench 
of human corruption, suddenly so strong it nearly curdled the air. 
Slowing his truck, the driver leant out of his window; looking for 
bodies. 

They saw enemy bodies too, disintegrating rapidly. At one 
small town they made a detour through side roads, the main road 
being completely under the enemy's netting. At other points along 
the route they met human survivors, walking, listlessly waiting, 
thumbing a lift. Some villages were unharmed, some completely 
. unaltered except for barricades at windows and doors. Everything 
emphasised the randomness of the enemy's attack. 

Evening drew in. The sun disappeared behind a hill. Darkness 
was like a positive quality radiated by the ground, a primitive thing 
opposing the senses. 

" Shall I switch our lights on ?" the driver asked; his voice was 
reluctant, even surly — though whether through habit, as the 
lieutenant suspected, or because he recognised in himself a dread of 
night, it would be hard to determine. 

" Wait a bit longer," the lieutenant replied, and as he spoke 
they saw the enemy. The driver killed his engine; the truck stopped 
dead. Behind it, the other truck did the same. 

Round the lieutenant's neck hung a pair of service binoculars. 
Opening his door, he stood with his feet inside the cab, and peered 
through the binoculars over the roof of the lorry. 

The enemy were flying, on a course that would eventually bring 
them across the road. There were fifteen of them by the lieutenant's 
count. They were high, in sunlight, the sun glinting on their 
retracted forward blades, glinting on the fifteen guide lines spread 
out behind them. 

Removing the binoculars from bis eyes, the lieutenant looked 
about him. The second truck was a few yards down the road, within 
shouting distance. Men in both trucks peered out to see why they 
had stopped. '■- '■• " 



THE LIEUTENANT 



65 



"Can we have a shot at the. blighters if they come nearer ?" 
one of the men in the lieutenant's truck 'called to him, 

" We will hot bother them if they don't bother us," the 
lieutenant said. 

Everyone watched in silence then, and the enemy sailed on in 
silence. As they got higher in the sky, they , swerved in perfect 
unison, bodies glinting gold. The great arc they moved on took them 
eastwards. They dwindled, dulled as they lost the sun. In a 
minute more they were hidden from view by cloud. 

Slowly the lieutenant climbed back into his seat, conscious of 
anticlimax. 

" Move on ?" the driver enquired. He got a nod for an answer. 

Twilight was thick about them and their pace had dropped to 
a crawl as they entered Aylesbury. Glancing at his wrist watch, the 
lieutenant saw that they had made good progress. He decided 
abruptly on an alteration of plans, abandoning the idea of travelling 
on till midnight 

" We are going to turn off the main road," he announced. 
" This will be where we halt for the- night. Go slow." 

The driver grunted. Moving at a crawl, still without lights, 
they came on a left turn between neat semi-detached houses. 

" Turn in here." 
They swung round carefully, past an overturned and deserted 
milk van. The road curved until it ran parallel with the main road. 
Discreet little houses with their own gardens, shielded from the 
public gaze by shrubs and ornamental trees, stood on both sides 
of them. 

" Good. Stop here," said the lieutenant. 

Jumping, down as soon as his driver braked, the lieutenant 
walked back to meet the second truck. In the first, the men were 
restless, and he told them to stay where they were. As the other 
vehicle drew up, Corporal Bow jumped out. He saluted. 

".I have decided we will stay here for the night," the lieutenant 
said. " There seems to be some enemy activity, and our headlights 
might easily give us away. We should be able to find rations here 
without breaking into our own." 

"Aylesbury ducklings,", reminded the corporal. It was his 
only comment : the lieutenant had hoped for something more 
explicit in the way of approval. 

" Everyone out of the trucks," he said sharply. " Fall in in 



66 



NEBULA 



threes. Corporal Bow, take charge of .the squad. I am going to see 
if this house is occupied." ' 

The garden was trim, even prim. The garage had been hidden 
away behind trellis on which honeysuckle grew. An ornamental 
pool the size of a pudding basin lay in the lawn. Each side of the 
front door, concrete dwarfs stood coyly. Ignoring a luminous bell:push, the lieutenant tried the door. It was locked. He banged on it. 

In the middle of the door was a long narrow panel of frosted 
glass. The lieutenant kicked it in, knocking the shards away with 
his side arm. A sense of power and elation filled him. Keeping the 
gun in one hand and a torch in the other, he squeezed through the 
middle of the door. Breathing rapidly he stood in the hall listening. 
Silence. 

Everything was neat here. The sense of desertion, as the 
lieutenant moved from downstairs room to downstairs room, was 
complete : but the people had left without panic or fuss. Everything 
was beautifully tidy, even the ashtrays emptied. 

The lieutenant, not an imaginative man, amused himself by 
visualising the owner of the house, the man who had built the 
ornamental pool, ushering his wife and children quietly and methodically out of the house. He must have said, " Better pack the kettle, 
darling," for no kettle now stood on the kitchen stove. The gas had 
been cut off, though the electric light still worked. 

In the hall stood one suitcase. Opening it with eagerness, the 
lieutenant found only clothes, women's clothes over which he felt 
no interest. At the last minute, this suitcase must have proved too 
much, and had been left behind. 

" Typical English family," the lieutenant muttered, feeling both 
love and contempt. He ought now to rejoin his squad, but the urge 
to explore was on him. Kicking the suitcase aside, he went upstairs. 
He used his torch, not switching on the overhead lights : that way 
was safe — and more dramatic. 

The front bedroom, the bathroom with its toothbrushes gone 
from the chromium rack, were what he had expected. In one of 
the back bedrooms he found a dead woman. 

She lay comfortably in bed with her jaw wide open, her mouth a 
hole into which the lieutenant did not care to shine his torch. From 
the evidence, she had been a chronic invalid; her age suggested she 
might have been the mother of the house owner. Medicine bottles 
and pill boxes were -stacked on top of . a tallboy. The paraphernalia 
of illness lay about the room : an invalid tray, spare pillows, a bed* 



THE LIEUTENANT 



pan. And on a bedside table stood a bottle of sleeping pills, almost 
empty. The old lady had been too ill to travel; the family had taken 
care of her in the only possible way. 

For some minutes the lieutenant stood there, his last muttered 
remark coming back to him. At length he went out of the room, 
closing the door behind him, and descended the stairs. Sliding sideways through the front door, he walked down the drive. 

The squad was standing about on the pavement, talking and 
smoking with half a dozen civilians, men and women. When their 
officer appeared, they shuffled uneasily. 

" Corporal Bow, what's going on here ?" 

As Bow came up, he ground the tip of a cigarette against the 
butt of his nuc-gun and slipped the unsmoked inch of it into a 
pocket. 

" These folk live in this road* sir. They've not evacuated like 
the rest. They're staying on, sir. They were just putting us in the 
picture, like, sir." 

" Alright, corporal. Fall your men in again." 

As the men reluctantly formed up, the lieutenant counted them. 
One man was missing. At the last moment, he came running across 
from the other side of the road. With a sudden spurt of anger, the 
lieutenant discerned a woman in the shadows. Always women to 
interfere with soldiers' business ! He was about to issue a reprimand 
when one of the civilians came over and interrupted. 

" I understand you are about to install your men in this house 
here, lieutenant ?" 

The speaker was a tall man in his sixties, wearing an overcoat 
and an oilskin hat which somehow failed to make him look ridiculous. He carried a sporting gun tucked comfortably under one arm. 

" We shall be camping here for one night, yes," the lieutenant 
replied. 

" My name is Ropeness, lieutenant This house belongs to 
Ivor Merdock, and he has asked me to keep an eye on it for him 
while he is away. By law you have no right to enter it." 

"The country is under military law now." The lieutenant's 
voice was absolutely adamant./ Skilfully, Ropeness changed his 
tactics slightly. 

■ "Nevertheless, sixteen men could do considerable damage to 
a small house, even in one night. Merdock was a friend of mine — 
I'd bate to see his. place spoilt. Why not put yourself up at the 



68 



NEBULA 




church hall, quarter of a mile down the road? They'll probably have 
blankets and a bit of food for you there." , ^ 

" We're staying here, thank you," the lieutenant said sharply. 
" You might feel a litde less solicitous for your friend if you knew 
he'd left the corpse of an old woman behind. He's a murderer, 
nothing more or less." 

Dismissing the man, he turned back to his troops. Under his 
direction, they ran the trucks into the drive of Merdock's house and 
shut the ornamental white drive gates on which was printed the 
house name: ' Apres Midi '. A search in the empty garage revealed 
a ladder, which was secured across the gates to reinforce them. 
Two men were sent to reconnoitre in the back garden. 

All the while, the little knot of people who still remained in the 
road stood outside, watching and discussing the matter in low voices. 
The lieutenant was surprised at the hatred he felt for civilians and 
their aimlessness. They seemed a more immediate threat to his 
men than did the enemy. 

One sentry was posted in the front garden, one in the back. 
Everyone else went inside. When, the curtains were drawn, the 
lieutenant allowed the light td.be switched on. Grinning and joking, 

\ 



THE LIEUTENANT 



«9 



the men climbed over armchairs and sofa, lighting cigarettes or 
poking in corners. One man peered into the coal bin, 
" Shall I get us a fire, sir?" 

"Do. Make yourselves as comfortable as possible." He saw 
he was already beginning to know their faces, to differentiate between them. He allowed himself to smile and one or two of them 
grinned back; all were curiously delighted by the contrast they 
offered to the domesticity about them. 

" I shall sleep in the bedroom above this. The rest of you will 
sleep in here or in the djningroom next door. Make fires in each 
room — good ones, because youH be short of blankets. Use the 
furniture if necessary." 

This suggestion appealed to them. He must beware of turning 
the whole thing into an adventure. In colder tones, he gave them 
other instructions and then called for two volunteers to accompany 
him in search of food and information. 

Two men stepped forward, a curly-haired Welshman called 
Davies and a bony lad with a cast in one eye who said his name 
was Hogg. Giving the corporal strict instructions to let nobody in 
or out, the lieutenant set off with his patrol. 

Back on the main road, they turned a corner and were at once 
greeted with chaos. Peace and normality faded at the sight of six 
cars piled up together across the street. A light blazing from an 
empty window lit the scene, emphasising its ghastliness. There had 
been a stand-up battle with the enemy here. Human and alien 
corpses lay about the area. Furniture had been flung Out of windows. 
A tank had ploughed through two gardens and now stood motionless 
against a smashed house wall. Over everything lay the nets and 
guide lines of the enemy, trailing across flower beds and roof tops 
indiscriminately. 

"This happened not so long ago, Fll bet you," Davies observed. 
" The bloody bastards are beyond reason." 

"Avoid the guide lines and we can get round this way," the 
lieutenant said, taking the lead, happy to reflect that he was showing 
no emotion before his men. 

As he skirted one of the crashed cars, Hogg grabbed his arm. 

" Just look there!" he said in a constricted voice, pointing to the 
lighted window. They could see the ceiling of the room. Over it 
shadows moved, shadows here spindly, there bulky. Next minute, 
one of the enemy appeared at the window above them. 

. Its palps waved into the dark, ,-= With sudden agility, it heaved 



70 



NEBULA 



itself up onto the sill. Its head or cephalic region was the size of 
a dustbin. Hardly hurrying, it stretched up tarsal claws and dragged 
itself up onto the roof. Its body was the size of a bath. For a 
moment the watchers saw it outlined against the peak of theroof; 
then it disappeared. 

"God, man, why didn't" we shoot the filthy thing?" Davies 
enquired: 

"Better to let it go; shooting might only attract others/' the 
lieutenant said. His mouth had gone dry, he wanted a drink; but 
he kept his voice level. 

An hour later, they had most of what they wanted. The centre 
of the town was empty of people, though doubtless a few still 
crouched in barricaded houses. Enemy nets lay thickly everywhere; 
the sounds of the enemy and the choking smell of them gave the 
night air menace. The lieutenant felt a vague alarm to think how 
carelessly he had chosen to camp so near to danger. 

Several shops had been broken into by looters. They found an 
unopened general store in a side street. Davies charged the door. 
At his second thrust, they heard the side lip of the lock break from 
the wood, and the door opened. Closing it, they worked by shielded 
% torchlight The place was piled with tinned goods. 

"We ought to carry as much of this stuff as we can," the 
lieutenant said, in sudden excess of greed. " Food may be short at 
Stow H.Q. Hogg, have a look round the side and see if you can 
find a cart or barrow of some sort." 

Unlocking a side door behind the counter, Hogg found himself 
in a back yard. Masking his torch with his fingers, he saw the end 
of a shed ahead. It was open to one side. On rounding the corner, 
he tripped and stumbled over something. It was a guide line, no 
thicker than a piece of thin string but infinitely stronger, and sticky. 

Hogg jumped quickly to his feet. At the same time he saw 
the great net in the shed. From the black centre of it gleamed, the 
six eyes of an enemy. The eyes were coming forward, shining 
salmon pink. Hogg was very frightened. 

Even as he raised his nuc-gun, he heard a scuttling behind him. 
He turned, saw nothing. Down, springing down, sailing down from 
the roof came an enemy, knifed legs gleaming. Hogg whirled back 
to the thing in the shed, fired hastily, fired again. As he fired a 
third time, big poisonous fangs sank into his shoulder. 

Dropping their provisions, the lieutenant and Davies ran 



THE LIEUTENANT 



71 



through the shop and into the yard. With a twist of line around 
him, Hogg was being hoisted up to the chimneys. 

As they tramped back to ' Apres Midi ' with sacks of supplies 
over their shoulders, Davies said angrily, " If only they weren't just 
insects, spiders, you wouldn't mind so much. It's terrible to think 
we'r? being overrun just by spiders." 

The lieutenant was silent for a second, organising what he had 
to say, . 

" They've been so lucky on this planet, Davies," he answered. 
" The egg-clutch that drifted here was lucky to land in a warm, and 
desolate bit of Africa. Then look at the way they can multiply! They 
have no natural enemies here except man — one bite from their jaws 
can fell a tiger. They've evidendy come from a planet bathed in 
hard radiation from its sun, because their tolerance is much higher 
than ours. They can't be indiscriminately H-bombed because they're 
too dispersed. Every factor's on their side." 

" Well it's terrible to think we're being overrun just by spiders." 

Irritated by the repetition of this remark, the lieutenant said, 
" They aren't really spiders, though they often act and look like 
spiders. They have lungs and a circulatory system like ours. If 
they have no actual intelligence, their instinct is of a very high 
order." 

"I know, sir, but it's terrible to think we should be overrun 
just by spiders!" 

The lieutenant, lapsed into silence. Davies in all his stupidity 
was right. Davies had hit the nail bang on the head. Not only was 
it a bitter blow to have civilization threatened, but the enemy itself 
was an unknowable and unaccountable natural machine, more 
frightening than the most formidable intelligence. 

They arrived at ' Apres Midi '. The civilians had disappeared. 
The elderly corpse from upstairs had been heaved over .the hedge 
into the next door garden. Merdock's house downstairs was 
a shambles. The men, prompted by some unknown malice 3 had 
ruined all the rooms. The furniture had been broken up into firewood; the carpets had been sliced up to make blankets; the pictures 
had teen smashed; the walls were covered with names and obscene 
remarks. Viewing it all, the lieutenant was both shaken and pleased. 

When a guard duty roster had been arranged and a meal eaten, 
the lieutenant ordered lights out and returned upstairs to sleep. He 
had the double bed so ^recently yaeated by Mr. and Mrs. Merdock. 
Pleasurably he climbed beneath the sheets, leavidg his boots on. His 



72 



NEBULA 



last waking thought was a picture of himself in Buckingham Palace, 
living like a lord or a pig and shooting gigantic spiders from an 
upper window. 

At two o'clock in the morning he was roused by Corporal Bow. 
. " Enemy outside, sir, lots of little 'tins the size of coal buckets. 
Shall we shoot them, sir?" 

"Ill come down," the lieutenant said. He spoke kindly; he 
was pleased to be woken, so that he could demonstrate, how easily 
he roused, how quickly he swung his legs out of bed. 

All the men Were roused downstairs, where gigantic fires still 
roared in the grates, demolishing chairs and sideboards. The diningroom smelt frowsty. They had switched the lights out; peering 
through the curtains, the lieutenant could see a certain amount of 
furtive and hunchbacked activity in the back garden. Thin moonlight 
glittered occasionally on a guide line. 

" They're more versatile than any of our species of spider," 
the lieutenant observed. " They can hunt by day or night. And in 
an area like this they won't find much to feed on except. . . ." 

" Can we have a pot at them, sir?" someone asked. 

" It's safer to leave them alone. They're too small to break 
windows and get in and bother us. Have the guards come indoors? 
Good. This lot will have moved on by morning. Nothing to worry 
about. Guards continue duties inside, rest of you get your heads 
down again. They won't bother us If we don't bother them." 

But as he returned upstairs his thoughts ran on. The arachnid 
race showed no desperate eagerness to attack man. Meanwhile, in 
its remorseless search for food, it was attacking everything else, from 
cattle to birds. Another few months and Earth's ecology would be 
seriously upset. 
He lay on his bed without climbing into it. A scratching, 
slithering noise sounded overhead. The creatures were crawling 
over the house, scampering Over the tiles. Reluctantly getting up, 
the lieutenant went into the back bedroom where he had discovered 
the dead woman and peered out of the window. 

The dead woman peered in at him. Even as he jumped back 
in horror, she moved, banging her nose against the pane. Her torso 
was visible, glistening whitely as if in a frosty shroud. Again she 
tapped, like a summons to the petrified man inside. Seeming to 
grow taller, she loomed up in the window. 

A small enemy climbed over her and disappeared. 



THE LIEUTENANT 73 

That broke the spell. Sweating, the lieutenant forced himself 
forward again. He stared out past the dangling body. The enemy 
had retrieved the corpse from the next door garden. Now, having 
woven a cocoon round it, they were hauling it up onto the roof 
before devouring it. Without thinking, he opened the window and 
peered up past the dangling corpse. A row of palps and legs could 
be seen over the guttering of the roof, waving and beckoning like 
seaweed in a fierce current. The lieutenant slammed the window 
shut. 

As he rah down the stairs he noticed detachedly that there was 
panic in his voice. 

" Burn the house down!" he was shouting. " Set fire to everything! Burn the house down!" 

BRIAN W. ALDISS 



Waiting for You... 

A feast of new top quality' science-fiction stories by 
both British and American Authors awaits you every 
month in NEBULA. 

Make sure that you won't be unlucky enough to miss 
any of the imaginative and, unforgettable yarns which will 
be appearing in forthcoming editions of this magazine by 
placing a standing order for it with your newsagent or 
bookseller today. In case of difficulty, you should send 
a cheque or postal order for 24/- ($4,00 in U.S.A.) whereupon the next twelve issues Will be mailed to you post free 
from NEBULA ScienoerFiction, 159 Crownpoint Road, 
Glasgow, && 



ROBERT PRESSL1E 




Suicide Squad 



It was an ugly and hostile planet which promised only 
death to men- — or a life . fuller and more fruitful 



Illustrations by Eddie Jones 



The skin between Woitmore's toes was the virulent mauve of 
gentian violet. Every time he pulled off a rotten shred it revealed 
the new tender skin underneath, already magenta coloured by fungal 
infection. His whole body was mottled in varying shades of pink and 
purple, lie was naked from the feet upwards. The only reason he 

75 



76 



NEBULA 



was picking at his toes was because he had finished defoliating the 
dead skin off his torso and he had to do something to kill time while 
. the hurricane blew itself elsewhere. 

When the Beaufort dial registered Force Seven, which meant 
the wind had dropped to a moderate 35 miles per hour, he crawled 
out of his blister and stretched. Stretching was both a joy and an 
agony after several hours in the Miner which was a shallow, lightalloy dome, eight feet in diameter and only two feet high at its apex. 
When most of the kinks were out of his spine, he made his way round 
the other domes and rapped a signal on each to" rouse the occupants. 

Including Whitmore, the camp numbered nineteen men all told. 
Discounting size, weight and age, there was a uniformity about them. 
All were naked. All had the permanent stoop that came from months 
of living in blisters and months of leaning into the wind— the wind 
which was never milder than a gale and was more often than not a 
blasting hurricane or a twisting tornado. 

They had grown to talk little. Whitmore made his intentions 
known by deed. He uprooted the anchor pins of his blister 
and fanned the twelve segments of the shelter together to form a 
broad curved scimitar which he hung across his back by the chain 
mesh carrying strap. The others followed his example— except that 
two men left their folded blisters on the ground while they went 
across to Whitmore. 

Bendix bawled into Whitmore's cupped ear. "You still want 
to drag the big one?" He filled out his words with a thumb jerk 
in the direction of the twenty-foot dome that housed the remains of 
their signalling equipment. 

"We took it this far " Whitmore mouthed. 

Bendix shrugged to Lieberman and they made towards the 
dome. They thought Whitmore was crazy. Taking it in turns, the 
squad had dragged the dome through eighty miles of mud, bog and 
swamp against a perpetual wind that sometimes cut their progress to 
fractions of a mile per day, in a fitful light that was never brighter 
than olive green and with the heat and humidity making every breath 
a distinct physical effort. And for nothing. The communications 
equipment was next to useless. 

Whitmore followed Bendix and Lieberman. He caught them 
before they had time to fold the dome and couple the generator to 
me half-track." 

"Try for a fix before we move," he shouted. 
'-"■Bendix looked defiant for a moment. " The -Whip won't take 
/ - • 



SUICIDE SQUAD 



77 



much more," he protested. " Fatigue is going to make it snap any 
time now. Besides, we heard nothing yesterday." 
"Try it!" 

Bendix shrugged again. He pulled aside one blade of the dome 
and crawled inside. Lieberman watted until the thirty foot antenna 
had detelescoped to its full height before following Bendix and starting the generator. Whitmore waited and anxiously watched the Whip 
snapping through the murky air. 

" Nothing," Bendix announced when he reappeared. " They 
must be dead." , 

" Radar?" asked Whitmore. 

" The bowl isn't fixed yet. You want to wait?" 

Whitmore looked into the sky, which told him nothing, gave 
him no clue as to how long the temporary comparative calm would 
last. If they waited until the bowl antenna was repaired they might 
be halted for days by another hurricane. If they took advantage of 
the lull and forged ahead without a fix, they could be going in the 
wrong direction altogether. Either decision was bound to be the 
wrong one. 

He shifted the neck strap of his blister to a less tender spot on 
his shoulder, slung the small satchel containing all his worldly goods 
over the other and picked up his energy rifle. 

" Fold the dome," he yelled. " We're moving out." 

Whitmore was the old man of the party. He looked it too. 
With nine months' growth of beard on his face it was hard to believe 
he was only thirty-three. It was just as hard to believe that his 
muscle-corded frame belonged to a man who had once been a deskriding schoolmaster. 

Back on Earth he had never thought of himself as a potential 
leader of men. Nor, for that matter, had his wife, Julie. 

" Whit," she would say when she was on her favourite theme. 
" Have you put in" for one of the new schools yet?" 

" You know I haven't." 

" You promised you would." 

"I promised nothing. I said I would look into it. Which I 
did. And I decided IH stick to being the kind of teacher I am, the 
kind of teacher I like to be — not a damned resident electrician to a 
staff of robotutors!" 

" Do you like the kind of money you're making? You could 
get five times as much if you — — " 

" Julie, I admit. I am tempted by the money. But not that way. 



78 



NEBULA 



I don't like the principle of kids being fed their teaching by a mindpump." 

"Principle! That's all you have in all this wide, wide world. 
But can we eat principles? Can I take a fistful of your principles 
down to the stores when I want a new coaf?" 

He thought Julie was probably right. He was a shade overstrong on principles. Maybe that was why the squad had elected 
him leader when they had been cut off from the main army. The 
men knew he was too hidebound to be anything but just. 

He wondered if they still thought the same, now that they had 
discovered the stubborn streak in him, the hard core of purpose 
which Julie had never suspected. 

She gaped when he told her : " I'm joining the army." 

Then she laughed in his face. "Which army, Whit?" 

" Federated Space Security. They always want people." 

" Boys, Whit. They want; glory-chasing boys with stars in their 
eyes, not schoolmasters without any sense of adventure. Honest, 
Whit, I can't help laughing!" 

" I mean it," he said. " I told you a lie just now when I said 
I was joining. I've already joined." 

Julie's smile twisted into a little sneer. " And they took you? 
They must be hard up " 

" Maybe. It's a special branch. They can never get too many 
volunteers for this one. It isn't the usual policing of the inner 
planets. This branch operates much farther away." 

Through a barrage of cross-talk he eventually got her told. 
That a foothold had been made on a planet of Polaris. That when 
he went, it would be for a long time. That he might even never 
get back. 

"What about me?" Julie asked. "What do I live on while 
you're playing hero?" She paused, thought to herself, and went 
on : " It must pay well- — " 

It was his turn to smile. " It pays, Julie. But that wasn't why 
I joined. So I've made you a maximum allotment. And if I shouldn't 
come back, if anything should happen, there'll be a handsome 
pension for you." 

Too late , she discovered his stubbornness. Suddenly she did 
not want him to leave her. Suddenly his presence was worth more 
man his FSS pay. Whitmore had expected something like that to 
happen, had even hoped it would happen if only to show that she 
still had some feeling for him. And because he knew she would 



SUICIDE SQUAD 



79 



probably have been able to ta& him out of it, he had taken the 
irrevocable step first. 

Afterwards, he often suspected that his real reason for joining 
was to dodge the recurrent question of applying for the deanshtp 
of a robot-school. 

He called for a halt when they came to a wide pool, a small 
lake almost. They had been marching for two hours, alternately 
leaning into the wind and backing against it as it changed direction. 

The pool had no definite edge. The ground beneath their feet 
had become increasingly more sodden, more muddy, more yielding. 
Ahead of them, the mud got thinner and thinner in consistency until 
it dissolved into an inky fluid. In the pool, they would find their 
next meal. 

The planet was a world of fungi. Big fat saucer-topped fungi 
that stank. Small putrescent pimples of fungi that squelched under 
their feet. Uny invisible fungi that threaded their rnycelia under 
the skin to rot it and turn it purple. None of the fungi were edible. 
But in pools of water they had learned they could find weeds which 
looked like strips of leather, tasted like the rind of old cheese, yet 
were vigorously life sustaining. 

Whitmore thought they were lucky to find the pool just where 
it was. They had marched about as far as they could without a rest; 
and the surrounding terrain was sufficiently flat to prevent them 
being surprised by an enemy attack. He elected Darro to collect 
the edible wefid. 

In another age Paddy Darro would have been a buccaneer. He 
was a little man, just inches outside the status of midget, but his 
size was the only little thing about him. His hair and beard met in 
a fierce black mask through which he stared at life belligerently. In his 
time he had been a circus acrobat; he still had the acquired litheness 
and agility; he was the fittest man in the squad. His courage was 
always on display. 

Some of the others protested when it was their- turn to gather 
the weed. Darro's reaction was the opposite. He flashed his teeth. 
It was a lousy, filthy job, not too dangerous but extremely unpleasant. 
He welcomed it as he welcomed any chance to pit his guts against 
nature. ■•: ' 

The pool was not deep; they never were. The planet's aqueous 
component was in a state of constant equilibrium. In the distant 
past Che. lakes and the seas had boiled into the atmosphere until it 



80 



NEBULA 



was saturated with water vapour. Since then it had never dried out 
and was incapable of holding more. 

Darro waded out until the water of the pool was waist high. He 
paused to make sure he had an audience— an exhibitionist jhabit of 
his circus days — and dived under the surface. 

As he detached the weed from its anchorage in the sfltj it 
floated to the top. He made repeated dives until he had -uprooted 
enough to feed the nineteen men. Then he swam to the side, pastaag 
the floating larder before him. 

Immediately he was on his feet, he was surrounded by wilting 
helpers, their knives at the ready to scrape his body free of the submarine fungi which always swarmed to the food collector like predatory fish and anchored themselves to the skin by suckers and tendrils. 

"Lookit!" he yelled. "D'you ever see so many!" He sounded 
pleased, as if the leech-like fungi were medals or badges of honour. 
Yet he let the others scrape Mm because he was not fool enough to 
let bravado kill biro. Unless the fungi were removed quickly, their 
root-like mycelia could set up a lethal allergy.. As it was, Darro 
was going to have a bad time for a few hours when his skin would 
boil up in angry blotches and peel itself off the tormented flesh underneath. 

The weed was eaten raw. It was tough. Six inches of it, 
which made an average meal, took a solid hour of chewing. The 
men's teeth, as a result, were in better condition than they had ever 
been. 

Whitmore sat beside Darro, asked him how he felt. 

" D'you ever hear me complain, Whit? It'll pass." 

Whitmore lapsed into silence. Somebody like Darro should 
have been leader, he thought. Then he realised that the little roan's 
perpetual air of bravado Was probably an irritation to the others, 
who did not know that it was Tnthing assumed but simply a natural 
part of Darro's make-up. ' 

Darro had told him about it once. 

" D'you think I'm a show-off, Whit? It's nothing like that, 
you know. It's something I can't help, something that is so strong 
it has shaped my whole life. Fve.got this urgency inside me, it's 
burning hot all the time. Always I've got to be aggressive, going 
out of my way to fight And because I'm too little to fight people, 
I have to fight other things— nature, danger, the elements* or circumstances. D'you know I once went to sea? Thought it wouH hold 
plenty opportunity for— well, I suppose you would call it adventta*. 



SUICIDE SQUAD 



It didn't E«eqttfa&v°im°|o»°j|iNlwoiM4)° too perfect, too safe. 
Noftnil could go wrong." 

From the sea he had gone to the circus, still in his teens. Circus 
lif e had given him a lot of satisfaction, fiye years of %■ until its 
challenges, palled. The day came when he had done everything, met 
every Challenge and beaten it, and the circus was finished for him. 
There were no more tricks to try on the trapeze, nothing that could 
excite him any more on the high wire. ' 

He became a construction engineer, working eight and nine 
hundred feet above ground, erecting television transmitter masts. 

" That was okay while it lasted," he told Whitmore. " Until 
tiie jobs ran out. They don?: need any. more masts. So I joined 
this outfit" 

f How does it measure up? You couldn't hope for more to 
fight than we have on this , planet." 

" It's all right," Darro' admitted. " But sometimes I wish I 
was different. More like you, for instance. You don't look like you 
had any compulsions, you've got nothing riding you.. With your 
background, you were crasy to enlist. Steady job and steady pulse." 

Whitmore surfaced out of his reminiscences. He turned to 
Darro and asked, " What made them pick me to lead the outfit?" 

Darro pondered. " Probably because you were the oldest, I 
guess. And being a teacher, you're accustomed to giving orders, 
seeing that things are done in a regimented way. Maybe some of 
them regret it how. You know ... the way you insist we keep on 
going even if we don't know where and don't know if we'll ever see 
Cummings and the rest again. But don't take that as a personal 
com^Saint— whatever it is, you say it, I'll do it." 

Had it been any of the other men, Whitmore would probably 
have reiterated his reasons for going on. . With Darro, no explanation 
was necessary. The little Irishman did not care, why; if he did, he 
was astute enough to see that. Whitmore had no alternative. 

The ship was more than eighty miles behind them, somewhere. 
Exactly where, they no longer knew. But if they should ever get back 
to it, there was the comforting knowledge that it would be in a Sightworthy condition. Cummings had stressed the point when he called 
for their help : the ship must be sealed off against any enemy attack 
in their absence. 

. But Whitmore suspected they would never see the ship again. 
The odds were too high. 

This was the fourth expeditionary force to the pknet, the planet ' 
which loir obvious and waggish reasons had been dubbed Espresso. 



82 NEBULA f~ 

The first ship" had been on a glory mission; its task was purely 
exploratory. Her ten-man crew had found the planet. They, had 
signalled the news of their find back to Earth, a message which had 
been duly picked up four-and-a-half years later. That was the first 
and last signal from the crew. 

When another six months had passed in silence, a second ship 
was sent. She was bigger, her crew numbered twenty. Her threefold purpose was to follow the trail that had been blazed, find the 
other ship and ascertain what had. happened to its crew, and to 
establish a foothold on the first habitable planet found outside the 
solar system. 

This second ship fared even worse. From it came no signal at 
all. Last time she was heard from, she was almost four light-years 
from Earth. It was not known what had happened later; whether she 
had crashed on Espresso, or landed safely and suffered whatever fate 
overtook the first ship, or whether she was still boring into outer 
space, her target missed completely. 

There was no giving up now. The planet was there to be conquered, and challenges are made to be accepted. Besides, there was a 
double mystery to clear up. A third ship was sent. 

She took a task force of fifty men, each of' them armed to the 
teeth. 

She got there safely, boasted about her achievement and began 
to send a steady stream of signals. 

She reported in detail on the peculiarities of the planet's atmosphere, even came up with an explanation. Outside the heavy sodden 
atmosphere, which had a pressure one-tenth more than Earth's, there 
was a moon. The moon was close, so close it must have been skirting 
round the rim of Roche's Limit. As it orbited, it dragged the atmosphere round in great tidal waves, causing eternal gales and hurricanes. 

The crew, armed with energy weapons and pugnacity, had 
explored the planet. They found the second ship and reported that 
she had crashed. 

Then the exploring parties failed to return. Others were sent to 
find them. Some they did find, dead and already too decomposed to 
determine the cause of death. , But there were too many of them for 
the cause to have been natural. Another report came back to Earth : 
the planet must .be inhabited and the natives^-henceforth called the 
enemy — were hostile. 

Dangerously depleted in numbers, the leader of the expedition 
signalled- his intentions of returning. Fending bis return with a full 



SUICIDE SQUAD 



83 



report, he advised that the next ship should be of shallow, windresistant design and that she carry as many men as possible. 

Whitmore belonged to that fourth ship, which was despatched 
when nothing more was forthcoming from its predecessor. 

He asked Schultz and Lilly to get the Whip extended. The 
squad had rested as long as he dared allow them if any further 
progress was to be made before the next blow-up. The failure to 
contact Curnmirigs last time was discouraging, but did not permit 
them to neglect trying again. 

Schultz and Lilly were next in line for dragging the dome. 
Meanwhile, having erected the antenna, their job was done. Schultz 
and Lilly — like Margiotta, Hock and Newcastle— had enlisted purely 
as stores and equipment men who could also handle a rifle. 

Only three men were qualified signals staff. They were Whitmore, Bendix and Lieberman. Darro and the remainder possessed 
only one talent; they were fighting men. 

Whitmore crawled into the dome himself. He found the radio 
non-productive. For one more time in a long list of times he cursed 
Espresso and its atmosphere which made radio and radar so fickle. 
The planet had plenty of oxygen, so much so that wave-lengths in the 
one centimetre range were almost completely absorbed. Round about 
ten centimetres,, signals were damped and obscured by countless 
diffuse echoes from the sweeping banks of cloud. 

And the one and only way out of the problem was not open to 
use, Mefe wavelengths and upwards would have been the answer. 
But they called for big aerials — and the wind put big aerials out of 
the question. 

" Whitmore gave up, disconnected the generator and hoped the 
real reason for Cnmmings' silence was not something worse than 
atmospheric conditions. When the dome had been folded into a 
quadrant, and the generator was. hooked into the outrigged half-track, 
he led the squad on its way again. 

His general education preparatory to becoming a teacher had 
included a working knowledge of geophysics. He had therefore been 
able to work out that the planet had the barest of axial tilts. Since 
they wwe somewhere near the equator and getting nearer, they 
marched in the heat of the local summer. Axial spin was slow and 
the days were long. One fact which he did not pass on to the others 
was that it was going to get hotter. 

By his reckoning it was getting near the planet's midday and 
also near midsummer. He thought it was funny that the atmos


S4 



NEBULA 



phere which sapped their strength with its humidity was saving their 
lives at me same time. Without the atmosphere, the furnace heat of 
Polaris would have fried them. • 
His calculations were borne out when Schultz and Lilly cracked 
up an hour later. They did not have to tell him they could not go on. 
They were stretched in -the mud, unconscious. He dug in their 
satchels, found their precious salt tablets and forced a half-dozen into 
each man. 

"It's' no use," Schultz said. "It's more than 9esh and blood 
can' stand. We've got to stop, Whit." 

- Lilly was slower in coming round and Whitmore had to ask 
Schultz to repeat what he had said. " Sorry," he apologised. " Lilly 
had me Worried." 

" It's too much, Whit, The half-track might just as well not be 
there. You've got to drag the dome sideways round the softer 
patches, heave it out of the mud all the time. If we have to go on, 
I vote we park the dome." 

Whitmore's mouth was set stubbotmy, and although he said he 
would think about it, his mind was already made up. . He went to 
have a word with Bendix and Liebermart They -went into a huddle, 
shoulder to shoulder, arms around necks; proximity was the only 
sure way to carry on an extended conversation. 

"Well have to hole up a while," Whitmore said. " Schultz and 
Lilly are whacked. I could assign the next pair to the dome, but 
we'd still have to wait until Schultz and Lilly get their strength back. 
So long as we're going to be static, let's get some work done. How 
about the bowl? Could you fix it in— say, four hours?" 

"Hard, to tell," said Bendix. "We can try." 

"You can try," Whitmore amended. " I want Lieberman 16 get 
on to that radio and stay with it until we leave or until he hears 
something." 

They argued. Bendix said-it was asking too much for one man 
to fix the damaged bowl. And Lieberman expressed his unhappiness 
at the prospect -of four hours in the dome. The thing that neither of 
them said, although it must have been on their minds, was what was 
preventing Whitmore doing some of tie work himself. 

He answered the unspoken" Question. " Tm taking Darro on a 
scouting trip. Dont worrg^we won't go far. But accbrding to the 
last signal we got from Ojrnmings, the main party can't be so very 
far away. I don't suppose they're dose enough for ift to find them. 
That would be fantastic luck. But we might find some sign of their 
passing this way." 



SUICIDE SQUAD 



85 



He showed his understanding, the humanity which be dared not 
expose too often for fear of losing his grip on the men, by patting 
Lieberrnan's shoulder. 

" Stick with it, Lover Boy!" 

Sweat' dripped from Lieberrnan's fingers as he kept moving the 
controls, doing everything he could to coordinate with the whipping 
antenna outside. And he kept thinking about Whitmore's parting 
words. ^Everybody else called him Lover Boy, but this was the first 
time from Whitmore, and from him it had sounded like a kindness. 

Lieberman was' from Vienna. He was twenty-six, looked twenty 
and probably always would. His body had as many fungal blotches 
as any man's but by some freak of chance his face had not been 
iifected. He often wished that it would. 

He hated his face audits eternal youth. Even now, after months 
ia the swamps of Espresso, it had a soft boyish look and his beard 
was a mere fringe, the sparsest beard in the squad. It was his baby 
face and a rough translation of his name that had earned him the 
title of Lover Boy. 

Back home it had been the same. Everybody thought that 
because he looked so effeminately handsome he must be lacking in 
courage. Since the inception of his manhood he had had to prove 
himself over and oyer again, accepting silly foolhardy challenges just 
to show that he was indefed a man. Even to Greta who should have 
known better. 

Greta had known him since childhood. Their fathers were 
professors at the same university. During their infancy 
and in their teens, they had been constant companions and Greta had 
seen nothing remarkably different about him. When he went on to 
the place in the university which his intelligence had earned him, she 
had congratulated him. It was only when the others began to use 
his nickname that she looked at him differendy. As time went on 
and he remained a boy in features, she began to wonder. She began 
to, tease, him. 

He took her teasing good-naturedly, secure in the knowledge that 
from childhood sweethearts they bid grown into a betrothed couple 
in all but the public declaration. TThen sjne too began to test him, to 
put dares in his face for him to answer. She chose a woman's way. 
And he, too Mind to, see the wile, was , shocked. He had deep 
religious feelings; -hetefuted her dare by citing bisconvictions. For 
her, it went from a pretend dare to the real thing. Had she stopped 



86 



NEBULA 




to think, she would have been shocked at herself. But she believed 
like all the others that he was lying, using his declared scruples as a 
mask for his inadequacy. 

It was in a mood of da2ed disbelief, with a sense of deep 
disillusionment, that he volunteered for the army of Federated Space 
Security. 

He wiped the backs of his hands under his armpits. He had 
been a fool to let her shake him. Especially now. Especially now 
that he knew none of the others had meant any real malice. He 
wished Whitmore would come back to call him Lover Boy again. 

Whitmore and Darro were taking no chances of getting lost. 
Every few steps they fired their E-guns at the ground, earmarking 
sudden cakes of mud which would stay dry for as long as they 
intended being away from the camp. 

In spite of the wind, which seemed to be rising, their bodies 
glistened with sweat. The enervating humidity prevented evaporation. The sweat piled up on their skins as it oozed from every pore 
until its mass got tod much for the surface tension which held it and 



SUICIDE SQUAD 



87 



it slid down their thighs, coursed its way through lie hairs on their 
legs and ran into the ground from their feet. 

They did not talk. They kept close together so that neither 
would get out of touch with the other in the haze which could hide a 
man ten yards away. They conserved their energy for walking. 

The information given in Cummings' last signal indicated that 
the main party was no more than five miles ahead. But four days 
had passed, without another signal. Cummings' squad could have 
moved since then. Or they could be dead. 

Fate was dealing , the fourdi expedition to Espresso pretty much 
the same hand it had given its predecessors. 

Things had gone well at first. The ship was built to withstand 
the climate, nothing could go wrong there. In the initial weeks, 
devoted entirely to the collection of physical data, there had been no 
casualties. Then the first patrol was sent out. 

Its strength was twenty men; sixteen trained fighting men, four 
signal experts to keep them in touch with the ship. Misfortune 
struck the patrol before it had gone a mile from the ship. Their 
signals dome had got bogged down. They put in a quick report and 
said they were trying to extricate the dome. Only minutes later they 
sent a second report, a panic call to the effect that one complete 
radio and radar unit was rapidly sinking in the mud. 

Cummings— since this was technically an army he was titled 
General although nobody used the title — told them to sit tight. 
They were quite near. He had a fix on them. They were not to 
move until he sent a second patrol to bring them in. 

Three men never returned. They had been killed while the 
stranded patrol waited to be rescued.. 

Nobody could give an exact account of what had happened. 
They swore one and all that they had kept close together. Yet when 
the time came for a roll-call before returning to the ship, three men 
did not answer to their names. 

They were quickly found. And fear was seeded in the men 
when they realised that some of them must have been standing 
shoulder to shoulder with the victims as they had been struck down. 
The ferocity of the killings was food to the newly planted fear. 

They had died by the knife. But the blade had not stopped at 
their death. They were slashed and carved, horribly mutilated, faces 
and bodies alike. 

The mud around their bodies was too churned by many feet 
for any particular set of alien prints to be picked'out. But no one 
doubted that the enemy had struck. The unseen enemy who had 



88 



NEBULA 



k&led the -men of earlier expeditions. An enemy who slipped- silently 
through the mists to d o bis kiting red tad tlip ft d away *g«da-^»*f 
as silently. • - . 

•.. Cummiogs gave his men a day to recover. Theft he sent the 
patrol out again, thirty men this time and each of them armed with 
a new alertness. 

They were gone for a week, a week when the atmosphere dispkyed-rits full repertoire of tricks and communication was impossible. 
At the end of the week, one solitary man staggered into camp. 

His name was Turaczek. He was a Polish fighting man who 
had never before shown fear- — certainly riot the terror' which made 
him talk incoherently and twitch his face as he talked. Bit by bit, 
Commings got his story; the story of what had happened during the 
week of radio silence. 

As before, a man had again died suddenly and mysteriously. 
But on this occasion he was found while the blood still Sowed from 
his body, before any mutilation had been done. On the assumption 
that the killer must be very dose, half the party prowled in one 
direction,, half in the other — with the understanding, that each patty 
was to turn back after an agreed limit of ten minutes. 

If vision was impaired by the thick atmosphere, sound was not. 
The small sound of men's voices was drowned by the howl of the 
wind, but the sharp crack of an energy rifle was carried clearly by 
the moist air. 

Turaczek's party had stopped when they heard the rattle of 
E-guns. They stopped, turned and slopped their way back, past 
their small camp and in* the direction which the other party had 
taken. 

Of the fifteen men, they found two.- Nine lay dead, friefi by 
E-fire. Four were missing, presumed dead. The survivors thought 
these four had been knifed by the aliens who had taken their guns 
and turned them against the others. 

Even while Turaczek questioned the survivors, fierce bolts of 
energy crackled at his men from the mists. He told them to hug 
the mud. ■ " 

The firing stopped, leaving only the howl of the wind. 

They stayed immobile for hours, afraid to move, not knowing 
whether the enemy had departed or whether they waited for the 
Terrans to betray their position, 

"I crawled along the ground". Turaczek said. "AUthetime 
I kept moving among them, telling them to keep quiet, encouraging 



SUICIDE SQUAD 



them, trying to cheer diem. They were scared. General. 1 bad made 
* rfcw round trips*hefore I noticed — 

He broke off and rolled his eyes. Curarnings waited, 

"'They were getting less!" Turaczek's voice held all the 
incredulity he must have experienced. " Each time I went along 
the line there were less of them. They couldn't have slipped off; 
they were too scared to move^ Somebody . . . something . . . most 
have sneaked up, killed them, dragged their bodies away. And all 
I could tell the rest to do was sit tight! It was hell for them! To 
ait tight when every instinct told them to nm!" _ 

Cummings let him rest for a moment. 
- "How did you get back and not the others?" he prodded, when 
it looked as if Turaezek's twitching silence would last forever. 

" Fm coming to that I'm sorry; it is difficult to tell it. Give 
me time." 

' Qjrflmings was patient and the rest fame eventually. 

" The silence— if you could call it a silence with that galewas broken. Not far off, very close in fact, there was a tiring of 
rifles. We could see the muzzle flares dimly. It was like two 
groups fighting each other. The flares seemed to show that some of 
oat men were fighting each other. Then I remembered the enemy 
had our rifles/too. And I thought some of our men were fighting 
the eriemy. I got up, ran towards the firing, prepared to help. When 
I got to the spot, I knew the truth." 

He sobbed, took quick control of himself, and went on as if 
determined to say it all and thereby get the horror out of his mind. 

" There was a heap of bodies. All burned. Impossible to tell 
how many. There were arms and legs without bodies, torsos without heads. It was not a fight I had seen. It was evil destruction. 
Cfcir Utissing men had been collected in a mass. The two groups I 
had seen firing must have been the enemy cremating their bodies!" 
Cummings repeated: " How did you and you alone get back?" 

" I ran! When I had seen the bodies, I remembered the men 
I had left lying in the mud, the men I had told to sit tight. I made 
to |6 back to them. And between me and my goal there was sud'dehiy more firing. I began to fire myself. At nothing, you understand! I had a mad compulsion to kill the enemy we have never 
seer^ and I flailed through the mud, firing dementedly as I went. ... 
It did no good. There was ho one left alive on the ground. Every 
man had been ^incinerated. So I kept on running. I kept on running, General, Running, running, running...'' 

■ Omimings felt that unless he wanted the ignominy of a retreat 



90. 



NEB U L A 



back to Earth, fee ^must have a showdown with the enemy. As yet 
he knew nothing of me enemy, their appearance^ the size of their 
forces or their motives for kitting. On the other hand, the enemy 
seemed to know every move he made and were able to pick off his 
men at will. . 

' His appointed task was to establish a beach-head on Espresso. 
He looked like failing. He made a report to Earth, told them of 
his predicament, asked for reinforcements and said that in the meanwhile he was going to make an all-out assault to clear the territory 
around the ship. Once cleared* he would try to hold the area until 
help arrived. 

He had left a skeleton squad to guard the ship and to receive 
any signals he made. Then he pushed into the fungus jungle with 
the rest of his men. Whitmore was one of the men who had been 
left. 

And ' Whitmore, with Darro at his side., was now searching for 
Cummings and the main army. 

Bendix had joined Lieberman in the dome. 

" How's it going?" 

" Dead. You fixed the bowl?" 

" As best I can. But one good gust will warp it again. What 
does .Whit., expect — we got no proper tools, no nothing. I bet he 
doesn't even come back. He'll be carved or fried .like the rest. 
That'll leave us real stuck." 

" Wbit'll be back." 
, "Where d'you get, that confidence from, Lover Boy? He's 
no superman." 

"Maybe not. But Whit always knows what he's doing " 

"He should tell us sometime. It might help if we knew what 
he was after." 
" We know." 
"Cummings?" 

" C ummin gs." \ 

" He's dead. They're all dead. Why d'you think we haven't 
heard anything for days? , You can't -blame the atmo all the time. 
They're dead, Lover Boy. Like we ? ll all be dead pretty soon." 

" You should have stayed outside, Bendix. I can't stand all 
this moral uplift." 

"It isn't funny." 

" Nobody said it was. I'm just saying I can do- without the 
woe and misery," 


SUICIDE SQUAD 



- 9! 



" Liebeiman — -'' 
"Yes?" . 

. .. " I was serious. I think we've had it. We're down to seventeen 
. . . all right, nineteen if Whit and Darro get back. Nineteen out 
of a hundred. And there's a million unseen baskets waiting to get 
the last nineteen. They don't like us, Lieberman. They don't want 
us here. We should never have left the ship." 
" Cumraings asked our help." 

"Cummings! Know what he was after? A medal. A big 
gold -medal for being the man who droye the first stake of a new 
colony. And us? We'd have got nothing. It would have been 
Cummings, Cummings, Cummings." 

" Win or lose, Bendix, he gets the responsibility. He gets the 
kicks if the expedition fails." 

" If? It has failed. He should have read what the signs said 
and got us out while he could. But no ! He has to go glorychasing into the great unknown!" 

Lieberman hushed him while he listened intendy. Then his 
tautness relaxed. 

" Thought I heard something," he said. 

" You won't. As I was saying, Cummings shouldn't have gone 
away like that." 

" And you shouldn't talk like that. He did all right for a while. 
What was it they made? Forty miles. Forty miles without a death. 
That shows his policy of using a big force wirs sensible. The enemy 
were scared to attack." 

Bendix snorted. " So instead of being content he decided to 
push his luck. In the next twenty miles he loses five men. And 
five more in the next twenty. But still he goes on and next thing 
we hear he's calling for mama." 

Lieberman, always the earnest soul, lectured Bendix. 

" It wasn't the way you make it sound, and you know it. He 
did a damn good job until a series of hurricanes bogged him down 
in the same spot for days. You can't blame him for that. That was 
just bad luck. And when the enemy took advantage of the situation 
and started sneak attacks, that wasrft his fault either. He didn't yell 
for mama. He sized up the situation, decided there Were not a 
helluva lot of the enemy in the vicinity and it was a good place for 
a show-down. It was a chance to show our strength against theirs. 
So he called us, told us to seal the ship and get to him as fast as 
possible on the principle that he might win by sheer weight of 
numbers." 



92. 



NEBULA 



Bendix said: "And where is he now? Why doesn't he call?" 

" Maybe he's too busy holding the fort until we get there." 

" That's feeble, Lover Boy. Because he knows as well as we do 
that we can't find him without at least one more fix." 

" In that case you'd better get the bowl up before Whit copes 
back. If he finds you sitting around, he'll chew your " 

Lieberman turned his head sharply, urged by the nameless . 
sense which tells a man he has company. He saw Whitmore's 
upper torso squeezing into the dome. 

" Don't bother urith the bowl," Whitmore said. He brought his 
hand round his body and threw something on the floor of the dome. 

It was a satchel. On it were marks of identification. 

Five stars. 

It must have been Lieberman's day for shocks. Right on top of 
Whitmore's sudden appearance he heard a faint bleep in his earphones. He waved for silence, adjusted his controls and got the 
bleep coming in strong and loud. 

He was excited and grinning when he said to Whitmore : " He 
must have only lost his satchel. I've got his signal. Listen for 
yourself— — " 

Whitmore nodded for Lieberman to get out of the way. He 
took the phones and manipulated the controls himself, getting an 
accurate fix on the source of the incoming signal. When he finally 
laid the phones down, the steady bleep could still be faintly heard. 
And Whitmore looked puzzled. 

"It, doesn't figure," he said. " The satchel isn't empty. It's 
got Us salt tablets and all his personal gear. ' Cummings isn't the 
type to lose things. , Besides, there was the body." 

" What body?" Bendix asked. 

"We don't know. Usual thing — bumed anonymous. Darro 
found it and the satchel. Adding two and two gives the obvious 
answer that the body was Cummings'." , 

"Yet there's a signal," said Lieberman. 

" I' know. That's what doesn't figure." 

" Just because he was a general doesn't mean nobody else could ~ 
use the radio, Whit." 

" Far most people I would say that was so. But you know how 
he was, he liked to do everything himself. I'm worried in case that , 
signal is a trap — -" 

Bendix said: "Gome off it! The humidity's softening your } 
brains. I suppose you think the enemy has captured the general's < 



SUICIDE SQUAD 



93 



dome and has learned how to use the equipment— even if we've 
never seen one sign of machinery or apparatus of any Hhd." 

Liebennan added: "Maybe their stuff is as invisible as they 
are." 
" I'm still Worried," Wmtmore said. "I've thought about this 
to myself a lot At first I only had suspicions. Now I'm almost 
sure. That's why I think that signal could be a trap." 

" Sure of what?" asked Bendix?" 

" Sure that I know who the enemy is. I think you do too. 
By name'' 

" By . . . Whit! Do you know what you're saying? Are you 
trying to tell us that Saki and Jimmy Hudson and all the rest, that 
they're sending that signal so well go out and be killed by them?" 
" That's what I mean. Listen- — " 

Whitmore imburdened his suspicions. He made Bendix look 
at his own Words: that no buildings had been seen, no enemy 
machinery, no evidence of intelligent life whatsoever. He tacked 
on the point Liebennan had made : that no enemy had been seen. 

"All, there is is vegetable life. Fungi. No litde things like 
mice or big things like men. No birds. No insects. Nothing that 
crawls, walks or flies. Only fungi." 

" Maybe," said Bendix, "maybe the planet hasn't got around 
to that stage t>f evolution yet." 

" And maybe it has, but the animal life was killed off by the 
fungil" • 

"You mean they're the enemy? They killed all our boys? 
But you said-^^" 

Whitmore watched the expression change on Bendix's face. 
"You're beginning to "get the answer I got Some of. the fungj^Qod knows which!— have done things to our men, turned them 
into murderers. That's why the so-called enemy was never seen 
sneaking up:to do a killing." 

Liebennan looked yery young as he said: "These fungi— do 
you think they 'know* what they're doing? Is it a conscious act on 
their part?" 

"Thafs the biggest mystery," Whitmore said. " When you 
plant a seed upside down, does the seed actually think when it still 
sends the root growth downwards and the plant growth up to the 
light? I believe that's as'near .an analogyas well get to what motivates the fungi. This planet isn't overstrong on nitrogen. The 
human body is a good source of that element." 

Bendii looked at the blotches on his body. " So any moment I 



94 



NEBULA 



could grab an E-gun and fry you! And just so the things in me 
would be providing food for their brothers. Is that it?" 

Whitmore slapped one fist into the palm of the other hand. 
" I wish I knew. I told you, this is only a guess." 

" Whit," said Lieberman. " If they eventually kill us all off, 
they'll have killed their source of food. I mean — well, if you have 
a herd of cattle, you don't kill them all for beef." 

" Parasites are different! They kill senselessly. About ninety 
per cent, of all parasites kill their hosts, even if it does in the end 
mean their own death. They seem to know what they're doing up 
to a certain point and then their intelligence peters out." 

The faint but persistent bleep from the earphones prompted 
Lieberman to ask: "Suppose you're wrong, Whit -". 

The ex-schoolmaster punched his hand 'again. "I've thought 
about that. If I was sure I was right, our duty would be to make 
our -way back to the ship, call Earth and tell them to forget about 
this place. But if we did that and I was wrong, we'd be leaving a 
platoon of men marooned out there." 

" What are you going to do?" asked Bendix. 

"I'm going. to do nothing. I'm leaving the decision to you, to 
all of us after I've told the others what I suspect." 

The decision was swung by sentiment against reason. 
Whitmore's theories sounded feasible. The more they were thought 
about, the more feasible they became. So nobody thought about 
them too long. A quick decision was taken. The men who were 
transmitting the direction-finding signal were their buddies. If they 
were under the influence of a homicidal fungus, that was all the more 
motive for finding them, capturing them if possible, and taking them 
back home to be cured. 

For one more weary time they slung their blisters and pushed 
into the humidity in the direction of the signal's source, with Hock 
and Newcastle guiding the communications dome. 

Whitmore tried to convince himself he was not being a coward 
when he wished the decision had gone the other way. But he could 
not help fortifying his theory with new data. He remembered 
Turaczek's outburst: his confession to a mad compulsion to kill. 

He even managed to account , for the fact that none of his 
squad had been affected; until they had set out in answer to 
Cumrnings' request, they had been more or less isolated from the 
others and had not previously ventured into the fungus-ridden jungle. 

Since this latter fact was no longer true, he determined to keep 
a sharp eye on his companions. • 



SUICIDE SQUAD 



95 




He forgot to include one man in this surveillance. 
He forgot to watch himself. 

The Wind was howling in their faces at close on fifty miles per 
hour. They had to push hard against it to make any headway. Two 
men joined Hock and Newcastle who were having trouble with the 
dome. Everyone sweated like a pig. Everyone cursed the heat and 
the humidity. 

But no one would stop. They were driven by the incentive 
that comes when the end of a race is in sight. On top of which they 
felt an urgency to see Cummings and -his patrol— or what was left 
of it 

Whitmore put Darro out as lead man to give himself the freedom necessary to circulate among the others to see that no one got 
lost and to see that no one got homicidal impulses. It meant he 
had - torcovef a lot mor&'gfourur than anyone: else; He got sweatier 
arid muddier and more fatigHed than' anyone seise.: But-at the back 
of his mind was * iaint piciure of Julie; she warnever going to taunt 
him with having bitten oS: more than he could chew. 



% * NEBULA 

He was up beside Darro when they came across the lost patrol. 

Travelling through murk and mud it was almost rmpo^si$e to 
judge distance. Whitmore had known they must be gettisig close to 
the patrol. But for the last hoar fatigue and hnmMty had made 
time seem featureless, Without the division of minutes and seconds"He had not realised tow close they had got to their objective. 

A sodium-ysllow aurora lit up the fog 3 ahead and to the right 
of him. He recognised tile energy-rifle fusillade before the crackle of 
gunfire reached his ears. . He threw himself flat, oblivious to the 
glutinous black parage that slapped open to receive his body, 
.oblivious to the- squelched and stinting fungi that filled his mouth 
and his nostrils when he hit the ground. 

He heard another burst of fire. He spat his mouth 'empty, 
cleaned his nostrils with thumb and snort He rolled on one 
shoulder, tried to make out -.the figures of his men in the steamy 
gloom. So far as he could see, they had followed his example'and 
were hugging the ground for safety. 

He was sobbing for breath. Exertion and heat had made his 
rRartthump. 

After a third flicker, the firing ended, The wind filled his ears 
and his mind. He could not hear Whether anyone was appffoacjHag, 
* He could no longer think clearly. He wished he could make a hole 
in the vapour-laden gloorn. He slid bis E-rifle forward until he had 
the barrel in his left hand. 

He loosed a long flaming burst into the amorphous gloom 
before him. , 

Suddenly there was fierce light and fire all around him. His 
action had been taken as a signal; He sensed that near him men 
had got to their feet and were plunging forward to meet the assailants 
who had attacked them. ' ■ 

He pulled his knees under him, pushed with one hand and 
launched himself into a stumbling run. The reprisal which he had 
inadvertently started was fcinging more flares of energy from up 
ahead. It was like running into the bade end of an ion rocket. 

The atmosphere had a brightness that nature never gave it. Yet 
it was still as diffuse and unclear. But visibility of a kind was avail-* 
able for twice its normal distance. 

Silhouetted against a background of green fog* arid haloed wi& 
a yellow aura of light frorn doe energy gunsj ^utmore could see a 
group of men. There might have been a dozen* or twice (hat 
aurnber, or even more; the picture blurred at the edges and men 
merged with the mist. 



SUICIDE SQUAD 



But they were/rfle^'.i&fced ago.... Hiring atT WMtmore's group. 
■His fears had been justified. . . 

For a moment he looked at them with , an, almost . academic 
interest. Time iuxl motion were slowed down. He was aware that 
Cummings' patrol was shooting at his, but it did not register that 
death was involved. He saw one figure stop its random spraying of 
energy. He saw the figure face in a forward direction. He saw it 
raise its rifle from the hip to the shoulder. 

He was almost too late in realising that he was the target. 
. ' He had been running all , this, time. , He had covered a lot of 
ground without being detected. But now his advance had been 
spotted and it was going to be stopped. 

He poked his own rifle out lite a spear and fired as he ran. He 
bit the figure few down. Its iegs disappeared and it dropped vertically to its flaming stumps. 

From then ort) Whitrnore was a convert to the cause of death. 

Hie lolling of his would-be assailant meant nothmg to him. He 
forgot Urn in his concentration on the other figures ahead. 

He kept on running and kept on firing until he was alone in an 
area that stank of burned flesh. The enemy had been wiped out or 
had skulked into the seclusion and the safety of the vaporous 
atmosphere. 

" Whitmore turned around. He detected shooting from another, 
direction. , 

He started to run again, back to where he had come from. He 
was a superman. He could run forever, he felt The heat and 
humidity no -longer bothered him. 

- More figures appeared. Again he fired. And soon he was alone 
again. 

He prowled about for a while, looking for something else to 
shoot at. He found nothing. He sat down. , 

Slowly the homicidal urge ebbed. He noticed he was sitting 
among dead men. He put down his rifle, crawled, among them, 
peering close to examine their faces. 

He began to remember. 

Afraid that the human part of .him would be swamped agai% 
lie scurried frantically oyer the bodies, identifying, memorising, 
counting' He went across *o the remains of Cumrajngs' patrol. 
Again he counted and named . the dead. 

He could not identify everyone. Some were so burned as to be 
unrecognisable* He could not even account for die total number of 



98 



NEBULA 



the two patrols. • Many were missing from Gummings' group — -but 
he guessed that the vacancies had occurred earlier, before he had 
caught up with them. 

He found seventeen of his own men. One was not among the dead. 

He was glad he did not find Darro's body. 

He went looking for Darro. 

But it was Darro who found Whitmore. 

The little Irishman had been lying in the mud nursing a minor 
bum on his arm. In the howling wind he did not hear Whitmore 
approach. In his concentration on the wound he did not see him. 
It was a showering of ooze over his shoulders, splashed by Whitmore's running feet, that told him someone had passed. 

He stifled an impulse to shout He got up, took his rifle and 
followed the lumbering figure. He got within feet of Whitmore, 
close enough to recognise him, and still the man in front was too 
intent on staring into the' gloom to notice that he was being followed. 

Darro got close, stuck out a foot and Whitmore tripped. The 
Irishman jumped on his fallen body, hard enough to knock the 
breath out of him for a moment. Then he stood wide-legged, waiting for the- other to uncoil himself and sit up. 

" We're going back to the ship," he told Whitmore. 

" Not me, Paddy. I can't go back.'' 

"Where's your gun?" 

" I left it. Deliberately." 

" You mean you lost it " 

"I walked away from it. Paddy, listen to me. I've been 
killing. Killing wildly and for no reason. It started as self-defence. 
Then it became murder, then senseless slaughter. I left my gun 
because if I had it now I would kill you!" 

Darro's hesitation was only slight. " Okay, 111 be careful. But 
I can't leave you here. I'm. taking you back to the ship, you and 
anyone else we can find." 

"There's nobody else. Just you and me. And I'm glad it's 
you I'm talking to because you're the strong one, Paddy, you're the 
one who can make it back to the ship alone . . . Don't argue, it has to 
be that way.- If I go along, I'll find some way of killing you. Then 
who's going to call Earth to tell them to write this planet off die 
books? tfotiW^f-cm't-ge-lwcfevWt yte ' l h e y could cure mebefore 
I started killing again, but I couldn't live withe what - I've already • 
done." 
Darro covered him with his 'rifle, f Get up, Whit. You 



Suicide squad 



99. 



couldn't help what you did. And I'll take a chance on getting you 
back." * 

Whitmore beat his hands in the mud. His features were 
warped, knotted and twisted with the effort to control himself. He 
screamed. 

"Kill me, Darro! For God's sake, kill me!" 

"Let's go -" Darro's invitation was made calmly. 

Whitmore could feel the blind red urge returning rapidly. He 
knew what was going to happen. But he was determined it was 
going to happen now and happen his way. If he waited, his acquired 
instinct for murder would probably make him too quick for Darro. 

He got to his knees. "Paddy!" he roared. "You dumb 
Irish !" , • : 

He launched himself forward. 

Darro side-stepped, tripped him into the mud again. 

Whitmore sobbed. He knew that even now he was almost 
capable of besting the .other. He pushed hard, got up on his feet 
and swayed. He put his hands out, thumbs touching, fingers spread 
to the width of a man's neck. He took a step forward. 

" I'll club you," Darro warned. 

Clubbing was not enough. Whitmore dropped his hands. He 
plunged sideways into the gloom. 

" Now try it ! " he yelled. " You had your chance when I 
didn't have a gun. Well, now it's even. I've got a gun too." 

He charged back towards Darro, crouching low. 

" Don't make me do it, Whit!" 

Whitmore did not stop. A lance of fire scorched the mud in 
front of him. He did not stop. An orange spear crisped the top of 
his hair. He did not stop. 

He did not stop until one of his legs folded under him, burned 
off at the ankle. Even then his progress was only momentarily 
halted. Like a wounded animal, he shambled forward on three 
limbs. He could see Darro's knees within reach. He clawed for a 
grip on them. But at the last moment he cunningly changed his 
mind and rolled aside in case the Irishman tried to' stun him. 

"You didn't find a gun!" Darro accused. 

" Kill me," Whitmore repeated. This time he was quieter, not 
pleading, and the intensity had gone out of his voice. "You'll have 
to do it, Paddy. You know I can't live with this wound in this 
climate." 

Darro refused. " Whatever's got into you hasn't aifected me 
yet. I can't do it, Whit Not in cold blood. I've done a lot of 



100 



NEBULA 



things in my life <hat Iisrasn't too proud of, but I couldn't do tl>at. 
Neither-can I just leave you to die." , 

Overhead, the featureless sky was suddenly ripped apart by 
tremendous rivers; of Iightrong that had their source sonrewhejBe 
below the. horizon and forked their way 40 neutrality in a thousand 
deltas. The wind began to die miraculously. 

Before thunder could drown his words; Whitmore said weakly, 1 
" You've got to get to the ship. You've got to tell them back 
hom e : 1 -" 

"I know. PU make it, don't worry about that, Whit. And 
because I won't need it_ and you will, Fni leaving the rifle." 

Again the sky was torn by lightning, throwing up clearly the 
agony of mind that was etched on Whitmore's face. 

Datro saw the expression and understood. 

He said, " I'll leave it over here— out of your reach. By the 
time you v manage to crawl to it, Fll be too far away for you to do 
any damage." 

He cut the parting short. He said, " Good luck, Whit," trad 
loped into the storm-shattered landscape. 

Whitmore ignored the gun He had done with killing. 

It began to rain. As he sat and watched bU life pumping out of 
the stump of his leg, into the pools of ram-water, he had the smile 
of a man who had accomplished something. 

ROBERT PRESSLIE 



I BACK NUMBERS . . . 

I In response to requests from a large nuntber of readers we 

\ are again offering back mmbm of NEBULA for tko$e tehe 

1 are unable to obtain them from their usual supplier. 
\ All ' issues from Afo. n to No. ^ycan be k^fbr ^l- or 35c. 

< each post free* AM other numbers ore permanently sold out. 
\ Cash with order, please, to ; NEBULA Science-Fiction, 

\ 159 Crowttpoint Road, Glasgow, S*E. 



The Best of Science Fiction 
— at bargain prices! 



Already ptdthfuM «f«i MKtMl* 
to KfiV tnembm m /0MW»g. 

i, turn 

Asimov (Os.) 

tit Ytmp of tin Sput Baagli 

•■■ VsnVogt (es.) , 
Nmr Piano 

Vonaegut 0s.) 
ON : Mir 



B.) 



- Staj 
TH I 

Bister (8b.) 
flnat atortn ot tetann FleltH 

(as.) 

tin Krakan Wakts 

■ WywJtaun (is. fld.) 
MHWhaH 491 

Bradbury (4s. fld.) 

, Clarke (4a, fld-) 

Men ftan nmm 

Sturgeon (4s. W.) 

■ Kiitttier (4S. «d.) 
Tfo Qant of WW 

ASftt»V.(*s. fld.) 
Mffflunf Witaeat Tima 

ed; »hi<$ (5s. «d.) 

. • J^ker (5s. ■«,). 

Afini 9n*t ■' 

Tnbb (6s. fld.} ■ 
A Mirror tor Ojuamn 
.. :. Pangbora (5s. fld.) 
Oie In ttm Hnnartd 

Hfilatosli (53. 5d.) 
6«rtn* ttN Earrfars of SpMt Utd 

ed, Marl) (Ss. fld.) 
TUUm Wij BHk 

.Bennett (6s. 6A.) 
WWMof a»BM 

Jpick (5s, 8d.) 
t*o Dwrth of flra» 
' Christopher IBs. «d.) 
TIM Twmty
Mantfey :(l 

Grey Walter (5s. fld.) 

Urthaoit, cam* Horn 

■. Blish ;5s. 5d.) . 
Tlpf t Tign : 

Barter {fis. 84,| 
tMthm In 

KornbtuUi (5s. 8d.) \ 
B*«rt H9!n1»:n Onmllim 

■ &..8d.}. .... 
But «.F.Two 

&LCrispin: f6s.«d.) 
liWta «4 fIoHh 

Moose {jft. iSa.) ' 
* f i#t tfie titles yao wish to 
,£#&gia and enclose r^ttaara?' 
adjt&ig :i v'p^B^ag&--4^ ; ■ i, ' W» will 
rijSjjre your account if yoo 



Fox'sk years the Scieace Fiction Bock Club has been building 
tip a representative library ; of sfifen.ee fiction writm#. Thebes* 
of science fiction, we claimed, ahd We fliink you will agree when 
you read the list of books already issued to members and shown 
on the left. 

The books are chosen by an editorial committee beaded 
by Artlmraarke, E. J. Carnell {Editor of New Worlds) ; Dr. 
J. G. Porter and Herbert Jones. Chtb books «ie well produced i 
in, iffliform style, printed on good paper, attractively and 
Strongly bound. They are Issued to members at specially 
low pric»— only 6a. fld. for books selling elsewhere at more 
than double. 

Join the thousands oi S.F. fens who get their favourite 
reading at the moat favourable prices---post the coupon below 
today. ■ • . 

SF6G PROGRAMME JANUARY TO JUNE W 

THE NAKED IUN by Isaac Asimoy. Twenty thousand hoaUBS 
live is luxury on the planet Solaria surrounded by countless 
robot slaves. But murder sometimes happens. January. ■ 
fflsewhere «(.«.; SFB£ Edition only 5s. . 
flHILDBGH OF THE ATOM by Wilmar SMras. Some years 
after an explosion at an atomic plant, wnieh no-one long 
survived, a psychiatrist discovers children wrp possess extraOEdmary irrtelleetual gifts. This is the story of how they are ■ 
protected and developed, March. Elsewhere 91 M ;--5l*BC 
EdUtfon only gs, fid. 

SIMMERS IN THE UNIVERSE by Clifford Sintik, TWs 
book contains seven of the best of Sima&'s faaqinaidng .stories. 
May. Elsewhere 16*. ; ' SFBC Edition only $s. 6d. 

_ _ _ ENROL HERE - — 
To : Tin Stimt Fiction Beak ChA, 

38 WUttaM IV Stmt, London, W.Cfc > 6 

Please enrol me as a membec of the Science Fiction Book 
Ciub. I will purchase the six bi-monthly choices, commencing 

with the........... choice. After a >-ear, if I wish 

to dtseontinuemy membeishipi I can glye one nioiith's notice. 

Q I will pay monthly on receipt of each book at 6s, 8d. 
. (pits 9d..pQBt«ge and packing). 

Q I enclose 6s. M. (plm Sd. postasaand packing) for tbefirst 
book ancT.I'WflJ-pay for subsequent; books .»s they are sent. 

■Q I enclose 38s. (plus 48. fld. postage and packing) for six 
■'■ ehojees: 

(Eire and Overseas members p^payroeat requested tot three 
or six locks,). ■: 



101 



New Hard-Cover Science Fiction Reviewed by 



KENNETH F. SLATER 



There is nothing new in my 
column this month, but among 
the titles mentioned you may find 
some you've not read, and which 
will be worth reading. At long 
last we can give you some results 
on our research into the " Best 
Science Fiction " in the opinion 
of the readers of NEBULA 
Science Fiction. 

A number of points raised by 
the folk who did not send in the 
full lists, or sent in unpreferenced 
lists, have been answered individually, but for everyone's sake a 
few words of explanation are required. I ran a "test" on a group 
of 6 folk, asking for 6 books 
in order of preference. I then 
doubled the number of books, 
and found that in several cases 
books which were not included 
on the first 6 now came in; the 
top 3 of the lists submitted 
by the same people. The general 
reason offered ran on the fines of 
" I'd not thought of that one 
when 1 wrote out the 6, but now 
I recall it, I think ft better than 
. . ." Therefore we asked for 25 



titles to try to get readers to consider their lists. Anyone can sit 
down and list 6 or 10 titles — but 
it calls for a little more thought 
to list 25. But perhaps we made 
it slighdy too big a job! Then 
the question of "Why order of 
preference? Why not just a list?" 
Well, the answer to that will be 
apparent when you look at the 
" Placing " and " Mentioned" 
lists which follow. The "Placing" 
list is that which is based on 
" order of preference ", each 
title having been allotted a number of points according to its 
placing on each list; the " Mentioned " list just gives I point 
to each book for inclusion on a 
list — in other words, its position 
depends on how many people 
have voted for it, irrespective of 
their opinion of its worth. For 
instance, George R. Stewart's 
EARTH ABIDES was only listed 
on 3 of the 12 lists, but because 
of high placing it comes 13th on 
the " Placing " list, but is not on 
the " Mentioned " list. 



102 



SOMETHING TO READ 



103 



; PLACING 
j FOUNDATION 1 Isaac 132 
Asimov 

2 THE DEMOLISHED 125 
MAN: Alfred Bester 

,3 MORE THAN HUMAN: 1 14 
Theodore Sturgeon 

4 CITY: Clifford D. Simak 95 

5 TIGER, TIGER: Alfred 92 

Bester 

6 THE DAY , OF THE 91 

TRIFFIDS: JohnWyndham 

7 I, ROBOT: Isaac Asimov 88 

8 A MIRROR FOR OBSER- 87 

VERS : Edgar Pangborn 

9 THE DEATH OF GRASS : 86 

John Christopher 

10 SLAN : A. E. van Vogt - 85 

11 CHILDHOOD'S END: 83 

Arthur C. Clarke 
.12 THE PUPPET MASTERS: 74 
Robert A. Heinjein 

13 EARTH ABIDES: George 72 

R. Stewart 

14 THE CITY AND THE 63 

STARS: Arthur C. Clarke 

15 THE. CHILDREN OF THE 62 

ATOM: Wilmar H. Shiras 

16 I AM LEGEND : Richard 57 

Matheson 

17 THE CAVES OF STEEL : 55 

Isaac Asimov 

18 STORIES FOR TOMOR- 51 

ROW: William Sloane 
(editor) 

19 THE WEAPON MAKERS: ,50 

A. E. van Vogt 

20 THE SPACE MER- 48 

CHANTS : Frederik Pohl 
& C. M. Kornblurh 

21 RING AROUND THE 47 

SUN: Clifford D. Sirnak 

22 THE LORD OF THE 45 

RINGS: Prof, J. R. R. 
Tolkein 



MENTIONED 
MORE THAN .HUMAN : . S 

Theodore Sturgeon 
THE. DEMOLISHED MAN: 8 

Alfred Bester 
I, ROBOT : Isaac Asimov 7 

FOUNDATION: Isaac Asimov 6 
THE CITY AND THE STARS: 6 

Arthur C. Clarke 
THE CHILDREN OF THE 6 

ATOM : Wilmar H. Shiras 

THE DAY OF THE TRIFFIDS: 6 

John Wyndham 
THE CAVES OF STEEL : Isaac 5 
Asimov 

TIGER, TIGER : Alfred Bester 5 

THE DEATH OF GRASS : 5 

John Christopher 
CHILDHOOD'S END: Arthur 5 

C. Clarke 
THE PUPPET MASTERS : 5 

Robert A. Heinlein 
UNTOUCHED BY HUMAN 5 

HANDS : Robert Sheckley 
CITY: Clifford D. Simak 5 

SLAN: A. E. van Vogt 5 

THE ILLUSTRATED MAN: 4 

Ray Bradbury 
PRELUDE TO SPACE: Arthur. 4 

C. Clarke 
ONE IN 300: J. T. Mcintosh 4 



CHRISTMAS EVE (Not This 4 
August): C. M. Kornbluth 

A MIRROR FOR OBSERVERS : 4 
Edgar Pangborn 

THE SPACE MERCHANTS: 4 
Frederik Pohl St C. M 
Kornbluth 

STORIES FOR TOMORROW: 4 
William Sloane (Editor) 



m 



NEBULA 



I have finished the Est- at 22 
rather than zq or 25 tides because of the " Mentioned " listing. The figures following titles 
in raw listjag' indicate the nunjbet of nientions, and this covers 
all those which received inclusion 
in 4 of the lists. A further 10 
tides were mentioned on at least 
. 3 lists, and it would obviously be 
absurd to pursue this limited 
survey to that length. Hie figure^ 
following the titles in the " Placing? fist is, of course, the number of points secured by that 
title. In comparing the two lists 
A it must be noted that titles re
• eenfing the same number of 
" mentions " have been placed in 
alphabetical order of author, and 
thus die fact that TIGER, 
THJER is in 5th position on the 
first list, and 9th on the second, 
does not mean a great deal. However, some slight conclusion can 
be drawn from the fact that 5 
people awarded 92 points to 
TIGER, TIGER; while Robert 
Heinlein's THE PUPPET MASTERS, still with 5 mentions in 
the lists, was placed much lower 
with only 74 points. Various 
other ' conclusions can be drawn 
—for example, THE LORD OF 
THE; RINGS secured its 22nd 
□lace on the list with only 2 

* votes, thus beating all the 10 
titles which appeared on 3 lists. 
Two people thus rated this work 
very highly, and : on checking 
those' lists I find that one of the 
2 people rather definitely prefers 
"fantasy " to "strict science-Gctioa ". He is also one of the only 
2 people to give Abraham Merritt 
a mention! 

By and large, anthologies were 
ignored. The WQUam Sloahe 
edited STORIES FOR TOMORROW is the only one which 



received more than . 1 vote! 
(When, it, is recalled that this 
work was "refnaindered'' f *:it, 
does not seem that a preference 
list of this kind would be a gfsat 
deal of use to publishers . . .) If 
one accepts " collections ". like 
Simak's CITY, in which the 
stories form a connected whole, 
as " novels ", the only two " collections " to obtain a mention are 
the Sheckley work, aftl Bradbury's THE ILLUSTRATED 
MAN (this latter would have 
secured 23rd place on the pointsawarded fist). So one could con' . 
elude that although "collections" 
and "anthologies" are popular 
enough when' printed, they do not 
live long in the memory. 

Heading the poll came Isaac 
Asimov, with 26 mentions covering 8 books, and Arthur C. 
Clarke was nest with zi mentions 
for 6 books. Close behind came 
A. E, van Vogt, although his i§ 
mentions were spread over to 
titles. Compare that with the next 
in line, Alfred Bestei, who was 
included 13 times with only 2 
titles! Then Robert A Heinlehv 
to mentions on 4 titles, and neck 
and neck Ray Bradbury and Eric 
Frank Russell, both 10 mentions 
on 5 books. Theodore Sturgeon 
had 9 mentions on 2 books (if the 
9th time had also been for 
MORE THAN HUMAN, he 
would haye topped both lists), 
and Clifford Sunk 9 with 3. 
. . . for your interest, Jules! Verne, 
" Father of Science Fiction " 
according; to some, authorities, 
did not get one mention, and 
Britain's own H. G. Wells wis 
only listed twice, with 2 different' titles. Olaf Sapledoii did 
get -4 listings, equally divided 
between ODD JOHN and LAST 
AND FIRST MEN. 



&y Airmail from the USA. 



First of all, a Met statement 
amciralng mis brand-new department is probably appropriate. 
Its ' scope will be vast— for it is 
intended that it will covet all 
Ispects of the science fiction 
field, slanted, primarily, from the 
American point of view. 

Those or you who have been 
re»4i}! Walter Willis's excellent 
department in this magazine are 
well-acquainted -with the science 
fiction fan movement. Walt has 
told you a great deal about this 
gtwip of loyal, vociferous, and. 
eWreraely enthusiastic readers of 
science fiction. He has indicated 
how this group writes letters to 
the various discussion colurans of 
Wehtoh and its contemporaries; he 
fas talked of science fiction 
Collections; and he has described 
other facets of the fan field, such 
as She intensive conespondence 
within the group, the publication 
of innumerable amateur publications ("fanzines"), and the length 
to which many fans will go to 
attain personal contact — through 
conferences and conventions, 
which axe held all over the world, 
Yes, the science fiction fan is an 
enthusiast. And he is a philanthropist also. Which brings me to 
fne subject of " The Transatlantic 
Fan -Puhd," " oil? Ksson foif today. : < 

Li)w many other things in the 



s-f world, it all started .with 
Forrest J. Ackerman. Forry, who 
is known in America as " Mr. 
Science Fiction," has been reading s-f since 1926 and has been 
a science fiction fan since the inception of the term. He was projected into fandom through being 
a demon letter writer, and he 
started at a very early age. I can 
still recall his first letter-to-theeditor. It appeared in the Fall, 
1929 issue of Science Wonder 
Quarterly and started off thuSly: 
"Although I am only twelve 
years old. . . ." Through this, 
and subsequent letters, Forry 
obtained many, many correspondents, a large number of whom 
were residents in Great Britain. 

During World War n, when it 
appeared that the British fan 
world .was doomed to extinction, 
Forry kept it alive by contributions of books, magazines, paper, 
money— even mimeo stencils. As 
legend will have it, his British s-f 
friends wanted to repay Forry by 
paying iiis way to the U.K. 
Forry, philanthropist that he is, 
wanted it the. other way. He 
wanted American fans to bring a 
British fan to America for a 
World Conventioa As a mate of 
fact, Forry wanted to bring two 
British s-f fans to Arnerica simultaneously, if possible. 

Thus .was created " The Big 
' JOS 



106 



NEBULA 



Pond Fund/' which was one of 
die projects of the 1947 World 
Science Fiction Convention, held 
in Philadelphia. The basic idea 
behind the Big Pond Fund was 
that fandom, through voluntary 
contributions, would pay the 
passage of the first fan ambassador. Unfortunately, fandom 
was comparatively young (and 
small) and it wasn't until 
1949 that.Forcy's-jdiearfl *materiahsed when Ted Garsell 
anade it to the " Convention ", 
held in Cincinnati, Ohio. And 
even at that Ted paid a good portion of his expenses out of his 
own pocket. But the die was cast. 

Some time in 1949 a young 
fan appeared on the scene 
with an unpretentious publication 
called Slant This fan resided in 
Ireland and, as he was unaware of 
other fans in Ireland, communicated with American fans by 
sending them his magazine. The 
result of this was a large number 
of correspondents and an excellent staff of writers. This, coupled 
with meticulous typesetting and 
excellent format, catapulted Slant 
to the top group of fanzines. And 
Up the ladder with Slant went its 
meticulous editor, Walter A. 
Willis. 

In 195 1 Shelby Vick started a 
campaign to bring Willis, the fan 
world's brightest new star, to the 
"Nolacon": (New Orleans). However, the campaign didn't bear 
fruit until 1952 when Walt 
made it to the " Chicon " 
(Chicago, Illinois). When Walt 
returned to Ireland he wrote up a 
lengthy report of his trip, ** The 
Harp Stateside This interesting document appeared in many 
instalments in various fanzines 
and has now been published complete in pamphlet form. (Obtain


able from Willis for 2/- or 35 
cents at 170 Upper Newtownards 
Road, Belfast, Ireland. (An^with 
the publication of " The Harp 
Stateside " another fannish tradition was born, for it is expected 
that the recipient of the TAFF 
trip will write up his adventures 
so general fandom (or those who 
contributed for the trip) will be 
able to read it. 

fenmediately -folowing the 
1952 " Chicon v Donald E. Ford, 
of Ohio, started a campaign to 
bring an English friend of his to 
the 1953 World Convention in 
Philadelphia. However, the friend, 
one Norman Ashfield of London, 
proved unable to come. Ford 
wrote to Willis offering the money 
to any British fan who might be 
able to make the trip. Ford's 
letter arrived just about the time 
of the British Coroncon (1953) 
and it resulted in Willis, Carnell, 
Ken Slater, ^ and several other 
fans organising The Transatlantic 
Fan Fund. 

" Southgate in '58!" has been 
a legendary fannish war-cry for 
many years. And Southgate in 
'58 it was, for Los Angeles, 
which is a suburb of Southgate, 
was awarded this past year's 
convention. Ron Bennett, editor 
of the fan magazine Ploy, was 
the choice of both Britain and 
America, and has just recently 
completed a three-week stay in 
the colonies. 

■ This brief report has 
attempted to cover TAFF history and display how solid and 
worthy a fan effort it is. Anyone 
who is interested in seeing die 
fine fannish tradition of TAFF 
become even' more popular- is 
invited to write to Walt Willis 
at,the address already mentioned. 



WALTER WILLIS writes for you— 



While James White was having^ 
tea with us the . other night he 
mentioned casually that he'd just 
sold a story in Italy. Naturally I 
was spiritually uplifted to 'learn 
of this fresh advance of culture 
and enlightenment and I cast 
about for some diplomatic way 
of putting the question which 
lies nearest to the hearts of all us 
dedicated missionaries of science 
fiction. " How much?" was how 
I phrased it. "Eleven thousand 
lira," he said sonorously, and 
went on to talk about his model 
train set, " And how muctj is 
that in sordid sterling?" I pursued, wondering if he'd let rne 
drive his Maserati. James had 
already made his mark in Germany, not to mention his kroner 
in Sweden, and we were becoming minor authorities on currency 
exchange rates. "I suppose you'll 
keep on your job at the Co for 
awhile?" " Yes," said James, "I 
think I'd better. After deductions 
it works out at £4 14s. tod." 
" Still a five-figure cheque," I 
pointed out. " Yes," said James, 
brightening, "and, besides, you 
must admit it's nicer to be paid 
two ■lira a word : man a few 
guineas a thousand." 

I agreed. You have to be pretty 
famous to be paid by the single 
word in < Britain. I've heard that 
Arthur Conan Doyle got 5/- a 
word for the ' later Sherlock 



Holmes stories but I hope I'm 
not destroying any illusions when 
I say that few science fiction 
magazines, even NEBULA, can 
afford to pay that much, even to 
authors; who are turning out better science fiction that Doyle ever 
did 
Last month, as you probably 
don't remember, I mentioned 
how much science fiction was 
just fairy stories. The same 
thought has occurred to Edmund 
Crispin, anthologist of Best SF 
Three y and he has come up with 
a very snappy comeback which 
you can quote if anyone ever 
makes this criticism in your presence. Towards the end of his 
preface Edmund hauls off and 
delivers the following telling 
counterpunch : 
". . ■. they differ from conventional .fairy tales in carrying a 
massive, so to say epiphenomenal, load of religious, poli1 tical, ethical and sociological 
implication, and so, at their 
best, provide intellectual stimulation of a generalised variety 
which mainstream fiction is incapable of embodying 1 in any 
tolerable form." 
I'll bet this will silence your 
opponent, at least until he has a 
chance to sneak off and look up 
" epiphenomenal " in the dictionary. 

Which- brings me tack to this 
107 



188 



NEBULA 



question of word rates. Don't you 
think it's ridfarlaus to treat afi 
words as if they were the same 
, valae? It's obvious that a complicated piece of semantic machiseiy like " epipfaenomenal " is 
worrha dozen "ands" and "buts", 
aid an author capable of operating it without it falling on him 
deserves a bonus. I'm ' not suggestingwe should go back to paying authors by the line— «I don't 
like Stories consisting entirely of 
dialogue any more than you do— 
but that science fiction could be 
improved if we introduced a differential scale for words. Why, 
for instance, should an author 
get paid for conjunctions, when 
he : doestft get paid for full stops? 
And then, take adjectives. Everyone knows that the excessive use 
^ adjectives is a sign of bad 
writing and after you've written 
anything you , should go over it 
ana strike tbem all out. But you 
can't espeet.an author paid the 
present way to do it when every 
stroke of the pencil is taking 
bread out of the, mouths of its 
starving children. So suppose we 
pay half the standard rate for 
adjectives, and/ of course adverbs. 



Nouns and verbs, on the other 
hard, are good since they mean 
thought and action, » we'll pay 
double for those. Taking it ««en 
further, we could encourage 
colourful ahd ppetic wnting .fc 
/paying special bonuses for "lite" 
;:«nd "as ■ if ". Eventually we 
might work out a point value for 
every word in the language. 5 
Sou may suggest th{s WmiUtbe 
too eorflpUcated, but I'd reply 
that this is the sort of problem 
that would be child's play to the 
keen mathematical minds of our 
.professional edftors, jaSy:,as falling off a logarithm. In fact this 
son of thing is beijsg done already, by the electronic computer 
school of Iterary critics. What 
these people do, is count all tie 
words in ah- author *s work, and 
find the number of times each of 
them recurs. Then by comparing., 
these frequencies, with statistical 
norms, they can, deduce such 
things as that Shakespeare was: 
two other people or that Dickens 
had an pedipus ccnnplex. Wis* 
interests me, though, is that tley 
really can make quite legitimate 
deductions about an author's 
cducatior.. background, knowledge and method of thinking, 
whether imaginative or concrete 
and so on. It seems t3 me that all 
that is , needeA: % improve tiie 
standard of science fiction is for ' 
our editors to subject to statistical 
analysis the words used in all |he 

been puMishe| so. far and base 
their rates on the results. Naturally this would have to be kept 
dark to prevent. au&ofs casbijlg. 
in unfairly use rfPeter HamSfOn 
adopts the system I promise' to 
tell hardly anyone. I wonder if 
ftrnes 'will let me drive ttyjn 
Jaguar? 



"elo^onj OENTON 2940 

EDNA HANSON 

Social Setvke dad Marriage Surtdu 
UMEU WN-rn « Hrimi FihnOt in. 
■MMn tntMti. A* mit* km. 

A DAMS, AT WCW SERVICE 

591 Manchester Road, Denton 
Nr. MANCHESTER ; 



— GUJD5D 



LETTERS TO 
THE EDITOR 



Dear. Mr. Hamiltoiv-Tlie lead 
story in NEBULA No. 36 was 
ves$: good. As weUSas being a 
suspense yarn, it provided some 
thjqght - provoking concepts. 
Healing by non-physical methods 
.is to my mind a well established 
&«K, and certainly a valid subject for science, fiction. In a day 
and age when men are giving up, 
one by «ne,»atl jhe old outlooks 
upon the nature and origin of 
life, it is refreshing to find a new 
alternative to scientific materialism. As we penetrate into the 
mysteries of the Universe and 
the mind, we 'find* evidence of a 
real rational religion. Sometimes 
I feel that science fiction takes 
ufi a very petty and unscientific 
attitude to the spiritual possibilities of life; for all possibility.; are scientific possibilities. 
JAMES INGLIS, 
' Girvan, 
Scotland. 

V.<t* interesting point, James. 
JtSedern scientific thought and 
discovery twe been responsible, for the outmoding of a 
■great deed of the intractable 
and matertdhstic mtimbo-jumbo 
of nineteenth-century science, 
and J am ceriem, in the years 
to come, a great deal of that 
! which is even yet considered 
. ^ ; ,b^: pnppssibie, .or^ unscienijfa tt»B bssWM* its proper 
place in human understanding. 



Dear Mr. Hamiltott^-Goihg 
through some science fiction 
books- at my local newsagents,. 
NEBULA caught my eye. I was 
so impressed with the novelette 
" The Captain's Dog " that from 
now on, I intend to be a regular 
reader of your outstanding 
science fiction magazine. 
DAVID MOIR, 
London, E.i, 

England. * 

* I am glad to hear it, David. 
There are many fine stories 
scheduled for future issues 
also. . 

Dear Sir — 1 once read an 
advertisement for a Science Fiction Book Gub in your magazines 
and vowed I would join it Then 
I discovered I had swapped the 
magazine without realising it was 
the One I wanted. 

Do you know of such a Club, 
and if so could you please take 
pity on a science fiction addict 
and send me the details? 

MISS BARBARA FOLWELL, 
Market Harborough, 
Leicestershire, 
England. 

* Certainly, Barbara,. Among the 
best British Boofe Clubs, 
specialising in Science Fic tion 
is the S.F3:C. at 38 Wiuutm 
IV Street, London, W.C.l. 
This firm has had promnent 

109 



no 



NEBULA 



ONE GUINEA PRIZE 

To the reader whose Ballot Form 
(below) is first opened at the 
NEBULA publishing office. 

Alt you have to do, both to win. 
this attractive prize and to help 
yotir favourite author win the 1959 
Author's Award, is to number the 
stories in this issue in the order of 
your preference on the Ballot Form 
below, or on a postcard if preferred, 
and mail it immediately to 
NEBULA, 101 Greenhead Street, 
Glasgow, ,S.E


Infection 




Survey Goran 




The World He Left 
Behind Him 




The Return 




The Lieutenant 




Suicide Squad 





Name and address : 



Mr. A. V. Russell of Wolverhampton wins the One Guinea Prize 
offered in Nebula No. '36. The 
final result of the poll on the 
stories in that issue was ; . . . 

1. THE HARD WAY 

By Dan Morgan 25-5% 

2. SIGHT OF A 

SILHOUETTE 
By Brian W, Aldiss 22-0% 

3. IT 

By John Kippax 20 6% 

4. WALLPAPER WAR 

By E. C. Tubb 10-4% 

5. SELL ME A DREAM 

By Stuart Allen . 12-5% 

The result of the poll on the 
stories in this issue will appear in 
Nebula No. 42. 



adverttsenients in several recent 
issues of NEBULA, but would 
doubtless, send further information as well as an enrolment 
form on request. 

Whilst on the subject, I 
think that the most amazing 
- offer by a Book Club anywhere in the world — open to 
American readers only, unfortunately — is a free reservation 
on the first passenger space 
ship to the Moon! This, as 
welt as information about such 
mundane things as forthcoming science fiction titles, can be 
had from The Science Fiction 
Book Club, Garden City, NY. 

QUESTION SPOT 

In which scientific questions 
from our readers are 
answered by one of our 
"Photo Feature" team of 
experts. 

Dear Sir. — -Would you please 
explain the method by which ' the 
age of fossils can be ascertained 
by measurement of their radioactivity. 

T. D. BRYANT, 

Newcastle, 3. 

* Dr. Archie Roy says; Cosmic 
rays, entering the Earth' supper atmosphere, produce 
fast moving neutrons that 
collide with nitrogen atoms of 
atomic weight 14. The collisions change the nitrogen 
atoms into atoms of an isotope 
of carbon called carhon-iQ, in 
contrast to normal carbon-n. 
In nature the proportion of 
carbon-14 to ccrbon-12 atoms 
is very small but the carhon14 atoms r.'are > radioactive and 
make their presence felt to 
modern electronic counters by 



GUIDED MISSIVES 



II 



throwing out electrons ^and 
becoming nitrogen once more. 
This decay of carbon-14 proceeds at a fixed rate that 
neither heat nor cold nor any 
other process can vary. In a 
quantity of carbon-14, half of 
it will have disintegrated in 
five and a half thousand years, 
a period of time called the 
half-life. Half of the remainder 
will have disappeared in a 
further 5,506 years, and so on. 

It was soon seen that here 
was a method of dating archaeological remains. 

Radiocarbon, as carbon-14 
is often catted) combines with 
oxygen to form carbon 
dioxide. The plant-life of the 
Earth uses carbon dioxide in 
building its food. Plants are 
ezien- by animal life so that 
all living creatures contain a 
fixed proportion of carbon-14 
to earbon-12. When a plant or 
,an animal dies, the proportion 
gradually diminishes, according 
to the carbon-14. half-life scale, 
thus providing a means of telling when death took place. 
: Any organic material found 
by the archmologist at a site 
will therefore date that site 
with considerable accuracy. 
Hundreds of such dates have 
now been found. 

For example wood from the 
funeral ship of an Egyptian 
king was enough to date it as 
3,600 years old. Again charcoal 
from the fire-places of ancient 
man can tell when he lived. 
The last Ice Age ended barely 
10,000 years ago, according to 
carbon-dating of the remains 
of wood and peat, crushed 
under debris left by the great 
&e * sheet. The method has 
been used to check the authen


ticity of the Dead Sea Scrolls, 
Their linen, wrappings date 
them to be about 1,900 years 
old. The error in such dates 
may be of order plus or minus 
one hundred and fifty -years 
which may be improved in 
time, while the practical limit 
to the time-span would seem 
to be about 6o 3 ooo years, quite 
long enough to cover aU the 
most interesting treasures of 
man's past history dug up by 
archaeologists in past years. 

Dear Sir — I have heard that 
many of the satellites of the / 
outer planets are composed 
entirely of frozen water. Is there 
any truth in this? 

PHILIP ARTHURLY, 

Leeds, 11. 



The 1959 World Science Fiction 
Convention will be known as 
DETENTION, meeting Friday, 
September 4th through Monday, 
September 7th at the Pick-Fort 
Shelby Hotel in Detroit, Michigan, 
U.S.A. Guest of Honour and other 
arrangements will be announced 
shortly. 

Membership, in DETENTION is 
available for 7/2 to everyone 
living outside North America. 
British and European memberships may besent to DETENTION'S 
British agent, Ron Bennett, 
7 Somhway Arthur's Avenue, 
Harrogate, Yorkshire, England. 
All members will receive copies 
of all progress reports, a membership card, and the programme 
booklet, even if they are unable 
to attend. 

YouH like DETENTION. It's 
good for you ! 

THE DETENTION COMMITTEE 
Fred Prophet and Roger Sims, 

Co-Chairmen. 



V 



m NEBULA 



* Dr. iircftw JSoy sayi : Tfce 
Solar System contains thirty
■ ' '■m^ :^wd r ''.M^Um 
in size from Saturn's T$tatt> 
of - diam&tm- av£t~$,OQO Miles 
and. :}qf$er ikon the planet. 
Mercury, down to Ma's' 
Deimos and Phobos, under ten 
miles across.' Some, like the 

• /GaHlean moons of Jupiter, 
; have been studied /n cvr 

three centuries and can be 
seen in small telescopes, others 
, are so small and * faint that 
they can never be seen by the 
eye at a terresMal telescope 
but re^utee" fang-exposure 
■^o^>gr^^;tefim their Ji^ht 
rh&i^ the photon 

graphic plate capable of being 
detected. 

-J^oiU these faint satellites' 
physical constitutions toe -hmm 
nothing* It is certainly not' 

: true that astronomers believe 
them to be composed entirely 
of frozen wxtier. The four 
outer . satellites of fupiter are 

> thought fey some to be eaptured astermds end thus mhy 
be rocky in nature since it ts 
probable thai t)i4 ostermdi are 
solid, inegi^rty^na^ed lumps 
of rock. .. 

■y^,: : 4r^i^y-in^Mfifctie 



Ihvkvig of 'the hnowledge tee 
hone of the imfrties trf the 
fat? big satellites of Jupiter. 
From a knowledge of 'th&r 
diameters and nuHsds-^-thsy 
show disc* in telescopes and 
perturb each others* orbits 
comuUrably—ihetr tne&t, densities, cast he tdctefattd. It is 
found thai ■ they corfie out to 
be 2.9, 2 9, j.2 and o t 6 'Utnes 
that of water. Tkts meam that 
$t is probable ihM 'the inner 
two are to, u, Uke ovr Moon t 
and Jeffreys kas^- suggested iktst 
the thsrd and fourth v$ay fe* 
composed largely of ice or 
solid carbon dioxide — '* dry 
ice " 

It is possible, too, that three 
of Saturn's satellites, Mimas. 
Tethys and &kme, fseee mean 
densities hehm that of footer. 
■ if ■ so,. $@§mf0> ■ ^§m$0t Wty 
fit them too. But this sngges^out tk& c&^^tions of 
five of the Solar System's 
moons is a long way from 
hunsing that many of the 
satellites of the outer pkttiets 
are composed #ntavty of 
frozen water! The truth of the 
matter, in fact, xeiU have to 
v>cat until (&ese remote bodies 
have been visited by tnmhiiid 
in the njt-so-distant future. 



LOOK HERE— Co/«?rt«</ from fwgt 2 

In spite of all that bag been said, however, one feet 1 remains dpmmstxably dear, science fiction is in just as healthy a condition asm *j it 
was a year ago, and with the \~asit new potential readenhijp opened to 
m by the staggering sdentifcc achievements oi the iast feto months, 
should, with intelligent promotion, and the iiuioda^ion of .a reore 
ofisiHMsttc flavour, very soon rise to -a figktfiilly p»epssl« position 
amongst intelligent rehders throughout world. 

I think that a very excellent summing .up of all this ,««s gftoti us 
by Her Aiajcsty the -Queea during htf radio and tetevtskro hfoa*tca# on 
Christmas Dav,. 1958, when ahe said : " We have no pbt^t foe 1 i$ace 
rave . ss Yet," . * ( ' ' 

^ • fim&ton 



Continued from inside front cover 

They said that elliptical galaxies were the youngest, spiral-armed galaxies 
allegedly being much older. Yet spiral galaxies are the brighter. 

Weizackefs theory of galactic evolution has something in common with 
this— he suggested that the spiral arms unwound from the nucleus just as 
a drop of cream poured into a cup of stirred black coffee swirls and, caught 
by the slower moving streams near the edge of the cup, is forced into 
spirals. 

Jeans suggested that the arms were really tides, produced by the gravitational attraction of nearby galaxies, being impelled outwards as the galaxies' 
nuclei contracted and spun faster. 

We still know little about the true mode of galactic formation; but now 
we are certain which are the oldest and which the youngest of the galaxies. 

The young galaxies are the irregular ones, rich in gas and dust, shining 
brilliantly with the harsh blue light of Population I stars new born from 
their gas clouds. 

The oldest galaxies are the elliptical star clouds, usually small, lit only 
by the old Population II stars which burn steadily after the giant spendthrift blue stars have guttered into extinction. Elliptical galaxies are the 
commonest in space. Since small galaxies age faster than large ones this 
view fits in well with the idea that the monotonous character of elliptical 
galaxies is due to their senility. 

Somewhere in between these extremes come the normal and barred 
spirals. The shape of a spiral galaxy seems logically right; you have a thick 
nucleus and the whole rotates so that arms spiral off in a graceful motion 
like a multi-million year old Catherine wheel. 

But why, then, should a galaxy develop a bar— a structure which must 
rotate like a solid spoke, relatively speaking, trailing its spirals from either 
side? 

The answer to this enigma probably lies in the high concentration of gas 
in the bar, a substratum which is highly viscous in comparison with the 
near emptiness of intergalactic space. Too, the great magnetic fields and 
movements of electrical currents in the clouds of the bar may welt play an 
important part in welding the whole into what appears to be a semi-solid 
state. Both the bars and the spiral arms are visible only by virtue of the 
stars condensed out of their gas. 

One of our very close systems— the large Magellanic Cloud— is an 
irregular galaxy which may, in a few million years, give us a vital clue. 
It looks as though it is just in the process of becoming a barred spiral. . . . 

And— a staggering thought— bridges and bars of stars are known which 
connect two galaxies. Once again this effect is probably due to magnetic 
fields meshing in space. 

But — we don't really yet know why. It is difficult enough to determine 
the structure of the Earth, and we live on the planet; it is more difficult to 
try to comprehend the mechanics of the Sun; almost impossible to build 
up a composite mental image of all the intricacies of our normal spiral galaxy. 

Yet Man still reaches outwards, plumbing space and time to ponder 
and then grasp the "reason" for such strange systems as barred spirals. 
Only thirty-five years ago, in 1924, Hubble was the first person to show that 
the Andromeda Nebula — the Great Spiral Galaxy in Andromeda — was in 
fact a galactic aggregation similar to ours and that there were millions of 
such "island universes". 

In less than half a century we have gone from first realising that 
galaxies floated discreetly in space to a determined effort to peel away the 
layers of mystery. And these vast systems are themselves only building 
blocks in a Universe as large as it is meaningless — or meaningful. The 
answer to that question we may never know; but that we shall go on trying 
is written large in the stars. 



