TYRANN By ISAAC ASIMOV 

The Bedroom Murmured 

THE bedroom murmured 
gently to itself. It was almost below the limits of 
hearing; an irregular little sound, 



yet quite unmistakable and deadly. 

But it wasn't that which awakened Biron Farrill and dragged 
him out of a heavy, unrefreshing 
slumber. He turned his head restlessly from side to side in a futile 
struggle against the periodic burr 
on the end table. 



TYRANN 



5 



He put out a clumsy hand without opening his eyes and dosed 
contact. 

"Hello," he mumbled. 

Sound tumbled instantly out of 
the receiver. It was harsh and loud, 
but Biron lacked the ambition to 
reduce the volume. 

It said, "May I speak to Biron 
Farrill?" 

Biron said, fuzzily, "Speaking. 
What do you want?" 

"May I speak to Biron Farrill?" 
The voice was urgent. 

Biron's eyes opened on the thick 
darkness. He became conscious of 
the dry unpleasantness of his 
tongue and the faint odor that remained in the room. 

He said, "I'm Biron Farrill. Who 
is this?" 

It went on, disregarding him, 
gathering tension, a loud voice in 
the night: "Is anyone there? I 
would like to speak to Biron Farrill." 

Biron raised himself on one elbow and stared at the place where 
the visiphone sat. He jabbed at the 
vision control and the small screen 
was alive with light. 

"Here I am," he said. He recognized the smooth, slightly asymmetric features of Sander Jonti.' 
"Call me in the morning, Jonti." 

He started to turn the instrument 
off, when Jonti said, "Hello. Hello. 
Is anyone there? Is this University 
Hall, room 526? Hello." 

Biron was suddenly aware that 
the tiny pilot-light which would 



have indicated a live sending-circuit was not on. He swore under 
his breath and pushed the switch. 
It stayed off. Then Jonti gave up, 
and the screen went blank, and 
was merely a small square of featureless light. 

Biron turned it off. He hunched 
his shoulder and tried to burrow 
into the pillow again. He was 
annoyed. In the first place, no one 
had the right to yell at him in the 
middle of the night. He looked 
quickly at the gently luminous figures just over the headboard. 
Three-fifteen. House lights would 
not go on for nearly four hours. 

Besides, he didn't like having to 
wake to the complete darkness of 
his room. Four years' custom had 
not hardened hiiTT to the Earthman's habit of building structures 
of reinforced concrete, squat, 
thick, and windowless. It was a 
many-thousand-year-old tradition 
dating from the days when the 
primitive nuclear bomb had not 
yet been countered by the Forcefield- defense. 

But that was all in the past. 
Atomic warfare had done its worst 
to Earth. Most of it was hopelessly 
radioactive and useless. There was 
nothing left to lose, and yet architecture mirrored the old fears, so 
that when Biron woke, it was to 
pure darkness. 

BIRON rose on his elbow again. 
That was strange. He waited. 
It wasn't the fatal murmur of the 



6 




 



bedroom he had become aware of. 
It was something perhaps even less 
noticeable and less deadly. 

He missed the gentle movement 
of air that one took so for granted, that trace of continuous renewal. He tried to swallow easily 
and failed. The atmosphere seemed 
to become oppressive even as he 
realized the situation. The ventilating system had stopped working, 
and now he really had a grievance. 
He couldn't even use the visiphone 
to report the matter. 

He tried again to make sure. 
The milky square of light sprung 
out and threw a faint, pearly luster 
on the bed. It was receiving, but 
it wouldn't send. Well, it wasn't 
important. Nothing would be done 
about it before day, anyway. 

He yawned and groped for his 
slippers, rubbing his eyes with the 
heels of his palms. No ventilation, 
eh? That would account for the 
queer smell. He frowned and 
sniffed sharply two or three times. 
No use. It was familiar, but he 
couldn't place it. 

He made his way to the bathroom, reached automatically for the 
light switch, although he didn't 
really need it to draw himself a 
glass of -water. It closed uselessly. 
He tried it several times, peevishly. Wasn't anything working? He 
shrugged, drank in the dark, and 
felt better. He yawned again on 
his way back to the bedroom where 
he tried the main switch. All the 
lights were out. 



Biron sat on the bed, placed his 
large hands on his hard-muscled 
thighs and considered. Ordinarily, 
a thing like this would call for a 
nasty discussion with the service 
staff. No one expected hotel service in a college dormitory, but, by 
Space, there were certain minimum 
standards of efficiency one could 
demand. Not that it was of vital 
importance just now. Graduation 
was coming and he was through. 
In three days, he'd be saying a last 
good-by to the room and to the 
University of Earth; to Earth itself. 

Still, he might report it anyway, 
withput particular comment. He 
could go out and use the hall 
phone. They might bring in a selfpowered light or even rig up a 
fan so he could sleep without psychosomatic choking sensations. If 
not, to Space with them. Two more 
nights. 

IN THE light of the visiphone, 
he located a pair of shorts. 
He slipped a one-piece jumper over 
it and decided that that would be 
enough for the purpose. He retained his slippers. There was no 
danger of waking anybody even if 
he clumped down the corridors in 
spiked shoes, considering the thick, 
nearly soundproof partitions of this 
concrete pile, but he saw no point 
in changing. 

He strode toward the door and 
pulled at the lever. It descended 
smoothly and he heard the click 
that meant the door release had 



TYRANN 



7 



been activated. Except that it 
wasn't. And although his biceps 
tightened as he pulled harder, 
nothing was accomplished. 

He stepped away. This was 
ridiculous. Had there been a general power failure? There couldn't 
have been. The clock was going. 
The visiphone was still receiving 
properly. 

Wait! It could have been the 
beys, bless their erratic souls. It 
was done sometimes. Infantile, of 
course, but he'd taken part in these 
foolish practical jokes himself. It 
wouldn't have been difficult, for 
instance, for one of his buddies to 
sneak in during the day and 
arrange matters. Well, no, the ventilation and lights had been working when he went to sleep. 

VERY well, then, during the 
night. The Hall was an old, 
outmoded structure. It wouldn't 
have taken an engineering genius 
to hocus the lighting and ventilation circuits. Or to jam the door, 
either. And now they would wait 
for morning and see what would 
happen when good old Biron found 
he couldn't get out. They would 
probably let him out toward noon 
and laugh very hard. 

"Ha, ha," said Biron, grimly, 
under his breath. All right, if that's 
the way it was. But he would have 
to do something about it; turn the 
tables somehow. 

He turned away and his toe 
kicked something which skidded 



metallically across the floor. He 
just made out its shadow move 
through the dim visiphone light. 
He reached under the bed, patting 
the floor in a wide arc. He brought 
it out and held it close to the light. 

"They weren't so smart," he 
said. "They should have put the 
visiphone entirely out of commission, instead of just yanking out 
the sending-circuit." 

He found himself holding a 
small cylinder with a little hole in 
the blister on top. He put it close 
to his nose and sniffed at it. That 
explained the smell in the room, 
anyway. It was Hypnite. Of course, 
the boys would have had to use it 
to keep them from waking him up 
while they were busy with the circuits. 

Biron could reconstruct the proceedings step by step now. The 
door had been jimmied open, a 
simple thing to do, and the only 
dangerous part since he might have 
wakened then. The door might 
have been prepared during the day, 
as a matter of fact, so that it would 
seem to close and not actually do 
so. He hadn't tested it. Anyway, 
once it was open, a can of Hypnite would be put just inside and 
the door would be closed again. 
The anesthetic would leak out 
slowly, building up to the one particle in ten thousand of air- necessary to put him definitely under. 
Then they could enter; masked, of 
course. Space! A wet handkerchief 
would keep out the Hypnite for 



8 




 



fifteen minutes and that would be 
al! the time needed. 

It explained the ventilation system situation. That had to be eliminated to keep the Hypnite from 
dispersing too quickly. That would 
have gone first, in fact. The visiphone elimination kept him from 
getting help; the door- jamming 
kept him from getting out; and 
the absence of lights in order to 
induce panic. Nice kids! 

Biron snorted. It was socially 
impossible to be thin-skinned about 
this. A joke was a joke and all 
that. Ha-ha! Right now, he would 
have liked to break the door down 
and have done with it. The welltrained muscles- of his torso tensed 
at the thought, but it would be 
useless.. The door had been built 
with atom-blasts in mind. Damn 
that tradition! 

But there had to be some way 
out. He couldn't let them get away 
with it. First, he would need a 
light; a real one, not the immovable and unsatisfactory glow of the 
visiphone. That was no problem. 
He had a self-powered flashlight in 
the clothes closet. 

For a moment, as he fingered the 
closet door controls, he wondered 
if they had jammed that, too. But 
it moved open naturally, and slid 
smoothly into its wall socket. Biron 
nodded to himself. It made sense. 
There was no reason, particularly, 
to jam the closet, and they didn't 
have too much time, anyway. 

And then, with the flashlight in 



his hand, as he was turning away, 
the entire structure of his theory 
collapsed in a horrible instant. He 
stiffened, his abdomen ridging 
with tension and held his breath, 
listening. 

For the first time since awakening, he heard the murmuring of 
the bedroom. He heard the quiet, 
irregular chuckling conversation it 
was holding with itself, and recognized the nature of the sound at 
once. 

It was impossible not to recognize it. The sound was "Earth's 
death-rattle." It was the sound that 
had been invented several thousand 
years before. 

To be exact, it was the sound of 
a radiation counter, ticking off the 
charged particles and the hard 
gamma waves that came its way, 
the soft clicking electronic surges 
melting into a low murmur. It was 
the sound of a counter, counting 
the only thing it could count — 
death ! 

• 

QOFTLY, on tiptoe, Biron backaway. From a distance of 
six feet he threw the white beam 
into the recesses of the closet. The 
counter was there, in the far corner, but seeing it told him nothing. 

It had been there ever since his 
freshman days. Most freshmen 
from the Outer Worlds bought a 
counter during their first week on 
Earth. They were very conscious of 
Earth's radioactivity then, and felt 
the need of protection. Usually, 



TYRANN 



9 



they were sold again to the next 
class, but Biron had never disposed 
of his. He was thankful for that 
now. 

He turned to the desk, where he 
kept his wristwatch while sleeping. It was there. His hand was 
shaking a little as he held it up to 
the flashlight's beam. The watch 
strap was an interwoven flexible 
plastic of an almost liquidly smooth 
whiteness. But was it still white? 
He held it away and tried it at 
different angles. It was white. 

That strap had been another 



Hfll 

iiliirail^ 



10 




 




freshman purchase. Hard radiation 
turned it blue, and blue on Earth 
was the color of death. It was easy 
to wander into a patch of radiating soil during the day if you were 
lost or careless. The government 
fenced off as many areas as it could, 
and, of course, no one ever approached the huge lethal sections 
that began several miles outside 
the city. But the strap was insurance. 

If it should ever turn a faint 
blue, you would show up at the 
hospital for treatment. There was 
no argument about it. The compound of which it was made was 
precisely as sensitive to radiation 
as you were and appropriate photoelectric instruments could be used 
to measure the intensity of the 
blueness so that the seriousness of 
the case might be determined 
quickly. 

A bright royal blue was the finish. Just as the color would never 
change back, neither would you. 
There was no cure, no chance, no 
hope. You just waited anywhere 
from a day to a week, and all the 
hospital could do was to make final 
arrangements for cremation. 

But at least it was still white, 
and some of the clamor in Biron's 
thoughts subsided. 

There wasn't much radioactivity 
then. Could it be just another angle 
of the joke? -Biron considered and 
decided that it couldn't. Nobody 
would do that to anyone else. Not 
on Earth, anyway, where illegal 



TYRANN 



II 



handling of radioactive material 
was a capital offense. They took 
radioactivity seriously here. They 
had to. Nobody, therefore, would 
do this without overpowering 
reason. 

He stated the thought to himself carefully and explicitly, facing 
it boldly. The overpowering reason, 
for instance, of a desire to murder. 
But why? There could be no motive.. In his twenty-three years' of 
life, he had never made a serious 
enemy. Not this serious. Not murder serious. 

He tugged despairingly at his 
clipped hair. This was a ridiculous 
line of thought, but there was no 
escaping it. He stepped cautiously 
back to the closet. There had to be 
something there that was sending 
out radiation, something that had 
not been there four hours earlier. 
He saw it almost at once. 

IT WAS a little box not more 
than six inches in any dimension. Biron recognized it and his 
lower lip trembled slightly. He had 
never seen one before, but he had 
heard of them. He lifted the 
counter and took it into the bedroom. The little murmur fell off, 
almost ceased. It started again 
when the thin mica partition, 
through which the radiation entered, pointed toward the box. 
There was no question in his mind. 
It was a radiation bomb. 

The present radiations were not 
in themselves deadly; they were 



only a fuse. Somewhere inside the 
box a tiny atomic-pile was constructed. Short-lived artificial isotopes heated it slowly, permeating 
it with the appropriate particles. 
When the threshold of heat and 
particle density was reached, the 
pile reacted. Not in an explosion 
usually, although the heat of reaction would serve to fuse the box 
itself into a twist of metal, but in 
a tremendous burst of deadly radiation that would kill anything living within a radius of six feet to 
six miles, depending on the bomb's 
size. 

There was no way of telling 
when the threshold would be 
reached. Perhaps not for hours, perhaps the next moment. Biron remained standing helplessly, flashlight held loosely in his damp 
hands. Half an hour before, the 
visiphone had awakened him, and 
he had been at peace then. Now 
he knew he was going to die. 

Biron didn't want to die, but he 
was penned in hopelessly, and 
there was no place to hide. 

He knew the geography of the 
room. It was at the end of a corridor, so that there was another room 
only on one side, and» of Course, 
one above and below. He could do 
nothing about the room above. The 
room on the same floor was on the 
bathroom side and it adjoined via 
its own bathroom. He doubted 
that he could make himself heard. 

That left the room below. 

There were a couple of folding 



12 




 



chairs in the room, spare seats to 
accommodate company. He took 
one. It made a flat, slapping sound 
when it hit the floor. He turned it 
edgewise and the sound became 
harder and louder. 

Between each blow, he waited, 
wondering if he could rouse the 
sleeper below and annoy him sufficiently to have him report the disturbance. 

Abruptly, he caught a faint 
noise and paused, the splintering 
chair raised above his head. The 
noise came again, like a faint 
shout. It was from the direction of 
the door. 

He dropped the chair and yelled 
in return. He crushed his ear up 
against the crack where door joined 
wall, but the fit was good, and the 
sound even there was dim. 

But he could make out his own 
name being called, "Farrill ! Farrill!" several times over, and 
something else. Maybe, "Are you 
in there?" or, "Are you all right?" 

He roared back, "Get the door 
open." He shouted it three or four 
times. He was in a feverish sweat 
of impatience. The bomb might be 
on the point of letting loose even 
now. 

He thought they heard him. At 
least, the muffled cry came back, 
"Watch out. Something, something, 
blaster." He knew what that meant 
and backed hurriedly away from 
the door. 

There were a couple of sharp, 
cracking sounds, and he could ac


tually feel the vibrations set up in 
the air of the room. Then there 
followed a splitting noise and the 
door was flung inward. Light 
poured in from the corridor. 

Biron dashed out, arms flung 
wide. "Don't come in," he yelled. 
"For the love of Earth, don't come 
in. There's a radiation bomb in 
there." 

He was facing two men. One 
was Jonti. The other was Esbak, 
the superintendent. He was only 
partly dressed. 

"A radiation bomb?" he stuttered. 

But Jonti said, "What size?" 
Jonti's blaster was still in his hand, 
and only that jarred with the 
dandyish effect of his clothes, even 
at this time of night. 

BIRON could only gesture. 
"All right," said Jonti. He 
seemed quite cool about it, as he 
turned to the superintendent. 
"You'd better evacuate the rooms 
in this area, and if you have lead 
sheets anywhere on fhe University 
grounds, have them brought out 
here to line the corridor. And I 
wouldn't let anyone in there before 
morning." 

He turned to Biron. "It probably has a twelve to eighteen foot 
radius. How did it get there?" 

"I don't know," said Biron. He 
wiped his forehead with the back 
of his hand. "If you don't mind, 
I've got to sit down somewhere." 
He threw a glance at his wrist, 



TYRANN 



13 



then realized his wristwatch was 
still in the room. He had a wild 
impulse to ,return after it. 

There was plenty of action now. 
Students were being hustled out of 
their rooms. 

"Come with me," said Jonti. "I 
agree that you had better find a 
place to sit down and relax. You're 
white and shaking." 

Biron said, "What brought you 
out to my room? Not that I'm not 
thankful, you understand, just — 
curious. Wondering." 

"I called you. There was no answer, and I had to see you." 

"To see me?" He spoke carefully, trying to control his irregular breathing. "Why?" 

"To warn you that your life was 
in danger." 

Biron laughed raggedly. "I 
found out." 

"That was only the first attempt. 
They'll try again." 

"Who are the 'they?' " 

"Not here, Farrill," said Jonti. 
"We need privacy for this. You're 
a marked man, and I may already 
have endangered myself as well." 

CHAPTER II 

The Net Across Space 

THE student lounge was empty; 
dark as well. At four-thirty in 
the morning it could scarcely have 
been otherwise. Yet Jonti hesitated 
a moment as he held the door open, 
listening for occupants. 



"No," he said, softly, "leave the 
lights out. We don't need them to 
talk." 

"I've had enough of the dark 
for one night," objected Biron. 

"We'll leave the door ajar." 

Biron lacked the will to argue. 
He dropped into the nearest chair 
and watched the rectangle of light 
through the closing door narrow 
down to a thin line. Now that it 
was all over, he had the shakes. 

Jonti steadied the door and 
rested his little swagger-stick upon 
the crack of light on the floor. 
"Watch it. It will tell us if anyone 
passes, or if the door moves." 

Biron said, "Please, I'm not in a 
conspiratorial mood. If you don't 
mind, I'd appreciate your telling 
me whatever it is you want to tell 
me. You've saved my life, I know, 
and tomorrow I'll be properly grateful. Right now, I could do with 
a short drink and a long rest." 

"I can imagine your feelings," 
Jonti said, "but the too-long rest 
you might have had has been 
avoided, momentarily. I would like 
, to make it more than just momentarily. Do you know that I know 
your father?" 

The question was an abrupt one, 
and Biron raised his eyebrows, a 
gesture lost in the dark. He said, 
"He has never mentioned knowing 
you." 

"I would be surprised if he did. 
He doesn't know me by the name I 
use here. Have you heard from your 
father recently, by the way?" 



14 




 



"Why do you ask?" 
"Because he is also in great danger." 

"What?" 

Jonti's hand found the other's 
arm in the dimness and gripped 
it firmly. "Please! Keep your voice 
as it has been." Biron realized, for 
the first time, that they had been 
whispering. 

Jonti resumed, "I'll be more specific. Your father has been taken 
into custody. You understand the 
significance?" 

"No, I certainly don't understand. Who has taken him into custody, and what are you getting at? 
Why are you bothering me?" 
Biron's temples were throbbing. 
The Hypnite and the near-death 
had made it impossible to fence on 
even terms with the cool dandy 
sitting so close to him. 

"Surely," came the whisper, "you 
have some inkling of the work your 
father is doing." 

"If you know my father, you 
know he is Rancher of Widemos. 
That is his work." 

Jonti said, "Well, there is no 
reason you should trust me, other 
than that I am risking my own life 
for you. But I already know all you 
can tell me. As an example, I 
know that your father has been 
conspiring against the Tyranni." 

"I deny that," said Biron, tensely. 
"Your service to me tonight does 
not give you the right to make such 
statements about my father." 

"You are foolishly evasive, young 



man, and you are wasting my time. 
Don't you see that the situation is 
beyond verbal fencing? I'll say it 
outright. Your father is in the custody of the Tyranni. He may be 
dead by now." 

"I don't believe you." 

"I am in a position to know." 

"Let's break this off, Jonti. I am 
in no mood for mystery and I resent this attempt of yours to — " 

"To what?" Jonti's voice lost 
some of its refined edge. "What do 
I gain by telling you this? Let me 
remind you that this knowledge of 
mine, which you will not accept, 
indicated to me that an attempt 
might be made to kill you. Judge 
by what has happened, Farrill." 

BIRON said, "Start again and 
tell it straight. I'll listen." 
"Very well. I imagine, Farrill, 
that you know me to be a fellow 
countryman from the Nebular 
Kingdoms, although I've been passing myself off as a Vegan." 

"I judged that might be a possibility by your accent. It didn't 
seem important." . 

"It is important, my friend. I 
came here because, like your father, 
I didn't like the Tyranni. They've 
been oppressing our people for fifty 
years. That's a long time." 
"I'm not a politician." 
Again Jonti's voice had an irritated edge to it. "Oh, I'm not 
one of their agents trying to get 
you into trouble. I'm telling you the 
truth. They caught me a year ago 



TYRANN 



15 



as they have caught your father 
now. But I managed to get away 
and came to Earth, where I 
thought I might be safe until I was 
ready to return. That's all I need 
tell you about myself." 

"It is more than I have asked 
for." Biron could not force the unfriendliness out of his voice. Jonti 
affected him unfavorably with his 
too-precise mannerisms. 

"I know that. But it is necessary to tell you so much at least, for 
it was in this manner that I met 
your father. He worked with me, 
or, rather, I with him. He knew me 
not in his official capacity as the 
greatest nobleman on the planet of 
Nephelos. You understand me?" 




IRON nodded uselessly in the 
darkness and said, "Yes." 



"It is not necessary to go into 
that further. My sources of information have been maintained even 
here, and I know that he has been 
imprisoned. It is knowledge. Even 
if it had been merely suspicion, 
this attempt on your life would 
have been sufficient proof." 

"In what way?" 

"If the Tyranni have the father, 
would they leave the son at large?" 

"Are you trying to tell me that 
the Tyranni set that radiation bomb 
in my room? That's impossible." 

"Why is it impossible? Can't you 
understand their position? The 
Tyranni rule fifty worlds; they are 
outnumbered hundreds to one. In 
such a position, simple force is not 

16 



enough. Devious methods, intrigue, 
assassinations are their devices. 
The net they weave across space is 
a wide one and close-meshed. I can 
well believe that it extends across 
five hundred light years to Earth." 

Biron was still in the grip of his 
nightmare. In the distance, there 
were the faint sounds of the lead 
shields being moved into place. In 
his room, the counter was still murmuring. 

He said, "It doesn't make sense. 
I am going back to Nephelos this 
week. They would know that. Why 
should they kill me here? If they 
wait, they'd have me." He was relieved to find the flaw, eager to believe his own logic. 

Jonti leaned closer and his spiced 
breath stirred the hair on Biron's 
temple. "Your father is popular. 
His death — and once imprisoned by 
the Tyranni, his execution becomes 
a probability you must face — will 
be resented even by the cowed 
slave-race the Tyranni are trying 
to breed. You could rally that resentment as the new Rancher of 
Widemos and to execute you as 
well would double the danger for 
them. To make martyrs is not their 
purpose. But if you were to die in 
a faraway world, by accident, it 
would be convenient for them." 

"I don't believe you," said Biron. 
It had become his only defense. 

Jonti rose, adjusting his thin 
gloves. He said, "You go too far, 
Farrill. Your role would be more 
convincing if you pretended to no 


 



such complete ignorance. Your father may have been shielding you 
from reality for your own protection, presumably, yet I doubt that 
you could remain completely uninfluenced by his beliefs. Your hate 
for the Tyranni cannot help being 
a reflection of his own. You cannot help being ready to fight them." 

Biron shrugged without answering. 

Jonti said, "He may even recognize your new adulthood to the 
point of putting you to use. You 
are conveniently here on Earth and 
it is not unlikely that you may be 
combining your education with a 
definite assignment. An assignment, 
perhaps, for the failure of which 
the Tyranni are ready to kill you." 

"That's silly melodrama." 

"Is it? Let it be so, then. If the 
truth will not persuade you now, 
events will later. There will be other 
attempts on your life and the next 
one will succeed. From this moment 
on, Farrill, you are a dead man." 

BIRON looked up. "Wait! 
What's your own private interest in me?" 

"I am a patriot. I would like to 
see the Kingdoms free again, with 
governments of their own choosing." 

"No, your private interest," Biron 
insisted doggedly. "I cannot accept idealism only, because I won't 
believe it of you. I am sorry if that 
offends you." 

Jonti seated himself again. He 



said, "My lands have been confiscated. Before my exile, it was not 
comfortable to be forced to take 
orders from those dwarfs. And since 
then it has become more imperative 
than ever to become once again the 
man my grandfather had been before the Tyranni came. Is. that 
enough of a practical reason for 
wanting a revolution? Your father would have been a leader of 
that revolution. Failing him, you!" 

"I? I am twenty-three and know 
nothing of all this. You could find 
better men." 

"Undoubtedly I could, but no one 
else is the son of your father. If 
your father is killed, you will be 
Rancher of Widemos, and, as such, 
you would be valuable to me if you 
were only twelve and an idiot besides. I need you for the same reason the Tyranni must be rid of you. 
And if my necessity is unconvincing 
to you, surely theirs cannot be. 
There was a radiation bomb in your 
room. It could only have been 
meant to kill you. Who else would 
■ want to kill you?" 

Jonti waited patiently and picked 
up the other's whisper. 

"No one," admitted Biron reluctantly. "No one would want to 
kill me that I know of. Then it's 
true about my father." 

"It is true. View it as a casualty 
of war." 

"You think that would make it 
better? They'll put up a monument 
to him someday, perhaps ? One with 
a radiating inscription that you can 



TYRANN 



17 



see ten thousand miles out in 
space?" His voice was becoming 
harsh, savage. "Is that supposed to 
make me happy?" 

Jonti waited, but Biron said 
nothing more. 

Jonti said, "What do you intend 
doing?" 

"I'm going home." 

"You still don't understand your 
position, then." 

"I said I'm going home. What 
do you want me to do ? If he's alive, 
I'll get him out of there. And if 
he's dead, I'll — J'll — " 

"You'll do nothing!" The older 
man's voice was coldly annoyed. 
"You can't go to Nephelos. Don't 
you see that you can't? It would be 
just what the Tyranni would want 
you to do." 

Biron muttered, "What do you 
suggest ?" 

"Do you know the Director of 
Rhodia?" 

"The friend of the Tyranni? 
Everyone in the Kingdoms knows 
who he is. Hinrik V, Director of 
Rhodia." 

"Have you ever met him?" 

"No." 

"That is what I meant. If you 
haven't met him, you don't know 
him. He is an imbecile, Farrill. I 
mean it literally. But when the 
Ranchy of Widemos is confiscated 
by the Tyranni — and it will be, as 
my lands wer"e — it will be awarded 
to Hinrik. There the Tyranni will 
feel them to be safe, and there you 
must go." 



"Why?" 

"Because Hinrik, at least, has influence with the Tyranni; as much 
influence as a lick-spittle puppet 
may have. He may arrange to have 
you reinstated." 

"I don't see why. He's more 
likely to turn me over to them." 

"So he is. But you'll be on your 
guard against it, and there is a 
fighting chance that you may avoid 
it. Remember, the title you carry 
is valuable and important, but it is 
not all-sufficient. In this business 
of conspiracy, one must be practical 
above all. Men will rally about you 
out of sentiment and respect for 
your name, but to hold them, you 
will need money." 

BIRON hesitated. "I need time 
to decide." 
"You have no time. Your time 
ran out when the radiation bomb 
was planted in your room. The only 
thing left now is action. I can give 
you a letter of introduction to Hinrik of Rhodia." 

"You know him so well, then." 
"Your suspicion never sleeps, 
does it? I once headed a mission 
to Hinrik's court on behalf of the 
Autarch of Lingane. Hinrik's imbecile's mind will probably not remember me, but he will not dare 
to show he has forgotten. My letter 
will serve as introduction and you 
can improvise from there. I will 
have it for you in the morning. 
There is a ship leaving for Rhodia 
at noon. I have tickets for you. I 



18 




 



am leaving myself, but by another 
route. Don't linger. You're all 
through here, aren't you?" 

"There is the diploma presentation." 

"A scrap of parchment. Does it 
matter to you?" 
"Not now." 

"Do you have money?" 
"Enough." 

"Very well. Too much would be 
suspicious." He spoke sharply. 
"Farrill!" 

Biron stirred out of what was 
nearly a stupor. "What?" 

"Get back to the others. Tell no 
one you are leaving. Let the act 
speak." 

Biron nodded dumbly. Far down 
in the recesses of his mind, there 
was the thought that his mission 
had remained unaccomplished and 
that in this way, too, he had failed 
his doomed father. He was racked 
with a futile bitterness. His father 
might have told him more. He 
might have shared the dangers. He 
should not have been allowed to 
act in ignorance. 

And now that he knew the 
truth, or at least more of it, 
concerning the extent of his father's 
role in conspiracy, there was an 
added importance to the document 
he was to have obtained from 
Earth's archives. But there was no 
time any longer. No time to get 
the document. No' time to wonder 
about it. No time to save his father. 
No time, perhaps, to live. 

He said, "I'll do as you say." 



SANDER JONTI looked briefly 
out over the University campus 
is he paused on the steps of the 
dormitory. Certainly there was no 
admiration in his glance. 

Stepping down the bricked walk 
that wound unsubtly through the 
pseudo-rustic atmosphere affected by 
all urban campuses since antiquity, 
he could see the lights of the city's 
single important street gleam just 
ahead. Past it, drowned in daytime, 
but visible now, was the eternal 
radioactive blue of th» horizon, 
mute witness of the historic wars. 

Jonti considered the sky for a 
moment. Over fifty years had passed 
since the Tyranni had come and put 
a sudden end to the separate lives 
of two dozen sprawling, brawling 
political units in the depths beyond 
the Nebula. Now, suddenly and 
prematurely, the peace of strangulation lay upon them. 

The storm that had caught them 
in one vast thunder-clap had been 
something from which they had 
not yet recovered. It had left only 
a sort of twitching that futilely agitated a world here and there, now 
and then. To organize those twitchings, to align them into a single 
well-timed heave would be a difficult task, and a long one. Well, he 
had been rusticating here on Earth 
long enough. It was time to return. 

The others, back home, were 
probably trying to get in touch with 
him at his rooms right now. 
He lengthened his stride a bit. 
He caught the beam as he entered 



TYRANN 



19 



his room. It was a personal beam, 
for whose security there were as yet 
no fears and in whose privacy there 
was no chink. No formal receiver 
was required; no thing of metal 
and wires to catch the faint, drifting surges of electrons, with their 
whispered impulses swimming 
through hyper-space from a world 
half a thousand light years away. 

Space itself was polarized in his 
room, and prepared for reception. 
Its fabric was smoothed out of 
randomness. There was no way of 
detecting that polarization, except 
by receiving. And in that particular 
volume of space, only his own mind 
could act as receiver, since only the 
electrical characteristics of his own 
particular nerve-cell system could 
resonate to the vibrations of the 
carrier beam that bore the message. 

The message was as private as the 
unique characteristics of his own 
brain waves and in all the universe, 
with its quadrillions of human 
beings, the odds against a duplication sufficiently close to allow one 
man to pick up another's personal 
wave was a twenty-figured-number 
to one. 

Jonti's brain throbbed to the. call 
as it whined through the endless, 
empty incomprehensibility of hyperspace. 

"... calling . . . calling . . . calling . . . calling ..." 

SENDING was not quite as 
simple a job as receiving. A 
mechanical contrivance was needed 



to set up the highly specific carrier 
wave that would carry back to the 
contact beyond the Nebular. That 
was contained in the ornamental 
button that Jonti carried on his 
right shoulder.. It was automatically 
activated when he stepped into his 
volume of space-polarization, and 
after that he had only to think purposefully and with concentration. 

"Here I am!" No need for more 
specific identification. 

The dull repetition of the call 
halted and became words that took 
form within his mind, "We greet 
you, sir. Widemos has been executed. The news is, of course, not 
yet public." 

"It does not surprise me. Was 
anyone else implicated?" 

"No, sir. The Rancher made no 
statements at any time. A brave 
and loyal man." 

"Yes. But it takes more than 
simply bravery and loyalty, or he 
would not have been caught. A little more cowardice might have been 
useful. No matter. I have spoken to 
his son, the new Rancher, who has 
already had his brush with death. 
He will be put to use." 

"May one inquire in what manner, sir?" 

"It is better to let events answer 
your question. Certainly I cannot 
foretell consequences at this early 
date. Tomorrow he will set off to 
see Hinrik of Rhodia." 

"Hinrik! The young man will 
run a fearful risk. Is he aware 
that — " 



20 




 



"I have told him as much as I 
can," responded Jonti, sharply. "We 
cannot trust him too far until he 
has proved himself. Under the circumstances as they exist, we can 
only view him as a man to be 
risked, like any other man. He is 
expendable, quite expendable. Do 
not call me here again, as I am 
leaving Earth." 

And, with a gesture of finality, 
Jonti broke the connection mentally. 

Quietly and thoughtfully, he 
went over the events of the day and 
the night, weighing each event. 
Slowly, he smiled. Everything had 
been arranged perfectly, and the 
comedy might now play itself out. 

Nothing had been left to chance. 

CHAPTER III 

Chance and the Wristivatch 

THE first hour of a spaceship's 
rise from planetary thraldom 
is the most prosaic. There is the 
confusion of departure, which is 
much the same in essence as that 
which must have accompanied the 
shoving off of the first hollowedout tree trunk on some primeval 
river of Earth. 

You have your accommodations; 
your luggage is taken care of; there 
is the first stiff moment of strangeness and meaningless hustle surrounding you. The shouted lastmoment intimacies, the quieting, the 
muted clang of the airlocks, fol


lowed by the slow soughing of air 
as the locks screw inward automatically, like gigantic drills, becoming air-tight. 

Then the portentous silence and 
the red signs flicking in every 
room: "Adjust acceleration suits 
. . . Adjust acceleration suits." 

The stewards scour the corridors, knocking shortly on each door 
and jerking it open: "Beg pardon. 
Suits on." 

You battle with the suits, cold, 
tight, uncomfortable, but cradled in 
a hydraulic system which absorbs 
the sickening pressures of the takeoff. 

There is the faraway rumble of 
the atom-driven motors, on low 
power for atmospheric maneuvering, followed instantly by the giving back against slow-yielding oil 
of the suit-cradle. You recede almost indefinitely back; then very 
slowly forward again as the acceleration becomes negative. If you 
survive nausea during this period, 
you are probably safe from spacesickness for duration. 

The viewroom was not open to 
the passengers for the first three 
hours of the flight. There was a 
long line waiting when the atmosphere had been left behind and the 
double-doors were ready to separate. 
There were present not only the 
usual hundred per cent turnout of 
all Planetaries — those, in other 
words, who had never been in space 
before — but a fair proportion of the 
more experienced travelers as well. 



TYRANN 



21 



The vision of Earth from space, 
after all, was one of the tourist 
"musts." 

The viewroom was a bubble on 
the ship's "skin," a bubble of a 
curved two-foot-thick, steel-hard 
transparent plastic. The retractile 
iridium-steel lid which protected it 
against the scouring of the atmosphere and its dust particles had 
been rolled back. The lights were 
out and the gallery was full. The 
faces peering over the bars were 
clear in the Earthshine. 

For Earth was suspended there 
below, a gigantic and gleaming 
orange- and - blue- and- white-patched 
balloon. The hemisphere showing 
was almost entirely sunlit; the continents between the clouds, a desert 
orange, with thin scattered lines of 
green. The seas were blue, standing 
out sharply against the black of 
space where they met the horizon. 
And all around in the black, undusted sky were the stars. 

THEY waited patiently, those 
who watched. 
It was not the sunlit hemisphere 
they wanted. The polar cap, blinding bright, was shifting into view as 
the ship maintained the slight, unnoticed sidewise acceleration that 
was lifting it out of the ecliptic. 
Slowly the shadow of night encroached upon the globe and the 
huge "World Island" of EurasiaAfrica majestically took the stage, 
north-side "down." 

Its diseased unliving soil hid its 



horror under a night-induced play 
of jewels. The radioactivity of the 
soil was a vast sea of iridescent blue, 
sparking in strange festoons that 
spelled out the manner in which 
the nuclear bombs had once landed, 
a full generation before the forcefield defense against nuclear explosions had been developed, so 
that no other world could commit 
suicide in just that fashion again. 

The eyes watched until, with the 
hours, Earth was a bright little 
half-coin in the endless black. 

Among the watchers was .Biron 
Farrill. He sat by himself in the 
front row, arms upon the railing, 
eyes brooding and thoughtful. This 
was not the way he had expected to 
leave Earth. It was the wrong manner, the wrong ship, the wrong 
destination. 

His tanned forearm rubbed 
against the stubble of his chin and 
he felt guilty about not having 
shaved that morning. He'd go back 
to his room after a while and correct that. Meanwhile he hesitated to 
leave. There were people here. In 
his room, he would be alone. 

Or was that just the reason he 
should leave? 

He did not like the new feeling 
he had, that of being hunted, of 
being friendless. 

All friendship had dropped from 
him. It had shriveled from the 
moment he had been awakened by 
the phone call less than twenty-four 
hours earlier. 

Even in the dormitory, he had 



22 




 



become an embarrassment. Old Esbak had pounced upon him when 
he had returned after his talk with 
Jonti in the student lounge. Esbak 
was in turmoil, his voice overshrill. 

"Mr. Farrill, I've been looking 
for you. It has been a most unfortunate incident. I can't understand 
it. Do you have any explanation?" 

"No," Biron had half-shouted, "I 
don't. When can I get into my room 
and get my stuff out?" 

"In the morning, I am sure. 
We've just managed to get the 
equipment up here to test the room. 
There is no longer any trace of 
radioactivity above normal background level. It was a very fortunate escape for you. It must have 
missed you by only minutes." 

"Yes, yes, but if you don't mind, 
I would like to rest." 

"Please use my room till morning and then we'll get you relocated for the few days remaining 
you. Umm, by the way, Mr. Farrill, if you don't mind, there is another matter." 

He was being overly polite. Biron 
could almost hear the eggshells give 
slightly beneath his finicky feet. 

"What other matter?" asked 
Biron, wearily. 

"Do you know of anyone who 
might have been interested in — er 
— hazing you?" 

, "Hazing me like this} Of course 
not." 

"What are your plans, then? The 
school authorities would, of course, 



be most unhappy to have publicity 
arise as a result of this incident." 

HOW lie kept referring to it as 
an "incident." Biron said, 
dryly, "I understand you. But don'c 
worry. I'm not interested in investigations or in the police. I'm 
leaving Earth shortly and I'd jus!: 
as soon not have my own plans disrupted. I'm not bringing any 
charges. After all, I'm still alive." 

Esbak had been almost indecently relieved. It was all they 
wanted from him. No unpleasantness. It was-just an incident to be 
forgotten. 

He got into his old room again 
at seven in the morning. It was 
quiet and there was no murmuring 
in the closet. The bomb was no 
longer there, nor was the radiation 
counter. They had probably been 
taken away by Esbak and thrown 
into a contaminated area. It came 
under the head of destroying evidence, but that was the school's 
worry. Biron tossed his belongings 
into suitcases and then called the 
desk for assignment to another 
room. The lights were working 
again, he noticed, and so, of course, 
was the visiphone. The one remnant 
of last night was the twisted door, 
its lock melted away. 

They gave him another room. 
That established his intention to 
stay for anyone who might be listening. Then, using the hall phone, 
he had called an aircab. He did not 
think anyone saw him. Let the 



TYRANN 



23 



school puzzle out his disappearance 
however they pleased. 

For a moment, he had caught 
sight of Jonti at the spaceport. 
They met in the fashion of a glancing blow. Jonti said nothing; gave 
no sign of recognition, but after 
he had passed by, there were in 
Biron's hand a featureless tiny 
black globe that was a personal 
message capsule and a ticket for 
passage to Rhodia. 

He spent a moment upon the personal capsule. It was not sealed. He 



read the message later in his room. 
It was a simple introduction with 
minimum wordage. 

Biron's thoughts rested for a 
while upon Sander Jonti as he 
watched Earth shrivel with distance through the viewroom bubble. He had known the man very 
superficially until Jonti had whirled 
so devastatingly into his life, first 
to save it and then to set it upon a 
new and untried course. Biron had 
known his name; he had nodded 
whenever they had passed; had 




exchanged polite formalities occasionally, but that was all. He had 
not liked the man, had not liked 
his coldness, his overdressed, overmannered personality. But all that 
had nothing to do with affairs 
now. 

Biron rubbed his crew-cut with a 
restless hand and sighed. He actually found himself hungering for 
Jonti's presence. The man was at 
least master of events. He had 
known what to do; he had known 
what Biron was to do; he had made 
Biron do it. And now Biron was 
alone and feeling very young, very 
helpless, very friendless, and almost frightened. 

THROUGH it all, he studiously 
avoided thinking of his father. 
It would not help. 
"Mr. Malaine." 

The name was repeated two or 
three times, before Biron started at 
the respectful touch upon his shoulder, and looked up. 

The robot messenger said again, 
"Mr. Malaine," and for five seconds, Biron stared blankly, until 
he remembered that that was his 
temporary name. It had been penciled lightly upon the ticket which 
Jonti had given him. A stateroom 
had been reserved in that name. 

"Yes, what is it? I am Malaine." 

The messenger's voice hissed very 
faintly as the spool within whirled 
off its message. "I have been asked 
to inform you that your stateroom 
has been changed, and that your 



baggage has already been shifted. 
If you will see the purser, you will 
be given your new key and asked 
to surrender your old. We trust that 
this will cause no inconvenience for 
you." 

"What's all this?" Biron whirled 
in his seat, and several of the thinning group of passengers, still 
watching, looked up at the explosive sound. "What's the idea?" 

Of course, it was no use arguing 
with a machine that had merely 
fulfilled its function. The messenger 
bowed its metal head respectfully, 
its gently fixed imitation of a human smile of ingratiation unchanging, and left. 

Biron strode but of the viewroom 
and accosted the ship's officer at the 
door with somewhat more energy 
than he had -planned. 

"Look here, I want to see the 
captain." 

The officer showed no surprise. 
"Is it important, sir?" 

"It sure as Space is. I've just 
had my stateroom shifted without 
my permission and I'd like to know 
the meaning of it." 

Even at the time, Biron felt his 
anger to be out of proportion to the 
cause, but it represented an accumulation of resentment. He had 
nearly been killed; he had been 
forced to leave Earth like a skulking criminal; he was going heknew-not-where to do he-knewnot-what; and now they were pushing him around aboard ship. It 
was too much. 



TYRANN 



25 



Yet through it all, he had the 
uncomfortable feeling that Jonti, in 
his shoes, would have acted differently, perhaps more wisely. Well, 
he wasn't Jonti. 

The officer said, "I will call the 
purser." 

"I want the captain," insisted 
Biron. 

"If you wish, then." And after a 
short conversation through the small 
ship's communicator suspended 
from his lapel, he said urbanely, 
"You will be called for. Please 
wait." 

CAPTAIN HIRM GORDELL 
was a rather short and thickset man, who rose politely and 
leaned over his desk to shake hands 
with Biron when the latter entered. 

"Mr. Malaine," he said, "I am 
sorry we had to trouble you." 

He had a rectangular face, irongray hair, a short, well-kept mustache of slightly darker hue, and„a 
clipped smile. 

"So am I," said Biron. "I had a 
stateroom reservation to which I 
was entitled and I feel that not 
even you, sir, had the right to 
change it without my permission." 

"Granted, Mr. Malaine. But you 
understand, it was rather an emergency. A last minute arrival, an 
important man, insisted on being 
moved to a stateroom closer to the 
gravitational center of the ship. He 
had a heart condition and it was 
important to keep ship's gravity as 



low as possible for him. We had 
no choice,," 

"All right, but why pick on me 
as the one to be shifted?" 

"It had to be someone. You are 
traveling alone; you are a young 
man who, we felt, would have no 
difficulty in taking a slightly higher 
gravity." His eyes moved automatically up and down Biron's six-feettwo of hard musculature. "Besides, 
you will find your new room rather 
more elaborate than your old one. 
You have not lost by the exchange. 
No, indeed." 

The captain stepped from behind 
his desk. "May I show you your 
new quarters personally?" 

Biron found difficulty in maintaining his resentment. It seemed 
reasonable, this whole matter, and, 
then again, not reasonable, either. 

The captain was saying as they 
left his quarters, "May I have your 
company at my table for tomorrow 
night's dinner? Our first Jump is 
scheduled for that time." 

Biron heard himself saying, 
"Thank you. I will be honored." 

Yet he thought the invitation 
strange. Granted that the captain 
was merely trying to soothe him, yet 
surely the method was stronger than 
necessary. 

THE captain's table was a long 
one, taking up an entire wall of 
the salon. Biron found himself near 
the center, taking an unsuitable 
precedence over others. Yet there" 
was his placecard before him. The 



26 




 



steward had been quite firm; there 
was no mistake. 

Biron was not particularly overmodest. As son of the Rancher of 
Widemos, born to the nobility, he 
would have felt entitled to this kind 
of respectful treatment. But as 
Biron Malaine, he was just an 
ordinary citizen, and these things 
never happened to ordinary citizens. 

For one thing, the captain had 
been perfectly correct about his new 
stateroom. It was more elaborate. 
His original room had been what 
his ticket called for, a single, second class, while the replacement 
was a double room, first class. 
There was a bathroom adjoining, 
private, of course, equipped with 
a stall-shower and an air-dryer. 

It was near "officer's country" 
and the presence of uniforms was 
almost overpowering. Lunch had 
been brought to his room on silver 
service. A barber made a sudden 
appearance just before dinner. All 
this was perhaps to be expected 
when one traveled as a nobleman on 
a luxury spaceliner, first class, but 
it was too good for Biron Malaine, 
unknown commoner. 

It was far too good, for by the 
time the barber had arrived, Biron 
had just returned from an afternoon walk that had taken him 
through the corridors in a purposely 
devious path. There had been crewmen in his path wherever he had 
turned; polite, much too attentive. 
He shook them free somehow and 



reached HOD, his first room, the 
one he had never slept in. 

HE STOPPED to light a cigaret 
and in the interval spent thus, 
the only passenger in sight turned 
a corridor. Biron touched the signal 
light briefly and there was no answer. 

Well, the old key had not been 
taken from him yet. An oversight, 
no doubt. He placed the thin oblong sliver of metal into its slot and 
the unique pattern of leaden opacity 
within the aluminum sheath activated the tiny photo-tube. The 
door opened and he took one step 
inside. 

It was all he needed. He left and 
the door closed automatically behind him. His old room was not 
occupied; neither by an important 
personage with a weak heart nor by 
anyone else. The bed and furnishings were stripped down; no .trunks, 
nc toilet articles were in sight; the 
very air of occupancy was missing. 

So the luxury they were surrounding him with served only to 
prevent his taking further action to 
get back his original room. They 
were bribing him to stay quietly 
out of the old room. Why? Was it 
the room they were interested in, 
or was it himself? 

And now he sat at the captain's 
table with the questions unanswered 
and rose politely with the rest as 
the captain entered, strode up the 
steps of the dais on which the long 
table was set, and took his place. 



TYRANN 



27 



Why had they moved him? 

There was music in the ship and 
the walls that separated the salon 
from the viewroom had been retracted. The lights were low and 
tinged with orange-red. Even the 
queaziest passengers' space-sickness 
had passed after the original ac-. 
celeration, or as the result of first 
exposure to the minor gravity 
variations between various parts of 
the ship. The salon was full. 

THE captain leaned forward 
and said to Biron, "Good 
evening, Mr. Malaine. How do you 
find your new room?" 

"Almost too satisfactory, sir. A 
little rich for my way of life." He 
said it in a flat monotone, and it 
seemed to him that a faint dismay 
passed momentarily across the captain's face. 

Over the dessert, the skin of the 
viewroom's glass bubble slid 
smoothly back into its socket, and 
the lights dimmed to nearly 
nothing. Neither Sun, Earth, nor 
any planet was in view on that 
large, dark screen. They were facing the Milky Way, that lengthwise 
view of the Galactic Lens, and it 
made a luminous diagonal track 
among the hard, bright stars. 

Automatically, the tide of conversation ebbed. Chairs shifted so 
that all faced the stars. The dinner 
guests had become an audience, the 
music a faint whisper. 

'The voice over the amplifiers was 
clear in the gathered quiet. 



"Ladies and gentlemen, we are 
ready for our first Jump. Most of 
you, I suppose, know at least theoretically what a Jump is. Many of 
you, however, have never experienced one. It is to those last I 
would like to speak in particular. 

"The Jump is exactly what the 
name implies. In the fabric of 
space-time itself, it is impossible to 
travel faster than the speed of light. 
That is a natural law, first discovered by one of the ancients; the 
traditional Einstein, perhaps, except that so many things are 
credited to him. Even at the speed 
of light, of course, it would take 
years, in subjective time, to reach 
the stars. 
"Therefore one leaves the spacetime fabric to enter the little-known 
realm of hyper-space, where time 
and distance have no meaning. It 
is like traveling across a narrow 
isthmus to pass from one ocean to 
another, rather than remaining at 
sea and circling a continent to reach 
the same objective. 

"Great amounts of energy are required, of course, to enter this 
'space within space,' as some call 
it, and a great deal of ingenious 
calculation must be made to insure 
re-entry into ordinary space-time at 
the proper point. The result of the 
expenditure of this energy and intelligence is that immense distances 
can be traversed in zero time. It is 
only the Jump which makes interstellar travel possible. 

"The Jump we are about to make 



28 




 



will take place in about ten minutes. 
You will be warned. There is never 
more than some momentary minor 
discomfort; therefore, I hope all 
of you will remain calm. Thank 
you." 

THE ship lights went out altogether, and there were only the 
stars left. 

It seemed a long while before a 
crisp announcement filled the air 
momentarily. "The Jump will take 
place in exactly one minute." And 
then the same voice counted the 
seconds backward: "Fifty . . . forty 
. . . thirty . . . twenty . . . ten . . . 
five . . . three . . . two . . . one . . ." 

It was as though there had been 
a momentary discontinuity in existence, a bump which joggled only 
the deep inside of a man's bones. 

In that immeasurable fraction of 
a second, one hundred light years 
had passed, and the ship, which 
had been on the outskirts of the 
Solar system, was now in the depths 
of interstellar space. 

Someone near Biron said, shakily, 
"Look at the stars!" 

In a moment, the whisper had 
taken life through the large room 
and hissed itself across the tables: 
"The stars! See!" 

In that same immeasurable fraction of a second, the star-view had 
changed radically. The center of the 
great Galaxy, which stretched thirty 
thousand light years from tip to tip, 
was closer now, and the stars had 
thickened in number. They spread 



across the black velvet vacuum in a 
fine powder, backdropping the occasional brightness of the nearby 
stars. 

Biron, against his "will, remembered the beginning of a poem he 
himself had once written at the 
sentimental age of nineteen, on the 
occasion of his first space flight; the 
one that had first taken him to the 
Earth he was now leaving: 

The stars, like dust, encircle me 
In living mists of light; 
And all of space I seem to see 
In one vast burst of sight. 

The lights went on then, and 
Biron's thoughts were snapped out 
of space as suddenly as they had 
entered it. He was in a spaceliner's 
salon again, with a dinner dragging to an end, and the hum of 
conversation rising to a prosaic 
level. 

He glanced at his wristwatch, 
half looked away; then, very slowly brought the wristwatch into 
focus again. He stared at it for a 
long minute. It was the wristwatch 
he had left in his bedroom that 
night. It had withstood the killim; 
radiation of the bomb, and he had 
collected it with the rest of his 
belongings the next morning. Howmany times had he looked at it since 
then? How many times had he 
stared at it, taken mental note of 
the time, and no note at all of the 
other piece of information it 
shouted at him? 



TYRANN 



29 



For the plastic wrist band was 
white, not blue. It was white! 

Slowly the events of that night, 
all of them, fell into place. Strange 
how one fact could shake all the 
confusion out of them. 

He rose abruptly, murmuring, 
"Pardon me!" under his breath. It 
was a breach of etiquette to leave 
before the captain, but that was 
a matter of small importance to him 
then. 

He hastened to his room, striding 
up the ramps rapidly, rather than 
waiting for the non-gravity elevators. He locked the door behind 
him and looked quickly through 
the bathroom and the built-in 
closets. He had no real hope of 
catching anyone. What they had had 
to do, they must have done hours 
ago. 

Carefully, he went through his 
baggage. They had done a thorough 
job. With scarcely any sign to show 
that they had come and gone, they 
had carefully withdrawn his identification papers, a packet of letters from his father, and even his 
capsular introduction to Hinrik of 
Rhodia. 

THAT was why they had moved 
him. It was neither the old room 
nor the new that they were interested in ; merely the process of moving. For nearly an hour they must 
have legitimately — legitimately, by 
Space — concerned themselves with 
his baggage, and served their own 
purposes thereby. 



Biron sank down upon the 
double bed and thought furiously, 
but it didn't help. The trap had 
been perfect. Everything had been 
planned. Had it not been for the 
completely unpredictable chance of 
his leaving his wristwatch in the 
bedroom that night, he would not 
even now have realized how closemeshed the Tyranni's net through 
space was. 

There was a soft burr as his door 
signal sounded. 

"Come in," he said. 

It was the steward, who said respectfully, "The captain wishes to 
know if there is anything he can 
do for you. You seemed ill as you 
left the table." 

"I'm all right," Biron said, feeling very far from all right. 

How they watched him! And in 
that moment, he knew that there 
was no escape, and that the ship 
was carrying him politely, but surely, to his death. 

CHAPTER IV 

Free? 

SANDER JONTI met the other's 
eyes coldly. He repeated, 
"Gone, you say?" 

Rizzett passed a hand over his 
ruddy face. "Something is gone. I 
don't know its identity. It might 
have been the document we're after, 
certainly. All we know about it is 
that it had been dated somewhere 
in the fifteenth to twenty-first cen


30 




 



tury of Earth's primitive calendar, 
and that it is dangerous." 

"Is there any definite reason to 
believe that the missing- one is the 
document?" 

"Only circumstantial reasoning. 
It was guarded closely by the Earth 
government." 

"Discount that," Jonti said impatiently. "An Earthman will treat 
any documents relating to the preGalactic past with veneration. It's 
their ridiculous worship of tradition." 

"But this one was stolen and yet 
they never announced the fact. Why 
should they guard an empty case?" 

"I can imagine their doing that 
rather than find themselves forced 
to admit that a holy relic has been 
stolen. Yet I cannot believe that 
young Farrill obtained it after all. 
I thought you had him under observation." 




IZZETT smiled confidently. 
' "He didn't get it." 



"How do you know?" 

"Because," said Rizzett, "the 
document has been gone twenty 
years." 

"What?" 

"It was lost or stolen twenty 
years ago," Rizzett explained. 

"Then it can't be the right one. 
It was less than six months ago 
that the Rancher learned of its 
existence." 

"Then somebody else beat him 
to it by nineteen and a half years." 

Jonti thought silently. He said, 



"It does not matter. It cannot matter." 

"Why so?" 

"Because I have been here on 
Earth for months. Before I came, it 
was easy to believe that there might 
be information of value on r the 
planet. But consider now. When 
Earth was the only inhabited planet 
in the Galaxy, it was a primitive 
place, militarily speaking. The only 
weapon they had ever invented 
worth mentioning was a crude and 
inefficient nuclear-reaction bomb for 
which they had not even developed 
the logical defense." Jonti's nattily 
sleeved arm made a delicate gesture 
to where the blue horizon gleamed 
its sickly radioactivity. 

He went on, "All this is placed 
in sharp focus for me as a temporary resident here. It is ridiculous 
to assume that it is possible to 
learn anything from a society at that 
level of military technology. It is 
always very fashionable to assume 
that there are lost arts and lost 
sciences, and there are always these 
people who make a cult of primitivism, making all sorts of ridiculous claims for the prehistoric civilizations on Earth." 

"Yet the Rancher was a wise 
man," Rizzett objected. "He told 
us specifically that it was the most 
dangerous document he knew. You 
remember what he said. I can quote 
it. He said, 'The matter is death for 
the Tyranni, and death for those 
who use it as well; but it would 
mean final life for the Galaxy.' " 



TYRANN 



31 



"The Rancher, like all human 
beings, can be wrong." 

"Consider, sir, that we have no 
idea as to the nature of the document. It could, for instance, be 
somebody's laboratory notes which 
had never been published. It might 
be something that could relate to a 
weapon that Earthmen had never 
recognized as a weapon; something 
which on the face of it might not 
appear to be a weapon — " 

"Nonsense. You are a military 
man and should know better. If 
there is one science into which Man 
has probed continuously and successfully, it is that of military technology. No potential weapon would 
remain unrealized for ten thousand 
years. I think, Rizzett, we will return to Lingane." 

Rizzett shrugged. He was not 
convinced. 

Nor, a thousandfold, was Jonti. 
It had been stolen and that was 
significant. It had obviously been 
worth stealing. Anyone in the 
Galaxy might have it now. 

Unwillingly the thought came to 
him that the Tyranni might have 
it. The Rancher had been most evasive on the matter. Even Jonti, himself, had not been trusted sufficiently. The Randier had said it 
carried death; it could not be used 
without having it cut , both ways. 
Jonti's lips clamped shut. The fool 
and his idiotic hintings! And now 
the Tyranni had him. 

What if a man like Aratap were 
now in the possession of such a 



secret as this might be? Aratap! 
The one man, now that the Rancher 
was gone, who remained unpredictable; th? most dangerous Tyrannian of them all. 

SIMOK ARATAP was a small 
man; a little bandy-legged, narrow-eyed fellow. He had the 
stumpy, thick-limbed appearance 
of the average Tyrannian, yet, 
though he faced an exceptionally 
large and well-muscled specimen of 
the subject worlds, he was completely self-possessed. He was the 
confident heir (in the second generation) of those who had left their 
windy, infertile worlds and sparked 
across the emptiness to capture and 
enchain the rich and populous 
planets of the Nebular Regions. 

His father had headed a squadton of small, flitting ships that had 
struck and vanished, then struck 
again; and had made scrap of the 
lumbering titanic ships that had opposed them. 

The worlds of the Nebula had 
fought in the old fashion, but the 
Tyranni had learned a new one. 
Where the huge, glittering vessels 
of the opposed navies attempted 
single combat, they found themselves flailing at emptiness and 
wasting their stores of energy. Instead, the Tyranni, abandoning 
power alone, stressed speed and 
cooperation, so that the opposed 
kingdoms toppled one after the 
other, singly, each waiting half -joyfully at the discomfiture of its 



32 




 



neighbors, fallaciously secure behind its steel-shipped ramparts, until its own turn came. 

But those wars were fifty years 
in the past. Now the Nebular regions were satrapies that required 
merely the acts of occupation and 
taxation. Previously there had been 
worlds to gain, Aratap thought 
wearily, and now there was little 
left to do but to contend with individual men. 

He looked at the young man who 
faced him. A very young man. A 
tall fellow with good shoulders indeed; an absorbed, intent face with 
the hair of his head cut ridiculously 
short in what was undoubtedly a 
collegiate affectation. In an unofficial sense, Aratap was sorry for 
him. He was obviously frightened. 

BJRON did not recognize the 
feeling inside him as "fright." 
If he had been asked to put a name 
to the emotion, he would have described it as "tension." All his life, 
he had known the Tyranni to be 
the overlords. His father, strong 
and vital though he was, unquestioned on his own estate, respectfully heard on others, was quiet and 
almost humble in the presence of 
the Tyranni. 

They came occasionally to Widemos on polite visits, with questions 
as to the annual tribute they called 
taxation. The Rancher of Widemos 
was responsible for the collection 
and delivery of these funds on behalf of the planet Nephelos and, 



perfunctorily, the Tyranni would 
check his books. 

The Rancher himself would assist them out of their small vessels. They would sit at the head 
of the table at mealtimes where 
they would be served first. When 
they spoke, all other conversation 
slopped instantly. 

As a child, he wondered that 
such small, ugly men should be 
so carefully handled, but he learned 
as he grew up that they were, to his 
father, what his father was to a 
cowhand. He even learned to speak 
softly to them himself, and to address them as "Excellency." 

He had learned so well that now 
that he faced one of the overlords, 
one of the Tyranni, he could feel 
himself stiffen with tension. 

The ship which he had considered his prison became officially one 
on the day of landing upon 
Rhodia. They had signaled at his 
door and two husky crewmen had 
entered and stood on either side of 
him. The captain, who followed, 
had said in a flat voice, "Biron 
Farrill, I take you into custody by 
the power vested in me as captain 
of this vessel, and hold you for 
questioning by the Commissioner of 
the Great King." 

The Commissioner was this small 
Tyrannian who sat before him now, 
seemingly abstracted and uninterested. The "Great King" was the 
Khan of the Tyranni, who still 
lived in the legendary stone palace 
on the Tyrannian's home planet. 



TYRANN 



33 




Biron looked furtively about him. 
He was not physically constrained 
in any way, but four guards in the 
slate-blue of the Tyrannian "Outer 
Police" flanked him, two and two. 
They were armed. A fifth, with a 
major's insignia, sat beside the 
Commissioner's desk. 



The Commissioner spoke for the 
first time, his voice high-pitched, 
thin. "The old Rancher of Widemos, your father, has been executed 
for treason." 

His faded eyes were fixed on 
Biron's. There seemed nothing beyond mildness in them. 

Biron remained stolid. It bothered him that he could do nothing. 
It would have been so much more 
satisfying to howl at them, to flail 
madly at them, but that would not 
make his father less dead. He 
thought he knew the reason for this 
initial statement. It was intended to 
break him down, to make him give 
himself away. Well, it wouldn't. 

He said, evenly, "I am Biron 
Malaine of Earth. If you are questioning my identity, I would like to 
communicate with the Terrestrial 
Consul." 

"Ah, yes, but we are at a purely 
informal stage just now. You are 
Biron Malaine, you say, of Earth. 
And yet," Aratap indicated the 
papers before him, "there are letters here which were written by 
Widemos to his son. There are college registration receipts and tickets 
to commencement exercises made 
out to Biron Farrill. They were 
found in your baggage." 

Biron felt desperate, but he did 
not let it show. "My baggage was 
searched illegally, so that I deny 
that this is evidence." 

"We are not in a court of law, 
Mr. Farrill or Malaine. How do you 
explain them?" 



34 




 



"If they were found in my baggage, they were placed there by 
someone else." 

The Commissioner passed it by. 
Biron felt amazed. His statements 
sounded so thin, so patently foolish, 
yet the Commissioner did not remark upon them, but only tapped 
the black capsule. "And this introduction to the Director of Rhodia? 
Also not yours?" 



"No, that is mine." Biron had 
planned that. The introduction did 
not mention his name. He said, 
"There is a plot to assassinate the 
Director — " 

He stopped, appalled. It sounded 
so completely unconvincing when 
he finally put the beginning of his 
carefully prepared speech into actual sound. Surely, the Commissioner was smiling cynically at him. 



TYRANN 



35 



But Aratap was not. He merely 
sighed a little and with quick, 
practiced gestures removed contact 
lenses from his eyes and placed 
them carefully in a glass of saline 
solution that stood on the desk before him. His naked eyeballs were 
a little watery. 

He said, "And you know of it? 
Even back on Earth, five hundred 
light-years away? Our own police 
here on Rhodia have not heard of 

it." : " " 

"The police are here. The plot is 
being developed on Earth." 

"I see. And are you their agent? 
Or are you going to warn Hinrik 
against them?" 

"The latter, of course." 

"Indeed? And why do you intend 
to warn him?" 

"For the substantial reward 
which I expect to get." 

Aratap smiled. "That at least 
rings true, and lends a certain 
truthful gloss to your previous 
statements. What are the details of 
the plot you speak of?" 

"That is for the Director only." 

A momentary hesitation, then a 
shrug. "Very well. The Tyranni 
are not interested and do not concern themselves with local politics. 
We will arrange an interview between yourself and the Director and 
that will be our contribution to his 
safety. My men will hold you until 
your baggage can be collected, and 
then you will be free to go. Remove him." 

The last was to the armed men, 



who left with Biron. Aratap replaced his contact lenses,, an action 
which changed instantly that look 
of vague incompetence their absence had seemed to induce. 

He said to the major, who had 
remained, "We will keep an eye, I 
think, on this young Farrill." 

The officer nodded shortly. "For 
a moment I thought you might have 
been taken in. To me, his story was 
pure nonsense." 

"It was. It's just that which 
makes him maneuverable for the 
while. All young fools who get 
their notions of interstellar intrigue 
from the video spy-thrillers are 
easily handled. He is, of course, the 
son of the ex-Rancher." 

NOW the major hesitated, "Are 
you sure? It's a vague and 
unsatisfactory accusation we have 
against him." 

"You mean that it might be arranged evidence after all? For what 
purpose ?" 

"It could mean that he is a decoy, 
sacrificed to divert our attention 
from a real Biron Farrill elsewhere." 

"No. Improbably theatrical. Besides, we have a photocube." 

"What? Of the boy?" 

"Of the Rancher's son. Would 
you like to see it?" 

Aratap lifted the paperweight 
upon his desk. It was a simple 
glass cube, three inches on each 
side, black and opaque. He said, 
"I meant to confront him with it, 



36 




 



if it had seemed best. It is a shrewd 
process, this one, Major. I don't 
know if you're acquainted with it. 
It's been developed recently 
among the inner worlds.. Outwardly, it seems an ordinary photocube, but when it is turned upside 
down, there's an automatic molecular rearrangement which renders 
it totally opaque. It is a pleasant 
conceit." 

HE TURNED the cube rightside up. The opacity shimmered for a moment, then cleared 
slowly like a black fog wisping and 
feathering before the wind. Aratap 
watched it calmly. 

And then it was water clear, and 
a young face smiled brightly out 
of it, accurate and alive, trapped 
and solidified in mid-breath forever. 

"An item," said Aratap, "in the 
ex-Rancher's possessions. What do 
you think?" 

"It is the young man, without 
question." 

"Yes." The Tyrannian official 
regarded the photocube thoughtfully. "You know, using this same 
process, I don't see why six photographs could not be taken in the 
same cube. It has six faces, and by 
resting the cube on each of them 
in turn, a series of new molecular 
orientations might be induced. Six 
connected photographs, flowing 
one into another as you turned; a 
static phenomenon turned dynamic 
and taking on new breadth and 



vision. Major, it would be a new 
art form." A mounting enthusiasm 
had crept into his voice. 

But the silent major looked 
faintly scornful, and Aratap left his 
artistic reflections to say, abruptly, 
"You will watch Farrill?" 

"Certainly." 

"Watch Hinrik as well." 
"Hinrik?" 

"Of course. It is the whole purpose of freeing the boy. I want 
some questions answered. Why is 
Farrill seeing Hinrik? What is the 
connection between them? The 
dead Rancher did not play a lone 
hand. There was — there must 
have been — a well-organized conspiracy behind him." 

"But surely Hinrik could not be 
involved. He lacks the intelligence, 
even if he had the courage." 

"Granted. But it is just because 
he is half an idiot that he may 
serve them as a tool. If so, he represents a weakness in our scheme of 
things. We obviously cannot afford 
to neglect the possibility." 

He gestured absently; the major 
saluted, swung on his heel and left. 

Aratap sighed, turned the photocube thoughtfully in his hand and 
watched the blackness wash back 
like a tide of ink. 

Life had been simpler in his 
father's time. To smash a planet 
had a cruel grandeur about it, 
while this careful maneuvering of 
an ignorant young man was simply 
cruel. 

And yet necessary. 



TYRANN 



37 



CHAPTER V 

Uneasy Lies the Head 

THE Directorship of Rhodia is 
not ancient, when compared 
with Earth, as a habitat for Homo 
scpiens. It is not ancient even when 
compared with the Centaurian or 
Sirian worlds. The planets of Arcrurus, for instance, had been settled 
for two hundred years when the 
first spaceships circled the Horsehead Nebula to find the nqst of 
hundreds of oxygen-water planets 
behind. They clustered thickly and 
ic was a real find, for although 
planets infest space, few can maintain human life. 

There are between one and two 
hundred billion radiant stars in the 
Galaxy. Among them are some five 
hundred billion planets. Of these, 
some have gravities over 120% 
that of Earth, or less than 60%, 
and are therefore unbearable in the 
long run. Some are too hot; some 
too cold. Some have poisonous atmospheres, and planetary atmospheres consisting largely or entirely of neon, methane, ammonia, 
chlorine, even silicon tetrafluoride 
have been recorded. Some planets 
lack water, one with oceans of almost pure sulfur dioxide having 
been described. Others lack carbon. 

Any one of these failings is sufficient, so that not one world in a 
hundred thousand can be lived on. 
Yet this still leaves an estimated 
four million habitable planets. 



The exact number of these which 
are actually occupied is disputable. 
According to the Galactic Almanac, 
admittedly dependent on imperfect 
records, Rhodia was the 1,098th 
world settled by Man. 

Ironically enough, Tyrann, 
eventually Rhodia's conqueror, was 
the 1,099th. 

The pattern of history in the 
Trans-Nebular region was distressingly similar to that elsewhere during the period of development and 
expansion. Planet governments 
were set up in rapid succession, 
each government confined to its 
own world. With expanding economy, neighboring planets were 
colonized and integrated with the 
home society. Small "empires" were 
established and these inevitably 
clashed. 

Hegemony over sizable regions 
was established by first one, then 
another of these governments, depending upon the fluctuations of 
the fortunes of war and of leadership. 

ONLY Rhodia maintained a 
lengthy stability, under the 
able dynasty of the Hinriads. It 
was perhaps well on the road to 
finally establishing a universal 
Trans-Nebular Empire in a stolid 
century or two, when the Tyranni 
came and did the job in ten years. 

Ironical that it should be the men 
of Tyrann. Until then, during the 
seven hundred years of its existence, 
Tyrann had done little better than 



38 




 



maintain a precarious autonomy, 
thanks largely to the undesirability 
of its barren landscape, which, because of a planetary water-dearth, 
was largely desert. 

But even after the Tyranni came, 
the Directorship of Rhodia continued. It had actually grown. The 
Hinriads were popular with the 
people, so their existence served as 
a means of easy control. The Tyranni did not care who got the 
cheers as long as they themselves 
received the booty and power. 

To be sure, the Directors were 
no longer the Hinriads of old. The 
Directorship had always been elective within the family so that the 
ablest might be chosen. Adoptions 
into the family had been encouraged for the same purpose. 

But now the Tyranni could influence the elections for other reasons, and twenty years earlier, for 
instance, Hinrik (fifth of that 
name) had been chosen Director. 
To the Tyranni, it had seemed a 
useful choice. 

Hinrik had been a handsome 
man at the time of his election, and 
he still made an impressive appearance when he addressed the Rhodian Council. His hair had grayed 
smoothly and his thick mustache 
remained, startlingly enough, as 
black as his daughter's eyes. 

At the moment, he faced his 
daughter, and she was furious. She 
lacked only two inches of his 
height, and the Director lacked 
less than an inch of six feet. She 



was a smoldering girl, dark of hair 
and of eyes, and, at the moment, 
loweringly dark of complexion. 

She said, again, "I can't do it!" 

Hinrik said pleadingly, "But, 
Arta, this is unreasonable. What 
am I to do? What can I do? In my 
position, what choice have I?" 

"If mother were alive, she 
would find a way out." She stamped her foot. Her full name was 
Artemisia, a royal name that had 
been borne by at least one female 
of the Hinriads in every generation. 

"Yes, yes, no doubt. Bless my 
soul, what a way your mother had 
with her. There are times when 
you seem all of her and none of 
me. But surely, Arta, you haven't: 
given him a chance. Have you observed his — ah — better points?" 

"TTTHICH are?" 

VV "The ones which . . ." 
He gestured vaguely, thought a 
while and gave It up. He approached her and would have put 
a consoling hand upon her shoulder, but she squirmed away from 
him, her scarlet gown shimmering 
in the air. 

"I have spent an evening with 
him," she said, bitterly, "and he 
tried to kiss me. It was disgusting!" 

"But everyone kisses, dear. It's 
not as though this were your grandmother's time. Kisses are nothing, 
less than nothing. Young blood, 
Arta, young blood!" 

"Young blood, my foot. The 



TYRANN 



3? 



only time that horrible little man 
has had young blood in him these 
fifteen years has been immediately 
after a transfusion. He's four 
inches shorter than I am, father. 
How can I be seen in public with 
a pygmy?" 

"He's an important man. Very 
important!" 

"That doesn't add a single inch 
to his height. He is bowlegged, as 
they all are, and his breath smells." 

"His breath smells?" 

ARTEMISIA wrinkled her nose 
at her father. "That's right; 
it has an unpleasant odor. I didn't 
like it and I made sure to let him 
know it." 

Hinrik dropped his jaw wordlessly for a moment, then said in 
a hoarse half -whisper, "You let 
him know it? You implied that a 
high official of the Royal Court of 
Tyrann could have an unpleasant 
personal characteristic?" 

"He did! I have a nose, you 
know! So when he got too close, I 
just held it and pushed. A figure 
of man to admire, that one is. He 
went flat on his back, with his legs 
sticking up." She gestured with 
her fingers in illustration, but it 
was lost on Hinrik, who, with a 
moan, hunched his shoulder and 
put his hands over his face. 

He peered miserably from between two fingers. "What will 
happen now? How can you act 
so?" 

"It didn't do me any good. Do 



you know what he said? Do you 
have any idea what he said? It was 
the last straw. It was absolutely 
the limit. I made up my mind then 
that I couldn't stand that man if 
he were ten feet tall." 

"But what did he say?" 

"He said — straight out of a 
video, father — he said, 'Ha! A 
spirited wench! I like her all the 
better for that!' And two servants 
helped stagger him to his feet. But 
he didn't try to breathe in my face 
again." 

Hinrik doubled into a chair, 
leaned forward and regarded Artemisia earnestly. "You could go 
through the motions of marrying 
him, couldn't you? You needn't be 
in earnest. Why not merely for the 
sake of political necessity. . .?" 

"How do you mean, not in earnest, father? Shall I cross the fingers 
of my left hand while signing the 
contract with my right?" 

Hinrik looked confused. "No, of 
course not. What good would that 
do? How would crossing fingers 
alter the validity of the contract? 
Really, Arta, I'm surprised at your 
stupidity." 

Artemisia sighed. "What do you 
mean, then?" 

"Mean by what? You see, you've 
disrupted things. I can't keep my 
mind on matters properly when 
you argue with me. What was I 
saying?" 

"I was merely to pretend I was 
getting married, or something. Remember?" 



40 




 



"Oh, yes. I mean, you needn't 
take it too seriously, you see." 
"I can have lovers, I suppose." 

H1NRIK stiffened and frowned. 
"Arta! I brought you up to be 
a modest, self-respecting girl. So 
did your mother. How can you say 
such things? It's shameful." 

"But isn't that what you mean?" 
"I can say it. I am a man, a mature man. A girl like you ought 
not to repeat it." 

"Well, I have repeated it and I 
don't see how talking is worse than 
doing. I'll probably have to have 
them if I'm forced to marry for 
reasons of state, but there are limits." She placed her hands upon 
her hips, and the capelike sleeves 
of her gown slithered away from 
her tanned and dimpled shoulders. 
"But he would still be my husband 
and I just can't bear that particular thought." 

"He's an old man, my dear. Life 
with him would be short." 

"Not short enough, thank you. 
Five minutes ago, he had young 
blood. Remember?" 

Hinrik spread his hands wide 
and let them drop. "Arta, the man 
is a Tyrannian, and a powerful one. 
He is in good odor at the Khan's 
court." 

"The Khan might think it's a 
good odor. He probably would. He 
must smell even worse — maybe that 
is how they judge rank, by rankness." 

Hinrik's mouth was an O of 



horror. Automatically, he looked 
over his shoulder. Then he said, 
hoarsely, "Don't ever say anything 
like that again." 

"I will if I feel like it. Besides, 
the man has had three wives already." She forestalled him, "Not 
the Khan, the man you want me 
to marry." 

"But they're dead," Hinrik explained, earnestly. "Arta, they're 
not alive. Don't think that. How 
can you imagine I would let my 
daughter marry a bigamist? We'll 
have him produce documents. He 
married them consecutively, not 
simultaneously, and they're dead 
new, entirely dead, all of them." 

"It's no wonder." 

"Oh, bless my soul, what shall 
I do?" He made a last effort at 
dignity. "Arta, it is the price of 
being a Hinriad and a Director's 
daughter." 

"I didn't ask to be a Hinriad 
and a Director's daughter." 

"That has nothing to do with 
it. It is just that the history of all 
the Galaxy, Arta, shows that there 
are occasions when reasons of 
State, the safety of planets, the best 
interests of peoples, require that — 
uh. ..." 

"That some poor girl prostitute 
herself." 

"Oh, this vulgarity! Someday, 
you'll see, someday you'll blurt 
something of the sort in public." 

"Well, that's what it is, and I 
won't do it. I'd rather die. I'd 
rather do anything. And I will." 



TYRANN 



41 



The Director got to his feet and 
held out his arms to her. His lips 
trembled and he said nothing. She 
ran to him in a sudden agony of 
tears and clung desperately to him. 
"I can't. Don't make me." 

He patted her awkwardly. "But 
if you don't, what will happen? If 
the Tyranni are displeased, they 
will remove me, imprison me, 
maybe even exec — " He gagged on 
the word. "These are very unhappy 
times, Arta, very unhappy. The 
Rancher of Widemos was condemned last week and I believe he 
has been executed. You remember 
him, Arta? He was at court half a 
year ago. A big man, with a round 
head and deep-set eyes. You were 
frightened of him at first." 

"I remember." 

"Well, he is probably dead. And 
who knows, myself next, perhaps. 
Your poor, harmless old father 
next. It is a bad time. He was at 
our court and that's very suspicious." 

SHE suddenly held herself out at 
arm's length. "Why should it 
be suspicious? You weren't involved with him, were you?" 

"I? Indeed not. But if we openly insult the Khan of Tyrann by 
refusing an alliance with one of his 
favorites, they may choose to think 
even that." 

Hinrik's hand-wringing was interrupted by the muted buzz of the 
extension. He started uneasily. 
"I'll take it in my own room. 



You just rest. You'll feel better 
after a nap. You'll see, you'll see. 
It's just that you're a little on edge 
now." 

Artemisia looked after him and 
frowned. Her face was intensely 
thoughtful, and for minutes only 
the gentle tide of her breasts betrayed life. 

There was the sound of stumbling feet at the door. She turned. 

'What is it?" The tone was 
sharper than she had intended. 

It was Hinrik, his face sallow 
with fear. "Major Andros was calling." 

"Of the Outer Police?" 

Hinrik could only nod. 

Artemisia cried, "Surely, he's 
not. 4 . ." She paused reluctantly 
at the threshold of "putting the horrible thought into words, but waited in vain for enlightenment. 

"There is a young man who 
wants audience. I don't know him. 
Why should he come here? He's 
from Earth." He was gasping for 
breath and shivering as he spoke, 
as though his mind were on a 
turn-table and he had to follow it 
in its gyrations. 

The girl ran to him and seized 
his elbow. She said, sharply, "Sit 
down, father. Tell me what has 
happened." She shook him and 
some of the panic drained out of 
his face. 

"I don't know exactly," he whispered. "There's a young man coming here with details concerning a 
plot on my life. On my life! And 



42 




 



they tell me I ought to listen to 
him." He smiled foolishly. "I'm 
loved by the people. No one would 
want to kill me. Would they?" 

He was watching her eagerly, 
and relaxed when she said. "Of 
course, no one would want to kill 
you." 

Then he was tense again. "Do 
you think it might be they?" 
"Who?" 

He leaned over to whisper, "The 
Tyranni. The Rancher of Widemos 
was here yesterday, and they killed 
him." His voice ascended the scale. 
"And now they're sending someone over to kill me." 

Artemisia gripped his shoulder 
with such force that his mind 
turned to the present pain. 

She said, "Father! Sit quietly! 
Not a word ! Listen to me. No one 
wi!l kill you. Do y6u hear me? No 
one will kill you. It was six. months 
ago that the Rancher was here. Do 
you remember? Wasn't it six 
months ago? Think!" 

"So long ago?" whispered the 
Director. "Yes, yes, it must have 
been." 

"Now you stay here and rest. 
You're overwrought. I'll see the 
young man myself and then ■ I'll 
bring him to you if it's safe." 

"Will you, Arta? Will you? He 
won't hurt a woman. Surely, he 
wouldn't hurt a woman." 

She bent suddenly and kissed 
his cheek. 

"Be careful," he murmured, and 
closed his eyes wearily. 



CHAPTER VI 

That Wears a Crown! 

BIRON FARRILL waited uneasily in one of the outer 
buildings on the Palace Grounds. 
Fot the first time in his life, he 
experienced the deflating sensation 
of being a provincial. 

Widemos Hall, where he had 
grown up, had been beautiful in 
his eyes, and now his memory endowed it with a merely barbaric 
glitter. Its curved lines, its filigree 
work, its curiously wrought turrets, 
its elaborate "false-windows" — He 
winced at the thought of them. 

Earth was mellower, but it was 
minute and dreaming. The public 
buildings had been of white, glossy 
stone; the private homes, of plastic "near-stone" in pastel shades. 
The net effect had been one of 
gingerbread and sugar-candy. It 
was a toy world. 

But this ? This was different. 
The Palace Grounds of Rhodia 
was no mere lump of .ostentation 
built by the petty lords of a cattle 
kingdom; nor was it the childlike 
expression of a fading and dying 
world. It was the culmination, in 
stone, of the Hinriad dynasty. 

The buildings were strong and 
quiet. Their lines were straight and 
vertical, lengthening toward the 
center of each structure, yet avoiding anything as effeminate as a 
spire effect. They held a bluntness 
about them, yet lifted into a climax 



TYRANN 



43 



that affected the onlooker without 
revealing their method of doing so 
at a casual glance. They were reserved, . self-contained, proud. 

And as each building was, so 
was the group as a whole, the huge 
Palace Central becoming . a crescendo. One by one, even the few 
artificialities remaining in the masculine Rhodian style had dropped 
away. The very "false-windows," 
so valued as decoration and so useless in a building of artificial light 
and ventilation, were done away 
with. And that, somehow, without 
loss. 

It was only line and plane, a 
geometrical abstraction that led the 
eye upward to the sky. 

The Tyrannian major stopped 
briefly at his side as he left the 
inner room. 

"You will be received now." 

Biron nodded, and after a while 
a larger man in a uniform of scarlet and tan clicked heels before 
him. It struck Biron with sudden 
force that those who had the real 
power did. not need the outward 
show and could be satisfied with 
slate-blue. He recalled the splendid 
formality of a Rancher's life and 
bit his lip at the thought of its 
futility. 

"Biron Malaine?" said the 
Rhodian guard, and Biron rose to 
follow. 

THERE was a little gleaming 
monorail carriage that was suspended delicately by diamagnetic 



forces upon a single ruddy shaft of 
metal. Biron had never seen one 
before. He paused before entering. 

The little carriage, big enough 
for five or six at the most, swayed 
with the wind, a graceful teardrop 
returning the gleam of Rhodia's 
splendid sun. The single rail was 
slender, scarcely more than a cable, 
and ran the length of the carriage's 
underside without touching. Biron 
bent and saw blue sky all the length 
between them. For a moment, as 
he watched, a lifting gust of wind 
raised it, so that it hovered a full 
inch above the rail, as though impatient for flight and tearing at the 
invisible force-field that held it. 
Then it fluttered back to the rail, 
closer and still closer, but never 
touching. 

"Get in," said the guard behind 
him, impatiently, and Biron climbed two steps into the carriage. 

The steps remained long enough 
for the guard to follow, then lifted 
quietly and smoothly into place, 
forming no break in the carriage's 
even exterior. 

Biron became aware that the 
outer opacity of the carriage was 
an illusion. Once within, he found 
himself sitting in a transparent 
bubble. At the motion of a small 
control, the carriage lifted upward. 
It climbed the heights easily, buffeting at the atmosphere which 
whistled past. For one moment, 
Biron caught the panorama of the 
Palace Grounds from the apex of 
the arc. 



44 




 



The structures became a gorgeous whole — could they have been 
originally conceived other than as 
an air-view? — laced by the shining 
copper threads, along one or two 
of which the graceful carriagebubbles skimmed. 

He felt himself pressed forward, 
and the carriage came to a dancing 
halt. The entire run had lasted less 
than two minutes. 

A door stood open .before him. 
He entered and it closed behind 
him. There was no one in the 
room, which was small and bare. 



For the moment, no one was pushing him, but he felt no comfort 
because of it. He was under no 
illusions. Ever since that damned 
night, others had forced his moves. 

Jonti had placed him on the ship. 
The Tyrannian Commissioner had 
placed him here. And each move 
had increased the measure of his 
desperation. 

It was obvious to Biron that the 
Tyrannian had not been fooled. It 
had been too easy to get away from 
him. The Commissioner might have 
called the Terrestrial consul. He 



TYRANN 



45 



night have hyper-waved Earth, or 
taken his retinal patterns. These 
things were routine, could not have 
been omitted accidentally. 

He remembered Jonti's analysis 
of affairs. Some of it might still be 
valid. The Tyranni would not kill 
•him outright to create another 
martyr. But Hinrik was their puppet, and he was* as capable as they 
of ordering an execution. In that 
case, Biron would have been killed 
by one of his own, and the Tyranni 
merely be disdainful onlookers. 

Biron clenched his fists tightly. 
He was tall and strong, but he was 
unarmed. The men who would 
come for him would have blasters 
and neuronic whips. He found 
himself backing against the wall. 

HE WHIRLED quickly at the 
small sound of the opening 
door to his left. The man who entered was armed and uniformed, 
but there was a girl with him. He 
relaxed a bit. At another time, he 
might have observed the girl closely, since she was worth observation 
and approval, but at the moment 
she was only a girl. 

They approached together, stopping some six feet away. He kept 
his eye on the guard's blaster. 

The girl said to the guard, "I'll 
speak to him first, lieutenant." 

There was a little vertical line 
between her eyes, as she turned to 
him. She said, "Are you the man 
who has this story of an assassination plot against the Director?" 



Biron said, "I was told I would 
see the Director." 

"That is impossible. If you have 
anything to say, say it to me. If 
your information is truthful and 
useful, you will be well-treated." 

"May I ask who you are? How 
do I know you are authorized to 
speak for the Director?" 

The girl seemed annoyed. "I am 
his daughter. Please answer my 
questions. Are you from outside 
the System?" 

"I am from Earth." Biron 
paused, then added, "Your Grace." 

The addition pleased her. 
"Where is that?" 

"It is a small planet of the Sirian 
sector, your Grace." 

"And what is your name?" 
"Biron Malaine, your Grace." 
She stared at him thoughtfully. 
"From Earth? Can you pilot a 
spaceship?" 

Biron almost smiled. She was 
testing him. She knew very well 
that space-navigation was one of 
the forbidden sciences in the 
Tyranni-controlled worlds. 

He said, "Yes, your Grace." He 
could prove that when the performance test came, // they let him 
live that long. Space-navigation was 
not a forbidden science on Earth, 
and in four years one could learn 
much. 

She said, "Very well. And your 
story?" 

He made his decision suddenly. 
To the guard alone, he would not 
have dared. But this was a girl, 



At 




 



and if she was not lying, if she 
really was the Director's daughter, 
she might be a persuasive factor on 
his behalf. 
He said, "There is no assassination plot, your Grace." 

The girl was startled. She turned 
impatiently to her companion. 
"Would you take over, lieutenant? 
Get the truth out of him." 

Biron took a step forward and 
met the cold thrust of the guard's 
blaster. He said, urgently, "Wait, 
your Grace. Listen to me! It was 
the only way to see the Director. 
Don't you understand?" 

He raised his voice and sent it 
after her retreating form: "Will 
you tell his Excellency, at least, 
that I am Biron Farrill and claim 
my Sanctuary Right?" 

It was a feeble straw at which to 
clutch. The old feudal customs had 
been losing their force with the 
generations even before the Tyranni came. Now they were archaisms. But there was nothing else. 
Nothing. 

SHE turned, and her eyebrows 
were arched. "Are you claiming now to be of the aristocratic 
order? A moment ago, your name 
was Malaine." 

A new voice sounded unexpectedly. "So it was, but it is the second 
name which is correct. You are 
Biron Farrill indeed, my good sir. 
Of course you are. The resemblance 
is unmistakable." 

A small, smiling man stood in 



the doorway. His eyes, widely 
spaced and brilliant, were taking 
in all of Biron with an amused 
sharpness. He cocked his narrow 
face upward at Biron's height and 
said to the girl, "Don't you recognize him, too, Artemisia?" 

Artemisia hurried to him, her 
voice troubled. "Uncle Gil, what 
are you doing here?" 

"Taking care of my interests, 
Artemisia. Remember that if there 
were an assassination, I would be 
the closest of the Hinriads to the 
possible succession." Gillbret oth 
Hinriad winked elaborately, then 
added, "Oh, get the lieutenant out 
of here. There isn't any danger." 

She ignored that and said, 
"Have you been sounding the communicator again?" 

"Of course. Would you deprive 
me of an amusement? It is pleasant to eavesdrop on them." 

"Not if they catch you." 

"The danger is part of the game, 
my dear. The amusing part. After 
all, the Tyranni do not hesitate to 
sound the Palace. We can't do 
much without their knowing. Well, 
turnabout, you know. Aren't you 
going to introduce me?" 

"No, I'm not," she said, shortly. "This is none of your business." 

"Then I'll introduce you. When 
I heard his name, I stopped listening and came in." He moved past 
Artemisia, stepped up to Biron, inspected him with an impersonal 
smile, and said, "This is Biron 
Farrill." 



TYRANN 



47 



"I have said so myself," said 
Biron. More than half his attention 
was upon the lieutenant, who still 
held his neuronic whip in firing position. 

"But you have not added that 
you are the son of the Rancher of 
Widemos." 

"I would have, but for your interruption. In any case, you've got 
the story now. Obviously, I had to 
get away from the Tyranni and 
that without giving them my real 
name." Biron waited. This was it, 
he felt. If the next move was not 
an immediate arrest, there was still 
a trifling chance. 

Artemisia said, "I see. This is a 
matter for the Director then. You 
are sure there is no plot?" 

"None, your Grace." 

"Good. Uncle Gil, will you remain with Mr. Farrill? Lieutenant, 
come with me." 

Biron felt weak. He would have 
lilced to sit down, but no suggestion to that effect was made by 
Gillbret, who still inspected him 
with an almost clinical interest. 

"The Rancher's son! Amusing!" 

Biron brought his attention 
downward. He was tired of cautious monosyllables and careful 
phrases. He said, abruptly, "Yes, 
the Rancher's son. It is a congenital situation. Can I help you in any 
other way?" 




ILLBRET showed no offense. 
iHis thin face merely creased 



further as his smile widened. He 



said, "You might satisfy my curiosity. You really came for Sanctuary? 
Here?" 

"I'd rather discuss that with the 
Director, sir." 

"Oh, get off it, yOung man. 
You'll find that very little business 
can be done with the Director. Why 
do you suppose you had to deal 
with his daughter just now? That's 
an amusing thought, if you'll consider it." 

"Do you find everything amusing?" 

"Why not? As an attitude toward life, it's an amusing one. It's 
the only adjective that will fit. Observe the universe, young man. If 
you can't force amusement out of 
it, you might as well cut your 
throat, since there's damned little 
good in it. I haven't introduced 
myself, by the way. I'm the Director's cousin." 

Biron said coldly, "Congratulations." 

Gillbret shrugged. "You're 
right. It's not impressive. And I'm 
likely to remain just that indefinitely since there is no assassination to 
be expected, after all." 

"Unless you whip one up for 
yourself." 

"My dear sir, your sense of humor! You'll have to get used to 
the fact that nobody takes me 
seriously. My remark was only an 
expression of cynicism. You don't 
suppose the Directorship is worth 
anything these days, do you? Surely you cannot believe that Hinrik 



48 




 



was always like this. He was never 
a great brain, but with every year 
he becomes more impossible. I forget, you haven't seen him yet. But 
you will! I hear him coming. 
When he speaks to you, remember that he is the ruler of the largest of the Trans-Nebular kingdoms. 
It wjjl be an amusing thought." 

Hinrik bore his dignity with the 
ease of experience. He acknowledged Biron's painstakingly ceremonious bow with the proper 
degree of condescension. He said, 
showing a trace of abruptness, 
"And your business with us, sir?" 

Artemisia was standing at her 
father's side, and Biron noticed, 
with some surprise, that she was 
quite pretty. He said, "Your Excellency, I have come on behalf of 
my father's good name. You must 
know his execution was unjust." 

Hinrik looked away. "I knew 
your father slightly. He was in 
Rhodia once or twice." He paused, 
and his voice quavered a bit. "You 
are very like him. Very. But he was 
tried, you know. At least I imagine 
he was. And according to law. 
Really, I don't know the details." 

. "Exactly, your Excellency. But I 
would like to learn those details. 
I am sure that my father was no 
traitor." 

HINRIK broke in hurriedly, "As 
his son, of course, it is understandable that you should defend your father, but, really, it is 
difficult to discuss such matters of 



state now. Highly irregular, in fact, 
Why don't you see Aratap?" 

"I do not know him, Excellency." 

"Aratap? The Commissioner? 
The Tyrannian Commissioner?" 

"I have seen him and he sent 
me here. Surely, you understand 
that I dare not let the Tyranni — " 

But Hinrik had grown stiff. His 
hand had wandered to his lips, as 
though to keep them from trembling and his words were consequently muffled. "Aratap sent you?" 

"I found it necessary to tell 
him — " 

"Don't repeat "what you told 
him; I know," said Hinrik. "I can 
do nothing for you, Rancher — uh — 
Mr. Farrill. It is not in my jurisdiction alone. The Executive Council — stop pulling at me, Arta. How 
can I pay attention to matters when 
you distract me? — must be consulted. Gillbret! Will you see that 
Mr. Farrill is taken care of? I will 
do what can be done. Yes, I will 
consult the Executive Council. The 
forms of law, you know. Very important. Very important." 

He turned on his heel, mumbling. 

Artemisia lingered for a moment, and touched Biron's sleeve. 
"A moment. Was it true, your 
statement that you could pilot a 
spaceship?" 

"Quite true," said Biron. He 
smiled at her and after a moment's 
hesitation, she smiled briefly in return. 



TYRANN 



49 



"GilLbret," she said, "I want to 
speak to you later." 

She hurried off. Biron looked 
after her, till Gillbret tweaked at 
his sleeve. 

, "I presume you are hungry, perhaps thirsty, would like a wash?" 
asked Gillbret. "The ordinary 
amenities of life continue, I take 
it?" 

"Thank you, yes," said Biron. 
The tension had almost entirely 
washed out of him. For a moment, 
he was relaxed and felt wonderful. 
She was pretty. Very pretty. 

Hinrik, on the other hand, was 
not relaxed. In his own chambers, 
his thoughts whirled at a feverish 
pace. Try as he might, he could 
not wriggle out of the inevitable 
conclusion. It was a trap! Aratap 
had sent him and it was a trap ! 

Pie buried his head in his hands 
to quiet and deaden the pounding, 
and then he knew what he had to 
do. 

CHAPTER VII 

Musician of the Mind 

NIGHT settles in time on all 
habitable planets. Not always, perhaps, at respectable intervals, since recorded periods of 
rotation vary from fifteen to fiftytwo hours. That fact requires the 
most strenuous psychological adjustment for those traveling from 
planet to planet. 

On many planets, such adjust


ments are made and the wakingsleeping periods are tailored to fit. 
On many more, the almost universal use of conditioned atmospheres and artificial lighting makes 
the day-night question secondary, 
except insofar as it modifies agriculture. On a few planets — those 
of the extremes — arbitrary divisions 
are made which ignore the trivial 
facts of light and dark. 

But always, whatever the social 
conventions, the coming of night 
has a deep and abiding psychological significance, dating back to 
Man's pre-human arboreal existence. Night will always be a time 
of fear and insecurity, and the 
heart will sink with the Sun. 

Inside Palace Central, there was 
no sensory mechanism by which 
one could tell the coming of night, 
yet Biron felt that coming through 
some indefinite instinct hidden in 
the unknown corridors of the human brain. He knew that outdoors, 
the night's blackness was scarcely 
relieved by the futile sparks of the 
stars. He knew that, if it were the 
right time of year, the jagged "hole 
in space" known as the Horsehead 
Nebula, so familiar to all the 
Trans-Nebular Kingdoms, inked 
out half the stars that might otherwise have been visible. 

And he was depressed again. 

He had not seen Artemisia since 
the little talk with the Director and 
he found himself resenting that. 
He had looked forward to dinner; 
he might have spoken to her. In


50 




 



stead he had eaten alone, with two 
guards lounging discontentedly 
just outside the door. Even Gillbret had left him, presumably to 
eat a less lonely meal in the company one would expect in a palace 
of the Hinriads. 

So that when Gillbret returned 
and said, "Artemisia and I have 
been discussing you," he obtained 
a prompt and interested reaction. 

It merely amused him and he 
said so. "First, however, I want to 
show you my laboratory," he 
added. He gestured and the two 
guards moved off. 

"What kind of laboratory?" 
asked Biron with a definite loss of 
interest. 

"I build gadgets," was the 
vague response. 

IT WAS not a laboratory to the 
' eye. It was more nearly a 
library, with an ornate desk in the 
corner. 

Biron looked it over slowly. 
"And you build gadgets here? 
What kind of gadgets?" 

"Well, special sounding devices 
to spy out the Tyranni spy-beams, 
in a brand-new way. Nothing they 
can detect. That's how I found out 
about you, when the first word 
came through from Aratap. And I 
have other amusing trinkets. My 
visi-sonor, for instance. Do you 
like music?" 

"Some kinds." 

"•Good. I invented an instrument, only I don't know if you 



can properly call it music." A shelf 
of book-films slid out and aside at 
a touch. "This is not really much 
of a hiding-place, but nobody takes 
me seriously, so they don't look. 
Amusing, don't you think? But I 
forget, you're the unamused one." 

It was a clumsy, boxlike affair, 
with that singular lack of gloss and 
polish that marks the home-made 
object. One side of it was studded 
with little gleaming knobs. He put 
it down with that side upward. 

"It isn't pretty," Gillbret said, 
"but who in Time cares? Put the 
lights out. No, no! No switches 
or contacts. Just wish the lights 
were out. Wish hard! Decide you 
want them out." 

And the lights dimmed with the 
exception of the faint pearly luster 
of the ceiling that made them two 
ghostly faces in the dark. Gillbret 
laughed lightly at Biron's exclamation. 

"Just one of the tricks of my 
visi-sonor. It's keyed to the mind 
just as personal message capsules 
are. Do you know what I mean?" 

"No, I don't, if you want a plain 
answer." 

"Well," Gillbret said, "look at 
it this way. The electric field of 
your brain cells sets up an induced 
one in the instrument. Mathematically, it's fairly simple, but as far 
as I know, no one has ever jammed 
all the necessary circuits into a box 
this size before. Usually, it takes a 
five-story generating plant to do it. 
It works the other way, too. I can 



TYRANN 



51 



close circuits here and impress 
them directly upon your brain, so 
that you'll see and hear without 
any intervention of eyes and ears. 
Watch!" 

There was nothing to watch at 
first, and then something fuzzy 
scratched faintly at the corner of 
Biron's eyes. It became a faint blueviolet ball hovering in mid-air. It 
followed him as he turned away, 
remained unchanged when he 
closed his eyes. And a clear, musical tone accompanied it, was part 
of it, was it. 

IT WAS growing and expanding 
and Biron became disturbingly 
aware that it existed inside his 
skull. It wasn't really a color, but 
rather a colored sound, though 
without noise. It was tactile, yet 
without feeling. 

It spun and took on an iridescence while the musical tone rose 
in pitch till it hovered above him 
like falling silk. Then it exploded 
so that gouts of color splattered at 
him in touches that burnt momentarily and left no pain. 

Bubbles of rain-drenched green 
rose again with a quiet, soft moaning. Biron thrust at them in confusion and became aware that he 
could not see his hands or feel 
them move. There was nothing, 
only the little bubbles filling his 
mind to the exclusion of all else. 

He cried out soundlessly and the 
fantasy ceased. Gillbret was standing before him once again in a 



lighted room, laughing. Biron felt 
an acute dizziness and wiped shakily at a chilled, moist forehead. He 
sat down abruptly. 

"What happened?" he demanded, in as. stiff a tone as he could 
manage. 

Gillbret said, "I don't know. I 
stayed out of it. You don't understand? It was something your brain 
had lacked previous experience 
with. Your brain Was sensing directly -and it had no method of 
interpretation for such a phenomenon. So as long as you concentrated on the sensation, your brain 
could only attempt, futilely, to 
force the effect into the old, familiar pathways. It attempts separately 
and simultaneously to interpret ic 
as sight and sound and touch. Were 
you conscious of an odor, by the 
way? Sometimes it seemed to me 
that I smelled the stuff. With dogs 
I imagine the sensation would be 
forced almost entirely into odor. 
I'd like to try it on animals some 
day. 

"On the other hand, if you 
ignore it, make no attack upon it, 
it fades away. It's what I do when 
I want to observe its effects on 
others, and it isn't difficult." 

He placed a little • veined hand 
upon the instrument, fingering the 
knobs aimlessly. "Sometimes I 
think that if One could really study 
this thing, one could compose 
symphonies in a new medium; do 
things one could never do with 
simple sound or sight. I lack the 



52 




 



capacity for it, I'm afraid. However, just a light touch, not enough 
to confuse the established mental 
patterns, is sometimes rather interesting. It heightens perception, 
releases the psychological censor, 
accentuates wishful thinking . . . 
or expectant dread." 

He moved the knobs minutely 
before Biron could object. The 
moaning now was sweet cerebral 
music, which, for an instant, 
threatened to become, hollowly 
menacing before Biron thought of 
Arta. He thought of her and she 
was real against the background 
of the room and Gillbret with the 
box of dreams in his hand. The 
music rose to hungry longing more 
intense than any emotion Biron 
had ever experienced. She was 
beautiful and he wanted her. . . . 

IT ENDED and she was gone; 
he still stood with his fists tight 
and his heart beating in race 
rhythm. Gillbret looked hastily 
down at the sono-visor, as though 
embarrassed by the intensity of 
Biron's visible yearning. He should 
have been amused, yet he was not, 
and Biron, relaxing unhappily, was 
grateful for that. 

"I suppose it could have great 
therapeutic value," said Gillbret, 
"by revealing to us our suppressed 
wishes and fears — " 

"I'd like to ask you a question," 
Biron said, abruptly. 
"By all means." 
"Why don't you put your scien


tific ability to worthwhile use instead of — " 

"Wasting it on useless toys? I 
don't know. It may not be entirely 
useless. This is against the law, you 
know." 

"What is?" 

"The visi-sonor. Also my spy 
devices. If the Tyranni knew, it 
could easily mean a death sentence." 

"Surely, you're joking." 

"Not at all. It is obvious that 
you were brought up on a cattle 
ranch. The young people cannot 
even remember what it was like in 
the old days, I see." Suddenly, his 
head was to one side and his eyei 
were narrowed to slits. He asked, 
"Are you opposed to Tyranni rule? 
Speak freely. I tell you frankly that 
/ am. I tell you also that your 
father was." 

Biron said, calmly, "Yes, I am." 

"Why?" 

"They are strangers, outlanders. 
What right have they to rule in 
Nephelos or in Rhodia?" 

"Have you always thought that?" 

Biron did not answer. 

Gillbret sniffed. "In other 
words, you decided they were 
strangers and outlanders only after 
they executed your father, which, 
after all, was their simple right. 
Oh, look, don't fire up. Consider 
it reasonably. Believe me, I'm on 
your side. But think! Your father 
was Rancher. What rights did his 
herdsmen have? If one of them 
had stolen cattle for his own use 



TYRANN 



53 



or to sell to others, what would 
have been his punishment? Imprisonment as a thief. If he had plotted the death of your father, for 
whatever reason, for perhaps a 
worthy reason in his own eyes, 
what would have been the result? 
Execution, undoubtedly. And what 
right had your father to make laws 
and visit punishment upon his fellow human beings? He was their 
Tyrannian. 

"Your father, in his own eyes 
and in mine, was a patriot. But 
what of that? To the Tyranni, he 
was a traitor and they removed 
him. Can you ignore the necessity 
of self-defense? The Hinriads 
have been a bloody lot in their 
time. Read your history, young 
man. All governments kill as part 
of the nature of things. 

"So find a better reason to hate 
the Tyranni. Don't think it is 
enough to replace one set of rulers 
by another, that the simple change 
brings freedom." 

BIRON pounded a fist impatiently into his cupped palm. "Ail 
this objective philosophy is fine. It 
is very soothing to the man who 
lives apart. But what if it had been 
your father who was murdered?" 

"Well, wasn't it? My father was 
Director before Hinrik and he was 
killed. Oh, not outright, but subtly. They broke his spirit, as they 
are breaking Hinrik's now. They 
wouldn't have me as Director when 
my father died; I was just a little 



too unpredictable. Hinrik was 
tall, handsome, and, above all, 
pliant. Yet not pliant enough, apparently. They hound him continuously, grind him into a pitiful 
puppet, make sure he cannot even 
itch without permission. You've 
seen him. He's deteriorating by the 
day now. His continual state of 
fear is pathetically psychopathic. 
But that, all that, is not why I want 
to destroy Tyrannian rule," 

"No?" said Biron. "You have 
invented an entirely new reason?" 

"An entirely old one, rather. 
The Tyranni are destroying the 
right of twenty billion human beings to take part in the development of the race. You've been to 
school. You've learned the economic cycle. A new planet is 
settled," he was ticking the points 
off t>n his fingers, "and its first 
care is to feed itself. It becomes an 
agricultural world; a herding 
world. It begins to dig in the 
ground for crude ore to export, 
and sends its agricultural surplus 
abroad to buy luxuries and machinery. That is the second step. 
Then, as population increases and 
foreign investments grow, an industrial civilization begins to bud, 
which is the third step. Eventually, 
the world becomes mechanized, importing food, exporting machinery, 
investing in the development of 
more primitive worlds and so on. 
The fourth step. 

"Always the mechanized worlds 
are the most thickly populated, the 



54 




 



most powerful, militarily, since war 
is a function of machines, and they 
are usually surrounded by a fringe 
of agricultural, dependent worlds. 

"But what has happened to us? 
We were at the third step, with 
a growing industry. And now? 
That growth has been stopped, 
frozen, forced to recede. It would 
interfere with Tyrannian control of 
our industrial necessities. It is a 
short-term investment on their part 
because eventually we'll become unprofitable as we become impoverished. But, meanwhile, they skim 
the cream. 

"Besides, if we industrialized 
ourselves, we might develop weapons of war. So industrialization is 
stopped; scientific research is forbidden. And eventually the people 
become so used to that, they lack 
the realization even that anything 
is missing. So that you are surprised when I tell you that I could 
be executed for building a visisonor. 

"fXF COURSE, some day we 
v_y will beat the Tyranni. It is 
fairly certain. They can't rule forever. No one can. They'll grow 
soft and lazy. They will intermarry 
and lose much of their separate 
traditions. They will become corrupt. But it may take cehturies, because history doesn't hurry. And 
when those centuries have passed, 
we will still all be agricultural 
worlds with no industrial or scientific heritage to speak of, while our 



neighbors on all sides, those not 
under Tyrannian control, will be 
strong and urbanized. The Kingdoms will be semi-colonial areas 
indefinitely. They may never catch 
up and we may be merely observers in the great drama of human 
advance." 

Biron said, "What you say is 
not completely unfamiliar." 

"Naturally, if you were educated 
on Earth. Earth occupies a very 
peculiar position in social development." 

"Indeed?" 

"To be sure. All the Galaxy has 
been in a continuous state of expansion since the first discovery of 
interstellar travel. We have always 
been a growing society, therefore 
an immature society. It is obvious 
that that human society reached 
maturity in only one place and in 
only one time and that this was 
on Earth immediately prior to its 
catastrophe. There we had a society which had temporarily lost 
all possibility for geographical expansion and was therefore faced 
with such problems as overpopulation, depletion of resources and so 
on; problems that have never faced 
any other portion of the Galaxy. 

"They were forced to study the 
social sciences intensively. We have 
lost much or all of that and it is a 
pity. Now here's an amusing thing. 
When Hinrik was a young man, 
he was a great Primitivist. He had 
a library on things Earthly that was 
unparalleled in the Galaxy. Since 



TYRANN 



53 



he became Director, that's gone by 
the board along with everything 
else. But, in a way, I've inherited 
it. Their literature, such scraps as 
survive, is fascinating. It has a 
peculiarly introspective flavor to it 
that we don't have in our extroverted Galactic civilization. It is 
most amusing." 

Biron said, "You relieve me. 
You have been serious for so long 
that I began to wonder if you had 
lost your sense of humor." 

Gillbret shrugged. "I am relaxing and it is wonderful. First time 
in months, I think. Do you know 
what it is to play a part? To split 
your personality deliberately for 
twenty-four hours a day? Even 
when with friends? Even when 
alone, so that you will never forget 
inadvertently? To be eternally 
amused? To be of no account? To 
be so effete and faintly ridiculous 
that you have convinced all who 
know you of your own worthlessness? All so that your life might 
be safe, even though it means it 
has become barely worth living. But' 
even so, once in a while, I can fight 
them." 

HE LOOKED up, and his voice 
was earnest, almost pleading. 
' "You can pilot a ship. I cannot. 
Isn't that strange? You talk about 
my scientific ability, yet I cannot 
pilot a simple one-man spacegig. 
But you can, and it follows then 
that you must leave Rhodia." 
There was no mistaking the 



pleading, but Biron frowned coldly. "Why?" 

Gillbret continued, speaking 
rapidly, "As I said, Artemisia and 
I have discussed you and arranged 
this. When you leave here, proceed directly to her room, where 
she is waiting for you. I have 
drawn a diagram so that you won't 
have to ask your way through the 
corridors." He was forcing a small 
sheet of metallene upon Biron. "If 
anyone does stop you, say that you 
have been summoned by the Director, and proceed. There will be 
no trouble, if you show no uncertainty — " 

"Hold on!" said Biron. He was 
not going to do it again. Jonti had 
chivied him to Rhodia and, consequently, succeeded in bringing 
him before the Tyranni. The Tyrannian Commissioner had then 
chivied him to Palace Central* before he could feel his own secret 
way there and, consequently, subjected him, nakedly unprepared, to 
the whims of an unsteady puppet. 
But that was all ! His moves, henceforward, might be severely limited, 
but, by Space and Time, they 
would be his own. He felt very 
stubborn about it. 

He said, "I'm here on what is 
important business to me, sir. I'm 
not leaving." 

"What? Don't be a young idiot." 
For a moment, the old Gillbret 
was showing through. "Do you 
think you will accomplish anything 
here? Do you think you will get 



56 




 



out of the Palace alive if you let 
the morning sun rise? Why, Hinrik will call in the Tyranni and you 
will be imprisoned within twentyfour hours. He is only waiting this 
while because it takes him so long 
to make up his mind to do anything. He is my cousin. I know 
him, I tell you." 

Biron said, "And if so, what is 
that to you? Why should you be 
so concerned about me?" He was 
not going to be chivied. He would 
never again be another man's 
obedient marionette. 

But Gillbret was standing, staring at him. "I want you to take me 
with you. I'm concerned about myself. I cannot endure life under the 
Tyranni any longer. It is only that 
neither Artemisia nor I can handle 
a ship or we would have left long 
ago. It's our lives, too." 

Biron felt a certain weakening 
of his resolve. "The Director's 
daughter? What has she to do 
with this?" 

«T BELIEVE that she is the most 
-L desperate of us. There is a 
special death for women. What 
should be ahead of a Director's 
daughter who is young, personable, 
and unmarried, but to become 
young, personable and married? 
And who, in these days, should be 
the delightful groom? Why, an 
old, lecherous Tyrannian court 
functionary who has buried three 
wives and wishes to revive the fires 
of his youth with a young girl." 



"Surely the Director would never 
allow such a thing." 

"The Director will allow anything. Nobody waits upon his permission." 

Biron thought of Artemisia as 
he had last seen her. Her hair had 
been combed back from her forehead and allowed to fall in simple 
straightness, with a single inward 
wave at shoulder level. Tanned 
skin, black eyes, red lips. Tall, 
young, smiling. Probably the description of a hundred million 
girls throughout the Galaxy. It 
would be ridiculous to let that sway 
him. 

Yet he said, "Is there a ship 
ready?" 

Gillbret's face wrinkled under 
the impact of a sudden smile. But 
before he could say a word, there 
came a pounding at the door. It 
was no gentle interruption of the 
photo-beam, no soft sound of polite knuckles on hard plastic. It 
was the clang of metal, the overpowering thunder of the weapon 
of authority. 

It was repeated, and Gillbret 
said, "You'd better open the 
door." 

Biron did so, and two uniforms 
were in the room. The foremost 
saluted Gillbret with abrupt efficiency, then turned to Biron: 
"Biron Farrill, in the name of the 
Resident Commissioner of Tyrann 
and of the Director of Rhodia, I 
place you under arrest." 

"On what charge?" 



TYRANN 



57 



"High treason." 

A look of infinite loss twisted 
Gillbret's face. He looked away. 
"Hinrik was quick this once; 
ruicker than I had ever expected. 
An amusing thought!" 

He was the old Gillbret, smiling and indifferent, eyebrows a 



little raised, as though inspecting 
a distasteful fact with a faint tinge 
of regret. 

"Very amusing," he said. 

"Please follow me," said the 
guard, and Biron was aware of the 
neuronic whip resting easily in the 
other's hand. 




58 




 



CHAPTER VIII 




TYRANN 



A Lady's Skirts 

B IRON'S throat was growing 
dry. He could have beaten 
either of the guards in fair fight. 
He knew that and he itched for 
the chance. He might even have 
made a satisfactory showing against 
both together. But they had the 
whips and he couldn't have lifted 
an arm without having them paralyze it instantly. Inside his mind, 
he surrendered. There was no 
other way. 

But Gillbret said, "Let him take 
his cloak, 'men." 

Biron, startled, looked quickly 
toward the little man and retracted 
his mental surrender. He had not 
brought a cloak. 

The guard whose weapon was 
out clicked his heels as a gesture 
of respect. He motioned his whip 
at Biron. "You heard Milord. Get 
your cloak and make it quick."" 

Biron stepped back as slowly as 
he dared. He retreated to the bookcase and squatted, groping behind 
the chair for his non-existent cloak. 
And as his fingers clawed at the 
empty space behind the chair, he 
waited tensely for Gillbret. 

The sono- visor was just a queer 
knobbed object to the guards. It 
would mean nothing to them that 
Gillbret fingered the knobs gently. Biron watched the muzzle of 
the whip intensely and allowed it 
to fill his mind. Certainly nothing 

59 



else he saw or heard {thought he 
saw or heard) must enter. 

But how much longer? 

The armed guard said, "Is your 
cloak behind that chair? Stand up!" 
He took an impatient step forward, 
and then stopped. His eyes narrowed in deep amazement and he 
looked sharply at his left. 

That was it! Biron hunched and 
threw himself forward at the 
guard's knees. The guard went 
down with a jarring thud, and Biron's large fist closed over the 
other's hand, grasping for the neuronic whip it held. 

The other guard had his weapon 
out, but for the moment he was 
useless. With his free hand, he was 
brushing wildly at the space before 
his eyes. 

Gillbret's high-pitched laugh 
sounded. "Anything bothering you, 
Farrill?" 

"Don't see a thing," Biron 
grunted, "except this whip I've got 
now." 

"All right, leave then. They 
can't do anything to stop you. Their 
minds are full of sights and sounds 
that don't exist." Gillbret skipped 
out of the way of the writhing 
tangle of bodies. 

Biron wrenched his arms free 
and heaved upward. He brought 
his arm down solidly just below 
the other's ribs. The guard's face 
twisted in agony and his body 
doubled convulsively. Biron rose, 
whip in hand. 

".Careful," cried Gillbret. 



BUT Biron did not turn quickly' 
enough. The second guard was 
bearing him down again. It was a 
blind attack. What it was that the 
guard thought he was grasping, it 
was impossible to tell. That he 
knew nothing of Biron at the moment was certain. His breath rasped 
in Biron's ear and there was a continuous incoherent gurgle bubbling 
in his .throat. 

Biron twisted in an attempt to 
bring his captured weapon into 
play and was frighteningly aware 
of the blank and empty eyes that 
must be staring at some horror invisible to anyone else. 

Biron braced his legs and shifted 
weight in an effort to break loose, 
quite uselessly. Three times he felt 
the guard's whip flung hard against 
his hip, and flinched at the contact. 

And then the guard's gurgle dissolved into words. He yelled, "I'll 
get you all!" and the very pale, 
almost-invisible shimmer of the 
ionized air in the path of the whip's 
energy beam made its frightening 
appearance. It swept wide through 
the air, and the path of the beam 
intersected Biron's foot. 

It was as though he had stepped 
into a bath of boiling lead. Or as 
if a granite block had toppled upon 
it. Or as if it had been crunched 
off by a shark. Actually nothing had 
happened to it physically. It was 
only that the nerve endings that 
governed the sensation of pain had 
been universally and maximally 



60 




 



stimulated. Boiling lead could have 
done no more. 

Biron's yell tore his throat raw, 
and he collapsed. It did not even 
occur to him that the fight was 
over. Nothing mattered but the 
ballooning pain. 

Yet, though Biron did not know 
it, the guard's grip had relaxed, and 
minutes later, when the young man 
could force his eyes open and blink 
away the tears, he found the guard 
backed against the wall, pushing 
feebly at nothing with both hands 
and giggling to himself. The first 
guard was still on his back, arms 
and legs spread-eagled now. He was 
conscious, but silent. His eyes were 
following something in an erratic 
path, and his body quivered a little. There was a little froth on his 
lips. 

Biron forced himself to his feet. 
He limped badly as he made his 
way to the wall. He used the butt 
of the whip and the guard slumped. 
Then back to the first, who made 
no defense either, his eyes moving 
silently to the very moment of unconsciousness. 

Biron sat down again, nursing his 
foot. He stripped shoe and stocking from it, and stared in surprise 
at the unbroken skin. He chafed it 
and grunted at the burning sensation. He looked up at Gillbret, who 
had put down his visi-sonor and 
was now rubbing one lean cheek 
with the back of his hand. 

"Thank you," said Biron, "for 
the help of your instrument." 



Gillbret shrugged. "There'll be 
more here soon. Get to Artemisia's 
room. Please! Quickly!" 

Biron realized the justice of that. 
His foot had subsided to a quiet 
quiver of pain, but it felt swollen 
and puffy. He put on a stocking 
and tucked the shoe under his elbow. He already had one whip, 
and he relieved the second guard of 
the other. He stuffed it precariously 
within his belt. 

He turned at the door and asked 
with a sense of crawling revulsion, 
"What did you make them see?" 

"I don't know. I can't control it. 
I just gave them all the power I 
could and the rest depended on 
their own psychological makeup. 
Please don't stand there talking. Do 
you have the map of Artemisia's 
room?" 

BIRON nodded, and set off 
down the corridor. It was 
empty. He could not walk quickly, 
since trying to do so made his walk 
a hobble. 

He looked at his watch, then remembered that he had somehow 
never had the time to adjust it to 
Rhodian local chronometry. It still 
ran on Standard Interstellar Time as 
used aboard ship, where one hundred minutes made an hour and a 
thousand a day. So the figure 
"876" which gleamed pinkly on the 
cool metal face of the watch meant 
nothing now. 

Still, it had to be well into the 
night, or into the planetary sleep


TYRANN 



61 



ing-period, at any rate (supposing 
the two not to coincide), as otherwise the halls would not be so 
empty and the bas-reliefs on the 
wall would not phosphoresce unwatched. He touched one idly as he 
passed, a coronation scene, and 
found it to be two-dimensional. Yet 
it gave the perfect illusion of standing out from the wall. 

It was sufficiently unusual for 
him to stop momentarily in order 
to examine the effect. Then he remembered and hurried on. 

THE emptiness of the corridor 
struck him as another sign of 
the decadence of Rhodia. He had 
grown conscious of these symbols 
of decline now that he had become 
a rebel. As the center of an independent power, the Palace would 
always have had its sentries and its 
quiet wardens of the night. 

He consulted Gillbret's crude 
map and turned to the right, moving up a wide, curving ramp. There 
might have been processions here 
once, but nothing of that would be 
left now. 

He leaned against the proper 
door and touched the photo-signal. 
The door moved ajar a bit, then 
opened wide. 

"Come in, young man." 
It was Artemisia. Biron slipped 
inside and the door closed swiftly 
and silently. He looked at the girl, 
saying nothing. He was gloomily 
conscious of the fact that his shirt 
was torn at the shoulder so that one 



sleeve flapped loosely, that his 
clothes were grimy and his face 
welted. He remembered the shoe he 
was still carrying, dropped it and 
wriggled his foot into it. 

Then he said, "Mind if I sit 
down?" 

She followed him to the chair, 
and stood before him, a little annoyed. "What happened? What's 
wrong with your foot?" 

"I hurt it," he said, shortly. "Are 
you ready to leave?" 

She brightened. "You'll take us, 
then?" 

But Biron was in no mood to be 
sweet about it. His foot still 
twinged and he cradled it. He said, 
"Look, get me out to a ship. I'm 
leaving this damn planet. If you 
want to come along, I'll take you." 

She frowned, "You might be 
more pleasant about it. Were you in 
a fight?" 

"Yes, I was. With your father's 
guards, who wanted to arrest me 
for treason. So much for my Sanctuary Right." 

"Oh! I'm sorry." 

"I'm a lot sorrier. It's no wonder 
the Tyranni can lord it over fifty 
worlds with a handful of men. We 
help them. Men like your father 
would do anything to keep in 
power; they would forget the basic 
duties of a simple gentleman — Oh, 
forget it!" 

"I said I was sorry, Lord Rancher." She used the title with a cold 
pride. "Please don't set yourself up 
as judge of my father." 



62 




 



'Tm not interested in discussing 
it. We'll have to leave in a hurry, 
before more of your father's precious guards come. Well, I didn't 
mean to hurt your feelings. It's all 
right." Biron's surliness cancelled 
out any meaning of his apology, 
but, damn it, he had never been 
hit by a neuronic whip before and 
it wasn't fun. And, by Space, they 
had owed him Sanctuary. 

Artemisia felt angry. Not at her 
father, of course, but at the stupid 
young man. He was so young, 
practically a child, she decided, 
scarcely older than herself, if that. 

The Communicator sounded and 
she said, sharply^ "Please wait a 
minute and we'll go." 

IT WAS Gillbret's voice, sounding faintly. "Arta? All right at 
your end?" 

. "He's here," she whispered back. 

"Fine, fine. Don't say anything. 
Just listen. Don't leave your room. 
Keep him there. There.'s going to be 
a search of the Palace, which 
there's no way of stopping. I'll try 
to think of something, but, meanwhile, don't move." He waited for 
no reply. Contact was broken. 

"So that's that," said Biron. He 
had heard, also. "Shall I stay and 
get you into trouble, or shall I go 
out and give myself up? There's 
no reason to expect Sanctuary anywhere on Rhodia, I suppose." 

She faced him in a rage, crying 
in a choked whisper, "Oh, shut up, 
you big, ugly fool." 



They glared at each other, Biron 
standing on one foot and raging. 
In a way, he was trying to help 
her, too. "There is no reason for 
you to be insulting," he told her, 
just barely controlling his anger. 

She said, "I'm sorry," and looked 
away. 

"I meant your tone of voice, not 
what you said. You're entitled to 
your opinion of me." 

"You don't have to say the 
things you do about my father. You 
don't know what being Director is 
like. He's working for his people, 
whatever you may think." 
. "Oh, sure. He has to sell me to 
the Tyranni for the sake of the 
people. That makes sense." 

"Certainly it does. He has to 
show them he's loyal. Otherwise, 
they might depose him and take 
over the direct rule of Rhodia. 
Would that be better?" 

"If a nobleman can't find Sanctuary — " 

"Oh, you think only of yourself. 
-That's what's wrong with you." 

"I don't think it's particularly 
selfish not to want to die. At least 
for nothing. I've got some fighting 
to do before I go. My father fought 
them." He knew he was beginning 
to sound melodramatic, but she affected him that way. 

She said, "And what good did it 
do your father?" 

"None, I suppose. He was 
killed." 

Artemisia felt unhappy. "I keep 
saying I'm sorry, and this time I 



TYRANN 



\ 

63 



really mean it. I'm all upset." Then, 
in defense, "I'm in trouble, too." 

Biron remembered. "I know. All 
right, let's start all over." He tried 
to smile. His foot was feeling better anyway. 

She said, in an attempt at lightness, "You're not really ugly." 

Biron felt foolish. "Oh, I don't 
know — " 

Then he stopped, and Artemisia's hand flew to her mouth. 

There was the sudden, soft sound 
of many ordered feet on the semielastic plastic mosaic that floored 
the corridor outside. Most passed 
by, but there was a faint, disciplined 
heel-clicking just outside the door, 
and the night signal purred. 

GILLBRET had to work quickly. 
Damn Hinrik for making up 
his mind so quickly this once, for 
not waiting till morning. Gillbret 
had to get away; he might never 
have another chance. But he had to 
hide his sono-visor. For the first 
time, he wished he had a better, 
hiding-place. 

Then he called the captain of the 
guard. He couldn't very well 
neglect a little matter of two unconscious guards and an escaped 
prisoner. 

The captain of the guard was 
grim about it. He had the two unconscious men cleared out, and then 
faced Gillbret. 

"My Lord, I am not quite clear 
from your message exactly what 
happened," he said. 



"Just what you see," said Gillbret. "They came to make their 
arrest, and the young man did not 
submit. He is gone, Space knows 
where." 

"That is of little moment, my 
Lord," said the captain. "The 
Palace is honored tonight with the 
presence of a personage, so it is 
well-guarded despite the hour. He 
cannot get out and we will draw the 
net through the interior. But how 
did he escape ? My men were armed. 
He was not." 

"He fought like a tiger. From 
that chair, behind which I hid — " 

"I am sorry, my Lord, that you 
did not think to aid my men against 
an accused traitor." 

Gillbret looked scornful. "What 
an amusing thought, captain. When 
your men, with doubled advantage 
in numbers and weapons, need help 
from myself, it is time that you recruited yourself other men." 

"Very well. We will search the 
Palace, find him, and see if he can 
repeat the performance." 

"I shall accompany you, captain." 

It was the captain's turn to raise 
his eyebrows. He said, "I would 
not advise it, my Lord. There would 
be some danger." 

It was the kind of remark that 
one did not make to a Hinriad. 
Gillbret knew that, but he only 
smiled and let the wrinkles fill his 
lean face. "I know that," he said, 
"but occasionally I find even danger amusing." 

It took five minutes for the com


64 




 



pany of guards to assemble. Gillbrer, alone in his room during that 
time, called Artemisia. 

BIRON and Artemisia had 
frozen at the purring of the 
little signal. It sounded a second 
time and then there was the cautious rap upon the door, and Gillbret's voice was heard. 

"Do let me try, captain," it said. 
Then, more loudly, "Artemisia?" 

Biron grinned his relief and took 
a step forward, but the girl put a 
sudden hand upon his mouth. She 
called out, "One moment, Uncle 
Gil," and pointed desperately toward the wall. 

Biron could only stare stupidly. 
The wall was quite blank. Artemisia shook her head impatiently 
and stepped quickly past him. Her 
hand on the- wall caused a portion 
of it to slide noiselessly aside, revealing a dressing room. Her lips 
motioned, "Get inside!" and her 
hands were fumbling at the ornamental pin at her right shoulder. 
The unclasping of that pin broke 
the tiny biostatic force-field that 
held an invisible seam tightly 
closed down the length of the 
dress. She stepped out of it. 

Biron turned around after walking through what had been the 
wall, and its closing lasted just 
long enough for him to see her 
pulling a white-furred dressing 
gown around her proud body. The 
scarlet dress lay crumpled upon the 
chair. 



He looked about him and wondered if they would search Artemisia's room. He was helpless if a 
search took place. There was no 
way out of the dressing-room but 
the way he had entered. 

Along one wall there hung a 
row of gowns, and the air 
shimmered very faintly before it. 
His hand passed easily through the 
shimmer, with only a faint tingling 
where it crossed his wrist, but then 
it was meant to repel only dust so 
that the space behind it could be 
kept aseptically clean. 

He might hide behind the 
skirts. It was what he was doing, 
really. He had manhandled two 
guards, with Gillbret's help, to get 
here, but now that he was here, he 
was hiding behind a lady's skirts. 
A Lady's skirts, in fact. 

Incongruously, he found himself 
wishing he had turned a bit sooner 
before the wall had closed behind 
him. She had quite a remarkable 
figure. It was ridiculous of him to 
have been so childishly nasty a 
while back. Of course, she was not 
to blame for the faults of her 
father. 

And now he could only wait, 
staring at the blank wall; waiting 
for the sound of feet within the 
room, for the wall to pull back 
once more, for the muzzles facing 
him again, this time without a 
sono-visor to help him. 
