Dark Interlude By MACK REYNOLDS and FREDRIC BROWN 

SHERIFF BEN RAND'S 
eyes were grave. He said, 
"Okay, boy. You feel kind 
of jittery; that's natural. But if your 
story's straight, don't worry. Don't 
worry about nothing. Everything'!! 
be all right, boy." 

"It was three hours ago, Sheriff," 
Allenby said. "I'm sorry it took me 
so long to gel into toivn and that 1 
had to wake you up. But Sis was 



hysterical a while. I had to try and 
quiet her down, and then 1 had 
trouble starting the jalopy." 

"Don't worry about waking me 
up, boy. Being sheriff's a full-time 
job. And it ain't late, anyway; 1 
just happened to turn in early tonight. Now let me get a few things 
straight. You say your name ' s Lou 
Allenby. That's a good name in 
these parts, Allenby. You kin of 




Ranee Allenby, used to run the 
feed business over in Cooperville? 
I went to school with Ranee . . . 
Now about the fella who said he 
come from the future . . ." 

* * * 

THE Presidor of the Historical 
Research Department was skeptical to the last. .He argued, "I am 
still of the opinion that the project 
is not feasible. There are paradoxes 
involved which present insurmountable — " 

Doctr Matthe, the noted physicist, interrupted politely, "Undoubtedly, sir, you are familiar 
with the Dichotomy?" 

The presidor wasn't, so he remained silent to indicate that he 
wanted an explanation. 

"Zeno propounded the Dichotomy. He was a Greek philosopher 
of roughly five hundred years before the ancient prophet whose 
birth was used by the primitives to 
mark the beginning of their calendar. The Dichotomy states that it 
is impossible to- cover any given 
distance. The argument: First, half 
the distance must be traversed, then 
half of the remaining distance, then 
again half of what remains, and so 
on. It follows that some portion of 
the distance to be covered always 
remains, and therefore motion is 
impossible." 

"Not analagous," the presidor 
objected. "In the first place, your 
Greek assumed that any totality 
composed of an infinite number of 



parts must, itself, be infinite, 
whereas we know that an infinite 
number of elements make up a finite total. Besides — " 

Matthe smiled gently and held 
up i. hand. "Please, sir, don't misunderstand me. I do not deny that 
today we understand Zeno's paradox. But believe me, for long centuries the best minds the human 
race could produce could not explain it." 

The presidor said tactfully, "I 
fail to see your point, Doctr 
Matthe. Please forgive my inadequacy. What possible connection 
has this Dichotomy of Zeno's with 
your projected expedition into the 
past?" 

"I was merely drawing a parallel, 
sir. Zeno conceived the paradox 
proving that it was impossible to 
cover any distance, nor were the 
ancients able to explain it. But did 
that prevent them from covering 
distances? Obviously not. Today, 
my assistants and I have devised a 
method to send our young friend 
here, Jan Obreen, into the distant 
past. The paradox is immediately 
pointed out — suppose he should 
kill an ancestor or otherwise change 
history? I do not claim to be able 
to explain how this apparent paradox is overcome in time travel; all 
I know is that time travel is possible. Undoubtedly, better minds 
than mine will one day resolve the 
paradox, but until then we shall 
continue to utilize time travel, 
paradox or not." 



68 




 



Jan Obreen had been sitting, 
nervously quiet, listening to his distinguished superiors. Now he 
cleared his throat and said, "I believe the hour has arrived for the 
experiment." 

The presidor shrugged his continued disapproval, but dropped the 
conversation. He let his eyes scan 
doubtfully the equipment that 
stood in the corner of the laboratory. 

Matthe shot a quick glance at the 
time piece, then hurried last minute instructions to his student. 

"We've been all over this before, Jan, but to sum it up — You 
should appear approximately in the 
middle of the so-called Twentieth 
Century; exactly where, we don't 
know. The language will be AmerEnglish, which you have studied 
thoroughly; on that count you 
should have little difficulty. You 
will appear in the United States of 
North America, one of the ancient 
nations — as they were called — a political division of whose purpose 
we are not quite sure. One of the 
designs of your expedition will be 
to determine why the human race 
at that time split itself into scores 
of states, rather than having but one 
government. 

"You will have to adapt yourself to the conditions you find, Jan. 
Our histories are so vague that we 
can help you but little in information on what to expect." 

The presidor put in, "I am extremely pessimistic about this, 



Obreen, yet you have volunteered 
and I have no right to interfere. 
Your most important task is to 
leave a message that will come 
down to us; if you are successful, 
other attempts will be made to still 
other periods in history. If you 
fail—" 

"He won't fail," Matthe said. 

The presidor shook his head and 
grasped Obreen 's hand in farewell. 

Jan Obreen stepped to the equipment and mounted the small platform. He clutched the metal grips 
on the instrument panel somewhat 
desperately, hiding to the best of 
his ability the shrinking inside himself. 

rHE sheriff said, "Well, this 
fella — you say he told you he 
came from the future?" 

Lou Allenby nodded. "About 
four thousand years ahead. He said 
it was the year thirty-two hundred 
and something, but that it was 
about four thousand years from 
now; they'd changed the numbering system meanwhile." 

"And you didn't figure it was 
hogwash, boy? From the way you 
talked, I got the idea that you kind 
of believed him." 

The other wet his lips. "I kind 
of believed him," he said doggedly. "There was something about 
him; he was different. I don't mean 
physically, that he couldn't pass for 
being born now, but there was . . . 
something different. Kind of, well, 
like he was at peace with himself; 



DARK INTERLUDE 



gave the impression that where he 
came from everybody was. And he 
was smart, smart as a whip. And 
he wasn't crazy, either." 

"And what was he doing back 
here, boy?" The sheriffs voice was 
gently caustic. 

"He was — some kind of student. 
Seems from what he said that almost everybody in his time was a 
student. They'd solved all the problems of production and distribution, nobody bad to worry about 
security; in fact, they didn't seem 
to worry about any of the things ive 
do now." There was a trace of wistfulness in Lou Allenby's voice. He 
took a deep breath and went on. 
"He'd come back to do research in 
our time. They didn't know much 
about it, it seems. Something had 
happened in between — there was a 
bad period of several hundred years 
— and most books and records had 
been lost. They had a few, but not 
many. So they didn't know much 
about us and they wanted to fill in 
what they didn't know." 

"You believed all that, boy? Did 
he have any proof?" 

* * * 

IT WAS the dangerous point; this 
was where the prime risk lay. 
They had had, for all practical purposes, no knowledge of the exact 
contours of the land, forty centuries 
back, nor knowledge of the presence of trees or buildings. If he 
appeared at the wrong spot, it 
might well mean instant death. 



Jan Obreen was fortunate; he 
didn't hit anything. It was, in fact, 
the other way around. He came out 
ten feet in the air over a -plowed 
field. The fall was nasty enough, 
but the soft earth protected him; 
one ankle seemed sprained, but not 
too badly. He came painfully to his 
feet and looked around. 

The presence of the field alone 
was sufficient to tell him that the 
Matthe process was at least partially successful. He was far before 
his own age. Agriculture was still 
a necessary component of human 
economy, indicating a definitely 
earlier civilization than his own. 

Approximately half a mile away 
was a densely wooded area; not a 
park, nor even a planned forest to 
house - the controlled wild life of 
his time. A haphazardly growing 
wooded area — almost unbelievable. 
But, then, he must grow used to 
the unbelievable; of all the historic periods, this was the least 
known. Much would be strange. 

To his right, a few hundred 
yards away, was a wooden building. 
It was, undoubtedly, a human 
dwelling despite its primitive appearance. There was no use putting 
it off; contact with his fellow man 
would have to be made. He limped 
awkwardly toward his meeting 
with the Twentieth Century. 

The girl had evidently not observed his precipitate arrival, but 
by the time he arrived in the yard 
of the farm house, she had come 
to the door to greet him. 



70 




 



Her dress was of another age, 
for in his era the clothing of the 
feminine portion of the race was 
not designed to lure the male. Hers, 
however, was bright and tasteful 
with color, and it emphasized the 
youthful contours of her body. Nor 
was it her dress alone that startled 
him. There was a touch of color on 
her lips that he suddenly realized 
couldn't have been achieved by nature. He had read that primitive 
women used colors, paints and pigments of various sorts, upon their 
faces — somehow or other, now that 
he witnessed it, he was not repelled. 

She smiled, the red of her mouth 
stressing the even whiteness of her 
teeth. She said, "It would've been 
easier to come down the road 
'stead of across the field." Her eyes 
took him in, and, had he been 
more experienced, he could have 
read interested approval in them. 

He said, studiedly, "I am afraid 
that I am not familiar with your 
agricultural methods. I trust I have 
not irrevocably damaged the products of your horticultural efforts." 

Susan Allenby blinked at him. 
"My," she said softly, a distant hint 
of laughter in her voice, "somebody 
sounds like maybe they swallowed 
a dictionary." Her eyes widened 
suddenly, as she noticed him favoring his left foot. "Why, you've hurt 
yourself. Now you come right on 
into the house and let me see if I 
can't do something about that. 
Why—" 

He followed her quietly, only 



half hearing her words. Something 
— something phenomenal — was 
growing within Jan Obreen, affecting oddly and yet pleasantly his 
metabolism. 

He knew now what Matthe and 
the presidor meant by paradox. 

rHE sheriff said, "Well, you 
were away when he got to your 
pface — however he got there?" 

Lou Allenby nodded. "Yes, that 
ivas ten days ago. I was in Miami 
taking a couple of weeks' vacation. 
Sis and I each get away for a week 
or two every year, but we go at 
different times, partly because we 
figure it's a good idea to get away 
from one another once in a while 
anyway." 

"Sure, good idea, boy. But your 
Sis, she believed this story of where 
he came from?" 

"Yes. And, Sheriff, she had 
proof. I ivisb I'd seen it too. The 
field he landed in was fresh 
plowed. After she'd fixed his ankle 
she was curious enough, after what 
he'd told her, to follow his footsteps through the dirt back to 
where they'd started. And they 
ended, or, rather, started, right 
smack in the middle of a field, with 
a deep mark like he'd fallen there." 

"Maybe he came from an airplane, in a parachute, boy. Did yon 
think of that?" 

"I thought of that, and so did 
Sis. She says that if he did he 
must've swallowed the parachute. 



DARK INTERLUDE 



71 



She could follow bis steps every bit 
of the way — // was only a few 
hundred yards — and there wasn't 
any place he could've hidden or 
buried a parachute." 

The sheriff said, "They got married right away, you say?" 

"Two days later. 1 had the car 
with me, so Sis hitched the team 
and drove them into town — he 
didn't know how to drive horses — 
and they got married." 

"See the license, boy? You sure 
they was really — " 

Lou Allenby looked at him, his 
lips beginning to go white, and the 
sheriff said hastily, "All right, boy, 
1 didn't mean it that way. Take it 
easy, boy." 

* * * 

SUSAN had sent her brother a 
telegram telling him all about 
it, but he'd changed hotels and 
somehow the telegram hadn't been 
forwarded. The first he knew of 
the marriage was when he drove 
up to the farm almost a week later. 

He was surprised, naturally, but 
John O'Brien — Susan had altered 
the name somewhat — seemed likable enough. Handsome, too, if a 
bit strange, and he and Susan 
seemed head over heels in love. 

Of course, he didn't have any 
money, they didn't use it in his 
day, he had told them, but he was 
a good worker, not at all soft. 
There was no reason to suppose 
that he wouldn't make out all right. 
The three of them planned, ten


tatively, for Susan and John to stay 
at the farm until John had learned 
the ropes somewhat. Then he expected to be able to find some manner in which to make money — he 
was quite optimistic about his ability in that line — and spending his 
time traveling, taking Susan with 
him. Obviously, he'd be able to 
learn about the present that way. 

The important thing, the allembracing thing, was to plan some 
message to get to Doctr Matthe and 
the presidor. If this type of research was to continue, all depended upon him. 

He explained to Susan and Lou 
that it was a one-way trip. That 
the equipment worked only in one 
direction, that there was travel to 
the past, but not to the future. He 
was a voluntary exile, fated to 
spend the rest of his life in this 
era. The idea was that when he'd 
been in this century long enough 
to describe it well, he'd write up 
his report and put it in a box he'd 
have especially made to last forty 
centuries and bury it where it could 
be dug up — in a spot that had been 
determined in the future. He had 
the exact place geographically. 

He" was quite excited when they 
told him about the time capsules 
that had been buried elsewhere. He 
knew that they had never been dug 
up and planned to make it part of 
his report so the men of the future 
could find them. 

They spent their evenings in long 
conversations, Jan telling of his 



72 




 



age and what he knew of all the 
long centuries in between. Of the 
long fight upward and man's conquests in the fields of science, medicine and in human relations. And 
they telling him of theirs, describing the institutions, the ways of 
life which he found so unique. 

Lou hadn't been particularly 
happy about the precipitate marriage at first, but he found himself 
warming to Jan. Until . . . 

* * * 

rHE sheriff said, "And he didn't 
tell you what he was till this 
evening?" 

"That's right." 

"Your sister heard him say it? 
She'll back you up?" 

"I ... I guess she will. She's 
upset now, like I said, kind of hysterical. Screams that she's going to 
leave me and the farm. But she 
heard him say it, Sheriff. He must 
of had a strong hold on her, or she 
wouldn't be acting the way she is." 

"Not that I douJ>t your word, 
boy, about a thing like that, but 
it'd be better if she heard it too. 
Hoiv'd it come up?" 

"I got to asking him some questions about things in his time and 
after a while 1 asked him how they 
got along on race problems and he 
acted puzzled and then said he remembered something about races 
from history he'd studied, but that 
there weren't any races then. 

"He said that by his time — starting after the war of something-or


other, I forget its name — all the 
races had blended into one. That 
the whites and the yellows had 
mostly killed one another off and 
that Africa had dominated the 
world for a while, and then all the 
races had begun to blend into one 
by colonization and intermarriage 
and that by bis time the process 
was complete. I just stared at him 
and asked him, 'You mean you 
got nigger blood in you?' and he 
said, fust like it didn't mean anything, 'At least one-fourth.' " 

"W ell, boy, you did just what 
you had to do," the sheriff told 
him earnestly, "no doubt about it." 

"I just saw red. He'd married 
Sis; he was sleeping with her. I was 
so crazy-mad I don't even remember getting my gun." 

"W ell, don't worry about it, boy. 
You did right." 

"But I feel like hell about it. 
He didn't know." 

"Now that's a matter of opinion, 
boy. Maybe you stvalloived a little 
too much of this hogwash. Coming 
from the future—huh! These niggers'll think up the damnedest 
tricks to pass themself off as white. 
What kind of proof for his story is 
that mark on the ground? Hogwash, boy. Ain't nobody coming 
from the future or going there 
neither. We can just quiet this up 
so it won't never be heard of nowhere. It'll be like it never happened." 
